 
 Le Guin interview 
 Coming Back From the Silence 
 an interview with Ursula Le Guin 
 by Jonathan White 
 "Can one find a common denominator in the work and thought of Ursula K. Le 
 Guin?" asks writer Theodore Sturgeon. "Probably not; but there are some 
 notes in her orchestrations that come out repeatedly and with power. A 
 cautionary fear of the development of democracy into dictatorship. 
 Celebrations of courage, endurance, risk. Language, not only loved and 
 shaped, but investigated in all its aspects; call that, perhaps, 
 communication. But above all, in almost unearthly terms Ursula Le Guin 
 examines, attacks, unbuttons, takes down and exposes our notions of 
 reality." 
 With over 3 million copies of her books in print, Ursula Le Guin is not only 
 one of the most widely read writers in North America but also one of the 
 most prolific. During one of her intense writing periods, between 1966 and 
 1974, she published seven science fiction novels, nine poems, three fantasy 
 novels, sixteen short stories, five book reviews, and sixteen essays. For 
 these and other works she has received numerous awards, including the Boston 
 Globe-Horn Book Award in 1969, for her first fantasy novel A Wizard of 
 Earthsea. She received the Hugo and Nebula awards for The Left Hand of 
 Darkness in 1970 and was a finalist for the National Book Award for 
 Children's Literature in 1972 for The Tombs of Atuan. In 1985, Ursula Le 
 Guin was the National Book Award runner-up and Kafka Award recipient for 
 Always Coming Home, and in 1973 she received the National Book Award for The Farthest Shore. 
 INTERVIEWER: It's clear from your work that language and writing have become sharp tools for re-visioning human society and humanity's place in the larger household. 
 Much of that re-visioning, at least in the last thirty years, has been 
 inspired by feminist principles. Your goal, you say, is always to subvert, 
 creating metaphors for the future "where any assumption can be tested and 
 any rule rewritten. Including the rules of who's on top, and what gender 
 means, and who gets to be free." Let's begin with the question of how you 
 were introduced to the feminist movement, and the role it has played in your 
 writing. 
 URSULA LE GUIN: My introduction was slow and late. All my early fiction 
 tends to be rather male-centred. A couple of the Earthsea books have no 
 women in them at all or only marginal women figures. That's how hero stories 
 worked; they were about men. With the exception of just a few feminists like 
 Joanna Russ, science fiction was pretty much male-dominated up to the I960s. 
 Women who wrote in that field often used pen names. 
 None of this bothered me. It was my tradition, and I worked in it happily. 
 But I began coming up against certain discomforts. My first feminist text 
 was The Left Hand of Darkness, which I started writing in I967. It was an 
 early experiment in deconstructing gender. Everybody was asking, "What is it 
 to be a man? What is it to be a woman?" It's a hard question, so in The Left 
 Hand of Darkness I eliminated gender to find out what would be left. Science 
 fiction is a wonderful opportunity to play this kind of game. 
 As a thought experiment, The Left Hand of Darkness was messy. I recently 
 wrote the screenplay version, where I was able to make some of the changes I 
 wish I could make to the novel. They're details, but important ones, such as 
 seeing the main character, Genly, with children or doing things we think of 
 as womanly. All you ever see him doing are manly things, like being a 
 politician or hauling a sledge. The two societies in the book are somewhat 
 like a feudal monarchy and Russian communism, which tend to be slightly 
 paranoid. I don't know why I thought androgynous people would be paranoid. 
 With twenty years of feminism under my belt, I can now imagine an 
 androgynous society as being much different and far more interesting than 
 our gendered society. For instance, I wouldn't lock the people from the 
 planet Gethen, where the story takes place, into heterosexuality. The 
 insistence that sexual partners must be of the opposite sex is naive. It 
 never occurred to me to explore their homosexual practices, and I regret the 
 implication that sexuality has to be heterosexuality. 
 I gradually realised that my own fiction was telling me that I could no 
 longer ignore the feminine. While I was writing The Eye of the Heron in 
 1977, the hero insisted on destroying himself before the middle of the book. 
 "Hey," I said, "you can't do that, you're the hero. Where's my book?" I 
 stopped writing. The book had a woman in it, but I didn't know how to write 
 about women. I blundered around awhile and then found some guidance in 
 feminist theory. I got excited when I discovered feminist literary criticism 
 was something I could read and actually enjoy. I read The Norton Book of 
 Literature by Women from cover to cover. It was a bible for me. It taught me 
 that I didn't have to write like an honorary man anymore, that I could write 
 like a woman and feel liberated in doing so. 
 INTERVIEWER: Your mother, Theodora Kroeber, was an accomplished writer. Her book, Ishi in Two Worlds, is an ethnological classic. What kind of encouragement did her 
 life and work offer you? 
 URSULA LE GUIN: My mother wasn't really a feminist. She didn't even like the 
 word. She called feminists "those women's lib people." But she also asked me 
 questions like, "Why do you always have men heroes?" And I'd answer, "I 
 don't know, Ma. Ask me an easy question!" So, I got a lot from her. But 
 toward the end of her life, we were in some conflict. 
 My mother also led me to Virginia Woolf, who has given me a lifelong 
 education. As a novelist, Woolf is a much more important writer than the 
 keepers of the canons of English literature want to admit. In fact, they're 
 still afraid of her. And quite rightly. She's deeply subversive, and a great 
 novelist! I still turn to her for guidance. 
 INTERVIEWER: What was it that attracted you to the science fiction genre? 
 URSULA LE GUIN: I didn't exactly choose science fiction. I went where I got 
 published, which took a long time because my work is so odd. For the last 
 fifty or sixty years, literature has been categorised as "realism," and if 
 you weren't writing realism, you weren't respectable. I had to ignore that 
 and say to myself that I could do things in science fiction that I could 
 never do in realism. I tend to be prickly about this subject because I get 
 tired of being put down as a science fiction writer. The fact is, in the 
 post-modern era, all the barriers are breaking down pretty fast. 
 I've been editing The Norton Book of Science Fiction, which has inspired 
 some new thoughts on this matter. For instance, I've learned that science 
 fiction is a child of realism, not of fantasy. A realistic story deals with 
 something that might have happened but didn't, right? Many science fiction 
 stories are about worlds that don't exist, but could exist in the future. 
 Both realism and science fiction deal with stories that might be true. 
 Fantasy, on the other hand, tells a story that couldn't possibly be true. 
 With fantasy, we simply agree to lift the ban on the imagination and follow 
 the story, no matter how implausible it may be. 
 INTERVIEWER: Didn't you say once that fantasy may not be actual, but it's true? 
 URSULA LE GUIN: Wouldn't you say any attempt to tell a story is an attempt 
 to tell the truth? It's the technique you use in the telling that is either 
 more or less plausible. Sometimes the most direct way to tell the truth is 
 to tell a totally implausible story, like a myth. That way you avoid the 
 muddle of pretending the story ever happened, or ever will happen. 
 Who knows how stories really work? We're so used to stories with all the 
 trappings of being real that we've lost our ability to read anything else. 
 When you read a Native American story, you have to relearn how to read. 
 There's nothing in them to draw you in. There's no sweetening of the pill. 
 Maybe there's a coyote, but there's no description. We're used to a lot of 
 fleshing out, and we're used to being courted and drawn into the story. 
 INTERVIEWER: Nora Dauenhaeur, a Tlingit woman and co-author of Haa Shuka, Our Ancestors, reminded me last summer that Native American stories are usually told to an 
 audience that already knows them. In fact, they've heard the stories over 
 and over again, through many winters. As a result, the storyteller often 
 uses shorthand a single word or phrase to remind the audience of a larger 
 event with many details. She pointed out that we are telling stories like 
 this all the time, particularly among friends and family with whom we share 
 a history. We may say, "Remember that time we were caught in a dust storm 
 outside of Phoenix?" And that's the story, all of it. 
 URSULA LE GUIN: Yes, exactly. You don't describe the sky or the clouds or 
 what you were wearing. There isn't any of this scene-setting in Native 
 American stories. It bothers me when I read gussied-up Native American 
 stories. They're no longer sacred. 
 INTERVIEWER: What is it, exactly, that makes a story sacred? 
 URSULA LE GUIN: I don't know. But when we embellish a Native American story, 
 it turns into just another story. Our culture doesn't think storytelling is 
 sacred; we don't set aside a time of year for it. We don't hold anything 
 sacred except what organised religion declares to be so. Artists pursue a 
 sacred call, although some would buck and rear at having their work labelled 
 like this. Artists are lucky to have a form in which to express themselves; 
 there is a sacredness about that, and a terrific sense of responsibility. 
 We've got to do it right. Why do we have to do it right? Because that's the 
 whole point: either it's right or it's all wrong. 
 INTERVIEWER: We tend to have such a linear, cause-and-effect way of looking at the world. I wonder if one of the things that attracts us to stories is their ability 
 to change our way of seeing? 
 URSULA LE GUIN: The daily routine of most adults is so heavy and artificial 
 that we are closed off to much of the world. We have to do this in order to 
 get our work done. I think one purpose of art is to get us out of those 
 routines. When we hear music or poetry or stories, the world opens up again. 
 We're drawn in or out and the windows of our perception are cleansed, as 
 William Blake said. The same thing can happen when we're around young 
 children or adults who have unlearned those habits of shutting the world 
 out. 
 The tribal storyteller is not just providing spiritual access but also moral 
 guidance. I think much of American writing today is an exploration of 
 ethical problems. I'm thinking particularly of novels by black women such as 
 Paula Marshall, Alice Walker, Gloria Naylor, and Toni Morrison. The stories 
 these women write are gaining literary praise, but they're also doing 
 something terribly important for their people, who are not just black 
 Americans but all Americans. In a sense, these women are fulfilling the 
 ancient role of tribal storytellers, because they're trying to lead us into 
 different spiritual and moral realms. They're intensely serious about this, 
 and that's why they're so beloved as novelists. 
 INTERVIEWER: Stories can also help us remember who we are. In The Book of Laughter and Forgetting, Milan Kundera says, "What is the self but the sum of everything 
 we remember?" 
 URSULA LE GUIN: Yes. To remember, if my Latin is correct, actually means to 
 put the parts together. So that implies there are ways of losing parts. 
 Kundera talks about this aspect of storytelling, too. In fact, he says that 
 history, which is another kind of story, is often deliberately falsified in 
 order to make a people forget who they are or who they were. He calls that 
 "the method of organised forgetting." 
 History is one way of telling stories, just like myth, fiction, or oral 
 storytelling. But over the last hundred years, history has pre-emptied the 
 other forms of storytelling because of its claim to absolute, objective 
 truth. Trying to be scientists, historians stood outside of history and told 
 the story of how it was. All that has changed radically over the last twenty 
 years. Historians now laugh at the pretence of objective truth. They agree 
 that every age has its own history, and if there is any objective truth, we 
 can't reach it with words. History is not a science, it's an art. 
 There are still people who insist on teaching history as a science, but 
 that's not how most historians work anymore. My husband, Charles, who is a 
 historian, says, "I don't know the difference between story and history. I 
 think it may not be a difference in kind, but a difference in their attempts 
 to be truthful." 
 The history of the last hundred years still has a tremendous intellectual 
 bias toward the white European point of view. Defined by historians as the 
 written record, it conveniently illegitimizes all oral traditions and most 
 indigenous people right from the start. In fact, in its view, everybody but 
 white Europeans are "primitive." If you don't have a written language, you 
 aren't part of history. 
 INTERVIEWER: Are the current changes in how we look at history also changing the way we look at indigenous cultures? 
 URSULA LE GUIN: Absolutely. It's a de-centring process. We've been 
 pretending that Europe was the center of the world for too long. With the 
 help of anthropologists, and now historians, we are finding that there is no 
 center, or that there are many centers. Nobody has "the answer." It's 
 amazing how much resistance there is to this. Everybody wants to be "the 
 people," everybody wants to be "the center." And everybody is the center, if 
 only they'd realise it and not sneer at all the other centers. 
 INTERVIEWER: Because history, as it has been practised, concerns itself only with the 
 written record, language acquires a loaded role in terms of our perception 
 of reality. Like history, language can become a tool of forgetting, a tool 
 of estrangement. As a writer, how do you work against that? 
 URSULA LE GUIN: This is a tricky area. As a writer, you want the language to 
 be genuinely significant and mean exactly what it says. That's why the 
 language of politicians, which is empty of everything but rather brutal 
 signals, is something a writer has to get as far away from as possible. If 
 you believe that words are acts, as I do, then one must hold writers 
 responsible for what their words do. 
 One of the strangest things about our culture is our ability to describe the 
 destruction of the world in exquisite, even beautiful, detail. The whole 
 science of ecology, for instance, describes exactly what we're doing wrong 
 and what the global effects are. The odd twist is that we become so 
 enamoured of our language and its ability to describe the world that we 
 create a false and irresponsible separation. We use language as a device for 
 distancing. Somebody who is genuinely living in their ecosystem wouldn't 
 have a word for it. They'd just call it the world. 
 We can't restructure our society without restructuring the English language. 
 One reflects the other. A lot of people are getting tired of the huge pool 
 of metaphors that have to do with war and conflict. The "war against drugs" 
 is an obvious example of this. So is the proliferation of battle metaphors, 
 such as being a warrior, fighting, defeating, and so on. In response, I 
 could say that once you become conscious of these battle metaphors, you can 
 start "fighting" against them. That's one option. Another is to realise that 
 conflict is not the only human response to a situation and to begin to find 
 other metaphors, such as resisting, outwitting, skipping, or subverting. 
 This kind of consciousness can open the door to all sorts of new behaviour. 
 I am struck by how much we talk about rebirthing but never about rebearing. 
 The word itself is unfamiliar to most people. Yet both women and men are 
 capable of rebearing, women literally and men metaphorically. A door opens 
 just by changing the name. We don't have to be reborn; we can rebear. This 
 is part of the writer's job, either to rebear the metaphors or refuse to use 
 them. Gary Snyder's lifelong metaphor is watershed. How fruitful that is! 
 Another of his is composting, which is a lovely word that describes the 
 practice of creating. 
 INTERVIEWER: What role has your interest in indigenous people played in your work? 
 URSULA LE GUIN: I wasn't aware that it played any role at first. Although my 
 father was an anthropologist and an archaeologist, my entire formal training 
 in this area amounts to one physical anthropology class. Obviously I have 
 some temperamental affinity with my father, but I often say that he studied 
 real cultures and I make them up. He had an eye for exact concrete detail, 
 and an interest in it. He also had a respect for tools and the way things 
 work. I got a lot of that from him. 
 When I started thinking about Always Coming Home I took a lot of time to 
 discover what the book was going to be. Once I realised I wanted it to grow 
 out of the Napa Valley I looked around for a literary precedent. I couldn't 
 find anything except a couple of swashbuckling romantic novels about Italian 
 wine-growing families. The only literature of that earth was Native American 
 oral literature. The people of the valley itself, the Wappo, are gone. Even 
 the name they used for themselves is gone. There are people with a little 
 Wappo blood, but there is no language, no tradition, and there are no 
 stories left. So I read other Northern Californian myths and legends and 
 songs. There's a good deal of information available there. My father 
 collected much of it himself. I read widely from traditions all over the 
 United States. My problem was to find a way to use the literature without 
 stealing or exploiting it, because we've done enough of that to Native 
 American writing. I certainly didn't want to put a bunch of made up Indians 
 into a Napa Valley of the future. That was not what I was trying to do. What 
 I got from reading California oral literature was a sense of a distant and 
 different quality of life. You can't hear the voices but you can pick up the 
 feeling. 
 INTERVIEWER: The Kesh communities are saturated in ritual. They had festivals of the moon, water, summer, wine, and grass to celebrate the natural cycles. They 
 danced together at the equinox and the solstice. Where did you get your 
 understanding of ritual, and what role do you see it playing in a healthy 
 culture? 
 URSULA LE GUIN: What I know about ritual I learned from books. I've never 
 lived in a culture like the one in Always Coming Home. What we're talking 
 about here is partly a matter of literary tactics. The book is made of 
 words. The Kesh have to have a lot of verbal rituals so that I could write 
 about what they did. And their rituals had to be lively and interesting so 
 that they could be told through stories and poetry. I wasn't conscious of 
 these processes when I was writing the book, but I know that's the way it 
 works. These rituals are part of the context of the book, but they also show 
 a society living well, doing no harm, while at the same time not sitting on 
 their hands and doing nothing. Like a climax forest, the Kesh society is in 
 good balance. They have a refined technology, but not a growth technology. 
 They may change the details and the style in the way they do things, but not 
 quickly or radically as in a society built on growth technology such as 
 ours. One way to demonstrate the difference in the way the Kesh lived is to 
 show them involved in the ritual of repeated activities and festivals. The 
 rituals of the season reveal the Kesh embeddedness in the texture of 
 existence, environment, culture. Everything flows in one direction. 
 There seems to be a profound ritual aspect in most healthy Native American 
 cultures. I used the Pueblo and the Hopi to some extent as models. They have 
 a lot of ritualised behaviour, which is all taken very easily and 
 informally. I'm always impressed when I go to pow-wows by how casual they 
 seem. It's ritual, and yet people are talking and laughing and babies are 
 running around. It all seems appropriate. The ritual of organised religion 
 is a different kind of thing. It's something separate, hierarchical, and 
 male-centered. If everybody's doing ritual all the time, as they were in 
 Native American cultures, religion and life are absolutely inseparable. 
 INTERVIEWER: Did your appreciation for ritual change in the process of writing the book? 
 URSULA LE GUIN: One reason I hated to finish the book was that I had to wean 
 myself from going through the year as a Kesh person. I enjoyed it, and I 
 felt very much at home in that kind of round. Living with a fairly 
 consistent cycle of activities, ritual relationships, ceremonies, and 
 festivals is the way most people in most cultures have lived throughout 
 human history. 
 The historical period, which followed the Neolithic era for some thousands 
 of years, is referred to by the Kesh as the time when people lived "outside 
 the world." What do you mean by that? 
 URSULA LE GUIN: What I was doing there is playing with the idea of our 
 present growth technology from the Industrial Revolution on through the 
 present the last 200 years. We don't know when this period will end, but it 
 will. We tend to think of our present historic era as representing the 
 highest evolution of human society. We're convinced that our exploitive, 
 fast-growing technology is the only possible reality. In Always Coming Home, 
 I put people who believe this into one little capsule where the Kesh could 
 look at them as weird aberrations. It was the most disrespectful thing I 
 could do, like wrapping a turd in cellophane. That's sort of a Coyote 
 metaphor. 
 INTERVIEWER: Speaking of Coyote, she wanders in and out of much of your recent work. How did you meet up with her? 
 URSULA LE GUIN: She trotted through a project of mine in 1982. It was an 
 essay on utopia called "A Non-Euclidean View of California as a Cold Place 
 to Be," and when the tracks of utopia and Coyote crossed, I thought, "Yes, 
 now I'm getting somewhere!" The idea of utopia has been stuck in a blueprint 
 phase for too long now. Most of the writing you see is similar to 
 Callenbach's Ecotopia, which is another "wouldn't the future be great if we 
 did this or that?" Or, in science fiction, it's been dystopia: utopia gone 
 sour. These blueprints aren't working anymore. 
 Coyote is an anarchist. She can confuse all civilised ideas simply by 
 trotting through. And she always fools the pompous. Just when your ideas 
 begin to get all nicely arranged and squared off, she messes them up. Things 
 are never going to be neat, that's one thing you can count on. 
 Coyote walks through all our minds. Obviously, we need a trickster, a 
 creator who made the world all wrong. We need the idea of a God who makes 
 mistakes, gets into trouble, and who is identified with a scruffy little 
 animal. 
 Excerpted by permission of Sierra Club Books from Talking on the Water; 
 Conversations About Nature and Creativity, copyright (c) 1994 by Jonathan 
 White. Available at bookstores or by direct mail from: Sierra Club Store 
 Orders, 730 Polk Street, San Francisco, CA 94109. Enclose $15.00 plus $3.00 
 for shipping and handling. California residents please include sales tax. 
