 
 Akutagawa Prize draws controversy after win for work that used ChatGPT - The Japan Times 
 Subscribe 
 Digital 
 Print 
 September 07, 2026 
 Subscribe
 Digital 
 Print 
 Visa rules 
 Yen 
 Nepal flood 
 Latest News 
 Today's print edition 
 Home Delivery 
 JAPAN 
 Politics 
 Society 
 Crime & Legal 
 Science & Health 
 Explainer 
 History 
 WORLD 
 Politics 
 Crime & Legal 
 Science & Health 
 Society 
 ASIA PACIFIC 
 Politics 
 Crime & Legal 
 Science & Health 
 Society 
 BUSINESS 
 Companies 
 Economy 
 Markets 
 Tech 
 SPORTS 
 Sumo 
 Soccer 
 Baseball 
 Basketball 
 Tennis 
 Olympics 
 More sports 
 OPINION 
 Editorials 
 Commentary 
 Geoeconomic Briefing 
 Environment 
 CLIMATE CHANGE 
 Energy 
 SUSTAINABILITY 
 WILDLIFE 
 EARTH SCIENCE 
 LIFE 
 Travel 
 Digital 
 Food & Drink 
 Style & Design 
 Language 
 Lifestyle 
 CULTURE 
 Film 
 Books 
 Music 
 Art 
 TV & Streaming 
 Stage 
 Entertainment news 
 COMMUNITY 
 Voices 
 Issues 
 How-tos 
 Our Lives 
 My Account 
 My Bookmarks 
 Logout 
 Subscribe for more access 
 CULTURE 
 / Books 
 Akutagawa Prize draws controversy after win for work that used ChatGPT
 Rie Qudan speaks to reporters in Tokyo on Wednesday after being awarded the Akutagawa Prize. 
 | Jiji 
 By Thu-Huong Ha 
 Staff writer 
 SHARE/SAVE 
 X 
 Facebook 
 LinkedIn 
 Reddit 
 Bluesky 
 Threads 
 Email 
 Print 
 Bookmark story 
 Copy link 
 Jan 19, 2024
 In recent years, the Akutagawa Prize has diversified its recipient pool: In 2022, the shortlist was all female writers, last year Saou Ichikawa was the first author with a severe physical disability to win and this week marked the first time artificial intelligence walked away with a piece of the prestigious literary award.
 On Wednesday evening, Rie Qudan won the country’s most important prize for early career writers for “Tokyo-to Dojo-to,” or “Sympathy Tower Tokyo.” The novel is about an architect in the capital, billed as a narrative that “exposes the prophecy of the AI generation.” 
 In her acceptance speech, Qudan stated: “This is a novel written by making full use of a generative AI like ChatGPT, and probably about 5% of the whole text is written directly from the generative AI. I would like to work well with them to express my creativity.’”
 The internet had some thoughts. Hundreds of comments poured in on social media platform X, while the last prize announcement received merely dozens. On the platform now known to be rife with AI bots, users called the award unfair and tantamount to plagiarism.
 “If AI-generated works are subject to evaluation, then from now on, as AI evolves further, that would mean a work almost entirely created by AI would be OK too, no?” wrote one user . “In that case, it would no longer be a competition between humans but a battle between AIs. Would that be alright when AI is prohibited in chess and go matches?”
 生成AI使った作品が審査対象になるのなら、来年以降、AIの進化とともに作品のほぼ全部をAIで書いた作品が出てきたとしても、それもOKなんだね。そうなるともはや人ではなくAI同士の戦いだな。将棋・囲碁の対局はAI禁止なのにどうなの。
— 食卓のゾーマ (@shokutakunozoma) January 17, 2024 
 “With regard to an AI-generated work winning a literary award, people will be divided for and against,” wrote another X poster . “However, this has the potential to generate new discussions on the fusion of literature and technology, and new developments are expected in the literary world as well. (About 5% of my reply was written by ChatGPT.)”
 AIによる生成物で文学賞を受賞することについては、賛否が分かれるでしょう。しかし、これは文学と技術の融合において新しい議論を生む可能性があり、文学界においても新たな展開が期待されます。
 （５％くらいChatGPTで書いたリプ）
— どMなキョン (@dom_kyon) January 18, 2024 
 “It seems sales are everything,” wrote one user .
 “Do we need an AI Akutagawa Prize too,” joked another , adding a robot emoji.
 Several users have pointed out that the text of the story contains passages clearly delineated as “an answer given by AI.” If those passages comprise the 5% in question, users speculate, the incorporation of AI-generated text would be less problematic.
 Publisher Shinchosha declined to comment. The author and prize committee did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
 KEYWORDS
 Akutagawa Prize (https://www.japantimes.co.jp/tag/akutagawa-prize) , Rie Qudan (https://www.japantimes.co.jp/tag/rie-qudan) , LITERATURE (https://www.japantimes.co.jp/tag/literature) , AWARDS (https://www.japantimes.co.jp/tag/awards) , AI (https://www.japantimes.co.jp/tag/ai) , TECH (https://www.japantimes.co.jp/tag/tech) 
 In a time of both misinformation and too much information,
 quality journalism is more crucial than ever.
By subscribing, you can help us get the story right.
 SUBSCRIBE NOW 
 With your current subscription plan you can comment on stories. However, before writing your first comment, please create a display name
 in the Profile section of your subscriber account page. 
 Your subscription plan doesn't allow commenting. To learn more see our FAQ 
 WHAT’S TRENDING 
 Editors' Picks 
 Emperor Emeritus Akihito’s funeral rite could be downsized, per his request 
 Short JLPT application window leaves would-be test takers high and dry 
 Yen’s changing fortunes might finally be spooking the bears 
 The new izakaya economy 
 Chinese military commander overseeing Taiwan operations meets U.S. PACOM chief 
 How to navigate parenthood in a multilingual home 
 Punch Room Tokyo shakes its way to the top 
 From farmers to chefs, Japan’s culinary voices tell their tales 
 When the yen ruled the world: Shunji Iwai’s ‘Swallowtail Butterfly’ returns in 4K 
 Corporate venture capital develops in Japan 
 Our Planet
 The joys and challenges of running an Antarctic kitchen 
 By Tomoko Otake 
 Podcast
 Kabukicho: Tokyo’s ‘stadium of desire’ 
 Longform
 The new izakaya economy 
 By Alex K.T. Martin 
 SUSTAINABLE JAPAN 
 Destination Restaurants 2026 award ceremony report 
 SPECIAL SUPPLEMENTS
 Sponsored contents planned and edited by JT Media Enterprise Division.
 広告出稿に関するおといあわせはこちらまで 
 Read more 
 SUPPLEMENTS BINDER
 Bridges by SMS 
 Global Insight 
 GMI Post 
 World Eye Reports 
 Latest News
 Tamaki wins third term as head of Japan opposition DPP 
 9 hours ago
 Spotify’s Lorentzon says he’d leave Sweden if wealth tax imposed 
 9 hours ago
 ‘We can only win’: The rise of the far right in eastern Germany 
 9 hours ago
 At flood-destroyed China-Nepal border, no sign of a once-busy port 
 9 hours ago
 Kyiv adapts to new reality of life under constant Russian drone attack 
 10 hours ago
 SUBSCRIBE 
 In your social network
 Stay up to date with us on your social media platform of choice.
 In your inbox
 Get updates, insights and more via our newsletters.
 SIGN ME UP 
 products & services
 Print subscriptions 
 Academic & Business subscriptions 
 Student subscription 
 JT Digital Archives 
 Epaper Edition 
 RSS feeds 
 help & support
 Support 
 FAQs 
 Link policy 
 Republishing 
 Contact us 
 about us
 Company info 
 Privacy policy 
 Link policy 
 Announcements 
 Work with us 
 Advertise with us 
 Press releases 
 our sites
 The Japan Times Alpha 
 JT Bookclub 
 The Japan Times Jobs 
 Education In Japan 
 Classifieds 
 Public notices 
 Disaster information 
 Comfacts 
 our activities
 Sustainable Japan 
 Destination Restaurants 
 Satoyama Consortium 
 ESG Consortium 
 SUBSCRIBE 
 In your social network
 Stay up to date with us on your social media platform of choice.
 In your inbox
 Get updates, insights and more via our newsletters.
 SIGN ME UP 
 THE JAPAN TIMES LTD. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
