

 Gene Wolfe by Neil Gaiman | Science fiction books | The Guardian

 Skip to main contentSkip to navigation

Gene Wolfe: 'He was a former potato-crisp engineer and magazine editor, and he reminded me of a sweeter-natured, rotunder Sergeant Bilko.' Photograph: Beth Gwinn/Writer Pictures

Gene Wolfe: 'He was a former potato-crisp engineer and magazine editor, and he reminded me of a sweeter-natured, rotunder Sergeant Bilko.' Photograph: Beth Gwinn/Writer Pictures

My heroScience fiction books

 This article is more than 15 years old

Gene Wolfe by Neil Gaiman

This article is more than 15 years old

'Whatever I imagined the author of those glittering, dangerous stories to have been, I was not expecting the genial gentleman I met'

Neil Gaiman

Fri 13 May 2011 10.05 EDT

Share

Prefer the Guardian on Google

I was 22 when I met Gene Wolfe. The last volume in The Book of the New Sun, The Citadel of the Autarch, had just been published, and I had been reading his fiction since my teens.

I was as impressed and delighted by the Book of the New Sun as I was intimidated by it. Wolfe's use of language, the grand sweep of his story, the way he used science fiction to illuminate ideas and people and to stretch my mind in ways it had never been stretched before, the way he played with memory and gave us a perfectly reliable unreliable narrator – all these things thrilled me. (Years later, Michael Dirda of the Washington Post would call it "The greatest fantasy novel written by an American," and he would be right.)

I was a young journalist, and I asked for and was given an interview with Wolfe. I do not know what I expected, but whatever I imagined the author of those glittering, dangerous stories to have been, I was not expecting the genial gentleman I met. He was a former potato crisp engineer and magazine editor, and he reminded me of a sweeter-natured, rotunder Sergeant Bilko. Oddly, perhaps, given the difference in our ages and temperaments, we became friends. And now, almost 30 years later, we are still friends and I am still a fan.

I've met too many of my heroes, and these days I avoid meeting the few I have left, because the easiest way to stop having heroes is to meet them, or worse, have dinner with them. But Gene Wolfe remains a hero to me. He's just turned 80, looks after his wife Rosemary, and is still writing deep, complex, brilliant fiction that slips between genres. He's my hero because he keeps trying new ways of writing and because he remains as kind and as patient with me as he was when I was almost a boy. He's the finest living male American writer of SF and fantasy – possibly the finest living American writer. Most people haven't heard of him. And that doesn't bother Gene in the slightest. He just gets on with writing the next book.

Explore more on these topics

Science fiction books

My hero

features

Share

Reuse this content

More on this story

More on this story

The stars of modern SF pick the best science fiction

What's your favourite SF novel?

A life in writing: China Miéville

Great voices of science fiction

Ten of the best

Science fiction: Images from other worlds – in pictures

The Guardian Books podcast
Guardian Books podcast: Arts and science, one culture

Comments (…)
Sign in or create your Guardian account to join the discussion

Most viewed

Most viewed

Film

Books

Music

Art & design

TV & radio

Stage

Classical

Games

Design a better world

 
