Sci-Fi’s Difficult Genius | The New Yorker

Skip to main content

Gene Wolfe’s 1986 novel “Soldier of the Mist” centers on a Roman mercenary named Latro. Having suffered an injury during the Battle of Plataea, a Greco-Persian War skirmish, Latro has no memory of his past. Each night, he writes the day’s events on a scroll; the next morning he reads the scroll to bring himself current. Latro has to carefully choose what he is going to write down: he is limited by time, because when he sleeps he loses his memory again, and by the medium, because there is only so much papyrus. It is hinted that Latro’s wound was caused by the meddling of the gods, and, like the blind seer Tiresias, whose affliction was also the result of divine vengeance, Latro is given another gift: he can see the gods, and even speak with them. It could be the case, however, that Latro’s wound causes him to hallucinate.

Gene Wolfe is known as the Melville of science-fiction. Why hasn’t he found a wider audience?Photograph by Matheiu Bourgois/AP

On the phone from his home in Peoria, Gene Wolfe explained to me recently that Latro’s memory loss does not make him an unreliable narrator, as many critics assume. Instead, Latro might reveal only the truth that matters. Latro must ask himself, Wolfe said, “What is worth writing, what is going to be of value to me when I read it in the future? What will I want to know?” These are questions that Wolfe has been asking himself, in one form or another, for decades. His stories and novels are rich with riddles, mysteries, and sleights of textual hand. His working lexicon is vast, and his plots are unspooled by narrators who deliberately confuse or are confused—or both.

Peter Bebergal is the author of “Strange Frequencies: The Extraordinary Story of the Technological Quest for the Supernatural.”

More:BooksCatholic ChurchScience Fiction

Books & Fiction

Get book recommendations, fiction, poetry, and dispatches from the world of literature in your in-box. Sign up for the Books & Fiction newsletter.

Enter your e-mail address

Sign up

Will be used in accordance with our Privacy Policy.

Read More

The Anti-Tolkien

By Peter Bebergal

Just Write It!

A fantasy author and his impatient fans.

By Laura Miller


