Reviews: March 1988 

 Science Fiction Studies 

 #44 = Volume 15, Part 1 = March 1988

 BOOKS IN REVIEW 

 Handle with Care 

 Simone Vierne. Jules
 Verne . Paris: Balland, 1986. 447pp. FF89.00 

 As well as her Rite, roman, initiation (1973), Professor Vierne is justly
 well-known for her long-term pioneering work on Jules Verne--authorship studies, her 1972 
 thèse d'Etat , Jules Verne et le roman initiatique (published in 1973), prefaces to
 Garnier Flammarion editions of the "Voyages Extraordinaires," and many other
 distinguished efforts. Unfortunately, this latest volume--which appears in the Phare
 series, devoted so far to Freud, Machiavelli, and Malraux --does not fully live up to what
 might have been expected. The book, it is true, is written for a very general audience,
 and thus originality is not necessarily an important criterion; but all the same, Jules
 Verne shows signs of a certain haste. It is sometimes needlessly drawn out and
 repetitious; allusions are dropped which the general reader cannot possibly fathom;
 assertions are made but not followed up; and recent scholarship, especially of the
 non-traditional variety, is under-represented (e.g., Delabroy's thesis). All this is a
 shame, for there is a great deal of value in the book, especially for those new to the
 subject. The style is elegantly straightforward, and the decision to complement each of
 the six chapters with a selection of eminently-quotable extracts both from other works by
 Verne and from the critical corpus is very effective. 

 After a chronology of Verne's life, Vierne provides a general introduction and then
 proceeds to individual novels. Her commentary on Cinq semaines en ballon does
 justice to the brilliant chapitre sur rien of the desert scene, to the English
 and Scottish character types, to the role of the tree-refuge, and, more generally, to the
 authentic poetry of much of Verne's writing, its unique combination of realistic and
 symbolic levels. Her discussion of Voyage au centre de la Terre pins down much of
 the intertextuality evident in the text, including the mythical substratum. Vingt
 mille lieues and Le Tour du monde are dealt with adequately; but only a
 tantalizing snatch is given about a first draft of part of L'Ile mystérieuse ;
 and Le Château des Carpathes , finally, could have been covered in a more
 analytical fashion. One interesting detail from all this is that the extremely passionate
 and lyrical "quotations" put into Aouda's and La Stilla's mouths were apparently
 invented by Verne--although some evidence for this view of Vierne's she does not supply. 

 Ultimately, the most useful aspect of this book is its account of the reactions to
 Verne. His persistent reputation for scientificité and authenticity originated,
 it can be seen, in the contemporary critics, themselves often merely reproducing the
 hand-outs of his publisher, Hetzel (whereas we can recognize that the authenticity is in
 fact rarely more than extreme plausibility). Rimbaud's reaction in particular can be read
 in his very Vernian Bateau ivre ; and Zola, in a first article, also 
 quite liked Verne--but then subsequently attacked him ferociously, denying his 
 works even the quality of "novels." 

 The errors in this book include: " Forum de New York " for the Forum of
 New York (p. 26); " Goalh's companion de Boston" for Youth's Companion (p.
 100); "Ney Land" (p. 232); " Haarper' Bazar " (p. 385); "John
 Clark" as author of 2001 (p. 427); and "Gallacher" (p. 444) for Gallagher.
 It is also wrong to claim that Allotte de la Fuÿe was the first biographer of Verne (p.
 35); that the North and East of France were "peu accessibles à l'époque" (p. 81);
 that "les jeux de mots des romans...ne bravent jamais l'honnêteté" (p. 86; see Compère and Soriano); that Apocalypse Now is about the atomic bomb (p. 91); that
 "ce n'est que par hasard que le cataclysme n'a pas lieu" in Sans Dessus Dessous (p.
 98); that Verne quotes Wagner with admiration only before 1871 (p. 100); that wheat ever
 multiplies in "progression arithmétique" (p. 303); that the Minard RLM bibliography
 is still continuing (p. 394); and that the number of articles on Verne is "au moins
 2000 à mon avis" (p. 443--it already exceeded 2600 in 1982). Very debatable as well, in
 my view, are the claims that: "L'Eternel Adam" is purely and simply
 "extrêmement pessimiste" (p. 90); that "Saknussem" ( sic ) ever really
 reached the center of the Earth (p. 163); that my own thesis is "difficilement
 accessible," probably formalist, and systematically Ricardolien (pp. 412-13); that time
 can ever be totally "abolished" (p. 209); or that time's mythical and metaphysical
 aspects are ignored by Verne (p. 426). 

 But I would not like to give the impression that this book is without considerable
 usefulness. It's just that, to get from Jules Verne to Jules Verne, you need to
 keep your wits about you. A manier avec précaution. 

 -- William Butcher University of Buckingham 

 Second Chances 

 Richard Hauer Costa. H.G. Wells . Rev. ed. Boston: Twayne,
 1985. xx + 177pp. $13.95. 

 Robert Crossley . H.G.
 Wells . Starmont House, 1986 [rpt. 1983 ed.]. 79pp. $7.95 (paper) 

 By the very fact that Twayne has issued a revised H.G. Wells , one is reminded
 of how much has happened in Wells studies since Richard Hauer Costa originally produced
 his survey in 1967; and, indeed, in the updated index, bibliography, and acknowledgments,
 Costa cites some 25 new books about Wells. Pity he does not make better use of them. He
 does remedy some of the holes in the 1967 text. The discussion of Wells and feminism has
 been expanded, and there is a head-on effort to gauge the Wellsian and Jamesian types of
 "central intelligence" by comparing them in Britling and The
 Ambassadors . But very little has been added or altered as regards the Wells of the
 1920s, '30s, and '40s, where the survey was --and remains --the scantiest. What has not
 been remedied at all (indeed, has in some ways been exacerbated) is bad organization,
 with attendant repetitiousness, and factual unreliability. 

 For present purposes, I shall consider mostly the revised text. Rather than
 assimilating the old text to the requirements of the new findings, Costa typically retains
 the major sections of the original nearly verbatim and then at remote and arbitrary
 junctures interpolates the results of recent criticism. In large part because of this
 untidy and repetitious procedure, the book has fattened by maybe 30%. For example, the
 discussion of Wells's early SF is barely altered (occupying chapter 3 in the 1967 edition
 and chapter 2 in 1985); but then eight chapters later, without warning, comes a new
 section, "The Science Fictionists: The Time Machine ," which is subheaded
 disjunctively under "Suvin," "Parrinder," "Philmus," and
 "Huntington," and which alludes to the chapter 2 discussion only in passing. The
 all-new chapter 8, "Wells and Science," is another unexpected add-in. It explicates
 the science connection in Wells's opus by reference to the recent critics, Roslynn Haynes
 and (again) John Huntington; but the eighth chapter (out of 11) would be much too late for
 the basic question of Wells and science were it not that the subject has already been
 broached in the aforementioned chapter 2. This sort of postscriptum procedure makes the
 book a chore to read. 

 Unreliability is a bad problem. The book being a frankly derivative summary survey of
 Wells and his critics, factual accuracy is particularly important. I made a partial check
 of quotations and quickly turned up over 100 errors in the quotations themselves, the page
 references, or the attributions, and the majority of them were carried from the first
 edition. Too many slips are symptomatic. A survey may be derivative, but it ought not to
 be erroneously derivative. That last sentence is Richard D. Mullen's from a 1967 review
 (in Riverside Quarterly ) that decisively memorialized Costa's remarkable
 ignorance of the contents of The Holy Terror (taken as a sample of his general
 ignorance of the later Wells) and his evident erroneous understanding of his second-hand
 source, whatever it was, which he had not acknowledged. Actually, the source turns out to
 be Antonina Vallentin (apparent from verbal echoes), and it is true that Costa condenses
 her remarks to the point of inanity. The stinger, though, is that the "revised"
 (1985) Holy Terror discussion reads exactly as before. After that nothing is
 surprising, but I shall add four other curious inaccuracies. The Philmus-Hughes
 bibliography of Wells's early science journalism is said to list over 200 items (p. 10),
 when in fact it lists fewer than 100; William Bellamy's Rieffian psychological analysis of
 Wells at the fin-de-siècle is said to account for the "exhilaration" of Wells's short stories (p. 31), when in fact Bellamy's analysis sets out to account for
 "images of malaise"; Huntington is said to chronicle all of Wells, "The whole
 performance" (p. 107), when in fact Huntington halts at about 1905--except for the
 elaboration of a single phrase that he borrows from The Work, Wealth, and Happiness of
 Mankind ; and Philmus is said to have stated that the Time Traveler brings back a
 wilted flower "from the one hundred twenty-first century" (p. 146), when in fact Philmus mentioned that century in another connection, did not relate it to the wilted
 flower, and would have been about 690 millennia in error if he had. 

 As a Starmont pamphlet, Robert Crossley's H.G. Wells surveys exclusively the
 SF, a much less ambitious undertaking than Costa's, which is further simplified by
 limiting discussion to Wells's five SF classics ( The Time Machine, The Island of
 Doctor Moreau, The Invisible Man, The War of the Worlds, The First Men in the Moon )
 and a rather spotty run-down of the short stories. Granted these disclaimers, Crossley
 offers much in little. The core of individual readings of the SF, in the above order, is
 preceded by a sketch of Wells's life to age 30 and a concise account of Wells's
 development after 1900 as a movement from the "pure fantasy" of the SF to the
 "applied fantasy" of the action-oriented works that followed. So even though those
 works lie beyond Crossley's scope, he shows the SF as opening a path to them. The
 individual readings themselves are thematically unified in terms of continuing religious,
 political, and social motifs; but, at the same time, Crossley's approach is at bottom
 literary and aesthetic, as indicated by his rarely equaled interest in Wells's
 characters-as-characters and his attention to Wells's use of language. The latter involves
 generous and often un-shopworn chunks of quotation. Also, Crossley's own style is fluent
 and strikes off teachable if sometimes glib critical phrases. A few examples: as already
 noted, fantasy may by "applied" or "pure" (p. 13); Wells, with Samuel Johnson,
 would "regulate imagination by reality" rather than, with Henry James, build "a
 house of fiction," because Wells's was "a documentary imagination" (pp. 16-17); the
 Time Traveler is in part "profoundly Morlockian" (p. 26), and in the cannibalism of
 his future, "politics shall become flesh" (p. 28); and so forth. Altogether, this is
 a fresh, readable guide to Wells's most famous SF, and, at the same time, it is
 knowledgeable, unobtrusively at home with the recent secondary literature (i.e., as of
 1979, the date of composition; and the 10 pages of primary and secondary bibliographies,
 usefully classified and annotated, have been brought up through 1984). 

 Science is Crossley's blind spot--I think less from a humanistic or aesthetic than from
 a religious standpoint. He minimizes the science Wells knew by treating T.H. Huxley's
 influence as purely philosophical, as if Huxley never taught the dissection of a rabbit,
 and by encapsulating all of Wells's science in the fact that "he left school
 with a mediocre record and got various undistinguished jobs teaching science to
 preadolescent boys" (p. 13), as if Wells had not later taken the B.Sc. with first-class
 honors in zoology, taught adults (one of whom he married), and written or collaborated on
 two biology texts. Then, turning to the fiction, Crossley tends to equate science with the
 pseudo-scientific patter that accompanies time travel, invisibility, or anti-gravity, and
 by dismissing the patter, to undercut the claims of science upon Wells's science fiction.
 In turn, the vacancy thus opened up tends to promote religious themes stepping in, not
 necessarily an implausible displacement: it is 15 years since the Mackenzies connected the
 evangelical Christianity of Wells's youth with the apocalyptic aspects of Darwin
 (especially Huxley's Darwin). Crossley's religious glossings make good (if only partial)
 sense. He notes Wells's frequent biblical language and comments on the creation scenes by
 Moreau and on the lunar surface, the transformation scenes in The War of the Worlds ,
 and the first (Adamic) and last (contra-Adamic) men scattered through the SF. In a word,
 Crossley seems to miss the point that Wells uses the vistas opened by science to dwarf the
 "eternities" of religion and to create out of religious language and imagery an
 ironic comment on religious anthropomorphism. 

 In spite of this caveat, Crossley's H.G. Wells excels as an introduction
 intended for a wide audience, including non-specialists of all sorts. 

 --David Y. Hughes University of Michigan 

 Something to Think About 

 Joseph Sanders. E.E.
 Smith . [Starmont Reader's Guide No. 24.] Mercer Island, WA: Starmont
 Press, 1986. 96pp. $7.95 (paper) 

 This monograph deals with the problem of why good men write bad books and why sensible
 people read them-- or, to be precise, those are two issues that must be faced when dealing
 with such monuments of the Semi-Precious Metal Ages of SF as Doc Smith. I suspect that few
 men over 30 who read SF during their adolescence (I cannot speak for the women) did not
 enjoy Doc Smith's books--and that few would now admit to rereading, let alone enjoying,
 them. The "Skylark" and "Lensman" series, along with the work of Edgar Rice
 Burroughs, Edmond Hamilton, Ray Cummings, Robert E. Howard, and others of their generation
 and publishing niche, comprise the literary acne of SF&F, a painful and embarrassing
 adolescent memory. What Sanders must manage, beyond the basic Starmont imperative to
 deliver biographic and bibliographic data, is to remind those of us who have forgotten
 what it was that might have appealed to us in those tales of iron men in wooden prose. 

 One fairly common answer must be: "Nothing. We were, after all, immature,
 tasteless, and probably neurotic. Any lingering fondness for the stuff is evidence that we
 never quite managed to grow up." This is pretty much Brian Stableford's position in two
 brief critical pieces on Smith's work ("The Skylark Series" and "The Lensman
 Series" in Survey of Science Fiction Literature , ed. Frank Magill, 1979), where
 the best he can say is, "The Skylark books are aesthetically and
 intellectually vacuous, and can no longer offer the same kind of revelatory
 consciousness-expansion that they once did" ("Skylark," p. 2094). Smith's space
 operas were popular in their own time, Stableford says, partly because they offered
 marvels new to that time; they manage to remain popular thanks to a "constant supply
 of new naive readers" ("Skylark," p. 2095), for whom the "innocent brutality"
 of Smith's work is therapeutic rather than dangerous. 

 The strength of Sanders' study is that it is a sympathetic response to Smith's work,
 one with a sense of the history of the field and of its audience. Its weakness is that it
 is sometimes too sympathetic, so that readers who do not share Sanders's feelings about
 the subject will likely leave without satisfying answers to some of their questions about
 the continuing importance of Smith in SF. Sanders does offer a good portrait of E.E. Smith
 the man. He was, by more accounts than this one, decent and industrious, intellectually
 and athletically active, and ethically sensitive enough to get himself fired from a
 munitions plant job in a dispute over quality control. His outdoorsy, Western upbringing
 (which Sanders uses to explain some of Smith's gaudy, exaggerated dialogue) and his
 day-job career as a doughnut-factory chemist make him sound like something out of an old Saturday
 Evening Post story, and there is something appealingly of the period about Smith's
 life. 

 But the real question is: What kind of writer was Smith--where did those books
 come from and why did (and does) their audience enjoy them? Sanders shows how Smith
 worked, how he grew as a writer (I can already hear the opposition grumbling at that last
 verb). In the case of the "Lensman" books especially, we see how the series
 developed, changed, accreted; and we get some sense of what the appeal must have been as
 the four original serials ( Galactic Patrol , 1937; Gray Lensman , 1939; Second
 Stage Lensman , 1941; Children of the Lens , 1947) appeared in Astounding ,
 each topping its predecessor ( vide the "Riverworld" series for a similar
 effect). That Smith's ambitions for his space operas were large and their effects
 consciously worked at there can be little doubt; Sanders shows that the core of the
 "Lensman" series was conceived as a single large adventure, each new serial opening
 out onto a wider and wilder picture of who the galactic bad guys really are. Such planning
 makes Smith less the stereotypical pulpster, following up on a popular success with more
 of the same, improvising feverishly to top each climax with a bigger one. 

 With the addition of First Lensman (1950; written from scratch to fill a gap)
 and Triplanetary (1948; revised and patched in from a 1934 serial), the series
 became a different kind of work from the serials. First, the reworking of Triplanetary
 changed the way later generations of readers would experience Smith's saga by giving
 away at the start the mystery of who stands behind the forces of evil rather than
 revealing the layers of Boskone's organization a layer at a time. Second, the presentation
 of the series as a single multivolume work reinforced the impression that the author's
 intentions went beyond ephemeral pulp adventure; the specially-bound set issued as The
 History of Civilization (1955) may seem an example of fannish exuberance or authorial
 pomposity, but there is a kernel of serious purpose at the center of the title and
 packaging. Sanders argues that Smith was concerned with "the moral struggle for
 contact/ growth" (p. 60), the need to develop one's own powers and to recognize the
 humanity of other thinking creatures (including women). In this view, the heroes and
 villains are synechdochic representatives of their societies, of Civilization and Boskone,
 and we know Civilization through, say, Kimball Kinnison rather than through a clear
 portrait of his culture. 

 It is in explanations such as this that Sanders has the most trouble. Having handled
 the objection that Smith's picture of a future Civilization is sketchy (indeed, what we
 see looks remarkably like 1938 America) by saying that "Smith's lack of interest in
 the masses of society is balanced by his very strong interest in the individual" (p. 46),
 he must deal at once with the fact that Doc was not known for his characterization either.
 Here I think Sanders may be trying too hard to defend Smith against all comers, and I am
 not sure that case can be made without apologizing for Doc's limitations at least a
 little. I reread Gray Lensman before starting this review, and even after
 reviewing Sanders's argument that Smith's nearly-perfect heroes are hard to believe
 because their lack of ambivalence and weakness is "alien to most human experience"
 (p. 47), it still seems to me that Smith simply lacked the skill to pull off such
 portraits, and perhaps had not thought too deeply about what a moral, intellectual, and
 physical superman might be like. 

 In the end, Sanders makes as good a case for Smith as one can, and if he cannot
 completely answer the Stablefordian critique, he does balance it. Critical response to
 Smith and to space opera in general, I suspect, is less a matter of substance than of how
 one feels about works that do not transcend adolescence. It may indeed be difficult or
 impossible to revisit the scenes of teenage wonder without noticing that the backdrops are
 painted flats and that the wires holding up the spaceships are visible, but a complete
 devaluation of such works also devalues their audiences, and that is something that we
 should think about. 

 -- Russell Letson St Cloud, MN 

 Blooming Absences 

 Harold Bloom, ed. Ursula
 K. Le Guin . ["Modern Critical Views Series."] NY: Chelsea House,
 1986. x + 274pp. $27.50 

 Chelsea House has not shown much interest in including SF authors in its "Modern
 Critical Views" series--for which oversight, authors and scholars can be thankful.
 Reputations are not aided by being bound up in Chelsea House boards, in spite of the
 prestigious Harold Bloom serving as General Editor and as author of the introductions. 

 The Le Guin volume consists of 17 essays, arranged by date of publication (1974-85).
 The "Editor's Note" does not indicate how the essays were selected, only that they
 are the "most illuminating criticism" (p. ix). Essays were apparently chosen for
 uncovering central themes or background sources; for discussing meaningful contexts for
 Le Guin's work--genre, utopian literature, ethnology; and for examining, in depth, her
 major works. 

 It is disturbing to consider how many significant aspects of Le Guin criticism are
 missing--for example, Kathleen Spencer's study of Le Guin's fiction in light of Victor
 Turner's concept of liminality and social structure, Marty Bickman's demonstration of the
 unity of concept and structure in The Left Hand of Darkness , Kate Hayles'
 examination of the ambivalence of androgyny in The Left Hand of Darkness , Tom
 Remington's studies on the imagery of touch in Le Guin's work, M. Teresa Tavormina's
 discussion of physics as metaphors in The Dispossessed , Peter Nicholls' early
 review-article on the concept of death in The Farthest Shore . Also missing are
 the more controversial essays by other SF authors who admire Le Guin, but urge her beyond
 what they perceive as her limitations--Joanna Russ, Samuel Delany, Stanislaw Lem. There
 are no essays which give the more personal side of Le Guin, such as those by Karl Kroeber
 or Vonda McIntyre. 

 Perhaps one reason for the absence of this variety is that nearly two-thirds of the
 essays were selected from the two best known and most readily available sources of SF
 essays--the two North American journals devoted to SF. Seven essays in the Bloom volume
 are from SFS , four are from books, three from Extrapolation , and one each from Mosaic
 and Children's Literature ; one is original to this volume. Two of the
 omitted essays mentioned above, for example, were published in Foundation . 

 Another reason may be a lack of familiarity with Le Guin's entire opus. The last eight
 essays in the volume are identified as focusing "in depth upon what would appear to
 be Le Guin's principal achievements to date: The Left Hand of Darkness , The
 Dispossessed and The Beginning Place " (p. ix). The consensus on The
 Beginning Place is not that clear; nor does the volume give any consideration to Le
 Guin's collection of short stories, The Compass Rose (1982), or to her most
 recent novel, Always Coming Home (1985). In fact, neither of these works is even
 listed in the chronology of Le Guin's life and work at the end of the Bloom volume. 

 The arrangement of the essays is chronological, yet there is no discussion, in either
 the "Editor's Note" or "Introduction," of the history or development of Le Guin criticism. The book begins with essays by Ketterer (1974), Barbour (1974), and
 Scholes (1975). Not only are the dates misleading (both Ketterer's and Scholes's essays
 were first published a year earlier), but Eleanor Cameron's 1971 essay on A Wizard of
 Earthsea , which discusses the anthropological, mythical, and Jungian elements in Le
 Guin's fantasy, is noticeably missing. 

 All of these absences and oversights suggest a "factory-line" production of the
 "Modern Critical Views" series. Unfortunately, there is even further evidence of a
 carelessly produced volume. The note on Susan Wood, a contributor to the volume, is
 written in the present tense; she died in 1980. The co-editor of SFS is listed as R.D.
 Miller; R.D. Mullen, a thorough and careful editor himself, deserves better than this. The
 volume's bibliography lists only 26 additional essays and books. How items were selected
 for this "honorable mention" list is not indicated; its title, "Bibliography,"
 is misleading since the list is so short; neither of the two previous anthologies of
 criticism on Le Guin appears in the list (I mean De Bolt's and Olander and Greenberg's). 

 The most shocking indication of careless production is that all notes and references
 that originally accompanied the essays have been stripped away. I cannot imagine an
 audience that would find the Bloom volume's version of any of these essays useful or
 acceptable--neither high school nor university students or libraries. The reader must find
 an earlier published version of each essay to recover the original author's careful,
 scholarly documentation. It is unconscionable that anyone would wish to foster among
 students and scholars the idea that documentation can simply be deleted--and without
 even mentioning that it was ever there. Nor should any scholarly book foster the idea that
 critical essays are written without knowledge of colleagues' work. Furthermore, the editor
 has not provided notes of his own on the publishing context of the articles. Thus, the
 reader has no idea that Klein's contribution is the second part of an essay, the first
 part of which was published in SFS No. 13 (1977), nor that Joanna Russ responded to its
 sexism in SFS No. 17 (1979). Nor does the reader know that Ketterer's essay prompted
 several written responses (in SFS No. 6 [1975] and No. 8 [1976]) or that Barbour published
 an addendum to his article in SFS No. 7. Nor does the reader know that Scholes's
 discussion of the SF&F context of Le Guin's work rests on his identification and
 definition of an inclusive genre called "structural fabulation." 

 The conclusion is obvious: do not buy this book and do not ask your library to buy this
 book or any other volume in the "Modern Critical Views" series. 

 WORKS CITED 

 Bickman, Martin. "Le Guin's The Left Hand of Darkness : Form and 
 Content," SFS , 4 (1977):42-47. 

 Cameron, Eleanor. "High Fantasy: A Wizard of Earthsea ," Horn Book ,
 47 (1971): 129-38. 

 De Bolt, Joseph, ed. Ursula K. Le Guin: Voyager to Inner Lands and to Outer Space .
 Port Washington, NY: Kennikat, 1978. 

 Delany, Samuel R. "To Read The Dispossessed ," in The Jewel-Hinged Jaw (Elizabethtown,
 NY: Dragon, 1977), pp. 239-308. 

 Hayles, N.K. "Androgyny, Ambivalence, and Assimilation in The Left Hand of
 Darkness ," in Olander & Greenberg, pp. 97-115, 228-29. 

 Ketterer, David. " The Left Hand of Darkness : Ursula K. Le Guin's
 Archetypal 'Winter Journey,'" Riverside Quarterly , 5 (1973):288-97.

 Kroeber, Karl. "Sisters and Science Fiction," Little Magazine , 10
 (1976): 87-90. 

 Lem, Stanislaw. "Lost Opportunities: Part II: The Left Hand of Darkness ,"
 SF Commentary , 24 (1971):22-24. 

 McIntyre, Vonda. Introduction to Le Guin's From Elfland to Poughkeepsie .
 (Portland: Pendragon, 1973), pp. xiii-xviii. 

 Nicholls, Peter. "Showing Children the Value of Death," Foundation , 5
 (1974):75-79. 

 Olander, Joseph D. & Martin Harry Greenberg. Ursula K. Le Guin. ["Writers
 of the 21st Century Series"] NY: Taplinger, 1979. 

 Remington, Thomas J. "The Other Side of Suffering: Touch as Theme and Metaphor in
 Le Guin's Science Fiction Novels," in Olander & Greenberg, pp. 153-77, 234-36.

 ________. "A Touch of Difference, A Touch of Love," Extrapolation , 18
 (1976): 28-41. 

 Russ, Joanna. "The Image of Women in Science Fiction," in Red Clay Reader 7
 (Charlotte, NC: Southern Review, 1969), pp. 35-40. 

 ________. "Review of The Dispossessed ," Fantasy and Science Fiction ,
 38 (1975):41-44. 

 Scholes, Robert. "The Good Witch of The West," Hollins Critic , 11
 (1974):1-12. 

 Spencer, Kathleen. "Exiles and Envoys: The SF of Ursula K. Le Guin," Foundation ,
 20 (1980):32-43. 

 Tavormina, M. Teresa. "Physics as Metaphors: The General Temporal Theory in The
 Dispossessed ," Mosaic , 13 (1980):51-62. 

 --Elizabeth Cummins U. Missouri -- Rolla 

 Totalizing History 

 Brian W. Aldiss, with David Wingrove. Trillion Year Spree: The History of Science 
 Fiction. NY: Atheneum, 1986. 511pp. $24.95 

 When Brian Aldiss's Billion Year Spree: The True History of Science Fiction 
 (1973) appeared over a decade ago, it announced itself as "th[e] first history of the genre"
 (p. 2); and considering its scope, it was right to do so. In spite of its less than
 rapturous reception by reviewers and critics at the time (a fact which an understandably
 disgruntled Aldiss does not let readers forget in his introduction to the present revised
 and updated edition) Billion Year Spree proved to be a valuable compilation of SF
 history and (non-academic) criticism. That qualifying "non-academic" means that it
 is both intelligent and readable, entertaining in a way that, unfortunately, many works
 written for purely academic reception are not. This is the book I recommend to friends
 when they want to know more about an area in which I am currently investing so much of my
 time. 

 Billion Year Spree is subtitled in a way which calls the reader's attention to
 one of the earliest extant fantasies, the 2nd-century True History of Lucian of
 Samosata. Aldiss's implicit alignment of his 1973 history with a text of pure
 imagination gives to Billion Year Spree the kind of cachet such a work
 requires: it seems prepared to admit its own subjective limitations as the history of a
 literary genre which invites many differing perspectives. Even in this first edition,
 however, Aldiss was quite prepared to defend his historical viewpoint against all
 challengers. And in its present reincarnation, his history of SF is no longer
 (ironically?) subtitled "true history"; it has become simply "the history of
 science fiction." This much less flexible self-advertisement leaves Trillion Year
 Spree open to the many criticisms which can be (and have been) leveled at historical
 totalizations of any kind. Since this is a history which has been "designed to serve
 in schools where SF is on the curriculum" (p. 23), it is important to keep such caveats
 in mind. 

 It is as if Aldiss and David Wingrove have decided to accept Sam Moskowitz's critically
 na i ve assurance (recently expressed in his 
 "Five Steps to Science Fiction Sanity," Extrapolation ,
 27 [1986]:281-94), that there are "mountains of facts" available to be gathered
 about SF and that the " assemblage " of these facts is "very likely to
 give the right answers, just as placing all the pieces of a jigsaw puzzle into place
 offers the complete picture" (Moskowitz: 291). From this perspective, Trillion Year
 Spree proves to be a rather more irritating reading experience than its forerunner
 because it seems even more insistent on its own ability to offer "the complete
 picture." Since historical "facts" are precisely not like "the pieces
 of a jigsaw puzzle"--who chooses them? which facts are available to which historian?
 which facts do not fit which theory and therefore are not considered? how much does taste
 and personal history affect the choice of these facts? how can one separate historical
 facts from traditionally received ideas which have solidified into "facts"?--all one
 can ever hope to produce is "a" history, never "the" history, no matter what
 one's subject happens to be. All this strikes me as somewhat ironic since Aldiss and
 Wingrove express their agreement with James Blish's remark that Moskowitz's "sole
 critical principle is one of infinite regress" (p. 440, n. 23). From this perspective, Trillion
 Year Spree itself suffers from a certain critical backsliding. 

 As a consequence, I find myself somewhat less than completely reassured by the authors'
 claim that Trillion Year Spree has been written "with as much neutrality and
 freedom from favoritism or prejudice as its authors can contrive between them" (p.
 23). I assume this is why the authors chose to exclude Aldiss's own work from their
 history. Not only am I not convinced of the wisdom of such an exclusion, since Brian
 Aldiss is one of the most important figures in the history of modern British SF; but it
 holds true only insofar as the body of the work is concerned. The endnotes, while
 attesting to research which is both relevant and wide-ranging (and which clearly
 demonstrates the authors' familiarity with much of the critical work which has been
 produced since the publication of the previous volume), also amount to a mini-history of
 Aldiss's own work as SF writer, critic, and public figure. This hardly counts as complete
 exclusion from the text. 

 The authors make it clear in their introduction that the critical framework of the
 previous edition has remained unchanged. This framework was constructed upon several
 theses, all of which are still operant in the present volume: (1) that SF is a literary
 descendent of the Gothic mode; (2) that Mary Shelley's Frankenstein is the first
 "real" SF novel; (3) that SF can be defined as "the search for a definition of
 man and his status in the universe which will stand in our advanced but confused state of
 knowledge (science), and is characteristically cast in the Gothic or post-Gothic mould"
 ( Billion Year Spree , p. 8). The reader can accept these contentions or not; what
 counts here is the clarity with which Aldiss and Wingrove's framework is presented. I am
 happy enough to concede Frankenstein to Aldiss: it is certainly as appealing as
 any other starting point which has been suggested for SF and has much to recommend it as
 at least a significant progenitor. As for historical roots and definitions, Aldiss's
 arguments add much useful fodder to the critical debates surrounding these topics.
 However, while Trillion Year Spree continues to offer ideas which are
 intellectually challenging, its tone is often annoyingly self-congratulatory. For
 example: 

 It is hard to recognize now the confusion that existed then [at the time of Billion
 Year Spree's publication]. Before my book appeared, there was no accepted idea of
 when SF began. Some critics claimed it all started in a semi-juvenile pulp magazine in the
 twenties, others that Homer wrote science fiction. Ludicrously enough, these were often
 the same critics. Yet to have no understanding of this matter is to have no understanding
 of the function and nature of SF. (p. 20) 

 This is not only arrogant; it is questionable. And its tone guarantees that it will
 come under attack: to claim that one has set straight the entire literary community as to
 the provenance of a particular literary genre seems to me to be like waving a red flag at
 a breed of bull which is only too ready to involve itself in battles of this nature. 

 In the current volume, the authors have "modified" Aldiss's original definition
 of SF by changing two words: "man" has become "mankind" and "mould" has
 become "mode." The latter change emphasizes Aldiss's contention that SF is a mode
 rather than a genre; this change is advertised in the Introduction. Curiously, however,
 there is no mention of the change from "man" to "mankind." I assume that this
 is an attempt to excise the sexist language of the original ("science fiction is the
 search for a definition of man...") through the use of a word which is more
 "inclusive." But just as the use of "mankind" is a move in the right direction
 which still remains less than acceptable, so Trillion Year Spree includes a
 recognition which is also less than adequate of feminist presence in SF, in spite of the
 few pages devoted to the subject in their final chapter. This aspect of Aldiss and
 Wingrove's history indicates what I consider to be a significant weakness in their
 approach: a lack of recognition of the inevitably political nature of so much of the
 material in question. One example of the results of what I consider to be their
 underplaying of the role of feminism in the development of SF should suffice: in chapter
 3, "Honourable Ancestors: Good Places and Other Places," which includes a
 consideration of utopian fiction in the development of SF, the authors conclude that
 "Aldous Huxley's Island (1962)...may be among the last of the considerable
 utopias until the world climate alters" (p. 74). Not only has this discussion not
 mentioned Charlotte Perkins Gilman's Herland (1915), which is introduced only in
 the subsequent consideration of 19th-century SF; there is no acknowledgment at this point
 that works such as Marge Piercy's Woman on the Edge of Time (1976) or Joanna
 Russ's The Female Man (1977) may perhaps be worth at least as much attention as
 Huxley's rather fatigued final effort at utopian fiction. Aldiss and Wingrove demonstrate
 a subjectivity in their approach to the whole idea of utopian writing--which perhaps
 accounts for their relative neglect of works by Piercy and Russ (not to mention Le Guin
 and Delany) at this particular point in their history. They conclude that 

 a decline in the general belief in political systems; a profound questioning of the
 effects of technology; even the retreat from so much as lip service towards established
 religion; these are some of the factors which render unlikely the creation of utopias in
 the immediate future. (p. 74) 

 Surely "a decline in the general belief in political systems," for example, is
 itself a political attitude. And it is exactly these issues which are responsible for the
 creation of works like Woman on the Edge of Time, The Female Man, The Dispossessed, and
 Triton , all of which are considered important contributions to the field of
 utopian fiction. This is only one example of the subjectivity at play in Trillion Year
 Spree ; if it were more openly acknowledged, perhaps the reader might feel more
 tolerant about the occasional lapses from "fact" into personal approach. In
 addition, the tendency to "fracture" discussions (Gilman's mention in chapter 4,
 which we are then presumably expected to link to the discussion of utopian fiction in
 chapter 3, is a case in point) in order to preserve the chronological continuity of the
 book proves distracting at times and diffuses some critical arguments before they have
 been fully developed. 

 Part of the problem is that Aldiss and Wingrove are not attuned to political content,
 which is always an intrinsic aspect of SF, as of any other genre (or mode). Their
 introduction of feminism as one of the "many ground swells" (p. 322) which came into
 prominence during the 1970s is particularly revealing. It not only suggests the misguided
 notion that SF was relatively free of ideological programming before the "New Wave"
 insurgence of the late '60s; it reduces feminism to simply one of any number of political
 axe-grindings--choose your own axe. Feminism thus takes its place in a list which includes
 "ecology, computerisation, proliferation of nuclear power, psychoanalysis, [and]
 sexual liberation." The constant use of words like "man" and "mankind"
 throughout Trillion Year Spree is not only disturbing; it tempts me to conclude
 that, since feminism has developed into one of the major forces involved in "the
 search for a [re]definition of mankind," Aldiss and Wingrove have not taken to heart
 their own definition of SF. 

 As "a" history of SF, however, Trillion Year Spree occupies the same
 niche as its predecessor did a decade ago. It is an intelligent, entertaining, and
 wide-ranging effort to impose form on the "mountain of facts" available to the SF
 historian. While problems do arise in the final chapter, they are problems inevitable to a
 work which sets out to encapsulate the current state of any literary movement. As in Billion
 Year Spree , the present volume concludes in a rather diffuse and shapeless manner, as
 it attempts (a noble attempt at an impossible task) to list as many contemporary writers
 as the authors believe worthy of note. Inevitably (and this too is inherent in the
 attempt), the reader will question certain inclusions and exclusions: the range is wide
 but the choices, in the final analysis, depend upon less than completely objective
 criteria. The penultimate chapter, on the other hand, contains what I consider to be a
 series of necessary and cogent (re)evaluations of the current anomalous celebration of
 such '50s' figures as Asimov, Heinlein, Herbert, and Clarke (in the chapter appropriately
 titled "How to be a Dinosaur"), writers whose work represents SF for the average
 contemporary reader while new directions in the genre tend to be overlooked. In addition,
 some of the earlier chapters have been usefully expanded. The chapter devoted to the works
 of H.G. Wells, "The Great General in Dreamland," is a case in point: Aldiss and
 Wingrove include examinations of the impact of many of Wells's later works which were not
 discussed, or were only mentioned in passing, in the earlier Spree . 

 In spite of its shortcomings (many, although certainly not all, of which are
 unavoidable), however, Trillion Year Spree is an impressive undertaking, offering
 as it does a wide range of intelligent information about the historical development and
 current state of SF, entertainingly written, and exhaustively researched. The opposition
 and debate which it inevitably invites is by no means a bad thing, since it should
 stimulate many SF readers and critics to (re)define and clarify their own perceptions of
 the genre (or mode). 

 -- Veronica Hollinger Concordia University 

 Back to Home
