Reviews: July 1990 

 Science Fiction Studies 

 #51 = Volume 17, Part 2 = July 1990

 BOOKS IN REVIEW 

 Sturgeon's Law 

 Bill Warren. Keep
 Watching the Skies!: American Science Fiction Movies of the Fifties. Vol. I,1950-1957. 
 Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 1982. 485pp. $39.95. Vol. II, 1958-1962. Jefferson, NC:
 McFarland, 1986. 816pp. $39.95. Two-volume set: $65.00 

 These exhaustive, meticulous volumes by Bill Warren (assisted by researcher Bill
 Thomas) are an invaluable reference work for libraries and serious scholars of SF film.
 Together, they constitute an encyclopedic history of American SF movies of the 1950s, the
 formative period of the genre. 

 It is a personal history. Warren admits that he writes as a fan as well as a scholar
 and that he subscribes to no particular critical theory. His study is a labor of love, a
 homage to the films he cherished as a child: "I wish I could recapture the feeling of
 seeing The Day the Earth Stood Still for the first time again. It was the most
 exciting thing I had ever experienced [he was eight]. My heart was pounding and my knees
 were literally knocking together in excitement; I'd never seen anything like it before,
 and because of its newness to me, have never seen anything like it again" (I, viii). What
 sex is to the adolescent, SF films were to the boy Bill Warren. 

 Nevertheless, is his nostalgia for the thrill of "the first time" sufficient
 justification for these lengthy volumes (1301pp. in toto ), "the most extensive
 survey of such a limited focus undertaken in the history of film scholarship" (II, xix)?
 Certainly there are numerous other histories of the genre (and Warren is familiar with
 them all, frequently citing books by John Baxter, John Brosnan, Alan Frank, David Pirie,
 Philip Strick, Don Willis, and many others). Yet the sheer number of studies could be said
 to testify to the continuing fascination with the films. Furthermore, Warren's guide has
 two particular advantages over other such histories: first, it is the most detailed and
 comprehensive; and second, it is written with wit and love. Warren seems to have almost
 total recall of the way films struck him when he first saw them as well as the ability to
 analyze them coolly in retrospect. It is important that someone of Warren's generation
 (which is also my generation) record his childhood responses to these films, and compare
 them to the way the films look to him several decades later, for they played an important
 role in forming the emotional and imaginative life of the "baby boomers." 

 SF films as we know them today emerged in the 1950s. Despite their gimmicky plots and
 formulaic repetition, they sparked something in the imagination of a young audience that
 led to much of today's SF and fantasy literature and film--to the work both of writers
 such as Stephen King and of filmakers including Joe Dante, Robert Zemeckis, George Lucas,
 and Steven Spielberg. Consider also the wave of remakes of '50s SF films-- Invasion of
 the Body Snatchers, The Thing, Invaders from Mars, The Fly, The Blob, Little Shop of
 Horrors, The Absent-Minded Professor (remade as a TV movie)--as well as all the
 recent '50s'-inspired SF films: Strange Invaders, Back to the Future, The Incredible
 Shrinking Woman, Honey, I Shrunk the Kids, Teen Wolf, and My Stepmother Is an
 Alien . 

 Warren defines SF film by content and covers every film released theatrically in the US
 from 1950-62 with some significant SF plot element, excepting serials--almost 300 in all.
 For each, he gives a detailed plot summary and sometimes production history; he
 scrupulously assesses the script, direction, acting, cinematography, sound, make-up, and
 special effects; he quotes from contemporary newspaper reviews and cites more recent
 critics (often differing with them); and he provides occasional capsule biographies of
 screenwriters, producers, directors, actors, and special-effects technicians, some of whom
 he has interviewed. The encyclopedic wealth of information is impressive. Warren is
 meticulous about accuracy and corrects the errors of other critics. For example, he
 demonstrates how Frank D. McConnell's essay on The Creature from the Black Lagoon ( Journal
 of Popular Film 2.1 [1973]:14-28) is undermined by McConnell's fundamental mistake
 about the plot of that film. 

 Volume I ends with useful appendices covering credits and casts; films in order of
 release; announced titles (of films that were never made); and SF serials of the 1950s;
 plus a generous subject, title, and personal name index. In addition to all these, Volume
 II adds an addendum of six films overlooked in Volume I and a selective bibliography for
 both volumes. The lively cover art for both books is by Cathy Hill, and the charming
 cartoons inside by Marc Schirmeister. There are also many black-and-white photos, although
 this is by no means an illustrated history or coffee-table book; the bulk of it is well
 over 1,000 pages of fairly small print. 

 Warren organizes the movies by year, with those released in a given year arranged
 alphabetically. This leads to occasional anomalies, as when I Was a Teenage
 Frankenstein precedes I Was a Teenage Werewolf ( Werewolf begat the
 entire "teenage monster" film cycle). However, this should not bother the average
 reader, who is going to consult the book as a reference, not read it consecutively. 

 Warren's exhaustive survey illustrates once again the validity of "Sturgeon's Law":
 that 90% of SF (or of anything, for that matter) is crap. Warren admits to constantly 
 "looking for a few moments of quality among hours of dreck" (II, 396). Of the almost 300
 films, he rates perhaps 30 as good or great. Thus Warren is forced to spend most of his
 time making fine distinctions between levels of rottenness. He discriminates carefully
 between the agonizingly bad, the unredeemably moronic, the thoroughly mediocre, and the
 laughably camp: "Pictures like Jungle Jim in the Forbidden Land are above,
 beneath, or beside criticism" (I, 82); "those unsung heroes of science fiction...the
 Bowery Boys, spunky but stupid, the way you like them" (I, 76); "This film [ The
 Deadly Mantis ] is so perfunctory that it almost seems that no one at all 
 wrote it or directed it; it just appeared" (I, 335); " Cat-Women of the Moon is one of the
 most alarmingly awful films in the history of movies" (I, 105), though its 
 naiveté, he finds, is "screwily charming" (I, 109). He sifts painstakingly through 300 films,
 searching for nuggets of pleasure against heavy odds, believing that "each and every [SF]
 film should be examined in detail by someone who loves them...if for no other reason than
 to satisfy simple curiosity: I'm a collector and insatiably curious myself, and there are
 others like that" (II, xx). For this reason, he deplores smug critics like Harry and
 Michael Medved, whose Golden Turkey Awards he claims evince little love for film.

 As he plows amiably through the trash, Warren occasionally stumbles upon discarded
 gold: rarely seen or underrated films such as Enemy from Space (1957), one of the
 British "Professor Quatermass" series written by Nigel Kneale; Val Guest's The Day
 the Earth Caught Fire (1962), a fine British drama too adult for the kiddie crowd;
 and Karel Zeman's The Fabulous World of Jules Verne (1961), a Czech feature that
 eschewed Hollywood "realism" for a fanciful style inspired by woodcut illustrations in
 early editions of Verne. Warren rates Zeman's film the best of the entire period (I've
 never seen it, but he made me want to). 

 Warren divides the history of American SF films in that era into three phases: from
 1950 to 1955, the films are spurred by "novelty and 3D" (II, xvii) and aimed at adult
 and family audiences; between 1956 and 1958, there is a renaissance as SF films begin to
 specialize to compete with television and are released during the spring and summer to
 reach an audience of children, teenagers, and the drive-in crowd; and in the 1959-62
 period, a decline sets in. "At the beginning of the decade, SF movies were a part of the
 movie industry at large; by the end, they had moved off into their own little niche" (I,
 xi). In other words, they had moved into a ghetto--although it was not exactly congruent
 with the ghetto occupied by print SF. 

 The films became cheaper and more formulaic as the decade wore on: radiation explained
 every menace; male leads were bland and interchangeable team players, young scientists or
 military men, and female leads were characterless; and the visual style was "gray, flat,
 and 'realistic,'" a cheap, semi-documentary style popularized by crime and espionage
 films of the late '40s and early '50s and by television's Dragnet (I, xiii). In
 subgenres, such as the "monster bug" cycle begun with Them! (1954), "the films
 became so similar as to take on the aspects of ritual" (I, xii). Warren credits the
 reissue of King Kong in 1952 with inspiring the giant insect films and It
 Came from Outer Space (1953) with introducing the typical '50s' SF film hero and the
 characteristic desert setting. The decline of the genre came through repetition and
 dilution and the rise of Hammer and other studios which revived the old horror monsters
 with new sex and gore. 

 My main quarrel with Warren's project is its excessive length, especially in the
 gargantuan Volume II. Entries in Volume I average about three pages per film (more for
 major films), which seems about right for the quality of most of these products; but
 entries in Volume II average almost five pages each. Warren explains that he was able to
 see more of the later features because of their availability on videotape and so wrote
 more about them. Nevertheless, he admits that the genre from 1958-62 was in decline. Why
 then devote seven pages to "a cheap little shocker" (II, 40) like The Brain from
 Planet Arous (1958)? Or why, after admitting that "in the face of all this
 attention, there really isn't much more to be said about...[ Plan Nine from Outer Space
 (1958)]" (II, 154), does he give us ten full pages on this notorious stinkeroo?
 Warren can be an acute and marvelously well-informed critic and scholar, but some of the
 writing here betrays the fanatical interest in trivia of the fan or the completist
 collector. 

 Nevertheless, without that obsessive drive, we would not have this book. It was a nasty
 job, but somebody had to do it, and thank goodness Warren did it with wit and respect for
 the genre, even for its most debased specimens. By winnowing the gold from the garbage,
 Bill Warren has performed a service of great value to future scholars, if only by
 relieving them of the chore of having actually to watch all those abysmal films! 

 -- Andrew Gordon University of Florida,
 Gainesville 

 Rediscovering Science-Fiction Art

 Robert Weinberg. A
 Biographical Dictionary of Science Fiction and Fantasy Artists. Westport,
 CT: Greenwood Press, 1988. 347pp. $49.95 

 It is important to observe, first of all, that this book very successfully accomplishes
 what it sets out to do. "This is the first book of any note to cover in depth the science
 fiction art field. It is not an art book but a book about artists," Weinberg claims (p.
 viii); and the claim is not excessive. His introductory essay on the history of SF art is
 a detailed, thoroughly researched account which, almost as a by-product, serves equally
 well as a capsule history of SF publishing. His section of 279 artist biographies--the
 meat of the book--is endlessly fascinating, with detailed bibliographies of the artists'
 work in the field which collectively constitute a monumental achievement in themselves.
 And his concluding essay, "Science Fiction Art: What Still Exists," is an informative
 and at times heartbreaking account of how thousands of original works have been destroyed
 to save storage space, or sold at flea-market prices as promotions, or given away by
 publishers or editors with no thought of the artists' interests. The very unfamiliarity of
 many of the artists who have entries in this book is additional testimony to the suspicion
 that SF art has suffered under the double curse of being a marginal art form attached to a
 marginal literature in ephemeral publications. At least the authors still had their
 stories when the pulp era ended! 

 Weinberg's study is exhaustive and enormously impressive, but in some senses its title
 is misleading. Throughout his text, he refers to "science fiction art," and this is
 indeed what the book is about--art which, for the most part, has accompanied the
 publication of SF magazines and novels. He makes no ill-advised attempt to define 
 "science fiction art" as any more than this--he does not try to delineate some "S-F"
 tradition in the history of painting that would give him license to go on about everyone
 from Bosch to Magritte to Escher; and indeed, these artists are not present. But the
 rubric "fantasy art" does create some problems, since there is arguably a tradition of
 fantasy art quite separate from the history of illustration, and a tradition of fantasy
 illustration quite separate from the (largely American) 20th-century popular books and
 magazines which are Weinberg's forte. 

 Weinberg seems aware of this problem when he states in his introduction that
 "mainstream illustrators who worked in a fantastic vein but had not ever illustrated
 science fiction were not included. The same judgment also applies to children's artists
 and early fantasy artists, such as Arthur Rackham, whose names were primarily associated
 with children's literature" (p. viii). Very well--there go W.W. Denslow and John R. Neill
 of the Oz books, along with Tenniel, Dor é , Howard Pyle, Edward Detmold, Heath
 Robinson, Kay Neilsen, and even Rudyard Kipling. Yet Sidney Sime makes it, perhaps because
 his work on Dunsany and Machen connects him to authors somehow closer to the mainstream of
 modern fantasy and horror literature. 

 Elsewhere, however, exclusions seem less explicable. Weinberg's impressive work on pulp
 artists--he actually conducted extensive primary research by sending questionnaires to
 hundreds of artists--still omits George Rozen of The Shadow fame and Walter
 Baumhofer of Doc Savage (despite the fact that Baumhofer is given prominent
 mention in the introductory essay and that an interview with him is cited in the
 bibliography). Artists largely associated with film are also treated unevenly. Syd Mead,
 who did so much to create the "look" of Blade Runner , is here, but H.R. Giger,
 who did at least as much for Alien, is not. Nor is Brian Froud--perhaps because his major
 film, Dark Crystal , was a fantasy. Ralph McQuarrie is included, for his work on
 Lucas and Spielberg films, but not Carlo Rambaldi, whose "cute" aliens for Close
 Encounters of the Third Kind have proved to be such an unfortunately durable concept.

 There is little doubt that collectors could find numerous unfair omissions or
 inexplicable inclusions. But my only real complaint is that it is misleading to title a
 book A Biographical Dictionary of Science Fiction and Fantasy Artists when the
 focus is on SF artists alone and when the introduction clearly states an intention to
 exclude whole categories of fantasy artists. That complaint noted, let me now demote it to
 the status of a minor quibble. Weinberg's work is so ground-breaking, his research so
 arduous, and his precursors in this field so generally unhelpful (except that they had
 illustrations and he doesn't) that we must regard this as charting virtually unexplored
 waters. There is nothing really to compare the book to, and there is not likely to be a
 more complete such book in the near future. Weinberg deserves the thanks of anyone
 seriously interested in what we might call the cultural history of SF, and his book
 belongs in any collection that purports to represent that history. 

 -- Gary K. Wolfe Roosevelt University 

 J. G. Ballard's "Terminal Irony" 

 Peter Brigg. J.G.
 Ballard. Mercer Island, WA: Starmont Press, 1985. 138pp. $6.95
 (paper) 

 Despite a number of irritating "warts," this study of Ballard's entire 
 oeuvre manages
 to accomplish some useful tasks economically. Brigg has interesting things to say about
 the basic shape of Ballard's fiction; he offers a fair number of pithy observations, in
 passing, about particular works; and his chapter on The Atrocity Exhibition is a
 concise intelligible reading of that most complex novel. In addition I would like to
 single out the well-made bibliography for special praise. The chronological primary
 bibliography is comprehensive, and the secondary bibliography is thorough and annotated.
 The decent apparatus makes this volume far more useful than many another Starmont
 monograph. 

 As with the other Starmont guides, this one attempts to analyze the entire canon of the
 author in approximately 100 pages, and the limitation doubtlessly accounts for a somewhat
 breathless tone. Brigg begins with an introductory chapter that situates Ballard both as
 an SF writer and a contemporary "experimental" writer and then lays out a set of
 thematic coordinates that Brigg will use in subsequent chapters. The bulk of the book
 consists of a long chapter on Ballard's early short fiction; chapters on both of the 
 "disaster" trilogies; and an extended reading of The Atrocity Exhibition ,
 Ballard's most consistently experimental work. The final chapters address in a more
 cursory manner Ballard's later fiction through Hello, America (1981), and an
 epilogue mentions his 1985 non-SF novel, Empire of the Sun . 

 Brigg's thesis is that Ballard has fashioned a mode of composition that makes him a
 literary cousin to the surrealist painters, especially Delvaux and Ernst. In the distorted
 psychic landscapes of surrealism, Ballard finds a model for his own obsessions with the
 welter of pictorial and televised images of death, violence, sex and gross materialism
 that constitute the reality of post-modern European and American life. For Brigg the
 typical Ballard story assembles cultural icons and commodified objects in such a way that
 all objects have more or less equal subjective value. This sheer paratactic proliferation
 of "things" makes it all but impossible for the reader or the characters to organize the
 exterior world in a way that would subordinate it either in a collectively coherent manner
 or to the satisfaction of the individual ego. Thus while external representation is viewed
 as a kind of psychic road-map, it is of a psyche displaced, sterilized, and
 attenuated--poised in a way that it threatens to vanish into the interstices of the commodified world. In a style that juxtaposes the iconic with the clinical, Ballard pushes
 his "protagonists" into a kind of negative self-knowledge that is, in Brigg's words, 
 "more grim dare than romantic hope." Ballard's fictional world is a "horizon line at
 which inner and outer realities fuse uncompromisingly" (p. 17). 

 Brigg's name for this psychic condition of the Ballardian hero is "the death of
 affect" (p. 16), a continual deadening of human reaction and concern for other people as
 a result of the continuous mass violence of the century and its monotonous reproduction
 and repetition by the mass media. Most interesting is Brigg's connection of Ballard's
 obsession with the "death of affect" with a more underlying and insistent hatred of 
 "time," so that these grim parables of the death of the subject become as well a kind of
 quest for a perverse and ambivalent transcendence that is either a post-human rebirth or 
 "terminal irony" (p. 74). This thread is traced from the early disaster novels, through The
 Atrocity Exhibition , to a culmination in the later work, with its increasingly
 lyrical pursuit of figures of transcendence in a mythic landscape somewhere after the end
 of the American empire. Ballard becomes a strangely religious writer. 

 Despite some genuine virtues in this study, there are far too many surface glitches
 which will irritate anyone trying to read through it. The prose is by turns purple, lax in
 construction, and often ungrammatical to the point of incomprehensibility. Part of the
 problem may lie with the editor since any of these flaws could have been contained by a
 competent blue pencil. Either the book wasn't edited at all, or the editor made 
 "soup"
 out of previously intelligible English. Sometimes this carelessness has serious
 consequences: for instance, the opening paragraph of chapter 4, wherein Brigg attempts to
 address Bruce Franklin's important critique of Ballard, is utter nonsense at the most
 elementary level of composition. From context it is impossible to tell whether Brigg just
 doesn't know what he's talking about or an editor has created babel out of an important
 part of the argument (a possibility left open in view of other Starmont guides that I am
 familiar with). 

 Finally, I have some reservations about Brigg's conception of Ballard's place in
 contemporary SF. First, it seems to me that Brigg is reductive in his treatment of the
 goals of "classic Anglo-American" SF. It is simply unfair to treat writers like Heinlein
 and Asimov--whatever their faults and despite Ballard's views--as though they wrote merely
 what we might call "westerns-in-space." This excessive harping on the conventionality of
 ordinary SF is too simple, and it makes Ballard's experimentalism seem more outside of SF
 than is necessarily the case. Whatever polemical need Ballard had to set himself against
 magazine SF, it is ahistorical to see him as too sui generis, especially in light of a
 mode of production that had already produced writers as distinctly experimental as
 Sturgeon, Bester, and Cordwainer Smith. 

 Most problematical, however, is Brigg's failure to confront in an adequate manner
 Franklin's claim that when Ballard "makes the psychology of the individual the cause
 rather than the product of the death oriented political economy" (p. 67) this is not
 simply a neutral aesthetic choice; it has ideological consequences, consequences that
 might open up a more complex and problematical reading of Ballard's relation to SF as well
 as to the rest of those various textual strategies yoked under the term post-modernism.
 This reading would not pre-emptively "write off" as power fantasy or innocence SF's
 almost mystical adherence to the possibility of futures. 

 Brigg's analysis makes clear that Ballard's concern with the attenuation and
 sterilization of the ego in a world of iconic overload is related to the general
 displacement of the priority of the classical subject by system. Yet regardless of how
 displaced, attenuated, or sterilized it is, the subject as isolated consciousness still
 commands the center of Ballard's fiction. As Samuel Delany has pointed out many times, for
 SF the axis of concern is different. The convention of the future allows even the most
 pedestrian of SF texts to be written from the position of the historical object in its
 plurality and heterogeneity without catachresis. The future is thus not so much a
 projective power fantasy or (as it is increasingly in Ballard) an ironized lyrical
 absolute, but a complex dialogue with a present that no longer need be a metaphysical
 given. 

 Thus while Brigg uses Ballard's sarcastic description of the American SF community of
 the 1930s through the '60s--a description that mocks its subcultural convivialities, group
 living experiments, and collaborations--as a straightforward protest against the
 encroachments of "groupthink," another reading might see it as a rather fussy throwback
 to that most conservative and "literary" of modernist and romantic 
 clichés, the
 isolated creative artist. As well, Ballard's easy juxtaposition of technological excess
 with sexual perversion, especially as it regards the sexuality of women, may have
 unpleasantly reactionary implications, whatever Ballard's personal views--aesthetic
 conservatism as ethical failure of attention. 

 Whatever its backslidings and betrayals of potential, SF as a paraliterary mode of
 production may still be the most interesting site for a post-individualist writing
 practice. For that reason, one might want to argue that Ballard's seeming commitment to a
 more conservative "literary" practice is less a transcendence of SF's 
 naiveté than a
 failure to exploit some of its most fertile possibilities. 

 -- Dennis M. McGucken Millsaps College 

 Methodologically Questionable

 Marleen S. Barr. Alien
 to Femininity: Speculative Fiction and Feminist Theory. [Contributions
 to the Study of Science Fiction and Fantasy, No. 27] Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1987.
 xxv+189pp. $35.00 

 In this book, Marleen Barr forsakes the traditional methods (though not the trappings)
 of the "male-oriented" academic thesis in favor of the "patchwork quilt" approach,
 which some feminist theorists regard, properly, as more reflective of women's voices and
 concerns. Her goal, to link feminist critical theory with speculative fiction by women, is
 certainly worthy of the attempt. Her method involves juxtaposing passages from theory,
 real-world examples of women's experiences (including her own), and discussions of
 fiction, both "mainstream" and speculative, frequently by less well-known writers.
 Bringing these writers to our attention with sustained quotation and summary is one of the
 book's real strengths. Barr's stated purpose, however--"[to bring] the following boys and
 girls together: male speculative fiction critics and readers, feminist critics, and female
 speculative fiction writers" (p. xiii)--raises some questions in regard both to the
 subsequent choices she makes and to the way she implements her method. 

 The book is divided into three sections. "Part 1: Community" contains chapters on 
 "Immortal Feminist Communities," James Tiptree, Jr, and "Female Time Travelers," and
 considers along with these subjects the criticism of Nina Auerbach, Judith Fetterly, and
 Annis Pratt. "Part 2: Heroism" juxtaposes chapters titled "New Incarnations of Psyche:
 World-Changing Womanists" and "Heroic Fantastic Femininity: Woman Warriors" with the
 work of Carol Pearson, Katherine Pope, Carolyn G. Heilbrun, and Xavi è re Gauthier, among
 others. "Part 3: Sexuality and Reproduction" discusses phallocentrism and reproduction
 in relation to the writing of Nancy Chodorow. It should be noted, though, that this list
 of headings is potentially misleading, as is the title of the book itself, which in view
 of its actual subject matter, might more accurately have been called "Sexuality 
 and Reproductive Technology in Recent SF by Women." 

 Problems with incomplete categorization and shifting categories emerge in the
 introduction and persist throughout Alien to Femininity --as when Barr presents
 "Anglo-American, French, reader response, and psychoanalytic" as distinct "modes of
 feminist discourse" (p. xiii). This at times makes for considerable overlap between
 chapters--e.g., in the discussion of medical technology and childbirth. It occasionally
 produces confusion as well--the case, for instance, with Barr's handling of artificial
 insemination as a topic of discussion for feminist theorists and as a motif in speculative
 fiction. Here she seems to confound a number of issues, especially in comparing the forced
 insemination of women for the purpose of making them breeders (e.g., in Kate Wilhelm's Where
 Late the Sweet Birds Sang ) with the laboratory procedures that heterosexual couples
 who wish to have children may resort to in real life. While Barr treats both merely as
 tools of patriarchy, she approves of artificial insemination outside the laboratory or
 hospital by lesbian couples wishing to bear children with a minimum of male participation,
 whether in the fictional or the real world. Perhaps such a distinction is finally
 warranted; but the grounds upon which it is made need to be clear, and some attention
 needs to be given to the differences between the use of such motifs as fictional metaphors
 and the real-life adoption of such methods as techniques of feminist resistance. 

 Then, again, Barr seems to skew certain texts to fit a particular critical perspective.
 For instance, in arguing for Charnas's Motherlines as a less radical solution to
 the "male problem" than Tiptree's "Houston, Houston, Do You Read?," Barr claims that
 the Riding Women "neither fight nor kill to remove men from their environment" (p. 8).
 But men who stray into their territory are in fact hunted as animals. We learn, as does Alldera (the central character), that the Riding Women have chosen not to rescue women or
 to massacre men in the Holdfast simply because they are afraid that doing so would
 threaten their own existence. More importantly, Barr later omits Motherlines altogether
 from her discussion of cloning as a metaphor for escape from male-dominated reproductive
 technology and as a device for establishing communities of women capable of the full range
 of human activity, including heroism, without reference to men. Since Charnas creates a
 fictional situation in which whole lines are being lost and others are suffering from
 progressive weakening of genetic strains because the women do not have the technical
 know-how to overcome the problems, it is clear that she does not intend her audience to
 read a reproductively self-sufficient community of women either as an unmixed blessing or
 a practicable solution to "the man problem." 

 One last problem about Barr's method of juxtaposition is that it at least partly
 depends on an audience willing to suspend its expectations regarding traditional academic
 prose--an audience she is more likely to find among the already-converted than among male
 readers resistant to feminist thought and/or to female writers of SF. This is all the
 truer inasmuch as she largely presents feminist theorists in the form of block quotations
 from their work without the kind of explanatory commentary that would allow the
 uninitiated to understand them. The net effect is of one "preaching to the choir," and
 not altogether coherently, since obstacles to communication intrude at every level down to
 choice of diction. Her impassioned book has some value for those interested in its
 subject, but it could definitely have benefited from a strong editorial hand. 

 -- Carol D. Stevens Eastern Illinois University 

 A Herbert Bibliography

 Daniel J.H. Levack, comp. Dune Master: A Frank Herbert Bibliography ,
 with annotations by Mark Willard. Westport, CT: Meckler, 1988. xx+176pp. illus. $35.00 

 Levack and Willard's Dune Master began with the intention of listing 
 "all the
 published works of Frank Herbert through early 1987," with certain exceptions. The
 compilers chose not to include "Published letters, interviews and book reviews"; and
 some other material--much of Herbert's newspaper writing--proved too elusive to track
 down. Their aim was ambitious, given the variety of materials from fiction to film that
 lay before them. 

 One audience the book was clearly intended for was collectors, who will use it to
 identify editions found at used-book sales. As an example of the information a typical
 entry contains, consider the following from page 38, listed under The Great Dune
 Trilogy , a cover title for a collected set of Dune, Dune Messiah, and Children
 of Dune : 

 Gollancz, London (L. 6.95), 1979.* 

 Bound in dull red paper with gold lettering on the spine. "1979" on the title page.
 No indication of printing or edition on the copyright page. Jacket by Terry Oakes. 

 A " " precedes the entry, meaning that a reproduction of that edition's cover has been
 included in the bibliography's appendix. The asterisk following the date means that the
 compilers "physically examined" the edition. 

 The user should be warned that the compilers' inclusion of listings for items they have
 not seen may have produced some "ghosts." For example, the entry for The Jesus
 Incident lists 11 editions, 6 of which the compilers actually saw. Of 8 editions of The
 White Plague listed, the compilers saw 5. They saw 5 of the 6 listed editions of Heretics
 of Dune . In most cases, the unexamined editions are paperback printings, often
 British or of foreign translations. The compilers candidly admit that especially in the
 case of foreign editions their work is incomplete. 

 The bibliography will be important to students of Herbert for its inclusion of some
 information not hitherto available. One of the sources Levack and Willard used was Timothy
 O'Reilly's Frank Herbert (NY: Frederick Ungar, 1981), but two other sources are
 not in print. The first, the "starting point," is "the extensive bibliography that
 Charles E. Yenter of Tacoma, Washington had been compiling for many years...." The
 second, a mine of material that will surely be worked in years to come, is the special
 collection of Herbert's letters, manuscripts, and books at the Library of California State
 University at Fullerton. For some reason, Levack and Willard did not think it
 "appropriate" (their word) to give a detailed description of the collection, but they do
 have a short listing of the manuscripts of both published and unpublished works to be
 found there. 

 As an extended illustration of both the strengths and weaknesses of the bibliography,
 we may examine its treatment of one of Herbert's most obscure works, a poem of about 450
 lines entitled "Carthage: Reflections of a Martian." The easiest way to find a work in Dune
 Master is to first consult one of the checklists to see if there is an entry for the
 item. A bare listing of the poem's title, without date or place of publication, may be
 found in the section headed "Series and Connected Stories," surely not where one would
 look for a work that is neither a story nor part of a series. But "Carthage" also
 appears in the "Verse Checklist," so we know the poem is listed in one of the main
 sections. This is item 9 in the section "Non-Book Appearances," a gathering of works of
 all kinds--fiction, non-fiction, verse, even correspondence--that appeared as parts of
 collections of diverse material. There we find that "Carthage: Reflections of a Martian"
 appeared in Mars, We Love You , edited by Jane Hipolito and Willis E. McNelly (NY:
 Doubleday, 1971). The entry has no asterisk, which implies that the compilers did not see
 this work, so one wonders what the basis was of the paragraph that describes the content
 and mood of the poem. At least one reprinting unknown to Levack and Willard occurred: a
 British paperback reprint of Mars, We Love You , entitled The Book of Mars ,
 "with an introduction by Issac [sic] Asimov," was published in London in 1976 by Futura
 Ltd., under the Orbit imprint. 

 Although Levack's introduction calls the compilation "probably close to complete in
 English-language appearances (except for newspaper articles) through early 1987," some reprintings have been excluded by design. As Levack says, 
 "paperback editions of
 hardcover editions and reprints are not separately cited or normally even mentioned" (p.
 ix). Herbert's essay "Men on Other Planets" is no. 70 in "Non-Book Appearances," and
 the entry tells us it appears in The Craft of Science Fiction , edited by Reginald
 Bretnor (NY: Harper & Row, 1975: the actual date may be 1976). In keeping with
 Levack's statement above, Harper & Row's own paperback reprint by Barnes & Noble
 in 1976 is not listed. Yet the appearance of the essay in Timothy O'Reilly's The Maker
 of Dune: Frank Herbert , a Berkley paperback of 1987, is listed. It is hard to see the
 advantage of listing one paperback that the essay is reprinted in rather than another. 

 One section unlikely to be of much use is a list of "some representative works about
 Frank Herbert for the interested reader. It is not intended to be a complete secondary
 bibliography" (p. 152). The whole section headed "Works about Frank Herbert" has only
 11 entries. One of those is the "Cliff's Notes" pamphlet on Dune . Another is The
 Dune Encyclopedia , a work only derivatively about the Dune stories and not about
 Frank Herbert at all. Dune Master is almost exclusively a primary bibliography, and this
 section adds little to the work's value. 

 But the materials included in this bibliography are so diverse that one may sympathize
 with the compilers even while disagreeing with some of their judgments. Among my own
 disagreements would be two: first, the inclusion of 21 pages of black-and-white
 reproductions of book covers of Herbert's novels, covers of magazines in which his stories
 appeared, and even an illustration from the Dune Calendar . This is one of the
 features that Levack says have been added in an "attempt to make the Bibliography both
 useful and entertaining" (p. ix). For some readers this goal may have been achieved, but
 others may have found 21 pages of secondary bibliography much more useful. 

 A second problematic decision, a more important one, was the size and nature of the
 annotations. The "Books" section runs from page 3 to page 69; of that space over 50
 pages are exclusively annotation. Much of this is simply plot summary, although, as Mark
 Willard says in the "Annotator's Introduction," "in many cases I have tried to convey
 something of the mood/atmosphere/treatment of the work as I perceived it. While I usually
 tried for objectivity, opinions and value judgments have inevitably crept in, even if not
 deliberately included" (p. xix). It is hard to see for whom the annotations were
 intended. As they stand, they supply neither bibliographic information nor straightforward
 criticism. The user of this work should be aware that the bibliographic information it
 contains is much less than the book's 176 pages would lead one to expect. 

 Nevertheless, we may expect the book to have many users. Scholars interested in Herbert
 will necessarily consult it until something more specifically suited to their needs comes
 along. Collectors will find the physical descriptions helpful in their purchasing. And
 this close to Herbert's death, perhaps that is the most that one can ask. 

 -- Walter E. Meyers North Carolina State
 University 

 Back to Home
