 One third of game workers using genAI, but half think it's bad 

 Together, we power an unparalleled network of 220+ online properties covering 10,000+ granular topics, serving an audience of 50+ million professionals with original, objective content from trusted sources. We help you gain critical insights and make more informed decisions across your business priorities.
 Informa PLC | ABOUT US | INVESTOR RELATIONS | TALENT 

 This site is operated by a business or businesses owned by Informa PLC and all copyright resides with them. Informa PLC's registered office is 5 Howick Place, London SW1P 1WG. Registered in England and Wales. Number 8860726.

 Game Market Research Watch GDC Talks on GDC Vault Attend or Exhibit at GDC Advertise 

 Newsletter Sign-Up 

 Newsletter Sign-Up 

 Trending 
 Related Topics
 ▫️ Layoffs & Studio Closures 
 ▫️ GDC Festival of Gaming 
 ▫️ Generative AI & ML 
 ▫️ Industry Lawsuits 
 ▫️ Development Tools 
 ▫️ Culture & Dev Communities 

 Recent in Trending 
 Top Stories 

 Production Strategically making Star Wars Zero Company, ft. Greg Foertsch Strategically making Star Wars Zero Company, ft. Greg Foertsch by Game Developer Podcast 

 Sep 4, 2026 

 Design Paradox Interactive's Afterworld wants to entice new players to grand strategy with tasty RPG hooks Paradox Interactive's Afterworld wants to entice new players to grand strategy with tasty RPG hooks by Alessandro Fillari 

 Sep 1, 2026 7 Min Read 

 Latest News 
 Related Topics
 ▫️ Weekly News Highlights 
 ▫️ News Deep Dives 
 ▫️ GD Collective Research 

 Recent in Latest News 

 Cloud Xbox to cap Cloud Gaming hours for Game Pass subscribers Xbox to cap Cloud Gaming hours for Game Pass subscribers by Bryant Francis 

 Sep 3, 2026 3 Min Read 

 Business Supercell's acquisition of Metacore expected to close this month Supercell's acquisition of Metacore expected to close this month by Diego Argüello 

 Sep 3, 2026 2 Min Read 

 [GDC] 
 Related Topics
 ▫️ Talks & Interviews 
 ▫️ GDC News 
 ▫️ GDC Vault: Editor Picks 
 ▫️ Register for GDC 
 ▫️ GDC Vault: Full Library 
 ▫️ Dev Surveys, Data, & Insights 

 Recent in [GDC] 
 Learn More 

 Production Strategically making Star Wars Zero Company, ft. Greg Foertsch Strategically making Star Wars Zero Company, ft. Greg Foertsch by Game Developer Podcast 

 Sep 4, 2026 

 Design Paradox Interactive's Afterworld wants to entice new players to grand strategy with tasty RPG hooks Paradox Interactive's Afterworld wants to entice new players to grand strategy with tasty RPG hooks by Alessandro Fillari 

 Sep 1, 2026 7 Min Read 

 Game Developer Podcast 
 Game Design 
 Programming 
 More 
 Related Topics
 ▫️ Developer Interviews 
 ▫️ Game Dev Deep Dives 
 ▫️ Video Game Postmortems 
 ▫️ Partner Perspectives 

 Recent in More 
 Read More 

 Production Strategically making Star Wars Zero Company, ft. Greg Foertsch Strategically making Star Wars Zero Company, ft. Greg Foertsch by Game Developer Podcast 

 Sep 4, 2026 

 Design Paradox Interactive's Afterworld wants to entice new players to grand strategy with tasty RPG hooks Paradox Interactive's Afterworld wants to entice new players to grand strategy with tasty RPG hooks by Alessandro Fillari 

 Sep 1, 2026 7 Min Read 

 Business 
 Production 
 Programming 
 Design 
 News 
 36 percent of game workers use generative AI, but half think it's bad for the industry 
 AI is most commonly used for research or brainstorming, with daily tasks, code assistance, and prototyping lower on the list.

 Diego Argüello , Contributing Editor, News , GameDeveloper.com February 3, 2026

 3 Min Read 

 Photo by Jonathan Kemper on Unsplash 

 36 percent of game industry professionals are using generative AI tools as part of their job. Half of them, however, think the technology is having a negative impact on the industry. 
 That's according to the 2026 State of the Game Industry report, an annual survey conducted by GDC Festival of Gaming based on responses from over 2,300 industry professionals. 
 Respondents employed at game studios (30 percent) reporting using generative AI tools far less than their peers at publishing companies, support teams, and marketing or PR firms (58 percent). 
 There was also a considerable difference in AI usage based on the professional status of respondents. Those working in upper management (47 percent), for example, used AI tools more than those in the lower decks (29 percent). Studio directors sit between those two groups (36 percent). 
 21 percent of respondents said they use internal generative AI tools—although that metric increased to 30 percent for workers at triple-A studios. 
 Related: Supercell's acquisition of Metacore expected to close this month 
 Large language models (LLMs) were the most used AI tool by a country mile. The three most popular were ChatGPT (74 percent), Google Gemini (37 percent), and Microsoft Copilot (22 percent). 
 As for text-to-image or video tools, Midjourney was the most used (17 percent), with Adobe Generative Fill (13 percent) and Sora AI (8 percent) following behind. Several respondents also disclosed the use of Claude, a LLM that was not included in this year's survey. 
 So, what are developers using those AI tools for? According to the survey, 81 percent of respondents use them for research or brainstorming, while 47 percent leverage them to complete daily tasks such as writing emails and code assistance. 
 The data indicates generative AI tools are used less for creative tasks such as asset generation (19 percent), procedural generation (10 percent), and player-facing features (5 percent). 
 Men also reported using generative AI tools more than women (41 percent compared to 35 percent), while older workers appear to be more reliant on the tech than their younger counterparts (46 percent compared to 34 percent). 
 52 percent of professionals think generative AI is having a negative impact on the industry
 Game developers seemingly failed to warm to generative AI tools in 2025 , with some suggesting the technology would lower the quality of video games . 
 Indeed, according to the 2025 State of the Game Industry report, 30 percent of respondents felt generative AI would have a negative impact on the game industry (an increase from 18 percent in 2024). 
 Related: Gamecity Hamburg launches second round of prototype funding 
 That figure has once again shot up. This year's survey found that 52 percent of respondents believe generative AI is having a negative impact. Workers in visual and technical art (64 percent), game design and narrative (63 percent), and game programming (59 percent) hold the most unfavorable views. 
 The survey also surfaced a great deal of opposition among those in quality assurance and community support, but the sample sizes were relatively small. 
 There are some respondents who claimed generative AI is having a positive impact on the industry. About 7 percent of them expressed that view, which is down from 13 percent in 2025. The metric is higher for executives and those in business operations and services (19 percent each). 
 When asked 'What considerations or values guide your decisions about if, when, or how to use generative AI tools in your work?,' respondents provided a range of thoughtful answers: 
 "Why would I replace human creativity with a regurgitated amalgamation of everything that’s come before?," said one senior employee based in the United States. 
 "I believe AI can be a fantastic tool to streamline tedious work and help a lot in the STEM space. It, however, can never replace human creativity and artistic expression," added another respondent, also based in the United States. 
 Related: CD Projekt Red won't be abandoning physical releases 
 Game Developer and GDC Festival of Gaming are sibling companies under Informa Festivals. 

 Read more about:
 Generative AI, Machine Learning, & LLMs Top Stories State of the Game Industry Data 

 About the Author

 Diego Argüello

 Contributing Editor, News, GameDeveloper.com

 Diego Nicolás Argüello is a freelance journalist and critic from Argentina. Video games helped him to learn English, so now he covers them for places like The New York Times, NPR, Rolling Stone, and more. He also runs Into the Spine, a site dedicated to fostering and supporting new writers, and co-hosted Turnabout Breakdown, a podcast about the Ace Attorney series. He’s most likely playing a rhythm game as you read this. 

 See more from Diego Argüello 

 Daily news, dev blogs, and stories from Game Developer straight to your inbox

 Stay Updated 

 Latest News
 More News 

 Cloud Xbox to cap Cloud Gaming hours for Game Pass subscribers Xbox to cap Cloud Gaming hours for Game Pass subscribers by Bryant Francis 

 Sep 3, 2026 3 Min Read 

 Keep up with the latest News, Interviews, and Talk Coverage from GDC Festival of Gaming right here on Game Developer

 READ ON 

 Latest Podcasts 
 Production Strategically making Star Wars Zero Company, ft. Greg Foertsch
 Sep 4, 2026 
 Audio GDC Side Quest - Inside Austin Wintory's Collaborative Composing Process
 Aug 28, 2026 
 Programming We're finally talking about AI, ft. David 'Rez' Graham and Luke Dicken
 Aug 21, 2026 
 Production What devs need to know about localization, ft. Concha Fernandez Alvarez, Aurelie Perrin, and Guido Di Carlo
 Aug 7, 2026 
 See all 

 Game Developer Collective
 More 

 Business Games that sell DLC and in-app purchases appear to benefit most from subscription services Games that sell DLC and in-app purchases appear to benefit most from subscription services by Bryant Francis 

 Jan 27, 2026 3 Min Read 

 Business Devs are more worried than ever that generative AI will lower the quality of games Devs are more worried than ever that generative AI will lower the quality of games by Bryant Francis 

 Sep 16, 2025 4 Min Read 

 Game Design & Marketing Highlights
 See More 

 Design Paradox Interactive's Afterworld wants to entice new players to grand strategy with tasty RPG hooks Paradox Interactive's Afterworld wants to entice new players to grand strategy with tasty RPG hooks 

 Design Warlock's magic system was built on game-bending player choices Warlock's magic system was built on game-bending player choices 

 More from GD
 Blog with Game Developer Blogging Guidelines Game Developer Podcast Submit a Tip 

 Connect
 About Us Advertise Contact Us 

 Join Us

 Newsletter Sign-Up 

 Follow Us

 Copyright © 2026 Informa. This website is owned and operated by Informa. Informa PLC's registered office is 5 Howick Place, London SW1P 1WG.
 About Informa | Contact Informa | Privacy | Terms 

 Your Privacy Choices 

 