 

 AI's Assault on the Em Dash Should Worry All Writers 

 The Writer's Guide 

 Subscribe Sign in 

 AI's Assault on the Em Dash Should Worry All Writers
 If we let AI tell us how to write, based solely on not doing what AI does based on what we do, we’ve entered a linguistic looking glass

 Robert Roy Britt 
 Jul 28, 2026 

 6

 4

 2

 Share

 This post is about much more than the em dash. We writers are being forced to make choices about how to deal with AI and, crucially, how we react to what AI tells us about our writing. —Rob 

 Image: Artem Furman / Shutterstock (used under the writer’s license), modified by the writer 
 The em dash has a long history of controversy . Some writers and editors love this longest of punctuation marks. Others despise it. 
 I appreciate the em dash, when used sparingly and appropriately. I also love linguistic feuds. The long-running battle over the em dash—like that over the Oxford comma—should rightly rage on forever. Such grammatical disagreements are healthy for the craft and hurt no one. In the end, language evolves based on common usage, not by the insistence of grammar wonks. 
 Artificial intelligence threatens to ruin all the fun, however. 
 For more than a year now, AI detectors have been flagging the em dash as a sign of AI-generated writing, causing some writers and editors to avoid this uniquely useful punctuation mark so they don’t run afoul of the AI-detection police. 
 Fellow writers, I beg you: For the love of our craft, do not cave. 
 You might deem this a minor skirmish over a minor mark. In fact, if we writers let AI tell us how to punctuate, and therefore how to write, this blip will evolve into a major threat to writing as we know and love it. 
 Creativity itself will spiral inward, drawn irretrievably into an AI black hole, until no truly new and unique writing escapes and we see only the reflection of what once was.
 Hyperbole? I wish. 
 As I noted in my last post, Substack just introduced an AI detector , and the platform is asking writers to make choices about whether and how to use it. Already there’s mounting criticism over the effects it could have (probably will have). 

 Subscribe 

 Back to the em dash.
 So we know what we’re fighting over, let’s define the admittedly nebulous use cases for the em dash (so named because it was the width of a capital M in old-timey typesetting). From my Punctuation Rules & How to Break Them : 
 Em dashes are great for setting off passages that are contrarian, surprising, ironic or otherwise super special and related to the passage you set them off from. They’re also handy for inserting definitions of a term into the middle of a sentence. … Use with caution, just like parentheses and anything else that isn’t a comma or a period, and try not to squawk if your editor yanks them from your draft. 

 You see, em dashes aren’t the problem. Here’s what’s gone wrong: 
 Large language models (LLMs, such as ChatGPT, Claude and Gemini) train on human writing, scouring text on the interwebs to feed their pattern-based learning. As you might guess, there are a lot of em dashes out there. 
 “Turns out, em dashes are absolutely everywhere in the training data,” strategist and analyst Brent Csutoras wrote on Medium last year. “In books, articles, essays, humans used them so often that AIs learned them as a default natural flow. It’s like asking a bird not to chirp.” 
 So in their machine-generated writing, LLMs began tossing em dashes around like commas. AI-generated text became riddled with em dashes. 
 Ironically, some people who’d never used an em dash—didn’t even know what they were—took a cue from the AI-generated text they’d prompted and started loading up their own hand-crafted writing with the marks. Then, naturally, AI detectors began to see a terrible reflection of themselves, falsely flagging human-written stories that use em dashes as AI-generated. The AI detectors (and humans who rely on them) now view the em dash as a “tell” of inauthentic writing. 
 “Unfortunately, that tell is not the em dash, which has been around for many years,” explained Anna Jo Bratton, editor of the Associated Press Stylebook . “In fact, they are so ubiquitous in AP lingo, we just call them dashes.” 
 In case you didn’t follow all that, here’s the inane circular logic in four simple steps: 
 Human writers use em dashes. 

 LLMs learn from those writers to use em dashes. 

 AI detectors flag em dashes as a sign of AI-generated writing. 

 Human writers stop using em dashes. 

 If we play along, if we cower at the power of AI and nix em dashes from our work, then in the distant future (a few months from now at AI-speed) LLMs would take their cue from us and stop using em dashes, too. Logically, the lack of em dashes in human writing would then get it flagged as AI-generated. 
 This isn’t just about the em dash. 
 What will AI come after next? Parentheses? The period? We use a lot of periods, right? If periods become AI-tell taboo, would that leave us with only question marks to end every sentence? 
 No! 
 Share 
 Em dashes aren’t the problem. Artificial intelligence used in this manner, however, is an existential threat to the craft of writing and by extension all human creativity. 
 If we let AI tell us how to write, based solely on not doing what AI does based on what we do, we’ve entered a linguistic looking glass that will have all of us constantly reacting to machines to guide the style and structure of writing. All writing will become homogenous. Language, which changes naturally, will stultify. The only change will be constant rebounding. This. Not this. This again. 
 We writers should do absolutely nothing about this whole em dash kerfuffle. Keep calm and carry on, and don’t let AI kill your em dashes, if you like them and know how to use them wisely. 
 If you’re an em dash hater, keep on hating—the em dash doesn’t care. 
 AI will eventually figure out that really talented writers (some but not all) use em dashes effectively. It will figure out that sometimes em dashes are deployed brilliantly, sometimes they’re used poorly, and often they’re overused. The machines will learn how to use them well. Now there’s something to be scared of. 
 This post is one in my series on Anthro Intelligence (ai) , exploring the importance of human writing in this nascent era of artificial intelligence. 

 Do you know anyone who writes? I’d be grateful if you share this post with them (or restack it) so we can all help each other do it better. —Rob

 Share 

 Tidbits of Writing Wisdom 

 Stuff that pops into my head as I write and edit… 
 Funny thing : Among hundreds of writers I’ve edited over the years, a handful tried to be funny but came off as just cute or lame, detracting from their stories. Genuinely funny writers are rare. So my advice: Attempts at humorous writing are best left in the hands of funny people. If that’s you, have a ball. If not, best to stick to your strengths. 
 Too many words : Writers often unwittingly overuse certain words. Mine include “just” and “only.” And I have the annoying habit of using “and” as a sentence starter. I can’t not write without these words just showing up liberally in my drafts. So here’s the tip: Figure out what your overused words are. Don’t worry about them until you’re done writing (let your thoughts flow!). Then do a search and nix/edit before you send/publish. 
 Get an editor : The difference between a good story and a great story is editing. If you don’t have a formal editor, lean on an honest colleague, friend or family member. Don’t ask them what they like. Ask them to look for things they don’t understand, stuff they don’t like, confusing passages and anything boring. Then put on your thick skin and listen. 
 Concisely: If readers enjoy a story it means a lot of words were nixed before they got there. 
 Play the long game . I’ve studied internet traffic since the mid-1990s, analyzing what works in nonfiction media for more than a dozen different publications in science, health, tech and business. This truism has never changed: Honest, quality, useful and entertaining storytelling is the only path to long-term success. Shortcuts and schemes might work for a while, but eventually readers (and algorithms) catch on. 

 A Little Inspiration 

 Artificial intelligence will never know what you’re going to write next.

 Subscribe 

 Until next week, write on! 
 Rob 
 END OF STORY 
 In many cases, the period should come way before the end of the sentence. 
 ### 

 6

 4

 2

 Share

 Previous Next 

 Discussion about this post
 Comments Restacks 

 Georgia O'Brien Patrick 

 Jul 28 

 Thank you Robert Roy. Your timing is perfect. Out of nowhere this morning while walking with my dog I wondered if anyone has put all the style guides into AI with the command, "This is how we learned journalism. If we violated these rules the editor would punish us with lower grades. We had to learn with job sticks and hot lead and that's why extra commas and extra spaces cost time and money in publishing. So go through everything you've learned my LLM thingie and change it all to follow the style books." 

 Reply

 Share

 3 replies by Robert Roy Britt and others 

 3 more comments... 

 Top Latest Discussions 

 No posts

 Ready for more?

 Subscribe 

 © 2026 Robert Roy Britt · Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection notice 

 Start your Substack Get the app 

 Substack is the home for great culture

