
===== PAGE 1 =====
                                                                                         
                                                                                         
 
 
 
 
 
Blood Ties 
and 
 
‘Kings.  What a good idea’:  
Monarchy in Epic Fantasy Fiction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pamela Freeman 
Doctor of Creative Arts 
2006
===== PAGE 2 =====
                                                                                                                            i
                                                                                         
                                                                                         
Certificate of Authorship/Originality 
 
 
 
I certify that the work in this thesis has not previously been submitted for a degree nor has it 
been submitted as part of requirements for a degree except as fully acknowledged within the 
text. 
 
I also certify that the thesis has been written by me.  Any help that I have received in my 
research work and the preparation of the thesis itself has been acknowledged.  In addition, I 
certify that all information sources and literature used are indicated in the thesis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________ 
===== PAGE 3 =====
                                                                                                                            ii
                                                                                         
                                                                                         
Acknowledgments 
 
 
I would like to thank Marnie Parington and Patrice Marchbank for their assistance in 
researching Chapters 1 and 3 of the exegesis accompanying this thesis. 
 
Grateful thanks to Debra Adelaide for her supervision.
===== PAGE 4 =====
                                                                                                                            iii
                                                                                         
                                                                                         
Table of Contents 
 
Volume One 
 
Abstract…………………………………………………….…iv   
        
Thesis:  Blood Ties…………………………………………….1 
 
Synopsis:  The Castings Trilogy……………………………284 
 
 
Volume Two 
 
Exegesis: ‘Kings.  What a good idea.’:  
Monarchy in epic fantasy fiction……………………………288 
 
Bibliography………………………………………………...362 
 
===== PAGE 5 =====
                                                                                                                            iv
                                                                                         
                                                                                         
Abstract 
 
The thesis Blood Ties is a novel in the epic fantasy tradition.  It is intended to be the first of 
The Castings Trilogy.  A synopsis of the second and third books of the trilogy is also 
included. 
 
The exegesis, “‘Kings.  What a good idea.’: Monarchy in epic fantasy fiction”, examines 
some of the reasons writers from democratic countries may choose to use monarchical 
political structures in epic fantasy novels.  It considers evidence from folktale research, 
primate behavioural studies, literary traditions, both ancient and modern, and the effect of 
religious doctrine and history on the symbolic role of the monarch.  Folktales are found to 
have had very little effect on the role of kings in epic fantasy, which has been influenced by 
a combination of literary traditions, including the Arthurian saga and the historical romances 
of Sir Walter Scott.  More profoundly, the meaning of the king’s role has been influenced by 
the Christian mythos in two ways:  the king is a Christ surrogate who sacrifices his own 
safety for the good of the body politic and, in being successful against evil, restores a version 
of Paradise/Eden for his people.
===== PAGE 6 =====
 
                                                                                                                            5                               
===== PAGE 7 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
‘Kings.  What a good idea.’ 
Monarchy in epic fantasy fiction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part Two 
Pamela Freeman 
Doctor of Creative Arts 
2006
   1
===== PAGE 8 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
Chapter 1:  Introduction 
Royalty was like dandelions.  No matter how many heads you chopped off, the 
roots were still there underground, waiting to spring up again. 
It seemed to be a chronic disease.  It was as if even the most intelligent person 
had this little blank spot in their heads where someone had written: ‘Kings.  What a 
good idea.’  Whoever had created humanity had left in a major design flaw.  It was its 
tendency to bend at the knees. 
Terry Pratchett, Feet of Clay, 1997, p. 96 
   
In writing Blood Ties, the novel which accompanies this exegesis, I was working 
within a genre, that of epic fantasy, the kind of book which is usually described by 
publicists as ‘in the tradition of The Lord of the Rings’.  It is a very specific genre, 
requiring a very long story, a pre-industrial society, a rampant and sometimes radical 
evil which threatens that society, a quest structure and a universe where magic works.  
It also often has a group working together to combat the evil, rather than one single 
hero working alone. It requires a ‘secondary creation’, as Tolkien put it, of a self-
consistent world which differs from our own (Tolkien, 1964, p. 45). The genre 
abounds with secondary creations which are based on a monarchical political 
structure.  In writing Blood Ties, one of my main concerns was with the representation 
of a political system that would satisfy the needs of the fantasy genre and yet escape or 
challenge the use of monarchy within it; solving this problem led me to consider very 
closely some fundamental aspects of the use and function of monarchy in the genre. 
Like Terry Pratchett, I have a jaundiced view of kings.  I am interested in history, 
and reading history gives you a cynical attitude to monarchy.  The more you 
understand about the processes by which kings rule, the less you can believe in the 
concept of a ‘good king’.  I do, however, like epic fantasy fiction.  I read it and I write 
it.  But I am frequently mystified and frustrated by the insistence of modern epic 
fantasy writers – living in democratically ruled countries – to choose, deliberately, to 
present a secondary creation, an alternate fictional world, where the aim is to put a 
king on, or keep him on, his throne
1. 
I felt this frustration sharply some years ago when I read Guy Gavriel Kay’s 
trilogy The Fionavar Tapestry (Kay, 1996).  Kay is Canadian, and in the first volume, 
The Summer Tree, the story magically takes five young Canadian students from 
Toronto to another world, where they become involved in a fight against radical evil. 
In the ensuing story, two of his characters, young men – law students – go off on an 
expedition to another country with the young prince of the nation to which they have 
                                                 
1 Pratchett is the only fantasy writer I have encountered who really investigates the different aspects of 
kingship, but because his work is satirical it lies outside the scope of this exegesis.  I have used quotes 
from his Discworld series as chapter headings because I like them. 
   2
===== PAGE 9 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
been transported.  On the way, a villager makes a comment that they’d all be better off 
if the old, decrepit king died and the young prince were to take over.  At a nod from 
the prince, his lieutenant kills the man for treason.  The two Canadians protest.  They 
are told that, if the king’s security forces had found out, the man would have been 
tortured and his family would have lost everything.  This way, at least the family get 
to keep their house and goods and the prince will make provision for them.  Do the 
Canadians then make a stand for equality under the law, the immorality of torture, the 
right to free speech or any of the other things two fine, upstanding young law students 
ought to believe in?  No.  They mutter the equivalent of, ‘Oh, that’s all right then,’ and 
ride happily off with the prince, subsequently risking their lives to support the regime. 
This scene seriously angered me, as it implied that Kay approved of the use of 
arbitrary justice within his fictional, monarchic world. But it also made me wonder – 
what is it about kings and their ‘right’ to the throne?   Guy Gavriel Kay is one of the 
older writers of fantasy, strongly influenced by Tolkien.  I wondered if perhaps current 
writers, new writers, have abandoned the patriarchal monarchy in favour of other form 
of societies.  To test this, I looked at the website of HarperCollins Australia, the 
biggest publisher of fantasy fiction in Australia.  In the first ten pages of their 53 pages 
of fantasy listings, I found current epic fantasy books set in monarchies or empires by:  
Sara Douglass, David Eddings, Alma Hromic, Katharine Kerr, Fiona MacIntosh, 
George RR Martin, Karen Miller, Diana L Paxson, Jane Routley, Tony Shillitoe, 
Veronica Sweeney, Jane Welch and Sarah Zettel.  Monarchy was overwhelmingly the 
choice as background political system, and in many (Eddings, Douglass, Miller, 
Hromic, for example), the aim of the quest was to put or reinstate the rightful ruler on 
the throne.  I am sure the other 43 pages had many more examples. 
Why do people in democratic societies want to read stories about royalty?  For 
they do, not only in fantasy fiction, but in tabloids, gossip magazines, ‘tell-all’ books 
from behind the scenes, or even official press releases. When fantasy writers in the 
21
st century begin to create their fictional worlds, a patriarchal monarchy appears to be 
the default option.   
I have used monarchy as a background for books myself, but these are books for 
children, written deliberately in a fairy-tale format and undercutting the sexism and 
class consciousness of those tales.  Because I was trying to question the genre as well 
as tell an entertaining story, I felt that I had to stay, for the most part, with the 
traditional order (although Floramonde, my created world, is a constitutional 
monarchy rather than an absolute one; Freeman, 1994, 1995, 1998).  Most fantasy 
writers for adults are not trying to question the genre, or undercut anything.  So why 
do they continue to choose monarchy? 
   3
===== PAGE 10 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
Is it, as King James I suggested, that the monarchical ‘forme of government, as 
resembling the Diuinitie, approcheth nearest to perfection, as all the learned and wise 
men from the beginning haue agreed vpon; Vnitie being the perfection of all 
things’(Stuart, 1598, p.1)? 
When I began the novel which is presented here, I wrestled with these questions 
in earnest.  It was my first novel for adults and my first very long story.  I had to 
wonder – were there good practical reasons for writers to pick this type of setting?  As 
I considered the alternatives, it became clear to me that there were, indeed, practical 
advantages for a writer in choosing a monarchy as a political system. 
The first is simplicity.  Having a monarchy cuts down on exposition enormously.  
Because I was interested in the portrayal of kings in fantasy, I chose to present my 
world as one on the brink of monarchy.  The country in which the story takes place is 
‘The Domains’, a collection of fiefdoms run by warlords.  They are united by a 
common language and common culture.  One of the warlords, Thegan, has ambitions 
to unite the domains politically by becoming king.  Explaining all this, slipping in the 
exposition amongst the action, making sure the reader understood how the domains 
operated in both large and small ways, was much harder than saying, ‘The kingdom is 
ruled by a usurper.’   
As Steve Rasnic Tem points out, ‘In the Middle Earth of Tolkien and the Mercury 
of E.R. Eddison, the protagonists are enveloped by all manner of strange backgrounds 
and exotic figures, all of which tell us more exactly what sort of characters these are’ 
(Tem, 1991, p. 8).  Even better, it seems, is a strange background – that is, different to 
our own – but one which is familiar to the reader. 
Readers know about kings.  And queens.  They know about their analogues, 
sultans and emperors and high chieftains.  They know about barons and captains of the 
guard and palaces and courts.  They know you can’t trust a real courtier and the grand 
vizier is always evil.  They know a great deal and they often expect to get more of 
what they know, which gives us the second main reason I believe writers (and 
publishers) use monarchies.  They sell. 
It is easy to market something ‘in the tradition of The Lord of the Rings’.  There is 
a contract between publisher and reader when a book is positioned in the market in 
this way.  The cover has to have mountains on it.  Maybe a horse.  Some mist with a 
gleam of light in the distance.  The impression of distance and wilderness.  Perhaps a 
hooded figure or a group of travellers in cloaks.  The reader (the consumer) knows 
what they are buying. The reader wants a long story, complex and exciting.  The story 
must contain magic of some kind or another.  The fight must be between good and 
evil.  Good has to win. Lene Kaaberol, the Danish fantasy writer, says that she has 
   4
===== PAGE 11 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
‘signed a contract guaranteeing a happy ending’ when she begins a fantasy novel 
(personal communication).  
To create a fantasy world without a monarchy, or a world in which the existence 
of monarchy is the evil, is to stray from this clearly defined road.  Perhaps the reader 
won’t like it.  More to the point for many writers, perhaps the publisher won’t like it 
and it will never get published.  Some writers, no doubt, take this into account when 
planning their next book.  As all marketing people know, the familiar with a  twist 
sells more than the strange or the innovative.  In Chpaters 2, 3 and 4 I discuss the 
literary tradition which has given rise to the epic fantasy as commercial fiction. 
It may also be that the landscape of epic fantasy is the landscape of the quest, 
which requires the physical effort of travel as an analogue for moral stature.  Frodo 
and Sam from JRR Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings, or Ged and Arren from Ursula Le 
Guin’s The Earthsea Sequence, are heroes partly because they endure significant 
physical trials and yet persevere.  The requirement that travel be physically demanding 
and take the hero into the wild puts us into a pre-mechanised world; and in our own 
world, that returns us to a time which is associated with monarchies.  In fact, in our 
own world, pre-Industrial Revolution governments varied widely and included quasi-
democracies, tribal councils of elders (both men and women), local elected 
governments, warlordships,  empires and theocracies.  But the tradition English-
speaking writers draw upon is the British one, and monarchy has existed there (with 
brief interruptions) for a very long time.  A particular level of technology – or perhaps 
more importantly, access to wilderness and unsettled lands – may be associated in the 
writers’ and readers’ minds with earlier times and so with monarchy.   
Brian Attebery suggests that the choice of a pre-industrial landscape and political 
system is a way of presenting ‘the other’, a subversion of modern realist norms which 
allows a wider vision of humanity and the universe than the restrictions of mimetic 
fiction (Attebery, 1995, in Latham and Collins).  I would like to think this is true, 
although I am not sure that monarchy is an essential part of such a subversion.   
Stephen Donaldson achieves much the same thing in his Chronicles of Thomas 
Covenant without a throne in sight. 
But perhaps there are other, more fundamental, reasons why we like kings.  
Perhaps the need for a single male authority figure is rooted deeply in our culture, our 
psyches, even our genes.  To explore this idea, I decided to examine primate studies 
regarding social organisation and to look at psychological theories which might throw 
light on this type of narrative sub-structure (Chapters 5 and 6).  These theories, along 
with a great deal of the literary tradition, were influenced by the work of Sir James 
   5
===== PAGE 12 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
Frazer, The Golden Bough, and I discussed that work at length in Chapters 7 and 8, 
along with that of other comparative mythologists. 
It seemed necessary to me to do this because in my own writing, and in 
discussions with other fantasy writers over the years, it seemed to me that fantasy 
writers do not create the kind of worlds that they do mainly because of commercial 
considerations, but because they like them; because they find them deeply satisfying.  
Most fantasy writers started out as readers of fantasy in childhood:  Narnia, Alice, 
hobbits, Borrowers, Chrestomanci were part of their mental world.  A significant 
proportion ‘discovered’ fantasy in adolescence with The Lord of the Rings and became 
addicted – often to reading as well as to fantasy.  (This is one of the reasons The Lord 
of the Rings is consistently voted the best book by book buyers – for many now adult 
readers, it opened the world of books to them for the first time.) 
Get a group of fantasy writers around a dinner table, as I did recently, and they 
will talk willingly about trying to create in their own work the ‘sense of wonder’ they 
felt as a reader. (Although ‘sense of wonder’ is a term which has traditionally been 
used in reference to science fiction, it seems to be increasingly used among 
practitioners of fantasy as well.) Trying to pin the writers down about what ‘sense of 
wonder’ means is more difficult.  One of my guests talked about a sense of space, a 
sense of wilderness; another of potential – anything can happen.  This resonated for 
me with CS Lewis’ description of his discovery of the ‘Northern myths’, the 
Scandinavian legends which shaped his adolescence and much of his writing (Lewis, 
2002).  
Fantasy may thus be described by its effects as well as its contents; a ‘sense of 
wonder’ may be how we know we are encountering strongly felt writing which uses a 
fantasy landscape to evoke particular feelings.  Part of the sense of wonder, I think, 
must be a sense of ‘heightened reality’: that is, everything which occurs within the 
book matters.  Every word, every action, counts towards the outcome.  There is no 
such thing as a stray thought or a meaningless comment.  Ursula Le Guin makes this 
explicit in her use of magic in The Earthsea Sequence.  ‘Think of this: that every 
word, every act of our Art is said and is done either for good, or for evil’ (Le Guin, 
1971a, p. 35). 
A sense of heightened reality – greater than mimesis – is not confined to fantasy 
fiction, of course.  All fiction partakes of it to some extent.  But in fantasy, as in 
blockbuster thrillers, the stakes are very high: the life and often the soul of the world, 
or at least of one nation, is in the balance.  Fantasy fiction takes us to a place where 
everything matters, nothing is mundane, nothing can be ignored, nothing overlooked 
   6
===== PAGE 13 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
without grave consequences.  And once we are there in this extraordinarily significant 
time and place, it gives us magic. 
Magic, apart from its other attributes (fun, astonishment, the vicarious enjoyment 
of power), links the reader to a higher source of significance.  Immanence, a higher 
being, Guidance, Destiny, Fate, Order, Equilibrium…magic occurs, in most fantasy 
fiction, within a theoretical framework which implies or explicitly requires the 
existence of power which is greater than human.  God exists; the gods order our lives; 
something is in control of our destinies. 
Which brings us back to kings, because often the fantasy narrative requires the 
‘rightful’ king to be on the throne.  The term ‘rightful’ within this context has less to 
do with patrilineal inheritance and more to do with destiny and the intentions of the 
Immanent, however that is portrayed within the created world. 
Perhaps this is why kings are a popular trope; they lend themselves easily to a 
discourse based on immanence.  Why that might be so, however, remains complex and 
will be discussed at length in Chapters 6 and 7.   
What monarchists say 
‘But that’s not right, see?  One man with the power of life and death.’ 
‘But if he’s a good man-‘Carrot began. 
‘What?  What?  OK.  OK.  Let’s believe he’s a good man.  But his second-in-
command – is he a good man too?  You’d better hope so.  Because he’s the supreme 
ruler, too, in the name of the king.  And the rest of the court… they’ve got to be good 
men.  Because if just one of them’s a bad man the result is bribery and patronage.’ 
….. 
‘Even so, a good man as king-‘ 
‘Yes?  And then what?  Royalty pollutes people’s minds, boy.  Honest men start 
bowing and bobbing just because someone’s grandad was a bigger murdering bastard 
than theirs was.’ 
 Terry Pratchett, Men at Arms, 1993, pp. 69-70 
 
Before I went exploring biological, anthropological, psychological and literary 
theories which might explain why kings are so popular in epic fantasy, I thought I 
should find out if they are still popular in reality, and why.  That is, how many 
monarchists are there and why are they monarchists? Why, within constitutional 
monarchies, are efforts to create republican states often thwarted?  What do the 
monarchists say is good about kings? 
To do this, I looked firstly for surveys relating to monarchy and republicanism 
and then at the websites and publicity material of groups around the world who 
support the retention of constitutional monarchs.   
There were some interesting figures from surveys conducted over the past few 
years.  In 2002, the New Statesman found that just under one in four young Britons 
   7
===== PAGE 14 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
(16-25 year olds) believed the monarchy should be abolished (April 29, 2002, p. 24), 
while The Independent newspaper found that only 12 per cent of Britons overall 
wanted the monarchy abolished entirely (The Australian, April 10, 2002).  It is 
interesting that both these polls were conducted just after the Queen Mother’s funeral.  
A poll a year earlier by The Independent had found 34 per cent wanted the monarchy 
abolished (The Australian, April 10, 2002).   
In Australia, a referendum on becoming a republic in 1999 resulted in a vote of 55 
per cent in favour of maintaining the current system.  Polls in 2005 found the figures 
roughly the same, although support for a republic went up when people considered 
Prince Charles becoming the Head of State (Henry, 2005).   
Why do people support monarchies?  I examined the websites and manifestoes of 
various pro-monarchy groups, and found that their main themes seem to be that 
something which is working should be left alone, and a desire to ensure continuity 
with past traditions.  Underlying this is a deep distrust of elected officials and party 
politics.  Interestingly, this distrust is shown by politicians as well as by voters – Tony 
Abbott, currently an Australian cabinet minister, has made this argument forcefully 
(Abbott, 1995).  In monarchist discourse, the monarch (in the cases examined, Queen 
Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom and the Commonwealth) is said to represent all 
the people and to have their best interests at heart.  This is a fascinating argument for 
anyone with even a modicum of historical knowledge.  Historically, the monarchs of 
European countries have cared for their own interests first.  They were not thought of 
as ‘representing’ anyone, except perhaps God.  There appears to have been a 
magnificent sleight of hand which has whisked away a history of tyranny, oppression 
and exploitation and replaced it with a ‘tradition’ of pastoral care and concern.  Why 
this has happened will be discussed later in this exegesis, but the fact that it has 
happened at all is the main point.  For the monarchist, the monarch is a kindly, 
protective, apolitical figure, ensuring that today will be very much like tomorrow, 
protecting us from political machinations and sudden revolutions, from riots and 
violent protests, from extremes of any kind. 
This version of the monarch is the version which is associated, in fantasy fiction, 
with ‘the good king’ or ‘the rightful king’.  We can see from the number of people 
who still support monarchy that the desire for this kind of ruler is not confined to 
readers of fantasy.   
   8
===== PAGE 15 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
Chapter 2:  Folktales 
‘…Obviously, as king, he would concentrate on those things traditionally 
associated with kingship-‘ 
‘Waving,’ said Mr Sock. 
‘Being gracious,’ said Mrs Palm. 
‘Welcoming ambassadors from foreign countries,’ said Mr Potts. 
‘Shaking hands.’ 
‘Cutting off heads-‘ 
‘No! No.  No, that will not be part of his duties…’ 
Terry Pratchett, Feet of Clay, 1997, p. 228 
 
Discussions of fantasy literature often refer to ‘folk tale’ or ‘fairy tale’ roots.  Richard 
Mathews, for example, in his book Fantasy: The Liberation of the Imagination, states 
that  as ‘a literary genre, modern fantasy is clearly related to the magical stories of 
myth, legend, fairy tale and folklore from around the world.’ (Mathews, 2002, p.1) 
When Brian Attebery, a pioneer in fantasy scholarship, speaks of ‘the oral 
predecessors of modern fantasy’ he is clearly referring to folk and fairy tales 
(Attebery, 1992, p.54).  
Theorists have perhaps been encouraged to draw parallels between epic fantasy 
and folk or fairy tales by JRR Tolkien’s famous lecture ‘On Fairy Tales’, in which his 
enthusiasm for narrative structures which provide what he terms ‘eucatastrophe’ – the 
‘Consolation of the Happy Ending’ – is directed at modern works as well as traditional 
folk tales (Tolkien, 1964, p. 60).  Indeed, most of what Tolkien says in this lecture can 
be applied to his own work; and it is perfectly clear that he meant it to be so applied. 
Tolkien would have had no difficulty in agreeing with Attebery when he suggests that 
in Lord of the Rings Tolkien’s ‘presentation of events is governed by the rhetorical 
structure of a folktale’ (Attebery, 1992, p. 54). 
The lecture on fairy stories has been quoted by almost every later fantasy theorist 
who has dealt with the creation of ‘Secondary Worlds’ (a term which originated in this 
lecture) such as Middle Earth (Tolkien, 1964, p. 45).   Its approach to narrative 
structure within such worlds is seen to be widely applicable by scholars.  Colin 
Manlove is typical when, in dicussing the nature of fantasy fiction, he refers to 
Tolkien’s lecture extensively (Manlove, in Schlobin, 1982).  The most influential 
element of Tolkien’s argument was the definition of eucatastrophe as being desirable 
and attainable within contemporary fiction; that modern writers could and should have 
‘happy endings’, just as fairy stories do. 
Does Tolkien’s theory about narrative structures in fantasy fiction help us in 
discovering why monarchy is the preferred political system in modern epic fantasy?  
Perhaps it does, if a happy ending, a eucatastrophe, can only take place within 
   9
===== PAGE 16 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
something which is like a fairy story or folk tale. Perhaps it is simply that fantasy 
novels are longer and more complex folk tales, using the themes and relationships of 
the tales and elaborating them with mimetic literary devices such as an emphasis on 
character or focalisation through one character’s eyes.   
Of course, folk tales and epic fantasy share many tropes: wizards, witches, animal 
helpers, elves, dwarves, objects of power, stark contrasts between good and evil,  
swords and sorcery.  Perhaps more importantly, they share a landscape, a countryside 
rather than a cityscape, alternating villages with wilderness, a place where quests can 
happen.  This is the most powerful trope of all in epic fantasy fiction.  But does a 
sharing of tropes guarantee similar meaning?  Asking the same question of a different 
genre may give a clearer perspective to this question.  Both A Christmas Carol by 
Charles Dickens and The Turn of the Screw by Henry James are ghost stories.  They 
both include visitations from dead people to the living, in a setting of wealth and 
privilege, during the Victorian period.  However, they are strikingly dissimilar books, 
although they use the same tropes.  A simple correspondence of tropes does not, then, 
mean that the works are similar in meaning or impact upon the reader. 
Perhaps a sharing of tropes does, at the least, imply a choice by the author to work 
within a known tradition.  If this is so, do all  the tropes need to be present?  Must a 
writer choose a monarchy in order to stay within the tradition?  Many writers have not 
chosen the monarchic political structure for their secondary creation but still write epic 
fantasy.  The most obvious example is Stephen Donaldson’s The Chronicles of 
Thomas Covenant, first published in the 1970s, now a classic in the field. 
So what is the importance of fairy tales to epic fantasy? Referring to Tolkien’s 
insistence on the eucatastrophic ending, perhaps the importance lies in the narrative 
structure of traditional tales, which leads the reader to the consolation of the happy 
ending. Kathryn Hume looks at stories from ‘traditional societies’, by which she 
seems to mean those where oral storytelling of indigenous stories was extant at the 
time when ethnologists first recorded the stories.  She states that these stories present 
people either succeeding or failing to imitate or embody a mythic pattern.  In modern 
fantasy writing, she suggests, the fantasy (that is, deviation from consensus reality, 
such as magic) ‘serves to let [writers] copy the mythic pattern closely, and thus 
reinforces meaning’ (Hume, 1984, p.33).   
This allows us to test the proposition that epic fantasy writers use kings because it 
is ‘traditional’, and that this tradition ‘reinforces meaning’ for the reader.  We can test 
the first part of this statement by examining how, when and for what purpose royalty 
appears in traditional tales and comparing it to modern epic fantasy novels. 
   10
===== PAGE 17 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
Narrative structures in folk tales 
If it is true that monarchy is merely a component within a fairy tale narrative structure, 
replicated by modern writers purely as part of the tradition, then we should be able to 
find strong echoes of modern fantasy plots about kings in earlier folk tales which have 
kings as characters, and we should be able to find kings in modern novels playing 
essentially the same roles that they do in the earlier tales. 
We may find that the narratives structures do repeat the folk tale narrative 
structure, complete with the use of royalty; that they do not repeat it at all; or that they 
repeat only some elements of it.  This may include making a different use of royalty.  
That is, the narrative structures of modern stories may repeat some or all of the folk 
tale pattern, but the role – or the meaning – of monarchy, and specifically of kings, 
may be different.   
In order to compare the narrative structures, we need some way of analysing the 
folk tales to discover their treatment of royalty.  Two main theorists are useful here: 
Vladimir Propp and Antti Amatus Aarne (and his translator, Stith Thompson). 
The Russian structuralist Vladimir Propp in Morphology of the Folktale (1928) 
delineated a way of analysing fairy tales by examining their ‘functions’; that is, units 
of action.  He enumerated 31 functions which he claimed, following an analysis of 100 
Russian fairy/folktales, contain all the elements present in all such tales.  He presented 
a coding system by which these functions could be written as a type of formula which 
described individual tales, just as a chemical formula describes a substance. 
More controversially, he claimed that these functions occurred in a set order and 
that this order never deviated (although he allowed that some sections could be 
‘inverted’, he maintained that this did not constitute a deviation). 
Using the 31 functions, he claimed to describe an underlying formula for all 
Russian folktales.   In this he paralleled comparative mythologist Joseph Campbell’s 
claims about ‘the hero’s journey’ which must also follow a specific pattern, the 
‘monomyth’: ‘A hero ventures forth from the world of common day into a region of 
supernatural wonder: fabulous forces are there encountered and a decisive victory is 
won: the hero comes back from this mysterious adventure with the power to bestow 
boons on his fellow man’. This ‘monomyth’ is a symbolic representation of the 
journey of the psyche to fruitful adulthood, and is therefore, according to Campbell, 
universal (Campbell, 1973, p.30, p.21). 
Propp’s claims for his formula are less encompassing than Campbell’s, although 
he speculated that the underlying order it represented might be present in folktales 
across the world.  Propp and Campbell have some common points of reference: 
leaving home, a magical helper, trials to be overcome, a reward at the end, and so on.  
   11
===== PAGE 18 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
The notable difference is that the hero of Propp’s formula does not necessarily bestow 
‘boons on his fellow man’.  On the contrary, it is the hero who is accorded a boon at 
the end (marriage and wealth).  Is this the difference between folk tale and myth, or 
merely two researchers reading the same material differently?  Campbell does not list 
all his source material, so detailed comparisons are hard to make, but it does not seem 
that he and Propp were looking at the same type of story: Campbell has looked 
actively for mythic stories about ‘a number of the world’s symbolic carriers of the 
destiny of Everyman’ (Campbell, p.36), including stories from many of the world’s 
religions.  Stories which did not fit the monomyth schema were excluded. 
This preselection of which stories to analyse means that, although Campbell used 
some folk tales in illustrating his thesis, the concept of ‘the hero’s journey’ may not be 
helpful in assessing the influence of the folk tale structure on fantasy writers’ use of 
the particular folk tale trope of monarchy. 
Propp, in contrast to Campbell’s carefully winnowed selection, has simply used 
every Russian folktale he could find which fit into the Aarne-Thompson tale types 
300-749; the tales that Aarne-Thompson describe as ‘ordinary folk tales’. Aarne’s The 
Types of the Folktale (translated by Stith Thompson in 1964) is a classification of 
traditional stories into ‘tale-types’ by virtue of the ‘motifs’ within them; classifying 
according to dominant motifs.  As Propp points out, this is highly subjective, 
particularly in a complex tale where there is likely to be more than one strong motif.  
The construction of motifs is also variable: sometimes based on actions, sometimes on 
personality, sometimes on social position.  Although Propp was dissatisfied with the 
Aarne-Thompson approach, he recognised that Aarne’s classification system was 
widely used and the tale-types were recognisable to anyone interested in the subject. 
The ‘ordinary folk tales’ (tale types 300-749) are the stories also known as 
‘marchen’, and contain many of the stories we think of as ‘fairy tales’.  They were the 
source material for the 17th century French salon writers such as Charles Perrault and 
Catherine Bernard and for those who followed them in later centuries, such as English 
fairy story writer Andrew Lang, the compiler of the influential Fairy Books (Lang, 
1950a-i).  These tale types include familiar stories such as Cinderella, or Cap o‘ 
Rushes, Sleeping Beauty, Beauty and the Beast, Rapunzel and Rumpelstiltskin.  They 
also contain many less familiar stories, not all of which have ‘happy endings’. 
Kings in folk tales 
Propp ignores the social position and gender of the characters in tales, claiming that 
they can be easily swapped for other characters as long as the function remains the 
same. 
   12
===== PAGE 19 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
He makes an exception for kings as agents of matrimonial, monetary or social 
reward, however, giving an entire function (No. 31) over to ‘The hero is married and 
ascends the throne’ – the final function in his set (Propp, 1990, p. 63). 
In delineating characters (‘dramatis personae’ in Propp’s method) he  suggests 
that tales do not have characters as such but rather ‘spheres of action’ and identifies 
the king and/or the king’s daughter as possessing a sphere of action which involves: 
• the assignment of difficult tasks 
• branding (marking the hero either physically or by possession of some object) 
• exposure (of the hero as the hero) 
• recognition (ditto) 
• punishment of a second villain/false hero 
• agreeing to marriage to the princess. 
It does not matter whether it is the princess (the ‘sought-after person’) or the 
father who carries out these actions.  Similarly, it does not matter if the king is 
benevolent or not – what is crucial is the power he wields, which allows a particular 
set of narrative functions to occur. 
Regarding heroes (who are often princes), Propp suggest that there are only two 
types: the seeker, such as the soldier in The 12 Dancing Princesses, and the victimised 
(often enchanted) hero, as in The Frog Prince (Propp, 1990, p.80). 
Aarne-Thompson’s index of the same type of tales (that is, tale types 300-749) 
lists 26 individual tale types and/or variants which relate to kings.  Having looked at 
the narrative outlines of each of these tale types, I classified the king’s role as: 
Evil or tyrannical king:    5 
Animal/bird king:   5 
Deceived or imperilled king: 3 
Testing/Rewarding agent: 3 
Disguised king/robber:  3 
King as father:   3 
King taught a lesson:  2 
King is bastard:   1 
Innocent king:   1 
T o t a l :     2 6  
This shows a wide variation – but is completely misleading.  Even a cursory look 
at the 2411 tale-types show that kings appear in many more tales than those listed in 
the index.  I read the narrative outlines of all the 2411 tales given in the Aarne-
Thompson index and found many more of them included kings that the 26 tales 
   13
===== PAGE 20 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
indexed under ‘king’.  In addition, many of them included queens, princes and 
princesses, which implies the existence of monarchy.  Queens, interestingly, appeared 
only as the wife to a king, never as a princess who has inherited the throne. 
Propp concentrated on the tale-types numbered 300-749, the ‘ordinary folk tales’ 
or ‘marchen’ tales.  I read the narrative descriptions of these closely.   The main role 
kings appear to play in these stories is as a testing/rewarding agent.   
This usually relates to: 
• a problem which the king cannot solve and for which he needs the hero’s help 
• a testing of the hero for suitability to marry the king’s daughter (the test may be the 
solving of the problem) 
• the king being impressed by the hero’s qualities even if there is no problem and no 
daughter (much, much rarer). 
All three roles end with the king as the agent of reward: matrimonial, monetary or 
social or, more commonly, matrimonial and monetary and social (that is, half my 
kingdom and my daughter’s hand in marriage with an implied inheritance of the 
throne). 
This result resonates with the findings of Gottschall et al (2003) that male 
protagonists in folktales are likely to be primarily motivated to gain social status and 
material wealth.  Taking an evolutionary perspective, Gottschall et al assume this to 
be a strategy to acquire a mate. 
In this approach the king may be described simply as the mechanism through 
which the protagonist achieves his goal – in Gottschall’s terms, reproductive success 
symbolised by marriage.  The social status and wealth acquired by the hero (even if 
acquired by that marriage) ensures the well-being of any children and therefore further 
enhances reproductive success. 
Royalty is also represented by princes and princesses.  Even when the king is not 
a specified figure in a tale-type, the presence of a prince or princess implies the 
existence of a king. 
Looking more closely at the tale-types Propp used in his morphology (that is, 
Aarne-Thompson types 300-749), we can see that monarchy (rather than king as 
character) is present in many. 
Excluding the variants on each tale type, there are actually only 333 tale types 
listed between numbers 300 and 749.  Of these, 113 explicitly refer to at least one 
royal character; often several royal characters appear in the same tale (total 150 such 
characters).  Below see a table listing the appearance of royalty in these tales 
according to the roles played (loosely based on Propp’s ‘sphere of action’ description 
for these characters). 
   14
===== PAGE 21 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
 
Appearance of any royalty 
 
 
113 
King 
 Hero 
Villain 
Father/agent of 
reward 
Victim/Rescued 
Husband ( = queens) 
Enemy 
Total 
 
6 
0 
17
4 
6 
1 
34 
Prince 
Hero 
Villain 
Husband 
Rescued or is 
reward 
Other princes (ie  
brothers of hero) 
Total 
 
15 
1 
1 
22 
2 
 
41 
Princess 
Hero 
Villain 
Bride 
Rescued/ becomes   
reward 
Total 
 
10 
2 
3 
60
 
75 
Queen  
Victimised wife 
and mother 
Total 
 
6 
 
6 
Table 1:  Roles played by royal characters in tale types 300-749 
 
The Aarne-Thompson set of tale-types shows that monarchy is used primarily as a 
scaffold upon which to dangle a reward.  The greatest reward it is possible for an 
ordinary person to imagine within a monarchy is, of course, to ascend the throne, and 
this is the reward most often accorded to the heroes of folktales, both male and female.  
Princes and Princesses are merely the means by which this can happen, via marriage, 
whether that is to Cinderella, or to the country boy who makes the princess laugh for 
the first time.  Whether it is the marriage or the throne which is the real goal is 
irrelevant to this discussion; in both cases it is the king who provides the reward. 
It is worth nothing that there are many, many tales where these are not the 
rewards received by the hero; for example, the numerous stories about cheating death.  
However, where rewards are bestowed by human agency, that agency is likely to be 
royal. 
Of course, the institution of monarchy underlies all the stories since almost all of 
them were composed, related or recorded during a monarchic period.  Kings are taken 
for granted, but primarily as a representative of economic and political power.  They 
are not represented as caring for their subjects or representing good against evil, 
although princes as heroes must often face evil embodied in a monster, dragon or 
witch. 
Are the theories any use? 
The idea of the king as a sphere of action is a useful concept, as is the idea of 
functions within a story.   
   15
===== PAGE 22 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
Propp also emphasises the recurrent image of prosperity and peacefulness at the 
beginning of the tales he analysed; prosperity which is disrupted by the events of the 
villain.  This will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 6. 
However, having gone over the Aarne-Thompson tale types in some detail, I 
found that Propp’s idea that there is only one real folktale which has up to 31 parts (or 
‘functions’) is clearly inaccurate.  While it is undoubtedly useful for stories with a 
‘hero’, not all stories have heroes.  One example will suffice: the story of the 
fisherman who is given three wishes and subsequently wastes them, returning him to 
the status quo.  There are many such stories where there is no journey away from 
home, no trials overcome, no special qualities of the protagonists and no real reward.  
Interestingly, these other stories rarely feature royalty, perhaps confirming the idea 
that in folk tales monarchy is about providing appropriate reward for dangers 
overcome. 
If the hypothesis suggested earlier were true – if modern fantasy novels 
simplistically used folk tales as their basis, or had evolved from folk tales by applying 
modern literary devices to similar tales – then we should see, in contemporary fantasy 
novels, royalty being the scaffold from which reward hangs.  Kings would therefore 
act as agents of reward and princesses or princes be given as rewards to the heroes. 
This does occur occasionally. One can certainly point to instances of the story 
ending in royal marriages or betrothals (Aragorn marries Arwen in The Lord of the 
Rings; Lebannen becomes betrothed to Seserakh in The Earthsea Sequence; Rhapsody 
marries Ashe in the Rhapsody trilogy) although these are not marriages which reward 
heroes with princesses and thus prosperity and social rank. They are marriages 
between unknown heirs who have finally come into their inheritance and princesses or 
princes who are their equal in rank.  However, there is no doubt that these marriages 
are rewards for the characters’ courage, persistence, kindness, and so on, as revealed 
in the narrative.  They are rewarded with a more modern prize than improved social 
class: romantic love. 
Where the emphasis in the folk tale is on either the ‘ordinary person’ (the soldier, 
the cinderella) achieving high rank and status via marriage, or on the despised younger 
brother, the classic ‘third prince’, showing his worth and receiving due reward, in 
modern novels this socio-economic disparity is missing.  The king is the romantic hero 
who bestows his hand, once he has established his hold on his kingdom, on an 
appropriate and beloved bride (who has proved her worth during the story, or whose 
worth is inherently greater than his).   
Overall, therefore, what was most interesting in this analysis of folk tales was a 
gap.  The story of the ‘unknown heir’ who comes to claim his kingdom (Arren, Ashe), 
   16
===== PAGE 23 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
or the story of the secret heir who must fight to re-establish himself (Aragorn), both 
stock characters in modern fantasy fiction, are nowhere to be found in either Aarne-
Thompson or in Propp.   
These are later creations.  If we are to find where the king in modern fantasy 
fiction comes from, we must look, not to the folk tale, but to the romance. 
   17
===== PAGE 24 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
Chapter 3:  The Missing Heir or, The Rightful King 
Kings come in four kinds:… 
4 Long-lost Kings.  These are Kings who have been hidden or mislaid soon after 
birth.  They are normally rather young and will be using the Tour to acquire both 
experience  and various items of Royal regalia (SWORD, SCEPTRE, RING, CUP, etc.) 
which have been lost as least as long as they have.  There is, however, a subsection of 
long-lost Kings who have been magically deprived of their Thrones.  This will have 
been done either by the implanting of false memories or, in extreme cases, by 
transplanting the monarch to another body.  In these cases the throne will be held by a 
usurper.  Otherwise the same Rules apply.  There is obviously a bit of an overlap 
between long-lost Kings and M
ISSING HEIRS, but you can generally tell the difference 
when you see one:  a Missing Heir is almost inhumanly naive. 
Diana Wynne Jones, The Tough Guide to Fantasyland, 1996, pp. 110-111. 
 
The most influential missing heir story and the one most familiar to English writers is, 
of course, the Arthur legend, particularly as it appears in Thomas Malory’s Le Morte 
D’Arthur.  The influence of Malory’s book on later romance and historical fiction and 
thus on fantasy fiction will be examined in Chapter 4.   
All the Arthurian stories available to us are nostalgic, since the first stories about 
him were written several hundred years after the historic Arthur, if he existed, was 
alive.  He appears first as an historical character in Nennius’ 9th century Historia 
Brittonum, where he is credited with winning twelve battles, the last of which is Mons 
Badonicus.  Gildas, writing about 540AD, dates this battle at 500AD, and says that the 
Britons here finally defeated their enemies the Saxons.  If there was a historical 
Arthur, then, he was probably a 5
th-6th century chieftain (Jackson, in Loomis, 1959, 
pp.1-3).  Whether a Briton or a Welshman is unclear; certainly there is a large body of 
legend, folktale and bardic songs about Arthur from Wales which predates anything 
written about him in Latin or English (Black and Lloyd, 2000). 
Nennius’ skimpy reference to Arthur is not the prime source of our legends about 
him.  They come from Geoffrey of Monmouth, writing in the 12th century.  His 
Historica Regum Britanniae purported to be a history of Britain, which Geoffrey 
claimed was translated from ‘a very old book in the British language’. Geoffrey’s 
book established the characters of Arthur and Merlin, the fathering of Arthur by Uther 
Pendragon, Arthur’s miraculous weapons, Mordred as enemy, and Merlin as the 
guide/wizard/mentor so familiar to us.  However, the missing heir element is totally 
absent; Arthur is raised at court and is so well known and loved by his father’s men 
that he is immediately crowned on Uther’s death, although he is only fifteen 
(Geoffrey, 1978). 
Geoffrey was translated into French by Wace, and the Arthurian stories found an 
eager audience in the European courts of the time (Wace and Layamon, 1977).  Many 
   18
===== PAGE 25 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
courtly romances followed, in a number of languages, including Latin (Haskins, 
1961).  The story of Arthur being taken by Merlin for safekeeping just after his birth 
appears first in the work of Robert de Boron, a Burgundian writing around 1200.  His 
Merlin survives only in fragments, but a prose redaction of it is in the Vulgate Cycle 
of Arthurian stories, and a summary in the introduction to the Suite de Merlin, both 
French romances of the 13
th century.  In the Vulgate Cycle, Merlin puts Arthur ‘into 
safe fosterage with Antor and in due course brings about his coronation as the rightful 
heir of Uter’ (Micha, in Loomis, 1959, p. 321). 
The 12th and 13th centuries saw a large number of verse and prose romances about 
Arthur, notably by Chretien de Troys and Marie de France, but most of these related to 
Arthur’s actions after he had become king, and to the adventures of his knights, 
particularly in their search for the Holy Grail. 
In English, the story appears first in both rimed and prose romances which are 
mostly adaptations or translations of the French stories (Ackerman, in Loomis, 1959,  
p. 481).   
The Arthur romances were the first example in European literature of a long-
established oral tradition fusing with contemporary mores to produce a sophisticated 
body of literature.  Although other characters from the oral tradition, such as Robin 
Hood,  became the hero of ballads and poems, the Arthurian saga is notable for its 
prose stories which combine heroic deeds with romantic love, sex, religion and evil to 
produce a robust, malleable literature with wide appeal and great influence, which will 
be discussed in the next chapter. 
The Arthurian saga has given us a pattern for the missing heir trope as it appears 
in epic fantasy fiction. 
Firstly, the throne must be either vacant or possessed by a usurper and this is 
causing distress – typically, a breakdown in law and public safety, although 
sometimes the malaise runs deeper. 
Secondly, the heir must have been raised away from his family and/or birthright.   
The heir (almost always a male) may or may not know of his rights to the throne.  
Those rights may consist of blood inheritance or ordained destiny (selected by 
immanence).  He usually lives under an assumed name or without his true patronymic. 
Thirdly, the heir must be guided to claim the throne at the right time.  This 
guidance is typically given by an older man/mentor, often a wizard. 
Fourthly, the heir must be worthy of the throne, caring more for the good of the 
realm than for power or wealth.   
   19
===== PAGE 26 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
Fifthly, he must show his commitment to right and to the realm through battle 
with the forces of evil.  Occasionally this ‘battle’ does not include actual fighting, but 
is represented by some kind of physical and mental trial. 
Sixthly, he is rewarded not only with the throne, but with an appropriate marriage. 
While Arthur’s story does not end with his marriage, the missing heir trope does, 
as story moves on to another kind of narrative, the quest. Before we look at how 
Arthur’s story has affected modern fantasy writers, it is worth considering that the 
missing heir element of Arthur’s story did not arise in a vacuum, but followed on from 
many early uses of the same trope, which may also have influenced modern writers.  
Early missing heir stories 
Missing heir stories go back a very long way.  Perhaps the earliest example of a child 
raised by adoptive parents who returns to his birth-people to lead them to peace and 
glory is Moses. 
Moses’ mother hides him from Pharoah’s edict that all Hebrew sons be killed at 
birth, sets him afloat on the Nile in a waterproof ark of bulrushes, and sends his sister 
to watch over the ark to see what happens to him.  He is pulled from the river by 
Pharoah’s daughter… ‘and she had compassion on him, and said, this is one of the 
Hebrew’s children’ (Exodus 2:6).   Moses is raised as Pharaoh’s daughter’s son; but is 
physically nurtured by his own mother who is employed as a wet-nurse.  He is driven 
from home after Pharaoh finds out that he killed two Egyptians for ‘smiting an 
Hebrew, one of his brethren’ (Exodus 2:11). 
After various trials and tribulations in the land of Midian, Moses is told by God to 
return to Egypt and is given a magic ‘rod’ (the origin of the magic wand/staff of 
power?  The dimensions of the rod are not given but it seems to be more like a 
walking stick than a baton).  He returns to Egypt and is claimed as a brother by Aaron, 
who is also given a rod by God.  Together they confront Pharaoh and demand the 
release of the Hebrews.  What follows is the earliest description of a magicians’ duel 
which we have, which ends only with the seven plagues and the release of the 
Hebrews, followed by the crossing of the Red Sea and the destruction of Pharaoh and 
his armies. 
How closely does this correspond with the missing heir of fantasy fiction?    
While Pharaoh is clearly the ‘rightful king’ of Egypt, he is not acting as a rightful 
king should to the Hebrews; they are oppressed by unreasonable demands. The public 
good is thus threatened.  Moses was raised away from his own people, even though, 
through his sister’s guile, he was cared for by his own mother.  However, he did not 
know her as his mother until he returned to Egypt and was claimed as brother by 
   20
===== PAGE 27 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
Aaron.  Moses’ guidance to claim the leadership of the Hebrews is given by God 
rather than a human mentor and is given at, presumably, the right time.  Moses 
demonstrates that he is worthy of the throne by his actions in defending the Hebrews 
who were being ‘smited’ originally, and then later by his actions in the land of Midian 
where he again defends the helpless against violence.  Moses and Aaron’s battle with 
‘the forces of evil’ in the form of Pharaoh is prolonged and bloody, ending in a great 
slaughter.  One could argue that it is God rather than Moses who actually kills 
everyone, but it is Moses who chooses when to let the Red Sea come back onto its 
seafloor, wiping out the Egyptian army. 
Moses is already married with children when this occurs, so cannot be rewarded 
in the traditional way with a suitable wife, but he is certainly given undisputed 
leadership of the Hebrews during the wandering in the desert which follows, 
exemplified by him being chosen to receive the Ten Commandments.  
So far, then, the Moses story fits the narrative pattern.  The differences are that 
Moses knows all his life that he is not biologically Pharaoh’s daughter’s son and that 
he is a Hebrew.  The direct intervention of God is also a divergence – although fantasy 
fiction often has intervention by destiny, fate, or prophets/seers acting on behalf of 
gods.  In some books, notably Guy Gavriel Kay’s Fionavar Tapestry (the plot of 
which has a missing heir of a different kind), there are even gods intervening in person 
– however, these are gods and goddesses of a pantheon, who acknowledge fealty to a 
Creator (known as the Weaver in the world of Fionavar).  It is rare for the Creator to 
intervene directly. 
There are other mythic missing heir stories, from a number of different traditions. 
From the Greeks, we have the story of Perseus, the son of Zeus and Danaê.  Before his 
birth, an oracle foretells that Danaê’s son will kill her father, Acrisius.  Acrisius sets 
his daughter and the baby Perseus adrift in a chest to prevent this, but they are rescued 
by Zeus.  Perseus is brought up by King Polydectes and later does kill his grandfather, 
by accident, when throwing the discus at the Larissan games (Graves, 1974). 
Another early Greek story which has strong echoes of the missing heir story is 
that of Oedipus.  According to Sophocles, Oedipus is born in Thebes to King Laius 
and his wife Jocasta.  When a prophecy from Apollo’s temple forecasts that the child 
will grow up to kill his father and marry his mother, Laius orders that the child be 
pinioned through the ankles and cast out on the mountainside to die.  The shepherd to 
whom this task is entrusted is too soft-hearted to do it, and gives the child to another 
shepherd from Corinth.  He is adopted by the king and queen of Corinth and is 
brought up as their natural son.  As an adult, he learns of the prophecy and leaves 
home to protect his ‘parents’.  On the road, he meets Laius, has a road rage incident, 
   21
===== PAGE 28 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
and kills him.  He then proceeds to Thebes, which he saves from the Sphinx, and 
marries the queen, Jocasta, to cement his position as newly acclaimed king.   In the 
play, ‘Oedipus the King’, he discovers the truth of all this, puts out his eyes and awaits 
judgment.  Jocasta hangs herself after the truth is revealed (Sophocles, 1973). 
While eucatastrophe is definitely not the aim of this story – in fact, the opposite – 
it still bears some resemblance to the missing heir motif.  I would argue that two 
elements of it and of the other examples quoted here have strongly influenced later 
writers.  The first is the banishment of the child from the birth family and his raising 
by others, either to protect the child or to protect the parents or grandparents.  The 
second is the establishment of a ‘rule’ of fantasy fiction:  you can’t beat a prophecy.  
Whatever you do to fight against it is exactly what is needed to bring it about.  If Laius 
and Jocasta had bowed to the god’s decree and brought Oedipus up as their own son, 
none of the tragedy would have happened. Disobedience to fate or the gods/God leads 
to disaster.  If Pharaoh had listened to Moses’ and Aaron’s prophecies about the woe 
Egypt would feel if the Hebrews were not released, all would have been well.   
Throughout medieval literature we find stories which echo these rules, or which 
show us again the prevalence of the missing heir motif, particularly in stories about 
heroes.   
From Ireland, the hero-story of Fionn Mac Uail (Finn MacCool) has Fionn being 
sent away by his mother to be raised by druid foster-mothers to prevent him being 
killed by the killers of his father Uail.  He is known as Deimne and is trained in 
combat by his foster-mothers.  After many adventures he becomes the head of the 
warriors of Ireland and receives the submission of his father’s killers (Rackham, 
1995). 
Also from Ireland, the familiar theme of trying to prevent a prophecy comes in the 
story of Deidre, who is sent away to live in seclusion by her father after a soothsayer 
predicts she will cause ‘the greatest amount of blood to be shed in Erin since time and 
race began.  And the three most famous heroes that ever were found will lose their 
heads on her account’ (Jacobs, 1990, p.66).  But the bloodshed cannot be averted by 
human intervention.  As with other stories, if Deidre had not been sent away by her 
father the tragedy would never have happened – she would never have met Naois, her 
husband, or Connachar, whose desire for her caused the fight. 
From Wales, the story cycle known as The Mabinogion has the son of Pwyll, 
Lord of Dyved, stolen at birth by a great clawed beast.  His mother, Rhiannon, is 
blamed for his death and set a punishment.  By accident, he is recovered by Teirnon 
Twrvliant, ‘the best man in the world’, when he is a baby, and brought up as his 
natural son until Teirnon hears the story of Rhiannon and realises that the child is 
   22
===== PAGE 29 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
remarkably like Pwyll his father.  Teirnon returns the child to Pwyll and Rhiannon and 
she is released from her punishment.  The child is named Pryderi and grows up to 
inherit his father’s kingdom and create a golden age (Jones, 1978). 
By Elizabethan times, the missing heir motif is so familiar to audiences that it can 
be satirised in comedies such as Beaumont and Fletcher’s A King and No King 
(Flores, 1993).  The nineteenth century abounds with missing heir stories, the most 
influential of which will be discussed in Chapter 4. 
Modern missing heirs 
‘Only the rightful king could do it, see,’ said Nobby. 
‘Oh, right,’ said Colon.  ‘I understand.  Oh, yes.  So what you’re saying is, 
someone’d decided who the rightful king was before he pulled it out?  Sounds like a fix 
to me.  Prob’ly someone had a fake hollow stone and some dwarf inside hanging onto 
the other end with a pair of pliers until the right guy came along-’ 
Terry Pratchett, Men at Arms, 1993, p. 242 
The most obvious example of a modern missing heir is that of Aragorn from Tolkien’s 
The Lord of the Rings.  Aragorn, the last of the ‘Kings of Numenor’, was raised by his 
mother and Elrond the Half-Elven at Rivendell, half a continent away from the throne 
he claims in The Return of the King.  There he was called ‘Estel’ which means ‘hope’.  
He was guided by both Elrond and Gandalf the wizard (Tolkien, 1978a-c). 
In the course of the story, Aragorn resumes his rightful name, reforges his 
ancestral sword, does battle with evil, reclaims his throne and, perhaps more 
importantly, is crucial in helping Frodo and Sam’s quest, which enables the overthrow 
of Sauron, the Dark Lord.  He is revealed to his subjects in two ways: by introduction 
from his mentor Gandalf, followed by battle, and by his possessing the ‘healing hands’ 
of a king. 
Subsequently, he marries his long-standing love, Arwen Evenstar, and re-
establishes the royal house. 
So far, a classic missing heir story.  Although Aragorn is not the ‘hero’ of The 
Lord of the Rings, Tolkien has made it clear that the resumption of the throne by the 
rightful king is crucial to achieving what he has called ‘eucatastrophe’, the happy 
ending, which is essential to this type of story. 
  In a letter to a friend, he writes:  ‘We are to see the overthrow of the last 
incarnation of Evil, the unmaking of the Ring, the final departure of the Elves, and the 
return in majesty of the true King, to take over the Dominion of Men, inheriting all 
that can be transmitted of Elfdom in his high marriage with Arwen daughter of Elrond, 
as well as the lineal royalty of Numenor.’ (Tolkien, 1981, p 60). 
Aragorn has always known his true identity.  Other missing heirs are brought up 
in ignorance of their parentage.  A striking example is the 1902 novel by Pauline 
   23
===== PAGE 30 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
Hopkins, ‘Of One Blood: or, The Hidden Self’, about an African-American man who 
returns to Ethiopia and discovers (through magical means) that he is the true heir to 
that country’s throne (Latham and Collins, 1995, p. 75).  
Although not a king (although at the time of writing his eventual fate is yet to be 
determined), the most recent example of this type of missing heir is Harry Potter.  
Raised in obscurity, he is informed of his true, magic, inheritance by the classic 
wizard/mentor, Dumbledore, and returns to his rightful realm to battle the forces of 
evil.  Potter has both genetics and destiny backing him; like all good missing heirs, he 
is the subject of a prophecy (Rowling, 1999). 
The ‘rightful king’ may be made rather than born; or, rather, recognised as having 
been ‘chosen’ by immanent power.  In Le Guin’s The Farthest Shore, the third volume 
of the Wizard of Earthsea trilogy (now running to five volumes plus some short stories 
and known as The Earthsea Sequence), Arren, Prince of Enlad, joins the mage Ged on 
a quest to restore the equilibrium of the Archipelago (Le Guin, 1971c).  This is one of 
the fantasies where more is at stake than simply the rule of law or an evil overlord.  
Magic used by a rogue wizard has broken the barrier between death and life; death is 
winning by leaching all meaning from the living.  Arren joins Ged in a journey 
through the lands of the dead.  By doing so, he proves his fitness to take the throne of 
all the lands of the Archipelago.  The throne has been empty for some hundreds of 
years and this emptiness is seen, in the story, to be connected with the malaise of the 
body commonwealth.  Arren’s ascension to the throne under his true name, Lebannen, 
is an act of healing. 
The Earthsea books were originally written for children, but have been read far 
more widely.  It is important to note that Le Guin intended Lebannen’s ascension of 
the throne to be the end of the story of both Ged and Lebannen.  Some twenty years 
later, however, she resumed the story in books clearly intended for adults.  So far we 
have had Tehanu (1990), The Other Wind (1999) and Tales from Earthsea (2001), 
books which interrogate some of the assumptions in the earlier books.  Lebannen is 
trying, with limited success, to introduce a form of democracy to the Archipelago, and 
must marry a foreign princess to ensure safety abroad.  It is all much more adult and 
complex than the quest he embarked upon with Ged.   
And yet, at the end of The Other Wind the king becomes formally betrothed – the 
one element to the ‘happy ending’ which was missing from The Farthest Shore.  In 
line with modern sensibilities, he marries a person rather than a figurehead; much of 
the book is devoted to the two royals getting to know one another and to the princess, 
Seserakh, showing her mettle.  For eucatastrophe, we must have, not politically 
expedient marriage, but love. Tenar, the female protagonist from the second volume of 
   24
===== PAGE 31 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
the series, The Tombs of Atuan, describes the final scene to Ged, who has stayed at 
home this time, on the island of Gont. 
“Lebannen came and stood here, see, on my left, and then Seserakh came and 
stood here on my right.  In front of Morred’s throne.  And I held up the Ring. … 
Lebannen took it in his hands and kissed it and gave it back to me.  And I put it on her 
arm, it just went over her hand – she’s not a little woman, Seserakh – Oh, you should 
see her, Ged!  What a beauty she is, what a lion!  He’s met his match. – And 
everybody shouted.  And there were festivals and so on.  And so I could get away.”  
(Le Guin, 2001, p. 245). 
 
This is the essence of eucatastrophe, modified by feminism and the disdain Le 
Guin’s main characters feel for courts and secular power.  Although the story is far 
more complex than a fairy tale, and is concerned primarily with human hubris and the 
fear of death, it ends in the classic way, thus completing Arren’s journey to fully 
becoming King Lebannen. 
Some ‘missing heirs’ are, in Diana Wynne Jones’ term, ‘long-lost kings’ (Jones, 
1996, p.110).  Their function is the same – to regain the throne and take their rightful 
place.  Valentine, in Robert Silverberg’s Lord Valentine’s Castle(1980), is one of 
these. His mind and personality have been magically switched into the body of a 
juggler so that his throne can be occupied by an impostor.  The switch has wiped 
much of his memory, so that the first part of the book is about Valentine gradually 
recalling his past and coming to an understanding of who he is.  The second, and far 
less interesting, part is about his reclamation of the throne.  Lord Valentine’s Castle is 
about class, power, ambition and love, and it ends, inevitably, with Valentine on his 
throne.  He says to the assembled throng, ‘Today we hold grand festival, to celebrate 
the restoration of the commonwealth and the making whole of the order of things….’ 
(Silverberg, 1980, p. 503). 
Part of the ‘making  whole’ is the presence in the throne room of ‘humbler folk’ 
as well as dukes and princes; Valentine has learned, through his travels and travails, to 
be a real ruler, one who cares about the fate of the people under his care. 
The most recent popular example of restoration of the throne combines the 
themes of inheritance and destiny.  Elizabeth Haydon’s Rhapsody trilogy ends – the 
third volume is actually titled Destiny – soon after Rhapsody publicly marries her true 
love Ashe, and they are revealed to be the ‘Lord and Lady’ of the land, who, although 
elected as head of a Council, are effectively rulers.  Rhapsody, originally a farmer’s 
daughter, has already been chosen as Queen to lead one of the world’s races, the Lirin, 
and is chosen by acclamation to be the Lady over all the races of this commonwealth.  
Ashe, now named Gwydion, has a ‘blood right’ to the position of Lord.    
   25
===== PAGE 32 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
These are only a few examples of the missing heir motif in post-World War II 
epic fantasy.  There are many more.  It is, for example, very popular in children’s and 
young adult fantasy fiction, in books such as CS Lewis’s The Silver Chair (1984f), 
Robin McKinley’s Deerskin (1994), or Susan Cooper’s The Grey King (1975) and 
Silver on the Tree (1977) in The Dark is Rising sequence.  
If we accept that the missing heir is a powerful motif in epic fantasy, and perhaps 
underlies much of the use of monarchy as a political structure, since classically the 
missing heir reclaims a throne, we must ask two questions:  why people like it, and 
where it comes from. 
There seems to be two main themes carried by the missing heir story.  The first is 
on the surface: the proper, patriarchal transmission of property.  The missing heir must 
be the rightful heir, or the story goes awry.  Twentieth century writers have played 
with this theme in many ways.  Perhaps the most famous example is Josephine Tey’s 
Brat Farrar, about someone who impersonates the missing heir yet who may, 
nonetheless, be a missing heir (Tey, 1949). There are many other examples.  Popular 
writers such as Mary Stewart (The Ivy Tree, 1961) and Agatha Christie have used the 
trope as a basis for mysteries – in fact, in Agatha Christie’s Hercule Poirot’s 
Christmas (1938) there are no fewer than three missing heirs, two of whom are fake 
and one of whom is a murderer. 
Inheritance and the rules of inheritance are central to patriarchy, and the reader’s 
desire to see justice done gives a missing heir story considerable impetus, useful to a 
storyteller.  But underneath this social, civilised meaning of the story there is another: 
the return of the child, the completion of the family, the rounding of the circle.  This is 
a powerful image which speaks to our hearts and perhaps to our blood.  The hunger to 
belong, to be part of, to connect to one’s roots, is a real hunger, as many adopted 
children will testify, and relinquishing mothers speak eloquently of the gap in their 
lives left by the child given up for adoption (see, for example, three stories of families 
reunited in Campbell, 1999).   
This theme carries the poignancy and heartache often expressed in missing heir 
stories, for the family may not be able to be completed – the child is often an heir 
because someone has died, or the revelation about blood ties may be unwelcome (as 
with Oedipus).  But the underlying assumption here is that truth about family, about 
birth and birth status – noble or common, bastard or legitimate – is worth knowing; 
that the truth will set you free.  There is a sense in many such stories that without this 
revelation, without the truth, the family, group or society is living in suspension, a 
kind of stagnation which, in fantasy fiction, is likely to bring about disruptions to the 
natural world, such as drought, famine or plague. 
   26
===== PAGE 33 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
Since it carries such emotional weight, it is no wonder that the missing heir trope 
has been, and is, so popular with writers.  When it is combined with the ‘search for the 
rightful king’ trope, as with Arthur, it is doubly potent and influential.   
   27
===== PAGE 34 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
Chapter 4:  Arthur, Sir Walter Scott, Tennyson and 
William Morris 
Ah, thought Lord Rust, so he’s that kind.  Young Edward thinks the touch of a 
king was a cure for scrofula, as if royalty was the equivalent of a sulphur ointment.  
Young Edward thinks that there is no lake of blood too big to wade through to put a 
rightful king on a throne, no deed too base in defence of a crown.  A romantic, in fact.  
Terry Pratchett, Men at Arms,  1993, p.18 
 
It would be hard to overstate the importance of Arthur’s story, ‘the Matter of Britain’, 
on the latter reaches of  English literature.  It ranks with the St James’ Bible and 
Shakespeare in shaping the tastes and subject matter of generations of writers, up to 
the present.  Although Malory’s influence was less in the 17
th and 18th centuries, 
which had their own problems with defining and coming to terms with kingship, he 
became much more popular in the 19th century.  As early as 1817 we have Robert 
Southey, the poet, translating Malory’s The Byrth, Lyf and Actes of King Arthur 
(Faxon, 1989).  It is interesting to speculate that nostalgia for the rule of an absolute 
king was only possible for people who had always lived peacefully under the reign of 
a constitutional monarch.  Perhaps kingship only looks attractive when the king can 
not say, ‘Off with his head!’ or, perhaps more importantly, ‘Give me your taxes!’ 
Scott and Tennyson 
Sir Walter Scott, one of the first successful commercial writers of nostalgia, was 
influenced by the Arthurian saga, particularly in his presentation of chivalry and 
honour.  While his opinion of Malory’s Le Morte D’Arthur is unrecorded, we do know 
that Bishop Thomas Percy’s Reliques of Ancient English Poetry, which includes four 
Arthurian ballads, inspired him so much that he began collecting Scottish ballads, later 
published in Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border in 1802-03.  
Scott was the biggest selling novelist of the early 19th century, and arguably the 
century’s most popular and influential. Interest in his books remains strong – at the 
time of writing, the Edinburgh University website devoted to him lists 15 books about 
his work published recently (
www.walterscott.lib.ed.ac.uk/works/index.html.)  
Scott’s use of supernatural themes, particularly prophecy, prefigures later fantasy 
novels.  More significantly, his combination of crucial moments of history (such as 
Bonnie Prince Charlie’s bid to regain the throne) with romance was extremely popular 
world-wide.   
Later in the century, Alfred Lord Tennyson turned to Malory’s Le Morte 
D’Arthur for inspiration for his own Morte D’Arthur of 1842.  He added to this 
original poem until there were twelve Idylls of the King, the first four of which were 
published in 1859 (Tennyson, 1912).  Tennyson began publishing poems in 1830, but 
   28
===== PAGE 35 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
the bulk of his work was published between 1842 and 1885, during the long and very 
prosperous reign of Queen Victoria.  He had grown up in the scandal-ridden and 
uncertain Regency period, a time of European war when the English king, George III, 
was not only unpopular but made insane by porphyria, while his son, the Prince 
Regent, was a byword for profligacy and adultery.  Perhaps it is not surprising that in 
the Idylls he enthusiastically portrayed a king whose aim was peace, justice and 
godliness.  His view of royalty was evidently appreciated by Victoria, as he was made 
Poet Laureate in 1850 and was awarded a baronetcy a few years before his death in 
1896. 
Tennyson was by far the most popular poet of his day and his work was widely 
read, studied and illustrated.  The Idylls sparked a revived interest in all things 
Arthurian.  Even Arthurian scholars who hated Malory, such as George Cox, 
responded to the increased interest in the subject by publishing popular versions of the 
legends (Cox and Jones, 1995).  His 1871 introduction to Arthurian Legends of the 
Middle Ages begins ‘The genius of a great poet has in our own time shed a new lustre 
of the story of Arthur…’.  Whatever the lite rary merits of Tennyson’s poem cycle, 
there is no doubt that it took a strong grip on the imagination of his contemporaries. 
Tennyson, significantly, had a strong influence on the Pre-Raphaelite movement, 
of which William Morris was a leading member.  Many of their paintings, such as 
Edward Burne-Jones’ The Beguiling of Merlin, Dante Gabriel Rosetti’s Arthur’s Tomb 
or The Damsel of the Sancte Grael, or Morris’ own La Belle Iseult, took Arthurian 
themes, often from Tennyson’s work.   
Southey’s 1817 translation of Malory had led Rosetti, at least, to Le Morte 
D’Arthur some years before the forming of the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood (Faxon, 
1989).  The combination of Malory, Scott and Tennyson’s  Idylls of the King underlay 
much of the Pre-Raphaelite stance of nostalgia for the past and for the medieval 
relations of liege lord and vassal.  Rosetti had begun writing his own Arthurian 
romances as early as 1840 (Roderick and Rosalba: A Story of the Round Table; Faxon, 
1989, p. 33) but the only member of the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood to gain a real 
reputation as a novelist was William Morris. 
Morris had read all of Sir Walter Scott’s novels by the time he was seven and 
spent much of his childhood imagining himself into those stories, particularly the 
medieval novels of knights and chivalry (Daly, 1989).  The entire Pre-Raphaelite 
movement, of which Morris was a leading figure, shows the influence of Scott’s 
combination of history and romance.  Called the writer of the ‘first great fantasy novel 
ever written’ by author Lin Carter in the introduction to Morris’ novel Water of the 
   29
===== PAGE 36 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
Wondrous Isles, (Morris, 1971), Morris, along with his contemporary George 
MacDonald, created the tradition which was continued by JRR Tolkien.  
Tolkien has acknowledged the influence Morris had on his own work.  As early as 
1914 he writes to his fiance: ‘I am trying to turn one of the stories [from the 
Kalevala]… into a short story somewhat on the lines of Morris’ romances with chunks 
of poetry in between…’ (Tolkien, 1981 , p. 7).  In 1960, replying to a question about 
the influence of war on The Lord of the Rings, he says, ‘Perhaps in landscape.  The 
Dead Marshes and the approaches to the Morannon owe something to Northern France 
after the Battle of the Somme.  They owe more to William Morris and his Huns and 
Romans, as in The House of the Wolflings or The Roots of the Mountai.’ (Tolkien, 
1981, p. 303).  We may therefore trace a direct literary descent from Scott to modern 
fantasy fiction. 
Scott’s novels abound with missing heirs.  In both epic poems such as Rokeby and 
novels such as Guy Mannering (1815), The Antiquary (1816), The Heart of Mid-
Lothian (1817), The Legend of Montrose (1819), The Abbot (1820), The Pirate (1821), 
Redgauntlet (1824) and The Talisman (1825), the hero or someone close to him is 
revealed to be someone’s heir (Barnaby, 2006).  Sometimes they have been kidnapped 
at birth, rather than put into safekeeping, and usually the outcomes are happy when 
their identity is revealed.  Often the revelation of his parentage is what is needed to 
ensure the happy marriage which is the hero’s romantic due.  
Scott was writing in a modified version of the gothic tradition which Jane Austen, 
writing at the same time, satirised in Northanger Abbey (1818).  Melodrama rather 
than drama, Scott’s novels were saved from mediocrity by his ability to create 
memorable characters (particularly minor characters), to bring history alive by the 
shrewd selection of details, and to keep the action moving. 
During his lifetime, and beyond it, he was criticised for ‘prettifying’ history, for 
creating a market for nostalgia.  At the time of Ivanhoe’s publication, for example, one 
reviewer objected to the mixture of history and romance which became Scott’s 
hallmarks (Croker, in Bradbury, 2006).  The most trenchant criticism came from Mark 
Twain (Samuel Clemens) who claimed, in Life on the Mississippi, that where once the 
American South was a region of progress, practical industry and commitment to 
democracy,  
Then comes Sir Walter Scott with his enchantments, and by his single might 
checks this wave of progress, and even turns it back; sets the world in love with 
dreams and phantoms; with decayed and swinish forms of religion; with decayed and 
degraded systems of government; with the sillinesses and emptinesses, sham 
grandeurs, sham gauds, and sham chivalries of a brainless and worthless long-
vanished society. He did measureless harm; more real and lasting harm, perhaps, than 
any other individual that ever wrote.’ (Twain, 2000, p.376) 
   30
===== PAGE 37 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
 
If we are to believe Twain, even allowing for his characteristic exaggeration, Sir 
Walter Scott may be solely responsible for later writers ‘in love with dreams and 
phantoms’ (as good a description of fantasy writers as any) using monarchies in their 
books.  Twain did what he could to offset the effects of Scott’s work.  His A 
Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur’s Court was written deliberately to challenge 
Scott’s nostalgia for the past (Twain, 1988).   
Ursula Le Guin suggests that, ‘We cherish the old stories for their changelessness.  
Arthur dreams eternally in Avalon, Bilbo can go “there and back again” and “there” is 
always the beloved familiar Shire.  Don Quixote sets out forever to kill a windmill… 
So people turn to the realms of fantasy for stability, ancient truths, immutable 
simplicities’ (Le Guin, 2001, p. xiv).  She then goes on to be very scathing about the 
commercial exploitation of these yearnings. 
Attebery believes, however, that nostalgia is not sufficient reason for fantasy 
writers to ‘define their imaginative spaces by drawing on Medieval folklore and feudal 
institutions’ (Attebery, 1995, p. 5). He suggests that, ‘Something else is going on - 
something at least partly political,’ and which may be that bringing older traditions 
into the present incorporates ‘that sense of otherness... the sense that things have not 
always been as they are now, that our reality extends only as far as the social compact 
that upholds it’ (Attebery, 1995, p. 6).   
This was clearly Morris’s intention.  Morris’s socialism called into question the 
value of ‘progress’ and industrialisation on humanitarian grounds.  It could, like HG 
Wells, have pushed him towards science fiction rather than fantasy.  The direction he 
took, towards describing an ideal set of power relations which belonged in the past, 
was no doubt influenced by his early reading and love of nostalgic romances.  
Mathews suggests that William Morris's stories established that a characteristic of 
fantasy writing is ‘an intrinsic value placed on ancient ways of life’ (Mathews, 2002, 
p.38) and strongly influenced later writers. 
Modern treatments of Arthurian stories 
Arthur is the pre-eminent missing heir and rightful king of modern English literature, 
and interest in his story shows no signs of diminishing.  When Deepak Chopra uses a 
story as a basis for discussing ‘the resplendent peace that each of us enfolds within our 
own hearts’ (blurb, The Return of Merlin, 1995), we know that it has reached either a 
zenith or a nadir of popularity. 
In the 20th century, the Arthur story was retold as a fantasy (TH White’s The Once 
and Future King, 1939), as a pseudo-historical story (Mary Stewart’s The Crystal 
Cave trilogy, 1970-1983), as a feminist retelling (Marion Zimmer Bradley’s The Mists 
   31
===== PAGE 38 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
of Avalon,1983), as a science fiction space opera (Patricia Kennealy’s The Celtiad, 
1984-present), as the background for a children’s fantasy series (Susan Cooper’s The 
Dark is Rising Sequence, 1961-1977), as a stage musical, (Camelot, 1960), as films – 
comedy (Monty Python’s Holy Grail, 1974), drama (Excalibur, 1981, First Knight, 
1995) and musical (Camelot again, 1967) – as a television miniseries (Merlin, 1996), 
as a comic strip (Prince Valiant, 1937-present) and as innumerable retellings of 
Malory.  It has been popular in each incarnation. 
Characters from the Arthurian saga appear in many books which do not deal 
directly with the Matter of Britain, from Merlin (ever-popular) in CS Lewis’ That 
Hideous Strength (1945) to a recent Australian/Canadian television series, Guinevere 
Jones (2004) (with accompanying books by Sophie Masson and Felicity Pulman), 
where the main character is a re-incarnation of Arthur’s queenMost recently,  a 
children’s animation series appears on TV:  King Arthur’s Disasters.  Comedy for the 
early primary school child, it assumes a knowledge of kings, knights and quests. 
There is also a surprisingly healthy market for non-fiction books about Arthur, 
often debating his historicity – for example, the competing theories that Camelot was 
really, truly, located at Cadbury (Alcock, 1972) or at Montgomery (Blake and Lloyd, 
2000).  The number of books about Arthur or Merlin or the Holy Grail continues to 
grow – Dan Brown’s The Da Vinci Code is a good example of how elements of the 
Arthurian story which entered the legend relatively late (such as the Holy Grail, or the 
character of Lancelot) still intrigue a modern audience (Brown, 2004). 
In analysing Arthur, apart from the missing heir motif and the ‘good king brought 
to ruin’ theme, we also find the ‘once and future king’ idea.  Where this comes from 
will be discussed more fully in Chapter 6.  However, I will say here that it interests me 
as a focus for the religious or sacramental nature of Arthur’s kingship, establishing 
him as both pagan king and Christ substitute. 
The other fascinating part of researching Arthur is finding the variants in the 
legends.  The ‘good king’ who cares for his people and brings the rule of law and great 
prosperity is also the king who sleeps with his sister and, because of a prophecy, puts 
to death a shipload of babies, so that her child, destined to destroy him, will be killed.  
These echoes of Oedipus are not accidental.  Oedipus is also a good king, but, like 
Arthur, is destroyed because of unintentional unnatural congress with a family 
member.  What can destroy even a good king?  The gods, via hubris, expressed by 
pride, fear, violence against the helpless – and most importantly, by trying to prevent 
what the gods have ordained.   
I have always been interested in this dichotomy in the legend of Arthur.  Such 
inconsistencies are inevitable when a late understanding of a character is based on the 
   32
===== PAGE 39 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
accretion of many folk traditions and from deliberately crafted literature, as Stephen 
Knight has shown so clearly in his study of the Robin Hood legend, which he calls ‘a 
tradition [which] is multiple, mobile, many-layered and variable’ (Knight, 1994, p. 6). 
The Arthur stories are likewise taken from both rural, crude ballads and from the 
most sophisticated court writing of the time.  Some of the earlier English ballads are 
bawdy in the extreme; the later romances emphasise chaste love as the ideal (although, 
it must be admitted, the ideal is rarely achieved).  Whether there was an historical 
Arthur, and what he was like, has been fully obscured by the stories about him. 
Keeping this in mind in crafting a ‘back story’ for Blood Ties, I was interested in 
creating an historical character whose real story, a thousand years later, was at least 
partly obscured; an Arthur-like character who was also a ‘once and future’ person; not 
a king, since the possibility of uniting the country under one king for the first time is 
part of the plot belonging to the ‘present’, but the next best thing to a king; and the 
precedent that the secondary villain, the aspirant to king-hood, cites as his 
justification. 
I developed the character of Acton, who led the invasion of the area known now 
as the Eleven Domains a thousand years before the story starts.  A hero to most of the 
population, he is thought of as the cause of oppression by the remnants of the original 
inhabitants.  He was called the Warlord, and his rule gave the pattern for the warlords 
who now rule oppressively over the Domains.  He was reputed to be irresistible to 
women, fierce and light-hearted, good at everything and blessed by the gods.  He left, 
it was said, without warning, saying to the guard at the gate that he would ‘be back 
before you need me’, was never seen again, and, like Arthur, will return if the country 
is ever in dire need. 
His legend is established in the first volume.  In the part two of the trilogy, one of 
the main characters, Bramble, magically relives his life and we discover that many of 
the elements of his legend are false, misunderstood or exaggerated.  Later in the story, 
his ghost is resurrected and plays a crucial role in the reconciliation with the ghost 
army which ends the story. 
 I wanted to use the Acton character to explore ideas about the partiality of 
history, the unreliability of legend and the truth about those who establish kingdoms.  
As Terry Pratchett puts it in Interesting Times: 
 ‘Rite of conquest, that’s the thing.  Blood.  People understand blood.  You just 
walk in and take over and no-one takes it seriously.  But seas of blood.. Everyone 
understands that.’ 
‘Mountains of skulls,’ said Truckle approvingly. 
‘Look at history,’ said Cohen… ‘…Yes, whenever you comes across a king 
where everyone says, “Oo, he was a good king all right,” you can bet your sandals he 
was a great big bearded bastard who broke heads a lot and laughed about it.  Hey?  
   33
===== PAGE 40 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
But some king who just passed decent little laws and read books and tried to look 
intelligent… “Oh,” they say, “oh, he was all right, a bit wet, not what I’d call a proper 
king.”  That’s people for you.’ (Pratchett, 1995, p. 324-325) 
 
However, I was also writing a mainstream fantasy novel which, while it could explore 
and interrogate familiar ideas from the tradition, still had to play by the rules or 
disappoint its readers. I could twist the prophecy about Acton’s return, since 
prophecies never come true the way you expect them to, but the force of prophecy had 
to remain.  Acton therefore also plays another role in the story, the fulfilment of a 
different prophecy. A ‘demon’ in an inn prophesises that Bramble will ‘love no human 
never’.  But she can, and does, in the second book, fall in love with Acton through 
reliving his life, as in her time he is no longer human but spirit. 
The tragedy of Arthur is that he has everything he sets out to achieve, and then 
sees that achievement disintegrate at the end of his life.  Similarly, Acton is a 
character who has achieved everything he intended; in his return, however, he is 
brought to understand that what he did with such passion and lightheartedness, to 
protect and provide for his people, caused the destruction of another people.  Death 
has given him the impartiality he could not have in life; he learns to accept and to 
regret his actions. 
As I had found the echoes of Arthur so useful in creating my own story, it became 
even easier to recognise similar echoes in others.  The Arthurian stories are part of the 
literary tradition of magic and heroism which was, until the 18
th century, the 
mainstream, carried not only by prose but by verse, plays and songs.  The treatment of 
adventure (particularly quests), heroism and magic in fantasy fiction can be seen to 
have their roots in this tradition.  But the Arthurian works – as distinct from, say, the 
Mabinogion, the Greek and Roman myths, the Irish hero-tales or even the 
Charlemagne Legends – have a particular vision of kingship which has been 
influential.   
As Richard Mathews, the Tolkien scholar, says of Aragorn’s return to the throne 
in The Lord of the Rings: 
The monarch's restoration at the novel’s end seems politically anachronistic in the 
twentieth century; Tolkien’s utopian vision is curiously neither democratic nor 
socialistic, but it is certainly Catholic, English, and even Arthurian.   His New Age is 
like a reborn England in which divinely ordained kingship takes on its full 
significance.  Although it is meet and right that the king assumes his throne, his 
ascension is a matter of affirming form and structure rather than of rewarding a hero.  
His position as ruler promotes himself far less than it does the restitution of order, 
which has been accomplished through the convergence of all the eccentric individuals 
of the Free People (Mathews, 2002, p. 78). 
 
   34
===== PAGE 41 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
Arthur, similarly, is the wise and just ruler who applies the law equally to all, even 
when it means the execution of his own beloved queen.  Arthur is the ‘good king’ par 
excellence, the dux bellorum who succeeds in war and then creates a precious peace 
which lasts for only a generation before it is torn apart by treachery and malice, the 
once and future king who, like Christ, will come again to save us all. 
It is this last element in his legend that makes me ask: can the use of kings and 
monarchies be simply explained by the existence of a literary tradition?  Do kings 
represent something other than just a way of telling a story?  Do they bring something 
larger into a narrative, something from deeper in our mind and history, and is that why 
both writers and readers continue to find them compelling? 
   35
===== PAGE 42 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
Chapter 5:  Is it in the genes? 
People kept on talking about the true king of Ankh-Morpork, but history taught a 
cruel lesson.  It said – often in words of blood – that the true king was the one who got 
crowned. 
Terry Pratchett, Feet of Clay, 1997, p. 65 
 
In considering the seemingly unending fascination of kings for both the modern writer 
and the modern reader, it seemed necessary to ask the question:  is it in our genes?  
Does the desire for a single (usually male) leader who is in charge of everything lodge 
in our blood and bones?  And if it does, why is the enemy in so much fantasy fiction a 
single (usually male) figure who wants to be in charge of everything (aka the Dark 
Lord)? 
Clearly, it is not just a king we want, it is a good king.  
Does the desire for goodness also come with our primate genes? 
To investigate this, I looked at the issue of dominance in primates, particularly in 
chimpanzees (Pan troglodyte) and bonobos (Pan paniscus), our nearest animal 
relatives.  There are four currently recognised sub-species of chimpanzees, Pan. 
troglodyte  verus and P. t. vellerosus in west Africa, P. t. troglodytes in the centre and 
P. t. schweinfurthii in the east, as well as Pan paniscus, the bonobo or pygmy chimp, 
south of the Congo River.  An argument is currently occurring about whether a fifth 
sub-species should be recognised (Pan troglodyte marungensis; see New Scientist 3 
July 2005).  Most research has concentrated on P.t. verus and P.t. vellerosus. Unless 
stated otherwise, where the word ‘chimpanzee’ is used in this discussion it will refer 
to these subspecies.  Bonobos are sometimes referred to as ‘pygmy chimpanzees’ and 
are chimpanzees taxonomically, but they differ so greatly from the other pan 
subspecies in behaviour that they must be discussed as a separate species.  Reference 
will also be made to gorilla behaviour, as gorillas (Troglodytes gorilla) are the next-
closest group of animals to humans, followed by orang-utans (Simia satyrus) and the 
various monkey species. 
Estimates of shared genes between humans and chimpanzees/bonobos range from 
96-98.5% (for example, see articles in New Scientist, 3 September 2005 vs 26 May 
2004), and chimpanzees are increasingly being recognised as sharing many ‘human’ 
traits and abilities, such as language acquisition and the ability to lie (de Waal, 2001).   
Primate responses are used in medicine, drug trials, psychology and anthropology 
to suggest ‘baseline’ human characteristics: perhaps they can also illuminate our 
propensity to create kings. 
   36
===== PAGE 43 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
Are we genetically inclined to respond to a dominant leader? 
The concept of dominance was first formulated by the Norwegian researcher Thorleif 
Schjelderup-Ebbe, who coined the term “pecking order” following his studies on 
chickens  in the late 19th century (Conniff, 2003).  The use of the term ‘alpha male’ in 
primate studies (and, unfortunately, in business studies) has led lay people to associate 
dominance with maleness, but the original concept came out of studying females – 
hens. 
Dominance appears to occur in all animals which have evolved to live in groups; 
everything from chickens to wolves to kookaburras to kangaroos to horses to 
chimpanzees – the ‘social animals’ – all have hierarchies based on dominance which 
influence behaviour.  Humans are, of course, social animals, and our reliance on 
hierarchical structures is too obvious to need substantiation here.  However, 
dominance structures among social animals take many forms.  Sometimes there are 
several animals at the top of the pyramid; in some species (such as elephants), females 
are dominant, either singly or in groups; and in some, males are dominant, again either 
singly or in groups. 
All the African apes (to whom we are most closely related) except the bonobo 
operate on a social system based on single male dominance.  Gorillas have one male 
(with perhaps one junior ally, usually a son) who mates with and guards several 
females.  The four chimpanzee sub-species have a dominant male.  Within these 
species, there is also a parallel dominance structure among females, so there is an 
alpha female as well as an alpha male (McGrew, 1996). 
Bonobos have dominant female coalitions instead, with females mating with all 
non-related males (de Waal, 2001).  As with chimpanzees, there is a parallel 
dominance structure, this time among males.  While the female dominance structures 
among chimpanzees are largely independent of the male structures, male dominance in 
bonobos is directly related to the female structure – that is, the higher the mother’s 
rank, the higher the son’s (Furuichi, 1997). It is worth noting that even among 
chimpanzees, support from the mother is invaluable to an aspirant to dominance.  (See 
de Waal, 1998, for an entertaining description of how this operates.)  
The other thing all these apes, including bonobos, have in common is male 
philopatry and female dispersal – that is, males stay with the group they were born in 
while females join nearby groups as adolescents or adults. This is not always the case 
with other animals, even among primates.  For example, in ring-tailed lemurs, females 
remain with their natal group while males emigrate to other groups. Interestingly, ring-
tailed lemurs are female dominated, with strong alliances between mothers and 
daughters (Koyama, 2005). 
   37
===== PAGE 44 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
Why are bonobos different from chimpanzees?  The consensus is that bonobos 
have access to a greater variety and quantity of foodstuff than chimpanzees; thus 
females do not have to disperse during the day in order to find enough to eat (which 
would leave them alone and vulnerable to male aggression); so bonobo females can 
and do join together to protect themselves against infanticide and forced copulation. 
(The female philopatry of the lemurs, who live in a similarly fertile area, also 
encourages female alliance.) 
One of the ‘prices’ of the bonobo system is that females mate with all males.  It is 
thus not ‘worth’ the male the energy it takes to become dominant over the females, as 
this would not change his reproductive success enough to warrant the expended 
energy (see Kano in Mcgrew, 1996, and de Waal, 2001).  It is still to the male’s 
advantage, however, to become dominant over other males. 
Dominance structures 
For both the dominant and the subordinate individual, dominance appears to have 
some use.  Ehlrich et al (1988)  suggest that ‘the birds at the top of the peck order 
benefited both by increased access to food and by avoidance of injuries (even bullies 
can get hurt in fights). The birds at the bottom, while having to wait until those higher 
up had eaten their fill, at least were not subjected to continuous fights that they were 
likely to lose’ (Ehlrich et al, 1988).  Clearly understood dominance structures work for 
social stability, reducing the number of fights (‘agonistic episodes’) and, since in the 
wild the physical fitness of each member of a group affects the well-being of the rest 
of the group, this improves the group’s survival chances. 
Ehrlich et al suggest that  ‘costs and benefits may more or less balance one 
another at each level in a dominance hierarchy, and evolution may favor the 
maintenance of the hierarchy itself, rather than just those near the top’ (Ehrlich et al, 
1988). 
Where there is a single dominant animal (usually a male, except in certain 
polyandrous bird species), the advantages are clear: improved access to food and/or 
reproductive success.  (Note that improved access to food, the goal of the ‘pecking 
order’ amongst hens, also improves reproductive success in the longer term).   
Study after study has shown that dominant males get more sex and are therefore 
likely to have more offspring.  Among some animals, such as gorillas, the dominant 
male is theoretically the only male who mates (female chimpanzees and gorillas often 
find ways to mate with other males, however, as discussed by Gagneux et al, 1999).  
Among other animals, he mates more often than other males, particularly with parous 
females (that is, females who have had offspring, proving their fertility).   Even among 
   38
===== PAGE 45 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
bonbos, who appear to have sex all the time with every non-relative they can reach, 
the alpha male has an advantage.  He does not have sex more often than other males, 
but he has sex more often with females at the peak of their fertility (Kano, 1996). 
Dominant females gain in several ways.  Increased access to food leads to 
improved survival, and also improves the survival chances of any offspring: firstly by 
helping to create a healthy baby, secondly by providing good quality nourishment 
while it is young, and thirdly (at least among primates) by improving the offspring’s 
place in the pecking order.  This third advantage is limited to animals which remember 
their offspring once the offspring are mature.   
Bears do not recognise their offspring after two years, for example, but 
chimpanzees have a life-long relationship between mother and son.  The daughters 
leave the troop when adult, but enjoy close relationships with their mothers until then.  
This recognition of offspring may be linked to the relatively long ‘childhood’ of 
primates compared to other animals.  Chimpanzees in the wild, for example, may be 
13-15 years old before becoming pregnant for the first time (Wrangham, 2004). 
Boesch (1997) has found that the sons of dominant chimpanzee females have a 
higher survival rate than other males, and that the dominant females invest around two 
years more in raising a son, while non-dominant females invest eleven months more in 
raising daughters. He believes this is related to the chances of reproductive success 
among the offspring – since an alpha male is likely to have more reproductive success 
than other group members, it is worth while for dominant mothers (who are more 
likely to produce dominant sons) to devote extra time to the likely contenders.  For 
other females, whose sons are less likely to become dominant (and who are therefore 
likely to be shut out of reproduction), it is more productive to devote time to 
daughters, since all fertile females have equal access to reproductive chances. 
Among primates, there is also another ‘pay-off’ for dominance, which may be 
related to both physical and mental health.  Higher ranks are groomed more often – 
that is, other members of the troop go through their fur and ‘nit pick’, pulling out any 
parasites such as lice.  The higher the rank, the more grooming the animal receives 
(see, for example, Nakamichi, 2003).  This has an obvious physical advantage; the 
fewer the parasites, the healthier the animal.  However, among socially complex 
animals like chimpanzees and bonobos, grooming can have other benefits, such as 
relaxation, improved social relations and, importantly for dominance, the creation and 
maintenance of alliances (de Waal, 1998, Nakamichi, 2003, Mitani, 2000, among 
others). 
In Darwinian terms, then, there is a large pay-off for a dominant animal and social 
animals may invest large amounts of energy in becoming and remaining dominant.  
   39
===== PAGE 46 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
Subordinate animals gain not only surcease from attack, but also, in primates at least, 
a protector.  
The ‘control role’ of the alpha male 
The 'control role' of the alpha male is mentioned in much of the literature on 
dominance in primates  (see de Waal 1998 and 2001,  Boehm, 1992,  or Ehardt 1992).  
de Waal says it  is found in many primate species.  An alpha male, it is suggested, has 
not only privileges but also responsibilities.  It is his job to both secure the safety of 
the group (for example, among chimpanzees, by leading charges against rival troops) 
and to intervene between group members to prevent escalation of intra-group violence.  
The alpha male’s role is to be the ‘champion of peace and security and try to prevent 
conflicts escalating by supporting the losers’ (de Waal, 1998, p. 118).   
Ehardt suggests that the concept of a control role has changed over time, but has 
been thought of as the animal which will ‘respond aggressively to sources of 
disturbance external to the group...and to control sources of disturbance within the 
group, particularly agonistic conflicts between group members’.  While this is 
substantially the concept described by de Waal, interventions by female primates on 
behalf of kin, immature members and female allies are, in fact, more frequent than 
interventions by the dominant male. (Ehardt, 1992, p. 84)  Ehardt was studying 
macaques.  However, it appears from the bonobo and chimpanzee studies already cited 
that the degree to which females intervene varies from species to species. 
More interesting than female intervention, which is easily explained in Darwinian 
terms, is the difference between the way the dominant male macaque intervenes 
compared to the non-dominant males. ‘[T]here are differences between the types of 
interventions made by adult females and adult males: females intervene on behalf of 
kin and immature macaques; males tend to join in with the participant likely to be the 
winner, usually the aggressor.  The exception to this is the alpha male who may often 
intervene on behalf of the “underdog”’(Ehardy, 1992, pp. 86-87).  Similar processes 
have been observed in chimpanzees (de Waal, 1996; Harcourt, 1996). 
Here we get glimpses of the ‘good king’, who champions the weak and controls 
the bullying strong.  Why would an alpha male primate act in this fashion?  There are 
two main theories, which may be mutually inclusive. 
The first is simple:  if an alpha male chimpanzee or gorilla or macaque is 
responsible for most of the pregnancies in the group (and remembering that his first 
act on becoming dominant was probably to kill all the infants recently fathered by the 
deposed alpha male), then the ‘young’ and the ‘weak’ are likely to be either offspring 
or potential mates, and in protecting them he is protecting his reproductive success. 
   40
===== PAGE 47 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
The second is more complex and relates to the fact that primates, in particular, 
have a complex social structure.  de Waal suggests that ‘[i]t is conceivable that there is 
a connection between the protection offered by a dominant group member in his 
control role and the support he receives in return when his position is 
threatened…,.the control role of the alpha male is not so much a favor as a duty: his 
position depends on it’ (de Waal, 1998 p. 118). 
All descriptions of chimpanzee society make obvious the complicated, shifting 
alliances between group members.  This is particularly true of males, who are 
constantly engaged in processes to improve or maintain their rank in the dominance 
structure.  To do this, they engage in alliances, share favours, lie, cheat and sneak off 
with the females behind the alpha male’s back. 
Unlike most animals (such as horses, deer or seals), the alpha male chimpanzee 
may not be the physically strongest of the troop.  The ability for what de Waal calls 
‘the canny and complex management of alliances’ is the key to dominance in this 
species (de Waal, 1998, p. 205).  Again, unlike many other species, alliances among 
primates, particularly chimpanzees, are not primarily between closely related kin 
(Mitani, 2000 or Muller, 2003 for descriptions of alliance formation in wild 
chimpanzees, and de Waal, 1998, for captive populations).  Males ally according to 
pragmatism rather than kinship (remembering that, because of male philopatry, all 
male members of a chimpanzee troop are related in some degree). 
Since alliances are so important, and include alliances with the most dominant 
group of females, an alpha male’s position may depend on how much support he can 
muster when his position is challenged.  A male who fails to perform his control role 
duty will receive far less support than a male who fulfils it well.  While this process 
has only been observed in its entirety in captive populations (de Waal, 1998), enough 
elements of it have been observed in wild populations to make it a reasonable 
hypothesis (Mitani, 2000 and 2002; Muller, 2003; Gagneux, 1999; Harcourt, 1992). 
This gives us not only an understanding of where the idea of ‘good king’ comes 
from, but perhaps also an idea of where we first find the ‘Dark Lord’ – the alpha male 
who is aggressive and cunning in achieving dominance, but then neglects his duty to 
protect and defend those under his control. 
The gender of dominance 
Among bonobos and some monkey species, older females are dominant.  This 
dominance pattern, however, seems to be related to an abundance of food, allowing 
females to group together during food collection.  (I was reminded, in considering this 
issue, of the cautionary tales: ‘Don’t go into the forest alone, little girl’ is good 
   41
===== PAGE 48 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
advice.)  Species where females can gather food together may have dominant females; 
species where females must gather food alone or in much smaller groups have male 
dominance. (Perhaps feminism is the inevitable biological result of women being put 
together to work in factories and offices…? Gorillas, bonobos and chimpanzees 
practice female dispersion – that is primates have evolved so that females are adept at 
creating alliances with other females outside their family in order to survive.  Give 
them the opportunity to make alliances and they will…) 
Over our history as homo sapiens, humans have lived in such a variety of eco-
systems that it is impossible to talk about the environment affecting dominance in any 
consistent way.  But if we look at earlier, pre-human species, such as 
australopithicenes and homo erectus, we see that they inhabited a similar eco-system 
to chimpanzees (Fernanddez-Armesto, 2004). It may be that our tendency for 
patriarchy began then – or it may just be that males have been dominant historically 
among homo sapiens simply because they were physically capable of it. 
There have been instances of females assuming the dominant role in a group of 
chimpanzees, but these have occurred in ‘unnatural’ situations – that is, within 
captivity where there has been no male strong enough to challenge the largest female. 
de Waal examines in detail the process by which an alpha female became the 
dominant animal in a group of captive chimpanzees, her struggle to maintain sufficient 
alliances to keep control, and her eventual violent ‘dethroning’ by a younger male (de 
Waal, 1998).   
The process de Waal describes reminded me of the way in which women fantasy 
writers have dealt with the issue of monarchy – they have, on the whole, kept the 
political structure and simply substituted a queen instead of a king (see, for example, 
Anne Bishop’s Daughter of the Blood, (2001)  a good example of the type, or Alma 
Hromic’s Changer of Days series (2001).  At the most, they have a male/female 
couple in power (as in Elizabeth Haydon’s Rhapsody trilogy, 1999-2001) or a group of 
women with magically linked abilities (as in Marion Zimmer Bradley’s Black 
Trillium, 1991). Other women writers have kept the whole male/king package, 
although some, like Ursula Le Guin and Robin Hobb, have in their later works begun 
to question this.  (See, for example, the difference in attitudes to monarchy between 
Hobb’s Assassin’s Apprentice series, 1996-1998, and her Liveship Traders books, 
1999-2001.) 
When I came to decide on the political structure to use in Blood Ties, my 
dissatisfaction with this solution led me to examine how I might both use the 
undoubted narrative benefits of a hierarchical society while still remaining 
uncommitted to a monarchy.  It seemed to me that a society in transition from 
   42
===== PAGE 49 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
baronies/fiefdoms to monarchy would be an interesting way to question our 
assumptions about kings, while still presenting readers with a familiar political 
structure which would not bog down the narrative. 
Historically, like the young male who took power in de Waal’s case study, those 
who achieve sole power in their own right have done so by force of arms; one need 
only think of William the Conqueror, Charlemagne, Alexander, Attila, and in more 
recent times Napoleon and Hitler, despite their eventual failure.  Although 
Charlemagne’s transition in his own lifetime from conqueror to wise ruler was 
incorporated into his legend, this is rare.  Most founders of dynasties are remembered 
as warriors rather than rulers. 
It seemed to me that someone who decided that he wanted to be king must almost 
certainly be an unpleasant person: ambitious, prepared for thousands of people to die 
so that he could achieve power, selfish to the ultimate degree – but that, like the 
chimpanzees making alliances to attain dominance, he must also be able to create and 
use personal relationships for his own ends.  Words like  ‘personable’, ‘charming’, 
‘charismatic’ came to mind.  I was reminded of Napoleon’s effects on his troops after 
his escape from Elba.  An army of French soldiers, intent upon catching him and 
returning him to imprisonment, approached him on the road.  They wore white 
cockades in their hats to declare their allegiance to the newly-restored Bourbon king.  
Napoleon was backed by a smaller but dedicated army.  Instead of throwing them into 
battle, he dismounted and walked forwards, throwing his arms wide.  ‘Men of the 
Fifth!’ he declared.  ‘I am your Emperor!  Know me!  If there is one of you who 
would kill his Emperor here I am!’  The troops immediately broke ranks, tore off their 
white cockades and rushed forward yelling ‘Vive L’Empereur!’ (Schom, 1998). 
I needed to create a character who had both the charisma and the ruthlessness of 
Napoleon.  It was instructive, in devising this character, Thegan, to remember the 
straightforward actions and rewards of dominance among animals: aggression and 
politicking lead to more food and more sex. 
To return to our question for this chapter, however – are we genetically inclined 
to want a king? – the answer, rather depressingly, may be ‘yes’. 
We are primates.  Primates all have dominance structures, usually with a single 
male at the top.  The exception, bonobos, still have dominance structures and still 
allow the alpha male privileged access to reproduction.  Where there is no dominant 
male amongst the other primates, a female may fill this role, but usually only until a 
sufficiently strong male arises.    
However, while our evolutionary desire for an alpha leader may explain 
narratives which favour hierarchical political structures, it does not explain why the 
   43
===== PAGE 50 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
heads of these structures have to be kings.  ‘President’ implies a hierarchy with 
(usually) a male at the top as succinctly as does ‘king’.  So, if it comes to that, does 
‘chief’ or ‘headman’ or even ‘mayor’.   Why do writers from democratic countries 
ignore these options for hierarchy in favour of monarchy? 
 
   44
===== PAGE 51 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
Chapter 6:  It’s all in the mind 
‘He found his council served him well, and people of power had come to respect 
it.  Common folk did not pay much attention to it.  They centred their hopes and 
attention on the king’s person.  There were a thousand lays and ballads about the son 
of Morred, the prince who rode the dragon back from death to the shores of day, the 
hero of Sorra, wielder of the Sword of Serriadh, the Rowan Tree, the Tall Ash of 
Enlad, the well-loved king who ruled in the Sign of Peace.  But it was hard going to 
make songs about councillors debating shipping taxes.’ 
Ursula Le Guin, The Other Wind, 2001, p. 138. 
 
Kings may be significant in fantasy fiction because they can carry an emotional or 
sacerdotal weight for the reader which cannot be carried by a political character in the 
modern mode, such as a president.  In Freudian terms, any strong male authority 
figure calls up the pater familias, the longed-for father figure who is wise and strong 
and just (strong echoes here of the control role of the primate alpha male).  But 
Freudian theory does not distinguish between types of male authority figures – an old 
wizard will do just as well or perhaps even better than a young king.   
The young king searching for his birthright, throwing down the forces of darkness 
and ascending the throne in a blaze of glory, usually at the same time he marries, is 
interpreted by Freudians (notably Bettelheim, 1998) as the boy enacting an Oedipal 
fantasy of killing the father and marrying the mother.  However, again, the boy does 
not have to be a king-in-waiting for the Oedipal drama to play itself out.  Any boy, 
any powerful evil figure, any bride carries the same psychological weight. Freudian 
theory does not, therefore, help us to answer ‘why kings?’. 
In his essay, Totems and Taboos, Freud does discuss kings directly, but only in 
the context of taboos surrounding kings in ‘primitive societies’. He concludes ‘the 
ceremonial taboo of kings is ostensibly the highest honour and protection for them, 
while actually it is a punishment for their exaltation, a revenge taken on them by their 
subjects’ (Freud, 1972, p. 51).  The relationship between ‘primitive people’ and their 
king he sees to be a neurotic one, full of ambivalent feelings:  loyalty and distrust, 
worship and hostility.  Freud suggests, inevitably that ‘much of a savage’s attitude to 
his ruler is derived from a child’s infantile attitude to his father’ (Freud, 1972, p. 53). 
Freud based this opinion on Sir James Frazer’s The Golden Bough (Frazer, 1911).  
All his examples come from there and share Frazer’s methodological problems, which 
will be discussed in Chapter 7.  This does not mean, however, that his insight into the 
relationship between the ruled and their rulers is incorrect.  Yet hero-kings in fantasy 
fiction are not ambivalent characters; we are not expected, as readers, to resent them 
and love them at the same time (although this feeling can arise when a feminist reads 
an enthralling but sexist story).  Overall, our relationship to them is not neurotic.  
   45
===== PAGE 52 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
Partly this may be because we are not, in fact, ruled by them.  Equally important, I 
believe, is the fact that most readers are not really being ruled by kings or queens at all 
any more, even if they live in a constitutional monarchy.  The key issues, are ‘Who 
makes the laws that govern us?  Who decides upon and collects taxes?  Who 
commands the army?’  We no longer need to resent our kings because they are no 
longer our rulers, and may thus carry the symbolic or sacerdotal weight of monarchy 
without the counterweight of government.  This does not, however, help us to 
determine why kings continue to carry symbolic weight once governance has been 
taken away from them. 
Archetypes  
The proposition that any symbolic figure carries emotional weight without clear cause 
immediately suggests archetypes. 
The notion of archetypes was popularised by Carl Gustav Jung, although he was 
not the first to use the word.  The OED defines archetype as ‘The original pattern or 
model from which copies are made; a prototype’.  The word first reaches its English 
form with Bacon, who wrote: ‘Let vs seeke the dignitie of knowledge in the Arch-tipe 
or first plat-forme, which is in the attributes and acts of God’ (Bacon, 1605, I. 27).  
The connection with God is an interesting one, as there is much about archeype theory 
which echoes theological doctrines such as original sin. 
Jung's original essay Archetypes and the collective unconscious (1959) sets out 
his basic theory that the unconscious part of the human psyche is composed of at least 
two levels: the personal unconscious and the collective unconscious.   
[The] personal unconscious rests upon a deeper layer, which does not derive from 
personal experience and is not a personal acquisition but is inborn.  This deeper layer I 
call the collective unconscious.  I have chosen the term “collective” because this part 
of the unconscious is not individual but universal; in contrast to the personal psyche, it 
has contents and modes of behaviours that are more or less the same everywhere and 
in all individuals…constitutes a common psychic substrate of a suprapersonal nature 
which is present in evey one of us…The contents of the collective unconscious… are 
known as archetypes (Jung 1959, p. 287). 
 
Archetypes are described as inherited structures around which cultural images 
form and are, according to Jung, common to all humans, ‘universal images that have 
existed since the remotest times’ (Jung, 1959, p. 288). 
The archetype itself, he suggests, can never be directly seen or understood, as it is 
a deep structure of the unconscious mind.  Only its representation can be experienced, 
and this representation changes according to the culture of the person creating the 
representation.  However, he does not allow the possibility that archetypes themselves 
may change over time, even when that time is measured in millennia.  They are fixed 
   46
===== PAGE 53 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
attributes of the human mind.  While Jung was writing before the current popularity of 
social Darwinism, many of his ideas match that theory’s emphasis on inherited 
characteristics influencing contemporary behaviour (Jung, 1967).   
Jung’s own understanding and emphasis on archetypes changed during his 
lifetime (Atmanspacher, 1998), but at no time did he ever propose a ‘king’ or 
‘monarch’ archetype.  This comes as something of a surprise.  We have the ‘wise old 
man’ archetype so successfully embodied by the wizards of fantasy fiction, but 
nowhere is there a ‘ruler’ of any kind in Jung’s schema of collectively inherited 
images.    
Jung admits he has not described all the archetypes possible.  In an essay in 1967, 
Psychology and Literature, Jung divided texts into two types: psychological and 
visionary (Jung, 1967).  His descriptions of the two types of text make it clear that he 
would place all fantasy fiction in the ‘visionary’ category.  ‘Visionary’ texts embody 
archetypes in culturally sourced characters.  The king, as a type of character arising in 
this genre, would by Jungian standards be culturally sourced and embody some type of 
archetype.  Take your pick of which one.  
Leaving aside the interesting question of how any writer creates a character which 
is not ‘culturally sourced’, at first sight this sounds persuasive.  The king is common 
in fantasy fiction because he carries information from the collective unconscious for 
both reader and writer.  The king role is our cultural embodiment of something much 
deeper – perhaps, even, the role of the primate alpha male. We must then ask, what is 
the collective unconscious and how does it operate? 
The collective unconscious is an idea of Jung’s for which there is no experimental 
evidence. Jung’s work talks about it at length, but nowhere is there any attempt to 
prove that it exists.  It is an axiom from which all his arguments flow.  The most 
interesting thing about the collective unconscious is how readily other theorists, 
psychologists, writers and readers have adopted the idea without a single shred of 
proof.   
Memes and archetypes 
Richard Dawkins, in his 1976 book The Selfish Gene, which described evolution as a 
competition between genes rather than between organisms, suggested another way that 
ideas can be shared in common across a culture.  Just as genes compete for survival 
and are naturally selected for their fitness for the environment, so ideas (‘memes’) 
undergo a similar contest for survival, and this contest, which is as complex as natural 
selection is for organisms, dictates which ideas survive.  He includes things like music 
and art as memes – ‘abstract entities’ as they have come to be called in memetics – the 
   47
===== PAGE 54 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
building blocks of culture. Memeticists suggest that, ‘there is a novel replicator-based 
process underlying the population-level, epidemiological dynamic that is culture 
change’ (Augner, 1999). 
Biologists, like detectives, ask ‘cui bono?’ – in their case about a genetic trait, in 
order to discover why a particular adaptation has survived and prospered in an 
environment.  What is the benefit to the organism in having this particular trait?  
Dawkins suggested that when we ask ‘cui bono?’ about a meme, one may find that the 
answer is ‘the meme’, rather than the person or culture which transmits the meme 
(Dawkins, 1976).  This has resulted in a theoretical focus on memes as independent of 
their hosts.   
In memetics, ‘the king’ as a role or concept in fiction would be considered a 
meme, pursuing its independent existence through the medium of literature (as well as 
through other cultural entities like cinema, television, computer games and graphic 
novels). 
The theory of archetypes is also a meme, and a very successful one.  Memes and 
archetypes have some elements in common.  Both are supposed to exist independently 
of their host.  Both are subject to cultural change, not in their essence, but in their 
expression within a particular time and culture. 
In fact, the meme theorists have tried to reconcile the two concepts, although with 
little success (Wheelwell, 1998). British psychiatrist CMH (Chris) Nunn suggests that 
‘Archetypes, as opposed to their representations, are the factors which predispose 
particular sets of memes to spread within a group of people and enter their 
awarenesses’ (Nunn, 1998, p. 363).  Nunn sees an archetype, therefore, to be rather in 
the nature of a widespread genetic predisposition to catch a certain disease. Harald 
Atmaspacher, a physicist who investigates the relationship between mind and matter, 
suggests that while Nunn’s work is interesting, ‘the difficulty is not only how to relate 
memes to archetypes, but also to distinguish that concept of archetypes to which 
memes relate from those to which they do not’ (Atmanspacher, 1998, p. 355).  He 
suggests a hierarchical arrangement of memes, where the ‘top’ or most successful 
memes have an archetypal basis.  
In this interpretation, readers have an innate pre-disposition (the archetype) to like 
the king meme, and it is therefore popular among writers and readers.  Is this helpful 
to our understanding?  In my notes on this article I wrote in the margin ‘looks like the 
marriage of two totally unsubstantiated ideas’.  Without proof that the collective 
unconscious exists, it still looks like that to me.  Memetics’ weakest point is that it has 
no explanation for why humans have the innate pre-disposition in the first place.   The 
problem seems to be that a perfectly good metaphor – that of ideas struggling to 
   48
===== PAGE 55 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
survive and only the ones which best fit the culture succeeding – has been taken up as 
though it were a fact, as though there really were entities called memes which exist 
separately from their human hosts.  If we treat memetics as an extended metaphor, the 
problems disappear and we can appreciate what meme theorists have to say about the 
transmission of culture. 
For example, some meme theorists would see the concept of ‘king as a symbolic 
character in fiction’ to be a particularly successful meme in its own right, without any 
need for the intervention of archetypes.  The philosopher Daniel Dennett (2001), for 
example, in discussing the success of certain musical types, suggests an origin for 
music: that certain tunes and themes just make us ‘feel good’, and that this is a 
biological function rather than a cognitive one, based on unspecified ‘neural 
pathways’. Since the person who produces the pattern of (in this example) drumming 
and humming which draws most attention from others also ‘feels good’, competition 
is set up between the creators of patterns, and the most pleasing wins and is 
reproduced throughout the culture.  This may also, although not necessarily, result in 
reproductive success for the successful creator, but the meme is reproduced anyway.  
This merely takes the question back a step – why do these particular abstract entities 
(whether they are music or ideas or art) make people feel good?  The step back takes 
us to evolutionary biology and, perhaps, social Darwinism, topics far too complex to 
discuss in this exegesis.  We must merely note that for Dennett’s approach to be valid, 
there must be a biological reward for the adoption of particular memes. 
As the meme grows more complex (that is, music takes on aspects such as 
harmony, counterpoint, etc) its creation becomes more intentional.  However, 
memeticists suggest that creators are still just reproducing memes, that memes mutate 
and thus evolve through the conscious manipulation of the creator.  Dennett states: 
‘There is no conflict between the claim that artefacts [including abstract artefacts —
memes] are the products of natural selection, and the claim that they are (often) the 
foreseen, designed products of intentional human activity’ (Dennett, 2001, p. 323). 
In this view, presumably, kingship is a meme with which some creators have 
become infected (the metaphors of disease and parasitism are widespread amongst 
memeticists) and which they now consciously mutate in order to create a sensation in 
their audience – like the proto-drummers, in order to be the ‘focus of attention’ and to 
feel good.  Kingship is clearly a highly infectious meme, with strong survival instincts. 
Experimental proof 
For both memes and archetypes, experimental proof is thin on the ground.  
Memeticists don’t seem to attempt empirical research – perhaps because the theory is 
   49
===== PAGE 56 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
still unclear on whether memes really do exist independently of their hosts.  I could 
find only one attempt to experimentally prove the idea of archetypes.  In 1999, Alan 
Maloney, an empirical psychologist, noted that ‘Archetype Theory is consistent with 
the full range of empirical psychological research, yet has not itself been empirically 
studied’ (Maloney, 1999, p. 101).  He asked 151 subjects to rate their preferences for 
images representing archetypal themes and factor analysed their responses. The results 
were ‘consistent with the hypothesis that archetypal themes determine affective 
responses in adults’ (Maloney, p. 114); that is, people respond to archetypal images 
with stronger emotions.  Maloney gives little detail about how the research team 
determined the content of the ‘archetypal images’, merely saying it was ‘consistent 
with Jungian theory’.  He also fails to make a valid distinction between archetypes and 
stereotypes – that is, standardised, familiar and culturally specific images – which 
advertising research has shown elicit much the same reactions.  
The culturist James Trilling’s work on the variations which a single ‘archetypal’ 
image can have across cultures, moreover, suggests that Maloney may not have taken 
cultural differences into consideration (Trilling, 1993).  The 151 people used in the 
test were selected by convenience sampling, which means, among other things, that 
they were not selected to provide ethnic or cultural diversity, and the universality of 
archetypes – the theory’s basic tenet – was therefore not tested.  
Cognitive science has also tried to incorporate the idea of archetypes.  JM Knox, a 
cognitive scientist interested in the concept of innateness in human behaviour, 
considered the nature of archetypes in the light of cognitive science research and 
proposed a minimalist mode, in which they can be likened to image schemas, that is, 
primitive conceptual structures that exist in a form which can never be experienced 
directly or indirectly (Knox, 2001).  These archetypes are tantalising, elusive images, 
which nonetheless carry emotional weight.  The writer and reader do not know why 
they find the image of the king compelling, but still they do…  an explanation which 
does not help us. 
The Finnish historian Petteri Pietikainen points a way out of the circle by 
suggesting that we divorce the idea of archetypes from the ‘rather unfruitful discourse 
on the genetic inheritance of archetypes’ (Pietikainen, 1998, p. 325).  Archetypes can 
then be seen as symbolic forms, ‘culturally determined functionary forms organizing 
and structuring certain aspects of cultural activity, namely those predominantly non-
cognitive (for example, emotional, numinous, pathological) mental aspects of human 
life, which remain more or less unarticulated due to their non-discursive nature’ 
(Pietikainen, 1998, 325).  While this takes us back to the tantalising, elusive image, it 
neatly shells the archetype from its social Darwinistic immutability, and allows us to 
   50
===== PAGE 57 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
discuss the content of the symbolic form as a product of culture, rather than of the 
collective unconscious. 
   51
===== PAGE 58 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
Chapter 7:  Kings and Culture 
 And when our kings have the same warrant as they had, whether it be to sit upon 
the throne of their fathers, or to destroy the house of the preceding sovereign, they will 
then, and not before, possess the crown of England by a right like theirs, immediately 
derived from heaven. 
William Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England, 1765-1769, Book I, 
Chapter 3. 
 
From a social science perspective, if kings are significant in 20th and 21st century 
fantasy fiction because they carry an emotional or sacerdotal weight for the reader, we 
should expect to find precursors to this in other cultural products or processes. 
Historically, kingship goes back as far as written records and is closely associated 
with the production of such records, especially in early Babylonian, Egyptian and 
Middle Eastern cultures.  The institution of kingship is thought to pre-date records by 
some millennia.  Certainly, archaeologists have consistently interpreted particular 
types of Neolithic and Chalcolithic burials as proving the existence of ‘chieftains’ who 
exercised power within a goddess-worshipping culture.  However, Maria Gimbutas, a 
renowned archaeologist who questions received wisdom about early societies, argues 
that within Europe patriarchal political structures did not arise until the invasion by 
Indo-European peoples in the 5
th millennium BC and that political structures before 
this were characterised by ‘gylany’; that is, both women and men exercised political 
and social power (Gimbutas, 1991). 
No-one, however, disputes that the Indo-European cultures which swept over and 
dominated Europe during the Bronze Age were characterised by patriarchal 
dominance, demonstrated by such customs as suttee, warrior elites and chieftains.  
Fortifications appeared for the first time, indicating an organised response to organised 
attack (Gimbutas, 1991, Clark, 1977).   
These civilizations, which gave rise to and influenced European culture, were 
familiar with the concept of the king/emperor who is either a god in himself, the ritual 
embodiment of a god, or someone of such significance to the state that he could, and 
should, be elevated to the pantheon on his death. 
Many of the god-kings of the past are familiar to us: the pharaohs of Egypt in 
particular, but also the Babylonian kings who took the part of the god in the annual 
festivals, and the Roman emperors who extracted promises from their successors that 
they be declared gods immediately after their death so that they should not be 
punished for the excesses of their lives.  The connection between absolute rulers and 
the gods seems to have been an accepted part of life.  Even Tacitus, so critical of the 
Julio-Claudians and their habits, lets the deification of Caesar Augustus go by with a 
   52
===== PAGE 59 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
simple, ‘After an appropriate funeral, Augustus was declared a god and decreed a 
temple’, although he describes the criticism made when Augustus while alive 
‘superseded the worship of the gods when he wanted to have himself venerated in 
temples, with god-like images, by priests and ministers’ (Tacitus, 1971, p. 39).   
Whether Augustus actually did this is unclear (Tacitus was very good at repeating 
gossip without committing himself to its veracity), but what is clear from that criticism 
is that godhood in Imperial Rome, at least, was dependent on the acclamation of the 
people and the clergy, rather than on apotheosis bestowed by an already worshipped 
deity.  Augustus erred in forcing his worship on the people, not in believing that he 
could be worshipped.  The pantheon was neither fixed nor particularly exclusive; and 
it was definitely open to dead emperors.   
During this period (1st century AD), the Romans encountered peoples who had 
radically different views on kingship and godhood.  The Celts, the Picts and the 
Germanic peoples whom the Empire was trying to conquer had a tribal concept of 
kingship rather than a national or imperial one.  This had significant effects on the 
practice of kingship, not least being that the king was less secure in his position, since 
he had no Praetorian Guard or army to enforce his commands on his people – his 
people were his army, and he had to answer to them. 
Much of what we believe about these early Europeans depends on the work on 
19th and early 20th century scholars, among whom the most prominent is Sir James 
Frazer, whose ideas will be examined in Chapter 8.  However, as well as the ancient 
concept of kingship as described by scholars, there has been an enduring, evolving 
concept of kingship which belonged to everyone – just as there is the common law as 
well as the statutes.  This concept of kingship differed slightly from place to place and 
from time to time but, within Europe at least, remained remarkably stable until the 
Reformation. 
Like most political concepts, it had its theory and its practice.  In theory, 
everyone’s position was decreed by God.  This explained and supported the feudal 
system, the rights of the nobility to command and control the peasantry, the rights of 
the king to command and control the nobles (Kantorowicz, 1997).  The idea of a 
divinely ordained hierarchy was entrenched not only in political theory, but also in 
religion.  Christ’s statement that ‘the poor are always with us’ (John 12:8) was 
interpreted as an endorsement of the class system rather than as a criticism of the 
human tendency towards establishing inequality (Baumer, 1966; Franklin, 1981).   
An example of how entrenched this view of hierarchy was is the sumptuary laws, 
prevalent throughout Europe from the 12th to the 16th centuries, which set out what 
type of clothes each class was allowed to wear:  fabrics, style, ornamentation, even 
   53
===== PAGE 60 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
how long the toe of a noble’s shoe was allowed to be.  While the laws’ avowed 
intention was to reduce excess and decadence among both nobles and the growing 
merchant class, their underlying assumption was that there was a distinct separation 
between nobles, merchants, commoners and serfs, and that this distinction should be 
apparent at first sight (an assumption which was also prevalent in the Roman empire, 
with its purple-edged senatorial robes).  Cloth of gold was reserved for kings.  In 
France, the last European state to abandon them, the sumptuary laws stayed in place 
until the French Revolution. 
This approach to class, wealth and the inequalities of power reached its zenith in 
the doctrine of the ‘divine right of kings’, the theory that kings rule by divine 
permission and therefore have a religious as well as secular right to loyalty from their 
subjects.  Surprisingly, perhaps, this theory in its full form is of relatively recent date, 
arising first in medieval times during struggles between monarchies and the papacy 
and coming to fruition during the Reformation.   
It was not until 1598 that James I of England and VI of Scotland fully expounded 
the theory as doctrine in his True Law of Free Monarchies (as the Head of the Church 
of England, his pronouncements on this subject did, indeed, carry double weight).  
Eighty-five years earlier, Machiavelli had presented a very different view of royalty in 
The Prince, his pragmatic approach covering princes who had inherited their thrones, 
those who had acquired it by their own force of arms, by others’ force of arms, by evil 
and cunning, by election (his preference) or by gift from God (a nod to the Papal 
States, very powerful at the time).  Nowhere in this treatise is there any suggestion that 
secular princes should be considered specially favoured by God, or in any way 
connected with divinity.  Although his book attracted much criticism for its ‘amoral’ 
stance, contemporary critics did not question the division between secular and 
religious heads of state (Machiavelli, 1979).  
But James, beset by rebellious Quakers, occupying a throne he had not been born 
to, and scenting early on the dangers of Dissent, needed his people to believe 
otherwise, and went to the Bible (his Bible) for proof. 
Kings are called Gods by the prophetical King Dauid, because they sit vpon GOD his 
Throne in the earth, and haue the count of their administration to giue vnto him. Their 
office is, To minister Iustice and Iudgement to the people, as the same Dauid saith: To 
aduance thegood, and punish the euill, as he likewise saith: To establish good Lawes 
to his people, and procure obedience to the same as diuers good Kings of Iudah did: 
To procure the peace of the people, as the same Dauid saith: To decide all 
controuersies that can arise among them, as Salomon did: To be the Minister of God 
for the weale of them that doe well, and as the minister of God, to take vengeance 
vpon them that doe evill, as S. Paul saith. And finally, As a good Pastour, to goe out 
and in before his people as is said in the first of Samuel: That through the Princes 
prosperitie, the people’s peace may be procured, as Ieremie saith (Stuart, 1598).  
   54
===== PAGE 61 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
This is a vision of a king which is easily recognisable – it is the alpha male in the 
control role, but it is also Arthur, the just king, and Aragorn, returned to his rightful 
place and ruling wisely.  James compares kings to ‘a loving Father and careful 
watchman, caring for them (his people) more then for himselfe’.  But what remedy 
should a people have if their king turns out to be an abusive father and a careless 
watchman? ‘[P]atience, earnest prayers to God, and amendment of their lives, are the 
onely lawful meanes to moue God to relieue them of that heauie curse’ (Stuart, 1598).  
In other words, just put up with it.  Unfortunately for James’ son Charles I, the British 
people did not take his words to heart, although the phrase ‘the divine right of kings’ 
passed into the language and, thus, into the hearts and minds of later generations of 
writers.   
The ‘good king’ and the ‘Dark Lord’  
The High Priest of Blind Io was stumbling over his words.  There had never been 
an official coronation service in Ankh-Morpork, as far as he could find out.  The old 
kings had managed quite well with something on the lines of:  ‘We hath got the crown, 
i’faith, and we will kill any whoreson who tries to take it away, by the Lord Harry’.  
Terry Pratchett, Guards! Guards!, 1990, p. 209 
 
European history up until the Reformation offers a theoretical concept of kingship, 
enforced by strength of arms, which is based on a formal, unchanging hierarchy, 
where serfs are at the bottom and the king is at the top, next to God.  The theory 
doesn’t bear close examination in practice, despite James Stuart’s desperate apologia 
for tyrants.  Kings who supposedly had been placed on their throne by God were often 
deposed; their countries invaded by foreigners, or a coup executed by their own 
relatives.  Princes, as Machiavelli pointed out, changed often, and as long as they 
didn’t touch the people’s cattle or families, the commonality got on with life just the 
same (Machiavelli, 1979, pp. 80-81). 
The practice of kingship, then, has always been at odds with the theory.  Perhaps, 
however, Chris Nunn was right when he suggested that an idea is more welcome to a 
mind which already has a similar concept embedded in it:  centuries of the theory have 
left a mark; millennia of god-kings have worn a track in the human mind which we 
find it easy to follow.  And perhaps we find it particularly easy to follow when the 
king in question conforms to particular behaviours which we, as a culture, recognise.  
In 1948, George Dumézil, a trailblazer in comparative mythology studies, 
published Mitra-Varuna, a study of the similarities between the Sanskrit deities 
Varuna and Mitra and the mythical ‘first kings’ of Rome, Romulus and Numa.  His 
hypothesis was that Varuna and Romulus embodied for their societies the generative, 
wild, violent, uncontrolled and tumultuous aspects of sovereignty.  They were 
   55
===== PAGE 62 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
responsible for the society’s fertility, its victories in war and the security of the state.  
Mitra and Numa, on the other hand, embodied wisdom, law, fidelity, justice and 
control.  Varuna and Romulus were bachelors, associated with secret male cults 
dedicated to excess and virility.  Mitra and Numa were happily married, joined with 
their wives in leading the people to public worship.  Varuna/Romulus was night, 
Mitra/Numa was day, and so on.  Dumézil suggests that these are two essential aspects 
of the one god or conception of maleness; that one cannot exist without the other 
(Dumézil, 1948, p. 65). 
Setting these ideas to work on primate societies, we can see them quite easily as 
the two elements of the alpha male’s role.  The violent, uncontrolled aspect is 
responsible for defending the troop against invaders and/or invading other territories 
for the good of the troop.  The wise law-abiding aspect is the control role, protecting 
the young and weak while controlling the violence of others.  
Dumézil further suggests that all Indo-European cultures have been influenced by 
these concepts. Early myths break the two aspects apart while insisting on the close 
relationship between the two entities (Mitra and Varuna are tightly entwined in Vedic 
literature).  Interestingly, later mythic and semi-mythic conceptions of kingship have 
tended to combine both aspects in one person, while separating them over the person’s 
life, ascribing the uncontrolled, tumultuous aspects to the youth of the king and the 
wise and law-abiding aspects to his maturity (Dumézil, 1948, p. 41).   
We have, for example, Theseus, in youth a reveller and seducer, in age a wise 
ruler; or Odysseus, always virile and prone to sowing wild oats, but settling down in 
age to stable governance of his territory.  In historical times, Charlemagne followed 
the same pattern. 
Neither Romulus nor Varuna made this transition.  Instead, they remained 
haughty and uncontrollable after they were established in power, and were destroyed 
by their hubris. Romulus was eventually poisoned by the people he ruled. 
Examining Dumézil’s Mitra-Varuna hypothesis in the light of primate politics 
leads us to consider the nature of kingship and the contradictory nature of the many 
roles a king plays.  He must be aggressive to hostile outsiders and sufficiently 
aggressive to insiders to achieve dominance; yet once he achieves power, he must use 
that aggression (now cast as ‘strength’ and ‘wisdom’) for the benefit of the group. 
It is fascinating, therefore, that the main difference between Mitra and Varuna is 
their marital status.  The implication is that marriage (or, among other primates, 
having access to reproductive success) is the factor which changes the direction of the 
alpha male’s aggression from hostility to protection. The priests who inherited Numa’s 
role in the Roman religion (flamines) were married and were required to have children 
   56
===== PAGE 63 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
in their household, preferably their own.  Their wives were priestesses.  Those who 
belonged to the cult associated with Romulus, the Luperci, were bachelors, although 
their behaviour was strongly linked with virility and fertility.  In their mythic origins, 
they were responsible for curing the sterility of the Sabine women, who had been 
abducted by Romulus and his men, by whipping them.  They re-enacted this scene 
each year, but otherwise had no public religious displays.  It appears to have been a 
cult of young men (iuniores) dedicated to excess. 
The Luperci are associated with the beginning of things, the flamines with their 
stable maintenance.  In early Indian culture, a similar pattern is found in the adherents 
of Varuna (Gandharva) and Mitra (the brahman).   
For an alpha male, therefore, in primate or human societies, the challenge is to 
yoke aggression to different goals at different times; the fact that it is difficult for one 
real person to embody the conflicting essences of Mitra and Varuna may explain how 
few ‘good kings’ are found in history. 
(I found the recent media fascination in Australia with the marriage of Prince 
Frederick of Denmark to Mary Donaldson of particular interest, coming as it did 
during the writing of this exegesis.  Not only was there the Cinderella aspect of the 
story, thoroughly dissected by the media, there was a subsidiary ‘fairy story’ about the 
Prince, who had been noted for his youthful excesses but had now ‘settled down’ and 
was ready to marry and immediately procreate.  This fitted the Romulus/Numa pattern 
so well that it led me to consider the uses of such a pattern in creating a character; in 
my case Arvid, warlord of the Last Domain, a character who is referred to in Blood 
Ties but whom we do not meet until the second book of the series.) 
How has fantasy fiction dealt with this sovereign theme of virility vs wisdom?  
Firstly, by using the time-honoured pattern of ‘wild in youth, wise in age.’  As 
outlined in Chapter 3, the Arthur story displays this pattern very clearly.  In youth 
Arthur is the war-leader, the winner of battles, the boy who lies down with any girl 
who offers without asking questions (thus siring Mordred on his half-sister).  Once he 
has secured the throne, however, he becomes the wise, just ruler: temperate, forgiving 
and, most importantly, the founder of the rule of law which applies equally to 
everyone in the kingdom, including him.  
However, most fantasy fiction does not follow its young kings through their 
careers as the Arthurian saga does.  The classic eucatastrophic ending is the overthrow 
of the Dark Lord/radical evil/usurper and the ascension of the throne, often 
accompanied by marriage of the king.  Then the story ends.  We do not have the 
opportunity to see the young, generative king transform himself into the older, wiser 
ruler.   
   57
===== PAGE 64 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
But if Dumézil is right, then a full conception of sovereignty must have both 
Mitra and Varuna represented and linked together.  Fantasy fiction has dealt with this 
by allotting the two roles to two characters:  young king or aspirant to power, and wise 
old wizard. 
JRR Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings, Ursula Le Guin’s The Earthsea Sequence, 
Guy Gavriel Kay’s The Fionavar Tapestry, Susan Cooper’s The Dark is Rising 
Sequence, Barbara Hambly’s The Darwath Trilogy,  all use this trope to greater or 
lesser extent. 
The figure of the wise old wizard, the Merlin analogue,  has become so popular 
that it has left sovereignty behind and now appears merely as a counterbalance to 
young heroes of any kind: witness the character of Albus Dumbledore in the Harry 
Potter books (Rowling, 1998-2005).  It is so familiar that it is now open to parody and 
a recision from the stereotype (or archetype).  Jonathan Stroud, author of The 
Bartimaeus Trilogy, speaking at the Sydney Writers’ Festival in 2006, talked about 
how he had worked directly against the stereotype of the wise, good, old wizard in 
robes to construct his main character, by making his wizard young, stupid and wicked 
– and dressed in very boring clothes.  However, the wise old magical mentor does 
exist in Stroud’s work, in the form of the demon Bartimaeus.  Stroud’s use of 
Bartimaeus in this way is fascinating, because he does not act as a mentor for the main 
character, Nathaniel, who has summoned him by the use of magic and controls his 
power, making him an ancient wise servant instead of an ancient wise master.  
Nathaniel is too self-centred and too well brain-washed by older wizards to pay any 
attention to Bartimaeus’s advice.  We, however, who read the demon’s account of the 
story, which speaks directly to the reader, as well as Nathaniel’s version, can give his 
perceptions of the world their real value.  He is therefore our mentor, not Nathaniel’s, 
which is a wonderful twist of the role (Stroud, 2003).  
Bartimaeus leaves Nathaniel at the end of Book 1 of the trilogy, allowing him to 
develop further alone.  This is not surprising.  In many fantasy stories, the wizard 
mentor dies or disappears at a crucial moment, sometimes for ever, sometimes, as with 
Bartimaeus and Nathaniel, merely for a time.   
There is a specific change-over point in the Arthur stories which illuminates this.  
Arthur founds Camelot with Merlin’s help, and then Merlin disappears.  Up until this 
time Merlin has represented Mitra, the wise, powerful older man, the mentor, the 
guide to youth.  With his disappearance,  Arthur is free to – perhaps must – take on the 
role himself.  It is no coincidence that Merlin disappears not long after Arthur’s 
marriage.  Marriage has always been the point at which young men were expected to 
stop roistering and ‘settle down’; to move to the next stage of masculine development, 
   58
===== PAGE 65 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
the provider and protector.  Arthur is subject to this constraint in the same way as 
other young men.  If we think of each family as a small primate group, we can then 
see this cultural requirement as an expression of the shift to the control role expected 
of the alpha male when he achieves dominance and/or reproductive success.  It may 
even be argued that Arthur’s inability to have children with Guenevere is necessary to 
his myth – that it frees him from the socio-biological requirement to protect his own 
offspring at the expense of others, and thus allows him to protect everyone in his 
kingdom; to truly become the father-king that James I describes.  This balance lasts 
only as long as Arthur is in ignorance of Mordred’s paternity; then he is dragged out 
of his, and the land’s, equilibrium. 
In many other stories, the death or disappearance of the wizard is the point at 
which the hero/king must find maturity in himself in order to fulfil the quest.  He can 
no longer rely on the father figure to teach him about masculinity; he must become a 
man.  Apart from Gandalf’s ‘death’ in The Fellowship of the Ring,  the second volume 
of The Lord of the Rings (Tolkien, 1978b), the best-known example of this is the first 
Star Wars movie.  When Obi-wan Kenobi dies, Luke Skywalker must draw on his 
own resources in order to defeat evil. 
The demonstration of maturity required of the young hero in the absence of his 
mentor prefigures the transformation of the Romulus/Varuna figure of the young king 
into the Numa/Mitra figure of the wise ruler.  Therefore, although we do not, in most 
fiction, stay with the story long enough to see the full transformation, we may be 
certain that it will follow, particularly where the story ends with a marriage. 
Recent fictions, both literary and cinematic, have combined the figures of wizard 
and young hero. There are examples apart from Harry Potter and Luke Skywalker.  In 
Lian Hearn’s Tales of the Otori series, Takeo, the main male character, is both wizard 
and hero (Hearn, 2002, 2003, 2004).  Terry Goodkind’s Sword of Truth series about 
wizard Richard Cypher is on its third book and is likely to continue (Goodkind, 2006).  
While Elizabeth Haydon’s eponymous heroine Rhapsody is not a wizard in the 
stereotypical sense, she does control certain types of magic related to nature and 
perception (and, importantly, learns to do so safely through the instruction of an older 
mentor) (Haydon, 1999, 2001a, 2001b).   
In all of these stories, the young wizard hero is striving for a safer life for 
everyone.  His or her opponents are often also wizards; the fight is usually between 
black and white magic.  We may be seeing in these stories a drift away from the hero 
as the holder of secular power towards a hero who holds personal power, expressed as 
magic. We are repeatedly told by the media that this is the age of the individual; that 
people in western societies preference personal good over common good.  A shift to 
   59
===== PAGE 66 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
the wizard hero may be an expression of this.  While he (or sometimes she) fights for 
the common good, at the end of the story he or she is not expected to take 
responsibility for maintaining it in secular terms. A story about a king ends with the 
king swearing to serve his people; a story about a wizard ends with the world safe and 
the wizard free to do what he likes.  Merlin goes after Nimue and is imprisoned in the 
crystal cave; Gandalf leaves Middle-Earth forever; Luke turns to the study of Jedi 
wisdom; Ged, shorn of magic, goes home to Gont and raises goats; Ingold finds true 
love with Gil – who knows where Harry Potter will end up? 
 
   60
===== PAGE 67 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
Chapter 8:  The Golden Bough and Fantasy Fiction 
‘…I know how it works.  There’s more to being a king than wearing a crown.  The 
king and the land are one.  The king and the queen are one.  And I shall be queen.’ 
Terry Pratchett,  Lords and Ladies 1997, p. 333. 
 
First published in 1890, The Golden Bough by Sir James George Frazer was a 
monumental work of anthropological scholarship.  The central conception was, 
according to Frazer in the preface to the 1911 edition (by then a total of 13 volumes), 
‘to explain the strange rule of the priesthood or sacred kingship of Nemi [a shrine of 
Diana in Italy] and with it the legend of the Golden Bough, immortalised by Virgil, 
which the voice of antiquity associated with the priesthood’ (Frazer, 1911, p.16)
 2. 
Under the guise of examining what was then known about Nemi and its 
priesthood, Frazer reports on an extraordinary multitude of religions, customs, 
superstitions and rituals, all of which throw some light, however faint, on the central 
story of ‘the slain god’ who self-resurrects or is resurrected symbolically.  He includes 
references to the Christian mythos although he avoids directly dissecting Christian 
dogma. 
In a discussion of the prevalence of monarchs in fantasy fiction, the question of 
why people wanted to have monarchs in the first place is relevant.  Frazer suggests 
that the path to kingship was via magic; that the first kings were magicians who could 
(or who convinced others they could) provide benefits such as rain-making to their 
communities.  He acknowledges that this may not have been the only path to kingship 
but maintains that magician-to-king was a common evolution.   
Frazer extrapolates both backwards and forwards from the magician/king to the 
god/king.  He suggests that originally the powers of magic were believed to be 
widespread, available to all and practised daily in attempts to control everyday life: the 
success of hunting, the pains of childbirth.  But, once it became obvious that most 
things in the universe could not be brought under the magical control of individual 
humans, people turned to inventing and then propitiating gods.  The magician/king 
then became an incarnation of the god, usually a god of fertility, and/or the consort of 
the goddess of fertility (Frazer, p.53). The health, virility and hardiness of the king 
were believed to be intimately bound up with the prosperity of the tribe.  This is the 
level of kingship often used in those fantasy novels which include the god/king  or 
king/goddess connection.   
                                                 
2 For the convenience of the reader, I have used the 1978 abridged version, edited by noted 
anthropologist Mary Douglas, as the reference for this chapter, except where the 1911 version 
included relevant material which was not mentioned in the 1978 edition. 
   61
===== PAGE 68 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
However, Frazer suggests that there was a price to pay for being the incarnation 
of a god – namely, that the earthly vessel of a god must be perfect and that therefore 
any king who showed signs of age or decrepitude was put to death; similarly, given an 
assumption about the health of the land being tied up with the god’s satisfaction with 
his earthly embodiment, any time of scarcity or famine might prompt the king’s 
sacrifice and the immediate acclamation of a new earthly vessel, one which the god 
would, with luck, prefer (Frazer, p. 102-110).  A scapegoat or substitute sacrifice was 
sometimes used (Frazer, p. 111-114). 
The concept of divine kingship eventually devolved into ‘the divine right of 
kings’, but originally, according to Frazer, meant that the spirit of the god descended 
into the king upon the death of his predecessor. 
Frazer’s examples and logic are not always convincing and the wide-ranging 
nature of his examples sometimes worked against his thesis – he would perhaps have 
been on firmer ground to have kept to European customs.   
In a post-colonial age, one reads sceptically; Frazer reports customs as absolute 
fact ‘the people of Central Angoniland…’ do this, and thus.  Knowing not only the 
poor quality of much of what passed for anthropology in the 19th century, but also how 
prone European explorers and missionaries were to take ‘native customs’ at face value 
and interpret them in a Eurocentric manner, we now understand that much of Frazer’s 
material is suspect, and tainted with racism.  A good example is his attitude to 
Australian indigenous people, ‘cunning and malignant savages’ (Frazer, p. 36).  He 
would have based his opinion of indigenous peoples on the few field studies available 
to him, such as Francois Peron’s Maria Island – Anthropological Observations, an 
early 19
th century work which has been criticised as contributing to the racist views 
held by Europeans at the time (Anderson, 2001).  Frazer’s methodology and attitudes 
have been criticised by scholars such as Ludwig Wittgenstein (in Frazer, 1978, p. 13) 
and Edmund Leach (Leach, 2003). Mary Douglas, in her introduction to The 
Illustrated Golden Bough, an abridged work, sums up criticisms of Frazer:  The main 
modern one is, first, that Frazer was ‘insufferably arrogant about primitive mentality, 
and second, that he dealt superficially with deep matters’ (Frazer, 1978, p. 12).  She 
acknowledges both criticisms as valid, but maintains that Frazer was not ‘racialist’ in 
any meaningful way as he subjected his own past culture and European culture to the 
same scornful analysis (Frazer, p. 12). 
Notwithstanding this, Frazer’s theory of the development of kingship from 
magicianship is based on the idea that ‘witch doctors’ and ‘shamans’ are people of 
influence in ‘native’ society.   He claims that ‘the public profession of magic has been 
one of the roads by which the ablest men have passed to supreme power’ (Frazer, p. 
   62
===== PAGE 69 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
46).  He does not, however, provide evidence of this.  Even allowing for a shift in 
knowledge and interpretation since Frazer’s time, it is clear that he selected his 
examples rigorously to support his case. He fails to mention the possibility of ‘might 
makes right’ or the need to defend home territory as factors in creating a king through 
warriorship, and ignores the historical precedents of new royal houses arising through 
conquest.   
There is also an underlying assumption that the magicians who turned themselves 
into kings were knowing charlatans, playing upon the gullibility of their compatriots.  
Perhaps some of them were.  But Frazer appears unwilling to accept that anyone of 
intelligence at any time in human history could have truly believed in magic.  This is a 
failure of imagination on his part which is matched by his contempt for ‘the primitive 
mind’ (Frazer, p. 51). 
There is so much material in The Golden Bough (looking through the 13-volume 
set is dizzying) that any one example can be excised without affecting the argument; it 
is possible that if one excised every suspect example the argument would be weakened 
beyond sustaining. 
Does this matter?  For a novelist, not at all.  What is important are the ideas which 
Frazer put forward.  There is no doubt that Frazer’s concepts have influenced writers 
and it is the use to which those concepts have been put which is of interest. 
Frazer and later writers 
An abridged version of The Golden Bough, edited by Frazer’s daughter was published 
in 1922.  This edition became extremely influential among 20th century writers, 
including WB Yeats, TS Eliot, EM Forster, Thomas Hardy, F Scott Fitzgerald and 
Ernest Hemingway (Steinberg 1988; Meyers, 1988; Radford, 2001; Vicery, 1973).  
Later writers, such as Michael Tippett, the opera librettist, have discovered Frazer 
through the modernists and been influenced in their turn (Robinson, 1990).  That 
influence shows no sign of waning. In 2004, Patricia Wrede and Caroline Stavermer 
published the second book in their Regency fantasy series, The Grand Tour, which 
climaxed in a scene where one of the characters is magically transformed into the 
priest at Nemi, the priest of the Golden Bough (Wrede and Staverner, 2004).  The 
rhetoric and rationale for the scene is lifted straight from Frazer. 
Overall, the most striking thing for me in reading The Golden Bough is that there 
are no unfamiliar concepts in it.  Although I am well-read in folk tales and in some 
folk-customs, I had not read widely in this area of anthropology before – but all of 
Frazer’s concepts have become such common currency in fantasy novels that they are 
extremely familiar to me.   
   63
===== PAGE 70 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
These ideas include ‘primitive’ beliefs about: 
• divine kingship (where the king is the incarnation of the god, as with the pharaohs) 
• the unity of the health of king and land  
• the need for the king to be sacrificed if the land is in ill health (drought, famine, crop 
failure, etc.) 
• the role of the king as sacred consort to the goddess  
• all goddesses and gods as variations on fertility deities 
• the need for the king to adopt particular taboos which either safeguard him from harm or 
safeguard others from an inopportune discharge of his power. 
 
What is most interesting with regard to fantasy fiction is that a ‘god/king’, 
‘magician/king’ or ‘wizard/ruler’ is so often portrayed negatively, as a despotic ruler – 
the original ‘Dark Lord’.  The need for separation of church and state seems to be 
alive and well in fantasy fiction, if nowhere else Sauron is the obvious example, but 
there are others, such as Ursula Le Guin’s The Earthsea Sequence, which has ‘God-
Kings’ ruling the Kargid lands.  While never sighted, the rule of these ‘God-Kings’ is 
portrayed as totalitarian and stifling for their people.   
Few fantasy writers have made their king an actual embodiment of a god (Terry 
Pratchett excepted, in Pyramids, 1990), but many have used the king/god or god/king 
idea and/or have used the king as consort to a goddess (or, more usually, the 
representative of a goddess, acting as her embodiment).   
There are numerous examples.   
Guy Gavriel Kay’s The Fionavar Tapestry uses some of Frazer’s ideas, especially 
the first volume, The Summer Tree (1996), where one of the main characters, Paul 
Schaeffer, offers himself as the sacrifice in the place of the king; he is bound to ‘the 
summer tree’, the oak which Frazer maintains has been central to the worship of the 
fertility god in Europe (Frazer, 1978, p. 67), and almost dies but is saved by the god 
because of his courage.  He returns as a true incarnation of the god with the ability to 
call on the god’s powers, but he is not the ruler of the country and plays a mostly 
positive role.  There is also an inversion of this in the third book where one of the 
other characters takes on the role of Adonis, becomes the lover of the goddess and dies 
in the process, but redeems the world from a magically induced winter in the process. 
Aragorn in The Lord of the Rings carries a faint echo of god-like powers in his 
ability to heal and his ability to command an army of the dead.  Marian Zimmer 
Bradley in The Mists of Avalon (1983) and associated texts uses the king as consort to 
the goddess idea a number of times; referring to ‘the sacred marriage’ which will 
   64
===== PAGE 71 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
ensure the health of the land. Similarly, Elizabeth Haydon in the Rhapsody trilogy 
gives a ‘happy ever after’ ending with a sacred marriage between two of the main 
characters in their roles as Lord and Lady of the land (in Destiny, Haydon, 2001b). 
Diana Wynne Jones in The Merlin Conspiracy (2003) has echoes of this in the 
importance of the king to the realm and the personification of ‘the land’ as a female 
spirit. Anne Bishop, in a feminist version, ties the health of the land to the power and 
integrity of its queen – in Daughter of the Blood (2001), the fight between good and 
evil is for the as-yet uncorrupted soul of the adolescent queen. 
In Le Guin’s The Farthest Shore (1971c) and later books, it is made clear that the 
well-being of the people of the archipelago of Earthsea is dependent on there being a 
king, and the choice of king depends upon his willingness to undergo pain in order to 
save his people. . 
According to Frazer, the king’s connection with the divine required him to adopt 
particular taboos which either safeguarded him from harm or safeguarded others from 
an inopportune discharge of his power.  Frazer suggests that the number and 
constriction of these taboos eventually rendered the business of ruling impossible, and 
that the divine ruler devolved into two branches of power:  church and state, 
represented by priest and king, with the king basing his secular power on his selection 
by the gods.   
The fact that these taboos are rarely adopted by fantasy writers is interesting, as it 
points to the usefulness of a king as an initiator or participator in action; the kind of 
taboos which Frazer discusses (for example, the king never touching the ground, or 
never being touched by others) would be death to most narratives in the genre. 
It does raise the question, however, of where the priests are.  Organised religions 
that are on the side of good are scarce in fantasy fiction.  I considered this at some 
depth before writing Blood Ties.  Did I want to create a religion?  I decided that I did, 
as I believe that all human societies have created systems of belief which link them to 
immanence.  If I wanted to create a truly believable human society, I needed some 
basis of belief. Tolkien solves this problem by having a beautifully worked out 
cosmology, religious mythology and belief system which underlies much of his 
characters’ actions, but articulating it in The Silmarillion instead of in The Lord of the 
Rings.   
Like him, I did not want to create a priesthood or an organised religion.  There are 
practical reasons to avoid this: just as monarchy has become detached for readers from 
its despotic roots in modern times, so churches have become associated with 
repression and conservatism, as Phillip Pullman uses to good effect in Northern Lights 
(Pullman, 1995).  This might not be an idea that is true for all readers, but it is certain 
   65
===== PAGE 72 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
to be true for some.  As someone raised in a very Catholic family, with a great deal of 
experience with the multi-faceted organisation of the Catholic Church, I think I knew 
too much about how a widespread organised religion really operates to want to include 
it as an ancillary feature in a large narrative.  Furthermore, in sheer plotting terms, it 
adds another layer of politics, negotiations and power bases to the story.  I already had 
a complex political landscape of eleven Domains, and did not wish to make that 
landscape more complex by adding further power players.   
Yet I did want immanence.  Not God, but the gods.  My reading in mythology had 
left me with a profound distaste for mythology based on pantheons, which are so like 
soap operas with lightning bolts.  No ‘personalities’, no ‘archetypes’.  So the gods in 
this story are local; not quite animistic, powers not fully defined, but definitely tied to 
the locale: the village, the forest, the town. To get away from priests, I made them 
approachable by all, especially (of course) by some of my characters.  To make sure 
they took no part in selecting a king, I made them not very interested in human beings 
except when forced to take notice. 
No doubt Frazer would think the religion in Blood Ties a poor, weak little thing, 
but I have made its roots strong, so that, as in real animistic societies, everyday actions 
are bound up with belief.  
Frazer’s description of how the king sacrifice degenerates into representations 
(Frazer, 1978, p. 116) in folk custom allowed me to ‘place’ my fictional world at a 
particular point in Frazer’s cycle, and to add a hint of immanence to a practice (horse-
racing) which is anything but sacerdotal in our world.  The ritual of the Autumn Chase 
in Blood Ties is a degenerated version of the annual killing of the king substitute 
(Frazer, p. 112).  A later section of the story is set in the past (1000 years ago) and the 
contrast between the ‘contemporary’ horse-racing and that of the past will add to the 
sense of authenticity of the created world.  
It is possible, I believe, to trace how kings are sometimes used in fantasy fiction 
back to the ideas in The Golden Bough, sometimes directly, sometimes at second- or 
third-hand.  But realising this does not answer our central question of why use kings at 
all?  It gives us some possibilities:  the god/king connection, if it is understood by the 
reader as well as the writer, allows the royal character to carry a sacerdotal role which 
is not available to other figures at the top of a political hierarchy.  But this assumes 
that the reader is familiar with Frazer’s ideas, or continues to be influenced by the 
remnants of the primitive god/king mythos in our culture.  This is a big assumption, 
and there is a much simpler explanation for any such influences. 
   66
===== PAGE 73 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
Christian representation of kings 
Frazer clearly identifies the Christian mythos as fitting the pattern of the sacrificial 
figure who is symbolically reborn to ensure fertility.  He stops short of saying that 
Christian beliefs are to be equated with ‘primitive’ superstitions, but the inference is 
plain.  It is clear that his discussion of the dying and ‘resurrected’ king is intended to 
throw an unflattering light on Christian belief (Frazer, 1911).   
Any discussion of the culturally persistent mythic pattern of a god, represented by 
a king who dies and comes back to life, is incomplete without the obvious addition of 
Christian theology.  If the pattern persists in our own cultural artefacts, it is unlikely to 
be solely because of anthropological data revealed in the 19
th century by a few 
scholars.  The sacrifice who saves his people, the good king who rules with just, stable 
and loving governance, the one who embodies immanence, is far more familiar to us 
from Christian iconography than from Frazer’s work. 
Christ is often portrayed as a king, as the titles of a few well-known hymns 
remind us: Hail, Redeemer, King Divine; Crown him with many crowns; O worship 
the King; All creatures of our God and King (The Book of Common Praise, 1972). 
As discussed earlier, European monarchs have made much use of the association 
with the divine, claiming a correspondence between Christ and his Church and the 
king and his subjects.  All this history is an unstated and perhaps unconscious element 
in any portrayal of a king in fiction. 
There is no need to belabour the parallels between Christ and the king who 
returns to his ‘rightful place’ and brings with him peace and prosperity, the 
eucatastrophe.  When Tolkien defines ‘eucatastrophe’ in his essay On Fairy Tales as 
‘the Consolation of the Happy Ending’ and suggests that it ‘is the true form of the 
fairy tale, and its highest function’, he goes on to link it to ‘the Christian Story’ and 
the eucatastrophe of Christ’s birth (Tolkien, 1972, p. 62-63).   
However, I believe there is another part of Christian iconography which has been 
equally influential in fantasy writing: the idea of earthly paradise, the Eden. 
Tolkien, in a letter to his son, says ‘…cer tainly there was an Eden on this unhappy 
earth.  We all long for it, and we are constantly glimpsing it:  our whole nature at its 
best and least corrupted, its gentlest and most humane, is still soaked with the sense of 
‘exile’…As far as we can go back the nobler part of the human mind is filled with the 
thoughts of sibh, peace and goodwill, and with the thought of its loss.’ (Tolkien, 1981, 
p. 110) 
Vladimir Propp, as noted earlier, found that the initial situation in traditional 
Russian folk tales which centred around a hero was the disruption of the peace or 
prosperity of a realm (Propp, 1990).  Eden lost, and restored at the end by the efforts 
   67
===== PAGE 74 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
of the hero.  The Golden Age ushered in by Aragorn’s ascent of the throne, the golden 
year of 1620 in the Shire, are a reflection of Eden, of Paradise, and can only be 
attained by sacrifice and the wise and loving protection of a king. Similarly, Ursula Le 
Guin’s Earthsea trilogy ends on the restoration of a king to his throne and the 
resumption of edenic peace.  A minor character early in The Farthest Shore sets the 
scene:  ‘It’s time there was a king again on the throne of Earthsea, to wield the Sign of 
Peace.  People are tired of wars and raids and merchants who overprice and princes 
who overtax and all the confusions of unruly powers’ (Le Guin, 1971c, p. 24). The 
Farthest Shore ends with the ascent of Arren to the throne and the promise of peace 
and safety.  The ascent of Rhapsody and Ashe to the position of Lord and Lady in the 
final volume of Elizabeth Haydon’s Rhapsody trilogy not only restores peace and 
plenty, but literally saves the world.  The story is told inside a narrative frame where 
the couple’s son, Meridion, is a Time Editor who influences events from outside 
space/time in order to prevent the wholesale destruction of life on the planet.  In his 
timeline, Rhapsody and Ashe did not rule, and perdition was the result (Haydon, 
2001b). 
Even in Stephen Donaldson’s The Chronicles of Thomas Covenant, the 
Unbeliever, which has no king to restore to the throne, the hero is ‘resurrected’ (on 
Easter Sunday!) by the direct intervention of a Creator and is then shown a vision of 
the Land he has saved, restored to peace and harmony (Donaldson, 1977c). 
In all these narratives the hero, in order to be the saviour, must go out, like Adam 
and Eve, like Christ in the desert  – leave the settled lands and enter the wilderness.  
The wilderness, that essential landscape of epic fantasy, here plays three roles.  Firstly, 
it is a contrast to the earlier settled peace and prosperity, warning us of what might 
overtake the homeland if the hero is unsuccessful.  Secondly, it provides opportunities 
for danger and thus growth, so that the hero can prove him/herself worthy.  Thirdly, it 
is in wilderness (traditionally, in the desert) that God has spoken; the will of the 
immanent is made manifest in the wild places. 
This all sounds suspiciously like Joseph Campbell’s Hero’s Journey, and in some 
respects, since we are drawing on similar material, it is.  But Campbell’s hero returns 
to his tribe with wisdom, not with the re-establishment of peace.  Anyone can be a 
hero in Campbell’s schema (Campbell, 1973).  Even a president.  
But with a story of Eden lost and regained, we have a role for kings (and, in more 
recent books, queens) which cannot be performed adequately by presidents or mayors.  
Heroes may solve problems, confront evil and destroy it, but to regain Paradise 
Christian mythos tells us that the monarch – the Christ figure – must be on his throne, 
reborn by a baptism of fire, going before us into Heaven.   
   68
===== PAGE 75 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
‘In such stories when the sudden “turn” comes we get a piercing glimpse of joy, 
and heart’s desire, that for a moment passes outside the frame, rends indeed the very 
web of story, and lets a gleam come through’ (Tolkien, 1972, p.61). 
Perhaps this correspondence between Christ and king-hero also explains how 
successful the Arthur stories have been.  Arthur shares the Christ-like attribute of a 
Second Coming and, within the boundaries of his story, we wait for this in confidence 
that he will, indeed, come when the time is right.  Arthur’s story gives us 
eucatastrophe early, when he attains the throne, and then again when the Holy Grail is 
achieved by Galahad, but we are left at the end, not with redemption and Paradise, but 
with the promise of redemption still to come.  So Arthur, like Christ, is both man and 
something more, living out of time and bodily mortality, but human in a way Christ is 
not, because Christ succeeded and Arthur failed – yet he has not deserted us, has not 
left the story.  We don’t like our favourite stories to end, so this promise of return, the 
promise of the second coming, is another reason for cherishing the Arthurian cycle. 
How does this affect someone like me, writing fantasy without a king?   
I have incorporated Christ-like attributes into one of my main characters, 
Bramble.  She goes through a form of death and later becomes the Kill Reborn.  In the 
final volume of the story, she will lead the dead, not to Heaven, but to a position from 
which they can be reborn.  I did not make these decisions from a conscious desire to 
have a Christ-substitute in the story, or from a need for what Tolkein calls evangelium, 
that glimpse of immanence shining through eucatastrophe (Tolkien, 1972, p. 62).  The 
decision to have Bramble undergo a symbolic death came very late, in the final draft, 
and was taken because the first part of the novel seemed a little flat to me, a bit 
pedestrian.  Not enough sense of wonder.  I had already established her as the Kill 
Reborn in an earlier draft, so it seemed to make a nice balance to have an action 
episode earlier (where she jumps the chasm) which would lead her through death.  It 
also strengthened her motivation to keep riding the roan in the Chases even though he 
was not fully fit. Her fear that the ‘half-death’ would come back if she didn’t keep 
chasing made her choice there more difficult and her decision more sympathetic. 
The decision to make her the Kill Reborn came at a very early stage and was, I 
confess, influenced by reading The Golden Bough.  In it Frazer describes the hunt and 
sacrifice of the king figure and discusses how this ‘primitive’ ritual degenerated over 
time to other rituals, such as the burning of the corn dollies, which were also believed 
to ensure fertility.  The image of the hunt stayed with me and the idea that I could 
present the custom in its degenerated form in the first book and then in its original 
form in the second appealed to me.  
   69
===== PAGE 76 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
Then, quite late in the planning process, I realised that at the end of the third book 
I would be left with an army of ghosts who had laid down arms but not been sent to 
their rest.  I had not then read The Other Wind, where Le Guin is confronted with the 
same problem and solves it in only a slightly different way.  I am glad I had not read 
that story when I planned the third book as I think this ending is the right one for this 
story, and I might have tried to make it significantly different to Le Guin’s solution if I 
had read her version first. 
The whole point of my narrative is the power of forgiveness and the uselessness 
of hatred and revenge.  The ghosts must forgive their killers – but it seemed both 
psychologically and spiritually true that forgiveness is a boon for the forgiver first, 
even more importantly than for the transgressor.  To demonstrate this, there had to be 
a change in the ghosts which would mirror their internal change.  It is well established 
earlier in the story that one has to ‘earn’ rebirth; this had to become the external 
change that the ghosts went through. 
I also had another problem which making Bramble the leader of the ghosts into 
true death solved for me.  By the end of the story, she is in love with Acton, a ghost, 
and he with her.  It is the strong love story in the narrative and for real eucatastrophe I 
needed a happy ending.  But I couldn’t have one while Bramble was still alive.  So 
Bramble became the sacrifice, the Christ-figure, for a combination of reasons, some 
practical and some not so pragmatic.  
The story thus reinforces the idea of the saviour/hero, but divorces this from the 
notion of monarchy, casting monarchy as an unwanted political development which is 
being proposed by an evil character.  This is intended to challenge some of the anti-
democratic  ideas implicit in epic fantasy while maintaining the strong narrative drive 
and sense of wonder which is characteristic of this genre. Similarly, the incorporation 
of first-person stories from ‘minor’ characters will undercut the idea that only the 
main characters in the narrative are significant and worthy of our interest.  This 
structure, giving voice to the ordinary and everyday as well as the magical and special, 
will reinforce the political philosophy described in the story as ‘Valuing’ (that is, 
egalitarianism and democracy).  The ‘Eden’ to which the end of the narrative delivers 
us, as the Last Domain turns to Valuing, is one which has the hope of equality and 
prosperity for everyone, including the marginalised, rather than a prosperity which 
most benefits the powerful. 
   70
===== PAGE 77 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
Chapter 9:  Conclusion 
Vimes went back to the rank in a gloomy rage.  Say what you like about the 
people of Ankh-Morpork, they had always been staunchly independent, yielding to no 
man their right to rob, defraud, embezzle and murder on an equal basis.  This seemed 
absolutely right, to Vimes’s way of thinking.  There was no difference at all between 
the richest man and the poorest beggar, apart from the fact that the former had lots of 
money, food, power, fine clothes, and good health.  But at least he wasn’t any better.  
Just richer, fatter, more powerful, better dressed and healthier.  It had been like that 
for hundreds of years. 
   ‘And now they get one sniff of an ermine robe and they go all gooey,’ he 
muttered. 
Terry Pratchett, Guards! Guards! 1990, p. 157. 
 
A writer working within the literary tradition of fantasy may well choose to use a 
monarchy as the political structure for their secondary creation simply because it is 
traditional; familiar to readers, easy to understand, quick in exposition, ‘fitting’ the 
type of tale they are about to commence, and strongly commercial. 
Or they may do so for deeper, less conscious reasons. All social animals create 
dominance structures in their social groups.  With the exception of bonobos, primate 
social groups have a single male at the top of the hierarchy.  Even among bonobos, 
there is a male dominance structure which ensures that the alpha male has priority 
access to reproductive success.  Perhaps, then, we use kings in fantasy fiction because 
we long for the single male leader who will assume the ‘control role’ of the alpha 
male, protecting the group against outsiders and protecting the weaker members 
against the bullies in the group.  Perhaps our desire for a ‘good king’ goes back to this 
most basic of human social structures.   However, the alpha male gains his position by 
political guile and strength of will, rather than by inheritance (although having a 
dominant mother helps).  There is no ‘rightful alpha male’.  The process is much more 
like modern politics than it is like royal descent.  Kingship enters human society later, 
exploiting our undoubted desire to have someone in charge. 
We cannot truly know how kings first arose or what they meant to their subjects.  
We can be sure, however, of two things:  they have been around a long, long time and 
they have almost always claimed some special relationship with the divine.  
Sometimes that relationship was direct:  ‘I am a god, worship me!’  Sometimes it was 
based on revelation:  ‘God has revealed to me only what we must do’ (as with Moses).  
Sometimes it appears to have been based on being the male partner of the fertility 
goddess, as represented by her priestess.  Sometimes it was based on a claim that ‘God 
put me here and here I stay until He changes His mind’ (the divine right of kings).  
And sometimes, perhaps, it was based on becoming the incarnation of a god, with the 
   71
===== PAGE 78 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
attendant danger of being sacrificed if it seemed that the god was not satisfied with 
that incarnation. 
While few claim nowadays (even on the most fanatic monarchist website) that 
royalty is divinely appointed, nonetheless a crucial idea has been implanted in our 
culture:  the idea of ‘the rightful king’, where ‘rightful’ has implications of ‘ordained 
by God’.  It also, of course, has implications of lawful, which is to say patrilineal, 
inheritance.  Despite the sudden appearance of ‘rightful queens’ in fantasy fiction 
since the 1970s, the queens in question are all legitimate daughters of the royal family.  
Where patrilineal inheritance is not followed, the ‘rightful’ ruler is selected by 
Immanence:  thus Arren, in The Earthsea Sequence, or Rhapsody, in Haydon’s trilogy.  
The corollary to this idea is that when the ruler is not ‘rightful’, terrible things happen, 
either from malice and wanton greed on the part of the usurper, from decline and 
decay when a ruler is absent, or from the land itself (including the weather) reflecting 
the political unheaval.  This goes well beyond the pathetic fallacy.  While tyrants and 
usurpers generally make things unpleasant for those they rule, there are not usually 
earthquakes, droughts, incursions of demons, plagues or a suspension of the normal 
laws of physics, all of which can be found in epic fantasy and all of which portray a 
world in which proper governance is central to the stability of the eco-system.  That is, 
‘the king and the land are one’.   
‘One what?’ Terry Pratchett has a character ask, and the answer may be: one 
expression of immanence (Pratchett, 1989, p.31). 
Comparative mythology has given us two influential views of sovereignty:  the 
Mitra-Varuna pairing which translates in fantasy fiction to the wizard/young hero 
couple; and the king with links to the divine which we find in The Golden Bough.  
Both are well-represented in fantasy fiction, sometimes in the same book.  However, a 
far more pervasive influence has been Judeo-Christian religion and its representation 
of the messiah/Christ figure who rescues a fallen and desperate people from death and 
restores for them the Eden which they had lost. 
Despite its beginnings in William Morris’s staunch socialism, epic fantasy fiction 
in the second half of the 20th century and in the 21st century is a genre imbued with ‘a 
greater power’, immanence, divinity, intention…   Tolkien, influential in this as in so 
many ways, was deliberate in his creation of a quasi-Judaeo-Christian mythos for his 
secondary creation.  Middle Earth is our world before Christ’s appearance, and The 
Lord of the Rings is presented as history.  For other writers who may not share 
Tolkien’s deep faith, the use of a ‘greater power’ may be simply a plot device, or may 
add to the sense of wonder, of heightened reality, which both they and their readers 
enjoy. 
   72
===== PAGE 79 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
The link between kingship and godhood, in the Christian tradition, allows access 
to another part of the Christian mythos:  Eden, or Paradise.  Both folktales and fantasy 
novels often begin the story with a disruption to the proper order of things; with the 
Fall.  This may, as with Earthsea and Middle Earth, have happened long ago in the 
secondary creation, but that event is the true beginning of the narrative which is now 
unfolding.   
The king may not be the hero of the story, but the return of the king, the 
reclamation of the throne by the rightful heir, must be part of the resolution of this 
type of story in order for it to partake of the force of myth, of true eucatastrophe.  The 
rightful king, whether Arthur or Aragorn, then ushers in a Golden Age, a return to 
Eden which cannot occur unless the king is on throne.   
Does this mean that a narrative without a king cannot achieve eucatastrophe?  
That without the king returned to his throne, Eden cannot be regained in the reader’s 
mind?  I suspect, like most literary effects, that this can be achieved by other means, 
but perhaps only if the writer is aware of how the tradition operates and the nature of 
the reward that the reader receives from the traditional story.  Certainly, when I come 
to write the last book in the Blood Ties narrative, I will keep in mind the need for Eden 
in the resolution, for the promise, at least, of peace and plenty and rightfulness in the 
order of things. 
   73
===== PAGE 80 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
Bibliography 
 
Aarne, Antti, and Thompson, Stith. 1964. The Types of the Folktale: A Classification and 
Bibliography. Helsinki: Academia Scientiarum Fennica. 
Abbott, Tony. 1995. The minimal monarchy: and why it still makes sense for Australia. 
Adelaide: Wakefield Press. 
Ackerman, Robert W. 1959. “The English Rimed and Prose Romances.” Pp. 480-519 in 
Arthurian Literature in the Middle Ages, edited by R. S. Loomis. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press. 
Alcock, Leslie. 1972. 'By South Cadbury is that Camelot...': excavations at Cadbury Castle 
1966-70. London: Thames and Hudson. 
Anderson, Stephanie. 2000. “French anthropology in Australia, a prelude: the encounters 
between Aboriginal Tasmanians and the expedition of Bruny d'Entrecasteaux, 1793.” 
Aboriginal History 24:212-223. 
Atmanspacher, H. 1998. “Commentary on Chris Nunns `Archetypes and memes'.” Journal of 
Consciousness Studies 5:p355(7). 
Attebery, Brian. 1995. “The Politics (If Any) of Fantasy.” Pp. 1-13 in Modes of the Fantastic:  
Selected Essays from the Twelfth International Conference on the Fantastic in the 
Arts, edited by R. A. C. Latham and Robert A. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood 
Press. 
Attebery, Brian. 1992. Strategies of Fantasy. Bloomington: Indiana Unversity Press. 
Augner, Robert. 1999. “A Report On The Conference “Do Memes Account For Culture?” 
Held At King's College, Cambridge.” Journal of Memetics 3:123-131. 
Bacon, Francis. 1605. “Of the Advancement of Learning.” vol. 2006: Project Gutenberg. 
Barnaby, Paul. 2006. “The Walter Scott Digital Archive.” vol. 2006: Edinburgh University. 
Baumer, Franklin Le Van. 1966. The Early Tudor Theory of Kingship. New York: Russell & 
Russell. 
Bettelheim, Bruno. 1988. The Uses of Enchantment: the meaning and importance of fairy 
tales. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books. 
Bishop, Anne. 2001. Daughter of the Blood. Sydney: Voyager Harper Collins. 
Blackstone, William. 1765-1769. Commentaries on the Laws of England: 
www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/blackstone/blacksto.htm. 
Blake, Steve and Lloyd, Scott. 2000. The Keys to Avalon. Shaftesbury: Element Books. 
Bloomfield, Morton W, ed. 1981. Allegory, Myth and Symbol. Cambridge, Massachusetts: 
Harvard University Press. 
Boehm, Christopher. 1992. “Segementray 'warfare' and the management of conflict: 
comparison of East African chimpanzees and patrilineal-patrilocal humans.” Pp. 137-
173 in Coalitions and alliances in humans and other animals, edited by A. H. 
Harcourt, & Frans de Waal. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Boesch, Christophe. 1997. “ Evidence for dominant wild female chimpanzees investing more 
in sons.” Animal Behaviour 54:811-815. 
Book of Common Praise, The, with Australian Supplement. 1972. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
Bradley, Marion Zimmer. 1983. The Mists of Avalon. New York: Knopf. 
Bradley, Marion Zimmer. 1991. The Black Trillium. New York: Bantam. 
Brown, Dan. 2004. The Da Vinci Code. London: Corgi Books. 
Campbell, Joseph. 1968. The masks of God. Secker & Warburg ; Harmondsworth : Penguin 
Books. 
Campbell, Joseph. 1972. The flight of the wild gander : explorations in the mythological 
dimension. Chicago: Regnery. 
Campbell, Joseph. 1973. The Hero with a Thousand Faces. Princeton: Princeton University 
Press. 
Campbell, Joseph. 1976. The masks of God. v 4 . Creative mythology. Harmondsworth: 
Penguin Books. 
   74
===== PAGE 81 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
Campbell, Joseph. 1988. The power of myth. New York: Doubleday. 
Campbell, Carolyn. 1999. Together Again: True Stories of Birth Parents and Adopted 
Children Reunited. New York: Berkeley Publishing Group. 
Camporesi, Christiano. 1995. “Origins of Frazer's Golden Bough.” Nature 376:546. 
Chesebro, James W. , Bertelsen , Dale A. and Gencarelli, Thomas F. 1990. “Archetypal 
criticism.” Communication Education 39:p257(18). 
Chopra, Deepak. 1995. The Return of Merlin. New York: Fawcett Columbine. 
Christie, Agatha. 1938. Hercule Poirot's Christmas. London: Crime Club. 
Clark, Grahame. 1977. World Prehistory: in new perspective. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Conniff, Richard. 2003. “Survival of the richest.” in The Age, May 17, 2003. Melbourne, 
Australia. 
Cooper, Susan. 1965. Over Sea, Under Stone. London: Puffin. 
Cooper, Susan. 1973. The Dark is Rising. London: Puffin. 
Cooper, Susan. 1974. Greenwith. London: Puffin. 
Cooper, Susan. 1975. The Grey King. London: Puffin. 
Cooper, Susan. 1977. Silver on the Tree. London: Puffin. 
Cox, George a nd Jones, Eustace. 1995. Arthurian Legends of the Middle Ages. London: 
Senate. 
Daly, Gay. 1989. Pre-Raphaelites in Love. London: Fontana. 
Dawkins, Richard. 1976. The Selfish Gene. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
de Waal, Frans. 1996. “Conflict as negotiation.” Pp. 159-172 in Great Ape Societies, edited by 
W. C. McGrew, Linda F Marchant, and Toshisada Nishida. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
de Waal, Frans. 1998. Chimpanzee Politics:  Power and Sex among Apes. Baltimore: The 
Johns Hopkins University Press. 
de Waal, Frans, ed. 2001. Tree of Origin:  What Primate Behaviour Can Tell Us about Human 
Social Evolution. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Unversity Press. 
de Waal, Frans. 2001. “Apes from Venus;  Bonobos and Human Social Evolution.” Pp. 41-68 
in Tree of Origin, edited by F. de Waal. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 
Dennett, Daniel C. 2001. “The Evolution of Culture.” Monist 84:305-324. 
Donaldson, Stephen. 1977a. Lord Foul's Bane. London: Fontana/Collins. 
Donaldson, Stephen. 1977b. The Illearth War. London: Fontana/Collins. 
Donaldson, Stephen. 1977c. The Power that Preserves. London: Fontana/Collins. 
Doughty, AA. 2002. “This is the Real Story... I Was Framed.” Journal of American and 
Comparative Cultures 25:357-362. 
Dumezil, Georges. 1988. Mitra-Varuna: An Essay on Two Indo-European Representations of 
Sovereignty. New York: Zone Books. 
Ehardt, Carolyn L. & Bernstein, Irwin S. 1992. “Conflict intervention behaviour by adult male 
macaques: structural and functional aspects.” Pp. 83-111 in Coalitions and Alliances 
in Humans and Other Animals, edited by A. H. Harcourt, & Frans de Waal. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
Ehrlich, Paul R. , Dobkin, David S. and Wheye, Darryl. 1988. “Dominance Heirarchies.” 
2005: Stanford University 
http://www.stanford.edu/group/stanfordbirds/text/essays/Dominance_Hierarchies.html
. 
Eliot, T.S. 1936. Collected Poems 1909-1935. London: Harcourt Brace. 
Faxon, Alicia Craig. 1989. Dante Gabriel Rossetti. Oxford: Phaidon Press. 
Flores, Stephen P. 1993. “‘I am Arbaces, we are all fellow subjects’: the political appeal of 
Beaumont and Fletcher's ‘A King and No King’ on the restoration stage.” Essays In 
Literature 20:171-196. 
Franklin, Julian H. 1981. John Locke and the Theory of Sovereignty. Canbridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Frazer, Sir James George. 1978. The Illustrated Golden Bough. London: Macmillan. 
Frazer, Sir James George. 1911. The golden bough : a study in magic and religion. London: 
   75
===== PAGE 82 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
MacMillan. 
Freeman, Pamela. 1994. The Willow Tree's Daughter. Melbourne: Little Ark Books/Allen & 
Unwin. 
Freeman, Pamela. 1995. Windrider. Melbourne: LIttle Ark Books/Windrider. 
Freeman, Pamela. 1998. The Centre of Magic. Melbourne: Little Ark Books/Allen & Unwin. 
Freud, Sigmund. 1972. Totem and Taboo. London: Rutledge & Kegan Paul. 
Freud, Sigmund. 1986. A Case of Hysteria, Three Essays on Sexuality and Other Works. 
Translated by J. Strachey. London: Hogarth Press. 
Furuichi, T. 1997. “Agonistic interactions and matrifocal dominance rank of wild bonobos 
(Pan paniscus) at Wamba.” International Journal of Primatology 18:855-75. 
Gagneux, Pascal, Boesch, Christophe and Woodruff, David S. 1999. “Female reproductive 
strategies, paternity and community structure in wild West African chimpanzees.” 
Animal Behaviour 57:19-32. 
Geoffrey of Monmouth,. 1978. The History of the Kings of Britain. Harmondsworth: Penguin 
Classics. 
Gimbutas, Marija. 1991. The Civilization of the Goddess: The World of Old Europe. San 
Francisco: Harper Collins. 
Goodkind, Terry. 2006. Phantom. London: HarperCollins. 
Gossin, Pamela. 1996. “‘All Danae to the Stars’: a nineteenth-century representation of 
women in the cosmos.” Victorian Studies 40:65-96. 
Gottschall, Jonathan, Berkey, Rachell, Cawson, Mitchell, Drown, Carlyl, Fleischner, Matthew, 
Glotzbecker, Meissal, Kernan, Kimberly, Magnan, Tyler, Muse, Kate, Ogburn, 
Celeste, Patterson,  Stephen, Skeels, Christopher, St Joseph, Stephanie, Weeks, 
Shawna, Welsh, Allison & Welch, Erin. 2003. “Patterns of characterization in 
folktales across geographic regions and levels of cultural complexity.” Human Nature 
14:365-382. 
Graves, Robert. 1974. The Greek Myths: Volume One. Harmondsworth: Penguin. 
Harcourt, Alexander H., & de Waal, Frans, eds. 1992. Coalitions and alliances in humans and 
other animals. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Haskins, Charles Homer. 1961. The Renaissance of the 12th Century. Cleveland: Meridian 
Books. 
Haydon, Elizabeth. 1999. Rhapsody. London: Gollancz. 
Haydon, Elizabeth. 2001b. Destiny. London: Gollancz. 
Haydon, Elizabeth. 2001a. Prophecy. London: Gollancz. 
Hearn, Lian. 2002. Across the Nightingale Floor. Sydney: Hodder Headline. 
Hearn, Lian. 2003. Grass for his Pillow. Sydney: Hodder Headline. 
Hearn, Lian. 2004. Brilliance of the Moon. Sydney: Hodder Headline. 
Henry, Allison. 2005. “An Australian Head of State: where are we at? [An address to the 
Sydney Institute on 2 March 2005].” Sydney Papers 17:20-32. 
Hillman, James. 1979. The dream and the underworld. New York: Harper & Row. 
Hillman, James, ed. 1980. Facing the gods. Dallas, Tex.: Spring Publications. 
Himes, Jonathan. 2003. “World's end imagery: how William Morris and C.S. Lewis imagined 
the Medieval North.” Extrapolation 44:304-311. 
Hiroshi, Kawamori. 2003. “Folktale Research after Yanagita: Development and Related 
Issues.” Asian Folklore Studies 62:237-. 
Hobb, Robin. 1996. Assassin's Apprentice:  Book 1 of the Farseer Trilogy. London: 
HarperCollins. 
Hobb, Robin. 1997. Royal Assassin:  Book 2 of the Farseer Trilogy. London: HarperCollins. 
Hobb, Robin. 1998. Assassin's Quest:  Book 3 of the Farseer Trilogy. London: HarperCollins. 
Hobb, Robin. 1999. Ship of Magic:  Book 1 of the Liveship Traders. London: HarperCollins. 
Hobb, Robin. 2000. The Mad Ship:  Book 2 of the Liveship Traders. London: HarperCollins. 
Hobb, Robin. 2001. Ship of Destiny:  Book 3 of the Liveship Traders. London:    
HarperCollins. 
House, Jeff. 1993. “Sweeney among the archetypes: the literary hero in American 
culture.”  
   76
===== PAGE 83 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
Journal of American Culture 16:65(7). 
Jackson, Kenneth Hurlstone. 1959. “The Arthur of History.” Pp. 1-11 in Arthurian Literature 
in the Middle Ages, edited by R. S. Loomis. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Jacobs, Joseph. 1990. Celtic Fairy Tales. London: Studio Editions. 
Jones, Diana Wynne. 1996. The Tough Guide to Fantasyland. London: HarperCollins. 
Jones, Diana Wynne. 2003. The Merlin Conspiracy. London: HarperCollins. 
Jones, Gwyn and Jones, Thomas. 1978. The Mabinogion. London: JM Dent & Sons. 
Jones, R.A. 2000. “On the empirical proof of archetypes: commentary on Maloney (JAP 44, 
January 1999, 101-16).” Journal of Analytical Psychology 45:599(7). 
Jung, Carl Gustav. 1959. The Basic Writings of CG Jung. New York: Random House. 
Jung, Carl Gustav. 1967. The Spirit in Man, Art and Literature. London: Ark Paperbacks. 
Jung, Carl Gustav. 1998. Jung on Mythology. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University 
Press. 
Kano, Takayoshi. 1996. “Male rank order and copulation rate in a unit-group of bonobos at 
Wamba, Zaire.” Pp. 135-145 in Great Ape Societies, edited by W. C. McGrew, Linda 
F Marchant, and Toshisada Nishida. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Kantorowicz, Ernst H. 1997. The King's Two Bodies: A Study in Mediaeval Political 
Theology. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Kawamori, Hiroshi. 2003. “Folktale research after Yanagita: development and related issues.” 
Asian Folklore Studies, Dec 2003 v62 i2 p237(20) 62:237-256. 
Kay, Guy Gavriel. 1996. The Summer Tree, Book One of the Fionavar Tapestry. London: 
HarperCollins. 
Kennealy, Patricia. 1984. The Copper Crown. New York: St Martin's Press. 
Kerenyi, Carl. 1958. The Gods of the Greeks. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books. 
Knight, Stephen. 1994. Robin Hood:  A Complete Study of the English Outlaw. Oxford: 
Blackwell. 
Knox, J.M. 2001. “Memories, fantasies, archetypes: an exploration of some connections 
between cognitive science and analytical psychology.” Journal of Analytical 
Psychology 46:613(23). 
Koyama, Naoki , Ichino, Shinichiro, Nakamichi, Masayuki and Takahata, Yukio. 2005. 
“Long-term changes in dominance ranks among ring-tailed lemurs at Berenty Reserve, 
Madagascar.” Primates 46:225-234. 
Lang, Andrew. 1950. Blue Fairy Book. London: Longmans, Green & Co. 
Latham, Robert A & Collins, Robert A. 1995. Modes of the Fantastic: Selected Essays from 
the Twelfth International Conference on the Fantastic in the Arts. Westport, 
Connecticut: Greenwood Press. 
Le Guin, Ursula K. 1971a. A Wizard of Earthsea. London: Puffin Books. 
Le Guin, Ursula K. 1971b. The Tombs of Atuan. London: Puffin Books. 
Le Guin, Ursula K. 1971c. The Farthest Shore. London: Puffin Books. 
Le Guin, Ursula K. 1999. Tehanu. New York: Harcourt Inc. 
Le Guin, Ursula K. 2001. The Other Wind. New York: Harcourt Inc. 
Le Guin, Ursula K. 2001. Tales from Earthsea. New York: Harcourt Inc. 
Leach, Edmund. 2003. The Essential Edmund Leach: Volume One:  Anthropology and Society. 
London. 
Levi-Strauss, Claude. 1970. The Raw and the Cooked: Introduction to a Science of Mythology:  
Translated by J. W. Weightman, Doreen. London: Jonathan Cape. 
Lewis, C.S. 1984a. The Magician's Nephew. London: Fontana. 
Lewis, C.S. 1984b. The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe. London: Fontana. 
Lewis, C.S. 1984c. The Horse and His Boy. London: Fontana. 
Lewis, C.S. 1984d. Prince Caspian. London: Fontana. 
Lewis, CS. 1984e. Voyage of the Dawn Treader. London: Fontana. 
Lewis, C.S. 1984f. The Silver Chair. London: Fontana. 
Lewis, C.S. 1984g. The Last Battle. London: Fontana. 
Lewis, C.S. 2002. Surprised by Joy. London: Fount/HarperCollins. 
Loomis, Roger Sheridan, ed. 1959. Arthurian Literature in the Middle Ages. Oxford: 
   77
===== PAGE 84 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
Clarendon Press. 
Lourdusamy, S. 1998. “Structural Analysis of Kashmiri Folktales.” Asian Folklore Studies 
56:176-178. 
Machiavelli, Niccolo di Bernardi. 1979. The Portable Machiavelli. Translated by Mark 
Bondanella. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books. 
MacLeish, Archibald. 1952. Collected Poems 1917-1952. London: Houghton-Mifflen. 
Maloney, A. 1999. “Preference ratings of images representing archetypal themes: an 
        empirical study of the concept of archetypes.” Journal of Analytical Psychology 
44:101(16). 
Maloney, A. 2000. “Response to ‘On the empirical proof of archetypes: commentary on 
Maloney’.” Journal of Analytical Psychology 45:607(6). 
Malory, Sir Thomas. 1977. Works. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Mathews, Richard. 2002. Fantasy:  The Liberation of Imagination. New York: Routledge. 
McGrew, William C., Marchant, Linda F., & Nishida, Toshisada, eds. 1996. Great Ape 
Societies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
McKinley, Robin. 1994. Deerskin. New York: Ace Books. 
Mellaart, James. 1965. Earliest Civilizations of the Near East. London: Thames & Hudson. 
Meyers, Jeffrey. 1988. “Hemingway’s Primitivism and ‘Indian Camp’.” Twentieth Century 
Literature 34:211-222. 
Micha, Alexander. 1959. “The Vulgate Merlin.” Pp. 319-324 in Arthurian Literature in the 
Middle Ages, edited by R. S. Loomis. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Mitani, John C., Merriwether, D. Andrew  and  Zhang, Chunbin. 2000. “Male affiliation, 
cooperation and kinship in wild chimpanzees.” Animal Behaviour 59:884-893. 
Mitani, John C., Watts, David P.,  Pepper, John W.  and Merriwether,  D. Andrew. 2002. 
“Demographic and social constraints on male chimpanzee behaviour.” Animal 
Behaviour 64:727-737. 
Monty-Python. 1974. “Monty Python and the Holy Grail.” Directed by Terry Jones and Terry 
Gilliam.  London: National Film Trustee Corporation Limited. 
Morris, William. 1971. The Water of the Wondrous Isles. New York: Ballantine Press. 
Muller, Martin M. and Wrangham, Richard W. 2003. “Dominance, aggression and 
testosterone in wild chimpanzees:a test of the ‘challenge hypothesis’.” Animal 
Behaviour 67:113-123. 
Nakamichi, Masayuki. 2003. “Age-related differences in social grooming among adult female 
Japanese monkeys ( Macaca fuscata).” Primates 44:239-246. 
Neher, Andrew. 1996. “Jung's theory of archetypes: a critique.” The Journal of Humanistic 
Psychology 36:61(31). 
New Scientist. 2004. “DNA shows how different we are.”2449. 
New Scientist. 2004. “Chromosomes reveal surprise human-chimp differences.” 26 
May  
2004:  NewScientist.com news service 
New Scientist. 2005. “Chimps and us - it is the differences that count.” 3 September 
2005. 
New Scientist. 2005. “Chimp genome: Lessons from our closest cousin.” 3 
September:2005. 
Newton-Fisher, Nicholas. 2004. “Hierarchy and social status in Budongo chimpanzees.” 
Primates 45:81-87. 
Nishida, T & Hosaka, K. 1996. “Coalitions strategies among adult  male cimpanzees of the 
Mahale Mountains, Tanzania.” Pp. 114-134 in Great Ape Societies, edited by W. C. 
McGrew, Linda F Marchant, and Toshisada Nishida. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Norfolk, Lawrence. 2003. “Reward of the goddess.” Pp. 14-15 in The Times Literary 
Supplement. London. 
Nunn, C.M.H.. 1998. “Archetypes and memes: their structure, relationships and behaviour.” 
Journal of Consciousness Studies 5:p344(11). 
Palumbo, Donald. 2005. “The monomyth in Gene Wolfe's The Book of the New Sun.” 
   78
===== PAGE 85 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
Extrapolation 46:189-235. 
Pietikainen, P. 1998. “ Archetypes as symbolic forms.” Journal of Analytical Psychology 
v43:p325(19). 
Pratchett, Terry. 1989. Weird Sisters. London: Corgi. 
Pratchett, Terry. 1990a. Pyramids. London: Corgi. 
Pratchett, Terry. 1990b. Guards!  Guards! London: Corgi. 
Pratchett, Terry. 1993. Men at Arms. London: Corgi. 
Pratchett, Terry. 1995. Interesting Times. London: Corgi. 
Pratchett, Terry. 1997a. Lords and Ladies. London: Corgi. 
Pratchett, Terry. 1997b. Feet of Clay. London: Corgi. 
Propp, Vladimir. 1990. Morphology of the Folktale. Austin: University of Texas Press. 
Pullman, Philip. 1995. Northern Lights. London: Scholastic. 
Rackham, Arthur, ill. 1995. Irish Fairy Tales. Ware: Wordsworth Classics. 
Radford, Andrew. 2001. “J.G. Frazer and a strange harvest custom in Hardy's ‘Tess’.” Notes 
and Queries 48:164-165. 
Robinson, Suzanne. 1990. “An opera of "depth”: Tippett's ‘The Midsummer Marriage.’” The 
Music Review 51:116-132. 
Rowland, Susan. 1999. C.G. Jung and Literary Theory. New York: Palgrave. 
Rowling, JK. 1998. Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets. London: Bloomsbury. 
Rowling, JK. 1999. Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban. London: Bloomsbury. 
Rowling, JK. 2000. Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire. London: Bloomsbury. 
Rowling, JK. 2003. Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix. London: Bloomsbury. 
Rowling, JK. 2005. Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince. London: Bloomsbury. 
Sannen, Adinda, Van Elsacker, Linda, Heistermann , Michael and Eens, Marcel. 2004. 
“Urinary testosterone-metabolite levels and dominance rank in male and female 
bonobos (Pan paniscus).’ Primates 45:89-96. 
Schlobin, Roger C., ed. 1982. The Aesthetics of Fantasy Literature and Art. Notre Dame: 
University of Notre Dame Press. 
Schom, Alan. 1998. Napoleon Bonaparte. London: HarperPerennial. 
Schubert, Glendon & Masters, Roger D., eds. 1991. Primate Politics. Lanham: University 
Press of America. 
Sheets-Johnstone, Maxine. 1992. “Corporeal archetypes and power: preliminary clarifications 
and considerations of sex.” Hypatia 7:p39(38). 
Silverberg, Robert. 1980. Lord Valentine's Castle. London: Pan Fantasy. 
Smith, Stan. 1996. “The Golden Bough: A Study in Magic and Religion.” The Review of 
English Studies 47:627-629. 
Solomon, H. McFarland. 1998. “ Response to Petteri Pietikainen's ‘Archetypes as symbolic 
forms’.” Journal of Analytical Psychology 43:373(5). 
Sophocles. 1973. The Theban Plays. Harmondsworth: Penguin Classics. 
Steinberg, Erwin R. 1987. “Dick Diver and the Priest of Nemi.” Journal of Modern Literature 
XIV:65-81. 
Stewart, Mary. 1961. The Ivy Tree. London: Coronet Books. 
Stewart, Mary. 1974. The Hollow HIlls. London: Coronet Books/Hodder and Stoughton. 
Stewart, Mary. 1976. The Crystal Cave. London: Coronet Books/Hodder and Stoughton. 
Stroud, Jonathan. 2003. The Amulet of Samarkand. London: Doubleday. 
Stuart, James. 1598. “Trew Law of Free Monarchies” Access date 12/5/2006: Alexa Net. 
personal.pitnet.net/primarysources/stuart.html 
Tem, Steve Rasnic. 1991. One View:  Creating Character in Fantasy and Horror Fiction. 
Eugene: Pulphouse Publishing. 
Tennyson, Alfred Lord. 1912. Idylls of the King. London: Edward Arnold. 
Tey, Josephine. 1949. Brat Farrar. London: Peter Davies. 
Todorov, Tzvetan. 1975. The Fantastic:  A structural approach to a literary genre. Ithaca: 
Cornell Paperbacks, Cornell University Press. 
Tolkien, JRR. 1972. Tree and Leaf. London: Unwin Books. 
Tolkien, JRR. 1977. The Silmarillion. London: George Allen & Unwin. 
   79
===== PAGE 86 =====
Kings. What a good idea.  Pamela Freeman 
Tolkien, JRR. 1978a. The Fellowship of the Ring: Part One of Lord of the Rings. London: 
George Allen & Unwin. 
Tolkien, JRR. 1978b. The Two Towers: Part Two of Lord of the Rings. London: George Allen 
& Unwin. 
Tolkien, JRR. 1978c. The Return of the King: Part Three of Lord of the Rings. London: 
George Allen & Unwin. 
Tolkien, JRR. 1981. The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien. London: George Allen & Unwin. 
Trilling, James. 1993. “’Meaning’ and meanings in ornament: in search of universals.” 
Raritan: A Quarterly Review 12:52(18). 
Twain, Mark. 1988. A Conneticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court. New York: Aerie Books 
Ltd. 
Twain, Mark. 2000. Life on the Mississipi. Koln: Konemann. 
Vicery, John B. 1973. The Literary Impact of The Golden Bough. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press. 
Viola, Andre. 1996. “‘Buds on the tree of life’: a recurrent mythological image in Virginia 
Woolf's ‘Mrs. Dalloway.’” Journal of Modern Literature 20:239-248. 
Von Franz, Marier-Louise. 1997. Archetypal Patterns in Fairy Tales. Toronto: Inner City 
Books. 
Wace and Layamon. 1977. Wace and Layamon: Arthurian Chronicles. Translated by Eugene, 
Mason.  London: Everyman's Library, Dent and Dutton. 
Walker, Steven F. 2002. Jung and the Jungians on Myth: An Introduction. New York: 
Routledge. 
Wheelwell, D. 1998. “And the meme raths outgrabe." Journal of Consciousness Studies 
5:362(13). 
White, TH. 1978. The Once and Future King. London: Book Club Associates. 
Wrangham, Richard W. 2004. “Dominance, aggression and testosterone in wild chimpanzees: 
a test of the ‘challenge hypothesis’.” Animal Behaviour 67:113-123. 
Wrede, Patricia C. & Stevermer, Caroline. 2006. The Grand Tour. Orlando: Magic Carpet 
Books, Harcourt Inc. 
New Scientist. 2005. “Fifth subspecies of chimpanzee revealed.” 3 July 2005:  issue  
2510. 
Zimmer, Heinrich Robert. 1956. The king and the corpse : tales of the soul’s conquest of evil. 
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. 
Zipes, Jack. 1979. Breaking the Magic Spell:  Radical Theories of Folk and Fairy Tales. 
London: Heinemann. 
Zipes, Jack. 1989. The Brothers Grimm: From Enchanted Forests to the Modern World. 
London: Routledge. 
Zipes, Jack. 1994. Fairy tale as myth/myth as fairy tale. Lexington: University Press of 
Kentucky. 
 
 
 
   80