pe 

lea ery  ee  Ya! 

_URSULA 

eas  ell 

VIRGINIA  KIDD,  EDITORS 

Sic 

Malaita  tee  fel  mils 
BORDERLANDS  OF  THE  IMAGINATION 

   
EDGES 

GLIMPSES: 

—of  disaster  too  great  to  believe 
—of  a  captured  quantum  creature 

VISIONS: 

—of  a  lover  never  known 

—of  a  sweetheart  forever  lost 

JOURNEYS: 

—to  the  last  days  cf  a  dying  empire 
—to  the  land  of  lust  and  lost  gods 
—to  an  awesome  world  of  earth  and  sky 

URSULA  K.  LE  GUIN  and  VIRGINIA  KIDD 

Two  of  speculative  fiction’s  most  respected 
anthologists  present  an  original  collection  of 
entertaining  and  provocative  stories  by  thir- 
teen  of  the  field’s  most  gifted  talents.

  
  
  
URSULA  K.  LE  GUIN 
_  VIRGINIA  KIDD,  EDITORS 

EDGES 

THIRTEEN  NEW  TALES  FROM 
THE  BORDERLANDS  OF 
THE  IMAGINATION 

» 

PUBLISHED  BY  POCKET  BOOKS  NEW  YORK

“The 

Ballad 

of 

Bowsprit 

Bearstead’ 

copyright 

© 

1980 

by  Damien 

Broderick 

“Omens”  copyright  ©  1980  by  Carol  Emshwiller 
“Touch  the  Earth’  copyright  ©  1980  by  Scott  Sanders 
“The  Other  Magus”  copyright  ©  1980  by  Avram  Davidson 
“Peek-A-Boom”  copyright  ©  1980  by  Sonya  Dorman 
“Suzanne  Delage”  copyright  ©  1980  by  Gene  Wolfe 
“The  Finger”  copyright  ©  1980  by  Naomi  Mitchison 
“Barranca,  King  of  the  Tree  Streets”  copyright  ©  1980  by  Lowry  Pei 
“Thomas  in 

Yahvestan’” 

copyright 

Estate 

1980 

by 

of 

© 

George 

P. 

Elliott 

“The  Vengeance  of  Hera”  copyright  ©  1980  by  Thomas  M.  Disch 
“Falling”  copyright  ©  1980  by  Raylyn  Moore 
“Father  Returns  from  the  Mountain”  copyright  ©  1980  by  Luis  Urrea 
“The  Oracle”  copyright  ©  1980  by  M.  J,  Engh 

Another  Original  publication  of  POCKET  BOOKS 

POCKET  BOOKS,  a  Simon  &  Schuster  division  of 
GULF  &  WESTERN  CORPORATION 
1230  Avenue  of  the  Americas,  New  York,  N.Y.  10020 

Copyright  ©  1980  by  Ursula  K.  Le  Guin  and  Virginia  Kidd 

All  rights  reserved,  including  the  right  to  reproduce 
this  book  or  portions  thereof  in  any  form  whatsoever. 
For  information  address  Pocket  Books,  1230  Avenue 
of  the  Americas,  New  York,  N.Y.  10020 

ISBN:  0-671-83532-7 

First  Pocket  Books  printing  November,  1980 

10 

9 

8 

7 

6 

5  43  2  1 

POCKET  and  colophon  are  trademarks  of  Simon  &  Schuster. 

Printed  in  the  U.S.A.

CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION 

by  Ursula  K.  Le  Guin 

THE  BALLAD  OF  BOWSPRIT 

BEAR’S  STEAD 

by  Damien  Broderick 

OMENS 

by  Carol  Emshwiller 

TOUCH  THE  EARTH 

by  Scott  Sanders 

THE  OTHER  MAGUS 

by  Avram  Davidson 

PEEK-A-BOOM 

by  Sonya  Dorman 
SUZANNE  DELAGE 

by  Gene  Wolfe 

THE  FINGER 

by  Naomi  Mitchison 

9 

15 

58 

65 

85 

88 

93 

99 

BARRANCA,  KING  OF  THE  TREE  STREETS  108 

by  Lowry  Pei 

THOMAS  IN  YAHVESTAN 
by  George  P.  Elliott 

THE  VENGEANCE  OF  HERA 

by  Thomas  M,  Disch 

FALLING 

by  Raylyn  Moore 

114 

140 

153 

FATHER  RETURNS  FROM  THE  MOUNTAIN  163 

by  Luis  Urrea 

THE  ORACLE 

by  M.  J.  Engh

169 

Virginia’s  half  is  dedicated 
to  Virginia’s  third— 
Ben  Blish

INTRODUCTION 

Edges  are  strange;  very  different  from  middles.  Edges  are 
first  cousins  of  thresholds,  yet  they  can  cut  the  hand  that 
holds  them.  An  edge  is  twofaced;  it  may  force  one  to  stop 
yet  forbid  one  to  stay.  An  edge  may  make  one  edgy.  Art- 
ists 
are  often—by  no  means  always,  but  often—found 
on  edges:  peering  anxiously  over;  rapturously  admiring 
the  view;  putting  up  signs  saying  You  are  about  to 
fall 
off!  Stop!;  sneaking  by  at  night  to  knock  holes  in  the  pro- 
tective  fence;  planning  marvels  of  onelegged  bridge  en- 
gineering;  dancing;  going  for  a  walk.  Long  ago  someone 
remarked  that  it 
is  not  an  easy  thing  to  walk  the  razor’s 
edge. 

Science  Fiction,  Speculative  Fiction,  Fantasy,  though 
all  very  hard  to  define,  are  by  definition  on  the  edge:  not 
central,  not  in  the  Main  Stream  of  unqualified,  unmodified 

9

  
10 

Introduction 

'  Fiction,  but  (pejoratively)  marginal,  or  (optimistically) 
on  the  leading  edge,  or  (descriptively)  slightly  elsewhere 
—a  bit  off  thataway. 

The  most  solid  and  desirable  residences  are  not  as 
a 
rule  to  be  found  on  the  edge  of  town,  out  where  the  West 
begins,  but  downtown,  close  to  the  First  National  Bank. 
People  who  live  out  at  the  edge  are  frontiersmen,  fron- 
tierswomen;  not  perfectly  respectable,  not  fully  reliable. 
You  can’t  quite  put  your  fingers  on  them. 

Even  on  the  frontier,  towns,  of  course,  get  built—very 
quickly,  sometimes  very  cheaply.  The  bank,  the  saloon, 
the  jail,  the  whorehouse,  some  kind  of  church,  there  they 
are  overnight,  white  frame  popups,  and  there  are  the  pros- 
perous  and  thriving  inhabitants  living  at  First  and  Wash- 
ington  and  planning  to  rebuild  next  year  in  brick,  with 
two  cupolas  and  a  gazebo.  It  always  happens,  even  in 
the  Outback  and  the  Elsewhere,  even  in  crazy  literature. 
SF-Fantasy  is  currently  a  boomtown,  and  on  Main  Street 
all  the  faces  are  familiar,  known  ’em  since  Ah  wuz  so 
high,  the  brave  starship  captain,  the  loyal  robot,  the  cute 
alien,  the  rescuable  princess,  the  wise  old  daddyman,  the 
swordslinging  barbarian  from  out  of  town,  and  all  of  them 
making  a  real  good  living,  yes  sirree  bob.  But  if  you  keep 
on  walking  West,  towards  the  edge  of  town,  things  begin 
looking  quite  strange  at  last;  there  aren’t  any  used  car  lots, 
and  you  start  to  see  faces  you  never  saw  before. 

Some  of  the  faces  belong  to  the  people  in  the  stories 
in  this  book,  stories  by  people  who  live  out  on  the  edge 
of  the  edge. 

It 

as 

is  hard  to  categorize  them.  As  writers  they  are  not, 
I  think,  what  you  could  properly  call  avant-garde  (smile 
when  you  say  that,  podner).  An  avant-garde  implies  prog- 
ress, 
in  an  army  marching  forever  forward,  forward, 
a  new  wave  forever  breaking.  These  are  people  who  tend 
rather  to  move  sideways,  or  out,  or  away,  or  even  unex- 
pectedly  back  home.  They  are  not  experimentalists,  be- 
cause  they  seem  to  know  what  they  are  doing,  and  do  it 
very  well.  They  are,  certainly,  story-tellers.  Some  of  them 
are  famous  in  SF-Town,  and  some  in  the  Big  City  (home 
of  Critical  Towers  and  the  Great  Novel  Building).  Some 
of  them,  on  the  other  hand,  are  rank,  shameless  out- 
siders.  In  fact,  fame  or  no  fame,  I  believe  they  are  all 
outsiders,  threshold  people,  artists 
of  the  liminal,  edge- 
dwellers,

Introduction, 

il 

Some—Engh,  Mitchison,  Sanders,  Dorman—write  of 
existences  at  the  limits  of  civilization/the  comprehensible/ 
the  known,  that  gleaming  uneasy  ground  where  two  kinds 
or  cultures  meet,  or  fail  to  meet:  the  boundary,  no  man’s 
or  woman’s  land.  Wolfe,  and  Pei,  and  Emshwiller  tell  of 
lives  lived  on  the  edge  of  hope,  or a  little  over  the  edge. 
Broderick  plays  knucklebones  at  the  mad  fringe  of  Time, 
and  Davidson  teeters  genially  on  the  margins  of  the  Real; 
Moore  crouches  at  the  verge  of  Panic,  while  Disch,  smil- 
ing,  whets  Irony’s  fine-edged  scalpel.  Urrea  climbs  to  the 
farthest  edge  of  all  and  the  nearest,  the  line,  what  fine, 
between  life  and  death;  and  Elliot  returns  from  some- 
where  off  the  edge  of  the  map  to  say  what  existence  is 
like  where  no  angels  are,  those  crossers  of  boundaries, 
messengers  from  the  unimaginable. 

For  there  are  limits  to  the  human  imagination;  though, 
this,  one  might  well  wonder  where 

on  such  evidence  as 
they  are. 

as  we  go  around  the 
Virginia  will  present 
circle  of  writers  gathered  here;  I  have  agreed  to  introduce 
the  book  entire. 

* 
each 

Ed 
* 
story 

Seeking  a  summation  or  motto  for 

this  anthology,  I 
found  various  scraps  of  quotations  hanging  around  my 
mind:  bits,  orts,  jetsam,  none  of  which  I  was  quite  sure 
was  right.  So  I  went  and  looked  for  them  under  Edge 
and  Edges  in  my  Familiar  Quotations  (Oxford,  not  Bart- 
lett,  because  the  Oxford  was  much  cheaper  in  the  used 
book  store  where  I 
the 
edges  I  had  been  groping  after—from  Matthew  Arnold: 

it),  and  there  was  one  of 

got 

...  down  the  vast  edges  drear 
And  naked  shingles  of  the  world. 

Ah,  the  cheerful,  cozy  Victorians,  yes  indeed.  Then  there 
is  always  one  from  the  Bible: 

The  fathers  have  eaten  sour  grapes, 
and  the  children’s  teeth  are  set  on  edge. 

And  the  almost  equally  dependable  Edward  Lear:

12 

Introduction 

-  And  hand  in  hand,  on  the  edge  of  the  sand, 
They  danced  by  the  light  of  the  moon... 

But  none  of  these  was  quite  right  for  this  book.  The  next 
listing  seemed  a  mere  cliché:  “Even  to  the  e.  of  doom,” 
it  said.  You  mean  there  was  a  first  person  who  said  “the 
edge  of  doom’?  I  looked  it  up,  and  smote  my  brow.  Of 
course  it  would  be  Shakespeare.  And  one  of  the  greatest 
of  the  Sonnets.  And  since  as  he  used  the  words  they  are 
not  melodramatic  or  ominous  but  gallant  against  all  odds, 
I  put  his  lines  here  for  our  motto,  chance-struck  and  so  all 
the  more  appropriate  to  these  thirteen  tales: 

Love  alters  not  with  his  brief  hours  and  weeks, 
But  bears  it  out  even  to  the  edge  of  doom. 
If  this  be  error,  and  upon  me  prov’d, 
I  never  writ,  nor  no  man  ever  lov’d. 

Ursula  K.  Le  Guin 
Portland,  Oregon  1980

EDGES

Damien  Broderick  was  born  in  1944  in 
Melbourne,  Australia,  the  eldest  of  six.  He 
spent  two  years  in  a  Junior  Seminary  of 
The  Blessed  Sacrament  Fathers,  and  there- 
after  five  years  at  Monash  University, 
Victoria.  He  has  done  two  short-story 
anthologies  in  Australia,  in  1970  (in  the 
U.S.)  a  sword  and  sorcery  novel,  and  in 
1980  the  novel  Dreaming  Dragons  from 
Pocket  Books. 

Broderick  may  or  may  not  have  raised 
turnips  while  cultivating  his  garden,  but  it 
can  be  assumed  he  never  locked  his  tender 
places  up  in  bands  of  prohibition. 

The  Ballad  of  Bowsprit 
Bear’s  Stead 

BY  DAMIEN  BRODERICK 

I  was  there,  my  smalls,  when  empire  came  crashing  down 
about  the  cars  of  the  old  galactics.  This  is  what  the  wick- 
edest  man  in  the  galaxy  told  his  wife  at  the  time: 

“When  the  entire  universe  is  blowing  itself  to  buggery, 
the  only  prudent  course  of  action  is  to  be  Emperor  of  the 
whole  goddam  shebang.” 

as 

his 

well: 

patricians  were  prolix, 

He  was  capable  of  coarse  epigrams,  and  atypical  in 
that, 
and  adorned 
themselves  with  names  fished  from  a  ridiculous  pool  of 
gnomes  and  proverbs.  Those  I'll  paraphrase.  Translations 
would  only  confuse.  Beneath  a  dawn  sky  invariably  the 
hue  of  clotted  blood,  the  shepherd’s  warning  was  a  hor- 
tation  of  a  different  colour. 
The  Emperor  kept 

one  cave-browed  eye  cocked  on 
posterity.  That  was  pretty  remarkable,  under  the  circum- 

15

  
16 

EDGES 

Stances,  since  he  had  more  than  an  inkling  that  the  his- 
tory  he  represented  was  about  to  be  shrugged  off  like  a 
tattered  old  coat.  Not  that  the  old  galactics  were  big  on 
coats.  They  were,  if  you'll  forgive  me,  a  hairy  people. 

I  torqued  into  the  High  Imperial  demesne  in  full  cere- 
monial  drag,  and  the  stinky  heat  wrenched  open  every 
pore  of  my  body.  Humid  summer’s  sun,  on  that  fabled 
world,  was  a  fat  hot  peach  drifting  in  watered  claret.  For 
a  while  I  just  stood  there  gasping,  letting  the  sweat  run 
into  my  mouth.  Off  to  one  side  of  the  clearing  was  a  mon- 
strous  sail,  a  flat  leaning  deformed  tetrahedron  woven  all 
of  straw  and  decorated  on  its  face  with  faces:  gargoyle 
shields  in  rank  on  row,  lofting  fifty  meters  to  the  structure’s 
pointed  tip.  At  its  base  was  a  hut,  the  lower  swelling  of  the 
sail,  with  two  pert  pierced  nipples  for  leaving  and  enter- 
All  the  foliage  of  the  ferns  and  trees  beyond  the 
ing. 
clearing  was  hard  somber  green,  tricking  the  eye  to 
see 
varieties  of  black.  It  took  me  some  effort  to  pick  out  the 
hunched  servant  at  work  on  his  shrubs  and  herbs  in  the 
garden. 

I  sighed.  finally,  and  went  to 

see  what  he  was  doing. 
Undoubtedly  he  was  the  filthiest  old  man  I'd  ever  set  eyes 
on,  his  tawny  pelt  thick  with  greasy  emulsions  on  those 
patches  where  the  hair  had  not  been  plucked  out  and  his 
hide  cicatrized  with  welts  and  gouges,  nothing  like 
the 
delicate  tattoos  which  grace  your  mother’s  upper  lips.  He 
to  warm  be- 
had  a  ripe  aroma,  like  a  wormy  cheese  left 
side  the  hearth,  and  T  was  obliged  to  turn  my  head  aside 
and  regain  myself.  When  I  looked  again  over  his  preoc- 
cupied  shoulder,  shielding  my  eyes  against  the  orange  sun, 
I  saw  that  his  hands  moved  through  a  pale  elaze  of  sap- 
phire  light,  a  streaky  weft  of  blue  radiance.  My  telephone 
rang. 

Entranced  by  the  light, 

my  belt.  “Yep?” 

I  fumbled  for  the  receiver  at 

“This  is  Roger,  your  Life  Support  System.” 
“What  is  it,  Roger?”  I  said  patiently. 
“Let  go  of  your  nose  and  start  the  recorders,  That's 

Cerenkov  radiation.” 

“How  extraordinary.”  I  did  as  the  Liss  suggested,  and 
the  holofield’s  subdued  ticking  came  on. 
It  was  hardly 
necessary  to  give  public  notice  that  a  recording  was  being 
made,  since  the  gardener  had  no  way  of  knowing  I  was 
there  (which,  strictly  speaking,  I  wasn’t),  but  the  equip-

The  Ballad  of  Bowsprit  Bear’s  Stead 

17 
ment  had  been  designed  to  conform  to  standing  regula- 
tions. 
a-  servant 
tachyon 
manipulation?  I  thought  magic  was  strictly  reserved  to 
Imperial  citizens.” 

doing  with 

“Roger, 

what’s 

“So  he’s  a  citizen,”  the  telephone  deduced  acerbically, 
likes  pottering  with  flowers.  Bowrprit, 
of  meron  activity  coming 

“Maybe  he  just 
that’s  not  all.  There’s  a  raft 
from  the  jungle  to  your  right.” 

__ 

“Vacuum  fluctuations?”  The  dirty  old  beast  was  still 
fiddling  with  the  damp  soil, 
his  stubby  fingers  drifting 
through  blue  pale  webs.  “Roger,  have  you  been  thoroughly 
serviced  lately?  The  barbarians  are 
light- 
hours  away,  and  you  know  how  these  people  feel  about 
physical  technology.” 

several 

still 

“Have  it  your  own  way,”  the  Liss  said  sulkily.  “Every 
single  sensor  in  my  pack  reports  singularity  flux  not  half 
if  you 
a  kilometer  from  here,  and  coming  closer, 
Bowsprit,  the  tachyons  are  gone.” 
wish  to  insist  that 
“So  I  see.”  My  eyes  stung  with  sweat,  but  I’d  noticed 
out.  With  a  grunt  and  a  groan 
the  sapphire  haze  flick 
the  old  fellow  got  up  off  his  knees  and  turned  in  my  di- 
rection.  Uncannily,  he  seemed  to  glance  straight  into  my 
eyes.  He  placed  his  grubby  hands  on  the  crown  of  his 
his  cheeks,  whining  loudly, 
head  and  lowered  them  to 
and  barked  like  a  dog. 

but 

Ah,  you  jump  and  squeal,  my  sproggies.  Imagine  my 
reaction!  My  belly  turned  over  and  little  mice  did  cart- 
wheels  in  it.  Every  lock  of  my  beard  bit  at  my  throat  and 
the  sweat  faving  my  flesh  turned  to  beads  of  crisp  dew. 
Before  I  could  gather  my  wits,  the  grimy  derelict  dropped 
his  arms,  regarded  me  with  a  quizzical  moue,  and  fell 
into  that  squatting  posture  we  know  so  well.  Stunefied, 
I  watched  him  brush  the  fingers  of  his  right  hand  (bronze- 
furred,  the  nails  ragged  and  blackened)  across  the  palm 
of  his  left,  watched  him  brush  right  palm  with  Icft  digits. 
My  will  bobbed  away  from  my  mind,  and  I  found  my- 
self  without  deliberation  on  my  own  haunches,  respect- 
fully  brushing  my  palms  in  greeting.  The  claws  on  the 
paws  of  my  sacred  garb  fell  together  with  a  rattle.  I  bab- 
bled  some  nonsense  in  our  own  tongue,  while  my  mind 
whirled  to  catch  up  with  my  well-bred  instincts.  Then  I 
Tose,  with  what  dignity  I  could,  and  gave  the  old  man  my 
his  people’s  Vocal  Tongue.  The  telephone  was 
name  in 
ringing;  I  ignored  it,  and  it  stopped. 

 
18 

EDGES 

“Neither  wild  animal  nor  man,  eh?”  the  Neanderthal 
said.  His  hand  stroked  lightly  my  borrowed  pelt.  “And 
no  star  barbarian  either,  to  judge  by  your  phenotype.”  He 
tugged  at  my  beard,  which  in  those  sprightly  days  came 
only  to  the  mid-point  of  my  breast.  “Your  eyes  are  not 
crooked,  young  man,  and  your  skin  has  a  curious  pallor. 
But  come,  let  me  show  you  an  unusual  vegetable, 
as 
rare  perhaps  in  its  kingdom  as  you  are  in  ours.”  And  he 
crouched  down  again  into 
of  turned  soil,  and 
his 
fetched  me  down  beside  him. 

plot 

I  knew  these  people  for  great  workers  of  magic,  my 
smalls,  and  I  was  not  appalled  to  find  a  mass  of  stems, 
densely  packed  and  decked  with  yellow,  where  a  minute 
earlier  had  been  only  naked  earth  and  flimmery  sapphire. 
What  dried  my  tongue  was  the  simple  fact  of  his  seeing 
me,  addressing  me.  We  were,  by  every  law  of  physics 
in  mine. 
known  to  me,  mutual  ghosts:  he  in  his  time,  I 
Under  the  shelter  of  Heisenberg,  I  was  a  skein  of  virtual 
particles,  instanton  fluctuations  in  the  zero-energy  state. 
Yet  my  chin  smarted  from  his  tug  to  my  whiskers.  It  was 
all  quite  impossible.  If  possible,  it  was  horrendous. 

a 
He  delved  into  his  garden  miracle  and  snapped  off 
bloom  in  one  hand,  a  leaf  in  the  other.  The  leaf  was  deep- 
est  green,  heavily  veined,  like  the  tissue 
a  stretched 
scrotal 
with  his  tongue, 
chewed,  grimaced,  spat  it  out.  He  held  up  the  flower  to 
me,  detailing  its  salient  features. 

sac.  The  old  man  touched  it 

of 

its 

‘T  haven’t  altered  its  genome  much,  though  it  craved 
a  cooler  climate.  It  has  four  petals,  not  terribly  attractive, 
and  four  sepals.  Here  is 
pistil,  and  you  will  find  six 
stamens.  Evidently  one  of  the  Cruciferae,  the  mustards, 
you  know.  Marx  calls  it  Brassica  rapa,  but  Smith  insists 
it’s 
his  mouth, 
munched  without  pleasure,  and  discarded  it.  “Pity.  I  was 
informed  that  it’s  edible.  Are  you  a  keen  gardener  your- 
self?” 

a  rutabaga.”  He  popped  the  flower  into 

Wordless,  I  shook  my  head.  T  realized,  then,  that  he 
would  not  recognize  the  gesture,  but  I  was  wrong.  He 
shot  me  a  hard  look. 

; 

“How  may  I  serve  you.  then.  sir?  I  had  imagined  that 

you  were  here  to  view  my  horticulture.” 

The  telephone  rang. 

I  screamed  with  frustrated  rage 

and  snatched  the  receiver  up. 

“God  damn  it!” 

I  covered  the  mouthpiece  with  my

The  Ballad  of  Bowsprit  Bear’s  Stead 

‘ 

19 

palm  and  told  the  Neanderthal,  “Excuse  me  for  a  mo- 
ment.” 

“This  is  Roger,  your  Life  Support  System.” 
“I  guessed.  Listen,  Roger,  I’m  in  the  middle  of  —” 
“Bowsprit,  don’t  blow  it.  He’s  right  about  the  plant, 
a  related  but  different  herb,  Brassica 
pull  up 

the  rutabaga 
napobrassica,  This  one’s  a  turnip.  Tell  him  to 
the  root,  but  not  to  gnaw  on  it—it  has  to  be  cooked.” 

is 

“Roger,  you’re  a  gem.” 
“Don’t  hang  up.  Those  singularities  are  getting  closer. 

There  are  two  of  them.  Marx  and  Smith?” 

to 

old 

fellow, 

“Presumably.  I'll 
the 

get  back  to  you.”  I  passed  on  the 
facts 
trying  to  breathe  through  my 
mouth.  You  have  no  idea  how  bad  he  smelled.  He  un- 
earthed  a  number  of  spherical  roots  with  tails,  their  plump 
white  bodies  swathed  at  the  top  in  purple  much  darker 
than  the  sky. 

“Fascinating,”  he  said,  peeling  one  open.  “You  don’t 
happen  to  know  how  to  prepare  them,  I  suppose?  Marx 
obtained  the  seeds  for  me  for  my  birthday,  but  it  would 
never  occur  to  him  to  get  a  recipe.  They  don’t  eat,  you 
see,” 

I  risked  offending  him,  but  there  couldn’t  have  been 
any  alternative  explanation.  “There  are  mechanisms  from 
Earth  here,  at  the  Imperial  palace?” 

“Just  the  two.  Robots.  Artificial  human  beings, 

it 
were,  The  barbarians  sent  them  a  long  time  ago,  as  a  gift 
to  the  last  Emperor.  They’re  very  old,  like  me.”  He  took 
my  elbow  in  a  comradely  way.  “Can  I  offer  you  a  drink? 
Come  in  out  of  the  hot  sun,  you’re  sweating  like  a  pig, 
you  know.  Tell  me,  are  all  your  race  so  hairy?  Do  you 
all  have  two  heads?” 

as 

With  some  embarrassment,  I  tapped  the  dead, 
fero- 
cious  jaws  which  gaped  over  my  forehead.  “This  is 
a  vest- 
ment,  Old  Father,  a  costume.  It 
is  of  sacred  significance. 
I  wear  the  head  and  pelt  of  my  brother  Bear  when  I,  uh, 
voyage.” 

“I  thought  his  eye  was  a  trifle  glazed.”  We  started  to- 

ward  the  great  sail-hut,  and  my  telephone  rang. 
“This  is  Roger,  your  Life  Support  System.” 
“T  know  already.  Can’t  you  leave  us  in  peace  for—” 
“To  prepare  a  delicious  turnip  ragout,”  the  Liss  said, 
“peel  a  dozen  baby  turnips,  not  too  long  in  the  ground, 
mind,  and  set  them  aside.  Blend  a 
large  spoonful  of

20 

EDGES 

flour  in  the  same  quantity  of  melted  dripping,  heating 
and  stirring  until  the  blend  is  yellow.  Add  a  cup  of  stock 
and  bring  to  the  boil.  Put  in  the  turnips,  seasoned  with 
salt,  pepper  and  two  teaspoons  of  sugar,  and  simmer 
for  about  three-quarters  of  an  hour.  Tender,  the  turnip 
is  a  toothsome  treat.” 

“Thank  you,  Roger.” 
“A  pleasure.  Do  you  hear  that  crashing  in  the  trees?” 
Now  that  he  mentioned  it.  Alarmed,  I  looked  question- 
ingly  at  the  scarred,  naked  ancient.  He  was  staring  with 
interest  at  the  handpiece  of  my  Liss.  When  I  was  younger 
I  was  enormously  proud  of  the  instrument,  a  beautiful 
and  delicate  receiver, 
fragile  with  brass  and  ivory  and 
carved  black  wood.  I  slammed  it  down.  “Are  there  wild 
animals  here?”  Children,  you  see  that  I  had  lost  all  per- 
spective.  The  most  fearsome  of  carnivores  could  no  more 
state,  than  it  could  detect  my 
hurt  me, 
presence.  Nor,  of  course,  could  I  hurt  it,  even  if 
it  ran 
straight  through  me. 

in  my  virtual 

“Calm  yourself,  young  man.  It  is  only  my  robots.  They 

will  not  molest  you.” 

at 

his 

the  grass 

“Your—?”  The  spark,  belatedly,  arced.  I  threw  myself 
on 
feet.  “Magnificence,  forgive  me.  I 
failed  to  recognize  your  Mightiness.”  This  was  impromptu 
stuff,  and  went  against  the  grain,  but  I  understood  with- 
out  difficulty  that  if  the  incomparable  magic  of  the  Galac- 
tic  Emperor  enabled  him  to  see  and  hear  me  I’d  be  well 
advised  to  keep  on  his  good  side. 

get 

up, 

lad, 

“Get  up, 

you'll  smother  under  all 

that 
fur.”  He  helped  me  to  my  feet,  and  his  grip  and  leverage 
were  startlingly  strong.  “There's  no  need  to  burden  me 
with  all  that  court  crap  in  the  sanctuary  of  my  own  gar- 
den.  Bowsprit  Bear’s  Stead,”  he  said,  “my  name  is  Lyric 
Music  Stirs  Too  Fierce  the  Heart,  and  it’s  refreshing  to 
make  your  acquaintance.  In  private,  you  must  call  me 
Lyric  Music.  Now,  let’s  get  that  drink  before  you  expire. 
Besides,  you  still  haven’t  told  me  how  to  cook  these  ad- 
mirable  herbs.” 

I  grinned  suddenly  at  him  and  shouted,  over  the  racket 
just 
at  the  edge  of  the  clearing,  “As  it  happens,  Sire, 
happen  to  have  a  most  delectable  recipe.  First,  you  peel 
your  turnips—” 

A  sharp  report  cracked  behind  us,  and  T  jumped  around 
to  see  a  splintered  tree  fall  into  the  springy  arms  of  its

I 

The  Ballad  of  Bowsprit  Bear’s  Stead 

21 

plentiful 

breath 
P-, 

a 
subsonic 

and  preceded  by 
S-, 

neighbor.  Into  the  clearing,  skirting  the  Emperor’s  rude 
teeth- 
garden  by 
jarring 
earthquake 
and 
waves,  Jumbered  an  immense  polished  cylinder.  Its  loco- 
motion  was  bipedal:  the  elephantine  metal  legs  rose  and 
a  quintessential  parody  of  the  ma- 
fell  thunderously  in 
chine  technology  which  the  old  galactics  despised  so  ar- 
dently.  It  gave  an  awful  blast  on  its  klaxon  as 
it  spied 
the  Emperor. 

surface-type 

his 

the 

said 

Music, 

“Smith,  Smith,” 

Situation  Triple-Danger!  Withdraw  to 

“Sire!”  it  cried,  grinding  toward  us.  “Condition  Red! 
Alert! 
deep 
bunkers!”  In  the  centre  of  its  torso  a  hefty  ruby  spun  and 
glinted,  bloodier  than  sun  or  sky:  part  of  a  laser  detection 
system,  and  surprisingly  merry. 
tone  weary. 
Lyric 
“Calm  down.  Show  some  regard  for  our  guest.”  To  me 
he  said,  “They  are  a  hysterical  breed,  these  robots.  Noth- 
ing  will  satisfy  them  but  rumors  of  war.”  Smith  had  qui- 
etened  at  once,  but  hopped  from  one  mighty  leg  to  the 
other  with  unrelieved  anxiety.  It  stood  fifteen  meters  high 
in  the  puddle  of  its  own  shadow.  The  Emperor  patted  its 
left  Jeg  affectionately.  “This  one,  Bowsprit,  was  the  mili- 
tary  executive  computer  for  the  barbarians’  Right-Hand 
Hegemony.  Marx  served  the  same  role 
tradi- 
tional  enemy,  the  Left-Hand  Hegemony.  They  were  dis- 
patched  to  the  Empire  as  a  gift  by  the  previous  Chairman 
of  Earth’s  Glorious  Republic.  Apparently  they  were  obso- 
lescent,  but  they  can  run  up  a  nice  woven  hut  in  double 
time.”  He  gestured  to  the  leaning  tetrahedron. 

for  their 

In  a  tiny,  strangled  voice,  the  robot  said:  “Permission  to 
speak,  Sire?”  The  confused  crashing  from  the  midst  of  the 
trees  had  not  ceased;  I  could  hear  more  trees  crumpling. 
“Of  course,  my  dear,  but  keep  it  cogent.  My  guest  is 

thirsty,  and  seems  quite  faint  from  the  heat  of  the  day.” 

“Guest?”  muttered  Smith.  “I  see  no  guest,  only  a  ghost, 
a  disturbance  in  the  vacuum.  Still,  I  guess  you’re  the  boss.” 
I  perceived  in  the  robot  a  family  resemblance  to  my  Liss. 
All  machines  are 
the 
barbarians  are  coming.  The  Empire  is  on  the  verge  of 
collapse.” 

at  dumb  insolence, 

“Sire, 

adept 

“Oh,  that.  The  Empire  has  been  on  the  verge  of  col- 
lapse  for  five  hundred  years.  Bowsprit,  why  don’t  you 
take  that  damned  shaggy  suit  off  and  come  inside.  I  have

22 

: 

EDGES 

a  euphoriant  potation  you'll  like,  distilled  from  the  ichor 
of  a  certain  native  bush  leech.” 

and 

cried 

sprinted 

a  hoarse 

Liebling!” 

“Gospodin!  Mein 

away.  “Your  hole!” 

excited 
voice.  Rearing  and  careening,  a  second  robot  thumped 
across  the  grass  out  of  the  trees.  Half  the  height  of  Smith, 
it  accelerated  to- 
chubby,  propelled  by  four  bald  tires, 
a  mad  rush.  Smith  leaped  to  one 
ward  its  companion  in 
side 
shouted  Marx. 
“Open  to  me  your  hole,  my  little  mouse,  for  I  am  on  fire!” 
It  executed  a  neat  slalom  turn,  bright  bronze  shell  blurr- 
ing,  and  tripped  the  first  robot  to  the  ground.  The  shock 
of  impact  bruised  my  ankles,  and  J  felt  my  knees  buckle. 
Halfway  between  horror  and  hilarity,  I  saw  the  enormous 
rubber  hose  which  extruded  questingly  from  Marx’s  un- 
dercarriage.  It  pulsed;  a  wave  ran  from  its  base  to  the 
glowing  metal  connecting  jack  at 
“I  burn,  dump- 
ling!” 

tip. 

its 

“Get  away  from  me,  you  loathsome  brute,”  shrieked 
Smith,  furrowing  backwards  through  the 
soil  with  pro- 
digious  kicks.  “Put  that  thing  away.  It’s  the  wrong  time 
of  the  month.” 

“Stop  screwing  around,  you  bloody  dolt,”  roared  Marx. 
“Something’s  brought  me  on  early.  Open  up,  or  I'll  blow. 
You'll  take  your  virtuc  to  kingdom  come.” 

“Oh.”  Smith  ceased  its  struggles.  “I’m  sorry,  Karl,  I 
figured  you  were  just  feeling  saucy.  Oh  my  god,  Karl, 
your  positron  count  is  going  up  exponentially.  Quick,  my 
dearest,  come  to  me.”  A  plate  cycled  open  in  the  cylindri- 
cal  torso,  and  Marx  jerked  forward,  thrusting  home  its 
throbbing  rubber  hose.  For  an  instant,  before  the  red-hot 
jack  entered  Smith’s  socket,  I  saw  the  eye-searing  corona 
of  the  power  hole. 

“Jenny,  my  darling  wife!” 
“Eve,”  cried  Smith,  acquiescent  at 

last 

in 

a  mythic 

rapture. 

I  picked  up  my  telephone  and  dialed  O.  “Did  we  have 

anything  to  do  with  that?” 

“This  is  Roger,  your  Life  Support  System.  T  think  our 
arrival  must  have  triggered  the  decay  curve  in  Marx’s 
black  hole.” 

“Explain.” 
“Well,  these  robots  are  fantastically  primitive.  To  tell 
the  truth,  they're  peripatetic  gigaton  bombs.  I  wouldn’t 
sort  of
be  surprised  if  the  Republic  sent  them  here  as 

The  Ballad  of  Bowsprit  Bear’s  Stead 
23 
Trojan  Horses,  They  run  off  quantum  black  holes,  about 
fifty  tons  apiece  I'd  estimate,  locked  into  a  pinch  effect. 
But  the  holes  are  grotesquely  unstable.  Any  Singularity 
that  small  tends  to  evaporate  quick-smart,  and  if  you 
can’t  dispose  of  the  radiation  that  it’s  ripping  out  of  the 
Dirac  negative  mass  you  have  an  annihilation  vortex  on 
your  hands,  Blooey.” 
“They’re  not  anchored  to  a  collapsar?”  I  asked  in  hor- 
“Not  these  early  models.  From  the  look  of  things, 
they’ve  been  jerrytigged  to  evaporate  on  a  turn-and-turn- 
about  basis.  That  tube’s  a  superconducting  conduit.  When 
Marx’s  black  hole  gushes,  as 
it’s  doing  now,  it  pumps 
about  a  gigawatt  straight  into  Smith’s  event  horizon.  That 
destabilizes  Smith’s  hole,  but  there’s  a  reasonable  degree 
of  compliance.  Our  meron  flux  stirred  up  the  Dirac  Ocean 
a  bit  and  brought  Marx  on  too  soon,  that’s  all.  Really 
nothing  to  fret  about.” 

ror. 

“Helen!” 
“Eve,  Eve,  sock  it  to  me,  baby.” 
“Friedrich!”  Marx  yelped  in  a  trembling  voice. 
Sobered,  the  taller  robot  jerked  back  to  the  full  length 
of  the  rubber  conduit.  “That’s  quite  enough  of  that,  Karl.” 
Marx  pounded  its  wheels  on  the  ground.  I  couldn’t  take 
my  eyes  off  them,  though  I  was  aware  that  the  Emperor 
had  ambled  off  to  the  shade  of  the  sail. 
“Baby,  I  need  ya!”  screamed  Marx.  “Tussy!’  With  a 
terminal  spasm,  it  shook  its  battered  old  jelly-roll.  The 
hose  retracted,  the  Jack  cooled  to  a  dull  grey,  and  the 
socket  plate  snapped  shut, 

Smith  drew  back,  trembling  with  fury.  “Tussy?”  it 
moaned.  “Tussy?  You  degenerate  monster.  You  Commie 
filth,  Your  own  daughter!”  And,  sobbing  and  grinding  its 
swivel  legs,  the  robot  rushed  from  the  clearing  with  a  ter- 
rible  tearing  of  ruptured  branches. 

Vaguely,  I  heard  the  Emperor  of  the  Galaxy  calling  to 
me.  He  stood  at  the  entrance  to  his  hut,  two  Iong  cool 
drinks  in  his  hands.  “Can’t  we  be  friends  again?”  Marx  was 
hollering  from  the  clearing.  “You're  not  really  mad  at  me, 
you  know.  It’s 
had 
fallen  on  my  backside  in  the  dry,  purple-green  tufts,  the 
teeth  in  the  jaws  of  the  bear’s  skull  over  my  brow  chat- 
tering  together;  I  was  clutching  my  belly,  my  smalls,

just  post-quantal  tristesse,??  But 

I 

24 

EDGES 

laughing  uncontrollably,  dizzy  in  the  stinking  heat,  laugh- 
ing  fit  to  bust. 

Both  Lyric  Music  and  I  found  the  barbarians’  abhorrence 
of  incest  (actual  and  metaphorical)  at  once  comical  and 
offensive.  One  serious  glance  at  the  Galactic  Emperor, 
with  his  bleached-out  irises  and  his  buckled  legs,  not  to 
mention  the  magical  tachyon  haze  furring  his  thauma- 
turge’s  hands,  yielded  evidence  enough  of  stringent  in- 
breeding.  The  genome  for  effective  psi-focus  is 
a  mess  of 
recessives,  alleles  as  slippery  as  spawning  salmon.  Oddly 
enough,  though,  none  of  Lyric’s  wives  stood  in  closer  de- 
gree  than  second  cousin—he  took  most  of  his  puissance 
from  his  swarm  of  kids,  coupling  his  genes  through  them 
a  social  register  refined  in  thirty  thousand  years  of 
to 
in  the  family.  He’d  potlatched  his  way  to  the 
keeping  it 
top  of  the  tree,  building  up  an  immense  fortune  black- 
marketing  with  the  barbarians  and  disposing  of  it 
in 
one  monumental  eleemosynary  blowout  which  had  left  him 
drunk  as 
a  coot,  creditor  of  half  the  ancient  families  in 
the  galaxy,  personally  skint,  and  the  husband  of  his  pred- 
ecessor’s  mother-wife.  In 
a  tradition  bereft  of  hard-core 
personal  ambition,  Lyric  Music  Stirs  Too  Fierce  the  Heart 
was  a  rarity. 

all 

As  for  me,  had  I  not  sprung  from  the  Joins  of  Dulcet, 
prettiest  daughter  of  that  redoubtable  hunter,  Bountiful, 
my  father?  My  own  dear  wife  was  my  cousin  Lustrous,  and 
the  tusu-guru  of  our  village,  wizard  and  terrible  master  of 
our  fetishes,  was  joint  uncle  to 
us  both,  brother  to  that 
kind  woman  whose  breasts  gave  me  suck,  breasts  heavy 
from  her  carrying  of  Lustrous.  My  future  spouse  and  I, 
engaged  in  the  week  of  our  birth,  had  exchanged  parents 
on  that  same  day,  and  Dulcet  was  more  to  me  an  aunt 
is  a  fine  way  to  grow  a  child  up,  though 
than  a  mother.  It 
I  would  hate  to  have  to  try  to  explain  it 
to  the  purse- 
mouthed  puritans  of  the  Glorious  Republic.  You  can  see 
why  I  warmed  at  once  to  chubby,  addlepated  Marx. 

Getting  through  the  low  bulging  entrance  to  the  palace 
hut  was  a  bit  tricky,  bulked  out  as  I  was  with  Liss  modules 
and  my  bear-voyager’s  pelt.  You  can  travel  one  of  two 
ways:  hypnotically  geared  for  deference  and  accommoda- 
tion  to  the  reality-structure  of  your  destination,  or  as 
a 
spectre.  I’ve  never  enjoyed  finding  myself  embedded  in  a

The  Ballad  of  Bowsprit  Bear’s  Stead 

25 

pelt. 

wall,  or  running  my  fist  through  someone’s  head,  so  I  was 
hampered  by  the  dimensions  of  the  hut  doorway. 

Finally  I  backed  out  again  and  took  off  the 

I 
bundied  him  up  respectfully  and  left  him  outside.  Under 
the  pelt  I’d  been  wearing  my  attush,  the  same  cloak  I'd 
had  since  my  training  began  twenty  years  earlier.  That 
was  a  garment  to  be  proud  of,  my  smalls:  a  gift  from  my 
true  mother,  woven  by  her  in  the  old  way  from  the  cloth 
of  the  mountain  elm,  soft  and  supple  from  the  delicate 
flesh  of  the  inner  bark.  The  rich  blues  of  its  blocky  em- 
broidery  were  faded,  it’s  true,  but  every  stitch  had  been 
Jaid  in  by  Dulcet’s  hand.  I 
felt  sorry  for  Lyric  Music: 
maybe  his  body  scars  held  something  of  the  same  mean- 
ing  to  him,  but  I  judged  it  a  depressing  loss  to  go  through 
life  naked  as  a  savage. 

The  Emperor  was  waiting  inside  for  me,  sipping  his 
drink.  Certainly  it  was  cooler  there.  I  had  expected  the 
interior  to  be  pitch  dark,  for  there  were  no  windows,  but 
remarkably  it  glowed  with  earthlight  from  a  barbarian 
luminator.  Well,  an  old  galactic  with  a  brace  of  robots  is 
hardly  going  to  shrink  from  the  elementary  creature  com- 
got  my  bear-engraved  mustache 
forts  of  technology.  I 
lifter  from  my  bag,  dipped  it  ceremoniously  into  the  glass 
Lyric  held  out  to  me,  placed  it  on  my  upper  lip,  and  took 
the  glass.  It  slipped  straight  through  my  hand  and  shat- 
tered  on  the  rammed-earth  floor.  Hard  as  rock,  that  floor, 
and  wonderfully  level;  I  imagined  Smith  had  made  it, 
thundering  on  the  soil  with  fifty-ton  blows. 

“Oh  shit,”  I  said,  peering  down  at  the  shards  over  the 
mustache  lifter  beneath  my  nose. 
Lyric  Music  hadn't 
turned  a  hair,  though  one  would  have  expected  him  to  be 
bellowing  for  exorcists. 

“Smith  was  right,  then,”  he  said,  regarding  my  confusion 
placidly.  “You  are  a  ghost,  though  of  the  strangest  kind, 
Did  I  not  touch  your  arm,  and  tug  your  whiskers?” 

“Indeed  you  did,  Sire,  and  it 

is 

a  tribute  to  your  magic. 

Here,  let  me  clean  this...” 

Now  he  did  look  shocked.  “Do  not  demean  yourself, 
master  Ghost.  What  else  are  my  thousand  lazy  bundles 
to  do  with  their  time?”  A  fat  young  Neanderthal  girl  was 
suddenly  kneeling  beside  us,  scooping  up  the  broken  frag- 
ments  onto  a  platter  of  wood.  It  was  cbvious  that  she 
couldn’t  see  me,  and  her  eyes  rolled  somewhat  in  their

26 

EDGES 

hooded  sockets  as  the  Emperor  took  his  ease  on  a  rush 
palliasse  and  motioned  me  down  beside  him.  “They  eat 
their  heads  off,  Bowsprit,  and  swive  one  another  from 
dusk  to  dawn,  and  not  one  of  the  brainless  creatures  stops 
for  an  instant  to  consider  what  will  become  of  them  when 
the  barbarians  arrive.  Which,  as  the  impetuous  Smith  is 
fond  of  telling  me,  will  certainly  happen  any  day  now.” 
Without  a  word,  her  task  done,  the  servant  was  tele- 

ported  out  of  the  hut. 

“You  interest  me,  sir  Ghost,”  the  Emperor  said,  drain- 
ing  his  drink.  “I  have  seen  barbarians  in  my..day,  and 
done  business  with  the  rogues,  but  I  have  never  witnessed 
your  like  among  them.  But  you're  not  a  citizen,  still  less 
a  servant.  And  I  doubt  somehow  that  you’re  from  the  Fur- 
ther  World.”  He  left  questions  implied,  and  hanging. 

. 

. 

.” 

“Sire 

IT  hesitated,  pondering  paradox.  To  my 
knowledge  this  sort  of  thing  had  never  come  up  before. 
If  it  did,  the  mathematics  indicated  that  a  voyager  would 
loop  straight  out.  At  any  given  instant, 
in  Superspace, 
every  elementary  particle  subsists  in  a  condition  of  abso- 
lute  ubiquity,  an  infinite  fog  of  all  possible  virtual  states. 
A  temporal  paradox  is  impossible,  because  when  effect 
a  damping 
precedes  cause,  to 
that  same  effect 
vitiate 
oscillation  brings  the  whole  sement  back  to 
its  ground 
state,  but  at  a  dreadful  cost  in  energy.  The  Archives  peo- 
ple  disapprove  mightily  of  historians  who  go  over  budget, 
and  it  didn’t  take  an  accountant  to  see  how  much  a  para- 
dox  loop  would  cost. 

All  this  went  through  my  mind  in  a  flash,  of  course.  But 
how  do  you  explain  such  a  thing  to  an  old  galactic?  You 
don’t,  naturally. 

“Sire,”  I  said  again,  “forgive  me,  but  there  are  certain 
facts  I  must  not  disclose,  even  to  you,  and  certain  mat- 
ters  of  politics  I  am  forbidden  to  discuss.” 

Lyric  Music  looked  at  me  steadily  for  quite  a  while. 
Then,  “Quite  right,”  he  cried,  slapping  my  knee.  “Only 
the  vulgar  and  the  shiftiess  waste  their  worry  on  politics, 
sir  palpable  Ghost,  and  I  do  not  believe  in  pushing  a  man 
where  he  will  not  go.”  He  considered  me  craftily.  “Still, 
you  pique  my  curiosity.  What  was  that  stick  you  held  so 
oddly.  beneath  your  nostrils?  And  may  you  not  throw  me 
some  small  tidbit  about  our  people?  How  are  your  tribe 
known,  Bowsprit  Bear’s  Stead?” 

Td  been  glancing  surreptitiously  around  the  long,  bare

as 

The  Ballad  of  Bowsprit  Bear’s  Stead 

27 
hut,  expecting  someone  to  interrupt  us  and  get  the  pres- 
sure  off  me.  All  my  training  was  as  an  observer,  an  in- 
terpreter  of  the  lost  and  the  alien,  a  witness;  I  was  no 
diplomat.  To  my  astonishment,  we  were  completely  alone. 
Apart  from  the  arrival  and  vanishing  of  the  servant,  there 
was  no  indication  that  Lyric  Music  had  not  all  his  life  lived 
incarcerated,  or 
a  hermit.  The  psychic,  I  reminded 
myself  earnestly,  are  different  to 
us.  On  some  waveband 
of  the  mind,  the  Galactic  Emperor  was  plugged  into  a  uni- 
verse  of  bustle  more  frenzied  than  a  termite’s  hill, 

I  compromised,  showed  him  the  mustache  lifter  my  fa- 
ther  had  carved  for  me  when  my  beard  was  a  laughable 
wisp.  “My  people,  Sire,  are  known  as  the  Men—in  our 
tongue,  the  Ainu.  We  pride  ourselves  for  our  hirsuteness, 
and  the  ancestors  of  the  barbarians  made  mock  of  this, 
naming  us  the  ‘Hairy’  Ainu.  The  most  blessed  among  us, 
such  as  my  fortunate  self, 
are  scholars,  voyagers,  mes- 
sengers  of  the  bears.”  His  short,  thick  fingers  ran  admir- 
ingly  across  the  embossed  bears  on  my  lifter.  “Like  your 
mighty  nation,  Sire,  the  first  seed  of  my  people  was  nur- 
tured  in  the  soil  of  the  world  Earth.” 
seed 

Lyric  Music 
gloomily,  “is  on  its  way  with  its  damned  bloody  engines  of 
death  to  fertilize  our  gardens  with  our  blood.”  He  rose, 
handing  back  my  lifter. 
“It  is 
a  topic  which  much  exer- 
cises  my  principal  wife.  I  suppose  I'll  have  to  see  the 
harridan.  I  have  enjoyed  our  chat,  sir  Mystery,  but  I  must 
leave  you  now  to  your  own  devices.  Even  an  Emperor 
must  work  on  occasion.” 

that  world,”  said 

“The  latest 

of 

The  hut  was  crammed  with  bodies,  rank  with  their  own 
effluvia  and  the  short-chain  aliphatic  pheromones  the  Ne- 
anderthals  favour  for  perfume.  All  of  them  were  women, 
short  and  broad,  with  heavy  broad  noses  and  immense 
gleaming  teeth,  breasts  jaunty  and  sagging  according  to 
age  but  all  scarred  with  initiatory  symbols;  slender  col- 
larbones,  to  be  sure,  but  arms  and  legs  like  wrestlers;  pu- 
bic  beards  to  put  an  Ainu  warrior  to  shame.  I  confess  it: 
excitement  jolted  in  me,  despite  the  shock  to  my  nostrils. 
Quickly,  I  withdrew  to 
a  corner  of  the  palace  hut,  and 
watched  with  more  than  the  delight  of  the  historian  as  the 
serving  women  of  the  Empress  sorted  themselves  into  a 
Kind  of  order,  and  the  ancient  woman  herself  stepped  for- 
ward  haughtily  to  greet  her  liege.

28 

: 

EDGES 

. 

As  a  boy  I  was  randy  as  a  beagle,  which  befits  a  healthy 
child,  but  I  was  never  noticeably  Oedipal  with  it.  Certainly 
I  was  a  rogue  with  the  village  girls,  and  the  boys,  too, 
more  than  once,  tugging  at  their  skirts  and  wraparounds, 
quick  to  pull  another  child’s  hair  or  tickle  her  armpits,  all 
the  better  to  cop  a  delicious  feel.  Surely  it  was  the  bane 
and  gory  tragedy  of  the  pinched,  trap-lipped  hordes  of  the 
Glorious  Republic  that  they  locked  their  tender  places  up 
in  bands  of  prohibition.  All  their  buried  heritage  cried 
this  madness—their  Taoists,  their 
out  in  repudiation  of 
their  rubber-limbed  Tantric  athletes—and 
Shinto  saints, 
went  unheard,  smothered  by  the  colder  joys  of  mechanism 
and  lock-step  marching.  I’ve  seen  their  rigid  bodies,  clad 
of  brain- 
in  their  dull  uniforms:  as  inveterate  a  tribe 
softened  masturbators  as  the  species  ever  spawned.  Not 
that  we  failed  to  twang  our  own  nice  places,  in  my  youth, 
when  the  need  was  hot  upon  us  and  no  fellow  creature 
close  by,  but  that  was  not  often.  I  speak  of  yesterday,  of 
course,  my  smalls;  today  I  am  a  husband  and  a  father,  a 
stood  in  Lyric  Music’s 
grandfather, 
crowded  hut.  I  have  never  fancied  the  faithless  husband’s 
fate,  toe-dancing  on  the  ground,  suspended  by  the  shriek- 
ing  hairs  of  the  shame-heaped  scalp. 

as  I  was  when  I 

the 
Such  matters  are  seldom  all-or-nothing,  but  for 
wretched  subjects  of  the  Glorious  Republic  it  came  a  long 
chalk  too  close  to  nothing.  What  other  nation  could  have 
conceived  so  gross  a  travesty  as  the  rutting  robots  of  their 
abandoned  Hegemonies?  There,  at  least,  their  fundamen- 
tal  equation  spelled  out  its  formula  without  disguise:  that 
spasm  yoking  sex  and  power,  raw  crude  power,  the  energy 
of  implosion,  the  fusion  of  self  with  self  in  endless  self- 
containment,  and  the  burning  violence  of  its  only  seed? 

I  have  said  that  I  was  not  overly  Oedipal,  yet  the  truth 
is  that  I  find  my  highest  pitch  in  the  womanly  pelt  of  a 
lustrous  pubic  beard.  An  epithalamic  allusion,  my  sprog- 
gies,  but  my  fixation  was  pre-nuptial.  Many  the  winter  eve- 
ning,  in  the  shadows  of  the  flickering  hearth,  before  my 
the 
manhood  was  fully  upon  me,  had  I  wriggled  in 
mandala  of  an  inverted  kiss,  licking  and  snorting  at  the 
apricot  cleft  of  a  friendly  girl  child  (and  sniffed  in,  more 
than  I  cared  to,  the  odour  of  dried  urine),  but  my  heart’s 
delight  was  the  prospect  of  snuffling  a  nether  beard. 

There  are  great  mysteries,  my  children,  in  our  peo- 
of  a

ple’s  ancient  ways.  That  tattoo, 

on  the  upper  lip 

The  Ballad  of  Bowsprit  Bear’s  Stead 

29 

up 

the 

the 

and 

way 

wrong 

berries, 

bellies  would  have  shrunk  to 

a  man, 
wedded  woman—does  it  say  that,  secretly,  she  is 
with  all  the  powers  over  life  of  a  man?  Or  does  she  tell 
us  that  a  man  is  the  budded  form  of  a  woman,  with  his 
and  over-boastfully 
pubic  thatch 
paraded  from  his  chin?  To  the  men  of 
Glorious 
Republic  such  speculations  would  have  seemed  obscene; 
their 
their 
manly  parts 
(too  often  self-handled,  unless  I  miss  my 
mark)  have  contracted  like  snails.  For  them,  the  making 
of 
a  baby  was  no  more  than  a  momentary  convulsion. 
All  the  burden  went  upon  their  women,  those  grim  de- 
votees  of  duty.  Is  it  any  wonder  that  their  children  lacked 
souls?  A  woman  cares  for  the  tiny  growing  thing  within 
its  wrinkled  red  head 
her,  but  it 
with  intellect.  Lustrous,  when  our  first 
child  was  due, 
went  about  without  complaint,  I  recall,  until  the  day  the 
the  dark.  I,  though, 
midwives  took  her  off 
like  a  good  father,  responsive  to 
the  fish  kicking  in  her 
lumpy  womb,  lay  for  weeks  with  the  fetishes  before  the 
fire,  morose,  my  spirit  straining  at 
its  fecundating  task, 
in  couvade. 

a  man’s  place  to 

to  squat  in 

fill 

is 

tribulations 

What  inkling  could  the  machine-folk  have  of  our  re- 
ward,  when  the 
the 
chubby  thighs  of  the  infant  are  slashed  and  stuffed  with 
fungus  mycelium?  They  are  barren  of  mystery,  locked  in 
their  time,  heeding  only  cesium  clocks,  endlessly  visiting 
apocalypse  upon  the  endless  worlds  of  the  old  galactics, 

behind 

and 

are 

us, 

Despite  her  immense  age  (she  was  certainly  old  enough 
to  have  been  Lyric  Music’s  grandmother,  and  conceiva- 
bly  his  great-great  grandmother),  the  Empress  The  Early 
Bird  Catches  the  Worm  struck  me  as  formidably  impres- 
sive.  Out  from  the  ranks  of  her  chamberlains  and  serv- 
ing  women  she  stepped,  bald  high  and  low  as 
a  lizard, 
skin  translucent  and  creased  infinitely  fine  as  oiled  brown 
paper  folded  and  unfolded  by  centuries  of  archivists,  and 
her  breasts,  too,  like  brown  paper  bags  emptied  of  their 
goods  and  discarded;  right  eye  turned  inward  and  useless, 
the  other  glaucous  with  antiquity  but  alive  and  raging. 
All  her  lineaments,  in  truth,  made  up  a  catalogue  of  sub- 
lethal  recessive  defects,  yet  a  kind  of  absolute  power  and 
self-conviction  was  instinct  in  her. 

“You  foolish  man,”  she  cried,  quivering,  as  she  stood 
before  the  Emperor  of  the  galaxy.  “Do  I  find  you  loiter-

30 

EDGES 

in 

this  absurd  place  built 

by  your  abominations? 
ing 
Have  you  nothing  better  to  do  as  the  foe  hurtles  toward 
our  world?” 

The  old  man  glanced  up  to  meet  the  eye  of  the  old, 
old  woman,  and  from  my  position  in  the  hut’s  corner  I 
could  just  make  out  the  pixie  smile  which  transformed 
his  huge  mouth. 

“My  dear,  you  come  at  an  auspicious  moment.  Come, 
come,  sit  down  here  with  me.  Look,”  and  he  held  up  the 
purple-and-white  vegetables, 
this  minute 
‘grown  a  wonderful  novelty,  a  plant  known  as  ‘turnips,’ 
and  I  expect  them  to  be  precisely as  tasty  as  they  look. 
Don’t  you  find  them  elegant?”  Lyric  Music  offered  them 
to  his  wife  courteously,  holding  them  by  the  stalks. 

have 

just 

“I 

“Imbecile!”  Early  Bird  snatched  the  turnips  from  his 
hand  and  cast  them  on  the  floor.  They  winked  out  of 
existence.  “You  have  become  a  doddering  child,  Lyric. 
What  next!  By  my  ancestors,  I  am  ashamed.  Wife  to  the 
High  Magus?  Wife  to 
a  village  gardener!  You  are  a  pol- 
lution  to  my  honorable  bloodline,  Lyric,  a  curse  and  a 
disgrace  . 
.”  Her  breath  failed  in  a  rattling  wheeze,  and 
instantly  women  held  her  by  waist  and  elbow,  helped 
her  down  to 
the  palliasse  despite  her  objections;  their 
glances  at  the  Emperor  were  venomous. 

. 

“My  good  wife,”  said  Lyric  Music,  with  a  touch  of 
acerbity,  “I  find  your  slurs  on  the  craft  of  the  gardener 
offensive  and  short-sighted.  Competent  agriculture  is  the 
wellspring  of  society,  and  inspired  horticulture  its  highest 
art.  Nourishment  for  both  body  and  soul  is—” 

“Lyric!” 

“——both  the  supreme  end  and  the  finest  means—” 
“Sire,  I  beg  you!” 
Gently,  Lyric  Music  took  her  crippled  hands  in 

his, 
and  fell  silent  for  a  space.  One  of  them  wordlessly  ex- 
pressed  a  command,  and  the 
hut  was  empty.  Neither 
took  any  notice  of  me  in  the  corner. 

“Early  Bird,  sometimes  you  forget  yourself.” 
She  was  weeping,  but  she  had  not  softened.  “I  apolo- 

gize,  Sire.” 

“Oh,  crap.  Madam,  you're a  stiff-necked  old  bird  and 
all  your  children  are  the  same.”  He  stroked  her  fingers. 
“Do  you  think  that  a  genotype  like  ours  will  be  disturbed 
one  whit  by  the  antics  of  barbarians  from  a  single  world?” 
Whipping  her  head  up  and  around,  Early  Bird  stared

The  Ballad  of  Bowsprit  Bear’s  Stead 

31. 

at  him.  “The  New  Humans  are  not  a  comic  troupe.”  With 
patrician  decorum,  she  insisted  on  giving  the  earth  peo- 
ple  their  proper  designation.  “They  are  murderers,  Lyric. 
They  have  slaughtered  their  own  kind  for  half  a  hundred 
millennia,  and  now  they  mean  to  slaughter  us.  Something 
must  be  done  to  stop  them.  Their  leader  is  only  hours 
distant.  When  his  abominable  machines  arrive 
will 
is  their  way.  Our  na- 
have  this  world  put  to  the  torch.  It 
tion  will  be  utterly  destroyed.  It 
is  your  duty  to  prevent 
that  holocaust.” 

he 

My  own  excitement,  my  smalls,  was  extreme,  and  I 
could  not  suppress  a  shudder.  Here  was  history!  Here 
were  the  principals  of  the  fall  of  empire,  and  I  was  privy 
to  their  debates.  Lyric  Music  toyed  with  what  were  left 
of  his  turnips.  The  only  sound  in  the  hut  was  the  ticking 
of  my  holofield  recorder,  lapping  up  the  actuality.  The 
swift  penetrating 
then, 
Emperor  looked  my  way, 
flick 
of  his  eyes,  and  away  again.  I  have  listened  to  that 
recording  a  hundred  times  since,  children,  and  I  am  mor- 
ally  certain  that  his  next  words  were  meant  as  much  for 
us  as  for  his  wife.  How  could  he  have  known?  I  can  only 
say  that  Lyric  Music  was  the  craftiest  man  I  have  ever 
encountered. 

one 

“My  dear,”  he  said,  rising  to  his  feet  and  striding  back 
and  forth  in  the  long  hut,  “are  you  reminding  me  of  my 
duty  to  history?” 

The  ancient  woman  laughed  with  some  bitterness.  “To 

history,  Lyric?  What  else  is  our  nation  if  not  history?” 

“Indeed,  It 

is  written  in  our  genes,  and  the  genes  of 
our  children.  You  and  I,  Early  Bird,  are  the  custodians 
of  thirty-seven  thousand  years—” 

“You,”  she  snarled,  “by  right  of  purchase.” 
“Because  my  gene-line  strayed  from  the  path  of  psy- 
chic  purity?”  Lyric  Music  sighed, 
fingers 
down  the  wonderfully  woven  straw  of  the  wall.  “Because 
my  ancestors  discerned  value  in 
talents  other  than  the 
single  vampirie  ability  to  suck  off  the  mana  from  count- 
less  human  cattle?” 

and 

ran 

his 

The  Empress  was  on  her  feet,  trembling  and  blood- 
less.  “Guttersnipe!  How  dare  you?  With  every  word  you 
muddy  and  defame  the  nation 
at  whose  pinnacle  you 
loll  like  a  drunken  slave.  You  showed  enterprise  enough 
toadying  to  the  machine-mongers,  buying  your  way  into 
eminence.”  Beside  herself,  she  lifted  an  earthlight  lumi-

32 

EDGES 

nator  and  dashed  it  on  the  fioor.  It  bounced  several  times 
without  breaking,  and  rolled  aganst  a  rush  wall,  casting 
strange  shadows.  “All  your  power  you  owe  to  me  and 
our  children,  and  you  dare  to  defame  us  as  parasites.” 

post  were 

obtained  this 

“Sit  down,  madam.”  His  voice  rasped  with  authority 
and  anger,  somewhat  belated  in  my  opinion.  “The  means 
by  which  I 
time- 
honored.  I  would  remind  you  that  I  am  your  liege.  Your 
behavior  is  disgraceful.  For  one  who  despises  the  bar- 
barians  so  strenuously,  you  remind  me  distastefully  of 
their  arrogant  women.  Now,”  and  his  voice  regained  its 
gruff  blandness,  if  you  see  what  I  mean,  “we  were  speak- 
ing  of  history,  and  its  demands.” 

legal 

and 

Thinly,  the  Empress  told  him:  “There  will  be  no  more 

history  when  the  New  Human  warriors  land.” 

“You  astonish  me.  History  is  the  record  of  events.  It 

has  no  favorites.  You  make  time  a  myth.” 

is 

the 

dew 

with 

from 

which 

itseif, 

Yours 

Lyric, 

the  tree 

evaporates 

“And  so  it 

is,  Lyric.  We  see  time  with  different  eyes, 
Sire. 
the 
is 
drenched  earth,  leaving  no  trace.  Mine  is  the  rain  which 
smites  the  topmost  leaves  of  the  forest,  runs  from  twig  to 
branch  to  trunk  to  root,  fecundating  the  earth.  And  its 
older  than  that  transitory  time 
fruit 
its  roots.  The  history  of  our  nation 
which  gives  drink  to 
is 
frag- 
tree, 
the 
the  myth  of 
ile  branches  in  a  thousand  million  worlds.  And  its  Em- 
peror  is  the  trunk.  They  will  hack  you  down  with  their 
barbarous  instruments,  and  hurl  the  tree  of  our  people 
into  the  fire.  Then,”  she  said,  with  a  voice  as 
lost  and 
elegiac  as  her  words,  “time  for  both  of  us  will  be  a  thin 
smoke  dispelled  by  the  breeze,  and  a  handful  of  dying 
ashes.” 
“I 

see.”  The  Emperor  turned  away  from  her 
and 
crouched  on  his  haunches,  tracing  with  his  right  index 
finger  the  scars  on  his  left  biceps.  Perhaps  the  blue  glow 
danced  at 
the  Women’s 
Mysteries?” 

his  fingertip.  “You  speak  for 

infinite 

its 

“T  speak  for  the  nation  entire.” 
“Do  you  understand  what  you  are  asking?” 
TI  could  hardly  hear  her  voice.  All  the  snappy  verve 
and  choler  was  gone  from  it.  “I  ask  for  a  Great  Culling.” 
shoulders. 
“You  are  prepared  to  destroy  a  whole  people,  to  the  last 
man,  woman  and  child,  to  preserve  your  own  culture?”

A  tremor  passed 

through 

Music’s 

Lyric 

The  Ballad  of  Bowsprit  Bear’s  Stead 

33 

“What  choice  do  we  have?  They  are  savages.  They 

will  not  rest  until  they  have  laid  waste  our  nation.” 

I  felt  sickened.  My  head  reeled.  Some  hint  of  this  mo- 
ment,  this  swinging  balance,  had  passed  into 
later 
apocrypha,  but  no  one  believed  it.  No  one  had  doubted 
that  the  thing  was  feasible,  but  who  could  credit  the  cold 
proposal  to  murder  twenty  billion  human  people?  We 
can  imagine  the  barbarians  making  such  a  calculation, 
but  not  the  old  galactics.  My  body  was  cold,  my  smalls, 
and  my  bowels  like  water. 

the 

But  I  see  that  some  of  you  do  not  understand.  Let  me 
explain  how  that  ancient  witch  had  planned  the  death 
of  old  Earth. 

In  coldest  winter,  the  year  I  became  a  man,  my  uncle 
the  tusu-guru,  he  of  the  “double  life,”  sought  me  out  one 
day  beside  the  hearth,  under  the  dark  sooty  rafters,  and 
led  me  through  the  frigid  sleep  to  his  brightly-lit  study. 
I  had  never  been  within  that  code-locked  place  before, 
and  I  shivered  more  to  see  the  yellow  bears’  skulls  and 
willow  fetishes  and  other  arcana  than  I 
did  from  the 
blustering  walk  there  through  snow  halfway  to  my  knees. 
He  took  from a  tall  shelf  a  curious  artifact  of  lovingly 
polished  wood  and  glass, 
as  wonderful  and  powerful,  I 
thought,  as  any  fetish,  and  perched  it  on  his  lap.  It  was 
an  elongated  triangle 
(not  unlike  the  sail-hut  palace  of 
the  Emperor,  in  fact),  and  behind  its  glass  face  a  thou- 
sand  small  buttons  spread  across  a  velvet  backing  in  an 
array  as  regular  as  Pascal’s  Triangle.  I  couid  not  con- 
ceive  any  mundane  use  for 
it,  but  its  simple  elegance 
bespoke  an  instrument  of  some  kind. 

“Saucepan,”  my  uncle  said 

(for  in  those  days  I  was 
not  yet  Bowsprit,  and  certainly  had  not  dared  to  hope 
for  that  lofty  role  as  the  bear-messenger’s  proxy),  “have 
you  been  taught  anything  yet  about  the  old  galactics?” 

“A  little,  sir,”  I  admitted,  looking  at  my  feet  and  the 

cork  tiles  they  stood  upon. 

“You  have  heard  that  they  were  wizards?” 
“Yes,  sir.”  Was  it 

a  trap?  I  glanced  at  him  quickly. 

“But  their  magic  was  not  like  our  magic.” 

“No.”  My  uncle  moved  the  instrument,  opening  a  lever 
old, 
recessed  into 
for- 
its  apex.  “Their  magic  was  the 
a  million
bidden  kind,  harnessing  the  stored  power  of 

34 

EDGES 

minds  to  the  benefit  of  one  magus.  Do  you  know  the  bi- 
nomial  theorem,  Saucepan?” 

I  assumed  it  was  mathematics.  “No,  sir. 

I  am  studying 

hunting,  training  the  dogs.” 

“Well  and  good,  my  boy.  You  seem  agile  enough  in 
the  snow.  Still,  I  wish  they’d  give  you  children  an  earlier 
start  with  numbers.  It  doesn’t  matter,  my  little  engine 
here  will  make  the  point  well  enough.  Look  closely,  lad. 
At  the  top,  here,  is 
a  chute  giving  access  to  the  board 
within.”  He  took  up  a  canister  from  his  bench,  and  I 
saw  that  it  was  filled  with  hundreds  of  small  perfect  metal 
balls.  My  uncle  fixed  this  container  to 
the  open  chute 
by  means  of  a  narrow  valve  at  its  base.  “When  I  release 
these  spheres,  they  will  rush  down  the  chute  and  dispose 
themselves  at  the  bottom  of  the  triangle.  As  they  fall, 
they  will  strike  the  buttons  and  suffer  deflection,  some 
this  way,  some  that.  Can  you  tell  me,  boy,  what  the  pat- 
tern  will  be  when  all  have  fallen  to  the  lowest  available 
point?” 

I  gazed  at  the  machine  and  puzzled  over  the  problem. 
The  gap  between  velvet  and  glass  seemed  hardly  greater 
than  the  diameter  of  each  ball, 
as  did  the  distance  be- 
tween  adjacent  buttons.  As  the  tusu-guru  had  said,  each 
sphere,  in  falling,  would  hit  numerous  buttons  on  its  path. 
I  became  slightly  dazed,  trying  to  picture  the  pattern. 
Some  of  you  laugh  at  my  naivete,  but  the  matter  is  not 
immediately  apparent  if  you  are  innocent  of  statistics. 

“IT  suppose  they'll  pile  up  in  the  middle  and  spread 

out  evenly,”  I  hazarded. 

“Let’s  see,”  said  my  uncle,  and  released  the  spheres. 
With  a  rattling,  glinting  rush,  the  balls  cascaded  into  the 
triangle.  It  was  impossible  to  observe  their  paths  as  they 
batted  and  caromed  from  button  to  button.  In  a  moment 
the  activity  stilled—and  the  balls  could  be  seen  as 
sil- 
very  bell-shaped  mass  at 
the  instrument’s  base,  few  at 
the  extremities  of  the  triangle,  most  mounding  upward 
at 
its  center.  I  was  dazzled  by  the  demonstration,  I  think 
that  moment  was  the  beginning  of  my  life-long  love  of 
mathematics:  the  latent  order  in  random  things. 

a 

“We  call  that  curve  the  normal  distribution,”  said  my 
as 
uncle,  “Few  interactions  in 
neat  and  clear  as  the  carefully-designed  workings  of  my 
little  toy.  Still,  the  underlying  principle  can  be  found  in

this  complex  world  are 

The  Ballad  of  Bowsprit  Bear’s  Stead 

35 

most  things  which  are  the  result  of  a  multitude  of  small 
infiuences,  none  of  them  connected.” 

deft 

flick, 

all  the 

“And  this  is  the  secret  of  magic?”  J  guessed. 
“On  the  contrary,  Saucepan.  This  is  the  secret  of  sci- 
ence.  We  cannot  predict  the  path  of  any  particular  ball 
in  that  maze,  but  we  know  quite  perfectly  the  end-state 
of 
this.”  And 
balls  together.  Magic  works  like 
he  inverted  the  instrument.  Spheres 
with  a 
scurried 
and 
miniature 
whirling 
drained  back  into  the  canister.  “The  psychic  force  is  gen- 
erated  at  random  within  the  human  brain.  Some  of 
us 
are  more  powerful  emitters  than  others,  but  psi  is  always 
sporadic  and  unpredictable.  It  can  only  be  directed  use- 
fully,  and  put  to  work  as  magic,  under  strict  social  con- 
ditions.” 

worlds, 

jostled, 

and 

“Like  an  orchestra,  you  mean?” 
“Exactly,  Saucepan.  But  an  orchestra  playing  powered 
instruments,  with  the  current  cut  off  from  any  given  in- 
strument  ninety-nine  percent  of  the  time.  To  obtain  music 
from  such  an  ensemble,  you’d  need  thousands  of  instru- 
mentalists,  maybe  hundreds  of  thousands,  none  of  them 
it 
sure  if  his  keyboard  was  alive  but  obliged  to  play  as  if 
were.  Well  now,  imagine  how  crucial  is  the  role  of  the 
conductor  in  such  circumstances.” 

In  fact,  I  knew  almost  as  little  about  orchestral  music 
as 
I  did  about  stochastic  analysis.  ’'d  heard  holos,  but 
that  is  sound  detached  from  its  root.  I  tried  to  bring  the 
analogy  back  home,  to 
the  night  gatherings  where  we 
played  our  tonkori  zithers,  striking  the  open  strings  with 
both  hands,  adding  our  voices  in 
the  ancient  guttural 
polyphonies.  And  the  image  no  longer  conveyed  my  un- 
elixir 
cle’s  meaning;  magic  is 
distilled  from  the  dross  of  masses.  Our  music,  even  our 
shamanistic  rapture,  was  too  personal  for  that,  too  earthy 
and  immediate. 

centrally  totalitarian, 

an 

I  stared  at  the  canister,  and  all  the  little  slobes  of  silver 
crammed  together.  They  reminded  me  of  salmon,  the 
divine  fish,  piled  gleaming  in  the  sun  ready  for  drying. 
“The  conductor—the  magician—he,  he  sucks  out  the  psy- 
chic  force  from  other  people?” 

“You  could  put  it  that  way,  lad,  but  the  truth  is  more 
horrible.  The  forbidden  magic  of  the  old  galactics  gained 
its  power  from  the  willing  co-operation  of  a  race  bred  like 
cattle.  To  be  a  magus,  a  psi-focus  for  that  confluence  of

36 

EDGES 

a 

by 

sort 

refined 

careful 

genetic 

force,  required  in  its  turn  a  very  special  genotype.  Magic, 
like  language  and  mathematics,  is 
of  machine 
which  transforms  energy  through  symbols.”  My  eyes  must 
have  glazed  over;  he  added,  “Well,  never  mind.  The  im- 
a  magus  has  a  special 
portant  thing  is  that  the  brain  of 
selection  through 
structure, 
many  generations,  When  it  taps  the  random  blurts  of  psy- 
chic  energy  from  ordinary  brains,  it  acts  as 
a  rectifier,  a 
transformer.  Nor  is  it  the  brain  of  the  magus  alone  which 
channels  this  force, 
all  those  whose 
genetic  constitution,  most  resembles  his  own.  And  arche- 
typal  symbols,  in  their  turn,  are  all-important.  The  Em- 
peror  of  the  old  galactic  order  stood  at  the  peak  of  an 
immense  psychic  pyramid,  confirmed  in  his  role  by  a  tra- 
dition  of  untold  thousands  of  years,  and  his  children  were 
the  most  vital  circuit  in  his  psychic  amplifier.” 

but  the  brains  of 

“Yes,  sir,”  I  mumbled.  I  desperately  needed  to  take  a 
piss,  but  I  was  much  too  awed  to  say  so.  And  the  pres- 
sure  on  my  bladder  was  acting  as  an  erotic  stimulus;  I 
had  arranged  with  another  young  person  to  meet  under 
the  furs  that  afternoon,  and  it  began  to  seem  that  I  would 
miss  my  appointment.  How  little  we  value  the  truly  im- 
portant  things  of  life,  such  as  the  opportunity  for  pure 
learning,  when  we  are  young.  Ah,  smirk  if  you  will. 

Nevertheless,  what  my  uncle  told  me  next  cooled  my 

ardor. 

“Saucepan,  listen  carefully.  We  have  come  to  the  point 
where  the  dogs  drive  the  catch  to  shore.”  He  smiled.  “I’m 
sure  you  would  rather  be  back  beside  the  fire,  under  the 
covers  with  your  little  friends.  But  I  wish  you  to 
fix  this 
in  your  thoughts,  engrave  it  there,  for  your  manhood  rites 
is  one  of  the  great  truths 
are  very  close  now  and  this 
every  man  must  know  well  and  fear.”  He  paused  until,  in 
my 
was 
tone 
in  shocking  contrast  to  the  portent  of 
his  words,  more 
effective  than  any  ranting  might  have  been. 

nodded. 

friendly 

sudden 

fright, 

His 

I 

“The  psychic  force,  like  poctry,  operates  at  the  level  of 
symhols.  And  the  fundamental  symbolic  structure  in  our 
bodies  and  minds—and  in  the  bodies  of  all  living  creatures 
—is  the  architecture  of  our  cells.  and  within  our  cells  the 
DNA  of  our  genes,  In  the  antiquity  of  our  species,  it  was 
believed  that  knowledge  of  a  man’s  name  conferred  con- 
trol 
a  mistaken  belief,  my 
small.  but  it  hinted  at  the  greater  truth:  for  knowledge  of

his  person.  That  was 

over 

The  Ballad  of  Bowsprit  Bear’s  Stead 

37 

the  phenotype  does  indeed  yield  authority,  in  psychic  op- 
erations,  over  the  genotype.  The  ancients  of 
all  nations 
employed  dolls  adorned  with  a  man’s  name,  hair  and 
nail-parings,  but  the  magus  used  true  gene-linked  sym- 
bols.  A  race  of  men  or  animals  is  defined  by  those  sym- 
bols,  even  the  most  superficial.” 

My  uncle  leaned  forward  intently,  his  hazel  eyes  re- 
garding  me  over  his  snubbed  nose,  and  grasped  my  left 
hand,  turning  it  upward. 

“Look  closely  at  the  shape  of  your  fingerprints.  See  the 
loops,  like  a  buffeted  wave  curling  under  its  own  rushing 
force?  That  shape  is  typical  of  our  people,  scribed  in  our 
DNA.  The  fingerprints  of  the  old  galactics  were  predomi- 
nantly  whorled,  like  the  rings  across  a  tree  stump.” 

Despite his  intensity,  and  my  apprehension,  I  was  dy- 
ing  for  a  leak.  I  hopped  about  edgily.  “It  doesn’t  seem 
like  a  very  important  difference.” 

“By  itself  it’s  not.  But  it  segregates  the  Ainu  from  those 
bearing  a  different  genetic  makeup.  Suppose  a  strange 
and  terrible  plague  arose  which  discriminated  its  victims 
according  to  which  fingerprint  gene  they  possessed.  Then 
you  might  find  the  matter  less  than  trifling.” 

“Is  there  a  disease  like  that?” 
“In  the  ancient  days  there  were  many——malaria  was 
one.  But  I  am  trying  to  make  a  more  general  point,  boy. 
Mother  Goddess,  I  wish  they’d  get  you  started  on  science 
earlier.  Do  you  know  about  blood 
a  couple  of  years 
type?” 

any 

the  Ainu  as 

a  blood-type  signature  unlike 

“For  accident  transfusions?  Of  course,  ’'m  type 
“Good,  good.  Well,  my  small, 

B.” 
a  group 
have 
other  people. 
Twenty-eight  percent  are  like  you,  bearing  the  gene  for 
type  B.  Five  percent  less  have  mine,  for  type  A.  None  at 
Rh- 
all  have 
of  NS 
negative,  and  we  have  the  highest  recorded  level 
combination.  Never  mind  what  that  means:  the  point  is, 
a 
map  of  the  Ainu  people  would  show  gradients  for  a  mil- 
lion  characteristics  of  this  kind  in  proportions  singular  to 
us  alone.” 

A,.  There  are 

percent 

with 

four 

type 

“Uh.  sir,”  I  said  with  some  desperation,  “may  I  be  ex- 

cused  for  a  moment?  T  gotta  take  a  leak.” 

“Huchi.  Sancepan,  why  didn’t  you  sav  so?  Get  the  hell 
out  of  here.  then.  I  don’t  want  you  piddling  all  over  my 
nice  new  floor.”

38 

EDGES 

I  bolted  out  the  door.  The  weather  had  eased,  but  the 
sky  hung  over  me  like  a  grey  hand.  I  ripped  open  my 
garments  and  poured  a  hissing,  smoky  stream  into 
the 
snow,  sagging  with  relief.  The  spark  arced  in  my  mind, 
ripping  away  the  blissful  emptiness,  and  I  jerked,  spray- 
ing  my  boots. 

I  slammed  the  door.  My  uncle  looked  up  in  exasper- 

ation, 

“You  weren’t  talking  about  disease,  you  meant  magic,” 

the 

other  way  too, 

I  said  with  horror, 
“Of  course.” 
“And  the  triangle—the  balls  falling  into  that  pattern.  It 
works 
got 
his  power  from  his  own  kind,  channelled  through  his  kin. 
And  if  he  wished,  he  could  aim  it  in  the  same  way.  He 
could  make  a  map,  a  symbol  map  of  his  enemies,  and 
blast  all  that  power  straight  into  their  bodies,  and  their 
own  genes  would  act  like 
like  an  antenna  tuned  for 
a, 
exactly  that  frequency.” 

A  magus 

doesn’t 

it? 

if 

“A  selective  effect,”  the  tusu-guru  said  gravely,  “and 
no  way  to  avoid  it 
it’s  aimed  at  you.  The  old  galactics 
used  it  for  ecological  control,  thinning  out  animal  popula- 
tions  on  a  scheduled  basis.  They  needed  neither  fences, 
nor  domestication,  nor  cultivation.  And  they  employed 
the  same  techniques,  handled  with  infinite  delicacy,  in 
breeding  their  trillions  of  human  slaves.  They  sculpted  the 
genome  as  easily  as  I  carve  a  fetish  from  willow.” 

He  picked 

and 
bird’s 
it  slowly,  his  fingertips  skimming  the  empty  sockets. 

oracular 

skull 

up 

a 

turned 

the 

fact 

“Saucepan,  when  you  leave  here  I  would  like  you  to 
meditate  on 
that  you  immediately  interpreted 
your  insight  in  lethal  terms.  That  is  one  of  the  reasons 
why  the  old  magic  is  forbidden.  We  are  a  peaceful  peo- 
ple,  we  Ainu,  but  we  have  a  legacy  of  war.  Today  we 
once  we  were  ferocious  sol- 
are  hunters  and  scholars: 
are  too  great.” 
diers,  and  we  could  be  again.  The  risks 
He  sighed.  “We  are  hostages  to  our  own  symbols,  too 
often  the  symbols  written  with  the  four  letters  of  the  pri- 
meval  code.  When  we  sicken,  our  bodies  are  in  rebellion 
against  some  symbolic  statement  our  cells  repudiate.  I 
might  heal  the  sick  with  antibiotics,  or  with  whale  bristle 
and  deer  horn  powder,  but  in  both  cases  I  am  waging  a 
war  of  propaganda.  There  are  certain  bacteria,  Saucepan, 
graffiti  which
which  wear  embroidery  on  their  attushes, 

The  Ballad  of  Bowsprit  Bear’s  Stead  _ 

39 

enrage  our  flesh.  These  lipopolysaccharides  are  harmless 
in  themselves,  but  the  moment  we  read  their  slogans  our 
white  blood  corpuscles  become  hysterical.  They  swarm 
together  in 
the  blood  vessels,  blocking  the  body’s  fuel. 
They  gush  pyrogens,  igniting  fever.  A  normal  activating 
hormone  from  the  adrenal  medullae  begins  literally 
to 
kill  the  tissues  it  encounters.  Serum  fractions  in  the  blood 
holler  for  more  teucocyte-  reinforcements.  In  the  worst 
cases,  the  victim  goes  into  hemorrhage,  high  fever  and 
shock.  And  all  of  this  crazy  runaway  self-destruction  has 
been  provoked  by  an  automatic  response  to  endotoxin 
symbols  which  by  themselves  do  no  damage  at  all.” 

I  gaped.  Until  that  moment  I  suppose  I'd  always  re- 
garded  myself  as  on  perfectly  cordial  terms  with  my  own 
body.  Abruptly,  I  saw  it  as  my  potential  assassin. 

exactly 

“That’s 

Saucepan.”  The 

Struggling,  I  asked,  “Do  you  mean  that  the  old  galac- 
tics  could,  could  trigger  this  kind  of  sickness  in  people,  by 
magic?  Make  their  bodies  destroy  themselves?” 
right, 

skull 
cracked,  with  a  sharp  sound,  in  his  hands,  and  fell  into 
two  uneven  pieces.  “They  did  it  when  culling  animals, 
There  is  no  reason  why  they  could  not  have  done  the 
same  with  human  beings.  Fortunately,  to  our  knowledge, 
in  war.  The  Neanderthals,  after 
they  never  did  use  it 
all,  had  left  Earth  originally  because  of 
their  nation’s 
loathing  for  the  violence  of  the  New  Humans.  But  they 
have 
barbarians. 
could 
slaughtered  every  single  one  of  them.” 

fragile 

culled 

could 

They 

have 

the 

My  uncle  rose  and  took  me  to  the  door.  A  freezing 
gale  was  blowing  up  again,  in  the  black,  splattered  night. 
He  put  his  arm  about  me  as 
left.  “Saucepan,  medi- 
tate  on  what  we  have  discussed.  And  ask  yourself,  until 
the  answer  is 
clear  and  without  qualification:  Do  you 
think  that  you  would  trust  yourself  with  such  power?” 

I 

I  slogged  off  through  the  snow,  and  felt  the  burden  of 

manhood  on  my  shoulders. 

A  reprise  of  that  emotion  took  hold  of  me,  as  I  stood  out 
of  the  way  in  the  corner  of  the  palace  hut,  destroying  the 
last  remnants  of  my  professional  composure  and  detach- 
ment.  I  was  in  the  grip  of  an  acute  anxiety  attack.  My 
have 
situation 
’  been  a  ghost,  intercepting  a  shadow  reality.  Instead,  that 
phantom  realm  had  chatted  to  me  and  tugged  at  my

was  unprecedented, 

should 

after 

all. 

I 

40 

. 

EDGES 

whiskers,  Far  from  my  practiced  role-as  observer  par  ex- 
cellence,  I  had  become  a  participant.  At  a  level  of  un- 
conscious  self-perception  deeper  than  my  training—and 
that  buffer  of  educated  response,  in  turn,  now  abruptly 
irrelevant—I  had  introjected  the  reality  I  saw  and  heard. 
Unlike  the  youth  of  memory,  though,  discussing  the 
theory  of  psychic  genocide  with  his  shaman,  I  was  spared 
the  pressure  of  my  bladder.  But  without  the  renal  dialysis 
unit  of  my  Liss,  rubbing  on  my  cramped  belly  muscles, 
I’m  sure  I  would  have  pissed  my  pants. 
I 

realize  how  close 
I'd  been  to  passing  out.  My  face  was  icy  cold,  and  my 
limbs  trembled.  Roger,  monitoring  my  vital 
signs,  had 
reorganized  my  endocrinal  balance. 
Tranquilizers  have 
their  place. 

Clarity  returned.  Only  then 

did 

Lyric  Music,  the  comical  savage  whose  act 

will 
could  blight  a  world,  stood  facing  his  wife.  She  had  not 
moved,  The  enormity  of  her  demand  had  shaken  her,  I 
suspect,  almost  as  much  as 
it  had  shaken  me,  but  she 
was  not  cowed. 

of 

“T  have  never  been  in  any  doubt  that  you  despise  me,” 
he  told  her.  She  did  not  deny  it.  A  professional  eaves- 
dropper,  I  nevertheless  felt  uncomfortable.  The  ticking 
of  the  holofield’s  public  notification  seemed  unnaturally 
loud.  “You  can  doubt  my  wisdom  to  your  heart’s  con- 
tent,  madam,”  he  said  more  sharply,  “but  I  hope  you  do 
not  dispute  my  knowledge.” 

“I  do  not.  But  we  are  not  discussing  your  unparalleled 

access  to  the  collective  memory  of  my  ancestors—” 

“They  are  my  ancestors  too,  Early  Bird.” 
“Only  in  diminished  degree.” 
The  Emperor  took  a  deep,  harsh  breath.  “Your  patri-- 

cian  regard  for  heraldry  is  quite  stupefyingly  beside  the 
point.  madam.  Do  you  think 
I  entered  your  gene-line 
because  J  was  hungry  for  personal  prestige?” 

“Why  else?”  Her  voice  was  as  dry  and  parching  as 

a 

desert  wind. 

Coarsely,  Lyric  Music  Stirs  Too  Fierce  the  Heart  said: 
“When  the  entire  universe  is  blowing  itself 
to  buggery, 
the  only  prudent  course  of  action  is  to  be  Emperor  of  the 
whole  goddam  shebang.  As  Emperor,  I’m  the  sfuice-gate 
for  the  energy  of  a  galaxy  of  minds.  As  Emperor,  I’m  the 
of  my  predecessors. 
custodian 
cull  the  barbarians.  TH
You  wish  me  to  use  the  first 

records 
to 

the  psychic 

of 

The  Ballad  of  Bowsprit  Bear’s  Stead 

‘41 

draw  on  the  second  instead  to  prove  why  your  sugges- 
tion  is  an  abominable  stupidity. 

“Twenty-eight  thousand  years  ago,  there  was  an  Em- 

peror  named  Every  Cloud  Has  a  Silver  Lining—” 

“We  do  not  speak  of  him,”  Early  Bird  said  with,  I 

swear  to  you,  a  sniff. 

For  the  first  time,  the  filthy  old  man  laughed.  His  eyes 

rolled  under  their  jutting  brows. 

“I  suppose  you  don’t.  He  died  insane,  after  all,  But  I 
have  his  memories.  It  comes  with  the  job,  madam,  and 
I  can’t  prune  them  off  your  mythic  tree  in  the  interests  of 
neatness  and  convenience.” 

“Lyric,  this  is  in  the  worst  possible  taste.” 
“By  god,  woman!”  He  seized  her  frail,  birdlike  jaw  in 
his  blunt  fingers,  and  I  waited  for  her  skull  to  shatter. 
The  blood  left  her  crumpled  brown  paper  face,  and  she 
gave  a 
shriek.  “You  demand  a  Great  Culling  of 
human  beings,  and  you  find  your  black  sheep  ancester 
too  ignoble  a  topic  for  polite  soirée.  This  is  what  your 
fucking  mad  disgraceful  ancestor  did: 

thin 

“Silver  Lining  took  himself  off  to  the  solitary  moon  of 
a  gas  giant  world  ten  thousand  light  years  from  other 
human  company.  There  he  skulked  for  the  decades  from 
the  company  of 
his  middle  age  to  gibbering  dotage,  in 
fanged  slugs  and  insects  huge  as  clouds,  not  all 
his 
own  imagining.  He  had  fathered  three  children,  daugh- 
his 
ters 
genes.” 

multiplied 

behind 

stayed 

they 

and 

and 

all, 

of 

“At 

last, 

Silver 

disease 

Lining’s 

spiritual 

The  Empress  jerked  her  bruised  jaw  out  of  his  clutch- 
ing  grip,  and  covered  her  face  with  her  own  bony  hands. 
populated 
even  this  bolt-hole  with  enemies  and  lurking  wizards,” 
Lyric  Music  said  inexorably.  “A  solution  occurred  to  the 
lunatic,  finally.  If,  he  could  not  out-run  his  illwishers,  he 
could  at  least  hold  them  at  bay.  He  issued  a  decree  for  a 
festival  of  poets  and  artists...” 
“T  do  not  wish  to  hear  this.” 
“He  summoned  to 

his  gloomy  moon  a  hundred  thou- 
sand  of  the  finest,  most  refined  men  and  women  of  en- 
hanced  sensibility  in 
the  galaxy.  Our  nation’s  numbers 
were  much  fewer  then,  madam.  but  the  highest  flower  of 
its  talent  was  no  less  distinguished.” 

The  old,  old  naked  woman  was  bent  double,  and  she 
keened  with  an  almost  inaudible  register  of  distress.  My

42 

EDGES 

own  fear  was  gone,  now,  and  my  skin  prickled  with  the 
strangeness  of  it.  Lyric  Music  was  speaking  to  her  with 
more  than  words,  I  was  sure;  perhaps  he  was  evoking  in 
her  consciousness  the  demented  phantasmagoria  of 
his 
monstrous  borrowed  memory.  And  the  words  themselves 
were  enough  to  fix  my  attention  utterly. 

“He  brought  them  to  his  thin-aired  world,  and  disposed 
them  one  by  one  on  every  range  of  hills,  beside  the  seeth- 
ing  lakes,  on  islands  and  places  rimed  with  ice.  And  he 
set  them  to  the  making  of  their  arts:  the  weavings  of  col- 
ors  and  textures,  bright  songs  like  lonely,  lovely  birds,  the 
meditation  of  exalted  philosophies.  And  when  he  judged 
that  the  moment  was  right,  when  their  fears  were  soothed 
and 
eternity, 
to 
he  gathered  in  the  power  of  the  worlds  beyond  number  of 
our  nation  and  he  fashioned  ten  thousand  burning  sunlets 
in  the  void—” 

whisper 

opened 

souls 

their 

the 

of 

“No!  No!  Too  bright!” 
“__plasmas  from  a  fusing  star-heart,  and  he  cast  the 
flame  upon  them,  a  small  piece  of  hell  for  each  man  and 
woman  scattered  across  his  moon,  and  as  they  blazed  up 
in  their  private  infernoes  like  insects  shrivelled  in  a  camp- 

fire—”’ 

shicld 

agony  into 

Early  Bird  screamed,  and  fell  onto  the  floor. 
a 
“the  magus  wove  their 

that 
locked  his  world  away  from  humankind  forever.”  Without 
pity,  the  Emperor  regarded  the  naked  crone  writhing  at 
his  feet.  The  fall  had  been  too  much  for  her  decalcified 
frame;  her  left  arm  had  bent  sideways,  fractured  at  the 
humerus,  and  there  was  something  badly  wrong  with  her 
clavicle.  Possibly  her  pelvic  girdle  had  cracked  as  well. 
Keening,  Early  Bird  brought  her  knees  up  and  her  bony 
buttocks  pointed  at  me.  With  a  blend  of  profound  shame 
and  clinical  fascination,  I  noted  that  the  poor  bitch  had 
long  ago  suffered  a  prolapsed  uterus,  and  massive  piles 
stood  out  like  a 
of  greasy  knuckles.  Early  Bird  had 
earned  her  pride  and  her  dignity.  The  old  galactics  bred 
their  star  gene-line  dams  well  into  their  ninth  decade. 

fist 

Lyric  Music  knelt  down  carefully  beside  his  moaning 
wife.  Cerenkov  radiation  flared  in  his  palms  as  he  straight- 
ened  her  broken  bones.  Obviously  there  was  nothing  he 
could  do  for  the  tissues  which  nature  had  ruptured.  He 
helped  her  to  her  feet,  but  his  expression  remained  stony. 
“There  will  be  no  Great  Culling,  madam.  If  you  wish

The  Ballad  of  Bowsprit  Bear's  Stead 

43 

to 

kill 

barbarians, 

all 

shall 

never 

forgive 

detestation. 

understand?” 

you  must  use 
their  own  methods. 
I  doubt,  though,  that  they  will  be  terribly  eager  to  sell  you 
Weapons.” 
Holding  herself  away  from  his  touch,  Early  Bird  stared 
at  him  with 
“{ 
you 
for  what  you  have  just  done.” 
“It  was  necessary  to  make  you  understand.  Do  you 
She  refused  to  reply.  Her  hatred  was  palpable. 
“You  are 

the  same,”  the  Emperor  said  dismally, 
“You  use  power  with  no  concern  for  its  source  or  its  laws. 
Silver  Lining  turned  an  entire  world  into  a  pustule  of  poi- 
son  we  can  never  lance,  and  you  would  have  me  do  the 
same  to  the  galaxy.  Magic  is  not  a  tool  you  can  use  and 
discard.  It 
is  ourselves.  It  casts  back  our  actions  upon 
ourselves,  like  a  barbarian  mirror  reflecting  the  light  from 
our  faces.  Our  nation,”  he  said,  sharpening  each  word 
like  a  blade,  “is  rotten  through  and  through.  It  is  time  to 
dismantle  it.  Now  go.” 
The  Empress  vanished.  Lyric  Music  sat  with  his  legs 
spread,  elbows  pressing  his  knees,  kneading  his  fingers. 
After  a  moment  he  vanished  as  well,  and  I  stood  alone 
in  the  sweat-stinking  hut. 
My  telephone  rang. 
“This  is  Roger,  your  Life  Support  System.  I  didn’t  think 
bell  might 

you'd  want  to  be  interrupted;  I  figured  the 
throw  our  subject  off  his  stride.” 

“Yeah.  Use  the  microwave  link  if  anything  big  blows 
up  while  Lyric  Music’s  here.  Roger,  I  could  really  use  a 
drink.” 

“Won’t  be  much  longer,  the  Earth  fleet  has  just  entered 
planetary  orbit.  Bowsprit,  something  has  come  up.  The 
robots  must  have  tuned  their  detectors.  They're  aware  of 
our  presence  at  an  interactive  level.  Smith  has  been  nos- 
ing  around  the  bear  pelt.  Oh  shit,  he’s  picked  it  up.” 
“Fire  Goddess!”  I  yelped,  and  ran  for  the  exit. 

That  bear  had  been  with  me,  you  understand,  almost 
from  the  beginning.  How  well  I  recall  capturing  him,  a 
snuffiing  cub,  and  toting  him  home  triumphantly  to  the 
village.  He  was  the  last 
of  the  animals  our  people  ever 
sent  on  the  great  pilgrimage,  and  I 
still  believe  that  the 
abandonment  of  that  tradition  has  been  a  grave  impov-

44 

EDGES 

erishment of  our  way  of  life.  No  doubt  you  think  me  an 
incorrigible  fogey. 

I  was  twenty-four  then,  and  our  village  had  shifted  to 
the  mountains  of  Hokkaido  after  our  ancestral  home  in 
Sakhalin  cracked  into  three  pieces  and  sank,  spewing  lava 
and  superheated  steam  into  the  ocean.  A  terrible  year  for 
fishing.  The  Okhotsk  Current  went  crazy.  Lustrous  and  I 
were  on  the  slopes  of  Fujiyama  at  the  time,  where  I  was  . 
taking  accelerated  courses  in  the  new  meron  physics.  My 
eldest  son  had  not  yet  been  weaned,  and  when  he  flew 
back  to  help  settle  the  survivors  Lustrous’  breasts  were 
still  rich  with  milk.  My  village  had  lost  their  bear  in  the 
disaster,  and  I  chivvied  the  men  into  coming  in  search  of 
another. 

Fiercely  cold  was  the  snow,  and  the  bamboo  gaunt  and 
flattened.  We  clambercd  blindly  through  territory  none  of 
us  had  hunted  before,  carrying  only  bows  for  arms.  When 
I  saw  the  yellow  marks  in  the  snow,  the  breath-spoor  of 
the  hibernating  bear,  I  called  the  others  to  a  halt  and  dis- 
persed  them  to  their  posts.  I  wrapped  my  head  in  thick 
cloth,  fingers  frozen  and  heart  thumping,  and  crept  into 
the  beast’s  den  with  my  knife.  The  animal  was  dormant, 
and  there  were  two  cubs  curled  against  her.  I  rousted  her 
out  of  her  hole  with  cries  which  terrified  me  as  much  as 
her,  booting  her  in  the  arse  as  she  turned  blindly  to  find 
a  locomotive,  dogs 
me.  Once  started,  she  went  out  like 
yapping  around  her,  arrows  thudding  into  her  hide,  the 
men  bellowing  like  a  gang  of  yahoos.  One  cub  jolted  after 
her,  tumbling  in  the  snow;  the  other  I  captured  with  little 
enough 
my 
adopted  son. 

complaint. 

creature, 

biddable 

was 

He 

a 

tell 

her 

shared 

the  cub 

breasts,  I 

Lustrous  loved  him.  She  took  Woodchip  off  the  teat  as 
it  could  be  managed,  but  for  a  time  my  son 
quickly  as 
you 
and 
us, 
the  name  we  gave  the  cub;  he  has  travelled  ahead  of 
and  it  would  be  impolite.  He  was  a  sturdy  little  fellow, 
all  truth, 
with  his  baggy  skin  that  seemed  a  fur  coat  in 
his 
small  eyes  gleaming  with  the  promise  of  wisdom  in 
broad  head.  He  quickly  knew  us  for  his  family,  and  I  do 
not  think  his  sharp  teeth  ever  bothered  my  wife’s  long 
nipples. 

will  not 

We  had  two  more  children  by  the  time  he’d  grown  large 
enough  for  the  cage.  Or  was  it  only  one,  my  eldest  daugh- 
ter?  That  must  be  it:  two  children,  one  bear.  You  have

The  Ballad  of  Bowsprit  Bear’s  Stead 

45 

When  the  Feast  of  Sending  Forth  came  at 

lost  so  much,  my  smalls,  in  giving  up  that  rite.  He  ate  at 
the  hearth  with  us,  taking  the  lid  delicately  from  the  millet 
pot  and  scooping  up  as  much  as  his  appetite  called  for.  I 
taught  my  youngsters  that  he  was  the  mirror  of Aeoina, 
the  “Person  Smelling  of  Man,”  who  came  among  us  in  the 
times  of  fable  and  bore  back  to  the  gods  a  human  attush. 
last,  the 
Iomande  maratto,  my  beautiful  Lustrous  lingered  for  a 
time  on  the  edge  of  a  psychotic  break.  Perhaps  you  are 
right,  my  sproggies.  Perhaps  the  price  of  our  message  was 
too  great.  As  the  bear  waxed  fat,  squatting  cheerfully  in 
his  cage,  poor  Lustrous  lost  her  taste  for  food.  I  lay  beside 
her  in  the  nights  of  that  September,  while  she  shivered  and 
wept,  and  I  traced  the  tattoos  of  her  mouth.  There  I  had 
gashed  her  skin  with  an  obsidian  knife,  and  rubbed  in 
soot  to  complete  her  passage  into  womanhood;  now,  it 
seemed,  it  was  her  very  soul  which  had  been  lacerated. 
I  told  her  of  the  honor  this  meant  to  her  adopted  child.  I 
took  her  to  the  cage  where  every  day  we  praised  our  bear 
and  passed  him  wine  to  drink  and  begged  him  to  carry 
no  good. 
only  good  reports  of  our  hospitality. 
Lustrous  bit  her  tongue  and  redoubled  her  tears,  wresting 
herself  from  my  grip  and  fleeing  home,  throwing  herself 
before  the  lilac  inua  fetish  in  the  northeast  corner  of  the 
hut. 

did 

It 

kids, 

On  the  day  of  the  feast,  though,  she  was  resigned.  With 
the  other  women  she  baked  a  tangy  meal  of  dumplings 
and  spicy  cakes,  and  set  it  before  us.  I  went  privately  and 
whispered  to  my  bear,  and  now  found  myself  overwhelmed 
with  grief.  I  patted  his  narrow  snout  and  gave  him  the 
and  then 
stored  away  from  the 
confections  I'd 
I  turned  away  with  my  eyes  blurry  and  went  inside,  and 
shaved  the  beard  from  my  neck  with  a  nicked,  rusty  ra- 
zor,  and  hacked  the  hair  from  my  forehead  and  shaved 
the  stubble  clean.  The  children  were  singing  when  I  came 
out  into  the  luminous,  cloudless  day;  the  women  swayed 
and  clapped  their  hands,  inducing  trance.  It  was  a  glori- 
ous  misery.  One  by  one  the  other  men  came  from  their 
huts,  skin  pale  and  bloody  where  they  had  shaved  their 
foreheads.  We  danced,  crying  to  our  fetishes,  striking  the 
ground  hard  with  our  feet,  begging  the  bear’s  forgiveness, 
calling  for  his  advice.  Arrows  whistled  between  us,  blunt 
His  paws 
and 
myself  laugh-
went  up 

striking  the  bear  in 
protect 

stinging, 
to 

his 
I  found 

cage. 

face. 

his 

46 

EDGES 

ing,  reaction-formation,  and  I  ripped  a  bow  from  some- 
body’s  hands  and  flung  an  arrow  at  my  son. 

I  do  not  think  I  was  fully  conscious  when  we  ran  to  the 
cage  and  dragged  the  stunned  animal  out.  He  had  drunk 
much  sake,  §  suppose  he  was  drunker  than  us.  He  wad- 
dled  between  us  on  his  clumsy  back  legs,  and  waited  pa- 
tiently  as  we  lashed  him  upright  to  a  post  and  jammed  a 
chunk  of  wood  in  his  jaws.  My  cousin  Valid  handed  me  a 
pole;  together,  we  strangled  the  bear  into  insensibility. 
Something  was  placed  in  my  hand.  It  caught  the  sun’s  au- 
tumnal  brilliance.  I  had  carried  the  same  blade  with  me 
into  the  den  when  I  had  captured  this  winter  cub. 

He  died  without  pain,  without  waking.  His  spirit 

as- 
cerded,  carrying  our  messages.  Now  he 
is  walking  the 
earth  in  a  new  body,  hungry  for  honey,  rollicking  in  snow 
drifts. 

We  caught  every  drop  of  his  blood  and  drank  its  salty 
into  our  beards  and  hair  until  we 

warmth,  smearing  it 
took  on  the  guise  of  a  party  of  axe-murderers. 

chief’s 

Lustrous,  like 

pelt,  when  the  feast 

all  the  women  who  have  given 

a  bear 
suck,  grew  quiet  and  strangely  patient  in  the  years  that 
was 
followed,  My  uncle  took  the 
done  and  the  bear  brought  through  the  shattered  east 
window  of  the 
hut,  and  had  it  tanned.  Shortly 
after  that  last 
of  the  great  feasts  I  was  called  away  to 
continue  my  studies,  and  took  up  my  role  finally  as  the 
Bear’s  Stead,  walking  the  endless  paths  of  the  vacuum 
fluctuations,  and  in  that  sacred  duty  I  was  comforted  al- 
ways  by  the  warmth  of  my  bear’s  brown  saggy,  baggy 
pelt.  If  the  robots  messed  with  him,  I’d  strip  the  bastards 
down  for  junk. 

Purple  dusk,  under  a  mandarin  star  flecked  with  sun-spot 
whorls.  They  were  gone.  Distant  crashing  in  the  afternoon 
forest,  diminishing.  I  pelted  through  the  grass  toward  the 
trees,  cursing. 

A  vertigo  whir  in  the  pit  of  my  brain  made  me  stum- 
ble.  My  Liss  had  shifted 
to  microwave,  two  gigahertz 
straight  to  my  soft  neuro-tissues.  The  power  was  too  low 
his  imposed  and  disem- 
for  anyone  else  to  pick  it  up; 
bodied  voice  demodulated  in 
the  asymmetrical  synaptic 
array  of  my  cortical  rind,  and  [I  “heard”  him  without  any 
difficulty.  Generally  the  process  is  illegal,  and  I  wouldn’t 
recommend  it  anyway;  it  can  make  your  nose  bleed.

The  Ballad  of  Bowsprit  Bear’s  Stead 

47 

“This  is  Roger,  your  Life  Support  System.  You'll  never 
catch  them  on  foot.  Hang  on  a  moment  and  I'll  change 
our  co-ordinates.  Okay?” 
“T  hear  you,”  I  said. 
“Ive  found  the  band  they’re  talking  to  one  another 
for  one-to-one  tran- 

on,”  Roger  said. 
scription,  but  I  can  slow  it  down  for  you.” 

“It’s  way  too 

fast 

“Put  it  on,”  I  said,  chafing. 
“Scrawniest  animal  I’ve  ever  seen.  It  seems  to  have  no 

internal  organs.” 

oO 

“I  don’t  get  any  EEG,  Smith.  I  think  you've  killed  it.’ 
“Oh  Jesus.”  A  pause.  “Maybe  it’s 
a  symbiont. 
Maybe  the  primary  creature  moults.  You  know,  sloughs 
off  its  outer  skin.” 

not 

“If 

I  didn't  know  better,  Smith,  P’'d  place 

it 

in 

the 

Ursidae  family,  from  back  in  the  USSR.” 
my 
jingoistic 

you 
most  obdurate, 

“Christ, 

Marx, 

really 

the 

get 

You're 
ever...” 

goat  sometimes. 
reductionist 
T’ye 

An  indigo  jump.  The  robots  faced  each  other  at  the -lip 
of  a  cliff,  with  nothing  beyond  them  but  bruised  sky.  We 
stood  on  rock,  blue-grey  basalt, 
the  kind  formed  when 
lava  vomits  up  red-hot  and  poisonous  from  a  world’s  guts 
and  quenches  fast: 
hard.  A  laser 
reference  beam  speared  out  from  the  belly-button  of  the 
huge  columnar  robot, 
scanning 
spread- 
eagled,  slowly  rotating  pelt. 

glassy  and  hard, 

my  airborne, 

it’s 

“That’s  my  property,  you  son  of  a  glitch,”  I  screamed. 
“Put  it  down  at  once.  What  the  fuck  do  you  think  you’re 
playing  at?” 

There  was  a  noisy  guffaw  inside  my  head,  which  turned 
1  heard  the  robots  say 

into  a  peal  of  laughter,  Through  it, 
with  startlement: 

“It's  the  ghost.” 
“He's  angry,  but  at  least  he’s  not  dead.” 
“T  never  thought  the  ghost  was  dead.  I  was  talking 

about  this...” 

They’d  completed  their  conversation  Jong  before  the 
Liss-slowed  transcription  ran  out,  and  my  bear  bundled 
itself  up  neatly  in  the  air  and  deposited  itself  on  the  rock 
in  front  of  me.  The  robots  edged  closer  together. 

Frustrated  and  enraged,  I  yelled,  “Roger,  is  that  you 
up.”  The  snickering  cut  out

laughing?  Shut  the 

fuck 

48 

EDGES 

abruptly.  I  picked  up  the  pelt  and  shook  it  out.  No  dam- 
age  that  I  could  see.  “What’s  the  joke?” 

Resentfully,  the  Liss  said:  “This  is  Roger,  your...” 
“I  know  who  it 

is,  you  cretinous  dummy.  What  was  so 

funny?” 

“TI  should  have  thought  it  was  obvious.  Didn’t  you  won- 
der  why  the  Smith  robot  has  no  arms?  It  uses  an  external 
pinch  effect  for  manipulation.” 

“So?” 
“Bowsprit,  really—it’s  Adam  Smith’s  Invisible  Hand!” 
I  was  totally  baffled  by  now.  “And?” 
“Mother  of  Fire,”  the  Liss  snapped  irritably,  “you  hu- 
mans  are  so  ignorant.  Look,  it  doesn’t  bear  exegesis.  The 
essence  of  wit  is  concision,  an  unexpected  and  pleasing 
juxtaposition  of—” 

“Explain!”  I  roared. 
In  a  dry,  marked  manner,  Roger  said:  “Adam  Smith 
(1723-90),  b.  Kirkcaldy,  d.  Edinburgh,  proposed  in  his 
‘An  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  and  Causes  of  the  Wealth  of 
Nations’  (1776)  that  the  sum  of  independent  entrepre- 
neurial  actions,  cach  governed  by  self-interest  alone,  tends 
to  an  equilibration  identical  with  maximal  societal  well- 
being.  This  cybernetic  effect  Smith  likened  to  the  benign 
infiuence  of  an  Invisible  Hand,  which...” 

“Fnough.”  Again,  the  Liss 

silent  instantly.  Match 
and  game.  Ears  and  tail.  The  two  robots  were  creeping 
closer  to  me,  somehow  forlorn  and  hang-dog.  I  hung  the 
pelt  over  my  shoulders. 

fell 

“Ahem,”  said  Marx,  sagging  back  on 

its  threadbare 
“Sir  Ghost,  please  accept  our  apo'ogics.  We  hope 
too  much 

not  caused  you 

tires. 
this  regrettable  incident 
mental  anguish.” 

has 

“APs  well  that  ends  well,”  I 

said  gruffly.  My  anger, 
deep  and  seething,  was  all  directed  a’  Poger  now.  It  oc- 
curs  to  me  for  the  first  time,  my  smal's 
that  perhaps  my 
Liss  meant  it  that  way.  He  was  shrewd,  shrewd. 

1  regarded  the 

robots  speculatively,  recalling  Roger’s 
surmise  that  they  were  fifth  columni-ts,  black  hole  time- 
of  mammoth  gravita- 
bombs.  There  wasn’t  any  record 
tional  collapse  in 
but  the  records 
the  immedéat>  tutuce. 
were  such  a  shambles  that  nothing  would  have  surprised 
me.  “Tell  me,  are  you  robots  hard-w'red  to  tel!  the  truth?” 

“Categorically,”  Marx  affirmed  stoutly. 
“If  youll  forgive  me.  sir,’  Smith  added,  “that  was  a

The  Ballad  of  Bowsprit  Bear’s  Stead 

49 

rather  pointless  exchange.  You’ve  run  up  against  the  para- 
dox  of  the  Cretan  Liar,  sir. 
liar,  how  can 
you  trust  a  word  he  says?” 

If  Marx  is 

a 

“Quite  so.” 

I  cudgeled  my  brains.  Stepping  closer,  I 
discerned  a  line  of  print  stamped  into  their  looming  hulls, 
one  in  English,  one  in  Russian,  Illiterate  in  either,  I  asked 
Roger,  “Is  that  the  statutory  warrant  that  these  robots 
are  programmed  to  obey  the  Three  Laws?  Answer  yes  or 
no.” 

“Yes.” 
With  a  note  of  resonant  ritual,  Marx  said:  “We  avow 

our  adherence  to  the  Three  Laws  of  Microprocessors.” 

“First,”  said  Smith,  “  ‘Thou  shalt  love  mankind  with 
thy  whole  mind  and  thy  whole  heart  and  thy  whole  soul.  ” 
“Second,”  cried  Marx,  “  ‘Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbor 

as  thyself.’  ” 

“Third,”  finished  Smith,  clashing  its  heels  together  in  a 

crisp  salute,  “  ‘Thou  shalt  love  thyself.’  ” 

I  was  shaken;  I’d  imagined  the  behemoths  under  the 
control  of  a  more  stringent  algorithm  than  that,  “It  seems 
rather  open  to  interpretation.” 

“Ethics  is  like  that,”  Marx  said.  “It’s  a  Gédel  problem, 
like  the  Cretan  Liar.  Don't  fret,  though,  sir.  We're  situa- 
tionalists,  but  we  opt  from  a  rather  comprehensive  meta- 
physical  consensus.” 

That  seemed  to  dispose  of  the  Trojan  Horse  hypothesis, 
or  at  least  to  put  it  beyond  testing.  There  was  a  lurid 
flash  across  the  sky,  and  a  heinous  booming.  Th:  Glorious 
Republic  was  dropping  down  out  of  parking  orbit.  I  had 
to  get  back  to  Lyric  Music.  My  hand  went  automatically 
to  my  telephone.  Smith  swivelled. 

“Before  you  go,  sir  Ghosi,  we  wonder  if  you'd  settle  a 

private  dispute?” 

“Hurry  it  up,  then.” 
“We've  deduced  that  you’re  a  time-travel'er,  sir. 

I  say 
you’re  from  the  remote  past.  Marx  maintains  that  you 
must  be  from  the  future.  We  have  a  wager  riding  on  the 
matter,  you  see.” 

Fuji-no-yama,  mountain  of  the  Grandmother,  old  Huchi 
the  Fire  Goddess,  came  howling  and  red-faced  into  the 
world  in  a  single  catastrophic  night.  in  285  BC.  Lustrous 
a  sundeck  on  her  southern  s'orc,  she'tered 
and  I 
from  the  cold  wind,  gazing  over  Suruga  Bvy.  the  day  the 
Institute  engineers  first  tore  merons  out  of  the  zero-energy

sat 

in 

50 

EDGES 

vacuum  and  accidentally  ripped  our  birthplace  apart.  Un- 
der  us 
the  earth  rumbled,  shook  the  deck,  tossed  little 
Woodchip  out  of  his  tripod-hanging  litter.  Fujisan  belched, 
mildly.  The  black,  boiling  clouds  out  of  the  north  took 
hours  to  reach  us,  and  by  then  Sakhalin,  old  Karafuto, 
had  wallowed  like  a  butchered  whale  back  into  the  depths. 
Subtract  my  grief  from  that  moment,  my  smalls,  and  you 
might  guess  how  well  the  shock  and  incredulity  which  is 
left  over  serves  as 
a  metaphor  to  my  reaction  at  Smith’s 
easy  question.  J  blinked  at  them  hke  a  puppy  and  said  at 
last,  “What  an  extraordinary  suggestion.  I  am  a  scholar, 
no  more  and  no  less.” 

“A  scholar  you  may  be,”  Smith  said, 

“but  you  are 
clearly  not  from  this  era.  Your  technology's  a  dead  give- 
away.  Of  course  we  can’t  compe!  you  if  you  decline  to 
humor  our  perfectly  reasonable  curiosity.” 

the 

other. 

You  can  see  my  fix.  Whether  I  told  them  the  truth  or 
not,  these  garrulous  buggers  would  bleb  from  one  end  of 
the  galaxv  to 
loop 
Pd 
straight  back  to  the  beginning  of  insertion,  and  the  scale 
of  the  thing  was  so  gross  that  we’d  probably  get  quantum 
hysteresis  locking  us  out  of  the  entire  period.  We'd  never 
find  out  what  happened  on  the  day  the  empire  fell—and 
it  would  all  be  my  fault. 

be  slammed  into 

a 

starships.  You  can’t 

“Would  you  like  to  hear  our  reasoning?”  asked  Marx. 
“You're  not  a  Neanderthal,  though  there’s  a  striking  phys- 
ical  resemblance.  You're  not  from  the  Glorious  Republic 
-—~if  they  had  equipment  of  your  class  they  wouldn’t  be 
farting  around  in 
sir 
Ghost,  because...  well,  for  example,  if  scems  vanishingly 
unlikely  that  spirits  need  little  black  boxes  to 
into. 
Phenotype  too  close  te  human  fer  an  elien,  and  none  have 
ever  been  detected  anyway.  That  leaves  parallel  universes 
and 
the 
first,  paradoxa  against  the  second.  We're  rooting for  the 
conservation  laws.” 

time-travel.  Conservation 

militate 

against 

spirit, 

laws 

piss 

be 

a 

Their  logic  was  shot  to  shit,  but  it  held  up  well  enough 
in  terms  of  their  contemporary  physics.  It  didn’t  leave  me 
any  choice. 

aKay,  guys,  Pil  come  clean.”  |  an  authority  into  my 
voice:  “Under  the  provisions  of  the 
Three  Laws,  I  bind 
you  both  never  to  divulge,  whether  by  action  or  implica- 
tion,  the  conjectures  you  have  advanced  about  me,  or  the 
facts  I  shall  now  reveal.”

The  Ballad  of  Bowsprit  Bear’s  Stead 

51 

“Freedom  of  Information!”  Smith  protested. 
“A  nation  which  hampers  the  free  flow  of  data,”  Marx 

cried  vehemently,  “is  a  nation  in  chains.” 

“That’s  rich,”  I  said,  “coming  from  you  two.” 
“That  was  in  the  past,”  Smith  said  in  an  injured  tone. 

“Circumstances  alter  cases.” 

“The  dialectic  has  moved  on,”  added  Marx.  “Now  that 

the  negation  has  negated  the  negation—” 

“Be  quiet,”  I  told  them.  “Do  you  understand  my  stipu- 

lation?” 

“Naturally,  but  we  don’t  have  to  like  it.” 
“Tm  a  historian  from  the  future.” 
Marx  crowed.  Snarling,  Smith  booted  it  savagely  in  the 
tire.  “Will  the  Glorious  Republic  win,  or  did  the  Empire 
rally  at  the  last?” 

“Don’t  be  simple-minded,”  I  said.  “The  actual  outcome 
wouldn’t  make  the  faintest  sense  to  you.  History  is  always 
opaque  to  its  participants.  Now  you  can  tell  me  something 
in  return.  Just  a  moment.”  My  Liss  had  announced  him- 
self  in  my  queasy  brain-tissues.  ‘“What  is  it?” 

“Bowsprit,  I've 

been  keeping  tabs 
the  Emperor. 
He’s  been  flashing  from  place  to  place  like  a  demented 
mosquito,  but  now  he’s  back  in 
hut.  And  the  bar- 
barians  have  started  landing.  I  think  we  should  get  back 
to  where  the  action  is.” 

his 

on 

“Hold  it.  Pil  give  you  the  word.”  I  looked  up  again  at. 
Smith’s  towering  presence. 
“I’m 
Smith.  How 
could  you  suppose  that  I’m  from  the  past?  Time  travel 
never  existed  until  my  people  discovered  it.” 

puzzled, 

“Well,  I  thought  you  might  have  been  a  Cro-Magnon 

and  got  it  from  the  Old  Ones.” 
absurd. 

“That’s 

The 

Neanderthals 

travel.” 

never 

had 

time 

“No,  no,  not  the  Neanderthals—those  Old  Ones  who 
led  the  galactics  out  of  the  home  world  when  the  New 
Humans  appeared.” 

I  goggled,  my  smatis,  and  felt  that  first  radiant  crack 
appear  in  my  preconceptions  which  heralds  a  paradigm 
cataclysm.  I  must  have  been  ripe  for  drastic  change;  there 
was  no  strangled  clawing  to  preserve  my  verities.  In  some 
quarters,  this  has  been  attributed  to  my  genius,  Modesty 
aside,  my  sproggies,  it  wasn’t;  simply,  I’'d  taken  such  a 
mental  thumping  that  cognitive  dissonance  seemed  my

52 

EDGES 

natural  condition,  and  impossible  truths  bobbed  on  the 
surface  for  all  to  see. 

“But  you  said  no  aliens  had  ever  been  detected.” 
“The  Old  Ones  are  hardly  ‘aliens,’  ”  Smith  said  primly. 

“Besides,  They’re  all  asleep.” 

“They're  hibernating  under  the 

sands, 

on  the  planet 

Marx.” 

“ve  never  even  heard  of  it.” 
“You  must  have.  Fourth  planet  out  from  the  sun,  in  the 

home  system.” 

“This  is  Roger,  your  Life  Support  System.  It  means 

Mars.” 

“Don’t  you  mean  Mars?” 
“The  Red  Planet,”  added  Roger. 
“The  Red  Planet?” 
“That’s  what  I 

said,  haw,  haw,  haw!”  shricked  Marx 
with  delight,  and  spun  its  tires  wildly  on  the  basalt  shelf. 
Smith  put 
an  end  to  these  comic  capers  with  another 
ringing  kick  to  its  undercarriage. 

“But  seriously,  sir  Time  Traveller,”  Smith  told  me,  “Pm 
surprised  you  haven’t  deduced  the  Old  Ones  yourself.  A 
historian  should  comprehend  the  import  of  chronologies.” 

a  rotten  place  to 

But  the  Martian  orbit 

“Make  it  snappy,  the  Chairman’s  on  the  ground.” 
“Most  of  the  time,  Mars  is 

live.  The 
atmospheric  pressure  is  less  than  one  mm,  and  all 
its  wa- 
ter  and  carbon  dioxide  is  frozen  in  huge  layers  on 
the 
of  eccentricity, 
poles. 
around  point  zero  nine,  so  there  are  massive  precessional 
seasons.  Every  twenty-five  thousand  years  it  swings  into 
the  ecozone,  The  atmosphere  comes  off 
the  poles,  lakes 
form,  ozone  heats  the  air  and  blocks  the  UV.  The  Old 
Ones  come  up  to  the  surface  and  play  god  games.” 

has 

lot 

a 

as  we  can  make  out, 

“They  ...  interfered  with  Honio  sapiens?” 
“You  bet.  Last  summer  was  twelve  thousand  years  ago, 
and  They  stirred  up  the  New  Humans  into  inventing  agri- 
culture.  As  far 
the  New  Humans 
were  a  long  term  project  of  Theirs.  They  got  them  started 
several  seasons  ago,  mutating  them  off  the  original  stock 
by  fuzzing  their  psi  capacities.  That  might  have  been  a 
mistake,  because  it  turned  them  into  a  bloodth uirsty  gang 
of  mothers.  The  Neanderthals  couldn't  hack  it,  so  the  Old 
Ones  lifted  them  out  thirty-seven  thousand  years  ago  and 
gave  them  the  rest  of  the  galaxy  to  play  with.  Now  the 
chickens  are  coming  home  to  reost.”

The  Ballad  of  Bowsprit  Bear’s  Stead 

53 
I  swore  vilely  for  a  while,  and  slapped  my  head  with 
the  heel  of  my  hand,  and  went  over  to  the  edge  of  the 
cliff  and  watched  the  sunset.  Flocks  of  dark  native  birds 
drifted  like  blown  soot  over  the  black  trees.  I  hadn’t  seen 
any  domestic  pets  around  the  Emperor’s  palace,  no  cats 
or  dogs,  not  even  a  trained  parrot.  The  old  galactics  pre- 
ferred  to  domesticate  people.  Had  Lyric  Music  appre- 
ciated  the  ancient  embedded  parallel 
his  borrowed 
action,  when  we’d  met  beside  his  garden  patch?  Into  my 
mind  he’d  snuck,  deft  as  a  thief,  to  pluck  out  our  Ainu 
greeting  rituals.  There’d  been  no  time  for  search,  to  check 
the  catalog;  it  must  have  been  quite  automatic. 

Staring  into  the  darkening  sky  I  put  my  hands  on  the 
top  of  my  skull, 
as  he  had  done,  my  eyes  blurry  with 
anger,  with  truly  bitter  anger,  and  drew  down  my  fingers 
to  the  sides  of  my  face,  stroking  the  heavy  fur  of  my 
beard,  whining  in  greeting  across  the  unspeakable  light 
years  to  my  discovered  masters  and  creators  snug  and 
dreaming  like  hibernating  bears  under  the  frozen  sands  of 
Mars. 

in 

“Hello,”  I  screamed,  pawing  at  my  cheeks.  I  whined 
again,  salutation  of  custom,  the  courtesy  of  two  Ainu 
warriors  met  in 
a  bamboo  trail.  “Hello  there,  you  bas- 
tards,  you  sons  of  bitches,  you  tawdry  gods.  Wake  up,  get 
out  of  bed,  your  experiment’s  proceeding  nicely,  right  on 
time  no  doubt,  hello,  hello,  you  fucking  heartless  shits,” 
and  I  barked  like  a  dog,  I  went  down  on  my  hands  and 
knees  on  the  hard,  hard  rock  and  bayed  a  canine  howl  of 
fury  and  revulsion,  while  the  two  robots  from  old  Earth 
stared  at  me  in  consternation  and  Roger  my  Life  Support 
System  dithered  in  my  uncomprehending  ears. 

Before  the  fall  of  Sakhalin  into  the  broken  sea,  my  grcat- 
est  pleasure  was  in  taking  out  the  dogs  to  fetch  in 
a  haul 
of  fish. 
I  had  a  wonderful  dog  in  those  days,  a  kelpie 
named  Beadle,  true 
of 
our 
Amurian  cousins  in  the  Murray  River  basin,  in  ancient 
Australia.  He  would  stand  forward  proudly  on  the  prow 
of  a  dugout  when  we  surged  out  with  our  lethal  gaffs  to 
hunt  fur  seals,  but  his  great  skill,  and  our  mutual  joy, 
was  to  lead  the  pack  into  the  waves. 

the  animals  bred 

son 

by 

Even  in  the  warmer  months,  when  we  fished,  the  ocean 
waters  bit  like  aconite,  but  the  dogs  never  flinched.  They 
would  run  cheering  and  snapping  ahead  of  us  through  the

54 

EDGES 

dense  bamboo,  churning  up  the  gritty  sand  at  the  shore, 
falling  into  line  at  our  command.  Beadle  went  always  to 
the  head  of  the  righthand  queue,  straining  to  be  off,  ears 
pricked,  never  looking  back,  waiting  for  my  cry.  I  would 
stand  there  between  the  lines 
of  animals,  my  sproggies, 
with  the  salty  wind  in  my  throat,  the  dogs  quivering  a 
hundred  meters  distant  on  either  hand,  and  I  would  give 
the  ringing,  harsh  command,  and  in  they  would  dash, 
slashing  the  waters  in  a  demonstration  of  Euclid’s  arbitrary 
axiom,  and  you  could  sense 
the  deep  shock  of  dread 
which  vibrated  through  the  schools  of  fish  moving  blindly 
in  the  water,  you  could  sense  it  at  the  tendrils  of  your  skin. 
Another  cry,  and  Beadle  would  turn,  sharp  left,  and 
paddle  resolutely  across  the  stinging  tide  toward  the  wheel- 
ing  dogs  that  came  to  meet  him.  Deployed,  then, 
an 
animate  net,  they  would  ride  the  surge  and  wait  for  the 
signal.  I’d  howl  it  out,  and  in  they’d  come  like  torpedoes, 
curving  to  a  crescent,  driving  the  terrified  salmon  before 
them,  driving  the  divine  fish  toward  us.  Then  into 
the 
water  we’d  splash  to  greet  them,  no  tools  in  our  hands, 
scooping  up  the  threshing  chum-fish,  the  sacred  salmon, 
the  gift  they’d  brought  us.  Once  purchased  on  the  sea  floor, 
each  dog  would  dart  and  harry  the  fattest  fish 
ir  sight, 
clamp  it  in  his  tender  mouth,  run  and  deliver  it  up  before 
shaking  off  the  chill  in  a  cloud  of  sparkles.  To  me  would 
Beadle  come,  for  though  we  shared  the 
dogs  without 
ownership  he  knew  me  for  his  master,  and  a  plump  fish 
would  be  my  reward  for  allowing  him  this  sport.  After 
we'd  cleaned  our  catch,  I  always  gave  Beadle  as  many 
heads  as  he  could  eat. 

J  panted  for  a  time,  my  cheek  pressed  to  the  ground. 
“Youre  making  a  fool  of  yourself,  Bowsprit,”  Roger 

told  me. 

“We're  their  doggies,”  I 

said.  “We  fetch  in  their  fish 
while  they  sleep,  and  they  graciously  allow  us  the  heads.” 
Acutely,  Roger  said,  “I’ve  always  taken  you  for  a  re- 
ligious  man,  Bowsprit  Bear’s  Stead.  Would  you  prefer  the 
history 
a 
have 
random  process?” 

been  the  outcome  of 

of  humanity  to 

“Better  than  this,”  I  mumbled. 
T  rolled  over.  For  the  first  time  I  noticed  the  droplets 
of  fierce  light  falling  with  all  their  ominous  threat  into 
Lyric  Music’s  venerable  sanctuary.  Roger  was  pestering

The  Ballad  of  Bowsprit  Bear’s  Stead 

55 

me,  but  I  got  to  my  feet  and  watched  the  starships  make 
planetfall.  Chairman  Pan-Ku  and  his 
staff  were  already 
in  conference  with  the  naked,  complex  savage  who  thought 
he  ruled  all  the  bright  pin-points  which  shortly  would  be 
coming  out  over  my  head  and  the  ones  I  couldn’t  see 
under  my  feet  because  a  world  was  in  the  way.  I  experi- 
enced  the  demented  clarity  of  manic  hysteria,  hard  and 
faceted  and  feverish.  It  was  like  the  euphoria  in  which 
I'd  slain  my  adopted  son,  my  brother  bear,  but  where 
thought  then  had  been  bound  in  the  infrangible  constraints 
of  ritual  it  was  now  exalted,  utterly  disconnected  from 
precedent,  a  mad  surgeon  dismembering  something  warm 
and  breathing  and  unearthly. 

“Roger,  are  we  linked  to  the  robots?” 
“Certainly.  How  else  could  they  perceive  us?” 
“Not  just  information.  Can  we  affect  them?”  Shivering, 
I  pulled  the  bearskin  tighter  about  me.  “Sorry,  of  course 
we  can.  We  already  did.” 

“Right,  when  we  churned  up  Marx’s  black  hole.  Un- 
precedented.  It’s  clearly  a  function  of  Lyric  Music’s  in- 
comparable  magic,  a  direct  consequence  of 
his  psychic 
tapport  with  us.  The  robots  are  tuned  to  him,  and  they’re 
getting  a  feed  through  his  personal  wormhole  mosaic.” 

I 

cold. 

Even  though  my  teeth  were  clattering  together,  I  didn’t 
feel 
feel  anything  much,  my  sproggies. 
“Roger,  can  we  use  that  channel  to  destabilize  the  holes?” 
There  was  a  shriek  of  anguished  remonstration  from  the 
eavesdropping  robots.  I  ignored  them.  ‘‘Roger?” 

didn’t 

After  a  lengthy  pause,  “Bowsprit,  forgive  me  but  you’re 

not  being  rational.  Your  physiological  indicators...” 

“Just  answer  the  question.” 
“Yes,  we  can.” 
My  legs  gave  way,  and  I  sat  down  again  on  the  rock. 
“Three  points.  Can  we  do  it  without  getting  caught  by 
whiplash?  Is 
the 
channel?  And  do  we  have  any  evidence  in  the  historical 
records  of  Marx  and  Smith  still  being  here  after  the  con- 
ference?” 

it  feasible  to  cut  Lyric  Music  out 

of 

“We  don’t  have  any  post-Earth  record  of  them,  period. 
That  could  mean  anything.  If  you  want  to  take  them  out 
you'll 
risk  precipitating  a  temporal  loop. 
But  for  Huchi’s  sake,  Bowsprit,  they’re  Good  Guys!” 

just  have  to 

Wearily,  I  said,  “I  know.  But  they’re  tattletales,  I  can’t 
run  the  risk  of  leaving  them  intact;  Lyric  might  get  past

56 

. 

EDGES 

my  prohibition.”  The  robots  were  keening  pitifully,  met- 
aphorically 
side- 
effects?” 

wringing 

“What 

hands. 

about 

their 

I'd  never  heard  the  Liss  so  bitter. 

“I  can  manage  it.” 
“Do  it.” 
Blue-white  light  flared  like 

clever  machines  went  into 

a  nova.  A  quantum  filter 
kept  it  bearable,  even  beautiful.  All  the  megatons  of  those 
a 
poor, 
millimeter  wide,  straight  up  into  the  sky.  Winds  howled 
in 
and  thunder  hollered, 
When  my  eyes  had  come  back  to  normal  there  was  a 
small  bubbling  lava  pool  on  the  clifftop,  sizzling  with  leaves 
of  the 
ripped  from  the  trees  below,  and  no  sign  at 
robots  from  old  Earth. 

a  superheated  micro-vortex, 

a  pinch  beam  half 

all 

“Are  you  sufficiently  purged?”  the  Liss  asked  snidely. 

“Can  we  get  to  the  conference  now?” 

“Change  of  plan,  Roger,”  I  said.  “Take  me  home.” 
“Whaaat?  Bowsprit,  do  you  know  how  much  this  jaunt 

cost?” 

“T  know.  Move  it.” 
“How  often  do  you  get  to 

history  carved  up?” 

see  the  greatest  empire  in 

at 

“Someone  else  can  do  it,”  I  said. 
“Mission  aborted,”  Roger  sighed.  Through  the  micro- 
the 
I  heard  bat  squeaks,  tiny  flutterings 
wave  link 
back  of  my  tongue:  the  Liss  setting  up  homing  signals 
through  the  Dirac  Ocean,  laying  co-ordinates  for  our  re- 
turn  to  the  future.  So  must  Lyric  Music’s  swollen,  tender 
mind  vibrate  to  the  tachyon  whispers  from  a  galaxy  of 
active  brains.  Was  he  yet  aware  of  the  catastrophic  de- 
or  had  Roger’s  counter-magic 
mise  of 
spared  him  that?  I  imagined  the  pang  of  their  termina- 
tion  going  into  him  like  a  needle,  trembling  his  voice,  his 
hand,  as  he  sat  with  the  New  Humans  as  he’d  planned 
for  decades,  ceding  them  the  Empire. 

his  metal  pets, 

“Done,”  said  Roger.  “Before  we  go, 

I  have  one  thing 
to  tell  you,  Bowsprit,  if  you  can  contain  your  Weltschmerz 
for  a  moment.” 

You  can  believe,  my  smalls,  that  there  was  an  edge  fo 

his  voice. 

“Go  ahead.” 
“Have  you  ever  paused  to  wonder  what  it’s  like  to  be 

me?” 

It  took  me  unawares;  I  laughed  unbelievingly.

The  Ballad  of  Bowsprit  Bear’s  Stead 

57 

“Gods  of  the  hearth!  Spare  me  your  sanctimonious 

allegories.” 

Fallen  starships  burned  victorious  in  the  darkness,  cities 
of  light  and  power.  The  birds,  disturbed,  were  trying  to 
get  to  sleep  against  their  better  judgement. 

“No,  you’ve  never  wondered.”  Was  it  pity 

or  con- 
tempt  I  heard  in  Roger’s  tone?  “Poor  bear  messenger,  how 
insulated  you  keep  yourself!  Always  the  observer,  eh? 
Wrapped  up  in  your  heavy  protective  fur.” 

“Shut  up,”  I  said  shrilly,  the  sound  petulant  even  to  me. 
“T,”  the  Liss  said,  “have  always  known  where  I  came 
from.  Your  people  made  me.  You  put  me  together  from 
micro-laminates  and  you  programmed  me  in  a  factory  and 
you  sent  me  out  to  do  a  job.” 

“That’s  right,”  I  yelled.  “You’re  a  machine.  I’m  not. 

Iam  not  a  machine.” 

“My  thoughts  run  ten  thousand  times  faster  than  yours. 
IT  am  never  deactivated.  While  you  plod  in  your  clumsy 
pedestrian  way  from  idea  to  slow  idea,  I  sing  in  my  soul 
like  a  dolphin.  But  I  do  not  deny  what  I  am.  Yes,  of 
course,  Bowsprit.  I  too  am  a  machine.  Allow  me  to  rec- 
ommend  a  stance  of  adaptive  despair.” 
the  meron  flux, 

We  torqued  into 

grey  banners 

of 

mockery. 

“40s  okay,  brother,”  Roger  said  gently.  “You'll  get  used 

to  it.”

All  I  could  find  within  me  was  the  image  of  my  dog 
Beadle,  alert,  obedient,  gulled.  He  was  a  wonderful  ani- 
mal,  wonderful. 

Carol  Emshwiller  grew  up  in  the  town  of 
Ann  Arbor,  Michigan,  and  was  graduated 
from  the  University  of  Michigan.  She  has 
lived  most  of  her  adult  life  on  Long  Island, 
an  existence  leavened  by  forays  to  such 
places  as  the  MacDowell  Colony,  Rio  de 
Janeiro,  California...  and  by  the  winning 
of  various  monetary  grants  to  further  her 
writing.  Anatole  Broyard  describes  her  work 
as  “a  wilderness  of  economy.”  Emshwiller 
writes  solely  in  the  short  story  mode  and 
ordinarily  eschews  plot  in  favor  of  more 
objective  concerns;  witness  ber  collection, 
Joy  in  Our  Cause. 

There  are  reputed  to  be  a  limited  number  of 
possible  story  situations,  anyhow,  of  which 
boy  meets  girl  is  one.  Boy  almost  meets 
girl  is  another. 

Omens 

BY  CAROL  EMSHWILLER 

Wait. 
Don’t  reach  out. 
Stand  still 

or  whatever  sort  of  spell  there  is  here  on 
2ist  Street  and  6th  Avenue  will  break  before  the 
light 
changes  and  it  says  WALK  in  green  letters.  But  what  can 
happen  after  that  first  glance  except  that  they  go  on,  she 
to  an  Italian  grocery  store 
Ital- 
ian),  he  to  the  nearest  coffee  shop  where  there’s  magic 
in  those  boomerang  shaped  designs  on  the  counter  top, 
magic  where  you  might  walk  through  a  mirror  so  suddenly 
you’d  never  know  you  were  doing  it. 

(she  certainly  must  be 

And  don’t  go  near  those  Spanish-speaking  short-order 

58

  
Omens 

59 

cooks.  He  knows  this.  Hides  his  eyes  with  his  hands  pre- 
tending  headache.  Eats  a  sixth  of 
a  pizza.  Drinks  tea. 
Well,  how  can  a  man  like  that  be  loved  without  casting 
a  spell,  too  big,  too  fat,  too  hairy,  too  old  and  with  one 
secret  lewd  desire.  Count  seven  steps  and  seven  steps  and 
seven  steps  or  nine,  Walk  around  this  particular  block 
three  times  with  umbrella  up  thinking:  Remember  Mother. 
She  had  a  right  to  be  angry  that  last  year  before  she  fi- 
nally  died.  Remember  (vaguely)  almost  dying,  too.  That 
was  the  only  time  ever  held  hands  with  mother. - 

Three  days  pass. 

Another  meeting  is  unlikely,  but  now  he  has  found  him- 
self  standing  next  to  her  at  Nedick’s.  He  spills  mustard  on 
his  beard  and  doesn’t  even  know  it.  Guesses  it,  though, 
but  isn’t  sure.  Beard  always  was  mustard  colored  right 
around  his  mouth  anyway. 

She  avoids  his  face.  (He  sees  that.)  He  doesn’t  have 
his  glasses  on  and  can’t  read  the  runes  on  her  purse.  Cer- 
tainly  she  would  have  liked  to  turn  him  into  a  big  dog 
with  his  fur  full  of  burrs.  He  wears  his  pants  too  low. 
(Everything  he’  owns  is  brown.)  They  don’t  speak. 

It’s  crazy!  Now  they  have  met  in  Macy’s  basement,  both 
buying  identical  black  wool  scarves.  He  smiles.  Frowns. 
Smiles.  Winks.  A  tear  comes  to  that  eye  and  he  turns 
away  to  wipe  it.  When  he  looks  back  he  sees  her  old  tan 
sweater  already  off  into  the  crowds  beyond.  He  waits  for 
his  change  and  then  leaves  in  the  opposite  direction.  It’s 
the  only  thing  to  do.  Sits  hopefully  in  the  front  of  Chock 
Full  O’Nuts  for  twenty  minutes.  Shuffles  back  to  apart- 
ment  in  basement  of  brownstone  thinking  of  Nietzsche  and 
the  Birth  of  Tragedy. 

So,  while  thirty  to  forty  pigeons  mate  in  Central  Park, 
while  six  or  eight  men  are  goosing  women  in  the  subway, 
‘while  the  first  conference  on  prostitution  is  taking  place, 
he  says,  “She  loves  me,  she  loves  me  not,”  breaking  out 
the  teeth  of  his  plastic  comb  and  she  has  a  sudden  head- 
ache  as  though  someone  were  sticking  pins  in  her  doll. 

Think  twice. 
Think  three  times. 

Saturday  maybe  take  ferry  to  Staten  Island.  (He  once 
So,  whispering  a  secret  number,  he

had  a  friend  there.) 

60 

. 

EDGES 

does  that  but  misses  her  by  half  an  hour  because  he  gets 
lost  in  the  subway.  It’s  the  same  on  the  way  back.  Sits  on 
deck  in  the  rain  thinking:  Mother  had  a  right  to  be  angry, 
dying  a  slow  death  every  day  and  not  even  knowing  it 
(but  she  suspected).  And  then  one  tube  down  the  left  nos- 
tril,  needle  in  arm,  etc.,  etc.,  etc.  Nothing  left  but  bones  by 
now.  Teeth  and  hair.  The  boat  hums.  A  sad  guitar  plays 
in 
but  he 
could  feel  that  in  his  knees  before,  anyway.  Thinks:  Me, 
a 
little  thinner,  and  that  girl  “under  a 
sheet,”  as  we  used  to  say  when  we  were  fourteen,  fifteen. 
Ym  very  gentle.  She’s  never  known  anyone  as  gentle  as-I 
am.  Until  suddenly.  And  right  now.  Very  nice.  Just  fine. 
Fine.  “The  best  I  ever  had,”  she  says. 

his  mind.  (Classical),  The  Times  said 

little  younger,  a 

rain, 

Be  the  last  one  off  the  ferry. 
Thinks:  An  encounter  group  might  teach  me  to  touch 

my  fellow  man. 

Dear  Mother;  I’ve  been  having  a  glorious  time.  Brief  mo- 
ments  of  ...  Well,  it’s  wonderful  how  sometimes  the  pe- 
nis...  in  conjunction  with  the  thoughts,  that  is... 

Dear  Mother;  I’ve  moved  to  Florida.  It’s 

a 

lot  better. 

Pve  found  love.  More  than  you  ever  thought  I  would. 

Dear  Mother;  Look  at  me  now! 
Dear  Mother;  In  the  forest  . 
. 

.  the  smell  of  pine  nee- 

dles  blocks  out  all  else.  I  lie  back.  I  shut  my  eyes... 

Dear  Mother;  (May  fourth,  1973  or  1974.)  We  have 

forgotten  all  about  you  by  now.  We  are  happy. 

A  week  goes  by. 

the  garden.  You  are 

He  writes:  Dear  one  who  has  not  read  the  Birth  of 
Tragedy,  (Instinctively  he  knows  this.)  Vi  meet  you  at 
the  movies  at  the  Museum  of  Modern  Art.  We'll  have 
lunch  in 
kindness, 
charm,  all  delicacy,  all  sensitivity.  You  are  artistic,  I  know 
because  I  can  read  faces  like  the  palms  of  hands.  I  also 
see  that  my  own  handwriting  is  ever  optimistic.  But  I 
wanted  to 
tell  you  most  of  all  that,  from  my  lifcline,  I 
know  I  will  die  suddenly  and  in  great  pain.  I  write  you 
this  because  I  want  you  to  know  something  intimate  and 
important  about  me. 

all  goodness, 

A  week  goes  by. 

He  comes  home a little  late  the  next  day,

Omens 

61 

“Ts  that  you?” 
“What?” 
“Listen,  this  is  important.” 
Who  can  that  be? 
“Listen,”  Mother  calls  from  back  room.  (Somehow 
she’s  not  dead  after  all  and  she  still  doesn’t  even  know 
she’s  dying.) 

“I’ve  been  waiting  all  this  time  to  tell  you  this.  I  heard 
it  on  the  radio.  Something  in  the  hot  dogs.  I  forget  what. 
You  should  be  careful.  And  taxis, 
too,  you  should  be 
careful.” 

“Yes.  Yes.” 
“Yesterday  I  thought  I'd  try  to  get  up...” 
But  yesterday  they  robbed  her  of  her  TV  set  and  all 
her  blankets  right  before  her  eyes,  and  they  robbed  him 
of  his  umbrella  and  they  took  the  ten  lucky  silver  dollars 
in  his  top  bureau  drawer.  Tomorrow  they  will  surely  come 
for  the  radio  and  the  leather  bookbag  he  sometimes  car- 
ries  his  lunch  in. 

Dear  Mother;  I  have  moved  to  the  country  ...  toa 
country  where  grown  men  are  crying  every  day  and  drink- 
ing  themselves  into  stupors.  You  wouldn’t  like  it  here  so 
don’t  ask  me  any  questions  about  where  it  is. 

Certainly  she  must  have  gotten  a  second  chance  on  life 
at  the  age  of  fifty-five  or  sixty.  Took  it  in  exchange  for  her 
only  son,  paid  in  advance.  How  did 
it  happen?  “Ray- 
mond,  Raymond,  fat  old  cave  man.”  He  sits  now  in  Cen- 
tral  Park  reading  from  the  Birth  of  Tragedy: 

...  “The  old  tune,  why  does  it  wake  me?”  And 
what  once  secmed  to  us  like  a  hollow  sigh  from  the 
core  of  being  now  merely  wants  to  tell  us  how  “des- 
olate  and  empty  the  sea.”  And  where,  breathless,  we 
a  con- 
once  thought  we  were  being  extinguished  in 
all  our  feelings,  and  little 
vulsive  distention  of 
re- 
mained  to 
to  our  present  existence,  we  now 
hear  and  see  only  the  hero  wounded  to  death,  yet 
not  dying,  with  his  despairing  cry:  “Longing!  Long- 
ing!...” 

tie 

us 

And  she,  who  has  never  read  this,  comes  to  Central 
Park  no  doubt  looking  for  the  simple,  outdoor  life  (as  he 
is)  wishing  there  really  was  a  god  of  the  forest  hiding 
there.  She  will  look  up  at  the  new  buds  and  see  His  face

62 

EDGES 

instead  of  buildings.  He’ll  be  tall,  brown,  thin,  bearded, 
beautiful  and  invisible  ... 

Tall,  fat,  bearded  and  all  in  brown  sits  in  Central  Park 
now  facing  West  and  visible,  though  not  too.  Boy  steps  on 
his  leg.  Dog  pees  on  his  book,  the  Birth  of  Tragedy.  He 
doesn’t  notice  this  till  later.  He’s  talking  to  himself  in  stage 
whispers.  Says,  “If  I  see  two  747s  and  six  regular  planes 
in  the  space  of  half  an  hour,  and  surely  I  will,  then  she'll 
come  ten  minutes  later.”  She  does,  only  she’s  early  and 
she’s  looking  for  a  tall,  thin,  invisible  man  who  peeks  out 
from  behind  the  largest  trees,  and  he,  he  has  his  back  to 
her  and  is  busy  counting  planes.  He  notes  that  the  shad- 
ows  of  the  planes  sometimes  go  right  over  him.  It  can’t  be 
by  coincidence. 

Discovers  peed-on  book,  feels  bruised  leg  and  thinks: 
There'll  be  one  more  bad  thing  happen  before  any  good 
ones  therefore  how  can  they  meet  today?  Thinks:  Mother 
had  a  right  to  be  angry,  dying  a  slow  death  like  that  and 
not  even  knowing  it  until  the  very  last  moment  and  then 
not  any  time  to 
say  what  she  really  meant.  Maybe  I 
should  have  moved  her  to  the  country.  Yes. 

. 

So  it’s  love,  love,  love  and  six  kisses  on  the  surface  of  the 
.  six  kisses  on  the  surface  of  the  water  in  the 
mirror  . 
sink.  He  finds  a  secret  message  in  the  dust  on  the 
old 
upright.  Something  tells  him  THIS  IS  YOUR  LAST 
all  along  anyway.)  Like  a 
CHANCE!  (He  suspected  it 
drop  in  the  barometer,  it  gives  him  a  headache. 

LAST  CHANCE  FOR  WHAT? 
Murder,  rape  or  incest? 
Think  twice.  Can  this  really  be  love? 
And  think  of  it!  Mother  alive  and  fairly  well  and  living 
as  happily  as  could  be  expected  in  the  back  room,  calling 
out,  “Hey.  Hey  there.  Is  that  you?  Is  that  you  out  there? 
Who’s  out  there?” 
No  answer. 
Never  marry  a  woman  with  a  thin  upper  lip.  He  heard 

that  someplace.  Weil,  it  doesn’t  matter  now. 

Is  his  wife  his  mother? 
Or  the  other  way  around? 
Meanwhile  remember  that  condemned  men  are  allowed 
one  last  phone  call,  one  last  good  meal,  one  more  ciga- 
rette,  one  more  jerk-off. 

Sometimes  it  feels  as  though  the  sky  is  full  of  swans

Omens 

63 

. 

. 

a  few  feathers  fall- 
and  the  sound  of  their  big  wings  . 
ing  down.  They’re  hardly  built  to  fly,  but  they  do  it.  Dear- 
est  one,  he'll  write:  You'll  know  me  by  the  way  I  look  at 
you,  by  the  way  I  walk,  my  bulbous  nose.  I'll  be  older 
than  you  expected.  Pll  be  looking  around,  humming.  I 
have  only  one  secret,  unacceptable,  lewd  desire. 
(Nietzsche  loved  his  sister  and  went  mad.) 
Go  on  do  it.  Make  one  magic  gesture  in  that  direction. 
Fill  in  all  the  Os  on  three  pages  of  the  Birth  of  Tragedy, 
but  if  you  miss  one  O  it’s  all  for  nothing. 

Go  on  do  it.  Nobody  looking.  Hand  to  crotch.  Yes, 

somebody  looking.  Oh  well,  some  other  time. 

lose 

an  antique  brooch.  Cairn  Gorm,  they  call 

Stay  away  from  the  river. 
Thinks:  I  already  know  my  future. 
But  no.  That  can’t  be.  Certainly  a  death  one  of  these 
days  and  other  chance  meetings.  She  will  drop  her  purse, 
that 
or 
kind  of  stone.  That  will  make  her  Scotch.  Dear  Scotch 
person;  I’m  a  mild-mannered  man.  I  expect  to  come  into 
a  small  sum  of  money  soon  and  then  Pll  move  to 
the 
country.  Also  you  should  know  that  I  snore.  But  some- 
times  I  can’t  sleep.  I  think  my  breath  smells.  My  teeth 
need  attention.  My  mother  is  dead. 

But  wait.  He  must  have  gotten  the  right  combination  for 
once  because  right  here  in  his  room,  after  having  blacked 
out  dozens  of  Os,  his  back  to  the  light,  and  having  mut- 
tered  forbidden  words  that  a  long  time  ago  his  mother 
said  not  to 
say,  there  she  is.  Not  Her,  though.  A  tall, 
blonde,  silent  creature  with  eyes  like  a  fox.  This  will  be 
an  episode  in  his  life  he  ought  to  forget. 

He’s  wary.  She's  wary,  too.  Not  a  single  word. 
He  tells  himself  she’s  no  human  being.  Can’t  be,  so  it 
doesn’t  matter.  Any  kind  of  strange  and  secret  desires  OK 
under  these  circumstances.  Get  her  to  come  at  him  from 
behind  with  that  that  he  keeps  for  these  purposes.  (He 
remembered  to  bring  a  lubricant.)  For  a  minute  he  knows 
he  doesn’t  love  his  mother  and  is  guilty  of  it  and  of  this, 
too.  (He  can’t  stand  the  sight  of  blood  or  bruises,  so  has 
to  find  other  ways.)  All  night  will  be  $100.  It’s  gone  up. 
All  right.  All  right,  but  not  in  this  place.  “To  hell  with 
you.  To  hell  with  you.  To  hell  with  you.”  She  doesn’t 
mind.  Neither  would  the  other.  It  wasn’t  Her,  though. 

He'll  forget  it  by  tomorrow.

64 

EDGES 

Yes,  of  course,  there  she  is,  the  real  one,  sitting  on  the 
steps  of  the  library  with  her  lunch.  It  must  be  Spring. 
Her  dress  is  a  peculiar  shade  of  purple  and  black  and  he 
wonders  what  it  means. 
LAST  CHANCE! 
“Hello,”  he  says.  “I  saw  you  someplace  recently.” 
Well,  she  doesn’t  want  to  be  picked  up  by  an  older, 

fat  man  with  spots  on  his  tie. 

“Y’m  a  philosopher,”  he  says.  “I  know  the  future.  All 
that  can  happen  is  nothing  happens.  Other  people  have 
a 
babies,  but  not  you  and  I.  Life  or  death,  with  us  its 
long  time  between  events.  Some  people  live  at  a  different 
pace.” 

He  sits  down  very  slowly  while  she  gets  up.  He  supposes 
she  is  thinking  she  won’t  have  lunch  on  these  steps  any- 
more.  This  is  just  like  life,  he  thinks,  no  murder,  no  rape 
or  incest  and  not  even  going  on  a  diet,  shaving  beard  or 
whatever,  but  maybe  getting  robbed  of  a  few  dollars  on 
the  way  home  today. 

And  to  think  that  Mother  continues  to  live  without  ei- 

ther  TV  or  radio! 

Tragedy  is  easy.  A  matter  of  waiting,  sitting  here  on 

the  steps  in  the  sun.

Scott  Sanders  keeps  from  perishing  in  the 
English  Department  of  Indiana  University 
and  has  recently  begun  to  publish  fiction. 
He  has  sold  three  stories:  one  to  New  Di- 
mensions  (“Eros  Passage’),  one  to  Fantasy 
&  Science  Fiction  (“Terrarium”),  and  one  to 
us  (see  below)—all  loosely  grounded  in,  or 
departing  from,  the  novel  on  which  he  is 
working  (also  called  Terrarium). 

Indeed,  if  one  has  lived all one’s 
sulated  from  eyes  and  weather,  in  a  world 
where  fox  and  turtle,  bear  and  beaver,  may 
equally  have  been  imaginary  or  are  extinct, 
it  is  not  easy  to  trust  one’s  instincts. 

life  in- 

Touch  the  Earth 

BY  SCOTT  SANDERS 

The  world  was  so  recent  that  many  things  lacked  names, 
and  in  order  to  indicate  them  it  was  necessary  to  point. 
—Gabriel  Garcia  Marquez 

The  nine  conspirators  took  care  to  vanish  from  Ohio  City 
along  separate  paths.  On  the  agreed  night,  Marn  set  out 
through  the  labyrinth  of  avenues,  carrying  her  fear  as 
if 
it  were  a  dish  of  mercury.  The  last  lights  she  saw  were 
the  neon  signs  at  the  gamepark,  where  the  pedbelt  ended. 
Every  further  step  pushed  her  deeper  into  the  unlit  ruins 
of  the  factories.  Even  in 
the  dark  she  could  sense  the 
refinery  towers,  the  snarl  of  pipes,  the  pumps  with  their 
great  hinged  elbows  jutting  domeward.  The  gritting  be- 
neath  her  boots  told  her  she  had  reached  the  gravel,  and 
there  welling  up  before  her  was  the  shadow  of  the  oil 
tank,  the  meeting  place,  like  a  massive  concentration 
the  darkness. 

of 

She  pressed  her  ear  against  the  tank,  but  could  hear  no 
murmur  of  voices,  no  rumble  of  carts.  What  if  no  one 
else  had  come? 

65

  
66 

EDGES 

Her  face  felt  clammy  behind  the  mask.  As  she  brushed 
her  gloved  hands  over  the  metal,  searching  for  the  drain 
valve,  paint  flaked  away  with  tiny  snicking  sounds.  When 
at  last  she  found  the  valve,  she  hesitated,  a  fist  clenched 
on  each  side  of  the  spoked  wheel.  Behind  her  the  city 
called  and  called.  Twenty-eight  years  of  memory  worked 
in  her,  turned  her  around  to  face  the  dazzle  of  lights. 
Nearby,  the  gamepark  glowed  orange  and  green.  Further 
away  the  biogas  plants  and  agrifactories  flared  yellow. 
at  the  core  of  the  city  where  her  own 
And  further  still, 
the  towers 
chamber  hummed  without  ears 
blazed  upward  like  a  mountain  afire.  Overhead,  the  ped- 
belts  scrawled  their  curves  of  light  against  the  darkness, 
reminding  her  of  the  beaded  trails  left  by  particles  in  bub- 
ble  chamber  photographs.  Crystalline,  glittering  city. 

hear  it, 

Let  go.  That  is  past  now,  dead.  We  will  make  a  new 

to 

place. 

the 

and 

gloves 

She  tugged  at  the  valve  wheel,  then  peered  through  the 
opening  into  darkness.  “It’s  Marn!”  she  cried  into  the  tank, 
louder  than  she  meant  to.  Marn,  Marn  the  tank  echoed 
back. 

Then  light  flared  inside,  and  she  could  make  out  Jur- 
gen’s  shaggy  head  silhouetted  within  the  opening.  “It’s 
about  time,”  he  called  to  her. 

She  slithered  through  the  valve  and  emerged,  blinking, 
suit  were 
the  others  were  all 

inside 
smeared  with  oil.  Six,  seven,  eight: 
here,  muffled  in  their  worksuits  and  gauzy  masks. 

tank.  Her  mask  and 

“Welcome,”  came  Hinta’s  voice, 

and  then  welcome, 
welcome,  all  around  the  echoing  erease-filmed  walls  of 
the  tank. 

Marn  whispered  grectings.  Safe  here  with  the  others, 
surrounded  by  the  crates  and  tools  for  the  settlement,  she 
began  trembling.  The  fear  she  had  balanced  so  carefully 
she  remembered. 
spill.  The  valve, 
now  threatened  to 
After  one  last  glance  back  the  way  she  had  come,  at  the 
city  lights  snared  in  the  opening  like  stars  in  a  telescope, 
she  cranked  the  valve  shut. 

“How's  our  slowpoke  chemist?”  Jurgen  asked.  “No 

problems  coming  over?” 
Marn  shook  her  head. 
“Good.  We're  ready  to  go.  Your  crates  are  the  only 

ones  left  to  check.” 

So  she  had  come  last.  Marn  lowered  her  eyes  until

Touch  the  Earth 

67 
the  man’s  bulky  shape  withdrew.  From  her  sleeve  pocket 
she  took  the  inventory  of  medicines,  catalysts,  acids,  all 
the  chemicals  they  expected  to  need  on  the  outside  but 
would  not  soon  be  able  to  synthesize  there.  While  she 
checked  through  the  list,  the  others  were  pushing  loaded 
dollies  ahead  of  them  into  the  pipeline.  Jurgen  went  first, 
since  he  had  discovered  this  exit  from  the  city,  had  marked 
the  spot  seventeen  kilometers  out  from  the  hermetic  energy 
wall  where  the  pipe  broke  ground.  As  usual  he  wore  no 
hood,  so  his  shaggy  hair  brushed  against  the  top  of  the 
pipe.  Lee  went  next,  then  slouching  Rand  and  waddling 
Norba,  then  all  the  others,  each  one  with  gait  and  posture 
unique  as 
a  thumbprint.  Marn  followed  Hinta  into  the 
pipe,  carrying  the  last  flare  with  her. 
After  four  hours  of  slogging,  their  throats  gasping  the 
stale  air,  the  conspirators  reached  the  spot  Jurgen  had 
marked.  They  all  shouldered  close  to  him,  almost  touch- 
ing,  chests  heaving,  while  his  torch  cut  through  the  steel 
wall  of  the  pipe.  Then  Marn  smelled  them  for  the  first 
time.  Their  animal  smell  seeped  through  the  deodes.  She 
smelled  herself,  She  had  never  been  this  hot,  this  lathered 
with  sweat,  this  lost  in  her  body. 
The  torch  cut  through  the  last  few  centimeters  of  steel, 
and  the  section  of  wall  tilted  outward.  Daylight  blinded 
her.  Tears  seeped  around  her  closed  lids,  yet  she  wanted 
to  look  out,  to  see  the  Earth,  Films  of  the  outside  had 
never  given  her  a  notion  of 
light.  Unfiltered,  it 
poured  down  on  her  like  flame. 
No  one  spoke,  no  one  moved.  Marn  squinted  out  past 
a  haze  of  tears  at  blurred  trees,  boulders,  vines.  She  did 
not  know  the  name  of  anything  she  saw.  Green—a  radi- 
ant  chaos  of  greem  was  all  she  could  make  out.  So  she 
fixed  her  gaze  on  a  single  plant,  its  twin  leaves  canted 
upward  like  awnings,  a  bud  sheltered  underneath,  brown- 
tipped,  potent.  If  she  stared  at  it  long  enough  the  bud 
might  open,  a  flower  might  burst  forth,  proving  in  this 
one  mutation  that  she  really  was  outdoors,  in  the  wilds. 
“Great  God  in  the  morning,”  Jurgen  finally  murmured. 
Marn  let  out  a  breath,  as  if  she  had  come  to  the  surface 
Jurgen  Jeapt  first.  He  thudded  heavily  and  tumbled 
forward  onto  hands  and  knees,  The  rest  followed,  dropping 
gingerly  to  earth.  To  Earth.  Marn  lifted  one  boot,  set  it 
down  again  on  the  littered  soil,  amazed  to  find  herself

after  swimming  underwater. 

this 

68 

EDGES 

actually  standing  on  the  planet.  She  took  a  few  cautious 
steps.  The  others  were  doing  the  same,  shuffling  like  tod- 
dlers.  Giddy,  she  pranced  about.  Her  boots  made  the 
forest  floor  crackle.  The  soil  yielded  beneath  her,  sprang 
back,  resilient.  Her  feet  were  two  miracles  of  lightness. 
She  could  hear  the  others  crashing  through  the  under- 
growth,  their  voices  thrilling  in  high-pitched  squeals.  Her 
eyes  still  watered  from  the  raw  sunlight.  But  she  could 
see  well  enough  to 
it  was  a  young  forest  they  had 
reached.  Few  of  the  trees  were  thicker  than  her  waist. 
The  ground  was  a  tangle  of  briars. 

tell 

Jurgen  came  lumbering  toward  her,  pawing  the  green- 
ery  aside.  “Great  glorious  God  in  the  morning!  Let’s  get 
that  stuff  unloaded.  Let’s  build.” 

By  late  afternoon,  all 

“Where?”  Marn  asked. 
“Anywhere.  Any  blessed  where!” 
“We  need  water.” 
“Then  let’s  find  water.”  And  he  went  crashing  away, 
ignoring  the  briars  that  ripped  at  his  suit.  In  half  an  hour 
he  was  back,  with  news  of  a  lake.  His  gloves  were  slick. 
of  them  working  with  hoods 
thrown  back,  masks  steamy  from  sweat,  they  had  cleared 
a  space  on  the  shore  and  inflated  the  dome.  Only  Jurgen 
kept  lugging  packets  from  the  supply  crates 
the 
dome  was  sealed.  The  other  eight  sheltered  inside,  panting, 
thankful  for  the  vault  overhead,  the  relief  from  sunlight 
and  green.  Through  the  translucent  skin  of  the  dome  Marn 
watched  Jurgen’s  bulky  shadow  pass  with  arms  loaded. 
“We've  got  to  take  this  in  small  doses,”  she  called  out 

after 

to  him.  “Leave  it  for  tomorrow.” 

Jurgen  only  grunted  as 

he  trudged  back  for  another 

load. 

Beside  her,  Hinta  lay  with  milkywhite  hair  spread  in 
a  halo  against  the  somber  brown  of  the  polycloth  floor. 
“He  told  me  once  it  was  the  aching  made  him  feel  alive,” 
she  said. 

“He'll  kill  himself,””  Marn  said. 
“Not  Jurgen.”  Hinta  rolled  onto  her  side,  propped  her 
head  on  an  arm  bent  at  the  elbow.  Her  neck  showed  pale 
beneath  the  edge  of  the  mask.  “He’ll  be  the  last  of  us 
to 
die.” 

“Why  should  we  die?” 
“You  expect  to  live  forever?” 
“I  thought  you  meant  we’d  die  soon,  out  here.”

Touch  the  Earth 

69 

a  map  of  tube-lines  converging 

“Who  knows?” 
Lying  back  on  her  water-cushion,  Marn  stared  up  at 
the  point  in  the  vault  where  all  the  arched  sections  of 
the  dome  met,  like 
on 
Ohio  City.  She  imagined  the  city  as  a  vast  printed  circuit. 
Its  eighteen  million  people  might  have  been  so  many 
electrons  shuttling  in  a  web.  She  would  already  be  fading 
from  the  memories  of  the  few  who  knew  her  back  there, 
displaced  by  video  images,  flushed  away  by  neuroes  and 
chemmies.  “Did  you  leave  anyone  behind?”  Marn  asked 
the  other  woman. 

“Everybody  I  care  about  is  right  here,”  Hinta  answered. 

“And  you?  Do  you  miss  anybody?” 

“No,  not  really.  I  don’t  know.  Maybe  a  few  people.” 
“People  whose  faces  you’ve  seen?” 
“A  few,”  Marn  admitted. 
“People  you  even...  touched?” 
Marn’s  tongue  felt  prickly,  like  a  limb  gone  to  sleep. 

“No  one.” 

“I’m  sorry.”  Hinta  lay  quietly  for  several  minutes,  then 
cautiously  reached  out  her  gloved  hand.  Hearing  the  slither 
of  fabric  on  fabric,  Marn  rolled  away  beyond  reach. 

Outside  the  dome  Jurgen’s  shadow  Iurched  past,  loaded 

down  like  a  robot  porter. 

By  nightfall,  even  Jurgen  retreated  to  the  dome.  Dousing 
all  but  one  small  flare, 
he  took  his  place  among  the 
others,  who  were  lying  down  on  their  sleep-cushions,  their 
bodies  arrayed  like  spokes  with  feet  pointing  toward  the 
center  of  the  dome. 

Despite  the  near-darkness,  Marn  rolled  away  from  him 
before  removing  her  work  mask  and  hood  and  gloves. 
She  paused,  feeling  the  breath-moistened  air  on  her  face. 
Then  she  covered  herself  with  the  sleep  mask  and  lay 
down. 

realized 

Instead  of  sleeping  she  listened  to  the  others  breathing. 
Once  she  heard  them,  their  animal  noise  was  deafening. 
At  first  she  thought  they  only  seemed  loud  because  she 
had  never  slept  near  more  than  one  person  before.  Then 
she 
a 
background  of  silence.  No  electronic  hum,  no  whirr  of 
haulers  on  the  pedbelts,  no  blare  of  loudspeakers.  As  the 
others  drifted  into  deeper  sleep  their  breathing  hushed, 
and  the  silence  thickened.  Marn  felt 
she  could  almost 
gather  it 
in  her  hands,  taste 
this  dense  silence.  She

she  heard  their  breathing  against 

that 

it, 

70 

EDGES 

a  seed  encased  in  the 
imagined  the  wheel  of  bodies  as 
dome,  the  dome  encircled  by  forest,  the  forest  by  conti- 
nent  and  oceans,  and  so  on  outward  in  ever  larger  circles 
until  Earth  and  solar  system  and  Milky  Way  were  encom- 
passed  by  the  ultimate  circle  of  creation. 

For  the  next  eight  days  Marn  would  not  leave  the  dome. 
She  mixed  the  starter-culture  for  the  bio-digester,  and  ran 
tests  on  all  the  samples  of  fiber  and  soil  and  water  the 
others  brought  in  to  her.  But  she  would  not  remove  her 
gloves  or  throw  back  the  hood  or  venture  one  step  be- 
yond  the  closed  skin  of  the  dome.  She  bathed  in  the  vat  of 
purified  water.  At  night,  she  dosed  herself  with  histaphones 
and  immunies.  Dopey  from  the  drugs,  she  slept  behind 
a  screen,  her  ears  plugged,  and  she  dreamed  of  pacing 
in  her  chamber,  where  there  were  no  eyes  or  weather. 
Still,  she  woke  in  the  mornings  with  the  word  wilds  rest- 
ing  on  her  lips  like  the  sediment  of  a  nightmare. 

“It’s  the  outside  shock,”  Jurgen  reassured  her.  “Same 
thing  the  sea-miners  get,  and  the  health- patrollers.  We've 
all  suffered  from  it.  Don’t  worry,  it'll  pass.’ 

Marn  glared  sullenly  back  at  him,  and  went  about  her 

work. 

Then  on  the  ninth  day,  at  sunset,  she  forced  herself  to 
go  out.  The  countryside  was  luminous.  For  a  long  time  she 
stood  on  the  threshold  of  the  dome,  fighting  against  her 
all  her  clothes  and 
dread.  Maybe  she  should  throw  off 
swim  in  the  lake,  drown  her  fear  by  yielding  completely 
to  the  waters,  the  disorder.  The  thought  made  her  shudder. 
She  turned  her  back  on  the  lake.  But  the  forest  was 
no  more  comforting,  with  its  drool  of  vines,  its  explosions 
of  leaves.  Only  the  newly-made  works  of  the  settlement 
reassured  her.  Above  her  head  the  solar  panels  swivelled 
to  catch  the  last  slanting  rays  of  sunlight.  The  windmills 
whirred  overhead,  sucking  power  from  the  breeze.  Every- 
where  she  looked  around  the  clearing  she  saw  blueprints 
come  to  life:  the  filtration  tanks,  the  methane  generator, 
the 
six  domes  for  meditation  and  mindwork  clustered 
around  the  large  central  dome  like  bubbles  on  a  pool.  A 
network  of  glass  pathways  already  crisscrossed  the  settle- 
ment. 

Marn  chose  the  widest  path  and  followed  it  with  her 
head  bent  down.  The  etched  green  surface  of  the  glass 
she  could
rasped  against 

her  boot  treads;  through  it, 

Touch  the  Earth 

71 

vaguely  make  out  the  underbed  of  pebbles.  This  artificial 
green  held  her  eyes,  kept  her  from  seeing  the  anarchy  of 
green  that  overhung  the  path. 

When  she  finally  looked  up  she  found  herself  a  few 
Meters  from  the  pipeline.  The  slab  which  Jurgen  had  cut 
away  still  lay  in  the  weeds,  its  unpainted  inner  side  bright 
with  rust.  She  scuffed  at  the  redness  with  her  glove.  Oxides. 
Nothing  rusted  in  Ohio  City. 

She  pressed  her  hooded  ear  against  the  sun-warmed 
pipe,  listening,  unsure  what  she  wanted  to  hear.  The  purr 
of  float  cars  coming  after  them?  The  ticking  gears  of  the 
city?  The  hum  of  her  own  abandoned  chamber? 

She  could  hear  nothing.  ‘No  one  would  come  for  them, 
she  felt  certain, 
so  long  as  they  stayed  outside,  never 
broke  the  seal  around  the  city.  You  could  lapse  into  wild- 
ness,  but  you  could  not  return,  with  your  germ-smeared 
skin  and  your  eyes  saturated  in  green. 

“Thinking  about  going  back?” 
The  voice  jerked  Marn  away  from  the 

pipe.  Hinta 
stood  on  the  path,  her  mask  askew,  her  gloves  grimed 
with  dirt.  “Just  listening,”  Marn  answered. 

“Listening?”  Hinta  repeated  the  word  skeptically. 
“Well,  aren’t  you  ever  tempted?”  Marn  said. 
“Sure  I’m  tempted,  everyone’s  tempted,  to 

go  back, 
where  every  inch  of  life  is  measured  out.  Where  every- 
thing  is  made,  while  out  here’—arms  sweeping  wide,  her 
milky  hair  flaring  out  as  she  turned—“out  here,  nothing’s 
made.  It  just  grows.  It  just  is.” 

Watching  her,  Marn  felt  that  Hinta  might  be  the  first 
one  she  could  touch,  a  woman  like  herself,  less  alien,  Jess 
coarse  and  brutish  than  a  man.  The  swirl  of  her  hair 
seemed  as  uncanny  as  the  dusk-lit  trees.  Voice,  sweep  of 
arms,  eyes,  everything  about  her  crackled  with  the  same 
fierce  energy. 

Later  that  night,  when  all  nine  sat  on  their  water- 
cushions  planning  the  next  day’s  work,  Marn  spoke  for 
the  first  time  of  her  dread. 

The  others  nodded,  admitting  their  own  fears.  Even 
Jurgen  confessed,  “I 
still  have  to  squint  everytime  I  go 
out  through  that  hatch,  so  I  only  see  a  little  of  the  chaos 
at 
a  time.”  He  bent  forward  to  spread  his  huge  gloved 
palms  on  the  floor.  “But  I  know  we  can  make  it. 
I  know 
it.  We’re  going  to  survive  here.  All  we  have  to  do  is  touch 
the  earth.”  A  surge  of  emotion  jolted  his  body.  “Touch

72 

EDGES 

the  earth!”  he  shouted,  and  yanked  the  mask  from  his 
face. 

Marn  was  too  dazed  by  his  naked  eyes  to  understand 
what  was  happening.  Then  Hinta  lifted  her  mask  away, 
then  Sol,  then  Norba  and  Jolon,  and  soon  Marn  found 
herself  pushing  the  molded  husk  loose,  flinging  it  aside, 
gaping  at  the  others  with  bare  face.  She  had  only  seen  a 
dozen  people  raw-faced  before,  and  then  only  after  months 
of  ritual  preparation.  Now  suddenly  here  were  eight  more, 
and  she  was  too  ashamed  and  dazzled  to  gaze  at  them. 

Everyone  bent  forward,  palms  spread  on 

floor, 
chanting,  Touch  the  earth.  It  scared  her,  the  raw  flesh  all 
around,  the  earth  itself  only  a  few  millimeters  beneath 
her  hands.  Dirt.  Things  lived  in  it. 

the 

air  and  sky.  Sometimes  as 

she 
She  began  to  trust  the 
worked  outdoors  she  would  find  herself  in  a  drowse,  sat- 
urated  with  the  heat,  her  mind  gone  out.  In  the  seventh 
week,  while  searching  through  the  woods  with  Jurgen  for 
some  damp  place  where  water  gushed  from  the  rocky  soil, 
she  had  to  keep  waking  herself  from  this  sensuous  drowse. 
“We  want  our  fishpond  fed  by  a  spring,”  Jurgen  ex- 

plained,  “Pure  water,  deep  down-under-rock  water.” 

At  last  they  found  a  spring,  in  a  ravine  where  someone 
pit.  At  the  center  was  a  jumble  of 
long  ago  had  dug  a 
wet  stones  scummed  over  with  moss,  and  around  the  bor- 
ders  of  the  pit,  where  water  gathered  in  puddles,  there 
was  a  sprinkling  of  tiny  blue  flowers.  Jurgen  had  a  way 
of  stooping  over  any  new  plant,  screwing  up  his  slate-grey 
eyes  in  an  effort  of  memory,  and  then  telling  Marn  its 
ancient  name.  “Butterworts,”  he  announced.  “How’s  that 
for  a  name?  They’re  waterlovers.” 

Marn  felt  her  own  face  mirroring  his  pleasure.  She  had 
not  gone  without  a  mask  long  enough  to  learn  to  control 
her  features,  so  the  emotions  swirled  across  her  face  un- 
checked,  as  wind  swirled  on  the  lake. 

Circling  the  pit,  they  gauged  the  work  necessary  to  make 
it  into  a  fishpond.  Uproot  the  brush  and  saplings,  seal  the 
basin  with  clay,  roof  it  with  a  sun-bubble.  But  first  they 
would  need  to  clear  away  the  rock. 

“It  seems  a  shame  to  disturb  them,”  Marn  said.  “The 

moss  is  so  brilliant  green,  the  little  flowers  are  so  blue.” 

“Butterworts,”  Jurgen  insisted. 

He  seeemed  intent  on 
using  the  old  names  for  these  frail  earthly  things  which 
had  forever  been  sealed  outside  the  walls  of  Ohio  City.

Touch  the  Earth 

73 

So  Marn  repeated  the  word:  “Butterworts.” 
His  black-bearded  jaw  wagged.  Turning  to 

his 
if  to  enwrap  her,  he  said  wonderingly, 

her, 

arms  spreading  as 
“And  look  at  that.” 

She  flinched  back  a  step,  shuddering,  not  yet  ready  to 
embrace  even  delicate  Hinta,  much  less 
this  ponderous 
man.  But  then  he  lumbered  past  her,  arms  swung  wide, 
boots  gouging  at  the  bank  of  the  ravine,  until  he  stood 
at  the  base  of  an  immense  tree,  The  grey  bark  of  the 
trunk  flaked  away  in  fist-size  chips  to  reveal  lighter  green 
bark  underneath,  as  if  the  tree  were  shedding.  And  higher 
up,  where  the  branches  canopied  .against  the 
the 
underbark  showed  through  like  the  pale  skin  of  something 
newly  born. 

sky, 

“A  sycamore,”  Jurgen  cried, 

sycamore,” 
turning  the  word  over  with  his  gruff  voice.  And  he  actu- 
ally  hugged  the  tree, 
his  cheek  against  its  leprous 
bark. 

“sycamore, 

laid 

“Jurgen,  that’s  ridiculous.” 
“But  just  look  at  it.  Open  your  eyes.” 
“So?  A  big  tree.” 
“But  a  sycamore,”  he  repeated,  as 

. 

if  the  name  alone 
should  astonish  her.  “They  used  them  for  butcher-blocks. 
To  cut  up  meat.” 

Marn  turned  away  in  disgust.  Meat.  Blood.  Her  stomach 
churned.  And  that  was  the  way  of  laboring  with  Jurgen: 
one  minute  he  made  her  feel  easy  in  the  outdoors;  the 
next  minute  he  sickened  her. 

Even  his  stony  eyes  could  see  her  disgust.  “You’re  be- 

ing  city,  pure  city.” 

“I’m  just  being  human.  Not  animal.” 
His  mouth  tensed  for 

lips  were 
clean  of  the  bristling  fur.  Then  he  swatted  the  air  once, 
as  if  to  brush  her  away:  “Forget  it.  Let’s  work.” 

an  answer.  Only  his 

They  leaned  their  tool-packs  against  the  trunk  of  the 
scabby  sycamore,  between  two  roots.  Scuffling  down  the 
bank,  trampling  through  the  blue  dust  of  flowers,  Jurgen 
was  the  first  to  reach  the  pit’s  bottom  and  the  damp  rocks. 
He  grabbed a  stone,  then  another  and  another  in  a  frenzy, 
and  heaved  them  out  of  the  gully.  Marn  picked  her  way 
down  the  bank,  wary  of  his  flailing  elbows  and  fists. 
didn’t  mean—-”  The  words  dried 

“Listen, 

her 

on 

I 

tongue. 

His  eyes,  grey  and  rough  as  the  stones  he  was  heaving, 

 
74 

EDGES 

fixed  on  her  for  a  moment,  then  returned  to  his  work.  As 
he  hefted  the  next  rock,  there  was  a  blur  of  movement— 
like  an  end-knotted  rope  snapping  taut  and  jerking  back 
on  itself.  Clutching  the  rock,  mouth  open,  he  gazed  at 
his  arm. 

“Jurgen?” 
“Bite,”  he  answered  incredulously. 
“Bite?”  She  tried  to  think  what  he  could  mean.  Only 

people  bite.  “Rock  cut  you?” 

“Something  bit  me,  damn  it.  Bit,  bit.  With  teeth.  You 

understand?” 

She  watched  in  bewilderment  as 

he  unsnapped  the 
sleeve  at  his  wrist.  He  folded  the  cloth  back,  bared  his 
forearm  inch-by-inch.  She  forced  herself  to  look  at  his 
skin,  as  they  had  all  promised  to  look  on  one  another 
nakedly,  to  trust  one  another  with  their  bodies.  There  was 
the  same  coarse  hair  that  covered  his  jaw.  Bunchy  mus- 
cles  netted  with  veins,  ugly  blue  seams  full  of  blood.  And 
there  near  the  elbow  were  twin  rows  of  puncture  marks, 
like  pin-pricks,  and  two  larger  purplish  holes. 

Bite,  she  kept  telling  herself.  Then  from  some  recess 
her  memory  retrieved  the  word:  snake.  Impossible.  Stu- 
pid.  But  that  rope-like  lashing-out,  that  knotted  head 
striking  at  Jurgen’s  arm,  these  perforations  in  his  skin... 
The  idea  made  her  woozy:  “Maybe  it  was  a  snake.” 

“Beast,”  he  swore,  scoffing  at  her.  He  scrabbled  up  the 
bank,  the  wounded  arm  hanging  slack  at  his  side.  Over  his 
shoulder  he  muttered:  “Bitten,  yes.  But  not  by  any  snake. 
Like 
griffins 
They’re  imaginary,  like 
zebras.” 

sea-serpents. 

and 

“No, listen.  I’ve  seen  them  in  glass  boxes  at  the  dis- 

neys.” 

“Right  between  cages 

ele- 
for 
phants.”  He  slumped  against  the  piebald  sycamore.  His 
outstretched  legs  in  their  coveralls  looked  like  two  more 
knotty  tree  roots.  “They’re  all  mechanoes,  Marn.  Auto- 
mated  fantasies.” 

dragons 

flying 

and 

“But  some  of  those  creatures  used  to  be  alive,  out  here, 
back  in  the  twentieth.  Didn’t  you  ever  read  the  signs 
below  the  cages?”  She  looked  away  from  the  repulsive 
the 
wound,  trying  to  remember  her  childhood  trips 
disneys.  ‘Some  of  the  labels  said  imaginary.  Some  said 
extinct.  Poisonous.  Some  of  the  snakes  were  extinct,  I’m 
sure  of  it.  They  used  to  be  out  here,  they  used  to—”

to 

Touch  the  Earth 

75 

Jurgen  laughed  harshly,  his  chin  thrust  upward  by  pain. 

“You  mean  they  were  alive?” 

“Rasy,  easy” 
“They  were  real,  and  they  swallowed  all  our  pesticides 

and  herbicides,  and  they  survived?” 

Hysteria  rasped  in  his  voice.  Was  this  how  the  poison 
worked?  Or  was  this  the  outside  madness,  that  insanity 
her  tutor  threatened  would  possess  anyone  who  spent  so 
much  as  an  hour  beyond  the  city  walls? 

“And  more  of  their  own  poison  in  them  than  we  could 
spray  on  them,”  Jurgen  kept  on.  “Think  of  it,  the  whole 
woods  filled  with  snakes!” 

“The  dome,”  she  urged  him.  ‘““We’ve  got  to  get  you 

back.” 

“And  if  snakes,  maybe  some  of  the  others,  too.”  His 
eyes,  already  squinting  from  the  pain,  squeezed  tighter  in 
his  effort  of  memory,  as  he  searched  for  names.  “Fox. 
Turtles.  What  else?  Bears.  The  dam-builders—what  were 
they?—beavers.” 

Marn  didn’t  want  to  remember  those  cages  in  the  dis- 
neys.  The  forest  already  seemed  to  be  crawling  with  crea- 
tures  she  had  thought  were  long  dead.  Al!  the  terror  she 
had  felt  when  she  first  looked  out  across  the  lake  rushed 
back  over  her.  It  was  madness  to  have  left  Ohio  City. 
Stifling  or  not,  life  back  there  was  at  least  known.  Nothing 
could  lash  out  at  you.  Nothing  ever  crept  up  on  you  with 
a  secret  load  of  poison.  Beneath  her  worksuit  the  flesh 
was  twitching. 

“Jurgen,”  she  said  as  calmly  as  she  could,  “we’re  both 

losing  control.  We  have  to  get  back  to  the  dome.” 

He  grunted.  “True.”  But  instead  of  moving  he  gazed  at 
his  wounded  arm.  The  lacerated  flesh  was  turning  purple, 
the  skin  from  elbow  to  wrist  was  puffy.  “Amazing,”  he 
said.  “Some  creature  did  that  to  me.” 

“Jurgen,”  she  pleaded. 
“Right.”  His  legs  jerked  back  and  forth  over  the  ground, 
but  they  would  not  lift  him  up,  as 
if  they  had  lain  too 
long  among  the  tree  roots.  His  weakness  embarrassed  her 
now,  as  his  strength  had  always  embarrassed  her. 

“PIL  call  the  others.”  She  groped  among  the  tumbled 

packs  for  the  talkie. 

Jurgen  shook  his  head.  “No.  Body  still  works. 
I'll 
walk,”  Finally  he  dragged  the  legs  under  him,  lifted  him-

76 

EDGES 

to 

a  crouch,  back  against 

the  sycamore,  “Stupid 
self 
head,”  he  grumbled.  “Stupid  dizzy.”  A  point  of  fear  glis- 
tened  at  the  center  of  his  dilated  eyes. 

she 

Avoiding  those  eyes, 

said,  “Gloves.”  He  obeyed, 
lifting  both  hands  toward  her,  and  she  braced  her  feet 
against  a  root  and  tugged  with  all  her  strength.  Through 
the  two  layers  of  syntho  gloves  she  could  sense  his  fingers 
curling  fiercely  against  hers,  alive. 

Once  upright,  he  staggered  a  few  steps 

by  himself, 
crushing  the  flowers  whose  names  he  had  taken  such  care 
to  teach  her.  “Can’t  see.  Fool  legs  won’t  work.” 

Without  thinking  she  eased  her  shoulder  against  his  side, 
slipped  an  arm  around  his  back,  braced  him  with  her 
body,  and  they  lurched  ahead.  His  weight  grew  with  every 
step.  But  she  wouldn’t  let  go,  not  even  when  his  head 
lolled  against  her,  not  when  his  beard  rasped  her  cheek. 
She  could  feel  his  quick,  frenzied  panting  against  her  ribs. 
Before  she  knew  it 
she  was  panting  in  sympathy.  It’s 
faintness,  she  told  herself.  The  poison.  Shock.  He'll  for- 
give  me  for  holding  him. 

By  the  time  they  reached  the  dome  she  was  too  numb 
with  fatigue  to  worry  about  their  intertwined  bodies.  But 
the  startled  expressions  on  Hinta  and  Sol  brought  back 
all  her  shame. 

“Snake  bit  him,”  Marn  explained,  short  of  breath. 
Sol  murmured,  recoiling. 
“Outside  madness,” 

Even 
if  to  shove  them 

Hinta  raised  her  gloves,  palms  out,  as 
away. 

“Just  help  me  get  him  inside.” 
*Dome?”  Jurgen’s  voice  rose  brokenly.  The  good  fist 
stone- 

with  the 

pawed  at 
eyes, 
roughened  glove.  “Can’t  see  a  thing.” 

scuffing 

flesh 

his 

his 

That  drew  both  Hinta  and  Sol  out  of  their  daze.  To- 
gether  with  Marn  they  lugged  him  through  the  vacu-lock 
into  the  dome,  laid  him  on  his  sleep-cushion.  The  swollen 
arm,  mottled  with  scarlet  and  purple,  made  Marn  feel 
nauseous.  But  she  forced  herself  to  fold  his  sleeve  higher, 
to  ease  the  swelling. 

“Jurgen,”  she  spoke  close  to 

his 

ear.  “We'll  care  for 

you.  You'll  forgive  the  touching,  if  we  help  you?” 

His  answer  came  in  a  mumble:  “Sure,  sure.  Touch,  go 

ahead.” 

The  sharp  point  of  fear  still  glinted  from  his  eyes.  His 
shivering  made  the  water-cushion  tremble.  Marn  drew  the

Touch  the  Earth 

17 

cover  to  his  chin,  tucked  it  around  his  head,  leaving  only 
the  wounded  arm  exposed.  “Hurry,”  she  whispered  to  the 
other  two.  “He’s  in  shock.” 

Only  Hinta,  busy  sorting  through  the  medicine  file, 
could  hear,  for  Sol  was  outside  calling  news  of  the  emer- 
gency  to  the  other  five. 

: 

“Snake  bite?  You  said  snake  bite?” 
Impatient  with  her,  Marn  said,  “Believe  me.  I  saw  it. 

Just  code  it  in,  see  if  there’s  an  antidote.” 

the 

medical  console. 

Quickly  Hinta  slipped  off  her  gloves  and  typed  the  im- 
As  Marn 
plausible  message  on 
watched  the  slender  naked  fingers  dance  on  the  keys, 
desire  uncoiled  in  her.  She  found  herself  yearning  for  the 
hundredth  time  to  make  her  first  contact  with  this  swift- 
moving  woman,  so  easy  in  her  body.  But  instead  here  was 
Jurgen  stretched  out  beside  her,  his  body  cumbersome  and 
rough. 

“Archives,”  Hinta  muttered.  “Jurgen’s  got  himself  hurt 
a  way  so  ancient  it’s  stored  in  the  blessed  archives.” 
in 
it 
She  punched  the  new  code,  then  read  the  answer  as 
glowed  up  from  the  console  in  yellow  lights.  Lower  the 
at  the  elbow  to  keep  down  swelling,  slit  the 
arm,  bind  it 
skin  at  both  fang  marks,  suck  the  venom  out.  Easy,  so  far. 
But  then  she  read  the  final  instructions:  “Doctor  imme- 
diately.  Administer  anti-venin.” 

“Which  we  probably  don’t  have,”  Marn  said. 
Hinta’s  fingers  played  over  the  keys  again,  paused.  She 
shook  her  head,  the  milk-white  hair  swirling  round  her 
face.  “Idiot  machine  synthesizes  antidotes  for  every  in- 
dustrial  poison  ever  invénted.  But  natural  poisons—noth- 
ing.” 

Jurgen  broke  his  delirious  babbling  long  enough  to  say: 

“Thought  they  were  all  dead.  Ghost  bite.” 

“Easy,  easy,”  Marn  whispered.  She  fumbled  with  the 
bandage,  trying  not  to  cut  off  blood-flow  at  his  elbow.  Her 
gloves  seemed  coarse  against  his  wounded  skin,  cruel,  and 
so  she  drew  them  off  and  touched  him  with  her  bare 
hand.  The  shudder  of  that  contact  ran  through  her  whole 
body.  But  she  had  no  time  to  savor  it,  or  brood  on  it. 

Hinta  passed  her  the  antiseptic  swab,  then  the  scalpel. 
Only  fear  kept  Marn  working,  made  her  slice  through  his 
skin,  expose  the  flesh.  Meat,  the  same  as  any  animal. 

“Now  where’s  the  syringe?” 
“I’m  looking.”

78 

EDGES 

Marn  waited, 

waited. 
under  her  hands.  “Hurry.” 

Jurgen  grew  unnaturally  still 

Hinta  opened  and  shut  the  medical  cases  with  angry 
clacking  noises.  “Somebody  ate  the  stupid  thing.  It’s  not 
anywhere.” 

Marn  let  her  body  think  for  her.  “Quick,  type  another 

question.  See  if  the  venom  is  a  stomach  poison.” 

“Why  do  you—?” 
“Just  do  it.” 
Clicking  of  keys.  Then  Hinta  answered,  “No,  only  a 

blood  poison.” 

Marn  looked  down  at  Jurgen,  his 

eyes  barely  open, 
nothing  but  the  white  showing,  his  mouth  a  wheezing  hole 
of  blackness  in  the  beard,  “Jurgen,  I’m  going  to  suck— 
I'm  going  ...”  She  couldn’t  finish  the  sentence.  But  it 
didn’t  matter,  because  he  was  beyond  answering.  Another 
archaic  word  clamored  at  her:  unconscious.  Not  to 
be 
asleep,  because  you  can’t  be  wakened.  Not  to  be  under 
chemmies  or  neuroes,  for  you  can’t  counteract  the  stimu- 
Jant.  Unconscious,  out  of  control. 

She  studied  the  festering  wound.  Each  stit  oozed.  The 
skin  seemed  ready  to  split  from  the  pressure  of  swelling. 
the  others?”  Hinta  whispered  near 

“Maybe  wait  for 

her  shoulder. 

Marn  waved  her  away.  She  kept  her  eyes  open  as  long 
as  she  could  stand  it,  to  guide  her  as  she  bent  down  over 
the  arm.  Pressing  her  lips  to  one  fang  mark,  she  sucked 
gingerly.  The  first  trickle  of  fluid  on  her  tongue  made  her 
gag, 
Blood.  Then  she 
sucked  again  at  the  wound.  desperate  to  clean  it  out.  to 
finish  this, 
so  she  could  stumble  away  and  be  sick,  scrub 
her  lips  with  disinfectants. 

violently. 

and  she 

Poison. 

spat 

Soon  the  others  were  crowding  into  the  dome,  murmur- 
ing  questions,  carrying  with  them  in  the  folds  of  their  work- 
suits  the  smells  of  wood  and  dirt.  Marn  heard  the  word 
snake  taken  up  and  muttered  from  ear  to  ear,  as  if 
it  were 
an  incantation.  So  many  bare  faces  bent  over  her  made 
her  reckless.  She  sucked  and  sucked,  gagging  and  spitting. 
until  the  others  were  shocked  into  silence.  When  she  could 
draw  nothing  more  from  the  wound  she 
sat  back,  her 
mouth  sticky  with  blood  and  snake  juices.  “What  are  you 
gawking  at?  You  rather  he  die?” 

They  all  squatted  on 

their  sleep-cushions  while  Marn 
stayed  with  Jurgen,  her  hand  on  his  wrist.  The  acrid  taste

Touch  the  Earth 

79 

seared  her  mouth  and  lips.  Yet  she  felt  a  connection  with 
this  man,  as 
in  pressing  her  face  against  him  a  circuit 
had  been  closed,  power  had  surged  round  and  round  be- 
tween  them. 

if 

“We  don’t  have  the  right  medicine,”  Hinta  was  explain- 

ing  to  the  others. 
“How  serious 

is 

it?”  Coyt  demanded.  His  wet 

eyes 
shifted  from  face  to  face  around  the  circle.  Here  was  our 
expert  on  the  wilds,  Marn  thought  bitterly,  and  he  hadn’t 
said  a  word  about  snakes.  But  immediately  she  knew  that 
was  unfair.  Who  could  truly  know  the  wilds?  What  did 
you  ever  see  of  them  in  Ohio  City?  The  books  said  noth- 
ing,  and  the  tutors  merely  filled  you  with  dread  of  the 
sulphurous 
outdoors. 
mountains,  blank-faced  oceans,  nothing  but  miles  of 
in- 
human  emptiness.  You  could  learn  about  this  forested 
and  rivered  world  only  by  hearsay,  through  the  old  folks, 
ot  through  tedious  hours  in  the  archives. 

only  showed  deserts, 

The  video 

“See 

for  yourself,”  Marn  answered.  Jurgen’s  mouth 
catch  a  drop  of  something.  His 
side, 

discolored, 

lay 

his 

at 

sagged  open  as 
naked  arm,  ballooned  and 
twitching  beneath  her  fingers. 

to 

if 

Coyt’s 

moist 
wounded  arm.  “Yes,  I  see.” 

gaze 

lingered 

for 

a  moment  on 

the 

“The  question  is,”  Hinta  continued,  “do  we  take  him 

back  or  not?” 

“And  give  it 

all  up?”  The  acid  scars  on  Jolon’s  cheeks 

reddened  from  her  anger. 

Voices  jumbled  together  too  quickly  for  Marn  to  sort 
them  out.  The  sensations  from  her  hands  commanded  all 
her  attention.  She  could  feel  the  matted  hair  of  his  arm, 
faint  and  rapid,  through  an 
so  strange, 
artery  on  the  inside  of  his  elbow.  Could  a  heart  pump  so 
fast,  through  so  huge  a  body?  He  bulked  on  his  water- 
cushion  like  a  fallen  tree. 

and  the  pulse, 

When  Marn  could  separate  the  voices  again,  Rand  was 
saying:  “It'd  take  two  of  us  to  haul  him  through  the  pipe- 
line.  Or  we  might  locate  a  health  patrofler.” 

“And  the  Medical  Squad  would  be  here  in  ten  minutes 
with  cages  and  neurochems.”  The  flaming  red 
scars  on 
Jolon’s  cheeks,  the  tension  in  her  body,  the  balled  fist  on 
either  knee  announced  to  everyone  she  had  no  intention 
of  going  back. 

Heads  nodded  in  agreement  all  around  the  circle.  Marn

80 

EDGES 

knew  they  were  right.  Any  visit  to  Ohio  City  would  end 
the  experiment,  probably  land  them  all  in  quarantine  for 
twelve  months.  But  she  wanted  the  choice  made  clear: 
“And  if  he  dies?” 

No  one  answered.  Except  for  the  strain  showing  in  their 
faces,  the  others  might  have  been  meditating,  or  dreaming 
under  chemmies.  Marn  remembered  the  vows  she  had 
taken  with  them  back  in  that  echoing  oil  tank,  to  live  out- 
doors  for  a  year,  for  a  whole  cycle  of  seasons,  before 
voting  to  stay  or  return.  And  she  hoped  the  others  were 
remembering  Jurgen,  whose  arms  and  mind  had  always 
been  the  first  to  shove  aside  every  obstacle.  Jurgen,  with 
sawdust  on  his  beard,  proclaiming  to 
all  the  astounding 
properties  of  wood.  Jurgen,  refusing  to  use  deodes  to  mask 
his  sweat,  laughing  when  the  others  wrinkled  their  noses 
at  him. 

Marn  spoke  deliberately.  “It’s  not  worth  him  dying. 

Nothing’s  worth  it.” 

Sol  pinched  his  upper  lip  between  thumb  and  fore- 

finger.  “We  knew  there’d  be  accidents.” 

“That’s  the  reason 

there’s 

ten 

of  us—redundancy,” 

Coyt  added. 

They  seemed  to  be  speaking  an  alien  language.  Marn 
could  not  connect  their  words  to  this  body  panting  beneath 
her  outstretched  hand.  Maybe  the  poison  had  filtered 
through  the  walls  of  her  stomach  and  unbalanced. her 
mind.  Can't  see,  she  kept  hearing  him  cry  out,  kept  seeing 
those  mitts  claw  at  his  inflamed  eyes.  Her  own  vision  be- 
gan  to  dizzy.  The  others’  faces  blurred  together,  until  they 
all  seemed  to  her  like  clones  of  the  same  hostile  person. 
For  the  first  time  in  weeks  she  longed  for  her  mask,  to  hide 
herself. 

Then  she  heard  Hinta’s  voice,  and  recognized  once  a- 
gain  the  quick-darting  eyes  and  high  cheekbones.  “I  don’t 
think  Jurgen  would  want  this  creature—this  snake—to 
drive  us  back  indoors.” 

Her  eyes,  which  usually  made  Marn  think  of  sky,  now 
made  her  think  of  ice.  “Look,  it’s  not  a  log  here.  It’s  not  a 
broken  machine.  It’s  Jurgen,  don’t  you  see?” 

“We  know,  Marn,  we  know,”  Hinta  soothed.  “Calm 
yourself.  We’re  not  forgetting  him.  He’s  why  I’m  here, 
and  why  I’m  going  to  stay  here.” 

Marn  looked  at  the  other  woman  sharply. 
“Vote,”  Jolon  insisted,

Touch  the  Earth 

81 

“Vote,  vote,”  rose  in  murmurs. 
“All  right,  then,”  Hinta  said.  “Do  we  take  him  back?” 
Like  the  others,  Marn  hid  one  hand  in  her  lap,  thinking 
furiously.  Vote  one  raised  finger—or  her  closed  fist?  That 
was  the  computer’s  binary  choice,  yes  or  no,  too  stark  for 
human  questions.  How  could  she  let  him  die,  the  first 
person  she  had  ever  touched  nakedly?  And  yet  this  was 
why  they  had  ceme  outside,  to  get  back  in  touch,  with  one 
another  and  with  the  Earth.  Return  to  Ohio  City  would 
be  death  of  another  kind. 
“Time,”  Hinta  called. 
As  Marn  lifted  her  hand  along  with  the  others,  her  fist 
closed  of  itself,  squeezed  tight  as  if  to  keep  hold  on  some- 
thing.  Around  the  circle  were  eight  balled  fists,  all  of  them 
saying,  no,  Jurgen,  we  will  not  go  back,  His  panting, 
the  frantic  pace  of  his  heart,  kept  on  and  on,  against  all 
reason. 

The  others  rose  from  their  cushions.  Most  of  them 
padded  away  to  the  vacu-lock  where  their  boots  and  tools 
waited  for  them.  Several  hesitated  near  Marn  for  a  mo- 
ment,  glancing  sidelong  at  Jurgen,  whispering  in  sober 
tones.  If  the  largest  one  of  us  could  fall  so  quickly,  to  a 
beast  we  thought  was  extinct--what  might  happen  to  the 
rest  of  us?  That  is  what  Marn  heard  in  the  overtones  of 
their  whispers,  what  she  read  in  their  taut  faces  as  they 
withdrew  again  to  the  day’s  chores. 

Only  Hinta  stayed  behind.  Her  eyes  were  no  longer  ice, 
had  become  sky  again,  a  softer  blue.  As  she  lowered  her- 
self  beside  Marn  her  weight  set  up  languorous  waves  in 
the  water-cushion.  The  two  women  rocked  softly  against 
one  another,  shoulders  touching.  Neither  drew  back.  “So 
we  wait,”  Hinta  said. 

“We  wait.” 
“He  might  live.  Just  to  spite  the  city.  Show  them  he 
can  survive  outdoors,  do  without  their  fancy  medicines.” 
Marn  wanted  to  squeeze  her  face  against  that  milk- 
white  hair.  But  her  lips  were  still  gummy  with  Jurgen’s 
blood.  Beneath  her  hand  his  frantic  pulse  shredded  away 
the  minutes. 

After  a  while  Hinta  stirred.  “Come  on,  there’s  no  sense 
sitting  here  brooding.”  Rising  with  a  pliant  sensuous  un- 
folding  of  her  legs,  she  punched  a  code  into  her  talkie. 

Moments  later 

Sol  ambled  through 

the 

vacu-lock. 

“News?”

82 

EDGES 

“No.  He’s  the  same.  How  about  you  sit  with  him,  keep 
him  warm,  spoon  him  some  cardio  if  he  comes  to?” 
Marn  caught  the  small  word:  if. 
“Sure,”  Sol  replied.  “And  Marn?” 
“She’s  coming  with  me.”  Hinta  drew  on  her  gloves, 
tucked  her  hair  into  the  collar  of  her  worksuit.  “Some- 
body  still  has  to  move  those  rocks,  clear  that  spring.” 

“No,”  Marn  shook  her  head.  “The  rocks  can  wait.” 
“Marn.” 
“T  can’t  just  leave  him.” 
“And  staying  won’t  do  him  any 

good.  You'll  only 
wreck  yourself.  And  we  need  you,  we  need  everyone.” 
Hinta  waited  by  the  vacu-lock,  boots  half  snapped,  one 
hip  thrust  out  in  a  challenge  Marn  could  not  decipher. 
there’s 

code  you  if 

Sol  urged. 

“Go  on,” 

“Ill 

any 

change.” 

Marn  knelt  over  Jurgen,  hesitating.  Every  breath  set 
her  fingers  tingling  on  his  throat.  The  pulse  seemed  to  be 
slackening  its  pace,  growing  stronger.  And  a  half  moon  of 
stone-grey  iris  showed  under  each  eyelid.  What  if 
he 
should  wake,  now,  and  find  her  hand  on  his  throat,  her 
hair  dangling  down  inches  from  his  face? 

Confused,  she  drew  back  from  him,  lifted  her  fingers 
from  the  warm  skin.  But  she  carried  the  memory  of  that 
touch  with  her  as  she  followed  Hinta  outdoors. 

The  rock-strewn  spring,  which  had  seemed  a  kilometer 
distant  this  morning  when  she  was  staggering  with  Jurgen 
back  to  the  dome,  was  only  a  few  minutes’  walk  away. 

“Took  at  the  queer  blue  flowers,””  Hinta  said. 
“Butterworts,”  Marn  told  her.  “And  that’s  a  sycamore,” 

pointing  to  the  gigantic  piebald  tree. 

“Such  weird  names.  Sounds  like  Jurgen’s  teaching.” 
“Yes.”  Marn  scuffled  down  the  bank  amidst  the  tiny 
nodding  blossoms.  The  spring-sodden  dirt  squished  beneath 
her  boots. 

“Flere,  use  this, 

in  case  mister  snake  is 

still  around.” 

Hinta  reached  down  to  her  a  pole  from  the  tool-rig. 

And  mister  snake  was  still  around,  lashing  out  at  the 
pole  as  soon  as  Marn  disturbed  its 
lair.  There  was  the 
same  blur  of  movement,  like  an  end-knotted  rope  snap- 
ping,  and  the  click  of  teeth  against  metal.  The  two  women 
leapt  back,  and  the  snake  withdrew.  Furious,  Marn  real- 
ized  now  why  she  had  come.  She  jammed  the  pole  into 
the  stones  again,  tumbled  a  few,  and  then  out  the  creature

Touch  the  Earth 

83 

gliding  with  sinuous  ease  to 

the  ground.  Its 
slithered, 
wedge-shaped  head  was  the  color  of  copper,  and  its  body 
was  mottled  with  stripes  of  brown.  It  might  have  been  a 
limb  off  the  sycamore,  cast  down  and  given  motion.  Noth- 
ing  in  the  disneys  approached  it  for  grace.  Marn  watched, 
a  forked  tongue  licked  out  between  the 
mesmerized,  as 
fangs,  darting  from  side  to  side  as  if  tasting  the  air. 

Only  when  the  snake  lowered  its  head  and  began  un- 
dulating  away  did  she  remember  Jurgen  lying  unconscious 
back  in  the  dome.  And  for  an  instant  hatred  ran  like  acid 
in  her  veins.  Hefting  the  pole  overhead  she  advanced  on 
the  snake,  tightening  every  muscle  to  crush  it.  But  even 
before  she  heard  Hinta  crying,  “No,  no,  let  it  be!”  she  was 
easing  the  pole  back  down  to  her  shoulder.  The  hatred 
passed,  pushed  out  by  an  emotion  she  could  not  name, 
as  she  watched  the  creature  until  it  glided  out  of  sight 
into  weeds. 

“He  belongs  here,”  Hinta  said.  “This  is  his  place.” 
Marn  nodded,  half  mesmerized.  Now  that  it  had  van- 
ished,  the  snake  seemed  almost  legendary  again,  an  im- 
possibility.  She  tugged  the  gloves  away,  to  wipe  her  eyes. 
Hinta  removed  her  own  gloves  and  without  a  word  she 

took  Marn’s  hand. 

That  night,  when  Jurgen  sat  up  crookedly  and  demanded, 
‘““Where’s  Marn?  I  want  Marn,”  she  crept  out  of  the  dome 
without  answering. 

Shreds  of  moonlight  glittered  on  the  lake.  Beast-sounds 
were  thick  along  the  shore.  In  the  water  there  might  be 
more  snakes,  or  other  creatures  for  which  she  had  no 
names,  but  she  would  go  in  anyway.  Her  clothes  formed 
a  puny  heap  on  the  glass  walkway,  easily  kicked  aside. 
She  waded  in  with  muscles  tensed,  breath  held,  and 
then  she  recklessly  splashed  forward  as  she  would  in 
a 
bathing  vat.  But  this  was  no  pure  water;  this  was  what- 
ever  fell  out  of  the  sky  and  trickled  off  the  land. 

Marn  floated  with  all  but  her  face  submerged.  The  air 
was  rank  with  the  smell  of  water  weeds  and  mud.  The 
water  licked  the  salt  from  her  skin,  licked  away  the  dirt, 
the  animal  smell.  But  it  could  not  scour  away  the  taste 
of  Jurgen’s  blood,  or  the  feel  of  Hinta’s  fingers. 

The  night  was  the  coolest  she  had  ever  felt,  just  as  the 
day  had  been  the  hottest.  This  was  living 
in  weather, 
shivering  and  sweating  by  turns.  Weather—another  of  the

84 
EDGES 
ancient  words  they  were  reviving.  She  had  always  used 
the  word  to  indicate  moods,  the  play  of  emotions,  because 
there  was  no  weather  in  the  air  of  Ohio  City. 

Lit  from  inside  by  flares,  the  dome  looked  from  this 
distance  like  a  gigantic  faceted  globe.  Marn  could  see  the 
dim  shapes  of  the  others  readying  sleep-cushions  for  the 
night.  One  of  them  would  be  Hinta.  Someone  would  be 
stooping  over  Jurgen,  giving  him  water,  making  him  com- 
fortable.  It  should  be  me,  Marn  thought.  But  she  could 
not  yet  look  into  his  stone-grey  eyes  without  confusion. 
Her  body  could  not  overcome  shame  that  quickly. 

Afloat,  her  thoughts  spread  out  on  the  water,  thinned, 

dissolved. 

Sometime  later  a  voice  cried  her  name,  and  she  opened 

her  eyes  on  darkness.  “Marn,  Marn!  Are  you  all  right?” 

Hinta’s  voice,  Hinta’s  lean  shadow  on  the  bank,  hands 

raised  to  mouth,  shouting. 

“Yes.” 

Marn  answered. 

water 
sluiced  along  her  ribs,  her  thighs,  as  she  swam  toward 
shore.  The  dome  was  lit  now  only  by  a  feeble  glow. 

coming.” 

“You  were  gone  so  long,”  Hinta  said.  “The  others  are 

“I’m 

The 

all  asleep.” 

“Time  seemed...”  Marn  began.  But  she  could  not 
tell  what  had  become  of  time,  or  what  had  become  of  her 
fear.  She  lay  in  the  shallow  water,  her  naked  face  turned 
toward  the  other  woman. 

“Here’s  a  towel.”  In  the  gloom  the  cloth  was  barely 

visible. 

The  water  lapped  against  Marn’s  sides.  Her  arms  were 
sunken  nearly  to  the  elbows  in  the  muck  of  the  shore. 
“I  don’t  want  it  yet.” 
“Aren’t  you  cold?” 
“Come  see.” 
For  a  few  seconds,  Hinta  did  not  move,  a  slender  col- 
umn  of  darkness.  Then  she  shrugged  free  of  her  clothes 
and  eased  herself  into  the  shallows  beside  Marn. 

“Warm,”  she  said. 
“Come,”  Marn  answered.  “I'll  take  you  out  where  the 
springs  churn  up  cold  beneath  your  legs.”  Touching  the 
other  woman  to  keep  contact  in  the  dark,  Marn  led  her 
away  from  shore.

Avram  Davidson  first  achieved  notice  more 
than  twenty  years  ago,  with  such  stories  as 
“My  Boyfriend’s  Name  Is  Jello,”  “The 
Golem,”  “Help!  I  Am  Dr.  Morris  Gold- 
pepper,”  and  “Author,  Author.”  Recently  he 
has  been  touring  the  groves  of  academe  as 
Visiting  Distinguished  Writer,  a  diversion  of 
which  he  tires;  he  says  that  he  may  go  back 
to  being  just  “a  plain  ol’  writer.”  In  his  time, 
Davidson  has  given  us  such  nobly-conceived 
and  executed  novels  as  that  history  of 
Vergil  Magus,  The  Phoenix  and  the  Mirror, 
and—in  a  lighter  frame  of  mind—com- 
mitted  some  memorable  shaggy  dog  stories 
to  paper...  one  of  them  also  about  that 
magician. 

Author,  shaggy  author! 

The  Other  Magus 

BY  AVRAM  DAVIDSON 

Vergil  was  seated  in  his  Glass  Garden  on  the  upper  ter- 
race  of  the  Castle  of  the  Egg  one  morning  when  he  be- 
came  aware,  first,  that  someone  was  looking  at  him  and, 
second,  that  he  had  heard  no  one  enter. 

That  inner  awareness  which  he  had  so  long  cultivated 
now  directed  him  to  turn  his  eyes  to  the  left.  There,  in 
between  the  saplings  sent  him  by  the  Soldan  of  Babylone, 
cuttings  from  the  Tree  of  the  Sun  and  the  Tree  of  the 
Moon,  was  a  man  with  the  willow  wand  of  The  Order 
between  his  hands.  “Compeer,”  said 
Vergil,  “you  are 
thrice  welcome.”  He  rose,  and  gestured  his  fellow  mage 
to  come  and  sit  beside  him. 

The  man  did  not  move.  “Canst  fly,  thou?”  he  asked, 
“I  am  neither  Phaéton  nor  Icarus.” 

85

  
86 

EDGES 

“Their  mistakes  need  not  be  made.  —  Can  thee  fly, 

thou?  Teach  me  how!” 

“This  gift  I  have  not,”  said  Vergil. 
“Nay,  but  I  will  pay  thee  for  its  sale.” 
Vergil,  puzzled,  abated  not  his  courtesy.  “If  I  had  it, 
sale, 
offer 

suffer 

nor 

for 

it 

perhaps  I  would  neither 
Serrah.” 

The  strange  eyes  of  the  other  stared  at  him  and,  it 
seemed,  partly  into  him.  “All  gifts  are  for  sale,”  he  said 
simply.  After  a  moment’s  silence  he  made  an  abrupt  ges- 
ture,  vanished. 

present, 

Earth  was 

Vergil  examined  the 

and 
floor. 
sand,  but  no  trace  of  any  human  feet,  “He  treads  more 
lightly  than  I,”  murmured  the  Brundisian.  With  his  own 
wand  he  inscribed  on  the  sand  and  loam  a  circle  full 
or  inches  the  Apparition 
large  to  include  whichever  ell 
of  the  Mage  had  superimposed.  Next  he  took  up 
the 
lectern  and  set 
circle.  “Be 
thine  eloign  never  so  far,  compeer,”  he  said,  softly,  “but 
I  shall  find  thee  out.”  He  set  on  top  the  lectern  the  codex 
called  The  Oracles  of  Maro  and  gave  the  movable  top  a 
single  spin.  Then  with  closed  eyes  asking,  “What  mage 
was  this?” 
he  opened  the  book  at  random  and  thrust 
gently  at  the  page  with  his  own  willow  rod.  And  opened 
his  eyes. 

it  down  in  the  midst  of  the 

long 

only 

Jater 

shifts 

The  word  was  Minos. 
“Strange,”  he  said. 
And  ordered  books  brought  him. 
Long  centuries  ago  a  Phoenician  vessel  had  foundered 
off  the  Cumaean  Sands, 
of 
and 
winds  and  drifts  and  tides  had  exposed  first  her  sundered 
timbers  and  then  her  wrack-choked  cargo-hold.  The  glass 
had  grown  iridescent  in  the  passing  of  time,  but  perhaps 
the  shock  of  shipwreck  or  the  pressure  of  sand  centuries 
endurant,  or  whatsoever,  had  snapped  the  neck  of 
al- 
most  every  bottle,  and  shattered  the  sides  of  most:  only 
the  thicker  glass  of  the  bottoms  had  in  every  case  sur- 
vived  uncracked.  And  Vergil  had  used  them  to  build  the 
iridescent  walls  and  roof  of  the  Glass  Garden  on  the  Up- 
pert  Terrace  of  the  Castle  of  the  Egg.  Rose  spots,  violet 
whorls,  green  and  red  and  golden  marks  swirling  round 
his  face  and  hands,  rainbows  rippled  the  surface  of  the 
books. 

“Strange,”  he 

said. 

“I 

find  no  mention  of  any  mage

The  Other  Magus 

87 
named  Minos.  Could  his  entry  to  The  Order  have  been 
clandestine?” 

And  later,  Clemens,  his  beard  and  Poseidonian-heavy 
locks  as  thick  and  curly  as  ever,  but  now  full  white,  said 
to  him,  “Have  you  after  all  found  your  mage  Minos, 
then?  You  have!  Good,  How?” 

“By 

the 

Oracles 
grammatically.  His  name  in  truth  is  Simon.” 

The 

simplest 

way. 

spoke 

ana- 

“Simon,”  said  Clemens,  considering.  “Simon?  Simon 
Magus?  Of  Samaria.  So.”  A  faintly  odd  expression  crossed 
his  face. 

Vergil  asked,  swiftly,  “Do  you  hear  them,  too?” 
“Hear 
cautiously. 

Clemens 

them?” 

asked, 

what?” 

“Hear 

“Echoes...” 
Clemens  looked  at  him,  slightly  puzzled.  “Again,  your 

echoes.  Of  what  this  time?” 

, 

“Oh  ..  .”  Vergil  sighed.  “Of  books  never  written  in 

our  world.  Of  parables  never  told...” 

Clemens  put  his  head  slightly  to  one  side.  Then  he 
shook  it.  Then  he  reached  for  the  small  flask  containing 
the  fifth  essence  of  wine,  and  its  colors  glowed  and  rip- 
pled,  and  he  poured  himself  a  few  drachms.  “No,”  he 
said,  and  sipped.  “No,”  he  said,  “I  cannot  say  that  I  do.” 
He  ran  his  tongue  over  his 
lips,  and  swallowed.  Then 
he  made  a  sound  in  his  face.  “What  I  can  say  is  that 
Y  am  afraid  that  when  a  Samaritan  is  bad,  he  is  very,  very 
bad.” 

Vergil  nodded. 

He  seemed  faintly 
“No 
doubt  there  were  times  when  he,  too,  was  good,”  he  said.

abstracted. 

Sonya  Dorman  is  one  of  several  notable 
poets  represented  here  (though  not  in  this 
instance  by  poetry).  The  first  volume  of  her 
work,  entitled,  simply,  Poems,  was  a  Na-— 
tional  Council  on  the  Arts  selection;  the 
second  was  Stretching  Fence;  the  third,  A 
Paper  Raincoat.  Within  the  genre  of  science 
fiction,  and  in  the  demanding  category  of 
young  adult  novel,  her  current  title  is  Planet 
Patrol,  chronicling  the  adventures  of  Roxy 
Rimidon. 

Dorman  examines  communication—under 
duress—from  the  viewpoint  of  an  alien. 

Peek-A-Boom 

BY  SONYA  DORMAN 

his 

arrival.  Probably  that  was 

He  had  been  in  capture  a  long  time,  in  the  metal  groves 
and  labyrinths,  though  time  appeared  to  have  condensed 
his 
since 
loneliness,  or  perhaps  the  experimental  attempts  at  com- 
munication  forced  on  him.  It  might  be  because  he  spent 
so  much  time  at  the  resting  level  of  his  longest  X-rays, 
in  the  dim  glow  below  his  transmission  frequency. 

effect 

the 

of 

If  he  refused  his  rations,  or 

if  he  became  careless  in 
the  turns  he  took,  rather  than  eagerly  seeking,  the  incom- 
ing  rays  Jengthened  until  the  heat  was  nearly  intolerable. 
On  the  other  hand,  when  he  went  briskly,  and  took  the 
correct  turns,  his  prison  cooled  so  that  his  strength  rose 
and,  even  in  this  confined  place,  tried  to  flow  free. 

It  was  all  metal,  except  for  the  quartz  crystal  at  one 
end,  and  he  rested  on  that  even  though  it  was  a  bit  too 

88

  
Peek-A-Boom 

89 

warm.for  comfort,  because  it  was  different,  identifiable, 
a  “place” 
this.  indeterminate  place.  Sometimes  the 
metal  hedges  around  him  flowered  with  sensors;  then  he 
was  urged  to  work  the  labyrinth  as  often  as  possible. 

in 

in 

On  occasions  he  was  so  unhappy  he  would  draw  him- 
tight  around  the  membrane  through  which  he 
self 
perceived  shapes,  the  flare  of  violet  fluorescence  and  the 
long,  cool  perspectives  which  were  partly  memory  and 
partly  the  habitation  in  which  he  was  kept. 

When  first  confined,  he  had  opened  as  widely  as  pos- 
sible  to  receive  any  sort  of  message,  but  all  his  receptor 
encountered  was  a  combination  of  speckles  and  flickers: 

“Ten  thousand  a  year,  poor  schnook.” 
“He  doesn’t  respond  to  microwaves,  either,  Doctor.” 
“Christ  help  me.” 
“Tt’s  lunch  time,” 
“God  have  mercy.” 
“And  then  she  put  it  in  her  mouth!” 
“Half  a  cc  and  an  alcohol  rub.” 
“Three  jiggers  and  a  whiff  of  vermouth.” 
“Nothing  on  the  audio,  Doctor?” 
“Christ,  my  guiding  light.” 
“Merry  Christmas.” 
“Happy  Birthday.”  | 
“Gut  Yontif.” 
If  there  had  been  some  pattern  he  would  have  mem- 
orized  it,  but  he  could  find  none  in  what  came  through, 
or  along,  the  audio  walls.  He  was  doing  the  labyrinth 
variations  often,  determined  to  keep  himself  occupied. 
And  he  had  learned  to  respond  to  the  color  stimuli.  He 
wondered  if  they  were  trying  to  contact  him  in  these  color 
frequencies,  which  he  could  perceive,  but  not  transmit. 
Now  and  then  he  would  be  presented  with  an  illusion 
of  himself,  shape  of  cool,  familiar  form.  He  knew  it  was 
an  illusion  but  it  comforted  him  anyway.  At  the  same  time 
he  was  ashamed  he  could  derive  comfort  from  an  illusion, 
since  he  came  from  a  culture  where  illusions  were  used 
to  arouse  amusement,  or  to  discipline  the  young. 
Each  time  he  confronted  one  of  these 

he 
fought  bitterly  against  the  impulse  to  reach  out,  to  flare 
forth.to  the  shape  so  much  like  his  own. 

illusions, 

His  ultraviolet  would  transmit  involuntarily:  “Who  are 

you?”

90 

EDGES 

Then  he  would  return  to  rest,  though  never  quite  giv- 

ing  up  his  hope  for  freedom. 

Yet,  when  they  learned  his  seeming  preferences,  they 
prepared  feasts  for  him,  rays  shortened  upward  so 
he 
could  be  refreshed.  Then  his  response  was  very  strong, 
his  receptor  would  open,  his  spark  was  released  to  swim. 
It  was  a  daily  ritual  to  try  for  communication,  but  the 
most  that  he  ever  received  were  those  pulses  of  tinsel: 

“T  can’t  stand  chipped  beef.” 
“God,  light  of  my  soul.” 
“Twenty  thousand  on  contract.” 
“Do  it  again.  Do  it  again.  Do  it  again.” 
“Let’s  knock  off  for  hunch.” 
“Happy  New  Year,  Doctor.” 
“Gut  Shabos.” 
“Bon  voyage.” 
“Up  yours!” 
“Happy  Birthday.” 
“Pray  for  me  now  and  at  the  hour.” 
“It  must  be  on  another  frequency.” 
“And  Christ  receive  my  soul.” 
Every  day  he  repeated  his  transmission: 

“Are  you 
there?  Are  you  there?”  and  waited,  but  nothing  came 
back. 

In  the  course  of  time,  he  became  able  to  distinguish 
rhythmic  patterns  on  the  metal  walls,  and  although  he 
couldn’t  get  any  meaning  from:  “Catch  the  eight-fifty,” 
it  was  evident  that  these  streaks  of  light  were  messages 
of  some  kind.  Not  from  his  sort  of  life,  and  not  his  kind 
of  communication,  but  as  long  as  he  was  in  contact  with 
the  quartz,  he  could  pick  up  the  dashes  and  splatters.  It 
gave  him  hope  that  at  some  point  he  and  they  would 
merge,  if  only  for  an  instant.  There  was  little  else  for  him 
to  look  forward  to.  He  missed  merging  more  than  any- 
thing,  the  constant  give  and  take,  ebb  and  flow.  When  he 
encountered  the  faintly  shining  illusion  of  himself,  he  al- 
ways  paused,  sent  out  a  request  for  recognition.  But  to 
no  avail. 

As  he  despaired  of  making  contact,  or  of  discovering 
what  had  happened  to  him  so  he  could  order  it  and  then 
escape  it,  he  became  wilder  and  wilder,  way  up  to 
his 
top  limit,  to  the  shortest  X-ray  frequency. 

It  was  too  dangerous  and  difficult  to  maintain.  Drop- 
ping  from  that  narrow  intensity  he  involuntarily  went  to

Peck-A-Boom 

91 

the  other  extreme,  down,  wider  and  wider,  until  he  was 
spread  along  the  width  of  the  border  between  limits  of 
violet  and  edges  of  blue.  Temperature  and  voltage  be- 
gan  to  change,  the  perceptor  membrane  developed  cracks 
and  fissures.  The  pulses  came  in 
at  such  increased  speed 
that  he  writhed  on  the  crystal  which  transmitted  them. 

“Look,  in  blue!” 
“Thought  it  couldn’t  get  through  on  visibility.” 
“What  have  we  here?” 
“Call  Dr.  Barlow.” 
“It’s  gone,  now.” 
“Call  Dr.  Barlow  anyway,  we  got  a  reading.” 
“Maybe  it’s  dead.” 
“Can't  be.  Goose  it  along  with  ultraviolet,  maybe  it'll 

come  through  again.” 

, 

“Dr.  Barlow’s  on  the  way.” 
“What  do  you  think  we  got  in  there,  hm?” 
“We'll  find  out  yet.” 
“Well,  gentlemen,  what  do  we  have  here?” 
“We  got 

a  reading  on 

the  lowest  ultraviolet  fringe. 

Came  and  went  just  like  a  buoy  beacon.  Gone,  now.” 

“Splendid!” 
“You  think  it  blew  itself  up,  or  something?” 
“My  dear  Miss  Krakow,  we  don’t  use  such  expressions. 

It’s  a  living  entity.” 

“Well,  it  doesn’t  speak  my  language,  Doctor.” 
Weakly,  he  began  his  standard,  receptive  call:  “Are 
you  there?  Are  you  there?”  He  had  little  hope  there 
would  be  a  response,  but  continued.  There  must  be  an 
exit,  a  way,  maybe  not  for  all  of  him  as  an  entity  but  for 
the  essential  part  of  him  to  escape.  He  went  on  repeating 
his  call,  When  exhausted,  he  dropped  below  his  communi- 
cation  frequency,  and  tried  to  block  out  the  little  flashes 
and  streaks: 

“Okay,  let’s 

try, 

right  up  into 

the  top  of  ultraviolet.  Let’s  see  what  we  get, 
reach  it.  It  must  have  survived  that  one  effort.” 

the  hot  spark  area  at 
if  we  can 

“Survived?  Of  course  it  did,  it’s  still  radiating.” 
“Get  the  mantle  off  the  laser,  will  you,  Miss  Krakow, 

there’s  a  good  girl.” 
“Here  we  are.” 
“Now  let’s  see  what  we  have  here.” 
“Well,  don’t  zap  it  with  everything  at  once.” 
“Would  it  get  drunk?”

92 

EDGES 

“Miss  Krakow!” 
“Sorry,  Doctor.” 
“All  right  now,  let’s  try  to  get  a  real  glimpse  of  it.” 
He  was  at  the  end  of  his  endurance.  All  he  could  feel 
or  desire  was  to  be  set  free.  He  had  been  resting  a  long 
time,  saving  his  strength  for  a  final  try. 

Without  the  least  warning  he  was  directed  at  enormous 
velocity;  his  receptor  spread  flat, 
his  sunspark  began  to 
glow.  He  didn’t  have  time  to  move  from  his  resting  po- 
sition, 
fast,  the  incredible  directness  of 
the  beam. 

it  happened  so 

The  plate  covering  his  receptor  burnt  to 

ash,  The 
sunspark  burst  free  at  186,000  miles  per  second,  along 
the  corridor  of  exit,  the  walls,  the  cables,  the  tables,  the 
Dr.  Barlow  and  the  Miss  Krakow,  before  the  apparatus 
fused  with  a  blast.  Bruised  and  terrified  survivors  fled. 

“Great  God!” 
“What  happened?” 
“Watch  out,  that  I-beam’s  loose.” 
“Still  smoking.  Poor  Miss  Krakow.” 
“What’s  that?” 
“A  shred...  oh,  my  God.” 
“Who’s  going  to  tell  Mrs.  Barlow?” 
“TH  do  it.  Here  come  the  recommish  boys.” 
“Wait’ll  the  Board  gets  the  bill  for  this  one.” 
*T  could  use  a  drink.” 
“So  could  I.  How  about  you,  Dr.  Swerdlow?” 
“Mrs.  Barlow  will  give  me  one,  she  always  does.” 
“Poor  Miss  Krakow.  See  you  tomorrow,  then.” 
“Okay.  And  somebody,  put  in 

a  requisition  for  an- 

other  one.  The  shipping  box  is  still  intact.” 

“Not  sure  I  want  another.” 
“Me  neither.  Guess  there’s  not  even  any  remains.” 
“You  don’t  think  it  escaped?” 
“It  couldn’t.  I  wonder  if  it  hurt.” 
“Better  go  have  a  drink.  So  long.” 
“God  have  mercy.” 
“Happy  Birthday.” 
“Go  to  hell.”

Gene  Wolfe  was  born  in  New  York,  raised 
in  Texas,  and  now  lives  in  a  suburb  of 
Chicago,  Illinois.  He  won  a  Nebula  Award 
in  1973  for  his  novella,  “The  Death  of  Dr. 
Island”;  the  Chicago  Foundation  for  Litera- 
ture  Award  in  1976  for  his  novel,  Peace; 
and  the  Rhysling  Award  for  the  Best  Long 
SF  Poem  of  1979,  “The  Computer  Iterates 
the  Greater  Trumps.”  With  only  three  or 
four  books  to  his  credit  thus  far,  and  after 
a  couple  of  years  spent  working  extensively 
on  his  tetralogy  (The  Rock  of  the  New  Sun) 
he  has  three  books  forthcoming  within  a 
very  few  months  of  each  other:  the  first 
volume  of  the  tetralogy,  The  Shadow  of  the 
Torturer;  his  collection,  The  Island  of  Dr. 
Death  and  Other  Stories  and  Other  Stories; 
and  Gene  Wolfe’s  Book  of  Days,  a  garland 
of  celebrations.  He  is  unique. 

His  short  story  hereunder  is  a  den  of  iniq- 
uity;  no  one  else  could  have  written  it. 

Suzanne  Delage 

BY  GENE  WOLFE 

As  I  was  reading  last  night—reading  a  book,  I  should  ex- 
plain,  which  was  otherwise  merely  commonplace;  one  of 
those  somewhat  political,  somewhat  philosophical,  some- 
what  historical  books  which  can  now  be  bought  by  the 
pound  each  month—I  was  struck  by  a  certain  remark  of 
the  author’s.  It  seemed  to  me  at  the  time  an  interesting,  if 
almost 
had 
turned  the  page,  and  many  other  pages,  and  was  half 
through  a  new  chapter  bearing  very  little  relation  to  what 
had  gone  before,  this  idea  found  its  way  back  into  my 
consciousness  and  there  acted  as 
a  sort  of  filter  between 
my  mind  and  the  book  until  I  put  it  down  and,  still  think- 
ing,  went  up  to  bed. 

afterward,  when  I 

self-evident, 

idea;  and 

The  idea  which  had  so  forcibly  struck  me  was  simply 

93

  
94 

EDGES 

his  own  person  serve  as 

this:  that  every  man  has  had  in  the  course  of  his  life  some 
extraordinary  experience,  some  dislocation  of 
all  we  ex- 
pect  from  nature  and  probability,  of  such  magnitude  that 
he  might  in 
living  proof  of 
Hamlet’s  hackneyed  precept—but  that  he  has,  nearly  al- 
ways,  been  so  conditioned  to  consider  himself  the  most 
mundane  of  creatures,  that,  finding'no  relationship  to  the 
remainder  of  his  life  in  this  extraordinary  experience,  he 
has  forgotten  it. 

a 

It  seemed  to  me  (considering  the  immense  extent  of  the 
universe  of  the  senses  and  the  minute  size  of  that  area  of 
it  we  think  of  as  “everyday”)  that  this  must  certainly  be 
correct.  Yet  if 
it  were  true  of  every  man  it  ought  also  to 
be  true  of  me—and  try  as  I  might  I  could  remember  no 
such  extraordinary  circumstance. 

When  I  had  switched  off  the  light  I  lay  recalling,  very 
It  has  been  a  pleasant 
pleasantly  on  the  whole,  my  life. 
life,  though  I  fear  a  dulJ,  and  perhaps  a  lonely,  one.  I  live 
now  not  five  miles  from  the  hospital  in  which  I  was  born, 
and  have  lived  nowhere  else.  Here  I  grew  up,  learned  a 
profession,  practiced,  and,  much  sooner  than  most  men, 
I  have  twice  been  married,  but  both  marriages 
retired. 
were  brief,  and  both  ended  in  friendly  separations;  the 
truth  is  that  my  wives  (both  of  them)  bored  me—and  I 
am  very  much  afraid  I  bored  them  as  well. 

As I  lay  in  bed,  then,  thinking  of  times  when  my  grand- 
father  had  taken  me  fishing  and  of  skating  parties  with 
friends,  and  about  our  high  school  team  (on  which  I  was  a 
substitute  quarterback,  but  one  so  much  inferior  to 
the 
first-string  occupant  of  that  position  that  I  almost  never 
got  into  a  game  unless  we  were  several  touchdowns  ahead, 
at  last  occurred  to  me  that  there 
which  was  not  often),  it 
has,  in  fact,  been  one  thread  of  the  strange—I  might  al- 
most  say  the  incredible,  though  not  the  supernatural—in 
my  own  history. 

It  is  simply  this:  living  all  my  life,  as  I  have,  in  a  town 
of  less  than  a  hundred  thousand  population,  I  have  been 
dimly  aware  of  the  existence  of  a  certain  woman  without 
ever  meeting  her  or  gaining  any  sure  idea  of  her  appear- 
ance. 

But  even  this  is  not,  perhaps,  as  extraordinary  as  it  may 
sound.  I  have  never  made  an  effort  to  meet  this  woman, 
and  I  doubt  that  she  has  ever  attempted  to  meet  me,  if, 
indeed,  she  is  aware  that  I  exist.  On  the  other  hand  we

Suzanne  Delage 

95 
are  neither  of  us  invalids,  nor  are  we  blind.  This  woman 
-—her  name  is  Suzanne  (though  I  fear  most  of  us  here 
have  always  pronounced  it  “Susan”)  Delage—lives,  or  at 
least  so  I  have  always  vaguely  supposed,  on  the  eastern 
edge  of  our  little  city;  I  live  on  the  western.  I  doubt.  that 
we,  as  children,  attended  the  same  elementary  school,  but 
I  know  that  we  were,  for  four  years,  at  the  same  high 
school.  I  was  able  to  ascertain  this 
a  matter  of  cer- 
tainty  through  my  yearbooks,  which  my  mother,  with  that 
more  or  less  formalized  sentimentality  characteristic  of 
her,  saved  for  me  in  the  attic  of  this 
tall,  silent  frame 
house  (itself  saved  for  me  as  well). 

as 

Actually,  of  the  four  volumes  which  must  originally 
have  existed,  only  two  remain—those  for  my  sophomore 
and  senior  years.  There  are  a  number  of  pages  missing 
from  the  class  picture  section  of  the  earlier  book,  and  I 
seem  to  recal}  that  these  were  torn  out  and  cut  up  to  ob- 
tain  the  individual  photographs  many  decades  ago.  My 
own  face  is  among  those  missing,  as  well 
as  Suzanne 
Delage’s;  but  in  another  section,  one  devoted  to  social  ac- 
tivities,  a  girl’s  club  (it  was  called,  I  think,  the  Pie  Club) 
is  shown,  and  one  of  the  names  given  in  the  caption  is 
Suzanne’s.  Unfortunately  the  girls 
in  the  picture  are  so 
loosely  grouped—~around  a  stove  and  work  table—that  it 
is  not  possible  to  be  certain  in  every  case  which  name 
should  be  attached  to  which  young  lady:  besides,  a  num- 
ber  of  them  have  their  backs  to  the  camera. 

The  senior  book  should  have  told  me  more—at  least  so 
I  thought  when  I,  at  last,  came  across  it  at  the  end  of  an 
hour  or  so  of  rummaging.  It  is  whole  and  undamaged,  and 
I,  thanks  largely  to  football,  have  no  less  than  four  pic- 
tures  in  various  parts  of  it.  Suzanne  Delage  has  none.  On 
one  of  the  closing  pages  a  woebegone  roll  of  names  re- 
minds  me  of  something  I  had  forgotten  for  many  years— 
that  there  was  an  epidemic  of  some  kind  (I  think  Spanish 
influenza)  just 
at  the  time  the  pictures  for  the  annual 
were  to  be  taken,  Suzanne  is  listed  as  one  of  those  “unable 
to  be  photographed.” 

I  should  explain  that  ours  was  one  of  those  overgrown 
schools  found  in  the  vicinity  of  small  towns,  a  school  re- 
peatedly  expanded  because  the  growth  of  the  town  itself 
had  been  slow  (though  always  faster,  so  it  seemed  in  ret- 
rospect,  than  anyone  had  anticipated)  and  the  taxpayers 
bad  not  wanted  to  authorize  a  new  one. 
It  was  large

96 

EDGES 

enough,  in  short,  that  only  a  few  leading  students—the 
star  athletes,  the  class  officers,  the  few  really  promiscuous 
girls  and  the  dazzlingly  beautiful  ones  whom  we,  in  those 
naive  times,  called  “queens”—-were  known  to  everyone. 

and 

players 

The  rest  of  us, 

if  we  moved  socially  at 

I  remember—were  the  football 

all,  went  by 
classes  and  cliques.  A  student  might  know  the  others  in 
his  English  and  algebra  rooms;  the  cliques—at  least  the 
ones 
their 
girls,  the  children  of  the  rich,  the  boys  and  girls  whose 
families  attended  a  certain  fundamentalist  church  on  the 
outskirts  of  town;  and  certain  racial  minorities,  the  chess 
and  debating  socicty  types,  and  the  toughs.  It  sounds,  I 
suppose,  as  though  there  were  a  group  for  everyone,  and 
at  the  time  (since  I  was  fairly  well  entrenched  among  the 
athletes)  I  believe  [  thought  myself  (if 
I  thought  about 
that  there  was.  IT  now  realize  that  all 
the  matter  at 
these  little  coteries  embraced  no  more  than  a  third  of  the 
school,  but  whether  Suzanne  Delage  had  entry  to  one  or 
more  of  them  I  do  not  know. 

all) 

our  area, 

I  should,  however,  have  made  her  acquaintance  long 
before  I  entered  high  school,  since  Mrs.  Delage,  Suzanne’s 
mother,  was  one  of  my  own  mother’s  close  friends.  They 
had  met,  I  think  at  about  the  time  I  was  eight,  through  a 
shared  passion  (much  more  widespread  in 
I 
think,  than  in  the  country  as 
a  whole,  and  more  ardently 
pursued  in  the  past  than  it 
is  now)  for  collecting  antique 
fabrics:  in  other  words,  for  embroidered  tablecloths,  for 
quilts,  crocheting  of  all  kinds.  afghans.  crewel  work,  hand- 
hooked  rugs,  and  the  like. 
If  my  mother  or  her  friends 
could  discover  a  sampler,  or  a  bedspread  or  “comfortable” 
made  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  nineteenth  century  (it  was 
their  enduring  hope,  I  think  never  well  satisfied,  to  find  a 
piece  from  what  they  called  “American  Revolution  times” 
—bv  which  they  meant  the  eighteenth,  even  such  dates  as 
1790  or  1799),  a  piece  well  made  and  decorated—the 
more  the  ‘better—in  the  unschooled,  traditional  ways  of 
the  old  farm  families,  then  their  jov  and  their  vride  knew 
no  hannds.  Tf  in  addition,  the  work  was  that  of  some  no- 
table  woman—or  to  be  more  precise,  of  some  woman  re- 
lation  of  some  notable  man;  the  sister.  sav.  of  a  lieutenant 
governor—and  could  be  authenticated,  the  home  of  the 
to  which  visitors  were 
of  shrine 
finder  hecame  a 
brought,  and  to  which  solitary  pilgrims  from  other  towns 
a  result  of
came  (ringing  our  bell—for  we  possessed,  as 

sort 

Suzanne  Delage 

97 
Mother’s  efforts,  a  vast  appliquéd  quilt  which  had  been 
the  civil-wartime  employment  of  the  wife  of  a  major  in  a 
fencible  Zouave  regiment—usually  at  about  ten-thirty  in 
the  morning  and  offering,  in  introduction,  a  complicated 
recitation  of  friendships  and  cousincies  linking  themselves 
to  our  own  family)  bearing  homage  like  cookies  on 
a 
plate  and  eager  to  hear,  for  the  better  direction  of  their 
own  future  strategies,  a  circumstantial  description  of  the 
inquiries  and  overheard  clues,  the  offers  made  and  re- 
jected  and  made  again,  which  had  led  to  the  acquisition  of 
that  precious  object  which  would,  as  terminator  of  the  in- 
terview,  at  last  be  brought  forth  in  a  glory  of  moth  crys- 
tals,  and  spread  sparkling  clean 
of  course  these 
collected  pieces  were  never  used)  over  the  living  room 
sofa  to  be  admired. 

(for 

Mrs.  Delage,  who  became  my  mother’s  friend,  pos- 
sessed  pieces  of  her  own  as  valuable  as  the  major’s  wife’s 
quilt  (which  was,  as  my  mother  never  tired  of  pointing 
out,  entirely  hand-sewn)  and  a  collection,  too,  of  tesser 
treasures  ranking,  as  my  mother  herself  admitted,  with 
our  own  hoard.  Together  they  scoured  the  countryside  for 
more,  and  made  trips  (trips  so  exhausting  that  I  was,  as  a 
boy,  always  surprised  to  see  how  very  willing,  in 
a  few 
weeks,  my  mother  was  to  go  again)  to  view  the  riches  of 
neighboring  countics——and  even,  once  or  twice,  by  rail,  of 
neighboring  states.  It  would  therefore  have  been  entirely 
logical  for  Mrs.  Delage  to  have  been  our  frequent  guest, 
at  least  for  tea;  and  for  her  to  have  brought,  occasionally, 
her  little  daughter  Suzanne,  whom  I  would  no  doubt  have 
soon  come  to  both  love  and  hate. 

This  would  doubtless  have  occurred  but  for  a  circum- 
stance  of  a  kind  peculiar,  I  think,  to  towns  exactly  the 
size  of  ours,  and  incomprehensible  not  only  to  the  resi- 
dents  of  cities,  but  to  truly  rural  people  as  well.  There 
lived,  directly  across  the  brick-paved  street  from  us,  a  bit- 
ter  old  woman,  a  widow  who,  for  some  reason  never  ex- 
plained  to  me,  detested  Mrs.  Delage.  It  was  lawful  for  my 
mother  to  be  friendly  with  Suzanne’s,  but  if  (women  in 
small  towns  somehow  know  these  things)  she  had  gone  so 
far  as  to  invite  Mrs.  Delage  to  our  house  this  widow  would 
at  once  have  become  her  enemy  for  life.  The  invitation 
was  never  given,  and  I  believe  my  mother’s  friend  died 
while  I  was  at  college. 

Thus  while  I  was  still  small  I  was  hardly  aware  of  Su-

98 

EDGES 

zanne  Delage,  though  my  mother  often  mentioned  hers;  in 
high  school,  as  I  indicated,  though  I  was  in  much  closer 
proximity  to  the  girl  herself,  this  was  hardly  altered.  I 
heard  of  her  vaguely,  in  connection  perhaps  with  some 
friend  of  a  friend,  I  must  surely  have  seen  her  in  the  cor- 
ridors  hundreds  of  times—if  one  can  be  said  to  see,  in  a 
crowd,  people  one  does  not  know.  I  must  sometimes  have 
shared  classrooms  with  her,  and  certainly  we  were  to- 
gether  at  assembly  and  in  the  vast  study  hall.  She  would 
have  attended  many  of  the  same  dances  I  did,  and  it 
is 
even  possible  that  I  danced  with  her--—but  I  do  not  really 
believe  that,  and  if,  indeed,  it  happened,  the  years  have 
so  effectively  sponged  the  event  from  my  mind  that  no 
slightest  trace  remains. 

And  in  fact  I  think  I  would  never  have  recalled  the 
name  of  Suzanne  Delage  at  all,  as  J  lay  in  bed  last  night 
listening  to  the  creaking  of  this  empty  house  in  the  au- 
tumn  wind  and  searching  the  recesses  of  my  memory  for 
some  extraordinary  incident  with  which  to  attest  the  au- 
thor’s  thesis,  if 
it  had  not  been  for  something  that  took 
place  a  few  days  ago. 

I  had  been  shopping,  and  happened  to  meet,  on  the 
sidewalk  in  front  of  one  of  the  larger  stores,  a  woman  of 
my  own  age  whom  I  have  known  all  my  life  and  who  is 
now  the  wife  of  a  friend.  We  stood  chatting  for  a  moment 
—she,  after  the  usual  half  teasing  reproaches  about  my 
(supposed)  gay  bachelor  life,  gossiping  about  her  husband 
and  children.  As  she  turned  to  leave  a  girl  of  fifteen  or  so 
came  out  of  the  store  and,  smiling  but  intent  upon  her 
own  concerns,  walked  quickly  past  us  and  down  the  street. 
Her  hair  was  of  a  lustrous  black,  and  her  complexion  as 
pure  as  milk;  but  it  was  not  these  that  for  a  moment  en- 
chanted  me,  nor  the  virginal  breasts  half  afraid  to  press 
the  soft  angora  of  her  sweater,  nor  the  little  waist  I  might 
have  circled  with  my  two  hands.  Rather  it  was  an  air, 
at 
once  insouciant  and  shy,  of  vivacity  coupled  with  an  inno- 
cence  and  intelligence  that  were  hers  alone.  To  the  woman 
beside  me  I  said:  “What  a  charming  child.  Who  is  she?” 
“Her  name?”  My  friend’s  wife  frowned  and  snapped 
her  fingers.  “I  can’t  think  of  it.  But  of  course  you  know 
whose  she  is, 
the  very  image  of  her 
mother  at  that  age-—Suzanne  Delage.”

don’t  you?  She’s 

Naomi  Mitchison,  a  native  of  Edinburgh, 
has a  lifetime  of  deeds  and  accomplishments 
that  beggars  description.  Among  other  dis- 
tinctions,  she  was  a  Labour  candidate  in 
England,  and  was  tribal  advisor  to  the  Bak- 
gatla  of  southeast  Botswana  (and  is  in 
Africa  as  this  note  is  being  written).  She  has 
had  published  approximately  fifty  books,  in- 
cluding  several  about  Africa,  and  a  novel 
called  Memoirs  of  a  Spacewoman—feminist 
science  fiction,  two  decades  ahead  of  its 
time,  and  never  yet  properly  appreciated 
though  often  reprinted. 

Here,  however,  she  deals  with...  magic, 

The  Finger 

BY  NAOMI  MITCHISON 

Kobedi  had  a  mother  but  no  father.  When  he  was  old 
enough  to  understand  such  things  someone  said  that  his 
father  was  the  Good  Man.  By  that  they  meant  the  Bad 
Man,  because,  so  often,  words,  once  they  are  fully  known, 
have  meanings  other  or  opposite  to  their  first  appearance. 
Kobedi,  however,  hoped  that  his  father  was  the  fat  man 
at  the  store.  Sometimes  his  mother  went  there  and  brought 
back  many  things,  not  only  the  needful  meal  and  oil, 
but  tea  and  sugar  and  beautiful  tins  with  pictures,  and  al- 
most  always  sweets  for  himself.  Once,  when  he  was  a 
quite  little  boy,  he  had  asked  his  mother  where  she  kept 
the  money  for  this  and  she  answered  “Between  my  legs.” 
So,  when  she  had  drunk  too  much  beer  and  was  asleep 
on  her  back  and  snoring,  he  lifted  her  dress  to  see  if  he 
little.  But  there  was 
could  find  this  money  and  take a 

99

  
100 

EDGES 

nothing  there  except  a  smell  which  he  did  not  like.  He 
had  two  small  sisters,  both  fat  and  flat-nosed  like  the  man 
at  the  store.  But  his  own  nose  was  thin,  and  the  Good  Man 
also  had  a  thin  nose  as  though  he  could  cut  with  it. 

Kobedi  went  to  school  and  he  thought  he  now  under- 
stood  what  his  mother  had  meant  though  he  did  not  wish 
at  least  she  paid  the  school  fees,  though 
to  think  of  it; 
she  grumbled  about  them.  He  was  in  Standard  Three  and 
there  were  pictures  on  the  wall  which  he  liked;  now  he 
wrote  sentences  in  his  jotter  and  they  were  ticked  in  red 
because  they  were  correct.  That  was  good.  But  in  a  while 
he  became  aware  that  things  were  happening  around  him 
which  were  not  good.  First  it  was  the  way  his  mother 
looked  at  him,  and  sometimes  felt  his  arms  and  legs,  and 
some  of  her  friends  who  came  and  whispered.  Then  came 
the  time  he  woke  in  the  blackest  of  the  night,  for  there  was 
a  smell  which  made  him  feel  sick  and  the  Good  Man  was 
there,  sitting  on  the  stuffed  and  partly  torn  sofa  under 
the  framed  picture  of  white  Baby  Jesus.  He  was  wearing 
skins  of  animals  over  his  trousers,  and  his  toes,  which  had 
large  nails,  clutched  and  burrowed  in  the  rag  rug  Kobedi’s 
mother  had  made.  The  Good  Man  saw  that  Kobedi  was 
awake  because  his  eyes  were  open  and  staring;  he  pointed 
one  finger  at  him.  That  was  the  more  frightening  because 
his  other  hand  was  under  the  skirt  of  a  young  girl  who 
was  sitting  next  to  him,  snuggling.  The  pointing  finger 
twitched  and  beckoned  and  slowly  Kobedi  unrolled  him- 
self  from  his  blanket  and  came  over  naked  and  shaking. 
The  Good  Man  now  withdrew  his  other  hand  and  his 
dampish  fingers  crawled  over  Kobedi,  He  took  out  two 
sinews  from  a  bundle,  rubbing  them  in  the  sweat  of  his 
own  skin  until  they  became  thin  and  hard  and  twisted 
and  dipped  them  into  a  reddish  medicine  powder  he  had 
and  spat  on  them  and  he  pointed  the  finger  again  and 
Kobedi  stunk  back  and  pulled  the  blanket  over  his  head. 
The  next  day  the  tied-on  sinews  began  to  make  his 
his  mother 
skin 
slapped  him,  saying  they  were  strong  medicine  and  he 
must  keep  them  on.  He  could  not  do  any  arithmetic  that 
day.  The  numbers  had  lost  their  meaning  and  his  teacher 
beat  him. 

pull  them  off 

itch.  He  tried 

but 

to 

The  next  time  he  became  aware  of  that  smell  in  the 
night  he  carefully  did  not  move  nor  open  his  eyes,  but 
pulled  the  blanket  slowly  from  his  ears  so  that  he  could

The  Finger 

101 

hear  the  whispering.  Again  it  was  the  Good  Man  and  his 
mother  and  perhaps  another  woman  or  even  two  women. 
They  were  speaking  of  a  place  and  a  time,  and  at  that 
place  and  time,  a  happening.  The  words  were  so  dressed 
as  to  mean  something  else,  as  when  speaking  of  a  knife 
they  called  it  a  little  twig,  when  they  spoke  of  the  heart 
it  was  the  cooking  pot,  when  they  spoke  of  the  liver  it 
was  the  red  blanket,  and  when  they  spoke  of  the  fat 
it 
was  the  beer  froth.  And  it  became  clear  to  Kobedi  that 
when  they  spoke  of  the  meal  sack  it  was  of  himself  they 
were  speaking.  Death,  death,  the  whispers  said,  and  the 
itching  under  the  sinews  grew  worse. 

The  next  morning  all  was  as  always.  The  little  sisters 
toddled  and  played  and  their  mother  pounded  meal  for 
the  porridge  and  called  morning  greetings  to  her  neigh- 
bors  across  the  walls  of  the  lapa.  Then  she  said  to  him: 
“After  the  school  is  finished  you  are  to  go  to  the  store 
and  get  me  one  packet  tea.  Perhaps  he 
give  you 
sweets.  Here  is  money  for  tea.” 

will 

It  was  not  much  money,  but  it  was a  little  and  he  knew 
he  had  to  go  and  fast.  He  passed  by  the  school  and  did 
not  heed  the  school  bell  calling  to  him  and  he  walked  to 
the  next  village  and  on  to  the  big  road.  He  waited  among 
people  for  a  truck  and  fear  began  to  catch  upon  him;  by 
now  he  was  hungry  and  he  bought  fatty  cakes  for  five 
cents.  Then  he  climbed  in  at  the  back  of  the  truck  with 
the  rest  of  the  people.  Off  went  the  truck,  north,  south,  he 
did  not  know.  Only  there  was  a  piece  of  metal  in  the 
bottom  of  the  truck,  some  kind  of  rasp,  and  he  worked 
with  this  until  he  had  got  the  sinew  off  his  ankle  and  he 
dropped  it  over  the  side  so  that  it  would  be  run  over  by 
many  other  trucks.  It  was  harder  to  get  at  the  arm  one 
and  he  only  managed  to  scrape  his  own  skin  before  the 
truck  stopped  in  a  big  town. 

Now  it  must  be  said  that  Kobedi  was  lucky;  after  a 
short  time  of  hunger  and  fear  he  got  a  job  sweeping  out  a 
small  shop  and  going  with  heavy  parcels.  He  was  also 
allowed  to  sleep  on  a  pile  of  sacks  under  the  counter, 
though  he  must  be  careful  to  let  nobody  know,  especially 
not  the  police.  But  under  the  sacks  was  a  loose  board 
and  below  it  he  had  a  tin,  and  into  this  he  put  money  out 
a  time.  He  heard  about  a 
of  his  wages,  a  few  cents  at 
schoo]  that  was  held  in  the  evenings  after  work;  he  did 
not  speak  to  anyone  about  it,  and  indeed  he  had  no  friends

102 

EDGES 

in  the  big  town  because  it  seemed  to  him  that  friends 
meant  losing  one’s  little  money  at  playing  dice  games  or 
taking  one’s  turn  to  buy  a  coke;  and  still  his  arm  itched. 
When  he  bad  enough  money  he  went  one  evening  to 
the  school  and  said  he  had  been  in  Standard  Three  and 
he  wanted  to  go  on  with  education  and  had  money  to  buy 
it.  The  white  man  who  was  the  head  teacher  asked  him 
where  he  came  from.  He  said  from  Talane,  which  was  by 
no  means  the  name  of  his  village,  and  also  that  his  father 
was  dead  and  there  was  no  money  to  pay  for  school.  The 
truth  is  too  precious  and  dangerous  to  be  thrown  anywhere. 
So  the  man  was  sorry  for  him  and  said  well,  he  could  sit 
with  the  others  and  try  how  he  did. 

At  this  time  Kobedi  worked  all  day  and  went  to  classes 
in  the  evening  and  still  he  was  careful  not  to  become  too 
friendly,  in  case  the  friend  was  an  enemy.  There  was  a 
knife  in  the  shop,  but  it  was  blunt,  and  though  he  sawed 
at  the  sinew  on  his  arm  he  could  not  get  it  off.  Sometimes 
he  dreamed  about  whispering  in  the  night  and  woke  fro- 
zen.  Sometime  he  thought  his  mother  would  come  sud- 
denly  through  the  door  of  the  shop  and  claim  him.  If  she 
did,  could  the  night  school  help  him? 

to 

like 

T.T.C.; 

One  of  the  Motswana  teachers  took  notice  of  him  and 
jet  him  come  to  his  room  to  do  homework,  since  this  was 
not  possible  in  the  shop.  There  were  some  books  in  the 
teacher’s  room  and  a  photograph  of  himself  with  others  at 
this 
after  a  while  Kobedi  began 
the 
teacher,  Mr.  Tshele,  and  half  thought  that  one  day  he 
would  tell  him  what  his  fears  were.  But  not  yet.  There 
came  an  evening  when  he  was  writing  out  sentences  in 
English,  at  one  side  of  the  table  where  the  lamp  stood. 
Mr.  Tshele  had  a  friend  with  him;  they  were  drinking 
beer.  He  heard  the  cans  being  opened  and  smelled  the 
fizzing  beer.  At  a  certain  moment  he  began  to  listen  be- 
cause  Mr.  Tshele  was  teasing  his  friend,  who  was  hoping 
for  a  post  in  the  civil  service  and  had  been  to 
a  doctor 
to  get  a  charm  to  help  him.  “You  believe  in  that!”  said 
Mr.  Tshele.  “You  are  not  modern.  You  should  go  to 
a 
cattle  post  and  not  to  the  civil  service!” 
“Everyone  does  the  same,”  said 

his 

it  helps,  perhaps  not.  I  do  not  want  to  take  risks. 
my  life.” 

“Well,  it 

is  certainly  your  money.  What  did  he  charge 
you?”  The  friend  giggled  and  did  not  answer;  the  beer

friend,  “perhaps 
is 

It 

The  Finger 

103 

“I  am  asking  you  another  thing,” 
cans  chinked  again. 
said  Mr.  Tshele,  “This  you  have  done  at  least  brings  no 
harm.  But  what  about  sorcery?  Do  you  believe?” 

Mr.  Tshele  leaned  back  in 

The  friend  hesitated.  “I  have  heard  dreadful  things,” 
he  said,  “What  they  do.  Perhaps  they  are  mad.  Perhaps 
it  no  longer  happens.  Not  in  Botswana.  Only  perhaps— 
well,  perhaps  in  Lesotho.  Who  knows?  In  the  mountains.” 
chair.  Kobedi  ducked 
his  head  over  his  paper  and  pencil  and  pretended  to  be 
in  the  High 
busy  writing.  “There  is 
case  coming  up 
Court,”  said  Mr.  Tshele.  “My  cousin  who  is 
a  lawyer  told 
me.  A  man  is  accused  of  medicine  murder.  The  trial  will 
be  next  week.  They  are  looking  for  witnesses,  but  people 
are  afraid  to  come  forward.” 

his 

a 

“But  they  must  have  found—something?” 
“Yes,  a  dead  child.  Cut  in 

a  certain  way.  Pieces  taken 
out.  Perhaps  even  while  the  child  was  alive  and  screaming 
for  help.” 

“This  is  most  dreadful,”  said  the  friend,  “and  most  cer- 
tainly  the  man  I  went  to  about  my  civil  service  interview 
would  never  do  such  a  thing!” 

“Maybe  not,”  said  Mr.  Tshele,  ‘not  if  he  can  get  your 
money  a  safer  way!  Mind  you,  T  myself  went  to  a  doctor 
who  was  a  registered  herbalist  when  I  had  those  headaches, 
and  he  threw  the  ditaola  and  all  that,  but  most  certainly 
he  did  not  murder.” 

“Did  he  cure  your  headaches?” 
“Vos,  yes,  and  it  was  cheaper  than  going  to  the  chem- 
ist’s  shop.  He  rubbed  the  back  of  my  neck  and  also  gave 
me  a  powder  to  drink.  Two  things.  It  was  a  treatment,  a 
medical  treatment,  not  just  a  charm.  I  suppose  you  also 
go  for  love  charms?” 

Again  the  friend  giggled,  and  Kobedi  was  afraid  they 
would  now  only  speak  about  girls.  He  wanted  to  know 
more,  more,  about  the  man  who  had  cut  out  the  heart— 
and  the  liver—and  stripped  off  the  fat  for  rubbing,  as  he 
remembered  the  whispering  in  the  night.  But  they  came 
back  to  it.  “This  man,  the  one  you  spoke  of  who  is  to  be 
tried,  he  is  from  where?”  the  friend  asked.  And  Mr.  Tshele 
carelessly  gave  the  name  of  the  village.  His  village.  The 
name,  the  shock,  the  knowledge,  for  it  must  indeed  and 
in  truth  be  the  Good  Man.  Kobedi  could  not  speak,  could 
not  move.  He  stared  at  the  lamp  and  the  light  blurred

104 

EDGES 

and  pulsed  with  the  strong  terrible  feeling  he  had  in  him 
like  the  vomiting  of  the  soul. 

if 

a  strong  jail,  but 

He  did  not  speak  that  evening.  Nor  the  next.  He  won- 
dered  i*  the  Good  Man  was  in 
so 
surely  he  could  escape,  taking  some  form,  a  vulture,  a 
great  crow?  And  his  mother?  And  the  other  women,  the 
whisperers?  But  the  evening  after  that,  in  the  middle  of  a 
dusty  open  space  near  the  school  where  nobody  could  be 
hiding  to  listen,  he  touched  Mr.  Tshele’s  coat  and  looked 
up  at  him,  for  he  did  not  yet  come  to 
a  man’s  shoulder 
height.  Mr.  Tshele  bent  down,  thinking  this  was  some 
school  trouble.  It  was  then  that  Kobedi  whispered  the 
name  of  his  village  and  when  Mr.  Tshele  did  not  immedi- 
ately  understand:  ‘Where  that  one  who  is 
tried 
comes  from.  I  know  him.” 

be 

to 

“You?  How?”  said  Mr.  Tshele  and  then  Kobedi  began 
to  tell  him  everything  and  the  dust  blew  round  them  and 
he  began  to  cry  and  Mr.  Tshele  wiped  his  dusty  tears 
away  and  took  him  to  a  shop  at  the  far  side  of  the  open 
space  and  gave  him  an  ice  lolly  on  a  stick.  He  had  seen 
boys  sucking  them,  but  for  him  it  was  the  first  time  and 
great  pleasure. 

’  cousin  the  lawyer,  which  was  set 

Then  Mr.  Tshele  said,  “Come  with  me,”  and  took  him 
by  the  hand  and  they  went  together  to  the  house  of  his 
a  garden  with  fruit 
trees  and  tomato  plants  and  flowers  and  a  thing  which 
and 
it  was 
Inside 
whirled  water. 
Kobedi’s  bare  feet  felt 
a  soft  and  delicious  carpet  under 
them.  “Here  is  your  witness  in  the  big  case!”  said  Mr. 
Tshele, 
“Tell  him!”  But  Kobedi 
could  not  speak  of  it  again. 

and  then  to  Kobedi: 

a  shop 

light 

as 

as 

in 

the  stomach,  and  in 

But  they  gave  him  a  drink  that  stung  a 

little  on  the 
a  while 
toneue  and  was  warm  in 
Kobedi  was  able  to  say  again  what  he  had  said  to 
his 
teacher  and  it  came  more  easily.  “Good,”  said  the  cousin 
who  was  a  lawyer.  “Now,  little  one,  will  you  be  able  to  say 
in  the  Court?  If  you  can  do  it  you  will  destroy  a 
this 
great  evil.  Modimo  will  be  glad  of  you.”  Kobedi  nodded 
and  then  he  whispered  to 
will  come 
better  if  you  take  this  off  me,”  and  he  showed  them  the 
sinew  with  the  medicine.  The  two  men  looked  at  one  an- 
other  and  the  lawyer  fetched  a  strong  pair  of  scissors  and 
cut  through  the  sinew;  then  he  took  it  into  the  kitchen, 
and  before  Kobedi’s  eyes  he  put  it  with  his  own  hand

Tshele, 

Mr. 

“It 

_ 

The  Finger 

105 

into  the  stove  and  poked  the  wood  into  a  blaze  so  that  it 
the 
was  consumed  altogether. 
lawyer  the  shop  where  he  worked.  “So  now,”  said  the 
lawyer,  “no  word  to  any  other  person.  This  is  between  us 
three.  Khudu  Thamaga.” 

that  Kobedi  told 

After 

That  night  Kobedi  slept  quickly  without  dreaming. 
Two  days  later  a  big  car  stopped  at  the  shop  where  he 
was  sweeping  out  the  papers  and  dirt  and  spittle  of  the 
customers.  The  lawyer  came  to  the  door  and  called  him: 
“You  have  not  spoken?  Good.  But  in  Court  you  will 
speak.”  Then  the  lawyer  gave  some  money  to  the  man  at 
the  shop  to  make  up  for  taking  his  servant,  and  when 
they  were  in  the  car  he  explained  to  Kobedi  how  it would 
be.  The  accused  here,  the  witness  there.  “I  will  ask  you 
questions,”  he  said,  “and  you  will  answer  and  it  will  be 
only  the  truth,  Look  at  the  Judge  in  the  high  seat  behind 
the  table  where  men  write.  Do  not  look  at  the  accused 
man.  Never  look  at  him.  Do  you  understand?”  Kobedi 
nodded.  The  lawyer  went  on,  “Speak  in  Setswana  when 
I  question  you,  even  if  you  know  some  English  words 
which  my  cousin  says  you  have  learnt.  These  things  of 
which  you  will  tell  cannot  be  spoken  in  English.  But  show 
little.  You  can  say  to  the  Judge,  ‘I 
also  that  you  know a 
greet  you,  Your  Honour.’  Repeat  that.  Yes,  that  is  right. 
Your  Honour  is  the  English  name  for  a  Judge  and  this  is 
a  most  important  Judge.” 

So  in  a  while  the  car  stopped  and  Kobedi  was  put  into 
a  room  and  given  milk  and  sandwiches  with  meat  in 
them  and  he  waited,  The  time  came  when  he  was  called 
into  the  Court  and  a  man  helped  him  and  told  him  not 
eyes  down  and  saw  nothing, 
to  be  afraid.  He  kept  his 
but  the  man  touched  his  shoulder  and  said,  “There  is  His 
Honour  the  Judge.”  So  Kobedi  looked  up  bravely  and 
greeted  the  Judge,  who  smiled  at  him  and  asked  if  he  . 
knew  the  meaning  of  an  oath.  At  all  times  there  was  an 
be’  very 
interpreter  in 
many  people,  who  sometimes  made  a  rustling  sound  like 
dry  leaves  of  mealies,  but  Kobedi  carefully  looked  only 
at  the  Judge.  So  he  took  his  oath;  there  was  a  Bible,  such 
as  he  had  seen  at  his  first  school.  And  then  the  lawyer 
began  to  ask  him  questions  and  he  answered,  so  that  the 
story  grew  like  a  tree  in  front  of  the  Judge. 

the  Court  and  there  seemed  to 

Now  it  came  to  the  whisperers  in  the  midnight  room 
their  purpose;  the

and  what  they  had  shown  him  of 

106 

EDGES 

lawyer  asked  him  who  there  were  besides  the  actused. 
Kobedi  answered  that  one  was  his  mother.  And  as 
he 
did  so  there  was  a  scream  and  it  came  from  his  mother 
herself.  “Wicked  one,  liar,  runaway,  oh  how  I  will  beat 
you!”  she  yelled  at  him  until  a  policewoman  took  her 
away.  But  he  had  turned  towards  her,  and  suddenly  he 
had  become  dreadfully  unhappy.  And  in  his  unhappiness 
he  looked  too  far  and  in  a  kind  of  wooden  box  half  a 
grown  person’s  height,  he  saw  the  Good  Man. 

is 

all 

Before  he  could  take  his  eyes  away  the  Good  Man 
suddenly  shot  out  his  finger  over  the  top  of  the  box  and 
it  was  as  though  a  rod  of  fire  passed  between  him  and 
lies,”  shouted  the  Good  Man.  “Tell 
Kobedi.  “It 
them  you  have  lied, 
lied!’  And  a  dreadful  need 
came  onto  Kobedi  to  say  just  this  thing  and  he  took  a 
shuffling  step  towards  the  Good  Man,  for  what  had  passed 
between  them  was  kgogela,  sorcery,  and  it  had  trapped 
him.  But  there  was  a  great  noise  from  all  round  and  he 
heard  the 
and 
Judge’s 
other  voices  and  he  felt 
a  sharp  pain  in  the  side  of  his 
stomach. 

lawyer’s 

voice 

voice 

lied, 

and 

the 

Now  after  this  Kobedi  was  not  clear  what  was  happen- 
ing,  only  he  shut  his  eyes  tight,  and  then  it  seemed  to  him 
that  he  still  wore  those  sinews  which  the  Good  Man  had 
fastened  onto  him.  And  the  pain  in  his  stomach  seemed 
to  grow.  But  the  kgogela  had  been  broken  and  he  did  not 
need  to  undo  his  words  and  he  was  able  to  open  his  eyes 
and  look  at  the  Judge  and  to  answer  three  more  questions 
from  his  friend  the  lawyer.  Then  he  was  guided  back  to 
the  room  where  one  waited  and  he  did  not  speak  of  the 
pain,  for  he  hoped  it  might  go. 

the 

But  it  was  still  there.  After  a  time  his  friend  the  lawyer 
came  in  and  said  he  had  done  well.  But  somehow  Kobedi 
no  longer  cared.  When  he  was  in 
car  beside  the 
lawyer  he  had  to  ask  for  it  to  stop  so  that  he  could  get 
out  and  vomit  into  a  bush,  for  he  could  not  dirty  such  a 
shining  car.  On  the  way  to  the  Court  he  had  watched  the 
little  clocks  and  jumping  numbers  in  the  front  of  the  car, 
but  now  they  did  not  speak  to  him.  He  had  become  tired 
all  over  and  yet 
if  he  shut  his  eyes  he  saw  the  finger 
pointing.  “I  will  take  you  to  Mr.  Tshele,”  said  the  lawyer 
and  stopped  to  buy  milk  and  bread  and  sausage;  but 
Kobedi  was  only  a 
little  pleased  and  he  began  less  and 
less  to  be  able  not  to  speak  of  his  pain.

The  Finger 

107 

After  a  time  of  voices  and  whirling  and  doctors,  he  be- 
a  white  bed  and  there 
gan  to  wake  up  and  he  was  in 
was  a  hospital  smell.  A  nurse  came  and  he  felt  pain,  but 
not  of  the  same  deep  kind,  nor  so  bad,  Then  a  doctor 
came  and  said  all  was  well  and  Mr,  Tshele  came  and 
told  Kobedi  that  now  he  was  going  to  live  with  him  and 
go  properly  to  school  in  the  daytime  and  have  new  clothes 
and  shoes,  He  and  the  lawyer  would  become,  as  it  were, 
Kobedi’s  uncles.  “But,”  said  Kobedi,  “tell  me—the  one— 
the  one  who  did  these  things?” 

“The  Judge  has  spoken,”  said  Mr.  Tshele.  “That  man 

will  die  and  all  will  be  wiped  out.” 

“And—the  woman?”  For  he  could  not  now  say  mother. 
is  out  of  her.” 
“She  will  be  put  away  until 
Kobedi  wondered  a  little  about  the  small  sisters,  but  they 
were  no  longer  in  his 
so  he  could  forget  them  and 
forget  the  house  and  forget  his  village  forever.  He  lay 
back  in  the  white  bed. 

evil 

the 

life 

After  a  while  a  young  nurse  came  in  and  gave  him  a 
pill  to  swallow.  Kobedi  began  to  question  her  about  what 
happened,  for  he  knew  by  now  that  the  doctors  had  cut 
his  stomach.  The  young  nurse  looked 
the  pain  out  of 
round  and  whispered: 
a 
small  crocodile,  but  dead,”  she  said. 

“They  took  out 

a  thing  like 

“That  was  the  sorcery,”  said  Kobedi.  Now  he  knew 

and  was  happy  that  it  was  entirely  gone. 

The  young  nurse  said,  “We  are  not  allowed  to  believe 

in  sorcery.” 

“¥  do  not  believe  in 

it  anv  longer,”  said  Kobedi,  “be- 

cause  it  is  finished.  But  that  was  what  it  was.” 

.

Among  the  trees  in  the  academic  groves, 
there  is  a  Lowry  Pei.  He  was  observed  a 
couple  of  years  back  running  a  Writing  Pro- 
gram  at  the  University  of  California  in  San 
Diego,  was  next  sighted  in  the  purlieus  of 
Princeton,  and  is  presently  receiving  mail  in 
the  environs  of  Cambridge.  Since  this  rara-. 
avis  changes  his  roost  every  year  (and  never 
answers  his  phone)  it  is  not  easy  to  pin  Pei 
down  for  the  usual  bio.  One  would  have 
liked  to  ask  him  some  searching  questions, 
if  only  because— 

This  is  a  haunting  story. 

Barranca,  King  of 
the  Tree  Streets 

BY  LOWRY  PEI 

My  friends  lived 
on  Chestnut  Street,  and  when  I  was 
looking  for  a  place  to  live  they  said,  “Go  see  Barranca, 
up  at  the  barber  shop,  he  owns  half  the  tree  streets.” 

“Tree  streets?” 
“Chestnut,  Maple,  Spruce—right  around  here.” 

“Oh.” 

(if 

I  saw 

the  grocery  store 

I  remember  right) 

In 
a 
young  woman  who  looked  like  a  girl  I  was  in  love  with  in 
college.  They  were  called  girls,  twenty  years  ago.  She 
said  “hi”  to  me  in  the  checkout  line  and  also  later,  on 
Chestnut  Street, 
I  looked  like  someone  she  knew, 
too.  I  noticed  the  unselfconsciously  arrogant  way  she  held 
clerk 
a  twenty-dollar  bill  between  two 
bagged  her  groceries.  Outside  the  store,  I  passed  a  couple 

fingers 

the 

as 

as 

if 

108

  
Barranca,  King  of  the  Tree  Streets 

109 

of  other  young  women  and  caught  a  whiff  of  some  per- 
fume,  like  an  odor  of  sanctity,  that  went  right  into  me 
and  hit  the  mark. 

Chestnut  Street  was  lined  with  pin  oaks,  sugar  maples, 
lindens,  and  scarlet  oaks—the  ones  whose  leaves  tell  you 
a  “C”  cut  out  of  the  leaf  and 
their  name  because  there  is 
their  Latin  name  is  Quercus  coccinea.  There  was  a  Chi- 
nese  Redbud  that  I  looked  up  in  the  Atlas  of  Woody 
Landscape  Plants,  and  it  said  “barely  survives  in  central 
in  northern  New  Jersey. 
Indiana.”  It  was  doing  fine 

“Hi,”  she  said. 

I  thought  of  the  voice  of 
“It’s  late 
September  and  I  really  should  be  back  in  school.”  JI  had 
trouble  remembering  where  I  was  staying  while  I  looked 
for  a  place. 

a  singer,  long  ago: 

I  went  into  the  barber  shop;  a  bell  clicked  and  dinged 
over  the  door, 
“Yes?” 
“Td  like  to  speak  to  Mr.  Barranca.” 
“He’s  busy  right  now.” 
“Well,  do  you  know  when  he’ll  be  back?” 
“What  would  you  like  to  see  him  about?” 
“I'm  looking  for 
You  come  back  later.” 

an  apartment  and  I  heard  that—” 

I  described  the  man  I  had  spoken  to—graying,  gaunt- 
faced,  short,  kneading  his  cheek  as  he  stood  looking  out 
the  barbershop  window,  one  foot  up  on  a  chair.  “That 
was  Barranca,”  said  my  friend. 

Every  day  there  were  more  and  brighter  leaves  on  the 
.” 

sidewalk,  “The  maidens  taste,  and  stray  impassioned  . 

. 

I  bought  a  new  corduroy  jacket  like  one  I  had  had  in 
college,  such  as 
I  had  been  promising  myself  for  years, 
but  somehow  I  forgot  to  take  it  with  me.  I  also  forgot  that 
I  had  bought  it,  until  the  next  day,  when  I  remembered, 
because  I  had  it  on. 

That  same  day  I  met  the  same  young  woman  at  the  cor- 
ner  of  Chestnut  Street.  She  said  “hi”  again,  and  since

110 

EDGES 

all  right  to  walk  together.  “Sure,”  she 

we  were  both  going  down  the  hill,  I  asked  her  if  it  would 
said,  smiling, 
be 
and  the  coldness  left  her  face  for  a  moment,  leaving  her 
almost  shy.  I  found  out  her  name  was  Caroline,  which 
was  all  right—not  the  same  as  the  other.  I  told  her  some- 
thing  about  plants,  especially  the  ones  on  the  street.  She 
J  taught  a  class. 
was  a  student,  as  I  thought,  and  asked  if 
When  we  reached  the  bottom  of  the  hill,  she  turned  to  the 
left  and  I  did  not  have  the  courage  to  follow  her.  “Maybe 
we'll  meet  at  the  corner  again,”  she  said,  smiling  once 
more.  She  wore  a  beige  trench  coat  and  carried  a  square 
leather  bag  with  a  shoulder  strap;  her  hair  was  a  splotch 
of  red-gold  against  the  grey  blotter  of  the  afternoon.  From 
behind  she  looked  exactly  as  I  remembered  her.  I  watched 
her  for  a  long  time,  afraid  that  she  would  look  back  and 
see  me  watching.  At  one  point  a  couple  of  blocks  away 
she  suddenly  seemed  to  grow  very  tall;  then  she  returned 
to  normal  size. 

“Mr.  Barranca?” 

“Mr.  Barranca  is  not  in  right  now,”  he  said,  moodily 

watching  the  sidewalk.  I  didn’t  know  what  to  say. 

“Perhaps  you  remember  I  was 

day, 
asking  about  apartments.  Did  you  speak  to  him  about  it, 
by  any  chance?” 

other 

here 

the 

“No,  I...”  He  seemed  to  lose  interest  in  the  conver- 
sation,  After  a  while  he  said,  “He  doesn’t  have  anything 
right  now.” 

“Well,  thank  you.”  I  turned  to  go. 
“What  were  you  interested  in?”  he  said 

as  my  hand 

touched  the  doorknob. 

“Something  right  around  here—you  know,  the 

tree 

streets—nothing  elaborate,  just  for  me.” 

“You  got  pets?” 
“No.  Well,  I  might  have  a 

I  said,  surprised  at 
this  piece  of  information.  “Some  friends  of  mine  are  keep- 
ing  him  for  me.”  I  couldn’t  remember  their  names,  but 
I  recalled  the  cat  perfectly  now. 

cat,” 

“You  let  them  keep  him,  huh?” 
“Do  you  think  it  would  help  me,”  I  said,  looking’  at 
I  could,  “you  know,  with  Mr.  Bar- 

him  as  directly  as 
ranca?” 

He  glanced  at  me  briefly.  “Yes.” 
I  began  devising  ways  to  show  up  at  the  corner  of  Chest-

Barranca,  King  of  the  Tree  Streets 

111 

nut  Street  ten  times  in  an  afternoon  without  simply  hang- 
ing  around.  On  the  third  day  I  met  Caroline  there,  and 
we  walked  down  the  hill  together  again.  At  the  bottom, 
where  I  expected  her  to  turn,  we  both  kept  straight  on, 
past  the  music.  school,  until  we  reached  a  frame  house 
where  she  said  she  lived.  She  invited  me  in  for  a  cup.  of 
tea;  my  heart  pounded,  not  bcause  of  the  stairs.  It  turned 
out  she  lived  in  one  large  white  room  at  the  top  of  the 
house.  There  were  few  furnishings—a  big  square  table 
of  unstained  oak,  a  mattress  on  the  floor  with  an  antique 
quilt  over  it,  some  bentwood  chairs.  It  was  impeccably 
clean.  J  put  down  her  groceries  and  reached  up  to  pull 
the  string  that  hung  down  from  the  overhead  light, 
but 
she  said,  “No,  that  makes  everything  ugly,”  and  turned 
on  a  lamp  by  the  table. 

As  she  made  tea  she  talked  to  me  about  the  anthropol- 
ogy  she  was  studying  and  how  curious  people  were.  I 
thought  that  I  might  have  been  content  to 
sit  in  silence, 
watching  it  grow  dark,  without  a  light  in  the  room  except 
her  breathing  and  my  own.  The  tea  steeped  in 
a  heavy 
brown  stoneware  pot,  white-flecked  in  the  glaze.  I  told  her 
how  beautiful  it  was,  how  beautiful  her  room  was,  but  she 
did  not  reply. 

I  tried  to  tell  her  a  few  things  about  myself,  my  life, 
but  could  manage  only  stumbling  phrases,  and  I  found 
the  subject  of  no  interest. 

She  was  silent  for  a  long  time,  looking  at  a  picture  on 
the  wall  (I  thought).  I  did  not  get  up  to  make  sure  what 
it  was,  When  I  began  to  speak  she  shushed  me. 

Finally  I  became  convinced  she  was  not  going  to  speak 
again.I  got  up  and  moved  toward  her  with  the  intention  of 
her, 
saying  goodnight.  Awkwardly,  I  stood  in  front  of 
offering  my  hand;  she  looked  up.  “Why  did  it  take  you  so 
long  to  come  back?”  she  said.  I  bent  down,  putting  my 
hand  on  her  neck,  to  kiss  her;  at  the  last  moment  she 
turned  her  cheek  to  my  lips  with  half  a  smile.  “My  name 
isn’t  Caroline,”  she  said,  now  that  I  was  unable  to  speak. 
Her  hand  touched  mine  gently,  moving  it  away. 

I  went  to  wherever  it  was  I  went  at  night  and  slept  and 
slept. 

Click,  ding. 

“Mr.  Barranca,”  I  said,  taking  all  my  courage  in  hand, 

“T  must  have  a  place  to  live.”

112 

EDGES 

“Mr.  Barranca  is  not  in,”  he  said  tiredly,  perfunctorily. 

“So,  you  must,  eh?” 

“Yes.” 
“Whereabouts  do  you  want  to  live?” 
“The  tree  streets.  Chestnut  Street.” 
He  sighed  profoundly,  turned  the  sign  on  the  door  from 
“Open”  to  “Back  in  Ten  Minutes,”  put  on  his  jacket,  and 
showed  me  out. 

We  walked  down  the  hill,  scuffling  red  leaves,  in  silence. 
“Anyone  you  know  live  here?”  he  said. 
“Yes—a  couple  of  friends,  in  one  of  these  houses  here,” 

I  said,  indicating  vaguely. 

“Anyone  else?” 
His  questioning  annoyed  me,  and  I 
did  not  answer. 
We  continued  down  the  hill  to  the  bettom,  straight  on, 
past  the  music  school,  to 
large 
white  room  at  the  top.  Her  furniture  was  gone.  I  could  see 
holes  where  picture  hangers  had  been  driven  into  the  walls. 
One  seemed  to  be  in  the  spot  I  remembered.  He  turned  on 
the  overhead  light. 

a  frame  house  with  a 

“Previous  tenant  just  moved  out.” 
“But—” 
“You  say  you  must  have  a  place,  nothing  elaborate, 

here  is  a  place.” 

“Yes.” 
“Well?”  He  seemed  very  old,  his  eyes  hooded;  he  did  not 

look  at  me. 

“Yes,  Pll  take  it.” 

to 

the  barber  shop 

We  walked  back  up 

I 
could  sign  the  rental  agreement,  under  the  pin  oaks,  the 
sugar  maples,  the  scarlet  oaks  with  a  “C”  cut  out  of  their 
leaves.  When  I  had  completed  the  papers  and  paid,  he 
said,  “And  now  you  will  have  a  haircut.  On  me.  This 
apartment-hunting  has  been  hard  on  you.”  He  gestured  me 
toward  a  chair. 

that 

so 

“Oh,  no,  I  couldn’t  think  of—” 
“Yes,  I 

insist, 

is  my  trade  after 

it 

all,  and  you  will 

know  that  I  am  glad  to  have  you  for  a  tenant.” 

“So  you  are  Mr.  Barranca,  then,”  I  said  triumphantly, 
impassively 

some 

but 

he 

expecting 
acknowledgement, 
motioned  me  to  sit  back  in  the  chair. 
as 

“And  a  manicure,”  he 

said. 

if 

I  had  not  spoken.

Barranca,  King  of  the  Tree  Streets 

113 

From  the  side  of  my  field  of  vision,  a  woman  took  my 
hand  in  professional  fingers.  I  looked  over. 

“T  haven’t  seen  you  in  an  age,”  she  said.  “It’s  wonderful, 

the  people  I  meet  in  this  shop.” 

“Hello,  Alison,”  I  said,  closing  my  eyes.  Nothing  else, 

but  still  the  red-gold  hair.

George  P.  Elliott  died  untimely  at  the  age 
of  sixty-one  on  the  3rd  of  May  1980.  He 
had  been  Professor  of  English  at  Syracuse 
University  for  seventeen  years.  He  is  best 
known  for  his  novels:  Parktilden  Village, 
David  Knudson,  In  the  World  and  Muriel; 
he  had  several  volumes  of  short  stories, 
poems  and  essays  to  his  credit;  and,  within 
the  genre,  his  story,  “Among  the  Dangs,”  is 
well-remembered  from  its  first  appearance 
in  F&SF. 

In  Yahvestan,  when  the  choice  is  whether 
to  be  a  wolf  among  wolves  or  a  hog  among 
swine... 

Thomas  in  Yahvestan 

BY  GEORGE  P.  ELLIOTT 

ever 

left  home?  Childbirth 

his  broken  tooth,  and  all 
Thomas  awoke  to  an  ache  in 
day  the  pain,  which  he 
did  not  mention  to  any  of  the 
caravaners,  made  him  reflect  gloomily  on  his  follies  and 
errors.  Why  had  he 
kills 
women  no  deader  in  Illyria  than  anywhere  else.  And  that 
solitude  he  had  been  hankering  after?’  There 
was  plenty 
of  it  five  miles  from  his  native  town.  And  at  least  the 
people  of  Iilyria  didn’t  talk  wrong,  dress  wrong,  look  at 
you  wrong.  As  for  the  China  this  caravan  was  headed 
for,  his  urge  to  go  there  had  not  survived  the  first  week 
with  the  caravan;  now,  the  only  reason  he  could  think 
of  for  going  to  China  was  to  tell  the  people  at  home  about 
it,  and  home  was  what  he  was  running  from.  This  moun- 
and  down  and 
tain  range  they  had  been  winding  up 
among  for  twelve  days,  so  bleak  it  didn’t  even  have  a 

114

  
Thomas  in  Yahvestan 

115 
name,  though  some  of  the  men  said  they’d  heard  of  some 
country  called  Yahvestan  in  these  parts  somewhere  and 
though  Wry  Neck  said  he  came  from  there—even  the 
animals  were  wrong  hereabouts,  griffons,  people  said, 
werewolves,  birds  with  teeth.  While  the  others  were  eat- 
ing  the  evening  meal,  Thomas  sat  on  a  mound  well  apart 
from  men  and  camels,  chin  in  hand.  He'd  gone  over  the 
edge  of  the  world  as  he’d  promised  himself  to  do,  he 
deserved  to  be  punished,  he  had  no  right  to  complain. 

But  the  moment  Wry  Neck  sought  him  out  and  asked 

why  he  was  not  eating,  Thomas  complained. 

Wry  Neck  shrugged,  and  looked  solicitous,  His  hand 
reached  into  an  inner  pocket  and  fetched  out  a  dried  leaf; 
his  fingers  twiddled  it.  “This  is 
a  cure  for  pain.  Pll  seethe 
this  for  a  while  in  camel's  milk,  and  at  least  you'll  be  able 
to  sleep  tonight.” 

It  was  a  good  thing  he  used  only  the  one  leaf  of  dried 
lanthan;  the  drugged  milk  was  so  formidable  a  potion  that 
Thomas’  toothache  vanished  after  he  had  drunk  a  cup  of 
it.  However,  so  far  from  straightway  falling  to  sleep  he 
bounced  into 
an  amiable,  silly  delirium,  swinging  like 
the  clapper  of  a  tinkle-bell:  first  he  would  giggle  to  be 
feeling  so  good;  then  he  would  remember  how  painfully 
his  tooth  had  been  throbbing  just  a  little  while  ago,  and 
his  lower  lip  would  tremble,  he’d  blubber.  Wry  Neck, 
for  the  sake  of  his  longed-for  slavery,  had  to  talk  Thomas 
back  into  some  semblance  of  masterfulness;  but  he  could 
not  think  what  to  say.  He  had  resolved  not  to  mention 
the  priestess  of  the  love-rites,  the  Tuma,  till  they  were  al- 
ready  in  Yahvestan,  reasoning  that  a  man  as  fastidious 
as  Thomas  would  not  be  able  to  endure  the  very  thought 
navel-licking  woman—though  once 
of 
Thomas  was  a  member  of  a  wedding,  the  lanthan  would 
trick  him  into  mindless  desire.  But  here  and  now,  with 
Thomas  insufferably  silly  from  the  Janthan,  Wry  Neck 
could  not  think  how  better  to  restore  him  to  dignity  than 
by  giving  him  something  to  look  down  on,  the  Tuma.  He 
told  Thomas  about  Yahvestan  and  her. 

lewd 

such 

a 

When  Thomas  had  stood  at  Maria’s  winter  graveside, 
fists  clenched  and  eyes  dry,  the  thud  of  the  first  shovel- 
ful  of  earth  hitting  the  coffin  made  his  heart  pound  to 
join  her,  and  by  the  time  the  grave  was  filled  he  had 
vowed  eternal  fidelity  and  chastity;  but  that  had  been  a 
plain  and  several  mountains  and  two  wide  seas  ago,  and

116 

EDGES 

the  matter.  Now, 
his  loins  had  not  been  consulted  in 
susceptible 
at  Wry  Neck’s  mentioning 
and  incautious, 
a  priestess  of  pleasure,  Thomas’  mind  filled  with  images 
so  lascivious  that  he  grinned  for  more.  Wry  Neck,  greatly 
relieved,  chattered  on,  assuring  Thomas  that  the  lewder 
the  images  the  holier  they  were  in  the  Tuma’s  eyes,  though 
nothing  was  holier  than  navel-licking.  “Ah?”  said  Thomas 
and  frowned  solemnly  at  his  navel.  After  a  while,  he  wob- 
bled  to  his  feet  and  informed  Wry  Neck  he  was  ready  to 
set  off  for  Yahvestan  then  and  there.  Wry  Neck  persuaded 
him  to  lie  down  first  and  rest.  Thomas  fell  asleep  as  soon 
as  he  stretched  out. 

By  midnight  he  had  slept  off  the  giddiness  but  not  the 
images.  They  were  more  vivid  than  the  stars  above  him 
in-the  moonless  sky.  ‘Shame,’  his  heart  reproached  him, 
‘are  you  not  ashamed  of  such  base  thoughts?’  ‘It’s  not 
that  I  want  to,  but  the  flesh  is  strong  and  besides  these 
God-forsaken  regions  are  given  over  to  devils.’  ‘Faithless, 
inconstant  husband.’  ‘No!  I  love  Maria  and  only  her  and 
I  always  will.’  ‘To  the  whores  with  you.’  ‘T  can’t  help  it, 
Hearing  Thomas  groan,  Wry  Neck  came  awake,  poked 

up  the  fire,  and  watched  him  gnaw  his  lip. 

“Human  Beings,”  Wry  Neck  said,  “like  to  be  married 
by  the  Tuma  as  often  as  they  can,  except  the  Sinseekers, 
of  course.” 

“You  ever  marry?” 
Wry  Neck  sniggered,  and  spat.  “Usually  people  marry 

themselves  along  with  nine  other  couples.” 

“How  often?” 
“Every  new  moon.  The  dark  of  the  moon  unmarries 
them.  Mostly  they  remarry  each  other,  but  there  are  al- 
ways  some  who  are  looking  around.  Young  women  es- 
pecially.” 

“Well,”  said  Thomas,  “every  month?” 
“Tonight’s  the  night  for  us 

to  take  off  and  go  there. 

Shall  we?” 

“Why  not?”  Thomas  thought,  hunching  down  further. 
“The  wolves,”  said  Wry  Neck,  “were  howling  around 
last  night,  and  I  told  the  others  that  werewolves  run  in 
the  dark  of  the  moon.” 

“Do  they?” 
Wry  Neck  winked. 
“Bich,”  said  Thomas  and  spat  through  the  hole  made 

by  his  broken  tooth.

Thomas  in  Yahvestan 

117 

The  country  into  which  Thomas  was  about  to  disappear 
was  triply  sequestered  from  the  world:  by  its  poverty,  by 
mountains  behind  and  desert  before,  and  by  its  religion. 
The  few  Outsiders  who  had  ever  come  this  way  had  had 
many  strange  gods,  wheras  Human  Beings  (as  the  people 
of  Yahvestan,  or  God’s  Country,  called  themselves)  had 
had  only  one  god  and  furthermore  had  always  claimed 
that  he  was  the  oldest  and  strongest  god,  more  attentive 
to  his  people’s  welfare  than  other  gods  were  to  theirs. 
Furthermore,  so  they  used  to  say,  in  order  that  time might 
begin  he  had  come  down  through  a  hole  in  the  sky  and 
entered  a  high,  cone-shaped  mountain  in  the  center  of 
Yahvestan;  they  called  him  Mountain,  though  of  course 
he  only  lived  there.  But  then,  a  few  generations  back,  he 
had  gone  away.  Thereafter,  Human  Beings  were  shunned 
even  by  the  few  traders  who  had  used  to  come  every  few 
years,  What  had  Human  Beings  done  that  their  god  would 
punish  them  so  cruelly  as 
to  abandon  them?  To  that 
question  no  one,  including  the  Human  Beings  themselves, 
could  conceive  an  answer.  Outsiders  ceased  to  mention 
Yahvestan,  wanted  to  not-know  what  abominations  had 
been  committed  there  lest  such  knowledge  inflame  their 
imaginations,  tempting  them  to  do  likewise, 

When  Mountain  had  belched  flame,  and  a  river  of  mol- 
ten  rock  poured  from  his  lip,  and  bottomless  cracks  ap- 
peared  in  the  earth,  and  ash  settled  on  all  Yahvestan,  the 
Human  Beings  had  been  stunned.  Cowering,  they  thought 
to  appease  his  wrath  by  muttering  the  prayer  for  mercy; 
he  was  not  appeased.  After  the  days  of  his  roaring,  Moun- 
tain  suddenly  died:  obviously  the  fountain  of 
fire  had 
burned  a  hole  in  the  sky,  and  he  had  gone  up  through  it. 
The  priests  set  about  to  discover  what  prayers,  rituals, 
sacrifices,  would  win  him  back.  Some  Human  Beings 
thought  this  was  a  waste  of  time:  wherever  he  was,  he 
was  surely  so 
far  away  that  the  sound  of  their  voices 
could  no  longer  reach  his  ears  or  the  smoke  of  their  sacri- 
fices  please  his  nostrils.  Most,  however,  lords,  commoners, 
and  slaves  alike,  agreed  it  would  be  a  good  idea  to  main- 
tain  the  ancient  ways  so  as  to  be  worthy  of  him  when  he 
returned:  a  rite  might  chance  to  snare  him  long  enough 
for  them  to  pray  him  back  into  the  mountain,  where  they 
would  glut  him  with  sacrifices  forever  after,  But  in  fact 
most  Human  Beings  were  too  occupied  getting  along  in  a 
world  without  god  to  bother  worshipping  him  on  the  off-

118 

EDGES 

and 

a  handful 

chance;  the  job  was  delegated  to  a  priest,  God’s  Remem- 
brancer, 
of 
of 
Tradition,  who  lived  on  the  side  of  Mountain,  sequestered 
from  all  other  Human  Beings;  and  in  Yahvestan  generally 
religion  etiolated  for  lack  of  fresh  blood,  most  of  which 
was  pumping  into  arguing  about  the  foundations  of  justice, 
authority,  and  love. 

Custodians 

priestesses, 

These  arguments  never  ceased.  What  they  lost  in  vigor 

over  the  years  they  gained  in  ingenuity. 

The 

was: 

question 

never-resolved 

It  was  obvious  that  without  god’s  justice,  ultimate  and 
infallible,  Human  Beings  must  construct  their  own  justice, 
winnow  all  the  grievances,  lay  all  the  blame,  do  all  the 
punishing. 
how  to 
lay  a  foundation  on  which  so  great  a  palace  may  safely 
be  erected?  The  only  consensus  by  way  of  answer  to 
this  question  was  negative:  neither  might  nor  exceptional 
the  foundation  to  Human  justice.  But 
ability  could  be 
without  god  to  sanction  the  authority  of  Human  Beings, 
how  shall  they  prevent  brute  force  from  triumphing?  Only 
by  treating  each  other  as  equals.  But  how  can  they  do 
that,  since  they  are  not  in  fact  equal?  No,  but  authority 
can  be  distributed  more  or  less  equally,  not  much  for  any- 
one,  a 
little  for  everyone.  The  many  who  neither  want 
to  nor  are  competent  to  handle  authority  were  quelled 
by  the  following  argument:  who  but  god  dispersed  author- 
ity 
all  over  Human  Beings  by  abandoning  his  people  to 
fend  for  themselves?  It  took  the  idea  a  couple  of  genera- 
tions  to  establish  itself, 
so  shocking  was  it,  but  finally  it 
was  generally  accepted:  god  had  sinned.  By  abdication, 
god  made  each  responsible  for 
all  and  all  for  each;  if 
you  don’t  like  this  state  of  affairs,  blame  god;  the  sin  is 
his.  (There  was  some  talk  of  changing  the  name  of  God’s 
Country,  but  the  name  was  kept:  his  sin  stayed  fresh  on 
people’s  tongues.) 

Justice  and  authority:  in  common  to  these  was  govern- 
ing.  Who  should  rule? 
(It  occurred  to  some  Human 
Beings  that  all  government  should  be  abolished,  but  they 
were  dismissed  as  harmless  madmen.)  How  better  to  make 
responsibility  universal  than  to  have  everybody  at  once 
own  another  and  be  owned  by  another?  There  must  be 
no  rulers,  no  leaders,  but  only  judges:  a  Council  of  Twenty 
judges  was  elected  annually  by  all  Human  Beings;  the 
twenty  elected  from  among  themselves  the  year’s  Settler 
(so  called  since,  as  the  final  court  of  appeal,  he  settled

Thomas  in  ¥ahvestan 

119 

grievances  once  and  for  all);  then  the  Council  publicly 
criticized  and  cast  doubt  on,  though  seldom  negated,  al- 
most  every  decision  the  Settler  made,  even  as  the  popu- 
lace  at  large  unfailingly  complained  about  the  Council’s 
decisions  as  well  as  the  Settler’s.  The  result  of  this  dense 
reticulation  of  mutual  distrust  was  that  Human  Beings 
milled  and  drifted  like  a  shepherdless  flock  of  sheep  and 
watchdogs  all  tethered  together,  complacent  in  their  free- 
dom  and  equality:  the  group  free  to  wander,  all  the  mem- 
bers  equally  constrained. 

In  order  to  endure  the  justice  they  had  bound  them- 
selves  with,  Human  Beings  had  to  satisfy  their  acute  need 
for  personal  freedom  of  some  sort. 
Practically,  where 
could  most  of  them  find  it  better  than  in  love? 

of 

assertion  tainted  love’s  pleasures 

love  even  from  marriage;  but 

Once  god  was  no  longer  there  to  sanction  sexual  love, 
Human  Beings  felt  free  to  make  it 
all  themselves.  But 
how  free,  and  especially  how  free  from  politics?  At  first, 
they  liberated 
the  con- 
love,  whatever 
sequence  of 
this  was  that  every  act 
and 
else  it  did,  also  surreptitiously  sloganized  J  am  free, 
this 
anxiety 
to  prove  it  true:  I  am  free.  Human  Beings  came  to  fear 
the  very  love  they  had  to  have.  So,  in  monthly  form,  they 
reinstated  marriage: 
on 
your  love  than  to  fear  the  love  itself.  Also,  they  instituted 
the  ceremonial  use  of  a  long-forbidden  drug;  it  weakened 
they  decided  this  was  worth 
the 
the  risk,  for  the  drug  also  released  desire  until  not  even 
satiety’s  “I  want  no  more”  stopped  it,  but  only  capacity’s 
“J  can  not.”  The  combination  of  weakened  will  and  in- 
genious  lust  freed  love  even  from  politics,  at  least  during 
the  monthly  nuptials. 

will  dangerously,  but 

restraints 

resent 

better 

with 

the 

the 

to 

It  was  this  drug,  lanthan,  which  Wry  Neck  adminis- 

tered  to  Thomas. 

“If  we  leave  tonight,”  said  Wry  Neck,  “you  will  have 

licked 

a  month  to  get  ready  for  the  next  love  feast.” 
the 

“Pthluh,”  said  Thomas  and 

his 
mouth.  But  then  a  Fatima  with  kohl-grey  eyelids  and 
a 
ruby  in  her  navel  began  loosening  for  this  never-hermit 
the  veils  of  her  lounging,  and  his  biceps  twitched.  ‘I  can 
go  on  with  this  miserable  caravan  and  be  a  wolf  among 
wolves,  or  go  off  with  him  and  be  a  hog  among  swine.’ 
He  hit  his  forehead  with  the  heels  of  both  hands,  straight- 
bil-
ened  up,  took  a  deep  breath,  and  gave  Wry  Neck a 

roof 

of 

120 

EDGES 

ious  look.  “But  I  only  know  a  few  words  of  your  lan- 
guage.” 

“1’ll  teach  you  all  you  will  need  to  know  at  first,”  said 
a  while  and 

a  simpleton  for 

Wry  Neck.  “You  will  be 
not  need  to  say  much.  You  learn  fast.” 

for  insubordination: 

“I  do,”  said  Thomas,  and  the  Fatima  twitched  for  him. 
no 
Wry  Neck  had  been  exiled 
man  would  have  him  for  a  slave,  because  he  demanded 
more  mastery  than  Human  Beings  were  capable  of  any 
longer.  His  immediate  problem  was  to 
get  Thomas  to 
the  wedding  without  either  of  them  being  caught  by  a 
so  different 
Sinseeker,  and  both  of  them  were  visibly 
from  ordinary  Human  Beings  that  the  risk  was  great.  If 
flat-bellied,  handsome 
only  the  Tuma  would  make  tall, 
Thomas  a  Human  Being, 
be 
Thomas’  slave  and  all  would  be  well. 

then  Wry  Neck  could 

When  asked  where  he  came  from,  Thomas  would  only 
say  “from  the  west.”  He  never  hinted  at  what  he  was 
fleeing  or  even  that  he  was  in  flight,  but  his  imprecations 
and  sullenness  had  to  do  with  kings  and  captains,  rich 
men,  the  powerful,  and  his  oaths  had  a  Christian  ring 
to  them.  It  took  Wry  Neck  weeks  to  believe  that  this  was 
not  some  sort  of  pose  on  Thomas’  part,  for  Wry  Neck 
had  fallen  into  the  role  of  Thomas’  inferior  so  naturally, 
with  such  grateful  consciousness,  that  when  Thomas  off- 
handedly  exercised  command  over  him  Wry  Neck  as- 
sumed  without  even  thinking  about  it  that  Thomas  knew 
what  he  was  doing;  however,  after  weeks  of  Thomas’ 
attacks  on  the  hierarchies  of  power,  finally  Wry  Neck 
had  to  conclude  that  Thomas  was  not  aware  of  his  own 
natural  lordliness.  This  only  heightened  his  value  in  Wry 
Neck’s  eyes,  for  now  he  would  shine  forth  all  the  more 
brightly  in  Yahvestan.  There,  hierarchy  had  been  razed 
flat  and  privilege  mangled  to 
a  pulp  three  generations 
earlier;  Human  Beings  had  forgotten  what  a  lord  looked 
like,  and  Wry  Neck  was  sure  that  many  of  them  yearned, 
as  he  did,  to  have  one. 

He  taught  Thomas  how  to  greet  any  Human  Beings 
they  might  come  upon  and  how  to  behave  when  he  came 
into  the  presence  of  the  Tuma. 

a  valley  at  three  baked- 
Wry  Neck  pointed  down  into 
earth  houses  huddled  together  at  the  edge  of  a  river,  and

Thomas  in  Yahvestan 

121 

he  told  Thomas  the  time  had  come  for  him  to  see  how 
he  made  out  alone  with  strangers. 

“Why  don’t  you  come  with  me?”  said  Thomas. 
“I’ve  been  here  before,  Sinseekers  live  there,  I'll 
be 
recognized,  and  then  ..  .”  He  made  a  chop  at  his  throat. 
“I’ve  returned  to  Yahvestan  without  permission,  and  I 
have  no  master.  I'll  be  safe  in  the  Valley  of  the  Tuma, 
Sinseekers  don’t  go  there.” 
“Where  will  we  meet?” 
“Go  where  they  direct  you,  towards  the  City.  Don’t 
worry,  I'll  find  you  soon  enough  and  we’ll  go  on  the  way 
we've  been  going.” 

Well  before  Thomas  reached  the  houses,  he  came  on 
three  little  girls  playing  on  the  bank  of  the  river.  They 
ran  shrieking  towards  a  thicket,  from  behind  which  there 
marched  a  chunky  little  woman  who  planted  herself  in 
front  of  him,  squinting  up  at  him  and  chewing  her  lips. 

“What  are  you  doing  here,  Outsider?” 
He  knew  her  for  a  Sinseeker  by  the  black  mark  on 
her  forehead  the  size  of  a  thumbnail.  “Sister,”  he  began, 
“fellow  Human  Being,”  but  her  glower  halted  him.  “We 
are  all  twins,”  he  said  deferentially. 

“You're  no  twin  of  mine.”  Her  voice  was  flat  and 

raspy. 

“God’s  Remembrancer  sends  me  to 

the  City,  and  I 

have  lost  my  way.  I  need  help  to  uncover  my  sin.” 

“That’s  more  like  it.  You’re  going  to  the  right  place.” 
She  barked  a  laugh  without  ceasing  to  glower.  “I  know 
what  there  is 
to  know  about  sinseeking.”  She  held  up 
her  arms;  her  left  hand  had  been  cut  off. 
“I  got  that  for 
praying  to  Mountain  in  my  sleep.  Three  different  hus- 
bands  testified  against  me.  I  haven’t  done  it  since.” 

to 

cross 

himself 

Involuntarily  Thomas  started 

but 
stopped  before  he  had  done  more  than  touch  his  forehead 
with  his  right  thumb.  Without  his  knowing  it,  this  gesture 
melted  her  suspicions  of  him:  it  meant  he  wanted  to  be 
a  Sinsecker  too,  She  told  him  there  was  no  point  in  his 
hurrying  to 
City  because  the  Council  of  Twenty 
would  not  be  meeting  till  the  full  of  the  moon.  Why  didn’t 
he 
feast  was  the  day  after 
tomorrow,  and  she  hadn’t  had  a  new  husband  for  over  a 
year.  He  lacked  words  to  answer  her  with;  he  just  smiled 
and  shook  his  head  mournfully.  “Oh,  it’s  one  of  those?”

stay  here?  The  next  love 

the 

122 

EDGES 

she  said.  “Well,  come  back  after  you  have  found  your 
punishment.” 

As  he  was  walking  in  the  direction  she  pointed  out  to 
him,  he  heard  one  of  the  little  girls  say,  “What  will  they 
do  to  him  for  being  so  good  to  look  at?” 

‘ 

“Slit  his  nose,  I  expect,”  said  the  mother. 
“And  he’s  so  tall.” 
“If  he’s  done  something  bad  enough,  they'll  cut  him 
off  at  the  knees.  I  hope  they  don’t  have  to  because  then 
he  couldn’t  come  back  and  marry  me.” 

. 

burly 

admitted  Thomas  into 
was 

audience- 
guard 
A 
chamber,  which 
An 
love. 
incense-heavy  room  with  an  earthen  floor,  twice  as  long 
as  it  was  wide.  A  divan  on  a  bearskin  near  the  back  wall. 
Who  was  this  woman  of  bangles  and  bulges,  with  a  pot 
over  her  head,  that  he  must  cringe  before  her? 

the 
the  chamber  of 

also 

Sitting  motionless  on  the  divan,  cross-legged  and  bare- 
footed,  the  Tuma  watched  Thomas  approach  upright  on 
his  knees. 

pot.  A 
Closer,  he  saw  she  was  not  really  wearing  a 
the 
on 
kind  of  cap  woven  of  many-colored  beads  sat 
crown  of  her  head;  out  from  it  stood  a  circlet  of  brass, 
and  on  wires  from  the  edge  of  this  circlet  dangled  frilly 
perforated  copper  discs;  this  fringe  hung  to  her  chin,  and 
the  discs  in  front  rustled  with  her  breathing. 
his 

and  his 
the  coldness  in 
obeisances  were  clumsy.  She  was  about  to  gesture  the 
guard  to  take  Thomas  away,  when  some  subtle  shift  to- 
wards  deference  in  his  manner  stayed  her  hand. 

She  did 

eyes, 

like 

not 

He  had  got  close  enough  to  smell  garlic  on  her  breath 
—during  the  dark  of  the  moon  the  Tuma  sucked  garlic 
to  fend  off  werewolves.  His  knees  forgot  their  soreness: 
her 
he  could  not  stand  up  to 
breath,  because  in  Illyria  it  was  the  custom  for  a  mother 
to  chew  garlic  before  she  beat  her  child,  and  Thomas’ 
mother  had  been  fond  of  garlic. 

a  woman  with  garlic 

on 

his 

sat  back  on 

When  he  was  within  touching  distance  of  the  divan, 
as  Wry  Neck  had  instructed 
he 
him  to  do,  neck  curved,  hands  on  knees,  and  addressed 
the  Tuma  respectfully  in  a  low  voice. 

heels, 

“Lady,  I  memorized  flattery  for  you,  but  now  that  the 
time  is  here,  my  tongue  cannot  find  the  words.  For  I  feel 
wither  every
such  emanations  from 

presence 

your 

as 

Thomas  in  Yahvestan 

123 

calculation  and  falseness  from  my  heart.”  It  was  a  good 
thing  neither  of  them  knew  these  emanations  were  gar- 
lic  fumes,  “I  was  told  to  remember  that,  even  though 
you  are  the  priestess  of  love,  you  are  only  a  Human  Be- 
ing.  My  mind  remembers,  but  my  heart  does  not  believe. 
You  must  be  a  higher  order  of  being,  Human  yet  more 
than  Human.  My  mind  asks:  how  can  you  be a  priestess 
of  yourself?” 

“If  you  proceed  one  more  word  in  that  direction,”  she 
a  low  caressing  voice,  “I  shall  have  your 
also  spoke  in 
tongue  cut 
right 
out.”  Slowly,  somewhat  grandly, 
hand  slid  under  the  chemise.  “I  am  only  a  Human  Be- 
ing.” 

her 

. 

“As  you  will,”  he  said  and  bowed  till 

his  forehead 

touched  the  bearskin. 

“But,”  she  said,  “you  have  not  been  enlightened,  so 
what  can  you  know?  If  you  were  a  Human  Being  J  would 
think  of  marrying  you.  But,  no.”  He  breathed  hard  with 
relief,  but  she  interpreted  it 
a  sigh  of  regret.  “Arlu,” 
she  called  to  the  guard,  ‘“my  crown.” 

as 

Arlu  took  hold  of  the  brass  circlet  with  careful  fingers, 
and  slowly  lifted  the  headdress  straight  up  so  that  none 
of  the  discs  touched  her. 

Thomas  was  prepared  to 

be  dazzled  by  beauty  or 
shocked  by  deformity;  instead,  he  saw  another  pudding- 
faced,  middle-aged  woman,  distinguishable  from  others 
chiefly  by  reason  of  the  fact  that  her  head  was  shaved, 
even  the  eyebrows.  She  rolled  her  bead  around  a  few 
times  and  waggled  her  shoulders,  and  he  watched  in- 
tently, 
as  though  she  were  doing  something  more  than 
just  loosening  up  after  sitting  rigid  a  long  time. 

“You  wonder  why  the  Tuma  is  bald,”  she  said,  and 
Thomas  nodded  dumbly.  “It  is  ugly,  no?’  One  shake  of 
his  head  was  as  much  untruth  of  this  sort  as  he  was  ca- 
pable  of  at  the  moment.  “Yes,  it 
is  ugly,”  she  said  with  a 
her  voice.  “Otherwise  the  Tuma’s  hus- 
slight  preen  to 
of  sorrow  when  his  month  is  up.  Now 
band  would  die 
then.”  She  flounced,  and  parted  her  chemise  so  that  her 
belly  was  exposed. 

Thomas  stared  as  though  paralyzed  at  the  absolutely 
ordinary  indentation  in  the  middle  of  that  considerable 
mound. 

“You  may  do  what  no  Outsider  has  ever  done,”  she 
said  graciously.  “You  may  lick  the  navel  of  the  Tuma.”

124 

EDGES 

“No!”  he  cried,  and  his  ears  told  him  there  was  too 

much  anguish  in  his  voice. 

She  blinked  at  him. 
Arlu  squatted  behind  him,  and  Thomas  felt  the  point 

of  a  dagger  at  his  left  kidney. 

“Lady,”  he  said,  his  voice  trembling,  “have  pity  on  me, 
a@  miserable  Outsider.  You  have  been  gracious  beyond 
my  merit  even  to  grant  me  this  audience,  But  you  are 
the  Tuma,  and  I  am  not  even  a  Human  Being.” 

“Not  yet,  no.”  Her  right  hand  reached  inside  his  shirt 
on  the  left  side  and  fondled  the  pectorals.  “But  I  think 
the  time  is  not  far  off  when  you  shall  become  one.”  She 
leaned  back  and  held  the 
of  her  belly  with  both 
hands,  “Now.” 

sides 

He  could  not  oppose  her.  He  knew  only,  with  incipient 
panic,  that  he  had  to  escape  before  she  commanded  him 
to  marry  her.  “J  am  not  worthy,”  he  said  fervently,  and 
licked. 
She 

shall 
marry  Arlu  again;  it’s  been  over  two  years  since  I  married 
him  last;  and  you  shall  guard  the  door  in 
his  place.  A 
the  chamber  of  love—we  shall 
in 
month  without  love 
see  how  worthy  you  are.” 

“Tonight 

straight. 

smiled, 

and 

sat 

up 

I 

Thomas  backed  away  on  hands  and  knees—he  could 

not  have  stood,  for  dizziness. 

When  he  had  withdrawn  a  suitable  distance,  she  nodded, 
and  he  stopped,  squatting  on  his  heels.  She  spat  out  the 
clove  of  garlic,  rinsed  her  mouth  with  water,  and  took  a 
nibble  on 
she 
assumed  the  Sleeping  Dog  position  and  within  a  minute 
had  entered  a  trance,  eyes  rolled  up  so  that  only  a 
slit  of 
white  showed.  Her  nose  was  running a  little. 

a  lanthan  leaf;  then, 

on  her 

lying 

side, 

in 

‘Christ 

heaven.’  Thomas  groaned  inaudibly. 

‘The 
priestess  of  herself-——what  was  I  thinking  of  when  I  said 
that?  On  my  knees  to  that  sow.  What  am  I  doing-here 
at  all?’ 

Another  prod 

of  dagger 

over 

the  kidney  reminded 

him  he  was  not  going  anywhere. 

The  wedding  that  evening  began  with  a  dignity  he  was 
surprised 
it 
mounted  with  an  intensity  that  took  him  along. 

find  Human  Beings 

capable 

and 

of, 

to 

In  the  center  of  the  room,  on  a  round  dais  lighted  by  a 
score  of  candles,  stood  the  Tuma;  Arlu  was  just  behind

Thomas  in  Yahvestan 

125 

her  but  facing  the  other  way.  The  twenty-eight  brides, 
standing  about  a  foot  apart,  made  a  circle  facing  her,  be- 
hind  each  of  them  a  groom  as  close  as  he  could  stand 
without  touching,  also  facing  in.  Everyone  but  the Tuma, 
men  and  women  alike,  wore  a  straw-colored  sleeveless 
hempen  shift  that  was  clasped  tight  about  the  throat  and 
fell  straight  to  the  ankles;  the  Tuma’s  shift  was  pink,  the 
color  of  love,  but  was  otherwise  the  same  as  theirs,  and 
her  head  was  in  the  pot-crown  she’d  had  on  when  Thomas 
had  first  seen  her.  Throughout  the  long  opening  part  of 
the  ceremony,  during  which  she  was  standing,  she  slowly 
revolved,  Arlu  careful  to  keep  back  to  back  with  her. 
led  by 
Arlu,  would  respond  with  a  single  word,  alternately  love 
and  freedom,  on  love  stamping  with  their  right  foot,  on 
freedom  with  their  left. 

The  Tuma  would  chant  a  sentence;  the 

rest, 

“Once:  the  mountain  was  God.” 
“Love.” 
“The  mountain  is  the  center:  of  the  world.” 
“Freedom.” 
“In  the  center  of  the  mountain:  a  hole.” 
“Love.” 
“In  the  center  of  every  Human  Being:  the  same  hole.” 
“Freedom.” 
“My  navel  reminds:  my  mother.” 
“Love.” 
“My  father  is  gone:  forever I  fear.” 
“Freedom.” 
“Bearers  of  the  womb:  mothers.” 
“Love.” 
“Open  your  wombs:  to  the  desolate  sons.” 
“Freedom.” 
“Let  them  become:  unborn  again.” 
“Love.” 
“Sons:  bearers  of  the  connection.” 
“Freedom.” 
“Fill  the  wombs:  of  the  desolate  mothers.” 
“Love.” 
“The  cord  of  the  again-unborn:  reminds  me  of  my 

sinful  father.” 
“Freedom.” 
After  a 

great  deal  more  of  responsory  chanting,  of 
the  couples  half-dancing  and  circling  about  one  another,

126 

EDGES 

suddenly  the  Tuma  raised  her  arms,  and  everyone  fell 
still.  She  spoke  forcefully,  but  without  shouting. 

“The  world  is  reasonable.  We  must  always  rub  hands 

with  each  other.” 

in  each  of 

When  she  had  proclaimed  this 

the  four 
directions,  she  solemnly  rubbed  hands  with  Arlu.  Then  he 
took  off  her  wig,  pulled  her  shift  over  her  head,  and  laid 
it  out  on  the  dais—she  had  on  a  pink  bodice  and  trousers. 
He  knelt  at  the  end  of  the  cloth,  when  she  lay  down  on 
the 
shift  on  her  back,  he  rested  her  nude  head  on  his 
thighs.  Her  knees  lifted  and  spread,  and  her  hands  held 
soles  of  her  feet  clapped—the 
that 
her  ankles  so 
Silent  Wind  position. 

the 

Meanwhile,  the  twenty-eight  couples  had  been  doing 
an  intricate  prancing  serpentine,  without  music  but  with 
much  smiling  and  humming,  during  the  course  of  which 
several 
everybody 
times. 

hands  with 

everybody 

rubbed 

else 

At  a 

lull,  the  Tuma  called  in 

a  hollow  voice,  “Holy 
of  holies,  the  time  has  come.  Will  is  the  obstruction  of 
love.  Weaken  it.” 

out 

Each  woman  produced  a  lanthan  leaf,  took  a  nibble, 
and  gave  her  man  the  rest  to  chew.  The  room  filled  with 
a  moaning  hum, 
The  Tuma,  now 
everyone  swaying. 
standing,  held 
her  hand  towards  Arlu  and  began 
to  chant  “Come  come  come.”  He  took  off  his  shift  and 
a  loincloth  of 
laid  it  out  on  top  of  hers—he  was  left  in 
the  same  pink  as  her  bodice  and  trousers—and  followed 
her  step  by  step 
as  she  backed  toward  the  door  behind 
the  divan.  Meanwhile,  the  couples  helped  each  other  off 
with  their 
entirely  naked, 
they  stretched  their  shifts  out  carefully,  men’s  on  wom- 
en’s,  in 
uni- 
son,  women  falsetto,  men  growling,  a  hymn  of  which 
Thomas  could  make  out  only  the  first  words  but  which 
inflamed  his  lust:  “Come  let  us  enter  the  forest  of  cop- 
ulation.” 

a  wheel  about  the  dais.  Then  they  sang  in 

and  now,  all 

fifty-six 

shifts, 

As  soon  as  the  door  to 

the  bedroom  closed  on  the 
Tuma  and  Arlu,  the  men’s  “Freedom”  chorused  with  the 
women’s  “Love,”  and  they  all  lay  down  on  their  shifts, 
feet  towards  the  dais,  and  copulated. 

After  a  period  of  general  stillness  when  nobody  moved, 
half  a  dozen  couples  stirred,  took  up  their  clothes,  dressed

Thomas  in  Yahvestan 

127 

with  their  backs  to  the  circle,  and  departed,  slipping  by 
Thomas  at  the  door  without  looking  at  him—he  shrank 
from  them.  But  during  all  this,  their  decorum  was  pelted 
by  hoots  and  jeers;  only  this  bullying  kept  a  good  many 
waverers  from  leaving,  too.  What  tipped  the  balance  in 
favor  of  the  insatiety  the  scoffers  were  after  was  a  dark- 
haired  woman’s  yelling  “There’s  too  much  light  in  here” 
dais  blowing  out  candles.  The 
and  darting  around  the 
ceremonial  circle  dissolved, 
and  the  flickering  shadows 
from  the  fireplace  began  to  pullulate  with  restlessness: 
squeal  of  false  enticement  and  chuckle  of  false  capture, 
the  curlicues  and  switches  of  lubricity,  the  large  broken 
gestures  of  rampaging  langour.  Thomas’  nausea  turned 
into  muscular  distress:  he  stood  rigid  at  the  door,  mace 
in  hand,  wanting  nothing  so  much  as  an  opportunity  to 
use  it  on  some  of  those  hot  turnips. 

man 

sprawled 

When  the 

dark-haired  woman’s 

by 
the  way,  she  roamed  the  floor  for  better,  but  none  endured. 
Presently  she  stood,  hands  on  hips,  mouth  a  rictus,  ap- 
praising  Thomas.  He  looked  murder  at  her.  She  did  not 
approach  him  until  she  had  recruited  a  couple  of  other 
gorged  hungerers.  The  three  heavy-bellied  dust-stained 
young  women  paused  just  beyond  sniffing  range  of  him. 
“Look  at  the  scowl  on  him,”  said  the  dark-haired  one. 
the 
“And  the  grab  he’s 

got  on  that  ax-handle,”  said 

fat  one. 

“Will,”  said  the  one  with  breasts  of  different  sizes,  “It’s 

all  over  him.” 

the  dark-haired  one. 
“He  needs  some  lanthan,”  said 
“We're  not  supposed  to  give  any  to  Aer  guard,”  said 

the  lopsided  one,  “you  know  that.” 
lot 

“T  know  a 

of  things  we’re  not  supposed  to  do,” 

said  the  dark-haired  one,  licking  her  lips. 

“Let  me  alone,”  said  Thomas  through  clenched  teeth 

and  he  hefted  the  mace  a  time  or  two. 

The  lopsided  one  took  a  step  back,  ready  to  run  off,  but 

the  other  two  sneered. 

“TI  wonder,”  said  the  fat  one,  “if  he  needs  lanthan.” 
“What  do  you  mean?”  said  the  lopsided  one,  nervously 
taking  a  step  closer  to  him.  “Look  how  tight  with  will 
he  is.  Of  course  he  needs  it.” 

The  dark-haired 

Suddenly, 
had 
she  leaped  onto  him  from  the  side,  hugged  him,  began 
nuzzling.

prowling. 

been 

one 

128 

EDGES 

If  she  had  given  any  sort  of  warning,  he  would  have 
knocked  her  down  at  the  least,  preferably  have  cleft  her 
head;  but  the  press  of  her  flesh,  viscid  and  funky,  sur- 
prised  the  lust  he  had  not  known  was  still  in  him,  flushed 
it  out  into 
as  her  grip 
the  open,  so  aggravated  it  that, 
around  his  body  tightened,  his  grip  loosened  on  the  mace, 
which  fell  back  against  the  wall. 

“No,”  she  taunted,  peering  at 

his 

averted  face,  “he 

doesn’t  need  any  lanthan.” 

“Let’s  make  a  Human  Being  of  him, 

”  said  the  fat  one, 

rubbing  against  him  on  the  other  side. 

“How?”  said  the  lopsided  one. 
“He’s  Human  enough  for  me  already,”  said  the  dark- 

haired  one. 

“No!”  cried  the  lopsided  one.  “He’s  not  free.  He’s  got 

to  be  free  to  choose.” 

“And  love,”  said  the  fat  one,  “don’t  forget  love.  We've 

got  to  make  him  Human.” 

“All  right,”  said  the  dark-haired  one,  “but  let’s  hurry.” 
They  rounded  up  seven  other  women,  and  the  ten  of 
them  stripped  Thomas  of 
and  made  him 
his 
stand  with  his  hands  behind  his  back;  then,  one  after  the 
other  they  licked  his 
navel,  laughing  hilariously  at  the 
flatness  of  his  belly,  and  all  rubbed  hands  with  him  and 
one  another,  chanting  “Now  you  are  a  Human  Being.” 

clothes 

“He  was  my  idea,”  said  the  dark-haired  one,  “so  I  get 

him  first.” 

‘It  was  my  idea,”  said  the  fat  one,  “to  make  him  a 

Human  Being.  I  get  him.” 

“Choose!”  cried  the  others.  “Go  ahead,  man,  choose.” 
The  diffident  one,  covering  her  lopsided  breasts,  looked 
as  though  she  were  about  to  cry.  He  took  her,  partly  in 
the  hone  her  gratitude  would  temper  the  baseness  of  rut, 
but  mostly  out  of  malice  towards  the  other  two.  The  pain 
in  the  fat  one’s  snarl  and  the  thrashing  fury  of  the  dark- 
haired  woman,  whom  the  rest  of  them  had  to  drag  away, 
gratified  his  malice  immediately.  and  the  lopsided  one  was 
grateful,  all  right.  As  soon  as  his  boil  of  lust  was  lanced, 
he  blanked  out  of  turbid  consciousness  into  sleep. 

He  came  to  at  dawn,  the  hall  empty  and  cold.  He  wished 
he  had  chewed  lanthan;  maybe  it  would  have  prevented 
the  images  that  were  now  soiling  his  memory,  or,  if  they 
had  to  come,  maybe  it  would  at  least  have  made  them

Thomas  in  Yahvestan 

‘ 

129 

seem  pleasant.  There  was  nothing  for  it  but  to  get  out  of 
this  freedomlove  he  was  chained  to. 

More  painful  than  any  image,  there  rang  in  his  mind’s 
ear  the  whisper  of  the  woman  with  whom  he  had  copu- 
lated:  “I'll  come  back  next  month  and  marry  you,  now 
you’re  a  Human  Being.  I  already  love  you.”  He  knew  he 
would  marry  her  if  only  to  fend  off  the  Tuma,  and  he 
despised  himself.  He  thought  of  honest  whores  with  nos- 
talgia,  of  Maria  not  at  all. 

‘O  Lord,  love  is  yours  to  give  as  you  will,  it 

is  you.  I 
have  done  the  things  of  love  and  made  not  love  but  a 
rancid  travesty  of  love.  Love  is  not  for  us  to  make.  It 
is 
for  us  to  incarnate  for  little  whiles,  when  you  please  to 
allow  us  to  do  so.’ 

“Then  I’m  a  Christian?”  he 

said  aloud  and  clutched 
his  head.  “O  my  God,  I’m  still  a  Christian?  No!  J  will  not 
be!” 

Yet  he  had  to  pray,  and  the  only  prayer  he  could  recall 
at  the  moment  was  the  Lord’s  Prayer.  He  meant  its  words. 
Who  had  led  him  into  the  temptation  to  which  he  had  just 
yielded  but  God  to  punish  him  for  backsliding?  Who  but 
God  would  deliver  him  from  this  evil? 

Yet  within  a  month  he  had  convinced  himself  that  he 
must  change  his  ways  to  conform  to  theirs.  They  were 
right:  we  Human  Beings  belong  to  one  another,  we  are 
part  of  one  another,  in  cach  other  we  find  ourselves;  we 
are  not  ruled  by  the  privileged  but  rule  each  other  and 
ourselves,  we  are  all  privileged  equally;  I  am  my  broth- 
er’s  keeper;  love  must  be 
free.  He  allowed  himself  to 
become  a  Human  Being  and  marry,  to  take  Wry  Neck  as 
his  slave  every  Fairday  and  be  another  man’s  slave  the 
other  six  days  of  the  week. 

For  over  a  year  he  told  himsclf  his  repulsion  for  this 
country  was  wrong.  Only  here  was  privilege  seen  as  wick- 
edness  and  hedged  about  with  justice  which  is  equality, 
so  he  must  be  wrong.  He  willed  consent  to  mutual  en- 
be- 
slavement  and  free 
love. 
numbed  himself  against 
his 
feelings  that 
get  him  out  of 
Yahvestan  intact. 

But  in 
the 
it  took  a  violent  shock  to 

so 
seething  confusion  of 

doing  this, 

he 

One  Fairday  when  Thomas  took  the  knout  off  its  chim- 
glint  of
ney  hook,  he  thought  he  saw  not  dread  but 

a 

130 

EDGES 

expectation  in  Wry  Neck’s  eye,  and  it  was  not  many 
weeks  till 
it  seemed  to  Thomas  that  his  hatred  of  Wry 
Neck  had  become  unreal.  Wry  Neck  corrupted  the  beat- 
ings 
by  translating  Thomas’  blows  into  something  like 
caresses,  so  that  Thomas  could  derive  no  satisfaction  from 
these  punishments.  Instead,  he  got  the  unreal  satisfaction 
of  withholding  punishment:  ‘I  ought  to  beat  you,  but  I 
shall  not  because  you want  me 

to.’ 

Even  his  hatred  of  slavery  was  turning  unreal.  Some 
kinds  of  slavery  came  to  seem  to  him  better  than  the 
rancorous  freedom  Human  Beings  had  worked  out  for 
themselves. 

Clay  was  real,  and  his  hatred  of  digging  the  slimy  stuff 
and  lugging  it 
tangible, 
direct.  In  need  of  some  uncrooked  hating,  he  did  much 
more  than  his  share  of  digging  and  carrying. 

the  potters’  shed  was  real, 

to 

And  there  was  his  lopsided  wife,  his  “remedy  for  con- 
cupiscence.”  At  first  he  took  her  “I  worship  you”  and  “I 
am  all  yours”  to  be  trite  hyperboles.  It  had  never  occurred 
to  him  to  kneel  in  adoration  of  Maria,  and  she  for  her 
part  had  been  more  disposed  to  tease  him  than  pray  to 
him;  consequently  it  took  him  several  months  to  realize 
how  wrong  he  was  about  the  worship  of  this  woman  whom 
he  could  barely  endure. 

and 

said 

One  night  he  was  awakened  by  her  thrashing  about  in 
her  sleep  and  muttering  “Mountain”  in  a  yearning  voice. 
her  name,  whereupon  she 
He  shushed  her 
crouched  beside  him  and  did  what  people  still  did  when 
—and  only  when—they  visited  God’s  Remembrancer  on 
the  mountain:  she  clasped  her  hands  behind  her  neck  and 
bowed  three  times,  saying  successively,  “God  have  mercy 
on  me,  God  accept  my  adoration,  God  forgive  me.”  But  it 
was  Thomas  she  was  bowing  towards,  not  the  mountain. 
And  when  she  murmured  with  the  breathlessness  of  pas- 
sion,  “Oh  how  I  love  you  god,”  Thomas  was  petrified.  To 
his  great  relief,  she  presently  sank  into  sleep.  Maybe  if 
that  commotion  went  unmentioned  it  would  not  mean 
anything. 

He  wanted  to  escape  then  and  there.  But  she  was  preg- 
nant  and  he  could  not  in 
all  conscience  stop  remarrying 
her  every  new  moon.  He  would  wait  till  she  had  the  baby 
to  look  after,  and  the  roots  of  that  poison  tree  her  love 
would  have  someone  else  to  twist  into  for  nourishment. 
He  volunteered  to  dig  and  carry  ali  the  potter’s  clay

T. ‘homas  in  Yahvestan 

131 

from  then  on,  thereby  perplexing  his  master  and  making 
himself  an  object  almost  of  awe  to  other  slaves.  He  did  it 
to  keep  his  mind  ox-dulled  with  fatigue  and  also  to  keep 
at  least  some  of  his  hatred  steady—and  any  man  must 
hate  this  heavy  drudgery.  Otherwise  he  might  follow  the 
example  of  Wry  Neck  and  come  to  love  the  loathly. 

He  dreamt  of  the  nine  tiers 

of  angels,  each  of  them 
higher  than  the  next,  caroling  their  joy  in  celestial  hier- 
archy,  and  when  he  awoke  with  that  song  fading  in  his 
ears,  a  terrible  sadness  settled  on  him  to  reenter  this  joy- 
less 
his  detestation  must  be 
wrong  and  shunted  it  aside  as  best  he  could,  but  he  could 
fot  prevent  the  heavy  sadness  coming. 

life.  He  told  himself  that 

Yahvestan  had  given  Thomas  the  solitude  and  the  level 
justice  he  had  thought  he  wanted  when  he  fied  from 
Illyria.  That  is,  his  connections  with  Human  Beings  were 
unreal,  and  privilege  had  been  pretty  well  smashed  flat 
bere.  But  Yahvestan  was  off  the  map.  He  wondered  some- 
times  in  his  sadness  if  he  would  ever  see  a  Christian  land 
again,  where  hierarchy  was  in  the  nature  not  only  of  divine 
he  was 
justice  and  love 
Christian,  not  really,  but  the  map  seemed  to  be. 

of  men’s  too.  Not  that 

but 

Mother  and  child  died  in  childbirth,  and  Thomas  made 
Wry  Neck  dig  the  grave. 

Because  Wry  Neck  had  never  been  able  to  exercise  the 
innate  authority  he  had  always  known  was  his,  because 
his  chin  was  held  from  assuming  the  cock  it  wanted,  he 
had  pushed  his  masters 
after  another  towards  a 
one 
strength  of  rule  they  not  only  were  incapable  of  but  shied 
from.  Hence  he 
found 
Thomas,  who  seemed  to  him  naturally  superior  to  other 
Human  Beings  in  every  way  that  counted,  and  to  have  got 
Thomas  to  take  him  as  slave.  But  Thomas,  his  melancholy 
increasing,  had  become  negligent  in 
his  mastership,  and 
at  the  graveside  Wry  Neck  mistook  Thomas’  sodden  si- 
lence  for  conjugal  sorrow,  a  domestic  sentiment  which  he 
thought  unworthy  of  an  exemplary  master. 

overjoyed  to 

have 

been 

had 

He  taunted  Thomas  with  having  been  a  curse  to  both 
his  wives.  This  was  enough  to  provoke  Thomas  to  make 
the  ultimate  threat. 
he  delivered  the  threat  curtly, 
almost  offhandedly—‘Say  that  again  and  I'll  kill  you”— 
with  little  of  the  haughtincss  and  none  of  the  conscious 
In  open  transgression,
complacence  Wry  Neck  desired. 

But 

132 

EDGES 

Wry  Neck  drove  the  taunt  in  to  the  hilt:  “Eh,  you’re  a 
woman-killer.”  Thomas  killed  him. 

Under  extreme  circumstances,  a  master  had  the  right 
to  punish  his  slave’s  disobedience  with  death,  and  Wry 
Neck  was  well  known  to 
be  intractable.  But  there  had 
been  no  witnesses  to  this  punishment,  and  Thomas’  be- 
havior  for  some  time  had  be€n  incurring  suspicion:  he 
was  the  only  master  who  had  been  able  to  govern  Wry 
Neck,  he  was  by  far  the  hardest-working  slave  anyone 
had  ever  heard  of,  and  he  had  never  given  his  own  master 
occasion  to  beat  him. 

No  killing,  justified  or  not,  went  unpunished  by  at  least 
an  ear.  The  Settler,  who  had  formerly  been  a  butcher, 
sliced  off  Thomas’  Jeft  ear  and  threw  him  into  prison  to 
await  trial  by  the  Council  of  Twenty. 

Thomas  accepted  all  this  with  unclear  resentment.  He 
knew  he  had  not  disobeyed  the  law;  moreover,  he  had 
taken  oath  that  he  believed  the  laws  of 
this  land  were 
just.  Doubtless,  justice  would  be  done.  But  the  wound  on 
his  head  was  very  close  to 
soul.  His  dreams  were 
ferocious. 

his 

A  white-haired,  pink-skinned  youth  with  weak  eyes  was 
assigned  to  instruct  Thomas  in  chanting  the  rites  of  sup- 
plication,  confession,  and  resolve.  (No  Human  Being  was 
found  “innocent”  but  only  at  most  “not  guilty  as  charged”; 
nothing  was  more  Human  than  to  feel  vaguely  guilty  all 
the  time,  though  not  necessarily  of  anything  in  particular.) 
As  a  child,  White  had  had  to  squint  to  see,  and  the  other 
children  tormented  him  on  the  sly;  but  since  it  became 
clear  at  an  early  age  that  he  could  sing  beautifully,  he  was 
protected,  the  only  Human  Beings  allowed  to  excel  with 
impunity  being  singers.  Thomas,  having  no  qualms  about 
excelling,  memorized  the  rote  chants  very  fast,  with  the 
result  that  White,  whose  happiness  was  to  sing,  spent  ail 
the  time  he  could  in  singing  songs  of  every  sort. 

Listening  to  these  songs  with  little  substance,  no  more 
Human  than  Christian,  carefree,  delightful,  Thomas  real- 
ized  he  had  not  been  free  of  himself  for  over  a  year,  even 
for  little  whiles.  But  after  six  days  of  repeating  into  non- 
“I  am  no  one  unless  I  am  my 
sense  such  rote  as 
brother’s  keeper  and  he  is  no  one  unless  he  is  my  keeper 
I  commit,”
but 

I  alone  am  responsible  for  every  sin 

this, 

Thomas  in  Yahvestan 

133 

Thomas  found  White’s  singing  too  gentle  any  longer  to 
give  much  relief, 

Late  in  the  afternoon  of  the  sixth  day,  White,  feeling 
Thomas’  mood,  closed  his  eyes  and  tilted  his  face,  and, 
a  delicate  wail,  sang  a  new  song.  Thomas  listened, 
in 
a  pool; 
his  thoughts  going  every  which  way  like  fish  in 
but  something  about  the  last  line  made  all  his  thoughts 
dart  to  it. 

Come,  Love, 
Come  grace  my  groin,  my  tongue,  my  hand, 
Till  the  flow  of  letting  all  J  am. 

Thomas  did  not  know  what  those  last  words  meant,  but 
he  knew  they  meant  something. 

White  told  him,  in  a  low  voice,  that  this  song  survived 
from  the  days  before  god  had  sinned  and  if  they  knew 
what  it  meant  they  would  not  allow  it  to  be  sung.  When 
Thomas  asked  what  it 
did  mean,  White  trembled;  yet 
there  was  something  strange  in  his  trembling.  He  begged 
Thomas  not  to  tell  anyone  what  he  had  just  said,  and  as 
he  was  fumbling  among  words,  “God’s  Remembrancer” 
dropped  out.  He  hurried  off,  hand  over  mouth,  eyes  — 
wide,  and  did  not  lock  the  door  behind  him. 

It  took  Thomas  several  minutes  -of  staring  at  the  un- 
locked  door  to  realize  that  White  had  given  him  a  chance 
first.  Even  then, 
to  escape  and  a  hint  of  where  to  go 
Thomas  did 
not  move  but  considered  whether  it  was 
worth  the  risk  to  waylay  the  Settler  first  and  kill  him  for 
having  cut  off 
ear.  Thomas  knew  this  impulse  was 
foolish,  but  he  could  not  dislodge  it—till  White’s  song 
came  back  to  him.  It  called  for  Love  to  come  help  you 
be  yourself  body  and  soul—“till  all 
I  am.”  Not  Human 
sexual  love,  but  the  god  Love.  Yes.  The  rigid  urge  to 
kill  melted  away.  How  could  he  take  revenge  on  these 
whose  real  sin  was  being  what  they  were?  He  fled  to  the 
mountain  and  those  who  remembered  god. 

his 

Of  the 
five  widows,  Custodians  of  Tradition,  spinning 
and  weaving  under  the  arbor,  none  was  beautiful  and 
only  one  was  as  young  as  Thomas,  but  all  were  clean, 
and  they  greeted  him 
their 
with 
gesture 
friendliness 
he  had  not  encountered  in  Yahvestan  before.  The  oldest

hair  was  long  and 
a 

loose, 
and 

simplicity 

gaze 

of 

of 

134 

EDGES 

shapeless  little  woman  of  forty  or  so,  her  smile  open,  her 
grey  eyes  unclouded  by  suspiciousness,  rose,  held  out  her 
right  hand,  and  told  him  in 
a  low,  merry  voice  that  he 
was  welcome.  When  he  stammered,  she  laughed  with  the 
same  quiet  merriment  and  said,  “Don’t  bother,  friend,  it’s 
a 
different  here.”  Then  she 
bench, 
Mountain’s 
sake,”  told  him  to  make  himself  easy  for  a  few  minutes, 
and  went  off  towards  the  nearby  mouth  of  the  cave.  The 
other  four  smiled  at  him  and  continued  with  their  work, 
one  of  them  whistling  quietly  through  her  teeth. 

the  hand  to 
“for 

led  him  by 

bread 

piece 

gave 

him 

of 

a 

God’s  Remembrancer  was  much  the 

tallest  Human 
Being  Thomas  had  seen,  half  a  head  taller  than  Thomas 
himself;  he  wore  a  full  beard,  in 
a  land  where  Thomas 
a  mustache;  and,  though  he 
had  not  seen  so  much  as 
was  fat,  he  was  solid  inside  his 
fat,  and  his  movements 
were  as  confident  as  were  the  inflections  of  his  resonant 
voice. 

‘Ah,’  thought  Thomas,  ‘it 

is  even  better  here  than  I 
had  hoped.”  He  had  come  prepared  to  dance  through  a 
ceremony  of 
rote  questions  and  rote  answers.  Instead, 
this  manly  fellow  in  the  prime  of  life  sized  him  up  man 
to  man  rather  than  priest  to  suppliant  and  greeted  him 
with  the  natural  question  what  brings  you  here?  rather 
than  the  ceremonial  probe  when  last 
the 
high  places?  Thomas’  body  swiveled  just  a  little,  his  eyes 
flashed,  and  his  voice  rang  out  more  happily  than  at  any 
time  since  he  had  left  Illyria,  the  words  equally  his  and 
the  ritual’s. 

did  you  visit 

“I  come  to  find  out  how  to  cleanse  my  soul 

of 

the 

blood  on  it.” 

The  sigh  of  pity  thrummed  the  women. 
“Ah?”  said  God’s  Remembrancer.  “I  have  been  hear- 
ing  about  you,  Thomas,  and  I  have  been  waiting  for  you 
many  months.  But  I  did  not  expect  you  to  come  for  this 
reason.  Whose  blood  stains  you?” 

“My  Fairday  slave’s.  He  taunted  me.” 
“This  mountain  was  god,  and  there,”  the  priest  ges- 
dif- 
into 

tured  towards  the  cave,  “in  god’s  pocket  one  says 
go 
ferently.  When  you 
god’s  pocket.”  But  he  did  not  move. 

have  prepared,  we 

shall 

“I  have  only  this  pheasant  to  offer  you,  god’s  man.” 
Thomas  pointed  at  the  small  body  on  the  ground  beside 
him.  “When  the  hunter  is  hunted,  any  is  all.”

Thomas  in  Yahvestan 

135 

it 

“Roast  it,”  the  big  man  ordered  the  women.  “We  shall 
is  well  charred.  Then,  Thomas,  we 
eat  it  as  soon  as 
shall 
go  inside  god’s  pocket.”  He  turned  towards  the 
cone  of  the  mountain  and  intoned,  “God  have  mercy 
on  me.”  Thomas  joined  him.  “God  accept  my  adoration. 
God  forgive  me.  God  remember  me.” 

The  priest  turned  towards  the  women  by  the  fire.  “O 
a  liturgical  drone, 

Custodians  of  Tradition,”  he  sang  in 
“behold  this  Human  Being.” 

Thomas  recognized  his  cue,  and  fell  into  the  rote.  “I 

have  not  forgotten  god,”  he  droned  in  response. 

The  priest  turned,  and  looked  at  him.  “Behold  this 

Human  Being.” 

The  women  responded,  “We  behold  him. 

Let  him 

speak.” 

“T  come  in  uncertainty,”  said  Thomas. 
“J  am  myself,”  said  God’s  Remembrancer.  “I  am  not 

you.  Are  you  yourself?” 

“Not  yet,” 

said  Thomas,  and  he  lost  track,  thinking 

‘what  does  it  mean  to  say  that?’ 

God’s  Remembrancer  frowned  at  him.  “Disarray,”  he 

prompted. 

Thomas  nodded.  “Not  yet,  for  I  am  still 

in  disarray, 

the  disarray  of  unclear  sin.” 

They  raised  their  arms  and  sang  the  words  with  which 
the  rite  concluded:  “God  forgive  us.  God  forgive  us  sin- 
ners  all.” 

Thomas  had  no  idea  what  would  come  next. 

the  youngest  of 

“Come  here,”  called  the  priest  to 
the 
women.  “Minister  to  him  for  an  hour,  beloved,  then  we 
shall  feast  on  the  offering  he  brings  us.”  He  squinted  at 
the  sun;  it  was  still  high  but  starting  down  the  westward 
arc.  “He  and  I  will  not  leave  until  tomorrow.” 
“You  are  going  away  with  him?”  she  said. 
“He  must  seek  his  sin  elsewhere,  for  he  is  too  tall  to 
live  with  Human  Beings  without  being  taken  down  for 
it.  Therefore,  I  must  go  with  him  and  protect  him  from 
he 
the  Sinseekers  till 
of  God’s  Country. 
safely 
Now  take  him  to 
the  font,  beloved.”  He  put  Thomas’ 
hand  in  hers. 

out 

is 

She  squeezed  it  friendlily  and  said 

to  Thomas  in 

tender 
things.”  She  led  him  in  silence  along  a  mountainpath.

Remembrancer  in 

voice, 

God’s 

serve 

“I 

a 
all 

136 

EDGES 

This  young  woman  was  not  so  turnipy  as  most  and 
walked  with  a  light  swing  to  her  hips;  her  eyes  sparkled; 
her  voice  lilted.  God’s  Remembrancer  and  she  were  the 
first  persons  he  had  met  in  Yahvestan  whom  he  simply 
liked. 

a 

small 

They  came  to 

natural  amphitheater  in 

the 
center  of  which  was  a  pool  so 
still  that  its  surface  mir- 
rored  the  cliff-face  above  it.  She  knelt  on  a  patch  of  moss 
full 
the 
in  the  sun  and  dipped  her  cupped  hands  into 
water. 

“You  too,”  she  murmured,  and  Thomas  joined  her. 
She  lifted  her  dripping  hands  towards  the  cone  above, 
so  do  I  wash  away  my 
and 
her 
water 

and  said,  “As  I  wash  my  face, 
sins.”  Then  she 
rubbed.  Thomas  did  likewise. 

splashed  the 

face 

on 

“First  I  must  wash  you,”  she  said,  “I  am  your  slave 

for  an  hour.  Let  us  love  one  another  while  we  can.” 

They  took  off  their  clothes.  She  led  him  into  the  cold 
water  and  washed  him  clean  of  dust  and  blood.  They 
lay  on  the  warm  moss  till  they  were  dry;  then  with  a 
teasing  laugh,  she  licked  his  navel. 

“Come,”  she  crooned,  and  he  joined  her  in  the  nuptial 

song. 

Come  let  us  enter 
the  forest  of  copulation. 
Where  is  the  clearing? 
.No  way  is  the  way. 

Not  to  hurry.  Not  to  loiter. 
Each  way  is  first  where 
touch  leaves  touch. 
Let  go.  Let  go, 

that  we  may  join  to  plunge 
into  that  halo 
nothing  to  be. 
That  way  all  ways. 

It  was  not  stranger’s  love  they  made,  and  after  they 
were  done,  Thomas  lay  on  his  back,  his  head  turned  to- 
ward  her, 
one  arm 
on 
doubled  under  her  head.

facing 

him, 

side 

and 

her 

she 

Thomas  in  Yahvestan 

137 

“I  see  in  your  eyes,”  she  said,  “or  I  think  I  do,  that 

you  will  never  become  so  reasonable  as  to  forget  god.” 

“When  I  was  a  Christian,  I  ate  God’s  body  and  drank 

his  blood.  How  could  I  forget  part  of  myself?” 

A  veil  he  had  not  realized  was  there  vanished  from  her 

eyes,  and  her  lips  were  purely  sensual. 

“Yes,”  she  said, 

“of  course, 

and  you  are 

the  most 

beautiful  Human  Being  who  ever  lived.” 

“Will  you  come  with  me?”  he  said.  “I  could  love  you.” 
Her  forefinger  tapped  his  lips.  “I  am  a  Custodian.  I 

serve  whoever  would  remember  god.” 

“I  am  afraid,”  he  said.  “I  need  you.  Come  with  me.” 
“Shh.”  She  was  weeping,  but  without  sobs, 
smiling. 
“No  more  talk.  Let  us  make  love  again  before  my  hour 
is  gone.  That  is  all  there  is.” 

in 

no, 

no, 

the  middle  of 
Thomas  grunted  himself  up, 
the  night  and  struggled  to  get  out  of  the  mud-pit  of  sleep 
into  which  he  had  fallen.  Out  in  the  open  air  it  was  still; 
he  stared  about  blindly.  Then  he  shook  his  head  free  of 
clogging  dreams  and  knew  exactly 
what 
that  no  had  been  addressed  to:  the  girl  had  said  “that  is 
all  there  is.” 

vividly 

and 

‘That  is  not  all!’ 
He  had  been  lying  watching  her  put  her  clothes  on, 
practical  and  graceful,  and  he  extended  his  open  hand 
toward  her,  She  half-smiled,  touched  his  fingertips  with 
hers,  and  in  a  voice  as  serene  as  her  face  said  for  a  sec- 
all  there  is.”  He  thought  she  was  just 
ond  time:  “That  is 
saying  something  vague  and 
agreeable,  meaning  how 
good  love  makes  me  feel,  and  he  smiled  responsively.  But 
when  she  said,  no  less  serenely,  “I  must  go  back  now,” 
a  sadness. 
and  left,  with  the  small  smile  still  on  her  lips, 
rose  like  mist  from  his  contentment,  obscuring  it, 
a  sad- 
ness  which  had  not  come  from  the  poignance  of  parting 
but  from  the  empty  sorrow  of  that  is  all. 
‘That  is  not  all.  It  is  only  pleasure.’ 
A  question  rang  in  his  mind’s  ear,  and  he  crouched  as 
tense  as  though  he  had  heard  a  grow!  in  the  underbrush, 
though  in  fact  there  had  been  no  sound.  Then  he  noticed 
the  words  of  that  ringing,  where  are  the  angels?,  and  the 
memory  pounced  on  him  of  God’s  Remembrancer  ask- 
ing  him  if  he  knew  the  angels. 

So  far  as  he  could  see,  angels  did  not  matter  much  one

138 

EDGES 

way  or  the  other.  God’s  Remembrancer  had  said,  ‘‘When 
god  abandoned  Human  Beings  the  angels  went  with  him. 
They  brought  us  mercy, 
and  communion... 
and 
They  taught  us 
to  rejoice.  Now  they  are  gone,  and  we 
Human  Beings  are  forgetting  what  they  taught  us.” 

grace, 

And  later,  Thomas  remembered  having  refused  to  an- 
swer  his  question  about  the  Christian  God.  “What  have 
I  to 
tell  you?  You  have  lived  well  enough  without  god 
for  a  long  time.” 

Smiling,  the  big  man  bent  down,  almost  whispering  in 
his  ear—they  were  in  god’s  pocket.  “The  secret  is  this: 
behave  as  you  would  if  you  knew  god  was  spying  on 
you,  and  then  yow il  be  as  comfortable  as  you  would  be  if 
he  really  is.  That’s  the  goal,  to  be  comfortable  with  your- 
self.  Where  god  is  has  nothing  to  do  with  it,  only  how  you 
address  him.” 

Now,  out  in  the  dark  under  the  stars,  alone,  the  others 
asleep  in  god’s  pocket,  Thomas  knew  why  there  had  been 
such  melancholy  in  the  voice  of  the  smiling  priest,  and 
his  leg  muscles  twitched  with  the  impulse  to  run  from  this 
comfort  without  angels. 

they  constructed  were  untouched  by 

For  lack  of  the  angel  of  love,  Human  Beings  had  only 
pleasure.  For  lack  of  the  angel  of  merciful  justice,  they 
became  Sinseekers  demanding  impossible  equality.  The 
things 
angel 
of  beauty.  What  were  the  words  in  which  their  wedding 
song  culminated?  Nothing  to  be.  For  lack  of  the  angel  of 
grace,  they  aspired  to  be  nothing,  rejoiced  at  being  noth- 
ing,  asked  no  more  than  to 
be  comfortable  with  them- 
selves. 

the 

Thomas  resolved  to  escape  before  this  horror  wore  off, 
to  go  without  the  help  God’s  Remembrancer  had  offered, 
to  sneak  away  without  even  saying  goodbye  to  the  woman 
who  had  ministered  to  him  so  swectly.  He  liked  them 
too  much;  God’s  Remembrancer  might  ask  him  if 
he 
wished  to 
stay  a  while  before  fleecing,  and  if  she  joined 
her  voice  to  his,  Thomas  might  forget  how  terrible  their 
lack  and  stay  with  them.  No!  He  had  not  the  charity  to 
love  them  clearly;  love  of  them  would  turn  into  a  stew,  as 
his  feelings  for  Wry  Neck  and  for 
his  recent  wife  had 
done.  Better  to  risk  having  the  Sinseekers  catch  him  and 
cut  him  off  at  the  knees  for  being  handsome,  tall,  various, 
than  to  love  these  who,  in  deprivation  of  angels,  wanted 
to  be  nothing.

Thomas  in  Yahvestan 

139 

He  had  fled  long  enough.  He  had  come  to  Yahvestan 
not  knowing  what  it  was;  he  had  fled  from,  not  to;  if  he 
fled  any  further  he  would  fall  off  the  edge  of  the  world 
entirely.  He  must  go  back  in  the  direction  from  which 
he  had  come,  though  it  would  no  longer  be  home  when 
he  got  there.  He  would  have  to  make  it  his  home  again 
if  he  could. 

He  squatted  with  his  back  to  the  mountain  and  dozed. 

He  would  be  ready  at  the  first  crack  of  dawn.

Thomas  M.  Disch  is  the  quintessential  New 
Yorker  in  that  he  is  a  true  cosmopolitan— 
at  home  everywhere,  with  the  possible  ex- 
ception  of  Minnesota.  Recently  he  has  taken 
up  painting.  Among  his  other  accomplish- 
ments:  exquisitely  crafted  short  stories  (Get- 
ting  Into  Death,  Fun  With  Your  New  Head), 
widely  various  poetry  (The  Right  Way  to 
Figure  Plumbing  and  the  forthcoming 
ABCDEFG  HIJIKLM  NPOQRST  UVWXYZ 
(sic)  ),  and  the  consummate  novel  (Camp  Con- 
centration,  334,  On  Wings  of  Song). 

He  moves  on  familiar  terms  with  the  gods, 

The  Vengeance  of  Hera 
or,  Monogamy  Triumphant 

BY  THOMAS  M.  DISCH 

Hera’s  attendants  were  drying  her  after  a  ritual  bath  at 
the  spring  of  Canathus  when  her  friend  Iris  arrived  with 
the  Sunday  edition  of  The  Times.  Wrapping  her  hair  in 
a  towel,  Hera  settled  down  beside  the  pool  to  weed  out  the 
sections  of  the  paper  she  had  no  use  for.  At  last,  with 
a  grateful  sigh,  she  found  her  way  to  the  Social  Announce- 
ments. 

her 

nodded 

LYN  LORD  PLANS  MAY  BRIDAL,  The 

Times 
announced  under  a  Bachrach  portrait  of  the  bride-to-be. 
Hera 
youngest 
approval..  Lyn 
daughter  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Julius  Lord  of  Bayside,  Queens, 
a  family  with  a  particular  reverence  for  the  goddess  of 
marriage  and  the  family.  Their  eldest  daughter  Marjorie 
chil- 
was  already,  at  age  twenty-six,  the  mother  of  five 
dren,  and  Hera  intended  in  the  fullness  of  time  to  make 

was 

the 

140

  
The  Vengeance  of  Hera 

141 

Marjorie’s  descendants  a  major  force  in  Bayside  politics 
and  throughout  the  borough  of  Queens.  Lyn,  unhappily, 
could  not  hope  to  become  a  great  matriarch,  for  she’d 
come  to  marriage  tardily  and  was  destined  by  the  Fates 
to  die  only  two  years  later  in  an  accident  on  the  Major 
Deegan  Expressway.  Alas  for  all  poor  mortals—but  still 
how  fresh  and  engaging  she  looked  with  her  loose-flowing 
hair  and  the  double  strand  of  pearls.  Hera  wished  her 
well. 

Congregational 

Turning  to  the  next  page,  the  goddess  was  pleased  to 
note  that  Mary  Kemp  Ross  had  married  Ensign  Theodore 
a  ceremony  at  the 
Tyler  of  the  United  States  Navy  in 
Barrington 
ago 
that  outcome  had  still  been  very  doubtful.  Also,  Melinda 
Edwards  was  affianced  to  an  assistant  vice  president  of 
a  prominent  supermarket  chain.  And  here  was  a  surprise: 
Dr.  Caroline  Rhodes  planned  to  wed  one  of  her  colleagues 
at  Duke  University!  Hera  had  never  heard  of  the  bride- 
groom,  but  she  couldn’t  imagine  Caroline  Rhodes  mak- 
ing  any  but  a  prudent  choice. 

Church.  Two  months 

She  turned  to 

of 
announcements  declared  that  Bonnie  Malvin  of  Amity- 
ville  had  married  Jack  Fleetwood. 

last  page  where  the  very  least 

the 

Hera’s  large  eyes  widened  with  disbelief.  “Iris!  Look!” 
She  tapped  the  offending  paragraph  with  a  well-manicured 
nail.  “Jack  Fleetwood—married!  Again!” 

Iris  arched  a  sympathetic  brow.  “Isn’t  it  disgraceful?” 
“Can  it  be  the  same  Jack  Fleetwood?” 
The  announcement  left 

The 
bridegroom’s  parents  resided  in  California  and  Kuwait. 
His  father  was  an  Aramco  executive.  No  mention  was 
made  of  the  schools  he’d  attended  (and  been  asked  to 
leave).  Could  there  be  two  such  Jack  Fleetwoods? 

little  room  for 

doubt. 

“I 

shall  not  allow  it!’  Hera  declared,  flinging  down 

the  paper. 

“It’s  too  late,  my  dear,”  said  Iris.  “The  harm’s  been 

done.” 

“Were  they  wed  in  a  church?”  Hera  demanded. 
“The  First  Presbyterian.  There  was 

a  photographer, 
a  four-tiered  cake,  limousines,  a  honeymoon  in  Bermuda 
-—no  rites  were  omitted.  Her  mother  was  a  Quigley,  of 
the  Amagansett  Quigleys.  Very  traditional  people.” 

“And  this  girl—Bonnie?  I  have  no  recollection  of  her.” 
“She’s  not  exactly  been  one  of  your  votaries.  There

142 

EDGES 

earlier  marriage,  in  California,  in  somebody’s 
was  an 
back  yard,  one  of  those  do-it-yourself  ceremonies.  Even 
then  she  was  not  a  virgin.  The  marriage  lasted  a  year  and 
four  months.” 

“Children?”  Hera  inquired. 
Tris  shook  her  head.  “On  the  pill.” 
A  gleam  came  into  Hera’s  eye.  “And  is  she  still?” 
“Oh  yes.  From  the  first  Jack’s  been  insistent  as  to  not 

wanting  children.” 

“Then  pray  tell  me,  why  did  he  marry?”  Hera  asked 
rhetorically.  “Only  to  make  a  mockery  of  me?  He  shall 
learn,  Iris,  that  Hera—and  the  Institution  of  Marriage— 
are  not  to  be  mocked.  He  has  done  so  once  with  impunity. 
Admittedly  his 
first  marriage  was  the  thinnest  of  legal 
fictions.  An  offense  to  my  nostrils,  naturally,  but  there 
are  not  enough  hours  in  Eternity  for  me  to  chastise  all 
such  infractions  as  they  deserve.  I  was  wrong,  however— 
I  should  have  exacted  my  revenge  then.  Where  is  she 
now,  this  new  bride  of  his?” 

Iris  closed  her  eyes  and  concentrated.  A  vision  formed, 
on  the  rippled  surface  of  the  pool,  of  Bonnie  Fleetwood, 
née  Malvin,  seated  in  the  sunken  living  room  of  her  new 
home  in  White  Plains,  watching  Sesame  Street  as 
she 
brushed  her  long,  lightly  tinted  hair. 

Hera  knew  at 

a  glance  how  the  bored  young  matron 
was  to  be  dealt  with.  “Go  to  her,”  she  bade  Iris  with 
the  calm,  terrible  authority  that  only  the  gods  can  com- 
mand.  “Enflame  her  with  philoprogenitive  desire.  Make 
her  my  minion.  Jack  Fleetwood  shall  not  wriggle  free  of 
the  bonds  of  matrimony  a  second  time.” 

but 

before  Mike  Douglas 
Shortly  after  Sesame  Street 
had  properly  begun,  Iris,  in  the  mortal  form  of  Bonnie’s 
old  friend  Sharon  Salomon,  appeared  before  the  fieldstone- 
trimmed  facade  of  1282  Exeter  Road.  In  her  right  arm 
she  bore  a  sleeping  infant.  Another  child  peered  out, 
Janus-like,  from  the  canvas  carrier  strapped  to  her  back. 
She  rang  the  bell  and  waited.  Within,  the  nagging  voice 
of  Margaret  Hamilton  advertising  Maxwell  House  coffee 
was  silenced  in  mid-imperative. 

Bonnie  answered  the  door,  regarded  the  goddess  with 
a  frown  of  curiosity,  and  then  exploded  into  welcomes. 
“Sharon!  Sharon  Salomon!”

The  Vengeance  of  Hera 

143 

“Sharon  Wunderlich  now,”  said  Iris  with  a  smile  that 

begged  for  approval  as  candidly  as  any  puppy. 

Immediately  their  relation  was  re-established  on  its  old, 
unequal  footing.  “Of  course.”  She  leaned  forward  and 
the  goddess’s  freckle-constellated  cheeks. 
Kissed  one  of 
“How  good  to 
see  you!”  She  kissed  the  other  cheek. 
“Come  in,  come  in.” 

After  only  the  briefest  synopses  of  their  marriages,  the 
two  women  soon  had  settled  down  to  the  more  comfortable 
(for  Bonnie)  subject  of  Mount  Holyoke  where  they’d  both 
majored  in  English  Lit.  With  delicate  enthusiasm,  as  one 
might  unwrap  china  long  stored  unused,  they  invoked  the 
memories  of  Cora  Barnham;  of  Professor  Harrison  and 
her  odd  ways;  of  the  night  of  the  dormitory  fire  drill;  of 
their  Sunday  morning  dozens  of  Dunkin’  Donuts.  All  the 
while  they  reminisced,  little  Marietta  slumbered  on  beatifi- 
the 
cally  in  her  mother’s  lap  and  Jason  flailed  quietly  on 
sofa  beside  her,  gazing  at  the  furnishings  of  the  Fleetwood 
living  room  with  a  wandering,  wonderstruck  attention  that 
put  Bonnie  distinctly  in  mind  of  her  9  a.m.  class  in  Ro- 
mantic  Poetry.  (“There  was  a  time  when  meadow,  grove, 
and  stream,  the  earth,  and  every  common  sight,  to  me  did 
seem  apparelled  in  Celestial  light,  the  glory  and  the  fresh- 
ness  of 
a  dream,”  etc.)  What  a  lovely  child.  And  how 
radiantly  energetic  dear  old  Sharon  seemed,  how  altered. 
How  much  happier  than  Bonnie  felt  herself. 

Marietta  woke  and  asked  with  low  gurgles  to  be  nursed, 
Iris  peeled  away  half  her  bodice  and  offered  her  breast 
to  the  smiling  infant.  Iris’s  bushy  red  hair,  back-lighted 
by  the  picture  window,  formed  an  aureole  expressive  of 
maternal  fulfillment. 

“Tell  me,”  said  Bonnie,  already  caught  in 

devising, 

“about  your  babies. 

the 
They're 

toils 
both 

“. 

,  inexpressible  darlings—aren’t  they?  What  can  I 
say?  I  guess  the  most  incredible  thing  about  them,  the 
get  from 
thing  I  least  expected,  has  been  the  energy  I 
them,  Like  now,  with  Marietta  nursing,  I  can  feel  a  kind 
of  ...  like  a  lightning  bolt  I’ve  trapped  inside  my  spine.” 
Bonnie  tried  to  preserve  a  rational  skepticism.  “I’ve  al- 
ways  thought  they’d  be  a  drain.  Especially  the  first  few 
months.” 

Marietta  unclenched  a 

tiny 

fist,  pressed  her  fingers

of  Hera’s 
such...” 
, 

144 

EDGES 

against  her  mother’s  resilient  breast,  and  cooed  bubbles 
of  milk. 

“Oh,  there’s  that  side  of  it,  too,”  Iris  admitted.  “But 
they  replenish  much  more  than  they  ever  drain.  The  other 
thing,  or  maybe  it’s  the  same  thing  from  another  angle, 
is  the  way  they  connect  me  to  Reality.  I  mean,  before 
Jason  I  was  avoiding  Reality.” 

“I  wish  you'd  tell  me  how  to  do  that,”  said  Bonnie  with  a 

nervous  laugh. 

“I  mean,  staying  around  the  house  and  never  going 
out  or  seeing  anyone.  Just  watching  tv  and  combing  my 
hair.  Like  that.” 

Bonnie  winced. 
“And  I  felt  so  empty  all  the  time.  But  now,  with  the 
children,  the  whole  world  seems  different.  More  solid. 
Coming  over  here  today  is  an  example.  Before  Jason  I 
might  have  thought,  ‘Wouldn’t  it  be  nice  to  drive  over  to 
White  Plains  and  see  Bonnie?’  But  I  never  got  round  to 
doing  it.  No  oomph.” 

“Don’t  apologize.  I’m  just  the  same.” 
“But  that’s  my  point,  Bonnie—I’m  not  the  same,  any 

more.” 

Bonnie  looked  at  her  transformed  friend,  then  at  Mar- 
jetta,  then  at  Jason,  and  saw  herself  mirrored  in  them.  A 
premonitory  tingle  tingled  in  the  small  of  her  back.  Not 
a  lightning  bolt  yet,  just  the  merest  hint  of  what  she  now 
knew  to  be  her  preordained  and  necessary  fulfillment.  How 
to  have 
could  she  ever  have  been  so  blindly  selfish  as 
that  afternoon  in  Bermuda  as  they 
agreed  with  Jack, 
downed  rum  swizzles,  that  theirs  should  be  a  childless  mar- 
riage?  She  remembered  how  passionately  as  a  girl  she  had 
mothered  her  little  family  of  dolls—Selma  and  Baby  Su- 
san,  Whiffles  and  Wanda,  Lily  and  Rose;  how  she’d  never 
and  become  self-mirroring 
allowed  them  to  grow  up 
Barbie  dolls  but  kept  them  always  in  the  livery  of  infancy, 
pink  and  baby  blue;  how,  until  Jack  had  announced  his 
allergy  to  cat  fur,  she’d  cuddled  and  coddled  and  cared 
for  those  two  beautiful  Persians  from  the  animal  shelter. 
All  these  signposts  pointed  to  a  single  destination,  which 
a  spire  rising  from  the 
she  could  see  now  as  clearly  as 
plain:  Motherhood. 

Iris,  having  accomplished  Hera’s  purpose,  announced 
that  it  was  time  to  return  home  and  start  the  pot  roast.  On 
the  way  out  the  door  she  admired  the  macrame  pot  hanger

The  Vengeance  of  Hera 

145 

cascading  stringily  down  from  the  ceiling  of  the  breakfast 
nook.  Bonnie  insisted  on  giving  it 
a  present, 
languishing  ivy,  ceramic  pot  and  all. 

to  her  as 

“No,  really,”  Iris  protested.  “It’s  much  too  nice.” 
“Not  at  all.  It  will  give  me  a  chance  to  make  another.” 
“You  made  it  yourself?”  the  goddess  marveled. 
“It's  easy  once  you  get 

the  knack.  Like  tying  shoe- 

laces  all  day.” 

“I’m  sure  this  is  nicer  than  most  of  the  ones  I  see  in 

shops.  You  could  make  it  a  business.” 

Bonnie  laughed  in  self-deprecation.  “That’s  what  Jack 
said  yesterday.  I  think  he’s  afraid  my  mind  will  rot,  sitting 
around  ail  day  with  nothing  to  do.  And  I  think  he  may 
be  right.” 

Iris  scooped  up  Jason  from  the  couch  and  popped  him 
into  the  carrier,  then  slid  the  straps  over  her  shoulders. 
“T  can  tell  you  my-solution  to  that  problem.” 

She  did 

not  need  to 

eyes  were 
brimming.  Her  hands  strayed,  unconscious,  to  cup  the 
shallow  convexity  of  her  still  unquickened  womb.  Her  soul 
hungered. 

say  more.  Bonnie’s 

It 

That  night  as  her  fingers  exercised  their  almost  lost  facil- 
ity  on  lengths  of  coarse  twine,  Bonnie  began  the  slow  work 
of  bending  her  husband’s  will  toward  her  new-formed  pur- 
pose. 
wasn’t  hard  to  manipulate  Jack.  Having  no 
guiding  principles  beyond  serendipity  and  his  own  caprice, 
he  had  little  staying  power  against  a  will  sturdier  than  his 
own.  This  pliancy  accounted  for 
a  large  part  of  Jack’s 
charm.  His  photographs  had  the  same  quality  of  careless 
accommodation  to  prevailing  winds. 

Not  that  Jack  any  longer  considered  himself  a  serious 
photographer.  For  the 
past  three  years  he  had  photo- 
graphed  little  but  beds:  beds  with  sheets,  with  blankets, 
with  spreads,  with  comforters.  These  photographs  appeared 
in  magazine  advertisements  and  in  department  store  and 
mail  order  catalogues.  That  it  was  possible  to  make  nearly 
forty  thousand  a  year  photographing  beds  always  struck 
Jack  as  an  astonishing  testimony  to  the  colossal  size  of 
the  world  he  lived  in.  To  think  that  there  could  be  so 
many  people  who  needed  to  proclaim  the  merits  of  their 
particular  sheets  and  pillowcases  that  a  man’s  entire  life 
could  be  directed  to  that  single  purpose! 

This  matter  of  purpose  proved  to  be  his  Waterloo  in

146 

EDGES 

the  discussions  with  Bonnie.  What  was  the  purpose,  she 
wanted  to  know,  of  their  marriage?  It  could  not  be  the 
furtherance  of  his  career,  since  Jack  was  prepared  to  ad- 
mit  that  his  career  amounted  to  little  more  than  a  joke, 
But  then  he  asked  no  more.  Bonnie  would  not  accept  this. 
There  had  to  be  more.  There  had  to  be  a  purpose.  What 
was  the  point  of  living  in  her  parents’  two-and-a-half- 
bedroom  ranchhouse  instead 
city,  where  at 
least  you  could  go  out  to  a  movie  sometimes? 

the 

of 

in 

What  but  a  baby? 
Jack  was  certain  he  would  not  enjoy  a  steady  diet  of 
parenthood,  but  he  had  to  admit  that  this  theory  had  not 
been  put  to  the  test 
as 
certain  that  fate  had  decreed  her  to  be  a  mother,  and  her 
certainty  had  the  force  of  a  faith  behind  it.  By  the  time 
the  last  half-hitch  had  been  snugged  into  place  on  the 
new  macrame  pot  hanger  Bonnie  was  pregnant. 

of  experience,  Bonnie  was  just 

the 

same 

Four  weeks  after  the  birth  of  his  daughter,  Joy-Ann,  Jack 
Fleetwood  moved  out  of  his  suburban  home  on  Exeter 
Road  and  into  his  photography  studio  in a still  very  raw 
loft  on  West  26th  Street  in  the  city.  Since  earliest  youth 
Jack  had  been  able  to  solve  the  successive  crises  of  his 
life  by  the  simple  expedient  of  running  the  other  way. 
When  he  was  twelve  he  had  refused  point-blank  to  cope 
with  the  decimal  system,  and  after  only  a  little  while  his 
parents  had  transferred  him  to  a  progressive  school.  The 
invention  of  the  pocket  calculator  confirmed  Jack  in  this 
first  grand  refusal,  and  those  that  followed  all  seemed  to 
endorse 
resolutely 
ignored  was  a  problem  solved.  While  other  young  men  an- 
guished  over  the  trials  and  errors  of  young  love,  Jack 
sipped  the  nectar  from  each  flower  that  invited  and  fiut- 
tered  on  to  the  next.  While  others  elbowed  and  shoved 
their  way  into  the  elevator  of  success,  Jack  took  a  job  on 
the  ground  floor.  Far  from  deteriorating,  his  character 
took  on  the  agreeable,  hard-rubbed  patina  of 
a  vintage 
car  that  has  spent  all 
its  existence  in  a  museum.  At  the 
age  of  thirty-two  Jack  still  retained  the  ideal  fecklessness 
of  his  pampered  childhood.  Not  for  him,  therefore,  the 
colicky  nights  and  pails  of  diapers  of  responsible  parent- 
hood;  not  for  him  the  pretense  that  Joy-Ann’s  birdlike 
noises 
of  perpetual 
proud  fascination. 
she’d  never  represented

and  muscular  spasms  were  objects 
a 

moral—that 

problem 

fetus 

As 

a 

.  The  Vengeance  of  Hera 
147 
More  to  him  than  a  disfiguring  growth  in  Bonnie’s  no 
longer  smoothly  functioning  body.  As  an  infant  squalling 
in  a  crib  or  being  suckled  at  his  wife’s  engorged  and  droop- 
ing  breast  she  was  unendurable,  and  accordingly  Jack  did 
not  endure  her. 

There  were  allied  considerations.  The  house  on  Exeter 
Road,  which  had  been  dangled,  prior  to  the  wedding,  as  a 
carrot  was  still,  two  years  later,  the  property  of  Bonnie’s 
father,  a  professional  son-of-a-bitch,  who  continued  to  dan- 
gle  it  at  the  end  of  an  ever-receding  stick.  Meanwhile  it 
had  become  evident,  living  in  the  dump,  that  the  reason 
he'd  enticed  them  with  this  particular  property  was  that  its 
divers  liabilities  (electric  heat,  a  cellar  prone  to  flooding, 
and  the  threat  of  a  highway  that  was  to  be  their  new  view 
from  the  back  windows)  made  it 
all  but  unsaleable.  (It 
had  been  their  intention  to  sell  it 
as  soon  as 
it  legally 
belonged  to  them.)  Bonnie  was  livid  over  her  father’s 
treachery,  but  Jack’s  temperament  was  as 
little  given  to 
outrage  as  to  long-suffering.  However,  since  the  promise 
of  the  dower-house  had  been  a  decisive  factor  in  their  de- 
cision  to  undergo  matrimony,  it  seemed  reasonable  to  J ack, 
though  not  to  Bonnie,  that  Mr.  Malvin’s  failure  to  deliver 
the  goods  released  them  from  their  side  of  the  bargain. 
Jack  didn’t  care  to  argue  about  it  (arguing  never  accom- 
plished  anything)  but  when  he  did  pack  his  bags  and  sort 
out  his  records  from  Bonnie’s  it  was  without  any  pang  of 
guilt  for  having  been  derelict  in  his  duty.  As  for  the  Di- 
aper  Monster,  that  had  been  Bonnie’s  initiative  from  the 
first:  so  bye  baby  bunting,  Daddy’s  gone  a-hunting. 

Bonnie,  wholly  given  over  to  the  passion  of  motherhood, 
expressed  but  one  regret—that  with  Jack  away  from  home 
she  could  not  have  more  children  without  incurring  the 
guilt  of  adultery.  Jack,  half-jokingly,  suggested  artificial 
insemination,  and  Bonnie  half-seriously  considered  it  but 
decided  at  last  that  adoption  would  be  a  more  wholesome 
possibility.  She  actually  started  filling  out  reams  of  ap- 
plication  blanks  sent  to  her  by  the  various  agencics  that 
supply  orphans,  but  the  only  one  that  did  not  seem  to 
still  undivorced  single 
take  exception  to  her  status  as 
parent  was  an  agency  in  Seattle  that  arranged  the  adop- 
a  large  Korean  leper  colony 
tion  of  children  born  in 
(guaranteed  not  to  be  lepers  themselves).  Even  these  or- 
phans  might  not  be  made  available  for  another  year,  so 

a 

\

148 

EDGES 

Bonnie  was  obliged  to  lavish  all  her  affection  on  her  sol- 
itaire  jewel,  Joy-Ann. 

In 

the 

life. 

sheets 

day  he 

Jack,  among  the  model  beds  of  his  studio,  experienced 
no  difficulty  readjusting  to  the  zippier  rhythms  of  inner- 
city 
and  pillowcases; 
shot 
by  night  he  disported  upon  these  same  percale  plains  of 
Cherry  Blossom,  Royal  Blue,  Terra  Cotta,  Cream,  and 
Carnival.  The  young  women  who  shared  his  pleasures  were 
always  offered,  as  a  keepsake,  a  complete  change  of  bed- 
ding  from  among  the  ever-replenished  stock.  If  his  meals 
were  not  so  regular  as  they  had  been  on  Exeter  Road  they 
were  certainly  more  exquisite  and  less  starchy.  Soon  his 
waist  was  a  born-again  thirty-one  inches.  He  had  never 
looked  better  or  felt  healthier,  and  his  conscience  seemed 
as  trouble-free  as  the  engine  of  his  new  Jaguar  XJ6L. 

Meanwhile  on  Mount  Olympus  Hera  could  not  believe 
that  he  had  so  easily  evaded  the  lesson  she’d  meant  to 
teach  him.  Her  fury  waxed.  She  determined  to  use  the 
utmost  of  her  power  against  him.  If  in  doing  so  she  should 
also  exact  a  Jong-delayed  vengeance  against  Min-Tsing 
Bullard,  so  much  the  better! 

ago, 

that  had  first 

alerted  Hera  to 

It  had  been  Jack’s  earlier  marriage  to  Min-Tsing,  ten 
years 
his  impiety. 
Min-Tsing  was  the  daughter  of  an  aide  to  the  Indonesian 
delegation  to  the  United  Nations  and  a  fellow  student  with 
Jack  at  Pratt  Institute.  They  knew  each  other  through 
weekends  of  marathon  bridge  at  the  apartment  of  a  mu- 
tual  friend.  When  her  father  was  recalled  to  Djakarta, 
Jack  had  been  the  first  U.S.  male  citizen  she’d  approached 
with  an  offer  of  matrimony.  Her  object  in  marriage  was  to 
escape  being  deported  when  her  student  visa 
expired. 
At  eighteen  Min-Tsing  was  interested  in  sex  only  insofar 
as  it  related  to  photography.  She’d  approached  Jack  before 
anyone  else  because  she 
bridge 
game  and 
of  second-story 
windows  along  Sixth  Avenue.  Jack  dropped  out  of  Pratt 
as  soon  as  the  marriage  contract  was  signed  and  Min- 
Tsing’s  father  had  paid  out  the  stipulated  fee  of  $5,000. 
He  continued  to  sce  his  wife  over  the  bridge  table  on  such 
weekends  as  he  was  not  otherwise  engaged  in  squandering 
his  windfali,  but  through  all  the  time  they  were  wed  to 
each  other  he  made  no  attempt  against  her  chastity. 

his  black-and-white  studies 

sincerely  admired  his 

The  benefits  to  be  reaped  from  this  arrangement  didn’t 
cease  with  the  first  lump  sum.  When  she  was  twenty-one

The  Vengeance  of  Hera 

149 

of 

Min-Tsing  fell  in  love  with,  and  was  ravished  by,  Jerome 
Bullard,  a  highly  successful  photographer’s  rep.  By  the 
time  Min-Tsing  had  divorced  and  remarried,  Jack  was  set- 
tled  into  his  new  life-work.  Bullard,  though  ordinarily  an 
Othello  of 
Jack’s 
jealousy,  had  compelling  proofs 
honorable  conduct  toward  Min-Tsing,  and  he  was  made  to 
share  her  enthusiasm  for  Jack’s  talent  as  well.  Bullard  ex- 
ercised  his  influence  with  a  number  of  department  stores 
and  mail-order  houses,  and  in 
little  more  than  a  year 
Jack  had  established  himself  as  America’s  foremost  pho- 
tographer  of  bed  linens,  confirming  his  often-expressed 
opinion  that  success  depends  not  on  what  you  know  but 
‘who  you  know.  Bullard,  as  rep,  got  a  symbiotic  third  of  all 
Jack’s  fees  and  shared  with  him  the  distinction  of  being 
known,  in  the  industry,  as  the  Lord  of  the  White  Sale. 
That  Jack  should  prosper  so  undeservedly  had  been  a 
source  of  aggravation  to  the  goddess  of  marriage,  but  this 
was  compensated  to  a  degree  by  the  unhappiness  of  Min- 
Tsing  in  her  life 
as  Mrs.  Bullard.  Bullard  was  a  bully, 
business. 
sexually, 
socially,  and  in  the  conduct  of 
He  alternated  between  long,  morose  sulks  and  spells 
of 
witless,  cocaine-inspired  garrulity.  He  grew  fat,  and  then 
grew  still  fatter.  He  philandered,  disappearing  for  days 
at  a  stretch  with  frowzy  teenagers  he  obtained  from  agen- 
cies  supplying  office  temporaries.  The  charming,  intense, 
knowledgeable  Bullard  whom  Min-Tsing  had  fallen  in  love 
with  vanished  before  her  eyes,  and  gradually  she  resumed 
her  earlier  attitude  towards  the  realm  of  the  erotic,  which 
was  simply  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  it.  From  separate 
beds  she  and  her  husband  evolved  to  a  condition  of  sepa- 
rate  bedrooms  and  then  of  separate  apartments,  albeit 
in  the  same  building  (which  he  owned),  She  continued, 
nevertheless,  to  work  for  him,  since  no  one  else  could 
manage  the  complicated  duplicities 
their  system  of 
bookkeeping. 

his 

of 

This  had  been  their  status  quo  for  many  years  when 
Hera  determined  to  use  Min-Tsing  as  the  instrument  of 
her  fuller  revenge.  Summoning  young  Eros  from  his  moth- 
er’s  side,  she  instructed  him  to  inspire  Jack  with  a  passion 
for  Mrs.  Bullard,  and  her  with  a  passion  for  him.  No  need 
here  to  chronicle  the  delights  and  afflictions  of  the  lovers: 
any  program  of  popular  music  will  relate  Love’s  universal 
truths  (albeit  only  a  select  few).  Jack  wanted  her  love, 
he  needed  her  love,  and,  this  feeling  being  mutual,  he

150 

EDGES 

and  then 

a 
got  her  love.  For  six  months  they  lived  as  though  in 
the 
heaven  of  fleecy,  flesh-supporting  clouds, 
teeth 
of  Hera’s  trap  snapped  shut  about  their  unsus- 
pecting  limbs.  Min-Tsing  was  pregnant.  (The  pill,  needless 
to  say,  is  no  precaution  against  the  power  of  Hera.)  Since 
Min-Tsing’s  moral  principles  did  not  allow  her  to  think  of 
abortion,  she  was  soon  unable  to  conceal  her  condition 
from  her  husband-and-employer.  Nor  did 
require 
much  persuasion  to  name  the  father  of  her  unborn  child. 
Can  Love  ever  hesitate  to  pronounce  the  beloved’s  name, 
if  it  is  truly  Love?  In  any  case,  she  could  not  have  palmed 
the  baby  off  on  Bullard  as  his  own:  there  had  been  no 
sexual  congress  between  them  for  nearly  a  year. 

she 

Min-Tsing  had  misjudged  the  effect  her  candor  would 
have,  expecting  Bullard,  after  his  first  annoyance,  to  take 
her  infidelity  in  the  same  civil,  uncensorious  spirit  in  which 
she  took  his.  Instead,  he  reverted  to  his  Othello  manner. 
He  denounced  the  lovers.  He  threatened  physical  violence 
to  Jack—if  ever  they  should  meet.  He  revelled  in  horror, 
outrage,  and  self-pity.  And  he  vowed  to  bring  Jack  Fleet- 
wood’s  career  down  about  his  ears.  Jack’s  dealing  with  the 
merchants  he  worked  for  had  mainly  been  conducted 
through  Bullard,  who  had  set  the  fees  and  arranged  the 
kickbacks—and  so  was  able  now  to  call  the  tune.  Jack’s 
work  was  suddenly  not  in  demand.  He  was  billed  for  im- 
mense  inventories  of  bedding  that  had  been  consigned  to 
him  in  the  clear  understanding  that  they  were  to  be 
his, 
and  when  he  indignantly  refused  to  pay,  he  was  threat- 
ened  with  legal  action.  Most  painfully,  because  most  un- 
justly,  Bullard  simply  withheld  money  owed  to  Jack  for 
work  he’d  already  done.  Within  a  month  Jack  was  con- 
fronting  the  clear  prospect  of  bankruptcy. 

All  the  while  Jack  foundered,  Min-Tsing  would  tele- 
phone  with  the  news  of  her  latest  moods,  which  succeeded 
each  other  with  such  whirligig  impetuosity  that  Cleopatra 
herself  would  have  acknowledged  her  as  an  equal.  Giggles 
alternated  with  despair.  She  pitied  Bullard  from  on  high, 
then  wanted  to  kill  him,  or  at  least  confront  him  and  have 
off 
a  proper  shouting  match.  More  than  once  she  set 
to 
her  old  office 
to  have  it 
out,  but  Jack  was  always  able  to  stop  her.  Then  she  urged 
Jack  to  take  her  home  to  Djakarta.  There  Jack  would 
marry  her  and  open  a  photography  studio.  She  described 
life  in  Indonesia  in  lyrical  superlatives,  and  became  angry

(she  of  course  had  been  fired) 

The  Vengeance  of  Hera 

151 

when  Jack  refused  to  be  tempted.  She  discovered  drunk- 
enness  and  the  heady  pleasures  of  public  hysteria.  The 
barb  of  Eros  was  still  lodged  securely  in  her  flesh. 

Jack  was  not  so  fortunate.  At  the 

first  axstroke  of 
ill  fortune,  Love  disintegrated  into  a  welter  of  practical 
anxieties,  It  happened  suddenly,  like  a  slide  being  changed, 
snick-snack,  by  a  slide-changer.  Yet  he  could  not,  even  so, 
have  recourse  to  his  usual  solution,  flight,  if  only  because 
he  still  hoped  Bullard  could  be  made  eventually  to  come 
round  to  a  more  accommodating  attitude.  This  hope,  how- 
ever,  could  be  realized  only  on  condition  that  Min-Tsing 
were  made  to  comprehend  Love’s  last  universal  truth,  that 
it  dies.  Much,  therefore,  as  he’d  have  liked  to  simplify  his 
existence  by  taking  off  on  his  own  for  Las  Vegas  or  Mi- 
ami,  he  remained  at  Min-Tsing’s  beck  and  call,  hoping 
that  by  gradually  weaning  her  from  his  already  cooler  em- 
braces  he  might  yet  escape  complete  destitution.  Besides, 
it 
is  always  delightful  to  be  loved  so  thoroughly;  more  de- 
lightful  perhaps,  in  an  epicurean  way,  when  the  transac- 
tion  is  not  reciprocal,  for  then  the  beloved  will  have  the 
presence  of  mind  to  marvel  at  the  sweetness  of  so  much 
unmerited  fond  attention,  instead  of  vibrating  in  blissfully 
unconscious  resonance, 

Time  passed.  Min-Tsing,  far  from  tapering  off,  became 
clingingly  dependent  and  still  more  wildly  erratic.  The 
studio  had  to  be  sold,  and  most  of  its  equipment.  Jack 
was  reduced  to  looking  for  jobs  at  the  very  studios  whose 
business  he’d  stolen  during  the  years  of  his  ascent,  but 
Bullard  had  been  before  him,  offering  the  old  plums  back 
and  blackening  Jack’s  name,  and  so  his  abjection  was  of 
no  practical  value.  Another  photographers’  rep,  whom  he 
went  to  with  his  portfolio,  told  him  he  was  unemployable 
without  a  good  reference  from  either  Bullard  or  a  previ- 
ous  employer.  The  whole  city  seemed  to  be  in  a  conspir- 
acy  against  him. 

Then  one  half-soused  night  when  he  was  watching  an 
old  musical  with  Min-Tsing  in  her  new  and  so  much 
grottier  apartment,  a  walk-up  on  West  19th,  the  phone 
rang  and  dumped  a  load  of  new  worries  in  his  lap.  It  was 
Bonnie,  wondering  where  his 
child-support 
checks  had  gone  to  and  asking,  as  though  in.passing,  for 
a  divorce.  Jack  felt  as  the  captain  of  the  Titanic  must  have 
when  it  became  known  that  his  ship  lacked  lifeboats.  Bon-

three 

last 

152 

EDGES 

° 

nie  had  been  his  ace  in  the  hole—Bonnie  and  her  son-of- 
a-bitch  father,  whom  Jack  had  made  no  serious  effort  to 
exploit  since  the  debacle  over  the  house  on  Exeter  Road. 
Jack  told  Bonnie  to  stay  home,  he’d  be  right  there  to  dis- 
cuss 
ignoring  Min-Tsing’s 
threats  of  suicide  (which  she  did  not  carry  out),  he  set 
off  in  his  Regency  Red  Jaguar  for  White  Plains  and  a  last 
bid  to  keep  from  going  to  the  bottom. 

the  matter  seriously, 

Then, 

his 

with 

Jaguar 

collided 

Five  miles  from  the  entrance  to  the  Major  Deegan  Ex- 
pressway 
Toyota 
driven  by  Mrs.  Lyn  Balch,  née  Lord.  As  Hera  had  fore- 
known  two  years  ago,  young  Mrs.  Balch  died  instantly. 
Jack,  however,  survived,  though  not  without  severe  and 
permanent  impairment  to 
lesser 
his 
fractures  and  abrasions  that  time  could  be  expected  to 
mend. 

yellow 

vision 

well 

as 

as 

a 

The  vengeance  of  Hera  was  complete.  Jack  pleaded 
a  reduced  charge  of  second-degree  manslaughter 
guilty  to 
a  breathalyzer) 
(you  can’t  argue  with  the  testimony  of 
and  was  given  a  twelve-year  suspended  sentence  to 
be 
spent  in  his  wife’s  custody.  The  judge  said  he  was  being 
unusually  lenient  because  Jack  had  already  been  punished 
most  terribly  by  the  loss  of  his  eyesight. 

While  Jack  stayed  at  home  on  Exeter  Road,  looking 
after  his  daughters  by  Bonnie  and  Min-Tsing  and  the 
three  Korean  orphans  (ages  eight,  nine  and  twelve)  whom 
the  meantime,  Mrs.  Fleetwood 
Bonnie  had  adopted  in 
studied  to  become,  and  then  became,  a  real  estate  agent 
like  her  father  and  grandfather  before  her.  Jack  was  mo- 
rose  at  first,  unable  to  meet  the  demands  of  his  new  role 
in  life,  but  at  Bonnie’s  urging,  and  with  her  patient  tute- 
lage,  he  turned  to  macrame,  discovering  creative  talents 
that  he’d  never  known  himself  to  possess. 

Hera  did  not  begrudge  Jack  his  smali  fulfillment.  The 
gods,  after  all,  are  only  human,  and  once  their  rage  has 
been  placated  they  are  perfectly  capable  of  acts  of  mercy 
and  grace.

Raylyn  Moore,  resident  in  California  for 
Many  years,  was  born  in  Ohio,  worked  as  a 
newspaperwoman  on  the  Prescott,  Arizona 
Evening  Courier  and  the  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah  Deseret  News  &  Telegram;  as  an  editor 
in  the  New  York  office  of  The  Executive 
Housekeeper  (a  trade  journal);  and  has  since 
taught  journalism  and  English  at  Monterey 
Peninsula  College.  She  has  had  published  a 
contemporary  novel  (Mock  Orange),  a 
literary-critical  biographical  study  of  L. 
Frank  Baum  (Wonderful  Wizard,  Marvelous 
Land)  and  the  science  fiction  novel,  What 
Happened  to  Emily  Goode  After  the  Great 
Exhibition, 

She  writes  here  of  that  event  which  must 
mobilize  all  one’s  faculties,  the  moment  as 
to  which  Chicken  Little  issued  the  clarion 
call  so  long  ago.  The  sky  is—~ 

Falling 

BY  RAYLYN  MOORE 

Jillis  and  her  children  and  husband,  and  old  Nana  who 
was  believed  to  have  come  with  the  house,  and  the  dogs 
and  cats  and  the  monkey  had  all  lived  under  the  tower 
for  something  like  ten  years. 

Others  in  the  town  had  lived  under  the  tower  much 
longer,  some  probably  even  dating  their  residency  back  to 
the  long-ago  time  when  the  tower  first  appeared  (or  was 
built). 

But  Jillis  felt  especially  involved  with  the  tower  because 
her  house,  a  well  preserved  pile  of  gingerbread  and  lattice- 
work  with  a  spectacular  stained-glass  window  at  the  stair 
turning,  was  closest  of  all.  The  enormous  concrete  footings 
on  which  the  huge  metal  silo  rested  rose  practically  out  of 
Jillis’s  maple-shaded  backyard,  affording  an  incongruity  of 
landscape  that  never  failed  to  amaze  her. 

153

  
154 

EDGES 

The  children,  one  by  one  as  they  grew  strong  enough 
and  sufficiently  coordinated,  learned  to  climb  up  onto  that 
rough,  unyielding  bulwark,  skinning  their  knees,  at  the  top 
drawing  near  enough  to  the  tower  itself  to  touch  its  black- 
painted  flanks,  tipping  back  their  heads  to  stare  dizzily  up 
toward  where  the  top  of  the  tower  disappeared  into  the 
clouds. 

Naturally  the  monkey  could  do  better.  By  standing  on 
the  head  of  one  of  the  taller  children  he  could  leap  and 
grab  the  bottom  rung  of  a  narrow  black  metal  ladder  that 
spiraled  up  the  sides  of  the  tower. 

He  would  scamper  up  and  around  and  up  and  around, 
but  not  to  the  top.  At  a  certain  place  he  always  stopped 
and  cast 
a  worried  look  back  over  his  shoulder.  Then, 
dazed  by  fear  or  overcome  by  caution,  he  would  return, 
rappelling  as  judiciously  as  any  telephone  company  line- 
man. 

Of  course  the  children  were  warned  early  and  often 
never  to  try  this.  Their  mother  could  never  be  absolutely 
sure  they  obeyed  at  all  times,  but  at  least  she  had  never 
caught  them  on  the  ladder. 

On  cloudless  days,  Jillis  had  noticed,  one  could  either 
see  or  imagine  the  top  of  the  tower  in  full  view.  Either 
way  it  was  too  far  for  details  to  be  discerned,  though  at 
times  it  appeared  that  a  picket  fence,  of  iron  as  black  as 
the  body  of 
a  drunken  circle 
around  the  top  edge  of  the  structure. 
lot 

of  time  wondering  about  the  tower. 
And  even  when  she  wasn’t  actually  looking  at  it,  she  was 
aware  of  being  in  its  presence. 

the  tower  itself, 

Jillis  spent  a 

ran  in 

. 

But  this  was  bound  to  be  an  effect  produced  by  any- 
thing  that  large,  that  overwhelming  and  subtly  threatening. 
Like  a  local  god  it  posed  certain  mysteries  and  demanded 
propitiation,  but  all  this  in  a  way  so  ambiguous  that  Jillis 
could  never  organize  her  feelings  about  it  into  conscious 
thought. 

And  there  were  the  obvious  riddles  which  she 

also 
failed  to  understand.  Why,  for  instance,  no  matter  which 
side  of  the  tower  she  stood  on,  and  no  matter  which  way 
the  clouds  were  moving,  when  she  was  right  up  beside  it, 
looking  up, 
did  the  thing  always  appear  to  be  slowly, 
slowly,  very  slowly  falling  in  her  direction?  Falling  over  on 
her?  None  of  the  children  seemed  to  notice  this,  or  if  they 
did  they  didn’t  mention  it,

Falling 

155 

Meanwhile,  her  life  went  on.  There  was  a  succession  of 
sunrises.  Seasons  replaced  one  another,  The  children— 
there  were  three  of  them,  and  then  four—eventually  made 
some  headway  toward  growing  up 
after  having  lived 
through  enough  of  these  seasons  (though  Jillis  had  never 
seriously  believed  they  would  ever  grow  up  and  the  ten 
years  seemed  to  her  more  like  a  century).  Jillis’s  husband 
John  went  on  commuting  six  days  a  week  by  car  to  the 
city  fifteen  miles  away.  Groceries  had  to  be  brought  home 
once  a  week  and  put  away.  The  moon  doggedly  went 
through  its  phases  in  order  to  repeat  them.  The  PTA  met 
fortnightly.  The  mailman  arrived  every  morning  and  the 
bills  every  thirty  days. 

Then  finally,  Jillis  observed,  things  seemed  to  be  com- 

ing  to  the  point  at  long  last  after  all  this  aimless  cycling. 

One  of  the  dogs,  who  for  years  had  been  given  contra- 

ceptives  in  her  food,  whelped a litter  of  mongrels. 

And  one  Sunday  morning  very  early  the  family  was 
awakened  by  a  strange,  relentless  thudding  coming  from 
the  foot  of  the  backstairs.  Jillis  struggled  up  out  of  deep 
sleep  and  went  to  discover  that  old  Nana  had  had  a  stroke 
and  fallen  downstairs.  She  had  to  be  rushed  to  the  hospi- 
tal,  and  then  after  a  week  or  so  brought  home  again  and 
put  to  bed  and  nursed. 

The  emergency  brought  up  again  the  never  really  re- 
solved  question  of  where  Nana  had  come  from  in  the  first 
place.  At  the  time  Jillis  was  married,  she  had  supposed 
Nana  was  an  elderly  retainer  from  John’s  family  who  had 
retired  and  was  expecting  to  be  taken  care  of  in  return  for 
her  years  of  faithful  service.  But  John  swore  he  had  never 
seen  her  until  after  the  honeymoon,  when  they  moved  into 
the  house  by  the  tower.  He  said  if  she  wasn’t  someone 
Jillis  knew,  then  she  must  have  been  left  over  from  the 
family  that  occupied  the  house  before  them. 

Whoever  she  was,  she  hadn’t  ever  really  been  assimi- 
lated  into  the  present  menage.  Though  Jillis  tried,  espe- 
cially  at  first,  to  be  friendly  and  supportive,  Nana—who 
might  have  been  any  age  from  seventy  to  a  hundred-and- 
fifty—remained  suspicious,  uncommunicative,  even  furtive. 
She  spent  her  days  in  the  third-floor  room  she  claimed  for 
herself,  doing  crewelwork,  slipping  down  the  backstairs  in 
the  early  mornings  to  make  herself  a  pot  of  strong  tea. 

Something  of  the  same  kind  of  enduring  obscurity  hung 
over  the  urn  of  ashes  on  the  parlor  mantel.  At  least  the

156 

EDGES 

urn’s  contents  were  presumed  to  be  ashes,  and  human 
ashes  at  that.  The  urn,  which  had  a  sealed  top,  was  the 
kind  that  comes  from  a  mortuary,  with  a  somber  dark  blue 
glaze  and  no  decoration  to  speak  of.  Both  Jillis  and  John 
believed  the  urn  had  been  there  on  the  mantel  over  the 
fireplace  the  day  they  moved  in. 

Through  all  the  years  Jillis  dusted  around  it—though 
she  was  not  the  driven  sort  of  housekeeper  who  dusts  of- 
ten—thinking  vaguely  that  whoever  it  belonged  to  might 
some  day  call  to  pick  it  up. 

Sometimes  now  Jillis  saw  herself,  with  almost  bitter 
amusement,  as  curator  to  a  vast  collection  of  useless  ob- 
jects,  beginning  with  the  eight  puppies,  which  couldn’t  be 
given  away  because  no  one  wanted  them,  and  extending 
through  all  sorts  of  unfunctional  gimcracks,  to  Nana  and 
the  urn  of  ashes.  Depending  on  her  mood,  Jillis  did  or  did 
not  include  the  children  in  the  list. 

Then,  at  midmorning  on  a  day  of  no  particular  distinc- 
tion,  Jillis  noticed  the  monkey  was  missing.  She  could  not 
recall  having  seen  him  since  dawn,  when  he  had  scam- 
pered  across  the  bed,  waking  her  and  putting  John  into  a 
foul  humor.  She  remembered  now  that  he  had  not  been  on 
hand  when  she  fed  the  other  pets.  Nor  was  he  in  a  habit 
of  going  off  alone.  On  the  contrary,  he  was  extremely  gre- 
garious  and  always  underfoot. 

be  fond  of  him, 

For  herself  Jillis  didn’t  particularly  care  if  she  never 
saw  the  animal  again.  But  out  of  consideration  for  the 
she  began 
children,  who  claimed  to 
searching  the  house, 
beds, 
standing  on  chairs  to  see  all  the  way  to  the  back  of  high 
shelves.  And  though  there  was  evidence  he  had  been 
around  fairly  recently—-he  was  a  spider  monkey  and  could 
he  must 
not  be  housebroken—she  satisfied  herself  that 
now  be  somewhere  outside. 

looking  under 

calling 

and 

She  thought  of  the  tower,  then  discounted  it  because 
the  three  children  tall  enough  to  assist  the  monkey  into 
position  for  his  favorite  trick  were  all  in  school.  But  after 
she  had  checked  out  the  front  yard  there  wasn’t  anywhere 
else  to  look.  She  went  to  see  if  he  could  be  playing  alone 
on  the  concrete.  He  was  not. 

Even  though  she 

had  already  decided  the  monkey 
couldn’t  have  reached  it,  she  looked  at  the  spiral  ladder 
anyway.  Walking  slowly  around  the  tower  to  follow  its  up- 
ward  course  with  her  eye,  she  became  aware  of  something

Falling 

157 

wrong  much  higher  up.  At  the  very  top  of  the  tower  it 
a  huge  chunk  of  iron  picket  fence  had  be- 
looked  as  if 
come  detached  and  was  falling  straight  toward  the  house. 
Reacting  instinctively,  Jillis  curled  herself  into  a  ball 
to  protect  her  vital  organs  and  rolled  like  a  windfall  apple 
down  off  the  footing  and  in  under  the  maple  trees,  with 
her  arms  wrapped  around  her  head  and  face. 

In  the  backyard  she  picked  herself  up  and  started  for 
the  house,  telling  herself  that  the  important  thing  now  was 
not  to  give  way  to  panic. 

Jé  her  home  were  going  to  be  crushed,  obviously  she 
must  vacate  it,  but  in  an  orderly  fashion.  Taking  along 
what? 

As  she  passed  through  the  enclosed  back  porch,  she 
snatched  a  pillowcase  out  of  the  dirty  laundry  and  went 
from  room  to  room  loading  it  with  indispensable  items, 
half  a  jar  of  pickle  relish  from  the  refrigerator,  a  broken 
retractable  tape  measure  from  the  table  in  the  hall,  an 
overdue  library  book  from  the  coffee  table  in  the  parlor, 
a  blouse  she  had  never  particularly  liked  but  which  hap- 
pened  to  be  the  first  thing  she  saw  when  she  opened  her 
bedroom  closet. 

After  awhile  she  came  to  herself  and  set  down  the  bag 
of  valuables.  She  went  to  the  telephone  and  dialed  the 
operator  and  asked  for  the  police. 

- 

“Something’s  falling  from  the  top  of  the  tower,”  she 
said  with  admirable  calm  to  the  dispatcher.  “I’m  afraid 
it’s  going  to  crush  my  house.” 

“Give  your  full  name  and  address,  ma’am.” 
“Oh,  for  heaven’s  sake!  This  is  an  emergency.  Oh,  all 
at 
right.  I’m  Jillis  Carver.  Mrs.  John  Carver.  We  live 
five-oh-five  Summit  Drive  in  the  house  beside  the  tower. 
We're  about  to  be  wiped  out.  Something  that  heavy  falling 
all  that  distance—” 

‘Fas  anything  actually  happened  there,  Mrs.  Carver?” 
“Not  yet,  but  any  minute  now—” 
“We  can’t  deal  with  an  emergency  before  it’s  happened. 

Let  us  know  when—” 

Jillis  hung  up  the  telephone  and  rummaged  through  a 
desk  drawer  for  the  pamphlet  called  THIS  IS  YOUR 
she 
COMMUNITY  DISASTER  PLAN.  Surprisingly, 
found  it. 

“Save  this  plan,”  a  line  of  flame-orange  type  directed

158 

EDGES 

riffled 

brightly  on  the  front  of  the  brochure,  “and  it  can  save 
your  life.” 
She 

fire, 
There 
flood,  air  pollution,  nuclear  attack,  and  earthquake,  Noth- 
ing  seemed  quite  applicable,  but  the  act  of  sitting  at  the 
desk  forcing  herself  to  examine  the  pages  of  information 
in  novelty  typefaces  had  a  calming  effect. 

through. 

sections 

were 

on 

She  was  able  now  to  remember  Nana  in  her  room 
upstairs  and  the  dogs  and  cats  all  over  the  place,  particu- 
larly 
the  basement.  Her 
youngest  child  would  also  soon  be  home  in  the  car  pool 
from  the  preschool  he  attended  three  mornings  a  week. 

the  eight  pups  in 

a  basket  in 

Clearly  she  would  have  to  make  arrangements  for  get- 

ting  them  all  safely  out  of  the  house. 

But  she  had  delayed  so  long  already  that  she  saw  no 
harm  in  delaying  a  second  or  so  more  while  she  examined 
the  new  plan  for  flaws. 

Right  away  she  found  one.  Or  rather,  in  that  second  or 
so  she  happened  to  recall  a  story  she  had  read  in  a  high- 
school  literature  class  about  an  avalanche  in—was  it  the 
Alps?  A  family  living  in 
a  mountain  cottage  had  heard 
the  rumbling  several  miles  away  and  had  all  run  out 
of  their  house  to  presumed  safety.  But  at  a  crucial  moment 
the  avalanche  struck  some  barrier  which  caused  it 
to 
divide  just  above  the  cottage.  So  afterward  there  stood 
the  house,  safe,  while  the  people,  who  would  have  done 
better  to  remain  unperturbed  around  their  hearth,  had  all 
perished. 

. 

her  natural  hesitancy,  her  reluctance  to 

Of  course  it  was  only  a  fiction,  perhaps  or  perhaps  not 
it  served 
based  on  reality,  yet  the  fortuitous  memory  of 
a 
do 
to  feed 
wrong  thing  in 
the  present  to 
leave  well  enough  alone  inside  the  house,  while  she  went 
outside  again  to 
see  how  bad  things  really  were.  There 
was  always  the  chance  she  had  misjudged  the  situation 
before,  perhaps  even  imagined  at  least  part  of  it. 

Jillis  decided  for 

haste. 

But  as  soon  as  she  got  to  the  backyard,  she  saw  that 
if  anything  she  had  underestimated  the  seriousness  of 
the  problem. 

The  falling  piece  of  iron  fence  was  much  nearer  now, 
so  near  she  could  see  its  jagged,  raw  pickets,  like  a  pha- 
lanx 
bayonets  seemingly  aimed  right  toward 
where  she  stood  looking  up,  shielding  her  eyes. 

fixed 

of 

Stull, 

this  could  be  a  trick  of  the  light,  an  optical  mis-

Falling 

159 

it, 

If 

construction.  Surely  the  thing  was  still  too  far  to  judge 
exactly  where  it  would  land.  If  she  could  make  herself 
believe  this,  she  would  be  free  to 
fix  her  attention  upon 
the  further  complication.  For  behind  the  fence  she  saw 
that  another,  far  larger  object  was  hurtling  downward.  A 
a 
massive  hunk  of  black  iron  siding  with  a  curve  in 
fragment  which  must  be  part  of  the  tower  wall  itself.  Did 
that  mean  the  whole  structure  was  beginning  to  collapse? 
a  good  many  such  pieces  began  falling,  some  were 
So  neither 
sure  to  strike  the  house  and  some  the  yard. 
place  could  be  counted  perfectly  safe,  or  even  half  safe. 
That  settled  it  then.  She  would  have  to  go  on  with  her 
the 
of  evacuating  the  house  and 
original  plan 
neighborhood  of  the  tower,  getting  her  brood  out  of  the 
way  altogether,  including  the  invalid  Nana,  the  helpless 
puppies,  her  youngest  child  when  he  arrived  home,  the 
monkey  if  he  could  be  found,  though  this  seemed  less 
and  less  likely.  (Had  some  extrasensory  warning  alerted 
him  early?  Had  he  already  saved  himself  then?)  And 
yes,  she  really  should  take  along  whatever  family  valuables 
could  be  gotten  together  without  too  much  trouble.  The 
older  dogs  and  cats  could  fend  for  themselves. 

Yet  even  as 

she  was  plotting 

decisively, 
calling  up  all  her  inner  resources  for  the  effort  she  knew 
would  be  needed,  she  was  again  struck  with  an  exactly 
contradictory  notion. 

fleeing 

this 

all 

so 

Why,  for  ten  whole  years  they  had  all  been  safe 

in 
all  that  time  nothing  really  bad  had  hap- 
this  house.  In 
pened  (if  she  discounted  Nana’s  stroke).  In  ten  years  one 
can  accumulate  a  very  comfortable  supply  of  complacency 
if  nothing  interferes.  So  why  assume  the  worst  now?  Why 
couldn’t  she  just  go  on  as  usual,  say  nothing,  forget  what 
she  had  seen  in  the  backyard,  meet  the  car  pool  as  always 
and  bring  the  baby  in  and  give  him  lunch,  take  Nana  up 
an  hour  before 
her  tray,  and  then  lie  down  herself  for 
the  older  children  came  in  from  school? 

far 

It  was  by 

the  most  tempting  of  the  plans  she’d 
thought  of,  and  who  was  to  say  it  might  not  be  as  good  as 
any? 

After  all, 

it  was  only  by 

sheerest  chance  she  knew 
about  the  fragments  falling  from  the  tower.  If  she  hadn't 
gone  out  searching  for  the  monkey  she  would  never  have 
looked  up,  and  there  would  now  be  no  occasion  for  con- 
cern,

160 

EDGES 

Most  of  her  life, 

she  had  been  lucky, 
she  reflected, 
and  she  had  done  nothing  now  to  deserve  to  have  her 
luck  change. 

When  she  was  eighteen,  during  the  summer  between 
high  school  and  college—she  still  thought  of  it  this  way 
though  as 
it  turned  out  she  never  went  to  college—her 
remarkably  enlightened  parents  had  sent  her  to  Europe 
with  a  bicycle  and  enough  money  to  last  several  months. 
They  wanted  her  to  discover  herself,  they  said.  To  get 
to  know  herself.  To  decide  what  she  really  wanted  to  do 
with  her  life  before  she  settled  down. 

What  Jillis  discovered  about  herself  was  that  she  had 
no  particular  occupational  ambition  or  bent.  The  person 
she  really  got  to  know  was  not  herself  but  John  Carver, 
a  vacationing  compatriot  poised  between  college  and  an 
enviable  job  offer  from  a  firm  back  home.  They  were  wed 
practically  as  soon  as  they  had  cleared  customs  on  their 
return. 

She  had  never  been  consciously  sorry.  The  Carvers 
had  deliberately  had  their  family  while  they  were  young. 
That  had  been  more  or  less  John’s  idea  as  she  recalled 
it,  “To  get  it  over  with  so  Jill  will  have  plenty  of  time 
later  to  do  whatever  she  wants.” 

John  was  handsome,  generous,  considerate,  and  not  a 
bore.  The  children  were  handsome,  bright, 
socially  ad- 
justed,  and  not  sickly.  When  it  occurred  to  her  to  do  so 
from  time  to  time,  Jillis  congratulated  herself  on  the  direc- 
life  had  taken  even  though  she  really  hadn’t 
tion  her 
ever  done  anything  on 
course. 
Nor  had  she  the  faintest  clue  what  she  might  do  when 
that  time  came  that  John  had  promised  her,  When  she 
could  do  whatever  she  chose. 

her  own  to  shape 

its 

Jillis  Carver  was  in  fact  a  drifter.  Not  the  lonely  kind 
who  has  no  certain  home  and  drinks  wine  by  the  pint  out 
of  a  paper  bag.  Not  the  frightened  kind  who  goes  from 
love-partner  to  love-partner  seeeking  the  perfect  alliance. 
But  a  drifter  all  the  same,  a  secret  drifter  of  a  kind  far 
more  numerous  than  is  imagined  by  the  compilers  of  data 
on  this  and  that.  It  was  as  if  she  was  becalmed  in  a  back~ 
water  hidden  from  the  view  of  the  mainstream. 

Not  that  she  was  unaware  of  the  alarms  and  stresses 
of  the  times.  She  certainly  did  not  approve  of  the  oppres- 
sion  of  the  meek  or  the  exploitation  of  the  unfortunate  by

Falling 

161 

the  fortunate.  Yet  she  had  never  felt  personally  affected. 
Perhaps  she  would  feel  so  later. 

To  the  well-worn  argument  that  if  one  didn’t  come  to 
grips  with  things  now  there  might  not  be  any  “later,” 
she  had  long  since  replied,  “Well,  but  people  have  always 
said  that,  haven’t  they?  And  things  have  always  come  out 
all  right.” 

It  was  exactly  this  kind  of  optimism  that  suffused  her 

in  the  face  of  the  threat  from  the  tower. 

She  went  out  once  more  to  the  backyard  to  reassess 

her  situation. 

As  if  to  underscore  the  essential  rightness  of  this  latest 
impression  that  everything  might  yet  work  out  well  if  she 
did  nothing,  the  descending  fence  fragment,  although 
closer  now  than  when  she  had  looked  earlier, 
even 
seemed  to  have  slowed  considerably,  as  if  its  tate  of  fall 
were  steadily  diminishing  the  nearer  it  came  to  earth, 

True,  near  the  top  of  the  tower  a  third  fragment,  much, 
much  bigger  than  the  fence,  even  bigger  than  the  piece 
of  curved  siding  which  immediately  preceded  it,  seemed 
to  have  broken  free  and  be  on  its  way  down  too.  But  this 
monster  piece  of  debris  was  still  so  far  away  that  it  looked 
far  smaller  than  it  really  was.  And  that  was  a  comfort. 

A  blessing  as  well  that,  the  way  things  were  going,  it 
it 

too  could  be  counted  upon  to  diminish  in  speed  as 
neared. 

Wasn’t  there  something  she  had  once  heard  about  a 
train  which,  if  its  speed  were  decreased  by  half,  and  that 
speed  by  half,  and  that  by  half  again,  would  never  reach 
the  terminal?  Or  did  she  have  this  thoroughly  confused 
with  something  else? 

There  was  no  one  now  that  she  could  call  on  the  tele- 
phone  to  talk  things  over.  As  it  happened  John  was  on 
a  business  trip  for  the  rest 
of  the  week  and  wouldn’t 
be  driving  home  from  the  city  that  night.  Nor  did  she,  at 
the  moment,  know  how  he  could  be  reached.  He  was  pro- 
bably  still  on  the  plane.  And  her  best  friend  Kathy,  who 
lived  in  the  neighborhood,  was  on  a  camping  vacation 
in  Canada  with  her  own  husband  and  children. 

Because  the  car  pool  was  late  Jillis  took  the  time  to  slip 
up  the  backstairs  to  Nana’s  room,  not  with  any  idea  of 
alarming  the  old  lady,  just  to  see  how  she  was  getting 
‘on.  Usually  at  this  time  of  day  Nana  was  alert  and  wait- 
ing  for  her  lunch.  Now  she  was  napping,  her  calm,  ven-

162, 

EDGES 

erable  face  full  of  wrinkled  dignity  against  the  unwrinkled 
(no-iron)  percale  pillowslip. 

Jillis  went  to  the  basement  to  look  in  on  the  dogs.  On 
the  way  down  she  discovered  yet  another  complication. 
In 
a  storage  niche  on  the  stairwell  were  a  new  family 
of  four  kittens  and  their  mother,  a  strange  female  that 
Jillis  was  quite  certain  did  not  belong  to  the  household.  Or 
at  least  had  not  until  now.  The  mother  cat  stared  out 
at  Jillis  from  the  dimness  of  the  niche,  beaming  a  green 
gaze  of  fatuous  pride  and  fearlessness. 
matters 
well 

had 
not  been  settled  already.  None  of  the  things  in  her  charge 
was  portable.  She  didn’t  even  think  she  could  bring  her- 
self  to  pack  up  and  carry  away  the  ashes  from  the  mantel 
after  they  had  been  allowed  to  remain  where  they  were 
all  through  the  years.  It  wouldn’t  be  right. 

settled 

pretty 

then, 

That 

they 

if 

Once  more  arriving  in  the  backyard,  she  looked  up  at 
the  descending  particles.  The  jagged  fence  was  so  near 
it  was  almost  piercing  the  roof,  and  above  it  the  sky  was 
blotted  out  by  vast  pieces  of  metal  torn  loose  and  descend- 
ing. 

But  slowly.

Luis  Urrea  comes  from  Mexico  and  lives  in 
San  Diego,  California.  With  his  left  hand  he 
writes  stories  (and,  it  is  rumored,  a  novel), 
with  his  right  he  draws  indescribable  pictures, 
and  with  other  hands  he  does  something  in 
films  and  something  in  rock  music.  Cur- 
rently,  he  is  on  the  staff  of  San  Diego  Mesa 
College,  running  a  bilingual  literary  contest. 

“Things  that  do  and  do  not  exist  pass  by, 
one  after  one.” 

Father  Returns  from 
the  Mountain 

BY  LUIS  URREA 

Us,  and  them 
And  after  all  we’re  only  ordinary  men 
Me,  and  you 
God  only  knows  it’s  not  what  we  would  choose  to  do 
—Roger  Waters 

- 

red. 

It  has 

The  car  is 
a  sun-baked  and  peeling  black 
top.  Little  flakes  of  fake  leather  blow  away  in  the  wind. 
The  roof  is  crushed.  Windows  are  shattered.  The  front 
end  is  crumpled.  The  axles  are  split  and  the  tires  slant 
crookedly.  Dry  blood  on  the  hood.  The  steering  wheel  is 
twisted.  Details  of  violence.  An  American  Motors  Ram- 
bler  440,  1966.  Slivers  of  glass  are  stuck  in  the  carpets. 
Dust  settles  on  the  stains.  A  photograph  of  my  father  and 
me  is  caught  under  the  seat,  fluttering  like  a  flag,  like  a 
wounded  bird  trapped  in  the  wind.  There  is  a  dime  in  the 
broken  driver’s  seat.  Blood  where  the  radio  should  be./ 
This  is  the  truth.  The  truth  is 
a  diamond  or  at  least  a 
broken  mirror.  There  are  many  reflective  surfaces  and  we 
observe  the  ones  that  we  choose.  We  see  what  we  can./ 
a  dusty  compound  among 
The  car  is  red. 

It  stands  in 

163

  
164 

EDGES 

other  crushed  machines.  A  note  to  my  father  blows  out  of 
the  glove  compartment.  It  says  “Dear  Alberto”  a  hundred 
times  as  it  spins  away.  There  is 
a  chain-link  fence  that 
rattles  in  a  breeze  that  smeils  of  dogs  and  perfume  on 
women’s  bellies.  A  yellow  sticker  is  pasted  to  the  hood. 
Children  scare  each  other  by  touching  the  crusty  patches 
of  my  father’s  blood.  “He'll  come  back  and  eat  you!” 
The  dead  man,  the  dead  man./  A  Mexican  cop  slides 
down  the  slope.  He  squints  in  the  early  morning  sun.  He 
can  hardiy  see  my  father  in  the  wreckage.  He  runs  back 
up  and  calls  for  help.  The  blue  light  atop  his  car  flashes, 
flashes,  casting  marching  shadows  over  the  rocks.  Pink 
urine  spreads  across  my  father’s  clothing.  The  pain  is 
a 
sound  that  hums  inside  his  guts,  that  pierces  his 
skull. 
Darkness.  Sleep./  The  telephone  feels  warm.  I  look  out 
the  window  at 
a  Monday  sky.  “Hello,”  he  says,  “this  is 
Jaime.  Do  you  remember  me?”  Morning  sunlight  reaches 
through  the  trees.  “Of  course  I  remember  you.  What’s 
up?”  His  silence  buzzes  for  a  moment.  When  he  speaks 
he  speaks  carefully.  “Your  father...  has  had  an  acci- 
dent.”  “Is  he  hurt?”  “Yes.”  “Badly?”  “Yes.”  I  lean  for- 
ward.  I  think  of  my  father  being  hurt.  I  think  of  him  in 
pain.  The  tiny  agony  of  tears  pinches  the  corners  of  my 
eyes./  We  are  on  a  balcony  in  Puerto  Vallarta.  My  fa- 
ther’s  hand  on  my  shoulder,  lightning  bombarding  the 
hilltops.  Rain  undermines  the  streets  and  floods  the  river 
that  eats  great  rifts 
in  the  jungle.  We  spend  the  entire 
night  in  each  other's  confidence./  My  father  is  severely 
damaged.  His  eyes  are  open  but  will  not  function.  They 
Scrape  open  and  shut  but  do  not  break  the  thick  coats  of 
darkness  that  cover  them.  He  cannot  move.  His  mouth  is 
a  thickened  traitor  that  will  not  function.  It 
fills  slowly 
with  liquid.  When  it  reaches  his  lips  there  is 
a  slow,  end- 
less  snail  of  red  slipping  down  his  cheek  and  hiding  in 
his  ear.  I  am  sitting  in  my  room  listening  to  music./  “How 
bad?”  I  ask,  a  little  afraid,  a  little  unwilling,  a  little  un- 
ready.  “Very  bad.  He  seems  to  have  had  a  stroke  while 
driving.  He  hit  a  mountain  in  San  Luis  Rio  Colorado.” 
“He  was  almost  home.”  “Not  close  enough.”  I  feel  small. 
“He  is  paralyzed.  He  can’t  see  or  speak.  He  has  head  and 
internal  injuries.  The  family  has  started  out.”  The  sun  is 
bright./  The  police  compound  is 
quiet.  A  scrawny  cat 
licks  the  speedometer./  The  police  lift  him  into  the  ambu- 
lance.  He  tries  to  talk  he  tries  to  see.  He  is 
a  slab  of  meat

Father  Returns  from  the  Mountain 
165 
and  it  makes  him  angry.  The  pain  makes  him  angry.  The 
cuts  on  his  face  sting.  He  is  taken  to 
a  hospital  where 
they  strip  him  naked  decide  that  he  will  be  dead  soon, 
and  shoot  him  with  morphine.  They  put  him  in  a  room  at 
eight  A.M.  where  he  struggles  alone  for  eight  hours.  He  is 
given  no  aid.  My  cousin  finds  him  struggling  to 
talk. 
“Calm  down  tio,”  he  says,  “we're  here  with  you.  Don’t  be 
afraid.”  The  blood  has  made  his  throat  black./  I  sit  alone 
in  the  funeral  home.  There  is  little  sound  from  without, 
even  downtown  Tijuana  rests  at  three  a.M.  I  open  the 
coffin  lid  and  look  at  him.  He  is  broken.  His  chin  is 
a 
black  openness,  little  grey  whiskers  have  pushed  their 
beads  through  the  wound.  His  shirt  is  stained.  1  put  my 
face  on  the  side  of  the  box  and  I  stare  and  stare.  I  watch 
for  a  flicker,  a  twitch.  I  wait  for  a  microscopic  flare  of  the 
nostrils,  The  sealed  eyelids  seem  ready  to  pop,  to  rise  and 
lower.  I  want,  in  terror,  to  see  him  lick  his  lips  so  that  I 
can  break  the  sealing  glass,  pull  him  up,  save  him,  em- 
brace  him.  There  is  no  movement.  There  is  no  sound./  I 
found  a  photograph  just  yesterday.  In  it  my  father  stands 
with  the  president,  with  generals,  senators.  His  captain's 
a  salad.  At  times  I  shuffle 
uniform  looks  as 
through  his  official  papers  and  look  at  his  federal  police 
badge.  His  smiles  look  like  mine.  We  are  connected  by 
the  lips,  the  grin  is  our  chain./  I  lie  on  the  floor  beneath 
the  coffin.  I  close  my  eyes  to  sleep,  my  last  night  beside 
him.  I  am  a  poet  at  that  instant.  A  shadow  passes  over 
my  face,  I  jump  up,  thinking  that  someone  is  approaching. 
There  is  nothing.  Again  the  shadow.  Again  nothing.  Again 
and  again.  I  imagine  him  waving  farewell.  As  I  slip  into 
sleep  I  hold  on  to  a  vision  of  a  puffy  hand  stiffly  reach- 
a  series. 
ing  over  the  edge./  The  dreams  have  come  in 
They  are  diamonds,  they  are  broken  mirrors.  In  the  first 
I  am  run  over  by a  truck.  I  pull  at  people’s  legs  from  the 
black  street./  Death  is  here.  I  am  aware  of  that  now. 
is  grinning  at 
Perhaps  innocence  is  not  knowing  that  it 
you  from  the  corner.  It  has  pressed  its  face  against  the 
windows,  it  has  stalked  in  with  the  fog  and  awaits  its 
turn./  At  eight  p.m.  he  tried  to  open  his  eyes.  His  strain- 
the 
ing  produced  no  results.  He  had  been  waiting  for 
Mexicans  to  bring  an  ambulance  to  take  him  to  Yuma, 
Arizona.  The  Mexicans  did  not  respond.  An  American 
ambulance  crew  waited  for  an  hour  at  the  border.  My 
father  was  born  in  Rosario,  a  little  town  in  the  south  of

crisp 

as 

166 

EDGES 

ask.  “Yes,”  he  replies. 

Sinaloa.  He  died  in  San  Luis  Rio  Colorado,  a  small  town 
in  the  north  of  Sonora.  I  can  imagine  his  grey  hair  against 
the  dirty  pillow.  His  lips,  white,  rolling  slowly  back.  His 
abdomen  searing  red  hot  then  tingling  pink  as  he  passed 
through  to  the  new  side.  Possibly  music,  a  fragment  of  a 
tune  wafting  through  the  haze.  I  hope  he  heard  music. 
“This  is  Jaime  again.”  “Tell  me.”  “His  condition  deterio- 
rated  for  several  hours.”  “And?”  “And  your  sefior  ... 
rested.”  “Dead?”  “Dead.”  “Just  now?”  “Yes.  Your  family 
didn’t  want  to 
call  you.”  “Thank  you.”  “Are  you  all 
right?”  “Thank  you.”/  No  one  comes  to  the  funeral  home 
to  get  me.  I  have  watched  the  corpse  for  seven  hours.  I 
I  think  of  Rosario  again.  He 
have  closed  the  coffin  lid. 
died  returning  from  his  birthplace.  The  stupidity  of 
it 
makes  me  angry.  I  have  not  eaten  since  the  day  before. 
“I  hate  waiting,”  I  say  to  myself.  “I  know,  son,  I  always 
did.  It’s  boring.”  I  spin  around,  but  the  lid  remains  closed. 
“Do  you  hear  me,  papa?”  I 
“I 
love  you,”  I  say.  “I  know,”  he  says./  Mexicans  love  the 
dead.  They  are  a  lovely  treat  with  which  to  terrify  each 
other.  People  passing  on  the  street  push  open  the  door  to 
try  to  see  the  dead  man.  “What  are  you  looking  for,  you 
vampires?”  I 
at  them.  “El  muerto,”  they  whisper, 
“El  muerto.”/  We  carry  the  coffin  to  the  graveside.  I  have 
to  go  to  the  bathroom.  Dogs  are  running  on  the  graves. 
Whores  are  working  downtown.  People  are 
eating  and 
defecating  and  laughing  and  sweating  and  my  father  is 
even,  hesitated.  Nobody  has 
dead.  The  world  has 
noticed.  The  hard  part 
is  watching  the  box  go  down. 
Watching  it  being  pushed  into  the  black  mouth,  knowing 
that  his  flesh  is  being  hid  from  you,  and  if  you  should 
search  for  a  touch  of  it  again  you  will  find  dusty  corrup- 
I  walk  away  from  the  weeping. 
tion.  The  body  goes. 
White  clouds  in 
the 
distance. 
the 
crowd.  Tijuana  looks  nice  from  a  distance.  I  was  born 
there./  My  friends  and  I  bring  his  organ  to  the  house.  He 
spent  hours  with  it  daily.  I  put  my  fingers  on  the  key- 
board.  Cold  hands  grow  up  the  insides  of  my  arms  and 
put  fingers  inside  my  chest.  They  surround  my  heart  and 
in  my 
squeeze.  I  retreat, 
house  alone,  working  on 
the 
in 
driveway.  When  J  open  the  door  I  see  my  dead  father 
leaning  on  the  stecring  wheel.  His  hair  in  disorder,  his 
eyes  uncertain.  I  lead  him  inside.  His  hand  is  very  cool.

a  coward  before  pain./ 

I  keep  my  back  to 

a  book.  ]  hear  a 

sit 
car 

yell 

not 

I 

Father  Returns  from  the  Mountain 
167 
“What  happened?”  he  asks.  I  look  into  his  face.  Maybe 
I  should  remain  silent,  perhaps  I  can  fool  him  and  in  do- 
ing  so,  keep  him  alive.  It  is  impossible.  “Papa,  you  were 
killed  in  an  auto  accident.”  Shock  spreads  over  his  face, 
“No,”  he  says,  “it  can’t  be.”  I  am  afraid  of  hurting  him, 
but  I  must.  “Go  away,  you're  dead.”  “I  can’t  be,”  he  in- 
sists,  frustration  and  pain  mixing  on  his  face./  As  a  child 
I  would  stand  beside  him  as  he  drove,  holding  tight  to  his 
shoulder./  I  kneel  at  his  feet  and  take  his  pant-legs  in  my 
hands.  “Papa,  go  away,  you  can’t  be  here.  You're  dead!” 
He  shakes  his  head  sadly.  I  weep  liké  his  little  boy wept, 
with  my  head  on  his  knees.  “You're  dead,  you're  dead, 
you're  dead.”/  His  fingerprints  are 
still  on  the  organ 
keyboard.  Late  at  night  I  think  of  licking  them  from  the 
ivory.  It  would  be  a  kind  of  communion  with  him.  I  need 
him  and  he  is  gone./  .A  stonemason  gets  into  the  grave 
and  pours  concrete  over  the  coffin.  We  don’t  have  enough 
money  for  a  headstone.  Maybe  a  tree  will  grow  here,  or 
something.  Other  mourners  file  in  to  feed  the  hole  beside 
my  father./  The  car  is  red.  The  cold  desert  wind  moans 
in  it  at  night.  There  is 
a  scar  on  the  mountain  where  it 
was  hit  by  the  car.  It  flipped  and  rolled  six  times.  It 
is 
rumored  that  my  father  went  out  the  windshield  as 
it 
rolled.  His  glasses  bend  the  moonlight  between  the  crum- 
bling  rocks./  I  hear  his  car  again.  He  looks  much  better. 
“Get  in,”  he  says.  I  get  in.  He  takes  me  through  miles  of 
dream  lands.  Things  that  do  and  do  not  exist  pass  by,  one 
after  one.  We  are  free  to  go  wherever  he  chooses.  We  go 
to  Rosario.  “Did  it  hurt  to  die?”  I  finally  ask.  “Well,”  he 
says, 
“it  hurt  before  I  died.”  “Were  you  afraid?”  “Of 
course.  I  listened  for  you,  but  you  never  came.”  My  stom- 
ach  tightens.  “I  wanted  to  be  there.  I  couldn’t  get  to  you. 
Don’t  you  think  it  hurt  me  to  let  you  die?”  He  smiles.  “I 
Know,”  he  says.  We  pass  the  ruins  of  a  railyard.  “Your 
grandfather  is  proud  of  you,”  he  says.  I  look  at  him.  The 
tears  come,  I  try  to  stop  them,  but  they  force  their  way 
out  anyway.  “I  don’t  want  to  be  without  you,”  I  blurt.  He 
looks  at  me  for  a  long  while,  then  taps  me  on  the  knee. 
little 
“You've  got  to  stop  all  this  crying.  You  sound  like a 
girl.”  Then;  “You  aren’t  without  me.  Remember  that.” 
ask. 
His  eyes 
“They’re  still  on  the  side  of  the  road,”  he  says.  “But  that’s 
all  right,  I  won’t  be  needing  them  now.”  “Were  you  cog- 
nizant  in  the  hospital?”  I  ask.  “Yes,”  he  says  with  dis-

clear.  “Where  are  your  glasses?”  I 

are 

168 

EDGES 

gust  in  his  voice.  “I  was  stuck  inside  of  that  damned  dead 
tell  him.  He 
body.  I  hated  that.”  “I’m  sorry,  papa,”  I 
looks  at  me.  “Don’t  be  sorry.  You  waste  time  that  you 
need.”  I  nod.  “I  closed  the  coffin,”  I  say.  “Thank  you,  I 
didn’t  want  to  be  on  display.”  I  touch  his  arm.  “Papa, 
did  you,  did  you  see  God?”  He  smiles  at  me  and  turns  on 
the  radio./  When  I  was  fourteen  my  father  and  I  spent 
hours  laughing  in  the  night  about  nothing,  nothing  at  all./ 
The  car  is  red.  The  driver’s  seat  is  torn,  There  is 
a  bee- 
hive  inside  it.  Bees  fly  where  his  eyes  used  to  be.  They  fly 
through  the  air  that  used  to  touch  his  lips.  They  walk  on 
ribs.  They  sit  where  he 
the  bent  wheel  that  cracked  his 
used  to  sit.  A  slow,  warm  cascade  of  honey  spreads  over 
the  traces  of  demolition.  It  is  gold.  It  catches  the  sunlight 
and  reflects  the  clouds  that  move  in 
its  depths,  minute 
and  sparkling  white.  Droplets  reflect  the  blue  of  the  sky. 
They  hint  at  the  smile  in  my  father’s  eyes. 

Rosario,  my  earth 
little  town  in  which  I  tearned  to  love 
I  dream  of  you,  I  miss  you 
thinking  that  one  day  I  should  return 

Life  took  me  from  you, 
but  I  never,  never  forgot  you 
my  grandest  illusion 
is  to  be  able  to  return  to  you 
in  the  years  of  my  nightfall 

Alberto  Urrea 
June  2,  1915—January  10, 
1977

M.  J.  Engh,  the  author  of  1976's  stunning 
novel  of  world  conquest,  Arslan  (about  the 
general,  all  the  particulars)  ...  was  born 
and  raised  in  a  small  town  in  southern 
Tilinois;  attended  the  Universities  of  Chicaga 
and  Illinois  to  receive  an  undergraduate 
degree  with  a  major  in  “history,  the  queen 
of  subjects”;  has  lived  since  college  in  Chicago, 
the  Philippines,  Japan,  Mlinois  (again),  fol- 
lowed  by  a  long  stretch  in  Oklahoma,  and 
has  now  taken  up  permanent  residence  in  the 
state  of  Washington. 

Engh  writes  “trying  to  work  out  questions 
...  bothering  me.  ...  It  helps  to  clarify 
thinking.  ...  I  did  not  arrive  at  good  an- 
swers,  but  I  understand  the  questions  better.” 

The  Oracle 

BY  M.  J.  ENGH 

CHAPTER  1 

Several  people  stood  watching  a 
slender  woman  who 
sat,  or  more  nearly  crouched,  on  the  edge  of  an  ornate 
chair.  She  had  been  speaking,  trying  to  explain  some- 
thing  to  them.  Now  she  bowed  her  head  deeply,  thrusting 
forward  against  some  invisible  obstacle,  making  strange 
motions  with  her  hands,  of  swimming  or  fending  off.  They 
if  her  head 
could  not  know  why.  To  her  it  seemed  as 
like 
were  garnished  with 
the  tendril-curled  staghorns  of  Scythian  art, 
a  growth 
that  arched  downward  and  outward  from  her  forehead, 

a  densely  ramifying  growth, 

169

  
170 

EDGES 

dragging  her  down,  dragonward,  out.  Seemed  as 
if;  be- 
cause  she  knew  it  for  an  idiom  of  the  mind,  not  a  physical 
monstrosity.  Yet  it  was  real,  in  its  way,  and  she  intended 
to  force  a  course  clear,  to  master  this  weight  and  tangle, 
a  mane  of 
Shake  it  back 
The 
like 
watchers  saw  her  as 
a  woman  crushed  down  and  abject 
with  pain;  but  within  herself  her  feelings  were  not  abject. 
The  pain  that  was  killing  her  seemed  to  her  somewhat 
irrelevant. 

untidy 

hair. 

not 

her 

back, 

his  hand  on 

Philippe  Montoya  laid 

the 
thumb  curling  a  little  possessively  over  the  ridge  of  her 
a  magician  displaying 
shoulder.  He  waited,  rather  like 
one  of  his  more  casual  tricks.  The  woman  straightened 
gradually.  She  laid  her  hands  in  her  lap.  They  trembled; 
if  with  embarrassment.  Montoya 
her  face  was  flushed  as 
gave 
went 
those  who  were  servants 
and 
instructions, 
about  their  business.  The  doctor  shook  his  head  testily. 
This  case  had  annoyed  him  from  the  beginning. 

“It  will  be  all  right,”  the  woman  said,  anxious  to  re- 
assure  them.  “The  only  danger  is...”  But  it  was  exactly 
in  trying  to  explain  that  danger  that  she  had  come  to 
grief,  and  she  felt  still  the  shadow  of  horns  over  her  brow 
and  shoulders. 

her 

gently. 

Montoya’s  hand 

A  woman  servant,  shriveled  and  grandmotherly,  with 
a  perpetual  stoop,  stooped  farther  to  take  her  elbow  and 
lift 
her,  sliding 
lightly  down  her  back  as  she  rose.  The  servant  guided 
her  out  of  the  room.  In  this  house,  everyone  treated  her 
solicitously,  fondly.  At  times  she  suspected  that  this  was 
a  function  of  the  house  itself,  that  just  beyond  its  doors 
waited  the  ravenous  bruising  maelstrom  that  had  slammed 
the  rock  bottom  of  existence.  But 
her  once  almost  to 
Philippe  Montoya  had  been  gentle  to  her  from  the  first. 

released 

“What  do  you  think,  Doctor?”  As  he  might  have  asked 
an  auto  mechanic.  “What  do  you  think?’—and  reserv- 
ing,  as  in  that  case,  the  right  to  disagree. 

The  doctor  repeated  his  headshake.  “I 

can’t  tell  you 
anything  I  haven’t  already  told  you,  Mr.  Montoya.  Her 
physical  condition  is  improving  well  enough.  If  you  think 
she  should  have  psychological  help,  you  should  consult 
a  practitioner  in 
can’t 
help  you  there.  Of  course,”  he  added  irritably,  “her  eye- 
sight  is  not  very  good.  No  doubt  you  know  that.” 
organs 

that  field—as  [ve  said  before.  I 

eminently  sound,

Montoya,  whose 

were 

all 

The  Oracle 

171 

was  surprised.  It  had  not  occurred  to  him  that  she  might 
have  a  constitutional  defect. 

The.  moist  heat  came  with  the  sun.  Even  in  the  earliest 
morning,  when  things  were  just  becoming  distinguishable 
by  Color,  the  least  exertion  would  leave  a  dew  of  sweat 
standing  on  her  skin.  It  was  pleasant  then,  a  soft  warmth 
that  was  like  peace  made  tangible;  but  there  were  a  few 
hours  at  midday  when  she  was  always  sick,  physically 
ill  with  the  ballooning  pressure  of  the  heat.  That  was  the 
siesta  time.  Often  she  slept.  Often  she  lay  awake,  listen- 
ing  to  the  sounds  of  the  house  that  sustained  her—the 
soft  steps  of  the  servants,  the  chattering  of  the  birds,  the 
clocks’  ticking—and,  outside,  as  from  beyond  a  layer  of 
insulation,  voices  and  traffic,  going  their  own  ways,  busy 
with  their  own  purposes,  wonderfully  unaware  of  her,  of 
her  here  safe  in  their  ignorance. 

“The  only  danger  is  that  I  might  not  die.”  That  was 
how  she  framed  it 
to  herself.  What  she  was  struggling 
with  was  very  strong;  it  seemed  hardly  possible  that  she 
could  master  it  and  live.  Either  it  would  destroy  her  in 
battle,  or  she  would  die  in  the  act  of  victory.  Neither,  to 
her  way  of  thinking,  would  be 
a  loss.  The  only  danger 
was  that  she  might  not  die;  that  she  might  adjust,  adapt, 
learn  to  live  with  it  unmastered;  that  she  might  learn  to 
say,  “My  son 
she  knew  what  dying 
meant. 

is  dead,”  before 

At  night,  it  was  almost  cool—quite  cool,  sometimes. 
At  night,  when  she  had  come  to  the  end  of  her  excuses, 
the 
with  a  small  sigh  she  committed  her  body  to 
bed. 
a  cloud 
Delicate  sheets 
of 
cotton  like 
of 
sur- 
covered  her.  White  draperies  of 
rounded  her.  Outside,  the  night  hummed.  She  lay  waiting 
with  open  eyes. 

the  fabric 
the  mosquito  net 

a 

They  had  been  caught  in  one  of  those  anti-government, 
anti-foreign  riots  that  had  begun  the  abortive  revolution. 
Her  son,  with  the  simplicity  of  adolescent  manhood,  had 
tried  to  defend  her,  and  she  had  watched  him  beaten  to 
death,  after  which  her  own  circumstances  had  ceased  to 
concern  her  very  actively.  This  was  fortunate.  On  the 
basis  of  her  American  passport  she  had  been  identified 
other 
as 
enemies,  for  interrogation.  She  was  the  only  American

an  enemy  of 

detained, 

people. 

with 

and 

the 

172 

EDGES 

she 

before 

coastal 

islands.) 

in  the  little  group;  the  rest  were  Europeans.  She  was, 
eventually,  the  only  woman,  the  other  having  died  under 
something  less  than  the  treatment  she  survived.  One  or 
two  of  the  prisoners  actually  had  some  connection  with 
foreign  governments.  All  of  them,  with  her  exception, 
promptly  or  eventually  cooperated  as  well  as  they  could, 
revealing  or  inventing  any  information  they  were  asked 
for,  making  pro-revolutionary  statements  for  publication. 
It  was  not  a  situation  for  which  any  of  them  had  been 
prepared.  One  night  there  had  been  an  unusual  com- 
motion,  with  gunfire  very  close  and  strange  splashes  in 
the  sea.  (They  were  being  held  at  the  time  on  one  of  the 
tiny 
understood 
Even 
certainly  that  this  was  rescue,  she  had  a  fierce  surge  of 
life.  When  Philippe  Montoya  burst  in,  giving  orders  very 
concisely—“Run!”  in  three 
four  languages,  with  a 
indicate  direction—she  contrived 
flashlight 
pointed 
to  be  on  her  feet,  and  even  to  run  most  of  the  way.  Some- 
one,  not  Montoya,  caught  and  helped  her  roughly  through 
the  last  yards  and  into  the  boat,  so  that  she  was  preoccu- 
pied  for  some  time  with  the  pain  of  her  body.  But  it  was 
Montoya  who  examined  her  briefly  in  the  darkness  and 
carried  her  to 
a  tiny  cabin.  A  little  later  he 
came  back,  turned  on  an  electric  light,  and  bent  over  her. 
For  the  first  time  she  saw  Philippe  Montoya  as  something 
more  than  a  powerful  moving  shadow—a  smooth  Oriental 
a  mask,  even  his  eyes  still, 
face,  distant  and  alien  like 
opaque  as  ebony.  At  that  moment  her  condition  had  al- 
tered  somehow.  Months  later,  almost  a  year,  she  was  still 
puzzling  over  what  had  happened—whether  at  that  mo- 
ment  she  had  decided  to  accept  whatever  was  coming,  or 
whether,  on  the  contrary,  it  was  only  from  that  moment 
that  she  had  resisted  or  withdrawn. 

a  bunk  in 

or 

to 

and 

gently 

her  wounds—sketchily,  but 

Someone  had  brought  water  and  other  things.  Montoya 
proceeded  methodically  to  clean  her  and  apply  first  aid 
to 
businesslike 
as  a  good  nurse.  Later,  that  night  and  often  through  the 
next  days,  he  returned  to  sit  beside  her  on  the  bunk  and 
hold 
the 
weather  went  and  of  the  other  prisoners  (all, 
said, 
had  been  saved  unhurt,  though  one  of  his  own  men  was 
badly  wounded  and  might  yet 
die),  answering  unself- 
consciously  the  questions  she  might  have  asked  if  speech 
had  not  been  too  great  a  burden.  “My  headquarters  are

conversation, 

how 
he 

one-sided 

telling 

her 

a 

_The  Oracle 

173 

lot 

in  the  Philippines,  but  I  do  business  anywhere  I  can  make 
money.  I  do  a 
of  business  in  Indonesia.”  When  he 
talked,  his  face  was  not  masklike.  “I  heard  there  were 
Europeans  being  held  on  that  island,  and  I  thought,  ‘It’s 
not  their  war.  They  don’t  belong  there.’ 
.”  He 
shrugged.  “It  was  on  my  way.” 

So 

. 

. 

He  thought  at  the  time  that  she  was  a  European  too. 
He  had  tried  several  languages  on  her,  and  fancied  that 
she  showed  some  response  to  French,  so  that  he  went 
on  speaking  French  to  her  thereafter.  She  was  glad  of 
that—passively  glad—because  it  made  it  easier  to  ignore 
most  of  what  he  was  saying.  But  in  due  time  she  began 
to  answer  him-—at  first  hesitantly  in  French,  later,  in 
a 
horrible  gush,  in  English.  From  this  he  learned  how  her 
son  had  died,  and  incidentally  her  nationality.  But  when- 
ever  he.  asked  her  name,  or  how  to  contact  her  family 
or  friends,  she  would  take  refuge  again  in  the  unassail- 
able  helpessness  of  shock. 

He 

was 

Manila. 

respective 

consulates 

His  plan  had  been  simply  to  deliver  his  refugees  to 
well 
in 
their 
enough  known  in 
official  Philippine  circles,  and  would 
not  be  bothered  further.  But  this  woman  was  unexpected. 
The  last  morning  of  the  voyage,  he  walked  her  out 
onto  the  half-deck,  where  a  bed  of  matting  had  been 
prepared  for  her  in  the  shade  of  a  sailcloth  awning.  To 
Montoya,  the  sea  was  a  healing,  revivifying  thing,  and  he 
felt  dumbly  that  it  should  have  the  same  effect  on  her. 
Now  she  saw  for  the  first  time  what  sort  of  vessel  she 
was  on,  though  she  did  not  know  how  to  identify  it. 
It 
was  a  motorized  sailing  craft,  light  and  long,  with  a  great 
low-slung  sail.  Lying  there, 
she  saw 
Montoya  strike  one  of  the  men  he  had  rescued,  a  square- 
sixty,  whose  wife  had  died  beside 
jawed  Dutchman  of 
her  in 
filth.  Montoya’s  open  hand  cracked 
against  the  side  of  the  Dutchman’s  head,  a  sudden,  con- 
temptuous  blow.  The  Dutchman  sprawled.  She  watched 
with  large,  gloomy  eyes.  Montoya  jabbed  his  foot  into 
the  man’s  side, 
away.  The 
Dutchman  lay  gasping.  In  a  few  minutes,  one  of  the  sail- 
ors  helped  him  up  casually.  They  were  Malay-looking, 
these  sailors,  their  faces  shaped  in  broad  planes,  lit  some- 
times  by  swift  and  brilliant  grins. 

a  few  hours  later, 

a  token  kick, 

a  smell  of 

and  turned 

They  came  to  land  in  an  inlet  south  of  Manila,  to  avoid 
the  red  tape  of  the  harbor,  and  lay  there  overnight.  As

174 

EDGES 

always,  Montoya  slept  on  the  floor  of  the  cabin,  beside 
the  bunk  where  she  lay.  It  was  the  only  cabin  on  the  ves- 
sel,  and  it  was  his.  At  dawn  he  stood  looking  down  at 
her.  Everything  visible  was  soft  with  the  faint  blurring 
of  twilight.  “Where  do  you  want  to  go?”  His  voice  was 
impatient.  It  was  a  question  he  was  tired  of  asking  her. 
She  moved  her  head a  little  on  the  pillowless  mattress, 
not  so  much  in  sign  of  negation  as  in  hopeless  restlessness. 
“Nowhere,”  she  said  at  last. 

He  did  not  answer  her,  except  with  a  small  nod  that 
she  did  not  notice.  Much  later  she  understood  that  this 
had  been  the  last  real  question  he  was  to  ask  her. 

A  vehicle  was  waiting  for  them  on  the  dirt  track  that 
came  almost  down  to  the  water—a  jeep  remade  into  a 
species  of  open-air  mini-bus,  with  narrow  benches  down 
the  sides  of  the  canopied  bed.  She  rode  wedged  upright 
between  Montoya  and  the  driver,  the  Europeans  disposed 
uncomfortably  on  the  benches  behind.  Their  route  at  first 
was  circuitous;  with  so  many  unidentified  passengers, 
Montoya  thought  it  well  to  bypass  the  checkpoint  on  the 
main  road,  The  first  stop  was  at  a  private  medical  clinic, 
where  it  appeared  that  Montoya  was  known.  She  sat  in 
the  waiting  room  while  he  argued  with  the  receptionist. 
The  ride  had  been  deliriously  painful;  consciousness  of 
externals  was  returning  to  her  in  scraps,  “Dr.  Aguilar,” 
the  receptionist  asserted, 
“arrives 
at  nine  o’clock,  and 
other  patients  are  already  waiting.” 

“Give  me  your  phone.”  He  helped  himself  to  it.  Even- 
tually  he  handed  it  to  the  receptionist,  who  listened  with 
compressed  lips  that  opened  to  say  disapprovingly,  “Very 
well,  Dr.  Aguilar.”  Then  she  hung  up,  pulled  out  a  pad 
of  forms,  and  addressed  Montoya,  with  a  scant  glance 
toward  the  woman  he  had  brought.  “What  is  the  lady’s 
name?” 

He  did  not  bother  with  a  glance.  “Renée  Delisle,”  he 

said. 

So,  for  the  record,  she  had  received  a  name. 

On  shipboard,  as  during  her  captivity,  the  difference  be- 
tween  sleeping  and  waking  had  been  unclear.  She  had 
no  doubt,  by  fits  and  starts,  whenever  pain  had 
slept, 
relaxed  for  an  instant.  But  perhaps  beds  had  much  to  do 
with  it.  As  a  prisoner,  she  had  not  seen  a  bed,  or  even  a 
she  had  been
substitute  for  one.  On  Montoya’s  vessel, 

The  Oracle 

175 

the 

always  in  bed.  Nowhere  had  there  been  a  clear  distinction 
between  sleeping  time  and  waking  time.  But  that  day  she 
had  spent  several  exhausting  hours,  first 
in  the  jeepney, 
clinic,  where  she  was  examined,  sterilized, 
then  at 
medicated,  splinted,  bandaged.  He  was  waiting  for 
her 
not  with  a  jeepney  this  time,  but  with  a  big  American 
car.  The  drive  was  short.  Two  men  ran  to  open  a  gate 
for  them,  and  they  pulled  into  the  driveway  of 
a  house 
that  sat  like  a  Chinese  mandarin,  ornate  and  bellied.  And 
here,  at  last,  was  a  bed,  a  true  bed,  soft,  broad,  pillowed 
and  canopied,  and  in  that  richness,  clean  at  last,  dressed 
in  a  long  cotton  gown  that  quiet  women  had  slipped  over 
her  shoulders,  she  fell  asleep. 

He  let  her  sleep.  He  would  have  liked  to 

let  her  heal 
for  a  few  weeks  undisturbed.  But  he  had  business  to 
at- 
tend  to;  and  it  was  better,  he  thought,  to  have  things  clear 
from  the  beginning.  So,  a  little  before  sunrise,  when  there 
was  light  enough  to  see  by  and  darkness  enough  for  mod- 
esty,  he  woke  her,  gently,  saying,  “ll  try  not  to  hurt  you.” 
She  was  not  surprised. 

a  way,  the  beginning  of 
All  this  was  long  ago.  Tt  was,  in 
recorded  history.  She  was  an  excellent  student.  Every  day, 
a  day,  she  went  over  it 
sometimes  several  times  in 
all, 
repeating  every  detail 
she  remembered  and  sometimes 
discovering  new  ones,  reviewing  the  whole  to  see  if  her 
perspective  had  changed.  She  had  become  so  expert  that 
she  could  run  the  whole  sequence  through  at  high  speed, 
many  times  faster  than  it  had  happened.  At  such a 
rate 
a  dentist’s  high-speed  drill. 
it  was  almost  painless,  like 
this  was  merely  the  preliminary,  the  warm-up 
for  her  teal  work.  For  she  worked  hard,  in  that  house 
where  to  the  uninitiated  observer  she  seemed  to  do  noth- 
ing  serious,  to 
drift  idly  from  dressing  and  make-up  to 
wandering  in  the  garden  to  whistling  at  the  birds  in  their 
cages 
intricate 
productions  to 
long  days  and  evenings  of  baths  and  sjestas  and  dinner 
parties  with  feather-light  banter. 

toying  with  the 
with 

to  nibbling  and 

cook’s 
the 

carelessly 

children 

playing 

But  all 

The  dragon  at  the  bottom  of  the  world  . 

.  Montoya 
would  have  told  her—would  have  told  her  gladly—that 
dragons  are  really  not  like  that;  but  Montoya  knew  noth- 
ing  of  the  fantasies  that  tormented  her.  The  closcst  he 
nights 
had  come  to 

a  glimpse  was  on  one  of  her  bad 

. 

 
176 

EDGES 

his  arms—whether  to 

get  closer  or 
when,  writhing  in 
farther  away,  he  could  not  tell—she  had  gasped  out,  chok- 
ing  with  nausea,  “It  smells—it  smells!”  But  he  had  thought 
she  meant  the  hovel  where  she  had  been  tortured. 

a 

essentially 

In  Philippe  Montoya’s  experience,  people  to  whom  hid- 
eous  things  had  happened  reacted  simply  in  one  of  two 
ways.  If  the  trauma  had  been  too  great  or  had  lasted  too 
long,  they  remained  crippled—malfunctioning,  paranoid, 
it  had  been  briefer,  or 
unreliable  to  do  business  with.  If 
they  recovered—often  very 
less 
quickly,  and  always  in  the  same  way:  they  would  pack  the 
separate  mental  compartment  and 
hideousness  into 
leave  it  there.  It  was  a  normal,  practical  solution;  it  let 
you  go  on  living  your  life  on  the  basis  you  had  already 
constructed,  without  wasting  time  on  the  contradictions 
in  the  compartment. 

crushing, 

But  this  woman  was  abnormal.  In  Montoya’s  opinion, 
so  very  bad—not  bad 
what  she  had  suffered  was  not 
to  cripple  a  healthy  mind.  But  she 
enough,  certainly, 
was  not  recovering.  In  some  ways,  she  was  getting  worse. 
For  a  time  he  had  been  puzzled  and  concerned.  Now  he 
stood  in  a  kind  of  exasperated  awe,  for  he  understood,  in 
essence,  what  she  was  doing.  She  was  trying  to  absorb 
the  contradictions;  she  was  trying  to  integrate  what  she 
had  learned  in  the  riot  and  the  torture  chamber  with  what 
clear- 
life.  Montoya  esteemed 
she 
of 
headedness.  He  was  very  ready  to  admire  this 
endeavor,  however  troublesome  the  process  might  be,  be- 
cause  it  aimed  at  clarity  of  understanding  and  freedom  of 
action,  and  because  it  demanded  determination.  He  him- 
self  had  come  a  long  way  by  determination. 

already  knew  of 

So  that  it  was  really  unnecessary  for  her  to  explain  it 
to  Montoya,  as  she  had  tried  to  do  that  day  in  the  doctor’s 
presence,  when  the  fleshy  antlers  had  first  sprung  from 
her  bursting  forehead;  Montoya  understood  the  principle 
very  well,  though  the  details  escaped  him,  But  she  did  not 
know  that. 

sort 

The  dragon  at  the  bottom  of  the  world  ...  The  stench 
in  which  that  monstrosity  coiled  was  so  thick  that  it  was 
tangible,  almost  ponderous—a  soupy  fog  that  you  could 
scoop  up  and  pour  from  hand  to  hand,  while  thinner 
fumes  of  it  rose  visibly  like  steam.  It  left  your  fingers  im-

The  Oracle 

177 

pregnated  with  a  stink  of  rot  that  neither  soaking  nor 
scrubbing  removed,  a  stink  that  sank  into  the  flesh  and 
spread,  so  that  in  time  your  whole  body  seemed  gan- 
grened.  But  there  was  a  cure.  She  was  totally,  speechlessly 
grateful,  with  a  gratitude  so  unexpressible  that  it  left  her 
limp  and  motionless—grateful  that  there  was  a  cure  so of- 
ten  and  easily  available  to  her.  For  Philippe  Montoya’s 
touch  was  healing. 

which 

mutual 

concessions 

The  house  had  been  built  and  furnished  by  a  Chinese 
businessman,  the  proprietor,  among  other  enterprises,  of 
an  ice  cream  plant.  His  heirs  had  not  wanted  to  maintain 
the  house—he  had  had  other  houses—and  Montoya  had 
been  able  to  buy  it  outright,  as  part  of  an  arrangement 
were  made  elsewhere. 
in 
Montoya,  too,  had  his  other  house—on  Palawan,  a  prac- 
tical  measure,  since  his  maritime  operations  were  cen- 
tered  there-—-but  he  had  not  yet  achieved  a  summer  home 
on  the  cool  heights  of  Baguio. 
The  birds  had  come  with  the  house.  Along  one  side  of 
a  narrow  courtyard,  an  aviary  replaced  the  wall.  Two 
stories  high,  twenty  feet  wide,  but  scarcely  more  than  a 
yard  deep,  it  formed  the  outside  wall  of  a  sitting  room  on 
the  first  floor  as  of  the  bedroom  where  she  slept  on  the 
second.  Bushes  and  a  small  tree  grew  in  it.  Here  the  birds 
quarreled,  fed,  and  nested.  They  were  finches,  for  the 
sprightly 
most  part,  both  native  and  imported:  bright, 
little  birds,  tuneful  and  sociable.  All  this  was  under  the 
care  of  an  old  man,  who  had  also  come  with  the  house, 
and  to  whom  Montoya  was  merely  a  part-time  resident 
and  a  disburser  of  funds.  It  was  due  to  the  old  man, 
whose  name  was  Cheng,  that  there  were  other  birds  in 
the  house,  whose  cages  he  moved  from  room  to  room  in 
accordance  with  the  movements  of  sun  and  wind—sin- 
gles  and  pairs  of  birds  newly  purchased  or  being  specially 
fed  or  nursed.  This  old  man  seldom  spoke  to  her,  or  to 
anyone  else;  but  from  the  beginning  he  had  exchanged 
nods  and  smiles  with  her  when  she  talked  to  the  birds, 
his  broad  pleased  grin  to  her  uncertain  smile. 
She  found  a  pencil.  It  was  odd,  perhaps,  that  in  this  house 
where  everything  was  provided,  she  had  never  seen  a 
pencil  before.  (Montoya  had  always  a  couple  of  pens 
in  his  pocket,  and  no  doubt  there  were  other  writing  1m-

178 

EDGES 

plements  at  his  desk  in  the  upstairs  room  where  he  often 
worked;  but  she  had  never  seen  his  desk.)  She  had  not 
asked  for  a  pencil—she  asked  for  nothing—but  when  she 
found  it, 
a  little  blunt  stub,  probably  a  discard  of  Mon- 
toya’s  intended  to  be  thrown  out,  she  cherished  it  in  her 
hands  and  held  it  to  her  breast  like  a  parody  of  a  baby. 
Then  she  wandered  about  the  house,  seeking  unobtru- 
sively.  In  the  kitchen  she  found  a 
of  rice  paper  in 
which  some  coconut  confection  had  been  wrapped.  She 
smoothed  it  out  on  a  table,  sticky  side  down,  and  began. 

bit 

Hours  later  she  was  still  at  it,  now  on  a  linen  handker- 
chief  she  had  tacked  flat  on  one  of  the  broad  window- 
sills.  Montoya  bent  to 
she 
barely  turned  up  the  side  of  her  head  for  him,  “What  are 
you  doing?”  he  asked,  intrigued.  She  showed  him. 

she  was  so  busy, 

her; 

kiss 

He  thought  at  first  that  it  would  be  her  son’s  face.  But 
a  second,  longer  look,  it  was  not  so-  very  young.  It 
at 
would  be  her  husband,  then, 
or  her  lover.  He  did  not 
Know  if  she  had  a  husband  living  somewhere,  or  an  ex- 
husband.  There  had  been  no  ring  on  her  finger  when  he 
found  her;  but  any  rings  would  have  been  taken  by  her 
captors.  “Who  is  it?”  he  asked.  She  shook  her  head. 

she 

that 

trees 

That  day  he  had  drawing  pencils,  sketch  pads,  pens 
her.  Her  hand 
and  ink,  and  a  small  easel  bought  for 
shook  sometimes, 
spoiled  many  sketches; 
so 
otherwise  she  drew  well,  though  slowly.  The  same  head, 
in  different  aspects,  hairless,  bearded,  young,  old;  then, 
abortively, 
and  landscapes  that  were  very  unsuc- 
cessful;  then  birds;  two  or  three  formless  swirls  that  she 
destroyed  with  a  violence  he  had  not  seen  in  her  before. 
After  a  few  weeks,  he  asked  her,  “Do  you  want  some 
helplessly; 
paints?” 
he  was  appalled  and  touched.  “If  you  want  something, 
tell  me.”  She  looked  at  him  with  big  eyes.  “If  you  want 
something,  you  must  tell  me,”  she  said  firmly,  understand- 
ing  that  an  absolute  order  was  required.  She  pressed  her 
drenched  face  against  him,  limp  with  peace.  But  she  had 
not  known  she  wanted  anything. 

She  nodded  and 

Gratefully, 

wept. 

of  why  she 

What  had  attracted  him  to  her  in  the  beginning  was  her 
explanation 
the 
had 
other  prisoners.  Lying  very 
on  his  bunk,  she  had 
not  my  war.”  That 
said  in  her  small, 
voice  had  seemed  to  him  tiny  and  childlike  in  the  quiet

cool  voice, 

capitulated 

“It’s 

like 

flat 

not 

The  Oracle 

179 

is 

right 

cabin,  where  the  sounds  of  the  sea  and  the  boat  were  to 
him  like  silence,  or  like  an  infant’s  breathing  to  its  mother. 
“I  don’t  know  which  side 
she  had  said. 
“Probably  neither,  Probably  it  doesn’t  matter.  If  they  had 
asked  me  politely,  I  would  have  told  them  anything  I 
knew.  But  they  didn’t  ask.”  She  had  lifted  the  broken 
reed  of  her  left  arm,  her  fingers  at  odd,  stiff  angles  above 
the  rough  bandage  with  which  he  had  bound  ripped  flesh 
to  splintered  bone,  Her  lips  formed a  little  hard  pout,  al- 
most  humorous.  “It  made  me  mad,”  she  said. 

on,” 

He  had  liked  her  very  much  for  that  show  of  spirit,  at 
once  quiet  and  full  of  panache.  Since  then  she  had  often 
confused  and  disappointed  him,  though  never  enough  to 
counteract  the  first  impression. 

The  other  rescued  prisoners  had  praised  her  courage 
grudgingly.  Some  of  them  had  complained  that  her  un- 
bending  stubbornness  had  brought  worse  mistreatment 
on  all  of  them.  In  fact,  she  was  a  reproach  to  them,  and 
the  most  sensitive,  felt  it  most  keenly.  The  stubby  Dutch- 
man  was  the  worst.  The  last  day  on  the  boat  before  they 
the 
reached  Manila,  he  had  exasperated  Montoya  to 
wife’s 
point  of  anger,  by  blaming  her  outright  for  his 
death.  Even  so,  Montoya  had  struck  him  only  once.  It 
was  his  habit  to  be  gentle  with  old  people. 

CHAPTER  2 

Philippe  Montoya  was  troubled.  He  had  to  make  a  busi- 
ness  decision  that  would  affect  his  whole  future,  and  pres- 
ent  circumstances  made  it  awkward.  He  was,  in  a  word, 
considering  marriage.  This  was  an  option  he  had  reserved 
for  the  most  profitable  opportunity.  He  was  thirty-five 
have 
old  now,  and  the  opportunity  seemed  to 
years 
a  senator,  twenty-three,  pretty 
arisen.  The  daughter  of 
and  Catholic,  had  been  offered  him.  It  meant  a  contract 
that  was  worth  a  hundred  thousand  pesos  to  him  at 
once,  and  contacts  that  should  be  worth  millions,  directly 
and  indirectly,  in  time.  His  position  in  the  Philippines 
was  still  precarious  in  some  ways,  though  he  had  been  in 
business  here  for  six  years,  and  a  citizen  for  more  than 
three;  this  would  regularize  everything.  The  senator  was

180 

EDGES 

on  the  correct  side  in  Philippine  politics;  he  was  a  win- 
ner;  his  family  was  extensive.  The  girl,  too,  was  agree- 
able  company,  and  her  mother  was  in  good  figure  and 
good  temper  at 
he  had 
certain  reservations  about  these  Filipina  women.  To  his 
taste,  they  were  inclined  to  be a  little  strident  and  grasp- 
ing,  and  even  physically  coarse.  This  was,  of  course,  un- 
fair;  but  Montoya’s  esthetics,  like  his  business  sense,  had 
been  shaped  in  Indochina. 

a  promising  omen.  Still, 

fifty, 

Whenever  an  event  took  place,  major  or  minor—the  death 
of  a  bird,  the  fall  of  a  government—she  would  consult  the 
oracle  who  lived  in  her  mind:  and  he  would  answer,  with 
his  pale  smile,  “I  knew  it  would  happen.” 

an 

was 

Her 

always 

question 

“But  why?” 

anxious 
“why?”  Yet  that  was  not  necessarily  what  she  wanted  to 
learn  from  him.  The  secret  that  he  held  for  her  was  not 
secret  of 
the  why  of  any  particular  event;  it  was  the 
knowing,  itself.  For  he  knew,  knew  truly—not  only  the 
events  that  would  happen  to  him,  but  how  he  would  feel, 
what  he  would  think;  as  if  he  remembered  his  future  with 
a  perfect  recall,  Everything  he  would  ever  know,  he  knew 
now.  And  yet  he  was  alive,  and  conscious,  and  even  sane. 
It  was  this  that  made  him  miraculous  and  valuable;  it 
was  for  this  that  she  drew  and  painted  his  face,  again  and 
again,  trying  to  wrest  that  secret  from  its  contours. 

the  season  brushed  them  with  its 
The  first  typhoon  of 
wet,  vast  wing.  All  day  the  rain  flamed  down,  meeting 
walls  headlong,  licking  along  gutters  and  under  the  low 
eaves.  Everything  shuddered;  in  the  distance,  metal  roofs 
boomed  under  the  wind.  Torn  fronds  like  seaweed  flowed 
past  the  windows  in  the  running  rain.  Inside,  the  house 
was  filled  with  a  changing  underwater  dusk,  punctured  by 
the 
the  irregular  glow  of 
telephone,  had  failed. 

electricity,  like 

oil  lamps;  the 

In  the  garden,  as  the  rain  penetrated  the  baked  soil  be- 
ex- 
tween  the  potted  flowers,  subterranean  clods  stirred, 
tended  fect,  and  shoveled  to  the  surface.  They  were  toads 
that  had  slept  like  stones  for  months,  waiting  for  the  tem- 
life.  Now,  in  the  Julls 
pest  that  would  soak  them  back  to 
of  the  wind,  the  garden  rang  with  their  wet  cries,  as  if  the 
landscape  were  rejoicing. 

In 

intervals  between  successive  waves  of  storm 

(for

The  Oracle 

181 

the  gaps, 

after  the  first  plunging  flood  it  came  in  long  pulses,  slowly 
dying)  the  household  drifted  out  onto  the  porches,  watch- 
ing  the  sky.  Masses  of  grey  cloud  sped  silently  across  it; 
an  evening  star  showed  once  and  again, 
in 
golden  yellow.  The  toads 
chorused.  From  among  the 
great  curving  leaves  of  a  banana  tree,  split  and  frayed  by 
the  wind  into  the  likeness  of  palm  fronds,  a  butterfly  rose, 
tilting  upward  in  slow  spirals,  stately,  higher  and  higher, 
unaccountable  in  this  drenched  and  ravaged  world,  until 
she  lost  it  somewhere  in  the  high  grey  air. 

Philippe  Montoya  had  idiosyncrasies  that  people  noticed 
with  surprise  after  they  had  known  him  for  some  time. 
He  smoked  only  a  little,  and  drank  very  little  indeed.  It 
was  possible  to  attend  a  number  of  hard-drinking  occa- 
sions  with  him  before  you  realized  that  he  never  had 
more  than  two  or  three  drinks,  and  often  less.  Perhaps  it 
was  his  hands.  In  such  gatherings,  most  people’s  hands 
are  noticeably  empty  unless  they  are  grasping  something 
—a  glass,  a  cigarette,  another  person.  They  look  super- 
fluous,  embarrassing.  But  Montoya’s  hands,  even  quiet— 
and  they  could  be  very  quiet  sometimes—-never  looked 
unoccupied. 

“T  knew  it  would  happen,”  said  the  oracle. 

She  strove  to  feel  his  feeling;  that  was  all,  since  it  was 
not  possible  to  know  his  knowledge.  But  he  existed—he 
existed,  because  she  could  see  and  hear  him—and  there- 
fore  it  was  possible  for  a  human  mind  to  have  total  knowl- 
not  be  destroyed.  He  was  young,  much 
edge  and  yet 
younger  than  she;  his  memory  of  the  past  must  be  short. 
she  thought,  for  his  face 
old, 
But  he  would  live 
showed  the  track  of  old  memories,  and  they  could  only  be 
memories  of  a  long  future.  “Will  you  live  to  be  old?”  she 
asked  him. 

to  be 

a 
But  a  twitch  of  amusement,  like  a  single  switch  of 
cat's  tail,  furrowed  his  calm  oval  countenance.  “That,”  he 
said  precisely,  “depends  on  what  you  mean  by  ‘old.’  And 
don’t  assume,”  he  added,  “that  that  implies  I  shall  be  old 
in  any  obvious  sense.  Or  even  live.” 

She  was  disappointed.  “But  you  do  know?” 
“Yes.” 
“Then  why  don’t  you  tell  me?” 
“I  don’t  know.”

182 

EDGES 

“I  thought  you  knew  everything.” 
“I  know  what,  not  why.  I  knew  you  would  ask  me 
these  questions,  and  I  knew  I  would  give  you  these  an- 
swers.” 

“Then  can’t 
different  answers?” 

you  change  them? 

Couldn’t  you 

give 

“Of  course.  But  the  point  is, 

I  choose  to  give.” 

“Why?” 

these  are  the  answers 

“I  don’t  know  why.  I  only  know  what.”  He  was  laugh- 
ing,  gentle  and  delighted,  as  you  might  laugh  at  a  child’s 
questions.  “I  know  that  I  won’t  tell  you.  I  knew  I  would 
say  these  words,  and  now  I  am  saying  them.  I  could  say 
any  other  words,  any  words  I  choose,  but  I  knew  I  would 
choose  these.  Do  you  understand?”  His  mouth,  a 
little 
supercilious  always,  softened  toward  her.  “But  keep  on 
asking.  You  will  keep  on  asking.  And  sometimes  I  will 
answer  your  questions.” 

Raging,  ranging,  its  long  legs  sweeping  with  tireless  strokes. 
Her  body  humped  in  spasms  of  distress,  Thuds,  thuds 
of  rifle  ends  into  flesh.  One  man  swung  by  the  butt,  an- 
other  by  the  barrel,  as  if  they  were  amateurs,  their  meth- 
ods  not  yet  standardized.  Flesh  was  not  separate  from 
self,  it  was  self  that  the  rifle  blows  were  smashing,  how- 
ever  much  you  might  twist  and  turn,  fleeing  in, 
in,  into 
the  labyrinth  of  mind,  crying,  “There  is 
no  connec- 
tion!”  For  mind  is  contained  in  flesh.  Voice  is  made  by 
fiesh—by  windpipe  and  vocal  cords  and  broken  mouth, 
by  dying  lungs  that  the  booted  heels  crush  in—there  is 
one  with  boots,  why  is  there  always  one  with  boots?  And 
when  voice  is  gone,  the  residue  of  self  breaks,  breaks,  in 
the  broken  flesh.  And  then?  Then  there  is  night.  You  lie 
wiped  out,  like  a  ceased  shudder.  The  dragon  lurched, 
sinking,  into  the  center.  She  gazed  unblinking  into  the 
dark,  asking,  without  the  impossible  effort  of  words,  “Why 
am  J  not  dead?” 

“You  will  die,”  the  oracle  said  soothingly.  “You  will 

die.” 

Since  it  was  necessary  for  her  to  have  a  nationality,  and 
since  he  had  given  ber  a  French  name,  Montoya  made 
her  a  French  citizen.  He  was  a  French  citizen  himself. 
All  his  life  he  had  been  a  citizen  of  at  least  two  nations—

The  Oracle 

183 

not  always  the  same  two—and  he  was  deeply  convinced 
of  the  value  of  foreign  citizenship.  It  was  a  lifeline  con- 
necting  you  to  somewhere  else—no  matter  where;  and 
you  never  knew  when  you  might  need a lifeline.  It  would 
have  been  easier, 
in  some  ways,  to  forge  a  Philippine 
citizenship  for  her;  but  that  alone,  in  Montoya’s  opinion, 
would  have  been  worse  than  no  citizenship  at 
It 
would  be  to  lock  her  in  the  prison  of  a  single  nation’s 
laws  and  regulations.  As  for  confirming  her  American 
citizenship,  that  was  a  possibility  to  be  rejected  out  of 
hand.  Evidently  she  did  not  want  to  bring  her  past  to 
the  surface;  therefore  Montoya,  for  his  part,  would  make 
no  motion  that  might  stir  it  up. 

all. 

To  the  Chinese  and  Filipino  servants  he  had  acquired 
with  the  house,  Montoya  had  added  two  or  three  who 
had  come  from  Indochina  with  him-—-among  these  the 
old  woman  who  functioned  as  nurse  and  governess  for 
the  little  girl  whom  Montoya  believed  to  be  his  child.  At 
any  rate,  he  had  known  the  mother,  and  she  had  elected 
to  leave  the  baby  literally  on  his  doorstep,  though  that 
might  have  been  a  compliment  as  much  to  his  prospects 
to  his  paternity,  To  clinch  the  matter,  Montoya  had 
as 
legally 
adopted  the  little  girl.  Marie-Ange  was  the  name 
he  had  given  her.  She  was  seven  years  old  now,  a  lum- 
utterly  un-shy,  who 
inously  beautiful  child, 
played  with  the  other  children  not  as  a  leader  but  always 
as  an  active,  observant  second. 

quiet  but 

For  the  house  was  as  full  of  children  as  of  birds.  The 
oldest  were  children  only  by  courtesy,  or  rather  by  the 
technicality  that  they  were  not 
yet  independently  em- 
ployed.  These  had  shared  Montoya’s  spectacular  flight 
from  Vietnam  some  nine  years  earlier,  when  in  one  wild 
night  he  and  his  household  had  bulldozed  and  burned 
two  hundred  hectares  of  rubber  trees  before  decamping 
over  the  border—an  act  of  flagrant  illegality,  since  he  had 
just  accepted  a  rather  substantial  sum  of  money  from  the 
Provisional  Revolutionary  Government  for  that  very  acre- 
(it 
age.  Other  children  had  accumulated  around  him 
a 
was  an  almost  chemical  process,  like  precipitation  in 
supersaturated  solution)  during  his  short  career  as  a  busi- 
nessman  in  Cambodia,  where  also  his  putative  daughter 
had  been  born.  So  far  in  the  Philippines  he  had  acquired

184 

EDGES 

people 

received 

remarkably 

these  young 

only  two  more,  a  boy  toddler  and  a  girl  about  the  daugh- 
ter’s  age. 
All 

little 
thought  and  attention  from  Philippe  Montoya.  He  gave 
them  food  and  shelter,  a  degree  of  legal  protection,  and  a 
casual  but  total  acceptance.  For  the  rest,  they  were  in- 
formally  adopted  by  various  of  the  servants,  who  dressed 
and  fed  them,  taught  them  and  disciplined  them,  as  they 
saw  fit.  Sometime  in  their  teens,  if  they  had  stayed  with 
him  that  long,  he  would  hire  them  into  one  of  his  opera- 
tions  or  find  them  a  job  elsewhere.  In  return,  the  best  and 
worst  alike  of  the  children  adored  Montoya,  and  stood 
ready  to  burn  whole  forests  with  him,  wherever  the  shoot- 
ing  star  of  his  chosen  destiny  might  lead. 

To  this  conglomerate,  many-tongued  menage,  in  which 
ho  one  seemed  responsible  for  more  than  a 
tiny  frac- 
tion  of  what  went  on,  Montoya  had  added  two  Negrito 
guards  as  a  finishing  (or  at  least  the  latest)  touch,  They 
were  tiny,  well-knit  men,  armed  with  bolos  and  with  auto- 
matic  pistols  that  looked  huge  in  their  hands,  Their  func- 
tion  was  deterrence;  Negritos  had,  here,  a  reputation  for 
ferocity  and  loyalty.  Montoya  persisted  in  thinking  of 
them  as 
if  they  were  identical  with  the  montagnards  he 
had  known  in  Indochina,  and  this  made  their  communica- 
tion  difficult, 
if  they  were  shaking  hands  with  long 
poles;  still,  it  sufficed. 

as 

She  always  rose  early,  so  that  her  nights  were  as  short 
as  possible.  She  had  somehow  managed  to  convey  her 
need—or  perhaps  Montoya  had  conveyed  it—to  the  old 
nurse,  who  came  always  to  wake  her,  gently  but  persist- 
ently,  at  first  dawn.  She  would  have  her  coffee  beside  a 
wide  window,  where  she  could  watch  the 
light  reborn, 
the  world  reborn  under  the 
light,  each  petal  and  blade 
assuming  shape  and  color,  shuddering  (it  seemed  to  her) 
just  imperceptibly  with  resurgent  life 
it  crowded  back 
again  into  itself.  She  would  be  strong  enough,  she  thought 
patiently,  for  another  day.

as 

The  Oracle 

185 

CHAPTER  3 

In  fact,  Montoya  did  not  see  enough  of  her  to  realize 
to  what  an  extent  she  had  gotten  better.  It  was  a  mark  of 
how  spasmodic  and  agonized  their  communication  had 
been  that  he  knew  how  her  son  had  died,  but  not  his 
name.  This  death  in 
difficulty  between 
them  of  which  she  was  not  aware. 

itself  made  a 

The  boy  had  been  beaten  to  death  with  rifles.  Montoya 
knew  where  those  rifles  had  come  from.  Of  all  the  com- 
modities  in  which  he  dealt,  guns  had  proved  one  of  the 
most  profitable;  and  Indonesia  had  been  a  fruitful  market. 
What  it  came  to  was  that  the  same  expedition  that  had 
saved  her  life  had  killed  her  son—had  indeed,  in  a  sense, 
put  her  to  the  torture.  Montoya  thought  best  not  to  bring 
this  to  her  attention.  She  must,  he  supposed,  know  it  as  a 
possibility.  But  he  was  afraid  of  hurting  her.  She  looked 
very  fragile  to  him. 

To  herself  she  seemed  wiped  out—no  Jonger  a  person,  but 
a  desolate  battleground  where  only  the  ram  and  thunder 
of  moving  forces  lived.  Outsiders,  of  course,  had  a  differ- 
ent  perspective.  “That  little  Frenchie  of  Montoya’s  is  quite 
a  character”  was  how  one  of  the  Americans  expressed  it. 
The  little  Frenchie  had  slapped  a  man  for  saying  some- 
thing  that  displeased  her.  The  victim,  who  was  drunk,  had 
never  grasped  what  the  to-do  was  about—he  had  been 
trying  to  compliment  her—and  even  Montoya  had  misun- 
the 
derstood.  When  the  drunken  American  referred  to 
lucky  chance  that  had  brought  her  there,  Montoya’s  sim- 
ple  thought  was  that  the  imbecile  should  have  known  bet- 
ter; 
one  version  of 
Madame  Delisle’s  short  history.  But  it  was  not  “lucky”  to 
which  she  objected  in  that  description;  it  was  “chance.” 

guests  had  heard  at 

least 

the 

all 

But  how  was  anyone  to  know?  She  had  delivered  her 
slap  with  cold,  sudden  fury,  and  turned  without  transition 
it  were,  into  an  invisible 
to  Montoya,  who  had  gone,  as 
crouch.  “Tell  him  it’s  nothing  personal,”  she 
and 
walked  away  to  find  another  drink.  Her  tall,  slight  figure 
moved  with  a  certain  hauteur.

said, 

186 

EDGES 

Montoya  laughed 
“Nothing  personal,  Joe.” 

and 

patted 

the 

man’s 

shoulder. 

“Yeah,”  said  the  American,  blinking,  and  added  as  an 

afterthought,  “My  name  is  Freddie.” 

“It  doesn’t  matter  to  her,”  said  Montoya. 

All  else  was  trivial,  irrelevant.  It  amused  her—all  other 
daylight  feelings  gone,  she  could  still  be  amused—to  no- 
tice  that  the  population  of  this  dream  world,  from  Montoya 
to  the  toddler  sucking  sugarcane  in  the  kitchen,  felt  that 
what  they  did  was  of  consequence.  This  was  what  made 
her  laugh. 

For  she  did  laugh,  a  cascade  of  merriment  that  de- 
lighted  Montoya  and  his  household,  and  sometimes  puz- 
zled  his  guests.  There  was  no  malice  in  it.  She  was  like  a 
child  laughing  at  dead  leaves 
lifted  and  blown  by  the 
wind.  They  seemed  as  unreal  to  her,  these  people,  com- 
pared  to  the  reality  inside  her  darkness,  as  the  leaves  to 
the  child;  real  in  some  limited  way,  no  doubt,  but  only 
marginally  relevant.  It  was  absurd  that  sometimes  these 
leaves,  blown  into  her  face  by  sudden  gusts,  should  try  to 
touch  her,  should  invite  her  to  join  them,  to  become  a 
wind-tossed  leaf.  It  was  absurd—except  that  there  were 
the  children. 

can  make  himself  useful 

She  could  not  look  at  the  oldest  ones.  They  came  too 
near  her  son;  she  could  not  endure  their  young  male  bod- 
ies,  their  voices.  Full  of  their  own  things,  they  were  happy 
to  ignore  her.  To  them,  she  was  like  a  large,  exotic  pet,  in 
which  they  took  a  certain  family  pride.  She  strove,  even, 
not  to  know  their  names.  When  Montoya  said,  “I’m  taking 
Nguyen  to  Palawan;  he 
on 
Pagbo,”  she  looked  at  him  as  blankly  as  if  he  had  spoken 
an  unknown  language.  She  did  not  even  notice  that  this 
was  Nguyen’s  certificate  of  majority;  he  would  have  a  job 
to  do  on  Pagbo,  he  would  no  longer  be  a  child,  with  his 
smooth  golden-brown  chest  and  slender  arms  and  swift 
jeering  smile, 
It  was 

the 
kitchen,  she  sucked  sugarcane  gravely  with  the  toddler, 
exchanging  choice 
the 
stalks,  big  eycs  to  big  eyes,  until  the  child  melted  into  gur- 
gles  of  laughter.  Marie-Ange  brought  her  worms,  insects, 
spiders;  this  exquisite  child  had  a  taste  for  all  small  things 
that  moved.  They  hovered  together  at  the  mesh  of  the

the  younger  children. 

wordlessly 

different 

pieces, 

gazing 

over 

with 

In 

The  Oracle 

187 

aviary,  cooing  and  chirping  to  the  birds.  A  finch  perched 
inches  from  their  faces,  settling  and  rearranging  himself 
with  flippant  movements.  They  exchanged  a  look  of 
ar- 
cane  delight,  fellow  initiates.  A  thick,  wet  cloud  ran  stead- 
ily  across  the.  sky,  bumping  and  dragging  small  cloud 
cushions  around  its  edges.  The  child’s  eyes  sparkled;  she 
opened  her  small  fist  slowly.  A  creature  stood  upon  her 
palm,  sedately  waving  its  antennae.  Its  lacquery  green 
sides  glinted  with  spots  of  brilliant  gold,  as  if  molten  drops 
of  the  actual  metal  had  lodged  and  hardened  there.  “Je  le 
donne  au  Philippe,”  she  confided,  a  husky  whisper.  It  was 
by  this  quaint  denomination  that  all  the  children  referred 
to  Montoya—le  Philippe,  as  if  the  addition  of  the  definite 
article  changed  his  name  into  a 
at  once  respectful 
and  familiar. 

title, 

She  bent  low,  her  forehead  almost  to  the  child’s.  “Au 
diner,”  she  suggested  conspiratorially.  “Dans  sa  verre.” 
They  tilted  their  faces  upright  to  grin  at  each  other,  savor- 
ing  the  idea  of  Montoya  discovering  this  jewel-like  beast 
in  his  glass  at  dinner.  They  laughed  together.  The  small 
hand  closed  like  a  flower.  The  child  danced  away  with 
sidewise  skips,  uttering  sweet,  high-pitched  yips  to  which 
the  birds  replied. 

She  could  come  that  close  to  the  child—to  any  of  the 
children.  But  when  she  would  have  gone  farther,  when  her 
arms  were  opening,  her  shoulders  dipping  to  lift  that  warm 
mite  and  cuddle  it  against  her  breasts,  something  as  phys- 
ical  as  an  iron  brace  suddenly  held  her  rigid.  Her  heart 
folded  coldly  like  a  closing  triptych,  and  she  said  behind 
her  eyes,  Goodbye. 

a 

a  mole,  Dr,  Aguilar  as 

She  drew  portraits  of  the  guests  on  their  napkins—Fred- 
die  as 
little  cat—catching  her 
bottom  lip  between  her  teeth,  her  head  tilted  like  a  child’s 
intent  on  play.  Montoya  spread  his  arms  wide  in  mock 
despair.  “No  wonder  I’m  going  broke—new  napkins  every 
time  somebody  comes  for  dinner!”  He  tucked  the  mole 
into  Freddie’s  shirt  pocket.  “Why  don’t  you  wear  a  barong 
tagalog  like  the  rest 
of  us?  Never  mind,  any  man  who 
wears  a  shirt  and  tie  in  Manila  deserves  to  be  hot.” 

“Fiere,  Renée,  do  mine!”  “Do  mine!”  They  drifted  like’ 
schooling  fish  from  the  dining  room  onto  the  patio,  lit  by 
Chinese  lanterns.  But  she  clapped  her  hands  and  turned 
the  table
back,  saying  to  one  of  the  servant  girls, 

“Is 

188 

EDGES 

cleared-  yet?  Don’t  take  the  cloth  away.”  A  minute  later 
they  were  all  leaning  over  the  dining  table  again,  vying  to 
hold  the  cloth  flat  for  her  flying  pencil,  stretching  to  recog- 
nize  the  fish 
as  she  traced  their  faces.  “There  you  are, 
Peterson!  Hey,  who’s  that?”  She  could  sketch  very  quickly 
for  an  exercise  like  this. 

It  was  a  society  without  a  past,  moving  as  instinctively  as 
the  fishes.  No  one  asked,  “Where  did  you  come  from?” 
“How  did  you  get  here?”  “What  were  you  before?”  People 
with  pasts  they  wanted  to  keep  did  not  come  here. 

It  was  very  different,  of  course,  for  those  whose  past  it- 
self  was  here.  In  the  society  at  whose  threshold  Montoya 
stood  now,  the  present  was  merely  the  necessary  link  be- 
tween  the  past  and  the  future.  If  money  could  replace 
family  for  some  purposes,  it  was  only  because  both  were 
durable  goods.  Personal  character,  like  personality,  was 
temporary,  and  hardly  entered  into  consideration. 

CHAPTER  4 

Within  her  memory,  Josepha  Sandoval  had  never  been 
frightened  by  anything,  and  it  did  not  occur  to  her  to  be 
frightened  of  Philippe  Montoya.  He  did,  though,  give  her 
a  strange  feeling,  of  venturing  into  the  unknown,  some- 
what  like  leaving  home  for  the  first  time  to  attend  a  dis- 
tant  college.  She  realized  now  that  the  young  men  she  had 
known  had  been  too  absorbed  in  their  youth  to  have 
much  time  for  anything  else;  and  men  of  Montoya’s  age 
or  older  had  bothered  to  notice  her,  if  at  all,  only  as  a  de- 
sirable  but  unavailable  instrument  for  masturbation.  Mon- 
toya,  however,  noticed  her  seriously,  and  he  seemed  to 
her  a  serious  man,  though  all  their  conversation  so  far  had 
been  very  light.  His  history,  as  she  knew  it,  was  exotic 
and  adventurous,  and  yet  his  present  position  must  be  sta- 
father  would  not 
ble 
be  considering  him  as 
he  was 
handsome—strikingly  so,  with  his  Chinese  eyes—and  he 
carried  an  unobtrusive  but  distinguishable  air  of  cosmopol- 
itan  ease.  He  did  not  look  like  the  businessmen  and  poli- 
ticlans  to  whom  she  was  accustomed,  still  less  like  the  rest

and  comfortable—otherwise  her 

a  son-in-law.  Then,  too, 

The  Oracle 

189 

of  mankind  whom  she  lumped  as  “peasants.”  With  his 
smooth  piratical  face  and  his  masterful  way  of  moving,  he 
looked  perhaps  like  a  sea  captain. 

She 

knew 

about  Madame  Delisle—everyone 

knew 
about  Madame  Delisle—but  only  as  an  added  piquancy, 
which  seemed  to  have  no  relevance  to  her  own  life.  Mon- 
toya’s  world  was  full  of  mysteries.  When—if—the  time 
came,  Madame  Delisle  would  be  brushed  back  into  the 
shadowy  reaches  that  stretched  away  from  him. 

The  dragon  at  the  bottom  of  the  world...  There  was  no 
refuge,  none;  and  she  sought  no  refuge.  That  deep  battle 
was  all  her  business.  Still  she  was  grateful  for  the  house 
that  protected  her  from  extraneous  horrors.  No  one  who 
entered  here  would  hurt  her.  It  made  her  very  unself- 
conscious,  She  moved  among  these  people,  servants  and 
guests  alike,  as  if  she  fancied  herself  personally  invisible, 
like  a  scientist  among  objects  of  study.  It  was  as  if  she  no 
longer  believed  that  anyone  could  take  any  interest  in  her 
unless  to  hurt  her;  since  no  one  in  this  house  would  hurt 
her,  ipso  facto  they  were  not  interested  in  her,  and  there- 
fore  what  she  said  and  did  was  of  no  significance  to  any- 
one  but  herself.  It  gave  all  her  behavior  a  strange  quality 
especially, 
~impish, 
found  unsettling  and  charming.  The  servants  had  promptly 
categorized  her  with  the  children—one  more  difficult,  in- 
jured  waif.  She  was  surprised,  and  momentarily  frightened, 
whenever  she  met  someone’s  eyes, 

sleepwalkerly—that 

guests, 

male 

“I  knew  it  would  happen,”  said  the  oracle. 

She  held  the  body  in  one  hand,  it  was  so  small.  “Why?” 

she  asked  achingly. 

“All 

that 

lives  must  die,” 

the 

oracle 

said. 

“That’s 

Shakespeare.” 

She  nodded;  because  it  was  true,  and  because  she  ac- 
cepted  his  mockery  as  a  sort  of  corrosive  kindness,  eating 
at  her  ignorance,  “Yes.” 

“Shakespeare  died,  too,”  he  added. 

When  Montoya  was  not  there—and  Montoya  often  was 
not  there—her  nights  were  precarious.  She  would  lie  down 
painstakingly,  extending  her  slight  body  on  the  bed  in 
a 
position  that  seemed  to  her  appropriate  for  death.  Beneath 
her,  the  fragile  crust  of  the  world  lay  quiescent.  In  the

190 

EDGES 

dark,  her  first  steps  were  always  faltering.  She  touched  her 
son’s  thick  hair,  and  heard  his  voice,  bantering  and  ag- 
gressive,  a  young  man’s  voice,  or  a  boy  feeling  his  man- 
hood.  She  could  bear  this,  though  her  hand  burned  at  the 
contact;  in  less  than  a  year’s  time  she  had  learned  to  look 
at  her  son  and  say,  “He  will  die  like  that.”  They  stood  to- 
gether  on  a  street  of  Djakarta  in  their  ignorance,  and  all 
around  them,  behind  the  facades  of  buildings  and  faces, 
the  mucky  whirlpool  of  a  revolution  was  stirring,  turning; 
so  that  when  it  suddenly  tightened,  wheeling,  spinning,  it 
was  inevitable  that  they  must  be  sucked  down.  And  at  the 
bottom  of  the  world  a  filthy  mouth  had  taken  them  with  a 
yawn.  But  she  shied  away,  dancing  sideways  with  quick 
small  serious  steps.  She  was  not  ready  to  think  of  that  yet; 
before  she  came  to  battle,  there  were  affairs  to  settle. 

(And  Montoya  was  not  there.  And  her  bones  ached 
with  tiredness,  teats  not  of  grief  or  pain  but  of  tiredness 
welled  in  her  eyes,  and  it  was  not  that  she  would  evade 
the  battle,  but  only  postpone  it  a  little  while.) 

lightly, 

servants  slept 

All  the  things,  she  thought,  that  added  together  had 
that  whirlpool’s  circumference— 
brought  them  within 
all  the  accidents  and  decisions  that  looked  like  chance  or 
choice—they  had  been  inevitable,  too.  Now  in  the  dark- 
ness  she  went  over  them  carefully,  all  those  distant  events, 
verifying  the  silent  necessities  that  had  seemed  possibili- 
ties  then,  mere  possibilities  among  other  possibilities.  But 
she  thought;  those  other  possibilities 
it  was  inevitable, 
had  been  only  illusions,  Beyond  the  door,  in  the  warm, 
ready  to  wake 
breathing  house, 
and  tend  her.  In  the  cages  the  birds  slept,  silent,  crouched, 
their  long  toes  locked  around  twigs  or  perches.  This,  now, 
was  the  critical  time.  The  crust  of  the  world  lay  still,  and 
too  would  sleep.  Sometimes  she  would  sleep.  But 
she 
sometimes  a  piece  of  the  crust  would  tilt  up  before  her 
like  a  hinged  lid  opening,  and  she  would  be  facing  the 
great  gape  of  the  dragon’s  mouth.  She  made  a  sick  noise, 
a  wet 
a  groaning  whine  of  unwillingness,  and  sank  in 
heap.  Its  breath  seared  her.  She  rose,  to  match  the  poor 
heat  of  her  anger  against  the  breath  of  hell.  The  dragon 
soiled  raw  flame  squirted  between 
laughed;  spurts 
its  teeth.  Waves  of  stench  assaulted  her.  She  stood  and 
drew  great  breaths,  eyes  blind  with  effort.  Hell  opened 
dry  object  rammed
wider.  Twists,  thrusts;  some  gross 

of 

The  Oracle 

191 

between  her  legs.  This  she  could  bear.  This,  she  thought 
bitterly,  she  could  bear, 

Philippe  Montoya  could  not  easily  have  said  what  his 
Renée  was  to  him;  he  did  not  very  clearly  know.  She  was 
now,  of  course,  a  convenience  and  a  decoration;  but  it 
was  not  for  that  that  he  had  brought  her  here  and  been 
moved  by  her.  In  part,  it  was  no  different  from  the  recur- 
rent  impulse  that  had  filled  his  house  with  children.  This 
was  not  charity.  The  waifs  and  orphans  he  had  picked 
of  the  gutter  were  not  the  most 
from  the  turbulent  life 
by  most  people’s 
they 
helpless—no  more  than 
standards,  the  most  appealing.  It  was  more  nearly  the  im- 
pulse  of  fellowship,  a  sense  of  the  brotherhood  of  loners. 
Nothing  had  ever  summed  up  better  what  he  loved  and 
admired  than  that  bleak,  humorous,  hopeless,  wry  and  re- 
signed  bravado,  “It  made  me  mad.”  But  he  did  not  un- 
derstand  her  battles  in  the  dark.  He  thought  they  were 
only  bad  dreams. 

were, 

Sometimes  she  reneged—she  turned  away  from  the  dark. 
Those  were  the  dangerous  times,  as  she  rated  danger.  For 
she  could  really  have  done  it,  really  have  fallen  into  the 
easy  drift  of  the  days,  content  to  be  Montoya’s  woman, 
aging  and a 
little  mad,  with  nights  no  more  real  than 
other  people’s  nights;  could  have  drifted,  perhaps,  until 
some  prosaic  chance  or  choice  cast  her  back  on  the  shores 
of  her  past  life,  simply  a  woman  who  had  lost  a  son  and 
had  an  adventure,  cast  her  among  people  who  would  say 
“My  goodness”  and  “How  horrible”;  and  have  drifted  on 
among  them,  knowing  no  more  than  they  knew,  no  more 
than  she  had  known.  But  she  hated  those  times  and  was 
ashamed. 

Most  often,  she  faced  it  out.  It  was  not  really  so  hard 
-—she  had,  after  all,  nothing  to  lose—there  was  always 
just  a  sick  moment  at  the  beginning  when  she  thought  that 
this  time,  this  particular  time,  she  could  not  bear  it.  But 
if  she  did  draw  back,  the  sick  feeling  stayed  with  her, 
even  in  the  depth  of  her  relief,  And  the  next  night  she 
would  think,  “If  I  had  gone  on,  last  night,  I  would  be  that 
much  closer  to  the  end,”  and  despise  the  cowardice  that 
had  set  her  back  by  twenty-four  hours. 

For  these  struggles  in  the  dark  were  not  fruitless.  She

192 

EDGES 

progressed;  darkness  by  darkness  she  moved  closer  to 
knowledge. 

. 

“Why  do  you  want  to  know  this?”  the  oracle  demanded. 
His  eyes  burned  with  resentful  envy. 

live, 

to  leave  the  past, 

Yes,  why?  Billions  had  suffered  as  much,  she  knew, 
and  asked  nothing  better  than  to  forget.  What  was  im- 
portant,  surely,  was  to 
close 
the  wound.  “No,”  she  said  strongly.  For  it  was  wrong, 
wrong,  those  billions  had  been  wrong.  “Because,”  she 
told  the  oracle,  “if  the  wound  closes  before  it 
is  probed, 
it  festers  inside.”  But  suddenly  metaphors  seemed  to  her 
cheap,  deceitful.  “Because,”  she  said’  angrily,  “if  people 
don’t  know  what  happens  to  them  when  they  make  mis- 
takes,  they  go  on  making  the  same  mistakes  over  and 
over  again.” 

to 

The  oracle  smiled  knowingly.  His  voice  was  a  hateful 
purr.  “Then  why  do  you  say  it  was  all  inevitable?  If 
it’s 
inevitable,  what  difference  does  it  make  how  much  you 
know?” 

Her  fingers  clenched  on  her  pencil.  She  would  draw 

him  now,  now,  while  she  hated  him. 

She  held  the  child’s  arm  between  her  hands,  the  child’s 
face  with  her  eyes.  There  was  not  a  line,  not  a  surface, 
that  was  not  soft  and  clean.  “Is  she  his  child?” 

“How  should  I  know?”  replied  the  oracle.  The  child 

escaped  her,  casually. 

“I  think  she  is,”  she  said.  “Or  I  think  it  doesn’t  matter, 
which  is  the  same  thing.  I  think  the  mother  left  him  the 
baby  because  he  ought  to  have  it.  You  can  tell.  You  can 
he  must  make 
tell,” 
love  with  other  women  the  same  way  he  does  with  me. 
Which  is  with,  not  to.  Do  you  understand  what  I  mean?” 

she  explained  earnestly.  “I 

think 

“No,”  said  the  oracle. 
“With,  not  to—how  else  can  I  say  it?  ‘Make  love’  isn’t 
the  right  phrase,  though.  It  doesn’t  have  anything  to  do 
with  love.  ‘Have  intercourse’  is 
very  accurate,  if 
you  can  hear  what  the  words  say  and  forget  how  awkward 
the  phrase  has  always  sounded.  We  have  intercourse  with 
each  other.  And  I  think  that’s  normal  for  him:  he  doesn’t 
fuck  women,  he  has  intercourse  with  them.  Of  course, 
there  are  special  circumstances  sometimes—-but  he  doesn’t

very, 

The  Oracle 

193 

enjoy  it  much  that  way,  it  doesn’t  seem  normal  to  him. 
That’s  what  I  think,”  she  finished a  little  hesitantly. 

The 

smile 

tormenting 

oracle  smiled—a  mute, 

that 
stung  her,  and  she  cried  eagerly,  “Will  he—Will  we—”; 
but  before  she  could  frame  her  question,  the  triptych 
closed;  she  did  not  want  to  know  her  future  with  Mon- 
toya.  It  would  be  suicidal,  and  she  was  not  ready  for  sui- 
cide.  She  had  to 
battle;  and  it  was 
exactly  the  unadulterated  present  with  Montoya  that  pre- 
served  her,  the  present  untouched  by  past  or  future. 

finish  her 

live 

to 

“Philippe  Montoya,”  Josepha  said  playfully.  “With  a  name 
like  that,  you  had  to  come  to  the  Philippines  someday. 
It’s  destiny.” 
“And  all 

this  time  I  thought  it  was  good  business,” 

Montoya  responded  good-humoredly. 

“Well,  think  of  it!  This  is  the  only  Christian  democracy 
in  the  hemisphere—except  Australia  and  New  Zealand, 
and  they  are  so  very  Anglo-Saxon.”  She  was  repeating, 
not  so  much  with  conviction  as  with  a  simple  absence  of 
question,  things  which  she  had  been  taught.  “Here,”  she 
at  home.”  This  was 
went  on,  “Sefor  Montoya  can  feel 
coy,  though  not  unbecomingly  so;  they  were  at  present 
in 
the  garden  of  her  father’s  Manila  home,  hung  now 
with  lanterns  and  decorated  with  strolling  guests. 

Montoya’s  Annamese  grandmother  had  had  more  to 
do  with  his  everyday  childhood  than  any  other  one  per- 
son; 
and  though  he  had  been  baptized  and  confirmed 
a  Catholic,  his  memories  and  his  sympathies  were  more 
importantly  Buddhist.  He  had  nothing,  he  felt,  from  his 
Spanish  grandfather  but  his  name  and  a  kind  of  heredi- 
tary  license,  if  he  chose  to  exercise  it,  for  a  certain  arro- 
gant  touchiness.  In  fact  he  was  silently  exercising  it  now. 
How  often 
differentness, 
to 
explain 
“After  all, 
I  am  Spanish!”—just  as  he  said,  in  other  situ- 
ations,  “I  am  French”  or  “I  am  Vietnamese.”  All  the  time 
he  had  never  felt  Spanish.  Now,  listening  to  Josepha, 
he  felt  indignantly,  ‘Why,  I  am  more  Spanish  than  this 
little  mestiza.  At  least  my  grandfather  was  a  real  Span- 
iard.” 

said, 

had 

his 

he 

“My  family  came  from  Castile,”  she  was  saying.  “Where 

did  yours  originate,  Felipe?” 

He  did  not  like 

be  called  Felipe;  but  he  was  too 
tell  her  that  and  thereby  give  her  the  power

to 

prudent  to 

194 

EDGES 

of  annoying  him  deliberately  in  future.  “God  knows,”  he 
said.  “The  Garden  of  Eden,  perhaps.”  He  lifted  his  arms, 
inviting  her  to  dance. 

“Oh,  that’s  why  you  feel  at  home  in 

a  garden!”  She 
went  laughing  into 
his  arms.  The  music  was  pleasant, 
and  after  all  Josepha  Sandoval  was  pleasant  to  him  also, 
neither  stupid  nor  vicious. 

“You  and  your  family  must  visit  me  soon,”  he  said. 

For  Philippe  Montoya,  though  he  had  never  formulated 
it,  one  simple  principle  guaranteed  freedom.  In  his  com- 
plex,  precarious  life,  balanced  within  an  intricate  network 
of  connections,  he  had  remained  essentially  uninvolved. 
His  self  was  not  entangled.  Therefore  he  was  free  to  make 
his  choices  without  consulting  the  necessities  of  any  other 
or  divine.  It  gave  him  an 
entity—-human,  institutional, 
in 
that  was  very  useful 
will 
incorruptible  integrity 
business  dealings.  He  behaved  always  as  if  he  had  noth- 
ing  to  lose. 

of 

hair, 

clear 

sweet 

childlike.  In 

and  through  his 

In  sleep,  the  oracle’s  face  was  soft, 
sleep, 
perhaps,  she  thought,  he  found  the  blessing  of  uncertainty. 
it  wash  around  him,  over  his  face,  into 
He  would  feel 
his 
flow; 
a 
nostrils 
the  caked  crust  of  knowledge  would  dissolve.  Cool,  the 
touch  of  freedom.  She  watched  tautly  in  the  dark.  What 
good  was  it,  then,  if 
to  master  knowledge  brought  only 
in  sleep? 
this  need  to  escape  from  knowledge,  to  lose  it 
But  another  time  she  thought,  swallowing  once  and  nod- 
ding,  Yes,  it  was  good,  then;  he  had  mastered  knowledge, 
he  held  it 
in  leash  when  awake,  and  aslecp  he  was  free 
of  it  and  could  forget.  But  she  was  never  free;  she  fought 
it  always,  light  and  dark,  or  crouched,  dread- 
it  or  fled 
ing,  and  waited  for  its  claws. 

CHAPTER  5 

He  bent  over  her  chair,  leaning  his  hands  on  its  arms,  to 
set  a  small,  comfortable  kiss  on  her  cheek.  These  martial 
kisses,  which  would  have  surprised  her  if  she  had  not  been 
about  them,  were  Montoya’s
too  preoccupied  to 

think 

The  Oracle 

spontaneous 
nounced,  “I’m  going  to  take  you  south.  Soon.” 

offering.  As 

straightened 

he 

195 

up, 

he 

an- 

Now  she  startled,  and  lifted  her  big-eyed  humorless 

gaze. 

“It’s  time  for  you  to  get  better.” 
By  which  he  meant,  at  present,  merely  that 

it  was 
in 
time  for  her  to  learn  to  leave  this  house.  She  took  it 
a  deeper  way,  and  leaned  forward,  frowning,  abstracted. 
“But...”  she  said;  then,  “Yes,  I  know.”  She  raised  her 
face  again,  but  her  eyes  were  so  intently  inward  that  they 
crossed a  little.  “It’s  stupid.  It’s  stupid.  Because,  you  see, 
it  killing 
I  didn’t  really  find  out  anything  new.  So  why  is 
me?  Why  does  it  make  a  difference  just  because  it  hap- 
pened  to  me?”  Her  gaze  refocused.  She  looked  pathetic 
to  him,  childlike.  “I  can’t  be  that  selfish,  can  I?  I  can’t  be 
that  stupid.  Seventeen-year-old  boys  get  beaten  to  death 
it’s  important,  why 
every  day,  everybody  knows  that.  If 
as  real  as 
didn’t  it  kill  me  before?  I  mean,  every  boy  is 
every  other  boy.” 

“Everybody  doesn’t  know  it.”  Montoya  said.  When  she 
moved,  she  trembled.  She  would  have  a  bad  night  tonight, 
and  he  had  been  looking  forward  to  sleep. 

it 

give 

the  house, 

He  would  not  have  done  this  to  her  without  reason.  But 
it  was  impossible  to  think  seriously  of  marriage  while  she 
serious 
was  in 
thought—which  would  involve,  for  example,  having  the 
Sandovals  as  house  guests.  And  in  any  case,  he  believed 
what  he  had  told  her:  it  was  time. 

and  he  needed  to 

Having  decided  that  it  was  to  be  done,  he  took  sat- 
isfaction  in  it.  The  house  on  Palawan  was  very  private  to 
him,  like  his  boats—something  reserved  from  the  show- 
his  Manila  life.  He  would  take  there  both  his 
case  of 
Renée  and  his  child.  Marie-Ange  too  must  be  removed 
from  the  sphere  that  Josepha  Sandoval  was  to  occupy. 

Neuyen’s  job  on  Pagbo,  though  technically  menial,  was 
not  without  importance.  He  had  been  given  a  place  in  the 
crew  of  a  kumpit  that  plied  irregularly  between  Palawan 
and  the  southern  reaches  of  the  Sulu  Sea.  He  had  a  use- 
ful  facility  with  languages,  and  a  suppleness  that  was  use- 
ful  on  shipboard;  but  bis  chicf  function  was  simply  to  be 
among  them,  a  presence  from  Montoya’s  own  househoid,

196 

EDGES 

guaranteeing  by  his  existence  the  involuntary,  spontane- 
ous  loyalty  of  hand  to  head. 

He  admired  the  Moro  seamen  for  their 

their 
casual  cheerfulness,  their  pride—qualities  he  had  long  ad- 
mired,  under  other  forms,  in  Montoya.  He  felt  that  he 
was  already  like  them,  but  distinct. 
It  remained  only 
to  demonstrate  his  likeness, 

skill, 

he 

felt  protectively  that 

They  would  make  the  trip  by  water.  There  were  air- 
ports  of  a  sort  on  Palawan,  but  none  closer  than  Puerto 
Princesa,  thirty  miles  of  imperfect  road  from  Montoya’s 
house.  Besides, 
it  would  be 
easier  for  her  if  she  could  make  the  whole  journey  en- 
closed,  as  it  were,  in 
a  piece  of  his  household,  For  this 
voyage  he  chose  his  personal  favorite  from  his  motley  lit- 
tle  fleet, 
a  middle-sized  Tonkinese  junk,  seaworthy  and 
comfortable,  not  as  fast  as 
a  prao  on  the  open  sea,  but 
eminently  maneuverable  and  as  stable  as 
a  lighthouse, 
There  was  a  cove,  over-hung  with  scents  that  swayed  in 
the  green  air  like  flowering  vines.  Before  they  stepped 
ashore  they  were  within  the  forest.  The  path  they  followed 
led  gently  upward,  winding,  then  across  a  stream  by  a 
footbridge  that  she  crossed  with  Open  eyes  and  closed 
heart.  She  walked  slowly,  holding  Marie-Ange’s  hand. 
Birds  were  all  around  them,  fluttering,  calling.  She  had  a 
new  ambition,  immediate  and  strong.  She  wanted  to  come 
out  of  the  forest—not  that  it  oppressed  her,  but  simply  be- 
cause  she  wanted  to  see  birds  flying,  flying  in  the  open 
sky.  The  path  skirted  a  dark  ravine,  turned,  offered  sud- 
denly  a  blaze  of  openness.  They  stood  at  the  edge  of  a 
broad  yard,  overrun  with  a  low,  many-leaved  plant.  The 
house  faced  them,  low,  long,  wide,  She  lifted  her  eyes  to 
the  brilliant  sky. 

Montoya  was  not  casual  about  his  dwelling  places—no 
more  than  a  ground  squirrel  about  its  burrow.  Before  he 
showed  her  her  room,  he  explained  her  escape  route. 
(In  Montoya’s  experience,  there  was  always  an  escape 
possible,  if  you  had  either  foresight  or  luck.)  The  Moros 
of  these  waters  moved  among  the  southern  islands  like 
birds  in  a  forest.  No  one,  not  the  Moros,  had  ever  counted 
the  islands  of  that  rich  sea,  still  less  charted  them.  Every 
prao’s  skipper  had  his  own  secret  paths  and  places,  and 
the  gunboats  of  the  Philippine  Constabulary  moved  harm-

The  Oracle 

197 

lessly  among  them  like  large  blundering  balloons.  If  the 
need  arose  (it  was  well  not  to  limit  your  thinking  by  be- 
ing  too  specific  about  what  the  need  might  be),  any  of 
Montoya’s  household  would  be  safe  with  his  Moro  crews. 
The  only  difficulty  would  be  in  reaching  them  promptly; 
and  for  that  he  maintained  a  one-armed  Moro  called 
Mako.  Ostensibly  he  was  a  gardener.  In  fact,  his  function 
was  more  specialized, 

As  the  other  had  been  a  house  of  birds,  so  this  was  a 
house  of  vines.  There  were  other  plants  as  well,  large  and 
small,  inside  and  out;  but  it  was  the  vines  that  were,  for 
her,  characteristic.  Here  it  was  not  enough  for 
a  plant 
simply  to  grow;  there  was  a  gush,  a  flow,  of  vegetation— 
fountaining  leaves,  stems  that  flung  themselves  wide  to 
grasp  and  climb. 

Spurting  green  flowed  down  the  window,  an  emerald 
coruscation.  Slowly  her  eyes  began  to  focus  on  the  cur- 
taining  vine.  The  leaves  condensed  toward  solidity,  then 
toward  clarity.  A  little  to  one  side  of  the  center,  where  a 
branch  twisted  slantwise,  she  made  out  the  shape  of  a 
bird,  jewel-like  and  still,  Her  brows  drew  together  a  little 
as  she  forced  her  eyes  through  the  final  notches  into  clear 
focus.  The  bird  rested  motionless,  its  head  turned  away 
from  her,  Then,  on  the  instant,  with  a  motionless  jerk,  it 
was  not  a  bird.  It  was  the  knuckles  of  a  hand,  yellow- 
she 
green,  grasping  slantwise 
leaped,  panicking,  upright,  the  leaves  beside  it  broke  into 
a  face,  not  human,  green  with  reflected  light,  and  moved, 
and  the  face  broke  again  into  leaves.  She  sat  still  on  the 
edge  of  her  bed  and  thoughtfully  selected  a  cigarette. 

along  the 

and  as 

vine, 

see  her  thus,  un- 
Montoya  smiled  fondly.  He  liked  to 
hurried,  idle,  at  ease  in  the  green  asylum  of  his  protection. 
He  did  not  know  that  urgency  beset  her.  A  kind  of 
swelling  bubble  divided  her  life.  Above,  cut  off  from  the 
depths,  insulated  by  the  nothingness  of  the  bubble,  a  layer 
idle, 
almost  of  merriment,  of  quick,  disordered  flights, 
content  in  truth  as  in  appearance.  But  below  was  where 
she  lived. 

She  knew  now  the  anxiety  of  the  dying.  Is  there  time? 
was  her  continual  question  to  the  oracle.  “Yes,”  he would 
answer;  “yes,  but  you  must  hurry.”  She  did  not  dare  to 
ask,  Have  I  strength?  She  could  not  forget  the  leafy  in-

198 

EDGES 
truder  at  the  window,  when  for  a  moment  reality  had 
flickered.  That,  she  knew,  was  madness,  the  loosening 
of  her  weary  grip.  She  smiled  idly  back  at  Montoya. 
Inwardly,  below  the  bubble,  she  trembled  like  a  leaf, 
a 
bird  among  the  vines.  Before,  she  had  been  afraid  that 
she  might  not  die;  now  there  was  another  and  worse  fear, 
that  she  might  die  too  soon. 

“You  are  alive,”  the  oracle  said.  “J  knew  you  would 
live  in  this  house.”  Yes;  she  was  alive;  therefore  it  was 
not  simply  the  house  of  the  birds  that  had  sustained  her, 
Something  more  inward  fed  her  life. 

Here,  in  this  house,  she  had  not  faced  the  dragon. 
Yet  it  was  here;  it  prowled,  it  stalked,  it  waited.  She  felt 
its  bulk  moving,  somewhere  underfoot.  Now  and  again 
the  floor  quivered  as  it  scraped  beneath.  But  of  course  it 
was  here,  below  her,  rising  from  the  bottom  of  the  world. 
All  houses,  all  streets  were  built  upon  the  same  crust, 
over  the  same  center, 

One  sign,  as 
it  seemed  to  her,  of  her  approaching  death 
Was  a  progressive  weakness.  As  she  pushed  further  into 
the  dragon’s  night,  she  had  grown  not  stronger  but  more 
skilled.  Her  technique  improved;  she  coped  with  horror 
more  adroitly.  At  the  same  time  she  felt  herself  debilitated, 
reduced  to  a  raw  skeleton  whose  naked  bones  buzzed  and 
quivered  with  pain  at  a  fly’s  touch.  Sometimes  in  the  great 
heat  of  the  day  she  would  lie  wretched,  whimpering  with 
refusal,  whipping  her  restive  head  this  way  and  that  in 
hopeless  jerks.  She  who  endured  the  dragon’s  claw  could 
no  longer  endure  the  simple,  senseless  heat.  It  had  not 
oppressed  her  so  in  the  beginning. 

But  there  was  a  technique  for  this  too.  After  a  time— 
always  longer—she  would  rally  her  scattered  forces,  col- 
great 
lect  herself,  and  cease  to  struggle.  This  was  the 
secret  of  the  heat:  accept  it,  and  its  misery  was  tolerable. 
Sweat  collected  steadily  on  the  high  points  of  her  face  and 
body,  globed,  trickled  ticklingly  downward.  But  it  was 
this 
that 
only 
her  vibrated 
squalid  imitation  of  repose.  Something  in 
sporadically,  trying  to  escape  once  more  into  the  irrespon- 
sibility  of  panic.  The  heat  was  tolerable,  yes;  but  tolerance 
was  a  level  of  strength,  and  something  in  her  longed  to 
of  strength.  “When?”  she  whispered.
slough  off  the  last 

by  vigilance 

maintain 

could 

even 

she 

The  Oracle 

199 

“Tater,”  said  the  oracle.  “It  will  be  cool,  cool.  There 

will  be  rain.  The  wind  will  blow.” 

Not  a  hair  stirred,  not  a  leaf.  Everything  hung  limp, 
clung  damply.  Every  breath  lifted  the  great  weight  of  the 
air  a  tiny  space,  and  sank  again  in  collapse.  “Soon?”  she 
asked  pitifully,  angrily. 

“Soon.” 

all, 

the 

her 

other 

house  had  been 

In  this  spiraling  lushness,  she.  felt  herself  shrink.  Perhaps, 
after 
protection. 
Montoya,  too,  would  leave  her,  perhaps  tomorrow,  per- 
haps  next  week.  He  had  stayed  already,  out  of  silent  con- 
sideration  for  her  needs,  longer  than  his  custom.  She  was 
shriveling,  wilting.  Dread  inhibited  every  movement  of 
what 
cunning. 
her 
all  the  future  be  a  blank.  She 
she  must  know,  then  let 
could  endure,  perhaps,  so  much  knowledge;  she  would 
not  burden  herself  with  more. 

past  was 

spirit. 

grew 

She 

the 

If 

Pagbo  was  a  way  station,  a  rendezvous  and  transfer  point, 
a  halt  between  stages  of  a  journey;  sometimes,  for  a  short 
time,  a  depot.  It  had  the  inherent  privacy  of  islands,  and 
it  had  one  artificial  improvement,  a  wooden  house  or 
shed  that  was  clearly  different  in  origin  from  the  airy  ar- 
chitecture  of  these  southern  regions.  There  was  no  other 
wood  on  Pagbo  but  driftwood,  just  as  there  was  no  fresh 
water  but  what  the  rain  and  the  transitory  inhabitants 
brought.  Flat,  naked  to  the  wind,  the  island  lay  beneath 
the  sun,  one  among  many,  the  sand  and  coral  cays  scat- 
tered  in  loose  clusters  down  the  coast  of  Palawan.  She  had  - 
never  seen  Pagbo.  She  had  no  cause  to  think  she  would 
ever  see  it.  She  would  not  have  recognized  its  name. 

The  oracle’s  face  was  shadowed,  haggard.  He  had  a  beard, 
soft  and  close  to  his  face,  tracing  its  hollows  and  salients 
like  pencil  shadings.  “You  don’t  ask,”  he  said  fiercely. 
“Why  not?” 

“Why  are  you  angry?” 
“Because  -you  don’t  ask.  I  know  why  not—you’re  going 
to  tell  me  in  a  minute—but  I  don’t  like  your  not  asking 
questions.  Why  don’t  you  ask  me  what’s  going  to  hap- 
pen?” 

“J  don’t  want  to  know!”

200 

EDGES 

“Why  not?”  he  cried,  pushing  closer  out  of  the  dark- 

ness. 

She  had  pressed  her  flat  hands  over  her  ears, 
her 
shoulders  hunched  forward,  her  elbows  protecting  her 
breasts.  “Because,”  she  whined,  “if  you  know  what’s  go- 
ing  to  happen,  it’s  inevitable.” 

He  struck  her  hands  away  from  her 

ears.  He  was 
strong,  stronger  then  she  had  imagined.  “No!  Nothing  is 
inevitable!”  He  grasped  her  arm,  her  wounded  arm,  in 
both  hands,  and  his  face  twisted  cynically. 
“I  choose 
to  do  this,”  he  said,  and  squeezed,  twisting  his  grasping 
hands  in  opposite  directions.  She  screamed.  (Ah,  that  was 
a  luxury  she  had  here, 
she  could  scream  here  in  the 
dark.)  He  dropped  her  arm. 

“Why  did  you  do  that?”  she  cried  raggedly.  “Why?” 
“There  was  no  reason,”  he  said  drily.  “It  was  not  in- 
evitable.  I  chose  to  do  it.  But  I  knew  that  I  would  choose 
to  do  it.” 

“You  did  it  because  you  knew  you  would  do  it!”  she 

accused, 

His  face  flashed  with  anger  again.  “No!  No!”  His  voice 
was  bursts  of  thunder.  “I  know  because  I  did!”  Her  head 
swam.  You  could  faint  from  unconsciousness  into  deeper 
unconsciousness,  just 
keener  pain.  “Do  you  think  time  is  important?”  he  roared. 
“Act  is  important!  You  know  what  happened  to  your  son 
in  Djakarta.  You  know  what  happened  to  you  on  that  is- 
land.  Does  that  make  what  happened  inevitable?” 

as  you  could  rise  from  pain  into  | 

And  she  was  writhing,  spitted  on  the  dragon’s  claw,  her 
head,  her  whole  body  in  the  gape  of  its  gullet.  Vomit  drib- 
bled  from  her  mouth,  blood  and  excrement  from  her 
loins;  her  nails  scrabbled  at  her  body,  at  the  horror  around 
her;  her  mind  rolled  and  twisted  in  swift  jerks,  knotting 
itself  into  itself.  “Yes,”  she  heard  herself  whisper,  rap- 
idly,  clearly,  so  close  that  the  whisper  filled  all  the  space 
of  sound.  “Inevitable.  It  was  inevitable.  Otherwise  it  could 
not  have  happened.  Inevitable.  It  was  inevitable.  Other- 
wise  it  could  not  have  happened.  Inevitable.”  The  dragon 
crunched.  Its 
teeth  closed  around  her; 
the  stifling, 
stinking  dark  its  ridged  tongue  wiped  her  against  the  fur- 
rowed  roof  of  its  mouth.  “It  was  not  inevitable,”  the  ora- 
cle’s  voice  said  softly.  She  fell  into  Montoya’s  arms.

in 

The  Oracle 

201 

CHAPTER  6 

Montoya  had  heard  the  car  coming,  and  stepped  out  onto 
the  long,  veranda-like  porch  of  his  house,  alert.  He  was 
accustomed  to  making  the  traffic  on  this  road  himself. 
Senator  Sandoval  emerged,  waved  to  Montoya,  paid 
off-the  driver  (hired,  no  doubt,  in  Puerto  Princesa),  and 
helped  his  daughter  out.  They  stood  amid  a  threatening 
collection  of  luggage. 

Montoya  had  come  slowly  down  into  the  yard  to  greet 
them,  framing  an  unenthusiastic  smile.  He  was  displeased. 
He  did  not  enjoy  anyone—least  of  all  the  Senator—look- 
ing  over  his  shoulder  so  assiduously. 

Josepha  laid  her  little  hand  on  her  father’s  arm,  laugh- 
ing.  “It’s  my  fault,  Philippe.  I  wanted  to  see  your  house. 
Besides,  I  wanted  to  see  how  a  bachelor  from  Manila  lives 
on  Palawan.” 

“You'll  be  disappointed,”  Montoya  said.  “On  Palawan, 
I  only  have  time  for  business.  If  you  want  excitement, 
you  should  have  stayed  in  Manila.” 

“Maybe  I’m  tired  of  excitement.  Besides,  Papa  wants 
to  talk  business.  May  I  see  your  house?”  She  released  her 
father’s  arm  with  a  pat,  and  moved  across  the  porch,  toss- 
ing  her  head  coltishly.  Montoya  moved  swiftly  to  reach 
the  door  first.  He  was  good  at  tight-rope  walking—usher- 
ing  them  in 
as  he  clapped  his  hands  and  issued  instruc- 
tions  in  Vietnamese,  delaying  them  with  hospitality  in  the 
front  of  the  house  while  the  old  nurse  got  her  charges  un- 
der  cover.  This  house  was  his  sanctuary.  He  would  not 
have  his  family  (so,  in  effect,  he  thought  of  them)  driven 
from 
of  Josepha  seeing 
the 
or  touching  them,  as  simply  and  vehemently  as  his  stom- 
ach  would  reject  an  emetic.  This  was  not  quite  consistent 
of  him;  Josepha  had  met  them  both  already,  and  even 
hugged  the  little  girl,  who  had  slipped  out  of  the  embrace 
like  a  wild  bird,  shaking  her  arms  as  if  to  settle  the  feath- 
ers.  But  Josepha  had  been  only  a  dinner  guest  then.  She 
knew,  of  course,  that  there  was  a  legally  adopted  child 
among  his  waifs  and  strays;  but  her  father  had  given  her 
to  understand  that  she  would  not  be  expected  to  function

rejected 

idea 

But 

he 

it, 

202 

EDGES 

as  a  stepmother,  and  that  the  little  mestiza  would  never  be 
a  threat  to  her  own  future  children.  There  was  even  to  be 
some  legal  arrangement  to  guarantee  that.  All  this  was 
absolutely  as  Montoya  wished  it.  He  would  not,  for  any 
consideration,  knowingly  subject  his  daughter  to 
a  sena- 
torial  family’s  condescension;  and  he  did  not  want  to  place 
Josepha  in  a  position  that  would  make  him  resent  her.  He 
was  quite  willing  to  provide  for  Marie-Ange  by  an  inde- 
pendent  settlement,  and  breed  new  heirs 
of  impeccable 
legitimacy.  Only  let  there  be  no  interference! 

The  Senator  had  been  considering  a  pied  d  terre  on  one  of 
the  southern  islands  for  some  time.  He  had  accumulated 
money  that  called  for  investment,  and  he  felt  the  need  for 
added  solidity  and  protection  to  comfort  his  declining 
years.  There  had  never  been  so  good  an  opportunity  as 
Montoya  offered  (offered,  as 
it  happened,  involuntarily); 
there  would  never  again,  he  felt,  be  a  better  moment  to 
catch  that  opportunity.  He  and  Montoya  knew  each  other. 
They  were,  now,  like  two  traders  haggling  in  the  market, 
watchfully  circling  each  other’s  wares,  assessing  possibili- 
ties  of  profit  and  loss,  offering  with  one  hand  and  with- 
holding  with  the  other.  It  was  a  kind  of  work  they  both 
enjoyed. 

“Yes,  I  envy  you,”  the  Senator  announced.  He  stood 
upright,  his  elbow  on  the  high  porch  railing,  his  small, 
plump  hand  resting  with  complacent  pats  on  his  stom- 
ach,  He  surveyed  the  grounds  before  him,  turned a  little 
to  survey  the  line  of  the  house  front.  “You  have  every- 
thing  here  that  I  have  wanted  for  my  retirement.  And  you 
a  young  man!  This  is  wasted  on  you.” 

Montoya  laughed.  “A  base  to  work  from,  that’s 

all. 

You  would  find  there  are  no  comforts  here.” 

“Even  a  retired  person,”  said  the  Senator,  “needs  some 
interest  to  occupy  his  time.  And,  of  course,  a  little  income. 
I  have  been  thinking  about  buying  a  boat.” 

“What  kind  of  boat?”  Montoya  asked  politely. 
“One  of 

course, 
I  could  be  sure  that  it  would  be  handled  as  profitably.” 
a 
lightly.  “No  one 

Montoya  smiled 

the  same  type 

as  you  use. 

guarantee 

can 

If, 

of 

profit.” 

The  Senator’s  chuckle  was  paternal.  “I  didn’t  say  ‘prof- 
itably’;  I  said  ‘as  profitably.”  If  we  were  partners  in  the 
operation,  I  providing  the  boat,  and  you  the  skill...”

The  Oracle 

203 

But  the  Senator  had  hit  upon  the  one  type  of  business 
venture  for  which  Montoya  felt  real  distaste.  All  the  ef- 
fort  of  his  life  had  been  directed  to  being,  first  and  above 
all,  his  own  man.  The  generosity  for  which  he  was  known 
was  premised  on  the  satisfying  awareness  that  what  he 
*  gave  was  his  own,  won  by  his  own  labors.  The  pleasure  he 
took  in  his  vessels  and  his  houses  was  the  pleasure  of  un- 
encumbered  ownership,  the  powerful  sensation  that  he 
could  set  the  torch  to  them  at  will,  as  he  had  done,  with 
less  legal  justification,  to  the  rubber  plantation  in  Annam. 
“Well,”  he  said,  “you  came  to  the  right  place.  This  coast 
is  full  of  boats,  and  men  who  know  how  to  use  them.” 
kind  of  arrangement  in 

the 
family,”  the  Senator  said,  reprovingly.  He  lit  a  cigar,  of- 
fering  one  to  Montoya.  Montoya  declined;  instead,  he  lit 
an  American  cigarette  (he  always  carried  a  fresh  pack, 
though  he  so  seldom  smoked  them)  and  leaned  on  the 
railing,  gazing  forward  toward  the  unseen  sea,  the  ciga- 
rette  projecting  from  the  fingers  of 
his  clasped  hands. 
“You  know,  of  course,”  said  the  Senator,  “that  I  am  a 
member  of 
the  committee  which  is  now  investigating 
smuggling  in  the  southern  islands.” 

“I  prefer  to  keep  this 

“TI  read  the  newspapers,”  said  Montoya. 
“In  fact,  that  is  one  of  my  reasons  for  coming  to 

Palawan.” 

This  was  unfair.  The  range  of  Montoya’s  business  in- 
terests  was  not  unknown  in  government  circles  already, 
and  the  Senator  himself  had  expressed  interest  before  now 
in  the  possibility  of  arrangements  for  mutual  profit.  But 
Montoya  took  the  threat  in  good  part,  as  legitimate  under 
the  rules  of  the  game.  He  smoked  for  a  time  in  silence 
before  he  spoke  again.  “I  like  the  Moros,”  he  said  con- 
versationally.  “Some  people  say  they  are  too  excitable  to 
be  trustworthy,  but  I  find  them  very  reliable.  They  are 
touchy  people,  though.  If  someone  offers  them  a  bribe, 
they  take  it  as  an  instilt—just  as  if 
it  was  a  threat.  They 
are  like  the  Spanish  in  that  way.” 

“Yes,”  said  the  Senator  thoughtfully.  “Perhaps  that  is 
why  Spanish  culture  took  root  so  readily  in  the  Philip- 
pines.” 

Montoya  straightened  and  put  out  his  cigarette.  “A  boat 
is 
a  risky  thing  to  put  your  money  in,  Senator.  One  storm 
can  sink  your  whole  investment.”  He  gestured  toward  the 
sky,  as  if  he  were  casually  invoking  a  storm  god.  “And  if

204 

EDGES 

you  want  a  house  to  retire  to,  why  not  pick  Mindanao, 
where  there  are  no  typhoons?” 

“There  are  no  typhoons  on  Palawan,”  the  Senator  said 

obstinately.  “And  Mindanao  is  full  of  Moro  rebels.” 

Montoya  drew  in  air  through  his  teeth,  a  silent  whistle 
of  private  exasperation.  There  were  typhoons  on  Palawan, 
although  not  every  year,  or  even  every  other  year.  As  for 
Moro  rebels—he  was  aware  that  Manila  did  not  recog- 
nize  danger  signs 
on  Palawan,  any  more  than  it  had 
recognized  them  on  Mindanao.  He  himself  had  good  rea- 
son  to  be  sensitive  to  angry  stirrings  among  the  Moslem 
Palawefios;  he  was,  potentially  at  least,  one  of  the  objects 
of  their  resentment.  What  had  set 
off  the  still-seething 
rebellion  on  Mindanao  was  an  in-flowing  of  Christian 
outsiders,  bent  on  taking  everything  they  could.  Montoya 
realized 
the  same 
process  on  Palawan,  although  personally  he  did  not  feel 
very  Christian,  and  less  an  outsider  here  than  in  Manila. 
But  the  Senator  was  only  a  senator,  and  could  not  be  ex- 
pected  to  grasp  all  this;  therefore  Montoya  spoke  to  him 
patiently.  “Did  you  hear  the  radio  this  morning?  Unless 
be  here  within  three 
it 
the  typhoon  turns 
days.  That’s  why  I  need  to  go  up  the  coast  in  a  hurry.  I 
have  things  to  take  care  of  before  the  storm  hits.” 

well  enough  that 

he  was 

north, 

part 

will 

of 

“I  am  prepared  to  pay  cash,”  said  the  Senator.  “At 

this  moment.” 

Montoya  did  not  pause  in  the  movement  he  had  begun, 
he  was 
turning  casually  toward  the  house  door; 
interested. 
his 
If  the  Senator  had  come  with 
pocket,  it  was  because  he  meant  to  make  a  deal,  and  one 
not  wholly  suitable  for  transaction  on  paper.  That  meant 
quite 
it  would  be  an  unusually  large  amount  of  cash, 
enough  to  buy  another  house  and  another  boat.  Also, 
Montoya’s  liquidity  was,  at  the  moment,  not  all  he  could 
wish; 
this  cash  was  decidedly  tempting.  “Let’s  have  a 
drink,”  he  suggested. 

but 
cash 

in 

of  matting,  contem- 
Nguyen  lay  half-propped  on  a  roll 
plating  the  sky.  A  wall  of  clouds  stood  in  the  east,  and  it 
seemed  to  him  that  it  was  slowly  advancing. 
His  first  Sulu  voyage—-now  that  all 

its  awkwardnesses 
were  past—had  filled  him  with  a  boiling,  eager  pride.  It 
was  pleasure  simply  to  lie  on  the  hot  deck,  feeling  him- 
self  from  inside,  nothing  of  his  bubbling  restlessness  show-

The  Oracle 

205 

ing  through  the  somnolent  pose.  There  was  nothing  to  do 
on  Pagbo;  and  on  Pagbo  they  were  to  stay  until  word 
came  from  Palawan.  So  he  lay  in  the  sun  and  watched 
the  sky;  and  the  clouds  advanced. 

“Well,  have  you  finished  your  business  discussion?”  Jose- 
pha  asked  lightly,  brightly. 

“We  discussed  the  weather,”  Montoya  said.  “And  the 

Moros.” 

Josepha  laughed,  a  rich  chuckle.  “I  think  that  some- 
times  you’re  a  Moro  yourself,  Felipe.”  She  stood  very 
close  to  him,  bending  her  head,  touching  his  shirt  button 
with  one  fingertip,  so  that  her  deep,  black  hair  brushed 
his  chest;  with  a  very  slight  tilt  she  would  have  been  lean- 
ing  against  him.  His  chest  expanded  toward  her;  but  they 
stayed  separated,  joined  only  by  that  breathlike  touch  of 
hair  and  finger.  Looking  down  on  her  dark  head,  he  felt  a 
painful  swell  of  tenderness,  a  feeling  much  like  incest,  as 
if  he  were  looking  in  this  way  at 
a  child  of  his  own;  she- 
was  so  small. 

a 

long,  ungainly  island, 

Palawan—though  Montoya  was  hardly  conscious  of  the 
fact  in  such  terms—had  become  in  his  eyes  somewhat  of 
a  private  preserve.  His  feeling  was  less  affectionate  than 
hardly 
proprietary.  Palawan: 
more  than a  straight  ridge  of  forested  rock,  stretching 
away  at  a  south-southwesterly  slant  from  the  main  body 
of  the  Philippines,  as  if 
it  were  the  archipelago’s  walking 
stick.  In  the  whole  length  of  the  island,  there  was  only 
one  major  road,  fifty-odd  miles  from  northeast  to  south- 
west,  lying  along  the  southern  coast  with  the  town  of 
Puerto  Princesa  at  its  center.  From  the  airport  at  Puerto 
the 
Princesa, 
teeming  international  terminal  of  Manila,  There  was  no 
manufacturing  here,  no  agriculture  beyond  the  patches  of 
rice  and  sweet  potatoes  scraped  in  the  thin  soil  along  the 
coast,  no  evidence  of  mineral  wealth  waiting  to  be  tapped. 
Nevertheless,  to  Montoya  as  increasingly  to  others,  Pala- 
wan  appeared  a fertile  field,  to  be  sown  and  reaped.  One 
industry,  at  least,  was  both  prosperous  and  legal.  The  little 
fishing  fleets 
of  the  coast—above  all,  from  the  bay  of 
Taytay,  at  the  northern  tip  of  the  island—shared  the  rich 
fishing  grounds  of  the  southern  seas  with  the  more  modern 
trawlers  from  Manila.  Four  of  the  shabby-looking  vessels

irregularly  connected  with 

planes 

small 

206 

EDGES 

operating  out  of  Taytay  belonged  to  Montoya;  he  hoped 
to  add  soon  a  refrigerated  ship  that  would  give  him  an 
advantage  in  the  ravenous  Manila  market.  These  fishing 
boats  of  his  were  also  suitable  for  delivering  other  goods, 
usually  after  a  rendezvous  with  swifter  vessels  from  south 
in  the  Sulu  Sea. 

But  his  most  enterprising  ambition  was  on  land.  The 
forests  of  Palawan  were,  by  Philippine  standards,  thin  and 
poor;  but  they  included  the  archipelago’s  only  commercial 
stands  of  ipil,  which  its  admirers  billed  as  the  world’s  most 
useful  wood;  and  Montoya  had  quickly  noted  that  they 
were  absurdly  underexploited.  He  had  begun  by  buying 
one  of  the  small  existing  sawmills.  What  he  envisioned 
was  no  less  than  an  eventual  lumbering  empire.  Such  a 
base  on  Palawan  would  give  him  leverage  in  the  already 
savage  competition  on  Mindanao—and  Mindanao  was  the 
most  likely  field  for  his  next  expansion.  Mindanao,  in- 
deed,  had  already  been  swept  by 
so  many  waves  of 
speculators  and  settlers  that  the  native  Moslems,  suddenly 
a  minority,  had  risen  in  furious  revolt.  The 
reduced  to 
revolt  seemed  to  have  settled  into 
an  interminable  low- 
key  war  (Montoya  smiled  drily;  he  had  seen  the  theme 
of  these  variations  elsewhere),  and  the  settlers  and  specu- 
lators  were  turning  toward  Palawan.  Before  the  waves 
broke  there  in  earnest,  Montoya  meant  to  be  firmly  estab- 
lished. 

CHAPTER  7 

She  had  not  seen  Montoya  since  the  Sandovals’  arrival. 
She  had  been  told  only  that  he  would  be  busy  with  visi- 
tors,  that  she  and  the  child  could  occupy  themselves  in 
the  servants’  quarters.  She  understood  from  this  that  they 
were  to  keep  out  of  sight,  and  for  the  first  time  since 
Montoya  had  washed  her  wounds  in  the  cramped  cabin,  a 
spasm  of  simple  fear  touched  her,  like  a  cold  hand  among 
her  entrails.  “Will  they  find  me?”  she  asked  the  oracle, 

“Yes,”  he  said  flatly. 
The  cold  hand  clenched.  For  a  moment  her  own  hands 
opened  spasmodically,  the  fingers  drawing  back  as  if  the 
tendons  were  suddenly  tightening.  But  her  son  was  dead.

The  Oracle 

207 

Her  son  was  already  dead,  they  could  not  kill  him.  The 
relief  was  so  real  that  she  smiled,  a  little  wanly,  and  drew 
herself  together. 

‘ 

“Why  don’t  you  ask  who  they  are?”  the  oracle  inquired. 
His  voice  was  patient,  distant,  and  amused.  That  would 
be  how  you  survived,  if  you  knew  everything  that  was 
going  to  happen  to  you.  Patience,  distance,  amusement— 
what  else  could  there  be,  other  than  raving  frenzy?  It  was 
all  she  could  do,  to  cope  with  the  single  fact  that  she 
would  be  found.  Her  flesh  twisted  on  its  bones,  not  yet 
with  pain  but  with  grim  anticipation.  The  cold  hand  had 
become  a  hundred  vises,  closing  on  her  muscles.  Well, 
well,  she  thought  wryly;  after  all,  it’s  not  important. 

“Why  not?”  he  insisted. 
“Oh!  All  right,  who  are  they?”  Irrelevant.  That  was  one 
thing  she  had  deeply  learned:  it  didn’t  matter  who  they 
were.  There  was  nothing  unique  about  a  street  in  Djakarta. 
Those  were  people  who  walked  and  rode  it.  People;  she 
knew—she  and  her  son  had  spoken  with  them,  laughed 
with  them,  dickered  with  them.  They  had  seemed  differ- 
ent  then,  unlike  people  in  her  own  country.  Later,  what 
struck  her  was  their  likeness,  their  overwhelming  human- 
ness;  just  as  that  strange,  different  street  was  overwhelm- 
ingly  a  street.  So  it  did  not  matter  who  they  were.  They 
could  all  wield  rifles, 
or  other  weapons,  whatever  street 
they  came  from. 

“Then  how  can  you  trust  anybody?”  the  oracle  asked 
curiously.  Trust  would  be  a  difficult  concept  for  him  to 
grasp,  as  difficult  as  knowledge  was  for  her.  There  could  be 
trust  only  where  there  was  an  unknown;  and  where  there 
was  an  unknown,  there  could  be  surprise,  therefore  be- 
trayal;  so  that  trust  could  never  be  certain,  never  quite 
trusting.  You  could  only  trust  where  you  could  be  be- 
trayed. 

said 

“Because,”  she 

sturdily,  “everybody  is  good  to 
somebody.”  Montoya  was  good  to  her—at  Jeast,  good 
enough.  She  did  not  inquire  whether  he  was  good  to  any- 
one  else. 

“  ‘Because’  doesn’t  answer  ‘how,’”  the  oracle  said, 
a 
little  vexed,  like  a  teacher  bored  with  correcting  minor  er- 
rors  of  grammar. 

lie  down—not 
At  siesta  time,  they  gave  her  a  place  to 
really  a  bed,  as  Montoya’s  bed  had  defined  the  word  for

208 

EDGES 

her.  The  heat  lay  like  wet  bandages.  Montoya  came  and 
sat  beside  her;  she  turned  on  her  side,  to  fit  the  curve  of 
her  body  to  his  hip.  “I’m  leaving  now,”  he  said.  “I  should 
be  back  the  day  after  tomorrow  at  the  latest—tomorrow, 
if 
I  can.  You  must  stay  here,  in  the  servants’  quarters, 
until  the  old  woman  tells  you  to  come  out.  Understood?” 

“Yes.”  She  watched  his  face  darkly,  patiently. 
He  touched  her  cheek,  a  gesture  of  exasperation.  “Why 
don’t  you  ever  ask  a  question?”  She  smiled  helplessly, 
and  he  laughed.  “It  looks  as  if  we'll  get  some  of  the  ty- 
phoon.  I  should  be  back  before  it  gets  here—but  if  I’m 
delayed  at  Taytay,  I  may  have  to  wait  it 
out.  Nobody 
will  bother  you  here.”  He  picked  up  her  hand,  consider- 
ing  for  a  moment  whether  to  give  her  an  important  trust, 
“Take  care  of  Marie-Ange,”  he  concluded, 

“What  is  it  like  to  know?”  she  asked.  “How  can  you  live?” 
The  oracle’s  ravaged  face  drew  back,  drew  nearer.  His 
eyes  were  wild  with  dizzy  pain.  “Only  by  knowing  that  I 
will  live,”  he  said,  his  voice  thin,  brittle,  ready  to  break 
into  the  shards  of  hysteria.  “Only  by  knowing  that  I  will 
live,  and  therefore  I  can  live.” 

“Must  live,”  she  corrected  quickly. 
“No!”  His  face  rushed  forward  out  of  the  dark.  “Can 
He 
live  and  will!  Can  live  and  will!  There  is  no  ‘must.’ 
threw  out  a  laugh,  cracked  and  feverish.  “Do  you  think  it 
would  be  hard  to  know  something  inevitable?  Christ!”  It 
was  a  trembling  cry,  shaken  with  too  many  feelings.  “If  a 
thing  is  inevitable,  then  only  stupidity  can  keep  you  from 
knowing  it.  And  to  know  that  something  is  inevitable  is— 
is  peace,  It  must  happen;  you  are  a  cog  in  the  machinery; 
that  is  easy  to  understand—easy  to  know.”  He  used  the 
word  know  as  she  did,  with  a  special  emphasis,  It  meant 
not  only  know  but  accept.  “But  to  know  that  something  is 
not  inevitable  and  yet  will  happen—you  could  alter  it  but 
you  won't  alter  it;  to  know  that—that  ...”  His  frantic 
his  face  collected,  calmed;  he 
hands  sank  to 
stood  straight.  “That  is  an  accomplishment,”  he  said  with 
simple  dignity. 

sides; 

his 

Her  son  was  dead.  ...  She  lay  with  open  eyes.  Strange, 
what  a  difference  a  perspective  could  make.  Here  was  the 
simple  fact.  now,  that  for  the  first  time  she  saw  something 
good  in  her  son’s  death—he  would  not  have  to  die  again

The  Oracle 

209 

—and  that  simple  fact  made  the  whole  world  liveable.  Or, 
at  least,  unveiled,  like  a  rising  curtain,  the  possibility  that 
it  might  be  liveable. 

She  took  a  proud,  shuddering  breath,  and  announced 
let 

clearly,  “My  son  is  dead.”  And  closed  her  eyes,  to 
the  tears  come  unopposed.  My  son  is  dead. 

So  there  it  was,  the  first  possibility  of  a  path,  the  first 
clearing  in  the  tangle.  With  a  small,  flat  smile  she  felt  the 
overgrowth  of  coiling  horns  swell  from  her  brow;  not  her 
hands  but  her  mind  slit  and  spread  a  narrow  opening  in 
the  cramped  mass.  She  shook  her  head—a  heavy,  pain- 
ful  toss—sitting  upright  now  on  the  raised  pallet.  She  could 
not  yet  shake  back  that  hideous  mane,  but  she  could 
hold  her  head  straight  up  despite  it.  The  soles  of  her  feet 
curled  and  tingled;  below,  the  dragon  was  stirring.  God  is 
not  mocked,  she  thought.  No,  nor  dragons. 

Nguyen  had  known  typhoons.  Islands  like  Pagbo  were  new 
to  him;  but  it  did  not  require  personal  experience  to  vis- 
ualize  what  a  typhoon  would  do  to  this  island.  His  opinion 
of  the  Moro  seamen  changed  abruptly.  The  very  fact 
that  a  house  had  been  built  here  showed  that  they  either 
did  not  expect  typhoons  or  did  not  respect  them.  In  either 
case  they  were  wrong,  dead  wrong.  And  why  should  he  let 
himself  be  governed  by  people  who  made  such  mistakes? 
No,  he  would  leave  this  island  while  there  was  time;  and 
since  he  could  not  sail  a  kumpit  alone,  some  at  least  of 
and 
the 
approached  a  group  of  his  shipmates  around  their  leader 
—“captain”  would  be  perhaps  too  strong  a  word-—adding 
his  walk.  It  was  necessary  that  they 
a  little  swaeger  to 
should  know  he  was  not  a  coward, 

must  go 

He  rose 

lithely, 

others 

him. 

with 

CHAPTER  8 

It  was  dark  night;  the  sky  solid  with  the  canopy  of  the 
alert.  The  oracle 
coming  storm. 
opened  sleepy  eyes,  and  she  relaxed  a  little,  sharing  vigil 
she  asked. 
with  him,  however  reluctant.  “Who  is 
“Who’s  coming?” 

upright, 

startled 

She 

it?” 

“Do  you  want  to  know?”  he  asked  cynically.

210 

EDGES 

“Yes.”  She  trembled  too  rhuch, 
rouse  to  her  trembling.  But  she  said  yes. 

she 

felt. 

the  dragon 

“Don’t  worry,  it’s  just  a  little  revolution.”  Her  son  had 
said  that  to 
her,  putting  his  arm  around  her  playfully, 
when  they  heard  the  first  shouts  in  Djakarta.  For  a  mo- 
ment  she  thought  it  was  her  son’s  voice  again.  Then  she 
sprang  up;  her  bare feet. felt,  through  the  slatted  floor, 
touches  of  scaled  skin  as  she  ran.  “Take  care  of  Marie- 
Ange!”  the  oracle  called  after  her. 

That  was  her  whole  intention.  For  a  horrible  time,  sec- 
onds  long,  she  skittered,  lost  and  confused,  half  a  dozen, 
false  starts  in  false  directions.  Then  the  dark  focused;  she 
knew  where  the  child  and  the  old  nurse  slept,  and  knelt 
beside  them,  squeezing  the  nurse’s  arm.  “Wake  up!  Léve- 
toi!” 

The  old  woman  was  attuned  to  sudden  alarms;  her  re- 
actions  were  simply  practical.  She  thrust  her  old  feet  into 
their  slippers  and  reached  for  the  child.  They  had  hardly 
gotten  farther  than  that  when  the  alarm  was  raised.  Other 
steps  were  running  in  the  house,  dogs  barking  outside.  She 
shook  the  nurse’s  arm.  “We  must  wake  the  others.”  Her 
eyes  seemed  at  once  to  darken  and  to  grow  luminous, 
“Yes,  the  others—Mr.  Montoya’s  guests.”  But  someone 
was  already  running  to  do 
it.  She  stood  hesitant,  like  a 
bird  poised  on  a  branch.  holding  Marie-Ange’s  hand. 

Someone  had  brought  the  alarm  from  farther  down  the 
coast.  No  one  could  know  yet  how  extensive  the  uprising 
was.  It  was  not  even  clear  whethcr  Puerto  Princesa  had 
been  taken.  Only  one  thing  was  certain:  the  rebel  leaders 
were  explicitly  threatening  to 
or  expel  all  Christians 
and  other  foreigners,  and  calling  on  all  the  native  popula- 
tion  to  join  in  that  great  purgation. 

kill 

She  turned  to  the  old  woman.  “Take  Marie-Ange  and 
get  dressed.  Hurry!”  Through  another  door  Josepha  San- 
doval  appeared,  sleepy  and  uncertain.  The  Senator  fol- 
their  expensive  dressing  gowns,  they 
lowed.  Wrapped  in 
milling  servants,  vulncrable  in 
looked  alien  among  the 
their  ignorance.  “You  are  in  danger  here,”  she  told  them 
sternly.  “You  must  put  on  your  clothes  at  once.” 
“What  about  yours?”  Josepha  retorted  pertly. 
She  stared,  astounded  that  this  unknown  person  should 
waste  time  in  flippant  argument.  “We  must  all  be  dressed 
in  five  minutes,”  she  said,  and  started  away.

The  Oracle 

211 

“Do  we  know  each  other?”  Josepha  asked  suddenly.  “I'm 

Philippe’s  fiancée.” 

, 

Before  she  answered,  she  gazed  for  a  piercing  moment, 

“Yes.” 

Josepha  turned.  “I  want  you  to  meet  my  father,  Senator 
is  Madame 
said  decisively.  “Papa,  this 

Sandoval,”  she 
Delisle.” 

Her  fingers  fumbled  at  her  clothes,  her  shoes.  “Five  min- 
utes,”  the  oracle  said  sardonically.  “Five  minutes  is  too 
Jong.” 

“I'm  ready!”  She  found  Marie-Ange,  fled  back  to  the 
long  front  room  where  the  household  was  gathering.  Com- 
ing  from  the  other  door,  dressed  already,  quick  with  ex- 
and  touched  the 
citement,  Josepha  Sandoval  met  her, 
thing  come 
child’s  head.  “And  where  did 
from?” 

pretty 

this 

. 

“This  is  your  fiancé’s  daughter,”  she  said  firmly. 

safe, 

The  Senator  was  decisive.  There  was  a  post  of  the  Philip- 
pine  Constabulary  at  Puerto  Princesa,  If  they  hurried, 
they  could  reach  it  before  either  the  rebels  or  the  typhoon 
and  the  PC 
struck  them.  There,  they  would  be 
would  arrange  their  transportation  back  to  Manila.  He 
would  not  trust  his  daughter  (or  his  money,  though  he 
did  not  mention  that)  to  the  protection  of  the  local  po- 
lice;  these  southern  provinces,  in  his  private  opinion,  were 
not  far  removed  from  barbarism.  But  the  PC  was  a  na- 
tional  body,  with  a  proper  respect  for  national  legislators. 
She  listened  with  growing  dismay.  There  was  so  little 
time;  and  now,  with  these  people,  without  Montoya,  she 
stood  so  alone.  She  pushed  herself  forward.  “No.”  The 
Senator  did  not  recognize  her  objection  in  the  general 
low  bubbub.  “Senator  Sandoval!”  She  gripped  his  arm 
rudely,  which  captured  his  attention.  “Philippe  left  very 
precise  instructions  for  a  case  like  this.” 

“What  instructions?” 
“We  are 

to 
get  safely  to  one  of  the  praos.” 

go 

with  Mako.  He  will 

see 

that 

we 

“One  of  the  praos?” 
“Yes.  We  will  be  perfectly  safe  at  sea.” 
“Safe  at  sea  in  a  storm?  In  one  of  those  primitive  ca- 

noes?”

212 

EDGES 

“Yes,”  she  insisted.  “Safe  at  sea.  Or  on  one  of  the  is- 

lands.” 

“The  offshore  islands?  I  have  no  intention  of  subjecting 
my  daughter  to  being  trapped  in  that  pirate  nest.  Who  is 
this  Mako?” 

“There  he  is.”  She  pointed  out  the  one-armed  man  who 
stood,  slender  and  tranquil,  in  the  doorway—the  patient, 
fluid  calm  of  a  rippled  knife  blade. 

The  Senator  snorted.  “Yes,  a  Moro!  No,  thank  you! 
We  are  starting  at  once  for  the  post  at  Puerto  Princesa.” 
He  felt  the  thick  layer  of  bills  in  his  belt  as  a  pregnant 
woman  might  feel  the  child  in  her  womb—precious,  vul- 
nerable,  and  dangerous. 

sea 

She 

whirled, 

a  year, 

clapping 

take  to 

So,  for  the  first  time  in 

since  Montoya  had 
asked  her  his 
last  question  on  the  prao,  she  had  deci- 
sions  to  make.  More  than  that,  a  responsibility  and  a  field 
for  judgment.  Take  care  of  Marie-Ange—that  was  first; 
but  also,  she  judged,  he  would  want  the  Sandovals  to.  be 
taken  care  of.  Yet  nothing  was  simple.  Was  this  really  the 
emergency  for  which  he  had  provided  the  one-armed  gar- 
dener—or  was  it  indeed  foolish  to 
in  the 
typhoon’s  teeth?  Her  mind  dodged  away  into  the  dark. 
The  oracle’s  face  met  her  reprovingly. 
hands. 

stood 
her 
ready  with  Marie-Ange.  She  steered  them  to  the  door  and 
out.  Mako  moved  like  a 
flat  spring.  She  held  him.  “Tell 
Montoya  I  have  gone  with  these  people...  ”  she  pointed 
at  the  Sandovals  ...  “to  the  PC  at  Puerto  Princesa.”  For 
a  moment  she  had  to  stiffen  her  legs;  otherwise  she  would 
have  fallen  on  her  knees  to  clutch  the  child  against  her 
body.  There  was  no  time.  ...  She  pushed  past  the  crowd- 
ing  servants,  calling  for  the  car,  for  a  driver  who  knew 
the  road  to  Puerto  Princesa.  Three  or  four  volunteers 
urged  their  qualifications.  She  chose  a  middle-aged  man 
with  a  wizened  face.  The  younger  ones  had  more  flair; 
he  had  a  different  sort  of  assurance.  She  steered  Josepha 
and  the  Senator,  startled,  to  the  car.  They  wanted  their 
luggage.  “Get  in!”  she  shouted. 

The  nurse 

It  was  still  two  hours,  perhaps,  before  dawn.  The  wind 
blew  in  long  gusts,  almost  lifting  the  little  car  from  the 
road  when  they  caught  it 
at  the  wrong  angle.  Sometimes 
the  gusts  carried  rain.  Riding  in  the  runaway  dark,  with 
the  jerk  and  plunge  of  the  pell-mell  road,  she  sank  back

The  Oracle 

213 

against  the  seat,  silently  into  the  roar  of  motion.  “I  could 
have  hugged  her  then,”  she  thought  contentedly. 

They  got  no  farther  than  the  first  checkpoint.  The  oracle 
found  it  extremely  funny.  She  had  asked  him,  “What  is  the 
best  way  for  us  to  get  through?”  and  he  had  answered, 
“How  should  I  know?  I  only  know  which  way  you  will 
go.”  But  she  had  grown  cleverer  at  extracting  information 
tron  him.  “If  we  follow  this  road,  will  we  get  through?” 

ae 

oO.” 

road, 

That  meant  that  they  would  follow  this 

and 
would  not  get  through.  For  the  oracle  did  not  lie,  and  the 
oracle  only  knew  what  would  actually  happen;  if  they 
were  going  to  follow  a  different  road,  he  would  not  know 
the  fate  that  awaited  them  on  this  one.  But  this  time  she 
did  not  accept  what  she  had  been  told.  She  did  not  want 
that  future;  she  would  find  a  way  to  prevent  it. 
“Stop!”  She  turned  to  the  driver,  laying  her  hand  on 
his  shoulder,  The  car  jerked  and  stopped,  tossing  them 
all  forward.  “Is  there  another  road?” 
The  driver’s  nutlike  face  gleamed  in  a  lightning  flicker. 

“Yes,  ma’am.  When  we  get  to  Rizal.” 

“How  far  is  that?” 
“Beyond  the  checkpoint.” 
“Then  we  must  leave  the  road  now.” 
He  tapped  the  window,  where  now  the  plunging  rain 
beat  ceaselessly.  “No,  ma’am.” 
Her  forehead  itched  strangely.  He  was  right,  of  course. 
this. 
It  would  be  impossible  to  drive  across  country  in 
Perhaps  one  of  the  younger  men  would  have  tried  it,  and 
stranded  them  axle-deep  in  muck,  or  wedged  among 
rocks  and  trees.  “We  can  walk,”  she  said. 
But  Senator  Sandoval  had  had  enough.  He  thumped 
the  driver’s  shoulder.  “Drive  on!” 
Inside  herself  she  dodged  and  twisted,  trapped.  She 
fingered  her  head  dizzily,  shouting  her  arguments  as  they 
rain.  “They'll  take  the  checkpoints 
drove  through  the 
first  of  all!  We’ve  got  to  stay  away  from  the  checkpoints!” 
But  to  the  Senator,  checkpoints  meant  hope,  security, 
contact  with  legally  constituted  authority.  He  did  not  no- 
tice  when  the  driver  took  a  pistol  out  of  his  jacket  front 
and  laid  it  on  the  seat  beside  him.  But  she  noticed,  and 
drew  away  from  it  as  if  it  were  an  obscene  thing. 
rain,  they  hardly  saw  the  checkpoint  before

the 

In 

214 

EDGES 

display  his 

they  reached  it.  For  the  first  moment,  everything  looked 
normal.  Even  the 
flashlight  in  their  faces  was  reasonable 
during  an  insurrection.  The  Senator  was  pulling  out  his 
wallet,  reaching  it  across  Josepha  toward  the  driver’s  win- 
dow  to 
identification. 
she 
snatched  it;  over  his  surprised  protest,  she  broke  into  a 
torrent  ef  loud  French.  The  flashlight  had  already  been 
turned  off;  with  a  force  that,  it  seemed,  could  lift  impossi- 
bility,  she  yearned  to  know  that  the  Senator’s  gesture  had 
not  been  seen.  The  sentry’s  face  was  lowered  to  the  win- 
dow,  the  sentry’s  hand  was  on  the  door  handle;  but:  the 
door  was  locked.  “Get  out!”  he  ordered, 

that  instant 

At 

In  the  little 

car,  drowned  in  the  rain—at  this  rural 
checkpoint,  there  was  not  even  a  roof  to  shelter  the  cars 
that  stopped—the  pistol  report  was  ear-splitting.  They 
were  all  deafened,  a  spotty  deafness  that  blotted  out  seg- 
ments  of  reality.  For  a  moment  it  seemed  as  if  they  were 
blinded  in  the  same  way;  the  sentry  had  simply  disap- 
peared  from  the  window.  The  motor  roared,  suddenly 
gunned;  but  before  they  were  aware  of  movement,  a  sec- 
ond  explosion  burst,  Jess  loud.  The  car  lurched  once  and 
died.  The  driver  thumped  against  her,  an  instantaneous 
sideways  shove  that  ended  in  limpness.  She  had  thrust 
the  Senator’s  wallet  between  her  legs;  she  twisted,  reach- 
ing  into  the  back  seat  to  grab  a  handful  of  his  clothing 
and  Josepha’s.  “Shut  up!  You  are  French!  Don’t  speak!” 
she  hissed  cuttingly.  “Give  me  your  purse!”  That  to  Jose- 
pha,  who  clutched  her  little  purse  reflexly.  She  lunged 
violently,  tearing  it  from  Josepha’s  hand.  The  driver’s 
body  slumped  and _ 
For 
a  small  man,  it  was  strange  how  much  space  he  took  up. 
She  hurled  herself  awkwardly  back  around  at  the  door 
on  her  side,  shaking  him  off,  and  scrambled  out  into  the 
rain,  with  the  same  impetus  flinging  purse  and  wallet 
down  the  embankment  into 
and 
whirled  dizzily  to  address  herself  over  the  car  hood  to  the 
weakly  gleaming  lights  of  the  checkpoint  box.  “We  are 
French  citizens!”  she 
the  meaning  of 
this?” 

cried.  “What  is 

leaning  heavily 

the  streaming 

dark; 

slid, 

her. 

on 

A  shouted  command  answered,  incomprehensible,  It 
would  be  either  Come  here  or  Stay  there,  she  thought. 
But  in  fact  she  was  not  afraid  of  bullets.  At  the  moment, 
it  seemed  tremendously  absurd  that  people  should  let

The  Oracle 

215 

themselves  be  commanded  at  gunpoint.  A  gun  butt  was 
much  more  intimidating. 

They  had  gotten  the  door  on  the  driver’s  side  open, 
and  hustled  the  Sandovals  into  the  rain.  She  decided  on 
Come  here  as  more  probable,  and  came  around  the  front 
of  the  car.  Someone  pulled  the  driver’s  body  out,  into  the 
light,  where  someone  else  was  already  stripping  the  dead 
sentry.  They  had  only  one  uniform,  and  now  it  was  dam- 
aged. 
you 
had  each  had  a  gun,  you  might  have  fought  your  way 
through  this.  They  have  no  vehicle.”  She  was  looking 
down  at  the  driver’s  body.  “He  had  a  gun,”  she  said. 

“You  forgot 

guns,” 

oracle 

said. 

the 

“If 

a 

in 

she 

her 

and 

them 

reach, 

carried 

she  faked  a 

and  murmurs  into 

“We  are  French  citizens,”  she  kept  repeating.  “I  am  a 
resident  of  Manila.  These  people  are  my  guests.  We  are 
only  visiting  Palawan.”  They  stood  sodden  in  the 
rain. 
The  Sandovals  had  resigned  themselves  provisionally  to 
silence.  At  last  someone  listened  to  her,  motioned  them 
into 
the  box,  asked  for  identification.  She  showed  her 
papers.  She  had  no  purse—she  never  went  out—-but  Mon- 
toya  had  impressed  on  her  that  these  should  always  be 
within 
little 
flat  pocketbook  that  included  a  small  sketch  pad  and  a 
pencil  stuck  through  a  loop.  While  they  studied  the  pa- 
pers, 
little  confusion  with  the  Sandovals, 
talking  quick  French  with  gestures,  magnifying  their  hesi- 
tations 
“discovering” 
that  they  had  left  their  identification  behind.  This  was 
the  story  they  clung  to,  for  what  seemed  like  a  very  long 
time  in  the  windy  night.  She  introduced  them  as  Jean 
Dubois  of  Paris  and  his  daughter  Josephine  (grasping  for 
names  that  they  could  all  remember),  and—now  that  their 
lives  were  committed  to  it—they  played  their  parts  well 
enough.  Their  captors  were  themselves  not  very  fluent  in 
English, 
largely 
assumed 
wasted;  by  the  same  token,  their  transparent  phoniness 
went  unnoticed.  All  three  of  them  reiterated  passionately 
their  simple  story,  until  it  became  an  article  of  faith  with 
them  and  they  were  heartily  amazed  that  anyone  could 
doubt  it.  The  man  who  held 
gazing 
around  their  little  misshapen  circle,  Renée  Delisle  to  Jo- 
sephine  Dubois  to  Jean  Dubois  to  the  papers  in  his  hand, 
his  broad  Malay  face 
gentle  and  distant.  Perhaps  the 
phrase  “French  citizen”  did  not  mean  much  to  him. 

her  papers  kept 

conversation, 

accents 

their 

were 

that 

so 

Nevertheless  it  was,  so  far  as  she  could  see,  their  only

216 

'  EDGES 

a 

it 

so 

no 

car 

that 

little, 

longer 

blocked 

that  they  be  taken  to 

defense.  She  tried  another  tack  on  the  same  course,  in- 
the  French  consulate  at 
sisting 
Puerto  Princesa.  She  did  not  know  if  there  would  be  a 
French  consulate  at  Puerto  Princesa,  but  she  thought  it 
best  to  have  a  destination  of  her  own  choosing.  The  man 
with  her  papers  seemed  to  consider.  They  had  moved 
the 
the 
road.  There  had  been  no  other  traffic.  At  intervals,  the 
rain  stopped  or  slackened  suddenly.  The  body  of 
the 
sentry  had  been  brought  into  the  little  police  box  with 
them.  There  was  no  room  for  it  to  be  disposed  at  ease; 
instead,  it  was  crowded  half  upright  behind  the  leader’s 
chair,  so  that  the  dead  sentry  seemed  to  be  sitting  against 
the  wall  in 
his  ragged  underwear,  with  his  blown-open 
bead  hung  down.  At  last  the  leader  turned  abstractedly, 
speaking  in 
a  soft  voice.  None  of  the  three  understood 
the  local  language,  but  they  all  had  the  impression  that 
their  story  was  being  accepted,  and  that  they  were  to  be 
either  released  at  once  or  delivered  to  French  authorities. 
But  there  was  a  last  requirement  to  be  met,  a  final  search 
to  confirm  the  negative  results  of  the  first  hasty  frisking 
in  the  rain.  These  people  seemed  very  gentle  revolution- 
aries;  they  did  not  want  to  handle  the  women  rudely— 
who,  in  any  case,  it  appeared  obvious,  could  not  have 
anything  very  bulky  concealed  about  them.  The  scrutiny 
fell  on  the  car  and  the  Senator. 

an 

almost 

childlike) 

his  money  belt. 

Something  like 

electric  shock  went  through  the 
Senator’s  consciousness  when  the  searching  fingers  (slen- 
der, 
The 
touched 
women  had  not  known  about  this  cash,  and  they  were 
too  evidently  surprised  when  it  was  pulled  out  and  dis- 
played.  But  the  Senator  had  not  traveled  so 
life 
without  becoming  accustomed  to  shocks;  he  righted  him- 
self  instantly.  Since  the  money  could  no  longer  be  saved, 
his  immediate  hope  was  to  make  use  of 
it.  Rebels,  he 
supposed,  were  as  subject  as  anyone  else  to  human  needs 
and  aspirations,  and  therefore  bribeable.  If  he  gave  them 
the  money,  they  would  not  need  to  murder  him.  Staying 
as  well  as 
he  could  within  his  rich-French-tourist  role, 
he  made  his  offer.  The  rebels  seemed  not  to  understand. 
They  were,  however,  clearly  impressed  by 
the  money. 
leader  scrupulously  copied 
After  some  discussion, 
information  from  her  papers  onto  a  page  torn  from  her

far  in 

the 

The  Oracle 

217 

sketch  pad,  returned  the  papers  to 
give  instructions  to  someone  else. 

her,  and  turned  to 

She  took  the  papers 

absently,  holding  herself 

very 
tall,  looking  steadily  at  the  Senator.  She  had  understood 
the  purpose  of  the  money;  but  though  she  had  learned 
so  painfully  to  accept  so  much  of  outrage,  she  could  not, 
for  the  moment,  accept  this.  That  these  intruders  had 
driven  her  from  the  house  of  birds  was  bad  enough;  that 
they  had  pursued  her  to  this  island,  armed  with  money 
for  the  express  purpose  of  taking  away  her  last  refuge, 
was  intolerable.  She  stared  at  the  Senator  with  haughty 
contempt.  What  right  had  he,  he  and  his  ignorant  daugh- 
ter, 
to  interfere  in  her  life  and  death—hers  and  Mon- 
toya’s? 

Hands  bumped  at  her  elbow,  her  back,  turning  her, 
steering  her.  They  were  not  unlike  the  hands  that  had 
tended  her  in  Montoya’s  houses—officious,  diffident,  kind 
—except  that  these  were  clumsy,  rough  with  inexperi- 
ence,  The  sensation  was  so  familiar,  and  her  mind  was 
so  much  on  the  Senator’s  treachery,  that  she  did  not  real- 
ize  at  first  what  was  happening.  They  were  being  herded 
out  into  the  rain,  across  the  road,  down  the  embankment 
on  the  other  side,  up  a  long  slope  into  the  forest, 

In  fact,  the  money  presented  a  problem.  The  leader  of 
the  group  at  the  checkpoint  had  really  been  on  the  verge 
of  releasing  them  as  harmless  tourists.  But  this  impressive 
cache  of  good  Philippine  pesos  not  only  cast  some  shadow 
on  their  story;  it  was,  above  all,  tempting.  A  home-grown 
revolution  could  not  afford  to  throw  away  such  a  wind- 
fall.  On  the  other  hand,  this  Frenchman,  if 
a 
Frenchman,  might  be  too  important  to  tamper  with.  These 
with  their  money  and  their  documents,  would 
people, 
have  to  be  passed  on  to 
a  higher  authority  for  decision. 
And  the  higher  authority  was  in  the  hills. 

he  was 

the 

this 

Senator 

indignity 

accepted 
All 
and  hardship 
his 
with  a  stoicism  that  would  have  surprised  many  of 
colleagues.  He  was  a  reasonable  man;  he  would  save 
his  indignation  for  a  time  when  it  might  do  some  good. 
survival, 
For  the  present,  he  was  fully  occupied  with 
with  minimizing  discomfort  and  maximizing  the 
possi- 
bility  of  coming  through  without  serious  damage  to  him- 
self  or  his  daughter.  But  his  indignation  was  very  great;

218 

EDGES 
sooner  or  later  it  would  find  expression.  These  insurgents 
were  not  merely  animals  who  threatened  his  physical 
safety;  they  were  spoilers,  destroyers;  their  existence  was 
a  throat  to  the  integrity  of  life  as  he  knew  it.  It  was  not 
simple  courage  that  sustained  him  (though  in  his  pudgy 
body  he  had  his  share  of  that)  so  much  as 
a  sense  of 
moral  outrage. 

CHAPTER  9 

The  typhoon  had  stabilized.  It  was  one  of  those-elephan- 
tine  storms  that  could  hang  almost  motionless  for  days, 
bearing  its  whole  crushing  weight  upon a  single  island. 
The  heart  of  the  storm,  as  it  happened,  was  still  east  of 
them,  over  the  sea,  drawing  a  little  more  strength  from 
the  water,  hesitating  ponderously  there  until  some  tilt 
of  balancing  forces  should  set 
it  underway  again  west- 
ward,  or  northward,  or  even  curving  to  the  south,  For 
the  present,  the  hills 
of  Palawan  would  feel  nothing  of 
its  real  power,  only  the  rain,  the  inexhaustible  rain. 

Even  the 

rain  was 

steady.  The  grey  sky  was 
streaked  with  slots  of  blue.  She  lifted  her  head  to  see  it 
through  the  branches,  whenever  the 
rain  eased.  They 
plodded  on  through  the  sodden  woods.  Their  little  column 
had  lengthened.  Early  in  the  morning  they  had  met  two 
men  armed  with  bolos.  She  had  braced  herself  for  sudden 
movement—this  would  be 
and 
there  might  be  fighting—but  the  oracle  had  stopped  her 
with  a  laugh:  “They  are  rebels  too.”  Their  guard  had 
talked  to  them  briefly,  explaining,  and  then  all  had  fallen 
into  line  together. 

the  chance  to 

escape, 

not 

The  Senator  was  distressed.  With  the  guard  from  the 
checkpoint  he  had  felt  almost  secure.  If  it  was  necessary 
to  fall  into  the  hands  of  rebels,  then  it  was  good  that  they 
should  be  scrupulous  rebels.  They  had  not  killed  him, 
they  had  not  even  taken  away  his  money.  And  there  was 
always  the  hope  that  the  three  of  them  could  overpower 
or  escape  from  a  single  guard.  But  these  new  two  had 
an  unreliable  look  about  them.  Furthermore,  they  were 
for  they  spoke 
outlanders  here  almost  as  much  as 
Tagalog,  the  language  of  Manila  and  the  north,  He  had

he, 

The  Oracle 

. 

219 

heard  most  of  their  conversation  with  the  guard, 
and 
there  had  been  no  mention  of  money  in  what  he  heard; 
that  meant,  he  believed,  that  the  guard  did  not  trust  them 
either.  Also  the  looks  he  thought  he  saw  them  cast  now 
and  then  at  Josepha  sent 
of  horror  through  him, 
jets 
like  injections  of  ice  water  in  his  limbs  and  belly,  so  that 
at  times  it  was  difficult  to  walk. 

Philippe  Montoya  felt  no  moral  outrage.  His  principles 
were  simple,  and  in  no  sense  moral,  What  he  had  was 
his;  what  was  his  he  intended  to  keep,  or  dispose  of  at  a 
profit.  The  rebels  were  his  enemies  not  because  they  were 
wrong,  but  because  they  threatened  to  take  his  property 
and  interfere  with  his 
that 
they  were  under  some  universal  obligation  to  respect  his 
system  of  livelihood.  The  world  as  he  knew  it  was  too 
unstable  to  have  given  him  any  such  conviction. 

business.  He’ did  not 

feel 

He  had  already  started  back  from  Taytay  when  the 
the  insurrection  broke.  His  first  concern,  and 
news  of 
for  some  time  the  only  one  he  recognized,  was  for  his 
property.  He  did  not  believe  the  Philippines  were  ready 
for  a  serious  revolution,  or  even,  in  these  parts,  a  serious 
con- 
guerrilla  war—he  had  seen  revolutions,  and  felt 
fident  of  recognizing  the  signs—but  it  was  certain  that 
there  would  be  damage  done.  His  family  was  not  much 
on  his  mind.  As  terrorists,  these  Filipinos  were  the  merest 
babies;  he  could  not  help  feeling  a  good-natured  con- 
tempt.  Mako  would  take  care  of  Marie-Ange  and  Renée; 
he  thought 
and  if  the  Sandovals  were  in  danger,  that, 
savagely,  was  their  problem.  Let  the  Senator  see  what 
sort  of  retirement  haven  he  had  tried  to  buy. 

at  Puerto  Princesa  had 

It  was,  though,  he  admitted,  as  he  followed  the  news 
a  Philippine  uprising. 
by  radio,  unusually  extensive  for 
and 
been  seized, 
The  airport 
checkpoints  throughout  the  island  were  being  taken  over 
by  the  rebels.  Government  forces  were  reacting,  but  their 
first  priority  was  the  airport;  it  would  take  them  at  least 
a  few  days  after  that  to  restore  road  traffic.  Meanwhile 
and 
houses  were  being  robbed  and  burned;  capitalists 
mutilated. 
being 
landlords 
Montoya’s  lips  hardened  into  a  private  smile. 

kidnapped, 

In  fact,  he  found  the  situation  stimulating.  More  than 
once  he  had  been  faced  with  the  prospect  of  rebuilding 
his  life  from  nothing;  it  never  failed  to  give  him  a  sense

killed, 

were 

220 

EDGES 

of  relief  and  excitement,  such  as 
a  dragonfly  might  feel 
when  it  cracked  its  pupal  skin  and  crawled  out  of  water 
into  air.  This  was  a  lesser  thing;  but  the  possibility  was 
in  the  atmosphere,  and  his  skin  tingled  with  it. 

sat 

The  rain  had  grown  heavy  again.  Their  captors,  after  a 
little  discussion,  had  cut  branches  and  made a  leafy  lean- 
to  under  which  they  all 
or  squatted,  their  hips  and 
shoulders  touching.  The  Senator  had  contrived  to  maneu- 
ver  Josepha  between  himself  and  Madame  Delisle.  The 
shelter  was  far  from  waterproof,  but  it  made  the  differ- 
ence  between  downpour  and  dribble.  They  faced  the  open 
a  curtain  of  rain  whose 
side,  looking  point-blank  into 
fringes 
delicate 
swift, 
sprays.  They  did  not  speak  at  all. 

laced  their 

faces 

with 

legs 

and 

The  typhoon  was  impersonal,  as 

an  elephant  is  im- 
personal  to  an  ant.  It  rose  from  its  own  causes,  pursued 
its  own  path,  and  ceased  in  its  own  time.  There  was  no 
choice;  what  stood  before  it,  bowed.  It 
is  like  God,  she 
thought. 

“What  God?”  the  oracle  asked  derisively.  “What  is 

a 

God?” 

She  wet  her  lips.  She  knew  an  answer;  its  dry  ammo- 
stirred  from  its  unquiet 

(outriding  tendrils 

niac  stench 
lair)  burned  her  shut  eyes. 

CHAPTER  10 

When  Montoya  disembarked  in  the  little  cove  that  was  his 
private  harbor,  it  was  earliest  morning,  and  the  rain  had 
paused.  For  hours  he  had  been  pushing  his  boat  straight 
down  the  throat  of  a  southwest  wind,  and  the  land  felt 
disconcertingly  stable  and  quict  under  his  feet,  so  that  he 
laughed  as  he  took  his  first  step  on  it.  His  next  step  was 
backward,  as  automatic  as  an  animal’s  sudden  bristling, 
for  a  figure  rose  from  the  edge  of  the  woods  not  two  yards 
in  front  of  him,  silent,  gleaming  wet.  But  it  was  Mako. 
The  trees  under  which  he  had  sat  most  of  the  night  had 
broken  the  pounding  force  of  the  rain,  and  he  had  not 
he  was
thought  it  necessary  to 

shelter  himself  better, 

The  Oracle 

221 
soaked  to  the  skin,  but  he  carried  his  drenched  garments 
with  comfortable  grace. 

“What  happened  here?”  Montoya  demanded. 
Mako  made  an  interesting  gesture,  tilting  his  head  side- 
ways  toward  his  shoulder  and  his  shoulder  up  to  meet  it, 
a  movement  like  a  large,  impersonal  wink.  “They  came.  I 
took  the  little  girl  and  the  old  woman  to  Pagbo.” 

This,  as  far  as  it  went,  was  as  it  should  be.  But  it  did 
not  go  far  enough;  Mako  should  have  taken  Renée  as  well 
to  Pagbo,  and  delivered  all  three  on  board  the  kumpit  that 
would  be  waiting  there.  “What  about  Madame  Delisle?”  If 
he  had  not  been  startled  by  Mako’s  failure  to  mention  her, 
he  might  have  asked  whether  the  contact  with  Nguyen’s 
kumpit  had  gone  according  to  plan. 

Mako  pointed.  “Puerto  Princesa.  PC.  Ramon  took  them 

in  the  car.” 

“Puerto  Princesa!  Why?”  At  last  report,  Puerto  Princesa 
~—except,  precisely,  for  the  Philippine  Constabulary  post 
—was  in  the  hands  of  the  rebels.  It  was  not  a  tremendous 
feat  militarily,  since  that  metropolis  of  Palawan  was  an 
otherwise  undefended  town  of  eight  or  nine  thousand  peo- 
ple,  but  it  meant  that  the  airport  was  unusable  and  the 
PC  at  least  temporarily  neutralized. 

Mako  made  a  negative  gesture  with  his  head.  “She  went 
‘Puerto  Princesa, 

others.  The  fat  man  says, 

with  the 
Puerto  Princesa.’  ” 

Montoya  felt  a  pang  of  alarm.  What  had  possessed  her 
the 

~his  haughty,  pretty  lady—to  involve  herself 
Sandovals’  foolishness?  “When?” 

in 

“Yesterday  morning.  Three  hours  before  first  light.” 
Montoya  was  already  turning  back  toward  his  vessel;  the 
one-armed  man  sprang  forward  almost  soundlessly,  to 
stay  within  his  vision.  “She  told  me  to 
I 
didn’t  see  them  go.” 

tell  you  that. 

And  with  the  unpredictability  of  his  Renée,  there  was 
no  knowing  what  had  happened.  He  felt  that  she  was  ca- 
pable  of  much.  Half  a  minute  more  of  conversation  told 
him  that  Mako  had  not  returned  to  the  house,  and  in  fact 
had  no  knowledge  of  the  rebels’  movements.  He  had  ful- 
filled  the  single  commission  for  which  he  had  been  hired 
—at  least,  he  had  fulfilled  it  as  well  as  he  could  in  the 
circumstances—and  had  then  sat  down  and  waited  to  re- 
ort. 
It  was  imperative,  then,  for  Montoya  to  go  back  to  the

P 

222 

EDGES 

house,  to  find  out  for  himself  how  things  stood.  He  gave 
instructions.  His  crew  would  stay  with  the  boat,  making 
ready  to  cast  off  again  instantly.  Mako  was  dispatched  in 
his  own  prao—the  same  tiny  vessel  in  which  he  had  de- 
livered  his  charges  to  Pagbo—to  alert  certain  men  of  a 
settlement  a  few  miles  down  the  coast;  if  it  was  necessary 
to  sail  for  Puerto  Princesa,  a  larger  force  would  be  useful. 
Montoya  himself,  with  an  automatic  pistol  under  his  shirt, 
started  on  foot  for  the  house.  He  foresaw  no  need  of  as- 
sistance;  if  there  were  rebels  at  the  house,  he  would  ob- 
serve  and  withdraw. 

his 

was 

(that 

integrity 

questioned 

Montoya  had  survived  this  long  by  adhering  scrupulously 
to  the  tenct  that  his  own  skin  was  worth  more  than  any 
amount  of  money  or  extent  of  real  estate.  He  had  no 
patience  with  a  selfishness  so  short-sighted  as  to  be  self- 
destructive.  He  was  annoyed,  too,  that  the  Senator  had 
refused  to  trust  his  arrangements—not  so  much  insulted 
was  normal 
that 
enough)  as  vexed  that  the  Senator  was  too  stupid  to  see 
that  trusting  Montoya  had  been  his  best  hope.  It  was 
more  agreeable  to  him,  somehow,  to  think  of  the  Senator 
with  anger  than  to  think  just  now  of  Renée  Delisle. 
Under  the  trees,  the  floor  of  the  forest  was  clear  and  open 
for  long  stretches.  Darkness  changed  slowly,  becoming 
light.  She  lay  with  open  eyes,  on  her  side—sprawled  and 
little  height—facing 
limp,  as  if  she  had  been  let  fall  from a 
away  from  the  others.  Their  wrists  and  their  ankles—hers 
and  the  Sandovals’—were  bound  with  twisted  fiber.  Cap- 
tors,  captives,  all  slept.  Their  breathing  was  quiet,  irregu- 
lar  but  steady,  like  the  ceaseless  dripping  from  the  wet 
leaves.  Immobile,  almost  inanimate;  after  the  tumultuous 
night  they  lay,  all,  unwilling  to  wake,  not  so  much  resting 
as  dormant;  as  if,  having  achieved  immobility,  they  would 
maintain  it  indefinitely,  because  there  was  no  force  to  set 
them  moving.  It  hurt  to  lie  like  this,  awkwardly  disposed 
on  the  hard  ground,  one  shoulder  jammed  under  her  chin, 
and  all  her  flesh  numb  with  wet  chill;  but  it  would  hurt 
more  to  move. 
“He  is  coming,”  the  oracle’s  voice  said  in  her  ear.  “He 
is  on  his  way.” 
She  watched,  waiting.  Birds  stirred  in  the  leaves.  In  the 
sparse  underbrush  something  scurried.  The  light  was  infi-

The  Oracle 

223 

nitely  soft.  A  creature  emerged  with  stately  steps  into 
the  open  ground,  shaking  off  a  few  drops  of  shining  water. 
Its  long  toes  stretched  forward  at  every  step;  it  carried 
its  small  head  observantly,  crowned  with  a  delicate  spike 
of  shining  green  that  trembled  faintly  when.  it  moved. 
Directly  before  her  eyes  it  stood  still,  and  began  to  preen, 
drawing  its  beak  slowly  down  the  length  of  one  feather 
and  then  another.  Suddenly  it  thrust  its  near  wing  out  and 
down, 
feathers 
until 
the 
ground,  and  sank  its  beak  among  them. 

spreading 

skirted 

they 

the 

The  glade  was  very  quiet.  The  drops  fell.  The  sleepers 
his 
lay  breathing,  unmoving.  The  deep-green  gleam  of 
the  forest  floor.  He 
a  dark  light  on 
mantle  was  like 
stretched  and  closed  his  wings,  turned  and  stretched  to 
preen  his  back.  His  sheafed  peacock  tail  quivered;  flashes 
showed  in  the  mute  light.  Then  he  lifted  his  neat  head; 
lowered  it  once  to  scratch  his  chin,  and  walked  tranquilly 
on  and  out  of  her  sight.  She  closed  her  eyes  and  slept. 

the 

The  Janding  where  Montoya  had  set  foot  with  a  laugh 
was,  like  his  house,  on  the  north  side  of  the  little  river  that 
fed  into  the  cove.  But  between  the  landing  and  the  house, 
a  narrow  stream  cut  down  from  the  hills,  crossed  the  path, 
and  plunged  into  the  river.  The  footbridge  that  spanned 
it  had  been  a  pragmatic  structure  of  sapling  trunks  and 
withies—stronger  than  a  foreigner  would  have  expected, 
but  not  strong  enough  to  support  the  advance  guard  of  a 
typhoon.  Soaked  by 
rain  and  torn  by  the  swollen 
current,  whole  sections  of  the  stream  bank  had  given  way, 
sometimes  carrying  trees  and  rocks  with  them.  The  little 
bridge  was  gone.  The  very 
the  stream  was 
altered,  so  that  it  might  have  been  another  watercourse 
in  another  landscape,  newer  and  more  unsteady.  Here 
and  there  the  water  was  thrown  into  folds  by  large  stones, 
or  driven  foaming  above  the  lip  of  the  near  bank.  Else- 
where  the  stream  was  half-bridged  by 
or 
masses  of  brush.  Everywhere  the  bank  had  an  unstable 
look,  with  raw  earth  showing  between  down-beaten  stems. 
Montoya  ranged  quietly  along  it, 
in  search  of  a  bridging 
log  or  a  good  place  to  ford.  He  would  have  avoided  the 
bridge  if 
it  had  been  there—it  was  so  obvious  a  spot  to 
guard;  and  in  normal  seasons  it  was  easy  enough  to  ford 
this  stream.  But  now  the  logic  of  the  altered  terrain  fun- 
neled  him  back  toward  the  path  where  the  bridge  had

tree  trunks 

aspect 

of 

224 

EDGES 

been.  There  lay  the  only  means  of  crossing  without  a  full- 
scale  struggle  against  the  current  and  the  crumbling  banks: 
a  downed  tree,  half-submerged  and  insecurely  wedged 
slantwise  across  the  channel. 

He  would  have  crossed  elsewhere  without  hesitation  if 
his  life  were  at  stake,  or  if  there  were  no  other  way;  but 
the  situation  was  hardly  that  urgent;  and  it  would  have 
meant—aside  from  a  slight  risk  of  drowning—getting  his 
pistol  wet.  For  a  time  he  squatted  in  the  obscurity  of  the 
trees,  watching  the  other  bank.  Then  he  rose,  and  essayed 
the  fallen  tree. 

He  was  more  than  halfway  across,  his  feet  underwater 
and  feeling  for  purchase  on  the  smooth  bark,  his  hands 
grasping  branches  to  brace  himself  against  the  current  that 
ripped  at 
his  ankles,  his  eyes  testing  the  further  bank, 
where  the  tree’s  roots  were  lodged,  for  signs  of  giving  way 
again—more  than  halfway  across,  almost  within  leaping 
distance  of  that  treacherous  bank,  when  the  shot  spun  him 
off  his  footing  and  he  crashed  into  the  torrent.  But  the 
bullet  had  barely  notched  his  right  shoulder—which,  at 
such  close  range,  and  he  so  slowly  moving,  was  probably 
left  handhold. 
deliberate—and  he  had  not  even  lost  his 
His  feet  were  on  a  rock,  and  the  water  boiled  around  his 
waist.  But  the  upheaval  had  loosened  the  tree  again,  and 
he  felt  it  throbbing  and  trembling  in  the  current,  pushing 
against  his  hip  (for  he  had  fallen  downstream).  He  did 
a  wound  he  had  received, 
not  know  yet  how  much  of 
had 
whether  his 
stooped 
him 
some  sparse  cover—and  with  a  spasmodic  effort,  driving 
determination  into  all  his  right  hand’s  muscles,  he  pulled 
out  his  gun.  There  was  no  sign  from  the  bank  so  close  in 
front  of  him.  He  loosed  his  hold,  gingerly  felt  out  his 
wound,  and  was  gratified;  nothing  disabling.  But  two  or 
three  yards  away 
farther,  judging 
from  the  sound  of  the  shot  that  had  dropped  him)  some- 
one  was  watching  him  with  a  gun.  He  crouched  carefully 
lower  into  the  water,  and  began  to  work  his  way  backward 
along  the  tree.  The  stream  was  deep  enough  here,  but  it 
was  too  treacherous  to  try  to  swim—full  of  shallows  and 
obstructions  and  vicious  turns  of  current.  If  he  could  back 
up  to  where  the  tree  trunk  was  out  of  water,  he  ond 
and  without 
duck  under  it  without  wetting 
entangling  himself  in  branches  or  debris.  And  he  wanted

right  arm  would  be  useable; 

(it  could  hardly  be 

automatically—the 

he 
gave 

branches 

pistol 

tree’s 

but 

his 

The  Oracle 

225 

decidedly  to  be  on  the  upstream  side  of  the  tree-trunk. 
In  the  woods  in  front  of  him,  some  bird  suddenly  raised 
an  alarm  call,  harsh,  insistent,  reiterating.  Montoya  took 
a  breath,  ready  to  duck  his  head  on  split-second  notice. 
A  scatter  of  raindrops  sprinkled  the  water,  instantly  lost 
in  its  churning  surface.  It  was  just  then  that  the  tree  trunk 
broke  free. 

Loose,  it  was  like  a  wild  thing  in  fury,  ponderous  and 
yet  quick  and  malicious.  He  fought  to  keep  his  head  and 
arms  up,  above,  not  to  be  dragged  down,  forced  under  by 
the  threshing  branches.  The  mid-trunk  struck  an  obstruc- 
tion  with  a  shock,  and  it  pivoted,  the  brushy  head  wheel- 
ing  him  downstream  and  into  a  curve  of  the  bank,  the 
bank  where  his  enemy  waited.  He  tore  loose,  plunging 
ashore  in  a  muddy  scramble.  His  hand  was  numb;  he  had 
to  look  at  it  to  discover  that  his  pistol  was  gone. 

The  man  on  the  bank  had  run  downstream  to  meet 
him.  For  a  moment  they  saw  each  other  through  a  screen 
of  leaves.  Montoya  plunged  headlong  behind  a  tall  stump, 
collecting  himself  quickly  into 
a  crouch;  the  other  had 
dodged  behind  a  tree.  His  hand  and  arm  felt  like  slightly 
animated  mud.  A  bullet  tore  the  moldered  top 
his 
stump.  Another.  It  was  time  for  negotiation. 

of 

Montoya  called  an  inquiry,  using  the  Cebuano  lingua 
franca  of  the  southern  islands,  and,  after  a  moment,  re- 
ceived  a  cheerful  response:  “Do  you  have  a  weapon?” 

“No,”  He  hoped  the  other  had  not  seen  the  pistol  be- 

fore  the  tree  beat  it  out  of  his  hand. 

“Come  out.” 
“Not  if  you’re  going  to  shoot  at  me,”  Montoya  said 

reasonably. 

“Why  should  I  shoot  you?” 
“Why  did  you  shoot  me  already?” 
This  time  the  response  was  a  volley  of  shots.  Montoya 
his  stump 
crouched  close  while  chunks  and  slivers 
rained  about  his  head  and  shoulders.  “Now,”  the  voice 
announced  triumphantly—it  was  a  youthful  voice—‘if  I 
don’t  return  very  soon,  my  friends  will  come.  They  are 
many.” 

of 

“Return  where?”  It  was  perhaps  illogical,  but  Montoya 
felt  himself  once  more  on  the  offensive,  a  more  congenial 
position. 

. 

“To  the  rich  man’s  house.” 
“Pm  coming  out,”  Montoya  said.  “Don’t  shoot.  Pm

226 

EDGES 

already  wounded.”  This  was  true,  and  he  let a 
little pain 
into  his  voice  to  prove  it.  He  eased  himself  out  into  view. 
The  young  man  stepped  from  his  own  cover,  leveling 
a  carbine—U.S.  Marine  Corps  issue,  Montoya  noted, 
but  at  least  ten  years  out  of  date.  He  held  the  point  of 
aim  steady  at  chest  level  for  a  moment,  then  slowly  low- 
ered  it,  and  fired  a  single  shot  into  the  ground  at  Mon- 
toya’s  feet.  A  very  nice  touch  on  the  trigger.  Montoya 
smiled,  as  involuntarily  as  he  had  jerked  at  the  sound  of 
the  shot.  The  young  man  laughed  delightedly,  and  mo- 
tioned  him  back  upstream  to  the  path. 

Before  they  reached  the  house,  Montoya  had  learned 
all  that  his  escort  had  to  tell. 
If  this  boy  knew  what  he 
was  talking  about,  they  were,  he  thought,  rebels  of  a  child- 
like  simplicity.  Their  violence  was  directed  not  at  the 
Government  in  Manila,  but  at  rich  men,  foreigners,  and 
Christians—categories  that  overlapped  considerably,  espe- 
cially  when  “foreigner”  meant  anyone  not  native  to  the 
island  of  Palawan.  This  particular  band  of  rebels  was  one 
of  many—more  spontaneous  vigilantes  than  revolutionary 
cells—now  busily  expressing  their  disapproval  of  land- 
an  eager  wave  of 
lords,  squatters  and  entrepreneurs  in 
burning,  killing  and  mutilation.  It  was  not  totally  unlike 
the  spirit  in  which  he  had  set  fire  to  the  rubber  planta- 
tion. 

The  question  that  had  sent  him  here  was  not  answered 
until  they  had  almost  reached  the  grounds.  “And  they 
say,”  his  captor  pursued,  “there  were  two  ladies  and  an- 
other  rich  man  at  the  house,  but  they  ran  away  before  we 
got  there.”  He  paused  to  laugh.  “They  didn’t  run  far, 
though.  Our  people  caught  them  at  the  checkpoint.  They’re 
taking  them  up  to  headquarters  in  the  hills.  They’ll  know 
what  to  do  with  them  there.” 

It  was  raining  lightly  but  steadily  now. Montoya,  plod- 
ding  two  or  three  yards  ahead,  felt  the  aim  of  the  gun 
at  his  back  as  physically  as  if  the  barrel  were  pressed  to 
it.  A  new  sense  of  nakedness  was  chilling  him.  His  boats 
were  of  no  use  to  him  now;  his  route  lay  urgently  to  the 
hills,  and  speed  and  silence  would  be  more  important  now 
than  force. 

They  were  approaching  a 

spot  where  the  path  ran 
along  the  edge  of 
a  ravine.  Montoya’s  intention  was  to 
drop  over  the  edge.  Then,  assuming  that  quickness  had 
the  back,  he  should  have
saved  him  from  a  bullet  in 

The  Oracle 

227 

shots  brought  reinforcements.  Not, 

an  acceptable  chance  of  catching  the  boy  when  he  came 
in  pursuit;  and  at  hand-to-hand  he  anticipated  no  diffi- 
culty.  Or  perhaps  the  boy,  not  seeing  any  importance  in 
him,  would  not  try  to  pursue.  In  any  case,  it  would  be  a 
better  chance  than  he  could  expect  to  find  at  the  house. 
But  it  did  not  happen  like  that.  The  boy  had  been  right; 
indeed,  many; 
his 
but  two  were  enough  to  turn  the  probabilities  upside  down. 
Montoya’s  face  hardened.  He  followed  silently  through 
the  rain.  It  would  be  too  bad,  he  thought,  to  be  killed 
in  the  house  that  had  been  his  refuge,  his  sanctuary.  It 
would  be  too  bad  to  be  killed  for  being  a  Christian.  He 
had  atways  considered  Christianity  the  most  unreasonable 
of  religions. 

Slowly  she  turned  up  her  face  into  the  rain,  quivering  a 
little  with  the  strain  of  holding  against  that  wet  force.  It 
was  so  heavy,  so  pendulous;  it  must  be  pulling  down  the 
sky.  The  world  was  closing.  The  sky  up  there,  somewhere, 
above  her  blinking,  gasping  face,  was  sagging,  tearing. 
She  lifted  her  hands  to  shield  her  face  from  the  rain  for 
one  solid  breath.  My  son  is  dead.  She  could  not  quite  go 
further  yet. 

“It’s 

In  the  rain,  in  the  yard  in  front  of  his  house,  armed  men 
not  look 
crowded  around  Montoya  curiously.  He  did 
like  a  patron,  in  his  blue  laborer’s  clothes;  but  then,  he 
did  not  look  like  a  laborer,  either.  And  in  this  country 
his  face  was  distinctive.  A  man  with  a  pistol  seized  his 
arm  and  jerked  him  around  for  a  better  view.  The  others 
the  half-Chinese  from  Manila!” 
crowded  nearer, 
(By  this  inaccurate  title  he  was  known  in  some  circles.) 
The  man  with  the  pistol  contorted  his  face  in  an  exuberant 
sneer.  “Come  on,  sefior,  let  us  introduce  you  to  the  cus- 
toms  of  Palawan!” 

The  little  crowd  opened,  like  the  two  wings  of  a  gate, 
so  that  he  had  an  unobstructed  view  through  the  quiet 
rain  to  the  house  front.  At  the  end  of  that  short  vista, 
at  the  top  of  the  porch  steps,  stood  a  man  with  a  bolo  in 
his  hand.  Montoya  saw  that  there  was  blood  on  the  blade 
already. 

The  sky  was  darkening  to  night,  though  she  had  forgot- 
ten  that  night  still  came.  She  thought  rather  that  it  was

228 

EDGES 

only  the  thickening  rain,  lower  and  darker,  the  whole  sky 
drawing  forever  centerward.  They  had  stopped  for  the 
night,  but  she  did  not  know  that;  they  had  stopped  often 
all  day.  Here  at  the  edge  of  some  sort  of  man-made  clear- 
ing  or  broad  track,  the  men  with  bolos  were  constructing 
another  shelter.  They  were 
all  drenched,  sodden;  the 
women’s  breasts  stood  out  through  the  plastered  layers 
of  their  clothes;  their  hair  streamed  like  dark  water.  Jo- 
sepha,  she  noted  with  distant  contempt,  did  not  even 
know  enough  to  be  afraid. 

She  bowed  her  head.  There  were  rifts  in  the  wet  ait. 
Marie-Ange  is  alive.  She  could  not  say  safe.  There  was 
no  safety.  Life  was  enough  for  gratitude.  She  smoothed 
back  the  wet  tangles  from  her  forehead.  It  was  possible, 
it  was  likely, 
that  some  of 
the  water  streaming  along 
her  face  came  from  her  eyes. 

In  the  darkness,  where,  until  now,  she  had  seen  only  her 
oracle,  Philippe  Montoya  came  to  her.  He  wore  a  barong 
tagalog,  the  formal  shirt  of  the  Philippines,  and  its  lacy 
white  against  the  cool  olive  of  his  skin  enhanced  what 
had  always  been  present  in  his  face  and  bearing,  a  cer- 
tain  angelic  remoteness,  Here  in  the  darkness,  for  the 
first  time  she  was  able  to  question  him.  “How  can  you 
live?”  she  asked  eagerly.  “How  do  you  bear  it?” 

He  moved  closer, 

his 
face  and  body,  his  very  hands,  expressing  something  of 
a  smile.  “It’s  not  hard,”  he  said. 

not  explicitly  smiling,  but 

all 

“Tell  me.” 
“ve  always  known,”  he  said,  “—-no,  not  always,  but 
since  I  was  a  child—I've  known  that  we  live  on  quick- 
sand...  on  the  side  of  a  voleano...on  an  earthquake 
fault.  You  know  that  any  minute  of  any  day  or  night 
the  roof  can  fall  on  your  head,  the  floor  can  open  be- 
tween  your  feet,  the  earth  itself  can  suck  you  down.  And 
somehow  when  you  know  this—when  you  know  you 
always  live  surrounded  by  unappealable  forces  so  much 
stronger  than  you—-then  you  are  not  the  slave  of  those 
forces.  When  you  must  build  your  house  on  quicksand, 
you  don’t  count  on  its  standing.  You  find  your  security 
in  yourself;  because  your  self 
all  you  have.  And  if 
you’re  a  Buddhist  you  know  that  even  your  self  is  quick- 
sand.  In  a  way  I  don’t  exist,  I’m  an  illusion.  This  self  is 
only  an  accumulation  of  particles  and  forces  interacting,

is 

The  Oracle 

229 

all 

I  have.  When  it 

clinging  together  for  a  second  or  a  century.  But  this  ac- 
cumulation,  this  tension,  this  equilibrium  that  I  call  Phi- 
lippe  Montoya—this  is 
falls  apart, 
then  Philippe  Montoya  has  no  more  problems.  But  until 
then,  Philippe  Montoya  exists—and  what  difference  does 
it  make  what  happens  outside?  Philippe  Montoya  exists.” 
Philippe  Montoya  could  never  speak  to  her  like  that 
in  the  flesh,  she  knew.  But  if  he  could  have  spoken,  that 
was  what  he  would  say.  Now  he  smiled,  and  put  out  his 
hand  to  touch  her—his  warm  right  hand,  hard-fleshed, 
smooth-skinned,  the  hand  that  could  knead  away  the 
taint  of  horror.  But  something  withheld  the  touch.  She 
yearned  toward  it,  leaning  and  reaching,  but  he  was  farther 
away  than  she  had  thought.  She  needed  that  touch.  Lean- 
ing,  needing—and  he  was  reaching,  stretching  toward  her, 
but  farther  away,  always  farther. 

as 

the  prickles  pointed  inward,  and 

He  was  gone.  She  curled,  pulling  her  knees  against 
her  forehead,  balling  her  body  hedgehog-like.  But  she 
lacked  the  hedgehog’s  bag  of  prickled  skin;  on  her  skin, 
all 
she  tightened 
herself  she  felt  them  drive  and  bore  into  her  muscle 
lie  quiet,  motionless  in  mind,  as 
and  bone.  She  tried  to 
she  had  learned  to  do  a  year  ago.  She  was  cold,  very  cold 
in  her  sodden  clothes.  Dumbly,  she  felt  that  it  was  harder 
now  than  it  had  been  then.  Why?  The  burden  now  was 
less,  much  Jess,  and  she  had  grown  expert  in  carrying  it. 
The  thorns  or  claws  drove  deeper.  Then  she  had  been 
free—free  like  the  smashed  worm  on  the  pavement,  ex- 
empted  from  all  considerations  but  the  absorbing  writh- 
ing  of  what  remained  of  her  mutilated  life.  That  had 
been  aloneness;  this  was  aloneness  with  obligation.  Phi- 
lippe  Montoya  could  not  reach  her  now;  and  on  what  she 
did,  said,  failed  to  do  or  say,  on  how  she  looked,  on  what 
she  contrived,  remembered,  correctly  or  falsely  calculated, 
on  these  things  hung  the  future—life  or  death,  more  pain 
or  less—of  those  whom  Philippe  Montoya  had  left  behind 
him. 

But  Marie-Ange,  she  remembered  stubbornly,  Marie- 

Ange  is  alive.

230 

EDGES 

CHAPTER  11 

“Renée.”  The  word  was  not  whispered—a  whisper  car- 
ries—it  was  only  breathed  into  the  still  air,  light  as  down. 
She  thought  for  a  poised  moment  that  it  was  a  word  with- 
out  a  voice,  without  a  speaker.  Reborn,  it  hung  in  the  air 
beside  her  ear.  Then  she  remembered  that  this  was  the 
for  the 
name  Montoya  had  given  her, 
present,  had  perhaps  kept  them  all  alive.  She  turned  her 
head.  He  must  be  very  near;  but  the  night  was  so  dark, 
she  did  not  make  him  out  until  he  moved,  a  broad  form- 
less  shadow  soundlessly  leaning  to  her.  “Not  a  word,” 
the  shadow  breathed,  so  close  this  time  that  she  felt  the 
breath  on  her  face,  a  warmth  rather  than  a  movement. 
She  lifted  her  hands  and  touched  woven  straw;  he  was 
wearing  the  wide,  flat  hat  of  a  Filipino  farmer.  “Not  a 
sound,”  he  breathed.  “Tell  them.” 

the  name  that, 

She  rolled  carefully  onto  her  other  hip,  leaned  and 
reached,  closing  her  hands  tight  on  Josepha’s  wrist  and 
a  piece  of  the  Senator’s  shirt.  He  grunted,  startled;  Josepha 
held  silent,  though  her  wrist  jerked.  “Not  a  sound,”  she 
breathed.  “Not  a  word.”  The  point  of  Montoya’s  knife 
was  already  working  at  their  bonds. 

They  had  not  been  trained  for  this.  They  made  noise. 
But  Montoya  kept  them  closely  in  hand,  touching  them 
with  short,  firm  pulls  and  pushes,  timing  their  movements 
to  coincide  with  the  wind’s.  Once  he  stopped  them,  pull- 
ing  all  their  heads  close  together,  to  breathe  the  quiet 
threat,  “Not  a  sound,  One  mistake  and  we  are  all  dead.” 
He  wanted  to  keep  them  frightened.  It  was,  of  course, 
impossible  to  keep  them  perfectly  still;  but  if  they  be- 
lieved  the  danger  sreater  than  it  was,  they  might  stay 
quiet  enough  to  escape  the  real  danger.  Which,  certainly, 
was  danger  enough. 

At  the  edge  of  a  different  blackness,  he  stopped  them 
with  a  touch.  Josepha  had  been  waiting  all  this  time  for  a 
‘chance  to  throw  herself  into  Montoya’s  arms.  Somehow, 
in  their  cautious  progress,  the  opportunity  had  not  arisen; 
there  seemed  to  be  always  someone  else  between  them. 
But  when  she  understood  that  they  were  at  the  water’s

The  Oracle 

231 

edge  and  Must  step  down  into  a  boat,  she  pushed  past 
Madame  Delisle  and  pressed  herself  against  him,  slipping 
both  arms  around  his  neck,  whispering  “Felipe,”  lifting 
her  face  for  a  kiss  that  did  not  come.  He  held  her  gently 
but  without  eagerness,  enclosing  her  for  a  moment  in 
a 
one-armed  embrace,  before  he  said  softly,  “We'll  be  all 
a 
right  now.  Come  on,  get  in,”  and  shifted  his  hand  to 
grip  on  her  upper  arm,  pulling  her  firmly  away  from  him. 
He  got  them  all  placed  to  his  satisfaction  in  the  boat— 
Josepha  in  the  bow,  the  Senator  in  the  middle—before 
he  stepped  into  the  stern  beside  Madame  Delisle.  She 
a  released  spring,  flattening  herself 
turned  to  him  like 
against  his  chest,  and  he  wrapped  his  arms  around  her. 
“There’s  a  pole  beside  you,  Senator,”  he  said.  “Use  it.” 

still  intact  about  his 

The  Senator  said  nothing.  His  weary  muscles  quivered 
with  indignation,  but  he  was  aware  above  all  else  of  the 
waist.  He  had  poled 
money  belt 
a  boy,  on  the  canals  and  ponds  of  his  family’s 
boats  as 
estates,  This  was  a  workaday  dugout  banca  the  size  of  a 
rowboat,  slow  and  quiet  on  the  still  water.  He  felt  for  the 
pole,  and  a  silent  jubilation  rose  through  his  veins. 

She  clung  without  a  whisper  of  sound,  only  her  quiet 
breath.  Montoya  held  her  awkwardly;  there  was  some- 
thing  wrong  with  his  right  arm.  After  a  time  he  cleared 
his  throat  and  said  quietly—it  was  a  thing  that  had  to 
be  said—“They  cut  off  my  hand.  I’m a little  wea  ” 

She  shuddered  once,  and  again,  and  again,  until  she 
contrived  to  quench  all  shuddering  by  plastering  herself 
still  tighter  to  his  chest.  He  held  her  like  that,  his  truncated 
right  arm,  bundled  in  thick  wrappings,  pressed  lightly 
against  her  back,  his  left  hand  holding  the  back  of  her 
neck  tightly,  opening  sometimes  to  caress  her  shoulders 
if  he  were  smoothing  her  against  him. 
with  a  gesture  as 
Josepha  crouched  in  the  bow  of  the  boat,  facing  them. 
The  consuming  anger  that  had  occupied  her  since  Montoya 
act  more  sensed 
had  embraced  the  other  woman  (an 
than  seen,  in  the  darkness)  shielded  her,  for  a  moment, 
from  the  shock  of  his  remark.  Even  when  the  shock  came, 
she  rejected  it.  No;  she  did  not  want  to  feel  sorry  for 
Philippe  Montoya.  More  than  that;  what  had  happened 
to  her  so  far  she  could  accept  as  an  adventure,  but  she 
did  not  want  her  life  to  be  touched  by  real  horror.  Her

232 

EDGES 

eyes  squeezed  shut;  her  mouth  opened  in a  little  voice- 
less  cry  of  repugnance,  refusal. 

“How  did  it  happen?”  the  Senator  asked  sharply.  He 
was  puffing  a  little  from  his  efforts,  but  the  boat  was  mov- 
ing  smoothly  now  through  the  dark  water.  He  was  aware 
of  a  bank  on  their  right,  and  kept  it  close  alongside.  The 
air,  that  bad  been  calm  for a  little,  was  stirring  more 
briskly  now,  again  and  again. 

; 

“They  wanted  to  make  an  example  of  a  foreign  capital- 
ist,”  Montoya  said  wryly.  “They  would  have  preferred  a 
Chinese  millionaire,  but  I  was  the  closest  substitute  avail- 
able. 
in  Montoya’s 
Opinion,  was  an  illusory  phenomenon,  but  he  was  grate- 
ful  for  its  workings  nonetheless. 

lucky.”  Luck, 

Believe  me, 

I  was 

“Where  are  we  going?”  the  Senator  pursued.  He  had 
lost,  on  this  strange  island,  even  his  basic  sense  of  direc- 
tion—something  the  worst  typhoon  could  hardly  have 
done  to  him  on  Luzon. 

us 

get 

find 

did  not  occur  to  him  that 

“To  the  sawmill,  Mako  will 

there.  Then—it 
depends.  Mako  has  a  radio.”  By  this  he  meant  that  Mako 
would  know  the  current  status 
of  the  insurrection  and 
to 
the  typhoon.  “Probably  we  won’t  have  time  to 
Taytay.  Maybe  Puerto  Princesa.  There’s  a  French  con- 
sulate  there.”  All  three  of  the  others  stirred,  uneasy.  Fan- 
tasy  and  reality  seemed  to  have  grown  too  fused.  “I  am 
a  French  citizen,”  Montoya  explained.  “So  is  Madame 
Delisle.”  He  did  not  add,  I  have  no  money.  I  need  help. 
It 
the  Senator’s  money  belt 
could  be  still  intact.  Struggle  as  he  would,  his  mind  felt 
drained.  All  the  blood  that  had  gushed  from  the  pulsing 
conduit  of  his  wrist  seemed  to  have  flowed  direct  from 
his  brain.  But  it  was  necessary  to  hold  out  a  little  longer. 
He  moved a little,  gathering  his  arms  closer  about  her. 
“T  think  it  will  be  better  to  get  married,”  he  said  to  the 
boat  at  large.  “It  will  give  her  Philippine  citizenship  rights. 
And  I  can  arrange  for  her  to  have  joint  ownership  of 
everything.  That  way,  there  won’t  be  any  problems.  If 
anything  happens  to  me,  she  owns  everything  already.  No 
taxes,  no  bribes.” 

The  Senator  poled  mechanically.  The 
grasp. 

had 
grown  too  outrageous  for  him  to 
logic, 
Montoya  could  be  talking  of  marriage  to  no  one  but  his 
daughter.  But  obviously  his  daughter  was  not  in  need  of 
Philippine  citizenship  rights;  and  obviously  a  man  does

situation 
By 

all 

The  Oracle 

233 

not  talk  of  marriage  to  one  woman  while  he  holds  an- 
other  in  his  arms.  But  neither  does  a  man  propose  mar- 
his  virtual 
riage  to  another  woman  in  the  presence  of 
fiancée  and  her  father.  Not  even  Philippe  Montoya.  And 
yet  ...  The  Senator  groaned  unconsciously,  as  spontane- 
ous  a  sound  as  he  had  uttered  since  babyhood.  In  the 
bow,  Josepha  sat  rigid. 

this  landscape.  Montoya  had  taken  a  fancy  to 

Montoya  had  acquired,  with  his  sawmill,  the  traces  of 
some  previous  entrepreneur’s  hopes  for  a  lumbering  em- 
pire.  At  the  foot  of  a  logging  tract  on  the  hillside,  a  stream 
had  been  regularized  into  the  form  of  a  canal,  down  which 
logs  could  be  floated  to  a  holding  pond.  Beside  this  pond, 
and  sheltered  from  the  wind  by  the  bulk  of  the  mill  itself, 
stood  a  smali  square  structure  actually  built  of  concrete 
blocks,  with  wooden  shutters  and  door  and  corrugated 
metal  roof.  Nothing  could  have  looked  more  anomalous 
in 
at 
once.  Its  very  ugliness  had  seemed  to  guarantee  utility. 
Given  the  nature  of  the  uprising,  the  terrain,  and  the 
weather,  it  was  eminently  reasonable  that 
the  military 
to 
authorities—rather  than 
fight—had  dispatched  two  or  three  patrol  boats  down 
the  southeast  coast  of  Palawan  to  check  on  the  welfare 
of  the  wealthier  residents.  Such  a  boat  had  found  Mon- 
toya’s  house  gutted,  a  few  servants  remaining  with  the 
wreckage.  These  had  reported  that  Montoya  had  been 
released  alive,  and  that  he  was  likely  to  turn  up, 
if  he 
turned  up  anywhere,  at  the  sawmill. 

seeking  unnecessary  battles 

it 

When  the  banca  came  out  among  the  floating  logs  on 
the  sawmill  pond,  an  officer  and  three  men  from  the  patrol 
grey 
boat  were  clustered  beside  the  blockhouse  in 
morning  drizzle,  laying  idle  bets  on  the  next  move  of  this 
wild  goose  chase. 

the 

The  Senator  grounded  the  boat  hastily  and  dropped 
“I  am  Senator  José  Sandoval,”  he  announced, 
his  pole. 
is  my  daughter.  We  were  kidnapped  by  rebels 
“and  this 
and  escaped  from  them  last  night  in  the  hills.”  His  pudgy 
figure  had  reassumed  authority.  He  felt 
the  money  in 
of  warmth.  “My 
his 
daughter  is  very  tired.  She  needs  to  rest  in 
a  safe  place, 
and  I  must  communicate  with  Manila  as  soon  as  possi- 
ble.”  He  wanted  very  much  to  add,  with  a  wave  of  his 
a  smuggler.”
hand  at  Montoya,  “Arrest  that  man.  He  is 

an-  embracing  circle 

belt,  now,  as 

234 

EDGES 

But  all  that  could  come  later,  At  the  moment,  it  was  bet- 
ter  not  to  confuse  the  soldiers. 

The  officer  nodded,  accepting  the  Senator  provisionally 
at  his  word,  and  turned  more  dubiously  to  Montoya  and 
the  woman.  Whatever  they  were,  they  were  clearly  not 
Palawefios.  “Will  you  come  with  us?  We  can  take  you  to 
Puerto  Princesa.” 

For  the  moment,  Montoya  could  manage  no  answer 
but  the  expression  on  his  face,  a  kind  of  sick  sneer  that 
said  it  well  enough.  He  was  experiencing  a  spasm  of  total 
repugnance.  To  go  on  board  the  same  vessel  with  the 
to  take  his  Renée  on  board  that 
Sandovals—worse  yet, 
vessel—-seemed  to  him,  now,  too  nauseating  to  be  think- 
able.  And  then,  too,  there  was  a  bed  in  the  blockhouse 
and  the  blockhouse,  by  its  name,  its  structure,  its  appear- 
ance,  was  all  solid,  all  motionless—-an  oasis  of  rest  in  the 
sick,  moving  world.  Above  all  things  else,  he  wanted  to 
lie  down  on  something  that  would  not  sway,  or  sink,  or 
tremble.  And  he  did  not  forget—though  in 
his  numbed 
brain  he  felt  he  had  forgotten  many  things  possibly  im- 
portant—that  the  typhoon’s  wings  were  still  spread  above 
them,  poised  for  its  screaming  swoop.  “Go  on,”  he  mum- 
bled.  “We'll  stay  here.” 

The  soldiers  conferred,  the  officer  shrugged,  they  turned 
away.  Neither  the  Senator  nor  Josepha  looked  back  as 
they  were  helped  on  shore  and  escorted  down  to  the  pa- 
trol  boat.  For  that  matter,  Montoya  did  not  watch  them 
go.  He  had  turned  immediately  to  the  door  of  the  block- 
house,  holding  his  Renée  with  his  good  arm,  an  arrange- 
ment  which  yielded  them  both  support.  ” 

One  of  the  shutters  was  open,  so  that  light  fell  acrross 
the  bed—tight  still  pale  as  dawn,  though  the  sun  must 
have  been  well  up.  For  a  minute  they  sat  together  in  the 
light,  looking  at  each  other.  It  was  the  first  time,  for  all 
either  of  them  could  remember,  that  they  had  ever  looked 
at  each  other. 

a 
She  could  command  her  voice  a  second  or  two  at 
time;  she  spoke  in  quick  little  spurts.  “I  was  afraid,”  she 
said. 

He  thought  she  meant  in 

the  normal  way—afraid  of 
dying,  afraid  of  suffering  as  she  had  suffered  before.  “Of 
course,”  he  said.  “Everybody's  afraid.” 

“Of  the  dragon,”  she  said.

The  Oracle 

" 

235 

He  drew  back a little,  to  see  her  face  better.  “What?” 
“Of  the  dragon.  Le  dragon.” 
“Quel  dragon?”  he  asked,  puzzled,  startled  into  amus- 

ment. 

“At  the  bottom.  Of  the  world.”  And  she  wept  at  last, 

shuddering,  shuddering. 
He  held  her  off, 

a 

still, 

little,  gazing  at  her  with  an 
unconscious  frown.  For  the  first  time  he  glimpsed  the 
dark  scope  of  her  life,  the  hollow  depths  on  which  she 
aborted 
delicately 
movement;  he  had  such  a  yearning  impulse,  at  that  in- 
stant,  to  stroke  back  the  wet  hair  that  was  falling  across 
her  eyes.  “No,  no,”  he  said  carefully.  “A  dragon  is  a— 
is  a  nice  animal.  They  make  the  crops  grow.” 

right  arm  made  a 

little, 

trod. 

His 

She  shook  against  him  violently.  The  only  answer  he 
knew  was  to  close  his  arms  firmly  around  her,  pulling  her 
close;  but  it  was  the  right  answer.  In a  little  while  she 
ceased  to  sob,  and  they  lay  back  together,  like  the  limp 
debris  that  marks  high-water  along  the  shore. 

The  wind  was  rising.  She  thrust  herself  up  on  one  elbow  to 
gaze  at  Montoya.  His  face  lay  lax  and  sallow,  washed, 
-drowned  with  sleep.  His  lungs  pulled  steadily  at  the  rich 
air.  He  had  his  freedom,  she  thought;  and  she,  she  had 
hers.  It  was  true,  then;  it  didn’t  matter  how  much  you  suf- 
fered,  nor  how  many  entanglements  involved  you—you 
could  :still  be  free.  For  the  first  time  she  was  swept  with  a 
rush  of  love  for  him.  What  she  had  begun  to  feel  in  the 
dark  boat  on  the  still  canal—the  reality  of  him,  as  him- 
so 
this  recalcitrant  individuality,  unique  and  total, 
self, 
that  everything  he  did  expressed  him,  him  and  no  other, 
the  very  flicker  of  his  eyelash  as  he  slept  was  Montoya— 
this  feeling  shook  her  now  with  its  strength  and  endless- 
ness.  And,  feeling  that,  she  could  feel  love.  She  laughed 
with  joy,  a  silent,  open-mouthed  laugh. 

Mako  came  to  the  blockhouse  in  the  rain.  It  was  dark  in- 
side—she  had  closed  the  last  shutter-——but  in  the  light 
from  the  door  he  saw  them  both  asleep  on  the  bed.  He 
bad  come  to  report  to  Montoya—like  the  servants  at  the 
house,  he  had  assumed  that  Montoya  would  surface  here 
eventually  if  he  lived—-but  Montoya  was  obviously  sunk  in 
a  sleep  too  deep  and  deathlike  for  waking.  The  woman

  
236 

EDGES 

roused  and  stirred  a  little.  Mako  closed  the  door  and  set- 
tled  himself  beside  it. 

The  oracle  stirred  wearily  within  her.  His  face  looked 
drawn,  longer,  more  narrow;  he  moved  sickly.  “The  ty- 
phoon,”  be  said,  and  his  voice  was  a  crusty  sound,  liable 
to  crumble  into  nothingness.  “It 
will  come  very  soon. 
Marie-Ange  . 
.”  and  the  crust  broke,  nothing  lay  be- 
neath,  his  dry  lips  moved  impotently.  Dry—how  could 
even  fever  parch  him  so,  in  the  midst  of  the  seething  wet- 
ness  of  the  world?  Fumblingly  she  touched  his  face,  and 
was  pierced  at  once  with  fear. 

. 

“Marie-Ange—-where  is  she?” 
“Ask  Mako.”  It  was  a  whispered  croak. 
She  looked  at  her  fingertips,  unsure  whether  they  were 

burned  or  frozen.  “Yes—Mako—where  is  he?” 

“about  to 

die.”  It  was  hard,  hard,  to  endure  that 
his 
writhing  mouth,  that  broken  husk  of  sound;  and  in 
eyes  she  saw  amusement  still.  Again  he  mouthed a silence, 
and  heaved  his  arm  against  some  deadly  weight,  pointing. 

“Yes.”  Come,  dragon;  heel. 
The  one-armed  man  crouched  {ike  a  household  wraith 
beside  the  doorway.  She  knelt  beside  him.  “My  son  is 
dead,”  she  heard  herself  say.  But  no,  it  was  not  necessary 
to  explain  that  to  other  people.  She  was  here  for  a  differ- 
ent  reason.  “Where  is  the  child?” 

“On  Pagbo,”  he  answered  at  once.  He  had  been  waiting 
for  two  days  to  answer  this  question.  “No  way  we  could  get 
farther.  Bad  wind.  Me  ..  .”  He  lifted  the  stump  of  his 
arm.  “No  men  on  Pagbo,  No  kumpit.  Everybody  already 
gone.”  He  watched  her  face,  dubious  of  her  competence  to 
understand,  but  he  went  on  doggedly.  “There’s  a  good 
house  there,  wood.  Nobody  come  there.”  He  had  finished. 
From  this  she  understood  that  he  had  sought  one  of 
Montoya’s  crews  on  an  island  called  Pagbo  and  not  found 
them,  and  had  left  the  child  and  the  old  woman  there  in 
a  wooden  house  because  he  could  not  sail  them  to  a  safer 
place  unassisted  in  the  teeth  of  the  storm.  “When  the  ty- 
phoon  comes,”  she  asked  carefully,  “will  they  be  safe  in 
that  house?” 

He  moved  his  head  in  a  strange  way,  sideward,  as  if  he 
were  bowing  horizontally,  as  a  leaf  stretches  sidelong  in  a 
gale.  “That’s  a  Christian  wind,”  he  said—by  which  he 
meant,  among  other  things,  that  the  great  highway  of  ty-

The  Oracle 

237 

phoons  ran  north  and  east  along  the  Christian  islands, 
and  only  unorthodox  storms  strayed  south  and  west  into 
Moslem  lands  like  this.  It  was,  therefore,  no  responsibility 
of  his.  But  his  deep  eyes  were  gloomy.  He  would  have 
helped  his  charges  better  if  he  could.  At  any  rate,  he  had 
fulfilled  his  obligation  to  put  them  out  of  reach  of  the 
rebels. 

“Where  is  Pagbo?”  she  asked,  and  he  rose  immediately, 

reaching  his  one,  taut  arm  to  help  her  up  with  him. 

is 

not 

told 

him  earnestly. 

inevitable,”  she 

“Three  miles,”  he  said.  “Very  near.” 
“It 

He 
nodded,  but  she  did  not  think  he  understood.  “My  son  is 
dead,”  she  said,  taking  an  example.  “That  was  not  in- 
evitable,  but  it  happened.  Now,  something  is  going  to  hap- 
pen,  but...”  But  he  did  not  understand;  and  there  was 
no  time.  “But  it  depends  on  us.”  She  paused  only  a  mo- 
ment  by  the  bed  where  Montoya  slept  his  utter  sleep—so 
short  a  moment,  Mako  did  not  realize  she  had  paused. 
“Now,”  the  oracle  said.  His  soft  voice  rang  unbearably, 
unblended  jubilation  and  bitterness.  “J  am  dying.”  Mako 
shouldered  the  door  open,  holding  her  arm  with  his  hand, 
and  they  plunged  together  into  the  rain. 

Philippe  Montoya  slept.  The  Jong  rush  of  the  storm  did 
not  wake  him;  and  even  when  Marie-Ange  crept  onto  the 
bed  beside  him  like  a  small  wet  animal  (her  clothes  had 
been  wrung  out  as  well  as  the  old  woman’s  strength  could 
manage,  but  there  was  nothing  dry  to  put  on,  and  she 
crawled  into  the  shelter  of  his  arms  almost  bare,  her  skin 
adhesive  with  wetness),  he  only  muttered  in  his  sleep  and 
shifted  a  little,  huddling  his  body  around  her.  There  was 
no  way  to  know  what  words  he  mumbled;  the  cry  of  the 
typhoon  belittled  all  other  sounds  into  nothingness.  Later, 
when  one  of  the  wooden  shutters  broke  with  a  crash,  it 
was  a  crash  to  all  intents  silent,  and  the  only  change  the 
ear  could  detect  was  in  the  quality  of  the  storm-sound, 
other 
sharper  and  more  poignant.  The  shutter  of 
weatherside  window  was  taken  away  lightly  by  the  wind, 
a  child’s  hand  plucked  a  leaf  that  was  ready  to  fall. 
as  if 
rain  hurtled  in 
Through  the  unprotected  openings  the 
broken  masses,  rushing  and  swirling  about  the  room  until 
the  floor  was  ankle-deep  in  water  and  Mako  opened  the 
door  to  let  it  escape  on  the  lee  side.  After  a  time  the  nurse 
had  crawled  onto  the  foot  of  the  bed  and  squatted  there, 

the 

+

238 

EDGES 

with  her  old  arms  wrapped  around  herself.  Mako  still 
stood,  his  back  to  one  of  the  side  walls.  He  would  have 
joined  the  others  on  the  bed,  perhaps,  but  he  did  not  like 
to  wake  Montoya.  The  wall 
throbbed  and  trembled 
against  his  back  continuously,  like  a  rough  sound:  some- 
times  it  suddenly  jarred,  and  the  inescapable  roar  that 
submerged  them  was  split  for  a  moment  by a shriller  peal. 
It  was  interesting  to  Mako  that  as  other  sensations  died 
one  by  one  in  the  unceasing  rush  of  wind  and  water,  a 
pain  was  born  and  grew  in  the  arm  he  did  not  have,  so 
that  soon  he  could  trace 
out  almost  its  whole  absent 
length  and  fullness  by  the  shape  of  the  pain. 

Thev  did  not  notice  at  first  when  the  storm  slackened, 
they  were  so  benumbed.  Only  when  the  rain  had  ceased 
to  cannonade  in  thick  volleys  across  the  room,  did  they 
stir  and  swallow  and  look  about  them.  The  wind  had  fallen; 
a  very  little  while  the  rain  ceased  altogether,  and  the 
in 
wind  died  to  an  angelic  breeze.  Montoya  woke.  The  silence, 
and  the  throb  in  his  truncated  arm,  combined  into  a  single 
message:  it  was  good  that  the  typhoon  had  passed,  because 
it  was  very  necessary  to  reach  a  hospital. 

the 

He  sat 

up,  finding 

little  body  beside 

and 
hugged  the  child  with  his  good  arm.  She  woke,  but  she  did 
not  answer  his  questions.  He  looked  quickly  to  the  nurse, 
and  something  in  her  grim  old  face  made  him  turn  to 
Mako,  swinging  his  legs  to  the  floor.  “Where  is  she?” 

him, 

Mako  still  stood  against  the  wall,  but  now  he  shifted 
its  base.  “She  wanted  to  bring 

himself  and  squatted  at 
them  back  here.  Too  much  typhoon  for  Pagbo.” 

“Pagbo?”  Montova  repeated  harshly.  Pagbo  was  wrong, 
he  knew,  and  yet  for  a  moment  he  could  not  grasp  ex- 
actly  what  was  wrong  with  it.  Somcthing  seemed  to  have 
been  torn  loose  in  his  brain,  and  it  was  hard  to  re-establish 
the  connections. 

Mako  raised  his  face.  ““Paghbo.  No  way  to  get  them  far- 
ther.  No  kumpit,  no  men.  Good  house,  plenty  of  water, 
get  them  farther.”  Montoya 
plenty  of  food.  No  way  to 
nodded;  Mako  was  not  to  blame.  Marie-Ange  leaned  her 
big 
small  head  against  him.  “We  got  there  before  the 
wind,”  Mako  resumed.  This  was  true  in  a  narrow  sense. 
The  wind  had  not  reached  hurricane  force  until  shortly 
after  they  had  begun  the  return  from  Pagbo,  he  at  the 
tiller,  she  bailing  in  the  bow,  with  the  child  and  the  old

The  Oracle 

239 

woman  flat 
under 
canvas 
Mako  said,  “the  big  wind  came.” 

a 

between  them. 

“Then,” 

“Where  is  she?” 
“The  wind  took  her,”  Mako  said.  He  did  not  lower  his 
eyes.  He  had  no  apologies  to  make.  He  had  passed  very 
near  to  death  himself  out  there,  when  the  wind  had  flipped 
the  prao  almost  over,  outrigger  or  no,  and  they  had  fled 
like  a  scudding  flake  of  foam.  He  had  seen  her  go,  her 
grip  lifted  as  lightly  from  the  gunwale  as  if  her  hand  had 
only  rested  there  a  moment  at  ease.  In  the  typhoon  there 
were  no  rescues.  One  could  only  see  and  confirm:  Yes, 
this  is  happening. 

“Gone?”  Montoya  said,  seeking  his  own  confirmation. 

Mako  nodded. 

Montoya  rose  and  went  stiffly  to  the  open  door,  looking 
out  into  the  beaten  landscape.  Once  his  right  arm  moved 
a  little,  as  he  contemplated  the  hand  he  had  lost  for  noth- 
ing.  It,  too,  lay  somewhere  out  there—underwater,  per- 
haps,  or  wedged  in  the  wreckage  of  some  shattered  tree— 
mouthed  already,  perhaps,  by  small  survivors  returning  to 
in  the  track  of  the  great  storm.  His 
the  business  of  life 
mouth  was  dry  with  resret;  he  swallowed,  to  ease  it.  “She 
was—a  nice  woman,”  he  said  slowly.  “She  knew a  lot.”

HE  BEST  AUTHORS. 
HEIR  BEST  STORIES. 
Pocket  Books  presents  a  con- 
tinuing  series  of  very  special 
collections. 

THE  BEST  OF  POUL  ANDERSON 

—  83140/$2.25 

THE  BEST  OF  DAMON  KNIGHT 

—-.  83375/$2.50 

THE  BEST  OF 
WALTER  M.  MILLER,  JR. 

——  83304/$2.95 

~—  83497/$2.50 

—  83070/$2.25 

——  83268/$2.25 

THE  BEST  OF  JACK  VANCE 

THE  BEST  OF  KEITH  LAUMER 

THE  BEST  OF 
ROBERT  SILVERBERG 

     POCKET  BOOKS  Department  BSF 

1230  Avenue  of  the  Americas.  New  York,  N.Y.  10020 
Please  send  me  the  books  |  have  checked  above.  |  am  enclosing  $__.____. 
(please  add  50¢  to  cover  postage  and  handling  for  each  order,  N.Y.S,  and  N.Y.C, 
residents  please  add  appropriate  sales  tax).  Send  check  or  money  order—no 
cash  or  C.0.D.s  please.  Allow  up  to  six  weeks  for  delivery. 

CITY_.____  STATE /ZIP. 

ADDRESS 

NAME. 

46 

  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
 
Vege  MMe  ile  elite (1g 

“These  are  stories  by  people  who  live 
out  on  the  edge  of  the  edge—some  of  them 
famous—all  outsiders,  threshold  people, 
edge-dwellers.”—Ursula  K.  Le  Guin 

Tom  Disch 
on  the  Vengeance  of  Herain 
White  Plains,  New  York 
Dee  uel 
dark  tale  of  magic  in  modern-day  Africa 

Avram  Davidson’s 
lament  for  a  misplaced  magus 

M.J.  Engh’s 
poignant,  moving  novella 
of  love,  revolution,  and  the  dragon  at 
the  bottom  of  the  world 

A  dozen dazzling  journeys  that  hurtle  you 
across  the  vast  landscape  of  the 
imagination  to  its  furthest...EDGES 

 
