 

 Gene Wolfe - The Nebula Awards® 

 Visit Our Events Site 

 Search for: 
 Search 

 Menu

 Toggle navigation 

 News 

 About 

 Acknowledgements 

 About the Nebulas 

 How to Participate: Recommending, Nominating, and Voting for the Nebulas 

 Nebula Rules 

 Press Inquiries 

 The Awards 

 Search Awards 

 Awards by Year 

 Latest Winners 

 Grand Masters 

 Additional Awards 

 Infinity Award Honorees 

 Service to SFWA Award 

 Kate Wilhelm Solstice Award 

 Author Emeritus 

 Toastmaster 

 62nd Nebula Conference (2027) 

 About 

 Registration Open 

 Nebula Conference Sponsorship Opportunities 

 Gallery 

 The 60th Anniversary Nebula Awards Conference 

 2018 Nebula Conference Group Photos 

 2018 Nebula Awards® Ceremony 

 2017 Nebula Awards® Ceremony 

 Authors with Awards 

 Bulletin Advertisements 

 Banquet Photos 

 Future 

 Gene Wolfe 

 Named a Grand Master in 2012 

 Gene Rodman Wolfe (May 7, 1931 – April 14, 2019) was an American science fiction and fantasy writer. He was noted for his dense, allusive prose as well as the strong influence of his Catholic faith. He also was a prolific short-story writer and novelist and won many science fiction and fantasy literary awards.

 Wolfe is most famous for The Book of the New Sun (four volumes, 1980–83), the first part of his Solar Cycle. In 1998, Locus magazine ranked it third-best fantasy novel before 1990, based on a poll of subscribers that considered it and several other series as single entries.

 Wolfe was highly regarded by critics and fellow writers, and considered by many to be one of the best living science fiction authors. Indeed, he has sometimes been called the best living American writer regardless of genre. Award-winning science fiction author Michael Swanwick has said: “Gene Wolfe is the greatest writer in the English language alive today. Let me repeat that: Gene Wolfe is the greatest writer in the English language alive today! I mean it. Shakespeare was a better stylist, Melville was more important to American letters, and Charles Dickens had a defter hand at creating characters. But among living writers, there is nobody who can even approach Gene Wolfe for brilliance of prose, clarity of thought, and depth in meaning.” Among others, writers Neil Gaiman and Patrick O’Leary have credited Wolfe for inspiration.

 Wolfe won the World Fantasy Award for Life Achievement in 1996, a judged award at the annual World Fantasy Convention. He was inducted by the Science Fiction Hall of Fame in 2007. The Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America named him its 29th SFWA Grand Master in December 2012; the annual Damon Knight Memorial Grand Master Award was presented to Wolfe during Nebula Awards® weekend, May 16–19, 2013.

 Related Links

 Gene Wolfe interview (Wizard/Knight) 

 Gene Wolfe at NIU Library - April 3, 2013 

 Isaac Asimov, Harlan Ellison, and Gene Wolfe discuss science-fiction writing 

 The Shadow of the Torturer - Gene Wolfe - Full Audiobook 

 Alastair Reynolds Discusses Gene Wolfe’s The Book of the New Sun 

 Previous Nebula Nominations and Wins 

 Recommended Reading

 The Book of the New Sun 

 The Wizard Knight 

 The Sorcerer's House 

 Suggest Changes 

 © 2026 Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America, Inc. SFWA® and Nebula Awards® are registered service marks of Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America, Inc. Opinions expressed on this web site are not necessarily those of SFWA.

 Manage Consent

 To provide the best experiences, we use technologies like cookies to store and/or access device information. Consenting to these technologies will allow us to process data such as browsing behavior or unique IDs on this site. Not consenting or withdrawing consent, may adversely affect certain features and functions.

 Functional 

 Functional 

 Always active 

 The technical storage or access is strictly necessary for the legitimate purpose of enabling the use of a specific service explicitly requested by the subscriber or user, or for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission of a communication over an electronic communications network. 

 Preferences 

 Preferences 

 The technical storage or access is necessary for the legitimate purpose of storing preferences that are not requested by the subscriber or user. 

 Statistics 

 Statistics 

 The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for statistical purposes. 
 The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for anonymous statistical purposes. Without a subpoena, voluntary compliance on the part of your Internet Service Provider, or additional records from a third party, information stored or retrieved for this purpose alone cannot usually be used to identify you. 

 Marketing 

 Marketing 

 The technical storage or access is required to create user profiles to send advertising, or to track the user on a website or across several websites for similar marketing purposes. 

 Manage options 

 Manage services 

 Manage {vendor_count} vendors 

 Read more about these purposes 

 Accept 
 Deny 
 View preferences 
 Save preferences 
 View preferences 

 {title} 

 {title} 

 {title} 

 Manage consent 

