 “The best idea in [A Walking Tour of the Shambles] we stole, happily, from what may be the only place it’s ever been done (which is Charles G. Finney’s The Circus ofDr. Lao): the list of unanswered questions. He has a list of the questions which were not answeredin the book. We actually went one step further, because we provide not only a list of unanswered questions but a list of answers, which Genedid.It’s absolutely marvelous and rather creepy. The acid bath one always gets a horrified laugh at readings: ‘What kind of man would kill a woman anddis- solve her body in acid, and how could that safely be done today?’”’ NEIL GAIMAN

 Gene [Rodman] Wolfe was born May 7, 1931 in Brooklyn, New York and grew up in Texas, where he graduated from the University of Houston in 1956 with a BS in mechanical engineering. He served in the US Army in Korea
from 1952-1954, was a project engineer for Procter and Gamble from 1956-72, and senior editor ofPlant Engineeringfrom 1972 - 84, when he left to write full time. His first published story was “The Dead Man” (1965) for erotic maga- zine Sir. Most ofhis early SF work appeared in Damon Knight's Orbit series; manycollections of his stories have been published over the years.
Wolfe’s novels began to appear in 1970, with Operation ARES, and include The Fifth Head of Cerberus (1972), Peace (1975),
“Latro” books Soldier of the Mist (1986) and Soldier ofArete (1989), and Castleview (1990); he has also written books for young adults and poetry. His most ambitious and acclaimed works are the 12 books and various stories that share the same “Urth” universe: the “Book of the New Sun” sequence (four books 1980 - 83, with a
Award, and is a finalist on the Hugo ballot. His current children’s book Coraline (2002) is a bestseller. Other works include Don’t Panic: The Official Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy Companion (1988), collection Smoke and Mirrors (1998), and graphic children’s book The Day I Swapped My Dad for Two Goldfish (1997, with Dave McKean). Gaiman currently lives in Minneapolis, Minnesota with his wife, Mary McGrath, whom he married in 1985, their son and two daughters.
Wolfe and Gaimanfirst met in 1983, at the British Fantasy Convention in Birmingham. They and their families became friends when Gaimanandhisfamily movedto the US in 1992. They recently collaborated on A Walking Tour of the Shambles: Little Walks for Sightseers #16, published for the 2002 World Horror Convention where they were both guests.
The “interview” is a series of talks with Gaiman interviewing Wolfe, overseen by Charles N. Brown and Jennifer A. Hall.
have an audience. With most writing, you have an audiencebutit’s imaginary — somebodyjust like you wholikes the same kinds of things and likes your jokes, but isn’t you and is as smart or smarter, and you’re writing for him or her. The joy of our project was, I had my audience.I was writing for Gene. If it made Gene laugh, it worked. And Gene had an audience, too.
“The best idea in there westole, happily, from what maybethe only place it’s ever been done (which is Charles G. Finney’s The Circus of Dr. Lao): the list of unanswered questions. He has a list of the questions which were not answered in the book. Weactually wentone step further, because we provide not only list of unanswered questions but a list of answers, which Genedid. It’s absolutely marvelous and rather creepy. The acid bath one always gets a horrified laugh at readings: ‘What kind of man would kill a woman and dissolve her body in acid, and how could that safely be done today?’
“The strangest thing is this Gahan Wilson cover with a picture of me and Gene on it. How cool is that?”
GW:“The really cool thing there is, we’re in association with Alice in Wonderland, which is where I have always wanted to be! I’ve always wanted this little upper-class English girl to come up to me, holding a piece of cake in each hand, and say ‘Which one should I eat?’”
NG:“Gene and I resort to e-mail when we have to, if I’m on a different continent, but most of the time when we’re doing a story the fun of it is posting it to each other, then phoning up and laughing at each others’ jokes. We wouldn’t have been able to do that with e-mail. It would have been moreefficient, but muchless fun.”
GW:“I’m not sure it would have been more efficient. I’m not nearly as good a writer at e- mail as I am on paper. I’m an old-fashioned guy. I need time to print it out and look at it and revise, scratch my head, pencil out words and pencil in words. The computer drives menuts. I always remind people whotalk about how writ- ing is going to be revolutionized by the comput- er that Shakespeare wrote with a feather that he
fifth added in 1987, plus several related stories),
the “Book of the Long Sun” (four books 1993—
96), and its sequel trilogy “Book of the Short
Sun” (1999-2001). “New Sun” volume one, The
Shadow of the Torturer (1980), won a World
Fantasy Award; volume two, The Claw of the
Conciliator (1981), a Nebula; and volume four,
The Citadel of the Autarch (1983), the John W.
Campbell Memorial Award. Wolfe’s other wayI think we could doit is if we pick some awardsinclude a Nebula for novella “The Death
of Doctor Island” (1973), a World Fantasy Awardfor collection Storeysfrom the Old Hotel (1988), and a World Fantasy Life Achievement Award in 1996. He has been to married Rosemary Frances Dietsch since 1956; they have two sons and two daughters, and live in Barrington, Illinois.
Neil [Richard] Gaiman was born November 10, 1960 in Porchester, England. After attending school in southern England, he moved to London, where he worked as a free- lance journalist in the early 1980s and sold his
kind of thing that will allow us to do what you did in Bibliomen, where wehaveshorter things that make up something bigger. We could do a tarot deck, a dictionary, a guidebook.’ And Gene said, ‘Let’s do a guidebook.’ He could have said yes to a dictionary, and it could have beenjustas strange and dangerous.”
first stories to gaming and men’s magazinesin
1984 and 1985. His first work in the field was
co-editing humorous book of SF quotations
Ghastly Beyond Belief (1985, with Kim
Newman). His well-known “Sandman’”’
comic/graphic series began in 1989, and who’s ever done any touristing anywhere has includes “A Midsummer Night’s Dream (1990),
he did!”
NG: “And you, you started writing in col-
the only comic to win a World Fantasy Award. His novels include Good Omens (1990, with Terry Pratchett); Neverwhere (1996), a novel- ization ofhis dark-fantasy BBC series; Stardust (1998); and American Gods (2001), which won an International Horror Guild award, a Locus
ended up with one of these little guidebooks: ‘You are now looking at this example of 1870s whatever, and this happened here. Nowcrossthe road and you will see....’ It seemed one of those things where you could take the style and then insert your own contents.
‘For any collaborative work, suddenly you
NG: “The project we just did together was a lovely bit of fun.”
GW:“J certainly enjoyed it. There’s two versions printed out — one Neil gets top billing, and one / get top billing.”
NG: “The fun of it for me was theinitial problem-solving conversations. I phoned Gene up andsaid, ‘We’ve beenasked to collaborate on a story.’ He laughed hollowly. I said, ‘The only
GW:“Butthat, to my knowledge, has been
done more. AmbroseBierce wasthe original guy
in that area, and it’s been done by a numberof
other people. It’s very tempting to define terms,
put your own prejudices in as Samuel Johnson
did. But I didn’t know of anybody who had done
aguidebook,otherthanTheToughGuideto hadtoresharpeneverypageorso,andlookwhat Fantasy by Diana Wynne Jones (which really
liked).”
NG:“I think what attracted both Gene and me to it was the incredibly dry tone. Anybody
lege?”
GW:“I started writing at Texas A&M,for
The Commentator, which wasthe literary maga- zine. I wrote three or fourlittle stories for it. I wish to God I could remember the nameof the editor, because I learned more from the student editor of The Commentator than I have ever learned from any othereditor.
“He was an upperclassman and I was a sophomore, and I expected to be beaten. We
Continued on page 81 LOCUS September 2002 / 7

 Ron Walotsky’s death was and wasn’t a surprise: Editorial Matters two-page mimeographedissue in 1968. I don’t feel a
we knew he’d been hospitalized in June and had been following his progress almost daily through e-mails; and though his condition was very serious, we had
trum Board.
day older. Actually, yes I do — a lot older, almost ancient. I keep looking back at the staff photos and wondering where the time has gone. Jenni collected
E-MAIL PROBLEMS
| expectedhimtopullthrough.Sotosuddenlyhearhe Unknowntous,ourISPplacedaspamfilteron manyofthepiecesintheLocus500sectionwithout
hadn’t made it was a sad shock. I’d seen Ron at Worldcon and World Fantasy Conlast year, and spent most of I-Con with him in April. We talked mostly about growing up in the lower-middle-class neigh- borhoods of Brooklyn in the ’40s, and being Jewish. I was five years older (he told me he was born in 1942, but then artists don’t have to be exact), but we shared similar experiences. Ron wasone of the warm- est and friendliest people I knew.In the early ’90s, we ended up talking about masks and I told him I had a collection at home. Hetried to sell me one of his crab warrior masks, but when I told him I couldn’t really afford it he insisted I take it for free, “‘so I’ll be part of your collection.” I ended up trading him a lifetime Locus subscription even though he said he wanted nothing in return. I’ll miss him.
On a happier note, we had dinner with China Miéville while he was on tour in the Bay Area in July,andshowedhimtheLocusoffices.Averycharm- ing and well-read guy, he was suitably impressed by my collection. We had dinner at the Claremont Ho- tel, and I was able to regale him with stories of Ber- keley in 1968, when the Worldcon banquet was held in the very room we werein. Wealso had dinner with Eileen Gunn and John Berry, who have been living in San Francisco for several years and will be return- ing to live in the Seattle area in October. Eileen runs The Infinite Matrix, and we learned a lot about the problemsofInternet publishing. John Berry still looks too young to have been on the original Locus sub- scription list for 1968. We talked about recent trips to Russia and othertravels abroad, and how eachtrip gives us new perspective on our own country.
Tim Pratt has survived this place a year and is now an assistant editor. Congratulations! CORRECTIONS
In last month’s introduction to Kinuko Y. Craft’s interview, we incorrectly linked ASFA to the Spec- trum Awards. While Spectrum at one time included ASFAlistings, the two are and always have been com- pletely separate entities. The Spectrum AwardsCraft has received were presented by the jury of the Spec-
The Wolfe & Gaiman Show Continued from page 7
were beaten all the time at Texas A&M.You had to take it — bend down, and they whaled away at you with a big wooden paddle. This happened with alarm- ing frequency, and you never got time to heal. What he did was worse. He got mystory and he got a blue pencil, and he edited it there in front of me. As I was standing there, with the drops of blood coursing down my face, I said to myself, ‘I see what he’s doing. He’s taking out every word the sentence doesn’t require. I’m going to write the next story so he can’t do that.’ And I tried to doit. I didn’t succeed, but he wascross- ing out less in that secondstory. If it wasn’t for that, I would probably be a bitter old retired engineer, whereas now I’m bitter old still-active writer.
“T was a college dropout — before it was fashion- able. I lost my student deferment and I was drafted into the United States Army.
“T had just got home from the service, and Rose- mary cameto visit our family in Houston from far off Peoria, Illinois. We had lived next door when we were like three, and our mothers had stayed in touchall this time. Of course I was required to date her and take her out places. We got married in 1956. We didn’t have any money, and we were living in a ‘pointed apartment,’ whichis refinishedattic. You could only walk down the middle. One room was kitchen and dining room; the other was everything else. Rose- mary was a secretary and I was a cub engineer, just starting. (I had gone back to Houston and got a BSME.) I saw a newsstory that said Gold Medal Books wanted murder mysteries and would pay a minimum of $2,000 for any book they accepted. I
our e-mail that prevented quite a bit of legitimate e- mail from getting through to us since June, including subscription, CD-ROM,and back-issue orders. We have recovered the missing mail and are in the pro- cess of going throughit and straightening thingsout. THIS ISSUE
This is Issue 500, and ourfirst with expandedfull- color coverage, which weplan to continue regularly. Arnie Fenner did the cover and the color spreads of Ron Walotsky’s work and the two interviews. Melinda (Mandy) Himel became our in-house color expert, doing the table of contents, People & Publishing, news, and other pages. Other changesinclude a rede- signed table of contents, courtesy of Arnie. We’ll be making other changes in the coming months, most likely beginning with the bestseller pages next issue.
Jenni has been interviewing mesince the begin- ning of the year. What appearshere is a small portion of what she’s got. We hopeit serves to give readers an overview of the roots of Locus and some back- ground ofits illustrious founder. It seems almost in- conceivable that 34 years have passedsince that first
showing them to me until this month. I’m suitably impressed and wish I really was the person they think I am. Now Id better stop before I get maudlin.
Wehavea bit less news this month because of an earlier editorial deadline to get in the extra color and have the issue printed in time for Worldcon.It’s also the summer doldrums. Wealso had to hold conven- tions to have room for Ron’s art and obituary. The | updated convention listing is posted at Locus Online. | The cover price is now $5.95. We’ll be raising sub- scription rates in the next month orso, so please re- new (or subscribe) now.
NEXT ISSUE
October will have the Hugo and Chesley Awards
winners, the Hubbard Awards, and interviews with Dan Simmonsand probably Jeff VanderMeer. There will be Hugo Voting Figures, photos of the awards ceremony, and thefirst installment of our Worldcon report. There will also be our usual assortmentof re- views, news, people notes,etc.
Since Worldconis practically in our back yard, the entire in-house staff will be there as well as Mark R. Kelly from Los Angeles and Jonathan Strahan from Perth, Australia. We’ll have a Locus table. Look for
USA
___$29.00 for 6 issues (Periodical)
___$49.00 for 12 issues (Periodical) ____$90.00 for 24 issues (Periodical) ___$58.00 for 12 issues (1st class) ___$105.00 for 24 issues (1st class)
us there!
CANADA & MEXICO ___$32.00 for 6 issues (Periodical)
___$52.00 for 12 issues (Periodical) ___$95.00 for 24 issues (Periodical) ___$58.00 for 12 issues (1st class) ___$105.00 for 24 issues (1st class)
—C.N. BrownlJ.A. Hall
INTERNATIONAL ___$32.00 for 6 issues (Sea Mail)
___$52.00 for 12 issues (Sea Mail) ___$95.00 for 24 issues (Sea Mail) ___$85.00 for 12 issues (Air Mail) ___$140.00 for 24 issues (Air Mail)
All subscriptions are payable in US funds. Canadians, please use bankor postal money orders, not personal checks. Subscribeto: Locus Publications, P.O. Box 13305, Oakland CA 94661 orcall (510) 339-9198; or fax (510) 339-8144; or email <locus@locus mag.com>;or online at <www.locusmag.com>.Single copy price $5.95 + $2.00 s&h. Institutional : $3.00 extra per year.
Name: Address: City: Zip: Phone:
Enclosed is: $
Card Number:
Credit Card Type: Email:
Cardholder’s Signature
[] New [] Renewal
Exp. Date:
me ao)
Country:
State:
thought, ‘Well, I wrote those stories for The Com- mentator. | could write murder mysteries.’ Wrong, but I thought it and I started writing.
“IT wrote a full-length murder mystery which no-
body would buy, for really good reasons. I wrote a
numberofstories. And I finally made myfirst sale to
a skin magazinecalled Sir in 1965. I wrote ‘The Dead
Man’,thislittleghoststoryinvolvingacrocodile.I numberofOrbitstories.Iwroteonecalled‘TheFifth had read anarticle in Readers’ Digest about croco-
diles, and I put it together with stuff I had taken from
Kipling, because I had read a lot of Kipling that was
laid in India. I sent it to probably a couple of dozen
markets (because Sir would have been a bottom mar-
ket), and Sir bought it for $60.
“Of course I had other stories. I had one called “The Mountains Are Mice’. I sent it to Galaxy and got it back with a form rejection (which is what hap- pened with everything I sent). Fred Pohl was editor then. I was working from an alphabetical list of sci- ence fiction markets. The next magazine on it was/f. Little did I know that /fwas also edited by Fred Pohl. I wrote another cover letter and I put it in a fresh envelope andI sent it to the editor at Jf. I got back a letter from Fred Pohl that said, ‘You know,I think the rewrite has really improved this. I’m glad youlet me see it again. If you’ll take 2¢ a word, I will buy it.” am God’s own fool, but I’m not such a fool that I said, ‘No, I want to retain translation rights.’ That was mysecondsale.
“That got me into Worlds of If, and Worlds of If got me an invitation from Lloyd Biggle, Jr. to join SFWA.In some SFWApublication, I saw that Damon Knight was editing an original anthology called Or- bit and waslookingforstories. I sent him ‘Trip-Trap’, a riff on the Billy-goat Gruff thing with the troll un-
“Damonlived in this old Charles Addams house, The Anchorage. If you have seen the cartoons, you know exactly what this house was: a haunted Victo- rian monstrosity with a whopping front porch that went around three sides of the thing.
der the bridge, and he boughtit. For years after that, the Orbit series was my main market. Myothersales were stories that Damon Knight had turned down.”
NG: “The first novel was Operation Ares, and the next thing weget, if memory serves, is The Fifth Head of Cerberus.”
GW: “That was sometime after. I had written a
Head of Cerberus’, which was wonderful. I sent it to Damon Knight. Every year he would have the Milford Writers’ Conference, which was only for published writers — either people he was publishing in Orbit or people he would /ike to publish in Orbit.
“I brought ‘The Fifth Head of Cerberus’ to the workshop, and while I was there, an editor from Scribners came up to me andsaid, ‘You know,if you would write two more novellas like this, we would publish it as a book.’ So I did. That was myfirst hard- cover, and that wasthe first good book I had.”’
NG: “You did a lot more than add two novellas. Those three stories interweave, reflect, commenton, illuminate, confuse, and do all manner of things to each other.”
GW: “Yes. A lot of readers consider it a sort of three-part novel. The second novella is a story told by one of the characters in the third novella, and so on. There’s lots of ugly stuff about being buriedalive, because I tend to be claustrophobic. I used to have these horrible ‘buried alive’ dreams, which alternated with my “being condemned to Hell’ dreams, so a lot
LOCUS September 2002 / 81

 The Wolfe & Gaiman Show
Book of the New Sun’ plus ‘The Book of the Long Sun’ plus the new three now hadto be seen as a com- plete sequence, which I’m not quite sure about. Yes, it’s set in the same integral universe, but it doesn’t give that feeling of movement you get from the be- ginning of “The Book of the Long Sun’all the way through the next seven books, or whatever.
ing to people is ‘Your life could be much worse. You could be like these lead characters but you’re not.’ So that’s hope too.”
NG: “‘The various things SF can be include being predictive, but it can also be cautionary. Much of the bleakest fiction is cautionary — ‘Don’t go there.’”
GW:“In A Christmas Carol, Marley’s ghost ap- pears. He’s in Scrooge’s bedroom but he’s also in Hell even while he’s in Scrooge’s bedroom. And what he is telling Scrooge is “There’s still hope for you. There’snolongerhopeforme.Mylifeisover.Iblew it. You, Ebenezer, formerly my partner, couldstill pull yourself out.’ That’s hope.”
NG:“Of course what Scrooge windsup getting is visions of past, present, and future, and the future he gets is blacker than anything Barry Malzberg ever came up with.”
GW:“You don’t give hope the way you give rai- sins by putting raisins in raisin bread. You give hope the way you give bread when you bakebread.It’s all hope. I’m quite conscious of doing that. The basic hopeis the hope that things can be different. I’ve been in some godawful situations, and I think people in those situations despair because they come to believe change is impossible. Both science fiction and fan- tasy can be literatures of hope. We’re saying the world doesn’thavetobelikethis,andyourlifedoesn’thave to be like this. When you know enoughabouthistory and you know enough about prehistory, you realize there are times whenit was very different. There were times when Earth’s climate was far warmerthanit is today, and times whenit was far colder than it is to- day. It’s not like we’re veering off the map with glo- bal warming.”
NG: “‘It’s easy to talk about what we’re trying to give readers, but what do you take from it as an au- thor? One of the hardest things of yours I ever read — in terms of actually feeling the effort involved spiri- tually and emotionally, in terms of just the work and how you doit — wasin Castle of Days,I think, where youprinted a prayer you’d written for writing, which I assume was a prayer you said before going off to work.It had that sort of ‘four o’clock in the morning’ quality. What do you take from writing? What does it give you?”
GW:“Enormoussatisfaction. When I think that I have done what I have done the way it ought to be done, and that I have really created something that needed to be created and would not have been with- out me, obviously writing is a dream job. Umpty- ump people would love to be writers and they can’t do it. I can do it. You can do it. We’re blessed.”
of that tended to show up in myfiction. Have you
evertried to do a story based on a dream? I’ve done a
couple of them that worked, but mostly I can’t. “To
the Dark Tower Came’ wasa nightmare story about a
towerthat stretches between the Earth and the moon
and is anchored at both ends.(It’s an engineering
impossibility, but in a fantasy story you can doit.)
The other, ‘Kevin Mallone’, is about a household that
advertisesfora‘well-bredbutimpecuniousyoung Stuffthatyoureadwhenyoungmulchesdowninthe
couple’ who will live in the house and be the master and mistress. The thing is, the gardener is possessed (or may be) by the ghost of a former servant in the house.”’
NG: ‘‘You wrote while doing a real job for 28 years. How did you do it? What was your schedule?”’
GW:“I experimented, as I think anybody would. For 17 years I worked as a mechanical engineer. Af- ter The Fifth Head of Cerberus had been published, I woke up one morning and Rosemary wascrying in bed. She was homesick. So I went in to work that day and one of the guys in the office had left his Wall Street Journal on his desk. I picked it up and paged through it, and there was an ad for technical editors. I said to myself, ‘If this job is in Illinois, I’m going to apply for it.’ And by golly, it was in Illinois, so I applied and interviewed for the job. They gave me this form to fill out and it said, ‘How much money do you want?’ I thought to myself, ‘I will ask for so much money, if they give it to me there’s no question I am going to quit my job andtakethis oneflat out.’ They ended up giving me a thousand dollars a year more than I had asked for. We sold the house in Ohio and I became a staff member on Plant Engineer.
‘““What I did mostly was get up early in the morn- ing and write for one to two hours. One of the good things about working for this magazine was that in ten minutes I could get from my front door to my desk, which gave me more writing time. I often wake up during the night, and I had rule that if it was after 4 a.m. I got up for the day, and I would write until Rosemary had breakfast ready. Then of courseI wrote on Saturdays and Sundays as everybody does, and the holidays.”
back of your head,andit’s there as a tool to draw on.” GW: ‘‘Absolutely.”’
NG: “‘When you were doing the ‘Long Sun’ and
‘Short Sun’ sequences, were there places where you were definitely conscious of doing that, or wasit just where the story went that day?”’
GW:“There were things I was conscious of, and there were things I was not consciousof. It depends on what things we’re talking about. Were mylater discoveries interesting enough to talk about? No.”
NG: “‘Is feedback important to you? I thought the Washington Post article made some very sensible points. It said, ‘This is how good Gene Wolfe is, and this is why you haven’t heard of him.’ One point was that you make noeffort in your fiction to be user- friendly.”
GW: ‘‘What would I do that I don’t do, if I were being user-friendly?”’
NG:“It goes back to that line I’ve been using ever
NG: “What’s the most important thing aboutfiction?”
GW: “The most important thing is that it assures the readerthat things need not be as they are now.In other words,the most im- portant thing is hope.”
NG: ‘‘Was there a big change when youretired and becamea full-time writer?”
‘When I was reading ‘The Book of the Long Sun’, there was a definite feeling of Kipling, and also ech- oes of Chesterton’s very first ‘Father Brown’stories.
since I read it in a letter where you defined goodlit-
erature: ‘Mydefinition of goodliterature is that which
can be read by an educated reader, and reread with
increased pleasure.’ While ‘user-friendly’ may have
been the wrong word, there is a level on which lot
of fiction these days is expected to give everything
up first time to somebody, whether he knows some-
anhourandahalffromoverheretotheLoop,’andI thingaboutthesubjectornot.Youdonotdothat.” Geneisthemasteroflyinginfiction,bothdirectly
GW:“Yes and no. I had written on vacation, and this was like I was on vacationall the time. All I had to do was write. It was really neat. This was cruel of me, but I would set the clock radio to a station that gave traffic reports for commuters. They would be saying, ‘Oh, the Kennedy is wall-to-wall today. It’s
NG: ‘‘Not only can youlie in fiction, but I think
would get up and yawnandstretch andsay, ‘I don’t have to be downthere.’ So I’d brush myteeth,start the coffee, and go over to the desk and write.”
NG:‘How different is the person who writes the stories from the person that everybody gets to meet, encounter, look up at on the platform today?”’
GW:“I drink blood. Other than that disgusting proclivity, I’m aboutlike this. The difference was when I was working as an engineer. I learned that I had to be very different as an engineer than from be- ing a sciencefiction writer. I had to be very staid and conventional, the white shirt and the necktie andall this stuff. I had breakaway neckties with clips in them, becauseifyouworeaconventionalnecktieanditgot caught in the machinery, you were dead. With a breakawaytie, you wouldn’t get pulled into the gears and have your head and neck turned into hamburger.”
GW:“Phooey! I don’t want to write that kind of thing. Rats! I don’t like it and it would bore me to write it and I’m not gonna write it. And besides, I don’t know everything fo give it up. You’re going to see things in there that I don’t see consciously.I like those things.”
NG: ‘“‘I take enormous pleasure in the fact that people are still arguing about the first four in the ‘Book of the New Sun’ sequence to this day. ‘Was the Autarch Severian’s mother?’ ‘Is the Clute theory valid?’ ‘Oh, we’ve got another Australian theory...’ You have these dueling theorists, pointing to the text and trying to second- and third- and outguess.”’
GW:“Yeah, but the thing is, too often people want meto go in andsettle their argument. That’s exactly what I should not do. I am dealing from this position of presumed expertise. We don’t have a level playing
and indirectly. Peace is built on lies. And I assume that, being who heis, Gene is pretty damn sure what the truth and whatthelies are in Peace. Therest of us have to get through that as best we can. After three or four times through that text, you begin to be able to say, ‘I think he’s lying aboutthis or that.’”’
GW: “T never lie.”
NG: ‘‘Gene, you create the trickiest characters! Like in ‘The Walking Sticks’. You not only get to do a wonderful Jeckyll and Hyde riff, but it gives us a narrator whose unreliability cheerfully lies to us all the way through the story. And we know he’s prob- ably lying. That’s part of the joy of the story.”
GW:‘Well, if he wasn’t lying he wouldn’t be the guy in this story! He is a type of man that I have met working in industry ten thousand times. He is not going to tell you intentionally anything that is to his owndetriment.”
NG: “‘And we figure out where the story is hap- pening sometimes from the places where he contra- dicts himself or he has to tell you a little bit more than he would have liked. You have a narrator who’s lying, but the authorisn’t.” .
GW: ‘‘Remember, I was a journalist on an indus- trial magazine, Plant Engineering. I’ve been in a ton of industrial plants, in order to talk to ten tons of people who worked in them, including some places that are right out of Dante and somethat are so nice you think they must be movie sets, so clean andbright
NG:“HowdidyoufeelwhenTheWashingtonPost field.IfArthurConanDoylehadgoneinandsettled
basically said “The Book of the New Sun’is your masterwork?”
GW:“Well, I know that’s what everybody thinks. I keep trying to write something better than that. I may never succeed, but you try and top yourself, right? I would like to write something my readers think is better, but I haven’t donethat. I’ve done things that J thought were better. I did meet one guy today whosaid Soldier of the Mist is the best thing he had ever read. That’s very pleasant.”
NG: “‘The Post was very explicitly saying that ‘The 82 / LOCUS September 2002
all this ‘Holmes’stuff, there would be no BakerStreet Irregulars today, yet people have made whole hob- bies out of being Baker Street Irregulars — why shouldn’t they? There’s no sacredness to the text.”
NG: “What’s the most important thing aboutfic- tion?”’
GW:“The most important thing is that it assures the reader that things need not be as they are now. In other words, the most important thing is hope.
‘‘Sure I’ve read Barry Malzberg. Barry is very black, but it seems to me oneofthe things he is say-

 “WOLFE Is AS FINE A WRITER
AS SCIENCE FICTION HAS PRODUCED.” theNewYorkTiniesBookReview GENE WOLFE Available now in trade paperback, the acclaimed Book of the Short Sun trilogy.
J
ON BLUE'S WATERS AVAILABLE NOWIN TRADE PAPERBACK
Oo a ? * * On Blue's Waters is easily
the best science fiction novel
of the year.... Further evidence that Wolfe is the finest living writer in his field.” —The Seattle Times
[Wolfe] concludes his alternately
dreamyandchillingBookofthe
aOne ofthe ShortSuntrilogy[with]the Ssenre’smost strikingmixofphilosophy,humor, BRILLIANT
and horrorthatis uniquely Wolfe'sstock-in-trade.”—Booklist
t al. t
con oe tors. — Library Journal
”
me NRCTI
THESECONDVOLUMEOo" 3 HE BOOK OF HE SHORT FY
AVAILABLE NOW IN TRADE PAPERBACK
iia te os
THE URTHor THENEWSUN

 The Wolfe & Gaiman Show
and cheerful it’s got to be Doris Day over there run- ning the milling machine.I wasin a rubbertire plant that was a vision of Hell.”
NG: “To what extent does that stuff wind up in the fiction?”’
GW:“To whateverextentit intrudes when I’m writ- ing. You can’t help drawing upon yourself. We take the facts of our lives and try and transmute them into a coherent story. A lot of Peace,is autobiographical.
“I’m working on ‘The Wizard Knight’ now, two big books. The first one, The Knight, is in fourth draft, and the second, The Wizard,is in first draft, and it’s going to take a hell of a lot more work.If youaskmewhatI’lldonext,whatisthepointofmy sitting back now and saying, ‘Well, when I finish this, maybe two years from now, what I’ll dois...’ I’m going to change my mind a dozen times between now andthe time whenI finishit. It’s pointless.
‘““The Wizard Knight’ books are about an Ameri- can kid who is switched by fairies into a different universe, a quasi-medieval universe that works on the ‘club sandwich’ principle: there are several lay- ers. He, of course, is in the middle layer. There’s the fairy world below, and up aboveis the realm of the Norse gods, and so on and so forth. He has vari- ous adventures and matures in the course of these, and experiences love and sex, and sex andlove.All that good stuff. Actually, he falls desperately in love with the queen of fairies who has switched him, and much of it is his attempt to be united again with her. She’s going to take this kid and make a hero out of him.”
NG: “‘In some ways,it soundslike the flip side of Castleview, where we got to see Faerie distantly from Illinois.”’
GW: “‘He’sthere. By the end of the book, he knows it far better than he knows the America he only vaguely remembers and never knew that well any- way, because he was immature whenheleft. Sup- poseyoutookaboyof17andsethimdowninChina for the next 30 years. How much will he know about America?ButthisisanunfinishedworkandI’mstill tinkering with it.”
NG:“Howabouthorror?Hereyouareasaguest at the World Horror Convention, and I don’t recall a full-length work of horror from you (apart from Peace, and eventhat is pushing it). But you’ve done short stories. There’s definitely horrorin stories like ‘The Tree Is My Hat’ or ‘The Walking Sticks’. What
is the attraction there?”
GW:“Theattraction in all horror is the same. For
one thing,it’s survivability. The reader comesto the end and has survived the experience. The reader may, to some extent, also feel more qualified to deal with horror in his or her ownlife. And weall get a certain dosage of horror in our own lives, unless we have very brief lives indeed.”
NG:“Despite the fact that I’ve written a novel that’s been nominated for the Year’s Best Horror award, I don’t actually think of American Godsas a horror novel. I don’t think I could do a horror novel. I know why / couldn’t, but I’m interested to know why I can’t see you doing a work ofthat length.”
GW:“I wouldn’t want to live there for two years.”
NG: “‘Isthereanypossibilityofyourevercom- pleting the Soldier of the Mist sequence, the ‘Latro’ books?”’
GW: “‘That’s a possibility, but I don’t know. An idea takes you, or some sort of impulse takes you, and that’s how you go. MaybeI will write a baseball novel. I’ve never written a baseball novel.
“See this little cane I’m holding? Thisis the Egyp- tian God of the dead, which I received as a token of regard from my friend Neil Gaiman. What doesit mean when yourfriends give you the Egyptian God of the dead? Last night he did not come alive. Any- way, I might write a book-length ‘Latro’ horror novel. That’s a real idea, yeah! You know whatthose early Semitic gods were like? Wow. We can do ‘Locked in the Pyramids’... I’ve always wanted to do a book in which the Sphinx stood up and walked. The ancient Egyptians would change the face to be the face of the reigning pharaoh; when they got a new pharaoh,the stonemasons went in and they reshaped the face. Think of the possibilities right there — I think we’re cookin’ here, folks!”’
If somebodystarts absolutely originally, not imitat- ing anyone,he hasto begin by inventing speech. Early Lafferty, he was trying to conform,trying to say ‘I am a writer like other writers.’ Later he decided to abandon the pretense, changing from whatI call ‘Lafferty with water’ to ‘Lafferty straight.’
‘“Myearlier influences include H.G. Wells. He snuck completely through my defenses, made mere- alize a lot of the things I had been condemning as old-fashioned 19th-century fiction were really better than mostof the things I was reading then as a kid reading pulp magazines. Actually, my favorite pulp magazine, Famous Fantastic Mysteries, reprinted great old stories, but it didn’t emphasize (to me the kid reader) what it was doing. I swear there was a periodoftwoorthreeyearsinwhichIthoughtitwas publishing the stories that the other magazines were too cowardly to put into print, this powerful stuff! My father was a big H.G. Wells fan, so of course I would not read H.G. Wells. Then Famous Fantastic Mysteries came out with an entire issue reprinting TheIsland of Doctor Moreau. I, being a dumb kid, failed to notice that the author was Wells. It blew me away! I guess somewhere in the middle of my sec- ond rereading(I readit three times without ever stand- ing up andstretching), I realized this was by the au- thor my father kept trying to get meto read.
“T read Lewis Carroll, whoI still think is delightful. In those days, people did notinsist thatlittle boys could only read books in which the heroes were otherlittle boys, andlittle girls could only read books in which the heroes werelittle girls. I read Alice in Wonder- land and The Wizard of Oz,all this stuff, and I en- joyed them because I thought they were goodstories.
‘“‘Then there was a wholetradition of “bad boy’ literature — there’s a lot of it in Tom Sawyer.It’s died away because kids today watch TV and play computer games,and they don’t do thingslike let the cat down through the chimneyorsteal pies. Modern kids can’t imagine there was a time when mostkids went perpetually hungry. They got up hungry and
TOUR THE SHAMBLES
OF
A WALKING
FANTA
P.O. Box 1059, Woodstock, IL,
60098 ¢ garpubserv@aol.com CARRIED BY SCIENCE FICTION SPECIA
- STORES & MAIL
84 / LOCUS September 2002
NG: “I get very frustrated with my fans because
they don’t know anything else. I spend a lot of time
trying to say, ‘Look, go and read this, go andreadthat.
Understand where I’m coming from. I didn’t spring fromthebrowofJove!ThisistheChestertonline,this theywenttobedhungry.”
is the Zelazny line, this is the Lafferty line, this is the Ellison line. These are the people I came from.”
NG:“I read some analysis of ‘Hansel and Gretel’ which wasall about its psycho-sexual nature. It ana- lyzed up, down, inside out, and sideways, and I
GW:“I’ve read a lot of Lafferty and I would never
denythatI’vebeeninfluencedbyLafferty,anymore thoughtitcompletelymissedthefactthatit’sabouta
than I would deny that I’ve been influenced by Chesterton. Youstart writing, imitating someone con- sciously or unconsciously. You develop your own voice, but I think you always bear some imprint of the people who impressed you when you were young.
family during a famine whodid not have enough food for their two children and themselves and so were going regretfully to dumpthe children.It’s about two starving children who descend on this gingerbread house. Thetrail they leave is eaten by starving birds, and they themselves are immediately picked up by a woman as potential food. It’s a story about hunger.”
GW:“Academics can be incredibly obtuse.”
|
NG: “One thing I’ve always wanted to ask you was, how involved were you in the creation of Pringles?”’
GW:“I was the engineer on the original Pringles cooker. Pringles was invented by a German madman. He was making them with a kind of scissor and dip mechanism that wasn’t adaptable to mass production. There was a four-man team,and I did the cookerthat closed around the future potato chips and dragged them through the hot oil and opened them up and dumped them out. The fourth guy, who did the can- ning machine,theyliterally drove crazy with all their nitpicking and pressure to do better.”
NG: ‘‘What do you think about the state of your career?”’
GW:“I guess I’m not quite as optimistic now. In 1979,Iwasworkingasatechnicaleditor.Ihadhopes of becoming rich and famous from myfiction. Those hopes have not eventuated. Neil Gaiman is far more famousthan I am.I suspect he’s also richer.”
NG:“I probably am, but that’s mainly just thanks to Hollywood.It’s not a book thing. Movies are where silly moneyis paid, and they do payit to me. But you are in a very interesting position. If you asked people randomly on the street to name science fiction au- thors, they would probably not name Gene Wolfe, but if you asked science fiction authors, fantasists, horror writers, at this point they will all list Gene Wolfe. You are the writers’ writer.”
WWW.AMERICAN-FANTASY.COM
s Passetoe)ke Skee

