 
 READING FRIENDS WHEN THEY WISH TO SHOW THEM THE GENRE’S POSSIBILITIES. WOLFE’S FOUR-VOLUME THE BOOK OF THE NEW SUN 1S REGARDED
AS A MASTERPIECE, AND HIS LONG AND CELEBRATED CAREER ALSO INCLUDES SUCH NOVELS AS PEACE AND SOLDIER IN THE MIsT, AND THE Wortp Fantasy Awarp- WINNING COLLECTION STOREYS FROM THE OLD HorTet. His MOST RECENT NOVELS ARE THE KNIGHT AND ITS SEQUEL, THE WiIzarp.
WOLFE — AN ARDENT SUPPORTER OF THE Comic Book LecaL DEFENSE Funp — COLLABORATED WITH GAIMAN ON A WALKING TOUR OF THE SHAMBLES [AMERICAN Fantasy, 2002] - THEIR MACABRE “TOUR BOOK,” PUBLISHED FOR THE CHICAGO Wor.p Horror Convention.
THE FOLLOWING INTERVIEW Was CONDUCTED AT THE 28TH Wor.p Fantasy CONVENTION IN MINNEAPOLIS. WOLFE WAS CELEBRATING HIS WEDDING ANNIVERSARY
DURING THAT LONG WEEKEND, BUT SHARED SOME OF HIS TIME ON THE LAST NIGHT OF THE CONVENTION.
Neil remarked in a recentinterview [Weird Tales 320] that at the end ofthe day he is probably “in the Stephen King camp” — a “storyteller,”As opposed to a “risk-taker’like R.A. Lafferty, Robert Aickman, Avram Davidson, or Gene Wolfe. Whatis your opinion ofNeil’s work?
How do you think he became such a master ofdialogue?
I don’t think we can
say anything in the way of training or experience it’s inborn talent.
An earfor it?
GENEWOLFE
275

 Neil’s gotit. I recently saw
to what those people are saying. Whe well,itlookssoeasythatthere’snoarttoit.AndNeilislikethat.
How did A Walking Tourof the Shambles come about?
Somebody,I think it was Bob Garcia, got in touch with Neil and said, “I'd like you andGenetocollaborate
on a book to be sold atWorld Horror.” And Neil said,“Yes, Til do it if Gene will do it.” I thought,
“Wow, Neil Gaiman!It would be great fun to work ) with him becauseI like Neil andI know that he is damn, damn good.” Andit was far easierthanIexpectedanditwasaboutthreetimesmorefunthanIexpected.Itwas a blast. Some people, I think, have enjoyed the book lot, probably some have been disappointedinit;thatsortofthingisinevita
ble. But we had a wonderfultime writing it, and trying to top each other and make upfantastic stuff, and take some little thing
Neil came up with list of ideas that he thought we might want to do. One was a dictionary, one was a guidebook, one was an almanac, and so on. said, “Well, Jet’s do the
guidebook.” So ifyou
wantto give credit, credit Neil for coming up with all the original ideas. What I did was pick something out of this list that seemed to me to have more promise than the other things did. It seemed to me, for example, that an almanac
would be awfully limited as long
as it remained an almanac. And the dictionary thing has been
done by a numberof people already
— I think Ambrose Bierce was probably the first one. He wrote The Devil’s
Dictionary, which is a very
skeptical take onlife and things.
Did all ofNeil’s ideas have an Edward Gorey-Charles Addams feel to them? That sense ofhumorthatfilled thefinal work?
Yes, that’s certainly the
kind of thing that we came out with, but I don’t think that either
of us knew
for sure that that was what we were going to do. That’s what worked out. Hejust started out
by saying,
“Let's do a
dictionary
or a travel
book or an almanac, a
guide to a neighborhood,or somethinglike that.”
So the only common theme amongthese ideas was
— since this was
done for the 2002 World Horror Convention — the macabre?
Yes, well, that’s
the thing. We could have done the same thing and doneserious horrorif that
had been our
bent. But we
decided we would just have
a lot of fun with it. Andit was loto
f fun.It was, you know — the Cereal House, the Blind Man’s House, and all that. The cover [by Gahan Wilson]is tremendous.
Neilcommentedinhisonline
journal that he'd always enjoyed Gahan Wilson cartoons and now he was able to be
a Gahan Wilson cartoon.
Yes, I think everybody doeslike Gahan Wilson cartoons. By the way, are you familiar with the radio play that they did of “The Tree is My Hat”
at World Horror
Convention?
2:76 HANGING OUT WITH...

 Has that one been collectedyet?
It isn’t in any of my collections, it’
In that radio play, Neil plays the Rev
td, that “the only true communication is between equals.” I suppose that could be modtfied to “true collaboration.”
GENEWOLFE 277

 I don’t know. I would have some hesitation about that. Obviously you're going to have to define what you mean by “equals,” and what you mean by “true
collaboration.”
As you said, a working relationship in which one partner doesn’t completely dominate the other one.
Yes, or dominate the other one to the point where the other one rebels. And, of course, if one partner is very dominant, the partner will start thinking, “Well, it’s really about ninety-percent me, but I’m only going to getfifty percent of the credit, and fifty percent of the money. Not avery good deal for me,is it?”
Yesterday, here at the World Fantasy Convention, you and Neil appeared on a panel together. Neil mentioned a couple ofhis Sandman stories and you instantly knew whichoneshewasreferringto.Therewasasizeablenumberofpeopleonthatpanel, but I didn’t notice any other panel member reacting as quickly to the stories Neil mentioned. And since you wrote the introduction to the Sandman collection Fables and Reflections, Iguess it’s safe to say you're a bigfan ofthat
series.
Yes. I’m a big fan of Neil Gaiman’s.I will read just about anything he writes,if I can find time to doit and if my eyes will hold up. I’m at the point now where I can read formaybeahalfanhouroranhour;andIhavetotake
a break because I can’t see the print any more. When I was a young
man, I could read eight hours a day.
Andit’s no longer physically possible for me. And,of course, I have my own work to do.
Oneofthethingsyourworkshareswith
Neil’s is an interest in gods and in religion. Where do you think the two ofyou agree in your depictions ofgods, and where do you
think you differ?
I’m not sure that we differ at all, to be honest.
We differ theologically, but that’s
sort of a given.
How do you differ theologically?
Well, ’'m a Christian, and I
don’t think that Neil is a Christian.I believe in the divinity of Christ. I don't believe that Neil does. Now, maybe I'm wronging him, but my guessis that he does not. But I think both of us agree in the existence of God, and in a God whois ultimately unknowable. If God hasan infinite mind, then human beings are not capable of understanding that mind. And we're never going to be capable of understanding that mind.Wecangofive-hundredyearsintothefutureand have computers that are a whole helluvalot better, but they’restill not going to be able tocomprehendaninfinitemind.WeneedtorelatetoGodinawaythat’ssatisfactory to both parties, and to adjust our behavior in a way that’s satisfactory to God as well as us.
And I think Neil and I agree on those things. If Neil were
an atheist or an agnostic, I wouldstill like him and he would still be a
heck of a good writer, but I don't think that we’re that far apart.
I was a friend of Isaac Asimov's. Isaac Asimov would
probably have considered himself an agnostic, although he might have called himself an atheist — that did not preventus from being friends. But itdid mean thatwe had some serious philosophical differences. It seems to me thatyou can almost define civilizati
2.78 HANGING OUT WITH...

 to be honest with the reader, that’S what you do. The other thing is pretendin , and maybethat’s allowable in certain
,
, or people-with-one-foot-in-each-camp just in the human soul. If you assume
GENEWOLFE 279

 thatmygroupisrightandtheothergroupsarenotreallyworthlookingatveryhard, you get very limited, and that doesn't make for good writing.
Since we’re talking about religion, “Murder Mysteries” comes to mind. In Neil’s short stories one often sees — as one does in yours
_ that attempt to challenge the reader. It's it at
perhaps most evident in “Murder Mysteries,” which ts one of his most highly regarded tales.
Yes, one of the best stories
I ever read.
I think I can see some ofyour influence in thatstory. Are you aware of- or has Neil spoken to you of- how much he’s been influenced by your work?
He’s read a lot of me. I know that. I don’t know how much he’s been influenced. i e read. I’m influenced,
Neil commented in that interview I mentioned earlierthat tfa person is reading a Gene Wolfe story and not ‘getting it,” it’s theirfault somehow. “Go back and readit
again,” he says, “you'll get
there.”
They may be working
very hard. They’re
just not getting
the answer. I’m an engineerbytraining,andIhave
good third-rate
mathematical talent. I got very good grades in mathematics, up until I got
intothehigherreachesof
calculus, and whenI got up into
differential
equations,| hit
the wall. Mytalent
had carried
me as far asit would carry me. And from now on, I was
having terrible time getting
anywhere with it, because, as I say, I have good third-rate
ability. Alice Bentley, who
is a bookseller here in
the huckster room,canhandle high-energy
physics.I couldn’t do that.
You couldfool
me, from the level ofyour writing.
I might
fake you into thinking
that I could, because
when you're writing you learn how to
cram up on a subject, and learn the things that you
need to know to write the story. I
was asked,a few months ago, how muchresearchI
did before I began writing a story. The answeris “Almost none,” because whatI
dois begiin
writing
the story and then find
out whatit is that
I need to
know as
I go throughthe
story, and so I do the research in parallel with the writing,
not reading twenty books and then
sitting down and writing the
story, but writing the story and
stopping to page
through
twenty books
j
to find the
facts I want.
When you
write a short story, do you find you do most of the research while first draft?
writing the
How many drafts do you tendto
do? Atleastthree.Andoftenmorethanthree.Fourorfive—
not uncommon.
280 HANGING ouTWITH...

 Are
any
ofthese handwritten?
—shesaid,“Youkeepondoingwhatyoubeendoingandyou’regonnakeepongettin’ what you beengettin’.” And we don’t have to keep on doing what we’ve been doing. Wecan do somethingelse ifwe don’tlikewhatwe'regettin’. Ithinkalotofthepurpose offictionoughttobetotellpeoplethat.
To help them achievea kind ofNirvana?
Yes.To freeyourselffromthewheel, andyou'llbecomeat onewith God orBrahma
trying to turn the knob with his front paws. And Ithought, “Has he always been a dog?” It makes me wonder... There are things like that that you wonder about.
GENEWOLFE 28]

