
DnD's 2024 DM's Guide debuts tracking sheets for absolutely everything - Wargamer
Wargamer
Main menu
Warhammer 40k
MTG
D&D
Board games
About us
-->
Network N Media
Search
DnD's 2024 DM's Guide debuts tracking sheets for absolutely everything
Want to DM a Dungeons and Dragons game but struggle with organization? The 2024 Dungeon Master’s Guide is designed to solve that problem.
Mollie Russell                
Updated:
Oct 1, 2024
Dungeons and Dragons
Dungeons and Dragons
 has revealed a new feature of its upcoming 2024 Dungeon Master's Guide - tracking sheets to help you manage every inch of your campaign. In an official livestream from October 1, game designer Chris Perkins explains that "these sheets are designed to help you keep track of important information in your game". This includes key NPCs, settlements, the new Bastion mechanics, magic items, character backstories, and more.
Perkins' personal favorite is apparently the session planner sheet, which can be used to detail "key beats and character notes" ahead of a game. "I think these sheets are compelling, and I think DMs will want to use them - or create their own versions of them." Perkins is so confident in the fanbase' love of handouts, he predicts the tracking sheets will be a majorly popular feature of the new '
One DnD
' DMG.
In fact, Wizards of the Coast is so eager for fans to use the sheets that they'll be available 
outside
 of the Dungeon Master's Guide, too. "We're going to make them downloadable off of our website", Perkins says. No date or further details are given about this, but we assume these sheets will be found on D&DBeyond as free PDFs, much like the 2024 
DnD character sheets
.
Releasing worldwide on November 12, the 2024 DM's Guide is next up on the year's 
DnD release schedule
. Tuesday's stream covered a lot of information we already knew about the tabletop tome - the example Greyhawk campaign setting, for example, or the brand-new rules for 
DnD Bastions
. While much of this feels like old news for keen D&D fans, Wizards of the Coast promises that more previews are on the way. We'll be keeping our eyes peeled.
For more on the new rules, check out our full 
DnD 2024 Player's Handbook review
. We can also explain how the new 
DnD 2024 backgrounds
 work, as well as what's changed for 
DnD classes
 and 
DnD races
.
Mollie Russell                
 Mollie Russell is Wargamer's resident 
D&D
 and guides specialist. She has a degree in Creative Writing and English Literature, and you can also find her writing at 
Pocket Tactics
 and in various poetry magazines. She's covered some of the biggest and weirdest releases for Wargamer - including the DnD movie, 
Frosthaven
, and 
Baldur's Gate 3
.
Mollie is constantly playing Dungeons and Dragons, but she's still on her quest to try every tabletop RPG she can get her hands on. An avid fan of MTG drafts and horror board games, she will take any opportunity to info-dump about why 
Blood on the Clocktower
 is the best social deduction game. (She/Her)            
As an Amazon Associate, we earn from qualifying purchases.
As an eBay Partner, we earn if you make a purchase. 
Learn more
.
">
Discord
TikTok
Facebook
X
Bluesky
Steam
Google News
Newsletter
© 2026
Powered by Network N Media
Terms and conditions
About us
Careers
