Volume 21
Number 2 Article 38
Winter 10-15-1996
Point of View in Tolkien
Point of View in Tolkien
Christine Barkley
Follow this and additional works at: https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore
Part of the Children's and Young Adult Literature Commons
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation
Barkley, Christine (1996) "Point of View in Tolkien," Mythlore: A Journal of J.R.R. Tolkien, C.S. Lewis,
Charles Williams, and Mythopoeic Literature: Vol. 21: No. 2, Article 38.
Available at: https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol21/iss2/38
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by
the Mythopoeic Society at SWOSU Digital Commons. It
has been accepted for inclusion in Mythlore: A Journal of
J.R.R. Tolkien, C.S. Lewis, Charles Williams, and
Mythopoeic Literature by an authorized editor of SWOSU
Digital Commons. An ADA compliant document is
available upon request. For more information, please
contact phillip.fitzsimmons@swosu.edu.
To join the Mythopoeic Society go to:
http://www.mythsoc.org/join.htm
Online Summer Seminar 2023
August 5-6, 2023: Fantasy Goes to Hell: Depictions of Hell in Modern Fantasy Texts
https://mythsoc.org/oms/oms-2023.htm
Point of View in Tolkien
Point of View in Tolkien
Abstract Abstract
Many stories are told by more than one teller in Tolkien's works. This paper compares different versions to
see what areas of interest or emphasis arise, and what differences might be explained by the specific
interests or culture of the teller. The paper also evaluates which kinds of stories are told most often by
which tellers.
Additional Keywords
Additional Keywords
The Hobbit; The Lord of the Rings; narrators; points of view; The Silmarillion; Unfinished Tales
This article is available in Mythlore: A Journal of J.R.R. Tolkien, C.S. Lewis, Charles Williams, and Mythopoeic
Literature: https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol21/iss2/38
Point of View in Tolkien
Christine Barkley
Abstract: Many stories are told by more than one teller in Tolkien’s works. This paper compares
different versions to see what areas of interest or emphasis arise, and what differences might be
explained by the specific interests or culture of the teller. The paper also evaluates which kinds of stories
are told most often by which tellers.
Keywords: The Hobbit, The Lord of the Rings, narrators, points of view, The Silmarillion, Unfinished
Tales
Peter Pan is a very different story told from the point of view
of Captain Hook rather than Wendy, as in Steven Spielberg’s
Hook. John Gardner’s Grendel changes our perspective of
Beowulf. A story from the point of view of Javert (as
opposed to Jean Valjean) in Les Miserables or from the point
of view of the Sheriff of Nottingham rather than Robin Hood
would not only change our sympathies somewhat but also
our perceptions about the world, what is right and wrong.
Point of view is extremely important in a story. It affects our
moral sense and our understanding of the secondary world of
the tale. It provides us with our world view which suggests
that the perceptions and judgments made by the omniscient
narrator are absolute truth and right thinking. Even this,
however, can be thought of as the author’s point of view.
And if the tale is told by a character or even by a narrator
limiting his main perceptions to those of a single character,
The centre of interpretation, of course, is the plot or the
story itself. Our awareness of the particular character traits or
personalities of the characters can colour our evaluation of
the plot. These next two levels I added when I was writing a
paper on Hamlet and may apply better to plays than to
novels, but are still relevant here, I believe. What other
characters tell us about (which I call verbal tableaus) or just
show us (which I call visual tableaus) can also add to our
or only one character at a time (as does Tolkien), then more
can be learned than from just plot, dialogue, or action of the
story. For characters, by what they notice, report, comment
upon, or find worthy of attention and by what they fail to
notice, can reveal much about their own characters and world
views than mere actions or dialogue.
Most criticism of literature asks us to look beyond what is
being said by the author to examine also how it is presented.
A closer look at J.R.R. Tolkien’s technique of using a limited
or omniscient point of view in his stories may reveal much to
us. The diagram below illustrates several levels of
interpretation possible for any work of literature. This
represents various levels at which a work may be interpreted.
It is based on a model by Hazard Adams from the University
of Washington.
A) Context of Story, of author
B) Author, his canon or “fictive reader”
C) Title, introduction, preface
D) Theme(s), issues
E) Narrator(s) omniscient or limited
F) Visual tableaus - what we are only shown
G) Verbal tableaus - what we are only told about
H) Characters/events
I) Plot/story inferred
understanding of the events. One example in Tolkien of this
level comes in the “Council of Elrond” chapter of The Lord
of the Rings when each participant at the council tells his
own story, but we also see much of Boromir’s personality
coming forth when he is willing to interrupt Elrond’s plan to
get his own say in. However, it is on the fifth level, level E,
the level of point of view of the narrator(s) that I wish to
concentrate at present. But first let me continue to explain
POINT OF VIEW IN TOLKIEN 257
the other levels. Themes may be stated by the author, by
characters, or implied by the action and resolution of the
plot. Certainly the issues which the author is interested in
will become known by the situations in which he or she
placed the characters. Above the level of the tale itself,
additional meaning can sometimes be inferred through the
use of the title or from an introduction (often by the author
himself). Tolkien’s “Prologue” to The Lord of the Rings is a
perfect example of this, as the entire frame tale which
authenticates the story as having come from the “Red Book
of Westmarch”, a history of Hobbits which included the
story of The Hobbit, also provides a larger context for the
present tale and gives away the “happy ending” by
mentioning some history of the characters after the events of
the present tale. This level is useful to compare with the
point of view in The Hobbit, as well, since the narrator then
paraphrased Bilbo’s account, revealing his own bias.
Tolkien’s “Foreword”, in this case, is yet another level
removed from his “Prologue”. The “Prologue” deals mainly
with hobbits and the tale of The Lord of the Rings; the
“Foreword” refers to Tolkien’s creative process in writing
The Lord of the Rings. Beyond just one work lies an entire
canon of a particular author. Knowing that, for Tolkien, The
Silmarillion came first and was the major opus he kept
returning to, adding to, and revising would also affect our
interpretations of the other works. Sometimes themes
become more evident when we see them repeated over and
over in other works, or we get variations on a theme in other
works. The last level of possible interpretation of a work
(that I use) is the contextual level. Here not only the time
period in which the author is writing, but also his particular
interests and even the events which have shaped his life
become important.
There are schools of criticism, such as deconstructuralism,
which also include reference to our own paradigms, the
contexts of the reader’s life which might colour an
interpretation of the work, but I have deliberately kept my
focus on the text itself and its many levels of possible
meaning. An evaluation of the reader’s bias would, of
course, be broader than my A level as would Marxist
criticism which tries to tie power and finance into creativity
by suggesting the political situation could dictate which
works could get published. But this is not my concern.
Another school would focus more particularly on the word or
sentence level (in more detail than my level I, sort of on the
J, K, or L level). Here the author’s choice of vocabulary,
sentence structure or the flow of the sentences, the division
into paragraphs or chapters would be examined, but this is
more detailed than I choose to be at this time. One might
even doubt my own last level, arguing that a work of
literature can stand on its own without need for knowledge
about the author’s life or likes, but in light of so many
excellent critical articles published about Tolkien which
illustrate his sources and influences, I doubt that anyone
would begrudge me that level.
This paper will focus on level E, then, and compare three
different sets of works to show how a change in narrator can
change the focus of the tale itself. First I want to evaluate
Bilbo as the narrator of The Hobbit and compare this to
Gandalf’s version of the first part of that story found in “The
Quest of Erebor” in Unfinished Tales. For this I will also
refer to the summary from Tolkien’s “Prologue” to The Lord
of the Rings. Then I would like to compare Aragom’s version
of the Beren and Luthien tale to that found in The
Silmarillion with some reference to “The Tale of Aragorn
and Arwen” from Appendix A. And finally I will look at
Bilbo’s telling of Earendil’s tale in the halls of Elrond to the
version provided in The Silmarillion. Other such examples
are possible but these should illustrate my points. I hope to
show that hobbits, men, Istari, a historian/scholar or a scribe,
and the omniscient narrator of The Silmarillion focus on
different aspects of a tale due to their own personalities,
interests, or concerns. Naturally the interests of the hobbits
or men might be more limited than those of a God-like
narrator.
Let me begin with a definition of the different kinds of
narrator possible. A first-person narrator is the most limited
because he can only report what he thinks, sees, says, hears,
does, or is told about by another character. The Hobbit uses a
third-person/limited narrator which is very similar. It also
purports to have been written after the conclusion of the
adventure from a journal kept by Bilbo on his travels; thus
the subtitle “There and Back Again” reveals the ending. It
also brings us the issue of memory and the trustworthiness of
the recollection. The Lord of the Rings uses a similar
third-person limited point of view with some variations. Its
point of view is limited to one character at a time, but it is
not always the same character: for example, it is Gimli’s
point of view we get on the Paths of the Dead, and more
importantly Sam’s in Mordor. But Tolkien usually chooses a
less powerful, less “in charge” character for his point of
view. However, there are even a few exceptions in The Lord
of the Rings, for example the seeming omniscient reporting
of the dreams each of the hobbits (except Sam) has in Tom
Bombadil’s house. But even this supposed exception could
be explained by having each of the hobbits tell his dream to
Frodo who eventually compiles the entire story. But this does
not explain the fox’s point of view as he wonders at seeing
three hobbits travelling through the woods, but this is one of
the few exceptions to Tolkien’s use of third-person/limited
point of view as opposed to omniscient in The Hobbit and
The Lord of the Rings. This third-person/limited viewpoint
narrows our focus to what that character is aware of or
interested in. The choice of this character determines what
details we will have, and how those details will be weighted
or interpreted for us. Since the limit is on what the character
already knows and then sees, hears, and does, there is often
much dialogue, and even minor actions are reported. This
tends to limit the story in time and space as well, but to
expand it in detail.
The Silmarillion and Unfinished Tales often use a different
narrator. It has been said that The Silmarillion was like
Tolkien’s Bible as it is the history of an entire race of beings
and thus the scope is much vaster. Each tale is like reducing
The Lord of the Rings to a 15-page summary, and connecting
it to all other significant happenings of that age. The
258 J. R. R. TOLKIEN CENTENARY CONFERENCE
connections to other tales, to the larger history in The
Silmarillion, become more important than the limited
individual actions, dialogue, or observations. This provides
us with a larger sense of purpose but less personal
involvement. So there are advantages and disadvantages to
each type of narrator. But that is not the point here. I simply
want to illustrate how the choice of narrator affects our
interpretation of the tale.
Let me begin with The Hobbit, “The Quest of Erebor”
(which is Gandalf’s version of the beginning of that tale),
and the narrator from the Prologue to The Lord of the Rings.
I will assume more familiarity on the part of the audience
with The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings, so I will focus
more on the other works to show contrast. Bilbo, as has been
pointed out, was very concerned about eating and drinking,
creature comforts, and things familiar to himself (like
riddles), so his version focused often on what meals he was
enjoying or was deprived of, etc. At the beginning of the tale
Bilbo has no plan to seek adventures - the designs seem to
be either Thorin’s or Gandalf’s, and it is mainly Bilbo’s
confusion and limited understanding we see through the
narrative. His interests are limited to dirty dishes and
forgotten handkerchiefs. “The Quest of Erebor” shows a
different focus on the tale itself and the choice of Bilbo to
accompany Thorin and Company.
But first let me comment that “The Quest of Erebor” is
complicated by yet another level of interpretation as to its
narrator for it purports to be Frodo’s recollection of a
conversation with Gandalf in Minas Tirith after the
coronation of King Elessar. So technically it is Frodo who is
the narrator, but almost the entire tale is a quoted passage of
Gandalf speaking, so perhaps we could trust to Frodo’s
memory and his accurate representation of Gandalf’s words
and intent. Therefore I will refer to this as Gandalf’s point of
view, despite the fact that Frodo admits, “I cannot remember
all the tale now” (Tolkien, 1980, p. 321). So we know we do
not have the entire story the exact way Gandalf told it. Frodo
interprets Gandalf’s interests and motives a bit when he says,
“we gathered that to begin with Gandalf was thinking only of
the defence of the West against the Shadow” (Tolkien, 1980,
p. 321). This would make Gandalf’s point of view broader,
certainly more so than Bilbo’s or even Thorin’s, and more
like that of the omniscient narrator in The Silmarillion. And
yet the quoted material, supposedly Gandalf’s own words,
does not entirely bear out the claim that Gandalf was only
concerned with Middle-earth itself. However, Frodo’s claims
predispose the reader towards a particular interpretation of
the events which an examination of the text does not clearly
prove true. But this just shows us the power of the narrator.
In the text, Gandalf first admits to going to the Shire himself
for some rest and to reason out the problem that Sauron
posed to the West (not yet to act, in other words). Gandalf
focuses much on the concept of fate. He claims when he met
Thorin, “it was at that moment that the tide began to turn”
(Tolkien, 1980, p. 322). He talks of his possession of the map
and key as “another strange chance” (Tolkien, 1980, p. 323).
Apparently an earlier version also suggested the older
Gandalf was “no longer trammelled by the burden of
Middle-earth as I was then” (Tolkien, 1980, p. 329). So the
most recent version of “The Quest of Erebor” shows more
awareness of the broader perspective of happenings in
Middle-earth (beyond the scope of the concern of the
dwarves or of the hobbit Bilbo) and at least in retrospect a
belief in and trusting in fate - a faith in the concept of the
overarching universe with some sort of plan beyond the
individual’s. Gandalf’s point of view gives us a breadth of
space, a larger view of Middle-earth, which includes the
Necromancer/Sauron and his plans as well as the desires of
the dwarves (and possibly one hobbit’s desire for adventure).
It gives us a larger space but not the same depth in time we
would get in The Silmarillion. Nor does the quoted material
support Frodo’s claim for totally unselfish motives on
Gandalf’s part.
Gandalf’s version provides another point of interest or
comparison, for at one point he interprets Bilbo’s
motivations.
I guessed that he wanted to remain “unattached” for
some reason deep down which he did not understand
himself - or would not acknowledge, for it alarmed
him. He wanted, all the same, to be free to go when the
chance came, or he had made up his courage.
(Tolkien, 1980, p. 331)
Nowhere in Bilbo’s version does he ascribe such motives to
himself for his unmarried state. Thus a different narrator can
give us a different psychological view of a character. This
passage again reveals Gandalf’s interest and belief in fate,
which we don’t find in Bilbo’s account. Bilbo talks about
luck and chance but not fate.
Gandalf himself recognized and acknowledged the truth
that different narrators tell slightly different tales about the
same events. “The Quest of Erebor” really only attempts to
explain why Bilbo was included in the dwarves’ plans at
Gandalf’s suggestion. Gandalf then said, “the rest of the
story is well known to you - from Bilbo’s point of view. If I
had written the account, it would have sounded rather
different” (Tolkien, 1980, p. 335). Later Frodo says,
“Well, I am glad to have heard the full tale. If it is
full. I do not really suppose that even now you are
telling us all you know.”
“Of course not,” said Gandalf.
(Tolkien, 1980, p. 336)
And also we might remember that Frodo admitted that he
had forgotten some of the tale when he went to set it down.
Thus another truth about the point-of-view of the narrator is
that it is always a partial story, not a complete version of the
tale, which would require not only perfect memory, but also
a point-of-view account from each of the characters.
Ironically Tolkien’s omniscient narrator in The Silmarillion
is often the scantiest with details, though the limits of
memory, or awareness of the thoughts, actions, dialogue, and
perceptions of several characters are available to him. In
other words, he should have access to more detail but he
chooses not to include them. Instead the focus for the
omniscient narrator is broader in purpose or theme. But he’s
still controlling to what the reader will be exposed.
The result of Gandalf’s addition to the tale, however, is to
POINT OF VIEW IN TOLKIEN 259
broaden The Hobbit to include actions more directly
connected with the larger picture provided by The Lord of the
Rings. The actions of the dwarves and Bilbo are thus
connected to Gandalf’s battle with the Necromancer/Sauron
and its repercussions for all of Middle-earth. No longer could
Sauron enlist the aid of a dragon in the north; Sauron does
not choose to attack Rivendell or Lothlorien but instead flees
to Mordor; and finally fate decrees that the One Ring will be
found again, thus precipitating the events in The Lord of the
Rings. Gandalf as narrator broadens our perspectives and
concerns over space, he shows us a larger map.
The “Prologue” to The Lord of the Rings provides a frame
tale of the discovery of the “Red Book of Westmarch” telling
tales of days gone by in the Third Age. Thus a perspective of
time is introduced. The narrator at one point says, “Those
days, the Third Age of Middle-earth, are now long past, and
the shape of all lands has been changed” (Tolkien, 1991, p.
14). This narrator is complex, of course, because he is a
“modem” historian/scholar who has uncovered an old
manuscript and will interpret it for us. He is not involved in
the tale nor affected by it. But through the perspective of
time and with hindsight, he can focus on the most important
events. Thus in his version of Bilbo’s tale, his concern is not
Bilbo’s confusion or interest with food or a dry bed, nor
Gandalf’s designs and motivations. He summarizes in one
paragraph the entire tale and then comments that this
“adventure” was only important because of the “accident” of
Bilbo’s finding of the Ring. He then recounts in much more
detail the “Riddles of the Dark” chapter from The Hobbit.
As a historian/scholar his interest also lies in the different
versions of Bilbo’s tale - the lie he first told the dwarves and
set down in his memoirs and the true account which this
narrator subscribes to Frodo or Sam rather than Bilbo. Our
narrator from the Prologue, the historian/scholar, also
analyses Bilbo’s choice of calling the Ring a “present” as
being suggested by Gollum’s naming it his “birthday
present.” The historian/scholar not only has Gandalf’s
spacial perspective but also a temporal view from safely in
the Fourth Age. However, unlike the omniscient narrator of
The Silmarillion, he is limited to the text itself. He can
interpret the author of the text’s use of a specific word like
“present” but has no other knowledge than that provided in
his version of the “Red Book of Westmarch”. And though he
tries to claim its authenticity, he also admits his own
limitations. This is not the original; “the original Red Book
has not been preserved, but many copies were made”
(Tolkien, 1991, p. 26). He traces his copy to one written in
Gondor, “an exact copy in all details of the Thain’s Book in
Minas Tirith" (Tolkien, 1991, p. 27) which “was a copy,
made at the request of King Elessar, of the Red Book of the
Periannath” (Tolkien, 1991, p. 27). Thus even this narrator
admits that he has only that portion of the tale which was
preserved in his version.
Of the next two comparisons I wish to make, the tale of
Beren and Luthien is perhaps the best known though for my
purposes the most obvious and therefore the less interesting.
I am comparing Aragorn’s telling of that story at Weathertop
with The Silmarillion's version. As I do this I will also refer
to “The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen” from Appendix A of
The Lord of the Rings. Most of Strider’s entire poem or chant
(eight of nine stanzas) deals with Luthien and recounts her
meeting with Beren. The only exception is a line that refers
to Beren’s fate: “Enchantment healed his weary feet / That
over hills were doomed to roam” (Tolkien, 1991, p. 208).
But this version does not tell us over which hills, why he was
doomed, or where he roamed to and why. It does not require
a great stretch of the critical faculties to suppose that
Aragorn is reminded of his own meeting with Arwen and
how he mistook her for Luthien Tinuviel, and that this
determines his focus on the tale that he tells the hobbits.
Only the last stanza deals with the adventures Beren and
Luthien shared.
Long was the way that fate them bore.
O’er stony mountains cold and grey.
Through halls of iron and darkling door,
And woods of nightshade morrowless.
The Sundering Seas between them lay,
And yet at last they met once more,
And long ago they passed away
In the forest singing sorrowless.
(Tolkien, 1991, p. 209)
And even this stanza mentions the romantic idea that even
death could not keep them apart. But more importantly, the
entire passage does not mention the Silmarils at all. Strider
does admit that this is only part of the tale, and he
summarizes part of the rest for the hobbits. He tells of the
slaying of Barahir, Beren’s father, and Beren’s escape over
the Mountains of Terror to Thingol’s kingdom (Beren’s early
experiences here, by the way, do coincide a bit with
Aragorn’s own history of losing his own father at age two
and going with his mother to live with Elrond under a hidden
identity to keep Sauron from discovering his whereabouts, so
again there is a personal connection). Thus there was more to
the story before the part that Aragorn chose to relate. And
there was more after:
Many sorrows befell them afterwards, and they
were parted long. Tinuviel rescued Beren from the
dungeons of Sauron, and together they passed through
great dangers, and cast down even the Great Enemy
from his throne, and took from his iron crown one of
the three Silmarils, brightest of all jewels, to be the
bride-price of Luthien to Thingol her father. Yet at the
last Beren was slain by the Wolf that came from the
gates of Angband, and he died in the arms of Tinuviel.
But she chose mortality, and to die from the world, so
that she might follow him.
(Tolkien, 1991, p. 210)
Here at least we have a wider glimpse of the significance
of the story but he also focuses still on the romance -
Tinuviel’s choice to become mortal, as Arwen will. Aragorn
then relates the lineage of Luthien and Beren, connecting
both Elrond of Rivendell and the kings of Numenor (himself,
though he does not claim this at the time). This part isn’t in
The Silmarillion, but it would certainly be of interest to
Aragorn especially since he had just discovered it prior to
meeting Arwen. Aragorn himself admits that he must of
260 J. R. R. TOLKIEN CENTENARY CONFERENCE
necessity omit part of the tale “for it is a long tale, of which
the end is not known; and there are none now, except Elrond,
that remember it aright as it was told of old” (Tolkien, 1991,
p. 208). So his choices of what part of the tale to tell, what to
summarize, and what to quote from the song “in a mode that
is called ann-thennath" (Tolkien, 1991, p. 210) become even
more significant. In addition this is supposedly a translation
into the Common Speech and has by implication lost
something in the translation, as Aragorn says, “this is but a
rough echo of it” (Tolkien, 1991, p. 210).
But again, as I said before, this is a relatively simple
comparison because Aragorn puts almost the entire emphasis
on the romance of the tale, the meeting between Beren and
Luthien which is so closely related to his own meeting with
Arwen. “The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen” (or actually a part
of that tale as it is labelled in Appendix A of The Lord of the
Rings) creates for us another problem with identifying the
narrator. It is included as per the “Prologue” as part of the
“Red Book of Westmarch”. But according to our
historian/scholar the “abbreviated version of those parts of
The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen which lie outside the account
of the War” (Tolkien, 1991, p. 27) was added later in Minas
Tirith. Thus we cannot assume Frodo or any hobbit
translated, transcribed, or wrote from memory this tale. The
entire passage is in quotes which could be accounted for by
the fact that it is only a part of a larger tale. But I prefer to
think that it was written, dictated, or related by Aragorn
himself. Certainly dialogue is included between Aragorn and
his mother Gilraen, between Aragorn and Elrond, and even
between Aragorn and A.wen which only he would know.
The story also refers to Aragorn’s solitude. Yet it often
subtly praises him as well, for example, “he seemed to Men
worthy of honour” (Tolkien, 1991, p. 1097) and this would
suggest that a scribe or court writer might well have recorded
the tale. And also the story continues beyond the death of
Aragorn to that of Arwen as well, so the court scribe as
narrator seems more likely but I will refer to Aragorn as the
narrator in the same way I called Gandalf the narrator of
“The Quest of Erebor” since (other than a little harmless
flattery of Aragorn) the scribe does not seem to interject his
own world view or observations.
In “The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen” we learn that indeed
Aragorn had been singing part of the “Lay of Luthien” about
the meeting between Beren and Luthien (perhaps the very
same passage he quoted to the hobbits) when he first saw
Arwen. So we know that Aragorn has a personal connection
to and fondness for the part of the story he chose to relate. As
I said, in The Fellowship of the Ring, the story focuses almost
entirely on the romance. Very little was said of the long way
“which fate them bore” or the dangers or indeed even the
successes or the glories either. In “The Tale of Aragorn and
Arwen” an older Aragorn with an awareness of how his own
tale worked out (in retrospect) more clearly connects his life
quest with Beren’s when he relates his conversation with
Elrond: “ I see that I have turned my eyes to a treasure no
less dear than the treasure of Thingol that Beren once
desired. Such is my fate” (Tolkien, 1991, p. 1096). Both
Gandalf and Aragorn (after the fact, with the quest
successfully completed) do focus more on fate than they did
earlier. Yet even “The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen” still
emphasizes the romantic story, not Aragorn’s role in the
political events of Middle-earth, except that becoming King
of both Gondor and Amor was a condition upon which he
could claim Arwen.
So we see, through Aragorn as a narrator, that his focus is
more narrow even than Gandalf’s. He is, of course, deeply
involved in the War of the Ring, the battle against Sauron,
but he limits his own concerns to those of men, to fight to
defend Minas Tirith before attacking the Dark Lord directly,
to claim his kingship and his bride, to govern well, and to
choose the hour of his own death rather than to “fall from my
high seat unmanned and witless” (Tolkien, 1991, p. 1100).
And the primary motivating factor for him is his love for
Arwen. This is revealed partly in his choice of which portion
of the Beren and Luthien tale to tell.
The narrator of The Silmarillion, on the other hand, has a
much vaster focus of interest. He is telling the tale of the
entire First Age, of which the tale of Beren and Luthien is
only a small, but important, part. His interests, though, will
be in connecting this tale to the larger political and social
history. In The Silmarillion the story is told in prose rather
than poetry (either in the Common Speech as is Aragorn’s
translation, or in its original Elvish). This choice alone on the
part of The Silmarillion's narrator affects the reader. The
narrator does use poetry to quote the battle between Finrod
Felagund and Sauron in songs of power, and also quotes the
Song of Parting which figures prominently in the plot. But he
relates all the rest, even Luthien’s songs to Morgoth or to
Mandos, in prose. Thus this version reads more like
summary of a tale than the tale itself. We sometimes feel
deprived of the dialogue, the psychological or physical detail,
the report of the songs themselves.
I won’t recount the entire tale of Beren and Luthien from
1 The Silmarillion, but I would like to point out that the
emphasis is on the political interactions between the various
groups of elves and how Beren’s and Luthien’s actions
affected those political relationships. The narrator often
veers the tale away from Beren or Luthien to reveal the
political shenanigans of the sons of Feanor - Celegorm and
Curufin - or to reveal Sauron’s or Morgoth’s plots to defeat
Huan, or to discuss the machinations of Thingol. The love
between Beren and Luthien is not as much the focus as the
repercussions of that love on the other elves. Melian tells
Thingol that the quest he has devised for Beren will bring
doom and draw Doriath “within the fate of a mightier realm”
(Tolkien, 1992, p. 168). Fate again is an important theme.
And the perspective of this narrator is on the entire fate or
history of the elves, how every action, every character, is
interconnected with the others. It is broader in both space and
time than Aragom’s view. Thus it seems weightier in theme,
though scantier in detail.
My last example, I believe, will show much the same thing,
as I compare Bilbo’s version of the story of Earendil to that
given in The Silmarillion. Actually, the poem Bilbo recited,
though composed mostly by himself, was also amended,
edited, or added to by Aragorn. Bilbo claims that it should be
POINT OF VIEW IN TOLKIEN 261
easy to tell which is the narrator. To Lindir, a listening elf, he
says, “if you can’t distinguish between a Man and a Hobbit,
your judgement is poorer than I imagined. They’re as
different as peas and apples” (Tolkien, 1991, p. 253). Lindir
claims all mortals sound alike. Bilbo tells Frodo that
Aragom’s addition was mostly the reference to a green stone
(probably the line “upon his breast an emerald”). Aragom’s
own name, “Elfstone”, foretold to him even before he
received the stone, might suggest his interest in such a
talisman. And assuming Aragom’s interest in romance, there
could easily have been more detail in the poem about Elwing
and her love and help for her husband in his trials were
Aragorn truly a co-author. Since there is not and also for
other reasons (for one Aragorn had only been around three
days and had doubtless had important business other than
composing poems to attend to), and also because of the style
and point of view in the poem, I will assume most of the
version is Bilbo’s and refer to him as the narrator, but I will
eventually show how his interests and perceptions as
revealed by the poem might also coincide with Aragom’s, so
that it is appropriate that both are judged to be the author/
narrator.
First, the choice of subject matter is always of interest -
why does Bilbo choose Earendil? Aragorn seems to think it a
bit cheeky for him to do so in Elrond’s own house. Bilbo
could have done so to try to flatter Elrond but nothing in the
poem suggests flattery (certainly not in the same way that the
scribe of Minas Tirith seemed to flatter Aragorn in “The
Tale of Aragorn and Arwen"). If this theory can be
dismissed, then it seems likely that Bilbo’s interest in
Earendil is personal, that he feels some kinship of spirit with
the restless Elf (or half-Elf) who wanted adventure, yet later
yearned for home, who took the plea for help from men and
elves to the shores of Valinor itself, and who was eventually
exiled from the earth into the heavens with the Silmaril on
his brow. At the end Bilbo writes of Earendil “But on him
mighty doom was laid . . . [and he could] tarry never more
on Hither Shores where mortals are” (Tolkien, 1991, p. 253).
He is forever on an errand, never to rest or go home. At this
point in his life, of course, Bilbo is in self-imposed exile
from the Shire. He has done his wandering and merely
settled in Rivendell because it seemed the best place to be -
yet it isn’t home and he is without his kin and loved ones
(most notably Frodo). Aragorn as well has had little rest
from wandering and thus it is appropriate that the poem be
partly ascribed to him as well.
Bilbo does give elaborate detail of the makings of the ship,
the wardrobe of Earendil, his flight into the heavens. Bilbo is
interested in the details of the story which personalize it to
one man, one ship (actually two), more so than its political
import. There is no mention of the political necessity for
Earendil’s journey to Valinor, nor of the coming of the Valar
to Middle-earth to fight with men and elves in the final battle
between the Host of the West and Morgoth in which
Morgoth is defeated and exiled to the void, nor of the part
played by the sons of Feanor when the other two Silmarils
from the Iron Crown are recovered or how they are lost
again. None of the vaster political or social ramifications of
Earendil’s tale are referred to by Bilbo. This broader
perspective is only seen through the point of view of the
narrator of The Silmarillion.
The omniscient narrator in The Silmarillion has another
advantage: he can provide for us motivation or emotion for
several characters. He can tell us of Elwing that “she sat in
sorrow by the mouths of Sirion” (Tolkien, 1992, p. 246) or
that Maedhros was tormented by knowledge of his
unfulfilled oath or that Earendil turned in despair at seeing
the ruins of Sirion. These details provide the logical
connections, the cause-and-effect logic, to explain the
actions of the characters on that grander scale, but also might
divide the reader’s interest or sense of loyalty. The limited
third-person narrative focuses attention more on one
character.
We’ve examined several kinds of narrators: Bilbo,
Aragorn, Gandalf, the historian/scholar who discovered the
“Red Book of Westmarch”, the scribe in Minas Tirith who
recorded Aragom’s story, and the omniscient narrator in The
Silmarillion. As I said earlier, there are advantages and
disadvantages to each kind of narrator — the more limited
point of view is less broad in scope or theme, but at least in
Tolkien more detailed in description, dialogue, poetry, song,
etc. The omniscient narrator has a broader purpose but loses
the ability to involve his readers with a greater wealth of
detail and focus. He can still involve them with the power of
the story or the theme or purpose itself. I do not presume to
choose one as better than the other, though since we already
have The Silmarillion to provide the scope, I would love to
read a three-volume version of the Beren and Luthien story
or of the Fall of Gondolin in the same detail as The Lord of
the Rings.
But hopefully I have demonstrated how the awareness and
observations, the interests, the world view and concerns of
the narrator can affect the telling of the tale. We never really
get to read a definitive tale. It is always a summary or
presentation by some narrator. If there were an ur-Tale or an
Ideal Tale, it would have to encompass the points of view,
awareness, and biases of all the characters as well as the
scope of vision and the depth of space and time possible with
an omniscient narrator. Not only would such redundancy be
boring, but even that could not be without its bias as then the
order of the presentation of the various points of view would
suggest their relative importance.
So each author must choose how to present the tale.
Looking at the circles again - an omniscient narrator tends to
focus on the theme or issue level (D); a more limited
narrator’s interest stays more on the plot, action, character
levels (I, H). This is not to say the limited narrator does not
reveal theme, but it takes longer; the omniscient narrator
does discuss plot and character but perhaps in less detail. But
any narrator, whether limited or omniscient, still gives only a
partial rendering of the tale. And therefore, the narrator by
his choice of what aspects of the tale he presents or
emphasizes can reveal as much about himself as he does
about the tale. A gifted author, like Tolkien, would keep this
in mind in his choice of narrator. This kind of evaluation, of
course, focusing on point of view, going back to the circles
262 J.R. R. TOLKIEN CENTENARY CONFERENCE
again, is only one layer of analysis, but examination of the other versions of Tolkien’s tales which have come out as
tale at this level should make our appreciation of the tale that then we can better see the choices the narrator has made,
much richer. It should also make us very appreciative of the
References
Tolkien, J. R. R. 1980. Unfinished Tales. Ed. Christopher Tolkien. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Tolkien, J. R. R. 1991. The Lord of the Rings. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Tolkien, J. R. R. 1992. The Silmarillion. Ed. Christopher Tolkien. London: HarperCollins.
