University of South Carolina
University of South Carolina
Scholar Commons Scholar Commons
Senior Theses Honors College
Spring 2019
A Spatial Text Analysis of J. R. R. Tolkien's Middle-Earth
A Spatial Text Analysis of J. R. R. Tolkien's Middle-Earth
Michael H. Beasley
University of South Carolina - Columbia
Follow this and additional works at: https://scholarcommons.sc.edu/senior_theses
Part of the Digital Humanities Commons
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation
Beasley, Michael H., "A Spatial Text Analysis of J. R. R. Tolkien's Middle-Earth" (2019). Senior Theses. 297.
https://scholarcommons.sc.edu/senior_theses/297
This Thesis is brought to you by the Honors College at Scholar Commons. It has been accepted for inclusion in
Senior Theses by an authorized administrator of Scholar Commons. For more information, please contact
digres@mailbox.sc.edu.
A SPATIAL T EXT ANALYSIS OF J. R.R. TOLKIEN'S MIDDLE-EARTH
By
Michael H. Beasley
Submitted in Partial Fulfillment
of the Requirements for
Graduation with Honors from the
South Carolina Honors College
May, 2019
Approved:
Dr. Michael Gavin
Director of Thesis
;& 4p:( ~at t; JSimmons, Sr
Second Reader
- --~"··-· · · '"""""'* - ···- -·-
--- · -· · ·· · ·· ~ ··· · "~ '"" -~"'~ "
-· Steve Lynn, Dean
For South Carolina Honors College
Table of Contents
Introduction 3
Previous Scholarship 5
Data and Methods 16
Analysis 25
Conclusion 50
Works Cited 52
Appendices 54
Thesis Summary
Using a technique called “distant reading”, which aggregates and analyzes large amounts of data
with computational models that can be used to understand literature and find insights or patterns
that may otherwise be undetectable, this paper seeks to understand the system of J. R. R.
Tolkien’s fictional world of Middle-earth through a statistical approach. In an attempt to provide
an entirely different view on his work, this paper examines semantic aspects of Tolkien’s corpus
and how they complement the narrative structure, with particular emphasis on the topographic
landscape and the journeys of specific characters through the space of Middle-earth itself.
3
Introduction
J. R. R. Tolkien created the entire world of Middle-earth, populating it with people,
languages, landmarks, and history. It has inspired generations of writers, artists, and musicians
with its richness and depth, and nearly every aspect of his masterful corpus has been analyzed for
decades. Less work, however, has been done on analyzing the narrative and geography of
Tolkien’s work with a computational approach. This paper does exactly that: using statistical
models created in the programming language R, both the geospatial framework of Middle-earth
and the narrative structure of The Lord of the Rings are analyzed, with emphasis on how they
complement one another, demonstrating that meaningful semantic analyses can be performed on
fictional worlds. The vocabulary that Tolkien uses in his work is shown to correlate with specific
locations in Middle-earth, and thematic connections can be drawn between words that coincide
with characters and the journeys undertaken by those characters, particularly with regards to
where they are spatially in Middle-earth at a given time. This offers a new depth to Tolkien’s
work, and offers some fascinating insight and interpretation of how words are used spatially
within it.
In order to analyze a fictional world like Middle-earth in such a way that statistical models
would be relevant and useful, it is necessary to employ a technique called “distant reading”, a
term coined by Franco Moretti. Modern application of this technique aggregates and analyzes
large amounts of data, based on the assumption that computational models can be used to
understand literature and find patterns that may otherwise be undetectable. In Moretti’s own
words: “‘Distant reading’, I have once called this type of approach; where distance is however
not an obstacle, but a specific form of knowledge; fewer elements, hence a sharper sense of their
4
overall interconnection” (Moretti 2005, 1). Discussing the narrative structure and overarching
themes of fiction in a literary sense is one thing, but understanding the system of a fictional
world as a whole, through the lens of computational models, provides an entirely different view
on a work in which the aspects of the geographical landscape and how it complements the
narrative structure may otherwise be lost in analysis. Distant reading allows a broader look at the
connections between elements of a work – words, places, concepts – to better define those
connections and examine how they influence one another.
Applying this to Tolkien is the purpose of this paper. Simply reading through The Hobbit
and The Lord of the Rings makes several elements of the narrative extremely apparent – the
characters, their journeys, the overarching themes, and other aspects of the world itself. Distant
reading as an approach, however, is able to show mathematically which of these elements are
interconnected, relying on the semantics used by Tolkien himself rather than external
interpretation. Where characters are in Middle-earth, how those locations are described, and the
impact that certain places have on the narrative are all more easily analyzed with semantic data,
and it shows that Tolkien was able to construct a fictional world that has meaningful connections
between its individual locations and other elements of the narrative.
5
Previous Scholarship
There are many discussions on various aspects to Tolkien’s life and work; many focus on
him as an academic, the process of his writing, the construction of The Silmarillion, and the
creation of his mythology. Others write of themes in his novels, analyze his characters, and
(despite Tolkien’s insistence to the contrary) examine the work as allegory. There are many
writings that focus on his invented languages and writing systems, and the real-life languages,
cultures, and mythologies that inspired Middle-earth. His literary contributions and legacy are
frequent topics, as well, in addition to specific themes that are found in his work (such as good
and evil, war, music and beauty, and environmentalism). Among the plethora of writings on
Tolkien, there are some topics in particular that will be important to this paper going forward;
these all focus on major themes of his work, its narrative structure, and how language and
writing style add to its depth.
Perhaps most important to this paper is discussion on the concept of the Hero’s Journey, the
geography of Middle-earth, and how Tolkien uses all of these together to enhance his narrative.
Scholars write about the interlaced narrative of The Lord of the Rings and how its characters’
journeys are separate, yet connected. The scholarly consensus is that the novel forms a variety of
interconnected quest narratives, each of which explore different themes and follow different
characters through different locations in Middle-earth. This is all crucial to understanding the
spatial aspects of language that Tolkien uses, and how specific locations are tied to both
overarching themes of the novel and important moments of development for the characters.
John R. Holmes begins “The Lord of the Rings” with a brief history and synopsis of the
eponymous novel before discussing its narrative structure. He describes it as a quest narrative
6
with the appropriate elements, and notes Tolkien’s practice of establishing safe havens for the
characters between times of peril. Because these havens are spatial locations, “… Tolkien’s
imagination is not just mythopoeic, but also geographic” (Holmes 2014, 136). The Lord of the
Rings has an interlace narrative structure, where characters are separated and their individual
tales told separately, before reuniting near the end of the story. “Tolkien does not leave the reader
helpless in lacing the plot strands: he offers key narrative ‘landmarks’ to help readers
‘synchronize’ events in separate chapters, even when we read them out of sequence” (Holmes
2014, 137). Though he denied The Lord of the Rings to be an allegory, Tolkien did consider the
three major concerns of his work to be “Fall, Mortality, and The Machine”; a common theme
throughout the three books is the world and all the good things therein dwindling over time.
Holmes also discusses the role that Tolkien’s linguistics play in the novels, especially in the
fictional languages that he invented; the names that Tolkien gave to objects, people, and
locations are all “phonaesthetically” satisfying, having an uncanny fitness to them.
Discussion on the importance of languages and nomenclature in Tolkien’s work is
continued in Arden R. Smith’s “Invented Languages and Writing Systems”. He examines the
aesthetic and artistic appeal of creating languages, Tolkien’s method of constructing them, and
how the development of Quenya led to the creation of the entire Elvish mythology. Tolkien
himself describes The Lord of the Rings as “fundamentally linguistic in inspiration,” claiming the
novel to have been written around the languages he made; for him, no matter the subject, the
name preceded the story. Smith presents an overview of Tolkien’s various constructed languages,
their origins, their writing styles, and where they appear in the novel.
7
Aside from the linguistics used by Tolkien, the very structure of The Lord of the Rings’
narrative deserves special attention. In fact, as Diana Wynne Jones writes in “The Shape of the
Narrative in The Lord of the Rings”, “Tolkien was far more concerned with the matter of his
narrative than the manner, and he only exercised his undoubted gift for language in inventing
names, particularly names of places” (Wynne Jones 1983, 89). The novel is organized in a series
of “movements”, each one with an extension (referred to as a “coda”) that reflects on the
previous movement, as well as the movement to come. Understanding these movements (a term
that even in itself implies there to be a spatial aspect to the narrative) is key to understanding the
narrative itself, and some time must be devoted to smaller details that have significant meaning.
The first movement is described as ending with the flight from Bree, its coda being the
journey to and incident at Weathertop. The second movement, a more peaceful one, concerns the
debate at Rivendell, where the narrative changes – Frodo has achieved what he initially set out to
do, and the debate extends the journey with the movement’s coda of the Fellowship setting out.
The third movement, in two parts, covers the journey through Moria and the sojourn in
Lothlórien; it ends with the coda of Frodo donning the Ring and the Breaking of the Fellowship.
Following this, the narrative divides into two concurrent stories, both of equal importance. The
positive section is told first – of the Ents, Rohan, and the victory over Isengard. The negative
section is told second – of the Dead Marshes, Ithilien, and the capture of Frodo after the defeat of
Shelob. Though the tremendous Battle of the Pelennor Fields, in which Rohan and Aragorn both
come to the aid of Minas Tirith, ends in victory, Sauron and the power of Mordor are still at
large, and thus the large movement has a coda, in which the decision is made to march on the
Black Gate to serve as a distraction to give Frodo a chance to destroy the Ring. This leads to the
8
final movement, where the quest fails save for actions by both hobbits in the past – sparing
Gollum’s life and turning him against the pair – leading to an accidental success. The coda to this
movement takes up nearly half of the sixth and final volume, ending the narrative with Frodo
departing into the Sea, which was signaled from the very beginning of the narrative.
The division of the fourth movement into two concurrent stories has been briefly
mentioned already – Richard West writes of this literary technique in “The Interlace Structure of
The Lord of the Rings”. West uses earlier literature to explain the novel’s form, which he
describes as a technique similar to medieval interlace. This contrasts with the more modern style
of organic unity, which uses clear and simple patterns to create a manageable narrative with a
single major theme. Interlace, on the other hand, provides multiple concurrent narrative lines,
dividing the reader’s attention and mirroring the feel of a chaotic reality in a real world. West
echoes Wynne Jones’ concept of the coda when describing its effectiveness; “… the apparently
casual form of the interlace is deceptive; it actually has a very subtle kind of cohesion. No part of
the narrative can be removed without damage to the whole, for within any given section there are
echoes of previous parts and anticipations of later ones” (West 1975, 79). The chain of events
that make up the narrative are even outlined in Tolkien’s initial title suggestions for the six books
that comprise The Lord of the Rings: The First Journey, The Journey of the Nine Companions,
The Treason of Isengard, The Journey of the Ring-bearers, The War of the Ring, and The End of
the Third Age. Each of these books are centered around events that would not be possible without
preceding events. These mixed narratives ebb and flow, with the novel’s themes and motifs
interwoven throughout and between them.
9
The narrative structure and story of The Lord of the Rings has long been the subject of
debate in regards to being a quest narrative. Traditionally, in this sort of narrative, a hero sets out
on a journey to acquire an object; however, as Anna Caughey writes in “The Hero’s Journey”,
this is a rather narrow definition of a “quest”. The purpose of Frodo’s undertaking is to destroy
(rather than acquire) an important object in the Ring, though the responsibility that he takes upon
himself at the Council of Elrond supports the notion of him undergoing what is referred to as the
Hero’s Journey. Even setting Frodo aside, the other figure on a traditional quest in the novel is
Aragorn, who seeks to reclaim the throne of Gondor – there is no doubt that The Lord of the
Rings is a quest narrative. Again, the importance of having multiple narratives is clear; “[t]he text
works successfully in both the adventure-story and elegaic modes because The Lord of the Rings
offers the reader not one quest-narrative or Hero’s Journey but several, which run simultaneously
in a number of registers and at a number of levels” (Caughey 2014, 404).
The Hero’s Journey is broadly defined by Caughey as a three-stage pattern: separation,
initiation, and return. She also uses Northrop Frye’s three stages that are found within The Lord
of the Rings:
1. The first stage is identified as the agon or conflict, the stage of “preliminary minor
adventures” (Frye 1957, 187), roughly corresponding in Tolkien’s work to the events of
Books One and Two (FR).
2. The second is the pathos, “the crucial struggle, usually some kind of battle in which
either the hero or his foe, or both, must die” (Frye 1957, 187), most obviously apparent in
Frodo’s questionably successful struggle on Mount Doom … but also present in other
variations within the text.
3. The third and final stage is “the anagnorisis or discovery, the recognition of the hero”
(Frye 1957, 187), which is perhaps the least conventional aspect of Tolkien’s text, as
different levels of recognition – or lack of recognition – are meted out to different
characters in the final chapters of Book Six… (Caughey 2014, 405)
10
Much of the structure and style of the novel is inspired by medieval literature, with two
techniques in particular: doubling and entrelacement. Doubling not only echoes previous events
(such as Faramir’s success in resisting the Ring after his brother Boromir fails), but also gives a
certain depth to otherwise flat characters; “while conceivably a rather flat hero when read alone,
[Frodo] becomes far more convincing when read in conjunction with Gollum as his double, not
merely an antagonist but an indication of Frodo’s own potential to be enslaved by the Ring”
(Caughey 2014, 408). Entrelacement (or interlacement) has been discussed already, though an
important aspect to which this paper is building is that of seeing the narrative device through a
geographical lens; not only do the members of the broken Fellowship have their own stories that
happen simultaneously, they all occur in different locations, and this has an effect on things.
Interlacement “allows for connections between key plot events to be made by the reader on a
second journey through the text and contributes to the variation in reading experience from first
to subsequent readings” (Caughey 2014, 407).
Caughey argues that there are three distinct Hero’s Journeys in The Lord of the Rings, and
involve two types of heroes: the high mimetic and the low mimetic (as identified by Northrop
Frye). On a spectrum, Aragorn is easily identified as a high mimetic hero – the leader, the
mythical figure with authority and powers greater than those of normal people – whereas Frodo
is identified as a low mimetic hero – a relatable Hobbit with a common sense of humanity. When
it comes to the Hero’s Journeys, however, “the plot is complicated by Tolkien’s decision to give
the truly epic quest to the more humble quester, while the more personal story of growth and
maturity is given to the high mimetic hero” (Caughey 2014, 408).
11
The first journey shares its narrative form with many typical fairy-tales, which Caughey
describes as follows:
… the young hero sets out on a series of adventures which turn out to be much more
challenging than expected. He faces obstacles, which are duly overcome by his own skill
or with the assistance of various companions, and returns home, laden with treasure, to a
life of significantly greater comfort and prestige (Caughey 2014, 409).
Described by Caughey as a “There and Back Again” quest, this fits squarely with the
journey of Bilbo Baggins in The Hobbit; he leaves the comfort of the Shire and undergoes
several dangerous situations, which he manages to overcome – at first with the aid of Gandalf
and the Dwarves, then gradually by using his own abilities – and returns to the Shire for a happy
ending, having grown wiser and more mature about the world.
The other example of this first quest form is one that bears significant resemblance to many
medieval romances – that of Merry and Pippin. Caughey describes them as untried heroes,
searching for a “knightly identity”; fittingly, both Hobbits are eventually knighted near the end of
their quests. The turning point comes in Fangorn Forest, where they begin to carry themselves
rather than being carried – it is even an instance of doubling, when compared to previous failures
in the Old Forest. Merry and Pippin return home to the Shire, as Bilbo did, largely unchanged
from how they left it.
In stark contrast lies the second journey, that of “The Broken Hero”; in this case, Frodo.
The hero may fail in their quest, and is forever altered after their return. Caughey’s reading of the
scene of pathos for Frodo, standing in the Crack of Doom and wrestling with temptation,
illustrates this:
This … reading suggests that the task simply demanded that Frodo use the ugliest and
most selfish part of his nature, as represented by Gollum, in addition to the noble and
12
sacrificial elements represented by Sam, and that with the destruction of Gollum, his
personality will never be wholly reintegrated again (Caughey 2014, 411).
The Broken Hero quest does not result in perfect success, but with the discovery of the
hero’s own fallibility through the testing of their virtues. Frodo is so wounded by his journey and
trials, both physically and emotionally, that he departs Middle-earth forever.
The third and final form of the Hero’s Journey is referred to by Caughey as “The
Patriarch’s Quest”, undertaken by Aragorn and Sam:
The third, and arguably most transformative, form of Hero’s Journey in The Lord of the
Rings is that of the nascent patriarch – the inexperienced young man who emerges from
his adventure not merely glorified, but transformed; who moves forward into a state of
social and emotional maturity that fits him for the role of husband and father (Caughey
2014, 412).
Aragorn assumes leadership after the apparent death of Gandalf in the Mines of Moria,
though he hesitates at times, even admitting failure after the Breaking of the Fellowship.
Through the forming of the Three Hunters, however, he is able to display his abilities to unite
people of Middle-earth with little in common, in pursuit of the ultimate goal of protecting those
who cannot protect themselves, as a leader, a father, and a king. In contrast, the low mimetic
figure of Sam (referred to by Tolkien himself in his letters as the “chief hero” of the quest)
begins his journey as a humble gardener, growing in maturity as he accompanies Frodo to the
point where he is the only character able not only to temporarily carry the Ring in Frodo’s
absence, but also return it. He ends his journey as the Mayor of the Shire, effectively a ruler like
Aragorn, protecting his people and becoming a father. Caughey concludes by saying that “the
multiplicity of heroic journeys, characters, and modes that [entrelacement] makes available
provide some of the greatest pleasures that the text has to offer” (Caughey 2014, 415).
13
Charles A. Huttar, in “Hell and the City: Tolkien and the Traditions of Western Literature”,
discusses another aspect to the Hero’s Journey. In classical mythology, there is a three-tiered
nature to many myths – the underworld, earth, and heaven – and Tolkien utilizes this symbology
in The Lord of the Rings, especially the image of descending into the underworld, or hell, and the
image of the city. Huttar includes his own interpretation and summary of Frodo’s journey with
these things in mind:
The hero’s adventure has three stages, departure, initiation, and return; the first two
compromise his journey to hell. He is singled out to be a hero, called to undertake the
quest, given a choice to accept or refuse which is at the same time a test of whether or not
he really qualifies. He then undergoes a series of further trials, wins through by
supernatural aid, enters into the final death-like struggle, and eventually emerges
victorious (Huttar 1975, 119).
Huttar follows Frodo’s journey from the womb-like Bag End, through images of hell in the
Barrow-Downs, to a brief respite and midpoint in Rivendell, and through the hellish descent into
Moria. The darkness and struggle of Moria serve as an experience in which Frodo, as well as the
other hobbits, learn valuable lessons – they learn courage, pity, and how to carry on through
sorrow in the absence of hope after Gandalf’s fall. Frodo himself emerges with a renewed sense
of responsibility. Gandalf’s battle with Durin’s Bane reflects a kind of ascent, returning to life
and being rescued by an eagle. Another midpoint of Middle-earth, Lothlórien, follows the
journey through Moria before the second journey to “hell” for Frodo: through the Dead Marshes
and into Mordor itself. This portion of his adventure is notably different; “… this part of Frodo’s
journey to hell is not a matter of landscape alone but of the ring which weighs more and more
heavily on him and, still worse, of the growing power of the Eye” (Huttar 1975, 128).
The image of the city takes a different approach that focuses on the morals of The Lord of
the Rings. The verticality of the cities in Middle-earth, exemplified in towers such as Minas
14
Tirith, Barad-dûr, and Orthanc, demonstrate the celestial dimension of good as well as the
infernal dimension of evil. This also applies to characters, the vast majority of which are neither
good nor evil; rather, they possess the potential for both, and are constantly making decisions
between them. In Huttar’s words:
… Tolkien’s moral vision is reinforced by his treatment of the inanimate world that
furnishes man with the opportunity and challenge to be a subcreator. Objects are not in
themselves good or evil, but nearly everything has a potential for both. Mithril is both the
greatest of treasures and a deadly bane. Cities are built on an axis that reaches to hell as
well as heaven… The dual potential included in the capacity of “making” embraces
poetry and jewelry as well as instruments of war and torture… The mastery of fire
produces bombs, but also comfortable hearths and homes (Huttar 1975, 139).
This notion of a spatial aspect to morality is further explored by Walter Scheps in “The
Fairy-tale Morality of The Lord of the Rings”. Scheps describes the relation between physical
and moral direction in Tolkien’s works, with the North and West generally being associated with
good, and the South and East with evil; the Grey Havens and the Shire are in northwestern
Middle-earth, Mirkwood and the Desolation of Smaug are in the northeast, Mordor is in the
southeast, and Gondor is in the southwest. Even the Shire, divided into quadrants, can be seen as
a microcosm of Middle-earth with the spread of fear, the appearance of the Black Riders, and the
entry of Saruman all from the south and east, with characters like Tom Bombadil and Aragorn
introduced with mentions of the west.
Summarizing the relationships of spatial representation, characters’ journeys, and
linguistics, Robert Tally writes in Topophrenia of Tolkien’s approach to constructing the
geography of The Lord of the Rings:
… [T]he plot of Tolkien’s novel is itself cartographic, even if one were to set aside the
helpful maps included at the beginning of each volume. The Lord of the Rings represents
a vast space: the imaginary realms of Middle-earth, which features not only a diverse
topography and geography … but also a rich, dense historical background that gives these
15
places a kind of overdetermined significance or surfeit meaning. Each place is not only
marked as if on the map but also described, contextualized, interpreted, and woven into a
larger geopolitical discourse. Many of the places encountered bear three or four different
names, for example, as their geographical or spatial situation is couched with a long
history … The more or less linear itineraries of the novel’s protagonists … are set in
relation to a much larger geography and history that make their own personal encounters
and discoveries all the more meaningful. The “map” of Middle-earth is not merely the
sketched drawing included at the front of the book … but is primarily formed through the
narrative itself (Talley 2018).
Again, the scholarly consensus on The Lord of the Rings is that it forms several
interconnected quest narratives that are each tied to a series of spatial locations, most of which
serve either as a place of respite or as a tribulation through which the characters must undergo.
Regardless of which category any given location falls under, they all present opportunities to
discover things about the characters and the world of Middle-earth. This paper aims to take these
concepts of how various aspects of the narrative structure are spatially represented and take
certain computational approaches to show it.
16
Data and Methods
Aelib, an open source digital library associated with GitHub, has HTML files of The
Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings; these digital copies of the four novels were read into R, the
programming language used to write the scripts that performed analysis and statistical
computing. The first step was parsing out the vocabulary – every word that Tolkien uses in the
corpus – and creating a simple two-column matrix that demonstrated the number of appearances
each word makes. This was expanded by a script that looped through each file, divided the novel
into its chapters, and counted each word as it appeared by chapter; this resulted in a larger matrix
with each row representing a word, each column representing a chapter in Tolkien’s work, and
the intersection points being how many times each word appeared in that chapter.
The total number of columns was eighty-six; this began with one “chapter” of notes at the
beginning of The Hobbit, followed by its nineteen chapters. Five “chapters” of prologue began
The Lord of the Rings, with its three volumes comprising the remaining sixty-one chapters. The
total number of types, or unique words, was 13,888, though a very small number (less than one
percent) were aspects of the HTML files themselves, and were not actual words. The number of
tokens (occurrences of any given word), or the total word count calculated, was 578,432, though
this includes the notes to The Hobbit and the prologue to The Lord of the Rings.
Part of the preliminary research done before the scripts were ever written involved
compiling a gazetteer, or a geographical index of locations within a given area. In this case, the
gazetteer took the form of a list of all the named places in Middle-earth. This list included
several categories of locations: the names of larger regions such as Mordor and Gondor, smaller
sub-regions such as Southfarthing and the Westfold, city names such as Minas Tirith and
17
Hobbiton, individual landmarks such as Weathertop and Orthanc, smaller places of note such as
the Prancing Pony and Helm’s Gate, locations that no longer exist such as Beleriand and
Númenor, geographic features such as the river Anduin and the Misty Mountains, and even
references to more abstract concepts such as the Sea and the West. The total number of unique,
individually named locations throughout The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings was 772.
The gazetteer was used as the basis for a similar set of loops that, rather than counting each
word, focused solely on the named locations from the gazetteer. This resulted in a second matrix
similar in construct to the first, though each row represented a place in Middle-earth rather than a
given word. The columns still represented chapters, and the intersection points displayed how
many times each location was named in a given chapter.
These two matrices were used as the basis for the bulk of the analytics, in tandem with a
set of geographical coordinates that were taken from a printed map of Middle-earth; simply using
a ruler to mark out two numerical axes gave each location a relative latitude and longitude.
18
Figure 1: The map of Middle-earth used to generate relative latitude and longitude values for
each specifically named location in the corpus.
The scale was roughly 1.50cm = 100 miles. Using the centimeter scale as units, the map
provided a way to quantify the relative location of each place in Middle-earth; for example, the
city of Minas Tirith had a latitude of 6.1 units and a longitude of 17.3 units, while Rivendell had
a latitude of 15.3 units and a longitude of 13.0 units. The larger the latitude, the further north the
place was located; locations with larger longitudes were located further east. For regions such as
the Shire (14.6, 7.4) and Gondor (5.5, 13.5), values were assigned based on the relative center of
their areas; for some areas such as Harad (0.8, 22.5), however, this was not possible, and the
center of where their names appeared on the map was used instead. The sheer scale of the map
19
used also meant that the more specific the location, the less accurate relative locations would be;
in other words, several individual landmarks such as the Houses of Healing and the White Tower
of Ecthelion were both located in Minas Tirith, so all three of these locations had the same
latitudes and longitudes. Places with different names, such as Rivendell and Imladris, were also
assigned the same latitudes and longitudes.
Once the baseline of vocabulary, locations, and coordinates were set, the next step was
creating functions to perform relevant analytical calculations, the first of which was measuring
pointwise mutual information, or PMI. This is a measure of association between two variables, or
how likely it is that two things (in this case, words) coincide, using their individual probabilities
and joint distribution.
pmi ( x ; y )=log p (x , y )
p (x) p ( y)
In the PMI formula, shown above, p(x) represents the probability that any word, chosen
randomly, will be of type x; p(y) represents the probability that any word, chosen randomly,
appears in chapter y. The joint probability distribution is given as p(x) times p(y), and p(x, y)
represents the actual value observed in the relevant matrix. In total, the PMI of any given word
shows whether it is more or less frequent than expected. PMI works well with regards to
measuring semantic similarity in a word-context matrix, performing better than a wide variety of
alternative weighting methods (Turney & Pantel, 2010, 157).
Another computation was that of cosine similarity, a measure of similarity between vectors.
When used in analyzing text, the dimensional value of vectors representing words correspond to
the number of times each word appears in the text; cosine similarity can be used to measure how
similar two texts are with regards to their content.
20
cos(θ)= Α ⋅ Β
‖Α‖ ‖Β‖
=
∑
i=1
n
Ai Bi
√∑
i=1
n
Ai
2 √∑
i=1
n
Bi
2
In the similarity formula, shown above, A and B are two non-zero vectors, with Ai and Bi
being components of said vectors, respectively. The numerator is the sum of the products of the
components of each vector, while the denominator is the product of the square roots of each
vector component squared and summed together. The formula utilizes the Euclidean dot product
and results in a value between negative one and positive one; a result of negative one indicates
that the two words are exactly opposite to one another, with positive one indicating the two
words are one and the same.
In order to avoid words seeming to be highly similar simply because they appear
frequently, the cosine similarity formula divides by the respective length of the vectors and
provides a length normalization to obtain the cosine of the angle between them (Clark 2015,
504). Measuring cosine similarity for a given location over the location matrix gives other named
locations that coincide most frequently with the specified place. This becomes clearer in practice;
for example, measuring the cosine similarity of Bree over the location matrix gives the following
results:
Table 1. Given Location Measured over Location Matrix
Location Similarity Score
Bree 1.0000000
Bree-land 0.9147455
Staddle 0.8644356
Archet 0.8424889
Greenway 0.8275395
21
Bree-hill 0.8170181
Combe 0.7869258
When measuring a given word over the overall word matrix (as opposed to only focusing
on locations), broader comparisons can be made, and the calculation results in the words that are
the most similar to the given word. For example, measuring the cosine similarity of the word
“tree” produces the following results:
Table 2. Given Word Measured over Word Matrix
Word Similarity Score
tree 1.0000000
branches 0.8613180
trunk 0.8374366
trees 0.8003490
rustle 0.7612032
blending 0.7446865
boughs 0.7124064
It is clear that the results of measuring the cosine similarity of a given location will produce
other locations that are somehow related, be it geographically or thematically. In a similar
manner, measuring a word over the word matrix produces words that are closely related to one
another. Given, however, that locations are also words, cosine similarity can be used to measure
locations over the word matrix, as well. Extending the previous example, Bree (taken from the
location matrix), when measured over the word matrix rather than the location matrix, produces
the following:
Table 3. Given Location Measured over Word Matrix
Word Similarity Score
bree 0.9994855
greenway 0.8928279
22
butterbur 0.8754266
landlord 0.8591487
staddle 0.8585841
landers 0.8576275
gatekeeper 0.8291039
This essentially gives a list of keywords for any given place. The implications of this
measurement deserve further discussion, and more comparisons of this nature will be explored in
the dedicated Analysis section of the paper.
In order to make the geographical coordinates useful, a third computation was made, this
time to find geographical centroids. This process multiplies the word matrix by the location
matrix in order to give each word (converted to a vector) a geographic footprint derived from the
latitude and longitude of each location with which it coincided. The end result allowed this data
to be mapped onto a coordinate plane, with each word’s location on the graph being affected by
where it was used most often in the text.
Another way to geographically visualize Tolkien’s vocabulary is to graph each word’s
longitude from the geographic centroid alongside its radius, calculated using the Euclidean
distance of the vectors. This measures how dispersed the words are going from west to east in
Middle-earth.
23
Figure 2: A graph of the 500 most frequently occurring words in the corpus, plotted using their
relative longitude and radius.
In the graph above, words like “denethor” and “bree” have very low dispersion, meaning
that the places in which these words are referenced – or the places with which they coincide – are
all extremely close together; Denethor is mentioned most often in reference to Minas Tirith, and
Bree is a town that is relatively self-contained in the narrative. On the other hand, words like
“éowyn” and “strider” have very high dispersion, meaning that they coincide with a wide variety
of locations across Middle-earth. Strider in particular is a good example of this; Aragorn is
introduced into the narrative in Bree under the name “Strider”, and though his true name is
eventually revealed, he travels all the way from Bree to Rivendell being referred to frequently as
24
“Strider”. Even when Merry and Pippin are separated from him and travel to Fangorn, they refer
to him as “Strider”, and Aragorn himself uses the name when meeting the Riders of Rohan.
When Sam awakens in Ithilien after the Ring is destroyed, the name “Strider” is used – the word
appears all across Middle-earth, giving it a relatively high dispersion.
This is simply a surface level analysis of the scripts; understanding the methods used to
gather the data is necessary to support further synthesis of the information. Individual
comparisons that can be made, and how the data can be extrapolated to relate to the narrative,
will be explored further in the dedicated Analysis section.
25
Analysis
The geographic centroids of words mapped onto a coordinate plane are displayed below in
Figure 3; this analysis will be the starting point to examine the world in which characters are
moving in a geosemantic sense. The paths taken by the characters and the locations they
encounter are tied to specific words, a concept that will be elaborated on below.
Figure 3: A graph of the 1,000 most frequently occurring words in the corpus, plotted using their
relative latitude and longitude, with a line of best fit in dark green. The graph is overlaid onto
the appropriate section of the Middle-earth map used to calculate the values.
Due to the nature of the calculations and the high frequency of words being used, the
majority of meaningful vocabulary clustered near the center of the map; however, a clear shape
can be seen in the graph above, demonstrated with the line of best fit, stretching from the
26
northwest to the southeast. Perhaps unsurprisingly, this is the overall direction that the narrative
of The Lord of the Rings takes – beginning in the Shire to the northwest, traveling across the
Misty Mountains and through Rohan, and ending in Gondor and Mordor in the southeast.
Words that are central to the story tend to be located in the center of the cluster, such as
“Frodo” (with a longitude of 12.9 and a latitude of 10.7) or “ring” (12.5, 10.5); some words are
more self-contained within relevant locations, such as “marsh” (18.2, 11.7), which is drawn
towards the geographic location of the Dead Marshes (17.3, 8.1), or “Durthang” (18.1, 7.5), a
fortress in Mordor, which is drawn towards Mordor itself.
In contrast, there are some locations that still fall near the center; for example, the
geographic centroid of the Shire (12.7, 10.5) is, on the coordinate plane, nearly halfway between
the Shire and Mordor. This tends to occur with locations that have high frequencies – not only
due to the tendency of high-frequency locations to gravitate towards the center of the plane, but
also because they are being referred to in a wide variety of circumstances. The Shire is not only
described when the characters are physically there, but also when Frodo and Sam think back on
their home while trekking through Mordor and scaling the slopes of Mount Doom. Similarly,
Mordor (13.0, 10.7) is not only described when the characters are physically there, but also when
members of the Fellowship think of the journey ahead and their ultimate destination, even when
Gandalf speaks of it in the Shire. The broader regions of Middle-earth are referred to more often
and in a wider variety of contexts, making them more likely to be drawn into the center of the
cluster.
Aside from words that are centrally located, there are many words that lie on the fringes of
Middle-earth, far to the east or west; these words tend to be tied to specific locations or events in
27
the story. Some of the more frequent words that occur relatively far to the west (from longitudes
ranged roughly from 6 to 9) include some that are associated with the early parts of the narrative.
As a simple example, the word mushrooms (8.9, 13.9) appears nine times throughout the novel,
seven instances of which appear in Chapter 4, fittingly titled “A Shortcut to Mushrooms”; this
chapter is set in the outskirts of the Shire, just before the four hobbits cross the Brandywine
River into Buckland. Many of the words that are drawn to the west are location names
themselves: the Loudwater (8.3, 14.3), or the River Bruinen that flows near Rivendell; the
Withywindle (8.5, 13.2), the river that runs through the Old Forest; and the Westfarthing (8.6,
11.4) of the Shire are all located in the western reaches of Middle-earth, so it is appropriate that
they are also found in the lower longitudes relative to other words. For the purposes of a more
literary analysis, the word farmers (8.2, 14.5) is also located far to the west, a fitting descriptor
for the laidback people of the Shire. Though there are almost certainly farms to feed the people
of Rohan and Gondor, the word “farmers” is only associated with hobbits from the Shire,
supporting the homely feel of the entire region, especially when compared to the other, more
impressive lands to the east.
Other interesting words that appear far to the west of the central cluster are evocative of
specific narrative events. The names of Thingol (6.6, 12.5), the King of Doriath in the First Age,
and of Tinúviel (6.6, 12.5), the name given to his daughter Lúthien, have the exact same
coordinates, and are both used only in the scene at Weathertop, where Strider tells the hobbits the
tale of Beren and Lúthien. This scene is significant; not only does it give a sense of the depth of
Tolkien’s mythology, but it cements the hobbits once again as being very grounded in the Shire;
these mythical figures, who were powerful and influential in the First Age of Middle-earth, are
28
simply a legend to them. From a geographical perspective, Goldberry (7.2, 13.3), the wife of
Tom Bombadil, is also located far to the west, where she and Bombadil stay in their realm; this is
fitting, as they do not interfere with the rest of Middle-earth, and she is never seen outside the
area where she resides. When Bombadil rescues the hobbits from the Barrow-Downs, he reminds
them that “Tom has his house to mind, and Goldberry is waiting!” (FR, “Fog on the Barrow-
Downs”).
These words all evoke warmer feelings, being associated with the Shire, the house of Tom
Bombadil, and the Elves of the First Age, all things that could be considered good in Middle-
earth – and the West is normally associated with the good. The East, however, is the opposite,
and the words that are located furthest to the east on the coordinate plane (from longitudes
ranged roughly from 16 to 19) reflect that. The word troubling (18.5, 7.3) is used when Frodo
and Sam are in the Dead Marshes, and later when they are traversing Mordor itself. The words
driver (18.1, 7.5) and durthang (18.1, 7.5) are in reference to the Orc slave-drivers and a fortress
within Mordor, respectively. Other negative words have extremely similar coordinates, being
used heavily or even exclusively in association with Mordor – words like starve (18.1, 10.7),
lash (18.1, 7.5), badness (18.1, 7.5), grassless (18.1, 7.5), brutes (17.8, 7.1), waterless (17.6,
7.6), tortured (17.6, 7.6), and defile (17.4, 7.0).
These words showing the evil of Mordor is clear; when Frodo and Sam draw near to Mount
Doom, Sam hears “the dreadful cries of tortured things” (RK, “Mount Doom”). When Aragorn
marches on the Black Gate, it is said to hide “the shadowy defile beyond” that was “tunnelled by
teeming broods of evil things” (RK, “The Black Gate Opens”). The Words of the West, one could
say, compared to the Words of the East, show a clear path across Middle-earth that echoes the
29
overall journey taken by the two primary protagonists, Frodo and Aragorn. They travel west to
east, and the good of the former fades to the evil of the latter as they traverse Middle-earth.
The words and places found in Middle-earth are shown to form a clear geography, and
there are narrative and thematic threads that run through semantically similar words. This can be
taken into account for specific locations, as well, using cosine similarity. Calculating the cosine
similarity of words provides a wealth of information by measuring how semantically similar they
are to one another. The words with higher similarity scores coincide more frequently with the
word to which they are being compared. As was previously mentioned, two words that have a
similarity score of positive one are one and the same; thus, in the tables and analysis that follow,
these results are excluded.
30
Table 4. Frequent Named Locations with Semantically Similar Locations
Location Similar Locations and Similarity Scores
Shire Buckland
0.7775905
Michel Delving
0.7131518
Bag End
0.7002573
Brandywine
0.6769123
Hobbiton
0.6591584
Gondor Ered Nimrais
0.7080882
Ithilien
0.6765778
Lossarnach
0.6489313
Minas Tirith
0.6384341
Mindolluin
0.6380255
Mordor Barad-dûr
0.7159829
Gorgoroth
0.6814617
Dark Tower
0.6433909
Orodruin
0.6429616
Black Gate
0.5892472
Rohan Meduseld
0.5887864
Edoras
0.5737468
Mark
0.5657517
Entwash
0.5555635
Gondor
0.5513264
Isengard Nan Curunír
0.7756563
Wellinghall
0.7204994
Fangorn
0.6768723
Brown Lands
0.6113360
Entwash
0.5730949
Rivendell
Ford of
Bruinen
0.6924914
Bruinen
0.6888266
Weathertop
0.5851053
House of
Elrond
0.5492989
Hall of Fire
0.5125958
Minas
Tirith
Rauros
0.7660162
Gondor
0.6384341
Númenor
0.6269256
Tol Brandir
0.5935504
Ered Nimrais
0.5792584
As was shown in Table 1, specific places can be measured over the location matrix to
semantically compare them against one another. Table 4 displays the named locations in Middle-
earth that appear more than one hundred times, with semantically similar words that are strictly
other named locations. For most of these examples (as was the case for Table 1), the results are
places that are found within or near the initial location; Michel Delving and Hobbiton are cities
within the Shire, with Bag End being the Baggins’ home within Hobbiton itself. Buckland is just
outside the Shire, and the Brandywine is the river that borders between the two. Similarly, Barad-
dûr, Gorgoroth, Orodruin, and the Black Gate are all found within Mordor.
31
These two regions in particular appear to be relatively self-contained, at least when
compared to the smaller city of Minas Tirith, which – surprisingly – is heavily related to the falls
of Rauros, the island of Tol Brandir near it, and the long-fallen island of Númenor. Perhaps the
departure of Boromir near the aforementioned falls weighted Rauros and Tol Brandir more
heavily toward Minas Tirith; far more intriguing, however, is the semantic connection that Minas
Tirith shares with Númenor. Tolkien drew strong connections between the two locations through
the White Tree – originally Nimloth, the White Tree of Númenor, from which the dead White
Tree of Gondor is descended, it serves as a symbol for the line of kings from Isildur down to
Aragorn. Númenor having such a relatively strong semantic similarity to Minas Tirith
strengthens the connections that Tolkien drew from both a linguistic and a geographic
perspective.
As has already been demonstrated in Table 2, individual words have their own lists of
similar vocabulary. This has been explored in Table 4 with locations, but any word in the corpus
can be examined and compared to others. In order to see how the characters of The Lord of the
Rings are connected to the world of Middle-earth and the overall narrative, their names can be
measured over the word matrix.
Table 5. The Fellowship with Semantically Similar Vocabulary
Character Similar Words and Similarity Scores
Frodo sam
0.7767146
didn’t
0.7397747
trying
0.7354412
keep
0.7289882
shan’t
0.7039926
Gandalf wizard
0.7671267
staff
0.6771592
glamdring
0.6390158
stand
0.6353180
hammer
0.6294722
Sam frodo
0.7767146
didn’t
0.7610867
isn’t
0.7409293
mr
0.7337675
gamgee
0.7127476
32
Aragorn legolas
0.8457541
gimli
0.8282479
nonetheless
0.7582307
judge
0.7245775
must
0.6987855
Pippin peregrin
0.8564995
betide
0.8258391
embrasure
0.8258391
ernil
0.8258391
fists
0.8258391
Merry score
0.6991391
meriadoc
0.6707345
fellows
0.6647251
call
0.6638438
stared
0.6463807
Gimli legolas
0.9139816
aragorn
0.8282479
dwarf
0.7563165
company
0.7247781
judge
0.7122482
Legolas gimli
0.9139816
aragorn
0.8457541
dwarf
0.7290931
nonetheless
0.7152580
judge
0.7122482
Boromir company
0.6789346
rauros
0.6623723
cannot
0.6387438
heavily
0.6330999
boat
0.6320360
Table 5 displays the nine members of the Fellowship of the Ring and the five most
semantically similar words to each of them. The strongest relationships between characters
become abundantly clear; as Frodo and Sam not only spend the entire novel together, but are also
frequently mentioned in the same breath by others referring to them and their journey, their
names appear as the most semantically similar word to one another. In a similar vein, the Three
Hunters all have semantically similar names to one another; Aragorn, Legolas, and Gimli forge
their own bond and travel together in search of Merry and Pippin.
Words with high similarities can also be used to develop insights about the journey of the
character and thematic connections can be drawn (though reading too much into every word is a
dangerous and slippery slope). For Frodo, the words keep and trying are evocative of his sense of
duty and perseverance, continuing on with his quest despite his expectation of failure and the
weight of the Ring upon him.
33
For Gimli and Legolas, the word dwarf is strongly associated with both characters, whereas
the word elf is not. This is likely due to the fact that in The Lord of the Rings, various members
of Fellowship comes across elves relatively frequently – Frodo meets Gildor in the woods of the
Shire, the Fellowship forms in Rivendell, and Aragorn leads them to Lothlórien – but as Gimli is
the only living dwarf that has any relevance to the narrative, the majority of references to
dwarves are in direct reference to him and to the Three Hunters.
Gandalf, of course, is the most prominent wizard in the novel, and it is no surprise that he
is strongly associated with his staff and his sword, Glamdring. Merry and Pippin have their full
names in their results, with seemingly random words appearing near them; however, in the case
of Pippin, the words betide, embrasure, and ernil (an Elvish word meaning “prince”) only appear
in chapters that take place in Minas Tirith, the location where Pippin is finally “knighted”. The
results for Merry are less clear, though this could be that because Merry is “knighted” in Rohan,
and with Rohan being a realm in which the narrative is constantly in motion – the riding of
horses, the fighting of battles, and Merry’s eventual journey away from Rohan into Gondor –
there are less established words to tie him down, so to speak.
Lastly, Boromir’s results have some clear connections, the strongest of which is his tie to
the company, or the Fellowship itself. Other characters have the word company associated with
them (or in Aragorn’s case, companions) further along in their results, but only Boromir has the
word take the top spot. One could suggest this giving him the strongest ties to the company; after
all, his death has a profound impact on Aragorn and helps catalyze the breaking of the
Fellowship. The other four words, however, evoke different images and tell a clearer story: one
of Boromir at the falls of Rauros, unable to overcome the burden of the Ring weighing on his
34
mind, falling to the temptation to take it from Frodo, then redeeming himself in death and being
sent over the falls with honor in a funeral boat.
Table 6. Other Characters with Semantically Similar Vocabulary
Character Similar Words and Similarity Scores
Faramir stewards
0.8967964
risked
0.8500669
captain
0.8454338
perceiving
0.8427889
dínen
0.8101560
Saruman orthanc
0.8117029
persuade
0.7753027
conceal
0.7686051
foaled
0.7686051
grievances
0.7686051
Éomer mark
0.8706302
théoden
0.8637906
eorl
0.8199018
king
0.8109946
household
0.7807262
Théoden ride
0.8967258
edoras
0.8822574
éomer
0.8637906
mark
0.8627714
king
0.8567600
Sauron crave
0.8435983
insolence
0.7875551
foreseen
0.7849458
isildur
0.7758541
destroyed
0.7746595
Éowyn women
0.8656680
woman
0.8147677
king
0.8063194
begs
0.8002305
flashing
0.7921499
Galadriel celeborn
0.8266605
gift
0.7700119
gem
0.7303585
overlaid
0.7064388
blows
0.6800466
Aside from the Fellowship, there are numerous supporting characters (and antagonists) that
play crucial roles in the narrative of The Lord of the Rings. Table 6 displays seven of these
characters with each of their five most semantically similar words, and once again, several
thematic connections are clearly demonstrated through computational data.
Faramir is not only the son of the current Steward of Gondor (who ascends to his father’s
position briefly before allowing Aragorn his rightful place on the throne), but also the Captain of
the Rangers of Ithilien, explaining the associations of both stewards and captain. The other three
35
results, however, are much more worthy of discussion. The word dínen is Sindarin for “silent”;
while its association with Faramir likely comes from it being a portion of a street name in Minas
Tirith, Faramir’s home, it is also a fitting (if unintended) adjective to describe the man who has
spent his life in Boromir’s shadow. In contrast, perhaps, to his image as the more cautious of the
two sons of Denethor, the word risked appears very strongly associated with Faramir. As
Beregond tells Pippin in The Return of the King:
[Faramir] is bold, more bold than many deem; for in these days men are slow to believe
that a captain can be wise and learned in the scrolls of lore and song, as he is, and yet a
man of hardihood and swift judgement in the field. But such is Faramir. Less reckless and
eager than Boromir, but not less resolute (RK, “Minas Tirith”).
The other attribute of Faramir exemplified by a semantically similar word is that of
perceptiveness. The word perceiving may indicate Faramir’s ability not only to see the truth in
Frodo and Sam’s explanations about the Ring, but also his immediate realization of the true
identity of Aragorn in the Houses of Healing.
Other character insights that can be gleaned from this particular data set center around the
two main antagonists of the novel, Sauron and Saruman. The word most closely associated with
Sauron is crave, indicative of his lust for power and hunger for domination over Middle-earth.
Sauron craves the One Ring, and will do anything to obtain it. The words isildur and destroyed
are likely considered semantically similar to Sauron due simply to the frequent discussion on
seeing Sauron destroyed, and mention of Isildur – either in reference to the end of the Second
Age, when Isildur cut the One Ring from Sauron’s hand, or when referring to the One Ring itself
as “Isildur’s Bane”. The word foreseen appearing in the results suggests Sauron’s propensity for
planning, though the irony is heavy in light of the one thing he could not have foreseen – two
36
hobbits trekking through his own lands to destroy the One Ring, rather than use it against him as
he expected.
Saruman is, of course, associated with his tower Orthanc, but the words persuade, conceal,
and grievances are of particular interest. The voice of Saruman is well documented to have a
power over those who hear it, as he uses his wizardry to sway people to his side. He even tries to
persuade Gandalf to join him, though Gandalf refuses – after learning that Saruman had
concealed his possession of a palantír from the rest of the White Council. All of Saruman’s plans
were kept from his allies as he feigned allegiance to Sauron with the intent of ruling Middle-
earth with power of the One Ring. These plans lead to the grievances committed against the
people of Rohan, through his manipulation of Théoden and the events that lead to the battle at
Helm’s Deep.
Interestingly, the three characters that hail from Rohan – Éomer, Théoden, and Éowyn –
have some similarities in their results. They all share the word king, which appears to be
associated heavily with Rohan rather than Gondor (given the Steward that sits on the throne at
Minas Tirith in the absence of their king), and Éomer and Théoden in particular share not only
one another’s names, but the word mark, in reference to the Riddermark (the Rohirrim’s name
for Rohan itself). The word most closely associated with Théoden is ride, which comes as no
surprise given Rohan’s connection to horses and the proclivity of Théoden himself to ride into
battle (both at Helm’s Deep and the Pelennor Fields).
Éowyn deserves special mention aside from her shared results with the other two; both the
word women and its singular form woman appear as highly similar words. It is no coincidence
that both words are so strongly associated with Éowyn; she is, in her own words to the Witch-
37
king on the Pelennor Fields, “no living man” (RK, “The Battle of the Pelennor Fields”), and is
thus able to slay him. The pain of Éowyn being unable to accompany the men of Rohan into
battle is central to her character, and her womanhood ends up as the very thing that gives her the
power to kill the Witch-king, a crucial moment in the narrative.
Finally, Galadriel’s results, particularly the first three words, give an insight into her role in
the story. Celeborn is the name of her husband, the Lord of Lórien; Lothlórien is where she
resides and meets the Fellowship after their journey through Moria. The word gem is frequently
used in association with elves, and is used to describe the Three Rings untouched by Sauron, one
of which Galadriel herself wields. But perhaps Galadriel’s most important role in the narrative is
her giving of gifts to each member of the Fellowship, especially to Frodo and Sam. The lembas
bread keep them alive in Mordor, and the Elven cloaks help keep them hidden on their journey.
The Elven rope given to Sam becomes particularly useful in traversing the Emyn Muil, but the
most crucial item they receive is the Phial of Galadriel: used not only in fending off the attacks
of Shelob, but also to overcome the will of the Two Watchers at the Tower of Cirith Ungol. All
together, the gifts of Galadriel are imperative in the success of the Quest by helping Frodo and
Sam travel through the heart of Sauron’s realm, making the semantic similarity of the word gift
that much more potent.
Table 7. Polyonymous People with Semantically Similar Vocabulary
Name Similar Words and Similarity Scores
Gollum sméagol
0.9311162
precious
0.8827871
yess
0.8264254
nice
0.8248856
yes
0.7889800
Sméagol gollum
0.9311162
nice
0.8780458
precious
0.8609962
yess
0.8260633
slinker
0.8044042
wizard staff glamdring stand hammer
38
Gandalf 0.7671267 0.6771592 0.6390158 0.6353180 0.6294722
Mithrandir beregond
0.8963902
citadel
0.8892151
halfling
0.8713649
duties
0.8645035
betide
0.8571764
Strider weathertop
0.9181024
ferny
0.8293248
comfortless
0.8241551
crosses
0.8238455
presses
0.7938950
Aragorn legolas
0.8457541
gimli
0.8282479
nonetheless
0.7582307
judge
0.7245775
must
0.6987855
Elessar elfstone
0.8990467
especial
0.7665790
warden
0.7650582
healers
0.7560882
healer
0.7495625
Tolkien has a habit of creating people and places with multiple names; Rivendell is also
called Imladris, Gandalf is also called Mithrandir, and Mount Doom is also called Orodruin.
Each separate name has a distinct meaning and is used in distinct contexts, and Table 5 displays
the semantic differences between various people in Middle-earth with multiple names.
Four of these instances are of particular interest. The first is Gollum, though not because of
vast semantic differences with his alter-ego Sméagol – on the contrary, the two are
extraordinarily similar. It is interesting in and of itself that his two names are so closely related,
while the other examples (as will be explored below) do not share this. Perhaps the personalities
of Gollum and Sméagol are so closely linked, and the two are so irrevocably tied together, that
even semantically, it is impossible to untangle one from the other. Also appearing in both names’
results (aside from the words that he speaks frequently, the slithering yess and nice), is the other
object that cannot be sundered from his being – precious. Gollum’s connection to the One Ring
is so strong, his own name for it ranks among the highest semantically similar words to both
sides of himself.
39
The second polyonymous person is one that has already been covered to an extent –
Gandalf’s semantic attributes have been discussed, and the difference seen between his more
commonly used name and the Sindarin name of Mithrandir appears heavily tied to location.
While words strongly associated with Gandalf are broader words that relate to him as a character,
when he is referred to as Mithrandir, it is strongly weighted towards Gondor and the city of
Minas Tirith. The citadel (one of the most important landmarks in the city), beregond (the name
of the soldier in Minas Tirith that helped Gandalf save Faramir’s life), halfling (the word used for
hobbits that appears frequently in the lands of Gondor), duties (the men of Gondor are strongly
beholden to their duties, with some even obeying Denethor in his madness), and betide (a word
also strongly associated with Pippin, and only used in chapters that are set in Minas Tirith). This
suggests that the word Mithrandir is strongly tied to Minas Tirith, and if that is indeed the case,
then their relative latitudes and longitudes should be close to one another. As it happens,
mithrandir has a longitude of 14.4 and a latitude of 9.3, while minas tirith (calculated using the
geodata for the word tirith, given that it only ever coincides with minas in reference to the city,
while minas is used in reference to other locations such as Minas Anor and Minas Ithil) has a
longitude of 14.5 and a latitude of 9.6. The two words plot incredibly close to one another on the
coordinate plane, and are both weighted heavily towards the southeastern end of the word cluster
from Figure 1, the direction of Gondor and the White City itself.
Aragorn also stands out as a semantically interesting character, with not just two, but three
different names used across the novel. When he is introduced to the narrative, he is referred to as
Strider, and so under this name he is associated with the events that unfold on the journey from
Bree to Rivendell; ferny (the name of the man that acted as a spy for the Nazgûl in Bree),
40
weathertop (the location at which Strider fended off the Nazgûl themselves and Frodo was
stabbed by the Morgul blade), and crosses (indicative of the crossing of the Bruinen, to safety
and towards Rivendell) stand out in particular. For the majority of the novel, he is referred to as
Aragorn, and his lengthy journey alongside Gimli and Legolas weighs the three names heavily
towards one another, as has been discussed. His royal name, Elessar, is extremely similar to the
word elfstone, which is what “Elessar” means in Quenya. The words warden, healers, and healer
are all reminiscent of the Houses of Healing in Minas Tirith, where Aragorn finally agrees to
enter the city to help save the men and women afflicted by the Black Breath of the Nazgûl.
Before this, “Elessar” is only used seven times, and all in crucial moments in the narrative:
once by Galadriel after the Fellowship’s journey through Moria and into Lothórien; once as they
pass by the statues of Isildur and Anárion at the Falls of Rauros; once as the Three Hunters reveal
themselves to the Riders of Rohan; twice when Gandalf tells of his return to Middle-earth; once
when Aragorn proclaims mastery over the Shadow Host with the Grey Company; and once when
he emerges from the ships at the Battle of the Pelennor Fields to help turn the tide against the
armies of Mordor. Elessar is clearly an important name for Aragorn, and it is fitting that the
return of the King to Gondor is accompanied by the use of the royal name, and one that is so
heavily associated with Minas Tirith.
This portion of analysis is meant to show that the semantics of Tolkien’s work align with
his narrative structure, with glimpses into the narrative space itself. It demonstrates how tied
certain characters and events are to specific locations or regions. With all this in mind, the
concepts previously introduced with Table 2 can be more deeply explored; finding keywords for
places that serve as crucial locations in the story will further illustrate the importance of Middle-
41
earth’s geography to the narrative.
Table 8. Frequently Named Locations with Semantically Similar Vocabulary
Location Similar Words and Similarity Scores
Bag End
bagshot
0.9199458
hobbiton
0.9156653
arrangements
0.9085135
bywater
0.8944593
gaffer
0.8774376
admittance
0.8559210
deals
0.8559210
distribution
0.8559210
gentlehobbit
0.8559210
insist
0.8559210
stocks
0.8559210
trapessing
0.8559210
september
0.8502755
umbrella
0.8421149
cart
0.8345230
carts
0.8229759
lobelia
0.8209924
party
0.8138705
sandyman
0.8109152
tooks
0.8036850
Shire
year
0.7419132
folk
0.7075100
later
0.7041525
end
0.6862632
much
0.6808367
hobbits
0.6625460
years
0.6612142
well
0.6585852
doings
0.6523686
known
0.6515096
frodo
0.6513328
been
0.6513042
mostly
0.6505195
rule
0.6480813
events
0.6446192
called
0.6401848
rather
0.6370507
exclaimed
0.6335095
buckland
0.6312508
often
0.6302448
Bree
greenway
0.8928279
butterbur
0.8754266
landlord
0.8591487
staddle
0.8585841
landers
0.8576275
gatekeeper
0.8291039
underhills
0.8155869
barliman
0.8094006
inn
0.8061278
underhill
0.8051219
inhabitants
0.7851658
fidgeted
0.7843692
imitation
0.7843692
mugs
0.7822873
outsiders
0.7822873
accounting
0.7708456
acrobatics
0.7709456
afternoons
0.7708456
applause
0.7708456
blackberry
0.7708456
Weathertop
strider
0.8885272
lúthien
0.8692869
ferny
0.8473883
booted
0.8264745
archet
0.8140272
tinúviel
0.8131434
angband
0.8131434
ann
0.8131434
babbling
0.8131434
boldly
0.8131434
bolsters
0.8131434
breek
0.8131434
bride
0.8131434
brightest
0.8131434
compensation
0.8131434
conical
0.8131434
cricket
0.8131434
crowing
0.8131434
crumb
0.8131434
defiantly
0.8131434
42
Rivendell
bruinen
0.6979195
ornament
0.6886097
elrond
0.6800449
reluctance
0.6746970
case
0.6716792
glorfindel
0.6685963
journey
0.6513670
dúnadan
0.6489107
ringwraiths
0.6438172
ford
0.6411809
gravest
0.6372138
flood
0.6216418
elf
0.6200400
seas
0.6167168
others
0.6124775
wound
0.6093988
verses
0.6034673
ranger
0.5967951
elder
0.5942089
rise
0.5940376
Moria
anvil
0.8895135
annon
0.8658382
attracted
0.8658382
berúthiel
0.8658382
beth
0.8658382
bewilder
0.8658382
buckler
0.8658382
churning
0.8658382
cooler
0.8658382
covets
0.8658382
creek
0.8658382
daeron
0.8658382
dammed
0.8658382
dan
0.8658382
dares
0.8658382
darksome
0.8658382
decipher
0.8658382
disquietingly
0.8658382
doggedly
0.8658382
dolven
0.8658382
Rohan
war
0.8411767
speak
0.8235498
shall
0.7890092
yet
0.7817102
nay
0.7777228
proud
0.7717276
will
0.7663195
gondor
0.7661723
man
0.764086
tidings
0.7612044
my
0.7584183
is
0.7531144
lord
0.7520321
battle
0.7514759
hour
0.7502625
may
0.7485747
son
0.7442446
set
0.7431275
horses
0.7379821
aragorn
0.7351003
Isengard
nan
0.7730207
ents
0.7329282
curunír
0.7296711
saruman
0.7290215
treebeard
0.7251475
leisurely
0.6993997
striding
0.6696268
ent
0.6650387
wellinghall
0.6612244
isen
0.6508884
quickbeam
0.6493095
chatter
0.6311687
furnace
0.6311687
hollowed
0.6311687
dales
0.6310495
hom
0.6310495
hasty
0.6272925
aye
0.6225403
bowl
0.6189983
roused
0.6170501
Minas Tirith
boromir
0.7760613
maybe
0.7162375
gondor
0.7103452
hour
0.7100327
yet
0.6857233
surely
0.6731995
need
0.6714900
anduin
0.6713712
trial
0.6694675
halflings
0.6672862
43
rauros
0.6616034
may
0.6559257
our
0.6555772
halfling
0.6551451
words
0.6546402
part
0.6523117
set
0.6504780
númenor
0.6482726
me
0.6474147
save
0.6472638
Gondor
yea
0.8077411
halfling
0.7807475
men
0.7693074
rohan
0.7661723
honour
0.7574521
proud
0.7553325
tidings
0.7527349
errand
0.7487391
son
0.7457798
minas
0.7434889
lords
0.7389203
lord
0.7379994
maybe
0.7369089
city
0.7337513
save
0.7336817
yet
0.7270591
worthy
0.7234507
anduin
0.7190570
hour
0.7177815
tirith
0.7128942
Mordor
evil
0.7345005
its
0.7237474
sauron
0.7133250
fear
0.7029030
gorgoroth
0.7007808
tower
0.6986935
westward
0.6927736
power
0.6842445
towers
0.6789814
black
0.6736350
hope
0.6710605
doubt
0.6629501
overthrow
0.6624103
cloak
0.6546882
might
0.6508370
roads
0.6507436
hide
0.6496316
march
0.6437491
destroyed
0.6423854
enemy
0.6402233
Table 8 displays significant locations that appear in The Lord of the Rings in the general
order that they are visited, and the twenty words that are most semantically similar to each one
with their respective similarity scores (again, excluding the location name itself, which would
have a similarity score of positive one). While examining all of these would be too much for the
purposes of this paper, three of the more interesting locations – Rivendell, Rohan, and Mordor –
will be discussed further, and examined as three stages of the characters’ overall journey.
The first location, Rivendell, is a place of respite for the hobbits after their grueling journey
from the comfort of the Shire through the wilderness, culminating at Weathertop and the flight to
and across the Ford of Bruinen. As the House of Elrond, Rivendell (or Imladris) is one of the
three remaining havens for Elves in Middle-earth (the others being Lothlórien and the Woodland
44
Realm). When Frodo inquires if it is safe, Gandalf explains that “there is a power in Rivendell to
withstand the might of Mordor, for a while” (FR, “Many Meetings”). Like everything in Middle-
earth, however, the safety of Rivendell will not last forever, and so the Council of Elrond meets
to decide the appropriate course of action to be taken. The words in Table 8 that are associated
with Rivendell paint a clear picture of the location’s purpose in the narrative. Frodo uses
Rivendell as a place of healing, to recover from his encounter with the Nazgûl (or ringwraiths);
Gandalf tells him that “there was some fragment of the blade still in the closed wound”, but that
the wound is “mending fast … Elrond has cured you” (FR, “Many Meetings”). Despite the perils
that lay ahead of them, “such was the virtue of the land of Rivendell that soon all fear and
anxiety was lifted from their minds” (FR, “The Ring Goes South”).
Rivendell serves another purpose for Strider, now properly called Aragorn. It is here that
the full extent of his lineage is revealed, when Gandalf explains to Frodo that Aragorn is not “just
a Ranger”, but “the last remnant … of the great people, the Men of the West” and a member of
the “race of the Kings from over the Sea” (FR, “Many Meetings”). Bilbo tells Frodo why
Aragorn is referred to as “the Dúnadan”, it being Elvish for “Man of the West” or
“Númenorean”. It is in Rivendell, also, that the shards of Narsil, the sword of Elendil that Isildur
used to cut the One Ring from Sauron’s hand, are reforged into Andúril, Flame of the West. The
transition of the character from Strider to Aragorn is completed in Rivendell with the reforging of
the blade that was broken.
Though relatively safe, Rivendell is also the place where Frodo begins to see the effects of
the Ring he bears. When Bilbo asks to see it again, Frodo “[feels] a strange reluctance” before “a
shadow … [falls] between them” and Bilbo is seen as a creature reminiscent of Gollum (FR,
45
“Many Meetings”). Later, at the meeting of the Council of Elrond, Gandalf instructs Frodo to
bring out the Ring and show it to everyone present, and Frodo again feels “a great reluctance to
reveal the Ring, and a loathing of its touch” (FR, “The Council of Elrond”). This culminates in
Frodo as the protagonist reluctantly accepting his burden and the quest before him:
A great dread fell on him, as if he was awaiting the pronouncement of some doom that he
had long foreseen and vainly hoped might after all never be spoken. An overwhelming
longing to rest and remain at peace by Bilbo’s side in Rivendell filled all his heart. At last
with an effort he spoke, and wondered to hear his own words, as if some other will was
using his small voice (FR, “The Council of Elrond”).
Rivendell is crucial to the narrative for these three reasons in particular; it is a place for
Frodo to heal, a place for Aragorn to realize his legacy, and a place for Frodo to accept the
burden of the Ring. It is located in the western reaches of Middle-earth, and serves as a major
starting point for Frodo and Aragorn’s journeys to Mordor and Gondor, respectively. The central
part of Aragorn’s journey leads fittingly through central Middle-earth, in the kingdom of Rohan.
He leads the Three Hunters in pursuit of Merry and Pippin, reluctantly leaving Frodo and Sam to
their own quest.
Rohan is a kingdom consistently embroiled in war, first against Isengard and eventually
against Mordor alongside Gondor; Aragorn says to Éomer that “open war lies before him, with
Sauron or against him”, and Éomer tells of Gandalf’s warning that “sudden war was preparing in
Isengard” (TT, “The Riders of Rohan”). The Rohirrim that reside there are described by Aragorn
as “proud and wilful, but they are true-hearted, generous in thought and deed; bold but not cruel;
wise but unlearned, writing no books but singing many songs” (TT, “The Riders of Rohan”). As
the Riders of Rohan, horses are extremely important to their culture, and horses from Rohan
“were of great stature, strong and clean-limbed; their grey coats glistened, their long tails flowed
46
in the wind, their manes were braided on their proud necks” (TT, “The Riders of Rohan”). The
words war, proud, and horses all appear in Table 8 as being semantically similar to Rohan, and
again, are able to paint a clear picture of the importance of the location to the narrative. When
meeting the Rohirrim, Aragorn introduces himself as Elessar for the first time, showing his
reforged blade and momentarily appearing as a majestic king of old. This is indicative of another
step in Aragorn’s journey to accepting his role as King of Gondor.
Rohan also marks the importance of the Rohirrim themselves, who ride to the aid of
Gondor and prove the two kingdoms’ loyalty to one another. The Riders’ rescue of Minas Tirith
renews the closeness between Gondor and Rohan through battle, and the courage and heroism
displayed by them at Helm’s Deep as well as the Pelennor Fields is inspiring, showing Sauron
that the world of Men can be united once more to overthrow him. Though Gondor is a different
kingdom, it too appears in Table 8, making the connection between it and Rohan quantifiable.
The word battle also appears, further cementing the importance of battles to Rohan and its
people; Helm’s Deep is a fight for their peoples’ survival, and at the Pelennor Fields (though
located in Gondor), the Riders come to save the day in battle.
Finally, the third stage of Frodo’s journey takes him into the Land of Shadow itself:
Mordor. Its role in the narrative is clear: reaching it is the goal of the quest, to go into the heart of
Mordor and destroy the Ring in the fires of Mount Doom. One would expect the word evil to be
strongly associated with Mordor, the center of evil in Middle-earth during the Third Age. The
tower of Barad-dûr serves as a bastion of evil and the stronghold of Sauron’s power; when
debating whether to ride to the aid of Minas Tirith, Théoden laments that “[s]o great a power as
the Dark Lord seems now to wield might well contain us in battle before the City”, showing that
47
Sauron’s foes know how powerful he is (RK, “The Muster of Rohan”). Barad-dûr itself is a
symbol of the Dark Lord’s might, and as the Dark Tower, it contrasts greatly with the White
Tower of Minas Tirith; “out from the Dark Tower there crept the veils of Shadow that Sauron
wove about himself (RK, “Mount Doom”). Other words from Table 8 appear in direct reference
to Sauron himself; when Sam is forced to carry the Ring for a time, it tempts him, and he
considers the option to “challenge the Power that sat in its dark hold beyond the valley of
shadows” (RK, “The Tower of Cirith Ungol”). Frodo mentions seeing “a map of Mordor that was
made before the Enemy came back here” (RK, “The Land of Shadow”), and Ithilien is said to
have fallen “under the shadow fo their Enemy” (RK, “Minas Tirith”).
The word fear is indicative of Sauron’s main power over the free people of Middle-earth;
“yet another weapon, swifter than hunger, the Lord of the Dark Tower had: dread and despair”
(RK, “The Siege of Gondor”). When he is defeated at last, his mind is shaken free “[f]rom all his
policies and webs of fear and treachery” to focus solely on the fate of the Ring; ironically,
Sauron is subject to fear himself in his final moments (RK, “Mount Doom”). Strange, perhaps, is
the association of the word hope with such a hopeless place as Mordor, though there are distinct
differences in some of its occurrences. Frodo laments to Sam as they trek through Mordor, telling
him that he will follow Sam “[a]s long as you’ve got any hope left. Mine is gone” (RK, “The
Land of Shadow”). When the Ring is destroyed, however, the Captains of the West see the
weakened armies of Mordor, and “their hearts were filled with a new hope in the midst of
darkness”; similarly, Frodo and Sam sleep after the completion of their quest, and “in the
morning they rose again in hope and peace” (RK, “The Field of Cormallen”).
48
The purpose of Frodo journeying into Mordor is to see the Ring destroyed, completing his
quest narrative. It is fitting, then, that the word destroyed should associate closely with Mordor,
the former being the goal and the latter the destination. Gandalf makes it clear when he says that
“[i]f [the Ring] is destroyed, then [Sauron] will fall; and his fall will be so low that none can
foresee his arising ever again … And so a great evil of this world will be removed” (RK, “The
Last Debate”). The destruction of the Ring will lead directly to the destruction of Sauron, and as
Gandalf says, “[i]n wisdom or folly it has been sent away to be destroyed, lest it destroy us” (RK,
“The Last Debate”). The Ring is an object of evil, and is tied to Sauron’s power.
Tolkien tends to use color as a metric for morality. Green is associated with living things,
trees, and the beauty of the natural world; Aragorn even reprimands one of the Rohirrim by
claiming the green earth to be “a mighty matter of legend, though you tread it under the light of
day (TT, “The Riders of Rohan”). Gold and silver are often associated with the grace of the
Elves; Lothlórien is even called the “Land of the Valley of Singing Gold” and the “Golden
Wood”, and Elrond and Arwen wear silver in Rivendell. Black, however, is a color that Tolkien
associates with evil; Mordor is the “Black Land”, its entrance is the “Black Gate”, the
ringwraiths are the “Black Riders”, and their leader is the “Black Captain”. The depth of evil in
Mordor is demonstrated by its association with the word black, and Frodo and Sam are keenly
aware of it as they trek through the barren lands:
But far worse than all such perils was the ever-approaching threat that beat upon them as
they went: the dreadful menace of the Power that waited, brooding in deep thought and
sleepless malice behind the dark veil about its Throne. Nearer and nearer it drew, looming
blacker, like the oncoming of a wall of night at the last end of the world (RK, “Mount
Doom”).
49
Frodo also sees the peak of Barad-dûr while climbing Mount Doom; “… and then he saw,
rising black, blacker and darker than the vast shades amid which it stood, the cruel pinnacles and
iron crown of the topmost tower of Barad-dûr” (RK, “Mount Doom”). Despite the evil of
Mordor, the quest succeeds (though due only to the interference of Gollum), and the characters’
journeys end with a triumphant return to the west, with Aragorn being crowned as the King of
Gondor and accepting his place on the throne, and Frodo returning west to the Shire – then going
even further west, sailing from the Grey Havens and departing Middle-earth forever.
50
Conclusion
Applying the technique of distant reading through statistical models provides a different
look at the geography and narrative structure of Tolkien’s work than one would have simply by
reading through it. Tolkien was able to create a story and world in which the narrative structure is
complemented by the semantic ties of specific words to one another, with particular emphasis on
locations and how they affect the journeys of the characters. The mythology and culture he
created and applied to Middle-earth has deep thematic connections to the overall narrative, and
both of these have similar connections to the geography of the world itself. As quoted in the
Previous Scholarship section above, “Tolkien’s imagination is not just mythopoeic, but also
geographic” (Holmes 2014, 136). The meaning of this becomes clearer in light of the
quantitative connections that can be drawn between locations in Middle-earth and the narrative
and themes of The Lord of the Rings through distant reading. Characters travel through the space
of Middle-earth, and each location they come across not only serves an important role in the
narrative, but also makes the world feel richer, more alive, and more connected with its own
internal laws and legends.
This paper not only seeks to provide a deeper understanding of how the narrative space
influences the characters and the story, but also to demonstrate the capability of spatial text
analyses to be performed on fictional worlds such as Middle-earth. Other authors, such as
George R. R. Martin or C. S. Lewis, may have similar aspects to their writings in Westeros and
Narnia, respectively. There is also more to Middle-earth that is not included in this analysis: the
history of the First and Second Ages are covered in The Silmarillion, along with the full extent of
Tolkien’s mythos and a chronicling of how the geography of Middle-earth changes over time.
51
These would all be relevant to further semantic analysis, but the time horizons and scope of The
Silmarillion excluded it from this paper. Based on these results, however, it can be said that the
geography of Middle-earth, the path taken by the narrative, and the overall themes associated
with various locations were all intentionally placed by Tolkien himself, and these connections
can now be quantitatively shown through a computational and statistical approach.
52
Works Cited
Caughey, Anna. 2014. “The Hero’s Journey.” In A Companion to J. R. R. Tolkien, edited by
Stuart D. Lee. Chichester: Wiley Blackwell.
Clark, Stephen. 2015. “Vector Space Models of Lexical Meaning.” The Handbook of
Contemporary Semantic Theory, 493-520.
Gavin, Michael and Gidal, Eric. 2016. “Topic Modeling and the Historical Geography of
Scotland.” Studies in Scottish Literature: Vol. 42, Iss. 2, 185-197.
Holmes, John R. 2014. “The Lord of the Rings.” In A Companion to J. R. R. Tolkien, edited by
Stuart D. Lee. Chichester: Wiley Blackwell.
Huttar, Charles A. 1975. “Hell and the City: Tolkien and the Traditions of Western Literature.” In
A Tolkien Compass, edited by Jared Lobdell, 117-142. La Salle: Open Court.
Moretti, Franco. 2005. Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract Models for a Literary History. New York,
New York: Verso.
Scheps, Walter. 1975. “The Fairy-tale Morality of The Lord of the Rings.” In A Tolkien Compass,
edited by Jared Lobdell, 43-56. La Salle: Open Court.
Smith, Arden R. 2014. “Invented Languages and Writing Systems.” In A Companion to J. R. R.
Tolkien, edited by Stuart D. Lee. Chichester: Wiley Blackwell.
Tally, Robert. 2019. Topophrenia: Place, Narrative, and the Spatial Imagination. Bloomington,
Indiana: Indiana University Press.
Turney, Peter D. and Pantel, Patrick. 2010. “From Frequency to Meaning: Vector Space Models
of Semantics.” Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, Vol. 37, 141-188.
53
West, Richard. 1975. “The Interlace Structure of The Lord of the Rings.” In A Tolkien Compass,
edited by Jared Lobdell, 77-94. La Salle: Open Court.
Wynne Jones, Diana. 1983. “The Shape of the Narrative in The Lord of the Rings.” In J. R. R.
Tolkien: This Far Land, edited by Robert Giddings, 87-107. London: Vision Press.
54
Appendix A: Maps, Graphs, and Tables
Figure 1
55
Figure 2
56
Figure 3
57
Table 1. Given Location Measured over Location Matrix
Location Similarity Score
Bree 1.0000000
Bree-land 0.9147455
Staddle 0.8644356
Archet 0.8424889
Greenway 0.8275395
Bree-hill 0.8170181
Combe 0.7869258
Table 2. Given Word Measured over Word Matrix
Word Similarity Score
tree 1.0000000
branches 0.8613180
trunk 0.8374366
trees 0.8003490
rustle 0.7612032
blending 0.7446865
boughs 0.7124064
Table 3. Given Location Measured over Word Matrix
Word Similarity Score
bree 0.9994855
greenway 0.8928279
butterbur 0.8754266
landlord 0.8591487
staddle 0.8585841
landers 0.8576275
gatekeeper 0.8291039
58
Table 4. Frequent Named Locations with Semantically Similar Locations
Location Similar Locations and Similarity Scores
Shire Buckland
0.7775905
Michel Delving
0.7131518
Bag End
0.7002573
Brandywine
0.6769123
Hobbiton
0.6591584
Gondor Ered Nimrais
0.7080882
Ithilien
0.6765778
Lossarnach
0.6489313
Minas Tirith
0.6384341
Mindolluin
0.6380255
Mordor Barad-dûr
0.7159829
Gorgoroth
0.6814617
Dark Tower
0.6433909
Orodruin
0.6429616
Black Gate
0.5892472
Rohan Meduseld
0.5887864
Edoras
0.5737468
Mark
0.5657517
Entwash
0.5555635
Gondor
0.5513264
Isengard Nan Curunír
0.7756563
Wellinghall
0.7204994
Fangorn
0.6768723
Brown Lands
0.6113360
Entwash
0.5730949
Rivendell Ford of Bruinen
0.6924914
Bruinen
0.6888266
Weathertop
0.5851053
House of Elrond
0.5492989
Hall of Fire
0.5125958
Minas
Tirith
Rauros
0.7660162
Gondor
0.6384341
Númenor
0.6269256
Tol Brandir
0.5935504
Ered Nimrais
0.5792584
59
Table 5. The Fellowship with Semantically Similar Vocabulary
Character Similar Words and Similarity Scores
Frodo sam
0.7767146
didn’t
0.7397747
trying
0.7354412
keep
0.7289882
shan’t
0.7039926
Gandalf wizard
0.7671267
staff
0.6771592
glamdring
0.6390158
stand
0.6353180
hammer
0.6294722
Sam frodo
0.7767146
didn’t
0.7610867
isn’t
0.7409293
mr
0.7337675
gamgee
0.7127476
Aragorn legolas
0.8457541
gimli
0.8282479
nonetheless
0.7582307
judge
0.7245775
must
0.6987855
Pippin peregrin
0.8564995
betide
0.8258391
embrasure
0.8258391
ernil
0.8258391
fists
0.8258391
Merry score
0.6991391
meriadoc
0.6707345
fellows
0.6647251
call
0.6638438
stared
0.6463807
Gimli legolas
0.9139816
aragorn
0.8282479
dwarf
0.7563165
company
0.7247781
judge
0.7122482
Legolas gimli
0.9139816
aragorn
0.8457541
dwarf
0.7290931
nonetheless
0.7152580
judge
0.7122482
Boromir company
0.6789346
rauros
0.6623723
cannot
0.6387438
heavily
0.6330999
boat
0.6320360
60
Table 6. Other Characters with Semantically Similar Vocabulary
Character Similar Words and Similarity Scores
Faramir stewards
0.8967964
risked
0.8500669
captain
0.8454338
perceiving
0.8427889
dínen
0.8101560
Saruman orthanc
0.8117029
persuade
0.7753027
conceal
0.7686051
foaled
0.7686051
grievances
0.7686051
Éomer mark
0.8706302
théoden
0.8637906
eorl
0.8199018
king
0.8109946
household
0.7807262
Théoden ride
0.8967258
edoras
0.8822574
éomer
0.8637906
mark
0.8627714
king
0.8567600
Sauron crave
0.8435983
insolence
0.7875551
foreseen
0.7849458
isildur
0.7758541
destroyed
0.7746595
Éowyn women
0.8656680
woman
0.8147677
king
0.8063194
begs
0.8002305
flashing
0.7921499
Galadriel celeborn
0.8266605
gift
0.7700119
gem
0.7303585
overlaid
0.7064388
blows
0.6800466
61
Table 7. Polyonymous People with Semantically Similar Vocabulary
Name Similar Words and Similarity Scores
Gollum sméagol
0.9311162
precious
0.8827871
yess
0.8264254
nice
0.8248856
yes
0.7889800
Sméagol gollum
0.9311162
nice
0.8780458
precious
0.8609962
yess
0.8260633
slinker
0.8044042
Gandalf wizard
0.7671267
staff
0.6771592
glamdring
0.6390158
stand
0.6353180
hammer
0.6294722
Mithrandir beregond
0.8963902
citadel
0.8892151
halfling
0.8713649
duties
0.8645035
betide
0.8571764
Strider weathertop
0.9181024
ferny
0.8293248
comfortless
0.8241551
crosses
0.8238455
presses
0.7938950
Aragorn legolas
0.8457541
gimli
0.8282479
nonetheless
0.7582307
judge
0.7245775
must
0.6987855
Elessar elfstone
0.8990467
especial
0.7665790
warden
0.7650582
healers
0.7560882
healer
0.7495625
62
Table 8. Frequently Named Locations with Semantically Similar Vocabulary
Location Similar Words and Similarity Scores
Bag End
bagshot
0.9199458
hobbiton
0.9156653
arrangements
0.9085135
bywater
0.8944593
gaffer
0.8774376
admittance
0.8559210
deals
0.8559210
distribution
0.8559210
gentlehobbit
0.8559210
insist
0.8559210
stocks
0.8559210
trapessing
0.8559210
september
0.8502755
umbrella
0.8421149
cart
0.8345230
carts
0.8229759
lobelia
0.8209924
party
0.8138705
sandyman
0.8109152
tooks
0.8036850
Shire
year
0.7419132
folk
0.7075100
later
0.7041525
end
0.6862632
much
0.6808367
hobbits
0.6625460
years
0.6612142
well
0.6585852
doings
0.6523686
known
0.6515096
frodo
0.6513328
been
0.6513042
mostly
0.6505195
rule
0.6480813
events
0.6446192
called
0.6401848
rather
0.6370507
exclaimed
0.6335095
buckland
0.6312508
often
0.6302448
Bree
greenway
0.8928279
butterbur
0.8754266
landlord
0.8591487
staddle
0.8585841
landers
0.8576275
gatekeeper
0.8291039
underhills
0.8155869
barliman
0.8094006
inn
0.8061278
underhill
0.8051219
inhabitants
0.7851658
fidgeted
0.7843692
imitation
0.7843692
mugs
0.7822873
outsiders
0.7822873
accounting
0.7708456
acrobatics
0.7709456
afternoons
0.7708456
applause
0.7708456
blackberry
0.7708456
Weathertop
strider
0.8885272
lúthien
0.8692869
ferny
0.8473883
booted
0.8264745
archet
0.8140272
tinúviel
0.8131434
angband
0.8131434
ann
0.8131434
babbling
0.8131434
boldly
0.8131434
bolsters
0.8131434
breek
0.8131434
bride
0.8131434
brightest
0.8131434
compensation
0.8131434
conical
0.8131434
cricket
0.8131434
crowing
0.8131434
crumb
0.8131434
defiantly
0.8131434
Rivendell
bruinen
0.6979195
ornament
0.6886097
elrond
0.6800449
reluctance
0.6746970
case
0.6716792
63
glorfindel
0.6685963
journey
0.6513670
dúnadan
0.6489107
ringwraiths
0.6438172
ford
0.6411809
gravest
0.6372138
flood
0.6216418
elf
0.6200400
seas
0.6167168
others
0.6124775
wound
0.6093988
verses
0.6034673
ranger
0.5967951
elder
0.5942089
rise
0.5940376
Moria
anvil
0.8895135
annon
0.8658382
attracted
0.8658382
berúthiel
0.8658382
beth
0.8658382
bewilder
0.8658382
buckler
0.8658382
churning
0.8658382
cooler
0.8658382
covets
0.8658382
creek
0.8658382
daeron
0.8658382
dammed
0.8658382
dan
0.8658382
dares
0.8658382
darksome
0.8658382
decipher
0.8658382
disquietingly
0.8658382
doggedly
0.8658382
dolven
0.8658382
Rohan
war
0.8411767
speak
0.8235498
shall
0.7890092
yet
0.7817102
nay
0.7777228
proud
0.7717276
will
0.7663195
gondor
0.7661723
man
0.764086
tidings
0.7612044
my
0.7584183
is
0.7531144
lord
0.7520321
battle
0.7514759
hour
0.7502625
may
0.7485747
son
0.7442446
set
0.7431275
horses
0.7379821
aragorn
0.7351003
Isengard
nan
0.7730207
ents
0.7329282
curunír
0.7296711
saruman
0.7290215
treebeard
0.7251475
leisurely
0.6993997
striding
0.6696268
ent
0.6650387
wellinghall
0.6612244
isen
0.6508884
quickbeam
0.6493095
chatter
0.6311687
furnace
0.6311687
hollowed
0.6311687
dales
0.6310495
hom
0.6310495
hasty
0.6272925
aye
0.6225403
bowl
0.6189983
roused
0.6170501
Minas Tirith
boromir
0.7760613
maybe
0.7162375
gondor
0.7103452
hour
0.7100327
yet
0.6857233
surely
0.6731995
need
0.6714900
anduin
0.6713712
trial
0.6694675
halflings
0.6672862
rauros
0.6616034
may
0.6559257
our
0.6555772
halfling
0.6551451
words
0.6546402
64
part
0.6523117
set
0.6504780
númenor
0.6482726
me
0.6474147
save
0.6472638
Gondor
yea
0.8077411
halfling
0.7807475
men
0.7693074
rohan
0.7661723
honour
0.7574521
proud
0.7553325
tidings
0.7527349
errand
0.7487391
son
0.7457798
minas
0.7434889
lords
0.7389203
lord
0.7379994
maybe
0.7369089
city
0.7337513
save
0.7336817
yet
0.7270591
worthy
0.7234507
anduin
0.7190570
hour
0.7177815
tirith
0.7128942
Mordor
evil
0.7345005
its
0.7237474
sauron
0.7133250
fear
0.7029030
gorgoroth
0.7007808
tower
0.6986935
westward
0.6927736
power
0.6842445
towers
0.6789814
black
0.6736350
hope
0.6710605
doubt
0.6629501
overthrow
0.6624103
cloak
0.6546882
might
0.6508370
roads
0.6507436
hide
0.6496316
march
0.6437491
destroyed
0.6423854
enemy
0.6402233
65
Appendix B: Scripts
install.packages("xml2")
library(xml2)
html_loc = "~/Desktop/tolkien"
setwd(html_loc)
vocab = c()
filenames = dir()
for (i in 1:length(filenames)) {
txt = read_html(filenames[i])
full_text = xml_text(txt)
words = strsplit(full_text, split = "\\W")
words = unlist(words)
words = tolower(words)
words = words[words != ""]
freqs = table(words)
terms = names(freqs)
vocab = c(vocab, terms)
}
vocab = unique(vocab)
wordcount = matrix(0, nrow = length(vocab), ncol = 1)
rownames(wordcount) = vocab
# The Hobbit
txt = read_html("hobbit.html")
nodes = xml_find_all(txt, "//*")
elements = xml_name(nodes)
hits = which(elements == "h2")
for (i in 1:(length(hits))) {
start = hits[i]
if (i < length(hits)) {
end = hits[i+1]
} else {
end = length(nodes)
}
chapter_paragraphs = nodes[start:end]
chapter = xml_text(chapter_paragraphs)
ord = which(elements[start:end] != "p")
chapter = chapter[-ord]
words = strsplit(chapter, split = "\\W")
words = unlist(words)
66
words = tolower(words)
words = words[words != ""]
freqs = table(words)
terms = names(freqs)
vec = rep(0, length(vocab))
names(vec) = vocab
vec[terms] = freqs
wordcount = cbind(wordcount, vec)
}
totals = colSums(wordcount)
hits = which(totals > 10)
labels = paste("hobbit_", 1:length(hits), sep = "")
wordcount = wordcount[,hits]
colnames(wordcount) = labels
# The Fellowship of the Ring
wordcount_lor1 = matrix(0, nrow = length(vocab), ncol = 1)
rownames(wordcount_lor1) = vocab
txt = read_html("lor1.html")
nodes = xml_find_all(txt, "//*")
elements = xml_name(nodes)
hits = which(elements == "h3")
for (i in 1:(length(hits))) {
start = hits[i]
if (i < length(hits)) {
end = hits[i+1]
} else {
end = length(nodes)
}
chapter_paragraphs = nodes[start:end]
chapter = xml_text(chapter_paragraphs)
ord = which(elements[start:end] != "p")
chapter = chapter[-ord]
words = strsplit(chapter, split = "\\W")
words = unlist(words)
words = tolower(words)
words = words[words != ""]
67
freqs = table(words)
terms = names(freqs)
vec = rep(0, length(vocab))
names(vec) = vocab
vec[terms] = freqs
wordcount_lor1 = cbind (wordcount_lor1, vec)
}
totals = colSums(wordcount_lor1)
hits = which(totals > 50)
labels = paste("fotr_", 1:length(hits), sep = "")
wordcount_lor1 = wordcount_lor1[,hits]
colnames(wordcount_lor1) = labels
# The Two Towers
wordcount_lor2 = matrix(0, nrow = length(vocab), ncol = 1)
rownames(wordcount_lor2) = vocab
txt = read_html("lor2.html")
nodes = xml_find_all(txt, "//*")
elements = xml_name(nodes)
hits = which(elements == "h3")
for (i in 1:(length(hits))) {
start = hits[i]
if (i < length(hits)) {
end = hits[i+1]
} else {
end = length(nodes)
}
chapter_paragraphs = nodes[start:end]
chapter = xml_text(chapter_paragraphs)
ord = which(elements[start:end] != "p")
chapter = chapter[-ord]
words = strsplit(chapter, split = "\\W")
words = unlist(words)
words = tolower(words)
words = words[words != ""]
freqs = table(words)
terms = names(freqs)
68
vec = rep(0, length(vocab))
names(vec) = vocab
vec[terms] = freqs
wordcount_lor2 = cbind (wordcount_lor2, vec)
}
totals = colSums(wordcount_lor2)
hits = which(totals > 50)
labels = paste("tt_", 1:length(hits), sep = "")
wordcount_lor2 = wordcount_lor2[,hits]
colnames(wordcount_lor2) = labels
# The Return of the King
wordcount_lor3 = matrix(0, nrow = length(vocab), ncol = 1)
rownames(wordcount) = vocab
txt = read_html("lor3.html")
nodes = xml_find_all(txt, "//*")
elements = xml_name(nodes)
hits = which(elements == "h3")
for (i in 1:(length(hits))) {
start = hits[i]
if (i < length(hits)) {
end = hits[i+1]
} else {
end = length(nodes)
}
chapter_paragraphs = nodes[start:end]
chapter = xml_text(chapter_paragraphs)
ord = which(elements[start:end] != "p")
chapter = chapter[-ord]
words = strsplit(chapter, split = "\\W")
words = unlist(words)
# Mark proper nouns or other text processing
words = tolower(words)
words = words[words != ""]
freqs = table(words)
terms = names(freqs)
69
vec = rep(0, length(vocab))
names(vec) = vocab
vec[terms] = freqs
wordcount_lor3 = cbind (wordcount_lor3, vec)
}
totals = colSums(wordcount_lor3)
hits = which(totals > 50)
labels = paste("rotk_", 1:length(hits), sep = "")
wordcount_lor3 = wordcount_lor3[,hits]
colnames(wordcount_lor3) = labels
word_mat = cbind(wordcount, wordcount_lor1, wordcount_lor2,
wordcount_lor3)
locs = read.csv("~/Desktop/tolkien/tolkienlocations.csv",
stringsAsFactors = F)
places = locs[,1]
places = unique(places)
setwd("~/Desktop/tolkien")
txt = read_html("hobbit.html")
nodes = xml_find_all(txt, "//*")
elements = xml_name(nodes)
hits = which(elements == "h2")
for (i in 1:(length(hits))) {
start = hits[i]
if (i < length(hits)) {
end = hits[i+1]
} else {
end = length(nodes)
}
chapter_paragraphs = nodes[start:end]
chapter = xml_text(chapter_paragraphs)
ord = which(elements[start:end] != "p")
chapter = chapter[-ord]
chapter = paste(chapter, collapse = " ")
freqs = rep(0, length(places)) # Creating a blank vector
for (j in 1:length(places)) {
results = gregexpr(places[j], chapter)[[1]] # This finds all
the places in the string where the place-string appears
if (results == -1) {
freq = 0
} else {
70
freq = length(results)
}
freqs[j] = freq
}
if(i == 1) {
places_mat = matrix(freqs, length(freqs), 1)
} else {
places_mat = cbind(places_mat, freqs)
}
}
rownames(places_mat) = places
setwd("~/Desktop/tolkien")
txt = read_html("lor1.html")
nodes = xml_find_all(txt, "//*")
elements = xml_name(nodes)
hits = which(elements == "h3")
for (i in 1:(length(hits))) {
start = hits[i]
if (i < length(hits)) {
end = hits[i+1]
} else {
end = length(nodes)
}
chapter_paragraphs = nodes[start:end]
chapter = xml_text(chapter_paragraphs)
ord = which(elements[start:end] != "p")
chapter = chapter[-ord]
chapter = paste(chapter, collapse = " ")
freqs = rep(0, length(places))
for (j in 1:length(places)) {
results = gregexpr(places[j], chapter)[[1]]
if (results == -1) {
freq = 0
} else {
freq = length(results)
}
freqs[j] = freq
}
if(i == 1) {
places_mat_1 = matrix(freqs, length(freqs), 1)
} else {
places_mat_1 = cbind(places_mat_1, freqs)
}
}
71
rownames(places_mat_1) = places
setwd("~/Desktop/tolkien")
txt = read_html("lor2.html")
nodes = xml_find_all(txt, "//*")
elements = xml_name(nodes)
hits = which(elements == "h3")
for (i in 1:(length(hits))) {
start = hits[i]
if (i < length(hits)) {
end = hits[i+1]
} else {
end = length(nodes)
}
chapter_paragraphs = nodes[start:end]
chapter = xml_text(chapter_paragraphs)
ord = which(elements[start:end] != "p")
chapter = chapter[-ord]
chapter = paste(chapter, collapse = " ")
freqs = rep(0, length(places))
for (j in 1:length(places)) {
results = gregexpr(places[j], chapter)[[1]]
if (results == -1) {
freq = 0
} else {
freq = length(results)
}
freqs[j] = freq
}
if(i == 1) {
places_mat_2 = matrix(freqs, length(freqs), 1)
} else {
places_mat_2 = cbind(places_mat_2, freqs)
}
}
rownames(places_mat_2) = places
setwd("~/Desktop/tolkien")
txt = read_html("lor3.html")
nodes = xml_find_all(txt, "//*")
elements = xml_name(nodes)
hits = which(elements == "h3")
for (i in 1:(length(hits))) {
start = hits[i]
if (i < length(hits)) {
72
end = hits[i+1]
} else {
end = length(nodes)
}
chapter_paragraphs = nodes[start:end]
chapter = xml_text(chapter_paragraphs)
ord = which(elements[start:end] != "p")
chapter = chapter[-ord]
chapter = paste(chapter, collapse = " ")
freqs = rep(0, length(places))
for (j in 1:length(places)) {
results = gregexpr(places[j], chapter)[[1]]
if (results == -1) {
freq = 0
} else {
freq = length(results)
}
freqs[j] = freq
}
if(i == 1) {
places_mat_3 = matrix(freqs, length(freqs), 1)
} else {
places_mat_3 = cbind(places_mat_3, freqs)
}
}
rownames(places_mat_3) = places
places_mat = cbind(places_mat, places_mat_1, places_mat_2,
places_mat_3)
totals = colSums(places_mat)
hits = which(totals > 3)
labels = paste(1:length(hits))
places_mat = places_mat[,hits]
colnames(places_mat) = labels
colnames(places_mat)[1] = paste("h_notes", sep = "")
colnames(places_mat)[2:20] = paste("hobbit_", 1:19, sep = "")
colnames(places_mat)[21:25] = paste("p_", 1:5, sep = "")
colnames(places_mat)[26:47] = paste("fotr_", 1:22, sep = "")
colnames(places_mat)[48:67] = paste("ttt_", 1:20, sep = "")
colnames(places_mat)[68:86] = paste("rotk_", 1:19, sep = "")
colnames(word_mat)[1] = paste("h_notes", sep = "")
colnames(word_mat)[2:20] = paste("hobbit_", 1:19, sep = "")
colnames(word_mat)[21:25] = paste("p_", 1:5, sep = "")
73
colnames(word_mat)[26:47] = paste("fotr_", 1:22, sep = "")
colnames(word_mat)[48:67] = paste("ttt_", 1:20, sep = "")
colnames(word_mat)[68:86] = paste("rotk_", 1:19, sep = "")
save(word_mat, file = "word_mat.rda")
save(places_mat, file = "places_mat.rda")
setwd("~/Desktop/Thesis Stuff")
load("places_mat.rda")
load("word_mat.rda")
chaps = read.csv("chaptersettings.csv")
latlon = read.csv("latlongs.csv")
locs = read.csv("tolkienlocations.csv")
plot(latlon$Lon, latlon$Lat, cex = 0)
text(latlon$Lon, latlon$Lat, labels = latlon$Location)
# Correlating with textual data
places = latlon$Location
# Calculating centroid for a given chapter
vec = places_mat[places, 1]
vec = vec / sum(vec)
mean_lon = sum(latlon$Lon * vec)
mean_lat = sum(latlon$Lat * vec)
# Compiling place-keyword matrix
ord = which(rowSums(places_mat) == 0)
places_mat = places_mat[-ord,]
ord = which(rowSums(word_mat) == 0)
word_mat = word_mat[-ord,]
pw = places_mat %*% t(word_mat)
# PMI function
ppmi = function(mat) {
total = sum(mat, na.rm = T)
pcol = apply(mat, 2, function(x) sum(x, na.rm = T) / total)
prow = apply(mat, 1, function(x) sum(x, na.rm = T) / total)
pmat = as.matrix(prow) %*% t(pcol)
mat = mat / total
mat = mat / pmat
mat = apply(mat, 1, log)
74
mat = t(mat)
mat[mat < 0] = 0
mat[is.na(mat)] = 0
mat[is.infinite(mat)] = 0
return(mat)
}
pw_ppmi = ppmi(pw)
# Cosine similarity
semantic_similarity = function(mat, term, output = "top") {
cos_sim = function(x, y) {
x %*% y/(sqrt(x %*% x) * sqrt(y %*% y))
}
if (length(term) == 1) {
if (term %in% rownames(mat) == F) {
stop("The term is not among the rownames of your matrix.
This can happen
for several reasons: 1) the term is just not included
in your
data, 2) the matrix does not have rownames, or 3) you
are trying
to calculate over the columns, in which case you need
to transpose
the matrix with t(mat).")
}
vec = mat[term,]
} else {
vec = term
}
results = unlist(apply(mat, 1, cos_sim, vec))
if (output == "top") {
results = sort(results, decreasing = T)[1:12]
}
return(results)
}
#### Work with lonlat data ####
geo_coords = latlon[,c(1,3,4)]
colnames(geo_coords) = c("NAME", "LAT", "LON")
footprint = function(mat, term, coords) {
vec = mat[,term]
vec[is.na(vec)] = 0
75
vec = vec[vec > 0]
vec = vec[names(vec) %in% coords[,"NAME"]]
hits = which(coords[,"NAME"] %in% names(vec))
#vec = vec[coords[hits,"NAME"]]
ord = which(is.na(vec))
if (length(ord) > 0) {
hits = hits[-ord]
vec = vec[-ord]
}
mean_lon = sum(coords[hits,"LON"] * vec[vec > 0]) / sum(vec)
mean_lat = sum(coords[hits,"LAT"] * vec[vec > 0]) / sum(vec)
euc_dist = function(x, y) { sum(sqrt(x - y)^2) }
distances = c()
for (i in hits) {
lat = coords[i,"LAT"]
lon = coords[i,"LON"]
d = euc_dist(x = c(mean_lon, mean_lat), y = c(lon, lat))
distances = c(distances,d)
}
mean_dist = sum(distances * vec, na.rm = T) / sum(vec, na.rm =
T)
sd_dist = sd(distances, na.rm = T)
results = list()
results$n = length(vec)
results$freq = sum(vec, na.rm = T)
results$sd = sd(vec, na.rm = T)
results$lon = mean_lon
results$lat = mean_lat
results$radius = mean_dist
results$stdev = sd_dist
return(results)
}
# Gathering geosemantic data for each word
geodata = matrix(0,nrow(word_mat), 7)
rownames(geodata) = rownames(word_mat)
for (i in 1:nrow(geodata)) {
print(i)
res = footprint(mat = pw, term = rownames(word_mat)[i], coords
= geo_coords)
geodata[i,] = unlist(res)
}
colnames(geodata) = names(res)
76
# Mapping the data
ord = order(geodata[,"freq"], decreasing = T)[1:1000]
plot(geodata[ord,"lon"], geodata[ord,"lat"], cex = 0)
text(geodata[ord,"lon"], geodata[ord,"lat"], labels =
rownames(geodata[ord,]))
fit = lm(geodata[ord,"lat"] ~ geodata[ord,"lon"])
abline(a = fit$coefficients[1], b = fit$coefficients[2], lwd = 4,
col = "dark green")
ord = order(geodata[,"freq"], decreasing = T)[1:500]
plot(geodata[ord,"lon"], geodata[ord,"radius"], cex = 0)
text(geodata[ord,"lon"], geodata[ord,"radius"], labels =
rownames(geodata[ord,]))
ord = order(geodata[,"freq"], decreasing = T)[1:500]
plot(geodata[ord,"radius"], geodata[ord,"lat"], cex = 0)
text(geodata[ord,"radius"], geodata[ord,"lat"], labels =
rownames(geodata[ord,]))
