Welcome 

 Tour Journals 

 Art Gallery 

 Scholarship 

 Readers 

 News 

 GGK’s Words 

 Skip to content 

 Welcome 

 Original Introduction 

 Buying Books 

 Tour Journals 

 Children of Earth & Sky 

 River of Stars 

 The Last Light of the Sun 

 Under Heaven TOUR JOURNAL 

 Ysabel JOURNAL 

 Books 

 Written on the Dark 

 All the Seas of the World 

 A Brightness Long Ago 

 Children of Earth and Sky 

 River of Stars 

 Under Heaven 

 Ysabel 

 Lord of Emperors 

 Sailing to Sarantium 

 Last Light of the Sun 

 The Lions of Al-Rassan 

 A Song for Arbonne 

 Tigana 

 The Fionavar Tapestry 

 Beyond this Dark House 

 Art Gallery 

 Written on the Dark Art 

 All the Seas of the World Art 

 A Brightness Long Ago Art 

 A Children of Earth and Sky Art 

 River of Stars Art 

 Under Heaven Art 

 Ysabel Art 

 The Sarantine Mosaic Art 

 The Last Light of the Sun Art 

 The Lions of Al-Rassan Art 

 A Song For Arbonne Art 

 Tigana Art 

 Fionavar Art 

 Beyond this Dark House Art 

 Scholarship 

 Professional Scholarship 

 Student Papers 

 Readers 

 Reader Art 

 Readers Music & Verse 

 Music & Verse 

 Fun Stuff! 

 GGK’s Words 

 Essays & Poems 

 Bibliographies 

 Interviews 

 Tour Journals 

 Readings 

 Contact 

 . 

 . 

 . 

 . 

 THE BOOKS
 FICTION: 
 A Brightness Long Ago 
 Children of Earth & Sky 
 River of Stars 
 Under Heaven 
 Ysabel 

 THE SARANTINE MOSAIC: 
 Sailing to Sarantium 
 Lord of Emperors 

 The Last Light of the Sun 
 The Lions of Al-Rassan 
 Song For Arbonne 
 Tigana 

 THE FIONAVAR TAPESTRY: 
 The Summer Tree 
 The Wandering Fire 
 The Darkest Road 

 POETRY: 
 Beyond this Dark House 

 BUYING BOOKS: 
 Signed and personalized books can be ordered from Bakka-Phoenix Books in Toronto 

 Recently Added

 Where I Have No Notes 
 January 2, 2026 

 Search for: 

 ← Gateway to Fionavar, A Photographic Travelogue 

 The Fionavar Tapestry Tarot by Sara Strand → 

 The Hitchhiker’s Guide to Survival in Fionavar

 Posted on November 15, 2014 by Deborah Meghnagi 

 by Mabry Slemmons.

 Fionavar is a dangerous place. People die there at an astonishing rate. Here are a few tips to increase your chance of survival, and also decrease the number of dreadful things that happen to you:

 Be serious, grim, and dour. Cheerful, light-hearted, witty people die. In fact the more seriously your take things, the better your chances of surviving or at least being resurrected.

 Learn how to either fight or do something cool and magical. Dispensible people always die.

 Trust the mercy of no one except the lios alfar and Dalrei. This especially applies to: people from Cathal, royalty, brigands, priestesses.

 Do NOT say anything treacherous around Diar.

 Moreover, don’t say anything treacherous around Aileron. No one’s tried it, because no one is stupid enough to try.

 Going up into the mountains with only one or two companions may not seem like a good way to stay alive…but it works.

 Never get in a fight with anyone dressed in white, even if he is evil. It is way too much for you to handle.

 Previous statement stands for women dressed in white too.

 Do not blow the cool looking horn you recently picked up. I mean it. It MAY just be a nice pretty-sounding hunting horn, but the odds are it is not.

 Avoid creepy shadowy horsemen. Don’t ask why. Trust me.

 Now is not a good time to decide you are into ecology and want to save the wolves.

 Do not be musical. All the best singers die.

 Be on the side of good. They will win, and while there is a small chance they will spare you if you are on the wrong side, take careful note of number 3. This does not apply if one of your parents is a god.

 Do not mistake the dagger in Rakoth Maugrim’s hand for a sign that he is happy to see you.

 Do not accept any challenges to single combat unless you are a dwarf. You may be good, but the other guy is also good, and he’s a lot bigger than you.

 Never agree to be part of a medium sized party escorting someone from another world, unless Diarmuid is with you. Otherwise, you are doomed.

 Do not under any circumstances be within twenty miles of the princess of Cathal when she is pissed off.

 Be aware that avoiding her in this matter will not do any good. She’s disguised as one of the soldiers and is waiting for a chance to stab you.

 Not only can svart alfar kill people, there is a fairly good chance they might kill you no matter how puny they are if you do not abide by rule 2.

 Note: The Hitchhiker’s Guide does not claim that by following these guidelines you can ensure that no harm befalls you or even your survival. They will however improve your chances.

 This entry was posted in Fun Stuff . Bookmark the permalink . 

 ← Gateway to Fionavar, A Photographic Travelogue 

 The Fionavar Tapestry Tarot by Sara Strand → 

 Comments are closed.

 Powered by WordPress and Sliding Door theme.