Welcome 

 Tour Journals 

 Art Gallery 

 Scholarship 

 Readers 

 News 

 GGK’s Words 

 Skip to content 

 Welcome 

 Original Introduction 

 Buying Books 

 Tour Journals 

 Children of Earth & Sky 

 River of Stars 

 The Last Light of the Sun 

 Under Heaven TOUR JOURNAL 

 Ysabel JOURNAL 

 Books 

 Written on the Dark 

 All the Seas of the World 

 A Brightness Long Ago 

 Children of Earth and Sky 

 River of Stars 

 Under Heaven 

 Ysabel 

 Lord of Emperors 

 Sailing to Sarantium 

 Last Light of the Sun 

 The Lions of Al-Rassan 

 A Song for Arbonne 

 Tigana 

 The Fionavar Tapestry 

 Beyond this Dark House 

 Art Gallery 

 Written on the Dark Art 

 All the Seas of the World Art 

 A Brightness Long Ago Art 

 A Children of Earth and Sky Art 

 River of Stars Art 

 Under Heaven Art 

 Ysabel Art 

 The Sarantine Mosaic Art 

 The Last Light of the Sun Art 

 The Lions of Al-Rassan Art 

 A Song For Arbonne Art 

 Tigana Art 

 Fionavar Art 

 Beyond this Dark House Art 

 Scholarship 

 Professional Scholarship 

 Student Papers 

 Readers 

 Reader Art 

 Readers Music & Verse 

 Music & Verse 

 Fun Stuff! 

 GGK’s Words 

 Essays & Poems 

 Bibliographies 

 Interviews 

 Tour Journals 

 Readings 

 Contact 

 . 

 . 

 . 

 . 

 THE BOOKS
 FICTION: 
 A Brightness Long Ago 
 Children of Earth & Sky 
 River of Stars 
 Under Heaven 
 Ysabel 

 THE SARANTINE MOSAIC: 
 Sailing to Sarantium 
 Lord of Emperors 

 The Last Light of the Sun 
 The Lions of Al-Rassan 
 Song For Arbonne 
 Tigana 

 THE FIONAVAR TAPESTRY: 
 The Summer Tree 
 The Wandering Fire 
 The Darkest Road 

 POETRY: 
 Beyond this Dark House 

 BUYING BOOKS: 
 Signed and personalized books can be ordered from Bakka-Phoenix Books in Toronto 

 Recently Added

 Where I Have No Notes 
 January 2, 2026 

 Search for: 

 ← The Greatest Russians of all Time 

 Site Essays → 

 Sometimes a Game is Just a Game

 Posted on November 15, 2014 by Deborah Meghnagi 

 This was first printed in the Globe & Mail , May 2008. Reproduced with kind permission. Incidentally, the title was their choice!

 Edmond Burke said, “All it takes for evil to triumph is for good men to do nothing.”

 Sometimes evil comes hand in hand with virtue, animated by good intent. It is most worrisome then because we focus on the intentions, the valid cause, and miss the danger. Happens all the time. I heard a story recently and followed it up. Here’s the essence.

 Students in a high school history class. Two of them, friends, are vying to be selected by the teacher to go to the board and write answers to a section-opening assignment. Teacher picks one, turns to board. Selected kid, call him Jim, exults flamboyantly. Unselected kid, Alex, mimes indignation, levels index finger, shoots his friend by dropping his thumb on said index finger. Jim sprawls in his chair, shot and laughing.

 Sally, behind Alex, calls out, ‘Teacher, Alex shot Jim!’

 Teacher turns and says, ‘If I’d seen that I’d have to send you to the office for suspension.’

 That’s the story. Now, I want to be fair. Teacher did not actually do anything. No punishment was imposed, I am told. There is no grim ending here. This is about friends joking, someone offended and informing, and a verbal response by a teacher in a history class.

 Of course, it is about a lot more. It is about our culture as it evolves.

 I tracked down an administrator at the school and wrote him. He was good enough (and generous enough with his time) to reply, and then engage in a back and forth. I want to make clear this is a thoughtful and intelligent man – and I am told the teacher is, as well.

 That’s actually the heart of the problem, seems to me.

 The administrator wrote, ‘I find it all ridiculous and silly,’ but added, ‘All it takes is one person without a sense of humour, or a grievance, and students and schools can be in immediate trouble. Students need to remember to be very careful of joking, ever, anywhere … on topics of sex or violence.’

 A clarification followed as to the possible trouble. ‘Folks in our position are justifiably nervous since a failure to quash such behaviour can be found to be criminal culpability if anything later should come of it.’

 This can paralyze a school. An office. A government. He wrote, compellingly, “The cyclone of fallout is all too real.”

 All it takes is one person . Hence, zero allowance for common sense, complexities of interaction, human give and take. I was informed, ‘Teens need to learn that some topics are best not treated as a joke, since those without humour have the power to make one’s life miserable.’

 I thought about it. I’m still thinking about it. Can even see the point. But surely what we really need to say, and teach, is something different: teens need to learn that this is the world they are at risk of growing up in, if we don’t resist it.

 If we construct a school, workplace, any public environment where the single offended person, whether lacking in common sense, fierce with an agenda, or just wide-eyed with awareness of their power to cause things to happen to others, is given so much license to control us, we are more than merely impoverished, we are held hostage.

 If decent and well-meaning teachers and school administrators are forced to say that yes, this is a fight that should be fought but they cannot fight it, it is too time-consuming, too fraught with risk and complexity, who will do the fighting for those growing up? Who will teach teenagers that they are wrong to feel they have a right or even a duty to act like Stasi informers?

 Are most of us content merely to shake our heads (off camera, out of sight) with rue at these stories?

 Violence in some schools is a brutal reality of today. It chokes off lives, makes learning precarious, introduces terror where it should never be. We want to – have to – address it. That is the ‘good intent’ I cited at the outset. But when our pursuit of a virtuous cause leaves common sense gasping for oxygen and schools petrified by the idea of lawsuits for ‘condoning’ humour, a different evil has entered the scene.

 William Butler Yeats was not, as it happens, the shrewdest or most well-balanced thinker – poetic genius and logical thought don’t have to go together. But Yeats did nail an aspect of his world and ours (and echoed Burke) with brilliance when he wrote:

 The best lack all conviction, while the worst

Are full of passionate intensity. 

 Lacking all conviction, we all run the risk, sooner or later, of being convicted.

 © Guy Gavriel Kay

 This entry was posted in Essays , GGK's Words . Bookmark the permalink . 

 ← The Greatest Russians of all Time 

 Site Essays → 

 Comments are closed.

 Powered by WordPress and Sliding Door theme.