Toggle navigation 

 EBR 

 Home 

 by Rating 

 Books We Love 

 Books We Like 

 Books We Like…and Hate 

 Books that are Mediocre 

 Books We Don’t Like 

 Books We Hate 

 by Genre 

 Fantasy 

 Epic Fantasy 

 Dark Fantasy 

 Urban Fantasy 

 Heroic Fantasy 

 Sword & Sorcery 

 Horror 

 Alternate Historical Fiction 

 Science Fiction 

 Space Opera 

 Dystopian SF 

 Military SF 

 Science Fantasy 

 Steampunk 

 Techno Thriller 

 Mystery 

 Young Adult 

 Middle Grade 

 by Category 

 All Authors 

 Favorite Authors 

 Book Series 

 Favorite Series 

 Best-of Lists 

 Interviews 

 by Year 

 Elitist University 

 Elitist Classics 

 Editorials 

 News 

 EBR Team 

 Steve the Bookstore Guy 

 Vanessa 

 Dan 

 Current Reviewers 

 Past Reviewers 

 Guest Reviewers 

 About Us 

 Contact Us 

 Review Queries 

 ELITIST BOOK REVIEWS 
 Excellent taste. Insightful readers. Reviews for the discerning SF/F fan. 

 Review: A Brightness Long Ago

 Posted: May 14, 2019 
 by
 Jane Funk 
 in
 Books We Like...and Hate ( 3 / 5 ) 

 Meta: Guy Gavriel Kay , Alternate Historical Fiction , Fantasy 

 Amazon

 Imagine you’re a chef and at your restaurant you only make one meal. It’s beautiful and satisfying and no one’s complaining about the plate of gorgeous food in front of them. In fact, you have plenty of repeat customers, because hey, a lot of people go to restaurants and order the same thing every time. Why venture into the unknown towards probable disappointment?

 But no matter how great your one meal is, some of your customers are eventually going to wonder what the dessert menu might look like. 

 And that analogy is close to where I find myself as a Guy Gavriel Kay fan. I’ve been reading him for close to a decade now and I’m a completist (except his poems, haven’t read those). His books make me cry. They’re lovely and poetic and full of ordinary and extraordinary people alike trying to make good choices when the world doesn’t seem to give them any. 

 Even as a fan, I’m cognizant that his books tend towards a certain… sameness. He works with archetypes — the poet, the warrior, the artist, the lover, the priest — and continually revisits themes of fate and choice. He does it well, but while reading his latest offering I found myself wondering what else he has to offer.

A loosely tied companion book to Kay’s CHILDREN OF EARTH AND SKY ( Amazon ), A BRIGHTNESS LONG AGO ( Amazon ) is a meditation on the power of memory. Plucking a (very) background character from CHILDREN OF EARTH AND SKY Kay imagines a rich inner life and history for Guidanio Cerra. Danio is old now, and powerful, caught in a rush of memories from his youth as he sits in a council room in Venice Seressa, meditating on the unexpected ways his meeting with one woman changed his life. 

 That young woman is Adria of Ripoli. In a world that only offers two paths to women of her rank — marriage or the convent — she tries to carve a third path for herself, which is what brings her to Danio’s attention as she flees the scene of an assassination. She is also the niece of Folco di Cino and thus a player, however small, in the generation-spanning feud between Folco di Cino and Teobaldo di Monticola, which provides the central tension in the novel. 

 The exact nature of the feud is never important. There are too many incidents, slights, grievances — some real, some imagined — to untangle or to keep score. What’s important is the gravity of the feud, the way it warps and shapes the world, dragging Danio from the path that he’d chosen and involving him with more dangerous and powerful people than he’d ever imagined. 
 A meditation on the power of memory, A BRIGHTNESS LONG AGO hits all the right marks but the theme of nostalgia (ironically) pales with time.

 Danio’s reflections are the major POV throughout the novel. First person is rare enough (in adult speculative fiction) because it requires a sustained character voice and doesn’t allow a lot of context, which Kay avoids by making most of Danio’s perspective a reflection of the past so that he can provide his own context. Perhaps it was just the setting in Batiara (Guy Kay’s equivalent of Renaissance Italy) but Danio’s perspective reminded me of a Browning-style dramatic monologue (See: “My Last Duchess”). Kay does switch POVs throughout the book, although these are presented in third person, so they are immediately distinct from Danio’s musings. As always, his small glimpses of other lives are poignant and interesting and I especially enjoyed the journeys of Jelena and Antenami Sardi. 

 While Danio’s voice is interesting, I thought that A BRIGHTNESS LONG AGO was not Guy Kay’s strongest novel, perhaps because Danio’s character, from whom so much of the story flows, was simply a little flat. Nostalgia is a powerful emotion to experience and a universal one, but it pales during an extended reading in contrast with more current and lively passions. For example, I would have loved to see more from Adria’s perspective, or even more of Folco’s. 

 My final recommendation is that if you’re sucker for books with extensive, well-researched reading lists in the back, you should check out this novel. However, if you’ve never read Guy Kay before, this probably isn’t the book to start with. Try TIGANA ( Amazon ) if you’re interested in a little more magic, or THE LIONS OF AL RASSAN ( Amazon ) if you want to cry your eyes out.

 There are some really satisfying plot and character moments near the end that I felt like were some good pay-off for the journey; but just because I wonder what else could be on the menu doesn’t mean that I didn’t enjoy the meal. 

 Recommended Age: 13+

 Language: None

 Violence: Several deaths, not too gory

 Sex: A few scenes (with slow fades) and some explicit conversations

 Your link:

 A Brightness Long Ago 
 — Amazon 
 — Audible 

 Author Links:

 Guy Gavriel Kay — Website — EBR Reviews 

 Leave a Reply Cancel reply 
 Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked * 
 Comment * 
 Name * 

 Email * 

 Website 

 Name 

 Δ 

 EBR
FB 

 EBR
Twitter 

 Tweet 

 EBR IG 

 LATEST POSTS

 Parasite 

 A Sea of Storms 

 Back from the dead 

 Residue by Steve Diamond updated and re-released 

 Warriorborn 

 Yumi and the Nightmare Painter 

 The Dragon's Promise 

 Six Crimson Cranes 

 Witch King 

 The Far Reaches 

 Review Tags
 alternate history 
 Anthology 
 Audible 
 Books for Chicks 
 Books vs. Shows 
 Collection 
 Fairy Tales 
 fantasy 
 Friends of Ours 
 Ghost Stories 
 Graphic Novels 
 historical fantasy 
 Hugo Awards 
 LGBTQ+ 
 Occult Fantasy 
 RPGs 
 Self-Published Science Fiction Competition 
 Short Fiction 
 Speculatively Lite 
 Subterranean Press 
 The Great Self-published Fantasy Blog-off 

 Recent Comments
 Writer Dan on Back from the dead Thanks, yo. Have missed doing this.

 John on Back from the dead Welcome Back

 Mary on The Goblin Emperor This book had me bewildered - I thought it was more about administration than po ...

 Trudi Phillips on The Lost Symbol Take it for what it is, light weight entertainment to read in bed before you set ...

 Eric Kay on All You Need is Kill Thanks for the review. I haven't read AYNiK but it was one of the top books when ...

 RSS FEEDS

 Entries 

 Comments 

 Home 

 About Us 

 Contact Us 

 Privacy Policy 

 ©2009-2026 ElitistBookReviews.com