Literary Hub 

 Craft and Criticism Literary Criticism 

 Craft and Advice 

 In Conversation 

 On Translation 

 Fiction and Poetry Short Story 

 From the Novel 

 Poem 

 News and Culture History 

 Science 

 Politics 

 Biography 

 Memoir 

 Food 

 Technology 

 Bookstores and Libraries 

 Film and TV 

 Travel 

 Music 

 Art and Photography 

 The Hub 

 Style 

 Design 

 Sports 

 Become A Member 

 Lit Hub Radio The Lit Hub Podcast 

 Awakeners 

 Fiction/Non/Fiction 

 The Critic and Her Publics 

 Windham-Campbell Prizes Podcast 

 Memoir Nation 

 Beyond the Page 

 First Draft: A Dialogue on Writing 

 Thresholds 

 The Cosmic Library 

 Culture Schlock 

 Reading Lists 

 Reading Challenge 

 Book Marks Best Reviewed Books 

 CrimeReads True Crime 

 The Daily Thrill 

 Log In 

 Craft and Criticism 

 Fiction and Poetry 

 News and Culture 

 Lit Hub Radio 

 Reading Lists 

 Reading Challenge 

 Book Marks 

 CrimeReads 

 Log In 

 The First Rule of Write Club Is...

 Guy Gavriel Kay on Sorting Through Millions of Rules for Writing

 Guy Gavriel Kay 

 July 6, 2016 

 Some years ago, The Guardian in England ran what amounted to a Top Ten of Top Ten Tips About Writing. They brought together many different writers’ suggestions.
 Article continues after advertisement 

 I will say I dislike these. I think they reflect a trend in the culture to chase gurus and shortcuts, and for some to assume the role of guru. Even more, I feel these listicles undermine the essential individuality of the creative process. But the tips in The Guardian did have some unexpected interest.

 Roddy Doyle suggested writers could obtain a thesaurus but should promptly toss it in the garden shed or behind the refrigerator. It was #6 on his list. The great Margaret Atwood, by contrast, said writers do need a thesaurus handy, that writing professionally requires tools. That was #7 for her.

 Here were two justly admired authors, giants, really, with completely different views on precisely the same point. What to make of this? Well, it is possible for would-be (or starting-out) writers to cherry-pick their tips, find someone distinguished who says what the start-up wants to hear anyhow. We do that all the time in life, no harm no foul? ‘I write the same way Neil Gaiman does!’ 

 But there might be harm in the very notion that there are rules to be followed in art. Never revise until you are done with the book. Never use a prologue. Short chapters. No sentence fragments. One narrator only. (Yes, I’ve broken all of these.) I’ll argue that those engaged in teaching creativity need to exercise of restraint, and respect for how amazingly varied the processes are whereby people get writing—or painting, or music, or any other art form—done. Some do exercise this caution (the good teachers) but people still chase down these top ten lists, these rules.

 There are rules in some contexts. The film script formula of the Three Act Structure may not be the best way to write a particular story, but it is likely to be the best way to pitch and sell it to an executive in the industry—someone following corporate rules (of keeping a job, in part).

 Similarly, if one is looking for success in a defined genre, the market usually offers signals as to what it wants. Editors and agents read the tea leaves urgently. But both of these are different from trying to write as well as one can. They are about calculated campaigning for a market response. One famous thriller writer compiled a list of the names of protagonists in successful thrillers before writing his own first book, searching for a common element in naming patterns. The story is that he also charted the page number for the first deaths, first sex scenes… there is no doubt people approach the market this way at times.

 And there is nothing wrong with it, at all, or even misguided. It is just a different exercise . Of course I’m aware that if one wants to write full-time, to make a living in an increasingly fragmented literary world, awareness of markets will enter into it, even if markets change and are hugely unpredictable. But this is still not the same thing as writing as best one can. The rules of smart commerce are not identical to the rules of good writing. I call it the Dan Brown Principle, but I could use other names, too.

 There’s another worrisome aspect to the market pressure coming down on younger writers today. One author who has brought this issue to the fore is the brilliant Elena Ferrante, whose Neapolitan Quartet has been so much talked about lately. But Ferrante has been writing for decades, and this is the first time she’s had an impact— and no one knows who she is 

 She told her original editor long ago she’d be the easiest author he ever published, that he need only produce her book and distribute it. She expected no promotion, marketing and she would not do any herself, she did not want to get in the way of her book. 

 How much more against the current can someone possibly swim?

 The presence of the author today, on social media, at conventions, conferences, literary festivals, tour signings, lobbying for awards, even (ahem!) publishing essays as a new book comes out… these do stand right beside our books. And today’s culture seems to want this. The sense of knowing the writer. That aura of ‘authenticity’ writers are supposed to cultivate in person or online.

 Ferrante’s approach is so out of step it became newsworthy. She’s in the news because she refuses to be there! She isn’t the first publicity-shy author, but she’s the version for right now, and she’s a challenge to the way things are supposed to be.

 As access to thoughts about using a thesaurus from Atwood and Doyle and others becomes google-easy, as self-publishing creates greater numbers of people who want to be instructed how to write, as it becomes more viable for many to teach writing while it becomes ever harder make a living actually doing it, we are, in one sense, more together than ever.

 Connection can be trivially simple. Click. Press return. We are all linked online—writers, teachers, students, readers. But on another level, one less talked about, might we be risking a loss of the value of being ‘alone’ in creativity?

 Lawrence Durrell, the poet-novelist, once described his writing as ‘art conspiring with introspection against loneliness’. It is a beautiful phrase. Alone can matter in art, it seems to me. Our own way of doing things also matters if we aspire to anything substantial.

 Of course if we decide we’re not pursuing the substantial, if we want formulas… well, yes other considerations (and their lists) will emerge, surface, appear, arise, signify…

 Share 
 Save 

 -->

 craft 
 Dan Brown 
 Elena Ferrante 
 Guy Gavriel Kay 
 Margaret Atwood 
 on writing 
 Roddy Doyle 
 rules for writing 
 Sherry Turkle 
 writing 
 writing advice 

 Guy Gavriel Kay

 Guy Gavriel Kay CM is a Canadian writer of fantasy fiction. Many of his novels are set in fictional realms that resemble real places during real historical periods, such as Constantinople during the reign of Justinian I or Spain during the time of El Cid. Those works are published and marketed as historical fantasy, although Kay has expressed a preference to avoid genre categorization. As of early 2016, Kay has published 12 novels and a book of poetry. His fiction has been translated into more than 25 languages.

 Lit Hub Daily 
 August 31 – September 4, 2026

 Do booksellers think this is the end of reading? 

 Emily Witt reports on Operation Metro Surge 

 Anne Carson having a “Rosalía hangover” 

 More News 

 The Best International Fiction of the Month: September 2026 September 4, 2026 by Molly Odintz 

 How Harry Kurnitz Conquered Hollywood, Broadway, and the Biblio-Mystery September 4, 2026 by Nicholas A. Basbanes 

 How the New T.J. English Reader Mines the Dark Soul of America September 4, 2026 by David Masciotra 

 The Best Reviewed Books of the Week 
 "A maximalist s banquet It is humane blood-flecked disturbing and sustaining James has written a…" 

 The Latest 

 Is Time Even Real? Does It Even Flow? 

 10 Literary Science Fiction and Fantasy Novels That Offer Hope for the Future 

 What Should You Read Next? Here Are the Best Reviewed Books of the Week 

 How Fordism and Fascism Gave Birth to Modern Car Culture 

 Literary Hub

 Created by Grove Atlantic and Electric Literature

 Masthead 

 About 

 Sign Up For Our Newsletters 

 How to Pitch Lit Hub 

 Advertisers: Contact Us 

 Privacy Policy 

 Support Lit Hub - Become A Member 

 If you buy books linked on our site, Lit Hub may earn a commission from Bookshop.org , whose fees support independent bookstores.