
 Reddit - Dive into anything 
 Advertisement
 Open menu
 r/Fantasy 
 Get app
 Log In 
 Get the Reddit app
 Scan this QR code to download the app now 
 Or check it out in the app stores 
 Home 
 Popular 
 Topics
 Gaming 
 Valheim 
 Genshin Impact 
 Minecraft 
 Pokimane 
 Halo Infinite 
 Call of Duty: Warzone 
 Path of Exile 
 Hollow Knight: Silksong 
 Escape from Tarkov 
 Watch Dogs: Legion 
 Sports 
 NFL 
 NBA 
 Megan Anderson 
 Atlanta Hawks 
 Los Angeles Lakers 
 Boston Celtics 
 Arsenal F.C. 
 Philadelphia 76ers 
 Premier League 
 UFC 
 Business 
 GameStop 
 Moderna 
 Pfizer 
 Johnson & Johnson 
 AstraZeneca 
 Walgreens 
 Best Buy 
 Novavax 
 SpaceX 
 Tesla 
 Crypto 
 Cardano 
 Dogecoin 
 Algorand 
 Bitcoin 
 Litecoin 
 Basic Attention Token 
 Bitcoin Cash 
 Television 
 The Real Housewives of Atlanta 
 The Bachelor 
 Sister Wives 
 90 Day Fiance 
 Wife Swap 
 The Amazing Race Australia 
 Married at First Sight 
 The Real Housewives of Dallas 
 My 600-lb Life 
 Last Week Tonight with John Oliver 
 Celebrity 
 Kim Kardashian 
 Doja Cat 
 Iggy Azalea 
 Anya Taylor-Joy 
 Jamie Lee Curtis 
 Natalie Portman 
 Henry Cavill 
 Millie Bobby Brown 
 Tom Hiddleston 
 Keanu Reeves 
 Animals and Pets 
 Anime 
 Art 
 Cars and Motor Vehicles 
 Crafts and DIY 
 Culture, Race, and Ethnicity 
 Ethics and Philosophy 
 Fashion 
 Food and Drink 
 History 
 Hobbies 
 Law 
 Learning and Education 
 Military 
 Movies 
 Music 
 Place 
 Podcasts and Streamers 
 Politics 
 Programming 
 Reading, Writing, and Literature 
 Religion and Spirituality 
 Science 
 Tabletop Games 
 Technology 
 Travel 
 Resources
 About Reddit 
 Advertise 
 Help 
 Communities 
 Rereddit 
 Topics 
 Blog 
 Careers 
 Press 
 Content Policy 
 Privacy Policy 
 User Agreement 
 Reddit, Inc. © 2023. All rights reserved. 
 Go to Fantasy
 r/Fantasy 
 r/Fantasy 
 r/Fantasy is the internet's largest discussion forum for the greater Speculative Fiction genre. Fans of fantasy, science fiction, horror, alt history, and more can all find a home with us. We welcome respectful dialogue related to speculative fiction in literature, games, film, and the wider world.
We ask all users help us create a welcoming environment by reporting posts/comments that do not follow the subreddit rules.
 Members 
 Online 
 • 
 by 
 joshua-bush 
 SPOILER 
 [Review] Tigana: A Misguided Masterpiece? 
 false
 This is the first book review I've written since, I dunno, middle school, but I was so struck by this book that I just couldn't get it out of my head. Feel free to give me constructive criticism on it, so that if I do decide to do more reviews in the future, they can be better. 
 Let me get the obvious out of the way.
 Tigana is an excellent book. That Kay is one of the most skilled writers of prose and most artful storytellers we have in our genre cannot reasonably be doubted. It is common to speak of fantasy stories as transporting the reader to a different world, or at least to a different time, and you would struggle to find another writer whose books approach this ideal any more closely.
 Kay’s Peninsula of the Palm is a land rich in history and culture, but Kay — obviously a lover of history — never bludgeons the reader with it, instead planting seeds early on, cultivating them carefully, and revealing them only at the most dramatic moment. There is a sense that he could lecture on the details of this world for hours, but instead he shows us only what is most interesting, what we are most hungry for.
 At its heart, this is a Romantic story, a grand adventure driven forward by larger-than-life heroes and villains, but the less heroic have their say as well, often to great and terrible effect. It is mostly through the eyes of these more humble characters that we perceive the moments on which the great triumphs and tragedies turn, and it is in contrast to them that the great strengths and flaws of the bigger players stand out all the more starkly.
 That Tigana is a work of sublime storytelling should come as no surprise to anyone familiar with Kay’s work, but there is more to it than that. Any well-written work of fiction cannot help but reveal something about the author’s understanding of the world and the way it works.
 So what ideas lay at the heart of Tigana?
 One obvious theme is memory , especially the role it plays in how we form our identities. A closely related theme, and the one I want to talk about, is nationalism , which Google helpfully defines as identification with one's own nation and support for its interests, especially to the exclusion or detriment of the interests of other nations . In particular, Tigana brings up interesting questions about the conflict between national interests and individual interests, as well as questions about the scope at which nationalistic identification applies.
 Spoilers lie ahead.
 In the prologue, we find an army of desperate defenders poised to make a final stand against an all-conquering invader. Fully expecting to be slaughtered, they content themselves in the knowledge that the name of their nation, Tigana, will go down in history as one of great pride and courage. We are inclined to think of this kind of willing self-destruction as heroic — putting the reputation of their nation ahead of their own lives is a kind of noble self-sacrifice. What they did not account for, however, was the tyrant’s sorcery.
 Far from allowing this sacrifice to echo in history, Brandin the tyrant magically expunges Tigana from existence — both from the memories of anyone who wasn’t born there, and from the language itself. This is portrayed as the most vicious retribution, far more harmful than the levying of crippling taxes or the pillaging of the countryside and cities. Brandin’s sorcery leaves the survivors of Tigana without an identity, and it is against this crime that our heroes struggle.
 But it is not only against the tyrants that they struggle. It is also against those who do not share in our heroes’ belief that individual interests should be subsumed beneath the interests of nations. This can be seen most starkly in the form of Erlein, a wizard and roaming troubadour who is seemingly quite content with the current state of affairs in the Palm. The roads, he says, are safer under the rule of the tyrants than they were before, and he is as free as he has ever been. For Alessan, the exiled prince of Tigana, however, freedom is impossible without ‘mastery of our own peninsula’. The word mastery is particularly crucial, as Alessan effectively enslaves Erlein to his cause.
 It is in Alessan’s conversations with Erlein that his convictions are articulated most clearly. When Erlein protests against the injustice of his enslavement, Alessan replies that as a member of the ruling family of Tigana, his duties to the realm supersede the rules of ordinary morality. He takes no pleasure in binding the wizard against his will, but in the struggle to restore Tigana’s name, almost any action can be justified. Once you buy into the idea that such injustices can be committed so long as they bring great benefit to the nation, how much easier is it to stomach the notion of committing injustices for smaller, or even illusory benefits to the nation?
 But it is not merely to restore Tigana that Alessan and our heroes struggle. We are shown again and again that the history of the Palm is one of petty but bloody wars between the ancient provinces, much like the Italian peninsula it is based on. Alessan wants to unite the Palm into one nation. Again, our natural inclination is to find this a noble cause. To widen the boundaries of national identity from that of a province to an entire region is to simultaneously shrink the scope of otherness , to reduce the range of people against which grave violence can be committed with impunity.
 Setting aside the thorny issue of whether such a cause justifies the enslavement of wizards, would such a shift really tend to reduce violence? We know the misery and slaughter that a united Germany wrought in both of the Great Wars, and we know the terrible role that a fascist Italy played in both the Spanish Civil War and World War Two. It may well be that such national unification reduces violence internally, but it is unclear whether or not the larger nation’s greater capacity for violence against other nations outweighs these benefits, when one takes a global perspective.
 The nationalism of Tigana, which at first blush seems at once heroic in its resistance against outside invaders and progressive in its vision of a united Palm, falters under deeper scrutiny. It cleaves families in two, claims the lives of innocents, and enslaves the unwilling to its cause. Kay does not shy away from showing us the costs of his heroes ambitions, and he does not fail to give eloquent voice to its opposition, principly in the form of the individualist Erlein. But, in an almost inexplicable turn, Erlein willingly joins with Alessan, suggesting the ultimate righteousness of the cause of nationalism.
 But couldn’t a fantasy story be more bold? It’s easy enough to find stirring books of courageous rebels and patriots oustering foreign tyrants and unifying fractured nations, but perhaps these stories miss the mark. Perhaps what is really needed is not the broadening of national identity, but the annihilation of it. It may be difficult to envision such a world, but therein lies the beauty of speculative fiction.
 What would that book look like, I wonder?
 You can also find this review on my website, https://joshua-bush.com/tigana-a-misguided-masterpiece/ , where I'll probably be posting more book reviews eventually. 
 Read more
 Archived post. New comments cannot be posted and votes cannot be cast.
 More posts you may like
 