Subverting Historical Cause & Effect: Generation of Mythic
Biographies in Caves of Qud
Jason Grinblat

C. Brian Bucklew

Freehold Games
Berkeley, California
jason@freeholdgames.com

Freehold Games
Walkerton, Indiana
bbucklew@freeholdgames.com

ABSTRACT
Procedurally generating history is a daunting task. The process of
proceduralization requires codifying relationships into rules, and
real-life histories are tangled networks of people, places, and events
whose complexities obscure their relational mechanics. The task
is further complicated by the fact that history serves a rhetorical
function, i.e., historical accounts are used to promote certain cultural narratives that can belie the facts they purport to narrativize
(this function is routinely neglected in video games’ treatment of
history). This paper describes a novel approach for procedurally
generating coherent biographical narratives for historical figures,
as implemented in our far-future roguelike game Caves of Qud. Using a state machine and replacement grammar as procedural tools,
we construct a system that subverts the logic of cause and effect
in favor of a process that first generates historical events and rationalizes them ex post facto.

CCS CONCEPTS
•Applied computing → Computer games; Arts and humanities;
•Computing methodologies → Modeling and simulation;

KEYWORDS
Qualitative procedural generation; history; myth; narrative generation
ACM Reference format:
Jason Grinblat and C. Brian Bucklew . 2017. Subverting Historical Cause &
Effect: Generation of Mythic Biographies in Caves of Qud. In Proceedings
of FDG’17, Hyannis, MA, USA, August 14-17, 2017, 7 pages.
DOI: 10.1145/3102071.3110574

1

INTRODUCTION

Procedural generation in games continues to transcend its origins
as a tool to create physical spaces and veer into the qualitative
realms of history, religion, language, and culture [8]. Simulation
genre paragon Dwarf Fortress [1] already features an extensive historical simulation with many interesting results [5]. But there’s a
distinction to be made between history as a process and history as
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
FDG’17, Hyannis, MA, USA
© 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
978-1-4503-5319-9/17/08…$15.00
DOI: 10.1145/3102071.3110574

an artifact. The former can be conceptualized as the playing out
of rules and relationships that continually produce the present. To
simulate this process, we might seek to reproduce its logic. On the
other hand, the latter is a constituent of the present, something we
engage with through a contemporary lens and whose complexities
may be obscured by that flattening of perspective. Only historical
accounts are accessible to us in the present, and the further back
we look, the greater our uncertainty becomes about their veracity. To generate this type of history—that is, to generate historical
accounts—we might also seek to recreate the logic that produced
it, or we might invent a new logic that reproduces it altogether.
In this paper, we present an approach for procedurally generating historical and mythic narratives that circumvents the recreation of historical logic in favor of a process of historical rationalization. Our system first decides that a particular historical event
will occur, then it rationalizes a cause based on the states of the
historical entities at play. The concept is related to the narrative
principle of Schrödinger’s Gun, which states that a fictional world
is constrained only by what’s been revealed to the audience, and
work done with plan-based narrative generation to mediate resolution when player actions create conflicts [11]. Instead of using
rationalization to account for player agency, however, we use it to
produce a variety of curated historical events without having to
simulate their underlying logic.
We situate our approach among the constellation of works that
simulate history, explore its rhetorical function, and use replacement grammars for qualitative procedural generation. In particular, both Dwarf Fortress and Bad News [12] take a deeply simulative
approach to history generation. Though it doesn’t employ procedural generation, Opera Omnia [9] argues that from the perspective of the present, historical logic is malleable and serves political
ends. Finally, Voyageur [4] makes extensive use of replacement
grammars to describe extraterrestrial landscapes, biomes, and cultures while maintaining a consistent voice.
We begin by establishing the context and introducing our farfuture roguelike game, Caves of Qud [6], in which we implemented
this system. We articulate the design goals that motivated our particular approach, and we describe the resultant system in some
detail, including its interaction and generation models. Then we
discuss the system’s salient features, including the lack of expected
causality, the parameterization of historical events, the emergence
of coherent narratives, event branching, and the use of a replacement grammar to generate historical descriptions. We continue
by illustrating how the generated histories impact the game world
and the experience of its players. Finally, we discuss the system’s
successes and the possibility of future work.

FDG’17, August 14-17, 2017, Hyannis, MA, USA

2

CAVES OF QUD

Caves of Qud is a science fantasy roguelike game currently in development by the authors. It’s set thousands of years in the future
among the geologically reclaimed ruins of a vast arcology. While
we identify Caves of Qud with the post-apocalypse genre, the game
complicates the genre’s usual preoccupation with the aesthetics of
decay by focusing as much of its attention on the richness of the descendent cultures as the departed ones. It draws inspiration from a
variety of sources, including pen & paper RPG Gamma World, “Dying Earth” genre fiction like Clark Ashton Smith’s Zothique and
Gene Wolfe’s The Book of the New Sun, the subversive works of
New Wave sci-fi authors like Ursula K. Le Guin, historical texts
like Edward Gibbon’s The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire,
and roguelike predecessors Dwarf Fortress and Ancient Domains of
Mystery (ADOM).
We use a variety of techniques to construct the world of Caves
of Qud. In many ways, the game is a hybrid of handcrafted and procedural systems. In contrast to most roguelikes, it features a static,
handcrafted narrative of the sort you might expect to encounter in
a traditional open-world RPG. The world map is also static, but individual areas are highly procedural and vary in detail from game
to game. Many physical systems are simulated, environments and
bodies are mutable, and there’s a rich social and political landscape
for players to navigate.
Caves of Qud’s themes are manifold. By letting players customize characters via a system of body and mind-altering mutations, it aims to explore our relationship with our morphology. By
procedurally situating players in a variety of circumstances with
technological artifacts, sometimes as their masters and sometimes
their victims, it aims to depict our complicated interdependence
with technology. Most relevantly to this paper, by embedding players in a layered labyrinth of lost and contemporary civilizations, it
argues that our insights into the past are always filtered through
the lens of the present.
Development on Caves of Qud began in 2007, and in 2010 we
released a freeware beta version as Freehold Games, LLC. In July
2015, Caves of Qud launched on Steam Early Access1 . At the time
of this paper’s authoring, over 30,000 Steam users have purchased
Caves of Qud, steamdb.info ranks it as the 44th highest-rated game
on Steam2 , and Steam lists it as the highest-rated post-apocalyptic
game on their platform3 .
On December 23, 2016, we released an update that included the
history generation system discussed in this paper. On May 5, 2017,
we released a further update that lets players browse historical
texts they’ve discovered via an in-game journal. The game’s full
release is slated for 2018.

3

MOTIVATION AND DESIGN GOALS

The idea that the present filters our insights into the past played
a major role in motivating our design for a generative history system. In particular, we were primarily interested in players’ engagement with history as an artifact—that is—as a diegetic experience
1

http://store.steampowered.com/app/333640/Caves_of_Qud/

2 https://steamdb.info/stats/gameratings/

3 http://store.steampowered.com/search/?sort_by=Reviews_DESC&tags=3835

Jason Grinblat and C. Brian Bucklew
in the game world’s present. Accordingly, we didn’t aim to explicitly simulate historical logic, just as most procedural terrain generators don’t aim to simulate water erosion. This approach stands
in contrast to genre exemplar Dwarf Fortress, which allows players
to interrupt its simulated history at any point to start play, and so
must remain agnostic as to what’s past and what’s present.
Put another way, our goal was to generate history in order to
simulate historical accounts. These accounts would be relayed through
cultural artifacts or diegetic history texts, and like their real-life
counterparts, would originate from inherently limited perspectives
and represent particular points of view.
Caves of Qud’s state at the time of this system’s development
provided several constraints that guided our design. For one, because the system would serve in a subordinate position to the major systems already at play, we couldn’t devote the resources to research and develop a generative system whose complexity matched
the historical and cultural simulations of qualitative PCG exemplars Dwarf Fortress and Ultima Ratio Regum [7]. Secondly, the generated histories would have to mesh with the handcrafted lore and
narratives that had already been developed for the game. These
two constraints lead to the decision to focus the generated histories around the mythic lives of five significant rulers—called sultans—from a diegetic age known as the sultanate, in which one of
Qud’s early advanced cultures thrived and before which much of
the handwritten lore took place.
From this point, we decided on some aesthetic principles. Firstly,
we wanted to generate structured text that matched the voice of the
game’s handwritten text. Secondly, because we highly value novelty in our output, we sought to avoid prescribing a morphology for
the sultans’ lives. That is, we didn’t set out to generate life events
along a narrative arc, preferring instead to give the generator room
to trace atypical life paths for the sultans and allowing players to
employ apophenia, the human tendency to perceive patterns, in
their interpretations. This last point was especially important to
us. Players would be engaging with the sultan narratives in a game
world full of rich narrative context. The sultans would be part of
a cultural tapestry that included the ruined environments of the
diegetic past, the NPCs and cultures of the present, and the aggregated experiences of their myriad player characters. Each of these
would act as a cultural touchstone that colors their interpretations
of the sultans’ lives. This would allow us to aim for evocative biographical narratives—rather than meticulously detailed ones—that
leverage our players’ apophenia. Because we intended to generate
several sultans per instantiation of the game world, and because,
as part of a tertiary game system, the details of any individual sultan’s life would have a limited effect on the player’s critical path,
we afforded ourselves this freedom.
Finally, in order to confer both a characteristic personality and
a mythic quality to each sultan, we decided to assign each one an
archetypal unit of culture we call a domain. Types of domains include culturally resonant, physical objects and phenomena such as
glass, jewels, ice, and stars, as well as abstract ideas such as might,
scholarship, and chance. Sultans would be assigned a single domain
when they were initialized but could accrue others over the course
their lives (between 0 and 2 in practice).

Subverting Historical Cause & Effect: Generation of Mythic Biographies in Caves of Qud FDG’17, August 14-17, 2017, Hyannis, MA, USA

Figure 2: Several gospels from a sultan’s life appear in the
player’s journal.

Figure 1: A shrine depicting a historical event from the life
of Uumasp II, a procedurally generated sultan of ancient
Qud. (©Freehold Games)

4 GENERATED HISTORIES
4.1 Gospels and Cultural Artifacts
When players start a new game of Caves of Qud, the world-creation
engine generates a unique history in five periods, each one centered around a generated sultan. Each period is comprised of several historical events, and for each event, a descriptive text snippet is generated. Internally, we call these single-event text snipFigure 3: Flow diagram for the generation of a sultan’s hispets gospels. Histories are generated one gospel at a time, and so
tory.
gospels form the basic discrete unit of history in Caves of Qud. In
the system’s current implementation, each historical event manifests a single gospel.
4.2 Generative Model
During play, players engage with the generated history via gospels
Fundamentally, our system models history as the interplay between
shared with them by NPCs or appearing in the descriptions of cultural artifacts—namely, shrines, paintings, and engravings—encountered historical entities—places, items, and sultans represented as data
in the game world. These cultural artifacts are generated dynamstructures—and historical events that modify the properties of those
ically as players explore new areas, and each one depicts a single
entities. In order to engender coherence, the events themselves are
gospel from a sultan’s life, chosen randomly from the generated
parameterized by the properties of existing historical entities, inhistory. Figure 1 shows an example of a sultan shrine, including
cluding the very ones they modify.
the gospel for the historical event it depicts.
At a high level, the system generates an individual sultan’s hisPlayers can encounter these historical snippets in any order. As
tory via the following process, illustrated in Figure 3. First, it inthey do, they are inscribed in a journal and sorted chronologically
stantiates a historical entity that represents the sultan in an initial
(see Figure 2). Players can swap snippets with NPCs through a
state described by a few core properties (name, pronouns, birth
custom of cultural exchange called the water ritual that’s mediated
year, birth region, location in birth region, and domain). Then, it
by a currency of reputation with various in-game factions. Over
randomly chooses a life event—for example, sieges a city—from a
time, players accrue more and more of the gospels from a sultan’s
pool of such events. Based in part on the sultan’s state and in part
life, and a biographical narrative coheres.
on random branching, the event resolves an outcome, and then

FDG’17, August 14-17, 2017, Hyannis, MA, USA
Number
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

8
9
10

11
12
13

Jason Grinblat and C. Brian Bucklew

Gospel
(sultan initialization; name set to Antixerpur, pronouns set to she/her, birth region set to the Philosophers’ Quarter of
Shaneruk, and domain set to ice)
At daybreak on the first day of summer, a geologist found a babe with a freezing icicle in each hand outside her dig site. She
and her fellow geologists adopted the babe and named her Antixerpur.
In 230, Antixerpur assassinated the sultan of Qud over an ordinance prohibiting the practice of encasing things in ice. She
won and ascended to the throne. She was 21 years old.
Acting against the prohibition on the practice of taking a spiritual trek through the tundra, Antixerpur led an army to the
gates of Minekesh. She sacked Minekesh and persecuted its citizens, forcing them to change its name to Antixerpurplatz.
Acting against the prohibition on the practice of encasing things in ice, Antixerpur led an army to the gates of Darchesh.
She sacked Darchesh and slaughtered its citizens, forcing them to change its name to Antixerpurabad.
After treating with cats, Antixerpur convinced them to help her found a dig site in the Philosophers’ Quarter of Shaneruk
for the purpose of excavating ancient blocks of ice. They named it the Freezing Dig Site.
At the Battle of Old Teggash, Antixerpur fought to liberate cats. She wielded a frosty hammer with such prowess, that it
became forever known as Frostycus Catsfriend.
Deep in the wilds of the Philosophers’ Quarter of Shaneruk, Antixerpur stumbled upon a clan of bears performing a secret ritual. Because of her reputation for murdering someone with a dagger made of rime, they furiously rebuked her and
declared her a villain to their kind.
While traveling near Old Teggash in the Philosophers’ Quarter of Shaneruk, Antixerpur was captured by bandits. She languished in captivity for 7 years, eventually escaping to Urashur.
While wandering around the Philosophers’ Quarter of Shaneruk, Antixerpur discovered the Shrine at Mailimrod. There
she befriended highly entropic beings and calculated the distance to a nearby star.
In 300, Antixerpur won a decisive victory against the combined forces of the Jewelers’ Quarter of Biilitum at the bloody
Battle of Tappa Cave, though she lost her prized Frostycus Catsfriend during the course of the conflict. As a result of the
battle, Tappa Cave was so devastated by icy winds that it was renamed the Freezing Marsh.
In 302, Antixerpur won a decisive victory against the combined forces of Suppir at the bloody Battle of Miarravah. As a
result of the battle, Miarravah was so devastated by icy winds that it was renamed Freezingmoor.
Deep in the Historians’ Quarter of Tunepad, Antixerpur discovered Tarchenna. There she befriended mysterious
strangers and dug into the earth’s strata.
In 306, Antixerpur, the Untitled, died of natural causes. She was 97 years old.

Table 1: Text representing a change in state is bolded. Text generated according to existing state is underlined. Text generated
via random branching or synonymization is italicized.
it modifies the sultan’s properties and the properties of any nonsultan historical entities that are consequently affected. A gospel
for the event is generated via a Tracery-like [3] replacement grammar whose rules map sultan properties to text fragments for a variety of narrative circumstances. As a result of the event, some
global properties of the history are also updated, such as the current year. The system then serially chooses and processes about
twelve more events in the same fashion, each one parameterized
by the sultan’s state at the start of the event, and each one transitioning the sultan to a new state by the end of the event. Finally,
if the sultan is still alive, the system selects a generic death event
that results in the sultan’s death. Taken in aggregate, the gospels
for the events in the sultan’s life form their biography.

4.3

Causality

Note an important characteristic of the system: there’s no logic behind the choice of events. Historical cause and effect aren’t intrinsic. Events themselves are chosen at random, though their gospels
often profess causes. These rationalizations are generated inside
the events and are mediated by the sultan’s state. As an example,
consider the sieges a city event, whose gospel starts with the following pattern:

Acting against #injustice#, #sultanName# led an
army to the gates of #location#.4
When determining how to replace #injustice#, the event examines
the sultan’s properties for meaningful state. If, for instance, the
sultan has any allied animal factions—say, frogs—#injustice# may
be replaced with “the persecution of frogs”. In this way, the event’s
effect precedes its cause. When the sultan’s state fails to produce
a suitable cause, the event can even create one by, say, altering
the sultan’s allied factions property to include frogs and performing the substitution described above. In these cases there’s a full
reversal of the expected causality; the effect causes the cause.

4.4

Parameterization and Narrative Coherence

Though there’s no intrinsic causality to the series of events in a sultan’s life, the event parameterization promotes player-interpreted
causalities that give rise to coherent biographical narratives. The
sultan’s shared state acts as a glue that holds the disjointed events
together. Domains play an especially important role in the parameterization of historical events. In the context of the replacement
4 This example uses Tracery’s syntax.

Subverting Historical Cause & Effect: Generation of Mythic Biographies in Caves of Qud FDG’17, August 14-17, 2017, Hyannis, MA, USA
grammar, almost all gospel patterns include symbols that represent domains, meaning that once the replacement is complete, the
generated text frequently includes narrative references to the sultan’s domains. The effect is the production of a narrative coupling
between these domains and the sultan’s personality. The domains
act as narrative threads that tie together the events of a sultan’s
life.
Consider the typical example in Table 1, which includes the
full set of gospels for the life of the sultan Antixerpur with text
fragments marked up according to how they were generated. In
gospel 5, Antixerpur treats with cats and convinces them to help
her found an excavation site. Then, in gospel 6, she liberates cats at
the Battle of Old Teggash. Though Antixerpur’s rendezvous with
cats played no role in the system’s decision to have her initiate
the Battle of Old Teggash, the gospel claims otherwise. When put
to the task of rationalizing the battle, the event logic repurposed
Antixerpur’s affiliation with cats, which had just been created as
a result of gospel 5. With the aid of apophenia, players can draw
narrative conclusions about the deal Antixerpur struck with cats.
Because of the limited number of sultan properties shared across
many events, emergent micro-narratives like this one are quite
common.
Antixerpur’s domain of ice, chosen during the pre-historic initialization step, was also repeatedly incarnated in the gospels, coupling her with the archetypal phenomenon. Miraculously, she’s
found as a babe with icicles in her hands (gospel 1). This occurs
as the result of a birth event that functions as an orphaned hero
mytheme, or discrete unit of myth [10]. Early in her life, she fights
against the prohibition on ice-associated practices: encasing things
in ice (gospels 2 and 4) and taking spiritual treks through the tundra (gospel 3). Later, she founds a dig site to excavate blocks of
ice (gospel 5), wields a frosty hammer during a momentous battle
(gospel 6), and historically devastates two sites with icy winds in
her wake (gospels 10 and 11). These ice-flavored text fragments
are manifested by the replacement grammar according to Antixerpur’s initialized domain, and collectively they act as narrative
force that pushes through the aggregated events of her life.

4.5

Event Branching and Text Replacement

To understand the inner workings of the system, it’s instructive to
examine how an individual event’s logic plays out, updating state
and generating a gospel via the replacement grammar during its
resolution. Consider gospel 2 from Table 1, reproduced below.
In 230, Antixerpur assassinated the sultan of Qud
over an ordinance prohibiting the practice of encasing things in ice.
She won and ascended to the throne. She was 21 years
old.

This gospel was generated by a challenge sultan event. This event’s
logic contains a significant branch depending on whether the (wouldbe) sultan has already become the sultan at the start of the event.
If they have, then the event generates a gospel about a challenger
who defies the sultan for some generated reason. If they have not,
as is the case with Antixerpur at the start of gospel 2, then the
would-be sultan assumes the role of the challenger. As the challenger, the would-be sultan always wins and takes the crown, and
their state is updated accordingly.

Let’s look at how the event rationalized Antixerpur’s challenge.
Each event contains logic controlling the types of properties that
could determine its outcome and get reflected in its gospel text.
For the challenge sultan event, the candidate properties are allied
factions, profession, and domains. The event first randomly determines which property to use, rerolling if it selects a property for
which the sultan doesn’t have a value. For example, if allied factions is chosen but the sultan has no allied factions, the result is
rerolled. If no valid value is found, some events create new values by altering one of the candidate properties, thereby inventing
a cause (as described in 4.3). In the case of the challenge sultan
event, the value instead defaults to domains, which is guaranteed
to have at least one value since a domain is set for the sultan in the
initialization step. For gospel 2, the value is ice.
The pattern of the gospel segment representing challenge sultan’s rationalization differs based on which property is chosen. For
domains, the pattern is “over an ordinance prohibiting the practice
of #practice#”. To replace #practice# with text, the event looks up
the appropriate grammar rule, stored in a static, nested JSON file,
by using a query language we developed for this purpose. Within
the grammar, there are a variety of rules that map keys representing narrative concepts to arrays of text fragments for each domain;
practices is one such key. Put another way, each domain’s JSON
representation contains a practices rule. In our query language,
#practice# takes the following form:
< domains.sultan$domains[random].practices.!random >
In the case of gospel 2, the syntax domains.sultan$domains[random]
resolves to ice. The resultant transformed query indicates where
to find the appropriate practices rule in the JSON structure, with
the !random syntax signifying a random choice from among that
rule’s array of text fragments. For gospel 2, the query referenced
the practices rule contained in ice’s JSON object and randomly selected the text “encasing things in ice”. Other possible values included “ice sculpting” and “taking a spiritual trek through the tundra”. If Antixerpur were associated with a different domain—say,
time—#practice# would instead be replaced with a random text fragment from the practices rule contained in time’s JSON object. In
that case, the query would have returned a text fragment such as
“watching sand sift through an hourglass”.
The grammar file contains rules for several sultan properties in
addition to general rules that produce curated synonyms for common words and phrases in the game’s voice. Query statements can
be embedded in the grammar rules themselves, enabling arbitrary
levels of nesting and allowing us to generate the variety of text
seen in Antixerpur’s gospels.

4.6

Impact on the Generated World

Although the primary means of engagement with the generated
histories in Caves of Qud is knowledge exchange with NPCs and
the examination of cultural artifacts, historical events also shape
the generated game world. Places that the sultans visit are modeled as historical entities and instantiated as historic sites during
world generation (see Figure 4). Items named during the course of
life events, such Frostycus Catsfriend, are also modeled as historical entities. If a sultan leaves a named item at a location as the

FDG’17, August 14-17, 2017, Hyannis, MA, USA

Figure 4: A historic site generated in the world history, instantiated in the game world, and procedurally described.

result of a life event, as Antixerpur lost Frostycus Catsfriend during the Battle of Tappa Cave (gospel 10), that item is instantiated
according to its historical properties at the appropriate historic site.
In the case of Frostycus Catsfriend, the instantiated item is a hammer that deals frost damage and grants bonus reputation with cats.
Players engage with the histories through cultural artifacts that
tell the sultans’ stories, and this historical knowledge acts as a vector for players to find and engage with the material remnants of
the sultans’ lives.

5

EVALUATION

Because the system described in this paper has been in the hands
of players for six months, we’re in a unique position to evaluate
its effectiveness, both in terms of our own assessment and the responses of our players. The fact that the system plays a subordinate
role complicates any quantitative analysis of game sales or active
players, so we stick to a mostly qualitative approach. However, as
a brief note, we did experience a significant uptick both of sales
and active players following the update that introduced the system. With some confidence, we attribute most of the uptick to the
fact that we crossed a review threshold into the “Overwhelmingly
Positive” category on Steam, probably increasing our baseline visibility. That being said, the update was likely responsible—at least
in part—for the spate of reviews that pushed us into the new category.
Now for the qualitative analysis. As for the goal of producing
novel output in the voice of the game’s handwritten text, we believe the system is quite successful. An illustrative example is the
child crowned sultan in the gospel of Figure 1. In testing our output, we were surprised by the phenomenon of children accomplishing extraordinary feats, a consequence enabled by the lack of a
prescribed ordering or categorization of events. Fortuitously, extraordinary children fit into the mythic mold we wanted to cast for
sultans. In fact, the last line of this gospel, in which the sultan’s
age is revealed, was added after we noted the phenomenon and realized it would make a powerful narrative impression on players.
In particular, the replacement grammar was remarkably successful at enabling us to generate text in the game’s voice. Caves
of Qud relies heavily on its corpus of text—over 40,000 words—to

Jason Grinblat and C. Brian Bucklew
establish its voice, and via the replacement rules we were able to
codify our diction and repackage it procedurally to great effect.
By our evaluation, players reacted positively to individual gospels.
As of the authoring of this paper, gospels are featured in 14 of the
150 most popular screenshots uploaded to the Caves of Qud steam
community page in the last six months5 . Several screenshots featuring other aspects of the system, such as historic site or item descriptions, also appear in the top 150. Considering the subordinate
role the system plays, we believe these results point to a positive
reception.
As for the goal of producing narrative coherence, we believe
the system is successful, but the results are less definitive for two
main reasons. Firstly, we only recently added the in-game journal to track and juxtapose multiple gospels. Before this update,
players would have to mentally juxtapose several gospels from a
sultan’s life for the narrative to cohere. Secondly, by the nature
of the game’s permadeath mechanic, only a small subset of player
characters persist long enough to accrue several gospels from a single sultan. This means fewer candidate players to manifest their
approval or disapproval.
Our debugging tools afford us a perspective unavailable to our
players, namely, the ability to generate several sultans quickly and
read through their gospels. Our satisfaction with the degree of narrative coherence can largely be attributed to time spent honing it
through these tools. However, it’s worth noting that no players
have explicitly expressed dissatisfaction with the coherence of the
generated narratives. Though this fact’s contribution to an argument of positive reception may be limited, it does stand in contrast
to some of our other procedural systems, whose results were explicitly criticized by our players. Finally, we include a reference to one
standout player interpretation of a sultan’s life [2]. The full text is
omitted here due to its length, but it serves as an exceptional example of narrative coherence resulting from evocative output and
the employment of apophenia.

6

FUTURE WORK

A few extensions to the system are obvious to us. Most immediately, the variety of output would be improved by expanding the
set of domains (currently numbering ten) and the suite of historical events (currently numbering nineteen). In fact, the system was
designed with this modularity in mind, and we’ve added new domains and events since the system’s release. Secondly, the core
presentation of history could be expanded beyond biographies by
introducing events that affect other historical entities, such as locations and items, and generate corresponding gospels. This approach could be employed to construct a richer representation of
history that extends beyond the lives of a few storied rulers. Thirdly,
in further exploring the idea of history’s rhetorical function, events
could generate multiple, conflicting gospels from different perspectives. The history of a city’s siege, for example, might read quite
differently from the perspective of the sieged as it would from the
perspective of the sieging party.
More broadly, we hope this approach gives a new perspective on
historical modeling to both researchers and practitioners seeking
5 http://steamcommunity.com/app/333640/screenshots/?p=1&browsefilter=

trendsixmonths

Subverting Historical Cause & Effect: Generation of Mythic Biographies in Caves of Qud FDG’17, August 14-17, 2017, Hyannis, MA, USA
to generate histories. By privileging historical accounts over the
processes that produce them, the designers of history generation
systems gain access to a whole space of generative methods. In particular, the technique of using existing state to rationalize narrative
events after the fact may have application across the landscape of
qualitative procedural generation.

7

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We’d like to thank Gillian Smith for her preliminary review of this
paper and Adam Summerville for his formatting guidance.

REFERENCES
[1] Tarn Adams and Zach Adams. 2006. Slaves to Armok: God of Blood Chapter II:
Dwarf Fortress. Bay 12 Games.
[2] Angry Diplomat. 2017. Caves of Qud: My Axe Turtle’s Tongue Rotted
After Time in Golgotha’s Cloaca. (2017). https://forums.somethingawful.
com/showthread.php?threadid=3739217&pagenumber=141&perpage=40#
post471677689
[3] Kate Compton. 2015. Tracery. (2015). https://github.com/galaxykate/tracery
[4] Bruno Dias. 2017. Voyageur. Failbetter Games.
[5] Joshua L. Diaz. 2009. Dwarf Fortress gathers at the statue and attends a party.
(2009). http://dspace.mit.edu/handle/1721.1/54502#files-area
[6] Jason Grinblat and Charles B. Bucklew. 2010. Caves of Qud. Freehold Games.
[7] Mark R. Johnson. 2012. Ultim Ratio Regum.
[8] Mark R. Johnson. 2016. Towards Qualitative Procedural Generation. Computation Creativity and Games Workshop 2016.
[9] Stephen Lavelle. 2009. Opera Omnia. Increpare Games.
[10] Claude Lévi-Strauss. 1955. The Structural Study of Myth. Journal of American
Folklore, Vol. 68, No. 278.
[11] Justus Robertson and Robert M. Young. 2014. Finding Schrödinger’s Gun. Proceedings of Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digitial Entertainment.
[12] Ben Samuel, James O. Ryan, and Adam J. Summerville. 2015. Bad News. Expressive Intelligence Studio.

