Modelling Cultural, Religious and Political Affiliation in
Artificial Intelligence Decision-Making
Mark R Johnson1
Abstract. This paper examines cutting-edge work in the
generation of individual AI actors who behave according to
procedurally-generated social, cultural, political and religious
norms. Based on the author’s ongoing development of the game
Ultima Ratio Regum (URR) – built with a hand-made game
engine in Python – the paper explores three core aspects of
URR’s AI actors. Firstly, the generation of a full world
population of AI actors and ensuring that they are distributed
appropriately and logically for a culturally-varied world;
secondly the procedural generation of densely complex religious,
political, cultural and socially normative values to assign to these
AI actors, and how their decision-making processes are
determined by these allegiances; and thirdly and lastly how this
game, among other objectives, seeks to forward what I term
“qualitative AI” where culture and society, not pathfinding and
“optimal” decision-making, are the primary determinants of
behaviour. The paper concludes with a summary of both these
three points and the future plans for the game’s AI systems. 1

1 INTRODUCTION
This exploratory paper is based on the author’s own
work, having been for the last three years the sole developer of
the roguelike game “Ultima Ratio Regum” (URR). Set during
the Scientific Revolution, almost everything within the game is
procedurally generated – this ranges from the “macro” level of
2000+ years of detailed history, historical figures, empires and
nations, religions, wars, dozens of vast cities and a vast world
population of procedurally-generated non-player characters
(NPCs) unique to each playthrough, to the “micro” level of
individual towns and cities, individual NPCs, specific buildings
and items, and flora and fauna. Inspired by the works of
Umberto Eco and Jorge Luis Borges, the game is an exploration
of a number of themes including historiography and the writing
of the historical record, metanarrative and political ideology, and
the philosophical idealism of George Berkeley. Most crucially
the work aims to specifically integrate this “thematic” content
with the game’s mechanics, rather than leaving such content as
“background” or “lore” that the player can take or leave. Much
of this will be achieved through the use of innovative AI actors
currently being developed at time of writing. Every aspect of the
behaviour of these actors – their greetings, their insults, their
dress, their farewells, their behaviour in challenging situations,
their reaction to those from other nations, and much else – is
procedurally generated, and fore-grounded in their decisionmaking algorithms. It is these actors and the roles they play
which this paper focuses upon, and the break they represent from
1

Science & Technology Studies Unit, Dept. of Sociology, Univ. of
York, YO10 5DD, UK. Email: mrj503@york.ac.uk.

much traditional AI research into decision-making optimization
[1] and pathfinding [2].

2 PROCEDURAL GENERATION AND
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Firstly, the paper explores the procedural content
generation of the game, and how this affects the AI actors. An
“average” generated URR world has a population of
approximately ten million NPCs. Naturally for such numbers,
the management of these NPCs takes place at a number of
different “levels” in the game depending on the player’s
activities – many of the NPCs are “abstracted out” at any given
time. The game also contains a system which identifies the most
“important” NPCs and ensures that their actions and decisions
are always simulated regardless of the player’s location (roughly
500-700 NPCs on average are considered “important” by the
game’s algorithm at any one time, and their actions are carried
out constantly, unless one falls below the metric for
“importance”, at which point that actor is then abstracted out
once more). NPCs within the game vary according to a
significant range of variables: according to their race, language,
cultural background and cultural norms, sex and gender, age,
political alignment, religious beliefs (if any), national
citizenship, and interests and agendas. A rough calculation
currently suggests that there are over 1 trillion possible AI actors
that may be procedurally generated within the game world who
will, crucially, behave differently according to the social and
cultural context within which they are generated. The agendas of
these actors (returned to later in this abstract) are largely
dependent on their cultural and religious backgrounds, leading to
a densely complex world within which the player will uncover
information about religious feuds, cultural differences, longstanding war bitterness, language difficulties, and many similar
concepts of a sort not normally explored in games. The paper
will therefore examine the generation of the AI actors from a
creative standpoint; the management of so many AIs from a
technical standpoint; and the integration of the two into a
culturally and socially variegated and dense world.

and therefore strongly differentiate between all the procedurallygenerated AI actors in a given instance of the game. Equally, the
greater the knowledge the player has attained about the world’s
culture, the more able the player is to make their wishes felt
within the game world.

3 TOWARDS QUALITATIVE AI

Figure 1. Example of Generated Political Divisions
Secondly, the paper explores how this content
generation creates a deeply complex environmental simulation,
arguably one of the most detailed and dense generated worlds
ever created in a game. As above, the agendas of these AIs are
dependent on the procedural generation of their origins. A
generated URR world contains approximately forty civilizations
(Figure 1) designed to emulate the massive variety in real-world
civilizations from this historical era. Some may be nomadic
desert peoples who travel in lengthy caravan routes across the
world, or hunter-gatherer tribes in close to the Arctic Circle who
construct their buildings from ice and stone and have limited
trading relations with a nearby civilization, or feudal
civilizations who range from the imperialist and the expansionist
to the protectionist or isolationist, and have widely differing
cultural preferences on issues such as aesthetics, slavery,
gladiatorial sport, ethics and morality, and so forth. This variety
extends into other areas, such as religion, where a complex
algorithm can procedurally create over a million detailed
religions with information about their beliefs, their god(s), what
festivals or special events are on their religious calendar, their
relationships with other religions, their presence in civilizations,
eschatological and creation beliefs, the appearance of their altars,
expectations from worshippers, etc. All of these “cultural actors”
inform the creation of the AI actors who exist within these
contexts. Crucially, therefore, rather than presenting this
civilizational/cultural/religious detail as “background” or “lore”
as many games do, they are foregrounded in the AI actors,
whose motivations, interests and agendas can only be understood
via a detailed understanding of the generated cultural
backgrounds from which they originate. In turn, this affects their
willingness to interact with the player, to assist or communicate
with the player, and to potentially oppose the player if the player
has aligned themselves with religions or cultures inimical to
those of other NPCs. At the same time, it is a game of
incomplete information [cf 3] where both the player, and NPCs,
must make judgements about the opinions of others based on the
data they possess. The actions of AIs are dependent upon the
social conditions and expectations into which they are “born”,

Thirdly, the paper brings these together to explore the
use of this integration of procedural generation and sociological
concepts as a method for game-based learning in the fields of
philosophy, sociology, and the humanities more generally. AIs
respond and behave according to their political, cultural, social
and religious affiliations, and this transforms these concepts in
the social sciences into gameplay mechanics that affect the
behaviour of AI and the world the player explores, rather than
simply a method for constructing a game world which then has
no further impact upon the player’s experience. This is in part
akin to the world by Mateas on “expressive AI” [4] and
Gruenworldt and Katchabaw’s “Realistic Reaction System” [5]
but develops it into further qualitative and social science
domains, and integrates far broader “relationship” structures of
religions and cultures into the interpersonal dimension previous
focused upon. The paper therefore explores how the game
depicts the influence of these many factors on social interaction,
and how these influences are represented in the actions,
decisions and interests of the game’s AI. In turn, this leads to
game-based learning where understanding the cultural, political
and religious motivations of AI actors is actually essential to
success or failure within the game world. Lastly, this also serves
to illustrate the potential for the development of ‘qualitative’
game mechanics in video games more generally, and highlights
the potential for the use of complex AI actors in moving away
from the ubiquitous stat-based gameplay of levels, items,
rewards, and so forth, and towards developing “AI” that can be
understood in terms of their as full actors with a range of interest
and agendas, rather than as only actors in combat or strategy
situations.

4 CONCLUSIONS
The paper explores three central components to the
game’s AI – the emphasis on procedural content generation and
the integration between that and artificial intelligence; the
emphasis within this on creating cultures, societies and religions,
and having these directly influence AI decisions; and thirdly the
potential for this game to develop “qualitative AI” and to create
gameplay mechanics based on political, sociological and
humanist concepts rarely explored in interactive media. It notes
the potential educational and pedagogic value of these, the
potential for new forms of gameplay rarely explored in computer
games, and the paper lastly notes the planned future
developments of the game’s in-development system.

REFERENCES
[1] G. Chaslot, S. Bakkes, I. Szita and P. Spronck. Monte-Carlo Tree
Search: A New Framework for Game AI. In: Proceedings of the
Fourth Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment
Conference. AAAI (2008).

[2] T. Standley. Finding Optimal Solutions to Cooperative Pathfinding
Problems. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-10). AAAI (2010).
[3] D. Billings, A. Davison, J. Schaeffer, D. Szafron. The Challenge of
Poker. In Artificial Intelligence, 134:1-2:201-240 (2002).
[4] M. Mateas. Expressive AI: Games and Artificial Intelligence. edings
of Level Up: Digital Games Research Conference (2003).
[5] L. Gruenwoldt and M. Katchabaw. Creating Reactive Non Player
Character Artificial Intelligence in Modern Video Games. In
Proceedings of the 2005 GameOn North America Conference (2005).

