Monsters and Manuals

 Creator of Yoon-Suin and other materials. Propounding my half-baked ideas on role playing games. Jotting down and elaborating on ideas for campaigns, missions and adventures. Talking about general industry-related matters. Putting a new twist on gaming. 

Showing posts sorted by relevance for query Gene Wolfe . Sort by date Show all posts 

 Showing posts sorted by relevance for query Gene Wolfe . Sort by date Show all posts 

 Tuesday, 16 April 2019 

 Gene Wolfe, Ursula Le Guin, and Friendships Across the Divide 

Gene Wolfe and Ursula Le Guin were friends. (Wolfe talks about this a little bit in the interview I linked to yesterday.) Nothing unusual in that, you would have thought; they moved in similar circles, were roughly the same age, and there is a certain similarity in their approaches to narrative.

But you couldn't get two more different people politically. One a traditional Catholic conservative; the other an ardent advocate of left-wing thought of the anarchist variety and a feminist icon. I bet they didn't agree about abortion; I don't have hard evidence for this, but it seems a reasonable supposition (and I'm certain they would have disagreed about plenty of other things). 

Yesterday, when I was googling for news about Wolfe's death, I came for some reason across P Nielsen Hayden 's twitter account. (I hadn't heard of him either; he's apparently the Editor-in-Chief at Tor.) Here's him tweeting in response to the news:

A word that keeps coming up in people’s memories of Gene Wolfe is “kind.” We should all live our lives so as to be so remembered.

Gene had strong beliefs and could be flinty in their expression. But he always acted as if other people, different from him, also mattered.

— P Nielsen Hayden (@pnh) 15 April 2019 

Something made me scroll down and look at his other recent tweets, though, and here we find this, nestled in among a very long list of other extremely partisan tweets:

The irony won't be lost on you, but there's a broader point to be made: the texture of life has changed a lot since Gene Wolfe and Ursula Le Guin were in their heyday, hasn't it? You don't just agree to disagree any more; people from the other end of the political spectrum are unclean .

Now, this is twitter, which is all about people completely losing their minds, and sense of perspective into the bargain, so you wouldn't want to read too much into it. But as a foreigner in social media, I find it more than striking: here you have all these apparently intelligent, reasonable people, successful in their fields, collectively acting out a descent into a kind of Reformation/Counter-Reformation style of politics that you might have thought had gone out of fashion with the Patent of Toleration. That can't fail to have some sort of influence on the culture in general.

Long-term readers of the blog may be tired of me harping on about this issue, but it's an important one for us nerds. Gene Wolfe and Ursula Le Guin were nerds, and their shared interests allowed them to set aside profound political differences and get along. That was a good thing. Modern day nerds (P Nielson Hayden can, I think, be put into that category) seem at the forefront of the movement to drive wedges between oneself and others on the basis of political differences alone, and that's a bad one. I feel it's important for those of us with a bit of perspective left to keep pointing the finger at divisiveness in order to emphasise how silly it all is - and how unkind . Nobody chooses to believe anything; neither politics nor religion works that way. You arrive at the views you have for host of very complicated reasons, and pure free will is never one of them; you're at the end of a very long chain of circumstances which led you to where you are today. If somebody thinks something radically different to you, it's because they're at the end of a very different, but equally lengthy, chain of circumstances to yours. You've got two alternatives with such a person: you can treat them with kindness and respect because they are a fellow human who is just as much a victim of circumstance as you are (which does not have to mean inviting them round to dinner, by the way; it can simply mean being civil), or you can vilify them for being bad and wrong. Which one, ultimately, has the stronger chance of turning them round? And which one will make you fearful and stressed-out and a narrower, meaner-spirited sort of person?

Answers on a postcard.

Posted by
 
 noisms 

at
 
 21:21 

37 comments:

 Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest 

 Tuesday, 14 March 2023 

 On Gene Wolfe and the Feeling of Being Inspired 

 I have recently been re-reading Gene Wolfe's The Wizard Knight , and wanted to write some longish blog entries about some of its key themes. But before doing that I thought it might be worth dwelling on the way inspiration works.
 I've read many excellent books in my life, listened to some great music, and watched some great films. I've also watched some wonderful sporting performances. Some of these things have inspired me. But most haven't. And I'm curious about what it is that separates the former from the latter.
 Let's put some flesh on those bones. When I read The Lord of the Rings for the first time, around the age of 10 or 11, I immediately got it into my head that I also wanted to write novels. Some quality in those books must have struck me, in a way that no book I had read before, as being in some way worthy of emulation - not I think in the sense of aping their content, but in the sense of wanting to attain a similar creative achievement. Reading Tolkien's work made me feel good about the world and glad to be in it, and it convinced me that if I could only produce a book that would make other people feel that way, then it would be pretty much the greatest thing that I could possibly do with my time on Earth. (I was obviously hardly alone in this - three generations of fantasy writers seem to have had an almost identical series of thoughts after reading LOTR .)
 I also, however, used to play cricket to a decent-ish amateur level, beginning at roughly the same age as I was taking the plunge into Middle Earth (I gave the game up shortly before going to university). And in my life I have watched an awful lot of cricket, live and on TV. I have had plenty of cricketing heroes -Brian Lara, Sachin Tendulkar, Graham Thorpe, Shane Warne, etc. - and witnessed some truly great moments that I will cherish forever. (I'm not sure I've quite recovered from 'that' Ben Stokes innings in 2019.) But never once can I say that I have watched a game of cricket that made me want to emulate what I have seen in the same way that I wanted to emulate Tolkien. It has made me feel happy (more often, as an England fan, sad, and reflective upon the vagaries of fortune). But it has never really made me want to rush out and get into the nets in order to get better. 
 Why is this? What confluence of factors is it that causes one cultural experience to inspire you while another does not? It can't simply be the medium; I've read lots of great books that have made me happy to be alive simply because it gave me the opportunity to have experienced them (Jack Vance's Ecce and Old Earth , TH White's The Goshawk , Newton Thornburg's Cutter and Bone , Kingsley Amis's Lucky Jim , Michael Ende's The Neverending Story , James Ellroy's My Dark Places , Turgenev's Fathers and Sons - I could go on). But the number that have given me that LOTR feeling - that sensation that I simply must try to produce something an iota as good, or die trying - is few indeed.
 And it can't simply be down to the availability of resources, either. I am a music lover with wide and eclectic tastes - I adore Zoltan Kocsis; I adore Glenn Gould; I adore Ella Fitzgerald; I adore Al Di Meola; I adore Billy Corgan; I adore Bill Withers; I adore Marvin Gaye. I could at any time have been inspired by their music to put in the effort to get good at singing, or playing the guitar, or playing the piano, just as reading Tolkien made me want to just pick up a pen and paper and start writing. But I never have really done those things as a result of listening to a record - even one which has thrilled me to the very core of my being with its wondrous beauty. 
 All I can say is that the way in which books, films, music, etc. influence our minds and our souls is something that we will probably never really come close to understanding. And all I can add to that is that, along with Tolkien, it is Gene Wolfe whose work has the highest hit ratio when it comes to inspiring me. I don't always read Gene Wolfe. But when I do, I want to write novels. The Wizard Knight really brought back that LOTR feeling to my heart, second time around more intensely than ever - and even more so than did reading The Sword of the Lictor or Soldier of the Mist . There is a great deal to be said about the book. But, before doing so, I though this needed to be said first.

Posted by
 
 noisms 

at
 
 21:42 

15 comments:

 Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest 

 Thursday, 27 May 2021 

 Of Krynn and Urth: Shared vs Singular Settings 

 Comments on recent entries suggest that there is a need to clear something up about fantasy settings.
 Look at the following spectrum:

 Urth <------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------>Krynn 

 Any fantasy setting can be placed somewhere on that spectrum. Across one dimension it serves, of course, as a proxy for quality. Urth is a powerfully rich, unique and dense setting and the books Gene Wolfe set there are wonderful. Krynn is derivative and the Dragonlance books are not very good. 
 But that is not the dimension that interests me. What I'd like to emphasise instead is that Urth is a very singular setting - unique, indeed, to the brain of Gene Wolfe and probably unreplicable (except in weak, uninteresting pastiche) by anybody else. Krynn, on the other hand, is a shared one. Yes, I suppose Maragaret Weis and Tracy Hickman came up with it. But it is founded on conventions that anybody who has read a fantasy book will recognise and which are, to a large extent, common property to fantasy fans. (And this is indeed why so many people have contributed to the Dragonlance series' over the decades without really changing the books' mood or character appreciably; Volume 51 of Kender, Gully Dwarves and Troll s is basically the same thing as Dragons of Autumn Twilight - different varieties of cheddar cheese.)
 When it comes to novels, I want everything clustered to the left hand side of that spectrum. This is probably also true of those RPG settings which I know I will never play.
 But when it comes to actual gaming, it is important that settings lean towards the right. Not all the way, by any means. But at least part of the way there. This is because RPGs and novels are fundamentally different things. Reading a novel is all about becoming involved in the singularity of the author's vision - or, at best, co-creating that vision in one's own mind and imagination. There, distinctiveness is what really matters, and singular settings are therefore best.
 Playing an RPG, though, is about running a successful game . It's not chess, football or boxing, but ultimately it is still about communal fun. Sitting down at the table, the players are not simply engaging in exploring the DM's beautiful and unique creative product, but actively contributing. This requires them to have a certain footing on the same ground - to be deploying certain assets of shared property. The setting they are inhabiting does not have to be as derivative and bland as Krynn, but it has to take at least certain assumptions for granted in order for there to be long-term success. 
 Tekumel is perhaps the classic example of an edge case. It is a unique setting, for sure, but it perhaps has enough of the shared furniture of D&D - the quest for gold and XP, the basic system, the core conceit of exploration/dungeoneering/questing - to make it gameable. With Yoon-Suin I suppose I was aiming for something slightly to the right of that. 
 Another reason for preferring game settings to be on the shared end of the spectrum (rather than the singular) is simply that what happens in a game tends to do extreme violence - literal and figurative - to the setting, and the DM's tolerance for that happening if his game is set in an environment like Gene Wolfe's Urth is probably much lower than if it is set in a place like Krynn. In this respect, a setting like Krynn, the Forgotten Realms, and so on is a bit like an ABBA song - even if Piers Brosnan is singing a cover version in a crappy movie, it still kind of works on its own terms because those melodies are almost part of our cultural heritage at this point. But nobody wants to hear him singing Captain Beefheart. 

Posted by
 
 noisms 

at
 
 14:03 

32 comments:

 Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest 

 Saturday, 4 March 2023 

 On the Satanic Nature of AI Art 

 My friend Dan is a dab hand at manipulating AI art programs. (He will undoubtedly be one of the few humans permitted to hold a position of responsibility once AM has taken over and the rest of us are reduced to drone-slaves; I for one welcome our new Sumption Overlord.)
 Here are some examples of his (their?) oeuvre :

 When Dan posts these on my gaming group's Discord, I am invariably impressed by the fact that they are impressive, but also by the fact that they are quite profoundly evil and Satanic. Just examine them closely and see how dead they are behind their eyes . These are not people, but horrible homonculi, as utterly alien to real human beings as are rocks or icebergs. If they gained life I would not be able to sleep at night simply knowing about their existence in the universe; it would confirm to me quite inescapably that God exists, for the simple reason that things so evidently evil must also have an opposite.
 After Dan's most recent posting, I was immediately reminded of Sir Able's description of the Angrborn (the race of evil giants from Gene Wolfe's The Wizard Knight ), which I just happen to be re-reading for the third or fourth time:
 
They are never loved, neither by us, nor by their own kind, nor by any animal. Disiri probably knows what it is in people, in Aelf, in dogs and horses, and even houses, manors and castles that makes it possible for somebody to love them; but whatever it is, is it not in the Angrborn and they know it.
 This seemed particularly apt as a way of describing all the AI art I have seen. It is often technically highly competent, and in its own way remarkably creative and genuinely surprising. But it somehow lacks the capacity to be loved. We examine it as we would a constellation of stars - a thing that, however beautiful, is impenetrable to emotion. We do not love it in the same way that we can love a real painting by a real person, or at least recognise such a painting to be loveable in some sense to somebody even if it's not to our personal taste. We humans can love all manner of things - think of how deeply a child loves a stuffed toy, a hardworking parent loves his or her comfortable bed, a football fan loves his team, or a young person loves an item of clothing. But we do not love AI art. It is inert to our affection.

 It is perhaps not surprising that Gene Wolfe, a devoutly Christian writer, should have thought so carefully about the nature of evil and seen it as a reflection of the incapacity to be loved - perhaps even a product or result of the incapacity to be loved (or of feeling that way). 

 That in turn calls to mind that other most notably Christian SF/fantasy writer, CS Lewis, and his description of the demonically-possessed Professor Weston in Perelandra :

He did not look like a sick man: but he looked very like a dead one. [His] face...had that terrible power which the face of a corpse sometimes has of simply rebuffing every conceivable human attitude one can adopt towards it...It did not defy goodness, it ignored it to the point of annihilation. Ransom perceived that he had never before seen anything but half-hearted and uneasy attempts at evil. This creature was whole-hearted. The extremity of its evil had passed beyond all struggle into some state which bore a horrible similarity to innocence.

 There is, here, an intriguingly similar-but-different point being made: evil inheres, again, in the fact of being impenetrable to emotion, but in this case it is not just love but 'every conceivable human attitude' per se . Here we are very much in the territory of Terry Eagleton and his presentation of evil as a rejection of being - the desire to transcend all barriers to pure will, and hence best understood as a fundamental opposition to the notion of human nature as such. AI art also seems to embody this phenomenon: a rejection of the very concept of art as a product of human creators, as well as a comprehensive rebuttal of the idea that human feeling should play a role in the creation of art itself. 

 The theodicy of AI art, if we can call it that, therefore brings to the surface very thought-provoking questions about God (assuming for the sake of argument He exists). If Gene Wolfe is right, this body of art's evil is as a result of its lacking the capacity to be loved. If we follow Lewis, on the other hand, its evil derives from its rejection of limits on the will (and particularly those posed by human nature and human feeling). Is evil therefore predetermined and inherent (imposed by the circumstance of a thing being unloveable), or deliberately chosen? 

Posted by
 
 noisms 

at
 
 22:02 

35 comments:

 Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest 

 Friday, 1 February 2019 

 My Recommendations 

A commenter challenged me, entirely fairly, to make some of my own book recommendations to my readers. I often struggle when asked to do this, but fortunately for the last five years or so I have been carefully recording and reviewing every book I read on Goodreads. So, here are all the books I have read during that time which I have deemed worth of being 5 stars, in the completely random order Goodreads put them in when I ranked my reviews by rating:

 The Game by Neil Strauss. I don't care what you think of PUAs as a cultural phenomenon; it is without doubt a subject worthy of anthropological study and this book is just a phenomenal piece of gonzo journalism on it - maybe the best piece of gonzo journalism ever written by anybody not Hunter S. Thompson.

 Vietnam: An Epic Tragedy, 1945-1975 by Max Hastings. I love Hastings' books and this doesn't disappoint. It takes a while to get going, but when it does it rollicks along. Just brilliant popular history about an important subject, which also does a decent job of looking at the war through the eyes of the Vietnamese (and doesn't shy away from indicting the Viet Cong as much as the Americans, which I feel is important).

 Everybody Loves Our Town: A History of Grunge by Mark Yarm. It probably helps if you like the music, but even if you don't I'd say that the story of grunge - underground movement to pop sensation to debauchery and decline - is well worth reading about as a kind of paradigm case reflecting the life story of essentially every cultural movement that there has been since the renaissance. Also Eddie Vedder comes out of the book smelling like the worst of all possible turds.

 Jennings Goes to School by Anthony Buckeridge. I re-read this as a sort of guilty pleasure remembered from my youth. If you like children's books set in impossibly-hyper-idealised boarding schools for upper-middle-class nitwits in mid-20th century England, you will love it. Think Harry Potter with no magic (or female characters whatsoever).

 American Tabloid by James Ellroy. Love Ellroy, had not got round to reading this one. This is what I said in my Goodreads review: "I found this book almost absurdly entertaining. The pages brim with manic violence, sex, and foul language. The characters are all etched larger than life. The writing is hard, fast, dirty but strangely poetic. The plot is like a labyrinth but you are whisked around it in a blur. Simply a great read."

 The Worst Journey in the World by Apsley Cherry-Garrard. An account of the exploration of Antarctica by a member of Scott's expedition. The journey of the title is not the one which led to Scott's death (although that is in the book), but rather an absurdly demanding trip through the Antarctic winter to try to capture an emperor penguin's egg to bring back to England. Cherry-Garrard basically never recovered from what happened to him in Antarctica and after reading the book you can see why. This is probably in the top three books on this list, one which I would give 6 stars to if I could.

 The Neverending Story by Michael Ende. Oh God, The Neverending Story. If you've never read it, do it now. Stop reading this blog entry and go and get it out of your nearest library and read it, and report back once you've finished. This one I would give 7 stars to if I could.

 The Soldier of the Mist and The Soldier of Arete by Gene Wolfe. Somebody recommended this series to me on the blog, and I'm very glad they did. What can you say about it, except that it's a story about a mercenary from the Italian peninsular who cannot make new memories and is somehow in contact with the world of the gods, journeying around Ancient Greece in the aftermath of the failed Persian invasion? And Gene Wolfe wrote it. There is a third volume about his adventures in Egypt which I also read and like, but gave 4 stars to.

 In the Lake of the Woods by Tim O'Brien. On the face of it a book about the aftermath of the Vietnam War and the long shadow of war crimes would not usually be my cup of tea, but after my Dad died I took it upon myself to try to read through his library (a work in progress) and this is one of the standouts. Lyrical and powerful and lingered long in the memory.

 The Goshawk by TH White. TH White is one of the greatest of all English prose writers and this book is about him trying to tame and train a goshawk. It made me cry, and books never do that. This is another one of my top three on the list, I think.

 My Dark Places by James Ellroy. James Ellroy gives a non-fictional account of his early life and tries to track down his mother's killer (she was murdered when he was a youngish boy) while also discussing crime and, in particular, crimes men perpetrate against women. Calling it "James Ellroy does feminism" would be pushing it, but it's an absolutely shocking book for a man to read. (I say that as a man who is resolutely not "woke" and will do my damnedest never to be wakened.)

 Mythago Wood by Robert Holdstock. I read others in the series and also ranked them highly, but the first one, the one I gave 5 stars to, is the best. Like all really great fantasy books it is also about something deeper than just a fancy setting and magic; this one is about the relationship between father and son and it manages to say very important things about that kind of relationship in the context of an entertaining fairy-tale sort of plot. Like Narnia for grownups.

 Nemesis: The Battle for Japan 1944-45 by Matt Hastings. Another Hastings tome, another wonderful example of popular history. The chapter on the firebombing of Japanese cities should be read by everybody.

 Chin Ping Mei, Or, The Adventurous History of the Mandarin and His Six Wives . And now for something completely different - how about a 500-year old Chinese novel about, well, a minor bureaucrat and his six wives? I didn't give this 5 stars just because it's a classic and felt like I ought to. It is an absolute page-turner, very funny, and gives startling insights into a way of life completely different to our own.

 City of the Chasch by Jack Vance. I love me a bit of Jack Vance, and this is very much a bit of Jack Vance - not much more than 100 pages. Somebody recommended this one to me on the blog, too; some day I will get around to reading the rest of the series.

 Japan and the Shackles of the Past by R. Taggart Murphy. A history of modern Japan, from a refreshingly opinionated and critical author. A great way to understand the actual country, not the one you see on TV, films, or in anime.

 Meadowland: The Private Life of an English Field by John Lewis-Stempel. Just great nature writing - a beautiful series of meditations written over the course of a year by a farmer about his land and the creatures (domesticated and wild) living in it.

 The Path to Power by Robert Caro. The first of five (four of them published) volumes of Caro's biography of Lyndon Johnson - each of which is, not incidentally, about 1000 pages long. I have not read the others yet, but plan to as soon as possible. To say it puts other biographies to shame is to engage in gross understatement. It is a titanic work. It is also one of the greatest books I think I have ever read - a political biography which reveals not just the subject but also the nature of politics and is in its own right a stunning literary achievement and beautiful, poetic history of the period and milieu in which Johnson lived. I can't recommend it highly enough (even for somebody who knows little or nothing about LBJ; before picking up this book my knowledge of him extended to, "Er, was he the one who became President after JFK got shot?").

 Lucky Jim by Kingsley Amis. I am not a great one for "funny" books - I tend not to find them terribly funny. (My own personal readership hell is The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy .) This one actually is funny, and made me laugh on almost every page despite myself. The bus-ride scene towards the end may be one of my favourites in English literature. It is fabulous.

 Reappraisals: Reflections on the Forgotten 20th Century by Tony Judt. It is always worth reading anything by Judt, even though he represents the kind of elitist liberal normativism I intensely dislike, and this is a superlative collection of essays on very recent history - the history that textbooks have not yet been written about. His skewering of Tony Blair is delicious.

 The Iliad (prose translation by Martin Hammond). What is there to say about The Iliad ? Probably nothing that hasn't already been said. If you've not read it, nor had I until I got this, and I loved it. I can't speak for other translations.

 The Fifth Head of Cerburus by Gene Wolfe. Foreshadows the entire "new weird" movement, I think - you'll never be able to read any of those authors again without thinking them a pale imitation of Wolfe. There is a fan theory out there that these stories are the future of the same planet that The Book of the New Sun is set in, which then makes you wonder if it is perhaps our very, very distant future, since some people think New Sun is far-future Earth. Whatever. It's a classic.

 The Master and His Emissary: The Divided Brain and the History of the Western World by Iain McGilchrist. I can't summarise this book in a way that would remotely do it justice - look it up, and then get a copy and read it. This is the third of my top 3 books on this list. I was spellbound from start to finish, and more than any other book I think I've read, it actually changed how I look at the world . Don't read it unless you're prepared for the same thing to happen to you.

 The Histories (Herodotus, translated by Robin Waterfield). I loved this up-to-date, readable translation of Herodotus, which turns them into the wonderfully eccentric shaggy-dog story they really are.

 Cutter and Bone by Newton Thornburg. Another one from my Dad's library that I never would have ordinarily read. A trio of deadbeats try to solve a murder which may not actually have happened. That's the plot. It doesn't begin to describe how well it's written and how brilliantly it keeps you guessing until the very end. If you love a good mystery, get this.

 The Idea of Poverty: England in the Early Industrial Age by Gertrude Himmelfarb. None of you will read this. Don't pretend you will. It deserves 5 stars, though.

 Dark Companions by Ramsay Campbell. I think I must have read this 7 years ago, which makes me wonder whether my statement of having joined Goodreads 5 years ago was accurate. Anyway, a really chilling and warped selection of Campbell's non-Lovecraftian horror fiction. These are mostly "plain" ghost stories, but of the bleakest, harshest and scariest kind.

An odd selection, looking at them all listed. Not much SF/Fantasy fiction at all in there, which says a lot about both me and the genre, I suspect.

[PS: I should add that I didn't include re-reads of The Lord of the Rings on the basis that...well...why are you reading this blog if you need me to recommend you try The Lord of the Rings ?]

Posted by
 
 noisms 

at
 
 18:39 

20 comments:

 Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest 

 Monday, 12 June 2023 

 On the Thinness of Fantasy Thinking 

 Regular readers can give themselves a treat and listen to/watch this fascinating discussion of the philosophy of Owen Barfield . You don't need to know anything about Barfield to enjoy it (I didn't, except that he was a member of 'the Inklings' along with CS Lewis and JRR Tolkien) - what you hear will make you very curious.
 The conversation's subject, really, is the way in which ancient people thought - and its difference to how modern people not only think but think about thinking. It ranges across all manner of subjects, from the importance of religion and the gods, the 'nature' of nature, the distinction between process-based understandings of human interaction with the world and dualistic/instrumental ones (very McGilchristian one for you McGilchristians among my readership), the bicameral and unicameral mind, and so on. But ultimately I suppose the most fascinating observation of all comes right at the beginning: why is it that, for all that modern people have read and written about the classical philosophers, there is still a sense that we don't quite know what they were driving at, and our understanding of their work seems so thin ?
 I have often been similarly disappointed with fantasy writers and fantasy role playing games in this regard. It just so happens that I am currently re-reading Julian May's Sage of Pliocene Exile after it came up in conversation on StuPat's blog , and have been very struck by this sense of disappointment during my reading. Don't get me wrong: I think Julian May was a very gifted storyteller and writer, if a little hackneyed in her dialogue and characterisation, but what impresses me about the various alien and early-hominid characters she creates is how thoroughly modern their thoughts and concerns are. In their needs, desires and perceptions of reality they are totally comprehensible and relatable to a contemporary readership - and this just doesn't ring true to the richness of difference that must surely exist between a late 20th/early 21st century reader and a member of a race from a foreign planet or a people from a distant time.
 What you could say about Julian May is of course true of 99% or more of fantasy fiction (think of how George RR Martin's characters all behave - like us, but a bit more sociopathic and 'Machiavellian', or think of the internal dialogue of China Mieville's characters and how completely they come across as modern day Londoners even while purpotedly inhabiting Bas-Lag). Nobody ever stops to consider how different the structure of thought itself would be in a world in which magic genuinely exists; in which there are actually supernatural entities walking around; in which there really are many gods with whom one could personally interact. What would it mean to be a human being in those circumstances? How would humans think about themselves and, indeed, about the nature of thinking? How would one interpret one's relationship to the magical and divine?
 To give a brief entry point into how big and interesting these questions are, the discussants in the Barfield discussion I linked to earlier on bring up the ancient Greek word pneuma (which apparently has cognates in many other ancient languages), which simultaneously meant both wind, breath, and spirit. To the ancient Greeks, it seems, these concepts were not distinct, but the same, and Plato even describes this concept as being a process wherein what we call the 'wind' is taken into the body in the 'breath' and becomes 'spirit'. What, phenomenologically, would it be like to concieve of things in this way: the act of breathing, and hence living, being part of the same unity as the wind itself? And what would this mean for one's understanding of the world around one?
 To give another from my own experience: imagine there is somebody who you vaguely know or have seen around and who you find attractive - not just objectively physically but because there is 'something about them'. You'll know what I mean, I'm sure. How would you describe that feeling? You might say you fancy them, if you're where I'm from, or that they're 'fit'. In Japanese, somebody would, informally, say something rather like ano hito ga nanka ki ni naru , meaning that, with regard to that person, 'something happens to my spirit'. The nuance is totally different, and so, also, I think, the thought itself. It's not just the use of a different word, but the use of a different concept, which says something different about the nature of the relationship between beholder and beheld.
 The only fantasy writers who I think come close to capturing something of what I am talking about - going somewhat deeper into the matter of how different the human experience would be in a world not our own - are JRR Tolkien and Gene Wolfe (and it's probably no accident in this regard that Wolfe was such a Tolkien fan). For Tolkien himself it was probably a case of having imbibed so much in the way of medieval texts in various languages that he almost unconsciously developed the capacity to think in a different way; for Gene Wolfe it seems to have been an act simply of great creative genius and imaginative insight. (Think of the scene in the last book of The Book of the New Sun with the storytelling contest, for example, to see this creative power at work.) There may also be a hint of this ability shown in M. John Harrison's Viriconium stories, too: a genuine attempt to think through how people in the very distant future would themselves think. 
 But it is vanishingly rare in my experience. And what is rare in fantasy fiction is even rarer in fantasy role playing games (is Pendragon or Ars Magica an exception?). Let's leave aside the question of what it would really feel like to 'be' a dwarf or an elf. What it would really feel like to be a human being in a standard D&D-type world? According to almost everything I've ever read, it would be like being a modern post-enlightenment liberal person but running around in chainmail or a spangly star-covered magician's robe. How would such people think, and how would they regard the world around them and the other living things within it? Well, like a modern post-enlightement liberal person given the incentives thrust upon them by the game system to gather gold and XP.
 This is fun, but imaginarily unsatisfying and, to use the word I deployed earlier, thin. I understand why things are that way: it's because sitting around trying to operationalise abstract ideas about the structure of thought is not exactly an exercise that has mass-market appeal. I'm not even arguing it would have appeal for me, most of the time. But it would have appeal some of the time, and I'm interested in the exercise of trying. 

Posted by
 
 noisms 

at
 
 15:32 

73 comments:

 Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest 

 Wednesday, 26 April 2023 

 WizardKnighting Planescape 

I have been intending for some time to do a series of posts on Gene Wolfe's The Wizard Knight , which I recently re-read (after having had a first pass at it sometime in the mid-noughties) and thought worthy of much comment. 

 The first thing to say about it is its cosmology and how that sheds light on a big problem that Planescape encountered and which I discussed here . This is that, in an infinite setting, with infinite possibility, it is difficult to imbue events with any meaning. Instead, as I put it in that post, everything comes across as 'intangible, airy, ineffectual'. I might better have used the word 'inert'. 

 The cosmology of The Wizard Knight is something akin to that presented in Planescape . We have a series of infinite planes which have a kind of alignment-based composition (in this case, Elysion, at the top, is the most pure and good, home of the Most High God, and Niflheim, at the bottom, is the most base and profane, home of the Most Low God; the planes in the middle are shades between them). The central plane, Mythgarthr, is akin to the Prime Material Plane, where human beings live. 

 The relationship between the planes is also Planescape -esque, with characters being able to move from one to the other to a certain extent. There are no portals exactly between the planes; rather, one simply travels literally upwards or downwards from one to the other. (If one is in Aelfrice, one's sky is literally Mythgarthr - so unless one is below Mythgarthr's sea, one lives in shadow; one can also descend to Muspel, home of dragons, by going down tunnels far enough.) But the basic idea - of travellers from the most 'human' plane going to other ones on adventures - is roughly similar. 

 But this is also where things start to diverge. Planescape was very much a product of the 1990s, in which 'edginess' and being the anti-hero was in vogue. This meant that all of the planes were conceptualised as being essentially equal. There was no real hierarchy between them. Yes, the 'Upper Planes' were the ones of good alignment and the 'Lower Planes' bad, but this had absolutely no in-game consequence. This was in keeping with the orthodox TSR position of the day on alignments - that good and evil, law and chaos had to be 'in balance'. This was even depicted as a known quality of the multiverse in-game; in 2nd edition AD&D characters of True Neutral alignment were actually presented as seeking to consciously preserve the balance between the alignments through their actions.

 (Incidentally, the text of Planescape is strangely coy about the relationship between the good and evil planes - the only real conflict that gets any 'air time' is the Blood War, fought between Lawful Evil and Chaotic Evil respectively.)

 The Wizard Knight , however, assumes a hierarchy, and this actually matters. It is easier to go down than up - almost anyone can accidentally wander into Aelfrice, and going to Muspel and Niflheim is a relatively simply matter of physically descending into the bowels of the Earth. But it is very hard for Aelf to go to Mythgarthr, and almost no human beings are permitted to go to Skai, let alone Kleos. Time also flows differently in the different planes, so that what seems like an hour in Aelfrice may be weeks or months in Mythgarthr, and the main character disappears to Skai for what seems like a very brief period (I think from memory it is just a few hours, though I might be wrong about that) but comes back as a comparatively old man, having spent decades in the upper plane.

 In addition to this, there is supposed to be a relationship of veneration between the inhabitants of lower planes vis-a-vis those in the upper ones. Humans, on Mythgarthr, are supposed to worship the Overcyns, who are the gods of Skai. And the Aelf of Aelfrice are supposed to worship humans. At the same time, humans and Overcyns are supposed to set a good example to those in the plane below and model for them the right behaviour; again from memory, I think it is implied that this is so that ultimately everybody in the hierarchy can eventually ascend all the way up to Elysion, but, again, I could be wrong about that. (The book is over 1000 pages long and written by Gene Wolfe, so don't expect me to get every detail right!)

 This, however, in practice often gets perverted - most notably by the Aelf, who come up to Mythgarthr when they can. Their magical prowess ensures that humans, particularly those who have lost their moorings by being badly ruled or falling on hard times, start to worship them instead. Similarly, although Skai is objectively better than Mythgarthr, it is riven by conflict between good and evil, and the malformed spawn of the evil gods comes falling down to Mythgarthr in the form of hideous giants - the Angrborn. This throws everything into disorder, and (without spoiling the plot), righting it is one of the things the story is about. (I say one of the things - I think what it is mostly about is a boy growing up into a man, but that's a subject for a future post.)

 What Wolfe provides, in The Wizard Knight , is therefore a cosmology that feels dynamic. There is something for its inhabitants to strive for, and a wider telos , if you will, in which they can become integrated. There is a way for their actions to really matter.

 Why Planescape doesn't feel dynamic in the same way is something of a mystery, because of course the authors of the setting actually tried their damnedest to imbue it with the kinds of themes that are infused through The Wizard Knight . In Planescape , one of the idealised things that PCs are supposed to be doing - it is suggested - is reshaping the planes through their actions: by ridding, for example, a chunk of the Outlands of chaos and evil, they can actually tip its geography into Mount Olympus or Arcadia. Or, by acting in the name of a God (although the writers called these 'Powers') of one kind or another, they can literally physically enlarge his or her sphere of influence. And, of course, the PCs can themselves aspire to ascend to Godhood and carve out a realm of their own, individually or collectively. 

 The mystery is at least partly solved by reflecting on how awkwardly the engine of D&D fit into that thematic chassis. Without wishing once more to channel Ron Edwards, there is a basic incoherence that results from using the mechanics of AD&D, which were originally designed for dungeon/hexmap exploration games on a sandbox model (as we all surely now accept), to run campaigns that are orthogonal to that theme. By the time Planescape was being written, that incoherence had become intolerable and unsatisfying - AD&D 2nd edition was being ripped apart at the seams by trying to stay true to the game's mechanics while insisting on grand narrative and plot arcs, to which those mechanics were not at all suited. (This is strongly evident in Planescape's bizarre and half-arsed introduction of a Belief Point economy.) 

 To do Planescape justice, one really needed a system that was something like Pendragon's , in which the game is to a certain extent about the PCs forging themselves into paradigms of knighthood, and the most important stats are those concerning values and personality. There is an unwritten but much better version of Planescape out there in the ether, in which PCs' stats are largely to do with belief and values, and they roll against these stats in order to effect change in their surroundings. This would be a game worth playing and an exercise worth doing. And in making the relationship between setting and mechanics more coherent, it would give Planescape campaigns a sense of being about something more than simply wandering about in an infinite multiverse. It would, like The Wizard Knight , thereby present its cosmology with more seriousness and weight. 

Posted by
 
 noisms 

at
 
 21:51 

15 comments:

 Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest 

 Thursday, 6 June 2024 

 Space Wolfe: Or, Why Grimdark Needs a Theology 

 As somebody who is, let's say, Warhammer 40,000 -curious (I played an awful lot of Warhammer Fantasy Battle, Warhammer 40K, Necromunda, Blood Bowl, WHFR etc in my teenage years but have only half kept an eye on GW products since), it has always interested me how the setting sets up but spectacularly fails to deliver on an obvious Christian theological inspiration. We get the trappings of a kind of pastiche, parody or satire of religion in the form of the Emperor. But it's basically shallow and teenage. 
 This is entirely understandable - since the people who come up with the rules and write the novels are probably mostly themselves agnostics and atheists, and since most of the audience are too. But it has the effect of denuding the setting of what could be a great deal of emotional heft and import - something which I think even non-religious people could appreciate, much as they are able to appreciate the obviously Christian themes within the fiction of, say, Tolkien, Lewis, and Wolfe without having to feel as though they are being preached to.
 Sticking with the triumverate of Tolkien, Lewis and Wolfe for a moment then, while clearly Lewis's work was more actively engaged in Christian apologetics than the other two, there is a strong thematic commonality between the three of them in that they all sought to depict fantasy worlds which were very different from our own but which were animated by an idea of divine grace. 
 This is made very obvious through comparing the work of these authors to their non-Christian or secular equivalents - Ursula Le Guin, say, or ER Eddison, or George RR Martin, or Terry Goodkind, which typically posit a world which is largely defined by human will: the interest is in how individual people or groups amass power, or shape their own futures, or remake society, through their own actions. For Tolkien, Lewis and Wolfe on the other hand, while undoubtedly their stories are characterised by human heroism, that heroism is always reliant for its success on the notion that there is an underlying or overarching (pick your preferred term) natural goodness in the universe which both pulls events towards an ultimate telos and at crucial moments intervenes miraculously in acts of mercy, blessing and so on.
 Hence, for example, in The Lion, The Witch and The Wardrobe Edmund is given the chance to become heroic by the fact that Aslan intercedes with the Witch on his behalf to save his life. In The Hobbit Bilbo is able to change the world because of miraculous happenstances (Sting found in a random troll hoard; secret entrances and hidden meanings discovered in maps at opportune moments; stumbling on the ring; the intervention of the eagles and Beorn at the Battle of the Five Armies, etc.). In The Book of the New Sun Severian comes across the Claw of the Conciliator by sheer fluke at the end of the third book. And so on and so forth.
 A consistent theme in Wolfe's fiction in particular is the thrusting of a young man into an evidently perverse and dangerous setting (Urth; Mythgarthr; Greece in the aftermath of the Persian invasion; etc.) and the subsequent discovery by that character that he holds a different morality to those around him - rather by 'accident'. And not only this; the character also then discovers that that this personal morality in fact fits into a broader moral structure which underpins the universe, such that the prevailing social order in which he is enmeshed is revealed to be a corruption of what is in fact True. Thus, to take the most obvious example, Severian finds himself by accident (which is to say, grace) stumbling on the awareness that he simply cannot live as a torturer without compunction. And this forces him, over the course of the novels, towards the understanding that the society in which he lives is evil and alien to the proper moral way of things, with explosive results.
 The problem that 40K has, as I see it, is that it sets up a kind of metaphysical halfway house in this regard, in positing the perverse and dangerous 'grimdark' setting but hiding away from the counterpoint of natural goodness or right. All of the different factions, including the forces of the Imperium, are basically variations of baddies vying to impose their own conditions of Being on the universe. That's fine, as far as it goes - it works as the setting for a tabletop wargame. But there is something thin and unsatisfying about it when it comes to role playing games - being mere rogues in a 'crapsack world' is only to go with the flow, and going with the flow is not the stuff of good fiction, whether emergent or otherwise.
 For events to feel as though they have consequence at the individual level within the context of a setting like that of Warhammer 40K, which is defined by all-or-nothing conflict, they have to be accompanied by the sense that the individuals involved are in some sense wrestling with and against the very conditions of that conflict. I am much more interested in the idea of people in the Warhammer 40K universe trying to do good in terms of a vision of morality that sits entirely at odds with the prevailing morality across the conflicting factions than I am in the basically cosmetic choice of picking between those factions, or the superficial one of glorying in grimdark kitsch . A Warhammer 40K roleplaying game in which the PCs hunt daemons or battle orks is one thing. One in which they try to do good in a different sense is much more appealing.
 What I want, I realise I am saying, is for Gene Wolfe to come back from the dead and write Warhammer 40K fiction. Then we would be cooking with gas.

Posted by
 
 noisms 

at
 
 22:35 

107 comments:

 Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest 

 Wednesday, 17 August 2022 

 Natural Right and Relativism in Vance, Wolfe and Lewis 

 This year, I have read an awful lot of books by Jack Vance, Gene Wolfe and CS Lewis. This has caused me to reflect on the nature of morality and how we conceptualise it.
 Wolfe, being a Catholic, wrote fiction that was infused with a commitment to the notion of natural right , which here I will use, in the Straussian sense, to refer to the notion that there are objectively good ways for human beings to live, that these derive from an underlying metaphysics, and that there are hence morally better or worse modes of life - both at the individual and societal levels. 
 The Book of the New Sun , which I reread this year after having first encountered it probably 20 or more years ago, encapsulates this commitment. Some people think of Severian as an analogy for Christ, but this never passed the sniff test for me first time around, and I was gratified to read somewhere that Wolfe himself also dismissed the idea. Severian is not an analogy for Christ but for a christian , in the same manner as John Bunyan's pilgrim: his tale is one of gradual spiritual and moral growth and redemption. He begins steeped in a morally degraded culture, and over the course of the four books very slowly finds his way - through what can only be attributed to divine grace - not only to the discovery that his culture is morally degraded, but to a position in which he can attempt to change both it and himself for the better. This is basically the christian story, as I understand it at least: humankind's redemption through grace, and its slow discovery of how to be better in light of God's revelation. 
 The point, to put it in a more spoilerish way, is that Severian begins as a torturer but comes ultimately to achieve empathy - albeit very imperfectly - and indeed to abolish torture. He slowly discovers, and effects, a better morality . And this happens not from the application of his own reason or intrinsic goodness but through the intervention of grace - at certain moments that I think will be evident to anybody who has read the novels and reflects on them.
 (Wolfe's genius of course is that one doesn't have to be a christian to appreciate the books, whose essential premise is: here's a set of incredibly dense and symbolic novels that you could spend a lifetime unpicking, but if that's not your cup of tea, how about all this virtuoso prose, these peerless feats of imagination and a side of horrible monsters?)
 Lewis's That Hideous Strength echoes the same themes as The Book of the New Sun in a more explicit way. In one of the more important sequences in the book our antihero, Mark, finds himself being forced to undergo a series of apparently arbitrary and puerile mental exercises designed to achieve absolute objectivity and hence the ability to apply pure reason. The aim of this, of course, is to be in a position to put traditional morality or conceits about natural right before what Oakeshott calls the 'tribunal of the intellect', and cast it all aside when it is inevitably found wanting. The novel's punchline - again, to get a little spoilerish - is that such a state can be attained only through utter relativism and the absolute dissolution of meaning itself: meaning only comes from living in such a way that God intended , and the application of human reason alone to the task of constructing a fresh morality in practice ends in nihilism of the most extreme kind - a war of all against all in which it is just the loudest voices that win. 
 This is elucidated for us in Vance's very different approach to the question of metaphysics. In Vance's fiction, particularly the Gaean Reach novels, we find a universe in which there is no concept of natural right, either explicit or implicit - the people in that universe do not believe in it, and nor (apparently) does the author. What exists instead is innumerable cultures whose moral codes and laws rest on mere circumstance; they happen to have developed in the manner in which they have because that is what the history and evolution of those societies has produced in the millennia of their separation from Earth. The endless variety that results is one of the great charms of the Gaean Reach books, and nobody in their right mind would have them any other way, of course, but there is no denying that it is the result of an essentially relativistic understanding of morality. No culture can objectively be said to be "better" or "worse" - they are all simply different (and indeed a persistent theme in Vance's fiction is that they all seem to have malevolence simmering either right at the surface or somewhere deep within). 
 This means that Vance is basically a Nietzschean, although I'm not sure he would have described himself in those terms. Since there is no underlying metaphysics upon which morality rests, and it is simply a product of evolution, it can be made subject to human reason, and if an individual human being has sufficient will and vitality he can apply his reason to constructing a moral code of his own. This is indeed what Vance's heroes almost inevitably do, albeit generally unconsciously. The trouble, though, is that the number of individuals who actually do have the will and vitality to achieve this task is very few, and what ends up happening for the mass of human beings is that the moral code which they end up following is simply imposed upon them by those who shout the loudest. When there is no notion of natural right, embodied in a tradition, to draw from, everything is up for grabs in moral terms, and a struggle emerges which is settled only by (literal or metaphorical) force. The result is societies dominated by the moral codes of the victors of such struggles - and laws and customs tending to be harsh, capricious and without any capacity for self-critique. This describes most of Vance's cultures aptly.
 Whether Wolfe and Lewis or Vance is correct about how the universe and its underlying morality (or lack of it) is arranged is a question I leave for you to answer.

Posted by
 
 noisms 

at
 
 20:53 

20 comments:

 Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest 

 Tuesday, 6 December 2022 

 Best Books of 2022 

 It has now become a December tradition - as keenly awaited by my readers, no doubt, as the coming of Father Christmas himself - for me to post a list of my favourite books of the year. This year I did less reading than usual because of a new addition to the family; I seem to more or less invariably fall asleep within 20 minutes of beginning reading a book these days, in whatever circumstance and at whatever time of day. Hopefully this will resolve itself as the years go on and it's not the incipience of old farthood. But in any event, I did manage to finish some books at least. Here are the best 5 (cheating a little bit by including some from the same series) with exerpts from my Goodreads reviews:
 1. The Third Reich at War , by Richard Evans. 
 Each of the three volumes of this trilogy is excellent, but this is probably the best, if only for the sheer feat that it represents - condensing so much historical incident into an (admittedly long) 760 pages. What is perhaps most notable is its insistence on the centrality of the Holocaust to WWII. Quite rightly, Evans eschews much in the way of military history; the war was lost as soon as the Nazis invaded Russia simply by dint of lack of resources. The real story is the way in which an entire society was transformed from the centre of European civilisation to a nihilistic, moral void in the space of less than a decade. Evans recognises this, and brings the sheer enormity of it home in a very calm and understated way. 

 2. Perelandra and That Hideous Strength by CS Lewis. 

 [On Perelandra ]: As well as being a profound exploration and elucidation of the concept of the Fall, this is also a beautifully written and paced book, in which CS Lewis reveals himself to be a prose stylist of the first rate. I suspect that one has to at least be open to Christian thought and teachings to really enjoy it thoroughly, but I found the plot and worldbuilding riveting independent of the theology.

 [On That Hideous Strength ]: This is what being counter-cultural really looks like. A book utterly and profoundly at odds with all of the cultural developments of the past 100 years - and which, read in 2022, seems almost shockingly subversive as a consequence. It's brilliant, and the ending is second only to The Ill-Made Knight in its eucatastrophic beauty.

 3. The Sword of the Lictor and The Citadel of the Autarch by Gene Wolfe. 

 [On The Sword of the Lictor ]: I was entertained by, but a little sceptical about, the first two volumes of The Book of the New Sun, but this third part has to rank in its own right as one of the greatest pieces of fantasy literature, full of invention, beauty, wonder, intrigue and - most importantly - emotional payoff. Where I felt in the previous two books that Gene Wolfe was using smoke and mirrors to create the mere appearance of depth, here the richness and subtlety of the narrative just can't be denied. But it's a flat-out page-turner to boot. A brilliant work.

 [On The Citadel of the Autarch ]: A supremely satisfying end to the series, which very subtly reveals the character's "arc" from callow youth to mature man in a way few writers could accomplish. It also shows that the four books taken together are probably one of the great Christian allegories, although one does not have to be a Christian to really enjoy them as one probably would, for instance, to appreciate CS Lewis's Space Trilogy or John Bunyan. Severian is a pilgrim for the late 20th century, and his tale ultimately one of redemption - but if you're not into that, it has plenty to bewitch and bedazzle even the most hardened SF/Fantasy fan.

 4. Ports of Call by Jack Vance. 

There may be something deep going on in this apparently largely 'plotless' book, but equally, it may simply be that Vance had reached the end of his career and had nothing else to prove, and decided just to write things he enjoyed writing. For a Vance fan, either way the result is a sheer pleasure - a funny, whimsical, at times beautiful, and at times disturbing, tribute to the wonderful feat of imagination that is the Gaean Reach. 

 5. The Fortune of the Rougons by Emile Zola. 

 A lot of the symbolism, allusions and political satire present in this novel are lost on a modern non-French audience, but this is probably for the best, as it means one can simply enjoy a good story, well told - which, for the most part, it is. Zola's prejudices are obvious (like a lot of intellectuals, he clearly reserves a special place in hell for the petite bourgeoisie), and there are moments of hand-waving in order that the plot reaches its climax, but on the whole it is a captivating narrative full of intrigue and excitement.

 *

 So there we have it. Looking back, it was a year partly dominated by Christian allegory/apologia, for which I, no pun intended, do not apologise. I was glad to be converted (again, no pun intended) both to the Space trilogy and The Book of the New Sun , which share the same feature of a slowish and slightly dubious beginning before turning everything round in the second half. It was also a year dominated by Vance; I think I read in the region of 15 of his novels this year. Ports of Call is not his best book, but it was without doubt the book of his I read this year that I enjoyed most - especially the character of Dame Hester. It is sheer entertainment from start to finish, and full of laugh-out-loud moments. As for Zola, what can one say? These canonical writers - Dickens, Zola, Trollope, etc. - are still read for a reason. They're actually rather good. 

 I should probably also give an honourable mention to James Hogg's The Private Memoirs and Confessions of a Justified Sinner , which would have been number 6 if I'd had a Top 6 (my review: The introduction to the text in my Oxford World's Classics edition of this book calls it 'at once terrifying, pitiful and funny', and that summarises it well. Other reviewers play down the last of these descriptors, but the elements of dark comedy are important to mention - Hogg is by no means playing with a straight bat, here.

With all of that said, it is one of the strangest novels I have read, defying any attempt at easy categorisation, and constantly playing games with the reader - clear proof that 'post-modernism' was old hat even in the 19th century. Is Wringhim's companion Satan, or a figment of his psychotic imagination? I defy anybody to be able to make a convincing case one way or the other.).

 A final nod also goes to Thomas Carlyle's The French Revolution: A History . Goodness knows I tried, but it remains on my shelf, a bookmark placed forlornly about half-way through its length. I'll get to the end one day, Thomas, I promise.

Posted by
 
 noisms 

at
 
 14:25 

11 comments:

 Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest 

 Friday, 6 June 2008 

 Risus! Or: Knights! And Wizards! 

 Why is it that nobody has ever told me about Risus before? I've seen the name bandied about on the internet, of course, mostly at therpgsite and on Jeff Rients' blog , but why is it that none of my gaming friends has ever grabbed me physically, by the lapels, and yelled in my face "You've never played Risus before? What are you, stark raving mental or something!? "? With their veins sticking out on their forehead. And slobbering a little.

I've just downloaded it, and it puts the very phrase "insanely brilliant" into a whole new light.

Of course, comedy gaming isn't my thing, but as you're probably aware, pseudo-intellectual literary wankiness most certainly is. So as soon as I started leafing through the .pdf my brain got to working and came out with: The Wizard Knight , but ROLE PLAYING.

I love The Wizard Knight , and I love Gene Wolfe . First things first, if you haven't read that book but have read a lot of Gene Wolfe, it's important to say that it isn't anything like The Book of the New Sun apart from being brilliantly good. The Wizard Knight is fantastical fantasy in the finest tradition of Lord Dunsany , T. H. White , Thomas Malory , Chaucer and George MacDonald , but with a very Wolfeian twist and a fine smattering of Norse mythology. There are no orcs here; it's all about knights who fall in love with faeries, fight giants and dragons, and never refuse a challenge to a duel or a request to rescue a fair maiden - just like Gawain and Lancelot. It's all larger than life, and concieved of in a universe of seven realms, from the pits of hell where the dragons and giants come from, to the heavens themselves where the Valfather lives.

This is just made for a Risus game, I feel. Not entirely the same as The Wizard Knight , of course. But a game where all the characters are writ large and their challenges are rogue knights, evil enchantresses, giants, ogres, gryphons, dryad temptresses and vile dragons. Travel to hell to fight wyverns! Outwit villainous hags who've charmed you with their magick! Swear oaths to never rest until the manticore is slain! Fight hour-long duels knee deep in the icy waters of mountain rivers, only stopping to trade insults! Seduce elven queens! Quest for the love of maidens!

You get the idea. Possibly. If you don't, I really feel this picture just sums it up:

Posted by
 
 noisms 

at
 
 07:34 

3 comments:

 Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest 

Labels:
 campaign settings ,
 literature ,
 risus ,
 the fantastical 

 Thursday, 30 November 2023 

 Best Books of 2023 

 The greatest of traditions have a timeless quality that allows us to imagine ourselves inhabiting an unbroken chain of custom that goes back into the mists of the ancient past. And so it is with Monsters & Manuals 'Best Books of...' lists, which each year are keenly awaited by small, ruddy-cheeked children up and down the land, so that they can refer to it when deciding what to put on their Christmas lists to St Nick.
 This year, the recommendations will be as follows. I limiting myself here to five books, as is the tradition; according to Goodreads - where I religiously review every book I read - I read thirty-three books in total this year, which I think is less than usual. I went back and forth over whether to include Beowulf , literally the last thing I 'read', but technically I didn't read it (I listened) and it was the subject of my most recent blog entry anyway (and will be the subject also of the next). 
 So, in no particular order, the top five are:
 1. Who Framed Colin Wallace? by Paul Foot . This, an account of the trial for murder of a British serviceman who blew the whistle on a 'dirty tricks' campaign by MI5 in Northern Ireland, has nothing whatsoever to do with the subject matter of this blog, but I thought the book was a great read and highly recommend it. From my Goodreads review:
 
 I was swept up in this tale, which is written in an utterly absorbing way and which successfully builds a meticulously researched and argued case that Wallace was framed. The account of his trial in itself is absolutely superb - indeed, it's difficult to imagine a better example of a detailed dissection of court-room procedure in all of non-fiction. The book is marred slightly by the author's evident biases, which at times lead one to question whether he can have viewed the evidence dispassionately. But even if one does not agree with its conclusions, it's impossible to put down.

 2. The Knight and The Wizard by Gene Wolfe (okay - I suppose I lied when I said this list would contain five books). I wrote a series of posts (beginning here ) on the blog about The Wizard Knight after reading the series, and probably bored the pants off my readership through repeated references to it thereafter, but the fact of the matter is that great books sometimes have that effect - and these are genuinely Great Books. From my Goodreads reviews:
 
(The Knight) I read this almost 20 years ago and liked it, but second time around it has grown immeasurably in the telling, possibly because a middle-aged man can see within it themes which a younger man ignores or rejects. It is very much a tale about men and manhood, and I suspect quite alienating to female readers as a result, but there's nothing really wrong with that (I've got no problem with books being written by women for women) - and what it has to say about the subject is extremely important, counter-cultural and profound. 

 (The Wizard) I am thoroughly prepared to accept that the first Act of this novel is too long and at times tortuous. This probably means I should give it less than 5 stars. But in a way the difficulty of that section is almost worth it for the emotional payoff of what comes after. Wolfe here achieves that rarest of things in contemporary fiction: a genuinely happy ending (who has the guts to try to write one of those these days?) that is thoroughly convincing and satisfying. In this respect, it reminded me a lot of TH White's The Ill-Made Knight, to which it makes an excellent companion piece.

 3. Last Witnesses by Svetlana Alexievich . I am a huge fan of Alexievich's work but nothing could prepare me for the emotional body blow that comes from reading this book for the first time. Simply a retelling, in their own words, of the stories of people who had been children in the Soviet Union (chiefly Belarus) at the time of the Nazi invasion in 1941, it contains the full gamut of human experience across the spectrum - the depths of sorrow and despair, and the glory of hope and love, and all that lies between. An amazing, 'Best Books of a Lifetime" contender. From my Goodreads review:

The less said about some books the better, because they cannot be improved by another's words - only diminished. This is indeed the philosophy underlying all of Alexievich's work: that other people's stories must speak for themselves and could only be made worse by inserting the interviewer's perspective. This, in any case, is an unspeakably moving book - suffering on every page, but also survival and redemption. It made me understand the human condition better for having read it.

 4. The Inheritors by William Golding . The short, terrible, horrifying, and disturbing tale of the meeting between a group of neanderthals and a group of homo sapiens , and of the passing away of one world and its replacement with the next. Somebody recommended in the comments to an entry on this blog that I should read this, and I'm very glad they did (it might even have been this guy ); it changed my perspective on what fiction could be. From my Goodreads review:

A great novel will make you understand human nature better, and in a different way. This novel is very great, because it does this with stark purity by forcing us to confront humanity from the outside, as it would be perceived by minds that are not our own. This is an achievement that truly merits being labelled a work of genius. That it is also a work of great lyrical beauty and terrible tragedy makes that achievement more unlikely, and more impressive still.

 5. Now We Are Six by A A Milne . Is this cheating? I suppose it might be cheating. But I deeply enjoyed the experience of reading the poems in this collection to my eldest child, over and over again, during the course of the year. To the adult ear there is something truly magical about the rhythms and cadences of Milne's; one rarely ever reads poetry nowadays, really, and when one does one tends to read pretentious and impenetrable stuff like Pablo Neruda or free verse like Raymond Carver. Milne set himself an altogether different task: picking a meter (sometimes quite a complex one), sticking strictly to it, and communicating clearly and effectively - and beautifully - while doing so. This is enough to inspire one to try it oneself. From my Goodreads review:

These poems must be read out loud (ideally to one's son or daughter) in order to appreciate the sonorous cadences of AA Milne's verse. Things have changed in the last 100 years; what was expected of the reader in terms of poetic literacy were much higher in 1927, and some of the rhyme structures and rhythms strike the modern ear as genuinely complex. This makes the book all the more useful in communicating to a child the beauty of the English language deployed well.

 *
 A funny year, in retrospect, in that I read almost no SF or fantasy (Gene Wolfe excepted, and unless you count The Inheritors ), and read very few books that really had me properly hooked - I noted down quite a few two- and three-star reviews. But the ones that I loved, I really loved. 
 Do feel free to leave your own lists in the comments - I can never have enough recommendations for good reading material.

Posted by
 
 noisms 

at
 
 23:28 

19 comments:

 Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest 

 Monday, 25 April 2022 

 How Your Favourite Authors Cheat, Why That's OK, and Why Every DM Should Too 

 [Warning: this entry contains mild spoilers for A Song of Ice and Fire and The Book of the New Sun .]
 When reading an intricately-plotted novel, it is easy to fall into the trap of feeling intimidated by the author's great intellect and technical skill. How can this author have planned this all out in advance? 
 The truth of the matter is, it is almost certainly the case that the story was largely made up as the writer went along. (If memory serves, Bernard Cornwell and Kurt Vonnegut are notable exceptions.) They have followed Humpty Dumpty's advice and begun at the beginning and kept going until they have got to the end, and then stopped. The intricate plotting really just comes from the author using what he has already written as seeds for future plot developments ("I know, wouldn't it be interesting if the lady in the red hat from way back in Chapter Two turned out to be the sister of the dwarf who I've just written into Chapter Nine?"), and then going back and ret-conning things later to keep things tidy. It's a product of being constantly attentive to what one has written and how it might tie into what one is writing, or imagining, now - coming up with interesting premises, situations and characters and then making connections between them as one goes.
 Think, for example, of Dr Talos and Baldanders in The Book of the New Sun. I don't care how much has been read into that book, or Gene Wolfe's writing process, but you will have a hell of a job convincing me that those two didn't just appear as interesting figments of the imagination to begin with ("Wouldn't it be cool if Severian ended up in cahoots with a fox-like playwright and his giant companion?"), who Wolfe later on decided to bestow with much greater significance during the course of the writing of what became The Sword of the Lictor . He didn't plot out the entirety of their role before sitting down to begin the first sentence of The Shadow of the Torturer . He wove it into the telling of the story as it unfolded in the course of the writing. Once it was clear who Baldanders really was, and he had completed his first run-through of what would become the final version of the book, Wolfe then presumably went back and made all the necessary amendments in the rewrite so you couldn't see the "join". 
 Think also of Tyrion killing Tywin Lannister towards the end of A Storm of Swords . Did George RR Martin have it in mind that would happen at the start of writing A Game of Thrones ? Almost certainly not. The idea that Tyrion might end up killing Tywin may have crept up on him gradually over the course of writing the first drafts of the books, or occurred to him in a flash of insight, but it would have been something that emerged from the story - and how the relationship between those two characters, and the characters themselves, had developed in Martin's mind - during the initial writing process.
 What seems like very clever plotting, in other words, is clever, but it is really better described as clever rereading and rewriting. As readers, it is very easy to forget we are not reading the story as the writer wrote it. We are reading the final product of a long process of rewriting and editing: the final version that is presented to the world, not the first draft that was 100,000 words too long and will forever remain locked in the author's attic.
 It helps to bear this in mind as a DM. The idea that one could plot out "an adventure" in advance (except for a very simple and boring railroad), or could fill in all the details of a campaign setting before play commences, is a pie-in-the-sky. As with writing a novel, DMing is really an iterative process - it's just that while an author merely riffs on his own ideas, a DM can also riff on those of the players. Events transpire not because they were carefully detailed back before the start of the campaign itself. They transpire because the interesting locations and NPCs the DM has come up with, and the PCs' interactions with them, bring about connections in his mind. It's not that Steffi the Orc was intended to be the PCs' arch enemy all along. It's that Steffi the Orc was captured by the PCs after the rest of her companions were killed in a random encounter, and she was then released, and the DM thought, "Wouldn't it be interesting if she decided to get her revenge? And wouldn't it be nice if she teamed up with Cedric, the hireling the PCs kicked out of their party for stealing, after finding him wandering in the wilderness? And wouldn't it be good if the two of them decided to burgle the PCs' treasure stash while they were away...?"
 The exercise comes, in other words, not from pre-plotting, but plotting as a continuous process or flow.
 [I am running a Kickstarter throughout April. You can read more about it, and back it, here .] 
 [I also did a nice interview with the ever-interesting Solomon VK of Worldbuilding & Woolgathering here . You will find it relevant to your interests.] 

Posted by
 
 noisms 

at
 
 21:16 

25 comments:

 Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest 

 Monday, 15 April 2019 

 So. Farewell then... 

You will have probably heard of Gene Wolfe's death by now. 

This is a nice interview with him in the last year of his life. He begins slightly irascibly and maybe even rather shyly, but he warms up after the first 10 minutes or so. 

If you aren't already familiar with Wolfe's work, this is a very good opportunity for you to start. The Book of the New Sun is what he is rightly most famous for, but I think the Wolfe beginner would be better off starting with the Soldier of... series ( Solder of the Mist , Soldier of Arete, Soldier of Sidon ). I read these books a year or so ago after a recommendation from somebody commenting on an entry on this blog, of all places (which entry it was, I can't now remember; whoever it was who recommended it - thanks!), and I was blown away by them. They are the finest novels I've read in a very long time. That the series will now forever be unfinished seems also sadly apt.

Posted by
 
 noisms 

at
 
 20:38 

5 comments:

 Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest 

 Tuesday, 15 May 2018 

 Recommendations: Bartok, Wolfe, Dixon, Huss 

A few cultural artifacts I've been enjoying lately. The first is Bartok's music for the 1924 ballet "The Magnificent Mandarin". Here's the synopsis from wikipedia :

After an orchestral introduction depicting the chaos of the big city, the action begins in a room belonging to three tramps. They search their pockets and drawers for money, but find none. They then force a girl to stand by the window and attract passing men into the room. The girl begins a lockspiel — a "decoy game", or saucy dance. She first attracts a shabby old rake, who makes comical romantic gestures. The girl asks, "Got any money?" He replies, "Who needs money? All that matters is love." He begins to pursue the girl, growing more and more insistent until the tramps seize him and throw him out. 

The girl goes back to the window and performs a second lockspiel. This time she attracts a shy young man, who also has no money. He begins to dance with the girl. The dance grows more passionate, then the tramps jump him and throw him out too. 

The girl goes to the window again and begins her dance. The tramps and girl see a bizarre figure in the street, soon heard coming up the stairs. The tramps hide, and the figure, a Mandarin (wealthy Chinese man), stands immobile in the doorway. The tramps urge the girl to lure him closer. She begins another saucy dance, the Mandarin's passions slowly rising. Suddenly, he leaps up and embraces the girl. They struggle and she escapes; he begins to chase her. The tramps leap on him, strip him of his valuables, and attempt to suffocate him under pillows and blankets. However, he continues to stare at the girl. They stab him three times with a rusty sword; he almost falls, but throws himself again at the girl. The tramps grab him again and hang him from a lamp hook. The lamp falls, plunging the room into darkness, and the Mandarin's body begins to glow with an eerie blue-green light. The tramps and girl are terrified. Suddenly, the girl knows what they must do. She tells the tramps to release the Mandarin; they do. He leaps at the girl again, and this time she does not resist and they embrace. With the Mandarin's longing fulfilled, his wounds begin to bleed and he dies.

LIKE. Here's a rendition with the score:

The second is Gene Wolfe's Soldier of Arete . I can't remember who it was who recommended these books to me in the comments to a post on this blog, but whoever it was - thank you. Soldier of the Mist was one of the best fantasy books I had read in years. Soldier of Arete is even better. I would scarcely have thought that could be possible. I could also have scarcely have thought it possible that I could respect Wolfe's work more than I did already, but this, to me, is next-level stuff: in fact, I'm just going to go straight ahead and right now give him the coveted Noisms Award for Best Current Living Writer. It's him. Don't disagree. You're wrong.

The third is Judson Huss . Somebody shared some of his work on G+. It is so far up my alley it is practically right at the end of it, with the biggest, fattest rats, oldest piles of rotting waste, and most well-stowed mob hits. I mean, look at this stuff. It's like Dali, Bruegel, Bosch and Escher put in a blender and given the slightest hint of essence of Larry Elmore:

The fourth and final is Dougal Dixon's After Man: A Zoology of the Future . I must declare an interest: Breakdown Press, who are publishing it, are people I am working with and I've gamed with one of the people who run it. That may colour my appreciation for the book, but I doubt it. I was a fan of Dougal Dixon's work anyway - his Complete Book of Dinousaurs and Dinosaurs & Prehistoric Creatures are a huge inspiration for Behind Gently Smiling Jaws - but again, this is sort of next-level stuff: what do you get when an expert on evolution and paleontology gets to speculate about the future of evolution? Well, stuff like this:

Goes up there with Mythago Wood , Jin Ping Mei and Herodotus's Histories in the list of "Books I want to make into campaign settings".

Posted by
 
 noisms 

at
 
 21:21 

9 comments:

 Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest 

 Monday, 8 January 2024 

 Implied Magic, No Magic, Low Magic, Fake Magic 

 I mentioned in a previous post that I am currently reading The Masters , the first volume in the reworked Stone Dance of the Chameleon series. I vaguely remembered the original iteration of these books (then a trilogy) coming out at the end of the 90s, and I think I read bits of it, but this is something of a director's cut - if by that we mean a redux version that has more volumes (seven) but is actually slimmer and more efficiently told.
 I have been impressed by it so far - indeed, it has kindled within me the fire of enthusiasm for the fantasy genre, which I have not felt lo these many years. Fantasy's great sin has been its derivativeness of Tolkien (which manifests even in hostile responses to Tolkien's work, such as those by Moorcock, Harrison, Mieville, and so on); Pinto has I think managed the much rarer feat of copying Tolkien's approach without borrowing any of his furniture, even to react against - a thing which only a very small number of fantasy authors have been able to convincingly achieve. 
 Gene Wolfe is the obvious comparator here. I would not put Pinto in his class (though this may of course change as I read through the series), but the project feels to me to be similar: to create worlds which feel as Important and Resonant as Tolkien's Middle Earth, while being in all other respects only accidentally related. Pinto seems to have, whether intentionally or not, achieved this too, and it is in itself a feat worthy of respect - leaving to one side the fact that it is also a genuine page-turner from the start.
 There is another point of interesting comparison: Wolfe's Book of the New Sun feels infused with magic (in that case, of course, very advanced technology) but it exists in the background as a kind of permeating force, rather than a plot point or distinct field of knowledge. The characters don't behave as if there is some discrete, identifiable phenomenon such as 'magic' or 'technology'; where it exists at all it is a seamless part of their experience of the world. In Stone Dance of the Chameleon , we get a similar, but even more muted, sense that there is probably something magical going on somewhere, but if it is, it is so natural and normal to the characters that they do not really think of it at all - as a fish does not particularly pay attention to decorative statues in its nicely filtered tank.
 I like this type of setting, which I will call (I am not sure I have ever heard anybody name such a category) one with implied magic - implied because it never really comes out and makes the statement: 'A spell will now be cast!' 
 It is different to the no magic setting, where as the name suggests there is clearly no such thing as magic at all. The Viriconium stories spring to mind here, as do quite a lot of Moorcock's, and also probably most of A Song of Ice and Fire 's early volumes. There will be others, if I think hard enough. (Those Tad Williams books?) Here, it is often the case that having no magic is a statement of some kind - either a refutation of irrationalism or an insistence that the existence of magic pollutes the materiality of the fiction. It doesn't have to be that way, of course, and I have an abiding sense of attachment to the bits of A Song of Ice and Fire that read like a history of the Wars of the Roses happening on a different plane of existence.
 The classic low magic setting is Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings , where magic is rare, treated with suspicion, and is hinted to be corrupting. Would one put the Sword of Truth series in this category too? There will, again, be others for those willing to put their thinking caps on. Here, again, it often seems as though the decision for magic to be 'low' is more than an aesthetic choice; it hints that something symbolic is being said about the nature of power.
 I am not sure if I have ever come across a fictional setting in which all the characters believe that magic exists and has observable effects but it isn't in fact real (or in which the matter is never decided or made clear either way). This is true for RPG settings also, but could be interesting to experiment with: what if PC magic was all just a matter of legerdemain and bluff?

Posted by
 
 noisms 

at
 
 22:19 

16 comments:

 Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest 

 Next Posts 
 
 Home 

Subscribe to:
 Posts (Atom) 

 My Shop and Website

 Buy Yoon-Suin, the Fixed World, the Peridot, and Other Things 

 Flying Monkeys

 Noisms' Miscellany of RPG Creativity

 A Gaming Podcast About Nothing 

 Let's Read the AD&D 2nd Edition Monstrous Manual 

 Subscribe To

Posts

 Atom

Posts

All Comments

 Atom

All Comments

 Blog Archive

 ▼ 

2026
 
 (44) 

 ▼ 

September
 
 (2) 
 
 The Great North Title Opinion Forming Braintrust A... 

 The Succinct History of the Crocodilian Apocalypse 

 ► 

August
 
 (6) 

 ► 

July
 
 (7) 

 ► 

June
 
 (6) 

 ► 

May
 
 (3) 

 ► 

April
 
 (3) 

 ► 

March
 
 (9) 

 ► 

February
 
 (4) 

 ► 

January
 
 (4) 

 ► 

2025
 
 (67) 

 ► 

December
 
 (5) 

 ► 

November
 
 (8) 

 ► 

October
 
 (7) 

 ► 

September
 
 (1) 

 ► 

August
 
 (3) 

 ► 

July
 
 (6) 

 ► 

June
 
 (6) 

 ► 

May
 
 (5) 

 ► 

April
 
 (4) 

 ► 

March
 
 (8) 

 ► 

February
 
 (6) 

 ► 

January
 
 (8) 

 ► 

2024
 
 (81) 

 ► 

December
 
 (7) 

 ► 

November
 
 (4) 

 ► 

October
 
 (2) 

 ► 

September
 
 (6) 

 ► 

August
 
 (6) 

 ► 

July
 
 (8) 

 ► 

June
 
 (7) 

 ► 

May
 
 (7) 

 ► 

April
 
 (7) 

 ► 

March
 
 (9) 

 ► 

February
 
 (7) 

 ► 

January
 
 (11) 

 ► 

2023
 
 (105) 

 ► 

December
 
 (7) 

 ► 

November
 
 (13) 

 ► 

October
 
 (8) 

 ► 

September
 
 (8) 

 ► 

August
 
 (8) 

 ► 

July
 
 (6) 

 ► 

June
 
 (8) 

 ► 

May
 
 (8) 

 ► 

April
 
 (7) 

 ► 

March
 
 (8) 

 ► 

February
 
 (10) 

 ► 

January
 
 (14) 

 ► 

2022
 
 (101) 

 ► 

December
 
 (10) 

 ► 

November
 
 (9) 

 ► 

October
 
 (6) 

 ► 

September
 
 (7) 

 ► 

August
 
 (7) 

 ► 

July
 
 (5) 

 ► 

June
 
 (10) 

 ► 

May
 
 (5) 

 ► 

April
 
 (15) 

 ► 

March
 
 (8) 

 ► 

February
 
 (7) 

 ► 

January
 
 (12) 

 ► 

2021
 
 (92) 

 ► 

December
 
 (8) 

 ► 

November
 
 (9) 

 ► 

October
 
 (15) 

 ► 

September
 
 (13) 

 ► 

August
 
 (13) 

 ► 

July
 
 (4) 

 ► 

June
 
 (5) 

 ► 

May
 
 (13) 

 ► 

April
 
 (2) 

 ► 

March
 
 (3) 

 ► 

February
 
 (1) 

 ► 

January
 
 (6) 

 ► 

2020
 
 (97) 

 ► 

December
 
 (10) 

 ► 

November
 
 (8) 

 ► 

October
 
 (5) 

 ► 

September
 
 (6) 

 ► 

August
 
 (8) 

 ► 

July
 
 (7) 

 ► 

June
 
 (2) 

 ► 

May
 
 (11) 

 ► 

April
 
 (10) 

 ► 

March
 
 (16) 

 ► 

February
 
 (11) 

 ► 

January
 
 (3) 

 ► 

2019
 
 (143) 

 ► 

December
 
 (7) 

 ► 

November
 
 (2) 

 ► 

October
 
 (10) 

 ► 

September
 
 (9) 

 ► 

August
 
 (12) 

 ► 

July
 
 (10) 

 ► 

June
 
 (10) 

 ► 

May
 
 (13) 

 ► 

April
 
 (14) 

 ► 

March
 
 (19) 

 ► 

February
 
 (19) 

 ► 

January
 
 (18) 

 ► 

2018
 
 (89) 

 ► 

November
 
 (3) 

 ► 

October
 
 (11) 

 ► 

September
 
 (6) 

 ► 

August
 
 (6) 

 ► 

July
 
 (5) 

 ► 

June
 
 (8) 

 ► 

May
 
 (14) 

 ► 

April
 
 (7) 

 ► 

March
 
 (10) 

 ► 

February
 
 (9) 

 ► 

January
 
 (10) 

 ► 

2017
 
 (123) 

 ► 

December
 
 (5) 

 ► 

November
 
 (7) 

 ► 

October
 
 (5) 

 ► 

September
 
 (8) 

 ► 

August
 
 (13) 

 ► 

July
 
 (6) 

 ► 

June
 
 (11) 

 ► 

May
 
 (13) 

 ► 

April
 
 (9) 

 ► 

March
 
 (12) 

 ► 

February
 
 (16) 

 ► 

January
 
 (18) 

 ► 

2016
 
 (161) 

 ► 

December
 
 (6) 

 ► 

November
 
 (10) 

 ► 

October
 
 (9) 

 ► 

September
 
 (15) 

 ► 

August
 
 (12) 

 ► 

July
 
 (9) 

 ► 

June
 
 (16) 

 ► 

May
 
 (17) 

 ► 

April
 
 (10) 

 ► 

March
 
 (17) 

 ► 

February
 
 (22) 

 ► 

January
 
 (18) 

 ► 

2015
 
 (90) 

 ► 

December
 
 (6) 

 ► 

November
 
 (6) 

 ► 

October
 
 (7) 

 ► 

September
 
 (9) 

 ► 

August
 
 (10) 

 ► 

July
 
 (3) 

 ► 

June
 
 (6) 

 ► 

May
 
 (1) 

 ► 

April
 
 (8) 

 ► 

March
 
 (12) 

 ► 

February
 
 (7) 

 ► 

January
 
 (15) 

 ► 

2014
 
 (66) 

 ► 

December
 
 (7) 

 ► 

November
 
 (2) 

 ► 

October
 
 (2) 

 ► 

September
 
 (6) 

 ► 

August
 
 (2) 

 ► 

July
 
 (9) 

 ► 

June
 
 (1) 

 ► 

May
 
 (10) 

 ► 

April
 
 (11) 

 ► 

March
 
 (3) 

 ► 

February
 
 (1) 

 ► 

January
 
 (12) 

 ► 

2013
 
 (85) 

 ► 

December
 
 (3) 

 ► 

November
 
 (2) 

 ► 

October
 
 (9) 

 ► 

September
 
 (11) 

 ► 

August
 
 (15) 

 ► 

July
 
 (10) 

 ► 

June
 
 (10) 

 ► 

May
 
 (2) 

 ► 

April
 
 (8) 

 ► 

March
 
 (3) 

 ► 

February
 
 (6) 

 ► 

January
 
 (6) 

 ► 

2012
 
 (192) 

 ► 

December
 
 (13) 

 ► 

November
 
 (15) 

 ► 

October
 
 (19) 

 ► 

September
 
 (6) 

 ► 

August
 
 (14) 

 ► 

July
 
 (13) 

 ► 

June
 
 (8) 

 ► 

May
 
 (15) 

 ► 

April
 
 (14) 

 ► 

March
 
 (22) 

 ► 

February
 
 (24) 

 ► 

January
 
 (29) 

 ► 

2011
 
 (99) 

 ► 

December
 
 (5) 

 ► 

November
 
 (7) 

 ► 

October
 
 (13) 

 ► 

September
 
 (25) 

 ► 

August
 
 (31) 

 ► 

May
 
 (4) 

 ► 

March
 
 (1) 

 ► 

January
 
 (13) 

 ► 

2010
 
 (99) 

 ► 

October
 
 (4) 

 ► 

September
 
 (4) 

 ► 

August
 
 (3) 

 ► 

July
 
 (5) 

 ► 

June
 
 (7) 

 ► 

May
 
 (13) 

 ► 

April
 
 (12) 

 ► 

March
 
 (12) 

 ► 

February
 
 (17) 

 ► 

January
 
 (22) 

 ► 

2009
 
 (226) 

 ► 

December
 
 (10) 

 ► 

November
 
 (13) 

 ► 

October
 
 (16) 

 ► 

September
 
 (7) 

 ► 

August
 
 (17) 

 ► 

July
 
 (23) 

 ► 

June
 
 (20) 

 ► 

May
 
 (20) 

 ► 

April
 
 (25) 

 ► 

March
 
 (31) 

 ► 

February
 
 (25) 

 ► 

January
 
 (19) 

 ► 

2008
 
 (168) 

 ► 

December
 
 (20) 

 ► 

November
 
 (15) 

 ► 

October
 
 (18) 

 ► 

September
 
 (20) 

 ► 

August
 
 (19) 

 ► 

July
 
 (26) 

 ► 

June
 
 (32) 

 ► 

May
 
 (18) 

 My Blog List [which appears to be broken]

The Grand Tapestry 

[Music]

BARKING ALIEN 

A Star Wars Story...Solo

What a Horrible Night to Have a Curse... 

Selling Physical Books

Rise Up Comus 

The play's the thing

Bat in the Attic 

Development of the Majestic Fantasy RPG, Part 3

The Other Side blog 

Witchcraft Wednesday: The Three Laws of Witchcraft

World Building and Woolgathering 

July-August Miscellany 2026: Minting Imperials

B/X BLACKRAZOR 

Back Into The Woods

TEMPLE OF DEMOGORGON 

Marvel RPG - Ain't no party like a Quantum Scientist party!

Age of Dusk 

2026 Reading List – [May-August]

Throne of Salt 

Delta Green: Running Through Apocalypse Protocol

Roles, Rules, and Rolls 

TSR's module A3, Assault on the Aerie of the Slave Lords

Grand Commodore 

A Spot of the Old Voice Acting

Beyond the Black Gate 

Hasturi, City of Heroes

The Manse 

The BIG Spell Table

A Knight at the Opera 

Why I closed up shop

d4 Caltrops 

d100 - How Do Those Wizards Know Each Other?

The Setting to End All Settings 

Dragonlance: Law vs Chaos

Mazirian's Garden 

The Sacrament of the Minotaur

Vargold: The Wolf-Time 

2025: A Year's Reading

sword +1 

I have joined the cool kids on substack

Jeffs Gameblog 

jimbo update

Known World, Old World 

Experience with Python

Dungeonskull Mountain 

Escape, Engagement, and Eucatastrophe

Places to Go, People to Be 

Zombie Survival Escape USA

Peakrill 

This blog has moved - please update your feeds

Dark Horse Game Design 

Who Writes BTS Songs? Here Are 16 Songs Written by Them

destination unknown 

Legends of Gath #69; Two Skellies Under a Fig Tree

Joethelawyer's Wondrous Imaginings 

Classic Rock Artists as D&D Character Classes and Tropes

Ode to Black Dougal 

Nightmoor Abbey Level 1 Saturday Night Specials

Superhero Necromancer 

Using the Rainy City with Risus: The Anything RPG

Troll and Flame 

Old-School Essentials Online Tools and SRD

Lord of the Green Dragons 

Lake Geneva Original RPG Campaign: New EN World Column: #1

Tankards & Broadswords 

Wargaming Wednesday: The Pure Insanity of Warhammer 40,000

D and D Doodle 

SWORD & SHIELD 

FROSTCRAWL AVAILABLE NOW

Kellri 

Interview with Richard Barton, Author of Arden Vul

Unofficial Games 

So long and thanks for all the fish

Appendix N 

The West is Dying: Book 1 Fall of the First World

Swords & Wizardry Blog 

Old School Adventures Ep 0 | Roll20 Games Master Series

THE LAND OF NOD 

Eurafrika Attacks! [Campaign Idea]

Harbinger of Doom 

Meet the New Blog

Old School Heretic 

The Big Time, by Fritz Leiber

Savage Swords of Athanor 

Some King's Kent 

Permanently Deleting Blog on Tuesday

James Games 

Dog Food Coupons and Promo Codes

A Hamsterish Hoard of Dungeons and Dragons 

More Little Treasures

The Society of Torch, Pole and Rope 

Stonehell Dungeon: Into the Heart of Hell On Sale Now

RPG Creatures - a free online Bestiary 

The Tar'Bukhi

Cogito, ergo ludo. 

A new rpg blog

The Moldy Vale 

Keindahan Gunung Prau (Foto dan Catatan Perjalanan)

Save vs Pointy Stick 

Conventions I've been to

ChicagoWiz's RPG Blog 

Fin. With an update

Tran Eskoor an Doon 

SANDBOX EMPIRE 

Deep Carbon Observatory: The Flooded Land

Eye Candy for Bibliophiles 

Penguin Modern Classics 7–Miscellaneous

"The Troll Ate My Homework" 

North Texas RPG Con 2014 Lineup

Asshat Paladins 

[Savage Worlds] Alternate Hindrances

The Badger King's Den 

Happy new year!

Lunching on Lamias 

Deadened Emotions - The Ghosts of Wings

Vaults of Nagoh 

Lets Read Mythus pt 25

lokipan 

lokipan

Dragões & Masmorras 

New Website & Blog Live

An Old Gamemaster's Guide to the Universe 

the-underminer

Statecraft GSRPG 

statecraftgsrpg

The Underdark Gazette is Closing on January 2, 2012! 

Closing Today

Crit or Cruddy 

First Session Winter 2011

SHARK EMPIRE 

Adventures of Roadside Inns and Mysterious Charcacters

RPG Diehard 

After-action report: Tomorrow's War

Eiglophian Press 

eiglophian

QUANTIQUE 

News of the Weird (lands)

Kira Scott Art 

a new project

Confessions of Not a Grognard 

Kingdoms of Kalamar Play Report: Session III - Mopping up Bandits

Old Guard Gaming Accoutrements 

Under-rated items of adventuring equipage.

Dungeons and Dragons of Middle-earth 

Turn order and Initiative

RPG dumping ground 

New Blog

Adventures in Gaming 

More Dreaming Games

The Citadel of Eight 

Building the Sandbox

World of Thool 

Here's the promised heads-up

Sword & Shield 

The Call of the Dungeon 

Visually Uncreative 

HUGE RUINED PILE 

Mutant Foursome 

The Core Mechanic 

RPG Blog II 

Tarqis 

HeroPress 

Rach's reflections 

Blood of Prokopius 

Show 10

Show All

Simple theme. Powered by Blogger .