Skip to the content 

 Ultan's Library 

 a web resource for the study of Gene Wolfe

 Toggle the mobile menu 

 Toggle the search field 

 Home 

 Articles 
 
 Book of the New Sun 

 Fifth Head of Cerberus 

 Latro (Soldier) novels 

 Book Reviews 

 Interviews 

 News 

 About 
 
 Contributors 

 Search 

 Home 

 Articles 
 
 Book of the New Sun 

 Fifth Head of Cerberus 

 Latro (Soldier) novels 

 Book Reviews 

 Interviews 

 News 

 About 
 
 Contributors 

 Gene Wolfe 1931 – 2019 

 Latest:

 Gene Wolfe and The Pocket Book of Science-Fiction 30 May 2024 Wolfe said that Wollheim’s 1943 anthology was his gateway to discovering the science fiction pulps. Here, Michael Andre-Driussi explores one of Wolfe’s earliest influences.

 Micro-Wolfenomics: Joan Gordon reviews ‘Gene Wolfe’s First Four Novels: A Chapter Guide’ by Michael Andre-Driussi 23 November 2020 There are two kinds of Wolfeian criticism: macro and micro. Michael Andre-Driussi offers the micro, noting all the small details, word meanings and origins, specific allusions, patterns and inconsistencies in plot, time-lines, and so on, things very useful to us broad-stroke people.

 A Curiously Conflicted Book: Craig Brewer reviews ‘Interlibrary Loan’ 9 November 2020 This final work is not simply a coda to Wolfe’s career but an integral part of its working out of some of his most central concerns.

 A Weird Mystery: James Wynn considers Gene Wolfe’s ‘A Borrowed Man’ 26 October 2020 As a detective novel, this is not a puzzle. It’s a finger-trap.

 Review: Gene Wolfe’s ‘Operation ARES’ 3 August 2020 A review by Martin Crookall of Gene Wolfe’s problematic and rarely discussed first novel.

 Standing on the Shoulders of Giants – A Review of Michael Andre-Driussi’s ‘The Book of the New Sun: A Chapter Guide’ 20 July 2020 “While Andre-Driussi acknowledges the complexity and allusiveness of Wolfe’s work, his writing has always seemed to me the most objectively grounded and easiest to digest … of all the writers and analysts currently exploring Wolfe’s work.

 Here my pen shall halt, reader, though I do not. I have carried you from gate to gate – from the locked and fog-shrouded gate of the necropolis of Nessus to that cloud-racked gate we call the sky, the gate that shall lead me, as I hope, beyond the nearer stars.

My pen halts, though I do not. Reader, you will walk no more with me. It is time we both take up our lives.

 Gene Wolfe, The Citadel of the Autarch (1982) 

 Articles from Master Ultan’s scholars

 Gene Wolfe and The Pocket Book of Science-Fiction 

 Posthistory 201 

 Place Names in Gene Wolfe’s Soldier of the Mist 

 The Feast of Saint Katharine (with a “K”) 

 Proving Veil’s Hypothesis: Variance Reduction Techniques, Larval Life Cycles on an East Wind, and Shadow Children Riding Mars(c)hmen in The Fifth Head of Cerberus 

 Gene Wolfe’s time at Plant Engineering 

 The Religious Implications of Gene Wolfe’s The Book Of The New Sun 

 Japanese Lexicon for The Book of the New Sun 

 The Book of Gold… returns to Ultan’s Library 

 The Death of Catherine the Weal and Other Stories (1992) 

 Lions and Tigers and Bears . . . of the New Sun 

 Desanctifying Victor Trenchard: some notes on Peter Wright’s “Confounding the Skin and the Mask” 

 Confounding the Skin and the Mask: Gene Wolfe’s The Fifth Head of Cerberus and the Politics of Ambiguity 

 Torture and confession in Wolfe’s Book of the New Sun 

 The Reader as Augur: Beginnings and Endings in Gene Wolfe’s The Book of the Long Sun 

 Five Steps towards Briah: Gene Wolfe’s The Book of the Long Sun 

 Some Greek Themes in Gene Wolfe’s Latro novels 

 Reviews from Master Ultan’s shelves

 Micro-Wolfenomics: Joan Gordon reviews ‘Gene Wolfe’s First Four Novels: A Chapter Guide’ by Michael Andre-Driussi 

 A Curiously Conflicted Book: Craig Brewer reviews ‘Interlibrary Loan’ 

 A Weird Mystery: James Wynn considers Gene Wolfe’s ‘A Borrowed Man’ 

 Review: Gene Wolfe’s ‘Operation ARES’ 

 Standing on the Shoulders of Giants – A Review of Michael Andre-Driussi’s ‘The Book of the New Sun: A Chapter Guide’ 

 Mapping a Masterwork: A Critical Review of Gene Wolfe’s The Book of the New Sun 

 The Fifth Head of Cerberus reviewed 

 Strange Travelers reviewed 

 Harmonies and Mysteries: a review of Gene Wolfe’s On Blue’s Waters 

 Conversations with acolytes

 Everything has to be true somehow 

 An Homage to my Honorary Grandfather 

 What would it be like… 

 Me & Gene – by Stephen Palmer 

 Shadows of the New Sun: an interview with Judi Rohrig 

 Shadows of the New Sun: Nancy Kress 

 Shadows of the New Sun: Marc Aramini 

 An interview with artist Bruce Pennington 

 “The Lupine Scholar” – an interview with Michael Andre-Driussi 

 “Tell me about the Lexicon Urthus”: an interview with Michael Andre-Driussi 

 Contact Master Ultan
 Jonathan and Nigel can be contacted at:

ultan01 [at] yahoo.co.uk

 Subscribe to Blog via Email

 Enter your email address to subscribe to this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email.

 Email Address 

 Subscribe 

 Join 57 other subscribers. 

 Recently

 Gene Wolfe and The Pocket Book of Science-Fiction

 30 May 2024

 Micro-Wolfenomics: Joan Gordon reviews ‘Gene Wolfe’s First Four Novels: A Chapter Guide’ by Michael Andre-Driussi

 23 November 2020

 A Curiously Conflicted Book: Craig Brewer reviews ‘Interlibrary Loan’

 9 November 2020

 A Weird Mystery: James Wynn considers Gene Wolfe’s ‘A Borrowed Man’

 26 October 2020

 Review: Gene Wolfe’s ‘Operation ARES’

 3 August 2020

 Meta

 Log in 

 Entries feed 

 Comments feed 

 WordPress.org 

 Powered by WordPress & Theme by Anders Norén