 
 
 
 
Lost in Translation: How the perception of Characters changes in the German 
Translations of J.R.R. Tolkiens The Lord of the Rings 
 
Lost in Translation: Wie sich die Wahrnehmung von Charakteren in den deutschen 
Übersetzungen von J.R.R. Tolkiens The Lord of the Rings verändert 
 
 
by 
Alexander Held 
 
 
A thesis 
presented to the University of Waterloo 
and the Universität Mannheim 
in fulfilment of the 
thesis requirement for the degree of 
Master of Arts 
in 
Intercultural German Studies 
 
 
 
Waterloo, Ontario, Canada / Mannheim, Germany 2021 
 
© Alexander Held 2021
 
 
ii 
 
Author's Declaration 
I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. This is a true copy of the thesis, 
including any required final revisions, as accepted by my examiners. 
I understand that my thesis may be made electronically available to the public. 
 
 
 
 
Ehrenwörtliche Erklärung 
Ich versichere, dass ich die Arbeit  selbstständig und ohne Benutzung anderer als der  
angegebenen Hilfsmittel angefertigt habe. Alle Stellen, die wörtlich oder sinngemäß aus  
Veröffentlichungen in schriftlicher oder elektronischer Form entnommen sind, habe ich als  
solche unter Angabe der Quel le kenntlich gemacht. Mir ist bekannt, dass im Falle einer 
falschen Versicherung die Arbeit mit „nicht ausreichend“ bewertet  wird. Ich bin ferner damit  
einverstanden, dass meine Arbeit zum Zwecke eines Plagiatsabgleichs in elektronischer Form 
versendet und gespeichert werden kann. 
 
 
Zwingenberg, 29.07.2021 
 
 
iii 
 
Abstract 
It is an accepted paradigm that translated texts will never be the perfect equivalent to the 
original text in a different language. It is a fact that foreign literary works will influence a 
culture through translations. However, this influence of the translation will usually be 
attributed to the author of the original work, not to the translator. 
The aim of this study is to raise awareness of the influence of the translator rather  than the 
author, and thus to kill the author of the examined work, J.R.R. Tolkien's The Lord of the 
Rings, twice: once as the author influencing the German (fantasy) literature through the 
German translations of Margaret Carroux and Wolfgang Krege, and a second time  as 
authoritative figure in the academic field of Tolkien studies. 
To this end, the three text versions have been read following the hermeneutic approach of 
Paul Ricœur and subscribing to Roland Barthes Death of the Author paradigm. In this stud y, 
the most significant differences have been analyzed, making the impact of the translators on 
character perception, and, thus, on the influence of The Lord of the Rings, obvious. 
The analysis resulted in a plethora of significant differences between the three text versions, 
confirming that translations may deviate from the original work even when translating 
sentence-for-sentence. The changes include a discussion of xenophobia and racism, thinning 
the lines of social standings and relations, and many more . I argue that these differences are 
in themselves an argument for killing the author in Tolkien studies, creating an opportunity to 
discuss these aspects introduced by translators, and that they are evidence for how translators 
influence their culture as much as the author. 
  
 
 
iv 
 
Acknowledgements 
I would like to thank Prof. Paul Malone of the Department of Germanic and Slavic Studies at 
the University of Waterloo, for his guidance in this project from a confused e -mail about 
"translations and stuff" I sent him in the Summer of 2020, to the development of the idea of 
this thesis, to research and, finally, to this final product. He continuously led me to the next 
crossroads, while leaving the choice of left, right, or center to me. Thank you! 
 
I would also like t o thank Prof. Thomas Wortmann of the Philosophische Fakultät at the 
Universität Mannheim for his enthusiastic agreement to be the second supervisor of this 
thesis. Danke! 
 
I further extend my thanks to the faculty, students, and staff at both universities who had my 
back in various academic and bureaucratic challenges.  
 
Finally, I would like to thank my friends around the world, who gave me a safe space to cool 
down whenever I needed one, and my family for the constant support across the board and 
from all sides.  
 
 
v 
 
Table of Contents 
1. Introduction ............................................................................................................................ 1 
2. Literature Review................................................................................................................... 3 
2.1 Translation Theory ........................................................................................................... 3 
2.2 Literature Theory ............................................................................................................. 7 
2.3 Tolkien-Specific Literature ............................................................................................ 11 
3. Methodology ........................................................................................................................ 16 
4. General Comparison ............................................................................................................ 20 
5. Analysis................................................................................................................................ 29 
5.1 The Black Riders............................................................................................................ 30 
5.2 Gollum ........................................................................................................................... 43 
5.3 Galadriel ......................................................................................................................... 50 
5.4 Other Characters And Scenes ........................................................................................ 59 
5.4.1 Boromir ................................................................................................................... 59 
5.4.2 Aragorn/Strider ....................................................................................................... 62 
5.4.3 Denethor .................................................................................................................. 64 
6. Analysis: Results .................................................................................................................. 66 
6.1  Result 1: Translations In Literature Studies.................................................................. 67 
6.2  Result 2: Tolkien Studies .............................................................................................. 70 
7. Conclusion ........................................................................................................................... 72 
 
 
 
1 
 
1. Introduction 
 John Ronald Reuel Tolkien  first published The Lord of the Rings  in 1954 and 1955  
(split into three volumes) , expanding his text -world of Middle -Earth from the small 
confinement of The Hobbit  into something bigger, a world that mesmerized readers for 
decades to come and brought forth one of the most successful franchis es of our time . It was 
adapted into multiple other media, the most well-known adaptation being Peter Jackson's 
movie trilogy in 2001 to 2003. Even in the current year of 2021, almost 50 years after the 
author's death, people across the world are looking forward to more content around Tolkien's 
Middle-Earth, with the current publication on the horizon being a TV Series around the 
Second Age of Tolkien's world. 
 Translators across the world undoubtedly played a  huge part of the international 
success of Tolkie n's work, translating The Lord of the Rings  into dozens of languages. In 
some languages it was even translated twice, like in German.  
 In this study, I will e xamine three different versions of The Lord of the Rings  
(henceforth LotR), focusing on differences in the perception of characters in the text-world by 
readers of the three versions. The three versions I will examine are the English text by J.R.R. 
Tolkien, using the 50 th Anniversary Edition from 2004; the German translation by Margaret 
Carroux, using the 12 th edition from 1984, originally published 1969 -1970; and the German 
translation by Wolfgang Krege, using the 10th edition 2002, originally published in 2000. 
 I will take an in-depth look at how translation decisions by Carroux and Krege change 
the perception readers have of their characters compared to the same characters in the 
respective other versions of the text. Towards this goal, I will first compare both translations 
in their overall translation strategy, showing how their approache s to LotR were different 
from each other. Next, I will examine what I call "meaningful differences" in the text and 
explain why the excerpts I show in this study are meaningful, and which impact they have on 
 
2 
 
the perception of the characters acting in, or b eing talked about in these excerpts. These 
excerpts will include utterances by characters, but also how characters are framed by the 
narrator throughout the text. 
 The goal of this examination is to show the impact translations  have on the 
interpretation of the translated text, especially by academics of literature studies. Thus, the 
goal is at the same time to show the implications of working with translations in literature 
studies. Towards this end, I work with a hermeneutic approach following Ricœur. I argue that 
translations change the clues the text provides for the construction of possible meanings, 
leading to different possible interpretations, even when working with the "same" text. 
 Building upon this goal I then pursue a follow -up goal of this stud y. That goal entails 
pointing out that translations have an impact on the target cultures, especially on the future 
texts produced by these cultures. By establishing this impact, the goal is to emphasize the 
importance of working with translations in the a cademic field of literature studies, instead of 
only working with texts originally produced in the respective language. 
  
 
3 
 
2. Literature Review 
 Before the analysis begins, it is necessary to introduce some theoretical background I 
will be referencing in th is study. This includes translation studies, literature studies, but also 
studies done exclusively around Tolkien and his works as well as specific terms used in these 
academic fields, which will be explained below. 
2.1 TRANSLATION THEORY 
Two terms which w ill be frequently used in this study are the terms Source Language (SL) 
and Target Language (TL). In translation studies, TL is the language the translator translates 
into, creating the target text (TT), while SL is the language the source text (ST) is written in 
(or spoken in, in verbal translation). In the case of this study's subject, the SL is English 
(Tolkien's text), while the TL is German (Carroux's and Krege's texts). The translator's role 
then is that of a mediator between SL and TL, or as Rainer Nagel phrases it:  
 The specific mediation a translator performs is that of mediating between the speakers 
 of two langua ges, implying that speakers of the target language (TL), the one he is 
 translating for, are not (or at least not sufficiently) familiar with the source language 
 (SL). This means that first he has to process and understand (and interpret) the SL text 
 before he can go on to produce a derived version of that text in the target language. 
 ("New One" 22) 
Nagel paraphrases the terms SL and TL and  one of many definitions of  the role of the 
translator in translation studies , but this quote is a good starting poi nt to talk about more 
controversies that kept (and still keep) translation studies theorists busy for a long time. 
 In this passage, Nagel states that it is implied that TL speakers are not sufficiently 
familiar with the SL to be able to process the ST the mselves. This is not a general statement: 
it is not supposed to imply that all TL speakers are unable to understand the SL. It is 
 
4 
 
supposed to show the premise the translator should start from in his work: making the 
inaccessible accessible.  
 When making t he inaccessible accessible, the translator always creates an 
interpretation of the ST, as Nagel mentions. Venuti in The Translator's Invisibility  quotes 
Derrida as follows: 
 Translation is a process by which the chain of signifiers that constitutes the for eign 
 text is replaced by a chain of signifiers in the translating language which the translator 
 provides on the strength of an interpretation. Because meaning is an effect of relations 
 and differences among signifiers along a potentially endless chain ( polysemous, 
 intertextual, subject to infinite linkages), it is always differential and deferred, never 
 present as on original unity. (13) 
This part of translation as interpretation will be further elaborated in 2.2. 
 Due to the subject of this study, I w ill analyze translations on a small word -for-word 
or sentence-for-sentence scale of translation. In this analysis, I will show and argue that while 
it is possible to transpose a message signifier by signifier (at least between German and 
English), addition al issues arise even then, due to the task of interpretation done by the 
translator: in this signifier -by-signifier translation, the translator can, on purpose or by 
accident, change the possible perceived message (see 2.2). In these cases, then, it can be  
argued that the translator did so on purpose, and it is possible that they follow a larger scale 
translation strategy. 
 In The Translator's Invisibility , Laurence Venuti discusses two different large -scale 
strategies translators have used to make the inac cessible source text accessible for their 
audience: "foreignizing" and "domesticating" translations. Venuti writes: 
 Admitting … that translation can never be completely adequate to the foreign text, 
 Schleiermacher allowed the translator to choose between  a domesticating practice, an 
 
5 
 
 ethnocentric reduction of the foreign text to receiving cultural values, bringing the 
 author back home, and a foreignizing practice, an ethnodeviant pressure on those 
 values to register the linguistic and cultural differences of the foreign text, sending the 
 reader abroad. (15) 
In other words, a domesticated text is a text that was changed to fit the Target Culture, the 
culture the TL is spoken in, while a foreignized text is a text mimicking the ST in stylistic, 
linguistic and cultural properties.  
 In the opening chapter of The Translator's Invisibility  Venuti writes under "The 
regime of fluency": 
 A translated text … is judged acceptable by most publishers, reviewers and readers, 
 when it reads fluently, when the absence of any linguistic or stylistic peculiarities 
 makes it seem transparent, giving the appearance that it reflects the foreign writer's 
 personality or intention or the essential meaning of the foreign text – the appearance 
 in other words, that the translation is not in fact a translation, but the "original". (1) 
This describes Venuti's idea of a domesticated text: when the translated text was adapted to 
the TL so much that it is not apparent to the reader anymore that they are reading a translated 
work that was originally written in a different language. A "foreignized" text then is the 
opposite:  
 Foreignizing translation signifies the differences of the foreign text, yet only by 
 disrupting the cultural codes that prevail in the translating language. In its effort to do 
 right abroad, this translation practice must do wrong at home, deviating enoug h from 
 native norms to stage an alien reading experience. (15) 
Thus, when reading a foreignized text, the reader will notice that they, in fact, read a 
translation of a foreign text and not a text initially written in the language they are reading it 
 
6 
 
in. However, this is not due to the translator using subpar style on purpose, but due to the 
foreign source's culture being preserved. 
 As a part of this study, I will also attempt to determine whether the Carroux and 
Krege translations, respectively, could be  dubbed as domesticated or as foreignized 
translations. 
 When talking about foreignized and domesticated translations, the word "culture" 
appeared repeatedly. Reiß and Vermeer list five "refractions" in Towards a General Theory 
of Translational Action  in t heir passage about "Language and Culture": Culture -specific 
conventions (or traditions), individual attitude (or disposition), different realities (or 'possible 
worlds'), frozen traditions, and value systems (23). Each of these cultural refractions, they 
argue, can cause translation problems (24). 
 However, Reiß and Vermeer do not work towards a differentiation of foreignizing and 
domesticating translations, but, as the title of their book suggests, towards a theory of 
translation, known as the skopos theory. It states: 
(1) A translatum is determined by its skopos. … 
(2) A translatum is an offer of information in a target culture and language about an 
offer of information in a source culture and language. … 
(3) A translatum is a unique, irreversible mapping of a source -culture offer of 
information. … 
(4) A translatum must be coherent in itself. … 
(5) A translatum must be coherent with the source text. … 
(6) These rules are interdependent and linked hierarchically in the order set out above. 
(Reiß and Vermeer 107) 
The most central pa rt of this theory lies within (1), the skopos. In short, the skopos is the 
purpose behind the translational action, which, according to (1), determines the translation: 
 
7 
 
"Given that translational action is a specific form of interaction, it is more importan t that a 
particular translational purpose be achieved than the translation process be carried out in a 
particular way ." (Reiß and Vermeer 89) or: " A translational action is governed by its 
purpose." (85). To determine the skopos of a translation, the trans lator first needs to 
determine the target audience, Reiß and Vermeer argue: "A skopos cannot be set unless the 
target audience can be assessed. If the target audience is not known, it is impossible to decide 
whether or nor a particular function makes sense for them." (91). 
 In this study, I will argue that Krege, whether on purpose or by accident, follows the 
skopos theory in his translation, following Rainer Nagel (see 2.3). 
2.2 LITERATURE THEORY 
This study is in huge parts also a literature studies study, thus it can not operate solely on 
translation studies. Arguably the most important literature theory discussion to touch on here 
is the discussion on the authority of the author. 
 Due to the subj ect of the study being two translations and the original text, the 
relationship of the author of the original text is an unusual one compared to the majority of 
literature studies texts. For example, Roland Barthes published his essay La mort de l'auteur  
in 1967, claiming the – translated - Death of the Author. Paraphrased, he claims that the 
author of a text has no greater authority over that text than any literature critic or other reader, 
as the text should speak for itself. Thus, one should not ask the author to decipher a text but 
presume that the reader has all the tools needed; in extension, a text should be able to be 
understood without the help of the author. 
 What does this mean for translations? I argue that one can read translations as the 
interpretation of a reader – in fact it would be difficult to argue otherwise. A translation, then, 
is the original text as the translator, the "first reader" so to say, read it. From a purely 
literature studies perspective, it is then the same whether it was wr itten down in the same 
 
8 
 
language as the original text or whether it was written down in a different language: one way 
or the other, the reader is confronted with an interpretation, and yet again we kill the author; 
this time the interpreting translator. It does not matter what interpretation of the original text 
the translation was supposed to show according to the translator, what matters is what the text 
actually shows to the reader. This also means that any influence Tolkien or editors may have 
had on the  translations (as was the case in Carroux's translation, see Stopfel 11) is not 
important for the understanding of the text. 
 Allan Turner in Translating Tolkien  (see 2.3) attempts to make an exception to the 
Death of the Author in the case of (Tolkien) tr anslations: he argues, that, "while the critic 
may opt for multiple interpretations, … the translator normally has to produce just one target 
text" and "in translation there may be a valid part for both the author and the translator to play. 
… [T]he author  may clarify ideas for the translator, and … the translator may be helping to 
create meaning(s) of the text in the target culture" (60). However, this is a weak counter -
argument as the same reasoning for the Death of the Author works here as well: if the a uthor 
manages to convey his intended meaning(s) in the text, the translator does not need to consult 
the author to "clarify ideas" and will "create meaning(s)" of his own according to the 
meaning(s) they gathered from reading the ST. If the author did not manage to convey his 
intended meaning(s) in the ST, the translator would not translate the ST when consulting the 
author for the meaning(s), but create a new text that can not be seen as a translation any 
longer. It is of course possible that the translato r makes mistakes or misunderstands the 
semantics of a rare phrase in his second language; however, to quote Turner: "key issues will 
come across clearly in translation even if some of the fine detail is inevitably lost at word 
level" (53). 
 The subject of this study is the change of the reader's perception of the text, more 
specifically the characters, due to differences in the three text versions. In other words, it is 
 
9 
 
concerned with differing possible interpretations of characters and their actions. Thus,  this 
study can be situated within the literature studies  sub-field of hermeneutics; not as a 
contribution to hermeneutic theory, but as a study that applies hermeneutics in practice. 
 Paul Ricœur writes in The Task of Hermeneutics  about interpretation: "it consists in 
recognising which relatively univocal message the speaker has constructed on the polysemic 
basis of the common lexicon" (4), where polysemy is ""the feature by which our words have 
more than one meaning when considere d outside of their use in a determinate context" ( Task 
4). Thus, interpretation is the activity of choosing a possible meaning of an ambiguous word 
or phrase or paragraph. One immediately recognizes the similarities of Ricœur's theory of 
hermeneutic interp retation and Derrida's description of the task of a translator quoted by 
Venuti in 2.1. 
 Following Heidegger, and in accordance to Roland Barthes, Ricœur rejects the idea of 
early hermeneutics that the reader should attempt to grasp the meaning the author gave the 
text: "the text must be unfolded, no longer towards its author, but towards its immanent sense 
and towards the world which it opens up and discloses" (  Task 13). Thus, the reader 
constructs the meaning of a text: 
 Why must we 'construct' the meani ng of a text? First, because it is written: in the 
 asymmetrical relation between the text and the reader, one of the partners speaks for 
 both. … Reading resembles … the performance of a musical piece regulated by 
 written notations of the score. For the text is an autonomous space of meaning which 
 is no longer animated by the intentions of its author; the autonomy of the text, 
 deprived of this essential support, hands writing over to the sole interpretation of the 
 reader. 
 A second reason is that the t ext is not only something written, but is a work, that is, a 
 singular totality. As a totality, the literary work cannot be reduced to a sequence of 
 
10 
 
 sentences which are individually intelligible; rather, it is an architecture of themes and 
 purposes which can be constructed in several ways … and it is by constructing the 
 details that we build up the whole. (Metaphor 136) 
Thus, while the reader constructs the meaning of the text, he is also limited in his 
interpretation by the fact that the text is a singu lar totality; Ricœur elaborates later on: "As 
Hirsch says in Validity in Interpretation , there are no rules for making good guesses, but 
there are methods for validating our guesses" ( Metaphor 137); thus, any constructed meaning 
should be validated by the text. Ricœur: "the construction rests upon 'clues' contained in the 
text itself. A clue serves as a guide for a specific construction, in that it contains at once a 
permission and a prohibition; it excludes unsuitable constructions and allows those which 
give more meaning to the same words" (137). 
 In the context of Ricœur's hermeneutic approach I will also mention Norbert Greiner's 
book Übersetzung und Literaturwissenschaft . As the title ( translation and literature studies) 
suggests, this book is intereste d in the effect of translation on the works of literature studies 
and thus can be situated both in translation studies and literature studies. 
 In the passage "Übersetzung u nd Interpretation" (Translation and Interpretation), 
Greiner writes: 
 Ein allgemein bekannter Grundsatz der philosophischen Hermeneutik besagt, daß sich 
 das Verstehen eines Textes immer nur als Gespräch zwischen Interpreten und dem 
 Sinnangebot des Textes vollzieht, daß sich also das Verstehen eines Textes nicht nur 
 aus dem ergibt, was im Text angelegt ist, sondern in gleichem Maße aus dem, was als 
 Erwartungshaltung und Sinnhorizont des Interpreten an ihn herangetragen wird. 
 Insofern ist jedes Übersetzen mehr als die Übersetzung einer Sprachäußerung, 
 sondern stets eine … Interpretation eines literarischen Werkes. Darin liegt ein weiterer 
 Grund für die zwangsläufig gegebene Abweichung der Übersetzung vom Original: der 
 
11 
 
 Umstand nämlich, daß zwischen dem übersetzten Text und dem Original immer ein 
 Verständnis des originalen Textes zwis chengeschaltet ist … [D]er Übersetzer 
 [unterliegt] als Interpret den hermeneutischen Bedingungen des Verstehens: Er erstellt 
 den Sinn des Werks durch seine Lektüre, faßt dieses Ergebnis in neue Sprache, in 
 neue Worte. Insofern ist jede Übersetzung im gu ten Sinne vorläufig, Teil eines nicht 
 endenden Rezeptions- bzw. Interpretationsprozesses. (105) 
To vaguely translate: there is a  hermeneutic theory that understanding a text results from a 
sort of conversation between the reader and the clues for meaning in the text (to use Ricœur's 
words). Thus, the understanding of a text results not only from what the text offers, but also 
from the expectations and experiences of the reader who reads the text. This means that 
translation is more than transposing an utte rance into a different language, but also involves 
the interpretation of a literary work. Thus, the translation will always deviate from the 
original, as between reading the original and writing the translation, the translator goes 
through the process of h ermeneutic interpretation: while reading the original, the translator 
constructs the meaning of the text and then attempts to express this meaning in a new 
language. Any translation, then, is only a part of a never -ending process of reception and 
interpretation. 
 Greiner also mentions that a translator will always be influenced by previous 
translations (and, thus, interpretations) of the same text, and raises the possibility of 
consciously interpreting the text differently than older translations (106). 
2.3 TOLKIEN-SPECIFIC LITERATURE 
Tolkien's LotR has been heavily discussed since its publication in the 1950s. Thus, it is not 
surprising that a lot of literature has been written specifically about this work, and more 
specific about the translations of this work. Some of these texts have been written by Tolkien 
himself, such as the Guide to the Names in The Lord of the Rings , also known as 
 
12 
 
Nomenclature of the Lord of the Rings , as it is cited in The Lord of the Rings. A Reader's 
Companion (pp. 750 -779). The Guide gives instructions to translators how t o translate the 
names of people, characters or places and singular words or phrases (such as "Elder Days" or 
"Tale of Years"). 
 Additionally, Tolkien wrote about translations in LotR itself, namely in Appendix F 
II: "On Translations" (pp. 1133 -1138). Here Tolkien explains the linguistic workings of his 
pseudotranslation, as the books are, in Tolkien's text -world, a translation into English from 
the fictional Red Book of Westmarch. In Appendix F then, Tolkien explains how he 
translated names, which characteristics of the fictional language Westron Tolkien attempted 
to show in his writing choices and why some characters and/or races use a different style of 
speech from each other. Some parts of Westron Tolkien wanted to express he found to be 
impossible to express in English, hoping that translations into other languages may be able to 
express it, for example: 
 One point in the divergence may here be noted, since, though important, it has proved 
 impossible to represent. The Westron tongue made in the pronouns of the second 
 person (and often also in those of the third) a distinction, independent of number, 
 between 'familiar' and 'deferential' forms. It was, however, one of the peculiarities of 
 Shire-usage that the deferential forms had gone out of colloquial use. … Peregrin 
 Took, for instance, in his first few days in Minas Tirith used the familiar for people of 
 all ranks, including the Lord Denethor himself. (Tolkien 1133) 
However, both translations translated Pippin's speech pattern towards Denethor rather formal, 
ignoring this passage, even though the German language has the means to distinguish familiar 
and deferential pronouns with "Du" and "Ihr/Sie". Tolkien's guidelines for the translation of 
names, however, were followed in both translations, leading to very homogeneous names 
between both German versions. 
 
13 
 
 The most in-depth work on Tolkien translation is probably Allan Turners Translating 
Tolkien. In this book, Turner approaches LotR as he believes Tolkien approached it, from a 
philological angle, and examines how translations worked around the rich linguistic 
background of Tolkien's text -world; for example, Turner points out that the Rohirrim's 
language is based on Old English, which shows in their usage of the word "cunning" as 
"skillful" rather than "deceitful" and the following ambiguous meaning of Saruman's tower 
Orthanc, which is supposed to mean "Cunning Mind" – as in "skillful" when it was built, but 
as in "deceitful" when it is the homebase of Saruman (see Turner 31). 
 While Turner's theoretical framework is not the same used in this study (as he uses a 
hermeneutic approach based on "reconstructing the author's literary design" (182)), working 
with Translating Tolkien  proved to be useful nonetheless: Turner explains multiple issues 
translators are facing when translating LotR, some of which directly or indirectly influence 
the translation of characters as well, for example the (in Tolkien criticism) popular theory of 
the Shire as a representation of an idealized rural society in ~1900 England, or the literary 
device of the pseudotranslation as explained above. While I disagree with Turner's author -
centered methodology, I will reference some of his results and theories throughout this study. 
 Rainer Nagel compares the two German Translations in ""The New One Wants to 
Assimilate the Alien." Different Interpretations of a Source Text as a Reason for 
Controversy: The 'Old' and the 'New' German Translation of The Lord of the Rings " and the 
German counterpart to that article, "Verschiedene Interpretationen eines Textes als Grundlage 
von Übersetzungsstrategien. Die "alte" und die "neue" deutsche HdR -Übersetzung1". Due to 
minor differences between the articles I will reference the English version if possible, while 
referencing the German version if needed ( e.g. for the terms "Funktionsäquivalenz" and 
 
1 HdR = Herr der Ringe, the German title of LotR. 
 
14 
 
"Formäquivalenz" which only appear in the German version, see below); statements in the 
form of "Nagel argues …" in this study generally refer to both articles.  
 Nagel points out some core differences between t he two German translations, 
labelling Carroux's translation as "formäquivalent" (formally equivalent) and Krege's 
translation as "funktionsäquivalent" (dynamically equivalent). According to Nagel, Carroux 
remains "as 'loyal' to the text as was possible wit hout sacrificing the need to create a readable 
German text" ( "New One" 25). This so -called loyalty, according to Nagel, leads "up to the 
point of producing awkward German" ( "New One" 48). Krege, on the other hand "is more 
fluent, but takes unnecessary libe rties with [Tolkien's original version]" ( "New One" 48), for 
example "[Krege] does have a certain tendency of explaining things to the reader in places 
where further explanations are not really necessary" ( "New One " 37). Both claims will be 
examined in this study. 
 With Duzen und Ihrzen in the German Translation of Th e Lord of the Rings Arden R. 
Smith contributed an analysis of the usage of "Du", "Ihr" and "Sie" (and their respective 
forms) as translations of "you" and "thou" (and their respective forms) in the translation of 
Margaret Carroux. This article will be referenced when transla tion choices of "you" and/or 
"thou" in German change the perception of characters. Since the article was published before 
the translation by Wolfgang Krege, the missing information will be provided by my own 
research. 
 Lastly, Susanne Stopfel offers a shor t comparison of the German LotR translations in 
Traitors and Translators: Three German Versions of the Lord of the Rings . The third version 
mentioned in the title is a "corrected and revised" version of the Carroux translation 
published in 1991 that went o ut of print quickly (Stopfel 12). In her comparison, Stopfel 
points out some of the differences Rainer Nagel talked about in his article as well, but also 
introduces a criticism of Krege's translation implying an erasure of anything that could be 
 
15 
 
understood as homoerotic scenes (Stopfel 13 -14). This criticism (or accusation) of 
homophobic tendencies will be discussed later in this study as well. 
  
 
16 
 
3. Methodology 
 It is important to note that this study started as a translation theory study before it 
became a study concerned with LotR. The reason why LotR became the subject of this study 
was simply due to practical reasons: my knowledge of the text, the fact that th ere were two 
German translations, and easy access to the English text as well as both German translations. 
Thus, I approached LotR looking for meaningful differences in the translations, opposed to 
noticing such a difference and then examining the whole book. 
 My definition of  "meaningful differences " are  such differences between the text 
version in which semantics or syntax was changed in translation, compared to the "usual" 
differences one can observe in almost every sentence between the Krege and Carroux  
translation, as every sentence can be translated slightly differently. However, changes in 
syntax (e.g. splitting phrases or combining them) and semantics (especially polysemic words 
or phrases, but also idioms) can be meaningful. 
 In this study, I quote such differences by quoting all three text -versions in a table, 
with the left -most column showing the citations, and the other three columns showing the 
quotations in the order of Tolkien – Carroux – Krege. Since the version of Carroux's 
translation I am w orking with is split into three volumes, I will cite Carroux as I:22 for page 
22 in the first volume, or III:123 for page 123 in the third volume. An example: 
Tolkien 375 
Carroux I:453 
Krege 404 
In this box there 
is earth from my 
orchard, and such 
blessing as 
Galadriel has still 
to bestow upon it. 
In diesem Kästchen 
ist Erde aus meinem 
Obstgarten, und was 
Galadriel noch an 
Zaubersegen zu 
vergeben hat, ruht 
darauf. 
In der Schachtel 
ist Erde aus meinem 
Obstgarten, mit 
allem Segen, den 
Galadriel noch 
verleihen kann. 
 In this table, I am citing Tolkien 375 (English -text column), Carroux I:453 (middle 
text column) and Krege 404 (right -most column). This excerpt is an example for a 
meaningful difference of semantics: The Elves make it clear multiple time s that they do not 
 
17 
 
understand what Sam means when he is talking about "magic". Thus, it is odd for Galadriel to 
use "Zauber" ("spell; sorcery; magic") in Carroux's translation. 
 My initial work with the three text versions was not focused on the reader's perception 
of the characters yet. Instead, I was merely looking for any meaningful differences between 
the three versions. To find these differences, I carefully compared each sentence on its own 
and jotted down any meaningful difference I found, together w ith my thoughts on those 
differences. With this approach, I was able to identify every such difference, but I also 
progressed very slowly, never exceeding ten pages (of the English version) per day. While 
this approach was sure to give the most fool -proof and detailed results, it also meant that it 
would take over a hundred days of concentrated work before I would be able to start working 
with my results. This approach was not feasible. 
 Thus, I had to quicken my approach. I first increased the amount of te xt I would read 
at once before switching between text versions to compare it to a paragraph. Shortly after I 
thus increased my pace, I was confronted with the Black Riders in the text of LotR. The 
depiction of the Rider that talked to Farmer Maggot (Tolkie n 94), combined with the 
difference in the depiction of Gollum in the Prologue (Tolkien 11) shaped the topic of my 
study: the change in the reader's perception of characters in LotR across the three versions of 
the text. At this point I changed my approach again and started only reading the English LotR, 
while consulting the German translations only when I suspected the possibility of a 
meaningful difference for my topic. This included descriptions of characters, external as well 
as internal (thoughts, mono logues or similar), characters talking about other characters, 
characters getting addressed in a certain way (thou vs. you, titles etc.) and, as a general rule, I 
also compared every scene where a new major character gets introduced with the same 
approach I initially used for the whole text, reading all three versions sentence for sentence. 
 
18 
 
 This approach highly quickened my pace, thus making it possible for me to finish 
LotR in a reasonable time. The obvious downside of this approach was its susceptibility to 
missing single passages with meaningful differences, which thus would not appear in this 
study. However, the goal of this study is merely to show that meaningful differe nces between 
the text versions do exist, and what this means for literature studies and translations going 
forward. Thus, a few missed meaningful differences will not invalidate this study; finding 
them would merely increase its validity. 
 To build my theo retical framework, I researched literature about Tolkien translations, 
both in general and specific to the German translations. Turner's Translating Tolkien  then 
gave me a model for a theoretical framework I adapted to include and to be consistent with 
Roland Barthes' concept of the Death of the Author. 
 During this research, the goal of this study solidified as I researched what had been 
done before, and what has not been done yet. I wanted to avoid merely building upon existing 
studies, and instead aimed for a new contribution to Tolkien translations specifically and 
going forward to the combination of literature studies and translation studies in general. As 
general comparisons between the German translations of LotR had been done already (e.g. 
Stopfel an d Nagel), as well as an in -depth comparison of the translations of multiple 
languages concerning the songs and poems, archaisms, name translations, and the manner in 
which proverbs show the worldview of different people in LotR (Turner), and other detailed  
examinations of specific characteristics (e.g. German pronouns in Carroux's translation with 
Smith), what was missing was a literature studies approach to characters between different 
translations. 
 As I mentioned initially, the study was not inspired by a meaningful character 
difference I observed prior to this study, but was built on an exploring approach, reading 
through the three text versions with an open mind for anything of value for a literature studies 
 
19 
 
approach to translations. This means this stu dy is build upon what I found without prior 
knowledge of how significant it would be. However, while most differences of a reader's 
perception of a character were minuscule, singular differences were significant, as will be 
shown in the analysis section. 
  
 
20 
 
4. General Comparison 
 Before starting the in -depth analysis of single characters, I begin by comparing the 
two German translations as a whole concerning translation choices with direct or indirect 
influence on character perception. 
 Some comparisons have  been made already, as mentioned in the Literature Review. 
Rainer Nagel argues that a core difference between the translations is the utilization of 
"Formäquivalenz" (formal equivalence) by Carroux and "Funktionsäquivalenz" (dynamic 
equivalence) by Krege: "It is obvious at first glance that [Carroux] tries to convey Tolkien's 
old-fashioned syntax, while [Krege] modernises syntactic structures almost wherever 
possible" ("New One" 33). 
 As quoted in 2.3 , Nagel states that Carroux translates with formal equivalence "up to 
the point of producing awkward German" ("New One" 48). As an example, Nagel states: 
Tolkien 365 
Carroux I:441 
Krege 393 
Would not that have 
been a noble deed 
to set to the 
credit of his Ring, 
if I had taken it 
by force or fear 
from my guest? 
Würde das nicht 
eine edle Tat 
gewesen sein, die 
dem Einfluß des 
Ringes 
zuzuschreiben wäre, 
wenn ich ihn meinem 
Gast mit Gewalt 
oder unter 
Drohungen 
abgenommen hätte? 
Wäre es nicht ein 
schöner Beweis für 
des Ringes Kraft, 
wenn ich ihn mit 
Gewalt oder List 
meinem Gast 
abnähme? 
 Nagel: "While [Carroux] closely mirrors the syntactic relations of [Tolkien], its … 
choice of the present perfect subjunctive, even less frequent in German as it is in English, 
makes for somewhat hard reading, while [Krege]'s syntactic simplification … still gets 
Galadriel's meaning across" ("New One" 48). As a second example I provide the following: 
Tolkien 63 
Carroux I:87 
Krege 81 
How long have you 
been 
eavesdropping?" 
"Eavesdropping, 
sir? I don't follow 
you, begging your 
Wie lange hast du 
gelauscht?" 
"Gelauscht, Herr 
Gandalf? Ich kann 
Euch nicht folgen 
und bitte um 
Wie lange hast du 
schon gehorcht?" 
"Gehorcht? Herr 
Gandalf? Bitte 
gehorsamst um 
Verzeihung, aber 
 
21 
 
pardon. There ain't 
no eaves at Bag 
End, and that's a 
fact!" 
Vergebung. In ganz 
Beutelsend gibt's 
kein Haarwild und 
folglich keine 
Lauscher." 
ich gehorche immer 
aufs Wort, Herr 
Gandalf!" 
 In this example, it is not the syntax that makes Carroux's version awkward to read, but 
the terms used. While Carroux's sentence in theory makes sense and is correct, the average 
reader will have a hard time understanding it, due to Carroux presupposing the knowledge of 
two terms: "Haarwild" ("furred game" as in quarry when hunting) and "Lauscher ". 
"Lauscher" in common knowledge is the noun to "lauschen", which would be the translation 
of "eavesdropping"; however, the average reader will not be aware that the word "lauschen" 
is derived from the term "Lauscher" for the ears of "Haarwild". 
 In short, if the reader is not familiar with hunting, they will most likely have the same 
reaction I had initially when reading Sam's response in Carroux's translation: confusion as to 
why "Haarwild" is mentioned in the first place. The reason why Carroux is using  these 
hunting terms is to stay true to Tolkien's sentence structure and pun setup; and admittedly, 
Carroux solved the pun very well, albeit using terms the reader would most likely not know.  
 Looking at the whole translation, I would agree with Nagel tha t Carroux's translation 
attempts (and, for the most part, succeeds) to mirror Tolkien's text down to the exact 
vocabulary and sentence structure, if it is possible in German to do so. There are awkward 
sentences as a result, as shown in the two excerpts ab ove; however, they are less prevalent 
than Nagel's article may suggest. In the passages I jotted down in preparation for this study 
(see 3 for my methodology of doing so), the second excerpt is the only one with awkward 
German I could find. 
 At the same time, that passage is also an example for Krege's translation with dynamic 
equivalence (meaning "Übersetzung nach zu vermittelnden Informationen"  ("Translation 
guided by information to be imparted")  according to Nagel ( "Verschiedene Interpretationen" 
 
22 
 
88)). While Sam's attempt at pretending not to understand what Gandalf is on about is very 
weak in Krege's version, as it is in Tolkien's English text, so that Krege's creative translation 
conveys the same meaning: a flustered Sam tries to weasel out of an awkwar d situation under 
the eyes of a (to him) terrifying wizard. 
 A clearer example of dynamic equivalence may be the following excerpt: 
Tolkien 31 
Carroux I:47 
Krege 46 
"There's something 
fishy in this, my 
dear! I believe 
that mad Baggins is 
off again. Silly 
old fool. But why 
worry? He hasn't 
taken the vittles 
with him." He 
called loudly to 
Frodo to send the 
wine round again. 
"Da ist irgendwas 
faul, meine Liebe! 
Ich glaube, der 
verrückte Beutlin 
ist wieder auf und 
davon. Alberner 
alter Narr. Aber 
warum sollen wir 
uns darüber 
Gedanken machen? 
Die Weinbuddeln hat 
er ja nicht 
mitgenommen." Laut 
rief er zu Frodo 
hinüber, er möge 
den Wein noch 
einmal kreisen 
lassen. 
"Da ist doch etwas 
faul, meine Liebe! 
Ich glaube, dieser 
verrückte Beutlin 
ist wieder auf und 
davon. Alter Narr! 
Aber was sollen wir 
uns grämen? Das 
Wichtigste hat er 
ja dagelassen." Und 
er rief laut zu 
Frodo hinüber, dass 
die Weinflaschen 
noch mal herumgehen 
müssten. 
 This excerpt is the reaction of Rory Brandybuck on Bilbo's party, right after Bilbo 
uses the Ring to turn invisible and leaves the party (and later the Shire) without a proper 
good-bye. The important part of this passage is the second -to-last sentence. Tolki en and 
Carroux mention the vittles/Weinbuddeln, conveying the message: there is no reason to 
worry about what Bilbo is doing, as the wine is still here to enjoy. Krege translates: "Das 
Wichtigste hat er ja dagelassen" (Re-translated: "He left the most important thing behind after 
all"). Thus, Rory Brandybuck's message in Krege is: there is no reason to worry about what 
Bilbo is doing, as he left the most important thing behind – as the reader learns in the 
following sentence, the wine. Krege takes much more  liberty in translating this sentence 
compared to Carroux, who once again matches Tolkien's template verbatim. 
 
23 
 
 Unlike the awkward sentences of Carroux, the freely translated examples for Krege's 
dynamic equivalence are encountered frequently throughout Kr ege's text, albeit not all of 
them are as obvious as the above example, which basically replaces a sentence with another 
that leads to a similar message being conveyed. Thus, I agree with Nagel's attribution of 
Krege's translation as a translation with dyn amic equivalence opposed to Carroux's 
translation with formal equivalence.  
 However, Nagel also criticizes Krege for "tak[ing] unnecessary liberties" ( "New One" 
48) in his translation of LotR. Two reoccurring liberties are mentioned: the "tendency to give  
explanations to the reader, thus possibly falling prey to a form … of overspecification" 
("New One " 40) and the use of familiar instead of deferential pronouns (while modern 
English does not differentiate between familiar and deferential pronouns, Nagel c riticizes the 
use of familiar pronouns in Krege's translation when the situation (to Nagel) calls for a 
deferential pronoun). 
 Krege's tendency to give explanations is important in the scope of this study as it 
occasionally results in ambiguity being remov ed in his translation while Carroux manages to 
retain it – considering Ricœur's definition of interpretation as choosing a possible meaning in 
an ambiguous context, this is especially impactful when constructing the meaning of a 
sentence, paragraph or even character as a whole. It often surfaces as Krege stating explicitly 
what Tolkien and Carroux simply imply. 
 When examining the changing perception readers may have of characters when 
reading the three versions of LotR used in this study, the use of famili ar or deferential 
pronouns plays a huge part: The pronoun a character uses when addressing another character 
not only tells the reader the social standing of the addressed character, but also of the 
character using the pronoun.  
 
24 
 
 The pronouns in Carroux's translation have been studied in -depth by Smith; however, 
a comparison to Krege's translation has not been made as Smith's article precedes it. To 
preface the comparison, Smith explains the deferential pronouns the following way: 
 [L]anguages like German …  make a distinction in the second person pronouns 
 between singular and plural and between familiar and deferential forms, whereas 
 modern English makes no such distinctions. Thus, in translating out of English, the 
 translator of a literary text must dete rmine whether a character in the text is speaking 
 to one or more other characters and what sort of relationship exists between these 
 characters. (33) 
 In her translation of The Lord of the Rings, Carroux makes use of three second person 
 pronouns: familiar singular du, familiar plural ihr, and polite singular and plural Ihr. 
 She presumably eschews Sie in order to give the story a more medieval flavor. If she 
 uses Ihr where Sie is used in the modern standard language, we should expect to find 
 du and ihr used in addressing the following: relatives; spouses; (close) friends; equals 
 in certain occupations …; someone to whom respect is deliberately not being shown 
 …; young people and children; the dead; deities and saints; animals; inanimate 
 objects; abstract concepts … we should expect Ihr in all other exchanges. (34) 
Overall, Smith finds that Carroux adheres to these rules, with very few exceptions in 
complicated relationships (e.g. he finds Éomer and Éowyn addressing Theoden with "Ihr" 
even though they are relatives, likely because while Theoden is their uncle, he is also their 
king (36)) and some exceptions that appear to have been mistakes or oversights which were 
partly removed in later prints of the Carroux translation.  
 When comparing the use of pr onouns between the Carroux translation and the Krege 
translation, then, as a general rule it could be said that, when in doubt, Carroux uses 
deferential pronouns, while Krege uses familiar pronouns. As examples may be mentioned: 
 
25 
 
Frodo uses deferential pron ouns towards Tom Bombadil in Carroux (e.g. I:160), but familiar 
pronouns in Krege (147); Butterbur uses deferential pronouns towards Strider in Carroux (e.g. 
I:210), but familiar pronouns in Krege (190); Faramir uses deferential pronouns towards 
Frodo in Carroux (II:305), but familiar pronouns in Krege (695) (and vice versa respectively); 
Ingold uses deferential pronouns towards Gandalf in Carroux (III:17), but familiar pronouns 
in Krege (790) (and vice versa respectively). However, neither does Carroux use  exclusively 
deferential pronouns, nor does Krege use exclusively familiar pronouns throughout their 
respective translations. The tendency of Krege to default to familiar pronouns does change 
character perception in some places, however, as I will show in the analysis later. It was the 
reason why Nagel criticizes Krege's usage of familiar pronouns : as an example Nagel gives 
Krege 390 (Tolkien 363), where Galadriel offers Frodo to look into her mirror. In that scene, 
Frodo uses familiar pronouns, even though their social standings call for deferential pronouns. 
 It is also worth to view the two German translations on the scale of foreignizing and 
domesticating translations, especially in the context of the ST, as Turner states in Translating 
Tolkien:  
 [T]he principles of domesticating and foreignising translation are already inscribed in 
 the text of The Lord of the Rings as a part of its literary and philological structure. The 
 device of pseudotranslation has given Tolkien the justification for making a cle ar 
 linguistic distinction between those characters and settings which are intended to 
 appear familiar to the reader, and those which are meant to be exotic. (69) 
Foreignization in the sense of Venuti means preserving the culture of the foreign in the 
translation into the TL; for example, one could leave aristocratic titles of the source culture 
when translating from one language and thus culture into another, or on e could attempt to 
replace them with those aristocratic titles of the target culture which best match the cultural 
implications of the original titles. Keeping the titles would be foreignization: the reader of the 
 
26 
 
translation in the TL is confronted with SL -titles, thus noticing that the ST was written in a 
different language, and the text he is confronted with is a translation. Changing the titles, and 
thus domesticating the translation, makes it more difficult  for the reader to realize he is 
reading a translation. 
 Turner now argues that Tolkien already uses domestication and foreignization in the 
ST as he is "translating" the text from the fictional Red Book of Westmarch. Turner implies 
that the Hobbit culture wou ld be domesticated, while for example Elvish culture is 
foreignized. Thus, Elvish words are often left in their language, e.g. Tolkien 377 (" Ai! laurië 
lantar lassi súrinen,… "), to show the "otherness" of the Elvish culture compared to the 
familiarity of t he Hobbit culture: Tolkien's Guide helps with this "local" domestication and 
foreignization, as it (generally speaking) advises to translate names from around the Shire 
(including Bree), while names from e.g. Rohan are usually advised to be left untranslat ed. 
Additionally, Turner mentions the Rohirrim using a lot of archaic uses for contemporary 
words (the meaning of "skilful" for "cunning"), as well as compounds ("sister -son"), making 
their culture foreign in the sense of archaism. 
 A "second-hand" translation from English into a "third" language, then, should (if we 
assume authority for this proposal) domesticate the text where it is "domesticated" to the 
English reader, while leaving the text foreignized where it shows "otherness". 
 This is not the case i n the German translations, however. Carroux's translation shows 
a sort of foreignization throughout the text, but not by preserving English allegories 
necessarily, but by using archaic language (e.g. the archaic deferential Ihr pronoun) and at 
places awkward syntax. There is also barely any effort being made in assimilating the text to 
the modern German culture (besides following the Guide to translate names). It may be a 
hyperbole, but for a potential target reader, who is not familiar with the SL English,  and who 
thus does not notice that the syntax may stem from following the source syntax too closely, 
 
27 
 
Carroux's translation may read like a "translation" from Middle High German into modern 
German, and thus foreignized. 
 The only element in the text (I noti ced) that will definitely mark it as a modern text is 
the anachronism Tolkien uses in the first Chapter: "express train" (28), or "Schnellzug" in 
Carroux (43). There is no feasible explanation as to why Tolkien chooses to let a fictional 
source from a myth ical past compare something to an express train, besides the proposed 
theory of Turner that this was a change made by Tolkien to the fictional ST by domesticating 
it to modern English. 
 Krege's translation has no further problem with the "Expresszug" (43):  he uses a, for 
the time of publication in 2000, modern German (though he preserves the archaism where a 
contrast between archaic and modern speech was made in Tolkien's text, e.g. in the first 
meeting of Theoden and the Hobbits in Isengard). This "modern"  aspect of Krege's language 
does not hold up well to a reader in 2021: for example words like "Halunke" (412) are not 
used in the German of 2021; but Nagel in 2004 criticizes the use of "speziell" by Krege as it 
ruins the simple speech of Butterbur ( "Verschiedene Interpretationen" 96), while a German 
reader in 2021 would not even notice it. However, as we can read in Nagel's articles, at the 
time of publication Krege's German struck readers as too modern for an epic tale such as 
LotR. In fact, Nagel even "a ccuses" Krege of creating the translation for young people as the 
target audience, following the skopos theory of Reis/Vermeer: "[I]t would appear that 
Wolfgang Krege approached his translation not merely as a translation, but as a 
modernisation of Tolkien 's text to make it acceptable … for what he believed to be a 'new' 
generation of readers" ( "New One" 28); "we … expect the new German translation to be a 
conscious modernisation of the original, adapting it to a younger audience by deliberately 
changing Tolkien's sometimes old -fashioned choice of words and phrases to a text easier to 
read for young people and … more 'in tune' with current German" ("New One" 32). 
 
28 
 
 While not all of the "modern" word choices of Wolfgang Krege preserved their 
"modernness" over the years, in total I would have to agree with Nagel that it is at least 
overall less archaic than Carroux's. Krege changes the manner of speech of certain characters, 
to lend Nagel's example of Butterbur: in Tolkien's text, Butterbur speaks a form of a ru ral 
English dialect in an old-fashioned form ("New One" 29;30); while Carroux, as usual, tries to 
translate verbatim with a similar syntax, Krege gives Butterbur a vernacular manner of 
speech, with expressions like "Dalli, dalli!" (174; Tolkien: "Double sh arp!" 153; Carroux: 
"Schneller, schneller!" 193). This is symptomatic for Krege's translation, as he repeatedly 
replaces idioms or introduces an idiomatic phrase when the English text did not include one: 
Tolkien 170 
Carroux I:213 
Krege 193 
If he forgets, I 
shall roast him. 
Wenn er es vergißt, 
werde ich ihn 
rösten. 
Wenn er's vergisst, 
wasch' ich ihm den 
Kopf. 
 As usual, Carroux sticks close to the English text, while Krege takes the opportunity 
to introduce a German idiom: "jemandem den Kopf waschen", lite rally "to clean somebody's 
head", but with a similar meaning of the English idiom: "to give somebody a piece of one's 
mind." This is not an exact translation of the double meaning of "roasting someone", but it 
does come close while using a German idiom; it  does, however, lose the, considering that the 
writer of these words is Gandalf, a wizard, very real possibility that Gandalf meant it 
verbatim (thus changing the perception of the character Gandalf, also considering the fact that 
Krege lets Gandalf use oral forms ("er's"; "wasch'") in a written letter). 
 With these idiomatic domestications of the text in his translation, it can be said that 
Krege's translation falls under the translation tradition of domestication, even though some 
"foreignized" forms already existing in the ST prevail (e.g. "Schwestersohn" as translation of 
"sister-son" instead of using "Neffe") and the reader will still be confronted with "otherness" 
in the text; However, this stems from the genre of Fantasy itself, which by definition 
confronts the readers with strange places and cultures. 
 
29 
 
5. Analysis 
 A theoretical framework, methodology and t he general features of the German 
translations have now been established. With the groundwork thus being laid out, I will now 
begin the analysis of the changes in the reader's perception of characters across the three 
versions of LotR examined in this study. 
 Throughout my work with the three text versions, I noticed an abundance of character 
changes between the versions related to character perception. Some of these changes seem to 
be single cases, where a poor translator choice created a context which changed a character in 
this context, without additional, similar changes of perception of the same character 
appearing throughout the text; for example the following: 
Tolkien 91 
Carroux I:120 
Krege 111 
'But all the same,' 
he added with a 
shamefaced 
laugh, 'I am 
terrified of him 
and his dogs. 
"Aber trotzdem", 
fügte er mit einem 
verlegenen 
Lachen hinzu, "habe 
ich entsetzliche 
Angst vor ihm und 
seinen Hunden. 
"aber trotzdem" – 
und er lachte 
verlegen -, "ihm 
und seinen Hunden 
möchte ich um jeden 
Preis aus dem Weg 
gehen. 
 Krege's translation is the only v ersion of the text in which Frodo does not explicitly 
admit that he is terrified, instead stating that he wants to avoid Maggot and his dogs at any 
cost. However, this is not a part of a large-scale character change in Krege's translation which 
paints Frodo as someone who avoids admitting his own weaknesses, but a singular moment 
in the book. 
 Other character changes, however, pervade the text, with multiple examples from a lot 
of the scenes the character(s) in question appears in; other changes, again, pervade a certain 
scene, but the respective character shows (almost) no further changes in other scenes of the 
respective translation. Most of these changes are small, as they are made within trans lating 
from the same ST; however, there are exceptions I will show below. 
 
30 
 
5.1 THE BLACK RIDERS 
One of the most significant changes in the reader's perception of characters between the three 
versions of LotR analyzed in this study is the change in perceptio n of the Black Riders, 
Nazgûl, or "The Nine."  
 The Black Riders are initially described as human, since the first appearance of one of 
them is written from the perspective of the hobbits Frodo, Sam, and Pippin. In their eyes, they 
see a man riding on a horse, wearing a black cloak and hood. However, it becomes clear later 
in the story that the Black Riders are not just human, but powerful spirits taking the form of 
men through their garments. Due to their nature as spirits they often show powers or 
behaviours not attributed to normal humans and are shrouded in mystery, often supported by 
vague descriptions by other characters or the narrator. 
 One of these vague descriptions is already used in the Black Riders first appearance: 
Tolkien 74 
Carroux I:100 
Krege 93 
Round the corner 
came a black horse, 
no hobbit-pony but 
a full-sized horse; 
and on it sat a 
large man, who 
seemed to crouch in 
the saddle, wrapped 
in a great black 
cloak and hood, so 
that only his boots 
in the high 
stirrups showed 
below; his face was 
shadowed and 
invisible. 
Um die Biegung kam 
ein schwarzes 
Pferd, kein 
Hobbitpony, sondern 
ein ausgewachsenes 
Pferd; und darauf 
saß ein großer 
Mensch, der sich 
auf dem Sattel 
niederzuducken 
schien, eingehüllt 
in einen großen 
schwarzen Mantel 
und eine Kapuze, so 
daß nur seine 
Stiefel in den 
hohen Steigbügeln 
unten 
herausschauten; 
sein Gesicht war 
beschattet und 
unsichtbar. 
Um die Biegung kam 
ein schwarzes 
Pferd, kein 
Hobbitpony, sondern 
ein richtiger Gaul 
in voller Größe, 
und auf ihm saß ein 
großer Mensch, der 
sich im Sattel zu 
ducken schien, ganz 
eingehüllt in einen 
langen schwarzen 
Mantel mit Kapuze, 
sodass nur unten 
die Stiefel in den 
hohen Steigbügeln 
hervorschauten, 
während das Gesicht 
verhangen und nicht 
zu sehen war. 
 To note is the fact that both translations decide to translate the male "man" as gender -
neutral "Mensch"; however, this could be explained by Tolkien's decision to use "Men" to 
 
31 
 
represent "Humanity" throughout LotR, so that "man" can be read as "human" here. E.g.: 
"Only the Elves still preserve any records of that vanished time, and their traditions are 
concerned almost entirely with their own history, in which Men appear seldom and Hobbits 
are not mentioned at all." (Tolkien 2 ); here  (and throughout LotR) Tolkien use s "Men" to  
distinguish humans from the races of Middle-Earth, in this example Elves and Hobbits. 
 However, the main reason why this paragraph is interesting for this study is the last 
phrase: "his face was shadowed and invisible". In Carroux's translation the Rider's face is 
invisible, probably due to a shadow (presumably of the hood) falling on the face. This is very 
close to Tolkien's English text. Krege, on the other hand, changes this phrase: in his text the 
face is "verhangen und nicht zu sehen". 
 "Verhängen" means to hide something with a cloth or something similar. For example, 
if someone covers a painting with a tablecloth, that painting is "verhangen". The Black 
Rider's face in Krege's version, thus, is not hidden in shadows, but behind his hood. It is also 
not invisible, but "nicht zu sehen" – it cannot be seen. 
 If we consider the Black Rider's nature as a powerful spirit, Krege's version robs the 
reader of a possible interpretation showing the supernatural might of the Rider. Consider that 
hobbits are described as much smaller than humans and the Rider sits on top of a full -sized 
horse, while the hobbits crouch low, thus giving the hobbits a worm's eye view. This should 
make it easy to glance underneath the hood of the Rider and yet the Rider's face is supposedly 
invisible. In fact, it is later heavily implied that the Black Riders do not have (visible) faces in 
the first place. When the Witch King, leader of the Black Riders, reveals his "face" there is 
nothing between the crown he wear s and his armor: "The Black Rider flung back his hood, 
and behold! he had a kingly crown; and yet upon no head visible was it set. The red fires 
shone between it and the mantled shoulders vast and dark" (Tolkien 829). It is not 
unreasonable to assume that all Black Riders share this invisible body, so that only their 
 
32 
 
garments give them a distinguishable form. Thus, when Frodo looks at the Rider, he is not 
only unable to see his face clearly, but also unable to see any facial features, like the shape of 
a nose, a chin, or any strand of hair. 
 Would it thus be unthinkable that the Black Riders use supernatural powers to conceal 
their quite literally invisible faces by not only using the natural shadow of their hood, but also 
by weaving the shadows unnaturally around their faces? Tolkien's text does not explain this 
invisible "state" of the Rider's face, due to the short and vague description, leaving it to the 
reader to construct whether it is really the shadow of the hood rendering the Rider's face 
invisible, or if it is the Rider's supernatural powers. It is of course possible, that the readers 
choose to think of the Riders as normal humans at this point of the text, and that the 
"invisible" face was the result of Frodo not looking long enough and/or Tolkien d eciding to 
omit a lengthy description of barely visible shapes of facial features, which is also a possible 
explanation for this vague description. However, Krege's translation does not allow the 
supernatural interpretation, or at least not at this point i n the text, robbing the reader of this 
possible construction and thus (possibly) changing the reader's perception of the Rider. 
 A second instance that can be observed in this passage is the translation of "horse": 
Carroux uses the word "Pferd", being the closest equivalent to "horse": a genderneutral noun 
describing the race of the animal. Krege's "Gaul", however, usually describes a working horse, 
like a draft horse or farm horse, but not a riding horse. It is also connoted with slow and stolid 
(and male) horses who are not fit to ride at a gallop, which will be important to come back to 
in the following passage. 
 In that paragraph Krege's translation changes the Riders in the opposite way: instead 
of concealing or removing a possible power, Krege's version gives the Riders a "power-up" in 
this paragraph: 
Tolkien 213 
Carroux I:262 
They seemed to him 
to run like the 
Sie schienen ihm 
dahinzufliegen wie 
Wie ein Sturmwind 
kamen sie 
 
33 
 
Krege 237 wind and to grow 
swiftly larger and 
darker, as their 
courses converged 
with his. 
der Wind und rasch 
größer und dunkler 
zu werden, als sie 
nun in derselben 
Richtung ritten wie 
er. 
dahergerast, rasch 
immer größer und 
dunkler werdend, zu 
dem Punkt hin, wo 
ihre Bahnen sich 
kreuzen mussten. 
 The important difference between the t hree versions here is that Krege does not 
translate "seemed to him". Thus, the Riders do not seem "to r un like the wind and grow 
swiftly larger and darker", they actually do – which contradicts Krege's earlier translation that 
the Riders ride on a "Gaul", as no horse capable of keeping up with an apparently magically 
enhanced Elven-horse should be called a "Gaul". 
 The Rider's feat of increasing in size and darkness  is on one hand a significant 
increase in the power of the Black Riders; on the other hand it is repeated throughout the 
LotR books that the mightiest weapon of the Black Riders is fear (e.g.: "their power is in 
terror"; Tolkien 174) . Thus, this change in Krege's version also takes power away from the 
Black Riders. The reason why they  seem to grow larger and their pursuit so fast to Frodo in 
Tolkien's and Carroux's text seems to be due to the deep fear the Riders instilled in him 
("Then at once fear and hatred awoke in him."; "Fear now filled all Frodo's mind."; Tolkien 
213). Krege's text takes away the Black Riders' aura of fear that creates a sort of hallucination 
of their power in the mind of their enemies and replaces it by giving the Riders the 
hallucinated powers for real. However, this trade -off is not consistent throughout Krege 's 
translation. Whatever Krege's reason was to not translate "seemed to him" (or maybe it was a 
mistake), it does change the reader's perception of the Black Riders. 
 Carroux's translation, meanwhile, decreases the danger emanating from the Riders: in 
Tolkien, "their courses converge" with Frodo's and in Krege their courses cross ("ihre Bahnen 
sich kreuzen mussten"). In Carroux's version, however, they merely ride in the same direction 
as Frodo ("in derselben Richtung ritten wie er"). This eliminates the immediate threat: 
Tolkien's and Krege's version imply that the Riders are faster: they will converge with or 
 
34 
 
cross Frodo's way, thus they will, in the foreseeable future , be at the same place as Frodo. In 
Carroux's translation this is not implied, as they merely travel along the same path, without 
any implications about their relative speed. 
 A similar change can be observed on the very same page in the following excerpt: 
Tolkien 213 
Carroux I:262 
Krege 237 
He could see them 
clearly now: they 
appeared to have 
cast aside their 
hoods and black 
cloaks, and they 
were robed in white 
and grey. 
Er konnte sie jetzt 
deutlich sehen: 
offenbar hatten sie 
ihre Kapuzen und 
schwarzen Mäntel 
abgeworfen und 
waren nun weiß und 
grau gekleidet. 
Er sah sie nun ganz 
deutlich. Sie 
hatten die 
schwarzen Mäntel 
und Kapuzen 
abgeworfen und 
trugen nun graue 
und weiße Gewänder. 
 Here, both Krege and Carroux  do not translate parts of the se ntence: "appeared to" . 
While it can be argued that Carroux's "offenbar" is meant to convey  that this sentence is 
written exclusively from Frodo's perspective, I would argue that this is a suboptimal solution , 
as "offenbar" can also be read as "evidently", which is a factual statement.  
 Very similar to the previously untranslated "seemed to him" it is again a phrase 
showing uncertainty, a phrase that does not represent the factual state of the world, but only 
how it is perceived by a certain being or multip le beings. In this case, however, the German 
translators seem to have missed an important reason why Tolkien used "appeared to" in this 
context: The person perceiving the Black Riders, who appear "to have cast aside their hoods 
and black cloaks" in this sentence is Frodo. "[T]hey were robed in white and grey" shows that 
Frodo sees them in the same way as he did at the Weathertop when wearing the One Ring: 
"He was able to see beneath their black wrappings. … In their white faces burned keen and 
merciless eyes; under their mantles were long grey robes; upon their grey hairs were helms of 
silver; in their haggard hands were swords of steel" (Tolkien 195). As previously mentioned, 
however, the Black Riders appear invisible without their garments to any normal pe rson. The 
reason Frodo can "see beneath their black wrappings" in the excerpt above, without the Ring, 
is due to the concept of "fading" that is explained by Gandalf: "You were beginning to fade" 
 
35 
 
(Tolkien 219); "If they had succeeded [in fading Frodo], you  would have become like they 
are … You would have become a wraith under the dominion of the Dark Lord" (Tolkien 222). 
Hammond and Scull explain in the "Reader's Companion": "Gandalf explains in Book II, 
Chapter 1 that because of his wound Frodo was already  on the threshold of becoming a 
wraith, and thus, even though he did not put on the Ring, he could see the Riders and they 
could see him." (195) 
 Thus, when Tolkien writes "He could see them clearly now", Frodo sees them as they 
are, as wraiths, since he himself is starting to become one. Any other character present in this 
scene, however, perceives the Black Riders as men hooded in black cloaks; thus, they only 
appear "robed in white and grey" to Frodo.  
 When the German translators do not translate "appea r to" in this context, they present 
their readers with a weird situation: The Black Riders change clothes in the middle of their 
pursuit for seemingly no reason. It is virtually impossible for the reader to realize that only to 
Frodo it looks like they cha nged; and there will not be an "I see" -effect when Gandalf 
explains the concept of "fading" later on, solving this mystery. Due to these circumstances I 
would title this difference not just as a translation decision, but as a translation mistake. 
 A second  translation mistake can be argued for in the following excerpt about the 
Witch King, leader of the Black Riders: 
Tolkien 706 
Carroux II:363 
Krege 745 
This way and that 
turned the dark 
head helmed and 
crowned with 
fear, sweeping 
the shadows with 
its unseen eyes. 
Hierhin und dorthin 
wandte er voll 
Furcht den 
behelmten und 
gekrönten Kopf und 
suchte mit seinen 
unsichtbaren Augen 
die Schatten ab. 
Hin und her drehte 
er den schwarzen 
Kopf mit der 
Schreckenskrone, 
durchkämmte die 
Schatten mit seinen 
unsichtbaren Augen. 
 As previously mentioned, their ability t o instill fear is one of the chief weapons the 
Black Riders possess. Thus, I argue that when Tolkien writes "helmed and crowned with 
fear" he does not mean, as Carroux translates it, that the Witch King  feels fear. In contrast I 
 
36 
 
would argue that Tolkien's text explains the relationship between the Riders and the emotion 
of fear: they rule over fear, as they can use fear as a weapon – thus they are "crowned with 
fear". The fear they instill in their enemi es also keeps those enemies from harming them: 
even if these enemies had means to do so, their fear prevents them from attacking and thus 
using these potential means. Thus, the Black Riders are "helmed … with fear", as the fear 
they instill is a protective measure as well. 
 Carroux's translation misses this metaphor completely. However, Krege's translation 
does not convey this metaphor as clearly as Tolkien's version either,  as his translation 
pictures the Witch King with a dreadful crown (literally: " dread-crown" instead of "crowned 
with fear"). " Dread-crown" could be read as a metaphor, in context of the  text, however, it 
seems to me to be a physical crown. This does fit the description of the Witch King Tolkien 
gives during the siege of Minas Tirith (Tolk ien 829), but it does not allow easily for the 
reading of the metaphor that is available to the reader of the English text. Thus, we have a 
very different picture of the Witch King between all three versions of the text. 
 Besides the differences in the dep ictions of the Black Riders' powers as seen in the 
previous examples, one can also observe differences in the depictions of their animality and 
their character. 
 The Black Riders are depicted as animalistic already at their first appearance in the 
Shire: "I can't say why, but I felt certain he was looking or smelling for me" (Tolkien 75). 
Especially their reliance on their sense of smell is repeatedly described. But it is not the only 
animalistic behaviour they show: 
Tolkien 173 
Carroux I:216 
Krege 196 
Suddenly I shivered 
and felt that 
something horrible 
was creeping near: 
there was a sort of 
deeper shade among 
the shadows across 
the road, just 
beyond the edge of 
Plötzlich überlief 
mich ein Schauer 
und ich spürte, daß 
etwas Entsetzliches 
näherkroch: da war 
sozusagen ein 
tieferer Schatten 
zwischen den 
Schatten jenseits 
Auf einmal läuft 
mir's kalt über den 
Rücken und ich 
spüre, wie etwas 
Entsetzliches 
heranschleicht, 
eine Art dichterer 
Schatten zwischen 
den Schatten auf 
 
37 
 
the lamplight. It 
slid away at once 
into the dark 
without a sound. 
der Straße, gleich 
hinter dem 
Lichtkreis der 
Lampe. Er 
verschwand sofort 
geräuschlos im 
Dunkeln. 
der andern Seite 
der Straße, dicht 
hinter dem Rand des 
Lichtkreises. Er 
huschte sofort weg 
in die Dunkelheit, 
lautlos. 
 Carroux pushes the animalistic behaviour here: Tolkien's "creeping" is not necessarily 
equivalent to the German "kriechen" (crawl, grovel, crouch) which Carroux uses; Krege's 
translation of "schleichen" (sneak, lurk, tiptoe) is also valid. In the end this comes down to 
translator preference: Carroux decides to give the Black Riders another animalistic trait by 
using "kriechen", while Krege stays neutral with "schleichen". Interestingly, both German 
translators also decide to translate the "It" at the start of the last sentence as "Er" (He). This 
means they translated it as a pronoun for "shade" which is grammatically male in the German 
language (though the German translation does lose the meaning of "shade" as "wraith", as 
German does not differentiate betwe en "shade" and "shadow", using "Schatten" for both). 
However, the translators could have also translated "It" as "Es" (It), using it as a pronoun for 
"something horrible" ("etwas Entsetzliches" in both German translations ). Using "Es" instead 
of "Er" could have further dehumanized the Black Riders, though due to "something horrible" 
being further away in the passage it does make sense to refer back to "shade" instead. 
 The most jarring differences in the reception of the Black Riders between the three 
versions is the reception of their character, in the sense of their mannerisms and how other 
characters talk about them. 
 These differences mainly stem from the retelling of Farmer Maggot's meeting with a 
Black Rider. When Frodo, Sam and Pippin arrive at Farmer  Maggot's house, the farmer tells 
the other three hobbits of the Black Rider that came by earlier that day. In this retelling, the 
Black Rider appears, at least in Krege's translation, extremely uncouth: 
Tolkien 94 
Carroux I:122 
Krege 113 
Have you seen 
Baggins? 
Habt ihr Beutlin 
gesehen? 
Hast du gesehn 
Beutlin? 
 
38 
 
 The differences between Krege's translation and Carroux's translation are immense, 
even in this short sentence. Firstly, the Black Rider uses "ihr" in Carroux's translation, while 
he uses "du" in Krege's. As was shown in Smith's article discussed earlier i n this study, "du" 
is familiar speech, while "ihr" is deferential and, thus, polite. Since Maggot and the Black 
Rider are strangers and not relatives, spouses, friends, or equals in their occupation and 
neither is Maggot a child, the use of "du" of the Bla ck Rider in Krege's version is very 
impolite. Addressing an adult stranger with "du" is universally considered bad manners. 
Using "Sie" is a basic rule to show respect (or "Ihr" in the case of Carroux's translation).  
 Thus, the Black Rider is rude in this  excerpt in Krege's translation, while meeting the 
norm for talking to strangers in Carroux's translation. In contrast, Maggot uses "Sie" or "Ihr" 
respectively throughout the whole conversation, staying polite even when he gets angry at the 
Black Rider (Krege 113, Carroux 122). 
 However, this is not the only difference between the translations that makes the Black 
Rider impolite in Krege's translation. Krege also lets the Rider speak in an ungrammatical 
way, swapping verb and object in the sentence. This st yle of speech shows the Rider's lack of 
understanding of the language. Nowadays (in Germany), it is also often (negatively) connoted 
with low education and a migration background, and native speakers will use this style of 
speech to imitate and/or mock foreigners with little grasp of the German language. 
 Combine these connotations with the following excerpt from the same passage: 
Tolkien 94 
Carroux I:123 
Krege 113 
If he passes will 
you tell me? I will 
come back with 
gold. 
Wenn er 
vorbeikommt, wollt 
Ihr es mir sagen? 
Ich komme mit Gold 
zurück. 
Du sagst mir, wenn 
er des Weges kommt. 
Ich kehre wieder 
mit Geld. 
 Yet again, the Rider is p olite in Carroux's translation, as he is in Tolkien's text. He 
uses "Ihr" and asks a question with the option for Maggot to decline. In Krege's translation, 
however, the Rider once again uses "Du", being impolite, and does not ask Maggot for 
 
39 
 
cooperation. I nstead, Krege's translation rephrases the original question as an assumption, 
implying that Maggot will cooperate no matter what: "You tell me, when he passes. I will 
return with money." (re -translation by me ; it is also worth mentioning  that Krege uses 
"money" instead of "gold", which means his Rider is cheaper than Carroux's or Tolkien's). 
 In fact, the choice to make the Black Riders impolite removes (or changes) possible 
interpretations of the Black Riders' characters as well: the reader will in later c hapters find 
out that the Black Riders are beings with supernatural powers. Questions then may arise, like: 
why did the Riders not use force, but resulted to polite information gathering (though their 
"otherness" gained them a lot of attention while doing so)? A possible explanation could be, 
that politeness was used to show civility and no desire to fight; and a possible explanation for 
that lacking desire to fight could be, that they were not sure how powerful the Ringbearer 
would turn out to be, as sugge sted in The Hunt for the Ring  by Tolkien, as quoted in A 
Reader's Companion  (Hammond and Scull 164). However, the Black Riders in Krege's 
translation are the opposite of polite, a behaviour that emanates hostility and brings about 
conflict. This could open up other interpretations the reader could construct of course; it does 
change the perception of the characters even later on in the book though, compared to 
Carroux's and Tolkien's versions. 
 Besides giving the Black Riders much worse mannerisms in his tr anslation than in 
Carroux's or Tolkien's text, Krege also further pushes the migration background  connotation 
of the Riders in this paragraph: 
Tolkien 95 
Carroux I:123 
Krege 113 
If any of these 
black fellows come 
after you again, 
I'll deal with 
them. 
Wenn irgendwelche 
von diesen 
schwarzen Gesellen 
noch einmal hinter 
Euch her sind, 
werde ich sie mir 
vornehmen. 
Und wenn noch mal 
so ein Schwarzer 
nach dir fragt, 
dann werd' ich dem 
was erzählen! 
 Krege translates "black fellow[s]" as "Schwarzer". "Schwarzer" is the word used in 
German to describe people of colour (literally: "black" (as a noun) or "black guy"; full 
 
40 
 
sentence re -translated: "If another black guy asks for you again, I'll tell him some thing 
[aggressively/threatening]".). Due to the native population in Germany being white, black 
skin colour is connoted with a migration background as well. Thus, Krege depicts the Black 
Rider in this scene as an uncouth foreigner and likens him to a person of colour.  
 This opens up a racism/xenophobia discussion in Krege's LotR translation. This is not 
to imply or argue for Krege being (or having been) racist, however. One should keep in mind 
that all of these descriptions are used in the retelling of the  meeting between Maggot and the 
Black Rider, told from the perspective of Maggot. It is not the tale of the actual meeting, told 
by a neutral narrator that describes the meeting from the sidelines. 
 This is important to note since Maggot is described (in all three versions) as being 
extremely cautious or even hostile towards any kind of foreigner, especially Men or other 
non-hobbit folk, falling in line with the majority of Shire -folk. It is repeatedly stated that 
Hobbits do not mingle with f oreigners: Bilbo is often described as " queer" for having 
"outlandish" relations (e.g. Tolkien 24) and Tolkien writes: "The Shire -hobbits referred to 
those of Bree, and to any others that lived beyond the borders, as Outsiders, and took very 
little interest in them, considering them dull and uncouth" (150). 
 It can thus be established that Shire -Hobbits show quite a bit of prejudice towards 
foreigners in the Shire. Thus, the additional framing of the Black Rider as foreign Krege 
employs in his translation can be read as a criticism of societies such as the Shire that tend to 
talk negatively about anyone not fitting into their community, based on race (Hobbits versus 
Men), looks (black clothing of the Riders versus bright colours of the Hobbits (Tolkien 2)) o r 
manner of speech (ungrammatical question of the Rider versus grammatically correct speech 
by the Hobbits). 
 
41 
 
 However you read Maggot's retelling of his meeting with the Black Rider, though, it 
is the case that this framing of the Black Riders is exclusive  to Krege's translation, since 
neither Carroux's nor Tolkien's text support this kind of framing in a tangible way. 
 How should Maggot's increased xenophobia in Krege be read then? Maggot is the 
only Hobbit talking about a direct meeting with a Black Rider , and, as established prior, he 
shares a lot of characteristics with the "typical" Hobbit as described by Tolkien. Additionally, 
in 2.3 I paraphrased the popular theory in Tolkien criticism of the Shire being a 
representation of an England of the not -so-distant past, as described by Turner in Translating 
Tolkien. If the reader subscribes to this theory, the xenophobic Maggot in Krege is a 
representation of a stereotypical person in real life society. It is not clear, exactly which 
society's stereotypical ol der rural man Maggot is representing: in Tolkien, it may be rural 
England from around 1900; but in Krege's text the vernacular mannerisms of Maggot's 
speech may point towards a German speaking society, albeit the Shire in general is largely 
unchanged compared to Tolkien's template. 
 This is where the reader's construction of meaning comes in. As Greiner mentions in 
Übersetzung und Literaturwissenschaft, the reader's experience and expectation play a part i n 
constructing the meaning of the text. A reader bor n and raised in Germany may see Maggot 
as a xenophobic German farmer, while someone experienced with other cultures who reads 
Krege's translation may attribute him to another society – one way or the other, the fact 
remains that Maggot can be read as a symbolism for xenophobia. 
 As a short tangent, I would like to bring in Stopfel's criticism of Krege's translation at 
this point, pointing out "homoerotic" erasure in his translation: "Where Carroux translated 
Tolkien's frequent uses of the words 'love' and ' dear' to describe relationships between 
characters as she found them, using their German equivalents without a sign of 
 
42 
 
embarrassment, Krege's vocabulary consistently eliminates anything suggesting strong 
emotion between males" (13). 
 Whether Stopfel's crit icism is justified or not is, in my opinion, debatable; it is true, 
"dear" gets repeatedly translated with a form of "guter", but when we take a look at a passage 
where this happens (Tolkien 910, Krege 957), Frodo still lays down in Sam's arms, and Sam 
still kisses Frodo's forehead. A complete homoerotic erasure has not been undertaken, and a 
reasonable explanation for Krege's translation choices for "love" and "dear" could be a 
change in connotations of the German counterparts: friends may have told each o ther that 
they "love" each other in the past, but in current, and presumably also in 2000's German, this 
is a highly unusual phenomenon, presumably due to the rise of awareness of homosexuality, 
introducing the sheer possibility that a man telling another man he "loves" him in a public 
setting (like a published book) can be sexually connotated – though I am not a sociologist. 
One way or another, it is likely that Krege's "erasure" of the German equivalents to "love" 
and "dear" was not done by homophobic intent. 
 However, this is the same issue as Maggot's xenophobia in Krege's translation. In the 
end, following my theoretical framework, it is the reader's decision what meaning to 
construct from Krege's changes: whether it is a ironically non -self-aware text with criticism 
of xenophobia while pushing homophobia or whether the Black Riders are just wraiths with a 
weird manner of speech and the various male -to-male relationships are just good friends or 
family. Krege's part in this is offering the clues to these interpretations with his translation. 
 If one follows these clues, then, it will sensitize the reader to xenophobia and racism 
throughout LotR. Considering that Middle-Earth is the home to a huge variety of races (Men, 
Hobbits, Elves, Dwarves, Orcs, Trolls, sentient Eagles, Ents and more), the question of racist 
prejudices, xenophobia and how different races interact with each other in general is one that 
can be very interesting to the reader and of course shows parallels to our real world, where 
 
43 
 
racism and xenophobia still run wild (even though Tolkien himself denies any allegory to real 
world problems in LotR (Tolkien XXIII -XXV), this does not stop the reader from seeing 
these allegories). 
 To conclude my examination of the Black Riders: It can be said th at across the three 
text versions the Black Riders have differing levels of power, sometimes (seemingly) gaining 
additional powers in one translation, sometimes losing them in another. The three text 
versions also differ in how animalistic the Riders are d escribed, and, lastly, the Krege 
translation introduces xenophobic framing to the Riders. Due to these differences, the 
perception the reader may have of these characters may differ greatly between readers of the 
three different text versions, as the clues in the text changed greatly. 
5.2 GOLLUM 
Tolkien 11 
Carroux I:26 
Krege 28 
He was a loathsome 
little creature: he 
paddled a small 
boat with his large 
flat feet, peering 
with pale luminous 
eyes and catching 
blind fish with his 
long fingers, and 
eating them raw. 
Das war ein 
widerwärtiges 
kleines Geschöpf: 
mit seinen großen 
Plattfüßen paddelte 
er in einem kleinen 
Boot, schaute mit 
blassen, 
leuchtenden 
Katzenaugen um sich 
und fing mit langen 
Fingern blinde 
Fische, die er roh 
verschlang. 
Er war eine 
widerwärtige 
Kreatur: mit seinen 
breiten Plattfüßen 
paddelte er ein 
kleines Boot, 
spähte mit fahl 
leuchtenden Augen 
durch die 
Dunkelheit und 
schnappte mit 
seinen langen 
Fingern nach 
blinden Fischen, 
die er dann roh 
verzehrte. 
 This excerpt is  the first appearance of Gollum in LotR (the previous sentence being: 
"At the bottom of the tunnel lay a cold lake far from the light, and on an island of rock in the 
water lived Gollum" (Tolkien 11)). According to a famous saying, first impressions are 
everything: they may permanently define the image a person has of another person. This 
saying is consistent with current psychological research about first impressions, including 
first impressions in writing (e.g. Stanchi 2010). 
 
44 
 
 However, the first impressio n readers may have after reading this introduction may 
vary between the three versions of the text. This is due to Carroux dehumanizing Gollum in 
her version, two -fold. While Tolkien and Krege introduce Gollum as "He" or "Er" 
respectively, Carroux uses "Das" (It/That). All three versions describe Gollum as "loathsome 
little creature", but Tolkien and Krege at least give Gollum the pronoun of a person, while 
Carroux uses an article that is definitely not used for a person, but for things or animals.  
 Speaking of animals, Carroux also describes Gollum's eyes as "Katzenaugen" 
(literally "cat's eyes", but also a German word for reflectors, e.g. on bicycles); while this is 
not to be taken literally, but as a description for the trait of Gollum's eyes to light up  in the 
dark, it still furthers the reader's impression of Gollum as an animal. 
 Krege, on the other hand, translates Gollum in a more humanizing way than Carroux 
or even Tolkien, for example in these excerpts: 
Tolkien 384 
Carroux I:463 
Krege 412 
I wish I could 
lay my hands on 
the wretch. 
Ich wollte, ich 
könnte diesen Wurm 
packen. 
Wenn ich ihn nur zu 
fassen bekäme, den 
Halunken! 
Tolkien 612 
Carroux II:251 
Krege 646 
Like a nasty 
crawling spider 
on a wall. 
Wie eine 
scheußliche 
krabbelnde Spinne 
auf einer Wand. 
Wie eine krabbelnde 
Spinne an der Wand! 
Tolkien 685 
Carroux II:337 
Krege 723 
I marvel at the 
creature: 
Ich staune über das 
Geschöpf: 
Ich frage mich, was 
in dem Burschen 
vorgeht: 
Tolkien 685 
Carroux II:338 
Krege 724 
The creature is 
wretched and 
hungry 
Das Geschöpf ist 
unglücklich und 
hungrig 
Dem Kerl geht es 
elend, und er hat 
Hunger 
 Carroux's dehumanization of Gollum does not seem to continue, in contrast to the 
introductory paragraph. One could argue that using "Wurm" (worm) as translation for 
"wretch" in the first example listed here likens Gollum to an animal again, thus dehumanizing 
him, but I do not think this is necessarily the case in this context, as "Wurm" is commonly 
used to describe people in German, either when they ar e pitiable, despicable, or both (as is 
the case with Gollum). 
 
45 
 
 Krege, however, shows a trend of humanizing Gollum. "Halunke" is unmistakably 
human; in the second example, Krege chooses to not translate "nasty", which shifts the 
statement of the sentence fr om emphasis on the (arguably) disgusting movements of a spider 
towards the possible interpretation of admiration: admiration of Gollum's skill in climbing; in 
the third and forth example, Krege translates "creature" as "Bursche" and "Kerl", both 
describing male humans (both could be re -translated as e.g. chap, lad or bloke; in any case a 
word describing a (typically young) male). The only exception to this trend is when Sam talks 
about Gollum: 
Tolkien 614 
Carroux II:253 
Krege 648 
"Well, what's to 
be done with it?" 
said Sam. "Tie it 
up, so as it 
can't come 
sneaking after us 
no more, I say." 
"Na, was soll nun 
mit ihm geschehen?" 
fragte Sam. 
"Fesseln, damit er 
uns nicht mehr 
nachschleichen 
kann, das sage 
ich." 
"Na, was machen wir 
mit dem Biest?" 
sagte Sam. "Es 
anbinden, damit es 
uns nicht mehr 
nachschleichen 
kann, würd' ich 
sagen." 
Tolkien 688 
Carroux II:342 
Krege 727 
And nothing will 
ever be all right 
where that piece 
of misery is. 
Und nichts wird 
jemals gutgehen, 
wenn dieses 
Häufchen Elend 
dabei ist. 
Und nichts kommt 
wieder ins Reine, 
solange wir dieses 
Häufchen Dreck 
nicht los sind. 
 Sam does not like G ollum. This is evident to any reader of LotR, in any (of the three) 
version(s). Krege seems to have decided to show this very aggressively in his translat ion, as 
he inserts even more demeaning remarks by Sam than the text by Tolkien prescribes. In the 
first example, Krege adds "dem Biest" (the beast) instead of just translating "it", comparing 
Gollum to a wild animal or monster. In the second example, Krege  does not translate "piece 
of misery" closely as "Häufchen Elend" (heap of misery) as Carroux does, but instead 
chooses to translate it as "Häufchen Dreck" (heap of filth/dirt). Carroux's "Häufchen Elend" 
is incredibly more human than Krege's translation, as "Häufchen Elend" is a German idiom 
commonly used to describe people in a pitiable state, often with an endearing connotation: a 
mother may for example refer to her child as "Häufchen Elend", for instance when that child 
is sad over a broken toy or a sim ilar tragedy. From the context of Sam's usage of "Häufchen 
 
46 
 
Elend" any endearing factor can be easily dismissed; however, the fact prevails that this 
idiom is used to refer to a fellow human (or fellow hobbit-like creature in this case). 
 The same can not b e said for "Häufchen Dreck". In fact it is quite the opposite: The 
aim of a person using "Häufchen Dreck" to describe another person is usually to deny that 
person's humanity and portray them as a sub -human creature who should not be treated as 
human or en joy the same rights as a human. For example, it can be used to excuse a crime 
committed against that person, since a crime can't be committed against someone without 
rights. 
 With these translation decisions, Krege elevates Sam's hatred of Gollum to a new 
level: not only does he make some of Sam's remarks harsher, he also makes other people's 
comments about Gollum more kind. This creates a stronger contrast in the treatment of 
Gollum and makes Sam's hatred more pronounced to the reader. Thus, we see both a change 
of Gollum's and, indirectly, of Sam's character in Krege's translation: due to the elevation of 
Gollum as a character, the character of Sam becomes comparatively meaner. 
 The trend of humanizing Gollum even extends to Gollum's manner of speech. For 
example, read the following excerpt taken from the Prologue of LotR, Gollum's first 
appearance in the books: 
Tolkien 12 
Carroux I:28 
Krege 29 
We hates it 
forever! 
Wir hassen es auf 
immerdar! 
Wir hassen ihn auf 
immerdar! 
 In a linguistic thesis the focus would be the failure of both German translations to 
recreate the unique grammar uses in his speech with "We hates", using the third person 
singular verb form while speaking in the first person plural – a possible explanation would be 
that Gollum, due to his double persona references himself as "We", speaking of both personas, 
but uses third person singular since he is taking about himself in third person, as the single 
body Gollum, thus showing the awareness of the currently  talking persona that two personas 
 
47 
 
("We") are living in a single body ("[he] hates"). In German, this could be translated as "Wir 
hasst ihn/es auf immerdar!". However, an explanation for why this was not done in either 
German translation is Gollum's habit of sometimes hissing in his speech ("Nice fissh" 
Tolkien 686; "He musstn't hurt Preciouss" Tolkien 943). Thus, the translators may have 
attributed the "s" in "hates" to hissing rather than to a unique way of addressing himself in 
third person singular and first person plural at the same time. Additionally, this unique 
grammar is not used consistently throughout LotR ("We hate it" Tolkien 613 opposed to "We 
hates them" on the same page just a paragraph later, which makes it unlikely that the "hate" 
and "hates" grammar are used by different personas)2. 
 This study, however, is mainly interested in Gollum's use of pronouns between the 
two translations in this excerpt: Carroux uses "es" (it), following Tolkien's lead in the English 
text ("it" being Bilbo). Krege decides to translate "er" (he) instead. Thus, Gollum recognizes 
Bilbo as a person in Krege's text, while Bilbo is just a thing or animal in Tolkien's and 
Carroux's versions. By having Gollum elevate Bilbo to a person, Krege also elevates Goll um 
to a person in the reader's mind. 
 Gollum even falls less into "mindless" brabbling compared to Tolkien and Carroux. 
Consider the following examples: 
Tolkien 686 
Carroux II:339 
Krege 725 
Fissh, nice fish. 
White Face has 
vanished, my 
precious, at 
last, yes. Now we 
can eat fish in 
peace. No, not in 
peace, precious. 
For Precious is 
lost; yes, lost. 
Dirty hobbits, 
nasty hobbits. 
Fisch, netter 
Fisch. Weißes 
Gesicht ist endlich 
verschwunden, ja, 
Schatz. Jetzt 
können wir Fisch in 
Frieden essen. 
Nein, nicht in 
Frieden, Schatz. 
Denn Schatz ist 
verloren; ja, 
verloren. Dreckige 
Fissch, lieber 
Fissch! Weißfratze 
ist verschwunden, 
mein Schatz, 
endlich, ja! Jetzt 
in aller Ruhe Fisch 
fressen. Nein, 
nicht in aller 
Ruhe, mein Schatz. 
Schatz ist weg, ja, 
weg. Dreckige 
Hobbits, garstige 
 
2 It is possible that "hates"  is consistently used when the object of hate is a plural form (them), while "hate" is 
used for singular form (with the same formular for other verbs as well); however, this was not paid further 
attention to in this study. 
 
48 
 
Gone and left us, 
gollum; and 
Precious is gone. 
Only poor Sméagol 
all alone. No 
Precious. Nasty 
Men, they'll take 
it, steal my 
Precious. 
Thieves. We hates 
them. Fissh, nice 
fissh. Makes us 
strong. Makes 
eyes bright, 
fingers tight, 
yes. Throttle 
them, precious. 
Throttle them 
all, yes, if we 
gets chances. 
Nice fissh. Nice 
fissh! 
Hobbits, gräßliche 
Hobbits. Weg und 
haben uns 
verlassen, gollum; 
und Schatz ist weg. 
Nur der arme 
Sméagol ist ganz 
allein. Kein 
Schatz. Gräßliche 
Menschen, sie 
werden ihn nehmen, 
werden meinen 
Schatz stehlen. 
Diebe. Wir hassen 
sie. Fisch, netter 
Fisch. Macht uns 
stark. Macht Augen 
scharf, Finger 
kräftig, ja. Sie 
erwürgen, Schatz. 
Sie alle erwürgen, 
ja, wenn wir 
Gelegenheit haben. 
Netter Fisch. 
Netter Fisch! 
Hobbits! Gehen und 
lassen uns allein, 
gollum, und Schatz 
ist weg. Und der 
arme Sméagol ganz 
allein. Kein 
Schatz. Garstige 
Menschen, die 
nehmen ihn weg, 
stehlen meinen 
Schatz! Diebe! Wir 
hassen sie. Fissch, 
lieber Fissch! 
Macht uns stark. 
Macht Augen scharf 
und Finger fest, 
ja. Erwürgen, 
Schatz, alle 
erwürgen, ja, wenn 
wir sie zwischen 
die Finger kriegen! 
Lieber Fissch, 
lieber Fissch! 
Tolkien 724 
Carroux II:384 
Krege 764 
We'll see. It may 
well be, O yes, 
it may well be 
that when She 
throws away the 
bones and the 
empty garments, 
we shall find it, 
we shall get it, 
the Precious, a 
reward for poor 
Sméagol who 
brings nice food. 
And we'll save 
the Precious, as 
we promised. O 
yes. And when 
we've got it 
safe, then She'll 
know it, O yes, 
then we'll pay 
Her back, my 
precious. Then 
we'll pay 
everyone back! 
Wir werden sehen, o 
ja, es mag wohl 
sein, wenn Sie die 
Knochen und die 
übriggebliebenen 
Kleider wegwirft, 
daß wir ihn finden, 
ihn bekommen, den 
Schatz, eine 
Belohnung für den 
armen Sméagol, der 
nettes Essen 
bringt. Und wir 
werden den Schatz 
retten, wie wir 
versprochen haben. 
O ja. Und wenn wir 
ihn in Sicherheit 
haben, dann wird 
Sie es erfahren, o 
ja, dann werden wir 
es Ihr heimzahlen, 
mein Schatz. Dann 
werden wir es jedem 
heimzahlen! 
Mal sehn! Es könnte 
sein, o ja, könnte 
sein, dass wir ihn 
finden, wenn SIE 
die Knochen und die 
Kleider wegwirft, 
dass wir ihn 
finden, den Schatz, 
und dann kriegt ihn 
der arme Sméagol 
zum Lohn dafür, 
dass er so feines 
Futter bringt. Und 
so retten wir ihn 
ja, den Schatz, wie 
versprochen. Und 
wenn wir ihn erst 
mal haben, dann 
soll SIE's 
erfahren! O ja, 
dann zahlen wir's 
IHR heim, mein 
Schatz. Allen 
werden wir's 
heimzahlen! 
 
49 
 
 These are just two o f multiple examples of this sort of brabbling monologue by 
Gollum (see also Tolkien 57/614, Carroux I:80/II:253, Krege 75/648). They do not only show 
an (arguably) untranslatable method of Tolkien to differentiate when Gollum refers both to 
the Ring (uppercase) and to himself (lowercase) as "Precious/precious" (see Hammond and 
Scull 38); but they also show that  Krege's Gollum appears more thoughtful or concerned 
about his monologues. 
 Gollum in Tolkien's and Carroux's text brabbles mindlessly. This is shown in the 
punctuation and syntax: Gollum uses a lot of short sentences in parataxe, at times not even 
using full sentences ("No Precious."; "Thieves."; "O yes."). This leads to a staccato of short 
utterances the reader can easily read over without paying attention to it, a train of thought 
with no brakes, so to speak. While there is an underlying logic to the mon ologue, as the 
content is not completely random, and jumps in topic are somewhat related ("Now we can eat 
in peace. No, not in peace, precious. For Precious is lost;"), the monologue has no point to 
make, as it is just Gollum talking to himself; not to eva luate his options to find a solution to a 
problem, but to describe his situation in relation to the Ring (first example) or to reiterate 
what he already decided (in the second example). Neither of these monologues results in a 
change of heart for Gollum. Thus, they have no greater purpose: Gollum is just brabbling. 
 Krege's translation is, with all the liberties he is taking, still a rather faithful adaption 
of the English text. As such, the content of Gollum's brabbling is still the same in Krege's 
version, and it does not impact his character development, just like it didn't in Tolkien's text. 
However, the Krege Gollum seems to at least be more aware of his own monologue in 
Krege's version due to the differing punctuation: Tolkien (and following Tolkien, C arroux) 
use mainly dots to connect the brabbling sentences. Krege, however, introduces additional 
exclamation marks (nine exclamation marks combined replacing dots in the two examples). 
These exclamation marks interrupt the reading flow of the reader more than a simple dot 
 
50 
 
would do it, thus separating the monotonous monologue of the English text into small bits the 
reader consciously reads. In the second example, Krege also translates the uppercase "She" as 
"SIE" in all capital letters, putting way more emphasis on Shelob than Carroux's "Sie". 
 In total, the Krege Gollum, thanks to the translation decisions in Krege's version, 
seems more human and, thus, more sympathetic than his counterparts. While all three 
versions show that Gollum once was a normal perso n who turned into an animalistic evil 
through the influence of the Ring, Gollum preserves more of his humanity in Krege's version: 
his mind seems clearer, and his past as a normal person shines through more compared to the 
other two versions. Of course, Kr ege's version is still a translation of Tolkien's text – thus 
Gollum does not change completely. He is still betraying Frodo and Sam by luring them into 
Shelob's lair and he is still addicted to the evil influence of the Ring, holding his Precious 
dearer than himself. But I believe that the changes Krege made may make it easier for the 
reader to understand why both Bilbo in The Hobbit and Frodo in LotR pity Gollum. 
5.3 GALADRIEL 
My third in -depth character a nalysis will be about the character of Galadriel, the Lady of 
Lórien. Galadriel is a prime example of a character with a very "concentrated" appearance in 
LotR, with the vast majority of her appearances being in the chapter "The Mirror of 
Galadriel" and the chapter directly following that chapter, "Farewell to Lórien". 
 Due to her character being mainly explored in these 26 pages (in Tolkien), with only 
short appearances or mentions throughout the rest of LotR, her depiction in this short part of 
LotR greatly influences her character perception. 
 Before the first mention of her name by a character, the name of Galadriel appears 
twice in LotR: once in a passing mention in the prologue, and the second time in the title of 
the chapter "The Mirror of Galadriel" before she gets mentioned in the text. Thus, this 
introduction by Haldir is the first real impression a reader gets of this character: 
 
51 
 
Tolkien 353 
Carroux I:426 
Krege 380 
Here is the city of 
the Galadhrim where 
dwell the Lord 
Celeborn and 
Galadriel the Lady 
of Lórien. 
Hier ist die Stadt 
der Galadrim, wo 
der Herr Celeborn 
und Galadriel, die 
Herrin von Lórien 
wohnen. 
Dies ist die Stadt 
der Galadhrim, wo 
der Herr Celeborn 
und die Frau 
Galadriel wohnen, 
der Herr und die 
Herrin von Lórien. 
 As usual, Carroux mirrors Tolkien's semantics and syntax as closely as possible, while 
Krege shows some liberties again. This was criticized by Nagel: "It is obvious from [Tolkien] 
that Galadriel is ruler of Lórien, while Celeborn is not. He is called "Lord" as title of honour, 
but the qualification "of Lórien" is applied to Galadriel alone; thus, [Krege] overgeneralises" 
(36). Thus, Krege changes the standing of Galadriel. However, he does not do so in this 
excerpt alone: whenever Galadriel is mentioned by, e xclusively, "Lady" outside of spoken 
conversation, Krege translates the title by simply writing "Galadriel" (compared to "Lady 
Galadriel", which he usually translates with "Frau Galadriel"); examples: 
Tolkien 358 
Carroux I:432 
Krege 385 
the Lady die Herrin Galadriel 
Tolkien 359 
Carroux I:433 
Krege 386 
the Lord and Lady Den Herrn und die 
Herrin 
Celeborn und 
Galadriel 
Tolkien 361 
Carroux I:436 
Krege 389 
the Lady Frau Galadriel Galadriel 
Tolkien 363 
Carroux I:438 
Krege 390 
the Lady Frau Galadriel Galadriel 
Tolkien 366 
Carroux I:441 
Krege 393 
the Lady die Herrin Galadriel 
Tolkien 376     
Carroux I:454 
Krege 404 
the Lady die Herrin Galadriel 
Tolkien 376 
Carroux I:454 
the Lady Frau Galadriel Galadriel 
 
52 
 
Krege 404 
Tolkien 377 
Carroux I:455 
Krege 405 
the Lady die Herrin Galadriel 
Tolkien 377 
Carroux I:455 
Krege 405 
of the Lady der Herrin Galadriels 
 As can be seen from these examples, Krege often replaces the title of Galadriel with 
her name in his translation, when the title is used outside of s poken sentences, while 
Galadriel retains her title in conversation3: 
Tolkien 361 
Carroux I:435 
Krege 388 
the Lord and Lady den Herrn und die 
Herrin 
den Herrn und die 
hohe Frau 
Tolkien 361 
Carroux I:436 
Krege 382 
the Lady of the 
Elves 
die Herrin der 
Elben 
die hohe Frau 
Tolkien 362 
Carroux I:437 
Krege 389 
Lady Herrin hohe Frau 
Tolkien 366 
Carroux I:442 
Krege 394 
Lady Herrin hohe Frau 
Tolkien 375 
Carroux I:452 
Krege 403 
Lady Herrin Hohe Frau 
Tolkien 376 
Carroux I:453 
Krege 404 
Lady Herrin Hohe Frau 
Tolkien 376 
Carroux I:454 
Krege 404 
Lady Herrin hohe Frau 
 
3 The upper - and lowercase occure nces of "hohe/Hohe Frau" follow conventional German capitalization rules 
within their context. 
 
53 
 
 All of these instances of " Lady" have been spoken by other characters (Frodo, Sam, 
Aragorn, Gimli). An explanation for why Krege (mostly) replaces Galadriels title outside of 
spoken utterances could be his "modernizing" of the text: perhaps Krege thought it outdated 
or strange for his readers to refer to characters as their title instead of their name while 
writing as the narrator, while characters referring to other characters by tit le fits the text -
world. The "modernity" argument does fall flat, though, since "hohe Frau" is an extremely 
outdated title, that arguably feels more archaic than, whilst not improving on, Carroux's 
translation of "Herrin". 
 Krege was not throughout with these changes, however, leaving single occurrences of 
the title in the narrators' words. Most of these occurrences can be explained otherwise, 
however: either do they directly follow a mention of her name, while they cannot be  replaced 
by a pronoun ("Sehr groß waren sie beide, Frau Galadriel nicht minder als Herr Celeborn, 
sehr schön und würdevoll. Gekleidet waren sie ganz in Weiß; das Haar der hohen F rau …" 
Krege 382); or they are mentioned in indirect speech, thus indirectly being uttered by a 
character in the text -world ("Ein Weilchen sprachen die Reisenden noch … über den Herrn 
und die Herrin der Galadhrim" Krege 385); or she is mentioned in a double mention after 
Celeborn was named directly ("An diesem Abend wurden die  Gefährten abermals in 
Celeborns luftigen Palast hinaufberufen und vom Herrn und der Herrin aufs liebenswürdigste 
empfangen" Krege 395). 
 Carroux is equally (in-)consistent with the translations of the title, usually sticking to 
"Herrin", while at times using " Frau Galadriel", even when the English text only mentions 
"Lady" (and, in one instance, even translating "Frau Galadriel" when Tolkien only writes 
"Galadriel", without title). Unlike for Krege, I cannot access the English text Carroux 
translated from. Thus , it is possible that these inconsistencies stem from changes in the 
English LotR between Carroux's translation in 1969 and the 2004 edition I use in this study. 
 
54 
 
 There are three additional occurrences of the title mentioned by the narrator in Krege's 
translation which can not be explained in the ways I mentioned above:  
Tolkien 373 
Carroux I:450 
Krege 401 
The Lady ended her 
song and greeted 
them. 
Die Herrin beendete 
ihr Lied und 
begrüßte sie. 
Frau Galadriel 
beendete ihr Lied 
und begrüßte sie. 
 There is no discernible reason w hy Krege would translate this particular instance of 
"Lady" with "Frau Galadriel" instead of just "Galadriel" as he does everywhere else in these 
two chapters. I will thus attribute this instance to an oversight. I will detail the se cond and 
third occurrence below. 
 What is the effect of these title translations, however? In Krege, the decision to almost 
exclusively mention any sort of title in spoken utterances of characters in the text -world 
leaves multiple viable interpretations to  the reader. On the two far ends of the scale of 
interpretations, then, is either the interpretation that Krege's Galadriel is less awe -inspiring 
and/or less worthy of respect than the Galadriel in Carroux's and Tolkien's version; or the 
interpretation that the reader should realize the social standing, and maybe even that Galadriel 
deserves her social standing, through the behaviour of Galadriel herself and those around her, 
and not through the imposition of the author (and translator) by forcing ominous t itles on the 
reader in passages written by the "neutral" narrator, thus this interpretation gives the most 
power to the reader. 
 Carroux, meanwhile, managed to mirror Tolkien's title very well: "Lady" is without a 
doubt a title; but at the same time, it is  not very descriptive of Galadriels specific position, as 
"Duchess", "Baroness", or "Queen" would do. With "Herrin", Carroux manages to capture 
this perfectly: its an unspecific title, yet it is a title, thus showing the superior social standing 
of Galadriel. 
 At the same time, it is interesting to see that both German translations choose to 
translate the title as "Frau" when in combination with her name (as in "Lady Galadriel"), 
 
55 
 
instead of translating the title as usual (e.g. "(die) Herrin Galadriel" or "( die) hohe Frau 
Galadriel") respectively). 
 Two more title translations are also interesting to observe: 
Tolkien 358 
Carroux I:432 
Krege 385 
Elvish Lady Elben-Herrin Elbendame 
Tolkien 361 
Carroux I:436 
Krege 389 
Elf-lady Elben-Herrin Elbenfürstin 
 In the first example, Boromir t alks about Galadriel and calls her "Elvish Lady". 
Carroux stays consistent with her translation of "Lady" (when the name "Galadriel" does not 
follow) and chooses to separate the title from the descriptor ("Elvish" or "Elben"), instead of 
creating a compound, as Krege does in his translation. Since this is an utterance by a 
character in the text -world, and not a passage by the narrator, this is not in line with his 
observed practice of handling t he title. "Dame" is a word for a mature woman, usually 
connotated with respect. However, it is far from being a title on the level of "Herrin". This 
instance may say more about Krege's treatment of Boromir's character than that of Galadriel's, 
though. One could argue that Boromir chooses to not use the title in Krege's translation, as he 
is in disdain towards Galadriel's mind -reading in the context of this utterance (see also the 
translation of "To me it seemed exceedingly strange" (Tolkien 358) as "Ich fan d es unerhört" 
(Krege 385) – re-translated: "I thought it outrageous"). 
 The second instance, however, is a description by the narrator and is the second 
occurrence in which Krege breaks with his established practice. Not only does he translate 
the title i n a narrator -passage (though it could be argued that it is again due to the name 
"Galadriel" appearing close-by when Galadriel names her "Mirror of Galadriel"), Krege even 
chooses a title implying nobility: "Fürstin". This is the title of a high -ranking noble woman, 
often translated as "Princess". Krege most likely intended the "Fürstin" to simply mean "ruler 
 
56 
 
(of Lórien)" instead of introducing an Elvish nobility system. However, his intention has no 
effect on the reader, who may now be left with unanswerab le questions if the existence of a 
"Fürstin" also implies the existence of Elf-Dukes, Elf-Barons and Elf-Earls. 
 I can not give a satisfying explanation for Krege's translation choice in the last 
occurrence of breaking his practice either, however it does lead me away from the title 
discussion: 
Tolkien 362 
Carroux I:437 
Krege 389 
"Like as not," said 
the Lady with a 
gentle laugh 
"Höchstwahrscheinli
ch", sagte die 
Herrin und lachte 
leise 
"Na klar!" sagte 
die hohe Frau leise 
kichernd 
 Krege's translation of "gentle laugh" as "leise kichernd" has been repeatedly criticized, 
including Stopfel and Nagel: "[T]he translation of "'Like as not,' said the Lady with a gentle 
laugh" … reads somewhat like "'Sure!' said the Lady giggling softly"" (Stopfel 13); 
""Kichern" (giggle) is nowhere near within the span of meaning of "to laugh gently", and in 
this context … provides the elven ruler with some kind of 'girlish' image" (Nagel 47). They 
both also criticize Galadriel's "Na klar!" (Nagel explicitly, Stopfel implicitly); h owever, this 
criticism is misguided, as Galadriel merely mocks Sam (gently, as we can see from the quote), 
who uses the respective words ("Like as not", "Höchstwahrscheinlich" and "Na klar!") right 
before Galadriel. Thus, criticizing Galadriel's use of Sam 's words is equal to criticizing 
Krege's choice of Sam's words, but  uttering "Na klar" fits Sam's character as portrayed in 
Krege and Tolkien. 
 Both German translations have trouble conveying the "gentle" part of Galadriel's 
laugh, however. This makes Galadriel meaner in both German translations, and in Krege's 
translation she even degrades, to use Nagel's comparison to an extreme, to a female High 
School bully, mocking Sam's simple manner of speech. In Tolkien's text, meanwhile, 
Galadriel is merely amused, without ill intent. 
 
57 
 
 There are some other parts of Galadriel's character which were changed between 
translations. As with the Black Riders, Galadriel's powers were also changed: 
Tolkien 357 
Carroux I:431 
Krege 384 
And with that word 
she held them with 
her eyes, and in 
silence looked 
searchingly at each 
of them in turn. 
None save Legolas 
and Aragorn could 
long endure her 
glance. Sam quickly 
blushed and hung 
his head. At length 
the Lady Galadriel 
released them from 
her eyes, and she 
smiled. 
Und nach diesen 
Worten hielt 
Galadriel sie mit 
ihrem Blick 
gefangen und 
schaute schweigend 
der Reihe nach 
jeden einzelnen von 
ihnen forschend an. 
Keiner außer 
Legolas und Aragorn 
vermochte ihren 
Blick lange zu 
ertragen. Sam 
errötete gleich und 
ließ den Kopf 
hängen. Schließlich 
entließ Frau 
Galadriel sie aus 
ihrem Blick und 
lächelte.  
Und mit diesen 
Worten fasste 
Galadriel sie ins 
Auge und sah sie 
einen nach dem 
andern forschend 
an, ohne ein Wort 
zu sagen. Niemand 
bis auf Legolas und 
Aragorn konnte 
ihrem Blick lange 
standhalten. Sam 
wurde gleich rot 
und senkte den 
Kopf. Dann entließ 
Frau Galadriel sie 
aus ihrem Blick und 
lächelte. 
 On first glance, all three text versions appear to carry the same meaning. However, 
Carroux's use of the German idiom "Blick gefangen halten" subtly changes Galadriel's 
power: the idiom is similar to the English "catching your eye", in that it describes something 
you can not look away from. If a person catches your eye in the active sense, as is the case for 
Galadriel in this passage, it implies that this person locks eyes with you in a way that you can 
not avert your eyes voluntarily. Carroux's choice of words suggests a similar situation. 
 However, this is not what is happening in this passage, as the reader will notice from 
the context: Galadriel's gaze does not capture the body of the Fellowship, but their minds. 
The respective person being "held … with her eyes" is able to turn away with their body, but 
they can not turn away from Galadriel's words in their mind. As the reade r will read a few 
pages later, Galadriel tests the endurance and willingness of each member of the Fellowship 
to push on and continue their journey after the death of Gandalf in this passage. That's why 
 
58 
 
the Fellowship can turn away from Galadriel first and  afterwards be released by her later: 
because her eyes are not holding them physically. 
 Krege's translation fits Tolkien's meaning better here. His translation states that 
Galadriel looks at them deeply and later releases them from her gaze. This captures  the 
English meaning perfectly, arguably better than the English text itself. 
 Another change can be observed in this passage: 
Tolkien 365 
Carroux I:440 
Krege 392 
she said, divining 
his thought, 
sagte sie und 
erriet seine 
Gedanken. 
sagte sie, seine 
Gedanken erratend 
 "Divining", according to the Reader's Companion , means "to determine or interpret 
by supernatural insight" (Hammond and Scull 324). Both German translations, on the other 
hand, translate it with "guessing his thoughts", eliminating any supernatural activity by 
Galadriel here, and instead leaving the impression of good guesswork. More fitting German 
translations, in my opinion, would have been "Gedanken erforschen" (explore thoughts) or 
"Gedanken (er)fühlen" (feel thoughts). This would ha ve preserved Galadriel's power of 
touching on the mind of other people, which is lost in the German translations. 
 In total it appears that Galadriel has been subject to changes on two broad subjects: 
how her titles were handled, and how powerful her telep athic powers are. While the power 
translation falls into a category of close versus liberal reading already seen in this study, 
where small changes in the translation may result in small changes of a character, the title 
translations show a big challenge f or translators: here cultures clash, as German translators 
attempt to find a cultural equivalent to an English title, which appears to not be perfectly 
doable. As an additional challenge, the title is that of a fictional culture, creating even more 
difficulties, as the standing of a "Lady" is not clearly defined in Elvish culture and the 
translator has to decide on a proper translation of the title in context of Galadriel's social 
standing in the text-world. 
 
59 
 
5.4 OTHER CHARACTERS AND SCENES 
  In this chapter , I will analyze additional characters and scenes with changes in 
character perception by the reader which are too small or few to warrant an own chapter. 
Even so, this chapter will not be comprehensive; listing every text-excerpt with meaningful 
differences in character perception (and more, see 3) would go beyond the scope of this thesis. 
5.4.1 BOROMIR 
Boromir's character is largely consistent throughout the three text -versions. Two observed 
differences were mentioned in the chapter concerning Galadriel, where he uses "Elbendame" 
instead of "Elben-Herrin" or "Elvish Lady" and "Ich fand es unerhört" instead of "Ich fand es 
überaus merkwürdig" or "To me it seemed exceedingly strange", respectively. The 
implications of these changes were touched on  briefly in that chapter and require no 
additional comments. 
 However, there is another scene with remarkable changes to Boromir's character 
presentation between the three text -versions, namely the scene where he argues with Frodo 
about the futility of their endeavor and the "correct" way to use the Ring. First instance: 
Tolkien 398 
Carroux I:480 
Krege 426 
Boromir got up and 
walked about 
impatiently. 
Boromir stand auf 
und schritt 
ärgerlich auf und 
ab. 
Boromir stand auf 
und lief ärgerlich 
hin und her. 
 At the point of this sentence, the reader does not fully know yet that Boromir is under 
the influence of the Ring and intends to take it from Frodo. It is implied, as Boromir already 
argues with Frodo at this point; yet it could also merely be a quarrel of opinions with multiple 
possible outcomes. Both German translators decide to translate "impatiently" in this situation 
with "ärgerlich". However, a conventional German -English dictionary will list "ungeduldig" 
as the most fitting translation, often as the only one. 
 Both translations seem fitting in the context, thus I am not arguing for a translation 
error of the German translators. It is remarkable, however, that both translators chose to go 
 
60 
 
with the more "aggressive" translation of the two viable translatio ns available, increasing the 
foreshadowing of what is to come compared to the other option. 
 In the same passage, another word -choice is notable: in Carroux, Boromir "schritt", 
while in Krege, he "lief". "Lief", from "laufen", is the most immediate translation of "walked", 
merely describing the method of locomotion by using limbs. "Schritt", from "Schreiten", 
however, has a more noble connotation: it describes a conscious mode of movement; a prince 
on his way to his coronation may do so by "schreiten".  It is a word often used in combination 
with words such as "dignified", "gracefully", "ceremoniously" etc. 
 With this word-choice, Carroux preserves Boromir's dignity as son of the Steward of 
Gondor and as the man he believes himself to be – even through this s cene, where the 
influence of the Ring takes over and dictates his thoughts, leading to his quasi -monologue as 
he explains to Frodo why the destruction of the Ring is the wrong path: 
Tolkien 398 
Carroux I:480 
Krege 426 
The fearless, the 
ruthless, these 
alone will achieve 
victory. 
Die Furchtlosen, 
die Mitleidlosen 
allein werden den 
Sieg erringen. 
Die 
Unerschrockenen, 
die Rücksichtslosen 
allein können den 
Sieg erringen. 
 In this excerpt, the translators c hose to translate "ruthless" very differently. While the 
translations of "fearless" are rather similar ("furchtlos" = "fearless", quite literally, while 
"unerschrocken" = "unfrightened"), there is a striking difference between "Mitleidlosen" and 
"Rücksichtslosen". 
 In my reading, the core difference between "Mitleidlos" and "Rücksichtslos" is the 
moral conviction: a "rücksichtslose" person may be willing to make sacrifices in a sort of 
utilitarian thinking, sacrificing few for a greater good. They may not even feel remorse for 
the victims a long their path to the greater good. However, they are capable of empathy in 
general. A "mitleidlose" person, however, does not feel empathy in any given situation. 
 
61 
 
 Not every German speaker may agree with this reading of "rücksichtslos" and 
"mitleidlos"; however, I as a reader feel like the Boromir in Carroux is simply insane, while 
the Boromir in Krege seems to be a hardliner, who may still have sanity left in him. 
 One could argue convincingly that Tolkien's Boromir at this point in the text is indeed 
insane, succumbing to the influence of the One Ring. We see the effect of that in the 
following excerpt: 
Tolkien 399 
Carroux I:481 
Krege 427 
How it angers me! 
Fool! Obstinate 
fool! Running 
willfully to death 
and ruining our 
cause. If any 
mortals have claim 
to the Ring, it is 
the men of Númenor, 
and not Halflings. 
It is not yours 
save by unhappy 
chance. It might 
have been mine. It 
should be mine. 
Give it to me! 
Wie mich das 
erbost! Narr! 
Dickköpfiger Narr! 
Wissentlich dem Tod 
in die Arme laufen 
und unsere Sache 
verderben! Wenn 
irgendwelche 
Sterblichen 
Anspruch auf den 
Ring haben, dann 
sind es die 
Menschen von 
Númenor, und nicht 
Halblinge! Du hast 
ihn nur durch einen 
unglücklichen 
Zufall erhalten. Er 
hätte mir gehören 
können. Er sollte 
mir gehören. Gib 
ihn mir! 
Ich könnte rasen! 
Dummkopf! Du 
dickschädeliger 
Dummkopf! 
Vorsätzlich dem Tod 
in die Arme zu 
laufen und unsere 
Sache zuschanden zu 
machen! Wenn irgend 
Sterbliche auf den 
Ring einen Anspruch 
haben, dann die 
Menschen von 
Númenor und nicht 
die Halblinge. Er 
ist nur durch einen 
unglücklichen 
Zufall an dich 
gekommen. Er hätte 
mein sein können. 
Er sollte mein 
sein. Gib ihn her! 
 If one remembers the brabbling m onologues of Gollum, one may find a striking 
semblance in this passage. While Boromir's manner of  speech is not exactly in the same style 
as Gollum's monologues, the concatenation of short bursts of thought are similar. The most 
important difference to me, however, is the last sentence: "Give it to me!" Carroux translates 
it as "Gib ihn mir!", while Krege chooses "Gib ihn her!". 
 The important difference here is the implication; Carroux's Boromir wants the Ring 
for himself, just as Tolkien's: he wants Frodo to give the Ring to him. The Krege Boromir 
wants the Ring, without stating the purpose (the purp ose in Tolkien being "to me"). This 
 
62 
 
omission of the egoistic centre of Boromir's motivation changes Boromir's character in 
comparison to the other two: in Krege, there is the slightest chance left that Boromir intends 
to use the Ring exclusively for the wa r of Minas Tirith and Mordor – this chance does not 
exist in Carroux and Tolkien. In their versions, the culminating "Give it to me!" makes it 
obvious that Boromir wants the Ring solely for himself, without thinking much further as to 
if or how to use it. It is clear that Boromir already lost to the manipulation of Sauron's Ring. 
 It is only a slight difference, yet it changes who Boromir is and stands for: The 
"[t]rue-harted Men" who will "not be corrupted" (Tolkien 398) stand a chance in Krege. They 
do not in Tolkien and Carroux. 
 The difference in translation  is minimal and, as always, reader -dependent; some 
would argue that "mein sein" is more possessive than "mir gehören", making Krege's 
Boromir more egoistic than Carroux's and maybe Tolkien's. As this is reader -dependent, 
however, it merely strengthens this study when multiple readings exist. 
5.4.2 ARAGORN/STRIDER 
The character of Aragorn is similarly largely consistent but shows several differences in his 
introduction scene in the "Prancing Pony", where he is still named "Strider". 
Tolkien 156 
Carroux I:196 
Krege 177 
"Him?" said the 
landlord in an 
answering whisper, 
cocking an eye 
without turning his 
head. 
"Der?" sagte der 
Wirt und schielte 
zu ihm hinüber, 
ohne den Kopf zu 
drehen. 
"Der?" antwortete 
der Wirt, 
gleichfalls 
flüsternd und 
zwinkerte warnend, 
ohne den Kopf 
hinzuwenden. 
 Yet again, the reader is c onfronted with a first impression of a new character. 
Butterbur's behaviour is careful, giving a first hint of potential danger from this Strider person. 
However, I have difficulty imagining a  "warning wink", which Krege introduces in his 
translation. This brings the reader to additional alert – the warning aspect is not existent in 
 
63 
 
any of the other two versions. At the same time, Butterbur's behaviour is less careful of 
Strider in Carroux's version: there he does not whisper, but just speaks. 
 Krege betrays the true affiliation of Strider in a subtle way early on, however. As 
mentioned in 4, Krege uses familiar pronouns much more often than deferential. If a 
deferential pronoun comes up in Kreg e's translation, it is a special sign of respect – and the 
enemies in Krege's translation would never use a deferential pronoun when speaking with 
Frodo – which Strider does in Krege's translation before the Hobbits (and the readers) figure 
out that Strider is a friend of Gandalf: "Sie sollten lieber schnell etwas tun!" (Krege 179). A 
careful reader will know at this point that Strider is not an enemy. 
 The most important difference in the presentation of Aragorn, however, is in the scene 
of his departure to the Paths of the Dead, when he rejects Éowyn: 
Tolkien 758 
Carroux III:61 
Krege 829 
"Then wilt thou 
not let me ride 
with this 
company, as I 
have asked?" […] 
"For that I could 
not grant without 
leave of the king 
and of your 
brother; and they 
will not return 
until tomorrow. 
[…] Farewell!" 
"Willst du mich 
dann nicht 
mitreiten lassen in 
dieser Schar, wie 
ich gebeten habe?" 
[…] "Denn diese 
Bitte könnte ich 
nicht gewähren ohne 
die Erlaubnis des 
Königs und Eures 
Bruders, und vor 
morgen werden sie 
nicht zurückkehren. 
[…] Leb wohl!" 
"Und willst du mich 
nicht mit deiner 
Schar reiten 
lassen, wie ich es 
erbeten habe?" […] 
"Denn das könnte 
ich dir nicht ohne 
Erlaubnis des 
Königs und deines 
Bruders gewähren; 
und sie werden erst 
morgen 
zurückkommen. […] 
Lebe wohl!" 
 This scene is one of the very rare instances in the text, where Tolkien uses the old thee, 
thou. This passage is a representation of the situation described in the Reader's Companion:  
 Èowyn began [the prior] conversation with Aragorn using formal you, your, but … 
 pointedly changes to the intimate thee, expressing her feelings. When [this] 
 conversation resumes the next [day], she continues to use thee, thou, but Aragorn 
 consistently addresses her with you, your, painfully polite. (532) 
 
64 
 
 This scene is a rejection scene, and the marker for the rejection is Aragorn's continued 
use of you, your ("your brother"), even after Èowyn starts using thee, thou ("wilt thou not"). 
Carroux mirrors th is use of familiar and deferential pronouns: Èowyn uses "du", Aragorn 
"Ihr" ("Eures Bruders"). While not quite as striking as in Tolkien's version, due to both 
familiar and deferential pronouns still being used in modern German, unlike in English, the 
reader can still figure out what happens, as Carroux uses familiar pronouns very sparingly. 
 In Krege, this rejection is completely lost, as both characters use familiar "du" from 
the start. The switch in pronouns does not happen, and the rejection is not clear thanks to that. 
The reader can not even understand that this scene is a rejection of Èowyn's feelings, not just 
of her proposal to ride with Aragorn. This changes the dynamic of the whole Aragorn -Èowyn 
relationship. 
 This continues later, when Aragorn st arts using thee, thou, as Èowyn accepts his 
rejection and bonds with Faramir (Tolkien 977), as Aragorn merely continues using "du" in 
Krege, instead of showing a switch of deferential to familiar pronouns as in Tolkien and 
Carroux. 
5.4.3 DENETHOR 
Another example of Tolkien using thee, thou can be found in Denethor's madness: while he 
used you, your when talking to Gandalf before (e.g. Tolkien 758), Denethor switches to thee, 
thou when his madness manifests during the siege of Gondor (e.g. Tolkien 8 54). Yet again, 
this switch of deferential to familiar pronouns, in this case out of disrespect instead of 
familiarity, does not exist in Krege, as Denethor uses "du" throughout the text, while Carroux 
can yet again show this switch in pronouns. 
 However, Krege finds an alternative way to show Denethors loss of respect before 
anyone: when talking about Aragorn, Denethor uses "Ranger of the North" in Tolkien (853), 
and "Waldläufer aus dem Norden" in Carroux (III:143); Krege translates it as "Waldschrat 
 
65 
 
aus dem Norden" (901). A "Schrat" is a mystical being in German and Austrian folklore (an 
example of Krege's domestication). They are spirits of nature, often attributed to cause 
nightmares, which fits with Denethor's perception of Aragorn, as the homecoming of  the 
King is a nightmare for Denethor, who would lose his position of power. 
 In modern German, "Schrat" is usually not used to reference spirits of nature, however, 
but to describe a disheveled, uncivilized person. Thus, Krege introduces a clever polysemy , 
by which Denethor both insults Aragorn, as he does in Tolkien, even though he uses the 
correct title of "Ranger"; and at the same time sort of accepts Aragorn's claim on the throne 
as he describes him as a cause of nightmares. 
  
 
66 
 
6. Analysis: Results 
 In this study, I have t aken an in -depth look at the changes in character perception 
between the three text -versions of LotR examined in this study, created by translation 
decisions by Carroux and Krege in their respective translations. I have explored the Black 
Riders, Gollum and Galadriel with increased care, as I found more, and more significant 
changes for these three chara cters, but I also shed light on the changes affecting other 
characters as well. 
 In this process, I found the most unique version to be the translation by Krege, as he 
translates taking more liberties than Carroux, who tries to mirror the semantics and syn tax of 
Tolkien as closely as possible. As a logical consequence of his different approach, Krege's 
text shows more, and bigger deviations in character perception in general, though it does not 
follow that Carroux's translation perfectly encapsulates the ch aracter perceptions readers may 
have when reading Tolkien either. 
 While Carroux's differences compared to Tolkien are often minuscule, Krege's 
differences led to the clues for a discussion of xenophobia and homophobia in his translation, 
changed how human or how animalistic the readers may perceive Gollum or the Black Riders 
to be and changed Galadriel's social standing in Elvish society, as titles were translated 
differently. However, as was shown in the last section, these changes are not the only ones 
introduced, as additional differences were observed throughout the whole text of LotR. 
 Krege was found to be domesticating and dynamically equivalent in his translation, 
while Carroux was foreignizing in the sense that her text is obviously a translation, and 
formally equivalent. I suppose it makes sense, then, that Krege's version deviates more from 
the English text in terms of clues for differing possible constructions of meaning, as Carroux, 
in Schleiermacher's words "leaves the author in peace as much a s possible and moves the 
 
67 
 
reader towards him", while Krege "leaves the reader in peace, as much as possible, and 
moves the author towards him" (quoted in Venuti 15). 
6.1  RESULT 1: TRANSLATIONS IN LITERATURE STUDIES 
In this section, I am going to talk about the impact I hope this study to will have in the future. 
The goal of this study was to show the implications of working with a translation in the field 
of literature studies. As established, a translation is not the exact repetition of the meaning of 
the ST in the TL, but an interpretation of the ST, written in the TL. In this case, it is Carroux's 
and Krege's interpretation of LotR, which leads to the changes examined in this study. The 
reader of these interpretations, then, constructs his own meaning based on the (changed) clues 
of the interpretations by Krege and Carroux, creating their own interpretation yet again. 
 Thus, a literature studies  academic must be aware of these circumstances when 
working with translations: his reading of the relationship of , for example, Aragorn and 
Èowyn, may be vastly different depending on which version he is working with. When 
discussing a literary work, then, it is important that the participants of the discussion know 
which version of the text they are discussing: the mention of Maggot's xenophobia will 
puzzle the reader of Tolkien's English text. 
 Is this, then, an argument to not work with translations at all in literature studies? I do 
not think so: translations are the only widespread medium in which academics can find a 
complete interpretation of a literary work by a third person. This makes them case studies for 
hermeneutics. Thus, I would argue that this is an argument in favour of working with 
translations in literature studies. 
 Additionally, translations will h ave a cultural effect on the cultures speaking the 
language of the translation. The perception of LotR in Germany before the Krege translation 
and the movie trilogy was arguably more influenced by Carroux's translation than by 
 
68 
 
Tolkien's English text. This perception of LotR, then, may have influenced various German 
authors over the years. 
 Translations are, thus, a part of the intertextual relationship and as such cannot be 
ignored in academic fields working with texts. They are not only interesting for aca demics, 
however, as they influence generations of readers. 
 I argue that translators, then, should be ascribed a similar importance as authors. Even 
in the age of the Death of the Author, authors are still omnipresent when working with texts: 
people read the "new Tolkien" (or insert other author names)  and academic texts will quote, 
for example, Tolkien 245. In this study, I consistently quoted Carroux's and Krege's 
translations as "Carroux 245" and "Krege 245". This was, on one hand, of course for practical 
reasons, as per quotation guidelines the author should be cited (symptomatic for the low 
importance assigned to translators), which is confusing as Tolkien would be the author for all 
three text versions. On the other hand, I believe there is an argument  to cite translations like 
this in the future. 
 Lawrence Venuti first published The Translator's Invisibility  in 1995, criticizing the 
under-representation of translators compared to the authors of the works they translate. He 
advocates for foreignization as the translation method to go for, to make translations 
noticeable as such, and thus to draw attention to the work of the translator: 
 An illusionism fostered by fluent translating, the translator's invisibility at once enacts 
 and masks an insidious domestication of foreign texts, rewriting them in the 
 transparent discourse that prevails in English and that s elects precisely those foreign 
 texts amenable to fluent translating. (Venuti 12) 
In this passage, Venuti talks about the phenomenon that translators live in self -imposed 
invisibility: by translating "fluent", they hide the fact that the reader reads a tra nslation, thus 
making their work as translator unnoticeable. 
 
69 
 
 Even though my reasoning is different, I come to the same conclusion: the translators 
are under -represented, not only in society, as Venuti shows, resulting in low wages and 
contracts that do no t give translators any rights to their translation, as these rights stay with 
the author of the original work (Venuti 9); but in academics too. 
 This may be symptomatic of the way literature studies departments are structured in 
various countries: universi ties may have an English department, a German department, a 
French department (or Germanic and Romance departments , respectively) etc.; and each of 
these departments almost exclusively work s with novels or poetry originally written in the 
language(s) of the respective department. This most likely stems from the fact that literature 
studies departments want to work with literature that influenced  (and still influence)  the 
culture of their language.  However, as this study has shown, translations are more than  
merely replacing an SL element with the equivalent TL element, resulting in a perfect 
representation of, e.g., the English text in German. Instead, they are interpretations, 
introducing a new point of view on the contents of the original work, and they in fluence the 
intertext of any culture translations are prevalent in. This influence of translations on the 
intertext should be extremely interesting for any literature studies department, thus making 
the translations themselves interesting, thus making the translator as interesting as the author.  
Translations and translators should then be included in the academic field of work of these 
departments. 
 Even when the author is dead, the work still influences; and if the translator is dead, 
the translation still influences. 
 In conclusion, I think there is merit in a closer collaboration of the academic fields of 
translation studies  and literature studies ; translations should not only be interesting for 
linguists, but for any academic in the field of literature studies as well, who will undoubtedly 
work with literary works of his chosen language that are influenced by translations of foreign 
 
70 
 
literary works. It follows that working with (influential) translations and translators should be 
included in the field of w ork of any literature studies department – and in their respective 
(under-) graduate programs. 
6.2  RESULT 2: TOLKIEN STUDIES 
A second main result of this study will ideally lead to a change, or at least the development of 
a parallel movement, in Tolkien studies. As any reader of this study will be aware of at this 
point, I do subscribe to the Death of the Author theory, or paradigm. While reading through 
various articles and books in Tolkien studies, I noticed that a lot of these articles and books 
operate under the idea of penetrating the text to reach the intention of the author, Tolkien. 
Examples of works cited in this study would be Allan Turner in Translating Tolkien  to a 
certain extent, but mainly Rainer Nagel, who starts his comparison of Carroux's and Krege's 
translations with a look at "Tolkien's Intentions When Writing The Lord of the Rings " ("New 
One" 23).  
 While the fact that it is called " Tolkien studies" shows a certain fascination with the 
author Tolkien, which may make it unsurprising that the Death of the Author does not exist 
for huge parts of this academic community, I argue that this defiance of the Death of the 
Author is unnecessary. In fact, I succeed ed in basing my comparisons in this study 
exclusively on Tolkien's, Carroux's and Krege's text, without any need to reference secondary 
literature; and when I did refer  to the Reader's Companion it was either due to concise 
summaries of what the text expre sses I could quote, explanation of words, or background 
information on possible constructed meanings available in the text itself without the use of 
secondary literature as well. 
 In other words: The intentions of Tolkien this academic community  is so fond  of 
when working with his texts, quoting his Letters and other works, are for the most part  
already expressed by the text, which makes it an unnecessary effort to prove these meanings  
 
71 
 
through third-party means. By clinging to Tolkien as authoritative figur e, Tolkien studies at 
the same time create unnecessary work for themselves, and cripple themselves of additional, 
new readings of Tolkien's works. 
 This is even more significant when working with translations: by reducing translations 
into those that can c onvey Tolkien's intentions and those that cannot, dismissing the latter 
translations as "bad", Tolkien studies further narrow their scope. When Krege introduces a 
discussion about xenophobia and racism to Tolkien, why should it be dismissed when 
Tolkien created a world of a plethora of different races, which of course leads to racism being 
displayed – just look at the prejudices between Dwarves and Elves in LotR? 
 In conclusion, I argue that while Tolkien studies , as the name suggests, is centered 
around Tolkien and his works, it would profit of centering only around the works. The person 
and author J.R.R. Tolkien can still be  one of many literary critics of his works, of course, 
instead of an authoritative figure . To explore Tolkien's intentions should not be the main 
driving force of the academic field of Tolkien studies. I do not suggest that there is no merit 
in doing so, but I do suggest that there is increased merit in allowing other points of view and 
methodologies in working with Tolkien's works. 
  
 
72 
 
7. Conclusion 
 In this study, I compared the two German translations of LotR, the 1969 translation by 
Margaret Carroux and the 2000 translation by Wolfgang Krege, to each other and the English 
text by Tolkien. The comparison focused on the change in the re ader's perception of 
characters due to changed clues for possible constructed meanings resulting from differing 
translation decisions by the translators, as well as the fact that not every polysemic English 
word has an equally polysemic German counterpart. 
 I detected  meaningful differences between character perceptions across the three 
examined text versions, leading to different characters in each text version . The translation of 
Krege deviates more from Carroux and Tolkien than those deviate from each ot her. This is a 
result of Krege's translation being dynamically equivalent and domesticating compared to the 
formally equivalent translation by Carroux. 
 With his dynamically equivalent translation strategy, Krege introduces new clues for 
possible constructed meanings, resulting in new possible interpretations. As noteworthy one 
can mention the xenophobia of Farmer Maggot towards the Black Riders and the change of 
character relationship between the (in comparison to both Tolkien and Carroux) more 
humanized G ollum and Sam, who is increasingly malicious towards Gollum in Krege's 
translation. On Carroux's side, a translation mistake  allows for new interpretations of the 
hierarchy within the ranks of Mordor, implying a hierarchy governed by fear and oppression. 
Further differences of less significance were observed throughout the whole book, slightly 
changing various characters and character relationships between the three text versions. 
 Based on these results of the analysis of my findings , comparing character perception 
across all three text versions, I then argued for an increased heedfulness of translations in the 
academic field of literature studies , including the framing of translators, for example  in 
citations of translations. I pointed out  that translation s impact the culture s of the target 
 
73 
 
languages and, thus, the future texts produced by th ese cultures, which implies that 
translations are very significant for any academic field working with literary works.  I then 
emphasized the importance of literature st udies departments frequently working with 
translations, instead of focusing on texts originally written in their respective language. 
 Furthermore, I argued for the killing of the author in Tolkien studies, a field that still 
frequently produces academic articles based on the assumption of  Tolkien as an authoritative 
figure for his own work. By doing so, Tolkien studies defy the Death of the Author prevalent 
in other fields of literature studies . I further argued that by following the paradigm of the 
Death of the Author, Tolkien studies  would benefit from a larger variety of approaches to 
Tolkien, which w ould enhance Tolkien studies as a whole, instead of defiling the purism of 
Tolkien's works. 
  
 
74 
 
Works Cited 
PRIMARY SOURCES 
Tolkien, J.R.R. The Lord of the Rings. 50th Anniversary Edition. HarperCollinsPublishers. 
 2004. 
 
---. Der Herr der Ringe. Die Gefährten. Translated by Margaret Carroux and poems 
 translated by E.-M. von Freymann, 12th paperback Ed., Klett-Cotta, 1984. 
 
---. Der Herr der Ringe. Die Zwei Türme. Translated by Margaret Carroux and poems 
 translated by E.-M. von Freymann, 12th paperback Ed., Klett-Cotta, 1984. 
 
---. Der Herr der Ringe. Die Rückkehr des Königs. Translated by Margaret Carroux and 
 poems translated by E.-M. von Freymann, 12th paperback Ed., Klett-Cotta, 1984. 
 
---. Der Herr der Ringe. Translated by Wolfgang Krege and poems translated by E.-M. von 
 Freymann, 1st Ed. of the new translation, 10th Ed., Klett-Cotta, 2002 
 
SECONDARY RESOURCES 
Greiner, Norbert. Übersetzung und Literaturwissenschaft. Tübingen, Gunter Narr Verlag 
 2004. 
 
Hammond, Wayne G. and Christina Scull. The Lord of the Rings. A Reader's Companion. 
 HarperCollinsPublishers, 2005. 
 
"Margaret Carroux." TolkienGateway, 20 June 2014,  
 
75 
 
 www.tolkiengateway.net/wiki/Margaret_Carroux, accessed 24 June 2021. 
 
Nagel, Rainer. ""The New One Wants to Assimilate the Alien." Different Interpretations of a 
 Source Text as a Reason for Controversy: The 'Old' and the 'New' German Translation 
 of The Lord of the Rings." Translating Tolkien: Text and Film., edited by Thomas 
 Honegger, Walking Tree Publishers, 2004, pp. 21-52. 
 
Nagel, Rainer. "Verschiedene Interpretationen eines Textes als Grundlage von 
 Übersetzungsstrategien. Die "alte" und die "neue" deutsche HdR-Übersetzung." 
 Hither Shore, vol. 1, no. 1, 2004, pp. 85-118. 
 
Reiß, Katharina and Hans J. Vermeer. Towards a General Theory of Translational Action. 
 Skopos Theory Explained. Routledge, 2014. 
 
Ricœur, Paul. "The Task of Hermeneutics." Hermeneutics and the Human Sciences. Essays 
 on Language, Action and Interpretation. Cambridge, 2016, pp. 3-22. 
 
Ricœur, Paul. "Metaphor and the central problem of hermeneutics." Hermeneutics and the 
 Human Sciences. Essays on Language, Action and Interpretation. Cambridge 2016, 
 pp. 127-143. 
 
Smith, Arden R. "Duzen and Ihrzen in the German Translation of The Lord of the Rings." 
 Mythlore: A Journal of J.R.R. Tolkien, C.S. Lewis, Charles Williams, and Mythopoetic 
 Literature, vol. 21, no. 1, 1995, pp. 33-40. 
 
 
76 
 
Stanchi, Kathryn M. "The Power o f Priming in Legal Advocacy: Using the Science of First 
 Impressions to Persuade the Reader." Oregon Law Review , vol. 89, no.1, 2010, pp. 
 305-351.  
 
Stopfel, Susanne. "Traitors and Translators: Three German Versions of The Lord of the 
 Rings.” Mallorn: The Journal of the Tolkien Society, no. 43, 2005, pp. 11-14. 
 
Turner, Allan. Translating Tolkien. Philological Elements in The Lord of the Rings. Peter 
 Lang, 2005. 
 
Venuti, Lawrence. The Translator's Invisibility. A History of Translation. 2nd ed., Abingdon, 
 Routledge 2008. 
 
 
 
 
 
 