Popular Abstract - As texts which are based on collaborative and interactive narration, tabletop – also 
known as “pen and paper” – role-playing games (TRPGs) are distinct in their technological simplicity. 
Indeed, in their traditional form all they require is the physical presence of a group of players – commonly 
around a table, hence “tabletop” – who collaboratively participate in developing a narrative; and a system 
of rules which allow resolving the outcome of situations in which different levels of chance may be 
involved – the need to write down statistic information making them “pen and paper”. Evidently, this 
apparent lack of sophistication makes role-playing games – as a clearly contemporary cultural 
phenomenon (cf. Punday, 2005; Nephew, 2004; Harrigan, 2007; Mackay, 2001) – stand out in the context of 
a world that is becoming ever more dependent on technology. All the more so, considering the persistence 
of TRPGs in the face of its “descendants” in other more technologically advanced media and despite what 
has become the popular notion of “the bigger, the faster, the better.” Nevertheless, that which occurs 
during a role-playing game session – the level of interactivity, player immersion in the narrative, ﬂexibility 
of the rules, etc. - generally surpasses, even today, what many of its “successors” achieve. How does this 
occur? How is it possible; through what mechanisms do TRPGs allow such sophistication when relying 
solely on the “old fashioned” technologies of (hand-) writing and oral narration? Approaching these 
questions from the general perspective of literary studies, the following paper problematizes what can be 
called a “naïve view” of communication technology by addressing the complex relationship between the 
printed texts used for role-playing – such as rule- and sourcebooks – and the narratives created during 
game-play. To do so, it addresses the fundamental inﬂuence that framings, such as rules, character sheets 
and setting, as well as paratextual elements contained within or at the borders of these texts, such as cover 
illustrations, prologues and epilogues, just to name a few – have on participants’ interpretation and, most 
importantly, creation of TRPG narratives.
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4 
A Closer Look at the (Rule-) Books: 
Framings and Paratexts in Tabletop 
Role-playing Games
ABSTRACT
Approaching the subject from the general 
perspective of literary studies, the following paper 
analyzes the impact that framings (as by Wolf, 
1999) and paratexts (as by Genette, 1987) 2 
contained within TRPG rule- and sourcebooks 3 
have on the construction and negotiation of 
narratives during game-play. More speciﬁcally, the 
text argues for an unconventional use of such 
elements due to the fact that they not only affect 
the reception of the diegesis (once it has come into 
existence) but, because they temporally precede its 
actual creation, heavily inﬂuence player 
expectations and are thus decisive for the 
subsequent production of text. This way of using 
ﬁction to create additional ﬁction has relevance to 
forms of readership beyond RPG play (Walton, 
1990) and may account for the persistence of the 
face-to-face game in a technologically mediated 
age.
39
David Jara 
University of Heidelberg
Germany
david.jara@hggs.uni-heidelberg.de
1 The references to Genette in the following paper are based on the English translation of Seuils (1987)
2 For the purpose of this paper, I will be using mainly game material published by White Wolf due to their explicit focus 
on ‘storytelling’. (All material used under permission from  the publisher: White Wolf © 2012 CCP hf. All rights 
reserved.)
3 At least in relation to their use in “traditional” literary forms.
4 Understood in the context of linguistic analysis, the term  ‘frame’ (as by Goffman, 1974) may be described as “the sum  of 
various factors that inﬂuence and predetermine discursive exchanges, contribute to their coherence and meaningfulness 
and distinguish speciﬁc discursive exchanges from  other possible ones.” (Wolf, 1999: 98) As such, frames are generally 
equated with “a ‘speech situation’ in its broadest sense including the rules and contexts stabilizing the meaning  of the 
discursive exchange.” (ibid.) Moreover, they are to be understood as cognitive meta-concepts that “generally function as 
preconditions of interpretation.” (Wolf, 2006: 5) Because of 
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4 
1. INTRODUCTION
From the perspective of literary studies, TRPGs 
present us from the beginning with an intrinsic 
theoretical dilemma: the fact that a “proper”, ﬁxed, 
“main text” is unavailable. Indeed, the actual role-
playing game narratives only emerge during the 
game session itself and exist ephemerally within its 
boundaries.  Nevertheless, the session can also be 
seen as being “tertiary”, largely the product of 
other texts; those that establish the broad ﬁctional 
premises and the rules by which the ﬁctional space 
is to be negotiated (“primary texts”); and those that 
establish the speciﬁc ﬁctional premises that allow 
for a particular game session to develop 
(“secondary texts”) (Hammer 2007). But how 
exactly does this textual “conversion” take place? 
While there are several accounts on how rules 
enable and shape diegetic play (Punday, 2005), the 
function of the rulebooks qua books is still greatly 
under examined. The following paper explores 
their impact by looking at both the framing (Wolf, 
1999) as well as the paratextual elements (Genette, 
1987) contained in these texts. Furthermore, I will 
argue that TRPGs are a special instance of 
textuality in which the construction of narratives 
relies heavily on an unconventional2 use of such 
elements. Rather than functioning solely as 
mediators between the reader(s) and the framed 
text – inﬂuencing the perception and interpretation 
of the latter3 – these ‘genesic’ framing devices are 
created prior to the main text, and serve thus the 
function of extending (multi-) authorial control 
over the game by actively shaping the narrations 
created during play. This is done not only 
procedurally, but also by shaping the narratives’ 
“story space”, its genre conventions or ‘interaction 
codes’ (Fatland, 2006) that players draw upon to 
create their contributions to play.
2. FRAMINGS AND PARATEXTS
Criticizing what he considers to be a general lack of 
academic research concerning framing in literary 
works, Werner Wolf, has called attention to the 
“well known fact that literary texts, more than non-
literary ones, are usually accompanied by framings 
referring to the speciﬁcity of the text and giving 
hints as to how to read it.” (1999: 102) Implicitly, 
therefore, Wolf proposes a speciﬁc use of framing 
devices (or ‘framings’) in literary texts which is to 
be distinguished from their function in “normal” or 
stereotyped speech situations. In the latter cases, 
“frames will be more or less taken for granted, as 
such situations seem to call for certain frames 
automatically as default settings.” (Wolf, 2006: 5) 
With ﬁctional texts however, not only has the frame 
of reference ﬁrst to be established (cf. Hruschovski, 
1984) but it has to be assigned a meaning as well; 
In such cases, “special (additional) agreements 
between ‘senders’ and ‘receivers’ have to be made 
and signaled.” (ibid. 6) Because of the fact that the 
most effective framing devices are those that 
inﬂuence the reading of a text from its beginning, 
focusing on those elements which precede the 
main text is recommended. According to this 
approach, (literary) ‘framings’ are to be understood 
as, 
“[…] easily identiﬁable markers […] that exist 
in the immediate context or within a work of 
ﬁction previous [emphasis in the original] to the 
reader’s framing activity and indeed serve as its 
most important basis. These framings are or 
seem to be located on another level than the 
framed text, they contribute, for the reader, to 
the constitution or stabilization of a (real or 
imaginary) communicative situation in the 
literary exchange and also help him or her to 
select frames of interpretation or reference 
relevant for the work under 
consideration.” (1999: 103)
In addition, Wolf also points out that there are four 
“potential ‘agencies’” of such framing, adding to 
the authorial instance (‘sender’) that of the reader 
40
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4 
(‘recipient’), the text (‘message’) and its context 
(2006: 15). Of the four, however, it is primarily the 
textual and contextual framings that can be directly 
observed and analyzed since ‘sender’ and 
‘recipient’-based ones are mainly internal cognitive 
processes (ibid.).
Generally speaking, Wolf’s idea of a framing 
device appears to correspond with what Gerard 
Genette (1997) has deﬁned as the paratext. The 
latter encompasses a wide variety of phenomena 
such as the name of a book’s author, titles, 
subtitles, footnotes, prefaces, commentaries, and 
illustrations; all of which, as Genette argues, 
surround and extend the text in order to make it 
available, allowing its reception or, as he puts it, to 
“ensure the text’s presence in the world” (1). 
Furthermore, because paratexts inﬂuence the way 
in which a text is interpreted, Genette considers 
them to be deﬁned on the most part “by an 
authorial intention and assumption of 
responsibility” (ibid. 3). Accordingly, such textual 
phenomena may be considered to be an instance of 
authorial control; a point from which the author 
can inﬂuence the way in which his text is read. 
Indeed, this fringe (the paratext), always the 
conveyor of a commentary that is authorial or 
more or less legitimated by the author, 
constitutes a zone not only of transition, but of 
transaction [emphasis in original]: a privileged 
place of a pragmatics and a strategy, of an 
inﬂuence on the public, an inﬂuence that – 
whether well or poorly understood and 
achieved –is at the service of a better reception 
for the text and a more pertinent reading of it 
(more pertinent, of course, in the eyes of the 
author and his allies) (ibid. 2)
Thus, the paratext is to be understood as secondary 
to the main text and as such, as “fundamentally 
heteronomous, auxiliary, and dedicated to the 
service of something other than itself that 
constitutes its raison d'etre.” (ibid. 12) 
While useful, Genette’s notion of the paratext 
proves to be a problematic one as well; a fact which 
is not difﬁcult to understand when considering 
that for him, “‘every context serves [in principle] as 
a paratext’” (9) Thus, the paratext could include 
even background information about the author 
concerning such things as, for example, his age, 
sex, etc. (ibid. 7) Clearly, there is little value in 
using a term which could “in principle” apply to 
almost anything. In order to avoid such 
recursiveness, Wolf proposes a principle of 
contiguity to the deﬁnition of framing while 
redeﬁning the term paratext as a framing sub-
category:
“[I]n contrast to Genette, for whom ‘paratexts’ 
comprise both ‘contextual’ and ‘textual’ 
framings, I would like to restrict ‘paratextual 
framings’, whether authorized or not, to a 
variant of ‘textual’ framings, namely to [those] 
which are parts of individual works and are 
positioned at their borders, but are discernible 
not only through their liminal position, but also, 
and, above all, through their function as 
introductory, explanatory etc. that forms the 
‘threshold’ to the main text of the work in 
question” (2006, 20)
As Genette, Wolf also indicates that the main 
function of framing in literature – of which the 
paratext is, indeed, a prominent form - is to guide 
and control interpretations within the “abstract 
cognitive frames” presented by ﬁctional texts 
(2006: 6). 
Not only is Wolf’s re-deﬁnition of the term 
‘paratext’ necessary, but it is also an important one 
to notice here, especially considering the fact that 
the latter has been broadly used in game theory 
since its introduction to the ﬁeld by Mia Consalvo 
in her inﬂuential book Cheating (2007). In it, 
Consalvo coins the term “paratextual industries” 
stating that: 
“I believe that the peripheral industries 
surrounding games function as just such a 
paratext. Gaming magazines, strategy guides, 
mod chip makers [etc.] work to shape the 
gameplay experience in particular ways. Those 
ways have played a signiﬁcant role in how 
gameplay is now understood. […]The central 
tendency remains though: the creation of a 
ﬂourishing paratext has signiﬁcantly shaped 
games and gamers in the process of creating 
new markets.” (9) 
While Consalvo’s application of the term has 
proved enlightening and useful in a general sense, 
41
5 This distinction, however, is done mainly for practical purposes: The fact that the TRPG game session is, in itself, a multi-layered 
text is one that is acknowledged and the necessity of such a reduction will be justified later on.
6 This notion ties in closely with Ilieva’s (2012) enlightening analysis of the negotiation of cultural codes in LARP discourse. My 
focus in this paper, however, is more directed towards the specific materiality of these triggering elements and their relationship to 
the negotiated, diegetic text.
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4 
as it adds an important perspective to the study of 
games and the seemingly endless production of 
text that surrounds them, a more detailed approach 
must acknowledge that in order to determine 
speciﬁc types of paratext and their functions, the 
particularities of the medium itself must be ﬁrst 
put under consideration. Additionally, it is 
necessary to identify the nature (and location) of 
the primary/main text. Only then will it be 
possible to recognize and differentiate relevant 
paratexts and framings. In the case of TRPGs, such 
a distinction has special importance due to the 
complex nature of its text(s) (cf. Padol, 1996; 
Stenros, 2004). Since my approach to TRPGs is 
mainly from the perspective of literary studies, I 
will consider the diegetic level as the primary text 
of the game session2. In a general sense then, TRPG 
framings can be understood as elements that serve 
to ‘trigger’ relevant ‘meta-concepts’ (i.e. frames) for 
the interpretation of discourses within the game’s 
diegesis3.
3. FRAMING IN TRPGs
As mentioned previously, the lack of a ﬁxed, “main 
text” or diegesis is a major difﬁculty for the study 
of the TRPG medium. However, as Hammer (2007) 
has proposed, from the point of view of its 
construction, the diegesis of the RPG session can 
actually be seen as being “tertiary”, since it 
emerges greatly as a product of other texts. Where 
the “primary” text serves to ﬁrst establish the 
broad ﬁctional premises (setting) and the rules by 
which the ﬁctional space is to be negotiated, the 
“secondary” text provides the speciﬁc ﬁctional 
premises on which a particular game-session is 
based (plot). Correspondingly, Hammer 
distinguishes three types of RPG authorship: 
primary, secondary and tertiary. Because TRPG 
rulebooks exemplify how “primary authors” 
extend their inﬂuence upon the game, it is through 
them that we can better understand how the 
different authorial instances involved in TRPGs 
negotiate the shared ﬁctional environment during 
play. Moreover, since both Genette as well as Wolf 
have stressed the importance of paratexts/
framings as an instance of authorial control over 
the text, the study of these elements is key to 
understanding how this negotiation takes place.
Additionally, TRPG rulebooks in themselves also 
seem to comply with several of the criteria 
mentioned in Wolf’s deﬁnition of framings: they 
exist in the immediate context of the diegesis and, 
since they precede the actual game playing, they 
also exist prior to any reader/player’s input or 
framing activity. At the same time, they are 
physically separated – and thus appear to be easily 
identiﬁable – from the diegesis of the game. Clearly, 
these texts guide the interpretation of in-game 
events, either by laying out the rules which 
underlie the outcome of certain actions or by 
providing a (ﬁctional) context within which 
character action becomes meaningful. 
However, because of the fact that the information 
they contain may be directly adopted in the 
interface (Padol, 1996), becoming an integral part of 
the diegesis, the nature of such information 
becomes ambiguous: is it within or without of the 
diegesis? Or is it perhaps both? While rules are 
always formally external to the story, their 
implementation has direct effects on the in-game 
events; setting and plot material, for their part, are 
always potentially diegetic. Evidently, far from 
being a singular text, the rulebook comprises in 
itself a great amount of heterogeneous information 
which is relevant for different levels of meaning 
within the complex system of information that is 
the TRPG session2. At the same time, not all of its 
components must necessarily be seen as framing 
devices and, even if they are, do not have the same 
relevance. Thus, it becomes necessary to further 
reduce our focus within the rulebook itself. I 
propose therefore a (very) general distinction of the 
information contained in these texts which may be 
roughly classiﬁed into: rules, setting information 
and (meta)framing devices. Because of their 
explicit focus on ‘storytelling’, I will be drawing 
42
Because TRPG rulebooks exemplify 
how “primary authors” extend their 
influence upon the game, it is through 
them that we can better understand 
how the different authorial instances 
involved in TRPGs negotiate the 
shared fictional environment during 
play. (3)
7 For an in depth analysis of  role-playing as a system of information, see Harviainen (2012)
8 In this respect, Wolf  has stated that “a frame is, as a rule, designated by a single term  and as such corresponds to one metaconcept 
but usually governs a plurality of subconcepts and expectations.” (2006: 4)
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4 
examples for the most part on games based on 
White Wolf’s World of Darkness (WoD) TRPG.
3.1 Rules
While rules constitute the basis of the textual 
interface that allows for multiple player interaction 
during role-playing games (Punday, 2005), we 
must ask ourselves whether these elements are 
merely constituents of the ‘game frame’ or whether 
they are also a framing (i.e. whether they act as 
frame ‘triggers’) of the diegesis. Necessarily, they 
are the ﬁrst, since the idea of ‘rules’ is an essential 
part of the meta-concept ‘game’2; at the same time, 
however, rules also allow player interpretation of 
in-game situations, functioning simultaneously as 
framing devices. In this respect, Will Hindmarch 
has asserted that “TRPG rules help the players and 
the Storyteller understand and explain how their 
characters, as their agents in the game world, affect 
and respond to the actions that unfold in the 
story.” (51) Furthermore, in their speciﬁc form - by 
including (or excluding) rules for certain actions 
instead of others – rules affect player (as well as 
GM) expectations for the game, thus inﬂuencing 
their input in the narrative. Thus, the rules not only 
allow the interpretation of in-game i.e. diegetic 
situations, but also shape them as they 
meaningfully delimit the choices available to 
players from the “outside”. Indeed, as Hayot and 
Wesp (2004) have pointed out, “those elements of 
the game that lay at the heart of the game’s 
strategic considerations are also a form of 
representation.” (410) This becomes especially 
evident when considering the issue of character 
construction (cf. Lankonski, 2004). For example, 
games such as those published by White Wolf not 
only have rules to statistically represent “physical” 
elements and character attributes, but also for 
representing a number of “inner” attributes such as 
personality and, most interestingly, moral values 
(see ﬁg 2.). In the case of the World of Darkness 
games, characters’ personalities are depicted partly 
in terms of ‘virtues’, ‘vices’ and ‘morality’, thus 
triggering the frame ‘moral conﬂict’ as a guiding 
interpretive meta-concept of the potential stories 
created during game-play. By doing this, not only 
does the game implicitly encourage players to 
create characters with psychological depth – thus 
creating stories which involve the portrayal of 
inner conﬂict – but, because of the nature of the 
attributes it focuses on, it also inﬂuences the type of 
inner conﬂict portrayed. 
It is important to point out, however, that 
quantiﬁcation is not necessarily the only (although 
it is probably the most common) mode of 
representation within a RPG rules system (cf. 
Hitchens & Drachen, 2008). An example of this is 
the fact that, while the ‘morality’ trait is indeed 
represented numerically, the ‘virtue’ and ‘vice’ 
attributes are expressed solely in qualitative form. 
As stated in the WoD rulebook, “Virtues are not 
extensions of a character’s Morality. Rather, they 
are ideals that inform his actions and provide a 
framework by which he interacts with society [my 
emphasis].” (92)
Still, the representation (statistic or otherwise) of 
inner traits implies an important hermeneutic 
inversion regarding most other types of ﬁction; that 
is, where in conventional ﬁction readers may 
deduce and/or interpret a character’s inner 
feelings and struggles by his actions or - itself a 
classic example of a framing device - internal 
monologues within the text, in TRPGs, the inner 
characteristics have been (numerically) ﬁxed to 
guide and help participants in understanding and, 
therefore, playing their characters. 
Fig. 1. Dungeons and Dragons Character Sheet 
(1974)
43
in their specific form - by including (or 
excluding) rules for certain actions 
instead of others – rules affect player 
(as well as GM) expectations for the 
game, thus influencing their input in 
the narrative. (3)
9 Kindred being the self-designating term used by vampires in White Wolf’s Vampire setting (cf. Requiem 14).
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4 
This, as expressed in the Vampire Players’ Guide 
represents a “convenient heuristic if a player isn’t 
entirely certain how his character is likely to 
respond to a certain situation” (21). Thus, players 
are expected to interpret in-game situations 
concerning their characters in terms of a 
quantiﬁed/qualitative representation of inner 
traits. To this extent, stat sheets are clearly framing 
devices, but such that they not only guide 
interpretations but also determine to a certain 
extent that which they frame. It is important to 
note, however, that the translation of a rating into 
the game through character action is in itself also a 
matter of interpretation since not all characters 
with the same rating necessarily reveal it the same 
way. Take, for example, the trait of ‘Humanity’ in 
Vampire, a trait that represents “humankind’s 
better, more humane and caring aspect.” (ibid. 22) 
The players’ guide states that: 
“[M]oral decay does not affect everyone the 
same way. Not every mortal with a Humanity 
of 2 [a very low rating] or less is going to 
become a Charles Manson, Adolf Hitler or 
Joseph Stalin. Moral bankruptcy wears many 
faces, and not all of them coincide with the 
more simplistic expressions with which we may 
be familiar” (ibid.)
Evidently, the way in which a trait is portrayed 
depends on how it is to be interpreted within the 
context of a speciﬁc game. Nevertheless, in-game 
events can also modify the statistics that represent 
them. 
Fig. 2. World of Darkness Character Sheet (2004)
Thus, a “good” character might reasonably act in a 
way that is contrary to his “nature” – the trait only 
determining the probability of a character acting in a 
certain way -, resulting in a change in its statistic 
representation on the game level. This change, for 
its part, might then inﬂuence future actions of the 
same character. The following passage of the 
rulebook makes this clear:
 “[M]ortals have a much greater penchant for 
change and growth than vampires. As living 
things, they are free to change their courses at 
any time. Mortals can “turn over a new leaf,” 
while vampires don’t really have that option. To 
reﬂect this, mortal characters regain humanity 
at a different rate than Kindred”3 (Requiem 23)
This understood, one may describe the role-playing 
game session as a constant “interpretive loop” 
between diegetic and game frame4. This is made 
especially evident in the character creation process; 
more speciﬁcally, in the transition from the 
character as a statistic entity to a narrative one. 
Indeed, after constructing the framework of a 
character, all a player has are “some traits and a 
general sense of who [his] character might 
be.” (Players’ Guide 23) However, in order to “ﬂesh 
it out”, the player must be able to “make the leap 
from seeing the character as a collection of 
numbers and begin to view him as a full-ﬂedged 
living, breathing individual.” (ibid.) This transition 
is based on a fundamental need for providing 
inner-diegetic plausibility. In other words, it does 
not sufﬁce that character stats have been 
appropriately chosen from a strategic point of view 
– which would make sense if a TRPG were truly 
only a game – if they cannot be explained in a 
logical way from a diegetic one. Therefore, the 
Vampire Players’ Guide  recommends GMs 
(‘storytellers’) to “demand a certain degree of 
realism from the game [so] that players can suspend 
their disbelief and immerse themselves in their 
characters [my emphasis]” (ibid.). Failing to do so, 
the text warns, will have repercussions on the 
game as it “will never take on a feel of a shared 
world and […] always feel like a bunch of people 
sitting around a table rolling dice.” (ibid.)
44
10 Harviainen (2008) has defined this in terms of  each player’s “personal hermeneutic circle” (75). Thus, the game can be considered 
a number of  texts where “the gaming process itself  can be treated as interpretation done by the participants, and analyzed as 
such.” (ibid.)
11 Borgstrom  (2007) goes even further, arguing that the setting of  the actual game is never the same as that contained within the 
published book: 
 [T]he setting that one group plays in is not the setting that another group plays in. In effect, role-playing games in their 
 static, published form  do not describe a specific fictional world or story. They describe a large multidimensional space of 
 fictional worlds and stories organized by unifying data (57).
12 The following examples are indeed only a very tiny fraction of  the framings available in these texts. A thorough identification and 
analysis of all of such elements would greatly surpass the scope of this article.
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4 
3.2 SETTING INFORMATION
Setting information constitutes what can be seen as 
the “substance” of the TRPG rulebook; it consists 
of information pertaining to the ﬁctional world that 
can be selectively used and introduced into the 
game interface2. Nevertheless, unless disputed or 
explicitly modiﬁed during the game, the setting 
can be seen as an implicit agreement constituting 
the diegetic level’s frame of reference, i.e. the 
“hypothetical primary framework” on which the 
game is based. Thus, if the discursive interface of 
the players is to be seen as the artifact of the role-
playing game, the setting information can be 
considered a coding of the frame within which this 
discourse becomes meaningful. In this respect 
setting information complies with the general 
function of “substitut[ing], simulat[ing], 
modify[ing], add[ing] to, or […] represent[ing], 
those frame constituents and framings which in 
ordinary discursive exchange are implied in the 
communicative situation or are agreed 
upon.” (Wolf, 2006: 103) 
Additionally, genre, theme and mood indications are 
among the most important framings for the 
collaborative construction of narrations during 
role-playing game sessions. Clearly, the triggering 
of speciﬁc genre frames does not affect the reading 
of the rulebook – which, in itself, has no literary 
genre; or rather, whose “genre” is precisely that of 
being a ‘rulebook’ – as much as it produces 
expectations as to the story possibilities of the 
game. As a consequence, players are guided into 
creating narratives which are conceptually and 
aesthetically more uniﬁed as they follow general 
literary genre conventions. For example, the WoD 
core-rulebook, which comprises the basic, common 
setting and rule information for most of the 
company’s other games, is deﬁned as a “horror 
game” (WoD 22, 23). Thus, by invoking the frame 
of ‘horror ﬁction’ the rulebook invites players to 
include motifs, tropes and topoi typical of this genre 
into their campaigns. The same can be said 
concerning its mood (“dread”) and theme (“dark 
mystery”). As for the latter, the rulebook states:
“While each story has its own central theme, the 
looming theme behind them all explores the 
dramatic ramiﬁcations of a world of 
supernatural secrets. Storytellers and players 
alike should be mindful of this theme when 
they feel the need to return to the roots of the 
game.” (ibid. 23)
Evidently frames such as genre and theme serve as 
guiding meta-concepts within which the TRPG 
narratives develop. Their central importance is 
highlighted by the fact that they are explicitly 
triggered within the main text of the rulebook. In 
the case of Vampire: The Requiem, the genre – 
“modern gothic storytelling game” – proves to be 
important not only for the main theme of the game 
(“morality”), but also for the aesthetic associated 
with it:
“What you hold in your hands is a Modern 
Gothic Storytelling game, a roleplaying game 
that allows you to build chronicles that explore 
morality through the metaphor of vampirism. 
In Vampire, you “play the monster,” and what 
you do as that monster both makes for an 
interesting story and might even teach you a 
little about your own values and those of your 
fellows […] The setting of Vampire  borrows 
greatly from gothic literature, not the smallest 
amount of which comes from the “set dressing” 
of the movement. Key to the literary gothic 
tradition are the ideas of barbarism, corruption 
and medieval imagery.” (14)
45
if the discursive interface of the 
players is to be seen as the artifact of 
the role-playing game, the setting 
information can be considered a 
coding of the frame within which this 
discourse becomes meaningful. (5)
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4 
3.3 RULEBOOK (META-)FRAMING 
DEVICES12
Among the different elements of the rulebook, it is 
its own framing devices which present the most 
interesting features concerning the framing of the 
diegesis. Indeed, considered as an artifact in its 
own right, the rulebook, as any other printed text, 
features a variety of framing elements such as a 
“front and back cover, which usually displays its 
title and the names of its designer and 
publisher” (Nephew, 2004: 21). However, as we 
will see, these texts not only serve to stabilize the 
meaning and guide the interpretation of the 
information contained within the rulebook itself but, 
in most cases, they are directly related to the 
diegetic level of the game. Thus, they become 
meta-framings of the potential diegesis, creating 
expectations concerning the stories that may be 
told during play. Considering the fact that one of 
the main functions of framings is to “mark an 
artifact as such and distinguish it from its 
surroundings by indicating the special rules 
(frames) that apply in its reception,” (Wolf, 2006: 
26) these framing devices can be said to have a 
double function by marking two artifacts: the 
rulebook proper and the textual interface produced 
during play. 
The most evident examples of framing in rulebooks 
are those denominated paratexts in the narrower 
sense, such as titles, prologues, epilogues, 
illustrations, and so on. More speciﬁcally, these 
elements correspond to what Genette has deemed 
‘peritexts’ – texts at the borders of a work – as 
opposed to ‘epitexts’ – those texts which are 
materially removed from the work in question. 
Among these framings, those which exist in initial 
position tend to have greater relevance in their 
inﬂuence upon reader expectations and 
interpretation of a text (Wolf, 1999). Evidently, 
because of their practically invariable position at 
the beginning of a text, titles are one of the primary 
mediators between work and reader. As such, they 
are one of the main instances of inﬂuence upon a 
text’s reception. Moreover, titles of role-playing 
game rulebooks are interesting cases of initial 
paratexts, because they do more than just referring 
to the content of the book that they frame. Indeed, 
if we consider games such as Dungeons and 
Dragons, Vampire o r  Paranoia, it becomes evident 
that their titles say less about the books as artifacts 
than about the type of stories than can be told with 
them. As Wallis (2007) has observed,
“[s]tory structure can also come from the 
game’s setting and the assumptions that people 
take from a game’s components and packaging. 
If you buy a game called “Kill the Dragon,” you 
assume that there will be a dragon and to win 
you must kill it, and that is the direction your 
play will take.” (77)
This can be described in terms of the double function 
of the text’s framing devices explained previously, 
as they mark both the artifactuality of the rulebook 
as well as that of the potential interface/diegesis 
created by the players. 
3.3.1 The cover
Rulebook covers are generally good examples of 
how different paratextual elements may be 
combined to create what can be seen as a uniﬁed, 
plurimedial framing device. Thus, although we can 
generally deconstruct them into a verbal, a 
typographical and a pictorial component, we must 
keep in mind that they function as a framing unity. 
Furthermore, by observing the simplicity of the 
original cover of the D&D game from 1974 (See ﬁg. 
3), it becomes evident that the aforementioned 
“double use” of framing devices was notoriously 
less prominent in early TRPGs (compare also ﬁgs. 1 
& 2). 
46
Rulebook covers are generally good 
examples of how different paratextual 
elements may be combined to create 
what can be seen as a unified, 
plurimedial framing device. (6)
13 A similar framing strategy has been described by Roy Sommer (2006) in the context of film analysis: 
Both the design of, and the information conveyed by, the titles and credits themselves make a significant contribution to the framing 
process. For instance, paratextual devices such as the use of distinctive fonts in the title sequence of Star Wars: Episode III create 
continuity between this episode and the other movies of the saga. (392)
14 Indeed, later on in the rulebook we find a passage that closely resembles our interpretation of the cover:
Characters in the World of  Darkness can blur the line between reality and the occult. Indeed, that’s what it’s all about. 
Exploring a world of  mystery that tries to keep itself hidden. A world that punishes those who look too deep. But those 
who refuse to look suffer even worse. They’re rocked on seas of conspiracies of which they go unaware. Damned if you 
do, damned if  you don’t. There are no easy answers, and knowing is not half  the battle. It’s only the first shot in a long, 
grinding war against the shadows. (WoD 23)
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4 
Fig. 3. Dungeons and Dragons Covers (1974)Fig. 3. Dungeons and Dragons Covers (1974)
Apart from the rulebook’s title and illustration, it is 
clear that the subtitle refers primarily to the 
strategic character of the information contained 
within the text itself rather than its possibilities of 
constructing an actual story within the ﬁctional 
world. Thus, these elements trigger the frame 
‘game’ rather than ‘narrative’ (i.e. ‘ﬁction’) as the 
governing frame of the TRPG session. This may be 
contrasted with ﬁg. 4, which shows the cover and 
inlay cover respectively of the World of Darkness 
core-rulebook. Although the title in itself is still 
relatively generic, it already conveys an ominous 
feeling, a certain uneasiness that relies heavily on 
the general association that is made between 
darkness and the fear of the unknown; of that 
which may not be seen. Were it on its own, 
however, the title would still leave enough space 
open to speculation: What kind of world is meant? 
What kind of darkness? Indeed, the “world of 
darkness” of the title could still refer to any 
number of settings, with “darkness” referring to, 
for example, evil (i.e. “dark”) forces, the “dark 
ages” of a particular ﬁctional world, or a particular 
“dark lord.” However, the title could also refer to 
an outer space setting or to a setting where the 
characters are all blind. Clearly, taken on its own 
the title is highly indeterminate. In this respect, 
although the cover illustration might appear at ﬁrst 
glance to be a quite “literal” translation, so to 
speak, of the title, it is actually an essential 
complementary element that expands the initial 
premise established in verbal form. Seen from 
behind, a solitary human ﬁgure is shown walking 
down a dim lit street at night. 
Fig. 4
a) World of Darkness Cover (Left) and b) Inlay Cover 
(right)
Fig. 4
a) World of Darkness Cover (Left) and b) Inlay Cover 
(right)
The picture is altogether full of dark shadows, with 
the lighter areas being merely a slight hue of blue 
or gray. Nevertheless, the image is actually less 
redundant than it seems. First of all, the “world” of 
the title is now portrayed as a familiar one, not a 
valley full of ‘orcs’ or a spaceship adrift in the vast 
darkness of the cosmos, but an alleyway that does 
not appear to differ greatly from those in the real 
world. Additionally, there seems to be a 
concretization of the slight uneasiness implicit in 
the title, now heightened and transformed into 
deﬁnite suspense by the almost topical motif of the 
lone ﬁgure in the dark alleyway. At the same time, 
there seems to be the implication that this now 
impending menace is not of a natural kind - not the 
“junkies” around the corner - but something more 
mysterious and unknown. This feeling is conveyed 
by the blurred and “shaky” nature of the image 
which resembles a badly taken picture. Within it, 
the objects appear to lack deﬁnite borders, giving 
almost the impression of “seeing double”. It is 
precisely this idea that is further reinforced by the 
47
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4 
typographical form of the title itself (ﬁg 5.), whose 
letters appear to be shifted and slightly displaced. 
Indeed, what appears at ﬁrst almost like a printing 
mistake is yet another indicator of the “otherness” 
of the “world” presented by the game, giving the 
idea of an underlying, “hidden” reality. 
Considering the above mentioned, the inlay cover 
(ﬁg 4. b) is to be seen as an extension of the front 
cover, answering but also expanding to a great 
extent the expectations previously created by it. 
First of all, by recurring in the same position and 
form, the title reinforces the idea of unity between 
the previous illustration and this one3. 
Fig. 5. WoD Title Graphic
In other words, because it has not been altered, the 
title calls our attention to the changes in the 
picture. As we can observe, the slight bluish hue of 
the previous image has been reduced to black and 
shades of grey. This fact may be correlated with the 
absence of any source of light - in contrast to the 
cover where, despite the darkness, there were still 
streetlamps in the background. The solitary human 
ﬁgure, for its part, has now been replaced by 
several explicitly or implicitly non-human ones. 
Again, boundaries here are not clearly cut and the 
ﬁgures, as well as their background, appear only in 
parts, as if covered by, or emerging from a 
surrounding fog. It is only upon closer examination 
that one may spot the “odd man out” in the upper 
right corner of the picture (see ﬁg. 6). 
Fig. 6. WoD Inlay Cover Detail
!
Contrasting with the rest of the illustration, this 
image displays a clearly contoured depiction of a 
person – or rather his shadow – in a solitary 
alleyway. This image necessarily evokes the ﬁgure 
on the cover page and by doing so produces 
questions, semantic blanks that may be ﬁlled 
during the game: “Is he afraid? Is this what is 
awaiting him? Will he become - or is he already - 
one of ‘them’?” In a way then, the image represents 
a window between (front and inlay) covers and, 
therefore, between the “worlds” of the game.
Considering what has been discussed above, these 
initial framing devices can be said to foreshadow 
the whole concept of the World of Darkness setting 
in a nutshell4. This considered, the cover may be 
described  as  an  “anticipatory  
illustration” (Wandhoff, 2006: 210) that has the 
function of “provid[ing] the narrative text with a 
moralizing maxim or theme that is encapsulated in 
a picture and put before the reader’s inner eye 
before the narrative proper starts.” (ibid. 212) 
Moreover, the cover triggers important frames of 
reference, creating expectations as to the type of 
narrative that can be developed during the game. 
As a matter of fact, one is under the impression 
that this framing alone is enough to engender the 
ideas to construct a story. In fact, as Genette (1997) 
has already pointed out, “a title hit upon all of a 
sudden, and sometimes well before the subject of 
the book is […] like an instigator: once the title is 
there, the only thing left to produce is a text that 
justiﬁes it” (67).
Another element of the cover page(s) which should 
not go unattended is the caption “Storytelling 
System Rulebook” which appears in the lower area 
of both illustrations and serves to trigger two major 
frames – i.e. meta-concepts – within which both the 
rulebook as well as the potential diegesis are to be 
understood: that of ‘game’ and that of ‘ﬁction.’ 
Paradoxically, by doing so, it simultaneously 
creates a space for suspension of disbelief by 
establishing that the diegetic level is based on “a 
set of transformation rules that indicates what is to 
be treated as real and how it is to be treated as real 
within the make-believe framework.” (Fine, 1983: 
183) In other words, the denomination of a text as 
“role-playing game rulebook” implies the 
agreement “to ‘bracket’ the world outside the 
game” (ibid.) during play. Indeed, more than 
signaling its game character, the indication on a 
printed text as “role-playing game” may be seen as 
a more complex version of the original framing 
48
15 This explicitness is given by typographical, stylistic and spatial differences; as well as by the fact that these texts are generally 
surrounded by, or appear within, accompanying illustrations.
16 One must distinguish how both “framing” as well as “embedded” are to be understood: Indeed, these texts may be either embedded 
in, or framing, the rulebook as a text, however, this function may shift concerning the diegesis. In the latter case it is probably more 
accurate to consider these texts in general as framing narratives rather than embedded ones.
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4 
used in child’s play (i.e. “let’s make believe”). In 
this last case, suspension of disbelief is easily 
broken as soon as disagreements between 
participants are encountered. However, by 
including more complex, rule-based framings, 
TRPG rulebooks allow a greater plausibility, a 
reality, to a certain extent, of the diegetic world. 
Moreover, the issue of the size of the font – 
notoriously small in the ﬁrst cover; slightly larger 
in the inlay – is to be noted as well since it 
represents the conscious decision to foreground, in 
the ﬁrst place, the atmosphere and tension 
displayed in the cover while de-emphasizing the 
ludic/ﬁctional nature of the text. Obviously, this 
may be seen as a strategy intended to augment the 
suspense created by the cover, but also a framing 
that indicates that, while the World of Darkness is a 
game, it is a game to be taken seriously. In fact, the 
introduction to the players’ guide to Vampire 
begins with the following quote by MC. Escher in 
its heading – indeed, yet another paratext!: “My 
work is a game, a very serious game” (qtd. in 
Vampire Players’ Guide 7). At the same time, this 
subtitle also underscores the focus of the game in 
producing interesting stories rather than just fun, 
“escapist” adventures. Again, this is meant to 
inﬂuence the way in which the players create their 
campaigns and the stories they tell since there is no 
great difference – at least in principle – between 
how a “storytelling game” is played and how any 
other TRPG is.
3.3.2 Prologues, Epilogues and Framing/
Embedded Narratives
Because of the explicit, salient nature that makes 
them clearly discernible from the rest of the text5, 
prologues, epilogues and “framing” or 
“embedded” narratives6 offer us with further 
examples of paratexts within the rulebook.
Fig. 7. Werewolf the Forsaken (2)
As has been previously mentioned, there is a 
notorious prominence of such elements in 
storytelling-based role-playing games. Indeed, if 
we go back to our analysis of the games and 
sourcebooks published by White Wolf, we will 
notice that practically all of them begin with a 
prologue consisting of a short narrative text that 
provides an atmospheric introduction into the 
ﬁctional setting of the speciﬁc game. In most cases, 
such as Werewolf: The Forsaken (WF), Vampire: The 
Requiem (VtR) and Mage: The Awakening (MtA), the 
narrative is continued as an epilogue in the last 
pages of the book. For example, in WF, the reader 
is presented at the beginning with a character’s 
(Mark) ﬁrst transformation into a werewolf and the 
mysterious circumstances that surround it (ﬁg. 7). 
In the epilogue (ﬁg. 8), after recovering 
consciousness in an alleyway, Mark is approached 
by a group of strangers – a “pack” of other 
werewolves, in fact - who offer to give him 
answers to his new condition:
49
17 Again, intra-textual refers in this case to the fact that these framing devices occur within the rulebook’ s main text, as opposed to the 
previous examples such as the cover, prologues and epilogues which are at its borders. As in the previous cases of embedded/
framing narratives, however, it remains difficult to determine whether these framings may be considered intra- or extra-textual in 
relation to the session’s diegesis. 
18 This, of course is not a narrative instance in the proper sense, as there is no actual narration of ‘events’.
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4 
Fig 8. Werewolf the Forsaken (313)
A hard, bitter smile creased Russell’s face, and 
he refused to back off. “First, I thought we’d 
answer some of your questions for you, son. Tell 
you a little about what you are and what it 
means.” 
“What I’ve become.” 
“No, what you are,” Russell said. “After that, 
there’s people you have to meet and some hard 
tests you’ll have to pass. Then your life can 
ﬁnally get started and you can try to put it to 
some good use.” “Or,” the Hispanic guy put in, 
“you can just get the hell out of our territory 
and fend for yourself.” (312, 313)
Evidently, the use of the framing narrative here 
creates a bridge between levels of meaning since 
the player is naturally led to identify with the 
newborn Werewolf character, Mark. Thus, the 
framing allows a trespassing to a certain extent of 
the borders between “worlds” and the invitation to 
Mark to “learn what [he is] and what it [all] 
means”, becomes a beckoning to the players to take 
his place and investigate the setting by playing out 
their own adventures.
Apart from such cases of prologues/epilogues, 
the use of “embedded” narratives in the WoD core-
rulebook is especially notorious. In fact, within the 
ﬁrst 30 pages of the book, there is little mention of 
players, rules or characters. Instead, and after the 
prologue proper, the reader is presented with a 
number of short, fragmentary narratives 
intercalated with considerations on the basics of 
storytelling. In general terms, these narratives 
serve a similar function to that of frame stories in 
literary texts (cf. Wolf, 2006: 179-206). However, 
because of the fact that the framed story – the one 
produced during play – is clearly the dominant text 
during a RPG session, the function of these texts 
can be described in terms of what Wolf has called 
‘mise en cadre’:
“In this case, rather than shed light through 
revelatory similarities in a ‘bottom up’ process – 
as in mises en abyme – the framing implicitly 
sheds light on the framed text in a ‘top down’ 
process. As narratology has failed to provide a 
separate term for this reversal of mise en 
abyme, I have proposed […] to baptize it ‘mise 
en cadre’” (ibid. 198)
Furthermore, these stories, although mostly 
fragmentary and unrelated, not only serve the 
general function of establishing the mood and 
genre of the game – both of which are explicitly 
stated in White Wolf’s games – but also exemplify 
how these frames can be translated into narratives.
.1(Intra-)textual, implicit framings
Although they are by far not as salient as the 
previous examples, intra-textual7 framings also 
play a central role in the interpretation of the 
content of the rulebook. Moreover, because they 
are neither statistic, nor setting information in the 
proper sense, these elements clearly serve a 
different function than that of structurally (the 
rules) or materially (setting information) 
grounding the game. Indeed, these framing devices 
inﬂuence how meaning is to be ascribed within the 
“primary framework” of the ﬁctional world. While 
the rulebook provides a system of rules and 
information concerning elements, creatures and 
phenomena of a ﬁctional setting, this data still 
portrays a ﬁctional environment which is, to a 
great extent, without meaning. As Fine (1983) has 
observed, since the events of the role-playing game 
take place within a ﬁctional ‘world,’ “[t]he creation 
of the broad outlines of a fantastic setting is not 
50
19 As Nephew (2004) has stated, “[t]he text necessarily presents the world as incomplete and fragmentary, as no sourcebook can 
describe every inch of a fantasy world.” (39)
20 Indeed, as he concludes in one of his reviews: “I hope I can play this one day, either with my current group or with a group I’ll 
have in the future” (Game Geeks #117 Houses of the Blooded) Doubtlessly, this type of commentary would be inconceivable in any 
other medium  as it would appear nonsensical to seriously comment on a book one has not read, a film  one has not seen, or a game 
one has not played.
21 In Das Fiktive und das Imaginäre (1991), Wolfgang Iser establishes the necessity of  reformulating the traditional notion of reality 
and fiction as a binary system of  opposed elements by adding the concept of  the imaginary. Thus, he proposes a ternary system, 
arguing that all fictional texts are based on the triadic relationship between the spheres of the real, the fictive and the imaginary. 
Because of the fact that signs, which are used to refer to real elements or concepts – understood as those of  the empiric, extra-
textual world –, lose their original pragmatic determination in the fictional text, while the imaginary – understood by Iser as an 
experience which is “diffus, formlos, unfixiert und ohne Objektreferenz” (20) – is given substance and form by the text, the 
relationship between these spheres is one of  ‘boundary crossing’. This crossing of boundaries occurs, according to Iser, by a 
conscious and intentional act he has called fictionalizing act (Akt des Fingierens). 
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4 
sufﬁcient to set the stage for a game.” (76) Because 
of this, it becomes necessary to also “establish a 
world view that directs the game action and 
represents the implicit philosophy or ideals by 
which the world operates.” (ibid.) This, precisely, is 
the main function of rulebooks’ intra-textual 
framings. In the following example, we may 
observe how setting information is intertwined 
with intra-textual framing in order to inﬂuence the 
interpretation of the diegetic reality from “within”:
The Kindred gain most of their power and 
strength not from their own innate abilities, but 
from the inﬂuence they wield in the mortal 
world. […] Why risk one’s own potentially eternal 
existence, miserable as it might be at times, when one 
can manipulate pawns into taking those risks 
instead? [my emphasis] (Requiem 26)
Clearly, there are two types of discourse available 
in this paragraph. On the one hand, the ﬁrst half of 
it consists of the stating of information from an 
“uninvolved”, third person point of view. 
However, what immediately follows it is a sentence 
that portrays what can be interpreted as the 
thoughts of a vampire within the ﬁctional world 
itself. In narratological terms we could describe 
this as a transition of the “narrative8” instance from 
an extra-, heterodiegetic perspective to an 
apparently intra-, homodiegetic one. By creating 
the illusion of observing the ﬁctional world from 
within, this transition – a beautiful case of ‘free 
indirect discourse’ in fact – frames the diegetic 
world, thus adding new structures of meaning to it. 
A similar case of intra-textual framing can be 
observed in the next example where, after 
elaborating on the main characteristics concerning 
the vampire clan of the Nosferatu – a central aspect 
of which is the fact that they are generally 
repulsive, either because of their appearance, their 
smell, or both –, the text goes on to add 
information concerning the way in which these 
vampires relate to other Kindred. If it were indeed 
only setting information (i.e. data) that was being 
conveyed, it would sufﬁce to mention the fact that 
other clans generally have little to do with 
Nosferatu vampires. However, this information is 
again intertwined with the portrayal of “intra-
diegetic” systems of meaning. 
“If they had their druthers, most other clans 
would prefer never to associate with the 
Nosferatu at all, yet the Haunts’ [i.e. the 
Nosferatus’] inarguable talents and brute force 
make them too dangerous to ignore. So other 
Kindred offer them a tense hospitality, hide their 
unease behind wary diplomacies and pray that the 
Nosferatu leave as soon as possible.  [my 
emphasis]” (Players’ Guide 111)
Not only does this passage express the fact that 
Nosferatu are generally disliked, but expands its 
signiﬁcance by portraying the attitude other 
Vampire’s have toward them and the 
circumstances under which Kindred might seek 
Nosferatu assistance. Thus, this passage reinforces 
overarching themes (frames) of the game such as 
‘deceit’ and ‘conspiracy’.
4. CONCLUSION
Throughout this paper I have argued that a close 
examination of TRPG rulebooks is central to 
understanding the way in which these games allow 
for the construction of highly complex, 
collaborative and interactive narratives. To 
demonstrate their impact, I have recurred mainly 
to Genette’s and Wolf’s considerations concerning 
the speciﬁc use of paratexts and framings in works 
of ﬁction. By distinguishing three basic rulebook 
components – namely, rules, setting and 
(meta)framing devices - I have attempted to show 
how these elements, in addition to their main 
51
22 In this respect, Wallis (2007) has pointed out that “all stories must follow the rules of their genre and of storytelling in general if 
they are to satisfy an audience.” (78) Consequently, a “game’s mechanics must take into consideration the rules of the genre that it 
is trying to create: not just the relevant icons and tropes, but the nature of a story from that genre” (ibid. 73).
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4 
function, serve as framings to the potential 
diegeses created during game-play. In this respect, 
I have argued that setting and rules not only 
provide the structural basis to the game but that 
they also frame it as they invariably imply 
reductions of the imagined world2. Consequently, 
by including or excluding (hypothetical) 
information, they create expectations concerning 
the playing of the game much in the same way as 
initial framing devices used in “traditional” written 
ﬁction. At the same time, rules and setting 
information affect the interpretation players make 
of diegetic events. Rulebook paratexts, for their 
part, are especially notorious for having a “double” 
framing function as they extend their inﬂuence 
from the rulebook towards the diegesis by 
triggering important frames within which the 
diegesis is to be constructed. In addition, the 
rulebook’s intra-textual framing devices serve to 
add diegetic meaning to the otherwise purely 
factual information given by the game setting. 
In view of the aforementioned, perhaps the best 
way to describe TRPG rulebooks would be as a 
system of framings. However, because of the fact that 
the diegesis only emerges during the actual 
playing of the game, the framings provided in the 
rulebook are to be understood as surrounding a 
diegetic void. This void, however, is not a 
completely abstract nothingness but, because 
framing devices are conveyors of meaning, it 
becomes what in Iserian terms is called a Leerstelle 
or semantic blank. (In other words, a semantic 
blank can only exist within an established system 
of meaning; only within it may a semantic vacuum 
be “ﬁlled”.) As Henry (2009) has stated, “the 
existence of these ﬁctional worlds, written without 
their stories, is an invitation for stories to 
happen.” (7)   Rulebooks are therefore texts that 
enable the visualization of potential diegeses. One 
could say then, that the rulebook is also an artifact 
that produces an aesthetic object, the object being 
the reader’s visualization of stories in potence. 
Indeed, Kurt Wiegel’s video reviews of TRPGs on 
the internet are a good example of this. Wiegel, 
who is an experienced game-master, discusses in 
short video clips different role-playing games, 
commenting on their playability and story 
possibilities. However, in many of these cases, 
Wiegel’s commentary is done without any actual 
playing experience of the game3. Likewise, it is not 
uncommon for players to purchase rulebooks for 
different games, not so much with the objective of 
playing them, but rather as a mode of gathering 
ideas – be it rules, setting or storylines – for 
campaigns already running in another game 
system. In this respect, it is important to 
distinguish rulebooks from proto-diegetic 
phenomena such as the draft of a novel. In this last 
case there will regularly be a single text (i.e. one 
story) as an outcome, whereas a RPG sourcebook 
may inform an indeﬁnite number of narrations. 
Thus, one could argue that RPG rulebooks are to be 
understood as an incomplete ‘act of 
ﬁctionalizing’ (Akt des Fingierens)4. Here, indeed, 
the imaginary has been ﬁxed by giving it form as 
setting information. In fact, it has been given an 
additional aspect of “reality” by the introduction of 
rules for its transformation into statistically 
determined elements. However, the rulebook in 
itself is still not a single complete story and is, as 
yet, not completely ‘realized’ (realisiert). Indeed, 
“the creation of world, character, and story become 
“real” when experienced during the course of a 
game session, rather than on the reading of the 
game rulebook itself.” (Nephew, 2004: 39) Thus, the 
role-playing game rulebook is a text still imbued by 
the possibilities of the imaginary. It is only during 
game play that this ﬁctionalizing act is completed. 
As Borgstrom (2007) has observed, “[b]efore the 
game begins there is a large space of possible 
stories deﬁned by the initial premise. During the 
process of gaming the players progressively reduce 
the space of possible stories down to a single story 
– one set of things “happened,” while all other sets 
did not.” (58) For this reason, the expectations 
triggered by a rulebook’s framing devices directly 
inﬂuence the formation of the story. Indeed, there 
is no actual ‘horror’ within the rulebook of the 
World of Darkness but, because its framings trigger 
this speciﬁc genre frame, the players, as well as the 
GM, will be inclined to produce a text that matches 
what is expected from it5. 
52
During the process of gaming the 
players progressively reduce the 
space of possible stories down to a 
single story – one set of things 
“happened,” while all other sets did 
not.”
23 As a matter of fact, Stefanescu (2006) has pointed out that “all comprehension of  a literary work is ultimately a negotiation 
between the interpretive frames imposed by the reader and those suggested by the text itself.” (330)
24 A similar point has been made by Loponen and Stenros (2012)
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4 
The system of framings constituted by the rulebook 
is therefore crucial in order to establish the speciﬁc 
‘interaction codes’ and ‘improvisation patterns’ (as 
by Fatland, 2006) relevant to a given game. Equally 
important, however, is the fact that by doing so 
TRPG texts also reveal to their readers, both 
implicitly and explicitly, how this is achieved, 
inciting players to further modify or even replace 
them with other (framing) texts. This speciﬁc mode 
of self-disclosure, as well as the use of framings in 
TRPGs to incite the production (and not only the 
reception) of text is what I have called genesic 
framing. Moreover, it is this feature that is likely to 
account for much of the complexity of the TRPG 
medium as well as for its persistence in time. 
Indeed, despite the appearance of alternatives in 
more technologically advanced media, TRPGs are 
still unique in that participants are not only playing 
a (storytelling) game but, by doing so, they are also 
learning the mechanisms that will allow them to 
(re-)construct and manipulate it along the way.
Finally, it is important to note that by focusing on 
rulebooks as “primary” texts, it is possible to 
elucidate how the different authorial instances 
involved in the game – primary, secondary and 
tertiary – extend their inﬂuence over the ‘story 
space’ beyond their speciﬁed areas of agency. If the 
narratives created during role-playing games may 
be seen as an actualization of player expectations, 
their (potential) fulﬁllment is to be understood as 
the result of collective negotiation. While the latter 
may be done explicitly, as in meta-game dialog in 
general, from what has been discussed in this 
paper it becomes evident that much of it in fact 
results from the manipulation of expectations and 
diegesis interpretation by means of genesic 
framing. In this respect, a description and analysis 
of how secondary and tertiary authors make use of 
such framing strategies is still a matter for further 
investigation.
As for now, it is possible to assert that tabletop 
role-playing games demonstrate the true extent to 
which framings are relevant in mediating works of 
ﬁction. This is especially important if we consider 
the notion that all ﬁction is in fact a form of 
pretense play (cf. Walton 1990; Iser 1991; Sutrop, 
2000). Indeed, much as the players’ individual 
visualization of the game events, any aesthetic or 
literary work is only truly available as the 
individual experience of a given recipient. When 
communicating about these texts, negotiation 
through framings – interpretations, blurbs, 
reviews, opinions, etc. – allows us to bridge the gap 
between our own experience of the text and that of 
others6. Thus, not only may role-playing games 
teach us something about the way in which we 
negotiate reality (cf. Mackay, 2001) but, foremost, 
about how we negotiate ﬁction7.
5. REFERENCES
[1]Achilli et al. 2004. The World of Darkness: White Wolf 
Publishing.
[2]Achilli et al. 2004. Vampire: The Requiem: White Wolf 
Publishing.
[3]Achilli et al. 2006. Requiem, Chronichler's Guide: 
White Wolf Publishing.
[4]Blackwelder et al. Vampire: Players’ Guide: White 
Wolf Publishing.
[5]Borgstrom, R., 2007. Structure and Meaning in Role-
Playing Game Design. In: P . Harrigan and N. 
Wardrip-Fruin, eds. Second Person: role-playing and 
story in games and playable media. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 58–66.
[6]Bunia, R., 2006. Framing the End. In: W. Wolf and W. 
Bernhardt, eds. Framing Borders in Literature and 
Other Media. Amsterdam: Rodopi, 359–383.
[7]Consalvo, M., 2007. Cheating: gaining advantage in 
videogames. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
[8]Costikyan, G., 2007. Games, Storytelling, and 
Breaking the String. In: P . Harrigan and N. Wardrip-
Fruin, eds. Second Person: role-playing and story in 
games and playable media. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 5–13.
[9]Dembeck, T., 2006. (Paratextual) Framing and the 
Work of Art. In: W. Wolf and W. Bernhardt, eds. 
Framing Borders in Literature and Other Media. 
Amsterdam: Rodopi, 263–295.
[10]Fatland, E. (2006). Interaction codes: Understanding 
and establishing patterns in player improvisation. In 
T. Fritzon & T. Wrigstad (Eds.), Role, play, art: 
Collected experiences of role-playing (pp. 17-34). 
Stockholm: Foreningen Knutepunkt.
[11]Fine, G.A., 1983. Shared Fantasy: Role-Playing Games 
as Social Worlds. Chicago, London: Univ. of Chicago 
Press.
53
This specific mode of self-disclosure, 
as well as the use of framings in 
TRPGs to incite the production (and 
not only the reception) of text is what I 
have called genesic framing.(11)
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4 
[12]Gelber, D., Costikyan, G., and Goldberg, E., 1984. 
Paranoia: West End Games.
[13]Genette, G., 1997. Paratexts: Thresholds of 
interpretation. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
[14]Glaser, B.G. and Strauss, A.L., 1974. Awareness of 
dying. Chicago: Aldine.
[15]Goffman, E., 1974. Frame Analysis: An Essay on the 
Organization of Experience. Harmondsworth: 
Penguin.
[16]Grünzweig, W. and Solbach, A., eds., 1999. 
Grenzüberschreitungen: Narratologie im Kontext/
Transcending Boundaries: Narratology in Context. 
Tübingen: Gunter Narr Verlag.
[17]Gygax, G. and Arneson, D., 1974. Dungeons and 
Dragons: Rules for Fantastic Medieval Wargames 
Campaigns Playable with Paper and Pencil and 
Miniature Figures. Lake Geneva: TSR.
[18]Hammer, J. (2007). Agency and authority in role-
playing 'texts'. In M. Knobel & C. Lankshear (Eds.), 
A new literacies sampler (pp. 67-93). New York: Peter 
Lang.
[19]Harrigan, P . and Wardrip-Fruin, N., eds., 2007. 
Second Person: role-playing and story in games and 
playable media. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
[20]Harviainen, J.T., 2008. A Hermeneutical Approach to 
Role-Playing Analysis. International Journal of Role-
Playing [online] (1), 66–78. Available from: http://
journalofroleplaying.org/ [Accessed 21 Sep 2012].
[21]Harviainen, J.T., 2012. Systemic Perspectives on 
Information on Physically Performed Role-play. 
Doctoral dissertation. Tampere, Univ of Tampere
[22]Hayot, E. and Wesp, E., 2004. Style, Strategy and 
Mimesis in Ergodic Literature. Comparative Literature 
Studies, 41 (3), 404–423.
[23]Henry, L., 2003. Group Narration: Power, Information, 
and Play in Role Playing Games [online]. 
www.darkshire.net. Available from: http://
www.darkshire.net/jhkim/rpg/theory/liz-
paper-2003/ [Accessed 21 Sep 2012].
[24]Hindmarch, W., 2007. Storytelling Games as a 
Creative Medium. In: P . Harrigan and N. Wardrip-
Fruin, eds. Second Person: role-playing and story in 
games and playable media. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 47–55.
[25]Hitchens, M. and Drachen, A., 2008. The Many Faces 
of Role-Playing Games. International Journal of Role-
Playing [online] (1), 3-21. Available from: http://
journalofroleplaying.org/ [Accessed 21 Sep 2012].
[26]Hruschovski, B., 1984. Fictionality and Fields of 
Reference. Poetics Today, 5 (2), 227–251.
[27]Ilieva, A. 2012. Cultural Codes, Cultural Memory 
and Cultural Concepts in Live Role-Playing 
Discourses. Paper presented at Role-Playing in 
Games seminar, 10-11 April, 2012, Tampere, Finland.
[28]Iser, W., 1991. Das Fiktive und das Imaginäre: 
Perspektiven literarischer Anthropologie. Frankfurt a. 
M.: Suhrkamp.
[29]Lankoski, P ., 2004. Character Design Fundamentals 
for Role-Playing Games. In: M. Montola and J. 
Stenros, eds. Beyond Role and Play: Tools, Toys and 
Theory for Harnessing the Imagination. Helsinki: 
Ropecon, 139–148.
[30]Loponen, M. and Stenros, J. 2012. Power Relations in 
Cultural Semiospheres. Paper presented at Role-
Playing in Games seminar, 10-11 April, 2012, 
Tampere, Finland.
[31]Machell, M., 2002. The Problem with Character 
Backgrounds [online]. Available from: http://
www.realms.org.uk [Accessed 21 Sep 2012].
[32]Machell, M., 2003. Social Contract Gaming [online]. 
Available from: www.realms.org.uk [Accessed 21 
Sep 2012].
[33]Mackay, D., 2001. The Fantasy Role-Playing Game: A 
New Performing Art. Jefferson, North Carolina, 
London: McFarland & Company.
[34]Miller, J., 2006. Role Playing Games as Interactive 
Fiction. Reconstruction: Studies in Contemporary 
Culture [online], 6 (1). Available from: http://
reconstruction.eserver.org/122/contents122.shtml 
[Accessed 22 Sep 2012].
[35]Montola, M. and Stenros, J., eds., 2004. Beyond Role 
and Play: Tools, Toys and Theory for Harnessing the 
Imagination. Helsinki: Ropecon.
[36]Nephew, M.A.B., 2004. Playing with Power: The 
Authorial Consequences of Roleplaying Games. 
Dissertation Abstracts International, Section A: The 
Humanities and Social Sciences, 64 (11).
[37]Padol, L., 1996. Playing Stories, Telling Games: 
Collaborative Storytelling in Role-Playing Games 
[online]. Available from: http://
www.recappub.com/games.html [Accessed 24 Aug 
2009 - document no longer available online].
[38]Punday, D., 2005. Creative Accounting: Role-Playing  
Games, Possible-World Theory, and the Agency of 
Imagination. Poetics Today, 26 (1), 113–139.
[39]Rein-Hagen, M. et al. 1991. Vampire: The Masquerade: 
White Wolf Publishing.
[40]Schick, L., 1991. Heroic Worlds: A History and Guide to 
Role-Playing Games. Buffalo: Prometheus Books.
[41]Sommer, R., 2006. Initial Framings in Film. In: W. 
Wolf and W. Bernhardt, eds. Framing Borders in 
Literature and Other Media. Amsterdam: Rodopi, 383–
407.
[42]Stefanescu, M., 2006. The (Dis)Continuity of 
Framings. In: W. Wolf and W. Bernhardt, eds. 
Framing Borders in Literature and Other Media. 
Amsterdam: Rodopi, 329–341.
[43]Stenros, J., 2004. Notes on Role-Playing Texts. In: M. 
Montola and J. Stenros, eds. Beyond Role and Play: 
Tools, Toys and Theory for Harnessing the Imagination. 
Helsinki: Ropecon, 75–80.
[44]Sutrop, M., 2000. Fiction and Imagination: The 
Anthropological Function of Literature. Paderborn: 
Mentis
54
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4 
[45]Wallis, J., 2007. Making Games That Make Stories. 
In: P . Harrigan and N. Wardrip-Fruin, eds. Second 
Person: role-playing and story in games and playable 
media. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 69–80.
[46]Walton, K. (1990). Mimesis as Make-Believe: On the 
Foundations of Representational Arts. Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard Univ. Pr.
[47]Wandhoff, H., 2006. Found(ed) in a Picture: 
Ekphrastic Framing in Ancient, Medieval, and 
Contemporary Literature. In: W. Wolf and W. 
Bernhardt, eds. Framing Borders in Literature and 
Other Media. Amsterdam: Rodopi, 179–207.
[48]Waskul, D.D., 2006. The role-playing game and the 
game of role-playing: the ludic self and everyday 
life. In: P . Williams, S.Q. Hendricks, and W.K. 
Winkler, eds. Gaming as Culture: essays on reality, 
identity and experience in fantasy games. Jefferson, 
N.C.: McFarland & Co., 19–38.
[49]Wiegel, K. Game Geeks [online]. http://
gamegeeksrpg.com/ [Accessed 22 Sep 2012].
[50]Williams, P ., Hendricks, S.Q., and Winkler, W.K., 
eds., 2006. Gaming as Culture: essays on reality, identity 
and experience in fantasy games. Jefferson, N.C.: 
McFarland & Co.
[51]Wolf, M.J.P . and Perron, B., 2003. The video game 
theory reader. New York, London: Routledge.
[52]Wolf, W. and Bernhardt, W., eds., 2006. Framing 
Borders in Literature and Other Media. Amsterdam: 
Rodopi.
[53]Wolf, W., 1999. Framing Fiction: Reﬂections on a 
Narratological Concept and an Example: Bradbury, 
Mensonge. In: W. Grünzweig and A. Solbach, eds. 
Grenzüberschreitungen: Narratologie im Kontext/
Transcending Boundaries: Narratology in Context. 
Tübingen: Gunter Narr Verlag, 97–124.
54
David Jara is a Chilean Ph. D. candidate in literary 
studies at the University of Heidelberg, Germany. 
His current research focuses on the negotiation of 
narratives and ﬁctional spaces in tabletop role-playing 
games.