 
 TalkToYoUniverse: Genly Ai: A Ridiculously Close Look 
TalkToYoUniverse
 Where I talk to you about linguistics and anthropology, science fiction and fantasy, point of view, grammar geekiness, and all of the fascinating permutations thereof... 
 Home 
 Publications 
 About Juliette Wade 
 Interviews 
 Read! 
 Saturday, October 4, 2008 
Genly Ai: A Ridiculously Close Look
Today I thought I'd take a look at Ursula LeGuin's The Left Hand of Darkness . This is possibly my favorite book of all time; certainly it's a source of inspiration to me in my own writing. The opening is actually quite complex, because it involves three different voices. The first one appears in the title of the first chapter:
"1. A Parade in Erhenrang"
Let's start with the phrase "in Erhenrang." This gives us a location with an entirely foreign name, so it's clearly some alien place (assuming that we've come to the first page knowing we're looking at science fiction).
The second thing I'd like to point out is " a parade." The word "a" has a special function, that of introducing something that is new - specifically, something that is new to the reader. It's the word "a" here that gives me a sense of a narrator, and a subtle sense of "once upon a time." So this is the over-narrator's voice: as close as we'll get to hearing the voice of the author herself.
Then we hit the second voice:
"From the Archives of Hain. Transcript of Ansible Document 01-01101-934-2-Gethen: To the Stabile on Ollul: Report from Genly Ai, First Mobile on Gethen/Winter, Hainish Cycle 93, Ekumenical Year 1490-97"
This is a voice of ultimate authority, the notes that would head a scientific report, and thus it gives us the sense that what will follow is a completely factual account. Notice that there are no verbs in this excerpt. No verbs means no subjects, and thus no actors - the sense of agency, of identity and intent is completely removed, leaving us with a sourceless truth. This impression is strengthened by the word "archives," a place where history is recorded, and "transcript," a completely accurate re-copying of something not originally in text form.
Along with this we get "Hain," another unfamiliar place but obviously the source of this authority. The word "ansible" may be unfamiliar but it clearly must produce documents, and in particular, messages ("To the Stabile on Ollul...").
Think about the number of alien names in these few sentences. The feeling I get from all of this is that the protagonist, clearly indicated to be Genly Ai, is a small individual in the context of a very large and complex overarching institutional structure. This structure not only incorporates separate planets (notice the use of "on" in "on Ollul" rather than "in" which we saw in the chapter title) but it also dictates its own measurement of time.
So from the chapter title we've backed off to the voice of the greater institution, and then LeGuin takes us into this:
"I'll make my report as if I told a story, for I was taught as a child on my homeworld that Truth is a matter of the imagination. The soundest fact may fail or prevail in the style of its telling..."
Here, beginning with the word "I," suddenly we hear our point-of-view narrator's voice. LeGuin indicates that this voice belongs to Genly Ai by linking back to the previous piece with the phrase "my report." We get confirmation of the outer space setting in the world "homeworld." But rather than starting to recount events immediately, Genly Ai says, "Truth is a matter of the imagination. The soundest fact may fail or prevail in the style of its telling..."
This is a fascinating move. Le Guin sets us up to receive facts, using the lines from the Archive notes, and then immediately has her narrator question the nature of truth and fact . (By the way, we don't actually get to the parade until the fourth paragraph on page 2).
It strikes me that this is intended to be deliberately disorienting. It sets the reader up to take the story seriously, but to be prepared for alienness and a great deal of ambiguity. It prepares us for the voice of Genly Ai, who comes out of an Earth-born storytelling background, but does have the skills of a linguist and anthropologist, as well as (to some extent) a political negotiator. It also fits well with the way Genly Ai himself feels disoriented a lot of the time.
Throughout the novel, we get the very succinct chapter titles which give us a calmly reflective sense of the story's progress, but the complexity of the characters, the world, and the situation just grows and grows. That LeGuin is able to keep it all driving forward and pointing to a dramatic conclusion is a measure of her skill.
There's a reason this book won the Hugo and Nebula awards. Read it.
Posted by
 Juliette Wade 
at
 10:45 PM 
 Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest 
About:
 analysis ,
 discourse ,
 LeGuin ,
 narrator ,
 point of view ,
 Ridiculously Close Look ,
 The Left Hand of Darkness 
 No comments:
 Post a Comment
 Newer Post 
 Older Post 
 Home 
Subscribe to:
 Post Comments (Atom) 
 The Google+ Hangouts with Juliette Wade
 Translate
 Tweet this!
 Tweet 
 Subscribe To
Posts
 Atom
Posts
Comments
 Atom
Comments
 Twitter
 @JulietteWade 
 Facebook
 Like me here! 
 Popular Posts
 A checklist for deep POV (in 1st or 3rd person!) 
 TTYU Retro: Secondary characters can add dimension and tension 
 Culture Share: Philippines - Engagement and Wedding feasts in Ifugao 
 Diners, Drive-ins, Dives and how to tell them apart 
 TTYU Retro: What's in a "strong female character"? 
 Why the internet is a trap - and how this writer deals with it 
 Know Your Character Inside and Out 
 Designing character interviews that really matter (including genre-inspired questions) 
 Why (not) tell the story in present tense? 
 Feet and Shoes across cultures 
 SERIES (#of articles)
 The Writer's International Culture Share (34) 
 Worldbuilding Hangouts on Google+ (30) 
 Wednesday Worldbuilding Workshop (14) 
 A different value (6) 
 How linguistics can help you! (9) 
 Ridiculously Close Looks (6) 
 Classic Posts
 Designing an Alphabet or Writing System 
 Hiding Information in Plain Sight 
 Myth of the Native Speaker 
 Point of View (IROSF article) 
 Show Don't Tell - Exposed! 
 At My Author Site
Juliette Wade 
I have an agent!
12 years ago
 Contact me 
 "The Language of the Silent," March/April 2016
 Guest Editorial, "Not Just Semantics," May 2015
 "The Valiant Heart," February 2015
 "Lady Sakura's Letters," December 2014
 "Soul's Bargain," July 2014
 "Mind Locker," July/August 2014
 Essay, "Women are the Future of Science Fiction," June 2014
 "Suteta Mono de wa Nai (Not Easily Thrown Away)," March 2014
 "Smoke and Feathers," 2013
 "The Liars," 2012
 "Cold Words," 2009
 "At Cross Purposes," 2011
 "The Eminence's Match," 2010
 "Cold Words," 2009
 "Let the Word Take Me," 2008
 Interesting Blogs
The Other Side of the Story 
Shh! It's a Secret: How to Raise Tension and Conflict in a Scene
1 day ago
The Bookshelf Muse 
How to Deliver Important Backstory Using the Setting
3 days ago
Tales to Tide You Over 
LAcon V: The 84th World Science Fiction Convention Has Added Me as a 
Panelist!
2 weeks ago
Hopes and Dreams: My Writing and My Sons 
Doorways To Adventure!
1 year ago
Science In My Fiction 
Celtx
4 years ago
The Character Therapist 
Forgiveness by Marriane Evans
9 years ago
The Sharp Angle 
Taking a Break
11 years ago
Science Fiction and Other ODDysseys 
Two shiny new books - one for each of my names!
11 years ago
Diverse Pages 
 Author Sites
 Aliette de Bodard 
 Ann Wilkes 
 Athena Andreadis 
 Birgitte Necessary 
 Dario Ciriello 
 Deborah J. Ross 
 Janice Hardy 
 Kaycee Looney 
 Les Edgerton 
 Margaret McGaffey Fisk 
 Mary Robinette Kowal 
 Sheila Finch 
 T.L. Morganfield 
 Research Sites
 Listen to Endangered Languages 
 Science in my Fiction 
 Found in Translation (UCBerkeley) 
 Endangered Languages (UNESCO) 
 Grammatical Gender (NPR) 
 Alex Solokoff on Story Structure 
 Holly Lisle on worldbuilding (blog) 
 Patricia Wrede on Worldbuilding (SFWA) 
 Japanese Buddhist&Shinto Deities (onmark productions) 
 Japanese Ghosts (Obakemono Project) 
 Script Decipherment (Wikipedia) 
 Terms and Researchers (link list) 
 Science Fiction and Fantasy Sites
 Analog Science Fiction and Fact 
 Asimov's Science Fiction 
 Convention Finder 
 Fantasy & Science Fiction 
 Fantasy Magazine 
 Internet Review of Science Fiction 
 OSC's Intergalactic Medicine Show 
 Panverse Publishing 
 Strange Horizons 
Powered by Blogger .
 