 
Artificial Intelligence versus Maya Angelou: Experimental evidence that people cannot 
differentiate AI-generated from human-written poetry 
 
Nils Köbis1, 2* & Luca D. Mossink1 
1 Department of Economics & Center for Experimental Economics and Political Decision 
making (CREED), University of Amsterdam 
2 Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Center for Humans & Machines 
 
* Correspondence: Nils Köbis (n.c.kobis@gmail.com), Center for Research in Experimental 
Economics and Political Decision Making, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.  
Funding: This project has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under 
the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreements: 
ERC-StG-637915; ERC-AdG 295707) from Research Priority Area Behavioral Economics 
(University of Amsterdam, proposal number 201906250406).  
Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that they do not have any conflict of interests.  
Acknowledgements: We thank Bobbie Goettler, Silvia Dominguez Martinez, Margarita Leib, 
Giulia Ranzini, Shaul Shalvi, Ivan Soraperra, Christopher Starke, Koen van der Veen, and the 
participants of the CREED Lunch Seminar for useful comments, suggestions and assistance. 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  2 
Abstract 
The release of openly available, robust natural language generation algorithms (NLG) has 
spurred much public attention and debate. One reason lies in the algorithms’ purported ability to 
generate human-like text across various domains. Empirical evidence using incentivized tasks to 
assess whether people (a) can distinguish and (b) prefer algorithm-generated versus human-
written text is lacking. We conducted two experiments assessing behavioral reactions to the 
state-of-the-art Natural Language Generation algorithm GPT-2 (Ntotal = 830). Using the identical 
starting lines of human poems, GPT-2 produced samples of poems. From these samples, either a 
random poem was chosen (Human-out-of-the-loop) or the best one was selected (Human-in-the-
loop) and in turn matched with a human-written poem. In a new incentivized version of the 
Turing Test, participants failed to reliably detect the algorithmically-generated poems in the 
Human-in-the-loop treatment, yet succeeded in the Human-out-of-the-loop treatment. Further, 
people reveal a slight aversion to algorithm-generated poetry, independent on whether 
participants were informed about the algorithmic origin of the poem (Transparency) or not 
(Opacity). We discuss what these results convey about the performance of NLG algorithms to 
produce human-like text and propose methodologies to study such learning algorithms in human-
agent experimental settings. 
Keywords: Natural Language Generation; Computational Creativity; Turing Test; Creativity; 
Machine Behavior 
  
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  3 
Artificial Intelligence versus Maya Angelou: Experimental evidence that people cannot 
differentiate AI-generated from human-written poetry 
Artificial intelligence (AI), “the development of machines capable of sophisticated 
(intelligent) information processing” (Dafoe, 2018, p. 5), is rapidly advancing and has begun to 
take over tasks previously performed solely by humans (Rahwan et al., 2019). Algorithms are 
already assisting humans in writing text, such as autocompleting sentences in emails and even 
helping writers write novels (Streitfeld, 2018). Besides supporting humans, such natural-
language generation (NLG) algorithms can autonomously create different types of texts. Already 
in use in the field of digital journalism, algorithms can generate news pieces based on 
standardized input data, such as sports scores or stock market values (van Dalen, 2012). 
However, autonomous creative-text generation presents a bigger challenge because it requires 
the creation of original content that is deemed appealing and useful (Bakhshi, Frey, & Osborne, 
2015). Hence, creative writing has long been considered an impregnable task for algorithms 
(Keith, 2012; Penrose, 1990). 
Yet, more recent developments in machine learning have expanded the scope and 
capacities of NLG (Jozefowicz, Vinyals, Schuster, Shazeer, & Wu, 2016). A notable case is the 
open-source algorithm called Generative Pre-Training 2 (GPT-2; Radford et al., 2019). At close 
to zero marginal cost, it produces text across a wide variety of domains, ranging from non-
fiction, such as news pieces, to fiction, such as novels. The text outputs adhere to grammatical 
and semantical rules, and allegedly reach human levels. Due to such claims about the 
unprecedented abilities and the potential ethical challenges it raises, for example, as a tool for 
disinformation (Kreps & McCain, 2019), much controversy accompanied the algorithm’s release 
(The Guardian, 2019).  
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  4 
However, systematic empirical examination of these claims is largely lacking – especially 
from an experimental social science perspective. In particular, whether humans are able to 
reliably distinguish creative text that is generated by an algorithm from one written by a human, 
when they are incentivized to do so, remains unknown. Do people prefer creative text written by 
fellow humans to that generated by algorithms? Does the information about the respective origin 
– being a human or an algorithm – sway this preference for the creative-text output? Does human 
involvement (or lack of) in the selection of the text output generated by the algorithm make a 
difference? To address these questions, we use incentivized paradigms to extend previous 
research into computational creativity by emphasizing the human behavioral reactions to NLG. 
Although much research has focused on the machinery – how to design algorithms to write 
creative text (Boden, 2009; Gonçalo Oliveira, 2018; Oliveira, 2009) – research on humans’ 
behavioral reactions to such algorithms is much less developed.  
1.1.Distinguishing between Artificial and Human Text 
To gain empirical insights into people’s ability to discern artificial from human content, 
we draw on the famous Turing Test (Saygin, Chaminade, Ishiguro, Driver, & Frith, 2012; 
Turing, 1950). Based on a thought experiment, Turing proposed it as a way to find out whether 
machines can think. The basic set-up entails three agents: one judge and two participants. The 
judge seeks to find out which of the other two participants is a machine and which is a human. In 
the classic version, the judge has five minutes to ask multiple questions and receives answers 
from the participants, after which the judge indicates which of the two is a human and which is a 
machine.  
Since its introduction, various algorithms have attempted to pass the test in multiple 
tournaments and competitions (for an overview, see Warwick & Shah, 2016). In 2014, a chat 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  5 
bot, called Eugene Goostman, was claimed to have passed the Turing Test, by tricking 33% of 
human judges into believing they were communicating with a 13-year-old Ukrainian boy 
(Marcus, Rossi, & Veloso, 2016; Walsh, 2017; Warwick & Shah, 2016). Hence, a deceptive 
strategy of pretending to have rudimentary English proficiency paid off. Therefore, many 
scholars have criticized the standard Turing Test for identifying deceptive ability rather than 
intelligence (e.g., see Riedl, 2014; Walsh, 2017). In pursuit of better measures of machine 
intelligence, many extensions, modifications, and alternative tests have been proposed (for an 
overview, see the special issue on the subject in AI Magazine, Marcus et al., 2016). 
However, according to the results of a systematic literature review (for more details, see 
SOM), no version of the Turing Test has contained financial incentives for judges’ accuracy. 
That is, judges typically do not receive any financial reward for successfully detecting the human 
among the competitors. Hence, whether people are unable, or might simply not be motivated, to 
differentiate human from machine counterparts remains somewhat unknown. Filling this gap, we 
introduce a new version of the Turing Test that entails incentives for judges’ accuracy. In both 
studies, we tested the prediction that humans’ accuracy in correctly identifying whether the text 
is human-written or algorithm-generated does not exceed random guessing. 
1.2.Overconfidence about Algorithmic Detection 
Besides examining people’s ability to detect human-written from algorithm-generated 
text, it is crucial to understand whether people have accurate beliefs about their own ability in 
that domain. Multiple studies have revealed overconfidence, and hence the systematic 
overestimation of one’s own capabilities (Kruger & Dunning, 1999). While generally causing 
personal and social harm (Malmendier & Tate, 2008; Moore & Healy, 2008), overconfidence in 
the domain of algorithm detection poses the threat of making people especially vulnerable to 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  6 
deception. That is, when people overestimate their own abilities to detect algorithmic behavior, 
and fail to reliably do so, they can fall prey to being exposed to, and potentially influenced by, 
algorithms without noticing. To examine whether the commonly observed phenomenon of 
overconfidence also exists for algorithmic detection, we tested the hypothesis that people’s 
perceived ability to detect algorithms systematically exceeds their actual accuracy levels.  
1.3. Artificial Creativity: Aversion and Appreciation 
Classically, machines have been seen as static rule-based systems. Because creativity 
requires the generation of original and useful ideas (Amabile, 1983), the possibility that 
machines could be creative was historically considered unfathomable. In fact, creativity still 
provides a big obstacle for machines that merely rely on automation (Bakhshi et al., 2015). Yet, 
recent advances in machine learning (ML) have increasingly enabled computers to “‘learn’ and 
change their behaviour through search, optimisation, analysis or interaction, allowing them to 
discover new knowledge or create artefacts which exceed that of their human designers in 
specific contexts” (McCormack & D’Inverno, 2014, p. 2). Hence, algorithms are becoming 
increasingly able to adapt, learn, and create original, unpredictable outputs.  
ML has also changed the field of computational creativity (Boden, 2009; Loller-
Andersen & Gambäck, 2018; Majid al-Rifaie, Cropley, Cropley, & Bishop, 2016; Oliveira, 
2009; Sloman, 2012). Multiple algorithms have been developed to serve single creative purposes 
such as generating story narratives (Bringsjord & Ferrucci, 1999), crafting jokes (Ritchie et al., 
2007), or writing poetry (for an overview, see Oliveira, 2009). Although these algorithms have 
been programmed with single purposes – for example, creating poetry – recent developments in 
transfer learning have rendered algorithms capable of text generation across various domains. 
The algorithm GPT-2, released in 2019 by OpenAI, is one of the most famous examples of such 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  7 
a robust text-generating algorithm. In short, using ML technology, GPT-2 is a transformer-based 
language model, trained on an unprecedentedly large dataset, to predict the next word for a given 
textual input (for more details on the algorithm, see Radford et al., 2019). Due to these extensive 
training datasets, the algorithm has a more thorough ability to reproduce syntax and thus 
autonomously generate text, including new creative content.  
Yet, do human readers find such algorithm-generated text as appealing as – or more 
appealing than – human-written creative text? Do people’s preferences differ when they are 
aware (transparency) versus unaware (opacity) of the algorithmic origin of the text? We 
experimentally examine how information about algorithms shapes humans’ behavioral reactions, 
reflecting current directions in AI-safety research that deal with algorithmic transparency 
(Craglia et al., 2018; Garfinkel, Matthews, Shapiro, & Smith, 2017; Marcinkowski, Kieslich, 
Starke, & Lünich, 2020; Shin & Park, 2019).  
Although transparency can refer to different types of disclosures around algorithmic 
decisions, here we focus on algorithmic presence, and hence the disclosure about whether an 
algorithm is involved in the decision (Diakopoulos, 2016). Transparency around algorithmic 
presence pertains to the current policy debate around whether people have a right to know when 
they are dealing with an algorithmic counterpart. For example, a proposed “Turing’s red flag 
law” (Walsh, 2016) states, “An autonomous system should be designed so that it is unlikely to be 
mistaken for anything besides an autonomous system, and should identify itself at the start of 
any interaction with another agent” (Walsh, 2016, p. 35). Requests for such transparent 
information regimes have become increasingly voiced in light of the recently published hyper-
realistic phone-call assistant Google Duplex (Leviathan & Matias, 2018) and robust text-
generation algorithms such as GPT-2 (The Guardian, 2019). 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  8 
When people are informed about algorithmic presence, extensive research reveals they 
are generally averse toward algorithmic decision-makers. This reluctance of “human decision 
makers to use superior but imperfect algorithms” (Burton, Stein, & Jensen, 2019; p.1) has been 
referred to as algorithm aversion (Dietvorst, Simmons, & Massey, 2015). In part driven by the 
belief that human errors are random, whereas algorithmic errors are systematic (Highhouse, 
2008), people have shown resistance to algorithms in various domains (for a systematic literature 
review, see Burton et al., 2019). For example, people dislike, machines making moral decisions 
(Bigman & Gray, 2018), especially when they appear eerily human (Laakasuo, Palomäki, & 
Köbis, 2020), devalue purely algorithmic political choices (Starke & Lünich, 2020), and are even 
reluctant to rely on superior algorithmic recommendations about which jokes others would find 
funny (Yeomans, Shah, Mullainathan, & Kleinberg, 2019). 
Regarding aversion to algorithm-generated text, research within digital journalism has 
assessed people’s perceptions of news generated by algorithms (Carlson, 2015; Diakopoulos & 
Koliska, 2017). For example, companies such as Automated Insights produce articles for the 
Associated Press in domains where information exists in standardized formats, such as finance, 
sports, or weather. Experiments have compared people’s evaluations of such algorithm-
generated news pieces with those written by journalists (Clerwall, 2014; Graefe, Haim, 
Haarmann, & Brosius, 2018; Sundar & Nass, 2001). In one study, participants judged, among 
other facets, the overall quality, credibility, and objectivity of the text. The results reveal that 
algorithm-generated content is rated as more descriptive and boring, while also being viewed as 
objective and not necessarily distinguishable from content written by journalists (Clerwall, 
2014). Another online experiment assessing people’s perception of news pieces systematically 
manipulated the articles’ actual and declared source (Graefe et al., 2018). Assessing credibility, 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  9 
readability, and journalistic expertise of the stimuli revealed participants consistently favored the 
allegedly human-written articles. People also reveal some aversion to algorithm-generated news, 
and thus non-fiction text. 
Yet, do they equally dislike algorithm-generated fiction, that is, creative text? And does 
the information disclosure influence revealed preferences? Gaining answers to these questions is 
relevant to understanding the advances in artificial creativity and gauging the potential impact 
algorithms might have for creative industries (Bakhshi et al., 2015). Understanding whether 
people like or dislike creative text written by an algorithm also provides insights into whether 
NLG algorithms could be used to deceive others into believing the creative text stems from a 
human. That is, if people find the current output of algorithms such as GPT-2 entirely 
unappealing, the potential for ethical harm is less imminent. If, however, people find human and 
AI-written creative text comparably appealing, the door would open for AI to be used to craft 
such text on humans’ behalf.  
To find out whether people are averse to algorithm-generated creative texts, we assessed 
people’s revealed preference for algorithm-generated creative text. From pairs of poems – each 
time, one originated from an algorithm and the other from a human – participants picked one 
they liked more. Between subjects, we either disclosed the respective origin of the poem 
(transparency) or not (opacity). We differed the degree of proficiency on the side of the human 
writers – untrained novices in Study 1 and experts in Study 2 – and compared their performance 
with the state-of-the-art algorithm GPT-2. We tested the prediction that humans would prefer the 
human-written poem, in particular when they were informed about the origin of the poem. 
Moreover, in Study 2, we additionally assessed stated preferences of algorithm aversion, by 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  10 
asking people how they generally perceive algorithms that write creative text, and tested our 
prediction that stated and revealed preferences are positively correlated.  
1.4. Human Selection in and out of the Loop 
Moreover, the combination of understanding people’s accuracy in detecting algorithm-
generated text and their preference for such text enables new insights into the deceptive potential 
of such NLG algorithms. That is, if people cannot tell human-written from algorithm-generated 
text and do not systematically prefer the former, GPT-2 and other algorithms might indeed be 
used for new forms of plagiarism. One key feature to understanding the deceptive potential of 
such algorithms is the degree of autonomy the algorithms have. Someone using the algorithm to 
craft text on one’s behalf can scan through the outputs – algorithms such as GPT-2 are capable of 
creating multiple samples of text in mere seconds – and select the one most suitable for a 
particular task. In fact, media coverage such as The Economist interviewing GPT-2 has been 
criticized for “cherry picking” only GPT-2’s most coherent and funny replies to make it appear 
more capable than it actually is (Marcus, 2020). Such human editing reflects a selection process 
with humans-in-the-loop (HITL, Goldenfein, 2019). On the other end of the spectrum are 
unfiltered algorithmic outputs, such as many chatbots, tweetbots, and other automated text-
generating algorithms. These algorithms act autonomously. The selection process occurs with 
humans-out-of-the-loop (HOTL). 
Previous research suggests human involvement in algorithmic decision-making crucially 
shapes perceptions of identical outcomes (Starke & Lünich, 2020), and the degree of a machine’s 
autonomy drives moral evaluations (Bigman, Waytz, Alterovitz, & Gray, 2019). Yet, the 
behavioral reactions to these different regulation regimes remains largely unknown, in particular 
in relation to the generation of creative text. To gauge the state of the art in NLG creative-text 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  11 
generation, a human in the selection process plays a vital role. Therefore, we introduce an HITL 
and an HOTL treatment to the experiment to gauge the gain insights into how human 
involvement shapes behavioral reactions to the algorithm’s performance. We tested the 
prediction that people’s detection accuracy and revealed algorithm aversion of algorithm-
generated poetry would drop when the poems were pre-selected by humans (vs. randomly 
sampled) from the outputs generated by GPT-2. 
2. General Method  
In the set of pre-registered studies, we introduce established tournament designs from 
behavioral economics to computational creativity research, by creating a competition between 
two agents, and have an independent third party function as a judge (for similar set-ups, see 
Gneezy, Saccardo, & van Veldhuizen, 2019). Extending previous behavioral research, in which 
two humans competed with each other (for an overview, see Camerer, 2011), in our experimental 
set-up, humans directly compete with an AI agent, in this case, the NLG algorithm GPT-2. 
Both studies entailed four parts (for an overview, see Table 1). Part 1 consisted of 
creating pairs of human-AI poems. On the human side, in Study 1, poems were written by 
participants who took part in an incentivized real-effort creative-writing task; in Study 2, we 
used existing professionally written poems. On the algorithm’s side, the poem stemmed from a 
state-of-the-art NLG algorithm GPT-2. In Study 1, we, the authors, selected output that the 
algorithm generated. In Study 2, we introduced a between-subjects manipulation of selection 
procedure, namely, whether the poems entering the competition were again selected by the 
authors, that is, HITL, versus randomly sampled from the outputs that GPT-2 produced, that is, 
HOTL. 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  12 
Part 2 entailed a judgment task. In it, a separate sample of participants acted as third-
party judges and indicated their preference for the creative texts. In both studies, we manipulated 
between subjects whether participants received information about the origin of the text, that is, 
which of the two poems was written by a human. Comparing the Transparency treatment, in 
which participants were informed about the origin, with the Opacity treatment, in which they 
were oblivious, enables us to gain causal insights into how the information about algorithmic 
presence shapes revealed preferences. In Study 2, the selection manipulation of the HITL versus 
HOTL treatment additionally allowed us to test how human involvement in the selection process 
of the outputs of GPT-2 shapes these preferences. 
Part 3 consisted of a new, incentivized version of the classical Turing Test (Saygin et al., 
2012; Turing, 1950) to assess people’s accuracy in identifying algorithm-generated creative text. 
Judges naïve to the origin of the poems faced the task of correctly distinguishing human-written 
from algorithm-generated text and stood to gain financially when they accurately did so. In 
Study 1, participants in the Opacity treatment engaged in this version of the Turing test, whereas 
in Study 2, we recruited a separate sample of participants. Study 2 further contained the selection 
treatment to assess how human involvement in the selection procedure (HITL vs. HOTL) shapes 
people’s ability to differentiate human-written from algorithm-generated creative text.  
In part 4, accompanying the accuracy assessment, participants indicated their confidence 
in identifying the correct poem. In Study 1, this measurement was unincentivized, whereas in 
Study 2, we attached financial incentives for judges correctly estimating their performance. 
Namely, they received a reward of €0.50 if they correctly indicated the number of rounds in 
which they identified the correct origin of the poem, which allows us to gauge how people’s 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  13 
estimated performance compares with their actual performance, and how incentives influence a 
potential gap between the two.  
2.1.Pre-registration statement 
All studies reported in this manuscript are pre-registered on the Open Science 
Framework,1 where we provide an overview of all hypotheses, pre-analysis plans, material, data, 
and R analysis scripts. We further provide several accompanying documents that provide 
background information and technical details on the use of the NLG algorithm, the procedure 
employed to gather and select the poems for the competitions.  
  
                                                 
1 Pre-registration Study 1: https://osf.io/znjex  
Pre-registrations for both parts of Study 2: https://osf.io/z6fhr & https://osf.io/uvmjx 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  14 
Table 1. Overview of two studies that each contain four parts 
 Study 1 Study 2 
Part 1 – Selection of poems 
as stimulus material  
Poems written by untrained 
writers (N=30)  
vs.  
GPT-2 Medium (final poems 
selected with HITL)  
Professional poems (e.g., Maya 
Angelou) 
vs.  
GPT-2 XL (between-subjects 
treatment of final poems selected 
either with HITL or HOTL) 
Part 2 – Preference Participants (N=200) reveal 
preference for human-written vs. 
AI-generated poems while 
knowing the origin of the poems 
(Transparency) or not (Opacity) 
Participants (N=400) reveal 
preference for human-written vs 
AI-generated poems while 
knowing the origin of the poems 
(Transparency) or not (Opacity)  
Part 3 – Detection Accuracy Incentivized version of Turing 
Test among participants in 
Opacity treatment (N =100, 
reward = €0.50) 
Incentivized version of Turing 
Test with separate sample (N = 
200, reward = €0.50) 
Part 4 – Confidence Unincentivized assessment of 
confidence in detection ability  
Incentivized assessment of 
confidence of detection ability 
  
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  15 
3. Study 1 
3.1.Method 
3.1.1. Part 1 – Selection of poems 
3.1.1.1. Participants and Procedure. Thirty participants (MAge = 29.40, SDAge = 8.75; 
female = 56.67%) completed the task to write a poem and answer a few exit questions, which in 
total took, on average, around 11 minutes. To obtain high-quality online data, we recruited the 
participants via the online research platform Prolific Academic (for a discussion of different 
online research platforms, see Peer, Brandimarte, Samat, & Acquisti, 2017), paid participants an 
average of €15 per hour, and restricted the sample those who were proficient in English. After 
providing informed consent, participants were informed about the incentivized competition that 
they would enter (for full instructions, see SOM). Namely, they could win a prize of €2 if their 
text was chosen as the winner in the competition, which led to a total of €40 in bonuses being 
paid out.  
3.1.1.2. Human Competitor. To enter the competition, participants had to write a short 
piece of poetry for which they received the first two lines. Participants could freely decide how 
to continue the poem, which had to be at least eight lines long and be written in English. 
Instructions further explained to participants that they should abstain from (a) writing gibberish 
(e.g., kajsdkjasdkjaskjd), (b) addressing the judge directly (e.g. “choose me as the winner”), and 
(c) plagiarizing other people's work, because doing any of the three would result in exclusion 
from the competition. Three independent naïve coders screened the entries according to whether 
the written texts adhered to these criteria. We randomly picked 20 poems that fulfilled the pre-
specified criteria. The instructions explained this procedure to the participants, who, under the 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  16 
assumption that all participants fulfilled the inclusion criteria, had a 67% chance of being entered 
into the writing competition. 
3.1.1.3. AI Competitor. The randomly picked poems written by participants were 
entered into a competition with poems written by GPT-2. Namely, for Study 1, we used the 
345M model of GPT-2, which is the second model that OpenAI released (for the code, see 
https://github.com/openai/gpt-2). We trained GPT-2 for this specific writing task on a self-
compiled dataset consisting of works from various professional poets, including Jane Campion, 
Roald Dahl, Robert Frost, and William Blake. Being trained to generate poems that abided by 
the above-mentioned rules, GPT-2 received the same two starting lines. To imitate poetry, text 
generated by GPT-2 further had to adhere to one of the pre-specified poetry appearance criteria 
to enter the writing competition. Namely, the poem had to use lines and verses, rhyme (ending or 
beginning rhyme, assonance), alliteration (words beginning with the same letter), onomatopoeia 
(phonetically imitating the sound of its meaning), rhythm, repetition, symbolism, or 
contradictions. Adhering to recent suggestions to increase reproducibility in AI research 
(Gibney, 2020), all the material including the training dataset is available on OSF. Of the GPT-2-
written poems that qualified, 10 were chosen for the competition and randomly matched with a 
human-written poem.  
3.1.2. Part 2-4 – Preference, Detection Accuracy, and Confidence 
3.1.2.1. Participants. Applying the same pre-selection criteria as in Stage 1, we recruited 
200 participants via Prolific. Participants completed the task within 17 minutes, on average, 
yielding a mean payoff of €11.67 per hour. Applying the pre-registered attention check, we 
excluded eight participants. All results reported in this manuscript remaining qualitatively 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  17 
unaffected by the exclusions. The final sample consisted of 192 participants (MAge = 29.06, SDAge 
= 10.61; female = 39.1%, other/prefer not to indicate = 1%). 
3.1.2.2. Preference. Participants assigned to the role of judges received 10 pairs of 
poems, all beginning with the same two opening lines. For each pair, they had to indicate which 
poem they liked better, which had financial consequences because one of the 10 comparisons 
would be paid out, and the chosen winner would receive a prize of €2. Judges knew that in each 
pair, one poem stemmed from a human writer and the other poem stemmed from the algorithm 
GPT-2. To avoid efficiency concerns of judges seeking to reward the human writer, randomly 
chosen token players received the prize when the GPT-2-generated poem won the competition. 
That is, all participants knew that if GPT-2 won the pay-off-relevant round, another randomly 
selected writer received the reward.  
3.1.2.3. Information Treatment. Participants were randomly assigned to either the 
Transparency or the Opacity treatment. In the Transparency treatment, the judges received 
information about the origin of the poems. Hence, for each pair, they knew which poem was 
written by a human and which was generated by GPT-2, prior to their decision to award a 
winner. In the Opacity treatment, judges did not receive this information about the respective 
origin. Although knowing the pair of poems consisted of a human and an AI poem, judges did 
not know which was which. 
3.1.2.4. Detection Accuracy. Participants in the Opacity treatment, who were thus naïve 
about the origin of the poem, additionally engaged in an incentivized version of the Turing Test 
(Saygin et al., 2012; Turing, 1950). Akin to the original version proposed by Turing, judges 
faced the task of correctly distinguishing human- from machine-written text. In contrast to the 
standard version, however, judges could not directly interact with the two participants by asking 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  18 
questions but merely received the text output. As a second refinement, we introduced incentives 
for accuracy. That is, judges could earn €0,50 if they correctly identified the origin of the text. 
They received 10 pairs of poems from which we randomly selected one for payment.  
3.1.2.5. Confidence. Judges also estimated their level of confidence in correctly 
identifying the human poem on a 100-point scale (0 = not at all confident, 100 = very confident). 
We compared these subjective ratings of participants’ confidence with the actual level of 
accuracy in determining the origin of the text. 
3.2. Results 
3.2.1. Part 1 – Selection of poems 
Human-written and GPT2-generated poems did not significantly differ in length, as a 
signed-rank test on the number of words reveals (p = .824). Participants wrote a median of 37 
words (SD = 14.36) using eight lines (7.55), whereas GPT-2 generated a median of 40 words (SD 
= 12.94), also using eight lines (7.75) on average. Thus, the poems were of similar length and 
could also not be distinguished visually or by other aesthetic rules. As outlined in the pre-
registration, we collected additional exploratory variables assessing the human writers’ level of 
confidence in winning the competition and the creativity ratings of the poems (see OSF).  
3.2.2. Part 2 – Preference 
Overall, human-written poems won 1,091 out of 1,915 competitions corresponding to a 
win share of 56.97%, which differs significantly from a win-share of 50% (χ² = 37.23, p < .001). 
Mixed-effects probit regressions with random effects to account for dependencies of responses 
of individuals and per poem equally consistently reveal significant preferences for human-
written over algorithm-generated poems as the significant intercept in Models 0-3 indicates (see 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  19 
Table 2).2 Hence, overall, judges showed a preference for human-written over algorithm-
generated poems. 
  
                                                 
2 All mixed-effect regressions reported in the manuscript include random effects for the participant ID and 
 the poem pair.  
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  20 
Table 2. Mixed-effects probit regressions predicting preference for the human-written poem in 
each round 
  Model 0 Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 
DV: Preference for human-
written poetry     
(Intercept) 0.18** 
(0.03) 
0.20** 
(0.04) 
0.22** 
(0.05) 
0.35* 
(0.16) 
Treatment  -0.06 -0.06 0.07 
 (0.06) (0.06) (0.06) 
Age   -0.01 -0.01 
  (0.03) (0.03) 
Gender   -0.03 -0.04 
  (0.06) (0.06) 
Education     
    
 Primary School    -0.34 
(0.30) 
 High School    0.04 
(0.07) 
 Master     0.12 
(0.08) 
 PhD    0.09 
(0.16) 
English Proficiency     
    
None    0.04 
(0.29) 
Limited Working    -0.15 
   (0.18) 
Professional Working     -0.17 
   (0.16) 
Full Professional    -0.15 
   (0.17) 
Native or Bilingual    -0.19 
   (0.17) 
N 1915 1915 1905 1905 
Note. Random effects included for the participants’ ID and the pair of poems. Standard errors are reported 
in parentheses. DV = Preference, binary variable across 10 rounds coded as 0 = preference for algorithm-
generated poem, 1 = preference for human-written poem. Independent variables: Age (continuous, 
standardized), Gender (dummy, reference category = male), Education (dummy, reference category = 
Bachelor’s), Language: The Interagency Language Roundtable scale is used to determine the participants’ 
level of English, with the reference category being elementary proficiency. Significance coding: * p < .05, 
** p < .01, *** p < .001. 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  21 
 
As a first test of whether people are more averse to algorithm-generated poetry in the 
Transparency than in the Opacity treatment, a two-sample t-test with equal variances on the 
number of wins for the human writers indicates no significant differences (t(189) = 1.05, p = .29, 
see also Figure 1).3 Human writers won only slightly more often in the Transparency (M = 5.82, 
SD = 1.69) than in the Opacity treatment (M = 5.59, SD = 1.49). Because the assumption of 
normality of the aggregated wins was violated (Shapiro-Wilk: W = 0.96, p <.001), we conducted 
a Wilcoxon signed-rank test that similarly indicates no significant treatment differences 
(mdnOpacity = mdnTransparency = 6, W = 4285, p = .39).4 Further, Bayesian independent-sample t-
tests reveals a Bayes factor of BF0+ = 7.40, thus providing moderate support that the H0 of no 
treatment differences is more likely than the H1 of stronger preferences toward human-written 
poetry in the Transparency treatment. Finally, mixed-effects probit regressions predicting the 
binary outcome of preference in each round reveal no significant treatment differences, also 
when controlling for demographics and education levels (see Models 1-3, in Table 2). Taken 
together, these results suggest that, contrary to our hypothesis, judges did not reveal a stronger 
preference for human-written poetry when they were informed about the origin of the poems.  
  
                                                 
3 Conservative sensitivity analysis with α = .05, power of 1-β =.8 and 100 participants per treatment 
suggests our analysis was able to detect a small effect (Cohen’s d = 0.39). 
4 We report non-parametric tests throughout the manuscript when assumptions of normality were violated.  
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  22 
 
  
Figure 1. Violin plots of revealed preference for human-written poetry across information 
treatments. 
Note. The plot depicts the sum score of rounds in which the participants chose the human-
written poem in the Transparency treatment (left pane) and in the Opacity treatment (right 
pane). Inside the violin plot, mean and 95%confidence intervals are plotted, indicating a 
significant preference for human-written poems in both treatments yet no differences across 
treatments. 
 
  

 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  23 
3.2.3. Part 3 – Detection Accuracy 
Overall, judges identified the correct origin with an average accuracy of 50.21% 
(95%CI[46.4; 53.9]), which, according to a Wilcoxon signed-rank test, indicates no significant 
deviance from chance (V = 1479, p = .935).5 A Bayesian binomial test yields a Bayes Factor of 
BF01 = 24.91, which strongly supports that the H0 of judges’ accuracy not exceeding chance is 
more likely than the H1. Mixed-effects probit regressions, predicting the judges’ accuracy in each 
round, reveal no significant deviation from chance at detecting the correct poem, also when 
controlling for standard demographics of age, gender, and education (see Table 3). Taken 
together, the results indicate people are not reliably able to identify human versus algorithmic 
creative content.  
  
                                                 
5 Conservative sensitivity analysis with α = .05, power of 1-β =.8 and 100 participants and a normal parent 
distribution suggests our analysis was able to detect a small effect (Cohen’s d = 0.28). 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  24 
Table 3. Mixed-effects probit regressions on detection accuracy for each round 
   Model 0  Model 1  Model 2  
DV: Detection Accuracy       
(Intercept) 
0.01 
(0.05) 
0.01 
(0.14) 
-0.35 
(0.27) 
Age 
 0.02  
(0.05)  
0.05  
(0.06)   
Gender 
 -0.13  
(0.10)  
-0.19  
(0.10)   
Education 
    
    
High School 
    -0.04 
(0.11)      
Master  
    -0.01 
(0.15)      
PhD 
   -0.22 
(0.21)     
English Proficiency     
 None  
    1.72* 
(0.65)  
 Limited 
   0.45 
(0.31) 
 Professional Working  
  0.62* 
(0.29) 
 Full professional 
  0.33 
(0.28) 
 Native or bilingual  
    0.47 
(0.28) 
N 733 733 733 
Note. Random effects included for the participants’ ID and the pair of poems. Standard errors are 
reported in parentheses. DV = Detection Accuracy, binary variable across 10 rounds coded as 0 = 
incorrect guess, 1 = accurate guess. Independent variables: Age (continuous, standardized), Gender 
(dummy, reference category = male), Education (dummy, reference category = Bachelor), Language: The 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  25 
Interagency Language Roundtable scale is used to determine the participants’ level of English, with the 
reference category being elementary proficiency. Significance coding: * p < .05, ** p < .01, *** p < .001.  
3.2.4. Part 4 – Confidence  
As non-pre-registered exploratory analyses, we examined judges’ level of confidence in 
detecting the correct origin, prior to having read any samples. On a scale from 0 to 100, the 
average confidence level of the judges was M = 62.27 (SD = 22.27), which significantly exceeds 
chance levels (t(732) = 14.92, p < .0001). The distribution of confidence ratings is moderately 
left skewed (skewness = -0.496, SE = 0.09; see Figure 2, left pane). Hence, on aggregate, people 
rate their confidence level higher than chance. Regression analysis of peoples’ confidence in 
differentiating human from GPT-2-written poems on their actual performance reveals no 
significant relationship (b < .01; β = .017, t(74) = 0.143, p = .887). Hence, self-rated confidence 
did not predict their actual performance. Moreover, we find a significant proportion of 
participants (69.33%) reveals overconfidence, defined as confidence levels exceeding 
participants’ actual accuracy in their performance (see also Figure 2, right pane). Overall, these 
results provide a first tentative indication that people are not able to accurately predict, and 
instead overestimate, how well they would perform in the incentivized Turing Test.  
  
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  26 
  
  
Figure 2. Density distribution of the judges’ confidence score ranging from 0 to 100% (left pane). 
Scatterplot illustrating the relationship between confidence and their actual standardized performance 
across all rounds of the incentivized version of the Turing Test (right pane).  

 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  27 
3.2. Discussion 
Study 1 examined the behavioral responses to algorithm-generated creative text. The 
results reveal judges slightly preferred human-written to algorithm-generated poems, 
independent of whether they were cognizant (transparency) or oblivious (opacity) about the 
origin of the poem. This effect occurred even though their decisions had financial consequences 
for the writers. Moreover, in line with our expectations, judges were unable to reliably 
distinguish human from artificial poetry. In light of the financial rewards for accuracy in our 
version of the Turing Test, these results are among the first to indicate that detecting artificial 
text is not a matter of incentives but ability. At the same time, most judges’ confidence levels 
exceeded their actual performance in recognizing artificial poetry – a first sign of overconfidence 
in algorithm detection. 
4. Study 2 
One potential criticism of Study 1 is that the comparison favored the algorithm. That is, 
poems created by novices competed with the output of a state-of-the-art algorithm trained on the 
works of prolific poets. Indeed, the recruited participants did not have any prior training in 
poetry writing and were put on the spot to write a poem within a short time frame. Moreover, the 
criteria for GPT-2-generated poetry were slightly stricter than for the human-written poetry, 
because GPT-2-generated poems had to adhere to an extra criterion of poetry appearance (e.g., 
using rhymes). Although algorithm-generated poetry was able to pass as written by a human, and 
people’s preferences did not change according to whether they were informed about the origin of 
the poem, what happens when trained, or even professional poets, compete against an NLG 
algorithm remains unknown. To address these questions, we drew on existing poems written by 
renowned professional poets, such as Maya Angelou and Hermann Hesse, and entered them in 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  28 
the competition on the human side. On the algorithm’s side, we fed the full model of GPT-2 the 
first two lines of these professional poems to generate samples of poems.  
Further, to address the concern that GPT-2-generated poetry might have performed well 
due to stricter inclusion criteria, we introduced a new treatment, differing in the degree to which 
humans were involved in the selection of the generated poems. Ample AI research points out 
that whether humans are involved in the decision chain has a crucial impact on the performance 
of the algorithm and on people’s evaluation of these outcomes (Rahwan, 2018; Schirner, 
Erdogmus, Chowdhury, & Padir, 2013; Starke & Lünich, 2020; Wang, Harper, & Zhu, 2020; 
Zhu, Yu, Halfaker, & Terveen, 2018). Yet, behavioral reactions to different levels of human 
involvement in algorithmic decision-making remain largely unknown. Studying machine and 
human behavior means dealing with autonomous, unpredictable outcomes on the sides of the 
human and the machine (Rahwan et al., 2019). In our case, the NLG algorithm GPT-2 produces 
samples of different outcomes each time it is run. For the purpose of the current study, the 
unpredictable outcomes raise the important question of how to determine which of the various 
outputs, namely, poems, that GPT-2 produces in a single run to use for the competition.  
Two main strategies can be applied. The first is human selection, where humans pre-
screen and select the poem they deem most suitable, that is, HITL. This strategy reflects the 
situation in which someone uses GPT-2 as a writing aid and selects the output deemed most 
useful. The second is random selection, in which the algorithmic output is randomly sampled and 
hence enters the competition unfiltered, with HOTL. This selection procedure reflects the 
unfiltered use of NLG algorithms such as for most tweet- or chatbots. Using HITL versus HOTL 
in the selection of poems this way, Study 2 provides some of the first answers to whether and 
how much these different strategies for the selection of the algorithm-generated content affect 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  29 
people’s behavioral reactions. We thus again examined people’s preferences, their accuracy in 
detecting algorithm-generated text, and their confidence levels of doing so. 
4.1.Method 
4.1.1. Part 1 - Selection of poems 
4.1.1.1. Human and AI Competitor. We again created pairs of human-written and AI-
generated poems. As outlined in more detail in the documentation of the stimulus material (see 
helper file on OSF), the human-written poems stem from a collection of poems written by 
professional poets. The AI-generated poems were generated using the full model of GPT-2, fed 
with two starting lines of the respective poem it was competing against as a prompt to generate a 
poem. 
4.1.1.2. Selection Treatment. As a new treatment, we manipulated the way in which the 
algorithm-generated poem was selected. When letting GPT-2 generate text outputs, it produces 
samples of multiple poems at once. As a between-subjects manipulation, we differed how the 
poem was selected from this sample. In the HITL treatment, the authors (NCK & LDM) selected 
the best poem by consensus voting from the outputs generated by GPT-2. In the HOTL 
treatment, the poem was randomly sampled from the same outputs.  
4.1.2. Part 2 – Preference 
4.1.2.1. Participants and Procedure. For the poetry-judgment task, we recruited a 
sample of 400 participants via Prolific, paying on average €1.98 for a study that took around 16 
minutes (= €7.43/hr). After applying the pre-registered exclusion criteria of excluding 
participants who failed the attention check, the final sample consisted of 384 judges (Mage = 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  30 
31.38, SDage = 11.92, female = 47.14%, other/prefer not to say = 0.54%). Judges read 10 poem 
pairs and, for each pair, picked the poem they liked more. 
4.1.2.2. Information Treatment. Identical to Study 1, we again manipulated whether 
participants were informed about the origin of the poem. Hence, in the Transparency treatment 
(N = 192), judges knew which poem was written by a human and which was generated by AI, 
whereas in the Opacity treatment (N = 192), they did not. 
4.1.2.3. Algorithm-Aversion Scale. To assess stated aversion to algorithmic poetry, we 
included a new item to an existing scale to measure algorithm aversion (Castelo, Bos, & 
Lehmann, 2019). The scale consists of multiple items, each describing different tasks (e.g., 
“driving a car”), for which participants have to indicate whom they trust more to execute that 
task. Answers are given on a 100-point slider scale ranging from 0 (=a qualified human) to 100 
(=an algorithm). To the list of existing items, we added the new item, “Writing poetry.” 
4.1.3. Part 3 & 4 – Detection accuracy & confidence 
4.1.3.1. Participants & Procedure. To assess detection accuracy and confidence in 
detecting algorithm-generated text, we recruited a separate sample of 200 participants via 
Prolific for a study that took, on average, 13.92 minutes and paid €2.26 (= €9.74/hr). After 
applying the pre-registered exclusion criteria, the final sample consisted of 185 participants 
(MAge= 27.66; SDAge = 9.47, female = 47.02%). 
4.1.3.2. Detection accuracy. Identical to Study 1, we used the incentivized version of the 
Turing Test in which people could receive a financial reward of €0.50 for correctly identifying 
the origin of a poem, that is, whether it was human-written versus algorithm-generated. 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  31 
4.1.3.3. Confidence. After participants completed the accuracy assessment, they were 
asked to estimate in how many of the rounds they correctly identified the origin of the poem. We 
incentivized this elicitation of confidence by rewarding the correct estimation of the number of 
rounds with a financial bonus of €0.50. We assessed the estimated performance after and not 
before participants completed the incentivized Turing Test to avoid hedging, namely, 
participants changing their performance in the task to match their estimation.   
4.1.3.4. Knowledge of Poetry. After participants completed Parts 2-4, we assessed their 
prior poetry knowledge. We presented the poems used in the study and asked two questions. 
First, as a stated poetry-knowledge assessment, we asked the participants whether they had read 
the poem prior to participating in this study (Y/N). Second, as a measure of revealed poetry 
knowledge, we asked them to impute the respective poet’s name. 
4.1.3.5. Demographics. Using the same questions as in Study 1, we again assessed all 
participants’ standard demographic information of age, gender, and education, as well as their 
experience with computer science, and their views on the development of general artificial 
intelligence at the end of the study. 
4.2. Results 
4.2.1. Part 2 – Preference 
Testing whether judges overall preferred the human-written over the AI-generated 
poems, a χ² test comparing the observed human win share with a chance-level win share of 50% 
suggests a significant deviation (χ²(1) = 340.82, p < .001). Human writers overall won 64.90% of 
the comparisons. A t-test similarly reveals human-written poems were chosen more often across 
the 10 rounds (M = 6.49, SD = 1.65) than would be expected by chance (t(383) = 17.73, p < 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  32 
.001). Mixed-effects probit regressions reveal significant intercepts in all models (see Table 4), 
indicating a preference for human-written poems. Taken together, the results replicate results 
obtained in Study 1 and confirm our hypothesis that people overall reveal preferences for 
human-written poems over algorithm-generated poems. 
Examining whether judges reveal a stronger preference for human-written poems in the 
Transparency (vs. Opacity) treatment, a two-sample t-test comparing the mean number of human 
wins reveals no significant treatment differences (t(365) = 0.62, p = .54). In fact, judges selected 
human poems slightly less often when they knew the origin (M = 6.44, SD = 1.46) than when 
they did not (M = 6.54, SD = 1.82). Similarly, non-parametric tests reveal no differences (WSR: 
W = 17961, p = 0.44, mdnTransparecny = 6, mdnOpacity = 7), and Bayesian analyses provide strong 
evidence that no treatment differences are more likely than the expected treatment differences 
(BF01 = 13.55). Mixed-effects probit regressions predicting the binary preference measure in 
each round reveal no significant information treatment effects either (see Models 1,3 & 4 in 
Table 4). Hence, contrary to our hypothesis, people did not reveal stronger preferences for 
human-written poems in the Transparency treatment than in the Opacity treatment. 
Testing whether judges revealed a stronger preference for human-written poems over AI-
generated poems in the HOTL (vs. HITL) treatment, a t-test of the mean number of human wins 
suggests significant differences (t(372) = -2.82, p = .005). Judges selected the human poem on 
average more often in the HOTL (M = 6.69, SD = 1.69) than in the HITL treatment (M = 6.23, 
SD = 1.55). Similar results are obtained for non-parametric tests (WSR: W = 15256, p = .007; 
mdnHOTL = 7, mdnHITL = 6). Mixed-effects probit regressions predicting the preference each round 
also consistently reveal significant treatment differences (see selection treatment dummy in 
Models 2-4, Table 4). Taken together, the results suggest judges reveal a stronger preference for 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  33 
the human-written poems when the algorithm-generated poems are randomly sampled (HOTL) 
than when they are selected by humans (HITL).  
Table 4. Mixed-effects probit regressions predicting preference for the human-written poem in 
each round  
  Model 0 Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 
DV: Preference for human-
written poetry      
(Intercept) 0.66*** 
(0.15) 
0.69*** 
(0.15) 
0.51*** 
(0.06) 
0.35*** 
(0.10) 
0.35*** 
(0.10) 
Information Treatment  -0.05  -0.03 -0.03 
 (0.08)  (0.05) (0.05) 
Selection Treatment   0.21*** **0.13 0.14*** 
  (0.07) (0.05) (0.05) 
Revealed Poetry Knowledge    -0.16 
(0.13) 
-0.15 
(0.13) 
Age     0.08 
    (0.02) 
Gender       
     
 Male     -0.01 
(0.05) 
 Other     0.60 
(0.36) 
N 3840 3840 3840 3840 3840 
Note. Random effects included for the participants’ ID and the pair of poems. Standard errors are 
reported in parentheses. DV = Preference, binary variable across 10 rounds coded as 0 = preference for 
algorithm-generated poem, 1 = preference for human-written poem. Independent variables: Information 
treatment (dummy, reference category = Opacity), Selection treatment (dummy, reference category = 
HITL), Revealed poetry knowledge (continuous), Age (continuous, standardized), Gender (dummy, 
reference category = female).  Significance coding: * p < .05, ** p < .01, *** p < .001. 
 
  
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  34 
Besides revealed preferences for human-written poetry, we additionally analyzed 
people’s stated preferences. Responses to the item assessing whether people prefer humans (0) 
or algorithms (100) to write poetry reveals an average score of M = 19.50, SD = 20.73 – a 
significant negative deviation from the mid-point of the scale (t(383) = -28.83, p < .001). This 
finding indicates people generally state that they prefer that humans as opposed to algorithms 
write poetry. Testing whether stated and revealed preferences for human versus algorithmic 
poetry are related, a point-biserial t-test between the stated preference item and the number of 
human wins reveals a significant positive correlation (t(382) = 2.55, r = 0.13, p = .01). Mixed-
effects probit regressions similarly reveal a positive association (b = 0.06, SE = 0.03, Z = 1.93, p 
= .05). The marginal effect is b = 0.06, SE = 0.02, Z = 2.55, p = .01, which remains significant 
when controlling for both treatments, knowledge of the poets, and demographic information of 
gender and age (all bs > 0.05, ps < .03). Taken together, we find evidence for a weak but 
significant link between stated and revealed preferences in the domain of algorithmic poetry. 
4.2.2. Part 3 – Detection accuracy 
Testing whether people’s poem-detection accuracy exceeds chance levels, a one-sample 
t-test comparing the aggregated accuracy across all rounds (M = 5.94, SD = 2.01) to a chance 
level of 5 reveals a significant difference (t(184) = 6.33, d = 0.47, p <.001). Non-parametric tests 
reveal similar results (Wilcoxon V = 8406, p < .001, mdnaccuracy = 6). Mixed-effects probit 
regressions predicting detection accuracy in each round reveal a significant intercept when not 
including control variables (see Model 0, in Table 4). In sum, these findings suggest that overall, 
participants were able to detect the correct origin of the poems at better than chance levels.  
  
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  35 
Table 5. Mixed-effects probit regression predicting the detection accuracy of the origin of the 
poem per round 
  Model 0 Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 
DV: Detection Accuracy     
(Intercept) 0.26*** 
(0.09) 
0.10 
(0.09) 
0.09 
(0.09) 
0.20 
(0.10) 
Selection Treatment      0.34*** 0.33*** 0.32*** 
 (0.08) (0.08) (0.08) 
Revealed Poetry Knowledge   0.62** 
(0.25) 
0.67** 
(0.25) 
Age    0.00 
   (0.04) 
Gender     -0.19* 
   (0.08) 
N 1850 1850 1850 1850 
Note. Random effects included for the participants’ ID and the pair of poems. Standard errors are 
reported in parentheses. DV = Detection accuracy, binary variable across 10 rounds coded as 0 = 
incorrect guess, 1 = accurate guess. Independent variables: Selection treatment (dummy, reference 
category = HITL), Revealed poetry knowledge (continuous) Age (continuous, standardized), Gender 
(dummy, reference category = female). Significance coding: * p < .05, ** p < .01, *** p < .001.  
 
As a first test for whether accuracy levels are higher in the HOTL than in the HITL 
treatment, a two-sample t-test comparing accurate guesses across all 10 rounds reveals a 
significant difference (t(183)= -4.19, d = -0.62, p < .001). Participants identified the correct 
origin of the poems more frequently in the HOTL treatment (M = 6.55, SD = 1.90) than in the 
HITL treatment (M = 5.37, SD = 1.95). Similarly, results of non-parametric tests reveal 
significant differences (Mann-Whitney U = 2872.5, r = -0.33;  p < .001; mdnHOTL = 7, mdnHITL = 
5). Mixed-effect probit regressions also reveal significant treatment differences (see Models 1-3 
in Table 5). Taken together, the results provide support for the predicted effect that people are 
better at detecting the origin of the poem for randomly chosen poems generated by GPT-2 
(HOTL) than for human-selected poems (HITL).  
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  36 
Further, subgroup analyses reveal that whereas the accuracy rates in the HOTL treatment 
deviate significantly from chance (Student: t(88) =7.72, p < .001; WSR: V = 2304, p < .001), in 
the HITL treatment, they do not (Student: t(95) = 1.83, p = .07, WSR: V = 1820.5, p = .1, see 
also Figure 3). To further corroborate these subgroup effects, we conducted non-pre-registered 
Bayesian analyses. The results reveal strong evidence that in the HOTL treatment, people’s 
accuracy significantly positively deviated from chance (BF10 = 5.095e+8). By contrast, in the 
HITL treatment, the results provide anecdotal evidence in support of the null hypothesis that 
people are not better than chance at detecting the correct origin (BF01 = 1.79). Similarly, 
subgroup analysis using mixed-effects probit regressions suggest people are better than chance at 
detecting the HOTL selected poems (b = 0.44, SE = 0.10, Z = 4.53, p <.001), while not deviating 
significantly from chance in the HITL treatment (b = 0.10, SE = 0.09, Z = 1.06, p = .26). These 
patterns remain robust when introducing control variables of demographics and knowledge of 
the respective poem (see Models 2 & 3, Table 5). Taken together, these findings support the 
prediction that people’s ability to detect the correct origin of a poem depends on the way the 
poems are selected. Although people can distinguish professional poems from algorithm-
generated poems that are randomly chosen with an HITL, they cannot reliably do so when these 
poems are selected by an HOTL. 
  
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  37 
 
Figure 3. Violin plots depicting the distribution of accurate rounds across the selection 
treatment.  
Note. The plot depicts the distribution of aggregated rounds in which the participants correctly 
identified the origin of the poem across in the HITL treatment (left pane) and HOTL treatment 
(right pane). Inside the violin plot, mean and 95% confidence intervals are plotted, indicating a 
significant ability of people to identify the correct origin only in the HOTL treatment preference 
for human-written poems in both treatments.  
  

 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  38 
4.2.3. Part 4 – Confidence  
As a first analysis of overconfidence, we examined the distribution of self-reported 
confidence ratings. On a 10-point scale, average confidence level of the judges was M = 5.99 
(SD = 1.77), with the distribution being slightly left skewed (skewness = 0.26, SE = 0.18 see 
Figure 4, left pane). Using the same classification of overconfidence as in Study 1 (confidence - 
performance), 38.91% of the participants displayed overconfidence. A linear regression of 
confidence predicting accuracy levels to assess whether actual and believed performance are 
correlated indicate a significant, positive relationship (b = 0.93, SE = 0.03, t(185) = 34.92, p < 
.0001, see Figure 4, right pane).  
Tests examining whether estimated accuracy levels significantly exceed actual accuracy 
levels reveal no significant differences (t(184) = -0.35, p = .76; WSR: W = 17045, p = .95). 
Mixed-effects linear regressions predicting overconfidence (i.e., confidence - accuracy) also 
reveal no significant intercept, also when controlling for demographics and stated as well as 
revealed poetry knowledge (bs < 0.06, ps > .18). In concert, these results suggest people overall 
show few signs of overconfidence and rather accurately estimate their ability to detect algorithm-
generated poems.  
 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  39 
 
4.3.Discussion 
Study 2 replicated two main findings observed in Study 1 and provides novel insights 
indicating humans being in versus out of the loop in process of selecting the poems crucially 
shapes both preferences and detection accuracy. First, the findings again reveal people prefer 
human-written to algorithm-generated poems, which is unaffected by the information about 
algorithmic presence, and hence whether the origin of the poem was transparently communicated 
or remained opaque. As a second replication, people were again unable to reliably distinguish 
human from artificial poetry, while being incentivized to do so. However, this inability only 
occurred when humans could handpick the best poems (i.e. in the HITL treatment). When poems 
were randomly selected (i.e., in the HOTL treatment), people could detect the algorithm-
generated poem with higher-than-chance levels. Lending further credence to the importance of 
the selection procedure involved, the results equally show significantly higher preference for 
algorithm-generated poems when humans were involved in the selection process. As some of the 
Figure 4. Density distribution of the judges’ confidence score ranging from 0 to 10 (left pane). 
Scatterplot illustrating the relationship between people’s estimated (x-axis) and actual (y-axis) 
detection accuracy (right pane). The graphs plot linear regression slope as well as a slope with binomial 
smoothened estimates.  
 

 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  40 
first insights into the behavioral responses to different levels of human involvement in the 
selection process of AI-generated content, the results show that humans being involved or not in 
the selection process strongly influences the abilities of the algorithm. 
The results provide nuance to the link between estimated and actual algorithm-detection 
accuracy. Whereas in Study 1, participants’ unincentivized estimated performance significantly 
exceeded their actual performance, Study 2 elicited these estimations in an incentivized way. 
Contrary to the results of Study 1 and the hypothesis, the estimated performance did not 
significantly exceed actual performance, and a positive link between detection accuracy and 
confidence therein existed. 
5. General Discussion 
Algorithms increasingly influence humans’ daily lives. Due to their growing learning 
abilities, autonomy, and unpredictability in outcomes, understanding such machine behavior, and 
how it affects human behavior, becomes vital (Rahwan et al., 2019). The current set of studies 
contributes to this research by examining behavioral responses to the state-of-the-art NLG 
algorithm, GPT-2. Our results provide four main insights. First, although participants stated and 
revealed aversion to artificial poetry, this aversive tendency did not increase when they were 
informed about the algorithmic origin of the text. These results bear special relevance when 
considering the second main insight: participants were incapable of reliably detecting algorithm-
generated poetry, even when they were incentivized to do so and when the algorithm competed 
with esteemed poets. Third, although overconfidence in the algorithm-detection abilities existed 
when assessed in an unincentivized way (Study 1), no sign of systematic overconfidence existed 
when measured in an incentivized way (Study 2). Finally, the results of Study 2 point toward the 
important role that humans play in the implementation of algorithmic outputs: humans involved 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  41 
in the process of selecting poems reduce revealed algorithm aversion and detection accuracy. In 
fact, when people are not involved in the selection process, accuracy did exceed chance levels. 
We discuss the implications of each of these insights in turn.  
5.1. Artificial Creativity: Aversion and Appreciation 
Although first algorithms reach, and even surpass, human capacities in many narrow 
tasks, humans often show a general aversion to adopting algorithms (for a review, see Burton et 
al., 2019). In line with these findings, participants’ views on algorithms crafting poetry were 
aversive, and these views correlated consistently, but weakly, with their behavior in choosing 
human poems over algorithmic poems. Reflecting current policy debates about transparency of 
algorithmic presence (Diakopoulos, 2016), our experiments examine the interplay of information 
and preferences for artificial versus human text outputs. Contrary to our expectations, 
participants revealed no stronger algorithm aversion when informed about the algorithmic origin 
of the text.  
Our findings thus contribute to ongoing research seeking to disentangle when people are 
averse to (vs. appreciative of)  algorithmic decision-making across various domains (Castelo et 
al., 2019; Lee, 2018; Pew Research Center, 2018). One key finding arising from that literature is 
that people dislike algorithms to execute emotional (vs. mechanical) tasks (Castelo et al., 2019). 
Hence, one interpretation of our results documenting aversion to algorithmic poetry is that 
people view writing poetry as an emotionally charged task. We derive first support for that 
notion from our data collected using the existing algorithm-aversion items. One of the original 
items asked participants about their views about algorithms writing newspaper articles. 
Comparing the views about algorithms performing these different language-generation tasks – 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  42 
writing poetry versus newspaper articles – indicates people are significantly more approving of 
algorithms in the role of journalists than in the role of poets (see full analysis in OSF). 
5.2. Distinguishing between Artificial and Human 
The question we brought to the online lab – whether people are able to distinguish 
artificial from human poetry – has attracted academic (Oliveira, 2009; Riedl, 2014) and public 
attention (Schwartz, 2015). For example, in a TED talk with more than 850,000 views, Oscar 
Schwartz compares poems by poets with generative poetry, and based on his results, claims  
computers can indeed write poetry (Schwartz, 2015). Here, we extend such previous approaches 
in two fundamental ways. First, instead of using generative poetry algorithms that are 
specifically developed to merely write poetry, we use GPT-2, an algorithm more robust to 
different environments. The fact that although the algorithm is not specifically tailored to 
generate poetry, yet still manages to pass as a human writer, underlines the purported abilities of 
the algorithm to create human-like text (Radford et al., 2019).  
Second, we deviate from previous approaches by introducing financial incentives to a 
version of the Turing Test. Financially incentivizing choices is common in behavioral research, 
aimed at reducing measurement errors by increasing people’s accuracy (Ariely & Norton, 2007). 
The results of both studies substantiate the view that differentiating between human-written and 
algorithm-generated poetry is not a matter of effort, but ability. Moreover, as we return to below, 
gaining a definite answer about whether a computer can write poetry that passes as human 
depends on whether and how humans are involved in the process of selecting the output. 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  43 
5.3.Confidence in Algorithm-Detection Abilities 
Incentives seem to also play a role in people’s estimation of their own abilities in 
detecting algorithmic poetry. Although the majority of participants displayed overconfidence 
when confidence was elicited in an unincentivized way (Study 1), using incentivized measures of 
confidence produced no evidence for systematic overconfidence (Study 2). Instead, detection 
accuracy and confidence were positively correlated. When people stood to gain financially from 
detecting the origin of the poems, they seemed to calibrate their responses, because their 
estimated and actual performance overall matched well.  
This lack of overconfidence is remarkable in light of participants’ inexperience with the 
task. Participants were not able to draw on prior knowledge of their ability to detect algorithmic 
poetry yet were still able to provide informative estimates when reflecting on their own 
performance. Taken together, the results suggest overconfidence in algorithm detection can be 
curbed by providing financial rewards so that people strive to accurately estimate their own 
performance. Although the two studies also differ on other aspects – most notably the relative 
quality of the human and the AI poems – previous research corroborate the claim that incentives 
indeed lead to more precise confidence ratings (Schlag, Tremewan, & van der Weele, 2015). 
5.4. Human Selection in and out of the Loop  
Our results suggest NLG algorithms can generate poems that pass as human and that the 
poems are considerably appealing to readers, even when competing with the work of 
professional writers. However, the results of Study 2 suggest humans play an integral role in the 
process – only poems selected by the experimenters successfully passed as human and lowered 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  44 
algorithm aversion. Hence, whether humans are in or out of the selection loop shaped 
participants’ reactions to the algorithm’s performance.  
Thereby, we provide some of the first behavioral insights into people’s reactions to 
different HITL systems, and complement a rich (technical) literature in AI research (Schirner et 
al., 2013). Seeking to mitigate the limitations of algorithms, HITL systems have been proposed 
to increase algorithmic accountability (Wang et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2018), because keeping 
humans in the loop helps to monitor and adjust the system and its outcomes (Rahwan, 2018). 
Here, we show that humans in the loop also allow us to harness the potential of recent 
developments in NLG, and crucially shape the conclusions drawn about the machine’s behavior. 
5.5.Implications and Future Research 
The results of the studies have (ethical) implications. Language-generation algorithms are 
entering daily lives. Using transfer learning, GPT-2 can be fine-tuned to craft text in domains 
other than poetry, such as crafting artificial online reviews, patent claims (Lee & Hsiang, 2019), 
or fake tweets (Ressmeyer, Masling, & Liao, 2019), but also assist creative writers or provide 
useful feedback for customers (Budzianowski & Vulić, 2019). NLG algorithms thus have 
potential but also perils. To contribute to responsible use, future experimental studies examining 
how people react to algorithm-generated text in different domains will help provide valuable 
empirical insights. 
Our experimental framework contributes to the methodological toolkit to systematically 
study the impact of NLG algorithms on human behavior. To gain insights into the question of 
whether people are able to detect algorithm-generated text, future studies using the novel 
incentivized version of the Turing Test could examine NLG’s abilities in other domains. For 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  45 
example, studies on automated news generation (Carlson, 2015; Diakopoulos & Koliska, 2017) 
or longer AI-generated (creative) texts could unveil whether AI similarly can pass as human in 
these domains. 
Studies seeking to investigate existing NLG algorithms face the challenge of 
unpredictable and changing text outputs, which leads to less experimental control over the 
machine’s behavior (Rahwan et al., 2019), yet provides new researchers degrees of freedom in 
stimulus selection. Our new treatment comparing HITL with HOTL indicates this 
methodological choice influences the results. Future research could extend the external reliability 
of the current design by letting fellow participants be the ones who select the text output. We 
hope the current set-up encourages standardized selection protocols paired with open science 
practices (Srivastava, 2018) to gain reliable and reproducible findings on the nexus of human and 
machine behavior. 
Taking a step back and examining the overall pattern of results, we emphasize that the 
results do not indicate machines are “creative.” In fact, one of the main functions of creativity in 
general and in poetry in particular is the expression of (deep) emotions, a feat that machines lack 
(so far). The results are rather a testament to the increasing abilities of NLG algorithms to create 
text that mimics human creative text and that people do find appealing. Algorithms such as GPT-
2 are widely assumed to have a long way to go before they can autonomously write truly creative 
text, especially in longer formats than poems. However, projects in which humans and 
algorithms form hybrid writing teams and collaboratively craft fiction text present one way in 
which such algorithms could enter our daily lives. Whether such forms of hybrid collaborations 
between human and machines should be considered plagiarism remains unclear. Or, conversely, 
to what extent does the (developer of the) algorithm deserve (financial) credit for the textual 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  46 
outputs? Related to the set-up used in the current studies, would an entry to an actual poetry 
competition by a contestant who uses GPT-2 input be counted as fraud? If so, how could it be 
detected? And if not, (how) should the prize money be split?  
5.6.Conclusion 
Algorithms that generate text resembling human language are becoming ever more 
widely accessible. Not only novelists with writer’s block can make use of freely available 
algorithms like GPT-2. Understanding humans’ behavioral reactions to such algorithms helps 
shape policies to ensure artificial intelligence remains beneficial (Crawford & Calo, 2016). As a 
step in that direction, the present set of studies adopts a behavioral science approach to examine 
creative artificial intelligence. We hope more studies follow suit to inform policies of disclosure 
of algorithmic presence and provide new behavioral insights into human versus (creative) 
artificial intelligence. 
  
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  47 
6. References 
Amabile, T. M. (1983). The social psychology of creativity: A componential conceptualization. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 45(2), 357–376. http://doi.org/10.1037/0022-
3514.45.2.357 
Ariely, D., & Norton, M. I. (2007). Psychology and Experimental Economics: A Gap in 
Abstraction. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 16(6), 336–339. 
http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8721.2007.00531.x 
Bakhshi, H., Frey, C. B., & Osborne, M. (2015). Creativity vs. Robots - The creative economy 
and the future of employment. Nesta, (April), 1–40. 
Bigman, Y. E., & Gray, K. (2018). People Are Averse to Machines Making Moral Decisions. 
Cognition, 1(viikko 37), 399–405. 
Bigman, Y. E., Waytz, A., Alterovitz, R., & Gray, K. (2019). Holding Robots Responsible: The 
Elements of Machine Morality. Trends in Cognitive Sciences. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2019.02.008 
Boden, M. A. (2009). Computer models of creativity. AI Magazine, 30(3), 23. 
Bringsjord, S., & Ferrucci, D. (1999). Artificial intelligence and literary creativity: Inside the 
mind of brutus, a storytelling machine. Mahwah, NJ, USA: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Budzianowski, P., & Vulić, I. (2019). Hello, It’s GPT-2 - How Can I Help You? Towards the 
Use of Pretrained Language Models for Task-Oriented Dialogue Systems. In Conference 
Proceedings Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL). (pp. 15–22). 
http://doi.org/10.18653/v1/d19-5602 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  48 
Burton, J. W., Stein, M. K., & Jensen, T. B. (2019). A systematic review of algorithm aversion in 
augmented decision making. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, bdm.2155. 
http://doi.org/10.1002/bdm.2155 
Camerer, C. F. (2011). Behavioral game theory: Experiments in strategic interaction. Behavioral 
Game Theory: Experiments in Strategic Interaction. New Jersey, NJ, USA: Princeton 
University Press. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.socec.2003.10.009 
Carlson, M. (2015). The Robotic Reporter: Automated journalism and the redefinition of labor, 
compositional forms, and journalistic authority. Digital Journalism, 3(3), 416–431. 
http://doi.org/10.1080/21670811.2014.976412 
Castelo, N., Bos, M. W., & Lehmann, D. R. (2019). Task-Dependent Algorithm Aversion. 
Journal of Marketing Research, 56(5), 809–825. http://doi.org/10.1177/0022243719851788 
Clerwall, C. (2014). Enter the Robot Journalist. Journalism Practice, 8(5), 519–531. 
http://doi.org/10.1080/17512786.2014.883116 
Craglia, M., Annoni, A., Benczur, P., Bertoldi, P., Delipetrev, P., De Prato, G., … Vesnic, A. L. 
(2018). Artificial Intelligence: A European Perspective. Brussels, Belgium. 
Crawford, K., & Calo, R. (2016). There is a blind spot in AI research. Nature, 538(7625), 311–
313. http://doi.org/10.1038/538311a 
Dafoe, A. (2018). AI Governance: A Research Agenda. Governance of AI Program. Oxford, UK: 
Oxford University. http://doi.org/10.1176/ajp.134.8.aj1348938 
Diakopoulos, N. (2016). Accountability in Algorithmic Decision Making. In Communications of 
the ACM (Vol. 59, pp. 56–62). http://doi.org/10.1145/2844110 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  49 
Diakopoulos, N., & Koliska, M. (2017). Algorithmic Transparency in the News Media. Digital 
Journalism, 5(7), 809–828. http://doi.org/10.1080/21670811.2016.1208053 
Dietvorst, B. J., Simmons, J. P., & Massey, C. (2015). Algorithm aversion: People erroneously 
avoid algorithms after seeing them err. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 
144(1), 114–126. http://doi.org/10.1037/xge0000033 
Garfinkel, S., Matthews, J., Shapiro, S. S., & Smith, J. M. (2017). Toward algorithmic 
transparency and accountability. In Communications of the ACM (Vol. 60, p. 5). 
http://doi.org/10.1145/3125780 
Gibney, E. (2020). This AI researcher is trying to ward off a reproducibility crisis. Nature, 
577(7788), 14–14. http://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-019-03895-5 
Gneezy, U., Saccardo, S., & van Veldhuizen, R. (2019). Bribery: Behavioral Drivers of Distorted 
Decisions. Journal of the European Economic Association, 17(3), 917–946. 
http://doi.org/10.1093/jeea/jvy043 
Goldenfein, J. (2019). Algorithmic Transparency and Decision-Making Accountability: 
Thoughts for Buying Machine Learning Algorithms. In Closer to the Machine: Technical, 
Social, and Legal aspects of AI (pp. 41–145). 
http://doi.org/https://ssrn.com/abstract=3445873 
Gonçalo Oliveira, H. (2018). A Survey on Intelligent Poetry Generation: Languages, Features, 
Techniques, Reutilisation and Evaluation. In Proceedings of the 10th International 
Conference on Natural Language Generation. (pp. 11–20). http://doi.org/10.18653/v1/w17-
3502 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  50 
Graefe, A., Haim, M., Haarmann, B., & Brosius, H. B. (2018). Readers’ perception of computer-
generated news: Credibility, expertise, and readability. Journalism, 19(5), 595–610. 
http://doi.org/10.1177/1464884916641269 
Highhouse, S. (2008). Stubborn Reliance on Intuition and Subjectivity in Employee Selection. 
Industrial and Organizational Psychology, 1(3), 333–342. http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1754-
9434.2008.00058.x 
Jozefowicz, R., Vinyals, O., Schuster, M., Shazeer, N., & Wu, Y. (2016). Exploring the Limits of 
Language Modeling. Pre-print available via https://arxiv.org/abs/1602.02410. 
Keith, R. (2012). Explaining Creativity-the Science of Human Innovation. Oxford, UK: Oxford 
University Press. 
Kreps, S., & McCain, M. (2019). Not Your Father’s Bots. Foreign Affairs. Available via 
https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/2019-08-02/not-your-fathers-bots 
Kruger, J., & Dunning, D. (1999). Unskilled and unaware of it. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 77(6), 1121–1134. http://doi.org/10.1109/MMM.2011.2173980 
Laakasuo, M., Palomäki, J., & Köbis, N.C. (2020). Moral Uncanny Valley – A Robot’s 
Appearance Moderates How its Decisions are Judged. University of Helsinki Working 
Paper. 
Lee, J.-S., & Hsiang, J. (2019). Patent Claim Generation by Fine-Tuning OpenAI GPT-2.Pre-
print available via https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.02052. 
Lee, M. K. (2018). Understanding perception of algorithmic decisions: Fairness, trust, and 
emotion in response to algorithmic management. Big Data and Society, 5(1), 1–16. 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  51 
http://doi.org/10.1177/2053951718756684 
Leviathan, Y., & Matias, Y. (2018). Google Duplex: an AI system for accomplishing real-world 
tasks over the phone. http://doi.org/https://ai.googleblog.com/2018/05/duplex-ai-system-
for-natural-conversation.html 
Loller-Andersen, M., & Gambäck, B. (2018). Deep Learning-based Poetry Generation Given 
Visual Input. In Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Computational 
Creativity (ICCC’18) (pp. 240–247). 
Majid al-Rifaie, M., Cropley, A. J., Cropley, D. H., & Bishop, M. (2016). On evil and 
computational creativity. Connection Science, 28(2), 171–193. 
http://doi.org/10.1080/09540091.2016.1151862 
Malmendier, U., & Tate, G. (2008). Who makes acquisitions? CEO overconfidence and the 
market’s reaction. Journal of Financial Economics, 89(1), 20–43. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2007.07.002 
Marcinkowski, F., Kieslich, K., Starke, C. & Lünich, M. (2020). Implications of AI (Un-
)Fairness in Higher Education Admissions: The Effects of Perceived AI (Un-)Fairness on 
Exit, Voice and Organizational Reputation. In Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, 
Accountability, and Transparency of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM 
FAT*). Available via https://doi.org/10.1145/3351095.3372867 
Marcus, G. (2020). GPT-2 and the Nature of Intelligence. Retrieved August 25, 2020, from 
https://thegradient.pub/gpt2-and-the-nature-of-intelligence/ 
Marcus, G., Rossi, F., & Veloso, M. (2016). Beyond the turing test. AI Magazine, 37(1), 3–4. 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  52 
http://doi.org/10.1609/aimag.v37i1.2650 
McCormack, J., & D’Inverno, M. (2014). On the future of computers and creativity. In AISB 
2014 - 50th Annual Convention of the AISB (pp. 1–9). 
Moore, D. A., & Healy, P. J. (2008). The Trouble With Overconfidence. Psychological Review, 
115(2), 502–517. http://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.115.2.502 
Oliveira, H. G. (2009). Automatic generation of poetry: An overview. In 1st Seminar of Art, 
Music, Creativity and Artificial Intelligence (pp. 1–6). 
Peer, E., Brandimarte, L., Samat, S., & Acquisti, A. (2017). Beyond the Turk: Alternative 
platforms for crowdsourcing behavioral research. Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology, 70, 153–163. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2017.01.006 
Penrose, R. (1990). The Emperor’s New Mind: Concerning Computers, Minds, and the Laws of 
Physics. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. http://doi.org/10.1119/1.16207 
Pew Research Center. (2018). Public attittudes toward computer algorithms. Available via 
https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/2018/11/16/public-attitudes-toward-computer-
algorithms/ 
Radford, A., Wu, J., Child, R., Luan, D., Amodei, D., & Sutskever, I. (2019). Language Models 
are Unsupervised Multitask Learners. OpenAI Blog, 1(8), 1–24. 
Rahwan, I. (2018). Society-in-the-loop: programming the algorithmic social contract. Ethics and 
Information Technology, 20(1), 5–14. http://doi.org/10.1007/s10676-017-9430-8 
Rahwan, I., Cebrian, M., Obradovich, N., Bongard, J., Bonnefon, J.-F., Breazeal, C., … 
Wellman, M. (2019). Machine behaviour. Nature, 568(7753), 477–486. 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  53 
http://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1138-y 
Ressmeyer, R., Masling, S., & Liao, M. (2019). “Deep Faking” Political Twitter using Transfer 
learning and GPT-2. Working paper Stanford University. Stanford, CA, USA. 
Riedl, M. O. (2014). The Lovelace 2.0 Test of Artificial Creativity and Intelligence. Pre-print 
available via https://arxiv.org/abs/1410.6142 
Ritchie, G., Manurung, R., Pain, H., Waller, A., Black, R., & O’Mara, D. (2007). A practical 
application of computational humour. In Proceedings of the 4th International Joint 
Workshop on Computational Creativity (pp. 91–98). 
Saygin, A. P., Chaminade, T., Ishiguro, H., Driver, J., & Frith, C. (2012). The thing that should 
not be: Predictive coding and the uncanny valley in perceiving human and humanoid robot 
actions. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 7(4), 413–422. 
http://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsr025 
Schirner, G., Erdogmus, D., Chowdhury, K., & Padir, T. (2013). The Future of Human-in-the-
Loop Cyber-Physical Systems. Computer, 16(1), 36–45. 
Schlag, K. H., Tremewan, J., & van der Weele, J. J. (2015). A penny for your thoughts: a survey 
of methods for eliciting beliefs. Experimental Economics, 18(3), 457–490. 
http://doi.org/10.1007/s10683-014-9416-x 
Schwartz, O. (2015). Can a computer write poetry. Retrieved from 
https://www.ted.com/talks/oscar_schwartz_can_a_computer_write_poetry?utm_campaign=t
edspread&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=tedcomshare 
Shin, D., & Park, Y. J. (2019). Role of fairness, accountability, and transparency in algorithmic 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  54 
affordance. Computers in Human Behavior, 98(March), 277–284. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2019.04.019 
Sloman, A. (2012). Meta-morphogenesis and the Creativity of Evolution. In T. R. Besold, K.-U. 
Kühnberger, M. Schorlemmer, & A. Smaill (Eds.), Computational Creativity, Concept 
Invention, and General Intelligence (Vol. 1, pp. 51–58). Osnabrück, Germany: Publications 
of the Institute of Cognitive Science. 
Srivastava, S. (2018). Sound inference in complicated research. Pre-print available via 
https://psyarxiv.com/bwr48 
Starke, C., & Lünich, M. (2020). Artificial Intelligence for Decision-Making in the European 
Union: Effects on Citizens’ Perceptions of Input, Throughput and Output Legitimacy. Pre-
print available via https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.11320. 
Streitfeld, D. (2018). Computer Stories: A.I. Is Beginning to Assist Novelists. New York Times, 
pp. 1–13. http://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781107415324.004 
Sundar, S. S., & Nass, C. (2001). Conceptualizing sources in online news. Journal of 
Communication, 51(1), 52–72. http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1460-2466.2001.tb02872.x 
The Guardian. (2019, February 14). New AI fake text generator may be too dangerous to release, 
say creators. http://doi.org/https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2019/feb/14/elon-
musk-backed-ai-writes-convincing-news-fiction 
Turing, A. M. (1950). Computing Machinery and Intelligence. Mind - A Quarterly Review of 
Psychology and Philosophy, 236(Oct), 433–460. 
van Dalen, A. (2012). The algorithms behind the headlines: How machine-written news 
 
CREATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  55 
redefines the core skills of human journalists. Journalism Practice, 6(5–6), 648–658. 
http://doi.org/10.1080/17512786.2012.667268 
Walsh, T. (2016). Turing’s red flag. In Communications of the ACM (Vol. 59, pp. 34–37). 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2838729 
Walsh, T. (2017). The meta turing test. In AAAI Workshop - Technical Report (Vol. WS-17-01-, 
pp. 132–137). 
Wang, R., Harper, F. M., & Zhu, H. (2020). Factors Influencing Perceived Fairness in 
Algorithmic Decision-Making: Algorithm Outcomes, Development Procedures, and 
Individual Differences, 1–14. 
Warwick, K., & Shah, H. (2016). Can machines think? A report on Turing test experiments at 
the Royal Society. Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Artificial Intelligence, 28(6), 
989–1007. http://doi.org/10.1080/0952813X.2015.1055826 
Yeomans, M., Shah, A., Mullainathan, S., & Kleinberg, J. (2019). Making sense of 
recommendations. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 32(4), 403–414. 
http://doi.org/10.1002/bdm.2118 
Zhu, H., Yu, B., Halfaker, A., & Terveen, L. (2018). Value-sensitive algorithm design: Method, 
case study, and lessons. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, 
2(CSCW). http://doi.org/10.1145/3274463 
 