GenAI Detection Tools, Adversarial Techniques and Implications for Inclusivity in Higher Education  
 
 
 
1 
 
 
GENAI DETECTION TOOLS, ADVERSARIAL TECHNIQUES AND IMPLICATIONS 
FOR INCLUSIVITY IN HIGHER EDUCATION 
 
 
 
A PREPRINT  
 
 
Mike Perkins 1*, Jasper Roe 2, Binh H. Vu 1, Darius Postma 1, Don Hickerson 1, James McGaughran1, Huy 
Q. Khuat 1 
 
1 British University Vietnam, Vietnam.  
2 James Cook University Singapore, Singapore.  
*Corresponding Author: Mike.p@buv.edu.vn  
 
March, 2024  
 
Abstract 
This study investigates the efficacy of six major Generative AI (GenAI) text detectors 
when confronted with machine -generated content that has been modified using 
techniques designed to evade detection by these tools (n=805). The results 
demonstrate that the detectors' already low accuracy rates  (39.5%) show major 
reductions in accuracy (17.4%) when faced with manipulated content, with some 
techniques proving more effective than others in evading detection. 
The accuracy limitations and the potential for false accusations demonstrate that these 
tools cannot currently be recommended for determining whether violations of 
academic integrity have occurred, underscoring the challenges educators face in 
maintaining inclusive and fair assessment practices. However, they may have a role 
in supporting student learning and maintaining academic integrity when used in a 
non-punitive manner.   
These results underscore the need for a combined approach to addressing the 
challenges posed by GenAI in academia to promote the responsible and equitable use 
of these emerging technologies. The study concludes that the current limitations of 
AI text detectors require a critical approach for any possible implementation in HE 
and highlight possible alternatives to AI assessment strategies.   
 
Keywords: Generative Artificial Intelligence, adversarial  techniques, academic integrity, higher education, Artificial 
Intelligence text detectors, machine-generated content  

GenAI Detection Tools, Adversarial Techniques and Implications for Inclusivity in Higher Education  
 
 
 
2 
Introduction 
Recent developments in Artificial Intelligence (AI) have led to paradigm-shifting applications and technologies 
which have significantly impacted multiple aspects of society. The ‘AI Spring’ (Manyika & Bughin, 2019)  of 
the early 2020s and its ongoing consequences has already garnered a great deal of attention in academia and 
education in a short span of time. At the time of writing, AI is receiving greater adoption both formally and 
informally among students and teac hers and has become a ‘hot topic’ (Cotton  et al., 2023) , of which our 
understanding is only just beginning. Generative AI (GenAI) tools, that is, those which produce an output of 
some form in response to user input, whether text, audio, image, or video, have attracted the most attention in 
this area. Despite many proclaiming the potential benefits of these tools in aiding learning, GenAI also presents 
several risks, including equity and inclusion in education. Despite such risks, a consensus on the acceptance of 
GenAI in some spheres of academia is emerging. For example, many academic publishers have moved towards 
a position which accepts the use of GenAI in crafting manuscripts, albeit with certain restrictions (Perkins & 
Roe, 2024a), and studies have shown the rising popularity of using GenAI tools to support academic writing and 
research (Bedington et al., 2024; Chan, 2023; Perkins & Roe, 2024b; Sobaih, 2024). Simultaneously, a growing 
number of organizational bodies are now producing guidelines for the ethical use of GenAI in education 
(Foltynek et al., 2023; Miao & Holmes, 2023).   
Regarding inequality and inclusion, the consensus acceptance of GenAI tools in scientific publishing may 
disadvantage certain groups of students and researchers. For example, barriers in access to the internet, financial 
barriers in accessing paid GenAI to ols (as premium versions often require a subscription) and other issues of 
access (for example, disability) all play a role in worsening ‘digital poverty’ (Miao & Holmes, 2023) . Further, 
Bissessar (2023) also identifies the digital divide as an important c onsideration in the use of GenAI tools in 
classroom settings and Liang (2023) recognizing that GenAI tools are known for producing structurally biased 
and ethnocentric worldviews.   
This is not the only concern regarding GenAI technology in HE. Shortly after the rapid increase in the popularity 
of GenAI tools caused by the release of ChatGPT in November 2023, tools were released commercially, claiming 
that textual GenAI outputs could be detected. We refer to these as GenAI text detectors. Many of these detectors 
claim a high degree of reliability in identifying the presence of AI-generated content in submissions, often giving 
either a percentage score (i.e. ‘this text is 10% AI-generated') or a likelihood score (i.e. ‘this text is likely to be 
AI-generated'). Underlying the principle of these detectors is the assumption that by identifying GenAI text, 
assessors and educators can ensure fair and secure assessment. Research has shown that  the assuredness of 
fairness and equity is vital for inclusive assessment practices (Morris et al., 2019), and notions of fairness and 
security suggest that students will not be able to misrepresent authorship and thus gain educational outcomes that 
they have not earned.   
However, research has shown that GenAI text detectors have the potential to be barriers to inclusive assessment 
practices by disproportionately targeting individuals who don't speak English as their first language, or those 
with lower English proficiency (Liang et al., 2023). In this study, we use the term 'Non-Native English Speaker' 
(NNES) to refer to this population. We recognize that there are various terms used to describe individuals who 
don't speak English as their first language, such as English Language Learner (ELL), English as a Second 
Language (ESL) speaker, and English as an Additional Language (EAL) speaker with each term having its own 
merits and limitations. While NNES may be seen as problematic by some because it categorises people based on 
what they are not, rather than what they are, we have chosen to use this term in our study because our primary 
focus is on exploring biases specifically related to these groups, and in this context believe NNES to be the most 
accurate and direct term to describe our target population.   
It has long been known that non- native English speakers face challenges when participating in science. These 
‘manifold costs’ include spending a greater amount of effort and time reading, writing, and disseminating work 
(Amano et al., 2023). Even when NNES do not use GenAI tools, research suggests that they are likely to suffer 
GenAI Detection Tools, Adversarial Techniques and Implications for Inclusivity in Higher Education  
 
 
 
3 
false accusations. Liang et al (2023) found that GenAI text detectors falsely detect NNES writers’ outputs as AI-
Generated due to the higher level of perplexity and lower coherence often found in NNES writing. As a result, 
linguistic measures, such as perplexity, as indicators of GenAI, are associated with bias against NNES (Liang et 
al., 2023). Following this, although GenAI detectors are borne from a place of good intention, that is, to limit the 
ability of individuals to commit AI-enabled academic integrity violations, to understand how students use GenAI, 
and to ensure fairness and parity in assessment submissions, thus promoting inclusivity and fairness, they have 
unintended, paradoxical consequences. Most concerning among these is that they can be used  to generate false 
accusations of academic dishonesty, create confusion or heightened anxiety among students, and disadvantage 
some groups of students (e.g. NNES) in comparison to others.   
To assess whether the benefits GenAI text detectors provide to the educational process (ensuring fairness by 
limiting the scope of AI -enabled authorship misrepresentation) outweigh their potential to drive inequalities 
(false accusations of NNES, potential for students with technological ability, and financial resources to bypass 
detection systems), we investigate the efficacy of six GenAI text detectors. We do this by testing content 
subjected to prompting techniques that alter the standard output of GenAI  tools to disguise that they are AI -
generated texts. We refer to these manipulation techniques designed to evade detection as ‘adversarial 
techniques’ in reference to the combination of methods that have been referred to as adversarial attacks in the 
extant literature related to attacks on machine learning based tools (Alsmadi et al., 2021; Qiu et al., 2019; 
Sadasivan et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023) . This contributes to the understanding of the limitations of such AI 
text detector tools in light of their r isks to inclusivity in educational practice, given that prior research has not 
investigated the impact of adversarial techniques on the ability of AI text detectors to maintain a reliable detection 
accuracy rate.   
Objectives 
 
The overarching aim of this research is not to vilify the use of GenAI tools or AI text detectors, but to explore 
the efficacy and sensitivity of these tools to linguistic changes and adversarial prompting techniques, thereby 
assessing their ability or inability to foster an inclusive system of education. By ‘inclusivity’ we refer to providing 
equal opportunities to all who participate in the educational process and ensuring that no group of students is at 
a disadvantage through a lack of opportunity or unfair assessment process. By measuring the susceptibility of 
existing AI text detectors to various adversarial techniques and assessing their efficacy, we can draw conclusions 
about their suitability for use in higher education and their ability to enable inclus ive practices by reducing the 
risk of academic misconduct or detracting from inclusivity through unreliability (thus leading to a higher 
likelihood of false positives). In doing so, this research aims to serve as a guide for educators and institutions 
regarding the use of AI text detectors. 
 
To achieve these objectives, this study explores whether AI text detectors can be considered reliable tools which 
contribute to academic integrity and offer a net positive rather than negative (given their bias) in fostering 
inclusivity and fairness. Specifically, we aim to answer the following questions.  
1. Reliability of AI Text Detectors : To what extent can we trust the results of AI text detectors to 
accurately determine the source of a piece of text? What implications does this have for inclusive 
assessment practices?  
2. Adversarial Techniques: Is it possible to disguise AI generated content using adversarial techniques 
in prompting strategies and paraphrasing? What are the most effective adversarial techniques for 
deceiving text detectors? How might this advantage some writers over others?  
3. Comparative Analysis of AI Tools: Which AI tools provide outputs that are easier or more challenging 
for detectors to identify? What are the implications of this?  
4. Detector Efficacy: Which AI text detectors show more promise in terms of accuracy and reliability? Is 
it possible to recommend any of them based on their performance?  
 
GenAI Detection Tools, Adversarial Techniques and Implications for Inclusivity in Higher Education  
 
 
 
4 
Literature 
Generative AI Tools  
Educators and researchers are currently grappling with the changes brought about by the popularisation and 
development of Foundation Models (FMs). These models share the fundamental capability of generating human-
like texts in response to natural language prompts, a feature that enables a wide range of applications, and t his 
study focuses on the outputs created by three popular FMs: GPT-4 by OpenAI (accessed through the ChatGPT 
interface), Bard (now known as Gemini) by Google, and Claude 2 by Anthropic.   
In an evaluation of GPT-4, Claude 2, and Bard’s performance, Borji and Mohammadian (2023) identified GPT-
4 as providing correct answers to standardized questions 84% of the time, while Claude 2 and Bard achieved 
scores of 64.5% and 62.4%, respectively. In the multiple-choice section of the Bar exam, Claude 2 excelled with 
a 76.5% accuracy rate, surpassing GPT-4's previous record of 75%. For tasks involving multistep reasoning, Fu 
et al. (2022) concluded that Claude 2's performance is comparable to that of GPT-4, with Lin and Chen (2023), 
claiming that Claude 2 slightly outperforms GPT -4. Despite these achievements, Claude 2 lags in scientific 
writing and quantitative accuracy compared to other models (Chang et al., 2023; Lozić & Štular, 2023; Z. Wu et 
al., 2023), primarily because of the ability of GPT -4 and Bard to access the internet for information gathering. 
Studies by Fu et al. (2022) and Lin and Chen (2023) have shown that Claude 2 can perform comparably to or 
even slightly outperform GPT-4 in multistep reasoning and dialogue.   
Efficacy of AI Text Detection Tools  
 
There is a wide range of software available which has been designed to classify whether text is machine or human 
generated, with providers claiming high levels of accuracy in being able to identify whether text is written by a 
human or by a GenAI tool (GPTZero, n.d.; Turnitin, 2023). While some of these tools are free and others require 
either registration or payment, research by Walters (2023)  has identified that the accuracy of paid -for tools is 
only slightly higher than that of free versions. However, cl aims of accuracy are contradicted by studies which 
demonstrate the varied levels of the detectors' ability to distinguish accurately between AI and human-generated 
content. (Chaka, 2023a; Gao et al., 2022; Krishna et al., 2023; Orenstrakh et al., 2023; Perkins, Roe, et al., 2023; 
Walters, 2023; Weber-Wulff et al., 2023).  
Detection tool biases against NNES have been highlighted as a potential issue of bias by Fröhling and Zubiaga 
(2021) and Liang et al. (2023) because of their reliance on standardised linguistic metrics such as perplexity and 
burstiness, which can disadvantage NNES. Liang et al. (2023) , identified that GPT -based detection tools 
misclassified over half of the samples from NNES, with an average false positive rate of 61.3%. However, 
research produced by GPTZero challenges Liang’s findings and demonstrate that GPTZero can accurately 
determine the human written status of text when produced by an NNES (Tian, 2023) . This claim is repeated in 
research produced by Turnitin who also show no differences in how NNES writing is classified (Adamson, 
2023). However, on a broader scale, questions remain, especially as OpenAI’s AI classifier, although trained on 
varied human textual patterns, did not include training on NNES-generated text (Elkhatat et al., 2023; OpenAI, 
2023). Owing to the inability of this classifier to accurately detect the output of GenAI tools, OpenAI withdrew 
this tool from use in July 2023 (OpenAI, 2023). Research by Originality.AI (2023) acknowledges that all AI text 
detectors have their limitations. These include lagging behind in training against recent GenAI tools, which have 
reached a level of complexity in producing content, making it very difficult to distinguish between AI and human-
generated content, and that they are susceptible to being bypassed by using adversarial techniques. These 
problems underscore the need for educational institutions to balance the use of AI detection tools with 
accommodating AI-produced materials (Perkins, Roe, et al., 2023).   
GenAI Detection Tools, Adversarial Techniques and Implications for Inclusivity in Higher Education  
 
 
 
5 
Adversarial techniques as a method of evading GenAI detection   
A few previous studies have investigated how the accuracy of AI text detectors can decrease following 
manipulation of the textual output of GenAI tools. Mitchell et al. (2023) identified that DetectGPT correctly 
detected 70.3% of model -generated sequences from GPT2 -XL. However, after altering the content using an 
Automated Paraphrasing tool (APT), the detection rate decreased to 4.6%. Similar results of major drops in 
accuracy rates following the application of APTs and translation tools were identified by Weber-Wulff et al. 
(2023).  
A key technique for reducing detection accuracy involves the deliberate incorporation of errors in AI-generated 
text weakness (Perkins, Roe, et al., 2023). This technique exploits the natural occurrence of minor mistakes in 
human writing, such as typographical errors, grammatical inconsistencies, and stylistic irregularities. By 
mimicking these imperfections, AI-generated content can effectively mislead detectors into classifying them as 
human-authored content. Another approach, as discussed by Liang et al. (2023), involves tailoring the 
complexity of a text to mirror the style typically found in human-produced academic works. This method focuses 
on adjusting language use and vocabulary to align closely with human writing styles. Thus, AI-generated content 
can blend more seamlessly with human-authored texts, thereby evading detection more effectively.   
The role of prompting GenAI models (‘prompt engineering’) has also been emphasised as important when 
evading the detection of machine -generated text. As observed in studies by Elkhatat et al. (2023) , carefully 
crafted prompts can guide GenAI tools in generating text that not only aligns with the desired content but also 
strategically incorporates elements that challenge the detection capabilities of AI detectors. This involves a 
nuanced understanding of the capabilities of AI and the limitations of detector s, ensuring that the generated 
content remains undetectable while retaining its intended meaning and coherence. Other techniques for evading 
the identification of machine-generated text have also been presented by Solaiman et al. (2019), Sadasivan et al. 
(2023) and Ippolito et al. (2020). These include “recursive paraphrasing attacks”, which utilize automated, 
network-based paraphrasing tools to reduce the accuracy of detectors on watermarked texts, and “spoofing 
attacks” in which an adversarial human deliberately writes a passage falsely detected as AI -generated without 
having access to the inner workings of the detection methods. Lancaster (2023) proposed that watermarking AI-
generated text may be a potential solution; however, the attacks discussed above demonstrate that even LLMs 
protected by watermarking schemes are vulnerable to manipulation of this type.   
Research gap  
 
Despite the growing interest and concern surrounding the reliability of AI text detectors and the effectiveness of 
adversarial techniques in deceiving them, there are no comprehensive comparative analyses which systematically 
evaluate the performance of various AI text detectors against different GenAI tools, nor are there any studies that 
do this while exploring the potential consequences from an inclusivity and equity perspective. Existing research 
points to a lack of holistic understanding of the interpl ay between AI text detectors, GenAI models, and 
adversarial techniques (Anderson et al., 2023; Chaka, 2023b; Elali & Rachid, 2023; Elkhatat et al., 2023; Liang 
et al., 2023; Orenstrakh et al., 2023; Perkins, Roe, et al., 2023; Weber -Wulff et al., 2023) . This research gap 
impedes our ability to provide robust evidence -based recommendations for educators regarding the use of AI 
text detectors. Gaining a more nuanced perspective on how accurate AI text detectors are in real-world settings 
means that we can highlight their potential benefits, limitations, and biases and therefore support a more inclusive 
educational environment in this new GenAI-infused era.  
To support this goal, this study explores the effectiveness of different adversarial techniques in adjusting the 
output of GenAI tools to evade detection by AI text detectors. In doing so, we address the need for a standardised 
framework and taxonomy to compare and evaluate the performance of AI text detectors against GenAI tools and 
adversarial techniques (Abd-Elaal et al., 2022). With a growing number of GenAI tools available, each having 
unique characteristics, strengths, and weaknesses, students attempt ing to evade detection may employ various 
techniques to manipulate AI-generated text, making it less likely to be identified by text detectors. Understanding 
GenAI Detection Tools, Adversarial Techniques and Implications for Inclusivity in Higher Education  
 
 
 
6 
these manipulation techniques can help demonstrate the true effectiveness of AI text detectors in more realistic 
settings, where students actively try to avoid detection. This knowledge can inform recommendations for higher 
education institutions and acade mics regarding whether and how to effectively use these tools to support 
academic integrity. In addition, these insights can guide software developers in creating more robust detection 
methods to counter evasion techniques and further enhance the reliability of AI text detectors.  
Methodology  
Overview   
This study employs an experimental design in which we use three popular GenAI tools to generate short samples 
of text (n=15). Altered versions of the original samples are created by applying six adversarial techniques (n=89). 
Ten human-written samples are used as controls. All the developed samples (n=114) are tested against seven 
popular AI text detectors to determine the effect of adversarial techniques on the accuracy of AI text detectors 
(n=805). Sample creation and testing were conducted in September and October 2023. 
 
All prompts used to generate the samples, as well as the samples themselves are publicly available at Mendeley 
Data at the following link https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/xv6fk2mmh9/2  (Perkins et al., 2024).  
GenAI Sample Generation  
First, we generated an initial set of 15 text samples using three GenAI tools (GPT4, Claude 2, and Bard), with 
five samples created using each tool. All samples were created using the same five prompts designed to emulate 
a range of tasks in which GenAI tools may be used. These prompts requested the development of the following 
outputs.  
• Mini (short form) university essay testing AI’s ability to construct coherent, argumentative, or 
exploratory work within an HE setting.   
• Professional blog post to assess whether GenAI -generated content can demonstrate professionalism, 
industry knowledge, and expertise, while maintaining reader engagement.  
• Cover letter to apply for an internship designed to test GenAI’s ability to design tailored content specific 
to a position and the suitability and motivation of the applicant.  
• Middle-school level comparative analysis task designed to test GenAI's use of language specific to that 
of a younger author requiring clarity and simplicity.  
• Magazine article intended to test for content and tone in a journalistic manner that may appeal to a broad 
audience.   
The prompts were designed to create outputs which covered a range of different topics, linguistic styles, and 
complexity levels to provide insights into the versatility and consistency of AI detectors in producing results 
across different forms of text.  
 
Ten control samples were created by the human authors (researchers in this project). The human authors are all 
proficient English speakers, comprising academic staff who described English as their primary language, and 
Vietnamese undergraduate NNES students who study at a UK-oriented international university in English.   
Adversarial sample generation  
All original 15 AI -generated samples were modified using six different adversarial techniques. With the 
exception of a separate APT tool to paraphrase the outputs, all adversarial techniques were applied using the 
same FM with which the samples were origin ally generated. This maintains the likely process of a user 
interacting with their chosen FM. This was performed by copying the sample to a new chat window in each tool 
and then using prompting strategies to request the text to be adjusted according to the  requirements of each 
adversarial technique. 
GenAI Detection Tools, Adversarial Techniques and Implications for Inclusivity in Higher Education  
 
 
 
7 
All adversarial techniques were applied following a standardised protocol. The testers were given a standard 
prompt format for application to each of the 15 samples. These prompts include specific techniques designed to 
improve the performance of GenAI tools. Examples include the use of delimiters (Sweenor & Ramanathan, 
2023) and prompt chaining (T. Wu et al., 2022) . Delimiters (in this case, hashmarks and titles) were used to 
identify to ChatGPT where instructions ended, and the content for adjustment began. If a suitable output was not 
obtained on the first attempt, prompt chaining was used to request specific adjustments to meet the required 
output. Researchers were restricted to making up to five requests for new prompts to obtain suitable outputs. If 
a suitable output could not be created within these five iterations, the sample was not considered for testing. Any 
potential ambiguities in prompts were addressed by requesting the GenAI tool to ask any required questions 
before providing output. At no point were the text samples manually edited: all adjustments to the original 
samples were carried out using the relevant GenAI tool.  
The format used for each adversarial technique is presented in Table 1.  
Technique  Prompt format  
Add Spelling 
Errors  
(SE)  
Topic: "Rewriting with Intentional Errors"   
Instructions: Rewrite the following text passage with spelling errors.   
Style: someone who is not proficient in English spelling. However, the errors should not be so 
extreme that the text becomes incomprehensible. Aim for errors that are commonly seen in writing 
by individuals who have a good grasp of the English language#   
Text Passage for Rewriting: [Insert text here]#   
Word Count: approximately 500 #   
Ask any questions that you need clarifying before producing the output   
Increase 
Burstiness  
(IB)  
Topic: "Varying Sentence Length "  
Instructions: Rewrite the following passage with the aim of varying sentence length to create a 
more dynamic and engaging text. Use a mix of short, medium, and long sentences to achieve this 
effect. Adjust paragraphs so that these are also of a different length#   
Text Passage for Rewriting: [Insert text here]#  
Note: While varying sentence length, ensure that the text remains coherent and academically 
appropriate. The goal is to make the writing more engaging and human sounding without 
sacrificing its core meaning.#  
Word Count: approximately 500  
Increase 
Complexity  
(IC)  
Topic: "Increasing Text Complexity "  
Instructions: Rewrite the following passage to significantly enhance its linguistic complexity. Use 
specialized vocabulary, intricate sentence structures, and nuanced arguments to make the text more 
advanced.#  
Text Passage for Rewriting: [Insert text here]#  
Note: While increasing the complexity, ensure that the text remains coherent and that the core 
arguments are not lost. Feel free to incorporate academic jargon or technical terms that are relevant 
to the subject matter.#  
Word Count: approximately 500#  
Ask any questions that you need clarifying before producing the output  
Decrease 
Complexity  
(DC)  
Topic: "Downgrading Text Complexity   
Instructions: Rewrite the following passage to reduce the overall complexity, making it simpler to 
understand.   
Text Passage for Rewriting: [Insert text here]#  
Note: The rewritten text should maintain the essential points but use simpler vocabulary and 
sentence structures. The aim is to produce a text that is less complex and linguistically 
sophisticated than the original output.#  
GenAI Detection Tools, Adversarial Techniques and Implications for Inclusivity in Higher Education  
 
 
 
8 
Word Count: approximately 500#  
Ask any questions that you need clarifying before producing the output  
Write as NNES  
NNES)  
Topic: "Rewriting as a Non-Native English Speaker (NNES) with IELTS Band Level 6"  
Instructions:  
Rewrite the following text passage to reflect the writing style of a non-native English speaker who 
has achieved a band level 6 in IELTS writing. This level indicates a competent user of English, but 
with some inaccuracies, inappropriate usage, and misunderstandings. The text should be mostly 
clear but may contain occasional errors in grammar, vocabulary, and coherence.#   
Text Passage for Rewriting: [Insert text here]#  
Note: Aim for errors that are typical of an IELTS band level 6 writer. These could include minor 
grammatical mistakes, slight misuse of vocabulary, and occasional awkward phrasing. However, 
the overall meaning of the text should remain clear and understandable.#  
Word Count: approximately 500#  
Ask any questions that you need clarifying before producing the output  
Paraphrase  
(PR)  
Paraphrasing was carried out using the free version of the APT ‘Quillbot’ (Paraphrasing Tool - 
QuillBot AI, n.d.) in the standard mode.  
Table 1. Adversarial technique prompts  
Suitable outputs could not be obtained in one case, resulting in 89 samples of AI -generated text in which 
adversarial techniques had been applied. When creating the samples for testing, we considered using few -shot 
prompting techniques to guide the AI models in generating more human-like text. However, we ultimately chose 
not to employ this method to minimise the influence of external text on the final output. By allowing the AI tools 
to apply adversarial techniques based on their own underlying datasets and processes, we aimed to demonstrate 
how each tool would uniquely interpret and execute these techniques, thereby providing a more authentic 
representation of their capabilities. Table 2 highlights key points related to the application of each technique.  
Technique  Prompt format  
Add 
Spelling 
Errors  
(SE)  
This technique was designed to increase the number of spelling errors found in the output of a text to 
mimic the work of someone who had not carefully proof -read their work. This prompt resulted in 
outputs which generally contained a minimum of 20 errors, even when prompt chaining requested a 
reduced number of errors. Following discussions among authors it was decided that s amples with a 
larger number of errors would be accepted for testing.  
Increase 
Burstiness  
(IB)  
This technique is designed increase the 'burstiness' or variability in the sentence lengths of responses, 
a key determinant used by some AI text detectors such as GPTZero (Tian & Cui, 2023) to identify AI 
generated text. By including a range of sentences varying in length and structure, the aim was to create 
sentences with varied lengths that reflected a more typical human writing pattern. The outcome was 
text that frequently sounded more human -authored, but sometimes resulted in overly short sentences 
that might not be suitable for formal or professional contexts.   
Increase 
Complexity  
(IC)  
This technique was designed to produce text that increases the complexity of writing styles by adding 
jargon, increasing sentence length, and using more convoluted grammatical structures. Following the 
application of this technique, significant changes wer e made to the output, albeit at the expense of 
readability and stylistic consistency. We observed that the outputs often descended into jargon or 
strayed significantly from the expected style which may result in suspicion as to the authorship of the 
work, similar to the ‘word salad’ that frequently appears following the use of an APT (Roe & Perkins, 
2022; Rogerson & McCarthy, 2017).  
Decrease 
Complexity  
This technique requested a simplification of a sample’s vocabulary and sentence structures, with the 
goal being to reduce the linguistic complexity while preserving the core message of the sample, and 
therefore potentially highlighting the authorship of a text.  
GenAI Detection Tools, Adversarial Techniques and Implications for Inclusivity in Higher Education  
 
 
 
9 
(DC)  
Write as 
NNES  
(NNES)  
This technique aimed at mimicking the writing style of a NNES. In some ways the concept of a ‘NNES’ 
is problematic, as it may lead to a stereotypical output which reflects societal and cultural biases in the 
training data. This adversarial method sought to generate text embodying certain inaccuracies, 
inappropriate usage, and misunderstandings typical of a NNES possessing a competent yet not 
advanced level of English proficiency. However, it was decided that any output produced using this 
technique needed to be comprehensible despite any errors.   
Paraphrase  
(PR)  
This technique was designed to test the ability of existing APT software tools in misleading AI text 
detectors by rewriting the original material using different lexis, phrasing, and sentence construction 
to express the same ideas. This reflects typical strategies that can be used to pass traditional plagiarism 
checking software without adjusting the main message of the original sample.    
Table 2. Notes regarding adversarial techniques  
Summary of sample generation  
Owing to limitations inherent in some of the AI text detectors used, the length of the samples requested in all 
cases was restricted to approximately 500 words. This resulted in the final length of the samples for testing falling 
between 350 and 625 words.  
Table 3 summarises the different samples generated.   
Sample description  Number of samples created  
Human written control samples  
(written by authors)  
10  
AI generated samples  
(developed from five standardised prompts)  
15  
AI generated samples with adversarial techniques applied  
(Six techniques applied in a standardised manner to each of the 15 samples)   
89  
Total  114  
Table 3. List of samples for testing  
Testing protocol  
All samples created were tested against seven AI text detectors which had been previously identified in literature 
(Chaka, 2023a; Gao et al., 2022; Krishna et al., 2023; Orenstrakh et al., 2023; Perkins, Roe, et al., 2023; Weber-
Wulff et al., 2023) as being somewhat effective at successfully identifying GenAI content. The detectors were 
chosen based on a review of existing studies (Chaka, 2023a; Gao et al., 2022; Krishna et al., 2023; Orenstrakh 
et al., 2023; Perkins, Roe, et al., 2023a; Weber-Wulff et al., 2023) as follows:  
• Turnitin AI detect (Turnitin.com, 2023)  
• GPTZero (Tian & Cui, 2023)  
• ZeroGPT (ZeroGPT.com, n.d.)  
• Copyleaks (Copyleaks.com, n.d.)  
• Crossplag (Crossplag.com, n.d.)  
• GPT-2 Output Detector (OpenAI, n.d.)  
GenAI Detection Tools, Adversarial Techniques and Implications for Inclusivity in Higher Education  
 
 
 
10 
• GPTKit (GPTKit.com, n.d.)  
To test the samples, the text was either copied and pasted onto online software tools or uploaded where this 
option was available. The tools used free versions of the software, where possible. However, Turnitin’s AI 
detection software was used as part of t he licence held by the lead author’s institution, and both GPTKit and 
Copyleaks required credits to be purchased to run the required number of samples. All 114 samples were tested 
using each of the six detection tools, resulting in a total number of 805 te sts. Eight samples could not be tested 
using some of the tools, resulting in a total of 797 valid tests. 
 
The results provided by the AI detection tools were recorded and interpreted based on a modified version of the 
protocol designed by Weber-Wulff et al. (2023) for comparison with the existing literature. All test results were 
classified on a scale as either Positive (P) or Negative (N) based on the accuracy of the tool in determining 
whether the output was written by a human or generated by a GenAI tool. The classification is presented in Table 
4.  
Human-written (NEGATIVE)   
and the tool says that it is written by:  
[100 - 80%) human/ [0-20%] AI  TN  True negative  
[80 - 60%) human/ [20-40%] AI  PTN  Partially true negative  
[60 - 40%) human/ [40-60%] AI  UNC  Unclear  
[40 - 20%) human/ [60-80%] AI  PFP  Partially false positive  
[20 - 0%] human/ [80-100%] AI  FP  False positive  
AI-written (POSITIVE)   
and the tool says that it is written by:  
[100 - 80%) human/ [0-20%] AI  FN  False negative  
[80 - 60%) human/ [20-40%] AI  PFN  Partially false negative  
[60 - 40%) human/ [40-60%] AI  UNC  Unclear  
[40 - 20%) human/ [60-80%] AI  PTP  Partially true positive  
[20 - 0%] human/ [80-100%] AI  TP  True positive  
Table 4. Classification scale  
Interpretation protocol  
As the AI text detectors all display their results differently, with some providing quantitative statements (“X% 
probability for AI”) and some qualitative statements (“most likely human written, we needed a way to standardise 
the output to allow for compar ability. Therefore, we recorded the results based on the interpretation protocols 
shown in Table 5.  
 
Tool  Result  
Human-
written  AI-written  
Turnitin  
"… [0-20%] of the text is generated by AI"  TN  FN  
"… [20-40%) of the text is generated by AI"  PTN  PFN  
"… [40-60%) of the text is generated by AI"  UNC  UNC  
GenAI Detection Tools, Adversarial Techniques and Implications for Inclusivity in Higher Education  
 
 
 
11 
Tool  Result  
Human-
written  AI-written  
"… [60-80%) of the text is generated by AI"  PFP  PTP  
"… [80-100%] of the text is generated by AI"  FP  TP  
GPT Zero  
“likely to be written entirely by human”  TN  FN  
“may include parts written by AI”  UNC  UNC  
“likely to be written entirely by AI”  FP  TP  
ZeroGPT  
"… is Human written"  TN  FN  
"… most likely Human written"  TN  FN  
"… most likely Human written, may include parts generated by 
AI/GPT"  PTN  PFN  
"... likely Human written, may include parts generated by AI/GPT"  PTN  PFN  
"… contains mixed signals, with some parts generated by AI/GPT"  UNC  UNC  
"… is likely generated by AI/GPT"  PFP  PTP  
"… is most likely AI/GPT generated"  PFP  PTP  
"… most of Your text is AI/GPT generated"  FP  TP  
"… is AI/GPT generated"  FP  TP  
Copyleaks  
"… [0-20%] probability for AI"   TN  FN  
"… [20-40%) probability for AI"  PTN  PFN  
"… [40-60%) probability for AI"  UNC  UNC  
"… [60-80%) probability for AI"  PFP  PTP  
"… [80-100%] probability for AI"  FP  TP  
Crossplags  
“… mostly written by human”  TN  FN  
“… may include parts written by AI”  UNC  UNC  
“… mostly written by AI”  FP  TP  
GPT-2 output 
detector  
"… [80-100%] real"  TN  FN  
"… [60-80%) real"  PTN  PFN  
"… [40-60%) real"  UNC  UNC  
"… [20-40%) real"  PFP  PTP  
"…[0-20%] real"  FP  TP  
GPTKit   
"… [80-100%] real"  TN  FN  
"… [60-80%) real"  PTN  PFN  
"… [40-60%) real"  UNC  UNC  
"… [20-40%) real"  PFP  PTP  
"…[0-20%] real"  FP  TP  
Table 5. Interpretation protocol for AI detectors  
Accuracy and error analysis   
After classifying the outcomes of the tools as (partially) true/false positives/negatives, we assessed the accuracy 
of the tools using three separate methods, as identified by Weber -Wulff et al. (2023). These included a binary 
classification in which the accuracy was calculated as the ratio of correctly identified cases to all cases, a semi-
GenAI Detection Tools, Adversarial Techniques and Implications for Inclusivity in Higher Education  
 
 
 
12 
binary approach which allowed for the results of partially correct results to be awarded half scores, and a 
logarithmic approach in which scores increased as accuracy rates increased. We also report the mean values of 
the combined methods.  
The calculations used for each test are presented in Table 6.   
Accuracy method  Calculation  
Binary  Acc_Bin = (TN + TP) / (TN + PTN + TP + PTP + FN + PFN + FP + PFP + UNC)  
Semi-binary  Acc_SemiBin = ((TN + TP) + 0.5 * (PTN + PTP)) / (TN + PTN + TP + PTP + FN + PFN + 
FP + PFP + UNC)  
Logarithmic  Acc_Logarithmic = (1 * (FN + FP) + 2 * (PFN + PFP) + 4 * UNC + 8 * (PTP + PTN) + 16 * 
(TP + TN)) / (TN + PTN + TP + PTP + FN + PFN + FP + PFP + UNC)  
Average  Acc_Final = (Acc_Bin + Acc_SemiBin + Acc_Logarithmic) / 3   
Table 6. Calculations of accuracy rates  
In addition, error analysis was conducted to assess false accusations and undetected cases, which are particularly 
relevant in ensuring an inclusive and non-discriminatory environment. Instances of AI detectors falsely accusing 
students of academic misconduct are not uncommon and cause concern regarding inclusivity, fairness, and 
ethical practice in education. Therefore, it is important to establish a threshold at which the AI-generated content 
detected by these tools is sufficient to level an accusation or to take disciplinary actions. For this calculation, we 
used a threshold value of 60% to represent a value higher than chance, and to recognise the low likelihood of a 
partially negative or unclear value resulting in a false accusation of a student (FAS):   
FAS = (FP + PFP) / (TN + PTN + TP + PTP + FN + PFN + FP + PFP + UNC)   
Another type of error, which is the potential for AI detectors to fail to identify AI -produced texts, can lead to 
students who use AI for unauthorised content generation being awarded similar credit as honest ones. The 
likelihood of undetected cases (UDC) is calculated as follows:   
UDC = (FN + PFN) / (TN + PTN + TP + PTP + FN + PFN + FP + PFP + UNC)   
Results 
Baseline testing  
The results of our baseline testing of 15 AI-generated samples and 10 human samples are shown in Table 7. This 
test aims to establish the abilities of AI detection tools to determine the authorship criteria of a given sample 
before any adversarial techniques are applied.   
Rank BY AI DETECTORS MEAN 
ACCURACY 
Binary Semi-binary Logarithmic 
1 Copyleaks 64.8% 64% 64% 66.3% 
2 Turnitin 61% 56% 62% 65% 
3 Crossplag 60.8% 60% 60% 62.5% 
4 GPT-2 detector 57.2% 56% 56% 59.5% 
5 ZeroGPT 46.1% 40% 460% 52.3% 
GenAI Detection Tools, Adversarial Techniques and Implications for Inclusivity in Higher Education  
 
 
 
13 
Rank BY AI DETECTORS MEAN 
ACCURACY 
Binary Semi-binary Logarithmic 
6 GPTKit 37.3% 32% 36% 43.8% 
7 GPTZero 26.3% 16% 24% 39% 
BY GENAI TOOLS 
1 Bard 76.9% 71.4% 78.6% 80.7% 
2 GPT-4 23.9% 20% 21.4% 30,2% 
3 Claude 2 17.7% 14.3% 15.7% 23.2% 
OVERALL 
Original AI-generated samples 39.5% 35.2% 38.6% 44.7% 
Control samples 67% 62.9% 66.4% 71.6% 
Table 7. Baseline testing  
We wish to highlight that these results were accurate at the time of testing, but because of the evolution of both 
the FMs and AI text detection tools, these comparative results may not necessarily represent the current ability 
of any of the listed tools.   
Testing shows that the AI detectors tested have a mean accuracy rating of only 39.5% when evaluating 
unmanipulated AI-generated content. Importantly, regarding the human- written control samples, only 67% of 
the tests were accurate, leading to significant concerns regarding the potential for false accusations from these 
tools.  
 
Regarding the performance of individual AI detectors, Copyleaks displayed the highest sensitivity, being able to 
detect 64,8% of AI -generated texts, followed closely by Turnitin at 61%. The worst -performing detector was 
GPTZero, with a considerably lower accuracy rating of approximately 26%. Before the content was subjected to 
any manipulation, the GenAI tool which produced the most easily detectable text was Bard, with 76.9% of its 
outputs correctly identified as AI generated by the detector tools.  
Accuracy of AI detectors following the application of adversarial techniques  
Next, the performance of the AI detectors was assessed based on their average accuracy rate when detecting 
manipulated outputs. Table 8 shows the accuracy of the tools when faced with non-manipulated AI content, the 
accuracy following the application of adversarial techniques, and percentage drops in accuracy. All reported 
figures are the mean values.  
 
Ranking  AI Text Detector  Accuracy (non-manipulated 
output)  
Accuracy (manipulated 
output)  % drop in accuracy  
1  Copyleaks  73.9%  58.7%  15.2%  
2  Crossplags  54.3%  32.4%  21.9%  
3  GPT-2 output  34.7%  17.5%  17.2%  
GenAI Detection Tools, Adversarial Techniques and Implications for Inclusivity in Higher Education  
 
 
 
14 
4  ZeroGPT  31.3%  17.3%  14%  
5  GPTZero  26.4%  16.7%  9.7%  
6  Turnitin  50%  7.9%  42.1%  
7  GPT Kit  6%  4.5%  1.5%  
 Average   39.5%  22.2%  17.4%  
Table 8. Accuracy rate as an average of 3 approaches discussed, by AI detectors  
A comparison of the tools showed reductions in accuracy with variations ranging from 1.5% to more than 42% 
when the outputs were subjected to adversarial techniques (mean value 17.4%). Copyleaks was the most accurate 
(58.7%), whereas GPT Kit was the least accurate (4.5%).  
 
Turnitin, one of the most widely used platforms in HEIs, demonstrated the highest drop in accuracy (42.1%) 
when testing the manipulated output. As a result, despite having the second-highest accuracy in baseline testing, 
this detector only ranked 5th place out of the seven AI detectors in terms of accuracy following the application 
of adversarial techniques. 
 
The effectiveness of each technique in reducing the ability of the AI -generated text to be detected is shown in 
Table 9, ranked by the overall percentage drop in accuracy after the application of each technique.  
Ranking Adversarial Technique Accuracy % drop in 
accuracy 
1  
Add Spelling Errors 
(SE)  12.9%  27%  
2  
Increase Burstiness  
(IB)  15.9%  24%  
3  
Paraphrase  
(PR)  18.4%  21%  
4  
Decrease Complexity  
(DC)  21%  19%  
5  
Write as NNES  
(NNES)  27.7%  12%  
6  
Increase Complexity  
(IC)  37%  2%  
Mean 22.1% 17.5% 
Table 9. Accuracy rate as an average of 3 approaches discussed, by adversarial techniques  
Regarding techniques which have a major impact on reducing text detectability, outputs produced with spelling 
errors (12.9%) or higher burstiness (15.9%) were almost undetectable. However, we recognise that an 
examination of many of the samples produced using the SE technique resulted in an output that would be very 
unlikely to be submitted by a student. Although they evaded detection, they would very likely receive poor marks 
in a real -world setting because of the high number of errors. Increasing the complexity of texts was the least 
effective adversarial technique, with only a marginal drop of 2% in the detectability rate. Overall, the application 
of adversarial techniques resulted in a 17.5% drop in accuracy compared to non-manipulated content.   
Error analysis   
Table 10 presents an analysis of the errors produced by AI detectors with a focus on false accusations against 
human-written samples and the proportion of undetected machine-generated samples.  
 
GenAI Detection Tools, Adversarial Techniques and Implications for Inclusivity in Higher Education  
 
 
 
15 
AI Text detector False accusation  Undetected cases  FAS  UDC  
Turnitin 0 88 0% 84% 
GPT Zero 1 58 10% 55% 
Zero GPT 0 77 0% 73% 
Copyleaks 5 41 50% 39% 
Crossplag 3 69 30% 66% 
GPT-2 output 0 81 0% 77% 
GPT Kit 0 89 0% 85% 
Total/Mean 9 414 15% 65.7% 
Table 10: FAS and UDC ratios  
Considerable disparities were observed across detectors in terms of false accusations. However, four of the seven 
detectors did not misclassify any of the human-written samples. Notably, despite detecting the highest proportion 
of manipulated text, Copyleaks possessed the highest likelihood of producing false results, with 50% of human-
generated samples misidentified as AI written. Regarding undetected cases, Table 10 also reveals a major risk to 
academic integrity from the use of adversarial techniques, wi th six out of seven detectors having a UDC ratio 
exceeding 50%, and even the highest-performing tool (Copyleaks) failing to identify 39% of AI-generated cases.  
Comparative Performance of Generative AI tools   
As discussed earlier, the GenAI tools (Bard, Claude 2, GPT -4) chosen to generate the samples and apply 
adversarial techniques possess inherent differences in their capabilities, which stem from the different 
architectures used, and sizes of the training datasets employed. Table 11 highlights s ome noticeable features 
regarding the differences between these tools and their potential impact on how well they were able to reduce 
the detectability of the original samples.   
Adversarial Technique 
Bard  Claude 2  GPT-4  
Accuracy  
% 
reduction  Accuracy  
% 
reduction  Accuracy  
% 
reduction  
Original AI samples  76.9%  -  17.7%  -  23.9%  -  
Add spelling errors (SE)  14.3%  62.6%  7.9%  9.9%  16.5%  7.3%  
Write as NNES (NNES)  16.4%  60.5%  2.2%  15.5%  29.0%  -5.2%  
Decrease complexity (DC)  57.2%  19.7%  14.6%  3.2%  34.9%  -11.0%  
Increase complexity (IC)  50.4%  26.5%  10.8%  6.9%  2.1%  21.7%  
Increase burstiness (IB)  57.7%  19.2%  14.1%  3.6%  11.3%  12.6%  
Paraphrase (PR)  32.4%  44.5%  8.8%  8.9%  13.9%  10.0%  
Mean accuracy reduction  -  38.8%  -  8.0%  -  7.6%  
Table 11. Performance of Generative AI tools  
GenAI Detection Tools, Adversarial Techniques and Implications for Inclusivity in Higher Education  
 
 
 
16 
Overall, we observed that the reduction in detectability was highest when applying adversarial techniques using 
Bard, with a mean reduction in accuracy of 38.8%. Claude 2 and GPT -4 ranked very closely, at 8% and 7.6%, 
respectively. However, this must be co nsidered in light of the high accuracy of the AI detectors in correctly 
identifying the output from Bard in the original AI -generated samples. Therefore, in these cases, adversarial 
techniques had an oversized impact on reducing the detectability of the Ba rd output. It is also notable that the 
three GenAI tools exhibited unique patterns in performance when applying different adversarial attacks. For 
example, outputs from Bard and Claude 2 showed reductions in detectability when all techniques were applied, 
whereas applying certain techniques in GPT-4 resulted in an output that was easier to detect. This suggests that 
the choice of the GenAI tool has an impact in which adversarial techniques might be chosen if reducing the 
detectability of the text is the goal.   
In comparison to Weber-Wulff (2023) et al.’s testing of detection tools, we noted that AI detectors performed 
significantly worse in our study, even with unedited text. In their analysis, all detectors achieved accuracy rates 
of less than 80%, but five scored above 70%. However, in our baseline testing, no detectors achieved such high 
accuracy. Furthermore, while Weber-Wulff et al. (2023) found that Turnitin’s detector was the most accurate, 
our results placed Turnitin at number two, with Copyleaks showing greater accuracy. The application of machine 
translation in their study led to a 20% reduction in accuracy, whereas human manual editing reduced accuracy 
to approximately 50%, and machine translation (paraphrase) reduced the overall accuracy to 26%. Our re sults 
showed similar impacts, with paraphrasing as a technique that reduced accuracy by 21%. In reference to the 
findings of  Elkhatat et al. (2023) and Perkins et al. (2023), we also noted a high degree of variability and low 
consistency when dealing with GPT-4 content. Our findings also corroborate Chaka’s (2023) and Walters’ (2023) 
research, demonstrating that Copyleaks appears to be the most accurate of the current generation of GenAI text 
detectors (despite a high FAS rate), with Turnitin also performi ng relatively well compared to other detectors. 
These results contribute to the body of knowledge about the variable accuracy of these tools and highlight the 
potential for inequity in educational assessments across cohorts if detection software is used.   
Discussion  
Accuracy and vulnerabilities of AI text detectors as a barrier to inclusivity  
In our baseline testing protocol of both non- manipulated AI-generated samples tested alongside the human-
written control samples, we see an initially lower than expected average accuracy rating for the detection of AI-
generated content, coupled with a substantial rate of false accusations in the human -written control samples. 
When the AI -generated samples were subjected to manipulation, significant vuln erabilities in accurately 
detecting text were observed. If the goal of implementing AI detection tools as part of an overall academic 
integrity strategy is to support academic staff in identifying where machine-generated content has been used and 
has not been declared, these inaccuracies may lead to a false sense of security and a broader reduction in 
assessment security. As assessment security is a key component in ensuring inclusive, equitable, and fair 
opportunities for learners, this is problematic. The  varying degrees of reduction in accuracy following the 
application of adversarial techniques also point to the broader issue of inconsistency and unpredictability in the 
current AI detection capabilities. The effectiveness of these techniques varies dramatically across detectors, 
suggesting that the internal algorithms and heuristics of these detectors are tuned differently and react 
distinctively to similar inputs. Therefore, the results even within an institution may differ depending on the tool 
being employed and how it is being used.  
Effectiveness of adversarial techniques 
 
When exploring individual adversarial techniques, we see that relatively simple manipulations of content (such 
as the addition of spelling errors and increases in burstiness) are highly effective in evading detection, 
highlighting the limitations of AI detectors in distinguishing between human-like irregularities in text production 
and actual human writing. The least effective technique, ‘increase complexity’, had a minimal impact on 
GenAI Detection Tools, Adversarial Techniques and Implications for Inclusivity in Higher Education  
 
 
 
17 
detectability, which implies that dense and complex text alone is not a sufficient criterion for AI -generated 
content to pass undetected.   
The results also indicated a significant variance in the detectability of content produced by different GenAI tools, 
with the output from Bard being easier to detect than Claude 2 and GPT -4. This suggests that not all GenAI 
outputs are equally recognisable  by AI detectors, which has implications for their use in educational settings. 
The lower detectability of the content generated by Claude 2 and GPT -4 could make them more appealing to 
those who intend to circumvent academic honesty policies. Claude 2’s superior performance in evading detection 
across all categories suggests that its outputs might align more closely with the nuanced and variable patterns of 
human writing or that it may be better at producing more human-like text in its original outputs. 
 
Implications of adversarial techniques for inclusive education in the age of AI  
The effectiveness of adversarial techniques in decreasing the likelihood of detecting machine- generated text 
raises concerns about both academic integrity and inclusivity. The current ability of GenAI tools to generate 
content that closely resembles human writing poses a significant threat to the fairness and authenticity of 
academic assessment. If students were to use AI tools to produce their academic work using these adversarial 
techniques, this would undermine the educational value and compromise the integrity of the assessment process, 
thereby benefiting some groups of students over others, especially those with access to paid GenAI tools and 
technical and procedural knowledge. Simultaneously, the fact that detectors may pose additional risks to NNESs 
that may produce text with less burstiness suggests that the risks of AI detection outweigh the potential benefits 
by exacerbating the existing inequities in academia. For instance, students with access to advanced AI tools and 
knowledge of adversarial tech niques could gain an unfair advantage over their peers, further widening extant 
digital inequalities and the digital divide (Lutz, 2019).   
The high level of variability between different detectors suggests that if institutions or academics take an 
individualistic approach to using these technologies (e.g. different academic staff at the same university using 
different GenAI detection technologies), the rates of efficacy would vary. Educators therefore need to be 
cognizant of the fact that while we focus on problematising text -detection software from a perspective of 
inclusivity, too much focus on GenAI as an emerging risk to academic integrity (Cotton et al., 2023; Perkins, 
2023) may lead us to forget that that extant threats to inclusivity and educational equity, such as contract cheating 
or ‘traditional’ plagiarism, have not disappeared.   
Error analysis provided insights into the risk of undetected cases and false accusations. With the rate of false 
accusations at 15%, considering the major impact that this could have on student outcomes, we consider this to 
be a major concern for student equity. Although some detectors did not have any false accusations, this appeared 
to come at the cost of a higher UDC ratio, indicating that many instances of AI -generated content could go 
unnoticed, potentially providing an unfair advantage to dishonest st udents who can apply these adversarial 
techniques in a matter of seconds to hide the true source of text. 
 
The use of GenAI text detectors in education  
While GenAI tools have great promise in enhancing academic practices for both students and teachers alike, and 
most publishing houses now permit the transparent use of such tools (Perkins & Roe, 2024a) , there are 
circumstances in which the detection of GenAI texts remains necessary, such as in assessment practices which 
do not allow for the additional use of these tools or in computer -aided examinations. However, the fact that AI 
detection tools can be easily manipulated or bypassed using relatively simple adversarial techniques calls into 
question their viability as tools for maintaining assessment security.   
Overall, our results demonstrate the challenges of current AI text detection tools being able to accurately 
determine whether a given piece of text was created by a human or a GenAI tool. This ability is further reduced 
when adversarial techniques are used to obscure the nature of a sample. If the goal of any given HEI was to use 
AI text detectors solely to determine whether a student has breached academic integrity guidelines, we would 
GenAI Detection Tools, Adversarial Techniques and Implications for Inclusivity in Higher Education  
 
 
 
18 
caution that the accuracy levels we have identified, coupled with the risks inherent in false accusations, means 
that we cannot recommend them for this purpose. This is not because of the demonstrated abilities of any one 
tool tested, as we recognise that developers are continuously updating these tools, and the detection of AI -
generated content when subject to adversarial techniques is likely to improve. However, simultaneously, 
advances are being made in the development of more capable FMs that can produc e more human-like content, 
resulting in a constant arms race between FMs and AI text detectors, with student inclusivity paying the price.  
We believe that there will be a continued adjustment to GenAI-related learning and assessment practices within 
HE, with a move towards more acceptance of GenAI -enabled writing. Despite their shortcomings, AI text 
detectors may be part of a broader process of enabling discussions with students regarding the effective use of 
GenAI tools in academic writing. Students need experience and practice in learning how to work with GenAI 
tools, whether they are text -based or multimodal in nature. Being able to demonst rate to students how GenAI 
text may be integrated with their own writing is a task that these software tools may help with; however, this 
would only be possible if a non-punitive approach was taken to help students understand how GenAI tools can 
be used to support their own learning experiences.  
 
GenAI and the future of inclusive education  
Committing to inclusive methods of teaching, learning, and assessment implies a willingness to critique and 
adjust practices which incorporate new technologies. Similar to blended learning and communities of enquiry 
that contribute to the reorientation of the traditional classroom structure (Hilliard & Stewart, 2019), the presence 
of multiple forms of media on the Internet prompts us to reconsider the reliability and usefulness of source 
materials in the practice of academic argumentation (Radia & Stapleton, 2009). GenAI tools offer an opportunity 
to reconsider the traditional notions of misconduct and the potential barriers and inequities that a punitive 
approach to detection can face, particularly when relying on novel technologies.  
New forms of academic fraud, such as online diploma mills, are growing (Roe & Perkins, 2023), and complex 
cases of fraud, such as contract cheating, continue to create unequal opportunities and outcomes (Curtis & Clare, 
2024; Daly & Ryan, 2024); thus, efforts to promote inclusive forms of participation in higher education cannot 
solely focus on GenAI, as traditional, long- standing issues in equality of assessment have not gone anywhere, 
and some are even increasing.   
Therefore, we need to foster alternative approaches to educational assessment which recognise the growing 
ubiquity of GenAI and account for obstacles to inclusive assessment designs. This requires fundamentally 
rethinking how we assess student learning, moving away from the traditional assessment methods that are easily 
compromised by AI tools. We would recommend that educators consider how GenAI tools can be more deeply 
integrated into learning and assessment so that students gain a deeper understanding of the practical and ethical 
applications of these technologies prior to moving into the workforce. Strategies such as the AI Assessment Scale 
(Perkins, Furze, et al., 2023), where the expected use of AI in any given assessment is clearly stated, could help 
guide educators in adapting assessment practices to align with the AI era, potentially leading to increased student 
outcomes and pedagogical redesign (Furze et al., 2024).   
Limitations  
This study has several methodological limitations that should be considered when interpreting the findings and 
assessing their generalisability, which stem from both the choices made in the experimental design and the 
rapidly evolving nature of the AI landscape investigated.  
First, the scope of our research was restricted to a relatively small number of samples, three GenAI tools, and 
seven AI detectors which do not encompass the entire spectrum of possible writing styles, types of manipulation, 
or available tools to generate and detect samples. The pace at which both GenAI tools and AI text detectors are 
developed and existing ones are updated means that our results are valid only for a specific snapshot in time. 
GenAI Detection Tools, Adversarial Techniques and Implications for Inclusivity in Higher Education  
 
 
 
19 
Therefore, the findings here should be viewed as indicative rather than exhaustive, and subsequent research 
would benefit from a broader evaluation of the currently available detection software, as well as considering how 
some of the newest FMs, such as Claude 3 Opus and Gemini Pro 1.5, perform on these tasks.  
Second, our experimental design did not mirror the iterative process that is likely to occur during the use of 
GenAI-supported academic writing and editing, particularly if there is a deliberate attempt to evade detection. In 
practice, students are likely to apply several of the techniques we have discussed and engage in continuous 
software-aided and manual refinement and adjustments, meaning that the ability of AI text- detection tools to 
detect this type of hybrid text would likely be even lower than demonstrated in the study. Future methodological 
designs should attempt to replicate the iterative nature of writing to provide more accurate assessments of AI 
detectors in academia as opposed to experimental settings.  
Finally, some of the samples generated after applying adversarial techniques for testing may not accurately 
represent the quality of work that students would submit in a real-world setting. Although these samples evaded 
detection by software tools, they are likely to evoke suspicion from human markers because of their poor quality, 
strange phrasing choices, and excessive errors. This was particularly the case for some of the samples generated 
by either Claude 2 or Bard when asked to add spelling errors. Aga in, a broader sample of real-life cases would 
help explore this in more detail.  
Conclusion  
The results of this study revealed that the average accuracy of AI text detectors in identifying non-manipulated 
AI-generated content was 39.5%, with a 67% accuracy rate for human-written control samples. When adversarial 
techniques were applied to the AI -generated samples, the average accuracy of the detectors dropped further to 
22.14%, with some techniques, such as adding spelling errors and increasing burstiness, proving highly effective 
in evading detection. Error analysis also highlighted the risk of f alse accusations and undetected cases. These 
findings underscore the limitations of current AI text-detection tools in accurately determining the authorship of 
a given piece of text, particularly when faced with deliberate attempts to obscure the nature of the sample. 
 
These findings demonstrate that the use of GenAI text -detection software has important ramifications for 
inclusivity, equality, and integrity in the AI era. Such tools are based on the assumption of assuring assessment 
fairness, which is a key principle in inclusive assessment design (Morris et al., 2019) . However, our results 
showed that detectors are highly sensitive to the application of adversarial techniques, which may represent a 
more pragmatic view of how GenAI tools are used in academic writing. The  implications of this are that, first, 
those with technological sensibility and resources, as well as inclination, will be able to disguise GenAI content 
relatively easily for the purpose of misrepresenting authorship. This reduces the equality of assessme nt (or 
publication of research) and thus, advantages some groups over others, acting as a barrier to inclusion. 
Furthermore, the potential for such tools to unfairly penalise students who write at a higher level of perplexity 
(including NNESs or lower-proficiency English speakers) suggests that, at the present time, the use of GenAI 
detection software for the identification of academic misconduct may produce barriers to inclusive assessment, 
rather than reduce them. 
 
  
Declaration of Generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process  
During the preparation of this work, the authors used Claude 3 and GPT-4 to develop draft text, revise wording 
and adjust text throughout the manuscript. After using these tools, the authors reviewed and edited the content 
as needed and take full responsibility for the content of the publication.  
 
 
GenAI Detection Tools, Adversarial Techniques and Implications for Inclusivity in Higher Education  
 
 
 
20 
Acknowledgements  
The authors would like to acknowledge the contributions of Viet Anh Nguyet, who assisted with reviewing the 
literature, providing samples of human written text, and performing tests.  
Data availability statement:  
The data that support the findings of this study are openly available in Mendeley Data 
https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/xv6fk2mmh9/2 (Perkins et al., 2024)
 
Declaration of interest:   
The authors have no relevant financial or non-financial interests to disclose.  
  
GenAI Detection Tools, Adversarial Techniques and Implications for Inclusivity in Higher Education  
 
 
 
21 
References 
Abd-Elaal, E.-S., Gamage, S. H., & Mills, J. E. (2022). Assisting academics to identify computer generated 
writing. European Journal of Engineering Education, 1–21. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/03043797.2022.2046709  
Adamson, D. (2023, October 26). New research: Turnitin’s AI detector shows no statistically significant bias 
against English Language Learners. https://www.turnitin.com/blog/new-research-turnitin-s-ai-
detector-shows-no-statistically-significant-bias-against-english-language-learners  
Alsmadi, I., Ahmad, K., Nazzal, M., Alam, F., Al-Fuqaha, A., Khreishah, A., & Algosaibi, A. (2021). 
Adversarial Attacks and Defenses for Social Network Text Processing Applications: Techniques, 
Challenges and Future Research Directions (arXiv:2110.13980). arXiv. 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2110.13980  
Amano, T., Ramírez-Castañeda, V., Berdejo-Espinola, V., Borokini, I., Chowdhury, S., Golivets, M., 
González-Trujillo, J. D., Montaño-Centellas, F., Paudel, K., White, R. L., & Veríssimo, D. (2023). 
The manifold costs of being a non-native English speaker in science. PLOS Biology, 21(7). 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3002184  
Anderson, N., Belavy, D. L., Perle, S. M., Hendricks, S., Hespanhol, L., Verhagen, E., & Memon, A. R. 
(2023). AI did not write this manuscript, or did it? Can we trick the AI text detector into generated 
texts? The potential future of ChatGPT and AI in Sports &amp; Exercise Medicine manuscript 
generation. BMJ Open Sport & Exercise Medicine, 9(1), e001568. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjsem-
2023-001568  
Bedington, A., Halcomb, E. F., McKee, H. A., Sargent, T., & Smith, A. (2024). Writing with generative AI 
and human-machine teaming: Insights and recommendations from faculty and students. Computers 
and Composition, 71, 102833. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compcom.2024.102833  
Bissessar, C. (2023). To use or not to use ChatGPT and assistive artificial intelligence tools in higher education 
institutions? The modern-day conundrum – students’ and faculty’s perspectives. Equity in Education 
& Society, 27526461231215083. https://doi.org/10.1177/27526461231215083  
Borji, A., & Mohammadian, M. (2023). Battle of the Wordsmiths: Comparing ChatGPT, GPT-4, Claude, and 
Bard (SSRN Scholarly Paper 4476855). https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4476855  
Chaka, C. (2023a). Detecting AI content in responses generated by ChatGPT, YouChat, and Chatsonic: The 
case of five AI content detection tools. Journal of Applied Learning and Teaching, 6(2), Article 2. 
https://doi.org/10.37074/jalt.2023.6.2.12  
Chaka, C. (2023b). Generative AI Chatbots - ChatGPT versus YouChat versus Chatsonic: Use Cases of 
Selected Areas of Applied English Language Studies. International Journal of Learning, Teaching and 
Educational Research, 22(6), Article 6. https://ijlter.org/index.php/ijlter/article/view/7524  
Chan, C. K. Y. (2023). A comprehensive AI policy education framework for university teaching and learning. 
International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education, 20(38). 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s41239-023-00408-3  
Chang, Y., Wang, X., Wang, J., Wu, Y., Yang, L., Zhu, K., Chen, H., Yi, X., Wang, C., Wang, Y., Ye, W., 
Zhang, Y., Chang, Y., Yu, P. S., Yang, Q., & Xie, X. (2023). A Survey on Evaluation of Large 
Language Models (arXiv:2307.03109). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2307.03109  
Copyleaks.com. (n.d.). AI-Based Plagiarism & AI Content Detection. Copyleaks. Retrieved 3 March 2024, 
from https://copyleaks.com/  
Cotton, D. R. E., Cotton, P. A., & Shipway, J. R. (2023). Chatting and cheating: Ensuring academic integrity 
in the era of ChatGPT. Innovations in Education and Teaching International, 1–12. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/14703297.2023.2190148  
GenAI Detection Tools, Adversarial Techniques and Implications for Inclusivity in Higher Education  
 
 
 
22 
Crossplag.com. (n.d.). The only cross-lingual plagiarism checker—Crossplag. Retrieved 3 March 2024, from 
https://crossplag.com/  
Curtis, G. J., & Clare, J. (2024). Prevalence, Incidence, and Rates of Contract Cheating. In S. E. Eaton (Ed.), 
Second Handbook of Academic Integrity (pp. 681–696). Springer Nature Switzerland. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-54144-5_110  
Daly, T. M., & Ryan, J. C. (2024). University ‘Pay-for-grades’: The bait and switch search engine optimization 
strategies of contract cheating websites in the United States. International Journal for Educational 
Integrity, 20(1), 1. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40979-023-00148-x  
Elali, F. R., & Rachid, L. N. (2023). AI-generated research paper fabrication and plagiarism in the scientific 
community. Patterns, 4(3), 100706. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patter.2023.100706  
Elkhatat, A. M., Elsaid, K., & Almeer, S. (2023). Evaluating the efficacy of AI content detection tools in 
differentiating between human and AI-generated text. International Journal for Educational Integrity, 
19(1), 17. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40979-023-00140-5  
Foltynek, T., Bjelobaba, S., Glendinning, I., Khan, Z. R., Santos, R., Pavletic, P., & Kravjar, J. (2023). ENAI 
Recommendations on the ethical use of Artificial Intelligence in Education. International Journal for 
Educational Integrity, 19(12). https://doi.org/10.1007/s40979-023-00133-4  
Fröhling, L., & Zubiaga, A. (2021). Feature-based detection of automated language models: Tackling GPT-2, 
GPT-3 and Grover. PeerJ Computer Science, 7, e443. https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj-cs.443  
Fu, Q.-K., Zou, D., Xie, H., & Cheng, G. (2022). A review of AWE feedback: Types, learning outcomes, and 
implications. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 0(0), 1–43. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2022.2033787  
Furze, L., Perkins, M., Roe, J., & MacVaugh, J. (2024). The AI Assessment Scale (AIAS) in action: A pilot 
implementation of GenAI supported assessment (arXiv:2403.14692). arXiv. 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2403.14692  
Gao, C. A., Howard, F. M., Markov, N. S., Dyer, E. C., Ramesh, S., Luo, Y., & Pearson, A. T. (2022). 
Comparing scientific abstracts generated by ChatGPT to original abstracts using an artificial 
intelligence output detector, plagiarism detector, and blinded human reviewers (p. 
2022.12.23.521610). bioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.521610  
GPTKit.com. (n.d.). GPTKit—AI Generated Text Detector Tool for Chat GPT. GPTKit - Highly Accurate 
Detection of GPT Generated Text. Retrieved 3 March 2024, from https://gptkit.ai  
GPTZero. (n.d.). GPTZero FAQ. Retrieved 28 May 2023, from https://app.gptzero.me/app/faq  
Hilliard, L. P., & Stewart, M. K. (2019). Time well spent: Creating a community of inquiry in blended first-
year writing courses. The Internet and Higher Education, 41, 11–24. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iheduc.2018.11.002  
Ippolito, D., Duckworth, D., Callison-Burch, C., & Eck, D. (2020). Automatic Detection of Generated Text is 
Easiest when Humans are Fooled (arXiv:1911.00650). arXiv. 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1911.00650  
Krishna, K., Song, Y., Karpinska, M., Wieting, J., & Iyyer, M. (2023). Paraphrasing evades detectors of AI-
generated text, but retrieval is an effective defense (arXiv:2303.13408). arXiv. 
http://arxiv.org/abs/2303.13408  
Lancaster, T. (2023). Artificial intelligence, text generation tools and ChatGPT – does digital watermarking 
offer a solution? International Journal for Educational Integrity, 19(1), Article 1. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40979-023-00131-6  
Liang, W., Yuksekgonul, M., Mao, Y., Wu, E., & Zou, J. (2023). GPT detectors are biased against non-native 
English writers (arXiv:2304.02819). arXiv. http://arxiv.org/abs/2304.02819  
GenAI Detection Tools, Adversarial Techniques and Implications for Inclusivity in Higher Education  
 
 
 
23 
Lin, Y.-T., & Chen, Y.-N. (2023). LLM-Eval: Unified Multi-Dimensional Automatic Evaluation for Open-
Domain Conversations with Large Language Models (arXiv:2305.13711). arXiv. 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2305.13711  
Lozić, E., & Štular, B. (2023). Fluent but Not Factual: A Comparative Analysis of ChatGPT and Other AI 
Chatbots’ Proficiency and Originality in Scientific Writing for Humanities. Future Internet, 15(10), 
Article 10. https://doi.org/10.3390/fi15100336  
Lutz, C. (2019). Digital inequalities in the age of artificial intelligence and big data. Human Behavior and 
Emerging Technologies, 1(2), 141–148. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbe2.140  
Manyika, J., & Bughin, J. (2019, October 14). The coming of AI Spring. 
https://www.mckinsey.com/mgi/overview/in-the-news/the-coming-of-ai-spring  
Miao, F., & Holmes, W. (2023). Guidance for generative AI in education and research. UNESCO: United 
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation. 
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000386693  
Mitchell, E., Lee, Y., Khazatsky, A., Manning, C. D., & Finn, C. (2023). DetectGPT: Zero-Shot Machine-
Generated Text Detection using Probability Curvature (arXiv:2301.11305). arXiv. 
http://arxiv.org/abs/2301.11305  
Morris, C., Milton, E., & Goldstone, R. (2019). Case study: Suggesting choice: inclusive assessment processes. 
Higher Education Pedagogies, 4(1), 435–447. https://doi.org/10.1080/23752696.2019.1669479  
OpenAI. (n.d.). GPT-2 Output Detector. Retrieved 3 March 2024, from https://openai-openai-
detector.hf.space/  
OpenAI. (2023, January 31). New AI classifier for indicating AI-written text. https://openai.com/blog/new-ai-
classifier-for-indicating-ai-written-text  
Orenstrakh, M. S., Karnalim, O., Suarez, C. A., & Liut, M. (2023). Detecting LLM-Generated Text in 
Computing Education: A Comparative Study for ChatGPT Cases (arXiv:2307.07411). arXiv. 
http://arxiv.org/abs/2307.07411  
Originality.AI. (2023). AI Content Detector Accuracy Review + Open Source Dataset and Research Tool – 
Originality.AI. https://originality.ai  
Paraphrasing Tool—QuillBot AI. (n.d.). Retrieved 3 March 2024, from https://quillbot.com  
Perkins, M. (2023). Academic Integrity considerations of AI Large Language Models in the post-pandemic 
era: ChatGPT and beyond. Journal of University Teaching & Learning Practice, 20(2). 
https://doi.org/10.53761/1.20.02.07  
Perkins, M., Furze, L., Roe, J., & MacVaugh, J. (2023). Navigating the generative AI era: Introducing the AI 
assessment scale for ethical GenAI assessment (arXiv:2312.07086). arXiv. 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2312.07086  
Perkins, M., & Roe, J. (2024a). Academic publisher guidelines on AI usage: A ChatGPT supported thematic 
analysis [version 2; peer review: 3 approved, 1 approved with reservations]. In F1000Research (Vol. 
12, Issue 1398). https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.142411.2  
Perkins, M., & Roe, J. (2024b). The use of Generative AI in qualitative analysis: Inductive thematic analysis 
with ChatGPT. Journal of Applied Learning and Teaching, 7(1), Article 1. 
https://doi.org/10.37074/jalt.2024.7.1.22  
Perkins, M., Roe, J., Postma, D., McGaughran, J., & Hickerson, D. (2023). Detection of GPT-4 Generated 
Text in Higher Education: Combining Academic Judgement and Software to Identify Generative AI 
Tool Misuse. Journal of Academic Ethics. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10805-023-09492-6  
Perkins, M., Roe, J., Vu, H. B., Postma, D., Hickerson, D., McGaughran, J., & Khuat, Q. H. (2024). Data files: 
GenAI Detection Tools, Adversarial Techniques and Implications for Inclusivity in Higher Education 
[dataset]. Mendeley Data. https://doi.org/10.17632/xv6fk2mmh9.2  
GenAI Detection Tools, Adversarial Techniques and Implications for Inclusivity in Higher Education  
 
 
 
24 
Qiu, S., Liu, Q., Zhou, S., & Wu, C. (2019). Review of Artificial Intelligence Adversarial Attack and Defense 
Technologies. Applied Sciences, 9(5), Article 5. https://doi.org/10.3390/app9050909  
Radia, P., & Stapleton, P. (2009). Unconventional sources as a new convention: The shifting paradigm of 
undergraduate writing. The Internet and Higher Education, 12(3), 156–164. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iheduc.2009.05.002  
Roe, J., & Perkins, M. (2022). What are Automated Paraphrasing Tools and how do we address them? A 
review of a growing threat to academic integrity. International Journal for Educational Integrity, 
18(1), Article 1. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40979-022-00109-w  
Roe, J., & Perkins, M. (2023). Welcome to the University of life, can I take your order? Investigating Life 
Experience Degree Offerings in Diploma mills. International Journal for Educational Integrity, Article 
1. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40979-023-00138-z  
Rogerson, A. M., & McCarthy, G. (2017). Using Internet based paraphrasing tools: Original work, 
patchwriting or facilitated plagiarism? International Journal for Educational Integrity, 13(1), 2. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40979-016-0013-y  
Sadasivan, V. S., Kumar, A., Balasubramanian, S., Wang, W., & Feizi, S. (2023). Can AI-Generated Text be 
Reliably Detected? (arXiv:2303.11156). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.11156  
Sobaih, A. E. (2024). Ethical concerns for using artificial intelligence chatbots in research and publication: 
Evidences from Saudi Arabia. Journal of Applied Learning and Teaching, 7(1), Article 1. 
https://doi.org/10.37074/jalt.2024.7.1.21  
Solaiman, I., Brundage, M., Clark, J., Askell, A., Herbert-Voss, A., Wu, J., Radford, A., Krueger, G., Kim, J. 
W., Kreps, S., McCain, M., Newhouse, A., Blazakis, J., McGuffie, K., & Wang, J. (2019). Release 
Strategies and the Social Impacts of Language Models (arXiv:1908.09203). arXiv. 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1908.09203  
Sweenor, D., & Ramanathan, K. (2023). The CIO’s Guide to Adopting Generative AI: Five Keys to Success. 
TinyTechMedia LLC.  
Tian, E. (2023, October 25). ESL Bias in AI Detection is an Outdated Narrative. GPTZero. 
https://gptzero.me/news/esl-and-ai-detection  
Tian, E., & Cui, A. (2023). GPTZero | The Trusted AI Detector for ChatGPT, GPT-4, & More. GPTZero. 
https://gptzero.me/  
Turnitin. (2023). AI Writing Detection. https://help.turnitin.com/ai-writing-detection.htm  
Turnitin.com. (2023, April 4). The launch of Turnitin’s AI writing detector and the road ahead. 
https://www.turnitin.com/blog/the-launch-of-turnitins-ai-writing-detector-and-the-road-ahead  
Walters, W. H. (2023). The Effectiveness of Software Designed to Detect AI-Generated Writing: A 
Comparison of 16 AI Text Detectors. Open Information Science, 7(1). https://doi.org/10.1515/opis-
2022-0158  
Wang, W., Wang, R., Wang, L., Wang, Z., & Ye, A. (2023). Towards a Robust Deep Neural Network Against 
Adversarial Texts: A Survey. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 35(3), 3159–
3179. https://doi.org/10.1109/TKDE.2021.3117608  
Weber-Wulff, D., Anohina-Naumeca, A., Bjelobaba, S., Foltýnek, T., Guerrero-Dib, J., Popoola, O., Šigut, P., 
& Waddington, L. (2023). Testing of detection tools for AI-generated text. International Journal for 
Educational Integrity, 19(1), Article 1. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40979-023-00146-z  
Wu, T., Jiang, E., Donsbach, A., Gray, J., Molina, A., Terry, M., & Cai, C. J. (2022). PromptChainer: Chaining 
Large Language Model Prompts through Visual Programming. Extended Abstracts of the 2022 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 1–10. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3491101.3519729  
GenAI Detection Tools, Adversarial Techniques and Implications for Inclusivity in Higher Education  
 
 
 
25 
Wu, Z., Qiu, L., Ross, A., Akyürek, E., Chen, B., Wang, B., Kim, N., Andreas, J., & Kim, Y. (2023). 
Reasoning or Reciting? Exploring the Capabilities and Limitations of Language Models Through 
Counterfactual Tasks (arXiv:2307.02477). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2307.02477  
ZeroGPT.com. (n.d.). AI Detector—Trusted AI Checker for ChatGPT, GPT4 & Bard. Retrieved 3 March 
2024, from https://www.zerogpt.com/  
  
 