©2020 Wizards of the Coast LLC. Confidential information. Do not distribute. 1 
D&D STANDARDS 
The following standards apply to D&D products created by 
Wizards and its partners. These standards are based on a 
review of existing policies as well as standards used to 
determine ratings in other media, such as television and 
film. These standards can apply to text, art, or both. 
 Abortion and Pregnancy. Don’t depict abortions or put 
pregnant women in danger. 
 Abuse. Don’t depict the abuse or torture of animals, 
children, or defenseless adults. 
 Glamorization of Evil. Don’t glamorize evil actions and 
ideologies. Villains can be sympathetic, but their evil 
should be called out as awful and wrong. Avoid depicting 
evil heroes. 
 Iconic Characters. Don’t alter iconic D&D characters 
without approval. Examples of such characters include 
Drizzt Do’Urden and Kitiara Majere. 
 Likenesses. Don’t use likenesses of real people, living or 
dead, famous or otherwise. 
 Nudity. It’s okay to show bare skin, but it must be 
tasteful. Avoid gratuitous nudity and objectification. 
 Other Brands & IPs. Don’t coopt proprietary content 
from other brands and intellectual properties. 
 Photographs. Don’t incorporate photographs into your 
art unless those photos are yours. Nothing in your work 
must be recognizably another person’s property. 
 Plagiarism. Don’t plagiarize other people’s work. Give 
credit where credit is due. 
 Profanity. Don’t use profanity. 
 Rape and Incest. Don’t depict rape, and avoid themes of 
rape and incest. 
 Sexual Acts. Don’t depict individuals or creatures 
having sex. 
 Stereotypes. Avoid stereotypes. Don’t attach specific 
traits or attributes to all members of a particular people, 
culture, religion, or sexuality. 
 Substance Abuse. Don’t glamorize substance abuse. 
 Real-World Symbols. Don’t use symbols that represent 
real-world religions, organizations, or movements. That 
includes real-world religious costumes, peace signs, 
pentagrams, and hate symbols. 
 Religion. Don’t use real-world religions as analogs for 
evil religions in D&D. 
 Tokenism. Avoid tokenism. It’s good to depict 
characters of different origins, ages, genders, body types, 
and sexualities, but give them the equal weight they 
deserve. Don’t confine representatives of a marginalized 
people to marginal roles. 
 Violence and Gore. It’s okay to depict gore or scenes of 
violence, but avoid excessive gore and gratuitous violence. 
Don’t portray cannibalism in a positive light. 
D&D’S “RATING” 
D&D is, for the most part, a G-rated game. When it deals with 
mature themes or features scenes of graphic violence, it slides 
toward being a PG-rated experience. However, PG-rated content 
allows things we normally don’t, such as nudity and profanity. 
 D&D products can violate certain standards, but not without 
approval. The Rick & Morty boxed set, which contains profanity 
and glamorizes substance abuse, is an example of just such a 
product. It is rated PG-13. 