Never pretend we are anything but what we are. Assassins, not merciful agents of a wise king. Political assassins dealing death for the furtherance of our monarchy. That is what we are. Fitz. A word that means bastard. Now a name to identify a boy. A boy that has been cast out but is not free. A word that is an insult that everyone treats a kindness. But beneath this name, beneath this title, there is a boy. Who is this boy? Does he even know himself? Hey everyone, welcome back to another review, the book podcast. For today's episode, I will be doing Robin Hobbs Assassin's Apprentice, which is a great book. Kicking 2026 off, kicking the fantasy for 2026 off with this series, the Far Sea trilogy. I'll be doing the other two books in February and March. Of course, I'm only talking about Assassin's Apprentice today. and it was a fantastic little book. I don't know why I came to it. I just kind of picked it up one day and decided to read it and and here we are and I'm really glad I did. It's reminded me it's very reminiscent of a series I did the exact same time last year actually, the Gorman series by MV and Peak. It feels quite similar and I think that's because both series largely take place within this huge wonderful castle and steel a lot with kind of the petty political minations of of court intrigue or just royal intrigue or you know however you want to define it just daily intrigue. Uh and yeah, it felt very reminiscent of that which was very cool because I absolutely loved uh that series. I did episodes on that. Go watch them if you're interested. But this is very very different for a number of reasons and wonderful and fresh and really interesting and I had a fantastic time doing them. So or just doing this one so far because this is the only one I've read. But I'm assuming by how it's spoken about that uh yeah all the books are going to be really really good. And it's one of those really annoying things that I think I love and hate about fantasy is that uh I started this book I was about halfway through. I knew there was a trilogy and then I found out I think there's 16 books total that round out the kind of uh the entire compendium of of books dealing with this world. And the reason it's annoying is because so far this book was fantastic. And I can only assume the way people people speak about them that all the books are fantastic. And yeah, it's one of those wonderfully annoying things about fantasy is that that means I've now got to read another 15 books. I don't have to do them right now. Of course, I'll finish the trilogy and probably take breaks, but yeah, just one of those things where you're like, "Oh, no. 16 books. There we go. We're we're we're locked in now." Um, so one of the wonderfully annoying things about fantasy is that there are a lot of books to get through and I keep coming across different fantasy series. I'm like in the middle of six different fantasy series at the moment, and it's a lot. It's a lot. I absolutely love it, but it is a lot, but I love it. So, let's get into it. Plot overview and reading the book. It's a relatively simple, straightforward story, but there is a lot that goes on. Fitz is the character that we follow. It's a very character-driven story. Fitz is this bastard. As I said, his father was the king in waiting, but after he fathered a bastard, he abdicates the throne and his parents die. Fitz's parents die. So Fitz is alone in the world. He kind of balances in this kind of limbo between two lives where he's sort of recognized as a commoner. you know, he associates and grows up a lot with the common folk of of Buckkeep of the kingdom, but he's also a bastard of the previous king and waiting. So, he does have uh I guess royal ties, monarch ties, and he is kept kind of close. Even though he can't inherit the throne or inherit power, he is still seen as kind of a threat in a sense because he does have royal blood within him despite the fact that he is a bastard. So, he's kind of kept in these two different worlds. he doesn't understand or can't quite make sense why he's kept in two worlds. Uh and I'll get into that in a bit. And then within the story, he is trained as an assassin to fulfill the wishes of his king. Uh and as I said or as I read in that quote, you know, they they just kill for the king uh for whatever is needed for the furtherance of the monarchy. So that is the story of of Fitz. Now this is a very very character-driven book. This is a very character heavy book. It is incredibly dense and that is not a criticism at all. I actually really really loved it. I think it just kind of took me by surprise a bit because I picked up this book and was like, "Oh, it's 380 pages. I'm going to be able to smash this in a few solid days of reading." It's kind of one I picked up over the Christmas New Year's period thinking I was going to really sink my teeth into it. And as I started to read it, I was like, "Oh, wow. It's actually a lot denser than I thought." And that's something I I absolutely love. And it's kind of these slow these slow character-driven stories that I'm really finding I'm drawn to at the moment. And I don't know if this is just a a consequence of age that I'm not as interested or not as taken with big flashy sequences anymore or maybe I'm just oversaturated with those in other aspects of my life. you know, marvelization of of films that I'm really drawn to these character-driven stories. But it was a wonderful surprise to come to it and and to read it and to really enjoy it because it is a book that you really have to sink your teeth into. I don't think it's one you can really just read a couple pages at a time when you have a spare five minutes. It's one you really want to have like some solid time put aside and and sink your teeth into it. And it got me thinking about this question of uh could it be published in today's market if Robin Hobb was an unestablished author? And I the question kind of popped up in my mind because I'm in this writing group and one of the women there writes uh youth youth fiction young adult fiction and she was saying how in today's current climate and today's current market of you know this was 2025 uh Harry Potter and the Philosopher Stone wouldn't be published under how or structurally how it is presented today. And she said the reason for this is because the first half of the book doesn't really do much. It's quite slow to build up and it is, you know, not a lot happens in the in the first half of the book. Now, I think a lot of us that listen to that sort of recoiled a bit because we'd all grown up with Harry Potter and sort of had it uh in our faces a lot in a in a nice way and have this kind of emotional attachment to it that the first half of the book, even though not a lot happens, it does still fight quite it does feel quite charming to us. And so, there was kind of that knee-jerk reaction of what? How could you possibly cut it? But in a sense, it's kind of right. It is, you know, quite a slow book to get started. And yeah, it's one of those things where, you know, you need to now open another person in the writing group hates this, but you need to now open with, you know, films and books with, you know, the big explosion, the the flashy sequence and then cut to two days previously. And it's kind of like you need to just hook people instantly that it kind of I guess would be killing off stories like Assassin's Apprentice or and possibly Harry Potter where it is slow, where it is character-driven, where it takes a few chapters to get into it because a lot of people don't have the time or maybe the attention to to wait around for these kind of moments to build up into something. And I think it's something that I'm now I don't know if it's a reaction to that kind of state of the the the cultural sphere that I'm now being more drawn to these slower character-driven stories or if it's just something that happens naturally as you grow up and you understand not everything needs to be big and flashy right from the get-go. But I don't know that would just my my incoherent ramblings just then about the the structure of the story I guess and the state of the the the current uh cultural climate. that I did thoroughly enjoy that this was a very slow and character-driven novel because it is nice to trace uh a character and especially a character like Fitz that is faced with so much. So let's get into the story itself. The magic systems so far the wit and the skill are the two magic systems that uh you come across in this book. I don't know if there's going to be more. There might be. I'm not sure. But there is currently just the wit and the skill. And when it comes to the wit, I would say this was probably my only real gripe with the book is that I felt it was a bit unexplained as to what the wit really is. So I should explain it now actually before I continue. It seems to be the wit is this connection with animals and it's this inherent thing that you have no control over in terms of it's within you. It's something you can, I guess, train and work on, but it's not something you can just develop from thin air. It's it's it's sort of something that's within you from your birth, I imagine. And it's this connection with animals. And it's perceived as this, well, I should say Fitz has this this this wit. And at the start, I was kind of like, oh, that's kind of cool. He gets to talk to to to animals. It reminds me of uh Eliza Thornbury, you know, she gets to talk to to animals, that old TV show. And I was kind of like, that's cool. But he's immediately shamed for it by one of his mentors, Burick. And Burick sort of is really disgusted by it. And I think Robin Hobb maybe could have done a better job about explaining what the wid is and why it is kind of viewed as this dark magic, this disgusting magic, this really repellent magic that people have. Because from my position, I was like, "Oh, this is very cool. I I'd love to be able to chat to animals. I I don't see an issue with this." So, I think that was probably my only gripe is that I don't think that was fleshed out enough to explain why I should be recoiling at this this this magic system, this wit because yeah, I didn't really understand it. I'm I'm beginning to understand it a bit better now. I'm starting to see what it can do and the effects of it, but I think in the moment it just needed a few lines to just explain that it is this this bad thing. The skill, on the other hand, I mean, they both seem cool. The skill also seems cool. is it seems to be this ability to manipulate people uh sort of within their minds an almost form of tele tele telepathy it's not just necessarily manipulating I shouldn't have said that you can also communicate with people but it seems to be this almost like oculmancy from Harry Potter versus or tag teams with inception in that you can manipulate people and it's this way that people can communicate with each other through the skill over vast uh physical distances they and skill to each other and have sort of unconscious conversations within their minds. But within the skill, if someone's not trained in the skill, you can then use your skill to infiltrate someone's mind and sort of slowly manipulate to do things. And it's a it just sounds like this wonderful thing as well. And so Fitz is trained up in that as well, though he doesn't do too well. So they are the two sort of magic systems that are present at the moment. I'm not sure if there's going to be an unfurling, there's going to be a revealing of more magic systems, but at this stage, I think I really enjoy the fact that magic isn't playing. It plays a huge part in the story, but it's not a huge defining factor of the story. It does feel to be more uh this character-driven sort of gritty political uh monarchical monarchy thriller, the petty political minations of court life. It seems to be this really sort of story that does feel quite rooted in in the fundamentals of of the human experience, which I really really enjoy. So, not that there's anything wrong with large and vast magical systems. And if one does appear, I'm not going to be angry about that. But I think I did really like the fact that it did feel to be more character-driven and a bit more gritty and not relying on on the magic, which a lot of fantasies do, which is again, as I say, absolutely fine. This brings me to a question I found asking myself is Fitz a reliable narrator. Now, it's an interesting question because I don't think he's an unreliable narrator in the traditional sense of I don't think he's necessarily directly trying to mislead us as the reader. Not in that sense, but more that he is never free to make his own choices and he's very dutifully bound to his king and the monarch. He's very eager to please and he's very happy to, I guess, sign his life away and be bound by a kind of code of conduct or this honor. And so I found myself wondering at times, are you saying what you actually think or are you kind of censoring it for us, the reader, because this is the warped worldview that you now have as a result of your situation? And it just kind of got me thinking, does that make him an unreliable narrator in some sense? I don't I I don't know. I don't It's something I think I'm going to pay attention to the more I read the books. But I think he is definitely a child of abuse. You know, he's placed in very difficult situations. He is shunned by the court, but not free to be a child. As I said, he is indoctrinated into being a political assassin, and that is just an insane kind of thing to happen to a child that they just are trained to be an assassin. and fulfill the wishes of the king. And it's this taking advantage of the fact that they have isolated him and they know that he is essentially alone that they're taking advantage of it and putting him in a position where he is eager to please. He is willing to please. He does want to please. He is groomed into this position that murders people for good. And it's kind of raising all these kinds of questions about morals and ethics. And that's why it started with that opening paragraph from from his mentor Chade that says, you know, don't get it twisted. we're not good, we're not bad, we're just doing this to further the monarchy and that's that's it. This isn't like some good thing. And it kind of blurs the lines because it it's on one hand creating this idea that my king wants it, so therefore it's good. And that's what I mean about he's got this honor to sort of please and he's got this desire to please. Then you've got Chade being like, well actually we're just doing it to stay alive. like we're doing it to save and further the monarchy because at this state of the the current sphere of the world, we think the monarchy is the best place to be and that's what we want to keep going. So yeah, is he an unreliable narrator? Not in the traditional sense, but I think he is withholding or at least censoring certain world views for us because that's how he is. He's been indoctrinated into this into this way of life. And it made me realize something. Fitz is very much alone in the world. He is just kept alone. He is kept isolated. Like I said, he is shunned for things he cannot control. He is shunned for the fact that he is a bastard, which he had no say in. He is shunned for the fact that he has the wit, which he has no say in. He is denied the freedoms of a child, whether that be a royal child or a child that is not royally uh chained. You know, he's not allowed to completely be free and off with the the plebs in the in the commoners. uh he's denied the respect of nobility. He is kind of chained as this political porn. And this isolation that Fitz feels only deepens as he becomes this assassin because because he's an assassin, he's not allowed to reveal the fact that he's an assassin. Not a very good assassin if everyone knows you're an assassin. So he's he can't take honor from his tasks. He can't take honor from the job that he's doing, the the task that he's doing, this self-sacrifice that he has to endure. You know, you have to sacrifice. Well, I assume you do. You have to sacrifice some kind of moral dignity to kill someone. I've never killed someone, so I don't know, but I'm just assuming you do. So, he kind of has to sacrifice this this this part of him, this level of humanity within him for this thankless task in this court that doesn't respect him. and it's just he is just so alone in the world and it is such a depressing position and I think what makes it more depressing is reading this from the perspective of of us as the as the reader uh because I don't think Fitz really realizes it and it's going to be something I think to watch in the following two books as he grows up and starts to understand the world in in in better context in a greater light how he then starts to interact with these tasks that he's been made to do or the the jobs and the way he's treated as a result of these jobs. I think it will hopefully develop and and will be something to watch. But it is something I think because he's young and impressionable, he just happily does it and he's so eager to please because he wants some kind of respect in his life. He wants some father figures. He wants he wants something in his life, but he doesn't know what that is because he's never been given any opportunity to do something. And so when he is given the opportunity, he leaps upon it and he's very get pleased. So yeah, I think it's it's it's it's tough to read because he doesn't realize he's being abused and we know he's being abused. So yeah, like I said, tough to read. I think it will be interesting how it develops, but I read this thing that Robin Hob hates all their characters and that made me laugh. Uh because they are definitely mistreated. Whether Robin Hobb hated them, I I don't know. But yeah, Fitz has a glass ceiling and I think it'll be interesting when he starts to realize it properly. The power, dynamics, and the drama. This was I think one of the shining lights of the book for me is the existential threat versus the daily drama that goes on. And it just makes me laugh because yeah, we as human beings are dramatic people. Uh so the the what I mean by this the d the power dynamics the existential threat versus the daily drama is there's the red ship raiders and they're these kind of elusive uh people race of people that keep uh attacking the the six duchies most importantly the coastal duchies because they come on red ships and they attack them and they kill them and there doesn't seem to really be a motive for it other than the fact that they want to kill rape pillage plunder whatever. uh and they just are doing it at will and the the kingdoms are really struggling with this but it's at the coastal six duchy so it's a little bit far off so it hasn't really penetrated the inland duchies yet the inland kingdoms yet but it is this very very real threat assailing the kingdoms and I really love how and if they were explained I I completely missed it but I really love how they're kept quite spectral they're kept quite elusive they're kept very much any kind of definition of them is kept quite periphery, so you never have like a really solid understanding of who they are or what they are or what they want, what they embody, all these kinds of things that keeps them really kind of spectral. And I really enjoy that because it just allows you to create this kind of ethereal uh definition of them, which I think is kind of the point because they are then this existential threat that's far away that you can't really put your finger on. You can't really define them. And because they're far off and distant for this kingdom, they don't seem as important despite the fact that they are a very real threat. And this is wonderfully contrasted against the daily drama of of of the court life. And it just makes me laugh because it's kind of like yes, even in our world, there are very real everyday threats, existential threats assailing us constantly, but then sort of when they're far off or they're not affecting us directly, we kind of forget about them and we just get caught up in the own kind of nonsense of, oh, that person didn't respond to my email fast enough or some some kind of like nonsensical office drama that we let then define and and dominate our lives. So, I kind of loved all the the con the contrasting political minations because it did, even though they're very serious and the court drama is also trying to kill people, you know, like Bits is a trained assassin for this reason to to kill people, it does for me have this comical edge to it because it's like, guys, there's these red ship raiders over there and they pose a very real threat. But humor aside, I think it does actually also provide some wonderful commentary on the nature of, you know, or or the proximity, the nature of threats and the proximity of them to our own lives and how when something is far off, when something is distant, when something is out of sort of like our direct uh vision, how we can kind of forget about it and we kind of forget that it is very important. And you know, the king, King Shrewd, is working with his son, the new king, and waiting to to keep these red ship raiders at bay. They spend a lot of their energy to keep these ships away. They use their skill power a lot to divert the ships or to crash the ships into the rocks. And people at court don't see that because the ships never make it to their ey line. And because they don't see it, they don't understand what's really going on. They think their king is just kind of like absent. And because they think they're king's absence, there's a gaping hole in their lives. And what can you fill in that hole? Rumor and court intrigue and all these kind of things that then start to undermine uh the the kingdom, the monarchy. And I think it's just it's something a friend of mine and me explored or spoke about in a tutorial once at university. And it was it was kind of like this idea of drama and the nature of drama and how we are constantly as humans just in love with drama. And our example was Titanic the film because even though the ship is sinking in the second half of the film and even though everyone is looking down the barrel of drowning or you know dying on this ship, there's still like this other threat going on. This guy's like trying to kill Leah, like chain him up and kill him for sleeping with his wife. And it's kind of like, dude, are you aware that like the ship is sinking right now and you're still trying to kill someone that's probably going to die anyway? Like, do something else. But we kind of love it. Like the drama of everyone dying isn't enough for us. We also have to have this extra layer of added drama of then Leo trying to be killed individually that really kind of adds to the story. So, it's just kind of like the existential threat of the raiders is not enough. We also need the the court intrigue, the political intrigue going on. And I I I really love it. There's actually a good quote that I'm going to read from the book itself and I think this really kind of sums it up uh on so many different levels. It's such a wonderful line and it is genuinely only one line. It's on page 301 and it says when settled people look for security they look for continuity. And that is absolutely correct. like as long as things are going up uh as long as things are going on the way I expect them to go on as long as I'm waking up and doing the same things every day I think I'm safe and that is a true fact I think on how people operate within society but it then also contrasts what I was saying around well people think they're safe therefore they can start criticizing other areas of their life like why isn't the king present why isn't the the prince or the king and waiting present what's going on here and that's when you can sort of start to fill the the world with rumor and start to undermine uh the power of of this world through the the political minations. And it was just I don't know this really fantastic story like so much went on. I think despite the fact that it's an incredibly slow burn, Robin Hobb just had this ability to ramp it up especially in the last 100 pages which is I don't know kind of crazy to think when you consider how slow the book moves. It does pick up this wonderful pace and you find yourself just turning the pages so much faster and you're really kind of sunk into this story and really keen to to see what happens. For me, it was a four out of five. It's a gritty, character-driven novel. Hob is completely in control. The story only gets larger as I can see. It does make me a little nervous because it is quite dense and it will take me some time to read, but I'm absolutely looking forward to it. Yeah, this was a this was a great book to start off the year of fantasy. I think it's going to be a good year for Fantasy on the Pod. Four out of five, Assassin's Apprentice. But I think it's time to end this episode. Thank you so much, guys, for listening all the way to the end. If you would like a like and subscribe, I would greatly appreciate that. But as always, just thanks so much for listening. So today, to take us away, a quote from page 17. I grew up fatherless and motherless in a court where all recognized me as a catalyst, and a catalyst [music] I became.