Guy Gavriel Kay interviewed - infinity plus non-fiction 

 Historical Significance: 

 An Interview with Guy Gavriel 
 Kay 

 by Sandy Auden 

 Guy Gavriel Kay is an author is command of 
 his craft. With a string of excellent fantasy novels behind him, he's 
 ably demonstrated how he can recreate historical settings with an abundance 
 of atmosphere and a highly 
 personal touch. 

 His Fionovar Tapestry trilogy is a flight 
 through traditional fantasy tropes to show that not all Tolkien-style 
 fantasy needs to be a weak imitation of the original; Tigana is 
 a novel about memory, and how necessary identity is in cultural terms; 
 A Song for Arbonne is a tale of art, courtly love and religious 
 warfare inspired by medieval France and the Albigensian Crusade; The 
 Lions of Al-Rassan features a character inspired by El Cid and looks 
 closely at the conflict and tragedy of a fragmenting world based on 
 the history of reconquista Spain; and The Sarantine Mosaic series 
 summons forth the 6th Century Byzantine world from the ether as you 
 read. 

 Now, in The Last Light of the Sun , Kay 
 turns his attention to the Vikings and Anglo-Saxons, re-creating their 
 fearful days. He allows us a glimpse of what it could have been like 
 when raiding and feuding was a major daily threat, and coloured every 
 decision and action. 

 So how does Kay create these well-executed 
 stories? We go in search of his modus operandi and discover that 
 it's just not that simple ... 

 Guy Gavriel Kay (photo © copyright Beth Gwinn) 

 What is the trigger that first draws you to a particular 
 period of history? 

 The clarity-reducing truth is that there's no single formula I've evolved 
 for how and why a given time or place begins to resonate for me. When 
 each book is finished I end up, all-too-soon, with a pervasive anxiety 
 that instructs me to get going on whatever's coming next. I never know 
 what's coming next. At times my reading (it usually starts with reading) 
 has involved casting a comically wide net. At 
 other times, something has steered me to a subject early and that subject 
 has 'worked' for me. The most amusing (to me, at any rate!) example 
 is this:

 After Lions of Al-Rassan was published I was sent, within a 
 24 hour period, two separate early reviews noting the 'Byzantine' nature 
 of my plotting and characters. I remember grinning about this and thinking, 
 'You know, if this is so, I really ought to know more about the Byzantines 
 than I do.' I picked up a half a dozen histories of Byzantium, started 
 reading, and, truthfully, I was hooked instantly. It was the reviews 
 that sent me there. The challenge then became to identify a period within 
 a1000 year history that engaged me the most. And of course, given that 
 I spin fantasies upon themes of history, I was able to condense some 
 motifs that actually involve events hundreds of years apart. (Justinian 
 precedes the Iconoclast movement by a considerable period.)

 How many non-fiction books will you read in order 
 to complete your research to the required level?

 No set number, and no set pattern. Which is consistent with my not 
 planning out the novels when I begin. I don't block out the process--or 
 even the moment I decide to start writing--ahead of time. The last few 
 books have taken me about a year of reading and contacting people and 
 note-taking, and travel sometimes, before I start writing. I often end 
 up corresponding with interesting people, experts in various fields, 
 sometimes form friendships, and invariably broaden my knowledge, scribbling 
 away in a notebook.

 Do you enjoy the research equally 
 across eras, or do you have some favourite eras? 

 I've enjoyed the process the same for each book, I'd say, but I don't 
 think all eras can possible resonate equally for a writer. We must have 
 our areas of particular receptivity, intuitive understanding (or the 
 illusion/delusion of that!). I felt easily 'at home' in medieval Provence 
 when I researched and wrote Arbonne . I knew something about it 
 beforehand and what motifs I thought I wanted to work with. I knew very 
 little about Byzantine history when I started the Mosaic pair, 
 and part of the challenge there was finding a period and themes that 
 'worked' for me.

 History is full of facts, events, locations and battles. 
 With such a wealth of information, how do you select the details to 
 enrich your own stories? 

 For me, and I suspect for many people who struggle to shape creative 
 works, it doesn't take place in so precise a fashion. I can't actually 
 tell you how I choose details, or reject them. Sometimes I have 
 a note to use a piece of information and it doesn't get into the book 
 because there isn't room or time, it feels gratuitous, forced, or like 
 one of those raw information dumps I dislike in other people's books 
 (and try, accordingly, to avoid in my own) ... the James Michener Effect.

 As you read more and more history, does the information 
 from previous research influence a current novel?

 Absolutely. One of the pleasures of what I do is seeing how elements 
 of history repeat themselves, or ideas influence other periods and places. 
 What I learn about religion, art history, medicine--to pick three examples--can't 
 help but filter through and carry over from book to book.

 I confess this is, in many ways, the very best part of the writing 
 process for me. Research, once I know what I'm doing, is pure pleasure. 
 I'm just ... learning things, without (as yet) any burdens or responsibilities 
 attached to that. Those burdens come when the writing starts.

 And 
 what burdens are they?

 Partly the 'get it right' process, coupled with the underlying reality 
 of all creative activities: you never do get it entirely right. The 
 inner vision never meshes seamlessly with what comes out. This, over 
 the years, can become burdensome. On the other hand, to be honest, over 
 the years it can also grow easier because you come to terms with this. 
 There's an ebb and flow to the phenomenon, depending on one's mood, 
 I suppose. 

 Another burden is a measure of awareness of one's own body of work, 
 a sense of needing to match up to oneself, not let readers (or characters!) 
 down. There's also the core truth that I never know exactly where a 
 novel is going, en route, and this creates a chronic tension as it is 
 being written.

 Despite not knowing where the book will be going, 
 you still maintain some common themes in your books. Why does 'the need 
 to leave something behind to be remembered by' appear more than once?

 The things that fascinate or interest us obviously shift, modify, emerge 
 as time goes by. The 'legacy' issue emerged strongly in The Sarantine 
 Mosaic because it was central to the world view of the time. Justinian's 
 building of Hagia Sophia and the declared purposes of it ('Solomon, 
 I have outdone you,' is what's he's reported to have said when he first 
 entered it) mingled for me with things I learned about the anonymity 
 of artists at the time. 

 Then, for no good reason, I started thinking about Breughel's painting 
 of Icarus falling into the sea. Well, that's disingenuous--the reason 
 was linked, obviously, to the presence of a sun god, and myths of Heladikos, 
 his falling son. I remembered Auden's poem about that painting ... and 
 the relative un importance of great events (and people) for 'ordinary' 
 citizens ... and another theme or motif of the two books arose strongly.

 With The Last Light of the Sun , there was a natural extension 
 (and comment) upon these issues, because of the presence of a fame-and-glory 
 based culture in the Vikings, and the Celtic preeminence granted to 
 bards and their task of exalting the ruler they served. 

 I've always been mindful of Pound's line: 

 Small talk, O Ilion and O Troiad

 If Homer had not stated your case.

 [from the Homage to Sextus Propertius ]

 I think every serious artist writes or paints or composes with some 
 view to doing something that will last. In the Mosaic , I was 
 also made to think about those art forms that are inherently transitory: 
 dance, singing, cooking, sport ... the forms that cannot, by definition 
 endure. (Or couldn't, until audio and video recording emerged.)

 When your focus is on the history and the people 
 living in it, why do you need to include any elements of the supernatural 
 in your novels? 

 Some 
 of the major impulses of fiction (for me) are seeking delight and wonder, 
 the story-telling, page-turning elements. In some of my books, the presence 
 of magic, the supernatural, faerie, old gods, feels right in that process--the 
 desire to keep you up half the night. In others, those motifs felt out-of-place, 
 gratuitous, and I played them down, or took them right out. 

 There isn't, in fact, a single overriding 'purpose' to the fantasy 
 elements in my fiction. In Tigana I wanted the central magical 
 idea (erasing a people's name from history) to be a metaphor for the 
 well-known actions of tyrannies all through history, in controlling 
 those they've conquered. In The Last Light of the Sun I was interested 
 in the transition from 'pagan' faiths to monotheism, and it struck me 
 as appropriate to tell the story as if the way people very likely saw 
 the world (faerie as lingering, threatening, alluring; old gods, as 
 well) were really so. 

 You also seem to enjoy highlighting the similarities 
 between the past and our lives today. 

 I enjoy a number of different aspects of intermingling the past and 
 fantasy in the way I've been doing for a number of years. I'm fascinated 
 by both the way in which the past is so different from today and 
 by how similar it is in other ways. They 'do things differently there' 
 but at the same time (so to speak), 'Tho' much is taken, much abides.' 
 At times the expectation of difference misleads us. There was, for example, 
 a fairly recent, very strong fashion among historians to assume parents 
 didn't care much about their children in medieval times (high mortality 
 rates, too many kids, etc.). Most of the recent data and research suggests 
 that this is untrue. 

 I'm intrigued by all issues of this sort. I also find fantasy as a 
 method to be exceptionally useful--a prism of sorts for addressing these 
 matters. It removes a level of presumption, that we can know 
 what Justinian and Theodora's marriage was like, or grasp the 'true' 
 religious world-view of someone in the British Isles in the 9th century. 
 Fantasy offers an up-front acknowledgement of the guesswork and imagination 
 involved, frees author and reader (to my mind) from some moral and intellectual 
 traps. 

 After the themes have been incorporated and the historical 
 comparisons made, how do you feel when the book is complete?

 Hmm. Well. I let out a ritualized primal scream when I finish typing 
 the last word of every novel. I've done that since the very first book, 
 written on Crete. I was writing on the rooftop of my hotel overlooking 
 the sea, and announced the completion to the immediate universe. My 
 sons have actually come to expect it, though it only happens, at my 
 pace, at three year intervals these days, so they can't await it too 
 eagerly. Only when they know I'm near the end.

 For more about Guy Gavriel Kay and his novels, please 
 visit the Bright Weavings 
 website.

 © Sandy Auden 2005. 

 Order Guy Gavriel Kay's books online using these 
 links and infinity plus 
 will benefit: 

 ...from Amazon.com 

 ...from Amazon.co.uk 

 Elsewhere in infinity plus : 

 non-fiction - reviews 
 of Guy Gavriel Kay's work . 

 Elsewhere on the web:

 For more about Guy Gavriel Kay and his novels, 
 please visit the Bright Weavings 
 website .

 Guy Gavriel Kay at Amazon.com 
 / Amazon.co.uk .

 Google 
 Guy Gavriel Kay .

 Let 
 us know what you think of infinity plus - e-mail 
 us at:

 sf@infinityplus.co.uk 

 support this site - buy books through these 
 links:

 A+ 
 Books: an insider's view of sf, fantasy and horror 

 amazon.com 
 (US) | Internet 
 Bookshop (UK) 

 top 
 of page 

 [ home page | fiction 
 | non-fiction & features 
 archive | other 
 stuff | A 
 to Z ]

 [ infinity 
 plus bookshop | search 
 infinity plus ] 

 © Sandy Auden 3 July 2005