infinity plus - non-fiction contents 

 infinity plus isn't just
 fiction: it's about fiction, too. This part of the site is where
 our contributors indulge their passion for science fiction and fantasy
 by writing about it: book reviews, critical essays, viewpoint pieces,
 discussions of what drives the writers to do what they do, and more. 
 There are three main areas: 

 Features 
 -- insight, discussion and analysis. 
 infinity plus introduces... 

 Book
 reviews . 

 Note: all contributions to infinity
 plus remain the copyright of the authors, and must not be distributed
 in any form without permission. 

 Features

 The most recent non-fiction features are listed below
 (in chronological order); for a full listing see Features
 Archive .

 An
 Interview with Paul McAuley 

 Paul McAuley talks about SF, thrillers, and things lost, things that
 should be restored. 
 -- non-fiction by Stuart Carter ; added:
 August 2007 --

 The Human Element:
 an interview with Eric Brown 

 Eric talks about storytelling, aliens, bigotry and his new novel,
 Helix . 
 -- non-fiction by Amandine Xavier-Peyroux ;
 added: June 2007 --

 The Arthur C Clarke
 Shortlist 2007 by Abigail Nussbaum

 "...therein lies the loopy charm of this award, which seems to
 have been created, first and foremost, to get people talking."

 -- non-fiction by Abigail Nussbaum ;
 added: June 2007 --

 Gail Z Martin interviewed 

 Gail tells infinity
 plus about ghosts, bullying and the end of the world. 

 -- non-fiction; added: June 2007 --

 Bright of the Sky:
 An Interview with Kay Kenyon by Karen D Fishler 

 Kay Kenyon tells Karen D Fishler about world-building and the thinking
 behind her new series The Entire and the Rose. 

 -- non-fiction by Karen D Fishler ; added:
 April 2007 --

 Conrad
 Williams interviewed by Keith Brooke 

 Butchery, teaching creative writing and suitcases full of cash...
 the world of Conrad Williams, as told to Keith Brooke. 

 -- non-fiction by Keith Brooke ; added:
 March 2007 --

 Brian
 Stableford interviewed by Barbara Godwin 

 Marking publication of his hundredth book, Brian Stableford talks
 to his former student about achievements to date and what lies ahead. 

 -- non-fiction by Barbara Godwin ; added:
 September 2006 --

 Jon Courtenay
 Grimwood interviewed 

 Award-winning English science fiction author Jon Courtenay Grimwood
 talks about his tenth novel, End of the World Blues . 

 -- non-fiction by Claire Weaver ; added:
 August 2006 --

 Martin
 Sketchley interviewed 

 Author of the Structure seriews, Martin Sketchley talks about music,
 time and castanets. 
 -- non-fiction by Ian R MacLeod ; added:
 August 2006 --

 A complete listing of infinity
 plus essays and interviews is available in the Features
 Archive .

 infinity
 plus introduces... 

 ...authors or books that may be unfamiliar
 to current readers but should not be. In this occasional series, authors
 seek to draw your attention to works of sf, fantasy or horror they feel
 are not currently getting the attention they deserve: an author who
 has slipped from prominence, an overlooked current writer, a lost masterpiece,
 or maybe someone who's never had the attention they deserve. 
 Recent additions : Recommended
 Modern Anthologies of Cthulhu Mythos Fiction by William P Simmons,
 John Christopher's Tripods trilogy 
 by Keith Brooke, Talented
 Dreamer: an appreciation of the fiction of Zoran Zivkovic by Tamar
 Yellin. 

 full
 listing of infinity plus introductions 

 Reviews 

 The most recent reviews are listed
 below; all infinity plus reviews are listed
 in the Reviews
 Archive ; and this site also hosts Claude
 Lalumière's Fantastic Fiction , the online reviews archive
 from The Montreal Gazette . 
 Each review includes publishing details for
 the copy of the book seen by the reviewer. Our Books
 Received sections list details of books awaiting review, and
 includes information about where to send review copies. 

 Glorifying
 Terrorism edited by Farah Mendlesohn 

 "A superb vaccine against the relentless drip-drip-drip of the with-us-or-against-us
 attitude expressed by our political leaders." 

 -- a review by Stuart Carter ; added:
 August 2007 --

 Ink: The Book of All
 Hours 2 by Hal Duncan 

 "A furious lament, a work of love and anger ... amazing." 

 -- a review by Jakob Schmidt ; added:
 August 2007 --

 Threshold
 Shift by Eric Brown

 "An Eric Brown book to enthuse about ... worth a read for anyone who
 enjoys ideas-driven SF." 

 -- a review by John Toon ; added: August
 2007 --

 Residue 
 by Andrew Hook 

 "This book will entertain you, because Hook is an excellent writer,
 but, more importantly, will make you think." 

 -- a review by Mario Guslandi ; added:
 August 2007 --

 Fast Forward:
 future fiction from the cutting edge edited by Lou Anders

 "Worth checking out for the standouts." 

 -- a review by Peter D Tillman ; added:
 August 2007 --

 The Servants 
 by Michael Marshall Smith

 "A great, captivating work which will make you wonder about life's
 true meaning and essence." 

 -- a review by Mario Guslandi ; added:
 August 2007 --

 The Midnighters
 trilogy by Scott Westerfeld 

 "An entertaining series that relies on the interaction between its
 engaging characters as much as its action setpieces and its well-worked-out
 premise." 

 -- a review by Gary Couzens ; added:
 August 2007 --

 Fledgling 
 by Octavia Butler 

 "Certainly Fledgling is up there with her earlier novels."

 -- a review by Jason Prince ; added: August
 2007 --

 Vicious Circle 
 by Mike Carey

 "Really rocks along with an exquisitely paced corkscrew twisty plot."

 -- a review by Martin Owton ; added:
 August 2007 --

 To Love a Sagelord:
 The Return to Enlightenment Volume One by Paul Massey 

 "All the usual faults of the beginning writer are evident ... and
 there's poetry." 

 -- a review by Martin Owton ; added:
 August 2007 --

 The End of Harry
 Potter? by David Langford

 "A pleasant read that goes some way to overcoming the fact that the
 book will be obsolete in the none-too-distant future." 

 -- a review by Gary Couzens ; added:
 August 2007 --

 The Justice
 of the Night by Glen Cavaliero

 "A disturbingly beautiful yet emotionally scathing collection." 

 -- a review by William P Simmons ; added:
 August 2007 --

 The Complete
 Chronicles of Conan: Centenary Edition by Robert E Howard

 "There is no doubt they are a product of their times... but they manage
 to transcend this and remain accessible for readers today." 

 -- a review by Jason Prince ; added: August
 2007 --

 Nova Swing 
 by M John Harrison 

 "Even if it had been a mainstream novel the noirish style and lack
 of engagement with the characters would render it substantially flawed."

 -- a review by Jack Deighton ; added:
 August 2007 --

 Match to Flame:
 The Fictional Paths to Fahrenheit 451 by Ray Bradbury 

 "A gorgeous and highly collectible book." 

 -- a review by William P Simmons ; added:
 August 2007 --

 Common and Precious 
 by Tim Susman

 "This is a coming-of-age story and a social class analysis; but it's
 also a great novel, dark and bitter as fine chocolate." 

 -- a review by Elizabeth Barrette ;
 added: August 2007 --

 Parallax View 
 by Keith Brooke and Eric Brown 

 "Serious science fiction for the more thoughtful grown-ups amongst
 you." 

 -- a review by Stuart Carter ; added:
 June 2007 --

 Ephemera 
 by Neil Williamson 

 "A very strong collection, well worth buying and reading, not once
 but many times." 

 -- a review by Lawrence Osborn ; added:
 June 2007 --

 The
 Ladies of Grace Adieu and Other Stories by Susanna Clarke

 "An enchanting atmosphere and a winning formula."

 -- reviewed in Claude Lalumière's
 Fantastic Fiction ; added: June 2007 --

 Sloth 
 by Gilbert Hernandez 

 "His strongest non-Love & Rockets work to date." 

 -- reviewed in Claude Lalumière's
 Fantastic Fiction ; added: June 2007 --

 See also: earlier reviews of books with
 recently published new editions - Black
 Juice by Margo Lanagan, Peace and War: The Omnibus Edition 
 by Joe Haldeman (comprising The Forever War ,
 Forever Peace and Forever
 Free ), Air, or Have Not
 Have by Geoff Ryman. 

 Other recent reviews include: The
 Baldwins by Serge Lamothe, The
 Man from the Diogenes Club by Kim Newman, The
 Line Between by Peter S Beagle, Cinema
 Macabre edited by Mark Morris, Keep
 The Giraffe Burning by John Sladek, World
 of Hurt by Brian Hodge, Temeraire,
 books 1-3 Naomi Novik, The Secret
 of the Sangraal & other writing by Arthur Machen, The
 Unblemished by Conrad Williams (a second review), Jack
 of Ravens: Kingdom of the Serpent Book One by Mark Chadbourn,
 Before They Are Hanged: Book
 Two of The First Law by Joe Abercrombie, The
 Endymion Omnibus by Dan Simmons, Heart-Shaped
 Box by Joe Hill, Impossible
 Stories by Zoran Zivkovic, Closing
 Time and other stories by Jack Ketchum, Electric
 Velocipede: Issue 10 edited by John Klima, The
 Good People by Steve Cockayne, Double
 Vision by Tricia Sullivan, I Am
 the Bird by TM Wright, The Mammoth
 Book of Extreme Science Fiction edited by Mike Ashley, The
 Fungal Stain and other dreams by WM Pugmire, Knife
 of Dreams: Book Eleven of The Wheel of Time by Robert Jordan,
 Goblin Quest by Jim C Hines,
 Hell's Belles by Jackie Kessler,
 Keeping it Real: Quantum Gravity Book
 One by Justina Robson (a second review), The
 Devil You Know by Mike Carey (a second review), Dead
 Beat: A Novel of the Dresden Files by Jim Butcher, The
 Hill of Dreams by Arthur Machen, Soul
 Purpose by Nick Marsh, The Turning 
 by Paul J Newell, Against the Day 
 by Thomas Pynchon. 

 A complete listing of infinity
 plus reviews is available in the Reviews
 Archive . 

 Let
 us know what you think of infinity plus - e-mail us at:

 sf@infinityplus.co.uk 

 support this site - buy books through these
 links:

 A+
 Books: an insider's view of sf, fantasy and horror 

 amazon.com 
 (US) | Internet
 Bookshop (UK) 

 top
 of page 

 [ home page | fiction 
 | non-fiction | other
 stuff | A
 to Z ]

 [ infinity
 plus bookshop | search
 infinity plus ] 

 © Keith Brooke 25 August 2007