The Last Light of the Sun by Guy Gavriel Kay - an infinity plus review 

 The Last Light of the Sun 

 by Guy Gavriel Kay 

 (Pocket Books, £7.99, 512 pages, paperback, first published 2004, 
 this edition July 2005, ISBN 0743484231.)

 Review by Sandy Auden 

 Each Guy Gavriel Kay novel is a labour of love. He's an author who 
 produces a book every three years, rather than the usual one 
 a year, and the additional time investment means that there's never 
 a rushed feel to the story--every aspect of Last Light of the Sun 
 oozes with care and attention.

 This time around, Kay has been busy recreating the Viking era of Scandanavia 
 and the British Isles. Bern Thorkellson is forced to pay for his father's 
 murderous actions by becoming a slave at the local manor while his father 
 is exiled from their island, their property confiscated and his mother 
 taken to wife by a local official. Before long, Bern's hatred of his 
 situation leads him to steal a horse and flee, almost losing his life 
 twice on the journey. Landless and broke, only one option is open to 
 him--to join the mercenaries at Jormsvik, but passing the initiation 
 test puts his life in the balance once more. Meanwhile, across the water, 
 two princes are raiding in the neighbouring Kingdom, but Brynn ap Hywll's 
 property is about to be attacked by a larger force. Through the blood 
 and fear, the lives of a prince and a cleric will twist together into 
 a single future, and their journey will take them to the royal court 
 of King Aeldred--a man bent on uniting his country and defending it 
 from the vicious warriors assailing its shores.

 Kay's love of history is the first aspect of Last Light that 
 shines out clearly. The author creates a palpable atmosphere through 
 his use of historical detail, from the minutae of everyday life, through 
 to the attitudes of the people and the events that shape their world. 
 There are no dry technical facts and what Kay delivers is a living, 
 breathing, burping, laughing, fighting narration where you can smell 
 the horse dung on the roads and feel the cold radiating from the castle's 
 stone walls in Winter.

 More atmosphere builds through the author's use of language. Names 
 like Halldr, Ceinion and Aeldred conjure their own ancient images. Rhythmic 
 sentences, vivid descriptions and the ebb and flow of dialogue all work 
 to expand those images further. And Kay's use of speech is intelligent 
 and layered too--it drives the plot and illustrates his 9th Century 
 world concurrently. It's never wasted or pointless. 

 And there's more. Kay's prose style is rather adventurous in places. 
 Not only does he use an informal style though out the main body of the 
 book:

 He felt it hit hard, but not bite. He had used the flat of his 
 sword. Couldn't have said why. 

 But he also blends the present tense with unusual cadences to demonstrate 
 the strangeness of the faeries:

 She feels hooves on the earth, west of them. Her own fear, before 
 sight. The riders leaping the fence, smashing through it into the 
 farmyard below, and fire is thrown and iron is drawn, is everywhere, 
 sharp as death, heavy as death. 

 It is a little unsettling at first, but that's mostly because it's 
 an unusual mixture of tenses and style that's not often attempted in 
 fantasy novels. However, Kay knows his audience is up to the challenge 
 and before long you're well into the swing of it.

 The story structure is another aspect that shows the benefits of extra 
 attention. Last Light of the Sun is a prose spiral. Starting 
 with a wide vista concerning kingdoms, it then narrows down to focus 
 on the different nationalities until everything draws tightly together--with 
 the individual characters finally moving under their own spotlights. 
 Kay even manages to spin-off additional stories at tangents along the 
 way to show how the stories of side characters are equally valid. Careful 
 selection of these potted histories adds even more depth and complexity 
 to an already detailed world.

 Combine all of these elements together and you find that Last Light 
 of the Sun is carefully constructed, lavishly written, and easy 
 for readers to love too. Haunting, intelligent, fascinating and fun--what's 
 not to love? 

 Elsewhere in infinity plus : 

 non-fiction - Guy 
 Gavriel Kay interviewed by Sandy Auden; more reviews 
 of Guy Gavriel Kay's work . 

 Let 
 us know what you think of infinity plus - e-mail us at:

 sf@infinityplus.co.uk 

 support this site - buy books through these 
 links:

 A+ 
 Books: an insider's view of sf, fantasy and horror 

 amazon.com 
 (US) | Internet 
 Bookshop (UK) 

 top 
 of page 

 [ home page | fiction 
 | non-fiction & reviews 
 archive | other 
 stuff | A 
 to Z ]

 [ infinity 
 plus bookshop | search 
 infinity plus ] 

 © Sandy Auden 3 July 2005