The SF Site Featured Review: Sailing to Sarantium 

 Sailing to Sarantium 

 Guy Gavriel Kay 

 HarperPrism, 438 pages

 Guy Gavriel Kay 

Guy Gavriel Kay was born in Weyburn and raised in Winnipeg.
'In 1974-75, he assisted Christopher Tolkien with
the editing of J.R.R. Tolkien's The Silmarillion .
Guy Kay studied law at the University of Toronto and was admitted to the Bar in
Ontario in 1981. He worked both as script consultant and principal writer for
CBC Radio's award-winning series The Scales of Justice .
He and his family live in Toronto.

 Guy Gavriel Kay Website 

 ISFDB Bibliography 

 Guy Gavriel Kay Tribute Site 

 Guy Gavriel Kay Interview 

 A review by James Seidman 

 Advertisement 

 Sailing to Sarantium is the first book of Guy Gavriel Kay's new two-part
series, The Sarantine Mosaic . It has the unusual distinction of having been
voted #5 on the SF Site's "Best SF and Fantasy Books of 1998" despite not
yet having been released in the United States.

This stunning book is set in a fantasy world based on the historical Byzantine
Empire. It is actually amazing how many varied aspects of the Byzantine Empire are
represented in his fictional Sarantine Empire. Some are obvious, such as a fallen
empire to the west and competing factions supporting charioteers. Some are very
obscure, such as a violent religious dispute that mirrors Christianity's Arian
heresy. Unlike the historical empire, the Sarantine Empire is one in which alchemy,
pagan gods, and the like are, at least sometimes, actually real.

Into this richly described world comes the protagonist, Caius Crispus, or Crispin
for short. Crispin is a mosaicist in the barbarian kingdom that was once part of
the now-fallen western empire. One day, an Imperial Courier arrives with a letter
for Crispin's mentor Martinian, inviting the latter to Sarantium, the
imperial capital, to work on a new chapel. Martinian, feeling too old for such a
journey, invites Crispin to assume his name and travel in his stead.

Approximately half of the book discusses the journey to Sarantium. Due to the
tardiness of the courier, Crispin misses the sailing season and must travel on
foot. The journey is at times harrowing, but he successfully arrives in the city
with a couple of companions he picks up along the way. Once he arrives in the
capital, he is very rapidly drawn into various court intrigues, having to use
his substantial wits to compensate for how far out of his element he is.

Of course there are several substantial subplots in this complex and detailed
story as well. They all add up to a rich tapestry of a story that surpasses
even Kay's previous novels.

While Sailing to Sarantium is the start of a duology, reaching the
end of the first volume didn't leave me with the empty feeling I experience with so many
series. Kay succeeds in concluding enough of the plot lines to leave the reader
fulfilled but still wanting more. While the book does end with a somewhat
clumsy teaser scene, this was one of the few times where I was glad I read the
book when it became available rather than waiting for the series to be complete.

 Copyright © 1999 James Seidman 

James Seidman is a busy technology manager at a Fortune 100 company, who
needs the excuse of doing book reviews to give himself time to read. He
lives with his wife, daughter, two dogs, and twenty-seven fish in Naperville, Illinois.

If you find any errors, typos or anything else worth mentioning,
please send it to editor@sfsite.com .

 Copyright © 1996-2014 SF Site All Rights Reserved Worldwide