The SF Site Featured Review: The Last Light of the Sun 

 The Last Light of the Sun 

 Guy Gavriel Kay 

 Viking Canada, 512 pages

 Guy Gavriel Kay 

Guy Gavriel Kay was born in Weyburn and raised in Winnipeg.
In 1974-75, he assisted Christopher Tolkien with
the editing of J.R.R. Tolkien's The Silmarillion .
Guy Kay studied law at the University of Toronto and was admitted to the Bar in
Ontario in 1981. He worked both as script consultant and principal writer for
CBC Radio's award-winning series The Scales of Justice .
He and his family live in Toronto.

 Guy Gavriel Kay Website 

 ISFDB Bibliography 

 SF Site Interview: A Conversation With Guy Gavriel Kay 

 SF Site Review: Beyond This Dark House: Poems 

 SF Site Review: Lord of Emperors 

 SF Site Review: Sailing to Sarantium 

 SF Site Review: The Lions of Al-Rassan 

 SF Site Interview: A Conversation With Guy Gavriel Kay 

 Guy Gavriel Kay Tribute Site 

 Guy Gavriel Kay Interview 

 A review by Alma A. Hromic 

 Advertisement 

Holding a bewildering array of worlds in one's head is one of the things that writers do, that's part of the job
description, and with fantasy it's more pertinent than most because the worlds in question can be so very different from the one
we are used to seeing around us every day. But holding multiplicities of worlds in one's mind is something that Guy Gavriel Kay
has already transcended -- he's been there, done that, issued readers' visas for a number of different and equally fascinating
spheres of otherworldliness.

But he has done more than this. If there is anything more difficult that holding many alternate worlds in one's head, it's the
holding of just ONE -- one other world, parallel to this one, perhaps, honed to a cohesiveness and a clarity that is rarely found even in
so-called mainstream novels which rely on the reader's intimate knowledge of their everyday existences.

 The Last Light of the Sun is a book set in the same geographical milieu as a number of Kay's earlier works such as
 The Lions of Al-Rassan and the Sarantium Mosaic ( Lord of Emperors and
 Sailing to Sarantium ). The parameters established in those earlier books are faithfully nurtured
in this one, the book Kay has called his "Northern novel" -- but in this book he has decided to visit a corner of that milieu that
is far more raw and earthy than the rarefied decadence of a Sarantine Empire or the complex mix of arts, politics and high drama that
characterised Al-Rassan. As the blurb of The Last Light of the Sun has it, "...there is nothing soft or silken about the north." This is a
place which is far more on the edge of survival, the edge of the world. This is the place where the "last light" of the
title falls, the furthermost glow cast by the god named Jad. But under that glow, as usual with Kay's novels, many others are
casting their own light or shadow -- gods, faerie folk, ordinary people (be they crofters or kings).

Kay melds history, magic and fantasy with an easy grace. What comes through his words is a sense that he believes that history is
not made up of the sweeping epic history books written after some grand battle by the victorious nations. Rather, history is woven
from the small things, the things that happen to and are done by the people who live under the cloak of great events. People like
the handful of characters who pass through the pages of The Last Light of the Sun without doing anything much to alter the
course of the book -- except carry some trace of events that have rolled across them, and allow such memories to shape their own
dreams and thoughts and fears -- and thus the further course of history of which they are so fundamental a part. Everything
is history -- every thought, every dream, every prayer, just as much if not more so than the looming shapes of hungry empires on
the horizon. History is not decided by battles, or at least not by battles alone. Kay can see the beat of the wings of that butterfly
which causes the mountains to fall down on the far side of the world, and he uses these secondary characters (many of whom never
even meet his main protagonists) to shape that fall.

It's another vivid, complex fantasy from Kay's pen. There is the usual sense that there is more, so much more, in the background
of this story than the reader has been told -- the sense of glimpsing a few shining threads in a larger tapestry. A book to savour.

 Copyright © 2004 Alma A. Hromic 

Alma A. Hromic, addicted (in random order) to coffee, chocolate and books, has a constant and chronic problem
of "too many books, not enough bookshelves". When not collecting more books and avidly reading them (with a cup of
coffee at hand), she keeps busy writing her own. Following her successful two-volume
fantasy series, Changer of Days , her latest novel, Jin-shei , is due out from
Harper San Francisco in the spring of 2004.

If you find any errors, typos or anything else worth mentioning,
please send it to editor@sfsite.com .

 Copyright © 1996-2014 SF Site All Rights Reserved Worldwide