★★★★☆ Tigana, by Guy Gavriel Kay - Brok3n Engines 

 Brok3n Engines 

 Subscribe Sign in 

 Brok3n Engines Reviews 

★★★★☆ Tigana, by Guy Gavriel Kay

GGK in transition

 Brok3n Engines 
 Apr 16, 2025 

 3

 Share

Tigana 

Guy Gavriel Kay 

 GGK in transition 

 Guy Gavriel Kay  writes historical fantasy. He doesn't like to be categorized, but he has borrowed the phrase  "a quarter turn to the fantastic"  to describe his work, so I think we're allowed to use it. I am a fan. I first discovered his  Under Heaven  series, which is about China, called Kitai in the novels.  Under Heaven  is brilliant. 

 His first novel was, I believe,  The Summer Tree , which is the first book of the  Fionavar Tapestry  trilogy. It is not historical fantasy; rather, it is straight high fantasy, and I  did not like it . His next book after the  Fionavar Tapestry  was this one,  Tigana , and here we begin to see the turn away from the fantastic. I might call this one a half-turn to the fantastic. Although he has not, In  Tigana , yet reached that level of historical verisimilitude that his latest works display, and although magic is an explicit and key part of the story, it is less fantastic than  Fionavar Tapestry  and more fantastic than, for instance,  Under Heaven . 

 Tigana  takes place on a peninsula that is politically much like Renaissance Italy. In his acknowledgements  GGK  is clear that this was intentional. The peninsula is called the Palm, and geographically it is more like the Peloponnese than the Italian boot. None of the major characters can be explicitly identified with any particular real historical figure. 

 It's a novel about memory. Tigana's name is being erased by sorcery. People not from Tigana cannot hear the name. As  GGK  points out, the erasure of memory is indeed a thing real-world conquerors and oppressors do, although by more mundane means than sorcery. Thus the story has a realistic feel. The world in which  Tigana  takes place has two moons, a white one and a blue one. The two moons are a sort of a trademark of  GGK 's later quarter-turn novels. Thus when he wrote  Tigana ,  GGK  was clearly on the path towards his quarter-turn.  Tigana  is not as good as the later novels, but it is still pretty good. 

 GGK  writes beautifully. But the truth is that, while I enjoy his prose, I often wish there was less of it.  Tigana  is a long novel, and it certainly felt too long to me by the time I got to the end. 
 
Subscribe for free to receive new posts.

 Subscribe 

 Leave a comment 

 Share 

 Tigana  on Amazon 

 Goodreads review 

 3

 Share

 Previous Next 

Discussion about this post
 Comments Restacks 

 Brok3n Engines reply rules

 Top Latest Discussions 

No posts

Ready for more?

 Subscribe 

 © 2026 Brok3n Engines · Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection notice 
 Start your Substack Get the app 
 Substack is the home for great culture
