The J.R.R. Tolkien Lecture on Fantasy Literature | An annual public lecture on fantasy literature held at Pembroke College, Oxford 

 The J.R.R. Tolkien Lecture on Fantasy Literature 

An annual public lecture on fantasy literature held at Pembroke College, Oxford

 Menu 
 Skip to content 
 
 Home 

 About the Series 

 Past Speakers 

 Our Committee 

 F.A.Q. 

 Contact Us 

 Support Us 

 ‘On Fantasy’ by Brandon Sanderson – Lecture Recording 

 1 Reply 

 Photo by Natalie Hytiroglou, Pembroke College 

 Photo by Adam Horne, Copyright by Dragonsteel 

 Photo by Adam Horne, Copyright by Dragonsteel 

 Photo by Adam Horne, Copyright by Dragonsteel 

 Photo by Adam Horne, Copyright by Dragonsteel 

Brandon Sanderson delivered the 2026 Tolkien Lecture titled On Fantasy on 19 May 2026. The full recording is now available on our YouTube channel, allowing audiences everywhere to enjoy this engaging and thought-provoking lecture.

The J.R.R. Tolkien Lecture on Fantasy Literature is an annual event dedicated to fostering works of fantasy literature and broadening access to leading voices in the field.

This lecture series is made possible each year through the generous support of the Pembroke Pink Grant Scheme, the Kadas Foundation, and the many attendees who have supported the lectures over the past thirteen years. We are also grateful to the Tolkien family and Estate for encouraging the exploration of fantasy literature through this series, and to Utah Valley University for helping to bring this year’s speaker to Pembroke. Special thanks also go to the Events, Catering, and Communications teams at Pembroke College.

 This entry was posted in Tolkien Lecture and tagged #jrrtolkien , brandonsanderson , fantasyliterature , pembrokecollege , tolkienlecture , universityofoxford on June 19, 2026 by sedapemb . 

 Tickets for the 2026 Tolkien Lecture, delivered by Brandon Sanderson 

 Leave a reply 

Tickets are now available for the 2026 Tolkien Lecture, delivered by Brandon Sanderson!

You can reserve your ticket now on Eventbrite . 

Tickets are free, but required for entry, so make sure to book yours before they run out! 

An optional donation helps cover the costs of running the lecture and will help us keep the event free for the public in future years. All donations are greatly appreciated.

The lecture will be held on 19 May, at 6:00 pm, at Oxford Town Hall. For further information, please see our F.A.Q. 

 This entry was posted in Tolkien Lecture on March 19, 2026 by lilysonnenblick . 

 Brandon Sanderson to Deliver the 2026 Tolkien Lecture 

 12 Replies 

We are delighted to share that the 2026 Tolkien Lecture on Fantasy Literature will be delivered by the award-winning fantasy and science-fiction author Brandon Sanderson.

 The lecture will take place on Tuesday, 19 May at 6:00 pm, at Oxford Town Hall. 

 Tickets will be released on Eventbrite on Thursday, 19 March at 12:00 pm.  The event is free to the public, but tickets are required. We will share the link to the Eventbrite here, on our website, and across our social media at that time.

For those unable to attend, the lecture will be recorded and available to view after the event on our YouTube channel . We are generously supported by Pembroke College, the Pembroke Pink Grant, and the Kadas Family Charitable Foundation.

 About the Speaker 

Brandon Sanderson grew up in Lincoln, Nebraska. He lives in Utah with his wife and children and teaches creative writing at Brigham Young University. In addition to completing Robert Jordan’s The Wheel of Time, he is the author of such bestsellers as the Mistborn saga, Warbreaker , the Stormlight Archive series beginning with The Way of Kings , The Rithmatist , the Skyward series, the Reckoners series beginning with Steelheart , and the Alcatraz vs. the Evil Librarians series. He won the 2013 Hugo Award for The Emperor’s Soul , a novella set in the world of his acclaimed first novel, Elantris .

 This entry was posted in Tolkien Lecture on February 19, 2026 by lilysonnenblick . 

 Listen now: The Tolkien Lecture Podcast! 

 1 Reply 

We are pleased to announce that audio recordings from the Tolkien Lecture archive are now available on Spotify as the J.R.R. Tolkien Lecture Podcast. Whether rediscovering an old favourite lecture or listening for the first time, we hope you enjoy hearing our speakers’ fantastic insights via a new medium!

Find the podcast here: https://open.spotify.com/show/3RA1OGfF3zS14BSwS0N1RY?si=E18tBm53SXWHoVgH06ea0A&nd=1&dlsi=971a4dfff2934e16. 

 This entry was posted in Tolkien Lecture on August 1, 2025 by lilysonnenblick . 

 ‘The Uses of Fantasy’–Zen Cho Lecture Recording 

 Leave a reply 

On 19 May 2025, Zen Cho delivered the 2025 Tolkien Lecture, on ‘The Uses of Fantasy’. The full recording is now available to view on our YouTube channel. We hope you enjoy this truly fantastic lecture!

The annual J.R.R. Tolkien Lecture on Fantasy Literature seeks to promote the study of fantasy literature by making access to its lectures available to audiences from around the world. 

We are immensely grateful to the Pembroke Pink Grant Scheme, the Kadas Foundation, and of course, the support of lecture attendees over the years. Thanks also to the Events, Catering, and Communications teams at Pembroke College.

 This entry was posted in Tolkien Lecture on June 19, 2025 by lilysonnenblick . 

 Tickets for the 2025 Tolkien Lecture, delivered by Zen Cho 

 3 Replies 

 Tickets are now available for the 2025 Tolkien Lecture, to be delivered by Zen Cho! 

Visit Eventbrite to reserve your seat: https://tinyurl.com/2025TolkienLecture . 

The lecture will be held on Monday 19 May at 6:00 pm, in the Pichette Auditorium, Pembroke College, Oxford.

The Tolkien Lecture is free of charge, but tickets are required for entry. An optional donation of £10 goes toward the costs of running the lecture and will help us keep the event free for the public in future years. All donations are greatly appreciated.

___

 About the Speaker 

Zen Cho was born and raised in Malaysia, and lives in the UK. She writes fantasy and romance. Her titles include the Sorcerer to the Crown historical fantasy novels and Malaysian contemporary fantasy Black Water Sister, as well as the Lambda Award-nominated novella The Order of the Pure Moon Reflected in Water, and a short story collection, Spirits Abroad. Her newest novels, The Friend Zone Experiment and Behind Frenemy Lines, are contemporary romances set among London’s East and Southeast Asian community.

Zen is a winner of the Hugo, Crawford and British Fantasy Awards and the LA Times Ray Bradbury Prize, as well as a finalist for the World Fantasy, Ignyte, Locus, Astounding, Kitschies and Diverse Book Awards. Her short fiction has been translated into French, Spanish, Italian, Finnish, Chinese and Japanese. She has spoken at literary festivals and conventions, taught creative writing and appeared on radio, and was once a model in a campaign for a global luxury make-up brand, chosen specifically for her accomplishments rather than her looks.

When she isn’t writing, Zen works as a lawyer. She enjoys cooking and baking, reading, gossip and travel.

Photo © Ilona Denton.

 This entry was posted in Tolkien Lecture on March 19, 2025 by lilysonnenblick . 

 Zen Cho to Deliver the 2025 Tolkien Lecture 

 Leave a reply 

We are thrilled to announce that the 2025 J.R.R. Tolkien Lecture on Fantasy Literature will be delivered by Zen Cho! 

 The lecture will take place on Monday 19 May at 6:00 pm, in the Pichette Auditorium, Pembroke College, Oxford. 

 Tickets will be released on Wednesday 19 March at 12:00 pm.  

The lecture is free to the public, but tickets are required for entry.

For those unable to attend, the lecture will be recorded and available to view afterwards on our YouTube channel . We are generously supported by Pembroke College, the Pembroke Pink Grant, and the Kadas Family Charitable Foundation.

 About the Speaker 

 Zen Cho was born and raised in Malaysia, and lives in the UK. She writes fantasy and romance. Her titles include the Sorcerer to the Crown historical fantasy novels and Malaysian contemporary fantasy Black Water Sister, as well as the Lambda Award-nominated novella The Order of the Pure Moon Reflected in Water, and a short story collection, Spirits Abroad. Her newest novels, The Friend Zone Experiment and Behind Frenemy Lines, are contemporary romances set among London’s East and Southeast Asian community.

Zen is a winner of the Hugo, Crawford and British Fantasy Awards and the LA Times Ray Bradbury Prize, as well as a finalist for the World Fantasy, Ignyte, Locus, Astounding, Kitschies and Diverse Book Awards. Her short fiction has been translated into French, Spanish, Italian, Finnish, Chinese and Japanese. She has spoken at literary festivals and conventions, taught creative writing and appeared on radio, and was once a model in a campaign for a global luxury make-up brand, chosen specifically for her accomplishments rather than her looks.

When she isn’t writing, Zen works as a lawyer. She enjoys cooking and baking, reading, gossip and travel.

 Photo © Ilona Denton .

 This entry was posted in Tolkien Lecture and tagged #fantasyliterature , #jrrtolkien , #oxford , #oxforduniversity , #pembrokecollege , #tolkien , #tolkienlecture , #universityofoxford , #zencho on March 5, 2025 by lilysonnenblick . 

 ‘Hand Grenade Pins: On Libraries and the Fantastic’ – Neil Gaiman Lecture Recording and Photos 

 Leave a reply 

 Please note, this lecture took place in June 2024, prior to more recent developments regarding the speaker. 
 — 

The annual J.R.R. Tolkien Lecture on Fantasy Literature seeks to promote the study of fantasy literature by making access to its lectures available to audiences from around the world. 

On June 12th 2024, Neil Gaiman delivered the 2024 Tolkien Lecture, highlighting the power of libraries and fantasy and drawing attention to the life and work of Nicholas Stuart Gray.

“Fiction … heals us, by letting us feel things we didn’t experience, see through others’ eyes when the only eyes we have are our own. It tells us there are options, it gives us friends. It gives us memories of places we have never been, and that never were. It makes the bullied, brave; and the impossible, possible.”

If you missed the lecture or simply want to relive the magic again, the recording is now on our YouTube channel!

—

We are immensely grateful to the Pembroke Pink Grant Scheme, the Kadas Foundation, and of course, the support of lecture attendees over the past 11 years. In addition, many thanks to the events, catering, and communications teams at Pembroke College.

—

 Videography by Gregory Jenkins 

 Photography by Gabriel Schenk and Seda Öztürk 

 This entry was posted in Tolkien Lecture and tagged #americangods , #anansiboys , #coraline , #fantasyliterature , #goodomens , #graveyardbook , #jrrtolkien , #neilgaiman , #oxford , #oxforduniversity , #pembrokecollege , #pembrokecollegeoxford , #sandman , #tolkien , #tolkienlecture , #tolkienlectureseries , #universityofoxford on July 15, 2024 by anikaluo . 

 Maria Dahvana Headley Lecture Recording and Photos 

 Leave a reply 

On Tuesday, May 16 th  Maria Dahvana Headley delivered the 2023 J.R.R. Tolkien Lecture on Fantasy Literature at Pembroke College, Oxford. 

It was wonderful to have Maria at Pembroke and to listen her engaging lecture about storytelling, magic, and monsters. Many thanks Maria for the inspiring lecture and taking the time to travel to Oxford, engaging the lecture attendees and simply being delightful. 

We are also grateful to our sponsors: Pembroke College Annual Fund, The Kadas Family Charitable Foundation, and everyone who donated when they booked their tickets. The Tolkien lecture series would not be possible without them. 

We also thank Pembroke College librarian Laura Cracknell, and archivist Amanda Ingram for the fantastic Tolkien display. Additionally, many thanks to events, catering, and communications teams at Pembroke. 

And of course, thank you everyone who attended the lecture in person, or via livestream. It is always a pleasure to see so many people. If you missed the lecture, or simply would like to watch it again, the recording is available here. 

 Videography by Gabriel Schenk 

 Photography by Gabriel Schenk 

 This entry was posted in Tolkien Lecture and tagged fantasyliterature , jrrtolkien , mariadahvanaheadley , pembrokecollege , tolkien , tolkienlecture , universityofoxford on May 25, 2023 by sedapemb . 

 Maria Dahvana Headley to Deliver the 2023 Tolkien Lecture 

 1 Reply 

Acclaimed fantasy author Maria Dahvana Headley will deliver this year’s Tolkien Lecture on Fantasy Literature at Pembroke College, Oxford.

The lecture will take place on Tuesday, May 16th in the Pichette Auditorium at 6 PM BST . 

 Please click here for more information about the event and to reserve your lecture ticket. 

A recording of the lecture will also be made available via our YouTube Channel . 

About the Speaker

 Maria Dahvana Headley is the New York Times -bestselling, Hugo and World Fantasy Award-winning author of eight books, most recently Beowulf: A New Translation (MCD/FSG), which was named as a book of the year by The Atlantic Monthly, National Public Radio, Vox, The Irish Times, The Guardian, The New Statesman , and more. It won the 2021 Harold Morton Landon Translation Award from the Academy of American Poets, and the 2021 Hugo award for “Best Related Work”. Her novel, The Mere Wife (MCD/FSG), a contemporary adaptation of Beowulf , was named by The Washington Post as one of the “Notable Works of Fiction in 2018”. 

She has written for both teenagers ( Magonia and Aerie , Harper Collins) and adults in various genres and forms. Headley’s short fiction has been shortlisted for the Nebula and Shirley Jackson awards and for the 2020 Joyce Carol Oates Prize and has been anthologised in many year’s bests; a collection is under contract to FSG. Her work has been supported by the MacDowell Colony, Arte Studio Ginestrelle, and the Sundance Institute’s Theatre Lab, among other organisations. 

In Summer 2023, she’ll be a fellow at the Hawthornden Foundation’s Casa Ecco in Lake Como, Italy. She currently teaches at Bennington College and Sarah Lawrence College and has delivered masterclasses and lectures at Harvard, Oxford, Stanford, Columbia, UCSD, The University of Iowa, U Penn, Dartmouth, and Northwestern University, among many others. She delivers regular Zoom writing workshops to the public through The Shipman Agency’s workroom. 

Her upcoming projects include a ten-episode full-cast musical adaptation of Vergil’s Aeneid for Audible UK, to be released in 2023; a novel from FSG about volcanoes, creation myths and time travel; a spy thriller; and a nonfiction book about the history of storytelling. 

She grew up in the high desert of Idaho on a survivalist sled dog ranch, where she spent summers plucking the winter coat from her father’s wolf. 

 Maria Dahvana Headley’s photo is credited to Beowulf Sheehan. 

 This entry was posted in Tolkien Lecture and tagged fantasyliterature , jrrtolkien , mariadahvanaheadley , pembrokecollege , tolkien , tolkienlecture , universityofoxford on March 21, 2023 by sedapemb . 

Post navigation

 ← Older posts 

 Support the Tolkien Lecture 

We run entirely on donations from Pembroke Alumni and the public.

 Donate Now

Follow us 

 Type your email… 

 Subscribe 

 Instagram 

 Bluesky 

 Facebook 

 X 

 Spotify 

 YouTube 

Kindly Supported By

and

 The Kadas Family Charitable Foundation 

Recent Posts

 ‘On Fantasy’ by Brandon Sanderson – Lecture Recording 

 Tickets for the 2026 Tolkien Lecture, delivered by Brandon Sanderson 

 Brandon Sanderson to Deliver the 2026 Tolkien Lecture 

 Listen now: The Tolkien Lecture Podcast! 

 ‘The Uses of Fantasy’–Zen Cho Lecture Recording 

 A WordPress.com Website .

 The J.R.R. Tolkien Lecture on Fantasy Literature 

 A WordPress.com Website . 

 Subscribe 

 Subscribed 

 The J.R.R. Tolkien Lecture on Fantasy Literature 

 Join 393 other subscribers

 Sign me up 

 Already have a WordPress.com account? Log in now. 

 The J.R.R. Tolkien Lecture on Fantasy Literature 

 Subscribe 

 Subscribed 

 Sign up 

 Log in 

 Report this content 

 View site in Reader 

 Manage subscriptions 

 Collapse this bar 

 Loading Comments... 

 Write a Comment... 

 Email (Required) 

 Name (Required) 

 Website
