

===== PDFPAGE 1 =====
The Distant Suns of
Gene Wolfe
John Farrell
L
ots of novel readers—from the highest brow to
the lowest—nod politely when the science-
fiction writer Gene Wolfe is mentioned. But
even among science-fiction
 fans, one gets the sense that
they're saying, "Yes, yes, we know how good he is, but
we'd rather talk about such bestselling authors as Neil
Gaiman or Robert Jordan, Laurel Hamilton or Neal
Stephenson." As Glenn Reynolds, the inveterate
science-fiction enthusiast and popular blogger of
Instapundit.com, recently wrote, "Gene Wolfe is a
superb writer, but I'm not crazy about his story-
telling." I recently asked a veteran New York editor
whether Wolfe could find
 a publisher today if he were
just coming along as a young writer. "Probably not,"
she admitted. His writing is too religious, too difficult,
and too strange.
Both the Soldier cycle and the Book of the New Sun
series reveal the problem and the promise of Gene
Wolfe. The New Sun series, for instance, takes place in
a world more than a million years in the future, where
artifacts of Christ still have healing power, while the
Soldier novels chronicle the life of a mercenary bedev-
iled by gods and goddesses in the Mediterranean world
a few centuries before the birth of Jesus.
The Book of the New Sun started out as a long
novella and rapidly grew to a four-volume science-
fiction tour de force. The hero, Severian, is a lictor—a
professional torturer—whose entire life has been dedi-
cated to the infliction of agony. "It has been remarked
thousands of times," Wolfe once said, "that Christ died
JOHN FARRELL is a writer in Boston. His book, The Day Without
Yesterday: Lemaitre, Einstein, and the Birth of Modem Cosmol-
ogy, is now available in paperback (Thunder's Mouth Press).
under torture. Many of us have read so often that he
was 'a humble carpenter' that we feel a little surge of
nausea on seeing the words yet again. But no one ever
seems to notice that the instruments of torture were
wood,
 nails, and a hammer; that the man who built the
cross was undoubtedly a carpenter too; that the man
who hammered in the nails was as much a carpenter as
a soldier, as much a carpenter as a torturer. Very few
seem even to have noticed that although Christ was a
'humble carpenter,' the only object we are specifically
told he made was not
 a table or a chair, but a whip."
Or, as Severian puts it in The Book of the New Sun:
Memory oppresses me. Having been reared
among the torturers, I have never known my
father or my mother. No more did my brother
apprentices know theirs. From time to time, but
most particularly when winter draws on, poor
wretches come clamoring to the Corpse Door,
hoping to
 be admitted to our ancient guHd. Often
they regale Brother Porter with accounts of the
torments they
 will willingly inflict in payment for
warmth and rood; occasionally they fetch animals
as samples of their work.
All are turned away. Traditions from our days
of glory... forbid recruitment from such as they.
Even at the time I write of, when the guild had
shrunk to two masters and less than a score of
journeymen, those traditions were honored.
It is a familiar charge of modern atheism that the
existence of pain argues against the existence of God.
"For some time it has seemed to me," Wolfe insists,
"that it would be even easier to maintain the position
that pain proves or tends to prove God's reality." The
tale of Severian, apprentice to the Order of Saint
27

===== PDFPAGE 2 =====
28 FIRST THINGS
Katharine of the Seekers for Truth and Penitence, is the
tale of a man reared in the state-sponsored infliction of
physical agony who comes to discover over his life's
adventures that the power of pain ultimately points to
something deeper. Expelled from his own guild when
he shows mercy to one of their "clients," he is sent into
exile as a disgrace to his guild. His adventures lead him
to the estate of an order of religious women from
whom he unwittingly comes into possession of an
ancient relic, called the Claw of the Conciliator.
Unaware of its seemingly magical powers, Severian
comes to realize that he can sometimes—not always—
heal people with a touch from the glowing artifact.
Only gradually does it become revealed to the reader
that the Claw is believed to be a relic of Christ, the
Conciliator, also known as the New Sun, who will one
day return, bringing not only peace but a rebirth of the
dwindling red orb in Urth's daylight sky. Severian
eventually returns to the Guild from which he has been
exiled, assumes the throne of the Commonwealth, and
silences the machines of torture.
G
ene Wolfe was bom in 1931 in Brooklyn, but
his family moved often. He did not settle in
one place until he was ten; Texas became his
home for the next fourteen years. He dropped out of
Texas A & M in 1952 and was drafted and fought as an
infantryman in the Korean War before returning to
earn his bachelor's in mechanical engineering at the
University of Houston. Along the way, he married a
girl he had known since he was four years old and con-
verted to Catholicism.
About his conversion, Wolfe
 says: "I was raised in a
rather lax fashion as a Presbyterian. I don't think my
father had any particular religious convictions. My
mother had been raised as a Presbyterian and so I was
nominally a Presbyterian. It was largely an answer to
give when people asked you. ... I married a Roman
Catholic and had to take instruction in it in order that
we could have a Catholic wedding I became inter-
ested in it, read and studied, and talked to people about
it and so forth, and eventually converted. ... I didn't
read a lot of theology.... I read Chesterton's book on
St. Thomas Aquinas .. . and ended up reading every-
thing of Chesterton's that I could find. I had gone
through very much the same thing earlier with C.S.
Lewis."
While working for Proctor and Gamble, Wolfe
helped design the machine that makes the well-known
Pringles potato chip. He left the company after sixteen
years, however, to become an editor for Plant Engi-
neering magazine, where he worked until 1981. He had
been writing and publishing short stories since the
mid-1960s (including a long-forgotten short novel
called Operation Ares). In 1973, The Fifth Head of
Cerberus got him notice among his peers in science
fiction. In 1975, Harper published Peace, his first and,
to date, only mainstream novel (also one of his person-
al favorites), about a wealthy old man who builds
museum-style rooms in his mansion to match the
rooms from houses pf his past life.
The Book of the New Sun is considered Wolfe's sig-
nature work. But shortly after chronicling Severian's
adventures in the world a million years after Christ,
Wolfe looked back to the past, creating a different sol-
dier on the opposite end of the historical timeline, set in
the world prior to the rise of Christianity.
Soldier of the Mist (1986), Soldier of Arete (1989),
and the newest installment. Soldier of Sidon (2006),
begin with the same contrivance: an archeological dis-
covery, an ancient scroll, with an introduction by
Wolfe posing as translator.
About two years ago, an urn containing scrolls of
papyrus, all apparently unused, was found behind
a collection or Roman lyres in the basement of the
British Museum.... After passing through sever-
al hands, they became the property of
 a Mr. D
A , a dealer and collector in Detroit. He got the
notion that something might be concealed on the
sticks on which the papyrus was wound and had
them X-rayed. The X-rays showed them to be
solid; but they also showed line after line of
minute characters on the sheet (technically the
protokoUon) gummed to each stick. Sensing him-
self on the verge of a discovery of real bibliotic
importance, he examined a scroU under a power-
ful lens and found that all its sheets were covered
on both sides with minute gray writing, which the
personnel of the museum, and of Someby's, had
apparently taken for dust smears. Spectrographic
analysis has established that the writing instru-
ment was
 a sharp "pencil" of metallic lead. Know-
ing my interest in dead languages, the owner has
asked me to provide this translation.
Each of the novels opens with Latro telling the
reader: "I am to write everything that takes place on
this scroll, as concisely as I can. I will try. I must read
this every morning, too." The scroll is Latro's key to
his identity and our key to piecing together what hap-
pens to him throughout his adventures. Every night
sleep wipes away in his mind the events and meetings
of the previous day, so from day to day he is dependent
on the daily journal he keeps.
Latro's adventures take place immediately after the
battle of Plataea, in which the armies of Athens and
Sparta repulsed the invasion of Xerxes in 479
 B.C. A
Roman in the service of the Persian emperor, Latro is
actually named Lucius, but he has forgotten this. He
finds himself a prisoner among the victonous Greeks,

===== PDFPAGE 3 =====
APRIL 2007 29
recovering from the head wound that has cost him
much of his memory. He is a slave, with companions
such as lo, a young slave girl, and an African warrior
who becomes one of his most reliable friends. Latro
makes friends with others as well (some of whom will
be familiar to anyone who has read the Histories of
Herodotus) as he makes his way through the Athens
and Sparta of the Persian Wars, trying to find his way
back to his wife and home in Italy.
Latro's wound has not only damaged his memory
but also touched him in some way, giving him occa-
sional access to the world of spirits and gods—or so his
friends believe, because he reports interactions with the
deities, coming and going almost as prosaically as the
people he meets every day. Thus, for example, in Sol-
dier of Sidon, the captain of an Egyptian ship takes
Latro to the shrine of the goddess Hathor, where he
will procure a wife for himself to accompany him on
the trip.
"Hathor was wet-nurse to Osiris," the priest
explained. "We give animal heads to many of our
gods to illustrate their honor and authority. You
foreigners are frequently puzzled by it, wishing
your gods to be like yourselves. Hathor
 is not like
us, but a mighty divinity. It is Hathor who feeds
the dead ancT governs love and family...."
I heard no more. A homed woman taller than
any man had stepped from behind the image of
the goddess. As she strode toward us, it seemed
that some other held
 a lamp behind her, so that her
whole form was outlined with light, although her
smiling face was shadowed. "You go into danger,
foreign man," she told me. "Do you wish my
help? You may have it at
 a price."
I wanted to kneel but felt I could not. My
body was still standing next to Muslak. "I need
your help very much. Great Goddess, but I have
nothing to give but my sword."
Before Latro's vision fades, the goddess asks him to
protect her "kitten" in return for her favor. When
Latro sees that one of the women being shown to the
captain bears a clasp on her headband in the shape of a
cat, Latro asks his commander to procure her for him
as well. In Latro, the deities could not have found a
more guileless target: "I like this young scribe. He is
eager to teach, yet very ready to learn. Not many men
are like that. I cannot know whether he is brave or not,
for Myt-ser'eu says we have not known him long and
there has been no fighting. Yet his eyes say he is, and
what is better yet, that he does not know it. I would
rather have him at my side than most men. Surely his
god must favor him! What god would not favor such a
priest?"
Latro's openness allows him to make friends of
more-honorable warriors, even those who oppose him
at first. But it also makes him easy prey for the gods
who take advantage of his honor for their own ends.
The constant interference of the deities—sometimes in
his favor, sometimes not—plagues Latro, and in
moments of despair he more than once considers sui-
cide, although his soldier's code prevents him. His
hopelessness and death wish could be interpreted as the
state of mankind before the Incarnation: honorable,
well-meaning, but also despairing, mired in ignorance
and darkness and desperate for salvation. But Wolfe
cannot be accused of such straightforward allegory.
The novels are too dense with the details of history.
I
n Soldier of Sidon, for example, Latro joins the
expedition of a Phoenician sailing up the Nile to
explore the region below Egypt for the Persian
satrap Achaemenes, who has ruled the country since
the Persians conquered it. Like its earlier installments.
Soldier of Sidon reads like a fictional travelogue
through ancient Egypt—an Egypt that more than two
thousand years ago was already ancient—and Latro,
with his new wife at his side, marvels at the many
sights.
The city [Mennufer/Memphis] is noisy and
crowded, exciting but tiring, particularly when
one goes from shop to shop in the jeweler's quar-
ter. The streets are narrow, and the buildings
crowded together
 like men. The floor on the street
is always a shop. There are other things above, and
Myt-ser'eu says sometimes these are finer shops
for the rich. This inn has a cookshop on the
street—it was where we ate—and rooms for rent
above. The highest are best and cost most. The
walls at the street are very thick,
 as they must be to
support so many levels above them. This keeps
the lower levels cool, while the wind and a thick
roof cool the upper levels.
Myt-ser'eu wants to buy cosmetics tomorrow.
She says that she may only look at them and we
may buy nothing, but I am not so young as to
believe it. She also says that her own city, called
Sais, was the capital of Kemet [Egypt] long ago.
Now the satrap rules from here, and she is glad.
She would not wish him and all his foreign sol-
diers in her city. I am a foreign soldier myself—so
I read. Yet Myt-ser'eu left Sais with me. No one
can know the heart of a woman.
When Latro first boards the riverboat, he sees that
one of the passengers, a magician, has created for him-
self the waxen image of a beautiful woman he can call
to life at
 will. Her fleeting appearances terrify the crew,
for she seems to be a sort of golem or vampire. She
appears only at night, and throughout the novel the
reader wonders whether Latro, in an unguarded
moment, will allow himself to be tricked by her into

===== PDFPAGE 4 =====
30 FIRST THINGS
exposing his mistress to danger; despite her seductive
approach to Latro, the demon woman clearly wants
the blood of the girl.
As the story progresses, the adventurers decide to
detour in order to save the son of one of the higher-
born Egyptian passengers who is held captive by
Nubians. Latro leads an expedition to free the young
man, only to be caught by their adversaries—and lose
his sword in the process.
Since his sword is his honor, Latro is close to
despair. The captives are eventually purchased and
freed when the king of Nysa recognizes Latro from
their adventures in Greece and embraces him as a
brother. In the end, it is Latro's fierce adherence to his
soldief's code ahd his desire to recover his lost sword
that alldw him to escape the dangers that beset him.
Soldier of Sidon closes with Latro's entries becoming
more and more disjointed as he wanders through
Egypt hunting for his sword. Myt-ser'eu, who clearly
loves him, doggedly pursues the Roman throughout
the country and comes to his aid, but we are left with
the lone soldier as lost—if not more so—as when the
novel began.
The subjection of men to the whim of gods is a
theme Wolfe has worked with in several other novels,
and not always successfully. There Are Doors (1988)
focuses on the plight of a mental patient who believes
the goddess Aphrodite has persisted into the modem
era; but the novel, told in a detached third-person
voice, seems strained and rigged like an elaborate game.
Another, Castleview (1990), projects the legendary fig-
ures of the Grail saga into a Chicago suburb with more
success, although it, too, lacks the unifying force of a
first-person narrator and threatens to collapse under
the weight of
 its too-large cast. Soldier of Sidon returns
Wolfe to his more confident first-person style.
The Soldier novels have not been as widely read as
The Book of the New Sun. This seems odd, as they are
more accessible, with a historical setting that is less
mysterious to the average reader than that of his sci-
ence-fiction
 saga of the Urth of the New Sun. It may be
that in the long run they will represent Wolfe's most
enduring work. Consider passages such as this:
A man's life
 is indeed short, ending in death. If
it were long, his days would be of small value. If
there were no death, of none. Let him fill each day
with honor and ioy. Let him not condemn himself
or another, for ne does not know the laws of his
existence or theirs. If he sleeps in death, let him
sleep. If while sleeping he should meet a god, he
must let the god decide how well or ill he lived.
The god he meets must rule upon a man's life,
never the man himself.
That last sentence, and its note of defiance, perhaps
hints at what the man of the ancient world was ready
for on the eve of the Incarnation: a true deity who
would come to judge a man's life without tyrannizing
the man himself. El]
The Argument
Our priest exulted, "How wonderful His ways,"
then climbed his pulpit's Calvary. The tide,
lit by the after-dawn had brimmed the bay's
calm
 space, reflecting light on the roof inside.
What boy, by a choir-loft window, could resist
turning to look? A seal swam round a trawler
whose lantern-masts were moored above in mist,
and rippled sparkling water-lap down all her
salt-rust
 length. Past diesel pumps and dock,
the sun unpicked the nets by the fish-house door
as I watched the seal clamber on Pollock's Rock.
The mist had almost dissolved and a green pour
of ocean swelled and tumed by the harbour stair
while the priest struggled, explaining God's design,
and the seal shook his watered quiff of hair,
slicked down for Sunday morning, just like mine.
—  Oliver Murray