Journal of Tolkien Research Journal of Tolkien Research 
Volume 14 Issue 1 Article 7 
2022 
Tolkien as a Literary Artist (2021) by Thomas Kullmann and Dirk Tolkien as a Literary Artist (2021) by Thomas Kullmann and Dirk 
Siepmann Siepmann 
John R. Holmes 
Franciscan University of Steubenville, jholmes@franciscan.edu 
Follow this and additional works at: https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch 
 Part of the Literature in English, British Isles Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Holmes, John R. (2022) "Tolkien as a Literary Artist (2021) by Thomas Kullmann and Dirk Siepmann," 
Journal of Tolkien Research: Vol. 14 : Iss. 1 , Article 7. 
Available at: https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol14/iss1/7 
This Book Review is brought to you for free and open access by ValpoScholar. It has been accepted for inclusion in 
Journal of Tolkien Research by an authorized administrator of ValpoScholar. For more information, please contact 
a ValpoScholar staff member at scholar@valpo.edu. 

===PAGE===

Tolkien as a Literary Artist: Exploring Rhetoric, Language and Style in “The Lord 
of the Rings” , by Thomas Kullmann and Dirk Siepmann . Cham, Switzerland: 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2021 . xiv,  319 pp. $149.99  (hardcover) ISBN 
9783030692988. Also available in ebook format. 
This book will ruffle feathers.  
In Tolkien as a Literary Artist, authors Thomas Kullmann and Dirk Siepmann  
have applied corpus linguistics (the quantitative and qualitative analysis of word 
frequency and sequence that large databases of digitized texts have made possible 
in this century) to the text of The Lord of the Rings. Along the way they have also 
incorporated into their study other, more traditional, methods of literary analysis, 
though these are always informed by this newly available data.  
Some of the results of such deep analysis of Tolkien’s “Rhetoric, Language, 
and Style,” to echo the subtitle of this book, corroborate judgements of critics over 
the half-century since the publication of The Lord of the Rings (such as the role of 
the hobbits as mediating focal characters , K& S Chapter 4 ). Other results tend to 
refute long-held views (like the prevalence and significance of archaic inversions; 
see K & S p. 40), and these are the findings likely to make some splash. In between 
are those findings that will be a matter of indifference to most readers but will prove 
useful to some future writer on Tolkien who wonders why Aragorn begins a 
pronouncement about the future with shall half again as often as Gandalf does, and 
seven times as often as Sam or Pippin. 
Kullmann and Siepmann’s title is a fair reflection of their approach to studying 
the language of The Lord of the Rings: “Tolkien as a Literary Artist.” By “liter ary 
artist” they purport “not to accord any special status to the creator of Middle-earth,” 
but simply to use the same tools to evaluate Tolkien’s works as might be brought 
to bear on those of more “canonical” authors such as James Joyce or Virginia Woolf 
(4). These techniques are primarily Corpus Stylistics on Siepmann’s part, and 
literary analysis within a framework of “intertextuality” on Kullmann’s . The 
distinction between the two authors is invited by the careful attribution of each 
chapter to one or t he other (or both), though to be sure there are fruitful mutual 
influences between the two authors. By measuring Tolkien with the same rod used 
for academically respectable authors, Siepmann and Kullmann  touch on the 
simmering question of Tolkien’s canonical status in academe—a status which still 
seems slow in coming . The authors measure the glacial pace of canonical 
acceptance in the introduction of this book (and in its conclusion) by appeal to 
standard histories of English -language literature which alloc ate relatively little 
space (in some cases none) to Tolkien (1). Avoiding the chimera of “relative literary 
merit,” virtually all the statements about Tolkien’s style in this book are made 
1
Holmes: Tolkien as a Literary Artist (2021)
Published by ValpoScholar, 2022

===PAGE===

against the baseline of English -language novels of the nineteenth a nd twentieth 
centuries (a particular area of expertise for Professor Kullmann).  
While this analysis allows a n easy refutation of critical charges of Tolkien’s 
language as “impoverished” or “simple and lacking in conventional novelistic 
textures” (5)—a refutation more empirical than hitherto possible—the procedure 
has the effect of bringing newer and more sophisticated weapons to a battle whose 
issue has been decided decades ago. Nevertheless, a few litanies of key words 
illustrating new uses of old roots in Tolkien leads to the bold and possibly startling 
assertion that Tolkien is “in a much less obvious sense than in the case of James 
Joyce or Virginia Woolf . . . a linguistic post-modernist” (8). 
Even pronouncements like this, presented as challenges to critical consensus, 
will strike many current Tolkien scholars and fans as old news.  Tolkien’s debt to 
19th- and early-20th-century novels is presented by Kullmann and Siepmann as 
“often . . . overlooked” (297), an assessment that itself overlooks the pa st few 
decades of criticism explicating echoes of modern fiction in Tolkien, culminating 
in Holly Ordway’s Tolkien’s Modern Reading  (2021). 
A particular strength of Tolkien as a Literary Artist is its catalogues of Tolkien’s 
archaisms of diction and syntax, long stigmatized by detractors as either grating on 
the modern ear, or channeling the pseudo -medievalism of the nineteenth century. 
As impressive as these massive marshalling of texts can be, judgments about just 
what key words are supposedly “archaic” are not presented with any regularity. 
This is particularly surprising, since the database makes possible an objective 
definition of archaism. We could simply consider an archaism to be an older usage 
not reflected elsewhere in the corpus, or reflected measurably less frequently. So a 
purely nominal definition of “archaism” can be posited by appeal to what words are 
no longer in wide use. But surely this is as useless to criticism as the other extreme, 
the reader’s whim which asserts, “Verily and forsooth, such and such a locution be 
archaism, because I say it be archaism.” Unless there is a measure of such usages 
before the 19 th century, how do we know the given usage is archaic? And if, as 
Siepmann and Kullmann seem to imply, romances by the like of Sir Wa lter Scott 
and William Morris are the sources of supposed the elder diction, how do we 
identify them as archaisms in Scott and Morris? 
Illustrations of what I consider the arbitrariness of the “archaic” label abound: 
I shall (note the archaism of “shall” and “abound”) select a few. The differentiation 
of “glad  / gladness” from “happy / happiness,” “joyous / joy” across different 
characters (Aragorn, hobbits, and Gimli respectively; pages 265, 273, 287) is itself 
quite valuable. Why, though, label glad “literary” (265)? Perhaps because of 
association with the King James “glad tidings ? In w hich case “tidings” is the 
2
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 14 [2022], Iss. 1, Art. 7
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol14/iss1/7

===PAGE===

archaic element (as Kullmann and Siepmann duly report in contradistinction to 
“news,” p. 265), not “glad.” Nearing my seventh decade of exposure t o colloquial 
English, I cannot bring myself to consider “glad” a linguistic throwback.  
Further: m ere infrequency is not enough to brand a word: this study marks 
unscathed as similarly “literary,” though I’ll wager it will pass unnoticed among 
most 21st century general readers. Recent lexicographers seem to agree: I could not 
find a current dictionary that lists “scathe” as archaic.  
While the introduction to this book seems to take a proper delight in twitting 
Tolkien fans and critics who “seem to know Tolkien by heart, but have read little 
else,” and “explain Tolkien by reference to Tolkien”—these are the ruffled feathers 
referred to earlier, and perhaps you’ll say they need ruffling , and perhaps I’ll 
agree—nevertheless, Siepmann and Kullmann are sometimes guilty of the opposite 
extreme of ignoring obvious contexts in Tolkien’s major texts outside of The Lord 
of the Rings. Granted, the stated purpose of Tolkien as a Literary Artist is objective 
study of that one text. But something as simple as placing “ orcs” in the same 
category with “hobbits” as words “invented by Tolkien” (without any detectable 
play with the etymology of Latin inventio as “discovery”) is the sort of claim one 
would expect of that hypothetical reader who knows Tolkien by heart, but lit tle 
else. Otherwise the very sources that Tolkien mined for the word orc would be 
obvious, as would its connection with the modern metathesized and vocalized form 
ogre (noted by the OED). When the tenth -century glossator(s) of MS Cotton 
Cleopatra A.iii listed equivalents for Latin orcus, the first choice was simply “orc.” 
(Then þyrs, then hel-deofol.) 
A bit more nuanced is this book’s unfortunate designation of such phenomena 
as the sentient willow in “The Old Forest” chapter (Book I, Chapter 6), Treebeard, 
and Elves as “supernatural” (pages 133, 149, 240) without at least acknowledging 
Tolkien’s twitting of the OED for the unsuitability of the word in regard to fairy. 
In the same way, the conscious nuance of “magic” in the text of The Lord of the 
Rings itself is ignored by Kullmann and Siepmann, to the point of calling plants 
that have healing properties “magic” ( 132) when the ir effect could as easily be 
considered pharmacological, even within the context of the fantasy novel; and 
Saruman’s hypnotic cont rol over people is termed “magic” (145) when similar 
auto-suggestion can be instanced in the primary world , even if it be merely a trick 
of the mind. 
Prof. Kullmann’s expertise in the 19 th and 20 th century British novel  is 
invaluable in detecting echoes (or in Julia Kristeva’s terms “pre-texts”) of Tolkien’s 
contemporaries in The Lord of the Rings . Such echoes, whe re demonstrable, are 
welcome as a healthy antidote to the too-frequent assumption in Tolkien criti cism 
3
Holmes: Tolkien as a Literary Artist (2021)
Published by ValpoScholar, 2022

===PAGE===

that the salient pre-text must always be m edieval. Yet Tolkien as a Literary Artist 
perhaps sounds the other extreme by excluding pre -modern corpora of English 
writing—corpora that undeniably informed Tolkien’s diction. The loss of that pre-
modern context is not limited to the words in The Lord of  the Rings that are no 
longer found in English, such as mathom or marish or eored, but is felt in words 
that are still with us, like tale, sheen, or the verb form of shape, which 
simultaneously bear quite di fferent modern (“story,” “reflected light,” “to give 
form”)  and Anglo-Saxon (“counting,” “beauty,” “to create”) meanings.  
Consequently, Kullmann and Siepmann’s discussions of the supposed 
disposition of reek (49), the supposed cliché status of  bitter end  (59), or the 
preference of doom for “judgment” (179) all miss the diachronic nuances of those 
three items. In the case of reek, the primary meaning when Tolkien wrote was 
“smell,” but many of the iterations in The Lord of the Rings more closely fit the 
earlier sense of “vaporish wafting .” Of the twenty -four iterations of 
reek/reeks/reeking, in The Lord of the Rings , Siepmann and Kullmann’s assertion 
that the word is “associated with the foul odours of Mordor” (49), do not 
differentiate the two layers of meaning. Admittedly, some of Tolkien’s uses of the 
word, such as “a reek arose of torches,” or “reeking marshes,” might merge both 
senses. But locutions like “a smoldering reek” and “a reek lay on the land” tend 
more toward the sight of the rising cloud than to the smell. 
The case of bitter end is stickier. In the discourse of the 19th and 20th century 
novels that form the baseline for the study of Tolkien’s words  for Kullmann and 
Siepmann, authors consciously avoid any collocations of words other writers have 
used before them, anathematizing such combinations with the stamp of “cliché,” 
originally French printers’ jargon for the pre-arranged block of type or image (also 
called a “stereotype”). But before moveable type such re-use of others’ words was 
not stigmatized. It was even cultivated. And in any case, collocations happen 
despite our diligence, or else the concept of “pre-text” used in this study would be 
impossible. Simply remember that Tolkien was trained as a language historian and 
the significance of word patterns change. A cliché becomes a fossil of various 
semantic associations, pointing to earlier forms. More often than not, a cliché in 
The Lord of the Rings presents Tolkien with an opportunity to suggest earlier states 
of the words. Bitter originally suggested a physical image, meaning “sharp” (related 
to bite), subsequently applied metaphorically to taste. But that semantic change is 
a red herring in the combination “bitter end,” because it does not derive, as 
commonly assumed, from the bitter dregs after the sweet stuff is gone, but from the 
“bit” end of a rope.  
4
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 14 [2022], Iss. 1, Art. 7
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol14/iss1/7

===PAGE===

Tolkien reverts to the earlier visual meaning of “bitter” twice in the “Shelob’s 
Lair” chapter (Book IV, Chapter 9), avoiding r eference to the “bitter end” of 
Frodo’s sword Sting by speaking of its “bitter edge” —a double pun, since “edge” 
was an Old English word for “sword” (related to the modern meaning by 
synecdoche). A few pages later Sam’s blade meets Shelob when the giant spi der 
“thrust herself on a bitter spike.” Tolkien only uses the combination “bitter end” 
nine times in the half-million words of the novel, modifying it four times with “the,” 
three times with “a,” once with “its” and once with no direct modifier (“to find 
bitter end”). These variations force the reader, I think, to consider the constituent 
words of the collocation separately. 
The “layered” semantics of English words is yet another argument for extending 
the corpora in any future studies of Tolkien’s style. The continuity of English style 
and syntax, a pet notion of Tolkien’s, is obscured when the context of earlier forms 
is ignored. Something as simple as the gendered pronouns for sun and moon in 
Middle-earth, for example, is misconstrued when Kullmann presen ts them  as 
following “Germanic conventions . . . rather than the English poetic convention of 
referring to the sun as ‘he’, as in Latin.” The significance of the feminine sun is not 
that it is a Germanic rather than a Latinate feature, but that it is later  rather than 
earlier. English did not change its grammatical gender: it lost it as an inflection. 
Old English grammatical gender not a matter of pronouns only. And while it is true 
that one can find a masculine sunna in Old English (in Ælfric, for example), by far 
the norm is feminine sunne. Alfred the Great’s educational reform normalized the 
West Saxon feminine form, and the instruction in Old English that Tolkien received 
in the first decades of the 20 th century followed such West Germanic 
normalization—much to the irritation of young John Ronald, who remained 
Mercian at heart. 
Another mechanism by which the words of older writers merge with ours is in 
song, and the prevalence of song and verse in The Lord of the Rings  calls for a 
procedural exclusion in the word-crunching involved in this study. The book does 
in fact give special attention to the lyrical side of The Lord of the Rings , and 
Kullmann’s chapter on “Songs and Poems” (Chapter 8) is one of the best features 
of this volume. But the tendency of diction in poetry to skew older than diction in 
the novel will consequently taint the results of any word search intended to scout 
“archaism” or “literary” word use—unless song is separated out in the sample. 
If a ll these quibbles over detail (and some over design) obscure the 
attractiveness and (what is even rarer) the usefulness of Tolkien as a Literary Artist, 
then shame on the reviewer. Even readers who quarrel with some of its conclusions 
5
Holmes: Tolkien as a Literary Artist (2021)
Published by ValpoScholar, 2022

===PAGE===

will, I believe,  find the beginnings of several critical conversations on Tolkien’s 
stylistics in this book.  
The introduction (Chapter 1) is virtually an executive summary of the whole 
book, including paraphrases and direct repetitions from the later chapters.  
Chapter 2 (“Tolkien as a Stylist,” Siepmann) presents the key-word analysis as 
a function of the same key-words in 19th and 20th century fiction, with a bonus in 
2.3.3 of “Key Words Shared with Tolkien’s Translation of Beowulf.”  
Chapter 3 (“Narrative Syntax,” Siepmann)  gets deep into the weeds of 
grammatical construction in Tolkien’s style on word, phrase, and clause levels, 
ending with analysis of two sample paragraphs.  
Chapter 4 (“Points of View,” Kullmann) confirms and deepens the stylistic 
observations of Tom Shippey (not cited in the chapter bibliography), Jared Lobdell, 
Brian Rosebury, and Steve Walker , measuring the dominance of the hobbit point 
of view in the novel by making them the internal storytellers (85% o f all “non -
direct” speech, according to Kullmann, represents hobbits), and the foci of 
“psychonarration (p. 105).  
Chapter 5 (“Landscape Descriptions,” Kullmann), identifies three functions of 
landscape in The Lord of the Rings: to glorify the English countryside, to mirror the 
state of a character’s mind, and to “add magic.”  
Chapter 6 (“Speeches and Declarations,” Ku llmann) allows for more formal 
and ritual uses of speech, and acknowledges the extent to which syntax and style 
observations of previous chapters become more complex when speech acts become 
more formal.  
Chapter 7 (“Storytelling,” Kullmann) identifies three categories of the 45 to 50 
“intercalated” stories told by twenty -three characters in the novel: simultaneous 
events, exposition, and “mythological” past.  
Chapter 8 (“Poems and Songs,” Kullmann) includes a well-crafted argument 
that in following the hist ories of these traditional songs “readers become 
philologists.”  
Chapter 9 (“Language and Character,” both authors) is an expansion of 
suggestions in earlier chapters of the ways in which idiolect aids characterization 
in The Lord of the Rings . The individual observations on characters’ speech is of 
tremendous value to readers and critics interested in character study in Tolkien.  
The conclusion (Chapter 10, “Tolkien’s Position in Literary History,” both 
authors) is modest, tentative, and brief, though it does not shirk from stylistic 
comparison with the canonical giants Shakespeare and Joyce.  
I have called Tolkien as a Literary Artist a useful book, and that may be an 
understatement. Its word lists and stylistic observations will form the basis of 
6
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 14 [2022], Iss. 1, Art. 7
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol14/iss1/7

===PAGE===

articles and studies for years to come. One of my first evaluative questi ons of any 
work on Tolkien is always, “will this add to our understanding and appreciation of 
Tolkien’s work?” For this work, the answer is, “oh, yes, immensely—both in itself, 
and in its potential to generate valuable criticism.” 
In spite of the feathers. 
 
John R. Holmes 
Franciscan University of Steubenville 
Steubenville, Ohio 
7
Holmes: Tolkien as a Literary Artist (2021)
Published by ValpoScholar, 2022