Volume 41 
Number 1 Article 23 
October 2022 
Tolkien as a Literary Artist: Exploring Rhetoric, Language and Style Tolkien as a Literary Artist: Exploring Rhetoric, Language and Style 
inin  The Lord of the Rings by Thomas Kullmann and Dirk Siepmann The Lord of the Rings by Thomas Kullmann and Dirk Siepmann 
Sharon L. Bolding 
Independent Scholar 
Follow this and additional works at: https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore 
 Part of the Children's and Young Adult Literature Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Bolding, Sharon L. (2022) "Tolkien as a Literary Artist: Exploring Rhetoric, Language and Style in The Lord 
of the Rings by Thomas Kullmann and Dirk Siepmann," Mythlore: A Journal of J.R.R. Tolkien, C.S. Lewis, 
Charles Williams, and Mythopoeic Literature: Vol. 41: No. 1, Article 23. 
Available at: https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol41/iss1/23 
This Book Reviews is brought to you for free and open 
access by the Mythopoeic Society at SWOSU Digital 
Commons. It has been accepted for inclusion in Mythlore: 
A Journal of J.R.R. Tolkien, C.S. Lewis, Charles Williams, 
and Mythopoeic Literature by an authorized editor of 
SWOSU Digital Commons. An ADA compliant document 
is available upon request. For more information, please 
contact phillip.fitzsimmons@swosu.edu. 
To join the Mythopoeic Society go to: 
http://www.mythsoc.org/join.htm 


===PAGE===

Online Summer Seminar 2023 
August 5-6, 2023: Fantasy Goes to Hell: Depictions of Hell in Modern Fantasy Texts 
https://mythsoc.org/oms/oms-2023.htm 
Tolkien as a Literary Artist: Exploring Rhetoric, Language and Style inTolkien as a Literary Artist: Exploring Rhetoric, Language and Style in  The Lord of The Lord of 
the Rings by Thomas Kullmann and Dirk Siepmann the Rings by Thomas Kullmann and Dirk Siepmann 
This book reviews is available in Mythlore: A Journal of J.R.R. Tolkien, C.S. Lewis, Charles Williams, and Mythopoeic 
Literature: https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol41/iss1/23 

===PAGE===

Reviews 
Mythlore 41.1, Fall/Winter 2022  277 
with.” “These tales,” as Ball continues, “help us deal with the irresolvable 
dilemmas of being human” (379, italics in original). For those of us who care 
about mythopoeic fiction, this is a ringing e ndorsement of the significance of 
what we study. 
—Janet Brennan Croft 
 
 
 
TOLKIEN  AS A LITERARY  ARTIST : EXPLORING  RHETORIC , LANGUAGE  
AND  STYLE  IN THE LORD  OF THE RINGS . Thomas Kullmann and Dirk 
Siepmann. Palgrave Macmillan, 2021. 319 p. 9783030692988. $149.99. 
 
RS. KULLMANN AND SIEPMANN APPROACH THE TOPIC of literary artistry in the 
works of Tolkien from the point of view of both linguistics and the history 
of literature, in which the author of The Lord of the Rings was so deeply educated. 
Given that Tolkien was foremost a philologist, analyzing his vocabulary and 
syntax makes sense. This approach forms a “corpus stylistic” treatment 
combined with discourse theory and intertextuality. The co -authors relate 
Tolkien’s writing techniques to a wide-ranging corpus of English fiction as well 
as poetics; style and rhetoric, while traditional approaches, receive fresh 
treatment in this work as the authors bring out the role of languages in the world 
building that takes place through speeches, sto rytelling, descriptions of mythic 
landscapes, and the many poems and songs inserted into the narrative. Each 
type receives its own chapter. With a combination of a corpus -based linguistic 
analysis and a more traditional literary dissection of the text, the y bring a 
nuanced and detailed study to the body of scholarly criticism surrounding 
Tolkien’s work.  
As the initiating premise, the authors portray Tolkien as caught 
between the Charybdis and Scylla of disdainful literary critics who ignore him 
and overly enthusiastic fans who idolize him. This dichotomy has kept him out 
of the mainstream of literary trad ition and sidelined his writing, especially The 
Lord of the Rings , from receiving its due consideration. To rectify this situation 
the authors propose to examine the “rhetoric, story -telling, description and the 
malleability of English prose” (3) employed by Tolkien. Kullmann and 
Siepmann desire to place Tolkien, not on a pedestal, but rather on a shelf 
alongside other literary greats, and simply accord him the same critical 
consideration of linguistic and literary study.  
They propose to undertake a standa rd, two -fold approach of 
qualitative and quantitative measures. This affords a heuristic that permits 
comparison with other similar works from normative literary canons: apples to 
D 

===PAGE===

Reviews 
278  Mythlore 141, Fall/Winter 2022 
apples checkpoints, as it were. The quantitative approach employs corpus 
linguistic methods to assess Tolkien’s use of language. The qualitative approach 
concentrates on intertextuality as a framework to cover the investigation of 
fantasy and its metaphorical relationship with reality. In presenting their 
methodology, the authors preclude that Tolkien “is a linguistic postmodernist” 
(8) before presenting much more than cursory evidence. Subsequent critical 
details may prove their statement to be true.  
Using the constructs of metaphor and metonymy as a launching point 
for their dis cussion of reality juxtaposed with fantasy, the authors posit two 
misconceptions about fiction in general: escapism and realism. Namely that a 
certain type of fiction either provides an escape from everyday life or mimics it 
more closely than fantasy. Using the concepts of similarity and contiguity, they 
attempt to refute these misconceptions at the outset before diving into a closer 
analysis of The Lord of the Rings in specific. Basing their reading on the theories 
of Jacobson (10), stylistics and discours e are examined to determine how these 
two aspects create a relationship between the world of the text and the real 
world in the mind of the intended reader:  
 
Fantastic texts, we should like to argue, regularly take a grasp on the 
world of our experience by means of metaphor, that is, through 
relationships of similarity, as opposed to “realistic” fiction which is 
mainly related to the world we know by means of m etonymy, that is, 
through relationships of contiguity. (10)  
 
To prove their position, The Hobbit is presented as metaphorical in nature, 
while The Lord of the Rings is a combination of metaphor and metonymy, in that 
both fantasy and realism abound. The Ho bbit is pure quest and follows the 
narrative structure and program of similar children’s literature from the 19 th 
century, of which several examples are cited. In contrast, The Lord of the Rings is 
presented as “fantastic” by virtue of an extensive breakdo wn of descriptive 
scenes, character development, and subplot story -telling that exemplifies the 
realist novel of the late 19th, early 20th century.  
 
Tolkien’s epic narrative actually abounds in descriptions of the 
characters’ outward appearance, their hab itations and the landscapes 
they pass through during their quest. In these respects, The Lord of the 
Rings, in spite of its fantasy plot, is indebted to the nineteenth -century 
realist novel. (15)  
 
Why the combination of realistic and fantastic details in The Lord of the Rings ? 
The authors state that this mix lends to the willing suspension of disbelief when 
reading the text. But furthermore, the realism pulls the reader into the tale, 

===PAGE===

Reviews 
Mythlore 41.1, Fall/Winter 2022  279 
allowing for poetic faith in the more extraordinary details. In other words, the 
fantastic world is given a cloak of familiar cloth from which to operate. As we 
travel through strange and amazing worlds, we are comforted and equally 
horrified by the familiar details, intensifying our sympathetic response.  
Concerning the method of intertextuality and discourse theory as 
applied in the analysis presented, the approach of providing a composite view 
of linguistic and thematic elements is unique, in that they are generally t reated 
as disparate domains of inquiry. The Introduction of this work takes time to look 
at the narrative technique of The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings by seeking the 
“pre-text” that may have informed their composition at various points of 
interest. And so the realm of fairy tales and myth emerges preeminent. Irony 
and parody are emphasized as well as a variety of other features including 
pathetic fallacy as a means of characterizing the representation of fantastic space 
through which protagonists venture.  
In order to further examine The Lord of the Rings and Tolkien’s style, the 
authors propose an examination of key word phrases and how they are used 
within the narrative passages to create a body of narratorial motifs and 
movements that define language  and its various modes as unique within the 
corpus of English literature. Foundational to subsequent discussions, “Tolkien 
as a Stylist: Key Words and Key Collocations in The Lord of the Rings” describes 
a data -driven analysis of the work. Siepmann’s objec tive is to compare word 
selection and usage, unigram and bigrams, to curated sets of 19 th- and 20 th-
century writings, both fiction and non -fiction, containing 30 and 94 million 
words respectively. A word or two -word phrase is considered to be key if it 
occurs at least three times and is outstandingly frequent compared to the 
baseline corpus.  
With a comparison of word selection and phrasing, the concept of 
“overuse” surfaced a number of interesting facts surrounding Tolkien’s mastery 
of the English language . Concerning 19 th-century terminology, he had a 
propensity to use about twice the number of key words. Phrasing for verb -
adverb pairings, narrative constructs, and modalities of intent were also archaic. 
Additionally, descriptors for landscape features, an d positioning of nature 
elements depend on obsolete or archaic forms of composition. Analysis of 
modern fiction from the early 20th-century corpus indicates that while the words 
were modern, they were placed within 19 th-century structural patterns of 
speech, such that common English words are rendered strange to the eye of the 
reader. Words like “endless” and “fair” are repeatedly used in non -standard 
contexts for example. Addressing the common argument that Tolkien relied on 
his knowledge of Old English an d epic tales, the analysis of keyword density 
between his translation of Beowulf and The Lord of the Rings  is especially 

===PAGE===

Reviews 
280  Mythlore 141, Fall/Winter 2022 
noteworthy. Consideration is given to the verb smite, or the usage of its past 
tense smote in various passages.  
When examining bigrams, the evidence points to a selection of 
everyday adjectives juxtaposed in unusual pairing with nouns, such that 
collocations of words create a distribution pattern which heightens the sense of 
adventure. For example “great” is a common adj ective but paired frequently 
with abstract nouns that are decidedly archaic: “peril,” “weariness,” “deed.” 
Sometimes adjectives are combined to create a stronger impact of otherness: 
“great black mace.” 
 
Part of Tolkien’s special gift as a writer appears t o lie in this ability to 
craft literary turns of phrase from the most basic lexical material in the 
language, a feat which authors of lesser stature generally cannot 
accomplish, opting instead for more complex forms of words. (57) 
 
A noteworthy outcome of the investigation into key n-grams in The Lord of 
the Rings is the degree to which Tolkien animated the landscape. Using contrasts 
of dark and light, anthropomorphism, and descriptive patterns of uncertainty 
to introduce the fantastic into an otherwise realistic journey, he balances themes 
of trust and terror to create dramatic tension. Finally, the common domains that 
emerge from the data driven analysis provide an insight into thematic areas of 
investigation: Darkness/light/color, geographical/location -based content, 
nature/plant life, time, distance, ethical values, etc. Especially useful is the 
appendix of Key Words exclusive to The Lord of the Rings (64-67). 
In conclusion, the word counting, bigram analysis, collocation study, and 
semantic categorization details add up to evidence of Tolkien’s reliance on the 
19th-century novel and his translation of Beowulf. He relies on his academic 
knowledge of linguistics, putting old words to new usage and forcing modern 
words to take on archaic significance. In thi s sense, the authors conclude that 
much like James Joyce or Virginia Woolf, Tolkien, according to Siepmann, 
should be considered a postmodernist.  
The third chapter is purely analytic and provides a bridge between the 
statistical approaches of semiotic wor d analysis and the subsequent, more 
traditional literary narrative treatments. Continuing the theme of data -driven 
investigation, Siepmann’s next step is to query the narrative syntax of Tolkien’s 
work starting at the word, then phrase, and finally clause level of discourse. He 
looks for negative evidence, in other words, what is common usage that Tolkien 
eschews, before examining those attributes that are unique to The Lord of the 
Rings. Taking his findings, he examines two sample paragraphs to provide an 
exegesis of intent behind the use of everyday language in avoidance of the banal. 

===PAGE===

Reviews 
Mythlore 41.1, Fall/Winter 2022  281 
To contrast styles, the author looks at a passage from the Shire, which exhibits a 
familiar style, compared to a heroic scene cast in the “high” style of epic or myth.  
Next, Thomas Kullmann takes over to examine the historic point of view 
attempting to identify the literary antecedents of The Lord of the Rings. As a novel 
of the mid -20th century, the trilogy follows the standard patterns, using direct 
speech to comprise 50 percent of the text (90). Narrative oversight comes from 
the point of view of the hobbits and their experiences while even maintaining 
the third -person voice. Explicati ons and interpretations of events come from 
other characters rather than the narrator, so that narratorial intervention into the 
story is minimized. In other words, we do not get an omniscient point of view, 
but the more fantastic characters provide the in sights: wizards, dwarves and 
elves seem to be more in touch than the “everyman” of Hobbiton.  
Continuing his program in Chapter 4, “Points of View,” Kullmann brings 
to bear the historic analysis of themes and influences for The Lord of the Rings . 
Noting that just over 50 percent of the text is dialog between characters, he 
compares Tolkien’s narrat ive to epic and classic romance prose (90) while the 
narration is more modern in nature hewing to the conventions of 19 th century 
writing tradition. The key narrative construct of realism from the point of view 
of the hobbits is contrasted with various other character types which bring into 
play degrees of the fantastic and supernatural. By using the hobbits’ point of 
view for what is real and their sense of wonder at what is “not real,” the 
emotions, ethics, and sense of fair play create a movement in not only space and 
time, but in that quintessential realm of spiritual maturity. For example, the 
transcendental beauty of the elves and their realm not only marks a way point 
in the journey of the fellowship, but also, using the technique of limited point of 
view, creates an intermediate agency between reality and fantasy: we see but 
through a glass darkly. Focalized vision creates metaphorical journeys for the 
reader. 
Shifting points of view also serve to raise narrative tension. By separating 
the hobbits into two groups (Sam and Frodo, Merry and Pippin), the narrative 
spreads out like the landscape into a wider field of play. While the main 
narrative continues as the quest of the ring, Merry and Pippin introduce us to 
Fangorn, Gondor, Rohan, Helm’s Deep, and ultimately Minas Tirith, all highly 
mythic in nature if not reputation. Through this secondary journey we get a 
wider historical and mythical perspective on Middle-earth. In contrast the main 
journey of Frodo and Sam continues in the epic tradition of lone liness and 
subjectivity.  
By examining these points of view, the author emphasizes Tolkien’s varied 
techniques in both character and narrative development of the story line. Noting 
that Tolkien relied upon his background in Old English and especially his 
translation of Beowulf for inspiration to characterize military communities such 

===PAGE===

Reviews 
282  Mythlore 141, Fall/Winter 2022 
as the Riders of Rohan and the defenders of Minas Tirith, Kullmann is not 
unearthing any new surprises. However, his contrast of parataxis and hypotaxis 
as defining these two c ultures on scales of sophistication creates a narrative 
foreground both auditory and visual in nature against which events play out. 
The juxtaposition of styles is a statement both about the love of language and 
the registers of society in which that langu age is used to narrate the battle of 
good and evil. The one person who fluidly moves between societies, languages, 
and social registers is Gandalf. Kullmann spends some time looking at the 
wizard’s point of view as both judge and jury, counselor and comrad e in arms 
to various members of the fellowship. Ethical discussions come about through 
the pre -texts and contexts of Gandalf’s stories and adventures. He is both a 
source of information about the history of the peoples and landscapes they 
travel through and a participant in that history, being almost as old as the elves. 
He mediates between realms and times, illustrating a state of mind while in the 
midst of telling stories. Gandalf’s point of view, more than any other character’s, 
is omniscient even though no one is a complete know-it-all.  
If Chapter 4 was about personas and their points of view, the next chapter 
focuses on Landscape as a singularly unique presence in The Lord of the Rings . 
“Landscape Descriptions,” while extensive in its review of the many descriptive 
passages, can be summed up as one of defining the landscape as a persona that 
moves narration forward. In other words, if the company does not get moving, 
the land will force them onward. “Why?” is the key issue addressed in this 
analysis. Why does Tolkien take the various scenery pieces and animate them 
with a force and a will of their own? Mountains and trees seemingly rage against 
the protagonists with a hatred equivalent to that of demons and orcs, lending a 
gothic dankness to the surround ings. The author posits three reasons for the 
personification of nature as an ancient malevolent force: glorify the English 
countryside by contrast, mirror at times the characters’ state of mind, and inject 
a magical dimension to the story (131). Each has its own narrative tradition 
which is explored at length. There is a nice table laying out the metaphorical 
interrelationship of landscapes to characters’ psychology (138) that hearkens to 
19th-century romanticism and the gothic novel, using Ruskin’s pathet ic fallacy 
as a construct. The use of metonymic and metaphoric systems of signification 
for plants, trees, details of nature and the landscape is a means to also contrast 
the real and the supernatural.  
The next two chapters look at “Speeches and Declarati ons” and 
“Storytelling” respectively. As previously noted, over 50 percent of The Lord of 
the Rings is direct speech, and these three types of speech are predominant. As 
with the chapter on Landscapes, most of the effort is in cataloging and analyzing 
the various passages that comprise each type of dialogue. Of note, only reciting 
poetry is not used for the rhetorical means of persuasion. It is purely for 

===PAGE===

Reviews 
Mythlore 41.1, Fall/Winter 2022  283 
entertainment. There are categories of speeches, such as those of welcome, 
prediction, and personal adv ice. Each has its purpose of persuading the 
audience to a point of view. Some are more classical in their format, and some 
such as that of the hobbits, tend toward plain talk. Manipulation as a key power 
of language is especially highlighted for Gollum. Hi gher born characters use 
archaic, epic speech for their own manipulative purposes, using fancy words to 
hide their desires. Noble words do not always equate to noble deeds.  
Storytelling, in contrast to speech -making, is used to impart narrative 
information that otherwise would not be able to be conveyed. It tends to be more 
epic in nature and while there are 23 story tellers, each with their own style, the 
common purpose is to give historic context to the quest. Immediate, historic, 
and mythic timeframes c ategorize the type of information conveyed. (194) The 
three levels of the past that this body of knowledge creates establishes a timeline 
of remoteness and immediacy. Short and long time determine current reality 
and mythology with Gandalf as the mediator. The degenerate nature of current 
times, as seen in Gondor, only highlights the glory of former times as witnessed 
firsthand by the elves and wizards. Interestingly, speech that is prophecy 
becomes story where the character involved realizes that they part icipate 
directly in the tale. Storytelling, thus becomes a social activity, inviting the 
listener and the reader to participate in the adventure, where language becomes 
the basis of human interaction.  
The analysis of “Poems and Songs,” of which there are more than 60 within 
The Lord of the Rings, posits that various recitations and performances serve the 
plot by advancing narrative development as much as to add entertainment. 
Kullmann notes four types of verse: Mythic, Functional, Bellicose, and 
Otherworldly. A handy table (230 -233) catalogs a breakdown of the types and 
their schemas. The poems are then elucidated by their textual traditions and 
genres, mostly related to English folksongs. The chief purpose of this chapter is 
to show the breadth of Tolkien’s erudition and pretextual knowledge. Kullmann 
also notes that the poetry serves to give voice to a sort of transcendental 
experience (238) for the speaker, and therefore the reader. It opens up both to 
the possibility of a greater world beyond the current  one and creates a bridge 
that crosses physical as well as metaphysical boundaries.  
An additional aspect of poetic utterances is the philological one. Poems 
and songs allow the characters to play with words, explore archaic traditions, 
chant in other lang uages, and in essence create a commentary on language, 
literature, and by extension Old and Middle English, often the realm of 
folklorists and historians.  
The penultimate chapter “Language and Character” appears a bit 
repetitious. This may be due to the fact that several of the preceding topics were 
independent papers republished here as loosely associated themes, each one 

===PAGE===

Reviews 
284  Mythlore 141, Fall/Winter 2022 
dealing with different aspects of language that the characters employ. In this 
dissection of the text, the author sets out to look at t he “character by character” 
stylistics of direct speech. Before it was “Direct speech as storytelling,” ‘Direct 
speech presenting Point of View,” and so forth. Here it is the stylistics of Frodo, 
Gandalf, etc. as speakers. The chapter takes each major memb er of the 
fellowship and breaks down the registers and vocabulary they employ, be it epic 
or everyday content, placing these characters into specific literary traditions. 
Gandalf and Frodo are found to be the most flexible. Sam undergoes the most 
evolution. Gimli and Legolas represent the most traditional registers for their 
typology. Merry and Pippen use common English language as befitting their 
role of reality-based touchstones.  
Concluding their work, the authors declare that The Lord of the Rings  is 
firmly entrenched in the novel -writing tradition of English literature by virtue 
of its language and style. Spanning the epic to fairy tales, romances, and 
ultimately 19th- and early 20 th-century realist novel, Tolkien called upon a vast 
field of pretexts fo r linguistic and literary input in composing The Lord of the 
Rings. This is evinced through the “presentation of a story through the point of 
view of a character” (297 -98). Landscape features also mirror the 19 th-century 
novel. They would like to see Tolki en given the same consideration as 
Shakespeare or Joyce. Comparing Tolkien’s vocabulary to Shakespeare’s, the 
authors note that he had over three millennia of literary tradition and word 
choices from which to pull, creating a similar linguistic versatility . The authors 
also compare Tolkien to Joyce, stating that both are modernists updating the 
epic with their writings, using various techniques and references to mythic and 
fictional precursors. The difference drawn between the two writers is that Joyce 
is f irmly placed in the realist camp, while Tolkien is relegated to the fantasy 
aisle. And only serious writers get serious consideration.  
This study aims to correct that mis -categorization by bridging the 
interpretive gap of, on one hand, the philological ap proach and the other more 
interpretive, modernist treatment. They posit that the tools of data mining that 
corpus linguistics provides can bridge this gap by showing the wealth of 
language, word usage, and grammar constructs both quantitatively and 
qualitatively. While some consider The Lord of the Rings low-brow or children’s 
literature, the corpus -driven stylistics examination has shown numerous 
similarities with high-brow style (304). Indeed some of the greatest value in this 
work is the many tables of d ata, word lists, and cataloging of stylistic elements 
revealed by computational analysis, automating what old -school philologists 
formerly had to do by hand. All in all, this work will serve as a valuable 
reference for the serious Tolkien scholar for many years to come, laying the 
groundwork for future studies into the artistry of Middle-earth.  
—Sharon L. Bolding 