Journal of Tolkien Research Journal of Tolkien Research 
Volume 11 Issue 1 Article 4 
2020 
Tolkien and the Age of Forgery: Improving Antiquarian Practices in Tolkien and the Age of Forgery: Improving Antiquarian Practices in 
Arda Arda 
Will Sherwood 
Independent Scholar, wsherwood92@outlook.com 
Follow this and additional works at: https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch 
 Part of the Literature in English, British Isles Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Sherwood, Will (2020) "Tolkien and the Age of Forgery: Improving Antiquarian Practices in Arda," Journal 
of Tolkien Research: Vol. 11 : Iss. 1 , Article 4. 
Available at: https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol11/iss1/4 
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Christopher Center Library at ValpoScholar. It has 
been accepted for inclusion in Journal of Tolkien Research by an authorized administrator of ValpoScholar. For 
more information, please contact a ValpoScholar staff member at scholar@valpo.edu. 
Tolkien and the Age of Forgery: Improving Antiquarian Practices in Arda Tolkien and the Age of Forgery: Improving Antiquarian Practices in Arda 
Cover Page Footnote Cover Page Footnote 
I am obliged to The Tolkien Estate for allowing me to quote from Tolkien’s unpublished manuscripts in 
this article, and particularly to Cathleen Blackburn, the solicitor for the Estate, who handled my requests. 
This article is available in Journal of Tolkien Research: https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol11/iss1/
4 
1 
 
Tolkien and the Age of Forgery: Improving Antiquarian 
Practices in Arda 
 ‘If a young, perhaps a female author, chooses to circulate a beautiful poem . . . 
under the disguise of antiquity, the public is surely more enriched by the 
contribution than injured by the deception.’ (Scott, 1849, p. 16). 
Literary forgery is not a title we commonly affiliate with J.R.R. Tolkien’s 
mythical legendarium. Neither is it a term I wish to label him with. However, as 
Nick Groom has pondered, ‘it is nonetheless interesting that he adopts the 
techniques of literary forgery’ (2014, p. 294). When referring to the authorial 
conceit that ties The Book of Lost Tales, The Silmarillion, The Red Book of 
Westmarch and the less substantial texts that orbit the legendarium together, we 
are more inclined to use titles like ‘framework’, ‘meta-textual frame’, and ‘depth’ 
to describe Arda’s historicity.1 We perceive the text to exist simultaneously on 
two different planes: the fictional world of the story (the “secondary world”) and 
the real world (“the primary world”) (Pezzini, 2018, p. 49). The theoretical scope 
of Tolkien’s world-building has therefore received significant attention and 
scholars have further examined the tools that Tolkien used to bring Arda to life.2 
However, what has been overlooked is how his world-building strikingly echoes 
the motivations and methodologies of two literary forgers who were writing in the 
1760s – the epoch known as the Age of Forgery. James Macpherson (1736 – 
1796) is renowned for his pseudo-Medieval Scottish mythology attributed to the 
figure of Ossian, and Thomas Chatterton (1752 – 1770) similarly created scores of 
manuscripts and paratexts that he purported to be original works by the imaginary 
Thomas Rowley and Turgot. All three writers considered themselves to have 
‘found’ the mythologies that they built and dedicated them to their nations. 
Of the two, Macpherson has received the most attention within Tolkien 
scholarship. Tom Shippey has argued that Tolkien would have seen Macpherson’s 
Scottish forgeries as ‘phony’, a poor example of a myth cycle that mishandles its 
source material and stands far below Elias Lönnrot’s Kalevala (1835), his 
favoured example of antiquarian scholarship (2007, p. 22). Yet other scholars 
have since drawn more positive connections between Macpherson’s and Tolkien’s 
mythologies, citing the sweeping, dramatic landscapes and reliance on ‘Celtic’ 
 
1 For ‘framework’ see Fimi (2010, p. 128) and Tolkien (1984, p. 5). For ‘meta-textual frame’ see 
Pezzini (2018, p. 32). For ‘depth’ see Shippey (2005, p. 259) and Tolkien (1984, pp. 2 – 5). 
2 In particular see Nagy (2003, pp. 239 – 258), Flieger (2005, pp. 55 – 84), Flieger (2006, pp. 206 
– 218), Nagy (2006, pp. 44 – 45), Oberhelman (2008, pp. 81 – 92), Brljak (2010, pp. 1 – 34), 
Thiessen (2014, pp. 195 – 207), Lee (2014, p. 61), Nagy (2014, pp. 112 – 116), Pezzini (2018, pp. 
32 – 64). 
1
Sherwood: Tolkien and the Age of Forgery
Published by ValpoScholar, 2020
 
 
myth as key methods.3 Jamie Williamson reminds us that Macpherson’s Ossian 
texts were drawn from various ‘Celtic’ sources (Irish and Scottish) and Tolkien 
similarly ‘built his initial fictional indigenous English mythology out of chosen 
bits of Germanic and Celtic (and other) tradition and a great deal of his own 
invention’ (2015, p. 63). Although none of these studies have located evidence 
that Tolkien read Macpherson, it is strongly implied that Macpherson and Ossian 
were a part of the academic backcloth that Tolkien grew up with. 
Comparatively, Chatterton has received little attention and his relationship 
to Tolkien is woefully under-represented. Nick Groom, Jamie Williamson, and 
Dimitra Fimi are the only figures to have thematically linked the Bristolian to 
Tolkien. Groom acknowledges that ‘it is not clear that Tolkien ever studied 
Chatterton’ but notes that he was later a colleague of David Nichol Smith, an 
eminent eighteenth-century scholar, and was supposed to supervise a thesis on 
Thomas Tyrwhitt, the first editor of Chatterton’s work (Groom, 2014, p. 295). 
Williamson’s attention on the subject is regrettably brief, calling Chatterton a 
‘clear precursor to the . . . elaborate invented languages of Tolkien’ (2015, pp. 64 
– 65). Fimi has produced the most fruit thus far, ‘teas[ing] out similarities and 
parallels’ between their methodologies of Medieval world-building (Fimi, 2016, 
p. 60). 
Drawing on new, previously unpublished manuscript material from 
Tolkien’s undergraduate notebooks, this article will expand and combine these 
two avenues of scholarship under the frame of the Age of Forgery. It will argue 
that Tolkien’s legendarium draws heavily from the antiquarian methodologies of 
Macpherson and Chatterton. It conceives of all three as authors of feigned history 
who responded to the national anxieties of their contexts. At the heart of their 
respective mythologies lies the desire to provide their distressed nations with 
historical and national identities. The modes of transmission are key to their 
success (or failure) as Macpherson promotes the virtues of the oral tradition and 
Chatterton, having learnt from his predecessor’s perceived short-comings, sides 
with the authority of the written word. Tolkien’s position enabled him to judge the 
values and quality of Macpherson’s and Chatterton’s distinctly different 
mythologies. He picked, modified, and improved on the antiquarian practices that 
had been prevalent during the Age of Forgery. Indeed, extent echoes of 
Macpherson and Chatterton are not coincidences, they are deliberate 
improvements on previous antiquarian material that marries rather than segregates 
methodologies. In this manner, Tolkien ultimately transformed the work of the 
 
3 See Shippey (2007, p. 22), Robson (1986, p. 234), Gaskill (1991, p. 6), Rosebury (2003, pp. 3 & 
22), Groom (2014, pp. 294 – 295), Dawson (2005, pp. 108 – 118), Hunter (2005, pp. 61 – 72), 
Williamson (2015, pp. 63 – 64) and Bugajska (2014, pp. 159 – 168). 
2
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 11 [2020], Iss. 1, Art. 4
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol11/iss1/4
 
 
antiquarian literary forgers into what structuralists would call the codes and 
conventions of modern fantasy literature. 
The article will begin with an overview that will establish how the 
contextual worlds of Macpherson, Chatterton, and Tolkien mirror one another in 
terms of national anxieties. In order to fully understand how Tolkien and his 
contemporaries understood the forgers, it will then place them within the 
contextual scholarly spheres of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries 
while analysing Tolkien’s undergraduate notebooks. Turning its attention to the 
texts themselves, it will approach Macpherson and Tolkien, and Chatterton and 
Tolkien separately, examining the methodological similarities and developments 
within The Book of Lost Tales (1910s – 1930s), The Hobbit (1937), and The Lord 
of the Rings (1954 – 1955). 
 
The Worlds of Macpherson, Chatterton, and Tolkien 
 
The 1760s saw a surge in antiquarian activity that pertained to the reclaiming of 
the British literary tradition. Previously, Thomas Gray had rejected the Hellenic 
muse in ‘The Bard’ (1757) for a native one and the paucity of Medieval British 
texts generated a belief that a more substantial body of literature survived 
somewhere and needed to be found. This desire was so strong that writers started 
to present their work as spurious antiquarian finds. Horace Walpole’s short-lived 
preface to The Castle of Otranto (1764) declared that the novel had been ‘found in 
the library of an ancient catholic family in the north of England’ (2014, p. 5). The 
English translation of William Beckford’s Vathek (1786) erroneously presented 
the original text as Arabic, when Beckford had created the story and originally 
written it in French. This trajectory led to greater forgeries by a wealth of figures 
across Britain: Iolo Morganwg, Macpherson, Chatterton, and William Ireland to 
name just a few.4 From the surge of national interest in its literary past and 
tradition, Macpherson and Chatterton forged respective histories and mythologies 
in an effort to ‘explore imaginatively the idea of authentic regression into the past’ 
in order to reclaim it and revive Britain’s national tradition (Haywood, 1986, p. 
30).  
Much like Lönnrot, Macpherson undertook field research. He collected 
native Scottish ballads from the Highlands before redacting and translating them 
into the Ossian mythology. Set in the third-century Scottish Highlands during the 
reign of Fingal, Fragments of Ancient Poetry (1760) was followed by two ‘epics’: 
 
4 It is not within the scope of this paper to explore Tolkien’s connections to all of these forgers. 
However, ‘Tolkien’s Celtic Library’ at the Bodleian evidences that he was familiar with 
Morganwg. He owned an edited version of Iolo Manuscripts (1888) (edited by Taliesin Williams) 
and John William’s publications of Barddas volumes 1 (1862) and 2 (1874). 
3
Sherwood: Tolkien and the Age of Forgery
Published by ValpoScholar, 2020
 
 
Fingal (1761) and Temora (1763). They presented the Scottish as the British 
people with the rich and untapped national history that Britain had been searching 
for. Ossian was proclaimed the ‘Homer of the North’ and across Europe, the texts 
were lauded over by significant cultural figures.5 Macpherson permeated the texts 
with a deep melancholy that nostalgically recalled the glory of Highland Clan 
culture that had degenerated down the centuries and was finally destroyed by the 
Highland’s defeat at the Battle of Culloden in 1746. The choice of the third 
century was strategic as it allowed Macpherson to ‘turn the Highlands into one 
enormous echo chamber, evoking an emphatically oral world’ that reflected 
contemporary views on the value of the oral tradition (Trumpener, 1997, p. 70). 
 However, not everyone was convinced of Ossian’s authenticity and the 
permanence of the oral tradition from which it supposedly originated. Samuel 
Johnson led the assault against Macpherson and demanded that the Scot reveal his 
sources. Macpherson failed to do so and thus began the tirade against 
Macpherson’s ingenuity, use of language, and source adaption that was still 
ongoing during Tolkien’s student days at Exeter College, Oxford. Macpherson’s 
failure to produce tangible evidence was a warning for later forgers to take greater 
efforts when fabricating history. 
 Thanks to William Wordsworth’s ‘marvellous Boy’ description and Henry 
Wallis’s oil painting The Death of Chatterton (1856) Chatterton is well-known as 
the iconic youthful artist (Wordsworth, 2008, p. 262; l. 43). His suicide at the age 
of seventeen has however been contested by Groom in The Forgers Shadow; he 
has argued that the ‘myth’ of the act ‘became part of the very genesis of 
Romanticism’ (2002, p. 12). In Chatterton’s very short life he forged a plethora of 
manuscripts by the fifteenth-century monk Thomas Rowley and tenth-century 
Anglo-Saxon Turgot, producing a treasure-trove of texts and paratexts that 
mythologised Bristol in Britain’s literary tradition. This imagined world came 
from his frustration with the decline of English culture and tradition after the 
Norman Conquest. He found ‘insufficient materials for his fertile mind’ in the 
church of St Mary Redcliffe, Bristol, so he started to ‘invent his own’ materials 
with the intent of reclaiming England’s forgotten glory (Groom, 2014, p. 294). As 
much as Macpherson was a writer of Highland identity, Chatterton was a poet of 
English identity (Groom, 2002, p. 170).  
Chatterton’s letters attest to his dissatisfaction with England after 1066. He 
strove to archaicise Rowley’s and Turgot’s work with a pseudo-Medieval script 
 
5 Such as Friedrich Gottlieb Klopstock, Gotthold Ephraim Lessing, Johann Gottfried Herder, 
Gottfried August Bürger, Johann Heinrich Voss, Friedrich Schiller, Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, 
Madame de Staël, François-René Chateaubriand, Novalis, Ludwig Tieck, Napoleon Bonaparte, 
Alphonse de Lamartine, Franz Schubert, George Sand, Felix Mendelssohn , and Johannes Brahms. 
4
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 11 [2020], Iss. 1, Art. 4
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol11/iss1/4
 
 
that the Romantic poet John Keats would later call the ‘purest English’ (1935, p. 
425). Whereas Macpherson embodied the extremes of the oral tradition, so far so 
that it brought into question his work’s authenticity, Chatterton swung the other 
way. The aligning of Rowley with the invention of the printing press and 
manuscript culture was a deliberate choice; the posterity and tangibility of the 
manuscript meant that Chatterton’s claim to historical authenticity was more 
secure. Although Macpherson and Chatterton ‘acted as discoverers of “buried” 
MSS, of literary “monuments”’, Chatterton’s obsession with forging the actual 
evidence surpassed Macpherson’s own mythological achievements and 
anticipated Tolkien’s own (Haywood, 1986, p. 22). Chatterton told the spurious 
tale that he had found and translated the texts of the ‘Battle of Hastings’, ‘The 
Tournament’, and ‘Ælla’ and claimed that Rowley had translated them from the 
originals of Turgot in the tenth century. They were therefore products of their 
time’s nationalism and act as precursors to Tolkien’s own response to twentieth-
century England’s yearning for a mythology. 
 The nationalism that permeated the late nineteenth- and early twentieth-
century was not just located in Britain. The hunt came ‘after the Napoleonic wars’ 
when ‘the nations or proto-nations of Europe became engaged in what was almost 
an “arms race” to provide themselves with national literary traditions that would 
cement their claim to having always existed’ (Shippey, 2004, p. 147). In 1871, 
Germany became a unified state; Italian irredentism was still ongoing and would 
not become fully realised until 1918. On the run up to the Great War ‘most of the 
populations participating . . . already felt to some degree a sense of national 
identity’ (Mann, 2013, p. 174). The empires of the three Great Powers: Austria-
Hungary, Russia, and the Ottoman Empire all blended national identities with 
imperial ones to form a unified nationalism. It was very easy to ‘tug at the strings 
of national identities’ and spark a patriotic reaction ‘across the classes’ of a nation 
(Mann, 2013, p. 175).  
The promotion of nationalism and patriotism in the British school 
curriculum meant that Tolkien’s own school, King Edward’s, Birmingham was 
saturated with national pride. During an inspection by The King Edward’s Board 
of Education in July 1905, the inspectors applauded how boys in the First Form 
‘did good essays on Patriotism’ (Gross & Matthews, 1905, p. 7), and again on 25th 
August 1906 how many students ‘took a rather provincial patriotic tone about 
England, as if there were no other countries in the scale of civilisation’ (Gross & 
Matthews, 1906, p. 17). Tolkien no doubt partook in classes like this as he moved 
up to the First Form in the Autumn term of 1907 (Hammond & Scull, 2017a, p. 
15). The patriotic attitude of the school would find resonance in Tolkien’s letter to 
Christopher Wiseman on 16th November 1914, in which he considered the 
unifying forces of the T.C.B.S. to be ‘religion, human love, the duty of patriotism, 
5
Sherwood: Tolkien and the Age of Forgery
Published by ValpoScholar, 2020
 
 
and a fierce belief in nationalism’ (quoted in Hammond & Scull, 2017a, p. 63). 
The education reports and Tolkien’s letter therefore echo the larger concerns 
around the waning state of the British Empire and the global push for national 
pride. 
Closer to home the ‘rising Welsh and Scottish nationalism during this 
period w[ere] additional reason[s] for the focus on English nationalism’ (Fimi, 
2010, p. 54).  England’s students and writers reacted to this period of national 
upheaval by deliberately promoting the country’s might in their writing ‘as if 
there were no other countries in the scale of civilisation’, simultaneously fuelling 
a powerful English nationalism and separating them from their ‘Celtic’ 
neighbours. Much like Macpherson’s Highlands and Chatterton’s England, 
Tolkien’s England found its history to be lacking a mythological identity 
altogether. Although ‘the Anglo-Saxons had been rediscovered and praised as the 
ancestors of modern England . . . [there was] very scanty mythological material 
from the literature of this “great people”’ which frustrated Tolkien and the 
T.C.B.S. (Fimi, 2010, p. 54). 
  Macpherson, Chatterton, and Tolkien reacted to the intense national 
drives of their periods by creating complete mythologies for their deprived 
nations. Tolkien would reflect on the aim of The Book of Lost Tales in his 1951 
letter to Milton Waldman in which he originally planned to dedicate his 
mythology to England (2006a, pp. 144 – 145). 
 
Tolkien’s Undergraduate Notebooks 
 
Tolkien’s education at Oxford introduced him to a vast range of medieval texts 
and traditions in Britain. Through them he was able to observe how the eighteenth 
and nineteenth centuries had compartmentalised the Middle Ages; adapting and 
romanticising it for each century’s gain (Tolkien, 2006b, p. 173). Humphrey 
Carpenter considers the ‘General Literature / General Miscellaneous’ notebook to 
contain a ‘few sketchy notes’ that show ‘no indication that [Tolkien] had more 
than a passing interest’ in the topics covered (2002, p. 99). However, this 
notebook grants us a fuller picture of what the Oxford curriculum included.  
In his first year Tolkien was exposed to the Age of Forgery. This came 
from David Nichol Smith’s lecture series ‘Johnson and His Friends’ that started 
on Wednesday 15th October 1913 (Hammond & Scull, 2017a, p. 53). On 
Wednesday 22nd October, Smith lectured on Samuel Johnson’s criticism of 
Macpherson and Ossian and provided sufficient bibliographical information for 
his students to take away and investigate further. Tolkien took notes for this 
lecture and although they focused heavily on Macpherson, Chatterton was 
6
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 11 [2020], Iss. 1, Art. 4
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol11/iss1/4
 
 
included in the list of forgers: 
 
[BODLEIAN LIBRARY MS. TOLKIEN A 21/4: GENERAL LITERATURE / 
GENERAL MISCELLANEOUS, FOLS. 10 – 11]  
 
Folio 10 
 
Ossian   
      Johnson’s criticism (one of the few critics) 
Wordsworth’s critic.<ism> 
Influence of Ossian. on later poetry (Byron) 
controversy . JS Smart. “James MacPherson” 
The age of forgery. Chatterton: Horace Walpole. 
Castle of Otranto. Ireland .(WH. Skeat. places) 
James MacPh.<erson> 1736-1796. amid rain sky 
tutor. (of T. Graham). holidaying at Spar of Moffat 
in S.Scotl.<and> born Inverness. – univ<ersity> aberdeen 
Edinburgh 
Dr Blair. Fingall. 
Fragment of A. Highland Poetry. 1760. 
 
Folio 11 
 
10 fragments. Celtic scholars find only 2 that have any trace of reality.  
Fingal an ancient epic in 6 books “1761”. 
Name Ossian (Oise) a real name. he made 
him a contemp<orary> of the emperor Caracalla. 
Temora in 8 book 1763. 
This is the bulk of Ossianic poetry   —————  
                             
They went forth to battle but they always fell. 
Sylva Gadhelica —————— 
No one denies a certain windy moonlight 
Kind of poetry in parts of Ossian. Byron Goethe 
etc could not have been so far deceived.. 
There may be much memory of reality. 
Macph<erson> born about Culloden. 1745 
It has real scenery of a Kind.. 6 
 
6 These three words are underlined four times. 
. . 
7
Sherwood: Tolkien and the Age of Forgery
Published by ValpoScholar, 2020
 
 
Strong strain of litt<erary> reminiscence. 
(Milton a great source) 
 
The lecture is a key moment in Tolkien’s developing fascination with myth as it 
provided him with a list of previous writers who had attempted to feign history 
and literary culture. Although there is no evidence that Tolkien borrowed any 
copies of Macpherson or Chatterton, there was nothing preventing him from 
reading about these writers. The notebook mentions the author J.S. Smart, whose 
1905 book James Macpherson: An Episode In Literature was accessible to 
students at Oxford. It is evident that Smith’s lecture derives from Smart’s book, 
referencing it as a recommendation for students to consult. Tolkien appears to 
have also copied down quotations that resonated strongly with him: ‘They went 
forth to battle but they always fell.’ is the misquoted line from Ossian ‘they came 
forth to war, but they always fell’ (Macpherson, 1807, p. 244). This contains a 
poignant thematic echoing of the Northern courage that Tolkien admired so much 
in Northern mythology, using it to enrich his own fiction as early as the 1910s. 
The noting of Ossian as a ‘real name’ and his temporal positioning as a 
‘contemp<orary> of the emperor Caracalla’ evidenced to Tolkien that 
Macpherson was tying his mythology into authentic Celtic and Roman history. 
This of course preceded Tolkien’s own attempt to link his own mythology with 
authentic English history (Hengest and Horsa) only a few years later. Although he 
would reference the Kalevala as a key influence, his earlier exposure to 
Macpherson’s mythological framework for Scotland will have surely piqued 
Tolkien’s interest. 
 The biographical information will have brought to Tolkien’s attention how 
Macpherson was trying to preserve a disappearing Scottish heritage, such as he 
would soon try to preserve a lost English heritage. The parallel in their motives 
stem very much from their shared sense of cultural loss. Macpherson’s ‘regret for 
a great and heroic past, not lost beyond all recall, and of lamentation for the 
warriors of an earlier time whose day of glory [wa]s gone’ strikingly anticipates 
the mourning in Chatterton’s Rowley texts and Tolkien’s own for England’s lost 
Faërie culture (Smart, 1905, p. 29). It was the landscape within the stories as 
much as the stories themselves that grounded them. The ‘mountain torrent, the 
dark rock in the ocean, the mist on the hill, the ghosts of heroes half seen by the 
setting moon’ that make up Macpherson’s mythology helped to build the 
Romantic Nationalism of the late nineteenth century that later permeated The 
Book of Lost Tales (Beers, 1899, p. 310). 
The mention of Chatterton in the undergraduate notebook is also highly 
significant. It shows that Chatterton was as much a part of the British literary 
backcloth as Johnson and Macpherson and that Tolkien will have had some 
8
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 11 [2020], Iss. 1, Art. 4
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol11/iss1/4
 
 
awareness of him as a Literature and Language student. The Smith October 1913 
lecture proves that the poet was taught (if briefly) at Oxford in the 1910s as part 
of the Age of Forgery. 
During the fin de siècle and early twentieth century, Chatterton had 
developed two personas in the public eye. The first was cultivated by the literary 
critics and philologists, who broke his work down and exposed his ignorance of 
Middle English. In particular, Walter Skeat’s philological essay shed immense 
light on the origins of what he called the ‘Rowley dialect’, demystifying a key 
element of Chatterton’s mythology (1872, p. xl). In his editions of Chatterton’s 
work, Skeat controversially swapped the language around so the footnotes were 
made up of the medievalisms and the modern English became the language of the 
poems. Skeat’s editorial decisions started a trend in Chatterton scholarship, 
editions by Henry D. Roberts (1906) and Sidney Lee (1906) followed Skeat’s 
example. To Skeat and others, Chatterton was simply a juvenile forger and 
second-rate language adapter.  
The second persona was promoted by the artists. Dante Gabriel Rossetti 
and Oscar Wilde were two members of an ‘impassioned generation of artists and 
writers who established the conviction that Chatterton’s works had positively 
redirected the course of English poetry’ (Bristow & Mitchell, 2015, p. 15). They 
anticipated Groom’s argument that Chatterton was a ‘poet of English identity’ 
(2002, p. 170). As Rossetti would insist, not knowing Chatterton was ‘to be 
ignorant of the true day-spring of modern romantic poetry’, his work was to be 
revered and admired, not cast aside as juvenile rubbish (2010, p. 186). In 1906 
Francis E. Clark argued that English in the early twentieth century owed much to 
the ‘boy poets’ Chatterton and Keats (1906, p. 265).  
As a student philologist Tolkien could have sided with Skeat, but as a 
fellow poet, creator of ‘feigned history’ and medievalist, he would have 
appreciated Chatterton’s efforts and methodology in reconstructing the lost 
Anglo-Saxon past and drawn parallels with his own attempt to do the same thing 
from 1915 onwards.7 Tolkien also shared a distaste for French influence. In the 
King Edward’s Debating Society meeting of 4th November 1910, he had deplored 
the Norman Conquest. The ‘influx of polysyllabic barbarities’ from the French 
had ‘ousted the more honest if humbler native words’ and Tolkien, much like 
Chatterton, called for a ‘return to something of Saxon purity of diction – “right 
English goodliness of speechcraft”’ in order to maintain the English heritage in a 
 
7 Tolkien was familiar with Skeat around the time of Smith’s lecture as he was borrowing his 
editions of Chaucer from Exeter College library. 
9
Sherwood: Tolkien and the Age of Forgery
Published by ValpoScholar, 2020
 
 
period of anxiety over national identity and freedom (MacSwiney & Payton, 
1910, p. 95). 
When it came to the framework that Tolkien would use for his mythology, 
he would go beyond the work of Macpherson and Chatterton. They had worked 
with homogenous methods: the former celebrating the power of the oral tradition 
and the latter learning from Macpherson’s controversy and relying on the security 
of the written word for historical transmission. With over one hundred and fifty 
years between the Age of Forgery and Tolkien, the twentieth-century author was 
able to critically reflect and weigh up the pros and cons of both methods. The 
result was a mythology that was built around a ‘mixture of oral and literate 
cultures’, balancing both approaches and building on them simultaneously (Lee, 
p. 2014, p. 59). 
 
The Oral Tradition: Young Nations and Immortality 
 
Deidre Dawson has identified how Macpherson and Tolkien both saw language as 
‘the key to reviving, recovering, or reconstructing an ancient culture and 
mythology’ (2005, p. 109). Macpherson thought his contemporary Highlanders 
‘stood outside contemporary civilisation, preserving in their remote wilds the 
freshness of early life, their own ancient language, their own picturesque costume 
and simple habits. They even retained, unimpaired by the contagion of luxury, all 
the valour of the race that had defeated the Romans themselves’ (Smart, 1905, p. 
5). They were ‘preserving the last relics of the ancient culture’ of the Celts 
(Stafford, 1988, p. 97). The failure of the Romans and Normans to colonise 
Caledonia (the Roman name for the Scottish Highlands) elevated them in 
Macpherson’s view because their history had remained uncorrupted, unlike the 
rest of Britain. In his Ossian mythology he aimed to remind his contemporaries 
just how powerful their ancestors were by making a Caledonian recount the wars 
of Fingal. 
According to Katie Trumpener the true subject of the Ossian mythology 
‘is not epic heroism but the vicissitudes of oral tradition’ (1997, p. 75). 
Macpherson demonstrates that ‘oral performance functions precisely to keep the 
past alive’ (Trumpener, 1997, p. 76). Contemporary works like Thomas 
Blackwell’s An Enquiry into the Life and Writings of Homer (1735), Robert 
Lowth’s Lectures on the Sacred Poetry of the Hebrews (1753), and Robert 
Wood’s An Essay on the Original Genius and Writings of Homer (1769) argued 
that the oral tradition had merit and endurance; it did have the capability to carry 
the weight and memory of a race or state. These publications helped cultivate a 
‘rising generation of authors, nurtured on accounts of the fiery eloquence of native 
speakers, [who] were increasingly willing to speculate that the oral tradition could 
10
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 11 [2020], Iss. 1, Art. 4
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol11/iss1/4
 
 
give rise to literature of outstanding merit’ (Hudson, 1996, p. 167). For Blackwell 
such fiery eloquence could not be found in modern society as ‘a language 
thoroughly polished in the modern Sense, will not descend to the Simplicity of 
Manners absolutely necessary in Epic-Poetry’ as it has made ‘many Words 
obsolete, it coops a Man up in a Corner, allows him but one Set of courtly 
Phrases, and deprives him of many significant Terms, and strong beautiful 
Expressions’ (1735, p. 60). Epic poetry was made in a ‘rude Community’ only ‘a 
little advanced’ where letters were not commonly used (Blackwell, 1735, p. 42). 
As a result, Homer’s ‘Poems were made to be recited, or sung to a Company; and 
not read in private, or perused in a Book, which few were then capable of doing’ 
and Blackwell subsequently called for his contemporary readers to listen to 
Homer’s works for ‘his Style . . . cannot be understood in any other light . . . lest 
we put ourselves in the place of his Audience’ (Blackwell, 1735, p. 122).  
Works like Blackwell’s enthused the public with a renewed passion for the 
oral tradition and the memories of the cultures it brought with it. Macpherson 
aided in revitalising the popularity of the tradition with just his Fragments of 
Ancient Poetry. But Scotland was not the only country to have produced such as 
rich oral history. The Finns, Scandinavians, and Germans which Johnson will 
have called ‘barbarous’ people had produced the Kalevala, The Poetic Edda, and 
the Nibelungenlied from their own oral traditions, displaying just how capable 
they were of transmitting tales of extensive length while keeping their integrity. 
Tolkien worked with these particular texts for the majority of his life and will 
have seen Macpherson as partaking in the ‘barbarous’ tradition of immortalising 
the tales of one’s nation by injecting one’s prose with oral techniques. 
Macpherson’s methods mimicked those of the eighteenth- and nineteenth-
century ballad collectors like Lönnrot. Tolkien was clearly aware that Macpherson 
had, like Lönnrot, conducted field research, collected, and consulted his native 
ballads, as his undergraduate notebooks identify that ‘Celtic scholars find only 2 
that have any trace of reality.’8 His later reading of Campbell’s Popular Tales of 
The West Highlands will have positively shifted Tolkien’s understanding of 
Macpherson’s method as the book identified that Macpherson had built his 
mythology on the Red and Black Books of Canranald. There were important 
historical documents from Clan Donald’s heritage that had been compiled from 
ballads and other surviving tales from the Highlands by Niall MacMhuirich (Red 
Book) and Christopher Beaton (the main compiler of the Black Book) and 
transcribed into Gaelic script. It is worth noting here that whereas it has been 
identified that the Red Book of Hengest is a (if not the) source for Tolkien’s Red 
 
8 As was noted about Smith’s lecture, this information was lifted from Smart’s book (1905, p. 94). 
11
Sherwood: Tolkien and the Age of Forgery
Published by ValpoScholar, 2020
 
 
Book of Westmarch, there is a strong correlation between Tolkien and 
Macpherson. 
For Tolkien, this framework was exactly what he needed. The similarities 
between Tolkien and Lönnrot’s work has been thoroughly covered, yet it cannot 
be denied that his framework for The Book of Lost Tales runs closer to 
Macpherson’s. 9 Eriol did not take part in the myths but is still a named character 
who is interpolated into English history as the father of Hengest and Horsa and 
undergoes character development in the work. Tolkien’s similar fascination with 
the oral tradition’s power is deeply rooted in his mythology. It is intimately tied 
with cultures that are, similarly to Macpherson’s Scotland, ‘young’ but vigorous 
and energetic or ancient (Fimi, 2010, p. 149). 
Perhaps the most prevalent example of a youthful culture that relies on the 
oral tradition is the Rohirrim. It is also the culture that most poignantly recalls 
Ossian’s Highlands. Aragorn reflects that the Rohirrim are ‘wise but unlearned, 
writing no books but singing many songs’ (Tolkien, 2007, p. 430). In contrast to 
the Elves, the ‘living memory’ of the Rohirrim is limited (Honegger, 2019). To 
them, the ‘raising of [Edoras] is but a memory of song’ and when Aragorn chants 
‘Where now is the horse and the rider?’ Legolas’s comments reflect centuries of 
Ossian scholarship: ‘That, I guess, is the language of the Rohirrim . . . for it is like 
to this land itself; rich and rolling in part, and else hard and stern as the mountains 
. . . it is laden with the sadness of Mortal Men’ (Tolkien, 2007, pp. 507 – 508). 
The language itself is interlinked with its land, just as Ossian’s mournful tone is 
interlaced with the sounds and movements of the Highlands. Rohan’s culture 
thrives on this solemn, wilder model of a youthful society that Fimi has called 
‘closer to the stereotype of the Northern “barbarians”’ that is ‘perceived as a 
stronger “race”’ (2010, p. 149). The Rohirrim’s oral tradition is saturated in 
Ossianic melancholy. Even when Théoden improvises verse it is foreboding and 
laced with the semantics of death: 
 
Arise, arise, Riders of Théoden! 
 Fell deeds awake: fire and slaughter! 
 spear shall be shaken, shield be splintered, 
 a sword-day, a red day, ere the sun rises! 
 Ride now, ride now! Ride to Gondor! (Tolkien, 2007, p. 838). 
 
9 See Flieger (2005, pp. 27 – 31) and (2004, pp. 277 – 283), Shippey (2001, xv – xvi, 64 & 250), 
(2004, pp. 154 – 160) and (2005, p. 297), West (2004, pp. 285 – 293) and Gay (2004, pp. 295 – 
303). 
12
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 11 [2020], Iss. 1, Art. 4
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol11/iss1/4
 
 
 
Although the verse can be read as a celebratory battle cry, it is also portentous of 
the many Rohirrim that will fall, including their King. In this fashion it reads 
much like the line from Ossian that Tolkien misquoted in his undergraduate 
notebooks: ‘they came forth to war, but they always fell’ (Macpherson, 1807, p. 
244). Even later when the song of the Mounds of Mundberg is recited, the heavy 
alliteration and melancholy aesthetic channels the ‘sadness of Mortal Men’ that 
permeates Rohan’s oral tradition. 
 In complete contrast to the Rohirrim can be found the oral culture of the 
Hobbits. Casting aside the former’s mournful verse, Tolkien shows a very 
different side of the oral tradition by having the Hobbits recite or sing verse in 
order to brighten their spirits (Kelly, 1972, p. 172). From the cheery ‘Ho! Ho! Ho! 
To the bottle I go!’ to the fragments of verse used to ‘encourage’ the Hobbits 
during their escape from the Shire and the Black Riders, the Hobbits’ approach to 
the oral tradition is far removed from the Ossianic melancholy, injecting its 
readers with hope and joy (Tolkien, 2007, p. 112). Perhaps the most powerful use 
of the oral tradition by a Hobbit is when Sam is searching for Frodo in Cirith 
Ungol: 
 
The torch, that was already burning low when he arrived, sputtered 
and went out; and he felt the darkness cover him like a tide. And 
then softly, to his own surprise, there at the vain end of his long 
journey and his grief, moved by what thought in his heard he could 
not tell, Sam began to sing. . . . He murmured old childish tunes 
out of the Shire, and snatches of Mr. Bilbo’s rhymes . . . and then 
suddenly new strength rose in him, and his voice ran out. (Tolkien, 
2007, p. 908). 
 
If the torch symbolises extrinsic hope then Sam’s performance evidences the 
power of intrinsic hope. He finds new motivation and bravery through the songs 
of his people. Indeed, Sam uses the tunes to forge his own set of lyrics that look 
forwards to new life, not backwards into the dark past: 
 
In western lands beneath the Sun 
the flowers may rise in Spring,  
the trees may bud, the waters run, 
the merry finches sing. 
13
Sherwood: Tolkien and the Age of Forgery
Published by ValpoScholar, 2020
 
 
Or there maybe 'tis cloudless night 
and swaying beeches bear 
the Elven-stars as jewels white 
amid their branching hair. 
Though here at journey's end I lie 
in darkness buried deep, 
beyond all towers strong and high, 
beyond all mountains steep, 
above all shadows rides the Sun 
and Stars for ever dwell: 
I will not say the Day is done, 
nor bid the Stars farewell. (Tolkien, 2007, pp. 908 – 909). 
 
Derived from the ballad form (a poetic form deriving from the oral tradition), the 
iambs bounce with energy and the anaphora catalogues the various natural 
elements that Sam recalls. It is again used in the second half of the verse to 
emphasise that ‘beyond’ all darkness stands the symbolic Sun and Stars. Tolkien 
is able to evidence in moments like this that the oral tradition need not be a 
historically weighted methodology that only recalls and laments the past, it can 
also channel courage and hope that looks to the future. It can further help us 
understand the present and express events in modes that bring cheer and joy. A 
being’s mortality therefore influences the way they draw on the oral tradition. 
However, a being’s immortality can imbue the oral tradition with an altogether 
different feeling. 
Besides the Rohirrim and the Hobbits, Tolkien’s faëries from The Book of 
Lost Tales and later Elves preferred to use the oral tradition because of their 
immortality and living memory. In The Book of Lost Tales, long tales are 
effortlessly recited at will by the faëries with intricate details, names and lists that 
show the faëries pride in their already long history, just like Ossian. The faëries 
and Elves superior memory and immortality meant that they could accurately 
relay their history for generations. The story tellers were still elders which is in-
keeping with a sense of realism as it reflects the age of Ossian and the story tellers 
in Highland culture (Stafford, 1988, p. 13). When he was working on The Lord of 
the Rings, the Elves still maintained their reliance on the tradition and took pride 
in their superior abilities. 
By removing the ‘human limitations’ of mortality for the faëries and 
Elves, Tolkien built on Macpherson’s view that oral delivery is infinitely more 
intense than reading an account (Tolkien, 2006a, p. 146). As Vairë reminds his 
audience, Eriol and the reader, the Cottage of Lost Play was ‘builded of good 
14
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 11 [2020], Iss. 1, Art. 4
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol11/iss1/4
 
 
magic . . . and here old tales, old songs, and elfin music are treasured and 
rehearsed’ (Tolkien, 1983, p. 20). ‘Rehearsed’ proves that the tales are frequently 
shared to keep the past very much alive in the present. The recounting of these 
traditions in the Cottage of Lost Play and much later in Rivendell’s Hall of Fire 
make them both ‘locus[es] of memory’ for the mythology, empowering the Elves 
with tradition and history that, in the case of The Book of Lost Tales, would feed 
down and become Britain’s own (Oberhelman, 2007, p. 485).  
The immortality of the faëries and Elves meant that it was possible to 
employ orators who had a living memory of the events they were narrating. This 
directly recalls Ossian’s living memory of the Highland’s decline. Utilising a 
character’s living memory makes their narration more nuanced, laden with depth 
and meaning. When Elrond recalls the ‘“splendour of their banners”’ of the Last 
Alliance, he embellishes thus: ‘“my memory reaches back even to the Elder Days. 
Eärendil was my sire, who was born in Gondolin before its fall; and my mother 
was Elwing, daughter of Dior, son of Lúthien of Doriath. I have seen three ages in 
the West of the world, and many defeats, and many fruitless victories”’ (Tolkien, 
2007, p. 243). An elf’s living memory adds incredible gravitas to their tales. It 
generates the weight that Tolkien would later refer to as ‘a past that itself had 
depth and reached backward into a dark antiquity’ in his ‘Beowulf: The Monsters 
and the Critics’ lecture of 1936 (2006b, p. 27). The ‘impression of depth’ grants 
works of historical and poetical importance like The Aeneid, Beowulf and even 
Macpherson’s Ossian mythology, a suggested history that the writer is not 
completely divulging to his audience; a ‘coherent, consistent, deeply fascinating 
world’ (Shippey, 2005, p. 259). It links to the lays and ballads that fed the ancient 
epics. Elrond and the memory of the Elven race offer this depth, adding dramatic 
effect to Elrond’s story.  
However, when it comes to the history of the Ring, it is concealed by an 
air of obscurity as only ‘a part of his tale was known to some there, but the full 
tale to none’ (Tolkien, 2007, p. 243), Elrond’s living memory only achieves so 
much, it has to be married with Gandalf’s antiquarian work in Minas Tirith to 
form a complete tale. Characters are not completely convinced by the oral 
identification of the Ring and relies on Gandalf’s unearthing of Isildur’s scroll 
where he describes the Ring to confirm the tale (2007, pp. 252 – 253). In the 
Council of Elrond then, Tolkien perfectly balances the importance of these two 
methodologies, showing how they complement and complete the other.  
Tolkien continued to build on Macpherson by using orators that far 
surpass Ossian in age. If, in Highland Scotland, only old men could recite ballads 
and epics then ‘there was no time to lose: it must be recovered before it vanished 
for ever’ (Stafford, 1988, p. 115). A chilling description from Ossian conveys 
this: ‘then comes a voice to Ossian, and awakes his soul! It is the voice of years 
15
Sherwood: Tolkien and the Age of Forgery
Published by ValpoScholar, 2020
 
 
that are gone! they roll before me, with all their deeds! I seize the tales, as they 
pass, and pour them forth in song’ (Macpherson, 1807, p. 319). A mortal’s 
preoccupation with the death of a narrative is overcome by granting the oral 
tradition to the immortal faëries and Elves. His early intention to have Heorrenda 
write up Eriol’s (his father’s) writings from his time in the Cottage of Lost Play 
and for the Irish and Welsh to tell ‘garbled’ renditions of the ‘true tradition of the 
fairies’ further evidences Tolkien’s intention to associate the power of the oral 
tradition with immortal beings (1984, p. 291). It is further telling that The 
Silmarillion closes with the line: ‘an end was come for the Eldar of story and of 
song’ (Tolkien, 1999, p. 366). Just as the passing of the faëries in The Book of 
Lost Tales signalled the end of the oral tradition, here too the passing of the Elves 
at the end of the Third Age coincides with the end of the living memory that made 
the Elvish oral tradition so powerful.  
This power does not only work on the reader, but on characters within the 
tale. Whereas Ossian’s narrative is emotional heavy and is supposed to conjure a 
deep nostalgia for its reader, the Elvish verse in the Hall of Fire has a much 
greater impact on Frodo. The effect is otherworldly and greatly surpasses what 
Ossian and Macpherson could wish for: 
 
At first the beauty of the melodies and of the interwoven words in 
elven-tongues, even though [Frodo] understood them little, held 
him in a spell, as soon as he began to attend to them. Almost it 
seemed that the words took shape, and visions of far lands and 
bright things that he had never yet imagined opened out before 
him; and the firelit hall became like a golden mist above seas of 
foam that sighed upon the margins of the world. Then the 
enchantment became more and more dreamlike, until he felt that an 
endless river of swelling gold and silver was flowing over him, too 
multitudinous for its pattern to be comprehended; it became part of 
the throbbing air about him, and it drenched and drowned him. 
Swiftly he sank under its shining weight into a deep realm of sleep. 
(Tolkien, 2007, p. 233). 
 
Tolkien luxuriously indulges Frodo’s experience with strikingly Keatsian tones. 
The entire experience of the oral tradition is intimately linked with the Romantic 
16
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 11 [2020], Iss. 1, Art. 4
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol11/iss1/4
 
 
mental flights and synaesthesia of Romantic lyrical poetry that scholars during the 
early twentieth century prominently associated with Keats.10 
Cultures like the Highland Clans, Rohirrim, Shire Hobbits, High Elves of 
Rivendell, and remnant faëries in the Cottage of Lost Play all utilise the oral 
tradition to bring the lost past to life in the present. To orally present a tale gave 
the words energy and tension that could not be encountered when written on the 
page. Tolkien employed the methodology to great effect in The Book of Lost Tales 
and The Lord of the Rings, aligning the oral tradition with the immortal faëries 
and Elves. This gave it a stronger purpose as they did not need to rely on textual 
transmission. Their long lives allowed them to surpass the mortal anxieties of 
Ossian. They did not need to capture songs because they lived already within the 
collective Elven memory. 
But as was identified earlier, Tolkien balanced the importance of the oral 
tradition with textual transmission. The authorial conceit that surrounds the chain 
of authors, editors, redactors, and transcribers of The Red Book of Westmarch and 
The Book of Lost Tales evidences Tolkien’s marrying of the oral with the written. 
 
Textual Transmission and Mortal Anxiety 
 
A long line of eighteenth-century antiquarian collectors ‘learned from 
[Macpherson’s] mistakes’ in order to avoid the label of ‘forger’, including Allan 
Ramsay, Thomas Percy, David Herd, Thomas Evans, Joseph Ritson, John 
Pinkerton, and Sir Walter Scott (Groom, 1999, p. 73). In the eyes of his 
disparagers, Macpherson had manipulated his material to the point where 
providing tangible evidence in Temora was not enough to convince them of its 
deeply entrenched indebtedness to the Highlands oral past. The ballad and folk-
tale collectors at the time made extensive use of what written records they could 
get their hands on, proving that they had not simply made up their edited and 
published material. In the late eighteenth century ‘the transmission of the past was 
literary’ (Haywood, 1986, p. 120) and ‘the handling of the source was crucial to 
the antiquarian reception of literature and its incorporation into the canon’ 
(Groom, 1999, p. 62).  
The oral mode of historical transmission lost favour and collapsed under 
the pressure to evidence antiquarian findings. Haywood has evaluated how 
Chatterton advanced and developed Macpherson’s experimentations with the past 
for this exact reason (1986, p. 175). Just his Ossianic imitations alone prove that 
he was processing and trying to aesthetically replicate Macpherson. The rising 
 
10 I have written extensively on this in chapter one of The Romantic Faëry: Keats, Tolkien, and the 
Perilous Realm (2020) https://ore.exeter.ac.uk/repository/handle/10871/40585 
17
Sherwood: Tolkien and the Age of Forgery
Published by ValpoScholar, 2020
 
 
controversy around the authenticity of the Ossian epics further emphasised to 
Chatterton that the manuscript was everything. In fact, the weight that the 
eighteenth-century antiquarians placed on the validity of the manuscript tipped the 
scales too far, leading Chatterton to make ‘historical fiction out of historical fact’ 
from which his mythology for Bristol grew (Haywood, 1986, p. 121). 
Chatterton promulgated the notion that the invading Normans had 
‘destroy’d all the Saxon MSS, Paintings &c that fell in their Way; endeavouring 
to suppress the very Language’ (quoted in Meyerstein, 1930, p. 264). Counter to 
David Hume and the views of the other ‘Modern Virtuosos’ on the ‘barbarous’ 
quality of Saxon literature and culture, ‘it is certain we are indebted to to [sic] 
Alfred & other Saxon Kings for ye wises of our Laws & in part for ye British 
Constitution’ (quoted in Meyerstein, 1930, p. 265). Chatterton finalised his case 
by explaining that the ‘motive that actuates me to do this, is, to convince the 
world that the monks (of whom some have so despicable an opinion) were not 
such blockheads, as generally thought and that good poetry might be wrote, in the 
dark days of superstition as well as in these more enlightened Ages’ (quoted in 
Meyerstein, 1930, p. 251). In this manner he took after Percy, who yearned to 
‘show that among the dross of the Dark Ages some literary gems existed’ 
(Haywood, 1986, p. 123). In Reliques of English Poetry (1765), Percy was 
‘attempting to “literate” the Goths, he gave written sources authority over oral 
sources, and printed texts over manuscripts’ (Groom, 2006, p. 183). This would 
not only influence Chatterton but be later picked up by Tolkien, who was keenly 
invested in presenting the overlooked grandeur and literary scope of the Middle 
Ages through various modes of historical transmission. 
His early fascination with the Gothic language is one example of his 
experimentation with historical transmission. The dominance of the Roman 
Empire and its wide-spreading imperial conquest were, to Tolkien, responsible for 
the ‘ruin of Gaul and the submergence of its native language (or languages) arts 
and traditions . . . dooming to obscurity and debate the history of perhaps the most 
remarkable of the Cymric speaking peoples’ (quoted in Hammond & Scull, 
2017b, p. 741). The sparse extent fragments of Gothic drove him to ‘regret the 
past’ and the ‘vanishing of their tradition, literature, history, and most of their 
tongue’ (quoted in Hammond & Scull, 2017b, p. 741). In response he tried to 
reconstruct the language, carefully distinguishing between the ‘historically 
recorded Gothic and his own reconstructed’, which came to fruition in the poem 
‘Bagmē Blōma’ (1936) (Hammond & Scull, 2017b, p. 741). Arden R. Smith has 
noted how only thirty-eight of the fifty-five words in the poem can be historically 
attested, meaning seventeen words came from Tolkien’s Gautisk (2006, p. 271). 
When creating the medieval spellings of Rowleyese, Chatterton drew on 
genuine Middle-English dictionaries much like how Tolkien based his languages 
18
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 11 [2020], Iss. 1, Art. 4
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol11/iss1/4
 
 
on Welsh, Finnish and other primary world languages, using dictionaries and 
primers as source material to dress his ‘words in medieval armour’ (Groom, 
2019).11 Chatterton crafted ‘calligraphy; produced his own complex medieval 
manuscripts, maps, sketches, and heraldry; loaded his pseudo-antique writings 
with prefaces, footnotes, appendices, and glossaries; and then wove authentic 
material into what was his predominantly imagined fifteenth-century world’ 
(Groom, 2014, p. 295). To a reader of Tolkien these will all sound familiar as they 
are the techniques that are used to immerse readers into Arda.  
Tolkien frequently employed protagonists who were storytellers, editors, 
or translators as a strategy to deepen the historical texture of his stories. As Fimi 
notes, this is not ‘dissimilar from Chatterton’s layers of ancient Bristol history via 
Rowley and Turgot’, or, we may add, Macpherson’s (2016, p. 52). Whereas 
Chatterton sought to merely authenticate his work through his own authorial 
conceit, Tolkien improved on Chatterton’s practice by amalgamating his 
knowledge of Medieval manuscripts with his own fiction. Like his mythological 
characters, he was in charge of ‘bringing ancient works and forgotten authors 
back to life’ and ensuring the past lived on (Shippey, 2014, p. 41). ‘The Golden 
Book of Heorrenda’, which recorded the tales of the Elves by Eriol’s third son, 
Heorrenda, and ‘The Book of Lost Tales’ by Ælfwine are the texts that were 
translated into The Book of Lost Tales. The Red Book of Westmarch contained The 
Hobbit, The Lord of the Rings, and other paratextual details and had a long history 
of textual transmission. Bilbo Baggins was its first author, who handed it to his 
nephew, Frodo Baggins, who gave it to his friend Samwise Gamgee. It then 
travelled to Minas Tirith for antiquarian editing and expansion before finally 
returning to the Shire for paratextual marginalia (Tolkien, 2007, pp. 14 – 15). 
Flieger has called Tolkien ‘the last in the line’ of ‘transmitters, translators, 
redactors, scribes, and copyists’ in the genealogy of The Red Book of Westmarch; 
he ‘inserted his own name into the header and footer on the title-page of The Lord 
of the Rings (and thus into the history of the “book”), not as the author of the book 
but as its final transmitter/redactor’ (2012, p. 42).  
Tolkien presents his texts as antiquarian artefacts that have been ‘filtered 
down to us through many minds, many disagreements, many rejections’, much 
like Beowulf, Macpherson’s Ossian mythology, and Chatterton’s Rowley texts 
(Shippey, 2007, pp. 161 – 162), proving the tales’ antiquity and converting them 
from ‘tales and narratives’ into ‘historical artefacts’ (Noad, 2000, p. 32). The 
reader is further reminded that they are reading a ‘found’ text by references to The 
Red Book of Westmarch: ‘In presenting the matter of The Red Book of Westmarch, 
 
11 According to Skeat: John Kersey’s Dictionarium Anglo-Britannicum (1708) and Nathan 
Bailey’s Dictionarium Brittanicum (1730) (1872, p. xlii). 
19
Sherwood: Tolkien and the Age of Forgery
Published by ValpoScholar, 2020
 
 
as a history for people of today to read, the whole of the linguistic setting has been 
translated as far as possible into terms of our own times’ (Tolkien, 2007, p. 1133). 
Like Macpherson and Chatterton, Tolkien was deeply invested in presenting his 
works as found historical artefacts that had come from ancient texts. 
It was in the 1960s when Tolkien started to conceive of Arda in a denser 
and more tangible antiquarian manner, creating new paratexts that complimented 
his narratives and cultures. He had already spent ‘a considerable amount of time 
creating three pages from The Book of Mazarbul’ with the intention of 
incorporated them into The Lord of the Rings, but the cost of printing them in 
colour meant that Tolkien’s vision did not come to fruition in his lifetime (Fimi, 
2016, p. 57). He later realised that the three pages contained an ‘erroneous 
extension of the general linguistic treatment’ he gave The Red Book of Westmarch 
(Tolkien, 1996, p. 299). The inhabitants of Arda at the point of The Lord of the 
Rings spoke the Common Speech. This is what Tolkien claimed to translate into 
English, keeping the other languages: Elvish, entish, and dwarvish, intact. 
However, ‘the text he had transcribed in runes and Elvish script was actually in 
modern English’ (Fimi, 2016, p. 59).  
Catherine McIlwaine’s companion book to the 2018 exhibition Tolkien: 
Maker of Middle-earth is a welcome help here as it not only illustrates Tolkien’s 
antiquarian experiments of the 1960s but also contains all three facsimiles from 
The Book of Mazarbul in colour. The task for Tolkien was a ‘labour of love’ 
(Fimi, 2016, p. 57) and McIlwaine fondly describes how he ‘burnt the paper with 
the edges with his pipe, pierced holes along one side to resemble the holes where 
the parchment would have been stitched to the binding and washed them with red 
paint to resemble bloodstains’ which echoes the techniques Chatterton used to age 
his own documents and give them the air and look of historic authenticity (2018, 
pp. 348 – 349).  
When Tolkien returned to the matter of the Silmarillion he spent time 
doodling on newspapers, developing ‘designs for brooches or clasps’ and 
ceramics for the Númenóreans (McIlwaine, 2018, pp. 188 – 194) and ‘drew 
heraldic devices for the main characters or houses in his legendarium’ 
(McIlwaine, 2018, pp. 236 – 238). He also ‘had a lifelong interest in calligraphy, 
which he attributed to his mother’s influence’ and can be drawn from his reading 
of Edward Johnston’s popular Writing & Illuminating, & Lettering (1906) 
(McIlwaine, 2018, pp. 186 – 187). Similarly, Chatterton ‘“fell in love with the 
illuminated capitals”’ at a young age when his own mother was tearing up old 
books to put on the fire and later when he consulted old manuscripts that lay 
around St Marys (quoted in Meyerstein, 1930, p. 22). Tolkien was also familiar 
with the medieval manuscripts that the Bodleian held. The Ancrene Wise and Old 
English Exodus are both examples of physical manuscripts that he will have 
20
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 11 [2020], Iss. 1, Art. 4
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol11/iss1/4
 
 
handled, consulted, worked, and lectured on which contained such illuminated 
capitals. 
His passion for calligraphy shone brightest when he was creating Tengwar 
and Cirth. Of Eldarin origin, these allowed Tolkien’s languages to inhabit a 
written world that was connected to and complimented the oral. Even in The 
Hobbit Tolkien relied on Nordic runes to build the dwarf alphabet, giving them 
historical authenticity. The dust jacket of The Hobbit and the title pages of The 
Lord of the Rings rely on these existing written modes to convey secret 
paratextual messages that unseat Tolkien as the ‘author’ of the texts. The Tengwar 
that featured on the Ring (Tolkien, 2007, p. 50), the Doors of Durin (Tolkien, 
2007, p. 305) and the Appendices (Tolkien, 2007, pp. 1119, 1124, & 1125) in The 
Lord of the Rings attempted to cement the languages in history, imprinting and 
recording these cultures onto tangible and historical objects. 
Tolkien’s external management of his work also saw him utilise these 
writing systems when replying to fan letters (2006a, pp. 132, 223 & 224). His 
letters, by extension, were a tool to excessively tease his fans about the grandeur 
of the First and Second Ages, controlling how much information about the stories 
and characters was released to the wider public. His expansive letter to Milton 
Waldman is just one of many where he enthusiastically provided deeper insights 
into Arda’s mythic past. Indeed, in a letter to Hugh Brogan on 18th September 
1954, he included contextual and editorial comments that strongly echo what has 
been argued throughout this article: 
 
I have tried to present a kind of legendary and history of a 
‘forgotten epoch’ . . . Middle-earth is just archaic English for ἡ 
οἰκουμένη, the inhabited world of men. It lay then as it does. In fact 
just as it does, round and inescapable. That is partly the point. The 
new situation, established at the beginning of the Third Age leads 
on eventually and inevitably to ordinary History. (Tolkien, 2006a, 
p. 186).  
 
He made it very clear that he preferred ‘history, true or feigned’ and gave each fan 
a reward of sorts for their curiosity (Tolkien, 2007, p. xxiv). For Tolkien letters 
were crucial paratextual components to the posthumous life of the mythology. He 
hoped that his work and letters would inspire others to continue the story. 
The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings are brimming with examples where 
characters rely on manuscripts and the written word. Bilbo is bound by the written 
contract that Thorin and Company present to him and even when he hands the 
21
Sherwood: Tolkien and the Age of Forgery
Published by ValpoScholar, 2020
 
 
Arkenstone over to Thranduil and Bard, he recalls the contract that legally classes 
him as a ‘burglar’ (Tolkien, 1995, p. 244). Additionally the Hobbits and Aragorn 
also have to decipher Gandalf’s runes on a stone at Weathertop so they can 
deduce where he might be. Cartography is infectious and maps present characters 
with more than just directions. Pippin and Gandalf fall into dispute about the 
Fellowship’s whereabouts and the entire quest to Erebor relies on cryptic moon 
runes on Thror’s map. Maps are integral to the progress of the companies in both 
texts and the success of their quest. Without its secured posterity, these quests 
may never have succeeded (or begun). They further serve as paratextual artefacts 
as they are placed on the inside covers of both publications. Yet this was not 
Tolkien’s original plan for Thror’s map as it was supposed to be placed mid-text. 
He wanted to produce the moon letters on the back of the map which would 
appear when the reader held the page up to the light (Rateliff, 2013, p. 118). 
Anticipating The Book of Mazarbul, Tolkien sought to enrich The Hobbit with 
experiments in antiquarian publishing. 
As Tolkien granted the oral tradition and its effects primarily to the Elves 
and primitive, mortal cultures, he channelled Man’s and the Hobbit’s mortal 
anxieties through their antiquarian dependency on the written word. In The Book 
of Lost Tales it is only when a mortal human, Eriol, and a half-man half-faërie, 
Heorrenda, hear the lost tales that the idea of transmitting them into writing even 
occurs. To Tolkien it is only mortal memory that requires the textual transmission 
of the oral tradition, reflecting their limited life spans and their anxieties over 
posterity. Even in the ‘Tale of Ælfwine’ it is the human who proceeds to copy 
down the Elvish history. This is of course how he planned for his English 
mythology to have survived down to the early twentieth century. His ‘chains of 
transmission’, like Chatterton’s alter-egos Rowley and Turgot, deepens and 
reinforces the historicism of his mythology (Fimi, 2016, p. 52). 
Tolkien’s central stance on the written and oral traditions came to its 
climax in The Lord of the Rings. Here he was able to channel mortal anxiety over 
narrative posterity into Bilbo, the now-turned-antiquarian Hobbit. He goes on a 
‘holiday’ to Rivendell with the intention of completing his book (The Hobbit) and 
once there, requests Aragorn’s help to finish his poetic setting of Eärendel’s 
travels – yet another example of a mortal transmitting the tales of the immortals 
onto the page (Tolkien, 2007, p. 233). He even asks Frodo to bring back ‘all the 
news you can, and any old songs and tales you can come by’ for ‘I should like to 
write the second book’ detailing Frodo’s adventures (Tolkien, 2007, p. 278). His 
final words to Frodo in Rivendell is a nod to the field work of Percy, Scott, 
Lönnrot, Macpherson, and many other eighteenth-century antiquarians who 
travelled in order to record ballads and songs for their cultural projects. By the 
end of The Lord of the Rings we are given the final title page for The Red Book of 
22
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 11 [2020], Iss. 1, Art. 4
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol11/iss1/4
 
 
Westmarch, a collective text that was ‘intended to echo the great medieval 
manuscript books’ of the Northern hemisphere such as the White Book of 
Rhydderch, the Black Book of Carmarthen, the Yellow Book of Lecan, the Red 
Book of Hengest, and the Red and Black Books of Canranald (Flieger, 2012, p. 
43).The italics are Bilbo’s sketches and the rest is Frodo’s: 
 
My Diary. My Unexpected Journey. There and Back Again. And 
What Happened After. 
Adventures of Five Hobbits. The Tale of the Great Ring, compiled 
by Bilbo Baggins from his own observations and the accounts of 
his friends. What we did in the War of the Ring. 
THE DOWNFALL 
OF THE 
LORD OF THE RINGS 
AND THE 
RETURN OF THE KING 
(as seen by the Little People; being the memoirs of Bilbo and 
Frodo of the Shire, supplemented by the accounts of their friends 
and the learning of the Wise.) 
Together with extracts from Books of Lore translated by Bilbo in 
Rivendell. (Tolkien, 2007, p. 1027). 
 
Tolkien passes the books off as Bilbo’s and Frodo’s actual work. His Red Book of 
Westmarch ‘takes us into metafictional territory, where Tolkien playfully 
collaborates with historical authors, translators, and editors that he himself 
created, treating his own work as if it were written by someone else’ much like 
Macpherson and Chatterton with their respective alter-egos (Croft, 2018, p. 192). 
Words like ‘compiled’, ‘observations’, ‘accounts’ and ‘translated’ give The Red 
Book of Westmarch the antiquarian air of Percy’s Reliques, Macpherson’s 
translations and Chatterton’s ‘Antiquities’, placing it strongly in the antiquarian 
tradition and making it a descendent of the Age of Forgery. 
Bilbo’s role in the forging of The Red Book of Westmarch caused him 
much angst and the various titles betray his fears of not finishing his work. Much 
like Tolkien with the Silmarillion, or Ossian with Fingal’s lineage, Bilbo agonizes 
over the completion of his book. Phrases like ‘if I am spared’ and ‘I am getting 
very old’ mirror Ossian’s mortal plight in trying to keep the Caledonian traditions 
alive in his old age (Tolkien, 2007, p. 238). Bilbo exclaims ‘Don’t adventures 
23
Sherwood: Tolkien and the Age of Forgery
Published by ValpoScholar, 2020
 
 
ever have an end? I suppose not. Someone else always has to carry on the story. 
Well, it can’t be helped. I wonder if it’s any good trying to finish my book?’ 
(Tolkien, 2007, p. 232). Although Bilbo is an exemplary employer of the oral 
tradition, when building The Red Book of Westmarch he has no interest in it. As 
he gets older he sounds more like Ossian, he seizes whatever tales he comes 
across (whether Elven or not) and pours them not into oral song, but written song. 
The reflective phrase ‘someone else always has to carry on the story’ neatly 
summarises Tolkien’s efforts to conjure a universe where a wealth of storytellers 
have added to the story of Arda. In a way, Bilbo is anticipating the longevity of 
The Red Book of Westmarch, for the Prologue to The Lord of the Rings records 
that ‘the original Red Book has not been preserved, but many copies were made’ 
(Tolkien, 2007, p. 14), noting the importance of the Thain’s Book as the first. Its 
history of ‘interwoven multivalent, identifiable source-traditions . . . and voices 
[therefore] produce the effect of age’ and crucially lend the text antiquarian 
authenticity (Painter, 2016, p. 125). For Bilbo and Tolkien, the editor (many of 
whom appear in the life of The Red Book of Westmarch) counted very much as a 
storyteller. Janet Croft notes that to Tolkien editing meant collaborating ‘with the 
long-dead original author or transcriber of the piece’, which allows a work to 
cultivate a history of its own (2018, p. 177).  
The long history of The Red Book of Westmarch deliberately builds on the 
manuscript culture cultivated by Chatterton and the antiquarians of the eighteenth 
century. Tolkien posits himself as one of Bilbo’s and Frodo’s literary descendants 
in the authorial chain and in so doing marries the internal history of Arda with its 
role as an antiquarian artefact in the primary world. By publishing the text and 
drawing the reader’s attention to the monumental task of ‘translating’ and 
arranging the book, Tolkien confirms the legendarium’s historical validity. The 
reader is pivotal to reviving and maintaining the forgotten history of Arda by 
purchasing the physical book and keeping it on their bookshelf. The act of reading 
the texts that come from The Red Book of Westmarch therefore elevates Arda’s 
secondary reality so that it becomes a part of the primary world. 
 
The Antiquarian Imagination 
 
Macpherson, Chatterton, and Tolkien all reacted to the gap in their nations’ 
literary heritage by filling the void with their own mythologies. Although Tolkien 
eventually moved away from his national pursuits, his early ambitions in The 
Book of Lost Tales mirror Macpherson’s and Chatterton’s antiquarian 
methodologies in cultivating a feigned history. Having learnt about the two 
literary forgers at Exeter College, Tolkien was well placed to have researched 
their works further before commencing his own mythopoeic project. 
24
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 11 [2020], Iss. 1, Art. 4
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol11/iss1/4
 
 
Tolkien’s antiquarian approach to his legendarium strongly channels the 
quotation from Sir Walter Scott that opens this article. It is undeniable that 
Tolkien’s work has ‘enriched’ the literary world and as Shippey summarised at 
the opening of Author of the Century, ‘the dominant literary mode of the twentieth 
century has been the fantastic’ (2001, p. vii). To achieve what he did, Tolkien 
revived the antiquarian methodologies from the Age of Forgery for his 
legendarium. He harmonised the extremes of the oral tradition and written word 
as modes of historical transmission so that they complimented and built on each 
other within the primary and secondary worlds. Individually, he improved on the 
methodologies of Macpherson and Chatterton by offering more nuanced, tragic, 
and powerful forms of the oral tradition and integrating the importance of 
cartography, calligraphy, and archival research into the plots of his works. 
Beyond this Tolkien layered the history of his legendarium with tangible paratexts 
that can to this day be found in the Bodleian Library and Marquette archives, 
allowing his work to exist as a single antiquarian treasury that marries the 
secondary world with our primary world. 
It is not overreaching to consider Tolkien’s fresh and blended antiquarian 
methodology as the perfect template for the fantasy genre more largely. Fantasy 
throughout the twentieth and twenty-first centuries has relied on the historic 
validity and gravity that Tolkien’s methodology has exemplified to forge its own 
histories and sub-creations. Works from Ursula K. Le Guinn’s Earthsea Cycle 
(1968 – 2001), Robert Jordan’s The Wheel of Time (1984 – 2013), George. R.R. 
Martin’s The Song of Ice and Fire (1996 – present), J.K. Rowling’s Harry Potter 
(1997 – 2007), and Christopher Paolini’s The Inheritance Cycle (2003 – 2011) to 
name just a few all employ Tolkien’s blended antiquarian methodology that has 
its roots in the literary forgery of the 1760s. There is therefore significant scope to 
re-evaluate how fantasy literature has derived its motives and methodologies from 
a period of literary and cultural history that thrived on historical and mythic 
forgery. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25
Sherwood: Tolkien and the Age of Forgery
Published by ValpoScholar, 2020
 
 
Bibliography 
J.R.R. Tolkien’s Unpublished Manuscripts – Bodleian Library 
 
Bodleian Library MS. Tolkien A 21/4: General Literature / General 
Miscellaneous, Fols. 10 – 11. 
 
Other Works Cited 
Beers, H. A. (1899). A History of English Romanticism in the Eighteenth Century. 
New York: Henry Holt and Company. 
Blackwell, T. (1735). An Enquiry into the Life and Writings of Homer. London: 
Rose and Crown in the Poultry. 
Bristow, J. & R. N. Mitchell. (2015). Oscar Wilde’s Chatterton: Literary History, 
Romanticism, and the Art of Forgery. New Haven: Yale University Press. 
Brljak, V. (2010). ‘The Book of Lost Tales: Tolkien as Metafictionalist’, Tolkien 
Studies 7, 1 – 34. 
Bugajska, A. (2014). 'Scottish Ghosts, English Wraiths: The Supernatural 
Imagination of Macpherson and Tolkien'. In Anne Walczuk and Wladyslaw 
Witalisz. (Ed.), Old Challenges and New Horizons in English and American 
Studies. (pp. 159 – 168). Bern: Peter Lang Edition. 
Carpenter, H. (2002). J.R.R. Tolkien: A Biography. London: HarperCollins. 
Chatterton, T. (1872). The Poetical Works of Thomas Chatterton Volume II. [Ed. 
Skeat, W, W.]. London: Bell and Daldy. 
Clark, F. E. (1906). 'What English Poetry Owes to Young People'. The North 
American Review, 182 (591) 255 – 265. 
Croft, J. B. (2018). ‘Doors into Elf-mounds: J.R.R. Tolkien’s Introductions, 
Prefaces, and Forewords’. Tolkien Studies (15) 177 – 195. 
Dawson, D. (2005). 'English, Welsh, and Elvish: Language, Loss, and Cultural 
Recovery in J.R.R. Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings'. In Jane Chance & Alfred K. 
Siewers (Ed.), Tolkien's Modern Middle Ages. (pp. 105 – 120). Basingstoke: 
Palgrave Macmillan. 
Fimi, D. (2010). Tolkien, Race and Cultural History: From Fairies to Hobbits. 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
26
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 11 [2020], Iss. 1, Art. 4
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol11/iss1/4
 
 
Fimi, D. (2016). ‘The Past as an Imaginary World: The Case of Medievalism’. In 
Mark Wolf. (Ed.), Revisiting Imaginary Worlds: A Subcreation Studies 
Anthology. (pp. 46 – 66). New York: Routledge. 
Flieger, V. (2004). ‘A Mythology for Finland: Tolkien and Lönnrot as 
Mythmakers’. In Jane Chance (Ed.), Tolkien and the Invention of Myth. (pp. 277 – 
284). Lexington: The University of Kentucky University Press.  
Flieger, V. (2005). Interrupted Music: The Making of Tolkien's Mythology. Kent: 
Kent State University Press. 
Flieger, V. (2006). ‘Frame Narrative’. In Michael. D. C. Drout (Ed.), J.R.R. 
Tolkien Encyclopedia. (pp. 206 – 218). New York: Routledge. 
Flieger, V. (2012). Green Suns and Faerie: Essays on J.R.R. Tolkien. Kent: Kent 
State University Press. 
Gaskill, H. (1991). Ossian Revisted. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 
Gay, D. E. (2004). ‘J.R.R. Tolkien and the Kalevala: Some Thoughts on the 
Finnish Origins of Tom Bombadil and Treebeard’. In Jane Chance (Ed.), Tolkien 
and the Invention of Myth. (pp. 295 – 304). Lexington: The University of 
Kentucky University Press. 
Groom, N. (1999). The Making of Percy's Reliques. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Groom, N. (2002). The Forger’s Shadow. London: Picador. 
Groom, N. (2006). '“The purest english”: Ballads and the English Literary 
Dialect'. The Eighteenth Century, 47 (2/3) 180 – 202. 
Groom, N. (2014). ‘The English Literary Tradition: Shakespeare to the Gothic’. In 
Stuart Lee (Ed.), A Companion to J.R.R. Tolkien. (pp. 286 – 302). Chichester: 
John Wiley & Sons LTD. 
Groom, N. (2019). Prom 37: The Childhood of Christ. BBC Proms. Available at: 
http://www.bbc.co.uk/sounds/play/m0007kws [Accessed 14 Aug. 2019]. 
Gross, E. J. & Matthews, P. E. (1905). King Edward’s Board of Education Report 
of First Inspection of the King Edward VI. High School for Boys. 
Gross, E. J. & Matthews, P. E. (1906). King Edward’s Board of Education Report 
of First Inspection of the King Edward VI. High School for Boys. 
Hammond, W. G. & Scull, C. (2017a). The J.R.R. Tolkien Companion: 
Chronology. New York: Houghton Mifflin Press. 
27
Sherwood: Tolkien and the Age of Forgery
Published by ValpoScholar, 2020
 
 
Hammond, W. G. & Scull, C. (2017b). The J.R.R. Tolkien Companion: Reader’s 
Guide Part I. New York: Houghton Mifflin Press. 
Haywood, I. (1986). The Making of History. London: Associated University 
Presses.  
Honegger, T. (2019). Memory, Lore, and Knowledge in Tolkien’s World.  Tolkien 
2019, 9 August, Birmingham. 
Hudson, N. (1996). 'Oral Tradition: The Evolution of an Eighteenth-Century 
Concept'. In Albaro Ribeiro & James G. Basker (Ed.), Tradition in Transition: 
Women Writers, Marginal Texts, and the Eighteenth-Century Canon. (pp. 161 – 
176). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Hunter, J. (2005). 'The Reanimation of Antiquity and the Resistance to History: 
Macpherson-Scott-Tolkien'. In Jane Chance & Alfred K. Siewers (Ed.), Tolkien's 
Modern Middle Ages. (pp. 61 – 76). Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Keats, J. (1935). The Letters of John Keats. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Kelly, M. Q. (1972). ‘The Poetry of Fantasy. Verse in The Lord of the Rings. In 
Neil Isaacs & Roose Zimbardo (ed.), Tolkien and the Critics. (pp. 170 – 200). 
Notre Dame: Notre Dame University Press. 
Lee, S. (2014). ‘Manuscripts: Use, and Using’. In Stuart Lee (Ed.), A Companion 
to J.R.R. Tolkien. (pp. 56 – 76). Chichester: John Wiley & Sons LTD. 
Macpherson, J. (1807). The Poems of Ossian Volume I. London: Cadell & Davies. 
MacSwiney, D. G. J. & Payton, W. H. (1910). ‘Debating Society’. King Edward’s 
School Chronicle (184) 94 – 95. 
Mann, M. (2013). ‘The role of nationalism in the two world wars’. In John A. 
Hall & Siniša Malešević (Ed.), Nationalism and War. (pp. 172 – 196). 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
McIlwaine, C. (2018). Tolkien: Maker of Middle-earth. Oxford: Bodleian Library. 
Meyerstein. E. H. W. (1930). A Life of Chatterton. London: Ingpen and Grant. 
Nagy, G. (2003). ‘The Great Chain of Reading: (Inter-)textual Relations and the 
Technique of Mythopoesis in the Turin Story’. In Jane Chance (Ed.), Tolkien the 
Medievalist. (pp. 239 – 258). London: Routledge. 
Nagy, G. (2006). ‘Authorship’. In Michael. D. C. Drout (Ed.), J.R.R. Tolkien 
Encyclopedia. (pp. 41 – 45). New York: Routledge. 
28
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 11 [2020], Iss. 1, Art. 4
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol11/iss1/4
 
 
Nagy, G. ‘The Silmarillion: Tolkien’s Theory of Myth, Text, and Culture’. In 
Stuart Lee (Ed.), A Companion to J.R.R. Tolkien. (pp. 112 – 116). Chichester: 
John Wiley & Sons LTD.  
Noad, C. E. (2000). ‘On the Construction of “The Silmarillion”’. In Verlyn 
Flieger & Carl F. Hostetter (Ed.), Tolkien’s Legendarium: Essays on The History 
of Middle-earth. (pp. 31 – 68). London: Greenwood Press. 
Oberhelman, D. D. (2007). 'Oral Tradition'. In Michael D. C. Drout (Ed.), J.R.R. 
Tolkien Encyclopedia: Scholarship and Critical Assessment. (pp. 484 – 486). 
London: Routledge. 
Oberhelman, D. (2008). ‘A Brief History of Libraries in Middle-earth: Manuscript 
and Book Repositories in Tolkien’s Legendarium’. In Jonathan B. Himes (Ed.), 
Truths Breathed Through Silver: The Inklings’ Moral and Mythopoeic Legacy. 
(pp. 81 – 92) Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars Publishing. 
Painter, J. (2016). ‘“A Honeycomb Gathered from Different Flowers”: Tolkien-
the-Compiler’s Middle-earth “Sources” in The Lord of the Rings’. Tolkien Studies 
(13) 125 – 147. 
Pezzini, G. (2018). ‘The authors of Middle Earth: Tolkien and the mystery of 
literary creation’. Journal of Inklings Studies, 8 (1) 31 – 64. 
Rateliff, J. D. (2013). The History of the Hobbit. London: HarperCollins. 
Robson, W. W. (1986). A Prologue to English Literature. London: Barnes & 
Noble Inc. 
Rosebury, B. (2003). Tolkien: A Cultural Phenomenon. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
Rossetti, G. D. (2010). The Correspondence of Dante Gabriel Rossetti: Volume 9. 
[Ed. Fredeman, W. E.]. Cambridge: D. S. Brewer.  
Scott, W. (1849). The Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border Volume IV. Edinburgh: 
Robert Cadell. 
Sherwood, W. (2020). The Romantic Faëry: Keats, Tolkien, and the Perilous 
Realm. Available at: https://ore.exeter.ac.uk/repository/handle/10871/40585 
Shippey, T. (2001). J.R.R. Tolkien: Author of the Century. London: 
HarperCollins. 
Shippey, T. (2004). ‘Tolkien and the Appeal of the Pagan: Edda and Kalevala’. In 
Jane Chance (Ed.), Tolkien and the Invention of Myth. (pp. 145 – 164). Lexington: 
The University of Kentucky University Press. 
29
Sherwood: Tolkien and the Age of Forgery
Published by ValpoScholar, 2020
 
 
Shippey, T. (2005). The Road to Middle-earth. London: HarperCollins. 
Shippey, T. (2007). Roots and Branches: Selected Papers on Tolkien. Zurich: 
Walking Tree Publications. 
Smart, J. S. (1905). James Macpherson: An Episode in Literature. London: David 
Nutt, Long Acre. 
Smith, A. R. (2006). ‘Tolkienian Gothic’. In Wayne G. Hammond & Christina 
Scull (Ed.), The Lord of the Rings 1954 – 2004: Scholarship in Honor of Richard 
E. Blackwelder. (pp. 267 – 283). Milwaukee: Marquette University Press. 
Stafford, F. (1988). The Sublime Savage: A Study of James Macpherson and The 
Poems of Ossian. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 
Thiessen, D. (2014). ‘A Baggins Back Yard: Environmentalism, Authorship and 
the Elves in Tolkien’s Legendarium’. In Bradford Lee Eden (Ed.), The Hobbit and 
Tolkien’s Mythology. (pp. 195 – 207). Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Co. 
Tolkien, J. R. R. (1983). The History of Middle-earth: The Book of Lost Tales, 
Part I. [Ed. Tolkien, C.]. London: HarperCollins. 
Tolkien, J. R. R. (1984). The History of Middle-earth: The Book of Lost Tales, 
Part II. [Ed. Tolkien, C.]. London: HarperCollins. 
Tolkien, J. R. R. (1995). The Hobbit. London: HarperCollins. 
Tolkien, J. R. R. (1996). The History of Middle-earth: The Peoples of Middle-
earth. [Ed. Tolkien, C.]. London: HarperCollins. 
Tolkien, J. R. R. (1999). The Silmarillion. [Ed. Tolkien, C.]. London: 
HarperCollins. 
Tolkien, J. R. R. (2006a). The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien. [Ed. Carpenter, H.]. 
London: HarperCollins. 
Tolkien, J. R. R. (2006b). The Monsters and the Critics and Other Essays. [Ed. 
Tolkien, C.]. London: HarperCollins. 
Tolkien. J. R. R. (2007). The Lord of the Rings. London: HarperCollins. 
Trumpener, K. (1997). Bardic Nationalism: The Romantic Novel and the British 
Empire. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Walpole, H. (2014). The Castle of Otranto. [Ed. Groom, N.]. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
30
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 11 [2020], Iss. 1, Art. 4
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol11/iss1/4
 
 
West, R. C. (2004). ‘Setting the Rocket Off in Story: The Kalevala as the Germ of 
Tolkien’s Legendarium’. In Jane Chance (Ed.), Tolkien and the Invention of Myth. 
(pp. 285 – 294). Lexington: The University of Kentucky University Press. 
Williamson, J. (2015). The Evolution of Modern Fantasy: From Antiquarianism 
to the Ballantine Adult Fantasy Series. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Wordsworth, W. (2008). The Major Works. [Ed. Gill, S.]. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
31
Sherwood: Tolkien and the Age of Forgery
Published by ValpoScholar, 2020