Journal of Tolkien Research Journal of Tolkien Research 
Volume 9 Issue 2 Article 8 
2020 
‘We don’t need another hero’ – Problematic Heroes and their ‘We don’t need another hero’ – Problematic Heroes and their 
Function in Some of Tolkien’s Works Function in Some of Tolkien’s Works 
Thomas Honegger 
Department of English, Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena, Germany, tm.honegger@uni-jena.de 
Follow this and additional works at: https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch 
 Part of the Medieval Studies Commons, and the Modern Literature Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Honegger, Thomas (2020) "‘We don’t need another hero’ – Problematic Heroes and their Function in Some 
of Tolkien’s Works," Journal of Tolkien Research: Vol. 9 : Iss. 2 , Article 8. 
Available at: https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol9/iss2/8 
This Peer-Reviewed Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Christopher Center Library at 
ValpoScholar. It has been accepted for inclusion in Journal of Tolkien Research by an authorized administrator of 
ValpoScholar. For more information, please contact a ValpoScholar staff member at scholar@valpo.edu. 
 
“We don’t need another hero.”1 To start a discussion of Tolkien’s heroes 2 with 
a line from a late 1980s pop -song3 may seem a bit strange. And yet we can 
very well imagine Bilbo saying: ‘We don’t want any heroes here, thank you! 
Nasty disturbing uncomfortable people! May get you killed before dinner!’ 
And not only the hobbits, whose late Third Age Shire represents an affluent 
pastoral and utterly unh eroic society, harbour a dee p-seated mistrust against 
some types of heroes. The surviving people of Dor -lómin, after Túrin’s 
disastrous visit to his former homestead and Brodda’s hall, seem to share such 
a view and bid him farewell with the following words: 
 
‘Farewell now, Lord of Dor-lómin,’ said Asgon. ‘But do not forget us. 
We shall be hunted men now; and the Wolf -folk will be crueller because 
of your coming. Therefore go, and do not return, unless you come with 
strength to deliver us. Farewell!’ (Children of Húrin 191) 
 
Asgon’s words, though phrased politely, are in agreement with Bilbo’s 
imagined sentiment, and point towards the potentially problematic  nature of 
certain forms of heroism and their representatives. The problem of how to 
contain and deal with the more aggressive forms of military prowess when its 
energies are not currently employed on the battlefield or in fighting an 
adversary such as a dr agon or giant is not hing new. The historical rise of the 
new military class of the cavalry and its transformation into a social , military 
and chivalric elite has been investigated , e.g. by C. Stephen Jaeger in his The 
Origins of Courtliness . The domestication, ‘taming’ and civilizing of the 
originally ferocious warriors is mirrored in and accompanied by secular texts 
that influenced and propagated the new heroic and later chivalric ideals. 
Already the Old English epic Beowulf puts great stress on  and gives ample 
space to  the description of what has to be called ‘courtly manners’  and 
ceremony. However, the harmonious fusion of physical strength, valour, 
courage and courtliness, as exemplified in Beowulf, is not always the norm 
 
1 An earlier version of this paper was presented at the 5th International Conference J.R.R. 
Tolkien: Individual, Community, Society (Budapest, 3-4 September 2015). 
2 Tom Shippey, in an email to me (20 March 2016), writes: “On heroes, though, what strikes 
me is Tolkien’s reluctance to use the word! If my computer is correct, the morpheme 
‘hero’ is NEVER used in The Silmarillion, only 5 times in The Hobbit  and 6 in LotR 
[Blackwelder’s Thesaurus lists only 3, but then he did no t have an electronic text available 
back then]. The word as used also shows the semantic downgrading of it laid out in the 
OED. But it is once again NEVER  used without some sort of qualification or distancing.” 
These philological findings are in harmony wi th my general observations as presented in 
this paper yet would profit from an in-depth discussion in another context. 
3 Tina Turner for the movie Mad Max: Beyond the Thunderdome  (1988) – maybe echoing 
Pink Floyd’s ‘We don’t need no education’ from the son g ‘Another brick in the wall’ from 
the album The Wall (1979). 
1
Honegger: Problematic Heroes and their Function in Some of Tolkien’s Works
Published by ValpoScholar, 2020
 
and we have numerous medieval texts that present a more disturbing picture of 
martial prowess and heroism.  Tolkien was  well aware of  the heterogeneous 
characteristics and sometimes unpleasant  aspects of heroism , and Tom 
Shippey (2007a) has discussed some aspects of Tolkien’s life-long exploration 
of and struggle with the problems posed by heroic behaviour. In the following, 
I would like to take up the thread and investigate some of Tolkien’s 
problematic heroes and the underlying heroic concepts.4 
Richard West, in his paper on Túrin’s  ofermod,5 makes two  important 
observations. First, he places Túrin’s behaviour within the context of the 
ofermod discussion as initiated by Tolkien’s comments on the Old English 
poem The Battle of Maldon  and, to some extent, also on Beowulf. West, like 
Shippey, uses Tolkien’s scholarly publications and lecture-notes to explore his 
works of fiction and to contextuali ze Tolkien’s literary publications within a 
larger context of medieval (mostly Germanic) literature. The story of Túrin in 
particular is shown to be a character study  of the origins, forms and, finally, 
consequences of ofermod. The second point in West’s e ssay concerns the 
development of the depiction of some of Túrin’s deeds. West, by means of 
comparing the different versions describing Túrin’s visit to his family’s former 
home and his appearance in Brodda’s hall, notices that Tolkien continued to 
add more and more elements that highlight the socially devastating 
consequences of Túrin’s acts of aggression.6 
 
The early version in “Turambar” does not have this wholesale slaughter 
(only Brodda himself and one defender are killed) (II, 90 -91), nor 
Aerin’s self-immolation (rather she gets her nephew safely away), nor 
faithful old Sador (instead it is a stranger who directs Túrin to the hall), 
[…]. Tolkien has gradually added all of that, the better to exemplify 
Túrin’s pride and wrath, and honor, and their consequences.  
(West 2000: 243) 
 
The textual evidence speaks a clear language  indeed, and I would like to 
complement West’s analysis by specifying ‘the consequences’ as, in this case, 
predominantly social consequences, i.e. as having reverberations for the 
people of Dor-lómin rather than for Túrin himself. I think it necessary to 
qualify West’s statement since, to my mind, there lies the major problem with 
Túrin’s behaviour. As Lady Aerin puts it, he is too rash and therefore does not 
 
4 This paper is to some extent a companion piece to my ‘Splintered Heroes – Heroic Variety 
and its Function in The Lord of the Rings’ (Honegger 2018). 
5 See West (2000) and also West (2014). 
6 Neidhardt (2014: 19f) makes a similar point for the increasingly negative development of 
Túrin’s character by comparing the different versions of the Saeros incident. 
2
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 9 [2020], Iss. 2, Art. 8
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol9/iss2/8
 
take into consideration the wider effects of his actions.  Contrasting Túrin’s 
homecoming with that of, for example, Odysseus shows this clearly. There are 
sufficient structural resemblances and incidental parallels to evoke an  
association between these two homecomers, such as the fact that  both are 
recognized first by an old servant  but not by anyone else . The similarities 
sharpen the contrast between Odysseus, who successfully wins back the 
dominion over his lands and people after slaughtering the suitors , and Túrin, 
who also spills a  considerable amount of blood , yet fails to re-establish his 
rule. Túrin’s ‘homecoming’ does not end in the permanent liberation of his 
people from the yoke of the Easterlings, but merely a ggravates the conflict 
with and oppression by the invaders. His admittedly heroic vengeance again st 
Brodda and his men is as ill -advised as it is rash since it is, as Tolkien wrote 
concerning Beorhtnoth’s behaviour , “at other people’s expense” ( Tolkien 
1988: 146).  
Although the individual situations of Beorhtnoth and Túrin differ widely 
– the one is an ealdorman and official leader of an Anglo -Saxon army, the 
other treated as  a homeless vagabond  and exile  – the problematic 
consequences of their actions are comparable and justify, in my opinion, the 
comparison of the two figures in one central aspect: their (at least temporary) 
disregard of the wider devastating social consequences of their deeds . Tolkien 
is quite outspoken in the judgment of the two men , though in different ways . 
In his essay -cum-dramatic-dialogue ‘The Homecoming of Beorhtnoth’, he 
refers explicitly to the Anglo -Saxon leader’s moral failure when putting his 
personal ideas of glory first:  “It was wholly unfitting that he should treat a 
desperate battle with this sole real object [i.e. to destroy or hold off the 
invaders] as a sporting match, to t he ruin of his purpose and duty ” (Tolkien 
1988: 146). With Túrin, however, Tolkien refrains from explicitly criticizing 
his deeds . In the Dor-lómin episode,  for example, he uses two other 
protagonists, Lady Aerin and Asgon , to comment on Túrin’s appearance in  
Brodda’s hall and the killing of its owner . While the former accuses Túrin of 
“[r]ash […] deeds […] as if you were still but the child that I knew” ( Children 
189), the latter is less direct but equally critical by pointing out that “[m]any a 
man of arms misreads patience and quiet. She [Lady Aerin] did much good 
among us at much cost . Her heart was not faint, and patience will break at the 
last” (Children 190). Asgon’s request to Túrin “[to] go, and […] not return, 
unless you come with strength to deliver us” ( Children 191), drives home the 
message: heroes do have a social obligation and a re not free to go about and 
do (presumably) heroic deeds as they please. 
3
Honegger: Problematic Heroes and their Function in Some of Tolkien’s Works
Published by ValpoScholar, 2020
 
Yet while there are, as West (2000) has shown, obvious parallels 
between the ofermod of the 10 th century Anglo -Saxon ealdorman and the 
mindset that can be discerned as responsible for  many of  Túrin’s fateful 
decisions, e.g. his refusal to take down the stone bridge over the Narog in spite 
of the warnings he received from various sides, they do not turn Túrin into a 
First Age Beorhtnoth. First of all, there is a structural difference in the position 
of the ofermod-motivated deeds of the two men. While Beorhtnoth’s blunder 
(if we want to call it thus) comes at the end of his heroic career (and life) and 
is, according to Tolkien, pre sented by the poet of The Battle of Maldon  as the 
crucial flaw in his character, ofermod is not always the motivating force 
behind Túrin’s behaviour and deeds. He is, as chief counsellor of the king and 
military leader , to blame for the general strategy that  led to the sack of 
Nargothrond, and  his strategic decisions can be seen as  at least partially 
motivated by ofermod.  
Yet, on the other side, his actions can also be interpreted as having been 
originally founded on mi litary (human) wisdom. Furthermore , Túrin seems 
able to develop and learn from his mistakes – especially when he finds a new 
home with the Men of Brethil and is re -integrated into society by means of his 
marriage to Níniel. His heroic energy is channelled and restrained through his 
love for his wife, so that when he sets out once more to confront the enemy , it 
is in direct response to Dorlas’s request to defend his new home and his new 
people:7 “Did you not ask to be counted one of our people, and no stran ger? Is 
this peril not yours also?” ( Children 222). Yet this time he is aware of the 
supreme threat posed by the dragon and is keen to avoid repeating th e mistake 
made at Nargothrond . His preparations for the confrontation with Glaurung 
show every sign of strategic circumspection and social responsibility. He is 
aware that he cannot kill the dragon in open battle and thus opts for the 
‘Sigurd manœuvre’. Before leaving, he  gives clear instructions to his people , 
who remain behind , what to do in case he cannot stop the advance of the 
worm. In this he contrasts with Beowulf who, in a similar situation, cho oses a 
head-on confrontation with the dragon  and does not seem to spend much 
thought on protective measures for his people .8 Túrin, f urthermore, makes a 
point of asking for  and taking along companions , so that the deflection of the 
threat to the people of Brethil does not rest solely on his shoulders . This way 
the attempt to kill Glaurung becomes a communal effort , incorporating 
 
7 Túrin, changing his name to Turambar, “dwelt among the woodmen, and was loved by 
them, and he charged them to forget his name of old, and to count him as one born in 
Brethil” (Children 196).  
8 Beowulf’s dragon, of course, poses a special challenge since he is airborne and thus not 
that easily evaded or waylaid and ambushed as are the earthbound Fafnir and Glaurung. 
4
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 9 [2020], Iss. 2, Art. 8
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol9/iss2/8
 
representatives from the different  groups of the men of Brethil . Lastly, Túrin 
does not make Beorhtnoth’s (alleged) mistake of letting the enemy cross 
unopposed over to the side where his people are but  he exploits , as the 
ealdorman could, and maybe should have done, the strategic advantage 
offered by topography. Unfortunately, circumstances and bad luck (if we want 
to call it thus) conspire against Túrin and his companions, and he finds himself 
facing the dragon on his own . In the end it  is only due to  his circumspect 
choice of the place for his attack that he is able to kill his antagonist. And yet, 
immediately after his  martial success,  fate takes its course and  his heroic 
triumph is overshadowed by his personal tragedy.9 
The narrative is not very clear as to what degree Melkor’s curse 
influences or even determines the outcome of Túrin’s actions ,10 and the reader 
knows little more  than Túrin himself , who , after Beleg’s  death,11 has been 
bereft of a wise counsellor figure, let alone divine assistance . Old Norse 
heroes such as Sigurd often profit from divine intercession  at key moments of 
their career,12 and model epic heroes such as Aragorn seem to have access to, 
and the humility and wisdom  to accept, the good advice of wise old men  such 
as Gandalf  on a more permanent basis – which seems to make all the  
difference for the quality of their heroic careers. 13  Aragorn, as the most 
prominent example of a responsible and well -advised hero, is aware that he is  
as much influenced  by what happens as he is shaping the outcome of events . 
He also knows that he has been able to achieve his aims solely because he has 
been helped by other people . This becomes especially clear in his relationship 
with the members of the Fellowship  and, at his coronation ceremony, he 
gracefully acknowledges his indebtedness  to his friends and supporters . He  
proclaims that by “the labour and valour of many I have come into my 
 
9 Comparing a work of pure fiction such as The Children of H úrin with a fictionalised 
account of a historical event, as we have it in The Battle of Maldon , can be problematic. 
However, in Tolkien’s case this is not only permissible but, as Tom Shippey and Michael 
Drout and other medievalists have shown time and again, even recommendable since 
Tolkien himself used fiction as an approach to explore problems of historical scholarship. 
10 Mitchell (2010) discusses this aspect in some depth. See also West (2000: 242).  
11 The importance of Beleg as friend and counsellor has been made explicit by Túrin himself: 
“From you [i.e. Beleg] I will take whatever you give, even  rebuke. Henceforward, you 
shall counsel me in all ways, save the road to Doriath only” (Children 140). 
12 Thus Odin, in The Saga of the Volsungs  (Byock 1990:  63), gives the young Sigurd the 
helpful advice to dig several ditches (and not just one) in order to avoid drowning in 
Fafnir’s blood when killing the dragon, yet disappears from Sigurd’s life as quickly as he 
has appeared, and fate takes its course. 
13 See Croft’s (2011) illuminating comparison of Túrin and Aragorn.  See also Stephen (2012: 
167-170). 
5
Honegger: Problematic Heroes and their Function in Some of Tolkien’s Works
Published by ValpoScholar, 2020
 
inheritance” ( LotR 967) and calls Gandalf “the mover of all that has been 
accomplished, and this is his victory” (LotR 968).14 
Aragorn is also painfully aware of his limited insight into the large r 
pattern and the potentially disastrous consequences of a wrong choice .15 Yet 
the mere awareness that there is a larger pattern16 and that his deeds contribute 
to and influence its development, changes the perception of individual 
accomplishments or failures and puts them into a broader perspective. As 
Dickerson has shown, The Lord of the Rings  avoids explicit mentions of 
religion yet clearly follows a providential scheme. This does not mean that the 
outcome of everything is predetermined, or that Free Will is disregarded, or 
that the actions of the protagonists are of no significance. Rather it means that 
a benevolent force supports those actions and protagonists that work towards 
the greater good an d the fulfilment of an implicit divine plan. We as readers 
may not sit in a high place and are thus not able to perceive everything, but the 
narrator’s/narrators’ somewhat privileged view of things 17 results in a feeling 
of coherence, meaningfulness and consolation.  
Compared to this, the reading of The Children of Húrin  leaves us 
disturbed or, if we are lucky, purged by the catharsis of the tragic catastroph e, 
yet without consolation.18 This is mainly because our point of view  is limited 
and the narrative voice does not even attempt to put the events into a wider 
and more meaningful context . We are, to use St. Augustine’s simile from De 
Ordine I.2, like an extremely myopic person who has to get v ery close to a 
mosaic in order to see anything . What we then behold from up close is a 
seemingly random arrangement of little coloured pieces and we fail to 
perceive the beauty and harmony of the  entire mosaic. The result of such an 
impaired view in the ca se of the story of Túrin  is an almost claustrophobic 
narrative whose main protagonist unwit tingly hastens towards his doom. This  
is also at least partially due to the fact that Túrin is a mortal man without even 
 
14 On the other side, he is very well able to act independently and asserts his status and 
position when, for example, questioned by Gimli about the use of the palantír (see LotR 
780). 
15 See his “And now may I make a right choice, and change the evil fate of  this unhappy day! 
[…] My heart speaks clearly at last […]” (LotR 967). 
16 See ‘The Music of the Ainur’ in The Silmarillion  for an account of the creation and 
purpose of the universe. 
17 It is difficult to identify clearly the identity of the narrator/narrat ors in spite of the conceit 
of the Red Book, which simply won’t fit the deixis of the narrative. The narrator’s 
temporary closeness to Gandalf may play an important role in the positive interpretation of 
events. See also Thomas (2000). 
18 See Eilmann (2020)  for a discussion of the relationship between The Children of Húrin  
and the Aristotelian theory of tragedy. 
6
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 9 [2020], Iss. 2, Art. 8
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol9/iss2/8
 
Aragorn’s longevity ,19 and it takes an elvish perspective to come to a more 
positive re-interpretation of his career. 20 Furthermore, within The Children of 
Húrin the workings of greater powers  (mostly malevolent ones, though)  are 
alluded to, but no coherent picture emerges and the effect is not the invocation 
of eucatastrophe and consolation, as in The Lord of the Rings , but of loss and 
frustration.  
The Children of Húrin  and The Lord of the Rings  could be seen as  
presenting two contrasting approaches to heroic narratives: on the one hand  
we are confronted with a stark, harsh and grim heroic world  where people 
have to flee from their homes into exile, where families are torn apart, and 
where returns do not end with the restoration of former normality (minus a 
few silver spoons) – it is rather a bleak version of a ‘there’ without the ‘and 
back again’ bit . Frodo, it may be argued, cannot go ‘back again’ either , since 
the traumatic experiences during his quest have changed him to o much. 
However, his sacrifice has contributed to a lasting restoration of peace and 
general prosperity, and his personal loss is given dignity and meaning by 
becoming part of the larger pattern supported by divine providence. Frodo 
cannot go back to his former life, but he can go on to the Undying Lands. He 
thus contrasts with the unhappy Túrin  who, within the confines of the 
narrative, despairs and perishes by his own hands. His posthumous fame and  
participation in the  apocalyptic eucatastrophe announced in the Second 
Prophecy of Mandos are of little consolation since, for him and the readers, his 
tale has come to an end. It takes someone like Sam to realise that “the great 
tales never end” ( LotR 712) and that they go “on past the happiness and into 
grief and beyond it” ( LotR 712). The tale of Túrin, as told in The Children of 
Húrin, ends with the ‘into grief’ and lacks the ‘beyond it’. 
The difference in outlook also reflects the development of Tolkien’s 
approach to Middle -earth and heroism . The Children of Húrin represent a n 
earlier, heathen view of the world that is largely inspired by the Kalevala,21 
whereas The Lord of the Rings possesses the characteristics of a proto -
Christian fairy story  as outlined in his 1939 lecture ‘On Fairy -stories’. As a 
consequence, the two works have a different feel  even though the world 
 
19 The contrasting and to some extent opposing views due to the difference in lifespan can be 
seen most clearly in Túrin and Gwindor’s debate about t he most appropriate strategy to 
counter Morgoth’s threat (Children 161-163). 
20 Elrond, for example, mentions him as one of “ the mighty elf -friends of old, Hador, and 
Húrin, and Túrin, and Beren” (LotR 270-271), and in the Second Prophecy of Mandos, 
Túrin shall be “coming from the halls of Mandos; and the black sword of Túrin shall deal 
unto Morgoth his death and final end” (Tolkien 1992: 333). 
21 See West (2000: 237-238) and Tolkien (2015). 
7
Honegger: Problematic Heroes and their Function in Some of Tolkien’s Works
Published by ValpoScholar, 2020
 
outside the Shire is no less wild than many of the lands Tú rin visits, nor are 
late-Third-Age heroes less heroic. A closer look at The Lord of the Rings  can 
shed some light onto th e way Tolkien redeems even the heathen and 
potentially problematic forms of heroism in his epic  and incorporates the pre -
Christian concepts of wyrd/fate into an emerging proto-Christian framework. 
The (northern) Germanic pre-Christian heroic attitude, as, for example,  
expressed by Beowulf, 22 hints vaguely at the workings of wyrd/fate: wyrd oft 
nereð // unfægne eorl,   þonne his ellen deah  (Beowulf 572b-573).23 Wyrd in 
The Lord of the Rings , however, is clearly the result of the  hidden interaction 
between divine Providence and Free Will . This constitutes, as Dickerson 
(2003) and others have shown, the underlying structural pattern. It is therefore 
not so much the typical Germanic heroic resistance against or stoic 
acceptance24 of an (often) nihilistic wyrd that is in the foreground, though The 
Lord of the Rings  has its ‘Germanic ’ heroic  moments. Tolkien, as almost 
always when adapting motifs from medieval literature, does not simply copy 
his model but alters them slightly to make his point. This can be seen  clearly 
in Éomer’s last stand  which Tolkien exploits to create a moment of pure 
northern heroic spirit of a leader – a moment otherwise not available in this 
unalloyed form within the corpus of surviving Germanic poetry.25  
The situation is as follows: the Rohirrim, after the initial success of their 
surprise attack, have not only lost their King Théoden, but are now also cut off 
from Prince Imrahil’s forces and in danger of being overpowered by the sheer 
numeric predominance  of the enemy. Éomer, having inherited the kingship 
after his uncle’s death in battle, has taken  over the command of the Rohirrim  
and orders them to rally around his banner. When he notices  the black ships of 
the Corsairs of Umbar , he believes the battle o f the Pelennor lost, and 
therefore 
 
thought to make a great shield -wall26 at the last, and  stand, and fight 
there on foot till all fell, and do deeds of song on the fields of Pelennor, 
though no man should be left in the West to remember the last King of 
 
22 Beowulf uses this maxim in his account of his fight against the dangers of the sea during 
the swimming-contest against Breca. 
23 Tolkien (2014: 29) gives the following translation: “Fate oft saveth  a man not doomed to 
die, when his valour fails not.” He adds a substantial comment to this enigmatic line 
(Tolkien 2014: 256-260). 
24 See, for example, Beowulf’s concluding Gæð a wyrd swa hio scel  (Beowulf 455b), which 
Tolkien (2014: 26) renders as: “Fate goeth ever as she must.” 
25 Tolkien (1988: 144) argues: “For this ‘northern heroic spirit’ is never quite pure; it is of 
gold and an alloy […] of personal good name […].” 
26 See Honegger (2011a) for an in -depth discussion of the Anglo -Saxon elements i n the 
Rohirrim. 
8
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 9 [2020], Iss. 2, Art. 8
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol9/iss2/8
 
the Mark. So he rode to a green hillock and there set his banner, and the 
White Horse ran rippling in the wind. 
 
Out of doubt, out of dark to the day’s rising  
I came singing in the sun, sword unsheathing.  
To hope’s end I rode and to heart’s breaking:  
Now for wrath, now for ruin and a red nightfall! 
 
These staves he spoke, yet he laughed as he  said them. For once more 
lust of battle was on him; and he was still unscathed, and he was young, 
and he was king: the lord of a fell people. And lo! Even as he laughed at 
despair he looked out again on the black ships, and he lifted up his sword 
to defy them. (LotR 847) 
 
The moment is, however, transformed by the eucatastrophic revelation of the 
true identity of the naval force when the flagship unfurls Aragorn’s banner.  
I have quoted this passage at length since it gives, to my mind, an 
unprecedented emotive access to the heroic pagan mindset and, at the same 
time, can be read as a typological comment on Christ’s resurrection  (see 
below). Please note that Éomer is not after lof (afterfame) in the usual meaning 
of the word. He is aware that the (very likely) annihilation of his men on the 
battlefield not only means the end of the Rohirrim, but the end of all the Free 
Peoples in Middle -earth – and thus the breaking of the ‘chain of songs’  that 
has so far preserved the memory of their heroes and linked  the generations to 
each other. As a consequence, Éomer’s defiance of defeat and despair can be  
seen as Tolkien’s answer to Beorht wold’s famous staves in The Battle of 
Maldon: 
 
Hige sceal þe heardra,    heorte þe cenre, 
mod sceal þe mare    þe ure maegen lytlað. 
 
‘Will shall be the sterner, heart the bolder, spirit the greater as our 
strength lessens.’ (Tolkien 1988: 124)  
 
As Tolkien writes, Beorhtwold’s words “have been held to be  the finest 
expression of the northern heroic spirit, Norse or English” (Tolkien 1988: 143) 
– and this all the more , or rather especially so , since they were spoken  and 
acted upon by a retainer and not a leader eager for fame and glory . Éomer, by 
contrast, is a  leader, and Tolkien is careful to place him within a framework 
where martial heroism does not stand in opposition to his duties to allies, 
people or kin, so that  the gold of northern heroic courage shines in all its 
purity, purged of any alloy of personal fame.  This way Tolkien  implicitly 
alludes, on the one hand, to Beorhtwold’s  admirable courage and posthumous 
9
Honegger: Problematic Heroes and their Function in Some of Tolkien’s Works
Published by ValpoScholar, 2020
 
loyalty and, on the other, compares Éomer favourably to Denethor, who gives 
in to despair and ends his life in suicidal madness.27  
As Tom Shippey (2007a) has pointed out, Tolkien felt uneasy about the 
nature of many of the pagan heroes he encountered in the texts he studied and 
taught as part of his syllabus at Oxford . His professional liking  for and 
admiration of these heroes stood in opposition to his moral-religious 
reservations about their often cruel and immoral  behaviour. Tolkien’s solution 
to this problem was to re -create in his own fiction pagan heroes who are 
naturaliter christiani in the manner of the Old Testament iusti, i.e. without the 
revelation of the Christian truth.  He would intentionally create parallels and 
similarities between exemplary figures of the European Middle Ages and his 
own protagonists and thus connect them with the m edieval project of 
interpreting history as a meaningful and coherent progression towards the 
Second Coming and the establishment of the Kingdom of God on earth. 28 
Aragron, for example, shares many characteristics with Arthur and, as 
renovator imperii, also with Charlemagne, 29 and is thus connected implicitly 
with the so -called Nine Worthies. First attested in the 13 th century, this idea 
unites nine legendary, historical an d scriptural characters in groups of three. 
Thus we have the three good pagans Hector of Troy, Alexander the Great, and 
Julius Caesar; the three good Jewish heroes Joshua, King David, and Judas 
Maccabeus; and the three good Christian heroes Arthur, Charlem agne, and 
Godfrey of Bouillon. The important lesson taught by the Nine Worthies is that 
chivalric excellence and knightly virtue are to be found throughout history and 
among different cultures and religions. Aragorn would fit in nicely as a Fourth 
Age prot o-worthy and thus foreshadows the actual worthies of the Middle 
Ages30 – which brings us to Tolkien’s second strategy of appropriating  the 
past: the typological interpretation of figures and events . This interpretative 
technique was originally developed to  link the Old to the New Testament. 
Events and figures in the Old Testament  are interpreted as foreshadowing 
 
27 There are, of course, the widely differing biographical circumstances to be taken into 
account. Most prominently, Éomer has a young man’s resilience and has been, most likely, 
not yet been confronted with his natural mortality (vs. potential death in battle). 
28 Most important are the concepts of the translatio imperii  and the sex aetates mundi  (see 
Honegger 2011b). 
29 See Finn (2005) and Hall (2012) on the parallels between Aragorn and Arthur, and 
Honegger (2011b: 90-96) and Gallant (2020) for those between Aragorn and Charlemagne. 
Tolkien would, of course, be conscious of these parallels and exploit them for his 
construction of Aragorn as the archetypal epic hero (on archetypes in Tolkien, see O’Neill 
1979). See also Ris den (2015: 106 -113) for a discussion of Arthur, Aragorn and the 
monomyth pattern. 
30 The nine walkers of the Fellowship in their diversity could be seen as a tongue -in-cheek 
foreshadowing of the Nine Worthies. 
10
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 9 [2020], Iss. 2, Art. 8
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol9/iss2/8
 
analogous events and persons  in the Gospels. Thus Abraham’s journey to 
Mount Moriah to sacrifice his only son Isaac is considered to prophetically 
mirror Christ’s ascent to  the hill of Golgotha. Since t he b iblical typological 
interpretation is often associative and vague and does not rely on a close one -
to-one correspondence of elements and patterns, it is closer to  applicability 
than to allegory31 – and literary scholars may also recognize parallels between 
the typological interpretation and the structuralist approach . Furthermore, the 
typological way of thinking and perceiving patterns would not only be familiar 
to Tolkien, but also constitute a highly attractive method for linking his 
fictional works to the revealed truth of the Gospels without having to recur to 
blatant anachronism s or to violate the precepts of his Christian faith . And 
lastly, it would give him the means to redeem his pagan heroes by placing 
them within a pre -Christian framework that is nevertheless ruled by divine 
Providence. How then, does this apply to the event s on the Pelennor fields? 32 
To start, the cockcrow heralding daybreak and, coincidentally, the coming of 
the Rohirrim, echoes the crowing of the cock in the Gospels (e.g. Mark 14:72). 
More significantly, the date of the Battle of the Pelennor Fields (15 Ma rch 
3019 TA) places it within or at least the vicinity of the general timeframe of 
the Easter week  with the central events of Christ’s death on the cross, his 
descent into the underworld and , finally, his triumphant resurrection on Easter 
Monday. Aragorn’s descent into the Und erworld (‘The Paths of the Dead ’) 
and his triumphant  emergence not only parti cipate in the archetypical pattern 
found in numerous myths and legends, 33 but continue the Easter theme  by 
foreshadowing Christ’s death, resurrection and triumphant return to Heaven  – 
the eucatastrophic event in the history of mankind , as Tolkien argues in the 
‘Epilogue’ to his lecture ‘On Fairy -stories’. Set against this bac kground we 
can see how Éomer’s northern heroic courage is hallowed and redeemed since, 
in opposition to Denethor’s despair, it gives Providence the necessary leverage 
to work its redemptive magic. It would be probably too much to go on and see 
the laughter of the Rohirrim as alluding to the risus paschalis, the Easter 
Laughter expressing the joy and exhilaration about Christ’s tricking and 
defeating of both Death and the Devil. 
 
31 I use Tolkien’s terminology, though his under standing of allegory (cf. LotR xxiv) is 
somewhat narrow. The actual allegorising of e.g. medieval exegetes is much more 
associative and free ranging than theoretical studies usually suggest. 
32 Such a reading does not mean that the allegorical domination of  the author is simply 
substituted by a typological straitjacket – however loosely fitting this might be. Tolkien’s 
approach is subtle and indirect, and he works more by means of suggestions and allusions 
than by establishing clear patterns. My own reading will therefore remain equally allusive. 
33 See Stevens (2020) for an in -depth discussion of the ‘underworld journey’ ( katabasis) in 
Tolkien’s work. 
11
Honegger: Problematic Heroes and their Function in Some of Tolkien’s Works
Published by ValpoScholar, 2020
 
Let us, to conclude, return once more to Túrin and the question of how 
his brand of heroism differs from that of, for example, Éomer. The answer is, 
in my opinion, to be found in the divergent views on the relationship between 
fate, Providence, and courage that constitute the ideological frameworks for 
their deeds. Éomer’s motivation is not explicitly given, but we can infer from 
the songs of Rohan that, like his maternal uncle and predecessor Théoden , it 
was the oaths taken that made him act as he did. 34 The young king of Rohan 
simply tries to honour the obligations of solidarity and friendship with Gondor 
in the idiom of his people – without questioning the deeper meaning and 
import of current events on a meta-historical level.35 He does the deed at hand, 
so to speak, implicitly trusting in the ultimate meaningfulness of the universe . 
Túrin, on the other side, bases his behaviour on a sort of heroic existentialism, 
as becomes evident from  his long speech in the council of Orodreth in 
Nargothrond: 
 
‘The Valar!’ said Túrin. ‘They have forsaken you, and they hold Men in 
scorn. […] There is but one Vala with whom we have to do, and that is 
Morgoth; and if in the end we cannot overcome him, at least we can hurt 
him and hinder him. 36 For victory is victory, however small, nor is its 
worth only from what follows from it. […]’ (Children 161)  
 
The elf Gwindor, opposing Túrin in the council, points out that such a view is 
too limited and that the Eldar have  
 
a prophecy […] that one day a messenger from Middle -earth will come 
through the shadows to Valinor, and Man wë will hear, and Mandos 
relent. For that time shall we not attempt to preserve the seed of the 
Noldor, and of the Edain also? […] You think of yourself and of your 
own glory, and bid us do likewise; but we must think of others beside 
ourselves, for not all can fight and fall, and those we must keep from war 
and ruin, while we can. (Children 162)  
 
It is, as we know, only after the fall of Nargothrond that Túrin has learnt his 
lesson and starts to think of others  – but by then it seems too late for him to 
attain personal salvation in this age , and it is no coincidence that both Túrin 
 
34 See the lines in the songs of Rohan praising Théoden: “ Fealty kept he; / oaths he had 
taken, all fulfilled them” (LotR 803). 
35 Éomer’s words at the council after the battle of the Pelennor Fields support such an 
interpretation: “I have little knowledge of these deep matters; but I need it not. This I 
know, and it is enough, that as my friend Aragorn s uccoured me and my people, so I will 
aid him when he calls. I will go” (LotR 880). 
36 Compare this, for example, to Aragorn’s march on the Black Gate, which may look to 
Sauron a bit like Túrin’s idea of heroism, but actually serves a higher purpose.  
12
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 9 [2020], Iss. 2, Art. 8
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol9/iss2/8
 
and Denethor commit suicide . Túrin is, structurally speaking, closer to 
Denethor than to Éomer. The latter , by doing the deed at hand, provides 
Providence with the opportunity to intercede on behalf of Men – as much as  
Gwindor hopes to do by preserving the seed of the Noldor and Edain.  Yet it 
would be cynical to interpret Túrin’ s tragedy as being merely a problem of 
finding the correct approach to events – which is probably why Tolkien , by 
means of  the elvish re -evaluation of Túrin’s deeds, provides  an alternative 
view.  
The value of Túrin as a problematic hero  is exactly his being 
‘problematic’ – at least within the confines of the extant narrative as given in 
The Children of Húrin . It highlights the necessity of a redeeming framework 
in which a plurality of different types of heroes collaborate towards the greater 
good and the fulfilment of the Divine Will by means of creating opportunities 
for the benevolent intercession of Providence. This also means that heroes 
need no longer be of the high mimetic (or higher) type but that even low 
mimetic hobbits can contribute their share ,37 and that with these new types of 
heroes the chances of getting invited for tea are actually greater than those of 
getting killed before dinner. 
 
 
 
 
List of Abbreviations 
 
Children Tolkien, John R.R. 2007. The Children of Húrin . Edited by 
Christopher Tolkien. London: HarperCollins. 
LotR Tolkien, John R.R. 2004. The Lord of the Rings . 50 th anniversary 
one-volume edition. Originally published in three volumes 1954 -
55. Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin. 
  
 
37 See also Honegger (2018). 
13
Honegger: Problematic Heroes and their Function in Some of Tolkien’s Works
Published by ValpoScholar, 2020
 
Bibliography 
 
Auden, W.H. 2004. ‘The Quest Hero.’  In Rose A. Zimbardo and Neil D. 
Isaacs (eds.). Understanding The Lord of the Rings: The Best of Tolkien 
Criticism. Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin Company, 31 -51. 
Originally published 1961 in Texas Quarterly 4: 81-93. 
Blackwelder, Richard E. 1990. A Tolkien Thesaurus. London and New York: 
Garland. 
Byock, Jesse L. (ed. and trans.). 1990. The Saga of the Volsungs . Berkeley 
CA: University of California Press. 
Campbell, Joseph. 1971. The Hero With a Thousand Faces . 2 nd edition. 
Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Carpenter, Humphrey (ed., with the assistance of Christopher Tolkien). 2000. 
The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien . First published 1981. Boston and New 
York: Houghton Mifflin. 
Caughey, A nna. 2014. ‘The Hero’s Jo urney.’ In Stuart D. Lee (ed.). A 
Companion to J.R.R. Tolkien. Oxford: Wiley Blackwell, 404-417. 
Cavill, Paul. 1995. ‘Interpretation of The Battle of Maldon , Lines 84 -90: A 
Review and Reassessment.’ Studia Neophilologica 67:149-164.  
Chichester, Christine L. 2015. Samwise Gamgee: Beauty, Truth, and Heroism 
in J.R.R. Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings . MA Thesis. Lynchburg VA: 
Liberty University.  
Clark, George. 2000. ‘J.R.R. Tolkien and the True Hero .’ In George Clark and 
Daniel Timmons ( eds.). J.R.R. Tolkien and His Literary Resonances . 
Westport CT: Greenwood Press, 39-51. 
Croft, Janet Brennan. 2011 . ‘Túrin and Aragorn: Embracing and Evading 
Fate.’ Mythlore 29.3/4 (#113/114): 155-70. 
Dickerson, Matthew. 2003. Following Gandalf. Epic Battles and Moral 
Victory in The Lord of the Rings. Grand Rapids MI: Brazos Press. 
Eilmann, Julian. 2020  (forthcoming). ‘“Horror and Fury”: J.R.R. Tolkien’s 
The Children of Húrin  and the Aristotelian Theory of Tragedy.’ In 
Hamish Williams (ed.). Tolkien an d the Classical World . Cormarë 
Series 45. Zurich and Jena: Walking Tree Publishers, 247-269. 
Finn, Richard J. 2005. ‘Arthur and Aragorn: Arthurian Influences in The Lord 
of the Rings.’ Mallorn 43: 23-26. 
Flieger, Verlyn. 2004. ‘Frodo and Aragorn: The Concept of the Hero.’ In Rose 
A. Zimbardo, Rose A. and Neil D. Isaacs. Understanding The Lord of the 
Rings: The Best of Tolkien Criticism. Boston and New York: Houghton 
Mifflin Company, 122 -145. Originally published in Neil D. Isaacs  and 
Rose A . Zimbardo (eds.). 1981. Tolkien: New Critical Perspectives . 
Lexington KY: University of Press of Kentucky, 40-62.  
–––. ‘The Music and the Task. Fate and Free Will in Middle -earth.’ Tolkien 
Studies 6: 151-181. 
Fornet-Ponse, Thomas. 2010. ‘“Strange and Free” – On Some Aspects of the 
Nature of Elves and Men.’ Tolkien Studies 7: 67-89. 
14
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 9 [2020], Iss. 2, Art. 8
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol9/iss2/8
 
Gallant, Richard Z. 2014. ‘Original Sin in Heorot and Valinor.’ Tolkien 
Studies 11: 109-129. 
–––. 2020. ‘Elessar Telcontar Magnus, Rex Pater Gondor, Restitutor Imperii .’ 
Journal of Tolkien Research 9.2, article 1. 
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol9/iss2/1 
Hall, Mark R. 2012. ‘Gandalf and Merlin, Aragorn and Arthur: Tolkien’s 
Transmogrification of the Arth urian Tradition and its Use as a 
Palimpsest for The Lord of the Rings.’ Inklings Forever 8: 2-10. 
Honegger, Thomas. 2011 a. ‘ The Rohirrim: “Anglo -Saxons on Horseback”? 
An Inquiry into Tolkien’s Use of Sources.’ In Jason Fisher (ed.). 
Tolkien and the Study of His Sources: Critical Essays . Jefferson NC 
and London: McFarland, 116-132. 
–––. 2011b. ‘Time and Tide – Medieval Patterns of Interpreting the Passing of 
Time in Tolkien’s Work.’ Hither Shore 8: 86-99. 
–––. 2018. ‘Splintered Heroes – Heroic Variety and its Function in The Lord 
of the Rings .’ In John D. Rateliff (ed.). A Wilderness of Dragon s: 
Essays in Honor of Verlyn Flieger . Wayzata MI: The Gabbro Head 
Press, 157-175. 
Jaeger, C. Stephen. 1985. The Origins of Courtliness – Civilizing Trends and 
the Formation of Courtly Ideals 939-1210. Philadelphia PA: University 
of Pennsylvania Press. 
Mitchell, Jesse. 2010. ‘Master of Doom by Doom Mastered: Heroism, Fate, 
and Death in The Children of Húrin .’ Mythlore 29.1/2 (#111/112): 87-
114. 
Neidhardt, Jenny. 2014. Representations of Heroism in J.R.R. Tolkien’s The 
Silmarillion. BA Thesis. Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf. 
O’Neill, Timothy R. 1979. The Individuated Hobbit: Jung, Tolkien and the 
Archetypes of Middle-earth. Boston MA: Houghton Mifflin. 
Petty, Anne C. 2003. Tolkien in the Land of Heroes . Cold Spring Harbor  NY: 
Cold Spring Press. 
Porter, Lynnette R. 2005. Unsung Heroes of The Lord of the Rings. From the 
Page to the Screen. Westport CT and London: Praeger. 
Risden, Edward L. 2015. Tolkien’s Intellectual Landscape . Jefferson NC: 
McFarland. 
Shippey, Tom A. 2007a. ‘Heroes and Heroism: Tolkien’s Problems, Tolkien’s 
Solutions.’ In Tom Shippey.  Roots and Branches: Selected Papers on 
Tolkien by Tom Shippey . Cormarë Series 11. Zurich and Berne: 
Walking Tree Publishers , 267 -283. Originally published in Lembas 
Extra (1991), 5-17. 
–––. 2007b. ‘Tolkien and ‘The Homecoming of Beorhtnoth’ .’ In Tom 
Shippey. Roots and Branches: Selected Papers on Tolkien by Tom 
Shippey. Cormarë Series 11. Zurich and Berne: Walking Tree 
Publishers, 323 -339. Originally published 1991 in Leaves from the 
Tree: J.R.R. Tolkien’s Shorter Fiction . London: The Tolkien Society, 
5-16 
15
Honegger: Problematic Heroes and their Function in Some of Tolkien’s Works
Published by ValpoScholar, 2020
 
Stephen, Elizabeth M. 2012. Hobbit to Hero. The Making of Tolkien’s King . 
Moreton in Marsh: ADC Publications. 
Stevens, Benjamin Eldon. 2020  (forthcoming). ‘Middle-earth as Underworld: 
From Katabasis to Eucatastrophe.’ In Hamish Williams (ed.). Tolkien 
and the Classical World. Cormarë Series 45. Zurich and Jena: Walking 
Tree Publishers, 105-130. 
Thomas, Paul Edmund. 2000. ‘Some of Tolkien’s Narrators.’ Clar k, George 
and Daniel Timmons (eds.). J.R.R. Tolkien and His Literary 
Resonances. Westport CT: Greenwood Press, 161-181. 
Tolkien, John Ronald Reuel. 1988. ‘The Homecoming of Beorhtnoth, 
Beorhthelm’s Son.’ In Tree and Leaf. London: HarperCollins, 119-150. 
Originally published 1953 in Essays and Studies, N.S. 6, 1-18. London: 
John Murray.  
–––. 1992. The Lost Road and Other Writings. (The History of Middle -earth 
5). Edited by Christopher Tolkien. Originally published 1987. London: 
Grafton. 
–––. 1994. The Silmarillion. Originally published 1977. Edited by Christopher 
Tolkien. London: HarperCollins. 
–––. 2004. The Lord of the Rings . 50 th anniversary one -volume edition. 
Originally published in three volumes 1954 -55. Boston and New York: 
Houghton Mifflin. 
–––. 2007. The Children of Húrin . Edited by Christopher Tolkien. London: 
HarperCollins. 
–––. 2009. ‘Fate and Free Will.’ Tolkien Studies 6: 183-188. 
–––. 2014. Beowulf. A Translation and Commentary . Edited by Christopher 
Tolkien. London: HarperCollins. 
–––. 2015. The Story of Kullervo . Edited by Verlyn Flieger. London: 
HarperCollins. 
West, Richard C. 2000. ‘Túrin’s Ofermod. An Old English Theme in the 
Development of the Story of Túrin.’  In Verlyn Flieger and Carl F. 
Hostetter (eds.). Tolkien’s Legendarium. Essays on The History of 
Middle-earth. Westport CT and London: Greenwood Press, 233-245. 
–––. 2014. ‘“Lack of Counsel Not of Courage”: J.R.R. Tolkien’s Critique of 
the Heroic Ethos in The Children of Húrin .’ In John Wm. Houghton, 
Janet Brennan Croft, Nancy Martsch, John D. Rateliff and Robin Anne 
Reid (eds.) . Tolkien in the New Century. Essays in H onor of Tom 
Shippey. Jefferson NC: McFarland, 216-220.  
Zahnweh, Gudrun. 1989. Heldenfiguren bei Tolkien. Die Hierarchie des 
Heldentums im Silmarillion und im Herr der Ringe . Passau: Erster 
Deutscher Fantasy Club e.V. 
 
16
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 9 [2020], Iss. 2, Art. 8
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol9/iss2/8