 
 Appendix B - Tolkien Gateway 
 Anonymous Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Search 
 Appendix B From Tolkien Gateway Namespaces Page Discussion More More Languages Page actions Read View source History (Redirected from Tale of Years ) Appendix B is the second Appendix to The Lord of the Rings . It is entitled The Tale of Years (Chronology of the Westlands) . It primarily contains timelines (lists of years) from the Second , Third , and Fourth Ages and the events of those years. There are also a few brief narrative sections, including a short discussion of the Wizards and how Gandalf received the Ring of Fire from Círdan . [1] 
 The Tale of Years was said to have been put together at the Great Smials (its library contained sources about Númenor , histories and legends about Elendil and his descendants and other copies of Gondorian scribes) and with the assistance of material collected by Meriadoc Brandybuck , who collected much information from Rivendell . Many of its dates are said to be conjectural but important, especially concerning the Second Age. [2] 
 Synopsis 
 Appendix B is divided into several sub-sections:
 The Second Age 
 It covers the major events of the little-documented Second Age , concerning Númenor and the Rings of Power . 
 The Third Age 
 It covers the years 2 - 3017 of the Third Age , focusing mainly on events in Arnor , Gondor , and The Shire . 
 The Great Years 
 It covers specific dates for particular events of the time period of The Lord of the Rings (the years 3018 and 3019 ); it begins with Gandalf 's return to Hobbiton and concludes with the destruction of the Ring. This section also gives a brief account of the battles of the Northern campaign during the War of the Ring that are not mentioned in the main book. 
 The Chief Days from the Fall of Barad-dur to the End of the Third Age 
 It finishes the events of The Lord of the Rings , giving specific dates up through Sam 's return to Bag End . 
 Later Events Concerning the Members of the Fellowship of the Ring 
 Chronology of the early Fourth Age (although dates are given in the Shire-reckoning , and primarily follow what happened with the hobbits). The last entry tells the final fate of Aragorn , Legolas , and Gimli . 
 References 
 ↑ J.R.R. Tolkien , The Lord of the Rings , Appendix B : The Tale of Years (Chronology of the Westlands) 
 ↑ J.R.R. Tolkien , The Lord of the Rings , " Prologue ", " Note on the Shire Records " 
 The Lord of the Rings Appendices 
 Appendix A · Appendix B · Appendix C · Appendix D · Appendix E · Appendix F 
Retrieved from " https://tolkiengateway.net/w/index.php?title=Appendix_B&oldid=321622 " 
 Categories : Annals The Lord of the Rings chapters 
 Navigation Navigation Main Page Recent changes Random page Community Portal To-do Forums Chat Help Portals Adaptations Books Characters Games Images Languages Locations Music Races Timeline Writings Wiki tools Wiki tools Special pages Cite this page Page tools Page tools User page tools More What links here Related changes Printable version Permanent link Page information Page logs Other projects In other languages Suomi Categories Categories Annals The Lord of the Rings chapters This page was last edited on 8 October 2020, at 07:43. Content is available under GNU Free Documentation License unless otherwise noted. Privacy policy About Tolkien Gateway 
 