 

 Prosecraft: A Knight of the Seven Kingdoms by George R. R. Martin 

 prose craft 

 BLOG 

 this is a SHAXPIR project
 how does it work? 

 A Knight of the Seven Kingdoms

 by George R. R. Martin 

 (about 418 pages)

 104,449

 total words

 68 th PERCENTILE 

 of all the books in our library

 62.82%

 vividness

 98 th PERCENTILE 

 of all the books in our library

 7.74%

 passive voice

 43 rd PERCENTILE 

 of all the books in our library

 2.26%

 all adverbs

 9 th PERCENTILE 

 of all the books in our library

 0.46%

 ly-adverbs

 3 rd PERCENTILE 

 of all the books in our library

 1.80%

 non-ly-adverbs

 34 th PERCENTILE 

 of all the books in our library

 clippings from this book 

 We’ve analyzed hundreds of millions of words, from thousands of different authors, training our linguistic models
 to recognize the most vivid words in the English language… the words that create the most intense sensory
 experiences: colors, textures, sounds, flavors, and aromas.

 Based on our analysis, we’ve scanned through the pages of this book to find the two pages at the extremes,
 both the least-vivid and most-vivid pages, so that you can compare them side-by-side and see the difference:

 MOST PASSIVE PAGE

 MOST VIVID PAGE

 up and down. “ Were you part of their company?” “We met them on the road , is all.” A good smell was drifting out the windows of the inn, one that made Dunk’s mouth water . “We might like some of what you’re roasting , if it’s not too costly.” “ It’s wild boar ,” the woman said, “ well peppered , and served with onions , mushrooms , and mashed neeps.” “We could do without the neeps. Some slices off the boar and a tankard of your good brown ale would do for us. How much would you ask for that? And maybe we could have a place on your stable floor to bed down for the night ?” That was a mistake. “The stables are for horses . That’s why we call them stables . You’re big as a horse , I’ll grant you, but I only see two legs .” She swept her broom at him to shoo him off. “I can’t be expected to feed all the Seven Kingdoms. The boar is for my guests. So is my ale . I won’t have lords saying that I run short of food or drink before they were surfeit. The lake is full of fish , and you’ll find some other rogues camped down by the stumps . Hedge knights, if you believe them.” Her tone made it quite clear that she did not. “ Might be they’d have food to share. It’s naught to me. Away with you now , I’ve work to do .” The door closed with a solid thump behind her, before Dunk could 

 It would have been discourteous not to toast the bride and groom, he told himself, and dangerous not to drink to the king and his Hand , with strangers all about. Mercifully , the Fiddler’s toast was the last. Lord Butterwell rose ponderously to thank them for coming and promise good jousting on the morrow. “Let the feast begin!” Suckling pig was served at the high table ; a peacock roasted in its plumage ; a great pike crusted with crushed almonds . Not a bite of that made it down below the salt . Instead of suckling pig they got salt pork , soaked in almond milk and peppered pleasantly . In place of peacock they had capons , crisped up nice and brown and stuffed with onions , herbs , mushrooms , and roasted chestnuts . In place of pike they ate chunks of flaky white cod in a pastry coffyn , with some sort of tasty brown sauce that Dunk could not quite place. There was pease porridge besides ; buttered turnips ; carrots drizzled with honey ; and a ripe white cheese that smelled as strong as Bennis of the Brown Shield . Dunk ate well , but all the while wondered what Egg was getting in the yard . Just in case, he slipped half a capon into the pocket of his cloak , with some hunks of bread and a little of the smelly cheese . As they ate , pipes and fiddles filled the air with spritely tunes , and the talk turned to the morrow’s jousting. “Ser Franklyn Frey is well regarded along the Green Fork 

 emotional story arc 

 Click anywhere on the chart to see the most significant emotional words — both positive &
 negative — from the corresponding section of the text…

 This chart visualizes the the shifting emotional balance for the arc of this story,
 based on the emotional strength of the words in the prose, using techniques pioneered
 by the UVM Computational Story Lab .

 To create this story arc, we divided the complete manuscript text into
 40 equal-sized chunks , each with
 2,611 words , and then we scored each section by counting
 the number of strongly-emotional words, both positive and negative.

 The bars in the chart move downward whenever there’s conflict and sadness ,
 and they move upward when conflicts are resolved, or when the characters are happy
 and content . The size of each bar represents the positive or negative word-count of that section.

 similar books by different authors 

 The Acts of King Arthur and His Noble Knights 

 John Steinbeck 

 Vampire Knight 

 Dan Davis 

 In the Eye of Heaven 

 David Keck 

 The Gathering of the Lost 

 Helen Lowe 

 Wonders Will Never Cease 

 Robert Irwin 

 The Red Knight 

 Miles Cameron 

 The Jester 

 James Patterson & Andrew Gross 

 Timeline 

 Michael Crichton 

 Kingfisher 

 Patricia A. McKillip 

 Ravenspur, Rise of the Tudors 

 Conn Iggulden 

 other books by George R. R. Martin 

 A Clash of Kings 

 A Dance With Dragons 

 A Feast for Crows 

 A Game of Thrones 

 Nightflyers & Other Stories 

 A Storm of Swords 

 something missing? 

 Our library is always growing, so check back often…

 If you're an author or a publisher,

 contact us at submissions@prosecraft.io to help grow the library.

 