 

 Production Companies, Literary Agents, Foreign Languages: AI-Driven Scams Continue to Morph - Writer Beware 

 Skip to content 

 About Us 

 Comments Policy 

 Guest Post Policy 

 Philippine Scams List 

 Impersonation List 

 Post Archive 

 Contact Us 

 Email 

 Facebook 

 Twitter 

 RSS 

 Search 

 The official blog of Writer Beware® shines a bright light into the dark corners of the shadow-world of literary scams, schemes, and pitfalls. Also providing advice for writers, industry news, and commentary. Writer Beware® is sponsored by the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers Association. 

 Email 

 Facebook 

 Twitter 

 RSS 

 Search 

 MENU 

 Search For : 

 AI SCAMS 

 Production Companies, Literary Agents, Foreign Languages: AI-Driven Scams Continue to Morph

 POSTED BY 
 VICTORIA-STRAUSS 

 FOR 
 WRITER BEWARE® ON 

 AUG 28, 2026 August 28, 2026 

 When I first began reporting on the aggressive AI-driven email scams that have been plaguing the Inboxes of authors everywhere for well over a year now, they were limited to marketing scams offering supposedly expert “visibility” for writers and their books.

 In the year-plus since then, the scams have adapted and expanded in response to writers’ reactions and increasingly widespread reporting and discussion . In addition to marketing offers, they now include book club and review scams and a wide variety of impersonation scams, where the goal of initial contact is to steer writers through one or more referrals into paid editing or marketing arrangements. They’ve impersonated well-known writers , literary agents , editors at publishing houses , book festivals (with fake invites), and radio stations and hosts (with fake interview requests). 

 The one thing the scammers haven’t changed or adapted is the set of markers that have characterized the scams from the start: hyper-personalization coupled with lavish praise (thanks to generative AI) that makes it seem the sender has actual knowledge of the writer’s book; the almost universal use of Gmail addresses; banking/payment information that traces to scammers overseas; and extreme aggressiveness that paradoxically undercuts effectiveness (when you’re getting multiple flattering yet suspiciously similar solicitations every day, they start to seen a tad inauthentic). It’s a business built on volume, so only a small fraction of writers need to be fooled in order for the fraudsters to make money.

 I’ve been trying to keep track of this scam wave, which is the most prolific and aggressive I’ve ever chronicled. Here , for example, is my list of frequently-impersonated companies and individuals, which I’m adding to daily, sometimes multiple times a day (not exaggerating here). And you can see all of my posts about the scams here . 

 All of this to say…sorry, I’ve got more for you.

 Production Companies

 While an earlier wave of foreign impersonation scams heavily focused on filmmakers and production companies , usually with the goal of tricking writers into paying big bucks for screenplays and other “book to screen” services that might or might not arrive and wouldn’t get them any closer to a movie deal even if they did, the current tsunami of AI-driven scams has exclusively–as far as I can tell–targeted books, publishing, and areas surrounding them (such as author interview shows). 

 Till now, that is. In recent weeks I’ve started getting reports of production company impersonations that bear the AI scams’ distinctive markers, including hyper-personalization and praise and the ubiquitous Gmail addresses. 

 Note the way the address is formulated in the example above: sendername dot company name @ gmail.com. That’s very characteristic of impersonation scams (I’ve written a whole post about that and other scammer email tells).

 The earlier production company impersonation scams are still active, so you could be targeted now on two fronts. The most important things to remember are that a) a production company reaching out to you directly is one of the least likely things ever to happen to you as a writer, and b) in the incredibly rare event that it does, the email will come from a company domain, not a Gmail or other non-professional address.

 Literary Agent Impersonation Scams 

 This wouldn’t be the first time AI scammers have impersonated literary agents , but this new one I’m seeing is a bit different.

 Basically, it’s a variation on the editor impersonation scam that is absolutely everywhere right now, except it’s a two step scam (fake agent to scam “editor”) rather than a three step scam (fake publishing house editor to fake agent to scam “editor”) and the emails tend to be less flowery and over-the-top. A literary agent (who, if you google them, is confirmably real) emails you out of the blue. As with the editor impersonation scam, they’re impressed with your work and want to know if you’re currently represented by a literary agent. Or they simply claim to want to know about you and what you’re working on. If you respond, the impersonator asks you to submit your query letter and manuscript, and after an improbably short period of just a few days, refers you to an “editor” who can fix whatever is wrong with your query letter or manuscript–for, of course, a sizeable fee. The scammer inhabits both personas.

 I’ve seen emails identical to the one above purportedly from Andrea Brown and Julia Churchill at AM Heath.

 This one skips the flattery, but also features the type of wonky Gmail address formulation you often see with these solicitations, where the name of the impersonated person is mashed together with their agency or publishing house.

 Congratulations, Non-English-Speaking Writers, It’s Your Turn

 All of the foreign scams I’m tracking– publishing and marketing scams from the Philippines, ghostwriting scams from South Asia (which pose online as self-publishing service providers), and the current wave of AI-driven scams that I’ve repeatedly traced to Nigeria and Nigerian individuals–have exclusively focused their efforts on English-speaking writers in the US, UK, Australia, New Zealand, and wherever else they can be found. The solicitations, the websites, and the advertising are all in English–as are the phone calls (though the callers typically have heavy accents).

 That may be changing.

 Just in the last couple of weeks, I’ve gotten several reports of marketing solicitations in German. Despite the language switch-up, they are clearly examples of the AI scam wave–Gmail addresses, personalization and praise, marketers who can’t be found online–and target authors in exactly the same way.

 This one, whose Gmail address doesn’t quite match the name in the signature (Erikson vs. Erykson; such discrepancies are a common scam marker) is purportedly from a marketing expert who specializes in “Amazon visibility, Goodreads presence, and organic discoverability”–all offerings that will be very familiar to anyone who has been targeted by a Gmail marketing scam. 

 Note also the next to last paragraph, which invites the receipient to respond to a series of questions: “How do you find your readers? Do they primarily come through your work at the <redacted>, or do they discover you independently?” This kind of friendly, open-ended inquiry is a common ingredient of AI marketing solicitations: it’s intended to incentivize response, so that the scammer can draw the writer in over an often-lengthy series of email exchanges designed to make it harder to say “no” when the money ask finally arrives.

 This one is also a highly personalized marketing pitch, with the scammer (whose “team” has zero web presence) claiming to “increase the visibility of [authors’] books by introducing them to relevant readership groups, book clubs, and thematically appropriate audiences.” It too closes with an invitation to respond, but makes it super-easy: “If this opportunity aligns with your current goals as an author, simply reply with “Interested.” We will then send you further information about the campaign and the next steps.” 

 Additional AI-Driven Email Scam-Spotting Tips

 As AI-driven scams continue to change and evolve, writers need to be ever more on their guard. We live now in a world where all writers are fair game, and any out-of-the-blue email or phone call related to your creative work has to be suspect, at least until you can determine that it’s not.

 In addition to the specific warnings above and in my other posts, watch out for these: 

 Non-typical salutations. Using myself as an example: Dear Victoria Strauss, rather than the more normal Dear Victoria or Dear Ms. Strauss. Ditto for Dear Author. Or no salutation at all. (First name/last name is the one I see most often.)

 Extended and apparently accurate discussions of your book’s theme and plot points, coupled with effusive praise. A genuine contact won’t necessarily not include these–but both are established scam M.O.s, and should always prompt extra caution.

 Emojis. When I first started getting reports of AI-driven marketing scams in the summer of last year, many of the emails were littered with emojis (you can see an example toward the end of this post ). Marketing professionals communicate professionally, which means not writing emails that look like social media posts. I’m not seeing this so often nowadays, but it is still something to watch for, and a big caution sign.

 Interminable email exchanges . As noted above, AI-driven marketing scams, especially, employ a boiled-frog approach, where they ease you gently toward the actual money ask over the course of multiple emails, with each email re-emphasizing how great they think you are and how excellently they can help you. It’s classic emotional manipulation: the deeper you’re drawn into the interaction, the more invested you become, the more plausible the scammer’s promises start to seem, and the harder it will ultimately be (the scammer hopes) for you to say no.

 Insistent nudging. Scammers want to close the deal as fast as possible, so if you don’t respond right away (especially to payment requests) they may repeatedly check back in with “just following up on my last email” or “wondering if you’ve had a chance to evaluate my offer” communications–sometimes within hours of when they last contacted you.

 Fees where they aren’t normally charged .This is always a warning sign. For example, real book clubs, radio shows, and conferences don’t charge fees to invited guests. The process of rights acquiition–such as optioning your movie rights–should never involve a fee or purchase requirement.

 Non-reversible payment methods. Instead of credit card transactions, scammers will often require payment by methods that are difficult or impossible to dispute or reverse: wire transfers, Upwork or Fiverr invoices, Paypal Friends and Family, apps like Zelle or CashApp.

 Invoices that lack vital information like names, addresses, and phone numbers. Scammers want to avoid accountability. Never pay an invoice that doesn’t offer full disclosure of the provider, their business, and how to contact the person.

 Share this:

 Share on X (Opens in new window) 
 X 

 Share on Facebook (Opens in new window) 
 Facebook 

 Share on Threads (Opens in new window) 
 Threads 

 Share on Reddit (Opens in new window) 
 Reddit 

 Share on Mastodon (Opens in new window) 
 Mastodon 

 Share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window) 
 LinkedIn 

 Share on Bluesky (Opens in new window) 
 Bluesky 

 Share on Tumblr (Opens in new window) 
 Tumblr 

 Email a link to a friend (Opens in new window) 
 Email 

 Print (Opens in new window) 
 Print 

 Share on Pinterest (Opens in new window) 
 Pinterest 

 Share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
 WhatsApp 

 More 

 Share on Telegram (Opens in new window) 
 Telegram 

 Share on X (Opens in new window) 
 X 

 Like this:
 Like Loading… 

 Related 

 Victoria Strauss 

 beware@sfwa.org 

 Victoria Strauss, co-founder of Writer Beware®, is the author of nine novels for adults and young adults, including her Way of Arata epic fantasy duology ( The Burning Land and The Awakened City ), and a pair of historical novels for teens, Passion Blue and Color Song . She has written hundreds of book reviews for publications such as SF Site , and her articles on writing have appeared in Writer’s Digest and elsewhere. In 2006, she served as a judge for the World Fantasy Awards.

She received the 2009 SFWA® Service Award for her work with Writer Beware®, and in 2012 was honored with an Independent Book Blogger Award for the Writer Beware® blog. She’s webmistress of the Writer Beware® website, which she also created, and maintains the Writer Beware® database, blog, and Facebook page. 

 44 Comments 

 mbctennessee@gmail.com says: 

 September 4, 2026 at 4:28 pm 

 My book has been discovered! For only $2,000 The Eagle Literary will market it on You Tube, and guarantee me 5,000 hits. OMG! What idiot does that? All this for a title that I did not publish. LMAO. I had such fun with this scammer and finally told her to read a sentence from my book and I would send her 2 grand. Could not find the book? Caught you!

 Reply 

 Pingback: Finds for Writers - Erika Dreifus 

 harryfreedman says: 

 September 3, 2026 at 1:19 pm 

 I get 3 or 4 of these each day, sometimes more. Recently they have been telling me how much they love my latest book. I haven’t finished writing it yet!

 Reply 

 Elle says: 

 September 4, 2026 at 2:13 pm 

 Yep. Got one today from servicemichael94@gmail.com saying they love my work and are looking at books for a “screen focused feature”. They then asked if I had an agent. One little problem here with their scam: I have no published work. Absolutely incredible.

 Reply 

 Dorothy Rockwell Olson Williams says: 

 September 2, 2026 at 11:37 am 

 I have hired seven publishers and fired seven publishers. I spent $2,000, for my novel to be shown on Broadway, NYC. It didn’t do a thing. Laura pressured and pressured me all the time. I spent over $1,000 for my book to be displayed at The London Book Fair. Laura said that you had a producer that showed interest in your novel. Then the publishers told me that nobody showed interest in your novel. I had a guy call me out of the blue zone and said, “blah blah and blah.” Do I know if he is legit. I don’t know.

 Reply 

 Victoria Strauss says: 

 September 2, 2026 at 11:58 am 

 As a general rule of thumb, if _they_ contact _you_ (rather than the other way around), the odds are very high that it’s a scam. Reputable publishers, agents, etc. don’t acquire authors by cold-calling them. You’re safest if you assume that ANY out of the blue publishing- or movie rights-related phone call or email is a scam, unless you can directly tie it to a query or contact that you yourself made.

 Reply 

 flowerperfectly1de3f050e4 says: 

 September 4, 2026 at 4:29 pm 

 I agree with one exception. I was contacted by Tantor Media by email. What made the email stand out was the lack of effusive praise and fluff. It simply asked if anyone had acquired the audio rights for my books. If not, I could reply to discuss a contract. It was short and to the point, and it gave contact information. It also didn’t ask me for money. 14 books later, I couldn’t be happier that they contacted me, but before I replied, I researched the company. Bob

 Reply 

 authorpaulmarzell says: 

 September 1, 2026 at 3:00 pm 

 The scam is apparent when my novel has not sold in either print or Kindle Unlimited form for months, yet I receive several glowing comments daily about how great the story is and how the world is missing out. 

 Is there any way I can locate them so I can introduce them to a permanent limp?

 Reply 

 Victoria Strauss says: 

 September 2, 2026 at 12:03 pm 

 Most scams these days come from the Philippines, South Asia (especially Pakistan), and Nigeria, so pursuing them is expensive and difficult. Your best bet is finding out if they work with a US person, as many do (for banking and business registration purposes); any legal action can then be directed at that person, and may expose the other scam actors.

 Reply 

 Elisa Carbone says: 

 September 1, 2026 at 10:27 am 

 Victoria thank you so much for all you do!

 A new way for a scam to reach an author:

 Years ago I was contacted by a gentleman who wanted to write a screen play using one of my books. My publisher said there was no need for him to pay for rights, since he was not a movie producer. He sent me the screen play, I edited it, and wished him well. This was all legit — well before AI.

 Yesterday this gentleman contacted me again, excited because he had finally been accepted by a wonderful agency that was about to start actively promoting his screen play and they expected it to be a major motion picture with at least a 233K advance. He wanted me to come up with a contract that would include what my share should be.

 I got excited, contacted the publisher to find out what to do next (they own the broadcast rights) and began an email to my agent to see if she could represent me for this potential movie deal even though she did not sell the book to the publisher.

 Fortunately, before I sent the email to my agent I realized I should look up the agency he said had accepted his screen play. It’s a scam.

 Gently, I suggested he look up the company and make sure he doesn’t pay them any (more) money. He thanked me. I didn’t want to totally rain on his parade, but when he does look them up, the rain clouds will form.

 For me, this meant an hour of so of wasted time, and some disappointment after initial fun surprise. It also meant another layer of learning — sheesh, scams are so pervasive now!

 Reply 

 A. L. Kaplan says: 

 August 30, 2026 at 12:27 pm 

 Thank you. And then there are the phone scams…..

 Reply 

 V.M.Sang says: 

 August 30, 2026 at 9:50 am 

 What would we do without you, Victoria? You are performing an invaluable service to us writers. I get several of these emails a day. I report them as scam and block the sender, but they keep on coming, seeming endlessly. I suspect some of them are from a person I’ve blocked using a different email address.

Thank you for your stirling work.

 Reply 

 Kostyantyn MalKoNI says: 

 August 29, 2026 at 1:36 pm 

 Dear Victoria! Your work is invaluable, thank you so much. You’ve saved my life more than once. Thanks to your information, I’m more attentive and careful. Thank you so much!

 Reply 

 Judy Backhouse says: 

 August 29, 2026 at 5:04 am 

 Thanks for the informative updates on this. Just one thought – you might want to be clearer about what you mean by the terms ‘overseas’ and ‘foreign’. I’d like more specificity. Since I grew up English-speaking in Africa, overseas for me means the UK, and I’m pretty sure that’s not what you intend. It might be more helpful to name actual regions or countries (as you do later in the article) so that we can better map the sources of the problem.

 Reply 

 Victoria Strauss says: 

 August 29, 2026 at 1:20 pm 

 Point taken. My primary readership is from the US (as am I), so I sometimes am guilty of writing in a US-centric way. Also, while it’s factually correct that certain types of scams operate from specific parts of the world, I don’t want to talk about that in a way that labels entire countries and their residents as frauds. So I try to be careful, but I can see that that sometimes results in confusing or vague language.

 Reply 

 Susan Nack says: 

 August 29, 2026 at 1:05 am 

 Thanks for a very thorough annd complete article. I have received all of the above and start every day deleting six or more solicitations. Some persist with second and third attempts.

Then there is “I see you’re an author. I am too. Could you tell me about your writing process?”

I hope every new writer reads your article.

Thanks again

 Reply 

 Vicki Hopkins says: 

 August 29, 2026 at 12:01 am 

 I started self-publishing in 2009 and have released 20 books. I took a five-year hiatus and just released a new book on August 1. My inbox has since been filled with scam emails. Book clubs, marketing, so-called publishing companies. Today, someone actually telephoned me and left a long message about how they could market one of my short stories. How in the world did they get my personal phone number? I’m just flabbergasted at this change.

 Reply 

 PJ Manney says: 

 August 28, 2026 at 10:34 pm 

 Thank you for everything you do, Victoria. So glad you have become the font of all scammer knowledge! 🙂 Not only did I get one that was meant for PJ Mahoney, but I received a suspect gmail address from a supposed tech recruiter “leading a confidential retained search for a Member Board Of Directors with an established organization in the Technology Ethics sector.” Yeah, right. I was surprised they used my personal gmail address, so that was new, but they were copying the rest of the letter off my LinkedIn. So I can only imagine how many people in industry sectors are getting similar come-ons.

 Reply 

 Wendy Eastman says: 

 August 28, 2026 at 10:25 pm 

 For the past few weeks I have gotten several invites to online literary “festivals”. They always have a catch; money. At first they sounded like a free event, then a second email arrives with the details. I tell them I’m not interested. But they write back and want to know why. They want my money. I don’t even bother to answer the new emails.

 Reply 

 Colin Devonshire says: 

 August 28, 2026 at 10:19 pm 

 Keep up the good work. The scammers found me here, in Thailand. Just waiting for a message written in Thai.

 Reply 

 Gail Kriegel says: 

 August 28, 2026 at 9:16 pm 

 I receive these everyday. Today it was from SimonShuster@gmail.com are there any legitimate marketers?

 Reply 

 Rustam Khan says: 

 August 28, 2026 at 8:53 pm 

 nice and very informative material. I gained much from this valuable information.

 Reply 

 SG Fessel says: 

 August 28, 2026 at 8:42 pm 

 Thank you so much for your work on this. Great to have you on our side!

 Reply 

 David Michael Rice says: 

 August 28, 2026 at 7:54 pm 

 Yesterday I saw that a predatory vanity press (She Writes Press) has on its website a warning that it and their staff are being impersonated online. That just cracks me up.

 Reply 

 Seth Bornstein says: 

 August 28, 2026 at 7:04 pm 

 Just received a few today. I told Marcy of Crooked Road that we first must meet for lunch at the Grand Budapest Hotel, but she deferred as she is so busy (but still wants me to send the synopsis for my next novel). Daniel of London Fun Bookclub (that’s how it’s spelled) is only asking for a donation of 500 pounds when my book is “showcased” to support the club’s charity (an orphanage in Dublin). I told him would be happy to be showcased but I to relieve of the administrative burden I am will donate directly the orphanage. Oy!

 Reply 

 Z Gottlieb says: 

 August 28, 2026 at 6:35 pm 

 The one thing these scammers are not willing to do is to buy your book and read it. Like many writers, I often get approached by scammers. The emails are gushing with flattery, which almost seems like they actually read the book. At the minimum AI is reading the reviews. I’ll ask an easy question to test a person’s knowledge of my story. The answers are hilarious but tell me right off the bat the writer did not read the book.

 Reply 

 Marlo Faulkner says: 

 August 28, 2026 at 6:05 pm 

 From: Daniel

Subject: Invitation to London’s Friendly Book Club — September 30

Date: August 27, 2026 at 7:07:53 AM PDT

To: marlo.faulkner@gmail.com 

 Hi Marlo,

 I hope you’re doing well.

 My name is Daniel, and I’m the organizer of London’s Friendly 20- and 30-Somethings Book Club.

 I came across The Second Mrs. London, and what caught my attention was the decision to bring Charmian Kittredge into focus alongside such a well-known literary figure as Jack London.

 I particularly liked the opportunity to look beyond the famous author and explore the woman beside him — her own life, ambitions, relationships, and the world she inhabited. That kind of perspective can make a familiar historical figure feel much more human and give readers a very different way into the past.

 We’re putting together a book club event on September 30, and I’d love to invite you to join us for a conversation about The Second Mrs. London.

 Why you, specifically?

 Because you can give our readers something the book alone can’t — the thinking and research behind the story. I’d love to hear what drew you to Charmian’s life, how you approached writing about her relationship with Jack London, and what you discovered while bringing her story into the foreground.

 And what would you get from saying yes?

 You’d have the opportunity to speak directly with readers who genuinely enjoy historical fiction and stories about the people behind well-known historical figures. You’d also get to hear their questions and interpretations and introduce your work to readers who may be discovering it for the first time.

 It would be a chance to discuss the creative process behind The Second Mrs. London and explore how historical research can become an intimate, character-driven story.

 We’d keep the event informal and conversational. No long presentation or formal lecture — just you, curious readers, and a relaxed discussion about the book, Charmian’s story, and the ideas behind it.

 If September 30 might work for you, I’d be happy to send you more information about the format.

 Would you be open to joining us?

 Warmly,

 Daniel

Organizer

London’s Friendly 20- and 30-Somethings Book Club

 Reply 

 lucky82ab4110d6 says: 

 August 28, 2026 at 5:43 pm 

 Thank you for this full explanation. I’ve been recommending folks online to check with Writer Beware and commenting on many of the writers groups I belong to online with the hint to”first look at the email – if it ends in gmail it’s likely a scam’. And also reminding readers that agents, and publishers seldom IF EVER reach out to writers. Keep up the good work.

 Reply 

 Bruce Overby says: 

 August 28, 2026 at 5:40 pm 

 I have to say, as one of the many who receive these scam emails daily, it’s pretty great to know you’re out there closely tracking these trends, Victoria. It’s very affirming to have you acknowledge the very things zi observe almost daily.

 Reply 

 Elizabeth says: 

 August 28, 2026 at 5:23 pm 

 Yes, they continue to evolve. The scams I got this week included one from a literary scout in a British TV and movie agency. I wrote them directly and they confirmed it was a scam. And one asking if my website URL was for sale. That one I forwarded to the Author’s Guild.

 Reply 

 nancysthompson says: 

 August 28, 2026 at 5:01 pm 

 I receive a couple dozen of most of these types of scams on a daily basis. I report as phishing and block every single time. One I didn’t see you mention are the emails from so-called BookBub agents. Have you heard about those, where someone emails an author claiming to be an agent with BookBub.

 Reply 

 John Heide says: 

 August 28, 2026 at 4:19 pm 

 Thank you so much for the work that you do on this important subject.

 Reply 

 R. Janet Walraven, M.Ed. says: 

 August 28, 2026 at 3:56 pm 

 Thank you, Victoria. You have taught me much. I’m now down to half a dozen email scammers each day, but no more do I spend a waste of my time. I either click on “block” or “phishing” or “scam.” I appreciate what you taught me to immediately recognize the impersonators and obvious scammers. Other “authors” email to say lovely things about my books and simply want to be “friends.” The second or third time around, they have a “marketer friend” who would love to help me sell more books. That’s become very clear from the get-go. Thanks, Victoria, for being an excellent teacher for all of us. Warm regards, Janet

 Reply 

 Phil Simon says: 

 August 28, 2026 at 3:39 pm 

 If your email program/service supports adding custom Sieve code, adding it is worth investigating. 

 Proton Mail, Fastmail, Purelymail, and Runbox support it. 

 Over the last few months with the help of Claude Code, I’ve pared these down from five per day to maybe one per week. 

 Here’s the code and how Claude Code generated it. 

 https://bit.ly/3SAzUb6 

 Just click on the button on this page, copy the code, put it in your email client, and voilà!

 Reply 

 Anita Stewart says: 

 August 28, 2026 at 3:35 pm 

 I’m getting them almost daily, from supposed “literary agents”, social media “influencers” and people posing as “agents” of BookBub.

 Reply 

 wised0c3727f6ed says: 

 August 28, 2026 at 3:29 pm 

 I agree that Dear Victoria Strauss sounds odd, because I’m from a generation that used Dear Ms. Strauss, but it’s today’s common salutation, at least for us authors querying agents, because Gen X and younger wants to avoid salutations that may not match with the person’s gender identity (such as “Ms.”). The full name salutation will always sound awkward to me, but I use it because one must keep in step with the times.

 Reply 

 Cathy Warshaw says: 

 August 28, 2026 at 3:23 pm 

 I receive from everyone. Just had my first one today as a literary agent. I receive over 100 emails a day unfortunately the good ones get lost in the crap. Very sad and such a waste of time. 

 http://www.SisterhoodSleuths.net 

 Reply 

 Adam Carpenter says: 

 August 28, 2026 at 3:20 pm 

 Since making my own gmail address harder to find, the scammers are now using the Jetpack forms of my website instead. They’re claiming to be from American companies… but have a Nigerian IP address.

 Reply 

 Dan Bar Hava says: 

 August 28, 2026 at 3:12 pm 

 I got this – what do you think?

From: readerlink.procurement.dept1@gmail.com 

To: dbhmsc@aol.com 

Aug 26, 2026, 8:31 PM

Good day,

 Thank you for confirming your account details.

 I am David Barker, Executive Vice President & Chief Marketing Officer at Readerlink Distribution Services [1.1.1, 1.1.5].

 During our quarterly catalog evaluation for mass-merchant and big-box store allocations (including major retail partners like Target and Walmart)the 36 watchers , was selected by my curation review committee for our upcoming regional retail placement cycle.

 Based on our store count and initial sales projections, my committee has designated your title for an initial distribution allocation of 3,000 to 4,000 physical copies across our regional retail network.

 Reply 

 Elle says: 

 August 29, 2026 at 9:14 am 

 This is a scam.

 Reply 

 Victoria Strauss says: 

 August 29, 2026 at 1:32 pm 

 I haven’t seen anything quite like this, but it’s clearly a scam. Readerlink is a real distributor, but it works with publishers (not individual authors). That’s a fake email address; a real contact from them would come from @readerlink.com. And the fake address includes elements that Gmail scammers use a lot: lots of periods and a number.

 Reply 

 Jay Feldman says: 

 August 28, 2026 at 3:11 pm 

 I’ve also been getting quite a few from “reading groups.” Same crap.

 Reply 

 Royce Adams says: 

 August 28, 2026 at 3:09 pm 

 Your information is so true. I get at least three to four offers of some kind every day. Some are very professional looking, but I’ve started to notice how the sources are gmail, not a company source.

 Reply 

 John W. Howell says: 

 August 28, 2026 at 3:03 pm 

 I had four in today’s mail alone. Thanks for keeping us informed, Victoria.

 Reply 

 Leave a Reply Cancel reply 

 AUGUST 14, 2026 

 Guest Post: A Narrow Escape From an Impersonation Scam 

 READ 

 SEPTEMBER 4, 2026 

 Anthropic Copyright Settlement: Publishers Are Making Incorrect Claims on Authors’ Payouts 

 READ 

 Sign Up for Updates 

 subscription-name 

 subscription-email 

 subscription-submit 
 Sign Up 

 Loading

 About Us 

 Comments Policy 

 Guest Post Policy 

 Overseas Scams List 

 Impersonation List 

 Post Archive 

 Privacy Policy 

 Contact Us 

 © All Rights Reserved. Powered by WordPress , hosted by Pressable 

 Email 

 Facebook 

 Twitter 

 RSS 

 Search 

 Discover more from Writer Beware

 Subscribe now to keep reading and get access to the full archive.

 Type your email… 

 Subscribe 

 Continue reading 

 Subscribe 

 %d 

