 How do Ubisoft's AI-driven NPCs handle dynamic player interactions? 

 Together, we power an unparalleled network of 220+ online properties covering 10,000+ granular topics, serving an audience of 50+ million professionals with original, objective content from trusted sources. We help you gain critical insights and make more informed decisions across your business priorities.
 Informa PLC | ABOUT US | INVESTOR RELATIONS | TALENT 

 This site is operated by a business or businesses owned by Informa PLC and all copyright resides with them. Informa PLC's registered office is 5 Howick Place, London SW1P 1WG. Registered in England and Wales. Number 8860726.

 Game Market Research Watch GDC Talks on GDC Vault Attend or Exhibit at GDC Advertise 

 Newsletter Sign-Up 
 
 Newsletter Sign-Up 

 Trending 
 Related Topics
 ▫️ Layoffs & Studio Closures 
 ▫️ GDC Festival of Gaming 
 ▫️ Generative AI & ML 
 ▫️ Industry Lawsuits 
 ▫️ Development Tools 
 ▫️ Culture & Dev Communities 

 Recent in Trending 
 Top Stories 

 Production Strategically making Star Wars Zero Company, ft. Greg Foertsch Strategically making Star Wars Zero Company, ft. Greg Foertsch by Game Developer Podcast 

 Sep 4, 2026 

 Design Paradox Interactive's Afterworld wants to entice new players to grand strategy with tasty RPG hooks Paradox Interactive's Afterworld wants to entice new players to grand strategy with tasty RPG hooks by Alessandro Fillari 

 Sep 1, 2026 7 Min Read 

 Latest News 
 Related Topics
 ▫️ Weekly News Highlights 
 ▫️ News Deep Dives 
 ▫️ GD Collective Research 

 Recent in Latest News 

 Cloud Xbox to cap Cloud Gaming hours for Game Pass subscribers Xbox to cap Cloud Gaming hours for Game Pass subscribers by Bryant Francis 

 Sep 3, 2026 3 Min Read 

 Business Supercell's acquisition of Metacore expected to close this month Supercell's acquisition of Metacore expected to close this month by Diego Argüello 

 Sep 3, 2026 2 Min Read 

 [GDC] 
 Related Topics
 ▫️ Talks & Interviews 
 ▫️ GDC News 
 ▫️ GDC Vault: Editor Picks 
 ▫️ Register for GDC 
 ▫️ GDC Vault: Full Library 
 ▫️ Dev Surveys, Data, & Insights 

 Recent in [GDC] 
 Learn More 

 Production Strategically making Star Wars Zero Company, ft. Greg Foertsch Strategically making Star Wars Zero Company, ft. Greg Foertsch by Game Developer Podcast 

 Sep 4, 2026 

 Design Paradox Interactive's Afterworld wants to entice new players to grand strategy with tasty RPG hooks Paradox Interactive's Afterworld wants to entice new players to grand strategy with tasty RPG hooks by Alessandro Fillari 

 Sep 1, 2026 7 Min Read 

 Game Developer Podcast 
 Game Design 
 Programming 
 More 
 Related Topics
 ▫️ Developer Interviews 
 ▫️ Game Dev Deep Dives 
 ▫️ Video Game Postmortems 
 ▫️ Partner Perspectives 

 Recent in More 
 Read More 

 Production Strategically making Star Wars Zero Company, ft. Greg Foertsch Strategically making Star Wars Zero Company, ft. Greg Foertsch by Game Developer Podcast 

 Sep 4, 2026 

 Design Paradox Interactive's Afterworld wants to entice new players to grand strategy with tasty RPG hooks Paradox Interactive's Afterworld wants to entice new players to grand strategy with tasty RPG hooks by Alessandro Fillari 

 Sep 1, 2026 7 Min Read 

 Design 
 Production 
 News 
 How do Ubisoft's AI-driven NPCs handle dynamic player interactions? 
 Do NEO NPCs dream of electric sheep?

 Michael Higham , Featured Contributor March 19, 2024

 5 Min Read 

 Courtesy Ubisoft 

 During GDC 2024, Ubisoft officially unveiled NEO NPCs, its generative AI-powered tech for in-game conversations and player interactions with non-playable characters. The NEO NPC project is a collaboration between developers at Ubisoft and Inworld AI, which is providing the large language model (LLM) for NEO NPCs, allowing developers to create and form characters with their own backgrounds, personalities, and attitudes. Nvidia is also involved, providing its Audio2Face tech to animate NEO NPCs in real time. 
 While the NEO NPC tech is still in an early stage, there was a playable demo available during GDC to showcase the tech in action. This included three separate scenarios in which the player speaks directly to a NEO NPC and converses with them, getting real-time responses and progressing objectives based around getting information out of the NPC. 
 The first scenario included learning about the background of a character named Bloom, sharing your own background in a role-playing sense, and getting information about the resistance group you're involved in. 
 This scenario also featured a relationship bar I had to fill, akin to that of RPGs with a social sim element, which is reactive to an emotions system and the pertinent topics depending on in-game objectives. Through the open-source voice recognition that's integrated with NEO NPCs and Inworld's AI Engine, they're able to interpret what you say to them, respond in kind, and remember what you've said which can be referenced at certain points later on. I tried testing the system by telling them I had superhuman powers and that I used to be on the enemy’s side, and Bloom reacted with measured responses within the bounds set in the game world. 
 all images courtesy Ubisoft

 The second scenario had me watching a video feed of a remote-controlled drone alongside Bloom, which showed a NEO NPC's ability to respond to things happening within the game's environment and a player's ability to talk to them specifically about it. There were constraints in terms of having natural interactions while the NPC is focused on a different task, however, if the NPC was focused on one thing and unable to interpret something said to him. 
 The third and final phase of the demo had me planning an operation to infiltrate a building alongside a new NPC named Iron. While talking to her and asking questions provided more insight on the goals of the operation, it was more structured like a traditional dialogue tree: there were correct responses for the best outcome; for example, suggesting the team's hacker disable cameras as opposed to creating cover with smoke grenades was the optimal choice. 
 It's worth noting that the Ubisoft narrative team dictates the parameters for NEO NPCs to be compliant within the bounds of the lore and story of the experience, so there is a level of curation when it comes to the creation of NEO NPCs. Xavier Manzanares, who was previously the lead producer on Mario + Rabbids: Sparks of Hope, is now a producer on the NEO NPC project, and he spoke to the design philosophy in a presentation. 
 
 "Something we keep in mind is every new tech that's on our table cannot create games by itself. It has to go in line with design and innovation as well. It's really important that GenAI is exactly the same thing," Manzanares said. He continued, "GenAI is a tool, it is tech. It doesn't create games, it has to be connected to design and it has to be connected to a team that really wants to push something with that tech. The questions we always had within the team is, 'What's in for the creatives? What's in for the players?'" 
 Nurturing NEO NPCs
 So, filling out NPC barks or having more reactive NPCs based on the GenAI model is only one way it's being used. It is clearly a tool for writing teams, which narrative director Virginie Mosser spoke about in a post-demo panel. "So my role is to nurture them [NEO NPCs] to build the backstory, the flow, the qualities, the colloquialisms, because it's important for the dialogue style. It takes a lot of content for them to be more coherent, to have a real personality and a real focus for emotion," Mosser stated when asked about how the tech has changed how she works. She also mentioned that she had her doubts going into the project 
 Kylan Gibbs, CEO and co-founder of Inworld AI, spoke to the boundaries designers can set for NPCs, saying, "We go through a variety of steps, not only like detecting anything that might be unsafe in what the player says, making sure the model ever sees that, then detecting topics that might be unsafe then passing through a variety of safety filters." He continued, "Then there's the narrative controls, making sure that you're not going outside of the intended domain of the world." Gibbs emphasized that the tools also allow developers to make NEO NPCs' behaviors stay grounded in the information that the narrative team provides. 
 As of now, the NEO NPC project includes the Ubisoft Paris, Montpellier, and Montreal studios forming a team of about 30 people, according to Manzanares. This includes senior data scientist Mélanie Lopez Malet and scientific director David Louapre who are also guiding the project. Currently, there are no known applications of NEO NPCs in upcoming Ubisoft games. 
 Game Developer and Game Developers Conference are sibling organizations under Informa Tech. 

 Read more about:
 GDC 2024 Generative AI, Machine Learning, & LLMs Top Stories 

 About the Author
 
 Michael Higham
 
 Featured Contributor

 Michael is a Filipino-American writer, editor, and video host who has been been covering the games industry for 8 years. He was with GameSpot for several years and can be found collaborating with Giant Bomb, Kinda Funny, IGN, and more. 

 See more from Michael Higham 

 Daily news, dev blogs, and stories from Game Developer straight to your inbox
 
 Stay Updated 

 Latest News
 More News 
 
 Cloud Xbox to cap Cloud Gaming hours for Game Pass subscribers Xbox to cap Cloud Gaming hours for Game Pass subscribers by Bryant Francis 

 Sep 3, 2026 3 Min Read 

 Keep up with the latest News, Interviews, and Talk Coverage from GDC Festival of Gaming right here on Game Developer
 
 READ ON 

 Latest Podcasts 
 Production Strategically making Star Wars Zero Company, ft. Greg Foertsch
 Sep 4, 2026 
 Audio GDC Side Quest - Inside Austin Wintory's Collaborative Composing Process
 Aug 28, 2026 
 Programming We're finally talking about AI, ft. David 'Rez' Graham and Luke Dicken
 Aug 21, 2026 
 Production What devs need to know about localization, ft. Concha Fernandez Alvarez, Aurelie Perrin, and Guido Di Carlo
 Aug 7, 2026 
 See all 

 Game Developer Collective
 More 
 
 Business Games that sell DLC and in-app purchases appear to benefit most from subscription services Games that sell DLC and in-app purchases appear to benefit most from subscription services by Bryant Francis 

 Jan 27, 2026 3 Min Read 

 Business Devs are more worried than ever that generative AI will lower the quality of games Devs are more worried than ever that generative AI will lower the quality of games by Bryant Francis 

 Sep 16, 2025 4 Min Read 

 Game Design & Marketing Highlights
 See More 
 
 Design Paradox Interactive's Afterworld wants to entice new players to grand strategy with tasty RPG hooks Paradox Interactive's Afterworld wants to entice new players to grand strategy with tasty RPG hooks 

 Design Warlock's magic system was built on game-bending player choices Warlock's magic system was built on game-bending player choices 

 More from GD
 Blog with Game Developer Blogging Guidelines Game Developer Podcast Submit a Tip 

 Connect
 About Us Advertise Contact Us 

 Join Us
 
 Newsletter Sign-Up 

 Follow Us

 Copyright © 2026 Informa. This website is owned and operated by Informa. Informa PLC's registered office is 5 Howick Place, London SW1P 1WG.
 About Informa | Contact Informa | Privacy | Terms 

 Your Privacy Choices 

 