
===== PAGE 1 =====
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for personal use only.    
Dungeoncraft Adventures: The Wild Beyond the Witchlight   1 
 
 
You can create your own DUNGEONS & DRAGONS adventures for D&D Adventurers League set in a fey domain of your own design 
using The Wild Beyond the Witchlight and Domains of Delight or set it in the domain of Fablerise as presented in Domains of Delight. 
This document provides design guidance for these adventures. Domains of Delight can be found for sale in the DMsGuild. In order to 
create your own adventures, you’ll also want the adventure templates and style guides used for the Dungeoncraft program. They 
can be found on the DMsGuild here.  
OPTION 1. CREATE A DOMAIN OF DELIGHT 
 
GENERAL GUIDELINES 
The Wild Beyond the Witchlight deviates slightly from the use 
of the traditional pillars of D&D, typically through a greater 
degree of non-combat approaches to solving challenges. 
Consider taking inspiration from this approach when you 
design your own Feywild adventures. There is a section in the 
Domains of Delight supplement that suggests various fairytale 
and folklore books which might be helpful as inspiration. 
TECHNICAL INFORMATION 
A template is provided for use, including the Community 
Created D&D Adventurers League logo. You must use this 
template, and follow the formatting standards as presented 
in the template. This logo must appear on your adventure 
(see “Additional Guidelines” below). You should be familiar 
with the D&D Style Guide (also provided) as well. Please 
review the Wizards and the DMsGuild Content Guidelines. 
Only you (or a co-designer) can Dungeon Master your 
adventure until it is published in the Dungeon Masters Guild.  
 Publishing. If you intend to publish your adventure on the 
Dungeon Masters Guild, adventures supporting The Wild 
Beyond the Witchlight season must appear for sale by August 
31, 2022. There are no exceptions to this rule. If you do not 
publish your adventure you can continue to Dungeon Master 
it through December 31, 2022. After that time, unpublished 
adventures are no longer available in the D&D Adventurers 
League.  
 Accessibility. There is also the option for producing a more 
accessibility-friendly version of your adventure. The template 
for that will be available soon and inserted into the pack.  
ART AND GRAPHIC DESIGN 
Your adventure must follow the template provided for layout, 
but may include art and other graphic design elements 
subject to the terms and conditions of the DMsGuild support 
site, which has information on content, format, art, and 
various other common creator questions.  
CRAFTING YOUR ADVENTURE 
Adventure Duration. Your adventure should ideally be 
written for a two-hour or four-hour play time. Adventures 
with shorter playtimes are not allowed, and while longer 
adventures are allowed, they are treated as four hour 
adventures for purposes of rewards. You must note your 
adventure play time in the description of the adventure.  
Using Creatures. You can use creatures suggested in the 
Domain Denizens table which are from the Monster Manual 
and The Wild Beyond the Witchlight. Other monsters from 
Mordenkainen’s Tome of Foes, or Volo’s Guide to Monsters 
can be included, but should be used sparingly. Stat blocks 
must appear as printed. Note that if you are using an NPC 
stat block such as the cult fanatic and need to add racial 
abilities for a gnome you can annotated it after the stat 
block with "Harry is a gnome cult fanatic with the 
following characteristics: Size small, Speed 25 feet, 
darkvision 60 feet, Languages Gnomish and Common." This 
information could also be presented within the encounter 
text.  
If an instruction in the Domains of Delight document includes 
a change to a stat block, mark that change with an asterisk 
“*” and include a note after the stat block explaining the 
asterisk. You cannot use the archfey presented in Domains 
of Delight. 
Adventure Setting. Most of the adventure must take place in 
the domain you create. If, for story purposes, they need to 
start not in your domain, then you should choose a location 
in the Forgotten Realms. Only you or a co-designer can 
create adventures in your domain. 
Canonical Elements. It is important to note that your 
adventure cannot feature the Prismeer domain featured in 
The Wild Beyond the Witchlight. 
REWARDS 
At the end of this document, you will find three tables of 
magic items. Consumables can be from any DDAL allowed 
source (most will be from the Dungeon Master’s Guide). 
Choose the magic item rewards for your adventure from 
these tables using the following: 
• 2-hour tier 1 (levels 1-4): choose 1 item from table A and 
up to 3 common or 1 uncommon consumables. 
D&D® ADVENTURERS LEAGUE 
DUNGEONCRAFT DESIGN GUIDE:  
THE WILD BEYOND THE WITCHLIGHT 
 
Effective Date: October 1, 2021. Version 1.2. 

===== PAGE 2 =====
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for personal use only.    
Dungeoncraft Adventures: The Wild Beyond the Witchlight   2 
 
• 4-hour tier 1 (levels 1-4): choose 1 item from table A, 1 
from table B and up to 3 common or uncommon 
consumables. 
• 2-hour tier 2 (levels 5-10) choose 1 item from table C and 
up to 3 common or uncommon consumables. 
• 4-hour tier 2 (levels 5-10) choose 1 item from table C, 1 
from table B and up to 3 common or uncommon 
consumables. 
You may add 1 minor property or quirk to each non-
consumable magic item (see the Dungeon Master’s Guide, 
page 143). Properties must come from the table in the 
Dungeon Master’s Guide.  You can take inspiration from your 
adventure setting’s theme or Feywild themes in general when 
choosing these. You may use the table for quirks or add a 
Feywild inspired non-mechanical (game mechanics) quirk. 
 
Gold Rewards. These are based on tier. This is total gold for 
the group, not individual. Treasure such as gems, coins, art 
objects, and anything else portable that isn’t adventuring 
gear counts towards the gold rewards listed. 
 
GOLD REWARDS BY ADVENTURE TIER 
Tier  Min.         Max. 
1 100 gp  500 gp 
2 1000 gp  5000 gp 
 
USING DOMAINS OF DELIGHT 
Follow the method outlined in the Domains of Delight for 
creating your domain for use in your adventure. In places 
where the document implies you can decide on the fly what 
triggers something (such as in “Weird Magic” section) you 
need to define what occurs or give the DM a short list of 
options appropriate for your domain. If it is something 
presented to only be used if you need to create something on 
the fly, then the use of the tables is optional, such is the case 
for Feywild Guides. You can use the tables in that section as 
inspiration or for creating NPCs. A few sections need 
additional guidance for use in D&D Adventurers League and 
are presented below.  
FEY OUTLOOK 
The information that is presented here should be reflected in 
your NPCs, but also should be something a helpful fey guide 
might present in a tier 1 (levels 1-4) adventure. 
FEY PACTS 
Fey Pacts can be used but should be limited to a specific 
task/need of either the fey or the adventurers rather than a 
random occurrence.  
 
Lesser Pact Gifts. These can be used in tier 1 (levels 1-4) or 
tier 2 (levels 5-10) adventures. The following restrictions 
apply (rewards requiring no adjustments are not listed): 
• Charm. This gift cannot include either the Charm of 
Restoration or the Charm of the Slayer. 
• Fey Kinship. This does not persist past the end of the 
adventure. 
• Guide. The Guide can be a reoccurring NPC if you write 
more than one adventure, otherwise this benefit does not 
persist outside of the adventure. 
• Invitation. This should occur within the adventure. 
• Minor Magic Item. This can be a Common or Uncommon 
item, however if it is an Uncommon item its use is limited 
to the adventure. It does not count toward the characters 
max magic item limit for that time, however if it requires 
attunement normal attunement rules apply. 
• Proficiency. This does not persist past the end of the 
adventure. 
• Spellcasting. This does not persist past the end of the 
adventure.  
Greater Pact Gifts. These can only be used in tier 2 (levels 5-
10) and the following rules apply (rewards requiring no 
adjustments are not listed): 
• Audience. This should occur within the adventure. 
• Major Magic Item. Legendary items are limited to use 
within the adventure and are not available as rewards. 
• Time Displacement is useful only if the player intends to 
retire their character.  
• The fey cannot grant a Title for locations within the 
Forgotten Realms (such as “Duke of Daggerford”) but can 
grant a title in your created domain (such a “Baron 
Snowfen of Skylar”). 
• The amount listed in Wealth is changed to the following: 
10,000 gp. 
• Safety. This can be used within the framework of the 
adventure but generally is not impactful in D&D 
Adventurers League. 
• The wish spell is still subject to D&D Adventurers League 
rules regarding scope of what can be gained and the 
permanency (or lack thereof) of anything granted through 
the spell. 
COST OF A FEY PACT 
While the “your firstborn” is a traditional cost (Greater Pact), 
do not use this cost. Many of the costs listed for Greater Pacts 
are only appropriate if it is the focus of the adventure 
(perform 3 quests, return stolen legendary item, etc.). 
BREAKING A PACT 
When making a pact is part of the adventure, then one of 
these consequences should be included. Make sure you 
include the information regarding how this can be reversed 
in your adventure. 
FEY CURSES 
You can choose the effect instead of rolling if using this in 
your adventure or give the DM a list of three possibilities to 
choose from. If removal is not completed by the conclusion of 
the adventure, then it persists for one more adventure or 
session afterwards. At the end of the next adventure or 
session, it disappears.  
  
===== PAGE 3 =====
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for personal use only.    
Dungeoncraft Adventures: The Wild Beyond the Witchlight   3 
 
CREATING YOUR ARCHFEY 
You can use the tables randomly, choose from the features 
listed or consider them more of a guide to what is 
feasible/allowed. If you intend for the characters to fight the 
archfey, then for tier 1 (levels 1-4) you are limited to a max 
CR 10 creature and for tier 2 a max CR 15 creature. 
MAGICAL GIFTS 
Anytime an entry says “it will vanish after a specified amount 
of time” that time is the adventure. A few gifts have additional 
modifiers. Only one magical gift may be given as a reward per 
adventure. 
• Charm. This gift cannot include either the Charm of 
Restoration or the Charm of the Slayer. 
• Refuge. While this gift does vanish after the adventure it 
first appears in, if you write another adventure in your 
domain you can indicate that the refuge reappears for the 
duration of that adventure.  
• Training. This normally costs 250 downtime days and 
1gp/day (PH 187) and is also limited to languages or tool 
proficiencies. The archfey instead grants a specific training 
or daily inspiration. The adventure must specify which 
language, tool proficiency, skill proficiency, or feat the 
archfey grants through training. Only one option may be 
selected from the list below. 
o One specific language or tool proficiency. 50 
downtime days, 0 gp. 
o Daily inspiration. 20 downtime days, 0 gp. 
o One specific skill proficiency. 100 downtime 
days plus 100 gp. 
o One specific feat. Must be from a player 
allowed resource. 200 downtime plus 250 gp. 
 
ADDITIONAL GUIDELINES:  
THE FINE PRINT 
• At your option, you can publish your adventure on the 
Dungeon Masters Guild. Until published, only the designers 
(maximum two individuals) can run the adventure.  
• You and up to one co-designer can create a domain for use 
for your adventures. No one else, including other co-
designers, may use the setting of that domain for future 
Dungeoncraft adventures.  
• The D&D Adventurers League Content Managers do not 
need to review your adventure for you to run or publish it. 
• Please include stat blocks for any creature you use in your 
adventure that does not appear in the Monster Manual. 
• Adventures must use the template provided.  
• When published on the Dungeon Masters Guild (or listed in 
an event program), your adventure must use the WBW-DC 
code to identify it as a Dungeoncraft Adventure intended 
for use during this Seasonal Campaign. This code should 
appear in the upper left corner of your cover. (If you intend 
to write multiple adventures, then we suggest that you 
consider using a three-letter identifier in you code such as 
the domain name so people can quickly find them. For 
example: WBW-DC-SKY-01 for the first adventure in series 
set in a created domain called Skylar.) 
• The DDAL Community Created logo and the DMsGuild logo 
must appear on the cover. No other logos should appear on 
the cover. 
• All Dungeoncraft Adventures published on the DM’s Guild 
must abide by the rules provided by the DM’s Guild in 
terms of content that can be published in that marketplace. 
• Adventures must be written for a single table of players. 
These cannot be epics/multi-table events. 
IMPORTANT: Dungeoncraft Adventures can be removed 
from the DMsGuild at any time for failing to meet these 
standards, those prescribed by the DMsGuild, or for any other 
reason deemed necessary by Wizards of the Coast. 
Additionally, any designer(s) publishing a Dungeoncraft 
Adventure on the Dungeon Masters Guild or running one that 
does not follow these rules can have their ability to continue 
to create and publish sanctioned content under these rules 
suspended or revoked. 
  
===== PAGE 4 =====
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for personal use only.    
Dungeoncraft Adventures: The Wild Beyond the Witchlight   4 
 
MAGIC ITEM REWARDS 
TABLE A: UNCOMMON ITEMS 
D12            Item 
1 Eyes of minute seeing 
2 Bag of holding 
3 Slippers of spider climbing 
4 Bracers of archery 
5 
Boots of striding and 
springing 
6 
Figurine of wonderous 
power (silver raven) 
7 Gem of brightness 
8 
Instrument of the bards 
(doss lute) 
9 Pearl of power 
10 Cloak of protection 
11 Feywild shard (TCE) 
12 Nature’s mantle (TCE) 
TABLE B: COMMON ITEMS 
D12            Item 
1  Veteran’s cane (XGE) 
2  Wand of pyrotechnics (XGE) 
3  Cloak of billowing (XGE) 
4 Pipe of smoke monsters (XGE) 
5 Illuminator’s tattoo (TCE) 
6 Masquerade tattoo (TCE) 
7 Cloak of many fashions (XGE) 
8 Hat of vermin (XGE) 
9 Staff of bird calls (XGE) 
10  Pole of collapsing (XGE) 
11 Talking doll (XGE) 
12 Wand of smiles (XGE) 
 
TABLE C: RARE ITEMS 
D12            Item 
1 Staff of swarming insects 
2 Staff of the woodlands 
3 Mantel of spell resistance 
4 Horn of Valhalla (silver) 
5 
Figurine of wonderous power 
(ivory goat) 
6 Elven chain 
7 Bell branch (TCE) 
8 Boots of speed 
9 Bracers of defense 
10 Ioun stone (protection) 
11 Quall’s feather token (tree) 
12 Ring of free action 
 
 
 
   
===== PAGE 5 =====
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for personal use only.    
Dungeoncraft Adventures: The Wild Beyond the Witchlight   5 
OPTION 2. USING ADVENTURE SEEDS 
If you are not interested in creating your own domain, do not despair! We have an alternative method for creating Dungeoncraft 
adventures by using the following adventure seeds and the Archfey described in the Domains of Delight. These adventure seeds 
are set in Fablerise, a small domain that has only recently appeared in Thither. See The Wild Beyond the Witchlight for more 
information about Prismeer, its archfey ruler, and Thither. 
 
GENERAL GUIDELINES 
The Wild Beyond the Witchlight deviates slightly from the 
use of the traditional pillars of D&D, typically through a 
greater degree of non-combat approaches to solving 
challenges. Consider taking inspiration from this approach 
when you design your own Feywild adventures. There is a 
section in the Domains of Delight supplement that suggests 
various fairytale and folklore books which might be 
helpful as inspiration. 
TECHNICAL INFORMATION 
A template is provided for use, including the Community 
Created D&D Adventurers League logo. You must use this 
template, and follow the formatting standards as 
presented in the template. This logo must appear on your 
adventure (see “Additional Guidelines” below). You should 
be familiar with the D&D Style Guide (also provided) as 
well. Please review the Wizards and the DMsGuild Content 
Guidelines. Only you (or a co-designer) can Dungeon 
Master your adventure until it is published in the Dungeon 
Masters Guild.  
 Publishing. If you intend to publish your adventure on 
the Dungeon Masters Guild, adventures supporting The 
Wild Beyond the Witchlight season must appear for sale by 
August 31, 2022. There are no exceptions to this rule. If 
you do not publish your adventure you can continue to 
Dungeon Master it through December 31, 2022. After that 
time, unpublished adventures are no longer available in 
the D&D Adventurers League.  
 Accessibility. There is also the option for producing a 
more accessibility-friendly version of your adventure. The 
template for that will be available shortly and inserted 
into the pack.  
ART AND GRAPHIC DESIGN 
Your adventure must follow the template provided for 
layout, but may include art and other graphic design 
elements subject to the terms and conditions of the 
DMsGuild support site
, which has information on content, 
format, art, and various other common creator questions.  
CRAFTING YOUR ADVENTURE 
Adventure Duration. Your adventure should ideally be 
written for a two-hour or four-hour play time. 
Adventures with shorter playtimes are not allowed, and 
while longer adventures are allowed, they are treated as 
four-hour adventures for purposes of rewards. You 
must note your adventure play time in the description 
of the adventure. 
Using Creatures. You can use creatures suggested in the 
Domain Denizens table which are from the Monster 
Manual and The Wild Beyond the Witchlight. Other 
monsters from Mordenkainen’s Tome of Foes, or Volo’s 
Guide to Monsters can be included, but should be used 
sparingly. Stat blocks must appear as printed. Note that 
if you are using an NPC stat block such as the cult 
fanatic and need to add racial abilities for a gnome you 
can annotated it after the stat block with "Harry is a 
gnome cult fanatic with the following characteristics: 
Size small, Speed 25 feet, darkvision 60 feet, Languages 
Gnomish and Common." This information could also be 
presented within the encounter text. 
Adventure Setting. The adventure can start in the 
Forgotten Realms, in Thither, or Fablerise. Other 
settings are not allowed, even briefly. Fablerise and its 
archfey the Yarnspinner are detailed in the 
Domains of 
Delight, information on Thither is in The Wild Beyond 
the Witchlight. 
Canonical Elements. It’s important to note that your 
adventure can’t feature the death of NPCs or the 
destruction of locations featured in The Wild Beyond 
the Witchlight. 
You can use the information about the fey provided in the 
Domains of Delight (including the restrictions listed in 
the previous section) within the context of the 
Adventure Seed used. 
USING THE ADVENTURE SEEDS 
Each adventure seed has a set level restriction, as well as 
assigned character rewards that your adventure can use. 
Your adventure can’t provide character rewards above 
and beyond what’s listed, including story awards or 
downtime activities. 
Adventure Seed Title. These are placeholder titles. Please 
create a unique title for your adventure when it’s 
completed and ready to run. You are to add the name of 
the seed in the credit section. 
Adventure Seed Level Range. This is the range of levels 
that your adventure can accommodate. 
Adventure Seed Hook. The content of your adventure 
should be based off this single evocative sentence. 
Adventure Seed Rewards. Your adventure can provide 
the items listed as rewards.  
If it’s a two-hour adventure, you can include only those 
two items.  
If it’s a four-hour adventure, you can include the magic 
item listed, in addition to those items listed for two-
hour adventures. 
Gold Rewards. These are based on tier. This is total gold 
for the group, not individual. Treasure such as gems, coins, 
art objects, and anything else portable that isn’t 
adventuring gear counts towards the gold rewards listed. 
 
===== PAGE 6 =====
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for personal use only.    
Dungeoncraft Adventures: The Wild Beyond the Witchlight   6 
GOLD REWARDS BY ADVENTURE TIER 
Tier  Min.         Max. 
1 100 gp  500 gp 
2 1000 gp  5000 gp 
 
  
===== PAGE 7 =====
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for personal use only.    
Dungeoncraft Adventures: The Wild Beyond the Witchlight   7 
ADDITIONAL GUIDELINES: THE FINE 
PRINT 
• At your option, you can publish your adventure on the 
Dungeon Masters Guild. Until published, only the 
designers (maximum two individuals) can run the 
adventure.  
• The D&D Adventurers League Content Managers do not 
need to review your adventure for you to run or publish 
it. 
• Please include stat blocks for any creature you use in 
your adventure that does not appear in the Monster 
Manual. 
• Adventures must use the template provided.  
• When published on the Dungeon Masters Guild (or 
listed in an event program), your adventure must use 
the WBW-DC code to identify it as a Dungeoncraft 
Adventure intended for use during this Seasonal 
Campaign. This code should appear in the upper left 
corner of your cover. (If you intend to write multiple 
adventures, then we suggest that you consider using a 
three-letter identifier in you code so people can quickly 
find them. 
• The DDAL Community Created logo and the DMsGuild 
logo must appear on the cover. No other logos should 
appear on the cover 
• All Dungeoncraft Adventures published on the 
DMsGuild must abide by the rules provided by the 
DMsGuild in terms of content that can be published in 
that marketplace. 
• Adventures must be written for a single table of players. 
These cannot be epics/multi-table events. 
IMPORTANT: Dungeoncraft Adventures can be removed 
from the DMsGuild at any time for failing to meet these 
standards, those prescribed by the DMsGuild, or for any 
other reason deemed necessary by Wizards of the Coast. 
Additionally, any designer(s) publishing a Dungeoncraft 
Adventure on the Dungeon Masters Guild or running one 
that does not follow these rules can have their ability to 
continue to create and publish sanctioned content under 
these rules suspended or revoked. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
===== PAGE 8 =====
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for personal use only.    
Dungeoncraft Adventures: The Wild Beyond the Witchlight   8 
TIER 1 DC ADVENTURE SEEDS 
Adv. Seed Title Never Too Late For Now Adv. Seed Lvl Range 1 – 4  
Adv. Seed Hook The characters run into an awakened rabbit that is late for an important event. Unfortunately, nefarious 
forces threaten his attendance. 
Adv. Seed 
Rewards 
Two-Hour Adventure: Oil of slipperiness, cloak of many fashions 
Four-Hour Adventure: +1 padded armor (a fine velvet vest) 
 
Adv. Seed Title Sticky Little Fingers Adv. Seed Lvl Range 1 – 4  
Adv. Seed Hook The characters awaken to find that something important has been taken from them. The only clue as to 
whom the perpetrator might be is a brilliant yellow feather. 
Adv. Seed 
Rewards 
Two-Hour Adventure: Spell scroll of fly, dark shard amulet 
Four-Hour Adventure: Wind fan 
 
Adv. Seed Title Lending a Hand Adv. Seed Lvl Range 1 – 4 
Adv. Seed Hook The characters find a badly injured sprite who claims to have been accosted by a creature made of mud. 
Adv. Seed 
Rewards 
Two-Hour Adventure: Potion of fire resistance, talking doll 
Four-Hour Adventure: Greatclub of warning  
 
Adv. Seed Title So…Thirsty… Adv. Seed Lvl Range 1 – 4 
Adv. Seed Hook The stream that an elf village has relied upon for a thousand years has run dry, and they can’t seem to figure 
out why. 
Adv. Seed 
Rewards 
Two-Hour Adventure: (5) +1 sling bullets, wand of pyrotechnics 
Four-Hour Adventure: Decanter of endless water 
 
Adv. Seed Title Where are We? Adv. Seed Lvl Range 1 – 4 
Adv. Seed Hook The characters take shelter in an unassuming ruin, only to find themselves in the Feywild when they awaken. 
Adv. Seed Rewards Two-Hour Adventure: Potion of growth, prosthetic limb (made of wood) 
Four-Hour Adventure: Restorative ointment (4 doses remaining)  
 
Adv. Seed Title What a Quagmire Adv. Seed Lvl Range 1 – 4 
Adv. Seed Hook Under the dark of each new moon, a mysterious shack emerges from the middle of a muddy bog. Rumors tell 
of wondrous treasures inside—though no one truly knows anyone who’s actually entered it. 
Adv. Seed Rewards Two-Hour Adventure: Spell scroll of entangle, orb of time 
Four-Hour Adventure: +1 all-purpose tool  
 
Adv. Seed Title Party Time! Adv. Seed Lvl Range 1 – 4 
Adv. Seed Hook All of the children in a small thorp have mysteriously gone missing, and the parents are worried sick. One of 
the kids mentioned everyone going to a special birthday party, but there are no clues other than that. 
Adv. Seed Rewards Two-Hour Adventure: Spell scroll of faerie fire, rope of mending 
Four-Hour Adventure: Hat of disguise (shaped like a conical party hat) 
 
Adv. Seed Title A Tough Sell Adv. Seed Lvl Range 1 – 4 
Adv. Seed Hook A seemingly friendly fey offers the characters a pouch filled with magic acorns, promising great wealth to those 
who plant them. He couldn’t tell a bigger lie. 
Adv. Seed Rewards Two-Hour Adventure: Potion of animal friendship, lock of trickery 
Four-Hour Adventure: Bag of tricks  
 
Adv. Seed Title Where the Winds Take Us Adv. Seed Lvl Range 1 – 4 
Adv. Seed Hook The characters are offered a trip in a splendid hot air balloon, but catastrophe strikes, and their 3-hour tour turns 
into a night of terror. 
Adv. Seed Rewards Two-Hour Adventure: (1) unbreakable arrow, feather token (feather fall) 
Four-Hour Adventure: Wind fan  
 
===== PAGE 9 =====
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for personal use only.    
Dungeoncraft Adventures: The Wild Beyond the Witchlight   9 
Adv. Seed Title Path of Resistance Adv. Seed Lvl Range 1-4 
Adv. Seed Hook Every path leads to a destination. But some paths lead to a destination you don’t know you needed to go and 
you can’t leave until you acquire what is waiting there for you. 
Adv. Seed 
Rewards 
Two-Hour Adventure: Potion of resistance (Force), Heward’s handy spice pouch 
Four-Hour Adventure: Add adamantine armor (scale mail or chain mail) 
 
Adv. Seed Title Looking a Gift Horse in the Mouth Adv. Seed Lvl Range 1-4 
Adv. Seed Hook What luck!  A fey is here to help the characters. No problem is too small or too great. (Causing problems of 
any size is great fun to some fey!) 
Adv. Seed 
Rewards 
Two-Hour Adventure: Pixie dust, charlatan’s die   
Four-Hour Adventure: Add boots of striding and springing (shaped like unicorns’ hooves and fuzzy ankles) 
 
Adv. Seed Title Who Goes There? Adv. Seed Lvl Range 1 – 4  
Adv. Seed Hook Curious creatures have been emerging from breaks in the thickets of Fablerise.  
Adv. Seed 
Rewards 
Two-Hour Adventure: dust of disappearance, cloak of many fashions 
Four-Hour Adventure: Add figurine of wonderous power (silver raven) 
 
TIER 2 ADVENTURE SEEDS 
Adv. Seed Title Face Off! Adv. Seed Lvl Range 5 – 10  
Adv. Seed Hook A mysterious stranger tells a scary story at a tavern before revealing themselves as an odd fey creature with 
the ability to steal their victims’ faces. 
Adv. Seed 
Rewards 
Two-Hour Adventure: (5) +2 crossbow bolts, armor of gleaming (scale) 
Four-Hour Adventure: Add amulet of health 
 
Adv. Seed Title Dryad Despair Adv. Seed Lvl Range 5 – 10 
Adv. Seed Hook The characters encounter a dryad in the middle of a blighted forest deep in the throes of despair. Her tree, a 
treant, was recently chopped down by a band of redcaps, and needs the last acorn it shed to return it to life. 
Adv. Seed 
Rewards 
Two-Hour Adventure: Spell scroll of blight, dread helm 
Four-Hour Adventure: Armor of resistance (necrotic) (medium armor only) 
 
Adv. Seed Title Woe Unto Ewe Adv. Seed Lvl Range 5 – 10 
Adv. Seed Hook A distraught hunter claims to be cursed after shooting a strange sheep with a golden pelt. 
Adv. Seed 
Rewards 
Two-Hour Adventure: Spell scroll of spirit guardians, pole of collapsing 
Four-Hour Adventure: Elven chain  
 
Adv. Seed Title A Host Spurned Adv. Seed Lvl Range 5 – 10 
Adv. Seed Hook Someone took advantage of Yarnspinner’s hospitality and has stolen one of the archfey’s favorite books. The 
immense spider is desperate to see it returned. 
Adv. Seed 
Rewards 
Two-Hour Adventure: Spell scroll of stoneskin, ruby of the war mage 
Four-Hour Adventure: Glamoured studded leather  
 
Adv. Seed Title Blood Bath Adv. Seed Lvl Range 5 – 10 
Adv. Seed Hook A notoriously vicious band of redcaps has filled a pond with the blood of their victims. Naturally, a nearby 
village takes issue with this and asks the characters for help. 
Adv. Seed 
Rewards 
Two-Hour Adventure: Spell scroll of greater restoration, shield of expression 
Four-Hour Adventure: Ioun stone of awareness  
 
Adv. Seed Title A Draconic Request Adv. Seed Lvl Range 5 – 10 
Adv. Seed Hook A faerie dragon with a fondness for meat pies has kidnapped an elderly baker and refuses to free her unless 
she reveals her secret recipe. Unfortunately, the baker has forgotten the recipe to a wicked hag. 
Adv. Seed 
Rewards 
Two-Hour Adventure: Spell scroll of guardian of nature, staff of adornment 
Four-Hour Adventure: +2 moon sickle  
 
===== PAGE 10 =====
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for personal use only.    
Dungeoncraft Adventures: The Wild Beyond the Witchlight   10 
Adv. Seed Title A Fine Suit Adv. Seed Lvl Range  5 – 10 
Adv. Seed Hook  A huge unseelie fairy has been kidnapping people from a destitute village. He’s taken advantage of 
their plight to fatten them up with the plans of making a coat from their skin. 
Adv. Seed 
Rewards 
 Two-Hour Adventure: Elixir of health, wand of conducting 
Four-Hour Adventure: Staff of withering  
 
Adv. Seed Title Wildest Dreams Adv. Seed Lvl Range 5-10 
Adv. Seed Hook The residents of a small Fey village have been seeing their dreams (and nightmares) come to life, and 
they’ve asked you to investigate why. 
Adv. Seed 
Rewards 
Two-Hour Adventure: spell scroll of revivify, cloak of billowing  
Four-Hour Adventure: Add staff of the woodlands 
 
Adv. Seed Title Feisty Fey Festivities Adv. Seed Lvl Range 5-10 
Adv. Seed Hook Two great fey courts have a mutual celebration planned but if they don’t get help soon, their strife may 
ruin the joy. 
Adv. Seed 
Rewards 
Two-Hour Adventure: Spell scroll of calm emotions, cloak of many fashions,  
Four-Hour Adventure: Add glamoured studded leather 
 
Adv. Seed Title Wild Hunt Adv. Seed Lvl Range 5-10 
Adv. Seed Hook Another fey hunting party is planned and some Feywild creatures express fear of becoming prey or 
collateral damage. They seek help. 
Adv. Seed 
Rewards 
Two-Hour Adventure: (5) +2 arrows, dread helm 
Four-Hour Adventure: Add bracers of defense   
 
 
 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, D&D, Wizards of the Coast, Forgotten Realms, the dragon ampersand, Player’s Handbook, Monster Manual, Dungeon Master’s Guide, D&D Adventurers League, all other 
Wizards of the Coast product names, and their respective logos are trademarks of Wizards of the Coast in the USA and other countries. All characters and their distinctive likenesses are property of 
Wizards of the Coast. This material is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the material or artwork contained herein is prohibited 
without the express written permission of Wizards of the Coast. 
©2021 Wizards of the Coast LLC, PO Box 707, Renton, WA 98057-0707, USA. Manufactured by Hasbro SA, Rue Emile-Boéchat 31, 2800 Delémont, CH. Represented by Hasbro Europe, 4 The Square, 
Stockley Park, Uxbridge, Middlesex, UB11 1ET, UK. 
 