=== PAGE 1 ===
DUNGEONSUBMISSION GUIDELINESBy the DUNGEON StaffTHE GROUND RULESWith few exceptions, submitting an article to DUNGEON requires these important steps:1. Review these guidelines.2. Send a query.3. Wait patiently.4. Submit the manuscript if approved.5. Wait patiently.DUNGEON is the official monthly resource for DUNGEON MASTERS, the most dedicated players of theDUNGEONS & DRAGONS game. Freelance writers just like you account for much of our content, and thesesimple guidelines provide you with the tools needed to get your articles and adventures published inour magazine. Before you submit an idea for publication, it is absolutely critical that you review theseguidelines.The QueryBefore you start writing, send us a query outlining what your adventure or article covers and how longyou expect it to be. DUNGEON publishes several different types of articles, each with their ownguidelines and ground rules. See the Writing Tips section of these guidelines for more information onhow to improve your chances of getting published for each type of article.Adventures: Adventures are the heart and soul of DUNGEON. Some of the finest D&D adventuresever published have appeared within our pages, which have also introduced D&D fans to folks whohave gone on to become some of the most well-known and respected names in the RPG industry.Before you submit an adventure to DUNGEON, send us a brief query via regular mail or email (weprefer email). If you email your query to us, please attach the query to the email as a Word documentor a rich text file, rather than pasting it into the body of the email. Also, to help keep us organized,please submit each adventure query as a separate email. Your proposal should be 1000 words or less(about two pages) and include the following elements: a working title, an original and compelling plot,the specific character level of the adventure, the major foes faced in the adventure, information onany rewards to be gained, and an estimate of the completed adventure’s length in words and numberof maps.Articles: We publish a large number of articles, ranging from the tiny (Campaign Workbook) to thetitanic (Backdrops). See the Writing Tips section of these guidelines for more information on ourdifferent article types. Campaign Workbook articles do not require a query, and are probably theeasiest way for a first-time author to get into the magazine. Longer articles require a query, preferablyby email.A copy of our Standard Disclosure Form is included with these guidelines. You have our permissionto make as many photocopies of this form as necessary. A completed form must accompany eachproposal and manuscript that you submit. You can append it to the end of the submission in the caseof hard copy submissions or include a scan of a signed and completed Standard Disclosure Form withyour electronic submission. If you send us the query and the SDF electronically, please attach the SDFas a separate file.We return unread all manuscripts and adventure proposals that are not accompanied by acompleted Standard Disclosure Form. You do not need to include a Standard Disclosure Form withsimple email queries for non-adventure articles.Our address for query-related matters is:

=== PAGE 2 ===
Regular MailDUNGEON MagazinePaizo Publishing 2700 Richards Road, Suite 201Bellevue, WA 98005-4200Emailgatekeeper@paizo.comThe Waiting (Part 1)An editor should reply to your query within soon after its receipt. This initial response is either asimple rejection (if it is immediately obvious that we can’t use your idea) or an acknowledgement thatwe have received your query. If you have not heard back after a month, please feel free to contact usagain and make sure that we actually received your submission. The simple truth is that sometimes asubmission gets misplaced.Once your query makes it past the initial read, it is evaluated in detail during the next approvalmeeting. Approval meetings occur every few months, and in general no query receives the green lightuntil after it has gone thorough the submissions meeting process. We try to let people know by way ofour messageboards (http://paizo.com/paizo/messageboards) when the next approval meeting iscoming up, so if you are curious about the status of queries in general that is a good place to start.Questions about specific queries should always be emailed to us directly.The ManuscriptManuscripts must be provided to us in electronic format, either on CD or attached to an email sent todungeon@paizo.com. Please follow these simple rules:1. Download the DUNGEON style sheets file from paizo.com/dungeon and write your manuscript usingthe styles found therein. This file should work with most versions of Microsoft Word. If you do nothave Microsoft Word, provide your manuscript in rich text format.2. On the first page of your manuscript, include your name, current email address, and home address.Also include the title of the submission. If the submission is intended for a specific section of themagazine, note that on the first page as well. IMPORTANT: Put the total word count somewhereconspicuous on the first page. While this bit of information might not seem like a big deal to you, it iscrucial to us.3. Include your name, the submission title, and page number on every page of your manuscript.4. At the end of your manuscript, write a 25-word personal bio (note that this only applies toadventure and backdrop manuscript submissions).5. Spellcheck your manuscript and personally edit a printout before you send it our way. In fact, ask afriend to read over the manuscript before you send it in. Other people will catch things you’veoverlooked. While manuscripts do not need to be perfect, ones that require an enormous amount ofediting seldom make it into the magazine.The Waiting (Part 2)We might need several months to evaluate of your submission. If you have not heard from us after acouple of months, feel free to inquire by email about the status of your query or submission. Whileyou wait, please feel free to send more queries. Do not contact us by phone to ask about the status ofyour manuscript.If you send hard copy queries or manuscripts (in electronic format on CD) and expect a response,please include a self-addressed stamped envelope. Likewise, if you absolutely require notice that themanuscript has arrived safely in our office, include a self-addressed stamped postcard with yoursubmission. We’ll throw it in the mail as soon as it arrives.If we like your query, we’ll respond with comments aimed toward helping you complete amanuscript with a good chance to make it into the magazine. We prefer to communicate by email, andwriters who have access to an email account should find that the process moves much more quicklythan those who are forced to rely upon regular mail.

=== PAGE 3 ===
RevisionsEven if we love your manuscript, we’ll probably ask for revisions. This request usually comes in theform of a long email with change requests outlined on a numbered list. Some of these are“suggestions,” while others are required changes in order to make the submission acceptable forpublication.We often ask for changes to articles to adjust style, game balance, length, or focus. Send yourrevision in Word or rich text format attached to an email to the editor who requested the revision, orto dungeon@paizo.com if no email address is provided. Put “Revision” in the title of your email and onthe first page of the new manuscript, and give a brief description of the article in the body of theemail.When we ask for a revision, it is not a guarantee of acceptance of the article. If you are unwilling orunable to revise your work as we require, we will not print your article.RejectionYour submission might be deemed unacceptable, even after the revision process. We often don’t havetime to provide a detailed explanation of why the article didn’t work for us, but we try to provide somepointers if time is available. Unfortunately, the quantity of submissions we must review each weekleaves us with very little time for constructive criticism of articles we don’t intend to publish. If youreceive a form rejection letter, please save your submission for future inspiration and query us aboutnew submission ideas. We never “change our minds” about articles we have already rejected, so inthe face of rejection it’s best to simply move on to the next idea.We realize that rejection stinks because every member of our editorial staff has, in the past, beenrejected by either DRAGON or DUNGEON magazines. We’ll try to be gentle.Articles are most often rejected because of poor writing quality, imprecise or incorrect gamemechanics, failure to present information in the proper D&D style, poor formatting and organization,clichéd approach to topics, or difference between the query and the final article.Rights & PaymentAny article published by DUNGEON becomes the sole property of Wizards of the Coast, Inc. We purchaseall rights to any submission that makes use of Wizards of the Coast’s copyrighted materials or thatmakes changes or additions to a product of Wizards of the Coast, Inc. We do not offer royalties on thearticles we purchase; we pay a flat fee. Payments are made 30 days after publication, at a startingrate of $.05/word. Quantity of published submissions, reliability, and overall quality of submissionscan push this rate considerably higher over time.In addition to monetary payment, we send you at least one free copy of the issue containing yourpublished work.WRITING TIPSDUNGEON publishes a wide variety of article types. This section of the Submission Guidelines givessuggestions and guidelines tailored to specific sections of the magazine.QueriesWriting a good query is the first step toward getting your adventure published in the magazine. Nomatter how brilliant or innovative your idea may be, if you can’t communicate it coherently in 1,000words, it will never see print in the magazine. With that in mind, here are some tips for good querywriting:• It’s extremely important to get as much of the adventure itself into the query as possible. Welove backstory, but we often get really into the setup for an adventure, only to arrive at thelast paragraph of the query and read “then the PCs show up and make it all better.”Regardless of how cool your backstory is, an adventure is not a short story. You need tocondense or sacrifice background description in favor of telling us about PC involvement. It’show the adventure PLAYS that determines whether or not a proposal is something we want topick up.• Along those same lines, if you condense the backstory and find that the section talking about

=== PAGE 4 ===
the adventure itself is still “then the PCs go take out the bad guy,” take it as a sign that theadventure itself could probably use some work. Adventures with a simple “go there/do that”plot rarely make it through. Twists, turns, and alternate ways to “win” are usually moreentertaining.• Don’t presume PC actions. One of D&D’s greatest draws is its ability to allow players to doanything they want. In your adventure, don’t presume that the PCs are always going to followthe path you’ve laid out for them. Proposals heavy on themes like: “the PCs will follow theinvaders back to their lair” or “the PCs will of course want to use the library” run the risk ofdrawing a “too leading” or “too straightforward/linear” comment from the editors. Go aheadand talk about incentives for the PCs to take various actions, but realize that being lead by thenose is rarely fun or effective.• If you find that your adventure centers entirely around a really cool villain, with the only realplot point being “the PCs go fight the bad guy,” consider shelving the adventure andsubmitting your antagonist as a Critical Threat instead. You’ll run a far better chance of gettingit published, and it’ll be vastly more useful and entertaining for the readers.• Put your best face forward. Consider what elements make your proposal exciting and a “mustbuy” from an editor’s perspective (great story, great NPCs, great location, basically greatanything) and put them up front. Let us know what makes your adventure cool, because if wehave to go hunting for it, there’s a good chance we’ll miss it. In newspapers they call this,“burying the lede.” Don’t bury your lede.• We are not your players. A lot of authors like to be sneaky about key plot elements, avoidingthe big “reveal.” Even if the adventure is a mystery, it shouldn’t be mysterious to us. Don’thide elements of your adventure from us. Give us all the information we need to make aninformed decision about whether or not to buy the module. If you don’t, we’re probably notgoing to buy it.• Please proofread! A spellchecker will make minor fixes, but an abundance of grammatical andspelling errors makes your manuscript much less attractive and professional. Try to get othersto read your submission first for clarity and correctness. Give yourself time to adequately goover the whole manuscript. This can be especially important for foreign-language contributorswho must compete with native speakers.• Along those lines, learn how to use apostrophes. Yes, we can fix them for you. We’d prefer notto, and a misuse of basic grammar and punctuation is an automatic strike against theproposal, because it means (almost no matter what) that developing the final adventure willinvolve more work (and hence more money) than developing a “clean” adventure. Badapostrophe usage is a good indicator of bad grammar in general. This won’t automatically sinka proposal, but it’s not good. Here’s a decent online primer on apostrophe usage:http://www.mantex.co.uk/samples/apo.htm• Show, don’t tell. Instead of saying “a really cool trap” or “a mind-bending puzzle,” give us aQUICK idea of what it involves.• Read recent issues of DUNGEON. Not only will this help you by showing you what kind ofadventures we tend to accept, but it’ll also tell you what kinds of adventures we’ve run toooften.AdventuresEvery issue, DUNGEON features three complete DUNGEONS & DRAGONS adventures, one each tailored tolow-level (1–5), mid-level (6–12), or high-level (13–20) parties. We publish an epic-level adventureabout once a year, but this is usually by special arrangement with the editors. Due to the AdventurePaths we have been publishing recently, we need fewer high-level adventures than we once did.However, the difficulty of writing a good high-level adventure means that if you can pull it off, it willalmost always be accepted.Before you begin thinking about your adventure, carefully review these guidelines and Chapter 3:Adventures of the 3.5 DUNGEON MASTER’s Guide. You’ll also find it helpful to review several past issuesof DUNGEON, to ensure that your query does not cover ground we’ve recently explored in the magazine.If we’ve published a half dozen adventures featuring half-dragons (and we have), it’s probably a good

=== PAGE 5 ===
idea to avoid half-dragons for the time being. Examining several issues of the magazine at once isprobably your best window into the tastes of our editorial team, who, after all, are the folks decidingwhether or not to approve your query and ultimately publish your adventure.Length: Our adventures typically range from 5,000 to 15,000 words in length. Occasionally, we’llpublish a longer adventure or an adventure that spans multiple issues, but these are uniformly createdby special arrangement with the DUNGEON staff and are only approved for authors with a proven trackrecord with the magazine. If you’re thinking about working on your first submission, it’s best to startsmall.It doesn’t matter if the finished manuscript comes in at exactly the word count predicted in thequery, but we automatically reject any adventure manuscript that contains fewer than 5,000 or morethan 15,000 words. The ideal manuscript size is 10,000 words, and hitting or coming close to thattarget gives your adventure a significant leg up on longer submissions.Campaign Settings: The ideal DUNGEON adventure works in any campaign, regardless of the DM’sfavored campaign setting. Accordingly, we favor adventures patterned after traditional sword &sorcery, the type of game exemplified by the three core rulebooks (the Player’s Handbook, DUNGEONMASTER’s Guide, and Monster Manual). The fewer setting-specific details you include in your adventure,the more useful the scenario will be to the majority of our readers. Try to confine your adventure to arelatively small area; it’s far simpler for DMs to insert a single town into their campaigns than anentire kingdom.All generic adventures should conform to the campaign rules presented in the DUNGEON MASTER’sGuide and use the same pantheon of deities presented in the core rules. The Player’s Handbookprovides a list of D&D deities; use this list instead of creating your own deities.In addition to generic adventures, we also publish adventures set in the GREYHAWK, FORGOTTEN REALMS,and EBERRON campaign settings, published by Wizards of the Coast. Such scenarios are published lessfrequently than generic D&D adventures, and only when excellent adventures in these settingsbecome available.We are not looking for unsolicited adventures designed specifically for out-of-print campaign settings(such as MYSTARA, RED STEEL, PLANESCAPE, DARK SUN, or RAVENLOFT) or for third-party settings (such asFreeport, Dawnforge, the Iron Kingdoms, Kalamar, etc.).Feel free to use material from other official sources of D&D material published by Wizards of theCoast. Books like Complete Warrior, Frostburn, and secondary monster books such as the Fiend Folioand Monster Manual III are excellent resources. If your adventure contains an official monster from abook other than the Monster Manual, be sure to include a complete stat block and physical descriptionof that monster in your manuscript, since the secondary books are not required to play the adventuresin DUNGEON.Once or twice a year, we publish an Oriental Adventures or Expanded Psionics Handbook adventure.Maps: Group all maps at the end of your manuscript, after the last page of text. Make sure that allmaps (and diagrams, if appropriate) are rendered neatly in ink. The map grid (if any) should beclearly marked without obstructing the map’s legibility. Scale lines may be used for outdoor maps. Usea straight edge to draw the straight lines on your final copy. Darken solid areas (such as rock around adungeon complex). Whenever possible, draw the furnishings or obvious features of an area. Use iconsfor beds, desks, ladders, trapdoors, curtains, and so forth. Try to make your icons recognizablewithout a map key. Refrain from painting your maps. Only use color to indicate important mapfeatures where use of plain ink does not suffice, such as to designate bodies of water, heavily forestedareas bordering plains, or other such locations.Remember internal consistency when designing maps. Inhabited areas require provisions forbringing in food, water, light, and heat, a method of disposing waste materials, and ways for theinhabitants to get around easily. Large area maps should conform to known geographical principles;note special cases. Use numerals for rooms in dungeons and other structures, numbered consecutivelythroughout. (Do not start over with room number 1 on a dungeon’s second level.) Always check yourmaps against the finished text. Make sure you have described all relevant areas on the maps and havenot mislabeled anything.For electronic submissions, it’s ok to include 150 dpi scans of your hand-drawn or computer-generated maps. For printed submissions, always provide clean photocopies. In either case, always,

=== PAGE 6 ===
always, always keep the original maps. Do not send us originals!Scenarios that rely on new magic items, monsters, weapons, or prestige classes to get the reader’sattention are not as interesting as scenarios that present fast-paced, exciting, enjoyable adventuresthat utilize elements from the three core rule books. If you create something new (such as a newmagic item used by an important NPC), make sure its presence in the adventure is justified, that it isfully explained in terms of its effects in the game, and that it is reasonable and fits with the gamerules.Site-based adventures are preferable to event-based ones. Unlike event-based scenarios, whichtend to rely on rigid timelines, site-based scenarios are based around interesting sites that characterscan explore for one or more sessions: for example, dungeons, castles, strongholds, catacombs,ancient ruins, or cities. Adventures that present fantastic locations filled with diverse, well-thought-outencounters are ideal. For more information on designing site-based adventures, consult the DUNGEONMASTER’s Guide.Elements an Adventure Should HaveIncorporating the suggestions below provides depth to your design. These suggestions allow everycharacter class a chance to shine. They provide several alternatives to straight combat encounters.The suggestions might provide you with new ideas. Look at it as an inspirational list, not a recipe to bestrictly followed.ActionAction is fun. Action is good. Promote action. Make the players want to take action. Don’t coercecharacters to act; when you do, you create a split between what the players want (to go on theadventure) and what the PCs want (not to go on the adventure).Start with action. A typical gaming group has several minutes to an hour of “preparation” at thestart of a session. Once the adventure is underway, the dice should start rolling (at least figuratively)very soon.Conclude with action. Let the actions of the PCs (not the actions of NPCs) resolve the adventure.Reward action. Players would usually rather act than think. Build encounters that reward the playersfor taking the initiative. (This doesn’t mean that the PCs should always win when they charge throughan adventure. A fight can be rewarding to the players even if it’s a big drain for the PCs.) Thinking isok too. Some encounters should reward (or even require) thought. A good balance is an encounterthat PCs can handle by brute force or that they can handle more easily with some good tactics.Warn players when action is bad. If you’re going to reward and encourage action most of the time,it’s only fair to give players some warning when the PCs are coming to an encounter where “kickingopen the door” is a bad idea. That way they can appreciate a “thinking” encounter as a good thinkingencounter rather than stumbling into it and finding it to be a bad combat encounter.Be careful with traps. If you sprinkle in traps randomly, the smart PC response is to take every roomor area slowly and cautiously. That might be smart, but it’s boring. Some hint that the characters areentering a trapped area helps the players slow down and be cautious when they need to withoutslowing the whole game to a crawl.DangerRandomness is dangerous. In any contest, an increase in randomness favors the underdog. Themonsters are the underdogs because the PCs almost always win. Thus, any increase in randomnessfavors the monsters. These things increase randomness:• High crit multiples (axes, scythes, picks, and so forth)• Concealment (miss chances)• Single, powerful creatures• “Save or sink” powers: poison, petrification, death gaze, and the like.Vary the danger level. Make some encounters weaker and others stronger. If the characters have achance to recover or are likely to be fresh, you can increase the danger. If the characters are likely tobe weak or if they must fight a series of encounters, be careful. Even a fight that they’re certain to winat full strength can kill weakened party members or can drain them to the point at which laterencounters become lethal.Peak fights are cool. Players want to take on the big boss monster. Let them, but be careful. If

=== PAGE 7 ===
they’ve had to fight past guards and traps, they’ll be weak by the time they face the boss. If hisdefenses are good, he doesn’t have to be more than a single EL above the party level to bedangerous.Don’t spend time detailing encounters that are not dangerous to the PCs. 4th-level warriors are notdangerous to 12th-level PCs—it’s ok to mention them if they patrol the halls of your fortress, but donot spend a lot of time talking about them.Other Encounter Elements• Tactical positioning of PCs/NPCs• Encounters you can “outsmart” (or possibly bypass)• Encounters that reward good planning• Monsters/encounters you should probably run from• Roleplaying encounters (“Let’s make a deal…”)• Sonic attacks (for bards to counter)• Area attacks (so rogues and monks can use evasion)• Encounters where PCs should have to use abilities of their level (5th-level PCs can probably usemagic to fly, so encounters should assume that at least one PC can fly)• Climbing, falling, and doing stuff in high places• Aerial attacks• Fear (so the paladin can shine)• Undead (for the cleric)• Traps (for the rogue)• Locked doors (for the rogue)• Secret doors (for elves and the rogue)• Normal animals (so the druid or ranger can use her wild empathy and animal-based spells)• Darkness (and other environmental hazards)• Use of cover and concealment• Nonlethal damage• Situations in which skills and feats are more applicable than spells and items• Grappling• Counterspelling• Alliances (PCs with NPCs, PCs with monsters, NPCs with monsters, monsters with monsters, andso on)• NPCs that think like PCs• Multiclass/prestige classes• Monsters with class levels, or advanced monsters• Poison and disease• Gaze attacks• Spell enhancement (pre-cast spells on creatures)Things To AvoidAvoid stereotypical material. We usually reject adventures in which the heroes must:• Rescue someone’s kidnapped daughter.• Solve a murder perpetrated by a doppelganger.• Retrieve an ancient artifact.• Battle a deranged wizard or sorcerer.• Repel a simple humanoid infestation.• Defeat an undead army.• Prevent the “assimilation” of their town.This list is not all-inclusive. There are many more overused plot devices that might seem new andfresh to you, but that we see many times each month. (This includes beginning your adventure in atavern or inn. Don’t do it.) We’re looking for new ideas or fresh approaches to old ideas. We do notaccept adventures that require evil PCs or that ask the PCs to slay good characters or monsters.

=== PAGE 8 ===
Avoid excessively linear plots that force the story toward an inevitable conclusion or “railroad” theactions of the PCs. The adventure should be flexible enough for PCs to make choices and decisionsthat could affect the outcome of the story. Avoid rigid timelines.High-level adventures should keep the balance of the game in perspective and should challenge theplayers without damaging the DM’s world set-up. Adventures that require the characters to kill deitiesor “save the world” are usually not accepted. Avoid adventures that propose dramatic changes to thecampaign world. This includes adventures in which the fate of entire kingdoms hangs in the balance,where the world is devastated by some great cataclysm, or in which deities play active roles in theoutcome of a scenario.Tastelessness should be strictly avoided. Do not submit adventures involving the abuse ordestruction of children or helpless persons, cruel mistreatment of animals, excessive gore or violence,descriptions of Satan or Satanism, or game versions of major real world religious or political figures.Explicit sex, the encouragement of substance abuse, offensive language, and bathroom humor cannotbe used.Remember that the PCs are the protagonists and central figures of the adventure. Do not use NPCsto help the player characters excessively. NPCs who step in and eliminate all opposition to the PCs,lead the PC party, and accomplish the PCs’ goals for them are very dangerous to campaigns. Set upthe adventure to challenge the PCs, and let them make it on their own.Do NOT:• Design magic items or spells that confer dodge bonuses• Use defunct rules from previous editions (including rules that were dropped in the transition from3.0 to 3.5)• Create a character ability that requires an activation check to use (for example, 30% chance tosucceed at something)• Use the word “memorized” when referring to the preparation of spells; “prepared” is the correcttermFeaturesAlthough DUNGEON’s focus remains strongly on adventures, we do publish certain types of featurearticles on occasion. Most of these articles are commissioned by the staff from some of our favoritegame designers, but others come straight from reader queries. We’re currently accepting proposals forthe following two feature types:Backdrop: A new feature for the magazine, Backdrops present a new locale for the DM to introduceinto his campaign. Backdrops can range in scope from a demiplane to a single city location, such as atavern or temple. See “Into the Isle of Dread,” in DUNGEON #114 for one example of such a feature.Backdrops run from 5,000–10,000 words. Be specific in your query about what type of “tool” theBackdrop provides the DM (in the case of the Isle of Dread, it’s a dinosaur-filled jungle island). Alsoinclude some crunchy game elements such as random encounter tables or a new monster or two. Theemphasis should be on “plug-and-play,” with maximum portability between campaign settings.Cities of Adventure: These articles, such as “Hardby: City of the Scorned” (DUNGEON #109) areessentially Backdrops, but the complex nature of a city means there are a lot more factors to consider.In your query, specify what your city “brings to the table” that will make a DM want to add it to hiscampaign. Also note that the finished article should include a brief appendix with up to five completestat blocks for personages important to the city. Cities of Adventure articles range in length from8,000–10,000 words. Before you send in a query for a City of Adventure article, take some time toanswer the questions in Appendix 1 of this document.We are currently only accepting Backdrop and City of Adventure proposals in conjunction withadventure proposals. We are not currently planning on printing any more “stand-alone” backdrops. Ifyour adventure features an especially interesting city or location that you do not have space to detailfully in the adventure itself, a backdrop is one possibility. Due to the increased amount of space that abackdrop article consumes, especially when paired with an adventure, we generally only acceptbackdrop proposals from trusted authors who have a history of working with the magazine.

=== PAGE 9 ===
Campaign WorkbookCampaign Workbook articles are 1,100–1,250-word articles offering short tips and tools to help a DMwith a specific part of his or her campaign. Review the Campaign Workbook sections of DUNGEON #114forward to get a sense of what we’re looking for. These are brief, fun articles meant to be read andenjoyed in a single sitting. You do not need to send a query for Campaign Workbook articles, but youdo need to send a completed Standard Disclosure Form. Here are the various Campaign Workbookarticle sections, your submission must fit into one of the five sections of the Campaign Workbook, andbe clearly labeled as such:The Cast: Tips related to NPCs. Articles might be anything from a list of three informants and somewords on the use of informants in a campaign to five complete stat blocks for archers of variouslevels.The City: Suggestions to enhance city campaigning. Articles might range from a collection ofencounter tables by neighborhood types to a list of a dozen guilds and related adventure hooks.The Dungeon: Short suggestions for dungeon adventuring. Ideas might range from a discussion ofhow to add a three-dimensional element to make dungeon rooms more interesting to a list of 20different pit traps.The Journey: Tips related to wilderness adventuring. Ideas might range from a discussion of how tohandle woodland ambushes to a list of adventure hooks related to wayside shrines.Critical Threat: A brief NPC sketch. Look to issues of the magazine for tips on format. Always be ableto fill in the blank in the following sentence: “In the campaign, this NPC fills the role of the_________.”
APPENDIX 1: CITIES OF ADVENTURETHIRTY QUESTIONS ABOUT YOUR CITYThe key to designing a compelling fantasy city is presenting a strong “sense of place.” Before you startwriting your Cities of Adventure submission, develop a familiarity with your locale by answering thefollowing 30 questions.1. Who rules the city?
2. How does the ruler maintain power?
3. What factions or personalities plot against the ruler? Why do they do so?
4. What four enemy types are common to campaigns set in this city?
5. Which local NPCs are the PCs likely to befriend? Why?
6. What three things about your city make it unique?
7. What monsters lurk in the city?
8. How powerful are the city’s trade guilds?

=== PAGE 10 ===
9. Is there a wizards’ guild?
10. A thieves’ guild?
11. What deities have temples in the city?
12. What is the most popular religion in your city? What about your city’s character makes this religionpopular?
13. From whom are the PCs likely to seek healing?
14. Where will the PCs buy weapons, armor, and equipment?
15. What’s the best inn/tavern in town?
16. Which tavern is most likely to be the site of a bar fight?
17. Where will the PCs buy, sell, and trade magic items?
18. How does social class affect the lives of citizens in your city?
19. What do the social classes think of each other?
20. How corrupt is the city watch? The courts?
21. How dangerous is the city at night?
22. What are the three most beautiful things in the city?
23. How does the city protect itself?
24. What does the city smell like?
25. What do the citizens do to have a good time?
26. What do the citizens fear more than anything else?

=== PAGE 11 ===
27. What would a bard like about the city?
28. What would a barbarian, druid, or ranger like about the city?
29. What would your significant other/spouse like about the city?
30. WHY DO ADVENTURERS COME TO YOUR CITY?
APPENDIX II: ADVENTURE DESIGN GUIDEUse these guidelines and templates when designing D&D adventures. When conceptualizing youradventure, remember that we rarely print unsolicited adventures that run over 15,000 words inlength, and prefer to print adventures that are about 10,000 words long. Here are some things tothink about when you’re getting ready to write up your adventure.• The Adventure Background section should be no more than 5% of the total length of theadventure.• Remember that sidebars take up more space in the magazine than their word counts wouldindicate. Try to keep the number of sidebars in your adventure to a minimum, and to no more than300 words in length.• NPCs and creatures with class levels, advanced Hit Dice, or templates take up more room thangeneric creatures straight out of the Monster Manual. If your adventure has lots of classed NPCs oradvanced monsters, you need to reduce the number of encounters to compensate for the increasedword count.• A good way to estimate an adventure’s length is to count up the number of encounters in theadventure. Multiply this total by 500 (a rough average for a single encounter’s word count). If yourdungeon map has 15 encounter areas labeled on it, you can expect the length of encounters to run atabout 7,500 words. Higher-level encounter areas tend to be wordier, averaging at 750 or even 1,000words.• Don’t forget that stat blocks for monsters and NPCs have a considerable “footprint” when it comesto word count. An average NPC stat block can run well over 300 words on its own.Introduction (Mandatory)The adventure’s introduction should begin with a “teaser,” a short paragraph that summarizes thetheme and plot of your adventure and serves as a hook to catch the reader’s interest. Think of theteaser as your best chance to catch a DM’s eye, and come up with something representative of youradventure that encourages the reader to read the rest of it.The second paragraph should indicate what game system the adventure utilizes (at this time,DUNGEON publishes adventures for DUNGEONS & DRAGONS only, but you should still indicate this), whatlevel of characters the adventure is designed for, and what game world the adventure is set in. If theadventure is tied to a specific location in a world, indicate where the adventure takes place. If youradventure utilizes material from non-core books like Complete Warrior or Fiend Folio, you don’t needto mention this here; simply mention usage as it appears in the text with a short sentence.Adventure Background (Mandatory)This section provides the DM with a clear, brief summary of events leading up to the adventure,including any pertinent historical details and villainous machinations. The main thing to keep an eyeon in this section is length. If you can’t present an adventure background in 500 words, it’s probablytoo complex and should be simplified. As a general guideline, the adventure background should be nomore than 5% of the adventure’s total length.

=== PAGE 12 ===
Adventure Synopsis (Mandatory)This section provides a clear, concise summary of the adventure for the DM. Outline surprises and plottwists here, not during the course of the adventure. Introduce key NPCs here, and indicate both whatthe central conflict of the adventure is and detail the most likely way the PCs can resolve this conflict.Adventure Hooks (Mandatory)This section helps DMs lead the PCs into the adventure. Although it’s fine to structure the adventureso that one of these hooks is the preferred way to start the adventure, all adventures need at leastthree different hooks. At least one hook should be simple and straightforward (“Deliver this messageto the high-priest of St. Cuthbert in Homlett”). Others can exploit alignment, class, race, or society.Hooks should not presume anything about the PCs’ actions, nor should they follow the standardadventure hook that presumes they are mercenaries available to the highest bidder. The hooks don’tnecessarily need to be associated with the adventure’s plot. Adventures for 1st-level characters shouldinclude some hooks that assume that the PCs don’t yet know each other.One adventure hook in particular we’ve seen quite enough of are those that have a relation or friendof a PC call for help. You should also avoid hooks that rely on the coincidence of the PCs’ presence inthe area for the adventure to start. The party should always have a reason to go on an adventure.The Adventure’s Encounters (Mandatory)At the start of the adventure’s encounters, you can include additional sections that detail rumors,background information the players can uncover in research or by using bardic knowledge checks,town statistics, the time of year the adventure takes place in, and other relevant bits. If the adventureis for higher-level characters, include information that can be learned by divination spells asappropriate.The adventure itself consists of a series of planned encounters keyed to a map, timeline, orflowchart. Each encounter can include any or all of the following sections: Read-aloud Text, GeneralDescription, Creature(s), Tactics, Trap(s), Treasure, Development, and Ad-Hoc XP Adjustment. Do notinclude sections that are unnecessary for a given encounter. For instance, an area devoid of trapsdoes not require a Trap section. If you find that you don’t have anything to say for any of thesecategories, the area is not an encounter and should not be assigned an encounter number. The editorsgreatly dislike printing the words “This room is empty” in DUNGEON.Each encounter should be rated with an Encounter Level (EL #) in the main encounter header,allowing the DM to quickly assess the possible threat to his or her PCs. The EL is the properlycalculated CRs of all creatures and traps in a particular encounter (see page 49 of the DUNGEONMASTER’s Guide). A sample encounter header would appear thus: 23. Vampire’s Den (EL 13).Certain encounters are structured so that the threats are not felt simultaneously. It’s one thing if thepit trap is in the center of the room and the hill giant keeps bull rushing its enemies into thepit—calculating the total EL by using the CRs of the monster and trap is expected. But if the trap is ona chest hidden in a closet and never makes an appearance during the fight, reasonably that trap’s CRshould not be figured into the EL (unless its CR is higher than the monster’s CR, in which case thereverse holds true). Likewise, if an encounter is designed such that NPCs initially encountered arefriendly, but on a repeat visit are revealed as a threat, the EL in the encounter’s main header shouldnot give the EL based on the second visit, because it is not true for the first visit to the encounter.Consult Appendix IV for a sample encounter written in the DUNGEON style.Dungeon Features (Mandatory)Some dungeons (or wilderness regions, demiplanes, and so on) have features that are commonthroughout. How high are the ceilings? How are rooms illuminated? What types of doors areprevalent? (This includes such information as thickness of door and the material doors are composedof, which has rule-specific implications for hit points and hardness.) What about wandering monsters?Rather than repeat this information throughout the adventure, keep the information in this section.Read-Aloud Text (Mandatory)This section generally precedes the other entries of an encounter, although part of the general

=== PAGE 13 ===
description might precede it if important to the encounter. The read-aloud text is meant to be read orparaphrased aloud to the players at an opportune time. It also provides the DM with a description ofthe room and its contents. Read-aloud text provides a bare-bones description of the encounter area; itdoes not make any reference to the viewer. Avoid phrases such as “you see,” “as you enter the room,”or other phrases that assume any action whatsoever on behalf of the players. You should also avoidincluding descriptions of any creatures in the room, since their activities and positions in the roomoften depend on multiple factors (such as if they hear the PCs coming, if it’s night or day, and so on).Read-aloud text for an encounter should only rarely run more than a few sentences. Long sectionsof read-aloud text are better served as player handouts.General Description (Optional)This section provides the DM with information on interesting features, creatures, traps, and otherspecifics of the encounter that play off the read-aloud text. Unusual magical or environmental effects,the room’s purpose (if not obvious from the read-aloud text), explanatory text about unusual featuresdescribed in the read-aloud text, and statistics for objects found in the room that are likely to bebroken go into this section.Creature(s) (Optional)Creature the PCs encounter are described here. Provide a physical description of the monster or NPC,as well as general motivations and background info. If the creature has information to impart to thecharacters, include that information here, along with the creature’s starting attitude and what happensif the PCs use Diplomacy, Intimidate, or magic to alter its attitude.Include the creature’s abbreviated statistics if it appears in the adventure almost exactly as it doesin the Monster Manual. In this case, include only the number of creatures appearing, hit points, andspecial equipment, as well as a Monster Manual page number for easy reference. Full statistics forcreatures should only be included if the creature is significantly different from the way it appears inthe Monster Manual (for example, it has class levels or advanced Hit Dice), or if the creature is takenfrom a non-core book like Monster Manual II, Fiend Folio, or the Draconomicon. See Appendix III forthe proper way to format creature statistics.Tactics (Optional)Use this section to describe specific and unique tactics the creatures take in combat. Evenunintelligent monsters can take advantage of terrain in combat. If an NPC uses magic to enhance hisstatistics, list what spells and items he uses to prepare for combat, and show how those effects modifyhis statistics. Any long duration or permanent magical effects should be noted and incorporated intothe stat block in the “Creatures” section above.Trap(s) (Optional)This section describes any traps that the PCs might trigger in the encounter. The section ends with atrap stat block (see Appendix III for proper formatting notes) for all traps found in the encounter. Ifthe creatures use the traps in some way against intruders, you should detail those actions in theTactics section but refer to those tactics here.Treasure (Optional)Any treasure the PCs can find during the encounter is described here, above and beyond anypossessions owned by the creatures in the room (a creature’s possessions are detailed in thatcreature’s stat block).Remember, the total treasure available for the PCs to find in an adventure should be reflected in theadventure’s level. Make sure to study Table 3—3 on page 51 and the sidebar on page 54 of theDUNGEON MASTER’s Guide to determine how much treasure to include in the adventure, and rememberthat NPC gear counts as well as treasure detailed in this section when determining totals. You don’tneed to adhere exactly to the totals given in the DUNGEON MASTER’s Guide, but you should stay as closeas you can.Some adventures feature a large number of magic items that normally cannot be used by PCs.

=== PAGE 14 ===
Other adventures feature creatures with Improved Sunder or other attacks that can ruin magic items.In adventures like these, it’s okay to give out higher amounts of treasure, since the PCs likely losemore of their gear than normal during the course of the adventure. Also, adventures with lots of NPCstend to have a lot of treasure in the form of gear and equipment, and as a result should have aproportionally lower amount of treasure in these sections.Avoid petty treasures, such as pouches of a dozen silver coins in a high-level adventure. Keepingtrack of miniscule amounts of treasure isn’t worth the time and effort, and only slows down the game.Give individual creatures worthwhile treasures or give them nothing.Remember, if you want to give a specific encounter a larger amount of treasure, you cancompensate by not giving out treasure in other encounters.Development (Optional)Reactions to the sound of combat from other creatures nearby should be noted in this section, as wellas conditions that might lead the creatures to surrender or flee the encounter.Sometimes the PCs’ actions can have unusual ramifications or affect later encounters. The PCs mayfind things have changed the second or third time they pass through the purple worm’s lair after theykill the monster the first time through, for example. This section details how the encounter “evolves”once the PCs finish it, and how this evolution can affect other encounters in the adventure.Ad-Hoc XP Adjustment (Optional)As per page 39 of the DUNGEON MASTER’s Guide, certain encounters can place the creatures at a tacticaladvantage or disadvantage. In these cases, you may judge that the PCs deserve extra (or less) XP forovercoming a situation in which they have a disadvantage (or advantage) over the creature. Use thissubhead in your encounter to note the XP adjustment for the encounter.Likewise, not every encounter in your adventure should involve killing monsters or overcomingtraps. Some encounters may be puzzles, mysteries, diplomatic situations, or role-playingopportunities. A distraught merchant might have his business revitalized by a group of PCs usingPerform to attract more customers. A green and blue crystal door might open only after a spellcasterhas channeled 20 levels of spells into its glowing facets. A huge library might require severalKnowledge checks and Search checks to fully explore and uncover hidden clues. The PCs should gainexperience for completing any encounter that advances the plot of the adventure, and you can usethis section to indicate what sort of XP award the DM should give the PCs for its successful completion.Rather than give set amounts of experience for these “story” awards, assign them a specific CR value.Concluding the Adventure (Mandatory)Describe the possible consequences resulting from the adventure’s success or failure, includingrewards, punishments, and spin-off adventures for later gaming sessions. Most groups roleplay theconsequences of a successful (or failed) adventure, and they should be provided with tools in thissection to do just that. Make the players feel as if they’ve accomplished something (or that theirfailures have had repercussions beyond their own damaged reputations).Scaling the Adventure (Mandatory)All adventures in DUNGEON include a “Scaling the Adventure” sidebar. This sidebar contains suggestionsthe DM can use to modify the adventure’s antagonists and encounters for PCs of higher or lower level.You should provide tips for a spread of two character levels in either direction from the level for whichthe adventure is designed, except in cases where this would move the adventure out of its designatedchallenge level (above 5th level for low-level adventures, below 6th level or above 12th level for mid-level adventures, and below 13th level for high-level adventures). If your adventure is for 18th levelor higher, you should include some notes on how to scale the adventure into the epic realm (level 21and above).This sidebar should be no longer than 300 words.Adapting the Adventure (Optional)If the adventure takes place in a specific game world that is removed from the core D&D experience

=== PAGE 15 ===
(such as EBERRON or Oriental Adventures), or if the adventure makes extensive use of non-corematerials (such as the Expanded Psionics Handbook or the Planar Handbook), include an “Adapting theAdventure” sidebar. This sidebar should tell the DM how to adapt the adventure for use in a D&Dgame that uses only the three core rulebooks, and should include substitutions for world-specificmonsters, magic items, deities, locations, and other non-core material.This sidebar should not be more than 300 words. If you find that you can’t provide substitutions foreverything in 300 words, focus on providing adaptation advice for the most unusual aspects of theadventure.Author Bio (Mandatory)The final paragraph of your adventure should be a short author bio—something to let the readers ofthe magazine know who you are. This shouldn’t be more than one or two sentences, and yes, it countsagainst the adventure’s total word count!Appendix (Optional)If you introduce only one or two simple magic items, a couple of new feats, or a single new spell, youcan simply detail these new rules in a sidebar. If, on the other hand, your new rules are extensive(several new spells, new magic items, a new monster, a new prestige class, and so on), put them inan appendix at the end of the adventure. As a general rule, if your new rules bit is more than 300words long, it should be in an appendix.Showing Your WorkWhen you include stat blocks for NPCs and advanced monsters, you should indicate how youcalculated skill point totals, and how a creature’s Armor Class, saving throws, and attack rolls arecalculated. Showing your work enables the editors to more thoroughly evaluate your adventure in atimely fashion. It’s generally best to duplicate your stat blocks in a separate document from youradventure, and change the color of the text of your work so it’s obvious what’s stat block and what’sbehind-the-scenes-math. Showing your work in the text of an adventure only makes your word countinaccurate and makes the editors sad because they have to manually delete the math.You should also show your work for any DC whose total contains nonobvious adjustments, and whenyou price out market values for new magic items.There might be other occasions that also require you to show your work, though that is up to yourdiscretion (only you know what sort of calculation went into a particular creation—if you’d ratherdemonstrate to the editors that your choice wasn’t based on simple fancy, then showing your work isa good idea).APPENDIX III: STAT BLOCKSIn DUNGEON, the majority of the stat blocks are creature stat blocks, although you may also need toinclude stat blocks for cities, objects, and traps. All of these stat blocks follow specific formats; makesure to follow these formats exactly in your adventure.Creature StatisticsAs the issues go by, we’re constantly adjusting and improving the way we present stat blocks; we’ll beupdating this section of the writers’ guidelines as we update our stat block styles. Specific things toremember when building any type of creature stat block follow.Simple Stat BlocksCreatures that are standard versions of monsters of the same name in the Monster Manual do notrequire full-length statistics. When such creatures are described under Creatures, the entry shouldcontain an abbreviated stat block indicating creature name, number appearing, hit points, and aMonster Manual reference page. The abbreviated statistics can include a few minor changes (such asan orc that wears plate armor and thus has a lower speed and a higher AC), but if the creature ischanged significantly, it’s a Monster Manual variant.Gorgon (3): hp 85; Monster Manual 137.

=== PAGE 16 ===
Complex Stat BlocksCreatures that have advanced Hit Dice, class levels, or appear in books other than the Monster Manualshould always be represented by complex stat blocks. Note that all lists should be given inalphabetical order unless noted otherwise. Here is a blank stat block template:CHARACTER NAME (NUMBER APPEARING)CR XXCreature race, templates, and class levelsCreature alignment, size and type (subtype)Creature reference (eg Lords of Madness 145)Init XXX; Senses XXX; Listen XXX, Spot XXXAura XXXLanguages XXXAC XXX, touch XXX, flat-footed XXX; Conditional AC modifiershp XXX (XXX HD); hp related special abilites; DR XXX/XXXImmune XXXResist XXX SR XXXFort XXX, Ref XXX, Will XXX (Conditional save modifiers)Weaknesses XXXSpd XXX ft., burrow XXX ft., climb XXX ft., fly XXX ft (maneuverability), swim XXX ft.Melee weapon +attack bonus (damage/critical hit information plus conditional damage) and/orweapon +attack bonus (damage/critical hit information plus conditional damage)Ranged weapon +attack bonus (damage/critical hit information plus conditional damage) and/orweapon +attack bonus (damage/critical hit information plus conditional damage)Space XXX; Reach XXXBase Atk XXX; Grp XXXAtk Options XXXSpecial actions XXXCombat Gear XXXSpells Prepared/Known (CL XXX, melee touch XXX, ranged touch XXX):Spell level in descending order (number of spells/day)—spell name (DC XXX)Domains/Prohibited schoolsSpell-Like Abilities (CL 3rd, melee touch XXX, ranged touch XXX):Number of times per day (fewest to most)—ability name (DC XXX)*Use this to indicate any spells or abilities (such as mage armor or Power Attack) that have already been incorporated into its stat blockAbilities Str XXX, Dex XXX, Con XXX, Int XXX, Wis XXX, Cha XXXSQ XXXFeats XXXSkills XXXPossessions combat gear, XXXSpellbook  XXX*Use this to indicate any inherent bonuses to the creature’s ability scoresSpecial Ability Name (Sp/Su/Ex) Special ability description.The first section of a creature’s stat block includes all the information necessary to handle the“before combat” portion of the encounter.Character Name (number appearing) and CR: The first line should include the name of thecreature (if it is a unique creature) or a very brief title for the creature (such as “Kobold Guard”)followed by the number appearing in parentheses. Include the CR of the individual creature after asingle tab.Creature race, templates, and class levels: The second line should include the race of thecreature, any templates that have been applied, and any class levels (starting with the first classtaken). If you are using an advanced version of the creature, or you have given a creature the eliteability array when it would not otherwise receive it, you should state that on this line as well. If thecreature has no class levels, and its race is given in the creature name, than this line can be omitted

=== PAGE 17 ===
(this frequently happens when you are reprinting the stat block of a non-core monster).Creature alignment, size, and type (subtype): Give the two-letter abbreviation corresponding tothe creature’s alignment, followed by the creature’s size, followed by the creature’s type. Include anysubtypes in parentheses. Note that the size of the creature is capitalized, but the type and subtypesare not. A humanoid creature’s subtype need only be given if its subtype is different from the name ofits race.Creature reference: Put any necessary reference material on the fourth line. You need to includereference information for any race or class that does not appear in the Player’s Handbook, as well asany monster. References should include the name of the book and the page number.Init: The creature’s total modifier on initiative checks.Senses: A list of all the creature’s sensory abilities (e.g., darkvision, low-light vision), followed byits Listen and Spot check modifiers after a semicolon.Aura: A list of all of the abilities the creature possesses that affect all nearby enemies and/or allies,including the radius of the effects and their save DCs, if applicable.Languages: List all the languages known to the creature. This should include racial languages,bonus languages from high Intelligence (but not from Intelligence points gained after 1st level), andlanguages purchased with skill points. Include special communication abilities like telepathy afterlanguages, separated by a semicolon.The second section of the creature’s stat block includes all of its combat statistics that are relevantwhen it is not the creature’s turn.AC: Indicate a creature’s standard Armor Class, touch Armor Class, and flat-footed Armor Class. Ifthe creature has any conditional effects that modify its armor class (such as the Dodge and Mobilityfeats, or the uncanny dodge ability) list those after a semicolon. Include a breakdown of the creature’sAC bonus only if the statblock is for a new monster.hp: Give the monster’s maximum hit point total, followed by the number of Hit Dice it has and itscurrent hp total (if it’s different from the maximum) in parenthesis. In general, creatures should haveaverage hit points. Creatures with elite stats or class levels gain maximum hit points on their first HitDie. Following a semicolon, list any abilities (such as fast healing or regeneration) that automaticallyaffect a creature’s hp total each round.DR: Give the creature’s damage reduction. If the creature has damage reduction from more thanone source (such as a lycanthrope with the stoneskin spell) list them separately.Immune: List the monster’s immunities. If a monster gains several immunities from its type, onlynote that (e.g., “undead traits”), don’t list all of those immunities.Resist: List the creature’s energy resistances, including those from resist energy or similar spellsthat you are incorporating into the creature’s stat block.SR: Give the creature’s spell resistance.Fort, Ref, Will: Give the creature’s total saving throw bonuses (Fortitude, Reflex, and Will). If thecreature has any conditional effects that affect saving throws, list them in parentheses following thisentry.Weaknesses: If the creature has any special weaknesses note them here.The third section of the stat block gives all of the creature’s combat statistics that are relevant whenit is the creature’s turn.Spd: Give the creature’s current land speed (including any modifiers for spells or armor), followedby speeds for other modes of movement. If the creature has a fly speed, list its maneuverability inparenthesis following the speed.Melee: List all of the creature’s likely melee attack routines, from most likely to least likely. Eachline of this entry should contain all the relevant information for a single weapon, followed by an “and”(if the next line is part of the same attack routine) or an “or” (if the next line is part of a differentattack routine). You should always give the statistics for a creature’s most likely single attack first,although if its most likely single attack is part of its most likely attack routine, you may simply list thatwhole routine.Each line of this entry should begin with the name of the weapon, followed by the creature’s attackbonus with that weapon. If the creature gets multiple attacks with a single weapon, list the attackbonuses, from largest to smallest, separated by slashes. After the attack bonus, list the weapon’s

=== PAGE 18 ===
damage, followed by the weapon’s critical hit statistics (threat range and damage multiplier)separated by slashes, if they are different from the minimum values (which are 20 and x2). If aweapon deals an additional form of damage or has another effect, include the additional damage byappending the word “plus” after the critical hit statistics and then list the additional damage or effect.The damage, critical hit statistics, and additional effects should be given in parentheses for eachweapon.If the creature always uses Power Attack or Combat Expertise to modify its attack rolls, place anasterisk after the word “Melee,” incorporate the modifiers into the creature’s stat block, and make anote at the end of this section.Ranged: This entry is formatted in the same way as the Melee entry, but is for ranged attacks.Space: The length of one side of a creature’s square (e.g., 5 feet for Medium creatures, or 10 feetfor Large creatures).Reach: The creature’s natural reach. If one of a creature’s natural weapons has a different naturalreach than the rest of them, list that weapon’s reach followed by its name in parentheses. You canomit both the Space and Reach entries if the creature’s Space and Reach are both 5 feet.Base Atk: The creature’s base attack bonus.Grp: The creature’s total grapple bonus.Atk Options: List any of the creature’s feats that are relevant in combat that are not alreadyincorporated into its stat block elsewhere on this line, followed by any of the creature’s special abilitiesthat modify its attacks that have not already been incorporated into the stat block elsewhere. If theattack option does damage, is useable a certain number of times per day, or has a save DC, list thatfollowing the ability name. Some examples of attack options are: Combat Expertise, Improved Trip,Power Attack, Whirlwind Attack, attach, constrict 1d6+4, improved grab (if the monster has improvedgrab with some of its natural attacks but not others, list all of the attacks that it can use improvedgrab with in parentheses following this ability), pounce, rage 2/day, rend 2d6+12, smite 1/day (+4attack, +2 damage), sneak attack +2d6.Special Actions: List any of a creature’s special abilities that it can use in place of making an attackon its turn. This should include any combat special ability that requires a standard action to use. Notethat feats should never be placed in this line, but in the Atk Options line above. If the special actiondoes damage, is useable a certain number of times per day, or has a save DC, list that following theability name.  Some of the more complicated special actions have a specific format—use the followingexamples as a template: bardic music 7/day (countersong, fascinate, inspire courage +1, inspirecompetence, suggestion [DC 16]), breath weapon (100-ft. line or 50-ft. cone, 16d8 electricity, ReflexDC 29 half), crush (2d8+15, Reflex DC 29 negates), petrifying gaze (DC 23), poison (DC 13, 1d6Str/1d6 Con), swallow whole, tail sweep (2d8+18 plus trip, Reflex DC 30 half), trample 3d8+24 (DC34), turn undead 5/day (+6, 2d6+14, 12th).Combat Gear: This section should include any consumable items the creature might wish to use incombat, as well as any short-duration magic items that require a standard action (or longer) toactivate. Items that grant persistent or long-duration magical effects should not be listed here, butincorporated into the creature’s stat block and listed on the possessions line below. If you include anitem with charges, an item that duplicates a spell with an unusual caster level, or a quantity of similaritems, indicate the relevant information in parentheses following the item name.Spells Prepared/Known: This line should include the spellcasting class for which you are listingspells, the caster level that these spells are cast at, the ranged and melee touch attack bonuses of thecreature (if it can cast any spells that call for ranged or melee touch attacks), and the creature’sbonus on caster level checks to overcome spell resistance (if the bonus is different from the creature’scaster level). On the following lines, you should list the spells the creature can cast, starting with thehighest-level spells and proceeding to the lowest. Include all the spells of each level on a single line.Start each line with the level of the spells you are listing, followed by the names of the spells and thesave DCs for each spell in parentheses after the spell names (if the spell calls for a saving throw).If you are listing spells for a class that casts spells without preparation (such as a sorcerer), includethe number of spells of each spell level the creature can cast per day in parentheses immediately afteryou give the spell level, and before you start listing spells. Don’t use a times sign for multiple spells,just add the number of duplicate spells prepared in parentheses after the spell. Mark domain spells

=== PAGE 19 ===
with a superscript D. Mark any spells that the creature has already cast with an asterisk, reduce thenumber of spells per day on that line of the stat block (if necessary), and incorporate the effects ofthat spell into the creature’s stat block (if appropriate).Domains/Prohibited Schools: If the creature is a cleric or a specialist wizard, note its domains orits prohibited schools of magic here.Spell-Like Abilities: This entry is similar to the Spells Prepared/Known entry above, except thespell-like abilities should be listed in order of the number of times per day they can be used, frommost frequent to least frequent, with all the spell-like abilities a creature can use with the samefrequency listed on the same line.The third section of a creature’s stat block includes supplemental information, and statistics for itsnon-combat abilities.Abilities: The creature’s ability scores, modified for gear worn and any spells you are incorporatinginto its stat block. If the creature has any inherent bonuses to its ability scores, you should include anasterisk after the ability score and make a note at the end of the section.SQ: List any of the creature’s non-combat special abilities that have not already been givenelsewhere in the stat block here. Some examples are: alternate form, spontaneous casting (curespells), summon familiar (rat named Fluffy), trapfinding, trap sense +2, trackless step, woodlandstride, wild empathy +5.Feats: List all of the creature’s feats here, even the ones that have already been listed elsewhere inthe stat block.Skills: List of all the creature’s skills followed by their modifiers. You may omit skills that have amodifier equal to the creature’s appropriate ability bonus. If a skill has a conditional modifier, list thenew bonus followed by the condition in parentheses after the skill bonus (e.g. Survival +8 (+10 onother planes). Don’t forget to include bonuses from ability scores, race, magic items, familiars, classabilities, armor check penalties, skill synergy bonuses, and other bonuses. Remember that creaturesthat have land speeds of less than or greater than 30 ft. have additional modifiers to Jump checks,and creatures that are smaller than or larger than Medium have additional modifiers to Hide checks.Remember also that humans gain additional skill points. Finally, if a creature increased its Intelligencescore as it gained additional Hit Dice or class levels, it may gain more skill points at those higherlevels. Don’t just calculate that wizard’s skill points based on his final Intelligence at 20th level!Possessions: If the creature had any combat gear, start this entry with the words “combat gear,”followed by a list of any items held, carried, or worn by the creature, in the following order: armor,melee weapons, ranged weapons with ammunition, permanent stat-boosting items, other permanentitems, nonmagical items of value, purely flavor stuff like identification papers, coins. Expensive itemshave their features and value listed in parentheses. Don’t forget to include expensive spell focuses andmaterial components.Spellbook: If the creature keeps spells in a spellbook, list them here. You do not need to repeatspells the creature has already prepared. For 0-level spells, it’s okay to say “all” instead of mentioningevery spell by name. For a specialist wizard, prohibited schools should be mentioned here as well.Spells mentioned in this paragraph do not require save DCs.The final section of the stat block contains additional information about the creature’s specialabilities. If the creature does not have any special abilities that temporarily modify its other statisticsor appear in sources other than the Monster Manual, the Player’s Handbook, and the DUNGEON MASTER’sGuide, than you may omit this section altogether.If the creature possesses special abilities that require additional explanation (including any abiltythat is not presented in the books above), give a detailed description of each ability in a newparagraph. If the creature possesses any special abilities that temporarily modify its statistics that ituses in combat (such as alternate form or rage), you need to list the ability here, followed by thecreature’s updated statistics when it is using the ability. Only list those statistics that are altered bythe ability.Minions: If a creature has an animal companion or special mount, include its stat block at the endof the creature’s stat block. You can use simple stat blocks if the creature’s Hit Dice are identical tothe standard creature detailed in the Monster Manual. You generally don’t need to include stat blocksfor familiars, although you do for improved familiars.

=== PAGE 20 ===
Sample Complex Stat BlocksBELIGCR 2Male goblin fighter 2NE Small humanoid (goblinoid)Monster Manual 133Init +2; Senses darkvision 60 ft.; Spot –1, Listen –1Languages Common, Giant, GoblinAC 19, touch 13, flat-footed 17; Dodgehp 17 (2 HD)Fort +4 Ref +2 Will –1Spd 30 ft.Melee flail +4 (1d6+1)Ranged throwing axe +5 (1d4+1/x2)Base Atk +2; Grp –1Atk Options Combat ExpertiseAbilities Str 12, Dex 15, Con 12, Int 13, Wis 8, Cha 12SQ goblin traitsFeats Combat Expertise, Dodge, Skill Focus (Intimidate)Skills Handle Animal +4, Intimidate +9, Ride +10, Swim -4Possessions scale mail, heavy wooden shield, light flail, 2 throwing axes, bullhorn, large rock crystal ( 70 gp), 2 pearls (100 gp each), 43gpSEA TIGERS (2)CR 6N Huge animalMonster Manual III 147Init +1; Senses blindsight 120 ft.; Listen +2, Spot +2AC 19, touch 9, flat-footed 18hp 75 (10 HD)Fort +10, Ref +8, Will +5Spd 20 ft., 50 ft.Melee bite +9 (2d8+4) and2 claws +4 (1d6+2)Base Atk +7; Grp +19Atk Options Improved Bull Rush, Power AttackAbilities Str 19, Dex 13, Con 17, Int 2, Wis 14, Cha 8SQ hold breathFeats Endurance, Improved Bull Rush, Power Attack, RunSkills Hide +6, Swim +12Blindsight (Ex) A sea tiger emits high-frequency sounds inaudible to other creatures that allow it to locate objects and creatures within120 feet. A silence spell negates this ability.Hold Breath (Ex) A sea tiger can hold its breath for a number of rounds equal to 6 times its Constitution score before it risks drowning.DUALLEN TEIRGAR, DWARF FORMCR 18Male dwarf blacktooth dire werewolverine wizard 13Monster Manual 170CE Medium humanoid (dwarf, shapechanger)Init +0; Senses darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision, scent; Spot +10, Listen +10Languages Common, Draconic, Dwarven, Elven, GiantAC 25, touch 12, flat-footed 25hp 77 (92 with false life) (18 HD); DR 10/admantine; fast healing 5SR 28Resist cold 30

=== PAGE 21 ===
Fort +16 (+18 vs. poison), Ref +11, Will +17 (+2 vs. spells)Spd 30 ft.Melee +1 quarterstaff +10/+5 (1d6+1)Ranged masterwork light crossbow +10 (1d8/19–20)Base Atk +9; Grp +9Combat Gear potion of cure serious woundsWizard Spells Prepared (CL 13th, +17 to overcome SR, +9 ranged touch)7th—forcecage6th—globe of invulnerability, quickened mirror image5th—baleful polymorph (DC 21), cone of cold (DC 21), quickened ray of enfeeblement, teleport*4th—Evard’s black tentacles, confusion (DC 20), ice storm, shout (DC 18), stoneskin*3rd—dispel magic, haste, lightning bolt (DC 19) (2), slow (DC 19)2nd—false life*, glitterdust (DC 18), Melf’s acid arrow, resist energy*, see invisibility*, web (DC 18)1st—feather fall, mage armor (3)*, magic missile, shield0—daze (DC 16), detect magic (2), ghost sound* already castAbilities Str 11, Dex 10, Con 13, Int 22, Wis 10, Cha 9SQ alternate form, dwarf traits, lycanthropic empathy, summon familiar (rat)Feats Alertness, Brew Potion, Craft Wondrous Item, Great Fortitude, Greater Spell Penetration, Improved Natural Attack (bite),Improved Natural Attack (claw), Iron Will, Lightning Reflexes, Quicken Spell, Scribe Scroll, Spell Penetration, Toughness, TrackSkills Climb +6, Concentration +22, Craft (alchemy) +17, Gather Information +1, Hide +2, Knowledge (arcana) +18, Knowledge(dungeoneering) +18, Knowledge (history) +16, Knowledge (local) +12, Listen +10, Move Silently +2, Spellcraft +22, Spot +10Possessions combat gear, +1 quarterstaff, ring of protection +2, amulet of natural armor +1, cloak of resistance +3, headband of intellect +2,masterwork light crossbow with 10 bolts, 1,500 gp worth of ruby dust, 500 gp worth of diamond dustSpellbook as above plus 0—all; 1st—burning hands, charm person, color spray, sleep; 2nd—command undead, knock, scorching ray;3rd—blink, fly, nondetection; 4th—dimension door, dimensional anchor, polymorph; 5th—dismissal, summon monster V; 6th—analyzedweomer, create undead; 7th—limited wishAlternate Form (Su) In hybrid form, Duallen cannot cast any spells with verbal components, and his statistics change as follows:CE Large humanoid (shapechanger)Init +3AC 31, touch 14, flat-footed 28hp 149 (164 with false life); DR 10/silver and magic, 10/adamantine; fast healing 5Fort +20 (+22 vs poison) Ref +14Melee 2 claws +14 (1d8+6) andbite +9 (2d6+3 plus curse of lycanthropy)Space 10 ft.; Reach 10 ft.Grp +19Abilities Str 23, Dex 16, Con 21Skills Climb +20, Concentration +26, Move Silently +5Alternate Form (Su) In dire wolverine form, the Duallen cannot cast spells with verbal, somatic or material components, and hisstatistics change as follows:CE Large humanoid (shapechanger)Init +3AC 28, touch 12, flat-footed 27hp 149 (164 with false life); DR DR 10/silver and magic, 10/adamantine; fast healing 5Fort +17 (+19 vs poison) Ref +11 Will +14Spd 40 ft., climb 10 ft.Melee 2 claws +14 (1d8+6) andbite +9 (2d6+3 plus curse of lycanthropy)Space 10 ft.; Reach 5 ft.Grp +19Atk Options rageAbilities Str 23, Dex 16, Con 21

=== PAGE 22 ===
Skills Climb +20, Concentration +26, Move Silently +5Possessions Duallen cannot use or carry any of his possessions while in dire wolverine form.Rage (Ex) If Duallen takes damage while in dire wolverine form he flies into a berserk rage on his next turn, clawing and biting madlyuntil either he or his opponent is dead. Duallen cannot end his rage voluntarily. While Duallen is raging, his statistics changefurther as follows:AC 26, touch 10, flat-footed 25hp 185 (200 with false life); DR 10/silver and magic, 10/adamantine; fast healing 5Fort +19 (+21 vs poison)Melee 2 claws +16 (1d8+8) andbite +11 (2d6+4 plus curse of lycanthropy)Grp +21Abilities Str 27, Dex 16, Con 25Skills Climb +22, Move Silently +5ARTOR MORLINCR 21Male vampire human fighter 13/blackguard 3/master vampire 3LE Medium undead (augmented humanoid)Monster Manual 250, Libris Mortis 55Init +8; Senses darkvision 60 ft.; Spot +14, Listen +14Aura despair (10 ft., -2 on saves)Languages Alzhedo, Common, ChondathanAC 29, touch 14, flat-footed 25; Dodge, Mobilityhp 129 (19 HD); fast healing 5; DR 10/silver and magicResist cold 10, electricity 10Immune undead typeFort +18, Ref +16, Will +13Weaknesses vampire weaknessSpd 30 ft., climb 20 ft.Melee +2 vampiric two-bladed sword +25/+20/+15/+10 (1d8+11/19-20 plus poison plus vampiric) and+2 vampiric two-bladed sword +25/+20/+15 (1d8+7/19-20 plus poison plus vampiric) or+2 vampiric two-bladed sword +27/+22/+17/+12 (1d8+14/19-20 plus poison plus vampiric) orslam +24 (1d6+7 plus energy drain)Base Atk +17; Grp +24Atk Options Combat Expertise, Improved Sunder, Power Attack, Spring Attack, Whirlwind AttackSpecial Actions blood drain, children of the night, create spawn, dominate (DC 27), rebuke undead 7/day (+8, 2d6+7, 1st)Blackguard Spells Prepared (CL 5th):2nd—eagle’s splendor1st—corrupt weapon (2)Spell-Like Abilities (CL 3rd):At will—detect goodAbilities Str 24, Dex 18, Con —, Int 14, Wis 12, Cha 22SQ alternate form, enhanced spawn, gaseous form, master’s chosen, spider climb, turn resistance +4 (+1 for each spawn within 30 ft.)Feats AlertnessB, Ability Focus (dominate), Combat Expertise, Combat ReflexesB, DodgeB, Endure Sunlight, Exotic Weapon Proficiency(two-bladed sword)B, Greater Two-Weapon Fighting, Improved Domination, Improved InitiativeB, Improved SunderB, ImprovedTwo-Weapon Fighting, Lightning ReflexesB, MobilityB, Power AttackB, Spring Attack, Two-Weapon FightingB, Weapon Focus (two-bladed sword)B, Weapon Specialization (two-bladed sword)B, Whirlwind AttackSkills Bluff +19, Climb +15, Concentration +9, Diplomacy +28, Disguise +10 (+12 acting), Gather Information +12, Hide +24, Intimidate+26, Jump +15, Knowledge (history) +6, Knowledge (local) +7, Knowledge (religion) +4, Listen +14, Move Silently +17, Search +10,Sense Motive +14, Spot +14, Tumble +6Possessions shoonfangs (+2 vampiric/+2 vampiric two-bladed sword), Artor’s armament (+5 mithral chain shirt), belt of giant Strength +4,bowl of blood (not carried, see below), cloak of etherealness, 10 additional doses of purple worm poison (Fort DC 24, 1d6 Str/2d6 Str), alarge assortment of keys

=== PAGE 23 ===
Enhanced Spawn (Su): Any vampire or vampire spawn created by Artor gains a +2 enhancement bonus to its Str and Dex scores. IfArtor is destroyed or releases the spawn from service, the spawn loses this bonus.Master’s Chosen (Su): Artor can designate a single vampire or vampire spawn that he created with his create spawn ability as hischosen. Doing this requires a 1-hour ritual during which the chosen must consume a small portion of the master’s flesh. Thechosen gains a +6 enhancement bonus to its Strength and Dexterity scores. Artor can remove this designation as a standard action.If Artor is destroyed or releases the chosen from service, the chosen loses this bonus.City Stat BlocksMuch like creatures, settlements that appear in adventures have a wide range of information that theDM must know to run encounters there. Pages 137–143 of the DUNGEON MASTER’s Guide cover thedetails of creating city stat blocks. The format for writing stat blocks for settlements is as follows.Name (size): [Power center type: Conventional, Nonstandard, or Magical]; AL [alignmentabbreviation]; # gp limit; Assets # gp; Population #; [Racial mix; Isolated, Mixed, or Integrated](race #, race #, race #, etc.).] NOTE: The number that follows each race name is a percentage of theentire population, not the exact number of individuals of that race.Authority Figure(s): [Name, alignment gender race class & level.]Important Characters: [Name, alignment gender race class & level (title or position); Name,alignment gender race class & level (title or position); Name, alignment gender race class & level (titleor position); etc.]Notes: Place any special notes about the community here.Sample City Stat BlockMarsember (metropolis): Conventional; AL LN; 100,000 gp limit; Assets 180,035,000 gp;Population 36,007; Mixed (79% human, 7% halfling, 4% half-elf, 3% elf, 3% gnome, 2% dwarf, 1%half-orc, 1% other races).Authority Figures: Lord Bledryn Scoril, LN male human fighter 9 (the King’s Lord of Marsember);Ayesunder Truesilver, N male human fighter 15 (Warden of the Port).Important Characters: Blentra Whaelbuckler, NG female human fighter 9/rogue 1/harper scout 2(Harper agent); Charnae Truesil, LG female human aristocrat 2/expert 6 (Constable of Marsember);Delthrin the Deadmaster, LN male human necromancer 7/loremaster 5 (mysterious necromancerand defender of the city); Elestra Blaebur, CN female human bard 6 (popular singer and dancer whosecretly delivers messages for War Wizards); Filfaeril Stormbillow, N female human wizard 16(retired adventurer and magic item merchant); High Morninglord Chansobal Dreen, LG malehuman cleric 12 (highpriest of Morningmist Hall); Scoril, LG male human fighter 4 (Herald ofMarsember); Szwentil, N male human fighter 3 (merchant and shipwright); Vindala Chalanther, LNfemale human illusionist 15 (tutor and mage for hire).Notes: Marsember’s network of canals can make it difficult for people to get around. Fortunately, alarge number of skiffs are available for easy transport along the canals. The greatest landmark in townis undoubtedly the King’s Tower, the abode of Lord Bledryn Scoril and the city garrison. Other notablebuildings include Morningmist Hall (the rosy walled temple of Lathander) and the frowning ramparts ofStarwater Keep.Object Stat BlocksAny items that the player characters may need to interact with in some manner should have statisticsin the manuscript. Common examples include doors, walls, chests, and altars.Object: # in. or ft. thick; Hardness #; hp #; Break DC #. NOTE: You can add additional DCs, suchas Escape Artist or Open Lock, as necessary.Sample Object Stat BlockDangling Iron Cage: 2 in. thick; hardness 10; hp 60; Break DC 28; Open Lock DC 40.Trap Stat BlocksAll traps in your manuscript must be accompanied by a trap stat block. Pages 67–76 of the DUNGEONMASTER’s Guide provide a wealth of detail about the design and construction of traps. You shouldfamiliarize yourself with these rules if your adventure includes any traps. If your trap doesn’t include

=== PAGE 24 ===
any of the following elements, feel free to leave those elements out of your stat block. Additionally, ifthe trap is obvious and can be destroyed by damage, incorporate an object stat block into the trapstat block.Some complex traps are difficult to condense into a stat block. In such a case, you should build asmuch of the stat block as you can, and refer the reader as appropriate to the text of the adventure inthe stat block.Sample Trap Stat BlockSlashing Blades Trap: CR 9; mechanical; location trigger; automatic reset; hidden lock bypass(Search DC 25, Open Lock DC 30); Atk +16 melee (2d4+8 plus poison/x4, 2 scythes); poison (dragonbile, Fortitude DC 26 negates, initial 3d6 Str, secondary none); Search DC 24; Disable Device DC 21.APPENDIX IV: SAMPLE ENCOUNTER5. Storage room (EL 2)This circular room holds a scattering of chests of all shapes and sizes. Their contents have beenthrown onto the floor in a jumble. The ceiling is covered in soot, and ash is mixed in with the mess onthe floor.This was once the depot’s main storage room. The House of the Circlet used this room to storesensitive items of no immediate use. When the depot was abandoned, the House carried off what theycould and sent Baron Wildhurst here to set fire to the rest. They hoped to destroy the evidence ofwhat was plotted here so long ago.Creatures: Many of the chests that remain in this room have mlarraun woven into the knotworkholding their handles closed. Resembling 5-foot-long dark brown snakes, mlarrauns have theremarkable property of turning to stone when targeted by magic, and changing back to flesh uponbeing struck by a second spell. Thus, any spellcaster attempting to use knock to get into the chestswould release their defenders. In the time since the depot was abandoned, the mlarraun woke fromtheir stone torpor and began to fend for themselves. Most abandoned the depot or starved, but onemated pair remains, living well now that the goblin midden heap (area 3) provides them with anample source of rats. While not hungry, these guardian snakes were bred to attack withoutprovocation, and do so as soon as a character gets too close.MLARRAUN (2)CR 1N Medium magical beastSerpent Kingdoms 70Init +3; Senses darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision, scent; Spot +5, Listen +5AC 16, touch 13, flat-footed 13hp 11 (2 HD)Fort +3 Ref +6 Will +1Spd 20 ft., climb 20 ft., swim 20 ft.Melee bite +5 (1d4–1 plus poison)Ranged poison spit +5 ranged touch (poison)Base Atk +2; Grp +1Special Actions poison (Fortitude DC 11; blindness for 2d6 hours/blindness for 4d6 hours plus 1d4 damage)Abilities Str 8, Dex 17, Con 11, Int 1, Wis 12, Cha 2SQ stone torporFeats Weapon FinesseSkills Balance +11, Climb +11, Hide +12, Listen +5, Spot +5, Swim +7Stone Torpor (Su): Any spell or magical effect that specifically targets a mlarraun causes it to instantly lapse into a torpor that lasts ford100 days. Its scales become hard and gray, though its body remains flexible. Contact with magic weapons or other magic itemsthat do not specifically target the mlarraun does not trigger this change. In this form, the creature’s natural armor bonus rises to+10. Damage in excess of one-half its original hit points awakens the mlarraun instantly, as does any spell that targets it.

=== PAGE 25 ===
Tactics: The mlarraun hide under the rubble, and try to blind each of the characters with theirpoison spit. They strike targets in the order offered, being careful to return to cover after each hit andexpecting their poison to render the invaders helpless.Development: A druid or ranger using wild empathy can get the attention of, and parley with, themlarraun. The mlarraun are vain creatures, and anyone who panders to their vanity by flattering theirlooks and cunning gets a +4 circumstance bonus on wild empathy checks. The mlarraun start asunfriendly, but if their attitude can be improved to indifferent (DC 15) or better they do not attack theparty.Ad-Hoc Experience Award: Using wild empathy to dissuade the mlarrauns from attacking is worththe same amount of experience as defeating them in combat.