

 Review: Under Heaven by Guy Gavriel Kay

 < Ysabel

 Russ Allbery
 > Reviews

 River of Stars >

Under Heaven

by Guy Gavriel Kay

 Publisher:
 Roc

 Copyright:
 May 2010

 ISBN:
 0-451-46330-7

 Format:
 Hardcover

 Pages:
 567

We first meet Shen Tai burying ghosts in a mountain meadow. The meadow is
the site of a vast, deadly battle in the ongoing border fights between
Kitai and Tagur, a battle that left tens of thousands of unburied dead.
Shen Tai is the second son of a famous and highly respected general of
Kitai forces in that battle. When his father died, Shen Tai went west to
the shores of Kuala Nor to spend his two years of mourning for his father
putting ghosts to rest.

By the time Under Heaven opens, both the Kitai and Tagur garrisons
have come to treat Tai like a holy hermit. They bring him food and other
supplies, arriving early in the morning so that they can be well on the
road before night and the screaming of the ghosts. They've been competing
in their support of him, each garrison bringing him slightly better gifts,
both attempting to gain honor by being the strongest supporter of a
hermit. But everything changes when the Tagur garrison commander brings a
letter to Tai from the Tagur court. The wife of the Tagur king, a Kitai
princess who was given as part of the treaty that ended the war, has sent
him a gift with value almost beyond measure: title to two hundred and
fifty near-legendary Sardian horses from the other end of the Silk Road.
And before Tai has a chance to absorb that, a friend arrives from the
other direction: an old companion from Kitai whose visit is as disruptive
of Shen Tai's quiet solitude as the horses.

Under Heaven is Kay's return to his distinctive style of epic
historical fiction touched with fantasy after a digression into
young-adult fiction with Ysabel.
Ysabel is a nice enough book, but this is why I read Kay. It's set
in Tang Dynasty China, following much of the structure of familiar (or not
so familiar) history, although Kay has followed his normal practice of
changing all of the names and some of the details. But it's Tang Dynasty
China, with its imperial politics, Silk Road commerce, and great poetry,
seen largely through the eyes of a scholarly second son of a philosophical
general. Shen Tai is a quiet, thoughtful, and careful protagonist with no
great aspirations, a failed soldier, failed monk, and interrupted scholar,
who is thrust into the center of the empire by other people's actions.
And throughout, he has very personal goals, often quite at odds with the
politics around him.

Long-time fans of Kay will, I think, be reminded of the Sarantine
Mosaic. Not since that duology has Kay done this good of a job of taking
a relatively modest character with his own idiosyncratic goals and pushing
him into the center of dramatic politics. But, and this is high praise
indeed coming from me, I think Under Heaven is even better. It's
more focused, more carefully written, and gem-like in its clear
construction of character and background. This is a beautiful, exquisite
book in large part because it's book that, like its protagonist, stays
within itself. I didn't mind the constant drumbeat of High Drama that
filled The Last Light of the Sun, but I
can see why some readers found it off-putting. Those readers will find
Under Heaven a much more comfortable reading experience. Kay does
turn up the dramatic narration a bit too high around the climax, but the
rest of the book is much more restrained. The sometimes-painful humanity
of the characters mostly pushes the drama of history off the stage.

I don't want to spoil anything about the plot beyond the opening chapters,
since the slow unfolding of scope and event is so much of the pleasure of
this book. But I will say I was reminded that Kay writes some of the best
conversations in fiction. There is a conversation near the center of
Under Heaven that rivals even the eavesdropping scene in
Tigana for the exceptional pacing,
characterization, and repeated broadening and revelation about the story
that occurs over the course of a single scene. This is the kind of a book
that, after a chapter or two, one relaxes into and completely immerses
onself in like a hot bath, confident that one is in the hands of a master
storyteller.

I cannot easily judge how respectful Kay is to his source material, not
being Chinese and not knowing what warning signs to look for. But at
least from my (white American) perspective, Kay does a good job avoiding
exoticism and orientalism. Positive signs on that front include the lack
of white characters shoehorned as actors into the story, a respect for the
culture and history that didn't feel stereotyped to me, and a willingness
to let the background be background and not hammer the reader with things
that the author found neat in their research. Handling of the background
felt as smooth to me as Kay's previous reworking of Byzantium or Spain,
and also felt respectful and accurate to his source material as best as I
could tell.

One potentially tricky spot that I think Kay handled well is poetry.
There is quite a bit of poetry in this book; it's a means for both
competition and self-expression for the educated elite and the scholars,
of which Shen Tai is one. Tai also picks up a poet as a companion for
much of the book, and poetry plays an important role in the conversation I
mentioned earlier. This is dangerous territory for a writer: one can put
exceptional composers, visual artists, or dancers in a book and get away
with a few oblique descriptions, but if you have poets, the reader expects
to see the poems, and expects them to be good. I'm not the best judge of
poetry, but they worked for me, both in terms of quality and in terms of
the resonance with the symbol sets and rhythm of actual Chinese poetry (to
the small extent that I've been exposed to it). Kay does have the
delightful structural excuse that, since the book is in English, clearly
all the poems are given in translation, so any major failings can be
written off to the difficulty in translating poetry. For those not as
fond of poetry, rest assured that these poems are generally clear in
meaning, always short, and very appropriate to the scenes in which they
appear.

I loved this book. The two primary protagonists are both likeable and
interesting (and Kay did a good job of finding a believable way to have a
female protagonist), and the book is beautifully written and
characterized. It may be the most restrained and balanced book that Kay
has written yet. I do wish that he'd kept his penchant for dramatic
narrator statements in check for the whole book rather than releasing it a
bit at the end, but it's a minor and forgettable flaw. More important is
both the impact and the quantity of moments and passages that had me
hanging on every word or left me in tears. Kay uses shifts in viewpoint
and insight into the inner thoughts of characters with a deft touch,
fleshing out from multiple angles people who I came to care deeply about.
My heart broke for them and soared with them, and I didn't want the story
to ever end.

If you at all like historical fantasy, read this. It may be the best book
Kay has ever written, which means that it's one of the best books written
in the genre.

Rating: 10 out of 10

Reviewed: 2010-11-23

 < Ysabel

 Russ Allbery
 > Reviews

 River of Stars >

 Last spun
 2025-03-30 from thread modified 2013-01-04

