

 Dan Jorgensen's Blog - Balancing characters and themes - November 07, 2018 05:37

 The worthwhile endeavor of storytelling
 Art, Writing, Life Imagined

 Balancing characters and themes

“I want readers turning pages until three o'clock in the morning. I want the themes of books to stick around for a reader. I'm always trying to find a way to balance characters and theme.” – Guy Gavriel Kay
Born in Canada on this date in 1954, Kay has had a knack for creating “page turner” books over several decades. He cut his teeth on fantasy writing by traveling to Oxford to assist Christopher Tolkien, son of J.R.R. Tolkien, with editing J.R.R.’s unpublished work The Silmarillion.  With that experience as inspiration he began his own career with The Summer Tree.  
Many of Kay’s novels are set in fictional realms that resemble real places during real historical periods, such as Constantinople during the reign of Justinian I, or Spain during the time of El Cid.  His current bestseller, Children of Earth and Sky, is in the Balkans, Italy and Turkey in the 15thCentury.   

   Kay’s 13 best-selling novels have been translated into some 30 languages, with settings and lead characters from almost every era.
He’s won multiple awards, including The World Fantasy Award for Ysabel, set in modern day France while also putting his teenage lead into direct contact with characters from both the distant past and a “parallel” world to ours.   “I have always argued,” he said, “(that) in a good novel, interesting things happen to interesting people, no matter who they are or where they are from.”  

Share A Writers 
 Moment
 with a friend by clicking the g+1 button below

 View more on Dan Jorgensen's website »

 Like

  • 
 0 comments

  • 
 flag

 Published on November 07, 2018 05:37

No comments have been added yet.

 post a comment »

 Add a reference:

 Book
 Author

Search for a book to add a reference

 add:   
 link
 cover

 Author: 

 add:   
 link
 photo

 Dan Jorgensen's Blog

Dan Jorgensen's profile

12 followers

