

 Sally Bend's Blog - Finding the Light in Written on the Dark by Guy Gavriel Kay - May 20, 2025 18:24

 Stacking the Shelves & The Sunday...
 Exploring Amplitudes: Stories of Quee...

 Finding the Light in Written on the Dark by Guy Gavriel Kay

 Title: Written on the Dark
Author: Guy Gavriel Kay
Publication Date: May 27, 2025
Genres: Fantasy
Representation: Nonbinary, Bisexual
Written on the Dark is another stunning historical fantasy from the masterful pen of Guy Gavriel Kay, who this time turns to medieval France for inspiration.

In many ways, this is a story about stories – about who tells them, how they tell them, and how we interact with them. As the old saying goes, beauty is in the eye of the beholder, but so is history. We get history told by those who were there and those who weren’t, but those who insist on being remembered and those who are content to be forgotten. All of this is wrapped up in the story of a poet (Thierry Villar) who even steps outside the narrative at times to offer brief asides to the reader, some adding color to what’s passed, and some foreshadowing what’s to come.

While much of this is precisely what you’d expect of Kay – history, drama, politics, and storytelling – there are two elements that stood out for me. The first is the women of the tale, probably my favorite in anything Kay has ever written. Silvy and Marina, their lives intertwined with that of Thierry, are wonderfully written characters, and the crossing of their affections is a quiet, subtle, but wonderful moment. Jeannette was an interesting character (as much as I chafed a bit against the introduction of a Joan of Arc figure), and Alaina, for the very little that we see of her, is just magical. The second is the character of Gauvard Cole, easily my favorite creation of Kay’s since Fionavar. Described as having an “element of uncertainty” and “a name wrapped in mystery,” who isn’t “exclusively male or female” but “changeable,” it’s not clear whether they’re transgender, nonbinary, or intersex, but I loved them and their role in the story. 

Narratively, it’s a bit of an odd story, skipping between characters, places, and plotlines, with those asides I mentioned earlier, but it all works . . . all comes together . . . all accentuates the story or the history or perhaps both.

Rating: 1/2

 I received an advance review copy for free, and I am leaving this review voluntarily.

 View more on Sally Bend's website »

 Like

  • 
 0 comments

  • 
 flag

 Published on May 20, 2025 18:24

No comments have been added yet.

 post a comment »

 Add a reference:

 Book
 Author

Search for a book to add a reference

 add:   
 link
 cover

 Author: 

 add:   
 link
 photo

 Sally Bend's Blog

Sally Bend's profile

363 followers

