Objective. The objective of the study is the linguistic-stylistic analysis of the prose of the modern American writer U. Le Guin in terms of its emotional significance and colour, the peculiarities of the writer’s creation of “emotional implied sense “ on the example of novels “Hainish cycle”. Methods. The following methods are applied during the research: the method of interpretation, the method of stylistic experiment, the method of combinatorial increment of meaning, the method of associative field and the method of regulatory structuring, Results. In the course of the research, it is established that stylistic meaning is a part of the semantic structure of a linguistic sign, although it goes beyond the language system. In order to analyze the linguistic and stylistic features of U. Le Guin’s stories, we use the idea of frame semantics, developed by Charles Fillmore, in which the researcher connects linguistic knowledge with an encyclopedia, where it is impossible to understand the meaning of one word without access to all existing knowledge related to this word. That is, the word activates or evokes a frame of semantic knowledge related to the specific concept to which it refers. The words not only highlight certain concepts, but also indicate a certain perspective from which the frame is considered. “The Left Hand of Darkness” can rightly be considered the most unusual novel in the Hainish cycle. This novel is extremely rich in means of artistic expression, among which metaphors stand out. The metaphorical nature of the novel is declared by the writer herself in the preface to it. Conceptual metaphors play an important role in the work, which can be divided into groups that characterize the main images of the work. The distinction of the author’s style is that the author does not set goals to show the image of darkness as negative. On the contrary, U. Le Guin urges people to see a single phenomenon in two opposites. Thus, the conceptual metaphors in the novel play an important role in understanding the issues of the work. The range of problems considered in the novel is significant. They cover both serious social issues and important psychological concepts. The metaphors used and created by the author enhance the effect of presence, the effect of involvement in events and ultimately contribute to a deeper understanding author’s intention.