 
 A Dance with Dragons, by George R.R. Martin - CSMonitor.com 
 Skip to main content 
 Skip to main menu 
 Skip to search 
 Skip to footer 
 Why is Christian Science in our name? 
 Why is Christian Science in our name?
 Our name is about honesty. The Monitor is owned by The Christian Science Church, and we’ve always been transparent about that.
 The Church publishes the Monitor because it sees good journalism as vital to progress in the world. Since 1908, we’ve aimed “to injure no man, but to bless all mankind,” as our founder, Mary Baker Eddy, put it.
 Here, you’ll find award-winning journalism not driven by commercial influences – a news organization that takes seriously its mission to uplift the world by seeking solutions and finding reasons for credible hope.
 Explore values journalism 
 About us 
 Log in 
 Log out 
 Shared content is always free to recipients.
 Copy link 
 Copied! 
 Topics 
 Regions 
 About us 
 Log in
 Account
 Subscribe 
 Give a gift 
 Shared content is always free to recipients.
 Copy link 
 Copied! 
 Search 
 Subscribe: $11/Month 
 Log in 
 About us 
 Free newsletters 
 One month free trial to the Monitor Daily 
 Give a gift 
 Log out 
 Manage your account 
 Subscription FAQs 
 Contact Customer
 Service 
 Current Issues
 Monitor Daily 
 Monitor Weekly digital edition 
 Values Behind the News
 A deeper view that unites instead of divides, connecting why the story matters to you.
 Explore News & Values 
 About us 
 Free newsletters 
 Follow us:
 News
 Economy 
 Education 
 Environment 
 Foreign Policy 
 Law & Courts 
 Politics 
 Science 
 Security 
 Society 
 Culture
 Arts 
 Food 
 Movies 
 Music 
 Television 
 The Home Forum 
 In a Word 
 Monitor Movie Guide 
 All Culture 
 Books
 Author Q&As 
 Book Reviews 
 Reader Recommendations 
 All Books 
 Commentary
 The Monitor's View 
 Readers Respond 
 A Christian Science Perspective 
 From the Editors 
 All Commentary 
 More
 News Wires 
 Points of Progress 
 People Making a Difference 
 Photo Galleries 
 Podcasts 
 Monitor Breakfast 
 Monitor Daily
 The Monitor Daily amplifies and clarifies how we deliver on the Monitor’s purpose, to benefit humanity by reporting what is happening in the world and why – and how this information matters to you.
 Listen to or read today's issue 
 Regions
 Africa 
 Americas 
 Asia Pacific 
 Europe 
 Middle East 
 South & Central Asia 
 USA 
 All World 
 Featured Coverage
 The Christian Science Monitor's coverage of the war between Hamas and Israel, and related articles.
 Connect with the stories
 War in the Middle East 
 Values Behind the News
 A deeper view that unites instead of divides, connecting why the story matters to you.
 Explore News & Values 
 Free newsletters 
 One month free trial to the Monitor Daily 
 The Christian Science Monitor
 The Christian Science Monitor is an international news organization offering calm, thoughtful, award-winning coverage for independent thinkers. We tackle difficult conversations and divisive issues–we don’t shy away from hard problems. But you’ll find in each Monitor news story qualities that can lead to solutions and unite us–qualities such as respect, resilience, hope, and fairness.
 About us 
 Search 
 Log out 
 Manage your account 
 Change password 
 Subscription FAQs 
 Contact Customer Service 
 Current Issues
 Monitor Daily 
 Monitor Weekly digital edition 
 of stories this month 
 > 
 Get unlimited stories 
 Your subscription makes our work possible.
 We want to bridge divides to reach everyone.
 Subscribe 
 Book Reviews 
A Dance with Dragons, by George R.R. Martin 
 No one – not even the most sharp-eyed of Martin readers – will be able to guess where this book is going.
 A Dance with Dragons
By George R.R. Martin
Random House
1,040 pp.
 Loading...
 What are you reading? 
 By Megan Wasson 
 July 12, 2011, 7:05 a.m. ET
 A Dance with Dragons may be the newest book in George R.R. Martin ’s “ A Song of Ice and Fire ” fantasy series, but it relies on a series of plot twists familiar to all fans of Martin’s writing. Namely, the characters you thought were crucial will be killed off and characters you thought were dead will miraculously reappear.
 The previous (and fourth) book in the series, “ A Feast for Crows ,” covers the same time span as does “A Dance with Dragons.” However, Martin’s trademark narrative device of choosing a set of point-of-view characters for each book and giving each of them a handful of chapters to narrate left “A Feast for Crows” in the hands of some of the series’ less interesting characters – making the book a less gripping read than most of the rest of the series.
 But in “A Dance with Dragons,” Martin focuses on some of the more popular characters not heard from in “A Feast for Crows,” including Jon Snow , Daenerys Targaryen, and Tyrion Lannister. In the first chapters of the book readers get the half of the story not told in “Feast for Crows.” Then “A Dance for Dragons” takes a classic Martin twist and rejoins the two sets of characters to create some hair-raising cliffhangers for the next book.
 As with “A Feast for Crows,” “A Dance with Dragons” begins with the startling realization that the war for the Iron Throne of the Seven Kingdoms may not really be what the series is about. While the contenders for the throne dwindle, threats of unrest spring up from beyond the Wall built to hold out the mysterious and deadly creatures of the night, and Daenerys begins to conquer cities across the narrow sea.
 Diehard George R. R. Martin fans will know that his writing style tends to start slow and build to a climax, and “A Dance with Dragons” is no exception. The first few hundred pages of the almost 1,000-page tome are simply setting the stage for the action in the second half of the book. However, you’ll want to pay close attention to the first half of the book. Martin is the kind of writer who needs to be read with an “A Song of Ice and Fire” encyclopedia at hand to catch all the layered, subtle hints and details that he leaves throughout his books. If you pay attention, you will be rewarded and questions will be answered.
 The dragons promised in the title do play a prominent role in the book, but they may not be as easily tamed as Daenerys might have hoped. While she attempts to hone her ability to rule and raise an army in Slaver’s Bay, chaos erupts all around her, threatening to take away everything she’s worked for.
 Jon Snow struggles to hold the Night’s Watch together, but is being pulled in all directions by the demands of Stannis Baratheon, claimant to the throne; by the wildings, by his ties to his family; and by the ever-present threat of the Others.
 Tyrion, ever a Lannister at heart, seeks out Daenerys to win her favor and ally himself with one of the strongest contenders for the Iron Throne, but faces significant stumbling blocks along the way.
 “A Dance with Dragons” may well be one of the best books in the five-book series so far. Martin’s prose is concise but pithy, begging to be devoured over and over again. All the fans’ favorite characters make an appearance, unlike in the last book. But what truly sets this book above some of the others in the series is Martin’s ability to keep his readers on their toes and the edges of their seats. No character, no matter how likeable and seemingly important, is ever safe from Martin’s pen (remember Ned Stark ?), and on the other hand, no one can ever be truly pronounced dead. What you thought was going to happen after reading Books No. 1, 2, and even 3 and 4, now clearly will not happen, and that’s where Martin’s strength lies.
 Fans should and will rush to buy “A Dance with Dragons” because no one, and I mean no one – not even the most sharp-eyed of Martin readers – will be able to guess where this series is going.
 And for any reader who is not yet a fan, I advise you to become one immediately. “A Dance with Dragons” is probably not the best place to start. You’ll want the background of the four earlier books to fully enjoy this one. But if you start on “A Game of Thrones” (Book No. 1) now, you should have plenty of time to savor Books 1-5 before you need to start worrying about No. 6.
 Megan Wasson is a Monitor contributor. 
 Join the Monitor's book discussion on Facebook and Twitter . 
 You've read   of   free articles.
 Subscribe to continue. 
 Help fund Monitor journalism for $11/ month
 Already a subscriber? Login 
 Mark Sappenfield 
 Editor
 Monitor journalism changes lives because we open that too-small box that most people think they live in. We believe news can and should expand a sense of identity and possibility beyond narrow conventional expectations.
 Our work isn't possible without your support.
 Subscribe 
 Unlimited digital access $11/month.
 Already a subscriber? Login 
 Digital subscription includes: 
 Unlimited access to CSMonitor.com. 
 CSMonitor.com archive. 
 The Monitor Daily email. 
 No advertising. 
 Cancel anytime. 
 Subscribe 
 Related stories
 Visit book editor Marjorie Kehe's Fan page (Facebook.com) 
 Share this article
 Copy link 
 Link copied.
 × 
 Read this article in
 https://www.csmonitor.com/Books/Book-Reviews/2011/0712/A-Dance-with-Dragons-by-George-R.R.-Martin
 Start your subscription today
 https://www.csmonitor.com/subscribe
 ISSN 2573-3850 (online)
 Follow us:
 About 
 Contact Us 
 Subscribe 
 Give a Gift Subscription 
 Support Monitor Journalism 
 Free Newsletters 
 Careers 
 Social Media 
 Content Map 
 Text Edition 
 RSS 
 Reprints & Permissions 
 A Christian Science Perspective 
 © 1980–2025 The Christian Science Monitor. All Rights Reserved. Terms. Privacy Policy. Cookies Settings 
 This website uses cookies to
 improve functionality and performance. By continuing to browse the site
 you are agreeing to our use of cookies .
 Close 
 Subscription expired
 Your subscription to
 The Christian Science Monitor has expired.
 You can renew your subscription or
 continue to use the site without a
 subscription.
 Renew subscription 
 Return to the free version of the site 
 If you have questions about your account, please
 contact customer service 
 or call us at 1-617-450-2300 .
 This message will appear once per week
 unless you renew or
 log out.
 Session expired
 Your session to The Christian
 Science Monitor has expired. We
 logged you out.
 Log in again 
 Return to the free version of the site 
 If you have questions about your account, please
 contact customer service 
 or call us at 1-617-450-2300 .
 No subscription
 You don’t have a Christian Science Monitor
 subscription yet.
 Subscribe now 
 Return to the free version of the site 
 If you have questions about your account, please
 contact customer service 
 or call us at 1-617-450-2300 .
