 
 Book review – Tehanu – Wet Broken Things 
 Skip to content 
 Wet Broken Things 
 Reading, writing and worldbuilding 
 Menu + 
 × 
 expanded 
 collapsed 
 Home 
 Blog 
 About 
 Contact 
 Book review – Tehanu
 Posted by Wet Broken Things 25th May 2025 25th May 2025 Posted in Book Reviews Tags: book review , Earthsea , fantasy , Tehanu , Ursula K Le Guin , wet broken things 
 "If women had power, what would men be but women who can't bear children? And what would women be but men who can? "
 The fourth book of Earthsea, Tehanu , was written two decades after the first three , and marks a dramatic change in the kind of story Le Guin tells. I suppose it is apt to say it is like meeting someone you knew, but twenty years later, still very much the same, yet significantly changed. Tehanu is no coming of age fantasy tale. It is the story of Tenar on Gont, and Ged with his powers lost, and how ordinary people confront ordinary, sexist, crude evil. The world isn't threatened, but a child, Therru, burned and raped and broken. This is Le Guin's story to revise fantasy in a feminist light, and to centre the story not on the grand and powerful, but the small, the powerless, the ordinary.
 I will say outright that this is a great story from a master writer. I have taken so much inspiration from it in my own writing, if nothing more than the idea that you can explore ordinary people in a world of your own creation. Le Guin's mastery of dialogue and character and the beauty of her writing enables you to drift from scene to scene, following Tenar in her middle age as she struggles to deal with Ged's fall from high power to the everyday, with the child she is now raising, and the demands of the powerful who encroach upin her. The novel asks at its heart what men are, what women are, and why men have power and women don't, and why some choose to wield such power in evil ways.
 The novel doesn't always work. For starters, I find the love that forms between Tenar and Ged uninspiring. I'm not offended by it, but the chemistry isn't there. I don't believe they fell in love: I believe Le Guin wrote that story. The plot led the characters. There are also moments when Le Guin's change in philosophical direction means Tehanu doesn't cohere with the first three books. Wizards aren't celibate by choice, but rather by a spell, which smells strongly of retconning and means preciously Ged was a liar. And whilst I don't mind exposing the male domain of wizardry as unfair, the fact that wizards are more concerned with power than with finding the moral way goes against so much of what the first three books are made of that you can't reread them and believe in them if you've read this book. To hold this book and the earlier books you have to squint a bit and fudge. It is like a mending of a broken knife expertly done: the knife is made whole, but the seams are visible, and you must try not to notice it.
 But I would advise you to simply understand that the first three books are a different story in the same world. What they have in common you can carry over, and where there are contradictions in spirit you should just relax and and hold them separately in your mind. Because this is a master story, the kind of story I feel would be taught as a part of the literary canon were it not written in that dreadfully denigrated genre of speculative fiction. How does a man cope when all he was is taken from him? What do you do with a broken child? How does a child like that heal after what has happened? The book says that "wrong that cannot be repaired must be transcended." Le Guin's idea of transcendence is so magical, so powerful, so wonderful that I don't care if some people find it illogical. It is poetic and it is true, and is therefore right.
 Le Guin's feminism is not what you might expect. Her idea of feminism doesn't state that women can do what men can do, and therefore there must be female mages and female warriors, and female kings. Tehanu rejects this. "A queen's only a she-king," says Ged, and Le Guin agrees. Women aren't valuable because they can don a man's clothes and act like a man. A woman's power is in her motherhood, her difference, her concern with the everyday, in the way her worth isn't bound to her pride. It has touches of first-wave feminism in it: Le Guin is trying to assert that femininity is equal to masculinity, not that women must do manly things as men do. That is why Tehanu has no hero doing magic, no adventure, no lords and mages and ships. There is only a child and a mother, a man and a woman in love, the harvest, cooking and cleaning, conversations amongst women, the routines of death, the routines of life. It is the book of a woman in a woman's world. Tehanu gives that its own magic and dignity. Few fantasy authors since have managed that.
 Share this:
 Share on X (Opens in new window) 
 X 
 Share on Facebook (Opens in new window) 
 Facebook 
 Like Loading... 
 Related 
 Posted by Wet Broken Things 25th May 2025 25th May 2025 Posted in Book Reviews Tags: book review , Earthsea , fantasy , Tehanu , Ursula K Le Guin , wet broken things 
 Post navigation
 Previous Post Previous post: 
 Book review – The Devils 
 Next Post Next post: 
 Book review – The Torment of Others 
 3 thoughts on " Book review – Tehanu " 
 Pingback: Book review – Tales from Earthsea – Wet Broken Things 
 Pingback: Book review – The Other Wind – Wet Broken Things 
 Pingback: Top five – 2025 – Wet Broken Things 
 Leave a comment Cancel reply 
 Δ 
 Wet Broken Things , 
 Blog at WordPress.com. 
 Privacy & Cookies: This site uses cookies. By continuing to use this website, you agree to their use. 
To find out more, including how to control cookies, see here:
 Cookie Policy 
 Comment 
 Reblog 
 Subscribe 
 Subscribed 
 Wet Broken Things 
 Join 62 other subscribers.
 Sign me up 
 Already have a WordPress.com account? Log in now. 
 Wet Broken Things 
 Subscribe 
 Subscribed 
 Sign up 
 Log in 
 Copy shortlink 
 Report this content 
 View post in Reader 
 Manage subscriptions 
 Collapse this bar 
 %d 
 Design a site like this with WordPress.com
 Get started 
