 

 Gene Wolfe's Peace - by Andy Lee - Lit & Chess 

 Lit & Chess 

 Subscribe Sign in 

Gene Wolfe's Peace 
Occult classic. 

 Andy Lee 

 Jul 12, 2026 

10 

7 

Share 

 The August cover story of The Atlantic is titled, ominously, “The End of Reading is Here.” There’s been a lot of this sentiment floating around the internet in recent years: we’re a CliffsNotes society now, easily distracted, hooked on the endless scroll. In this dystopian assessment of contemporary society, most writing will also be outsourced to AI, leaving in its wake a lonely corner for those interested in human-produced, “artisan” prose. In other words, an irreversible existential crisis has arrived for the humanities and the arts. 
Hopefully not, but in the meantime, it behooves us to stretch our literary muscles by reading actual works of literature rather than doomscrolling about their imminent demise. If I were to make the case for why reading literature will continue to be important, a major part of my argument would be about the power of perspective — no other art form has the power to install you so completely in someone else’s brain. In film and television the camera shows you the world; only in novels does the voice of the narrator construct it, revealing some truths and concealing others. 
 Gene Wolfe’s 1975 novel Peace is a wonderful example of the power of narrative voice. Wolfe introduces us to the perspective of Alden Dennis Weer, a narrator as seductive and unreliable as any since Humbert Humbert. The story opens on a stormy night: 

The elm tree planted by Eleanor Bold, the judge’s daughter, fell last night. I was asleep and heard nothing, but from the number of shattered limbs and the size of the trunk there must have been a terrible crashing. I woke—I was sitting up in my bed before the fire—but by the time I was awake there was nothing to hear but the dripping of the melting snow running from the eaves. I remember that my heart pounded and I was afraid I was going to have an attack, and then, fuzzily, thought that perhaps the heart attack had awakened me, and then that I might be dead. 
 Wolfe is best known as a writer of science fiction and fantasy, but the first paragraph of Peace feels like a gothic horror from the mind by a modern Edgar Allan Poe. A tree falls (or rather, a tree is violently destroyed, crashing and shattering like the House of Usher) but Weer sleeps through it, only to be roused by the pounding of his own heart. His imagination takes over, moving rapidly from the threat of a heart attack to the idea that the attack has already happened and that he is dead. The opening scene is at once rather conventional — who hasn’t woken suddenly in the middle of the night in an inexplicable panic at least once or twice in their life? — and also deeply strange. Why does Weer suspect that he might be dead? 
The rest of the novel is propelled by Weer’s visit to his doctor, who encourages him to tell stories based on the images from a set of Thematic Apperception Test cards: 

 Thematic Apperception Test images — kind of disturbing, in my opinion. 
Weer uses the cards to recall and tell the story of his life. His formative years, which make up the bulk of the story, were spent in the care of his Aunt Olivia, who was courted by three suitors, only to marry a fourth. Interwoven into Weer’s memories are fairytales and other tales that mimic and overlap with his own life. There are caves and treasures and sudden, deadly accidents, perhaps more than should reasonably exist in a single lifetime. There are gaps along the way as Weer grows up, meets a friendly librarian, and becomes the president of an orange juice factory. It could be the story of a conventional life, but the gaps are troubling. Weer, it seems, is searching for something in his memories, but he’s also trying to conceal a whole lot more. 
 What raises Peace from a good mystery yarn to a stunning work of postmodernist fiction is that Wolfe never shows you the monster directly. He leaves breadcrumbs along the way, but the novel requires multiple reads to fully reveal itself. As I finished the final pages and immediately circled back to the first chapter, I was reminded of David Foster Wallace’s trick of putting the final (chronological) chapter of Infinite Jest first, or Humbert Humbert’s hidden confession in the opening pages of Lolita . These narrative tricks are akin to Poe’s “The Purloined Letter,” the hiding of answers in plain sight. Wolfe’s own comments about Peace suggest that he was concerned that he’d done too good of a job, that readers weren't getting it, but I found the edginess of not knowing exactly what was going on far preferable to an explanation-heavy dénouement. 
 A first reading of Peace confirms and intensifies the eerie foreboding that begins in the first paragraph: something is wrong here. At one point Weer’s doctor puts him in front of a funhouse mirror and asks him to rotate some wheels until his true image appears: 

I spin the magic wheels, giving myself first a suggestive immensity in the region of my sex organs, then the corporate gut expected of a major industrialist, then the narrow waist and exaggerated shoulders of a working cowboy, and at last setting everything to rights. Lips pursed, Dr. Van Ness notes the numbers on each dial (there are five) and compares them with numbers on a slip of paper he takes from his desk. 
“How did I do?” 
“Very well, Mr. Weer. Perhaps too well. Your image of each of the psychosomic body areas is perfect; in other words your I.D.R. is zero. I would say this indicates a very high level of self-concern.” 
“You mean that’s how I look?” 
“Yes, that’s exactly how you look. Frightening, isn’t it?” 
“No, I don’t find it so.” 
Weer knows himself a little too well but also not well enough. He passes the test perfectly, but the disconnect between his doctor’s appraisal of his looks (“Frightening, isn’t it?”) and his own is revealing. I was reminded when reading this passage of yet another Nabokov protagonist, Hermann Karlovich, who tries to fake his own death by murdering a vagrant whom he believes looks identical to himself. Only when he is arrested does the reader realize that Karlovich and his dopplelgänger look nothing alike; their resemblance exists only in his own mind. 
Wolfe reminds the reader about the slipperiness of memory throughout the novel. Memory is bound together with the act of weaving together narratives about the past, narratives that are inherently suspect. Towards the end of the novel, Weer confronts Louis Gold, a seller of rare but counterfeit books: 

“To you I am a fraud, Mr. Weer. An eccentric. To myself I am an artist, shaping the past instead of the future. I write, yes. My hand moves across the paper carrying my pen, and there are words and I try to tell myself that they have all come from me. It may be that all mankind, living and dead, has a collective unconsciousness. The world shapes itself, I find, very fast, to what I write. Or I write more than I know—perhaps all of us who do what I do. This book on my lap—I just wrote it, but you will find it mentioned in a hundred others. A man over in Rhode Island made up the name and it was taken up—you understand.” 
I nodded. 
“So now it exists. The first book was said to be in Arabic, but there were later translations into Greek (the title, you see, it’s really the title of the Greek translation), Latin, and German—all languages I have some knowledge of. The present volume is a collection of rebound pages from several earlier editions; there are some duplications, and some hiatuses, as might be expected.” 
“Do you have a buyer for it?” 
“I might offer it to Columbia; their copy is missing.” 
“I thought you just wrote it.” 
“Nevertheless it is catalogued.” 
 Gold’s final line captures the power of narrative beautifully. It didn’t happen, it’s not true, I just made it up — but nevertheless it is catalogued, there it is on the page, a part of the collective history that, submerged like most of the iceberg that is Peace , drives the novel. 
 It’s hard to write more about Peace without giving too much away. It supports multiple interpretations, but these are fun to read after a first or second read through the novel, not before it. Fortunately plenty of deeper readings already exist on the internet. One of the best I found was Robert Borski’s “The Devil Has His Due: Gene Wolfe’s Peace ” , which takes every possible inference about the novel to its logical conclusion. Much as critics have poured over Joyce’s schema for Ulysses , in which the great artist described each chapter’s color, science, and organ of the body, Borksi charts the alchemical connections to each chapter of Peace . Joan Gordon took an entirely different approach for the LA Review of Books , arguing that Peace can be read as a mainstream piece of literature in her essay “We Read Things Differently” . Other valuable resources include a timeline by Roy C. Lacke and a discussion between a dedicated fan of the novel and a first-time reader on Blind Reads . 
 As for me . . . well, sometimes you read a novel and you feel like it was written with your particular enjoyment in mind. A long time ago I made a list of my ten favorite novels, and it’s become more or less canonical. I can’t add anything to it without kicking something out, so I don’t, but if I was going to, I’d probably add Peace . When I reached the final page, I only wondered how I hadn’t heard of it earlier. 

 Subscribe 

10 

7 

Share 

Discussion about this post 

 Comments Restacks 

 Ev Clark 

 Jul 14 

 Well, now you've piqued my interest. What are your 10 favorite novels? 

Reply 

Share 

 6 replies by Andy Lee and others 6 more comments... 

 Top Latest Discussions 

No posts 

Ready for more? 

 Subscribe 

 © 2026 Andrew Lee · Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection notice 

 Start your Substack Get the app 
 Substack is the home for great culture 

 This site requires JavaScript to run correctly. Please turn on JavaScript or unblock scripts

