
 Why Does A.I. Write Like … That? - The New York Times
 Skip to contentSkip to site index
 The A.I. Issue
Therapy
Rewriting History
New Jobs
Living With A.I.
Avatars
You have a preview view of this article while we are checking your access. When we have confirmed access, the full article content will load.
Credit...Illustration by Giacomo Gambineri
Why Does A.I. Write Like … That?
If only they were robotic! Instead, chatbots have developed a distinctive — and grating — voice.
Credit...Illustration by Giacomo Gambineri
Supported by
SKIP ADVERTISEMENT
Listen to this article · 25:47 min Learn more
Share full article
By Sam Kriss
Dec. 3, 2025
In the quiet hum of our digital era, a new literary voice is sounding. You can find this signature style everywhere — from the pages of best-selling novels to the columns of local newspapers, and even the copy on takeout menus. And yet the author is not a human being, but a ghost — a whisper woven from the algorithm, a construct of code. A.I.-generated writing, once the distant echo of science-fiction daydreams, is now all around us — neatly packaged, fleetingly appreciated and endlessly recycled. It’s not just a flood — it’s a groundswell. Yet there’s something unsettling about this voice. Every sentence sings, yes, but honestly? It sings a little flat. It doesn’t open up the tapestry of human experience — it reads like it was written by a shut-in with Wi-Fi and a thesaurus. Not sensory, not real, just … there. And as A.I. writing becomes more ubiquitous, it only underscores the question — what does it mean for creativity, authenticity or simply being human when so many people prefer to delve into the bizarre prose of the machine?
If you’re anything like me, you did not enjoy reading that paragraph. Everything about it puts me on alert: Something is wrong here; this text is not what it says it is. It’s one of them. Entirely ordinary words, like “tapestry,” which has been innocently describing a kind of vertical carpet for more than 500 years, make me suddenly tense. I’m driven to the point of fury by any sentence following the pattern “It’s not X, it’s Y,” even though this totally normal construction appears in such generally well-received bodies of literature as the Bible and Shakespeare. But whatever these little quirks of language used to mean, that’s not what they mean any more. All of these are now telltale signs that what you’re reading was churned out by an A.I.
Once, there were many writers, and many different styles. Now, increasingly, one uncredited author turns out essentially everything. It’s widely believed to be writing just about every undergraduate student essay in every university in the world, and there’s no reason to think more-prestigious forms of writing are immune. Last year, a survey by Britain’s Society of Authors found that 20 percent of fiction and 25 percent of nonfiction writers were allowing generative A.I. to do some of their work. Articles full of strange and false material, thought to be A.I.-generated, have been found in Business Insider, Wired and The Chicago Sun-Times, but probably hundreds, if not thousands, more have gone unnoticed.
Before too long, essentially all writing might be A.I. writing. On social media, it’s already happening. Instagram has rolled out an integrated A.I. in its comments system: Instead of leaving your own weird note on a stranger’s selfie, you allow Meta A.I. to render your thoughts in its own language. This can be “funny,” “supportive,” “casual,” “absurd” or “emoji.” In “absurd” mode, instead of saying “Looking good,” I could write “Looking so sharp I just cut myself on your vibe.” Essentially every major email client now offers a similar service. Your rambling message can be instantly translated into fluent A.I.-ese.
If we’re going to turn over essentially all communication to the Omniwriter, it matters what kind of a writer it is. Strangely, A.I. doesn’t seem to know. If you ask ChatGPT what its own writing style is like, it’ll come up with some false modesty about how its prose is sleek and precise but somehow hollow: too clean, too efficient, too neutral, too perfect, without any of the subtle imperfections that make human writing interesting. In fact, this is not even remotely true. A.I. writing is marked by a whole complex of frankly bizarre rhetorical features that make it immediately distinctive to anyone who has ever encountered it. It’s not smooth or neutral at all — it’s weird.
Image
Credit...Illustration by Giacomo Gambineri
We are having trouble retrieving the article content.
Please enable JavaScript in your browser settings.
Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.
Thank you for your patience while we verify access.
Already a subscriber? Log in.
Want all of The Times? Subscribe.
Related Content
Advertisement
SKIP ADVERTISEMENT
Site Index
Site Information Navigation
© 2026 The New York Times Company
NYTCo
Contact Us
Accessibility
Work with us
Advertise
T Brand Studio
Privacy Policy
Cookie Policy
Terms of Service
Terms of Sale
Site Map
Canada
International
Help
Subscriptions
Manage Privacy Preferences
