The Dearth of the Author in AI-Supported Writing
Max Kreminski
Santa Clara University
Santa Clara, California, USA
mkreminski@scu.edu

ABSTRACT
We diagnose and briefly discuss the dearth of the author: a condition that arises when AI-based creativity support tools for writing
allow users to produce large amounts of text without making a
commensurate number of creative decisions, resulting in output
that is sparse in expressive intent. We argue that the dearth of
the author helps to explain a number of recurring difficulties and
anxieties around AI-based writing support tools, but that it also
suggests an ambitious new goal for AI-based CSTs.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Applied computing → Arts and humanities.

KEYWORDS
creativity support tools, large language models, creative homogenization

1 THE DEARTH OF THE AUTHOR
What's the point of writing? Sometimes we write to learn, or write
to think, or write for solitary enjoyment—but when the process
of writing results in a piece of writing that's meant to be shared
and read by others, what is this piece of writing for? We assert
that in most cases, a piece of writing is meant primarily to convey
its author's expressive intent: to communicate information, invoke
feelings, or otherwise express to the reader a set of ideas and sentiments that the author intends to share. Indeed, this assumption
forms the basis of the expressive communication framework [20]
that has been used to evaluate AI-based creativity support tools
(CSTs) [7, 10, 25] in the past.

The process of writing can thus be viewed as a process of decisionmaking by the author. Authors of fiction must decide on character
names and personalities and appearances, on details of setting
and background, on the balance between action and introspection,
on moment-to-moment emotional tone; authors of argumentative
essays must decide on the points they want to argue, on the evidence
they want to use in support of each point, on the order in which to
introduce this evidence; authors in general must decide on what
words they want to use in what places to get their ideas across. A
piece of writing that contains fifteen hundred words can be thought
of as the result of at least fifteen hundred decisions: perhaps a bit
fewer when some of these words are "forced choices" that could not
be exchanged for another due to rules of grammar, but usually many
more due to the need for decisions beyond simple word choices in
composing any useful or interesting piece.

Historically, an author could not compose a substantive piece
of writing without making the vast majority of these decisions

directly.1 Thus the whole of every piece of writing could be taken
as reflecting its author's intent: the relationship between the length
of a written piece and the number of decisions that its author had
to make was relatively fixed, and an author could not lengthen a
piece of writing without deciding what specific words to add.

But we suddenly find that this is no longer the case. In particular,
when authors use AI-based CSTs to expand a small amount of input
text (such as a one-sentence instruction) to a large amount of output
text (such as a complete written story or essay), they delegate many
of the creative decisions involved in producing the larger output
to the CST—resulting in a piece of writing with an unusually low
ratio of human decision-making to output length. In other words,
the expressive intent of the author is underspecified relative to the
amount of text that is generated, and the resulting piece of writing
is unusually sparse in terms of expressive intent per word.

We refer to this unusual situation as the dearth of the author:
the naïvely AI-augmented author is not absent or dead, but their
intent is stretched so thinly over their writing that they may feel
barely present. In lieu of authorial intent, creative decisions are
made by the CST to which the author has delegated portions of
the writing process; simple LLM-based CSTs like ChatGPT make
these decisions by approximating highly probable choices that a
certain set of raters might also score well [23], while other CSTs
lean on knowledge encoded in handcrafted rulesets [16], in large
human-constructed databases of common-sense knowledge [11],
or in more specialized corpuses of text [21]. Across the full range of
AI-based CSTs for writing [18], the greater the discrepancy between
the size of a minimum viable user input and the size of the output
piece of writing, the more the naïve user's results tend to exhibit
the dearth.

2 SOME IMPLICATIONS OF THE DEARTH
Despite its simplicity, the dearth of the author helps to explain
many of the disparate anxieties and difficulties around AI-based
writing assistants. We briefly discuss a few of its implications here.
Homogenization of writing. Several recent studies of AI-based
CSTs have found either direct [2, 3, 8, 24] or indirect [4, 14] evidence
that these tools can exert a homogenizing effect on the creative
outputs produced by different users: in other words, different users
of the same CST may produce more similar outputs than they
would without the CST. Homogenization effects can be explained
by authors' delegation of creative decision-making to a tool that
makes similar creative decisions in similar usage scenarios, with
greater degrees of homogenization resulting from tools that make
a greater proportion of creative decisions directly.

1Though some words might be drawn verbatim from quotations, and in rare cases
some might be chosen via mechanistic, aleatoric, or automatic writing processes, such
as those adopted by the Oulipo movement [22].

Limited feelings of ownership. Recent studies have also found
that users of AI-based CSTs for writing tend to experience a limited
sense of ownership of or responsibility for the outputs of their
interaction with the CST [9, 19]. This is similarly explained by the
delegation of creative decisions to the CST: delegating a greater
proportion of creative decisions to the CST seems likely to result in
a commensurately lower feeling of ownership toward the resulting
text, as seen both in Draxler et al. [9] and in the stronger sense of
ownership reported by users of a narrower CST [16].

Rhetorical confusion. The typical outputs of AI-supported creative processes are often referred to as "soulless". Simultaneously,
users who build highly intentful creative processes around AI-based
CSTs—sometimes considering and discarding many dozens of AI
outputs before accepting one as complete [6]—are perplexed by
these assertions. The dearth of the author helps explain both phenomena. The term "soullessness" reflects the sparseness of intent
in the outputs that are easiest to create with many AI-based tools,
and that therefore dominate most non-enthusiasts' impressions;
meanwhile, the high-intent nature of some AI artists' processes
may not be immediately apparent to onlookers, because AI tools
permit the creation of comparably sized outputs from much smaller
specifications of intent.

Greater impacts on inexperienced writers. Experienced writers tend to have an ear for evocative language and a strong aversion
to cliché, both of which are components of a sophisticated sense of
taste built up over many years of paying close attention to language.
These writers are readily able to identify problems in AI-generated
text [5], and are often unwilling to simply accept creative decisions
made by the machine when these decisions conflict with their own
sensibilities [21]. Novice writers, on the other hand, may tend to
treat the machine as a creative authority [2] and delegate a greater
proportion of their creative decisions—a form of algorithmic loafing [13] that is likely to result in a stronger sense of dearth.

The value of underdetermination. Different AI-based CSTs
for writing vary widely in the nature of their output and their ability to make a large proportion of the decisions involved in writing
on the user's behalf. When the outputs of a CST take the form of
"sparks" [12], plot outlines [16], questions [15], or critiques [26]
rather than output-ready prose, the user cannot as easily delegate
creative decisions about the integration of these elements into a
complete piece of writing—leaving open a space of underdetermination [1], or perhaps even creative struggle [27], into which expressive
intent must flow.

3 REVERSING THE DEARTH
The dearth of the author arises when the ratio of authorial intent
to output text length is small. AI-based CSTs that make creative
decisions on the author's behalf tend to decrease this ratio. But
AI-based CSTs can also increase this ratio by leading the author to
make a greater number of meaningful creative decisions per unit of
text produced, drawing out unexpressed elements of the author's
intent and provoking them to refine this intent further [15, 17].
CSTs that do this well enough may even bring about an unexpected
alternative condition: an abundance of the author, in which
every word of a piece has been considered more carefully and from
more different angles than the author could otherwise manage or

2

afford. The question of how exactly to design CSTs to support this
abundance—we contend—is one of the biggest and most potentially
impactful research questions that faces the field of AI-based writing
support today.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by Hackworth Grant GR102981, "Investigating Homogenization of Imagination by Generative AI Models",
from the Markkula Center for Applied Ethics. Some of the ideas
discussed here were initially formulated in response to discussions
held at Stochastic Labs during the summer of 2022; thanks to all who
participated in these discussions, and in particular to Joel Simon
and Kyle Steinfeld.

REFERENCES
[1] Lea Albaugh, Scott E Hudson, Lining Yao, and Laura Devendorf. 2020. Investigating underdetermination through interactive computational handweaving. In
Conference on Designing Interactive Systems. 1033–1046.

[2] Barrett R Anderson, Jash Hemant Shah, and Max Kreminski. 2024. Homogenization Effects of Large Language Models on Human Creative Ideation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2402.01536 (2024).

[3] Kenneth C Arnold, Krysta Chauncey, and Krzysztof Z Gajos. 2020. Predictive text
encourages predictable writing. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference
on Intelligent User Interfaces. 128–138.

[4] Advait Bhat, Saaket Agashe, Parth Oberoi, Niharika Mohile, Ravi Jangir, and
Anirudha Joshi. 2023. Interacting with Next-Phrase Suggestions: How Suggestion
Systems Aid and Influence the Cognitive Processes of Writing. In Proceedings of
the 28th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces. 436–452.

[5] Tuhin Chakrabarty, Philippe Laban, Divyansh Agarwal, Smaranda Muresan, and
Chien-Sheng Wu. 2023. Art or Artifice? Large Language Models and the False
Promise of Creativity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.14556 (2023).

[6] Minsuk Chang, Stefania Druga, Alexander J Fiannaca, Pedro Vergani, Chinmay
Kulkarni, Carrie J Cai, and Michael Terry. 2023. The Prompt Artists. In Proceedings
of the 15th Conference on Creativity and Cognition. 75–87.

[7] John Joon Young Chung, Shiqing He, and Eytan Adar. 2021. The intersection of
users, roles, interactions, and technologies in creativity support tools. In Designing
Interactive Systems Conference 2021. 1817–1833.

[8] Anil R Doshi and Oliver Hauser. 2023. Generative artificial intelligence enhances

creativity. Available at SSRN (2023).

[9] Fiona Draxler, Anna Werner, Florian Lehmann, Matthias Hoppe, Albrecht
Schmidt, Daniel Buschek, and Robin Welsch. 2024. The AI Ghostwriter Effect:
When Users Do Not Perceive Ownership of AI-Generated Text But Self-Declare
as Authors. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 31, 2 (2024).
[10] Jonas Frich, Lindsay MacDonald Vermeulen, Christian Remy, Michael Mose
Biskjaer, and Peter Dalsgaard. 2019. Mapping the landscape of creativity support
tools in HCI. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems.

[11] Katy Ilonka Gero and Lydia B Chilton. 2019. Metaphoria: An algorithmic companion for metaphor creation. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems.

[12] Katy Ilonka Gero, Vivian Liu, and Lydia Chilton. 2022. Sparks: Inspiration
for science writing using language models. In Designing Interactive Systems
Conference. 1002–1019.

[13] Isa Inuwa-Dutse, Alice Toniolo, Adrian Weller, and Umang Bhatt. 2023. Algorithmic loafing and mitigation strategies in Human-AI teams. Computers in Human
Behavior: Artificial Humans 1, 2 (2023), 100024.

[14] Maurice Jakesch, Advait Bhat, Daniel Buschek, Lior Zalmanson, and Mor Naaman.
2023. Co-writing with opinionated language models affects users' views. In
Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
[15] Max Kreminski, John Joon Young Chung, and Melanie Dickinson. 2024. Intent
Elicitation in Mixed-Initiative Co-Creativity. In Joint Proceedings of the ACM IUI
Workshops.

[16] Max Kreminski, Melanie Dickinson, Noah Wardrip-Fruin, and Michael Mateas.
2022. Loose Ends: a mixed-initiative creative interface for playful storytelling.
In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Interactive
Digital Entertainment, Vol. 18. 120–128.

[17] Max Kreminski and Michael Mateas. 2021. Reflective creators. In International

Conference on Computational Creativity. 309–318.

[18] Mina Lee, Katy Ilonka Gero, John Joon Young Chung, Simon Buckingham Shum,
Vipul Raheja, Hua Shen, Subhashini Venugopalan, Thiemo Wambsganss, David
Zhou, Emad A. Alghamdi, Tal August, Avinash Bhat, Madiha Zahrah Choksi,
Senjuti Dutta, Jin L.C. Guo, Md Naimul Hoque, Yewon Kim, Simon Knight,

Seyed Parsa Neshaei, Antonette Shibani, Disha Shrivastava, Lila Shroff, Agnia
Sergeyuk, Jessi Stark, Sarah Sterman, Sitong Wang, Antoine Bosselut, Daniel
Buschek, Joseph Chee Chang, Sherol Chen, Max Kreminski, Joonsuk Park, Roy
Pea, Eugenia Ha Rim Rho, Zejiang Shen, and Pao Siangliulue. 2024. A Design
Space for Intelligent and Interactive Writing Assistants. In Proceedings of the 2024
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA)
(CHI '24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA.

[19] Mina Lee, Percy Liang, and Qian Yang. 2022. CoAuthor: Designing a humanAI collaborative writing dataset for exploring language model capabilities. In
Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
[20] Ryan Louie, Jesse Engel, and Cheng-Zhi Anna Huang. 2022. Expressive Communication: Evaluating Developments in Generative Models and Steering Interfaces
for Music Creation. In 27th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces.
405–417.

[21] Piotr Mirowski, Kory W Mathewson, Jaylen Pittman, and Richard Evans. 2023.
Co-Writing Screenplays and Theatre Scripts with Language Models: Evaluation
by Industry Professionals. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems.

[22] Nick Montfort and Noah Wardrip-Fruin. 2003. Six Selections by the Oulipo. In
The New Media Reader, Noah Wardrip-Fruin and Nick Montfort (Eds.). MIT Press,
147–148.

[23] Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela
Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell,
Peter Welinder, Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. 2022. Training
language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, Vol. 35. 27730–27744.

[24] Vishakh Padmakumar and He He. 2023. Does Writing with Language Models

Reduce Content Diversity? arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05196 (2023).

[25] Ben Shneiderman. 2007. Creativity support tools: accelerating discovery and

innovation. Commun. ACM 50, 12 (2007), 20–32.

[26] Jessi Stark, Anthony Tang, Young-Ho Kim, Joonsuk Park, and Daniel Wigdor.
2023. Can AI Support Fiction Writers Without Writing For Them? In Proceedings
of the Second Workshop on Intelligent and Interactive Writing Assistants.
[27] David Zhou and Sarah Sterman. 2023. Creative Struggle: Arguing for the Value
of Difficulty in Supporting Ownership and Self-Expression in Creative Writing.
(2023).

3

