 
 AI, Em-Dashes, and Witch Hunts - Sarah Goehrke Writes 
 Sarah Goehrke Writes Subscribe Sign in AI, Em-Dashes, and Witch Hunts spoiler: I don’t and won’t use AI Sarah Goehrke Aug 21, 2026 5 1 Share It’s 2026, which means it’s that time again in human history: Time for some good old-fashioned witch hunts! In this the year of my debut novel’s release, I’d rather hoped the witch hunts would stay fictional—specifically, to those happening in the aforementioned novel. The Keepers introduces a world on the brink of witch hunts, leading into book two of The Turners Saga where the Burning Times begin. (Book two is, appropriately then, called The Burners and releases in 2027 .) Alas that witch hunts are not relegated only to fiction. Grab your pitchforks, friends, it’s time for the AI hunts! You may spy an integral part of my author setup that lets readers know at a glance my stance on AI. Sarah Goehrke Writes is a reader-supported publication. To receive new posts and support my work, consider becoming a free or paid subscriber. Subscribe What’s Up with AI in Fiction & Publishing Generative 1 AI is a blight upon the creative community. It’s destroying prospects at the mere (or randomly headlined?) suggestion of its use in debut novels, tearing deals away—and, in the way of things, disproportionately affecting BIPOC authors. Some high-profile deals have been cancelled at the suggestion their authors used genAI in their writing process. Did they? Didn’t they? Why didn’t their agents, much less the offering publishers, detect/suspect AI usage prior to bidding wars, big announcements, then bigger headlines with CANCELLED across the top? That’s not for me to say; there’s enough discourse out there that I’m not linking to right now. But: It is a problem. For all of us. So many basic tenets of fiction have been touted as being “clear indicators of AI usage” including—but by no means limited to—em-dashes, oxford/serial commas, and the rule of three. Oh dearie me, I seem to have used all three of those in the preceding sentence. And yet…and yet I wrote it completely by myself. Fancy that. The AI Witch Hunts Candidly, I hate that these accusations are being bandied about so much that it’s being called a witch hunt. I’m writing witch hunts. I’m researching centuries of actual witch hunts. These are horrific events that have taken real people’s lives, livelihoods, reputations, property, and, again, disproportionately affected BIPOC individuals, as well as women. In line with that, we do see that cis white straight male authors haven’t been nearly so afflicted by accusations. Some, even tuberculosis darling Hank Green, have outright said they’ve used AI somewhere in their process, if not to write, then to research or brainstorm or otherwise pick Claude’s (or Gemini’s or ChatGPT’s or whichever bot’s) artificial brain. They have not been cancelled, nor have their book deals, and they go right along doing what they choose to do. When so many AI users are more than happy to own up to their use of these chatbots in their processes, why is society so happy to scream This is AI when there’s no actual evidence of that? Absolutely, there are the instances of full prompts or “Here’s another version” or whatever left in that are fully and blatantly copy/pasted from the chatbot. Those are bunk. Bunk, I say. In my ever-so-humble opinion, generative AI has no place in art. That includes written, visual, musical—these are humanity’s oldest forms of expression, let them remain human. As many like to say, if someone can’t be bothered to write their own book, I can’t be bothered to read it. I am, of course, coming at this from the bias of a published author, an editor with over a decade’s experience in fiction and more than that in technical writing, and a creative with degrees in theatre and English. I have personal investment into human-created art, as well as staking my own livelihood, hopes, and dreams in it. My Official Author Statement on AI Usage I, Sarah Goehrke, have not ever, do not, and will not use generative AI in my writing process. Any of it. The statement visible on my author table at events reads: Absolutely no generative AI was used in the writing, editing, or publication of this book. The Keepers is certified Human Authored (cert #6304122) by the Authors Guild. All art was likewise human created. This author does not accept generative AI in creative spaces. Before I typed all that up and put it right on my pricing sheets, I made this beautiful sign, which it turns out is quite the conversation starter: For so many reasons, my art is through words, not drawing. Still, this illustrates the point well enough :) My book contracts with Quills and Cosmos Press explicitly state that no generative AI is to be used, and that is perhaps the single clause that made me happiest to sign. For the curious, here is a complete list of creative credits for The Keepers and The Potioneer : ALL Writing: Sarah Goehrke Developmental & Copy Editing: Meagan Friedman, Beth Iler Cover Art: WolfBell8 Character Art: Kristina Gehrmann Cat Art: Chandra Jones-Graham Thanks as well to beta readers and critique partners who’ve been through years of manuscripts and idea bouncing; every one of these was a real human person. Every oxford/serial comma, every em-dash was placed there intentionally—I know, because I did it. And I thanked them in the book’s published Acknowledgements: Pointing this out during book events has directly been responsible for at least three sales of The Keepers ; shoutout to those readers for their great taste and humor. At any rate. GenAI is unethical (trained on stolen work; not an “author’s” actual words), terrible for the environment (water consumption alone is horrendous, and by no means the end-all of impact), and unnecessary. Witch hunts are horrific and best relegated to fiction in these purportedly more-enlightened times. Speaking of witch hunts, I have more in-person events coming up soon to bring The Keepers to new readers! I’d love to meet you soon: Sunday 8/23: The Book Nook’s Indie Author, Artist, & Maker Market — Warren, OH Saturday, 8/29: Practically Magic — Walls of Books, Parma, OH Saturday & Sunday 9/5 & 9/6: Akron Authors Con — Akron, OH Sunday 9/20: North Coast Indie Author Book Expo — Avon, OH Saturday 10/10: Banned Together Book Fest — Ferndale, MI Details for author events are always available here. Hope to see you soon and celebrate human creativity! Thanks for being here. I appreciate you. -Sarah 1 Please note this distinction: generative AI generates new content based on prompts; assistive AI has been around for many years now and includes great things like spell check. I use spell check (with copious Add To Dictionary, because I’m a fantasy author), if we need that disclaimer. Assistive AI is not the same thing as generative AI, and in the context of this discussion I am only discussing genAI. 5 1 Share Discussion about this post Comments Restacks Top Latest Discussions No posts Ready for more? Subscribe © 2026 Sarah Goehrke · Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection notice Start your Substack Get the app Substack is the home for great culture 
