 
 Rule of three (writing) - Wikipedia 
 Jump to content 
 Main menu 
 Main menu 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 Navigation
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us 
 Contribute
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages 
 Search 
 Search 
 Appearance 
 Donate 
 Create account 
 Log in 
 Personal tools 
 Donate 
 Create account 
 Log in 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 (Top) 
 1 
 Meaning 
 2 
 Slogans and catchphrases 
 3 
 Comedy 
 4 
 Storytelling and folklore 
 5 
 Literature 
 6 
 Rhetoric and public speaking 
 7 
 Use by large language models 
 8 
 See also 
 9 
 References 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 Rule of three (writing) 
 3 languages 
 Català עברית Norsk bokmål 
 Edit links 
 Article 
 Talk 
 English 
 Read 
 Edit 
 View history 
 Tools 
 Tools 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 Actions
 Read 
 Edit 
 View history 
 General
 What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Switch to legacy parser 
 Print/export
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 In other projects
 Wikidata item 
 Appearance 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 Writing principle 
 Some of this article's listed sources may not be reliable . Please help improve this article by looking for better, more reliable sources. Unreliable citations may be challenged and removed. ( July 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) 
 The story of " Goldilocks and the Three Bears " uses the rule of three extensively, with the protagonist examining three sets of three items in a house, finding only the third of each set to be satisfactory 
 The rule of three is a writing principle which suggests that a trio of entities such as examples, events, or characters is more satisfying, effective, or humorous than other numbers, hence also more memorable, because it combines both brevity and rhythm with the smallest amount of information needed to create a pattern. [ 1 ] [ 2 ] 
 Slogans, film titles, and a variety of other things have been structured in threes, a tradition that grew out of oral storytelling [ 3 ] and continues in narrative fiction . Examples include " The Three Little Pigs ", " Goldilocks and the Three Bears ", and The Three Musketeers . Similarly, adjectives are often grouped in threes to emphasize an idea. 
 Meaning [ edit ] 
 The rule of three can refer to a collection of three words, phrases, sentences, lines, paragraphs/stanzas, chapters/sections of writing and even whole books . [ 2 ] [ 4 ] The three elements together are known as a triad . [ 5 ] The technique is used not just in prose, but also in poetry , oral storytelling, films, and advertising . 
 A tricolon is a more specific use of the rule of three where three words or phrases are equal in length and grammatical form. [ 6 ] 
 A hendiatris is a figure of speech where three successive words are used to express a single central idea. [ 5 ] As a slogan or motto, this is known as a tripartite motto . [ 7 ] 
 Slogans and catchphrases [ edit ] 
 See also: Irreversible binomial § Common trinomials 
Many advertising campaigns and public information slogans use the technique to create a catchy, memorable way of displaying information. In marketing theory, American advertising and sales pioneer E. St. Elmo Lewis laid out his three chief copywriting principles, which he felt were crucial for effective advertising: The mission of an advertisement is to attract a reader so that he will look at the advertisement and start to read it; then to interest him, so that he will continue to read it; then to convince him, so that when he has read it, he will believe it. If an advertisement contains these three qualities of success, it is a successful advertisement. [ 8 ] Some examples include: 
 Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness – Rights outlined in the U.S. Declaration of Independence 
 Liberté, égalité, fraternité [ 9 ] – The slogan of the French Republic predating 1790 
 Einigkeit und Recht und Freiheit – Opening line of German National Anthem 
 A Mars a day helps you work, rest and play [ 10 ] – Mars advertising slogan since 1959 
 Stop, Look and Listen [ 11 ] [ 12 ] – A public road and level crossing safety slogan 
 Stop, Drop and Roll – A fire safety slogan listing the steps to take if one's clothing has caught fire 
 Faster, Higher, Stronger [ 13 ] – The Olympic motto; a translation of the Latin Citius, Altius, Fortius 
 Veni, vidi, vici – A triad translated from Latin as "I came, I saw, I conquered", popularly attributed to Julius Caesar of Rome. 
 Slip-Slop-Slap – Australian sun protection (anti-skin-cancer) campaign. 
 "See no evil, hear no evil, speak no evil". – Three wise monkeys 
 Turn on, tune in, drop out – 1960s counterculture-era phrase popularized by Timothy Leary . 
 Snap, Crackle and Pop – Cartoon mascots of Rice Krispies . 
 Government of the people, by the people, for the people – from Lincoln's Gettysburg Address 
 See it. Say it. Sorted. – A slogan encouraging passenger vigilance for railway safety by the British Transport Police [ 14 ] 
 Comedy [ edit ] 
 In comedy, the rule of three is also called a comic triple [ 15 ] and is one of the many comedic devices regularly used by humorists , writers , and comedians . The third element of the triple is often used to create an effect of surprise with the audience, [ 15 ] and is frequently the punch line of the joke itself. For instance, jokes might feature three stereotyped individuals—such as an Englishman, an Irishman and a Scotsman ; or a blonde, a brunette, and a redhead—where the surprise or punch line of the joke comes from the third character. 
 The comedic rule of three is often paired with quick timing, ensuring that viewers have less time to catch on to the pattern before the punch line hits. As a whole, the comedic rule of threes relies on setting up a pattern of two items and then subverting viewer expectations by breaking that pattern with the third item. One example comes from The Dick Van Dyke Show – "Can I get you anything? Cup of coffee? Doughnut? Toupee?" [ 16 ] 
 Just like most comedic writing, the rule of threes in comedy relies on building tension to a comedic release. In the case of the rule of threes, tension is built with the first two items in the pattern and then released with the final item, which should be the funniest of the three. Most triples are short in length, often only two or three sentences, but the rule can also be implemented effectively at longer length as long as base formula is still followed. [ 17 ] 
 The effectiveness of a pattern of three items has also been noted in the visual arts. Cartoonist Art Spiegelman described the rule of three as being key to the work of Nancy creator Ernie Bushmiller , giving the example that "a drawing of three rocks in a background scene was Ernie's way of showing us there were some rocks in the background. It was always three. Why? Because two rocks wouldn't be 'some rocks.' Two rocks would be a pair of rocks. And four rocks were unacceptable because four rocks would indicate 'some rocks' but it would be one rock more than was necessary to convey the idea of 'some rocks.'" [ 18 ] 
 Storytelling and folklore [ edit ] 
 In storytelling , authors often create triplets or structures in three parts. In the rule's simplest form, this is merely beginning, middle, and end , as expressed in Aristotle 's Poetics . 
 Snow White receives three visits from her wicked stepmother. 
 Vladimir Propp , in his Morphology of the Folk Tale , concluded that any of the elements in a folktale could be negated twice so that it would repeat thrice. [ 19 ] This is common not only in the Russian tales he studied but throughout folk tales and fairy tales : most commonly, perhaps, in that the youngest son is usually the third, although fairy tales often display the rule of three in the most blatant form. A small sample of the latter includes: 
 Rumpelstiltskin spins thrice for the heroine and lets her guess his name thrice over a period of three days. 
 In " East of the Sun and West of the Moon ", the heroine receives three gifts while searching for her lost husband; when she finds where he is held prisoner, she must use them to thrice bribe her way to the hero (the first two times she was unable to tell her story because he lay in a drugged sleep). 
 In " Brother and Sister ", Brother is transformed into a deer when he drinks from the third stream that their wicked stepmother enchanted, and when Sister is killed by the same stepmother, she visits her child's room thrice, being caught and restored the third time. 
 In " The Dancing Water, the Singing Apple, and the Speaking Bird ", a woman says she will bear the king three marvelous children; when they reappear, their envious aunts attempt to kill them by sending them on three quests, after the three marvelous things of the title. 
 In " The Silent Princess ", a prince breaks a peasant woman's pitcher thrice and is cursed; when he finds the title princess, he must persuade her to speak thrice. 
 In " The Love for Three Oranges ", the hero picks three magical oranges, and only with the third is he able to keep the woman who springs out of it. 
 Literature [ edit ] 
 In Charles Dickens 's A Christmas Carol , Marley 's Ghost tells Ebenezer Scrooge he will receive visits from three spirits: The Ghost of Christmas Past , The Ghost of Christmas Present , and finally The Ghost of Christmas Yet to Come , to which Scrooge says, "Spirit, I fear you most of all." 
 In the musical Fiddler on the Roof , Tevye must give his three eldest daughters away, one after another. Each match progressively challenges his faith, as represented by a monologue in which he argues with himself using the phrase "on the other hand" to play the devil's advocate and convince himself to side with his daughters. This is subverted with the youngest daughter who wishes to marry a Gentile , for which Tevye concludes that "No, there is no other hand." 
 In Shakespeare 's Julius Caesar , Mark Antony starts his speech by using the rule of three: Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears , to which the commoners start to listen. 
 In Shakespeare 's Macbeth , there are three witches , called "weird sisters". 
 Rhetoric and public speaking [ edit ] 
 Cassandre 's advertisement for Dubonnet aperitif uses wordplay to form a progression of three: "It's nice, it's good, Dubonnet." The use of a series of three elements is also a well-known feature of public oratory. Max Atkinson , in his book on oratory entitled Our Masters' Voices , [ 20 ] gives examples of how public speakers use three-part phrases to generate what he calls 'claptraps', evoking audience applause. 
 Martin Luther King Jr. , the civil rights activist and preacher, was known for his uses of tripling and the rule of three throughout his many influential speeches. For example, the speech "Non-Violence and Racial Justice" contained a binary opposition made up of the rule of three: "insult, injustice and exploitation", followed a few lines later by "justice, good will, and brotherhood". [ 21 ] Conversely, the segregationist Alabama governor George Wallace inveighed "segregation now, segregation tomorrow, segregation forever" during his 1963 inaugural address . [ 22 ] 
 The appeal of the three-fold pattern is also illustrated by the transformation of Winston Churchill 's reference to " blood, toil, tears and sweat " (echoing Giuseppe Garibaldi and Theodore Roosevelt ) in its popular recollection to "blood, sweat and tears". [ 23 ] [ 24 ] 
 Use by large language models [ edit ] 
 Large language models often use the rule of three. [ 25 ] AI writing may overuse the rule of three, especially when using adjectives, leading to writing which feels verbose but is lacking in depth. [ 26 ] 
 See also [ edit ] 
 Hendiatris (or tripartite motto ) 
 Rule of thirds ; a similar concept applied to visual art 
 Tricolon 
 The Three Classic Laws of thought 
 Triads 
 Triple deity 
 References [ edit ] 
 ↑ "What is the mysterious 'Rule of Three'? | Copywriters of Distinction" . rule-of-three.co.uk . Retrieved 1 June 2015 . 
 1 2 Crossfield, Jonathan (9 June 2009). "Writing: The Power of Three" . www.jonathancrossfield.com . Retrieved 5 June 2015 . 
 ↑ Graveline, Denise (November 2013). "Speechwriting Secrets" . Toastmaster . Toastmasters International . p. 17. 
 ↑ Craige, Alex (9 November 2013). "Do You Use The Rhetorical "Rule of Three"?" . At Counsel Table . Retrieved 2015-06-05 . 
 1 2 "How to Use the Rule of Three in Your Speeches" . 28 May 2009 . Retrieved 2015-06-05 . 
 ↑ "One, Two, Three: What Is a Tricolon?" . Retrieved 2015-06-05 . 
 ↑ Ltd., Blair. "ODLT dictionary definition of Tripartite motto" . www.odlt.org . Retrieved 2015-06-05 . 
 ↑ Bryant, Donnie (2016). "Is AIDA Outdated As A Marketing Process? (Part II)" . Rhino Daily . Retrieved 2019-04-22 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) 
 ↑ "Slogan of the French Republic" . Archived from the original on 2015-05-12 . Retrieved 2015-06-01 . 
 ↑ Sweney, Mark (28 February 2008). "Mars revives 'Work, rest, play' slogan with ad featuring bell-ringing monks" . the Guardian . Retrieved 2015-06-01 . 
 ↑ "Stop, Look and Listen – Child Road Safety Game – Tales of the Road" . talesoftheroad.direct.gov.uk . Retrieved 2015-06-01 . 
 ↑ "Crossing Ahead, Stop, Look And Listen" . www.lib.sk.ca . Archived from the original on 2015-12-11 . Retrieved 2015-06-01 . 
 ↑ "Olympic.org Registration" . registration.olympic.org . Archived from the original on 2015-09-18 . Retrieved 2015-06-01 . 
 ↑ "See it. Say it. Sorted" . British Transport Police . Retrieved 3 September 2025 . 
 1 2 Jjeffries. "The Rule of Three and the Comic Triple" . The Critique Circle Blog . Critique Circle. Archived from the original on July 1, 2014 . Retrieved 2018-12-07 . 
 ↑ "Using The Rule Of 3 To Elevate Your Presentations" . buckleyschool.com . 2021-10-13. 
 ↑ Henshey, Chelsea (2016-02-11). "Comedy Writing Secrets: Triple the Funny" . Writer's Digest . Retrieved 2018-12-07 . 
 ↑ McCloud, Scott . "Five Card Nancy," ScottMcCloud.com. Accessed September 16, 2024. 
 ↑ Propp, Vladimir. Morphology of the Folk Tale . Austin: University of Texas Press, 1968, p. 74, ISBN 0-292-78376-0 
 ↑ Atkinson, J. Maxwell. Our Masters' Voices: The Language and Body Language of Politics . London: Methuen, 1984. ISBN 0-416-37690-8 
 ↑ "Nonviolence and Racial Justice" (PDF) . www.stanford.edu . Retrieved 2015-06-01 . 
 ↑ Governor George Wallace of Alabama. "Inaugural Address (1963) The "Segregation Now, Segregation Forever" Speech" (PDF) . web.utk.edu . Retrieved 2015-06-01 . 
 ↑ "Blood, Toil, Tears and Sweat" . www.winstonchurchill.org . Retrieved 2015-06-01 . 
 ↑ "Presentation Skills 3. The Rule of Three" . www.presentationmagazine.com . Retrieved 2015-06-01 . 
 ↑ "How to Break Free from GPT's Rule of Three in Writing" . AI Detection Resources | GPTZero . 2024-03-04 . Retrieved 2026-03-23 . 
 ↑ "The Predictable Rhetoric of AI-Generated Text: Overused Stylistic Devices - My Framer Site" . www.grc-health.com . Retrieved 2026-03-23 . 
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rule_of_three_(writing)&oldid=1373211903 " 
 Categories : Narratology Recurrent elements in fairy tales Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from July 2025 All articles lacking reliable references CS1 maint: deprecated archival service 
 This page was last edited on 4 September 2026, at 16:20 (UTC) . 
 Page was rendered with Parsoid . 
 Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Legal & safety contacts 
 Code of Conduct 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 Mobile view 
 Search 
 Search 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 Rule of three (writing) 
 3 languages 
 Add topic 
 