Dungeoncraft
Ray Winninger
A 29-part series of articles which appeared in Dragon
Magazine from 1997 to 1999: a comprehensive look at the
process of traditional dungeon-based game-mastering.
Preserved by John H. Kim at
http://www.darkshire.net/jhkim/rpg/dnd/dungeoncraft/
Table of Contents
1 Should I DM? et al............................................ 4
2 World Building, Part I..................................... 22
3 World Building, Part II....................................43
4 World Building, Part III...................................72
5 Character Names........................................... 100
6 Home Base.................................................... 114
7 The Rumor Mill and Maps............................ 129
8 Four Things You Can (and Should!) Do With 
NPCs................................................................ 149
9 The Anatomy of an NPC............................... 164
10 Mapping the Wilderness..............................182
11 Wilderness Features.....................................195
12 Challenging the Players...............................213
13 Challenging the Characters......................... 227
14 Creating an Adventure Concept.................. 241
15 Starting Adventure Maps.............................263
16 Identifying the Sub-Goals........................... 273
17 Preparing for the First Session.................... 290
18 Tools............................................................ 310
19 Action and Reaction.................................... 328
20 Your Game's V oice...................................... 344
21 I've Got a Secret, Part I............................... 360
22 I've Got a Secret, Part II.............................. 377
23 Migrating to Third Edition.......................... 398
24 Newfangled Fighting...................................411
25 Let's Take It From the Top.......................... 425
26 Let's Take It From the Top II.......................441
27 Off to the Races...........................................456
28 Gotta Have Faith, Part I.............................. 474
29 Gotta Have Faith, Part II............................. 489
Rules of Dungeoncraft..................................... 514
1
Should I DM? et al.
From Dragon Magazine 255
The Advanced Dungeons & Dragons (AD&D) 
game is a game of the imagination. It's this 
characteristic more than any other that sets 
AD&D apart from chess, checkers, charades, 
poker, Monopoly, Chutes and Ladders, Space 
Invaders, and just about any other game that 
comes to mind. All of these other games are 
defined by their rules-pass "Go" to collect $200, a
flush beats a straight, and so forth. The AD&D 
game, on the other hand, doesn't really have any 
rules. The Player's Handbook and Dungeon 
Master Guide aren't full of rules in the 
conventional sense-they're more like suggestions. 
AD&D players are expected to take these 
suggestions and use them to create their own 
games ideally suited to their own tastes.
As a result, each AD&D session can be a unique 
and rewarding experience. It isn't just a game; it's 
an educational experience, a social event, and an 
outlet for creative energy. Because there are no 
absolute rules to fall back on, however, the 
AD&D game is only as much fun as the players 
can make it. A game of the imagination isn't very 
interesting unless the players are inventive. As 
both referee and guardian of the game world, 
much of this creative burden rests squarely on the
shoulders of the Dungeon Master (DM). Good 
DMing is the key to a rewarding AD&D 
campaign. A good DM can make the most 
mundane adventures come to life, while all the 
rulebooks and dice in the world can't save the 
ailing campaign of a poor DM.
A good DM is a writer, actor, game designer, 
storyteller, and referee all rolled into one. Taking 
on all these roles is not easy; effective DMing is 
more art than science. Beginning with this issue, 
Dragon Magazine devotes a few pages each 
month to exploring the art of Dungeoncraft. In the
months ahead, you'll have an opportunity to peek 
behind the scenes as I prepare and run a complete 
AD&D campaign. Along the way, I'll discuss how
I designed and ran various aspects of the 
campaign. I'll also give you tips for creating or 
improving your own campaigns and for handling 
special situations that arise during play. Future 
installments of this column will cover topics 
ranging from worldbuilding and character 
creation to dungeon design and playing effective 
NPCs.
Although "Dungeoncraft" is an obvious starting 
point for beginners running their first games, 
experienced dungeon-crawlers should find plenty 
of interesting material in these pages as well. 
Along the way, you're bound to encounter some 
new rules, techniques, and tricks to help you 
spice up even a long-running campaign. Between 
"Dungeoncraft," the monthly "Sage Advice" rules
column, and the occasional "Dungeon Mastery" 
articles on special topics related to DMing, each 
issue of Dragon Magazine should provide just 
about any DM with plenty of food for thought.
"Dungeoncraft" will include advice on how to 
handle the sticky situations that arise in your own 
games. Need advice on how to deal with a 
"difficult" player? Wondering how much treasure 
to place in your dungeons? Want to know how to 
run a doppleganger effectively? If so, drop me a 
line at the address above.
With all that out of the way, we can move on to 
this month's topic: getting started. A good DM 
knows that lots of prep time is necessary before 
building a new campaign. There are maps to 
draw, stories to write, characters to create, and 
dungeons to stock. Because the many tasks that 
must be completed before beginning play are 
obviously interconnected, it's sometimes difficult 
to decide where to begin.
Begin by asking yourself a few key questions. 
Although a couple of these queries might sound a 
bit trite, having clear answers in mind for each of 
them up front is bound to save you lots of time 
and headaches later. In order, the key questions 
are:
1. Should I DM?
Running your own AD&D campaign can be 
incredibly rewarding. In essence, you get to 
create an entire world, write its history, populate 
it as you see fit, and craft your own legends. 
What's more, if your campaign is effective, you 
might experience the unique satisfaction of 
creating something that eventually attains a depth 
and a life of its own. Some AD&D campaigns 
have run for twenty years or more and have 
generated enough tales to fill several volumes. On
the other hand, you should recognize that DMing 
isn't a responsibility to be assumed lightly. Before
you begin, you should take some time to make 
sure that you're ready to start a game.
DMs face two real problems. The first is a lack of
time. While it's certainly enjoyable work, 
preparing and running an AD&D campaign is just
that-work. In the early going, you should count 
on spending three to four hours per week (in 
addition to actual playing time) preparing 
adventures, drawing maps, and adding little 
details to your setting. If you don't have the time 
to spend, don't even try to run the game; you'll 
only frustrate your players. You can significantly 
decrease prep time by using published adventures
and settings, but as a practical rule, you're likely 
to get only as much out of these products as 
you're willing to put into them. Never try to run a 
published adventure without reading it thoroughly
prior to play.
The second problem facing DMs is a lack of 
restraint. If you think you'd rather be a player, 
don't DM. Part of the DM's job is to let the 
players grab center stage. A good DM always 
gives the players the last word and lets them 
decide what happens next. While this advice 
might sound straightforward, losing sight of it has
been the downfall of many a campaign. Once 
play begins, you're going to have to resist the 
urge to use favorite NPCs to steal the spotlight 
from the players. You'll also need to keep an open
mind about the outcome of the adventures and 
storylines you create lest you steer the players 
toward the endings you favor. Ultimately, the 
stories arising from your campaign belong to the 
players. If you have a problem with that, let 
someone else run the game.
"False starts" can waste a lot of time (yours and 
the players') and they inevitably make it even 
harder to set up a viable game later.
2. How Many Players Do I 
Want? Where Will I Find Them?
Unlike a lot of newer roleplaying games, AD&D 
works best with a lot of players. Think of the 
ideal AD&D adventuring party-you need at least 
a couple of fighters to engage monsters and 
protect the weaker adventurers in combat, a cleric
to cast healing spells, a thief to deal with tricks 
and traps, and a wizard or two to decipher 
magical clues and provide an extra punch in 
important battles. If any of these key roles aren't 
filled, the players are bound to run into trouble; 
many AD&D supplements were designed under 
the assumption that all these skills would be 
available to the players' party. Similarly, it is nice 
if one or two of the players choose to play 
nonhuman races, giving the party even more 
capabilities and flexibility with regards to 
language, etc. Because players are free to choose 
any role they wish, it's wise to plan on four or 
more players to guarantee a well-balanced party. 
If your players are willing to give up some of 
their options while creating their characters, you 
might get away with only four or five players 
(more on this in a later installment devoted to 
character creation). Playing with fewer than four 
players is likely to prove difficult in all but the 
most unusual campaigns.
On the upper end, you'll want to limit yourself to 
eight or ten players as a general rule. With more 
than ten players, it's easy to lose control of the 
game. For similar reasons, less-experienced DMs 
might want to limit themselves to six or seven 
players for the time being; you can always add 
more later. In any case, since you should always 
have enough room at the game table(s) to 
comfortably accommodate all players, it's far 
more likely that the real limit on the number of 
players proves to be a function of the space 
available.
If you don't know enough potential players to fill 
all the slots you have in mind, there are plenty of 
ways to locate new players. Find out if any local 
colleges have a gaming club (most do). Attend a 
local gaming convention and play in an AD&D 
tournament. Check with the retailers who sell 
AD&D products in your area to see if any of 
them will allow you to post a "players wanted" 
notice in their shops. You can also post notices in 
appropriate places on the Internet. The social 
element is one of the characteristics that makes 
AD&D such a great game; over the years, 
thousands of lifelong friendships have formed 
over the gaming table.
3. How Often Should We Play?
How often you expect to play also affects all sorts
of DM decisions. Effective pacing is one of the 
most important attributes of a successful AD&D 
campaign, and only by understanding how often 
you expect to play can you take steps to pace 
your campaign so that events unfold in an 
appropriate time frame.
If at all possible, try to play at a regular time, 
once per week. More often than once per week is 
going to force you to spend an extraordinary 
amount of free time preparing adventures and 
materials. Unless you have this much time to 
spend, you're likely to burn out before your 
campaign really gets off the ground. Playing less 
frequently than once per week, on the other hand, 
makes it difficult for the players to keep the 
details of the game fresh in their mind. You'll also
find that the less frequently you play, the more 
likely it is that some of your key players will miss
game sessions. The more frequent and regular 
your game times, the easier it will be for the 
players to remember them and plan accordingly.
If you can't play once per week, you might get 
away with any regular interval up to once per 
month. In this event, it's important to schedule 
each game session as long in advance as possible 
and to take careful notes during each session, so 
you can refresh the players' memories of the 
game situation at the start of the next session.
Note that for now, you need only estimate how 
often you expect to play on average. Once things 
get going, you might play slightly more or less 
often in certain situations depending on how the 
game progresses. To finish off a particularly 
climactic storyline, for instance, you might want 
to schedule an extra session. Similarly, after a 
lengthy storyline comes to a close, you might take
a week off, giving you extra time to prepare the 
next set of adventures.
4. What Rulebooks and 
Accessories Will I Need?
I'm going to assume that you've played the 
AD&D game before and know that you're 
interested in continuing. If you haven't played the 
AD&D game before, your best bet is to pick up 
the D&D Game Fast-Play Rules or the 
Introduction to Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 
boxed set and follow the instructions therein to 
run a few sample games. This should give you a 
nice opportunity to get your feet wet and to 
decide whether or not you're interested in 
investing further time and money. Once you're 
ready to create your own adventures and start a 
full-blown campaign, you can follow the advice 
below.
To run your own AD&D campaign, I recommend 
beginning with just five items: the Player's 
Handbook, Dungeon Master Guide, Monstrous 
Manual book, a DM's Screen, and a set of AD&D
Character Record Sheets. All together, these items
add up to roughly a $100 investment. Yes, that's a
lot of money, but you don't have to spend it all at 
once. Start by purchasing the Player's Handbook 
and take time to read and absorb it fully. Then 
purchase the Dungeon Master Guide and 
completely peruse it before moving on to the 
Monstrous Manual book. In this fashion, you can 
spread the investment over several months, while 
simultaneously insuring that you're not trying to 
tackle too much material at a time. If the cost is 
still a problem, see if your players might be 
interested in contributing to the cost of the 
rulebooks.
The Player's Handbook (PH) contains the basic 
rules for creating characters and handling 
combats, as well as complete descriptions of all 
the game's basic magic spells. Although the PH is
primarily for players, as DM, you'll find it an 
essential part of your library as well. You'll use its
rules for creating the NPCs who populate your 
campaign setting, and you'll need its spell 
descriptions to create tricks and traps and to 
conduct play.
The Dungeon Master Guide (DMG) reiterates the 
rules for combat, includes lots of indispensable 
rules for running campaigns and offers complete 
descriptions of all the game's basic magical items.
The DMG will prove extremely useful while 
you're creating adventures and during play itself.
The Monstrous Manual is a complete listing of all
the statistics for the monsters inhabiting the 
average AD&D game world. While it's possible 
to begin play without the MM (particularly if you 
plan to kick off your campaign with published 
adventures), I recommend buying it for three 
reasons. First, the Monstrous Manual includes a 
useful illustration of each of its creatures. These 
illustrations make it much easier to describe the 
beasts to your players. Second, the monster 
entries include lots of information that is omitted 
from the capsule monster descriptions found in 
published adventures, and this missing 
information (ecology, motivation, feeding habits 
and so forth) is often the key to bringing the 
creature to life. Lastly, perhaps more than any 
other AD&D accessory, the Monstrous Manual 
book is a rich font of ideas. Each of its 350-odd 
creatures is an adventure waiting to happen; just a
quick flip through its pages is bound to plant a 
few seeds for interesting encounters, obstacles, 
and storylines. Once play begins, you'll quickly 
realize that you can use every idea you can get 
your hands on.
AD&D Character Record Sheets are blank forms 
your players can use to keep track of their 
character's statistics, hit points, magical items, 
etc. While the sheets aren't strictly necessary, I 
recommend that you pick up a set and ask your 
players to use them. Using well-organized 
character sheets like these saves lots of time 
during play. Once they see how useful the sheets 
are, players might want to buy their own.
The AD&D DM's Screen is a cardstock screen 
you can stand up at your position at the game 
table and use to conceal your notes and dice rolls 
from the players. Printed on the inside of the 
screen, you'll find all the most frequently used 
game charts and lists, making it unnecessary to 
waste time flipping though the rulebooks to locate
this information during play. While an 
enterprising craftsman can easily photocopy a 
few charts from the rulebooks and create his or 
her own screen out of poster board, the official 
screen isn't terribly expensive. In later 
installments, I'll explore some specific techniques
you can use in conjunction with the a screen to 
add some spice to your games.
Other Books and Items
Beginners are often confused by the staggering 
variety of available AD&D products. For now, it's
best to ignore all those other products. You won't 
need them to get your campaign up and running. 
In later installments I'll explore a wide range of 
available products and discuss ways in which you
might gradually introduce new material to add 
variety to your campaign.
If you're a more experienced DM and plan to use 
additional material right from the start (perhaps 
something from the Player's Option or Complete 
Handbook series), it's a good idea to note exactly 
which products you'll be using before you go any 
further. Your choice of products might well 
influence a few of the basic design decisions 
ahead.
Where Do We Go From Here?
Now that that's over with, it's time to move on to 
something a bit trickier. Once you have answers 
in mind for all four fundamental questions, you're
ready to start building your campaign. Meet me 
here in thirty days for "World Building, Part I."
2
World Building, Part I
From Dragon Magazine 256
Last month, we resolved some basic logistical 
and administrative issues-how many players is 
best, what rulebooks to use, and so forth. With 
that out of the way, it's time to start creating the 
campaign environment.
Before we start play, before we even attempt to 
design our first adventure, we should flesh out the
campaign world. What's our fantasy world like? 
What sort of adventures await our brave players?
These are a couple of the more basic questions. 
Before we go too far, though, it's time to 
introduce you to the...
First Rule of Dungeoncraft:
Never force yourself to create more than 
you must.
Write this rule on the inside cover of your 
Dungeon Master Guide. Failure to obey the First 
Rule has been the downfall of too many 
campaigns. You shouldn't feel compelled to create
more information or detail than you'll need to 
conduct the next couple of game sessions. When 
some DMs sit down to create a new campaign, 
they are strongly tempted to draw dozens of 
maps, create hundreds of NPCs, and write 
histories of the campaign world stretching back 
thousands of years. While having this sort of 
information at your disposal can't hurt, it 
probably won't help-not for a long time yet. 
Spending lots of time on extraneous details now 
only slows you down, perhaps to the point where 
you lose interest in the game before it starts. For 
now, the goal is to figure out exactly what 
information you'll need to conduct your first few 
game sessions. You can fill in the holes later, as it 
becomes necessary. This approach not only gets 
you up and playing as quickly as possible but also
keeps your options open and allows you to tailor 
the campaign around the input of the players and 
the outcome of their adventures. In this spirit, you
should aim to start your campaign as soon as you 
can, while doing as little preliminary design as 
possible.
With that in mind, you face an important decision
at the start. You must choose whether you want to
use a published AD&D setting or create one of 
your own. As usual, there are both advantages 
and disadvantages associated with either path.
TSR's settings were all created by expert game 
designers, so they're full of great ideas. They also 
come packaged with professionally crafted maps 
and play aids, and there are dozens of published 
adventures available for most of them, which 
might help you get through the occasional dry 
spell during which you don't feel like creating 
your own adventures. Surprisingly, however, 
none of the settings is terribly appropriate for 
inexperienced Dungeon Masters. Most of them 
concentrate on presenting the sort of information 
that's unlikely to directly influence an actual 
game session for quite some time (detailed 
histories, cultural backgrounds, etc).
Creating your own setting, on the other hand, 
requires you to begin from scratch. Ultimately, 
you must generate your own maps and supply 
your own ideas. While this can be challenge, 
successfully tackling it is one of the most 
rewarding experiences you can have with the 
AD&D game.
For the purposes of future columns, I'm going to 
assume that you'll be creating your own campaign
world. If you'd rather use one of the TSR settings,
the advice in "Dungeoncraft" will still be useful. 
You'll be surprised how much of the work that 
goes into starting a new campaign remains the 
same under both options. If you decide to use a 
published setting, you might be able to skip a few
of the steps that follow, but we'll probably catch 
up to you within the next column or two. Note 
that those of you who create your own settings 
should still take the time to browse through the 
various AD&D supplements and adventure 
modules down at your local hobby shop, even 
those specifically tailored to one of TSR's 
published settings. Most of TSR's AD&D 
material is easily adapted to just about any 
campaign setting with relatively little effort. 
Later, you can look to the occasional module for a
welcome and temporary relief from your design 
duties.
Starting the World
How does one go about creating an entire fantasy 
world from scratch? After all, it sounds like a lot 
of work. The secret is to remember the First Rule 
and to keep in mind that "creating the world" is 
what you and your players are going to do 
together over the next several weeks, months, or 
years of play. For now, your job is to create only 
those details necessary to get the ball rolling.
Your starting point is the world's basic concept or 
"hook." Most successful AD&D settings have a 
single, easily digested characteristic that makes 
them unique and interesting. Ultimately, it's this 
concept that captures your players' imaginations 
and draws them into the game. Making an 
imaginary world come to life is one of the most 
difficult tasks you face as the Dungeon Master. 
The more unique and interesting your world, the 
easier it will be for your players to accept its 
reality. A good "hook" goes a long way toward 
immediately signaling the world's unique 
characteristics to the players. Think about your 
favorite fantasy worlds from books, movies and 
games and try to identify what it is about each of 
these settings that makes it different from all the 
rest. Try to express these differences in no more 
than a paragraph or a few sentences. This is 
exactly the sort of distinguishing characteristic or 
hook you need for your own world.
Most hooks can be broken down into five 
categories: culture, environment, class/race, 
opposition, and situations.
Culture
Perhaps your game world is set against a cultural 
backdrop not encountered in the typical AD&D 
game. For instance, you could run a game based 
on the cultures of ancient Egypt, ancient Greece, 
or the ancestors of the American Indians. You can
then set about adapting the AD&D game's magic 
systems, character classes, and monsters to this 
new environment. Depending upon the culture 
you choose, TSR has published some excellent 
sourcebooks and settings that might inspire you. 
Some of these titles are out-of-print, but you 
might be able to find them at local stores, game 
conventions, or Internet auction sites.
While settings based on cultural hooks can be 
interesting and rewarding, they're often difficult 
to create. To do a good job of adapting the AD&D
rules to your chosen backdrop, you'll probably 
have to do some serious research and maybe a 
little game design to patch the few holes that pop 
up. For a detailed example of the sort of work 
involved, pick up any of the TSR products 
mentioned in the sidebars. One obvious benefit of
a cultural hook is that it has the potential to tell 
you and your players an awful lot about the game 
world. If you base your game around an ancient 
Egyptian culture, for instance, you know 
something about the setting (largely desert), some
of the adventures the players can expect 
(exploring hidden tombs), some of the monsters 
the players are likely to encounter (sphinxes, the 
phoenix, various desert serpents) and something 
about the world's mythology and theology (both 
based on ancient Egyptian beliefs).
Environment
Another option is to use a particular environment 
as your hook. Imagine a continent that consists 
almost exclusively of forests, mountains, 
swamps, jungles, deserts, or islands. Note that 
your choice of environment can also tell you a 
few things about your game world. The idea of a 
forest world, for instance, suggests that elves are 
more prevalent than they are in other AD&D 
settings. A desert world suggests that its cultures 
are largely nomadic and that finding drinkable 
water might be an important part of many 
adventures. A world that consists of an enormous 
archipelago suggests that seafaring will play an 
important role in the campaign.
Class/Race
You might also think about basing a hook around 
one or more of the AD&D game's character 
classes or races. Imagine a world in which all the 
player characters are members of an ancient order
of wizards, or another in which all the 
adventurers are members of rival orc tribes (in 
which case you might want The Complete 
Humanoids Handbook). Most of TSR's Class 
Handbooks give you some advice on how you 
might run an entire campaign built around a 
single character class.
While campaigns built around such a hook can be
lots of fun, they're often difficult to pull off. First 
of all, the various character classes and races 
work together to balance the AD&D rules. By 
tampering with the available choices, you can 
upset that balance. As an example, think about 
how much more difficult the average adventure 
becomes if none of the player characters are 
Clerics and the party has no access to healing 
spells. Similarly, lots of players prefer or dislike 
various roles. By limiting the available options up
front, you're making it harder for some players to 
create characters they like.
Opposition
The most commonly encountered opposition is 
another possibility for an effective hook. In this 
instance, your campaign is dominated by a single 
monster or a closely related group of monsters. 
The exact monster you choose should suggest to 
yourself and your players something about the 
world. For instance, a world dominated by 
dinosaurs probably has a primitive "land that time
forgot" appeal. Likewise, a world dominated by 
undead suggests that the campaign environment 
has been subjected to some sort of evil curse and 
that the ultimate aim of the player characters is to 
lift that curse. In fact, if you're interested in 
running this type of game, it's important that you 
select an adversary that suggests similar 
possibilities. Deciding that your campaign is set 
in a world dominated by stirges or umber hulks is
bound to confuse your players and isn't likely to 
help you create the campaign environment.
Situation
Sometimes, a simple situation can serve as an 
effective campaign hook. Imagine, for instance, a 
world on the brink of apocalypse. Age-old 
prophecies predict that a great cataclysm will 
befall the world just a few short years after you 
begin play. It sounds like the players' job to 
uncover the true nature of this cataclysm so they 
can try to prevent it. Similarly, think about a 
campaign dominated by a conspiracy comprised 
of evil dopplegangers who have replaced many of
the world's most important nobles at the behest of
a tanar'ri prince (sort of a medieval version of The
X-Files). Games based upon a situational hook 
allow you plenty of room for creativity and give 
you an opportunity to create a memorable 
campaign. The possibilities for intriguing 
situations are endless. If you're finding it hard to 
invent your own, you can always borrow a 
concept from a favorite book or movie and adapt 
it to an AD&D setting.
To get your creative juices flowing, here are a 
few more ideas:
• A world in which all humans, elves, 
dwarves, and orcs are psionic.
• A world which hasn't seen a sunrise in 
more than five hundred years. This world 
is plagued by famines and suffering. 
Ultimately, you might allow the players to
solve the mystery of the eternal night and 
restore the light.
• A world in which humans are incredibly 
long-lived or even immune to death from 
natural causes.
If you're having a hard time choosing between 
several appealing possibilities, don't fret. Pick the
possibilities that are easiest to develop and move 
on. You can always supplement your world with a
new location built on an entirely different hook at
a later date. For instance, if you're having a hard 
time choosing between a world dominated by 
dragons (opposition hook) and a world dominated
by Wizards (class/race hook), go with the 
dragons. Later, you can introduce a separate 
continent ruled by Wizards. In fact, every time 
you introduce such an area you have an 
opportunity to devise a rationale that connects its 
hook to your other hook(s) and adds depth to 
your game world.
Returning to our example, let's suppose that, 
across much of the world, all the most important 
rulers are dragons and that most wars and 
international affairs stem from conflicts or 
alliances between these dragons. While humans 
can rise to the rank of duke or baron, they are 
ultimately little more than slaves or vassals of the 
dragons. Eventually though, the players discover 
a large hidden island in the middle of a vast sea. 
This island is ruled by Wizards, the ancestors of 
whom successfully rebelled against the dragons 
and established their own secret kingdom more 
than a thousand years ago. The Wizards' ancestors
defeated their reptilian masters by stealing the 
secret of magic from them. It turns out that every 
human Wizard in the world ultimately owes his 
ancestry or tutelage to an inhabitant or former 
inhabitant of the island. Working together, these 
two hooks have just provided us with some rich 
backstory and fodder for future adventures. We 
now know how mankind learned the art of 
sorcery, and we can suppose that at least some of 
the dragons are interested in finding the island 
and recovering magical treasures stolen long ago.
For the campaign I'll write about in future 
installments of "Dungeoncraft," I'm going to 
select an environmental hook-a world covered 
almost entirely by various forests. Although the 
First Rule precludes me from taking the hook too 
far at this point, before I go further it's worth 
quickly examining some of the hook's 
implications to see what they might tell me about 
the game world.
To me, a forest world suggests an uncivilized 
planet dominated by Mother Nature. It's not hard 
to take this a step further and envision a "living" 
world that is essentially one colossal organism. 
Perhaps the planet itself is the major deity in the 
campaign and a vast network of dungeon 
passageways beneath its surface form the living 
deity's veins and organs.
Next, I'll think about basic locations and 
geography. For variety's sake, I plan to eventually
incorporate all sorts of forests into this world-
tropical jungles near the equator, conifer forests 
near the icy polar regions, and thick marshes on a 
few of the coasts. I like the idea of outpost 
"cities" consisting of a series of interlocking 
platforms and treehouses spread across various 
levels of large deciduous forests. The geography 
of a forest world also suggests a geopolitical 
situation that revolves around the domination of 
strategically placed trails through the thick 
woods. It's worth noting that farmland is going to 
be relatively rare on such a world, so those few 
patches of land not blanketed in trees are going to
be very valuable.
Finally, it's worth thinking about how the hook 
might tie into the various monsters, character 
classes, and character races that make up the 
AD&D game. Obviously, I have an opportunity to
do something special with any or all of the plant-
related monsters. Perhaps treants (from the 
Monstrous Manual book) are heralds or avatars 
formed when the planet god instills some of its 
consciousness into a tree. The planet god uses the
treants to protect its interests and to impose its 
will upon its inhabitants. Clearly, there is a 
special role for Druids and Rangers to play on a 
forest world. Druids are probably the special 
servants of the planet god. Rangers might be the 
planet god's chosen warriors; perhaps their class 
abilities stem from a special bond with the 
essence of the planet god.
While I can explore any or all of these ideas in 
much greater detail, I have more than enough 
material to get started. As the campaign 
progresses, I'm sure I'll develop the religious 
customs of the Druids, the nature of the bond 
between the planet god and the treants, and the 
implications of the mystical bond between the 
Rangers and the forests. For now, I'm 
concentrating on assembling only enough 
information to get the first few game sessions off 
the ground.
Now that we've actually fleshed out some details 
of the campaign world, it's time to introduce you 
to the...
Second Rule of Dungeoncraft:
Whenever you design a major piece of the 
campaign world, always devise at least one 
secret related to that piece.
AD&D is all about the players' attempts to 
explore your imaginary world, and nothing 
captures the thrill of exploration quite so 
effectively as discovering a secret. As you build 
your world, you should devise plenty of secrets 
for the players to unravel. Try to create a new 
secret every time you flesh out a major part of the
campaign or create an important NPC. That 
should guarantee that your players always have 
new mysteries to uncover. Later, we're going to 
strew hints and clues all over the campaign world 
that foreshadow the events to come and help the 
players unravel some of these secrets. We might 
even design an adventure or two that revolves 
entirely around a secret. By introducing such 
hints weeks (and sometimes months or even 
years) before the players get to the bottom of a 
secret, you make your campaign world seem 
more carefully constructed and "alive." For now, 
don't worry about exactly how the players are 
going to unravel each secret or how long it will 
take them to solve each mystery. There's plenty of
time to decide on those details as play progresses.
So, I need at least one secret that stems from my 
chosen hook and the few details I've sketched out.
Two possibilities spring to mind, and I think 
they're both worth keeping. First, the "living 
planet" god suggests to me that somewhere in the 
campaign world, probably located atop the tallest 
mountain, there is a single enormous tree that is 
synonymous with the god's life essence. Felling 
this tree is the equivalent of dealing the god a 
serious if not mortal wound. Should this ever 
happen, the seasons of spring and summer will 
not come again for many years, many of the 
planet's forests will begin to wither and die, and 
the planet's Druids will lose their magical powers.
Of course, the god and its followers are keenly 
aware of this weakness. All Druids of 9th level 
and above know the secret of the tree and its 
location. With the help of a handful of trusted 
Rangers and hordes of treants, they secretly 
conspire to defend it. Much later in the campaign,
I'll probably design a series of adventures in 
which the tree is threatened, allowing the players 
to uncover its secret and safeguard the world by 
defending it. For the time being, I'll simply place 
a few key hints as to the tree's existence.
Second, I've decided that shambling mounds 
(from the Monstrous Manual book) are actually 
former treant heralds of the planet god who 
became corrupted by the influence of an evil 
artifact and rebelled. When play begins, only the 
treants and the shambling mounds themselves are 
aware of the beasts' true nature. Later in the 
campaign, I might introduce the artifact that 
caused the mounds' downfall and lead the players 
to believe that it boasts a potent, benevolent 
enchantment. Only by unraveling the secret of the
shambling mounds can they discover the true 
nature of the artifact and avoid its evil influence. 
Early in the campaign, I'll drop a few hints as to 
the origin of the mounds.
Join me in thirty days for "Worldbuilding, Part II"
in which we'll take a look at establishing 
government and religion in an AD&D campaign.
3
World Building, Part II
From Dragon Magazine 257
Last month, we began fleshing out our AD&D 
world by beginning with the "hook" or single 
characteristic that distinguishes our campaign 
world from most others. We also explored the 
first two Rules of Dungeoncraft:
1. Never force yourself to create more than 
you must; and
2. Whenever you fill in a major piece of the 
campaign world, always devise at least 
one secret related to that piece.
This month, we'll continue sketching out the basic
overview of the campaign world by looking at 
home bases, politics, and government.
The Government You Deserve
Obviously, the sort of government in the 
campaign locale is likely to have a profound 
impact upon the PCs and their adventures. Many 
of the published AD&D game settings devote a 
lot of pages to this topic, detailing noble 
hierarchies, laws, and taxation systems. While 
such information will eventually prove useful, for
now you should follow the First Rule and create 
only the information you need to get started. Just 
to recap, this approach gives you two important 
advantages: it gets you up and playing as fast as 
possible, and it keeps your options open so you 
can add more later.
What sort of information do you need to know 
about local politics to begin the campaign? The 
quick answer is, "just enough to give the players 
some idea of the world in which they live." For 
now, you want to provide a rough sketch that will 
help the players' imaginations fill in their 
surroundings. You won't need NPC write-ups for 
important government officials, specific crime 
and punishment systems, or detailed military 
chains-of-command.
Two different levels of politics are of interest, and
you should consider them separately. You must 
know something about politics on the broad 
"national" level and something about politics on 
the focused "local" level. Although none of this 
information will have a direct impact upon a play 
session for quite some time, it's likely to help you
create other details that are more directly 
relevant. Deciding a few things about political 
matters also provides a few more "secrets" (from 
the Second Rule of Dungeoncraft) that you can 
use to shape your world.
Home Base
Since it has the greatest potential impact upon 
your first several game sessions, start by 
considering local politics. Think, at first, in terms 
of geography. Your goal here is to decide upon a 
"home base" for the PCs, somewhere relatively 
safe and secure where they can rest and count 
their treasure between adventures. This base 
might serve as the locale in which all the player 
characters came of age. It should almost certainly 
serve as the site of their first meeting. You 
shouldn't agonize over this decision for too long-
your PCs aren't going to stay in this location 
forever. (By the time they reach 4th or 5th level, 
you'll probably move them along to bigger and 
better things.) Once you've decided upon a 
suitable base, you should think about who rules 
this base (if anyone), where the nearest 
uncivilized or wilderness areas are located, how 
the home base interacts with those areas, and 
whether there are any local rules of interest. 
There are a number of basic home-base 
templates:
City
You might choose to base your campaign in a 
large fantasy city with thousands of inhabitants. 
Such a locale has several advantages-a wide 
variety of shops and services at the players' 
disposal, constant traffic flowing through the city,
and a huge number of interesting NPCs with 
whom the PCs might interact. On the other hand, 
using a city as your base of operations probably 
has even more disadvantages. Cities are large and
time consuming to create and map. Also, large 
cities are so rare and important to most fantasy 
worlds that they are bound to have lots of contact 
with the outside world. In the early going, this 
might be a problem, since you don't know all that 
much about your world yet. Basing your 
campaign in a city will almost certainly keep you 
scrambling to create new details about the game 
world. While some DMs prefer such a challenge, 
most are be best served by trying to find a nice, 
semi-isolated locale to use as the setting for the 
early adventures.
Cities are generally overseen by an important 
political official who sits atop a large 
bureaucracy, usually an appropriately high-
ranking noble (a duke) or a civil servant (a Lord 
Mayor). (Of course, nothing says you must use 
the standard medieval European titles; feel free to
use or invent any titles you wish.) Since cities 
normally serve as centers of trade and knowledge,
some of the bureaucrats who govern the city are 
inevitably dedicated to these functions-perhaps a 
Master of the Docks who authorizes all cargo that
comes in and out of the city (and makes sure the 
appropriate tax is collected) or a Dean of 
Colleges who grants visiting scholars permission 
to use the city's archives. Because a city is bound 
to be of strategic importance to the kingdom or 
empire that controls it, it's likely to be heavily 
defended and thus home to one or more large 
military formations (and more bureaucrats, who 
oversee these formations). Cities are also likely to
have their own highly organized constabulary 
serving as a sort of medieval police force (with 
still more bureaucrats to head them).
Stronghold
A stronghold is a keep or fortress built on the 
fringe of an important border. Because the 
stronghold usually sits at an important crossroads 
or waypoint, it often becomes a stopover on 
various trading routes and a gathering point for 
local loners (hunters, trappers, prospectors, and 
adventurers). Strongholds have an important 
characteristic that makes them ideal home bases-
the fact that they are defensive constructs 
suggests a close proximity to some sort of 
perilous region (perhaps an enemy nation, a 
dangerous wilderness, or the territory of a 
threatening humanoid tribe). Such a conveniently 
located "area of mystery and danger" is an 
obvious and accessible setting for adventures 
(exploring ruins out in the perilous wilderness, 
protecting the inhabitants of the stronghold from 
the marauding humanoid tribe, unmasking enemy
spies, etc.). Most strongholds are also 
appropriately isolated from the rest of 
civilization, cutting down on the amount of game 
world detail you'll need to create before 
beginning play.
Because strongholds are usually the only outposts
of civilization in their vicinity, small towns or 
villages often spring up around them, offering 
various services to the stronghold's steady stream 
of visitors. Sometimes these towns are 
encompassed by the walls of the hold, sometimes 
they spring up immediately outside the hold, and 
sometimes they are founded a short distance away
from the hold next to another convenient 
geographical feature (such as a pond or river). 
Since the towns that grow up around strongholds 
are usually small and in a constant state of flux, 
with new businesses frequently opening and 
closing, they're easily manageable for a DM. 
When gaming in such a town, you can start with 
just a few shops and key inhabitants and expand 
as you're ready.
Typically, strongholds are under the command of 
an important military official, such as a marshal 
or warden, though they are sometimes overseen 
by a minor noble (such as a baron). Most often, 
the stronghold commander ultimately answers to 
a powerful noble or prince who is responsible for 
the defense of the entire region. Because 
strongholds are usually located far away from 
more civilized areas, their commanders are 
usually given wide latitude when it comes to 
enforcing justice. When combined with the 
considerable military forces at their disposal, this 
power can make a despotic commander 
particularly fearsome.
Feudal Towns
Feudal towns are mid-sized settlements 
constructed in the shadow of an important noble's
castle or fortress. Generally, such towns are 
founded upon a pact between the noble and the 
townspeople. In return for overseeing his lands, 
the noble offers the townspeople protection from 
perils ranging from rampaging monsters to 
famines and other calamities. (In these cases, the 
noble is expected to dip into his personal stores to
provide for his people.) Although the pact 
between the noble and the townspeople is rarely 
spelled out, it's usually well understood by both 
parties. A noble who fails to live up to his end of 
the bargain may expect little sympathy from 
neighboring nobles should the townspeople 
decide to revolt against him. For their part, the 
townspeople are typically obligated to hunt, farm,
or mine the land, while ceding the lion's share of 
the spoils to the landowner. Usually, no one 
questions the noble's right to discipline any 
townsperson who abuses this trust.
The exact stature of the noble responsible for a 
feudal town generally varies with the size of the 
kingdom in question. In some small kingdoms, a 
full prince might be responsible for his own 
feudal town, though the post is customarily held 
by a duke or baron. While the noble who oversees
a feudal town (or his appointed underlings) has 
the last word in justice, taxation, and privileges 
for the town's residents, the typical proximity to 
other, larger feudal towns generally prevents him 
from exercising the sort of total control 
commonly displayed in strongholds. Typically, 
the noble is a vassal of a nearby, more powerful 
noble who'd like to avoid a peasant revolt that can
easily spread to other nearby towns. All but the 
most evil or corrupt feudal masters are usually 
willing to intercede and gently correct the 
behavior of a vassal who violates the understood 
trust of the townspeople.
Farming Village
While both the stronghold and feudal village are 
largely defensive constructs, some small villages 
are more valuable economically. Typically, these 
villages lie deep within the borders of a kingdom,
where defense is not as great a concern. Most 
"farming villages" are actually devoted to one of 
four commercial ventures: farming, mining, 
hunting, or fishing. The village exists solely to 
allow its inhabitants to practice their craft 
efficiently. Because of the steady stream of 
commodities they produce, most of these villages 
are important stops on various trade routes.
When viewed as a prospective base of operations,
a farming village has both advantages and 
disadvantages. On the positive side, they are 
usually rustic and idyllic, providing the PCs with 
a nice safe base of operations where they can 
relax between adventures. Usually, even long-
term activities (such as spell research or 
convalescence) can be carried out in a farming 
village without fear of calamity or interruption. 
On the other hand, the fact that such villages are 
so neatly tucked out of the way suggests that the 
PCs might be forced to travel long distances to 
reach adventure sites, which are typically situated
in "dangerous" or "mysterious" areas. It's likely 
that basing the PCs in a farming village will have 
the added effect of forcing you to create a largish 
section of your campaign world rather quickly. 
Sometimes, you can offset this drawback by 
employing a bit of geography. Suppose, for 
instance, that your mining village lies along a 
stream and a trail, high in the mountains and 
isolated from the rest of the campaign world. The 
trail is a major route for trading caravans and 
leads to the larger kingdom. The stream winds 
through 15 or 20 miles of some extremely 
inhospitable terrain and down into a perilous 
valley. Although the village is located far from 
the valley and has nothing to fear from its 
inhabitants, the PCs can quickly and easily travel 
down into the valley by boat. More importantly, 
since the intervening rocky terrain is so 
inhospitable, there's no reason for you to make up
any details about it, so you can skip directly to 
detailing the smallish valley.
Normally, farming villages are governed by a 
civil servant (perhaps a mayor or burgermeister) 
who is appointed by a distant noble. Nobles rarely
reside in or around such villages and as a 
consequence, their residents tend to greet the 
occasional visiting knight or minor peer with a 
combination of awe and fear. Farming villages 
rarely boast any sort of organized constabulary, 
instead relying upon volunteers from among the 
townsfolk to protect the village from interlopers.
Wandering Tribal Camp
No one says your base of operations must be 
confined to a single geographic location. Another 
perfectly acceptable option is to base your 
campaign around a roving locale, like a nomadic 
tribal camp or a large merchant caravan. In fact, 
this approach has several advantages. The base's 
mobility gives you an excellent opportunity to 
move the PCs to new parts of the campaign world
at your own pace; whenever you have a new area 
ready to go, it's time for the camp to pull up 
stakes and move along. Since most roving camps 
aren't too big, it shouldn't be too difficult to detail
the camp and its major NPCs. Also, the basic 
premise of the wandering base might lead to 
some pretty entertaining adventures. Once it's 
ready to move, perhaps the camp encounters an 
unusual obstacle en route to its next destination. 
Or perhaps the PCs are dispatched to scout ahead 
to find a suitable location for the camp to 
establish itself.
If you select this option, you should spend some 
time figuring out exactly why the camp moves. 
Real-world nomads tend to migrate in order to 
follow game, resources, clement weather or some 
combination of the three. For instance, the camp 
might migrate down into a lush valley every 
spring to plant crops. Just after harvest, the tribe 
wanders back up into the mountains to winter 
among amid a collection of natural hotsprings. Of
course, you needn't confine yourself to such a 
mundane explanation. Perhaps instead the camp 
is really a train of pilgrims that aims to visit every
sacred site on the planet in the course of their 
lifetimes to atone for some egregious sin. Or 
perhaps the wandering camp is actually a circus, 
and the PC characters begin the campaign as 
performers or part of its crew!
Befitting their migratory nature, wandering 
camps usually have loose laws and social 
structures. Sovereignty over the camp is usually 
decided according to the doctrine of "ascension of
the fittest." In other words, anyone who can 
outfight or outsmart the current leader has the 
opportunity to become the new leader. Although 
such groups must generally rely upon volunteer 
mobs to keep the peace, they usually deal with 
criminals and sociopaths swiftly and severely. 
Since resources are often scarce in such camps 
and survival a challenge, anything that threatens 
that survival is ruthlessly dispatched.
It's the Economy
After you've decided upon an appropriate base, 
there are two important steps you should take to 
breathe a bit of life into your selection.
Means
First, you should think about the local economy. 
Basically, this translates into "how do the 
inhabitants of this area manage to get food and 
other necessities?" Common models include the 
following situations:
The residents hunt or grow their own food and 
trade for other necessities.
The residents produce some important 
commodity (such as mined ores) or offer some 
important service (such as expert blacksmithing) 
and trade for food.
The base is actually "funded" by a wealthy noble 
responsible for providing all food and necessities.
(Strongholds often fall into this category.)
The residents earn their keep through some 
unusual or "fantastic" means. For example, the 
base might stretch across a strategic mountain 
pass, and its residents might impose a large "toll" 
that travelers pay to traverse the pass. Or, the 
local gods may have placed the base under their 
aegis and required their followers to make a 
pilgrimage to the base to provide its inhabitants 
with food and necessities.
Some might be tempted to start working up 
detailed economic models and complex trade 
schemes. For now, you should remember the First
Rule and resist this urge. There will be plenty of 
time to add such details later; for now, you have 
more important things to worry about.
Ways
The second step to breathing life into your base is
to invent at least one interesting custom or 
cultural characteristic that sets it apart from 
anywhere else on the campaign world. Some 
examples from history and legend include the 
following situations:
The inhabitants of ancient Sparta were highly-
trained warriors who would rather die than 
surrender.
Ancient Alexandria housed a library that 
contained a good portion of all the world's 
knowledge.
King Arthur's legendary court of Camelot was 
home to the Knights of the Round Table, an order
of noble warriors sworn to protect the land and its
people.
These are all good examples of the sort of thing 
you're looking for. Just one simple unique fact 
goes a long way toward making the area seem 
alive in the minds of the PCs. Other possibilities 
include: a region internationally known for the 
games it throws annually, a town that houses a 
holy oracle, or a city in which any violent act is 
punishable by death.
At this time, it's also a good idea to choose an 
alignment for the society that dominates your 
base of operations (see the Dungeon Master 
Guide). Since this area is supposed to serve as a 
place of relative peace and comfort for the PCs, 
it's recommended that you select one of the 
"good" alignments, though a base of operations 
corrupted by "evil" might make an interesting 
change of pace and challenge.
The Body Politic
Once you've fleshed out your base of operations 
and local structure, it's time to think about politics
and government on the "national level." Since 
this information isn't likely to directly affect an 
adventure for some time, you needn't spend much
time thinking about this decision, and your 
choices are quite simple. Your real goal here is to 
provide the PCs with a single paragraph or so that
paints the "big picture" of the world in which they
live. Don't worry about the details-you'll fill those
in later. For now, you just want to give the PCs 
the rough idea that they're inhabiting a "big 
world" comprised of mighty nations. The 
simplest way to do this is to decide something 
about the form of government employed by the 
nation the PCs inhabit and to roughly sketch out a
sentence or two describing any of that 
government's major enemies or allies.
Basically, there are four forms of government 
likely to dominate most AD&D game worlds.
Despotism
A single "dictator" (perhaps benevolent) makes 
all decisions for the nation. Because so much of 
the society is invested in the dictator, the national 
character is inclined to change suddenly between 
regimes, and the nation tends to plunge into 
temporary chaos. Most humanoid tribes are 
essentially despotic nations.
Monarchy
Like despotism, a single leader makes all 
decisions for the society. In this case, however, 
leadership is determined on a hereditary basis, 
providing continuity and stability to the society 
between regimes. Typically, monarchies are based
upon complex social hierarchies (such as the 
feudal system of medieval Europe) that help 
determine the order of succession to the throne. 
The citizens of some monarchies believe that 
their royal families are descended from the gods 
themselves (and since this is a fantasy world, they
might just be right).
One noteworthy variation on the monarchy is the 
city-state. City-states are essentially a collection 
of tiny independent monarchies (usually based in 
individual cities) that band together to stand 
united against larger, foreign nations. Typically, 
the united entity is governed by some sort of 
ruling council agreed upon by all the kings.
Republic
Republics invest their power in a large ruling 
body that theoretically represents the people, such
as a senate or a parliament. Usually, the members 
of this ruling body are elected by a noble class 
and serve for a set term of office. The ruling body
selects a group of executives from among its own 
ranks to preside over meetings and oversee 
special governmental functions.
Anarchy
No national government at all is an interesting 
option. Such an area is usually a collection of 
tiny, squabbling local powers and warlords. 
Anarchies don't often last long since they're ripe 
picking for any larger, more organized nation that
is looking to expand.
Finishing Touches
Once you've chosen an appropriate government 
type for the PCs' home nation, round things out 
by inventing one interesting fact about that 
nation. Possibilities include: something unusual 
about the nation's ruler, something unusual about 
the nation's history, a unique custom, or an 
unusual commodity that can be found in the 
nation. Then, invent a few other nations (each 
with its own form of government and interesting 
fact) to serve as enemies and allies.
Example
Because they are easy to master and develop, I'll 
choose a stronghold as my base of operations. I 
imagine that this stronghold sits on the border 
between a mighty nation and a dark cluster of 
woods dominated by three rival orc tribes that 
might threaten that nation if they were ever 
united. This gives me a good area in which to set 
my first several adventures.
Befitting the hook I selected for the campaign 
world last month, the stronghold is actually a 
collection of fortified towers and platforms built 
high into the treetops. The only major pathway 
that leads out of the dark woods and into the great
nation actually passes directly beneath the 
stronghold, giving archers and engineers an 
excellent field of fire upon an enemy army 
attempting to overrun the structure. Commanding 
the garrison of troops that defends the stronghold 
is an ex-adventurer who now holds the title of 
Warden of the Black Wood. The Warden was 
appointed by the nearest noble, a Duke who runs 
the equivalent of a feudal town about 45 miles 
away from the stronghold. Though Neutral Good,
the Warden is a grim, determined man who is 
tough on his troops and the residents of the small 
settlement that shares the treetops. He is worried 
about the threat posed by the orcs and feels that 
only by enforcing the strictest discipline can he 
prepare the area for their inevitable assault.
Economically, the stronghold is divided into two 
classes that each receive their food and 
necessities from a different source. The soldiers 
who make up the garrison receive their food and 
wages via supply caravans dispatched weekly by 
the nearby Duke. The townsfolk, on the other 
hand, survive mainly by offering goods and 
services to the many drifters who stop at the 
stronghold on their way out to the black woods 
and beyond. Most of these drifters are 
adventurers or trappers who collect pelts from the
exotic wildlife that lives in the murky woods.
As for a unique characteristic that distinguishes 
the stronghold, I've decided that it's known for the
eerie wailing noise that can be heard echoing 
through its surrounding forests at night. The noise
is a complete mystery (even to myself, at 
present); no one knows what produces it or where
it comes from.
Now that I've created some important details 
about the campaign world, the Second Rule 
compels me to invent an appropriate secret based 
on these details. Looking back over last month's 
column gives me an interesting idea. Suppose that
a fairly sizable cluster of the woods surrounding 
the stronghold is actually comprised of an army 
of elderly treants whom the plant goddess has 
ordered to take root and guard a sacred spot 
located near the hold. From time to time, some of 
these treants wander a bit, shifting the course of 
several of the minor paths that crisscross the area.
Of course, only the most skilled foresters 
understand that the paths actually move; most 
people who try to negotiate the area simply 
believe the paths are unbelievably confusing. 
Let's further suppose that according to local 
legends, several decades ago, a great general was 
somehow able to bypass the stronghold (which 
was once originally held by one of the orc tribes) 
to launch a surprise attack into the black woods. 
No one knows how he could have accomplished 
this feat, so most people don't believe in the 
legend. But the legend is true. The general skirted
the stronghold by discovering the secret of the 
treants and convincing enough of them to move 
aside to form a second path through the forest 
large enough to accommodate an army. This 
secret has several interesting opportunities for 
future adventures: the PCs can discover the secret
of the treants, they can discover exactly what the 
goddess has deployed the treants to protect, and-if
the stronghold is ever temporarily captured by the
orcs-they might duplicate the general's legendary 
feat to reclaim it.
Finally, turning my attention to politics on the 
national level, I've decided the nation that 
maintains the stronghold is a feudal monarchy. Its
interesting fact is that its kings, on their fortieth 
birthday, have always been known to bid their 
friends and family farewell and venture into the 
black woods alone, never to return. No one 
knows why they observe this ritual. Obviously, a 
future adventure might give the PCs an 
opportunity to get to the bottom of this mystery. 
In accordance with the Second Rule, I've decided 
that the ritual has something to do with a price the
royal family agreed to pay to forestall some 
terrible calamity, though I'm not going to develop
it any further at this point.
In addition to the large, uncivilized black wood, 
I've decided that three nations border my feudal 
kingdom. One is an enemy under the despotic 
rule of an evil Wizard. Its interesting fact is that 
the Wizard's palace is set amid a clump of woods 
that continuously rages with fire. The second is a 
republic of elves that sometimes serves as an 
uneasy ally to the feudal king. These elves are 
believed to be the first inhabitants of the planet 
and know a great many secrets. The third nation 
is second feudal monarchy dominated by 
isolationists. Its rulers have gained an impressive 
knowledge of genetics which they use to 
selectively breed the members of the nation's 
noble houses. As a result, most of the nation's 
nobles are are almost superhumanly strong and 
intelligent.
Join me in thirty days for "World Building, Part 
III," where we'll tackle religion and finish 
everything we need to do before drawing our first
maps.
4
World Building, Part III
From Dragon Magazine 258
Last month, we thought about the basic 
geography of the campaign and put simple 
political and economic systems into place. This 
month, we'll flesh out a few details about the gods
and religions of the campaign world, giving us 
everything we need to begin mapping out a 
starting point for play.
Gods, Myth, and Faith
Gods and faith are important components of the 
average AD&D game world for a couple of 
reasons. Fleshing out the divine forces that shape 
your fantasy universe gives you an opportunity to
tackle some of the "cosmic" questions likely to be
on the minds of your world's inhabitants. Where 
do we come from? How was the world created? 
What is magic? Your answers to these questions 
give your world flavor and help your players 
relate to the cultures you create. Also, don't forget
that three of the game's basic character classes 
revolve around faith (Priest, Druid, and Paladin). 
It's quite likely that one or more of the players 
will select one of these classes, so you'll need 
some details to share with them before play 
begins.
If you have a copy available, take some time to 
flip through the pages of Legends & Lore, the 
AD&D game hardback that details a number of 
real world mythologies in game terms. You won't 
need nearly as much detail about your own gods 
as Legends & Lore provides, but a good perusal 
should get your creative juices flowing and get 
you into the right mood for the work ahead. 
While scanning Legends & Lore, be on the 
lookout for particularly interesting concepts or 
myths you can appropriate for your own world. 
You might even discover an entire pantheon that 
you can borrow for your game, particularly if you
selected a "cultural" hook for your game world 
(see Chapter 1). If you choose this path, you 
might want to change all the names of the gods, 
as well as a few important details to "file off the 
serial numbers" and prevent the players from 
recognizing them. This lets you keep some of the 
gods' secrets to yourself, at least until revealing 
them makes the game more fun.
The rest of this column presumes that you are 
creating your own mythology from scratch. Any 
information you borrow from Legends & Lore 
lets you skip one or more of the steps that follow.
In general, creating your own AD&D mythology 
is a five-step process. Before you begin, it's 
important to remind yourself of the First Rule of 
Dungeoncraft: "Never force yourself to create 
more than you must." At this point, all you need 
are a few simple details about the gods, their 
associated legends, and their followers. Although 
you might be tempted to start writing scores of 
elaborate legends and crafting dozens of highly 
detailed religious rituals, try to rechannel that 
enthusiasm for now. It will soon be needed 
elsewhere. You can always flesh out your 
mythology later, after you see how your players 
react to the bare bones you establish at the 
beginning. Once you decide to add more detail to 
your mythology, you might want to consult The 
Complete Priest's Handbook, which includes lots 
of useful tips and guidance.
1. Choose Polytheism or 
Monotheism
Your first step is to decide whether your faith is 
polytheistic or monotheistic. Polytheistic cultures 
believe in a collection of gods (collectively 
known as a pantheon). Typically, each of these 
gods has his or her own sphere of influence (such 
as air, water, wisdom, fire, magic, and so on), and
the pantheon is organized according to some sort 
of hierarchy, with one or more gods ruling over 
the others. Polytheism is far and away the model 
most commonly employed in AD&D game 
worlds-all of TSR's published settings and all of 
the cultures detailed in Legends & Lore (except 
the Arthurian heroes) are polytheistic. 
Monotheistic cultures, on the other hand, believe 
in a single supreme deity. Although all divine 
power resides in this single being, even 
monotheistic cultures typically recognize a host 
of lesser divine beings such as saints, angels, 
avatars, or divine servants.
If you decide upon a polytheistic faith, your next 
step is to think about the various gods' spheres of 
influence and sketch out the hierarchy that 
defines the relationships between the gods. 
Typical spheres of influence include sunlight, 
earth, air, fire, water, weather, love, war, death, 
agriculture, wisdom, art, evil, and magic. Select 
any of these spheres that you feel are appropriate,
or invent your own. You'll find plenty of ideas for
other spheres in the pages of Legends & Lore or 
any decent book on world mythology. Try not to 
select spheres at random. Instead, come up with a 
reason why these particular spheres have their 
own dedicated gods. For instance, in a world on 
which it is believed that all things are composed 
of the four alchemical elements-air, earth, fire, 
and water-it makes sense that the four most 
important gods would command these spheres. If 
you cannot imagine this sort of direct relationship
between spheres, stick to spheres that would have
an obvious cultural interest to the inhabitants of 
your world. A warrior culture has an obvious need
for a war god, for example, while a more civilized
people might worship gods of wisdom or 
agriculture.
Typical hierarchies of polytheistic religions have 
a single god or a mated pair of gods that rules 
supreme over the others. Sometimes the lesser 
gods accept the dominion of the chief god, and in 
other cases they scheme to capture his or her 
throne. Often, the lesser gods are the offspring of 
the greater god, though sometimes they are 
siblings or even totally unrelated by blood. Some 
hierarchies are quite complex, featuring more 
than two levels or comprised of several separate 
and smaller hierarchies. Imagine, for instance, a 
world shaped by three great gods, none of whom 
is superior to the others. One god watches over 
nature, one watches over humans, and one 
watches over magic. The nature god has three 
lesser offspring: a sea god, a god of the heavens, 
and an earth god (who, in turn, has her own 
offspring, a goddess of agriculture). The god of 
humans also has three offspring, each 
representing humankind's most powerful 
passions: a god of love, a god of art, and a god of 
war. The god of magic has two offspring: a god of
prophecy and a god of death.
Note that such complex hierarchies give you an 
interesting opportunity to say something about 
the nature of your world. The previous example, 
for instance, suggests something about how the 
inhabitants of the world might behave. Perhaps at 
any given time, each of the world's residents is 
under the influence of one of the lesser gods of 
humanity-love, war, or art. Similarly, the example
also defines death (more broadly interpreted as 
decay or destruction) as a magical effect, perhaps 
influencing the magic spells you make available 
in the campaign and prompting you to redefine 
some of their effects. (If death is a magical effect,
characters dying from disease, poison, or injury 
on such a world might be revealed by a detect 
magic spell.)
While it's okay to invent many gods at this stage, 
don't force yourself to do so. Whether you 
envision many gods or just a few, you'll detail 
only a few major powers before play begins (in 
accordance with the First Rule of Dungeoncraft). 
Since you want to share only as much 
information with the players as necessary to begin
play, the big picture should be sketchy enough to 
allow you to detail other gods later.
If you'd rather employ a monotheistic approach, 
your only task at this point is to think about any 
lesser divine entities that serve or oppose your 
supreme being. Does your god employ servants, 
saints, or spirits? Were these beings created 
specifically to serve the supreme being, or were 
they "promoted" from among the ranks of the 
faithful who have passed on?
2. Determine the Nature of the 
Major Gods
Your second step is to consider the nature of your 
major deities (or the single supreme being, if you 
opted for a monotheistic faith). One of your first 
decisions is whether your god(s) are 
"personifications"-that is, whether or not they 
resemble human beings. The deities that typically
crop up in AD&D games (and those appearing in 
TSR's published settings) are almost all 
personifications, though some cultures envision 
their deities as animals, spirits, or even nebulous 
and mysterious "forces." Opting for personified 
deities lets you set up more interesting 
relationships between the gods and makes it 
easier to generate myths and legends that might 
be used to propel adventures. On the other hand, 
non-personified deities are unusual enough to go 
a long way toward giving your game world a 
unique feel.
If you decide that your deities are 
personifications, you should then consider their 
basic personalities and demeanors. Some 
pantheons are composed of emotionless, 
otherworldly beings largely beyond human 
understanding. Others exhibit all the emotions 
and imperfections of humanity and are sometimes
capable of being duped or tricked by mere 
mortals. In this latter case, the individual 
personalities of the various gods often stem from 
their spheres of influence. Sea and fire gods, for 
instance, are usually short-tempered and 
overbearing, love gods are carefree, and wisdom 
gods are thoughtful and taciturn. Try to come up 
with two or three adjectives that describe the 
personality of each deity. At this point, you 
should probably start confining your thinking to 
the three or four most important members of your
pantheon, in accordance with the First Rule. Your 
goal is to develop only enough information to 
paint a rough picture and suggest a few options 
for any players who choose to create Priest, 
Druid, or Paladin characters.
If you've opted for more humanistic deities, you 
should now think about the relationships that 
exist between the various gods. Are any of your 
gods particularly good friends or particularly 
bitter rivals? Why? Sometimes the spheres of 
influence you have chosen suggest some obvious 
answers. For example, it's easy to imagine a fire 
god and a water god who are sworn enemies.
3. Describe the Faith and 
Worshippers
The next step is to think about how your major 
gods are worshipped (only your major gods; don't
forget the First Rule). There are several important
questions you should strive to answer. Think first 
about whether Priests and other worshippers are 
devoted to a single god or serve the entire 
pantheon. The former option gives you an 
opportunity to create interesting variations on the 
Priest character class, each with its own selection 
of weapons and special powers (see the Priest 
section of Chapter 3 in the Player's Handbook). A 
Priest devoted to a fire god, for instance, might 
have special access to the fireball or wall of fire 
spells, while the Priest of a war god might have a 
broader selection of weapons than the standard 
Priest class. The downside to this approach is that
it forces you to work harder before beginning 
play; you'll need to create details about how each 
of your major gods is worshipped. Note that 
assigning special powers to your own Priest 
subclasses can be tricky and might easily upset 
play balance. Unless you have some experience 
with the AD&D game and a good "feel" for 
whether a given power is appropriate, try to use 
the following rules of thumb. Assign each Priest 
class three special abilities, one gained at 1st 
level, one gained at 7th level, and one gained at 
12th level. The first is no more powerful than a 
1st-level spell (of any class), the second is no 
more powerful than a 3rd-level spell, and the 
third is no more powerful than a 4th-level spell. 
Each ability is usable once per day, and any 
ability that is the equivalent of a Wizard spell is 
treated as though it was cast by a Wizard of one 
level lower than the Priest's own level. The 
Priests of a fire god, for instance, might have the 
following special abilities: affect normal fires at 
1st level, fireball at 7th level, and fire shield at 
12th level; a 7th-level Priest of the fire god casts 
his fireball as though he were a 6th-level Wizard. 
Alternatively, you can assign special powers by 
finding a similar god in the pages of Legends & 
Lore and borrowing that god's assigned powers, 
or make use of the more advanced suggestions 
found in The Complete Priest's Handbook. If 
there is an appropriate nature or forest god in 
your pantheon, you might simply rule that the 
Priests of this god are members of the standard 
Druid class described in the Player's Handbook.
In addition to assigning special powers to your 
Priest classes, you must also decide which 
spheres of Priest spells are available to them. (See
Chapter 3 of the Player's Handbook for a 
complete description of all sixteen spell spheres.) 
Although balancing the number of available 
spheres against the special powers bestowed upon
a new Priest class is more an art than a science, 
again there's a simple rule of thumb you can use. 
If you followed the guidelines above for 
assigning special powers, give each of your Priest
classes major access to three spheres and minor 
access to three spheres. The responsibilities and 
nature of the deity in question should go a long 
way toward helping select the appropriate spheres
from those listed in the PH. Priests of our 
archetypal fire god, for instance, might have 
major access to the Elemental, Combat, and Sun 
spheres; and minor access to the Healing, 
Divination, and Protection spheres. Since a 
Priest's ability to cast the various healing spells is 
important to AD&D game balance, you should 
assign each of your Priest classes at least minor 
access to the Healing sphere unless there is a 
good reason not to.
If you decide that the Priests of your world serve 
an entire pantheon or you've opted for a 
monotheistic faith, it's likely that your Priest 
player characters will all use the Cleric class. In 
this case, it's probably a good idea to re-read 
Chapter 3 of the Player's Handbook to refresh 
your memory on the special benefits and 
restrictions that apply to Clerics. Of course, 
nothing says that you can't create your own 
custom Priest classes to handle these characters, 
as well. You might even present the players with 
several different Priest classes that all worship the
same pantheon or supreme being, but represent 
different factions or sects within the faith. 
Perhaps the fundamentalist followers of the 
pantheon have different abilities than the more 
mainstream priests, or maybe a special order of 
Priests within the faith have devoted their lives to 
a specific task or function. Likewise, there's 
nothing to stop you from making the Cleric class 
available to players (representing perhaps a 
special order of holy warriors or guardians) even 
if you've decided that most of the clergymen on 
your world are devoted to a specific deity and are 
members of the Priest class.
Now that you have some of the mechanics 
surrounding player character Priests and Clerics 
in place, think about whether the alignments of 
the Priest and Cleric classes should be restricted 
in any way based upon the nature of your gods. 
Depending on the god's personality and attitude, 
it might not make sense to allow Evil-aligned 
Priests to worship a god of healing. It's almost 
certainly inappropriate to allow Good-aligned 
Priests to worship gods of trickery or deceit. Try 
to make sure that you're presenting enough Priest 
and Cleric options to accommodate as many 
alignments as possible, but don't feel compelled 
to cover every single alignment. There's nothing 
wrong with deciding that there's simply no such 
thing as a Chaotic Evil Priest or Cleric in your 
world.
At this stage, you should also think briefly about 
what sort of religious services your Priest or 
Cleric factions hold, whether non-clergy attend 
these services, and where the services are held. 
Are services held once per week? Once per 
month? Are the services held in elaborate 
temples, sacred groves, or somewhere else? Does 
the service consist of a reading or lecture? Is there
some sort of sacrifice? Don't get too carried away.
For now, you need only a few sketchy details to 
help flesh out the faith. Later, as play progresses, 
you can elaborate.
Finally, take a few moments to set down two or 
three tenets for each of your Priest and Cleric 
class options. At least one tenet should describe a 
special belief of that class, and at least one other 
should consist of a special restriction. Your goal 
here is to give players a few details they can use 
to help flesh out their characters. Priests of a 
storm god might believe that all storms are an 
expression of their god's anger. Priests of a fire 
god might believe that fire is a holy, purifying 
force. Sample restrictions include: tithing (the 
Priest must give 10% of any wealth he receives to
the church), chastity (the Priest is not allowed to 
marry or have romantic relations), enforced 
prayer (the Priest is required to spend several 
hours per week in prayer), and honesty (the Priest
is not permitted to tell anything but the complete 
truth under any circumstance). When assigning 
restrictions, don't get too carried away. Your 
objective is to provide flavor, not to cripple 
members of the character class.
4. Create Two Myths
To seem lifelike to your players, your imaginary 
faith must consist of more than a few dry 
descriptions and restrictions. A great tactic you 
can use to add flavor to your religion is to think 
about its myths or its "explanations of cosmic 
mysteries." How was the world created? Where 
did humankind come from? What's the 
relationship between humans and the various 
demihuman races? What happens in the afterlife? 
How did humans discover the secret of fire? How
did humans discover the secret of magic? These 
are all great examples of the sort of questions that
interesting myths might tackle.
Before play begins, try to create two myths 
exploring any topics you choose. You should 
share these myths with the players just before the 
campaign begins to give them some idea of what 
faith and religion on your world are all about. 
Don't worry about providing anything too 
elaborate; a paragraph or two will do nicely. This 
is your opportunity to be creative. For inspiration,
consult Legends & Lore, or head to the local 
library and spend a couple of hours with a book 
on world mythology. If you absolutely can't 
invent any myths of your own, don't be afraid to 
"borrow" a couple from these sources. Later, as 
play progresses, you'll create additional myths to 
flesh out your faith.
5. Imagine Other Faiths
Few fantasy worlds are dominated by a single 
religion. Take a few moments to think about 
whether there are any other faiths existing on 
your world that the players are likely to run 
across in their first few adventures and describe 
each with a single sentence. You needn't fully 
detail these alternate faiths using the procedure 
described in the first four steps unless you are 
going to allow the players the option of serving as
their Priests or Clerics, a step you should take 
only if it's really necessary. Under most 
circumstances, you're better off requiring player 
clergy to stick to your primary faith at the 
beginning of the campaign.
Nonhuman faiths are a special exception. On 
most AD&D worlds, the various demihuman 
races worship their own sets of gods. If you want 
to follow a similar scheme on your own world, 
you must be ready to deal with any player who 
wants to create a nonhuman Priest or Cleric. The 
easiest solution to this problem is to adopt the 
official AD&D nonhuman deities into your own 
world. These entities described in Monster 
Mythology, Demihuman Deities, or The 
Complete Books of Elves (or Dwarves, etc.). If 
you'd rather create your own non-human deities, 
just follow steps one through four above. In this 
case, you can probably get away with inventing 
fewer details about the nonhuman deities than 
you invented for their human counterparts; create 
perhaps a single god in each appropriate 
nonhuman pantheon and a single myth.
If at all possible, try to determine the relationship 
between your primary faith and any alternates 
you create. Maybe the patriarchs of each 
pantheon are somehow related, or perhaps the 
various pantheons signed a sacred pact long ago 
to divide the world among themselves.
Example: Ray's World
With all the previous points in mind, it's time to 
return to my own campaign. Looking back at the 
information I've created in earlier installments, I 
think a monotheistic approach works best for my 
world. The "living planet" nature deity functions 
as a non-personified supreme being.
Moving on to Step Two, I think it's clear that the 
nature deity is not a personification. She (I've 
decided that the inhabitants of my world use the 
feminine pronoun when referring to the supreme 
being) shares all the attributes of nature-she can 
be bountiful and serene, or cold and destructive. 
In previous installments, I've already detailed 
some of her servants: treants she can imbue with 
a part of her consciousness and animate when 
necessary to protect her interests.
As for the faith and worshippers, the nature deity 
is honored, for the most part, by an extensive 
order of Clerics who maintain temples in sacred 
groves all over the campaign area. This order 
worships the deity's bountiful side and its 
members cannot be Evil in alignment. To make 
things more interesting, I envision two additional 
orders dedicated to the nature deity. The first is an
Evil group that worships the nature goddess in 
her destructive capacity. Its leader was a high-
ranking member of the main order who became 
seduced by the goddess' capacity for destruction. 
In civilized (i.e., Good-aligned) areas, this order 
operates entirely in secret and none of its 
members ever reveal their true nature to the 
outside world. The second lesser order consists of
clergymen who devote their time and energies to 
protecting and exploring the world's extensive 
forests. Made up entirely of Druids, the leaders of
this sect are ultimately responsible for protecting 
the secret tree mentioned in Chapter 3. Note that 
all the clergymen in my campaign (so far) are 
Clerics or Druids; there are no Specialty Priests.
Services & Tenets of the Main 
Order
The main order holds special religious services in
honor of the nature goddess during each change 
of seasons; the Clerics of the order spend the rest 
of their time studying, adventuring, trying to aid 
members of the flock, and spreading the 
reverence of the goddess. The services consist of 
lengthy festivals and banquets attended by most 
residents of the campaign area and designed to 
celebrate the goddess and her bounty. 
The Clerics of the main order believe that the 
goddess' bounty is a manifestation of the good 
and evil of the world's inhabitants. So long as the 
flock continues to do good deeds, the goddess 
will deliver a bountiful harvest, the weather will 
be mild, and her people will enjoy long, peaceful 
lives. They also believe that owls are sacred; the 
owls are the "eyes" the goddess uses to monitor 
her flock. Clerics of the main order are required 
to spend one week of each season alone in the 
wilderness.
Services and Tenets of the Evil 
Order
The evil order also holds services during the 
change of seasons; its Clerics spend the rest of 
their time trying to attract and corrupt new 
followers. The evil order's services consist of 
human sacrifices, ceremonial bonfires, and acts of
destruction.
The Clerics of the evil order believe that the main
order has blinded itself to the goddess' true 
nature. Power and understanding, they believe, 
always stems from suffering and an acceptance of
nature's destructive capacity. Clerics of the evil 
order are required to kill one innocent each 
season to reaffirm their faith.
Services & Tenets of the Druidic 
Order
The druidic order holds a service on the night of 
every full moon, consisting of chanting and a 
reading of litanies. The Druids believe that the 
goddess' only daughter (the planet's single moon) 
will one day take her place in the cosmos; life 
will eventually die out on the main planet and 
spring up on the moon. The Druids are required 
to abide by all the restrictions of the Druid class 
listed in the PH.
Two Myths
One myth commonly repeated across the 
campaign area is that all the living creatures on 
the planet are actually a part of the goddess 
herself. As they move across the planet, they are 
like blood flowing through her veins. The main 
order views evil as a sort of cancer infecting the 
goddess.
A second oft-repeated myth explains the origin of
the planet's single moon. Most inhabitants of the 
campaign world believe that the moon is the 
daughter of the goddess; it, too, is a sentient, 
living being. According to legend, the moon was 
once a continent on the main planet. It was 
thrown into the sky by a cataclysmic volcanic 
eruption that took place more than ten thousand 
years before the campaign begins, a process the 
clergy equates with childbirth.
Other Religions
I've decided that most of the demihumans across 
the campaign world don't worship the goddess 
directly, instead honoring her treant servants. The 
demihumans view themselves as the treants' 
heralds and protectors. Humanoids are believed to
be demihumans (and their descendants) who were
long ago corrupted by evil: orcs were once elves, 
goblins were once dwarves, etc. Beyond that, I 
don't envision any other sects that might be 
significant at this time.
The Second Rule of Dungeoncraft
Of course, now that I've created some new 
information, the Second Rule of Dungeoncraft 
(see Chapter 2) compels me to invent a secret that
is somehow related to that information. I've 
decided that the Druids are more correct about the
moon than they realize; the nature goddess did 
originally intend for her daughter, the moon, to 
replace her in the natural cycle. Unknown to the 
Druids, however, the moon has already birthed 
the new life form that is destined to replace 
humankind: mind flayers! (See page 251 of the 
Monstrous Manual book for more details.) These 
creatures are so malevolent that the nature 
goddess has disowned the moon and is striving to
create an entirely new moon to replace her. The 
mind flayers and their moon goddess, of course, 
hope to foil this scheme and claim their birthright.
While these events won't impact the campaign for
some time, they're bound to lead to all sorts of 
interesting adventures down the road. 
5
Character Names
From Dragon Magazine 259
Whew! If you're still with me after those last 
three installments, give yourself a little pat on the 
back. You're halfway to holding your first game 
session, and a nice big chunk of the hard work is 
behind you. You should now have a good idea of 
where your campaign is heading. This month's 
task, although it requires imagination, isn't as 
labor intensive as the earlier steps.
Believe it or not, one of the most difficult tasks 
you face as Dungeon Master is dreaming up cool 
names for all those places, gods, monsters, and 
NPCs you create. As superficial as this chore 
might seem, nothing kills interest in an AD&D 
game faster than goofy names. The minute your 
players are attacked by Gargathrank the Unclean, 
a great deal of the credibility you've carefully 
fostered flies straight out the window. Don't 
forget that the players' first impressions of your 
game world are based, in part, on the names you 
choose.
Here are a few simple techniques to help you 
choose the right names easily.
1. Never append adjectives to 
your character names.
I've listed this suggestion first for a reason. 
Garrok the Bold, Dobbin the Swift, and Peebold 
the Wise all sound silly and immediately call to 
mind "Knights of the Dinner Table" strips. 
Maybe, somewhere, someone once invented an 
adjective name that sounded as cool as it was 
supposed to sound, but-in twenty years of 
gaming-I've never heard it. The easiest way to 
avoid cluttering your game with silly adjective 
names is to rule out the adjectives altogether.
If a player chooses an otherwise okay name with 
an appended adjective, most of the people he 
meets in your game world should simply refuse to
address him by his self-proclaimed title until the 
player finally takes the hint and drops the silly 
thing. It's likely that many NPCs will form a bad 
impression of such a character. After all, there's 
something presumptuous and downright arrogant 
about a young whippersnapper of an adventurer 
wandering around calling himself "the Strong," 
"the Brave," or (especially) the "All-Powerful." If
the player persists, a little bit of mockery from 
NPCs or increasingly difficult challenges to prove
his right to bear the title should put him in his 
place. ("So you're Gabel the Tough, eh? Well why
don't you show me how tough you are!").
One workable alternative to appending an 
adjective to your names is appending a noun 
instead as a sort of surname. Thorvin Backbiter is
not a bad name for a Thief, so long as Thorvin is 
one of those guys who doesn't mind walking 
around with a name that immediately says, "Hey! 
I'm a Thief!" If you go this route, aim for an 
interesting, non-standard noun-"backbiter" 
instead of "backstabber," "spellshaper" instead of 
"magic-user," etc.
2. Borrow an existing 
language.
Remember this number: 400. That's the Dewey 
Decimal classification number for language. If 
you go to your local public library and browse 
around the 430s through about the 490s, you'll 
find plenty of foreign-language dictionaries, each 
of which can be strip-mined for good names. 
Flipping open just about any foreign language 
dictionary to a random page should either provide
you with a number of usable names or at least a 
nice collections of syllables that you can re-
arrange to form usable names. The advantage of 
this approach is that the names it generates don't 
sound like a clunky collection of sounds, since 
words in most languages naturally evolve to 
please the ear. In fact, it's not a bad idea to fix on 
one particular language and use it to generate the 
names of all the places and NPCs in one 
particular region of your game world. That way, 
you'll establish a continuity and make your names
sound like they were derived from a single, 
common tongue (because, in fact, they were). 
Later, you can select other real-world languages 
to use as the naming blueprints for other regions 
in your campaign, giving each locale its own 
individual "feel."
Note that this approach is particularly 
recommended if you selected a cultural hook for 
your game world (as described in Chapter 2). If 
you're building a Viking world, find a Norwegian 
dictionary. If your world is based on ancient 
Roman culture, find a Latin dictionary.
3. Don't be afraid to use 
English names.
For some reason, many people presume that 
AD&D character and place names should consist 
of random, nonsensical syllables. What's wrong 
with good, old-fashioned English names? What 
sounds better to you-The Knights of Gligathrax, 
or the Knights of the Blood Throne? Similarly, 
Jason, Elaine, and Thomas are all perfectly good 
character names.
You can also form interesting names by 
combining a couple of descriptive English words.
Tanglewood is not a bad name for a dense, scary 
forest. A town that lies along a river and was once
the site of an important battle might be known as 
Bloodwater. The local pixie king might be named 
Skitterfeet. The idea here is to select interesting 
words and avoid cliches. Orcsmasher, Bigtown, 
and Meatrender are not good names.
Remember that the names you choose tell your 
players a lot about your game world. Sticking to 
English names tends to reinforce a medieval 
(almost Arthurian) atmosphere. If that's what 
you're aiming for, then this is probably the 
naming strategy for you.
4. Mercilessly rip off good 
names.
This is the age of the super-sized bookstore. Just 
about every community in America boasts at least
one Barnes and Noble, Borders, SuperCrown, or 
other mammoth bookseller. Typically, these 
bookstores feature two or three enormous shelves 
stuffed with science fiction and fantasy 
paperbacks. Every book on those shelves is likely
to contain at least a handful of usable names. A 
bit of idle flipping through these books is bound 
to turn up some workable concepts. Similarly, a 
quick glance through a detailed world atlas or two
is likely to conjure a few usable place names. Get 
in the habit of bringing a notebook along when 
you go shopping and jot down anything that 
strikes your fancy. When swiping names, though, 
never use the names of well-known characters no 
matter how cool they sound. Naming shopkeepers
and town guardsmen Conan or Gandalf not only 
confuses your players, it usually sounds just as 
silly as a "random syllable" or "appended 
adjective" name.
One of the very best secret resources for Dungeon
Masters is your local bookseller's children's 
section. Not only are the children's books stuffed 
full of great names, they often contain useful, 
imaginative ideas for entire adventures. In the 
past, children's books have inspired me to design 
adventures that take place in giant trees, in the 
belly of enormous sea creatures, and other 
unusual and imaginative locales.
One last point to make about swiping names from
other sources: If you need a great name for an elf,
dwarf, halfling, or other demihuman, consider 
going directly to J.R.R. Tolkien, unless you have 
a compelling reason not to do so. Not only did the
good Professor derive his names for these 
creatures from complex invented languages he 
derived from real ones (thus lending the names 
that same sense of continuity mentioned in rule 
number two), just about every Dungeon Master 
who has preceded you ripped off his elf and 
dwarf names from Tolkien. Thus, Tolkienesque 
elf and dwarf names sound "correct" to many 
AD&D players.
This isn't to say that you should take your names 
directly from Tolkien's works-often, your best bet
is to pull a few syllables from a collection of 
three or four names and rearrange them to form a 
new name.
5. When all else fails, turn to 
the local phone book.
If you don't have immediate access to a foreign 
language dictionary or a Barnes and Noble, you 
can often glean useful names from your local 
phone book. Open to a random page and take a 
look at the surnames. To illustrate, I've just 
opened the Seattle Metro White Pages to page 
401. Glancing through the columns, I can see a 
couple of usable character names (Finzer, Fiori, 
Fiscus) and a couple of decent place names 
(Firnburg and Firth). Obviously, those in large 
cities can employ this tactic to greater effect than 
rural-dwellers.
6. Work with the players to 
name their characters.
All the hard work that you put into keeping silly 
names out of your game world can be destroyed 
by a couple of unimaginative players. It seems 
that every group has at least one or two jokers 
who want to name their characters Soupy, or 
Bullwinkle, or even ... (shudder) ... Kramer. 
Usually, these folks are just trying to be funny, 
but sometimes they're just terribly unimaginative.
In any case, you should be aware that as minor as 
this issue sounds, such names can wreak havoc on
your campaign. The first time a particularly fun 
and dramatic moment arises and you must 
address one of your players as Bullwinkle, you'll 
see what I mean. Don't be afraid to rule out any 
names that have the potential to trample the tone 
of your campaign. If your players are having 
difficulty inventing usable names, try suggesting 
some of the techniques outlined in this column. 
You might even suggest some names yourself. In 
any case, you don't want to go overboard. In the 
end, the players should have the right to select 
their own names, just so long as they don't select 
something unworkable.
With these strategies in mind, I've attached a few 
names to some of the places and concepts in my 
own campaign. Since I want to reinforce a sort of 
"Robin Hood" atmosphere (to go along with the 
general concept of a "forest world"), I'm going to 
try to stick to English names as much as possible.
From Chapter 2:
Stronghold, base of operations: Ironoak.
Woods surrounding the stronghold, secretly 
dominated by treants: Tanglewood.
Woods dominated by orc tribes that lie beyond 
the border protected by Ironoak: The Black 
Wood. (This is where the warden's title comes 
from.)
Warden of the Black Wood: Richard (For 
characters, I'd like to go with a combination of 
appropriate real world names and more traditional
fantasy names-the same approach George Lucas 
chose in Star Wars.)
Feudal monarchy that maintains the stronghold: 
Umbria (The name of an actual geographical 
location in Great Britain.)
From Chapter 3:
Nature goddess, also doubles as the name of the 
planet: Aris. (A homonym of Eris, the ancient 
Greek goddess of discord; I merely liked the way 
the name sounded and reworked it for my own 
purposes.) The moon: Selene. (The name of the 
ancient Greek goddess of the moon; I'm hoping 
this name will resonate with the players and 
remind them of the moon every time they hear it.)
The evil religious order: simply, the Legion.
The good order: the Children of Aris, or simply 
"the Children." Priests of the order often place the
title "Childe" before their names.
The druidic order: Why not call them "Druids"?
Now that you've attached names to some of the 
most important people, places, and concepts in 
your campaign world, it's time to perform an 
important task that will prepare you for some of 
the work ahead. If you've been following the 
Second Rule of Dungeoncraft, each time you 
invented a significant detail about your world, 
you created a secret related to that detail. It's now 
time to write each of those secrets on a three-by-
five index card for future reference. Later we will
use this "deck of secrets" to help us flesh out the 
campaign area and design adventures. That 
should do it for now. Join me next month, when 
I'll look at designing the campaign's base of 
operations
6
Home Base
From Dragon Magazine 260
Five installments so far, and we've yet to draw a 
single map. If you've followed this column, you 
know that we've already created lots of 
background details about our campaign world. In 
this installment and the next, we finally begin 
taking some of these concepts and turning them 
into a playable setting. Our first mission is to map
the players' base of operations. (See Chapter 3 for
details on selecting an appropriate base of 
operations.) Although many DMs begin mapping 
their gameworlds on a larger scale and slowly 
work their way down to more detailed local maps,
it's much easier and more efficient to go in the 
opposite direction. Remember that the First Rule 
of Dungeoncraft: Create only those details that 
are immediately useful. It's unlikely that you'll 
need large-scale maps of your campaign 
environment for quite some time. The players' 
local base of operations, on the other hand, is 
likely to serve as the setting for the bulk of play 
throughout your first several game sessions. 
Although the players are unlikely to embark upon
adventures within their home base, the details you
lavish upon the area establish the tone of the 
campaign and prepare the players for the 
challenges they'll face later.
Before we get started, let's briefly recap the role 
the players' home base will play in the campaign. 
Once play begins, we're going to subject the 
heroes to all sorts of trials and tribulations, 
pushing them to their limits whenever we can 
since a fast, perilous pace makes for fun 
gameplay. Occasionally, though, the players need 
to escape to some safe haven to divvy up treasure 
and plot strategy. From time to time, they'll need 
to purchase new equipment, heal their wounds, 
experiment with new magical items, and perform 
all sorts of other mundane but useful tasks. Over 
time, these tasks provide a welcome change of 
pace from the rigors of the wild and woolly 
campaign. That's where the home base comes into
play. An effective base serves as a safe, civilized 
haven for the players and houses the 
infrastructure they need to carry out their various 
administrative errands.
Effective bases tend to have the following 
features:
A Local Authority
Remember that the base is supposed to give the 
players a sense of security. Usually, this means 
that the base is home to some sort of constabulary
or military formation, and this in turn implies that
the base is under the command of a local 
authority. The presence of these forces assures the
PCs that their enemies can't easily pursue them 
and kill them as they sleep. Note that the forces 
present need not be formidable-a simple 
detachment of thirty to forty soldiers (0 level) is 
sufficient. The authority who oversees these 
forces is typically a minor noble or civil servant. 
For the purpose of drawing maps, the authority 
and his troops call for the presence of the 
appropriate quarters and barracks, which should 
be on high ground or otherwise defensively 
placed.
Don't forget that societies have alignments, just 
like individual characters. (See the Dungeon 
Master Guide.) To foster the players' sense of 
security, it's probably best if the society 
inhabiting the base of operations is Lawfully 
aligned. One of the key functions of the local 
authority is to enforce and maintain this order. As 
you create the local authority, think about 
whether the local code of conduct includes any 
unusual laws or provisions. You should also plan 
on incorporating some sort of stockade or jail into
your base map. After all, it's difficult to enforce 
laws if there is nowhere to house lawbreakers.
In the campaign developing in these pages, the 
players' base of operations is a forest stronghold 
known as Ironoak. The local authority is a minor 
noble named Richard who holds the title Warden 
of the Black Wood. Ironoak was built along the 
edge of a vast forest wilderness (the Black Wood)
to protect the civilized kingdom of Umbria 
against incursion. Because this mission is so 
critical, Richard has complete and unquestioned 
authority within Ironoak and its environs; his role
is essentially that of an old west sheriff in a 
frontier town. Fortunately, Richard and the 
society he represents are both Lawful Good. 
Richard has thirty-five men-at-arms and sixteen 
archers at his disposal. Because Ironoak is a 
forest stronghold, I've decided upon an interesting
provision in the code of conduct that he upholds. 
Fearful of devastating forest fires, during the 
summer dry season Richard has ruled that leaving
an open flame unattended in or around Ironoak is 
a serious offense that deserves brief 
imprisonment in the stronghold's stockade. This 
also gives me the idea to plan on incorporating 
some sort of central fire alarm (such as a bell or 
gong) into the Ironoak map.
Townsfolk
In addition to the soldiers, it's a good idea to have
a handful of common townsfolk around. Don't 
worry about giving them all names and statistics; 
that won't be necessary. In this case, inventing too
many details can actually prove harmful. The 
main reason to establish the players' base of 
operations in a populated area is to provide a 
handy mechanism you can later use to insert 
useful NPCs into the game. When you get around
to creating adventures and dealing with the 
whims of your players, you'll find it's often 
necessary to introduce new nonplayer characters 
into the campaign. Suppose, for instance, that you
come up with a concept for an adventure that 
revolves around an aging ex-soldier who hires the
players to accompany him on a mysterious 
mission to meet an old battlefield enemy. Now 
you need a nearby aging soldier. Similarly, what 
if the players decide to seek out an expert on 
ancient lore to help them translate some elder 
runes? Now you need a nearby sage. A vaguely 
defined population in the vicinity of your base of 
operations allows you to introduce new nonplayer
characters as they are needed; they've always 
lived "on the other side of town" and just haven't 
yet encountered the players.
When it comes to drawing maps, all these 
townspeople require houses and hovels in which 
to live. One important note to keep in mind is that
the residents of genuine medieval villages tended 
to crowd many more people into a single 
dwelling than we do today, with ten or twelve 
largish buildings usually providing more than 
enough shelter for anywhere from fifty to one 
hundred residents. Of course, nothing requires 
you to design your fantasy villages according to 
this principle, though it's certainly something to 
consider. As you're preparing your base map, also
think about what the townsfolk do for a living; 
perhaps this industry requires other structures and
dwellings. A town full of shopkeepers, for 
instance, means that there are plenty of shops 
around, as well as the infrastructure necessary to 
allow for the easy importation of goods (i.e., 
facilities to quarter merchant caravans, 
warehouses, etc).
I envision Ironoak housing between seventy-five 
and one hundred townsfolk. Most of these people 
live in multiple-family treehouses, so I'm 
assuming that there are between twenty and thirty
total dwellings. Most of Ironoak's residents earn 
their keep in the surrounding forest as trappers 
and hunters, though several operate market stalls 
catering to the steady stream of merchants and 
adventurers who pass through the frontier 
stronghold. All of this suggests to me that the 
Ironoak map should feature an unusual number of
inns (say, three) for an outpost of its size to cater 
to the adventurers and merchants.
Shops
Because the PCs will eventually need to upgrade 
their equipment and purchase various supplies, 
your base of operations should feature all the 
shops and merchants necessary to meet their 
needs. This does not mean that you should offer 
all of the items listed in the Player's Handbook 
for sale in the immediate area. You want to leave 
some items, particularly some of the more 
expensive pieces, unavailable for the time being. 
Later, when the players can afford these items, 
the fact that they must seek them elsewhere can 
serve as a useful springboard for an adventure or 
two. Suppose, for example, that horses are 
unavailable in the base of operations. When the 
players are ready to purchase mounts, they must 
travel to the nearest larger town or city, giving 
you a great opportunity to make their voyage a bit
dangerous and exciting. For now, simply make a 
list of those items that are definitely not available 
in or around the base. You should also think about
how many total shops are present and which 
shops sell which goods. Since it's generally easier
to deal with a fewer number of buildings, try 
thinking in terms of larger general shops that sell 
many different categories of goods rather than 
smaller specialty shops that sell only one or two 
items. Alternatively, you can go with one or two 
large marketplaces that house many small, 
specialized vendors.
The following items are normally not available in
Ironoak: any sort of expensive clothing, any kind 
of animals (including horses), any sort of 
transport, spyglasses, water clocks, arquebuses, 
composite bows, hand crossbows, lances, 
khopeshes, scimitars, and any armor better than 
chainmail. I'm going to presume that most of the 
other items listed in the Player's Handbook are 
available somewhere in the stronghold, though I 
won't rule out the possibility of excluding other 
items on a case-by-case basis later. Although a 
small smithy is the only real shop in Ironoak, the 
stronghold is home to a large market that features 
several dozen specialized stalls and tables. The 
regular vendors who operate in this market are 
sometimes temporarily joined by merchants 
passing through the stronghold, some of whom 
occasionally offer the items not normally 
available for sale.
Temple
You should definitely think about incorporating a 
temple or two into your base of operations. Not 
only does it give Clerics and Specialty Priests a 
place to pray, it also gives your adventurers 
somewhere they can turn to receive the higher 
order healing spells and cures early in the 
campaign, before the PC Priests are capable of 
casting such spells themselves. Of course, the 
NPC Clerics who run the temple will expect a 
donation in exchange for their services. (See 
Chapter 12 of the Dungeon Master Guide.) A 
good rule of thumb is to place the temple in your 
base of operations under the aegis of a 7th-level 
NPC Priest. This gives the players indirect access 
to all Priest spells up to the 4th level, including: 
cure light wounds, detect poison, cure blindness, 
cure disease, remove curse, cure serious wounds, 
and neutralize poison. Making these services 
available to the players will give you much 
greater freedom when it comes time to select 
monsters and adversaries to place in your 
adventures.
If you read the column on AD&D game world 
religions (see Chapter 4), you should already 
know something about the nature of religion and 
temples in your fantasy world. You may want to 
review those notes now to give you a better idea 
of how one of your temples might appear on a 
map. Are all your temples located in forested 
groves? If so, such a grove must exist in or 
around your base of operations. Are your temples 
surrounded by large colonnades? If so, you 
should plan on allocating more map space.
Ironoak boasts a small temple dedicated to the 
sect known as the "Children of Aris." The temple 
occupies yet another treehouse, and it boasts, 
among other things, a large library of ancient 
writings and scrolls. This library will make an 
excellent source of arcane information for the 
player adventurers, and the master of the temple 
also acts as a sage with fields of study in history, 
folklore, and religion. (See Chapter 12 of the 
Dungeon Master Guide; I'll consider his temple 
library "Partial" for the purposes of Table 62.) Of 
course, the temple master expects compensation 
for his services, just like any other sage.
Fantasy Element
This is no more than a matter of personal taste, 
but I like to place something "fantastic" in all the 
towns and villages I create for my AD&D games. 
This element immediately signals to the players 
that they are not in the real world and gives them 
an idea of what they can expect. Flip through the 
Monstrous Manual book. Perhaps one or more of 
its denizens are active in your base or village-
maybe the local innkeeper keeps a mischievous 
leprechaun trapped in a cage behind the bar, or 
perhaps a centaur serves as a special scout and 
advisor to the local authority. Similarly, you 
might think about whether any demi-humans are 
active in the base and what sort of role they play 
in the local society. Other good sources of ideas 
for workable fantastic elements include the 
various spell and magical item descriptions, 
children's books, and even modern buildings and 
cities. As an example of the latter, since Ironoak 
is suspended in the treetops, I think a large, 
ornately carved wooden elevator that moves 
people and items from the ground up to the trees 
sounds like a lot of fun. The elevator operates via 
a complex series of winches and pulleys; it's 
cranked between treetop and ground level by a 
contingent of Richard's troops who act as 
watchmen.
That should be enough to get you started. Next 
month, we'll take a look at a couple of additional 
characteristics of effective home bases and 
explore strategies for actually drawing the map!
7
The Rumor Mill and Maps
From Dragon Magazine 261
Last month we started work on a map of the PCs' 
base of operations for the early phases of the 
campaign. This month, we continue to look at the 
essential features of such a base and provide 
some tips on drawing the map itself.
The Rumor Mill
Adventures are the cornerstone of any AD&D 
game campaign, and it's difficult for the PCs to 
undertake adventures if they can't locate them. 
This might seem like a trivial problem, but 
inventing fresh and interesting ways to involve 
the players in your adventures is one of the most 
challenging tasks you'll face as Dungeon Master. 
To aid yourself in this endeavor, plan to include a 
fairly obvious "rumor mill" in your base of 
operations, a place where adventurers gather to 
swap boasts, rumors, and legends. Once the 
campaign begins, you can take steps to inform the
players that a few hours spent in the rumor mill 
are likely to turn up an interesting story, patron, 
or legend capable of steering them toward a fresh 
adventure. This isn't the only means you should 
use to guide your players into new adventures (at 
least, it shouldn't be), but it doesn't hurt to have a 
safe backup for those times when you just can't 
think of anything better. Also, a solid rumor mill 
prevents the players from getting the 
uncomfortable idea that there's just nothing left to
do.
Typically, the local rumor mill is an inn or tavern 
with one of those quaint names like "The 
Laughing Unicorn" or "The Wistful Wyvern," 
though there are plenty of other opportunities. 
The mill could just as easily be a marketplace, an 
"adventurers' guild," or even a library. Any place 
where adventurers, veterans, "mysterious 
strangers," or storytellers gather will do. 
Whatever locale you select to serve as your rumor
mill should be a location that obviously draws a 
lot of travelers and out-of-towners. The more 
people who pass through the mill, the greater the 
ease with which you can introduce new 
information, rumors, and legends.
Of course, nothing says that you must confine 
your rumor mill to a single location. If you can 
come up with multiple sources for gossip and 
legends that seem to fit into your plan, so much 
the better. In our developing campaign world of 
Aris, for instance, the forest stronghold features 
two separate rumor mills. Somewhere inside the 
marketplace introduced last issue is a storyteller's 
square that has acquired a degree of notoriety 
throughout the lands under the aegis of Richard. 
Bards, adventurers, and others with a tale to tell 
come to this square to speak their piece to the 
public, hoping for a few silvers in return.
A youngster, for instance, might come to the 
square to relate the story of how he and his father 
were recently waylaid by a huge furry beast 
(actually an owlbear) on one of the trails outside 
Ironoak. Fortunately, the youngster managed to 
escape the beast's clutches, though his father 
wasn't so lucky. Hearing this tale, an outraged 
local merchant offers five hundred gold pieces for
the beast's hide. This should be all that any 
adventurer worth his salt needs to hear before 
setting off to hunt the beast, and another 
adventure is underway.
In addition to the storyteller's square, one of 
Ironoak's inns, The Queen of Cups, is a notorious 
hangout for out-of-towners and adventurers 
passing through to the Black Wood. Ernst, the 
owner of the Queen of Cups, is a retired 
adventurer himself. Part of what attracts 
newcomers to The Queen is Ernst's huge 
collection of curiosities. He's known to pay top 
dollar for any souvenir of a daring exploit. He 
then exhibits these items to attract new patrons to 
the inn. For the price of a few drinks, he'll happily
relate the story behind any piece in his collection. 
At present, the collection includes a black 
dragon's tooth, an inert ioun stone, the pickled 
eyes of a medusa, and several lesser items, 
though Ernst is constantly acquiring new objects. 
This collection should be doubly effective in 
setting the players off on new adventures. Not 
only can they overhear gossip and rumors from 
Ernst's patrons but also Ernst himself and his 
items might easily serve to interest the players in 
a potential feat of derring-do. 
Interesting NPCs
Part of what makes the AD&D game fun for your 
players is the opportunity to interact with the 
interesting nonplayer characters you create. It's 
hard to imagine your base of operations taking 
root in the players' imaginations unless it's 
populated with interesting NPCs. At this stage, 
you should try to create at least two such 
personalities. If you can easily come up with 
more than two good ideas, so much the better, but
don't feel obligated to stretch yourself. It's much 
better to develop two really good ideas than four 
or five mediocre ideas. You'll also have plenty of 
opportunities to introduce new NPCs into the 
base later.
There are a number of characteristics that might 
make a nonplayer character particularly 
interesting. NPCs with obvious secrets, for 
instance, are always interesting; they encourage 
the players to get to the bottom of those secrets, 
possibly touching off an adventure or two. NPCs 
who can teach something of value to one or more 
of the players (like a master wizard, a high-
ranking cleric, or a retired master strategist) tend 
to be interesting, as do NPCs the characters can 
obviously help or assist in some fashion (an 
orphaned boy, perhaps, or a kindly merchant deep
in debt to an evil moneylender). Other viable 
strategies include NPCs who are not what they 
appear to be (a vaunted warrior who is secretly a 
coward), NPCs with distinctive physical features, 
NPCs who make mysterious prophecies ("One 
day, you will earn the right to command this 
stronghold."), and NPCs who are particularly 
good at involving the PCs in new adventures 
(perhaps an absent-minded wizard who 
continuously makes serious mistakes in his 
magical research, unleashing catastrophes the 
PCs must struggle to clean up). Note that at this 
stage you need only a couple of simple ideas for 
key characters so you can account for their needs 
when you draw your map. For now, don't worry 
about developing game statistics, personalities, or
backgrounds for the NPCs. We'll address those 
chores in a future installment.
Let's consider a couple of the most interesting 
local NPCs in Ironoak. The captain of Richard's 
guard, Tarrin, is both "not what he seems" and a 
"man with an interesting physical characteristic." 
Tarrin has no left hand. He has told everyone that 
he lost the hand many years ago while fighting in 
a war, but the real story is much more interesting. 
About twelve years ago, Tarrin led a special 
detachment of the king's troops to destroy a 
stronghold built deep in the forest by an evil cult. 
In retaliation, the cult leader cast a horrible curse 
on Tarrin that gave his left hand a mind of its 
own. Soon, Tarrin was waking up to discover 
bloody weapons in his hand; the next day he'd 
learn that one of his neighbors was killed in the 
night. Eventually, the situation became so 
unbearable that Tarrin went deep into the woods 
and cut off the hand himself to escape the curse. 
He doesn't know that the hand "survived" and is 
slowly crawling its way across the continent, 
wreaking subtle havoc and trying to find its 
erstwhile owner. Naturally, the hand is eventually 
going to show up in the campaign to provide a 
strange adversary (and surprise) for the PCs. As 
captain of the guard, Tarrin needs a special offic 
or barracks somewhere on the Ironoak map.
Another local NPC is an old, retired wizard 
named Jarrak who lives somewhere in the woods 
outside of Ironoak, though he frequently visits the
stronghold to replenish his supplies. Jarrak has 
the uncanny ability to come and go unseen. You 
might suddenly hear his voice from the corner of 
the inn and turn to find him comfortably seated 
and sipping his broth, even though no one saw 
him enter. A few moments later, you might turn to
speak with him, only to find that he is gone, 
though no one saw him leave. Jarrak is famous 
for having discovered a potent, unique spell that 
he used to save Ironoak from a band of marauders
almost thirty years ago. It's said that Jarrak is the 
only wizard on all Aris who knows this spell; he's
never found an apprentice worthy enough to learn
it. Naturally, this is meant to serve as a challenge 
to any PC wizards. I'm hoping (and assuming) 
that they'll eventually attempt to convince Jarrak 
that they are worthy recipients of his secret 
knowledge. Since he's an out-of-towner, Jarrak 
won't need any special accommodations on the 
Ironoak map.
Something Related to a Secret
If you've been following this column and obeying
the Second Rule of Dungeoncraft, you've already 
created a number of interesting secrets pertaining 
to your campaign world. Two installments ago 
(Chapter 5), you might have written each of these
secrets on a separate index card. It's now time to 
pull out your "deck of secrets" for the first time.
The idea behind these secrets, of course, is that 
the players will eventually uncover them and 
come to realize the depth and richness of the 
campaign world you've created. But the players 
can't possibly uncover any of the secrets without 
the appropriate clues and hints. Carefully shuffle 
the index cards you have prepared and draw one 
at random. Your task is to think up a clue related 
to that secret so you can place it somewhere 
within your base of operations.
I've drawn a secret I created in Chapter 4. If you 
recall, the campaign planet itself is a living entity 
known as Aris and worshiped as a goddess by its 
inhabitants. Most inhabitants believe that the 
planet's single moon, Selene, is also a living 
entity and the daughter of Aris. Legend has it that 
Aris gave birth to Selene so that her daughter 
could one day take her place in the cosmos. 
Eventually, Aris (and all life upon her) will die 
out, opening the way for Selene and new life the 
moon goddess will create. Unknown to almost 
everyone on the campaign world, however, 
Selene turned evil, prompting Aris to revoke her 
birthright. Selene has already given birth to the 
race that she hoped would replace the races 
birthed by Aris: hideous mind flayers! At present,
there are probably some ten thousand mind 
flayers and other assorted beasts living on Selene.
They and their goddess plan to destroy Aris and 
claim their birthright by force.
Now it's time to invent a clue to this secret that I 
can place inside Ironoak. Before I proceed, I note 
that I've drawn a particularly big secret: It affects 
the entirety of the campaign world and has the 
potential to pit the players against some pretty 
tough monsters. Ideally, the players won't get to 
the bottom of this particular secret until far in the 
future, when they have gained enough experience
levels to deal with the mind flayers. As a 
consequence, I'm not looking for a hint that gives 
away the farm; I need only raise the players' 
interest and allow them to uncover something 
suggesting the mere existence of the secret. As a 
general rule, the more time that elapses between 
the point at which the possible existence of a 
secret is first suggested and the moment the 
players finally uncover that secret, the more 
satisfying their experience. Since I hope to give 
the players a whiff of this secret long before they 
finally get to its bottom, the saga of the mind 
flayers and the evil moon goddess has the 
potential to form one of the most satisfying 
episodes of the entire campaign.
So what's the clue? Ernst provides an obvious 
opportunity. Somewhere among the items in his 
collection is a mysterious stone idol in the shape 
of a mind flayer perched atop an orb. The orb is 
inscribed with a strange rune. Ernst acquired the 
idol from a passing adventurer but has no idea 
where the adventurer found it. In fact, the seller 
was too afraid to talk about how he came to 
possess the idol and was obviously happy to get 
rid of it. (He sold the piece for a mere five gold 
pieces.) This gives me all sorts of possibilities for
the future. 
We might introduce a strange cult of moon 
worshipers (the mind flayers' agents on Aris) who
track their idol back to Ernst and attempt to 
reclaim it, possibly dragging the players into an 
adventure. Eventually, we could also allow the 
players to discover that the strange rune on the 
orb was a symbol for Selene in one of the planet's
ancient tongues, providing them with a clue to the
mind flayers' origin. In any case, the fact that the 
appearance of the flayers will be foreshadowed 
many months before they actually show up in the 
campaign should make their eventual arrival 
exceptionally dramatic. Since this hint is 
delivered in the form of Ernst, it won't require 
adding additional buildings or locations on the 
Ironoak map.
Drawing the Map
Now that we have surveyed all of its most 
important features, you can draw the map for 
your base of operations. Before you get started, 
you should review the five quick tips below. To 
recap, the following features must figure into the 
design of Ironoak:
• Barracks for Richard's troops
• A centrally located "fire alarm" gong
• Between twenty and thirty dwellings for 
townsfolk
• Three inns, one of which is The Queen of 
Cups
• A smithy
• A large, open marketplace that features a 
storyteller's square
• A temple of the Children
• An elevator that allows visitors and their 
goods to be hauled up to the treetops
• Tarrin's guardhouse
Tip 1: Use Graph Paper
A sense of scale and all that it implies are very 
important to the AD&D game. Although you 
won't need to keep track of such things during the
bulk of the time the players spend in town, 
someday you'll need to know how many 
buildings are affected by a fireball dropped in the 
middle of your village, or exactly how many 
rounds it takes a wizard to run from the town gate
to the local inn. If you get in the habit of drawing 
all your maps to scale on graph paper, you'll find 
it much easier to calculate the appropriate 
distances during play. Graph paper also helps you
track the characters' movements in those 
instances when it is important.
As a general rule, you should draw all your town 
and dungeon maps on regular square graph paper 
and all your wilderness maps on hex paper. 
(Regular graph paper is widely available at office 
supply stores; you can usually purchase hex paper
at your local hobby shop.) In general, hex paper 
makes it easier to quickly assess the distance 
between any two points on your map, but it's not 
well suited for towns and dungeons since the 
right angles so common in dungeon corridors and
city streets don't match the hexgrain well. I prefer
graph paper with five squares to the inch, but you 
should feel free to use the size that works best for 
you. If you can't find graph paper, you can draw 
your maps on blank paper and use the cellophane 
overlays from the Forgotten Realms Campaign 
Set to quickly drop a grid over the map when 
necessary. In any case, you should carefully craft 
your map to exact scale.
A scale of approximately 25 feet to the square 
works best for maps of small towns and villages. 
This means that the long side of a sheet of 
standard paper covers approximately one quarter 
mile (if you're using paper with five squares to 
the inch), giving you an opportunity to 
comfortably fit all the town's buildings and a bit 
of the surrounding terrain on a single sheet. If, for
some reason, your base of operations spans a 
larger area, increase the scale as necessary.
Tip 2: Get as Fancy as You Can
Unlike some of the dungeon and adventure maps 
you'll draw later, you're going to allow the players
to look at this particular map during play. The 
more fancy and interesting you can make it, the 
more likely it is to spur on the players' 
imaginations and improve your game. At a 
minimum, you should draw the map carefully and
neatly. You should also consider adding color 
(colored pencils work best) and any other artistic 
flair you're capable of providing. If you have the 
means, there is a wide variety of computer 
software available that can help you spice up your
maps, most notably the Campaign Cartographer 
product from Pro-Fantasy software or the AD&D 
Core Rules v. 2.0.
Tip 3: Make the Map Useful
When drawing maps for your campaign, you 
should always try to anticipate exactly how you'll 
use the map in play and tailor it to suit those 
needs. Anything that you can add to the map that 
might ultimately save you or your players some 
time is probably a good idea. On the map of your 
base of operations, for instance, you might 
include a legend indicating how far the average 
character can move in both one turn and one 
round. You might also place symbols on the map 
indicating where key characters are often found, 
diagrams showing the routes patrolled by guards, 
borders indicating areas frequented by local 
thieves, and other legends explaining the 
purposes of your buildings and areas. In this 
particular instance, though, don't place anything 
on your map that wouldn't be known to the 
average resident of the base. Remember, you're 
ultimately going to show this map to the players.
Tip 4: Don't Be So Predictable
Try to include at least one or two distinctive 
features on every map you draw. If every one of 
your towns uses the same basic layout, your 
players are likely to grow bored and confused. If 
there's something distinctive in each town, the 
players are more likely to remember each town 
individually and to bring each location alive in 
their imaginations. Sometimes, basic geography 
is enough to make each location distinctive. Try 
experimenting with angled streets, hills and other 
geographical features in the midst of town, and 
unusual building layouts. If you're struggling with
basic layouts, look to maps of real world cities 
and towns for inspiration. You can also give each 
village map its own unique identity by resorting 
to fantastic elements (see last issue), special 
monuments, or unusual features (maybe a circus, 
a library, a mint, or an arena).
Tip 5: Be Logical
Finally, when drawing a village or town map, try 
to put yourself in the shoes of one of the town's 
fictional residents. Is water readily available to 
each of the residences? Are the town's inns easily 
noticed and accessible to out-of-towners? Are 
there places for merchants and visitors to stable 
their mounts? This sort of consistency will help 
lend your campaign an air of plausibility that will 
pay big dividends down the road.
Next month, we'll look at more of your questions 
before moving on to our first area map.
8
Four Things You Can (and 
Should!) Do With NPCs
From Dragon Magazine 262
You can't run a memorable AD&D campaign 
without creating some memorable nonplayer 
characters. Think about it. The only tools you can
use to bring your campaign setting alive in your 
players' imaginations are your descriptions, 
storylines, and NPCs. Of these, only the NPCs 
give you an opportunity to step into your own 
world and flesh it out from the inside. Your NPCs
allow you to ham it up and bring the game world 
to life. They give you a chance to step out from 
behind your DM's screen and get in on the action.
Your characterization of NPCs is especially 
critical because your players look to you for 
guidance in developing their own characters. If 
your NPCs are lively, your players are likely to 
follow your lead with more memorable creations 
of their own.
Last month, we identified the first nonplayer 
inhabitants of our campaign world. In this 
month's installment and the next, we'll explore 
strategies for making those NPCs an effective 
part of the campaign. But before you can create 
great NPCs, you must first understand the various
roles they are likely to play in your adventures, so
let's begin with a discussion of...
Four Things You Can (and Should!) Do With 
NPCs
1. Provide the Players with 
Exposition
NPCs are a great tool you can use to introduce the
players to information about your setting. There 
is probably some resident somewhere on your 
campaign world who can answer just about any 
question the players might want to pose. The 
wizened sage who lives in the big city can 
probably identify the runes on that ancient book 
the adventurers pulled out of the last dungeon 
they visited. The local king can probably give the 
party a clue as to why his daughter recently 
disappeared. The goblin lord probably knows 
when the five tribes are planning to assault the 
local stronghold and how they might approach it. 
Of course, some or all of these folks are probably 
not inclined to share their secrets, leaving it up to 
the players to figure out how to loosen their 
tongues!
When creating an NPC, it's important to think 
about what he or she knows. What important 
questions might the NPC answer? How can this 
information help the players? What secrets might 
the NPC potentially reveal? You should also think
about how the players might gain this 
information. Is the NPC someone the PCs might 
befriend or someone they must outwit? And then 
there are some NPCs who are designed to reveal 
their information without any sort of coaxing 
from the players. Imagine an old beggar who 
aimlessly wanders around the city mumbling 
about some terrible creature he encountered in the
forest long ago, or a traveling minstrel who 
moves from inn to inn singing ballads of great 
heroes and their adventures. When NPCs are free 
with helpful information, make sure they keep 
their revelations as subtle as possible. Make it at 
least a little challenging for the players to puzzle 
out the significance of any information they 
glean. The wandering beggar shouldn't come right
out and tell the players that the creature he met 
was a wyvern. Instead, he should describe "a 
terrible hiss," "wings that blotted out the sun," or 
a "razor-sharp tail." Clever players will get the 
hint, deduce the creature's identity, and take the 
appropriate precautions before venturing into the 
forest themselves.
2. Offer the PCs Services and 
Tactical Options
Typical adventurers are able folks, but even the 
most experienced and well-equipped group can't 
do everything for itself. Sooner or later, the PCs 
will need the services of a blacksmith, a sage, or a
moneylender. This means that whenever you 
create an NPC, you should also consider what 
that character can do for the PCs-and what it 
might take for the PCs to procure these services.
A good AD&D campaign presents the players 
with a web of possible solutions to any problem 
they encounter, and NPCs are likely to occupy 
key positions within this web. Suppose, for 
example, that the PCs retrieve a magical sword 
from a dungeon but are unsure of the weapon's 
true nature and capabilities. In a well-developed 
campaign, they'd have several clear options, 
allowing them the freedom to choose and 
reinforcing the idea that their destinies lie in their 
own hands. They might simply use the sword and
try to deduce its capabilities from its 
performance. They might mount an expedition to 
recover a lost spellbook of which they've heard, 
hoping it contains an identify spell or other lore 
concerning the weapon. They might visit a nearby
sage in hopes that he'll recognize the blade, or 
they might travel all the way to the big city, 
where they can hire a friendly wizard to cast an 
identify spell for them. Of course, for these latter 
options to work, the PCs must have already met 
these two NPCs and familiarized themselves with
their capabilities. To build these sorts of options 
into your own game, you should anticipate the 
services the players might need in the months 
ahead, then liberally sprinkle appropriate NPCs 
all over your setting. Likely services usually 
include help with: spellcasting, identifying 
magical items, buying and selling equipment, 
raising money, acquiring information, and 
ensuring adequate security.
Keep in mind that the services your NPCs can 
supply aren't very helpful if the players are 
unaware that they are available. The local captain 
of the guard might be an expert jeweler, but this 
ability won't provide the players with any 
problem-solving options until the players 
discover the guard's expertise. This doesn't mean 
that you should immediately reveal the 
capabilities of your NPCs to the players, but think
about how and when you might go about making 
those disclosures. If the capabilities of the NPCs 
aren't obvious, try to reveal them in as subtle a 
fashion as possible.
A couple of months after the campaign begins, for
instance, the PCs might stumble across a fracas in
the local marketplace. An old man and a merchant
are loudly arguing over the value of a small ruby, 
each threatening to pummel the other. Apparently,
the son of the old man bought the ruby from the 
merchant earlier in the day. When the son 
returned home, his father discovered that the gem 
was flawed and that his son had been fleeced. For
his part, the seller insists that the ruby is 
exceptional and that the boy's father is near-
sighted and senile. Eventually, a patrol led by the 
captain of the guard comes on the scene. When he
learns the nature of the dispute, the captain 
snatches the ruby, holds it up to the light and 
announces that the old man is correct. He then 
threatens to imprison the merchant unless he 
returns the boy's money, quickly ending the 
incident. When his fellow soldiers look to him 
with surprise, the captain explains that his own 
father is a jeweler and that he mastered some of 
the basic skills early in his youth. Once the PCs 
have witnessed this scene, they realize that they 
could potentially turn to the captain should they 
need a gem appraised in the future.
For maximum effect, this revelation should come 
long before the PCs might actually need the 
guard's services. Otherwise, it will seem like 
you're conveniently suggesting a course of action 
and doing their job for them. The trick is to make 
the players feel like they're clever for 
remembering that guard they encountered all 
those adventures ago.
3. Propel the PCs into 
Adventures
As you create each of your NPCs, think about 
how each of them might direct, drag, or otherwise
coax the players into undertaking an adventure. 
NPCs might possess information that is just 
begging to be investigated, or they might keep 
secrets that reveal danger or opportunity when 
uncovered.
There are many strategies to use NPCs as 
adventure springboards. One tried and true 
method is to give the players some reason to care 
about the NPC-which shouldn't be too hard with 
good-aligned adventurers-then place the NPC in 
danger. For example, any AD&D adventurers 
worth their salt should rush off to save a friend's 
recently kidnapped son, giving you a great 
opportunity to throw some interesting and 
entertaining obstacles in the way. Similarly, what 
if an adventurer's sister is accused of witchcraft 
and threatened with execution? This should 
prompt the PCs to investigate, inevitably leading 
to a confrontation with the entity who is really 
responsible for the unexplained events that have 
panicked the townspeople.
Another classic method of using NPCs to trigger 
adventures is to create characters who are 
interested in hiring the PCs to undertake some 
dangerous assignment. Maybe a local merchant 
needs an armed escort to accompany a caravan he
plans to send across the Murky Swamp, or a 
powerful wizard is looking for a party capable of 
procuring those wyvern's teeth she needs to cast 
an important spell. While it's easy to use this 
method to launch new adventures, try to employ 
it sparingly. Using NPCs in this fashion often 
feels like you are telling the players what you 
want them to do. This is OK every once in a 
while, but in general you should allow the players
to feel like they've undertaken an adventure on 
their own initiative. That way, you'll give the 
players a sense of empowerment and reinforce the
idea that they are making as many contributions 
to the storyline as you are.
A third method that bears a mention is simply to 
create an NPC who is bound to become an 
adversary to the adventurers. If one of the PCs is 
a priest, introducing an important NPC priest 
from a rival sect is sure to result in the two 
characters' crossing ... er, maces. One great way 
to make this tactic more effective is to introduce a
foe whom the players don't immediately 
recognize as an adversary. Generally, the more 
time that elapses between the introduction of the 
NPC and the revelation of his or her true nature, 
the more dramatic the end result. Imagine the 
shock when the players discover that the kindly 
innkeeper they met fifteen or twenty adventures 
ago is actually the vampire responsible for the 
strange killings that plagued the campaign world 
over the last two years.
4. Create Atmosphere
Finally, NPCs are a great way to lend the game a 
touch of sorely needed atmosphere when 
necessary. You might think about creating an 
appropriately goofy NPCs who can visit and liven
things up when necessary or an appropriately 
somber NPC who can bring the players back 
down to earth when they are getting too silly. 
While these sorts of NPCs can be quite useful, it's
important that you don't overuse them. Try to 
confine their appearances to no more than once 
per adventure to guarantee that they don't hog too
much of the floor and draw attention away from 
the players' characters.
On a related note, it's not a bad idea to create an 
important "stereotypical" representative of each 
of the most important social and political factions
in your campaign world. Making sure that the 
players frequently cross paths with these 
characters is a great way to help the players learn 
to understand these various groups and the roles 
they play in the setting. In other words, if the 
elves of your world are generally proud and 
arrogant, you might introduce a particularly 
arrogant elf whom the adventurers often 
encounter. This will give them a better idea of 
what to expect from other elves and help them 
recognize and appreciate the unusual elves who 
run counter to the stereotype.
Tarrin and Jarrak
To illustrate some of these principles in action, 
let's return to the two sample NPCs from last 
month's installment: Tarrin the guard captain and 
Jarrak the wizard. Tarrin is Richard's second-in-
command of the Ironoak stronghold and the 
captain of all the guards stationed there. Years 
ago, he lost his left hand to the curse of an evil 
cult leader. Jarrak is a powerful and mysterious 
wizard who once devised a potent spell that saved
the stronghold from devastation. Jarrak has never 
shared the secret of this spell.
Tarrin is probably best used to 2) Provide the 
Players with Tactical Options, and 3) Propel the 
PCs into Adventure. Since the military might of 
Ironoak is essentially under his control, the PCs 
can earn the option of seeking assistance from his
troops whenever a crisis arises. Of course, you 
can't allow Tarrin to fight the PCs' battles for 
them; his assistance should definitely come at an 
appropriate price and on Tarrin's own terms. If the
PCs have nowhere else to turn, however, he can 
be a very powerful ally. As for propelling the PCs
into adventures, you can make special plans for 
Tarrin's missing hand, as hinted in the last 
installment. Eventually, the cult that left its curse 
on Tarrin (and the hand itself) will reappear and 
threaten Ironoak, dragging the PCs into the 
conflict.
For his part, Jarrak is best used to 1) Provide the 
Players with Exposition and 3) Propel the PCs 
into Adventure. That Jarrak is a wise and 
formidable wizard with his own mysterious 
agenda is already established. He certainly has 
access to important myths, legends, and other 
facts that could benefit the PCs on their journeys, 
and the fact that he occasionally emerges to share 
this knowledge with the PCs won't seem unusual. 
They're likely to presume that he is assisting them
for his own mysterious purposes. Eventually, 
Jarrak might propel the player characters into 
adventure by asking them to duplicate his feat of 
saving Ironoak from the same marauders who 
attacked it decades ago, as he is now too old to 
combat the fiends on his own. In fact, at the 
climax of this adventure, one or more of the PCs 
might even earn the opportunity to convince 
Jarrak to share the secret of his powerful spell.
Next month, we'll look at the details you should 
create to flesh out an NPC, and we'll concoct 
some examples from the world of Aris.
9
The Anatomy of an NPC
From Dragon Magazine 263
Last month, we looked at several interesting and 
effective roles that NPCs are likely to play in 
your campaign. Here are the remaining steps to 
preparing an NPC for play.
A fully developed NPC consists of four things: 
game information, a description, one or two 
memorable character traits , and (possibly) a 
secret. Before you determine any of these things, 
think about the specific role or roles the NPC is 
likely to play in the campaign. As noted last 
month, your choice of roles is bound to influence 
all the other facets of the character.
1. Game Information
Game information consists of statistics, 
equipment lists, spell assortments, and other 
information you need to handle the character in 
play. It is not necessary to fill out a full-blown 
character sheet for each of your NPCs. Don't 
forget the First Rule of Dungeoncraft! 
Concentrate your efforts on creating only the 
information that's likely to become relevant 
during play. 
In general, this means that there's no reason to 
figure out the king's Dexterity score. The PCs are 
unlikely to fight the king himself, and it's 
therefore unlikely that his Dexterity score will 
ever become an issue. In fact, on the subject of 
NPC ability scores, it's probably a good time to 
introduce you to the Third Rule of Dungeoncraft.
The Third Rule of Dungeoncraft:
Whenever you have no idea what the 
probability of success should be for a 
particular situation, consider it 50%.
In other words, suppose a metal portcullis is 
slowly descending in a dungeon. One of the PCs 
unexpectedly slides a wooden chair beneath the 
portcullis, hoping to delay the falling gate long 
enough so the entire party can crawl beneath it. 
What's the chance the chair can hold the 
portcullis long enough for the party to pass? Well 
gee, I don't really know much about the structural
integrity of wood vs. heavy metals so it's, um ... 
50%. This is certainly inexact, but it's simple, it 
keeps the game moving, and it's usually plausible 
enough to pass muster. 
How is this rule relevant to NPC attributes? Some
quick math produces a nice corollary to the Third 
Rule. Ability scores are often used to conduct 
ability checks, and a character with a score of 10 
has a 50% chance to pass such a check. This 
means that if you need an ability score for an 
NPC and haven't already determined it, the Third 
Rule of Dungeoncraft suggests that you use a 
score of 10. 
This rule jibes nicely with what the Player's 
Handbook has to say about ability scores 
("Ability Scores and What They Mean" in 
Chapter One)--a score of 10 is an average value 
for the typical inhabitant of an AD&D campaign 
world. This means that when you assign ability 
scores to your NPCs, you should only bother 
thinking about and listing his or her exceptional 
scores--those substantially less than or greater 
than ten (say, those scores less than 8 or greater 
than 12).
During play, if a score you haven't created 
becomes relevant, simply presume it's 10, and 
move on. If you take this advice, you suddenly 
have far fewer numbers to create and record. This
may not save a lot of effort right now, but after 
your campaign grows and you have several dozen
NPCs in play, you'll recognize the benefit. You'll 
also notice that you can dispense with 
determining ability scores altogether for a wide 
range of characters who are unlikely to have any 
extraordinary abilities.
Thus, the first step in creating ability scores for 
any NPC is to decide which of the six abilities is 
likely to be extraordinarily high or low. You can 
then go through these abilities one by one and 
assign the appropriate value. Note that it's usually
not a good idea to generate NPC ability scores 
randomly. You should decide the NPC's role in 
the campaign first, then assign the values you 
think are appropriate. This approach makes it 
easier to create NPCs who feel like true 
characters rather than random piles of numbers.
Once you've created the NPC's relevant ability 
scores, you can quickly decide on a character 
class, level, alignment, and hit point total. 
Remember that the inhabitants of your campaign 
who are not extraordinary adventurers or their 
equal should probably be 0-level, with few hit 
points. At this point, it's a good idea to make sure 
that your choices of class and hit points make 
sense with the character's various ability scores 
and level.
For equipment and spell lists, again focus your 
attention on the extraordinary. List only those 
special or magical items the character carries and 
those few spells he or she uses most often. During
play, you can improvise additional items and 
spells as necessary. 
The idea of improvising spells makes some DMs 
nervous. Since the players must select their spells 
before play begins, they feel it's unfair to allow 
NPCs to cast spells at will. While you should 
definitely make sure that none of your NPCs is 
casting more spells than his or her level permits, 
don't worry about figuring out which spells each 
NPC has memorized; it's just too much work. 
One of your responsibilities as DM is to make 
sure that you don't take advantage of the fact that 
you are making up the NPC spell lists as you go 
along. Your NPCs should definitely not have 
access to the perfect spell under all 
circumstances. If you ever come across a 
situation in which you can't decide whether or not
the NPC would have thought to memorize a 
specific spell, you can always roll for it. The 
chance the NPC has access to the spell is, um ... 
50%.
Note: The Third Rule of Dungeoncraft is a useful 
tool for keeping the game moving, not a 
replacement for your own good judgment and 
knowledge of the rules. Use it wisely!
2. Description
This entry is pretty self-explanatory. You should 
invent an appropriate physical description for 
each NPC. Don't strive for anything too elaborate;
just a few sentences will do. Again, try to 
concentrate on the unusual. Create just one or two
interesting physical features for each of your 
NPCs, and stress them. One NPC might be 
unusually tall, another might have an 
unbelievably long beard, and a third might have 
an elaborate facial tattoo. Of course, nothing says 
that these distinguishing characteristics must stem
from the character's anatomy. An unusual 
wardrobe, particularly interesting equipment, or 
an unusual demeanor all do nicely as well.
The real purpose of your NPC descriptions is 
twofold: to provide the players with details that 
spark their imaginations, and to serve as simple 
reminders that help the players distinguish the 
NPCs from each other. 
At the start of a new campaign, you can expect 
your players to confuse Ragnar with Hroth and 
Skjold. The moment they're reminded that Hroth 
is the old guy with the long white beard and 
Skjold is the fair-haired man with the lute, 
though, they'll get back on the proper page. 
Therefore, to get the most mileage from your 
descriptions, remind the players of NPC 
descriptions the first several times they are 
encountered. Try to keep these reminders as 
subtle as possible. "You see Ragnar, the 
extremely tall warrior, enter the inn" is more 
cumbersome than "You see Ragnar enter, ducking
low to clear the threshold." If you have access to 
a large library of AD&D game products or 
Dragon Magazine back issues, try to find an 
appropriate illustration to represent each of your 
major NPCs. (The "PC Portraits" column in 
Dragon Magazine is perfect for this task.) Not 
only does this let you dispense with most 
descriptions altogether, but pictures tend to work 
even better than the most effective text. Each time
the players meet the NPC in question, just flash 
the picture. If you go this route, try to photocopy 
the illustrations and cut away any text and 
graphics that surround them so the players aren't 
distracted.
3. Memorable Personality 
Traits
To create an effective NPC, you must also know 
something about his or her personality and 
general demeanor. Many beginning roleplayers 
mistakenly believe they should strive to create 
deep, complex characters and prepare for each 
game session with all the gusto of Robert DeNiro 
readying a new role. You're much better off 
setting more modest goals for yourself and 
allowing your NPCs to develop slowly over time. 
As with the descriptions, your best bet is to 
concentrate on creating one or two unusual 
behaviors, tendencies, or idiosyncrasies for each 
NPC. By focusing on just these few things, you'll 
give yourself time to get a handle on the character
and you'll also create another way for the players 
to distinguish between NPCs and remember 
which is which.
When creating these personality traits, confine 
yourself to simple behaviors that are clearly 
demonstrable during play. "Hrothgar has a deep-
seated hatred of his mother" is not a useful trait, 
because there is no way to demonstrate it to the 
players short of pausing every so often for 
Hrothgar to say, "You know, I really have a deep-
seated hatred of my mother." "Hrothgar is hard of
hearing and asks everyone to repeat everything 
they say," "Hrothgar is clumsy and bumbles every
task he is given," or "Hrothgar is a silent loner 
who almost never says a word" are all much more
appropriate. Each of these characteristics can be 
easily roleplayed in a wide variety of situations. 
Note that a valid and useful personality trait 
needn't necessarily say anything obvious about a 
character's personality at all. A catch phrase 
(Homer Simpson's trademark "D'Oh!"), a gesture,
or a funny voice are all workable. Once you start 
to use this method, you'll learn that the traits lead 
to the character's personality almost by magic.
4. Secret
The Second Rule of Dungeoncraft tells us that 
each time we invent a significant detail about the 
campaign, we should also invent at least one 
secret pertaining to that detail. Many NPCs are 
important enough to qualify for this treatment 
themselves. As a general rule, any NPCs the 
players are likely to encounter consistently for a 
few months of game time or more deserve their 
own secrets. Valid exceptions might be NPCs 
who tend to remain completely in the 
background, such as innkeepers, merchants, and 
other service people. 
Yes, this means that your campaign is bound to 
resemble a soap opera, with never-ending twists, 
turns, and unexpected revelations. This is a good 
thing. Many people become addicted to soap 
operas for a reason--the desire to uncover the next
secret or unravel the next plot twist is a powerful 
urge. By giving your players plenty of mysteries, 
you'll keep them interested in the campaign and 
coming back for more.
We've already discussed strategies for creating 
secrets elsewhere (Chapter 2), but there are a few 
approaches that work particularly well when it 
comes to NPCs. Unexpected relationships 
("Luke, I am your father!"), shady pasts, and 
hidden motivations all work well. If you're having
a hard time creating a specific secret for a 
particular NPC, you can look back to the various 
roles I outlined last issue for a clue. An NPC 
designed to provide the players with exposition 
probably knows a secret about the campaign 
world, while an NPC designed to provide the 
players with a service might have access to some 
secret item or power that the players will 
eventually earn an opportunity to win for 
themselves. 
Once you create the various secrets related to 
your NPCs, don't forget to write them on index 
cards and add them to your "deck of secrets" (see 
Dragon Magazine #246). Later, as you flesh out 
the campaign world, these cards will become a 
useful resource.
Tarrin and Jarrak
To refresh your memory, Tarrin is the second-in-
command of the Ironoak stronghold and the 
captain of the guards stationed there. Years ago, 
he lost his left hand to the curse of an evil cult 
leader. Jarrak is a powerful and mysterious 
wizard who once devised a potent spell that saved
the stronghold from devastation. So far, Jarrak 
has never shared the secret of this spell.
Tarrin is obviously a skilled warrior, so he 
probably has a high Strength and Constitution. 
Since I picture him as a charismatic leader and a 
trusted advisor of Richard, I'll give him 
abnormally high scores in Wisdom and Charisma 
as well. A 6th-level fighter with 40 hit points 
seems just about right. Tarrin carries a 
broadsword and wears studded leather armor. 
Tarrin's missing left hand already provides a big 
chunk of his description. I've further decided that 
he's an older man with a pencil-thin mustache 
who always wears a perfectly immaculate 
uniform.
For his first memorable trait, I've decided that 
Tarrin inevitably lapses into war stories culled 
from the many campaigns in which he served. For
a second, it might be fun if he interrupts all of his 
long speeches to bark orders to his men.
Tarrin's secret pertains to his severed hand and 
was discussed last issue.
• Tarrin: AC 6 (Studded leather); F6; hp 40;
NG; Str 15, Con 14, Wis 14, Cha 14.
• Description: Missing left hand; older man 
with a pencil-thin mustache.
• Memorable Personality Traits: Tells war 
stories, constantly barks orders to his men.
• Secret: Missing hand is "alive" and 
seeking him out.
Jarrak, on the other hand, is a powerful wizard. 
Obviously he has a high Intelligence, and I think 
it's appropriate to give him high scores in 
Wisdom and Charisma as well. Jarrak is a 14th-
level wizard. He wears bracers of defense AC 2 
and carries a staff of the magi. He is particularly 
fond of the teleport spell and various illusions.
As for a description, Jarrak is a thin, bony man 
who wears a flowing black robe and a skullcap 
crafted from raven feathers. His eyes are 
completely black, with no irises. Jarrak speaks 
only when spoken to, and only when he can 
answer a direct question with a question of his 
own. This should give him a spooky, 
otherworldly feel. For a second trait, he tends to 
come and go at unexpected times without 
warning.
Jarrak's secret is the mysterious spell he crafted 
several years ago to save Ironoak.
• Jarrak: CG; AC 2 (bracers); W 14; hp 38; 
Int 18, Wis 18, Cha 15.
• Description: Extremely thin, ageless man 
in black robe and skullcap; black eyes.
• Memorable Personality Trait: Speaks only
when spoken to and only in questions; 
comes and goes unexpectedly in a 
mysterious fashion.
• Secret: Powerful spell known only to him.
As you finish each of your NPCs, summarize all 
of the relevant information on an index card. 
Later, this will provide you with easy means for 
filing away and keeping track of the dozens of 
characters you'll create as your campaign grows.
Next month we'll start to map the wilderness the 
players are likely to explore throughout the first 
few months of the campaign.
10
Mapping the Wilderness
From Dragon Magazine 264
For you latecomers, "Dungeoncraft" is a column 
devoted to exploring the fine art of Dungeon 
Mastering. Over the past nine installments, we've 
examined the process of developing an AD&D 
campaign from scratch. So far, we've constructed 
the basic framework of a fantasy world, mapped a
home base, and built some interesting NPCs. 
Along the way, we've gathered a series of special 
guidelines that form the cornerstones of good 
dungeoncraft.
This month, let's begin mapping the outdoor 
environment for the PCs to explore over the first 
three or four months of play. Our goal is to create 
an interesting, expansive space that gives the PCs 
plenty to do without straying too far from the 
base of operations (from Chapters 6-7).
Before putting pen to paper, we have some 
thinking to do. First on our agenda is some 
careful consideration of the important issue of 
scale. How much area should this map cover? Ten
miles? Fifty miles? Five hundred? Before 
answering that question, consider these goals:
1. Start With the Familiar
This first outdoor map should detail the chunk of 
the gameworld that is intimately familiar to the 
player characters when the campaign begins. In 
other words, most buildings, locales, or towns 
known to the player characters or visited by the 
PCs prior to the beginning of play should be 
depicted on this map. Such a map should go a 
long way toward helping you answer questions 
about these locales during play. Achieving this 
goal probably seems like a tall order. After all, if 
any of you were to make a map depicting all the 
places you've visited, it might span several 
hundred (or even several thousand) miles. In the 
Middle Ages, though, it was common for the 
average citizen to spend the whole of his or her 
life within 20 miles of home. The only forms of 
relatively fast transportation that existed at the 
time (horses and sailing ships) were well beyond 
the means of most citizens.
2. Include the Unknown
The AD&D game is about exploration. As a 
consequence, this first map should cover plenty 
of unfamiliar territory for the PCs to explore. As a
general rule, the familiar territory should occupy 
no more than 25% of this first map. The PCs 
should have only a vague idea as to what lies in 
the remaining 75%.
3. Plan Ahead for Adventures
Your first outdoor map should house enough 
interesting details to keep the players occupied 
for several months of play. You'll soon learn that 
drawing one of these maps is a lot of work, and 
since you'll have plenty of other tasks to occupy 
your time as your campaign gets off the ground, 
you'll want to make sure that you won't have to 
draw another one for some time. In practice, this 
means that you should sprinkle your map with 
interesting locations and possible adventure sites. 
These sites should be placed far enough apart that
it takes the PCs some time to find and explore 
them all.
Combining the Three Goals
Together, these three guidelines suggest that the 
first map should cover a radius of approximately 
60 miles. This means that it takes the adventurers 
about three days to cross your entire map location
on horseback and approximately a week to cross 
it on foot. Most of your locations lie two or three 
full days of travel apart, which should work out 
just about right. At this distance, you can focus on
the journeys that take place between the various 
adventures as much or as little as you like, 
allowing you to control the pace of the campaign. 
Across two days of travel, it's equally plausible 
that the players experience several encounters en 
route or none at all.
If we presume that our map fills a half sheet of 
paper and covers a roughly circular area with a 
radius of 60 miles, its scale works out to about 15
miles per inch. This scale offers plenty of space to
depict towns, roads, and other relevant features 
on the map.
Now that we've decided upon a scale, let's look at
the individual characteristics of a good small-area
map.
Boundaries
One of our goals, remember, is to keep the 
adventurers more or less confined to this first 
map for several months. As a consequence, we 
should think about how to surround the fringes of
the map with natural barriers or other obstacles 
that make it a challenge to leave the area. We 
must be careful here; we don't want the players to
feel like they're imprisoned. Our boundaries 
should be as subtle and formidable as possible.
Some of our options are obvious: impassable 
mountains, deep seas, and thick forests; but there 
are plenty of other, more creative possibilities. 
Fear can serve as an excellent boundary. Suppose 
that the only trail leading off the map to the east 
is known to cross a long-abandoned cemetery that
is home to hordes of undead. Or what if the lands 
that lie just beyond one edge of the map are 
controlled by an enemy state known to imprison 
trespassers? 
Lack of amenities and motivation are other strong
possibilities. Suppose there are no obvious 
sources of fresh water for several days' travel in 
one direction. To cross this barrier, the players 
must either locate hidden water sources or acquire
the resources necessary to outfit an expedition 
large enough to carry several weeks' worth of 
water. Many game months are likely to pass 
before the players are in a position to explore 
either possibility. Similarly, you can often prevent
the players from traveling in a given direction 
simply by giving them a strong reason to believe 
that nothing of interest lies in that direction. Why,
for instance, would the PCs venture out into the 
middle of a vast desert said to be devoid of life? 
Of course, you can always change their beliefs 
later, when you're ready for them to move on. 
Perhaps they learn there is a hidden city in the 
middle of the desert that appears only at sunrise 
and sunset each day.
In the AD&D game, you can even call upon 
supernatural or otherworldly means of keeping 
your players in check. Perhaps a strange caustic 
mist permeates one border of your map and 
wreaks havoc upon anyone who ventures inside. 
No one knows the origin of the mysterious mist 
or what lies beyond it. (Sounds like a great 
opportunity for a future adventure.)
Alternatively, in a more whimsical fantasy world, 
perhaps your starting map consists of a small 
valley that rests beneath a ring of tall, sheer cliffs.
The only way out of the valley is to pay an 
enormous giant 1,000 gold pieces to lift you up 
and over the rim. It should take some time before 
the PCs accumulate enough wealth to get the 
whole party out.
Of course, the best strategy is to erect a series of 
boundaries that employ a combination of all these
methods. In the world of Aris, high, forested 
mountains, nearly impassable without the aid of a
skilled guide, close off a couple of flanks. 
Sparsely populated forests seal off another border.
Until they can obtain the appropriate magic 
(create food and water spells, for instance) or 
secure the financing necessary to mount a large 
expedition, PCs won't be able to carry enough 
supplies to go too far in this direction. Yet another
approach is sealed off by a series of formidable 
humanoid strongholds. It will be quite some time 
before the PCs are mighty enough to fight their 
way past these encampments. The final approach 
is bordered by the "wandering forest" first 
described in Chapter 2. This forest is secretly 
populated by a large tribe of treants who 
continuously move from place to place, shifting 
the location of the trails that cut through their 
domain. Most travelers who enter these woods 
become hopelessly lost. 
Wilderness and Non-
Wilderness Areas
In most AD&D campaigns, the players spend the 
bulk of their time on just two activities: 
adventuring and planning. You should 
accommodate them by making sure there is 
terrain appropriate to both activities on your area 
map. In essence, this means that you should make
sure that your area map contains both tame, 
civilized areas and wild, unsettled areas. The 
former territory makes an ideal retreat during the 
planning phases of the campaign. By adding it to 
your map, you guarantee that the players have a 
haven where they can feel safe. The wilderness 
areas, on the other hand, give the players 
something to explore and provide a nice venue 
for their daring exploits.
Perhaps the most important reason to include both
types of terrain on your area map, however, is to 
facilitate adventuring. Later, when you begin to 
devise adventures, you'll find that some of your 
adventure concepts require a wild setting, while 
others require a civilized setting. Exploring an 
undiscovered ancient ruin and seeking the lair of 
a fearsome monster are both good examples of 
the former. Helping a merchant outwit his 
crooked rival and hunting down a vampire 
terrorizing local barmaids are good illustrations 
of the latter. Giving yourself the flexibility 
necessary to run a wide variety of adventures in 
the area covered by this first map makes it a lot 
easier to keep the players comfortably confined to
this area for as along as possible.
Note that these civilized and wilderness areas 
don't necessarily equate to the known and 
unknown areas mentioned earlier. You can 
certainly include civilized areas that are 
unfamiliar to the PCs on your initial map, just as 
you can include wilderness areas they know well.
The civilized areas on the Aris campaign map 
consist of the Ironoak stronghold, its immediate 
surroundings, and the area surrounding a small 
town located about two days' travel from Ironoak.
Although much of the intervening land is 
wilderness, at least a couple of the PCs have 
grown up in the area and are familiar with this 
terrain.
Variety
Adventuring over the same ground can grow stale
fast. Try to depict a wide variety of terrain types 
on your initial area map. This gives you a lot of 
options when deciding upon where to set your 
adventures, as well as the opportunity to throw a 
variety of challenges at the players as the 
campaign progresses. Maybe a mountain 
climbing adventure would be fun, or an adventure
in which the players must cross a great sea or a 
burning desert. Most importantly, a wide variety 
of terrain types in your initial starting area allows 
you to make use of a wide variety of monsters. 
The PCs aren't likely to encounter a hill giant 
when there aren't any hills within a hundred 
miles.
Of course, this doesn't mean your terrain 
placement doesn't have to make sense. A tropical 
jungle just a few miles away from a desert isn't 
plausible. Try to observe the basic rules of 
geography. For example, mountains are usually 
surrounded by foothills, and dense forests are 
usually found along the coast or near a major 
river. 
Since the Aris campaign is set on a forest world, 
variety is a bit of a challenge. We can solve this 
problem by varying the terrain that lies beneath 
the forests (forested hills, forested mountains, 
arctic forests, and so on), the types of trees that 
comprise the forests and the density of the forest 
clusters. We'll also invent some exotic tree types 
to provide the players with new and unexpected 
terrain to explore: trees that secrete poison from 
their leaves, trees covered with dangerous thorns, 
and forests that grow a canopy so thick it blocks 
all sunlight from overhead.
Next month, we'll continue to review the key 
features of a good local map and address 
strategies for drawing the map itself.
11
Wilderness Features
From Dragon Magazine 265
In this month's installment, we continue the 
discussion of wilderness maps begun last issue. 
Then we'll sketch out a wilderness map, depicting
the areas the players will explore over the first 
few months of the campaign.
Last month, we left off by identifying the 
characteristics of a good, useful local wilderness 
map. This time, we'll look at four more important 
elements to consider when constructing a good 
local area map. Before continuing, however, 
remember the first three steps described last 
issue:
• Start With the Familiar
• Include the Unknown
• Plan Ahead for Adventures
4. Integration of the Local 
Economy
Presumably, the citizens of your make-believe 
cities and villages must somehow find food, 
clothing, and shelter. This means they must have 
direct access to these necessities or access to 
skills or resources they can trade for the 
necessities. Obviously, the manner in which you 
solve this problem can and should have a 
tremendous impact on your area map.
Because food transportation and preservation 
technology is relatively unsophisticated in the 
typical AD&D world, most populations should 
have direct access to a food source capable of 
supplying at least half the food needed to sustain 
the population-and usually quite a bit more than 
that. Food might be secured by hunting, herding, 
foraging (harvesting wild nuts, berries and fruit), 
or agriculture. Hunting obviously implies that 
plenty of wild game lives in the area. Herding 
implies that there are ample and convenient 
grazing lands somewhere on the map. Agriculture
implies the presence of farmlands and water 
sources. Once you've figured out where the food 
comes from, don't forget to give some thought to 
how it is distributed. Do the villagers feed upon 
grain grown by farmers who live in the fertile 
valley on the village's outskirts? If so, there is 
probably a trail leading from the village into the 
valley and one or two checkpoints along that trail 
to provide protection.
Anything the population needs and can't supply 
for itself (additional food, building materials, 
goods) must be secured through trade. Think 
about what it is that your local population 
typically offers in exchange for these necessities. 
Do your villagers work a mine in the area and 
trade ores for the other goods they need to 
survive? Do the villagers produce excess food 
they can trade? Are the villagers skilled craftsmen
who can trade their services? If your society 
relies upon trade for a number of the necessities, 
the placement of trade routes on your area map is 
obviously very important.
While answering these questions can give you 
important insights into how to construct your area
map, at this stage you don't want to spend a lot of 
time devising a complex treatise on the local 
economy. Don't forget the First Rule of 
Dungeoncraft! Your goal is to generate some 
ideas for your local area map and a few scant 
details you can use to help explain the area to the 
players. You can work out all the specific whys 
and wherefores of the economy later, if and when 
they become relevant.
The Ironoak area map depicts only two civilized 
populated areas: the Ironoak stronghold itself and 
a small town located a couple days' travel from 
the stronghold. The stronghold's economy is 
somewhat unusual in that the fort and many of its 
inhabitants (the various soldiers and such) are 
entirely funded and supported by the nearby 
kingdom of Umbria. Ironoak plays an important 
role in Umbria's defense and the kingdom 
dispatches regular caravans to the stronghold to 
guarantee that the soldiers have everything they 
need. Basically, the soldiers are trading a service 
(their skill at arms) for all their necessities. 
Ironoak is also home to a number of small shops 
and businesses that cater to the many merchants 
and travelers who stop at the stronghold on their 
way to the frontier. Most of the food consumed in
Ironoak consists of imported grain and salted 
meats, though the local innkeepers supplement 
their menus with live game from the surrounding 
forests. All of these things suggest that important,
well-defended trade routes lead in and out of the 
stronghold.
As for the nearby town, the bulk of its inhabitants
trade a combination of resources and services. 
The town, called "Redheath," is known 
throughout all of Umbria as home to the finest 
armorers, weaponsmiths and blacksmiths in the 
kingdom. It's built upon a series of flat, stony 
plateaus in the midst of the great forest. At the 
base of these plateaus lies the entrance to a rich 
iron mine. Hundreds of travelers, adventurers and
merchants from all over Umbria visit Redheath 
each year with new challenges for its highly 
skilled laborers. Those inhabitants of the town 
who are not involved in the smithing or mining 
operate businesses that cater to these visitors.
One peculiar feature of the Ironoak map is the 
complete absence of farmland. Those of you who 
have followed this column over the past year 
might remember that the Aris campaign is set on 
a dense forest world. Lands well suited to 
cultivation are scarce, forcing most of the 
inhabitants of the world to rely upon imported 
foodstuffs. This makes the supply lines between 
settlements particularly important. Wars on Aris 
are usually won by blocking the enemy's supply 
routes and cutting off their access to food.
5. Monster Lairs
It's difficult to imagine an AD&D game world 
that isn't populated by a wide variety of monsters.
Obviously, all of those monsters have to live 
somewhere. The first thing to understand about 
placing monster lairs on your area map is that it 
isn't necessary to determine every single monster 
that lives on the map before beginning play; in 
fact, it's a bad idea. Later, as the campaign 
progresses, you'll have all sorts of ideas for 
adventures, some of which may depend upon the 
presence of specific monsters. Unless you leave 
your map somewhat vague, giving yourself the 
ability to introduce new monsters in previously 
unexplored areas when necessary, you'll find it 
difficult to run these adventures. For now, you 
should concentrate on placing just a few, major 
monster lairs in the area. The general presence of 
most of these monsters is probably known to 
many of the region's inhabitants, though the 
specific locations of the lairs and the exact nature 
of the creatures in question may well be a 
mystery. In other words, if an owlbear lives in the
vicinity, the locals might be aware of a terrible 
beast that lives in the woods and a rash of 
disappearances attributed to the beast, but they 
probably don't know exactly where the beast lives
or what sort of beast they're dealing with.
For a map the size we've been discussing, try to 
identify three to five major monster lairs. Since 
this area is intended to serve as the starting point 
for your campaign, most of the monsters you 
select should have seven or fewer Hit Dice, 
although it's okay to toss in one or two more 
powerful monsters, as long as they're fairly 
isolated from most of the area's inhabitants. You 
should definitely select these monsters before you
start drawing the map. That way, you can make 
sure that each creature's special terrain needs are 
reflected in your drawing. 
As you select the monsters, take a few moments 
to think about the role each might play in the 
campaign and what the local inhabitants know 
about the creature. Is the monster a predator who 
sometimes preys upon the local population? A 
highly intelligent creature that is carrying out 
some sort of fiendish plot? An ally to a local 
noble or government? Also, don't forget that not 
all monsters are evil. You might want to place at 
least one good monster in your campaign area to 
assist the players in the their adventures. Once 
you come up with a few details about each of 
your major monsters, if one or more of them 
appear to be particularly important to your 
campaign environment, don't forget the Second 
Rule of Dungeoncraft. Each particularly 
important creature deserves its own secret.
When it comes time to place the lairs on your 
map, take advantage of the opportunity to plot as 
much useful information about the creature as 
possible. If the creature is a predator, for instance,
you might draw a dotted circle around its lair 
indicating the rough boundaries of its hunting 
ground. If the creature regularly travels or 
migrates, indicate its route(s) on the map. The 
real purpose of placing these lairs on the map in 
the first place is to provide you with inspiration 
for creating events and situations the players 
might encounter on their travels. Adding 
secondary details like these helps to accomplish 
that mission.
Suppose, for instance, that the adventurers are 
camped out at night, and that you've just rolled a 
random encounter. If you glance at your map and 
notice that the party has crossed into the hunting 
grounds of the owlbear you placed earlier. You 
now have all sorts of opportunities to spice up 
this encounter. Perhaps the players encounter the 
owlbear itself and realize after hearing its 
distinctive growl that they must be facing the 
terrible beast rumored to be hunting unlucky 
travelers from the nearby forest. Alternately, the 
players might encounter a merchant who was just 
chased off the trail by the owlbear, or a young 
man who managed to escape from the owlbear's 
lair and begs the players to return with him to 
save his sister, who is still in the beast's ghastly 
clutches.
Before deciding where to place your monster 
lairs, choose the monsters by browsing the 
Monstrous Manual tome. Depending on the 
nature of your campaign world, you might find 
different monsters more appropriate. For the Aris 
campaign, several choices appear in the "Monster
Lairs of Ironoak" sidebar. Taking a look at the 
list, it looks like the kenku and the dryads are 
each worthy of a secret as per the Second Rule of 
Dungeoncraft. Let's say that the kenku who live 
near Ironoak are the only such creatures on Aris. 
They were hatched from jeweled eggs that a high-
level thief once stole from the nest of a powerful 
owl spirit that lived on the Astral Plane. The 
priest who hatched the original kenku noticed that
the "gems" stolen by the thief were actually eggs. 
Due to his respect for the sanctity of life in all its 
forms, he bought the eggs and hatched them. To 
make matters more interesting, the owl spirit 
originally laid the eggs to repay a debt to a 
powerful extradimensional entity. She meant to 
hatch the eggs, birthing the kenku as a race of 
servitors who could serve as the entity's heralds. 
Since the eggs were stolen before they hatched, 
though, she was forced to default on her debt. 
Now, almost two hundred years later, she still 
languishes in a gilded cage in the entity's palace. 
The kenku would give a great deal to learn the 
story of their birth, and once they learn, they will 
almost certainly mount an expedition to rescue 
their creator.
As for the dryads, an incredibly valuable diamond
necklace was stolen from a noblewoman passing 
through Ironoak roughly two months before the 
campaign begins. When the noblewoman finally 
departed, she left the captain of her personal 
bodyguard at the stronghold to continue the effort
to locate the thief and return her property. 
Unknown to everyone, the necklace was stolen by
one of Ironoak's officers, a personal assistant to 
Tarrin (see Chapter 7). While out wandering the 
woods around the stronghold, the officer 
encountered one of the dryads and succumbed to 
her charm spell. He later stole the necklace and 
returned to present it to the dryad as a love 
offering. Now, months later, he continues to visit 
the dryad and uses whatever influence he has to 
stall the bodyguard's investigation. Ultimately, 
the players should stumble across this little 
mystery and investigate.
6. Hard-to-Reach Areas
A good map should tease the players and present 
them with hints of obvious challenges. You 
should strive to place two or three locations on 
your area map that are particularly hard to reach, 
preferably beyond the capabilities of the player 
characters as the campaign begins. Later, you can 
drop interesting hints about what the players 
might find in these areas, increasing the 
temptation to explore them. Over time, reaching 
the areas is likely to become a miniature puzzle 
that the players devote a lot of effort to solving, 
making sure they remain within the confines of 
this first map for as long as possible. The key is 
to make sure the players are not disappointed 
once they manage to get past the obstacles you 
put in their path. Fortunately, you'll have a long 
time to think about what might await them. 
There's no reason to figure out exactly what lies 
in your hard-to-reach areas just yet. Wait until the
players are getting close to finally penetrating 
them.
There are many strategies you can employ to 
make an area hard to reach. An obvious 
possibility is to surround the locale with dangers 
that are beyond the adventurers' means to 
overcome. For instance, you might place a sacred 
canyon said to house the entrance to an ancient 
ruined city on your area map. The entrance to the 
canyon is guarded by two iron golems left by the 
former inhabitants of the ruined city to protect 
their secrets. Obviously, there's no way a party of 
1st-level characters can deal with the golems, so 
it will take the players several months to 
penetrate the mystery. During this time, they'll 
have fun looking for alternate means of entering 
the canyon, exploring various magical means of 
sneaking past the golems and so forth, all while 
tackling other adventures they've stumbled 
across. Other means you can use to create hard to 
reach areas include: formidable terrain 
(unclimbable mountains), mazelike trails and 
even more "fantastic" barriers (such as mountain 
passes that open only when the correct password 
is spoken), or cities that magically appear only 
once every decade.
A couple of possibilities for hard to reach areas 
around Ironoak naturally suggest themselves. In 
an earlier installment, we considered a series of 
"wandering paths" that surround Ironoak (see 
Chapter 10). Many of the trees surrounding the 
paths are actually treants. As outsiders enter their 
wood, the treants move, subtly shifting the paths 
and leaving the outsiders hopelessly lost. 
Somewhere, in the middle of this wood, lies 
something incredible. To reach it, the players 
must learn that the treants exist and figure out 
how to deal with them. A second hard-to-reach 
area is suggested by the spider lair mentioned 
earlier in this column. Imagine a huge grove 
blanketed in thick, giant spider webs coated with 
sticky tree resin. Together these webs form a vast 
maze that's home to hundreds of giant spiders and
other insects. Over time, we can spread some 
rumors about a fantastic treasure said to be lost 
somewhere in the webs. Although tackling so 
many giant spiders is well beyond the players 
means when the campaign begins, eventually 
they'll become powerful enough to make their 
way through the webs to uncover their secrets.
7. Clue Pointing to a Secret
Thanks to the Second Rule of Dungeoncraft you 
should already know lots of secrets about your 
game world. Secrets are useless, though, without 
the clues the players need to uncover them. 
Before you finish thinking about your area map, 
pull out the "deck of secrets" you should be 
keeping (see Chapter 5) and draw a card. Try to 
create a clue pointing to this secret and place it 
somewhere on your area map. If you're feeling 
particularly confident or have a particularly large 
deck, go ahead and pull two cards and try to 
cover them both.
The secret I've drawn is Tarrin's Wandering Hand 
(see Chapter 7). As you might recall, Tarrin, the 
captain of Ironoak's guard, cut off his own hand 
years ago to escape the effects of a hideous curse.
Unknown to Tarrin, though, the hand is now a 
living being and has been slowly "crawling" its 
way across the countryside for several years, 
looking for him. An obvious clue I can plant on 
the map pointing toward this secret is the location
where the amputation took place. Somewhere out 
in the woods, in a relatively civilized area, lies the
bloodied rock upon which Tarrin did the deed.
With all this planning out of the way, we're finally
ready to draw the map itself. Before you proceed 
you might want to re-read the general tips for 
drawing maps presented in Chapter 8. 
12
Challenging the Players
From Dragon Magazine 266
In our first year together, we've devised campaign
hooks, governments, and religions. We've drawn 
stronghold maps and wilderness maps. We've 
created NPCs and sprinkled a few secrets across 
our fledgling game worlds. With this behind us, 
we're finally ready to turn our attention to the 
meat that lies at the heart of any compelling 
AD&D campaign-adventures!
In this installment and the next, we'll examine 
some general guidelines that should help you 
create the sort of fun, engrossing adventures that 
your players will recount to bemused Gen Con 
Game Fair acquaintances for many years to come.
In the installments that follow, we'll put these 
guidelines to work and create an actual adventure,
paying particular attention to how the most 
important decisions are made.
Good, compelling adventures are so important to 
the AD&D game that they demand a...
Fourth Rule of Dungeoncraft:
Always challenge both the players and their
characters.
This rule means that a good adventure works on 
two levels. On the first, it poses a challenge to the
players-it makes them think carefully and causes 
them to wonder for just a brief moment whether 
they are truly up to the task of overcoming its 
many obstacles. Once complete, great adventures 
provide the players with the same satisfaction 
they might receive upon finally completing a 
challenging level of a video game. This sense of 
satisfaction arises from the players' perception 
that it was their own skillful maneuvering and 
decision-making that led to success, not mere 
random luck or charity on your part. Balancing 
adventures so they challenge the players without 
overcomplicating the situation or causing 
confusion is one of the trickiest parts of adventure
design.
On the second level, good adventures always 
provide a challenge for the players' characters. In 
general, this means that you give the heroes 
opportunities to use their powers, proficiencies, 
and abilities. After all, it's no fun owning a vorpal
blade if you never get to use it. For many players,
part of the attraction of the AD&D game is that it 
allows them to play the roles of brave adventurers
who can accomplish almost superhuman feats. To
satisfy these players, you must give them a 
chance to flex their characters' muscles. In much 
the same way that you strive to balance the 
adventures to the players' capabilities, you must 
also balance the adventures to the capabilities of 
their characters. If the feats of derring-do you ask 
them to attempt are too easy-say, a high-level 
party pitted against an inconsequential goblin 
tribe-they'll soon become bored. On the other 
hand, if the obstacles you place in their path are 
obviously well beyond the PCs' capabilities, the 
players will soon become frustrated. Fortunately, 
this part isn't as hard as it might sound. While 
balancing an adventure to challenge the 
characters isn't as simple as falling off a log, it's 
usually much easier to accomplish than properly 
testing the players.
Since it's the more difficult task, let's first 
consider some specific tactics to challenge the 
players.
Make the Players Make 
Decisions
The best way to make sure the players remain 
involved in your adventure is to offer them the 
opportunity to make plenty of decisions. 
Decision-making gives the players a sense of 
empowerment and reinforces the idea that their 
destinies lie in their own hands. In a typical 
AD&D adventure, decisions can take on many 
forms. Is it best to enter the dungeon via the cave 
mouth or through the large oaken door? Should 
we accept the elves' offer of assistance? Is it wise 
to venture down to the next level of the dungeon?
Or should we return to town and heal our 
wounds? In many ways, the heart of every good 
adventure is a series of options. As you create 
your dungeon maps and individual encounters, 
you should definitely keep this in mind. Strive to 
offer the players a number of approaches to all 
the most important situations likely to arise 
during the adventure.
Examples
Suppose a band of evil cultists has captured the 
elven queen and taken her back to their mountain 
stronghold, where they hope to offer her as a 
sacrifice to their dark god. (And yes, I know this 
is an appalling cliché. Remember, this is just a 
simple example!) This situation leads to several 
ways you can cause the players to make 
important decisions.
The Road Less Traveled: It's probably a good 
idea to present the players with two possible 
routes to reach the stronghold. The first is short 
but very dangerous; the second is much longer 
but relatively safe. During play, these two 
alternatives force the players to make an 
interesting choice. The queen might be sacrificed 
at any moment, so time is of the essence. But the 
dangers of the shorter route threaten to damage 
the party before they reach the stronghold, 
possibly ruining their chances of defeating the 
cultists once the PCs arrive. This conundrum is 
likely to provoke an interesting and lively debate 
among the players.
Strength or Stealth: Once the PCs arrive at the 
stronghold, you might confront them with several
possible entrances. The first is a well-guarded 
main gate, where small mobs of hooded cultists 
regularly arrive and depart. The second is a 
doorway located just off a parapet that lies at the 
top of a steep cliff. Although the main gate is 
quite secure, the constant traffic might give the 
player heroes an opportunity to waylay some 
passing cultists, disguise themselves in the 
cultists' robes, and attempt to enter the stronghold
using trickery. The parapet entrance is probably 
the easier to negotiate. To reach it, however, the 
thief must pass a series of Climb Walls rolls to 
scale the cliff and drop a rope down to her 
comrades.
The Enemy of My Enemy: Finally, once inside 
the stronghold, the party might discover an 
imprisoned evil sorcerer who is also being held 
captive by the cultists. If the party frees him, the 
sorcerer promises to help them rescue the queen 
and defeat the cultists once and for all. Whether 
the sorcerer can be trusted is hard to determine. 
While he might prove quite an asset, it's also 
possible that he'll betray the party to pursue his 
own agenda. Freeing him might even endanger 
the party's mission.
One important point that these examples illustrate
is that whenever you build a decision point into 
your adventure, it's important to give the players 
some idea of the consequences that they can 
expect to accompany the choices they make. In 
other words, asking the players to enter a 
dungeon through one of two seemingly identical 
doors isn't really offering them a choice at all. 
Unless they have some information upon which 
to base their decision, you're asking them to 
perform the mental equivalent of flipping a coin. 
When setting up your decision points, try to 
associate some obvious possible advantages and 
drawbacks with each option. As they approach 
those two identical doors, for instance, suppose 
the players hear muffled screams beyond the first 
door and nothing beyond the second. Now their 
choice suddenly becomes quite interesting. If they
choose the first door, they're bound to encounter 
some immediate danger, but they might have an 
opportunity to come to the immediate aid of the 
screamer. If they choose the second door, they 
might have an opportunity to enter the dungeon 
unnoticed, but they might reach the screamer too 
late to be of assistance.
Have Players Solve Puzzles
Another way to engage the players is to confront 
them with puzzles or riddles. While magical 
tricks and traps are obvious methods for injecting 
such obstacles into your adventures, there are 
much subtler ways to accomplish the same goal. 
It's possible to disguise puzzles so they're not so 
obvious as such. 
Suppose that the PCs come to the end of a 
dungeon corridor to find an obvious door 20 feet 
up the wall, but no way to reach that door. The 
rope ladder that normally hangs down is missing, 
the wall is too smooth for climbing, and there is 
nothing up the wall that a grappling hook might 
catch. Although it might not seem like it, this is 
actually a puzzle. The solution is to realize that 
the lumber and tools the players found a few 
rooms earlier can be used to hammer together a 
makeshift ladder that allows them to reach the 
door. In fact, asking the players to figure out how 
to use the items they find in one part of the 
dungeon to overcome obstacles they find in 
another part of the same dungeon is a time-
honored tactic. 
Sometimes, this same technique is taken one step 
further, and the players are asked to take two 
items they found in disparate parts of the dungeon
and combine them to make a third item they need 
to circumvent an obstacle. You could employ this 
variation on an earlier example by placing the 
lumber in one room and the tools in a second 
room. It's then up to the players to realize that 
these two items can be combined to build the 
ladder that will allow them to reach the elevated 
door.
In general, as you design an adventure, be on the 
lookout for opportunities to make the players 
draw logical conclusions or remember things they
saw earlier to accomplish important goals. The 
entrance to the mad cultists' sacrifice chamber 
might be a secret door activated by touching a 
specific portion of a mural painted on the wall. If 
the players pay attention, they should notice that 
this mural is identical to several they saw earlier 
in the stronghold in every respect save one, and it 
is this single incongruous detail that marks the 
activation point. Similarly, to navigate the 
stronghold's dungeons to find the queen quickly 
(before she is sacrificed), the players might be 
required to deduce that she is being held prisoner 
on one of the dungeon's uppermost levels. They 
might do so by noticing that the stairway leading 
down to the lower levels is covered with a thick 
dust and obviously hasn't been used in several 
weeks.
In accordance with the first guideline, you might 
design your puzzles so they can be solved in 
several different ways. This is actually easier than
it sounds, since the average party of adventurers 
has access to an impressive collection of skills, 
items, and abilities. The elevated doorway, for 
example, can be solved with a jump spell, a fly 
spell, or boots of striding and springing. If the 
players miss the lumber (depending upon the 
circumstances), they might opt to leave the 
dungeon to memorize the appropriate spell or hire
someone capable of casting it for them. 
In fact, many AD&D players are so resourceful 
that it is sometimes okay to build minor puzzles 
into your adventures that have no intended 
solution. Suppose, for instance, that somewhere 
within the first couple levels of your dungeon is a
deep pool of clear water with a glowing magical 
sword at its bottom. The pool is too deep for any 
adventurer to hold his or her breath and reach the 
bottom. At the time you create this adventure, you
don't have to have any idea how the players might
retrieve the sword-maybe they'll think of 
something, and maybe they won't. Even if they 
fail, you'll at least give them something 
interesting to think about.
Give the Players Interesting 
Opportunities for Interaction
One of the biggest attractions of the AD&D game
is the opportunity to roleplay a heroic, well-
rounded character. Many players take pride in 
inventing interesting personalities and enjoy the 
opportunity to interact with colorful NPCs. Thus, 
another way to keep the players engaged is to 
provide them with particularly interesting 
opportunities for roleplaying. You might, for 
example, call upon a PC to console the young 
princess in the wake of her mother's death, or you
might ask another to compose a ballad capable of 
settling down an inn full of rowdy patrons. 
Generally, those scenes that are the most 
melodramatic or the liveliest have the best 
roleplaying potential.
This third tactic is all too frequently overlooked 
when constructing dungeon adventures. Don't 
forget that your monsters should have 
personalities. You should strive to provide the 
players with opportunities to interact with your 
monsters, even within dungeon settings. Instead 
of the four fire giants pounding the heroes until 
they are dead, what if the giants merely subdue 
the heroes and then play a game of cards among 
themselves to decide which giant earns the right 
to kill the captives? Such a situation allows clever
players an opportunity to talk themselves into the 
game somehow or convince three of the giants 
that the fourth is somehow cheating, possibly 
precipitating a timely escape. At the very least, 
you should give the players an opportunity to 
exchange words with the monsters while they are 
fighting. The mixture of threats and clever quips 
that tends to accompany most battles can be quite 
satisfying itself.
Join me here in 30 days, when we'll consider 
some specific tactics for engaging the player's 
characters, plus a brief list of dos and don'ts for 
adventure designers.
13
Challenging the Characters
From Dragon Magazine 267
Last month, we started to explore the fine art of 
creating AD&D adventures and examined the 
Fourth Rule of Dungeoncraft: Challenge both the 
characters and the players.
This rule means that good adventures give the 
players plenty of opportunities to think and plenty
of opportunities to show off their characters' 
abilities, spells, and magical items. Last month, 
we looked at some specific tactics for challenging
the players. This month, let's explore similar 
tactics for challenging their characters.
Challenging the Characters
The biggest attraction of the AD&D game is that 
it allows the players to assume the roles of bold 
heroes capable of performing incredible feats. 
One of the hooks that keeps players returning to 
the game table is the lure of gaining new levels 
and acquiring formidable spells, magical items, 
and capabilities. Obviously, this attraction loses 
its luster if the players have few opportunities to 
use those fantastic abilities.
In part, your job as Dungeon Master is to make 
sure that your adventures are full of situations 
that test the characters' mettle. Unlike obstacles 
that force the players themselves to think and 
make decisions, your goal this time is to design 
challenges that push the characters' game 
statistics, spells, and other capabilities to their 
limits. Generally, such challenges fit into one of 
three categories, each tailored to the specific class
of abilities it tests.
1. Balanced Combats
The most obvious method of challenging the 
player characters' abilities is to test their skill in 
battle. Combat is a big part of the AD&D game, 
and properly balancing the combat is one of the 
DM's most important responsibilities. 
Unfortunately, the only way to design a 
completely balanced encounter is to apply hard-
won experience. Until you have this experience, 
try to err on the side of making the foes too easy 
for the characters to vanquish. It's easier to add 
more enemies (or beef up existing enemies) 
during play than it is to mysteriously remove 
enemies from the battlefield.
Typical adventures make use of three different 
types of combat encounters: romps, battles of 
attrition, and drag-out fights. Romps are combats 
in which the player characters aren't in any 
danger; they're designed to allow the characters to
kick some butt and show off. A good example 
might be a small party of goblin raiders trying to 
waylay a party of 6th-level adventurers. Although
your ultimate intention is to push their characters' 
abilities to the limit, allowing them to run amok 
tends to increase the players' sense of satisfaction 
and create some good opportunities for 
roleplaying. Although this formula isn't 
completely reliable, most encounters in which the
total Hit Dice of the opposition is equal to or less 
than one-fourth the total experience levels of all 
the adventurers are bound to be romps. In other 
words, eight orcs (1 Hit Die each, total of 8 Hit 
Dice) versus four 8th-level characters (total of 32 
levels) is a romp.
Battles of attrition are engagements that pit the 
characters against slightly tougher foes. Although 
the characters should win these fights, the 
opposition might be stern enough to inflict a little 
damage. The idea here is to test the party's 
stamina. Alone, none of the battles presents a 
significant challenge to the heroes' abilities, but a 
series of these combats should start to inflict a 
real toll. Do the PCs have enough hit points to 
withstand the onslaught? Enough healing spells? 
Encounters in which the total Hit Dice of the 
opposition is roughly half the total experience 
levels of the adventurers often fit best into this 
category.
Drag-out fights are big, climactic battles in which
the players face strong opposition. Normally, a 
drag-out fight is a prelude to the players' 
receiving some great reward-obtaining valuable 
treasure, uncovering an important secret, or 
successfully completing the adventure. Drag-out 
fights are the hardest combats to balance. The 
ultimate objective is to make the opposition weak
enough that the players will almost certainly win 
the fight, but strong enough to make the players 
doubt their chances. As a rule of thumb, when 
designing your drag-out fights, begin by selecting
a group of monsters with total Hit Dice that equal
approximately 75% of the total experience levels 
of all adventurers. Since you're facing a much 
thinner margin of error when designing these 
encounters, though, you should be especially 
careful. Although the "75% Rule" might provide 
you with a decent starting point when setting up 
your drag-out fights, in the end you're going to 
have to trust your judgment. For now, just choose 
opponents that make the battle seem balanced in 
your eyes, and then take away one or two 
enemies or capabilities for good measure.
One of the keys to designing an entertaining 
adventure is to combine romps, battles of 
attrition, and drag-out fights in just the right 
proportion. The best adventurers establish a sort 
of combat "rhythm." For example, one or two 
romps can whet the players' appetites. These are 
followed by a few battles of attrition that lead to 
the first drag-out fight, which is then followed by 
a few more romps and then another drag-out 
fight. From here, the adventurers might face a 
series of battles of attrition that culminate in the 
big drag-out fight that serves as the adventure's 
climax. In effect, you're pacing your adventure in 
much the same way a good director paces a 
movie. Place romps in the areas where the 
surroundings are less interesting and you'd like to 
speed up the action. Battles of attrition are a good
way to provide the players with the feeling that 
they are slowly but steadily advancing toward 
some goal. Drag-out fights pick up the tension 
and get the players' hearts beating a bit faster. 
Although it's dangerous to make firm 
assumptions about the order in which the players 
will tackle the encounters you sprinkle in their 
path, you should give some thought to how you'd 
like your adventure to progress when you are 
designing the players' opposition.
2. Heroic Feats and Tests
The AD&D game provides several different 
systems that allow the players to use their 
characters' unique abilities to perform heroic 
stunts and feats: ability checks, saving throws, 
and proficiency checks. These systems can be 
used to force the players to overcome a wide 
variety of obstacles that aren't directly connected 
to combat.
For example, you might require the adventurers 
to leap across a narrow chasm (requiring a 
Dexterity check). Similarly, you might place an 
extremely valuable jewel in a room full of 
worthless trinkets; only a successful Appraising 
proficiency check allows the adventurers to make 
off with the real prize. For more inspiration, you 
should re-read the sections on ability checks, 
proficiency checks, and saving throws in both the 
Player's Handbook and the Dungeon Master 
Guide.
One important distinction to keep in mind as you 
sprinkle opportunities to perform heroic feats and 
tests throughout your adventure is the difference 
between ability checks and saving throws. Saving
throws improve dramatically with experience 
level, while ability checks do not. Since a 
character's experience level is the most important 
indicator of that character's significance and 
general aptitude, try to arrange things so that the 
adventure's most critical heroic feats are resolved 
by saving throws. As an example, suppose you've 
decided that, to reach the leader of the evil cult 
and rescue the princess, the heroes must first 
make their way through the Caverns of Despair-a 
magical labyrinth that saps their will to fight. 
Only heroes with the strongest willpower can 
hope to negotiate the caverns successfully and 
reach their quarry. Since Wisdom is a measure of 
personal willpower, it might seem like a good 
idea to require each adventurer to make a 
successful Wisdom check to make his or her way 
through the caverns. However, this situation is 
probably best handled with a saving throw vs. 
paralyzation, since it should always be easier for 
higher level characters to perform a feat that is so 
important to the adventure. There's certainly 
something wrong if a legendary hero has no 
better chance to complete an important test than a
1st-level character. In this particular case, you can
account for characters with high Wisdom scores 
by allowing them to add their Magical Defense 
Adjustment to their saving throws.
For similar reasons, an ability check or 
proficiency check should never be used to resolve
a life-and-death situation; always use saving 
throws to handle these cases. Let's return to the 
example of the narrow chasm the adventurers 
must leap to reach a remote portion of the 
dungeon. While it's reasonable to require a 
Dexterity check to perform the leap, any 
characters who fail the check should not fall to 
their deaths. Instead, give these unfortunates a 
saving throw vs. breath weapon to catch 
themselves on a ledge before plummeting. Again, 
the higher the hero's level, the greater the chance 
he or she will find a way to survive against all 
odds. Using saving throws in this fashion also ties
nicely to some of the game's other systems and 
assumptions. After all, shouldn't a ring of 
protection +2 help prevent an adventurer from 
stumbling down a chasm to his or her death? It 
will if you resolve the situation with a saving 
throw, but it won't if you rely solely upon an 
ability check.
Of course, one of the problems with using saving 
throws in this fashion is that it's sometimes 
difficult to determine which category to use in 
any particular situation. To help, here is a recap of
some important and often overlooked guidelines 
from Chapter 9 of the Player's Handbook.
Paralyzation, poison, death magic: Situations that 
call for exceptional force of will or physical 
fortitude. Petrification, polymorph: Situations in 
which a character must withstand massive 
physical alteration to his or her entire body. 
Breath weapon: Situations in which a 
combination of physical stamina and Dexterity 
are critical factors in survival. Spell: Situations 
that don't fit into any of the other three 
classifications.
3. Feats of Sorcery
The coolest thing about playing an AD&D wizard
or priest is the ability to toss around magical 
spells. You should strive to keep your spellcasters
happy by giving them all sorts of opportunities to 
exercise their magical abilities and show off for 
the other players. Generally, this gives you two 
things to consider when designing your 
adventures.
First, try to make sure that you eventually give 
each of the spellcasters in the party an 
opportunity to cast all of the spells in their 
various arsenals. If one of your wizards finds a 
scroll containing the plant growth spell and adds 
it to his or her spellbook, the player will become 
frustrated if your adventures never provide an 
opportunity to use the spell. Of course, this 
doesn't mean that you must include an 
opportunity for all your spellcasters to use all 
their spells in every adventure. As you sit down to
create each adventure, however, take note of any 
of the adventurers' magical capabilities you might
have been neglecting in recent weeks and try your
best to incorporate them.
Second, think about using special riddles, 
puzzles, and obstacles that can be solved only by 
the correct application of magic. Suppose, for 
example, the PCs are pursuing a band of orcs who
have captured one of their comrades. Eventually, 
the characters find the orcs slaughtered in a 
clearing, but there is no sign of their friend. What 
should they do? Well, if she's using her head, the 
party's priest might realize that she can spend a 
few hours praying and then cast a speak with 
dead spell. It's likely that the dead orcs can 
provide the PCs with the clue needed to continue 
the quest. 
When you incorporate these sorts of challenges 
into your adventures, you accomplish two aims. 
You make sure that the spellcasters have the 
opportunity to make an important contribution, 
and you confront the players with an interesting 
enigma. You can also use this tactic to prevent the
PCs from reaching certain parts of the adventure 
until they're ready. Placing a wizard lock on a key
door in your dungeon, for example, prevents the 
party from entering that area until one of their 
spellcasters obtains a knock or dispel magic spell.
Join us again in thirty days when we'll begin to 
lay the groundwork for an actual adventure.
14
Creating an Adventure 
Concept
From Dragon Magazine 268
Over the past two months, we've discussed some 
general tips for effective adventure building. Now
let's put those tips to work and generate a 
complete concept for a first adventure.
Creating the Concept
Every great adventure begins with a great 
concept. Before you pull out the graph paper or 
start thumbing through the Monstrous Manual 
book, take some time to stop and think about the 
adventure you're creating. Although other 
approaches can be equally effective, many of the 
most memorable AD&D scenarios are location 
based.
This means that the heart of the adventure 
consists of a series of maps and a key that 
describes the important locations on them; the 
heroes' mission is to explore the maps and 
overcome the challenges they meet along the 
way. As a consequence, you should begin 
planning your adventures by thinking about 
exotic, interesting locales. Ideally, you're looking 
for an environment that is relatively self-
contained and can accommodate plenty of rooms,
chambers, and nooks capable of housing 
monsters, tricks, and traps. To keeps things fresh, 
you should expend some effort trying to dream up
a location that is as different as possible from the 
dungeons your players have tackled in the past. 
An important part of devising a suitable 
adventure location is considering how and why 
that location was built, and how it came into its 
present state. Failing to answer these important 
questions is a mistake that derails an awful lot of 
first-timers. A random nondescript hole in the 
ground isn't nearly as interesting as the "long 
abandoned stronghold of Zelligar and Rogan that 
is said to have been deserted ever since a strange 
curse claimed the lives of all its inhabitants more 
than a hundred years ago."
Always keep in mind that the potential to uncover
the secrets created by the DM is one of the major 
attractions of the AD&D game. Without a 
coherent rationale underpinning your dungeon, 
it's going to be awfully tough to create 
meaningful secrets. And while you're giving some
thought to the history of the adventure locale, be 
sure that you don't make a related mistake that 
befuddles an equal number of beginners-make 
sure the players have an adequate opportunity to 
uncover and understand the background you 
create. Although the players needn't necessarily 
know that they are exploring the lost stronghold 
of Zelligar and Rogan when they first set foot in 
the dungeon, you should try to make sure that 
they'll uncover this secret by the time they leave. 
All too many novice DMs spend a lot of time 
creating elaborate backgrounds for their creations
without giving the players a good chance to 
understand what is happening.
Of course, whenever the subject of background 
arises, you should be thinking about the First 
Rule: to create only those details that are 
absolutely necessary for play.
After you've thought up a couple of possible 
locations, but before you go any further, consider 
your goals for this first adventure. An adventure 
that is perfectly suited to begin a new campaign 
has four special requirements. Although it's not 
really necessary to build all four of these 
characteristics into your scenario, each of them 
you manage to include will make it easier for the 
players to become interested in your game.
It Explains How the PCs Meet
The AD&D game gives players a tremendous 
amount of flexibility when creating their 
characters. Chances are good that your players 
will create characters drawn from a wide variety 
of races, classes, and alignments. An ideal first 
adventure provides your players with a ready 
rationale that explains how their characters meet 
and decide to adventure together.
Imagine, for instance, an adventure that opens 
with each of the player characters receiving a 
summons to visit a remote temple. Once they 
arrive, they all recognize the temple's high priest-
over the years, in a variety of different guises, the
priest provided some favor or service to each and 
every one of them in exchange for a promise one 
day to return his generosity. In fact, across the 
span of his career, the priest aided thousands of 
individuals under similar circumstances. The 
priest then reminds the adventurers of their 
promises to repay his kindness and explains that 
he needs them to join forces and track down an 
important relic that was recently stolen from his 
church by a gang of bandits. 
Similarly, you might plan an adventure that 
begins when the PCs each show up at the local 
temple seeking the cure for a strange fever that 
has recently gripped a friend or loved one. The 
priest of the temple explains that the only cure is 
a draught sipped from a magic chalice stolen 
from the temple by goblin raiders a few years 
ago. This news should provoke the player 
characters to join forces in search of the goblins 
and the stolen chalice.
Of course, elaborate rationales such as these 
aren't strictly necessary. If you can't think of 
anything else, you can always begin your 
adventure with the old classic, "One evening, 
you're all sitting around the inn enjoying 
yourselves, when you overhear an old man telling
a fantastic tale...." But the more you can do to 
make the player heroes' first meeting a more 
organic piece of your adventure, the easier it is to 
get the adventure off the ground and get the 
players interested.
It Provides a Portal for New PCs
Beginning AD&D characters are fragile. Just one 
or two mistakes is often all it takes to send a 1st-
level character to the afterlife. As a consequence, 
it's entirely possible that one or two of the PCs 
will not survive your first few adventures. Over 
time, as the adventurers become more durable, 
character deaths should become increasingly less 
frequent as the party gains more power and more 
flexibility. To account for this phenomenon, you 
should try to design your first few adventures in a
way that allows newly generated replacement 
PCs to be introduced into play as smoothly as 
possible. If you've selected an evil temple in the 
swamp as your locale, for instance, you might 
want to place a prison dungeon somewhere on the
temple map. If one of the PCs dies, then it's not 
too hard to explain how the remaining 
adventurers suddenly stumble across his 
replacement in one of the temple's halls-the new 
character just escaped from the dungeon prison 
and is hoping to avenge himself on his captors! 
The Location is Reusable
Most of the earliest and most notable AD&D 
adventures were vast complexes that called upon 
the players to make many return visits to 
penetrate all their secrets. If you can get away 
with it, it's not a bad idea to mimic this approach 
when creating the adventure you'll use to kick off 
your campaign. The advantages are obvious-not 
only do you present your players with a wide 
variety of possibilities for exploration, you also 
save yourself a lot of effort. A well-designed 
environment of this type might fill several weeks 
of play (or more!), giving you plenty of time you 
can use to begin crafting your next challenge. 
Note that an adventuring environment doesn't 
have to be huge to be reusable. You might set 
your adventure in a relatively small iron mine 
overrun by orcs, for instance. After a few 
evenings' worth of adventure, the heroes finally 
manage to rout the orcs from the mine, earning 
the eternal gratitude of a band of dwarves who are
the rightful owners of the mine. A couple weeks 
later, though, the orcs return to the mine in 
greater numbers and reclaim their prize, 
prompting the player heroes to clear out the 
complex once again and overcome an entirely 
new set of challenges the orcs have placed in their
path. Later still, the players might uncover a 
secret explaining why the orcs were so intent on 
capturing the mine in the first place, encouraging 
them to return to the mine for a third time in 
search of a hidden chamber or two they 
overlooked during their first two visits.
This last example illustrates an important point. 
Always save the maps and notes that make up 
your adventures. You never know when you'll 
find an opportunity to pull out an old location and
use it as the setting for an entirely new adventure.
It Foreshadows Bigger Events
Finally, an ideal first adventure should give the 
players a taste of bigger things to come. One of 
your most important responsibilities as Dungeon 
Master is to keep the players interested in the 
campaign. As noted in earlier columns, one of the
easiest methods of maintaining interest is to 
construct interlocking "onion layers" of secrets 
that the players can peel back one by one. Ideally,
your first adventure should introduce the players 
to these onion layers and hook them from the 
very beginning. If your campaign world partially 
revolves around an age-old conflict between a 
tribe of fire giants and a secret society of wizards,
for example, you might try to foreshadow this 
conflict in your first adventure. Perhaps the 
adventure consists of exploring an abandoned 
wizard's tower. As they explore the tower, the 
player heroes discover that a powerful band of 
creatures obviously attacked and ransacked the 
tower, killing all the inhabitants and somehow 
smashing through formidable defensive barriers. 
Particularly observant players might realize that 
the marauders made a systematic effort to destroy
every book in the tower and that the marauders 
were obviously looking for something. Even after
the adventure is complete, this set up gives the 
players a lot to think about. Who killed the 
tower's inhabitants? Why? What were they 
looking for? Why did they destroy the books? 
The fact that you incorporated these mysteries 
into the adventure suggests to the players that 
you'll eventually provide them with answers, 
probably piquing their interest.
If you're having a hard time deciding what to 
foreshadow in your adventure or how to go about 
it, don't sweat it for now-just carry on with the 
design. Later, after you've fleshed out the 
adventure's basic parameters, randomly pull a 
card or two from your "deck of secrets" (you have
been maintaining your deck, haven't you?) and 
take a crack at figuring out how you might link 
the secret you've drawn to your basic scenario. 
Don't be afraid to invent new details to make the 
secret fit; this is exactly how your campaign 
world will grow to take on a life of its own.
Creating the Situation
After selecting a suitable locale for your 
adventure and contemplating your goals, turn 
your attention to devising the basic situation. 
What sort of creatures live in the adventure area? 
What are they doing there? How did they get 
there? Do they hope to accomplish anything? 
How might the adventurers discover the 
adventure locale? What might the adventurers 
hope to accomplish? The key word here is 
"situation." Many beginners (and even a few 
professionals) mistakenly devise a "plot" at this 
point instead of a situation. Plot implies that you 
know exactly what is going to happen once play 
begins. Situation, on the other hand, implies that 
you know enough of the details to figure out what
will happen during play, after you see what the 
players decide to do. It's important to realize that 
creating an AD&D adventure is not the same 
thing as writing or planning a story. Instead, it's 
more akin to filling up a toy box with a collection
of puzzle pieces you'll use to assemble stories 
later. In general, if you can't look back on what 
you're developing and imagine four or five 
different ways in which the adventure might 
unfold, you're probably concentrating too much 
on plot and not enough on situation. If you fail to 
achieve the proper balance, you'll find yourself 
pulling the players through the adventure rather 
than letting them tackle the scenario their own 
way.
Suppose that your adventure calls upon the PCs 
to recover a stolen magical potion from the 
stronghold of a local wizard. In this case, you 
shouldn't worry about how you expect the players
to obtain the potion. Instead, concentrate on 
figuring out where the potion is kept within the 
stronghold and how it is guarded, why the wizard 
stole the potion, and what he plans to do with it. 
Armed with this information, you'll be prepared 
to deal with any approach the players might 
attempt. If they decide to sneak into the 
stronghold and pilfer the potion, you know what 
obstacles stand in their way. If they make an 
attempt to bargain with the wizard, you know 
exactly how important he considers the potion 
and can therefore decide what he might be willing
to accept in trade. If the PCs take too long to 
fulfill their quest, you know exactly what the 
wizard plans to do with the potion and can easily 
decide what happens next. Perhaps after a week, 
the powerful noble who hired the wizard to steal 
the potion arrives to claim it, giving the players 
one last chance to obtain the draught before it is 
gone forever.
Putting the Pieces Together
The easiest way to illustrate good adventure-
building technique is by example. These concepts
should become a great deal clearer as we walk 
through the process of devising a specific 
adventure.
First, I thought about location and decided upon a
ruined, underground temple. While a temple isn't 
terribly interesting, I was looking for something 
with a classic D&D "dungeon" flavor. To spruce 
up the locale, I've decided that this particular 
temple sits at the bottom of a deep, barren ravine 
located in the Black Wood, a few days' travel 
southwest of Ironoak. This ravine, known to 
locals as "The Scar," is one of the few patches of 
land on the entire continent that is not blanketed 
beneath Aris's lush forests. No one knows exactly
why the Scar is so desolate. All available 
evidence seems to indicate that the surrounding 
lands were once fertile, but they were somehow 
devastated by a mysterious natural catastrophe.
At this point, I turned my attention to crafting a 
situation that might fit the four criteria outlined 
above. Eventually, I hit upon an interesting idea: 
The temple is functioning as a makeshift prison 
camp under the control of an orc tribe that lives in
the Black Wood. The orcs have overrun the 
temple ruins and are using their prisoners to dig 
through the rubble so they can retrieve some sort 
of item lost in the temple several hundred years 
ago. I've decided that the PCs begin the campaign
as unarmed prisoners. Their obvious goal is to 
escape.
I like this concept for several reasons:
1. It explains how the player heroes met and 
decided to adventure together. With the 
adventurers all imprisoned together, they are 
well-motivated to get to know each other and 
cooperate.
2. It should be easy to introduce new PCs into 
play. Presumably, the PCs aren't the orcs' only 
prisoners. If one or more of the PCs dies, it 
should be relatively easy to introduce a new 
prisoner who can take his or her place.
3. Designed properly, the temple should be a 
highly reusable environment. I imagine a vast 
underground complex, many areas of which have 
been sealed off by fallen rubble and debris. As the
campaign progresses, I can gradually give the 
adventurers access to the capabilities needed to 
clear out more rubble, periodically opening up 
new areas of the complex and allowing the 
players to discover new secrets.
Furthermore, once the heroes manage to escape, 
there are many means that I can use to motivate 
them to return. While they are still imprisoned, 
for instance, the heroes might discover what the 
orcs are looking for. If the consequences of the 
orcs achieving this objective are sufficiently 
unpleasant, the heroes might be strongly tempted 
to return to the temple to foil the orcs, or to 
capture the prize for themselves. I might also 
introduce an NPC with a daughter imprisoned 
inside the temple. After the NPC discovers the 
players' escape, he might hire them to return to 
the temple to rescue his girl. Yet another 
possibility is to introduce various legends 
detailing items, spells, or knowledge said to be 
lost inside the temple, tempting the players to 
make even more return visits.
4. The "prison break" situation gives me a good 
opportunity to design an adventure that will 
adequately challenge both the players and their 
characters (the Fourth Rule of Dungeoncraft). 
Since the player heroes begin play unarmed and 
relatively defenseless, they'll have to use their 
wits as well as their character capabilities to 
succeed. I envision a Great Escape scenario, in 
which the players must make the most of the few 
items they manage to sneak out from under the 
noses of their orcish overseers. I might also ask 
the players to intelligently select their allies from 
among the other prisoners and overcome 
interesting physical obstacles. They might decide 
to dig secret tunnels, lead all the other prisoners 
in an uprising against the orcs, uncover some of 
the temple's secrets and use them to their 
advantage, or pursue any one of a number of 
other courses.
5. This setup lends itself to some interesting 
roleplaying possibilities. Not only can the PCs 
interact with their fellow prisoners and the orcs 
but each also will have an opportunity to figure 
out how he or she was captured before play 
began. This should encourage each player to 
invent a handful of interesting details about his or
her character.
With all that out of the way, the only base I've yet
to cover is to guarantee that this first adventure 
serves as an adequate introduction to my 
campaign and starts the players down the road to 
uncovering some of the interesting secrets I've 
prepared for them. To give me some ideas, I drew
a card from my "Deck of Secrets" and came up 
with "Selene's Treachery." (See the sidebar if you 
need to refresh your memory about this secret.)
After some careful consideration, I created a 
backstory linking the ruined temple with the 
secret of Selene. (See the above sidebar.) First of 
all, I've decided that the Scar is actually the site 
where Selene was "born" several thousand years 
ago. Her separation from Aris is the terrible 
cataclysm that dug the ravine, shattered the 
temple, and killed the local vegetation. In fact, the
temple itself served as a sort of "womb" in which 
the baby goddess was nurtured by Aris's high 
priests before she was born. I've decided that Aris
originally planned to give birth to twin moons. 
For several generations, the priests of the temple 
watched over two large "eggs" (resembling 
enormous gems) and cared for them according to 
Aris's instructions. Just before the eggs "hatched,"
though, they were temporarily stolen by cultists 
from the Legion, the rival sect that worships 
Aris's dark and destructive side. The Legionnaires
hoped to curse the eggs so the goddesses within 
them would be born as cruel and merciless beings
who might help the Legion seize control of Aris 
herself. Eventually, one of the temple's most 
noble paladins rescued the eggs, but not before 
the Legionnaires successfully cursed one of them.
Since Aris and her priests had no desire to birth a 
malevolent goddess, only the pure egg was 
returned to the womb; it's corrupted sister was 
locked in a deep dungeon to languish.
Curiously, just after the eggs were returned, the 
paladin awoke one night in the throes of a 
mysterious evil madness. Shortly thereafter, he 
secretly switched the positions of the two eggs, 
tricking the priests into birthing the cursed twin. 
This tale explains Selene's treachery.
I've decided that the orcs who are excavating the 
ruins of the temple at the base of the Scar are 
working under the direction of a mysterious 
stranger who is none other than the undead 
incarnation of the paladin who betrayed the 
temple priests several thousand years ago. Ever 
since his transgression, the paladin has been a 
dark servant of Selene and the Legion. To this 
day, he still doesn't understand what compelled 
him to forsake his duties. The paladin has 
returned to the temple ruins after all these years in
search of the second egg. The mind flayers have 
recently discovered a spell that would allow 
Selene to absorb the essence of her unborn sister, 
greatly augmenting the moon goddess' power.
Of course, I don't intend to allow the players to 
uncover much of this story for many weeks to 
come. In this first adventure, they'll briefly 
encounter the mysterious paladin and uncover 
just enough of the story to whet their appetites. 
For now, I'll emphasize the orcs, their mysterious 
quest, and the idea of escape.
That wraps up another installment. Tune in again 
in thirty days, when we'll begin to design the 
temple and its inhabitants.
15
Starting Adventure Maps
From Dragon Magazine 269
Last time, I decided upon an old ruined temple as 
the setting for the adventure that will inaugurate 
my new campaign. This month (and the next), 
let's walk through the steps I took to design that 
adventure from the ground up. Along the way, 
you're bound to pick up lots of helpful tips and 
inspiration that should come in handy when you 
sit down to design your own adventures. 
Remember that my opening adventure, "The 
Scar," will be presented in its entirety in our sister
publication, Dungeon® Adventures (issue #80). 
This column and the next might prove more 
useful if you pick up a copy of Dungeon 
Adventures, read the adventure, and follow along.
First Things First
Last issue, I fleshed out the basic concept of the 
temple adventure and spent some time devising a 
backstory. With these two preliminaries out of the
way, the next step is to start thinking about the 
map. Since the essence of the AD&D® game is 
exploration, a particularly strong map (and all it 
implies) usually translates into a strong 
adventure. For this reason, it's generally a good 
idea to design the map first and let the rest of the 
adventure flow from there.
Start your adventure maps by making a list of 
locations you know you'll need somewhere on the
map. For now, concentrate solely on the locations
that are absolutely essential to the adventure. For 
instance, if the adventure is centered around a 
quest for a magical item, you'll need the location 
in which the item is finally found. Similarly, if 
your adventure calls upon the player heroes to 
investigate an underground war between goblins 
and kobolds, you'll probably need several areas 
housing the two combatant tribes.
The best way to guarantee that you've correctly 
identified all your requirements is to mentally 
strip your adventure down to its barest elements 
so you can make sure to account for all these 
elements when you draw your map. For instance, 
"Party enters ruined stronghold looking for fabled
magic sword; party discovers that a tribe of hill 
giants has established a lair in the stronghold; 
leader of the giants uses the magic sword as a 
table knife, unaware of its value." Or, "Party 
enters dungeon to rescue a princess kidnapped by 
an evil cult; princess faked the kidnapping and is 
actually the cult's leader; she and her followers 
hoped the ruse would lead her father's champions 
(the party) into a trap." In the former case, your 
map would need quarters for the hill giants, 
especially the king's kitchen (where the sword is 
found). In the latter case, you'd need one or more 
areas that make up the cultists' trap.
My own adventure reduces down to "Party begins
as prison laborers for a band of orcs; orcs are 
forcing the prisoners to dig through the remains 
of a ruined temple to find some mysterious 
object; the party is trying to escape." For my 
adventure, I need:
• A semi-hidden vault (the orcs believe their
quarry is located in one of the temple 
vaults).
• Some rubble-strewn work areas the orcs' 
prisoners must dig through to reach the 
vault and the orcs' prize.
• Prisoner confinement areas and barracks 
for the orcs (both improvised atop the 
temple's original facilities).
Since escaping from the orcs and the temple is the
main objective of my adventure, I'll also need to 
include a number of possible escape routes on the
map. In an earlier installment, I noted that it's a 
good idea to include alternative approaches to 
overcoming an adventure's obstacles whenever 
possible. Since the escape is such an important 
goal in this adventure, I'm especially determined 
to provide the players with a good set of multiple 
choices. Therefore, in addition to the obvious 
main entrance, I've decided that there are a few 
hearths in the temple featuring chimneys that 
stretch up and out of the complex. Later on, to 
make the players' choice of routes more 
interesting, I'll try to position the chimneys such 
that each offers its own unique challenge.
Scouting the Locations
Once you've identified all your needs, the next 
step is to expand the list to include locations 
you'll want to place on the map. For me, this is 
usually a two-step process. First, I try to look at 
the setting from a logical perspective and ask 
myself what sort of locations should be present. 
The notion of a ruined temple, for instance, 
implies that some of the rooms in the complex 
once served as shrines, meditation chambers, and 
quarters for the priests and their servants. 
Similarly, logic dictates that if the temple once 
served as a living area, its inhabitants needed 
access to food, water, and other basic necessities, 
leading me to place ruined kitchens, pantries, and 
water storage areas on my list. Because my 
backstory states that the temple was originally 
constructed as a sort of citadel to house an 
important artifact, it also seems logical that 
warriors or guardians (paladins, in this case) were
quartered in the temple alongside the priests.
After I finish examining the setting from a logical
perspective, I round out my list of "wants" by 
looking at the map from a playability standpoint. 
Here, my goal is to come up with a few locations 
that will be fun for the players to explore-
something different and unique. As I finally draw 
my map, I'll attempt to scatter rooms like these 
among the more mundane locales I've already 
identified. When designing this first adventure, I 
drew my inspiration for these locations from a 
number of sources: a book on ancient Mayan 
temples, a couple of classic "prison break" 
movies, fairy tales, and-of course-my own 
imagination.
At this stage, I also flip through the Monstrous 
Compendium® books and their various 
supplements to start thinking about the sort of 
creatures I'll call upon to populate the map. 
Although it's unnecessary to draw up an 
exhaustive list of occupants at this point, some 
monsters have special requirements for their lairs 
that I'll need to take into account when drawing 
the map. In this case, I decided that large spiders, 
stirges, and wild dogs are ideally suited to inhabit
the temple ruins alongside the orcs.
Drawing the Map
Once the list of locations is complete, it's time to 
start drawing the actual map. Begin by deciding 
upon a couple of basic parameters. How large do 
you expect the map to be? How many "dungeon 
levels" will it cover? And, what (if anything) 
serves as a main entrance?
In my case, I decided that my map would consist 
of a single level that should cover roughly one 
sheet of graph paper with fairly small squares. As 
a general rule of thumb, you can assume that each
full page of dungeon maps that are part of your 
adventure translates into approximately two game
sessions of playing time. Two evenings sounded 
just about right for what I was trying to 
accomplish. My main entrance, I decided, would 
consist of a long staircase descending down into 
the very center of the complex.
When drawing dungeon maps, I always start by 
lightly sketching a very general outline on the 
graph paper. In this case, I noticed that most of 
the locations I identified fit into four general 
categories: priest quarters, temple rooms, special 
areas (the key room, paladin quarters, and wizard 
labs), and the monster maze. I drew a rough box 
the approximate size of the complex centered 
around my main entrance, divided the box into 
four quadrants and lightly labeled each to 
correspond to one of the location categories. I 
decided the monster maze would occupy the 
northwest quadrant of the complex, the temple 
areas would occupy the northeast, the special 
rooms the southwest, and the priest quarters the 
southeast. I then lightly penciled in the names of 
all the locations I identified in the exact areas in 
which I wanted to place them on the map.
With this guide in place, it was then a simple 
matter to sketch out the temple's various rooms 
and corridors. I placed all the locations I'd already
identified in the rooms that ended up closest to 
the locations I'd already sketched out for them. 
By the time I was finished, of course, the map 
contained more rooms than I could match to my 
list of locations. To decide what to do with these 
"extra" rooms, I was forced to double and triple 
up a few general locations like the priest quarters 
and meditation chambers. I also thought up a few 
more locations to occupy some of the gaps, a 
process that was a lot easier now that there was 
an actual plan for the complex in front of me. You
can see the final results of my mapmaking in 
Dungeon Adventures.
That wraps up another installment. Join me here 
in thirty days for our third descent into the 
dungeon and more notes on the construction of 
the adventure.
16
Identifying the Sub-Goals
This is a good point for relatively new readers of 
"Dungeoncraft" to check out the earlier 
installments available on the Internet. This 
month's column is the final installment of a series
examining the anatomy and construction of an 
AD&D adventure. The adventure it describes, 
"The Scar," will appear in Dungeon Adventures 
(issue #80), letting you trace the whole project 
from concept to finished form.
In the past two installments, we examined 
strategies for evolving adventure concepts and 
building maps. This time, let's explore the process
of turning a simple map into a full-fledged 
adventure.
Identifying the Sub-Goals
Once the map is drawn, mentally recap the 
ultimate objective of the adventure and try to 
imagine how play might progress. What routes 
might the players take? What might they see or 
encounter along the way? Often, the easiest way 
to accomplish this is to break the objective down 
into a series of "sub-objectives" the players are 
likely to see as prerequisites to the main 
objective.
In my own adventure, for example, the players' 
primary objective is to escape from their orc 
captors. They face an obvious obstacle in the orcs
themselves -- it will certainly prove difficult for 
the unarmed and weakened PCs to fight their way
out of the complex. Before they attempt escape, 
therefore, it's likely that the players will try to 
tackle one or more lesser objectives. They might 
try to find makeshift weapons or equipment to 
improve their odds in combat, for instance. Or 
they might search for spellbooks and material 
components necessary to restore their magic-
users' spellcasting capability.
A careful look at the maps for "The Scar" and 
trying to "think like a player" inspired this list of 
sub-goals:
1. To gain weapons.
Since the unarmed PCs stand almost no chance 
against the numerically superior orcs, this is a 
necessary first step toward any plan that involves 
the PCs' fighting their way out of the complex 
and a prudent precautionary step toward 
executing just about any other plan. There are 
three obvious ways to achieve this goal. The PCs 
can capture weapons from the orcs, they can find 
their own weapons stored somewhere within the 
complex, or they construct makeshift weapons 
from the stones, planks, and other items they find 
in the temple ruins.
2. To restore spellcasting ability.
As the adventure opens, the spellcasters in the 
party obviously lack the material components, 
spellbooks, and other items necessary for making 
magic. Finding a method of restoring this ability 
would obviously increase their chances of 
escaping -- a single sleep spell might be all the 
PCs need to elude their captors.
3. Identify less obvious exits.
The temple map depicts only one obvious exit to 
the outside, and it is certainly well guarded at all 
times. To increase their chances of escape, the 
PCs might search for a less obvious exit that isn't 
so well guarded.
4. Identify a "sneaky" method of 
taking out the orcs.
It's clear that the odds favor the orcs in a straight-
up fight, but clever players might look for a more 
devious method of removing a large number of 
orcs from the picture. Perhaps there's some way 
to trap the bulk of the orc tribe within a 
conveniently collapsed cavern or behind a locked 
door.
5. Identify a potential distraction.
If the PCs decide to leave via the main exit, they 
might improve their odds with a distraction aimed
at occupying their captors. Perhaps they'll free 
and arm the remaining prisoners, or devise a 
method to provoke a fight between two rival 
factions within the orc tribe.
Enabling the Sub-Goals
With such a list in place, you can make sure that 
you address each of these possible approaches as 
you design the adventure. Of course, nothing says
that you must design the adventure so that every 
single one of the potential approaches works -- 
maybe there aren't any less obvious exits -- but 
it's a good idea to enable as many as you can. 
That way, you give the players plenty of options. 
For "The Scar," let's allow every approach we can
devise, making some a bit more difficult to 
accomplish than others. Since this is the first 
adventure in a whole new campaign, there's no 
way to anticipate how the players will respond to 
the obstacles we place before them. 
Consequently, let's give them as many options as 
possible to decrease the chance that they'll 
become frustrated while the DM is learning to 
understand their playing styles.
Looking back at the past couple of installments, 
you can see that we've already accounted for most
of the subgoals:
1. To gain weapons
It won't be difficult to sprinkle weapons and 
potential weapons liberally throughout the 
complex. As a rule of thumb, it should be 
relatively trivial for the players to locate a 
weapon that inflicts less damage than the orcs' 
weapons (grabbing a rock from a rubble pile 
down in the work area should be easy enough), 
and a bit harder to find weapons that equal those 
of the orcs. To find a weapon that is superior to 
those carried by the orcs, the PCs should need to 
do something daring or clever.
2. To restore spellcasting ability.
Before play begins, the DM should ask each 
player to invent a brief story explaining how he or
she came to be held captive. Depending upon the 
nature of their individual stories, the DM can then
place the spellcasters' spellbooks and materials 
somewhere within the complex with the rest of 
the PCs' equipment. Furthermore, since there 
might be an old wizard's lab located somewhere 
within the temple, it might house the items 
necessary to allow wizards to cast a few carefully 
chosen spells.
3. Identify less obvious exits.
While building the map last month, we included a
few chimneys that lead directly to the surface. Of 
course, one or more obstacles will undoubtedly 
stand in the way of using these back-up exits, but 
the variety should provide the players with a nice 
set of options.
4. Identify a "sneaky" method of 
taking out the orcs.
Last month, we included a wine cellar within the 
temple complex. Poisoning the large kegs stored 
in the cellar might take out each of the many orcs 
who sample the wine supply every night. A 
suitable poison might be located in the fungus 
garden that we also described last month. 
Similarly, let's plan to make it possible for the 
PCs to call upon the temple's ancient magic to 
scare or neutralize the orcs.
5. Identify a potential distraction.
We've already recognized the possibility that the 
PCs might arm and free the remaining prisoners. 
As discussed last month, the PCs might also 
discover a way to unleash a powerful monster 
into the complex to cause general mayhem. 
Think Like a Player
Once you've identified a list of potential subgoals,
it's worth thinking about whether the players are 
likely to pursue any even lesser objectives before 
tackling the subgoals, particularly if your list 
features more than a couple of entries. Once 
again, try to think like a player, anticipate, and 
address any new objectives you identify.
The list of possible sub-goals suggests that, to 
pursue any of these goals, the PCs must first 
resolve to explore the temple itself. Because it's 
impossible for them to form an interesting escape 
plan without gathering plenty of information 
about their surroundings -- and because their 
opportunities to gather such information are 
limited -- we should probably provide them with 
some assistance. One good solution would be to 
include a series of elaborate friezes depicting the 
construction of the complex, running along the 
temple walls. By learning to interpret the friezes, 
perhaps the PCs can glean useful information 
about various areas in the complex without 
actually visiting those areas. These clues can 
vastly augment their "intelligence gathering" 
capabilities.
Of course, it's extremely unlikely that a list of 
potential objectives covers every possible 
approach the players might pursue. In your 
games, you'll quickly find that your players are 
great at tossing you unexpected curveballs. By 
identifying and enabling a number of possible 
sub-goals, though, you'll help guarantee that there
is enough meat beneath the surface of your 
adventure to help you deal with the unexpected.
When I ran an early version of this adventure, for 
example, one of the PCs tried to take the orc 
leader hostage and bargain for the party's 
freedom. Although I didn't anticipate the tactic 
while I was designing the scenario, I fleshed out 
enough details about the temple complex while 
preparing for the possibilities I did foresee to 
easily improvise and adapt.
In fact, the capacity to adapt is so important that 
you should make sure you're not falling into the 
trap of over-anticipating the PCs' actions while 
identifying your objectives. Beginning DMs often
make the mistake of designing their adventures 
around a single, expected plan of action. Should 
the players start to deviate from this expected 
plan, these DMs tend to react by subtly (or not-
so-subtly) "steering" the party back on course. Of 
course, this sort of steering inevitably frustrates 
your players and takes control of the game out of 
their hands. In general, if you can't look at your 
adventure and easily identify either several 
different ways the players might pursue your 
main objective or several different objectives to 
choose from, it's probably time to go back to the 
drawing board.
Fleshing Out the Challenges
Remember that the Fourth Rule of Dungeoncraft 
states that "Good adventures always challenge the
players and their characters." After you've 
identified and addressed the various objectives 
the players are likely to pursue, it's usually a good
idea to take a fresh look at your creation and 
make sure you are adequately accomplishing 
these aims. At this point, you might look for ways
to incorporate some of the tactics discussed back 
in Chapters 12 and 13 to help bring your 
challenges up to snuff.
"The Scar" looks like it has the potential to 
sufficiently challenge the players in a number of 
ways. First, the sheer number of potential 
approaches to escaping the temple promises to 
force the players to make a series of interesting 
decisions. Furthermore, several of the various 
objectives give the DM the opportunity to ask the 
players to solve puzzles. Using the mushrooms 
found in the fungus garden to poison the orcs' 
wine, for example, is a classic "item puzzle." We 
can also embed some interesting puzzles into the 
friezes that blanket the walls and into the various 
relics of the temple-builders that remain in the 
complex. Because the PCs aren't the only 
prisoners in the temple, we can also give the 
players plenty of opportunities for interesting 
interaction with the NPCs.
As far as challenging the players' characters is 
concerned, the fact that the PCs begin play 
without any weapons or armor should lead to 
some challenging combats. "The Scar" will 
certainly include some kind of mechanic that 
forces the PCs to make various saving throws or 
ability checks to avoid succumbing to weakness 
as their imprisonment drags on. Sneaking around 
the complex after hours and employing a few of 
the alternative escape routes should test the 
abilities of PC thieves. Making the most of the 
rudimentary spellcasting abilities at their disposal
should adequately test the PC clerics and wizards.
Doling Out the Rewards
After you've completed everything else, take 
another look at your adventure and think about 
how you plan to reward the players for 
overcoming the various obstacles you'll place in 
their path. Obviously, treasure and magical items 
are the easiest rewards to dish out. Although the 
Monstrous Manual book gives you a good 
starting point for assigning treasure to the various
creatures inhabiting your adventures, you should 
always modify these amounts based upon the 
circumstances at hand. If a monster is likely to be 
encountered when the PCs are in a weakened 
state (because there are other nearby monsters 
they might encounter first, for instance), you 
should increase the treasure guideline listed in the
Monstrous Manual book by as much as 50 or 
even 100 percent. If, on the other hand, the PCs 
are likely to encounter the monster when the 
creature is at a disadvantage, you should lower 
the listed treasure by as much as 50 percent. 
Because the PCs are generally disadvantaged 
throughout the course of "The Scar," we'll need to
be somewhat generous in allotting treasure to the 
orcs and the other denizens of the temple 
complex -- maybe the equivalent of 5-10 gp per 
orc. The fact that the orcs are in the process of 
looting the ancient temple neatly explains why 
they are so wealthy.
As far as magical items are concerned, my own 
rule of thumb is to include two or three 
"important items" per adventure, but to make all 
of these items particularly difficult to find or 
recover. Exactly what constitutes an "important 
item" depends upon the average experience level 
of the PCs who will tackle the adventure. For this 
first effort, I might include a single sword +1, a 
shield +1, and a little dust of disappearance. I 
chose this last item because it might play a 
particularly interesting role in the PCs' escape. To
keep things interesting, we can supplement the 
important items with twice as many lesser items 
-- healing potions, minor scrolls, a dagger +1, or 
some arrows +1, and the like.
It's important to note that money and magical 
items are not the only rewards at your disposal. 
You can also reward the players with simple 
information. If you've been dutifully following 
the Rules of Dungeoncraft, you should know a 
number of interesting secrets about your 
campaign world by this point. If you've done your
job well, simple clues pointing to these secrets 
and the occasional major revelation make for 
rewards that are just as satisfying as money and 
magic. In "The Scar," for example, we can begin 
peeling back the curtain on the "mind flayer 
conspiracy" described way back in Chapter 4.
Don't forget to pick up a copy of Dungeon 
Adventures #80 to see how "The Scar" came out. 
And come back here in thirty days to explore 
some methods for helping your players create 
interesting adventurers.
17
Preparing for the First 
Session
Last month, "Dungeoncraft" passed an important 
milestone. After sixteen installments, we've 
finally created everything needed to begin a new 
campaign. These last few months have been 
pretty grueling -- we've drawn maps, devised 
governments and religions, created some NPCs, 
and designed an entire adventure. Now it's finally
time to get those dice rolling!
The first step, of course, is to locate a group of 
players. As mentioned way back in Chapter 1, I 
feel that the AD&D game works best when you 
can round up a whole lot of players -- say, 
somewhere between five and eight. Finding the 
perfect player is an art form unto itself and 
probably worthy of an entire column some day. 
For now though, I'll just assume that you have 
easy access to five or six friends who enjoy each 
other's company, won't whine when they don't get
their way, and won't insist that you allow undead 
tyrannosaurs as player characters. Once you have 
them, it's time to begin the process of rolling up 
characters and preparing for play. 
DM Preparation
As DM, you have just a few more decisions to 
make before you're ready to invite your players to
create their characters. Begin by re-reading the 
character creation chapter in the Player's 
Handbook, paying close attention to the various 
options it presents. Your first order of business is 
to decide which class and race options you'll open
up to your players. Just because a particular 
combination is covered in the Handbook doesn't 
mean you have to allow it in your own game. 
Maybe there's no such thing as a half-orc on your 
world, or perhaps there aren't any druids. Of 
course, you don't want to narrow the options too 
much -- players appreciate a variety of choices.
As far as character classes are concerned, unless 
you're quite experienced, you should allow all of 
the basic classes: fighter, thief, wizard, and cleric.
By excluding one or more of these classes, it's 
pretty easy to throw the AD&D rules out-of-
balance -- imagine a world without clerics, for 
instance (and thus, no healing spells). Instead, 
pay particular attention to the specialized sub-
classes, looking for options that might not fit into 
the world you've built. If your campaign world is 
dominated by savage barbarians, for example, a 
paladin player character might not make a lot of 
sense. Similarly, depending upon how you see 
magic working in your campaign, you might want
to exclude illusionists and other specialist 
wizards.
Another good reason to exclude a character class 
is concern about potential abuse. If you've ever 
had bad experiences with a particular character 
class or you think you might have trouble 
handling any of a class's special abilities, feel free
to rule that class out of bounds. An excellent 
example of a potential concern might be the 
paladin's ability to detect evil. Some DMs find 
this ability extremely confining and believe that it
almost completely takes away their ability to plan
encounters that surprise the players. Other DMs 
find it relatively easy to adjust and handle detect 
evil without a problem. If you fit into the former 
camp, you should simply prohibit your players 
from choosing paladins.
These same guidelines apply when it comes to PC
races. Exclude any that make you uncomfortable 
or don't fit your campaign conception. I also tend 
to weed out a race when I can't think of anything 
interesting I can do with its culture. For some 
reason, I often drop gnomes from my games. I 
guess there's just something about the little 
beggars that throws off my imagination. Plus, I've
always had a difficult time differentiating them 
from halflings. Of course, your own experiences 
will vary.
The Cheat Sheet
Once you have a pretty good idea of what you 
will and won't allow, you should start to create a 
quick "cheat sheet" for the players. Ultimately, 
this sheet will contain everything the players need
to know about your campaign. The sheet should 
begin with a brief description of your campaign 
concept (see Chapter 2) and then a list of all the 
available character options, including a sentence 
or two describing how the more outré options 
might fit into the campaign. Rangers and 
paladins, for instance, are usually members of 
some sort of organized society or order. Are there 
any details about this order that a paladin or 
ranger player might need to know as play begins?
Similarly, thieves are often organized into guilds. 
Is there a thieves' guild operating in your 
campaign area? If so, are PC thieves 
automatically members? When creating this 
information, don't forget the First Rule of 
Dungeoncraft. You don't need to generate reams 
of data about any of these organizations or 
societies. For now, just a sentence or two will do; 
you'll fill in the details later, as they become 
important. The idea is to give the players 
everything they'll need to choose a character type 
before play begins. With this in mind, it's 
certainly a good idea to use this section of the 
cheat sheet to briefly summarize the options for 
priest and cleric characters we discussed way 
back in Chapter 4.
You can take this opportunity to tinker a bit with 
the restrictions and abilities of the various classes 
to help them fit into your own campaign. Perhaps 
in your campaign, all magic-users must be of evil 
alignment, or all paladins receive occasional 
prophetic dreams from their patron deities. 
Although this is a great way to "personalize" your
campaign, it isn't something you should do 
lightly. Again, the AD&D rules are carefully 
balanced, and it's surprisingly easy to upset the 
apple cart. It's generally a good idea to keep all 
alterations as minor as possible and proceed only 
if you are quite comfortable with the results.
After you've listed and discussed all the character 
and race options, you should round the cheat 
sheet off with a brief description of the geography
in your campaign area (discussed back in 
Chapter 7). Here, your goal is to give the players 
just enough "lay of the land" to understand any 
references that pop up during play, allowing them
to make some educated decisions about where to 
go and what to do. A single paragraph summary 
of the local government/economy and a brief list 
of the major geographic features in the region 
(each described by no more than a single 
sentence) should do nicely. You should already 
have all this information at your disposal. Lastly, 
if possible, adding a small version of your area 
map to the cheat sheet is a nice touch. This is 
particularly easy to do if you created your map on
a computer, but even if you resorted to old 
fashion paper and pencil, you might be able to 
photocopy your own map and add it to the cheat 
sheet. In any case, you should make sure that the 
map you'll give to the players does not include 
any secrets or other pieces of sensitive 
information.
Once the cheat sheet is complete, you should 
make copies for each of your players. While 
you're at it, make a nice pile of extras -- as soon 
as word gets out about your incredibly well 
conceived campaign, lots of latecomers will want 
to join in. You'll find a copy of my own cheat 
sheet on the following pages.
The Character Creation 
Session
Once your cheat sheet is finished, it's finally time 
to assemble all your players and ask them to 
create their characters. If at all possible, you 
should always ask the players to create all their 
characters together as a group -- unless you are 
particularly pressed for time, frown on the idea of
the players arriving at the session with their 
characters already created. In this way, you can 
guarantee that the players have an opportunity to 
review your cheat sheet before they get started. 
This method also allows the players to consult 
with each other, allowing them to assemble a 
better balance of character classes and races.
If at all possible, try to conduct the character 
creation activities immediately prior to an actual 
game session. Some DMs like to hold a special 
session solely devoted to character creation, but I 
like to make sure the game gets started 
immediately. I think it's important to give the 
players a taste of the adventure as soon as 
possible in order to keep their interest high. I've 
seen far too many DMs go the other route and 
never get the actual game off the ground due to 
boredom and logistics. Over the years, I've 
learned that the sooner you begin playing, the 
more likely you are to keep playing.
Once your players have cranked through all the 
various dice rolls and decisions discussed in the 
Player's Handbook, your final step before 
beginning play is to give each character a careful 
once over. Here you want to make sure that you're
completely comfortable with every aspect of the 
character. Pay particular attention to the class and 
race chosen, as well as the character's spells and 
equipment. Did the player purchase an item that 
isn't really appropriate to your campaign? Does 
the character have spells you're not comfortable 
with? If so, here's your chance to demand a 
change with a minimum of fuss. Also, you should
use this opportunity to make sure that the players 
have selected a healthy mix of character classes. 
If there isn't at least one cleric, one wizard, and a 
couple of fighters present, you might suggest the 
players shuffle things around a bit. Such a mix 
will definitely improve the players' chances and 
make a "false start," in which the entire party is 
quickly wiped out, far less likely.
Aris Player's Guide (the "Cheat
Sheet")
Although the world of Aris is covered with trees, 
it's simpler to indicate only those forests that are 
pertinent to the campaign. The DM should always
keep a simple terrain map handy. This map was 
created in only two hours using Photoshop 4.0. 
Aris is a lush world that is almost entirely 
blanketed in trees of almost all descriptions: tall 
redwoods, majestic conifers, dense oaks, and lush
palms. Because there is so little arable farmland, 
food can get quite scarce; a number of political 
factions square off to gain control of the all-
important trails that cut through the planet's thick 
forests.
Another characteristic that makes Aris unique is 
the fact that most of its inhabitants are certain that
the planet itself is alive. Legends speak of living 
forests capable of forming and obliterating new 
pathways at will, and strange sentinel spirits that 
occasionally rise up to defend the forests against 
incursion. Aris herself is the only major goddess 
worshiped across the planet.
Character Choices
Most of the options presented in the Player's 
Handbook are open to PCs:
• Fighter
Fighters come from all walks of life on 
Aris: ex-soldiers, jungle barbarians, 
adventurers and just about anything else 
you can imagine.
• Ranger
Rangers on Aris are fighters who feel a 
strange sort of mystical bond with the 
planet-goddess; in many ways, the rangers
are special defenders chosen by the planet 
itself. Although they aren't really 
organized in any fashion, rangers always 
seem to recognize each other by sight 
(even if they've never met before) and 
don't often refuse a request for assistance 
that comes from another ranger.
• Mage
Magic users of all types (including 
illusionists and other specialists) can be 
found scattered across all of Aris, though 
in most areas they are either so rare or so 
low profile that some of the planet's 
residents occasionally doubt whether 
wizards exist. Sorcery is an ancient and 
elusive art on Aris, and no worldly 
creature has ever penetrated enough of its 
secrets to understand its real origins.
• Cleric
For now, all player character clerics on 
Aris belong to one of two societies: the 
Children or the Legion. Both societies 
worship the planet as their only goddess. 
The Children are made up of good- and 
neutral-aligned clerics who operate most 
of the temples in most civilized regions of
the world and worship the planet's bounty.
The Legion is composed of evil clerics 
who worship the destructive aspect of the 
planet's nature. Because it operates like a 
secret society, relatively few of Aris's 
inhabitants are aware that the Legion 
exists.
Services and Tenets of the Children: The 
Children hold special religious services in 
honor of the nature goddess during each 
change of seasons; the clerics of the order 
spend the rest of their time studying, 
adventuring, trying to aid members of the 
flock, and spreading the reverence of the 
goddess. The services consist of lengthy 
festivals and banquets attended by most 
residents of the campaign area and are 
designed to celebrate the goddess and her 
bounty. 
The members of the Children believe that 
the goddess's bounty is a manifestation of 
the good or evil of the world's inhabitants.
So long as the flock continues to do good 
deeds, the goddess will deliver a bountiful
harvest, the weather will be mild, and her 
people will enjoy long, peaceful lives. 
They also believe that owls are sacred; the
owls are the "eyes" the goddess uses to 
monitor her flock. Clerics of the Children 
are required to spend one week of each 
season alone in the wilderness.
Services and Tenets of the Evil Order: The
Legion also holds services during the 
change of seasons; its clerics spend the 
rest of their time trying to attract and 
corrupt new followers. The Legion's 
services consist of human sacrifices, fires,
and other acts of destruction.
The clerics of the Legion believe that the 
Children have blinded themselves to the 
goddess's true nature. Power and 
understanding, they believe, always stem 
from suffering and an acceptance of 
nature's destructive capacity. Clerics of 
the Legion are required to kill one 
innocent per quarter (every three months) 
to reaffirm their faith.
• Druid
Druids on Aris are special priests who 
devote most of their time and energies to 
exploring and protecting the planet's 
forests. Like rangers, they have some sort 
of strange mystical bond with the world 
itself. Unlike rangers, they have organized
themselves into a strict hierarchy as 
described in the Player's Handbook.
Services and Tenets of the Druidic Order: 
The druidic order holds a service on the 
night of every full moon, consisting of 
chanting and a reading of litanies. The 
druids believe that the goddess's only 
daughter (the planet's single moon) will 
one day take her mother's place in the 
cosmos; life will eventually die out on the 
main planet and spring up on the moon. 
The druids are required to abide by all the 
restrictions of the druid class listed in the 
Player's Handbook.
• Thief, Bard
Like fighters, thieves and bards on Aris 
come from all walks of life: cutpurses, 
rogue adventurers, wily traders, and 
troubadours.
Local Geography
The campaign is set in Ironoak, a stronghold that 
lies on the fringes of the kingdom of Umbria. 
Umbria is a noble monarchy surrounded by an 
uncivilized wilderness that is inhabited by several
malevolent tribes of humanoids. One of the 
kingdom's many claims to fame is the fact that its 
rulers always abdicate on their 40th birthday and 
venture alone into the forest, never to be seen 
again. No one knows why they do this or where 
they go.
Built within and atop a cluster of tall trees, 
Ironoak is ruled by man named Richard, the 
rightful Warden appointed by the king of Umbria.
His main responsibility is to protect the kingdom 
against humanoid incursions that might arise in 
the adjoining cluster of wilderness known as The 
Black Wood.
A few points of interest are noted below.
• The Wandering Wood
A small subforest located just outside of 
Ironoak, the paths through the Wandering 
Wood seem to mysteriously shift and 
flow. Unskilled travelers often find it 
impossible to navigate the area effectively.
• The Webbed Wood
This small cluster of tall oaks is 
honeycombed by thick spider webs, 
causing all but the most intrepid travelers 
to avoid it.
• The High Mountains
This rocky, tree-covered mountain range 
forms Umbria's western border in this 
region.
• Redheath
Redheath is the town that stands closest to
the Ironoak stronghold. It currently boasts
approximately 1,100 residents and stands 
as a major waypoint along all the 
merchant trails leading through south 
Umbria.
• Rotwood
The Rotwood is a cluster of dead and 
fallen trees inhabited by all manner of 
strange creatures.
• Poisonwood
The trees in this sector of the forest 
occasionally drip a deadly poison from 
their leaves down onto the heads of 
interlopers. Although most of the poison 
trees in the region seem clustered in this 
area, there are a few scattered at random 
throughout several of the neighboring 
forests, making it dangerous to travel 
through certain areas without an 
experienced guide.
• The Scar
The Scar is a rocky, desolate rift that lies 
just inside of the Black Wood. It's one of 
the few areas on Aris that is not blanketed 
by trees. Local legend has it that some sort
of cataclysm formed the scar and killed all
the trees in the area several centuries ago.
18
Tools
Those of you who have followed this column 
over the past year and a half are now ready to roll
the dice. All preparations are complete, and it's 
time to start playing. Before you can expect your 
diplomas, though, there's the small matter of the 
final exam. You won't know for certain whether 
you have what it takes to DM unless and until 
you make your way through the first game 
session. I'm saving the pointers on how to run a 
session for next month. Before we consider them,
it's worth taking some time to survey the various 
tools that are necessary to play the AD&D game. 
Having an ideal collection of books, dice and 
supplies on hand is one of the most effective steps
you can take to ensure a smooth game session.
The notes that follow are my personal opinions. 
Of course, everything that appears in 
"Dungeoncraft" is my opinion, but in this case it's
worth noting. The true masters of Dungeoncraft 
are more likely to disagree on this subject than 
any other. Every DM plays differently, and what 
is an absolutely essential tool to some is an 
unseemly distraction to others. So as usual, treat 
my ramblings as food for thought; use the advice 
you like and ignore the advice you don't like. If 
you've never DMed before and don't have an 
opinion of your own, try it my way, discover what
works and doesn't work for you, and then write 
me a letter later to tell me why I was wrong.
There's one other point worth mentioning before I
get started. If you plan to do some serious 
Dungeon Mastering, a trip to your local office 
superstore is in order. These outlets (such as 
Office Max, Office Depot, or Staples) carry an 
indescribable array of papers, organizers, and 
gadgets that you're likely to find useful. My own 
tactic is to browse my local superstore from end 
to end and allow inspiration to strike. Over the 
years, I've unearthed an incredible collection of 
special graph papers, whiteboards, cork boards, 
and drawing templates that I've found invaluable.
With that out of the way, here are my thoughts on 
the specific tools you might have on hand before 
sitting down to a game of AD&D.
1. DM's Screen
A DM's screen of some sort is an absolute 
necessity. Although I recommend the official 
"store bought" screen, it's easy enough to 
improvise your own if you'd rather spend your 
gaming dollars elsewhere. The main purpose of 
the DM's Screen, of course, is to give you some 
place to set your various notes and maps without 
exposing them to the players. Trying to run a 
session without a DM's Screen is likely to force 
you into some uncomfortable contortions and 
slow play -- you won't be able to keep your 
materials spread out for easy access, and you'll 
find yourself constantly shuffling through papers. 
In fact, if you have the space on your gaming 
table, I recommend setting up two adjoining 
screens for even more secret space. This 
configuration lets you simultaneously lay out all 
your materials and keep a rulebook open to an 
important page, while still leaving plenty of dice-
rolling space.
As you get more and more sessions under your 
belt, you should strive to evolve your DM's 
Screen to make it as useful as possible. Do you 
have a consistent problem recalling a certain rule?
Scribble a note to yourself and paperclip it to the 
inside of your screen. Is your next adventure 
likely to place the players in situations requiring 
special rules or charts (such as underwater 
combat or extraplanar spell casting)? Photocopy 
the appropriate materials and clip them to the 
inside of your screen. Similarly, when I'm 
running a store-bought or prepared adventure, I 
almost always photocopy short sections of the 
text and clip them to my screen for reference. If I 
were running "The Scar" (my adventure from 
Dungeon Adventures #80), for example, I'd copy 
the random encounter charts and the sections 
about sneaking around the complex.
Somewhat related to the DM's Screen is the 
notion of a Player's Screen. Some players like to 
set up their own secret areas, and TSR even 
produced an official line of Player's Screens a few
years ago. Under all but the most extraordinary 
circumstances, I ban these distractions from the 
table. Not only do they take up too much space, 
but I find that most groups find one or more 
players maintaining obvious piles of secret notes 
distracting. Most players with such an interest are
really just frustrated DMs anyway and would be 
much better off running their own campaigns.
2. Adventure Notes
Some set of papers describing the adventure you 
are running is another obvious necessity. Unless 
you are one of the best eight or ten DMs ever to 
grace the gaming tables, don't even think about 
running a game without a prepared description of 
the adventure you are undertaking. A lack of 
preparation vastly increases the odds that the 
whole session will collapse into boredom. Sure, 
you can't possibly cover every contingency in 
your notes, but a good starting point and a 
foundation are necessities.
Adventure notes break down into two obvious 
categories: those you purchase and those you 
create yourself. The former category is pretty 
straightforward--you're planning to use whatever 
the designers give you. (Most store-bought 
adventures are quite well organized.) When using 
a store-bought adventure, I always take the time 
to photocopy any important charts or maps that 
appear in the text. That way, I can refer to these 
important materials while keeping the main 
booklet open to the section describing the players'
current activities.
Notes you prepare yourself are another matter 
altogether. Everyone has his own favorite format, 
but I prefer to scrawl my notes on carefully 
numbered loose-leaf paper and keep them in three
ring binders. This method allows me to separate 
the pages so I can refer to several of them 
simultaneously when necessary. In fact, I've 
grown so fond of this system that I'll sometimes 
photocopy smaller store-bought adventures onto 
individual sheets so I can use them in the same 
way. 
3. Rulebooks
You can't really play the AD&D game without a 
copy of the rulebooks on hand for reference. One 
of your goals as DM is to minimize the rules 
look-ups during play, but a certain amount of 
page turning is just unavoidable. Always make 
sure you have your own copies of the Player's 
Handbook and Dungeon Master Guide on hand, 
as well as the complete descriptions for any 
monsters that might turn up during the evening's 
adventuring -- not to mention any subsidiary 
rulebooks you're using (such as the various 
Complete Handbooks). If one or more monsters 
are likely to turn up in the current adventure, try 
copying their vital stats onto 3-by-5 index cards 
before play begins. That way, you can quickly 
pull out the cards during play and won't need to 
flip through various rulebooks and magazines.
I use a couple of other special regulations 
regarding rulebooks. First, I don't allow the 
players to refer to anything but the Player's 
Handbook (and the appropriate Complete 
Handbook) during play. This prevents the players 
from consulting monster statistics during a battle 
or referring to the lists of standard magical items 
when trying to make guesses about newly 
acquired items. In fact, I strongly discourage the 
players from bringing copies of the Dungeon 
Master Guide or other banned books to the 
session to save space at the gaming table.
Further, I require players with spellcaster 
characters to keep the appropriate spell 
descriptions handy during play. If I have a 
question about a particular spell cast by a player, I
expect that player to have the answer on hand. 
(What's the range on that sleep spell? What's the 
duration of invisibility 10' radius?) This prevents 
me from spending a lot of time flipping through 
the rules myself, and it usually gives me an 
opportunity to keep play moving by conducting 
some other action while the player seeks the 
answer.
4. Character Sheets
While a blank piece of paper can certainly serve 
as an effective character sheet, I prefer to provide 
more formal sheets and mandate their use. I go so
far as to require the players to fill out the entire 
sheet before play. That way, I can guarantee that 
the players are fully prepared and have pre-
calculated their THAC0s, saving throws, and 
various other details. Stopping for a player to 
look up these numbers during the game is only 
going to consume valuable time and cut into 
everybody's fun.
Of course, it's possible to take this philosophy too
far. Some of the character sheets I've seen (like 
those for the 1st edition produced about fifteen 
years ago) practically require the players to write 
entire books about their characters. The key is to 
find a sheet that requires a minimum of fuss but 
still includes all the important details. The official
sheets now sold by Wizards of the Coast are quite
good. You can also find some decent character 
sheets floating around various Internet sites, or 
you can sit down and draw up your own. I 
recommend this last course only if you expect 
your campaign to have some unusual needs. As 
DM, you already have plenty of work to do -- if 
you can't find anything else, investing a few 
bucks in the official sheets is almost always 
worth it.
5. Dice
Dice are an obvious requirement for playing the 
AD&D game, though there are a couple of points 
that are worth mentioning. Don't buy cheap dice 
made of soft plastic -- the high impact 
polyhedrons aren't much more expensive and one 
decent set will last you forever. The softies tend 
to wear out after a few months. Also, make sure 
you and your players have enough dice for 
everybody. Generally, at a minimum this means a 
full set for the DM, a full set for the players as a 
whole, and a separate d20 for each individual 
player. Sharing a single d20 among all the players
tends to waste a lot of time and slow down 
combat. It's also a good idea to ask the players to 
keep the dice they are using close to themselves 
and away from the center of the game table. 
Allowing the dice to clutter up the middle of the 
table not only makes it easy for players to lose 
dice they personally own, but it can make specific
dice difficult to find when needed.
While it's important to make sure you have 
enough dice on hand, it's also important not to 
clutter up the playing area with unneeded dice. 
For some reason, there are some DMs who like to
travel around with huge bags full of the things. 
I've never understood this impulse. As DM, you 
already have enough things to carry, and a huge 
mess of dice is just going to get in your way.
6. Miniatures
Miniatures constitute one of the great 
controversies among DMs. Some wouldn't think 
of playing without them; others find them 
distracting and limiting. Personally, I think they 
add a great deal to play, and I encourage you to 
use them every chance you get. That said, there 
are some obvious drawbacks that prevent many 
DMs from adopting them. 
If you've ever been in a game store, I don't need 
to tell you that miniatures are expensive. A good 
starting set can easily run a couple hundred 
dollars or more. Even after you shell out the cash,
you have to find the time to paint the things. The 
last seventeen columns have probably already 
clued you into the fact that, as DM, you already 
have an awful lot of work to do.
Of course, buying and painting miniatures is an 
enjoyable end unto itself. There's a real 
satisfaction in capturing just the right expression 
on that goblin's face or correctly painting chain 
mail for the first time. Plus, a good collection of 
painted miniatures is a nice trophy you can use to 
decorate your game room.
If you're thinking about using miniatures in your 
games but have yet to make up your mind, here's 
a recommendation. Never buy more than one or 
two figures at a time, and buy new figures only 
when you've finished painting the last ones. That 
way, if you discover that you don't really have the
time or the patience to invest in a collection, 
you'll minimize your investment and won't end up
with an enormous pile of unpainted lead.
7. Battle Maps
Some DMs like to run their combats entirely in 
the imaginations of the players, taking time each 
round to describe the relative positions of the 
various combatants and the surrounding scenery. I
prefer to use tokens, markers, or miniatures as a 
visual aid to depict the action. I find that such a 
scheme not only saves me time but also 
encourages the players to be a bit more creative 
when describing their actions. Showing a player a
battle map roughly depicting the scenery inside 
the dungeon is a great way to encourage him to 
try an interesting maneuver like yanking a 
tapestry off a wall down onto the head of his 
opponent. Another benefit of using a battle map is
that you'll find it much easier to adjudicate the 
range and effect areas of spells, breath weapons, 
and so forth.
If you're on a tight budget, a pad of paper and a 
pencil can serve as an effective map. Whenever 
you start a combat, sketch out a little map of the 
battleground and place each character's initials on
the map to indicate his or her position. As the 
combatants move, just erase and redraw the 
initials.
If you've got a little money to spend, an even 
better method is to purchase a small whiteboard 
(say 2 feet by 3 feet) and a set of dry erase 
markers from your neighborhood office supply 
store. Place the whiteboard in the middle of the 
gaming table and quickly sketch out the 
surroundings whenever a combat begins. You can 
use improvised tokens or miniature figures 
directly on the board to represent the various 
combatants or draw in initials as I recommended 
above.
8. Notepads
I always make sure to have two small notepads on
hand when running a session. I keep one and 
place the other outside of my DM screen in front 
of the players. The purpose of the notepads is to 
allow specific players and myself to exchange 
secret communications. 
Suppose, for instance, that the players are 
exploring a forest, they've sent their thief up 
ahead as a scout, and he's just stumbled across 
something interesting. For now, I might simply 
pass that player a note describing what he sees 
instead of blurting out the description to the 
whole party. After all, if the thief just discovered 
something dangerous, the rest of the party 
shouldn't know anything about it unless the thief 
is close enough to shout a warning. 
Similarly, if the thief just discovered some 
treasure, he might want to help himself to some 
of the choice pieces before he reveals the rest of 
the treasure to his friends.
9. Props
I'm a big fan of using relevant props during play, 
particularly little handouts approximating scrolls, 
notes and other important clues uncovered by the 
players. I think that props give the DM an 
excellent method of subtly communicating 
important information to the players and therefore
lead to much more interesting puzzles (for a more
complete discussion of puzzles, see issue #271). 
Suppose, for instance, that the players are 
searching a duke's private papers and they find a 
note the duke received from his lord ordering him
to launch a treacherous attack on a nearby town. 
The fact that a couple of specific words in the 
letter are misspelled might be a clue meant to 
convince the players that the note was a forgery. 
Perhaps the players have already seen another 
note undeniably written by the king's mischievous
brother in which those same two words were 
misspelled. How can you pass the players these 
clues without providing them with facsimiles of 
the notes in question? After all, simply 
announcing that "You find a note in which two 
words are misspelled" immediately calls attention
to the ruse and spoils the whole thing. This is a 
great example of the sort of puzzle you should 
strive to create, and you should try to use such 
props and facsimiles whenever you can.
On the other hand, I'm not a big fan of using 
props that don't really advance the adventure or 
provide the players with important information. 
I've known DMs and players who like to bring 
toy daggers, cheap jewelry, or even entire 
costumes to game sessions to help them "get into 
character." Personally, I find those sorts of things 
a little spooky, but if you find that they add to 
your fun, more power to you.
That wraps up another installment. Next month, 
as promised, I'll provide some tips for running 
your first session.
19
Action and Reaction
Traditionally, the best way to learn how to DM is 
to play in a few games run by a veteran Dungeon 
Master. In many ways, the fine art of 
Dungeoncraft is a grand oral tradition passed 
from DM to DM that stretches all the way back to
Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson. If it works, the 
following advice will help you get up and running
even if you don't have access to a veteran. 
Action and Reaction
The AD&D® game is one of action and reaction. 
As the DM, you begin the session by describing a
scene or situation. The players react by describing
the actions they wish to take. You react to their 
descriptions by deciding and announcing the 
outcomes of those actions. The players then react 
to the outcomes with new actions, and you react 
with still more outcomes. This process continues 
through the session and the entire campaign. The 
best way to illustrate is through the simple 
example in the box below:
Even this simple example reveals that the lion's 
share of DMing boils down to a trio of basic 
skills: 
• Providing effective descriptions.
• Determining how to resolve the outcomes 
of the characters' actions.
• Deciding when you should automatically 
reveal information and when you should 
force the players to specifically ask for 
information.
Providing Effective 
Descriptions
The first skill, providing effective descriptions, is 
by far the easiest to master. You've probably 
practiced it all your life. Giving accurate and 
interesting descriptions is an important part of the
DM's job for a number of reasons, most of them 
obvious. If you can't effectively describe the 
rooms the heroes explore or the characters they 
meet, you'll only confuse the players and make it 
difficult for them to formulate actions in response
to your situations. Neglecting to mention that 
open window on the north wall when the players 
are trapped in a burning inn, for example, might 
ruin your entire game. Similarly, droning on and 
on with boring descriptions of scenery is likely to 
put your players to sleep before the action even 
starts.
Although advice on improving your ability to 
provide descriptions is really the province of an 
English class, here are a few quick tips before 
moving on. First, if you're not completely 
comfortable inventing your own descriptions, 
stick with published adventures like those found 
in DUNGEON® Adventures. These offerings 
almost always include notes that help you 
describe the action and sometimes go so far as to 
provide complete, "ready to read" descriptions 
(usually boxed and shaded text). Although you'll 
still bear the brunt of the work, you're sure to find
a good starting point incredibly helpful. After you
get a couple of sessions under your belt, you'll 
almost certainly find yourself growing more and 
more comfortable with the notion of improvising 
your own descriptions. A simple tactic you can 
glean from the best published adventures is the 
idea of incorporating all of the heroes' senses into
the descriptions that you create. Don't just tell the 
players what they see in the dungeon; tell them 
what they hear and even what they smell when 
appropriate. Done effectively, this will take some 
of the pressure off your shoulders by making your
environment seem more real, allowing the 
players' own imaginations to fill any gaps or 
accidental omissions.
Also, never allow yourself to feel rushed while 
conducting a game session. If you're not sure 
what should happen next or how best to describe 
it, don't be afraid to pause for a few moments to 
think before you start talking. Your players 
certainly won't hold it against you, and, under 
most circumstances, the brief pause only adds 
another layer of suspense to the proceedings. 
Some beginning DMs tend to get nervous or 
"freeze up." Just remember, this is only a game. 
Nobody's grading you, and the very worst thing 
that can happen is that you and your friends will 
decide to let someone else DM for a while.
Resolving Actions
The second skill, resolving the players' actions, is 
a little more difficult to master, but it's still pretty 
straightforward. What makes this skill relatively 
easy to develop is a pair of powerful weapons that
are at your disposal: the AD&D game rules and 
simple common sense.
Instructions for resolving many of the most 
common actions the players are bound to throw 
your way appear in the Player's Handbook and 
the DUNGEON MASTER Guide. The rules tell 
you how to resolve armed attacks and attempts to 
cast spells, to turn undead, to find secret doors, 
and so on. The rules also tell you how to resolve 
many of the consequences that might arise from a
character's actions. A thief who fails to climb a 
wall falls. The rules tell you just how much the 
fall hurts the thief.
It is precisely because the rules are so helpful in 
resolving actions that a good working knowledge 
of the rules is a minimum requirement for any 
DM. Generally, each of the game rules exists 
because the specific situation it handles is 
particularly hard to resolve credibly without 
assistance. Take the earlier example of the thief 
falling off the wall. Does she die from the fall? 
Break a leg? Survive completely unscathed? Any 
ruling you might make based solely upon your 
own whim is bound to seem totally arbitrary to 
the players, risking your credibility. An arbitrary 
decision here or there is relatively easy to accept, 
but long strings of arbitrary decisions tend to 
make the players start to doubt the impact of their
own actions. After a while, they'll find it hard to 
make intelligent decisions because they have no 
idea how you'll rule. 
Using the rules whenever possible makes it easy 
to make some tough calls because the rules leave 
little for you to decide. The rules also provide a 
reliable mechanism by which the players can 
predict the outcome of some simple actions while
still leaving a great deal to chance. It's this fact 
that allows the players to make informed, 
intelligent decisions. A party of 3rd-level 
adventurers usually knows that they shouldn't 
mess with an ancient red dragon because even a 
cursory knowledge of the game rules reveals that 
the dragon will soon be picking bits of adventurer
out of its teeth. Without consistent rules, there 
would be no way for the players to decide when a
monster is worth fighting.
For all of these reasons, to be a good DM you 
must know as much about the game rules as 
possible. If you're not aware of some rules (and 
there are an awful lot to digest), you might find 
yourself making arbitrary decisions when it isn't 
really necessary. Making matters a bit more 
complicated is the fact that simply knowing the 
rules is sometimes not enough. Under some 
circumstances, you have to understand the intent 
of the rules to wield them capably. A perfect 
example might be the rules for saving throws; 
their true potential is often overlooked. The 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide tells us that a 
saving throw vs. paralyzation, poison, or death 
magic might be used to represent an extreme test 
of a character's physical fortitude or willpower. 
Suppose the prototypical damsel in distress is 
trapped in a burning tower and one of the PCs 
decides to run in after her. Does the attempt 
succeed? If you hadn't carefully read the 
DUNGEON MASTER Guide you might be 
forced to make an arbitrary decision even though 
this is an ideal opportunity to simply call for a 
saving throw vs. paralyzation or death magic. If 
the saving throw is successful, the character 
rescues the damsel. If the saving throw is 
unsuccessful, the character is forced out of the 
building before he can rescue her. Of course, the 
fact that the rules are useful doesn't mean that you
should become a slave to them. It's often more 
important to keep the game moving than to make 
sure you're following each rule strictly. This 
advice probably makes it sound like it's going to 
be difficult to determine when you should 
carefully follow the rules and when you should 
just "wing it," but you're likely to find that such 
decisions are surprisingly intuitive during play. 
You'll quickly develop a feel for which rules seem
too complex for your group and which seem 
relatively digestible. 
When it comes to resolving those actions that are 
not covered by the rules, common sense is your 
most useful ally. Once play begins, your players 
are going to throw all sorts of unexpected actions 
at you, and many won't be explicitly covered by 
the rules. It's at this point that you're forced to 
become both judge and jury. Do the actions seem 
plausible? What is their likely outcome? Suppose,
for example, that the adventurers are trapped high
up in a wizard's tower. To escape, they've decided
to rip some bed sheets into strips so they can tie 
the strips together and fashion a crude rope. How 
long do you think it might take to fashion the 
rope and scale down? Unfortunately, the rules are 
of little use here.
The best way to beef up your ability to make this 
type of decision is to watch a lot of adventure 
movies and read a lot of fantasy novels. The last 
example illustrates an important point. You 
should never lose sight of the fact that the events 
that take place in your AD&D games are not 
supposed to reflect our own reality, but a world of
grand adventure. In the real world it might be 
difficult and time consuming to shred bed linen 
into a useful rope. In movies and fantasy stories, 
though, the heroes do this sort of thing all the 
time. As a consequence, the tactic should work 
perfectly well in your games. The more stories 
you read and absorb, the better the feel you'll 
develop for handling these situations. Fortunately,
few DMs have to be specially motivated to read 
fantasy stories and watch adventure films. If 
you're interested in the AD&D game, the odds are
good that you're also interested in the stories that 
inspired it.
Revealing Information
The third and most difficult skill to develop is a 
good feel for when and how you should reveal 
information. Suppose that the adventurers hear a 
cry of distress coming from around the corner, 
deep in a dungeon. When you describe the cry, 
should you reveal that the voice sounds like that 
of the damsel the adventurers rescued from the 
burning tower a couple of sessions ago, or should 
you reveal that information only if one of the 
players specifically asks if the voice sounds 
familiar? Unfortunately, there's no easy answer to
this dilemma.
These situations generally reduce down to a 
trade-off between revealing lots of information to 
keep the game moving and revealing only a little 
information to force the players to make more 
decisions and ask for more clarifications. Expert 
DMs tend to use the amount of information they 
reveal at any given time to pace their adventures 
in the same way that great movie directors control
the pacing of their films. Consider a simple 
example: The adventurers have just entered an 
unpopulated dungeon chamber filled with various
bits of broken furniture. Beneath an old shattered 
bed is a small sack containing 10 gold pieces. 
There are several ways you might describe this 
scene, each revealing various bits of information.
• Method One
You enter a small chamber filled with 
broken bits of old furniture. From the 
doorway you can see what appears to be a 
small sack resting beneath an old 
shattered bed.
In this case, you're revealing everything. 
To get the gold, the players simply 
announce their intention to grab the sack.
• Method Two
You enter a small chamber filled with 
broken bits of old furniture.
Here, the gold is now one step removed. 
To find it, the players must announce a 
specific intent to search the broken 
furniture.
• Method Three
You enter a small chamber. Inside is an 
old smashed chair, two badly broken 
tables, and the remains of shattered bed.
This method makes the gold even harder 
to find. Simply searching the furniture 
isn't really possible. To find the gold, the 
players must announce a specific intent to 
search beneath the shattered bed.
Which approach is best depends upon the 
situation. If this isn't an important encounter, and 
you want the game to move quickly past it, you 
might select the first or second approach. If this is
a crucial encounter, though, you might opt for the
third approach to slow things down a bit and 
emphasize the action. Notice how the amount of 
information you supply in your descriptions 
dictates the amount of detail the players are 
forced to supply in return. Unfortunately, the only
reliable method of gaining a feel for which 
approach is appropriate at what times is to earn it 
through hard experience.
In addition to slowing down play, another reason 
why you might sometimes opt to reveal less 
information is to challenge the players to make 
decisions, take actions, or draw conclusions. 
Suppose a dusty room in your dungeon houses a 
giant spider living in a camouflaged web that 
stretches across the ceiling. Instead of 
immediately describing the web, you might 
describe a set of dusty footprints that lead into the
middle of the room and suddenly stop. It's now up
to the players to recognize that something must 
have dropped down to kill the owner of those 
footprints in the room's midst, prompting them to 
specifically examine the ceiling and find the 
hidden web. If the players don't grasp the 
significance of the disappearing footprints and 
simply blunder into the room, you might rule that 
the spider takes them by surprise, putting them in 
a bit of a pickle. This is a great example of the 
sort of "puzzle" you should try to incorporate into
your games. (See Chapter 12.) Deliberately 
withholding some information is often a 
necessary component of making such puzzles 
work. 
20
Your Game's Voice
Last month, we started to examine what it takes 
to run a D&D game session and got as far as the 
three basic skills that cover the lion's share of the 
DM's responsibilities-providing effective 
descriptions, resolving actions, and deciding how 
and when to reveal information. This month, let's 
conclude the examination with looks at two new 
and equally important topics-characterization and 
time keeping.
Your Game's Voice
The DM spends the bulk of any session 
describing the action. As DM, you must describe 
locations, events, actions, and characters. 
Properly describing this last category is 
particularly challenging. Before you even begin, 
you face an important decision that's likely to set 
the tenor of your entire campaign. To describe a 
character completely, you must describe not only 
that character's physical appearance but also what
the character says and does. Sometimes, you must
even describe how the character feels. Most DMs 
convey this information in one of two ways, 
which are best illustrated by example.
Method One
DM: You see a town guardsman on the road up 
ahead. He's asking you to come over, and he 
seems friendly.
PC: All right. I approach the guardsman. What 
does he want?
DM: He asks if you've seen any suspicious 
individuals out on the road this evening. 
Apparently, a merchant caravan was waylaid a 
couple of hours ago, and he's looking for the 
perpetrator. Something about the way he's asking,
though, suggests that he's not telling you 
everything he knows about the incident.
Method Two
DM: "You see a town guardsman on the road up 
ahead." (in a booming voice, as the guard) "Hello,
my good fellow! Might I have a word with you?"
PC: (hesitant) "Hello, my friend. Is something 
wrong?"
DM: (as guardsman)"Oh, no! No, sir. I was just 
hoping to ask you and your friends here if you 
might have seen anyone...well, suspicious out on 
the road this afternoon."
PC: "Suspicious? In what way."
DM: "Hmm...I suppose you might say, well...let's 
just say suspicious."
These two opposing play styles neatly define and 
divide Dungeon Masters in the same way that 
"right handed" and "left handed" define and 
divide major league pitchers. When all else is 
equal, neither style is "correct" or superior to the 
other, but most players respond better to one style
or the other. Similarly, it's usually difficult for a 
DM inclined toward the first style to run a game 
using the second, or vice versa. Since the style 
you choose-or, perhaps, the style that chooses 
you-has a profound impact upon the sort of 
games you'll run, it's important to understand all 
of the advantages and drawbacks of each method.
Third-Person Play
The first method is usually known as third 
person, a term you might remember from English 
class. In this case, the DM and players narrate the
action in a neutral voice and refer to the various 
characters they play in the third person-just like 
Bob Dole used to refer to himself in his campaign
speeches. In other words, if you're temporarily 
taking on the role of an orc and you want to insult
one of the player heroes and threaten him with 
death, you might say, "The lead orc walks up to 
you and threatens you with death." Games run in 
a third-person style tend to place more focus on 
plot and less on characterization. In other words, 
after you've played in such a game for a while, 
you're more likely to remember the epic sagas 
that unfolded rather than the colorful characters 
that have emerged.
One of the real advantages of a third-person game
is that such a style makes it considerably easier 
for shy players to participate fully in the action. 
Some players find it difficult to get a little silly, 
and the third person allows them to maintain a 
certain comfortable distance. Third-person games
also tend to move faster than their counterparts 
because lengthy, intricate conversations are often 
summarized into a series of quick conversations. 
This is one of the characteristics of a third-person 
game that tends to result in an emphasis on plot, 
since a faster pace tends to mean that more things
can happen during each session.
One of the myths about third-person gaming is 
that such a style makes it impossible for the 
players to create interesting characters. In fact, 
the third person sometimes allows you to easily 
convey certain subtleties that are difficult to get 
across in any other way. For instance, you might 
accept an invitation to lead a war party into 
enemy territory by saying, "I'll accept the king's 
offer. As I leave his chamber, though, the look in 
my eye clearly indicates that I do not relish the 
prospect of more bloodshed." Getting this point 
across using another technique might be much 
harder. In fact, this example nicely illustrates that 
the most interesting sort of characterization that 
emerges from third-person games tends to 
illustrate the deeper psychology of the characters 
involved in place of their simple mannerisms. It's 
often a bit harder to firmly create a character in 
the imagination of the players using such a 
method, but it's certainly possible.
First-Person Play
The second method illustrated in the earlier 
examples is usually known as first person. In a 
first-person game, the DM and the players 
temporarily become the characters they are 
playing. At a minimum, this means that the 
players speak their dialogue exactly as their 
characters would say the lines. In other words, 
instead of "I walk up to the guard and ask him 
what's causing that commotion on the other side 
of town," you might say, "Friend guard! What 
exactly is causing all the unrest on the far side of 
the bridge?" In most first-person games, though, 
the players go one step further and speak in funny
voices or use other mannerisms to better convey 
their characters. A fighter might speak in bold, 
confident tones, while a wise old wizard might 
scratch his chin a lot and quietly reflect before 
speaking. In other words, the players almost go so
far as to act out their roles as though the game is a
very special sort of stage play.
The chief advantage of the first person style is 
that it allows the players to easily convey their 
characters' basic mannerisms and attitudes. 
Players who are skilled in this style can very 
quickly create an impression of their characters in
the imagination of the remaining participants, 
making it very easy for everyone to distinguish 
one character from another. Since the players who
like this sort of thing tend to ham it up a bit, 
though, first-person games almost always 
progress more slowly than their third-person 
counterparts. In fact, it's quite easy for an 
accomplished group of first-person gamers to 
spend an entire session re-enacting a suitably 
social encounter, like a grand banquet or a ball. 
Of course, such delays aren't necessarily a bad 
thing at all. Even though it's entirely possible that 
no dice will ever hit the table and little "plot" will
be resolved, these experiences can be a lot of fun,
and they tend to help the players add depth and 
interest to their characters. The fact that such 
sessions don't require a lot of preparation on the 
part of the already beleaguered DM doesn't hurt 
either!
One of the big drawbacks to the first-person 
approach is the amount of stress it places upon 
the DM. After all, it's fairly easy for each player 
to invent a character voice or an interesting 
mannerism for his or her character, but the 
Dungeon Master often takes on the roles of 
several different characters each session! To keep 
things running properly, the DM must be a 
wellspring of funny voices and unique 
characterizations. Some DMs relish this challenge
and enjoy the opportunity to grab the spotlight. 
Others quickly fall into a rut and use the same 
voices over and over again. Fortunately, most 
DMs who are drawn to the first person style are 
natural hams and it tends to take a while before 
repetition starts to become a real problem.
Again, the most important thing to understand at 
this point is that neither style is superior to the 
other. Don't try to force yourself to adopt a style 
that seems uncomfortable. Employ whatever style
comes most naturally and try to take maximum 
advantage of its strengths while playing down its 
weaknesses. If you are inclined toward third 
person, this means preparing more plot for each 
session (due to the faster pace) and giving some 
thought to the deeper psychology of your NPCs. 
If you are inclined toward first person, it means 
designing encounters with plenty of opportunities
for conversation and working out fresh voices and
mannerisms for your NPCs. 
Timing
One of your most important duties as Dungeon 
Master is keeping an accurate account of time as 
it elapses in the fictional game world. In other 
words, you should always know how long it takes
the characters in the game world to resolve the 
actions they are currently undertaking. 
Sometimes the game rules will help you calculate
these durations. The rules tell you, for instance, 
how long it takes a given character to walk from 
one end of the dungeon to another, or how long it 
takes a wizard to prepare her spells. Often, 
though, you must judge the timing of an action 
with only your common sense and real-world 
references to guide you. Suppose, for example, 
that the players decide to hire some laborers to 
dig a gold mine. How long will it take to sink the 
mine and start extracting ore? A month? A year? 
How long should it take to hunt for game or 
assemble a makeshift shelter out of tree branches?
Tracking Time
Keeping an accurate account of the passage of 
time is important for a number of reasons. 
Inaccurate timing makes it difficult to gauge your
responses to the players' actions and unfold 
whatever plots you have devised. Suppose you've 
decided that the players' stronghold has attracted 
the attention of a local burglar who plans to sneak
in on the night of the next new moon. On the 
evening in question, the players happen to be 
returning from a dungeon when they decide to 
stop on their way home to ask a local sage to 
identify some treasure. Does the thief arrive at the
stronghold before or after the players return? 
Obviously, the answer to this question will have 
an enormous impact upon how you decide to deal
with the situation. This example is rather 
simplistic to help illustrate the point, but during 
the typical game session you're bound to 
encounter this dilemma in numerous and subtler 
guises.
Accurate timing is also crucial to resolving many 
situations arising directly from the rules. Suppose
a wizard casts a sleep spell on an ogre. How 
much farther into the dungeon can the party go 
before the ogre wakes up and comes looking for 
them? Similarly, imagine an army of enemy 
soldiers advancing on the adventurers' stronghold.
How many spells can the players' wizards 
manage to prepare before the army arrives and 
the battle begins? These are crucial questions, and
you'll need to arrive at clear, consistent answers.
The good news is that keeping track of time is 
one of the DM's easier responsibilities. Try to get 
in the habit of maintaining a special scratch pad 
used just for time keeping, and make sure this pad
is always handy. I like to mark a "D" on the pad 
for each day that elapses, an "H" for each hour, a 
"T" for each ten minutes, an "M" for each minute,
and a check mark for each melee round (10 
rounds make 1 minute). In other words, if the 
adventurers make a two-day trek to the nearest 
town for supplies, I mark "DD" on my timing 
sheet. If they pause for a meal as soon as they 
enter the town, I might decide that the meal takes 
about an hour and a half and I'll mark HTTT (1 
hour and 30 minutes) on the sheet. Once I've 
marked down enough 10 minutes to equal an hour
or enough hours to equal a day, I'll cross out those
markings and replace them as appropriate. In 
other words, when I reach six Ts (for 60 minutes),
I cross them out and replace them with an H (for 
a single hour). This system allows me to quickly 
compute the current day and time in the game 
world, which in turn allows me to time my plots 
and events accurately.
Pacing
Closely related to the importance of accurate 
timekeeping is the concept of pacing. Another of 
the DM's many important responsibilities is 
keeping the events of the game moving at a brisk 
pace in order to keep the players interested. 
Getting bogged down in details or describing 
each individual tree the players pass during a long
cross-country journey is a quick route to 
boredom. We touched upon the DM's ability to 
arbitrarily speed up play in last month's 
discussion of effective descriptions. It's important
to recognize, though, that there are also situations
in which it makes sense to slow down the passage
of time to emphasize important actions. 
Fortunately, this concept is built directly into the 
D&D game rules. Under normal circumstances, 
game play proceeds in a free-form fashion, with 
the players announcing their actions somewhat 
haphazardly and the DM resolving those actions 
and passing whatever time he feels appropriate. 
Once combat starts, though, the game becomes 
more formalized, the players begin announcing 
their intentions in strict turn order, and all actions 
are restricted to durations of 6-second rounds to 
make sure that nobody accomplishes too much 
before others have an opportunity to react. In 
essence, combats take a disproportionately 
greater amount of real time to resolve than most 
other game situations, drawing additional 
attention to them and heightening the suspense 
that arises from them.
Although the D&D game calls for the use of 
formalized melee rounds and initiative scores 
only to resolve combat, you should feel free to 
employ these rules whenever you'd like to slow 
down play for effect, whether or not the players 
are embroiled in a fight. It might make sense to 
use combat rounds while the players cross a 
rickety bridge suspended high over a valley. 
Asking each player to take formal turns 
describing his actions as he crosses the bridge not
only increases the drama of the encounter but also
helps you decide who has an opportunity to react 
should someone stumble.
That wraps up another installment. Next month, 
try the "Dungeoncraft" Pop Quiz to see what 
you've learned so far. Time to pull out your back 
issues and start brushing up!
21
I've Got a Secret, Part I
The Second Rule of Dungeoncraft:
Whenever you fill in a major piece of the 
campaign world, always devise at least one 
secret related to that piece.
Ever since I introduced the Second Rule of 
Dungeoncraft way back in Chapter 2, I've tried to 
stress the importance of keeping good secrets. It's
difficult to imagine a successful D&D campaign 
without a whole web of interesting secrets at its 
heart. In most cases, a good campaign is like a 
good soap opera -- it's the twists, turns, and 
unexpected revelations that keep the audience 
interested. Giving your players the opportunity to 
unravel big mysteries can give them a real sense 
of accomplishment, while simultaneously adding 
a lot of personality and depth to your campaign 
world.
Sadly, creating really interesting secrets can be 
tricky. I receive a lot of requests for tips on 
creating and using secrets in the fan mail I read 
each month. Unfortunately, creating appropriate 
secrets is a lot like swimming or riding a bike -- 
written instructions aren't very useful; you have 
to learn by watching and doing.
After giving this topic some thought, I decided 
that the best way I can help is to present a bunch 
of sample secrets. Although it should be easy to 
fit the rough templates I'll provide directly into 
most campaigns, my real hope is that exposure to 
enough of these ideas will get your own creative 
juices flowing. Along the way, I'll briefly discuss 
the ideas I present and include a few notes on 
how such a secret might affect the campaign.
One general piece of advice to consider when 
creating secrets is to strive for the truly 
outrageous. In most cases, the more shocking the 
secret, the more effective it will prove in play. A 
tactic I sometimes employ is to introduce a fact or
situation that seems impossible, then allow the 
players to uncover the information necessary to 
explain it. After the second or third time the 
players get to the bottom of such a mystery, you'll
usually find that you've nicely peaked their sense 
of anticipation, insuring their interest in the game.
(What's going to happen next, and how is he 
going to explain it this time?)
I've divided my examples into five simple 
categories: historical secrets, character secrets, 
divine secrets, geographical secrets, and just plain
weird secrets. The first two kinds are covered this
month.
Historical Secrets
Shocking revelations about the hidden past of 
your campaign world can provide plenty of 
entertaining opportunities. Generally, this sort of 
secret not only gives your players something 
interesting to explore, it also conveniently fleshes
out the history of your game world and provides 
springboards for several interesting adventures to 
come. The very best historical secrets give your 
players an opportunity to directly interact with the
most important events that shaped the history of 
the game world, allowing them to feel like an 
important part of that history themselves.
Historical secrets can also serve as a great way to 
introduce exposition about the politics of your 
campaign. Uncovering the hidden truths that lie 
behind the alliance of two great kingdoms, for 
instance, should give the players interesting 
insights into how they might break that alliance.
1. Return of the Long-Dead Hero
Perhaps one of the long-dead heroes of your 
game world isn't really dead after all. Since this 
sort of secret is an obvious staple of comic books 
and soap operas, it needs to be well executed in 
order to be effective and interesting. A great deal 
rests on the quality of the explanation -- how or 
why did the "dead" hero survive? Come up with a
detailed or novel answer and you've just created a
powerful secret.
My version might go something like this: I'll 
invent a famous king who waged war across an 
entire continent in order to unite all its peoples 
under a single benevolent rule. Ironically, it is 
believed that the king was killed by the last arrow
shot during the final battle of the great campaign, 
just over thirty years ago. In truth, the king wasn't
killed. After winning the final battle, he 
abandoned his armies and was never seen again. 
Confused by the king's sudden absence and 
fearful that their newly forged coalition would 
crumble in its wake, the king's advisors invented 
the story of his death and set about forging the 
new, united nation.
In reality, the king was concerned that his 
remarkable achievements were making him 
particularly susceptible to the dangerous sin of 
pride. In the end, he decided that taking up the 
throne after all his great military victories would 
constitute too many accomplishments for any one
man. In order to "put himself back in his proper 
place," he resolved to abandon his armies shortly 
after his final victory and spend the rest of his life
living as a humble beggar in his former capital 
city.
This secret might set you up for a series of 
adventures in which the players first discover that
the king is still alive, then discover the king's 
whereabouts, and finally attempt to convince the 
king to return to his armies and lead them against 
a menace threatening the kingdom he created.
2. A Secret Debt to Evil
This is a secret about a powerful and prosperous 
nation that overcame great odds to defeat a 
malevolent rival almost a century earlier. 
Unknown to just about everyone, the triumph 
came at a great price. During the final battle 
against their rivals, the rulers of the prosperous 
nation found themselves in desperate 
circumstances, and they were forced to employ 
the aid of a powerful demon to insure victory. In 
return for its services, the demon is entitled to the 
first daughter born to the ruling family every 
second generation. For the past one hundred 
years, the ruling family has secretly paid this 
price, each time carefully inventing a cover story 
to explain away the sudden death or 
disappearance of the princess.
During the campaign, the players might get their 
first inkling of this secret when they notice a 
strange outbreak of evil across the countryside. 
Eventually, they'll uncover the truth about the 
ruling family and the source of the evil outbreak 
-- the current king is refusing to turn his daughter 
over to the demon, prompting the infernal 
creature to take revenge. In the end, of course, it's
likely that the players will discover that the 
demon created the original conflict between the 
two nations as part of an elaborate plot to 
maneuver the royal family into accepting the 
pact. The second-generation daughters of this 
particular family have some mysterious value to 
the demon, nicely setting the stage for you to 
create yet another secret.
3. History Repeats Itself
This one is a bit stranger than the first two 
examples. Across the course of the campaign, the 
players will gradually glean more and more 
details about the past history of the setting. Once 
they've accumulated enough of these details, 
they'll start to realize that the history of the planet
is one huge cycle that repeats itself according to a
definitive pattern over and over again. For 
instance, maybe every 1,116 years two great 
nations go to war, the smaller of the two nations 
always wins after exactly 23,411 lives have been 
lost in the conflict, and exactly twelve years later,
the victorious general always loses his life to 
unexpected treachery.
This secret is particularly valuable to the players 
because of the way they can use it to predict 
future events, allowing them to accomplish great 
things while simultaneously giving them the 
feeling that they are true "movers and shakers." It
also nicely sets you up to create still more 
interesting secrets -- what is the exact 
significance of the historical pattern, and how did 
it come into being?
4. When is a King not a King?
Most D&D game worlds boast dynasties of great 
kings who have ruled wisely over a particular 
kingdom or empire for generations on end. 
Typically, the citizens of these kingdoms thank 
fortune that each successive generation always 
seems to produce a fitting heir who turns out to 
be as wise as all his ancestors.
Suppose, though, that the kings are not the real 
font of wisdom behind the kingdom and never 
have been.
Unknown to everyone, including the kings 
themselves, the king's hereditary sword has been 
secretly governing the affairs of state since the 
foundation of the kingdom many generations ago.
The sword is intelligent and capable of subtly 
manipulating its wielders to insure just rule. 
Perhaps it even houses the intellect of the very 
first king, who had the sword forged because he 
couldn't stand the idea of giving up his kingdom 
after death.
There are a number of ways such a secret might 
become important during the campaign. If the 
sword is stolen, for instance, the whole kingdom 
might unravel until it can be returned. Another 
possibility is a newly-crowned king discovering 
the secret of the sword and deciding that he 
doesn't want to make use of its capabilities. After 
the king attempts to rid himself of the sword, the 
sword begins plotting his downfall and drifts 
from owner to owner, hoping to find someone 
who can depose the king.
Character Secrets
Secrets about characters -- both PCs and NPCs -- 
provide another set of possibilities rich with 
opportunity. The classic character secret is a 
surprise revelation about a character's past, 
though the true possibilities are nearly limitless. 
Character secrets are particularly useful for 
encouraging good roleplaying and prompting 
your players to examine their characters a bit 
more closely. Nothing adds depth to a character 
like a good secret, and deep characters enhance 
your campaign in all sorts of ways.
It's easiest to create secrets about NPCs since you
completely control their backstories, mannerisms,
and behaviors, but don't be afraid to occasionally 
create secrets about the PCs. After all, heroes who
discover hidden details about their pasts are a 
staple of myth and legend. Of course, some 
players are likely to be more receptive to these 
"discoveries" than others. You'll occasionally 
encounter a player who likes to carefully control 
his characters and create every detail of the 
characters' histories himself. Fortunately, these 
folks are relatively rare and easy to spot. Your 
best bet is to avoid them altogether and save your 
secrets for a more appreciative audience.
5. The Unexpected Relationship
Even though this old chestnut has been parodied 
to death (thanks to Star Wars), it's still 
surprisingly effective. The bit, of course, is that 
one of the characters in the campaign is secretly 
related in some way to one of the other 
characters. Maybe an evil wizard turns out to be 
the long lost brother of one of the PCs, or an NPC
beggar discovers that he is actually a member of 
the royal family and the rightful heir to a throne.
Because secrets such as these can be kind of 
goofy if incorrectly executed, it's important to get
them right. First of all, such secrets are rarely 
effective unless a long period of time elapses 
between the point at which everyone meets the 
two characters in question and the instant the 
hidden relationship is uncovered. In other words, 
don't introduce a brand new NPC in an adventure 
and reveal that the NPC is actually a PC's mother 
by adventure's end. The revelation will be much 
more powerful if you delay it for several 
adventures to come. Give everyone a chance to 
get acquainted with the new character and a 
chance to think they know her before you spring 
your big surprise.
It's equally important to devise a clever 
explanation for why the relationship has remained
a secret for so long. Silly plot devices like 
amnesia and "stolen by gypsies" generally won't 
cut it without lots of additional details to shore 
them up and make them interesting. A workable 
example might go something like this: Suppose 
you've decided that one of the PCs is secretly the 
son of the evil baron who serves as the master 
villain in your campaign. All his life, the PC has 
assumed that he is actually the son of the good 
baron who is a lifelong foe of the villain. This 
mystery is explained by a strange pact the two 
barons forged long ago. In a desperate attempt to 
keep the peace between their two armies, the 
barons decided to secretly swap sons -- each 
would raise the other's child, making it difficult 
for either baron to attack the other without risking
harm to his own son. Although the pact served its 
purpose for many years, the whole scheme finally
went awry when the biological son of the good 
baron was killed by the PC during a craven 
attempt to assassinate the good duke, his 
"father's" lifelong enemy. Over the years, both 
barons became very fond of their charges and 
grew to think of them as their own sons. The evil 
baron now blames the PC for the death of his 
adopted son and has sworn revenge.
6. I'm a Murderer?
This is a great surprise to pull on a good-aligned 
player character. Every now and then, the PC 
should receive strange looks and such until one 
day a group of inquisitors finally arrives to 
confront him. The inquisitors have been pursuing 
the PC for several months and claim to have 
eyewitness evidence that the PC committed some 
unimaginably horrible crime. The campaign then 
proceeds for a time like a crime novel, with the 
PC and his companions struggling to prove his 
innocence, but becoming frustrated at each turn. 
If you orchestrate things properly, the remaining 
PCs might even begin to doubt their friend 
themselves. Things finally take the ultimate turn 
for the worse when some sort of unassailable 
method of establishing guilt (possibly magical) 
proves that the PC did, in fact, commit the crime 
even though he has no memory of it.
From this point, there are a number of ways you 
might explain the discrepancy, most involving 
magical mind control or similar means. My own 
explanation might go something like this: The PC
is not whom he believes to be and never has been.
In fact, the PC is a highly trained assassin from a 
land notorious for producing the most skilled 
assassins in the world. After performing a 
particularly difficult mission (the crime he is 
accused of), the PC was forced to drink a magical
potion to escape. This potion effectively made the
PC an entirely different person, giving him new 
memories and a new alignment. Once he had 
quaffed the potion, it was possible for the PC to 
evade various magical spells (like detect evil) that
might have prevented his escape from the target's 
home. Even if he was captured and magically 
compelled to tell the truth, the PC would have no 
incriminating memories. Naturally, part of the 
plan called for the assassin's colleagues to 
recapture him at some point and restore his old 
memories, but that never happened. In fact, 
maybe the PCs first get wind of this secret when 
they foil the assassins' seemingly mysterious 
attempts to recapture their old colleague.
Once the scheme is in motion, of course, the PC 
is in quite a pickle. As a consequence, maybe you
should wait until all the PCs have gained a few 
experience levels before springing this little gem. 
That should give them plenty of options when 
they deal with the fallout.
That wraps up another installment. Join me here 
in thirty days for "I've Got a Secret, Part II."
22
I've Got a Secret, Part II
Last Month I began discussing the hows and 
wherefores of keeping effective secrets in your 
D&D campaigns. As part of that discussion, I 
identified five general categories of secrets: 
historical secrets, character secrets, divine secrets,
geographical secrets, and "just plain weird" 
secrets. In last month's column I discussed the 
first two categories and provided a series of 
examples. 
This Month I'll tackle the final three.
Divine Secrets
Because their nature tends to imply mystery and 
hidden truth, the gods of your campaign world 
can often provide an excellent springboard for 
secrets. Since so many of the fundamentals of 
your world -- its creation, its history, and its 
destiny -- are likely to be intimately entwined 
with the activities of the divine powers, secrets 
about the gods are often among the most ancient 
and powerful mysteries you can devise. Of 
course, the epic scale of such secrets can be a 
double-edged sword. Plausibly drawing the 
players into contact with godly entities and their 
hidden truths can be difficult, not to mention the 
obvious play balance problems. Cleverly 
constructed secrets, though, can certainly skirt 
around these difficulties.
Assuming you do discover a way to pull one off, 
one of the truly interesting characteristics of a 
really good divine secret is the sense of power 
and participation it can lend your players. Little 
can do more to reinforce the characters' 
importance than uncovering a deep secret of the 
gods themselves. Such a discovery tends to 
almost automatically bestow a sort of legendary 
status upon the PCs, making the players more 
fond of their characters.
8. One of the Gods Walks Among 
Us
In most D&D campaigns, the gods are all-
powerful distant beings who live on a remote 
plane of existence. Under normal conditions, any 
direct contact between the PCs and the divine 
powers is extremely unlikely.
This particular secret revolves around the notion 
that one of the gods secretly resides on the 
physical plane in the guise of a being or character
with whom the PCs can meet and interact. This 
ploy is particularly effective if a lot of time passes
between the point at which the PCs first 
encounter the disguised entity and the moment 
when they uncover his secret. It's much more 
interesting when the secret involves a character 
with whom the players are quite familiar. The 
mysterious beggar who keeps turning up along 
the PCs' route is a much better choice than the 
fourth guard from the left on that random caravan
they passed on the way to the capital city last 
year.
Another choice that makes or breaks this secret is 
your explanation of how and why the divine 
entity decided to leave its home and walk among 
mere mortals. In most cases, such an undertaking 
would be extremely out of character for a god. A 
very interesting and unique set of circumstances 
should exist to justify it.
My own version of this secret goes something 
like this: The patriarch of the pantheon (your 
version of Zeus or Odin) is getting very tired and 
looking to retire from his divine duties. To find a 
replacement, he holds a contest among the 
remaining gods to determine who might be wise 
enough to replace him. The contest consists of an 
enormously complex riddle the patriarch devises 
to test his colleagues' wisdom. The first to solve 
the riddle shall inherit the divine throne and tend 
to the mortals.
Unfortunately, none of the other gods manage to 
arrive at a solution. Still looking to retire, the 
patriarch decides that instead of passing the 
throne along to another god, he should simply 
destroy the mortal world and wash his hands of 
the problem, leaving him free to retire. To this 
end, he unleashes a series of six plagues that will 
eventually consume the mortal realm.
Shortly after the plagues are unleashed, one of the
other gods (the favored daughter of the patriarch) 
discovers the patriarch's plan and pleads with him
to reconsider. The goddess tries to convince the 
patriarch that the mortal world has become a rare 
treasure, much too valuable to simply cast off. 
Although reluctant to accept this argument, the 
patriarch proposes a simple experiment. As a 
favor to his daughter, he agrees to spend exactly 
ten years roaming the physical world in the guise 
of a mortal. If he witnesses truly unique beauty 
on his travels, he will call back the plagues and 
continue to serve as lord of the heavens.
This secret opens up plenty of opportunities for 
interesting gameplay. Beyond the fact that the 
players get to interact with the king of the gods, 
there are also the six mysterious plagues to deal 
with and the possible involvement of the goddess.
You might even think of a way to include the 
patriarch's riddle. Suppose, for instance, that an 
evil mortal cleric discovers the riddle and devises 
a plan to solve it himself, hoping to catch the 
attention of the patriarch and claim the heavenly 
throne!
9. The Gods are Dead!
As I noted earlier, the gods play a pivotal role in 
just about any D&D game world. The gods and 
the religions that have sprung up around them are 
probably instrumental in defining the culture, 
history, and tone of your campaign. On a more 
practical level, the gods are the ultimate source of
the magical energies that allow clerics to cast 
their spells.
Or so everyone believes. Suppose, though, that 
the gods haven't been the real source of that 
magical energy all these years. Instead, all the 
gods are dead, and for some mysterious reason, 
nobody knows this.
Once again, to do this right, you should wait to 
spring this particular secret until you are well into
your campaign -- probably not until the PCs reach
10th level or above. Although this secret can be 
quite a shocking and interesting revelation when 
properly handled, it's certain to have severe 
consequences for the campaign moving forward. 
As part of your implementation of the secret, you 
should prepare yourself to deal with this fallout --
how can there be clerics in a world without gods?
How do clerics get their spells?
A decent explanation of how the gods died 
without attracting the attention of their followers 
is also in order. I have a couple of possibilities. 
Suppose the gods were secretly defeated and 
destroyed by a rival faction of new gods. Ever 
since the defeat, the rivals have answered the 
clerics' pleas and granted them spells in the guise 
of their fallen peers. The rivals believe the 
original gods failed their followers when they 
allowed evil into the world, jeopardizing all of 
creation. By seizing control themselves, the new 
gods hope to manipulate the faithful into 
destroying evil once and for all.
Properly staged, this particular variation on the 
secret should lead to plenty of opportunities for 
in-depth roleplaying. As an example, think about 
how a lawful good cleric might react. Once the 
cleric finally discovers the big secret, she learns 
that her beloved deity has been slain (itself an evil
act), but the usurper plans to bring about an even 
better world and might just have the power to do 
so. What role might the cleric decide to play in 
the unfolding events?
Another possible explanation is that the gods' 
death was entirely natural. Finally, after billions 
of years, the heavenly powers grew old and weak.
The gods had always hoped that by the time they 
reached the twilight of their lives, their mortal 
followers would no longer need their guidance or 
assistance. Unfortunately, this never came to pass 
-- the mortals are still at least a couple of 
centuries away from achieving a truly 
harmonious civilization. As a final act of 
devotion, the gods decided to end their own lives 
a few decades early and drain the last ounces of 
their energies into a heavenly wellspring. For the 
last several years, this wellspring has been the 
real source of the clerical spells granted to the 
mortal faithful. By draining the remainder of their
own lives into the spring, the gods used all their 
available powers to guarantee that the mortals 
will continue to receive spells for as long as 
possible.
Figuring out just how much energy remains in the
wellspring is the biggest decision you'll face if 
you decide to go this route. Is there energy 
enough for fifty more years of cleric spells? 
Twenty years? Five years? Depending upon how 
your campaign is unfolding, it might be 
interesting to let your cleric characters know that 
all but their simplest magical powers (such as the 
various cure spells) will suddenly stop working in
the near future. Figuring out how to deal with 
such a tragedy should prove quite a challenge for 
an experienced hero. Ideally, though, you might 
want to allow the PCs to discover a means of 
reversing the tragedy or recharging the 
wellspring. Suddenly taking away all of a PC's 
major powers with little recourse is a great way to
frustrate and lose a player.
10. The Champion
Another possibility for a divine secret revolves 
around a special destiny bestowed upon the PCs 
by the gods themselves. Allowing the players to 
discover that one or more of their characters have 
been specially selected by the gods to perform 
some important mission is another revelation that 
you can use to underscore the PCs' importance in 
the campaign.
My own version of this secret might go 
something like this: One day, the matriarch of the 
gods decides that she is too old and weak to sit 
upon the heavenly throne and desires to retire. 
Almost immediately after she breaks the news to 
her fellow deities, a battle breaks out among her 
three divine children over who is most fit to 
replace her. Since war is not an appropriate 
pursuit for gods, the matriarch is ultimately 
forced to devise a special contest to head off the 
conflict. She instructs each of the three pretenders
to secretly beget a mortal child. She will then see 
to it that these three mortals come into conflict 
when they reach adulthood. The winner of the 
resulting struggle will decide which of the 
matriarch's children shall sit upon the heavenly 
throne. The matriarch insists upon two additional 
rules: Each pretender can aid the mortal child 
only three times across the course of the mortal's 
life, and any god who willingly reveals the 
existence of the contest or the true heritage of the 
three champions to a mortal is disqualified.
As you might guess, one of the three champions 
is one of the PCs. Perhaps the first hint of the 
secret the chosen one receives is a sudden and 
miraculous escape from danger. Many game 
sessions later, the PC will discover that the 
miracle was due to the intervention of his divine 
parent using one of the three allowable "assists." 
Properly implementing this scheme also requires 
you to create two worthy rivals for the PC and 
skillfully set up a three-way conflict. While this 
might take a while, it certainly gives you lots of 
opportunities for interesting adventures and 
storylines once you've pulled it off.
Geographical Secrets
Secrets about the geography of your campaign 
world give the players opportunities to discover 
exciting new places to explore. When I presented 
my tips for developing local area maps in 
Chapters 10 and 11, I noted that it's often handy 
to have a mechanism you can use to keep players 
relatively confined to small areas, allowing you to
open up new lands when you are good and ready. 
Appropriate geographical secrets are an excellent 
tool you can use to achieve this goal. Suppose, for
instance, that your campaign area is bounded by a
seemingly impenetrable mountain chain. From 
time to time, though, mysterious strangers appear 
in the area who must be coming from somewhere 
beyond the mountains. Eventually, after you've 
had time to fully develop the area, you can allow 
the PCs to discover the secret that allows them to 
pass under the mountains. Such a tidbit can be 
anything from the mundane (a secret pass known 
only to the most experienced rangers) to the 
fantastic (a magic doorway that opens only with 
the appropriate command word, á la Ali Baba).
Here are a couple of other ideas...
11. The Disappearing Village
Fantasy literature and pop culture are rife with 
legends of magical cities and villages that only 
appear under certain special circumstances 
(Brigadoon, Kaddath, and so on). Although these 
stories have become something of a high fantasy 
cliché, such a locale can be a remarkably 
effective device in a Dungeons & Dragons 
campaign.
Making this concept work usually boils down to 
two things. First, you have to make the conditions
under which the city appears interesting and 
exciting. This is a fine opportunity to inject an 
interesting puzzle into your game. (For the 
importance of puzzles, see the "Dungeoncraft" 
installment in Dragon 266.) Even after the PCs 
discover the existence of the disappearing village,
they should still have to figure out how to get 
there. Usually, this involves being in exactly the 
right spot at exactly the right time (maybe the 
village only appears for the first day of each year)
-- but calculating the precise place and time might
be very difficult. Perhaps the village appears in a 
different location each time, and the appearances 
combine to form an intricate geometric pattern. In
order to predict the next place the village will 
appear, the players might have to figure out how 
to complete the pattern.
The second bit you need to figure out is how and 
why the village disappears. Is there a magical 
curse involved? A strange rift in the spacetime 
continuum? The interplay of powerful divine 
forces? A nice piece of backstory goes a long way
toward capturing the attention of your players, 
and making the village more than just a cliché.
My own disappearing village might look 
something like this: Many thousands of years 
ago, there existed an ancient city that was home 
to a large and prominent temple dedicated to the 
goddess of wisdom. So splendid was this temple 
that it housed the goddess' favored oracle, a 
mystical pool that allowed the faithful to gain 
knowledge by gazing upon the images 
mysteriously reflected in its waters. Eventually, it 
came to pass that the goddess of wisdom left on a 
lengthy quest to seek new understanding in 
distant dimensions. At first, the goddess' absence 
extended across several years, and later across 
several decades. Many of the inhabitants of the 
ancient city began to feel abandoned and betrayed
as a result. Over time, their faith in their patron 
began to wane until the temple was finally 
dismantled. The oracle still stood, though it was 
no longer consulted in reverence for the goddess, 
but in contempt of her. Before long, the oracle 
was being used for all sorts of unseemly purposes
-- everything from grave robbers gazing into the 
waters to uncover the whereabouts of local tombs
to infidels attempting to glean hidden secrets of 
the gods themselves.
When the goddess of wisdom finally returned 
from her quest and discovered what had happened
to her temple, she was so outraged that she 
decided to punish the entire city and its 
inhabitants by banishing them all to one of the 
frightful dimensions she discovered on her quest. 
Only a single soul escaped the god's wrath: the 
only one of the city's 4,126 inhabitants who kept 
the faith and honored the god every single day 
during her absence. Because of the loyalty of this 
single citizen, the goddess of wisdom allows the 
city to return to its rightful place in the material 
world one day out of each 4,126 (roughly once 
every eleven years).
Note that this scheme offers an excellent 
opportunity to make an interesting puzzle out of 
the situation. In order to actually enter the 
disappearing city, the players must not only 
discover its former whereabouts, but they must 
also deduce the nature of the city's curse and 
ferret out its exact population in order to calculate
when the city will next reappear.
12. The Message
This one is simple, yet quite strange and 
effective. It can provide an interesting means of 
testing the players' memories and perception.
Somewhere on your very first area map, place a 
lake with a distinctive (though natural) shape. 
Many adventures later, somewhere in a deep 
dungeon, the players should discover a pile of 
scrolls covered in ancient runes that are the 
remnants of a long-dead language. After the 
appropriate investigation and analysis, the players
might even learn to decipher several of the old 
runes and pick up some useful knowledge from 
the scrolls.
It just so happens that the lake from that first area 
map is in the exact shape of one of the elder 
runes: the symbol that translates as "danger." 
There is a powerful extradimensional entity 
trapped in a crypt at the bottom of the lake. The 
lake itself was created by the ancient and 
powerful civilization that trapped the entity, and 
its shape was selected to warn interlopers.
If you don't call any special attention to the map 
or lake once the players have uncovered the 
ancient writings, it's quite likely that it will take 
them several game sessions to notice your clue. 
Once they finally do, their reaction (and the series
of ensuing adventures in which they attempt to 
uncover the meaning of the warning) should 
prove priceless.
Just Plain Weird Secrets
This last category covers secrets that are so 
unusual they defy description. Most of the secrets
that fit into this category are odd enough to have 
a pretty profound impact on the game world. So 
much so, in fact, that you should introduce this 
sort of material with care. Some players really 
respond to this type of stuff, while others are put 
off by it. You should probably try a ploy like this 
only if you know your players all fit into the first 
category.
Again, the best way to illustrate a really weird 
secret of this sort is through an example. . . .
13. The Dream
I've borrowed this idea from H.P. Lovecraft. 
Eventually, after a couple dozen game sessions, 
the PCs might discover an entirely new fantasy 
world that exists in their dreams. Each night as 
the PCs sleep, they have an opportunity to enter 
this new realm, where they take on personae that 
are similar to themselves yet different in the way 
"dreamselves" often are. You can even conduct 
entire adventures set in the dream realm. 
Anything bad that befalls the characters there 
somehow spills over to their actual selves in the 
"real" world. (Perhaps dream wounds become 
real through some sort of psychic trauma.) 
Properly pulled off, this campaign should draw 
all sorts of interesting parallels between the 
dream realm and the physical world, and raise 
interesting questions about who created the dream
world and why.
23
Migrating to Third Edition
As I write this installment, I've just returned from 
the Gen Con 2000 Game Fair, where the new 
edition of the Dungeons & Dragons Player's 
Handbook was released amid much fanfare. 
Many of you who have written over the last 
several months have asked if and when I'll begin 
referencing the new edition's rules in 
"Dungeoncraft." Now that the project's veil of 
secrecy has been lifted, I can answer those two 
questions: (1) yes, of course; and (2) right now. 
From this installment forward, I'll refer 
exclusively to the new rules when preparing this 
column.
Does this mean I'll go back and rewrite the 
previous twenty-three installments for the new 
rules? Well, no. Fortunately, the rules haven't 
changed enough to invalidate the majority of the 
advice I've offered over the last two years. For the
most part, building a world and preparing a 
campaign under the new rules is much like 
building a world and preparing a campaign under 
the old rules. I'll occasionally revisit and revise 
some of my old advice in the installments to 
come, but for now you can safely assume that 
most of what I've presented so far is as valid 
under the new rules as it was when you first read 
it.
This doesn't mean that the new edition doesn't 
change the DM's job description. In some ways, 
the new game is very different from its 
predecessor and requires some very different 
approaches. In order to make this transition over 
to the new rules as easy as possible, I'm devoting 
this installment and the next to a discussion of 
how the new rules might impact the Dungeon 
Master. I can guarantee you that the first thing 
your players are going to do after getting their 
brand new copies of the Player's Handbook is to 
start looking for ways they can use all those new 
rules, feats, and skills to their advantage. 
Consider these two installments our opportunity, 
as DMs, to do the same.
When Should I Switch Over to 
the New Rules?
Before I consider the rules themselves, it's worth 
spending a few paragraphs discussing when -- or 
if -- you should migrate your existing campaigns 
over to the new rules. The most important thing 
to remember when you are considering these 
questions is that you shouldn't be in any sort of 
hurry to fix something that isn't broken. Sudden 
change can be bad. If your campaign is 
progressing well and your players are having fun, 
take your time before making the big switch. 
Give yourself and your players an opportunity to 
fully digest the new rules and familiarize 
yourselves with their idiosyncrasies. 
In the meantime, you might try running one or 
two new edition "one-shot" game sessions outside
the bounds of your regular campaign. This 
insures that everyone has some combat 
experience before you risk your real game and the
players' beloved PCs.
The easiest way to organize a one-shot session, of
course, is to pick up a copy of Dungeon 
Magazine and run one of the excellent adventures
within. If your players are really dedicated to 
your current campaign, though, completely 
abandoning it runs the risk of dampening their 
interest and interfering with your momentum. In 
this case, you might design a special one-shot 
scenario set on the same world as your regular 
campaign, but using entirely different PCs. Take 
advantage of this opportunity to give your players
a brief glimpse into an entirely different facet of 
your setting. Two particularly interesting tactics 
immediately come to mind:
1. Design an adventure that allows the 
players to assume the roles of their 
traditional adversaries.
Suppose, for instance, that your campaign 
regularly pits the players against an 
infamous tribe of orcs (like the Aris 
campaign I've built in these articles). The 
adventure you run to introduce your 
players to the new rules might put them in
the roles of the orcs for a change. Maybe 
they have to kidnap a princess or acquire a
powerful magic item from a nearby band 
of elves. If you do this right, you might 
even leave yourself with a great 
springboard for an adventure in the "real" 
campaign. Once they've successfully 
captured that princess, maybe the players 
must resume their traditional roles to 
pursue the orcs and retrieve her!
2. Give the players the opportunity to play
legendary and long-dead characters 
from your campaign setting.
In the Aris-based adventure "Secrets of 
the Scar" from Dungeon 80, a legendary 
order of clerics once operated a hidden 
temple, and some of the world's most 
interesting and formative events took 
place within the confines of their secret 
stronghold. An interesting "practice" 
adventure might place the players in the 
roles of those clerics and call upon them 
to protect the stronghold as it stood 
several hundred years ago. Not only 
would such an adventure give your 
players the sense that they are making an 
important contribution to the history of 
your game world, it might also give them 
the added pleasure of playing high-level 
characters for a change.
Even after you are sure that you and your 
players have plenty of experience with the
new game rules, you should only migrate 
your campaign once you're certain that 
you've had enough time to carefully 
consider all the implications of the 
conversion. Whatever methods you 
employ, though, the full process is certain 
to be time-consuming and require a lot of 
care. Again, don't feel rushed. Your 
players have waited this long for the new 
rules, and they can wait another couple 
months if necessary.
A few of you might be wondering if you should 
ever switch over to the new rules. While it might 
seem like a lot of work to migrate to the new 
edition, I guarantee that the exciting opportunities
the new rules open up will make the transition 
worthwhile. You should also note that not 
adopting the new rules will eventually make it 
more difficult to play the game. Unless you are 
using the new rules, you'll no longer have easy 
access to new game elements introduced in 
products and magazines published by Wizards of 
the Coast. Eventually, you'll find it harder and 
harder to locate players who are familiar with 
your chosen flavor. As a consequence, your 
decision should probably center around "when" 
and not "if." Even those of you who are heavily 
dependent on special 2nd edition rules are likely 
to see new edition replacements come your way 
eventually. Again, feel free to delay the 
conversion until you are completely comfortable.
The Heart of the New Edition
A large portion of the rules changes introduced in 
the new edition fall into a single bracket. Despite 
its voluminous rulebooks, old fashioned D&D 
was simple and unsophisticated at its core. The 
old rules handled lots of sticky situations by not 
handling the situation at all. Whenever something
unusual happened or a player decided to take an 
unexpected action, the DM was forced to resolve 
the situation by making an arbitrary judgment or 
inventing a new rule on the fly. Suppose a non-
thief is forced to scale a wall in order to escape 
pursuit, or a fighter tries to bluff an enemy into 
making a tactical blunder. Do their efforts 
succeed? The old rules provided no real guidance 
for resolution, forcing the DM to improvise. It 
was situations like these that inspired the Third 
Rule of Dungeoncraft.
Although the old approach usually worked well 
once you got used to it, it also stymied some 
beginning DMs and forced them to "freeze up" 
during play. With absolutely no rules advice to 
fall back on, these beginners sometimes found the
process of making snap decisions daunting. In 
turn, they would develop all sorts of bad habits in 
order to avoid being put on the spot.
The new rules adopt an entirely different 
philosophy and attempt to provide a much more 
comprehensive set of guidelines for resolving a 
wide variety of actions and situations. The best 
illustration of this philosophy is the interlocking 
series of ability and skill checks that can be used 
to resolve just about anything a player might 
attempt. Although the DM is still forced to decide
exactly what attributes and skills apply to an 
action and how difficult the action is, it's often 
easier to make these simple decisions than to 
make a completely arbitrary ruling with no 
guidance at all. Another illustration of the new 
philosophy is the series of comprehensive rules 
for handling unique situations presented in the 
new Dungeon Master's Guide. Although the new 
rules don't really allow us to get rid of the Third 
Rule of Dungeoncraft altogether, they guarantee 
that we're forced to invoke it less often.
The new edition gives you more tools to work 
with, but it's worth noting that the new approach 
has a particularly interesting repercussion. The 
new, meatier rules spell out a comprehensive set 
of modifiers, difficulty classes, and special 
situations in great detail. Although its much easier
to keep track of all these rules than it might seem,
it's quite easy to forget a stray modifier or 
improperly compute a difficulty class here and 
there in the heat of the moment. What makes this 
a problem is the fact that the players are often just
as familiar with the rules as you are, and you'll 
find that many of them take great delight in 
pointing out each and every modifier or dice roll 
you blow. Many times, these protests come after 
you've already resolved the roll in question and 
moved on -- sometimes long after. "Hey 
everybody! I just realized that when she killed my
cohort in that last battle she forgot to take into 
account the penalty for fighting with two 
weapons!" Sometimes these lapses might seem so
egregious that your sense of fairness will tempt 
you to "back up" the game and replay the 
situation. In fact, I found myself in this position 
so often during the early test games I ran using 
the new rules that I was inspired to debut a Fifth 
Rule of Dungeoncraft.
Fifth Rule of Dungeoncraft:
Once a roll has been made and you've 
moved on, you should never reset events to 
an earlier state in order to correct a mistake.
Doing so can only interrupt the game's 
momentum and runs the risk of confusing your 
players. If you need to rationalize such a decision,
put it down to fickle fate -- a lucky (or unlucky) 
break caused by potent karma or the intervention 
of capricious gods. After all, in the real world 
unusual and unexplainable things happen all the 
time. In fact, you might even use a particularly 
significant gaffe as a springboard for an 
adventure that explains the error. With that big 
(but forgotten) modifier in his favor, how could 
Lokir have possibly missed when he attacked that
hill giant? If the blow had connected, Lokir might
have killed the giant in time to save Mokk, his 
fallen comrade! A few adventures later, maybe 
Lokir discovers that he accidentally offended the 
high priest of a war god on one of his previous 
exploits and the god has sinced cursed him with 
horrible luck in battle. To remove the curse, Lokir
must right his earlier wrong and beg for the high 
priest's forgiveness.
Of course, the Fifth Rule doesn't imply that you 
should never accept a player's advice on how to 
resolve a situation or refuse to acknowledge any 
forgotten modifiers pointed out by the players 
before the dice are rolled. The fact that you can 
count on your players to be on the lookout for 
modifiers you've forgotten is one of the reasons 
why it's easier to keep track of the new rules than 
it might seem. Once a situation has been resolved 
and play has moved on, though, all outcomes 
should be considered final. Although some 
players might find this stance a bit difficult to 
deal with at first, they'll quickly get used to it as 
long as you're consistent.
Well, that wraps up another installment. More 
thoughts on the new edition next month.
24
Newfangled Fighting
Many of the rules changes introduced in the new 
edition ripple outward from a new approach to 
character creation. As I noted last month, the real 
heart of the new edition's philosophy is a move 
toward providing concrete rules for a greater 
number of actions and situations. Where previous
editions of the game forced the DM to guess or 
make an arbitrary ruling whenever the players 
attempted an unusual action, this new version 
provides an open-ended set of specific rules that 
can be used to resolve almost any situation. Want 
to trick a guard into releasing your friend the 
thief? Make a Bluff check. Trying to hunt for 
enough game to feed your party? Make a 
Wilderness Lore check. In short, the new rules 
handle many more situations by giving each 
character a wider range of abilities to check.
One byproduct of this new philosophy is that 
character creation can be a lengthier process than 
it was during previous editions of the game, 
though the final results are considerably more 
detailed and interesting. Properly selecting and 
collating all those new abilities certainly takes 
time. The designers have provided detailed, 
pregenerated character templates you can ask 
your players to select in order to save time, but I 
recommend that you use them only if your 
players are rather inexperienced. While the 
"starting packages" certainly save you a little 
time, they'll also make it more difficult for your 
players to truly personalize their characters and 
grow attached to them.
In fact, character generation has been beefed up 
so much that I think it's appropriate to reconsider 
some advice I provided in an earlier column. I 
now believe it is good idea to hold a separate 
session for the sole purpose of creating 
characters. I used to recommend against this 
practice because my experience shows that 
campaigns that begin in this fashion tend to have 
a fifty-fifty chance of never getting off the ground
at all. Generally, the play maintains the interest of
your fellow gamers, and any session during 
which you don't actually play is just another 
chance for one or more players to lose interest. 
Under the new rules, though, it's difficult to 
conduct an effective session long enough to allow
all the players to create their characters with 
enough time left over to get a good start on the 
first adventure. Players who are experienced with 
the new rules might pull off such a feat without a 
problem, but there aren't too many people out 
there who are all that experienced with a set of 
rules that's a few months old.
One way to avoid this dilemma altogether is to 
ask your players to show up at the first session 
with their characters already created. While this 
works well for some people, I generally don't 
favor it for a number of reasons. Having all the 
players in a single location while they create their
characters definitely results in a more effective 
and well-balanced party. The D&D rules and 
most D&D adventures assume that the 
adventuring party will be made up of a variety of 
character classes. If the players don't cooperate as
they create their characters, it's far too easy to end
up with a weak or unwieldy party. In fact, this 
risk is somewhat compounded under the new 
rules -- it's now important that your players select
not only a variety of character classes, but a 
variety of skills as well. A party without a single 
character who possesses the Bluff or Spot skills, 
for instance, might run into trouble. Another 
reason why it's often not a good idea to ask the 
players to create their characters on their own is 
the fact that players can easily make mistakes 
during the process. If you and the other players 
aren't around to notice some of these 
discrepancies, you run the risk of not spotting an 
error until it's already had an unfortunate impact 
on your game. During a recent session of my own
game, for example, I discovered that one of my 
players accidentally spent too many skill points at
first level, making him much more effective in 
my first few adventures than he should have been.
If you do decide to run a special session for 
character creation, there are a couple of strategies 
you might use to get your players' juices flowing 
despite the fact that the game isn't actually 
starting yet. If your players are particularly 
creative and oriented toward good roleplaying, 
you might ask each of them to create a brief "life 
story" for his or her character and relate it to the 
whole group. In order to keep things interesting, 
you can ask the players to judge the tales after all 
the stories have been told. Pass out score cards 
that instruct each player to secretly rate each story
on a scale of one to ten. After you collect and 
tally the scores, you can bestow a special prize 
upon the winner ranging from a few additional 
skill points all the way up to the privilege of 
beginning play at 2nd level. This scheme has the 
added benefit of not only making that first session
a bit more interesting for the players but also 
going a long way toward establishing their 
characters as well.
Another ploy you might try is the old "cliffhanger
trick." Start playing during the character creation 
session, but don't attempt to undertake an actual 
adventure. Instead, run the players through a 
quick teaser designed to get them hooked and 
interested in the things to come. A quick combat 
encounter that gives the players a chance to test 
out their new abilities is usually in order here, 
along with some brief exposure to your campaign
environment. Most importantly, though, you 
should try to end the teaser with some sort of 
shock or twist. Get the players hooked by 
confronting them with a compelling mystery or 
puzzle that won't be resolved until the next 
session. For example, your teaser might end with 
a hooded assassin murdering an important 
townsman right in front of the party. The 
adventurers give chase, but fail to catch the fiend.
Just before he makes good his escape, though, the
assassin's hood is torn off and the PCs are 
shocked and horrified by what they see. You don't
reveal exactly what that is until the next session. 
Note that if you decide to go this route, it's 
important that you actually deliver on the mystery
you created during the teaser. If you capture the 
player's imagination but then fail to invent a 
revelation that lives up to the dramatic buildup 
you've given the situation, you'll only do more 
harm than good. Returning to my example, for 
instance, it's probably not enough to simply 
reveal that what the players found so shocking 
was an ugly face or a bad scar. Instead, you might
reveal that the assassin is inexplicably an exact 
duplicate of a player character, or that the 
assassin is an old friend whom the PCs believed 
to be dead. This sort of solution provides you 
with a great springboard for adventures that allow
the players to uncover further revelations and 
delve even deeper into the mystery.
Newfangled Fighting
Like character creation, the new combat rules are 
home to many of the new edition's innovations. In
general, combat is more stringently codified and 
the various actions the combatants can select are 
more rigidly defined. It's still possible to run a 
battle entirely within the imaginations of the 
participants, but doing so definitely makes it 
harder to effectively wield all the interesting new 
maneuvers that the new rules have to offer. Now 
more than ever, I recommend employing some 
sort of counters or visual aids to track the 
positions of characters in battle. Detailed 
miniatures and scenery are obviously the ideal 
tools for this purpose, but not everybody has the 
time or money to invest in building an 
appropriate collection. In an earlier column, I 
suggested using a large whiteboard in lieu of 
miniatures to map out your battles. The idea is 
that you can quickly draw up battle maps on the 
board using dry erase markers, and plot the 
players' positions using makeshift tokens like 
coins or dice. The board also gives you a 
convenient way to record the positions and effects
of spells and obstacles. Should a wizard cast wall 
of ice, for instance, you can quickly sketch the ice
wall right on the battle map and even record a 
helpful note right next to it ("36 hp/10 ft., Break 
DC 27").
While the new rules make the whiteboard 
approach more useful than ever, they also add an 
additional wrinkle that you should consider. 
Many of the new combat rules become much 
easier to administer if a grid is overlaid atop the 
battlefield to designate 5-foot by 5-foot squares. 
Such a grid will make it much easier to keep track
of the "threatened areas" that provoke attacks of 
opportunity (Player's Handbook, page 122) and 
easier to adjudicate various movements and 
special maneuvers. In fact, the new Dungeon 
Master's Guide provides some detailed guidelines
on how to employ a grid on pages 67-69. 
Unfortunately, redrawing a grid on your 
whiteboard at the beginning of each battle isn't 
very practical. I've skirted this problem by using a
box cutter to lightly scratch a 1-inch square grid 
directly into the surface of my whiteboard, 
allowing me to draw on the board and erase to my
heart's content without ever removing the grid. 
You can also add a permanent grid to your battle 
board with very thin black or gray tape (available 
at office supply stores).
Beyond the more rigidly defined actions, the most
important changes in the combat rules are the 
various measures taken to clean up some of the 
awkward mathematics that sometimes plagued 
earlier editions. In addition to fixing the obvious 
problems that frequently befuddled newcomers 
("Now, let me get this straight . . . a -1 shield 
actually adds one to my Armor Class?"), the new 
rules also eliminate some of their predecessor's 
cumbersome charts and formulae. While the old 
game forced you to repeatedly look up what a 3-
Hit-Die creature needs to hit Armor Class 5, for 
example, the new system makes such calculations
irrelevant. Of course, some of the trimmed 
complexity has been reintroduced in the form of 
new modifiers and options, but it's generally easy 
for the players to keep track of their own bonuses 
and modifiers, allowing you to concentrate solely 
on the monsters and NPCs. It's also easier than 
ever to conceal the Armor Classes of your 
monsters. Now, just ask each player for a total 
attack roll. If the roll equals or exceeds the 
monster's Armor Class, the attack is a hit. The 
players need never know what they're shooting 
for.
Equally worthy of attention is the new initiative 
system. Before, all the combatants on one side of 
the battle took a turn, then all the combatants on 
the other side took their turns. A single simple die
roll decided which side went first. Now each 
character rolls his own personal initiative score. 
Although this system produces more interesting 
battles, it's sometimes hard to calculate the exact 
sequence in which all the combatants act, 
particularly when you're resolving a large battle 
with a wide variety of participants. To minimize 
your difficulties, you should closely follow the 
advice that appears in the Dungeon Master's 
Guide and scribble down a quick sequence at the 
start of each combat round. I'm experimenting 
with my own system that is even faster, though it 
certainly requires some advance preparation. I've 
created an "initiative board" on a small (8 1/2 
inch by 11 inch) piece of corkboard. With a 
marker, I've divided the board into two rows of 
twenty columns and numbered the resulting 
squares from one to forty. I've also labeled a set 
of pushpins with the initials of my PCs and 
reserved a few extra pushpins of different colors 
to represent monsters. At the start of the round, 
when everyone rolls initiative, I can simply place 
the pushpins in the appropriate squares to quickly
log the combat sequence, sparing me from the 
sometimes difficult task of scrawling down notes 
while eight players are simultaneously shouting 
their initiative scores. Later, I can place additional
pushpins on the board to represent the timing of 
spells and other effects.
Beyond these simple mechanical matters, the one 
thing about the new combat rules that every DM 
should note is that they can be much more brutal 
than their predecessors, particularly at low 
character levels. An orc with a battleaxe can now 
inflict a maximum of 30 points of damage in a 
single attack (orcs have a Strength of 15, and a 
battleaxe inflicts triple damage on a critical hit) --
more than enough to kill all 1st- and most 2nd-
level characters outright. Under the old edition, 
the same beastie could never inflict more than 8 
points of damage -- not enough to kill any PC in a
single blow (if you used the optional "death's 
door" rule). While the circumstances that produce
such extreme combat results are certainly quite 
rare, it's important to remember just how many 
battles the average PC will engage in across the 
course of his career and how many opportunities 
the monsters get to make such a devastating 
attack.
The upshot of all this is that you should follow 
the advice in the Dungeon Master's Guide very 
carefully when it comes to balancing your fights. 
Until you've gained experience with the new 
rules, you should mistrust any "conventional 
wisdom" you acquired playing the old game, 
particularly while your players' characters are at 
low levels.
That wraps up another installment. Drop back in 
thirty days to watch me raise the curtain on a 
whole new phase of Dungeoncraft.
25
Let's Take It From the Top
In the last two installments, "Dungeoncraft" took 
a long look at the new game rules and briefly 
discussed ways in which Dungeon Mastering 
under the new rules might be different than 
DMing under the old rules. In the twenty-odd 
columns prior to that, we stepped through the 
entire process of creating a brand new Dungeons 
& Dragons campaign, from the initial inspiration 
right up to the first adventure and beyond. Those 
of you who have been reading from the start 
should have more than a passing familiarity with 
the art of dungeoncraft by now. In fact, you're 
probably already zooming past the materials 
covered here to explore interesting ideas of your 
own.
At this point, the best way to continue your 
education is to back up and start an entirely new 
campaign from the ground up. This will allow us 
to illustrate some alternate approaches to those 
taken in the past. It gives us an opportunity to 
continue exploring the new rules and to revisit 
my old advice when necessary. Most importantly, 
now that we've been through the entire process 
once, we can attempt something a bit more 
ambitious this time around. Aris was essentially a 
traditional D&D game world with a few twists all
its own; let's aim for something that's unique on 
this outing. "Dungeoncraft" will focus energies 
on both demonstrating the flexibility of the D&D 
game and providing advice on how to 
occasionally modify the game's rules in order to 
further lend the campaign its own flavor. We'll 
continue to presume that you've read all the 
previous installments of the column, though, so if
you haven't, now is a good time to hit the website 
and catch up.
Those of you who have grown fond of Aris over 
the past couple of years shouldn't despair -- it 
needn't be abandoned. Any and all interested 
readers are encouraged to flesh out Aris to your 
hearts' content. If you post the results on a 
personal Web page, send me the URL, and we'll 
be sure to give it a mention here. 
Baiting the Hook
Let's begin this new campaign in much the same 
way the last one began. In the second installment 
of "Dungeoncraft," it was noted that a good first 
step in creating a new campaign is to develop a 
fundamental concept or "hook." What you're 
really searching for is the single idea or 
characteristic that will set your campaign apart 
from all the others. You know you've developed 
an appropriate hook when your players can 
effectively describe your campaign in one or two 
sentences. Those of you who have played D&D 
for some time now probably know that TSR and 
Wizards of the Coast published a number of 
official game settings over the years. Notice how 
easy it is to quickly describe the characteristics 
that make each of these settings unique? The Al-
Qadim setting was D&D in an Arabian land. The 
Dark Sun setting was D&D on a rough world that
seemed to share a lot of influences with the works
of Edgar Rice Burroughs. The Ravenloft setting 
was D&D in a gothic environment. The 
Spelljammer setting was D&D in space.
The real value of a good hook is that it gives your
players' imaginations something to grab onto and 
immediately begins to lend the game a life of its 
own. Any one of the hooks associated with these 
official D&D game worlds immediately tells you 
something about what sort of characters are 
appropriate, what sort of adventures you're likely 
to have, and what the world generally looks and 
feels like. In order to fulfill these missions, your 
hook must be simple and easily expressed. If it 
takes several paragraphs to explain why your 
world is unique, there is a good chance that your 
hook won't hit the players on a visceral level and 
fuel their imaginations like you want it to.
In the second installment of "Dungeoncraft," we 
identified five different types of effective 
campaign hooks.
1. Cultural: The world is based on a culture 
that is interesting and unusual. Examples 
include a game world with a Japanese 
flavor or a campaign set in ancient 
Greece. Several official D&D settings 
have chosen this approach, including 
Kara-Tur, Maztica, and Al Qadim.
2. Environment: An unusual environment 
dominates the game world. Imagine a 
campaign set entirely below ground or a 
game that takes place on a water world 
with a handful of tiny islands providing 
the only available land. Aris, the game 
world developed here previously, is based 
on this option -- it's entirely blanketed by 
forests.
3. Classes/Races: These campaigns limit all 
the player characters to a single class or 
race. Imagine, for instance, a campaign in 
which all the player characters are rogues 
or all the PCs are elves.
4. Opposition: Sometimes, basing the 
campaign around a particular monster or 
adversary can provide a workable hook. 
An effective game world might be 
completely dominated by undead or you 
might build an interesting world that is 
ruled by dragons.
5. Situation: Some effective hooks are 
simply the byproduct of an unusual 
situation that dominates the campaign 
setting. Imagine a game world that is on 
the brink of an impending apocalypse or a
world in which the sun never rises. Here's 
a sixth type of hook to add to that list.
Inspiration: Adopting the works of a specific 
author or artist as the inspiration for your world 
can sometimes provide a workable hook. 
Examples might include a game that features the 
sort of whimsical fantasy often found in the films 
of Terry Gilliam (such as Time Bandits or the The
Adventures of Baron Munchausen), or a 
campaign inspired by the florid fantasy of Lord 
Dunsany.
The New World
This time, "Dungeoncraft" is going to focus on a 
hook based on opposition. This new campaign 
setting will be dominated by dinosaurs. In fact it's
a world in which there are almost no mammals, 
and various sorts of dinosaurs are used as mounts 
and beasts of burden. Imagine an enormous 
apatosaurus sporting war paint and carrying a 
battle platform on its back, or a knight mounted 
atop an ankylosaurus. In addition, wild and 
fearsome dinosaurs dominate the wilderness areas
and prey upon any intruders who violate their 
territory. The aim here is to lend the world a "land
that time forgot" atmosphere with primitive 
warriors wielding stone axes and struggling to 
survive amid harsh surroundings. Altogether, this 
new world will be less civilized than Aris, and its 
inhabitants will be a great deal more savage.
This path has several interesting implications, 
many of which will present some formidable 
design challenges.
Primitive Cultures
First and foremost, the cultures that inhabit this 
new world will be a great deal more primitive 
than those that dominate a typical D&D setting. 
One obvious implication of this is that there will 
be a much lower level of technology available 
than the D&D rules presume. This lost world has 
advanced to roughly the level of Earth's early Iron
Age. While there are primitive metal swords and 
spears available, advanced metalworking (such as
that necessary to create advanced armor types) 
should be almost nonexistent. This will change 
the choice of weapons available to the players, 
but more importantly, it might upset the game's 
balance. Restricting access to the more effective 
armors, for instance, might radically reduce the 
combat effectiveness of the average party, 
particularly against foes like dinosaurs.
Furthermore, the lack of advanced technologies 
might force us to reevaluate some of the D&D 
character classes. Without access to various 
weapons and armors, certain classes lose 
important capabilities and proficiencies that 
might throw them out of balance with the other 
classes. Most likely, it will be necessary to either 
restrict the available character classes or grant 
some classes new abilities or proficiencies to 
make up for these liabilities. Similarly, the 
primitive nature of the cultures that dominate this 
new world will force us to reconsider several of 
the D&D character races. The idea of coarse, 
unrefined cultures clearly contradicts the vision 
of elves presented in D&D, for instance. Again, it
might be necessary to either limit the selection of 
available races, slightly rethink some of the 
standard races, or evolve all new races.
Magic
If you play "by the book," D&D's magic system 
isn't intended for this sort of primitive 
environment. The traditional D&D setting is 
dependent upon the classic notion of a wizard's 
workshop that is stocked with expensive 
laboratory equipment and dusty tomes full of 
arcane knowledge. Spellbooks, scrolls, and 
magical research all play prominent roles in the 
traditional setting. On this lost world, it's difficult 
to imagine encountering these things very often. 
Such primitive cultures certainly wouldn't 
develop many written materials of any kind, 
precluding an abundance of spellbooks and 
scrolls. Similarly, conditions are so harsh that it is
difficult to imagine any but the very richest 
inhabitants of the planet amassing the wealth 
necessary to construct even a modest wizard's 
workshop.
Perhaps the easiest way to address these problems
is to exclude magic (in the form of wizards) from 
the campaign altogether or to make magic-using 
characters incredibly rare. Although both are 
perfectly valid approaches, it's usually not a good 
idea to alter the basic essence of the game so 
radically. Spellcasters and magic items give D&D
a great deal of its unique flavor and play an 
important role in balancing the game. Removing 
them certainly changes the tenor of play, and it 
might also severely weaken the players' 
adventuring party, forcing the DM to take other 
steps to correct the problem as play progresses. 
For these reasons, we're going to allow 
spellcasters and retune the magic systems to tailor
them to the new world.
Harsh Reality
As hinted, this sort of "land that time forgot" 
atmosphere implies a harsh world in which mere 
survival is difficult. Although it's already decided 
that the humans and other intelligent inhabitants 
of the world have managed to tame some of the 
dinosaurs, the largest and most fearsome of the 
creatures are still the undisputed masters of their 
environment. This dominance is reinforced by the
humans' lack of advanced technologies and 
sophisticated armors. Just to clarify the intent 
here, we don't imagine the adventures set on this 
new world to be any more difficult than the 
standard D&D adventure. Although the going is 
tough, the average player character should be as 
durable as ever. Rather, it's civilization as a whole
that struggles. The life expectancy of a common 
inhabitant might be as low as thirty-five. The 
average human tribe spends so much time fleeing 
reptilian predators and natural disasters (such as 
volcanic eruptions) that there is little time to lay 
down any roots. As a consequence, food is 
probably somewhat scarce, and many of the tools 
that adventurers from other worlds take for 
granted are relatively rare on this world.
At the same time, let's not forget that dinosaurs 
are formidable opponents in D&D terms. Take a 
look at their statistics in the new Monster Manual.
Even a relatively small carnivorous dinosaur is 
more than a match for a low-level player 
character. If dinosaurs are common on the new 
world, such encounters won't be uncommon.
For these reasons, it's probably important to beef 
up the effectiveness of the typical beginning 
adventurer relative to the rest of the world's 
inhabitants. We'll want to make sure that the 
average adventuring party is capable of standing 
up to the occasional dinosaur and surviving the 
rigors that limit the population's life expectancy.
The Past
Finally, the lost world approach has one other 
interesting implication. A compelling and vibrant 
past is usually a critical component of a 
successful D&D game world -- it's the past that 
propels most D&D adventures. Aren't all those 
dungeons usually the remnants of long-dead 
ancient civilizations and forgotten cults? Aren't 
most important magic items the subject of 
legends that date back several centuries?
In a lost world situation, it might be difficult for 
the players to easily grasp the campaign's past. If 
the cultures that presently inhabit the world are so
primitive, what could have preceded them? 
Cultures that were even more primitive and even 
less refined? How could cultures like that leave 
any sort of legacy or lasting ruins in their wakes? 
In order to make it easy to create adventures set 
on this new world, we'll have to pay special 
attention to these questions as the campaign 
develops and make sure to create a past capable 
of capturing the players' imaginations.
This brings us to the Second Rule of 
Dungeoncraft. Now that an important detail about
the game world has been created (the hook), we 
need to create an appropriate secret that is tied to 
that detail. An effective secret will not only 
provide me with an interesting springboard for 
future adventures, but also will go a long way 
toward solving the problem with the past as well. 
When searching for an appropriate secret, we 
made a list of the fundamental characteristics of 
dinosaurs, looking for possibilities. An obvious 
one immediately leapt out: Dinosaurs are extinct. 
Thus, the dinosaurs on this new world are on the 
brink of extinction themselves. As play begins, 
the world is undergoing a formative change. 
Unknown to most of its inhabitants, control of the
planet is slowly but surely passing from the 
ancient dinosaurs over to the scrappy human 
upstarts. Further, the dinosaurs are somehow 
connected to an ancient and long-dead 
civilization of intelligent reptiles (lizardfolk in 
D&D terms). Somehow, long ago, the sorcerers 
of this once great civilization made a terrible 
mistake and unleashed some kind of terrible 
disaster that wiped their people from the planet 
and is still slowly killing off the last of the 
dinosaurs now. Thus, the world is probably dotted
with the remnants of the lizardfolk civilization, 
making for some interesting adventure 
opportunities. As we continue to add details to the
world, we'll have an opportunity to flesh out the 
nature of the ancient catastrophe and decide what 
it might mean for the modern adventurers.
Anyway, those are the most obvious problems 
cluttering up the road ahead. Come back in thirty 
days to see some solutions.
26
Let's Take It From the Top II
Last month, we laid the groundwork for a new 
D&D campaign to take advantage of the options 
introduced in the new rules. Our new campaign is
set on a primitive world dominated by volcanoes, 
jungles, and dinosaurs -- a sort of "lost world" 
environment that is home to primitive tribes and 
dangerous reptiles.
Way back in Chapter 3, the third installment of 
Dungeoncraft suggested that after selecting a 
"hook," the simple feature that should help root 
the campaign in the imaginations of the players, 
the next step in building a new campaign setting 
is to flesh out some rough details on the 
government and politics of the world at both the 
local and national levels. Hopefully, the details 
you create will arm you with everything you need
to start fleshing out the town or city that will 
serve as the players' "home base" in the early part
of the campaign. Although there are many valid 
approaches to building a campaign's 
infrastructure, let's try to nail down the political 
situation as the next step in building the new 
world.
The last time we tackled politics, the focus was 
on the local level, since local politics have a 
greater impact upon the early events of the 
campaign. This time, let's start thinking about the 
bigger picture and use those details to help bring 
the small stuff into focus. This world is different 
from the usual D&D campaign on the local level. 
The customary D&D "home base" (a small, safe 
town or stronghold overseen by a noble) certainly
doesn't fit the "rough-and-tumble" vision, and we 
need a better view of the whole world before we 
can be sure of how to replace it.
Thinking on a larger scale then, the primitive 
nature of the world suggests that there is no such 
thing as a large and powerful nation. Holding 
together such a union is always difficult and 
inevitably requires skills and technologies that 
don't exist on this world. It's difficult to imagine a
government operating a large nation without first 
mastering basic road-building techniques or 
inventing a fairly sophisticated bureaucracy. Most
of the inhabitants of this new world are far too 
uncivilized to possess such knowledge.
Given the details already mentioned, it seems 
clear that civilization on this new planet consists 
of a loose collection of tribal cultures -- perhaps a
whole world analogous to the situation in North 
America prior to the arrival of European settlers. 
To make things more interesting for game play, 
each tribe has its own identity and customs. 
Guaranteeing that each tribe is different from its 
rivals makes it much easier for the various 
cultures to come to life in the imaginations of the 
players. In fact, as we think about the sort of 
information we need to create for each tribe, it 
seems that there is probably very little difference 
between these tribes and the concept of a "race" 
in the D&D game.
We'll want to create between four and seven 
tribes to get the game started. In other words, just 
enough to provide variety, but not too many to 
flesh out quickly and cleanly. Although the planet
is undoubtedly home to many more cultures, 
these few are the only ones near the region where 
the bulk of the action will be set for the first few 
months of play. Because we envision the tribes to 
be conceptually close to the D&D game's races, 
an obvious source of inspiration are the D&D 
races themselves. We can meet a nice chunk of 
our needs by simply adapting existing D&D 
creatures to the world and tribal structure that we 
have in mind. Retuning the classic D&D races is 
a time-honored technique for lending a world its 
own flavor. Great examples of this technique can 
be seen in the Dragonlance and Dark Sun settings
-- Dragonlance reinvented halflings to help 
establish a less Tolkienesque feel, while Dark Sun
reworked most of the major races to create an 
alien atmosphere.
The first step in adapting the D&D races is to 
recognize their essential natures. The various 
races that appear in the Player's Handbook were 
each selected to fill a particular role, and each 
was inspired by a strong tradition of mythology 
and legend. A successful reworking taps into this 
lore and leaves the essence of the creature 
untouched, while providing new details to fuel 
the players' imaginations.
Before tampering with races, you should 
understand that players expect certain 
characteristics from each of them, and failing to 
satisfy these expectations is likely to cause 
confusion. Populating your game world with 
brutish elves cuts sharply against the grain of 
D&D tradition. After all, it's easy enough to 
create a beastly race of folks with pointed ears 
and not call them elves. Presumably, the only 
reason you'd use the label "elf" to describe your 
creation is to convey something about the race's 
nature and behavior to your players.
Here are some reflections on the essences of the 
various D&D races. You might disagree with a 
few details here and there, and that's fine. The 
important thing is that you collect your own 
thoughts before beginning your redesigns.
Elves and Half-Elves
Essential Characteristics: Old, wise, artistic, 
connected to nature, ancient civilization, rich 
traditions.
Function in D&D: Elves are a great font of 
knowledge. Players visit them when they need to 
learn something, particularly about the ancient 
past.
Elves and Half-Elves: Elves are often the oldest 
and wisest race inhabiting the typical D&D 
world. Their extraordinary lifespans and the 
remarkable age of their civilization generally 
combine to result in a very advanced culture that 
is rich in tradition. As a result, elven society is 
often dominated by the fruits of this culture, such 
as poetry, song, and other artistic endeavors.
An important characteristic of elves that stems 
from the advanced age of their society is an 
unusual affinity with the mysteries of life. 
Typically, many centuries of study have allowed 
the elven civilization to penetrate several of the 
great secrets of the universe. This is why elves 
often make such great wizards and sorcerers, and 
why elves are usually responsible for so many of 
the magic items found in the typical D&D setting.
This same characteristic also explains why elves 
often share some sort of special bond with nature.
In most campaign settings, elven society is 
consumed by an air of impending tragedy. The 
elves usually boast the oldest and most advanced 
civilization in a typical D&D setting, but these 
same worlds are always invariably dominated by 
humans. This tends to imply that the great elven 
civilization is in its twilight years and slowly 
waning to make way for a great age of humanity.
Dwarves
Essential Characteristics: Resilient, attuned to the 
underworld, strong sense of honor, master 
crafters.
Function in D&D: Like elves, dwarves are a 
source of knowledge. Their specialties are the 
underworld and magic weapons. Dwarves also 
give the players access to important skills and 
allies in dungeon environments.
Dwarves: Most often, dwarves are inextricably 
linked to the underworld. Dwarven citadels lie 
beneath stony mountains or at the bottom of deep 
dungeons. Their affiliation for these environments
tends to define dwarves as master crafters. Since 
mining and stonecutting skills are so often the 
key to its survival, dwarven civilization learned to
place a high value on these arts long ago. While 
elven society is often focused on studying and 
understanding the world, the society of the 
dwarves is committed to reshaping it. Dwarves 
believe that the process of creation is the single 
thread that unites all the great mysteries of life, 
and they believe the only way to penetrate those 
mysteries is to become a creator. This is why 
they'd rather tend a forge than study poetry, and 
why they are better known as crafters than magic 
wielders.
Typically, beyond craftsmanship, dwarves respect
nothing so much as personal honor. The concepts 
of self-sacrifice and heroism that fuel this attitude
stem from the unique hardships and rugged 
environments that dwarves face from childhood. 
To a dwarf, life is a test that must be faced justly. 
The temptation to unfairly improve one's station 
at the expense of another is a cancer that threatens
dwarven civilization. It's this characteristic that 
explains their tendency toward the lawful 
alignments.
Halflings
Essential Characteristics: Resourceful, clever, 
opportunistic, curious.
Function in D&D: Halflings live among other 
societies, taking advantage of whatever 
opportunities come their way. Halfling provide a 
good neutral source of adventure, either as people
who need protection or as the instigators of 
problems PCs must solve.
Halflings: Halflings are distinguished by their 
opportunistic mindset. They've never found the 
motivation to build the sort of elaborate empires 
favored by elves and dwarves because they prefer
to let other races do such things and then take 
advantage of all the opportunities those empires 
provide. As a whole, the halfling race is always 
on the move, finding a way to fit into whatever 
society can offer them new gains and the 
comforts they enjoy.
Individual halflings tend to be amazingly 
resourceful and dedicated. Often curious to a 
fault, halflings can be lead on the path of 
adventure at a whim.
Gnomes
Essential Characteristics: Inquisitive, ingenious, 
mischievous.
Function in D&D: Gnomes create unusual 
inventions that add flavor to the game world. 
Their creations can also help the players 
overcome specific obstacles.
Gnomes: Like the dwarves, gnomes tend to be 
defined by their craftsmanship. The difference is 
that gnome creations emphasize function over 
form and exhibit an uncanny technological 
sophistication. Whereas the dwarves are master 
smiths and stonecutters, the gnomes excel at 
creating mechanical gizmos, alchemical 
concoctions, clockwork machines and various 
other complex gadgets. They can't resist the urge 
to tinker, prod, and explore. The gnome 
civilization has evolved a unique philosophy that 
lies midway between those of the elves and the 
dwarves. Gnomes simultaneously favor 
understanding and reshaping the natural world, 
and it is the unique combination of these beliefs 
that is always pushing them to the fringes of any 
art or science they decide to explore. Thus, 
gnomes are talented spellcasters (unlike 
dwarves), but they are not content to simply 
unlock the secrets of magic (like the elves). 
Instead, they're constantly tempted to innovate 
and create unusual new spells.
Half-Orcs
Essential Characteristics: Outcasts, savage.
Function in D&D: Half-orcs allow players to 
create "fish-out-of-water" characters.
Half-Orcs: In most D&D game worlds, half-orcs 
are the ultimate outcasts. Orcs tend to see them as
soft and weak, while humans usually regard them 
as coarse and ugly. The real value of the half-orc 
as a game concept is that it allows players to take 
on the role of a "fish out of water" or a "bad boy 
made good." Assuming the role of an outcast is an
unusual challenge that often leads to lots of 
interesting roleplaying opportunities. Similarly, 
characters who must learn to overcome their own 
essentially violent natures to become great heroes
are a staple of fantasy fiction and comic books 
(think Worf on Star Trek or Wolverine from X-
Men). The idea of playing such a character is 
very appealing.
Now that we've boiled down the standard D&D 
races, we can identify possibilities for the "lost 
world" and rule out those that don't fit. Right off 
the bat, for example, we'll rule out halflings. The 
tightly knit, clannish societies of this world are on
a constant quest for survival, and they are 
unlikely to allow halflings in their midst. The 
opportunist mindset of the halflings would be 
detrimental. They simply don't exist on this 
world. You shouldn't be afraid to take a similar 
step when designing your own world. Just 
because a character race is listed in the Player's 
Handbook doesn't mean you have to offer that 
race in your campaign. In fact, if you don't have a
clear idea of how the race fits into your plans, 
you're better off excluding it. If one of your 
players should select a race you're not completely
comfortable with, you'll only be forced to expend 
a lot of valuable creative energy inventing details 
you're not ready for.
Similarly, the gnomes' fondness for wacky spells 
and inventions doesn't fit. Not only do we 
envision a primitive world that is far less 
advanced than the common D&D setting, we're 
also looking to create an atmosphere of savagery 
and danger. The congenial, carefree nature of the 
gnomes might spoil that.
Elves, dwarves, and half-orcs remain. To this list, 
we add three human tribes. This assortment 
should work out just fine because it will insure 
that there are as many human options as 
nonhuman. That should help reinforce the notion 
that the balance of power is still tipped in favor of
humanity. 
That wraps up another installment. Next month, 
we'll flesh out the five tribes that will dominate 
the early phases of the new campaign and present 
guidelines for using the information in the 
Player's Handbook and Dungeon Master's Guide 
to draw up the game information necessary to 
turn these creations into full-fledged D&D player 
races.
27
Off to the Races
Last month, "Dungeoncraft" hinted at the basic 
political situation of the new campaign world. 
Since it's a rough-and-tumble "land that time 
forgot" setting, the world is dominated by a loose 
collection of primitive tribes with little or no 
central organization. Five tribes were created to 
get the campaign off the ground -- one elven, one 
dwarven, one half-orc, and two human. The next 
step is to start adding details. In the spirit of the 
First Rule of Dungeoncraft, we only need enough 
information about each tribe to allow the 
campaign to get underway. Once simple details 
on the various tribes are decided, basic political 
and geographical characteristics about each of 
them can be created.
The Solaani (Elves)
Elves usually enjoy the oldest and most advanced
civilization on the typical D&D game world, so 
the elves of this world literally live higher up than
the other tribes. They inhabit lofty citadels 
located in the mountains. As a consequence, 
they've managed to tame a variety of flying 
reptiles with whom they share an almost 
supernatural bond that is now several centuries 
old. An elite order of elven knights ride into battle
mounted on these flying creatures.
As on most D&D worlds, the elven civilization is 
the oldest culture on the planet. This suggests that
it was actually the elves who were responsible for
the downfall of the lizardfolk civilization that 
once dominated the world (see Chapter 25). 
Combining this idea with the hint of tragedy that 
is usually implicit in the elven culture inspires an 
idea for an interesting secret, neatly taking care of
the obligation to the Second Rule of 
Dungeoncraft. Somehow, during the final conflict
of that great war, the elven leaders were secretly 
forced to sacrifice the future of their own people 
in order to secure a victory over the lizardfolk. As
a result, the elven civilization is gradually waning
and doomed to die out.
Culturally, the elves are a people of ceremony and
tradition. Although still less technologically 
advanced than the average culture on the average 
D&D game world, the elves are certainly the 
most sophisticated inhabitants of the lost world. 
Theirs is the only living culture that has evolved 
its own written language, the single most 
important tool the elves have used to safeguard 
and pass along generations' worth of lore and 
tradition.
Within the campaign, the elven civilization can 
function as a sort of library. The elves are a 
convenient source of mystical secrets and 
historical facts that will be needed upon occasion 
to serve as clues and springboards into 
adventures. This notion leads to the idea that 
knowledge is somehow tied to the social 
hierarchy within elven civilization -- every time 
an elf attains a higher social status, the tribal 
elders entrust her with a few new secrets. This 
way, only the tribe's highest-ranking elders know 
everything, a fact that conveniently explains why 
PC elves don't begin play knowing many of the 
world's secrets.
The Inuundi (Dwarves)
Dwarves are the great craftsmen of most D&D 
game worlds. This characteristic suggests that 
perhaps it was the dwarves who originally built 
all the cities and tunnels inhabited by the 
lizardfolk who once dominated the planet. This in
turn suggests that the entire dwarven race was 
once enslaved by the lizardfolk. Just before the 
empire of the lizardfolk fell, a Spartacus-type 
hero led an uprising of the dwarven slaves and 
secured their freedom. In fact, the results of this 
upheaval were probably so catastrophic that it 
seems natural to tie the revolt into the downfall of
the lizardfolk. Thus, at some point the leader of 
the dwarven uprising made an alliance with the 
leaders of the Solaani and it was this pact that 
both bought the dwarves their freedom and sealed
the Solaani victory. The elders of the dwarven 
tribe might even know the secret about the 
forthcoming end of the elven civilization.
Their background suggests that the dwarves of 
the lost world are somewhat isolationist. 
Although they have reached a tacit understanding 
with the elves, their centuries of slavery have 
made them generally distrustful of outsiders. 
Even now, several generations after they secured 
their freedom, only the hardiest dwarves have 
much contact with the outside world. The debate 
over whether or not to become more involved 
with nondwarves might be a major issue that 
divides dwarven society. A growing faction of 
younger dwarves might be urging their elders to 
strengthen ties with the rest of the world. The 
existence of such a faction provides a convenient 
means to explain PC dwarves, who obviously 
don't spend their time hidden away with the rest 
of the tribe.
The fact that the dwarves are isolationists implies 
that their home is naturally cut off from the 
outside world. In observance of D&D tradition, a 
subterranean home seems to be in order. The 
dwarves of the lost world will inhabit an 
underground citadel they once constructed for the
lizardfolk. This citadel is just one terminus of a 
huge network of underground structures and 
tunnels the dwarves constructed for their former 
masters. These subterranean passages allowed the
lizardfolk to travel across the continent -- they 
were as important to the reptilian empire as roads 
were to the ancient Romans. Since the civilization
of the lizardfolk collapsed, darker, less pleasant 
things began to occupy the tunnels, and even the 
dwarves fear to enter all but a few of them. This 
last bit of lore should guarantee an adequate 
supply of "dungeons" all over the continent. It 
also suggests an important role the dwarves can 
play in the campaign. Theoretically, the dwarves 
might be the only inhabitants of the lost world 
who are familiar with the locations and secrets of 
all the dungeons and tunnels. Thus, the dwarves 
can easily serve as an important source of ancient 
maps and geographical tidbits that can be used as 
adventure hooks.
The Second Rule of Dungeoncraft requires a 
secret about the dwarves: The dwarves are 
actually a genetic offshoot of the elves. 
Generations ago, before the dwarves were 
enslaved, the dwarves and elves were one people.
The elf leader at the time voluntarily offered up 
half of his tribe into servitude to protect the 
remaining half. Over the generations, natural 
selection forced the enslaved elves to evolve and 
adapt to their work in the tunnels. Gradually, they
became shorter, stockier, and more hairy.
The Half-Breeds (Half-Orcs)
As noted last month, on most D&D game worlds,
half-orcs play the role of the ultimate outcasts. 
Somewhat shunned by polite civilization and orcs
alike, the half-breeds are often forced to look out 
for themselves and occupy whatever little niche 
in society they can manage to craft for 
themselves.
Figuring out how half-orcs fit into the world 
obviously forces one to figure out how orcs fit in,
and you shouldn't create too much too fast. But 
what if the half-orcs aren't really half-orcs at all, 
but half-lizardfolk? In many respects, the new 
campaign is set up so that lizardfolk will play the 
role traditionally occupied by orcs: powerful evil 
humanoids who oppose elves and dwarves. 
Although their empire is now shattered, it's easy 
to imagine tribes of scattered lizardfolk still 
roaming the landscape and perhaps providing the 
lion's share of the players' opposition early in the 
campaign. Since it's already established that the 
lizardfolk are slavers, it's easy to imagine them 
siring half-breed children, and these unfortunates 
would suffer the same fate reserved for half-orcs 
in the typical D&D game world. Another strong 
advantage of this plan is that the unique half-
lizardfolk race helps reinforce the campaign's 
unique identity.
Most of the half-breeds on the lost world live on 
the fringes of other tribal societies and integrate 
into those cultures as best they can. Because the 
lizardfolk are so hated and mistrusted by most of 
the world's other inhabitants, the half-breeds are 
the victims of a lot of prejudice, and most of 
those who are accepted into other societies are 
only adopted reluctantly. Still, the hardships tend 
to make the half-breeds who survive resourceful 
and durable.
To make things a tad more interesting, there are 
rumors all across the lost world of a whole tribe 
entirely made up of half-lizardfolk. Most believe 
that this tribe lives somewhere within the ancient 
dwarven tunnels and occasionally ventures forth 
to raid other tribes and liberate more half-breeds. 
Many half-lizardfolk dream of one day finding 
this tribe and joining its ranks.
The Second Rule of Dungeoncraft requires a 
secret about the half breeds: This semi-secret 
tribe exists, and its charismatic leader is not a 
half-breed at all, but an elf who uses magic to 
disguise her appearance. The elf has been secretly
assembling the half-breed army to combat some 
enormous calamity she expects to arise over the 
next several years. She originally attempted to 
convince her fellow Solaani of the danger 
decades ago, but when it was clear they would 
not accept her warning, she began assembling her
army. At this time, not even her followers are 
aware of her true nature or grand purpose.
The Bruun (Human)
Most D&D game worlds are human-centric, and 
the lost world isn't an exception. At least two-
thirds of the campaign's player characters and 
important NPCs will be human. To encourage 
such a trend, the world needs a couple of 
interesting human tribes to attract the players' 
attention.
The largest and most populous band of humans in
the campaign's starting area is a tribe of 
formidable warriors known as the Bruun. In many
ways, the Bruun are an echo of the Spartans. 
Bruun society believes that the best way to insure 
survival is to begin brutally training the young at 
the earliest possible age. By the age of twelve, a 
warrior of the Bruun is a fierce combatant who 
has already learned how to survive alone in the 
jungle for several days. These harsh measures not
only prepare the youngsters for life on the lost 
world, but they cull out the weak, allowing the 
tribe to expend its resources on those with the 
best chance for survival.
Across the lost world, the Bruun are known not 
only for their battle prowess and ferocity but also 
for their elaborate festivals. Several times each 
year, all Bruun take part in complex rituals that 
re-enact various parables, legends, and important 
moments in tribe's history. The ceremonies are 
the means by which the Bruun hand down 
important lessons.
Two distinct "subtribes" of Bruun inhabit the 
starting area of the lost world -- one basically 
good-aligned and the other mostly evil. Such a 
schism makes a certain amount of sense -- the 
larger a primitive tribe gets, the more difficult it 
becomes to hold the tribe together. The division 
also accommodates a broader range of Bruun 
PCs. The basic origin of the separation was a 
sharp disagreement among tribal elders as to how 
to insure the survival of the tribe. One faction 
believed in using conquest to consolidate the 
tribe's power, while a second refused to subjugate
any free creature if it did not pose a direct threat 
to the Bruun. Eventually, some seventy-five years
before the campaign begins, the former faction 
left the main tribe to seek its own destiny. Both 
factions of Bruun now inhabit their own 
makeshift strongholds within the jungle and the 
surrounding hills.
The Bruun schism provides a good idea for a 
secret. The leaders of the evil-aligned "conquest" 
faction were actually subtly manipulated by a 
mysterious stranger, who is the real father of their
beliefs. To this day, the stranger still visits the 
leaders of the separatist faction and exerts an 
influence over them. Inexplicably, he doesn't 
appear to have aged a day in the last three-
quarters of a century. Over time, the stranger has 
taken his puppets down darker and darker paths, 
subtly fueling their bloodlust and need for 
conquest. Lately, he has introduced the leaders of 
the faction to an eerie magic ritual during which 
they drink the blood of a tyrannosaurus, the oldest
and most powerful of all the creatures on the 
planet; in return, they receive incredible raging 
strength and prowess. Of all the Bruun, only the 
elders of the separatist tribe have had any contact 
with the stranger and know he exists.
The stranger is actually a were-raptor, a shape 
shifter who can change between human and 
dinosaur forms. The were-raptors are servants of 
the tyrannosaurs, who possess a secret spiritual 
and malevolent intelligence. Although they are all
but extinct and rarely encountered on the lost 
world, the tyrannosaurs are much more than mere
dinosaurs and still subtly manipulate the affairs of
the planet like some sort of dark gods. Through 
their servant, they are slowly guiding the Bruun 
separatists toward a secret sinister destiny.
The Vistiiri (Human)
The second human tribe is a group of nomads 
known as the Vistiiri. Although they are not as 
populous or influential as the Bruun, the Vistiiri 
still comfortably out-number the Solaani and 
Inuundi in the campaign's starting area. Although 
they boast their own impressive army and they 
are more than capable of defending themselves, 
the Vistiiri basically believe in peace. To them, 
life on the lost world is already hard enough 
without going out to seek additional conflict.
The Vistiiri do not inhabit any sort of fixed 
villages and instead wander from place to place, 
following a carefully calculated plan of 
migration. Their aim is to avoid the hunting trails 
followed by the larger carnivorous dinosaurs at 
various points in the year. Along their routes, they
conduct a lot of trade with neighboring tribes, 
making them a good source of information about 
events in the region.
Thanks to their frequent contact with the Solaani, 
the Vistiiri have developed a true love of song, 
and just about every member of the tribe carries a
musical instrument. In fact, an interesting tribal 
custom has arisen around the Vistiiri's fondness 
for music. Whenever an older member of the tribe
is on his or her deathbed, the Vistiiri craft a 
unique musical instrument and place it at the 
elder's side. When death comes, the Vistiiri 
believe that the voice of the elder departs the 
body and moves into the instrument, where it can 
be heard whenever the instrument is played 
thereafter. These special instruments have a 
number of important functions in Vistiiri society. 
Skilled bards seem to have the ability to 
commune with the departed spirits of the elders 
by playing elaborate compositions on them. Also, 
the Vistiiri prefer to go into battle with the voices 
of their ancestors before them; a whole troop of 
musicians producing a cacophonous symphony 
on hundreds of unique instruments always stands 
at the head of their armies.
Their secret? The head of the Vistiiri tribe carries 
an unusual musical instrument as his badge of 
honor. The instrument houses the voice of one of 
the oldest and wisest departed chieftains of the 
tribe. For generations now, unknown to all, the 
spirit of the departed chieftain has been the real 
ruler of the tribe -- the rulers who have followed 
him have done little more than unwittingly follow
his instructions. This explains why the Vistiiri 
chieftain is usually found alone in his tent, 
obsessively playing the instrument; he is actually 
receiving instructions from the elder. As sinister 
as this sounds, it's actually good for the Vistiiri 
people. The departed elder is an excellent leader 
and his spirit has already guided the tribe through 
calamities that his earthly ancestors could not 
have handled on their own.
Putting it All Together
So now that the basic assortment of tribes has 
been decided, a quick summary of the overall 
political situation is in order. The chart below 
explains the relationship between the tribes. You 
can cross-index any two tribes to find out how 
they view each other.
Solaani Inuundi Half-
Breed
Bruun Vistiiri Lizard-
folk
Solaani 0 - 0 + --
Inuundi 0 - 0 T --
Half-
Breed
- - - T -
Bruun 0 0 - - --
Vistiiri + T T - T
Lizard-
folk
-- -- - -- T
Each tribe generally prefers dealing with its own kind.
T: The Vistiiri trade with all most other inhabitants of the 
lost world, including some lizardfolk. The one exception is 
the separatist Bruun faction. By and large, the Vistiiri have 
cordial, but not particularly friendly relations with their 
trading partners.
+: The two tribes favor each other and enjoy friendly 
relations.
-: The tribes view each other with suspicion, though they 
are not openly enemies.
--: The tribes generally view each other as enemies.
28
Gotta Have Faith, Part I
Three issues ago, "Dungeoncraft" started crafting 
an entirely new D&D campaign to showcase the 
rules of the new D&D game. This time around, 
the goal is to build a rough and tumble "lost 
world" dominated by dinosaurs, volcanoes, and 
primitive tribes. So far, a basic overview of the 
world and a first look at the basic political 
situation in the campaign's starting area have 
been developed. Some of the D&D game's races 
have also been customized to make them more at 
home in this creation. This month, let's flesh out a
few details about the gods, myths, and faiths of 
the lost world.
The subject of designing gods and faiths for D&D
campaigns was first dealt with way back in 
Dragon 258. That installment noted a few reasons
why it was particularly important to start thinking
about the deities and religions that will dominate 
your campaign setting as early in the world-
building process as possible. In addition, a five-
step process for creating a suitable faith from 
scratch was outlined. Rather than repeat that 
advice here, go ahead and either dig into your 
collection of Dragon back issues or point your 
web browser to the "Dungeoncraft" archive 
online. If possible, you might want to peruse the 
earlier column right now, before reading further.
Fortunately, almost all of the earlier advice is still
sound even in the wake of the new edition. 
Therefore, we're going to create the gods of the 
lost world by stepping through the same five-step 
process used last time, while selecting some 
different options on this go-round. This is also a 
good opportunity to demonstrate a technique or 
two for tweaking the D&D game rules to help 
lend your campaign its own flavor.
Step One: Polytheism vs. 
Monotheism
Just in case you don't have your dictionary handy,
"polytheistic" faiths believe in a multitude of 
interrelated gods, while their "monotheistic" 
counterparts believe in a single supreme deity. 
Since most D&D game worlds feature 
polytheistic religions, a monotheistic faith was 
incorporated into the last campaign just to be 
different. On that world, the only true god was 
Aris, the living consciousness of the planet itself. 
This time, in the interest of variety, we'll design a 
polytheistic faith. The next step, therefore, is to 
figure out roughly how many gods are necessary 
and how they are interconnected.
On most D&D worlds, the gods are organized 
into pantheons that give each god complete 
dominion over one particular realm. In other 
words, there might be a god of the sea, a god of 
the sun, a god of poetry, a god of war, and so 
forth. Similarly, most D&D campaigns are built 
around gods who walk in human form and 
manifest larger-than-life human personality traits.
Because this is our second time around the block, 
let's avoid these D&D conventions when possible
in the hope of creating something a bit more 
ambitious. The idea of all-powerful gods lording 
over the lost world just doesn't seem right. One of
the campaign's major themes is that savagery is 
everywhere and survival is difficult. If possible, 
this theme should be reflected in the gods created 
for the world. Deities should find life every bit as 
rough as their mortal subjects. Also, since the 
dinosaurs are the real "stars" of this world and 
represent its major differentiating feature, there 
should be a way to reflect them in the gods as 
well. 
It makes a certain amount of sense to turn some 
of the dinosaurs themselves into gods. As it's 
been presented thus far, the lost world is the 
ultimate venue for Darwin's concept of the 
survival of the fittest. What if the very oldest and 
fittest survivors acquire a reverence from Mother 
Nature and their fellow creatures that is akin to a 
spiritual aura? In other words, somewhere off in 
the forest is a tyrannosaurus rex that is so old, so 
large, and so fearsome that it has become a sort of
god. All the other inhabitants of the lost world 
immediately recognize the halo of power that 
surrounds this creature, and even the planet itself 
seems to shake with fear when it passes. The 
mysterious energies that emanate from the 
tyrannosaurus rex somehow stem from its long 
history -- all the battles it has won, the years it 
has seen, and the other creatures it has 
subjugated. These forces are so powerful that 
some of the world's humans, humanoids, and 
lizardfolk cultists who revere these beasts are 
capable of tapping into the energy themselves to 
manipulate the natural world (that is, through 
divine spells).
This concept is appealing for a number of 
reasons: Not only does it meet all the goals and 
establish that the lost world is quite unlike the 
standard D&D setting, it also has the advantage 
of providing some interesting springboards for 
potential adventures. Although they should be 
rarely seen, the fact that the gods walk the earth 
alongside the player characters is appealing. The 
idea that the PCs might one day confront a god 
also provides some interesting adventure ideas. 
It's not clear exactly how or why this would 
happen just yet, but it sounds heroic and 
interesting. 
This idea also fits well with the various concepts 
already created. The Solaani (elves) enjoy a 
special bond with pterosaurs, for instance. 
Undoubtedly they worship some sort of enormous
pterosaur who has become one of these gods. 
Similarly, it's already been established that the 
tyrannosaurs possess some mysterious form of 
group intelligence and have actually hatched a 
scheme that has torn the Bruun, one of the human
tribes, in half (see last issue). It looks like the 
great tyrannosaurus rex god is the source of that 
strange intelligence.
Of course, this concept does have one drawback: 
The gods usually suggest a few interesting details
about the campaign setting: How was the world 
formed? What is the nature of good and evil? 
That most of them will have fascinating histories 
of their own is an easy assumption to make, but 
these gods are really little more than glorified 
animals. They didn't create their world; it created 
them. Most of the central mysteries still remain.
To solve this problem, a second set of even older 
gods can be created who are now extinct. These 
elder beings were much closer to human in 
composition and attitude, and it was their power 
that created the lost world. This second pantheon 
consisted of two arch-gods: one representing light
and symbolized by the sun, the other representing
darkness and symbolized by a moon. Each of 
these elder beings was totally consumed by a 
hatred for his rival and the pair of them spent the 
whole of their very long lives battling each other. 
In fact, they created the lost world to serve as 
their battleground, standing as it does at the 
midway point between the sun and the moon. 
Over time, the lost world itself gave birth to the 
various creatures who came to dominate it, 
including the various dinosaur gods and the 
lizardfolk who built a civilization and a faith to 
celebrate them.
One day, the god of darkness finally struck a 
blow that was powerful enough to shatter the god 
of light into countless little fragments, each of 
which was an individual living being. These 
fragments became the Solaani (elves), the first 
mammalian inhabitants of the lost world. Over 
time, the Inuundi (dwarves) and the humans 
gradually evolved from the Solaani. Although 
these newly formed savages didn't realize their 
divine origins for many generations, most of them
did manifest a natural aversion to darkness almost
immediately, explaining perhaps why most of the 
humanoid inhabitants of the lost world favor 
nonevil alignments.
Once he destroyed his brother, the god of 
darkness was faced with a dilemma. His entire 
existence was defined by his hatred for his rival, 
and if the great battle was to come to an end, his 
life would have no more meaning. For about a 
century he tried to figure out how to continue the 
struggle against his hated enemy before he finally
noticed the Solaani and resolved to destroy them. 
Since there was no effective way to battle so 
many Solaani in his singular form, he traveled 
back to the lost world and let the great 
tyrannosaur god and its followers devour him. 
That way, the beasts and their followers among 
the lizardfolk would absorb his essence and his 
hatred, driving them to hound and hunt the 
Solaani and their descendants. The tyrannosaurs' 
plot against the Bruun is probably a direct 
manifestation of the darkness god's evil influence.
Before going further, it's worth deciding how 
much of this backstory is generally known to the 
world's inhabitants. While it's safe to assume that 
the denizens of the lost world are aware of the 
role the gods of light and darkness played in the 
creation of their world, only a few truly 
enlightened individuals should understand the 
elder gods' final fates. The idea of keeping the 
true origin of the Solaani a secret, as well as the 
fact that the spirit of the darkness god lives on in 
the tyrannosaurs is likewise appealing. This 
leaves a couple of big mysteries for the players to
uncover and neatly takes care of the obligation to 
the Second Rule of Dungeoncraft: Most of the 
world believes that the old gods simply perished 
in one last cataclysmic battle.
Speaking of big secrets, this latest bit of 
backstory has provided some inspiration that 
allows the opportunity to plug an earlier hole. As 
you might recall from the last couple of 
installments, the Solaani were somehow 
responsible for the downfall of the lizardfolk, and
this triumph is slowly leading to the end of their 
civilization. It was never established, though, just 
how the Solaani accomplished their victory. Now 
that the elves' true origins are set down, what if 
the elves are secretly "reconstructing" the god of 
light? Since the elves are fragments of the elder 
god, several of them somehow reunited 
themselves to form a lesser version of the long-
dead god. It was this measure that was finally 
necessary to defeat the lizardfolk, and it was this 
move that is slowly making the Solaani extinct. 
The reconstruction was accomplished through 
some sort of powerful magic spell, and a side 
effect of that spell is that the life essences of more
and more Solaani are being drawn to the proto-
god and rejoined over time. This phenomenon 
manifests itself as a strange plague contracted by 
the elves. The victims of this plague aren't really 
dying, though; their souls are simply being 
absorbed back into the god of light. Eventually, 
the god might be entirely reassembled.
All of this might also explain the strange plot of 
the tyrannosaur god and its followers. Perhaps the
god of darkness knows what is happening and is 
influencing the dinosaurs to snuff out his newly 
reborn foe and destroy the Solaani before the god 
of light can grow any more powerful. 
These ideas are useful because they should 
provide lots of interesting ideas for adventures. A 
Solaani PC might contract the plague, the 
characters might find and confront the newly 
reformed god of light, they might get caught up in
the plot of the tyrannosaur god, and so on. For 
maximum effect, this should be a secret for some 
time (as per the Second Rule). Only the very 
highest level elves understand the true nature of 
the plague that is slowly wiping out their 
civilization. 
Step Two: The Nature of the 
Gods
Now that the pantheon of the lost world has been 
sketched out, it's time to consider their basic 
natures. Fortunately, most of the information has 
already been created. But since the dinosaur gods 
are going to have the biggest impact upon the 
game world for the foreseeable future, it's 
necessary to flesh them out just a tad more. How 
many of these gods exist, what are their spheres 
of influence, and how do they conduct 
themselves?
Although it's obviously an arbitrary decision, four
dinosaur gods seems just about right. That 
provides enough gods for variety, but not so many
that a lot of early effort is expended creating 
them. Fortunately, this decision isn't restrictive -- 
with the way the structure is set up, it will be easy
enough to add more gods later should the need 
arise.
As indicated earlier, one of the dinosaur gods is a 
tyrannosaur and another is a pterosaur. This 
leaves two slots to fill. One obvious choice is 
some sort of sea creature, perhaps a giant 
plesiosaur (something akin to the Loch Ness 
monster for those of you who are dino-
challenged). A second good choice might be an 
ultrasaur (a classic bulky plant eater with a long 
neck and tail). Although the ultrasaur is not really
sentient, it's necessary to assign a "personality" 
trait or two to each of the gods to help 
differentiate them from each other. Each god 
should also possess a mystical bond with certain 
aspects of nature. Finally, each god should get a 
name. "Tyrannosaur god" is getting old.
For maximum effect, the dinosaur gods should 
rarely show themselves. They spend most of their
time hidden away in valleys and grottos unknown
to the lost world's sentient inhabitants. When they
do appear, they are always accompanied by a 
hefty retinue of lesser dinosaurs who serve as 
their followers. Although most of the dinosaur 
gods are generally disinterested in the affairs of 
the world around them (Kor being the obvious 
exception), they do occasionally use their 
considerable influences to defend their territories 
or aid the cults of worshippers who have sprung 
up to honor them. For now, these are probably the
only important factors to worry about.
Next month, we'll translate this bizarre 
mythology into D&D terms and offer some tips 
on how to customize the game rules to lend your 
clerics a little extra flavor.
Name Type "Personality" Aspects of 
Nature
Kor Tyrannosaur Vicious predatory, regal 
The hunt, death
Abrexis Pterosaur Wise inquisitive, free 
Skies, wind
Haali Plesiosaur Vain tempestuous Seas,
storms
Kalaar Ultrasaur Serene matronly The 
land, family
29
Gotta Have Faith, Part II
Last month, we looked at the major gods that 
hold sway over the Lost World. In this outing, 
let's conclude the design of faith and religion by 
taking a long look at those who worship the gods.
Along the way, we'll consider some tips for 
customizing the D&D game rules to accentuate 
the unique flavor of the campaign.
Note that we're employing a five-step process for 
designing gods and faiths originally detailed way 
back in Dragon 258. You can find this piece in the
"Dungeoncraft" archives.
Last issue, we completed steps one and two of the
process, which leads us next to . . .
Step Three: Faith and 
Worshippers
Most of the active gods in the campaign are 
essentially the oldest and largest dinosaurs on the 
planet. They earned their divine aspects by 
surviving the travails of the Lost World for ages, 
and this process has somehow translated into a 
mystical aura that surrounds them. The gods are 
rarely seen, but when they appear their presence 
inspires an overpowering sense of awe, and the 
planet itself seems to tremble in their shadows. 
It's important to note that, unlike the divine 
beings of the typical D&D world, these gods 
don't dwell in an extradimensional palace on 
another plane. They live right on the Lost World 
with everyone else, although they confine their 
wanderings to secret glens and grottos known 
only to their followers.
Although the dinosaur gods aren't overtly 
sentient, they do possess an undeniable 
intelligence and personality. They are clearly 
capable of communicating with their own kind 
using some sort of unspoken language, and the 
few humans who have managed to interact with 
the gods have been left with an impression of 
great wisdom. We've already decided that one of 
the gods, Kor the tyrannosaur, is somehow 
involved in a mysterious plot that threatens the 
whole of the Lost World (see Dragon 283). 
Now that we know something about the gods, the 
next task is to decide how the other inhabitants of
the Lost World pay homage to them. One 
possibility is that the humans and other civilized 
residents of the planet don't worship the gods. 
Perhaps only the other dinosaurs recognize their 
sovereignty. Although this is an interesting idea, 
it's pretty easy to reject. After all, faith and 
religion are important parts of the D&D game. If 
the humans and other intelligent races don't honor
the gods, it's difficult to imagine clerics and 
paladins, and the whole game changes radically. 
While it's certainly possible to run a campaign 
like this, it's not what we have in mind for the 
Lost World. We aim to create a game world with 
a distinctive "feel," but one built on familiar 
D&D concepts.
Somehow, then, the civilized inhabitants must 
pay their respects to the dinosaur gods. This 
presents a slightly sticky situation, since few of 
the traditional reasons why a culture worships its 
deities are applicable to these gods. Typically, one
might pray to the god of the skies for good 
weather before setting out to sea, or pray to the 
goddess of bounty to guarantee a good harvest. 
It's pretty clear, though, that these dinosaur gods 
don't have this sort of direct control over the 
environment. Other than not eating him, it's hard 
to say exactly how one of these gods might 
reward a loyal follower.
Our best bet is to take advantage of this mystery. 
Perhaps no one knows why certain members of 
the civilized communities of the Lost World 
swear their allegiance to the dinosaur gods -- not 
even the faithful themselves. Let's suppose that 
each of the gods has a cult of priests. Each cult 
serves as a network of guardians and agents that 
looks out for the god's interests and carries out 
subtle instructions the god somehow 
communicates to them through instinct and 
intuition. Oddly, the priests cannot explain 
exactly why they serve -- it's simply a compulsion
that has been with them for as long as they can 
remember. Shortly after birth, the priests-to-be 
receive a telepathic calling from the god and feel 
the mysterious compulsion to serve. This isn't to 
imply that the priests are mind-controlled by their
lords, simply that they are guided through instinct
and emotion; each priest maintains freewill and is
theoretically capable of turning his back on his 
patron, though few have done so. No one 
understands the mechanics of how the gods select
their followers. Heredity is certainly not a factor 
(for example, the son of a priest has no better or 
worse chance of becoming a priest than anyone 
else), and geographical location seems equally 
meaningless. It's clear that some receive the call 
to serve even though their gods have never passed
within hundreds of miles of their birthplaces.
These priests are the clerics of the Lost World. In 
addition to spiritual guidance, the gods also 
bestow powers upon them in the form of divine 
spells. Partially because of these powers, the 
priests are natural leaders in their communities. 
They are often able to assemble their own flocks 
of followers to help them do their master's 
bidding. This means that all the inhabitants of the 
Lost World are generally aware of the various 
priesthoods, and it guarantees that the dinosaur 
priests function almost exactly like the clerics 
who inhabit the traditional D&D game world.
Note that by keeping the true nature of the 
telepathic bond between the priests and their 
sovereigns somewhat secretive, we're hoping to 
lend the dinosaur gods an air of divine mystery. 
Clearly, these beings possess some strange power 
that is beyond the comprehension of most mere 
mortals. One day, we'll have an opportunity to 
develop this secret further, perhaps giving the 
players an interesting revelation or two to 
uncover (don't forget the Second Rule of 
Dungeoncraft). When we finally do delve into 
this mystery, it might be an opportunity to 
develop the exact mechanics by which the Lost 
World chooses its dinosaur gods and bestows 
their strange powers upon them. Fortunately, such
matters are best left for later in the campaign, 
after the players have a few experience levels 
under the belts, so we needn't worry about 
providing any of this detail just yet. 
So far so good, but we still have to answer one 
obvious question -- exactly what sort of services 
do the priests perform for the dinosaur gods? First
and foremost, the priests protect their lords and 
act as their eyes and ears. Suppose some 
formidable hero decides to make a name for 
himself by launching a quest to find and kill Kor. 
In that case, the tyrannosaur god would 
immediately mobilize his network of priests who 
would in turn mobilize their networks of 
followers to dispatch the hero long before he even
comes close to attaining his goal. Likewise, if a 
band of nomads builds a fortress in a dense forest 
that disrupts the feeding patterns of the large 
dinosaurs that live there, Kalaar (the ultrasaurus) 
might see the move as a threat to her "children" 
and mobilize her priests to drive away the 
invaders.
Beyond protection and intelligence gathering, the 
duties and activities of each priesthood depend 
upon the nature of the god in question.
Name Alignment Domains
Kor Lawful evil Evil, Death, Destruction
Abrexis Lawful good Good, Air, Knowledge
Kalaar Neutral good Plant, Protection
Haali Chaotic neutral Strength, Water
Kor (Tyrranosaur): As we decided in the last 
installment, Kor and his followers have absorbed 
the essence of the great god of darkness. As a 
consequence, Kor is essentially dedicated to 
eradicating the humans, elves, and dwarves who 
reside on the Lost World. In accord with his 
wishes, the priesthood of Kor is constantly 
hatching plots designed to slowly chip away at 
the power amassed by the civilized societies. 
Ultimately, all of these efforts are part of a 
coordinated plan of attack masterminded by Kor 
himself.
Obviously, all of Kor's priests are evil, and most 
are lizardfolk. There are, however, a few 
renegade humans among the faithful who act as 
spies and operate secret cults inside the Lost 
World's civilized societies.
Abrexis (Pterosaur): As a creature of the air, 
Abrexis values freedom above all else. Because 
he understands that freedom goes hand-in-hand 
with peace, his priesthood is dedicated to ending 
conflict and promoting harmony. In essence, 
Abrexis abhors the savagery of the Lost World 
and uses his priesthood to help the planet evolve 
beyond its harsh realities.
Clearly, this mission often brings Abrexis's priests
into conflict with the priests of Kor. In fact, the 
two sects are sworn enemies.
Kalaar (Ultrasaur): Kalaar and her "children" 
(the various brachiosaurs, apatosaurs, and other 
large plant-eating dinosaurs of the Lost World) 
are especially dependent upon the planet's forests 
for survival. As a result, she and her priesthood 
are dedicated to safeguarding the planet's 
wilderness and helping the great herds of 
herbivorous dinosaurs migrate across the planet's 
surface to avoid the elements and large 
concentrations of predators.
In many ways, Kalaar is a balancing force 
between Abrexis and Kor. Although she too 
appreciates the value of peace, she believes that 
the ever-expanding civilizations erected by the 
humans, elves, and dwarves might one day pose a
threat to purity of the wilderness and the well-
being of her children.
Haali (Plesiosaur): Haali is a vain god who is 
chiefly concerned with protecting his domain, the
world's oceans, from encroachment. Although the
seas of the Lost World are too big for Haali and 
his followers to patrol with complete efficiency, 
Haali is attempting to ensure that no one can 
cross the oceans without his permission. His 
priesthood is dedicating to making sure that 
fishermen and others who travel by sea pay their 
god his proper respects. Although the priests of 
all four gods occasionally organize rituals and 
festivals to honor their lords, Haali is far more 
interested in these activities than any of the 
others.
Clerics
What we've created so far should work quite 
nicely and provide the Lost World with plenty of 
pizzazz. Unfortunately, the cleric character class 
as described in the Player's Handbook doesn't 
quite sound like the dinosaur priests I've just 
described. The typical D&D cleric has certain 
abilities (such as turning undead), that don't 
logically stem from the dinosaur gods, while our 
dinosaur priests should clearly possess certain 
powers not germane to the cleric class. (Shouldn't
a priest of Kor receive some sort of protection 
against tyrannosaurs?) Once you start creating 
more ambitious and distinctive faiths, it's fairly 
easy to run into this problem. Fortunately, it's not 
too difficult to modify the standard D&D 
character classes to bring them in line with your 
vision. In fact, this can be a powerful means of 
lending your campaign its own distinctive flavor.
Just because such measures can be effective, 
though, doesn't mean they should be undertaken 
lightly. You should realize that the D&D rules are 
carefully balanced and sometimes fit together in 
ways that aren't obvious. Too much tampering 
with the rules can result in an unbalanced game 
that is no longer fun. Think about what might 
happen, for instance, if you gave your clerics a 
new power that turns out to be a lot more useful 
than you thought it would be. Suddenly, your 
modified cleric class is more powerful than the 
other classes, and you might end up with a 
campaign in which the clerics hog all the 
attention. Before long, you might even discover 
that nobody is interested in playing anything else.
Performing major surgery on a class, therefore, is 
a task best left to more experienced DMs who 
will do a better job of predicting the impact their 
changes might have on the campaign. 
Fortunately, there's a simple strategy for 
"tweaking" a class that doesn't run too much risk. 
The basic philosophy is not to add or subtract any
abilities to the class but to replace a few key 
abilities with nearly exact equivalents. Let's look 
at a few of the cleric's abilities and think about 
how we might apply such a philosophy.
Skills: Sometimes the cleric's listed class skills 
don't adequately reflect your campaign. On the 
Lost World, for instance, dinosaurs serve as 
mounts and beasts of burden. Since the priests of 
the Lost World all have a special connection with 
dinosaurs, shouldn't Animal Empathy be a class 
skill available to them? After all, it's hard to 
imagine any resident of the Lost World handling a
dinosaur better than a priest.
Again, the basic philosophy is not to add or 
subtract any abilities but to replace a few key 
abilities with near exact equivalents. Thus, if we 
replace a few of the cleric's class skills with 
completely different skills, we shouldn't run too 
great a risk of unbalancing the class. For 
example, Animal Empathy is normally not a class
skill for clerics. We can give our clerics Animal 
Empathy as a class skill, though, so long as we're 
willing to give up one of the cleric's existing class
skills and make it unavailable to the class 
altogether. In this case, Scry might be a good skill
to forfeit.
Turning Undead: Given what we know about 
the dinosaur gods, it does not necessarily follow 
that the clerics of the Lost World have any special
powers over undead. On the other hand, our 
clerics do have a special relationship with certain 
types of dinosaurs that is clearly not reflected by 
any of the standard cleric's abilities. Thus, let's 
eliminate the cleric's ability to turn undead and 
replace it with the ability to "turn" dinosaurs. A 
priest of Abrexis has the ability to dismiss (or 
turn) flying dinosaurs, making them leave the 
area. This ability requires a standard turning 
check and has the exact same effects as the 
standard turn undead ability. Similarly, priests of 
Kor can turn tyrannosaurs and similar predatory 
dinosaurs, priests of Kalaar can turn large 
herbivorous dinosaurs, and priests of Haali can 
turn aquatic dinosaurs. Again, we're not adding or
subtracting abilities, merely replacing some 
abilities with nearly identical equivalents.
Spells: Some of the cleric spells listed in the 
Player's Handbook look like they'll fit well with 
our conception of the dinosaur priests, while 
others look wholly inappropriate. This is another 
good opportunity to customize the class to give it 
some unique flavor. Once again, the easiest way 
to do this is to apply our general philosophy of 
replacing abilities with near exact equivalents. In 
this case, we have two options:
• First, we can replace some key spells with
spells of an identical level drawn from the
lists of wizard spells.
• In addition or instead, we can replace the 
specifics of a spell with a near equivalent.
See the sidebars for specific notes on these two 
processes.
Step Four and Five: Two Myths
and Other Faiths
Fortunately, both of these stages are already 
complete. The last installment laid down the 
framework for the dinosaur gods, creating myths 
that account for the creation of the Lost World 
and the "deaths" of the elder gods. As for other 
faiths, the elder gods aren't really dead, leaving 
open the possibility that a few of the Lost World's
inhabitants still worship these older deities 
directly.
Cutting and Modifying Spells
Spells that should be modified or eliminated on 
the Lost World include:
0-level
• Create water (eliminate this spell because 
it doesn't fit our conception of the gods, 
and it can't be this easy to get fresh water 
on the harsh Lost World)
• Purify food and drink (eliminate this spell 
for the same reasons as create water)
1st level
• Bless/curse water (eliminate these because
"holy water" doesn't fit with our dinosaur 
gods)
• Detect undead (modify to detect dinosaur;
instead of detecting undead, this spell 
detects dinosaurs of the sort the cleric can 
turn)
• Summon monster I (modify to summon 
dinosaur I; this spell summons appropriate
dinosaurs based on the priest's deity)
2nd level
• Consecrate/desecrate (eliminate these 
spells because our clerics aren't 
particularly good at dealing with undead)
• Summon monster II (modify to summon 
dinosaur II)
3rd level
• Searing light (eliminate this spell for the 
same reasons as eliminating 
consecrate/desecrate)
• Summon monster III (modify to summon 
dinosaur III)
4th level
• Dimensional anchor (eliminate this spell 
because the dinosaur gods have no 
extradimensional power or presence)
• Dismissal (eliminate this spell for the 
same reasons as dimensional anchor)
• Lesser planar ally (eliminate this spell for 
the same reasons as dimensional anchor)
• Summon monster IV (modify to summon 
dinosaur IV)
5th level
• Ethereal jaunt (eliminate this spell for the 
same reasons as dimensional anchor)
• Plane shift (eliminate this spell for the 
same reasons as dimensional anchor)
• Summon monster V (modify to summon 
dinosaur V)
6th level
• Banishment (eliminate this spell for the 
same reasons as dimensional anchor)
• Create undead (eliminate this spell for the 
same reasons as consecrate)
• Etherealness (eliminate this spell for the 
same reasons as dimensional anchor)
• Planar ally (eliminate this spell for the 
same reasons as dimensional anchor)
• Summon monster VI (modify to summon 
dinosaur VI)
7th level
• Summon monster VII (modify to summon
dinosaur VII)
8th level
• Create greater undead (eliminate this spell
for the same reasons as consecrate)
• Summon monster VIII (modify to 
summon dinosaur VIII)
9th level
• Gate (eliminate this spell for the same 
reasons as dimensional anchor)
• Summon monster IX (modify to summon 
dinosaur IX)
Replacing Spells
After cutting the inappropriate spells from the 
list, it's time to select suitable replacements. Note 
that, when replacing a domain spell, you should 
assume that the replacement spell substitutes for 
the original spell on the domain list unless there is
a compelling reason why it shouldn't. If there is 
such a reason, select a new entry to replace the 
spell on the domain list.
Also note that when selecting replacement spells, 
you should make sure you don't pick a spell that's 
already available to the cleric class at a different 
level.
0-level
• Daze
• Ghost sound
1st level
• Mount (summons appropriate riding 
dinosaur)
2nd level
• Detect thoughts
3rd level
• Invisibility sphere (Sun domain)
4th level
• Arcane eye (represents the ability to see 
through the eyes of distant dinosaurs)
• Charm monster (works only on dinosaurs)
• Locate creature
5th level
• Nightmare
• Prying eyes (again, represents the ability 
to see through the eyes of distant 
dinosaurs)
• Seeming
6th level
• Circle of death (Death and Evil domains)
• Eyebite
• Guards and wards
• Move earth
8th level
• Trap the soul (Death domain)
9th level
• Dominate monster (dinosaurs only)
Rules of Dungeoncraft
1. Never force yourself to create more than 
you must. (Chapter 2, page 23)
2. Whenever you design a major piece of the
campaign world, always devise at least 
one secret related to that piece. 
(Chapter 2, page 39)
3. Whenever you have no idea what the 
probability of success should be for a 
particular situation, consider it 50%. 
(Chapter 9, page 165)
4. Always challenge both the players and 
their characters. (Chapter 12, page 214)
5. Once a roll has been made and you've 
moved on, you should never reset events 
to an earlier state in order to correct a 
mistake. (Chapter 23, page 407)