The Dungeon Master Experience
This regular column is for Dungeon Masters who like to build worlds and campaigns 
as much as I do. Here I share my experiences as a DM through the lens of Iomandra, 
my 
Dungeons & Dragons® campaign world. Even though the campaign uses the 4th 
Edition rules, the topics covered here often transcend editions. Hopefully this series of 
articles will give you inspiration, ideas, and awesome new ways to menace your players 
in your home campaigns.
If you’re interested in learning more about the world of Iomandra, check out the wiki .
—Dungeon Master for Life,
Chris Perkins
Christopher Perkins   
Christopher Perkins  joined Wizards of the Coast in 1997 as the editor of Dungeon ® magazine. Today, he’s the senior 
producer for the Dungeons & Dragons Roleplaying Game and leads the team of designers, developers, and editors 
who produce D&D RPG products. On Monday and Wednesday nights, he runs a D&D ® campaign for two different 
groups of players set in his homegrown world of Iomandra . 
Surprise! 
Epic 
Goblins! 
2/17/2011
MONDAY NIGHT.
The adventurers are 22nd level, and crewing a ship head -
ing west across the Dragon Sea.
 The Maelstrom is a swift vessel powered by an elemental 
ring of water (an idea pilfered from the Eberron campaign 
setting). One of the adventurers, a genasi swordmage, was 
recently relieved as captain of the Maelstrom so that he 
could lead a special ops mission for his mentor and bene -
factor, Sea King Valkroi. (You might recall that the same 
thing happened to Captain Picard in the ST:TNG  episode, 
Chain of Command .)
 Three days ago, the Maelstrom survived a run-in with 
three enemy ships sent by a rival Sea King. Having weath -
ered that storm, the Maelstrom has resumed its westward 
trek toward the party’s ultimate objective.
 En route, the adventurers catch sight of a lone vessel 
heading in the opposite direction. Corpses are lashed to 
the other ship’s hull, and its sails are stained crimson with 
blood. The adventurers confronted a ship like this once long 
before, during the heroic tier, when goblins raided their 
island home. Clearly this blood-sailed vessel belongs to the 
Kingdom of Sanghor, a savage island nation of goblins far 
to the west.
 That’s right. Goblins. At 22nd level, no less.
The Dungeon Master Experience: Surprise! Epic Goblins! 
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
1
advantage presents a refreshing change of pace, par-
ticularly when they don’t see it coming from a mile 
away.
 All that being said, I still had some surprises in 
store for them. They say good things come in threes, 
so here we go:
Surprise #1: Boom Goes the Dynamite! The gob -
lins filled their cargo hold with kegs of alchemical 
“black powder,” rigged to blow up the ship if things 
went horribly awry. After Captain Mulk got the 
heave-ho, the goblins decided the time was nigh. 
And they would’ve succeeded too—if it hadn’t been 
for the party’s pesky halfling rogue, Oleander. 
After the goblin demolition squad inadvertently set 
off three powder kegs and filled the lower decks 
with blinding smoke (a trick I used to foreshadow 
the imminent destruction of the ship), Oleander 
jumped into the smoke-filled hold; once there, he 
used his formidable Bluff skill to impersonate Cap -
tain Mulk, telling the demolition squad to forgo 
the black powder and get their flea-bitten hides on 
deck (whereupon they were promptly killed).
Surprise #2: Advantage, Goblins! I decided not 
to make attack rolls for the goblins because there 
were so many of them. Basically, the goblins had 
no effective attacks. In place of an attack roll, a 
goblin could deal 15 damage automatically to one 
enemy it had combat advantage against. This made 
the tactical combat more interesting and forced 
the heroes to stay mobile, and it also felt right for 
goblins.
Surprise #3: Minions are the BOMB! Given the 
goblins’ propensity for alchemical experimenta-
tion, it seemed perfectly reasonable that Captain 
Mulk would have a squad of “exploding goblins” 
tricked out with bandoliers of alchemical fire 
flasks. Any damage dealt to a tricked-out goblin 
minion would cause it to explode in a close burst 
1 centered on itself, dealing 15 fire damage to all 
 Our heroes would’ve been inclined to leave goblin ship 
alone but for two reasons. First, the party’s ranger spots a 
cage being dragged alongside the goblin ship at sea level. 
Within the cage, he sees a prisoner struggling to stay above 
water. Second, the ship is openly plying the trade lanes and 
is clearly a threat to passing tradeships. The noble heroes 
decide to storm the ship and rescue the caged prisoner.
 What ensues is a rollicking shipboard battle against an 
enemy the heroes never expected to fight at their level.
Reasons  foR the 
encounte R
This goblin ship encounter was meant to provide con-
text for the larger campaign world. I created the side 
trek to remind my players (and their characters) that 
there’s far more going on in the world of Iomandra 
than “the quest at hand.” The goblin ship’s ability to 
slip past Dragovar patrols tells the heroes something 
meaningful about the world—that the Dragovar navy 
has lost control of the Dragon Sea. The war to the 
west (against a former imperial regency fallen under 
horrors from the Far Realm) has taken its toll on the 
imperial fleet, and the goblins of Sanghor are seizing 
advantage of the situation.
 But there was one more reason for the encounter. 
This one-night diversion was also crafted to remind 
the heroes how powerful they have become . The 
hobgoblin captain (Mulk, a level 8 soldier) was lit-
erally a pushover—he got thrown off his ship by a 
magical whirlwind in the first round of combat. The 
goblin mage (Zazz, a level 7 controller) was snuffed 
out before he could monologue. The bugbear shock-
troopers were swept aside like dust bunnies.
 One might expect players to get bored fighting 
weak enemies and scores of minions—and yet this 
became one of the campaign’s most memorable 
encounters. Like many DMs, I enjoy watching my 
players squirm and wrestle with conundrums, but 
giving the heroes an (occasional) overwhelming 
creatures in the burst . . . including other rigged 
goblins. Clearly the best tactic was to take out the 
goblins from afar—but a tall order on the confined 
and crowded deck of a ship!
The Dungeon Master Experience: Surprise! Epic Goblins! 
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
2
By the end of the session, the heroes had not only 
dispatched the goblins but also rescued the caged 
prisoner who, it turns out, was first mate of another 
ship that the goblins had attacked and plundered. 
Naturally, he presented the heroes with a quest—to 
transport his ship’s stolen cargo safely back to the raft-
town of Anchordown—and thereby earn the favor of 
another Sea King.
 One can only speculate what might happen to the 
heroes in the course of completing this seemingly 
straightforward side quest….
Lessons  LeaRned
In any case, here’s what I learned from the goblins 
encounter:
✦✦ Never underestimate the appeal of kicking 
ass. Players need to feel powerful once in a 
while, particularly at high levels.
✦✦ If you want your campaign world to feel like a 
living, breathing place, let the players encoun -
ter things below their level.
✦✦ Even low-level monsters can surprise the 
heroes with clever tactics and a never-say-die 
attitude (just consider the history of asym -
metrical warfare). Don’t be afraid to use them, 
particularly as minions, and don’t be afraid to 
mess with their stats.
Until the next encounter!
WEDNESDAY NIGHT. 
It’s 6:15 PM. The players are gathering around the table, 
having just returned from picking up dinner. As is cus -
tomary with the group, one of the players has bought my 
dinner and delivers it with an expression that I take to 
mean, “Here’s your dinner, Mister DM Sir. Please be kind 
tonight.” I smile, say thank you, and begin casting a ritual 
that has served me well for years, and which I now share 
with you.
 This ritual is neither arcane nor divine. In fact, it’s 
something I learned from watching episodic television. 
Many of the things that define my DMing style come from 
watching lots of serialized TV. Shows such as Lost and 
Battle star Galactica immediately spring to mind, and 
you’ll see me referring to them from time to time in this 
column.
 The ritual in question is called Campaign Recap, and it 
always begins with the same three words:
PRevious Ly in 
iomand Ra
You’ve seen this before: Previously on Lost. Previously 
on Battlestar Galactica . Any television show that car-
ries the baggage of a complex mythology and features 
an ensemble cast needs this ritual to remind the audi -
ence how far their story’s come. In this instance, the 
audience is my gaming group, and as much as I like to 
think that every one of my game sessions is unforget -
table, that simply isn’t true.
 The Campaign Recap ritual begins thus: At the 
top of a sheet of lined paper, I write today’s date and 
the name of tonight’s adventure (which I oftentimes 
refer to as an episode) followed by a short list of bullet 
points. Each bullet point recounts, in the past tense, 
something that occurred in a previous session (not 
necessarily the last session) that might be significant 
to tonight’s game. The bullet points are carefully 
thought out, and I try to limit them to a handful. 
Sometimes in my haste to jot down these notes, I get 
the order mixed up, so after writing down the bullet 
points I number them in the order in which I intend 
to recount them.
 At this moment, the player characters are in the 
middle of an adventure entitled “Death Incarnate,” 
having found themselves in the city of Io’drothtor 
searching for the lair of a dracolich named Icristus. 
Icristus used to be the dragon overlord of the mas -
sive island upon which Io’drothtor is built. (In the 
backstory of the campaign, Icristus was slain by a 
steel dragon named Krethmidion and his brood.) But 
enough history; let’s get back to the ritual at hand.
 At the end of last week’s session, the heroes fought 
their way into the dracolich’s lair; the session ended 
with Icristus rising from a pool of lightning-charged 
water to confront the interlopers. As the players 
Previously  
in Iomandra . . .
2/24/2011
The Dungeon Master Experience: Previously in Iomandra . . . 
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
3
devour their dinners and begin speculating on the 
outcome of tonight’s session, here’s what I write down:
As soon as I speak the words “Previously in Ioman-
dra,” a hush falls over the gaming table. The off-topic 
conversations end abruptly, and the players become 
all ears. This happens every time, without fail.
 After speaking the words, I begin stringing 
together my bullet points into a rough narrative. The 
whole recap usually takes about a minute. I don’t 
worry about adding detail because I trust that the 
players’ memories will begin filling in the gaps auto -
matically. The recap simply sparks their memories 
and puts the players in the right frame of mind to 
start the session.
 Some DMs rely on their players to provide the 
recap. Having tried it as a DM and experienced it as 
a player, I think that’s a mistake. Left to their own 
devices, players will often focus on the wrong details, 
or get the facts wrong, or phrase the recap in a way 
that doesn’t reinforce the atmosphere you’re trying to 
evoke. The recap is the DM’s best tool to get the ses-
sion started on the right foot, and to immerse players 
in the moment.
 The recap focuses only on the details that are per-
tinent to the story at hand. Most of the bullet points 
in the example above tie to a specific player char-
acter: Alagon, a revenant ranger played by Andrew 
Finch. The Wednesday group has eight players, each 
with their own character arc, but it’s Alagon that’s 
really driving this particular session. The recap gives 
the players a sense of what they can expect out of 
tonight’s game: a big fat fight against five dracoliches. 
For Alagon to achieve his epic destiny, Icristus must 
be destroyed. Simple as that.
 While this particular session focuses on combat 
and one character’s arc, the adventure as a whole is 
a tangled weave of many different plots, including 
a story revolving around the party’s deva warpriest 
discovering secrets from a past life, the search for a 
missing party member, and the theft of a mystical 
set of tomes that chronicle the rise and fall of a king -
dom wiped from history by Vecna. These are no less 
important to the players than Alagon’s quest to prove 
himself to the Raven Queen, and next week’s recap 
will probably include bullet points reminding the 
players where things left off with these other facets of 
the campaign.
 One of the cool side benefits of this approach? If 
and when you decide to chronicle the events of your 
campaign, say, in a wiki, you need only refer to your 
binder or notebook filled with page after page of 
bullet points touching on the highlights. I’ve come to 
rely on my own recaps for just this reason.
Lessons  LeaRned
Recaps kick off 99% of my gaming sessions. How -
ever, I can think of plenty of good reasons not to 
use recaps. The #1 reason is to intentionally jar or 
disorient your players. I remember one session that 
began with the words “Roll initiative!” It worked well 
because the players weren’t expecting the sudden 
springboard into combat. We had ended the previous 
session at the beginning of a climactic encounter, the 
“DEATH INcArNATE” 
(1/19/11)
Previously in Iomandra . . .
✦✦✦Alagon had the names of five blasphemous 
undead creatures burned into the fingers of his 
trigger hand by an emissary of the Raven Queen. 
In order to fulfill his epic destiny and take his 
place by the RQ’s side, Alagon must track down 
and eliminate all five targets, one of which is a 
dracolich named Icristus.
✦✦✦The heroes learned that Icristus was brought 
back from the dead years ago by an arcane 
sect called the Kalak Shun: outcast dragonborn 
wizards who practice necromancy. They also 
discovered that Icristus can control and com -
mand the otherwise benign ghosts that haunt 
the streets of Io’drothtor, effectively using them 
as spies.
✦✦✦The heroes confronted a high-ranking member 
of the Kalak Shun in his tower. After slaying the 
necromancer and interrogating his apprentice, 
the heroes activated a magical portal called the 
Throat of Tharzuul, which led to Icristus’s secret 
redoubt below the city.
✦✦✦The heroes arrived at a subterranean elemental 
node serving as Icristus’s lair, only to discover 
that the dracolich was not alone! Attending 
him were 4 Kalak Shun advisors mounted on 
dracoliches that were once Huge steel dragons—
the slaughtered brood of Icristus’s hated rival, 
Krethmidion.
The Dungeon Master Experience: Previously in Iomandra . . . 
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
4
of a toothy black maw, slowly growing larger and 
larger over the course of the campaign. And in this 
most recent session, Melech received a gift from yet 
another star entity called Nihil, who imprinted upon 
Melech’s mind a powerful ritual allowing him to 
summon “starspawn serpents” (inspired by the Mon -
ster Manual 3 ’s serpents of Nihil, page 186). Bruce 
doesn’t understand why his character is receiving 
gifts from these star powers, or what he’s supposed 
to do with them.
 And frankly, neither do I. Which brings us to the 
true subject of this article.
 A good campaign, like a good stew, has many 
ingredients. Some ingredients add flavor to the 
campaign, others give it texture. Sometimes the 
ingredients are so subtle as to go unnoticed, and that’s 
fine. Not everything you throw into the campaign is 
going to make a splash. The players will pick up on 
some elements, while others are quickly forgotten. 
Campaign building is an art, not a science. It all starts 
with ideas. I get ideas for my campaign all the time, 
and the first question that comes to my mind once I 
get an idea is: How can I fit this into the campaign? 
The answer is always the same: I just throw it in the 
pot and see what happens. Which brings us back to 
the title of this article:
players had the whole week to discuss tactics, and I 
could sense they were jazzed to start rolling dice. The 
recap wasn’t necessary, and frankly I wanted to keep 
things moving at a breakneck pace.
 Like all good rituals, mastery comes with repeti -
tion. If the Campaign Recap is something you’d like 
to experiment with, keep in mind the following:
✦✦ Begin each session jotting down bullet points 
about “what’s gone before.”
✦✦ The Campaign Recap sets the tone for the ses -
sion. Present the Campaign Recap yourself, 
and keep it short. Don’t worry about covering 
all the bases. Hit the highlights, and let the 
players’ memories fill in the gaps.
Until the next encounter!
MONDAY NIGHT.
The campaign has taken a dark turn. Having just attacked 
an island base belonging to their hated enemy, Sea King 
Senestrago, the adventurers return to their ship with the 
spoils of victory. Yet upon their return, they find the ship 
adrift, its crew gone.
 A thorough exploration suggests that the crew has 
been abducted. A strange sending stone discovered in the 
captain’s cabin confirms their fears—through this device, 
the heroes are contacted by another campaign villain 
who’s been shadowing their vessel, waiting to strike. He 
offers the heroes a trade: Their missing crew in exchange 
for a powerful relic the heroes have sworn to protect, an 
item which the villain desires above all and which, in the 
wrong hands, could cause great calamity. The question is, 
will the heroes agree to this exchange, knowing that sur -
rendering the item will have serious repercussions? An 
intriguing dilemma . . .
. . . but not the focus of this particular article.
 You see, there’s also a “B story” unfolding at the 
same time concerning Bruce Cordell’s character, 
a tiefling star pact warlock named Melech. Sev -
eral sessions ago, a powerful star entity known as 
Caiphon branded him with a strange tattoo: that 
I Don’t Know What 
It Means,  
But I Like It 
3/3/2011
The Dungeon Master Experience: I Don’t Know What It Means, But I Like It  
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
5
i don’t know   
what  it means ,   
but i Like it.
Whenever I get a cool idea that I think is worth 
exploring in my campaign, I throw it into the mix—
provided I can think of at least one character in the 
party whose story arc would benefit from its inclu -
sion. By “benefit,” I don’t mean to suggest that the 
character necessarily becomes more powerful as a 
result. The ultimate goal is to add stuff to the cam -
paign that makes the characters and their situations 
more interesting and fun to play. It’s also a great way 
to give your campaign extra layers or depth.
 Let’s consider Melech’s situation: Many months 
ago, I had an idea based on the fairly common experi -
ence of someone waking up one morning to discover 
he or she had a tattoo, but no memory of how it got 
there. (If that hasn’t happened to you personally, it’s 
probably happened to someone you know—just ask 
Alias, from Curse of the Azure Bonds ) This was an idea 
I wanted to include in my game. At the time, Bruce’s 
character was being overshadowed by the story arcs 
of other characters, and I wanted to give Bruce some -
thing to sink his teeth into while waiting for some of 
these other arcs to play out. So, without a lot of fore -
thought, I gave Melech a magical tattoo that appeared 
out of nowhere. Here’s the actual tattoo, written up as 
a magic item:
Tattoo of the Horizon Star  Level 20
The mark of Caiphon, the horizon star, resembles a toothy 
maw that widens and grows as the wearer draws closer to his 
doom.
Lvl 20  125,000 gp
Wondrous Item
Requirement: You must have the Fate of the Void pact boon.
Property
When you spend an action point to take an extra action, all 
enemies in a close burst 5 centered on you take 10 radiant 
damage and are blinded until the end of your next turn.
 Curse: When you fail a death save, you take damage equal 
to your level.
The curse is a nice touch, don’t you think? It keeps the 
tattoo from being a simple power-up. It also conveys 
the flavor of the idea, that “an evil star power gives 
Melech a gift he can’t refuse.”
 At the time, I had no clue what the tattoo meant 
or how it would factor into the campaign. I included 
it simply because I liked the idea. Several weeks 
later, I was thinking about one of my major cam -
paign villains—an eladrin star pact warlock hell-bent 
on releasing a bunch of evil star entities from their 
celestial prisons. It occurred to me that these same 
evil powers might be secretly courting Bruce’s char-
acter, also a star pact warlock. Maybe they think he’s 
destined for greatness. Maybe the gifts are a form of 
temptation. Maybe the star powers plan to devour my  
villain and groom Bruce’s character as his replace -
ment. At this point in the campaign, I’m still not 
exactly sure how it will all play out; a lot of it depends 
on Bruce and what happens to his character in the 
coming months. For now, the only thing I know for 
sure is that evil star powers have their eye on Melech 
. . . and that’s enough to keep Bruce both excited and 
terrified.
The Dungeon Master Experience: I Don’t Know What It Means, But I Like It  
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
6
Lessons  LeaRned
As the DM, your biggest challenges are keeping the 
players immersed in the story of your campaign, and 
making the campaign world a place the players like 
to visit week after week (or however often you meet). 
It’s also your job to surprise and delight them. One 
ironclad way to accomplish these admirable goals is 
to give players stuff to think about (and, by extension, 
stuff for their characters to think about). If you have 
an idea that fascinates you, don’t wait for the right 
opportunity to include it. Just include it, and let time 
and your players sort it out.
If the idea ends up going nowhere, the players prob-
ably won’t care (or even notice), but if it ends up going 
somewhere, your players will look upon you as a 
story telling genius.
Here are the important takeaways:
✦✦ Don’t squirrel away your ideas. Use them, 
even if you’re not sure how to get the most out 
of them. 
✦✦ Ultimately, it’s the players who decide what 
flies and what doesn’t in your campaign. So 
look for a way to connect your cool idea to one 
or more of the characters, preferably in a way 
that the player(s) might enjoy.
Until the next encounter!
My Campaign:  
The TV Series 
3/10/2011
WEDNESDAY NIGHT.
The party has reached the apex of an episode of the cam -
paign entitled “Nythe-Saleme.” The adventure takes place 
on an island ruled by the pair of purple dragon sisters, 
Nythe and Saleme (hence the name of the island and the 
episode)—but there’s more to them than meets the eye. The 
sisters hold the answers to many secrets, including the 
whereabouts of the Dragovar emperor . . . whose disappear -
ance is one of the biggest mysteries of the campaign.
Think of any serialized TV drama of the past 
decade that features a good-sized cast of charac -
ters. If you’re stuck, I’ll name a few off the top of 
my head:  Lost . Battle  star Galactica . The Sopranos . 
Deadwood . True Blood . Mad Men . Now think of all the 
story characteristics those shows have in common 
with D&D campaigns you’ve created or imag -
ined creating. I’d contend that the similarities are 
astonishing.
 The truth is, if I hadn’t wormed my way into the 
gaming industry, I’d probably be most happy work -
ing as a TV producer. I tend to think of my D&D 
campaign as a dramatic TV series for the following 
reasons:
The Dungeon Master Experience: My Campaign: The TV Series  
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
7
✦✦ My campaign has an ensemble cast of 
characters.
✦✦ It has episodic adventures, some of which are 
built around a larger mythology, while others 
have a more stand-alone feel.
✦✦ The episodes link together to form the “guts” 
of my campaign narrative, while simulta -
neously allowing for individual character 
development and, when it happens, character 
death.
 In fact, the only real difference I can ascertain 
between a D&D campaign and a serialized TV drama 
is that, unlike a TV show, a D&D campaign isn’t likely 
to be televised. (Having said that, I dare someone to 
prove me wrong. I will pay tribute and homage to 
anyone who actually manages to turn his or her D&D 
campaign into a TV series.)
 One of the payoffs for thinking about your cam -
paign as a TV series is that you’ll have an easier time 
remembering what’s important: the characters and 
their ongoing development. That’s why the players 
play in your campaign. It’s what makes designing 
adventures so much fun. It’s about the journey of the 
characters and the bad things and hilarious s**t that 
happen along the way.
 Here are three tricks to help you get into the mind -
set of treating your campaign as a TV series:
tRick #1: keeP a 
Running  ePisode 
guide.
Fans write episode guides for their favorite series all 
the time. Why? Because it’s fun. The episode guide 
chronicles all of the events that have transpired 
thus far. As you begin assembling your campaign 
episode guide, treat each adventure or play session 
as a separate episode, give them a number and a 
name, and write a short summary (no more than one 
paragraph!) of what happened. It’s okay to leave out 
specific details of who-did-what-to-whom. It’s okay 
to end on a cliffhanger. And it’s perfectly okay to 
take a longer adventure and break it up into smaller 
episodes. (TV series do this all the time. It’s called 
“Episode, Part 1” and “Episode, Part 2.”)
 Your episode guide can be any format, although 
wikis are ideal for this sort of thing. Because I run 
two separate campaigns in the same world, I keep 
separate wikis for my Monday night  and Wednesday 
night games.
 At the end of each one-paragraph episode write-
up, include a “Notes” section where you can dump 
miscellaneous information worth keeping track of. 
I often use this space to mention important NPCs 
by name, recount weird occurrences and character 
actions that have little to do with the plot, and other 
wacky stuff.
 In the right-hand column a sample write-up from 
my Wednesday night episode guide, modified slightly 
to make it comprehensible to those unfamiliar with 
the details of the Iomandra campaign.
EpISODE 149: cAvES Of THE 
KrAKEN culT, pArT 1
Campaign Date: 10 Lendys 1475
In the back of an underground warehouse, the 
heroes discover an illusory wall concealing a secret 
network of caves infested with aberrations. The 
heroes make their way to a cavern occupied by 
half-mad kraken cultists guarded by hungry chuuls. 
Deimos (played by Chris Youngs) insinuates himself 
among the cultists and lures them into an ambush. 
The party then confronts the chuuls and remain -
ing members of the cult. After a pitched battle, the 
heroes decide to withdraw and recuperate.
On their way out, they run afoul into a gang of 
Horned Alliance thugs led by Suffer, a tiefling 
with a whale-sized attitude problem. The heroes 
flee back into the caves. There, they find another 
exit connected to the Stone Rose Brothel in the 
city’s dwarven district. Once back in the city, they 
take refuge at the Temple of Bahamut—and come 
face-to-face with the Horned Alliance’s second-in-
command, Prismeus, who makes them an offer they 
can’t refuse.
Notes: Divin (played by Curt Gould) nearly dies after 
falling into a watery vortex at the bottom of a deep 
shaft. Divin calls to Melora for aid, and because he 
earlier placed some treasure on her altar, Melora 
answers his call, taking the form of a watery levia -
than that lifts him up out of the vortex.
The Dungeon Master Experience: My Campaign: The TV Series  
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
8
their shows; they identify the stories they want to tell, 
and how best to develop their ensemble cast and “pay 
off ” audience expectations. For your campaign, think 
of the ensemble cast as the characters in your game, 
with the players as your audience.
 Here are some episode one-liners I wrote for the 
Wednesday game, many of which were inspired by 
the actions and ideas of my players:
The Red Shoals of Dkar
(Armos episode) The hunt for Fathomreaver leads 
the heroes to an elemental domain ruled by greedy 
pirates and bloodthirsty politics. (Aside: This idea 
was actually inspired by an article that Bruce Cordell 
wrote for Dungeon, so props to him!)
Master of the Maelstrom
(Deimos and Vargas episode) The heroes confront 
their nemesis, the pirate warlord Vantajar, on the 
high seas.
Impstinger Must Die
(Deimos episode) Sea King Impstinger is accused of 
launching a savage attack on a Dragovar settlement.
Defective
(Fleet episode) The characters are reunited with 
their warforged companion, but there’s something 
different about him.
Constellation of Madness
A celestial event alters reality, allowing heroes from 
the Monday campaign to interact with heroes from 
the Wednesday campaign.
 I’ve fleshed out the first three one-liners on this 
list in anticipation of actually running them as 
adventures; the rest are half-baked ideas that might 
or might not ever unfold. Some of these represent 
natural steps forward, or sudden twists in the major 
campaign arcs playing out this season; others are 
stand-alone adventure ideas that will hopefully inject 
some new villains and surprises into the campaign.
 Some of your ideas for future episodes will get 
knocked off by better ideas. Others will die for rea -
sons beyond your control; for example, a player 
(around whose character the idea was based) might 
drop out of the game. A few ideas might perish for 
logistical reasons. I really like the “Constellation 
of Madness” adventure idea; however, mixing and 
matching players from my two campaigns is a sched -
uling nightmare. Consequently, as cool as this idea 
sounds, it might not be as feasible as originally con-
ceived. That said, I love the title and will definitely 
find a way to use that, if nothing else.
 Don’t be afraid to include future episode one-
liners in your published campaign wiki. It’s okay for 
the players to read them—desirable even. Here’s why: 
It’s fun to tease players with stuff that might happen, 
and just like teasers for a TV show, it excites them to 
think about the possibilities. It’s worth noting that the 
ideas you flag as character-specific episodes shouldn’t 
really focus on a single character; this should only 
serve to remind you that certain episodes help to 
advance specific character arcs. Show me a player 
who hates it when the spotlight shines on his charac -
ter, and I’ll show you a tarrasque that can fly!
tRick #2: think  of 
youR camPaign in 
teRms of seasons .
A season of a campaign might span any number of 
levels. My players have long-term commitments to 
my campaign, so I went with three seasons, each one 
spanning a tier (heroic, paragon, epic). If that works 
for you, steal the idea. If your game group is less 
stable, consider making your seasons shorter.
 At the beginning of each season, I ask each player 
to give me a list of three things he or she would like to 
see happen during the season. These might be char-
acter-specific, or might be larger in scale. When my 
Wednesday group hit epic tier, I recalled that Rodney 
Thompson had a couple memorable things on his list: 
He wanted his character to transform from one race 
into another, and he wanted the heroes to participate 
in at least one full-scale naval battle. Stuff like this is 
very helpful, once you begin using Trick #3.
tRick #3: imagine  
wheRe youR 
camPaign is going, 
and  concoct  futu Re 
ePisode ideas .
Once your episode guide is up-to-date, start writing 
1-sentence descriptions for a bunch of episodes that 
haven’t happened yet. This is what I call campaign 
projection; it’s an opportunity to imagine what might 
happen in the weeks and months ahead, based on 
where the campaign’s heading and the likely out -
comes and consequences of the characters’ actions 
up to this point. TV producers do something similar 
when they sit down to plot out upcoming seasons of 
The Dungeon Master Experience: My Campaign: The TV Series  
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
9
Lessons  LeaRned
To summarize: Imagine your D&D campaign as a 
TV series, with the heroes as your ensemble cast and 
the players as your audience. As the producer of this 
series, it’s your job to imagine where the campaign is 
headed and what journey each character must make 
toward the inevitable finale. Sometimes your cam -
paign will get cancelled prematurely, because it loses 
its audience; there’s really nothing you can do about it 
except start over (and maybe target a new audience).
 Here are some things to keep in mind if you 
decide to approach your campaign as a serialized TV 
show:
✦✦ Think of your campaign in terms ofepisodes 
and seasons.
✦✦ Create a campaign episode guide.
✦✦ Write one-liners for future episodes to help 
you imagine where the campaign’s headed.
Until the next encounter!
Instant 
Monster 
3/17/2011
MONDAY NIGHT.
Our heroes are 23rd level, fighting mind flayers aboard 
an illithid vessel on the Dragon Sea. The mind flayers are 
tied to one of the campaign’s big story arcs involving a war 
between the almighty Dragovar Empire (ruled by dragon -
born) and the upstart Myrthon Regency, a vassal state of 
the imperial commonwealth that has declared its indepen -
dence. It’s a familiar tale with a D&D twist.
 Around 11th level, the heroes learned a major cam -
paign secret: The Myrthon Regency was being influenced 
by mind flayers and other forces from the Far Realm. 
Knowing that most mind flayers fall in the level 18–20 
range (in 4th Edition), my players started getting ner -
vous by the time they reached 16th level. For my part, I’d 
expected mind flayers to start showing up around 19th or 
20th level. As it turns out, through no fault of the players, 
the Monday night heroes really didn’t get around to fight -
ing their first mind flayers until now.
 One of the dangers of running a complex campaign is 
that it’s easy for the party to become involved in certain 
unfolding stories and not others. By the time mind flayers 
were back on the menu, the heroes had gained a bunch of 
levels. Consequently, the monsters I’d planned for them to 
fight were now several levels below the party average. Solv -
ing this problem demanded special DM ninja skills . . . and 
took a lot less time than you might think.
Welcome to the microwave dinner approach to mon-
ster design! By the end of this column, you’ll have a 
new DM superpower: The ability to create a monster 
of any level “on the fly” in 2 minutes or less.
 And by “create,” I mean “customize.” As much as 
I love creating new monsters from scratch (my favor-
ite D&D activity, in fact, outside of actually running 
a game), it’s usually unnecessary. Most players sit-
ting on the other side of the DM screen can’t tell the 
difference between a monster you’ve created from 
scratch and an existing monster that’s been modi -
fied to suit your needs—so you should only create 
The Dungeon Master Experience: Instant Monster 
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
10
monsters from scratch when you have the time or 
want to try something weird.
 This article presents two simple and effective ways 
to customize a monster:
✦✦ Take a monster and adjust its level.
✦✦ Turn a monster into another monster of the 
same level.
the PeRkinsian  
aPPRoach to 
adjusting  a 
monsteR’s LeveL
My approach to adjusting a monster’s level isn’t math-
ematically perfect, but it serves the needs of most 
DMs. The ultimate goal is to tweak a monster so that 
it’s level appropriate and doesn’t cause players to 
shout “WTF!” during the game. This approach has 
three easy steps.
 For each level you add or subtract:
✦✦ Increase or decrease the monster’s defenses 
and attack bonuses by 1.
✦✦ Increase or decrease the monster’s hit points 
by 10 (x2 for elites, x4 for solos). If you’re 
feeling finicky, make that 6 for artillery and 
lurkers, 8 for controllers, skirmishers, and 
soldiers. Just remember, this exercise is about 
easy math, not pinpoint accuracy.
✦✦ Increase or decrease the monster’s damage 
by 1. If you’re making a minion, its damage 
is usually around 4 + one-half the monster’s 
level (minion brutes deal about 25% more 
damage on top of that).
Don’t bother adjusting the monster’s initiative 
modifier, skill modifiers , or ability score modi -
fiers unless you’re a stickler for detail; these sorts of 
changes have little discernible impact on a monster’s 
combat performance (at least, from the players’ point 
of view). If the encounter warrants it, increase or 
decrease these values by 1 for every two levels you 
add or subtract, and be done with it.
 Here’s the dolgaunt monk from the 
eberron 
Campaign Guide , and the dirt-simple level-adjusted 
version I used in the mind flayer adventure sprung on 
my players:
DOlGAuNT JAIlEr
(use Dolgaunt Monk, EbErron Campaign Guide p.203)
Level 21 Controller
HP 216/108, AC 35, Fort 33, Ref 34, Will 33
+13 to attacks and damage rolls
the PeRkinsian  
aPPRoach to 
tuRning  one 
monsteR into 
anothe R
As Jack Burton—er, I mean—Chris Perkins always 
says, you can’t judge a monster by its level. At least, 
most players can’t. What makes a monster memo -
rable is its “shtick”—in other words, the one or two 
powers and/or traits that truly define what the mon-
ster does. As long as you’re happy with the monster’s 
attacks and powers, it doesn’t matter where the rest of 
its stats came from.
 First, find a monster of the role  and level you 
need—preferably one that has at least one attack 
power or trait worth keeping—and do the following:
✦✦ Give the monster a new name.
✦✦ Ignore any of the monster’s powers or traits 
that are inappropriate or undesirable.
✦✦ If you’re feeling creative (and only if you’re 
feeling creative), give the monster a new trait 
or power—and by “new” I mean something 
you’ve invented on a whim or something lifted 
from another critter.
The Dungeon Master Experience: Instant Monster 
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
11
Having trouble finding a monster of the appropriate 
role and level? Try surfing the “creatures by level” 
charts at the back of every 4th Edition monster book 
we’ve ever produced, or better yet, use the D&D Com-
pendium online tool.
 I’ll be the first to admit it: This approach to mon-
ster customization is the D&D equivalent of stealing 
someone else’s homework, erasing that person’s name 
and writing your name on it instead—appropriate 
behavior for your home campaign only!
 Here’s the infernal girallon  from the Monster 
Manual 3, transformed into a foulspawn terrorhulk  
for my Monday night campaign:
fOulSpAWN TErrOrHulK
(use Infernal Girallon, Monster Manual 3 p.103)
Level 22 Brute
—Replace the burning soul aura with a psychic ooze 
aura (deals psychic damage instead of fire damage, 
but otherwise identical).
—Replace the burning ichor power with a psychic ichor 
power (deals psychic damage instead of fire damage, 
but otherwise identical).
—Delete the Combat Climber trait.
the “two-fanged 
stRike” of monsteR 
customization
If you feel like flexing your DM ninja skills, try using 
both approaches on one monster. Here’s an example 
of a monster that I wanted to include aboard my mind 
flayer ship, but was the wrong level and a bit too com -
plex for my tastes. A dolgrim warrior is basically two 
goblins fused together, and I wanted my version to 
be a minion with traits that preserved the monster’s 
shtick. The traits I ultimately gave the monster were 
“inspired” by the racial powers of elves and halflings. 
The end result:
DOlGrIM pEST
(use Dolgrim Warrior, EbErron  Campaign Guide  
p.203)
Level 21 Minion Skirmisher
HP 1; AC 35, Fort 33, Ref 32, Will 33
+17 to attacks, 13 damage/attack
—Replace the Double Actions and Combat Advan-
tage traits with:
Weez Awesome: Whenever it makes an attack roll, 
the dolgrim rolls twice and uses the higher result.
Weez Still Alive! (immediate interrupt; at-will)
Trigger: An enemy hits the dolgrim with an attack.
Effect: The triggering enemy must reroll the attack against 
the dolgrim and use the second roll, even if it’s lower.
The Dungeon Master Experience: Instant Monster 
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
12
Lessons  LeaRned
Use your newfound DM superpower freely and often, 
until it becomes as easy as breathing. Mastery comes 
quickly—in very little time, you’ll be able to customize 
monsters “on the fly” while still keeping your players 
on their toes. The truth is, you should never have to 
create a monster stat block unless you really want to. 
Don’t believe me? Take any monster stat block that’s 
been published and do the following:
✦✦ Write down the monster’s name and a page 
reference.
✦✦ Make a “short list” of the custom changes you 
want to make to the monster.
✦✦ Run the monster using the old stat block and 
your “short list” of notes.
Your players will either believe that you’re running a 
monster right out of the book, or they’ll think they’re 
fighting something new. Either way, they’re over-
joyed—and you didn’t kill yourself in the process.
Until the next encounter!
WEDNESDAY NIGHT.
Three years ago. The Iomandra campaign has just gotten 
underway. The characters have converged on Kheth: a 
small, politically insignificant island in the middle of 
the Dragon Sea… an island with many secrets yet to be 
revealed.
 Chris Youngs is playing a tiefling warlock named 
Deimos, who was shipwrecked on the island as a child 
nearly two decades ago. Little does Deimos know that the 
shipwreck was no accident, nor does he realize that the 
Dragovar Empire wants him dead. Neither Chris nor his 
character know that Deimos was, as a child, subjected to 
an arcane experiment that trapped the spirit of an ancient 
dragon-sorcerer inside him—or that he was sold off by his 
grandmother, the leader of a powerful tiefling thieves’ guild 
called the Horned Alliance. Over the next several years, 
these secrets will come to light, and the full story of how 
Deimos came to the island will be known.
Every campaign starts somewhere. A tavern in 
Waterdeep. An isolated village. A ship wrecked upon 
the shore of the Isle of Dread. These are backdrops 
against which we first meet the characters—the 
heroes of the campaign. At this point, the campaign 
world is a complete mystery to the players, and the 
only things they can relate to are their characters. For 
this reason alone, it behooves the Dungeon Master to 
take some time before the campaign begins to create 
hooks that tether the heroes to the setting . . . origin 
stories that make the characters feel intrinsic to the 
world.
 Once I’ve chosen a starting point for my campaign, 
but before play begins, I like to inspire my players to 
consider their characters’ origins… get them thinking 
about where their characters came from. I’m less con-
cerned about how the characters found one another; 
that bit of artifice usually isn’t important, since most 
players are willing and eager to accept that fate or 
circumstance has brought their characters together. 
However, it’s been my experience that players have 
trouble coming up with origin stories because their 
understanding of the world is so limited. (This is less 
true if you’re running a campaign in a world with 
which the players are intimately familiar.)
 All characters had lives before they became 
adventurers—at least, that’s the underlying conceit of 
character themes (first introduced in the 
Dark sun® 
Campaign Setting  and carried forward in other 4th 
Edition products published since). While character 
themes are terrific and I heartily encourage DMs to 
permit them in their campaigns, published themes 
can’t account for the specific stories you’re aiming 
to tell in the course of your home campaign. Conse -
quently, I like to create origin stories that my players 
can choose from, if they’re stuck for ideas.
 After I decided to start my campaign on a small 
island, I spent a rainy Sunday afternoon writing up 
a bunch of different origin stories that my players 
could choose from. (It wasn’t required that they do 
so. In some cases, my players already had an origin 
story in mind and I just needed to figure out how to 
fit it in.) This activity turned out to be a great exercise, 
because it forced me to think about different ways to 
bring characters together and connect them to events 
that were about to unfold.
 Here’s what I gave to my players as they were cre-
ating characters for the Iomandra campaign:
Point of Origin
3/24/2011
The Dungeon Master Experience: Point of Origin
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
13
youR oRigin stoRy
The campaign begins on the isle of Kheth, which 
begs the question: Are you a native of the island, or 
did events conspire to bring you here? Following are 
some likely origin stories for your character. Once 
you’ve chosen or concocted a story for your character, 
you can begin to hash out the details with the DM.
You’re Tyrak’n Born
You are a native of Tyrak’n, the only settlement on 
Kheth. Your family lives in town and either fishes, 
forages, tends a modest garden, or runs a small busi -
ness. You are friends with just about everyone in 
town, although you’ve probably forged a very close 
bond with at least one local citizen.
Racial Possibilities
✦✦ If you are a half-elf between the ages of 17 
and 25, you may choose to be the son or 
daughter of Magistrate von Zarkyn, giving you 
a fair amount of local clout. Your father is a 
shrewd leader and has taken great pains over 
the years to appease the island’s green dragon 
overlord and uphold his grandfather’s good 
name. Your mother is warm and funny in 
private, but surprisingly aloof and formal in 
public. You fear that there’s something impor -
tant she hasn’t told you or your father . . . a 
secret she’s likely to carry to her grave.
✦✦ If you are a halfling between the ages of 17 
and 25, you may have had a troubled older 
or younger brother named Jynt who disap -
peared four years ago. Jynt broke the law 
when he persuaded two other local youths (a 
human boy named Jesper and a half-elf girl 
named Vazia) to join him on an expedition to 
the ruins atop Serpent Hill. No one is allowed 
there by order of the magistrate. Jynt and his 
friends never returned, and the magistrate 
refused to send a hunting party to find them.
You’re a Shipwrecked 
Orphan
Nineteen years ago, a ship called the Morrow’s Folly  
crashed on the island of Kheth during a freak storm. 
The only survivors were the captain—a half-elf named 
Denarion Morrow—and several young children, your-
self included. You were very young at the time (2-5 
years old then, making you 21–26 years old now), 
and you don’t remember anything. You and the other 
children were adopted by the local townsfolk and 
raised as natives. Although he’s not much of a father 
figure, Captain Morrow has been watching over you 
all these years, but still claims that he can’t remember 
anything that happened before the shipwreck. You 
have no clue where you came from, or who your real 
parents are. You’re friends with just about everyone 
in town, although you’ve probably forged a very close 
bond with at least one local citizen.
 Four years ago, three of your friends (a troubled 
halfling boy named Jynt, a curious human lad named 
Jesper, and a half-elf girl named Vazia) left town to 
explore Serpent Hill, even though locals are strictly 
forbidden to go there. They never returned. Captain 
Morrow urged Magistrate von Zarkyn to send a patrol 
to locate them, but the magistrate refused. The two 
men haven’t spoken since. Jesper and Vazia were also 
survivors of the Morrow’s Folly  shipwreck, and Cap -
tain Morrow regrets not going after them himself.
You’re forsaken
You were born and raised elsewhere, brought to the 
island of Kheth by ship, and, for whatever reason, left 
behind. Hoping to find your place in the community, 
you’ve probably forged a close bond with at least one 
of the local citizens.
racial possibilities
✦✦ If you are a dragonborn, you may be the son 
or daughter of parents who were exiled from 
Arkhosian soil. One or both of your parents 
may have been pirates or outspoken oppo -
nents of the Dragovar monarchy. In either 
case, they probably figured you’d be safer on a 
small, backwater island of little consequence 
to the rest of the Dragovar empire.
The Dungeon Master Experience: Point of Origin
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
14
✦✦ If you are an elf between the ages of 24 and 
30, you may choose to be the son or daughter 
of Lady Thariel von Zarkyn from a previous 
marriage. Your father is a wealthy ship cap -
tain named Torel Winterleaf who recently 
made some powerful enemies. Three weeks 
ago, you were spirited out of Io’calioth (the 
Dragovar capital) by your father’s servants, 
smuggled aboard the tradeship Lantheon, and 
sent to stay with your mother for your own 
safety. You never got a chance to say goodbye 
to your father, and your mother didn’t exactly 
welcome you with open arms. It’s been 23 
years after all, and your sudden arrival has 
created unrest in Von Zarkyn Manor. For his 
part, Magistrate von Zarkyn seems to be han -
dling the situation quite well, particularly 
since your mother never told him she had a 
child with her previous husband.
✦✦ If you are a tiefling between the ages of 17 
and 25, you may choose to be the niece or 
nephew of Lucius Vezetus, the friendly propri -
etor of the Talisman. You were born and raised 
in the slums of Io’calioth, and several years 
ago your parents brought you to see “Uncle 
Lucius” as a child and left you with him with -
out explanation. Although he makes you do 
chores around the tavern, your uncle has been 
very forgiving of your irksome adolescent 
antics. When asked about your parents, he 
merely frowns and grumbles in Supernal.
None of the Above
Perhaps you’ve come to Kheth for entirely different 
reasons. As a result, you may or may not have forged 
strong ties with the community. Some brief sugges -
tions are listed below:
✦✦ Someone you care about was arrested ten 
years ago by Dragovar authorities and sent to 
the prison island of Mheletros. You believe 
this person was imprisoned wrongfully, and 
the key to clearing his or her good name rests 
with a missing sea captain named Denarion 
Morrow . . . whom you’ve finally tracked to 
the backwater town of Tyrak’n on the island 
of Kheth.
✦✦ You swindled or double-crossed a sea cap -
tain named Lydia Taralan, only to discover 
afterward that she was working for Sea King 
Senestrago. Upon learning the truth, you fled 
aboard the hammership Lantheon , headed for 
Tyrak’n. You’ve opted to lay low until things 
blow over. Hopefully by then, you’ll have 
found some protection . . . or some way to 
make amends.
✦✦ The church of Avandra has sent you to Tyrak’n 
to assist the local priest, Sister Alyson. She 
specifically requested “someone gifted with 
an adventurous spirit.” Alyson believes that 
certain townsfolk are blessed with an adven -
turous nature that will soon manifest, but 
they need Avandra’s assistance to survive 
their travails. You are the one Sister Alyson 
hopes will help these other adventurers 
“safely walk the dark path.”
✦✦ You had a vivid dream about a silver dragon. 
It asked you to travel to the island of Kheth 
and locate a man named Johias Ilum. The 
dragon in your dreams sounded real enough, 
and also claimed that the rewards for your 
success would be great.
Lessons  LeaRned
One of the joys of running a campaign is watching 
the players learn its mysteries. However, at the start 
of the campaign, everything is a mystery. One of the 
ways you can tell the players a little bit about the 
world and build anticipation for what’s to come is to 
give them origin story ideas that you can connect to 
some of the bigger stories of your campaign.
 Case in point, Chris Youngs was looking for a hook 
to tie his tiefling character to the world of Iomandra, 
and he liked the “You’re a Shipwrecked Orphan” idea 
quite a bit. He also liked the idea that Deimos would 
form a close bond with Lucius Vezetus, the tiefling 
proprietor of the Talisman. They were, after all, the 
only tieflings on the island.
 You only need a handful of origin stories, and the 
time you invest in their creation will pay off in spades 
over the course of the campaign. Here’s why I love 
creating them:
✦✦ Origin stories make the heroes feel like living, 
breathing elements of your campaign world.
✦✦ Origin stories come with pre-built hooks for 
adventures. Let the events of the past inform 
the events of the future.
Until the next encounter!
The Dungeon Master Experience: Point of Origin
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
15
MONDAY NIGHT.
As happens from time to time, three of my eight players 
are absent, so this game session is a bit more intimate than 
usual. The combats move quickly and seem a lot more dan -
gerous, probably because I’m not the kind of merciful DM 
who adjusts encounters to account for absent players!
 Fortunately, one of the attending players is Jeff Alvarez. 
By day, Jeff is the VP of Operations at Paizo Publishing, 
but on Monday nights, he transforms into the elf ranger 
Kithvolar: a whirling dervish of gut-spilling destruction 
who deals obscene amounts of damage. Tonight is Kithvo -
lar’s moment to shine—Jeff is about to learn that he’s not in 
complete control of his character, and that something vile 
is living in his brain….
A quick aside: This article was inspired by a ques -
tion posed at a PAX East seminar called “The Rat 
Bastard’s Guide to Running Long Campaigns.” Expe -
rienced DMs will find the point of this article rather 
obvious. If your reaction to the article is “No kidding,” 
then you’re well ahead of the curve. However, as with 
all things, that which is most obvious is often most 
ignored, and countless campaigns and players have 
suffered because experienced DMs have forgotten 
what I’m about to share with you.
 In an earlier article , I recommended treating your 
campaign like a TV series. If you analyze some of the 
best dramatic series in recent history, you’ll see that 
individual episodes generally focus on plot, charac -
ter, or both. When Mulder and Scully are exposing 
the government’s cover-up of alien-human hybridiza -
tion, they’re in a plot-driven episode of The X-Files . 
When they’re investigating the abduction of Mulder’s 
sister or dealing with the fact that Scully has cancer, 
they’re in a character-driven 
episode. Sometimes these 
two things cross: When we 
learn that Mulder’s sister 
and Scully’s cancer are part 
of a worldwide conspiracy, 
things get really twisted. 
When the Battlestar Galac -
tica crew is trying to escape 
from Cylon-occupied New 
Caprica, we’re talking plot, 
but we also have moments 
in which different charac-
ter arcs are expanded: Saul 
Tigh’s discovery that his wife 
is a Cylon collaborator, Kara 
Thrace’s attempts to escape 
imprisonment, Lee Adama’s 
“battle of the bulge,” and so 
on.
 I have three overarching 
(i.e., world-shaping) plots 
that form the foundation of 
my campaign. However, I’m 
always looking for opportunities 
to do “character episodes”—to present 
individual quests that help advance certain 
character arcs and give objectives that are per-
sonal. Again, TV series do this all the time; if all the 
Battlestar Galactica  crew did was fight Cylons week 
after week, the series would get tiresome, and we’d 
stop caring about the characters. When push comes 
to shove, it’s the heroes that are most important, 
not convoluted plotlines or crafty villains or ethical 
conundrums or “end of the world” tick-
ing clocks.
 Which brings me to Kithvolar, the 
elf ranger. Early in the paragon tier, my 
Monday night group opposed “kraken 
cultists” lurking underneath the city of 
Io’galaroth. The adventure culminated in an encounter 
with some aberrant horrors, during which Kithvolar 
fell unconscious. Amid the chaos—and unbeknownst to 
the players—a mind flayer implanted a critter in the elf 
ranger’s brain before slinking back to the Far Realm.
A Moment in the Sun 
3/31/2011
The Dungeon Master Experience: A Moment in the Sun 
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
16
characters naturally become more integral to the 
campaign than others. However, here’s some good 
advice if you have underdeveloped characters: Ask 
the players to send you three things they would like 
to see happen in the campaign. Once you have their 
lists, take one idea from each player and work it into 
an upcoming adventure. Then ask yourself, “How 
might this affect that player’s character?”
Lessons  LeaRned
Static heroes do not a great campaign make. If you 
want your D&D campaign to thrive, its heroes need 
to evolve. Your more sophisticated players will 
demand it, but even players with a relatively shallow 
investment in the game don’t like being treated as 
supporting characters or fifth wheels for very long.
 For me, the greatest challenge of running a long 
campaign is keeping all of the players invested in 
what’s happening. Toward that end, I try to keep the 
following in mind:
✦✦ A campaign has an ensemble cast of heroes. 
Make sure they all get time in the spotlight, 
and keep the spotlight moving!
✦✦ Every character gets an arc, including the 
player who doesn’t really crave one.
Okay, enough about the heroes. Next week, let’s 
embrace our “inner evil,” talk about amazing cam -
paign villains, and compare notes.
Until the next encounter!
 Flash forward several game sessions: The heroes 
are in the creaking bowels of Anchordown (a float -
ing “raft town”), assaulting a nest of aberrations. 
Strangely, none of the creatures seem to be attacking 
Kithvolar, and the players have no idea why. Also, 
Kithvolar sees disturbing things the other characters 
don’t, such as tentacles crawling inside the walls.
 Flash forward several more game sessions: The 
thing in Kithvolar’s brain has matured. It takes con-
trol of his mind and uses him to assassinate the 
trusted adjutant of a Dragovar military general, 
throwing the empire into chaos. A simple ritual is 
enough to remove the critter in his brain, but the 
more interesting questions are how will Kithvolar 
react to being used as a pawn, and can he make 
amends? Jeff ’s character is standing at the epicenter 
of the action, and Kithvolar will help set the tone and 
direction of the campaign going forward.
 Every character deserves a moment in the sun.
 Sometimes the moment comes unexpectedly when 
a character does something particularly cool and 
memorable, or when something surprising happens to 
that character. However, a good DM doesn’t wait for 
these moments. A good DM also prepares for them. As 
I prepare for a session, I ask myself, “Which character 
is this ‘episode’ about?” It’s okay to be proven wrong—
after all, you can’t always predict what’ll happen 
once the players convene and the dice start rolling! I 
remember planning an entire Monday game around 
Bruce Cordell’s character . . . which was great, except 
that Bruce couldn’t make it. (That was the infamous 
session in which Bruce’s character was decapitated.)
 Before you run your next game session, ask 
yourself which character gets the spotlight . . . and 
then see how right you are. Week after week, if you 
discover that the answer is the same one or two char-
acters, consider that a warning sign: Not all of your 
player characters are getting their moment in the sun.
 Giving each character “equal time” isn’t easy. 
It’s something I personally struggle with. Some 
The 
Dastardly 
Duo 
4/7/2011
WEDNESDAY NIGHT.
The characters, now 15th level, have reached the midpoint 
of the campaign. To celebrate this achievement, I decided 
to involve them in something truly world-shaking. The 
time had come to give them a flavor of evil they’d never 
tasted before.
 Enter Kharl Mystrum and Nemencia Xandros.
Kharl and Nemencia have three qualities that make 
them stand out: First, like all truly evil villains, they 
believe that their actions are justified. Second, they’re 
incredibly lucky. And third, like two sides of a coin, 
they can’t really exist without one another.
 If Buffy the Vampire Slayer (the TV series, not the 
loathsome movie) taught me anything, it’s that two 
villains are better than one. It was proven in Season 
2 with the vampires Spike and Drusilla, reaffirmed 
in Season 3 by Mayor Wilkins and Faith, and then 
sorely missed in subsequent seasons. (If you want 
to make a case for the “brilliant pairing” of Rutger 
Hauer and Paul Reubens in the Buffy  movie, knock 
yourself out. Preferably with a sledgehammer.)
 Like Spike and Dru, the “dastardly duo” in my 
Wednesday night campaign are lovers, which mostly 
serves as a plot device to explain why they’re together 
The Dungeon Master Experience: The Dastardly Duo 
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
17
 It’s very easy to hate a pair of spoiled rich kids who 
want to trade their silver spoons for platinum, and 
blow obscene amounts of money because they feel 
trodden upon.
 The heroes first become involved with them when 
they attend a secret auction of elemental weaponry; 
the last item up for grabs is the elemental citadel. It’s 
here when the heroes meet Nemencia, who seems 
pretty harmless and out of her league . . . until she 
bids 25 million gp on the citadel in question. At that 
time, it’s not clear what her intentions are—the play -
ers are initially led to believe she’s representing her 
father, a powerful baron with a sterling reputation.
 At the conclusion of the auction, Nemencia is 
more than happy to offer the heroes a tour of her new 
citadel, convinced that they share her disdain for 
the empire. However, it soon becomes clear that her 
intentions are far from noble. When the heroes try 
to wrest the crown from her, she crashes the citadel 
into the sea. Using a talisman obtained earlier in the 
campaign, the heroes travel back in time, effectively 
escaping a TPK. (Time travel: a fun if tricky plot 
device that I hope to discuss in a future article.) The 
heroes get a second shot, but instead of turning on 
Nemencia, they remain aboard the citadel and wait 
for an opportunity to betray her.
 Before the heroes can act against Nemencia a 
second time, Kharl appears. That’s when the heroes 
realize they’re facing two villains, not one. The added 
complication is that Kharl is not alone: He’s joined by 
a flight of mercenary dragons bribed into defending 
the citadel. What to do? The heroes first try to play 
the two lovers against one another; when that fails, 
they try to convince the dragon mercenaries to betray 
the lovers, and very nearly succeed. When Kharl 
finally becomes aware of their scheme, the battle’s 
joined! As the citadel cuts a swath of destruction 
through Io’calioth’s harbor, Kharl and Nemencia hold 
out for as long as possible before making their escape.
 What makes Kharl and Nemencia especially 
memorable (apart from their countless flaws), is 
their longevity. Since the first fateful meeting, 
they’ve crossed paths with the heroes on three more 
occasions:
✦✦ Weakened and wounded from their ordeal 
aboard the citadel, Kharl and Nemencia are 
captured by agents of the Dragovar empire. 
The heroes feel sorry enough for the lovers to 
extricate them from their predicament. Once 
out of harm’s way, Kharl and Nemencia betray 
the heroes and nearly get them killed before 
escaping once again.
✦✦ The heroes learn that the Dragovar empire 
has posted a 2,000,000 gp bounty for the 
capture of Kharl and Nemencia. The heroes 
finally catch them aboard Kharl’s ship, but 
when the vessel is overrun by githyanki 
pirates, the heroes are forced to surrender the 
lovers to save their own skins.
✦✦ After their vessel is destroyed by a Far Realm 
mine, the heroes seek another time-travel 
talisman to undo the sequence of events that 
caused their ship’s destruction. They discover 
a drow NPC who has what they need, and 
also learn that the drow is conducting secret 
business with githyanki pirates. Once they 
learn that the pirates have released Kharl 
and Nemencia into the drow’s custody, the 
vindictive (and somewhat more jaded) heroes 
hunt down and kill the two lovers out of spite, 
forcing the drow to use his time-travel talis -
man to undo the event. When they try again, 
the heroes discover that Kharl and Nemencia 
have been spirited away, and the talisman’s 
power has been spent. The heroes’ fleeting 
victory turns to bitter irony as their thirst for 
vengeance has cost them the very item they 
sought.
but also gives their relationship an added layer of 
realism and complexity—particularly when the cracks 
start to form. They’re both human, born into noble 
families suffering under the tyranny of the dragon-
born-dominated empire that rules most of Iomandra. 
Determined to shatter the imperial hold over their 
regency, Kharl and Nemencia have stolen their par-
ents’ fortunes to spend on a massive elemental citadel 
held aloft by a 1,000-foot-high cyclone of water. Once 
they’ve obtained the citadel, Kharl and Nemencia 
plan to wipe out the imperial fleet at Io’calioth and 
run roughshod over the island city. It might seem 
crazy in your campaign, but it fits perfectly into mine.
The Dungeon Master Experience: The Dastardly Duo 
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
18
Lessons  LeaRned
The saga of Kharl and Nemencia isn’t something I 
planned from the get-go. I fully expected them to 
be dead by now. Everything that’s happened so far 
is the result of hundreds of decisions and dice rolls, 
combined with calculated efforts on my part to have 
them resurface in unexpected ways. They’ve become 
the archetypal two-headed villain of my Wednesday 
night campaign. At some point, I’ll share with you 
another villainous archetype that’s become the bane 
of my Monday night group . . . but that’s another story!
 The theme of “dastardly duo” appears frequently 
in literature, film, and TV. Partnered villains are 
better than singular villains for so many reasons: 
They act as mirrors for one another, they can be 
turned against one another, and they remind the 
players that villains also have relationships that can 
be explored and exploited. Perhaps most importantly, 
if one of them dies, the other can carry the torch.
 Kharl and Nemencia have taught me three other 
important lessons worth mentioning here:
✦✦ The best villains are like the heroes: They 
don’t know everything, they make mistakes, 
and they have a knack for turning disadvan -
tage into advantage.
✦✦ The best villains are the ones the players can 
interact with.
✦✦ If you want to keep your villains from getting 
killed, try making them more valuable alive 
than dead, or make the consequences of their 
deaths severe and readily apparent.
Regarding the second point, there’s an inherent risk 
that comes with giving heroes “face time” with your 
carefully crafted villains. More often than not, the 
villains will perish before achieving any true level of 
infamy, but for every nineteen that die before their 
time, there will be the twentieth villain in whom the 
gods show favor, the villain (or dastardly duo) that 
survives long enough to make the heroes’ lives truly 
miserable.
 Regarding the third point, imagine what would 
happen if my players suddenly learned that Kharl and 
Nemencia had become heroes of the people—symbols 
of unity among humans fighting for independence 
against the “ruthless” Dragovar empire? What would 
happen, I wonder, if the heroes murdered them in 
cold blood?
Until the next encounter!
—Dungeon Master for Life,
Chris Perkins
She Eats 
Babies! 
4/14/2011
MONDAY NIGHT.
The heroes are mid-paragon tier and enjoying a love/
hate relationship with a guild of tiefling thieves and cut -
throats called the Horned Alliance. Over the course of 
several adventures, they’ve thwarted a major operation, 
killed several high-ranking members of the guild, and dealt 
the guild a severe financial blow. Now they find them -
selves in the cellar of The Dead Crow, a tavern in Io’calioth 
that serves as a front for the Horned Alliance, standing 
across the dining table from the guild’s supreme leader: 
a grandmotherly tiefling named Dorethau Vadu. What 
better opportunity to bury the hatchet and let bygones be 
bygones—the heroes have other fish to fry, and so does the 
Horned Alliance. Enough blood has been shed, and neither 
side is eager to escalate the violence. More importantly, the 
heroes have information that Dorethau desires, and she 
has information useful to them.
 Both sides agree to an information exchange. How -
ever, before the exchange begins, a servant places a covered 
platter in front of Dorethau. She rubs her fork and knife 
together expectantly as the platter lid is removed . . . reveal -
ing a cooked dragonborn baby.
The Monday night group was horrified.
 To understand the point of this article, one must 
first understand the Horned Alliance. This tieflings-
only club of miscreants and malefactors operates 
something like the Mafia—it wants to mind its own 
business (however criminal) and be left alone. That 
The Dungeon Master Experience: She Eats Babies! 
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
19
 The juxtaposition of the grandmotherly figure 
with the image of the cooked baby told the players 
everything they needed to know about Dorethau 
Vadu—and at this point, the negotiations were 
over. The looks on my players’ faces said it all: 
There was no doing business with this woman—
she had to die.
 As a DM, I sometimes make the mistake of 
relying too much on dialogue to make my vil -
lains compelling, but players are quick to dismiss 
evil monologues, insults, and hissed invectives. 
They’re just words, after all. What my players 
remember about Dorethau Vadu aren’t the words 
that came out of her mouth, but the baby that 
went into it.
 Actions always speak louder than words.
Lessons  LeaRned
I’m not suggesting that you add infanticide to your 
campaign as a means to shock your players. What 
worked for one villain in my campaign won’t nec -
essarily translate to villains in your campaign. 
The dragonborn baby stunt merely illustrates that 
the heroes need to see the villains do bad things 
in order to appreciate what they’re up against. 
Simply knowing the bad guy is evil isn’t thrilling 
enough.
 There’s a throwaway line spoken in the film 
Quantum of Solace to remind us that heroes, in large 
part, are judged by the strength of their enemies 
(“They say you’re judged by the strength of your 
enemies”). Well, truth be told, everything I know 
about creating villains I learned from James Bond 
novels and films—and my villains’ “strength” is 
determined by the extent they’re remembered long 
after they’re gone. For you, it might be the villain 
who “brands” his captives, the villain who betrayed 
one of his own to save himself, or the villain who 
wears a cloak made of the stitched faces of his slain 
enemies.
said, the tieflings in my campaign are a shattered 
race; their empire was wiped out by the dragonborn 
empire, and in Dragovar society, most tieflings are 
regarded as third-class citizens.
 Over the course of several levels, the heroes 
crossed swords with a number of Horned Alli -
ance tieflings. There was Suffer, the brutal tiefling 
thug who spoke with a Brooklyn accent; there was 
Zaidi Arychosa, the aria singer and wealthy dilet -
tante; there was Zaibon Krinvazh, who lived on a 
ship called the Hellstrike and collected the flayed 
bones of his adversaries; and there was Prismeus, 
Zaibon’s crafty tiefling lieutenant with the acid-
scarred face.
 For the supreme leader of the Horned Alliance, I 
needed someone more memorable than all of these 
other tieflings combined—someone with the smarts, 
the temperament, and the prescience to run a wide -
spread organization yet who also embodied the 
Horned Alliance’s abject hatred toward the Dragovar 
Empire. Dorethau Vadu is old, wise, and not about 
to pick a fight with a bunch of people who slay mon-
sters for a living. The Horned Alliance is her house, 
its members are her children and grandchildren 
(metaphorically speaking). She would be likeable and 
admirable except for one thing.
 She eats babies.
 This wasn’t some randomly assigned fetish. It 
makes perfect sense in the context of the campaign; 
one thing the heroes know is that the Horned Alli -
ance detests the ruling dragonborn empire, so how 
do I embody this hatred in the guild’s leader? The 
answer is perfect in its awesome evilness: Dorethau 
Vadu employs thieves to kidnap dragonborn babies 
and then eats them! When the idea came to me, I 
was walking my dog in the woods. Reggie, my three-
legged silky terrier, gave me a quizzical look when 
I shouted “She eats babies!” and immediately sent 
myself a text message so I wouldn’t forget. (Like I’d 
forget something that cool!)
The Dungeon Master Experience: She Eats Babies! 
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
20
✦✦ A villain needs only one good gimmick  
to be even vaguely memorable—be it a   
deformity, a white cat with a diamond collar, 
a razor-rimmed hat, or something equally 
obvious.
✦✦ Villains are defined by their deeds and 
quirks. It only takes one deed or quirk to 
make a lasting impression.
Next week I’ll present the winning entries from last 
week’s BEST VILLAIN EVER! contest, and then we’ll 
leave villains alone for a while to talk about what 
wonderful things can happen to a campaign when a 
player leaves the group.
Until the next encounter!
Normally I’d kick things off by describing some thrill -
ing event or happenstance from my home campaign, 
but we’re breaking format this week to bring you the 
three winning entries from the Best Villain Ever con-
test. Thanks to everyone who submitted an entry!
 When I began analyzing why I liked these par-
ticular villains, I realized each one was a textbook 
example of a villainous archetype: There’s the vil -
lain born out of the heroes’ backstory, the villain 
hiding in the heroes’ midst, and the good-aligned 
creature turned evil. Many of the contest entries fell 
into one of these three classic archetypes, though 
there were other archetypes represented as well: the 
world-destroying super-villain, the vengeance-driven 
villain, and the benefactor-turned-villain, just to 
name a few.
 Are these three truly the best villains ever? That’s 
ultimately for you to decide. I chose the villains 
that resonated with me personally; had you been 
the judge, you might’ve gravitated toward differ-
ent things. However, all of the submissions did have 
one thing in common: Each villain was a deeply 
embedded element of the campaign, not just some 
disposable bad guy.
Dragen Blackstone,  
Warlock Knight of vaasa
Here’s an example of a villain the heroes are 
expected to despise from the get-go. Dragen’s deeds 
are directly responsible for the situation in which 
they find themselves, and their reasons for hating 
him are hard-coded into their backgrounds.
 I admire a DM who can pit the heroes against a 
villain far too powerful for them, allow the villain 
to prevail without ending the campaign, and offer 
players the promise of sweet, sweet revenge. Dragen 
doesn’t need a black hat or a white cat to get the 
heroes’ attention. The day the heroes finally meet 
Dragen on equal footing promises to be the high 
point in the campaign!
 Also, the Warlock Knights of Vaasa are just plain 
cool.
Best Villain Ever 
4/21/2011
The Dungeon Master Experience: Best Villain Ever 
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
21
The porter Who Might 
Be King
“Curse your sudden but inevitable betrayal!”
 The villain who lurks among the heroes is a great 
premise... difficult to pull off but incredibly gratifying 
when executed well (no pun intended). Sometimes a 
betrayal comes out of left field—usually when the idea 
occurs to the DM late in the game—but I think this 
one was planned from the very start, and that’s awe -
some. Bravo!
 I often tell new DMs not to drink from the 
“betrayal” well too often. You can’t have NPCs betray-
ing the heroes at every turn; it makes the players 
suspicious of everyone (best-case scenario) or just plain 
DrAGEN BlAcKSTONE, 
WArlOcK KNIGHT 
Of vAASA
My “Best Villain Ever” is from my home Forgotten 
Realms campaign. He is a Warlock Knight of Vaasa 
named Dragen Blackstone. The players crafted back-
stories for their characters, and a couple of them 
made up stories that involved their homes being 
destroyed when they children—but they weren’t 
really specific about the regions they were from. I 
decided to make them from the mountains surround-
ing Vaasa and tied them together by the common 
thread that their villages were all destroyed by 
Dragen. Their first run-in with Dragen was while 
they were still very low level, and he knocked them 
unconscious and left them for dead, lying in the dirt. 
A wandering shaman (a new player joining the cam-
paign) discovered them and healed their wounds. 
The shaman was also very familiar with Dragen—his 
tribe was constantly avoiding the Warlock Knights. 
My players will have many run-ins with Dragen’s 
henchmen before they are powerful enough to get 
their revenge.
The best twist of the campaign is that one of my play-
ers thought he’d be clever and not create a backstory 
for his character. He told me his character woke up in 
the mountains with amnesia and has no recollection 
of his past. As the story unfolds, he will learn that he 
used to be one of Dragen’s henchmen!
—Bill Buchalter
Indianapolis, IN
THE pOrTEr WHO MIGHT 
BE KING
The best villain we ever had in a game was a hired 
porter for the party. He was a kind, wiry old man 
who shared fatherly advice and told great stories 
around the campfire. The party loved him... until one 
night when the party uncovered a powerful artifact 
they had retrieved from a lich and decided to camp 
outside the dungeon immediately afterwards. In 
the darkest hour of night, offering to watch over the 
camp while the party slept, the kindly old porter 
killed the PC with the artifact while he slept and 
disappeared into the night. What they didn’t know 
was that the old man was once a cruel king who had 
been dethroned at a younger age and now had a way 
to get back what once was his.
—Aaron Scott
Sioux Falls, SD
angry (worst-case scenario). I’m a big fan of the “vil-
lain in our midst,” but if your players have been stung 
in the past, it’s wise to drop a few clues before the big 
reveal. That way, when the players think you’re screw-
ing them over, you can point back at the clues and say, 
“Au contraire!” (or whatever they say in South Dakota). 
Havok the Betrayer
I like challenging players’ expectations, and a clas -
sic D&D example is the evil-aligned metallic dragon. 
This isn’t a new idea, but it’s often overlooked. My 
campaign includes a polymorphing silver dragon 
with evil ambitions; he’s not nearly as capable or 
dangerous as Havok, and I confess that I’ve used him 
as comic relief on occasion (I recall a time when the 
dragon—as he was taunting the heroes with a villain-
ous monologue—landed on a wooden platform that 
couldn’t support his weight).
HAvOK THE BETrAYEr
The best villain we ever had in a game was a hired 
porter for the party. He was a kind, wiry old man who 
shared fatherly advice and told great stories around 
the campfire. The party loved him... until one night 
when the party uncovered a powerful artifact they had 
retrieved from a lich and decided to camp outside the 
dungeon immediately afterwards. In the darkest hour 
of night, offering to watch over the camp while the 
party slept, the kindly old porter killed the PC with the 
artifact while he slept and disappeared into the night. 
What they didn’t know was that the old man was once 
a cruel king who had been dethroned at a younger age 
and now had a way to get back what once was his.
—Aaron Scott
Sioux Falls, SD
The Dungeon Master Experience: Best Villain Ever 
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
22
 Havok has the added virtue of being a monster as 
opposed to a two-armed, two-legged villain. Monsters 
are underused as major campaign villains, in my 
humble opinion. If a gold dragon can hold the heroes’ 
interest for multiple levels or even tiers of play, imag-
ine what could be done with an evil treant hell-bent 
on purging the natural world of civilization, an iron 
golem imbued with the sentience and ambition of its 
evil creator, or a beholder crime lord.
 Havok the Betrayer rekindled my desire to flip 
through the Monster Manual in search of the next big bad 
guy in my campaign, and that’s why he made the cut.
Lessons  LeaRned
Would I pilfer these villains for my own campaign? 
You bet. A campaign can never have enough good vil-
lains—I truly believe that. Aside from their admirable 
characteristics, the Best Villain Ever contest winners 
reminded me of three important things:
✦✦ Villains (even smart ones) make mistakes. 
Sometimes that includes not killing the 
heroes when they have the chance!
✦✦ Not every villain needs a world-shaking 
agenda to be cool.
✦✦ Villains come in all shapes and sizes.
It’s a bit of a digression, but Boraxe (one of our com -
munity members) has some wonderful DM advice 
embedded in his forum sig, which I’m paraphrasing 
here: Dangle lots of plot hooks in front of your players. 
Anything they do not bite can come back and bite them 
later. I think the same advice applies to campaign 
villains. You never know which villains will rattle 
the players’ cages, so the trick is to keep inventing 
new ones.
Until the next encounter!
Man 
Down!
4/28/2011
WEDNESDAY NIGHT.
I was sad when Trevor Kidd, one of my players, told me he 
was leaving Wizards of the Coast—he was moving to Iowa 
to be closer to his wife, attending med school. Trevor’s char -
acter, a dragonborn paladin named Rhasgar Vormund, 
had an amazing story arc tied closely to the events of the 
campaign, and I had big plans for him. Now all of my 
plans were suddenly dashed… which forced me to come up 
with a new, better plan that would allow Rhasgar to exit 
gracefully as well as propel the campaign and the other 
characters forward.
 Here’s everything you need to know about Rhasgar 
to understand the point of this article: He was born into 
the noble caste of Dragovar society, but his family was 
disgraced by powerful rivals (House Irizaxes and House 
Narakhty). Rhasgar ended up adopted by the Temple of 
Bahamut, while his younger brother Naxagoras ended 
up on the streets. Rhasgar became a dutiful servant of 
Bahamut and a sworn defender of the faith, eventually 
joining forces with the party in order to help the Dragovar 
Empire find its missing Emperor (as well as protect it from 
various looming threats). Once in a while, he crossed paths 
with Naxagoras, who had fallen in with a bad crowd and 
sworn a vow to Tiamat to avenge their family’s disgrace. On 
multiple occasions, Naxagoras’s thirst for revenge placed 
him and his brother in direct conflict with the two noble 
families responsible for their father’s death and mother’s 
suicide. Meanwhile, Rhasgar tried everything he could to 
persuade Naxagoras to abandon his oath to Tiamat.
The Dungeon Master Experience: Man Down!
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
23
 Over the course of several levels, Rhasgar obtained 
a solid lead concerning the Emperor’s whereabouts, but 
other quests (and his brother’s antics) continually got in the 
way. Then a window of opportunity suddenly opened, and 
Rhasgar persuaded his companions to accompany him 
to the island of Nythe-Saleme, where the wreckage of the 
Emperor’s flagship had been sighted. . . .
To the other players in the group, Trevor’s character 
was the “friendly face” of the Dragovar Empire—an 
honorable dragonborn through and through. He 
reminded them that the empire wasn’t as corrupt as 
the DM sometimes made it out to be. Trevor’s depar-
ture not only meant the group was shrinking (from 
8 to 7 players) but also that the party was losing its 
moral compass. And I was losing not only a great role -
player but also a character whose ties to the Dragovar 
Empire fueled a lot of great storytelling.
 When a player leaves the group on good terms, my 
DM skills are put to their greatest test, for it’s my job 
to make sure the departing player’s final session is an 
amazing, emotional experience for the whole group. 
In a long-running campaign such as mine, every 
player deserves an appropriately spectacular send-
off—to deny a glorious finale would’ve been negligent 
and disappointing, and a good DM never leaves the 
players feeling disappointed.
 In January, I co-hosted a DM seminar at D&D 
Experience in Fort Wayne, IN. One of the seminar 
attendees shared an anecdote from his campaign in 
which he had one player leave the group and another 
player join in the same session. In his final session, 
the departing player sacrificed his character to save 
the life of the new player’s character. This simple act 
of heroism created a bond between the new charac-
ter and the remaining party members, all of whom 
were touched by their comrade’s noble sacrifice. I 
practically wept at the ingenuity of it, even though the 
outcome had been somewhat orchestrated by the DM 
and departing player.
 I wanted something 
equally impactful. Due to 
forces beyond my control, 
I had only one game ses-
sion to wrap up Rhasgar’s 
story and plan a graceful 
exit. The day before the 
game, I made a list of all 
of Rhasgar’s unresolved 
plot hooks and quests:
✦✦ Find the Emperor 
and return him 
safely to the throne.
✦✦ Deal with House 
Irizaxes and House 
Narakhty.
✦✦ Reconcile with 
Naxagoras.
All three of these quests 
were originally meant to 
carry Rhasgar through the 
epic tier, and I had spaced 
them out accordingly. 
I ended up discarding 
my original plans and instead focused on how I was 
going to tie up Rhasgar’s story in 4 hours of game 
time. Shortly before the game, in a moment of sub -
dued panic, I made a list of events that would happen 
during this farewell session:
✦✦ The heroes find and rescue the Emperor and 
his entourage, who are trapped in stasis on 
the island of Nythe-Saleme.
✦✦ The heroes escort the Emperor back to the 
capital, and he rewards them. They are named 
“princes of the empire” and given parcels of 
land. They witness firsthand the impact of the 
Emperor’s sudden, glorious return.
✦✦ Upon hearing of the wrongs inflicted upon 
Rhasgar’s family, the Emperor awards Rhas -
gar the estates of his rivals and tasks him with 
bringing the Irizaxes and Narakhty leaders 
to justice. Rhasgar and Naxagoras confront 
their hated enemies, one of whom wields their 
father’s sword. Retrieving the stolen sword is 
the symbolic gesture that finally unites the 
two brothers. Naxagoras’s bloodlust is satis -
fied, and Rhasgar gains a powerful friend in 
the Emperor.
The Dungeon Master Experience: Man Down!
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
24
Originally the Emperor wasn’t on the island. How -
ever, I now decided to make him a prisoner of the 
island’s overlords—a pair of wizards named Nythe 
and Saleme who used magic to disguise themselves 
as purple dragons. The sisters’ political agenda is 
pure contrivance and beyond the scope of this arti -
cle—what’s important is that they live inside a flying 
citadel that, in the course of the evening, rose out of a 
volcanic caldera, flew across 
the open water, and plunged 
into the sea, nearly wiping 
out the entire party. (A mass 
fly spell cast by Rodney 
Thompson’s character saved 
the day.)
 At 9 PM, three hours into 
the game, I realized there 
wasn’t enough time to run 
separate combat encoun-
ters with House Irizaxes 
and House Narakhty, so 
I decided on a whim that 
Kaphira Narakhty would 
execute her entire house-
hold and take her own 
life instead of allowing an 
enemy to spill her blood. 
Moreover, rather than allow 
her family’s fortune to fall 
into Rhasgar’s hands, she 
would use it to hire assas -
sins to avenge her death. 
(Instead of posthumously 
hiring them, I suppose that 
makes it prehumously; in 
any case, how’s that for set-
ting up a future encounter?) 
That left Tyzaro Irizaxes. I 
don’t usually let NPCs steal 
the limelight, but I did allow 
Rhasgar’s brother to score the final blow against the 
evil dragonborn noble and reclaim his father’s sword. 
As for Rhasgar, he decided to spare the life of Tyzaro’s 
daughter, Taishan, and even allowed her to retain a 
small portion of her father’s estate—one final noble 
act brilliantly improvised by Trevor in the moment.
Lessons  LeaRned
Sometimes when a player leaves, the campaign stalls. 
The onus falls on the DM to make the most of it—to 
reassure the remaining players that the campaign 
will go on . . . and that it’s still full of surprises!
 As much as I’ll miss Trevor, his departure has 
already propelled the Wednesday game forward. 
What will happen now that the Emperor has 
returned, I wonder? Will Kaphira Narakhty make 
good on her threat to avenge her family’s destruction? 
How will the other players fare without their faithful 
moral compass? I see dark times ahead, but only time 
will tell.
 Here’s what Trevor’s sudden departure taught me:
✦✦ Nothing’s more important to a campaign than 
the stories of the player characters.
✦✦ Improvisation is the key to survival—both for 
the DM and for the campaign.
Next week I’ll talk about maps, which I love, and 
share a few DM mapping tricks. The Best Villain 
Ever! contest was well received, so expect another in 
the not-too-distant future as well.
Until the next encounter!
Big Map 
Attack
5/5/2011
WEDNESDAY NIGHT.
The Emperor of the Dragovar empire is missing! The 
heroes chase a lead to a small island dominated by an 
extinct volcano and populated by hill giants. The giants 
pay homage to the island’s gold dragon overlord, Zeryn -
droth, even though the dragon was turned to stone many 
years ago.
 The huge petrified dragon stands proudly atop a rocky 
outcropping south of the hill giant village, and every morn -
ing the giants leave a cornucopia of fresh food offerings at 
its feet. With Zeryndroth indisposed, a black dragon named 
Caustralanth has moved into seaside caves set into the 
northern cliffs of the volcano . . . but she’s not yet powerful 
enough to impose her will upon the hill giants and assert 
herself as the island’s new dragon overlord.
There’s more to the island than meets the eye, as my 
players will soon discover. In order to find out what 
happened to the Emperor, the heroes will undoubt-
edly confront the hill giants, investigate the petrified 
remains of the dragon overlord, explore the hilltop 
cairns in the giants’ cemetery, and perhaps even 
negotiate Caustralanth’s caves to reach the volcano’s 
caldera. With so many possibilities, I felt it was 
important to provide my players with a map—and 
how I build maps is the subject of this article.
The Dungeon Master Experience: Big Map Attack
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
25
 My maps are not photorealistic; they’re inspired 
by the works of David “Diesel” LaForce, a cartogra -
pher from TSR who did a lot of the early cartography 
for Dungeon magazine (not to mention several old 
TSR adventures). My maps tend to be very clean 
and utilitarian, but they also have an organic hand-
drawn quality that mapmaking software has trouble 
emulating.
 Sometimes I draw maps the old-fashioned way: 
freehand on graph paper. On this particular occasion, 
I’m using Adobe Photoshop CS4 and giving you an 
over-the-shoulder glimpse into my map-making pro -
cess. This is not intended as a Photoshop tutorial, and 
I should warn you: I’m not a Photoshop whiz. How-
ever, you’d be amazed what you can do in Photoshop 
with just four tools: the pencil , the eraser, the paint 
bucket, and the type tool .
Step 1. Say Hello  
to photoshop
I open a new file in Photoshop. This is my canvas, and 
I want to make sure the map fits on a single sheet of 
8.5” x 11” paper. This map won’t need a grid, so I use 
the paint bucket  tool (left column) to paint the back -
ground white. It’s like I’m starting with a fresh sheet 
of blank paper!
Step 2. use layers
I like to build my maps in layers. Each new map ele-
ment I create gets its own layer. That way, if I need 
to make changes to one layer of the map, I can do so 
without affecting the other layers.
Step 3.  
Grab My pencil
My pencil is embedded in the toolbar on the left side 
of my screen. Most of the map will be created using 
this simple hand-drawing tool.
Step 4. Draw, Erase,  
Draw, Erase
Using my mouse and the pencil  tool, I draw a rough 
outline of the island on the Background layer. I’ve 
set the pencil width to 5 pixels, which has a nice line 
weight. Drawing with a mouse is hard; sometimes the 
lines don’t look exactly right. So, I use the eraser tool 
The Dungeon Master Experience: Big Map Attack
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
26
(in the left toolbar) to erase the sections that offend 
me, and then redraw those sections until I’m happy.
Step 5.  
Build the volcano
The volcano on the island will be represented by a 
series of concentric contour lines, each one represent-
ing an increase in elevation of 100 feet. These “rings” 
are drawn with the pencil . It’s tedious work that will 
pay off later.
Step 6. Add cliffs
Using my pencil and eraser tools, I carefully extend 
the 100-foot cliffs around the rest of the island, 
except for a short section to the south. I make sure 
there are no gaps in the linework, so that I don’t run 
into problems when it comes time to paint sections of 
the map with color.
Step 7. Add Hills
This is an island inhabited by hill giants, so I figure it 
needs hills! I draw several low hills at the base of the 
volcano, as well as a rocky rise at the southern tip of 
the island where the petrified dragon is perched.
Step 8. Add a Dock
Using the eraser, I erase a small bit of the island 
outline. Then I use my pencil  to draw a stone dock 
protruding from the island. If it doesn’t look right the 
first time, I erase it and try again. Up to this point, 
everything has been drawn on one layer.
Step 9. create a New l ayer
I’m ready to start adding details to my map. I create a 
new layer and call it “Hill Giant Homestead.”
The Dungeon Master Experience: Big Map Attack
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
27
Step 10.  
Draw a House
My layers appear in the toolbar along the right side of 
the screen. Using my pencil  and mouse, I draw a hill 
giant homestead anywhere on the map; because it’s 
on a separate layer, nothing I do will affect the rest of 
the map. I draw the house bigger than it will appear 
in the final, so that I can get the detail I want. It looks 
like something the Flintstones might build, but which 
seems appropriate for a hill giant dwelling.
Step 11.  
Shrink the House
To shrink the hill giant house so that it’s the appropri -
ate size, I use Edit > Transform > Scale (as shown).
Step 12.  
place the House
Using my mouse, I “click and drag” the resized house 
so that it’s where I want it. I can do this because the 
house is on its own layer, separate from the rest of the 
map.
Step 13. Duplicate  
the House
Because I’m lazy, I’m not going to draw different hill 
giant houses; I’m going to copy and paste the same 
one over and over using Layer > Duplicate Layer. 
Each time I duplicate the Hill Giant Homestead layer, 
I get a new house that I can “click and drag” wherever 
I want using my mouse.
The Dungeon Master Experience: Big Map Attack
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
28
Step 14. Make a  
Hill Giant cemetery
The giants bury their dead under rocky hilltop cairns. 
The cairns are created exactly the same way as the 
giant homesteads: I create a new layer, build one 
cairn using my pencil , shrink it down to the appro -
priate size, duplicate the layer over and over, and 
“click and drag” each new cairn into place.
 On a whim, I use the same trick to create farm 
fields around the hill giant homesteads. I create a 
new layer, draw five rows of wavy lines using my 
pencil (set to 1 pixel width), and then duplicate the 
layer multiple times. Once the lines are placed, I use 
my eraser to “cut the corners.”
Step 15. Make Waves  
and caves
Believe it or not, my map is 75% complete. Time to 
add some details, specifically a row of caves along 
the northern cliffs and some water lines around the 
entire island. I want to make these changes to the 
Background layer, so I make sure that’s the layer I’m 
working on (see the right toolbar).
 The waves and caves are made with my pencil  
(set at 3 pixels). The waves in particular look better 
if the linework is a bit thinner than the outline of the 
island.
Step 16. Just Add Water
Before I apply color, I save my map. That way, if I 
screw something up, I have an unpainted version to 
revert to. My color palette is in the top right corner 
of my screen; I’m going to limit myself to the colors 
offered here.
 I want to make sure I’m applying color to the cor-
rect layer (in this case, the Background layer). I select 
the shade of blue I want and use the paint bucket  
tool in the left toolbar to fill in the desired area. If 
there are any breaks in the outline of my island, the 
paint will flow into areas I don’t want, so I’m care -
ful to check my linework. If I use the paint bucket  
and the color doesn’t fill the desired area, I can undo 
it (Edit > Undo, or Command-Z on my Mac) and try 
again.
The Dungeon Master Experience: Big Map Attack
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
29
Step 17. paint by Numbers
The paint bucket  is a poor man’s coloring tool, but 
it serves my needs. I select different shades of yellow, 
orange, and brown to represent the various elevations 
and then use the paint bucket  to apply those colors 
to specific layers. For instance, the blue water in the 
caldera is on a different layer than the blue water sur-
rounding the island.
Step 18. Add pretty  
little Trees
I forgot the trees! No problem—I create a new layer, 
then draw and paint the trees wherever I want on the 
map.
Step 19. Transform the Trees
I not only want to shrink and relocate the trees but 
also flip them horizontally, so that they fit in the spe -
cific area of the island I have in mind. Once again, I 
use Edit > Transform. The “horizontal flip” tool is an 
easy way to make your map elements feel less cookie-
cutter. In the accompanying diagram, the two smaller 
stands of trees are basically two identical layers, one 
of which as been horizontally flipped!
Step 20. Build the Beach
I use the pencil  tool (set at 1 pixel width) to make 
stipple marks along the western shore, giving it a 
sandy appearance. Then I create a new layer, use 
my pencil and paint bucket  to draw one palm tree, 
duplicate that layer six times, and then use my mouse 
to move the seven palm trees where I want them.
Step 21.  
Add Elevation Tags
We’re almost finished. Time to add text to the maps. 
To make the elevation clear to my players, I add text 
tags to the various elevation lines (+100 ft., +200 ft., 
and so on). To make the text more visible, I apply a 
“glow” around the text using Layer > Layer Style > 
Outer Glow. Not all of the text on the map needs this 
treatment, just the text that would be hard to read 
otherwise.
The Dungeon Master Experience: Big Map Attack
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
30
Step 22.  
Save and Enjoy!
I use a traditional D&D statue icon to represent 
Zeryndroth, the petrified gold dragon. This symbol 
is part of the Zapf Dingbats font family, as is the star-
like symbol I use for the compass rose. Like all of the 
tags, they’re added to the map as separate layers using 
the type tool (“T”) in the left toolbar.
 With the tags in place, the map is complete. I save 
the file.
 At some point, remind me to show you the tools 
I use to build maps for the ships that crop up in my 
nautical-themed campaign.
Until the next encounter!
The Dungeon Master Experience: Big Map Attack
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
31
MONDAY NIGHT.
The heroes convene aboard their ship, the Maelstrom, 
before embarking on their next epic quest. That’s when 
Melech, Bruce Cordell’s character, notices something 
strange in the night sky: three unfamiliar stars peering just 
above the southwestern horizon.
 In the days that follow, more strange stars come into 
view, until the entire constellation of thirteen is visible. The 
starry array resembles a dragon’s eye, and the writings and 
ramblings of ancient mariners and astronomers speak of 
an evil constellation that appears only when summoned—a 
constellation with the power to warp the very fabric of real -
ity. Some call it the Dragon’s Eye. Others call it the end of 
the world.
 Believing that an evil eladrin warlock named Starlord 
Evendor has summoned the constellation for his own fell 
purposes, the heroes travel to the Dragovar capital. There, 
they confer with Lenkhor Krige, a dragonborn archmage 
who leads the Shan Qabal, a powerful sect within the 
arcane caste. Lenkhor is someone in whom the characters 
have placed their trust. Yet by the time they arrive, real -
ity has been altered in such a way that the archmage is no 
longer around to help them. To further complicate matters, 
the heroes have no memory of ever meeting Lenkhor, which 
means my players must put all previous encounters with 
Lenkhor out of their minds.
 Welcome to my weird world.
My campaign is like a snow globe. Sometimes it needs 
a good shake.
 Buried in my original campaign notes is the follow-
ing bit of lore: Long ago, the world of Iomandra was home 
to a multitude of powerful dragon-sorcerers. Their mastery 
of magic made them undisputed rulers of the world. One 
by one they died, and with them their great magic. Present-
day dragons, more driven to acquire gold and property than 
arcane power, believe these ancient wyrms ascended to the 
heavens, becoming the stars in the night sky.
The above passage was the inspiration for an epic-
level adventure called “Constellation of Madness,” in 
which a major campaign villain with ties to the Far 
Realm summons a constellation that has the power 
to alter reality. What really excited me about this 
idea was the prospect of temporarily swapping play -
ers in my Monday and Wednesday night groups, and 
the Dragon’s Eye constellation was the plot device I 
intended to use to make it happen. Unfortunately, 
my players’ schedules made the swapping exercise 
impractical; however, I refused to abandon the alter-
nate reality idea entirely. After twenty-three levels of 
adventuring, my players understood all too well how 
the world worked—so what better way to turn things 
upside-down and change some of the fundamental 
truths of the campaign!
 From the outset, my campaign was built around 
the three-tiered structure of 4th Edition. The heroes 
spent the entire heroic tier (levels 1–10) exploring 
one small island and learning bits and pieces about 
the “larger world.”
 Paragon tier (levels 11–20) was all about leaving 
the island and exploring what the larger world had to 
offer. The heroes became embroiled in politics. They 
meddled in the affairs of others while chasing their 
own dreams. They got a ship and plied the Dragon 
Sea in search of new adventures. By the end of the 
paragon tier, they’d touched on every major cam -
paign arc and understood the world pretty well.
 Then came epic tier (levels 21–30), during which 
one expects all of the major campaign arcs to wrap 
up. However, epic tier is more than just “the end of 
plots.” It’s also the perfect time to challenge the play -
ers’ perceptions of the world, and turn the campaign 
on its head. Like the final season of a television series, 
anything can happen and nothing is sacred.
 Keeping my players engaged for 20+ levels 
isn’t easy. Hell, sometimes it’s hard to keep myself 
engaged, let alone them! With the heroes halfway 
to 24th level, my players have grown accustomed 
to their characters and each other, and think they 
know all of my sly DM tricks. To keep things exciting, 
I must be willing to take some big-money risks and 
shock the players with unexpected twists.
Constellation of 
Madness
5/12/2011
The Dungeon Master Experience: Constellation of Madness
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
32
you may ask 
youRseLf,  
weLL, how did i 
get heRe?
“Constellation of Madness” does just that—it throws 
the heroes into an alternate reality where certain 
things that used to be true no longer are. It creates 
weird situations in which the players become aware 
of something that their characters don’t know—and 
that, my friends, is the definition of roleplaying. Case 
in point: One of the major campaign villains is a 
dragonborn wizard named Hahrzan. Throughout the 
paragon tier, the heroes clashed with Hahrzan on sev -
eral occasions, even killing him twice before realizing 
he had a secret cloning lab. But in this new reality, 
he’s leader of the Shan Qabal in place of Lenkhor 
Krige, and in this alternate reality, the characters and 
Hahrzan have never once fought each other.
 My players hate Hahrzan, and they loathe the fact 
that he’s risen to a position of power in this new real -
ity, but their characters have no justifiable reason to 
attack him. To my players, I describe their characters’ 
relationship to Hahrzan as “prickly and tense, but not 
hostile,” and as much as the players want to slay him, 
there’s really nothing for their characters to act on. 
Their only recourse is to accept this new reality… at 
least until their characters become aware that reality 
has been altered. How’s that for an epic roleplaying 
challenge?
 “Constellation of Madness” is all about my play -
ers knowing more than their epic-level characters. As 
the players figure out why certain things are chang -
ing and others are staying the same, no doubt some 
event will occur that lets their characters realize their 
world around them has changed… paving the way for 
the inevitable (and hopefully satisfying) confrontation 
with Starlord Evendor.
 A few words of warning: While epic tier allows you 
to shift a well-established campaign in unexpected 
directions, you must be careful not to turn the cam -
paign into something unrecognizable or unfamiliar 
to your players. They’ve invested too much time in 
the world to watch it mutate into something bizarre 
and unrecognizable. Moreover, alternate reality story -
lines aren’t for everyone. Sure, it’s a great way to bring 
back dead villains, but not all players are capable of 
handling the metagame implications of an alternate 
reality storyline. No matter how hard they roleplay, 
their characters always seem to know as much as the 
players do! Even my Monday night players—expert 
roleplayers all—can accept only so much metagame 
torture before their heads leap off their shoulders and 
fly screaming about the room.
Lessons  LeaRned
The jury’s still out on whether “Constellation of Mad -
ness” will go down as a high point of the Iomandra 
campaign or sink like a stone to the bottom of the 
Dragon Sea—I’ll keep you posted. In any event, here’s 
what the experience has taught me about epic-level 
play:
✦✦ By the time they reach the epic tier, play -
ers think they know where your campaign is 
heading. Show them how wrong they are.
Next week’s column discusses the repercussions of 
last week’s poll results. The votes are in, and things 
don’t look good for Xanthum the gnome bard! To my 
credit, I rarely kill characters on a whim, but you’d be 
surprised how much I enjoy torturing them. As you’ll 
find out next week, it’s for the greater good.
Until the next encounter!
The Dungeon Master Experience: Constellation of Madness
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
33
Post 
Mortem
5/19/2011
WEDNESDAY NIGHT. 
This week’s session kicks off with a quick recap of the 
previous week’s game: The heroes assaulted the Black 
Candle, a stronghold of Vecna worshipers hidden in a 
demiplane that can only be accessed via a secret ritual. 
Fortunately Xanthum (Curt Gould’s gnome bard) had 
mastered the ritual.
 Unfortunately, the Vecnites—themselves masters of 
secret lore—were more than prepared for the party’s arrival. 
The heroes quickly found themselves surrounded and fight -
ing for their lives against evil wizards, assassins, cultists, 
shadow demons, and undead creatures that like to feast on 
healing surges. To make matters worse, the heroes had an 
unexpected run-in with an exarch of the Maimed Lord, who 
banished Xanthum the gnome bard to the Nine Hells.
In a recent poll, y’all voted to decide which character 
in my Wednesday night campaign should die next. 
The votes were tallied, and Xanthum the gnome bard 
“won” by a landslide. Perhaps it was fate, but even 
before we knew the final results of the poll, events 
of the campaign had already conspired against Xan-
thum. Curt Gould was forced to wait a whole week 
to find out whether Xanthum would return from the 
Nine Hells in one piece. His anxiety only grew once 
the poll results were tallied.
 Fortunately for Curt, I’m not the sort of DM who 
kills characters solely based on poll results; hon-
estly, my players are quite capable of killing off their 
characters, and sometimes each other, without my 
help. That said, I have been known to torture my play -
ers’ characters from time to time.
 Just ask Rodney Thompson.
 Many levels ago, the Wednesday night heroes 
faced a similar situation where they attacked an 
elemental weapons foundry and found themselves 
overwhelmed. The characters were knocked out 
(except for Andrew Finch’s character, who fled), 
branded as enemies of the Dragovar empire (and by 
“branded” I mean literally scarred with scorching-hot 
brands that marked them as criminals), and handed 
over to a ship full of privateers (and by “privateers” I 
mean pirates). Prior to the ship’s departure, Rodney’s 
character Vargas had one of his eyes gouged out and 
replaced with a magical one; the bad guys planned to 
use Vargas as a “mule” to deliver this magic item to 
a one-eyed pirate warlord locked away in an island 
prison.
 In the course of the journey, with a little help from 
Andrew’s character, the heroes managed to comman-
deer the ship and avoid incarceration. Yet the pain 
and mutilation inflicted upon Vargas would be the 
beginning of a new arc for that character, one that 
would carry Vargas through many levels and even 
tiers of play. Rodney seized upon the opportunity, 
transforming Vargas into an avenger dedicated to 
wiping out those who maimed him. The eye not only 
gave Rodney a new magic item to play with, but also 
a new enemy to look forward to: the aforementioned 
pirate warlord, who was recently released from prison 
and—not surprisingly—wanted his magic eye back.
 A little pain goes a long way . . .
 . . . which brings us back to poor Xanthum. After 
making Curt wait a whole week to learn the ulti -
mate fate of his character, I took him aside at the 
start of the session and told him that upon arriving 
in the Nine Hells, Xanthum was taken prisoner by 
a covey of night hags, whereupon he became their 
favorite “plaything.” After six years of torture and 
abuse (this being a PG-rated blog, I’ll spare you 
the horrific details), Xanthum was returned to his 
companions at roughly the moment he was spirited 
away. Curt was stunned, to say the least, but his 
horror turned to elation—I’d just given him a cam -
paign’s worth of roleplaying material to work with. 
Xanthum, the “cheery sing-along gnome bard,” 
would never be the same!
The Dungeon Master Experience: Post Mortem
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
34
 Alas, Xanthum died later in the session. Fortu -
nately, he was carrying a potion of life, which another 
character poured down his throat in the nick of time. 
In what can only be described as a cruel twist of 
irony, we managed to make good on the poll results 
while also keeping Xanthum in the game.
 It’s also worth noting that one of the Vecnite assas -
sins had a quiver stuffed with seven crossbow bolts of 
slaying—one bolt for each character in the party. (The 
Vecnites had plenty of time to study the heroes’ weak-
nesses and craft these menacing magic items, so this 
didn’t seem beyond the realm of reason.) Here are the 
stats I created for these busted items, in case you’re 
curious:
Missile of Slaying Level 30 Rare
Inscribed in Supernal script upon the razor-sharp tip of this 
crimson-fletched arrow or crossbow bolt is the name of the 
creature it aims to kill.
Wondrous Item  125,000 gp
Property
Inscribed upon this missile is the name of a specific individ -
ual. If the missile hits the creature whose name is inscribed 
upon it, that creature drops to 0 hit points. If the creature 
doesn’t die when reduced to 0 hit points, the creature 
must make a saving throw; if the save fails, the creature 
dies. Whether it hits or misses its intended target, the mis -
sile’s magic is spent once the missile is shot.
Over the course of the evening, the assassin managed 
to fire off six of the seven bolts before he was slain. 
Thanks to a couple missed attacks, some successful 
saving throws, and another potion of life, no one died 
(at least not for long). Ironically, the only bolt that 
wasn’t shot was the one with Xanthum’s name on it.
Lessons  LeaRned
Pain and death are part of the human condition, and 
until we experience them in some form or another, 
we cannot truly understand or appreciate what it 
means to be human. I don’t have enough fingers and 
toes to count the number of books, comics, movies, 
and television series that use death and near-death 
experiences as catalysts for character development. 
In all forms of storytelling, pain and death fuel char-
acter development, and D&D is all about character 
development. Without it, pain and death are largely 
meaningless. When I hear DMs complain about the 
pointlessness of death in their D&D campaigns due 
to the preponderance of Raise Dead rituals and other 
“cheats,” I wonder if maybe they’re missing an impor-
tant opportunity.
 On the other hand, I’m also told that 4th Edition 
characters are hard to kill. I can accept that. It’s par-
ticularly true if all they face week-in, week-out are 
encounters comparable to their level. For me, I like to 
give my player characters the full range, from easy to 
harrowing. While I don’t believe it’s the DM’s job to 
kill characters, I do get a morbid kick out of watching 
my players scour their character sheets in sweaty des -
peration, looking for that one half-forgotten power or 
magic item to save their bacon. I often plan sessions 
in which the characters might (depending on their 
choices and actions) find themselves fighting more 
than one encounter’s worth of opponents at once. I 
run a deadly game of D&D, and yet, more often than 
not, the heroes prevail. Desperation begets imagina -
tion, and when it comes to staying alive, my players 
can be very imaginative.
 To summarize:
✦✦ Never underestimate the death-defying des -
peration of player characters.
✦✦ Pain and death can trigger great character 
development.
Those of you who follow the Penny Arcade podcasts 
know what I’m saying is true. The death of Aeofel 
(Wil Wheaton’s character) at the end of the third 
series spawned an entire adventure built around his 
triumphant return. Ye gods, if you want to see charac -
ter development at its finest, check out the PAX 2010 
Celebrity Game podcast!
 When a character dies, it’s either a momentous 
event or a momentary inconvenience depending on 
the campaign. My goal as DM is to remind players 
that even in a world with Raise Dead rituals, pain and 
death can still serve as fodder for good character devel-
opment. Scars, nightmares, the thirst for vengeance, 
the undying enmity of the Raven Queen—these are 
the types of things that can haunt characters for a long 
time and make them more fun and interesting to play. 
So, before you puncture the hearts of your player char-
acters with arrows of slaying, try to remember that the 
goal isn’t necessarily to kill them off, but rather to give 
them more reasons to live.
Until the next encounter!
The Dungeon Master Experience: Post Mortem
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
35
Special Guest Star
5/26/2011
MONDAY NIGHT. 
Paragon tier. The search for a lost artifact leads the 
heroes to a sunken citadel, within which they find an 
extradimensional vault. The vault holds many treasures 
and surprises, including its mysterious architect—an 
astral giant driven mad by the passing centuries. Attend -
ing him are two angels: an angel of Erathis named 
Mercion the Icereaver, and an angel of Moradin named 
Kharandar the Firehearted.
 Rather than play all three NPCs myself, I invited two 
special guest stars ( former colleagues visiting from out of 
town) to play the angels, namely Steven “Stan!” Brown 
and Owen K.C. Stephens.
In keeping with my tradition of treating the campaign 
as a television series, I’m pleased whenever I can get 
a “special guest star” to show up for a session or two, 
even though my gaming group is already quite large. 
It’s a clever bit of stunt casting that can surprise and 
delight your players. I think it’s refreshing to bring 
new faces into the group, and it gives the campaign 
a different energy as well as someone other than me 
for the regular players to interact with. It’s also a good 
way to give friends who can’t commit to joining the 
“regular cast” an opportunity to contribute to the 
campaign, if only fleetingly.
 I started using “special guest stars” in my long 
running 3rd Edition campaign when I found myself 
in the enviable position of having more people inter-
ested in my game than seats at the table. I would 
include special guest stars whenever a player absence 
meant I had a spare chair, and they appeared often 
and with great success. (I use them less frequently 
now only because I’m so busy that I often don’t 
remember what an awesome idea it would be to 
bring in a special guest star until I’m setting up for 
the game and cursing my shortsightedness . . . but by 
then, of course, it’s usually too late.)
 It does take some DM preparation to make sure 
everyone enjoys the “special guest star” experience. 
To prepare for the session with Stan and Owen, I 
typed up three paragraphs of background informa -
tion for them to sink their teeth into . . . just enough 
for them to understand their characters’ goals and 
motivations. If they weren’t playing angels who’d 
spent the past several centuries trapped in an extradi -
mensional vault, I might’ve also given them a brief 
summary of the campaign world, but in this case it 
actually served the characters of the angels better 
if their players knew very little about the “outside 
world.”
 Here’s what Stan and Owen were told about Mer-
cion and Kharandar:
Hundreds of years ago, Erathis (the god of civilization and 
invention) inspired the servants of Moradin (the god of cre -
ation and the forge) to build an extradimensional vault, 
within which was hidden the treasures of bygone empires. 
The vault’s architect was an astral giant named Runor 
Everlast. After his work was complete, Runor decided to 
remain in the vault as its eternal guardian. Moradin and 
Erathis each appointed an angel to protect Runor and keep 
him company: Mercion the Icereaver, and Kharandar the 
Firehearted. Unfortunately for the angels, the astral giant 
has since lost his grip on reality.
 Many years ago, a small band of githyanki infiltrated 
the vault by some means Runor could not ascertain. 
Fearing that the vault had a flaw in its design, Runor set 
about making “repairs.” Despite his endless toiling, Runor 
still believes the vault’s security has been compromised. 
Although the githyanki invaders were dispatched, the astral 
giant is prone to hallucinations and sees githyanki in his 
mind from time to time.
 Mercion and Kharandar are obliged to protect Runor at 
all costs, even if the giant puts himself in harm’s way. How -
ever, if Runor is slain, the angels are released from service 
and harbor no ill will toward Runor’s slayers, and might 
even be persuaded to help them. Both are eager to return 
to the Astral Sea, but first they must find a way to escape 
from the vault. Runor occasionally speaks of a secret means 
of escape but always stops short of revealing the details.
Ultimately, the only things I felt Stan and Owen 
needed were (1) a reason to oppose the heroes, and 
(2) a reason to help the heroes. Realistically, they only 
have three hours to make these characters their own, 
and more detail wouldn’t have added much to the fun 
of playing these offbeat roles. I also don’t feel it’s my 
place to tell them how to play their characters unless 
they ask for advice; experienced roleplayers will find 
something to latch onto. In this case, Stan and Owen 
gravitated toward the elemental nature of each angel: 
Mercion the Icereaver sounded cold and calculat-
ing, while Kharandar the Firehearted sounded loud 
and temperamental. I didn’t tell Stan or Owen to play 
their characters that way; they made the call.
 However, Stan and Owen were allowed to ask me 
questions to fill holes in their player knowledge. For 
example, at one point the heroes asked the angels for 
more information about the githyanki raiders; I then 
stepped into the discussion and revealed some cru -
cial information, but only as much as I felt the angels 
would be comfortable sharing with the party based 
on how tight-lipped Stan and Owen were playing 
them.
The Dungeon Master Experience: Special Guest Star
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
36
 In addition to the three paragraphs of back -
ground information, I gave Stan and Owen unique 
stat blocks for each angel, mostly because I enjoy 
designing 4th Edition monsters so much. I could’ve 
easily given them stats for any of the existing variet -
ies of angels, but I wanted the angels to fill different 
combat roles, and I wanted to make sure they had a 
decent selection of combat options. Had these angels 
been designed for less experienced players, I prob-
ably would’ve cut the triggered action powers to make 
them a bit simpler. Anyway, feel free to plunder these 
for your home games:
Mercion, Angel of Erathis Level 21 Elite Soldier
Medium immortal humanoid (angel)  XP 6,400
HP 392; Bloodied 196 Initiative +16
AC 37, Fortitude 33, Reflex 32, Will 34 Perception +19
Speed 6, fly 9
Immune fear; Resist  15 cold, 15 radiant
Saving Throws +2; Action Points  1; Healing Surges 3
Traits
O Negation Aura  ✦ Aura 1
Creatures in the aura lose their resistance to cold.
Angelic Presence
Attacks against Mercion take a –2 penalty until the angel is 
bloodied.
Standard Actions
m Icy Longsword  (cold, weapon) ✦ At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +26 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 14 cold damage, and the target is immobilized 
(save ends).
M Double Attack  
✦ At-Will
Effect: Mercion uses  icy longsword  twice.
Move Actions
Freezing Teleport  (cold, teleportation) ✦ Recharge 5 6
Effect: Mercion teleports 5 squares. Any enemy adjacent to 
Mercion after he teleports takes 15 cold damage and is 
immobilized (save ends).
Triggered Actions
Bitter Rebuke  (cold) ✦ At-Will
Trigger: An enemy damages Mercion.
Effect (Immediate Reaction): The triggering enemy takes 15 
cold damage.
Skills Diplomacy +22, Insight +10, Intimidate +22, Religion 
+18
Str 22 (+16) Dex 20 (+15) Wis 18 (+14)
Con 20 (+15) Int 16 (+13) Cha 25 (+17)
Alignment unaligned Languages  Common, Supernal
Equipment longsword
Kharandar, Angel of Moradin Level 21 Elite Brute
Medium immortal humanoid (angel)  XP 6,400
HP 490; Bloodied 245 Initiative +14
AC 33, Fortitude 33, Reflex 30, Will 32 Perception +19
Speed 6, fly 9
Immune fear; Resist  15 fire, 15 radiant
Saving Throws +2; Action Points  1; Healing Surges 3
Traits
O Negation Aura  ✦ Aura 1
Creatures in the aura lose their resistance to fire.
Angelic Presence
Attacks against Kharandar take a –2 penalty until the angel 
is bloodied.
Standard Actions
m Flaming Longsword  (fire, weapon) ✦ At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +26 vs. AC
Hit: 4d8 + 18 fire damage.
Miss: Half damage.
M Double Attack  
✦ At-Will
Effect: Mercion uses  flaming longsword  twice.
C Vortex of Fire (fire, zone) ✦ Recharge 6
Attack: Close burst 1 (creatures in the burst); +24 vs. 
Fortitude
Hit: 4d10 + 17 fire damage.
Miss: Half damage.
Effect: This power creates a zone of fire that lasts until the 
start of Kharandar’s next turn. The zone remains cen -
tered on Kharandar and moves with him. Any creature 
that starts its turn in the zone takes 15 fire damage.
Triggered Actions
Fiery Rebuke  (fire) ✦ At-Will
Trigger: An enemy damages Kharandar.
Effect (Immediate Reaction):  The triggering enemy takes 15 
fire damage.
Skills Diplomacy +21, Dungeoneering +18, Intimidate +21, 
Religion +18
Str 22 (+16) Dex 19 (+14) Wis 19 (+14)
Con 25 (+17) Int 16 (+13) Cha 23 (+16)
Alignment unaligned Languages  Dwarven, Supernal
Equipment longsword
The Dungeon Master Experience: Special Guest Star
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
37
Lessons  LeaRned
Although they aren’t part of the regular cast, “special 
guest stars” hold a special place in my heart, and I 
never use them as frequently as I’d like. Still, when-
ever they show up, my players take special interest 
in the session’s events, thinking that maybe some -
thing big is afoot. Also, the new arrivals usually put 
my players on their best behavior. To their credit my 
players always try to make the special guest stars 
as comfortable as possible, even if they’re playing 
villains.
 My players understand the reason behind includ -
ing special guest stars, and that’s to make the 
campaign experience more surprising and fun for 
everyone involved. (That reminds me of a related 
story concerning David Noonan, who joined my 3rd 
Edition campaign as a “regular player” for a few ses -
sions before his character royally screwed the party. 
Dave and I were the only ones who knew he wasn’t, 
in fact, making a long-term commitment to the cam -
paign, and his character’s sudden betrayal left many 
lasting scars. You can’t really pull that trick more 
than once before players start to look at each other 
suspiciously.)
 There’s no formula for knowing when to include a 
special guest star. My rule is: whenever conceivable, 
but not so often that it becomes the norm. Unlike a 
TV show, it doesn’t cost any extra money to bring in 
extra talent, and it often makes my job easier as a DM 
because the players aren’t just reacting to me all eve -
ning. (That said, remember that too much of a good 
thing can be poisonous.) All you need is someone 
willing to play for a session or two, and an NPC, party 
companion or other character for them to take over 
and make their own.
A couple things to keep in mind about special guest 
stars in your campaign:
✦✦ A good special guest star is like the tiny 
umbrella in a piña colada—a fun little element 
to surprise and delight . . . or to give your cam -
paign a bit of a stir.
✦✦ If you want your special guest stars to have a 
good time, provide only the essential informa -
tion they need to play their roles effectively, 
then give them the same freedom you give 
your regular cast of players to play their char -
acters as they will.
Until the next encounter!
The Dungeon Master Experience: Special Guest Star
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
38
Popcorn
6/2/11
WEDNESDAY NIGHT. 
Early in the campaign, on the island of Kheth, the heroes 
destroyed a cursed cauldron hidden deep inside an under -
ground temple. This act triggered a curse that caused the 
dead to rise all across the island. The shambling horde 
chased the heroes back to the fortified village of Tyrak’n, 
where they made their final stand. I drew a map of the vil -
lage’s palisade wall on a wet-erase battle map, and beyond 
this wall I arrayed a legion of D&D miniatures—skeletons 
and other undead critters. There must’ve been at least fifty 
of them.
 Many levels later, the village of Tyrak’n was again 
threatened, this time by goblins hiding out in the Feywild. 
The goblins were using a ritual to create a fey crossing, 
allowing them to surreptitiously invade the village without 
having to breach the palisades. When the heroes caught 
wind of the goblins’ scheme, they ventured to the Feywild 
and assaulted the goblin stockade, which was filled to the 
brim with nearly one hundred of the villainous little bug -
gers (as well as a few dozen hobgoblins and bugbears).
 When it comes to throwing monsters at my players, the 
more the merrier.
I love minions. To me, they’re like popcorn. I can’t get 
enough of them. Every now and then, I dive into my 
collection of pre-painted plastic minis and sort them 
into armies that I can, at some future point, throw 
against my players. Skeletons. Goblins. Gnolls. Orcs. 
Ogres. Yuan-ti. Githyanki. Giants. Minions come in 
all shapes and sizes.
 The 1 hit point minion is one of 4th Edition’s 
great contributions to the D&D legacy. Minions are 
fun for the players insofar as they provide instant 
gratification; all it takes is one good sword swing or 
one magic missile to drop a minion, while a good 
area-of-effect power might annihilate an entire group 
of them in one fell swoop. They’re a godsend to the 
DM, who doesn’t need to waste time tracking hit 
points.
 The Dungeon Master’s Guide  has a simple formula 
for the power level of a minion compared to a stan-
dard monster. I say forget the math! When a battle 
calls for minions, give the players everything you’ve 
got. And I mean everything. What’s the worst that 
could happen? I’ll tell you: The heroes might be over-
whelmed and defeated. In my campaign, that’s never 
a showstopper. If you’re the type of DM who sees this 
potential outcome as an opportunity and not a cam -
paign-ender, then you’ll probably agree with me that 
you can never have too many minions. Give the play -
ers the fight they’ve been hankering for all week, and 
let the popcorn fall where it may.
 Don’t get me wrong: Sometimes it makes sense to 
include only a handful of minions in an encounter. 
What I’m referring to are those momentous occasions 
when you want to impress and terrify your players 
with what they’re up against. When an enemy has 
the advantage of sheer numbers, players start to think 
twice about their conventional monster-slaying tac -
tics; true, a wizard’s fireball can kill twenty minions 
as easily as one, but if that still leaves twenty more 
minions on the table, the heroes could find them -
selves in serious trouble. They might even be forced to 
retreat or (gasp!) surrender.
 When I build encounters, I balance them without 
factoring minions into the mix. That’s not in keep -
ing with the rules as written, but the DM has license 
to break the rules (as long as he or she does so fairly, 
consistently, and openly). Depending on how the 
minions are arrayed and when they show up has a 
lot to do with their effectiveness on the battlefield. 
If they’re neatly arrayed in tight clusters for all the 
heroes to see, the wizard will make sure they’re not 
around very long. On the other hand, if they’re spread 
out, or if they only appear when certain conditions 
arise, they can truly change the complexion of the 
battlefield and force the players to reconsider their 
tactics. For example, I sometimes keep minions in 
reserve until the bad guy summons them, and I often 
keep extras behind my DM screen in case the player 
characters are having too easy a time.
Lessons  LeaRned
When I think of minions, I think of the big fight 
scenes in all three films of The Lord of the Rings trilogy. 
For some reason, the image of Aragorn fighting orcs 
always springs to mind, and I think to myself, “I will 
never get tired of watching Aragorn kill orcs.” Most 
The Dungeon Master Experience: Popcorn
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
39
of my players are the same way: They long to play out 
battles against seemingly overwhelming numbers of 
foes and watch their heroes carve and blast their way 
through enemy lines.
✦✦ Wading through waves of minions makes the 
heroes feel like heroes.
✦✦ Minions in large numbers terrify and excite 
the players.
Although minions come with specified XP values, it’s 
ultimately up to the DM to decide how much XP the 
characters receive for defeating them (and don’t let 
any rulebook tell you otherwise). I tend to “ad hoc” 
the XP awards for minions. If the minions prove to be 
instrumental, then I might award full XP for them. 
On the other hand, if the minions aren’t terribly effec -
tive, I might award none.
 If you follow my advice and start bombarding your 
players with veritable armies of minions, be advised 
that the goal should not be to annihilate the party. If 
that’s your objective, it’s a lot simpler just to drop an 
asteroid on them and be done with it. No, your goal as 
the DM is to entertain the players by creating in-game 
situations that are perilous and fun, and minions 
are merely tools toward that end. If the heroes start 
dropping like flies, consider that the bad guys might 
stabilize them and take them prisoner. Many great 
adventures begin with just such a setback or defeat.
Until the next encounter!
The Wyrmworn 
Experiment
6/9/2011
MONDAY NIGHT. 
Jeremy Crawford plays a human wizard named Alex, who 
began the campaign as an orphan shipwrecked on the back -
water island of Kheth. There, he studied the magical arts 
under the tutelage of an eladrin recluse.
 In the first episode of the campaign, Alex came face-to-
face with Serusa, a dragonborn wizard in the service of the 
Shan Qabal (an imperial sect of wizards dedicated to magi -
cal research). Little did Alex realize that Serusa had come to 
the island to kill him.
 In due course, Alex learned that he and several other 
children were part of a magical experiment in which the 
spirits of mighty dragon-sorcerers were bound within 
them. In a story inspired by The Manchurian Candidate, 
Alex and the other children—dubbed the Wyrmworn—
were to be used as weapons against the enemies of the 
Dragovar Empire. However, a change in the political 
landscape resulted in the sudden termination of the proj -
ect. The Shan Qabal then sought to eliminate all of the 
Wyrmworn, quietly and without fuss, but opposing forces 
managed to smuggle several of the children to safety 
aboard two merchant ships. The ship bearing Alex and 
several other children was lost in a storm and presumed 
destroyed. It took the Shan Qabal fifteen years to learn 
there were survivors.
 By the time he hit paragon tier, Alex was exploring the 
world with his adventuring companions, and Serusa was 
nothing more than XP in the bank. As happens with many 
orphans in fiction, however, Alex discovered he wasn’t an 
orphan after all. His father, Vincent van Hyden, was dis -
covered to be an influential member of a worldwide trade 
consortium. From his father, Alex learned that he’d been 
given over to the Shan Qabal willingly, in exchange for 
money and the promise of power. Like everyone else, Vin -
cent presumed his son had been lost at sea and spent years 
wallowing in fatherly guilt. After making amends with his 
father and tired of the sect’s constant attempts to end his 
life, Alex took it upon himself to confront the leader of the 
Shan Qabal: Lenkhor Krige.
The Dungeon Master Experience: The Wyrmworn Experiment
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
40
 Lenkhor was an ancient, bedridden dragonborn arch -
mage clinging to life by means of a magical crystal acting 
as a life support system. To his surprise, Alex learned that 
Lenkhor was the one who secretly arranged for the Wyrm -
worn children to be smuggled to safety, for he could not 
bear to see his handiwork destroyed. Taking fatherly pride 
in Alex’s many accomplishments, Lenkhor also offered to 
help the young wizard contend with Hahrzan, Lenkhor’s 
apprentice and political rival. Alex comes to learn that 
Hahrzan not only despises Lenkhor and seeks to wrest 
control of the Shan Qabal, but also conspires to destroy his 
master’s legacy. Thus Hahrzan, it turns out, is behind the 
attempts on Alex’s life.
 Anticipating a confrontation with Hahrzan, Lenkhor 
tells Alex how to awaken his dragon spirit, believing him 
powerful enough to control it, but so far Alex hasn’t dared 
do so. Alex has witnessed others like him dominated or 
destroyed by their awakened dragon spirits, and it remains 
to be seen whether he has the will and fortitude to do what 
no other Wyrmworn has been able to. Maybe awakening 
the dragon is part of his epic destiny. . . .
The Wyrmworn Experiment was something I 
dreamed up at the start of the campaign. The seed of 
the idea was a simple character background: one or 
more characters are survivors of a shipwreck. Of the 
eight players in my Monday night group, only Jeremy 
Crawford selected this background. As I began 
plotting out the first few adventures, I started to con-
template the cause of the shipwreck and eventually 
settled on a magical storm. I surmised that the storm 
was a deliberate attack on the ship, but why would 
someone want the ship destroyed? I made the logical 
leap that maybe, just maybe, the ship was transport -
ing something dangerous to the Dragovar Empire… 
something that had to be destroyed at all costs.
 For the sake of good drama, this clearly had to be 
Alex.
 When Jeremy chose “shipwrecked orphan” as the 
hook for his character, he didn’t know anything about 
the Wyrmworn Experiment. His character didn’t 
even have a last name. These are elements I con-
cocted and doled out over the course of many levels. 
I’d be lying to you if I said I knew the full extent of 
Alex’s story from the very beginning, or how the vari -
ous facts would come to light. As happens, a lot of 
Alex’s story was dreamt up along the way. But from 
the outset, I knew three things were true:
✦✦ Alex survived a shipwreck as an infant and 
knew nothing about his parents. (This infor -
mation I got from Jeremy during character 
creation.)
✦✦ Alex and several other children were turned 
over to a group of dragonborn wizards, who 
bound the spirits of ancient dragon sorcerers 
within them.
✦✦ Ironically, the same wizards who bound the 
dragon spirit in Alex were now trying to kill 
him.
The truth about Alex’s father and Lenkhor Krige 
(whose last name I stole from the wonderfully allur-
ing actress Alice Krige) came much later, whenever 
something would happen in the game that drove 
home the need to give Alex’s story a forward push. 
The decision to make Lenkhor a sympathetic char-
acter was a spontaneous decision that happened in 
the middle of a session, when it occurred to me how 
cool it would be to give Alex two father figures, each 
repentant for different reasons: his conniving biologi -
cal father who gave him away, and the dragonborn 
archmage who made him into the man he’s become. 
Also, I was wary of the “evil archmage” cliché and 
wanted the leader of the Shan Qabal to be something 
unique and unexpected.
 The heroes stormed into Lenkhor’s tower 
expecting a big fight, and what they got was a 
withered husk of a mighty archwizard lying on 
his deathbed. The image of a figure who was 
simultaneously powerful and weak appealed to me, 
as did the idea that Lenkhor would do anything—
magical and otherwise—to prolong his life, if only 
to aggravate his apprentice.
 For Jeremy, who enjoys a good roleplaying chal-
lenge, it was an opportunity for Alex to confront the 
architect of the Wyrmworn Experiment and realize 
he’s not dealing with a monster but a wizard whose 
lifelong quest for knowledge and power matched his 
own. This decision to portray Lenkhor as something 
other than a threat also opened the door to the possi -
bility of Alex becoming a member of the Shan Qabal, 
which is basically what happened at the end of the 
paragon tier.
Lessons  LeaRned
I’ve been watching Mad Men  on DVD. It’s another 
one of those ensemble shows I like so much, where 
every character receives a measure of growth and 
development. (Sounds like my D&D campaign!) 
As is typical for me, I’ll watch an episode and then 
immediately watch it again with the commentary 
track, and what occurs to me over and over is that 
the show’s writers and creators don’t map out every -
thing from the beginning. They give the actors just 
enough understanding of their characters to be 
effective in their roles, put them in dramatic situ -
ations, and then watch and see what happens. As 
each character’s story comes into focus, the writers 
add new layers of complexity. They pay attention to 
what the actor does and give the actor new things to 
play with. Along the way, they look for surprises… 
and sometimes the things they thought were true 
in the beginning turn out to be false, or—better yet—
lead to deeper truths.
 The Wyrmworn Experiment is an example of 
an evolving character arc. It starts with something 
simple (“Your character is a shipwrecked orphan”) 
and grows into something epic (“Your character was 
sold to dragonborn wizards and transformed into a 
The Dungeon Master Experience: The Wyrmworn Experiment
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
41
vessel for a mighty dragon spirit that the Dragovar 
Empire intended to unleash as a weapon against its 
enemies”). It’s a difficult thing to pull off for every 
character, and frankly, not all players are hankering 
for something so intricate. For the invested roleplay-
ers in your group, you can develop similar character 
arcs by asking two questions at any point in the lifes -
pan of your campaign:
✦✦ What’s true about the character?
✦✦ What’s really true about the character?
Alex is an orphan (no, he’s not). The Shan Qabal is 
trying to kill him (yes and no). He has the spirit of a 
dragon-sorcerer locked inside him (absolutely true, 
but maybe that’s not such a bad thing after all).
 Not all characters have or need as much built-in 
mystery as Alex van Hyden. Consider another char-
acter from my Monday night game: Matt Sernett’s 
character, Bartho, began the campaign as a “local 
yokel,” a dull-witted youth who fishes all day and 
drinks all night. All we knew about Bartho (and all 
there was to know about Bartho!) was that he wasn’t 
particularly bright, and that he was taught how to 
fish by his uncle, who also happens to be the village 
drunk.
 When a character is bereft of mystery, it’s incum -
bent upon the DM to get creative and look at all of 
the elements that make the character what he is, 
including influential NPCs. Why is Bartho being 
raised by his uncle? Who is his uncle, really? Maybe 
the “village drunk” is a role he plays to divert sus -
picion. Maybe there’s more to Bartho’s uncle than 
meets the eye. In fact, what if he’s secretly an agent 
for the Knights of Ardyn, a radical group led by a 
politically motivated silver dragon who seeks to 
overthrow the corrupt Dragovar Empire? What if 
the uncle realizes that Bartho might make a great 
fighter someday and gives the lad a gift—a silver 
dagger that the Knights carry around to identify one 
another? Maybe one day Bartho will find himself in 
a Dragovar settlement, innocently skinning an apple 
with his uncle’s knife, when someone familiar with 
the emblem takes notice. It might lead to Bartho’s 
first brush with the Knights of Ardyn… or the Dra -
govar secret police. The possibilities alone make me 
smile and clap my hands like a schoolboy.
 Next week we’ll check out the winners of the Mag -
nificent Minion contest.
Until the next encounter!
The Dungeon Master Experience: The Wyrmworn Experiment
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
42
Magnificent Minions
6/16/2011
WEDNESDAY NIGHT. 
Nacime’s regular character is a defective warforged named 
Fleet. Several sessions ago, a group of Vecna-worshiping 
wizards abducted Fleet with the intention of dismantling 
and studying him. Fleet’s sudden and somewhat unex -
pected disappearance afforded Nacime the chance to roll 
up a new character and try something different for few 
sessions.
 Recently, however, the heroes located and stormed the 
Vecnites’ secret lair and rescued Fleet from his captors. 
(Now Nacime has two characters, which presents a different 
sort of challenge.)
 To get to the main bad guys, the heroes had to carve 
through Vecna’s disciples, which included plenty of minions. 
The disciples’ main “shtick” was that they uttered a terrible 
curse when killed. The curse made whoever killed them 
temporarily vulnerable to necrotic damage, which—as you 
might imagine—is particularly troublesome when fighting 
agents of the undead god of secrets.
Here’s the stat block I created for the disciples of 
Vecna, which you’re free to plunder for your home 
campaign:
Masked Disciple of Vecna  Level 23 Minion Brute 
Medium natural humanoid, human  XP 1,275
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion. Initiative +11
AC 35, Fortitude 36, Reflex  35, Will 34 Perception +14 
Speed 6 
Standard Actions
m Staff (necrotic, weapon) ✦ At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +28 vs. AC 
Hit: 15 necrotic damage, and the target cannot spend heal -
ing surges until the start of the disciple’s next turn.
r Stolen Secrets  (psychic) ✦ At-Will
Attack: Ranged 5 (one creature); +26 vs. Will 
Hit: 15 psychic damage, and the target cannot use encoun -
ter or daily powers (save ends). 
Trggered Actions
Curse of the Whispered One ✦ At-Will 
Trigger: An enemy’s attack drops the disciple to 0 hit 
points.
Effect: The triggering enemy gains vulnerable 10 necrotic 
until the end of the encounter. 
Str 15 (+13) Dex 11 (+11) Wis 17 (+14)
Con 20 (+16) Int 18 (+15) Cha 15 (+13)
Alignment evil Languages  Common
Equipment staff, skull mask
Because of their curse of the Whispered One power, 
these minion cultists are best combined with undead 
creatures that deal necrotic damage. Nothing says 
“bwah-haha” better than a minion who keeps dealin’ 
the damage long after it’s dead! Of course, once my 
players realized that the curse’s effects don’t stack, 
they got smart and let one character focus on taking 
out the minions so that the rest of them wouldn’t be 
cursed.
“magnificent  
minion ” contest
Thanks to everyone who submitted minion ideas 
and stat blocks for the “Magnificent Minion!” contest . 
Not surprisingly, we received a ton of fun and wacky 
ideas, with brutes and skirmishers by far the most 
popular monster roles represented. (Not a whole lot of 
love for artillery and lurkers, however.)
 I’ve picked my three favorites and have a few 
things to say about each one. A cautionary note: No 
real effort has been made to develop or edit these 
monsters. In a couple cases, I made some formatting 
changes and filled in some accidental omissions, but 
that’s it.
Blood of Torog
By Chris C., U.S.A.F. Academy CO
Torog is the god of imprisonment, torture, and the 
Underdark. This particular critter likes to crawl 
inside your body, mingle with your blood, and control 
The Dungeon Master Experience: Magnificent Minions
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
43
you like a meat puppet. Invade the blood  is a fairly com-
plex power for a minion, but undeniably scary.
 I might change the encounter power to a “recharge 
when the attack misses” power (just to make it even 
scarier), and while its basic attack damage might 
seem low at first glance, its aura makes up for it.
 The change shape power is a particularly nice 
little bit of flavor that doesn’t have much impact in 
combat but gives the monster a disturbing aspect that 
mirrors the mutilated form of Torog himself. Some -
times even the most experienced designers forget 
the impact that these sorts of powers can have at the 
game table. It also reinforces the idea that monsters 
can be more than the sum of their statistics.
clobbermob Nilbog
By Robert P., Toms River NJ
Try saying this monster’s name quickly three times! 
For those who don’t know, the nilbog (“goblin” spelled 
backward) traces its origins back to the earliest days 
of D&D. Its original shtick was that attacks healed 
the nilbog while healing spells wounded it. One of 
my all-time favorite Dungeon  adventures (“Pearlman’s 
Curiosity” in issue #32) featured one of these little 
buggers, and I’ve been favorably disposed toward 
them ever since.
 Clobbermob nilbogs resemble regular goblins save 
for their greasy, violet-red skin, black eyes, and back-
ward hands and feet. They speak a hideous mishmash 
of Elven and Goblin, and are inclined to sing grisly 
choruses as they swarm victims. Also, check out their 
equipment—gotta love a minion that carries around 
three goose eggs and a roasted pixie!
 I’m guessing that “AC 1” is not an error but an 
attempt to reflect the idea that nilbogs are “damage 
magnets.” I think I’d change its Thievery bonus to +17 
to account for training, but its other defenses and its 
damage are spot on.
Clobbermob Nilbog  Level 14 Minion Brute 
Small fey humanoid XP 250
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion. Initiative +14 
AC 1, Fortitude 27, Reflex 26, Will 26 Perception +12 
Speed 6 
Immune attack powers with the weapon keyword
Traits
Healing Aversion  
The nilbog loses its immunity and all temporary hit points 
if a creature adjacent to it uses a second wind or heals from 
a power with the healing keyword.
Tough Little Bugger  
Whenever the nilbog is hit with an attack power that has 
the weapon keyword, it gains 5 temporary hit points. 
These temporary hit points are cumulative.
Standard actionS
m Knucklebone Cudgel  (weapon) ✦ At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +19 vs. AC 
Hit: 14 damage. 
Skills Thiever y +12
Str 23 (+13) Dex 20 (+12) Wis 20 (+12)
Con 20 (+12) Int 20 (+12) Cha 20 (+12)
Alignment evil Languages  Elven, Goblin
Equipment knucklebone cudgel, burlap sack (tunic), wine 
bladder, three goose eggs, spit-roasted pixie
Blood of Torog  Level 10 Minion Skirmisher 
Medium immortal animate (ooze) XP 125
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion. Initiative +11
AC 24, Fortitude 20, Reflex  21, Will 17 Perception +10
Speed 6, climb 6 Blindsight 10
Traits
O Essence Drain  (necrotic) ✦✦Aura 1
An enemy that starts its turn within the aura takes 2 
necrotic damage.
Ooze
While squeezing, the blood of Torog moves at full speed 
rather than half speed, it doesn’t take a –5 penalty to attack 
rolls, and it doesn’t grant combat advantage for squeezing.
Standard Actions
m Slam (necrotic) ✦ At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +15 vs. AC
Hit: 6 necrotic damage, and the blood of Torog can shift 1 
square and pull the target into the space it just vacated.
M Invade the Blood  (healing, necrotic) ✦ Encounter
Effect: The blood of Torog shifts a number of squares equal 
to its speed and must end its move adjacent to a blood -
ied enemy. 
Attack: Melee 1 (one bloodied creature); +13 vs. Reflex
Hit: The blood of Torog grabs the target (escape DC 18). 
Until it escapes the grab, the target takes ongoing 
necrotic damage equal to its level. If this damage reduces 
the target to 0 hit points, the target regains hit points 
equal to its bloodied value and is dominated (no save), 
and the blood of Torog is removed from play. While 
dominated, the target acts in accordance with the blood 
of Torog’s wishes. When the dominated target drops to 0 
hit points, it is no longer dominated or grabbed, and the 
blood of Torog appears in a square adjacent to the target.
Minor Actions
Change Shape (polymorph) ✦ At-Will
Effect: The blood of Torog can assume the form of any crea -
ture it kills, though it appears tortured and mutilated. 
While in this form, it loses the ooze trait.
Skills Stealth +14
Str 10 (+5) Dex 18 (+9) Wis 10 (+5)
Con 16 (+8) Int 10 (+5) Cha 10 (+5)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages  —
The Dungeon Master Experience: Magnificent Minions
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
44
clockwork Wasp Drone
By Beren Ross S., Fort Collins CO
Beren reports that this particular minion was used 
during a fight where the heroes had to climb a tower 
with moving floors (shaped like Tetris  pieces) while 
being attacked by a hive of clockwork wasps, leading 
to a boss battle with their queen at the top. That’s one 
battle I would’ve loved to see!
 Being small of brain, I like minions that are simple 
and straightforward. However, the best minions have 
a signature power or trait that embodies what the 
monster is all about. In this case, it’s the extra damage 
that the drone deals when it’s adjacent to allies; it 
makes the DM want to group these minions into tight 
swarms, and how appropriate is that?
 As is true of many minions, the clockwork wasp 
drone explodes when it drops to 0 hit points. This 
particular critter unleashes a burst of lightning that 
targets enemies only, so the poor drone doesn’t have 
to worry about killing all of its buddies like an explod -
ing can of Raid insecticide. 
Clockwork Wasp Drone  Level 13 Minion 
  Skirmisher 
Small natural animate (construct) XP 200
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion. Initiative +12
AC 27, Fortitude 25, Reflex 25, Will 21 Perception +6
Speed 6, fly 6
Immune disease, poison
Standard Actions
m Stinger (poison) ✦ At-Will
Effect:  The drone can shift 1 square before it attacks. 
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +18 vs. AC
Hit: 8 poison damage plus 1 extra poison damage for each 
ally adjacent to the drone. 
Triggered Actions
C Clockwork Burst  (lightning) ✦ Encounter
Effect:  The drone drops to 0 hit points.
Attack (No Action): Close burst 1 (enemies in the burst); +16 
vs. AC 
Hit: 8 lightning damage.
Str 11 (+6) Dex 18 (+10) Wis 11 (+6)
Con 18 (+10) Int 2 (+2) Cha 10 (+6)
Alignment unaligned Languages  —
Honorable Mentions
Props also go to Rane S. of Nokesville VA for the 
“flying eyeball” (each minion comes with a random 
beholder eye ray) and Kendall B. of Toronto ON for 
the “troll whelp” (which a troll can spawn when it 
takes damage and then eat to gain temporary hit 
points).
Until the next encounter!
Joy and 
Sorrow
6/23/2011
WEDNESDAY NIGHT. 
Chris Youngs’ tiefling character, Deimos, came close to 
realizing his dream of becoming a Sea King (a powerful 
sea merchant) when tragedy struck. He had assembled 
a fleet of loyal ships, and spent a staggering amount 
of party gold to “trick out” his flagship, the Morrow  
(named after his surrogate father, Captain Denarion 
Morrow). However, as happens in my campaign, the 
winds of fate blew ill one game session and the Morrow  
was blown to smithereens. The details aren’t relevant; 
what’s important is that I could hear Deimos’s dreams 
of world domination shatter like a dropped mirror, and 
Chris was not a happy camper.
 The explosion that obliterated the Morrow  also killed 
Deimos and all but one of the other player characters, 
but their deaths were but a temporary inconvenience. 
Once he was raised from the dead, Deimos (a.k.a. Sea 
King Impstinger) was far more concerned about his pre -
cious ship lying in pieces at the bottom of the Dragon 
Sea than all of the actual party quests combined. What 
followed was a largely improvised game session during 
which Deimos, his companions in tow, approached vari -
ous NPCs in the hopes of finding some way to “undo” the 
ship’s destruction.
 Deimos eventually corralled the other heroes into help -
ing him obtain a time-travel talisman, but that endeavor 
ended badly. The details aren’t relevant; suffice to say, the 
talisman slipped through their proverbial fingers. What’s 
The Dungeon Master Experience: Joy and Sorrow
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
45
more important is that Deimos was thwarted, desperate, 
and broken.
 Okay, not quite broken—Chris had one card left in 
his hand. As one should expect from a wrathful tiefling, 
Deimos turned to the Nine Hells for aid. Without con -
sulting his adventuring companions, he used a ritual to 
summon an aspect of Dispater and entered into a binding 
contract with the archdevil, whereby Dispater would help 
Deimos raise his ship in exchange for Deimos taking an 
infernal consort and protecting her with his life. Once the 
agreement was signed, Dispater released the soul of a long-
dead tiefling archwizard of Bael Turath named Samantia 
Carnago, who used her formidable magic to raise the 
Morrow from the depths.
 As the ship broke the water’s surface, it became clear 
that the vessel had been transformed into an infernal 
aspect of its former self—iron rails lined with everburning 
torches, sails of black smoke, a flag of burning fire, and 
the stench of brimstone throughout. It became a constant 
reminder of the contract that Deimos had brokered. Her 
work done, Samantia returned to the Nine Hells, leaving 
the other characters to ponder what Deimos had gotten 
them into.
 In the end, Deimos’s ship was returned to him… but not 
in the way the players imagined. Chris changed the name 
of the ship from the Morrow  to the Sorrow, and Deimos 
set about hiring a new crew to replace those he’d lost. Sev -
eral sessions later, having left his ship briefly to complete 
an important quest, Deimos returned to find a tiefling 
woman curled up in his iron-wrought captain’s bed. She sat 
up, smiled, and introduced herself as Tyranny, his infernal 
consort. As Chris pondered this latest development, the 
other players squirmed in their chairs.
The DM giveth, and the DM taketh away . . . and vice 
versa.
 Every campaign needs moments when the 
heroes feel like they’re on top of the world—times 
when things seem to be going their way. These are 
the moments when their carefully laid plans go 
off without a hitch, when the battle is made easier 
because they have the advantage. As a counterpoint, 
the campaign also needs those deep, dark nadirs 
when the players are convinced you hate them for 
some unspeakable reason. These are the moments 
when nothing seems to go right, when every step for-
ward pulls them two steps back, and where they feel 
the loss of something important to them.
 I like it when my players feel mighty and power-
ful, and I like it when they feel helpless and at their 
wits’ end. Without these high points and low points, 
the campaign would lose its drama. No one wants 
to see a movie where the good guy always wins or 
always loses. We want to see our heroes win the 
race, but only after knocking down some hurdles—
or lose the race, but only after saving that cat in the 
tree.
 I know many DMs who are terrified to give their 
players ships, strongholds, and other “gifts” for fear 
that the campaign will run off the rails and explode 
like a train carrying rocket fuel. I know other DMs 
who give their players a veritable Death Star, only to 
then stand back and watch helplessly as the heroes 
blow their campaigns to dust. I don’t have any prob -
lem giving my players really cool toys to play with, 
because ultimately I know that everything in my 
campaign can be used to tell a story, and the social 
contract I have with my players allows me the flex -
ibility to do nasty things to fuel “good drama.” When 
the Morrow explodes, Deimos loses more than his 
ship; he also loses his moral compass. He eventually 
wins back the ship, which is the most important thing 
in the world to him—but ask the other players and 
they’ll tell you: He never found his moral compass. 
That realization, coupled with the presence of the 
infernal consort, sets the stage for even more drama 
in future sessions.
 Ultimately, my job as the DM is to propel the 
story forward and make my players happy. I can be 
brutal and savage to the characters, as long as my 
players know that the winds of fate will eventually 
blow in their favor. It’s part of the social contract 
that you “sign” with players at the start of your cam -
paign, the same social contract that says everyone 
at the table will respect one another. If the social 
contract you have is anything like mine, your players 
will accept a certain amount of torment and abuse 
in exchange for the promise of happiness, however 
fleeting.
 There’s a certain amount of improvisational skill 
required to pull off great drama in a game session. 
Case in point, when the Morrow  blew up, I had no 
idea that Chris Youngs would have his character 
make a deal with the devil. I was just as surprised as 
everyone else around the table. It took a fair amount 
of improvisational skill to devise the terms of the 
The Dungeon Master Experience: Joy and Sorrow
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
46
contract on the spot. An expert DM embraces those 
wonderful moments when the actions of the player 
characters propel the story forward, and anytime 
I can introduce a new NPC for the heroes to inter-
act with, I jump on it (even if she’s an vile succubus 
passing herself off as a seductive tiefling).
 I won’t lie to you: Narrative improvisation comes 
with experience. However, when I’m stuck and 
nothing springs to mind, I turn to TV’s storytelling 
masters and ask myself, “What would Joss Whedon 
do?” “What would Alan Ball do?” or “What would 
Ronald D. Moore do?” You’d be surprised how well 
that works.
Lessons  LeaRned
Good storytellers understand what makes good 
drama: joy and sorrow. You can’t have drama with-
out laughter and tears, just like you can’t have a great 
hotdog without mustard and meat. (Okay, that’s a 
terrible analogy, but all you mustard-haters and tofu-
lovers out there can keep your arguments to yourself!)
 Before you blow up the heroes’ stronghold and 
start layering on the drama, stop and consider the 
social contract of your campaign—the unspoken 
agreement you have with your players whereby you 
promise to be entertaining and fair, and they prom -
ise to respect your campaign and each other’s right 
to enjoy the experience. Some players have enough 
drama in their normal lives; all they want is to kill 
monsters and take their stuff. That’s okay if it’s part of 
the agreed-upon social contract. Campaigns without 
social contracts are doomed, and if your game group 
feels dysfunctional, chances are your contract is not 
being respected or acknowledged by everyone around 
the table.
 In the end, a campaign can’t rise to its dramatic 
heights or descend to its dramatic depths without 
a sturdy social contract between the DM and the 
players. Some players (particularly those who can’t 
recognize specific dramatic tropes) don’t like it when 
their characters are punished for their decisions and 
actions. They get upset when their characters are 
thrown in jail for murdering innocent bystanders, 
and they start throwing dice around when you take 
away their magic items. Maybe they don’t appreci-
ate the intricately layered drama unfolding before 
their eyes and aren’t patient enough to wait for good 
stuff to happen. In that case, it never hurts to tell the 
players that all is not lost, and assure them that their 
characters’ actions are the rudders and sails that 
determine the course of the campaign. On the other 
hand, if your social contract permits you to drag your 
players through heaven and hell with impunity, go for 
it! Just don’t leave them in either place for too long.
Time for a quick gut-check:
✦✦ Are you happy with the social contract you 
have with your players? 
✦✦ When was the last time the players in your 
campaign felt powerless and defeated? When 
was the last time they felt like they were in 
control? 
Until the next encounter!
The Dungeon Master Experience: Joy and Sorrow
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
47
All Talk
6/30/2011
MONDAY NIGHT. 
In the previous session, the heroes fought a death knight 
armed with a soul-draining sword. Two of them fell prey to 
the weapon.
 Once the death knight was destroyed, the surviving 
heroes sought to free their companion’s souls from the 
hungry blade. They turned to one of their dubious NPC 
allies—Osterneth, a lich with connections to the god Vecna—
and she assured them the souls could be freed by bathing 
the sword in the blood of a virtuous god. Fortunately for 
them, she happened to have the blood of a slain lawful good 
deity in her workshop.
 Unfortunately, things did not go as planned: The 
blood completely destroyed the sword and the souls along 
with it. The lich apologized profusely and tried to make 
amends. She offered to instead implant an artificial heart 
in one of the fallen heroes: Nick DiPetrillo’s character, 
the swordmage Yuriel, but the heart was designed to 
pump necrotic sludge through the veins of its beneficiary. 
Implanting it would effectively transform Yuriel into an 
undead creature.
 The heroes considered and rejected Osterneth’s 
offer—but they did bring the lich and their dead friends 
back to Yuriel’s ship, the Maelstrom, and consoled Yuri -
el’s distraught widow. They also conferred with a more 
trustworthy NPC ally, a dragonborn priestess, and asked 
her to petition Bahamut for advice on how to save the 
souls of their dead friends. A Commune ritual bore no 
fruit—the priestess concluded that their souls were well 
and truly lost.
 Meanwhile, left to her own devices, the lich gently per -
suaded Yuriel’s widow that “undead Yuriel” was better 
than no Yuriel at all; and so, the lich obtained permission to 
implant the necrotic heart in Yuriel’s corpse. Nick returned 
the following week with a new version of his character built 
using the new vampire class from Player’s Option: Heroes 
of Shadow as a chassis.
 The heroes, not fond of the “new” Yuriel, were troubled 
by the audacity of the lich, Osterneth. They were also dis -
tressed to learn that Yuriel needed the “life’s breath” of 
living creatures to “survive” in his undead state. Yuriel’s 
widow, a genasi named Pearl, diffused a tense confronta -
tion between the lich, Yuriel, and his former companions 
by offering her own life’s breath to sustain her undead 
husband.
 Then, as the Maelstrom made port on the island of 
Severasa, a group of dwarves in league with the Ironstar 
Cartel approached them for assistance. Frost giants had 
seized an important mine that the dwarves needed to 
finish building an iron ship—a prototype vessel that they 
hoped would earn them a lucrative shipbuilding con -
tract with the Dragovar Empire. To save her own “skin” 
and redeem herself in the eyes of the heroes, Osterneth 
used her apparent omniscience to ascertain that a rival 
consortium, the Winterleaf Coster, was employing the 
frost giants to delay the completion of the iron ship long 
enough to swoop in and steal the contract from under the 
Ironstar Cartel’s nose.
 Convinced that the lich was speaking the truth, the 
heroes confronted the Winterleaf Coster and threatened 
to expose their plot if they didn’t withdraw the frost giants 
from the mine immediately. They were very persuasive.
My Monday night group is a very different animal 
from my Wednesday night group. If the Wednesday 
players don’t get to kill something every session, they 
think I’m punishing them. The Monday group, on the 
other hand, is more willing to entertain the notion of 
a “diceless” session. They also have more tolerance for 
entertaining NPCs of conspicuously evil bent.
 Osterneth the lich was ripped from the pages 
of Open Grave: Secrets of the Undead
™, although I 
made a few tweaks to her history to accommodate 
my campaign. As the thousand-year-old ex-wife 
of the archwizard-turned-god Vecna, Osterneth 
is a tremendous source of information—and the 
Monday night group is naturally hesitant to make 
an enemy of her. I’d like to say her heart’s in the 
right place, but in truth, she’s a lich with bones of 
bronze, and the desiccated black heart hovering 
inside her hollow ribcage actually belongs to her 
ex. Her connection to the God of Secrets gives her 
access to information the heroes need to complete 
their quests, and she’s courteous enough to conceal 
her true form behind the illusion of a beautiful and 
charming Vhaltese noblewoman.
 But, to the point: The events described above 
played out over two game sessions, during which time 
the players made zero attack rolls. It was a roleplayer’s 
bonanza, and the hardest part for me was keeping 
all of the player characters involved. Even those who 
don’t typically take center stage during roleplaying 
encounters were on the hook.
 Case in point: Jeff Alvarez’s character, the sword-
wielding elf ranger Kithvolar, is the “silent killer” 
of the group. Whenever I noticed that Kithvolar 
had dropped out of the spotlight for too long, Oster-
neth would exchange playful banter with him, or 
a member of the Maelstrom  crew would try to split 
a bottle of rum with him and offer an unsolicited 
opinion about recent events. When the heroes were 
threatening agents of the Winterleaf Coster, I tried 
to establish a relationship between Kithvolar and 
the villainous Talia Winterleaf, the elf daughter of 
the Coster’s founder. It’s fun to watch a character 
known for his brutal savagery confront an enemy he 
can’t kill—at least not without foiling the party’s plans 
and earning the enmity of a politically powerful 
organization.
 Although everyone seemed to be having fun, I 
always feel like I should apologize to my players 
when we have a session that’s “all talk.” At the end 
of the session, I told them, “Next week you’ll get to 
The Dungeon Master Experience: All Talk
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
48
kill something, I promise!” The players gave me dis -
missive gestures, and Peter Schaefer (who currently 
plays Metis, Osterneth’s treacherous changeling man-
servant) exclaimed, “Are you kidding, these are my 
favorite sessions!”
 More than once during these sessions, I was cer-
tain a fight would break out, but the players never 
went there. Things probably would’ve played out dif-
ferently on Wednesday night. I guess that’s why the 
players in the Wednesday group often joke that the 
Monday players “sit around the table drinking tea” 
while they’re busy cracking skulls and fart jokes.
Lessons  LeaRned
There’s no shortage of D&D players in Renton, WA, 
so back when I was building my two game groups, I 
tried to put “birds of a feather” together. The Monday 
group thinks the Wednesday group is comprised of 
uncouth savages, while the Wednesday group thinks 
the Monday players get all their XP from story awards 
rather than combat challenges. These perceptions are 
mostly false—the two groups are more alike than not—
but running two different groups of players has taught 
me that despite their subtle differences in play styles, 
I can get away with combat-free sessions provided all 
of the players are pulled into the roleplaying fray.
 I also believe that the players—not the DM—get 
to decide when the talking stops and the fighting 
begins. I’m never disappointed when a player shouts, 
“Enough talk! Time to die!” because that invariably 
leads to two of the sweetest words in the D&D lexi -
con: Roll initiative.
 Any DM can survive the dreaded “all talk” session, 
but it’ll be most fun for all concerned if you hold fast 
to the following suggestions:
✦✦ Pull all of the players into the roleplaying fray 
(kicking and screaming if necessary).
✦✦  Let the players decide when the talking’s 
over.
As a quick footnote, I would like to give props to 
Calvin K. of Lincoln NE for his “Magnificent Minion!” 
entry, which came in at the tail end of the contest : the 
wacky wall of flesh . Each wall minion comes with 
one random graft: an eye that projects a psychic bolt, 
a mouth that roars, an arm that delivers a real punch, 
or a tentacle that slides you around. It doesn’t get 
much weirder than that, folks!
 Next week we’ll discuss the cinematic art of bring -
ing back dead heroes and villains and the wonderful 
havoc that can ensue if you time it just right.
Until the next encounter!
The Dungeon Master Experience: All Talk
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
49
It’s About 
Time
7/7/2011
MONDAY NIGHT. 
The heroes have traveled to the Feywild in search of a 
knowledgeable archwizard, only to discover that a lamia 
has taken over the wizard’s tower in his absence. Having 
seduced the wizard’s apprentice, she’s convinced him to help 
her locate a talisman hidden somewhere in the tower.
 The heroes defeat the lamia, break her spell on 
the apprentice, and wait for the archwizard to return, 
whereupon he calls forth a Leomund’s secret chest and 
offers them the talisman inside as their reward.
 With it, he says, they can travel back in time.
This week, I’d planned to discuss the dramatic 
impact of bringing back long-lost characters and 
NPCs. However, a question posed by Khilkhameth  
concerning last week’s article has prompted me to 
veer off on a tangent. The question is:
 How do you keep players involved in the game 
once their characters are killed off?
 My stock answer is, “Have them play something 
else—anything else.” Have them play an NPC com-
panion, hand them a monster stat block, or have 
them return as ghostly apparitions that haunt the 
party until Raise Dead rituals can be cast. Anything 
is better than having the players fall asleep at the 
game table. In the case of one Monday night player, 
I decided it was time to bring back an old character 
that the game group had all but forgotten.
 The Monday group recently lost two charac-
ters: the genasi swordmage Yuriel (played by Nick 
DiPetrillo) and the eladrin warlord Andraste (played 
by Michele Carter). They fell prey to a death knight 
with a soul-eating sword. Fortunately, Nick had a 
backup character among the crew on the party’s ship, 
the Maelstrom. Michele’s situation was a bit more 
complicated. She didn’t have a ready-to-play back-up 
character—or so she thought.
 Earlier in the campaign, the heroes used the arch-
wizard’s hourglass talisman  (a single-use wondrous 
item of my own invention) to travel back in time and 
“meet themselves” in the past. It was a great way 
to escape their present predicament, and afforded 
them the rare chance to team up with themselves 
and effectively play twins for a session or two. The 
two identical parties joined forces to face a common 
threat—but Andraste was the only character to sur-
vive the adventure with a living twin. Michele didn’t 
want to play two identical characters for the rest of 
the campaign, so “Andraste Prime” stayed with her 
companions while “Andraste Past” conveniently left 
the group to pursue other quests and interests.
 Andraste Past was absent from the campaign for 
over a year of game time (about ten levels of play), 
so even Michele was surprised when her character’s 
temporal twin reappeared shortly after Andraste 
Prime’s demise. The trick for me was concocting a 
situation that would logically reunite Andraste Past 
with the other heroes. To my credit, I had previously 
set up a major quest to rescue Andraste’s father, an 
eladrin wizard of some repute who had been arrested 
for conspiracy. It made perfect sense that Andraste 
Past would learn of her father’s incarceration, par-
ticular since the news had been delivered to her 
temporal twin via sending stone . (I decided it was pos-
sible for Andraste Past to overhear messages intended 
for Andraste Prime.)
 You’ve seen this trick used many times in TV 
shows and movies: Having suffered a great loss or 
setback, the heroes are drowning their sorrows when 
a familiar face appears out of the blue. It might be 
the face of salvation or a harbinger of worse things to 
come. Either way, it’s a tried-and-true cliché that can 
be surprisingly rousing, particularly if the character 
is beloved or reviled. (I used a similar trick once with 
a villain who’d cloned himself. As I recall, his sudden 
reappearance was greeted with gasps of “Oh, no!” fol -
lowed by shaking of fists.) Remember the scene in J.J. 
Abrams’ Star Trek when Spock Prime first appears in 
the ice cave? Yeah, you know what I’m talkin’ about.
 Andraste Past filled the hole left behind by poor 
Andraste Prime, but not perfectly. In order for 
Michele to effectively play Andraste Past, she needed 
a quick download of that character’s recent accom-
plishments—just the highlights. This required some 
prep work on my part, and the information I pro -
vided gave Michele a sense of the experiences that 
had shaped Andraste Past once she’d left the party. 
Of course, she was free to swap out her old gear for 
The Dungeon Master Experience: It’s About Time
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
50
new stuff, as appropriate. For Michele, these events 
afforded her the opportunity to redefine Andraste’s 
relationship with the other heroes and play a version 
of the character with her own agenda and aspirations.
Lessons  LeaRned
Time travel is a great storytelling tool, but like 
a chainsaw it comes with a warning label. Used 
unwisely, it can mutilate your campaign, as it 
demands a great deal of forethought and caution. I 
once subjected the Monday night group to the effects 
of an arcane contraption that teleported them into 
the future—the specifics of which are discussed in 
my blog. It was shocking and fun, but it took weeks 
of preparation since I needed to figure out all the 
ways in which Future Iomandra was different from 
Current Iomandra. (In general, the farther into the 
future you travel, the more gaps need to be filled.) 
Also, there are many complex factors to consider, 
such as determining which characters are still alive 
in the future, and what tragic fates befell the ones that 
aren’t.
 My dalliance with time travel in the Iomandra 
campaign has taught me a few things:
✦✦ If you use time travel, be ready for the 
unexpected.
✦✦ The past is easier to navigate than the future.
✦✦ Keep the “rules” for time travel as simple as 
possible.
Don’t introduce time travel if you’re worried about 
players altering your campaign’s history or acquiring 
items or information normally beyond their reach. 
Just as I view time travel as a fun way to mess with my 
players, they see time travel as a fun way to mess with 
my campaign. As for the “rules” of time travel, you 
need to determine how to handle temporal paradoxes 
and the extent to which the heroes can affect change. 
When I decided to give the Monday players the hour -
glass talisman , I did so with the full understanding 
that the heroes could go back in time, meet them -
selves, and change the course of history. But imagine 
if a character travels back in time and kills his par-
ents before he’s born. What happens next? Does the 
character suddenly disappear, having effectively 
erased himself, or is he a separate entity from his 
unborn self and therefore unaffected? Probably best 
not to overthink it, but there needs to be an underly -
ing logic that the players can follow; otherwise, you’re 
playing a game without rules, and that will cause 
your campaign to crack and fall apart.
 My own rules for time travel are simple:
✦✦ A character traveling through time is removed 
from play in the present timeline.
✦✦ A character traveling to the past or future 
is not affected by the changing states of 
creatures around him, including older and 
younger versions of himself. He can be 
wounded and killed as normal, but nothing 
adverse happens to him if his younger or older 
self is injured or dies.
✦✦ Time travel effects have durations. No matter 
how far into the past or present a character 
travels, he only gets to stay there for a finite 
amount of time before the time travel effect 
ends and he returns to the time and place 
whence he came. In this way, time travel is 
like an elastic band; eventually, the time trav -
eler gets pulled back to the exact time and 
place he left, minus any gear he left behind or 
resources he expended. This is true even if the 
character dies in the past or present.
✦✦ If a character acquires an item in the past or 
future, he still has the item when he returns 
to his normal time. So, if the character travels 
to the future, kills an evil wizard and takes 
the wizard’s staff back to the present, the 
character now has the staff and the wizard 
(who is technically still alive) does not.
These rules don’t address every corner case that 
comes up during play, and thoughtful players might 
discover (and exploit) a few loopholes. If they do, 
you’ll have to improvise. If improvisation isn’t one of 
your strengths, it’s probably best to forego time travel 
for the time being rather than let it disrupt or destroy 
your otherwise spectacular campaign.
Until the next encounter!
The Dungeon Master Experience: It’s About Time
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
51
What’s in 
a Name?
7/14/2011
WEDNESDAY NIGHT. 
The heroes have embarked on a quest to retrieve 
Fathomreaver, a cutlass with the power to unite the Sea 
Kings of Iomandra under one banner. However, time 
is of the essence, for the cutlass is also hunted by their 
arch-nemesis—a merciless, one-eyed dragonborn warlord 
named Vantajar.
 This mythic weapon was last seen in the hands of Sea 
King Draeken Malios, whose ship was lost in the Battle 
of the Roiling Cauldron nearly a century ago. Somehow 
the cutlass found its way into the Elemental Chaos. In last 
week’s game, the heroes set sail for the Demonmaw Sar -
gasso and were drawn down into a deadly vortex. They 
survived the descent, and their ship came to rest on an 
ocean of jagged ice in the Elemental Chaos near several 
other vessels trapped in the frigid wasteland, including a 
ship made of black glass and another made of stone.
 Not long after their arrival, the heroes came face-to-face 
with the captains of these stranded vessels: a fire-haired 
azer named Captain Zarance; a stormsoul genasi named 
Captain Ferrik Spark; a stone-skinned half-giant named 
Shrador; a water archon called Worlus; and a frost-bearded 
dwarf named Parcilla Shatterbone.
 “Oh, frabjous day!” my players cried. “Five new NPCs to 
add to the ever-growing cast of thousands!” 
One of my frequent readers, Matthias Schäfer, sent 
an email to dndinsider@wizards.com  asking why I 
give my NPCs weird names like “Draeken Malios” 
and “Vantajar” instead of more pronounceable ones 
taken from English, such as “Hammersmith” and 
“Clearwater.” He’s also curious how I make my play-
ers remember such odd names so that they don’t end 
up calling them “the dead Sea King” or “that dragon-
born dude.”
 First, you all need to know that I have a problem: 
I like concocting weird names. It’s a favorite exercise 
of mine, and one that drives me to create entire lists 
of names that I keep in binders for handy reference, 
so that if I ever need a name on the spot, I have scores 
of them to choose from. (And once I choose a name 
from the list, I strike it off so that I don’t end up reap -
plying it to another NPC down the road.) It’s one of 
the best DM tricks in the world, because it gives my 
players the impression that I’ve named every NPC in 
the campaign (which, I suppose, I have).
no john smiths
There’s a reason why you’ll never encounter an NPC 
named “John Smith” in my campaign. I find that 
common English names rip players out of their fan-
tasy world. Even “Jonah Hammersmith” treads a 
little too close to reality for my tastes. However, I have 
no problem with “Jaxar Hammersmith” as a dwarf 
name. In fact, I think I’ll add that one to my ever-
growing list.
 When I set out to build the cultures of my cam -
paign world, I decided to apply certain naming 
conventions to each race. The tieflings in my cam -
paign are refugees from a fallen empire, so I decided 
to derive their names from Roman and Greek cul -
tures (e.g., Decimeth, Hacari, Prismeus, Syken). They 
also have names more akin to those presented in the 
Player’s Handbook tiefling race entry (e.g., Suffer, Sun-
shine, Thorn, Tyranny), although these names are 
usually self-chosen monikers.
 Dragonborn names tend to come from Egyp -
tian and Middle Eastern cultures (e.g., Araj, Fayal, 
Kaphira, Nazir) or sound like names one might 
ascribe to dragons (e.g., Drax, Nagarax, Rhesk).
 I tend to give elves and eladrin lyrical, multi -
syllabic names, which is fairly stereotypical (e.g., 
Ariandar, Lorifir, Talonien).
 Dwarves tend to have simple first names with 
hard or earthy consonants (e.g., Glint, Halzar, Korlag) 
or names culled from Polish and Hungarian name 
generators (e.g., Gyuri, Ferko, Szilard), and they usu -
ally have compound last names comprised of two 
common yet emblematic words smashed together 
(e.g., Ambershard, Ironvein, Stonecairn).
 Halfling names are simple and playful (e.g., Corby, 
Happy, Rabbit, Ziza), and their last names tend to 
The Dungeon Master Experience: What’s in a Name?
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
52
include some thematic tie to nature or water (e.g., 
Blackwater, Skiprock, Yellowcrane).
 The gnomes in my campaign, though few in 
number, have cornered the market on silly first 
names or names tied thematically to magic (e.g., Don-
keywheel, Dweomer, Smidgeon, Sparkle).
 My human names are all over the map. I tend to 
go for names that sound like seldom used real-world 
names (e.g., Arando, Caven, Fenton, Mirabel, Remora) 
and last names with roots in western European cul -
tures (e.g., Caskajaro, Moonridge, Ratley, Van Hyden), 
or names built around nautical terms (e.g., Coldshore, 
Keel, Sandershoal). The trick is coming up with 
names that sound human but seem grounded in a 
world of fantasy, not reality.
 In my campaign, a name is used to evoke a certain 
mood or fortify the image I have in mind when I envi -
sion the NPC. It’s trite, but evil NPCs tend to have 
evil-sounding names unless I’m deliberately playing 
against type or trying to mislead the players. “Lhorzo 
Zalagmar” and “Azrol Tharn” are two dwarf villains 
in my campaign. The combination of certain letters 
and sounds (in these specific examples, the letter “z” 
coupled with the “ar” sound) gives these names an 
indescribable harshness or sleaziness. “Talia Winter-
leaf,” “Alathar Balefrost,” and “Arromar Sunshadow” 
are elf villains; here I use specific words such as 
“winter,” “balefrost,” and “shadow” to help reinforce 
their sinister role in the campaign. Sometimes it’s a 
combination of words that really sells the name: Case 
in point, the Wednesday night group recently ran 
afoul of a warforged villain named “Ironsmile.” And 
on occasion, I’ll surprise my players with a lighter 
name and apply it to a villainous character, as hap -
pened with a minor gnome villain and bard named 
“Clef Wimbly.”
Remembe Ring names
I don’t go out of my way to burn the names of NPCs 
into the minds of my players. They will remember the 
ones that are memorable, and they’ll forget the ones 
that are forgettable. If the NPC appears frequently 
or has a decidedly memorable quirk or manner 
of speaking, my players have a much easier time 
remembering the name. However, I don’t sweat it. 
My campaign includes thousands of NPCs. There’s 
no way my players can remember them all. If “Azrol 
Tharn” is remembered as “the dwarf vampire who 
turns into a puddle of oil,” I’m cool with that. If all 
else fails, the players can usually count on Curt Gould 
(the group’s record-keeper) to surf his campaign notes 
and remind them if and when it becomes important.
 I try not to shove names down my players’ throats, 
because it usually comes across as forced and too 
often leads to mockery. For example, I would never 
have my villain announce, “Kneel before me, for I am 
the pirate warlord Vantajar, scourge of the Dragon 
Sea!” That’s a little too much camp for my tastes. 
Better to have an NPC’s name remain a mystery 
until the players express an interest in learning it, for 
they’ll be more inclined to remember it afterward. 
(Would “Voldemort” have been half as memorable, 
unless it should not be said?)
 I must admit, my players have created a private 
game around trying to guess how I spell the names of 
my NPCs. The first time a name is mentioned, they 
take cracks at trying to spell it, anticipating the pres -
ence of a silent “h” or the use of “zh” instead of a “j”. 
How many different ways do my players spell and 
pronounce the names “Zaibon Krinvazh” or “Zaidi 
Arychosa”? More than one, let me tell you, and that’s 
okay. As far as I’m concerned, such names add real -
ism to the world by virtue of the fact that they are 
strangely built and difficult to pronounce. I know 
plenty of real-world people whose names are equally 
challenging (try pronouncing “Jon Schindehette” or 
“Bill Slavicsek” correctly, I dare you). Fortunately, my 
players have the benefit of hearing me say the names, 
so they’re not just reading letters off a page.
Lessons  LeaRned
The first several pages of my campaign binder con-
tain lists of random names, organized by race. Down 
the right-hand side of the page are blank spaces 
where I can either add new names or record notes 
concerning the names I’ve used. For example:
The Dungeon Master Experience: What’s in a Name?
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
53
Human First Names Human Last Names  
Anlow   Arkalis  
Arando   Bilger  
Azura (f )   Blackstrand  
Bram   Carnavon  
Cale   Corynnar   
etc.   etc.  
Arando Corynnar — Knight of Ardyn
Cale Blackstrand — Warden Drax’s spy
                                                                       
                                                                       
                                                                       
Where do I get my names, you ask? I’ve trained my 
wee brain to devise new names on a whim, but when 
I’m stuck or looking to flesh out my list, I turn to sev -
eral readily available sources.
✦✦ The Internet. Need some good names to popu -
late the inhabitants of your dwarf stronghold? 
Try doing a Google search on “Hungarian 
names.” Need names for that rampaging clan 
of goliaths lairing in the mountains? Try 
searching for “Hawaiian names” or “Native 
American names.” The Internet is full of baby 
name lists, pet name lists, and other lists. If 
you can’t find the perfect name on such a list, 
take two names and smash them together to 
create something new.
✦✦ Movies. Every movie in the past 20 years has 
a scrolling list of end credits filled with great 
names. Plop yourself down in front of your 
laptop or bigscreen TV with a notebook, skip 
to the credits at the end of your DVD copy of 
Hellboy or The Return of the King , and make note 
of some of the cool fantasy-sounding names 
that appear. You’ll be surprised how many 
good ones you’ll find, particularly if the movie 
was filmed on different continents.
✦✦ RPG supplements. Campaign-focused books 
such as the 
Forgotten  realms  Campaign Guide 
and the eberron Campaign Guide are strewn 
with names that can be repurposed for home 
campaigns. I can flip to any page in either of 
these two books and find an invented word 
that would make a great NPC name.
✦✦ Real names. Take a real name and tweak a 
few letters to create something new. “Chris 
Perkins” becomes “Carysto Perek.” “John 
Smith” becomes “Joran Snythe.” You get the 
idea.
Until the next encounter!
Voice 
Talent
7/21/2011
MONDAY NIGHT.
The heroes are sailing aboard their elemental ship, the 
Maelstrom, when suddenly Captain Yuriel (played by 
Nick DiPetrillo) receives a sending stone message from his 
mentor and benefactor, Sea King Valkroi. Word has come 
down that Sea King Senestrago, Valkroi’s hated rival and 
sometime campaign villain, has been killed off-camera in a 
naval battle.
 To deliver this great news, I conjure up the very best 
Jamaican accent I can muster. Suddenly, Nick gives me a 
quizzical look and says, “Doesn’t Valkroi have an Austra -
lian accent?”
Crikey!
 Nick’s right—I’ve gotten my accents and NPCs 
mixed up! It doesn’t happen often, but when it does, 
I’m horribly dismayed. I use a Jamaican accent for 
exactly one character in my campaign—a drow crime 
lord named Maliq du Mavian. You’d think I would 
remember that! (And for those who read last week’s 
article about names, this one’s pronounced “mah-
LEEK du mah-vee-AHN.”) Truth be told, even good 
DMs have their bad moments, and when it comes to 
voice acting, I’m at best an amateur.
 Before I dive headlong into this short discussion 
about using voices to bring NPCs to life, let me tell 
you about my recent encounter with a god among 
voice talent artists.
The Dungeon Master Experience: Voice Talent
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
54
 
Last month, to cap off a very pleasurable experi -
ence at Comicpalooza in Houston, I shared a limo 
ride to the airport with voice actor and professional 
announcer Tom Kane. We joked about flying cars 
and why humans should never be allowed to have 
them. (I’m sure it sounded grand back in the 1950s 
when futurists first postulated the notion, but imag -
ine someone’s half-eaten Big Mac, leaky antifreeze, 
or rusted-out muffler dropping on your head from a 
height of 100 feet. That’s not progress, people.)
 As we talked and joked, Tom let a bit of Admi-
ral Yularin (from The Clone Wars animated series) 
slip into the discussion. I was also treated to a wee 
bit of Yoda and a few other characters in Tom’s vast 
repertoire. The voices came out offhandedly and 
effortlessly, and at that point I realized we had more 
in common than successful careers in the fringes of 
entertainment. Tom was doing something I like to do 
in my D&D sessions and in real life—change voices 
in conversation, usually for comic effect—only he was 
doing it really well. He is, after all, the professional, 
and I’m just an amateur.
 I’m not selling myself short here. After all, being 
an amateur isn’t the same thing as being a novice, 
as evidenced by the fact that I have more than 20 
years of experience making up voices in my D&D 
campaigns. The fact that I don’t get paid for my voice 
“talent” is why I’m not a professional, and frankly I’m 
not sure I have the chops for that line of work. Voice 
acting requires serious training. However, I am Cana -
dian, which means I can do a passable Canadian 
accent on command. I can also riff on 2d6 + 7 other 
real world accents because I watch lots of TV and 
movies. The key word here is “riff,” because I’m not 
sure I can do any accent justice. My German accent 
makes it seem like I’m mocking Germans— you know 
vhat I mean, ya? Ditto with French, Spanish, Cajun, 
Russian, Scottish, Jamaican, Australian, Bostonian, 
Minnesotan, Texan, and so on.
 Anyone who’s seen all four Pirates of the Caribbean 
movies and all eight Harry Potter films should be able 
to conjure up one or more fake British accents (unless 
of course the person is genuinely British, in which 
case one would assume it comes naturally). If you 
can’t, it’s probably because your lips were sewn on 
upside-down. However, unless you’re a gifted mimic 
with a trained ear, the voice you hear when you speak 
is not the same voice everyone else hears around you. 
I’ve done a lot of podcasts, and every time I listen 
to myself, I feel like I’m hearing a stranger talk. My 
recorded voice does not sound like the voice echoing 
in my head when I speak aloud.
 Consequently, when I do an impression of a 
famous person like Jack Nicholson, or a famous char-
acter like Foghorn Leghorn, the voice that I ultimately 
create isn’t exactly one or the other. It sounds similar 
but not exactly the same. It is, for all intents and pur-
poses, derivative—and that’s perfect. I don’t want Jack 
Nicholson playing a part in my campaign, but I want 
a character inspired by him. I don’t want Foghorn 
Leghorn, either; I want a ruthless sea captain with a 
lot of southern bluster or a talking stone face carved 
into a wall that thinks it knows everything.
Let the mutiLation 
begin!
It’s perfectly fine to mutilate real-world accents. So 
what if your Maine accent doesn’t sound like a real 
Maine accent. It’s not like your campaign in set in 
Maine, after all; the players won’t hate you because 
your rendition failed to conjure memories of sum-
mers spent in Bangor. In my campaign, I have no 
qualms about “looting” regionally distinctive dialects, 
inflections, and idioms. So what if my tiefling hench-
man sounds like a caricature of a Boston thug? My 
players remember him. He’s the hahd-ass  with the big 
fat mouth (no offense to Bostonians). Rad Longham -
mer, the new intern of Acquisitions Incorporated, 
sounds like a Californian surfer dude—or at least my 
imitation of one—and he earned more than his fair 
share of laughs at PAX last year.
The Dungeon Master Experience: Voice Talent
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
55
 In my Monday night campaign, I have a recurring 
NPC named Rhutha. She’s a fat dragonborn military 
general who really knows how to throw her weight 
around. When I speak in her voice, I automatically 
stick out my pouty lower lip, talk as deeply as I can, 
and enunciate every syllable slowly as though she was 
the long-lost dragonborn sister of Alfred Hitchcock. 
Then. I. Make. Each. Word. Its. Own. Sentence.
 Not surprisingly, General Rhutha is one of the 
most memorable villains in the Iomandra campaign. 
It’s also easy for me to remember what her voice 
sounds like because my entire posture changes when-
ever I get into character. I slouch in my chair and talk 
down my nose, imbuing her with a certain air of con-
tempt. (Did I mention that DMing is one part acting, 
one part directing, and two parts improvisation?)
 I have another dragonborn NPC who bears the 
scar of having had his throat cut, and he speaks with 
a harsh whisper—simple yet effective.
 I typically reserve “new voices” (as opposed to 
higher-pitched, lower-pitched, faster-paced, and 
slower-paced versions of my natural voice) for impor-
tant characters. My campaign has thousands of NPCs, 
and it would be physically exhausting and mentally 
taxing to give each one a distinctive voice. My players 
can usually guess the relative importance of an NPC 
by the extents to which I describe the character and 
tinker with the voice. If my description of the NPC is 
threadbare and the character speaks in my own voice 
(more or less), the players know they’re probably deal-
ing with a “one-off ” NPC of little consequence. If the 
NPC instead sounds like Rosa Klebb in From Russia 
With Love or “Buffalo Bill” from The Silence of the 
Lambs, their expectations are immediately inflated.
 I rarely forget which voice to use, but it hap-
pens—as evidenced by my recent misstep with Sea 
King Valkroi. To my credit, Sea King Valkroi was 
envisioned as a particularly important NPC in the 
Monday night campaign, but because of the direction 
the campaign went, he’s been more of a background 
figure who pops up infrequently. I still feel like a bal -
loonhead, however.
Lessons  LeaRned
One of the most effective ways to make an NPC 
memorable (after giving him or her a distinctive 
physical trait, quirk, or habit) is to give him or her a 
voice inspired by a real-world or fictional character. 
Any person or character with a cool voice or trade -
mark affectation is fair game: Antonio Banderas. 
Anthony Hopkins. Katherine Hepburn ( “Norrrrrman! 
The looooons!” ). Alan Rickman. James Cagney. Anne 
“Throw Momma from the Train” Ramsey. Peter Lorre. 
Vincent Price. Christopher Walken. Cheech Marin. 
Zsa Zsa Gabor. Arnold Schwarzenegger. If you’re 
looking for something more exaggerated, try riffing 
on a character like Zapp Brannigan, Yosimite Sam, 
Jessica Rabbit, Gaston (from Beauty and the Beast ), 
Ren (“Steeempy, you Eeeediot!” ), or Vezzini and Fezzik 
(played by Wallace Shawn and André the Giant) 
from The Princess Bride .
 I occasionally come up with voices “in the 
moment” (particularly when I’m forced to breathe life 
into an NPC on the fly), although I admit those aren’t 
always the most successful. Sometimes the accent 
is too difficult or too hard to sustain; I once tried to 
make a villain sound like Dr. Claw from the Inspector 
Gadget cartoons, but my throat simply wasn’t up to it. 
Sometimes the voice just sounds horrid, and so I end 
up jettisoning it or “wearing down the edges” so that it 
becomes a bit more palatable.
 I like to rehearse voices ahead of time. My three-
legged dog, Reggie, tolerates it during long walks 
through the back woods, where no one else can hear 
me. A typical rehearsal is basically 5 minutes of me 
trying to imitate some TV or movie villain, such as 
Ralph Fiennes’ Voldemort or Bill Nighy’s Davey Jones, 
and maybe twisting it in some way (to make it sound 
female, for example).
 Here are some things worth remembering as you 
fearlessly experiment with voices of your own:
✦✦ Think of an actor whose voice you like. Try 
to imitate it, and no matter what the quality, 
you will end up creating a new character voice 
that’s all your own.
✦✦ Often a bad accent is better than no accent at 
all, and it doesn’t need to be “over the top” to 
be memorable.
✦✦ Change the shape of your mouth. Try speak -
ing with your teeth bared, your lips puckered, 
or your tongue firmly pressed against your 
lower gums. It sounds stupid, but it works.
There are scores of other tips and tricks—had my 
limo ride to the airport been a few minutes longer, 
I would’ve pestered Mr. Kane for some voice acting 
advice to step up my game. If you have some tricks of 
your own, I’d love to hear about them.
Until the next encounter!
The Dungeon Master Experience: Voice Talent
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
56
Intervention
7/28/2011
frIDAY NIGHT. 
San Diego Comic Con. I’m standing behind a podium, 
hosting a seminar panel on “The Art of the Dungeon 
Master” and sharing nuggets of wisdom with a packed 
house of 350+ people, most of them dedicated Dungeon 
Masters actively running campaigns. The presentation 
concludes with three tips that have served me well in my 
regular Monday and Wednesday night games: (1) show 
no fear, (2) don’t get bored with your own campaign, and 
(3) under-prepare, but be ready to improvise.
 As my presentation gives way to an open Q&A ses -
sion, it’s hard to miss the enormous white elephant 
lurking in the back corner. Every DM in the room is 
aware of it. It’s called the difficult player, and it tramples 
and destroys more D&D campaigns each year than we 
dare admit.
This is a very real problem and a difficult topic to 
broach with players. It’s also a topic that you and I, as 
dedicated Dungeon Masters, take very seriously.
 During the Q&A part of the panel, one strug -
gling DM bravely stepped forward and announced 
that his players made a frequent habit of laying 
waste to his carefully laid plans, transforming what 
should’ve been an epic campaign into a mind -
less slaughterfest. Not all DMs have the luxury of 
choosing their players. Options are limited, and 
sometimes jettisoning even one player can cause the 
entire group to crumble.
 That leaves two courses of action: restructure 
the campaign to give the players more of what they 
want (and less of what you want), or force them 
to adhere to certain codes of conduct on threat of 
ending the game.
 Fact: People play D&D for different reasons, 
and players come to the game table with different 
attitudes, expectations, and play styles. As DMs, 
we need to accept this fact, account for it in our 
adventures, and move on. However, every successful 
campaign I’ve ever run was built on the founda -
tion of a social contract (usually unspoken) that 
specifies what is acceptable behavior versus unac -
ceptable behavior. Ideally, the DM agrees to adhere 
to certain rules and to 
entertain the players 
while showing favor-
itism toward none. 
The players agree to 
respect each other’s 
play styles, respect the 
campaign, and refrain 
from cheating. That’s 
how great campaigns 
and lifelong friend -
ships come to pass.
 Depending on 
your circle of gaming 
friends, you might 
encounter one or 
more players who 
refuse to be bound by 
any form of social con-
tract. They willfully 
or subconsciously set 
out to undermine your 
authority, the campaign, the other player’s enjoy -
ment of the tabletop gaming ritual, or potentially 
all of the above. Maybe they like to challenge your 
rulings, maybe they like to murder all of your quest-
givers, or maybe they keep hogging the limelight 
and depriving the other players of opportunities to 
roleplay.
 Here’s what I suggest you do when confronted with 
one or more such players: ask them to read the fol-
lowing letter, or read it to them . Before sharing 
it, decide whether to remove the phrase “because of 
you” in the first paragraph; reserve it for players who 
aren’t likely to fly off the handle when confronted 
with the truth. If you think the intervention can do 
without it, cut it.
The Dungeon Master Experience: Intervention
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
57
Lessons  LeaRned
I have a degree in rhetoric, so I know a little some-
thing about writing persuasively. Whatever you do, 
keep things short and honest and private. One caveat: 
For spouses and siblings, do not hand them a letter! 
Better to memorize as much of the general content as 
possible, and then deliver it in a back-and-forth con-
versation. No point turning a dysfunctional game into 
a family feud!
 Your goals should be to call attention to the prob -
lem without dwelling on it, and to focus on more 
desirable behavior, which is working together to find 
a solution the serves everyone’s best interests. Inviting 
the player to be part of the solution is key; whether 
they agree to join your quest to save the campaign 
depends on how much they really want to be part 
of the game. Immature or disenfranchised players 
might refuse your “gracious” invitation; not every 
intervention works, and sometimes the best (albeit 
painful) cure for an ailing campaign is to cut loose 
the disruptive player. It’s not ideal but sometimes 
necessary.
 The intervention is best used as a last recourse 
when more disarming methods fail. In my Monday 
and Wednesday night games, I allow a certain 
amount of rowdiness and give the players license to 
have bad nights and silly moments. When I perceive 
that things are getting out of hand, I have no qualms 
about steering the game back on track through sheer 
force of will and the occasional “Okay guys, let’s 
play this game right” remark. I also let the players 
police each other; more often than not, they’re the 
ones making sure that their “inner jerks” don’t screw 
things up and reduce the campaign to rubble.
 That said, I met at least one DM at San Diego 
Comic Con whose players are 100% united in their 
quest to thoroughly trash his campaign. If that were 
my gaming group, I’d pack up my books and save 
my campaign for a worthier band of adventurers. 
I might also drop by my local gaming store on a 
Wednesday night, unfold my DM screen, and run 
a D&D Encounters  session. Who knows? I might 
meet some players who actually respect all that the 
game has to offer.
Until the next encounter!
DEAr plAYEr(S) . . . 
D&D is a game about heroes working as a team to 
complete quests, defeat villains and monsters, and 
interact with the campaign that I’ve created. Right 
now, because of you, our D&D game isn’t working, 
and I need your help to fix it.
It’s my job as the Dungeon Master to present a world 
for your character to explore and fun challenges to 
overcome. It’s also my job to set the rules of the 
game, be fair to all players, and keep things exciting. 
I’m hoping the campaign can last a while, and that 
your characters have a chance to become more pow-
erful and face new threats at higher level. It’s a lot of 
work—and frankly, you’re not making it easy on me.
It’s your role as a player to have a good time, but 
not at the expense of me, the campaign, or the 
other players. When we sit down to play, there’s an 
unspoken agreement that must be respected so that 
everyone has a good time. You can’t have a rock band 
if one player refuses to take it seriously or doesn’t 
allow everyone else to enjoy the experience. The 
same holds true for D&D games. That’s not to say 
you can’t have fun, but we need to agree on what’s 
fun for everyone.
Here’s what I’d like to do: I want to create the best, 
most fun campaign—not just for me, and not just for 
you, but for all of us. In return, I want to hear about 
the things you like and don’t like about the campaign, 
as well as ways I can make it more suitable for your 
style of play so that you’re having fun. I also want you 
to think about what makes the game fun for me and 
everyone else. Ultimately, we all want to have a good 
time, but right now that’s not happening. 
The Dungeon Master Experience: Intervention
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
58
Maptism
8/4/2011
WEDNESDAY NIGHT. 
The adventurers are plying the Elemental Chaos when 
they happen upon a pirate base made from the hulls of six 
wrecked ships. The map for this location is something I’d 
created for another purpose—an upcoming Organized Play 
event called D&D 
lair assault: Talon of Umberlee—
but I loved the way it turned out and decided to plunder 
it for my home campaign. A DM’s gotta do what a DM’s 
gotta do, and there ain’t nothin’ wrong with that.
If I could get a paying job as a “D&D mapmaker,” I 
would take that job in a heartbeat—even if the pay 
sucked. Don’t get me wrong—I’m perfectly happy 
with my current line of work—but creating maps has 
always been a true passion of mine. Many hours have 
I spent drawing halls and statues and spiral staircases 
on graph paper over the years! These days, my sched-
ule rarely permits me to indulge this artistic passion. 
Often I’m forced out of necessity to repurpose maps 
created for other uses—either maps I’ve created 
myself or maps created by others.
 At right is the version of the map I created for 
Talon of Umberlee and plundered for my Wednesday 
night game, juxtaposed with a more professional ren-
dering of the same map by freelance cartographer 
Mike Schley.
 Damn, that’s a cool map, if I do say so myself! 
Mike’s version is lovely, but the location itself has a 
certain novelty. I spent a long time getting the shape 
of the hulls just right. It’s always risky to go “off the 
grid,” and I struggle a bit with curved walls. (With 
this map, I cheated: I drew a ship’s bow on a separate 
piece of graph paper and then traced it over and over 
to create the versions that appear in my sketch ver-
sion of the final map.)
 Those of you who choose to participate in the 
D&D Lair Assault  program (premiering in Septem -
ber and running concurrently with the in-store D&D 
Encounters program) might actually get to play the 
encounter for which this map was truly designed. If 
not, feel free to loot the map for your home campaign. 
That’s what I do—and what every good Dungeon 
Master does.
 When I was a kid, I spent a large chunk of my 
allowance on D&D and AD&D adventure modules, 
knowing full well I’d never find time to run all of 
them. The adventure maps were usually printed on 
the inside covers, and they were so incredibly evoca-
tive and immersive that I would often decide whether 
an adventure was worth running based solely on the 
maps. Would Count Strahd von Zarovich be half the 
vampire he is today if not for Castle Ravenloft?
 I think it’s hard to be a Dungeon Master and not 
be inspired by good maps. World maps, dungeon 
maps, castle maps—they define the world as much 
as any character, NPC, or plot. I don’t think a love of 
maps is required to be a great DM, but it certainly 
hasn’t hurt or hindered me. In fact, whenever I try to 
conjure up a new adventure, one of the first things I 
The Dungeon Master Experience: Maptism
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
59
think about is the key adventure location and what 
the map might look like. In your campaign, it might 
be a haunted castle, a temple built by a pharaoh’s 
monstrous thralls, or the killer dungeon of a mad 
archwizard. In my campaign, it might be the winter 
palace of the Dragovar emperor, a star pact warlock’s 
celestial observatory, or an elemental warship.
 Recently I had an opportunity to catch up with 
Monte Cook, who I don’t see often enough these days, 
much to my chagrin. Monte is a brilliant DM who cre -
ates stories of remarkable depth and worlds of such 
intricacy that they feel absolutely real (although what 
actually makes him brilliant is his willingness to let 
the players decide where to take the campaign and 
roll with it, which, incidentally, is the topic of next 
week’s column—but I digress). Years ago, I was a regu-
lar player in Monte’s famous Ptolus campaign which, 
like my current campaign, was run with two different 
groups on Monday and Wednesday evenings. I was in 
both groups, which allowed me to observe how Monte 
managed to create intersecting stories and opportuni -
ties for one group’s antics to influence the other.
 One thing that Monte and I have in common 
beyond our passion and predilection for DMing is 
a love of maps. He, like me, is a diehard map afi -
cionado. One need only flip through the 672-page 
Ptolus: City by the Spire tome to see his passion for 
maps brought to vivid life. (The book’s cartography 
won an ENnie Award in 2007.)
 When Monte worked at Wizards of the Coast, he 
used to bring graph paper to meetings and draw glori -
ously Gygaxian dungeon maps. I wonder how many 
of those offhand designs ended up in print? I did the 
same thing in high school English class—my only 
regret was that I didn’t save any of those old maps, 
crappy as they doubtless were. My early designs were 
often nonsensical, and over the years I’ve learned 
that even dungeons need some internal logic in their 
design—that even the craziest archwizard or pharaoh 
builds toward a purpose, and every castle regardless 
of size needs at least one lavatory or privy.
 I don’t have as much time to draw maps as I used 
to, so whenever I attend a gaming convention and 
have a few hours to kill, I glide through the exhibit 
hall and peruse RPG books for interesting maps. If I 
see something I like, I’ll buy it in the hopes of plun-
dering it for my home campaign. Masterwork Maps  
products are notorious for catching my eye; they 
produce great stuff, and their castle maps are particu -
larly awesome.
 When I’m feeling lazy or pressed for time, I forgo 
the graph paper and instead turn to the Internet for 
inspiration. For an upcoming adventure, I needed to 
create a map of a mansion, so I typed “mansion blue-
prints” into the Google search engine and discovered 
among the myriad images the following low-res image 
of a real-world residence called Whitemarsh Hall:
 Realizing that I was missing the upstairs blueprint, 
I did a Google search on Whitemarsh Hall and dis -
covered an excellent website chronicling the history 
of the mansion, with maps of the upstairs and down-
stairs levels as well as exterior and interior images 
that could easily serve as player handouts. Marveling 
at my good fortune, I copied the mansion blueprints 
(GIFs) to my desktop.
 Since these maps don’t have a grid, I decided to 
add one. (The grid makes it easier for me to replicate 
sections of the map on a wet-erase battle map during 
the game.) I downloaded some free digital graph 
paper, which is a wonderful DM resource, and even 
specified how big I wanted the grid and the paper 
size to be. After converting the graph paper PDF 
into a JPG, I superimposed the maps of the mansion 
onto the grid. I copy-and-pasted them onto the graph 
paper as separate layers and resized them using the 
Edit > Transform function of Adobe Photoshop so that 
the walls and grid aligned more closely. Here, then, is 
what the mansion’s ground floor looks like on digital 
graph paper:
 In Photoshop, I can erase the tags I don’t want and 
add whatever other embellishments I like. However, 
The Dungeon Master Experience: Maptism
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
60
in this case, the maps don’t require much manipula -
tion. I’m pretty happy with them as they are.
Lessons  LeaRned
I’ve often joked that maps are D&D porn for Dun-
geon Masters. Forgive the weird analogy, but opening 
up the gatefold covers of old AD&D adventures is 
like opening a Playboy  or Playgirl centerfold, inviting 
drooling DMs to take their players into the poisonous 
dungeon beneath the Hidden Shrine of Tamoachan 
or the haunted house on the cliff in The Sinister Secret 
of Saltmarsh. Past issues of Dungeon are another great 
source of maps; the magazine has been around in one 
form or another since 1986, and those of you who 
have access to back issues are sitting on a veritable 
goldmine.
 We’re even learning the lesson here at Wizards 
and trying our best to get new maps into DM’s hands, 
by every practical means, because we know DMs don’t 
have the time or ability to create their own. Alas, too 
many modern adventure modules don’t pay enough 
mind to creative map design, and consequently they 
offer precious little plunder for DMs who need good 
maps to fuel their campaigns. (There are many nota-
ble exceptions.) If you can’t steal a map from Dungeon 
magazine or some other source, you can always turn 
to the Internet and use its power for good.
 Do a Google search on “castle maps” and see what 
you get. Now try “dungeon maps.” Next, “wilderness 
maps.” Finally, try searching for “medieval city maps.” 
(editor’s note: Don’t pass up a chance to visit the Car-
tographer’s Guild.) I think you’ll be awakened to new 
adventure possibilities. Truth be told, you might never 
need to draw another map again—although I hope 
that’s untrue, since it’s incumbent upon all DMs to 
put pencil to graph paper and create new dungeons 
that might one day get published for the rest of us to 
steal at our leisure.
Until the next encounter!
DM’s Lib
8/11/2011
MONDAY NIGHT.
The heroes are assaulting the Black Candle, a secret 
stronghold of Vecna-worshiping wizards. Upon reaching 
the inner sanctum, they discover that their adversar -
ies have summoned an aspect of Vecna mounted on a 
dracolich. As the aspect turns to destroy them, the belea -
guered, resource-drained heroes lower their weapons and 
beg for a truce, remembering that they and the Maimed 
Lord share a common foe—a growing threat from the Far 
Realm.
 I ask the players to make group Diplomacy checks as 
the aspect of Vecna considers their characters’ words. The 
dice results are in the party’s favor, and so the undead 
lord decides to heed the wisdom of their counsel and forge 
a temporary alliance. The aspect allows the heroes to 
destroy those they came to destroy and promises to send 
a more worthy vassal to them at a later time, as part of 
a pledge to aid them in their efforts to destroy the Far 
Realm threat.
 End of session.
This is not how I expected the game session to end. I 
expected what most DMs expect: a few minced words 
followed by a lot of blood and shattered bones. But 
then, I sometimes forget that a good DM provides the 
compass but lets the players choose the direction.
 I’ve often said that improvisation is the best tool in 
any Dungeon Master’s toolbox. Actually, it’s more of a 
skill than a tool, and I primarily rely on improvisation 
to curtail on preparation time and to keep my game 
from stalling or becoming dull. And like any skill, it 
develops over time.
 If you doubt your improvisational skills, take the 
following test:
 The heroes have a quest to slay Snurre Iron -
belly, the fire giant king. After slaughtering 
their way to his august presence, they decide 
on a whim not to kill him. Instead, they offer 
their services as mercenaries-for-hire, citing 
their success in breaching his hall as proof of 
their competence. Maybe the offer is genuine, 
maybe it’s a ruse. Regardless, does Snurre 
attack the heroes?
Some DMs prefer to run published adventures 
because the story is heavily scripted, and the likeli -
hood that the DM will be called upon to improvise 
is greatly reduced. But even published adventures 
cannot account for every action the player characters 
might take.
 In Hall of the Fire Giant King , the classic AD&D 
module, the heroes are expected to kill Snurre. At 
least, that’s what Gary Gygax surely intended when 
TSR published the original adventure back in 1978. 
However, no published adventure can account for 
every possible player choice, and a good DM, like any 
good storyteller, knows an opportunity when he or 
she sees it. Snurre’s death might be a foregone con-
clusion, but situations that naturally arise to forestall 
the inevitable are always worth exploring, as are 
opportunities that allow characters to break out of the 
traditional “adventurer” role and spend a few sessions 
trying on different hats (like the mercenary hat, for 
example) or exploring their morality.
 Were I the DM, I would let the skill check results 
guide my decision, but I would be strongly disposed 
toward taking the story in the more unexpected 
direction. Being a fire giant, Snurre would certainly 
respect shows of brute force and raw power, so of 
course he’d want mighty adventurers at his beck 
and call—who wouldn’t? Having the heroes become 
The Dungeon Master Experience: DM’s Lib
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
61
Snurre’s henchmen, even briefly, is the stuff players 
will remember long after the campaign has ended.
 Now try this one:
 The heroes receive a quest to escort the Impe -
rial heir to the capital. The foolish young 
heir proves to be a royal pain in the ass, and 
despite the heroes’ efforts (or because of 
them), the heir dies en route. Rather than 
deliver his dead body, the heroes bury it and 
decide that one of them will use a hat of dis -
guise to impersonate the heir and perhaps, in 
time, assume lordship over the kingdom. As 
the DM, do you allow this?
Yes, of course you do! Maybe you never expected the 
campaign to bend in that direction, but it’s a perfectly 
logical development to the story, and one that’s likely 
to spur all kinds of wonderful roleplaying opportu -
nities and campaign developments. Suddenly the 
heroes have a secret and a chance to really turn the 
campaign on its head. By allowing for unexpected 
twists and turns, you’ve forced yourself to improvise, 
and every time you do this, your improvisational skill 
improves and the players’ expectations are blown out 
of the water.
 In a seminar at San Diego Comic Con, I urged 
DMs to “under-prepare, then improvise.” My 
campaign, like many campaigns, has needs that 
published adventures can’t address. (It has lots of 
roleplaying and politics, and very few sprawling 
dungeons.) Consequently, I rarely use published 
adventures, even short ones, preferring to devise my 
own encounters week after week. Before each game 
session, I type up a one-page document that goes into 
my campaign binder (click here for an example). On 
this page is a summary of important things that need 
to be recapped at the start of the session, followed by 
a list of NPCs who will likely make an appearance, 
followed by short descriptions of events or encoun-
ters I expect to happen. If the adventure includes a 
location to explore, I include a map accompanied by 
swatches of descriptive text reminding me of impor-
tant details. Sometimes I’ll require a stat block for a 
unique NPC or monster, but I try to use existing stat 
blocks and modify them as needed (as discussed in 
Instant Monster).
 The one-page session overview illustrates the 
degree to which I “under-prepare” for a game session. 
It provides a few guideposts, but most of the session 
is improvised. I find my players don’t suffer for the 
lack of preparation on my part, as long as I prod them 
when the action stalls and roll with them once they’ve 
committed to a course of action.
Lessons  LeaRned
When the players do something that threatens to take 
the story in an unexpected direction . . .
✦✦ Allow it.
✦✦ Imagine the next logical outcome or event, 
and proceed from there.
If, for some reason, you can’t think of the next logical 
outcome or event, consider ending the session on a 
cliffhanger and allowing yourself time to mull over 
the implications. A hero wants to use a hat of disguise 
to impersonate the royal heir? No problem. But let’s 
see what happens when a perceptive royal sibling 
succeeds at an Insight check and senses something 
is amiss. Maybe the threat of discovery leads the 
characters to kill two birds with one stone by murder-
ing the king and framing the suspicious sibling for 
his death. Again, no problem! Yeah, the characters 
have usurped a kingdom, but all the threats to the 
kingdom are still there—and, ironically enough, the 
heroes’ skills as adventurers might be the kingdom’s 
best hope of survival. The campaign marches on, just 
not in the way you or your players expected.
 So my Monday night group, out of dire necessity, 
has forged an alliance with the evil god of secrets. 
The players know it’s a marriage of convenience not 
long for the world, but it raises lots of interesting ques-
tions and opens up lots of roleplaying opportunities. 
Can the heroes learn to work alongside Vecna’s evil 
servants? Will certain characters’ personal misgiv -
ings threaten to end the alliance? Which side will 
betray the other first? By their choices and actions, 
the players have made the campaign more interesting 
and complicated, and they’ve put my improvisational 
skills to the test. I shall not disappoint them!
 I’ve learned that the secret to developing one’s 
improvisational skills as a DM is to listen to what 
the players want to do, and then steer the adventure 
The Dungeon Master Experience: DM’s Lib
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
62
in that direction, even if it runs counter to my own 
expectations. Only when my expectations are chal -
lenged can the campaign go off in surprisingly fun 
directions. Many campaigns die of boredom (DM 
boredom, player boredom, or both), but you can miti-
gate the threat of boredom by keeping yourself open 
to ideas and demonstrating to your players that you’re 
not locked into telling one story and one story only.
Until the next encounter!
Epic Fail
8/18/2011
WEDNESDAY NIGHT. 
A legendary cutlass has fallen into the hands of the drag -
onborn warlord Vantajar, one of the campaign’s major 
villains. He’s a level 30 solo brute with an elemental war -
ship, a crew of epic pirates, and a half dozen storm giant 
mercenaries riding thundercloud chariots.
 Seeking the cutlass for themselves, the adventurers 
board Vantajar’s vessel and engage their hated foe head-on, 
despite the fact that they’re only 24th level and are out -
numbered 7 to 1. As the storm giants hurl lightning bolts 
at the party spellcasters, Vantajar brings his cutlass down 
on Kael, the party cleric, dropping him dangerously close to 
his negative bloodied value.
 With their own ship too far away to render assistance, 
the heroes are in dire straits. Failure is not an option — it’s 
inevitable.
Never underestimate the resourcefulness of good 
players. When things look grim, when the cold eyes of 
death seem fixed on their characters, they somehow 
find a way to turn certain defeat into victory. One of 
the players might figure out a way to regain a spent 
power or healing surge. Another might whip out 
that half-forgotten magic item or plot detail that can 
tip the scales in the party’s favor. Many times have 
I stacked the odds against my players and watched 
them frantically search their character sheets and 
campaign notes for something—anything—to turn the 
tide.
 And even when nothing presents itself, there’s 
always a chance that their luck could change, that 
their cold dice might suddenly turn red hot. Hell, I’ve 
seen player characters call out to the gods, throwing 
themselves at my mercy, and on rare occasion I’ve 
allowed the gods to toss them a bone, particularly if 
they’ve earned it.
 Not this time.
 The Wednesday night characters have thrown cau -
tion to the wind and acted rashly, and they’re doomed 
to break like waves upon the rocks. At least, that’s 
what I’m expecting will happen. Even as I write this 
column, the battle is still playing out. However, it’s 
safe to say that I’ve stacked the deck against them. 
How could I not? Throughout the entire campaign, 
Vantajar has been touted as a supreme badass, a leg-
endary renegade who surfaces like a giant shark in 
the nightmares of child and Sea King alike.
 What makes good drama? In a word: failure.
 You can’t have drama if the heroes never fail. We 
all know the story of the good guy who faces the bad 
guy before he’s ready and gets his ass kicked. What 
usually happens next is that the good guy deals with 
the consequences of his failure, learns a valuable 
lesson, gathers his wits and self-confidence, and deliv -
ers the villain’s comeuppance. The story’s an oldie but 
a goodie.
 The first article in this series ( Surprise! Epic Gob-
lins!) talked about using lower-level challenges to 
make player characters feel powerful. It should come 
as no surprise that higher-level challenges have their 
place in the game as well. I use them all the time, not 
to be cruel but to reinforce the notion that some chal -
lenges aren’t balanced for the heroes’ level. It forces 
the players to switch gears, try different tactics, and 
rely on more than their swords and spells. It also 
makes the campaign world a scary place, even to epic-
level characters.
 It’s my job as the DM to make sure that the heroes’ 
failure doesn’t spell the end of the campaign. If the 
Wednesday group prevails against all odds, I’ll have 
to work harder the next time they come face-to-face 
with a major campaign villain. If Vantajar defeats 
them, the campaign isn’t over, for I’ve concocted a 
The Dungeon Master Experience: Epic Fail
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
63
logical reason why he’d want to keep his enemies 
alive.
 Here’s a behind-the-curtain glimpse of what I’m 
thinking, to give you an idea of the thought process 
that went into planning the likely outcome of the 
heroes’ failure: Vantajar desires to use the legendary 
cutlass to unite the Sea Kings—the merchant lords 
of Iomandra—under his banner. Once the old feuds 
are cast aside, he will command a navy greater than 
that of the Dragovar Empire, and he plans to use it 
to himself become Emperor. However, he needs to 
present the cutlass before the Eye of the Kraken (an 
artifact hidden in the island fortress of Krakenholt) 
and be judged worthy of its power. Only then will the 
Sea Kings kneel before him. Chris Youngs’ tiefling 
character, Deimos, is better known as Sea King Imp -
stinger, and the supremely arrogant Vantajar wants to 
see his enemy broken and forced into servitude like 
all the other Sea Kings. To kill Deimos and his com -
panions now would deny Vantajar an even greater 
victory, not to mention the ships under Sea King Imp -
stinger’s command.
 In the event of their defeat, the characters will 
be knocked unconscious, deprived of their gear, and 
hauled to Krakenholt. En route, a generous helping 
of torture will deprive them of their healing surges 
and any ability to take short or extended rests. With-
out their precious magic items and their encounter 
and daily powers, the heroes will be hard-pressed 
to threaten Vantajar directly, and yet I can imagine 
all sorts of reversals. They might convince a disloyal 
crew member to return a useful magic item (such as 
a sending stone). Maybe they’ll ride out the journey 
and take their revenge as Vantajar presents the cut -
lass to the Eye of the Kraken. If all else fails, perhaps 
fate will intervene on their behalf: Maybe Vantajar is 
attacked en route by a Sea King determined to stop 
his ascendency, and the resulting battle affords the 
heroes a chance to reclaim their gear and win their 
freedom, or maybe the Eye of the Kraken will judge 
the evil warlord to be unworthy of the cutlass, deny -
ing him his destiny. Villains become much more 
interesting when things don’t go their way. They are, 
after all, dark reflections of the heroes.
Lessons  LeaRned
Sometimes a DM has to be cruel to be kind. Some -
times, for the sake of suspense and good drama, you 
have to drive the heroes into the dirt so that they 
can pick themselves back up, sharpen their game 
(and their blades), and stage a storybook comeback, 
becoming even more powerful than when they faced 
defeat. Here are some helpful tips to guide you:
✦✦ Be transparent: Give your players hints that 
they might be in over their heads.
✦✦ It’s okay to set the characters up for failure. 
Just don’t be surprised if they succeed.
✦✦ If you expect the characters to fail and they 
fail, know where to take the story from there.
Many players don’t like it when their heroes fail, 
die, or both—especially when it happens during an 
“unfair” encounter. My players understand that I’m 
not on a quest to annihilate their characters or make 
them feel like useless tools, and so should yours. In 
classic and modern fiction, heroes rise, fall, and rise 
again. The unfair encounter is something you can use 
occasionally (emphasis on occasionally) to rouse your 
players and propel your campaign in interesting new 
directions.
 If your players are unaccustomed to being 
trounced and you’re worried that they might turn 
against you, you could do worse than sow the seeds of 
their eventual comeback. Tell the players how much 
you’re looking forward to seeing how they remedy 
their characters’ latest misfortune, and plant a few 
hints as to how they might succeed next time. Maybe 
the villain’s subordinates are badly treated and could 
The Dungeon Master Experience: Epic Fail
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
64
be turned against him. Maybe the heroes can dis -
cover a weakness to exploit. Maybe the villain lets 
down his guard or makes a classic blunder of over-
confidence. But I’m getting ahead of myself!
 Just as the best heroes have faults, so too do the 
best villains. We’ll tackle this subject in next week’s 
column, and I’ll pull a few examples not only from 
the Iomandra campaign but also from the adventure 
I have in store for Acquisitions Incorporated at this 
year’s live D&D game at PAX 2011! Stay tuned.
Until the next encounter
The Villain’s Fault
8/25/2011
pAX prIME TIME 
If you are planning to attend the Live D&D Game at PAX 2011, be warned! This article contains umpteen 
SPOILERS. You might want to skip this section.
For those who don’t know, this Saturday, in the Paramount Theater in Seattle, I’m running a live game for the 
gang of Acquisitions Incorporated (Mike “Gabe” Krahulik, Jerry “Tycho” Holkins, Scott “PvP” Kurtz, and Wil “Don’t 
be a dick!” Wheaton) in front of a crowd of 2,500+ PAX attendees. I’m told there will be grand entrances, pyro -
technics, costumes, and live minstrels (as opposed to dead ones, I suppose). For the past couple of weeks, I’ve been 
neglecting my home campaign to prepare for this blessed event, but costumes and minstrels aside, the thing that 
excites me most about the game is the opportunity to take Acquisitions Incorporated somewhere they’ve never 
been and pit them against a worthy villain.
If you can’t attend the event, be sure to watch our live streaming coverage .
When last we left Jim Darkmagic, Omin Dran, and Binwin Bronzebottom, they had just freed their not-so-
dead companion Aoefel from the prison-fortress of Slaughterfast. With the gang reunited, it was decided  to draw 
them to New Hampshire for the reading of the Last Will and Testament of James Darkmagic I . . . Jim Darkmagic’s 
grandfather. The main villain of the adventure is Jim’s cousin, Percival Darkmagic, who doesn’t get the inheritance 
he’s expecting, namely a secret chest of magical lore that the Darkmagics have kept for generations. To make him 
interesting, however, I needed to give him some faults.
I hit upon the notion that Percy had foolishly promised to deliver this chest of “Darkmagic magic” to the Wort-
staff family, a rival clan of archwizards, and woe to him should he fail! I also gave him a more peculiar fault that 
could have very interesting consequences: Due to a curse placed upon him as a child, Percival is incapable of seeing 
or hearing creatures of fey origin. I suspect Wil (who plays the eladrin Aoefel) might have some fun with that!
To Percy’s credit, he’s not a buffoon. He’s a very, very bad person, and his plan to seize his “rightful inheritance” 
is quite clever, if you ask me. (Spoiler: It has something to do with the Darkmagic mansion itself, which has some 
unusual magical properties.) He also has a “thing” for his sister, which makes him appropriately loathsome.
The Dungeon Master Experience: The Villain’s Fault
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
65
MONDAY NIGHT. 
The heroes break into a safehouse belonging to a guild of 
tiefling thieves called the Horned Alliance. Their objective? 
To free a captured member of a rival guild.
 The heroes manage to free the prisoner and make their 
escape, only to find themselves pinned down on a rickety 
balcony overlooking a city built along the edges of a sunken 
grotto. An evil silver dragon working with the Horned 
Alliance lands on the balcony and blocks their escape. As 
the dragon begins spewing its villainous monologue, the 
balcony creaks under the dragon’s weight, shudders, and 
breaks away.
 Before the dragon can spread its wings and take to the 
air, it crashes into the city below and disappears in a cloud 
of dust and debris. Suffice it to say, the players are dumb -
founded and seize the chance to make good their escape. 
My villains, unlike their mad creator, are imperfect. 
They’re not omniscient. They don’t know everything, 
and like the player characters, they arrive at errone -
ous conclusions based on faulty assumptions. They 
miscalculate. They fall down. They suffer setbacks. 
My villains are deeply, profoundly flawed. And that’s 
why my players like them to a fault.
 The best thing about faults is that they can be 
exploited. Case in point, here are three villains from 
my Iomandra campaign, each of whom has faults for 
clever players to exploit:
 Prismeus: This tiefling henchman works for 
Zaibon Krinvazh of the Horned Alliance and has 
been loyal to the crime lord ever since Zaibon 
bailed him out of prison. While imprisoned, 
Prismeus was tortured by his dragonborn cap -
tors, his face scarred by acid. His ill treatment 
and disfigurement has made him resentful of all 
dragonborn, and his loyalty to Zaibon is beyond 
reproach. When Zaibon is killed off by the heroes, 
Prismeus turns the Horned Alliance against Zai -
bon’s killers, putting the entire organization in 
jeopardy and leading to a standoff between him, 
the heroes, and the Dragovar authorities who 
would like nothing more than to see the Horned 
Alliance broken once and for all.
 Cale Blackstrand:  This oily cad works for the 
Dragovar Empire. When he’s not escorting crimi -
nals to the island prison of Zardkarath, he’s cutting 
deals and taking bribes to allow criminals to be set 
free. He also has a weakness for powerful women. 
When Andraste (Michele Carter’s character) 
needs help freeing her aunt from prison, she reluc-
tantly turns to Cale. Under normal circumstances, 
Cale would betray her in a heartbeat, taking her 
money and leaving Andraste’s aunt to rot, but 
he’s smitten by Andraste and, like a lovesick fool, 
blindly agrees to her terms. It never occurs to him 
that he might be the one betrayed.
 Osterneth the Bronze Lich: She’s the ex-wife of 
Vecna (from the days before he became a god) and 
a powerful lich who hides her true form behind 
the illusion of a charming noblewoman. When 
the heroes cut a deal with an aspect of Vecna, 
Osterneth is sent as the Maimed Lord’s trusted 
representative to assist them in their endeavors. 
Although she provides the heroes with crucial 
intelligence, she’s also gathering secrets for her 
dark master. What Osterneth fails to see is that her 
trusted changeling manservant, Metis, might one 
day betray her and divulge her secret—that she has 
her husband’s shriveled, still-beating heart lodged 
inside her ribcage, and that its destruction would 
spell Vecna’s doom.
I’ve played in games run by experienced DMs who 
portray villains as unerring, evil-minded extensions 
of themselves. These villains seem to know every -
thing and always have the advantage because they’ve 
been imbued with an inexplicable omniscience. It 
threatens my suspension of disbelief as a player when 
my character confronts a villain only to learn that the 
DM has gifted his precious bad guy with an unbe -
lievable amount of precognition and insight into my 
character’s plans, intentions, and secrets. Omniscient 
villains are boring; I’d rather face a villain who gets 
my character’s name wrong or flees upon taking a 
critical hit. Suddenly, that villain seems infinitely 
more real to me.
Lessons  LeaRned
The most memorable villains in television, film, and 
literature have faults as big as the San Andreas. These 
faults not only make them seem “real” but also lead 
to their inevitable ruin. In the re-imagined Battlestar 
Galactica , Admiral Cain (played by Michelle Forbes) 
can’t see past her hatred of the Cylons, and that 
hatred destroys her. In the Bond movie Casino Royale , 
the villain Le Chiffre is undone by one too many bad 
gambles. Hannibal Lector’s fault is his affection for 
Clarice Starling which, on multiple occasions, nearly 
costs him his freedom. Annie Wilkes’ fault is her 
sycophantic adoration for Paul Sheldon, which blinds 
her to his ultimate betrayal at the end of Stephen 
King’s Misery. These faults do not make these char-
acters any less fearsome or menacing. If anything, it 
makes them more likeable.
 So here are the key takeaways:
✦✦ Villains aren’t perfect, and like the PCs, 
they don’t know everything and they make 
mistakes.
✦✦ Let the players see your villains’ flaws so that 
they might exploit them.
If you’re unaccustomed to concocting flaws for your 
villains, consider some of the classics: love  (the villain 
is infatuated with one of the characters or another 
The Dungeon Master Experience: The Villain’s Fault
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
66
NPC), hatred  (the villain is blinded by hate and can’t 
think straight), ritual  (the villain cleaves to certain 
predictable habits), arrogance  (the villain doesn’t 
kill the heroes when presented with the chance), 
fear (the villain is afraid of something), gluttony  
(the villain is never satisfied and always craves more), 
deformity (the villain suffers from a physical impedi -
ment), and curse (the villain is tormented by an 
affliction, bedevilment, or unusual malady).
 Maybe your villain is blind or haunted by ghosts. 
Maybe your villain needs a special elixir to stay 
young, or maybe your villain has the world’s stupid -
est henchmen (like “Mom” in Futurama ). In branding 
your villains with flaws, you might inadvertently turn 
them into clowns, fools, boobs, or imbeciles. Fear not. 
As long as they do bad things, your players will still 
love to hate them.
 As for Percival Darkmagic (see sidebar), it remains 
to be seen whether he can hold his own against the 
heroes of Acquisitions Incorporated. Frankly, I’m 
more concerned that Aoefel might go wandering 
around the Darkmagic mansion by himself—and we 
all know what happens when you split the party! In 
any event, if you can’t attend the live game at PAX, no 
worries: The game will be filmed and posted so that 
the rest of the world can see how things went down at 
the Darkmagic estate.
Until the next encounter!
T’wit
9/1/2011
WEDNESDAY NIGHT.
Kael, the party cleric, lies dead—killed by the evil pirate 
warlord Vantajar moments before the warlord himself 
meets his end. Before Kael’s bodily remains can be sal -
vaged, the enormous water elemental powering Vantajar’s 
warship escapes captivity and sinks the vessel. The surviv -
ing heroes flee into an extradimensional space (they are 
epic level, after all) and so avoid plunging into a sea of acid 
in the Elemental Chaos.
 Chris Champagne (Kael’s player) jumps on the chance 
to play a new character, and I spend the rest of the session 
trying to facilitate this character’s introduction. I’m not a 
fan of new characters showing up inexplicably to a chorus 
of voices exclaiming, “You look trustworthy!” No, I much 
prefer well-staged entrances. Remember Captain Jack 
Sparrow’s entrance in Pirates of the Caribbean ? Yeah—
it doesn’t get better than that.
 Chris’s new character is Kosh, an infernal pact warlock 
with the Prince of Hell epic destiny. After the surviving 
characters use the Plane Shift ritual to get back to their 
own ship, I orchestrate a roleplaying encounter in which 
Tyranny (the succubus concubine of the ship’s captain) con -
cocts a ritual to summon Kosh from the Nine Hells. “Tyra” 
(as she’s known) is convinced that the party could use the 
extra firepower, but her ritual requires nine drops of blood 
from nine different mortals, and being an immortal, she 
has only the crewmembers aboard the heroes’ ship to choose 
from. She must also convince the player characters that this 
is a good idea, and that having an epic-level Prince of Hell 
in the party has certain advantages. Suffice to say, it’s not 
an easy sell.
 In fact, it proves to be a very hard sell and takes 
more than an hour of back-and-forth roleplaying and 
conniving on my part to make happen. Meanwhile, Chris 
remains silent for most of the session, jotting down notes 
about his character’s background as I do everything in 
my power to bring Kosh into play—everything except 
shout to the other players, “Look, guys, Chris has a 
new character he wants to play, so stop roleplaying 
already and let him play!”
 I’m soooo glad I didn’t have to say that.
Thanks to a rash of conventions and summer vaca -
tions, many of us at Wizards are playing catch-up 
around the office. The interruptions have also 
impacted my Monday and Wednesday night cam-
paign and thrown me off my game, to wit: Last week 
was the first time in a long time that I sat down at the 
game table and couldn’t remember where we’d left 
off the previous session. I had to check my notes to 
realize, “Oh yeah, the players are smack-dab in the 
middle of the biggest battle of the campaign!”
 DM “spaz moments” aside, I run a very brisk 
game—as evidenced by watching the games I run for 
Acquisitions Incorporated and the writers of Robot 
Chicken. When I look back at my notes from the 
previous Wednesday night session, I see a long list 
of “stuff that happened” that needs to be organized 
and recapped for the players’ (and my) benefit. It also 
reminds me that a DM has the power to propel the 
campaign forward at a staggering pace with a few 
simple tricks.
 This installment of The Dungeon Master Experi -
ence discusses the ancient art of contraction  as it 
pertains to D&D game sessions. My impetus for tack -
ling this subject comes from some recent encounters 
with DMs at conventions. One question I get asked 
from time to time is, “How do you pack so much stuff 
into one session?” I’m guessing that many DMs have 
experienced occasions when the campaign loses all 
forward momentum and plods along at an insuffer-
able pace, either because the players lack motivation 
The Dungeon Master Experience: T’wit
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
67
or because the players get distracted by too much 
nonsense.
 In English grammar, we use contractions to neatly 
dispose of unnecessary letters and syllables in conver-
sation and informal writing. “I’m” is shorter and takes 
microseconds less time to write and say than “I am.” 
I contract my campaign in much the same way; on a 
per-example basis, it doesn’t amount to much, but a 
minute saved here and there really starts to add up in 
a 4-hour game session.
 Here are a few specific tactics that I use:
 I cut my campaign the way a film editor cuts 
a movie. If I find the session is lagging, I jump 
ahead as far as I reasonably can without causing 
the narrative to become disjointed. It might be 
rounds, minutes, hours, days, or months, but I do 
my best to encapsulate the skipped time period 
and press on. In my Wednesday night game, the 
ritual that Tyranny casts to summon Kosh from 
the Nine Hells happens very quickly in real-time 
because I wanted to give Chris a chance to play. 
But at the same time, his entrance needs to be 
memorable yet appropriate, and so I go the route 
of a giant flaming pentagram. To take a more 
common example, if the characters are spending 
too much time shopping for gear in town, I might 
say, “After a couple hours spent gearing up in 
town, you find everything you need and head east, 
following the edge of a vast, dry canyon. Six hours 
later, as the sun begins to set, you descend into 
the canyon and make camp near a fat cactus that 
provides ample water.” With a couple sentences, I 
can push the story along and skip over countless 
wasted minutes.
 Using subtlety and guile, I help players get 
past points of indecision. If the players are 
mired in indecision, I have an NPC offer them a 
well-reasoned opinion or bit of sound advice, or 
I give a player some free bit of information his 
or her character would logically know. I use this 
technique a lot as my way of telling the players, 
“The DM thinks you ought to do this, as opposed 
to that.” Sometimes my players will ignore the 
advice, but that’s more because I have, on occasion, 
used NPCs to deliberately feed them bad informa -
tion and advice (a topic which, by the way, really 
deserves its own article).
 I keep my descriptions spare. If the charac -
ters are hired to escort a merchant caravan from 
Town A to Town B and I’ve staged an encounter 
with bandits at some point in between, I take one 
sentence to describe the caravan and one sen-
tence to describe the journey from Town A to the 
bandit encounter. Then, if I feel so inclined, I add 
a sentence that describes a few pertinent or off-
beat “character moments” involving the PCs and/
or significant NPCs. For example, “Shortly before 
nightfall on the first day of travel, one of the mer-
chants uncorks a cask of dwarven whiskey and 
passes out flagons. Those of you who partake of 
the whiskey find it difficult to stay awake during 
your watch.” These sentences might include incon-
sequential details to give the campaign color, but I 
don’t dwell on stuff that isn’t important. If the play -
ers want more information (such as the brand of 
dwarven whiskey), they’ll usually ask for it.
 I keep my NPC descriptions brief as well. 
In the Wednesday night game, the adventurers 
recently faced their arch-nemesis for the first time. 
My description of Vantajar, the dragonborn pirate 
warlord, was that he was 9 feet tall—unnaturally 
large for his species—and had a metal eyepatch 
bolted to his skull, a la General Chang (Christo -
pher Plummer) in Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered 
Country. Everything else was left to the players’ 
imaginations. I generally like to give an NPC one 
distinguishing characteristic before moving on.
 I don’t frontload information.  I let it trickle 
out in dribs and drabs, and not just because I can 
always provide more information if the players 
ask for it. As the DM, I control the pace of the 
game, and if it takes me five painfully long min-
utes to describe the contents of a room, chances 
are good that the players will fail to pick up or 
remember important details that will then need 
to be repeated. My players don’t need to know that 
a balcony is 20 feet high until that information 
becomes relevant.
 I keep track of initiative on a magnetic white 
board. That way, the players can see when their 
turns are coming up and plan accordingly. Giving 
them visibility into the combat order reduces the 
number of wasted minutes during a player’s turn.
 I exhibit a low tolerance for player indeci -
sion in combat. Combat is supposed to be fluid 
and fast, and nothing causes the game to grind to 
a halt faster than an indecisive player who can’t 
decide what actions his character should take on 
his turn. I will press the player with questions such 
as, “What does your character do?” If this doesn’t 
push the player to swift action, I ask, “Would you 
like to delay?” (which, if answered in the affirma -
tive, lets me skip forward until the player decides 
he’s ready to jump back in). Other favorite sayings 
of mine include, “You can always use an at-will 
power” or “Do whatever feels right for your charac-
ter.” Another thing I do is have a monster or NPC 
verbally taunt or insult the character, which often 
incites the player to take immediate action against 
the offending enemy (and also breaks the lull with 
a touch of roleplaying).
 I ignore a lot of conditions and ongoing 
damage effects. Ongoing damage and conditions 
such as “slowed” and “weakened” are useful in 
moderation, but they slow down the game. I urge 
novice DMs to avoid them like the plague. I would 
rather have a monster deal straight-up damage 
than apply “rider effects” that need to be tracked 
(unless they’re part of a monster’s “shtick”). Since 
most ongoing damage effects end after 1 round 
The Dungeon Master Experience: T’wit
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
68
anyway, it’s faster and easier to have a monster that 
deals “ongoing 10 damage” simply deal 10 extra 
damage on the initial attack, and be done with it.
 I dump irrelevant encounters. I imagine every 
encounter as a scene in a movie script and decide 
for myself whether it’s worth preserving or not. 
Even a minor encounter should advance the cam-
paign narrative in some way or provide interesting 
“character moments.” At the very least, it should 
present a challenge unlike anything the play -
ers have faced before. If the players are suffering 
through their sixth “random wilderness encoun-
ter” in a row, I’ve done something horribly wrong.
 Sometimes it hurts to cut stuff; case in point, I 
had to cut a bunch of planned moments from this 
year’s live D&D game at PAX purely due to time 
constraints, including a cool bit where the Dark -
magic mansion decides it doesn’t like Binwin 
Bronzebottom and turns against him—a pity, but 
that’s just the way it is.
 I sometimes use average damage values. Aver -
age damage used consistently and to excess is 
boring and predictable—two things a DM never 
wants to be accused of being. Still, it’s tech we’ve 
applied to minions with great success. In a given 
session, I roll lots of dice, and adding up num -
bers takes time. When running complex combat 
encounters, I alternate between rolling damage 
for monsters and taking average damage. I have 
a chart similar to the one below attached to my 
DM screen, and for the record, I treat monster 
“recharge” powers as encounter powers when 
determine average damage for them.
MONSTEr  NON-BruTE  NON-BruTE  BruTE DAMAGE  BruTE DAMAGE
   lEvEl  DAMAGE  DAMAGE  (AT-WIll)                (ENcOuNTEr)
             (AT-WIll)  (ENcOuNTEr)  
  1  9  13  11    16               
  2  10  15  12    18               
  3  11  16  13    20               
  4  12  18  15    22               
  5  13  19  16    24               
  6  14  21  17    26               
  7  15  22  18    28               
  8  16  24  20    30               
  9  17  25  21    31               
  10  18  27  22    33               
  11  19  28  23    35               
  12  20  30  25    37               
  13  21  31  26    39               
  14  22  33  27    41               
  15  23  34  28    43               
  16  24  36  30    45               
  17  25  37  31    46               
  18  26  39  32    48               
  19  27  40  33    50               
  20  28  42  35    52               
  21  29  43  36    54               
  22  30  45  37    56               
  23  31  46  38    58               
  24  32  48  40    60               
  25  33  49  41    61               
  26  34  51  42    63               
  27  35  52  43    65               
  28  36  54  45    67               
  29  37  55  46    69               
  30  38  57  47    71               
The Dungeon Master Experience: T’wit
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
69
 When it comes to setting a brisk pace, there are 
dozens of tactics I use to cram more “gaming time” 
into my game sessions, some of which are better wit -
nessed than explained, but most of them boil down 
to being aggressive in my efforts to focus players on 
the important stuff and get them past distractions 
that might lead the campaign astray, cause the pace 
to slow to a crawl, or reduce the players’ overall sense 
of fun. I’m sure you have your own “tried and true” 
tricks for packing more punch into your game ses -
sions, and I’d love to hear about them.
 With regard to my Wednesday night game, it takes 
a special kind of player to sit still for an hour while 
his friends decide whether or not to let him play. 
Had I been “on my game,” I would’ve found a way to 
contract the back-and-forth debate about the merits 
of summoning a Prince of Hell so that Chris could 
put his cool new character in play. Still, I’m glad I 
didn’t go the route of having Kosh magically appear 
out of nowhere and ask, “Anyone need an infernal 
warlock?” Talk about dumb.
P.S. Thanks to everyone who voted in last week’s 
poll! The heroes of Acquisitions Incorporated made 
short work of Gygax the cat—for once it appears the 
butler didn’t do it.
Until the next encounter!
Lessons  LeaRned
One analogy I’m fond of using is that a D&D cam -
paign is like a wagon. The players are the horses, and 
the DM is the driver holding the reins. As the players 
move forward, they take the campaign and you along 
with them, and you can guide them to a point, but 
they can be stubborn, hard to motivate, or just plain 
out of control. Sometimes you have to snap the reins, 
but if you “crack the whip” too often and keep the 
players running at full speed all the time, they’ll get 
worn out, so you need to set a pace that’s comfortable 
for them but also gets the wagon where it needs to go.
The Dungeon Master Experience: T’wit
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
70
Lies My 
DM Told 
Me
9/8/2011
MONDAY NIGHT. 
Trouble on the high seas! Mind flayers are attacking coastal 
settlements and ships, and the adventurers are preparing 
to assault an illithid nautilus—a ship of mind flayers—to 
rescue the prisoners aboard. Imazhia, an NPC dragonborn 
priest of Bahamut who receives prophetic dreams, offers to 
cast a ritual on the characters to grant them resistance to 
psychic damage. The players readily accept the gift before 
teleporting aboard the nautilus, knowing they have their 
work cut out for them.
 Aboard the enemy vessel, the heroes find themselves 
taking a lot more psychic damage from the mind flayers’ 
attacks than expected. Something is clearly amiss, and it 
doesn’t take a wizard to realize Imazhia has lied to them.
 Her ritual has actually made them more vulnerable to 
psychic damage, not more resistant!
I lie to my players all the time. Or rather, my NPCs 
do.
 I never lie to my players “out of game.” In my role 
as DM, I’m always honest, lest the players walk away 
from the game table in frustration and never return. 
But “in game,” I like to feed my players a tasty mix of 
true and false information. It adds to the campaign’s 
realistic texture.
 Imazhia, the dragonborn priest, is a special kind 
of villain—the one who pretends to be helpful until 
the evil Far Realm entities in her head set out to 
confound and destroy the adventurers. Early in the 
campaign, Imazhia died aboard an exploding ship 
and was raised from the dead by her fellow priests. 
The players saw her as a casualty of a villainous plot, 
unaware that the villains who sabotaged the ship 
were actually doing them a favor by taking Imazhia 
out. After returning from the dead, Imazhia became 
one of the heroes’ most trusted advisors, using her 
dreams to guide their actions and steer them away 
from the monstrous threat posed by the mind flayers. 
By the time the threat became too great too ignore, 
the heroes trusted Imazhia more than most other 
NPCs in the campaign. Surely a psychic priest of 
Bahamut who’d died and come back from the dead 
would never deceive them.
 In the real world, people speak untruths for many 
different reasons. Maybe they believe what they’re 
saying is true. Maybe they are lying because they’re in 
denial and can’t face the truth. Maybe they’re hiding 
the truth to protect someone (or something). Maybe 
they’re lying out of guilt and fear of discovery. Or 
maybe they’re lying for the cheap thrill, just to screw 
with you. The less-than-honest NPCs in my campaign 
deceive for all of these reasons, to the point where 
my players must constantly judge the words against 
what they know about the individual speaking them. 
It makes for some very interesting roleplaying, let me 
tell you!
 In addition to the myriad reasons for not telling 
the truth, there are good liars and bad liars. My cam -
paign has both. Imazhia is an example of a good liar, 
and it doesn’t hurt that her words are bolstered by a 
priestly demeanor and the holy symbol of Bahamut 
hanging around her neck. I try to limit the number 
of really good NPC liars in my campaign to a hand -
ful, since it takes time for players to hack through the 
web of lies, and frankly, too much of a good thing can 
be a bad thing. On the other hand, my campaign has 
no shortage of bad liars, and in some respects they’re 
more fun. The players don’t have to work nearly as 
hard to cut to the truth, and a bad liar makes for great 
comedy.
 Feeding false information to player characters is 
something that’s been part of D&D since the early 
days of the game. Old adventures such as module L1 
The Secret of Bone Hill had those marvelous “rumor 
tables” that encouraged you to roll dice to determine 
which rumors the characters knew. Some of the 
rumors were true, some false. I once ran module L1 
for some middle school friends who learned, via the 
rumor table, that the Baron of Restenford was cha -
otic evil, and so they decided to attack the baron’s 
castle. Never mind that the baron was actually cha -
otic good. They stormed the keep, slaughtered the 
The Dungeon Master Experience: Lies My DM Told Me
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
71
guards, executed the baron and his family, and made 
off with some fine suits of armor and tapestries. 
Pelltar, the baron’s wizard, finally set them straight, 
but the damage had been done. I decided to use the 
misunderstanding as a springboard for a follow-up 
adventure in which the heroes tracked down the 
source of the false rumor and discovered an evil 
thieves’ guild seeking to gain a foothold in Resten-
ford. In hindsight, that was a pretty clever idea for a 
15-year-old!
 In the intervening 25 years, I’ve become quite the 
practiced liar. Whenever the characters arrive in a 
new village, town, or city, I pepper them with local 
rumors—some true, some false. As any practiced liar 
knows, the secret to adding rich layers to any D&D 
campaign is the aforementioned happy blend of truth 
and deception. If all of my NPCs lied to my players 
all of the time, that wouldn’t be a fun experience for 
anyone. Similarly, if the NPCs told the truth con-
stantly, the players would take everything—including 
my campaign—at face value. In the real world, drama 
is natural outcome of humans trying to ascertain 
what’s true and what’s false, and the emotions and 
confusion that come when humans are dishonest 
with one another. Why should the drama of my cam -
paign be any different?
Lessons  LeaRned
I love the roleplaying opportunities that arise when 
players attempt to deceive monsters and NPCs in 
my campaign, and as they say, turnabout is fair play. 
When it comes right down to it, there are basically 
two kinds of untruths your NPCs can tell the player 
characters:
✦✦ Deliberate deceptions
✦✦ Unintentional misinformation
When in doubt, tell the players things that are true. 
Even the old D&D adventures tended to have more 
true rumors than false ones. Players don’t like to be 
constantly deceived any more than they enjoy swim -
ming in shark-infested waters. However, when the 
time comes to deceive them, don’t let your evil NPCs 
have all the fun. Even good and unaligned NPCs 
have reasons to lie, and your campaign world is full of 
shamefully misinformed benefactors, inveigling poli -
ticians and court jesters, and good people who harbor 
dark secrets.
 Basically, you need to ask yourself, why would the 
NPC say something untrue? If the NPC has anything 
to gain from deceiving the heroes, then you have just 
cause to lie on that NPC’s behalf. However, in some 
respects “unintentional misinformation” is the more 
interesting way to go, since the characters are dealing 
with an NPC who is sincere (and therefore harder to 
threaten with violence). Recently in my Monday night 
game, two characters were killed by a death knight 
wielding a soul-draining sword. An evil-aligned NPC 
named Osterneth said she had the means to free the 
souls trapped within the blade and, in the process 
of trying to set them free, accidentally destroyed the 
sword and souls contained within. Some of the play -
ers felt confident enough in their characters’ high 
Insight skill checks to believe Osterneth was being 
sincere, and she truly was. The lesson: Even the DM’s 
all-knowing, all-powerful NPCs make mistakes some -
times, and it’s harder for players to justify killing an 
NPC who speaks honestly.
 Let’s take a little test, shall we, using another 
example from my Monday night campaign: In the 
world of Iomandra, wood is rare and highly prized 
for shipbuilding. Talia Winterleaf, whose father owns 
a wood-trading consortium called the Winterleaf 
Coster, has bribed a clan of frost giants into attacking 
an iron mine owned by the Ironstar Cartel, a rival 
consortium; Talia did so in order to prevent the cartel 
from finishing a prototype iron ship that it hopes will 
impress the Dragovar Empire enough to win a lucra -
tive shipbuilding contract. The heroes learn of the 
plot, confront Talia, and threaten to take down the 
Winterleaf Coster unless she pulls the giants out of 
the mine. Talia does as they wish and promises not to 
interfere with the Cartel’s shipbuilding operation any 
further. It’s also worth noting a minor complication 
that works in the party’s favor: Talia has genuine feel -
ings for Kithvolar, the party’s elf ranger (played by Jeff 
Alvarez). So the question is: Is Talia lying?
 The jury’s still out, but in this case my instinct is to 
say no—she’s speaking the truth. The players already 
have sufficient cause to believe she’s dishonest, and 
thus it’s more surprising that Talia will be true to her 
word. Also, her feelings for Kithvolar help to tip the 
scale in the party’s favor, and her fondness for the elf 
ranger would realistically impact her decision. But 
don’t worry—I haven’t gone soft. Talia can’t speak for 
her father or the rest of the Winterleaf Coster, who 
will no doubt continue to make the players’ eyes roll 
with their sinister business practices.
 Next week, we discuss what to do when a charac-
ter dies suddenly and leaves behind untold stories 
and unfinished business. The campaign marches on, 
but will it ever be the same?
Until the next encounter!
The Dungeon Master Experience: Lies My DM Told Me
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
72
C’est La 
Vie
9/15/2011
WEDNESDAY NIGHT.
When last we left the party, Deimos (played by Chris 
Youngs) had led his stalwart companions into the Elemen -
tal Chaos to recover the fabled cutlass Fathomreaver, which 
he hopes will unite Iomandra’s divisive Sea Kings under his 
banner.
 The quest culminates in an epic fight aboard the 
Maelstrom, an elemental warship commanded by the drag -
onborn warlord Vantajar. With Fathomreaver in hand, the 
evil warlord cuts down Kael, the party’s deva cleric (played 
by Chris Champagne), but it’s Deimos who deals the final 
killing blow and slays Vantajar.
 As the warlord’s blood spills across the deck, the water 
elemental bound to the vessel is released and wreaks havoc. 
The elemental unleashes its fury upon the ship itself, break -
ing it in two. As the Maelstrom goes down in a sea of acid, 
the surviving heroes escape into an extradimensional space 
but are forced to leave their dead behind. . . 
This week’s installment tackles a question posed 
by “Arbanax” in response to a previous column. 
Arbanax’s question, which I’m paraphrasing below, 
had to do with the untimely death of one of the char-
acters in my long-running Wednesday night game:
 “I am intrigued as to how you handled the cleric’s death, 
seeing as he’d been part of the campaign for so many 
levels. I assume he had a backstory and other stuff left 
unfulfilled. How do you handle this?”
Fantastic question!
 The characters in my campaign live and die by 
their own actions (although the luck of the die also 
plays its part). When a character is killed off, par-
ticularly at higher levels, they can leave behind a lot 
of unfinished business. I always give the player the 
interesting choice of continuing to play the character 
or trying something new. There are plenty of D&D 
plot devices to revive a dead character, and we’ve 
even built races and classes for players who want their 
characters to come back in a slightly different light 
(the revenant springs to mind).
 In my group, I have players who invest heavily 
in their characters and are crestfallen or downright 
pissy when death becomes them. I also have play -
ers with very little emotional investment in their 
characters; they look forward to injecting new char-
acters into the party mix. As a player, I very much 
fall into the latter camp. As the DM, I have no feel -
ings about it one way or the other. In my opinion, 
players should be allowed to play what they want 
to play (within reason). I don’t rule their imagina -
tions, and there are very few character concepts 
my campaign can’t accommodate with a little bit of 
forethought.
 Chris Champagne joined the Monday night group 
in the middle of the campaign’s paragon tier, and 
Kael, his deva cleric, actually died twice. The first 
time was during a Halloween-themed episode involv -
ing a killer plant and several enslaved “pod people.” 
(As a fun aside, the other characters used a special 
potion to reanimate Kael until he could be raised 
from the dead, giving Chris the chance to play a zom -
bified version of Kael for the extent of the adventure.) 
Kael’s second death came at the hands of the dragon-
born warlord Vantajar in the Elemental Chaos, and as 
a further insult, Kael’s body was cast overboard and 
dissolved in a sea of acid.
 Deva characters have a built-in rebirth mechanic , 
but in this instance, Chris decided the time had 
come to put Kael aside and try something new—this 
despite the fact that Kael was close to unlocking 
the secrets of a past life in which he was the loyal 
manservant of a young princess who would eventu -
ally become the Raven Queen! Now, it’s possible that 
Kael has been “reborn” somewhere (as devas are 
wont to do), and so there’s still a slim chance that he 
might reappear before the campaign concludes, but 
Kael’s story basically ended when Chris decided to 
play Kosh, his infernal pact warlock with the Prince 
of Hell epic destiny. The fact that Kael’s story is 
incomplete doesn’t raise my hackles; in a game in 
which heroes die, it’s not always possible to get per-
fect closure. You end up trading closure for shock as 
the surviving characters realize, “OMG, he’s dead!” 
A sudden death might cut short that character’s 
story, but hopefully it gives his surviving compan-
ions the newfound impetus to press on despite their 
trepidation.
 My campaign occasionally takes a hit whenever 
a character dies, usually because I have storylines 
tied to that specific character that have nowhere 
left to go. C’est la vie. In Kael’s case, he had found a 
relic (a bronze raven mask from a bygone age) that 
triggered flashbacks of his past life as a royal man-
servant, and we had just begun to explore that past 
life and Kael’s discovery of the Raven Queen’s true 
name. Also, one of the campaign’s major villains, a 
rakshasa named Chan, had strong ties to the Kael 
character—they were enemies in a past life. Luckily 
for the campaign (and unfortunately for the play -
ers), Chan has made enough enemies in the party 
that he’s still “in play” as far as I’m concerned. Had 
this not been the case, Chan might have fallen by 
the wayside.
 If my Wednesday night campaign has one struc -
tural flaw, it’s that many of the big story arcs hinge on 
certain lynchpin characters. No offense to Mat Smith, 
but if Garrot the fighter was crushed to death by a 
falling tarrasque, the villains steering the campaign 
The Dungeon Master Experience: C’est La Vie
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
73
wouldn’t even slow down to take a picture. Some 
characters are defined more by their personality 
or abilities than by their narrative importance. On 
the other hand, if Deimos died, the entire focus of 
the campaign would shift, as the party’s impetus to 
unite the Sea Kings is mostly driven by Chris Youngs’ 
character.
 (But you know what? As I write this, part of me is 
so excited by the very idea that I’m half-tempted to 
drop a tarrasque on Deimos just to watch the cam -
paign cartwheel off a cliff or take one last unexpected 
turn in the back end of epic tier.
 Of course, that would be wrong.)
 That said, over the years I’ve encountered the odd 
character I’ve wanted to kill off—usually because the 
character was unlikeable, unbalanced, or under-
whelming in the personality department (much like 
those poor red-shirt-wearin’ sods in Star Trek). I try 
to resist the urge, since that’s the DMing equivalent 
of “bad form” and is usually counterproductive—the 
player just rolls up an even more asinine or useless 
character.
Lessons  LeaRned
Much has been written on the topic of “coping with 
character death,” and at the risk of throwing more 
wood on that fire, it’s only the DM’s problem when 
the player is left feeling unsatisfied. Your campaign 
will survive and metamorphose regardless, but will 
the player want to continue partaking of it? If the 
player wants to continue exploring the facets of the 
character or feels that there’s an untold story left 
to tell, then the DM’s task should be to make the 
player happy. If the player shrugs his or her shoul -
ders and starts talking about a cool new character 
idea, then your challenge becomes how to make this 
new character feel like he or she belongs in your 
campaign.
✦✦ The decision to revive a dead character should 
fall to that character’s player. If you can’t 
think of a clever way to bring back the charac -
ter, there’s always the Raise Dead ritual.
✦✦ If the player decides to “move on,” be kind to 
the dead character’s memory: Let the charac -
ter’s heroism echo through your campaign.
✦✦ Your campaign is stronger than any one 
character. When a character dies and leaves 
unfinished business behind, declare “C’est la 
vie” and move on.
Kael died protecting his friends in the greatest battle 
of the Wednesday night campaign to date. Chris 
wisely believed that Kael would achieve no greater 
death, and so he let the character go. My responsi -
bility as DM is to keep Kael “alive” by evoking his 
name from time to time in ways that make his sac -
rifice meaningful. A saddened NPC might remark 
on Kael’s absence, an emissary from the Shadowfell 
might reassure Kael’s companions that their lost 
cleric has taken his place by the Raven Queen’s side, 
or a campaign villain might remind the heroes how 
weak and vulnerable they’ve become without their 
deva cleric to back them up. It’s also a tasty bit of 
irony that the party’s escape from the sinking ship 
was facilitated by an exodus knife which Rodney 
Thompson’s character lifted from Kael’s corpse, so 
the party has a useful memento mori to remind them 
of their bygone friend.
 As a final aside, Kael wasn’t the only character 
who perished in the climactic battle with Vantajar. 
The Dungeon Master Experience: C’est La Vie
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
74
Many of the characters came close, but a human 
pirate named Armos (played by Nacime Khemis) 
also died a player-imposed “permadeath.” Armos 
had been introduced several sessions earlier after 
Nacime’s primary character—a warforged warden 
named Fleet—was abducted by Vecna cultists wish-
ing to study the “living construct.” I’m pretty sure that 
Nacime knew Fleet would be back eventually and 
that, at some point, he would be playing two char-
acters. Armos wasn’t around long enough to win the 
hearts of his companions or carve out a major char-
acter arc for himself, so it remains to be seen whether 
his death has any lasting impression. Years after a 
campaign concludes, it’s perfectly natural for DMs 
and players to remember certain characters more 
readily than others, much as our real-world history 
judges heroes as popular or unsung.
Until the next encounter!
The 
Invisible 
Railroad
9/22/2011
MONDAY NIGHT.
As they edge toward the end of the paragon tier, the 
Monday night group confronts and slays various evil mem -
bers of the Shan Qabal, a powerful society of wizards, in 
the sunken city of Io’halador. Deep within the Shan Qabal 
fortress they encounter a warforged emissary of Vhalt, a 
secret kingdom protected by the evil god Vecna. The war -
forged poses no threat and claims to have a message for the 
leaders of the Dragovar Empire, which has been in disarray 
since the emperor disappeared along with his flagship—one 
of the great mysteries of the campaign. 
 My players immediately get the sense that this 
warforged is not some throwaway NPC but rather an 
important figure in the campaign—someone the DM has 
taken the time to develop. He has quirks and complex 
emotions, and several Insight checks confirm that he 
clearly means the party no harm. Perhaps for this reason, 
the heroes allow the warforged to tag along, but they are 
suspicious of its motives and eventually decline to escort 
it to the capital, at which point the warforged bids fare -
well and tries to leave the party. Out of the blue, Bruce 
Cordell’s tiefling warlock attacks! The other players are 
surprised by Melech’s snap decision but join the fray. As 
the warforged drops to 0 hit points, a magical docent 
planted in its chest causes the warforged to disintegrate, 
leaving nothing behind and no clue about the message it 
was supposed to deliver.
Players never cease to surprise me.
 Although I think it’s possible to run a campaign 
that is 100 percent driven by the players, I’m not the 
kind of Dungeon Master who can relinquish narra -
tive control to the point where I’m simply reacting 
to the players’ desires and “winging it” week after 
week. I like coming up with adventure ideas and 
stringing them together to form a cohesive arc that 
unfolds over multiple levels. When I plan out an 
adventure, I usually have a good idea where, when, 
and how it will end—assuming the heroes don’t get 
sidetracked or TPK’ed en route. I like to call it my 
invisible railroad.
 The worst kind of adventure, in my humble opin-
ion, is one that railroads the player characters—which 
is to say, one that denies them any opportunity to 
affect change through their actions or decisions. Play -
ers can see a railroad from a mile away, and they are 
well within their rights to steer clear of it. Even in its 
simplest form, D&D is all about making choices and 
dealing with the consequences: Do we go right or 
left? Climb down the pit or avoid it? Slay the guard or 
bribe him? Even with my years of experience running 
D&D games, I’ve designed encounters that unfold 
exactly as planned by making player choice irrel -
evant—and shame on me for doing it! Such encounters 
usually end with disappointment.
 That said, a D&D campaign is basically a series 
of quests that move the heroes from one destination 
to another, and if you want the player characters at 
Point A to visit Point B before, say, Point Q, then a 
track is a handy tool for getting them where they need 
to go. The trick (and yes, it is a trick) is to make sure 
that the players never feel as though they’re being car-
ried along by the story.
 When DMs ask me how I keep my campaign on 
track, I tell them that when I plan out the events of a 
The Dungeon Master Experience: The Invisible Railroad
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
75
game session, I’m basically laying down an invisible 
track that I hope my players never see. This track is 
what guides my campaign toward its intended des -
tination. If all goes perfectly, my players will make 
decisions and take actions that push the story farther 
along this track until, finally, I’ve gotten them from 
Point A to Point B. Of course, events rarely unfold as 
planned—you can’t lay down an invisible track and 
expect your players to follow it. The track is for my 
benefit, not theirs. Its sole function is to remind me 
of the intended destination and how far off track the 
campaign has gotten.
 To help steer the campaign back onto the invisible 
railroad, I use signposts. You might call them nudges, 
hints, or clues. No matter how far off track the heroes 
stray, they will at some point see an arrow-shaped 
signpost that says, in not so many words, “This way.” 
More appropriately the signpost takes the form of 
a rumor, a helpful or insightful NPC, a corpse that 
comes with a clue, a sudden and unprovoked attack, 
or some other plot device that tells the players where 
they should go next. Eventually it will dawn on the 
players that Oh, the DM is telling us the adventure 
is THIS way, or even better, it’ll present them with a 
choice designed to help steer the campaign back on 
track.
 In my Monday night game, for example, I decided 
to introduce a warforged NPC with tons of important 
information about the campaign—first and foremost 
that the kingdom of Vhalt, which was supposedly 
destroyed by the Dragovar Empire eons ago, has risen 
from the ashes (with a little help from Vecna). Not 
only has Vhalt created an army of warforged—living 
constructs empowered with the souls of the dead—as 
a prelude to war, Vhaltese agents have kidnapped 
Emperor Azunkhan IX in an effort to destabilize the 
Dragovar Empire. The warforged emissary killed 
by the heroes represented a rogue faction in Vhalt 
that sought peace, not war. He was under orders to 
inform the Dragovar leadership of their emperor’s 
whereabouts—and because he followed orders to the 
letter, he was reluctant to confide in the heroes. (And, 
truth be told, they took no strides to gain his trust.) 
My hope was that the heroes would learn enough of 
this information, through roleplaying or other means, 
to track down and rescue the emperor and be lauded 
as champions of the empire, but alas. . . . I had banked 
on the Monday group’s tendency to roleplay its way 
around a problem and was quite surprised when 
battle erupted.
 Rather than have the warforged break character 
and spill the beans just to keep the story on track, I 
took the “Well, let’s see where this takes us” approach. 
Several game sessions have passed, and the heroes 
still haven’t gotten back on track, but that’s because 
they’ve stumbled on another invisible railroad tied 
to a totally different campaign story arc—one involv -
ing a threat from the Far Realm. However, every so 
often I place a signpost that gently nudges them in 
the direction of Emperor Azunkhan and his Vhaltese 
captors. These signposts provide subtle reminders of 
Vecna’s (ahem) hand in the unfolding campaign. My 
most recent signpost takes the form of another NPC 
who has ties to Vhalt and some information about the 
missing emperor. Enough time has passed since the 
warforged incident that I can introduce this new NPC 
without my players feeling force-fed, and although the 
heroes have yet to question her, I feel confident that 
my patience will be rewarded. And if they kill her, 
okay—at least they’ll have a corpse upon which to cast 
a Speak with Dead ritual!
Figure 1: The good news is that the players have 
done exactly what you expected them to do. The bad 
news is that they probably feel railroaded and have no 
way to affect the outcome of the campaign.
Figure 2: The good news is that the players are 
making decisions that affect the campaign. The bad 
news is that you don’t know how to steer them back 
on track.
Figure 3: The good news is that you’re allowing 
players to chart their own path while cleverly steer-
ing them toward your intended destination. The bad 
news is that you’re exhausted from all the fun every -
one is having.
Lessons  LeaRned
Dungeon Masters who take the time to plan adven-
tures in advance share a common nightmare: At some 
point during the adventure, the players veer off track. 
Sometimes it happens unintentionally—the players 
simply do something you hadn’t anticipated. Other 
times they do it maliciously, to test or thwart you. I 
never lose sleep over this sort of thing; in fact, I think 
part of the fun of being the DM is watching the play -
ers derail my campaign and figuring out ways to steer 
it back on track.
 When your campaign goes off the rails, here’s 
what I recommend you do:
The Dungeon Master Experience: The Invisible Railroad
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
76
✦✦ Don’t worry, be happy! As long as you don’t 
freak out, your players might not even realize 
that the campaign has gone awry.
✦✦ Be patient. Let the players stray. Let them 
explore the consequences of their actions.
✦✦ Place subtle signposts that help guide your 
players back toward the desired destination.
I’ve found that when players feel as though they 
can make real choices that affect the outcome of an 
encounter or an adventure, they are less likely to 
maliciously ruin my campaign. Patience is the key—if 
you remain calm and don’t show panic or fear, your 
players will think that you’re prepared for any contin-
gency. Also, they’ll realize in no time that you’re not 
trying to lead them by the nose. As they fumble about 
and chase other distractions, you’ll see opportunities 
to steer them back on track, or, conversely, you’ll dis-
cover that the direction they’ve decided to go is more 
interesting than the one you had planned.
 Next week, I’ll talk about my three-arc approach 
to campaign building, which is, fundamentally, the 
idea of building a campaign around three big stories. 
I mention it here only because it dovetails nicely with 
the invisible railroad concept insofar as it gives you 
more tracks for your players to follow. If they fly off 
the rails, it’s often easier to steer them toward another 
invisible track than to try to lead them back to the 
one they just left. Consider that food for thought.
Until the next encounter!
The Covenant of  
the Arcs
9/29/2011
MONDAY NIGHT.
The heroes are sailing westward, hoping to rendezvous 
with the Knights of Ardyn, a group dedicated to wiping out 
corruption in the Dragovar Empire. It seems the knights 
have captured a mind flayer ship called a nautilus, and 
they need the heroes’ help to operate it. The knights have 
decided that the empire needs their help to overcome a 
threat to the west: a Far Realm incursion brought about 
by an eladrin warlock named Starlord Evendor, who plans 
to free evil, godlike entities trapped in the stars, transport 
them to Iomandra, and provide them with living recep -
tacles as bodies. The mad warlock has help from a powerful 
starspawn called Allabar and, oh, about fifty thousand 
mind flayers. To top it all off, the mind flayers have been 
launching raids on imperial settlements, capturing citizens 
and transforming them into degenerate foulspawn. Clearly, 
the heroes and the Knights of Ardyn have their work cut 
out for them, and their best hope is to find and slay Alla -
bar, which will unleash a psychic shock wave that kills 
every mind flayer on the planet. The captured nautilus will 
enable the knights and the heroes to slip behind enemy lines 
and reach their quarry undetected.
 En route to the rendezvous, the heroes’ ship is attacked 
not by mind flayers but by three marauding vessels flying 
the flag of Sea King Senestrago. The heroes have been a 
thorn in Senestrago’s side for many levels, and the Drago -
var Empire is too distracted by the mind flayer threat to 
deal with the fact that Senestrago is openly attacking those 
he perceives as his enemies, including other Sea Kings.
 As a further complication, the heroes have aboard their 
vessel an emissary of Vecna. This helpful lich, who wears 
the face of a noblewoman and travels with a changeling 
manservant (played by Peter Schaefer), hails from Vhalt, a 
secret kingdom that lies beyond a towering wall of deadly 
fog to the east called the Black Curtain. The heroes are 
among the few living souls who know of Vhalt’s existence, 
and they suspect that Vhalt might be responsible for the 
kidnapping of the Dragovar Emperor—an act that has 
caused great instability within the empire, particularly in 
light of the mind flayer threat to the west.
I hinted at this week’s topic in last week’s article, 
which was about managing a campaign that’s “gone 
off the rails.” The smartest thing I ever did as DM was 
to build my current campaign on a foundation made 
up of three story arcs that together form an interlock -
ing narrative—a kind of triptych, if you will. I used a 
similar three-arc structure in my previous 3rd Edi -
tion campaign, and it worked out so well that I kept 
the idea when plotting out the “big stories” in my 4th 
Edition world of Iomandra.
 A campaign arc is a big story. Its impact is mea -
sured from the beginning of the campaign to the 
end, unlike the hundreds of other stories in the cam -
paign that might end after one game session or after 
a few levels. Case in point: The Monday night group’s 
The Dungeon Master Experience: The Covenant of the Arcs 
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
77
enmity with the Horned Alliance thieves’ guild was 
a story that fueled many great moments in the para -
gon tier, but it wasn’t big enough and didn’t last long 
enough to be a campaign arc. However, many smaller 
stories are actually branches of a campaign arc, and 
good ones often can link two or more campaign arcs 
together. The Horned Alliance was made up of tief -
ling rogues who hated the Dragovar Empire, for it 
had not only destroyed the tiefling kingdom of Bael 
Turath but enslaved its people for generations. The 
thieves’ guild offered sanctuary to a group of “kraken 
cultists” who were staging terrorist attacks against 
the empire by deploying Far Realm mines to blow 
up Dragovar ships. Where did they get these mines, 
you ask? From the mind flayers, of course—which ties 
directly to one of my three campaign arcs.
 The three campaign arcs of the Iomandra cam -
paign are as follows:
✦✦ War erupts in the west when a star pact 
warlock triggers a Far Realm incursion that 
threatens the Dragovar Empire and the entire 
world.
✦✦ A secret kingdom to the east, long thought 
destroyed, is resurrected by Vecna and kid -
naps the Emperor in an attempt to destabilize 
the Dragovar Empire—for reasons unknown.
✦✦ As cracks begin to form in the Dragovar 
Empire, evil political forces conspire to seize 
power, and bickering Sea Kings (the merchant 
lords of Iomandra) become increasingly hos -
tile toward one another.
Basically, I have a war story (the war against the Far 
Realm threat to the west), an intrigue story  (the 
secret kingdom to the east), and a political story  
(boiling feuds and unbridled power-mongering in the 
wake of the emperor’s disappearance).
 I chose these three stories because I wanted to 
center my campaign around an empire in decline (a 
nod to ancient Rome, I suppose), and how does one 
go about showing an empire in decline? Well, a war 
going badly is good for starters. War is dramatic, and 
this is the second campaign in a row where I’ve used 
war as a pervasive theme, but I don’t think you need a 
war to make a campaign interesting. Eberron is set in 
the aftermath of war, and it’s the fear of another war 
that provides most of the tension. I also love, love, love 
intrigue—situations when the line between “friend” 
and “enemy” is indistinct, and players don’t always 
know whom to trust. The “secret kingdom” campaign 
arc was the last one to fall into place, and honestly 
I had no clue what the secret kingdom was or what 
its ultimate goals were. (I trusted that the answers 
would come to me later.) The Black Curtain began as 
a source of rumors, a mysterious barrier that seafar-
ers avoided. At the end of the heroic tier, the heroes 
found a journal containing the first hint of something 
on the other side of the Black Curtain, and it wasn’t 
until mid-paragon tier when the characters had their 
first encounter with someone from the “other side.” 
That’s a roundabout way of saying that not all three 
arcs need to be fully fleshed out from the get-go, nor 
must they vie for equal attention. It’s OK if one arc is 
“hazier” or less dominant than the others.
 It’s also OK, by the way, to have adventures and 
encounters that have nothing to do with your three 
campaign arcs. Tying every game session to an arc is 
like fighting troglodytes week after week: The whole 
campaign starts to reek. It’s been my experience that 
the player characters become more invested (perhaps 
entwined is a better word) in the campaign arcs as 
they become more powerful and influential. During 
the heroic tier, I was running a lot more stand-alone 
episodes than I am in the epic tier. Were I to compare 
it to, say, Star Trek: Deep Space Nine, it would be the 
difference between seasons 1–3 and seasons 4–7. The 
first three seasons of DS9  were mostly stand-alone 
stories, with occasional forays into the major series 
arcs. By the time we got into the later seasons, there 
were fewer one-off episodes and more attention given 
to the major arcs—the war against the Dominion, the 
protection and restoration of Bajor, and the religious 
awakening of Benjamin Sisko. I think that’s natural. 
Most campaign arcs can only be resolved by high-
level characters.
 Unless, of course, your campaign is short. It’s prob -
ably worth noting that if I had I decided to end my 
campaign at level 10 instead of level 30, I probably 
wouldn’t have needed three campaign arcs. There 
might be some correlation between the number of 
tiers in the campaign and the number of campaign 
arcs it needs. I’ve never run a campaign that climaxed 
at the end of the heroic tier, but I think one campaign 
arc would probably suffice. Having two or three 
seems unnecessary and would likely leave the cam -
paign and the players unfulfilled.
The Dungeon Master Experience: The Covenant of the Arcs 
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
78
Lessons  LeaRned
The benefits of having multiple campaign arcs in 
a long-running or multitier campaign are many. 
First and foremost, it’s like having slightly overlap -
ping safety nets; no matter what the players do, their 
choices have a pretty good chance of landing them 
smack-dab in the middle of one of your campaign 
arcs eventually. The arcs are so encompassing and 
pervasive as to be nigh unavoidable, and if your play -
ers are clearly turned off by one arc, they have two 
others to choose from. Having multiple arcs gives 
players opportunities to decide which threat they 
care about the most, and I promise you, each player 
will have his or her own opinion on the matter, 
based on which arc ties in most closely with that 
player’s character. Having three arcs also makes 
your campaign feel less like a “one-trick pony.” 
Finally, there’s the benefit of allowing you, the cam -
paign’s primary storyteller, to entangle plot threads 
and create opportunities or occasions when two or 
more arcs intersect.
 I take immense pleasure in watching my play -
ers react as their characters reach those cool points 
where two or more big stories come together, or 
those points when they’re forced to make a tough 
choice about which battle to fight. In my campaign, 
my players are constantly confronted by the reality 
that they can’t always deal with everything. In that 
respect, having multiple campaign arcs provides 
verisimilitude, insofar as the players must face the 
consequences of choosing their battles.
 Will the Monday night group resolve all three 
arcs by the time they reach level 30? I’m not sure. I 
doubt it. However, as the campaign rockets toward 
the finish line, I find myself spending a lot of waking 
hours pondering this very question. In my life, I’ve 
only ended a campaign five, maybe six, times. I’m 
not an expert in campaign resolution. After set -
ting three big arcs in motion and watching them 
play out over 25 levels, I’m worried about these last 
five levels and how each arc will resolve itself. Ulti -
mately, I think, everything ties back to the idea of 
players making choices: If they decide to travel west 
and overcome the Far Realm threat, they will have 
accomplished something truly epic and brought 
peace and stability to the world. That does leave 
behind some unfinished business, however; but 
maybe it’s OK for some campaign arcs to continue 
on past the life span of the game. Years from now, 
while railing against some new campaign threat 
I’ve concocted, my players will reflect back on “the 
Iomandra years” and imagine what what might have 
happened if their characters had made the other 
choice, and that by itself is pretty cool.
 Still, the perfectionist in me wants to tie off every 
single plot thread and bring every arc to a fitting 
end. It still bugs the hell out of me that Star Trek: Deep 
Space Nine ended without Bajor joining the Federa -
tion. That was the reason why Benjamin Sisko was 
sent to Deep Space Nine in the first place! Still, that 
Dominion War arc was pretty amazing.
Until the next encounter!
Setups 
and 
Payoffs
10/6/2011
WEDNESDAY NIGHT.
Epic tier. The heroes are on a collision course with Starlord 
Evendor, an eladrin warlock who plans to free a bunch of 
evil star-gods from their celestial prisons. Unfortunately 
for the heroes, they possess some information that Evendor 
needs, and so the villain dispatches one of his apprentices 
and a strike team of mind flayers to retrieve it one way or 
another. Despite their clever infiltration of the party’s ship, 
Evendor’s evil agents are swiftly dealt with and his appren -
tice captured.
 After interrogating the prisoner, Deimos (played by 
Chris Youngs) decides it would be prudent to “off ” her, 
or, at the very least, toss her overboard. Ravok (Andrew 
Finch’s new goliath battlemind character) thinks Even -
dor’s apprentice might be more useful as a prisoner than 
a corpse, and so he urges Deimos not to be hasty. Deimos 
reluctantly—yet wisely, as it turns out—opts to keep her 
alive a short while longer.
 When Ravok tries to use a Sending ritual to contact 
some allies of his (a holy order of Pelor worshipers who are 
working against Starlord Evendor and the mind flayers), he 
quickly realizes something is amiss. They’ve been arrested 
on trumped-up charges of treason by the crew of the Blood -
monger, an imperial warship under the command of a 
dragonborn captain named Artana, whose ship (according 
The Dungeon Master Experience: Setups and Payoffs
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
79
to intelligence reports) was lost during an intelligence-gath -
ering mission in enemy waters. Not only has the warship’s 
crew been partially lobotomized by mind flayers, but the 
captain and her first mate have been replaced by doppel -
gangers in league with Starlord Evendor.
 Rather than risk losing prisoners in a bloody conflict, 
the heroes inform “Captain Artana” that they have one 
of Starlord Evendor’s apprentices in their custody. Surely 
she is worth something to Evendor, and so the heroes begin 
negotiating a prisoner exchange.
My players learned a valuable lesson this week: some-
times it pays to take prisoners. As for me, I take no 
prisoners—at least not when it comes to throwing new 
challenges at my players and fishing for those “Wow!” 
moments that really pull players into the heart of the 
campaign. Ask yourself: when was the last time your 
players found themselves in the middle of a classic 
prisoner exchange? In the case of my Wednesday 
night group, it’s been a long time, so it took my players 
a few minutes to get back into the “Oh, hang on, we 
don’t need to kill everything just yet” groove.
 As a DM and a storyteller, I live for those moments 
when something that happened earlier in the cam -
paign helps, hinders, or haunts the PCs later on. It 
might be something a character did, something an 
NPC said, or some seemingly random occurrence 
that suddenly becomes significant. Sometimes it’s 
accidental, sometimes it’s planned, but when it hap -
pens, you know it instantly. You see it on your players’ 
faces: the dawning horror, amusement, or relief 
brought on by the moment of revelation.
 Novelists and screenwriters can illicit moments of 
revelation using a foreshadowing technique I like to 
call the setup and the payoff . The idea is that you 
establish something early in the story and then pay it 
off later on. In this week’s example from my Wednes -
day night campaign, the surrender of Starlord 
Evendor’s apprentice was the setup, and her value as 
a tradable commodity is the payoff. The players felt 
instant gratification because the story was rewarding 
them for not only keeping the evil apprentice alive 
but also for realizing they had the perfect bargain-
ing chip. It’s possible that one or more of the players 
saw it coming, but I don’t think that diminished their 
enjoyment of the moment or made me feel any less 
brilliant.
 It’s like that moment in a James Bond movie when 
Q gives 007 a new gadget. You expect that the gadget 
will come into play at some point, and so you wait 
for the payoff. Sometimes in the heat of the narrative 
you forget that Bond has the gadget, so when it finally 
comes into play, there’s a nice moment of surprise. 
The Aston Martin’s ejection set in Goldfinger  (1963) 
is a classic example. The wrist-mounted dart gun in 
Moonraker (1979) is another—and especially surpris -
ing because it comes into play not once, but twice. 
Conversely, if Q gave Bond gadgets that he never 
used, what would be the point? The writers know 
they can’t set up something like that and not pay it off.
 Of course, novelists and screenwriters don’t have 
to worry about RPGers mucking with the story of 
their novels and screenplays. They have total control 
when it comes to planting their setups and payoffs. 
A Dungeon Master, on the other hand, doesn’t have 
complete control of the story and can’t always predict 
what the heroes will do next. Consequently, not every 
setup has the perfect payoff. If my Wednesday night 
heroes had thrown Evendor’s apprentice overboard 
or killed her outright, the encounter with “Captain 
Artana” would have played out very differently.
 A setup that hinges on the characters keeping a 
captured villain alive is risky, but there are other 
kinds of setups that are subtle and thus more likely 
to pay off later. For example, at this summer’s live 
Acquisitions Incorporated game, I set up a mystery 
involving several crates of raw hamburger, which 
were delivered to the Darkmagic estate with no hint 
of who ordered or sent them. Later on, the heroes 
learned of the enmity between the New Hampshire 
Darkmagics and the Wisconsin Wortstaffs—and that 
most of the Wortstaff family were necromancers by 
trade. The big payoff came in the climactic battle, 
when the hamburger was transformed into four 
undead minotaurs by a Wortstaff necromantic ritual.
 The time that passes between the setup and the 
payoff can vary. You don’t want the payoff to happen 
too soon after the setup, but in a long-running cam -
paign you can delay the payoff for months or years. 
In my Wednesday night game, the heroic-tier heroes 
were arrested for attacking a military weapons 
foundry. While in captivity, Rodney Thompson’s 
character was tortured by a dragonborn priest of 
Tiamat, who replaced one of Vargas’s eyes with a 
unique magic item called an eye of vengeance . The 
magic eye was supposed to be delivered to the island 
prison of Zardkarath, where it would find its way to 
an imprisoned, one-eyed dragonborn pirate named 
Vantajar. On the voyage to Zardkarath, Vargas and his 
companions escaped . . . and it wasn’t until epic tier 
(nearly two years later) when Vantajar was released 
from prison and came searching for his missing eye.
The Dungeon Master Experience: Setups and Payoffs
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
80
Lessons  LeaRned
Not every setup will pay off in a satisfying manner. 
However, this fact doesn’t discourage me from plant-
ing seeds that will hopefully bear fruit in the future, 
because when the payoff happens, it’s immensely 
gratifying and makes me appear so much smarter 
than I actually am.
 Here are three classic D&D setups and payoffs 
which I use from time to time and which you’re free 
to plunder for your home campaign:
 Setup #1: The heroes find a strange word 
scrawled in blood on the floor, etched into a wall, 
or written on the inside cover of a spellbook or 
diary.
 Payoff: The word turns out to be a password to 
bypass a magical trap or unlock a sealed vault, the 
command word to deactivate a golem, the true 
name of an evil fiend, or a clever anagram.
 Setup #2: The heroes find a locket on the corpse 
of a slain NPC. It contains a tiny painted portrait 
of someone familiar or unfamiliar to them.
 Payoff: The heroes come face-to-face with the 
figure portrayed in the locket—a distraught or 
vengeful lover, one of the heroes’ relatives with a 
secret to share, or an NPC willing to reward the 
heroes for returning the locket and completing a 
quest.
 Setup #3: The heroes find an intelligent magic 
item with a secret past.
 Payoff: Someone recognizes the item in a future 
encounter and shares a bit of history that sheds 
light on the item’s previous owner or the secret 
curse that haunts all who wield it.
Until the next encounter! 
Love Letter to  
Ed Greenwood
10/13/2011
MONDAY NIGHT.
A woman walks into a tavern. She’s beautiful and volup -
tuous, wearing the finery of a noble and a devil-may-care 
smile. She prances around like she owns the place, flirts 
with the patrons, plays with her shoulder-length auburn 
curls, and finishes off a free tankard of mead in record 
time. A bard strums his lute, driving the free-spirited 
woman to dance, much to the delight of a dozen drool -
ing admirers. When Kithvolar (played by Jeff Alvarez) 
slyly turns his head to admire her reflection on the night -
time glass of a nearby window, gone is the lady’s striking 
beauty. In her place, he sees a twirling, dancing skeleton 
with bones of polished bronze.
One thing that classic fantasy stories have in 
common, apart from a preponderance of fantasy 
tropes, is an exhaustive cast of characters. Scores of 
characters populate J.R.R. Tolkien’s The Lord of the 
Rings trilogy, Terry Brooks’s Shannara  series, and 
George R.R. Martin’s A Song of Fire and Ice series. 
When one sets out to create a new world, it probably 
goes without saying that populating the world with 
fascinating characters is a priority. Few creative forces 
in the universe are better at this game than Ed Green-
wood, whose stories are rich with timeless characters 
that totally belong in his world and yet never cease to 
surprise.
 I’m in the third year of my Iomandra campaign. 
While my players joke about the “cast of thousands,” 
the actual number of unique NPCs that they’ve 
encountered so far is closer to 750—which, I suppose, 
means that the 1,000 mark isn’t beyond the realm 
of reason. Still, my list pales in comparison to Ed’s 
panoply of Forgotten Realms  characters and NPCs, 
which he has created over many decades. And yet, 
every time Ed introduces a new personality to the 
Forgotten Realms  setting, there’s always something 
about it that’s novel (no pun intended).
 For example, in an upcoming Eye on the Realms 
article, Ed introduces us to a beholder named Uldeth, 
whose physical form was nearly obliterated. All 
that remains of the creature are ten disembodied 
The Dungeon Master Experience: Love Letter to Ed Greenwood 
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
81
eyestalks that hover in midair. That’s something 
I’ve never seen done before, and you can bet that 
I’m going to spirit his creation out of Faerûn and 
drop Uldeth into my home campaign at the first 
opportunity.
 Many DMs I’ve talked to have trouble coming up 
with interesting new NPCs, and even the best of us 
can’t always conjure something out of thin air when-
ever a player character decides to stop some random 
schmo in the street and ask for his name and back 
story. But Ed can. I’ve witnessed it firsthand. He pulls 
names and hooks out of the ether. It’s the gift of a cre -
ative genius and an experienced storywriter to turn 
a faceless entity who didn’t exist two seconds ago into 
a fleshed-out character with more going on beneath 
the skin than the rest of us can imagine. Maybe “Joe 
Schmo” is actually Orvius Turlash, a necromancer 
in disguise, who’s on his way to broker a deal with a 
corrupt city official to acquire bones and body parts 
from the local cemetery. Or maybe it’s Griggly Muf -
finstock, a halfling adventurer who was ensorcelled 
by an archmage to always speak the truth, no matter 
how embarrassing or inappropriate. He might be 
looking for a way to rid himself of the “curse,” or he 
might be performing a service to gain the archmage’s 
favor. Granted, these are my ideas, not Ed’s, but if 
you’re familiar with Ed’s works, you’ll probably catch 
a whiff of Greenwood in these characterizations.
Lessons  LeaRned
I’ve been following Ed’s career (in a not-creepy way) 
since I was ten years old—long before I got to know 
the man personally and work with him professionally. 
Without even trying, Ed taught me two things about 
NPC creation:
✦✦ The character’s name can tell you a little 
something about the character and the 
setting.
✦✦ Distinctive physical traits and personality 
quirks are great, but an NPC needs only one 
thing to be captivating: a SECRET.
I’ve already discussed names in an earlier article , and 
Ed is a master at conjuring them, but the second point 
is really the thrust of this week’s column. One secret 
to creating awesome NPCs is to give them secrets. 
Secrets invest your campaign with intrigue and invite 
roleplaying. A secret can make the player characters 
want to get to know your NPC creation better. How 
did Uldeth end up without a body? Why is Orvius 
Turlash giving the adventurers nervous looks? Could 
he be heading for a secret rendezvous? What secrets 
can we learn from the annoyingly forthright Grig -
gly Muffinstock? What did the halfling do to deserve 
such a curse? And finally, what’s the deal with the 
dancing vixen whose true form Kithvolar glimpses in 
a window reflection?
 Players who like to roleplay not only like to invest 
their own characters with secrets but also like to pry 
into the secrets of others, and I’ve found that a little 
mystery surrounding an NPC can fuel hours of tire -
less, unadulterated fun. At least, that’s what Ed taught 
me (that, and when to use the word “vixen”).
Until the next encounter!
The Dungeon Master Experience: Love Letter to Ed Greenwood 
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
82
3DNPC
10/20/2011
WEDNESDAY NIGHT.
I don’t like it when NPCs steal the heroes’ thunder, but 
if there’s one NPC who could give the party a run for its 
money, it’s Nyrrska. He’s a retired dragonborn assassin who 
used to serve Tiamat, meting out vengeance in the name 
of his Dark Queen. At some point in his nefarious career, 
he miraculously survived a life-ending slash to the throat. 
A servant of Bahamut saved his life, and in the wake of 
this near-death experience, Nyrrska had an epiphany and 
repented. He forsook Tiamat and retired to the Temple of 
Bahamut, becoming a lowly acolyte. When the PCs showed 
up at the temple seeking refuge from Tiamat’s assassins, 
Nyrrska took it upon himself to help them survive, at the 
risk of alienating his former associates. When the temple’s 
high priest decided that the heroes were a worthwhile 
investment, he assigned Nyrrska to accompany them as 
Bahamut’s emissary. His assassin skills were rarely put 
to use, but when the PCs finally won themselves a ship, 
Nyrrska’s intimidating presence and raspy voice made him 
a great choice to keep the crew in line.
 When the PCs made an enemy of Vantajar, the one-
eyed dragonborn pirate warlord, Nyrrska understood why 
Bahamut had chosen HIM to watch over them. In one of 
those “too cool for skool” moments of the campaign, it was 
revealed that Nyrrska had tried to kill Vantajar once. That 
encounter left Vantajar short one eye and Nyrrska with a 
slashed throat.
Last week I talked about making nonplayer charac -
ters (NPCs) more interesting by giving them secrets, 
and at the risk of boring the masses, I’d like to con-
tinue exploring the topic of NPCs a bit more. It’ll 
give me a chance to do something I haven’t done very 
often: hearken back to some earlier columns and 
demonstrate how the pieces fit together.
 Not every DM invents his or her own monsters, 
but all DMs invent their own NPCs. There’s no way 
around it. Generic, nameless NPCs are easy enough 
to plunder, but they are inherently less compelling 
than campaign-flavored ones. Specific “named” 
NPCs have a lot more going for them, but the more 
hard-coded they are to a particular campaign world, 
the harder it becomes to transplant them. Yeah, I 
could file off Drizzt’s name and include a scimitar-
wielding drow ranger in my home campaign, but my 
players would think I’d finally run out of ideas. By the 
same token, the NPCs in my campaign aren’t likely to 
fit well into someone else’s campaign. Maybe it’s just 
me, but there’s just something awkward and uncom -
fortable about using someone else’s NPCs. It’s kind 
of like using someone else’s dice or wearing someone 
else’s socks. As a DM, I’m far more comfortable steal -
ing and modifying a stat block than I am stealing 
another DM’s concept for an NPC.
 Fortunately, NPC creation doesn’t have to be a 
chore. When I create an NPC on the fly (and let’s 
be honest, most of mine are created this way), first 
comes the name, then the secret , then the stats , 
then the voice, and finally the layers .
NAME
|
SECRET
|
STATS
|
VOICE
|
LAYERS
Here’s where I flash back to earlier articles . . .
Name: The hardest part, IMO. It takes a sharp DM to 
concoct appropriate and memorable names on the fly, 
and no, “Wizzy McWizard” and “Thundarr Super-
He Man” don’t qualify. If you’ve been reading this 
column week after week, you already know my tricks  
for coming up with names.
Secret: Campaigns are built on secrets. Without 
them, players have little incentive to explore the 
world and uncover its mysteries. And as we discussed 
last week, NPCs need secrets, too.
Stats: I rarely have time to create NPC stat blocks 
from scratch. Once I know the NPC’s level, I can use 
the D&D Compendium or the “Monsters By Level” 
appendices in the various Monster Manual s to find an 
appropriate stat block which I can customize using 
various cheap tricks .
Voice: The NPC’s voice is your voice, with or with-
out a twist. You might add an accent or a throaty 
rasp, change the tempo or pitch, or use any one of a 
number of other simple tricks, or you might decide it’s 
not worth the effort. Not every NPC needs a unique 
voice.
And the last piece of the puzzle . . .
Layers: That’s layers, not lairs! (Sometimes NPCs 
need lairs too, but that’s a topic for another week.) If 
all you need is a faceless NPC to remind your play-
ers that the world has other people in it, don’t worry 
about adding layers. Layers are what you need to turn 
a “cardboard cutout” into a fleshed-out NPC as real 
and three-dimensional as the heroes.
At last, we arrive at the crux of this week’s article—
what I like to call “the 3D NPC.” You’ve created an 
NPC and given him or her a name, a stat block, a 
secret, and a voice. The NPC is all dressed up and 
The Dungeon Master Experience: 3DNPC
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
83
ready to go! As he or she begins interacting with the 
player characters, you’ll see opportunities to start 
adding layers to the NPC. Layers are great because 
(1) you don’t need to add them right away and (2) you 
don’t need to add them all at once.
 Most layers have zero impact on the events of the 
campaign. They exist simply to add a touch of real -
ism or complexity to an NPC. To be effective, a layer 
needs to paint the NPC in a different light, revealing 
a side or aspect of the character that’s in some way 
surprising or unexpected. Here’s a random table of 
layers that you can use for NPCs of any level, align-
ment, disposition, and importance:
Lessons  LeaRned
I learned the importance of layers by watching seri -
alized television dramas such as Star Trek: The Next 
Generation , Lost, True Blood, Mad Men, Leverage, and 
Firef ly. Layers tend to show up in television series 
more often than in feature films because the writers, 
producers, and actors have more time to explore the 
various facets of the characters and revel in the com -
plexity of their relationships.
 Let’s use Firef ly for this week’s example. In the first 
episode, we learn that Captain Malcolm Reynolds 
(Nathan Fillion) is a self-serving bandit with a chip on 
his shoulder because he fought a war and ended up 
on the losing side. He bucks authority and doesn’t like 
it when people stick their nose in his business. He 
shies away from personal attachments, and the harsh 
frontier of space has turned his heart to ice. And yet, 
as the series unfolds, we discover his relationships are 
infinitely more complex and that he’s both smarter 
and dumber than we initially surmised, depending 
on the situation and the circumstances. We see him 
at his best and worst. And then there’s the character 
of Jayne (Adam Baldwin), a gun-toting halfwit who 
takes orders from Reynolds but has zero loyalty. Who 
could’ve guessed he’d turn out to be a pompom hat-
wearing momma’s boy?
 In the context of a D&D campaign, a layer is 
something you add that casts your NPC in a new 
light. In some cases, the new layer invites players to 
adjust their opinions of the NPC. An evil brigand 
surrenders to the party to avoid being killed and 
turns out to be a friendly and sympathetic jokester 
while in custody. A half-orc innkeeper who’s nothing 
but kind to wealthy adventurers shows little regard 
for his employees and bilks them out of their earn-
ings. You get the idea.
back to   
iomand Ra . . .
 You’ve already met Nyrrska, the dragonborn assas -
sin who lurks in the shadows of the Wednesday night 
party. Now allow me to introduce you to another NPC 
from my Wednesday night campaign.
 Tyranny (a.k.a. “Tyra”) was introduced at the start 
of epic tier as a foil for Deimos, a tiefling sorcerer and 
ship captain played by Chris Youngs. After Deimos’s 
ship was sunk, he forged a pact with Dispater to have 
the vessel returned to him. As part of the agreement, 
Deimos was forced to take Tyra, one of Dispater’s con-
sorts, as a concubine and swear to protect her against 
D20  THE Npc . . . 
1   doesn’t like children because they’re reminders of an unfortunate childhood.                                                                  
2   owns a collection of ukuleles, fiddles, and violins and plays them all beautifully.                                                            
3   used to be a sword swallower in a traveling circus or freak show.                                                                                       
4   has a “thing” for members of a particular race (such as elves or gnomes).                                                                         
5   stutters when he or she lies.                                                                                                                                                    
6   knows everything there is to know about demonology and the Abyss.                                                                              
7   is a hopeless romantic and matchmaker.                                                                                                                               
8   is obsessed with immortality and wants to be a vampire.                                                                                                       
9   fakes an injury to gain sympathy or advantage.                                                                                                                    
10   talks in his or her sleep.                                                                                                                                                                
11   is sickened by the sight of blood.                                                                                                                                              
12   claims to be of royal descent but hails from a common bloodline.                                                                                       
13   was raised by orcs, goliaths, or treants and picked up some odd habits.                                                                            
14   visits the grave of a deceased loved one regularly.                                                                                                                
15   looks after an ailing parent or elderly mentor.                                                                                                                             
16   makes dolls or carves wooden figurines, and gives them away as gifts.                                                                                 
17   is afraid of cats, heights, water, or the dark.                                                                                                                          
18   raises a child but isn’t very good at it.                                                                                                                                     
19   writes poetry.                                                                                                                                                                             
20   is a kleptomaniac.                                                                                                                                                                       
The Dungeon Master Experience: 3DNPC
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
84
all harm. Tyra appeared in Deimos’s bed one night as 
a voluptuous tiefling, although her “big secret” is that 
she’s a polymorphed succubus. (For her stat block, I 
used the level 9 succubus advanced to level 25.)
 Tyra’s arrival set the other characters (and play-
ers) on edge, for Deimos had not consulted with them 
prior to cutting his deal with Dispater. There were 
some personality conflicts, but a deal is a deal—the 
heroes couldn’t risk throwing Tyra overboard or kill -
ing her. And so, she became a necessary evil.
 Tyra’s mission is to find some way to resurrect 
the dead tiefling empire of Bael Turath, but that’s a 
fairly long-term goal. The first layer I added to her 
was an unflinching lawfulness. She learns the game 
and always plays by the rules. She needed to prove to 
her detractors that she was a valuable addition to the 
crew but couldn’t magically charm or dominate them 
without breaking Dispater’s contract. These shackles 
forced her to rely on her natural charms rather than 
her fiendish ones. She was blunt when it paid to be 
honest, quiet when it paid to be demure. Whenever 
the PCs reached an impasse and weren’t certain how 
to proceed, Tyra would step forward and offer a care-
fully considered insight that could only come from an 
NPC gifted with a shred of the DM’s prescience. Hon-
esty isn’t what the players expected from her at all. 
That, and the fact that she likes to take her clothes off 
and walk around in the nude (don’t we all).
 When it comes to adding new layers, the DM 
doesn’t have to do all the work. Sometimes a player 
will find a way to add layers to an NPC by way of 
association. In Tyra’s case, another layer was added 
after two party members died. Chris Champagne 
decided he wanted his next character to be a Prince 
of Hell named Kosh, and so he concocted a back-
ground that suggested he and Tyranny were old 
acquaintances. To bring Chris’s new character into 
the fold, I had Tyranny summon him from the Nine 
Hells. Afraid that the party was no longer strong 
enough to survive the trials and tribulations ahead, 
she convinced Deimos to let her cast the summoning 
ritual using drops of mortal blood taken from various 
willing crewmembers. I never expected her to have 
a history with a character other than Deimos. When 
your players take to an NPC in this way, you know 
you’re doing something right. It’s icing on the cake.
 Despite the fact that she’s a succubus in disguise, 
Tyranny has become genuinely fond and protective 
of the PCs—even the ones who don’t trust her. Over 
the course of the epic tier, she’s proven adept 
at spotting enemy deceptions (she is, after all, 
a master of deceit). This penchant coupled 
with her unwillingness to deceive the party 
elevates her from a mere companion to an 
equal. Having been stifled by the tyrannical 
hierarchy of the Nine Hells, she doesn’t take 
her newfound equality lightly, but in her heart, 
she’s still a succubus. She could’ve summoned 
any Prince of Hell, but she chose Kosh for a 
reason. He’s her ticket to restoring Bael Turath 
and fulfilling the terms of her agreement with 
Dispater. No matter how many layers she has, 
she must remain true to her essence.
 While layers add new depth or dimension 
to a character, underneath all those layers the 
character must remain recognizable and true 
to its core. Malcolm Reynolds would not be 
Malcolm Reynolds without that chip on his 
shoulder, and Jayne would not be Jayne if he 
stopped being a dumbass. Similarly, the ex-
assassin Nyrrska would lose his gravity if he 
burst into tears every time someone hurt his 
feelings. The next time you want to add a new 
layer to an NPC, remember: A layer is just 
icing. You can put tar on the cake instead of 
icing, but no one’s gonna buy it.
Until the next encounter!
The Dungeon Master Experience: 3DNPC
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
85
Boo Hoo
10/27/2011
MONDAY NIGHT.
The heroes find a nautilus (a mind flayer ship) beached 
on the island of Sha’hadam. The ship’s elder brain and 
crew are dead, killed by a mysterious psychic wave. The 
DM has just handed the PCs the means to an end—a ship 
with which they can infiltrate the mind flayer empire and 
reach their evil nemesis, Starlord Evendor. Peter Schaefer, 
who plays a changeling named Metis, discovers that he can 
operate the shipboard systems if he assumes the form of a 
mind flayer and sticks his tentacles into the pilot’s control 
station, but he still needs the elder brain to provide the ves -
sel’s motive force. Imagine my surprise when the players 
hit upon the idea of asking Imazhia, their NPC companion 
(and a cleric of Bahamut), to cast an Animate Dead ritual 
on the elder brain!
 The heroes are about to learn a painful lesson: Nec -
romantic rituals and undead elder brains aren’t to be 
trifled with.
Once they realized they needed the elder brain to 
power the ship, the Monday night players (to their 
credit) weighed the ramifications of raising it from 
the dead versus reanimating it. Ultimately they 
decided that the undead version would be easier to 
control, and under normal circumstances, they’d be 
right. But you can’t throw “undead elder brain” at the 
DM (at least, not THIS one) and expect it to end well. 
Suffice to say, the elder brain was shocked back to 
“life” by Imazhia’s ritual and immediately lashed out 
at the party. That’s more or less how the last game ses -
sion ended.
 Next Monday is Halloween, and the game 
is off because several of my players have other 
commitments. On the one hand it makes me sad, but 
on the other hand I have another week to think about 
how I’m going to further torment my players. In the 
spirit of Samhain, this week I fearlessly don my Scary 
DM hat, so take the following “advice” with several 
grains of salt.
 Here’s my “top 5 list” of ways to torture play-
ers, with specific examples from the Monday night 
campaign:
Torture Tip #1: Give the 
players what they want, 
then take it away.
It’s the oldest, nastiest DM trick in the book, and posi -
tively Gygaxian in its fiendish wickedness.
 Early on in paragon tier, my players learned of the 
Morkoth, a ship moored at the docks in Io’galaroth 
that was “up for grabs.” Its captain had been killed 
and its crew disbanded, leaving the ship ripe for the 
taking. After ridding the city of evil kraken-worship -
ing cultists, the heroes persuaded the city’s magistrate 
to give them the Morkoth for keeps. However, by this 
time they had made an enemy of an unscrupulous 
ship captain named Lydia Taralan, who not only com -
manded a ship of her own but also a 30-foot-long 
iron shark golem. After Taralan chased them out of 
Io’galaroth, the heroes decided not to wage a ship-to-
ship battle but instead used phantom steeds to bring 
the fight to Taralan on the deck of her own ship. 
Meanwhile, Taralan’s iron shark golem laid waste to 
the undefended Morkoth, and it sank into the briny 
depths.
 Free ships are great, but players appreciate help-
ful NPCs even more, particularly likeable ones who 
push obstacles out of the party’s way, give them free 
stuff, or provide wise counsel. Imazhia, the cleric of 
Bahamut, is one such NPC. She receives portentous 
dreams that warn the PCs of impending danger, she 
cuts through the bureaucracy of the Dragovar Empire 
like a knife through a pumpkin, and she provides 
free healing without complaint. I’m just dying to kill 
her off, but I’m waiting for the perfect moment . . . the 
moment when her loss will be shocking and deeply 
felt. Or maybe I’ll just have her arrested by a political 
The Dungeon Master Experience: Boo Hoo
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
86
rival on suspicion of treason. Either way, the players 
won’t be able to lean on her anymore.
 My players also grew to like Lady Thariel von 
Zarkyn, a noblewoman who secretly belonged to a 
cult of Vecna. Thariel had conflicting loyalties and 
ultimately decided to use the secrets in her posses -
sion to help the PCs, so when her superiors told her to 
dispose of them, she took her own life instead. (Insert 
creepy DM cackle here.)
Torture Tip #2: reward the 
players’ accomplishments 
with logical negative 
consequences.
For every action, there’s an equal and opposite reac -
tion. Okay, so the PCs just slaughtered the dragon 
and took its stuff. What are the odds that the dragon’s 
mother finds out what happened and puts a contract 
out on them? Pretty good, I think. And what about 
that evil merchant they killed? Surely the criminals to 
whom he owed large sums of money will want their 
pound of flesh. Learn a lesson from Greek mythology: 
For every head the heroes cut off, two more grow in 
its place.
 In my campaign, the heroes recently befriended 
the Knights of Ardyn, a “friendly” terrorist organiza -
tion committed to stamping out corruption in the 
Dragovar Empire. In doing so, they’ve come to the 
attention of the Vost Miraj, the empire’s equivalent of 
MI:6. The organization, which itself is riddled with 
corruption, already has an assassin in the party’s 
ranks (played by one of the players, no less), and his 
buddies are moving in for the kill. This is what hap -
pens when you make friends with people who have 
enemies!
Torture Tip #3: Have that 
light at the end of the 
tunnel suddenly go out.
In my mind, that “light at the end of the tunnel” is 
actually a demented will-o’-wisp, baiting the play -
ers as it leads the characters toward their doom. As 
the DM, you have the power to make them feel like 
no matter what they do, they’re no closer to reaching 
their ultimate goal or destination. When dismay sets 
in, but before the players become thoroughly discour-
aged and despondent, you shine rays of hope straight 
into their eyes to dazzle them before plunging them 
back into darkness.
 The Monday group desperately wants to end the 
mind flayer threat and live happily ever after, but 
every time they achieve a victory, Starlord Evendor, 
their evil nemesis, uses the reality-altering power of 
an elder constellation to affect horrendous changes, 
in one instance depriving the players of their elemen-
tal warship and in another resurrecting an old enemy 
to confound them and slow their progress.
Torture Tip #4: Kill player 
characters offscreen, and 
throw their body parts to 
the other players like scraps 
of meat to wild dogs.
No, I’m not being metaphorical here. That’s what I 
did to Melech, Bruce Cordell’s tiefling warlock, when 
Bruce missed a session. In my campaign, player-less 
PCs become glorified NPCs and fuel for storytelling 
and suspense.
 When players are absent in my game, their char-
acters typically “fade into the background” or, if 
possible, run errands while the other characters 
tackle the problem at hand. By DM fiat, a guild of sla -
vers managed to corner Melech while the other PCs 
were “adventuring,” and at the end of the session they 
delivered his severed head to the party in a bloody 
bag. True, Melech was raised the very next session, 
but the shock value was worth it. Head rolls across the 
floor AND . . . cut to black. See you next week!
 If you really want to take this idea to the next 
level, take a dead character and bring him or her 
back as an undead horror. That’s what happened to 
Nick DiPetrillo’s genasi swordmage, Yuriel, who had 
his soul devoured by a death knight’s sword. A help -
ful lich named Osterneth offered to put an artificial 
heart in Yuriel’s corpse and pump necrotic sludge 
through his dead veins, and though the other play -
ers objected, Yuriel’s wife and first mate (a watersoul 
genasi NPC named Pearl) was determined to have 
her darling husband back, and so . . . say hello to 
Yuriel the vampire! Undead Yuriel didn’t “survive” 
for many sessions. After dying heroically in battle, 
he had his heart ripped out (more or less) by a blue 
dragon sea captain, and Jeremy Crawford’s character 
destroyed the heart with a magic missile to make sure 
it couldn’t be used again.
Torture Tip #5: Thrust the 
pcs into situations they 
aren’t equipped to handle.
If I want my players to squirm, I’ll put them in a room 
where their swords and spells avail them not. It might 
be a room full of politicians discussing the future of 
the Dragovar Empire, or the hold of a ship containing 
a sentient Far Realm mine that they must disarm or 
outsmart before it blows them and their ship to bits.
 I’m reminded of a particular “character moment” 
involving Jeff Alvarez, who plays a highly optimized 
fighting machine named Kithvolar. The elf ranger 
The Dungeon Master Experience: Boo Hoo
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
87
does outrageous amounts of damage in combat and 
can practically solo your average encounter, but Jeff 
and Kithvolar are out of their element in noncombat 
situations. So imagine Jeff ’s surprise when Kithvolar 
“awakens” from his nightly reverie with blood on his 
swords and no memory of how it got there, followed 
by the discovery that he’s murdering people in his 
“sleep” because the mind flayers put something in 
his brain. He can’t stab the thing in his brain with a 
sword, at least not without killing himself, so what 
should he do? That, my friends, is torture.
Lessons  LeaRned
I’m sure every DM who reads this article can empa -
thize with my primal need to torment my players, 
and I’m fairly certain I’m not the only DM in the 
D&D multiverse whose campaign has a sadomasoch-
istic undercurrent. Nothing wrong with giving the 
campaign an occasional jolt. My players relish the 
adversity that they and their characters are forced to 
overcome week after week. The scars they earn along 
the way will pay off at the end of the campaign, when 
the surviving PCs gaze at the smoldering ashes of 
their enemies and realize they’ve been through hell 
and withstood the horrors of death, loss, and mutila -
tion. As long as everyone knows it’s all in good fun, 
there’s no love lost.
 And on that note, here’s another parting tip I’d 
like to share, a surefire way to torment your players: 
Think twice before you throw them a bone. Let 
the player characters be the instruments of their own 
demise. My players don’t need much help from me 
to kill off their characters; they’re perfectly capable 
of making ill-informed decisions and rolling a natu -
ral 1 on that final death save. When things go from 
bad to worse, some players expect the DM to jump in 
and contrive some clever escape for the character(s) 
in need, or fudge some die rolls in the party’s favor. 
Scary DM says, “Mercy is for the weak!” Stun them by 
letting that third consecutive critical hit stand. Terrify 
them by letting the vicious death knight make that 
coup de grace attack and finish off the party leader 
lying unconscious at his feet. My players don’t remem-
ber the time I cut them slack; they remember the 
horror of that moment when the death knight killed 
their beloved warlord while her companions wal-
lowed in their own blood and pooped themselves.
Until the next encounter!
Catapult
11/3/2011
WEDNESDAY NIGHT.
In a previous session, the heroes captured the apprentice 
of their nemesis, Starlord Evendor, and agreed to trade her 
for several prisoners in the clutches of mind flayers. The 
prisoner exchange was going swimmingly until the illithids’ 
sudden but inevitable betrayal, and although the heroes 
ultimately kicked ass, there were three “uh-oh” moments 
when things went from bad to worse.
 The first “uh-oh” moment happened when reinforce -
ments arrived in the form of a beholder named King 
Zorrb. The beholder arrived via Far Realm portal, cried 
out “Kneel before Zorrb!” and began shooting eye rays at 
everyone. The second “uh-oh” moment quickly followed 
when the beholder disintegrated Chris Youngs’ character, 
Deimos. The third and final “uh-oh” moment occurred 
near the end of the fight, when Mat Smith’s character, 
Garrot, grabbed King Zorrb by the eyestalks and cata -
pulted himself through the Far Realm portal, dragging the 
beholder with him.
 As they say in Hollywood, what an exit!
And that’s the story of how Garrot, the dimwitted 
human fighter, was devoured by the Far Realm.
 Most players would think twice about hurling their 
characters into the Far Realm, even if it meant saving 
another party member’s life. But Mat doesn’t play a 
smart character, and sometimes he has Garrot do 
things that don’t make a lot of sense except, of course, 
to Garrot. Not surprisingly, Garrot has died and been 
raised from the dead many times over the course of 
the campaign, but this time there’s nothing to raise. 
His body’s lost.
The Dungeon Master Experience: Catapult
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
88
 Over the past four years, Garrot never really 
evolved much at all. In fact, while I pride myself on 
creating interesting “growth opportunities” for char-
acters, I was pretty much at a loss when it came to 
thinking up good Garrot-centric episodes and adven-
tures. Mat played him so dumb that no NPC could 
communicate intelligently with him, and Garrot had 
no attachments—even his companions didn’t pay 
him much attention outside of combat. Garrot didn’t 
even have a last name (or if he did, it never came up 
in play). He was like a coat rack with no hooks; there 
wasn’t much to hang a story on. I also got the impres -
sion that after nearly four years of playing the same 
character, Mat was willing to throw Garrot on a limb 
just to see if it broke. Put another way, I don’t think 
Mat would be surprised or horribly depressed if 
Garrot never returned.
 I, on the other hand, am unwilling to let Garrot go.
 Maybe it’s because I feel like I’ve failed the 
character somehow. More likely it’s because Mat’s 
decision to hurl Garrot into the maddening void 
should be lauded and rewarded. If Garrot is well 
and truly dead, then the lesson to be learned from 
his actions is “Don’t hurl your character into the Far 
Realm.” However, I think it’s more fun to tell play -
ers, “You never know what’ll happen when you hurl 
your character into the Far Realm.” Or put another 
way, “If you’re willing to take a risk with your char-
acter, you might be pleasantly surprised by the 
outcome.”
 When it comes to building encounters, I have 
no qualms about layering on adversity, to the point 
where the players feel overwhelmed. I love having 
enemy reinforcements arrive just when things are 
starting to look up. I’m also happy to give players 
lengths of rope with which to hang proverbial nooses 
around their own characters’ necks. However, before 
you accuse me of being cruel, note that my intentions 
are good: The goal, as I’ve said before, isn’t to annihi -
late the party. No, the goal is to reward the players for 
taking risks.
 I tend to think of characters as “chandelier bait,” 
which is to say that if I hang a chandelier from 
the ceiling, I expect that at some point during the 
encounter a character will either (a) swing from it or 
(b) drop it on someone. The chandelier baits players 
into taking risks and making decisions 
they wouldn’t otherwise consider. In Gar-
rot’s case, King Zorrb’s Far Realm portal 
was the chandelier. It’s also a plot device 
that can be used to catapult the campaign 
forward.
 Speaking of catapults, there’s some -
thing about Garrot that I almost forgot 
to mention—a seemingly inconsequential 
bit of character development instigated 
by Mat many years ago, back when the 
heroes were looking to buy a magical 
catapult for their ship. Mat decided that 
Garrot was fascinated by catapults. He 
even went so far as to procure a minia -
ture catapult that Garrot would carry 
around with him and play with while his 
companions were doing “boring stuff ” like obtaining 
quests and forging alliances. This utterly marvelous 
bit of nonsense became a running character gag. At 
some point, I expected the gag to pay off with Garrot 
firing himself out of a catapult or something equally 
ludicrous.
 After debating whether or not to bring Garrot 
back, I finally decided to create a campaign “epi -
sode” set in the Far Realm. The adventure begins 
with Garrot plunging into Tyrak’n Bay and finding 
himself on the island of Kheth, where the campaign 
began. The island and its inhabitants are constructs 
of the Far Realm, familiar to Garrot but distorted by 
the plane’s malign interpretation of his memories 
and his rather dimwitted view of the world. More 
importantly, all of Garrot’s adventuring compan-
ions are there, including old characters who’ve been 
dead for many levels. The other players get to bring 
back some of their old characters to help Garrot 
escape from this nightmarish realm using the vil -
lain’s giant catapult—because in his childlike mind, 
that’s how Garrot would escape the Far Realm. Not 
only that, the players get to fight Starlord Evendor 
for the first time in the campaign, or rather, an 
effigy of him created by the Far Realm, and learn 
some of his dark secrets.
The Dungeon Master Experience: Catapult
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
89
Lessons  LeaRned
As a DM, if I’m going to create moments of seem-
ingly insurmountable adversity, I also need to create 
moments of opportunity  and be prepared for when 
my players attempt crazy-ass stunts. Although I’m 
well known for my elaborate schemes and plot twists, 
some of the most memorable and decisive moments 
of the campaign happened because of something the 
players did. I think it behooves every DM to remem-
ber that the players have a stake in determining how 
the campaign unfolds, and the best campaigns are 
inspired and propelled by the characters’ actions and 
decisions.
 So, to summarize:
✦✦ It’s the DM’s job to create situations that 
encourage players to take risks.
✦✦ It’s the DM’s job to let players know that with 
great risk comes great reward.
Until the next encounter!
Lloyd the 
Beholder
11/10/2011
MONDAY NIGHT.
The heroes commandeer an illithid nautilus, and Peter 
Schaefer’s changeling character figures out how to steer 
the ship by assuming the form of a mind flayer and 
inserting his tentacles into the pilot’s control station. He 
convinces the ship’s elder brain to take the vessel deep into 
enemy waters by first passing through the Far Realm. 
The DM (that’s me!) has Peter’s character make a hand -
ful of Dungeoneering checks to successfully navigate the 
Far Realm—and he fails spectacularly. As the ship drifts 
off course, it picks up three stray beholders who sound 
an awful lot like Kang and Kodos, the aliens from The 
Simpsons .
 These particular beholders are Far Realm “couch 
potatoes” who’ve never visited the natural world and have 
never seen creatures like the PCs before. They’re under -
standably confused and don’t speak a word of Common, 
but there are enough PCs who know Deep Speech to 
glean that one of the beholders is named Lloyd. Still, past 
experience has taught the characters to attack behold -
ers on sight. As battle erupts, out of nowhere the table 
conversation quickly degenerates into speculation about 
how beholders go to the bathroom. This, in turn, trig -
gers a seemingly endless series of poop jokes that (excuse 
the pun) runs throughout the evening, culminating in 
the final moment when the warlock’s eldritch blast kills 
poor Lloyd and the beholder lets out a resounding “Crap!” 
before exploding..
This week’s column was hell to write because I always 
have trouble articulating the importance of humor in 
D&D games. There’s a reason we don’t tend to write 
funny D&D products, and that’s because we design-
ers and editors know for a fact that players and DMs 
bring their own humor to the game table, and no one 
seems to have trouble mining an otherwise straight 
adventure for comedy gold. In short, D&D players 
are, by and large, connoisseurs of comedy. Many were 
raised on Monty Python, for Pete’s sake. I’ve never 
met a D&D player who was too lofty to appreciate a 
good fart or poop joke. (That is to say, a good fart joke, 
as opposed to a good fart.)
 I’m the first to admit it: Although my campaign 
is occasionally lauded for its entwined plots, strange 
twists, and rocket pace, there are times when it wal -
lows in poop jokes and is more akin to the games I 
used to run in junior high, which were lewd—and not 
in a cool Shakespearean way.
 This week’s session wasn’t a very accurate snap -
shot of the Monday night campaign. It’s more like one 
of those offbeat, funny episodes of The X-Files  that pop 
up once or twice per season. Just as humor can insin-
uate itself into otherwise serious TV shows, comedy 
is an integral ingredient in my campaign, and I sus -
pect most other campaigns as well, but it’s more like 
a spice or seasoning than a main ingredient. I take 
my D&D campaign seriously in terms of its entertain-
ment value to my players, which is to say, I put a lot of 
effort into making sure my players come back week 
after week by creating an immersive experience with 
lots of action, roleplaying, and surprises. However, it 
makes for a refreshing change of pace to inject a bit of 
silliness now and then.
 Jeremy Crawford, who plays the party wizard, said 
it best in jest: “You’ve ruined beholders! We’ll never 
look at them the same way again!” I place the blame 
squarely on Peter Schaefer’s shoulders, for reasons I’ll 
explain shortly. But first, a cautionary note . . .
The Dungeon Master Experience: Lloyd the Beholder
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
90
 Humor can spoil a campaign. I’ve seen it happen. 
It begins when a player decides to name his half-orc 
paladin “Sir Fartsalot” or when the characters enter 
a tavern in Waterdeep and see the cast of Cheers sit-
ting at the bar. Sometimes humor takes you OUT of 
the campaign world, and it’s hard to get players back 
into it. I remember playing in Monte Cook’s remark-
able Ptolus campaign and witnessing rare moments 
of frustration and disappointment whenever we, the 
players, cavalierly assigned silly monikers to villains 
who failed or declined to announce themselves by 
name. In my mind’s eye, I can still see Monte shaking 
his head and replying “Yes, fine, whatever” after we 
decided to “name” one of his carefully crafted NPC 
villains “Mister Poopiehead.” It’s been my experience 
that bad names tend to stick, and once the players 
take to calling your NPC “Mister Poopiehead,” there’s 
very little you can do but flush Mister Poopiehead 
down the proverbial toilet and never speak of him 
again or fling him at the characters and hope they 
learn to take him seriously.
 It’s been my experience that, outside of the weekly 
dose of playful banter, humor is best used in small, 
judicious doses and in situations that work within 
the context of the encounter or scene. My decision to 
name one of the beholders Lloyd was spontaneous, 
as was the decision to model his voice and personal -
ity after Kang’s. I was running what amounted to a 
random encounter (in other words, the beholders 
weren’t crucial to the campaign in any way), I was in 
a weird mood, and these impromptu (and arguably 
ill-advised) decisions basically gave my players license 
to assign the other beholders similarly ludicrous 
names. Consequently, the party’s journey through the 
Far Realm took an offbeat yet appropriately surreal 
turn. The players were a little taken aback at first, but 
I can’t help but feel that “Lloyd” is a perfectly cromu -
lent beholder name.
 My style of DMing changes depending on the 
group of players I’m with. If you watched me DM a 
game for Acquisitions Incorporated and then par-
ticipated in one of my home game sessions, you’d 
see subtle and not-so-subtle changes in my DM “per-
formance.” I tend to vary my DM style slightly even 
between my Monday and Wednesday night cam-
paigns, as Peter Schaefer recently experienced when 
he crossed over from my Monday group to be a spe-
cial guest star in my Wednesday night game. That’s 
because I’m playing to a different audience, and dif -
ferent groups of players have different expectations. 
By comparison, when I run games at conventions, I 
tend to be a bit more “neutral” as a DM and put a lid 
on the poop jokes . . . at least until I get to know my 
players better.
 My Monday group is, generally speaking, far less 
likely to wallow in filth than the Wednesday night 
group. The running gag is that that Monday group 
playfully disparages the Wednesday group for being 
a bunch of uncouth, self-destructive barbarians, 
whereas the Wednesday group accuses the Monday 
heroes of solving all their campaign woes by sipping 
tea and chatting with the baddies. This past Monday 
session was unusual for a number of reasons, first 
and foremost because the Monday players were less 
focused than usual and had “devolved” after a back-
to-back weeks of not playing. Peter also imported a 
little of the Wednesday night group’s uncouth barba -
rism to the Monday evening proceedings. He was the 
one who dropped the first poop joke of the evening, 
as I recall, and he also instigated the fight by attack -
ing the beholders without provocation. That’s not to 
say I’m blameless. When things started to get really 
silly, I could’ve told the players to can it. Instead, I 
added methane to the fire by referring to the lieu -
tenant of an important NPC as his “number two.” 
The truth is, when I’m feeling jovial, I drop things 
into the campaign that are deliberately intended to 
spark a laugh, such as the occasional mock-worthy 
NPC, laughable accent, and movie quote. But when 
I tire of the jokes and want to press forward with 
The Dungeon Master Experience: Lloyd the Beholder
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
91
the campaign, I suddenly turn very serious and ask 
pointed questions to deflate the ballooning silliness, 
such as “What do you do?” and “Is your character 
taking any actions this round?” That’s the queue to 
settle down and gets the players back on track in a 
hurry. Good humor has its place and knows it place.
Lessons  LeaRned
My sense of humor is very much in line with my play -
ers’ senses of humor, and therefore I can get away 
with Lloyd the beholder in my game. Lloyd might not 
strike you as funny or the type of thing your players 
will find amusing. A good DM plays to his or her audi -
ence and gives players queues to help them grasp the 
intended mood of the game session. If you’re running 
an intense session, you don’t want it to become a farce 
by having the villain or monster break wind. How -
ever, I’ll just come out and say it: No campaign is too 
good or too highbrow for a little potty humor now and 
then. And by “potty humor,” I mean the general silli -
ness that transpires when a bunch of adults sit around 
a table and act like 11-year-olds, pretending to be 
cooler and hipper than they really are (or ever will 
be). As a DM, I invest a lot of time thinking about my 
campaign and finding ways to keep the game moving 
forward. Sometimes I forget that my players don’t 
need multilayered plots and deep, immersive role-
playing opportunities to be entertained. Sometimes 
they need Lloyd the beholder, and they’ll remember 
him fondly too!
 I’m reminded of the television series Angel , star-
ring David Boreanaz as “the vampire with a soul.” 
The dark and brooding protagonist gave the show 
a grim intensity, and yet Angel had all sorts of little 
comic flourishes to remind viewers that they were 
being entertained, not tortured. I’ve been in cam -
paigns that were pure torture because the DM 
scowled at every attempt to inject a little humor 
into the characters and the situations they faced. 
This week’s encounter with Lloyd and his beholder 
buddies was like that final season episode where 
Angel is transformed into a vampire muppet. I 
remember thinking “THIS IS THE BEST EPISODE 
EVER!” while simultaneously acknowledging that 
it neither defines nor spoils the series as a whole. It 
works best as a one-off, and it drives home a couple 
key points:
✦✦ You can punctuate a fairly serious campaign 
with humorous moments and interludes with -
out ruining it.
✦✦ The DM sets the tone for the game session, 
and players who are “on their game” will usu -
ally follow the DM’s lead.
Until the next encounter!
Event 
Horizon
11/17/2011
MONDAY NIGHT.
The party’s campaign against Starlord Evendor has 
reached a threshold. The time has come to forge alli -
ances with powerful forces, from the Knights of Ardyn 
to the evil god of secrets, to put down the threat of the 
Far Realm. The players can sense the inevitability of the 
impending conflict, which will quite literally determine 
the fate of the world. The gravity is inescapable. Now 
comes the hard part.!
First off, if you’re a player in my Monday night game, 
STOP READING NOW! This article contains plot 
spoilers for an upcoming episode of the Iomandra 
campaign and is for Dungeon Masters only.
 The title of this week’s article is particularly apt 
because the Monday night group has reached a “point 
of no return.” We’re halfway through epic tier, the 
end is nigh, and the heroes know what must be done. 
There are plenty of big fights headed their way, they 
basically know what they’re up against, and the big -
gest mystery outstanding is who will survive to the 
campaign’s glorious end.
 The title is also a play-on-words. I’m not really 
talking about black holes or the gravitational pull of 
my campaign’s plot but rather responding to a query 
by BalogTheFierce, who was curious about how I go 
about designing encounters. I’ll endeavor to address 
the topic without regurgitating information you’ve 
seen in the Dungeon Master’s Guide  and other sources 
The Dungeon Master Experience: Event Horizon
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
92
that tackle the topic at great length. Instead, I’ll shed 
some light on a Very Important Episode of the cam -
paign that’s about to unfold.
 First, let me dispel any illusions: I don’t write 
complete, publishable adventures for my home cam-
paign because I haven’t the time and I rather like 
“running with scissors” and the improvisational chal -
lenge of working without a script. The adventures I 
tend to write (and I’ve written a lot of them over the 
years) are for the benefit of others and often focus 
on specific locations, such as a sprawling dungeon 
complex or an evil lich-king’s fortress, and feature 
room-by-room explorations of these locations. Loca -
tion-based adventures are great because they’re easy 
for DMs to run (because each room or area contains 
its own encounter) and difficult to create on the 
fly (because of the amount of room detail and map 
work required). A DM can take a large, fully detailed 
adventure location such as the Temple of Elemental 
Evil and make that the foundation for an entire cam -
paign, with the added benefit of not needing to spend 
a lot of time planning game sessions in advance. If 
the party ended the previous session in area 47, you 
can probably kick off the next session with the heroes 
entering area 48. No big deal.
 But my campaigns tend to be more EVENT driven 
than ENCOUNTER driven, so the way I prepare for 
a game session requires a different approach. It’s a 
bit weird that I think of my own campaign as a series 
of events and plot them out the way a TV series pro -
ducer plans a show’s seasonal arc, and yet I’m not a 
big fan of published event-based adventures written 
by other people. I think it’s because an event-based 
adventure has a certain pace and sequence that 
doesn’t suit every DM’s style, whereas a location-
based adventure is less about what-happens-when 
and more about what-happens-where, taking a lot of 
the DM’s pacing and sequential concerns out of the 
picture.
the ePisode 
summa Ry
A typical “episode” of my campaign is a series of events 
arranged in the order I expect them to unfold. It all 
starts with me remembering the events of previous 
sessions and fixating on something as the focus of the 
upcoming session. The focus might be a player charac-
ter, an important NPC, a location, a big event, or some 
combination thereof. In next Monday’s session, the 
focus is the secret island fortress of Ardynrise, which 
has been alluded to since the start of the campaign 
and which the PCs are finally going to visit for the 
first time. However, before the PCs reach Ardynrise 
and learn its secrets, I have some unfinished business 
from the previous session to tie up.
 So, here’s how an evening’s worth of D&D comes 
together in Chris Perkins’s home campaign:
Step 1: Word!
I open a Word document and type a short summary 
of important events from previous sessions, which I 
convert into a “Previously in Iomandra” paragraph 
to kick off the session. Doing this exercise puts me in 
the right frame of mind to look at the unfolding tap -
estry of my campaign, tie up loose ends, and pick up 
important threads.
Step 2: Dramatis personae
Every game session is an opportunity for character 
development. Underneath the “Previously” section of 
my Word document I spell out the dramatis personae , 
or cast of characters (a “call sheet,” if you will). Typing 
this list of PCs and NPCs gets me thinking about 
which heroes to shine the session spotlight on and 
how many different NPCs will likely come into play 
over the course of the evening. Sometimes the list of 
NPCs is quite short, but more often (particularly at 
higher levels) that’s not the case.
Step 3: A Watched plot
By the time I’ve finished Steps 1 and 2, I have a pretty 
good handle on where to take the campaign. In this 
case, I’ve decided to play up the Knights of Ardyn , a 
group of benevolent “terrorists” dedicated to stamping 
out corruption in the Dragovar Empire. They’ve been 
a behind-the-scenes force of good from the outset, 
and two of the characters have direct ties to them, yet 
we’ve never met Ardyn (the silver dragon leader of 
the group) or visited her secret island. That’s about to 
change.
 The characters know that the Myrthon Regency, a 
vassal state of the Dragovar Empire, has been taken 
over by mind flayers. They also just learned that the 
Knights of Ardyn recently helped the daughter of 
the Myrthon regent escape . . . and that she’s been 
sequestered on Ardyn’s island. It’s not enough to send 
the heroes to Ardynrise; I also need something to 
HAPPEN there. I’ve decided that the mad Myrthon 
regent, Tsar Dakor, wants his daughter back and 
has an ally hidden in the party’s midst. I also know 
that I have some other stuff to resolve en route to 
Ardynrise.
 This step requires me to wrap my brain around 
the main “plot points” of the episode, which could 
(depending on what happens) take multiple game 
sessions to resolve. Basically, it’s how I see the story 
unfolding in my mind barring the unexpected.
Step 4: Event-by-Event 
Breakdown
Once I’ve written down my prediction of how the 
plot will unfold, it occurs to me that there’s about a 
75% chance that the episode will take an unexpected 
detour, forcing me to rearrange events or jettison my 
ideas altogether. Nothing I can do about that; the PCs 
are epic level, after all, and anything can happen. 
Still, it helps me get a handle on the “scope” of the 
adventure by breaking the plot down into a sequence 
The Dungeon Master Experience: Event Horizon
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
93
of events, the order of which is less important than 
the ideas. After doing the event breakdown for this 
episode that I’ve decided to call “Ardynrise,” I realize 
that it might take more than one session to resolve all 
the business I have planned, and that’s okay. Before 
the heroes get to Ardynrise, they’ll have some inter-
esting scenes with Vecna’s followers and perhaps 
another Far Realm mishap.
 Not every event is a combat encounter, but it 
always adds something to the story or gives the story 
some forward momentum.
Step 5:  
Other roleplaying Notes
Event-based adventures make it easy for me to think 
about the game session in terms of roleplaying oppor-
tunities for the players. Every event is a roleplaying 
opportunity waiting to unfold, even the ones planned 
as combat encounters. During Step 4, I’ll sometimes 
think of ideas that don’t really qualify as “events” but 
are likely to come into play. I group these together 
under the heading “Other Roleplaying Notes” as a 
reminder to myself. For example, Stan! Brown plays 
a dragonborn agent of the Vost Miraj, the equivalent 
of MI6 in my world. The Vost Miraj leadership sees 
Ardyn as a threat to the Dragovar Empire’s stability 
rather than a potential ally, so I’m expecting some 
friction between Stan!’s character and the Knights of 
Ardyn played by Michele and Nick. However, I’m not 
sure how that potential conflict will be resolved and 
can’t really plan around it.
 Here, then, is the complete episode summary, 
which conveniently fits neatly on one double-sided 
sheet of paper and easily into my campaign binder:
“aRdynRise”
PREVIOUSLY IN IOMANDRA . . .
Osterneth the Bronze Lich (Vecna’s ex-wife) forged an alli -
ance with the party against their common enemy: Starlord 
Evendor and the mind flayers in control of the Myrthon 
Regency, who are using the Dragon’s Eye constellation 
to affect changes in reality. A flight of dragons bore the 
heroes safely to the island of Sha’hadam, where a derelict 
illithid nautilus had washed ashore. Aided by the Knights 
of Ardyn, the heroes commandeered the vessel, raised the 
ship’s elder brain from the dead, and convinced it to do their 
bidding. Osterneth’s changeling manservant, Metis (played 
by Peter Schaefer), discovered that he could pilot the nau -
tilus by assuming the form of a mind flayer and sticking 
his tentacles into the ship’s navigation station. The Knights 
of Ardyn wanted to use the ship to spy on illithid forces in 
Myrthon waters, and so the heroes persuaded the elder 
brain to cross a vast distance of ocean by taking the ship 
through the Far Realm. Metis’s inability to navigate the 
plane led to a random encounter with three beholders. After 
surviving the encounter and returning to the natural world, 
the heroes appeared in the middle of a naval battle between 
Dragovar and Myrthon ships and quickly took the nautilus 
underwater. Using a sea snake figurine of wondrous power, 
Andraste (played by Michele Carter) and Kithvolar (played 
by Jeff Alvarez) rescued four survivors of a destroyed Dra -
govar warship and learned that they’re deep inside enemy 
waters but not where they hoped to be.
HEROES (in alphabetical order)
 Alex von Hyden (one-eyed male human wizard 
and Wyrmworn) played by Jeremy Crawford
 Andraste (female eladrin warlord and party 
leader) played by Michele Carter
 Baharoosh  (male dragonborn rogue and Vost 
Miraj agent) played by Stan!
 Bartho (dull-witted male human fighter) played 
by Matt Sernett
 Kettenbar (male wilden shaman from an alter-
nate reality) played by Shawn Blakeney
 Kithvolar (male elf ranger) played by Jeff Alvarez
 Metis (male changeling warlock and Osterneth’s 
manservant) played by Peter Schaefer
 Melech (male tiefling warlock and vessel of 
Ulban) played by Bruce R. Cordell
 Theralyn (female elf ranger and dragon-riding 
Knight of Ardyn) played by Nick DiPetrillo
 with special guest star
 Xanthum Zail (male gnome bard from an alter-
nate reality) played by Curt Gould
NONPLAYER CHARACTERS
 Ardyn (female silver dragon and leader of the 
Knights of Ardyn)
 Arando Corynnar (male human Knight of Ardyn 
captain and Andraste’s confidante)
 Thorn Rel (male tiefling Knight of Ardyn captain)
 Lily von Marek (female human Knight of Ardyn, 
reporting to Thorn Rel)
 Kiril Szarke  (male half-elf Knight of Ardyn, 
reporting to Thorn Rel)
The Dungeon Master Experience: Event Horizon
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
94
 Taras (maimed male dragonborn Knight of Ardyn, 
reporting to Thorn Rel)
 Roksana Kral (female dwarf Knight of Ardyn, 
reporting to Thorn Rel)
 Vastian von Hyden (male human Knight of 
Ardyn, Arando’s friend, and Alex’s cousin)
 Tsarana Faijhan  (female dragonborn noble and 
daughter of the mad Myrthon regent)
 Ramiel (male demon-possessed elf with a dragon 
orb)
 Nyrrska (male dragonborn ex-assassin turned 
acolyte of Bahamut)
 Tauth-Xelramar (elder brain powering the illi-
thid nautilus Soulmonger)
 Alathar Balefrost (male half-elf lich working 
with Osterneth)
 Kronze (skeletal red dragon “overlord”)
 with
 Osterneth  (“the Bronze Lich,” Vecna’s ex-wife, 
and the PCs’ temporary ally)
 and
 Imazhia (female dragonborn priest of Bahamut)
EPISODE SYNOPSIS
 Thorn Rel recommends that Andraste assume com -
mand of the illithid nautilus Soulmonger, which has 
been without a captain. The heroes and the Knights of 
Ardyn conduct a very successful reconnaissance of Myr -
thon waters before setting sail for Ardynrise. En route, 
Osterneth instructs Metis to guide the ship to prear -
ranged coordinates where Vecna cultists are waiting to 
perform a ritual designed to make the heroes aware of 
past reality changes and protect them against future 
ones, but she also has ulterior motives. On Ardynrise, 
the silver dragon Ardyn gives Andraste a new assign -
ment: helping Arando capture Tsar Dakor, the mad 
regent of the Myrthon Regency, using information 
gained from Tsarana Faijhan, who is staying at Ardyn -
rise as the dragon’s protected guest. Suddenly, Imazhia 
reveals that she’s a Myrthon agent and opens a portal to 
the Far Realm, bringing forth an aberrant attack force 
to destroy Ardyn and recapture the Tsarana.
EVENTS
 Event 1: “This Ship Needs a Captain”
 Thorn Rel urges Andraste to take command of the 
illithid nautilus Soulmonger  and keep Metis the 
changeling in line.
 Event 2: “What’s Wrong With This Picture?”
 With Metis at the helm, the nautilus successfully 
reconnoiters Myrthon waters, gathering intel -
ligence on enemy fleet movements and bases. 
The ship’s elder brain seems very helpful in this 
endeavor and well disposed toward Imazhia, who 
raised it from the dead.
 Event 3: “We Really Don’t Belong Here”
 If Metis is dead-set on cutting down travel time 
by taking the nautilus through the Far Realm, 
another failed series of Dungeoneering checks 
might lead the vessel into a part of the mad plane 
ruled by Mak Thuum Ngatha. Giant tentacles 
ensnare the ship, and a gibbering orb emissary of 
Mak Thuum Ngatha boards the vessel to negotiate 
the crew’s surrender or a more suitable offering to 
the Nine-Tongued Worm.
 Event 4: “By Your Command, My Lady”
 Back in Iomandra, Osterneth informs Metis that 
Alathar Balefrost and his operatives have per-
fected a way to shield the nautilus against changes 
to reality evoked by the Dragon’s Eye constellation 
and orders him to guide the ship to the tiny island 
of Kronze, where Vecnite ritualists are waiting to 
board the ship and cast the ritual to protect the 
vessel from the reality-altering constellation.
 E vent 5: “It’s All About Secrets”
 The ship arrives at the prearranged coordinates—a 
craggy island inhabited by Kronze, a skeletal red 
dragon “overlord” under Alathar Balefrost’s con-
trol. The Vecnites have an artificially constructed 
demiplane that overlaps the natural world at this 
point. While Vecnite ritualists emerge to cast their 
warding spell on the ship, Alathar Balefrost smug -
gles special operatives onto the ship for the trip to 
Ardynrise, but strangely enough, Melech (with his 
otherworldly connection to the starspawn Ulban 
and the ship’s elder brain) can sense them. En 
route, the Vecnites try to deprive the heroes and 
Knights of Ardyn of their memories so that they 
alone are privy to the intelligence gathered in Myr-
thon waters (knowledge is power, after all).
 Event 6: “Many Dragons Died Here”
 Thorn Rel guides the nautilus toward a mist-
shrouded, star-shaped island littered with 
crumbled statues of dragons. Phantom dragons 
descend from the sky to fetch the heroes and bear 
them safely to Ardyn’s fortress atop the spire that 
rises from the middle of the island. The story 
of the island is that a powerful dragonslaying 
wizard once resided here, and that many dragons 
united to slay him, only to fall prey to a power-
ful petrifying ward. They were turned to stone 
and became testaments to the wizard’s power. 
Eventually, one dragon hit upon the idea of hiring 
adventurers to eliminate the wizard, and her plan 
succeeded. Ardyn was that dragon. The heroes 
are reunited with Arando Corynnar and meet 
Faijhan, the daughter of the Myrthon regent. She 
fled her homeland to escape the madness that has 
The Dungeon Master Experience: Event Horizon
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
95
engulfed it. Ardyn asks Andraste to join Arando 
on a “rescue mission” to capture Faijhan’s family, 
including the regent, and thus destabilize the Myr-
thon government.
 Event 7: “So Fall the Knights of Ardyn”
 Having allowed the heroes to lead her straight 
into Ardyn’s lair, the priest Imazhia reveals that 
she’s a Myrthon agent and a “living gate” to the 
Far Realm. She summons forth a large force of 
Myrthon soldiers as well as an old “friend” of the 
heroes—Ramiel, the demon-possessed elf. He uses 
the dragon orb (given to him by the PCs) to subju -
gate Ardyn and turn her against the knights and 
the heroes. Alex’s cousin, the “red shirt” Vastian, 
tries to stop Ramiel and might be killed off. Left 
to his own devices, Nyrrska assassinates Imazhia 
to close the living gate. Whoever kills Imazhia 
becomes deranged (as per permanent confusion ), 
and although a Remove Affliction ritual rids the 
affliction, the individual remains ever haunted by 
glimpses of the Far Realm.
 Event X: “They Call Me Xanthum Zail”
 Depending on how events unfold, the starspawn 
“godling” Allabar might use the Dragon’s Eye 
constellation to trigger another reality change, 
inadvertently bringing Xanthum Zail from the 
Wednesday night campaign into the Monday 
night game. Xanthum displaces Andraste as 
party leader, but who knows what’ll happen 
when he actually shows up and tries to takes 
charge. Wackiness, one assumes. Having been a 
puppet of Allabar himself, Xanthum senses that 
there’s a piece of the starspawn godling lodged 
deep in Kithvolar’s mind—a result of the change 
in reality.
OTHER ROLEPLAYING NOTES
 The Vost Miraj: Will Andraste, Theralyn, and the 
Knights of Ardyn allow Baharoosh—a known Vost 
Miraj agent—anywhere near Ardynrise? Stan! will 
need to be on his game if he wants to keep from 
being sidelined in Events 6 and 7. If he’s forced to 
remain aboard the illithid nautilus, the ship’s elder 
brain can keep him company . . . and turn on him 
once Imazhia tips her hand.
 The Von Hyden Drama: Vastian von Hyden 
(Alex’s NPC cousin) is introduced here for the first 
time. Vastian’s a likeable NPC who can provide 
Alex with news about his beleaguered family and 
is also someone to throw in harm’s way (a “red 
shirt”).
If you’ve followed this column from the beginning, 
you’ve seen this sort of episode summary before. My 
episode summaries are very modular, and each ele -
ment is short and surprisingly easy to write. And you 
know what? They become even easier to produce with 
practice, and they collectively form the “bible” for my 
campaign.
PRePaRing foR 
combat encounte Rs
Once I have an episode summary on paper and in my 
head, preparing for the actual combat encounters is 
relatively easy. There are three things I need to think 
about:
✦✦ Miniatures for key monsters and NPCs
✦✦ Stat blocks for unique monsters and PCs
✦✦ Tactical maps for key encounter locations
I have a large selection of miniatures and, given time, 
can find something appropriate for any monster or 
NPC in my campaign. I keep a selection of “stock 
NPC” minis of different races in containers that I 
take with me to the gaming table, and I pull mon-
ster minis from a giant coffin-sized plastic bin I keep 
under my desk. (It’s the worst organizational system 
in the history of miniatures collecting. Sorting my 
minis is one of those rainy day activities I never get 
around to doing, which is inexcusable since I live in 
Seattle, which gets more than its fair share of rainy 
days.)
 I’ve already discussed my secrets for creating 
instant stat blocks , so I won’t repeat myself here. 
When it comes to maps, I try to reuse existing mate -
rials where practical; for example, I keep an array 
of “stock” tactical maps for shipboard battles. (It’s 
no accident that a lot of the action in my campaign 
takes place on the decks of ships!) Most of my creative 
efforts go into mapping unique and important set 
pieces. For Ardyn’s fortress, I have two options: I can 
design something new or steal a fortress map from 
some previously published source, in the manner I’ve 
previously discussed . Fortunately, since Ardyn prefers 
to assume humanoid form and her home was once 
the lair of a wizard, I don’t have to create something 
humungous befitting a dragon of her stature.
 Given the choice between reusing an existing map 
or creating a new one, I prefer the latter endeavor 
because the act of sitting down to draw the map 
forces me to imagine what goes on inside the location 
I’m creating. It gets me in the mood to dream about 
how Ardyn furnishes her lair and what surprises 
might be in store for heroes who take time to explore 
it. It also inspires me to think of interesting encoun-
ter set-ups and terrain. Some DMs are content with 
a roughly drawn map or doodle, but if I can’t spend a 
generous amount of time creating something new, I’d 
rather just pillage something. When it comes to maps, 
I rarely see the event horizon before I’m completely 
The Dungeon Master Experience: Event Horizon
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
96
sucked in. I could spend an entire weekend design-
ing Ardyn’s fortress, from the time I settle on the 
architectural layout to the time I finish putting pen 
to graph paper. Talk about getting sucked into a black 
hole.
 Next week I’ll let some of my esteemed players 
chime in and mention a few things they’ve learned 
about Dungeon Mastering from the weekly abuse 
inflicted upon them by yours truly.
Until the next encounter!
Behind Every Good 
DM, Part 1
11/24/2011
WEDNESDAY NIGHT.
Mat Smith’s character, Garrot, is trapped in the Far Realm. 
His only means of escape is to fire himself from a giant 
catapult, which sounds dumb until you realize he’s trapped 
in a part of the Far Realm that has molded itself around his 
own memories and beliefs—and Garrot’s not particularly 
bright. Unfortunately, the catapult is guarded by a wizard 
wearing a pointy hat and surrounded by a force field that 
cannot be breached, only circumvented by digging under it 
with an apparatus of Kwalish . Fortunately, Garrot is not 
by himself—the Far Realm has conjured minion versions 
of all his adventuring companions, past and present. Will 
they help Garrot escape, or won’t they? That’s for the other 
players to decide, once they realize they’re playing alter -
nate, glass-jawed versions of their characters. Wackiness 
ensues, but the adventure has serious undertones, for Gar -
rot’s fate (and his future in the campaign) rests squarely in 
their hands. In the hands of less capable players, I shudder 
to think what could happen.
Week after week, I try to demonstrate by way of 
example that the role of the Dungeon Master really 
isn’t that demanding—not if you can think on your 
feet and have a few good players on your side. A 
couple weeks ago, I was listening to the commentary 
tracks for Season 3 of Leverage  when John Rogers, 
one of the show’s executive producers (and co-author 
of the 4th Edition Manual of the Planes ), joked that 
directing isn’t rocket science, and I realized that 
DMing isn’t either. There’s an art to it, however; and 
like artists, no two DMs are alike. What serves me 
well as a DM doesn’t necessarily serve you well as a 
DM. We paint our campaign canvases with differ-
ent colors using different brushes, as it were. Doesn’t 
mean your campaign is inherently better than mine, 
or vice versa. However, I think it’s safe to say that 
neither of our campaigns would be much fun if our 
players sucked rocks.
 If you ask film and TV show directors what they 
prize above all else, nine times out of ten they’ll say 
“a great cast.” If you have great actors, you can turn 
humdrum material into something enjoyable and 
excellent material into something spectacular. Simi -
larly, if a DM has great players, his or her job becomes 
a LOT easier.
 I have two regular groups of players — sixteen 
players total. Some of them are hardcore roleplay-
ers, a few are hardcore min-maxers, and all of them 
heed the unspoken social contract that says, in a 
nutshell, “Thou shalt not be a jerk.” Because it’s the 
week of Thanksgiving and I’m heading out on vaca -
tion, I decided to ask my players to carry the bulk of 
this article. Frankly, I think they know more about 
my strengths and weaknesses as a Dungeon Master 
than I do, for they’ve been watching me DM for sev-
eral years now. Not surprisingly, they have insightful 
things to say about the art of DMing.
The Dungeon Master Experience: Behind Every Good DM, Part 1
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
97
 Recently I asked my players to respond via email 
to the following question:
Based on your experience as a player in my cam -
paign, what’s one helpful bit of advice or lesson 
you’d like to share with the DMs of the world 
who are reading this article?
Here’s what some of the players from my Wednesday 
night game wrote:
 Chris Champagne
 Characters:  Kael (deva cleric), Kosh (tiefling 
warlock)
 Often, a DM may have an idea of a chain of events 
they predict a party to go through. Perhaps even 
in a certain order. However, players get their own 
ideas. The word I use for what Chris seems to do 
is “back threading.” If there is some super crucial 
resource, some super critical NPC the party needs 
to interact with, even if the party kills that NPC, 
Chris will haunt them with the ghost if necessary. 
The crucial bits come through no matter what, and 
the campaign evolves and moves forward. And one 
other tidbit: Chris never forgets that each player 
(and thus each character) wants to feel like a star 
at times, the center of the action, the intrigue and 
attention. He never forgets to shine the spotlight 
on them (whether the player is ready or not). In a 
Perkins campaign, everyone gets to be a star.
 Andrew Finch
 Characters:  Abraxas (dragonborn warlord), Alagon 
(revenant ranger), Ravok (goliath battlemind)
 The most important lesson that I learned about 
being a DM was “don’t say No.” I realized after 
seeing Chris apply this principle that it is similar 
to the rules of improvisation theater. Roleplaying 
and improv have a lot in common. As the DM, you 
should simply accept what your players want to 
do and then put your own twist on it. Just because 
you say “Yes” does not mean that you give the play-
ers what they want; in fact, it is fact better if you 
say yes but then give them something they don’t 
expect.
  I remember the time when the party had killed 
a mind flayer. A crystal shard grew out of its head 
and started to fly away. My character recognized 
that it was a memory crystal and that it was most 
likely taking the mind flayer’s memories back to 
the illithid collective mind. He told the party to 
smash it, and as they did that, I asked if my char-
acter could use Read Thoughts to get anything out 
of the memories as the crystal was shattered. Chris 
said, “Sure . . . make a saving throw.” It was bril -
liant. It gave me what I had asked for and at the 
same time filled me with anticipation of what was 
to come next. As my character took in all the mem -
ories of the slain mind flayer, he had to spend the 
rest of the campaign struggling to keep that mind 
flayer’s personality under control. It gave the party 
a bunch of information about what was going on 
in the campaign but also gave my character a very 
interesting subplot.
 Rodney Thompson
 Characters:  Vargas (eladrin avenger), Nevin (half-
ling rogue)
 Be careful when you blow up the ship. What 
I mean by that is that the most controversial 
moment in the campaign, at least from the players’ 
experience so far, was when Xanthum (played by 
Curt Gould) blew up the party’s ship. That was the 
moment that I think that we felt the most power-
less and blindsided and the moment that brought 
us closest to rebelling as a group. It was very much 
a rust monster moment—the moment when some-
thing we’d invested a bunch of money into was 
taken away.
  Now, in the end things worked out (and for the 
better, storywise), but that only happened because 
of a couple factors: first because we’ve played 
together a while and trust that the DM’s not being 
arbitrary for no reason, and second because most 
of us are seasoned players that enjoy exploring 
our characters’ weaknesses as well as strengths. 
We’re players who don’t mind losing an eye, get-
ting sucked into the Nine Hells, and so forth, 
because we know it’s a chance to distinguish our 
characters. Losing the ship was a big blow, but for 
Chris Youngs it was an open door to becoming 
evil. For me, seeing the direction that Deimos was 
headed, it was a chance to explore what happens 
when Vargas is torn between loyalty to a childhood 
friend and being a good-aligned character travel -
ing with an increasingly evil party. For Curt, it was 
The Dungeon Master Experience: Behind Every Good DM, Part 1
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
98
a chance to explore betrayal (even mind-controlled 
betrayal) and the ramifications of being the guy 
nobody trusts anymore. Yeah, that may be ascrib -
ing a lot of complex motivation to us as players, but 
I think it’s a fair analysis.
 Trevor Kidd
 Character: Rhasgar (dragonborn paladin)
 As a DM, Chris does quite a few noteworthy 
things, but the one that sticks with me the most 
is how much character he gives each NPC. Some -
times it seems like they’re fleshed out like a main 
character in a story, but other times, he manages 
to create a memorable character with just a few 
words and actions.
  An example that sticks with me from shortly 
after joining the campaign is Captain Prak, a 
member of the Dragovar empire’s martial caste. 
Apparently he had blackmailed the party before 
my character, Rhasgar, had joined a few sessions 
earlier. We ran into him again (the first time for 
me) after colliding with members of a thieves’ 
guild called the Horned Alliance. The party was 
later tasked with assaulting the Horned Alliance’s 
stronghold to sweep away the last remnants of 
the gang. Upon our arrival, we found Captain 
Prak leading the forces that had “contained” the 
remaining members of the guild. Prak started 
insulting and talking down to the party, not 
believing such a worthless group of casteless 
non-dragonborn could have been sent by the mag-
istrate to deal with the problem. It was just a few 
condescending lines of dialog, some sneers, and 
some sideways insults, and Rhasgar had as much 
animosity for him as any true villain they had 
faced already. After successfully completing the 
mission, we were all satisfied to see Captain Prak’s 
dumbfounded look. When the magistrate asked 
us what we wanted as a reward, Chris Youngs 
and I both said simultaneously, “Fire Prak!” Our 
request was granted instantly, and our victory was 
complete.
  It doesn’t take much to flesh out a supporting 
character, and not all bad guys are villains. Some -
times they’re just jerks, and taking them down a 
peg can be just as satisfying as saving a town.
 Greg Bilsland
 Characters:  Amnon (tiefling rogue), Brell (genasi 
ranger), Ashe (deva invoker)
 Don’t fight purple dragons that can dominate you 
while on 100-foot cliff ledges? Don’t attack young 
copper dragons at level 1 when you’re alone? 
When you’re below 0 hit points and stable, by the 
gods, stay down and don’t get back up! All of these 
examples point a truth about Chris’s game, and 
perhaps D&D games in general: The most memo -
rable moments are often the deadliest and most 
harrowing. Don’t pull punches just because you 
think you’ll upset players. Sure, characters might 
die, but deadly and near-death experiences are 
quintessential parts of the game. Looking back on 
those experiences as a player, I don’t feel the same 
grumpiness I might have felt at the time. In fact, 
now they’re joked, and that’s worth a lot more than 
if my character had simply beaten those encoun-
ters easily, got the XP, and moved on.
Lessons  LeaRned
Want to know if you’re doing a good job as a DM? 
Ask your players what they’ve learned about DMing 
by watching you work behind the screen. If they say 
“Nothing,” you know you’re in trouble!
 Behind every good DM are good players. I’ve seen 
good DMs run games for bad players, at least until the 
paralysis sets in or until they’re reduced to shambling 
wrecks. Bad players are DM kryptonite. That said, I 
recommend that every DM endure at least one hor-
rendous player experience to remind him or her of 
the value of great players, of which I probably have 
more than my fair share.
 Next week, in Part 2 of this article, you’ll hear 
from some of the players in my Monday group.
Until the next encounter!
The Dungeon Master Experience: Behind Every Good DM, Part 1
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
99
Behind Every Good 
DM, Part 2
12/1/2011
MONDAY NIGHT.
Against the wishes of his adventuring companions, Peter 
Schaefer’s changeling character, Metis (in mind flayer 
form), took the party’s ship—a recently commandeered illi -
thid nautilus—into the Far Realm for the second time. This 
enabled the ship to skirt vast distances of ocean in the natu -
ral world. However, his earlier attempt to navigate the Far 
Realm nearly ended in disaster, and no one expected this 
latest foray to go any better.
 Knowing how unpredictable Peter can be at times, I had 
anticipated the possibility that Metis might take the ship 
back into the Far Realm and even planned an encounter 
should the ship become stranded there. However, I wasn’t 
prepared for the success with which Metis piloted the ship 
or his intended destination. Peter had decided, on his own, 
that the time had come to take the fight to the campaign’s 
main villain, Starlord Evendor, and attack Evendor’s obser -
vatory deep in the heart of enemy waters.
 Navigating the ship through the Far Realm was handled 
as a skill challenge. However, when I asked Peter where 
exactly he wanted the ship to appear in the natural world, 
his intentions became horrifically clear. He aimed to crash 
the ship into Starlord Evendor’s observatory—and on this 
particular occasion, his aim was dead on. The ship mate -
rialized in the air above the observatory and plunged 
nose-down through the domed rooftop, embedding itself 
within the tower’s metal superstructure. Everyone aboard 
the ship took massive amounts of damage, some more 
than others, and several friendly NPCs aboard the vessel 
perished instantly. The impact also set off every alarm in 
the tower.
Welcome to Part 2 of this article! If you haven’t read 
Part 1, start there before pressing on.
 Two weeks ago, I shared with you my outline for 
this particular “episode” of the campaign , which is 
nothing like what’s described above. Suffice to say, 
Peter pretty much torpedoed my best-laid plans 
when his character abducted the campaign and 
took the party to an altogether unexpected place. 
I suddenly found myself flipping to the end of my 
campaign 
binder, where I’d placed my notes on Star-
lord Evendor’s tower observatory and its occupants. I 
hadn’t planned for the heroes to reach this encoun-
ter location until they were at least three levels 
higher, but when things like this happen, you just 
gotta roll with it.
 I don’t get scared when players take control of 
the campaign. There’s a little bit of role reversal that 
happens because now I’m the one who’s reacting to 
events, and I can’t simply throw my hands into the 
air and shouting, “I didn’t plan for this!” DMing is all 
about improvisation, and the show must go on. What 
do I do in situations like this? I use what I know and 
what I have, and I make up the rest. Although my 
plans for the session were jettisoned within the first 
twenty minutes, I found the experience exhilarating 
because the players were well and truly freaked out, 
and there was some wonderful inter-party conflict as 
a consequence of Metis’s bold actions.
 The point of this article, which I mentioned last 
week as well, is that you can learn a lot about DMing 
by listening to what your players have observed 
watching you “do your thing.” Recently I sent an 
email to my players, asking them the following 
question:
Based on your experience as a player in my cam -
paign, what’s one helpful bit of advice or lesson 
you’d like to share with the DMs of the world 
who are reading this article?
Here’s what some of the players from my Monday 
night game wrote:
 Stan!
 Character:  Baharoosh (dragonborn rogue)
 We always have choices as to where the adventur-
ers will go next, and those are meaningful in that 
things will continue to develop while we’re gone. 
If we choose to deal with Plot A first, when we 
come back, Plots B and C will have developed in 
our absence. It gives the world a feeling of great 
depth and makes every story arc choice feel more 
impactful. Sometime we can CREATE a big prob -
lem for ourselves just by letting a little one go 
unattended for a long while.
 Bruce R. Cordell
 Character: Melech (tiefling warlock)
 Chris is a master of creating colorful and easily 
distinguishable NPCs. His tool for accomplishing 
this is manner (friendly, suspicious, forgetful, etc.), 
speed of speaking, and accent. The more you, as a 
DM, can emulate any of these traits to differentiate 
your NPCs, the more your players will appreciate 
The Dungeon Master Experience: Behind Every Good DM, Part 2
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
100
your game, because the creatures they meet while 
playing will seem to almost have in independent 
life of their own.
 Matt Sernett
 Character: Bartho (human fighter)
 The plot is everywhere. You can’t escape it. But 
it’s not a monolithic freight train bearing you on 
whether you like it or not; it’s a tangled web from 
which everyone dangles. I never feel railroaded; 
instead, we’re often overwhelmed by options. 
Every NPC seems to have a story, so much so that 
I sometimes want to tell another player not to talk 
to an NPC. It’s fantastic, and it’s a way of running a 
game that I took to heart when designing the Nev -
erwinter Campaign Setting.
 Nick DiPetrillo
 Characters: Yuriel (genasi swordmage), Theralyn 
(elf ranger)
 The most important lesson is a simple one: be 
open. Take a chance on a player from outside your 
usual circles. If someone wants to launch them -
selves out of a catapult toward the enemy ship, let 
him! When the story starts to spin off in a direc -
tion you never anticipated, set your notes aside 
and go along for the ride. If you can’t find rules to 
support what a player wants to do, then you create 
rules. You should even be open to your own odd-
ball ideas. Why not have a session where players 
take on the role of their characters’ henchmen or 
have a flashback story arc that returns the group to 
their first-level selves? If you shut yourself off from 
the possibilities, you can still tell a great story, but 
legends are born when the whole group collabo-
rates and pushes each other to go a little crazy.
Lessons  LeaRned
In a heroic fantasy movie, the actions, dialogue, and 
fates of the heroes are scripted. Not so in a D&D cam -
paign. Good D&D players don’t pass up opportunities 
to take ownership of the campaign and make choices 
that affect its outcome, and I never get annoyed 
when that happens. Good D&D players also don’t cry 
“Foul!” when things don’t go their characters’ way. I 
can deal with a lot of negative player behavior, but I 
can’t stand whiners.
 Yeah, okay, I sometimes feel guilty throwing high-
level challenges at low-level characters when the 
players have no say in the matter (and there are valid 
reasons for doing so). However, when one or more 
players make a conscious decision to invite disaster, I 
have no qualms letting them stumble into harm’s way 
and seeing the wreckage pile up. That’s where all the 
best campaign stories come from!
 In my campaign, it’s absolutely possible for char-
acters to hurl themselves at enemies of much higher 
level. I try to make levels in my game semi-transpar-
ent so that the players have a general sense of which 
foes are within their abilities to defeat, but I don’t 
sweat when a character picks a fight with an enemy 
much stronger than him. I won’t adjust the encoun-
ter difficulty to match the party level, either. Players 
are allowed to bite off more than their characters can 
chew. Great risk begets great reward . . . and a higher 
probability of getting killed. The same thing happens 
in World of Warcraft when you decide to take your 
level 70 character into a realm populated by level 
80 monsters; sure, you might survive, but it’s a scary, 
dangerous place to be.
 In the case of the Monday night group, the adven-
turers (fortunately) have the element of surprise, but 
(unfortunately) they’re facing multiple encounters’ 
worth of enemies at once, all higher level than them. 
I look forward to seeing how they fare under the 
circumstances and where the campaign goes should 
they prevail or perish.
Until the next encounter!
The Dungeon Master Experience: Behind Every Good DM, Part 2
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
101
Riot Acts
12/8/2011
WEDNESDAY NIGHT.
Chris Youngs plays a tiefling sorcerer named Deimos, but 
he is better known in the world of Iomandra as Sea King 
Impstinger, an up-and-coming merchant lord with a fleet 
of thirteen ships under his command. His hated rival, Sea 
King Senestrago, gets the heroes’ attention by placing a 
catastrophic dragon egg aboard the Prince of Lies, one of 
Impstinger’s ships. Unless the heroes agree to the terms 
spelled out by Senestrago’s underling, an irksome tiefling 
captain named Eriesius Devilray, a ritual cast upon the egg 
will cause it to explode, sinking the Prince of Lies and kill -
ing its crew.
 The heroes decide to teleport to the Prince of Lies via 
a network of magic teleportation circles that connect all 
the ships in the Impstinger fleet. Deimos plans to distract 
Captain Devilray and his retinue so that Vargas, Rodney 
Thompson’s character, can attempt to dispel the magic cast 
on the enormous dragon egg. Using an invisibility spell, 
Vargas sneaks past the egg’s guards and begins making 
Arcana checks. As he sprinkles magic dust on the egg to 
enhance his Arcana checks, he hears a faint sneeze and 
realizes there’s a tiny, invisible creature perched atop the 
egg: Devilray’s imp familiar! Vargas immediately casts 
time stop, preventing the imp from sounding the alarm and 
buying him time to successfully disarm the egg. When the 
time stop ends, the imp warns Devilray that the egg has 
been disabled, and all hell breaks loose.
 Badly wounded, Devilray is forced to teleport back to 
his ship and immediately plots his escape. Deimos casts a 
Phantom Steed ritual, allowing the heroes to gallop across 
the ocean and board Devilray’s ship before it gets too far. 
However, Devilray’s crew is ready for them.
 As the heroes subdue Devilray’s crew, the ship’s elemen -
tal rudder is activated, enabling the vessel to cross a vast 
distance by traveling briefly through the Elemental Chaos. 
When the ship reappears in the natural world, it’s sur -
rounded by six of Sea King Senestrago’s warships waiting 
at a prearranged rendezvous point! Realizing they’ve fallen 
prey to Devilray’s back-up trap, the heroes decide to stall 
for 10 minutes while Deimos creates a teleportation circle. 
Meanwhile, Vargas discovers that Devilray’s ship is riddled 
with secret passages and finds Devilray himself hidden 
within them. A close-quarters fight leads to Devilray’s 
capture, and Deimos gives Devilray a dire message to pass 
along to Sea King Senestrago before the heroes abandon 
the ship and make good their escape.
 Yeah, I know, this adventure sounds a lot like a Star 
Trek episode! Given that I run a nautical-themed cam -
paign wherein approximately half of the action takes place 
on ships and the other half takes place on remote islands, 
it should come as no surprise that all five Star Trek  tele-
vision series serve as inspiration. But we’re not here this 
week to talk about Trek. This week, I’d like to talk about the 
structure I use to build combat encounters that feel epic, 
regardless of whether the player characters are actually 
epic level.
Before we begin, I think it’s safe to say that 4th Edi -
tion has been around long enough that more and 
more DMs are gearing up to run epic-level adven-
tures and campaigns. It’s taken years for my weekly 
campaigns to reach the epic tier, but here we are at 
last! And so far, it’s been a snap. Shocked?  Having run 
tedious epic-level campaigns in the past, I know I am.
 The epic tier makes a lot of DMs nervous. I sus -
pect that’s because the characters are much more 
powerful and have access to many more abilities, and 
consequently it can be hard to challenge them week 
after week. Nevertheless, in my campaigns there have 
been more character deaths in the epic tier than the 
previous two tiers combined, so I don’t buy the argu -
ment that epic-level characters are indestructible 
(and neither do my players). The other challenge DMs 
face when running epic-level games is the simple fact 
that there are fewer epic-level monsters to choose 
from, which means a DM doesn’t have as much pre-
generated content to work with. I’ve gotten around 
this problem by repurposing stat blocks, as I’ve dis -
cussed previously.
 When Rich Baker asked me to contribute some 
advice to his “Rule of Three” column concerning 
the obvious DMing challenge of “keeping up” with 
the game’s power curve, I sent him an email that 
included the following advice for epic-tier encounters:
Don’t show the players your entire hand at once. Let 
encounters unfold gradually, with new threats or challenges 
announcing themselves over a period of several rounds. I 
think of an encounter as a three-act play (or, if you prefer a 
different analogy, a three-stage rocket). I introduce a threat 
in Act 1, add reinforcements in Act 2, and then add a com -
plication or twist in Act 3. Depending on how the heroes 
are faring, the “twist” might be to their advantage rather 
than to their detriment. For example, Act 1 might begin 
with the heroes defending their keep against an ancient 
red dragon. In Act 2, villainous rogues in league with the 
dragon announce themselves by attacking the keep from 
within. In Act 3, a gold dragon allied with the party shows 
up, chases off the wounded red dragon, and helps the heroes 
catch the fleeing rogues.
Not every encounter can or should have three acts, 
but it’s a great format to follow for major combat 
encounters of ANY level because it keeps the players 
on their toes and varies the tension as the advan-
tage shifts back and forth between the heroes and 
the villains. If you’re familiar with literary three-act 
structures, you’ll know that a lot of playwrights and 
screenwriters use them when crafting plays and writ -
ing scenes for much the same reason.
The Dungeon Master Experience: Riot Acts
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
102
 The events described at the beginning of this arti -
cle follow this three-act format closely. Here’s how the 
Wednesday night encounter breaks down:
Act 1: The initial threat is introduced. The heroes 
confront Captain Devilray and take strides to prevent 
the catastrophic dragon egg from exploding. When 
the egg is finally disabled, combat erupts.
Act 2: Reinforcements “arrive.” Captain Devilray 
teleports away when first bloodied, and the heroes 
chase after his ship. They board his vessel and battle 
the crew. (In this case, Devilray’s subordinates are 
the “reinforcements,” even through the heroes come 
to them.)
Act 3: The twist. The heroes find themselves sur -
rounded by a clearly overwhelming force. Now 
they’re the ones who must flee.
As expected, the heroes were too busy negotiating, 
arguing, looting, and running about to take short 
rests between the three acts, which added ten-
sion and forced the players to be mindful of their 
resources. That said, the encounter could have 
“gone south” had circumstances been different. As 
a thought exercise, let’s consider how the encounter 
might have changed had the following occurred:
aLteRnate ReaLity: 
vaRgas faiLs to 
disaRm the egg.
Perhaps Vargas fails his Arcana checks to remove the 
destructive spell cast on the egg, or maybe the evil 
imp detects him before he can finish his work. Either 
way, Captain Devilray and his retinue teleport away 
moments before the egg explodes and destroys the 
Prince of Lies. Each character gets to take one action 
before the explosion engulfs the ship, dealing 500 
damage. Had this actually occurred, Acts 2 and 3 
might have changed as follows:
Act 2: Reinforcements arrive. Captain Devilray’s 
crew plucks the heroes’ corpses out of the floating 
debris for delivery to Sea King Senestrago. Heroes 
who weren’t killed in the blast might sneak aboard 
the ship and try to commandeer it.
Act 3: The twist. Captain Devilray intends to take 
his ship to the secret rendezvous point. The heroes 
must either convince him to betray Senestrago or find 
some other way to escape their predicament. If they 
fail, they are rescued and revived by one of Senes -
trago’s rivals—another Sea King to whom the party is 
now indebted.
Lessons  LeaRned
The example above illustrates the power of the three-
act structure. Even if an encounter doesn’t unfold 
exactly as planned, thinking of each major combat 
encounter in terms of three acts gives you room to 
ramp up the danger or diminish it. You no longer 
need to concern yourself with perfecting encounter 
balance because the three-act structure lets you make 
adjustments as the encounter unfolds. Epic level 
becomes no harder to manage than any other tier.
 It’s worth noting that not every three-act encounter 
needs to be structured exactly as I’ve described above. 
For example, I can envision a structure wherein Act 
1 introduces a threat, Act 2 presents an unexpected 
twist, and Act 3 is when the reinforcements arrive. 
Here’s an example: In Act 1, the heroes are leaving 
a tavern in Fallcrest when they are approached and 
threatened by a gang of rogues who seem intent on rob-
bing them. Battle erupts until the start of Act 2, when a 
cutthroat suddenly recognizes one of the heroes as an 
old childhood friend. He instructs his fellow rogues to 
back off and apologizes profusely. He even offers to buy 
his PC friend a drink. Before things get too chummy, 
Act 3 begins when a rival gang of rogues jumps the 
wounded heroes and their newfound allies.
 Once you’ve experimented with the three-act 
structure, you’ll begin to see all kinds of variations 
and permutations that also work quite well, which 
are probably worth discovering on your own.
Until the next encounter!
The Dungeon Master Experience: Riot Acts
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
103
My Campaign Has 
Issues
12/15/2011
MONDAY NIGHT.
The heroes are citizens of Arkhosia, a collection of more 
than two thousand islands spread over half the world. 
Centuries ago, a dragonborn empire sent its fleets across 
the Dragon Sea to conquer the human nation of Bael 
Nerath and the dwarven nation of Gar Morra. A bitter 
war also led to the destruction of the tiefling nation of Bael 
Turath. After these conquered islands were absorbed into 
the Dragovar Empire, dragonborn became the dominant 
race. Humans, dwarves, tieflings, and other “lesser” races 
became second-class citizens of the mighty empire, though 
sincere efforts were made to preserve their cultures and reli -
gions under Dragovar rule.
 Fed up with years of oppression, terrorists from Bael 
Nerath launch a daring attack on the Dragovar capital. 
The heroes tried to stop it but failed, and the beleaguered 
empire was forced to send a fleet to make an example of 
the humans. General Rhutha, a dragonborn warrior who 
embodies the best and worst traits of the Dragovar Empire, 
believes that humans should be grateful for the mercy her 
people have shown them. She does not bow before terror -
ists or believe that humans have any rights beyond those 
given to them by the Emperor. She is ready to make war 
to ensure that Bael Nerath never gains its independence, 
for that turn of events would surely weaken the empire 
and reignite old conflicts. However, some of the heroes 
are human, and their noble actions of late have proven to 
General Rhutha that not all humans are fools. She’s will -
ing to hear them out, and they persuade her to meet with 
the leaders of Bael Nerath before crushing the rebellion 
beneath her jackboots. Still, the heroes don’t know whether 
to trust General Rhutha. Is this warmonger capable of set -
ting aside her deepest prejudices for the good of the empire, 
and is there any way to end the unrest? And how much do 
they really care?
The Star Trek franchise has more influence on my 
campaign than any other brand of entertainment. I 
steal from it shamelessly, right down to its episodic 
structure and its vast, never-ending mythology. One 
thing that has kept Star Trek relevant for generations, 
one of the reasons why it resonates with so many dif -
ferent people from so many different cultures, is that 
it tackles real-life issues. So does my campaign, and 
that’s the way my players like it.
 Not every Trek episode deals with important issues, 
however. Not every episode offers thought-provoking 
commentary on the horrors of war, race relations, 
politics and religion, life and death. Some of them are 
just dumb fun. As it happens, there are moments in 
our existence when we want to explore “the human 
condition” and other times when we want to sit back, 
set our brains on stun, and watch big stuff go boom. 
Silly, paradoxical creatures that we are, we find both 
superficiality and depth entertaining. Star Trek  writ-
ers had the smarts to give us both, and I make a 
conscious effort to do the same as a DM.
 A campaign can get by without delving into the 
sorts of “issues” that magnetize or galvanize our 
moral compasses and spark debates and wars on 
Earth. I’ve seen player characters lose themselves in 
vast dungeon complexes, killing monsters week after 
week, never once wrestling with the “why?” ques -
tion as they plunge endlessly downward into deeper 
treasure-laden vaults. However, a campaign suddenly 
comes to life and feels more “real” when the heroes 
tackle issues from time to time. But there’s a fine line 
to walk, which perhaps can best be expressed as a 
question: Is it possible to create an arena in which 
players can have fun wrestling with serious issues 
such as political corruption, slavery, noble sacrifice, 
prejudice, genocide, and ethical misconduct? I believe 
so.
 D&D is first and foremost a game, and a game is 
supposed to entertain players, not make them feel 
like they’re in school, in church, or at work.
 That doesn’t mean I, as a DM, can’t put my play -
ers and their characters in situations where their 
morals, ethics, and perspectives might be tested or 
questioned on occasion. For example, how might the 
characters deal with a friendly dwarf wizard who 
keeps half-orc slaves? How would they interact with 
angry farmers hell-bent on burning innocent women 
at the stake because their crops are dying and they 
don’t know why?
 D&D is more than a game—it’s a roleplaying 
game. Week in and week out, the players are trying 
to put themselves in the boots of their characters and 
make decisions that reflect their characters’ chosen 
alignments and personality traits. Roleplaying is, 
by its nature, an outlet for exploring different facets 
of human and animal behavior. Roleplaying is, for 
most of us, a safe outlet to explore various issues we 
humans face in real life, but in a safe environment 
free of actual consequence. In a D&D game, I can kill 
and pillage to my heart’s content and still be outraged 
The Dungeon Master Experience: My Campaign Has Issues
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
104
by an evil king who burns a church to the ground 
because its priests worshiped an unpopular god. 
Issues give players who like to roleplay something to 
sink their teeth into.
Lessons  LeaRned
I can’t assume that every Dungeon Master has a lot 
of experience running campaigns that tackle serious 
issues, but I’d be surprised to hear from a DM who 
ran a D&D game that didn’t, at some point, confront 
players with a moral dilemma, ethical conundrum, 
or similar happenstance. One classic example: The 
heroes slaughter a tribe of evil, rampaging goblins 
and find a cave containing several harmless goblin 
children. Suddenly the characters are faced with an 
ethical conundrum: Do they kill the goblin children, 
or do they let the children survive? Some DMs avoid 
the issue by removing the children from the equation, 
if for no other reason that not all players enjoy wres -
tling with this kind of issue, and that’s perfectly cool.
 If you think your campaign needs issues, here’s 
some general advice that has served me well over the 
years.
Try not to beat the players over the head with 
an issue. A player isn’t going to get excited by a “very 
special adventure” about the evils of racial intoler-
ance, or a world in which his dwarf character is 
bad-mouthed by every non-dwarf NPC week after 
week. Better to present an issue in light brush strokes, 
and leave it to the players to make a big deal out of it 
(or not). If the players would rather turn a blind eye 
than confront an issue, let them. Some issues will 
resonate; others won’t.
Let the players make their own judgments. Most 
players I know don’t want to be told how their char-
acters should feel or how they should react to a given 
situation. They prefer to make those judgments on 
their own, based on their understanding of what 
motivates and provokes their characters. If the char-
acters happen upon a wounded monster, leave it to 
them to decide whether it’s better to slaughter or heal 
the creature. Imposing your own judgment on the 
situation doesn’t make the decision any more engag -
ing or challenging for the players.
Present issues fairly and responsibly. Ye gods, if 
you decide to present a controversial issue within the 
framework of your D&D campaign, be aware that an 
issue, by definition, can be seen from more than one 
point of view. If you intend to use religious fanatics 
as villains, for example, it would behoove you not to 
use them as tools to reflect your own personal misgiv -
ings about organized religion or to cast all religion in 
a negative light. Better to show more than one 
side of religious devotion by including a few 
devotees who aren’t villainous and fanati -
cal. Trust me when I say the party cleric will 
thank you.
Until the next encounter!
The Dungeon Master Experience: My Campaign Has Issues
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
105
Player vs. 
Player
12/22/2011
WEDNESDAY NIGHT.
Several sessions ago, the heroes learned the true name 
of the Raven Queen, the god of fate. The details of how 
this occurred aren’t important; what IS important is that 
the heroes have, over the course of the campaign, made 
enemies of Vecna and his followers. The god of secrets has 
been searching for clues to the Raven Queen’s true name for 
ages, hoping this knowledge would enable him to usurp her 
portfolio and become the undisputed Lord of Death. Obvi -
ously, the Raven Queen doesn’t want her secret to fall into 
Vecna’s hand.
 Rodney Thompson plays Vargas, a sworn servant of the 
Raven Queen. Recently, the Raven Queen contacted Vargas 
and declared that he was destined to become her eternal 
champion, but first he must keep her true name hidden 
from infidels who might use the knowledge against her. 
She tasked him with slaying everyone in possession of this 
knowledge, starting with his friends.
 Last night, worshipers of the Raven Queen began to 
flock to Vargas’s side, keen to help him complete whatever 
tasks the Raven Queen sets before him. Meanwhile, Vargas 
has been searching for a way to protect the Raven Queen’s 
secret without turning on his fellow party members. The 
Vecnites are known to have rituals that can erase people’s 
memories. Perhaps he can use such a ritual on his com -
panions and erase the Raven Queen’s true name from 
their minds, but that would mean confronting the servants 
of Vecna directly (a risky proposition, to say the least). So 
far, he’s declined to share the details of his “mission” with 
the rest of the party. Will he find an end-around before the 
Raven Queen grows impatient, and is the party doomed to 
self-destruct?
What would drive a Dungeon Master, particularly an 
experienced one, to deliberately turn player charac-
ters against one another? Seems like an act of sheer 
madness. D&D is supposed to encourage player coop-
eration and teamwork, and frankly, players are quite 
capable of turning on one another without the DM’s 
assistance. Why provoke inter-party discord and 
distrust?
 Maybe I am chaotic evil. Maybe I’m just plain 
crazy for putting Rodney’s character in the situation 
of choosing between his deity and his friends, but as 
a storyteller the predicament fascinates me on many 
levels. First and foremost, it’s a conundrum that isn’t 
solved by the simple casting of a spell, the spending 
of gold pieces, or the success of a skill check. Rodney 
isn’t going to buy or talk his way out of this one! I also 
love the notion that the Raven Queen’s command not 
only puts Vargas to the test but also puts Rodney’s 
play skill to the test. How much information should 
he share with the other players? How ready and will -
ing is he to put his character in jeopardy? Can he 
figure out some “out of the box” way to protect the 
Raven Queen’s secret and still keep the party from 
imploding?
 As a DM, I’m willing to risk party implosion for 
good drama. I’m enamored with the notion that 
good conflict doesn’t always come from without; 
sometimes it comes from within. A lot of television 
series rely on internal conflict to fuel the drama. 
I’m thinking now of Lee “Apollo” Adama and Kara 
“Starbuck” Thrace from the reimagined Battlestar 
Galactica  series. Here we have two heroic charac-
ters periodically at odds with one another as well as 
their commanding officers. In some cases, they make 
choices that fracture their “adventuring party,” fuel -
ing much of the show’s drama. Yet somehow, they 
always pull it together. In my campaign, I’ve adopted 
the mentality that whether the party survives or not 
is totally in the players’ hands. My job is to keep the 
campaign alive until such time as the players’ choices 
lead to a natural or sudden conclusion. As far as I can 
tell, my players enjoy getting together every Wednes-
day night to play their characters. They’re not going 
to let themselves become the instruments of the cam -
paign’s demise, and so they fight me at every turn to 
keep the party from disintegrating. How far will my 
players go to keep the game alive? Pretty damn far. 
They enable me to indulge my inner demon’s story-
telling shenanigans.
Lessons  LeaRned
The title of this article is a deliberate misnomer. 
Despite everything I’ve said up to this point, I’m not 
really talking about “player vs. player” conflict at all. 
It’s a silly DM who turns players against one another. 
What I’m really talking about is “character vs. charac -
ter,” and an experienced DM who knows his players 
well can run a game in which the heroes occasionally 
find themselves at cross-purposes that could, under 
certain conditions, escalate into all-out conflict. It’s 
been my experience that you need three things to 
pull it off:
✦✦ Players who genuinely like each other and 
enjoy a roleplaying challenge.
✦✦ A little foreshadowing, so the players can 
steel themselves.
✦✦ Wiggle room, so that the players can consider 
their alternatives.
My Wednesday night players are fond of inserting 
little “character vs. character” moments into the 
campaign that are usually played for laughs, so I 
felt pretty comfortable inciting a more serious inter-
party conflict by testing Vargas’s loyalty to the Raven 
The Dungeon Master Experience: Player vs. Player
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
106
Queen. I’m lucky because my players all have thick 
skins and a sense of humor, and they rarely let a good 
roleplaying opportunity go to waste. There was a nice 
bit of foreshadowing when the characters discovered 
the Raven Queen’s true name. The players knew 
that this discovery might come back to haunt them 
at some point, particularly given Vargas’s link to the 
Raven Queen, and the conflict organically stemmed 
from this discovery. Finally, I could’ve had the Raven 
Queen tell Vargas to turn on his friends immediately, 
but that paints Rodney into a corner. Allowing Vargas 
time to wrestle with the decision gives Rodney time 
to think of ways to satisfy the Raven Queen’s desires 
and save the party.
I have no qualms about creating situations in which 
characters are incited to turn against each other, but 
when it’s over I still want my players to be friends, not 
enemies. I might be crazy, but I’m not looking to end 
my campaign with a fistfight at the game table.
Until the next encounter!
About the Author
Chris Perkins  is the D&D Senior Producer at Wizards of 
the Coast LLC. He’s to blame for everything. However, before 
you start hurling insults, know that he recently had his lower 
spine reinforced with shark cartilage. If you thought he was 
bad-ass before, you ain’t seen nothin’ yet.
Editors
Bart Carroll, Kim Mohan, Stan!
Producers
Christopher Perkins, Greg Bilsland, Stan!
Graphic Production
Erin Dorries
The Dungeon Master Experience: Player vs. Player
December 2011   |  DUNGEON 197
107