139
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 17
Concealed Conscientization: 
A Case Study of a Commercial Dungeons & Dragons Adventure
Abstract: This study presents a case study of a Dungeons & Dragons (D&D) adventure that embeds 
key concepts from Karl Marx and Franz Fanon with the goal of provoking conscientization, the critical 
awakening advocated by Paolo Freire, for those who play it. The adventure was written under a pseud-
onym and has been accepted and published by a commercial publisher. Results from a playtest group 
provide empirical evidence that players received and made sense of the adventure in line with the intent 
of the author to critique contemporary religious fundamentalism and prompt reflection on colonial-
ism. This research indicates that commercial publication of critical game design specifically within the 
context of the hegemonic D&D rules system has the potential to reach a significant audience. 
Keywords: Dungeons & Dragons, reception theory, Franz Fanon, Paolo Freire, conscientization, game 
design
Brian McKenzie
Maynooth University, Ireland
Brian.McKenzie@mu.ie
Bret Zawilski
Maynooth University, Ireland
Bret.Zawilski@mu.ie
James Beirne
Maynooth University, Ireland
James.Beirne@mu.ie
1. INTRODUCTION
Role-playing games (RPGs), and D&D specifically, are potentially transformative, pivotal experiences for 
their players (Sidhu and Carter 2021). Content, design, and experience are at the heart of transformative play. 
Y et despite decades of research and gaming, the path from game design to impact, from theory to practice, 
remains difficult both to map and travel. How can we design game content that is impactful and transfor-
mative? How do we know if we are successful? Most importantly, if we achieve transformative game design, 
how can we make it broadly relevant? This article presents a case study of game design research through game 
design practice (A. Hook and Coulton 2017) using a D&D adventure written under a pseudonym by one 
of the authors and accepted for commercial publication. The adventure is inspired by and embeds Fanonian 
and Marxist critiques of colonialism and religion with the aim of achieving Paulo Freire’s goal of “conscien -
tization” of players. Our empirical research based on a playtest group for the adventure confirms that D&D 
is a potentially transformative game, and we show that a commercial D&D publication can prompt players 
to critically reflect on important social issues; yet our research also shows that D&D’s core feature of a small 
group of violent adventurers may teach lessons that are incompatible with Freire’s ultimate goals for consci-
entization.
2. LITERATURE REVIEW
The research on the potential of RPGs as persuasive and transformative is rich and varied across disciplines 
and methodologies. However, two axes of research dominate. One is the psychological, personal, and in-
ter-personal benefits of playing RPGs; the other is the ability of RPGs to influence players, and similarly, how 
players use and make sense of RPGs in the context of their own beliefs and values. A large and growing body 
of research attests to the social-psychological benefits of playing RPGs. A scoping review in the field of psy-
140
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 17
chology concluded that RPGs were a “complementary tool” for psychotherapy (Arenas, Viduani, and Araujo 
2022, 304). Another recent study showed that playing D&D for one hour per week over eight weeks had sig-
nificant benefits to players’ wellbeing by reducing depression, stress, and anxiety while increasing self-esteem 
and self-efficacy (Merrick, Li, and Miller 2024). The authors of another study summarize expansive benefits 
associated with playing D&D: “[it] can aid in friendship and relationship maintenance, mitigation of social 
anxiety, improved social skills, reducing stress, alleviation from mental health challenges, and providing a 
connection with others” (Baker, Turner, and Kotera 2022, 3906). The benefits from playing RPGs are thus 
empirically established, and significant (Sidhu 2024; W alsh and Linehan 2024). 
The other axis of research is related but distinct. Researchers here are less interested in the social-psy-
chological benefits of RPGs (or games in general) to the individual, and more interested in the ability of games 
to influence players’ beliefs and values. Ian Bogost’s Persuasive Games (Bogost 2010) is arguably the most 
impactful work in this area in the last two decades, but his focus is video games. Numerous publications in 
this area focus on tabletop, card, and board games while offering insight into game design generally (Flanagan 
2009; Kaufman and Flanagan 2015; Flanagan 2021; Kaufman, Flanagan, and Seidman 2016; Freedman et al. 
2018; Flanagan and Jakobsson 2023). Researchers also consider how players make use of games. Rather than 
a game’s influence on players, Mark Hines’s research examines how players use a D&D adventure, The Tomb 
of Annihilation, to “co-construct” orientalist beliefs (Hines 2023). 
An interesting aspect of this avenue of research is the variety of disciplinary and methodological ap -
proaches. Some research that critiques D&D for racist, colonial, and misogynistic tropes (Stang and T ram-
mell 2020; Garcia 2017) or an emphasis on violence (Albom 2021) is based on textual analysis of rules and 
game mechanics. In contrast, research that seeks to show the utility of games to shape values positively or as 
a pivotal experience is often empirical (Wright, W eissglass, and Casey 2020; Sidhu and Carter 2021). This 
variety in approach speaks to the richness of the game studies field, but also the difficulty of assessing impact, 
positive or negative, and designing impactful games—a challenge made clear in Bogost’s self-critique of Per-
suasive Games (Bogost 2021).  
The research on games’ ability to influence, as distinct from their benefits, is equally concerned with 
conscientization broadly construed and game design. The utility of games to promote conscientization was 
apparent almost immediately after the original publication of Freire’s Pedagogy of the Oppressed . In 1972, 
William A. Smith advocated using simulation games for conscientization (Smith 1972). Freire advocated an 
approach to education that would empower learners. “In problem-posing education,” he explains, “people 
develop their power to perceive critically the way they exist in the world with which and in which they find 
themselves; they come to see the world not as a static reality, but as a reality in process, in transformation” 
(Freire 1993, 56). Conscientization, according to Freire, empowers people to view their circumstances “as 
an historical reality susceptible of transformation” (Freire 1993, 58). The ability of games to model social 
structures combined with the power of the experience of play make them a natural, compelling site for con -
scientization. Smith’s emphasis on mechanics to achieve conscientization foreshadows Bogost’s “procedural 
rhetoric.”
The research group Homo Ludens at the Université du Québec à Montréal recently published a list 
of criteria to assess a game’s ability, not limited to RPGs, to contribute to Freireian conscientization or con -
sciousness raising (Homo Ludens 2023). “ A conscientization game,” they explain, “Is a game that through its 
ludic, narrative, and aesthetic elements explicitly aims to stimulate a critical consciousness in individuals in 
situations of oppression and to equip them with tools to facilitate the implementation of communal processes 
aimed at systemic social change” (Homo Ludens 2023, 6). In addition to offering examples of game design 
that meet their criteria, Homo Ludens advocates game jams as a form of consciousness-raising activity where 
individuals can create games, explore solutions, and share experiences. Other researchers also recommend 
141
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 17
game jams as a Freireian activity (Myers, Piccolo, and Collins 2019). The application of Freire to game design, 
particularly as articulated by Homo Ludens, is ambitious and political. 
Nevertheless, the reach of games designed for either avenue of research, benefits or influence, tends to 
be limited. Such games are usually niche and bespoke, designed for a specific audience, indeed sometimes lim-
ited to the test subject group itself. For example, two important studies that demonstrate the utility of D&D 
to teach moral reasoning (Wright, W eissglass, and Casey 2020) and as an efficacious activity for improving 
mental health (Merrick, Li, and Miller 2024) both make use of homebrew adventures. W e argue for a different 
approach, one that embraces commercial publication to reach, and hopefully impact, a large audience.
There is clear empirical evidence for the efficacy of RPGs in general and D&D specifically as a site 
of transformative play. W e agree with Dimitra Nikolaidou that the unique, immersive experience of D&D 
game sessions, of co-creating narratives, “influence participants at an even more fundamental level than other 
storytelling media” (Nikolaidou 2024, 163). In addition, D&D holds a hegemonic position in the industry 
and in its raw number of players (Griepp 2024; Given and Polkinghorne 2024). Y et the game and its players 
are surprisingly accessible to independent designers. In January 2023, Wizards of the Coast (W otC) released 
its System Reference Document (SRD 5.1), a collection of rules for D&D, under a CC-BY 4.0 license. In 
April 2025, W otC released an updated SRD 5.2, also under CC-BY 4.0, that includes material from the new 
Player’s Handbook. The SRD serves as the basis for many commercial so-called third-party publishers to pro-
duce RPG content for D&D. The SRD, combined with two self-publishing platforms, DriveThruRPG and 
DM’s Guild, offers opportunities for independent designers to reach a vast audience of gamers. Success on 
these platforms can serve as an entrée to the realm of commercial publishers, as was the case with the author, 
under a pseudonym, of the adventure for this research. In addition, several independent systems use the D&D 
rules system in a different setting or game because of the ubiquity of players familiar with its rules. This article 
takes a “research through design” approach to argue that commercial D&D publications afford critical game 
designers the opportunity to maximize their potential audience and thus the impact of their games. 
3. STEALTH DESIGN
Our work is informed by the “stealth interventions” and “embedded design” approach articulated by Geoff  
Kaufman, Mary Flanagan, and Max Seidman (Kaufman, Flanagan, and Seidman 2021; Flanagan 2021). Their 
approach makes use of three strategies: intermixing, obfuscating, and distancing. For the purposes of writing 
a D&D adventure, the latter two strategies are most applicable. Obfuscating hides the persuasive intent of the 
game and its designers. A key strategy here is to use a genre, as they explain, “whose associated goals or expec-
tations do not include the aim to change players’ attitudes, beliefs, or behaviors” (Kaufman, Flanagan, and 
Seidman 2021, 79). D&D players have an expectation that their play experience will be inclusive and allow for 
diversity. W otC’s “Commitment to Diversity” states, “One of the explicit design goals of 5th edition D&D is 
to depict humanity in all its beautiful diversity by depicting characters who represent an array of ethnicities, 
gender identities, sexual orientations, and beliefs” (D&D Official 2020). However, it is unlikely that play-
ers would expect a D&D adventure to introduce concepts such as false consciousness, organic intellectuals, 
structural inequality, or other socio-political ideas. That is, W otC supports inclusivity but that does not mean 
D&D adventures encourage players to explore the causes or consequences of intolerance. More research is 
needed on player expectations about fantasy worlds. Recent W otC adventures consist of depoliticized fantasy 
realism—dragons but not slaves, despots but not fascists. As Mason argues, W otC articulates “a conservative 
status quo, with a thin veneer of diversity, equity, and inclusion” (Mason 2024, 174). The D&D adventure is 
thus a suitable genre for obfuscation. 
Distancing is the other embedded design strategy that is felicitous for writing critical D&D adven-
tures. This refers to the psychological distance, a “safe space,” between players and any sensitive topics. “By sep-
142
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 17
arating players from their real-life identities and prior knowledge, beliefs, and experiences,” explain Kaufman, 
Flanagan, and Seidman, “Persuasive games can effectively circumvent players’ reticence or reluctance and en-
hance the game’s transformative potential” (Kaufman, Flanagan, and Seidman 2021, 83). Indeed, distancing 
is at the heart of RPGs though the “player-character” (PC), the fictional character the players roleplay. PCs 
are an opportunity for players to explore identities; PCs allow both distancing from and experimentation 
with a player’s own conception of self, values, and orientation (Bowman and Schrier 2018). They further 
recommend two mechanisms to achieve distancing: hypotheticality and fictionalizing. Both clearly are ideal 
for RPGs. RPG settings and adventures are a form of speculative fiction that can be used to test hypotheticals, 
e.g., what are the consequences for a society if magic is common? RPG settings and adventures also fictional-
ize—depict metaphorically or fantastically—real issues and events. For example, the Chernobyl disaster could 
be modelled as a magical vortex collapse or interplanar energy leak in a fantasy realm. 
Related to the idea of embedded design is the concept of “reskinning” or remixing. This refers to the 
process whereby a designer or Game Master (GM) translates or imports a compelling character or situation 
from another setting into a game (Shea 2018). In homebrew games a character might be taken into a game 
whole cloth. As a game master, one author has, on more than one occasion, reskinned Colonel W alter Kurtz 
from Apocalypse Now and used some quotes verbatim. For example, when in a recent game the final boss told 
the PCs, “Y ou have a right to kill me. Y ou have a right to do that. But you have no right to judge me” (Coppola 
1979). Crucially, reskinning can extend, and commonly does, to narrative and plot structure. For example, a 
GM for a science fiction RPG could reskin the classic movie The Blues Brothers as an adventure that finds the 
PCs in a desperate race to save a foundling hospital for exoplanet orphans from foreclosure. Reskinning allows 
the importation of famous works of fiction, historical events, moral parables, and much more, in a disguised, 
“fantasized,” way. The official D&D adventure Storm King’s Thunder is a remix of King Lear. 
An example that illustrates a missed opportunity for reskinning is Premeet Sidhu’s use of George 
Orwell’s Animal Farm (Sidhu 2023). Rather than reskinning the book, Sidhu gamified it. She re-created the 
book with close fidelity to its original content as a RPG adventure using the D&D rules system. The charac-
ters, setting, and the plot approximates the book. In other words, the players know they are playing the book. 
Sidhu was interested in using a game to investigate player agency, transgression, and death, and her playtest re-
sults indicate the game was successful in this respect (Sidhu 2023). Of course, Animal Farm itself is an exercise 
in fantasizing and reskinning. Y et, imagine Animal Farm reskinned with embedded design as a fantasy D&D 
adventure with the same themes but also with the intent of engaging PCs with the broader critical ideas raised 
by the book: W eberian institutionalized charismatic authority and T ocquevillian continuity. W e can reimag-
ine the character Napoleon reskinned as a Lawful Evil paladin non-player-character (NPC) while Snowball 
is a Neutral Good NPC. The farm can be reskinned as a remote underground city and we could change the 
Windmill to a lift apparatus to the surface. The designer who reskins Animal Farm in this way would follow 
plots and events, and write the same NPCs, but they would be distanced and fictionalized. 
Flanagan’s empirical research provides evidence of the effectiveness of these strategies. For example, 
she shows that fictionalizing or “activating fantasy’ creates psychological distance for players. This distance 
leads to abstraction and helps players “see the big picture” rather than make a judgement in response to ob-
jects and ideas recognized from their everyday experience (Flanagan 2021, 286). A fantasy game developed by 
Flanagan, The Enchanter, successfully increased self-confidence in women scientists (Flanagan 2021). 
4. RECEPTION THEORY
Central to our research is the question of how adventure writing converts to play, to player experience, and 
to player meaning-making. W e are interested in the nature of transmission, the conversion of author intent 
to a D&D adventure to player understanding. This is, of course, the crux of persuasive gaming and critical 
143
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 17
game design. As Flanagan explains, “While it is true that messages are a part of a game’s story, messages that a 
designer thinks are in the game may not actually be there, or may not be read/experienced as intended” (Fla -
nagan 2021, 284). There is a strong structuralist component in the field of persuasive gaming influenced by 
classic theories of communication such as Jakobson’s model of linguistic functions (Jakobson 1960). The Big 
Model developed by Ron Edwards at The Forge sought to organize and understand the experience and nature 
of tabletop role-playing games using a variation of frame theory as a means of designing better games (White 
2020). Bogost’s influential concept of “procedural rhetoric” was an attempt to convert game mechanics into 
persuasive outcomes, although he subsequently acknowledged its limitations (Bogost 2010; 2021). Structural 
theories are important, particularly for highlighting material conditions of play, but more recent research has 
focused more closely on player subjectivity and experience. 
W e are interested in using embedded design to shift the attitudes of players, but we are also interested 
in recognition. Do the players recognize the intended meanings, “the moral of the story”, and tropes em -
bedded in a D&D adventure? Recognition and identification of themes and tropes is a common strategy of 
scholars who criticize racist, misogynistic, or colonial tropes and themes in games. Why not turn this on its 
head? Why not use recognizable tropes as a component of critical design? W e can then better understand if 
the players recognize the proxies and themes in the adventure and how the game play session itself affords an 
opportunity for conscientization. Here we are following the work of Stuart Hall who argues that messages 
coded in the “dominant cultural order” will likely be decoded as such (Hall 1973).
The question of authorial intent, reader reception, and the nature of texts is central to literary theory. 
The “postmodern turn” in the 1980s landed several “critical hits” on classical reception theory. Stanley Fish’s 
1980 book Is There a Text in This Class?  argued against the existence of any determinate meaning for lan -
guage (Fish 1980). Language, according to Claude Lévi-Strauss, consists of “floating signifiers”—words with 
indeterminate meaning (Mehlman 1972). Readers are agentic and subjective, and words are indeterminate. 
T o make matters worse, according to Barthes, the author is dead: their intentions are inscrutable and cannot 
be inferred from context or biography (Barthes 1984). Postmodern theory elevated the ontological status of a 
text. “The artwork,” explains the theorist Brenkman, “Exceeds its source as the expression of its creator and its 
destination as an expression for its recipient” (Brenkman 2020, 111).
The nature of a text is also central to scholars who study RPGs. The game studies scholar, like the 
literary or art critic, confronts the complex relationship between author, audience, and text. One perspective 
is to consider the game session itself as a text. This creates complex methodological and theoretical issues. 
“The actual text of a [tabletop role-playing game] session is ephemeral,” explains Cover, “It exists in the moment 
of face-to-face interaction and then vanishes” (Cover 2010, 175). If we treat a RPG session as a text then as 
Harviainen explains, “The base text is not truly accessible and the interpretations will be subjective and in -
complete if and when they are explicated to a researcher” (Harviainen 2008, 75). Solipsism, however, is a risk 
here, and numerous critics highlight this tendency in postmodern thought (Kien 2021). Nevertheless, con -
temporary literary theory—even the context of postmodern theory —offers rich analyses, tools, and theories 
for game studies (Jara and T orner 2018). Close readings of adventures (Hines 2023), hermeneutical analysis of 
game sessions (Harviainen 2008), and genre analysis (Cover 2010), are just a few examples of how researchers 
have deployed the full range of literary theory to the study of RPGs.
Symbolic interactionism offers an important theoretical perspective for the study of role-playing 
games reception (Williams et al. 2018). This theory complements the move in media studies to thread a path 
between semiotic relativism and reception determinism (Ang 2013). As Fine explains, “central to this ap -
proach is the assertion that human beings reside in finite worlds of meaning, and that individuals are skilled 
in juggling these worlds” (Fine 1983, 181). Interactionism holds that individuals make practical sense of the 
media they use (Eichner 2020). Audiences recognize “action-guiding themes” in media that correspond to 
their lifeworld, a concept from phenomenology that holds that common beliefs and meanings operate inter-
144
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 17
subjectively, and also across and between societies (Beyer 2003; Eichner 2020). Recognizable, relatable themes 
rather than similarities or proximity in culture allow for the use and consumption of media, and explain their 
appeal, globally and locally. As Eichner explains, “When the topic depicted is not a central theme in the view-
ers’ lifeworlds, it will be disregarded or rejected during the reception process” (Eichner 2020, 117). Different 
audiences may focus on or be interested in different themes, but the themes themselves have cross-cultural 
appeal (Eichner 2020). The benefit of this perspective is that it affords epistemological and empirical grounds 
for researchers to speak to the fidelity of the intended meaning in an author’s work and its corresponding 
reception by an audience (Bryman 1999). 
The implications of symbolic interactionism for game design in the context of global late-stage capi-
talism can be pessimistic. Baeza-González offers a bleak assessment of video game production in Chile. “Chil-
ean games are not unique,” he concludes, “nor do they present authentic traits that characterize their games” 
(Baeza-González 2021, 51). Rather, Chilean game designers make games based on global cultural tropes to 
satisfy the core markets of the Global North. The strength of the Chilean video game design industry resides 
in its ability to satisfy consumers’ love of dominant game franchises (Baeza-González 2021). D&D not only 
represents the core market of the Global North, it is a hegemonic rules system, released under a CC-BY 4.0 
license, for tabletop role-playing games. The challenge thus becomes whether game designers can work within 
this dominant system subversively, capitalizing on global cultural tropes to embed critical ideas.
5. ADVENTURE DESIGN
The D&D adventure that is the subject of this study embeds key ideas from Franz Fanon’s The Wretched of 
the Earth. The author is specifically interested in Fanon’s argument for the necessity of violence, the role of 
religion in abetting colonial oppression, and the idea that colonial subjects must liberate themselves rather 
than rely on typically white anti-colonial allies originating in the colonial powers. The adventure seeks to 
subvert the D&D binary between heroic, “civilizing” PCs and savages, some in need of uplifting, others in 
need of killing (Justice 2024). Roland Barthes’s explanation of the Exotic was key in how the author framed 
the NPC factions. W estern culture, argues Barthes, creates “…an Orient which is exotic in form, while being 
in reality profoundly similar to the Occident…” (Barthes 1972, 94). For Barthes, exoticism is a means of strip-
ping colonial subjects of their histories and making them a “pure reflection of the W est” (Barthes 1972, 96). 
In practical terms for game design, carefully crafted factions can serve as vectors to introduce critical concepts 
and narratives into an adventure. An “exotic” faction possesses “authenticity” and is recognizable by players 
while at the same time psychologically distanced in line with “stealth” strategies. 
The main faction in this adventure is based on a well-known mythological European creature. They 
are written as multi-layered signs: primitives, savages, and religious fundamentalist. Their religious fundamen-
talism results in them being duped by imposters posing as prophets of their deity. This imposter faction is 
inspired by rudos from the Luchaverse. In the good/evil dichotomy of the Luchaverse, rudos are the bad guys. 
Although a rudo may be a complicated, transgressive figure, their morality is transparent. Rudos rely on decep-
tion and brute force; from a performance perspective the rudo strives to make the audience angry and incite 
their disapproval (Levi 2008). This faction marks the religious faction as victims—they have been deceived by 
the rudos and are clearly victims. The presence of a faction in the role of rudos reinforces the PCs’ identities as 
heroes (técnicos in the Luchaverse).
Prompted by reports of raids on “civilized” lands by “savages,” the PCs travel to the location at the 
behest of a powerful ruler. En route there is an encounter in a village designed to subvert the concept of “civi-
lized” and instead depict the “advanced” society as one of servile dependence. The denizens of the “advanced” 
society are more primitive in outlook than the factions encountered later. Upon arrival at the main location 
of the adventure, a number of encounters introduce the factions. The interaction between the factions is key 
145
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 17
to the adventure plot. It is clear to the PCs that the religious fundamentalism of the main faction allows them 
to be taken advantage of by the imposters. A small group of the religious faction proclaims them as imposters 
and breaks away to begin an asymmetrical campaign to eliminate the imposters and the members of the re -
ligious faction who follow them. The PCs either ally with the separatists or work independently pursuing 
the same goal, the elimination of the imposters. Ultimately the separatist faction will attempt to kill the PCs. 
While the imposters and their followers are heretical, the PCs represent colonizers, an equal threat. The be-
trayal, if allied, or attempted murder, if working independently, occurs after the defeat of the imposters and 
concludes the adventure. 
The design of the adventure relies on five elements to embed the critical ideas: plot (including encoun-
ters), read-aloud text, player handouts, instructions to the Dungeon Master (DM), and NPC dialogue. The 
adventure author used these elements conscious of the contested authority of adventure writers which falls 
between the agency and autonomy of players and DMs and the canonical authority of the system (Hammer 
2007). 
The creation of the adventure for this study thus comprises three strands: reception theory, critical so-
cial theory, and game design. The ultimate goal was to produce an adventure that would critique the influence 
of religion and challenge player assumptions about the status of “heroic liberators.” Freireian consciousness 
raising requires that individuals apprehend and understand the conditions of their own oppression.  In other 
words, rather than seeing the impact of religion on an NPC faction, for consciousness raising to occur, the 
adventure would need to prompt players to see the impact of religious fundamentalism in their own societies. 
In addition, the subversion of the civilized/savage and liberator/victim dichotomies present in the adventure 
would also prompt players to reflect on their own assumptions. 
6. PLAY SESSIONS AND DATA COLLECTION
In addition to the above elements of game design and theorization, our research builds upon a consideration 
of tabletop role-playing games—and D&D in particular—as transformative experiences (Sidhu and Carter, 
2021). In order to better understand the effects of a commercialized adventure focused around Fanonian and 
Marxist themes, we facilitated and observed players as they interacted with this material in D&D play sessions. 
W e employed a constructivist grounded theory approach (Charmaz 2017) in the development of our research, 
understanding the primary body of inquiry would be co-created through the participant observation of game-
play, and this stage of the project was guided by three questions:
• How do players recognize or fail to recognize critiques of colonialism and religion when exposed 
to embedded Fanonian and Marxist ideologies?
• T o what extent would this recognition or lack of recognition influence the choices made by play-
ers within the space of the game?
• Does ideological game content convert to meaning-making beyond the gaming table (Sidhu and 
Carter, 2021)?
Since we were interested in the effects of ideological content on players engaging with commercialized D&D 
adventures, it was important to locate individuals with prior experience playing D&D. The Games Society at 
Maynooth University is one of the largest student-operated organizations on campus and regularly facilitates 
D&D campaigns. Upon receiving ethical approval, we sent invitations to the members of the Games Society, 
and over the next two months, we interviewed and observed five participants. These individuals took part in 
a pre-game interview, game sessions that were observed by the researchers, and a post-adventure focus group.
146
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 17
The adventure itself was divided into three play sessions that took place over a month. Players had 
all previously had experience playing in fifth edition campaign settings, though their individual levels of ex-
perience differed. During the game sessions, one author DMed the adventure while another took notes and 
monitored audio recording equipment. 
Observations from throughout the three game sessions were used to inform a focus group interview 
with the players after the conclusion of the adventure. In this focus group, we asked participants to reflect 
upon their experiences over the course of the three play sessions and later used this session to identify places 
in the adventure that seemed particularly impactful for the participants. Once the data collection process was 
complete, transcriptions of interviews and play sessions were read alongside recorded notes and observations. 
Of particular interest were player reflections on in-game moments where they encountered Fanonian and 
Marxist themed content, the results of which are shared in the following sections.
7. RESULTS AND LIMITATIONS
As D&D is mediated entirely through language, both written and spoken, it becomes imperative to approach 
the study of the game through the lens of language. At the same time, materialist considerations must be taken 
into account, recognizing the situated space within which the game is taking place. And it is true that “quali-
tative research is heavily invested in language practices: interviews, fieldnotes, focus groups...But conventional 
forms of analysis frequently find the bodily entanglements of language troublesome or trivial” (MacLure 
2013, 664). Future research might pay more attention to the physical, bodily interactions of participants in 
this style of game, and a future project may benefit from video recording to better capture participant reac-
tions that otherwise might go unnoticed. After all, “transcripts seldom record what eyebrows, hands, shoul-
ders or crossed legs are doing” (MacLure 2013, 664).
Additionally, careful attention was given in the game to avoid overt prompting on the part of the DM. 
Analysis of the transcripts of play sessions confirmed that the DM offered no cues or prompts to promote 
recognition of the tropes and factions. Our intentions were to give students a chance to naturally react to the 
content of the campaign without overtly signaling any specific political or ideological undertones within the 
campaign itself. However, a future study may benefit from having an outside DM run the material to further 
ensure that participants are responding as naturally as possible. Building on Hammer’s research, it is also 
worth considering the role that the DM plays in rearticulating adventure content since D&D is ultimately a 
participatory activity (Hammer 2007). In some ways, the DM of a commercial adventure functions much as a 
technical communicator, taking material presented through game books and rearticulating it for a new audi-
ence. As Shanmugaraj et al. note (Shanmugaraj, W olfe, and W odzak 2020), any time an individual paraphrases 
or interprets texts, they are engaging in a knowledge transforming act. As such, the interaction of the DM 
with the game material is another promising site of future inquiry when considering games as transformative 
experiences.
The research of Guttorm et al. on the participatory nature of dance also applied to D&D, in which 
“encounters...consist of movement, talking, and writing in various combinations and ways emerging/(im)
materializing/(resulting) in scattered words, scattered papers, scattered thoughts...and lots of uninhibited ut-
terances, laughter, fooling around, and jokes” (Guttorm et al. 2016, 417). The players knew each other from 
the Games Society but had not played together previously. One difficulty this presented was that play style 
and expectations, the creative agenda of the players, differed. One player was often adversarial to other players 
and the DM. Only experienced DMing prevented player-vs-player (PVP) combat during some play sessions.
In using D&D as a site for critical design, an author faces two key constraints. The first is that combat 
is a key expectation for players of this game. An adventure that downplays this pillar of the game would likely 
fail to meet player expectations. Another constraint is the importance of the PCs as heroes. Adventures give 
147
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 17
the PCs the opportunity to be heroes and do heroic things. The adventure for this game subverted this role 
when the NPC faction refused to view the PCs as liberating heroes, viewing them as dangerous colonizers to 
be killed instead. Subverting this expectation without creating an unsatisfactory adventure was difficult. In 
the case of the playtest group, the players accepted the betrayal as an element of this faction’s religious funda-
mentalism. In addition, the PCs defeat the imposter faction, and this provides the heroic achievement in clear 
terms, as when the técnicos defeat the rudos.
The empirical results are encouraging. In particular, they confirm the validity of the interactions 
framework of reception. The results show that authorial intent can convert to player reception at the table. 
Discussing the main factions, a player from Spain made this comparison: “The way the [imposter faction] 
treated the [NPC faction] was kind of like, well, how the Spanish treated Latin America in colonization.” 
When discussing the NPC faction’s views of the PCs, another player who is involved in student government 
explained that the NPC faction was correct to be skeptical; the PCs were not, in fact, helping for selfless rea -
sons. This player compared the role of the PCs to university administrators who act, in their view, for personal 
gain and “to look less bad,” rather than from ethical principles or to serve the best interests of the students. 
The adventure author’s intent with the village encounter was to present its inhabitants as poverty-stricken but 
also wholly lacking in class consciousness. T wo players compared the village inhabitants to “nice Americans” 
who were attached to an abstract concept of “freedom” while living in squalor and ignorance. 
Regarding the specific targets for critical reflection, the adventure did prompt reflections on religion:
Author 1: Did the [NPC faction] remind you of anyone?
Sorcerer 2 PC: Republicans.
Author 1: Republicans?
Wizard PC: Y es.
Sorcerer PC: They’re crutching on their religion as an excuse to cause harm to others. And if they 
don’t like them, they just make up something like “God’s told me you suck therefore you must die.”
Wizard PC: Y eah.
Fighter PC: Using God as an excuse. 
Fighter PC: V ery xenophobic and hyper religious. They use their religion as a crutch. 
Before you were a fascist you were a bully and an arsehole. 
Author 1: Did the religion of the [NPC faction] hurt them or help them in their struggle?
Sorcerer 1 PC: So yeah, for the [NPC faction] it’s good to have something to cling to when they’re in 
the prison—their Christ or something that makes them stick together. But once we get past that step, 
taking actions for the good-being of a religion instead of people, it’s plain stupid.
Wizard PC: It hurt them. They believed [the Imposters] solely because they said they were from 
their gods. It’s like if they weren’t that strong into religion, 90% of them would have been rebels.
148
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 17
For conscientization to occur, an individual must come to grips and be aware of the source or cause of their 
oppression. In Ireland, 94.6% of public primary schools are governed by a religious ethos (88.4% Catholic, 
6.2% Protestant and other religious ethos) (Department of Education 2024). In the United States, the Su-
preme Court under Roberts has found in favor of religious organizations 83% of the time, compared to 50% 
since 1953 (Epstein and Posner 2022). As religiosity declines in many European countries (Nadeem 2022), the 
religious elite nevertheless remain a powerful oppressive force in the lives of billions. Our playtest showed that 
the religious fundamentalism of the NPC faction was read as intended, as analogues to contemporary funda-
mentalists. 
8. COMMERCIAL CONSCIENTIZATION?
Commercially published games are an underappreciated medium for this type of research. It might be thought 
that the dictates of commercial publishing, in which creations are created or subsumed within relations of 
global capital accumulation, could preclude them from offering moments of genuine critical experience. Also, 
given the constraints inherent to the use of a popular commercial game system or adventure, which comes with 
its own discourses, lore, mechanics, and expectations of social behavior, it might be thought researchers should 
use a bespoke game tailored to the audience, or at the least something underground. Y et across media, examples 
of effective critique being offered by commercial publications abound. Moreover, Fanonian and Marxist cri-
tique, whose transmission is under study, itself suggests that it is important to rely on the media terrain–both 
technical and discursive–provided by the very structures they critique. Commercial games, therefore, both can 
and should be explored as a site of conscientization.
The 2023 film Barbie offers a salient case study. The film has patriarchy as a central theme, but given 
Barbie’s longstanding role as an archetype of capitalist patriarchy, its reception was predictably contested both 
popularly and academically. One student journalist aptly summed up the debate: “Barbie: Feminist Master-
piece or Capitalistic Greed?” (Boskovic 2023). Robert Luke Naylor lauded the film’s “verve” and “nuance”, 
comparing it to the anarchist exploration of utopia in Ursula K. Le Guin’s The Dispossessed, and noting 
one character describes, like Karl Marx, how Ken’s new exploitative society has ‘sown the seeds of its own 
destruction’…. Of course, feminist critiques such as these exist in all sorts of different forms of big-screen 
fiction, but Barbie shows a system of oppression being systematically dismantled. It is dynamic and full 
of hope. (Naylor 2023, 1)
Naylor suggests that the critical storytelling of this film gives it a realism (in spite of its fantastic premise) that 
makes it a powerful tool for not only teaching and research, but also social change.
Amy La Porte and Lena Cavusoglu, on the other hand, situate Barbie in light of Mattel’s other recent 
attempts to rehabilitate Barbie by representing a greater degree of diversity in their toy lineup. While acknowl-
edging the benefits of such representation, they note that it occurs within a framework of conventional beauty 
standards, displaying “a clear preference for thinness” (La Porte and Cavusoglu 2023, 5). Similarly, they suggest 
that despite Barbie’s feminist themes, it fails to fundamentally challenge patriarchy. The film’s conclusion, in 
which Barbie visits a gynecologist, could be interpreted as “underscore[ing] the significance of reproductive 
health and broach[ing] a typically taboo topic,” but they note the potential problems with reducing women’s 
identity to genitalia (La Porte and Cavusoglu 2023, 7). “ At its core, Barbie is undisputedly an advertisement 
for a socially problematic doll,” a cynical money-grab from an audience willing to pay for its themes (La Porte 
and Cavusoglu 2023, 9).
However, the question of whether conscientization occurs is a different one than whether its instigat-
ing context–whether it be a film, game, or workshop–can be classified as radical or cynical. A context does not 
149
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 17
need to be purified of all problematic elements to still have subversive potential. It might take a long time for 
a critical consensus to form on Barbie, if indeed this ever occurs, but it is not necessary to wait until the ques-
tion is settled to look for conscientization. Since conscientization involves a transformation of consciousness 
that empowers people to understand how their reality can be transformed, it also leads to changes in behavior 
and is therefore subject to empirical study. In the case of Barbie, Senechel et al. note the established relation-
ship between health behaviors and popular media, finding that “In the week following Barbie’s release, there 
were large increases in the national online search volume for terms referring to gynecologists (51.3%; 95% 
CI, 31.8%-72.1%; P < .001) and gynecologist definition (154.1%; 95% CI, 68.2%-304.5%; adjusted P = .03)” 
(Senechal et al. 2024, 2), while noting that there was no other apparent reason to explain such an increase. 
This suggests that Barbie’s gynecology scene might have led to an increased interest in and awareness of gyne-
cological care. While the authors caution that this evidence does not of itself demonstrate an improvement in 
health access or outcomes, it is worth noting that the conscious act of seeking out further information is itself 
a change in behavior. Regardless of the film’s commercial nature, or its potentially compromised narrative, it 
therefore seems to have facilitated a notable moment of conscientization.
If potentially compromised sites of mass culture can  lead to conscientization, there are also explicit 
reasons why they ought to be exploited. In his 1959 study on the Algerian revolution, in which he was an 
active participant, Fanon noted that “Radio-Alger, the French broadcasting station which has been estab -
lished in Algeria for decades… is essentially the instrument of colonial society and values,” (Fanon 1965a, 69). 
While the cost of radio sets meant that their ownership was heavily concentrated among European settlers, 
he notes that out of a passive opposition to the proliferation of colonial cultural norms, even those Algerians 
who could have afforded to acquire one often did not. Meanwhile, he argues, the French cultural content 
discouraged settlers from “‘go[ing] native,’” (Fanon 1965a, 71). In sum, the radio in Algeria played an import-
ant dichotomizing function in colonialism’s cultural structure, keeping the French French and (via their ab -
stention) Algerians Algerian. In other words, it served as a bulwark against conscientization. It also played an 
important role in the dissemination of information to Europeans about threats to their rule, thereby further 
preventing social change (Fanon 1965a). 
Revolutionary Algerians naturally developed their own information networks with older technolo -
gies like word of mouth and newspapers, but these were subject to technical limitations such as censorship, 
excessive localism, and surveillance. The revolutionaries created a counterpart to Radio-Algiers, The V oice 
of Fighting Algeria (La voix de l’ Algérie combattante), and facilitated rapid and widespread dissemination of 
radio sets among an increasingly interested populace (Fanon 1965a). This not only had the effect of trans -
forming the radio into an instrument of liberation, but as Algerians began to broadcast not only in Arabic 
but in French they “created confusion and disorder in [the occupier’s] defense system,” (Fanon 1965a, 91). 
The revolutionaries authored the content of their messages, but their dissemination was dependent on the 
technical and discursive medium of the colonists. For Fanon, The V oice of Fighting Algeria was therefore a 
crucial step forward in the transformation of consciousness and society on a national and international scale. 
The scale of our study of conscientization is clearly much smaller than the cases of either Barbie or 
The V oice of Fighting Algeria, but the principles are the same. The fact that mass media can be subject to 
political and commercial constraints does not preclude conscientization. Indeed, mass media provides a speed 
and range of dissemination which cannot be paralleled by other media. Thus, it has a significance for con -
scientization which other media do not. Authors and activists who wish to facilitate conscientization will 
surely pursue commercial publication, even as they will also use other means. Furthermore, since audiences 
inevitably bring their own meanings to texts, appropriating and making use of them in their own way, the 
possibility for conscientization remains open even where it might not be intended by authors. In the realm 
of game studies, the clear analogue to the juggernaut of Hollywood is indisputably D&D, which in addition 
to official content, has a thriving and variegated market of third-party publishers who employ the discourses 
150
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 17
of the game system for their own ends. Exclusive analysis of systems or texts that are independent, noncom-
mercial, private, or homebrew—in other words, that have limited distribution—overlooks a crucial site of 
conscientization.
9. CONCLUSION
This study offers prima facie evidence that critical game designers can successfully publish commercial, mass 
distributed works that embed social theory and are impactful. The implications for this research suggest that 
more attention be given to working within established game systems with broad player bases. There are other 
lessons. Designing and writing a D&D adventure with critical intent and getting it accepted by a commercial 
publisher is challenging. Specifically, the strategies outlined by Flanagan, Kaufman, and Seidman (Kaufman, 
Flanagan, and Seidman 2021; Flanagan 2009; Kaufman and Flanagan 2015; Flanagan 2021) proved essential 
not only for the adventure’s impact on players but also for acceptance by a commercial publisher. By deploy-
ing these strategies we avoided the fate of Graeme Barber’s adventure in the official book Candlekeep Myster-
ies where W otC removed and edited content that sought to subvert racial and colonial tropes (Carter 2021). 
Our adventure was published as written. The designer must write a D&D adventure that meets the expecta-
tions of commercial publishers and the player base itself. The adventure must be fun, novel, challenging, and 
composed with absolute fluency in the rules system.
In one key respect our research shows that D&D is incompatible with the Freireian approach to con-
sciousness raising. The key goal of education and liberation for Freire is to transcend the dialectic so that the 
oppressed does not become the new oppressor. Awareness of the systems that perpetuate oppression is the 
key goal of conscientization, and how the dialectic can be broken (Homo Ludens 2023). Violence, for Freire, 
is the primary tool of the oppressor, not the oppressed. The oppressed may respond violently, but the goal is 
different: “Consciously or unconsciously, the act of rebellion (an act which is always, or nearly always, as vio-
lent as the initial violence of the oppressors) can initiate love” (Freire 1993, 30). Community, solidarity, unity, 
cooperation, and empathy underlie the actions of the oppressed. Without these animating the oppressed they 
are “mere objects of the revolutionary activity…” (Freire 1993, 144). For Fanon too, violence is an essential 
early feature of revolutionary praxis. The emphasis on violence in D&D generally and in this adventure spe -
cifically which sees an NPC faction embrace Fanon’s observation that “For the native, this violence represents 
the absolute line of action,” risks neglecting the longer-term  visions of revolutionary praxis he and Freire 
articulated (Fanon 1965b, 85).
Consider the typical D&D adventuring party. It consists of a small vanguard of outsiders who use 
violence to overthrow a regime. This model of praxis is Blanquist rather than Freireian (Blanqui 2009). A 
Gramscian organic intellectual is a rare background for a D&D PC. One avenue of further research would 
be to design a low-level adventure with “session zero” guidance (an introductory meeting where the players 
and DM make characters and agree on goals) to model the PCs as emergent organic intellectuals. This ad-
venture showed evidence of achieving conscientization in the players, but there was an unresolved tension 
between Fanon’s emphasis on the necessity of violence and Freire’s emphasis on community and solidarity. 
This tension is possibly resolvable. Fanon, for example, tells us, “Violence alone, violence committed by the 
people, violence organized and educated by its leaders, makes it possible for the masses to understand social 
truths and gives the key to them” (Fanon 1965b, 147). However, in our case, the adventurers were, from the 
outset, outsiders with no connection to “the people.” This was a conscious design decision to problematize 
the white savior-as-adventurer trope. However, another adventure could be written that more closely invests 
and relates the PCs to an oppressed group. This single D&D adventure does not align with all the criteria for 
a Freireian game proposed by the Homo Ludens research group, in particular the importance of community 
(Homo Ludens 2023). However, we are confident that another adventure or, more easily, a campaign (a series 
of linked adventures), could achieve this goal.
151
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 17
In addition, the question remains whether the players in the test group were oppressed in the classic 
Freireian sense. “The oppressed,” he contends, “having internalized the image of the oppressor and adopted 
his guidelines, are fearful of freedom” (Freire 1993, 21). Conscientization in this case means apprehending 
not only the source of oppression but also one’s own agency and reflexivity. The author specifically wrote the 
adventure in the hopes that it would be played by religious players. The strategy of using the exotic to embed 
the critique of religion is central to its design. However, we were unable to control for religiosity in the test 
group and there was very little. Thus, the players recognized the oppressive role of religion but the praxis 
was Fanonian and Blanquist not Freireian. A playtest with a group of religious players would be required to 
test for a more Freireian impact: bleed-out, rather than bleed-in (Bowman, Diakolambrianou, and Brind eds. 
2024).
A RPG adventure without critical theory and intent is a missed opportunity. T abletop role-playing 
games are an amazing site for theoretical experimentation. Whether it is the nature of morality (Mussett 2014; 
Hummel 2014) or, as in the case of this adventure, questions relating to colonialism, TTRPGs are a unique 
site to explore, model, enact, and speculate about history, social theory, and philosophy. The Creative Com-
mons SRD offers a powerful opportunity for critical designers to work within the hegemonic D&D land-
scape. W e hope this study encourages more critical designers to embrace commercial publication.
REFERENCES
Albom, Sarah. 2021. “The Killing Roll: The Prevalence of Violence in Dungeons & Dragons.” International 
Journal of Role-Playing 11: 6–24.
Ang, Ien. 2013. W atching Dallas: Soap Opera and the Melodramatic Imagination. Routledge.
Arenas, Daniel Luccas, Anna Viduani, and Renata Brasil Araujo. 2022. “Therapeutic Use of Role-Playing 
Game (RPG) in Mental Health: A Scoping Review.” Simulation &0 Gaming 53 (3): 285–311. Link 
here.
Baeza-González, Sebastián. 2021. “Video Games Development in the Periphery: Cultural Dependency?” 
Geografiska Annaler: Series B, Human Geography 103 (1): 39–54.
Baker, Ian S., Ian J. Turner, and Y asuhiro Kotera. 2022. “Role-Play Games (RPGs) for Mental Health (Why 
Not?): Roll for Initiative.” International Journal of Mental Health and Addiction (May). Link here.
Barthes, Roland. 1972. Mythologies. T ranslated by Annette Lavers. Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Barthes, Roland. 1984. “La Mort de l’ Auteur.” In Le Bruissement de La Langue, 61–67. Seuil.
Beyer, Christian. 2003. “Edmund Husserl.” The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , edited by Edward N. 
Zalta and Uri Nodelman. Winter 2022. Link here.
Blanqui, Auguste. 2009. Instructions pour une prise d’armes. Cent Pages.
Bogost, Ian. 2010. Persuasive Games: The Expressive Power of Videogames. MIT Press.
152
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 17
Bogost, Ian. 2021. “Persuasive Games, A Decade Later.” In Persuasive Gaming in Context, edited by T eresa de 
la Hera, Jeroen Jansz, Joost Raessens, and Ben Schouten, 29–40. Amsterdam University Press.  Link 
here.
Boskovic, Kat. 2023. “Barbie: Feminist Masterpiece or Capitalistic Greed?” Panther Press, November 4. Link 
here.
Bowman, Sarah Lynne, Elektra Diakolambrianou, and Simon Brind, eds. 2024. Transformative Role-Playing 
Game Design. 1st ed. T ransformative Play Research Series. Uppsala University Library. Link here.
Bowman, Sarah Lynne, and Karen Schrier. 2018. “Players and Their Characters in Role-Playing Games.” In 
Role-Playing Game Studies: Transmedia Foundations, edited by José P. Zagal and Sebastian Deterd -
ing, 395–410. Routledge.
Brenkman, John. 2020. Mood and Trope: The Rhetoric and Poetics of Affect. University of Chicago Press.
Bryman, Alan. 1999. “Global Disney.” The American Century: Consensus and Coercion in the Projection of 
American Power, edited by David Slater and Peter J. T aylor, 261–72. Wiley-Blackwell.
Carter, Chase. 2021. “ An Author Is Questioning Wizards of the Coast’s ‘Problematic’ Changes to His Adven-
ture in the Newest D&D 5E Sourcebook.” Dicebreaker. March 24, 2021. Link here.
Charmaz, Kathy. 2017. “Constructivist Grounded Theory.” The Journal of Positive Psychology  12 (3): 299–
300. Link here.
D&D Official. 2020.“Commitment to Diversity | Dungeons & Dragons.” D&D Official | Dungeons & Drag-
ons. No longer available online.
Coppola, Francis Ford, dir. 1979. Apocalypse Now.
Cover, Jennifer Grouling. 2010. The Creation of Narrative in Tabletop Role-Playing Games. McFarland.
Department of Education. 2024. “Statistical Bulletin August 2024.” Link here.
Eichner, Susanne. 2020. “Lifeworld Relevance and Practical Sense-Making : Audience Engagement with 
Danish T elevision Drama Series.” In The Global Audiences of Danish Television Drama, edited by Pia 
Majbritt Jensen and Ushma Chauhan Jacobsen 107–23. Nordicom, University of Gothenburg. Link 
here.
Epstein, Lee, and Eric A. Posner. 2022. “The Roberts Court and the T ransformation of Constitutional Pro-
tections for Religion: A Statistical Portrait.” Supreme Court Review 2021 (1): 315–47.
Fanon, Frantz. 1965a. A Dying Colonialism. T rans. Haakon Chevalier. Grove Press.
Fanon, Frantz. 1965b. The Wretched of the Earth. T rans. Constance Farrington. Grove Press.
Fine, Gary Alan. 1983. Shared Fantasy : Role-Playing Games as Social W orlds. University of Chicago Press.
153
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 17
Fish, Stanley. 1980. Is There a Text in This Class?: The Authority of Interpretive Communities . Harvard Uni-
versity Press. Link here.
Flanagan, Mary. 2009. Critical Play: Radical Game Design. MIT Press. Link here.
Flanagan, Mary. 2021. “If Y ou Play It, Do Y ou Believe It?” Narrative Mechanics. Transcript-V erlag, 279–90.
Flanagan, Mary, and Mikael Jakobsson. 2023. Playing Oppression: The Legacy of Conquest and Empire in Co-
lonialist Board Games. MIT Press.
Freedman, Gili, Max Seidman, Mary Flanagan, Geoff Kaufman, and Melanie C. Green. 2018. “The Impact of 
an ‘ Aha’ Moment on Gender Biases: Limited Evidence for the Efficacy of a Game Intervention That 
Challenges Gender Assumptions.” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 78 (September):162–67. 
Link here.
Freire, Paulo. 1993. Pedagogy of the Oppressed . T ranslated by Myra Bergman Ramos. New Y ork: Penguin 
Books.
Garcia, Antero. 2017. “Privilege, Power, and Dungeons & Dragons: How Systems Shape Racial and Gender 
Identities in T abletop Role-Playing Games.” Mind, Culture, and Activity 24 (3): 232–46. Link here.
Given, Lisa M., and Sarah Polkinghorne. 2024. “50 Y ears on, Dungeons & Dragons Is Still a Gaming Staple. 
What’s behind Its Monumental Success?” The Conversation. February 9, 2024. Link here.
Griepp, Martin, 2024. “Hobby Game Sales Eke Out a T ough Win in 2023.” ICv2, March 28. Link 
here.
Guttorm, Hanna Ellen, T eija Löytönen, Eeva Anttila, and Anita V alkeemäki. 2016. “Mo(ve)Ments, Encoun-
ters, Repetitions: Writing With (Embodied and T extual) Encounters.” Qualitative Inquiry 22 (5): 
417–27. Link here.
Hall, Stuart. 1973. “Encoding and Decoding in the T elevision Discourse.” Paper Presented at Council Of 
Europe Colloquy on T raining in the Critical Reading of Televisual Language. University of Leicester, 
September.
Hammer, Jessica. 2007. “ Agency and Authority in Role-Playing ‘T exts.’” In A New Literacies Sampler, 67–94. 
New Y ork: Peter Lang.
Harviainen, J. Tuomas. 2008. “ A Hermeneutical Approach to Role-Playing Analysis.” International Journal 
of Role-Playing, no. 1 (December), 66–78. Link here.
Hines, Mark. 2023. “Game Mechanics and Narrative as Symbiotic, Co-Constructive Elements in T omb of 
Annihilation.” Analog Game Studies (March 19). Link here.
Homo Ludens. 2023. “Dix critères inspirés de Paulo Freire pour l’étude et la conception de jeux à visée de 
conscientisation.” Sciences du jeu, no. 19 (June). Link here.
154
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 17
Hook, Alan, and Paul Coulton. 2017. “Games Design Research through Game Design Practice.” In Game 
Design Research, edited by Petri Lankoski and Jussi Holopainen, 97. ETC Press. Link here.
Hook, Nathan. 2015. “Grounded Theory.” In Game Research Methods: An Overview, edited by Petri Lankos-
ki and Staffan Björk, 309–21. ETC Press.
Hummel, Matt. 2014. “Menzoberranzan.” In Dungeons & Dragons and Philosophy, 121–31. John Wiley & 
Sons, Ltd. Link here.
Jakobson, Roman. 1960. “Linguistics and Poetics.” In Style in Language, 350–77. MIT Press.
Jara, David, and Evan T orner. 2018. “Literary Studies and Role-Playing Games.” In Role-Playing Game Stud-
ies: Transmedia Foundations, edited by José P. Zagal and Sebastian Deterding, 265–82. Routledge.
Justice, Daniel Heath. 2024. “Hack the Orcs, Loot the T omb, and T ake the Land: Reflections on Settler Colo-
nialism, Indigeneity, and Otherwise Possibilities of Dungeons & Dragons.” In Fifty Years of Dungeons 
& Dragons, 259–73. MIT Press.
Kaufman, Geoff, and Mary Flanagan. 2015. “ A Psychologically ‘Embedded’ Approach to Designing Games 
for Prosocial Causes.” Cyberpsychology: Journal of Psychosocial Research on Cyberspace 9 (3).
Kaufman, Geoff, Mary Flanagan, and Max Seidman. 2016. “Creating Stealth Game Interventions for Atti -
tude and Behavior Change: An ‘Embedded Design’ Model.” Transactions of the Digital Games Re-
search Association 2 (November). Link here.
Kaufman, Geoff, Mary Flanagan, and Max Seidman. 2021. “Creating Stealth Game Interventions for Atti -
tude and Behavior Change .” In Persuasive Gaming in Context , edited by T eresa de la Hera, Jeroen 
Jansz, Joost Raessens, and Ben Schouten, 73–90. Amsterdam University Press. Link here.
Kien, Grant. 2021. “Postmodernism T rumps All: The W orld Without Facts.” Qualitative Inquiry 27 (3–4): 
374–80. Link here.
La Porte, Amy, and Lena Cavusoglu. 2023. “Faux Feminism in a Capitalistic Fever Dream: A Review of Greta 
Gerwig’s Barbie (2023).” Markets, Globalization & Development Review 8 (2). Link here.
Lankoski, Petri, and Staffan Björk. 2015. Game Research Methods: An Overview. ETC Press.
Lankoski, Petri, and Jussi Holopainen. 2017. Game Design Research: An Introduction to Theory & Practice . 
ETC Press.
Levi, Heather. 2008. The W orld of Lucha Libre. Duke University Press. Link here.
MacLure, Maggie. 2013. “Researching without Representation? Language and Materiality in Post-Qualita -
tive Methodology.” International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education  26 (6): 658–67.  Link 
here.
155
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 17
Mason, Kelsey Paige. 2024. “ Are Games and Utopia ‘Just Make-Believe?’ A Study of Commodified Neutrality 
and Granular Diversity in Dungeons & Dragons.” In Utopia on the Tabletop , edited by Jo Lindsay 
W alton, 150–209. Ping Press.
Mehlman, Jeffrey. 1972. “The ‘Floating Signifier’: From Lévi-Strauss to Lacan.” Yale French Studies, no. 48, 
10–37. Link here.
Merrick, Alyssia, W endy W en Li, and Dan J. Miller. 2024. “ A Study on the Efficacy of the T abletop Roleplay-
ing Game Dungeons & Dragons for Improving Mental Health and Self-Concepts in a Community 
Sample.” Games for Health Journal 13 (2): 128–33. Link here.
Mussett, Neil. 2014. “Is Anyone Actually Chaotic Evil?” In Dungeons & Dragons and Philosophy , 35–59. 
Newark: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Link here.
Myers, Christina, Lara S. G. Piccolo, and T revor Collins. 2019. “Game Jams as a Space to T ackle Social Is-
sues: An Approach Based on the Critical Pedagogy.” In Proceedings of the International Conference on 
Game Jams, Hackathons and Game Creation Events 2019, 1–8. ICGJ 2019. Association for Comput-
ing Machinery. Link here.
Nadeem, Reem. 2022. “Key Findings From the Global Religious Futures Project.” Pew Research Center  
(blog). December 21, 2022. Link here.
Naylor, Robert Luke. 2023. “Why Barbie and Not Oppenheimer: A Film Review of Barbie, Directed by Gre-
ta Gerwig. W arner Bros. Pictures, 2023.” Endeavour 47 (3): 100873. Link here.
Nikolaidou, Dimitra. 2024. “Spelling With Dice: The Role of Dungeons & Dragons in Contemporary Specu-
lative Fiction.” In Fifty Years of Dungeons & Dragons, 161–77. MIT Press.
Pitkänen, Jori. 2015. “Studying Thoughts: Stimulated Recall as a Game Research Method.” In Game Re-
search Methods, edited by Petri Lankoski and Staffan Björk, 117–32. ETC Press.
Senechal, Eva, Charles F. Bray, Christopher M. W orsham, and Anupam B. Jena. 2024. “Online Search In-
terest in Gynecologists After the Release of the Film Barbie.” JAMA Network Open 7 (7): e2424658. 
Link here.
Shanmugaraj, Nisha, Joanna W olfe, and Sophie W odzak. 2020. “Rhetorically-Grounded Paraphrasing In-
struction.” Composition Forum 43. Link here.
Shea, Michael. 2018. Return of the Lazy Dungeon Master. Independently published.
Sidhu, Premeet. 2023. “Playing Animal Farm: Designing a Dungeons & Dragons [D&D] One-Shot for Piv -
otal Play and Learning.” In Proceedings of DiGRA 2023.
Sidhu, Premeet. 2024. “Classrooms and Dragons: Learning from Dungeons & Dragons.” In Fifty Years of 
Dungeons & Dragons, edited by Premeet Sidhu, Marcus Carter, José P. Zagal, 179–96. MIT Press.
156
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 17
Sidhu, Premeet, and Marcus Carter. 2021. “Pivotal Play: Rethinking Meaningful Play in Games through 
Death in Dungeons & Dragons.” Games and Culture 16 (8): 1044–64.
Smith, William A. 1972. “Concientizacaõ and Simulation Games.” Technical Notes 2:1–26.
Stang, Sarah, and Aaron T rammell. 2020. “The Ludic Bestiary: Misogynistic T ropes of Female Monstrosity 
in Dungeons & Dragons.” Games & Culture 15 (6): 730–47. Link here.
W alsh, Orla, and Conor Linehan. 2024. “Roll for Insight: Understanding How the Experience of Playing 
Dungeons & Dragons Impacts the Mental Health of an Average Player.” International Journal of 
Role-Playing, no. 15 (June): 36–60. Link here.
White, William J. 2020. Tabletop RPG Design in Theory and Practice at the Forge, 2001–2012: Designs and 
Discussions. 1st ed. 2020 edition. Palgrave Macmillan.
Williams, J. Patrick, David Kirschner, Nicholas Mizer, and Sebastian Deterding. 2018. “Sociology and 
Role-Playing Games.” In Role-Playing Game Studies: Transmedia Foundations, edited by José P. Za-
gal and Sebastian Deterding, 227–44. Routledge.
Wright, Jennifer Cole, Daniel E. W eissglass, and V anessa Casey. 2020. “Imaginative Role-Playing as a Medium 
for Moral Development: Dungeons & Dragons Provides Moral T raining.” Journal of Humanistic 
Psychology 60 (1): 99–129. Link here.
 
157
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 17
Brian McKenzie is an Associate Professor at Maynooth University. He has PhD in 
history from Stony Brook University. He is subject leader for Critical Skills, May-
nooth University’s First Y ear Seminar, and a co-creator of Maynooth University’s mi-
crocredential ‘Writing for Role-Playing Games: Narratives, Adventures, and W orld-
building.’ His research interests are in game studies, the pedagogy of multiliteracies 
and digital technologies, and Wikipedia. 
Bret Zawilski, Ph.D., is a Lecturer of Critical Skills at Maynooth University, where 
he teaches courses on writing and scientific communication. He’s an avid player of 
indie TTRPGs and his academic research investigates writing processes, knowledge 
transfer, and multimodal pedagogy. He has a background and experience in writing 
and technical communication.
James Beirne holds a PhD in Social & Political Thought from Y ork University. 
His doctoral research examined the transformation of property relations in Ireland 
through dispossessive colonial practices and the construction of the political appa -
ratus which mediated these processes. Current research interests include political 
subjectivity, the relationship between oral and literary cultural spaces, theories of the 
state, and political economies of colonialism and fascism. He currently teaches in 
Critical Skills at Maynooth University.