 

 Altering the Familiar: Tigana by Guy Gavriel Kay | Tor.com 

 Tor.com 

 Science fiction. Fantasy. The universe. And related subjects.

 Main menu

 Skip to content 

 Fiction 

 Series 

 Publishing 

 Newsletter 

 Search 

 Search 

 Log In 

 Register 

 That Was Awesome 

 That Was Awesome! Writers on Writing 

 Altering the Familiar: Tigana by Guy Gavriel Kay 

 Joshua Palmatier 

 Wed Jul 6, 2016 12:30pm 

7 comments 
 1 Favorite [+] 

 As an aspiring writer and voracious fantasy reader years (and years) ago, the aspect that intrigued me most and kept me reading and writing fantasy was the uniqueness of the world that could be found among the pages of each book. The arcane magic, the otherworldly creatures, and the never-before-seen races and creatures that inhabited the world captured my imagination and took me to new realms of awe and wonder. That is why it’s called fantasy, after all, isn’t it? The “new” is why we enjoy it so much, right?

 So imagine the utter shock while reading Tigana by Guy Gavriel Kay that it was the familiar that made the new so special.

 It changed the way I wrote and the way I read fantasy novels. I realized that, as an aspiring writer, I’d been attempting to worldbuild the wrong way. I was trying to create worlds anew from whole cloth—new cultures, new races, new magic, new everything. But after this epiphany, I realized that the only reason all of the newness—all of the magic, all of the creatures—was so interesting was because it was being contrasted against a backdrop that was essentially 90 percent familiar. The idea that in order for fantasy to work well, to have as much power as it has, comes from the fact that the majority of the world where it’s set is essentially the real world was, frankly, stunning.

 I didn’t need to create a new creature or new culture; I could take a setting from the real world—past or present—and make it the base for a creature or culture instead. All I needed to do to make the familiar new and fresh was change small aspects of that world, or add in something new and determine how the world would have to change in order to accommodate it.

 In Tigana , Guy Gavriel Kay creates a world centered on the culture of Italy. No, the peninsula isn’t shaped like a boot, and no, the culture isn’t exactly like Renaissance Italy, but the flavor of Italy is there—in the word structure, the place names, the characters; in the gestures, the traditions, the everyday force of life moving people forward. Behind the fantasy façade is a real-world foundation that’s recognizable, and it’s that familiarity that grounds the reader and provides them with stability for when the true magic of the world begins.

 Needless to say, I devoured Tigana and then A Song for Arbonne and The Fionavar Tapestry and the many other worlds created by Guy Gavriel Kay. He is a master at taking a recognizable setting from our world—a place or a culture—and transforming it into something otherworldly, while still retaining that sense of the familiar, that sense of having been there . And isn’t that one of the most essential elements of fantasy writing? Aren’t we all attempting to create a world that makes the reader feel as if they’ve lived there?

 How he does is it arcane in and of itself, and I must confess that after years of study of not only Guy Gavriel Kay’s novels, but practically every other fantasy novel I’ve read, I have still not divined fully his art. Certainly there are obvious alterations to bring the reader out of the familiar world and into the fantasy realm, such as having two moons or changing the landscape, but these are mere cosmetic changes. Kay’s craft is much more subtle. He alters the familiar through all aspects of life, down to arbitrary everyday rituals, including myths and legends and superstitions, such as the extremely powerful lore of the riselka in Tigana . Even thinking of the riselka now sends shivers down my back, evoking so effectively the chilling end to Tigana . Kay manages to take each such change—cosmetic or otherwise—and incorporate it into the familiar seamlessly. Each change not only alters the world, making it feel more fantastic, but also informs the world, shaping it at such depths that the reader cannot fathom removing that aspect from the world at all. It becomes intrinsic and informs and plays off of every other aspect of the world, until it can only be viewed as a whole, without separate parts. And that whole is also wholly new, even with that base of familiarity.

 Most writers, when speaking of Guy Gavriel Kay’s work, talk of his deft and lyrical skill with language. His writing is evocative, even impressionistic in places, and certainly transports one to a different world with simple word choices and turns of phrase. But for me, the true art of Kay’s work is not in the use of language, but in the subtle way he skews what is so obviously a familiar setting into something fantastical and mysterious and completely different. That is the power of Guy Gavriel Kay’s work, and it is nothing short of awesome.

 Joshua Palmatier is a writer and a mathematician. He was born in Pennsylvania, but has lived in numerous states over his life and currently resides in Binghamton, New York, and is a tenured professor of mathematics at Oneonta. Threading the Needle , the sequel to Shattering the Ley , is available July 5th from DAW.

 Share:
 Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) 
 Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window) 
 Click to share on Tumblr (Opens in new window) 
 Click to share on Google+ (Opens in new window) 
 Click to share on Pinterest (Opens in new window) 

 citation 

 That Was Awesome! Writers on Writing 
 ‹ previous 
 index 
 next › 

 Guy Gavriel Kay That Was Awesome That Was Awesome! Writers on Writing Tigana worldbuilding 

 World States and Mega Empires in SF 

 The Dúnedain and the Deep Blue Sea: On Númenórean Navigation 

 Five Books With Manipulated Memories 

 The Most Important Planet in Brandon Sanderson’s Books is Named After Jane Yolen 

7 Comments 

 skip to newest 
 skip to unread 

 More Comments 
 Check for New Comments 

 Subscribe to this thread 

 Receive notification by email when a new comment is added. You must be a registered user to subscribe to threads.

 Comment Preview

 Post a Comment

All comments must meet the community standards outlined in Tor.com's Moderation Policy or be subject to moderation. Thank you for keeping the discussion, and our community, civil and respectful. 

 Name 
 Email 
 Comment 

 Hate the CAPTCHA? 
Tor.com members can edit comments, skip the preview, and never have to prove they're not robots. Join now! 

 Latest Posts

 Stubby the Rocket 
 Mira Grant’s Murderous Mermaids Science Thriller Rolling in the Deep Optioned for Film 
 13 hours ago 

 Sweepstakes 
 Rivers of London Series Sweepstakes! 
 14 hours ago 

 Feliza Casano 
 A Specialty in Transformation: Marina and Sergey Dyachenko’s Vita Nostra 
 15 hours ago 

 Brit Mandelo 
 Blood Relations: My Sister, The Serial Killer by Oyinkan Braithwaite 
 16 hours ago 

 Alex Brown 
 Pull List: Blackbird and Jook Joint Remind You To Never Underestimate Women 
 17 hours ago 

 Stubby the Rocket 
 Annalee Newitz’s Autonomous Optioned for Television by AMC 
 17 hours ago 

 Mari Ness 
 When the Girl Rescues the Prince: Norwegian Fairy Tale “East of the Sun, West of the Moon” 
 18 hours ago 

 New in Series

 Oathbringer Reread: Chapter Fifty-Six 

 Lovecraftian Reread: “The Mainz Psalter” 

 Twenty Rings, Seven Stones, and Middle-earth’s New Dark Lord 

 Sleeps With Monsters: Unexpected Fun 

 Reading The Ruin of Kings : Chapter 5 

 The Theme of Return in Robert Jordan’s The Great Hunt (Part 16) 

 Rereading Captain Vorpatril’s Alliance , Chapters 8 and 9 

 all series 

 Recent Comments
 iworld on Writing Fantasy Horses Right: Kristen Britain’s Green Rider 21 mins ago 
 ajay on Good Omens , Part Four: Nobody Expects the Spanish Inquisition! 22 mins ago 
 phuzz on High-Stakes Space Opera: Mass Effect: Annihilation by Catherynne M. Valente 44 mins ago 
 Turnike on A Specialty in Transformation: Marina and Sergey Dyachenko’s Vita Nostra 1 hour ago 
 karina on When the Girl Rescues the Prince: Norwegian Fairy Tale “East of the Sun, West of the Moon” 2 hours ago 
 sallydeathhands on Mira Grant’s Murderous Mermaids Science Thriller Rolling in the Deep Optioned for Film 2 hours ago 
 zihana on Some of the Best from Tor.com 2015 is Free to Download Now! 3 hours ago 
 Luke on The Great Stephen King Reread: The Green Mile 3 hours ago 
 denise_l on You Meet a Man in an Inn: Jean Ray’s “The Mainz Psalter” 3 hours ago 
 PamAdams on Rereading the Vorkosigan Saga: Captain Vorpatril’s Alliance , Chapters 8 and 9 4 hours ago 
 more comments 

 About 

 Submissions 

 Advertise 

 Archive 

 Search 

Follow Tor.com 

 Twitter 

 Facebook 

 RSS 

Follow Tor.com Germany 

 Tor Germany Home 

 Twitter 

 Facebook 

 Privacy Policy 

 Ads and Cookies 

 Terms of Use 

 Contact 

 © 2018 Macmillan | All stories, art, and posts are the copyright of their respective authors 
 Back to top 

Our Privacy Notice has been updated to explain how we use cookies, which you accept by continuing to use this website. To withdraw your consent, see Your Choices . 

