University of Wollongong Thesis Collection

University of Wollongong Thesis Collections

University of Wollongong
Research Online

2013

Now and then: traces of the present in medievalist
fantasy fiction
Narelle Campbell
University of Wollongong

Recommended Citation
Campbell, Narelle, Now and then: traces of the present in medievalist fantasy fiction, Dcotor of Philosophy thesis, School of Arts,
English and Media, University of Wollongong, 2013. http://ro.uow.edu.au/theses/3910

Research Online is the open access institutional repository for the
University of Wollongong. For further information contact the UOW
Library: research-pubs@uow.edu.au

  Now and Then:

Traces of the 
Present in 
Medievalist 
Fantasy Fiction 

Narelle Campbell  

 
 
  
 
Abstract 

This  thesis  examines  two  medievalist  fantasy  series  by  authors  from 

former  British  settler  cultures  –  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles  (1995-

2003)  by  Australian  writer  Garth  Nix,  and  The  Fionavar  Tapestry 

(1985-1986)  by  Canadian  author  Guy  Gavriel  Kay.  I  argue  that 

although these texts are firmly situated in the realm of the imaginary, 

they  are  far  from  being  culturally  irrelevant.  They  are  inescapably 

contemporary  cultural  products,  strongly  informed  by  the  moments 

and  places  of  their  production,  and  revelatory  of  present  aspirations 

and  anxieties.  I  discuss  the  British  and,  more  broadly,  Western 

inflections at the centre of medievalist genre fantasy and examine how 

these  impact  on  representations  of  ethnicity,  gender  and  class  within 

my chosen texts.  This entails a consideration of how colonial legacies 

continue  to  inform  the  ways  in  which  postcolonial  settler  cultures 

construct their own identities and view other cultures. I argue that the 

medieval temporal and spatial settings utilised by Nix and Kay create 

a  privileged  space,  imbued  with  a  sense  of  greater  power,  authority 

and  authenticity  than  the  present.  Moreover,  I  argue  that  the  power 

available  to  imaginings  of  the  Middle  Ages  is  appropriated  by  the 

authors  as  these  fantasy  texts  engage  discursively  with  debates  of 

contemporary ideological significance. 

Page | i  

 
 
 
 
Completed at the University of Wollongong. 

I  certify  that  this  thesis  is  my  own  work  except  for  where  I  have  given  full 
documented references to the work of others, and that the material contained 
in  this  thesis  has  not  been  submitted  for  formal  assessment  in  any  formal 
course. 

Narelle Campbell  

26 March 2013. 

Page | ii  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Acknowledgements 

A  page  seems  inadequate  to  express  my  thanks  and  to  acknowledge  the 

encouragement,  patience  and  support  of  others  during  the  process  of  writing  a 

thesis. I will begin by thanking my ever supportive husband, Colin, and my offspring 

(during  the  time  of  my  writing  they  have  grown  too  old  to  be  called  children)  – 

Raewyn,  Shannyn,  Rhys  and  Dael  –  all  of  whom  have  at  various  times  both 

facilitated  and  frustrated  my  thesis  progress;  but  I  wouldn’t  have  it  any  other  way. 

Thanks, too, to my extended family for continued interest and encouragement.  

Thanks  to  Professor  Brian  Martin  who,  through  his  writing  group,  generously 

teaches,  supports  and  encourages  productive  and  consistent  writing  practices. 

Thanks also to other members of the writing group for feedback and the sharing of 

ideas, and thanks to my fellow HDR students in the Wollongong Faculty of Arts. A 

community  of  peers  is  invaluable.  Particular  thanks  go  to  Trevor  Kettlewell  for 

feedback  on  early  drafts  of  my  Nix  chapters,  and  to  Anne  Melano  and  Colin 

Campbell for  reading  and  providing feedback  on  a  number  of  completed  chapters. 

Special  thanks  to  Dr  Helen  Kilpatrick,  my  secondary  supervisor,  for  feedback  on 

early drafts of Nix, for all the helpful chats and encouragement along the way, and 

for reading and giving feedback on final drafts of a number of chapters.  

Finally,  I  cannot  thank  my  primary  supervisor,  Assoc.  Professor  Louise  D’Arcens, 

enough  for  her  unerring  support,  patience,  encouragement,  astute  direction  and 

practical guidance. As the thesis has unfolded I have come to appreciate more and 

more  not  only  her  knowledge,  scholarly  expertise  and  work  ethic,  but  also  the 

consistency and strength of her feedback, the wisdom of her advice, her generosity 

with both time and information, and her kindness in practice. Louise, I feel incredibly 

fortunate to have had you as my supervisor. 

Page | iii  

 
 
 
 
 
Contents 

Abstract 

Certification   

Acknowledgements  

Introduction: Popularity and Pertinence    

Chapter 1: Fantasy and Medievalism 

Chapter 2: North and South 

i 

ii 

iii 

1  

23 

67 

Chapter 3: Blood, Identity and Class        

108 

Chapter 4: Refugees, Humanitarianism   

and Naturalised Western Power 

Chapter 5: Heroines and Heroes   

Chapter 6: East and West   

Chapter 7: Dwarfmen and Indians  

Chapter 8: Archetypes and Myth   

Chapter 9: Romance, Seduction  

and the Other 

Conclusion 

Works Cited   

147 

165 

201 

234 

273 

310 

339 

348

Page | iv  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction:

Popularity and Pertinence  

Medievalist fantasy novels discursively engage  with contemporary issues of 

cultural and political significance. These include the areas of national identity, 

class,  ethnicity  and  gender.  Despite  being  commonly  set  in  an  imagined 

past,  fantasy  stories  are  contemporary  products  that  say  much  more  about 

the moments and  contexts  of  their  creation  than they  do  of historical  times. 

Although  genre  fantasy  has  been  proportionately  under-represented  in 

scholarship,  I  assert  that  its  extreme  popularity  in Western  societies  attests 

to its affective appeal and cultural relevance. This makes it a pertinent area 

for  greater  critical  attention.  This  chapter  will  introduce  The  Old  Kingdom 

Chronicles  by  Australian  author  Garth  Nix,  and  The  Fionavar  Tapestry  by 

Canadian  author  Guy  Gavriel  Kay.  It  will  address  the  quintessential 

‘Britishness’  that  I  contend  underlies  much  of  popular  medievalist  fantasy, 

and  consider  possible  post-colonial  and  cultural  implications  of  fantasy 

produced in former British settler cultures.   

Page | 1  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  2010  Booklover’s  Best  Top  101  List  compiled  by  Australian  bookseller 

Dymocks  is  but  one  source  that  immediately  demonstrates  the  appeal  of 

genre  fantasy.  With  Stephanie  Meyer’s  Twilight  Saga  in  the  number  one 

position,  J.K.  Rowling’s  Harry  Potter  Books  in  second  position,  and  J.R.R. 

Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings in position number five, both the commercial 

value  and  wide  readership  of  fantasy  are  evident.  The  remainder  of  the  list 

also contains a liberal smattering of books that qualify, if not always as genre 

fantasy, at least as fantastic. There are novels such as: Audrey Niffenegger’s 

The Time Traveller’s Wife (4)1 where the protagonist has a gene that causes 

spontaneous  time  travel;  Tim  Winton’s  Cloudstreet  (19)  with  its  hauntings 

and visions; Paulo Coelho’s The Alchemist (50) focusing on an exotic dream-

inspired quest; Donna Tartt’s The Secret History (94) with its mix of classical 

myth and mystery; and Jasper Fforde’s The Eyre Affair (36) with its (literally) 

novel-hopping  book  detectives.  Science  fiction  such  as  Douglas  Adams’s 

Hitchhikers  Guide  to  the  Galaxy  (31)  and  Frank  Herbert’s  Dune  (80)  sit 

alongside more conventional fantasy such as Tolkien’s The Hobbit (23), C.S. 

Lewis’s The Chronicles of Narnia (87) and Kristin Cashore’s Graceling (92). 

There are fond satires of the genre such as William Goldman’s The Princess 

Bride  (70)  and  Gregory  Maguire’s  Wicked  (72),  time-slips  in  Diana 

Gabaldon’s  Cross  Stitch  (26)  and  a  number  of  books  with  ‘Vampire’  in  the 

title.  This  survey  confirms  the  popularity  of  fantasy  seen  in  the  Australian 

Broadcasting  Corporation’s  (ABC)  2004  poll  which  sought  to  discover 

Australia’s  “favourite  books”  (My  Favourite  Book,  online).  With  more  than 

15000 respondents the result included numerous fantasy novels. Moreover, 

the vote was won by J.R.R. Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings.  

1 These numbers indicate the titles’ position in the 2010 Booklover’s Best Top 101 List. 

Page | 2  

 
 
                                                           
More  recently,  12  July  2011,  the ABC’s  national  television  programme First 

Tuesday  Book  Club  (FTBC)  hosted  a  discussion  of  the  fantasy  genre.  The 

panel,  mediated  by  Jennifer  Byrne,  consisted  of  four  bestselling  authors, 

each  of  whom  has  works  published  both  within  and  outside  the  fantasy 

genre.  Panellists were: Australian writer Emily Rodda (Jennifer Rowe), best 

known  for  her  children’s  fantasy;  British-born  Australian  writer,  Fiona 

McIntosh,  who  writes  in  the  genres  of  crime,  fantasy  and  historical  fiction; 

Australian  Matthew  Reilly,  known  for  his  action  thrillers,  many  of  which 

include overt fantasy elements; and American author Lev Grossman, who is 

also a book critic for Time Magazine.  

Pointing  to  the  clear  commercial  dominance  of  fantasy  fiction,  Grossman 

challenged  a  comment  made  by  McIntosh  which  marked  a  distinction 

between  ‘fantasy’  and  ‘mainstream’  readers.  “What  mainstreamers  are  you 

talking  about?”  Grossman  questioned,  “We’re  the  mainstream”  (FTBC 

10:08). McIntosh responded with qualified agreement, providing an example 

of how the distinction between fantasy and mainstream literature is situated 

more in reader perception than in actual practice: 

I'm  talking  in  front  of  500  people  and  say,  'Do  you  read?  Does 

anybody  here  read  fantasy?'  And  they  sort  of  get  that  lemon  sour 

look  on  their  face,  and  yet  if  I  say,  'Have  you  read  The  Time 

Traveller's  Wife?'  and  hands  go  up,  and,  'Oh,  it's  the  best  book  I've 

ever read,' and you think, 'OK, so, you're not reading fantasy, then'. 

(10:12) 

This  exchange  encapsulates  the  paradox  that  surrounds  the  fantasy  genre. 

Despite  the  fact  that  within Western  culture  fantasy  dominates  in  bestseller 

lists and in ‘favourite’ polls, somehow it remains discursively pigeonholed as 

Page | 3  

 
 
sub-literature,  being  perceived  as  lacking  in  aesthetic  value  and  in  its 

engagement with reality. 

The  issue  was  reprised  later  in  the  First  Tuesday  Book  Club  discussion  as 

Byrne  spoke  of  fantasy’s  “inability,  to  date,  to  really  cross  into  the 

mainstream”  (19:53).  The  panellists’  responses  drew  attention  to  the 

constructed  and  abstract  nature  of  this  perceived  difference  between 

‘fantasy’ and ‘mainstream’ literatures. Reilly asserted that, rather than being 

informed by consumers’ purchasing and reading practices, the perception is 

reinforced  by  artificial  book  store  categorisations  (20:00).  Rodda  pertinently 

noted that The Lord of the Rings was voted the most popular book of all time, 

prompting  Grossman 

to  reiterate  his  earlier  assertion:  “we  are 

the 

mainstream. Literary fiction, that's a subculture, that's a niche” (20.29). 

The  disparity  between  impression  and  actuality  is  amusingly  illustrated  in  a 

2007 interview, published in The Age, with fantasy author Terry Pratchett, a 

multiple  bestselling  novelist  who  has  sold  over  65  million  books  worldwide. 

Pratchett speaks of attending a book signing event in a large bookstore at a 

time when his latest novel had held the number one position in national book 

sales for several weeks. Noticing his novel was shelved in the SciFi/Fantasy 

section of  the basement  and  not  with  the  display  of the Top 10 bestsellers, 

Pratchett asked the store manager why this was the case. The reply came; 

"Well, Terry, you're not exactly bestseller material" (Hughes 26). 

The  above  examples  are  indicative  of  the  disjunction  between  the  vast 

readership  of  fantasy  and  the  seemingly  intractable  perception  that  this 

Page | 4  

 
 
 
 
genre exists only as a sub-literature. They also provide some insight into why 

fantasy  is  under-represented  in  literary  criticism.  Further  insights  into  genre 

fantasy’s  under-representation  might  be  found  in  discourses  that  label 

fantasy  as  nostalgic  escapism,  essentially  conservative,  derivative,  or 

juvenile.  

Such assumptions are clearly discernible in debates surrounding the literary 

merit  of  J.K.  Rowling’s  Harry  Potter  books.  A.S.  Byatt,  in  a  2003  opinion 

piece  for  The  New  York  Times,  categorises  many  of  J.K.  Rowling's  adult 

readers as “childish”, saying they are “simply reverting to the child they were 

when they read the Billy Bunter books, or invested Enid Blyton's pasteboard 

kids with their own childish desires and hopes” (Byatt 13).  This echoes the 

views of Anthony Holden, a Whitbread Prize judge in the year 2000, a year 

that  saw  Seamus  Heaney's  translation  of  the  medieval  poem  Beowulf 

narrowly  defeat  Rowling’s  The  Prisoner  of  Azkaban  for  the  award.  Holden 

asserts:  ''If  Harry  Potter  had  won  the  Whitbread  book  of  the  year  it  would 

have been sending out a signal to the world that Britain is a country that just 

can't  grow  up''  (Lyall  9).  He  also  expresses  the  view  that  Harry  Potter  is 

“derivative” and “traditional” (Lyall 9). Ironically, the epic Beowulf that won the 

prize is undeniably traditional, possessing the imprimatur of British culture. It 

is  unsurprising,  then,  that  another  of  the  Whitbread  judges,  Richard  Harris, 

places  Holden’s  criticism  within  discourses  of  ‘high’  and  ‘low’  art  that 

implicitly cast popularity as antithetical to excellence. Harris argues that this 

negative  reaction  to  Rowling’s  texts  “exemplifies  the  gap  between  the 

arbiters of literary taste and the appetite of the public for books'' (Lyall 9).  

Page | 5  

 
 
 
Debates  that  conflate  an  appreciation  of  fantasy  with  immaturity  are  not 

limited  to  Rowling’s  Harry  Potter  novels.  In  the  First  Tuesday  Book  Club 

discussion,  Fiona  McIntosh  commented  on  the  manner  in  which  fantasy  is 

widely bracketed as juvenile. She recalled “being in primary school, and the 

teachers  really  despairing  because  I  wouldn't  grow  up.  That  was  their 

accusation – that I needed to read more grown-up fiction. I think that sort of 

pervades  how  fantasy  is  seen  today”  (FTBC  3:31).  Lev  Grossman  drew 

attention  to  the  high/low  culture  debates  with  the  observation:  “my  parents 

are  English  professors,  so  fantasy  was  quite  disapproved  of  in  our 

household” (5:20), and Jennifer Byrne noted that ‘escapist’ was a “commonly 

used term of abuse” (6:32).  Matthew Reilly’s response indicates something 

of the power dynamics that accompany negatively dismissive discourses on 

fantasy literature: 

I'm  a  young  guy,  but  I  have  vast  amounts  of  experience  of 

disapproval of escapist fiction, and it's amazing how some people try 

to  sort  of  elevate  their  own  level  of  power.  And  what  we  find  in  the 

book world is you get people who say there's high literature, and then 

they  say  there's  escapism,  and,  oh,  my  God,  that  escapism  sells 

millions of copies, and let's be honest, the biggest-selling books and 

stories of all time – The Lord Of The Rings, Harry Potter, Star Wars 

… (FTBC 6:53) 

This  suggests  that  there  has  been  remarkably  little  change  in  broader 

perceptions of fantasy literature since fantasy critic Brian Attebery observed 

in  Strategies  of  Fantasy,  almost  two  decades  before  the  abovementioned 

discussion, that: 

we  have  book  reviewers  and  teachers  of  literature  who  boast  of 

being  unable  to  read  fantasy.  They  cannot  say  why:  whether  it  is 

content  or  form  they  object  to,  magic  or  reconciliation.  They  expect 

all  romance  to  be  escapist,  all  fairy  tale  to  be  arch  and  pretentious 

and those expectations govern their response. (Attebery, xi) 

Page | 6  

 
The  strength  of  negative  discourses  can  even  pervade  the  perceptions  of 

consumers  of  fantasy.  Grossman  speaks  of  the  largely  uninterrogated 

assumptions  attached  to  the  genre  that  he  sums  up  as  “a  really  common 

sense  that  fantasy  isn't  respectable”  (FTBC  8:15).  An  example  of  such  a 

‘common sense’ can be found in a recent Sydney Morning Herald review for 

the  HBO  television  drama,  Game  of  Thrones.  The  article  announces  in  the 

lead paragraph that “Fantasy has grown up at last” (Birmingham 6). Despite 

the  reviewer’s  overt  admiration  of  the  sophistication  of  Game  of  Thrones, 

fantasy as a collective phenomenon is still tacitly assumed to be juvenile. 

Criticisms  that  indiscriminately  relegate  fantasy  to  the  category  of  sub-

literature are not confined to cultural debates within the media. They are also 

present  in  academic  critiques.  Umberto  Eco’s  “Dreaming  of  the  Middle 

Ages”, for example, evocatively refers to genre fantasy as “an avalanche of 

pseudo-medieval  pulp  in  paperbacks”  (Eco 62)  and  “escapism à  la Tolkien” 

(Eco  65).    Rosemary  Jackson’s  influential  Fantasy:  The  Literature  of 

Subversion is even harsher in its criticism as she characterises Tolkienesque 

fantasy  as  “backwards”,  “chauvinistic”,  and  “totalitarian”  in  vision  (Jackson 

156).  A continued prejudice in favour of realism is discernible, for example, 

in  the  recently  defunct  Excellence  in  Research for  Australia  (ERA)  rankings 

for  journal  titles. The  listing  for  2010  shows  no  journal  with  a  specific focus 

on  fantasy  fiction,  speculative  fiction  or  science  fiction  classed  above  the 

rank  of  C,  the  lowest  possible  classification  for  peer-reviewed  academic 

journals.  

It  is  within  this  comparatively  under-represented  area  of  critical  discussion 

that I wish to situate this thesis. My discussion will point to examples of areas 

Page | 7  

 
 
 
of  this  engagement,  with  a  focus  on  postcolonial  cultural  identity,  ethnicity, 

class  and  gender.    Indeed,  as  John  Stephens  notes  in  Language  and 

Ideology  in  Children’s  Literature  (LI)  (1992)  fantasies,  though  not  set  in  a 

‘real’  world,  still  comment  “on  contemporary  social  practice”  albeit  by 

“indirections, parallels, figures, even allegory” (Stephens LI 256).   

Rather  than  partaking  in  a  wide-ranging  survey  of  fantasy  literature,  my 

thesis will involve an in-depth examination of two medievalist fantasy series 

Garth  Nix’s  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles  and  Guy  Gavriel  Kay’s  The 

Fionavar  Tapestry.  Both  these  series  have  been  recognised  and  awarded 

within  fantasy  and  broader  literary  communities. 2 They  have  also  proven 

their  longevity  in  the  market  place,  having  been  the  subject  of  multiple 

editions  and  reprints.  These  series  are  not  intended  to  be  seen  as 

representative  of  genre  fantasy  as  a  whole.  Despite  charges  that  much  of 

contemporary  fantasy  is  confined  and  imitative,  authors  and  texts  of  genre 

are  members  of  a  ‘broad  church’.  It  is  a  fluid  genre.  As  Tzvetan  Todorov 

claims, the evolution of literary genre is not confined to a fixed taxonomy but 

“operates with an altogether different rhythm: every work modifies the sum of 

possible  works,  each  new  example  alters  the  species”  (Todorov  6).  My 

selection, however, was influenced by the fact that Nix’s and Kay’s series are 

situated much closer to the generic centre of the fantasy literature than to its 

boundaries,  making  them  apt  choices  for  an  exemplary  consideration  of 

genre fantasy novels. 

2 Kay’s accolades include a World Fantasy Award, two Aurora Awards from the Canadian Science 
Fiction and Fantasy Association, and being placed thirteen in the All-Time Best Fantasy Author list 
(Guy  Gavriel  Kay  -  Award  Biography).  Nix’s  include  nine  Aurealis  Awards  for  Australian  Science 
fiction  and  Fantasy,  a  Ditmar  Award  (Garth  Nix  –  Award  Biography)  and  a  top  10  listing  in  the 
Young Adult section of the American Library Association (Teen’s Top Ten). 

Page | 8  

 
 
 
                                                           
The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles  (also  known  as  The  Abhorsen  Trilogy)  is 

comprised  of  Sabriel  (Sab)  (1995),  Lirael  (Lir)  (2001)  and  Abhorsen  (Abh) 

(2003). This series is set in a secondary world where Ancelstierre, a country 

that  resembles  a  pre-First  World  War,  industrialised  England,  sits  at  the 

southern  border  of  the  medieval,  magical,  Old  Kingdom.  The  novels  follow 

the  quests  of  Sabriel, Touchstone,  Lirael  and  Sameth as  they  seek  to  save 

the  Old  Kingdom  and,  by  extension,  Ancelstierre  from  the  destruction 

threatened by supernaturally powerful, evil and, largely, Dead enemies.  The 

Fionavar  Tapestry  is  comprised  of  The  Summer  Tree  (ST)  (1984),  The 

Wandering  Fire  (WF)  (1986)  and  The  Darkest  Road  (DR)  (1986).  This  tells 

the  stories  of  five  young  Canadians,  Kimberly  Ford,  Jennifer  Lowell,  Dave 

Martyniuk, Paul Schafer and Kevin Laine, who are mystically transported into 

the medieval, magical world of Fionavar, a world that is the ‘prime creation’ 

and  a  model  for  all  other  worlds.  Here  they  take  up  their  places  in  a  war 

against  a  great  evil  Power,  Rakoth  Maugrim,  who  threatens  to  destroy  not 

only  Fionavar,  but  all  possible  worlds.  Though  both  series  can  be  seen  as 

sites  of  Manichean  battles  of  good  against  evil,  providing  the  stories  with  a 

moral  imperative,  they  also  offer  the  opportunity  to  discuss  the  values 

attached to representations of class, gender, ethnicity and identity.  

Both  these  series  aptly  fit  within  the  categories  of  ‘heroic’  or  ‘sword  and 

sorcery’ fantasy popularised by Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings. In Strategies 

of  Fantasy  Brian  Attebery  usefully  appropriates  the  concept  of  ‘fuzzy  sets’, 

with  fixed  centres  but  imprecise  outer-limits,  to  describe  the  genre.  He 

argues that genres are “defined not by boundaries but by a centre” (Attebery 

12).  Asserting  that  resemblance  is  a  better  marker  of  fantasy  than  firm 

taxonomical limitations, he suggests that The Lord of the Rings provides the 

Page | 9  

 
 
“mental  template”  for  readers  of  popular  fantasy  in  English  (Attebery  14). 

Focal  generic  markers  of  fantasy,  then,  include  aspects  such  as:  internally 

coherent secondary worlds where things that contravene this world’s limits of 

reality  are  possible;  ‘sword  and  sorcery’  motifs  like  kings  and  queens, 

witches,  wizards,  prophesy  and  destiny,  supernatural  villains,  quests;  and 

northern,  medieval  settings.  Though  these  characteristics  of  fantasy  can 

ostensibly  appear  detached  from  reality,  they  can  be  used  as  effective 

vehicles for contemporary ideological discussions.  

Another  oft-used  quality  inherited  from  Tolkien’s  centrality  is  the  aura  of  a 

medievalesque  ‘Britishness’. 3  Indeed,  The  Lord  of  the  Rings,  which  is 

famously  J.R.R.  Tolkien’s  attempt  to  create  a  “mythology  for  England” 

(Chance  1),  draws  heavily  from  both  Celtic  and  Anglo-Saxon  mythologies. 

This characteristic is a central consideration in my thesis. It was influential in 

my  selection  of  the  works  of  Nix  and  Kay.  These  authors  are  from  former 

British  settler  cultures,  Nix  from  Australia  and  Kay  from  Canada,  which 

allows  me  to  examine  textural  inflections  of  national  identity,  postcolonial 

anxieties, and the affective pull of cultural heritage.  

The  medievalism  at  the  core  of  fantasy  demonstrates  an  attachment,  not 

necessarily  to  an  historical  past,  but  to  idealised  or  imagined  pre-modern 

places and times which frequently exhibit a certain quality of Britishness. To 

return  briefly  to  books  in  the  favourites’  lists  mentioned  at  the  beginning  of 

this chapter, an impression of Britishness is present not only in the works of 

the British fantasts listed. Australian writer Traci Harding’s Australian heroine 

3 Though  Britain  did not  exist as a  united  political entity  in  the  Middle  Ages,  I  will  be  using  it  as  a 
useful inclusive term for the areas and historic cultures that now comprise Britain.  

Page | 10  

 
 
 
                                                           
in  The  Ancient  Future  (1996)  which  is  not  drawn  back  in  time  to  an 

antipodean past, but to sixth-century Wales. The Deltora Quest (2000-2005) 

by  fellow  Australian  author,  Emily  Rodda,  does  not  have  an  Australian 

setting,  but  is  situated  in  a  pseudo-medieval  ‘past’.  American  Marion 

Zimmer-Bradley  returns  to  an  imagined  Arthurian  Britain  in  The  Mists  of 

Avalon (1979), while her compatriots, Raymond E. Feist, Christopher Paolini 

and  Kristin  Cashore  invent  new  secondary,  medievalist  worlds  for  their 

fantasies  in  Magician  (1982),  Eragon  (2002)  and  Graceling  (2008).  Diana 

Gabaldon, also American, chooses early eighteenth-century Scotland as the 

period and location for the time-slip in Cross Stitch (1991).   

If, as Attebery argues, Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings is the central template 

for  contemporary  fantasy  in  English,  it  is  unsurprising  that  medievalesque, 

‘sword  and  sorcery’,  heroic  pasts  feature  in  fantasy  fiction.  Though  fantasy 

writing  continues  to  evolve  and  expand  in  settings,  locations,  styles, 

temporalities  and  subject  matter,  there  remains  a  strong  interest  in  and 

demand  for  fantasy  which  is  situated  close  to  the  Tolkien  model.  Indeed, 

appropriating  J.R.R.  Tolkien’s  metaphorical  comparison  of  fairy-stories  to 

“attics and lumber-rooms” (Tolkien 39), Terry Pratchett wryly (and perhaps a 

little  too  cynically)  observed  that  “Most  modern  fantasy  just  rearranges  the 

furniture in Tolkien's attic” (Pratchett 591).  

Medievalism that employs various combinations of fantasy, nostalgic longing, 

and a sense of national identity, however, does not begin with Tolkien. It has 

long been evident within English literature. The existence of an actual Middle 

Ages seems not to foreclose on the invention of a disparate array of ‘Middle 

Ages’  by  modern  and  medieval  writers  alike.  Indeed,  marvellous,  idealised, 

Page | 11  

 
 
 
and  nostalgic  constructions  of  the  Middle  Ages  can  be  found  even  in 

medieval  texts.  Geoffrey  Chaucer’s  “The  Wife  of  Bath’s  Tale”  provides  an 

example of looking back with romantic longing to “th'olde dayes of the Kyng 

Arthour,  /  Of  which  that  Britons  speken  greet  honour,  /  [when]  All  was  this 

land fulfild of fayerye.” (Chaucer lns 857-861). Similarly, Sir Gawain and the 

Green  Knight  looks  back  to  “Arthurus  day”  (2522)  when  Bolde  bredden 

þerinne, baret þat lofden/ In mony turned tyme tene þat wroȝten (21-22).4 Sir 

Thomas  Malory  idealises  an  imagined  past,  when  “olde  love”  was  true. 

Unlike  “love  nowadayes:  sone  hote  sone  colde”,  in  “Kynge  Arthurs  dayes” 

“men and women coude love togydirs seven yeys, and no lycoures listis was 

betwyxte them, and than was love trouthe and faythefulnes (Malory 60).  

Medievalism is present in Early-Modern literature, such as Spencer’s didactic 

epic  The  Faerie  Queene  and,  to  varying  degrees,  in  a  number  of 

Shakespeare’s plays from King Lear to A Midsummer Night’s Dream. There 

is  evidence  of  the  continued  appeal  of  the  Middle  Ages  in  Gothicism,  and 

nineteenth-century medievalism is seen in movements like romanticism and 

pre-Raphaelitism.  Medievalist  genre  fantasy,  therefore,  continues  literary 

tradition  in  its  various  and  romanticised  constructions  of  the  medieval  past. 

Grounded in longstanding literary practice, as evidenced by the works of the 

abovementioned medieval  writers,  genre fantasy utilises the ‘empty’ spaces 

created by temporal distance and overlays them with imagined histories and 

fantastic possibilities. The medieval past, therefore, is an adaptable resource 

for fiction. 

4  “the old days of Arthur” (Borroff 2522), when the “Bold Boys bred” in Britain “did in their day many 
a deed most dire” (Borroff 21-22). 

Page | 12  

 
 
 
                                                           
Medievalism often indulges in imaginative constructions of the Middle Ages. 

The Old Kingdom Chronicles and The Fionavar tapestry participate in forms 

of  popular  medievalism.  The  Old  Kingdom  presents  as  a  medieval-esque 

Kingdom, complete with kings, queens, castles, knights and horses. It is pre-

industrial,  and  like  a  great  deal  of  nineteenth-century  medievalism,  values 

artisanship and disdains mass production. It employs medieval literary motifs 

such  as  knightly  service,  destiny,  caste  and  magic,  quite  literally  taking  up 

the imagery of ‘Bell, book and battleaxe’ (Wilkins BB&B 1).  The novels also 

engage  in  a  Gothic  medievalism,  evoking  horror  through  the  threat  of  the 

(un)Dead. The Fionavar Tapestry is also overtly medievalist, most obviously 

in its depiction of the High Kingdom of Brennin with its grand palace, kings, 

court  and  mages.  Other  Kingdoms  in  Fionavar  are  also  medievalist;  the 

Dwarf  Kingdom  represents  an  older  cruder  Middle  Ages  than  that  depicted 

by Brennin; Cathal represents a medieval Other in evoking the Saracen; the 

lios  alfar  evoke  Nordic  elves;  and  the  Giant  Paraiko  recall  characters  from 

Welsh  legend.  Medievalism  is  clearly  apparent  in  the  way  in  which  Kay 

draws from Celtic and Norse mythologies, even borrowing the characters of 

Arthur, Guinevere, Lancelot and Taliesin from Arthurian legend.  

Pertinently, rather than exerting a fixed positive identity of its own, the Middle 

Ages  are  often  defined  by  what  they  are  not;  they  are  not  modern,  not 

classical,  not  progressive.  The  Middle  Ages  can  be  rendered  as  a  gap  in 

enlightened  culture’s  evolution.  The  ‘Middle  Ages’  very  naming  defines  this 

period  less  by  any  substance  of  its  own,  than  by  its  position  between  the 

classical  and  the  modern.  When  combined  with  the  sheer  temporal  and 

geographical vastness of the Middle Ages, this can leave, within the popular 

imagination, spaces of perceived ‘emptiness’ or, at least, mere outlines of the 

Page | 13  

 
 
past;  spaces  and  outlines  over  which  modernity  and  post-modernity  can 

conjecture and write.  

My choice to study the works of an Australian fantasy author and a Canadian 

fantasy  author  has  been  motivated  by  questions  of  cultural  heritage, 

attachment,  and  identity.  I  am  interested  in  the  implications  of  a  literary 

nostalgia that suggests a yearning for a ‘home’ in place both temporally and 

spatially removed from geographic, national experience.  

The recent addition of a database on Australian Popular Medievalism to the 

Auslit  on-line  resource  on  Australian  literature  provides  evidence  of  this 

attachment.  Compiled  by  researchers  Kim  Wilkins,  Drew  Whitehead  and 

Oliver  Chadwick,  the  database  highlights  the  influence  of  medievalism  on 

Australian  popular  fiction.  In  “Bell,  Book  and  Battleaxe”  (BB&B)  (2010) 

Wilkins observes that medievalism is most notable in the genres of fantasy, 

historical,  and  romance  fiction  (9).  She  comments  that  more  than  250 

popular Australian novels for adult audiences were published between 1995 

and 2010, featuring a European   Middle Ages “either as an actual setting or 

as  a  source  for  adapting  images  and  ideas”  (6).  This  demonstrates  the 

significance  of  medievalism  within  the  Australian  popular  imagination, 

prompting Wilkins to ask “why the Middle Ages are important, how they are 

represented,  and  what  those  representations  might  tell  us  not  just  about 

individual authors but about contemporary Australia” (6).  

Pertinently,  Wilkins  identifies  160  of  these  books  as  “fantasy  fiction  in  its 

strictest sense, that is, epic high fantasy in the style of Tolkien’s Lord of the 

Page | 14  

 
 
 
 
Rings” (10).  Moreover, as this number only includes adult fiction, it does not 

reflect  the  full  extent  of  fantastic  medievalism  in  Australian  literature. 

Australian children’s and young adult fantasy are significantly represented in 

both the local and global marketplaces. Indeed, bestselling children’s author 

Emily Rodda alone has produced four fantasy series, collectively comprising 

thirty  five  novels,  and  Garth  Nix’s  individual  young  adult  catalogue  includes 

three  highly  successful  children’s/young  adult  fantasy  series  consisting  of 

twenty novels.  

Wikipedia too, with its amateur status, collaborative methodology and policy 

of consensus, reflects wide popular interest in the fantasy genre. This is seen 

in  the  high  number  of  entries  about  fantasy  authors.  Though  not  subject  to 

academic peer review, the site is useful resource for the viewing of societal 

trends.  Significantly,  Wikipedia’s  listing  of  fantasy  authors  reveals  a  strong 

association between genre fantasy and writers from Britain and former British 

settler cultures such as Australia, Canada, and the United States of America, 

with  more  entries for authors from  these  countries  than from  other Western 

nations. (“Category: Fantasy writers by nationality” online). 

Part of the phenomenon of fantasy’s popularity in Britain and in former British 

settler cultures likely arises from a history of continuity and identification with 

the  Middle  Ages.  In  1979  a  seminal  paper  by  Hans  Robert  Jauss,  “The 

Alterity and Modernity of Medieval Literature”, shifted the direction of debate 

on  medieval  studies  by  asserting  the  ‘otherness’  of  the  Middle  Ages  and of 

the  medieval  audience.  In  response  to  Jauss’  focus  on  alterity,  English 

academic  J.A.  Burrow  argued  that  he  felt  less  alienated  from  the  Middle 

Ages than his colleagues on the continent seemed to feel. Medieval studies 

Page | 15  

 
 
 
in  England,  he  contended,  demonstrated  a  greater  literary  and  cultural 

continuity  with  early  modern  writers  such  as  “Spencer,  Herbert  (and  some 

would  add  Shakespeare)”  drawing  strongly  upon 

their  medieval 

predecessors (385).  Where, according to Burrow, Jauss expresses a regret 

that  “the  study  of  the  literature of  the  European  Middle  Ages  …  has  lost  its 

place  in  the  educational  canon”  (385-6),  Burrow’s  experience  in  English 

universities  (in  the  late  1970s)  was  that  “medieval  literature  still  plays  a 

significant part in the ordinary curriculum of undergraduates reading English” 

(386).  Burrow  argued  that  the  British  experience  is  of  a  more  accessible 

Middle  Ages.  As  an  educational  model,  this  British  interest  in  the  Middle 

Ages was also exported to British settler cultures.  

Leslie Workman, in “Medievalism and Romanticism” (1994), makes an even 

stronger  claim  for  the  connection  between  Englishness  and  medievalism, 

arguing  that  in  the  eighteenth  and  early  nineteenth  centuries  medievalism 

was “so much a natural part of English life” (10) that the word ‘survival’ rather 

than 

‘revival’  might  be  more  appropriate 

to  a  consideration  of 

the 

phenomenon of British medievalism.  He, too, focuses on the significance of 

literature and education in sustaining a cultural connection with the medieval. 

In Imagined Communities, Benedict Anderson similarly emphasises the role 

literature  plays  in  the  construction  of  cultural  affiliation  and  identification. 

Anderson speaks of the importance of print-capitalism and the rise of the text 

in  meaningfully  combining  notions  of  “fraternity,  power  and  time”  (36).  He 

argues  print  commodities  paved  a  way  “for  rapidly  growing  numbers  of 

people  to  think  about  themselves,  and  relate  themselves  to  others,  in 

profoundly  new  ways”  (36).  This  “created  the  possibility  of  a  new  form  of 

imagined  community”  (46).  Rosemary  Marangoly  George  sums  this  up  in 

Page | 16  

 
 
The  Politics  of  Home:  Postcolonial  Relocations  and  Twentieth-Century 

Fiction by saying “all texts that are read in a society are intertwined with the 

imagining  of  that  community”  (108).  Where  Anderson  speaks  of  the  place 

texts  occupy  in  national  imaginings,  this  thesis  is  also  concerned  with  the 

role  stories  play  in  maintaining  and  confirming  broader  cultural  identity,  in 

constructing the idea of a shared heritage, character and ideals. 

Certainly, Australia and Canada are tied to Britain through membership in the 

Commonwealth  and  through  constitutional  monarchy  (although  the  Canada 

Act  (1982)  made  the  Queen’s  role  in  Canada  a  solely  symbolic  one). 

Canada’s  identity  is  also  influenced  by  its  history  of  French  colonisation 

alongside  British  colonisation.  Still,  despite  geographic  distance  and,  in 

practice,  political  independence,  the  impact  of  British  heritage  remains. 

Those of us who are descended from former settler communities cannot look 

back more than a few centuries without having to turn to Britain or Europe for 

a  cultural past. Though  story  tellers  have  the  alternative  of  utilising  the  pre-

settlement past and historical space of their current countries as the context 

for  historical  imaginings,  this  can  be  problematic.  As  will  be  discussed  in 

relation  to  the  inclusion  of a  Native  American  culture  in Kay’s The  Fionavar 

Tapestry,  the  use  of  Aboriginal  motifs  can  entail  an  ethically  fraught 

appropriation  from,  or  overriding  of,  the  cultural  and  spiritual  property  of 

Aboriginal  populations.  It  might  also  be  seen  as  a  retrospective  literary 

colonisation, discursively reinforcing the physical occupation of these lands.  

An  ancestral  heritage  provides  a  form  of  continuity  within  diasporic 

communities. The popularity of medievalist genre fantasy in nations that are 

spatially, and largely politically, removed from Britain demonstrates a sense 

Page | 17  

 
 
 
of cultural if not physical belonging. It speaks to the cultural imaginings of our 

communities  where  the  unspoiled  northern  landscapes  and  the  romantic 

medieval  models  of  castles,  crowns  and  kings  expose  an  affective 

attachment to an imagined homeland and to cultural roots.  

Rosemary  Marangoly  George  considers  ideas  of  belonging  in  postcolonial 

and twentieth-century realist fiction. Her work begins with a prologue entitled 

“All  fiction  is  homesickness”  (1)  and  ends  with  an  epilogue  stating  “All 

homesickness  is fiction”  (199).  George  argues  that  global  English language 

novels “re-present the ideologies of ‘home’” (1). She argues that the notion of 

‘home’  is  inherently  marked  by  ambivalence  –  that  ‘home’  is  not  fixed  in 

meaning;  it  is  a  “place  that  is flexible,  that  manifests  itself  in  various  forms” 

(9).  Although  unfixed,  the  idea  of  home  and  of  ‘home  country’  still  carries 

cultural  power.  It  is  built  around  a  “pattern  of  select  inclusions  and 

exclusions.    Home  is  a  way  of  establishing  difference”  (2).  George  asserts 

that  home,  “along  with  gender/sexuality,  race,  and  class,  acts  as  an 

ideological  determinant  of  the  subject”  (2).  A  sense  belonging  to  a  home 

relies on:  

a learned (or taught) sense of kinship that is extended to those who 

are  perceived  as  sharing  the  same  blood,  race,  class,  gender,  or 

religion.  Membership  is  maintained  by  bonds  of  love,  fear,  power, 

desire  and  control.  Homes  are  manifest  on  geographical, 

psychological  and  material 

levels.  They  are  places 

that  are 

recognized as such by those within and those without. (George 9) 

Clearly,  geographical  space  is  only  one  of  the  myriad  determinants  that 

construct  the  belonging  and  identity  incorporated  in  ‘home’.  George  argues 

that  for  colonial  writers,  any  reference  to  a  ‘home-country’  reflects  this 

tension, as it implies that somehow the writer is not speaking from home (2).  

Page | 18  

 
 
Such a tension is suggested by the allure that imaginings of medieval Britain 

hold for the writers of genre fantasy in settler cultures. Moreover, it speaks to 

the  strength  of  notions  of  cultural  heritage,  while  hinting  at  post-colonial 

concerns about contemporary belonging and identity.  

Considerations  of  cultural  lineage,  literary  heritage,  and  ideas  of  home  and 

loss  all  coalesce  in  an  examination  of  medievalist  fantasy  emerging  from 

postcolonial countries such as Australia and Canada. Moreover, the popular 

dominance of the genre evidences the affective resonance and reach of such 

literature. This gives fantasy a point of access to discourses of contemporary 

cultural significance. The flexibility of the Middle Ages, too, enables modern 

writers 

to  attach  an  historical  heritage 

to  contemporary 

ideas  and 

representation,  naturalising  and  giving  greater  cultural  weight  to  the 

ideologies their texts express. This can be turned to many purposes. In “The 

Idea of the Middle Ages Outside Europe” (2009), Kathleen Davis and Nadia 

Altschul  emphasise  that  the  medieval  is  “an  idea  rather  than  an  internally 

unified entity” (1). They argue that the period of the “Middle Ages” has never 

been  “a  stagnant,  inactive,  or  merely  inherited  category  in  the  former 

colonies, and that it continues to be an operative and volatile domain” (21).  

Rather  than  primarily  seeking  resemblance  and  inheritance,  this  thesis 

considers the flexible utility  of the  medieval  in  The  Old Kingdom  Chronicles 

and  The  Fionavar  Tapestry  and  how  the  Middle  Ages  might  be  co-opted  in 

the service of contemporary ideologies.   

Chapter  1  will  situate  this  thesis  in  the  critical  areas  of  fantasy  and 

medievalism studies. It firstly reviews fantasy criticism over the twentieth and 

early 

twenty-first  centuries,  highlighting 

theoretical  and  historical 

Page | 19  

 
 
 
perspectives  that  will  constructively  inform  the  discussions  of  my  selected 

texts. It also discusses works which, though not centrally concerned with the 

fantasy  genre,  have  strongly  influenced  the  manner  in  which  fantasy  has 

been  critically  approached,  or  sometimes  ignored.  Together  these  works 

provide  a  foundation  and  context  for  my  discussion  of  genre  fantasy. 

Secondly, it focuses on the semiotic plasticity and utility of the Middle Ages 

as a setting for contemporary storytelling, and considers the cultural power of 

imaginings  of  the  medieval.  This  section  also  discusses  the  anxieties 

attached  to  the  authentic/inauthentic  dichotomy  inherent  in  medievalism 

studies.  

Fantasy and medievalism studies do not represent the only areas of critical 

interest  in  my  discussion.  This  thesis  also  intersects  theoretically  with 

scholarship on matters including postcolonialism, Orientalism, gender politics 

and  national  identity.  Critical  considerations  of  such  subjects  are  situated 

within relevant sections of the thesis.  

Chapter 2 begins my discussion of Garth Nix’s The Old Kingdom Chronicles. 

It  focuses  on  the  cultural  significance  of  the  contrast  between  North  and 

South  that  is  central  within  the  series.  It  argues  that  the  novels  utilise  the 

affective  weight  of  a medieval  ‘Northernness’  and  ‘pastness’  in  a discursive 

challenge  to  pure  scientific  rationalism  and  unfettered  industrial  progress.  

Chapter  3  argues  that  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles  reflect  their  Australian 

origin and participate in contemporary debates on national identity and class. 

Chapter 4 considers how the novels respond more immediately to Australia’s 

political and cultural context at the time of their production. It does so through 

an  examination  of  the  refugee  crisis  depicted  in  Lirael  and  Abhorsen.  This 

Page | 20  

 
 
 
entails  a  discussion  of  Australia’s  own  refugee  crisis  and  the  cultural  and 

political  re-emergence  of  a  conservative  Anglo-centricity.  Chapter  5  closes 

my consideration of The Old Kingdom Chronicles with an examination of how 

the series represents its heroes and heroines. It asserts that Nix utilises the 

power of medievalist representation to subvert traditional gender paradigms 

and challenge entrenched expectations of gender behaviour.  

My discussion of Guy Gavriel Kay’s The Fionavar Tapestry begins in Chapter 

6. I introduce the various lands and races in Fionavar, and contend that the 

High Kingdom of Brennin represents the West, enlightenment and patriarchy. 

Informed  by  postcolonial  theory,  particularly  Edward  Said’s  Orientalism,  I 

examine  the  relations  between  the  Western  High  Kingdom  and  Cathal,  a 

domain  with  clear  Eastern,  Saracen  markers,  arguing  that  the  West  is 

strongly  privileged  within  the  novels.  Chapter  7  extends  this  study  to  the 

Dalrei,  a  tribal  culture  that  closely  resembles  that  of  the  North  American 

‘Indian’.  It  considers  the  Canadian  inflection  this  adds  to  the  series  and 

discusses  how  the  portrayal  of  the  Dalrei  intersects  with  issues  at  the 

forefront of Canadian politics at the time of Kay’s writing. I particularly focus 

on  Western  paternalism  and  the  issue  of  land  ownership,  arguing  that 

Western  authority  is  inconspicuously  naturalised.  The  latter  section  of  this 

chapter  looks  at  the  novels’  Dwarfish  kingdom,  arguing  that  The  Fionavar 

Tapestry  yet  again  represents  this  different  culture  as  essentially  inferior  to 

that  of  the  High  Kingdom.    In  this  case,  however,  as  the  Dwarves  evoke  a 

more  rudimentary,  working-class  Western  society,  this  hierarchy  is  justified 

by class rather than ethnicity.  

Page | 21  

 
 
 
Chapters 8 focuses on gender archetypes, arguing that although the novels 

include  strong  women  characters,  their  portrayals  are  constrained  by 

entrenched  constructions  of  appropriate  masculine  and  feminine  roles. 

Chapter  9  combines  the  earlier  themes  of  ethnicity  and  gender  through  a 

case study of the romance between Brennin’s Prince Diarmuid and Cathal’s 

Princess  Sharra.  I  consider  the  gender  and  power  dynamics  evident  in 

Diarmuid’s  seduction  of  Sharra  and  claim  that  these  can  be  read  as 

metonymic of the relationship between East and West.  

Fantasy  and  medievalism  criticism  provide  a  foundation  throughout  my 

thesis.  They  inform  and  underlie  this  consideration  of  The  Old  Kingdom 

Chronicles  and  The  Fionavar  Tapestry’s  discursive 

intervention 

in 

contemporary  debates  on  identity,  ethnicity,  class  and  gender.  I  argue  their 

appeal  to  the  past  both  utilises  and  feeds  the  considerable  affective  and 

cultural power available to contemporary imaginings of the medieval.  

Page | 22  

 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 1 

Fantasy and Medievalism 

This  chapter  contextualises  the  coming  analysis  through  a  survey  of 

scholarship  related  to  genre  fantasy.  Such  a  survey  offers  insight  into  the 

historical  underrepresentation  of  genre  fantasy  within  literary  criticism,  and 

supports my venture into this developing area of critical interest. My review of 

literature  also  considers 

the  cultural 

implications  of  medievalist 

representation, and the power attached to re-imaginings of the Middle Ages.  

This  review  of  scholarly  literature  discusses  criticism  from  the  1920s  to  the 

present.  It  includes  scholarship  on fantasy  and  on  related areas  such  as  of 

folktale, mythology and romance.  The movement across times and between 

disciplines means that  the  terminology  is  not  consistent  across  the  different 

works  considered.  Added  to  this  is  the  ‘fuzziness’  associated  with  many  of 

these  terms.  As  noted  in  Chapter  one,  in  his  discussion  of  fantasy  Brian 

Attebery  appropriated  the  concept  of  ‘fuzzy  sets’  from  George  Lakoff  and 

Mark Johnson5  to describe what constitutes popular fantasy. He argues that 

the  set  of  ‘popular  fantasy’  has  a  fixed  centre  and  fuzzy  boundaries.  This 

image  can  also  be  applied  to  the  question  of  what  constitutes  myth,  or 

5 See Lackoff, George, and Mark Johnson. Metaphors We Live By (1980). 

Page | 23  

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
romance,  or  fairytale  and  folktale,  or  even  to  subsets  of  fantasy  such  as 

medievalist fantasy, high fantasy, and genre fantasy. There are established, 

uncontroversial  makers  that  hold  the  centres,  but  the  boundaries  of  these 

concepts  are  not  similarly  fixed.  Moreover,  these  sets  have  large  sections 

that overlap or even reside inside related sets. 

Before moving to the literature review proper, therefore, I will consider some 

of the terms applied to fantasy literatures. The definitions given here attempt 

to  capture  aspects  at  the  centre  of  these  concepts,  but  I  would  like  to 

reiterate  that  these  terms  do  not  have  firm  outer-limits  and  that  they 

frequently  intersect  with  other  terms.    I  will  begin  with  ‘fantasy’  which,  at  a 

basic literary level, can be used as a descriptor for any work that is not realist 

in nature, making it “a most extraordinarily porous term” (Clute 337). Where 

realism  seeks  to  represent  experience  as  it  is  ordinarily  perceived,  fantasy 

goes  beyond  that  which  would  conventionally  be  considered  possible. 

Although  this  broad  definition  of  fantasy  can  encompass  a  range  of 

literatures  including,  but  by  no  means  limited  to  allegory,  fairytale,  folklore, 

science  fiction,  surrealism  and  horror  (Clute  337),  its  general  usage  within 

this  thesis  is  narrower.  It  is  applied  to  the  popular  genre  of  literature 

described by Attebery, as bearing a familial resemblance to the structure and 

atmosphere to J.R.R. Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings, the work he asserts is 

the “mental template” for readers of popular fantasy in English (Attebery 14).  

Attebery argues that resemblance becomes a better marker of fantasy than 

firm  taxonomical  limitations.  He  considers  three  fundamental  aspects  of 

contemporary fantasy’s resemblance to The Lord of the Rings. These relate 

to content, structure and reader response: content within fantasy involves the 

Page | 24  

 
 
 
impossible – a violation of that which the author “believes to be natural law” 

(14);  structurally  fantasy  is  comic  in  that  it  begins  with  a  problem  and  ends 

with resolution (15); and responsively, fantasy is evocative of a particular joy 

or  wonder  (16).  This  definition  underscores  significant  central  markers  of 

genre fantasy, whilst leaving the outer limits unfixed. 

Much  of  the  fantasy  that  comfortably  fits  within  Attebery’s  schema  also  fits 

into  subcategories,  and  these  subcategories  themselves  intersect.  John 

Clute  and  John  Grant’s  The  Encyclopedia  of  Fantasy,  for  example,  identify 

categories  such  a  ‘High  Fantasy’,  ‘Sword  and  Sorcery’  fantasy,  ‘Heroic 

Fantasy’,  and  ‘Genre  Fantasy’.  High  fantasy  is  “set  in  otherworlds, 

specifically secondary worlds”, and deal with matters “affecting the destiny of 

those  worlds”  (Clute  466).  Sword  and  sorcery  fantasy  as  “a  subgenre 

featuring  muscular  heroes  in  violent  conflict with  a  variety  of  villains,  chiefly 

wizards, witches, evil spirits and other creatures whose powers are – unlike 

the  hero’s  –  supernatural  in  origin”  (Clute,  Langford  &  Kaveney  915);  it  is 

easy to see how this might overlap with high fantasy if the conflict is of great 

import and set in a secondary world. Indeed, Clute comments on the extent 

of  intersection  between  certain  subsets  of  fantasy  when  he  defines  Heroic 

Fantasy with the observation that there “may be a useful distinction between 

[heroic  fantasy]  and  sword  and  sorcery,  but  no  one  has  yet  made  it”  (464). 

He goes on to argue the term is redundant “because a central thread in any 

analysis  of  [Sword  and  Sorcery]  is  the  understanding  that  it  is  a  kind  of 

Genre  Fantasy  which  features  a  hero”  (464)  (though  Clute’s  explanation 

appears  to  assume  ‘heroism’  is  inherently  ‘muscular’  and  embedded  in 

matters  of  high  destiny).  Such  an  explanation  places  these  subcategories 

under the broader subcategory of Genre Fantasy. 

Page | 25  

 
 
‘Genre’  as  a  modifying  adjunct  to  ‘fantasy’  is  often  used  in  a  pejorative 

manner.  John  Grant  argues  that  it  is  “almost  always  High  Fantasy,  Heroic 

Fantasy or Sword and Sorcery, and the main distinguishing characteristic is 

that, on being confronted by an unread [genre fantasy] book, one recognises 

it; one has been there before, and the territory into which the book takes one 

is  familiar”  (396).  Although  this  opens  the  genre  to  the  charge  of  being 

“imitative  dross”  (Grant  396),  my  discussion  of  literature  in  this  chapter  will 

show that I do not use the term in a negative manner. If, as Attebery argues, 

fantasy  is  defined  by  a  resemblance  to  a  fixed  central  template  (14),  one 

cannot be surprised at familiarity, but combinations of the expected and the 

unexpected can work together to allow the genre to offer continual surprises.  

Often  the  terms  I  use  in  my  consideration  of  fantasy  are  driven  by  the 

secondary material I am discussing.  Vladimir Propp, for example, discusses 

Folktales,  stories  originating  in  oral  tradition,  set  in  this  world,  which  often 

reflect aspects  of  cultural  identity  (Ashley  359-360).  Propp’s focus  upon the 

Wondertale,  a  subset  of  folktale  that  deals  with  marvellous  happenings, 

intersects strongly with the classification of fantasy fiction. Similarly, there is 

the  category  of  Romance,  and  I  primarily  employ  the  term  to  conform  to 

Northrop  Frye’s  use  of  ‘romance’  in  his  discussion  of  “The  Mythos  of 

Summer” (Frye 187-206). Frye’s usage heavily overlaps with conceptions of 

fantasy,  particularly  in  its  medievalist  form.  Brian  Attebery’s  entry  on 

Romance in The Encyclopedia of Fantasy (EoF) is another that speaks of the 

scope  of  such  a  term:  “Like  the  term  Fantasy  ‘romance’  refers  to  a 

bewildering number of forms of literary expression” (820).  A medieval term 

first  applied  to  any  text  translated  from  Latin  into  vernacular  languages,  it 

Page | 26  

 
 
 
was  soon  applied  to  tales  of  chivalry  and  courtly  love  (Attebery  EoF  820).  

Many  medieval  romances  were  based  on  traditional  legendary  or  historical 

figures but the stories were embellished, often by the addition of supernatural 

occurrences  and  features  such  as  quests  and  knightly  heroes  (EoF  820). 

The  term  ‘romance’  was  retrospectively  applied  to  classical  Greek  prose 

narratives  of  improbable  adventures  with  supernatural  elements  and  happy 

resolutions (EoF 820), and was later applied to medievalist fiction and poetry 

such as that by Sir Walter Scott, William Morris and Lord Alfred Tennyson; to 

gothic  novels  such  as  that  of  Anne  Radcliffe  and  Horace  Walpole;  and  to 

love  stories  such  as  those  by  the  Brontë  sisters  (EoF  821).    Typically,  my 

usage  of 

‘romance’  coincides  with 

the  medieval  and  medievalist 

understandings  of  the  term;  heroic,  chivalric  and  courtly  narratives  often 

embellished with non-realist or supernatural occurrences. Alternatively, I use 

the  term  ‘genre  romance’  when  speaking  of  the  popular  love  stories 

predominantly written by and marketed to women.  

‘Fairy-story’  is  another  term  that  has  a  particular  inflection  based  in  its 

context. When used in relation to a discussion of Tolkien this resides at the 

centre of the genre now known as fantasy. Tolkien uses it in his now famous 

essay,  On  Fairy  Stories,  setting  out  his  thoughts  on  the  nature  this  type  of 

literature.  Tolkien’s  fairy-story  is,  therefore,  synonymous  with  related  terms 

like  ‘Tolkienesque  fantasy’  or  ‘high  fantasy’.  If  I  discuss  stories  in  the  ilk  of 

Cinderella and Sleeping Beauty I refer to them as fairy-tale. 

Often the modifying terms I attach to ‘fantasy’ are used to highlight particular 

characteristics.  ‘Medievalist  fantasy’,  for  example,  is  used  to  draw  attention 

to  the  settings  and  tropes  that  demonstrate  the  legacy  of  the  Middle  Ages,  

Page | 27  

 
 
 
and  ‘popular  fantasy’  is  used  to  underscore  the  genre’s  wide  marketability 

and appeal.  These terms, however, still reside under the broader banner of 

genre fantasy. When speaking of literatures that might defy consensus reality 

but  do  not  sit  toward  the  centre  of  fantasy,  I  speak  of  ‘fantastic’  elements 

rather than referring to it as ‘fantasy’ literature.  

Significantly,  much  of  the  theoretical  work  that  has  influenced  scholarly 

criticism  of  popular  fantasy  fiction  is  only  tangentially  connected  the  genre. 

The  historically  privileged  place  of  realism  within  literary  scholarship,  and 

concomitant  lack  of  an  accepted  apposite  theoretical  framework  for  the 

fantasy genre, has mean that critics of fantasy have often turned to literature 

on  fairy  tale  and  folklore.  Russian  folklorist  and  formalist  Vladimir  Propp’s 

1928 Morphology of the Folktale exerted an influence on theorists including 

Claude Lévi-Strauss and Tzvetan Todorov. The intersection between folklore 

and  fantasy  is  obvious,  particularly  given  that  the  focus  in  Propp’s  study  is 

the Wondertale – folktales with supernatural or magical elements. Certainly, 

the  Wondertale  and  genre  fantasy  share  many  motifs:  castles,  curses, 

kingdoms,  kings  and  queens,  princes  and  princesses,  witches,  rituals, 

weddings.  Also,  both  genre  fantasy  and  the  Wondertale  sit  outside 

consensus reality.  

Although folklore,  like genre  fantasy,  can  superficially  appear  detached and 

escapist, the opening page of Propp’s Theory and History of Folklore (THF) 

makes  the  astute  observation  that  an  understanding  of  folklore  cannot  be 

divorced from ideology. He notes that “Folklore is an ideological discipline. Its 

methods and aims are determined by and reflect the outlook of the age” (3). I 

will  argue  that  the  same  can  be  said  of  fantasy  fiction.  As  a  formalist, 

Page | 28  

 
 
 
however,  Propp’s  central  concern  is  form  of  narrative  –  structure,  patterns, 

plot  components,  devices  and  conventions.  His  work  focuses  on  these 

aspects  above  the  cultural  purpose  served  by  the  form.    His  complex 

taxonomy  for  the  folktale  centres  on  the  progress  of  a  fairy  tale’s  narrative 

through  sequentially  linear  ‘functions’  (character  actions)  that  comprise  the 

‘generic units’ of a story. An accidental by-product of such a taxonomy was a 

scholarly  concentration  on  structural  aspects  at  the  expense  of  aesthetics. 

Propp’s schema also opened fantasy to charges of being derivative, imitative 

and unvarying.  

The recognition of narrative patterns within storytelling, however, should not 

imply  that  all  texts  are  essentially  the  same.  This  is  noted  in  Alan  Dundes’ 

introduction  to  the  1968  edition  of  Propp’s  Morphology  of  the  Folktale  (MF) 

as  he  comments  on  the  wide  applicability  of  Propp’s  taxonomy  to  many 

literary  forms  extending  from  novels  and  plays  to  comic  strips,  film  and 

television  (Dundes  XIV-XV).  Indeed,  Propp  himself  recognises  that  a  story 

rises  above  its  structure.  He  speaks  of  the  “two-fold  quality  of  a  tale:  its 

amazing multiformity, picturesqueness, and color, and on the other hand, its 

no less striking uniformity, its repetition” (MF 20).   

Propp,  however,  comments  on  the  wider  spectrum  of  possibility  allowed 

outside the constraints of realist fiction: 

The folktale  is  deliberate  and  poetic fiction. It  never  passes  itself off 

as reality. What makes the folktale attractive if the representation of 

reality is not its purpose? First of all, its unusual narrative. The lack of 

correspondence  with  reality,  fiction  as  such,  offers  special  delight. 

[…] this is why people find them so fascinating. (THF 19) 

Page | 29  

 
 
 
Fantasy,  like  the  Wondertale,  can  offer  this  enjoyment.  A  consideration  of 

fascination and delight can shift the focus from a story’s form to its reception.  

Northrop  Frye’s  “Archetypal  Criticism:  Theory  of  Myths”,  published  in  his 

1957 text, Anatomy of Criticism: Four Essays, though not directly concerned 

with  the  genre  fantasy,  has  also  proved  seminal  in  fantasy  criticism.  His 

category  “The  Mythos  of  Summer:  Romance”  (Frye  187-206)  can  be  aptly 

applied  to  fantasy  as  well  as  romance  literature,  influencing  the  criticism  of 

fantasy scholars including Katherine Hume and Brian Attebery.  The fantasy 

genre fits very closely within Frye’s conception of romance. Indeed, given the 

non-realist  nature  of  his  ‘romance’,  the  terms  ‘romance’  and  ‘fantasy’  can 

largely  be  viewed  as  interchangeable  in  my  discussion  of  Frye’s  critical 

framework,  with  the  exception  that  fantasy  often  engages  with  myth  in  a 

more  direct  way  than  Frye’s  romance.  Frye  observes  that  modernism’s 

appreciation  of  irony  and  objectivity  worked  to  relegate  the  romantic  to  an 

“old-fashioned”  past  (62).  This  contributed  to  the  binary  that  sets  the  real 

above the unreal. 

It  is  significant,  then,  that  Frye  questions  the  dichotomy  between  modern 

“realist” 

literature  and  romantic 

literature,  complete  with 

its 

fantastic 

elements.  He  stresses  that  both  forms  of  literature  are  fictional  in  their 

representation. “Realism”, he argues, is not achieved through the recreation 

of  something’s 

likeness,  but  rather  by  adherence 

to  certain  artistic 

conventions which imply likeness; “realism is an art of implicit simile”, which 

the  reader  can  interpret  as  contextually  plausible  (136).  Romantic  literature 

on the other hand, is no more fictional, but simply more overt in its fictional 

status.  Through  introducing  fantastic  elements,  this  literature  gives  up  its 

Page | 30  

 
 
 
“external analogy to ‘life’” (Frye 135); it steps outside the stylistic conventions 

that  imply  a  wider  contextual  plausibility.  I  will  argue,  however,  that  despite 

fantasy  giving  up  its  ‘external  analogy  to  ‘life’’,  the  familiarity  of  traditional 

motifs  and  patterns  are  able  to  create  an  alternative  sense  of  plausibility.  

Fantasy  texts  evoke  a  ‘reality’  that  exists  according  to  different  artistic 

conventions  than  those  that  are  upheld  in  realist  texts.  Furthermore,  I  will 

argue that this plausibility brings with it discursive power. 

Romance,  Frye  contends,  occupies  a  place  between  myth  and  realism.  

According to Frye’s analysis, “undisplaced myth [is] generally concerned with 

gods  or  demons,  [taking]  the  form  of  two  contrasting  worlds  of  total 

metaphorical  identification,  one  desirable  and  the  other  undesirable”  (139). 

Alternatively,  romance,  although  indulging  in  fantasy,  has  “the  tendency  to 

suggest  implicit  mythical  patterns  in  a  world  more  closely  associated  with 

human  experience”  (Frye  139-140).  This  tendency  draws  attention  to  the 

ambiguous  position  occupied  by  romance  or  fantasy.  Fantasy  approaches 

the real without fully taking hold of the conventions that maintain the façade 

of realist plausibility, and it approaches myth without attaining that sense of 

elevation  and  the  divine  attached  to  classical  myth.  Genre  fantasy,  then, 

does not quite fit into considerations of myth and archetypal meaning, and is 

similarly at the edge of considerations of the power of realist representation. 

This  ambiguity,  conversely,  also  allows  fantasy  access  to  conventions  of 

both  myth  and  realism,  enabling  it  to  utilise,  appropriate,  and  combine  a 

broader range of archetypes, conventions, forms and motifs in creative ways.  

Frye also observes that socially, romance has “a curiously paradoxical role” 

(186). Romance, he argues, is utilised by ruling and intellectual classes as a 

Page | 31  

 
 
 
channel  for  the  projection  of  dominant  ideals,  whilst  it  simultaneously 

demonstrates  a  “genuinely  ‘proletarian’  element  [...]  which  is  never  satisfied 

with  its  various  incarnations”  (186).  This  broadness  in  utility  is  indicative  of 

the ambivalence and the malleability and even cultural power available to the 

fantasy  genre.  It  is  not  insignificant  that  it  can  be  utilised  to  reinforce 

hegemonic power, or to subvert, or even to present an outright challenge to 

dominant authority. Something of the cultural potency of fantastic storytelling 

can  be  found  in  Frye’s  recognition  of  the  perennial  nature  of  romance.  He 

observes  that,  despite  marked  changes  in  society,  romance  “will  turn  up 

again,  as  hungry  as  ever,  looking  for  new  hopes  and  desires  to  feed  on” 

(186). Indeed, this thesis will discuss the hopes, fears and desires reflected 

in Nix’s The Old Kingdom Chronicles and Kay’s The Fionavar Tapestry. 

Myth is often regarded as high literature and romance as popular culture, but 

Frye  argues  the  difference  between  the  two  resides,  rather,  in  “the  hero’s 

power of action: in the myth proper he is divine, in the romance proper he is 

human” (188). Still, Frye observes, most “cultures regard certain stories with 

more  reverence  than  others,  either  because  they  are  thought  to  be 

historically  true  or  because  they  have  come  to  bear  a  heavier  weight  of 

conceptual  meaning”  (188).  I  suggest  that  Frye’s  observation  offers  insight 

into  readers’  affective  responses  to  genre  fantasy.  Though  divinity  may 

increase  distinction,  it  might  also  remove  the  story  and  characters  from 

human  experience,  disrupting  reader  identification  and  empathy.  The 

humanity  of  a  hero  more  easily  invites  an  empathetic  and  affective 

relationship between readers and a text’s protagonists. Moreover, given the 

parallel  themes  and  motifs  within  myth  and  romance,  the  human  element 

within  tales  does  not  necessarily  strip  romance  of  significance.  As  will  be 

Page | 32  

 
 
particularly discussed in my consideration of Guy Gavriel Kay’s The Fionavar 

Tapestry, the genre of fantasy extends beyond pure romance, in that is able 

to  appropriate  from  both  popular  tales  and  myth.  This  allows  the  genre  to 

blend the cultural weight of mythology with the humanity of romance.  

Another theoretical  approach  that  has heavily  influenced the  scholarship on 

fantasy  is  Tzvetan  Todorov’s  The  Fantastic,  first  published  in  English  in 

1973. In this influential work Todorov offers another structural framework for 

the  consideration  of  fantastic  literature.  Although  writing  in  a  critical  climate 

that  privileged  originality,  Todorov  recognises  the  importance  of  genre.  His 

framework  differs  from  prevailing  approaches,  in  that  it  endorses  an 

examination  of  both  sameness  and  difference.  He  argues  that  even  within 

genre fiction “the work of art is essentially unique, valuable because of what 

is original about it that distinguishes it from all other works, and not because 

of what in it may resemble them” (5).  

Rather  than  allowing  literature  to  be  constrained  by  precise  categories, 

Todorov’s work draws attention to flexibility both within and between genres. 

He argues that, regardless of the number of texts examined in any analysis, 

“we  are  never  justified  in  extrapolating  universal  laws  from  them”  (4). 

Addressing  Propp’s  use  of  biological  taxonomies  as  analogies  for  literary 

classification,  Todorov  asserts  there  is  a  substantial  difference  between  art 

and  science.  As  noted  in  Chapter  1,  he  contends  that  art’s  “evolution 

operates with an altogether different rhythm: every work modifies the sum of 

possible  works,  each  new  example  alters  the  species”  (Todorov  6).  This 

observation is significant for a consideration of fantasy, as it both recognises 

and demonstrates a capacity for movement and flexibility within a genre.  

Page | 33  

 
 
 
Building upon structuralist theorists that came before, Todorov offers a new 

criterion for the genre he calls ‘the fantastic’. He situates it in that unfamiliar 

place that resides between reality and dream, truth and illusion. In doing so 

he  explains  the  “fantastic  is  that  hesitation  experienced  by  a  person  who 

knows  only  the  laws  of nature,  confronting  an  apparent  supernatural  event” 

(25).  It  exists  only  in  that  moment  of  uncertainty  which  hangs  between  the 

real  and  the  imaginary.  Its  precarious  position  is  evident  in  that  once  “we 

choose  one  answer  or  the  other  we  leave  the  fantastic  to  a  neighbouring 

genre, the uncanny or the marvellous” (Todorov 25). Todorov argues that the 

fantastic  “lasts  only  as  long  as  a  certain  hesitation  common  to  reader  and 

character, who must decide whether or not what they perceive deviates from 

‘reality’ as it exists in the common opinion” (41). If the event can be explained 

by  the  laws  of  nature  the  story  defaults  to  the  ‘uncanny’,  if  it  cannot  be 

explained by existing laws of nature it defaults to the ‘marvellous’.  

Clearly,  according  to  Todorov’s  categorisation,  conventional  genre  fantasy 

falls  outside his  class of  ‘the fantastic’.  Although  that moment  of  ‘hesitation’ 

may  not  be  completely  absent  from  fantasy  texts,  it  does  not  occupy  a 

position of centrality in the genre. Rather than sitting easily within Todorov’s 

‘fantastic’,  genre  fantasy  more  aptly  fits  alongside  the  associated,  but 

separate class of ‘the marvellous’. Todorov’s marvellous encompasses fairy 

tale  where  impossible  “events  provoke  no  surprise”  (54).  He  also  identifies: 

the  hyperbolic  marvellous,  that  draws  on  exaggeration  and  larger-than-life 

imagery; 

the  exotic  marvellous,  where 

foreign  settings  account 

for 

transgressions  of  reality;  the  instrumental  marvellous,  where  magic  items 

and gadgets such as flying carpets and magic apples provide the marvellous 

Page | 34  

 
 
 
aspects of the story; and the scientific marvellous, where the “supernatural is 

explained  in  a  rational  manner,  but  according  to  laws  which  contemporary 

science does not acknowledge” (54-58). 

The acceptance of magic and of phenomena that transgress rules of natural 

possibility place most of what is generally classified as genre fantasy outside 

Todorov’s ‘fantastic’. Genre fantasy typically causes no hesitation, or quickly 

defaults to the marvellous.  It invites readers to commit themselves to worlds 

of  possibilities,  unrestrained  by  the  laws  of  science  and  reality  as  we 

understand  them  –  to  willingly  open  themselves  to  delights  of  magic, 

romance and adventure. Scholarly interest in Todorov’s taxonomy, however, 

has  largely  centred  upon  his  conception  of  the  fantastic.  Clyde  Northrup 

argues,  in  his  2004  The  Qualities  of  a  Tolkienian  Fairy-Story,  that  the 

influence of Todorov’s ‘fantastic’ was such that it became a foundation or a 

touchstone for critics in their own examinations of the fantastic, leading to the 

critical “exclusion of a whole category of fantasy literature” (815).   

Rosemary  Jackson’s  influential  1981  work,  Fantasy:  the  Literature  of 

Subversion  seems  to  bear  out  Northrup’s  claim.  Leaning  strongly  toward  a 

Todorovian  fantastic,  Jackson  primarily  considers  non-realist  works  that  fit 

more  comfortably  within  Todorov’s 

frame,  but  adds  a  strongly 

psychoanalytical perspective to her readings. Jackson argues that the added 

psychological focus is significant, as she identifies fantasy as a “literature of 

desire,  which  seeks  that  which  is  experienced  as  absence  and  loss”  (3). 

Literary fantasies, Jackson contends, express unconscious drives. Without a 

consideration  of  the  psychological,  she  asserts,  Todorov’s  fantastic  “fails  to 

consider the social and political implications of literary forms. […] it does not 

Page | 35  

 
 
 
move  outward  to  again  relate  the  forms  of  literary  texts  to  their  cultural 

formation”  (6).  Though  such  a  statement  would  appear  to  provide  a  frame 

through  which  the  hopes  and  desires  expressed  in  genre  fantasy  might  be 

profitably  considered,  Jackson  expresses  a  strong  disdain  for  fantasy  that 

sits within the generic ‘secondary world’ mode: 

This book aims to locate such a  transcendentalist approach as part 

of  a  nostalgic,  humanist  vision,  of  the  same  kind  as  those  romance 

fictions  produced  by  Lewis,  Tolkien,  T.H.  White,  and  other  modern 

fabulists, all of whom look back to a lost moral and social hierarchy, 

which their fantasies attempt to recapture and revivify. (Jackson 2) 

Jackson’s discussion of texts, therefore, though ranging from gothic fiction to 

works  by  Franz  Kafka  and  Thomas  Pynchon,  largely  repudiates  popular 

fantasy, negatively labelling it as both nostalgic and reactionary. She asserts 

that the popularity of Tolkien indicates the: 

strength of romance tradition supporting a ruling ideology. Tolkien is 

nostalgic  for  a  pre-industrial,  indeed  pre-Norman  conquest,  feudal 

order. He makes a naïve equation of industry with evil, referring with 

disgust to the ‘materialism of a Robot Age’, and looking backwards to 

a medieval paradise.  (Jackson 155)  

Using Tolkien as almost a metonym for popular fantasy, Jackson moves on 

to characterise the genre as “backwards”, “chauvinistic”, and “totalitarian” in 

vision (156).  It might be argued that Jackson’s criticism also reflects a ‘naïve 

equation’ of medievalist romance with intransigent conservatism, not allowing 

for  the  different  ways  medievalist  fantasy  can  be  harnessed  in  support  of 

varying  ideological  perspectives.    Her  assessment  suggests  a  modern 

disdain of the medieval.  

Page | 36  

 
 
Such a summary treatment of Tolkien provides some support for Northrup’s 

contention that, in an attempt “to define fantasy literature within a Todorovian 

framework,  [critics]  fail  to  account  for,  or  even  recognize,  Tolkien’s 

contribution to the study of fantasy literature in his lecture ‘On Fairy-Stories,’ 

or the critical framework that he delineates” (Northrup 816).  Still, despite this 

concern  being  borne  out  in  the  work  of  critics  such  as  Jackson,  Tolkien’s 

impact  on  both  writers  within  the  fantasy  genre  and  fantasy  criticism  is 

evident. Scholarship is not monolithic and more recent scholarship (including 

Northrup’s  own)  has  proven  that,  although  genre  fantasy  may  have  been 

comparatively  underrepresented  and  even  undervalued  within 

literary 

criticism,  it  is  not  absent.  A  quick  survey  of  scholarship  that  embraces  the 

analysis of fantasy as a critically valuable pursuit will be considered after the 

following discussion of J.R.R. Tolkien’s “On Fairy Stories”. 

Originally delivered in 1938 as an Andrew Lang Lecture at the University of 

ST Andrews, “On Fairy-Stories” discusses fantasy literature. Tolkien declares 

his own emotional investment in the genre in his opening statement, saying “I 

have been a lover of fairy-stories since I learned to read” (11). He, perhaps a 

little  disingenuously,  also  signals  that  his  interest  is  that  of  an  enthusiast 

rather than a critic (11). In his address Tolkien speaks of ‘Faërie’ as though it 

were  a  real  place,  “a  perilous  land”,  and  himself  as  “hardly  more  than  a 

wandering  explorer  in  the  land,  full  of  wonder,  but  not  of  information”  (11).  

Even so, one might suspect this scholarly humility to be a little disingenuous, 

or  possibly  a  manner  of  distancing  himself  from  the  more  structuralist 

approaches to myth and fable prevalent at this time.6  

6 Tolkien  notes  that  it  is  dangerous  for  a  traveller  in  Faërie  to  “ask  too  many  questions,  lest  the 
gates should be shut and the keys lost” (Tolkien 11). 

Page | 37  

 
 
 
                                                           
Despite  the  genre’s  dependence  on  the  strange  and  alien,  Tolkien’s 

examination  highlights  the  human  focus  of  fantasy  fiction.  He  argues  the 

stories  are  not  primarily  concerned  with  ‘fairies’,  but  rather  with  “the 

adventures of men in the Perilous Realm or upon its shadowy marshes” (17). 

He argues it is only ‘natural’ that fairy stories are more about men than elves, 

as  “elves  are  not  primarily  concerned  with  us,  nor  we  with  them.  Our  fates 

are sundered, and our paths seldom meet. Even upon the borders of Faërie 

we encounter them only at some chance crossing of the ways” (17). Clearly, 

Tolkien paints ‘Faërie’ as ‘Other’. This is significant to a consideration of how 

fantasy  fiction  positions  humanity  in  a  place  of  key  importance,  and  to  the 

way in which constructions of Faërie might operate as a mirror or contrast to 

contemporary  identity.  The  import  of  human  desire  in  fantasy  fiction  is  also 

evident,  as  Tolkien  claims  at  “least  part  of  the  magic  [elves]  wield  for  the 

good or evil of man is power to play on the desires of his body and his heart” 

(16).  Rather  than  situating  fantasy  as  detached  from  contemporary  human 

concerns, it is made central.  

As Tolkien moves on to definitions of a fairy story, the essence of desire and 

emotional response come even more to the fore. A fairy story, according to 

Tolkien,  is  not  simply  “one  which  touches  on  or  uses  Faërie,  whatever  its 

main purpose may be: satire, adventure, morality, fantasy” (17); it taps into “a 

particular  mood  and  power”  (17).  This  mood  and  magic,  even  in  a  satirical 

tale, must “be taken seriously and not be explained away” (18). Indeed, it is 

an  acceptance  of  the  reality  of  magic,  within  the  web  of  the  story,  which 

distinguishes  much  of  fantasy  from  associated  genres.  Tolkien  argues,  a 

fairy story “cannot tolerate any frame or machinery suggesting that the whole 

story in which [marvels] occur is a figment or illusion” (21). 

Page | 38  

 
 
Tolkien,  significantly,  differentiates  his  approach  from  more  structuralist 

methodologies which he argues are too narrow in view for a consideration of 

the  genre,  as  structuralism  forgets  the  nature  of  the  story  as  a  whole  (24). 

Indeed,  Tolkien  argues  that  similar  or  recurring  motifs  do  not  equate  to  the 

stories  being  the  same,  saying  “[i]t  is  ‘precisely  the  colouring,  atmosphere, 

the  unclassifiable  individual  details  of  a  story,  and  above  all  the  general 

purport  that  informs  with  life  the  undissected  bones  of  the  plot,  that  really 

count”  (24).  Tolkien  sees  value  in  antiquity  of  tales,  but  adds  that 

independent invention, inheritance, and diffusion have all “played their part in 

producing  the  intricate  web  of  story”  (26).  As  intertextuality  and  familiarity 

play a large part within genre fantasy, Tolkien suggests an analogy between 

story  making  and  a  cauldron  of  soup.  He  argues  that  history  and  myth  are 

among the ingredients mixed within the cauldron, and asserts that fantasy is 

dynamic  and  continually  developing;  “the  Cauldron  of  the  Story  has  always 

been boiling and to it have continually been added new bits” (32).  

Although  Tolkien  sees  fantasy  as  apolitical,  asserting  that  its  pure  form  is 

“artistic in desire and purpose” (54), I argue the manner in which the story is 

remixed,  and  the  elements  that  modern  writers  add,  make  fantasy  novels 

contemporary  and 

relevant  cultural  documents.  Even  without 

the 

transformation  of  imaginative  remixing,  certain  political  and  ideological 

inferences  still  accompany  the  repetition  of  myths  and  stories.  In  Retelling 

Stories,  Framing  Culture  John  Stephens  and  Robyn  McCallum  argue  that 

retold  stories  are 

implicated 

in 

the  construction,  preservation  and 

perpetuation of ideologies. They state that “literary and cultural formations re-

presented  in  retold  stories  are  often  apparent  bearers  of  clear  attitudes  to 

Page | 39  

 
  
 
such things as power (political, social and personal), hierarchy, gender, class 

and  race”  (21).  Although  appropriations from  older  literatures  can prove  apt 

vehicles for the transference of deep-rooted hierarchical ideologies, retellings 

can  also  be  the  site  of  challenges.  Indeed,  Stephens  and  McCallum  assert 

that “retold stories have the potential to disclose how old stories suppress the 

invisible, the untold and the unspoken” (22). 

Tolkien’s  focus,  however,  is  not  on  ideological  assumptions,  but  upon  his 

intertextual  soup  as  a  resource  for  reinvention.  He  labels  the  act  of  writing 

fantasy ‘sub-creation’, saying that the fantasy writer: 

makes a Secondary World which your mind can enter. Inside it what 

he  relates  is  ‘true’:  it  accords  with  the  laws  of  that  world.  You 

therefore  believe  it  while  you  are,  as  it  were,  inside.  The  moment 

disbelief arises the spell is broken; the magic, or art has failed. You 

are then out in the Primary World again, looking at the little abortive 

Secondary World from the outside.  (Tolkien 40-41) 

This perspective positions Tolkien awkwardly against postmodern emphasis 

on  irony  and  of  self-aware  intertextuality  which  advertise  literature’s 

constructed  nature.  The  intertextuality  that  genre  fantasy  indulges  in  is 

typically of a different kind. Aspects such as repeated motifs and references 

to  historical  events  and  personages  can  provide  a  sense  of  plausibility.  In 

spite  of  the  unreality  attached  to  the  genre,  the  familiarity  created  by 

intertextuality is able to facilitate an uncynical acceptance of the credibility of 

a  story  as  presented.  It  can  make  a  ‘belief’  in  magic  appear  normal  and 

reasonable within the frame of the secondary world.  

Page | 40  

 
 
 
Tolkien’s  intertextuality,  therefore,  might  be  perceived  as  lacking  the  irony 

foregrounded  in  many  modernist  and  postmodern  texts.  Tolkien  scholar 

Michael Drout argues that the perception that Tolkienian fantasy lack irony is 

a mistaken one, asserting that fantasy’s irony is merely different in form:  

it  is  a  kind  of  scholarly  irony,  enjoyable,  but  different  from  the 

morality-focused  irony  more  common  in  Modernist  texts.  Part  of  the 

pleasure  of  the  texts  comes  from  recognizing  how  authors  have 

pieced  together  incomplete  materials,  how  they  have  filled  lacunae 

and how they have remained true to their conceits while transforming 

their sources. (Drout 13) 

Still, Tolkien’s framework appears somewhat out of step with certain modern 

and postmodern expectations. There is also a sense of critical dissidence as 

Tolkien identifies “Fantasy, Recovery, Escape, and Consolidation” as fantasy 

literature’s key values (Tolkien 48). Tolkienesque fantasy, therefore, express 

the  pursuit  of  a  certain  wholeness  and  coherence.  Its  creation  seeks  not  to 

expose or deconstruct, but to construct and mend.  

While this critical dissidence may place fantasy outside the central concerns 

of much contemporary literary criticism, its manner of dealing with hopes and 

anxieties  makes  it  deserving  of  critical  attention.  Fantasy  creates  a  literary 

space 

in  which 

impossible 

longings  can  be  realised.  Through  “the 

imaginative satisfaction of ancient desires” (67), Tolkien argues these stories 

give  consolidation  to  desires  whether  frivolous,  such  as  wishing  to  fly,  or 

more profound “such as the desire to converse with other living things” (66) 

or the desire to escape death (67).  

Page | 41  

 
 
 
A crucial aspect of Tolkien’s thesis is his notion of the Eucatastrophe or the 

“sudden  joyous  ‘turn’”  in  the  story  (68).  This  ‘turn’  stands  opposite  to 

dramatic  tragedy.  Fantasy’s  consolation  does  not  deny  the  existence  of 

sorrow and failure, Tolkien argues; “it denies (in the face of much evidence, if 

you will) universal defeat [. . .] giving a glimpse of Joy, Joy beyond the walls 

of the world, poignant as grief” (68). This encapsulates much of the mood to 

which  a  great  deal  of  fantasy  aspires,  and  demonstrates  the  importance  of 

ambience  above  verisimilitude 

in  representation.  Tolkien’s 

lecture 

is 

unashamed  in  its  defence  of  engagement  and  enjoyment;  neither  is  it 

ashamed of paradoxically granting a greater sense of substance and ‘reality’ 

to  fantasy.  It  speaks  clearly  to  the  affective  appeal  of  such  literature, 

demonstrating  not  a  disconnection  with  the  present,  but  something  of  this 

literature’s  power  to  appropriate  from  the  sense  of  authenticity  and 

substance  with  which  the  past  is  often  endowed,  and  to  access  seams  of 

delight and desire within its readership.   

Although genre fantasy does not hold a central place in the works of theorists 

such a Todorov and Jackson, it is given substantial consideration in the work 

of later theorists, who express varying judgements on fantasy’s literary value. 

Published in 1984, Kathryn Hume’s Fantasy and Mimesis considers fantasy 

within  the  context  of  literature  as  a  whole,  as  “not  a  separate  or  indeed  a 

separable  strain” 

(xii).  Rather 

than  being  constrained  by  narrow 

classification,  Hume’s  working  definition  of  fantasy  literature  is  as  “inclusive 

and  flexible  as  possible”  (20).  For  Hume  fantasy  includes  any  text  that 

involves a “deliberate departure from the limits of what is usually accepted as 

real  or  normal”  (xii).  This  widening  of  definition  shifts  discourse  away  from 

structural debates which, intentionally or otherwise, worked to limit the scope 

Page | 42  

 
  
of scholarly conversation about fantasy fiction. Hume’s blurring of boundaries 

between  different  forms  of  non-realist  literature  can  also  be  seen  as  a  step 

toward the weakening of discernible hierarchies that have historically worked 

against the study of the popular forms of fantasy.  

To  consider  fantasy  within  literature,  Hume  posits  four  basic  approaches  to 

reality  –  “illusion,  vision,  revision  and  dissolution”  (55).    She  argues  that, 

depending on the approach, fantasy can “attempt to disturb the reader’s own 

assumptions,  or  reaffirm  those  assumptions  and  comfort  the  reader”  (55). 

According to her schema, the literature of illusion uses escape and comfort; 

the  literatures  of  vision  and  revision  try  to  expose  a new  reality  or  to  revise 

reality;  and  the  literature  of  dissolution  attempts  to  dismantle  comfortable 

beliefs  and  undermine  notions  of  reality.  Although  these  approaches 

demonstrate  something  of  the  multifaceted  nature  of  fantasy  and  the 

complexities  attached  to  the  form,  divisions  and  hierarchies  are  reasserted 

within  Hume’s  discussion  of  these  approaches.  Most  aptly  situated  in  the 

category of ‘illusion’ – escapist literature – genre fantasy is implicitly situated 

lower than literatures that challenge or disturb.  

Hume  argues 

that  authors  of 

illusory 

texts,  being  disillusioned  and 

disempowered by reality, offer “to disengage us from its grey unpleasantness 

and  to  enfold  us  in  comforting  illusions”,  holding  out  to  the  reader  “roses 

without  thorns  and  pleasures  without  payment”  (55).    Hume  expresses  a 

form  of  qualified  agreement  with  Lewis’s  and  Tolkien’s  arguments  that 

escape  can  be  positive,  saying  “one  can  feel  that  the  illusions  of  escape 

literature  offer  possible  benefits”  (68).  She  argues  that  despite  fantasy 

adventures’  tendency  to  trashiness,  they  can  provide  a  psychological 

Page | 43  

 
 
 
reassurance  of  individual  worth  and  “encourage  a  belief  in  the  possibility  of 

meaningful  action”  (68).  Hume  considers  illusory  fantasy,  however,  as 

indicative of a “retreat from society” (60), and a “refuge in day dreams” (64). 

The  psychological  benefit  she  speaks  of  is  undercut  by  an  implicitly 

patronising appreciation of the literature’s appeal to those unable to deal with 

the  realities  of  their  own  lacklustre  existences.  Its  readers,  Hume  asserts, 

“would like to think of themselves as crippled heroes, forced to operate in a 

materialistic universe which has lost its myths and monsters” (66). Identifying 

with  the  heroes  of  the  inner-circle,  as  opposed  to  the  unexceptional 

everyman, 

readers  can 

“glory  vicariously 

in  competence  and 

the 

accompanying self-confidence” (67). 

Although  written  as  a  defence  of  fantasy  fiction,  this  seems  a  confrontingly 

pejorative  and  generalising  statement,  particularly  given  the  extent  of  the 

genre’s readership. It sidesteps issues such as the polysemic nature of texts 

and  the  nuances  of  reader  reception.  In  Hume’s  schema  a  genre  fantasy 

reader is commonly one who “otherwise feels alienated and disenfranchised 

and finds one’s daily actions meaningless" (67). In a noteworthy instance of 

‘damning  with  faint  praise’,  Hume  allows  that  this  literature  is  at  least 

meaningful  for  “people  who  cannot  believe  in  themselves”,  saying  it  is  of 

psychological  value  in  building  the  feelings  of  worth  for  those  who  might 

otherwise  “have  trouble  engaging  themselves  with  life  in  any  fashion”  (68).  

Consequently, although considering fantasy worthy of critical attention Hume 

still participates in a negative discourse regarding both the texts and readers 

of  genre  fantasy.  Escape  literature,  Hume  asserts,  “rarely  challenges  us  to 

think”,  offering  “blind,  passive  enjoyment”  (81).    Through  my  discussion  of 

the works of Guy Gavriel Kay and Garth Nix, however, I  will assert that the 

Page | 44  

 
 
genre  is  far  from  simply  ‘escapist’  as  it  intersects  with  significant  issues  of 

contemporary cultural relevance.  

Published  in  the  same  year  as  Fantasy  and  Mimesis,  Ann  Swinfen’s  In 

Defence  of  Fantasy  asserts  the  cultural  significance  of  genre  fantasy, 

showing  that  scholarship  on  fantasy  literature  does  not  speak  with  a  single 

voice. Taking Tolkien’s On Fairy Stories as a starting point for her analysis, 

Swinfen  examines  English  and  American  fantasy  written  after  1945.  What 

most  separates  Swinfen’s  view  of  genre  fantasy  from  Hume’s  is  her 

insistence that it is very much a product of, and engaged with, the real world. 

Swinfen approaches the breach between realist and fantastic representation 

by  observing  that  “there  is  always  some  common  ground  between  the 

primary world and a secondary world” (76). Similarities in physical nature – in 

matters such as heat, cold, dark and light, compass settings, the changing of 

seasons,  and  the  celestial  sky  –  work,  she  asserts,  to  make  a  secondary 

world comprehensible and logical to the reader (77). Such a correspondence 

to  the  primary  world  becomes  even  more  important  as,  Swinfen  argues,  it 

reveals  a  contemporary  social  relevance  and  an  “underlying  seriousness  of 

purpose”  (95).  Within  secondary  worlds  she  observes  that  many  of  the 

issues  are  “social  ones,  paralleling  those  of  the  primary  world”  (96).  These 

include  questions  concerning  social  values,  social  structures,  the  balance 

between  communal  support  and  individual  freedom  and  the  moral  values 

attached to the misuse of wealth, power and knowledge. 

Page | 45  

 
 
 
 
 
Swinfen’s  text  demonstrates  a  shift  from  a  focus  on  structure,  literary 

influence  and  aesthetic  form  within  fantasy  criticism,  to  a  consideration  of 

how  fantasy  texts  might  participate  in  social,  ideological  and  philosophical 

discourses.  She  discusses  the  multivalent  nature  of  the  form  and  its 

“considerable use of allegory and symbolism” (100).  Swinfen argues that not 

only  do  fantasy  texts  construct  a  moral  and  intellectual  framework  for  a 

novel’s  action  (100),  they  demonstrate  an  attempt  to  “communicate  to  the 

reader a vision of some kind to transcendental reality” that extends over both 

the  secondary  and  primary  worlds  (121).  The  layers  of  meaning  and 

symbolism  within  fantasy  allow  novels  that  superficially  appear  unrelated  to 

the  real  world  to  comment  upon  real  world  issues.  Swinfen  matches  a 

concern  for  social  and  political  issues  with  the  authors’  awareness  of  their 

and  their  readers’  common  knowledge  and  experiences  of  contemporary 

history.  She  further  argues  that,  consciously  or  otherwise,  “the  facts  of  a 

shared contemporary social scene [will] colour the thinking of many writers of 

fantasy,  and  not  just  those  with  a  clear  social  or  political  message”  (191). 

This  corresponds  with  my  own  approach  to  Garth  Nix’s  The  Old  Kingdom 

Chronicles  and  Guy  Gavriel  Kay’s  The  Fionavar  Tapestry  as  I  argue  they 

interact with issues in national debates in Australia and Canada at the time of 

their production, for example, refugee policy in Nix’s writing and Native title in 

Kay’s. 

Although the miraculous in genre fantasy may obscure fantasy’s participation 

in contemporary discussions, Swinfen’s central thesis is that: 

fantasy, just as much as the realist novel, is about reality – about the 

human  condition.  All  serious  fantasy  is  deeply  rooted  in  the  human 

experience and is relevant to human living. […] fantasy provides the 

writer with greater scope to construct his own scheme of morality, his 

Page | 46  

 
 
own time structure, his own political and social order. But at no time 

does  this  apparent  freedom  permit  the  author  to  escape  from 

contemporary reality. (Swinfen 231)  

Swinfen’s 

In  Defence  of  Fantasy, 

therefore, 

recognises 

fantasy’s 

engagement  with  issues  of  cultural,  social  and  ideological  significance. 

Rather  than  situating  fantasy  as  ‘escapist’,  or  as  only  marginally  and 

tangentially  concerned  with  contemporary  reality,  Swinfen  highlights  the 

potential of fantasy as a tool for social criticism. 

Brian  Attebery’s  1992  Strategies  of  Fantasy  similarly  defends  fantasy 

literature  in  its  generic  form.  Writing  almost  a  decade  after  Swinfen  and 

Hume,  Attebery’s  work  is  illustrative  of  genre  fantasy  movement  toward 

critical  respectability.    Attebery  challenges  the  clear  distinctions  and 

hierarchies  often  attached  to  categories  of  the  fantastic,  asserting  “an 

overriding kinship among fantastic texts” (ix).   

Alongside  Attebery’s  appropriation  of  the  concept  ‘fuzzy  sets’,  discussed 

earlier, one of Attebery’s observations I wish to highlight is that contemporary 

critical  theories  lend  themselves  to  a  better  appreciation  of  fantasy. 

According 

to  Attebery,  because  of 

their  metafictional  and 

inventive 

emphases,  postmodern  approaches  are  more  apt  for  readings  of  fantasy, 

being  able  to  “illuminate  both  recent  and  older  works”  (37).    Along  with  an 

awareness  that  fantasy  stories  exist  only  within  the  artifice  of  narrative,  he 

points  out  that  Tolkienian  fantasies,  like  postmodern  works,  are  often 

metafictional. They make reference not only “to the narrative past, especially 

to  myths  and  its  near  relatives,  legend  and  fairy  tale”  (41),  but  to  other 

fantasy  stories  and  also  to  tales  within  tales.  Attebery  notes  such  devices 

Page | 47  

 
    
 
can be playful as well as fantastic (40), observing that they “comment on the 

story telling process” (41).   

Fiction,  Attebery  reminds  us,  is  not  a  mirror  of  reality.  Rather,  it  relies  on 

agreement  between  the  author  and  the  reader  and  the  acceptance  of 

narrative  conventions  (51).  A  shared  heightened  awareness  of  the  literary 

frames, however, does not equate to a sameness of emphasis or approach. 

Where  postmodernism  characteristically  exposes  literary  frames,  shattering 

the  illusory  reality,  Tolkienesque  fantasy  utilises  its  awareness  of  narrative 

construction  and  convention  to  sustain  plausibility  within  an  imagined 

magical world. It is “interested in sustaining illusion, not violating it” (Attebery 

42).    Still,  Attebery  notes  “the  form  of  fantasy  implies  a  degree  of  self-

reflexiveness  and  authorial  manipulation  of  reality”  (46).  This,  perhaps 

paradoxically, works most effectively when it assumes an ingenuous sincerity 

in 

its 

“perfectly 

impossible  narrative” 

(46).  Although  acknowledging 

differences  in  intent  and  approaches  between  postmodernist  and  fantasy 

literature,  he  draws  attention  to  similarities  such  as  a  playfulness  in 

construction. Both draw from popular forms, and on “the storytelling arts that 

make reading a pleasure” (49). Their utilisation of the familiar and simple can 

still take on deep significance. Attebery asserts that “Postmodernism justifies 

the  practice  of  fantasists,  who  have  been  willing  to  play  with  the 

inconsequential  until  it  explodes  into  myth”  (50).  Certain  fantasists,  he 

argues, “bear out the theories of Postmodernists in which  we recognise the 

parts  of  ourselves  that  defy  other  means  of  analysis”  (50).  Attebery,  like 

Swinfen, approaches genre fantasy as worthy of literary analysis, without the 

cringe  against  the  generic,  the  popular  or  the  ‘low’.  His  analysis  opens 

Page | 48  

 
 
fantasy  to  broader  approaches,  legitimating  the  form  and  the  study  of  it  as 

both a cultural and literary subject. 

Attebery,  however,  recognises  that  fantasy  conventions  can  also  involve 

complications.  He  argues  that  fantasy  fiction’s  employment  of  traditional 

narrative  structures,  for  example,  those  identified  by  Joseph  Campbell  and 

Vladimir  Propp,  can  entail  an  uninterrogated  sanction  of  accompanying 

traditional social structures (Attebery 87). This is particularly significant to an 

examination of representations of gender and class within genre fantasy.  It 

invites  consideration  as  to  whether  the  conventions  of  fantasy  literature  – 

which in many ways combine to create a desired effect of enchantment and 

‘pastness’  –  intrinsically  lead  to  an  essential conservatism  in  both form and 

ideology. 

This  question  significantly  informs  my  discussion  of  both  The  Old  Kingdom 

Chronicles  and  The  Fionavar  Tapestry.  I  will  argue  that  Nix’s  texts  utilise 

traditional structures in a manner that challenges hierarchical order, but that 

this challenge is more successful in the area of gender dynamics than it is in 

the areas of class and ethnicity. I will further assert that Kay’s more extensive 

use of mythic imagery, stories and paradigms ultimately reinforces traditional 

hierarchies  where  masculine  and  Western  structures  and  thought  are 

privileged.  

The ubiquity, and concomitant power, of traditional motifs may owe much to 

the  way  in  which,  as  Attebery  notes,  popular  works  such  as  fantasy  fiction 

borrow  freely  from  and  follow  up  “implications  from  earlier  texts”  (89).  An 

Page | 49  

 
 
 
 
intertextual  relationship  between 

texts  such  as  medieval 

literatures, 

mythologies,  fairy-tales  and  even  contemporary  fantasy  novels,  can  lead  to 

certain  patterns  in  class,  gender  and  ethnic  archetypes  taking  on  the 

appearance  of  being  natural.  Though  genre  fantasy  is  not  intrinsically 

inflexible,  Attebery’s  observations  still  give  insight  into  how  the  influence  of 

historical paradigms can continue to embed longstanding hegemonic power 

structures in new texts.   

The  line  that  genre  fantasy  navigates  is  between  adherence  to  and 

challenges against convention. It is within this space between conformity and 

departure that new conventions can be negotiated. These, in turn, may ‘alter 

the species’ (Todorov 6) of genre fantasy, however slight this alteration may 

be. The possibility of movement, then, becomes significant to a consideration 

of  ideology  within  fantasy  fiction,  and  is  central  to  the  question  of  whether 

fantasy’s  attachment  to  the  medieval  period  and  to  traditional  forms  of 

narrative lead to a fundamental conservatism within the genre. 

Hume, Swinfen and Attebery’s work participates in a shift from confining and 

predominantly structuralist approaches to the consideration of genre fantasy. 

In  her  2008  Rhetorics  of  Fantasy  Farah  Mendlesohn  pertinently  notes  that 

current  theoretical  work  on  fantasy  is  less  constrained  by  definitional 

frameworks. She observes:  

It  is  now  rare  to  find  scholars  who  choose  among  Katherine  Hume, 

W.R.  Erwin,  Rosemary  Jackson    or  Tzvetan  Todorov:  it  is  much  

more  likely  they  will  pick  and  choose  among  these  and  other 

‘definers’  of  the  field  according  to  the  area  of  fantasy  fiction,  or  the 

ideological filter, in which they are interested. (Mendlesohn xiii)  

Page | 50  

 
 
 
Moving  past  arguments  about 

the  definition  and  worth  of 

fantasy, 

Mendlesohn’s  Rhetorics  of  Fantasy  and  Mendlesohn  and  James’  A  Short 

History  of  Fantasy,  2009,  represent  something  of  a  shift  away  from  either 

negatively characterising or defending the genre, toward simply considering 

the  literature  in  its  own  right.  A  Short  History  of  Fantasy  provides  a  critical 

chronology of fantasy literature, discussing key texts and authors and placing 

them within the context of the genre’s development. Less broad in scope, it 

follows John Clute and John Grant’s 1996 comprehensive reference volume 

The Encyclopedia of Fantasy, which contains over 4000 entries on fantasy in 

theory, literature, film and art.  

Mendlesohn’s  Rhetorics  of  Fantasy  goes  further  than  a  critical  survey, 

offering new frameworks through which fantasy literature might profitably be 

considered. She argues her taxonomy “should be understood as a tool, not 

as  an  end  in  itself”,  recognising  in  the  “modern  context  that  taxonomical 

practices  are  increasingly  polysemic  and  multiplex”  (xv).  Her  category  of 

‘portal quest fantasy’ is one in which the fantastic world is entered through a 

portal,  where  the  magic  is  in  the  world  that  exists  on  the  other  side  of  the 

portal.  This  fantasy,  Mendlesohn  asserts,  is  “about  entry,  transition  and 

negotiation”  (xiv),  as  the  protagonists  move  from  a  mundane  life  into  direct 

contact  with  a  magical,  fantastic  realm.  It  is  within  this  category  that  both 

Garth  Nix’s  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles  and  Guy  Gavriel  Kay’s  Fionavar 

Tapestry are best situated.  

In her category of ‘immersive fantasy’, the fantasy is seen as normal for both 

protagonist and reader. This form of fantasy invites the reader “to share not 

merely  a  world,  but  a  set  of  assumptions”  (Mendlesohn  xx).  In  ‘intrusion 

Page | 51  

 
 
 
fantasy’  the  magical  or  fantastic  intrudes  upon  reality  (as  it  is  generally 

accepted), and in her final category of ‘liminal fantasy’ the fantastic in the text 

creates  an  anxiety  as  it  balances  at  “the  edge  of  belief”  (Mendlesohn  xxiii). 

These  sets  are,  in  Attebery’s  terms,  not  fixed  but  ‘fuzzy’  and  may  overlap. 

Writing  within  a  particular  style,  however,  Mendlesohn  asserts,  surprisingly 

entails  a  set  of  ideological  assumptions  attached  to  the  chosen  form  (273), 

as the conventions of certain categories exert political demands. Offering her 

approach  as  but  one  of  many  through  which  to  consider  fantasy  fiction, 

Mendlesohn’s analysis demonstrates how emerging approaches to the study 

of  fantasy  literature  can  respond  to  and  discuss  new  questions.  Swinfen, 

Attebery  and  Mendlesohn,  however,  are  representative  of  an  increasing 

number  of  scholars  who  view  genre  fantasy  as  a  literature  that  is  relevant 

and concerned with modern human experience. 

This  thesis  generally  aligns  itself  with  the  views  of  these  more  recent 

scholars  in  asserting  that  genre  fantasy  is  deserving  of  serious  critical 

attention. The works of earlier theorists, however, still offer valuable insights 

regarding  the  form,  appeal  and  effect  of  the  genre.  In  accordance  with  the 

critical  trend noted by  Mendlesohn,  this thesis  “will  pick  and  choose  among 

these  and  other  ‘definers’  of  the  field”  (Mendlesohn  xiii).  I  will  be  informed, 

rather  than  being  constrained,  by  theoretical  perspectives.  The  pastiche 

nature  of  fantasy  fiction  means  it  is  not  comfortably  confined  or  defined  by 

any  one  particular  perspective.  It  is  a  genre  liberally  drawing  from,  but  not 

limited  to,  folklore,  fairy-tale,  history,  myth,  literary  conventions  and, 

significantly for this thesis, constructions of the Middle Ages.  

Page | 52  

 
 
 
Fantasy  literature  appropriates  from  many  sources,  often  reconfiguring  and 

transforming  the  old  into  something  remarkably  familiar,  yet  paradoxically 

different. In  the  same way,  this  thesis hopes  to  draw from,  remix, and  build 

upon  the  capital of past fantasy  criticism  throughout  its  consideration  of  the 

chosen fantasy texts. Like Swinfen, Attebery and Mendlesohn I do not claim 

my analysis to be definitive or the final word on these texts. What I do argue, 

however,  is  that  this  analysis  will  demonstrate  that fantasy  texts  reflect  and 

respond to contemporary issues of political, moral and social relevance. 

A  similar  argument  can  be  made  for  the  contemporary  relevance  of 

medievalist  representation.  Various  imaginings  of  the  Middle  Ages  provide 

ironically  indefinable,  but  somehow  familiar  foci  for  contemporary  cultural 

identification  and  projection.  Spanning  approximately  one  thousand  years, 

and a geographic area extending beyond Europe to the borders of Asia, what 

is  understood as, or  associated  with,  the medieval  is  remarkably  malleable. 

Indeed,  in  “Yearning  for  the  sweet  beckoning  sound”  (2011),  Helen  Dell 

argues that: 

The  ‘middle’  of  Middle  Ages  allows  the  medieval  to  act  as  a  space 

between, a ‘dark age’ between the brilliance of the Classical Age and 

the  Renaissance.  This  age  in  the  middle  is  stripped  of  its  historical 

content  and  reduced  to  a  screen  on  which  nostalgic  fantasies  of  a 

timeless,  Edenic  presence  and  plenitude may  be glimpsed,  but  only 

dimly. (Dell 175) 

All  imaginings,  however,  are  not  idyllic.  Susan  Aronstein,  in  Hollywood 

Knights,  notes  that  differing  constructions  of  the  Middle  Ages  function  as 

pasts against which modernity can identify itself by opposition or alignment. 

As a barbaric, violent and superstitious ‘other’ it can work as a contrast to a 

Page | 53  

 
 
 
perceived  civilised  ‘enlightenment’  –  confirming  society’s  progress  or, 

alternatively,  in  its  romanticised  construction,  the  past  becomes  “a  site  of  a 

lost ideal and a past to which the modern must return in order to ensure its 

future” (Aronstein 11). This demonstrates but a small part of the malleability 

of  imaginings  of  the  Middle  Ages  that  serve  the  purposes  of  contemporary 

identification. 

In  “Dreaming  of  the  Middle  Ages”,  initially  published  in  1973,  Umberto  Eco 

argues that the “middle Ages have always been messed up in order to meet 

the  vital  requirements  of  different  periods”.  He  famously  lists  “Ten  Little 

Middle Ages” (68), each invented for purposes other than understanding the 

period as it actually existed. These include: the Middle Ages as a pretext for 

colourful  storytelling;  as  a  site  of  ironical  revisitation;  as  a  barbaric  age;  as 

the  age  of  romanticism;  as  the  age  of  national  identities;  the  age  of 

decadentism; and the age of tradition (68-71). In “What is happening to the 

Middle Ages?” (2007) Thomas Prendergast and Stephanie Trigg express the 

concern  that,  rather  than  opening  a  wider  understanding  and  discussion  on 

the cultural utility attached to medieval period, Eco’s list has had:  

a  stultifying  effect  on  the  study  of  the  Middle  Ages  both  because  it 

has  encouraged  the  fields  of  medievalism  to  engage  in  a  kind  of 

criticism that is largely taxonomic and because it has perpetuated the 

split  between  understandings  of  medieval  and  medievalism. 

(Prendergast and Trigg 216) 

Prendergast and Trigg draw attention to Eco’s favouring of the ‘Middle Ages 

of  philological  reconstruction’:  “By  separating  and,  frankly,  privileging  this 

Middle  Ages”,  Prendergast  and  Trigg  argue  that  Eco  undermined  the 

legitimacy  of  other  medievalisms  (216).  Eco’s  hierarchy  licensed  academic 

critique  of  medievalisms  not  bound  by  the  central  aspiration  of  a  fixed 

Page | 54  

 
 
historical  accuracy—  those  drawing  from  “different  variable  and  partial 

elements of medieval culture” (Prendergast and Trigg 216).  

Although, in practice, the over-determining influence of Eco’s taxonomy has 

served to inhibit broader considerations of medievalism, his list at least hints 

at  the  cultural  utility  of  varying  constructions  of  the  medieval  period. 

Prendergast  and  Trigg  comment  on  the  versatility  of  the  Middle  Ages, 

arguing it:  

can  always  return  to  us,  whether  in  dreamy,  embroidered  and 

idealized  form  (the  medieval  as  romance),  or  as  the  abjected  dark 

other  to  modernity  (the  medieval  as  gothic)  or  indeed  in  other 

variations  made 

increasingly  possible 

through  postmodernist 

combination and play.  (Prendergast and Trigg 217) 

They assert that the “practice of medievalism exists as a kind of reflex to the 

past, producing a dynamic and flexible relationship between the present and 

the past” (217). They thereby draw attention to the ineluctable complexity of 

contemporary  connections  with  the  Middle  Ages.  Prendergast  and  Trigg’s 

perspective 

is  subtly  but  significantly  different 

from  conceptions  of 

medievalism that focus purely upon oppositions between modernity and the 

medieval. It recognises popular identification, representation and pleasure in 

a  contemporary  interaction  and  investment  in  a  revived  Middle  Ages,  and 

even in a fantastic medievalism.  

Michael Alexander, too, in Medievalism: The Middle Ages in Modern England 

(2007) recognises different impulses in medievalism, one being “the recovery 

by antiquarians and historians of materials for the study of the Middle Ages”, 

and  another  being  “the  imaginative  adoption  of  medieval  ideas  and  forms” 

Page | 55  

 
 
 
(xxii).  He  also  pertinently  observes  that  these  are  not  mutually  exclusive, 

arguing that “the curiosity of the antiquarian can itself be a romantic impulse” 

(xxii). 

The flexibility of the Middle Ages is even present in considerations that focus 

on  alterity,  such  as  Catherine  Brown’s  discussion  of  the  Otherness  of  the 

medieval period. In “In the Middle” (2000), Brown refers to the Middle Ages 

as a “definitional whipping boy for generations of citizens who have needed 

an  ‘all-purpose  alternative’  against  which  to  define  themselves”  (547).    The 

Middle Ages, she argues, function as a place holder between classicism and 

‘enlightenment’  –  marking  a  “parenthetical  death  of  the  interval  between 

Classical  life  and  its  humanist  ‘rebirth’”  (547).  It  is  a  time  steeped  in 

Otherness, but Brown asserts that the central issue is less the alterity of the 

Middle  Ages,  than  “what  we  as  putative  nonmedievals  are  going  to  do  with 

the difference. What stories do we tell ourselves about it? What do they do to 

and for us?” (548). Drawing upon Edward Said’s seminal Orientalism Brown 

emphasises the way in which the Middle Ages can be seen as Other, as it is 

defined largely by modernity’s discourses concerning the period.  

Concerns about how modernity might appropriately and ethically interact with 

the Middle Ages are not new. As mentioned in the introduction, a key debate 

within  medieval  studies  played  out  around  Jauss’  1979  paper  “The  Alterity 

and  Modernity  of  Medieval  Literature”,  published  in  New  Literary  History. 

Jauss sought to defend contemporary academic interest in medieval studies 

by  focusing  upon  “the  aesthetic  pleasure,  the  surprising  otherness,  and  the 

model  character  of  medieval  texts”  (182).  The  first  two  of  these  emphases 

(pleasure and alterity) respond to the Other, as pleasure can be found in “the 

Page | 56  

 
 
 
astounding  or  surprising  otherness  of  the  world  opened  up  by  the  text” 

(Jauss  182).  Jauss  argues  the  “enjoyment  of  medieval  texts  for  a  modern 

reader”  can  be  found  by  one  “who  still  senses  the  aesthetic  charm  of  the 

past” (184). As enjoyment can be impeded by things the reader finds difficult 

or  inaccessible  such  as  conventions,  impersonality  of  style,  formalism, 

symbolism and didacticism, Jauss, observes that texts which possess more 

accessible  ‘readability’  –  adventures,  romances  and  ballads  –  hold  greater 

popularity (184).  

Such  a  sense  of  pleasure  and  strangeness  can  even  be  found  in  pseudo-

medieval 

texts.  Although 

their  Middle  Ages  are  not 

truly  historical, 

medievalist  fantasies,  unsurprisingly,  appropriate  from  these  more  pleasing 

and  accessible  aspects  of  medieval  texts,  utilising  characteristics  such  as 

romance, adventure and the marvellous. Indeed, when speaking of medieval 

literature,  Jauss  recognises  the  allure  of  fantasy,  saying  the  “elementary 

need  for  a  fantasy  world  of  adventures  and  lovers’  rendezvous,  of  the 

mysterious and the wish-fulfilling, may explain the success of this ‘evergreen’ 

of the medieval imagination” (184).  

Although  it  may  seem  almost  too  obvious  to  require  comment,  there  is  a 

significant  distinction  between  the  authentically  medieval  texts  that  Jauss 

refers to in his discussion, and genre fantasy.  Medievalist fantasy imagines 

and inherits from the Middle Ages; it is not a product of it. Although often set 

in  a  medieval  past,  genre  fantasy  novels  are  clearly  contemporary  texts, 

revealing  as  much  or  more  about  the  time  of  their  production  as  they  do 

about  the  times  in  which  these  stories  are  situated.  Genre  fantasy,  though 

Page | 57  

 
 
 
evoking a medieval ambience, is necessarily written from a time outside the 

Middle Ages. 

Still,  alterity,  or  at  least  strangeness,  can  play  a  significant  role  in  the 

appreciation  of  both  medieval  literature  and  genre  fantasy.    Jauss  places 

difference at the forefront of his discussion as he argues that a more ethical 

and rigorous approach to understanding the Middle Ages can be negotiated 

by a recognition of the alterity of both medieval text and the medieval world 

model.  He  asserts  that  medieval  texts  should  be  considered  through  a  lens 

that takes account of this literature’s alterity and the different expectations of 

a medieval audience. An appreciation of genre fantasy, too, can be aided by 

the  understanding  that,  more  broadly,  audience  expectations  of  genre  texts 

differ  from  the  expectations  readers  have  of  realist  literature.  Furthermore, 

there  is  a  certain  resemblance  between  a  contemporary  genre  reader’s 

approach to stories, and that of a medieval audience.  

Jauss contrasts the modernist, humanist view which represents written ‘work’ 

as  individual  and  autonomous  pieces  of  artistic  creation  (188)  with  the 

movement and intertextuality of medieval tales that, by nature, shifted due to 

their  oral  transmission  and  aural  reception.  A  medieval  listener,  he  argues, 

would  “not  presuppose  a  self-submersion  in  the  unique  world  of  a  single 

work” but would rather hold “an expectation which can only be fulfilled by the 

step from text to text, for here the pleasure is provided by the perception of 

difference,  of  an  ever-different  variation  on  a  basic  pattern”  (189).    Jauss 

suggests  that,  for  the  medieval  consumer  of  these  tales,  pleasure  was 

gained  from  generic  expectations  being  met  by  the  storyteller,  and  this 

pleasure was then accentuated by deviations from the expected. He refers to 

Page | 58  

 
 
 
this  as  “the  charm  of  an  already  ongoing  game  with  known  rules  and  still 

unknown surprises” (189).  

A  similar  process  can  be  observed  in  the  consumption  of  fantasy  fiction. 

Generic characteristics can act as points of identification and accessibility for 

authors  and  consumers  of  fantasy  fiction  alike,  providing  platforms  for  the 

surprise  of  deviation.    Indeed,  Jauss  notes  that  the  pleasure  attached  to 

expectation  and  deviation  is  “as  natural  to  the  modern  reader  of  detective 

novels as it was to the medieval hearer of the chansons de geste” (189). This 

pattern  of  familiarity  and  difference  in  storytelling  sits  alongside  many  other 

features  of  medieval  literature,  such  as  adventure,  romance,  a  pre-modern 

space and temporality, which genre fantasy has appropriated from medieval 

literature.  

Consideration of the present’s relationship with the past, however, does raise 

questions about how one might ‘appropriately’ use and interact with a former 

time.  Despite the points of kinship between fantasy and medieval literature, 

there remains a significant difference between the relationship with the past 

Jauss  proposes,  and  that  which  is  evoked  by  genre  fantasy.  Jauss  argues 

that  elements  which  are  pleasurable  and  accessible  within  medieval 

literature  might  provide  a  “hermeneutic  bridge”  to  further  knowledge  and 

appreciation of the “astounding or surprising otherness of the world opened 

up  by  the  text”  (182).    While  accessibility  and  aesthetic  pleasure  are  used 

here in the quest of a progressive understanding of the Middle Ages as they 

existed, genre fantasy uses these things for an entirely different purpose.  

Page | 59  

 
 
 
 
For  genre  fantasy,  identification  and  pleasure  can  become  ends  in 

themselves,  with  medieval  alterity  being  subsumed  by  the  familiarity  of 

generic representation. Consequently, although fantasy strongly draws from 

the Middle Ages in its use of character and setting, literary motifs, and even 

from the intertextual and pastiche nature of medieval storytelling, the Middle 

Ages  as  an  historical  period,  as  an  uncomfortably  and  confrontingly  alien 

Other,  is  largely  absent  from  the  genre.    Recognisable  images  and  reader 

identification  mean  that  the  strange  alterity  of  the  Middle  Ages  can, 

paradoxically, be transmuted into a familiar motif in medievalist fantasy. 

The  ahistoricism  of  such  an  approach  to  the  Middle  Ages  has  provoked 

critical  concern.  Umberto  Eco’s  speaks  of  the  Middle  Ages  as,  historically, 

being “ravaged by a persuasive medieval nostalgia” (66). Rather than seeing 

romance  and  fantasy  as  points  of  connection  with  the  past,  Eco  is  overtly 

censorious of the way these aspects of medieval literature are foregrounded 

in the popular imagination.  A certain similarity of opinion can be discerned in 

Fredric Jameson’s argument in Postmodernism, or the Cultural Logic of Late 

Capitalism,  first  published  in  1991.  He  suggests  that  representations  of  the 

past in contemporary cultural products are largely antithetical to, or at least a 

grave distortion of, the ideal of historical reality.  Censure is tacit as Jameson 

speaks  of  “dead  styles”,  and  “all  the  masks  and  voices  stored  up  in  the 

imaginary  museum  of  a  now  global  culture”,  ready  for  exploitation  by 

contemporary producers of culture as they mine the past (18).  

Jameson argues that current interest in things historical no longer represents 

an attempt to understand the past as it was. Historical representation, rather, 

has become “the random cannibalization of all the styles of the past” and “the 

play  of  random  stylistic  allusion”  constructed  to  satisfy  a  consumer  appetite 

Page | 60  

 
 
for “pseudo events and ‘spectacles'” (18).  He argues that the past is “itself 

modified”  and  then,  in  “a  faithful  conformity  to  poststructuralist  linguistic 

theory,  the  past  as  a  ‘referent’  finds  itself  bracketed,  and  then  effaced  all 

together, leaving us with nothing but the texts” (18). 

Jameson, therefore, draws attention to something of the dilemma associated 

with  contemporary  relations  with  the  past.  He  asserts  that  “genuine 

historicity”  is  incompatible  with  “postmodernist  nostalgia”,  contending  that 

many  contemporary  ‘historical’  texts,  particularly  film,  do  not  attempt  to 

represent  history  but  instead  attempt  to  convey  “pastness”  (19).  This 

becomes  a  symptom  of  the  “insensible  colonization  of  the  present  by  the 

nostalgia  mode”  (Jameson  20).  Jameson  expresses  concern  about 

contemporary  society’s  understanding  of  historical  intertextual  references 

within  contemporary  texts.    The  evocation  of  the  past  in  contemporary  film 

allows them to connote a ‘pastness’ while sidestepping actual historicity. This 

creates  a  “pseudohistorical  depth  in  which  the  history  of  aesthetic  styles 

displaces  ‘real’  history”  (Jameson  20).  The  construction  of  a  sense  of 

‘pastness’  is  clearly  discernible  in  medievalist  genre  fantasy.  Fantasy  texts 

overtly  rely  on  the  impression  of  ‘pastness’  above  conformity  to  pure 

historicism.   

Eco and Jameson express a concern that ‘real’ history will be supplanted by 

nostalgic  imaginings.  This  fear,  however,  entails  certain  presumptions.  First 

is  a  tacit acknowledgement of  the  power  of story-telling  and  representation. 

Second is the implication that varying understandings of or relationships with 

the past cannot easily co-exist. There is an implicit supposition that modern 

consumers  are  not  equipped  to  differentiate  between  real  history  and 

Page | 61  

 
 
 
romantic  imaginings;  that  one  necessarily  overwhelms  the  other.    Further 

affixed  to  the evident disapproval  of  nostalgia  is  a  moral  hierarchy  in  which 

there  are  ethical  and  unethical  ways  of  relating  to  the  past.  Honesty  is 

aligned with historical rigour, and nostalgia with misrepresentation. However, 

unlike the nostalgia films Jameson discusses, genre fantasy does not claim 

to be an historically accurate representation of times past. Indeed, through its 

magical aspects, the genre openly flaunts that it is imaginary, not realist. This 

is  even  more  pronounced  in  fantasy  stories  set  in  secondary  worlds  like 

those seen in The Old Kingdom Chronicles and The Fionavar Tapestry. 

Concerns  about  ahistoricism  are  a  staple  within  medieval  and  medievalism 

studies. 

In  “Deconstruction  and 

the  Medieval 

Indefinite  Article:  The 

Undecidable  Medievalism  of  Brian  Helgeland’s  A  Knights  Tale”  (2008), 

Louise  D’Arcens  considers  critical  responses  to  the  overt  and  unapologetic 

ahistorical representations of the medieval past in Helgeland’s film. D’Arcens 

observes  that  within  the  discipline  of  medievalism  studies,  despite  an 

established  “critique  of  the  positivistic  ideal  of  gaining  access  to  an 

unmediated Middle Ages” (82), there remains an “anxiety about anachronism 

within medievalist texts” (80).  Like a great deal of medievalist genre fantasy, 

A  Knights  Tale  utilises  the  appeal  of  a  popular  medieval  imagination  while 

simultaneously  advertising  that  it  is  not  history  but  an  impossible  fiction  (in 

the film’s case through blatantly anachronistic use of twentieth-century music 

and  symbols).    D’Arcens  asserts  that,  on  one  hand  medievalism  studies  “is 

too reflexive to reproduce medieval studies’ faith in presence and the ideal of 

unmediated  access  to  the  medieval  past,  yet  on  the  other  hand,  this  same 

reflexivity  bars  it  from  adopting  an  untroubled  affirmation  of  historical 

anachronism” (82). This can be seen in scholarly criticism of A Knight’s Tale 

Page | 62  

 
 
which  simultaneously  demonstrates  “a  clear  disavowal  of  ‘the  real  Middle 

Ages’”  and  “an  implicit  reliance  upon  the  ‘real  Middle  Ages’  it  disavows” 

(D’Arcens  86).  Such  tension,  D’Arcens  argues,  “discloses  a  paradigmatic 

instability  with  which  all  medievalism  scholars  grapple.  Whenever 

medievalism scholars attempt to discriminate as to when and on what terms 

anachronism is acceptable, this same instability arises” (88).  

A  similar  tension  can  be  perceived  within  genre  fantasy.  Critical  judgement 

regularly entails a higher valuing of novels which have a greater fidelity to the 

historical Middle Ages. Texts that draw more directly or more accurately from 

medieval  history  or  medieval  texts  are  often  perceived  as  possessing  a 

greater literary and aesthetic value than novels which rely more strongly on 

medievalist  imaginings.  In  his  2004  article  “The  Problem  of  Transformation: 

The  Use  of  Medieval  Sources  in  Fantasy  Literature”,  Michael  Drout  argues 

that  distance  from  medieval  materials  accounts  for  the  variance  in  the 

aesthetic and critical success of genre fantasy texts. Novels which lack direct 

engagement with medieval sources, Drout argues, do not have “the unity of 

onamastics,  sociology,  or  metaphysics  found  in  the  work  of  the  more 

successful authors” (16).   

Drout notes that “the link between fantasy and medieval materials is a critical 

commonplace”  (4),  but  rather  than  speak  of  fantasy’s  ‘appropriations’  from 

literatures  of  the  Middle  Ages  (a  term  which  he  argues  has  connotations  of 

expropriation)  he  speaks  of  ‘transformation’.  In  ‘transformation’  there  is  a 

recognition  of  fantasy’s  kinship  with  medieval  influences  and  sources,  but 

also  a  recognition  of  difference  (Drout  4).  While  appreciating  that  fantasy 

fiction  is  not  dependent  upon  exact  recreations  of  the  ‘real’  Middle  Ages, 

Page | 63  

 
 
 
Drout’s  argument  reflects  similar  anxieties  to  those  D’Arcens  discerns  in 

medievalism  studies,  as  the  Middle  Ages  still  holds  the  place  of  a  more 

appropriate or authentic referent. This can be seen in Drout’s assertion that 

medievalist  fantasy  which  only  indirectly  engages  with  medieval  sources 

does  not  have  the  cohesiveness,  richness  or  aesthetic  power  of  works  that 

are more directly indebted to a familiarity  with and appreciation of medieval 

sources  (15-16).  Drout  argues  that  novels  that  are  more  reliant  on  generic 

and medievalist-looking tropes, drawn from earlier fantasy literature, are less 

critically successful than those that have the scaffolding of medieval sources 

to make consistent and reinforce the conceits of fantasy’s secondary worlds 

(16).    The  privileged  place  of  the  ‘real’  Middle  Ages  is  evident  in  Drout’s 

contention  that  fantasy  has  the  power  to  introduce  and  illuminate  medieval 

materials to readers, bringing “new life to medieval texts that might otherwise 

be ignored” (17) .  

Drout’s  argument  provides  an  example  of  the  exchange  between  fantastic 

medievalism  and  medieval  scholarship  as  it  attempts  to  ward  off  anxieties 

over  distortions  of  the  Middle  Ages  through  the  “rhetorical  manoeuvre  of 

justifying  medievalism  via  the  medieval”  (D’Arcens  84-85).  Indeed,  the 

scholarly  philological  and  medieval  credentials  of  seminal  fantasy  authors 

such  as  J.R.R.  Tolkien  and  C.S.  Lewis  are  regularly  emphasised  by 

proponents of fantasy literature.7 Additionally, commentary on the rigours of 

historical  research  is  commonplace  in  reviews  of  contemporary  genre 

fantasy. Even within a literature that, on one level, resides outside consensus 

reality, historical accuracy retains importance as a marker of value, ironically 

7 See, for example Chance, Jane. Tolkien the Medievalist. Vol. 3. Routledge, 2003. Cantor, Norman 
F. and James B. McSwain. Norman F. Cantor’s Inventing the Middle Ages: Lives, Works and Ideas 
of the Great Medievalists of the 20th Century 1992. 

Page | 64  

 
 
                                                           
 
illustrating a need for fantasy itself to mediate fantastic pleasure with notions 

of duty and fidelity to an actual past. 

Being  located  beyond  the  borders  of  consensus  reality,  however,  genre 

fantasy  texts  are  able  to  use  and  construct  a  powerful  sense  of  ‘pastness’ 

while  simultaneously  signalling  their  fictional  status  though  their  reliance  on 

the  unreal. 

  This  serves 

to  create  a  space  outside  a  strict 

authentic/inauthentic historical binary, utilising the modality of the ‘would’ not 

the ‘did’. It imagines alternative ‘realities’ in worlds that operate according to 

different rules.  A bold ownership of unreality offers the reader the possibility 

of an altered relationship with the past, but one that is clearly not setting itself 

up  in  the  place  of  historical  reality.  Fantasy’s  understanding  of  its  own 

fictional  status,  when  supported  by  an  unabashed  embracing  of  the  unreal, 

can provide the genre with something of a release from the ethical dilemmas 

that  accompany  the  imperative  to  honour  the  alterity  of  the  past.  It  offers  a 

certain licence under which the cultural power held by imaginings of the past 

can  be  drawn  upon,  whilst  side-stepping  an  obligation  to  any  aspiration  for 

pure historicism.  

The  medievalism  in  genre  fantasy  need  not  be  authentic  or  even  stable  to 

have  power  and  resonance.  As  will  be  seen  in  the  following  chapters, 

medievalism’s  very  instability  can  widen  the  range  of  its  cultural  utility, 

providing  inspiration  and  support  to  varying  constructions  of  value  and 

identity.  Despite  a  generic  kinship  and  similarities  in  mood  and  motifs, 

different Middle Ages can be found in The Old Kingdom Chronicles and The 

Fionavar Tapestry and, along with these, varied implications and ideological 

nuances.  Indeed,  the  inherent  plasticity  of  both  medievalism  and  fantasy 

Page | 65  

 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
 
means  the  genre  is  remarkably  multifaceted,  offering  diverse  opportunities 

for thought-provoking and scholarly engagement. 

Page | 66  

 
 
Chapter 2 

North and South 

This  chapter  introduces  Garth  Nix’s  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles  and 

considers the implications of Nix setting a medieval Anglo-Celtic past against 

a  more  modern  English  society.  It  will  discuss  cultural  heritage  and 

identification,  with  a  focus  on  the  significance  of  medieval  motifs  and  the 

concept of  ‘Northernness’  within  genre fantasy.  It  will  argue  that  there  is  an 

affective  weight  and  value  attached  to  imaginings  of  a  northern,  medieval 

past. Nix’s texts utilise such affective power as they participate in discourses 

that  challenge  the  hegemonic  dominance  of  scientific  rationalism  and 

industrial  progress,  privileging  instead  the  value  of  aesthetics,  morality  and 

nature.  

Garth  Nix’s  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles  comprises  Sabriel  (1995),  Lirael 

(2001) and Abhorsen (2003). The trilogy is set in a secondary world in which 

the  North  and  the  South  experience  different  material  and  immaterial 

existences.  The  Northern  Old  Kingdom  is  magical,  medieval  and  mystical 

while  Southern  Ancelstierre  operates  according  to  a  scientific  reality  and  is 

progressive,  industrialised,  utilitarian  and  pragmatic.  Ancelstierre  resembles 

England  at  the  beginning  of  the  twentieth  century.  Whilst  both  of  Nix’s 

Page | 67  

 
 
 
 
 
  
historical  worlds  connote  ‘pastness’,  each  is  imbued  with  very  different 

values.  The  Old  Kingdom  projects  a  positive  affective  appeal  while  newly 

industrial  Ancelstierre  is  represented  in  a  more  ambivalent,  often  critical, 

fashion. 

The Old Kingdom is ordered according to ‘the Charter’, a governing magical 

force. The Charter is imbued with notions of preordained place and destiny, 

and essential right and wrong. The Charter is at the heart of all that which is 

good, appropriate and powerful in the North. It is ordered, not chaotic, and it 

is intimately connected to eternity and creation. The Old Kingdom Chronicles 

position  Charter  magic  against  unfettered  ‘Free  Magic’,  which  is  raw  and 

extremely  powerful,  but  can  also  be  corrupt,  unrestrained,  dangerous  and 

ultimately  self-absorbed.    The  fundamental  and  profound  nature  of  the 

Charter 

is  also  positioned  against  an 

image  of  soulless  modernity, 

represented  by  Ancelstierre’s  industrialisation,  rationalist  ideologies  and 

pragmatic practices. 

Sabriel,  the  first  book  of  the  trilogy,  is  situated  in  a  time  when  the  Old 

Kingdom is falling into anarchy. The kingdom has suffered greatly since the 

assassination  of  the  Queen  two  hundred  years  earlier,  leaving  the  Old 

Kingdom far more vulnerable to threats from the (un)Dead. Sabriel’s father is 

the 

‘Abhorsen’,  which 

is  both  a  role  and 

title.  The  Abhorsen  are 

necromancers  who  work  within  the  power  of  the  Charter,  not  to  raise  or 

communicate  with  the  dead,  but  to  make  sure  the  dead  remain  in  Death. 

Sabriel’s quest begins as her father is trapped in the Precincts of Death. She 

needs  to  return  to  the  Old  Kingdom  from  Ancelstierre  where  she  was 

schooled and take up the mantle of Abhorsen in her father’s place. With the 

Page | 68  

 
 
 
reluctant  assistance  of  Mogget,  an  inexplicably  powerful  but  morally 

ambivalent  ‘servant’  of  the  Abhorsen  who  takes  the  incongruous  form  of  a 

domestic  cat,  Sabriel  must  save  not  only  the  Old  Kingdom  but  also 

Ancelstierre  from  what  is,  quite  literally,  a  fate  worse  than  death.  She  must 

find  her  father  and  defeat  Kerrigor,  an  unequivocally  evil  member  of  the 

‘Greater  Dead’,  and  his  legions  of  (un)Dead  minions.  To  assure  a  return  to 

order  in  the  Old  Kingdom,  Sabriel  must  also  rescue  and  restore  the  rightful 

heir to the throne. This is not an insubstantial task for a seventeen-year-old 

girl, particularly one raised away from her father in non-magical Ancelstierre.  

The  events  within  the  remaining  two  books  of  the  trilogy,  Lirael  and 

Abhorsen,  take  place  after  Sabriel’s  success  and  the  restoration  of  the  Old 

Kingdom’s  monarchy.  The  protagonists  are  Lirael,  a  daughter  of  the  Clayr 

(the  seers of the  Old Kingdom)  and Prince Sameth,  known  as  Sam,  who  is 

the  son  of  Sabriel  and  of  Touchstone,  the  rescued  heir  to  the  throne.  Both 

these young characters suffer under expectations which they feel inadequate 

to fulfil. Lirael, though one of the Clayr, appears not to have the gift of sight. 

This  leads  to  feelings  of  inadequacy  and  to  self-imposed  withdrawal  and 

isolation.  Sam  is  seen  as  heir presumptive  to  the  title and  role  of Abhorsen 

but  he  suffers  from  an  overwhelming  and  debilitating  fear  of  all  things 

associated with such a calling. Ultimately, despite these obstacles, Lirael and 

Sam  join  forces  to  oppose  an  even  greater  threat  to  their  world  than  that 

posed by Kerrigor in Sabriel. They have to face Orannis, “the Destroyer! The 

Unmaker! The Unraveller!” who desires the annihilation of all worlds (Nix Abh 

128). This undertaking becomes a platform for their coming of age, and for a 

concomitant  exploration  of  role,  societal  expectations,  individuality  and 

subjective identity.   

Page | 69  

 
 
These novels conform to the expectations of many young adult novels, fitting 

comfortably in the category of Bildungsroman tales. The young protagonists 

grow  to  maturity  during  the  unfolding  stories.  They  deal  with  ethical 

dilemmas,  and  have  their  moral,  intellectual  and  physical  characters  both 

challenged  and  strengthened  during  the  progress  of  the  tales.  As  well  as 

being tales of individual growth, as I will argue in later chapters, these novels 

intersect  with  wider  contemporary  concerns  such  as  cultural  identity,  class, 

ethnicity and gender.  

At  first  glance  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles  seem  detached  from  the 

geographical  and  social  context  in  which  the  novels  were  produced.  Garth 

Nix,  an  Australian  author,  situates  his  book  in  very  non-Australian  place. 

Clearly, not only the landscape but also the societies of both the northern Old 

Kingdom  and  southern  Ancelstierre  are  significantly  removed  from  that 

typically  associated  with  Australia’s  physical  and  cultural  environment. 

Ancelstierre  recalls  early  twentieth-century  England,  while  the  Old  Kingdom 

is firmly situated in an imagined medieval time. Physically, the Old Kingdom 

is  even  further  removed  from  Australia,  on  the  ‘foreign’  side  of  even 

Ancelstierre’s border, metaphorically on a kind of Celtic fringe. 

Nix’s  choice  of  ‘Britishness’  in  setting  is  noteworthy,  particularly  when  one 

considers the myriad of settings ostensibly open to a writer of fantasy fiction, 

a  genre  theoretically  unconstrained  by  reality,  place  and  time.  Peter  Hunt 

notes that: 

Page | 70  

 
 
 
 
the  forms  that  fantasy  takes  –  for  all  the  endless  ingenuity  of  the 

human imagination – are surprisingly limited. Fantasy seems to have, 

like  the  folk  tales  from  which  it  sprang,  a  restrictive  number  of 

recurrent  motifs  and  elements:  there  are  young,  questing  heroes, 

wise  controlling  sages,  irredeemably  evil  monsters,  and  (although 

mercifully fewer these days) damsels in distress. (Hunt 2) 

To  Hunt’s  list  might  be  added  a  limited  landscape.  ‘British’  or  northern 

landscapes remain central within the genre, although, utilising the crusader’s 

image  of  the  Saracen,  eastern or  ‘oriental’  settings  are  increasingly  popular 

in medievalist fantasy fiction. In “Popular Genres and the Australian Literary 

Community:  The  Case  of  Fantasy  Fiction”  (PG),  Kim  Wilkins  offers  insight 

into  this  phenomenon.  Noting  the  prevalence  with  which  Australian  fantasy 

authors use “European geography, history, and mythology”, she argues that 

this  is  largely  “because  these  tropes fall  within  the  ‘horizon  of expectations’ 

that the genre community brings to the texts” (272).  

In  many  ways  the  plausibility  of  a  story  is  aligned  with  expectation.  A 

familiarity of temporal and geographical space creates a sense of credibility 

within  the  secondary  world  of  a  text.  In  an  “Old  Kingdom  Podcast”  (OKP) 

recorded for his official British website, Garthnix.co.uk, Nix touches on these 

expectations.  He  refers  to  the  United  Kingdom  as  “the  home  of  fantasy” 

(OKP1  1:48),  noting  that  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles  reside  within  this 

tradition.  He  reveals  that  in  writing  these  novels  he  “was  thinking  of  an 

alternative  England  in  some  degree”  (OKP1  8:51).  Indeed,  the  map  at  the 

beginning of each of the novels in the series is clearly reminiscent of a map 

of Britain. 

Page | 71  

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1.  

Page | 72  

 
 
Despite a wide readership in Australia and overseas, northern settings work 

to  situate  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles,  and  Australian  fantasy  fiction  more 

generally,  in  a  marginal  place  within  ‘Australian’  fiction.  Wilkins  notes  that 

within Australian literary discourse the “default setting for Australian literature 

is  the  Australian  landscape”  (PG  267).  Furthermore,  she  argues,  “Realism 

has always been seen as the mode that most defines, or should most define, 

Australian  writing”  (PG  273).    Transgressing  both  these  expectations, 

Australian  fantasy  fiction  is  tacitly  excluded  from  the  heart  of  what  is 

considered ‘Australian’ literature. 

This exclusion makes assumptions that align non-realist representation with 

cultural disengagement.  It also demonstrates how Australia seeks to define 

itself  through  literary  discourse.  The  official  sanction  of  works  portraying 

realist renditions of distinctively ‘Australian’ life, whether it be rural imagings 

or  multicultural  urbanism,  exhibits,  perhaps,  a  remnant  of  the  Australian 

‘cultural  cringe’.  There  is  a  manner in  which  this  literary  discourse  seeks  to 

disavow  the  continued  influence  of  British  history,  both  medieval  and 

colonial,  on  Australian  culture.  An  official  disdain  for  expressions  of 

medievalism within literature seeks to eliminate fantasy on the basis that it is 

incompatible  or  unrepresentative  of  a  distinctive  modern  Australian 

character.  In  Medievalism  and  the  Gothic  in  Australian  Culture,  however, 

Stephanie  Trigg  addresses  the  perception  of  such  an  incongruity,  drawing 

attention to ways in which conceptions of the medieval continue to assert an 

influence in Australia: 

‘Medieval  Australia’  enjoys  the  status  of  a  provocative  oxymoron, 

since  the  ‘Medieval’  initially  has  a  much  more  restricted  and  at  first 

glance, historical sense. Here the ‘common sense’ reaction is to say 

that Australia has no medieval past, separated as it is, so decisively, 

Page | 73  

 
 
from  the  English  or  European  Middle  Ages.  But  as  the  emergent 

discipline of medievalism has taught us, the ‘Medieval’ is only partly 

an historical category. The afterlife of medieval culture runs long and 

deep  […]  medieval  culture  is  understood  as  a  source  of  images, 

narratives,  roles  and  ideals,  available  to  be  combined  with  images 

from  other  periods  and  contexts,  detached  from  any  attempt  to 

represent  the  historical  or  the  real,  or  from  any  anxiety  about 

authenticity or continuity of place. (Trigg xvi) 

It would, therefore, be naïve to conclude that medieval and British allusions 

within a novel mean it is detached from the Australian environment in which it 

is produced. Nix himself comments on the varied sources and influences for 

his  novels,  with  inspiration  coming  not  only  from  folklore,  fable  and  the 

fantasy tradition, but also from “history […] the natural world, current events 

–  everything  really  [...]  everything is  a  potential  source of  ideas”  (Nix  OKP2 

4:21).    Unsurprisingly  then,  one  can  discern  aspects  of  Australian  cultural 

influence  within  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles.  As  will  be  discussed  in 

Chapter 3, the manner by which Nix mediates aspects of class and privilege 

is  aligned  with  Australian  egalitarian  discourses.  The  Southerling  refugee 

problem, addressed in detail in Chapter 4, intersects with a key issue within 

the  Australian  political  landscape  at  the  time  of  Nix’s  writing.  A  broader 

reading  of  the  novels,  therefore,  entails  an  acknowledgement  that  the 

contemporary ideological and cultural environments at the time and place of 

production exert pressure on a text.  

More  than  this,  I  suggest  that  setting  a  story  outside  present-day  reality, 

particularly  in  an  imagined  past,  paradoxically  has  the  capacity  to  render  a 

text  more  significant  to  its  readers.  Like  Northrop  Frye,  Nix  recognises 

Page | 74  

 
 
 
something of the “heavier weight of conceptual meaning” that fantasy inherits 

from  its  structural  affinities  and  associations  with  myth  (Frye  188).  Indeed, 

Nix  draws  on  the  mythic  associations  that  underpin  fantasy  stories.  In  his 

podcast  interview  Nix  comments  that  he  hopes  that,  through  familiarity,  the 

tropes  he  uses  resonate  “with  a  whole  bunch  of  myth  and  legend  which  is 

hard-wired into each of us – [which] we’ve experienced through legend and 

fairy-tales”  (Nix  OKP2  11:19).  He  asserts  that  literature  that  “harkens  back” 

to  old  stories  and  beliefs  can  be  “much  more  powerful”  (Nix  OKP2  11:35). 

This  form  of  ‘power’  is  rooted  in  a  sense  that  the  past  possesses  deep 

substance,  and  it  is  often  entangled  in  an  alignment  of  antiquity  with 

authenticity.  As  ‘heritage’,  stories  about  the past can  contribute  significantly 

to the construction of contemporary identity.   

Indeed,  literary  lineage  strongly  informs  cultural  identity.  This  is  noted  by 

C.S.  Lewis  in  The  Allegory  of  Love,  as  he  speaks  of  the  influence  that 

medieval stories continue to exert on modern society. He argues: 

Humanity  does  not  pass  through  phases  as  a  train  passes  through 

stations:  being  alive,  it  is  has  the  privilege  of  always  moving  yet 

never leaving anything behind. Whatever we have been, in some sort 

we are still. (Lewis 1) 

To continue Lewis’ analogy, heritage is not left behind by settlers emigrating 

from  Britain  to  countries  such  as  Australia  and  Canada.  The  influence  of 

English  literature  and  British  ancestry  still  provides  a  cultural  and  affective 

link within former British settler cultures. Such attachments, however, are not 

simply  abstract,  nor  are  they  necessarily  passive  or  even  innocuous.  As 

Trigg notes, “one of the primary manifestations of medievalism in Australia is 

Page | 75  

 
 
its  capacity  to  serve  as  a  model  for  social  organization  and  for  idealised 

forms of community” (xxii).  

Trigg’s observation draws attention to the ideological force of British heritage 

in colonial and postcolonial Australia.  In “Rebuilding the Middle Ages”, Sarah 

Randles  argues  that  the  medievalism  evident  in  Australian  architecture 

allowed Australians to construct “a false past for themselves as they failed to 

acknowledge the real past of the continent they had colonised (69).  Louise 

D’Arcens  extends  upon  this  in  “Most  Gentle  Indeed,  But  Most  Virile”  (MG) 

(2009), commenting that “dehistoricized allusion to the medieval period has a 

specific valence in the context of White Colonial Australia” (104). She argues 

that it is “simultaneously a sign of desire for proximity and cultural ownership 

of  the  medieval  past,  and  a  sign  of  distance  and  cultural  amnesia”  (104). 

Looking back to a more distant past and evoking the Middle Ages enabled, 

and continues to enable, White Australian society to forget its “role in in the 

destruction  of  indigenous  culture  and  their  participation,  whether  direct  or 

indirect, in a history of atrocity and dispossession” (103).  

Although  Nix’s 

texts  do  allude 

to  contemporary  Australian  concerns 

regarding  place  and  ethnicity,  the  British  setting  and  the  expectations  that 

accompany  the  ‘sword  and  sorcery’  genre  simplify  a  silence  in  regard  to 

indigenous  cultures.  This  silence  is,  in  many  ways,  a  by-product  of  the 

fantasy genre.  In “‘Cutting off the Head of the King’: Sovereignty, Feudalism 

and  Fantasy”  (CotH),  Kim  Wilkins  observes  that,  despite  the  continued 

inclusion  of  Aboriginal  Dreaming  mythologies  in  the  Australian  educational 

system,  Australian  fantasy  rarely  uses  Indigenous  mythology  (133).  She 

Page | 76  

 
 
 
suggests  this  is,  in  a  large  part,  due  to  the  pressures  of  the  genre,  arguing 

that: 

the  medievalism  in  Australian  fantasy  fiction  makes  it  almost 

impossible  to  represent  indigenous  stories  comfortably  because  the 

genre's 

typical  structures  and  conventions,  especially 

those 

concerning  politics  and  power,  are  not  equipped  to  engage  with 

indigeneity  as  it  is  conceptualised  in  contemporary  culture.  (Wilkins 

CotH 140)  

The absence of any reference to the Australian Aboriginal culture in The Old 

Kingdom  Chronicles,  however,  can  be  contrasted  with  The  Fionavar 

Tapestry  as  Guy  Gavriel  Kay  overtly  inserts  a  North  American  Aboriginal 

culture  into  his  series.  While  the  medievalism  used  in  a  great  deal  of 

Australian  fantasy  fiction  may  work  to  elide  the  violence  of  colonialism  and 

dispossession,  the  appropriation  of  Indigenous  culture  and  mythologies 

brings with it its own set of difficult ethical considerations.   

Many  of  these  difficulties  relate  to  ownership  of  stories  and  practices.  In 

Dhuuluu-Yala:  To  Talk  Straight,  Anita  Heiss  talks  of  the  complexities 

attached  to  non-indigenous  appropriation  of  Australian  Aboriginal  culture.  

Through highlighting  the oral nature of  the  intergenerational  transmission  of 

Aboriginal  stories,  knowledge  and  cultural  practices,  Heiss  argues  that 

“reducing  them  to  material  form  is  tantamount  to  the  destruction  of  them” 

(83).    Hiess  also  points  to  the  work  done  by  Terri  Janke  on  intellectual 

property  rights  and  the  incompatibility  between  Western,  legal  notions  of 

ownership  and  the  cultural  reality  of  Indigenous  practice  where  there  are 

communal interests in ‘ownership’ of stories. Under the Australian Copyright 

Act  1968,  “once  stories  are  published  in  books  and  other  documents,  the 

person  responsible  for  translating  the  oral  story  into  written    form  is 

Page | 77  

 
 
recognised as the owner of the copyright for the text” (Heiss 83). Moreover, 

the  person  who  translates  an  oral  story  into  a  material  form  becomes  the 

recognised author of the work (Janke & Quiggin 15). This sits starkly at odds 

with  oral  traditions  wherein  stories  are  seen  to  belong  collectively  to 

particular  communities,  kinship  groups,  or 

language  groups.  The 

appropriation  of  Aboriginal  stories  as  a  resource  for  the  works  of  non-

indigenous  writers,  therefore,  can  have  the  result  in  a  legal  transferal  of 

ownership through the assigning of copyright to the non-indigenous recorder 

(Janke & Quiggin 15). 

The  ethics  related  to  using  general  Indigenous  motifs  and  reimagining  the 

Native  and  native  cultures  in  Western  literature  are  similarly  complex. 

Although  this  does  not  involve  appropriations  of  specific  stories,  it  risks  the 

distortion and fetishisation of Indigenous peoples, products and culture. Such 

issues  are  discussed  in  detail  in  Chapter  7  in  relation  to  The  Fionavar 

Tapestry’s  representation  of  the  North  American  Nature  through  his  tribal 

Dalrei culture. 

What is evident in the medievalism of both The Old Kingdom Chronicles and 

The  Fionavar  Tapestry,  however,  is  a  “desire  for  proximity  and  cultural 

ownership  of  the  medieval  past”  (D’Arcens  MG  104).  The  attachment  that 

former  British  settler  cultures  retain  for  the  ‘mother  country’  is  not  unique. 

Medieval  scholar  Paul  Zumthor  speaks  of  the  significance  that  the  Middle 

Ages hold in broader Western cultural identity.8 Dating the phenomenon from 

the  nineteenth  century,  he  argues  that  a  substantial  part  of  medievalism 

8 Zumthor, Swiss-born, having studied in France, and taught in universities in both the Netherlands 
and in Montreal, was well situated to observe the breadth of the appeal of the medieval. 

Page | 78  

 
 
 
                                                           
 
“reduced  the  historical  character  of  the  Middle  Ages  to  the  mythic  category 

[…]  of  ‘our  origins’”  (369).  Though  Zumthor  is  clearly  censorious  of  the 

ahistorical decentring of the medieval period, the cultural force of the mythic 

category of ‘our origins’ seems undeniable, providing a point of contemporary 

appropriation and identification. 

Although  much  of  fantasy  strongly  relies  on  aspects  of  recognition  and 

identification,  the  genre  also  rests,  paradoxically,  on  the  affect  created  by 

strangeness  and  otherness.  The  medieval  period  may  symbolise  ‘our 

origins’, but it is also characterised by what Jauss identifies as a “surprising 

otherness”  (182)  and  what  J.R.R.  Tolkien  labels  an  “arresting  strangeness” 

(50).  This  creates  an  unsettling  but  pleasurable  tension,  as  fantasy  is 

situated amid both the familiar and the strange. It resides on the borderlands 

between  a  form  of  historical  ‘reality’  and  medievalist  idealism.  As  Northrop 

Frye notes, it also sits somewhere between realism and myth (139). The Old 

Kingdom  Chronicles  make  such  liminality  a  focal  point  within  the  text.  The 

imagery of a line between reality and myth is exemplified within Nix’s texts by 

the  potent  image  of  the  border,  which  is  a  magical  Wall  dividing  the 

mysterious Old Kingdom from scientific Ancelstierre.  

Nix’s idea of two separate realities has a pre-modern historical origin. It was 

suggested to him by a photograph of Hadrian's Wall, showing a green lawn 

in front of the wall and snow on the northern hills behind it. Nix remarks that 

this  led  to  the  impression  of  “summer  on  one  side  and  winter  on  the  other” 

(OKP1 7:48). As a boundary between English and Celtic cultures, this image 

demonstrates  something  of  the  different  historical  constructions  of  Britain 

from  which  writers  are  able  to  draw.  Moreover,  it  is  also  remarkably 

Page | 79  

 
  
 
illustrative  of 

the  conceptual  border  between  reality  and  magic. 

It 

encapsulates something of the strangeness that genre fantasy relies upon. It 

demonstrates a blend of beauty, of comfort and familiarity, with the unknown, 

the forbidding and the alien. A mood of elusive Otherness remains vital to the 

appeal of fantasy literature, but for an ‘Other’ to exist there must be a central 

paradigm from  which  Otherness  deviates. Indeed,  as mentioned  in  Chapter 

1,  J.R.R.  Tolkien  perceptively  notes  that  fantasy  is  not  primarily  concerned 

with  the  mysterious  Other,  but  with  a  human  interaction  with  strangeness. 

Fantasy,  he  argues,  centres  not  upon  ‘elves’,  but  upon  the  “adventures  of 

men in the Perilous Realm or upon its shadowy marshes” (17).  

The issue of Otherness has been well theorised in a range of critical fields, 

among  them,  Postcolonialism.  A  number  of  medievalist  scholars  have 

pointed  to  analogies  between  Orientalism  and  medievalism.9 In  his  seminal 

Orientalism,  Edward  Said  stresses  that  Western  representation  of  other 

cultures  has  “less  to  do  with  [other  cultures]  than  it  does  with  ‘our’  world” 

(12).  In  much  the  same  way,  depictions  of  alterity  in  fantasy  literature  have 

less to do with imagined worlds than with ‘our’ world. Said draws attention to 

how  cultural  power  can  be  discursively  exerted  through  things  such  as 

“orthodoxies,  canons  of  taste,  text,  and  values”  (12).  He  also  argues  that 

moral  authority  is  claimed  through  comparative  discourses  about “what  ‘we’ 

do  and  what  ‘they’  cannot  do  and  understand  as  ‘we’  do”  (12).  Catherine 

Brown argues that “it doesn’t take much editorial tweaking for Orientalism to 

speak  of  medieval  studies.  Just  read  ‘Medievalist’  for  Said’s  ‘Orientalist,’ 

9 See, for example. Pick, Lucy. 1999. “Edward Said, Orientalism and the Middle Ages.” Medieval Encounters 5.3: 
265–71.  Ganim,  John  M.  2000.  “Native  Studies:  Orientalism  and  Medievalism.”  The  Postcolonial  Middle  Ages. 
Ed. Jeffrey Jerome Cohen. New York: St Martin’s Press, 123–34.  Brown, Catherine. “In the Middle” Journal of 
Medieval and Early Modern Studies, Duke University Press, 30:3 Fall 2000. 

Page | 80  

 
 
                                                           
 
‘Middle Ages’ for his ‘Orient,’ and ‘the present’ for his ‘Europe’” (549). In the 

area of medievalism, however, this is not a straightforward dichotomy, as the 

Other  also  plays  the  dual  role  of  being  alien,  as  well  as  being  ‘our’  cultural 

heritage.  

Moreover,  in  contrast  to  Orientalism  where  advantage  always  resides  with 

the West,  in  depictions  of  the  Middle  Ages superiority  does  not  always  rest 

with the modern. As Nix’s approval of the medieval North above the modern 

South  demonstrates,  there  is  significant  plasticity  in  ideas  of  the  medieval. 

Indeed, in medievalism, superiority more frequently resides in the medieval. 

Though  Said’s  treatise  on  Orientalism  can  provide  a  model  that  greatly 

contributes  to  an  analysis  of  the  Other  in  medievalism,  and  even  in  genre 

fantasy,  there  are  significant  points  at  which  the  general  analogy  between 

Orientalism and medievalism breaks down.  

Nix  sets  up  a  division  between  two  differing  constructions  of  Western 

civilisation. In The Old Kingdom Chronicles the axis of division is not one that 

separates East from West but one that defines North in opposition to South.  

It  does  not  privilege  one  ethnicity  over  another,  but  divides  in  terms  of 

temporality,  placing  nostalgic,  chivalric,  agrarian  and  pre-industrial 

imaginings  of  Britain  against  industrial  and  scientific-rationalist  ones.    The 

North represents the old world and old ways; the South stands for a modern 

world and for ‘progress’. Nix’s binary divides a fantastic, romantic world from 

a pragmatic and utilitarian one. 

Page | 81  

 
 
 
 
The placement of the Old Kingdom in the North and Ancelstierre in the South 

is  not  without  significance.  As  can  be  seen  in  the  map  in  Fig.1,  Nix’s 

secondary  world  accords  Kim Wilkins’ observation  that even fantasy  novels 

“written  in  Australia  by  Australian  writers,  and  […]  read  by  Australian 

readers”, use a northern topography, setting stories “in medieval castles, on 

maps  where  north  is  marked  by  ice  and  snow”  (PG  265).    This  is  not  a 

merely arbitrary choice; there are strong affirmative connotations attached to 

the  North  in  genre  fantasy.  In  this  there  is  an  implicit  appeal  to  mythic  and 

medieval Anglo-Saxon and Celtic associations.  

Within genre fantasy the valuing of the North is particularly connected to the 

influence  of The  Inklings,  the  literary  discussion  group  in  Oxford  with  which 

prominent medieval fantasists including J.R.R. Tolkien and C.S. Lewis were 

associated.  Positive  connotations  are  clearly  discernible  in  Lewis’s  idea  of 

‘North’.  Lewis  uses  the  term  ‘Northernness’  to  describe  an  emotion  that 

combines  acute  joy  and  loss.  In  Surprised  by  Joy  (SBJ)  he  describes  this 

elusive but inspired mood as he speaks of experiencing ‘Northernness’ upon 

first  reading  a  translation  of  Tegnér’s  Drapa,  a  funeral  song  written  by 

Swedish poet Esaias Tegnér (1782-1846):  

instantly  I  was  uplifted  into  huge  regions  of  northern  sky,  I  desired 

with  almost  sickening  intensity  something  never  to  be  described 

(except that it is cold, spacious, severe, pale, and remote) and then 

[...] found myself at the very same moment already falling out of that 

desire and wishing I were back in it. (Lewis SBJ 20) 

Lewis  suggests  that  words  or  music,  particularly  those  evocative  of  Norse 

myth,  have  the  power  to  stir  intense  emotions.  He  also  reminisces  about 

another  instance  when  “Pure  ‘Northernness’  engulfed  me:  a  vision  of  huge 

clear  spaces  hanging  above  the  Atlantic  in  the  endless  twilight  of  Northern 

Page | 82  

 
 
summer,  remoteness,  severity…”  (SBJ  62).  Something  of  the  painfulness, 

loss  and  longing  that  is  embedded  in  nostalgia  is  present  in  the  feeling  of 

Northernness, which Lewis goes on to represent as “almost like heartbreak, 

the  memory  of  Joy  itself”  (SBJ  62).  ‘Home’  is  also  present  as  he  likens  the 

experience to:  

the knowledge that I had once had what I had now lacked for years, 

and  that  I  was  returning  at  last  from  exile  and  desert  lands,  to  my 

own  country;  and  the  distance  of  the  Twilight  of  the  Gods  and  the 

distance of my own past joy, both unattainable, flowed together into a 

single,  unendurable  sense  of  desire  and  loss,  which  suddenly 

became  one  with  the  loss  of  the  whole  experience  […]  (Lewis  SBJ 

62).  

With  the  combination  of  exquisite  grief,  the  desire  for  an  idea  of  home  and 

the  impossibility  of attaining  or  retaining  a  grasp  on  that  which  has  passed, 

Northernness  resides  on  the  intense  edge  of  nostalgia.  This  is  not  the 

comfortable  ‘rose-coloured’  view  of  times  past  to  which  nostalgia  is  often 

simplistically reduced and then dismissed. This is a powerfully raw emotional 

reaction, unable to disentangle grief from ecstasy, or the feeling of being lost 

from that of belonging.   

Tolkien  too,  attaches  significant  value  to  the  idea  of  North.  In  “Gathered 

around  the  Northern  Fires”  in  Tolkien  and  the  Invention  of  Myth,  2004, 

Andrew Lazo argues there is widespread scholarly support for the claim that 

“a  love  of  ‘Northernness’  played  a  vital  role  in  Tolkien’s  creation  of  Middle-

earth”  (192).  He  points  to  Tolkien’s  devotion  to  Northern  legends,  Norse 

language  and  Norse  Myth  (194).  It  is  widely  acknowledged  that  Tolkien, 

feeling that the Norman Conquest overwhelmed the traditions and mythology 

of  the  Angles  and  Saxons,  experienced  a  sense  of  lost  heritage.  Rhona 

Page | 83  

 
 
Beare  observes  Tolkien’s  affective  attachment  to  England’s  Nordic  past  led 

him  to  seek  a  ‘recovery’  of  sorts  “by  composing  myths  appropriate  to 

England”  (1).  She  discusses  this  devotion  in  her  paper  “A  Mythology  for 

England”  (2007),  asserting  that  a  northern  climate  was  integral  to  the 

construction  of  such  a  mythology.  She  argues  that  mythology  originating 

from cold regions such as Scandinavia is far better suited to the cool, misty, 

chilliness  of  England  than  that  which  arose  from  the  warmer  climes  of  the 

Mediterranean  (1  &  4).  This  shows  how  issues  of  national  and  cultural 

identity are entangled in mythological identification. 

In  Perilous  Realms  (2005),  Tolkien  scholar  Marjorie  Burns  also  recognises 

Northernness  in  the  mix  of  Nordic 10  and  Celtic  influences  in  Tolkien’s 

mythology, and discerns a fusion of these “Two Norths” in his depiction of the 

Middle-earth (12). Burns acknowledges that such an emphasis on the North 

did  not,  of  course,  originate  with  Tolkien,  pointing  to  eighteenth  century 

collections  and  translations  of  Scandinavian,  Anglo-Saxon  and  Celtic  texts, 

and their growing popularity during the nineteenth century (15). Significantly, 

the change in valuing that accompanied eighteenth and nineteenth- century 

Romanticism  impacted  upon  cultural  identity.  Burns  observes  that  an 

idealisation  of  the  North  entailed  a  concomitant  rejection  of  the  South: 

“Warmer,  more  southerly  countries  (whose  histories  and  literatures  had 

previously  done  much  to  shape  England’s  culture  and  thought)  were  now 

seen as un-English, decadent, feeble and lacking in  vigour or  will  (15). The 

South  then,  is  newly  reconstructed  as  an  ‘Other’  against  which  Northern 

‘British’ identity can be defined. 

10  Burns  acknowledges  Tolkien’s  dislike  of  the  term  ‘Nordic’  due  to  its  French  origins  and  its 
association with ‘racialist theories’, but notes its serviceability as a word for “the Scandinavians and 
Northern Europeans combined” (Burns 181). 

Page | 84  

 
 
                                                           
Ideological implications are also discernible in Burn’s observation that, in the 

cultural  imagination  of  the  nineteenth  century,  Northern  Romanticism 

answered  a  “longing  for  racial  purity”.  Despite  England’s  mixed  ancestry,  it 

allowed  the  English  to  see  themselves  as  “inherently  Northerners”  (Burns 

16). Clare A. Simmons, in Reversing the Conquest (1990), speaks of the way 

in  which  nineteenth-century  constructions  of  identity  discursively  asserted  a 

continuous English tradition where, despite Norman control, the “strength of 

Anglo-Saxon  character  prevailed.  Englishmen,  history  proclaimed,  were  not 

readily  defeated  in  battle  and  stripped  of  their  most  sacred  rights  of 

citizenship”  (Simmons  142).  By  the  beginning  of  the  twentieth  century, 

Simmons  argues,  “the  concept  of  Saxon  superiority  was  an  integral  part  of 

the  British  myth  of  origins  (192).  England  had  seen  a  cultural  “bloodless 

reversal  of  the  Conquest”  (Simmons  191).  This  “demanded  a  wholehearted 

identification  with  the  Saxon  and  acceptance  of  their  superiority  over  the 

Normans”  (Simmons  191).  Ambiguities  within,  and  contradictions  between 

ethno/historical  realities  and  Northern  identification  are  clearly  present, 

highlighting the disjunction between history as experienced and as idealised 

memory.  

These  very  ambiguities,  however,  make  room  for  diversity  in  modes  of 

identification.    Burns  draws  attention  to  different  versions  of  Northernness 

that  allow  for  differences  in  cultural  and  ideological  emphases.  Celtic 

Northernness  is  associated  with  the  fairy  world,  “mysteries  of  the  spirit” 

(Burns  14),  with  charm,  sensitivity  and  imagination  (174).  Indeed,  Burns 

argues  that  Tolkien’s  affective  representation  of  the  West  in  his  writing  on 

Middle Earth represents a form of Celtic Northernness, revealing a particular 

Page | 85  

 
 
 
attachment  to  pre-industrial  Wales  (20-21).  She  notes  that  Tolkien’s 

representation  of  the  West  “borrowed  heavily  Celtic  settings,  figures, 

attitudes  and  motifs” 

(21).  Contrastingly,  Germanic/Scandinavian 

Northernness 

is  more  associated  with  heroism,  courage,  manhood, 

determination  and  stamina  (173).  Even  amongst  those  whose  identification 

lay more strongly with a Teutonic Northernness, Burns argues, choices were 

available in regard to the type of Nordicism to be preferred, between varying 

Anglo-Saxon and Danish versions (16).11 

It  is  worthwhile  remembering,  however,  that  Anglo-Saxon  identity  in  Britain 

arises from a history of invasion following Roman withdrawal in the early fifth 

century.  Furthermore,  the  Danish  invasions,  beginning  in  the  late  eighth 

century,  create  an  association  between  the  north  and  threat.    This  adds  a 

complexity to the notion of Northernness, indulging in the romance of danger 

as well as that of joy, conjuring notions of strength, robustness and bravery. 

Again,  Tolkien’s  depiction  of  Faërie  as  ‘perilous  realm’  is  evoked.    In  both 

The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles  and  The  Fionavar  Tapestry  the  threat  to  the 

secondary  worlds  arises  in  the  North;  Orannis  and  Kerrigor  are  associated 

with  the  Old  Kingdom,  and  Rakoth  Maugrim  dwells  under  the  ominous  and 

intimidating  northern  Mount  Rangat.  Both  idealised  and  menacing  images 

work together to construct the air of Northernness from which fantasy novels 

are able to draw. 

Burns,  Simmons  and Beare’s  observations offer  insight  into both the  power 

and  adaptability  of perceptions  of  cultural  lineage, especially  when  they  are 

11 Burns notes that, in the twentieth-century, war with Germany solidified a pre-existing nineteenth-
century preference for Scandinavian over German Nordicism as more representative of England’s 
‘northern ideal’ (Burns 19). 

Page | 86  

 
 
 
                                                           
imbued  with  idealisation  and  heightened  by  identification.  They  also  shed 

light  on  how  Northern  identification  might  be  appropriated  and  utilised  in 

support  of  differing,  and  even  conflicting,  ideological  positions.  Although 

Norse  mythology,  most  notoriously,  was  co-opted  in  the  early  twentieth-

century  by  Nazism,  Northernness  could  also  be  made  to  serve  other 

ideologies.  

William Morris, for example, appropriates Northern imagery and medievalism 

in  support  of  socialism.  In  his  travel  writings  on  Iceland,  travelling  to  the 

North  becomes  equated  with  travelling  to  the  past.  Morris  represents  the 

height of the Middle Ages as a time which was less limited by class, or even 

by  gender,  and  a  time  that  demonstrated  a  personal  connection  with  the 

work of one’s hands. In an 1887 lecture, The Early Literature of the North – 

Iceland,  he  uses  the  feudalistic  society  of  Iceland  as  an  exemplar  of  social 

equity.  Morris  asserts  power  relations  were  enacted  according  to  an 

assumption of “the equal personal rights of all freedmen” (Morris online), and 

also argues that “the position of women was good in this society, the married 

couple  being  pretty  much  on  an  equality”  (Morris  online).  His  socialist 

perspective is evident as he asserts that during this period:  

manual  labour  was  far  from  being  considered  a  disgrace:  the 

mythical heroes have often nearly as much fame given them for their 

skill as weapon-smiths as for their fighting qualities; it was necessary 

of  course  for  a  northman  to  understand  sailing  a  ship,  and  the 

sweeps  on  board  their  long-ships  or  fighting  craft  were  not  manned 

by  slaves  but  by  the  fighting  men  themselves;  all  this  is  perhaps  a 

matter  of  course,  but  in  addition  the  greatest  men  lent  a  hand  in 

ordinary field and house work, pretty much as they do in the Homeric 

poems: one chief is working in his hay-field at a crisis of his fortune; 

another  is  mending  a  gate,  a  third  sowing  his  corn,  his  cloak  and 

Page | 87  

 
 
sword laid by in a corner of the field: another is a great house builder, 

another a ship builder. (Morris online) 

Here  Morris’s  medievalism  utilises  idealised  notions  of  the  past  and  unites 

them with his contemporary political perspective. 

Tolkien’s ‘Nordic’ medievalism and its concomitant disdain of industrialism is 

one  that  has  much  kinship  with  Morris’,  but  it  also  diverges  by  being  both 

more conservative and anti-secular. Tolkien’s foundational theistic beliefs are 

highlighted  as  he  represents  a  pre-modern  past  as  closer  to  primary  reality 

than  modernity.  Contrasting  nature  against  technology,  he  asserts  that 

fantasies “have many more permanent and fundamental things to talk about” 

than  “insignificant  and  transient”  things  such  as  electric  street  lamps, 

motorcars and factories (62). Moreover, Tolkien links the quality of joy found 

in successful fantasy with the joy and fulfilment he finds in the Christian story 

(70-71). Again, medievalism is employed in support of a particular ideological 

perspective. 

Another  ideological  association  with  medievalism  is  identified  in  Kim  Liv 

Selling’s  doctoral  thesis,  Nature,  Reason  and  the  Legacy  of  Romanticism: 

Constructing Genre Fantasy (2005). She argues that the privileging of Nature 

within  fantasy  literature  has  an  ecological  resonance  in  the  contemporary 

world,  and  offers  an  alternative  to  dominant  Western  utilitarian  thought. 

Following its romantic forebears, fantasy’s medievalism provides a foil to “the 

mechanistic, progressivist discourses of Enlightenment Reason” (Selling 28).  

Far  from  being  escapist  and  socially  irrelevant,  archetypal  fantasy's 

medievalism  challenges  and  critiques  many  of  the  hegemonic 

ideologies  of  modernity,  particularly  the  dualism  between  Reason 

Page | 88  

 
 
 
and  Nature  which  underpins  the  overvaluation  of  discourses  of 

capitalism, science, rationality and materialism, and forms part of an 

ongoing Romantic worldview. (Selling 31) 

Just  as  Morris  imbues  his  medievalism  with  socialistic  ideals,  and  Tolkien 

imbues his with his theistic beliefs, Selling asserts that many recent fantasies 

are  ideologically  influenced by  environmentalism. The  genre,  she observes, 

has  been  “symbolically  re-charged  with  an  awareness  of  ecological  issues” 

(46).  Again, medievalism is taken up in the service of contemporary ethical 

perspectives. 

The  above-mentioned  examples  from  Morris,  Tolkien  and  Selling  all 

demonstrate a kinship in their valuing of nature and a pre-modern past 

over  an  industrialised  modernity,  but  they  also  exhibit  varying 

ideological emphases, demonstrating the adaptability of medievalism. 

Medievalism and Northernness, in various shapes, can be called upon 

to  support  and  provide  authority  for  differing  perspectives.  This  also 

demonstrates  something  of  the  strength  medievalist  constructions 

within the cultural imagination.  

Although  some  forms  of  Nordicism  may  appear  increasingly  ideologically 

distant,  the  affective  power  of  Northernness  in  fantasy  fiction  remains  a 

legacy.  Whether  attached  to  notions  of  mysticism,  or  heroism  or  pastoral 

romanticism, the idea of North and the term ‘Northernness’ is constitutive of 

a certain literary atmosphere. It invites identification through association with 

Celtic and Anglo-Saxon cultural heritage. Moreover, fantasy’s debt to stories 

such  as  Nordic  sagas  and  Celtic  mythology  means  Northernness  becomes 

attached  to  an  aesthetic  mood  which  makes  an  acceptance  of  witches, 

Page | 89  

 
 
 
ogres,  dragons,  elves,  faëries  and  magic  more  credible.  It  is  able  to  make 

plausible  a  mysterious,  but  at  the  same  time  uncannily  familiar,  perilous 

realm  of  eerie  beauty  and  unrestrained  possibility.  And  despite  the 

strangeness  of  this  realm  it  is  strongly,  but  paradoxically,  tied  to  ideas  of 

heritage, identity and of home.  

Consequently,  when Nix sets up the geography of his secondary world, the 

placement  of  his  characters  is  anything  but  arbitrary.  He  deliberately  draws 

on  a  rich  tradition  of  positive  Northernness,  meshing  his  sympathetic 

characters  and  values  with  this  favourable  context,  and  situating  those 

characters and values he wishes to challenge in the contrastingly negatively-

presented  South.    It  is  no  coincidence  that  an  author  writing  for  a  fantasy 

audience  would  draw  on  the  connotations  of  the  North  presented  by 

forebears of the genre, such as Morris, Lewis and Tolkien.   

Moreover,  the  positive  resonances  of  this  Northernness  are  particularly 

strong  in  British  or  British-influenced  cultures  such  as  Australia.  It  is  in  this 

context  that  I  consider  Nix’s  creation  of  a  world  with  a  medieval,  mystical, 

cold and dangerous North and a progressive, industrialised, warmer South. A 

military  perimeter  and  a  magical  wall  separate  the  southern  nation  of 

Ancelstierre from the northern regions of the Old Kingdom. The border itself 

provides  a  strong  physical  illustration  of  the  divide  between  a  progressive 

modernity and a medieval ideal, and these representations are by no means 

neutral.   To approach the  North  is  to approach  the  past. The  imagery used 

for the perimeter on the southern, Ancelstierran side of the boundary shows 

the worst of industrialisation. It depicts a barren no-man’s-land, a “wasteland 

of wire and trenches” (Nix Sab 27) instantly evocative of the Western front in 

Page | 90  

 
 
 
the First World War. It is an image that recalls the first-hand experiences of 

influential  twentieth-century  fantasists  such  as  Tolkien  and  Lewis.  In 

“Authoring  the  Century:  J.R.R.  Tolkien,  The  Great  War  and  Modernism”, 

Aaron Isaac Jackson speaks of “the resonance of the historical moment of [a 

text’s]  composition”,  and  argues  that  “the  historical  has  an  inveterate 

propensity to erupt into the fantastic” (58). It is not surprising then that there 

are  layers  within  genre  fantasy  that  intersect  with  the  loss,  futility  and 

destruction  of  war.  Such  images  have  evocative  links  to  both  broader 

historical associations with war across the ages, and to specific associations 

with the Great War. 

In  contrast  to  the  barren  wasteland  at  the  south,  the  Wall  on  the  Old 

Kingdom’s  side  of  the  border  exudes  an  archaic  beauty,  with  its  medieval 

architecture  in  an  inexplicable  state  of  preservation.  Whereas  the  barbed 

wire  and  trenches  of  Ancelstierre  connote  ruin  and  death,  the  Wall  is  a 

structure  that  conveys  a  profound  substance:  “it  was  stone  and  old,  and 

about forty foot high and crenellated” (Nix Sab 27). Still more noteworthy, the 

wall radiates magic and life: “for those with the Sight, the very stones crawled 

with  magical  Charter  marks  –  marks  in  constant  motion,  twisting,  turning, 

sliding,  and  rearranging  themselves  under  a  skin  of  stone”  (Sab  27).  Such 

imagery explicitly and implicitly adds to pre-existing notions of Northernness 

as it attaches different worth to the countries on each side of the border; the 

South is barren and soulless, and northern Old Kingdom is alive, substantial 

and  beautiful.  The  description  of  the  border  is  just  one  of  many  examples 

where a value-laden contrast between the northern and southern nations can 

be  discerned.  The 

imagery  used  by  Nix  brings 

to 

the 

foreground 

comparisons  between  the  modern,  metropolitan  industrialism  encapsulated 

Page | 91  

 
 
by Ancelstierre, and the North’s promise of a ‘green’, pre-modern, heroic and 

expansive land.   

Nix himself comments that Ancelstierre represents an alternative England of 

about  1918,  but  one  in  which  England has not  lived  through  the Great War 

(Nix OKP1 8:52). Moreover, Nix “envisioned that there’d been a much longer 

period of French occupation of this sort of England analogue” (OKP1 9:10). 

Ancelstierre’s  French  flavour,  particularly  when  coupled  with  the  trilogy’s 

censure of the South, clearly intersects with Tolkienesque ideas which depict 

Norman 

influence  as  corrupting  of  England’s 

‘northern’  Anglo-Saxon 

mythology.  Tolkien’s  casting  of  the  Norman  Conquest  as  an  “unmitigated 

catastrophe” (Flieger 282) for English language and culture clearly privileges 

an  older  Anglo-Celtic  England  above  the  newer  Norman  England.    Nix’s 

higher  valuing  of  the  Old  Kingdom  over  a  Gallicised  Ancelstierre  implicitly 

aligns The Old Kingdom Chronicles with this form of Northernness.  

Certainly,  Tolkien’s  negative  perspective  on  French  influence  was  neither 

new  nor  unique.  Billie  Melman  observes  its  existence  in  both  political  and 

literary discourses of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries:   

British  patriotism,  regardless  of  political  affiliation,  had  been 

notoriously  Francophobe.  The  French,  the  historic  enemy,  and  well 

into  the  nineteenth century  Britain's  chief  rival  on  the  continent,  had 

traditionally featured as that nation's 'other'. (Melman 583) 

Imaging  an  alternative  ‘England’  that  is  more  substantially  affected  by  a 

longer period of French domination is, therefore, not culturally neutral. 

Page | 92  

 
 
 
 
The name ‘Ancelstierre’ may also imply a subsidiary status for the southern 

nation, ‘Ancelle’ being an archaic French term for ‘serving girl’, originating in 

‘Ancilia’, Latin for ‘handmaiden’. Where “The Old Kingdom” has connotations 

of  maturity  and  permanence,  “Ancelstierre”  is  made  infant,  feminised,  and 

placed in an ancillary  position. Moreover, the name might also suggest that 

Ancelstierre is ancillary to France as occupier, giving an image of an England 

that did not fight against ‘the Norman yoke’ or achieve the perceived Anglo-

Saxon  cultural  dominance  that  Clare  Simmons  identifies  in  Reversing  the 

Conquest. 

Comparisons  which  value  an  Anglo-Saxon/Anglo-Celtic  North  above  a 

Anglo-Norman South are evident even from the first chapter of Sabriel. The 

text’s  depiction  of  Wyverley  College,  Sabriel’s  Ancelstierran  school, 

immediately  illustrates  many  of  the  binary  oppositions  between  North  and 

South which grant the North a higher value. “Established in 1652 for Young 

Ladies, of Quality” (Nix Sab 12), Wyverley boasts a long history but its roots 

are  Early  Modern,  not  medieval.  Nix’s  opening  description  of  the  school 

evokes  something  of  façade,  as  the  gilt  and  “mock  Gothic”  lettering  on  the 

sign  that  sits  above  Wyverley’s  wrought-iron  gates  harks  back  to  a  time 

before the  school’s  existence. The  ‘mock  Gothic’  suggests  an  affectation  of 

greater  age,  while  the  gilt  masquerades  as something  of  greater substance 

than it is in actuality.  

No  matter  how  staid  Wyverley’s  outward  appearance,  its  close  proximity  to 

the Wall means it occupies a place of contradiction. The magical ‘realities’ of 

the  North  unavoidably  permeate  practices  within  the  school,  and  sit 

uncomfortably  beside  Ancelstierran  ‘realities’.  The  courses  offered  at 

Page | 93  

 
 
 
Wyverley demonstrate something of the contradictions between an untamed 

North  and  a  cultivated  South,  as  subjects  such  as  “fighting  arts”  and 

“etiquette”  are  amusingly  juxtaposed  with  each  other  on  the  school’s 

curriculum  (Sab  14).  Ambiguities,  however,  become  most  apparent  in 

Wyverley’s attitude to the practice and existence of magic. Magic violates the 

rationalist  and  scientific  stance  of  the  South,  making  it  remarkable  that 

Wyverley, a respectable School in Ancelstierre, goes so far as to offer magic 

within its subject choices.  

The text states that it is only close to the Wall between the Old Kingdom and 

Ancelstierre  that  magic  might  be  practised  at  all.  In  an  image  evocative  of 

Irish-Celtic  Otherness,  the  reader  is  told  that  further  south  magic  is 

“considered to be quite beyond the pale” (Sab 14); it is somewhere beyond 

civilised  control.  Indeed,  throughout  most  of  Ancelstierre,  magic’s  very 

existence was doubted and “persons of repute did not mention it” (Sab 14). 

Wyverley  College’s  “good  all  round  reputation”,  however,  is  able  to  lend 

some  sanction  to  the  teaching  of  magic  to  those  with  special  parental 

permission  (Sab  14-15).  Despite  a  residual  distrust  of  magic,  Ancelstierran 

pragmatism,  in  this  case  fostered  by  the  promise  of  material  gain,  counter-

balances  ideological  reservations.  Wyverley’s  Head  Mistress,  by  her  own 

wish, remains ignorant regarding the practise of magic, not wanting “to know 

more  about  it  than  the  pleasant  fact  that  some  parents  would  pay 

considerable sums to have their daughters schooled in the basics of sorcery 

and  enchantment”  (Sab  15).  This  entails  an  implicit  censuring  of  the 

materialism  of  modernity,  where  money  is  raised  above  principle,  and 

reinforces the sense of shallowness attached to the South. 

Page | 94  

 
 
 
The Head Mistress’ wilful ignorance can also be seen as a metonym for the 

South’s deliberate denial of all that is mysterious in the northern kingdom. It 

reflects a determined shutting of the eyes regarding the extent of Otherness 

represented  by  the  Old  Kingdom.  The  Old  Kingdom  is  an  alterity  in  the 

conventional sense of being a foreign land, but it is also Other in affect and 

practice. The mysticism and magic associated with the Old Kingdom place it 

outside  the  frame  within  which  Ancelstierre  is  willing  to  experience  and 

understand the world.   

Medievalism  and  magic  also  situate  the  Old  Kingdom  as  Other  within  the 

frame  of  a  contemporary  reader’s  experience  of  reality.  The  fantasy  genre, 

however,  provides  a  forum  in  which  alternative  ideas  and,  perhaps  more 

importantly,  the  values  attached  to  them,  cannot  be  summarily  dismissed 

due  to  their  lack  of  conformity  to  consensus  reality.  Fantasy  neither  claims 

nor  aspires  to  be  real  in  a  conventional  sense.  Instead,  the  fantasy  reader 

allows  the  internal  consistency  of  a  story  to  grant  plausibility  and  rationality 

based  upon  the  rules  within  the  constructed  world  of  the  story.  What  is 

possible, what is right, and what is wrong, will differ according to the varying 

realities of the secondary worlds within fantasy novels. 

Demonstrating the legacy of influential fantasists such as Morris and Tolkien, 

within the frame of Nix’s secondary world the power of magic is depicted as 

vastly  superior  to  that  of  technology.  Moreover,  there  is  no  compromise  or 

marriage between the differing ‘truths’ of the Old Kingdom and Ancelstierre. 

Like oil and water, the disparate realities cannot occupy the same space and 

time. This is evident when the Abhorsen mystically visits his daughter during 

her schooling in Ancelstierre. When he appears the electric light in her study 

Page | 95  

 
 
 
 
is immediately extinguished by the presence of Charter Magic (Sab 16). The 

supremacy  of  magic  is  more  graphically  symbolised  in  Nix’s  description  of 

the  marvellous  arrival  of  the  Dead  servant  to  deliver  Sabriel  her  father’s 

Charter-spelled  bells  and  his  sword.  As  the  Dead  creature  passes  through 

the First Form Girls’ dormitory in search of Sabriel, each electric light flares, 

in turn, and then goes out (Sab 19).  

This  pattern  of  Magic  overwhelming  technology  is  often  repeated within  the 

novels. Ancelstierran technology such as machine guns, telephonic systems 

and motor vehicles begin to fail as they near the northern border. Nix’s Old 

Kingdom Chronicles, therefore, demonstrate an overt privileging of the past. 

Though,  inversely,  the  magical  possibilities  of  the  Old  Kingdom  cannot  be 

sustained far past its southern border, magic is not constrained by the might 

of technology, but by magic’s own power in the form of the Wall. Whenever a 

residue of magic does break through or blow across the border with the wind, 

it  dominates and  exposes  the  conceits  of  the  industrial  advancement of the 

South.  

The  border  is,  by  necessity,  an  odd  mix  of  magic  and  technology,  northern 

realities and southern ideas; a place of disjunctions and unreliabilities.  It is 

not only a place which demonstrates a difference in power between science 

and  magic,  it  becomes  a  place  of  contest  between  more  ‘spiritual’  or 

aesthetic perspectives and industrialised pragmatism. Beauty and purpose is 

set  alongside  mere  functionality.  Southern  machine-made  paper,  clothing 

and  even  armour  quickly  perish  north  of  the  Wall.  For  example,  Sabriel’s 

passport,  in  order  to  prevent  its  deterioration,  is  “a  hand  bound  document 

printed by letterpress on handmade paper with an artist’s sketch instead of a 

Page | 96  

 
 
 
photograph” (Sab 32). Within the Old Kingdom one must default to a reliance 

on items created through intricate, personal handiwork. Arcane magical rites 

also  have  aspects  that  align  the  performance  of  Charter  Magic  with 

craftsmanship  and  artistic  practice.  Charter  Mages  ‘draw’  or  ‘sketch’  the 

Charter  symbols  with  their  fingers  and  minds,  ‘weaving’  them  together  to 

create objects imbued with magic, purpose and beauty. 

This distinction  between modern mass production and  traditional handiwork 

is on display at the border. Upon arrival at the crossing point on her return to 

the Old Kingdom, Sabriel notes that the “Perimeter was built for modern war, 

but manned by people expecting something rather more medieval” (Sab 30). 

Being  confronted  by  previously  unknown  realities  that  challenge  southern 

perspectives,  the  experienced  Ancelstierran  guards  overlay  their  drab  early 

twentieth-century  “factory  Khaki”  uniforms  with  symbols  of  medievalism  – 

chain mail  and  bucklers  bearing  bright  medieval  decoration.  Alongside  their 

conventional  weapons,  they  sport  “extremely  old-fashioned  sword-bayonets 

in well-worn scabbards” (Sab 27).  This allows for a contrast of styles where 

traditional handiwork is granted greater value.  

Such  depictions  are  sympathetic  with  Tolkien’s  romantic  contention  that 

some  of  fantasy’s  attraction  is  a  by-product  of  a  time  where  humanity  was 

more in tune with beauty and nature, when people “delighted with the work of 

their hands” (65). This time is set against a modernity where “many men feel 

disgust with man-made things” (Tolkien 65). A valuing of personal artisanship 

is  also  a  descendant  of  nineteenth  century  Pre-Raphaelite  medievalism 

associated  with  John  Ruskin  and  particularly  William  Morris,  who  saw 

machine-made items as tawdry, cheap imitations. In The Story of Art (2007), 

Page | 97  

 
 
 
E.  H.  Gombrich  argues  these  artists  mourned  an  idealised  pre-modernity 

where  hand-made  articles  and  ornaments  had  a  “meaning  and  nobility  of 

their  own”  (535).  They  disdained  industrialisation,  dreaming  of  a  “thorough 

reform of the arts and crafts and the replacement of cheap mass-production 

by  conscientious  and  meaningful  handiwork”  (535).  In  an  1888  review,  The 

Revival  of  Handicraft,  Morris  did  “not  shrink  from  saying  bluntly  that 

production  by  machinery  necessarily  results  in  utilitarian  ugliness  in 

everything which the labour of man deals with, and that this is a serious evil 

and  a  degradation  of  human  life”  (Morris  online).  It  is  not  difficult  to  see  a 

legacy of Morris’ thought in Tolkien’s writing, and in the continued valuing of 

craftsmanship in contemporary genre fantasy.  

Indeed,  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles’  negative  critique  of  Ancelstierran 

industrial  ‘progress’  extends  beyond  warning  of  the  destructive  potential  of 

modern  warfare,  here  evoked  by  images  of  “barbed  wire,  bullets,  hand 

grenades  and  mortar  bombs”  (Nix  Sab  26).  As  with  Tolkien  and  Morris, 

suspicion  extends  to  other  less  violent  indications  of  modernity.  Vehicles, 

factory  clothing  and  technical  communication  systems  are  all  depicted  as 

dull, unreliable and as lacking in both elegance and craftsmanship.  

Morris emphasises the connection between medieval artisans and their work, 

privileging  the  combination  of  artistic  beauty  and  purpose  in  an  object’s 

creation.  In  his  lecture  on  “Art  and  Labour”,  delivered  by  him  on  numerous 

occasions between 1884 and 1886, Morris claims that:  

in  the  Middle  Ages  everything  that man made  was  beautiful, just  as 

everything  that  nature  makes  is  always  beautiful;  and  I  must  again 

impress  upon  you  the  fact  that  this  was  because  they  were  made 

Page | 98  

 
 
 
mainly for use, instead of mainly to be bought and sold as is now the 

case.  I  have  also  said  that  the  workman  produced  this  beauty 

because he was in his work master of his material, tools, and time, in 

fact of his work. (Morris online) 

A  similar  ideal  is  showcased  in  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles  through  the 

character of Prince Sameth, who ultimately realises his destiny in the role of 

‘Wall-maker’.  The  Old  Kingdom’s  original  Wall-makers  built  the  Charter 

Stones  (powerful,  protective  relics)  and  the  magical  Wall  at  the  Kingdom’s 

southern border, and forged magical weapons and armour.  

Sam’s joy in the work of his hands is clear as he finds substance and comfort 

in creative exertion, immersing himself in these tasks almost to the exclusion 

of all else. In his small attic workshop “there was Charter Magic everywhere. 

The  faded  afterimages  of  Charter  marks  shone  in  the  air,  crawled  lazily 

across the walls and ceiling, and clustered by the chimney” (Nix Lir 316-317). 

His personal investment in the things he creates is evident in his dedication, 

and  in  the  mental  and  physical  effort  he  expends  as  he  weaves  magic  into 

both  small  artefacts  and  creations  of  power  and  significance.  This  is 

graphically symbolised by the blending of his own blood into the making.  

His  creations,  no  matter  how  small,  are  imbued  with  beauty,  a  simple 

elegance  and  also  with  purpose.  This  is  exemplified  in  the  ingenious  tiny 

jewelled  and  winged frog  that Sam  crafts  to deal  with  mosquitoes: a  “bright 

sparking  object”  that  “moved effortlessly,  bronze  wings  beating  as fast as a 

hummingbird’s,  making  a  soft  sound  like  tightly  closed  shutters  moving 

slightly  in  the  wind”  (Lir  484-5).  Beauty  and  purpose  are  evident  in  ‘trivial 

toys’ like the frog as much as they are in the golden, Charter-spelled hand, 

Page | 99  

 
 
 
“just as good as one of flesh and bone”, that Sam creates for Lirael after she 

loses  her  own  (ATW  116),  or  in  the  Charter-spelled  sword  he  magically 

forges  to  bind  The  Destroyer  (Abh    409).  While  factory-made  objects  from 

the  South  merely  deteriorate,  crumble  and  fail  in  the  northern  kingdom, 

Charter-imbued artefacts from the Old Kingdom remain powerful and largely 

uncorrupted  by  time  and elements. They  become  a  link  to  the past  and  the 

divine,  as  the  Charter  marks,  alive  and  endlessly  flowing  in  these  objects, 

have  a  pure  and  unadulterated  connection  with  eternity,  the  universe  and 

with creation, transcending space and time. 

Again,  such  representation  ascribes  the  medieval  past  a  far  greater  worth 

and  a  significantly  deeper  substance than  modernity. When  Sam  speaks of 

Ancelstierre he notes that it “always seems somehow less real” than the Old 

Kingdom,  like  a  “really  detailed  dream,  but  sort  of  washed  out,  like  a  thin 

watercolour. Softer, somehow, even with their electric light and engines and 

everything” (Lir 480-1). A sense of loss and of longing for home is revealed in 

Sam’s  comment  that,  when  in  Ancelstierre,  he  feels  part  of  him  is  asleep 

because he is denied access to the Charter (Lir 481).  

More  than  this,  however,  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles  represents  progress 

not simply as faded or impermanent, but as essentially posturing, empty and 

wilfully  blind.  This  is  exemplified  by  the  young,  predominantly  conscript, 

Ancelstierran  soldiers,  particularly  when  compared  to  the  experienced 

Crossing  Point  Scouts  who,  although  Ancelstierran,  have  learned  to 

recognise and respect (or at least fear) the powers within the Old Kingdom. 

The  young  officious  soldier  who  greets  Sabriel  is  a  personification  of  the 

posturing South. In him there is more a pretence of manhood than actuality. 

Page | 100  

 
 
 
He is a representative from the far south “where no magic crept over the wall 

and  widened  the  cracks  in  what  they  thought  of  as  reality”  (Sab  27).  He  is 

described  as  “so  cleaned,  polished  and  full  of  himself  [.  .  .]  a  natural 

bureaucrat currently disguised as a soldier” (Sab 31). In demanding Sabriel’s 

papers he shows himself as ignorant, but he is unaware of this state, either 

missing or refusing to acknowledge the magic Sabriel performs to make the 

papers  appear  in  her  hand  (Sab  31).    By  contrast, the  experienced  Scouts, 

somewhat  versed  in  the  ways  of  the  Charter,  immediately  sense  Sabriel’s 

magic  and  quickly  respond  to  its  potential  danger.  Their  awareness  and 

immediate  reaction  differentiates  them  from  the  pretentious  corporal  who  is 

“deaf  to  the  hum  of  Charter  Magic”  (Sab  33).  Ignorance  such  as  that 

displayed  by  the  corporal  might  even  be  seen  as  something  officially 

endorsed.  It  is  necessary  to  practise  such  blindness  in  order  to  sustain  the 

ideological  credibility  of  the  ‘truth’  as  constructed  by  the  Ancelstierran 

government.  

The  South’s  realist  discourse  is  maintained  through  a  carefully  controlled 

narrative  regarding  its  northern  neighbour.  The  South  constructs  itself  as 

scientific, progressive and rational while it labels the North as backward and 

superstitious.  The  South’s  meticulously  preserved  ‘reality’  does  not  include 

any  recognition  of  magical  possibility,  even  within  the  Old  Kingdom  itself. 

Those  within  the  bureaucracy,  primarily  situated  in  Ancelstierre’s  capital, 

Corvere, “far away in the south [. . .] refused to admit that this perimeter was 

different  from  any  other  contested  border”  (Sab  30).  This  belief  is  actively 

protected.  On  top  of  the  practical  difficulties  attendant  on  the  technological 

disruption  that  occurs  whenever  the  wind  blows  from  the  North,  tourism  to 

the Wall is vigorously discouraged. There are very few people authorised to 

Page | 101  

 
 
travel  to  the  Old  Kingdom,  implying  a  fear  of  difference,  or  even  a  form  of 

xenophobia.  While  the  Northern  characters  such  as  Sabriel,  Sam  and 

Ellimere widen their experience and knowledge by travelling and studying in 

the South, Nicholas Sayre reveals that for Ancelstierre, “officially, there is no 

Old  Kingdom”  (Abh  171).  Trespassing  within  the  perimeter  zone  is  strictly 

forbidden,  and  uncompromisingly  policed.    As  the  sign  near  the  border 

proclaims:  

PERIMETER COMMAND 

NORTHERN ARMY GROUP 

Unauthorised egress from the 

Perimeter Zone is strictly forbidden. 

Anyone attempting to cross 

The Perimeter Zone will be shot 

without warning. 

Authorised travellers must report 

to Perimeter Command HQ. 

REMEMBER—NO WARNING 

WILL BE MADE 

(Nix Sab 29) 

This regulation recognises something of the power attached to the control of 

discourse.    The  South’s  policing  of  information  from  the  North  works  to 

maintain  the  authority  and  influence  of  Ancelstierre’s  political  elite.  The 

desire  to  repress  the  spread  of  any  but  their  own  narrative,  one  which 

portrays  the  South  as  progressive  and  the  North  as  backward  and 

superstitious,  speaks  to  the  power  that  resides  in  stories  and  in  the  beliefs 

which they foster. In Mere Nostalgia (2000), Kimberly K. Smith suggests that 

the  application  of  negative  labels  (such  as  ‘nostalgic’,  ‘retrograde’  and 

‘sentimental’) to values and desires attached to the past can exert powerful 

discursive  force.  This  renders  nostalgic  emotional  responses  suspect,  even 

Page | 102  

 
 
to  those  who  experience  them  (Smith  522).  She  argues  that  such  labelling 

undermines the views of those who grant high value to the past and of those 

who  express  reservations  regarding 

the  consequences  of  unfettered 

industrial  progress  (506).  The  unreal  frameworks  within  genre  fantasy, 

however,  operate  according  to  alternative  webs  of  internal  consistency  and 

rationality. They are not constrained by the rationale of the primary world and 

this  provides  a  discursive  space  where  the  hegemony  of  scientific  and 

industrial process can be questioned.  

Fantasy  constructs  a  logic  and  plausibility  of  its  own  within  the  texts’ 

secondary world contexts. The value attached to the Old Kingdom, therefore, 

can  offer  a  counter-discourse  to  the  scientific  and  industrial  stance 

represented  by  the  South.  In  the  tradition of medievalist  fantasy  writers  like 

Tolkien, aspects such as heritage, the natural world, beauty, and something 

akin  to  the  spiritual,  are  highly  valued.  The  lexis  and  imagery  used  for  the 

Old Kingdom demonstrate an expressive energy  where physical description 

is  tied  to  an  affective  response.  This  can  be  seen  in  Sabriel’s  response  on 

arriving  at  the  Wall.  Elegantly  utilising  the  affective  appeal  of  medievalism, 

Nix  employs  words  with  a  strong  and  positive  emotional  charge,  such  as 

‘excitement’,  ‘wonder’,  ‘mystery’,  ‘freedom’  and  ‘alive’  (Nix  Sab  29).  The 

emphatic  repetition  of  the  word  ‘felt’,  ‘felt’,  ‘felt’  (Sab  29)  highlights  the 

importance  of  emotional  engagement  with  the  material  reality  of  the  Old 

Kingdom.  His  word  choice  overtly  privileges  things  such  as  intuition, 

aesthetics and the archaic above things new, practical and pragmatic.  

Although  the  Old  Kingdom  is  represented  as  possessing  greater  beauty, 

substance and worth, the nostalgic longing in this representation is not for a 

Page | 103  

 
 
 
rural idyll. The Old Kingdom is dangerous, not a utopia offering a life of calm, 

rustic  perfection.  Significantly,  a  damaged  Old  Kingdom  remains  preferable 

to  a  soulless  South.  It  is  privileged  above  Ancelstierre,  despite  the 

circumstance of Sabriel’s father being  trapped  in  Death,  despite  the  current 

lawlessness and disorder caused by the murder of the Old Kingdom’s royal 

family  and  despite  the  refusal  of  the  Old  Kingdom’s  Dead  to  stay  dead. 

Sabriel’s  awe  and  anticipation  on  returning  home  are  not  without  a 

contaminating  apprehension,  but  this  is  grounded  in  her  fear  for  her  father 

and  in  a  burden  of  responsibility,  not  in  a  dread  of  the  Old  Kingdom  itself 

(Sab 29-30).  

Moreover, the danger attached to the Old Kingdom overlays the image of the 

North with a robustness and sense of adventure. Once more this ties in with 

a particular medievalist sense of British/Northern identity. A clear example of 

this  can  be  seen  in  John  Ruskin’s  On  the  Nature  of  Gothic  Architecture 

(1854), in which he argues that a Northern “Gothic Mind” has a “[s]trength of 

will,  independence  of  character,  resoluteness  of  purpose,  impatience  of 

undue control, and that general tendency to set the individual reason against 

authority,  and  the  individual  deed  against  destiny”.  He  contrasts  this 

robustness  with  “the  languid  submission,  in  the  Southern,  of  thought  to 

tradition, and purpose to fatality” (33). The nostalgic appeal of these novels, 

then, is not rooted in a desire for escape to an idealised world. It is entailed, 

rather, in the weight and substance that heroic and romantic representations 

of a medievalised past can evoke. 

Even  things  both  terrible  and  dreadful  can  have  an  attraction  of  their  own. 

Nix’s texts seem to confirm Tolkien’s assertion that even the “maddest castle 

Page | 104  

 
 
 
that  ever  came  out  of  a  giant’s  bag  in  a  wild  Gaelic  story  is  not  only  much 

less ugly than a robot-factory, it is also (to use a very modern phrase) ‘in a 

very  real  sense’  a  great  deal  more  real”  (64).  It  is  within  this  tradition  of 

fantasy that Nix’s texts continue to unsettle straightforward notions of the real 

and  unreal  in  literary  representation,  and  of  the  value  attached  to  them. 

Worth is measured not by any economic standard or gauge of progress, but 

by  a  yardstick  that  esteems  history  and  beauty.  The  Old  Kingdom 

Chronicles,  consequently,  also  contains  a  challenge  to  discourses  which 

align  modernity  and  industrial  progress  with  understanding,  and  the  pre-

modern  past  with  ignorance.  There  is  an  implicit  critique  contained  within 

Nix’s  inverted  representation  of  the  rational/romantic  dichotomy,  with  the 

romantic and not the rational placed in the position of advantage.  

The  character  of  Nicholas  Sayre  in  Lirael  and  Abhorsen  serves  as  a  case 

study  for  such  a  discursive  challenge.  Nicholas  embodies  the  progressive 

discourses  of  Enlightenment  Reason  and  personifies 

the  South’s 

unwillingness or inability to step outside this scientific ideological perspective.  

His failure, therefore, works as a critique of pure rationalism. A nephew of the 

Chief  Minister  of  Ancelstierre  and  close  friend  of  Prince  Sameth  of  the  Old 

Kingdom,  Nick  has  the  advantage  of  being  exposed  to  both  Ancelstierran 

and  Old  Kingdom  realities.  He,  however,  refuses  to  recognise  magic  even 

when  he  experiences  it  first-hand.  Following  a  personal  encounter  with  the 

Dead and with a powerful Free Magic necromancer at the border of the Old 

Kingdom, he writes to Sam:  

I  admit  that  my  scientific  interest  has  been  piqued  by  those 

apparently  animated  corpses  and  your  own  exhibition  of  whatever  it 

was. I’m sure you think of it as magic, but I expect it can be explained 

by the proper application of scientific method. (Nix Lir 120-11) 

Page | 105  

 
 
This  highlights 

the  hegemonic  power  of  Ancelstierre’s  scientific  and 

rationalist discourses. 

Indeed,  Nicholas  attempts to  give  ‘rational’  explanations to  the  inexplicable. 

For  example,  he  attributes  the  northerners’  ability  to  see  maps  on  what  he 

perceives  as  blank  paper  to  tricks  like  “quasi-mystical  memorisation”  (Lir 

314).  He  complains  that  scholarly  texts  on  the  Old  Kingdom  are  “old  and 

highly superstitious”, and believes that as a scientist he will be able to reveal 

things  about  the  Old  Kingdom  that  have  until  now  been  screened  by  a 

“conspiracy  of  silence”  (Lir  314).  He  also  summarily  dismisses  Sam  and 

Lirael’s  perspectives  as  “superstition”  (Abh  167)  and  “mumbo  jumbo” 

(Abh170)  and  answers  Lirael’s  ‘incomprehension’  and  recourse  to  magical 

explanations,  not  with  evidence  to  the  contrary,  but  “with  a  superior  smile” 

and an eloquent rolling of the eyes (Abh 167-8). Within the secondary world 

of  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles,  however,  Nicholas’  unstinting  reliance  on 

rationality  alone  is  revealed,  ironically,  as  irrational.  Not  only  does  his 

scientific arrogance cause him to be derisive of those with greater insight, his 

blindness  to  other  perspectives  allows  him  to  serve  as  an  unwitting  tool  for 

the  forces  of  destruction.    Within  the  web  of  reality  constructed  by  Nix, 

Nicholas’s  rejection  of  magic  is  clearly  illogical.  As  Sam  tells  Nick  after  he 

expresses  disbelief  when  they  are  under  attack  from  the  Dead,  “they’ll  kill 

you whether you believe in them or not” (Lir 180). 

Fantasy’s  critique  of  pure  scientific  pragmatism,  along  with  fantasy’s 

emphasis  on  nature  and  aesthetics,  connects  with  real  world  ideological 

concerns. In the Abolition of Man, first published in 1943, C.S. Lewis asserts 

that meaningful  education  and  understanding  require  exposure  to the  value 

Page | 106  

 
 
 
of artistic beauty and “real sensibility”. A student taught only from scientific or 

pragmatic  perspectives,  he  argues,  becomes  limited  by  a  scepticism  about 

emotional  responses  to  place  and  to  nature,  thinking  them  “contrary  to 

reason  and  contemptible”  (11).    Such  a  student,  he  argues,  is  at  risk  of 

becoming  a  “mere  trousered  ape”,  never  able  to  “conceive  the  Atlantic  as 

anything more than so many million tons of cold salt water” (11). For all his 

scientific learning, Nick evokes something of Lewis’ ‘trousered ape’. 

Through depicting the South’s beliefs and approaches, Nix’s texts show that 

there  is  ideological  power  attached  to  progressive,  scientific  discursive 

frames,  but  the  texts  also  expose  their  limitations.  Fantasy  frameworks  can 

offer a discursive space for alternative perspectives to scientific rationalism. 

The privileging of a medievalised, magical North over an industrialised South 

in  Nix’s  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles  has  discursive  power.  The  high  valuing  of 

nature,  of  artisanship  and  of  a  marriage  between  beauty  and  purpose 

promotes  an  alternative  perspective 

to 

the  hegemony  of  scientific 

pragmatism and pure materialism, one which argues against progress that is 

at the cost of the natural world, relics of the past or cultural continuity.  

Chapter 3 will discuss how The Old Kingdom Chronicles can further draw on 

the  authority  attached  to  heritage,  Northernness  and  medievalism  to 

discursively engage in contemporary debates regarding national identity and 

class.  Chapter 4 looks more closely at Australian inflections through a case 

study on the novel’s representation of a refugee crisis. Chapter 5 then moves 

on to examine how notions of destiny and tradition in Nix’s trilogy are utilised 

to  challenge  conservative  and  hierarchical  assumptions in  regard to  gender 

and role.  

Page | 107  

 
 
 
Chapter 3 

Blood, Identity and Class  

Where the previous chapter situates The Old Kingdom Chronicles within the 

Northern,  medievalist  tradition  of  fantasy  writing,  this  chapter  returns  more 

specifically  to  the  novels’  Australian  intersections.  As  argued  above, 

medievalist  genre 

fantasy 

is  able 

to  discursively  combine  affective 

representations  of  the  past  with  issues  of  contemporary  significance.  This 

chapter  pays  particular  regard  to  issues  of  national  identity  and  class.  It 

considers the ways in which these texts mediate between imaginings of the 

medieval  and  the  feudal  hierarchical  assumptions  which  these  entail,  and 

contemporary  egalitarian  ideals.  It  will  look  at  the  tensions  created  by  the 

uniting  of  medieval  motifs, 

imagery  and  expectations  with  modern 

sensibilities.  Although  this  chapter  has  a  primary  focus  on  the  Australian 

context  of  the  texts’  production,  it  also  touches  upon  the  wider  context  of 

Western ideologies and cultural identity. 

As  addressed  briefly  in  the  Chapter  2,  Australia  appears  far  removed  from 

medieval  Britain.  Australia  is  the  antipodes,  separated  from  Europe  by  the 

distance of both time and space. Virtually untouched by European civilisation 

Page | 108  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
until the late eighteenth century, Australia never had that which is commonly 

understood as a medieval past. As Louise D’Arcens observes in “The Past is 

a Foreign Country” (PFC), for “any historically minded reader the phrase the 

‘Australian Middle Ages’ […] is patently oxymoronic” (319). Australia has no 

ancient  ruins  of  castles  or  gothic  abbeys,  no  Celtic  barrows  where  swords 

and  jewels  are  entombed  with  long  dead  warriors,  no  history  of  chivalric 

knights  or  royal  houses.  Temperate  to  hot,  flat,  in  a  large  part  desert,  it 

appears  climatically  and  geographically 

the  antitheses  of 

the  cold, 

mountainous  Northernness  that  fed  the  imaginations  of  the  progenitors  of 

popular  fantasy.  Still,  as  Stephanie  Trigg  asserts  in  her  introduction  to 

Medievalism and the Gothic in Australian Culture: 

The  medieval  can  be  detached  from  its  historical  and  geographical 

points  of  interest:  its  stories  can  be  retold;  its  images  relived  in 

different  contexts;  and  it  can  come  to  stand  for  a  particular  literary 

sensibility.  The  Gothic,  too,  can  evoke  its  own  historical  past  in 

eighteenth-  and  nineteenth-century  romanticism,  as  well  as  harking 

back to its origins as a version of critical or sympathetic medievalism. 

(Trigg xix) 

Generic  fantasy  motifs  used  by  Australian  authors  often  participate  in  a 

sympathetic medievalism. They reach back through cultural lineage; through 

the Anglo-Celtic heritage of the settlers who emigrated as representatives of 

the expanding British Empire and of the convicts who were forcibly removed 

from their homeland. D’Arcens comments that: 

Australian  medievalism  emerged  as  a  legacy  of  British  colonialism, 

and  as  such  also  reflects  the  extent  to  which  this  nation  has,  its 

physical 

remoteness  and  avowed  modernity  notwithstanding, 

maintained a sense of proximity to, and continuity with, the medieval 

European  heritage  of  its  settler  culture.  Its  literature,  architecture, 

parliamentary  rituals,  and  performance  culture  all  attest  to  colonial 

Page | 109  

 
Australia’s  desire  to  situate  itself  within  deep  European  and  English 

tradition. (D’Arcens PFC 320)  

Australia’s  desire  to  situate  itself  thus,  however,  does  not  necessarily 

indicate a purely reactionary impulse, or even mean that the ‘mother country’ 

is privileged above the new. Neither does it discount a blending of visions of 

the past with visions of the present.  

In Inventing Australia (1984) Richard White speaks of how settlement within 

Australia  answered  certain  British  longings  for  a  pre-industrialised  past.  He 

observes that for nineteenth-century pioneers:  

romantic visions were an imaginative response to the industrialisation 

of  Britain.  Behind  all  the  admiration  for  Australia’s  fresh  air,  its 

greenness,  its  sense  of  space,  its  Arcadian  innocence  and  its 

imagined  social  harmony,  there  lurked  an  unstated  comparison  with 

a cold, crowded, polluted, industrialised and socially divided England. 

The  industrial  revolution  was  still,  for  many,  a  traumatic  shock.  The 

visions  of  rural  innocence  in  Australia  appealed  to  a  deep-seated 

emotional resentment against industrialisation. (White 34)   

This  provides  a  pertinent  illustration  of  how  a  privileged  construction  of  the 

past  can  be  appropriated  for  contemporary  purposes  in  the  formation  of 

modern  identity.  These  constructions  looked  back  to  an  historical  England, 

but  in  doing  so  they  attached  a  greater  value  to  the  new  Australia.  Such  a 

nostalgia for pre-industrial Britain can, paradoxically, be seen to stir a desire 

for  a  future  in  a  ‘new  world’.    White  points  to  the  significance  of  romantic 

constructions  within  the  cultural  perspectives  of  those  promoting  Australia 

and emigration: 

Page | 110  

 
 
 
supporters of immigration saw Australia becoming the sort of society 

they  imagined  England  to  have  been  in  the  past,  before  it 

disappeared  under  the  grime  of  the  industrial  revolution.  The 

Edinburgh  Review  made  it  quite  clear:  “by  colonization  nations  are 

able to retrieve the past”. (White 34)  

Although  the  landscape,  geography  and  climate  might  be  vastly  different  to 

that of the North, several of the impulses of migration and settlement within 

Australia mimicked those aligned with a more overt and Northern nineteenth-

century medievalism.  

In  many  ways  these  impulses  resembled  William  Morris’  infatuation  with 

Iceland and Nordicism, as the desire they reflected was not simply a longing 

for a pre-industrialised Britain. Certain socialistic, utopian ideals were implied 

by  the  pre-industrial  fantasy. White  argues  that  this  idealisation  of  Australia 

imagined  a  culture  that  “would  allow  the  labouring  classes  to  reclaim  their 

patrimony  recreating  a  more  equal  society,  for  men  at  least”  (34).  Whether 

reflective of reality or not, through such constructions Australians indulged in 

a  form  of  medievalism,  even  from  the  early  stages  of  Australia’s  modern, 

Western formation. Many aspects of its medievalism, however, looked back 

in  order  to  move  forward,  creating  a  paradoxical  ambivalence.  Indeed, 

D’Arcens comments upon Australians’ “sense of themselves as both deeply 

connected to, yet also set adrift from, a pre-modern past that they revere yet 

also seek to supersede” (PFC 327). 

Counter-intuitively,  the  absence  of  an  actual  medieval  past  produces  a 

greater  flexibility  regarding  the  place  the  Middle  Ages  can  occupy  in  the 

Australian  cultural  imagination.  D’Arcens  notes  that, for Australia,  there  is  a 

Page | 111  

 
 
 
literality  in  the  phrase  ‘the  past  is  a  foreign  country’.  The  “conditions  of 

absence and distance”, D’Arcens argues:  

whether wistfully acknowledged or wilfully embraced, have even from 

the  earliest  days  of  Australian  settlement  granted  Australian 

medievalism  a  significant  interpretive freedom,  paving  the  way  for  a 

wide-ranging  and  fertile  engagement  with  a  world  that  can,  in  the 

most  concrete  sense,  only  ever  be  imaginary  for  Australians. 

(D’Arcens PFC 319-20) 

This  cultural  contextualisation  makes  the  popularity  of  medievalist  fantasy 

with  Australian  authors  and  readers  less  remarkable.  Although  ostensibly 

lacking  the  central  distinguishing  marks  of  ‘Australian’  literature,  that  is,  the 

Australian landscape and realism (Wilkins PG 267 & 273), these texts remain 

artefacts of the culture, place and time of their production. 

Indeed,  the  ‘significant  interpretative  freedom’  that  D’Arcens  recognises  in 

Australia’s  imaginative  engagement  with  the  Middle  Ages  leads  to  many 

identifiable  contradictions  in  representation.  Australia  can  be  seen,  like  the 

ice  wastes  of  the  North,  as  open,  mysterious  and  impenetrable  –  a 

remarkably ‘perilous realm’. Contrastingly, it can be formulated as a land of 

green and pleasant pastures in the idealised shape of ‘Merry England’. The 

Middle  Ages,  too,  can  be  simultaneously  the  origin  and  the  Other  of  the 

modern;  they  can  be  represented  as  inflexibly  hierarchical,  or  as  a  time  of 

greater  opportunities.  Although  such  differing  constructions  may  be 

irreconcilable,  they  continue  to  co-exist  within  the  spectrum  of  the  broader 

popular imagination.  

Page | 112  

 
 
 
Although  clearly  medievalist  in  setting,  and  though  heavily  informed  by 

Anglo-Celtic  fantasy  traditions  and  imagery,  certain  aspects  of  The  Old 

Kingdom  Chronicles  intersect  strongly  with  cultural  tensions,  with  national 

ideological  aspirations,  and  with  central  imaginings  of  Australian  cultural 

identity.  Rather  than  being  removed  from  contemporary  reality,  such  fiction 

reflects  something  of  Australia’s  continued  engagement  with  medievalism, 

and demonstrates the influence that British heritage continues to exert upon 

the Australian  psyche.  Indeed,  tensions found  in  Nix’s  novels,  as  they  seek 

to  negotiate  the  contradictions  between  medievalism’s  fixed  structures  and 

contemporary  democratic  ideals,  reproduce  social  and  political  tensions 

evident  in  modern  Australia.    An  example  of  this  can  be  found  in  the 

simmering  debate  on  Australian  republicanism  that  was  a  key  cultural 

question during the period of Nix’s texts’ production. Driven by the approach 

of the Centenary of Australian Federation, this debate culminated in the 1999 

Australian  Republican  Referendum 

in  which  Australians  rejected 

the 

proposed severing of its political ties to the British monarchy.  

In a 2000 post-referendum analysis by the Hon Justice Michael Kirby, Justice 

of the High Court of Australia, Kirby argues that,  although most Australians 

“feel republican in their hearts”, there is also a “vague lingering affection for 

the monarch” and a continued “measure of respect for the idea of the Crown” 

(online).  Ironically,  within  the  republican  debate  monarchism  became 

associated  with  the  common  ‘everyman’  while  arguments  for  republicanism 

were  popularly  construed  as  an  indulgence  in  intellectual  elitism  (Kirby 

online). As will be seen later in this chapter, Nix employs a similar strategy to 

negotiate the tensions created by the hierarchical castes in the Old Kingdom, 

aligning his privileged protagonists with the underdog.  

Page | 113  

 
 
Pertinently,  Kirby  argues  that  the  wider  Australian  public,  if  confronted  with 

the  contradictions  entailed  in  Australia’s  vote  to  retain  ties  with  the  British 

monarchy,  would  react  with  indifference  or  contempt  and,  perhaps,  just  a 

fleeting acknowledgement of “the paradoxes of their constitutional situation” 

(online).  Acknowledging  that  such  cultural  and  constitutional  contradictions 

exist within Australia, it is perhaps even more paradoxical that fantasy novels 

which reflect these tensions are largely deemed to sit outside the parameters 

of ‘Australian fiction’.  

It  would  be  simplistic, therefore,  to  see  Nix’s  use  of  royalty  and  medievalist 

hierarchies as disengaged from Australia’s political and cultural context, even 

though  social  elites  are  specifically  situated  outside  expressed  Australian 

egalitarian aspirations. Indeed, egalitarianism is not just seen as desirable, it 

is  officially  espoused  as  a  particularly  Australian  trait.  The  Australian 

Government’s Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) proclaims in 

its  factsheet  About  Australia:  people  culture  and  lifestyle  that  Australia  is  a 

“tolerant, informal and broadly egalitarian society” (1/7). Furthermore, it goes 

on  to  boast  of  legal  and  gender  equality,  equality  of  opportunity,  and  also 

claims that “there are no formal or entrenched class distinctions in Australian 

society, as there are in some other countries” (2/7).   

Nix, however, obfuscates the class hierarchies in his series by foregrounding 

other  qualities  approved  within  Australian  society.  Characteristics  such  as 

the  overt  humility  of  the  protagonists,  a  lack  of  entitlement  in  manner,  an 

informality in practice and in dress, and a certain disrespect for protocol and 

Page | 114  

 
 
 
 
for authority, all fit within imaginings of Australian character. These mediate 

the  tensions  between  the  elitism  of  royalty  and  an  egalitarian  imperative.  

The lack of formality in dress and behaviour, for example, is reflective of that 

which  Donald  Horne,  in  The  Lucky  Country  Revisited,  labels  a  “cult  of 

informality” (16). In a 2009 paper on Australian fashion and cultural identity, 

Jennifer  Craik  asserts  that  archetypal  “Australian  dress  is  regarded  as 

anything  that  is  practical,  informal,  and  casual”  (410).  She  argues  that  this 

reflects  “the  widespread  mythology  of 

the  outback, 

the  bush,  and 

egalitarianism  that  came  to  characterize  ideas  about  Australia  in  the  mid to 

late nineteenth century” (420).  

This  Australian  cultural  affinity  with  casual,  practical  clothing  aligns  with  the 

Abhorsen  and  Royalty’s  attitude  to  dress  in  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles. 

Differences between privileged and common people are elided somewhat by 

informality  in  dress  and  manners.    Unlike  a  generic  fairy-tale  princess  or 

queen, Sabriel is not a paragon of sartorial elegance. Rather than appear in 

finery she is seen initially in a school uniform; thereafter she is predominantly 

dressed in a martial style – a doeskin tunic, leather breeches reinforced with 

segmented  plates,  an  armoured  coat  and  hobnail  boots  finished  by  her 

sword  belt  and  bell  bandolier  (Nix  Sab  129-130).    Circumstances  leave  no 

time for  glamour  in  the  race  to  defeat Kerrigor  as  he  and  his  Dead minions 

threaten  to  overwhelm  the  kingdom.    She  is  shown  bruised  and  battered, 

surviving flights from and battles against the Dead and suffering the rigours 

of  travel  for  days  without  access  to  baths  or  fresh  clothing.  Sabriel’s 

circumstances  throughout  most  of  Sabriel  neither  suggest  prestige  nor 

adhere to conventional expectations of feminine beauty and desirability.  

Page | 115  

 
 
 
Even  after  Touchstone  and  Sabriel  take  up  the  roles  of  King  and  Queen  in 

Lirael  and  Abhorsen,  they  express  discomfort  with  the  formality  and 

impracticality  of  court  clothes.  This  is  made  clear  in  Touchstone’s  musings 

during their diplomatic mission to Ancelstierre:  

Touchstone still found it odd to see Sabriel dressed in Ancelstierran 

clothes,  particularly  their  court  clothes,  as  she  was  wearing  today. 

She  should  be  in  her  blue  and  silver  tabard,  with  the  bells  of  the 

Abhorsen  across  her  chest,  her  sword  at  her  side.  Not  in  a  silver 

dress  with  a  hussar's  pelisse  worn  on  one  shoulder,  and  a  strange 

little  pillbox  hat  pinned  to  her  deep-black  hair.  And  the  small 

automatic  pistol  in  her  silver  mesh  purse  was  no  substitute  for  a 

sword. 

Not 

that  Touchstone 

felt  at  ease 

in  his  clothes  either.  An 

Ancelstierran shirt with its stiff collar and tie was too constricting, and 

his suit offered no protection at all. A sharp blade would slide through 

the  double-breasted  coat  of  superfine  wool  as  easily  as  it  would 

through butter, and as for a bullet . . .  (Nix Abh 2-3) 

Accompanying this practical, casual approach to clothing, images of the royal 

family  at  home  in  the  Old  Kingdom  also  suggest  an  informal,  egalitarian 

attitude.  The family is depicted as neither condescending nor self-important. 

They  are  not  demanding  of  co-operation  or  submission  from  those  around 

them – nor do they appear ‘entitled’ in speech or manner.  Ellimere may be a 

princess  known  for  her  beauty,  but  her  “normal  attire  was  old  hunting 

leathers with her hair carelessly tied back out of the way”. Sam believes she 

looks out of place in the court dress she dons when acting as co-regent (Lir 

217).  Occasions  that  require  ceremony  grate  against  Sam’s  “desire  for 

informality” (Lir 217). Indeed, undertones of sacrifice become attached to any 

royal obligations to practise formality and ceremony. When Sam resists form, 

Page | 116  

 
 
ritual  and  courtly  dress,  Ellimere  reiterates  these  are  what  is  expected  of 

royalty  by  the  people  of  the  Old  Kingdom:  “The  Kingdom  must  come  first. 

[…]The  people’s  morale  is  very  important,  and  each  member  of  the  family 

must play a part in maintaining it” (Lir 218). 

Regardless  of  the  imperative  to  play  the  royal  role  on  special  occasions, 

casualness  is  clearly  preferred.  A  strong  image  of  informality  is  seen at  the 

pivotal  family  conference  in  the  reservoir.  Touchstone,  just  returned  with 

Sabriel  from  a  mission,  has  “managed  to  wash  and  change  out  of  armour 

and  riding  gear”.  He  appears  “wearing  an  Ancelstierran-style  bathrobe,  his 

curly hair still wet from a hasty bath” (Lir 284):  

‘Are you going like that?’ asked Ellimere, as Touchstone strode over 

to the fireplace and into the left-hand side of the inglenook. He turned 

as  she  spoke,  looked  down  on  his  robe  and  the  twin  swords  belted 

across it, shrugged, and went on. (Nix Lir 287) 

This  informal  attitude  to  dress,  united  with  an  expressed  lack  of  desire  for 

pomp  and  ceremony,  works  to  temper  the  images  of  privilege  that 

traditionally accompany representations of royalty.  

The royal family’s informal interactions with others also ameliorate notions of 

prestige. A clear example of this can be found when Ryelle and Sanar of the 

Clayr  greet  Sabriel  and  Touchstone  by  bowing.  Touchstone’s  immediate 

response  is  to  exclaim,  “don’t  get  formal  on  me!”  (Lir  49).  This  lack  of 

pretension  does  not  only  extend  to  interaction  with  others  of  the  Blood  – 

royalty,  the  Clayr  and  Abhorsen.  In  order  to  keep  their  children  grounded 

Touchstone and Sabriel establish routines requiring their children participate 

in everyday household tasks, known as ‘Perspective’.  

Page | 117  

 
 
 
Though Perspective involves things such as washing dishes, mopping floors 

or even mucking out stables, it functions more as a practice of humility than 

as a bridge between the privileged and the common. As Sam notes:  

the  servants  could  rarely  forget  that  Sam  and  Ellimere  would  be 

Prince and Princess again tomorrow. Most of the servants dealt with 

the  situation  by  pretending  Sam  and  Ellimere  weren’t  there,  with  a 

few  notable  exceptions  like  Mistress  Finney,  the  falconer,  who 

shouted  at  them  like  everyone  else.  So  Perspective  was  usually  a 

day  of  drudgery  performed  in  strange  silence  and  isolation.  (Nix  Lir 

219) 

Perspective,  however,  grants  royalty  the  privilege  of  condescension  in 

behaviour  and,  perversely,  it  tacitly  displaces  some  of  the  weight  of 

responsibility  for  any  perceived  divisions  between  castes  onto  the  “ordinary 

people”  (Lir  219).    Royalty  demonstrates  a  willingness  to  transgress  social 

boundaries,  but  this  is  not  reciprocated,  and  is  even  resisted,  by  those  of 

lower stations.  

There is a more comfortable integration between the royal family and those 

with  military  and  administrative  professions  in  the  Old  Kingdom.  Ellimere 

plays  tennis  with  her  peers,  happily  works  with  Jall  as  co-regent  when  her 

father  is  away,  practises  diligently  with  the  Guard,  and  demonstrates  close 

friendship with many in the court. This is also expected of Sam, even as he 

recovers from his almost fatal encounter with the necromancer in Death: 

‘He [Touchstone] said you needed to be busy,’ said Ellimere. […] ‘It’s 

about  time  you  did  something  useful  around  here.  I’ve  also 

scheduled  you  to  sit  with  Jall  at  the  Petty  Court  every  morning 

between ten and one, and you’ll have sword practice twice a day with 

Page | 118  

 
 
 
the  Guard,  of  course,  and  you  must  come  to  dinner—no  ordering 

meals to your grubby workshop.’ (Nix Lir 218-219)  

This down-to-earth approach is also enacted by the Clayr. In their community 

all  are  required  to  perform  duties  which  include  being  on  a  kitchen  and 

serving  roster.  This  involves  serving  not  only  other  Clayr,  but  also  guards 

and visiting merchants (Lir 15-16). Their duties extend to lowly tasks such as 

washing  dishes  and  cleaning  toilets  (Lir  58).  More  mundane  responsibilities 

are  supplemented  by  the  expectation  of  participation  in  exercises  such  as 

sword craft, archery and Charter Magic. This performance of service creates 

an impression that, despite their inherited gifts and rank, there is little desire 

to  practise  exclusivity  or  to  disdain  mundane  tasks  as  beneath  a  person  of 

Blood.  

Negotiating  the  hierarchies  that  are  entailed  by  medievalist  models  is  a 

complex process.  While Nix distances the royal family from images of luxury 

at the palace, there are clear traditional markers of privilege at the Abhorsen 

house. The Abhorsen’s residence is one that exudes stateliness, lavishness 

and  substance.  “Heavily  laden  with  Charter  Magic”,  it  has  gothic  features 

including a dominating “floor to ceiling stained-glass window” and furnishings 

of  lustrous  timber,  silver  and  gold  (Sab  104-5).  Not  only  is  the  Abhorsen 

house heavily fortified by both its natural environment and by magic, but it is 

also protected and manned by magical ‘Charter sendings’ – servants created 

and  maintained  by  Charter  Magic  for  service  to  the  Abhorsen.    Fantasy 

therefore provides Nix with a clear means to negotiate class hierarchies, that 

is, the use of magical or fantasy creatures to perform servant roles.  

Page | 119  

 
 
 
 
The  Charter  sendings  are  clearly  not  human.  Every  square  inch  of  the  first 

one Sabriel meets is “defined by tiny, constantly moving Charter marks and 

Sabriel  could  see  nothing  between  them  but  moving  air”  (Sab  89).  Sabriel 

finds this image disconcerting as “the illusion of flesh was imperfect, fluid and 

unsettling. Its face wouldn’t stay fixed, migrating between scores of different 

possibilities.  Some  were  women,  some  men  [.  .  .].  Its  body  and  clothing 

changed slightly, too, with every face” (Sab 89). The constant movement of 

Charter-marks in these magical constructions may hint at a myriad of options 

and  possibilities  for  these  sendings,  but  ultimately  the  continuous  flux  of 

character works to deny these creatures any kind of stable, individual identity 

or  subjectivity.  The  story’s  use  of  these  sendings  as  servants  enables  the 

privileged  position  of the  Abhorsen  to  be  enforced  without  the  subjection  of 

humans,  answering  some  of  the  ideological  difficulties  associated  with 

hierarchical class structures. It creates a fantasy wherein the subjugation of 

one group to another is quietly neutralised.  

Some  sendings,  however,  particularly  the  more  ancient  ones,  do  exhibit 

minds of their own. Mogget labels at least one ‘recalcitrant’, noting they are 

“[p]rivileged family retainers who always think they know best”. He calls them 

“practically human, in the worst possible way” (Sab 103). Nix, however, has 

created  sendings  whose  wills  and  most  fervent  desires  revolve  around 

meeting  the  needs  of  their  masters  and  mistresses.  When  Sabriel  is 

introduced as the new Abhorsen all the sendings drop to their knees, offering 

their  Charter-marked  hands  in  service  and  loyalty  (Sab  106).  Sam  notes  to 

Lirael  that,  in  the  Abhorsen’s  house,  “no  one  has  to  do  anything,  really, 

because there are so many sendings, all eager to help. I think they get bored 

when  the  place  is  empty”  (Lir  552).  Any  suggestion  of  exploitation  is 

Page | 120  

 
 
undermined  through  portraying  the  sendings  as  finding  fulfilment  in  their 

bonded service.  

It  is  worth  noting,  however,  that  Nix  does  not  give  the  Charter  servants 

voices.  This may emphasise the un-worldliness of the sendings, but it does 

not do so without an implication that the voice of the subaltern is supressed. 

Once  more,  however,  any  suggestion  of  powerlessness  is  undercut  by  the 

way  in  which  sendings  appear  to  exert  influence  within  the  house, 

personifying  a  connection  to  authority  and  the  past.  While  the  Abhorsen 

house is far more formal than the palace, both in appearance and operation, 

it is kept ‘old’ in its ways by the sendings, often contrary to the desires of the 

Abhorsen  themselves.  The  sendings  are  unmistakably  concerned  with  the 

maintenance  of  tradition.  Through  them  a  tangible  attachment  to  the  past 

exists.  Even  though  Abhorsen  die  and  pass  through  the  ninth  gate  into 

Death, their created Charter sendings remain in the living  world as a link to 

the past. This provides the sendings with a distinct gravitas. Sabriel notes, as 

she  “gently  pressed”  all  the  hands  offered  in  service,  that  many  of  the 

Charter spells within them “were old, far older than Sabriel could guess” (Sab 

106). The sendings, despite being created servants, feel a certain ownership 

over  the  current  Abhorsen.  This  allows  them  to  demand  an  adherence  to 

tradition and conventions.  

The  protagonists’  behaviours  and  reactions  to  the  sending’s  deference, 

however, are more aligned with modern Australian aspirations for informality. 

They  get  to  show  a  reluctance  toward  being  pampered,  washed,  dressed 

and served. The lavish attentions of the sendings are represented as a point 

of endurance rather than as a right or a privilege. The picture of privilege is 

Page | 121  

 
 
 
simultaneously  built  up  and  pulled  down  within  the  novels.  Nix  is  able  to 

utilise  affective  medieval  markers  of  privilege  at  the  same  time  as  he 

questions  them.  He  can  build  his  protagonists  up  as  extraordinary,  as 

deserving of worship and adulation and, simultaneously, further amplify their 

worth  in  the  eyes  of  contemporary  readers  through  emphasising  their 

disinclination to be pampered and venerated.  

While  the  subjugated  position  of  the  Charter  sendings  is  thus  neutralised, 

The Old Kingdom Chronicles more overtly affirm individual human autonomy, 

which,  according  to  John  Stephens,  is  a  central  principle  in  Australian 

children’s/young adult fiction. He argues that it is “desirable, if not essential” 

for the characters to aspire to an individual selfhood (ix). Reflecting broader 

Western  liberal  ideologies,  Nix’s  novels  are  unequivocally  critical  of  slavery 

and of the loss of agency that results from enslavement through Free Magic. 

Slavery is a key signifier of the enormous evil attached to the practice of Free 

Magic.  Indeed,  slavery  within  death  is  one  of  the  great  fears  for  citizens  of 

the  Old  Kingdom;  as  Sabriel  notes,  “[t]ruly  the  Old  Kingdom  was  a  terrible 

place,  when  even  death  did  not  mean  an  end  to  slavery  and  despair”  (Sab 

121).  It  is  clear  that  the  Northern  characters  experience  acute  horror  at  the 

thought  of  such  enslavement.  Sabriel,  Lirael  and  Sam,  despite  very  real 

threats  of  danger  and  an  imperative  to  keep  on  task,  stop,  time  and  time 

again, to perform the litany and ritual of cleansing, peace and sleep over the 

recently dead, using Charter marks of fire to ensure the freedom of spirits so 

souls  cannot  be  enslaved  (Sab  55,  208,  Abh  84-85,  129-30).  Occasions 

where circumstances make it impossible to administer final rites are acutely 

distressing (Sab 59) (Lir 544-545). 

Page | 122  

 
 
 
The  texts  also  contain  overt  criticism  of  actual  human  slavery.  Sabriel 

experiences  dread  and  anger  at  the  realisation  that  humans  are  being 

enslaved in service of the necromancers and their dead servants: “men and 

women—living, breathing people” (Sab 118). There is a greater revulsion still 

at the discovery that scavengers in the fallen city of Belisaere are practising 

child slavery, using “children—slaves—as decoys, or bait, for the Dead” (Sab 

264).  In  this  instance  Sabriel’s  abhorrence  is  so  great  that  it  almost  derails 

her from her duty as Abhorsen. Her instinct is to face impossible odds in an 

attempt to save these children from such a fate. Mogget needs to redirect her 

to  the  larger  picture,  asking  “What  will  it  profit  these  children  and  all  the 

others who may come, if you are slain? It is the Dead who are at the root of 

this  evil,  and  Abhorsen’s  business  is  with  the  dead”  (Sab  264).  It  is 

noteworthy  that  it  is  the  seemingly  amoral  Mogget,  a  creature  who  claims 

that  he  has  no  interest  in  the  rights  and  wrongs  of  the  Abhorsen’s  cause, 

who  here  clearly  identifies  slavery  as  evil.  This  represents  the  practice  of 

slavery as unequivocally malevolent.  

Paradoxically,  Mogget  himself  is  in  a  form  of  enslavement,  but  this  is  cast 

variously  as  a  safeguard  for  the  Old  Kingdom  or  as  a  punishment  for 

Mogget’s wrongs. In the final instalment of the tale it is revealed that Mogget 

is Yrael, one of the original deities of this secondary world; he is the Eighth 

Bright Shiner, who stood back, declining to become involved when the other 

seven  deities  took  their  stand  against  Orannis,  the  Destroyer.  His  moral 

ambivalence,  his  refusal  to  choose  right,  led  to  his  ‘binding’  by  the  seven 

Bright  Shiners  who  gave  themselves  up  for  the  protection  of  the  Kingdom. 

This  binding  made  him  a  servant  of  the  Abhorsen  against  his  will.  Mogget, 

Page | 123  

 
 
however, casts it more bluntly, claiming: “I am but a slave bound to service” 

(Sab 110).  

Unquestionably,  the  divine  power  and  Free  Magic  within  Mogget  make  him 

an extraordinarily dangerous being. His anger over his own servitude makes 

him more dangerous still, and his wrath is most acutely directed toward those 

he  has  been  made  to  serve.  In  moments  where  Mogget  is  temporarily 

released from  his binding,  he  is  represented  as  white  hot  and  uncontained; 

twisting and transforming, as “white fire lines […] streaming out, converging 

roiling,  coming  together”,  “a  blazing  blue  white  creature”,  distorting  and 

changing (Sab 152). He is enraged by the very thought of his “[m]illennia of 

servitude”, chained, he claims, “by trickery, treachery... captive in a repulsive, 

fixed flesh shape” (Sab 155). Although Mogget’s reluctant service repeatedly 

provides  invaluable  aid  to  the  cause  of  the  Charter,  it  is  only  when  Sam 

releases him from slavery, allowing him the power of choice, that Mogget is 

able  to  truly  join  with  the  others  to  defeat  Orannis.  Implicitly,  despite  the 

potential  danger  attached  to  the  release  of  Mogget,  true  victory  cannot  be 

achieved until the issue of his binding is resolved and Mogget is again given 

the agency to choose (Abh 418).  

There remains an identifiable ambivalence in the manner in which freedom is 

treated  in  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles.  Completely  unrestrained  freedom, 

freedom  that  is  executed  indiscriminately,  without  regard  for  others,  is 

portrayed  as  evil.  Moreover,  while  a  lack  of  choice  is  sometimes  cast  as 

unequivocally abhorrent, particularly when associated with Free Magic, when 

it  is  associated  with  the  Charter  it  is  positively  constructed  and  cast  as 

destiny. The texts make a distinction between the demands of ‘service’ to the 

Page | 124  

 
 
 
Charter, and ‘slavery’ under free magic. This is semiotically reinforced by the 

novel’s imagery. While the Charter sendings are complex and beautiful, the 

unconstrained Free Magic constructions are ugly, monstrous, “fell creatures” 

(Lir 460). Kerrigor’s powerful Mordicant that pursues Sabriel through most of 

the first  novel  is  the  antithesis  of  the  shining  and alive  Charter  sendings.  In 

very basic Manichean terms it is clear the Charter servants are creatures of 

the  light  while  the  returned,  enslaved  Dead  are  creatures  of  darkness.  The 

Mordicant is base and unnatural, having been built with “bog-clay and human 

blood moulded and infused with Free Magic by a necromancer, and a Dead 

spirit placed inside it as a guiding force” (Sab 85). The references to bog clay 

and  human  blood  make  allusions  to  occult  and  superstitious  sacrifice. 

Despite  the  Mordicant’s  power,  it  appears  savage,  crude  and  primitive  in 

comparison  to  the  ordered  beauty  and  artistry  seen  in  Charter  creations. 

Also, unlike Charter sendings who are able to demonstrate an, albeit limited, 

form  of  assertive  personality  in  the  performance  of  their  service,  the 

Mordicant demonstrates no agency of its own.  

Like the Charter sendings, the novels’ protagonists also have an apparently 

inexorable  bond  with  the  Charter.  Unlike  the  sendings,  however,  they 

experience  uncertainty  and  contend  with  questions  of  personal  agency.  As 

noted earlier, the issue of navigating one’s own path is a central concern in 

Australian  young  adult  literature.  This  appears  to  be  at  odds  with  the 

hierarchical  notions  of  destined  place  that  are  often  entailed  in  the  fantasy 

genre’s appropriation of medieval tropes. Through most of The Old Kingdom 

Chronicles  the  protagonists  struggle  with  the  demands  of  destiny  and 

expectation. 

Indeed, 

the 

tension  between  destiny  and 

freewill 

is 

foregrounded  in  the  oft-repeated  epigram  throughout  the  novels:  “Does  the 

Page | 125  

 
 
walker choose the path, or the path the walker?”. These words “redolent with 

the  echoes  of  Charter  Magic”  are  “the  very  last  words,  all  alone  on  the  last 

page  of The  Book of  the  Dead”  (Sab 47).  I argue  this  tension  is negotiated 

through  an  appeal  to  another  principle  that  John  Stephens  identifies  as 

central  within  Australian  young  adult  literature:  the  idea  that  autonomous 

selfhood should be “intersubjective, not solipsistic; altruistic, not self-serving” 

(Stephens ix). This modifies the imperative to strive for independent agency. 

Throughout most of Sabriel Sabriel resists her calling, insisting that her father 

still  lives.  Although  this  is  primarily  because,  as  a  loved father  and  her  only 

surviving family member, she does not wish him dead, it also represents an 

attempt  to  hold  on  to  life  choices  available  to  her  if  she  is  not  Abhorsen.  If 

she finds her father alive she has alternatives. She can still go south, go to 

university, live an ordinary life like her friends, and enjoy the social freedom 

that  includes  meeting  young  men  (Nix  Sab  16).  There  is  clearly  something 

within her that craves this kind of choice, but destiny and altruistic duty also 

exert  a  strong  pressure.  Her  Destiny  is  foreshadowed  not  only  by  her 

heritage,  but  in  her  very  first  experience  within  the  precincts  of  Death  as  a 

new-born  child,  recorded  in  the  novel’s  prologue.  Even  as  a  babe  Sabriel’s 

life force burns Kerrigor, her Greater Dead nemesis, giving her father time to 

send  Kerrigor,  for  a  time,  deeper  into  Death  (Sab  6-7).  Sabriel  knows  from 

childhood  that  she  has  an  “affinity  for  death  and  the  dead”  (Sab  16).  This, 

however, does not equate to desiring the role of Abhorsen: “Death and what 

came  after  death  was  no  great  mystery  to  Sabriel.  She  just  wished  it  was” 

(Sab 14). Despite her doubts, however, her destiny seems fixed. As Mogget 

unequivocally  asserts:  “you  are  Abhorsen,  and  you  must  put  the  Dead  to 

rest.  Your  path  has  been  chosen”.  He  simply  laughs  at  her  declaration  that 

Page | 126  

 
 
she “can walk a different path” (Sab110). It appears that moral duty to others 

trumps individual choice. 

Similarly, when faced with the expectations of destiny, the reluctance felt by 

Touchstone,  Lirael  and  Sam  is  entangled  with  a  desire  to  choose. 

Touchstone,  due to a misguided feeling  of  responsibility  for  the  state of  the 

Kingdom,  would  choose  abasement  over  kingship.  Lirael’s  desire  to  belong 

with  her  sister  Clayr  would  see  her  choose  the  sight  above  her  destiny  of 

Remembrancer  and  Abhorsen-in-Waiting.  Sam’s  experience 

is  more 

complex. Despite a desire to fulfil the expectations of both the Kingdom and 

the  Charter,  and  a  strong  “resolution  to  be  a  proper  Abhorsen”,  this 

emotionally  torments  him.  His  belief  that  he  is  destined  to  be  Abhorsen  did 

“not banish the fear that still lurked in his heart” (Lir 305).  

The  tension  between  choice,  destiny  and  altruistic  service  is  further 

negotiated by a paradoxical association between agency and submission to 

the  Charter.  Accepting  destiny  becomes  an  active  choice  for  these 

characters,  and  they  ultimately  achieve  fulfilment  in  compliance.  Life  within 

the  constraints  of  the  Charter  answers  their  deeper  longings.  Sabriel’s 

desires  for  a  romantic  partnership  (Sab  16)  are  answered  through  her 

relationship  with  Touchstone  (Sab  351).  Touchstone  has  family  restored  in 

his union with Sabriel; moreover, as King he is given greater opportunity fulfil 

his  desire,  indeed  his  need,  to  perform  service  and  sacrifice.  He  is  able  to 

enact  a  penance  for  his  unintended  part  in  fall  of  the  kingdom.  A  strong 

symbol of this is seen in his mending of the Great Charter Stones that were 

broken when his mother and sisters were sacrificed by Kerrigor. Touchstone 

uses  his  own  blood  mixed  with  Charter  magic  to  repair  them,  for  weeks 

Page | 127  

 
 
 
labouring alone, repeatedly reopening wounds in his own flesh to access the 

blood necessary for the mending (Lir 289-290).  

For Sam, resolution is found when his true destiny is ultimately revealed. It is 

discovered that he is not marked as Abhorsen, but as Wallmaker, a magical 

artisan  role  which  perfectly  fits  with  both  his  gifts  and  desires.  These 

coincidences between choice and destiny resolve tension within the novels, 

with  yielding  to  destiny  answering  the  deepest  needs  of  the  protagonists. 

There is only fulfilment and release when their true destinies, in accordance 

with  the  Charter,  are  revealed  and  accepted.  In  Sam’s  case  he  is  released 

from  the  anxieties  attached  to  the  pressure  of  expectation  and  his  fear  of 

Death; moreover, as Wallmaker there is no tension between aptitude, desire 

and expectation.  

Similarly,  Lirael  is  released  from  the  shame  she  feels  over  not  having 

received  the  sight.  Her  roles  as  Remembrancer  and  Abhorsen-in-Waiting 

come as second nature to her. She accepts them as right and natural, even 

while she believes acting her part will bring about her death. Understanding 

her destiny, Lirael is able to access feelings of self, power and belonging that 

were  denied  to  her  when  she  stood  outside  her  ordained  place.  Where 

previously it “seemed to be her fate that she would have no close friends” (Lir 

107),  she  now  has  people  with  whom  she  can  feel  at  home.  The  Dog 

encapsulates this as she tells Lirael during the denouement of the story, “you 

have found your family, your heritage; and you have earned a high place in 

the world” (Abh 422).  

Page | 128  

 
 
 
 
While  choices  of  submission  to  destiny  and  service  to  others  become  

conflated  with  fulfilment,  the  choice  to  transgress  the  will  of  the  Charter  is 

aligned  with  devastation  and  ultimate  failure.  Rogue  characters  such  as 

Kerrigor,  who  was  previously  a  royal  prince,  and  Chlorr  of  the  Mask,  a 

necromancer who was formerly Abhorsen-in-Waiting, show that it is possible 

for  those  of  the  blood  to  act  outside  one’s  destiny.  These  characters, 

however,  do  not  realise  success,  neither  do  they  achieve  completion.  They 

can be viewed as warnings to those who seek fulfilment outside the ‘natural’ 

order  ordained  by  the  Charter;  implicitly,  rejection  of  destiny  leads  only  to 

failure and destruction. 

Nix’s novels also portray choice within the bounds of the charter. Moreover, 

the  novels  actively  demonstrate  a  wariness  of  unthinking  compliance  to 

authority, even to traditions tied to the Charter. This is an oft-repeated motif 

throughout  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles.  Like  the desire for  informality, the 

rejection of pretentious behaviour, a disdain for tyranny, and the imperatives 

for  an  independent  selfhood  and  altruistic  service  discussed  earlier  in  this 

chapter,  the  motif  of  a  wariness  regarding  authority  is  strongly  attached  to 

entrenched understandings of ‘Australian’ character. These traits combined, 

reveal  a  discernible  synchronicity  between  the  popular  conceptions  of 

Australian  character  and  characteristics  displayed  and  valued  within  the 

novels.  

Richard White argues that from the nineteenth century there was “substantial 

agreement  on  a  particular  group  of  characteristics”  that  were  considered 

distinctly  Australian  in  quality.  Along  with  values  such  as  “independence”, 

“egalitarianism”  and  a  “dislike  of  mental  effort”,  White  lists  “a  certain 

Page | 129  

 
 
 
disrespect for authority” as one of the traits considered to be quintessentially 

Australian  (76-77).    Rooted  in  historical  constructions  of  Australian  identity, 

these  characteristics  still  hold  cultural  power.  A  2000  study  by  Tim  Phillips 

and  Philip  Smith  on  what  contemporary  Australians  see  as  ‘Australian’ 

provides evidence of the sustained resonance of these traits (204). Qualities 

such  as  demonstrating  an  “easy-going  personality”,  appreciating  “casual 

dress  codes”,  and  the  idea  of  giving  others  a  “fair  go”,  were  seen  as 

desirable,  as  was  a  cynical  “disrespect  for  authority  and  pointless  rules” 

(Phillips  and  Smith  218).  Although  this  self-flattering  view  of  Australia  is 

perhaps  more  reflective  of  a  desire  for  a  distinctive  national  type  than  a 

reflection  of  actual  practice,  it  is  still  revelatory  of  Australia’s  cultural 

aspirations.  

An  elastic  response  to  rules,  forms  and  protocols  is  clearly  evident  in  a 

number  of  episodes  in  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles,  demonstrating  again 

the alignment between  national  values  and the  values  expressed within  the 

novels.  Although  there  are  laws  tied  to  the  Charter,  the  novels  associate 

strict  adherence  with  petty  officiousness  and  pedantry.  They  suggest  that 

even the Charter itself approves the bending of its own laws in the service of 

broader ideals. Principles such as compassion and understanding are shown 

to  override  unthinking  compliance  to  the  letter  of  the  law.  Indeed,  Sabriel 

opens  with  a  clear  demonstration  of  this,  as  the  Abhorsen  persuades  a 

disapproving  Charter  Mage  to  baptise  his  new-born  daughter  Sabriel,  who 

has not survived her birth. The Abhorsen – whose role under the Charter is 

to  ensure  that  the  Dead  remain  dead  –  then  rescues  Sabriel’s  spirit  from 

Death,  returning  her  to  her  now  “living  flesh”  (Sab  7).    The  Abhorsen’s 

actions  are  clearly  outside  the  perceived  conventions  of  Charter.  Even  the 

Page | 130  

 
 
seemingly  amoral  Mogget  proclaims  in  a  voice  that  “seemed  to  carry  the 

weight of centuries”, that the Dead “must not” be brought back into Life (Sab 

109-110).  He  reiterates  that  Abhorsen  “must  put  the  Dead  to  rest”  claiming 

any other path represents a fall into evil (Sab 110). The rightness of Sabriel’s 

father’s  actions,  however,  is  confirmed  by  the  ‘taking’  of  Sabriel’s  Charter 

mark during the rite executed by the reluctant Charter mage: “the wood and 

ash disappeared from the priest’s forehead and slowly formed on the child’s. 

The  Charter  had  accepted  the  baptism”  (Sab  4).  Consequently,  Sabriel’s 

baptism and her survival in life are incontestably shown to be within the will 

of 

the  Charter. 

Implicitly,  greater  principles  rest  behind  and  above 

conventions  and  rules,  overriding  fastidious  obedience  to  the  letter  of  the 

law.  

Not only does the prologue begin with an infringement of religious protocol, 

the  first  chapter  starts  with  a  breach  of  promise  and  another  cameo  of  the 

contravention  of  rules.  The  episode  that  introduces  Sabriel  as  a  young 

woman shows her “breaking the promise she had made to both herself and 

her father” in order to go into Death to rescue an unquestionably dead (Sab 

11) pet rabbit belonging to Jacinth, one of the younger students at Wyverley 

College. Sabriel’s compassion seems to authorise her action, as the breach 

is but slight: “it was only a rabbit and Jacinth did love it so much” (Sab 14). 

Here, principles such as kindness and empathy take precedence over a strict 

obedience to moral or religious convention.   

The  epilogue  to  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles  provides  a  bookend  to  the 

prologue and opening chapter of the series. It again depicts a spirit reclaimed 

Page | 131  

 
 
 
from Death in the exercise of compassion. Although Nicholas Sayre has died 

in the final stand against the Destroyer, the Dog sends him back to into life: 

‘How can I go anywhere? I'm dead, aren't—‘ 

‘I'm  sending  you  back,’ said  the  Dog gently,  nudging  Nick's  leg  with 

her  snout,  so  he  turned  to  face  towards  Life.  Then  she  barked,  a 

single sharp sound that was both a welcome and a farewell. 

‘Is this allowed?’ asked Nick as he felt the [river’s] current reluctantly 

release him, and he took the first step back. 

‘No,’ said the Dog. ‘But then I am the Disreputable Dog.’ 

Nick took another step, and he smiled as he felt the warmth of Life, 

and  the  smile  became  a  laugh,  a  laugh  that  welcomed  everything, 

even the pain that waited in his body. (Nix Abh 425) 

What is significant here is that the Dog has now been revealed as Kibeth, a 

former deity, one of the Bright Shiners who imbued the Charter with much of 

her essence during its creation. Throughout The Old Kingdom Chronicles the 

Dog exhibits a clear disdain for formality and a disregard for letter of the law, 

so, by implication, these characteristics necessarily infuse the Charter itself. 

Although the larrikin traits in the Dog’s character can be imagined to reflect a 

distinctively  Australian  quality,  the  sense  that  compassion  should  outweigh 

legalism projects broader ideals within Western thought. 

A  critique  of  strict  legalism  does  not  just  bookend  the  trilogy;  it  pervades 

much of the narrative and is evident early in Lirael’s story. Although the Clayr 

have  a  clearly  defined  and  structured  society,  the  application  of  strict 

formality is depicted as something cold and undesirable. Kirrith, Lirael’s bitter 

Aunt,  is  unsympathetically  portrayed  as  someone  “all  for  rules  and 

regulation,  tradition  and  conformity”  (Lir  13).  By  contrast,  more  senior  and 

Page | 132  

 
  
respected  Clayr  are  approved  within  the  story  because  they  place  the 

feelings  of  others  before  the  application  of  rules  and  laws.  Those  who  act 

outside  complete  legalism  include  Filris,  “the  Infirmarian,  and  the  oldest  of 

the Clayr still living” (Lir 101), and also the twins, Sanar and Ryelle, who are 

described as  “the flawless  embodiment  of  the  perfect  Clayr”  (Lir  44).  Sanar 

and  Ryelle  demonstrate  compassion  to  Lirael  when  she  is  discovered 

trespassing near the Starmount Gate on her fourteenth birthday, considering 

suicide  in  despair  at  not  having  yet  received  the  sight.  Rather  than  punish 

Lirael they reassure her that she is one of the Clayr, and assign her a post at 

the  Great  Library  to  turn  her  mind  from  her  troubles  (Lir  62).  When  Lirael 

later breaks into the Old Levels of the library and accidently releases a Free 

Magic  creature,  Filris  hides  Lirael’s  folly  from  the  girl’s  superiors,  protecting 

her position as a junior librarian (Lir 102-106).  

The  twins’  disdain  for  unthinking  compliance  to  “rules  regulation,  tradition 

and conformity” (Lir 13) is again demonstrated in their disdainful reaction to 

Erimael’s  demand 

that  Lirael  be  blindfolded  before  entering  Clayr 

Observatory:  

‘You  may  pass.  But  the  other  with  you  has  not  Awoken.  By  the 

ancient laws, she must not be allowed to See the secret ways.’ 

‘Don’t  be  silly,  Erimael,’  said  Sanar.  ‘What  ancient  laws?  It’s  Lirael, 

Arielle’s daughter.’ […] 

‘The  laws  are  clear,’  said  Erimael,  still  in  the  same  stern  voice, 

though  Lirael  saw  her  gulp  nervously.  ‘I  am  the  Axe—Guard.  She 

must be blindfolded if you wish her to pass.’ 

Sanar snorted and turned to the other woman. (Nix Lir 352) 

Page | 133  

 
 
 
Ryelle  and  Sanar  demonstrate  that  their  understanding  of  service  to  the 

Charter  is  greater  than  the understanding  of  those  constrained by  legalism. 

Those who refuse to question the appropriateness and the personal cost of 

applying the letter of the law are portrayed as small minded. The twins, along 

with the novel’s readers, are able to see Lirael’s extreme distress and shame 

at this treatment. Against the twins’ empathy, stringent adherence to the law 

appears both unkind and unthinking.  

Significantly,  episodes  such  as  this  function  on  more  than  one  level;  they 

censure strict legalism and approve compassion and empathy, but they also 

obscure  privilege.  In  “The  Australian  Enigma”  (2007),  a  study  on  what  is 

unique  in  Australian  leadership,  Neal  Ashkanasy  identifies  characteristics 

that  he  argues  “represent  a  quintessential  expression  of  egalitarianism” 

(316).  These  are  “mateship”,  a  preference  for  those  who  are  “one  of  us”,  a 

suspicion  of  “tall  poppies”,12 and  an  appreciation  of  leaders  as  “underdogs” 

(316). In the Old Kingdom Chronicles, mateship is seen in the relationships 

and 

loyalty  between 

the  protagonists. 

  Given 

their 

informality, 

unpretentiousness  and  human  fears,  each  protagonist  can  appear  like  ‘one 

of us’ and thereby avoid the ‘tall poppy syndrome’.  The novels also situate 

the protagonists as underdogs. 

Rather than appear as one of a privileged caste, Lirael is clearly portrayed as 

disempowered and disadvantaged. The fact that she has not awoken in the 

sight isolates her and makes her feel inferior. She is also physically Other to 

most  of  the  Clayr;  she  is  white  skinned,  dark  haired  and  dark  eyed  and 

12  The  ‘tall  poppy  syndrome’,  involves  high  achievers  being  disdained  as  arrogant,  and  being 
disliked for rising above the group. 

Page | 134  

 
 
 
                                                           
where her ‘sisters’ are blonde, blue eyed, with skin that quickly tans (Nix Lir 

14).  Her  crisis  of  identity  is  compounded  by  not  knowing  anything  of  her 

father and by feeling abandoned by her late mother, who, in a very unClayr 

like  manner,  left  the  glacier.  When  combined  with  her  Aunt  Kirrith’s  cold, 

official  and  distant  treatment  (Lir  13),  this  all  undermines  any  image  of 

privilege within the text.  

Moreover,  even  as  Lirael  is  made  aware  of her  giftedness,  discovering  that 

her  true  destiny  is  to  see  the  past  rather  than  the  future,  any  sense  of 

advantage is undercut by an equal sense of difference and of loss. Although 

exceptional, Lirael’s gift is construed as something that further isolates her: 

But  while  she  had  always  been  alone  among  the  Clayr  for  her 

blindness to the future, now she was alone in another way as well. In 

a  perverse  reversal  of  all  her  hopes  and  dreams,  she  had  been 

granted the exact opposite of her heart’s desire. 

For  with  the  Dark  Mirror  and  her  new-found  knowledge,  She  could 

See into the past. (Nix Lir 371).  

This provides a clear example of how privilege can be glossed over and even 

completely  overwhelmed  by  accompanying  representations  of  isolation  or 

emotional hardship.  

Similarly,  each  of  the  novels’  protagonists  simultaneously  appears  as  both 

advantaged and  disadvantaged.  Sabriel’s  position  as Abhorsen  is mediated 

by  her  youth,  her  inexperience,  and  by  the  cultural  gaps  in  understanding 

attributable  to  spending  her  years  of  schooling  outside  the  Old  Kingdom  in 

Ancelstierre  (Sab  188).  Although  the  royal  heir,  Touchstone’s  disadvantage 

is seen in his bastard ancestry, his two-hundred years of enchanted captivity 

Page | 135  

 
 
 
as the figurehead of a hidden funerary ship, and in the murder of his family 

immediately  prior  to  his  entrapment,  a  tragedy  for  which  he  feels  he  was, 

albeit  unwittingly,  partially 

responsible 

(Sab  186).  Prince  Sameth’s 

disadvantage  resides  in  his  debilitating  fear  of  Death,  particularly  when 

weighed  against  the  expectation  that  he  will  be  the  next  Abhorsen. 

Disadvantage  is  also  present  in  others’  lack  of  understanding  and  even 

derision  regarding  his  desire  to  seclude  himself  and  indulge  in  his  creative 

artisanship (Lir 221).  

The  contexts  provided  by  the  stories  too,  with  overwhelming  terrors 

threatening the land, work to situate the protagonists in a position where the 

inherent power attached to their births is ameliorated by inescapable destiny 

and notions of personal sacrifice for the sake of the Kingdom. Moreover, the 

protagonists  do  not  covet  power.  Interestingly,  this  represents  a  striking 

difference from  the  contest for  leadership  played  out  in  Kay’s The  Fionavar 

Tapestry,  to  be  discussed  in  Chapter  6.  In  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles 

authority is not desired, but forced upon them by the protagonist’s destinies 

in  the  Charter.  In  both  Nix  and  Kay’s  series,  however,  the  ‘rightness’  of 

position  and  roles becomes  unassailable;  they  are  affirmed  by  the  authority 

of antiquity, blood and magic. This situates the question of power outside the 

realm of human decision and in the province of the supernatural, the divine. 

For  those  with  access  to  power  in  the  Old  Kingdom,  authority  is  not  a 

privilege, but a responsibility.  

Furthermore, for those of the Blood, the Charter does not exist as an external 

and  confirming  authority. Within  the  conceit of  the  story,  the Old  Kingdom’s 

royalty, Abhorsen and Clayr literally embody differing aspects of the Charter.  

Page | 136  

 
 
 
Nix employs the medievalist device of a riddle, a mnemonic in the form of a 

child’s rhyme, to reveal that the land is not simply governed, but was created 

and is held together through the power of the Charter that lives on in those of 

the Blood.  

Five Great Charters knit the land 

Together linked, hand in hand 

One for the people who wear the crown 

Two in the folk that keep the Dead down 

Three and five became stone and mortar 

Four sees all in the frozen water. (Nix Sab 232) 

The  five  Great  Charters  were  ‘Bright  Shiners’,  deities  who  fully  sacrificed 

themselves in order to create the Charter and save the world from the power 

of  the  Destroyer.  Through  their  sacrifice  the  Bloodlines  and  the  Old 

Kingdom’s  magical  artefacts  were  imbued  with  their  essence.  Line  three  of 

this riddle speaks of the royal family; line four of the Abhorsen; line five of the 

Wall  and  Charter  Stones;  and  line  six  speaks  of  the  Clayr.  As  the  Dog 

(herself a remnant of another of the Bright Shiners who gave much, but not 

all of her essence, to the Charter) explains to Lirael:  

‘The  Great  Charters  are 

the  keystones  of 

the  Charter.  The 

Bloodlines,  the  Wall,  and  the  Charter  Stones  all  come  from  the 

original  sacrifice  of  the  Five,  who  poured  their  power  into  the  men 

and women who were your ancestors. Some of those, in turn, passed 

that power to stone and mortar […]’ (Nix Lir 461). 

Consequently,  the  privilege  attached  to  being  one  of  the  Blood  does  not 

simply authorise a participation in the power structures of the Old Kingdom, it 

requires it. More significantly, it is implicitly attached to notions of continued 

sacrifice. Just as the Five Bright Shiners sacrificed their whole beings to the 

Page | 137  

 
 
 
creation  of  the  Charter,  members  of  the  Bloodlines  continue  to  give  the 

sacrifice  of  service  to  the  Old  Kingdom.  Gifts  and  destiny  are  not  for  the 

recipients alone. As the Dog points out to Lirael, “You must grow in your own 

powers—for yourself, for the Kingdom, and for the Charter” (Lir 555). It is in 

this that the concept of altruistic service is most clearly emphasised, turning 

privilege  into  duty.  As  Lirael  is  unequivocally  informed  by  Sanar,  “you  have 

been  given  other  gifts,  gifts  that  I’m  sure  will  be  sorely  needed  by  the 

Kingdom. And as all of us of the Blood are given gifts, we are also laden with 

responsibility  to  use  them  wisely  and  well.  You  have  the  potential  for  great 

power, Lirael, but I fear you will also face great tests” (Lir 348). Being one of 

the Blood, therefore, is presented as a double-edged sword. 

Not  only  does  the  notion  of  sacrifice  attenuate  the  privilege  of  blood  within 

The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles,  through  its  altruistic  appeal  it  ushers  the 

privilege  of  authority  and  position  back  into  a  place  that  fits  comfortably 

within  the  wider  aspirations  of  Australian  identity.  Though  sacrifice  for  a 

higher  cause  is  reflective  of  principles  clearly  apparent  in  broader  western 

systems  of  value,  nobility  and  belief,  Australians  have  claimed  it,  most 

commonly  drawing  upon  Anzac  mythology,  as  a  particularly  national  trait. 

The  Anzac  myth,  originating  with  the  Australian  and  New  Zealand  Army 

Corps’  (ANZAC)  ill-fated  landing  at  Gallipoli  in  April  1915,  initially  inducted 

sacrifice  as  a  central  ideal  within  the  Australian  cultural  psyche.  In  a 

discussion  of  the  Australian  response  to  recent  national  tragedies  (2010), 

Sarah  Gillman  notes  how  the  rhetoric  of  sacrifice,  mateship  and  heroism 

continues  to  reinforce  “hegemonic  discourses  of  Australian  identity  through 

the  identification  and  promotion  of  virtues  such  as  bravery  and  sacrifice  as 

intrinsic national characteristics” (246).  

Page | 138  

 
 
Furthermore,  during  the  time  Nix  was  writing  Lirael  and  Abhorsen,  the 

second and third books of his trilogy, Anzac  mythology  with its concomitant 

notions  of  sacrifice  and  bravery  were  experiencing  a  resurgence  under  the 

leadership of conservative Prime Minister, John Howard. In “Lest We Forget” 

(2010)  Matt  McDonald  asserts  that  the  “power  and  centrality  of  the  Anzac 

myth  to  Australian  national  identity  is  difficult  to  overstate”  (293),  observing 

that: 

While  leader  (from  1996  to  2007)  Howard  had  consistently  defined 

the  ‘‘digger’’  [Australian  soldier]  as  the  ideal  manifestation  of  the 

Australian type, the Anzac myth as the central narrative of Australian 

identity, and the experience of Gallipoli as the defining moment in the 

foundation of the Australian nation.  (McDonald 288) 

Speaking  of  the  impact  of  Australia’s  involvement  in  the  First  World  War, 

Richard White notes that commendations given to “raw colonial troops”, such 

as  those  from  Australia,  Canada  and  New  Zealand,  were  taken  up  in  the 

cause of Australian nationalism (128).  Pertinently, Australia’s desire to feel a 

connection with the past can also be seen in the construction of the diggers’ 

image.  White  tells  of  John  Masefield,  future  United  Kingdom  poet  laureate, 

drawing  on  notions  of  heroism  found  in  historical  literary  sources  such  as 

Shakespeare  and  the  medieval  Song  of  Roland,  to  eulogise  ‘untested’ 

colonial  soldiers.  Though  Masefield  addressed  colonial  troops  as  a  whole, 

the “reaction in Australia was to accept these idealised heroic qualities as not 

only characteristic of the digger, but to see them as distinctive to Australians” 

(White 129). 

Page | 139  

 
 
 
In  “The  Pleating  of  History:  Weaving  the  Threads  of  Nationhood”  (2005), 

Martin Ball notes that the Anzac myth answered the needs of a young nation 

to enmesh itself in an historical storyline: “Gallipoli provided the requisite epic 

narrative  to  lend  a  mythic  dimension  to  [Australia’s]  story.  It  provided  the 

folds needed to pleat history into the story of nationhood” (165).The desire to 

feel linked to the past is seen as central to Australian cultural imaginings, as 

Ball asserts: 

This  nation  craved  an  ancestral  past,  not  a  modern  future.  What 

Australia lacked was some cultural and historical baggage to call its 

own. It was not embarrassed by a medieval history, but in desperate 

need of one. There is no need to escape from a synchronous relation 

with the past; rather, this is exactly the type of temporal imagining the 

nation  was  searching  for,  a  way  of  claiming  an  ancestral  heritage 

without  having  to  inflate  the  meagre  and  dubious  details  of  the 

country's 'short history'. (Ball 170) 

The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles’  representation  of  heroism  is  closely  aligned 

with  Australian  values  and  aspirations.  There  is  a  significant  imperative  for 

altruism among those with the privilege of blood in the Old Kingdom. There is 

also  a  strong  history  of  sacrifice.  As  members  of  the  royal  family, 

Touchstone’s mother and sisters were literal sacrifices, Kerrigor slaughtering 

them  and  using  their  blood  to  break  two  of  the  Great  Charter  stones. 

Sabriel’s  father,  Terciel,  is  killed  within  the  course  of  Sabriel,  sacrificing 

himself in order to give Sabriel an opportunity to escape and to continue the 

fight  for  the  sake  of  the  Kingdom.  His  death  follows  that  of  four  other 

Abhorsen who had “fallen in this century alone, trying to deal with the Dead, 

the  broken  stones  and  the—the  original  problem”  (Nix  Sab  182).  Lirael 

similarly,  believes  that  binding  The  Destroyer  will  only  be  achieved  at  the 

cost of her life. She goes ahead regardless, but is saved by the intervention 

of the Dog, at the cost of the Dog’s current earthly life and of her own hand.  

Page | 140  

 
Sacrifice, for those of the Blood, is not only present in the loss of material life; 

it  has  many  manifestations.  These  include  the  sacrifice  of  family  life,  the 

sacrifice  of  choice,  and  the  sacrifice  of  connection  to  the  material  things  of 

the world. Just before his death, Abhorsen Terciel speaks of this to Sabriel: 

‘I  have  not  been  an  ideal  parent,  I  know,’  Abhorsen  said  quietly. 

‘None of us ever are. When we become the Abhorsen, we lose much 

else.  Responsibility  to  many  people  rides  roughshod  over  personal 

responsibilities;  difficulties  and  enemies  crush  out  softness;  our 

horizons narrow. You are my daughter, and I have always loved you. 

But  now,  I  live  again  for  only  a  short  time—a  hundred  hundred 

heartbeats,  no  more—  and  I  must  win  a  battle  against  a  terrible 

enemy. Our parts now—which perforce we must play—are not father 

and  daughter,  but  one  old  Abhorsen,  making  way  for  the  new.  But 

behind this, there is always my love.’ (Nix Sab 301-302) 

Arielle,  Lirael’s  mother,  also  dies  in  service  of  the  Charter  after  sacrificing 

both  family  and  choice  for  the  sake  of  fulfilling  her  destiny.  Before  Lirael’s 

birth  Arielle  foresees  this  sacrifice  will  be  required  and  leaves  a  message 

with Mogget: 

'You will stand by my daughter near the Wall. You will see her grown, 

as I will not. Tell Lirael that ... that my going will be ... will have been 

... no choice of mine. I have linked her life and mine to the Abhorsen, 

and put the feet of both mother and daughter on a path that will limit 

our own choosing. Tell her also that I love her, and will always love 

her, and that leaving her will be the death of my heart.' (Nix Abh 215) 

Similarly, Sabriel, even after the restoration of the monarchy and the defeat 

of  Kerrigor,  is  regularly  separated  from  family  due  to  the  responsibilities  of 

Page | 141  

 
 
 
 
her role, leaving Touchstone fearful for her safety and Prince Sameth feeling 

he  is  only  of  secondary  importance  to  his  mother.  This  can  be  seen  in  the 

exchange  between  Touchstone  and  his  son  following  Sameth’s  almost 

deadly encounter with the necromancer Hedge in Death:  

‘Your mother is more worried about you than anything else.’ 

‘Then where is she?’ asked Sam[…] 

‘Apparently,  there  is  a  Mordaut  riding  the  ferryman  at  Oldmond,’ 

explained  Touchstone  patiently,  as  he  had  explained  so  many  of 

Sabriel’s  necessary  absences  over  the  course  of  Sam’s  childhood. 

‘[…] She’ll meet us back at Belisaere.’ 

‘If  she  doesn’t  have  to  go  somewhere  else,’  said  Sam,  knowing  he 

was being bitter and childish. But he could have died, and apparently 

that still wasn’t enough for his mother to come and see him. 

‘Unless  she  has  to  go  somewhere  else,’  agreed  Touchstone,  as 

calmly as ever. […] 

‘Sorry,’ Sam mumbled. ‘I know she has to do it. Being the Abhorsen 

and everything.’  

‘Yes,’ said Touchstone, and Sam got a slight hint of his father’s own 

deep  feelings  about  the  many  and  frequent  absences  required  by 

Sabriel’s battles with the Dead. (Nix Lir 207-8)  

The above examples all demonstrate physical, social and emotional sacrifice 

in service of the Charter. 

Although  not  facing  the  imminent  dangers  of  Abhorsen,  the  Clayr  too, 

perform  sacrifice,  most  clearly  in  the  severing  of  their  connection  with  the 

material world in order to fulfil their destinies as the Kingdom’s seers. Indeed, 

“[i]t was not uncommon for some of the more ancient Clayr to perceive only [. 

. .] fragmented futures and not be able to interact with the present at all” (Lir 

Page | 142  

 
 
101).  Although  this  is  an  aspect  of  their  calling,  it  does  not  come  without  a 

sense  of  loss.  Just  before  her  own  death,  Filris,  Lirael’s  great-great-

grandmother shares her regrets with Lirael, including sorrow that, being “[t]oo 

much a Clayr, I suppose, too much in the future”, she was never close to her 

granddaughters  or  great-granddaughters  (106).    Filris  admits  to  Lirael  that 

“[m]ost of all I regret I have not lived enough in the present these last fifteen 

years. I should have met you sooner” (Lir 105). 

As  the  ostensibly  national  traits  of  heroism  and  sacrifice  actually  reflect 

broader western discourses of moral value, these motifs translate well to an 

international  western  readership.  As  Ball  astutely  observes,  “although  the 

Gallipoli  nation  purports  to  celebrate  a  distinctive  character  and  identity,  it 

betrays the paradox that nationhood has been achieved as per the old way, 

war and sacrifice – the nation is not so different after all” (171) . These texts, 

therefore,  intersect  with  not  only  the  cultural  imaginings  of  contemporary 

Australia,  but  with  widespread,  longstanding  discourses  of  merit  and 

significance.  

The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles’  use  of  the  image  of  blood  and  of  bloodlines 

also heavily intersects with and reflects Anglo-Australian identity and desire. 

Ball observes that the “importance of blood to the national imagining runs on 

two levels. There are the Blood lines of racial strength and purity; and there 

is  the  Blood  of  sacrifice  and  martyrdom”  (Ball  163).  Although  the  Blood  of 

sacrifice and martyrdom is foregrounded within The Old Kingdom Chronicles, 

the  notion  that  the  Bloodlines  need  to  remain  unadulterated  if  they  are  to 

retain strength and purity is also present within the texts. An explicit example 

of  this  is  when  Dog  explains  to  Lirael  that  the  Five  Great  Charters  not  only 

Page | 143  

 
  
 
poured their essence into bloodlines of Royalty, Abhorsen and Clayr, but the 

Bright  Shiners  also  “passed  that  power  into  stone  and  mortar,  when  blood 

alone was judged to be too easily diluted and led astray” (Lir 461).  

Indeed,  fear  that  the  purity  of  the  Charter  may  be  corrupted  is  recurrent 

throughout  the  trilogy.  Greetings  are  often  accompanied  by  the  touching  of 

Charter marks in order to test against corruption. Examples include Mogget 

testing Touchstone’s Charter mark with a lick, “finding him to be unsullied by 

Free  Magic,  or  necromancy”  (Sab  184),  and  Lirael  and  Sameth’s  first 

encounter, when Lirael remains suspicious despite the Dog’s assurance that 

“[h]e’s a royal prince all right […] I can smell his blood” (Lir 471): 

Quickly,  Lirael  reached  across  with  her  left  hand  and  touched  the 

Charter  mark  on  his  forehead,  her  sword  held  ready  to  strike  if  the 

mark was false or corrupted. But her finger felt the familiar warmth of 

the true Charter, bright and strong. (Nix Lir 473) 

Certainly, this undercurrent concerning purity of blood sits within the frame of 

magic not of race. Royalty, Abhorsen and Clayr literally hold the essence of 

the Charter in their blood, and there is a need for it to remain uncorrupted by 

unconstrained  Free  Magic.    Still,  the  metaphoric  resonance  of  a  need  to 

maintain  the  purity  of  blood,  of  the  imperative  that  it  remain  unsullied  and 

undiluted,  is  not  unproblematic.  While  the  Old  Kingdom’s  strong  Northern, 

Anglo-Saxon,  Anglo-Celtic  associations  contrast  with  the  Anglo-Norman 

associations  of  Ancelstierre,  they  contrast  even  more  strongly  with  the 

Otherness  represented  by  the  Southerling  refugees.  This  contrast  will  be 

discussed in greater detail in Chapter 4.  

Page | 144  

 
 
 
 
The exclusivity of the privilege of Blood, however, is somewhat offset by the 

fact  that  baptism  into  the  Charter  is  available  to  all,  not  only  to  Royalty, 

Abhorsen and Clayr. There is general access to the Charter, unrestricted by 

caste, ethnicity, or gender. The difference between “normal people’s” access 

to the Charter and those of the Blood, however, is striking. This is evident in 

Sam’s  musings  about  the  affinity  between  his  blood  and  ancient  Charter 

artefacts: 

Sam wondered about the use of blood, the same blood that ran in his 

veins.    It  felt  strange  to  him  that  his  pounding  heart  was  in  its  way 

akin  to  the  Great  Stone’s  ahead.  [...] Why  was  royal,  Abhorsen  and 

Clayr  blood  different  from  normal  people’s  –  even  that  of  other 

Charter  Mages  […]?  Why  did  their  blood  contain  Charter  Magic, 

magic  that  could  not  be  duplicated  by  marks  drawn  from  the 

generally accessible Charter? (Nix Lir 290)  

Still,  there  are  many  ‘normal’  Charter  mages  scattered  throughout  villages, 

the  Royal  Guard,  and  even  the  Ancelstierran  army.  Sabriel’s  school,  too, 

being  situated  close  to  the Wall teaches  the  use of  Charter magic  to  select 

pupils  (Sab  15).  A number of  the  Perimeter  Guard  have  been  baptised  into 

the  Charter.  Colonel  Horyse  speaks  of  the  Crossing  Point  Scouts  as  “a 

somewhat  motley  collection  of  Ancelstierrans  who’ve  managed  to  gain  a 

Charter mark and some small knowledge of magic” (Sab 35). Nicholas Sayre 

is another Ancelstierran who comes to possess a Charter mark after the Dog 

grants  him  a  baptism  and  a  second  chance  at  life  (Abh  425).  The  different 

forms of access to the Charter mix both elitist and egalitarian images, once 

more confusing and obscuring notions of inequity based on blood and caste. 

This hints at the way the novels negotiate ethnic difference, maintaining the 

authority and privilege for an elite group who are linked to the divine through 

Page | 145  

 
 
their  blood,  whist  simultaneously  approving  a  (lesser)  form  of  democratic 

sharing of this privilege.  

Situating  the  story  in  an  imagined  past  does  not  constrain  its  relevance.  

Despite a medieval and fantastic setting, the narrative and ideological bent in 

The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles  have  a  strong  Australian  inflection,  and, more 

broadly,  intersect  with  contemporary  Western  ideals.    Although  ostensibly 

concerned  with  a  distant  secondary  world,  texts  such  as  The  Old  Kingdom 

Chronicles  can  be  seen  as  barometers  of  their  own  times.  They  reflect  the 

discourses,  tensions,  and  ideological  contestations  present  in  Australian 

society  at  the  time  of  their  production.  The  following  chapter  will  take  the 

Southerling  refugee  crisis  as  a  case  study  to  illustrate  how  medievalist 

fantasy is able to comment on current political events.  

Page | 146  

 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 4 

Refugees, Humanitarianism and Naturalised 

Western Power 

This  chapter  will  focus  on  how  ethnic  difference  is  represented  in  The  Old 

Kingdom Chronicles. It will do so with particular reference to the Southerling 

refugee crisis depicted in Lirael and Abhorsen. I will consider how Otherness 

is  represented  within  the  conceit  of  the  story.  I  will  also  examine  how  the 

portrayal of the refugee crisis within the novels closely intersects with issues 

at the forefront of Australian politics at the time the novels were written. This 

entails  a  discussion  of  the  rise  of  populist,  Anglo-centric  nationalist  politics 

during  the  1990s  and  early  2000s,  particularly  that  associated  with  the 

reactionary  political  figure  of  Pauline  Hanson  and  the  related,  albeit 

moderated,  expressions  of  Anglo-centric  nationalism  by  the  then  Prime 

Minister, John Howard, and other members of his government. 

In  the  Preface  to  Creating  Australia  (1997)  Stuart  Macintyre  sums  up  the 

political  climate  during  this  period.  He  casts  the  early  1990s  as  a  time  in 

which  Australia  culturally  “found  ways  of  managing  diversity  without  ethnic 

recidivism”, but notes a stark discursive shift in the latter half of the decade 

after the election of the Howard Government in 1996: 

Page | 147  

 
 
 
 
 
 
Then in 1996, this new apparent national settlement was thrown into 

doubt.  In  the  space  of  a  year  the  cuewords  of  public  discourse 
changed—from  Paul  Keating’s  ‘Big  Picture’ 13 to  Pauline  Hanson’s  
‘Asian  Invasion’,  from  Don  Watson’s 14  anticipation  of  the    ‘first 

postmodern  republic’,  with  the  principal  values  of  difference  and 

tolerance,  to  John  Howard’s  assault  on  the  ‘black  armband’  view  of 

history’. (Macintyre ix) 

John  Howard’s  message  did  not  stop  at  advocating  a  more  forgiving, 

apologist view of Anglo-centric and racist practices and policies in Australia’s 

past.  It  looked  to  approve  and  reassert  the  purportedly  challenged  Anglo-

Celtic  dominance  at  the  centre  of  Australia’s  post-settlement  historical 

cultural  identity.  In  White  Nation  (WN)  Ghassan  Hage  observes  that  the 

desire  to  maintain  Anglo-centric  cultural,  political  and  economic  power  is, 

then, ironically, reconstructed as egalitarianism: 

In a peculiarly Australian way, the call for ‘equality’ was emptied of its 

socio-economic  significance  and  became  effectively  a  call  for  the 

reassertion  of  the  old  Anglo-Australian  order  and  for  assimilation. 

There  was  no  hypocrisy  here,  for  egalitarianism  was  precisely  a 

yearning for the time when Anglo-Celtic males could credibly, despite 

their  class  differences,  imagine  themselves  to  be  just  ‘mates’  and 

where  they  could  all  feel  that  they  had  an  equal  right  to  the  nation” 

(Hage WN 204) 

The disjunction between a firm belief in the liberal principles of equity and the 

increase  in  exclusionary  rhetoric  and  political  practice  is  obscured  by  the 

conflation  of  egalitarianism  with  Western  British  ideological,  political  and 

cultural  dominance.  It  becomes  axiomatic  that  Anglo-Celtic  Australia  is 

egalitarian,  and  by  extension,  that  the  Other  threatens  this  fundamental 

cultural aspiration. 

13 Australian  Prime  Minister  (1991-  1996)  Paul  Keating’s  ‘Big  picture’  looked  toward  greater 
economic  and  cultural  ties  with  the  Asia  region,  republicanism,  and  reconciliation  between  the 
settler and Indigenous Australians. 
14 Historian, DR. Don Watson, was speech writer for Paul Keating from 1992-1996. 

Page | 148  

 
                                                           
Deborah  Madsen  associates  the  conservative  shift  in  Australia’s  politics  of 

ethnicity  with  notions  of  home  and  homelessness,  exposing  a  particular 

postcolonial  concern  with  issues  of  identity.  This  is  exemplified  in  Pauline 

Hanson’s maiden speech in parliament: 15 

When  Pauline  Hanson  asked,  on  behalf  of 

the  white-settler 

community,  "where  can  I  go  home  to?"  she  indelibly  linked 

discourses  of  ethnic  difference  with  those  of  nation,  belonging,  and 

homeliness. This is underlined by her use of home as a metaphor for 

nation when, in her maiden parliamentary speech, she proposed that 

"if I can invite whom I want into my home, then I should have the right 

to have a say in who comes into my country".  (Madsen 19) 

This  rhetoric  is  both  echoed  and  answered  in  John  Howard’s  Federal 

election  campaign  policy  launch  speech  of  28  October  2001:  “we  have  a 

proud  record  of  welcoming  people  from  140  different  nations.  But  we  will 

decide  who  comes  to  this  country  and  the  circumstances  in  which  they 

come” (Politics 2001: online).  

Although  both  Hanson  and  Howard  were  decried  as  racist  by  advocates  of 

multiculturalism and charged with indulging in populist politics, it is clear that 

such  rhetoric  resonated  with  many  ‘ordinary’  Australians.  Hage  notes  that 

many Australians responded with wholehearted support for both Howard and 

Hanson, 

feeling 

that  which  he  describes  as  a  “neurotic  sense  of 

disempowerment”  associated  with  the  push  for  multiculturalism  (WN  205). 

The  largely  imagined  nature  of  this  sense  of  White  impotence,  however, 

15   This  speech  included  the  assertion:  “I  believe  we  are  in  danger  of  being  swamped  by  Asians. 
Between 1984 and 1995, 40 per cent of all migrants coming into this country were of Asian origin. 
They  have  their  own  culture and  religion,  form  ghettos  and  do  not assimilate.  Of  course,  I  will  be 
called racist but, if I can invite whom I want into my home, then I should have the right to have a say 
in who comes into my country”. (Hanson, Hansard 10/09/1996, 3859) 

Page | 149  

 
 
 
                                                           
 
does  not  invalidate  the  cultural  insecurity  attached  to  challenges  to  national 

identity. 

This  neurotic  sense  of  disempowerment  should  not,  however,  allow 

us to dismiss the actual loss and disempowerment from which it has 

resulted.  As  far  as  cultural  politics  is  concerned,  whatever  forms  of 

inclusion  and  ‘democracy’  White  cosmo-multiculturalism  grants  to 

ethnic  people,  it  takes  away  from  the  more  insular  White  working- 

and middle-class people who are perceived as unable, by definition, 

to  appreciate  and  value  otherness,  let  alone  govern  it.  Indeed, 

deprived  of  the  capacity  of  appreciating  other  ethnic  cultures,  and 

even  with  Anglo  culture  decreed  as  uninteresting  and  provincial  by 

the  multicultural  order,  those  possessors  of  Angloness  are  left 

without even a stall at the multicultural fair. (Hage WN 205) 

In  such  a  charged  political  environment,  refugee  advocate  Beth  Gibbings 

notes in “Remembering the SIEV X” (2010), that: 

Popular  support  for  Hanson’s  extreme  views  shifted  the  public 

debate to the right, and allowed the conservative government, under 

Prime  Minister  John  Howard,  to  take  an  increasingly  hostile  stand 

towards both Aboriginal people and asylum seekers. One result was 

the introduction in 1999 of a severe restriction on the rights of those 

people who had been recognized as refugees. (Gibbings 18) 

Similar  to  the  anti-intellectualism  evident  in  the  republican  debate,  pro-

immigration  and  refugee  advocacy  became  tied  to  the  perception  of 

intellectual  elitism  and  often  portrayed  as  the  province  of  politically  correct 

‘do-gooders’.  It  could  be  framed  as  an  “attack  on  the  core  British  values  of 

traditional White Australia […] where the figure of the ordinary ‘mainstream’ 

Australian,  the  ‘traditional  Aussie  battler’,  is  perceived  as  a  victim  of  a 

conspiracy to change the very nature of the country” (Hage WN 20). Indeed, 

sociologist  Katharine  Betts  argues  that  questions  about  “asylum  seekers, 

defence  and  national  security,  terrorism,  and  immigration  -  bear  on  the 

Page | 150  

 
integrity of the nation, both at the symbolic level and in reality” (52). Clearly 

present  in  these  debates  is  a  disquiet  over  perceived  challenges  to 

Australia's traditional national identity, and this brings cultural tensions to the 

fore. 

The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles  were  written  in  a  period  when  these  issues 

were  increasingly  at  the  forefront  in  national  politics.  Interestingly,  Lirael’s 

introduction to the Southerling refugee crisis is the only instance in the three 

novels  where 

the  South 

is  referred 

to  as 

the  “Commonwealth  of 

Ancelstierre”.  This  uses  the  structure  of  the  title,  the  “Commonwealth  of 

Australia”,  and  in  doing  so  seems  to  subtly  invite  comparison.  In  an 

examination  of  the  discourses  circulating  at  this  time,  “Dog  Whistles  and 

Death Penalties” (2004), political analysts Murray Goot and Tim Sowerbutts 

speak  of  a  divide  in  how  the  issues  surrounding  asylum  seekers  and 

immigration  were  framed. While  talk-back  radio  and  tabloid  news  produced 

examples  of  overt  xenophobia  and  racism, 16 Governmental  opposition  to 

asylum seekers, rather than employing a lexis which drew attention to ethnic 

difference, utilised suggestions of criminal activity and notions of inequity. It 

condemned  ‘queue  jumpers’,  ‘people  smugglers’  and  ‘illegal  immigration’ 

while  avoiding  mention  of  race  or  religion  (Goot  and  Sowerbutts  5).  In  a 

rhetorical move that appealed to humanitarian values, policies of deterrence 

could be cast as protection for refugees, both from exploitation by the people 

smugglers,  and  from  endangering  themselves  through  risking  perilous 

passages  on  unsafe  boats. 17  Asylum  seeker  advocates,  however,  saw 

stitching the Lips of a Migrant Nation”, pgs 80-83 

16 See Sara Wills: Un
17 See, for  example,  former  Minister  for  Immigration  Phillip  Ruddock’s  comment  that, if  not  for  the 
governments  hard-line  approach,  people  smuggling  would  not  have  been  curbed,  and  "we  would 
have had people still sailing, we would have people still drowning and people who are not entitled to 
priority  refugee  claims  getting  resettled  in  Australia.",  “Tampa  and  all  that,  one  year  on”,  Sydney 
Morning Herald, 27Aug 2002. 

‐

Page | 151  

 
 
                                                           
opposition to ‘boat people’ as “generated almost entirely by hostility to people 

from  the  Middle  East”  (Goot  and  Sowerbutts  3).  The  hard-line  attitude  to 

refugees  was 

interpreted  as  populist, 

‘dog-whistle’  politics,  with 

the 

government playing the ‘race card’ (Goot and Sowerbutts 3).   

The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles’  inclusion  of  similar  discourses  gives  an 

Australian  inflection  to  the  refugee  issues  addressed  within  the  fantasy 

storyline. The novels present an obvious humanitarian argument against the 

hysteria  and  harshness  rooted  in  xenophobia  and  racism.  They  make  a 

similarly  strong  statement  against  the  political  exploitation  of  a  fear  of 

Otherness.    This  critique  is  centred  on  the  character  of  Corolini,  an 

Ancelstierran  politician  who  has  had  a  recent  and  surprising  ascension  in 

Ancelstierre’s political realm. Ellimere, having left school in Ancelstierre only 

a  year  previous  says  Corolini’s  rise  happened  “after  my  time”,  while  Sam 

could  say  by  the  time  he  left  Ancelstierre  that  Corolini  was  regularly  in  the 

newspapers (Nix Lir 306).  The naming of Corolini’s ‘Our Country’ party has 

immediate resonance for the Australian reader, being suggestive of Pauline 

Hanson’s  ‘One  Nation’  party.  One  Nation’s  meteoric  rise  provides  another 

point of resemblance, as does the branding of Corolini as “a populist rabble-

rouser” (Lir 163) within sections of the Ancelstierran press. Another similarity 

between  ‘Our  Country’  and  ‘One  Nation’  is  that  both  groups  seek  political 

clout  as  a  minor  party  through  aspiring  to  the  balance  of  power  in 

government.  Further  similarity  is  discernible  in  the  way  both  parties  were 

able  to  pull  other  major  political  players  further  to  the  right  of  politics  in 

matters of national identity and immigration. 

Page | 152  

 
 
 
 
Corolini’s  ascension  to  power  is  traced  throughout  the  novels  as  he  moves 

from  being  a  mere  demagogue  to  becoming  someone  who  is  able  to  exert 

significant  influence  on  policy.  The  ‘Our  Country’  party  may  have  gained  a 

foothold through “populist rubbish, pandering to the fears of the countryfolk” 

(Lir  295),  but  its  power  soon  becomes  disproportionate;  as  Touchstone 

notes:  “Corolini  and  his  party  now  hold  the  balance  of  power  in  the 

Ancelstierre  Moot,  they’ve  been  able  to  get  the  Southerlings  [refugees] 

moved farther and farther north” (Lir 295).  

Corolini’s  xenophobic  rhetoric  is  able  to  stir  protesting  mobs,  such  as  the 

surging  crowd  that  attacked  Touchstone  and  Sabriel  in  Corvere,  “shouting, 

"Foreigners  out!"  and  "Our  Country!"  The  shouts  were  accompanied  by 

bricks  and  stones”  (Abh  8).  Although Abhorsen  was first  published  in 2003, 

there  is,  perhaps,  a  certain  prescience  in  the  novel’s  critique  of politics  that 

appeal to baser instincts and covertly incite hatred. Discourses such as those 

propagated by One Nation contributed to a cultural tension and environment 

in which incidents like the 2005 Cronulla riots could occur. 18  

Other  images  that  resonate  with  an  Australian  reader  are  the  text’s 

references  to  hundreds  of  refugees  arriving  on  boats,  “packed  aboard  like 

18 The  Cronulla  race  riots  occurred  11  December  2005  after  a  gathering  of  5000  predominantly 
Anglo-Celtic people who were invited, via text, to reclaim ‘their’ beach from ‘Middle-Eastern gangs’ 
on behalf of ‘Australians’.  The Reporting Diversity Project notes that “they began with reports of the 
aftermath  of  the  bashing  of  two  volunteer  lifesavers  at  Cronulla,  a  southern  beachside  suburb  of 
Sydney.  This  followed  ongoing  tensions  between  Cronulla  locals  and  visitors  to  the  beach.  On 
December 11, these tensions flared into what have been widely described as race riots, with violent 
confrontations between predominantly Anglo-European “Aussies” and predominantly Muslim “Lebs”. 
The Cronulla riots sparked a wave of claims and counter-claims about responsibility for the violence 
and, more broadly, about the nature of race relations in Australia. Cronulla locals displayed varying 
responses, with some claiming that it was “about time” and that the riots were about “respect and 
pride” by white Australians; while others expressed shame and fear. Some differentiated between 
those involved in the rioting and the Lebanese community more generally. This range of responses 
reflected a similar scope of reactions from the community more generally”.  (Cronulla Riots (The) – 
The Sequence of Events online) 

Page | 153  

 
 
 
                                                           
 
sardines”  (Lir  162).  This  is  despite  surveillance  and  active  measures  of  the 

“Navy  and  the  Flying  Corps  to  keep  such  trouble  on  the  other  side  of  the 

Sunder Sea”, with many boats “turned back on the sea or at the major ports” 

(Lir 162).  This form of border protection has a resemblance to that instituted 

by the Howard  government, which approved practices such as turning back 

boats in international waters, refusing permission for boats carrying refugees 

to  land  at  ports  in  Australian  territories,  and setting  up  the  ‘Pacific  Solution’ 

which  led  to  the  detention  and  processing  of  refugees  by  poorer  pacific 

nations  such  as  Nauru  and  also  Papua  New  Guinea  “in  return  for  large 

payments from the Australian government” (Clyne 180).  

Correlations  with  the  Australian  refugee  situation  are  also  present  in  the 

forced 

internment  of  Southerling 

refugees  while 

the 

“Ancelstierran 

government tried to work out how to send them back to their own countries” 

(Nix  Lir  162).  This  is  evident  in  the  observation  that  every  time  a  “mass 

deportment  had  been  attempted,  it  had  ended  in  hunger  strikes,  riots,  and 

every  form  of  possible  protest”  (Lir 162). This  recalls  situations  such  as  the 

hunger-strikes and roof protests at the remote Australian detention centre at 

Woomera,  particularly  following  rejection  of  a  repatriation  deal  by  Afghani 

refugees  that  would  see  many  of  them  forcibly  returned  to  the  volatile 

situation  from  which  they  had  fled  (Skeers  online).  It  evokes  desperate 

measures  such  as  suicides,  self-harm,  and  the  protests  in  which  some 

“detainees in Woomera, Port Hedland, and Curtin sew[ed] their lips together” 

(Evans  167),  graphically  illustrating  both  a  refusal  to  eat  and  their  lack  of 

voice. Similarly, Nix’s image of thousands of “men in blue hats and women in 

blue  scarves,  and  many  children  dressed  completely  in  blue[…]  throwing 

planks onto the concertina wire, forcing their way through and cutting where 

Page | 154  

 
 
they  had  to”  (Nix  Abh  261)  recalls    attempted  breakouts  from  detention 

centres  such  as  Woomera’s  “major  Easter  action  in  2002  where  Australian 

activists assisted over 50 detainees to pull down fences and escape” (Evans 

164).  

Much  of  the  imagery  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles  uses  in  describing  the 

refugees and the crisis, however, is broad and generic rather than specific. It, 

therefore,  resonates  also  with  wider  international  concerns  and  with 

representations  of  peoples  displaced  by  war  across  different  times  and 

spaces.  Some of Nix’s description is immediately evocative of more recent 

pictures of refugees in detention in remote locations in Australia such as Port 

Hedland and Woomera; centres which Christine Evans describes as “a vast 

prison complex ringed by five layers of razor wire, guarded by water cannon 

and patrolled 24 hours a day” (164).  In Lirael many refugees had been: 

given temporary refuge in what the Corvere Times described as “the 

remote northern regions of the nation,” which clearly meant close to 

the Wall.  

This  must  be  one  of  the  refugee  settlements  that  had  sprung  up  in 

the  last  three  years,  Sameth  realized,  noting  that  the  field  was 

surrounded  by  a  triple  fence  of  concertina  wire  and  that  there  were 

several policemen near the gate. (Nix Lir 161) 

Others passages evoke images of those displaced in the Great Wars of the 

twentieth century: 

Hundreds  of families. Grandparents,  parents,  children,  babies. They 

all had the same scared look on their faces, and nearly everyone, no 

matter  how  old  or  small,  was  weighed  down  with  suitcases,  bags, 

and small bundles. Some had strange possessions, small machines 

Page | 155  

 
 
and  metal  objects  that  Lirael  did  not  know  but  Sam  recognized  as 

sewing machines, phonographs, and typewriters. (Nix Abh 311) 

In a broader sense, the refugee sub-plot within The Old Kingdom Chronicles 

participates in world-wide debates regarding the response to those displaced 

by  war  and  adversity.  The  humanitarian  undercurrents  are  evident  in  the 

texts’  representation  of  the  refugee  issue.  There  is  overt  sympathy  for  the 

refugees’  plight  and  censure  of  the  way  they  are  rejected  or  pushed  out  of 

sight either through turning them away from Ancelstierre’s shores or through 

internment  in  remote  camps.    There  is  an  awareness  of  the  horror  of  war 

from which the refugees must be fleeing in order to take such great risks with 

their lives so as to escape.  

There is even more overt censure of populist, dog-whistle, politics that feeds 

on  fear  of  the  Other  and  appeals  to  base  hatreds.  The  condemnation  of 

Corolini  as  a  “dangerous  egoist”,  happy  to  exploit  the  refugee  situation, 

willing  “to  do  anything  to  gain  power”,  is  unequivocal  (Lir  163).  The  texts 

work  on  different  levels,  firstly  to  evoke  empathy  for  the  refugees  and  to 

demand  a  humanitarian  response,  and  secondly,  to  condemn  populist 

discourses of fear and hatred, particularly those utilised for political gain.  

Nix’s use of a medievalist secondary world as the setting for his story does 

not  mean  the  events  and  the  ideologies  within  the  tale  are  detached  from 

contemporary  concerns.  The  novels  contribute  to  current  discourses  and  in 

many  ways  reflect  the  zeitgeist  of  the  time  and  place  of  their  production. 

Moreover, books set within the past, even one that is imagined, are able to 

Page | 156  

 
 
 
 
appropriate  some  of  the  authority  vested  in  constructions  of  the  past;  they 

can  evoke 

the  weight  of  Lewis’s,  Tolkien’s,  and  Morris’s  medieval 

Northernness in service of their own ideological concerns. But still, there is a 

complex  exchange  between  modernity  and  the  medieval  which  makes  it 

difficult  to  completely  escape  hierarchies  and  assumptions  embedded  in 

appeals  to  the  past.  It  is  hard  to  escape  the  Whiteness  implicit  in 

Northernness, in ideas of blood and purity, and even in the power dynamics 

discernible 

in 

these 

texts’  censuring  of  racism  and  championing  of 

humanitarian refugee policies. 

An analysis of The Old Kingdom Chronicles, therefore, becomes problematic 

when  considered  within  the  frame  of  Whiteness.  There  is  a  way  in  which, 

while rejecting and censoring ethnic hatred and fear, the texts participate in 

contributing  to  the  hegemonic  privilege  of  Anglo-Celtic  power.  In  White 

Nation Ghassan Hage considers the divide between what he ironically labels 

‘evil  white  nationalists’  and  ‘good  white  nationalists’.  He  observes  that 

whether  nationalist  imaginings  are  expressed  as  aggression  and  exclusion, 

or  expressed  as  tolerant  multiculturalism,  in  both  of  these  formations  the 

cultural  power  still  resides  in  the  hands  of  Anglo-Celtic  Australia.  He 

suggests  that  both  these  positions  share  “the  same  imaginary  position  of 

power within a nation imagined as ‘theirs’. In fact, they enact the same White 

nation 

fantasy”  (WN  79).  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles  reflect 

this 

presumption of authority. While the text condemns aggression and exclusion, 

it assumes a position of power in order to practice tolerance and acceptance. 

As  Hage  argues  in  an  earlier  paper,  “Anglo-Celtics  Today:  Cosmo-

Multiculturalism  and  the  Phase  of  the  Fading  Phallus”  (AT),  Australia’s 

Page | 157  

 
 
multicultural  “discourse  of  tolerance  still  presupposes  a  dominant  Anglo-

Celtic centre” (AT 62). 

Hage  uses  Pierre  Bourdieu’s  notions  of  cultural  capital  to  introduce  a 

discussion of an Australian ‘national aristocracy’, where the ‘aristocracy’ not 

only holds cultural capital, but  they “naturalise their hold on it” (AT 46).  To 

feel one has a place in a nation, Hage argues, there must be a sense of not 

only  “homely  belonging”,  the  ability  to  feel  that  one  ‘fits  in’,  but  also  of 

“governmental  belonging”  which  gives  the  possessor  a  “right  to  contribute 

(even  if  by  only  having  a  legitimate  opinion  with  regards  to  internal  and 

external  politics  of  the  nation)  such as  it  remains  ‘one’s  home’”  (AT  48-49). 

Becoming a member of the national aristocracy, therefore, entails achieving 

dominance  through  being  able  to  see  oneself  as  “the  natural,  disinterested 

protector  and  guardian  of  an  equally  natural  national  order”  (Hage  AT  50).  

Though  clearly  benevolent,  the  Old  Kingdom’s  royalty,  Clayr  and  Abhorsen 

exude this sense of naturalised power. 

There is a strong implication that those in the North understand what is best 

for  the  refugees,  even  above  the  refugees  themselves.  Because  of  the 

North’s  understanding,  their  concern  over  the  entry  of  Southerling  refugees 

differs  from  that  of  Ancelstierre.  The  Old  Kingdom’s  response  is  situated  in 

humanitarian  concerns  for  the  wellbeing  and  protection  of  the  refugees, 

where  Ancelstierre’s  response  is  founded  upon  hysteria  and  xenophobia. 

This  is  seen  in  Sam’s  immediate  response  when  Nicholas  informs  him: 

“Uncle  Edward  says  that  Corolini  chap  wants  to  send  the  Southerlings  into 

your  neck  of  the  woods  […]  Across  the  Wall.  No  room  for  them  here,  he 

says,  and  lots  of  room  in  the  Old  Kingdom”.  Sam’s  reply  is  that  Corolini 

Page | 158  

 
 
 
“doesn’t know what he’s talking about. They would all die in the Borderlands. 

It’s not safe” (Lir 163).   

The  argument  that  it  would  be  dangerous  to  send  the  refugees  to  the  Old 

Kingdom  is  not  simply  one  that  appeals  to  the  refugees’  physical  safety;  it 

also suggests that refugees would find it difficult to process the culture shock 

of  living  in  a  land  in  which  magic  exists.  This  can  be  seen  in  the  dying 

Southerling man’s horrified reaction to Lirael trying to heal him with Charter 

magic. A simple movement of her hand evokes the response: “No! The Evil!”, 

as he attempts to escape Sam’s supporting hold. This is despite the Charter 

magic  being  “golden  light”  and  “clear  and  bright”  (Lir  547).  Given  the 

disjunction  between  Southerling  (dis)belief  in  magic  and  Old  Kingdom 

realities,  Sam  observes:  “It  must  have  been  terrible  for  them  when  they 

crossed the Wall” (Lir 546-547).  Although expressed as an informed concern 

for  the  mental  well-being  of  the  Southerlings,  there  is  an  underlying 

apprehension  that  the  Southerlings  would  be  unable  to  adapt  to  life  in  the 

North;  that,  given  the  fundamental  difference  in  the  way  they  perceive  the 

world, they would never have access to even a ‘homely belonging’ in the Old 

Kingdom.  

Such an apprehension also presupposes a generic Otherness. Although the 

refugees’  plight 

is  empathetically  represented,  within 

the  novels 

the 

Southerlings  are  seen  as  a  mass;  rarely,  if  at  all,  as  individuals.  None  is 

given  a  name  and  not  one  appears  in  more  than  a  passing  fashion. 

Separated  from  the  continent  that  is  home  to  the  Old  Kingdom  and 

Ancelstierre  by  the  aptly  named  ‘Sunder  Sea’,  the  names  of  the  far  South 

states from which the refugees are fleeing – Iskeria, Kalarime, Iznenia, and 

Page | 159  

 
 
 
Korrovia – also have a broadly generic alien quality,  suggesting something 

of Eastern Europe or the Middle East in their tone.  The texts’ description of 

the refugees also leads the reader to see the Southerlings as a group rather 

than individuals. The issue of different ethnicity is side-stepped by the lack of 

particular  physical  descriptors.  Apart  from  one  boy  who  is  seen  to  be  fair-

haired  (Lir  544),  Southerlings  are  generally  distinguished  by  their  national 

dress: “Nearly all of them had blue headscarves or hats, identifying them as 

Southerling  refugees”  (Lir  161).  Although  the  issue  of  religion  is  not 

foregrounded  in  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles,  the  images  of  women  in 

headscarves are instantly evocative of Islam. At the very least, an Otherness 

in  belief  is  tacit  in  the  very  different  metaphysical  perspective  of  the 

Southerlings;  as  Sam explains  to  Lirael,  “They  don’t  believe  in  magic,  even 

the superstitions the Ancelstierrans believe in, let alone our magic” (Lir 547). 

As  the  Southerlings  are  most  clearly  marked  as  ‘Other’  by  their  national 

dress, the Greater Dead’s exploitation and abuse of the Southerling refugees 

can  be  clearly  signalled  through  utilising  the  motif  of  blue.  It  is  immediately 

evident  that  many  refugees  have  been  killed  to  become  Dead  minions,  as 

they  “wore  the  remnants  of  blue  scarves  and  blue  hats”  (Lir  421).    Such 

imagery  is  oft  repeated:  “In  the  cool  light  he  saw  that  many  of  the  slain 

people wore blue hats or scarves. A scrap of blue material was caught in the 

claws  of  one  of  the  Dead  that  Lirael  had banished  with  her pipes”  (Lir  543-

544); “piles of corpses, bodies everywhere, bodies hanging on the wire and 

piled on the ground. They were all blue capped and blue scarved (Abh 271). 

Although  the  blue  hats  and  scarves  perform  the  purpose  of  instantly 

distinguishing  the  refugees  within  the  texts’  narrative,  this  too  works  to 

Page | 160  

 
 
 
present  the  refugees  as  an  homogenous  whole  rather  than  as  individual 

people.  This  is  despite  the  refugees  coming  from  four  different  states,  and 

despite  mentions  of  warring  rebel,  traditionalist,  anarchist,  and  imperialist 

factions in the far South (Lir 161-162). There are occasional glimpses given 

of individuals, such as the Southerling matriarch with whom Sam negotiates 

settlement  (Abh  338-340)  the  dead  fair-haired  boy  (Lir  544)  and  the  dying 

man who provides proof of the deceit, the treachery, and the horror enacted 

against the Southerling refugees before he, perhaps conveniently, succumbs 

(Lir  547-548).  Rather  than  three-dimensional  characters,  these  individuals 

are  almost  cursory  asides  within  the  book,  primarily  serving  a  narrative 

purpose within the story. 

Even  so,  the  texts  empathetically  represent  refugees  and  demonstrate  an 

understanding  sympathy  for  their  plight.  Pertinently,  it  is  the  Old  Kingdom 

that ultimately offers refuge to the Southerlings. Just as the refugees’ safety 

motivated  negotiations  to  prevent  the  movement  of  Southerling  refugees  to 

the  North,  their  safety  becomes  the  central  driver  in  the  offer  of  land  in  the 

Old  Kingdom.  This,  however,  evidences  a  certain  paternalism  toward  the 

refugees,  with  Sam  taking  up  the  mantle  of  ‘Prince  Sameth’,  assuming  the 

natural,  aristocratic  position  of  “disinterested  protector  and  guardian”  (Hage 

AT 50) of both those seeking refuge and of his national values: 

‘Southerlings!  Friends!  Do  not  go  beyond  the  western  ridge!  Only 

death  awaits  you  there!  Do  not  believe  the  papers  you  hold—they 

offer only lies! I am Prince Sameth of the Old Kingdom, and I promise 

to  give  land  and  farms  to  everyone  who  stays  in  the  valley!  If  you 

stay in the valley, you will be given farms and land beyond the Wall!’ 

(Nix Abh 316). 

Page | 161  

 
 
Moreover,  Sameth  demonstrates  a  naturalised  authority  apart  from  his 

position  as  prince.  Sam  shows  himself  to  be  cosmopolitan  enough  to 

appreciate  and  understand  the  Otherness  of  the  Southerlings.  He  is  Old 

Kingdom royalty, educated in the traditions of the north and in the power of 

the  Charter;  he  is  the  product  of  both  royalty  and  Abhorsen.  Sam  also  has 

experience and understanding of Ancelstierre through the time he has spent 

in the South during his schooling. He has mixed with those with entrenched 

power  in  Ancelstierre,  his  best  friend  being  nephew  to  the  Chief  Minister. 

Indeed, his privilege extends beyond his position as prince. 

For all his casual humility, Sameth fits the profile of what Ghassen Hage calls 

the ‘cosmopolite’: 

The  cosmopolite  is  a  class  (and  classy)  figure  and  western  (or  a 

culturally and physically westernised person), capable of appreciating 

and  consuming  ‘high  quality’  commodities  and  cultures,  including 

‘ethnic’ culture. (Hage AT 63) 

It  is  Sameth’s  ability  to  understand  and  appreciate  Otherness  that  enables 

him  to  act  as  both  protector  and  benefactor  of  the  Southerlings.  He 

demonstrates “cultural competence”, being able to appreciate “ethnic cultural 

diversity”  (Hage  AT  64).  Sam  shows  himself  different  from  the  ignorant 

“countryfolk”  who  Corolini  is  able  to  incite  by  appealing  to  their  fears  and 

anxieties (Lir 295).  It is his ability to recognise, appreciate, and work within 

the Southerlings’ own cultural framework (albeit for his own ends as well as 

theirs) 

that  precipitates  Sam’s  successful  negotiations 

to  have 

the 

Southerlings retreat into safety in order to secure land: 

[Sam]  was  struck  by  a  sudden  thought.  The  group  was  led  by  an 

ancient  matriarch,  white  haired  and  much  better  dressed  than 

everyone  around  her.  She  was  also  supported  by  several  younger 

Page | 162  

 
 
men  and  women.  It  was  the  only  group  that  was  not  obviously  a 

family, without children and without baggage. The matriarch was the 

leader,  Sam  thought.  He  knew  that  much  about  the  Southerlings. 

Someone who might be able to turn back the human tide.  (Nix Abh 

320-321) 

Sam’s  willingness  to  accept  this  Otherness  is  further  demonstrated  by  his 

quick  preparedness  to  participate  in  Southerling  rites  in  order  to  prove  his 

authenticity,  acceding  to  the  matriarch’s  request  that  he  promise  on  his 

blood. He demonstrates grace in allowing his blood to be drawn and mingled 

with that of the matriarch (Abh 340). This mingling of blood demonstrates a 

symbolic  joining  of  the  Southerlings  and  those  of  the  Old  Kingdom,  but  it 

simultaneously  represents 

the  matriarch’s  acquiescence 

to  Sameth’s 

authority within the North.  

The North’s acceptance of the refugees demonstrates a power dynamic that 

naturalises  the  authority  of  the  Old  Kingdom,  and  the  Old  Kingdom 

symbolically  remains  strongly  attached  to  Anglo-Celtic  identity.  For  all  the 

chaos at this point in the novel, it is still Prince Sameth who has the power to 

practise a national understanding, generosity and tolerance. Certainly, Sam’s 

actions come from a humanitarian position, and he is motivated by a genuine 

concern  for  the  well-being  of  both  the  Old  Kingdom  and  the  Southerling 

refugees.  In  this  dynamic,  however,  power  is  naturalised  and  imbedded  in 

the  Anglo-Celtic  North.  Tolerance  can  be  seen  as  a  “strategy  aimed  at 

reproducing  and  disguising  relationships  of  power  in  society,  or  being 

reproduced  through  that  disguise”  as  a  mode  in  which  “domination  is 

presented  as  a  form  of  egalitarianism”  (Hage  WN  87).  These  texts  overtly 

censure  populist  politics  that  feed  on  cultural  anxieties  and  fears,  but  they 

also implicitly present a naturalised Anglo-Celtic centre of power. 

Page | 163  

 
 
This  examination  demonstrates  how  difficult  it  is  for  texts  and  discourses 

alike to escape from entrenched and hierarchical paradigms of power. Even 

overt  challenges  to  cruelty,  racism  and  xenophobia  can  paradoxically  or 

unintentionally reinforce and naturalise hegemonic Western power. While the 

medievalist royal structure of the North serves to make the power dynamics 

within  these  texts  more  obvious,  it  can  also  make  them  more  natural.  The 

motifs  of  sacrifice, of protection, and  destiny  work  to further  obscure  issues 

of  privilege  and  power  with  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles.  Chapter  5  will 

consider  gender  dynamics  in  the  novels;  another  area  where  traditional 

paradigms of power continue to exert a strong, naturalised pressure. 

Page | 164  

 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 5 

Heroines and Heroes 

Chapter  2  discussed  the  affective  cultural  power  available  to  imaginings  of 

the past and Chapters 3 and 4 considered how this cultural power is utilised 

in  constructions  of  national  identity,  class  and  ethnicity.  This  chapter  will 

consider  how  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles  represent  gender  within  the 

context of a medievalised past. It explores whether a nostalgic appeal to the 

past  necessarily  leads  to  conservatism  and  the  confirmation  of  traditional, 

patriarchal  paradigms  of  power.  Through  an  examination  of  the  coming-of-

age  stories  of  both  male  and  female  protagonists  this  chapter  will  discuss 

ways in which these texts might conform to, subvert or challenge expectation 

in  regard  to  gender  roles.  It  will  discuss  the  effect  of  Sabriel  and  Lirael’s 

central  heroic  roles  within  the  novels,  and  of  the  supporting  roles  of 

Touchstone  and  Sameth.  It  will  consider  the  manner  in  which  The  Old 

Kingdom  Chronicles  mediate  between 

the  comparative 

influence  of 

longstanding  gender  paradigms  within  literature  and  the  influence  of 

contemporary ideologies that aspire to gender equity.   

Page | 165  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As  discussed  in  Chapter  1,  Brian  Attebery  argues  that  an  employment  of 

traditional  storytelling  forms,  patterns,  and  markers  can  easily  entail  an 

acceptance  of  conservative  class  and  gender  structures.  Attebery  asserts 

that  traditional  storytelling  paradigms,  particularly  within  coming  of  age 

fantasies,  typically  employ  separate  archetypal  approaches  for  male  and 

female protagonists. To discuss the hero’s journey he points to the works of 

folklorist Vladimir Propp and mythologist Joseph Campbell, positing that the 

traditional  rite of  passage for  a male  is  that of displacement,  transformation 

and  return  (Attebery  87).  To  discuss  the  traditional  heroine’s  journey  he 

appeals 

to  anthropologist  Bruce  Lincoln’s  pattern  of  enclosure, 

metamorphosis and emergence (Attebery 90).  

Traditional paradigms hold a discursive strength that makes them difficult to 

challenge. Within The Old Kingdom Chronicles, however, the journeys of the 

heroes and heroines are not clearly delineated by gender. Nevertheless, the 

texts  do  not  so  much  repudiate  archetypal  representations  as  complicate 

them;  sometimes  appearing  to  conform,  sometimes  shifting  slightly,  and 

sometimes  seeming  to  reverse  gender  expectation.  This  provides  an 

example of blending  the  comfort  of familiarity  and  the  surprise  of difference 

within genre fantasy.  Given both Sabriel and Lirael can be seen as coming 

of  age  tales,  it  is  not  surprising  that  these  heroines’  journeys,  at  least 

superficially,  can  be  made  to  fit  within  Lincoln’s  model  of  enclosure, 

metamorphosis  and  emergence.  For  much  of  her  childhood  Sabriel  is 

sheltered  in  a  protected  boarding  school  in  northern  Ancelstierre.  This 

enclosure  offers  protection  from  the  malevolent  forces  growing  in  power  in 

the Old Kingdom. It is revealed, too, that Sabriel’s confinement at Wyverley 

is, in part, directed by destiny. It responds to the Clayr’s foreknowledge that, 

Page | 166  

 
 
for the sake of the Old Kingdom, she would require a detailed geographical 

and cultural understanding of Ancelstierre.  

Sabriel’s  enclosure  at  school  is  also,  paradoxically,  intended  to  give  her 

greater  freedom.  Her  father  explains  to  her  that  safety  in  the  Old  Kingdom 

could have  only  been assured by  keeping  her  “practically  a  prisoner”  in  the 

Abhorsen  house  (Nix  Sab  297).  Her  sequestration  at  Wyverley,  therefore, 

provides  her  with  a  less  secluded  childhood  than  life  in  the  Old  Kingdom 

could have offered. Pertinently, too, Sabriel has access to a particular form of 

freedom associated with her necromantic calling. Although her body remains 

fixed  in  Ancelstierre,  the  Abhorsen  training  she  receives  allows  her  spirit  to 

travel  within  the  precincts of  Death.  Consequently,  Sabriel’s  ‘enclosure’  can 

be  seen  as  both  a  ‘shutting  out’  and  an  ‘opening  up’.  Her  experience  at 

Wyverley  ultimately  broadens  her  knowledge  and  life  experience,  and  this 

proves  crucial  to  the  protection  and  prosperity  of  her  homeland.  While 

Sabriel’s  experience  in  many  ways  corresponds  to  Lincoln’s  first  step  of 

enclosure, this is not without ambiguity or complexity. 

A  simple  alignment  of  Sabriel’s  journey  with  Lincoln’s  model  is  further 

complicated  by  the  ways  in  which  her  story  also  fits  with  the  masculine 

paradigm of a hero’s journey. Displacement is initially seen as she leaves the 

Old  Kingdom  to  reside  in  Ancelstierre.  It  is  even  more  clearly  identifiable 

when  she  subsequently  leaves  Wyverley  to  participate  in  a  literal  and 

physical quest within the Old Kingdom. 

Page | 167  

 
 
 
 
There  is  a  similar  complexity  in  the  narrative  of  Lirael’s  heroic  journey.  As 

one of the sisterhood of the Clayr, Lirael’s childhood is spent in enclosure. All 

the  seers  of  the  Old  Kingdom  live  in  the  mountain  at  Starmount  Glacier, 

separate to the general population of the villages and few remaining cities of 

the  northern  Kingdom.  They  not  only  live  apart  from  society,  but often,  in  a 

sense, also apart from time – confusing present past and future because of 

their  visions.  Their  experience  of  outside  the  Clayr’s  community  is  primarily 

through  revelations,  seen  in  visions  and  in  the  mirror  of  their  glacier.  Some 

higher-ranking  Clayr  do,  however,  have  regular  communication  with  their 

‘cousins’, the Abhorsen and royalty.  

It  is  significant  that  the  Clayr’s  seclusion  is  not  externally  imposed.  It  is  not 

the  consequence  of  patriarchal  or  societal  oppression,  nor  is  it  a  means  of 

withdrawal  or  escape.  It  is,  rather,  due  to  the  Clayr’s  essential  relationship 

with their glacier. It is firmly attached to their visionary calling. Regardless of 

how  isolating  and  removed  the  Clayr’s  life  might  be  from  conventional 

experience,  this  sequestered  existence  allows  access,  through  vision,  to  a 

world unconstrained by special and temporal limitations. Consequently, once 

again, this enclosure can be seen as both a ‘shutting in’ and as an ‘opening 

up’.  

Lirael’s  seclusion  is  even  greater  than  that  of  the  typical  Clayr,  as  she  is 

isolated  even  from  her  own  community.  This  separation  is  partly  self-

imposed,  and  partly  due  to  real  and  discernible  differences  between  Lirael 

and the rest of the Clayr. Her difference is not merely the contrast of her pale 

skin and dark hair with the Clayrs’ fair hair and tanned complexions. Lirael’s 

parentage  is  in  question  as  her  late  mother  eschewed  tradition,  leaving  the 

Page | 168  

 
 
 
glacier  “to  travel  who  knew  where,  only  to  return  seven  months  gone  with 

child”  (Lir  13).  Lirael  was  effectively  orphaned  at  the  age  of  five  when  her 

mother left the glacier never to return.  Lirael’s isolation, moreover, increases 

as  she  enters  her  teen  years  without  receipt  of  the  sight.  She  is,  therefore, 

physically and socially misfitted, and perceives herself as singularly ungifted. 

The reader, however, is able to recognise Lirael’s physical characteristics as 

those  peculiar  to  the  Abhorsen,  and  can,  therefore,  draw  inferences 

regarding  Lirael’s  paternity  and  the  direction  in  which  Lirael’s  giftedness 

might truly lie.  

As is the case with Sabriel, Lirael’s ‘enclosure’ is paradoxically also a means 

of freedom. Her assignment to work in the Clayr library (a further symbol of 

quiet  seclusion)  provides  access  to  a  reservoir  of  knowledge  in  the  form  of 

texts,  both  magical  and  non-magical.  Even  more  than  this,  Lirael’s  natural 

aptitude as a Charter Mage allows her to ‘awaken’ forbidden keys within her 

Charter spelled bracelet. This grants her admission to the labyrinth of library 

corridors and to rooms deep within the heart of the Clayr’s mountain, leading 

to Lirael experiencing many dangers, including cursed books and Free Magic 

creatures.  As  with  Sabriel,  that  which  equates  to  enclosure  and  that  which 

equates to freedom become confused. 

Lirael’s ‘enclosure’ in the library is also the means through which she meets 

her sole friend and confidante, the Disreputable Dog. Lirael’s exposure to the 

incorrigible Dog, who constantly encourages a certain restless exploration in 

her, means that Lirael’s isolation within her community does not equate to a 

sheltered  or  protected  existence.  As  with  Sabriel,  aspects  of  Lirael’s  story 

also  conform  to  the  male  archetypal  hero’s  journey. There  is  ‘displacement’ 

Page | 169  

 
 
 
as she physically must leave the mountain glacier in order to fulfil her heroic 

destiny, ‘transformation’ as she takes up the mantle of Abhorsen-in-Waiting, 

and her ‘return’ to her rightful place in the Kingdom.  

Sabriel’s and Lirael’s personal stories, however, can still be pressed into the 

mould  where  enclosure  gives  way  to  metamorphosis  and  emergence. 

Development and maturity are evidenced as these young women come to an 

acceptance  of  their  heroic  destinies.  The  awakenings  they  experience  are 

less  a  rejection  of  external  constraints  and  repressive  expectations,  and 

more an acceptance of their essential beings and destined place.  

The male protagonists of The Old Kingdom Chronicles, pertinently, can also 

be seen to undergo a process of enclosure, metamorphosis and emergence 

similar to that of the heroines. Touchstone experiences enclosure in a literal 

manner, akin to that which is endured by Snow White and Sleeping Beauty, 

as  he  is  magically  entrapped  in  a  ship’s  figurehead,  his  soul  in  stasis  just 

within  the  borders  of  death.  Prince  Sameth’s  life  too,  is  not  particularly 

distinguished  by  masculine  rites.  It  initially  follows  the  same  route  travelled 

by  his  mother,  Sabriel,  and  sister,  Ellimere. Like  them,  he  attends  boarding 

school  in  Ancelstierre  prior  to  facing  the  challenges  which  lead  to  his 

‘metamorphosis’ and ‘emergence’.  Pertinently, he ultimately emerges not to 

the adventurous and active life that he has been long expected to embrace, 

but  to  a  happily  enclosed  life  in  his  tower  room  workshop  living  out  his 

essential calling as a Wallmaker.  The male pattern of a hero’s journey can 

also  be  laid  across  his  experiences,  but  Sam’s  displacement  represents 

more a running away  from responsibility than the more generically depicted 

quest for freedom and adventure. Like the females within the novels, Sam’s 

Page | 170  

 
 
 
passage to adulthood is not clearly delineated along archetypal gender lines. 

The journeys of Nix’s protagonists are not uncomplicated; all might be seen 

to  simultaneously  conform  to and  push  against  traditional  gendered  models 

of coming of age rites. 

Jane Tolmie’s 2006 essay, “Medievalism and the Fantasy Heroine” provides 

another  model  through  which  to  consider  the  representation  of  women  in 

genre fantasy. She observes that a great deal of fantasy fiction with female 

protagonists  centre  “on  the  individual  woman  rising  above  a  system  that 

keeps her down [. . .] reversing expectations” (147). The exceptional heroine 

stands out from her female counterparts through being actively “independent, 

strong,  feisty  and  passionate”,  but  in  a  context  where  feminine  passivity  is 

the  rule  (Tolmie  146).  Although  fantasy  provides  a  clear  space  for  strong 

female  characters,  the  strength  of  the  trope  of  exceptionality  can  ironically 

serve  to  naturalise  feminine  weakness  and  submissiveness.  The  assertive, 

self-sufficient  woman,  argues  Tolmie,  is  shown  to  be  anomalous  and 

different from ‘normal’ women. Paradoxically, even while the active woman is 

lauded  within  a  story,  there  is  a  simultaneous  confirmation  of  traditional 

female  archetypes,  as  ‘natural’  femininity  becomes  aligned  with  conformity 

and passivity. 

The characters of Sabriel and Lirael conform to the pattern of strong, active 

heroines.  Significantly,  however,  within  the  context  of  The  Old  Kingdom 

Chronicles,  unlike  the  fantasy  novels  discussed  by  Tolmie,  it  is  not 

exceptional that women should take on these active heroic roles. Within the 

secondary  reality  of  the  Old  Kingdom  the  fact  that  Sabriel  and  Lirael  are 

female  is  neither  remarkable  nor  unnatural.  Although  both  women  may  be 

Page | 171  

 
 
 
seen as extraordinary in differing ways, this is not premised upon any breach 

of  gender  expectation.  Neither  heroine  suffers  any  gender-specific 

prejudices,  hardships  or  oppressions 

like 

those  Tolmie 

identifies  as 

conventionally  faced  by  female fantasy  protagonists. They  do not  “dress  up 

as men to escape restraints on their freedom, run away from abusive fathers, 

escape unwanted marriages, avoid, avert, or survive rape” (148). 

In  the  Old  Kingdom  the  idea  of  female  warriors,  rulers  and  Abhorsen  is 

quietly  naturalised.  This  is  not  simply  a  matter  of  caste  and  destiny.  Even 

amongst  those  not  of  the  Blood,  women  with  active  roles  and  power  are 

easily found within the text; indeed, female royal guards and Charter Mages 

appear  common,  and  there  is  mention  that  at  least  the  last  regent  was 

female.  Instances  of  active  female  participation  are  woven  into  Nix’s  text 

without  fanfare  or  particular  comment  on  gender.  The  simple  use  of  a 

feminine  pronoun,  for  example,  marks  the  gender  of  the  Abhorsen  who 

designed  the  first  Paperwing  (a  light  aircraft):  “The  Abhorsen  who  made  it 

once flew it to the sea and back in a single afternoon. But she was a great 

weather-witch  and  could  work  the  winds”  (Nix  Sab  137).  Wallmakers,  too, 

were  both  male  and  female,  as  Touchstone  refers  to  the  forger  of  his  and 

Sabriel’s ‘ensorcelled’ swords as “he—or she” (Sab 226). 

Many  other  mentions  of  females  serving  in  what  might  conservatively  be 

seen  as  ‘male’  roles  are  scattered  throughout  the  novels.    The  sacrificed 

Charter  Mage  in  the  village  of  Nestowe  is  a  woman  (Sab  207).  Sabriel, 

Lirael,  Princess  Ellimere  and  all  Clayr  are  among  the  many  other  female 

Charter  Mages  in  the  Kingdom.  The  Royal  Guard  accompanying  King 

Touchstone  is  described  as  “twoscore  tall  men  and  women”  (Lir  320). With 

Page | 172  

 
 
 
the  escalating  threat  to  the  Kingdom,  Ellimere  is  prepared  to  increase  her 

martial  role.  She  notes  to  Sam:  “I  shall  be  spending  more  time  with  the 

Guard  myself.  Getting  ready”  (Lir  318).  One  of  Sameth’s  regular  guards  is 

Tonin: “She was the same age as Ellimere, and they had been friends since 

they  had  played  together  as  children”  (Lir  323).  Moreover,  males  are  not 

privileged  above  females  in  matters  of  inheritance.  There  is  a  clear 

expectation that  Princess  Ellimere  will  inherit  the  throne above  her  younger 

brother Sameth. Pertinently, this is not due to her position as firstborn, but is 

the  result  of  her  aptitude  for  organisation  and  governance,  because  she  is 

“demonstrably the perfect royal heir” (Lir 278).  

Within the supernatural realm too, both good and evil have representatives of 

both  genders.  Oriannis  the  Destroyer’s  key  necromantic  henchmen  are 

Hedge,  a  man,  and  Chlorr  of  the  Mask,  a  woman.  Of  the  remnants  of  the 

‘eight bright shiners’ specifically mentioned within the story, Mogget (Yrael) is 

male  and  The  Dog  (Kibeth)  is  female.  Astarael,  the  remnant  of  whom  they 

encounter deep beneath the well at the Abhorsen’s house, is not only female 

but she is the most powerful and frightening of these former deities (Abh 52-

53).  

The ever-changing Charter sendings present another interesting portrayal of 

gender  within  the  northern  kingdom.  Each  individual  sending  is  made  up of 

constantly moving Charter marks, meaning the sendings exist in a ceaseless 

state of change. The first sending Sabriel meets displays this constant state 

of flux in identity and gender. Sabriel notes the sending’s “face wouldn’t stay 

fixed, migrating between scores of possibilities. Some were men, some were 

Page | 173  

 
 
 
women, but  they  all  bore  tough,  competent visages”  (Sab  89). Within  these 

magical creations gender is present, but it is by no means fixed or essential.  

The clear understanding that Sabriel and Lirael are acting according to their 

destined roles further naturalises the Old Kingdom’s images of assertive and 

active women. Within the novels, their behaviour is affirmed by the Charter. 

This  has  the  effect  of  placing  their  conduct  beyond  reproach.  Rather  than 

being unnatural, their actions become unquestionably appropriate. Similarly, 

as  will  be  discussed  later  in  this  chapter,  the  Charter  confirms  Sameth’s 

withdrawal from a more athletic, physical sphere of activity, allowing him, as 

a male, to retreat to a realm of quieter creativity without censure.  

Such  portrayals  are  not  merely  curious  diversions  from  archetypal  gender 

characterisations. They have a discursive power that is further enhanced by 

the  affective  imagery  and  cultural  weight  attached  to  imaginings  of heritage 

and  the  Middle  Ages.  In  making  female  heroism  unexceptional  within  a 

medieval  setting,  Nix’s  novels  claim  a  retrospective  authority  for  active 

female agency. Within the context of the novels, acceptance of gender equity 

becomes  aligned  with  antiquity  and  confirmed  through  the  essence  of 

authenticity,  magic  and  substance 

that 

is  strongly  associated  with 

Northernness. 

In  comparison  with  the  North,  Ancelstierre  reveals  itself  to  be  less 

enlightened and less inclusive than the medieval Old Kingdom.  The gender 

divisions  discernible  in  the  modern  nation  of  Ancelstierre  show  a  limited 

range  of  roles  and  behaviour  deemed  appropriate  for  women.  Indeed, 

Page | 174  

 
 
 
 
references  to  those  with  power  in  the  South  speak  of  men.  The  Sayres, 

Dawforth  and  Corolini,  all  influential  politicians  specifically  mentioned  within 

the  text,  are  all  men  (Abh  5).  The  South’s  military  too,  appears  completely 

male. Colonel Horyse’s border guards are referred to as his “men” (Sab 51). 

Indeed, when Lirael and Sam have an urgent need to cross the border Sam 

disguises them with a magical ‘glamour’ as “an officer and sergeant from the 

Crossing  Point  Scouts”  (Abh  211).  Lirael’s  male  disguise  includes  a 

bandaged  head  wound  which  prohibits  her  from  speaking  so  her  voice  will 

not give away that she is a woman and expose them. 

Nix’s  tale,  “Nicholas  Sayre  and  the  Creature  in  The  Case”,  also  portrays 

Ancelstierre as a society where females have little access to power. The first 

of the short stories in his book Across the Wall (AW), this tale is a sequel of 

sorts  to  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles.  It  offers  “various  bits  and  pieces  of 

information about Ancelstierre” and gives a “glimpse of the people, customs, 

government, technology and landscape of Ancelstierre” (Nix AW 4). Early in 

the  story  the  reader  is  introduced  to  Nicholas’  uncle,  “The  Most  Honorable 

Edward, Sayre, Chief Minister of Ancelstierre” (AW 6). There are mentions of 

Lewis, Ancelstierre’s Hereditary Arbiter (AW 7), Nicholas’ father, a politician 

(AW  12),  and  Dorrance,  the  head  of  Department  Thirteen,  known  as  D13, 

Ancelstierre’s  international  intelligence  agency  (AW  10).  This  sets  the  tone 

for  the  rest  of  this  tale  in  which  not  one  of  the  Ancelstierran  persons  of 

influence  mentioned  in  the  text  is  female.  The  scientists,  the  agents,  and 

government  representatives,  such  as  Sergeant  Hodgeman  (AW  14), 

Professor  Lackridge  (AW  18),  Constable  Ripton  (AW  34)  and  D13’s  foot-

soldiers are all male. The Ancelstierran women who appear in this story are 

either servants (AW 64) or mere beautiful decoration, such as the one used 

Page | 175  

 
 
to gain access to Nicholas’s room – “[p]robably a not very successful actor or 

singer,  the  usual  adornments  of  typical  country  house  parties”  (AW  43). 

These women stand in marked contrast to Lirael who arrives from the North 

at  the end of this story to subdue the Free Magic creature of the tale’s title 

(now  escaped  from  her  case),  and  to  assist  Nicholas’  escape  to  the  Old 

Kingdom.  

As  a  Northerner  schooled  in  Ancelstierre,  Sabriel  is  situated  between  two 

views  of  womanhood.  Her  choices  regarding  to  which  of  these  she  should 

conform become integral to Sabriel’s emergence, her quest, and her coming 

into  maturity.  Wyverley,  Sabriel’s  school,  proclaims  it  caters  for  “Young 

Ladies  of  Quality”  (Sab  12).  There  are  distinct  expectations  concerning  the 

attributes  and  manners  which  mark  young  ladies  as  ‘superior’.  Proper 

conduct is ingrained in the girls’ education, so much so that the words of her 

Etiquette teacher, Miss Prionte, often appear as Sabriel’s first line of defence 

or  offence  when  faced  with  challenging  circumstances.  Confronted  by  the 

officious  young  soldier  at  the border  crossing,  Sabriel  employs  a  quiet  tone 

and confident stare “in the manner which Miss Prionte had taught her girls to 

instruct lesser domestic servants in Etiquette IV” (Sab 31). She answers the 

soldier’s  continued  questioning  with  a  “frosty  smile  (also  part  of  Miss 

Prionte’s  curriculum)”  (Sab  32).  Her  quick  resort 

to  such  manners 

demonstrates  how  learned  behaviour  can  become  instinctive,  and  appear 

right and natural.  

Unsurprisingly then, Southern social conventions of feminine behaviour exert 

a  pressure  upon  Sabriel.  They  inform  her  conflicted  state  of  mind  as  she 

vacillates  over  whether  to  embrace  her  destiny  as  heir  to  the  position  of 

Page | 176  

 
 
 
Abhorsen,  or  whether  to  pursue  a  ‘normal’  life  in  Ancelstierre.  Prior  to 

discovering  that  her  father  is  trapped  in  Death,  Sabriel,  like  a  typical 

seventeen-year-old  girl  finishing  her  schooling,  is  grappling  with  choices 

regarding  her  future.  Should  she  go  on  to  university?  This  would  mean 

staying  in  Ancelstierre,  remaining  closer  to  friends,  enjoying  girlish  and 

frivolous social dealings and meeting young men, but it would also mean her 

magic  would  wane  (Sab  16).  Should  she,  alternatively,  return  to  the  Old 

Kingdom?  This  would  mean  accepting  the  role  of  necromancer  and  being 

tied to protecting the North by keeping the Dead dead.  

Just short of completing her final year at school, these are the considerations 

on  Sabriel’s  mind  as  she  waits  in  her  study  in  expectation  of  a  magical 

visitation from her father. She is faced with a choice between a role that fits 

within  the  Ancelstierran  conventions  of  ‘proper’  womanhood,  and  a  calling 

that  would  be  considered  anything  but  ‘lady-like’  by  Miss  Prionte.  The 

semiotics  of  this  portion  of  the  text  are  particularly  apt.  The  formal  study  in 

which Sabriel waits is indicative of security and privilege. It is recognition of 

the maturity and the responsibility she has as one of Wyverley’s seniors and 

prefects.  Sabriel  is  shown  drinking  from  a  china  teacup,  an  image  which 

evokes  notions  of  refinement  and  domesticity.    The  teacup,  however,  is 

precariously balanced on the arm of the chair, hinting at the instability of this 

cultured normality (Sab 17). The unease Sabriel begins to feel at her father’s 

continued absence also forebodes a shattering of this precarious peace (Sab 

17).  

The huge gulf between the two roads that are open to Sabriel is exposed by 

the  contrast  between  the  homely  scene  in  the  study  and  the  danger  that 

Page | 177  

 
 
 
awaits  her.  A  Dead  creature  threatens  the  First  Form  girls’  dormitory, 

breaking all illusion of security. Startled by the cry for help from Olwyn, one 

of the younger students, Sabriel manages to catch the teacup she has upset, 

symbolically  still  holding  to  the  refined  model  of  behaviour  (Sab  17).  On 

beginning to comprehend the situation, however, Sabriel reacts in what might 

be read as a decisive metaphorical rejection of the expectations attached to 

being a ‘young lady of quality’:  

Sabriel  threw  the  teacup  aside  and  pushed  past  Olwyn.  She  was 

already  half  way  down  the  corridor  before  she  heard  the  porcelain 

smash  behind  her,  and  Olwyn’s  horrified  gasp  at  such  cavalier 

treatment of good china. She ignored it and broke into a run[…]. (Nix 

Sab 18).  

Paradoxically,  this  passage  implies  both  choice  and  fate.  Sabriel  is  not 

compelled by these circumstances to run to danger. As a student she could 

have appealed for the help of teachers. Sabriel, however, assumes the role 

of  protector  as  though  it  belongs  to  her  alone.  Her  instinctive  reaction 

suggests  her  destined  role  as  Abhorsen  is  natural,  essential  and  intuitive. 

Her  response  stands  in  contrast  to  the  Ancelstierran  model  of  refined, 

passive  femininity  represented  by  the  formal  study  and  the  china  tea  cup. 

Sabriel’s  choice  of  the  active  over  the  passive  adds  to  the  texts’  many 

affirmations  of  Northern  ways  above  the  ways  of  the  South.  In  a  reciprocal 

way, the value that is attached to Northernness provides affirmation of active 

female participation and agency.  

The relationship between Sabriel and Touchstone provides another pertinent 

example  of  how  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles  unsettle  traditional  gender 

Page | 178  

 
 
 
paradigms.  Sabriel’s  awakening  of  Touchstone,  and  her  releasing  him  from 

the figurehead of the ship in which he is trapped, begins this process. Most 

obviously this represents an ostensible gender reversal of the rescues within 

classic  fairy  tales  such  as  Sleeping  Beauty  and  Snow  White,  upsetting  the 

generic  trope  of  a  man  acting  as  the  catalyst  for  female  transformation. 

Sabriel  takes  the  active  role  and  Touchstone  the  passive.  There  are, 

however,  subtle  differences  in  the  dynamics  attached  to  these  fairy-tale 

rescues and Sabriel’s liberation of Touchstone.  

Conforming to the pattern in many fairy tales, Touchstone is discovered in a 

mysterious,  unnatural,  and  eerie  environment.  He  is  imprisoned  within  the 

figurehead of a royal funerary ship, hidden far from the ocean, in a “strange 

harbour”.  This  ‘harbour’  is  a  deep  sinkhole,  protected  both  from  sight  and 

trespass by a “gleaming web-thin net” which, despite its fragile appearance, 

is  of  “considerable  strength”  (Sab  164-65).    The  uncanny,  magical  setting 

creates  an  aura  of  arcane  substance,  of  awe;  a  boding  that  something  of 

consequence is present or at least imminent.  The generic familiarity of such 

imagery evokes the ‘perilous realms’ of Faerie. It carries with it the weight of 

countless  stories  that  have  come  before.  This  grounds  this  episode  in 

fantasy  and  fairy  tale,  but  the  inversion  of  gender  roles  creates  an 

unexpected difference.   

Rather  than having  the  prince  gazing  upon the  enchanted  princess,  offered 

for  the  visual  pleasure  of  the  rescuer  and  reader,  here  we  have  Sabriel 

gazing  upon  the  displayed  prince.  Instead  of  falling  in  love  at  first  sight, 

however, Sabriel is unsettled.  She is quite discomfited by the figurehead, “a 

naked  young  man,  carved  in  perfect  detail”,  leaving  her  blushing  due  to  its 

Page | 179  

 
 
 
life-like exactness (Sab 166). The description of Sabriel’s initial examination 

indicates  a  sense  of  shame  attached  to  her  gaze,  particularly  when  noting 

even  a  “circumcised  penis,  which  Sabriel  looked  at  in  an  embarrassed  way 

before looking back at his face” (Sab 167). Despite this self-consciousness, 

Sabriel’s  gaze  and  thoughts  demonstrate  an  awkward  sexual  objectification 

of Touchstone’s body. His “muscles were lean and well formed”… his “hands 

well  shaped  and  elegant”…his  face  “not  exactly  handsome,  but  not 

displeasing” (Sab 166-67).  

Sabriel’s  perusal of  Touchstone  superficially  appears  as an  inversion of the 

gender  dynamics  of  ‘the  gaze’,  most  notably  theorised  in  Laura  Mulvey’s 

1975  "Visual  Pleasure  and  Narrative  Cinema”.  Mulvey  discussed  the  ‘male 

gaze’  within  the  context  of  the  Hollywood  action  genre,  but  the  gaze  has 

since received attention within more diverse areas of study. Clifford Manlove 

provides a useful summary of this as he observes that:  

“Gaze theory” has also made its way into literary and cultural studies, 

queer 

theory, 

postcolonial 

studies,  Holocaust 

studies, 

black/whiteness  studies,  and  critical  race theory.  In  most  cases, the 

gaze is used to help explain the hierarchical power relations between 

two  or  more  groups  or,  alternatively,  between  a  group  and  an 

“object.” (Manlove 84) 

Indeed,  the  dynamics  attached  to  looking  are  also  exemplified  in  fairy  tales 

like Sleeping Beauty and Snow White where passive women are displayed to 

the  active  male  gaze.  A  great  deal  of  scholarship  has  focussed  upon 

exceptions  to  the  inflexible  structure  of  Mulvey’s  theory  which  argues  the 

strength of patriarchy places all power with the man as voyeur and situates 

the woman as the object of man’s controlling gaze. Cultural studies theorist 

Page | 180  

 
 
Richard Dyer, however, argues for gaze theory’s continued relevance, saying 

it is important to: 

explore the complex interplay of power in looking and at being looked 

at,  above  all  in  terms  of  who  controls  these  relations,  who  has  the 

right  to  look  unchallenged,  uninterrupted  and  unembarrassed,  who 

controls the conditions under which they are looked at. (Dyer, 227)  

Although  Touchstone  can  be  seen  “displayed”  in  such  a  way  that  his 

appearance  seems  “coded  for  strong  erotic  impact”  (Mulvey  19),  Sabriel 

certainly  does not feel  the  right  to  “look  unembarrassed”.  Neither, it  seems, 

does she have the right to look “unchallenged and uninterrupted” (Dyer 227).  

Mogget slyly mocks her gaze at the sleeping Touchstone after his rescue – “I 

can  get  a  blanket  if  you  want  to  keep  staring  at  him”  (Nix  Sab  176). Whilst 

Touchtone  appears  physically  objectified,  Sabriel’s  gaze  is  not  free  from  a 

sense of shameful awkwardness. When Sabriel’s interest, however, shifts to 

a  ‘professional’  one  (if  one  can  call  necromancy  a  ‘profession’),  there  is  no 

sense  of  shame  attached  to  a  more  thorough  and  examining  gaze.  When 

Sabriel  gives  attention  to  her  magical  intuition  and  the  feeling  that  the 

figurehead  is  more  than  an  intricate  carving,  she  is  able  to  look  without 

embarrassment, “carefully examining him from every angle. The man’s body 

was an intellectual problem now” (Sab 167).   

Paradoxically,  Sabriel  experiences  shame  in  looking  at  what  she  initially 

thinks is a work of art, but loses inhibition when she begins to understand the 

figure as a person. She recognises Touchstone’s humanity in his expression 

containing  shock,  fear,  betrayal  and  even  a  little  madness  –  too  real  “to  be 

the  result  of  a  woodcarver’s  skills”  (Sab  167).  This  suggests  that  shame  in 

looking attaches to the act of objectification rather than to the gaze itself. A 

Page | 181  

 
 
recognition of humanity allows Sabriel to see Touchstone as something apart 

from  an  object.  This  provides  a  subtle  critique  of  superficial  judgement  and 

objectification based upon appearance rather than individual character. 

Significantly too, and divergent from fairy-tale patterns, Sabriel’s liberation of 

Touchstone is not spurred by notions of love or any desire to win the prize of 

a  beautiful  lover.  It  is  prompted  by  the  sense  of  an  “injustice  to  be  righted” 

and  a  perceived  duty  to  “remedy  unnatural  necromancy  and  Free  Magic 

sorcery”  (Sab  169).    Touchstone’s  rescue  also  requires  much  more  than  a 

kiss  or  the  dislodgment  of  a  poisoned  apple;  Sabriel  needs  to  retrieve  his 

soul  from  the  borders  of  Death  and,  even  for  an  Abhorsen,  entering  Death 

always  entails  danger.  Touchstone’s  deliverance  involves  necromantic 

expertise,  physical  strength  and  determination.  Sabriel  is  required  to  heave 

Touchstone’s  crystallised  spirit  through  the  strong  currents  of  Death’s  river. 

She performs this task whilst escaping the threat of a lurking Dead thing that 

bears  the  medievalised  form  of  a  monster  looking  “like  a  cross  between  a 

hog  and  a  segmented  worm”  (Sab  172).  The  act  of  deliverance  combines 

both  action  and  personal  risk.  The  heroine,  through  skill  and  physical 

exertion,  is  the  sole  agent  of  Touchstone’s  restoration  to  Life.  The  hero’s 

role,  conversely,  is  an  atypically  passive  one,  even  to  the  point  where  he 

collapses into the heroine’s arms (Sab 175).  

While  Touchstone’s  rescue  seems  to  represent  a  reversal  of  gender 

dynamics,  the  text  demonstrates  that  which  Dyer  refers  to  as  a  more 

‘complex  interplay  of  power’  (Dwyer  227).  Although  Sabriel  is  the  owner  of 

the gaze and, within the active/passive binary, she plays the active role, an 

inversion  of  Mulvey’s  paradigm  falls  short  as  Sabriel’s  behaviour  is  not 

Page | 182  

 
 
 
motivated by a desire for control. The rescue, however, does answer certain 

of her fears, allowing her to reassure herself through positive action: “for the 

first  time  since  she  crossed  the  Wall,  Sabriel  felt  there  was  a  clear-cut 

problem  for  her  to  solve”  (Nix  Sab  169).  Sabriel’s  own  refusal  to  see 

Touchstone  merely  as  a  sexual  object  alters  the  dynamics  attached  to  the 

gaze within this story, representing an ambiguity in portrayals of gender and 

power. 

This  ambiguity  is  further  reinforced  at  this  point  by  a  change  in  narrative 

perspective.  Although  Sabriel  is  narrated  through  a  third  person  omniscient 

voice, Nix has thus far remained close to Sabriel’s perspective. Focalisation 

through  the  character  of  Sabriel  works  to  privilege  her  perceptions,  making 

her  the  agent  through  which  the  audience  understands  and  interprets  the 

action  within  the  novel.  Significantly,  the  passage  immediately  following 

Touchstone’s  rescue  is  the  only  place  in  Sabriel  where  the  narration  steps 

away  from  her  point  of  view  and  the  perspective  becomes  that  of 

Touchstone. This in itself has a power-shifting effect, as the reader is made 

aware  that  Touchstone  has  access  to  arcane  knowledge  –    a  great  deal  of 

which is withheld from both Sabriel and the reader.   

Simple  things  such  as  his  ability  to  name  the  sinkhole  as  ‘Holehallow’ 

demonstrate that Touchstone is admitted to secrets of the Old Kingdom. This 

is  confirmed  in  his  conversation  with  Mogget.  It  is  clear  that  Touchstone 

understands  who  the  cat  is,  despite  Mogget  being  embodied  in  a  different 

form  and  having  a  different  name  from  when  they  last  met.  Touchstone’s 

tearful  devastation  when  Mogget  informs  him  that  the  Queen  and  her 

daughters  are  dead  intimates  a  personal  connection  with  the  Royal  family. 

Page | 183  

 
 
 
There are also hints of something dark attached to Touchstone’s past. Even 

the  name  ‘Touchstone’,  derisively  given  by  Mogget,  holds  ambiguity.  It  has 

an, albeit anachronistic, intertextual resonance with Shakespeare’s wise fool 

in As You Like It, and it also connotes a measure of value. 

Information  about  Touchstone  comes  to  the  reader  in  a  disconnected  and 

incomplete  fashion.  It  is  contained  in  snatches  of  conversation  between 

Touchstone  and  Mogget.  It  is  seen  in  instances  such  as  Touchstone’s 

response  to  Mogget’s  suggestion  he  arm  himself  with  weapons  from  the 

royal  funerary  ships  –  “but  I’m  not  fit  to  wield  royal—”  (Sab  182),  and  in 

Touchstone’s plea that Mogget keep information back from Sabriel: “Please 

don’t tell her—” (Sab 183). The incomplete sentences mimic the incomplete 

revelation  of  knowledge.  Readers  are  shown  that  both  their  and  Sabriel’s 

understanding is incomplete at this point of the novel. This is also a reminder 

of the gaps in Sabriel’s knowledge of the Old Kingdom. It functions as a cue 

to  Sabriel’s  own  fears  and  vulnerabilities.    As  Touchstone  and  Mogget 

obviously share knowledge that is kept from Sabriel, the dynamics of power 

between  Sabriel  and  Touchstone  are  confused.  Although  Sabriel  is  active, 

the  rescuer,  and  the  one  who  holds  the  gaze,  she  is  denied  full  power. 

Touchstone’s half-finished exchanges with Mogget, though self-deprecating, 

still  effectively  situate  both  the  readers  and  Sabriel  at  a  disadvantage.  

Sabriel is simply left with an uneasy suspicion that she is on the outside, that 

she is being told a “half-truth at best” (Sab 186).  

Conversely, Touchstone’s persona is passive and even ostensibly deferential 

but, despite being the object of both Sabriel and the reader’s gaze, he does 

not cede control to the watchers; not to the watchers within the novel nor the 

Page | 184  

 
 
 
readers  without.  Touchstone’s  deliberate  avoidance  of  Sabriel’s  eye  –  his 

affected humility with his “head bowed, carefully not meeting her gaze” (Sab 

185)  –  and  his  seemingly  deferential  (but  deliberately  obtuse)  responses  to 

her  questioning, 

ironically  work  against  Sabriel’s  power  rather 

than 

confirming  it.  These  dynamics  complicate  any  reading  of  Sabriel  that  might 

suggest  that  the  casting  of  an  active  female  protagonist  presents  a  clean 

reversal  of  the  hero/heroine  roles.  Indeed,  Touchstone’s  adoption  of  a 

subservient manner, rather than empowering Sabriel, frustrates her attempts 

to gain an understanding of, or establish a connection with, the young man. 

His  “servile  manner  [.  .  .]  seemed  to  be  an  affectation”  and  Sabriel  thought 

his behaviour reminiscent of a “bad actor playing the butler” (Sab 190). In her 

irritation  she  finds  herself  fighting  to  bite  back  scathing  remarks  “about  the 

arrogance  of  pretended  humility”  (Sab  195).  Touchstone’s  submission 

actually  hinders  rather  than  aids  Sabriel’s  aspirations,  creating  a  tension 

within the dynamics, not a reversal of gender hierarchies. 

Amusingly, 

the  power  struggle  between  Sabriel  and  Touchstone 

is 

expressed almost as a contest in unworthiness. Touchstone’s offer of service 

to the Abhorsen is refused by Sabriel who informs him of her own perceived 

inadequacies and the gaps in her knowledge of the Old Kingdom (Sab 188). 

Regardless  of  her  repeated  disavowals  of  both  the  authority  and  role  of 

Abhorsen, the high rank attached to Sabriel’s lineage and calling inescapably 

carries with it implicit power. Just as her role as Abhorsen grants Sabriel the 

intellectual distance to look on Touchstone without shame, it also works as a 

shield to any controlling male gaze. It is not she, or even her gender, that is 

seen  by  Touchstone,  but  her  position.  As  he  awakes  from  his  enchanted 

sleep  Touchstone  sees  a  “woman,  looking  down  at  him,  a  young  woman, 

Page | 185  

 
 
armed and armoured, her face. . . battered. No, not a woman. The Abhorsen 

[…]”  (Sab  178).  The  uniform  of  her  office  –  her  emblazoned  surcoat,  her 

sword-belt, and her necromancer’s bell-bandolier – overwhelm her gendered 

identity.  

Paradoxically,  although  not  sexual  in  nature,  Touchstone’s  seeing  Sabriel 

solely as Abhorsen is in itself a form of objectification. It takes a long period 

of  acquaintance for  him  to  recognise  Sabriel  as  either  an  individual  or  as  a 

woman; the realisation that she is both, leaves him surprised:  

Almost for the first time he really looked at her. He saw the weariness 

there, and the incipient lines of care, and the way her mouth looked a 

little  sad  around  the  edges.  Her  nose  was  still  swollen,  and  there 

were  yellowing  bruises  on  her  cheekbones.  She  was  also  beautiful, 

and Touchstone realised that he had thought of her only in terms of 

her office, as Abhorsen. Not as a woman at all… (Nix Sab 279) 

Although she is not sexually objectified, until Touchstone looks at Sabriel as 

a person and not as Abhorsen, she is denied individual subjectivity.  

The  above  physical  description  of  Sabriel  is  markedly  different  in  style  and 

detail from the description of Touchstone as the object of Sabriel’s gaze. The 

text’s  images  of  Touchstone  emphasise  physical  desirability,  not  only  when 

he  is  on  display  as  the  figurehead  but  also  after  he  has  been  awakened. 

There is a stress on his physical adeptness and strength as he is seen (albeit 

to  the  side)  “performing  a  series  of  fencing  exercises  with  his  twin  swords, 

and some stretches and minor acrobatics” (Sab 194). There is comment on 

him  not  being  able  to  get  the  trousers  provided  past  his  “heavily  muscled 

thighs”  (Sab  183).  Sabriel  notices  he  looks  “older  and  somewhat  more 

Page | 186  

 
 
 
intimidating” when armed and in the heroic dress of a red leather jerkin, and 

“a kilt of red-striped gold, disappearing into turned-down thigh boots of russet 

doeskin”  (Sab  184).  Sabriel,  by  contrast,  is  never  shown  in  an  overtly 

sexualised  manner.  She  is  first  introduced  in  a  proper  school  uniform  – 

regulation navy blazer, long skirt, stockings and sensible shoes (Sab 11) and 

spends most of the rest of the novel in her semi-martial Abhorsen garb. 

Again,  the  physical  display  of  Touchstone  does  not  mean  a  reversal  of 

dominant  gender  paradigms.  Established  structures  of  power  mean  the 

dynamics of a man displayed differ from that of a woman displayed. Indeed, 

Mulvey  argues  that  the  “principles  of  the  ruling  ideology  and  the  psychical 

structures  that back  it up  [mean] the  male figure  cannot  bear  the burden  of 

sexual  objectification”  (Mulvey  20).  She  asserts  that  the  male  protagonist’s 

“glamorous characteristics are [. . .] not those of the erotic object of the gaze” 

but  rather  of  “the  more  perfect,  more  complete,  more  powerful  ideal  ego” 

(Mulvey  20).  Certainly,  there  seems  a  suggestion  of  this  ideal  type  in  the 

images of Touchstone in his heroic garb, although this is unsettled as Sabriel 

performs the more active role in most of their interactions. The protagonists 

in Sabriel, therefore, do not comfortably fit into dominant and straightforward 

gender patterns and, as such, create a tension that is sustained throughout 

the  novel.  Touchstone’s  refusal  to  be  open  with  Sabriel  about  his  past,  his 

access  to  knowledge  that  is  denied  her,  and  his  greater  physical  strength 

complicate  any  attempt  to  read  this  situation  as  a  direct  inversion  of 

traditional power dynamics.  

Sabriel’s  own  attitude  toward  Touchstone  is  also  complex.  She  deliberately 

shifts away from viewing him as a sexual object when he is displayed as the 

Page | 187  

 
 
 
figurehead.  If  any  desire  tacitly  underlies  his  rescue  it  is  not  lust,  but  a 

yearning  for  companionship.  Despite  his  physique,  heroic  dress  and 

deference,  her 

initial 

reaction 

to 

the  awakened  Touchstone 

is 

disappointment.  Looking  forward  to  company  “other  than  the  sardonic 

Mogget” (Sab 184), Sabriel has “sinking expectations” when she first speaks 

with him as he “didn’t sound overly bright”.  His response to her queries are 

slow,  hesitant  and  dull,  “without  inflection”  (Sab  185-6).  Sabriel  becomes 

more hopeful though, when a rare unguarded look from Touchstone, reveals 

“a  clear  intelligent  gaze”  (Sab  186).  This  demonstrates  that  Sabriel  seeks 

intelligence  and  substance  above  physical  appeal.  Her  desire  is  for  a  more 

equal  companionship,  hinting  that  she  wishes  neither  to  dominate  nor  be 

dominated. 

The  desire  for  equality  above  dominance  is  reinforced  in  Sabriel’s  negative 

reaction  to  Touchstone’s  offer  of  service  as  sworn  swordsman.  His 

manufactured  deference  and  his  subservient  addresses  of  ‘Milady’  and 

‘Abhorsen’  only  exasperate  her.  Touchstone  pledges  Sabriel  his  sword  and 

service, but she rejects it with the frustrated explanation:  

I have very little idea about what is going on. I have huge gaps in my 

knowledge of the Old Kingdom, including everything from geography 

to  history  to  Charter  Magic  [. .  .] I  am  not  out  to  save  the  Kingdom, 

just to find my father, the real Abhorsen, so I don’t want to take your 

oath or service or anything like that [. . .]. And please remember, that 

my name is Sabriel. Not Milady. Not Abhorsen. (Nix Sab 188). 

Although  her  refutation  of  authority  is  tied  to  the  hope  that  her  father  might 

not truly be dead, as discussed in Chapter 3 it is also entangled in the desire 

to retain choice. Ironically then, Sabriel’s refusal of power can be seen as an 

assertion of self; as a demonstration of individual autonomy.  It is an attempt 

Page | 188  

 
 
to  remain  in  control  of  her  own  life  rather  than  ceding  to  the  dictates  of 

destiny  and  fate.  Also  discussed  in  Chapter  3,  Touchstone’s  rejection  of 

authority  can  be  read  as  an  expression  of  personal  agency  as  he  chooses 

his own penance for his perceived wrongs (Sab 199).  The notion of authority 

is  undercut  by  the  comic  undercurrent  present  in  this  competition  of  self-

deprecation, with both Sabriel and Touchstone each stubbornly arguing they 

are undeserving of power. Sabriel casts herself as unworthy of his oath, and 

Touchstone reacts by declaring to Mogget that he cannot be insulted by such 

a rejection, asserting “my oath isn’t worth much” (Sab 189).   

Touchstone’s  self-abasement,  however,  does  not  situate  Sabriel  and 

Touchstone’s  relationship  completely  outside  long-standing  literary  gender 

paradigms. The image of him offering himself as a sworn swordsman draws 

deeply from the medieval models in which a Lady is venerated, despite her 

being  outside  the  knight’s  reach.  Within  the  courtly  paradigm  the  knight 

practices humility and courtesy, swearing servitude to a highborn Lady, and 

refines and proves himself through abjectly acting out an undying obedience 

and  commitment  to  her  every  fancy.  Touchstone’s  deference,  however, 

enacts a lowering of himself rather than an elevation of Sabriel.  

Although  the  imagery  evoked  by  Touchstone’s  offer  of  service  draws  upon 

courtly  models,  the  dynamics  are  different.  While  fantasy  fiction  draws 

heavily  from  the  past  and  medievalist  representations,  it  is  not  bound  by 

historical accuracy or authenticity. Indeed, Attebery observes that a freedom 

comes with this uncoupling from historical and cultural realities. He notes that 

fantasy  “can  begin  with  inherited  story  structures  and  direct  them  toward 

unexpected ends, turning Cinderellas into Princesses Charming and waking 

Page | 189  

 
 
 
sleeping  strengths  in  Sleeping  Beauty”  (103).  The  relationship  between 

Sabriel and Touchstone is mediated through imaginings of medieval service 

and  devotion,  but  ultimately  the  text  combines  these  images  with  more 

contemporary beliefs about equity, romantic love and commitment.  

While  this  situates  Sabriel  and  Touchstone’s  relationship  closer  to  those 

within romance fiction, a genre which is a legacy of courtly love literature, it 

still contravenes the active/passive gender dynamics of the romance genre. 

This  is  not  only  evident  in  Touchstone’s  rescue  and  in  Sabriel  holding  the 

primary heroic role as Abhorsen; Sabriel is also the character who makes the 

first  physical  overtures.    She  is  direct  and  unrestrained  when  it  appears 

Touchstone  will  succumb  to  the  sound  of  one  of  the  necromantic  bells.  As 

the  sound  of  Astarael  calls  their  essential  spirits  to  death,  inviting  them  “to 

plunge joyfully into the strongest current, to be carried to the very end” (Sab 

313),  Sabriel  holds  Touchstone  with  an  appeal  to  sensuality  and  the 

materiality  of  the  body.  She  “kissed  him  savagely,  biting  his  lip,  the  salty 

blood filling both their mouths. His eyes cleared, and she felt him concentrate 

again,  concentrate  on  Life,  on  living”  (Sab  313).  Representation  within 

Sabriel  can,  therefore,  be  seen  as  a  pastiche  of  old  images  and  new 

representations,  with  the  new  further  strengthened  through  its  bonding  with 

the old.  

Although,  as  Attebery  argues,  traditional  motifs,  settings  and  narrative 

structures can entail an uninterrogated acquiescence to conservative gender 

paradigms (87) this is by no means inevitable.  Fantasy’s protagonists need 

not bear the cultural burdens of historical or contemporary gender inequities. 

The economy of fantasy’s exchange with the past can be seen as one that is 

Page | 190  

 
 
 
curiously  skewed  to  the  advantage  of  the  present.  The  past  becomes  a 

reservoir  of  cultural  appeal,  heritage,  authenticity  and  authority,  which  can, 

ironically,  be  anachronistically  appropriated  to  shore  up  and  support 

contemporary  ideologies,  including  aspirations  for  gender  equity.  The 

relationship  between  Touchstone  and  Sabriel  demonstrates  how  a  fantasy 

text can simultaneously utilise and step away from generic fairy tale romance 

and courtly love models, marrying traditional imagery to contemporary ideals. 

Although the trope of a Lady and her sworn protector is used within Sabriel, 

Sabriel and Touchstone’s relationship enacts a departure from conservative 

gender paradigms and their inherent imbalances in power.  

The  movement  away 

from 

traditional  hierarchical  models 

is  nicely 

encapsulated  in  Sabriel’s  desire  for  an  equal  companion,  bluntly  expressed 

to  Touchstone:  “Don’t  call  me  milady  and  stop  acting  like  a  halfwit!  Just  be 

yourself. Behave  normally.  I  don’t  need  a  valet,  I  need  a useful  .  . . friend!” 

(Sab  199).  Where  both  popular  fairy-tale  and  courtly-love  narratives 

emphasise physical desirability or prowess, Sabriel shifts value to attributes 

such as  intelligence  and  companionability.  Within  older  chivalric  models  the 

male’s  valour,  long  suffering,  or  nobility  demonstrate  his  worthiness  to  win 

the most beautiful woman. In The Old Kingdom Chronicles, however, beauty 

is  underplayed,  taking  a  secondary  place  to  considerations  of  compatibility, 

mutual understanding and support.  

As  discussed  above,  Touchstone’s  physical  prowess  and  attractiveness 

provide no compensation for Sabriel when she initially suspects he might be 

dull-witted  (Sab  186).  Similarly  for  Touchstone,  character  comes  above 

beauty  in  his  appreciation  of  Sabriel.  He  does  not  even  notice  her  physical 

Page | 191  

 
 
 
attractiveness  until  he  is  able  to  look  past  her  position  as  Abhorsen  and 

recognise  her  vulnerabilities  and humanity  (Sab  279).  Moreover, a  corollary 

of  their  contest  over  who  is  least  deserving  of  deference  is  that  their 

relationship  arises  from  an  understanding  and  acceptance  of  the  other’s 

weaknesses  as  well  as  strengths.  This  facilitates  a  partnership  where  the 

talents and knowledge of each, if shared, make up for the lack in the other. 

Touchstone’s understanding of the Old Kingdom – its ways, its history and its 

geography – compensate for Sabriel’s superficial knowledge in these areas, 

while  Sabriel’s  knowledge  of  Ancelstierre,  necromancy  and  the  current 

situation  in  the  Old  Kingdom,  fills  out  the  gaps  in  Touchstone’s  awareness.  

Touchstone brings a physical strength to aid Sabriel in her quest, and Sabriel 

is  able  to  recall  Touchstone  to  a  calmer  reality  when  he  is  unnaturally 

empowered,  overtaken  by  battle-madness  and  uncontained  fury  (Lir  207), 

similar to the battle frenzy of mythical hero Cuchulainn in the Ulster Cycle, or 

the  berserker  rage  seen  in  old  Nose  sagas.  This  emphasises  balance  and 

complementary attributes.  

Although Sabriel is unaware of Touchstone’s royal status until much later in 

the  novel,  there  is  also  equity  in  that  as  Abhorsen  and  Prince,  Sabriel  and 

Touchstone are both descendants of the “Five Great Charters” (Sab 232). In 

aptitude  too,  they  are  both  very  strong  Charter  Mages,  able  to  wield  the 

Charter  with  power.  Again  this  is  revealed  to  the  reader  in  a  manner  that 

demonstrates  mutual  support  rather  than  a  competition  for  dominance. 

Sabriel  learns  of  Touchstone’s  capacity  only  when  she  is  in  need,  as  she 

struggles to perform a Charter ritual to send a soul beyond the Ninth Gate of 

Death. Faltering due to the influence of corrupted magic: 

Page | 192  

 
 
she  felt  assistance  come,  strength  flowing  through  her,  reinforcing 

the marks, steadying her hands, clearing her voice.[…] 

The extra strength came through Touchstone’s hand, his open palm 

lightly resting on her shoulder. As she straightened up the touch was 

lost. When  Sabriel  turned  around,  Touchstone  was  just  drawing  his 

right-hand sword, eyes fixed on the houses—as if he’d had nothing to 

do with helping her. 

“Thank  you,”  said  Sabriel.  Touchstone  was  a  strong  Charter  Mage, 

perhaps  as  strong  as  she  was.  This  surprised  her,  though  she 

couldn’t think why. (Nix Sab 208-209) 

This incident early in their relationship exemplifies the protagonists’ mutually 

beneficial and co-operative relationship. 

The  image  of  Touchstone  lending  invaluable  support  to  Sabriel  becomes 

recurrent throughout The Old Kingdom Chronicles. Not only does he lend her 

the strength of his Charter magic; his support is often lifesaving. Examples of 

his value to Sabriel are abundant. They include his quick thinking arrow ward 

when  they  are  unexpectedly  fired  upon  by  the  villagers  of  Nestowe  (Sab 

213), and his similarly quick action in pinning an escaping Dead Mordaut to 

the  floor  with  his  Charter-spelled  sword,  giving  Sabriel  time  to  return  it  to 

Death  with  her  necromantic  bells  (Sab  223-  224).  Touchstone  is  there  to 

assist  in  the  casting  of  diamonds  of  protection  to  guard  her  body  while  her 

spirit  risks  travel  into  Death  to  find  her  father  (Sab  227-228).  He  also 

physically carries her from the imminent threat of capture by scavenger slave 

traders  (Sab  319-320).  While  much  of  this  has  the  appearance  of  a  knight 

protecting  his  Lady  in  the  traditional  manner,  the  dynamic  is  subtly  but 

significantly different as Sabriel fights alongside him, actively contributing to 

their safety, and being essential to the success of their mission.  

Page | 193  

 
 
 
 
Pertinently,  Nix’s  representation  of  co-operative  support  is  not  restricted  to 

the  active,  public  realm,  but  extends  to  the  domestic.  Indeed,  Touchstone 

takes  on  the  greater  share  of  childcare  as  Sabriel  is  often  and  necessarily 

absent  to  deal  with  threats  from  the  Dead  (Lir  207).  Instances  that 

demonstrate  Touchstone’s 

importance  and  worth 

frustrate 

ideas  of 

dominance  and  submission  within  a  relationship.  Significantly,  Sabriel  and 

Touchstone’s relationship fits within the dominant ideological aspirations that 

John Stephens identifies as pervasive in Australian young adult literature; he 

observes  that  a  recurrent  theme  is  that:  “Human  sexuality  operates  most 

satisfactorily within relationships grounded on sexual equality” (Stephens ix). 

Although Sabriel performs the central heroic role, the happy ending is made 

possible due to the way in which Sabriel and Touchstone work together and 

complement each other’s strengths and weaknesses.  

The  dynamic  of  balance  within  this  romantic  relationship  is  echoed  in  the 

nonsexual  relationship  between  the  protagonists  of  Lirael  and  Abhorsen. 

Lirael performs the central role of the heroic warrior while Sam aids her quest 

with  less  active  but  similarly  important  and  complementary  skills.  As 

Abhorsen-in-Waiting, Lirael is clearly more naturally adept in dealing with the 

Dead  than  Sam.  He  is  a  strong  Charter  Mage  and  competent  with  a  sword 

but,  unlike  Touchstone,  Sam  is  neither  a  soldier,  nor  a  natural  fighter.  This 

creates  an  even  more  atypical  dynamic  between  these  two  protagonists. 

Superficially,  this  pairing  appears  closer  to  an  inversion  of  archetypal  male 

and female role. 

Page | 194  

 
 
 
 
The contrast between Lirael and Sameth is striking, and most evident in the 

way  in  which  they  respond  to  Death  and  the  Dead.  Sam  feels  a  sickening 

fear at the expectation he will one day become Abhorsen and wishes it were 

otherwise.  The  tension  between  desires  and  expectation  is  evident  as  he 

says of The Book of the Dead, “I can’t get away from it, but I can’t look at it 

either”  (Lir  486).    Lirael,  on  the  other  hand,  “is  unable  to  disguise  her 

eagerness” to study The Book of the Dead, saying, “I can’t explain, but I feel 

that I must read it” (Lir 488).  Similarly, Sam is repulsed by the bandolier of 

the Abhorsen’s necromantic bells given him by his mother: “He was aware of 

how  cold  it  was,  how  it  pressed  against  his  chest  and  made  breathing  

sudden  urge  to  put  on  the  bandolier  and  walk  in  to  Death”  (Lir  487). When 

Sam admits to Lirael that he is afraid of Death, she cannot understand it: “He 

was the Abhorsen’s son, the Abhorsen-in-Waiting. It simply was not possible 

that he could be afraid of Death. That would be like a Clayr who was afraid of 

the sight. It was beyond imagining” (Lir 485).  A reading of their partnership 

as an inversion of gender roles, however, is complicated by Sam’s superior 

capacity as a Charter Mage and artisan and, ultimately, as discussed in the 

previous chapter, by notions of destiny.  

Active/passive  roles  within  the  story  are  also  complicated  by  actions  that 

Sam  takes  in  spite  of  his  fear,  making  it  clear  that  fear  does  not  equate  to 

cowardliness or selfishness. Regardless of his overwhelming dread, he faces 

the  necromancer  Hedge  and  his  army  of  Dead  when  the  bus  carrying  his 

school  cricket  team  is  attacked  close  to  the  Wall.  He  enters  Death  for  the 

sake  of  his  friends,  without  sword,  bells  or  even  time  to  cast  a  diamond  of 

protection  (Lir  179).    The  Dog  points  out  this  difference  between  fear  and 

Page | 195  

 
 
 
cowardliness  when  Sam  gives  voice  to  his  dread:  “you  don’t  smell  like  a 

coward—so  you  can’t  be  one”  (Lir  572).  Sam’s  natural  position  may  not  be 

that  of  a  warrior,  but  ultimately  this  does  not  undermine  his  courage  or 

contribution within the story. 

In a genre that, largely due to its chivalric inheritance, emphasises physical 

prowess and martial adeptness, Sameth is allowed an alternative expression 

of masculinity and strength. Although his passion for creativity is initially seen 

as  emasculating  within  the  story,  it  is  his  capacity  as  an  artisan  which 

restores  him  to  a  position  of  respect  and  significance  and  proves  to  be 

central to the salvation of the Kingdom. In an interesting negotiation between 

historical  archetypes  and  contemporary  identity,  Sam’s  behaviour  and  role 

strongly echo a contemporary ‘geek’ or ‘nerd’ stereotype. These terms, being 

subject to quickly shifting social construction, are often used interchangeably, 

though  ‘geek’,  perhaps,  carries  with  it  a  greater  association  with  computer 

culture  (Kendall  NN  264).  The  geek/nerd  identity  entails  notions  of 

intellectual  curiosity  and  obsessive  interest—  often  in  areas  of  science  or 

computing but also in more eccentric or imaginative areas including fantasy, 

science  fiction  and  gaming.  This  identity  is  also  regularly  associated  with 

social  awkwardness. 

In  “Nerd  Nation”,  published 

in  1999,  a 

time 

contemporaneous  with  the  writing  of  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles,  Lori 

Kendall writes that “the previously liminal masculine identity of the nerd” has 

been  increasingly  “rehabilitated  and  partially  incorporated  into  hegemonic 

masculinity”  (260).  She  notes  that,  alongside  derided  behaviours,  geek 

identity  also  possesses  “aspects  of  hypermasculinity  (intellect,  rejection  of 

sartorial display, lack of ‘feminine’ social and relational skills)” (NN 164). It is 

also  associated  with material  advantage as  “[g]eek  implies  wealth”  (Kendall 

Page | 196  

 
 
NN  164).  Indeed,  R.W.  Connell  notes  in  Masculinities,  that  the  rise  of 

computers has facilitated a redefinition of masculinity. Connell describes the 

area  of  Information  Technology  “as  an  arena  of  competition  and  power  – 

masculine, technical”, and no longer working class (56). 

Nix’s characterisation of Sam reflects something of the zeitgeist surrounding 

the increasingly visible geek identity.  It also provides a further illustration of 

how  popular  fiction  is  able  to  participate  in  the  cultural  contests  of  its  time. 

Raewyn Campbell (2012) comments that: 

The signifier ‘nerd’ has undergone a dramatic shift in the last twenty 

years. Once laden with negativity and accruing societal derision and 

ridicule,  the  nerd  label  is  now  frequently  worn  as  a  badge  of  pride, 

even bestowing upon the wearer increased cultural status (Campbell 

1).  

She argues that the stories circulating within popular culture realms can gain 

mass and traction, and ultimately “effect a noticeable change in a discursive 

regime” (Campbell 2).  The representation of Sam can be seen as but a part 

of the mass of stories exerting pressure on the definition of masculinity. 

It  is  not  difficult  to  see  where  Sam’s  characteristics  intersect  with  those 

associated  with  the  geek.    Whilst  in  Belisaere  he  indulges  in  antisocial 

behaviour, eschewing company, retiring “to his workshop, trying to forget his 

troubles in the construction of a particularly intricate and interesting magical 

mechanical” creation (Nix Lir 275).  Sam’s obsessive interest in creativity and 

in the minutiae of Charter spells is initially belittled. Ellimere characterises his 

shutting  himself  away  and  “tinkering  in  that  smelly  workshop  of  yours”,  as 

eccentric  and  useless  (Lir  217).  Almost  punitively,  Ellimere  increases  the 

Page | 197  

 
 
 
time Sam is to spend on other activities, social, civil and military, particularly 

humiliating him by assigning him to dance the part of the Bird of Dawning at 

the Midsummer festival: 

‘Sameth!  You  are  going  to  dance  the  Bird,  like  it  or  not,’  declared 

Ellimere.  ‘It’s  about time  you  did  something  useful  around  here.  I’ve 

also  scheduled  you  to  sit  with  Jall  at  the  Petty  Court  every  morning 

between ten and one, and you’ll have sword practice twice a day with 

the  Guard,  of  course,  and  you  must  come  to  dinner—no  ordering 

meals  to  your  grubby  workshop.  And  for  Perspective,  I’ve  assigned 

you  to  work  with  the  scullions  every  second  Wednesday.’  (Nix  Lir 

218-219) 

She unequivocally declares that Sam would be of “a lot more use” training as 

Abhorsen  than  “mucking  about  making  toys”  (Lir    221).    This,  however, 

represents  a  misjudgement  of  the  worth  of  Sam’s  interests,  knowledge  and 

abilities. 

The  value  Nix  grants  to  Sam’s  skills  in  Charter  creation  means  a 

contemporary  reader  need  not  measure  Sam’s  character  only  against 

romantic  medieval  benchmarks  of  masculinity,  such  as  valour  and  physical 

prowess. There is a greater complexity in Nix’s representations of manhood. 

Intellect  and  imaginative  creative  ability  are  also  shown  to  possess  great 

worth.  There  is  a  certain  irony  in  Sam’s  character  seeming  somewhat 

emasculated  when  in the  warrior  mode,  but powerful  when he  is allowed  to 

realise his potential as a ‘tinkerer’. Sam’s coming into his destined place can 

be seen as reflective of movements in modern society. Through a recourse 

to medieval tropes of magic and artisanship, in the character of Sam there is 

the figure of the geek, transported back to a medieval timeframe and granted 

power, 

importance  and 

influence.  This  reflects  changing  notions  of 

Page | 198  

 
 
masculinity, and demonstrates once more how constructions of the past can 

be used to confirm or support contemporary, even shifting, notions of gender 

role and place.   

Given  the  recognised  overlap  between  fantasy  readership  and  many  who 

align themselves with the geek/nerd identity, such a portrayal can also have 

a particular resonance and appeal to this portion of fantasy readership.  Nix 

can  be  seen  as  ‘hailing’  his  young  adult  male  readership  through  Sam’s 

character.  Coined  by  Louis  Althusser  in  “Ideology  and  the  Ideological  State 

Apparatus”  (1968),  ‘hailing’  and  ‘interpellation’  represent  a  call  to,  and  an 

acceptance  or  recognition  of,  an  ideological  subject  position  (301).      In 

“Culture, Ideology and Interpellation” (1987), John Fisk explains that: 

Hailing is the process by which language identifies and constructs a 

social position for the addressee. Interpellation is the larger process 

whereby  language  constructs  social  relations  for  both  parties  as  an 

act  of  communication  and  thus  locates  them  on  the  broader map of 

social relations in general. (Fiske 308) 

Hailing  for  reader  identification  through  a  character  such  as  Sam  indicates 

the growing strength of ‘geek’ as a collective subject identity, and also shows 

this identity’s increasingly visible place on the ‘map of social relations’.  

Nix’s  treatment of masculinity  is  similar  to that of his treatment  of femininity 

within  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles.  It  is  not  bound  by  traditional  roles  and 

behaviours,  but  it  weaves  images  of  the  past  into  redefined  notions  of 

masculine  identity.  Although Sameth plays  the passive  role to Lirael’s  more 

active  heroism,  as  with  Sabriel  and  Touchstone,  this  pairing  demonstrates 

the use of complementary talents and traits in order to achieve a final goal.  

Page | 199  

 
 
 
In  the  binding  of  Orannis  it  is  Sam  who  makes  the  sword  and  Lirael  who 

wields  it.  Their  roles  are  inter-dependent,  not  hierarchical.  There  is  a  neat 

symbolism  of  this  in  the  dénouement  of  the  story,  as  Lirael  loses  her  hand 

wielding  the  sword  as  Abhorsen,  and  Sam  is  able  to  make  her  a  new 

Charter-spelled one drawing on his skills as Wallmaker.  

Although  casting  females  in  the  central  heroic  roles,  and  males  in  more 

auxiliary  or  passive  roles,  steps  outside  the  dominant  gender  paradigms 

within traditional heroic texts, the stories in The Old Kingdom Chronicles do 

not  represent  straightforward  inversions  of  male  and  female  hierarchies. 

They unsettle notions of traditionally appropriate male and female behaviour 

while  simultaneously  drawing  from  images  and  motifs  of  the  past  to  add 

weight  to  the  challenge.    They  provide  a  constructive  case  study  of  the 

complexities  of  gender  representation  in  contemporary  medievalist  fantasy 

fiction. Nix strongly appropriates from, and appeals to, longstanding romantic 

literary models— from traditional rites of passage tales, courtly love imagery, 

fairy-tale  motifs  and  imaginings  of  the  past.  His  gender  representations, 

however, conform to contemporary ideological aspirations for gender equity. 

Nix’s  portrayals  demonstrate  possibilities  for  more  nuanced,  elastic  and 

dynamic  gendered  characterisation,  indicating  that  appeals  to  the  past  are 

not  inevitably  conservative  in  function.  This  shows  that  fantastic  renderings 

of  a  medievalised  past  can  contribute  to  the  shaping  and  confirmation  of 

understandings of the present in regard to gender identity and place.  

Page | 200  

 
 
Chapter 6 

East and West. 

Continuing  on  from  the  discussion  of  Garth  Nix’s  Old  Kingdom  Trilogy,  the 

following  chapters  will  focus  upon  Canadian  writer  Guy  Gavriel  Kay’s  high 

fantasy  trilogy,  The  Fionavar  Tapestry.  Interestingly,  Kay  has  a  near 

association  with  Tolkien’s  fantasy  world,  having  worked  with  Christopher 

Tolkien  to  compile  and  edit  The  Silmarillion  from  a  mass  of  stories  and 

‘histories’ of Middle-earth written by J.R.R. Tolkien over his lifetime (Tolkien, 

Christopher 9). My discussion will consider how the images, ideals and social 

structures  of  the  past  are  used,  presented  and  valued  within  Kay’s  texts. 

Again,  the  focus  will  be  upon  how  these  impact  on  representations  of 

ethnicity and national identity, class and gender.  

I  will  argue  that  different  constructions  of  the  past  within  the  novels  are 

measured  according 

to  different  standards  of  worth.  Though  Kay 

appropriates  widely  from  various  cultural  imaginings,  different  mythologies, 

and  diverse  constructions  of  the  past,  the  novels  work  to  naturalise  the 

superiority  of  the  West,  of  masculinity,  and  of  Western  liberal  ideologies.  

This  chapter  will  examine  the  connection  between  modern  Canada  and 

medieval  Fionavar  and  the  centrality  of  the High  Kingdom  of Brennin. It  will 

Page | 201  

 
 
 
 
 
 
introduce  the  different  cultures  within  Fionavar  before  moving  to  a  more 

detailed  discussion  of  how  Brennin  is  situated  against  Cathal,  Fionavar’s 

‘Eastern’ culture. 

As  in  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles,  there  is  a  discernible  national  inflection 

within  The  Fionavar  Tapestry.  Where  Australian-ness  is  covertly  present 

within Nix’s texts, there is an overt Canadian presence in Kay’s.  Indeed, the 

story’s  central  focus  is  on  Canadian  characters’  adventures  in  the  “Perilous 

Realm” of Faërie. Five students from the University of Toronto are magically 

transported to Fionavar, the “first” of all worlds – the world of which all others, 

including our own, are simply shadows.  Four of these students, Kevin Laine, 

Paul  Schafer,  Kimberly  Ford,  and  Jennifer  Lowell,  magically  ‘cross’  to 

Brennin, the medieval High Kingdom of Fionavar. The fifth, Dave Martyniuk, 

is accidently taken to The Plain, north of Brennin, an untamed land peopled 

by  nomadic  hunters,  the  Dalrei.  These  are  recognisably  modelled  upon 

images of the North American ‘Indian’, adding a further distinctive Canadian 

marker. The five become key participants in the alliance of ‘the Light', joining 

the  fight  against  Rakoth  Maugrim,  the  unraveller,  a  fallen  god  and  the 

personification of all evil, intent upon the destruction of all worlds.  

As  in  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles,  there  is  a  barrier  between  the  modern 

and  the medieval,  but in  this  instance the  barrier  is  a magical  rather  than a 

physical  border  between two  very  separate worlds.  Again,  as  is the  case  in 

The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles,  the  older  world  is  privileged  and  given 

supremacy  over  the  modern  world.    This  is  clearly  signalled  in  Fionavar’s 

representation  as  the  primary  creation,  the  first  of  all  worlds.  Fionavar  is 

initially  introduced  to  the  Canadians  by  Loren  Silvercloak,  a  Mage  from 

Page | 202  

 
 
 
Fionavar’s High Kingdom of Brennin. Loren aptly fits the generic conventions 

of a sage wizard in the likeness of Merlin in the Arthurian tales or Gandalf in 

Tolkien’s  The  Lord  of  the  Rings.  This  immediately  provides  him  with  a 

generic  trustworthiness  that  elicits  belief  as  he  explains  the  primacy  of 

Fionavar to the five travellers before assisting in their ‘crossing’ to his world: 

“There  are  many  worlds  [.  .  .]  caught  in  the  loops  and  whorls  of  time.  [.  .  .] 

Only  in  Fionavar,  the  prime  creation,  which  all  the  others  only  imperfectly 

reflect, is the lore gathered and preserved that tells how to bridge the worlds” 

(Kay  ST 30).   

The  ideal  represented  by  Fionavar  draws  upon  the  power  of  fantasy’s 

archetypes  and  motifs,  and  also  appropriates  from  the  Platonic  idea  of 

Forms,  which  postulates  the  things  of  our  world  are  mere  reflections, 

shadows of a transcendent, more perfect, reality.  This is by no means a new 

concept within the genre of fantasy. The influence of Plato’s Forms is clearly 

observable in many works of the Inklings, although given a strong Christian 

inflection.  The  idea  of  a  more  perfect,  transcendent  reality  can  be  found  in 

C.S.  Lewis’  concept  of  the  ‘shadowlands’,  evident  in  his  Christian  analogy 

The Great Divorce, and in his children’s series The Chronicles of Narnia. The 

protagonist  in  The  Great  Divorce  (TGD)  takes  a  bus  trip  to  heaven  from 

purgatory,  “the  grey  town”  (18).  Heaven  is  so  real  and  substantial  that  the 

visitors appear as ghosts within that setting, unable to affect or interact with 

the overwhelming material reality of this place: 

It was the light, the grass, the trees that were different; made of some 

different  substance,  so  that  much  solider  than  things  in  our  own 

country  that  men  were  ghosts  in  comparison.  Moved  by  a  sudden 

thought I bent down to try and pluck a daisy which was growing at my 

Page | 203  

 
 
feet.  The  stalk  wouldn’t  break,  I  tried  to  twist  it  but  it  wouldn’t  twist. 

(Lewis TGD 27) 

More  overt  still,  the  concluding  chapter  of  The  Last  Battle  (TLB),  the  final 

book  of  the  Narnia  series,  is  titled  “Farewell  to  Shadowlands”.  It  shows  the 

protagonists  leaving  behind  an  imperfect  Narnia  to  experience  the  real, 

perfect, heavenly Narnia: 

‘Of  course,  Daughter  of  Eve’  said  the  Faun.  The  further  up  and 

further in you go the bigger everything gets. The inside is larger than 

the outside’. 

Lucy looked hard at the garden and saw it was not really a garden at 

all,  but  a  whole  world,  with  its  own  rivers  and  woods  and  seas  and 

mountains. But they were not strange, she knew them all. 

‘I  see,’  she  said.  ‘This  is  still  Narnia,  and  more  real  and  more 

beautiful than the Narnia down below’. (Lewis TLB 170) 

The  idea  of  a  transcendent  reality  is  also  evident  in  Tolkien’s  On  Fairy 

Stories as it argues that the “particular quality of joy in successful fantasy can 

be  described  as  a  sudden  glimpse  of  the  underlying  truth  or  reality”  (70). 

Continuing with the sensory analogy, Tolkien later notes that this joy “has the 

very  taste  of  primary  truth”  (71).    In  “Saving  the  Myths:  The  Re-creation  of 

Mythology  in  Plato  and  Tolkien”,  Gergely  Nagy  asserts  that  “Plato’s  forms 

and Tolkien’s past are functionally in the same place” (88), both seeking, and 

even retrospectively constructing or appealing to, an original truth.  

Fionavar’s  position  as  the  prime  creation,  therefore,  draws  from  fantasy 

convention  and,  more  broadly,  from  wider  Western  philosophical  tradition. 

Both  fantasy  and  philosophical  influences  work  together  to  shore  up  the 

Page | 204  

 
 
 
importance  of  the  past  as  an  ideal.  The  significant  and  authoritative  place 

that the past holds in The Fionavar Tapestry is immediately evident as Loren 

Silvercloak  appeals  to  “ancient  wisdom”  to  justify  his  quest  to  fetch  five 

strangers  to  his  own  medieval  world.  As  Fionavar’s  ills  and  triumphs  have 

repercussions in all worlds, it is only right that Fionavar is given precedence 

above our world. 

Even in modern day Toronto the authority and appeal of the past is evident. 

Loren Silvercloak does not seek his five travellers randomly. He finds them in 

the  rarefied  halls  of  academia  at  the  University  of  Toronto,  an  institution 

strongly  associated  with  scholarship  on  the  Middle  Ages  through  its  Centre 

for  Medieval  Studies,  founded  in  1964.  Moreover,  the  picture  that  the  texts 

conjure of the University of Toronto draws on images of the past; Kay utilises 

symbols  of  heritage  and  history  and  imbues  them  with  a  sense  of 

permanence  and  authority.  This,  in  turn,  subtly  invests  even  the  characters 

from this world with an aura of ‘pastness’.  

History,  with  its  own  kind  of  pagan/magical  inflection,  is  emphasised  as 

Loren meets  ‘the five’ at an  international  Celtic  conference—  in  the  “august 

precincts of the domed auditorium” of the Convocation Hall, complete with its 

glittering  chandeliers  and  arched  windows  (ST  19-20).  Even  in  the  modern 

world  Loren  represents  authority  as  he  performs  the  role  of  a  “reclusive 

genius”  (ST  19),  Lorenzo  Marcus,  the  keynote  speaker  at  the  conference. 

The  five  leave  the  hall  with  Loren  Silvercloak  and  the  dwarf  Matt  Sören, 

Loren’s  ‘source’  from  whom  he  draws  strength  to  fuel  his  magical  powers. 

They walk across “the wide central green of the campus, then along the dark 

winding  path  known  as  the  Philosophers’  Walk  that  twisted,  with  gentle 

Page | 205  

 
 
 
slopes  on  either  side,  behind  the  law  school,  the  Faculty  of  Music,  and  the 

massive edifice of the Royal Ontario Museum” (ST 25-26). The semiotics of 

this description strongly appeal to the past. There are the obvious romantic, 

medieval literary tropes— the magician, the attendant dwarf, and the green, 

pleasant  landscape. The  imagery  also  links  the  scholarly  culture  of Toronto 

University  to  the  past.  It  suggests  the  protagonists  are  formed  by  culture— 

by  philosophy,  law,  music  and  by  history  itself.  As  in  The  Old  Kingdom 

Chronicles,  from  the  very  beginning  of  The  Fionavar  Tapestry  the  past  is 

situated  in  a  place  of  privilege.  Prestige  and  value  are  marked  by  an 

association  with  the  past.  The  professional  aspirations  of  the  five,  too,  are 

attached to history, status and authority. Kevin and Dave are studying Law, 

Kimberly is a medical intern, and Paul is a young academic in the university’s 

history department. Jennifer is later revealed to be Guinevere from Arthurian 

mythology and, consequently, is even more deeply grounded in the past than 

her  compatriots.  Moreover,  the  five  each  realise  an  even  greater  personal 

potential when they are transported to the ‘past’, in the spatialised form of the 

world of Fionavar.  

As previously noted, Fionavar is cast as the ultimate reality, more substantial 

and  more  real  than  the  ‘shadowlands’  that  include  the  readers’  own  world. 

Kay’s  hierarchy  of  worlds  both  participates  in  and  confounds  the  frame 

established by Tolkien in “On Fairy Stories”. It participates in allowing fantasy 

to  reflect  a  transcendent  reality,  but  it  confuses  this  frame  through  the 

employment of a different terminology.  Tolkien demarcates between worlds 

of fantasy and reality by referring to the material world, the world in which the 

readers  and  the  authors  dwell,  as  the  ‘Primary  World’;  and  the  imaginary 

constructs  of  fantasy  authors,  as    ‘sub-creations’  and  ‘Secondary  Worlds’ 

Page | 206  

 
 
(Tolkien 49-51). Kay’s texts invert Tolkien’s notions of primacy by presenting 

the  sub-creation,  Fionavar,  as  the  ‘first’  world  and  marking  it  as  the  ‘prime 

creation’.  Given  Kay’s  association  with  Tolkien  through  his  work  on  The 

Silmarillion,  this  might  indicate  an  attempt  to  step  outside  the  constraints of 

Tolkien’s  influence.  Kay’s  lexis  gestures  toward  Tolkien’s  framework, 

displaying his awareness of the influence of Tolkien’s writings on the fantasy 

genre,  but  it  also  shows  digression.  Indeed,  in  an  introduction  to  a  special 

edition of Kay’s novel Tigana, James Gunn quotes Kay as saying that “to be 

successful  in  fantasy,  you  have  to  take  the  measure  of  Tolkien  -  work  with 

his  strengths  and  away  from  his  weaknesses”  (Gunn  online).  Kay’s  lexical 

choices,  however,  generate  certain  difficulties  in  regard  to  the  vocabulary 

generally available to differentiate between the worlds inside and outside of a 

fantasy  novel.  Confusingly,  within  Kay’s  Fionavar  Tapestry  the  ‘Secondary 

World’ is the ‘first’ of all worlds’ and the ‘Primary World’ becomes second to 

the  fantastic  ‘sub-creation’.  In  an  attempt  to  circumvent  misunderstanding, 

the  following  chapters  will  avoid  using  the  terms  ‘Primary  World’  or 

‘Secondary World’ as set out in Tolkien’s framework. Instead, when referring 

to the world recognisable to readers as their own, this thesis will refer to ‘our 

world’ or ‘the readers’ world’.   

As  the  ‘Prime  Creation’,  Fionavar  is  set  above  the  readers’  modern  world, 

and above all other possible imagined worlds. Within this already privileged 

world  of  Fionavar,  the  High  Kingdom  of  Brennin  is  situated  at the  top of  an 

internal  hierarchy.  It  is  presented  as  the  centre  of  power,  culture  and 

influence.  Brennin  is  clearly  medieval  but,  as  will  later  be  discussed  in 

greater  detail,  it  is  aligned  with  the  privileged,  sophisticated,  enlightened 

West.  Moreover,  a  particularly  Canadian  inflection  can  be  found  in  Kay’s 

Page | 207  

 
 
High Kingdom. Where Nix’s imagined Middle Ages demonstrated Australian 

cultural  aspirations  such  as  informality,  egalitarianism  and  mateship,  Kay’s 

central  Middle  Ages  is  an  exemplar  of  masculine  civility.    In  White  Civility 

Canadian  scholar  Danial  Coleman  argues  that  at  the  centre  “of  English 

Canadian  whiteness  is  a  specific  form  of  civility  modelled  upon  the 

gentlemanly  code  of  Britishness”  (10).  Colman  asserts  “this  is  a  form  of 

Britishness that is a uniquely settler-colonial project (211). It is equated with 

an educated enlightenment, progressiveness, and the “ethical moral concept 

of  peaceful  order”  (Coleman  11),  and  is  significant  to  “Canada’s  project  to 

establish itself as a liberal, modern, and civil nation” (Coleman 13).  

The High Kingdom’s progressive enlightenment becomes particularly evident 

when  Brennin  is  juxtaposed  against  the  other  cultures  in  Fionavar.  These 

cultures  variously  evoke  the  Saracen,  the  North  American  ‘Indian’,  and  a 

more  rudimentary  Anglo/Celtic  society.  The  centrality  of  Brennin  in  this 

fictional  world  is  reflective  of  Kay’s  Canadian  and  Western  perspective. 

Indeed,  Kay  himself  acknowledges  his  own historical  and  cultural roots and 

their influence on his works. In a 1995 interview with Solaris magazine, Kay 

says: 

When  I  say  "we",  I  mean Western  men  and  women,  because  that's 

the culture that I feel most at home in, it's the culture that most of us 

are, to some degree, shaped by. So, in that sense [my novels] have 

been  incorporating  that  dimension,  but  it's  not  in  any  huge  sense 

central to my thinking or my own work. (Trudel online) 

This is indicative not only of the centrality of a Western cultural perspective in 

Kay’s  work,  but  also  of  the  ease  with  which  this  perspective  seems  to 

‘naturally’,  and  in  an  unmarked  way,  assume  the  centre.  Rather  than 

ameliorate the naturalised authority of Western thought and tradition in Kay’s 

Page | 208  

 
 
work, the qualification that his Western bent is ‘not in any huge sense’ central 

to  his  thinking  or  writing  demonstrates  something  of  the  uninterrogated 

power  of  Western  influence.    For  Western  readers  who  are  participants  in 

Kay’s  “we”,  this  centrality  easily  appears  natural,  fitting  within  a  hierarchy 

long established as right and plausible in Western literary representations. In 

Fautlines:  Cultural  Materialism  and  the  Politics  of  Dissident  Reading,  Alan 

Sinfield  discusses  the  role  that  narratives  play  in  shaping  notions  of 

plausibility. He argues that: 

The strength of ideology derives from the way it gets to be common 

sense;  it  “goes  without  saying.”  [.  .  .]  As  the  world  shapes  itself 

around and through us, certain interpretations of experience strike us 

as  plausible:  They  fit  with  what  we  have  experienced  already,  and 

are confirmed by others around us. (Sinfield 32) 

Within  the  canon  of  Western  literature  at  large  there  is  an  essentialising  of 

Western  centrality.  Despite  a  purported  detached  ‘other-wordliness’  in 

fantasy, a Western heart is also discernible in key conventions of the fantasy 

genre and in fantasy’s medievalism. Stories which place Western notions of 

civility and behaviour at the centre feed into each other, increasing credibility 

as  each  reiteration  confirms  the  others  as  correct;  the  more  something  is 

restated, the more ‘natural’ it becomes. 

As  has  been  well  theorised  within  the  field  of  postcolonial  criticism,  the 

influence  of  paradigms  that  naturalise  notions  of  Western  superiority  are 

clearly  evident  in  realist  literature.  In  his  seminal  Orientalism  Edward  Said 

argues  that  literature  plays  a  key  role  in  constructing  the  Other:  “Groups  of 

texts,  types  of  text,  even  textual  genres,  acquire  mass,  density  and 

referential power amongst themselves and thereafter in culture at large” (20). 

Page | 209  

 
 
Moreover,  Said  identifies  the  power  in  this  constructed  authority,  asserting 

that:  

There  is  nothing  mysterious  or  natural  about  authority.  It  is  formed, 

irradiated,  disseminated;  it  is  instrumental;  it  is  pervasive;  it  has 

status,  it  establishes  canons  of  taste  and  value;  it  is  virtually 

indistinguishable  from  certain  ideas  it  dignifies  as  true,  and  from 

traditions,  perceptions,  and  judgements  it  forms,  transmits,  and 

reproduces.  Above  all,  authority  can,  indeed  must,  be  analyzed. 

(Said 19-20) 

I  wish  to  emphasise  that  both  realist  and  non-realist  texts  alike  can 

participate  in  essentialising  Western  authority  and  superiority.  Even  fiction 

genres  such  as  fantasy  borrow  their  structures  of  plausibility  from  culturally 

powerful ideologies that privilege Western perspectives. Fantasy also draws 

plausibility  from  its  appeal  to  history,  myth,  tradition,  and  from  longstanding 

literary  depictions  and  conventions.    It  seems  natural,  therefore,  when  The 

Fionavar  Tapestry  situates  discernibly  Western  behaviours,  characters  and 

ideologies at the centre.  

Chapter  1  discussed  the  manner  in  which  modernity  can  use  the  Middle 

Ages  as  an  Other  against  which  modernity  can  identify  itself  either  through 

alignment (venerating the past) or through opposition (representing the past 

as  a  primitive,  unenlightened  other).  The  Fionavar  Tapestry  uses  these 

differing  constructions  of  the  past;  there  is  a  Middle  Ages  with  which 

modernity  can  identify,  and  varying  Middle  Ages  that  function  as  a 

superseded  obverse.    While  the  High  Kingdom  of  Brennin  embodies  the 

possibility  of  an  ideal  past  and  present,  within  Fionavar  there  are  cultures 

that  have  inflections  of  medieval  barbarism,  violence  and  superstition.  The 

‘Other’ cultures of Fionavar become the East to Brennin’s West, the primitive 

Page | 210  

 
 
and  uncivilised  to  Brennin’s  culture  and  enlightenment,  and  the  feminine  to 

Brennin’s  masculinity.  Although  these  other  cultures  are  Brennin’s  allies  in 

the  war  against  darkness,  undercurrents  of  an  inferior  alterity  can  be 

discerned in portrayals of the peoples of Cathal and Eridu, in representations 

of the Dalrei of the plains, and of the Dwarves in their  mountain kingdom. It 

can also be found in the depictions of those who worship the Goddess rather 

than the God.   

Kay’s varying constructions of the past are indicative of the malleability of the 

Middle  Ages. They  demonstrate how  the medieval  can  change  complexion, 

depending upon that which it is set alongside. Catherine Brown points to the 

flexible utility of the medieval as an Other alongside which modernity is set. 

She  considers  the  manner  in  which  ‘non-medievals’  “write,  think,  make 

movies,  novels,  poems,  or  advertisements”  about  the  Middle  Ages,  arguing 

that if there were no Middle Ages:  

people might have had to invent them just so that we could safely be 

non-medieval, and have someplace exotic to fly to when modern life 

got too, well, modern. Or so that we could have a convenient Other 

against which to define ourselves. (Brown 549)  

There  is  both  versatility  and  complexity  in  Kay’s  construction  of  his  Middle 

Ages  which  is  particularly  evident  in  his  creation  of  Fionavar’s  distinct 

civilisations,  practices  and  beliefs.  There  is  an  implicit  comparison  between 

the  present  and  the  past,  but  simultaneously  there  are  overt  comparisons 

between different imaginings of the past. Brennin, its people, its politics, and 

its  belief  systems  retain  the  centre,  while  representations  of  other  cultures 

work to confirm Brennin’s superiority.  

Page | 211  

 
 
 
Fionavar’s cultural hierarchies are significant because popular constructions, 

even those that are both medievalist and imaginary, impact upon and reflect 

real  world  national  discourses  and  beliefs.  Indeed,  the  inclusion  of  many 

cultures in Fionavar itself mirrors something of Canada’s contemporary pride 

in itself as a modern, pluralistic society. Coleman argues that: 

for  many  Canadians,  multiculturalism 

represents  Canada’s 

progressiveness,  not  only 

in  comparison 

to 

the  monocultural 

nationalisms of other countries but also in comparison to earlier eras 

of  monocultural  nationalism  in  Canada.  Indeed,  multiculturalism  in 

recent  public  opinion  polls  has  been  selected  as 

the  most 

fundamental  and  proudly  revered  feature  of  Canadian  ‘identity’. 

(Coleman 7) 

Even  so,  the  symbolic  placement  of  a  Western  Brennin  as  the  centre  of 

power,  knowledge  and  authority  in  Fionavar  unsettles  the  progressive  and 

egalitarian  overtones  attached  to  multiculturalism.  It  echoes  and  reinforces 

the  naturalised  authority  of  the  West  in  our  world  and  of  Britishness  in 

English  speaking  Canada.  Coleman  speaks  of  the  problematic  quality  of 

trying  to  organise  “a  diverse  population  around  the  standardizing  ideals  of 

whiteness,  masculinity  and  Britishness”  (10).  He  also  observes 

that 

“categories  of  privilege  attempt  to  secure  their  privilege  by  rendering  their 

preferential  status  as  natural  and  therefore  as  immutable  and  irresistible” 

(10).  

Canada’s standardising ideals of ‘whiteness, masculinity and Britishness’ are 

also  reinforced  by  its  cultural  association  with  Northernness.  Unlike  the 

antipodean  Australia  that  relies  on  a  spirit  of  Northernness,  Canada  has 

Page | 212  

 
 
 
access to the geographical North.  Coleman argues that ‘the Northern myth’ 

was central to the figuration of Canada as:  

a  testing  and  improving  ground  for  effete  European  manhood. 

According  to  this  myth  the  rigours  of  a  stern  unaccommodating 

climate  demanded strength  of the  body,  character  and  mind  while  it 

winnowed away laziness, overindulgence and false niceties. […] For 

early  ideologues  of  the  emerging  Canadian  nation  the  country’s 

northern  location  meant  it  would  remain  the  domain  of  upwardly 

mobile  White  people,  and 

its  Nordic  environment  would  so 

strengthen and sharpen them that they would be improved over their 

ancestral British stock. (Coleman 24) 

The  semiotic  and  cultural  significance  attached  to  topographical  settings  in 

fantasy  novels  was  discussed  in  Chapter  2,  and  the  map  Fionavar  fits  well 

within  high  fantasy’s  generic  expectations  (see  Fig.  2.)  Like  the  topography 

of  the  Old  Kingdom,  Fionavar’s  geography  has  the  almost  requisite  woods, 

lakes and wastes, and situates the great, foreboding mountainous regions in 

the  North.  Unlike  the  case  with  Australia,  this  is  not  at  odds  with  Canada’s 

physical Northernness.  

Page | 213  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2. 

Page | 214  

 
 
The  High  Kingdom  placement  in  the  middle  of  the  map  speaks  to  its 

centrality and importance, and the map shows Brennin in greater detail than 

the other nations, making it appear more substantial and complete. It shows 

the  castle  in  Paras  Derval,  Ysanne’s  Lake,  the  North  and  South  Keeps,  its 

harbours,  its  cultivated  fields,  woods,  the  Goddess’s  caves  in  Dun  Maura, 

towns  and  regions.  By  contrast  other  lands  are  represented  more  one-

dimensionally.    Cathal  appears  as  sparse  and  desert-like,  the  Plain  as  a 

uniform mass of vegetation, and the Dwarf Kingdom as a small mountainous 

region. Eridu is similarly nondescript; moreover, it appears on the margins of 

the diagram, its geographical position at the edge of the map symbolic of its 

marginal place within the story.  

The  central  position  of  the  High  Kingdom  is  made  more  natural  by 

conventional,  idealised  images  of  a  medieval  realm.  The  palace  in  the 

capital,  Paras  Derval,  has  “battlements  and  towers,  a  garden,  a  central 

courtyard, an open square before the walls and on the very highest rampart 

a banner somehow blowing in a non-existent breeze” (Kay ST 31). Unlike the 

castle 

in 

the  Old  Kingdom’s  Belisaere, 

the  architecture,  décor  and 

atmosphere of the palace inspire feelings of awe in the modern travellers as 

they  take  in  its  “pillars,  windows,  ever-present  tapestries,  the  jewelled  floor 

[and]  the  gem  encrusted  clothing  of  the  lords  and  ladies”  (ST  74).  The 

lavishness  of  the  castle  and  court  is  seen  in  the  grand  stained  glass 

depictions  of  great  warriors  and  victories,  in  the  “raised  dais  of  marble  and 

obsidian”, and in the “great throne carved of heavy oak” (ST 74). These are 

symbols  of  wealth,  power  and  history.  In  contrast  to  The  Old  Kingdom 

Chronicles, privilege and position are held up rather than played down. 

Page | 215  

 
 
 
Medieval markers of antiquity and authority are, ironically, reinforced by the 

above-mentioned  connection  between  Brennin  and  enlightenment.  Again, 

this  does  not  sit  at  odds  with  Canadian  experience.  Coleman  argues  that 

“Britishness  was  believed  to  represent  a  unique  achievement  of  liberty  and 

authority  while  yet  retaining  a  respect  for  traditional  monarchical  (and 

therefore  divinely  appointed)  order”  (20).  The  High  Kingdom’s  primacy  is 

further  strengthened  and  naturalised  by  its  intimate  connection  to  the 

reader’s  modern  world.  This  is  primarily  seen  in  Brennin’s  association  with 

the travellers from Canada. Kevin closely allies himself with Prince Diarmuid, 

becoming a member of his band, and Paul acts as the High King’s surrogate 

on  the  Summer  Tree.  Kimberly  becomes  Brennin’s  seer  and  brings  King 

Arthur from our world to Fionavar. Jennifer/Guinevere is reunited with Arthur 

at  the  palace  of  Paras  Derval.  Significantly,  narration  within  the  novels  is 

largely  focalised  through  the  Canadian  characters,  providing  a  subjective, 

modern,  Westernised  perspective.  Consequently,  their  allegiances  work  to 

invite reader identification with characters from Brennin.  

While the medieval and magical aspects of the High Kingdom add an edge of 

alien  mysteriousness  to  Brennin,  the  contemporary  protagonists  work  as  a 

conduit  between  this  past  and  our  present,  and  the  Arthurian  aspects  draw 

on  a  sense  of  shared  history  and  mythology.  Familiarity  with  culturally 

significant  Western  mythologies  can  provide  an  interpretive  key,  allowing 

portents  and  symbols  within  a  fantasy  story  to  resonate  with  readers.  For 

example, the link between the physical state of king and the suffering of the 

land, present  in Arthurian  and  Celtic myths of  Fisher or  Maimed Kings,  can 

cause  the  reader  to  connect  the  drought  that  afflicts  Brennin  with  a  moral 

Page | 216  

 
 
 
failing of the declining old King Ailell. Such symbols have the power to work, 

as Northrop Frye puts it, on some “murky ‘subconscious’” level (188).  This is 

particularly  the  case  when  the  images  in  the  stories  have  been  subject  to 

persistent reiteration in Western literature.  

Brennin’s  alignment  with  our  West  is  only  one  way  in  which  its  authority  is 

naturalised.  Its  central  position  is  further  confirmed  when  it  is  set  alongside 

the  other  significant  cultures  present  in  the  world  of  Fionavar. While  on  the 

surface Kay’s inclusion of a range of non-Western cultures appears a liberal 

affirmation  of  cultural  diversity, 

this  open-handed  perspective 

is  not 

unequivocal. In “Eating the Other”, bell hooks speaks of how dominant White 

culture’s relationships with the Other often simply serve Western desires for 

possession  and  experience.  She  argues  that  “[w]ithin  commodity  culture, 

ethnicity  becomes  spice,  seasoning  that  can  liven  up  a  dull  dish  that  is 

mainstream  white  culture”  (179).  While  the  centre  of  Fionavar  remains 

Western, the Other cultures contribute interest and exoticism. 

Despite positive representations of non-European cultures within these texts, 

there  is  a  noticeable  ambivalence  as  the  novels  ultimately  draw  on  and 

reinforce  literary  ethnic  stereotypes  and  assumptions.  In  The  Fionavar 

Tapestry,  Western,  Eastern  and  native  North  American-like  cultures  work 

together toward the common goal of defeating a Dark and evil threat to their 

world.  They fight  with dignity,  bravery  and  a self-sacrificial fervour. Brennin, 

however,  not  only  retains  its  centrality  during  the  war,  but  increases  in 

authority  and  stature  above  these  other  cultures.  Brennin’s  centrality 

provides  a  pertinent  example  of  the  “flexible  positional  superiority”  that 

Edward  Said  discerns  as  constantly  at  work  in  Orientalism.  This  “puts  the 

Page | 217  

 
 
 
Westerner in a whole series of possible relationships with the Orient without 

ever losing him the upper hand” (Said 7). By way of example, if the Other is 

savage, the West is civilised, but if the East is gentle the West is the strong. 

If the East is naïve the West is knowing, but if the East is eager to learn, the 

West becomes the teacher. Ironically, the greater the value attached to these 

Other  cultures,  the  greater  the  value  that  adheres  to  Brennin  as  Fionavar’s 

High Kingdom.   

An  understanding  of  how  Brennin’s  Western  authority  is  created,  sustained 

and  naturalised  within  the  text  entails  a  closer  examination  of  Fionavar’s 

secondary  cultures.  The  following  section  provides  a  brief  summary  of 

Fionavar’s  cultures  before  moving  on  to  a  more  in-depth  reading  of  Kay’s 

rendering  of  the  peoples  of  Cathal,  the  Dalrei  and  the  Dwarf  Kingdom.  The 

most  powerful  of  these  cultures  is  the  southern  kingdom  of  Cathal,  located 

beyond  the  River  Saeren,  immediately  evoking  the  Saracen  in  its  name. 

Indeed,  Saracen  markers  are  easily  located  in  Cathal’s  Eastern  sounding 

names,  titles  and  motifs.  There  is  exoticism  in  its  sultry  weather,  aromatic 

perfumes  and  images  of  exalted  personages  reclining  in  elaborate  rooms, 

beneath the waving fans of slaves.  Exoticism is further reinforced in modes 

of  clothing,  speech  and  form;  in  phrases  such  as  “The  sun  rises  in  your 

daughter’s eyes” (Kay ST 121). Cathal is cast as beautiful, but with an edge 

of  cruel  brutality.  It  is  simultaneously  represented  as  both  under-  and  over-

civilised.  Forms  of  cultural  interaction  are  depicted  as  overwrought.  Formal 

ways of greeting, acting, and prescriptions on how to demonstrate respect, at 

once  can  appear  highly  cultivated,  but  also  over-embellished,  artificial  and 

obsequious. Cathal is the only nation which, albeit unsuccessfully, presents a 

Page | 218  

 
 
challenge  to  Brennin’s  position  of  ultimate  authority  in  the  alliance  of  the 

Light. 

In  contrast  to  these  Eastern  markers,  the  texts’  depictions  of  the  northern 

tribes,  the  Dalrei,  nomadic  horsemen  of  the  plain,  evoke  the  American 

‘Indian’  in  a  generic  form.  The  explicit  Native  American  overtones  are  not 

without  an  inflection  of  the  noble  savage.  Furthermore,  the  texts  indulge  in 

the  fetishistic  representation  of  a  more  ‘primitive’  Other.  This  is  largely 

evident in the mystical connection between the Dalrei and their land. Images 

of  Shamans,  hunts,  totem  animals,  celebratory  feasts  and  wild  dances  are 

accompanied by characterisations which are simultaneously evocative of an 

endearing  naiveté  and,  paradoxically,  of  deep,  natural  wisdom.  Unlike 

Cathal,  the  Dalrei  do  not  seek  power  within  the  war  nor  covet  positions  of 

political or military prestige. They feel it an honour to ride at the side of the 

heroes of Brennin, and under Brennin’s leadership.  

The  text’s  treatment  of  the  land  of  Eridu  is  only  peripheral.  As  the  land  is 

ravaged by a killing rain and plague, little information is given concerning its 

people.  The  only  surviving  Eridun  are  its  outcasts,  living  in  the  mountains. 

Physically,  there  is  an  echo  of  Pacific  Islander  culture,  with  Eridun  faces 

decorated with green tattoos. There is, however, also mention of the father of 

a young outcast, Faebur, donning a white robe to formally denounce Faebur 

in  the  Lion’s  Square  in  the  city  of  Larak.  The  ritual  of  him  calling  upon  four 

heralds  to  witness  his  son’s  exile  seems  to  point  to  a  rigidly  structured 

society  (Kay  DR  12).  The  ‘primitive’  tattoos  seem  almost  at  odds  with  the 

picture  of  white  robes  and  town  squares.  The  people  of  Eridu  are  also 

referred  to  as  the  “People  of  the  Lion”. This  in  itself  evokes  Middle  Eastern 

Page | 219  

 
 
 
imagery such as that which labels Christ ‘the Lion of Judah’, or Muhammad's 

son-in-law  ‘the  Lion  of  Allah’.    The  strength  of  patriarchy  can  be  seen  in 

Faebur’s  banishment  for  refusing  to  marry  in  accordance  with  his  father’s 

direction.  Though  marginal  within  the  story,  the  text’s  inclusion  of  the  Eridu 

adds  to  the  complex  form  of  exotic  and  historic  multicultural  colour. 

Moreover, the genocide of the (albeit largely faceless) people of Eridu serves 

the purpose of proving both the immense evil and incredible threat of Rakoth 

Maugrim and his Dark forces.   

Not all the secondary cultures in Fionavar are non-Western. The Dwarves, a 

Tolkienesque staple in genre fantasy, are Anglo-Celtic in representation. On 

the whole, the mountain regions of Banir Lök and Banir Tal and their people 

are  portrayed  as  more  earthy,  perhaps  even  more  ‘ordinary’,  in  their  ways. 

The physical imagery, the border status, the mountains and the mines, evoke 

both Tolkien’s Nordic dwarves, as well as those from Celtic mythology. Their 

society’s  down-to-earth  and  comparatively  unsophisticated  customs  are 

suggestive of an earlier, less refined and less hierarchical medieval society. 

Things  valued  are  more  tactile  than  abstract.  Although,  within  Fionavar, 

dwarves  are  traditionally  allied  with  the  light,  Kay  utilises  an  ambiguity 

derived from Nordic sagas where dwarves are “depicted as being among the 

powers of evil who lurk beneath the roots of the world-tree Yggdrasil” (Ashley 

304). Though as a whole the Dwarves fit with Tolkien’s rendering of them as 

an (albeit flawed) essentially good people, Kay highlights motifs of scheming 

and cunning – characteristics that have long been attached to depictions of 

Dwarves (Ashley 304)  

Page | 220  

 
 
 
The two remaining cultures represented within the alliance of the light sit in a 

different  category  to  those  mentioned  above.  The  lios  alfar  (Norse  for  ‘light 

elves’) and the giant Paraiko are mythological types. Both embody the other-

worldly,  and  as  such,  do  not  seem  to  completely  belong  to  the  earthly 

Fionavar.  The  Paraiko  represent  something  from  outside,  a  pre-history 

shrouded  further  in  mystery  due  to  their  voluntary  withdrawal  from  the 

younger cultures of Fionavar. The Paraiko’s association with the creation of 

the Cauldron of Khath Meigol aligns them with Celtic giants and heroes who 

possessed magic cauldrons such as Bendigeid Vran19 and Culhwch from the 

Welsh tales of the Mabinogion.20 The Cauldron also provides a particular link 

to  early  Arthurian  legend  through  tales  such  as  Culhwch  and  Olwen21 and 

Preiddeu  Annwfn,22 and  through  the  Cauldron’s  links  with  the  Holy  Grail.23  

The  lios  alfar,  too,  are  mysterious,  seeming  closer  to  the  divine  in  beauty, 

history,  and  solemnity.  Their  very  naming  defines  them  as  light.    They  are 

clearly Nordic in both appearance and in their mythical association, and this 

again emphasises Anglo-Saxon centrality. Consequently, the lios alfar might 

be seen as serving the metaphorical function of standing for Anglo-Western 

heritage  and  the  Paraiko  for  Celtic  lineage.  The  other-worldliness  of  both 

Paraiko and lios alfar sets them apart, making them less grounded or ‘real’ in 

relation  to  political  power  in  Fionavar.  Through  support  and  alliance, 

however, they grant approval to and affirm Brennin’s centrality. 

19 Also  known  as  ‘Bran  the  Blessed’,  Bendigeid  Vran  possessed  a  cauldron    that  could  raise  the 
dead which he gave as a wedding gift when his sister Branwen married Matholwch, King of Ireland, 
see “Bendigeid Vran” (Guest 33-48)  
20 A “Collection of [medieval] Welsh-language tales offering a glimpse into the largely lost Mythology 
of Britain” (Sampson 600). 
21 A  tale  where  Culhwch  seeks  Arthur’s  help  to  complete  tasks  to  win  the  hand  of  Olwen,  the 
daughter of a Giant (Jones 95-136). 
22 Preiddeu Annwfn  or The Spoils of Annwn is an early Celtic poem in which Arthur and his men 
sail  to  the  Irish  otherworld  to  steal  a  magic  cauldron  (Ashley  427).  This  story  is  adapted  in  “the 
Wandering Fire”( Kay part IV).  
23  See  “Fisher  King”  (Ashley  353)  and  “Grail”  (  Ashley  427-8)    also  “Bendigeid  Vran”  (Dixon-
Kennedy 50) 

Page | 221  

 
 
                                                           
The following  section will  discuss  the  texts depiction  of  Cathal, arguing  that 

The Fionavar Tapestry employs a literary Orientalism. Cathal’s portrayal sits 

comfortably  within  generic  and  Orientalist  representations  of  the  East, 

disseminated  through  a  great  deal  of  Western  media  and  literature.    In 

“Representing  Middle  Eastern  Women”,  İrvın  Cemıl  Schick  speaks  of  the 

ingrained nature of Orientalist understandings and tropes: 

[a]  peculiar  mixture  of  eroticism  and  exoticism,  including  such 

elements 

as 

homosexuality, 

slavery, 

violence, 

polygamy, 

concubinage,  harem  life,  and  public  baths,  came  to  constitute  the 

building  blocks  of  a  certain  discourse  generally  included  under  the 

rubric  of  orientalism.  This  discourse  found  expression  in  diverse 

media, from philology to theology, from literature to painting, and has, 

to  this  day,  strongly  colored  western  perceptions  of  the  Middle  East 

and its inhabitants.  (Schick 351) 

Many of these motifs are present in The Fionavar Tapestry. Cathal is second 

to  Brennin  in  military  and  political  significance.  An  alliance  rather  than 

hostilities  between  these  two  civilisations,  however,  sets  Kay’s  depiction  at 

odds  with  many 

texts 

that  represent  or  re-enact 

the  Crusades  by 

antagonistically  positioning  East  against  West.  Instead,  it  represents  that 

which  E.L  Risden  calls  the  “desire  to  connect  with  and  approve  the  Arabic 

Other [that] ends short of any serious cultural integration and barely touches 

admissions  of  the  possibility  of  equity”  (187).    Regardless  of  Cathal’s  key 

position in the army of the Light, its generic Eastern alien-ness prevents any 

unequivocal acceptance of Cathal’s Otherness.   

Situated south of the High Kingdom it has a warmer, more sultry climate. Its 

gardens  of  Larai  Rigal  are  renowned  for  their  beauty  and,  fittingly, 

descriptions  of  the  land  and  the  court  are  highly  sensual.  Cathal’s  court  is 

Page | 222  

 
 
first seen sitting within a luxurious pavilion situated on the Circle Path which 

winds its way for miles within the walled gardens. It is here that Shalhassan – 

“Supreme Lord of Sang Marlen, of Larai Rigal, and of the nine provinces of 

the Garden Country” (Kay WF 108) – is shown reclining “surrounded by the 

scented  finery  of  his  court  […]  under  the  waving  fans  of  the  servants”  (ST 

123-124).    Indeed,  the  whole  of  the  air  of  Larai  Rigal  is  infused  with  the 

heavy  scent  of  perfumes,  “of  calath  and  myrrh,  of  elphinel  and  alder”  (ST 

121). It is redolent with opulence and decadence.  The court is described as 

“hedonistic and overbred” (ST 191). This is vividly illustrated as Shalhassan’s 

courtiers enjoy the spectacle of the “oiled bodies” of slaves fighting, “writhing 

naked  on  the  floor  in  the  presence  chamber”  (ST  191).  The  cruel  face  of 

decadence  is  graphically  depicted  in  the  capricious  practice  of  power  by 

Shalhassan,  as  in  one  breath  he  pardons  the  two  slaves  only  to  have  one 

garrotted the next moment by one of his mutes for being a “little tardy in his 

obeisance”  (ST  192).  Such  a  scene  fits  well  within  the  generic  tropes  of 

“[s]ensuality,  promise,  terror,  sublimity,  idyllic  pleasure  and  intense  energy” 

that  Said  identifies  as  longstanding  within  Western  literature’s  Orientalist 

representations (118).  

As  Alan  Sinfield  observes,  the  force  of  such  widely  reproduced  imagery 

asserts 

significant 

ideological  power,  making 

the 

stories  and 

characterisations endorsed “difficult to challenge, even to disbelieve” (33). So 

while Cathal is shown as beautiful and exotic, this is countered by the edge 

of  callous  brutality  seen  in  depictions  of  slavery,  in  the  use  of  mutes  in  the 

inner sanctums of the court, in the commonplace whipping of servants, and 

in  a  casual  disregard  for  human  life.  Such  representations  of  the  Other 

Page | 223  

 
 
discreetly  support  Brennin’s  Western  medievalist  model  over  the  novels’ 

‘Eastern’ Saracen stereotype. 

There is a notable competition played out between Brennin and Cathal when 

Shalhassan and his force cross of the River Saeren into the High Kingdom in 

order to join with Brennin as allies. This incident provides a clear example of 

how  The  Fionavar  Tapestry  naturalises  Western  authority.  Unlike  The  Old 

Kingdom  Chronicles  where  the  protagonists  all  experience  feelings  of 

inadequacy  and  reluctance  in  regard  to  authority,  leadership  of  the  Alliance 

of  the Light  is  strongly  contested. Shalhassan  clearly  covets the  role.  Upon 

leaving  Cathal  his  determination  and  expectation  is  that  he  should  be  the 

supreme commander of the combined armies. His mode of entry into Brennin 

is designed to physically illustrate the strength of his claim. It is planned with 

cunning  and  stealth  so  that  his  arrival  might  catch  the  young  King  Aileron 

unprepared. Shalhassan expects the soldiers of Brennin will: 

Look  shabby  and  badly  prepared  when  [Cathal’s]  glittering  force, 

twenty-five hundred strong, galloped up from the southwest. And not 

just  the  horsemen  either. What  would  the  Northmen  say  when  they 

saw two hundred of the legendary war chariots of Cathal sweep up to 

the  gates  of  Paras  Derval?  And  in  the  first  of  them,  pulled  by  four 

magnificent stallions from Faille, would be not a war leader or a mere 

captain  of  the  eidolath,  the  honour  guard,  but  Shalhassan  himself. 

Supreme Lord of Sang Marlen, Of Lai Rigal, of the nine provinces of 

the Garden Country. 

Let young Aileron deal with that if he could.  (Kay WF 108)  

Shalhassan’s  entry  is  a  show  with  purpose.  It  is  not  a  “trivial  display”  or 

“mere flamboyance”, but intended as an unequivocal sign that Cathal is “no 

Page | 224  

 
 
 
subservient  realm  to  Brennin”  (WF  109).    He  reasons  that  the  feuding 

principalities of the south (which have since been united to form Cathal) may 

have ridden under the command of Brennin in the first war against the Dark, 

but they are no longer divided factions. They are strong and united under a 

“real ruler, a man who had sat on the Ivory Throne for twenty-five years now, 

subtle,  inscrutable,  imperious,  no  stranger  to  battle”  (WF  109).  Shalhassan 

does not intend to defer to Aileron. 

Shalhassan’s assertion  that  “[b]attles  are  won  en  route”  (WF  109)  is  shown 

to be both presumptuous and prescient, as all his speed and careful stealth 

in  preparation  come  to  nought.  The  battle  for  the  leadership  is  “won  en 

route”, but not by Cathal.  Rather than being able to sweep into Paras Derval 

unannounced, Shalhassan finds himself and his army met and honoured en 

route to the city by Prince Diarmuid and a contingent of Aileron’s forces. The 

road is blocked by: 

a  score  of  soldiers  mounted  before  them,  clad  neatly  in  brown  and 

gold,  weapons  presented  toward  him  with  high  ceremoniousness  A 

horn blew, sweet and clear, from behind their ranks, and the soldiers 

turned sharply to line the sides of the wide road, making way for six 

children, dressed alike in red, brilliant against the snow. Two of them 

approached  past  the  Seresh  honor  guard  and,  unruffled  by  the 

movements of his horses, brought to Shalhassan of Cathal flowers of 

Brennin for welcome. (Kay WF 111-112) 

With  increasingly  obvious  signs  of  Brennin’s  anticipation  of  his  arrival, 

Shalhassan finds himself presented with a tapestry, “a work of sheerest art in 

a  gesture  befitting  royalty”,  depicting  a  scene  from  the  first  war  at  Bael 

Rangat, illustrating the event most “sung and celebrated in Cathal” (WF 112). 

The  tapestry,  though ostensibly  an  offering  which  honours  Cathal,  is  also  a 

Page | 225  

 
 
reminder  of  their  previous  place,  fighting  under  Brennin’s  leadership  in  the 

last  war.  This  presentation  is  followed  by  a  welcome  from  Prince  Diarmuid 

himself,  resplendent  in  “a  cloak  of  purest  white,  falling  in  thickly  furred 

splendour  from  shoulder  to  white  boots”;  creating  a  tableau  of  “studied 

magnificence” (WF 112). Such an honour is further capped as a heart-stirring 

rendition  of  renabael,  the  battle  summons  of  the  lios  alfar,  played  as  a 

fanfare  to  introduce  an  important  emissary  of  the  rarely  seen  elves,  Na-

Brendel. Na-Brendel’s presence, in his office as “Highest of the Kestrel Mark” 

(WF 113), tacitly provides official endorsement by the lios alfar of Brennin’s 

centrality.   

Shalhassan, therefore, is completely thwarted in his attempt to sweep in and 

impress.  He  is  escorted  at  walking  pace  along  a  road  flanked  by  smartly 

turned  out  foot  soldiers,  and  archers  and  horsemen  of  Paras  Derval.  Upon 

entry  to  the  city  square  he  is  greeted  again,  this  time  by  the  cheering 

populace and a delegation of Brennin’s dignitaries, from the First Mage and 

the  High  Priestess,  to  Toronto’s  Paul,  now  Pwyll  Twiceborn,  Brennin’s  Lord 

of the Summer Tree. All this leads to the moment where Shalhassan finally 

meets  King  Aileron,  who,  Shalhassan  notes,  “had  done  this,  all  of  this,  on 

perhaps two hours’ warning” (WF 114).   

The  semiotics  of  the  following  scene  again  privilege  Brennin.  Shalhassan’s 

studied  appearance,  “from  the  pleated,  scented  beard  to  the  fur  cloak  he 

wore,  artfully  slit  to  allow  access  to  his  curved,  bejeweled  sword”  has  been 

calculated  to  impress  with  its  splendour  (WF  109).  This  ostentation  is 

juxtaposed  to  the  appearance  of  the  young  king,  whose  austerity  stands  in 

Page | 226  

 
 
 
sharp  contrast  to  both  Diarmuid’s  studied  magnificence  and  Shalhassan’s 

lavish finery: 

Under the  unkempt  dark  hair, the  eyes  of the  High  King  were fierce 

and  appraising.  His  stern,  bearded  face—not  so  boyish  as  he’d 

thought  it  would  be—  was  fully  as  impassive  as  Shalhassan’s  own, 

and  as  unsmiling.  He  was  clad  in  shades  of  brown  and  dun,  and 

carelessly:  his  boots  stained,  his  trousers  well-worn.  He  wore  a 

simple  shirt  and  over  it  a  short  warm  vest,  quite  unadorned.  And  at 

his  side  was  no  blade  of  ceremony  but  a  long-hilted  fighting  sword. 

Bareheaded  he  came forward,  and  the two  Kings faced  each  other. 

(Kay WF 114-115)  

The  Eastern  flamboyance  personified  by  Shalhassan  seems  as  excessive 

and  immoderately  indulgent  against  the  modest,  efficient  and  no-nonsense 

Aileron.  Faced  with  the  realisation  he  had  been  unequivocally  out-

manoeuvred  by  the  young  “warrior  King”,  Shalhassan  understood  “that  he 

was  not  going  to  lead  this  war  after  all”,  though  “Aileron  had  not  spoken  a 

word” (WF 115). 

Shalhassan is reduced to “[a]bandoning on the instant every stratagem he’d 

envisaged  for  this  day”.  Instead,  when  he  speaks  it  is  to  cede  the  coveted 

leadership to the young, untested king: “High King of Brennin, the army and 

chariots of Cathal are here, and yours. And so, too, is such counsel as you 

would  seek  of  me”  (WF  115).  With  nary  a  word  the  great  Shalhassan  is 

brought  to  a  recognition  of  Brennin’s  superiority  over  Cathal,  and  to 

acknowledge Aileron’s right to lead over his own. The ‘East’ is made to bow 

to the ‘West’, and more than this, is made to consider it an honour to do so.  

Page | 227  

 
 
 
 
The  story  of  Brennin’s  victory  is  not  simply  left  at  the  point  of  Shalhassan’s 

submission.  Behind  the  scenes  of  Cathal’s  entry  into  Paras  Derval  there  is 

another competition being played out. In this contest Shalhassan is not even 

a contender; it is a contest between the austere King Aileron and Diarmuid, 

his  younger,  more  flamboyant  brother.  Shalhassan,  in  order  to  save  face 

through grand gestures, promises twice the number of men requested by the 

young  King  and  states  he  will  feed  not  only  his  own  army,  but  “as  many  of 

the  folk  of  Brennin  as  our  winter  granaries  allow”  (WF  116).  When 

Shalhassan  announces  his  daughter  will  arrange  these  things  from  Cathal, 

Diarmuid  mockingly  undermines  the  older  man  by  offering  a  wager  on  the 

location of Princess Sharra, claiming that she is not in Larai Rigal, but hidden 

within  the  army.  A  public  charade  is  played  out  as  the  visiting  army  is 

searched  without  revealing  Sharra,  and  Diarmuid  pretends  to  concede  the 

wager to Shalhassan, knowing all along that Sharra is hidden within Cathal’s 

honour guard (WF 117).  

This may, on the surface, appear as little more than a humorous interlude in 

the  novel,  but  the  undercurrent  again  affirms  Brennin’s  supremacy.  Despite 

all Shalhassan’s secrecy and planning, it is proven that Brennin’s intelligence 

network  was  well  appraised  of  all  Cathal’s  movements  and,  in  knowing  the 

princess’  whereabouts,  aware  of  even  more  than  Shalhassan  himself.  For 

Shalhassan,  his  only  compensation  is  in  the  knowledge  that  Aileron  had 

received advanced warning of his arrival:  

Shalhassan,  calculating  furiously,  salvaged  one  meagre  crumb  of 

nurture  from  the  ashes  of  the  afternoon:  they  had  known  all  along, 

but  if  that  was  bad  it  was  a  comprehensible  thing  and  better  that  it 

had been done this way than in two hours without warning. That was 

– would have been – simply too formidable. (Kay WF 121) 

Page | 228  

 
 
This  one  meagre  crumb,  however,  is  quickly  snatched  away  as  it  becomes 

apparent  from  Aileron’s  “black  expression,  very  close  to  a  killing  look”  that 

Diarmuid had not shared his intelligence with his brother (WF 123).  

Although  Diarmuid’s  closeness  with  this  information  initially  gives  the 

appearance  of  a  rift  in  the  High  Kingdom’s  leadership,  Brennin’s  natural 

dominance  is  again  reinforced.  Diarmuid  reasons  that  he  and  Aileron 

approach things differently, he with more spontaneity and Aileron with “charts 

and  plans”  (WF  122).  All  is  made  right  between  the  brothers  as  Diarmuid 

justifies his silence by asking, “How else would you have ever known? How 

else would you have been able to put your planning to the test? I expected 

you  to  succeed,  Brother.  We  had  it  both  ways”  (WF  122).  Rather  than 

demonstrating  internal  discord,  Diarmuid’s  concealment  means  Brennin  is 

proved superior both in planning and in stealth. 

Such  a  scenario  effectively  works  to  completely  exclude  Shalhassan  and 

Cathal  from  the  competition  for  leadership  within  the  war.  Despite  all  of 

Shalhassan’s  cleverness,  age  and  experience  he  is  simply  no  match  for 

these  young  men  of  Brennin.  Ultimately  the  contest  is  not,  as  Shalhassan 

understood  it,  between  him  and  Aileron,  between  East  and  West,  but 

between the two brothers, West and West. He and Cathal become irrelevant, 

merely  instruments  against  which  Brennin’s  natural  glory  is  reflected. 

Shalhassan is left with nothing to do but concede with admiration, even awe, 

to  these  young  men  of  Brennin.  “Both  ways,  Shalhassan  was  thinking 

bemusedly. They knew all along and they had prepared in two hours. What 

sort of men were these sons of Ailell?” (WF 122). Shalhassan of Cathal must 

admit the superiority of Brennin and the privilege of serving under Brennin’s 

Page | 229  

 
 
 
leadership.  Moreover,  Shalhassan’s 

recognition  of 

this  privilege 

is 

immediately confirmed by representatives of the dwarves and the elves. “‘Be 

grateful,’ came a voice at his side. ‘They are ours’. He turned and received a 

golden  wink  from  a  lios  alfar  and  a  grin  from  Brock,  the  Dwarf  next  to  him. 

Before he knew what he was doing, Shalhassan smiled” (WF 122). Brennin’s 

centrality  is  made  to  seem  inherently  right  and  natural.  By  extension, 

implicitly it is right and natural that other cultures should take second place.  

The 

‘common-sense’  rightness  of  Brennin’s 

leadership 

is  not  solely 

confirmed by the story told within the pages of The Fionavar Tapestry. Such 

authority is shored up by countless literary and artistic reiterations of Western 

dominance, in medieval and modern Western literature, in Western Art, and 

even  within  Western  histories  and  philosophies. 24  The  sheer  mass  of 

conventional  Orientalist  representation  works  to  naturalise  a  hierarchy  of 

West over  East.  Fionavar’s  internal  hierarchy  seems  plausible,  ‘right’, fitting 

within  not  only  generic  expectations  of  fantasy,  but  within  grand  narratives 

that pit the East against the West.   

Kay’s  renderings  of  Cathal  and  Brennin  supports  the  “flexible  positional 

superiority” that Edward Said identifies in Orientalist text, as regardless of the 

manner in which Cathal is represented in relation to Brennin, Brennin retains 

the  upper  hand.    Significantly,  Cathal  is  by  no  means  portrayed  in  purely  a 

negative  fashion.  Under  Shalhassan’s  leadership  it  is  shown  to  be  a  great, 

powerful  and  astute  nation.  Even  positive  representations,  however,  can 

have  negative  connotations  when  placed  within  the  frame  of  Orientalist 

24 See Said, pgs 22-23 for a broad sample of writers touched upon in Orientalism. Said sees this list 
as “still far from a complete history or general account of Orientalism” (Said 24). 

Page | 230  

 
 
 
                                                           
discourse.  The  text  is  equivocal  even  in  descriptions  of  Cathal  and 

Shalhassan’s strength, wrapping it in phrases such as “shaped by intrigue”, 

or  “subtle,  inscrutable,  imperious”  (WF  109).  Moreover,  Cathal’s  greatness 

becomes  co-opted  to  prove  Brennin’s  worth.  Brennin  is  not  shown  to  be 

great via a comparison to a weak, foolish or underprepared rival. It is great in 

comparison  with  greatness.  At  the  same  time,  the  positive  aspects  of 

Cathal’s  portrayal  work  to  obscure  racialist,  or  at  least  ethnically  clichéd, 

undercurrents  within  the  novels.  Indeed,  on  the  surface,  the  inclusion  of  an 

Eastern nation as an ally on the side of good can appear a generous image 

of  the  ‘Other’,  but  the  underlying  Orientalism  in  Cathal’s  representation 

ultimately  works  to  reinforce  ideas  of  Brennin’s,  and  metonymically  the 

West’s, superiority.  

The  above  competition  between  Diarmuid  and  Aileron  has  echoes  of  an 

earlier incident in The Summer Tree when there appears to be a rift between 

the  brothers  over  who  will  succeed  to  the  throne  after  the  old  king’s  death. 

There is a tense stand-off during which Aileron lays claim to both the Crown 

and the right to lead the war, declaring the absolute seriousness of his claim: 

“I  will  kill  for  it,  or  die  for  it  before  I  leave  this  hall”  (ST  362).  The  matter, 

however,  is  resolved  by  Diarmuid’s  flippant  graciousness  in  ceding  the 

Crown to his brother, claiming his decision is based solely upon his need for 

a  pint  of  ale  after  a  bad  day:  “It  has  only  just  occurred  to  me  that  as  High 

King I couldn’t very easily drop into the Boar at night, which is what I propose 

to  do  as  soon  as  we’ve  crowned  my  brother”  (ST  376).  Just  as  in  the  later 

incident  with  Shalhassan,  the  competition  between  the  brothers  becomes  a 

win/win situation for Brennin, as both are shown to advantage, and both are 

able to reflect different aspects of Western leadership and identity. Aileron’s 

Page | 231  

 
 
severity  and  uncompromising  seriousness  of  purpose  is  tempered  by 

Diarmuid’s  offhand  and  paradoxical  mix  of  flamboyance  and  humility,  while 

Diarmuid’s  ‘common’  associations  and  disdain  for  form  are  similarly 

tempered by Aileron’s sober dignity.  

Aileron’s  presumption  of  leadership  and  assurance  of  his  own  centrality  is 

not  challenged  by  either  Diarmuid  or  Shalhassan.  It  is,  however,  directly 

contested by the traveller, Paul Schafer. Just returned from his testing on the 

Summer  Tree,  Paul  accuses  Aileron  of  being  an  “arrogant  bastard”  for  his 

single-minded focus on all he perceives as his due:  

“How presumptuous can you get?” [. . .] “Your War. Your crown. Your 

destiny.  Your  war.  Your  war?”  [.  .  .]  “What  about  the  lios  alfar?  [...] 

“What  about  Cathal”?  Isn’t  it  their  war  too?”  [.  .  .]  “and  Eridu?  And 

The Dwarves? Isn’t this Matt Sören’s War? And the Dalrei?” (Kay ST 

374) 

Paul  here  gives  voice  to  a  disquiet  over  the  uninterrogated  assumption  of 

Western  centrality  and  authority  within  Fionavar.  Indeed,  the  text  almost 

anticipates  the  possibility  of  criticism,  but  at  the  same  time  it  provides  the 

opportunity  to  answer  such  a  charge  with  an  appeal  to  the  unassailable 

authority of destiny. Aileron’s reply to Paul’s charge is simply, “I was born to 

fight this war” (ST 375).  The altercation between Paul and Aileron, therefore, 

ultimately works to confirm and strengthen the rightness of Aileron’s position 

as leader, making it beyond challenge.   

More than this, Aileron’s assertion that this is his destined role is confirmed 

by Kimberly, another of the travellers. This is significant because Kimberly is 

now  the  seer  of Brennin;  she  is  a  seer  in  her  own  right,  and  has also  been 

Page | 232  

 
 
 
gifted  with  the  soul  of  Brennin’s  previous  seer,  Ysanne.  Consequently, 

Kimberly  speaks  with  a  double  authority  as  she  announces:  “everyone,  I 

have to tell you I’ve seen this. So did Ysanne. […] what he says is true” (ST 

375).  Kimberly  comprehends  the  necessity  of  Aileron’s  leadership,  as  her 

“blood  sang  to  her  that  this  was  right”  (ST  233).    Medievalist  and 

supernatural  understandings  of  fate  and  predestination  make  Aileron’s  role 

indisputable. Like Paul who is left with nothing to say to Kimberly but “If you 

tell me, I will believe it” (ST 375), the reader is left with no room to question 

Brennin’s headship within the alliance or Aileron’s position as leader.  

Sinfield  asserts  in  his  discussion  of  the  politics  of  plausibility  that:  “by 

appealing  to  the  readers’  sense  of  how  the  world  is,  the  text  affirms  the 

validity  of  the  model  it  evokes”  (Sinfield  50).  The  Fionavar  Tapestry  utilises 

the  strength  of  multiple,  even  contradictory,  discourses  to  justify  Brennin’s 

higher status. Brennin’s comparative enlightenment and association with the 

masculine  Britishness  at  the  heart  of  modern  Canada  make  it  appear 

progressive and civilized. At the same time, paradoxically, Brennin’s position 

and  eminence  are  confirmed  by  recourse  to  the  weight  of  tradition  and 

destiny. Brennin’s authority is also supported by entrenched representations 

of the exotic Eastern Other. These both bind the East to an inferior character 

and promote a western ‘we’ as natural and central. Kay unites the affective 

power of the medieval, the strength of the modern, and a ‘sense of how the 

world  is’  to  privilege  his  High  Kingdom  and,  by  association,  today’s  West. 

Chapter  7  moves  on  to  consider  Brennin’s  standing  in  comparison  with  the 

cultures of the Dalrei and the Dwarves. 

Page | 233  

 
 
 
 
Chapter 7 

Dwarfmen and Indians.  

As  discussed  in  the  previous  chapter, as  Kay’s  imagery  draws on  medieval 

and  historical depictions  of  the Saracen,  Cathal  sits  comfortably  within  both 

medievalist and genre fantasy paradigms. This chapter focuses on two other 

major cultures in Fionavar; the Dwarves, a Western race who are a staple of 

fantasy  literature,  and  the  Dalrei  who,  in  their  resemblance  to  the  North 

American 

Indian,  sit  outside  generic  expectation. 

I  consider  various 

contemporary  implications  of  the  power  dynamics  between  the  High 

Kingdom and these cultures.  I also continue my discussion on the flexibility 

and utility of medievalist representation. 

While  the  presence  of  Dwarves  is  unexceptional  in  a  fantasy  novel,  Kay’s 

inclusion  of  the  Dalrei  is  significant.  Just  as  medievalist  aspects  work  to 

signal  an  attachment  to  heritage  and  the  ‘old  country’  in  fantasy  from 

European  settler  cultures,  Kay’s  insertion  of  Indian  tropes  signals  an 

attachment  to  the  nation  of  Canada.  They  represent  a  desire  to  include 

Native Americans in the web of his fantasy tale, and give recognition to the 

significance  that  indigenous  cultural  narratives  hold  in  the  construction  of  a 

Page | 234  

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
distinctive  national  character.  Although  the  texts  strive  for  a  positive 

representation  of  the  Indian,  I  will  argue  they  struggle  to  escape  from  the 

power of Orientalism and from the ethnic marginalisation that is ingrained in 

Western literature concerning the Other. 

Before moving on I wish to make a note about vocabulary. In his book The 

Imagined  Indian  (1992)  Daniel  Francis  comments  upon  the  terminological 

difficulty  brought  about  by  generic  representations  of  Canada’s  Indigenous 

peoples. Literary depictions which owe less to actuality than to an archetypal 

‘imagined  Indian’  blur  the  distinguishing  cultural  signifiers  of  various  and 

distinct  Indigenous  groupings.  Rather  than  recognising  difference,  such 

portrayals blend individual groupings into a homogenous whole. Postcolonial 

critic  Abdul  J.  JanMohamed  addresses  the  implications  of  generic  literary 

renderings of the Other, asserting that: 

colonialist  discourse 

‘commodifies’ 

the  native  subject 

into  a 

stereotyped object and uses him as a ‘resource’ for colonialist fiction. 

The  European  writer  commodifies  the  native  by  negating  his 

individuality, his subjectivity, so that he is now perceived as a generic 

being. (JanMohamed 64)   

Largely  the  invention  of  Western  colonisers,  these  archetypal  images 

effectively  advance  the  coloniser’s  own  cultural,  political  and  economic 

purposes.  Francis  identifies  the  need  to  differentiate  between  the  imagined 

image  of  the  Native,  and  Indigenous  Canadians  themselves.  Consequently, 

he  uses  the  term  Native  and  Native  peoples  when  “referring  to  the  actual 

people”  and  “the  word  Indian  when  referring  to  the  image  of  Native  people 

held  by  non-Natives”  (Francis  9).    In  the  following  discussion  I  will  use 

Francis’  terminology,  employing  ‘Indian’  to  speak  of  the  ‘imagined  Indian’ 

evoked  by  Kay’s  Dalrei.  I  do  so  consciously,  anticipating  that  this  usage 

Page | 235  

 
 
might highlight the Western perspective in the texts and draw attention to the 

constructed character of this image of the Indian.  

Obviously,  The  Fionavar  Tapestry’s  classification  as  fantasy  separates  it 

from histories and biographies and realist colonial fiction. It makes no claims 

to  anthropological  and  ethnographic  authenticity  and  cannot  be  considered 

against  an  actual  grouping  of  people  or  historical 

reality 

in  any 

straightforward  way.  This  notwithstanding,  the  representation  of  the  Dalrei 

clearly  owes  a  great  deal  to  North  American  Indigenous  cultures  and,  by 

allusion,  still  participates  in  postcolonial  discourses  of  the  Native.  They  add 

to  the  mass  of  literatures,  popular  or  otherwise,  that  together  work  to 

construct and maintain a generic image of the ‘Indian’. I argue that even as 

fantasy these texts are implicated in discursive power struggles surrounding 

the  West  and  the  Other,  particularly  in  regard  to  issues  such  as  self-

governance and land ownership.  

The past, again, adds weight to representation. Kay employs medievalism to 

facilitate  the  integration  of  an  Indian  culture  into  his  fantasy  world.  As  was 

discussed  in  Chapter  2,  the  strength  of  generic  convention  still  exerts 

significant power on expectation and what readers perceive as appropriate in 

the  fantasy  genre.  I  noted  Kim  Wilkins’  argument  that,  due  to  the  way 

Indigeneity is conceptualised in Australian contemporary culture, it does not 

easily fit with the conventions of genre fantasy (Wilkins COtH 140). Although 

a Native American tribal culture sits outside generic expectation, Kay mixes 

Indian  tropes  with  Norse  motifs  thereby  mitigating  the  contrast  between 

medieval and native pasts. Medievalism also works to offset or blunt the New 

Page | 236  

 
 
 
Age  aspects  that  easily  adhere  to  fantastic  representations  of  Indigenous 

North American peoples. 

The reconciling association between the Indian and the Norseman is evident 

in  the  naming  of  the  key  characters  from  the  plains  tribes.  Rather  than use 

names  that  immediately  evoke  the  Canadian  Indian,  such  as  “Crowfoot”,25 

“Wandering  Spirit”,26 or “Pontiac”,27 Kay  uses  Ivor,  Leith, Levon,  and Tabor; 

names  more  readily  evocative  of  the  Vikings.  This  does  not  necessarily 

indicate a stepping away from Canadian associations; rather, I suggest that it 

draws  from  stories  of  medieval  Viking  contact  with  the  Skraelings  or  the 

Thule, the ancestors of modern Canadian First Nations peoples. This is most 

obvious  in  the  naming  of  Ivor  and  Leith,  the  patriarch  and  matriarch  of  the 

central  Dalrei  tribe.  ‘Ivor’,  almost  a  homonym  for  ‘Ivar’,  recalls  Ivar 

Bárdarson, the Church steward who, in the mid-fourteenth century recorded 

that  Greenland’s  western  Norse  settlement  was  overwhelmed  by  Skraeling 

incursions (Ingstad and Ingstad 178). ‘Leith’, in its close resemblance to ‘Leif’ 

evokes  a  further  Viking  connection.  According  to  the  Vinland  Sagas,  in  the 

eleventh  century  Leif  Erikson  (son  of  Erik  the  Red)  established  Norse 

colonies  in  what  is  now  Canada’s  Newfoundland  and  Labrador.  By  uniting 

images  of  the  medieval  Viking  and  Indigenous  Canadians,  Kay  moves  the 

Dalrei more toward the generic expectations of high fantasy, appealing again 

to Northernness.  The naming of the tribe’s shaman ‘Gereint’ works similarly. 

This  name  is  found  in  “Gereint,  Son  of  Erbin”  from  The  Mabinogion,  a 

collection  of  medieval  Welsh  mythological  tales  (Jones  229).  As  the  tribe’s 

25 Crowfoot  (c.  1830  –  25  April  1890)  or  Isapo-Muxika  was  a  chief  of  the  Siksika  First  Nation  in 
present day Alberta, Canada. 
26 Wandering Spirit (b.1845 - d.1885) or Kapapamahchakwew,  was a Cree war chief of a band of 
Plains Cree. 
27 Pontiac  (c.  1720  –  April  20,  1769),  or  Obwandiyag  was  a  Chief  of  the  Odawa  First  Nation  in 
present day Ontario, Canada 

Page | 237  

 
 
                                                           
spiritual  leader,  Gereint  is  associated  with  a  Celtic  Northernness  which,  as 

mentioned  in  Chapter  2,  is  aligned  with  “mysteries  of  the  spirit”  (Burns  14), 

while  the  Dalrei  as  a  whole  are  linked  with  Scandinavian  Northernness, 

aligned  with  heroism,  courage,  and  manhood  (Burns173).  Although  this 

‘Europeanising’ of the Dalrei draws them more toward generic expectation, it 

somewhat  dilutes  their  non-Western  cultural  distinctiveness,  making  the 

appropriation and mixing of Indigenous, Celtic and Viking tropes problematic. 

This merging of cultural signifiers accords with JanMohamed’s assertion that 

cultural  uniqueness  and  distinctiveness  are  lost  within  Western  literature’s 

depiction  of  the  Native  subject.  What  he  claims  for  realist  fiction  can  also 

apply to fantasy. The dichotomy between the fantastic and the real is not as 

clear  cut  as  it  may  superficially  appear.  All  literature  is  representation,  no 

literature  is  real.    Indeed,  JanMohamed  speaks  of  the  strong  pull  of  the 

imaginary  in  realist  colonial  fiction,  arguing  that  while  “masquerading  under 

the guise of realist fiction, the colonialist text is in fact antagonistic to some of 

the prevailing tendencies of realism” (JanMohamed 68).  

The pull of the imaginary is evident in how colonial fiction often forecloses on 

the  possibility  of  historical  change  and  cultural  development.  JanMohamed 

points out that Western privilege is maintained by preserving the status quo. 

Colonial  depictions  of  the  Other,  he  asserts,  have  no  “teleology  other  than 

the  infinitely  postponed  process  of  "civilizing"  (JanMohamed  69).  The  text 

traps  the  Native  in  a  depiction  that  is  always  positioned  as  primitive  in 

comparison  to  the  image  of  Western  civilisation.  This  positioning  is  clearly 

evident in Kay’s representation of the Dalrei. Indeed, The Fionavar Tapestry 

fixes the Dalrei culture within an indefinable past. This is akin to the way in 

Page | 238  

 
 
 
which  the  colonial  writers  that  Francis  discusses  situated  the  Indigenous 

Canadian  in  “a  timeless  Indian  past  where  nothing  much  really  changed” 

(Francis 41).   

Pertinently,  genre  fantasy  is  well  placed  to  obfuscate  ethical  questions 

surrounding  the  appropriation  of  the  Native  as  a  resource  for  Western 

literature.  Licence  for  ahistorical  representation  can  be  claimed  through  the 

defence  that  the  text  is  situated  in  the  imaginary.  Kay  himself  refers  to  this 

licence in a 2002 interview with Guy Haley of SFX Magazine. He speaks of 

looking at history through “the prism of fantasy”. He claims a certain freedom 

in  representation,  saying  “I'm  not  writing  the  actual  events"  (Haley,  online). 

Despite Kay’s use of generic Indian motifs and signifiers, the filter of fantasy 

(over real historical time and geographical place) is used to assert a distance 

from  the  histories and  peoples  he  is  utilising  as  a  resource.  Kay  tells  Haley 

that  through  the  employment  of  multiple  mythic  and  historical  symbols  and 

stories  he  is  endeavouring  to  create  “an  ambience,  a  generally  mythic 

flavour”: 

The  Dalrei  of  the  plains  are  taken  from  shamanistic  traditions  of 

North American Indians and the Russian steppes, of nomadic tribes. 

A great many mythical traditions worked their way into Fionavar quite 

deliberately  and  the  underlying  purpose  was  this  inchoate  floating 

about  of  mythic  ambience,  rather  than  an  expectation  that  readers 

would know any specific reference. (Haley online)  

It is unsurprising then, that the Dalrei characters and culture in The Fionavar 

Tapestry appear both archetypal and fetishised. Images of the occult and the 

‘noble savage’ are clearly discernible. Spiritual motifs such as totem animals, 

vision quests, a bond with nature, shamanistic insight, and intuitive capacity 

Page | 239  

 
 
are emphasised. These are combined with representations of innate bravery 

and physical prowess which unite images of both the Indian and the Viking.  

The reader is first introduced to the Dalrei when Dave Martyniuk, one of The 

Five  Canadians,  is  separated  from  the  others  during  the  group’s  magical 

crossing to Fionavar. Instead of arriving in Brennin with his peers, he arrives 

in  Faelinn  Grove,  a  wood  on  The  Plain.  Significantly,  Dave  is  on  the  social 

periphery of The Five. He is not a participant in the close friendship shared 

by the other four. Dave’s connection is through Kevin and Paul with whom he 

plays  on  the  university  basketball  team.  Dave’s  separation  occurs  when  he 

deliberately pulls away from the main group during the crossing, making his 

social outsider status a physical reality. 

On  arriving  alone  in  the  wood  Dave  is  seen  by  Torc,  a  Dalrei  warrior  who 

initially  mistakes  the  traveller  for  a  trespassing  creature  of  the  Dark.  Only 

Dave’s  timely  and  instinctive  exclamation  of  “Holy  Mother!”  saves  him  from 

summary execution as Torc recognises that “creatures of evil did not invoke 

the Goddess” (ST 265). The pragmatic ruthlessness demonstrated by Torc is 

further confirmed by his subsequent question to Dave: “Why […] shouldn’t I 

just kill you?”(ST 266). This introduction immediately represents the Dalrei as 

fierce  and  warlike,  evoking  a  trope attached  strongly  to  the  North American 

Indian. Drawing on generic representations of the natural ‘Indian brave’, the 

physical description of Torc complements the warlike image presented. The 

reader is made aware of his “very quick reflexes”, the knife in his hand and 

his  movement,  executed  with  “honed  speed  and  silence”  (ST  266).  Dave’s 

initial impression is that “Torc spoke of killing with disquieting frequency” (ST 

267).  He  is  described  as  looking  “like  a  wolf,  with  his  lean  body,  his  long, 

Page | 240  

 
 
 
straight, black hair, and the dark, unrevealing eyes. He never wore a shirt or 

moccasins; only his eltor skin leggings, dyed black to be unseen at night” (ST 

260).   

Torc’s  presence  in  the  grove,  however,  is  at  odds  with  this  ruthless  warrior 

image.  He  has been  charged  with  keeping  watch  over  some  ‘babies’  in  the 

wood. The ‘babies’ are, in actuality, two young teens of the tribe, sent to the 

Faelinn Grove to fast and to wait in quest of a vision of their totem animals. 

Talk  of  the  growing  incidence  of  creatures  of  the  dark  has  led  Chief  Ivor  to 

send Torc out to watch over the young men, unseen. The appearance of an 

essential  and  practical  fearsomeness  is  thus  combined  with  a  picture  of 

sensitive  protectiveness,  encapsulating  characteristics  that  increasingly 

emerge as fundamental to the nature of the Dalrei.   

Torc’s  own  existence  reflects  this  marriage  between  harshness  and 

sensitivity. He is simultaneously described as both an outcast and as a child 

of his tribe. Torc, like Dave, occupies a marginal position. This is due to his 

father’s exile and mother’s suicide after, “by the sheerest bad luck”, his father 

killed  a  pregnant  doe  during  a  traditional  hunt  of  eltor  from  the  herds  that 

roam the plain:  

An  accident,  the  hunters  agreed  at  the  gathering:  the  buck  he’d 

slashed  had  fallen  freakishly  into  the  path  of  the  doe  beside  it.  The 

doe had stumbled over him and broken her neck. When the hunters 

came up, they had seen that she was bearing. (Kay ST 261) 

This  back  story  draws  on  a  popular  belief  that,  for  North  American  Indians, 

the killing of a pregnant bison was taboo. Despite the accidental nature of the 

doe’s death, Chief Ivor has no choice but to exile Torc’s father. It is explained 

Page | 241  

 
 
 
that:  “No Chieftain could rise above the laws and hold his people” (ST 261). 

This  incident  provides  an  illustration  of  how  fiction  can  inextricably  bind  the 

Native  to  the  past. Stories  often  conflate authenticity  with  a  lack  of  change. 

The  inescapability  of  tradition  fits  with  JanMohamed’s  aforementioned 

contention that Western depictions of the Other shut down the possibility of 

Native  development  (JanMohamed  69).  As  the  value  of  the  Native  is 

attached  to  notions  of  authenticity,  cultural  development  and  change, 

paradoxically, dilute the perception of worth.  

While  the  uncompromising  severity  of  upholding  tradition  is  justified  by  the 

demands  of  authenticity,  any  residual  suggestion  of  primitive  savagery  is 

further assuaged as the chief watches over and worries for young Tabor, the 

outcast. Ivor is represented as a clearly emotional man who “always cried too 

easily”  (Kay  ST  333).  This  too,  uses  a  stereotype  of  the  Native,  evoking  a 

picture  of  the  weeping  Indian  widely  used  in  North  American  environmental 

campaigns  in  the  1970s  and  1980s.  This  paradoxical  mix  of  severity  and 

sensitivity, ruthlessness and childlikeness, is depicted as natural, as inherent 

in  the  character  of  the  Dalrei.  Although  there  is  a  certain  cold-blooded 

practicality in their cultural practice, it is portrayed as something quite distinct 

from  the  detached  brutality  associated  with  Shalhassan  and  the  people  of 

Cathal. The uncomplex nature of the Dalrei sits in sharp contrast to Cathal’s 

sophisticated shrewdness.  

Chief Ivor has his own natural children, but believes that Torc is “his son as 

well” (ST 261). He sees the whole tribe as his children. Indeed, Part Three of 

The Summer Tree is titled “The Children of Ivor” (ST 255). The metaphor of 

the  Dalrei  as  children  is  far  from  being  ideologically  neutral.    The  image  of 

Page | 242  

 
 
 
Indigenous  Canadians  as  children  is  not  without  precedent.  Francis  notes 

that  early 

twentieth-century  historian  Rev.  R.G.  MacBeth 

labels 

the 

Indigenous  South  Western  Canadians  “Children  of  the  plains”  (Francis  64), 

thereby justifying White paternalism. Regardless of the Dalrei’s competence, 

their  fierceness,  and  their  physical  prowess,  Kay’s  depiction  of  them  as 

children infantilises the culture as a whole. 

Just as this world’s travellers who arrived in Paras Derval serve as a conduit 

between  the  readers  and  the  characters  from  Brennin,  Dave  serves  as  a 

mediator  between  readers  and  the  Dalrei.  His  perspectives  and  beliefs 

operate  as  points  of  identification  and  also  appeal  to  ideals  of  a  common 

humanity. JanMohamed observes, however, that even identification with the 

Other in literature can work to privilege European perspectives and ideology. 

He argues that: 

[when faced with] an incomprehensible and multifaceted alterity, the 

European  theoretically  has  the  option  of  responding  to  the  Other  in 

terms  of  identity  or  difference.  If  he  assumes  that  he  and  the  Other 

are essentially identical, then he would tend to ignore the significant 

divergences  and  to  judge  the  Other  according  to  his  own  cultural 

values.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  he  assumes  that  the  Other  is 

irremediably different, then he would have little incentive to adopt the 

viewpoint of that alterity: he would again tend to turn to the security of 

his own cultural perspective. (JanMohamed  65-66) 

In  both  these  instances  Otherness  takes  second  place  to  a  Western 

perspective,  demonstrating  again  the  difficulty  attached  to  challenging 

entrenched paradigms of Western power.  

Page | 243  

 
  
 
This  dilemma  creates  a  distinct  ambivalence  within  Kay’s  texts.  There  is  a 

tension  between  the  lure  of  alterity  and  the  desire  for  identification.  The 

Fionavar  Tapestry  sometimes  indulges  in  the  exotic  image  of  impenetrable 

difference, while at other points it seeks to draw attention to similarities. The 

instability this creates, rather than being mitigated by the character of Dave 

as  a  mediator  for  the  Western  reader,  is  actually  reinforced,  largely  due  to 

the  fringe  position  Dave  himself  occupies  among  the  Canadian  travellers. 

From the moment Dave is introduced in the novel he is shown to be socially 

uncomfortable,  feeling  generally  ill-at-ease  within  a  crowd  and  particularly 

awkward next to the easy-going, accomplished and urbane Kevin Laine (Kay 

ST 20-21). Dave’s place on the social periphery provides an obvious point of 

fellow-feeling,  with  Torc  particularly,  and  with  the  Dalrei  more  generally.  A 

taciturn  man,  Dave  lacks  the  refinement  and  social  competence  seen  most 

clearly in the person of Kevin and, less intensely, in the rest of the Canadian 

travellers. Although Dave strives hard in his study of the law, high academic 

achievement does not come to him as naturally as it does to other characters 

such  as  Kevin  or  his  own  scholarly  brother,  a  speaker  at  the  Celtic 

conference. Dave is keenly aware of his social ineptitude. He rues his lack of 

diplomatic  skills,  particularly  upon  his  arrival  in  Faelinn  Grove,  wishing  that 

instead  of  him  it  had  been  the  eloquent,  likeable  Kevin  facing  Torc’s  initial 

aggressiveness  (ST  266).  Dave’s  marginalised  position  is,  therefore,  key  in 

his identification with the Torc and the tribe.  

Moreover,  physically,  Dave  displays  many  of  the  attributes  highly  regarded 

by the warriors of the Dalrei. He is described as a tall, athletic and agile man 

who “bristled with a certain aggressiveness” (ST 274). It is at physical rather 

than  academic  pursuits  that  Dave  is  naturally  adept,  and  it  is  this  innate 

Page | 244  

 
 
athleticism that cements the firmest of bonds between him and Torc.  When 

Torc’s  life  is  threatened  by  an  urgach,  a  terrifying  creature  of  the  Dark, 

Dave’s instinctive reaction saves the young tribesman: 

Only an athlete could have done it. With purest reflex, Dave launched 

himself  at  the  apparition  that  had  emerged  from  the  trees  beside 

Torc. He hit the hairy, ape-like creature  with  the  hardest  cross-body 

block he could throw, and the sword swinging to decapitate Torc was 

deflected away.  (Kay ST 268) 

In  return  Torc  kills  the  still  raging  creature,  saving  Dave.  The  bond  and 

understanding  that  results  from  this  shared  physical  experience  are  on  an 

instinctive rather than an intellectual level: 

The  two  men  gazed  at  each  other  across  the  dead  body  of  the 

monstrous creature. 

‘Well,’ said Torc finally, still breathing hard, ‘now I know why I didn't 

kill you.’ 

What  Dave  felt  then  was  so  rare  and  unexpected,  it  took  him  a 

moment to recognize it. (Kay ST 269) 

The  fellow-feeling  between  the  two  is  on  such  an  instinctual  level  that  it  is 

expressed  and  comprehended  without  specific  explication.  This  suggests  a 

unified  humanity,  confirmed  by  an  elemental  understanding  between  the 

contemporary  Western  law  student  and  the  savage  Indian  brave.  It  is 

destabilised, however, by Dave’s pre-existing marginality, and his inability to 

fully belong in modern-day Canada. Although his character can be seen as a 

mediator between the modern reader and the Other, Dave’s identification is 

founded more upon his being like ‘them’ than on ‘them’ being like ‘us’.  

Page | 245  

 
 
Interestingly,  Dave’s  affinity  with  the  Dalrei  also  fits  in  well  with  desires 

expressed by New Age philosophies. In “Plastic Shamans and Astroturf Sun 

Dances”  Lisa  Aldred  comments  on  the  appeal  of  New  Age  ideals  for  those 

who  experience  a  sense  of  loneliness  and  dislocation  in  their  own  society; 

they  can  look  to  Indian  culture  to  fashion  a  sense  of  identity  and  imagined 

community  (340).      She  asserts  that  the  “Noble  Savage  provides  a  fantasy 

for  Euro-Americans  wishing  to  escape  dilemmas  of  their  own  culture. 

Imitation of Native Americans and other appropriations of their identity have 

often accompanied this romanticization” (341).  Misfitted in his own time and 

community,  Dave’s  welcome  into  the  Dalrei  tribe  gives  concreteness  to  the 

fantasy of belonging.  

Despite  his  bonding  with  Torc,  the  alterity  of  the  Dalrei  is  once  more 

foregrounded  as  Dave  is  introduced  to  the  tribe  as  a  whole.  But  due  to  the 

use of common Indian motifs, this alterity is, paradoxically, also comfortably 

familiar.  In  her  thesis  on  boundaries  in  fantastic  literature,  Jennifer  L.  Miller 

comments on the utility of the familiar Indian tropes that Kay utilises: 

In many ways, Kay uses these racial images as shorthand to create 

a  group  of  people.  By  associating  the  Dalrei  with  Native  American 

tribes, Kay is easily able to convey a group of people that is spiritual 

and  in  touch  with  nature,  yet  that  is  also  slightly  primitive  when 

compared  to  the  races  of  people  that  live  in  urban  locations.  (Miller 

25) 

Natural and spiritual associations are emphasised as Ivor welcomes back the 

two  young  riders  that  Torc  had  watched  over,  as  they  returned  from  the 

dreamworld  of  their  vision  quests,  their  eyes  “yet  wide  with  wonder  not  yet 

fully returned from the other world, from the visions that fasting and night and 

Gereint’s secret drink had given them” (ST 270). Although dream quests are 

Page | 246  

 
 
exotic and alien to a contemporary Western reader’s belief and practice, the 

familiar  alterity  of  Indian  motifs  make  such  a  depiction  seem  immediately 

credible  and  apt  for  the  Indian  tribal  culture  that  Kay  creates.  Through  the 

combination  of  generic  representation  and 

the 

fetishisation  of  alien 

spirituality,  alterity  is  situated  comfortably  within  a  contemporary  reader’s 

understanding  and  expectations  of  the  Other.  The  Dalrei’s  mystical  ties  to 

both nature and instinct need not be constructed and made plausible within 

the  story  itself.  The  Dalrei’s  association  with  the  North  American  Indian 

means  a  connection  to  nature  and  spirituality  becomes  a  pre-established 

given.  

This  form  of  spirituality  is  further  accentuated  and  even  personified  in  the 

character  of  the  tribe’s  shaman  Gereint,  ceremonially  blinded  in  order  to 

come to his power and receive his mystical sight.  The association between 

blindness and  spiritual  insight  is  another motif  seen  in  New  Age  spirituality. 

For  example,  Mary  Summer  Rain  and  Lynne  Andrews,  commercially 

successful  authors  and  (self-labelled)  New  Age  shamans  whose  works  are 

contemporaneous  with  Kay’s  The  Fionavar  Tapestry,  claim  authority  from 

having  been  mentored  by  blind  spiritual  leaders—  “No-eyes”  in  the  case  of 

Summer  Rain,  and  Ruby  Plenty  Chiefs,  who  Andrews  identifies  as  a 

Canadian Cree medicine woman (Aldred 332).   

The brutality of the act of blinding the shaman in Kay’s text is justified both by 

the  frame  of  Native  tradition  and  by  New  Age  notions  of  primitive  wisdom. 

The spiritual and cultural import of Gereint’s blinding is shown to the reader 

from  Ivor’s  perspective,  illustrating  the  deep  cultural  significance  of  an 

intuitive rather than intellectual understanding:  

Page | 247  

 
 
 
The sight comes when the light goes, the Dalrei said. It was not the 

law but it had the same force, it seemed to Ivor at times. They found 

their totems in the dark, and all of their shamans came to their power 

in  blindness  with  that  ceremony  on  midsummer  night,  the  bright 

torches and the stars suddenly going black. (Kay ST 272) 

This demonstrates an acute difference in the way knowledge is represented 

across Fionavar’s various cultures. Although the magic of the shaman brings 

knowledge,  this  insight  does  not  come  from  intellectual  enlightenment.  The 

shaman gives up human sight and human perception for spiritual sight. The 

shaman’s  power  contrasts  significantly  with  the  power  of  the  mages  from 

Brennin,  whose  magic  comes  from  rigorous  study;  from  a  cerebral 

comprehension  of  Skylore.  In  Whiteness  and  Social  Change  (2013),  Colin 

Salter  pertinently  observes  that  “[r]elationally  positioned  to  the  subjectivities 

of  other  knowledge  systems,  white  ways  of  knowing  are  constructed  as 

epistemologically  (and  ontologically)  superior.  This  is  at  the  core  of 

Enlightenment rationality” (33-34). The novels’ utilisation of the Indian motifs 

of  affinity  with  nature  and  spirituality,  therefore,  imports  with  it  racial 

hierarchies that can be seen to privilege the West. 

The intersection between the reader’s world and Fionavar is also particularly 

significant. Miller talks of the importance of the “interplay between the fantasy 

world  of  Fionavar  and  the  world  as  we  know  it”.  She  argues  that  it  affects 

“the treatment of race in the novel as the characters from our world come to 

Fionavar  with  the  knowledge  of  Native  American  images  and  customs  and 

are  able  to  make  connections  between  the  Dalrei  and  certain  Native 

American  tribes”  (30-31).  I  would  argue  that  it  is  not  only  the  characters 

within the novels who are able to make these connections, as these cultural 

affinities  are  also  clear  to  readers.  The  idea  of  the  ‘Indian’  is  not  simply 

Page | 248  

 
 
transported into the novel by the Canadian characters; the novels’ image of 

the  ‘Indian’  is  also  metaphorically  transported  to  the  reader’s  world.  As  the 

similarities  between  the  Dalrei  and  the  Indian  are  so  clear,  by  allusion  the 

novels’ depictions contribute to the mass of real world discourses regarding 

the North American Native.   

The fantasy world offers a space in which real-world issues can be discussed 

at a remove from reality. Miller argues that Kay: 

uses  the  fantastic  interaction  between  our  world  and  the  world  of 

Fionavar  to  address  real-world  racial  fantasies  and  inequities.  The 

fantastic  interplay  in  the  border  space  between  Fionavar  and  our 

world  provides  Kay  with  the  space  to  challenge  the  images  created 

by  these  fantasies  and  rewrite  the  resulting  narratives  of  inequity. 

(Miller 33) 

Miller asserts that Kay’s granting of legal ownership of the Plain to the Dalrei 

and  his  writing  the  Dalrei  as  a  living  presence  function  as  a  challenge  to 

racial inequities and to dying-race discourses (33-34). A challenge can also 

be identified in the strongly positive representation of the Dalrei as a people, 

and  in  their  culture’s  healthy  relationship  with  Brennin.  I  suggest,  however, 

that  Kay’s  depiction  is  ultimately  subsumed  by  the  very  “real-world  racial 

fantasies” that the texts seek to challenge.  

JanMohamed addresses the intractability of entrenched racialised discourses 

as  he  distinguishes  between  two  broad  categories  of  colonial  writing  about 

the  Other.  The  first  he  calls  “the  imaginary”  where  “texts  are  structured  by 

objectification and aggression” (65). He asserts that in representations of the 

Native  that  fit  within  the  imaginary  category,  “issues  such  as  intention, 

Page | 249  

 
 
 
causality, extenuating circumstances, and so forth, are completely ignored; in 

the "imaginary" colonialist realm, to say "native" is automatically to say "evil"” 

(65). He argues that: 

The  writer  of  such  texts  tends  to  fetishize  a  nondialectical,  fixed 

opposition  between  the  self  and  the  native.  Threatened  by  a 

metaphysical  alterity  that  he  has  created,  he  quickly  retreats  to  the 

homogeneity  of  his  own  group.  Consequently,  his  psyche  and  text 

tend  to  be  much  closer  to  and  are  often  entirely  occluded  by  the 

ideology of his group. (JanMohamed 65) 

Fantasy  fiction  often  indulges  in  this  kind  of  othering  of  created  races.  An 

archetype of this can be seen in Tolkien’s unequivocally evil orcs and Uruk-

hai. This  type of  othering  is  also  present  in The  Fionavar  Tapestry,  seen  in 

beings such as the urgach, orc-like creatures, and in the svart alfar, the dark 

elves. These beings are completely alien and irredeemably evil creatures of 

Darkness.  The  other  broad  category  identified  By  JanMohamed  is  the 

“symbolic”:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

Writers of "symbolic" texts, on the other hand, are more aware of the 

inevitable  necessity  of  using  the  native  as  a  mediator  of  European 

desires.  Grounded  more  firmly  and  securely  in  the  egalitarian 

imperatives  of  Western  societies,  these  authors  tend  to  be  more 

open  to  a  modifying  dialectic  of  self  and  Other.  They  are  willing  to 

examine  the  specific  individual  and  cultural  differences  between 

Europeans  and  natives  and  to  reflect  on  the  efficacy  of  European 

values,  assumptions,  and  habits 

in  contrast  to 

those  of  the 

Indigenous cultures. (JanMohamed 66) 

Kay’s depiction of the Dalrei clearly resides within this second category. Not 

only  is  Kay  willing  to  examine  and  accept  individual  cultural  difference,  his 

texts  extol  the  value  of  difference.  The  difficulty  identified  by  JanMohamed, 

however,  relates  to  the  manner  in  which  Western  writers,  in  the  attempt  to 

find  syncretic  solutions  to  the  oppositions  between  the  colonised  and 

Page | 250  

 
coloniser,  resort  to  “imaginary”  identification.  Although  these  novels  “are 

conceived  in  the  "symbolic"  realm  of  intersubjectivity,  heterogeneity,  and 

particularity”, they are “seduced by the specularity of ‘imaginary’ Otherness” 

(JanMohamed 66).   

The desire to see the self reflected by the Other exerts a strong appeal and 

is  further  complicated  by  the  pressure  of  longstanding  paradigms  of  race, 

position and value. The issue of Dalrei’s land ownership provides a pertinent 

case in point. Miller sees Kay’s representation as a challenge to our world’s 

racial inequities: 

By making the Dalrei recognized, celebrated owners of their land and 

the  eltor  in  his  fantasy  novel,  Kay  uses  the  fantastic  to  rewrite  the 

theft  of  the  Native  American  land  in  our  world  and  establishes them 

as a central, vital, living presence in Fionavar. (Miller 34) 

I  argue,  however,  that  the  very  granting  of  the  land  to  the  Dalrei  within  the 

context of The Fionavar Tapestry, though ostensibly presenting a challenge 

to  inequities  in  postcolonial  practice,  ultimately  works  to  confirm  white 

Western authority and liberality. Dave becomes the instrument through which 

the reader is informed of the circumstances that led to a legitimisation of the 

Native tribes’ ownership of the land. With Ivor’s youngest son, Tabor, as his 

guide, he is given a cultural lesson concerning the Dalrei and is told that that, 

historically,  the  Dalrei  did  not  live  in  the  camps  but  lived  in  transportable 

homes  made  “of  eltor  skin  and  poles  so  they  were  easy  to  carry”  (Kay  ST 

277).  According  to  Tabor,  the  Dalrei’s  escape  from  the  demands  of  a 

nomadic lifestyle, and the privilege of living in permanent dwellings, is largely 

due  to  the  generosity  of  Brennin.  Tabor  explains  that  one  thousand  years 

previous the Dalrei were granted the Plain by Conary, High King of Brennin. 

Page | 251  

 
 
This was a reward after Conary was saved during the battle of Bael Rangat 

by the timely intervention of a Dalrei chieftain, Revor, and his riders (ST 277).  

Tabor’s  exposition  provides  a  remarkable  example  of  the  subtle  political 

undercurrents  that  can  be  present  in  genre  fantasy.  The  story  he  tells 

establishes  that  despite  the  Dalrei’s  traditional  occupation  of  the  Plain,  the 

land  was  not  recognised  as  theirs  by  the  High  Kingdom.    This  tacitly 

reproduces  imperial  notions  that  a  nomadic  lifestyle  does  not  equate  to 

ownership.  John  K.  Noyes’s  essay  in  The  Imperialist  Imagination  (1998) 

argues  that  colonial  discourses  around  the  nomad  suggest  a  purely 

accidental  relationship  between  the  Native  subject  and  the  land:  “Their 

relation to the territory can be described in terms of land utilization but not of 

ownership” (96). Conary of Brennin is able to gift the Plain to the Dalrei. This 

action unquestioningly presupposes Brennin’s authority over the land. It also 

implies  Western  benevolence  as  Conary  is  positioned  as  having  both  the 

right  and  the  generosity  to  reward  Revor  and  the  Dalrei  with  the  land  on 

which  the  riders  traditionally  lived  and  hunted.  Moreover,  the  permanent 

housing  that  was  erected  after  Conary’s  reward  became  a  symbol  of 

territorial ownership for the Dalrei: 

Revor  called  a  great  gathering  of  all  the  Dalrei  at  Ceidon,  the  mid-

Plain,  and  said  that  if  this  was  now  our  land  we  should  have  some 

mark of ourselves upon it. So the camps were built in those days that 

we might have true homes to come to as we followed the eltor about 

the plain. (Kay ST 277)  

The transferable dwellings of poles and animal skin clearly did not count as 

“true  homes”;  implicitly,  this  signified  the  Plain  was  not  ‘truly’  theirs.  Only 

permanent  dwellings  demonstrated  ‘true’  ownership.  The  recognisable 

Native  American  cultural  markers  in  The  Fionavar  Tapestry  intersect  with 

Page | 252  

 
 
contemporary  political  discourses  on  issues  such  as  Canadian  Native  title. 

The  right  of  the  West  to  determine  ownership  according  to  a  European 

standard  of  ‘settlement’  is  taken  for  granted.  It  is  not  at  all  questioned  in 

Kay’s texts, certainly not by the power brokers of Brennin and not, it seems, 

by the Dalrei themselves. Indeed, the Dalrei express nothing but gratitude to 

Conary for legitimising their ownership of the Plain. 

Kay’s  depiction  fits  comfortably  within  colonial  paradigms  of  belief  – 

paradigms which justified colonial power and the usurping and governing of 

Native lands with rationales such as Terra Nullius, and notions of protecting, 

civilising, and educating Native peoples. Questions of land ownership remain 

an  issue  of  significance  in  former  settler  cultures  such  as  Australia  and 

Canada.  Moreover,  Native 

title  was  an 

issue  of 

increasing  political 

importance  in  Canadian  law  and  politics  at  the  time  of  The  Fionavar 

Tapestry’s production.  The landmark case of Calder v. Attorney-General of 

British Columbia (1973) was just over a decade before the publication of The 

Fionavar  Tapestry.   This  decision  asserted  that  rather  than  being  based  on 

nineteenth-century treaties, Native title rested on the “pre-existing occupation 

and  social  organization”  of  Indigenous  Canadians  (Reid  346).  This  opinion 

influenced  the  Constitution  Act,  1982,  which  recognised  Indigenous  treaty 

rights  (Reid  346).  Moreover,  1984,  the  year  The  Summer  Tree  was  first 

published,  was  the  year  of  the  decision  in  Guerin  v.  The  Queen  (Supreme 

Court  of  Canada)  that  confirmed  that  Indigenous  title  was  based  upon  pre-

contact  occupation  of  a  territory.  Supreme  Court  Justice  Dickson,  although 

recognising the presumptive Indigenous rights of occupancy and possession, 

argued  that  European  rights  of  discovery  diminished  Native  rights  and  that 

ultimate  title  belongs  to  the  Crown  (Reid  347).    The  Crown,  therefore,  was 

Page | 253  

 
 
obliged  to  work  in  the  best  interests  of  the  Natives,  “so  as  to  prevent  the 

Indians from being exploited” (Guerin v. The Queen 336).  1984 also saw the 

beginnings of the Delgamuukw v. British Columbia proceedings; the complex 

and  contested  nature  of  the  issue  of  Native  land  ownership  is  clearly 

demonstrated in the decision for this case not being reached until 1997.   

It is, therefore, noteworthy that Kay overtly makes the ownership of The Plain 

an issue in The Fionavar Tapestry. As Miller observes, Kay rewrites “the theft 

of  the  Native  American  land  in  our  world”  (340).  The  novels  present  the 

Dalrei’s ownership of The Plain as something deserved, legitimate and just. 

This shows how novels reside within JanMohamed’s ‘symbolic’ frame, being 

“grounded more firmly and securely in the egalitarian imperatives of Western 

societies”  (66).  But  the  privileging  of  the  West  is  equally  evident  as  the 

intercultural  politics  of  Canada  are  reflected  in  the  intercultural  politics  of 

Fionavar.  Just  as  in  Canada,  where  Western  legal  processes  are  invested 

with  the  authority  to  determine  Canada’s  land  ownership,  it  is  Conary,  High 

King  of  Brennin,  who  has  the  ultimate  power  of  decision  over  The  Plain. 

There  is  a  similar  paternalistic  tone  as  Conary’s  decision  determines  the 

‘best  interests’  of  the  Dalrei.  There  is  an  unavoidable,  somewhat  ironic, 

residue of benevolence and of a naturalised Western authority present even 

within a Western recognition and acceptance of Native title.  

Significantly,  matters  of  intercultural  conflicts  and  relationships  are  made 

simpler in The Fionavar Tapestry than they are in the real world of Canada. 

As The Plain is geographically separate from the High Kingdom of Brennin, 

colonial  realities  such  as  conflicting  land  interests  are  absent  from  the 

novels, as are moral questions concerning genocide and displacement. The 

Page | 254  

 
 
 
novels, therefore, are able to elide significant issues which present Western 

colonisation 

in  a  negative 

light.  They  can  simultaneously  approve 

assumptions of Western authority and benevolence to the Other.  

The  physically  separate  states  of  The  Plain  and  The  High  Kingdom  also 

avoid  current  postcolonial  tensions.  Canadian  political  philosopher  Will 

Kymlicka  speaks  of  the  complexity  that  occurs  when  one  nation  state  has 

“two  forms  of  community  [that]  may  not  coincide:  The  political  community 

may  contain  two  or  more  groups  of  people  who  have  different  cultures, 

speaking  different  languages,  developing  different  cultural  traditions”  (135). 

The  creation  of  a distinctive  separate  space for  the  Dalrei’s  sovereign  state 

rewrites  the  physical  and  cultural  politics  of  Canada,  avoiding  tensions  that 

can  arise  due  to  cultural  plurality  and  attendant  competing  ideological  and 

political  demands.      Certainly,  the  use  of  familiar  racial  imagery  within  an 

imagined world can comment upon real-world inequities, but the distantiation 

of  fantasy,  the  rewriting  in  a  created  world,  can  also  act  as  a  blind  and  a 

justification in complex moral issues. 

The Dalrei’s role as a loyal ally to Brennin in the war also intersects with real-

world,  historical  racial  discourses.  Much  of  the  text’s  positive  valuing  of  the 

Dalrei resides in an appreciation of their prowess and adeptness as fighting 

men.  Francis  argues  that  Canadian  Natives’  usefulness  in  war  became  a 

central mediating factor in how they  were  viewed by  wider Canadian settler 

culture.  He  points  to  an  ambivalence  in  the  characterisation  of  Indians  as 

formidable combatants, observing that Western images of the Native ranged 

from  the  “frightful  and  bloodthirsty”  to  idealised  manhood.  The  Indian  could 

provide  a  standard  of  “virtue  and  manliness  against  which  Europeans 

Page | 255  

 
 
 
measured  themselves,  and  often  found  themselves  wanting”  (Francis  8).  

Moreover, Francis notes that as “long as Natives remained valuable allies in 

the  wars  the  colonial  powers  waged  against  each  other,  the  image  of  the 

Indian  remained  reasonably  positive”  (8).  Kay’s  texts  clearly  evoke  the 

nostalgic  picture  of  a  noble  and  unspoiled  people,  of  brave  and  heroic,  but 

subordinate, fellow soldiers in war.  

As  was  the  case  with  Cathal,  Kay  reinforces  Brennin’s  right  to  ultimate 

authority  through  an  appeal  to  antiquity.  The  texts  rely  on  traditional  ethnic 

hierarchies, on looking back to the allegiances and leadership in the past war 

to  legitimate  contemporary  structures  of  power  within  Fionavar.  As  the  new 

war unfolds with the renewed threat from Rakoth Maugrim, the stories of the 

past hold great sway in the determination of what should be the case in this 

war.  Unlike  Cathal,  however,  the  Dalrei  need  no  reminder  of  their 

subordinate place. Ivor’s oldest son, Levon, makes a proclamation at the first 

council  of  war  that  demonstrates  the  Dalrei’s  acquiescence  to  both  the 

authority of history and the High Kingdom: 

Never in our long history have the Riders failed the High Kingdom in 

time of need. I can say to you all that the sons of Revor will follow the 

sons of Conary and Colan into the Riik Barrens and beyond against 

Maugrim. Aileron, High King, I pledge my life to you, and my sword; 

do with them what you will. The Dalrei shall not fail you. (Kay ST 392) 

This  rendering  of  the  Dalrei  is  a  significantly  romanticised,  nostalgic 

depiction. It recalls the period of colonial conflicts in North American history 

where  both  coloniser  and  the  Native  were  allied  in  war,  united  against 

Page | 256  

 
 
common foes, such as in the war of 1812.28 Furthermore, the texts approve 

and  confirm  this  imagined  Indian  past,  representing  it  as  authentic,  natural 

and  beneficial.  Within  The  Fionavar  Tapestry  there  is  an  honouring,  not  a 

questioning,  of  the  laws  and  customs  that bind  the  Dalrei  to  the way  things 

have be enacted through the ages. Therefore, they appreciate the rightness 

and the honour of fighting under Brennin’s leadership and are presented in a 

significantly  more  positive  light  than  Cathal  for  their  understanding  of  their 

auxiliary  role.  Much  of  the  Dalrei’s  value  is  confirmed  in  their  humble 

recognition  of  place  alongside  Brennin  and  in  their  appreciation  of  the 

distinction  that  comes  with  fighting  under  Brennin’s  command.  It  is  an 

obligation which, far from being resented, is a matter for gratitude.  

Rather  than  being  depicted  as  held  back  by  an  adherence  to  hierarchies, 

customs and celebrations of the past, the Dalrei’s value is enhanced by their 

loyalty  to  these  things.  Paradoxically,  this  works  in  sharp  contrast  to  the 

texts’  depiction  of  Cathal,  where  Cathal’s  hierarchies,  customs,  and 

celebrations contribute to the image of a culture approaching decadence and 

decline.  As  will  be  discussed  in  detail  in  Chapter 8,  it  also  sits  at odds  with 

the rendering of the cult of the Goddess which is represented as reactionary. 

Contrastingly, the text firmly anchors the Dalrei’s value and authenticity in the 

past. Their place is preserved in time, and their worth becomes contingent on 

a lack of cultural evolution, upon an unchanged adherence to practices and 

traditions rooted in antiquity. 

28 The  War  of  1812  was  between  the  British  Empire  and  The  United  States  of  America.  A  key 
theatre  of  the  war  was  the  Canadian-American  frontier.  In  response  to  American  incursions  on 
Native lands, a confederation of Native tribes fought as valued allies of Britain and British Canada.  

Page | 257  

 
 
 
                                                           
This  image  of  an  unchanging  Dalrei  is  confused,  however,  by  the 

dénouement of the story. One strand in the ‘happy ending’ is that the chief’s 

son  Tabor  is  elevated  to  the  position  of  apprentice  mage.  Tabor’s  removal 

from  the  Plain  to  Brennin  is  placed  among  the  marriages,  the feasting,  and 

the bountiful harvests that demonstrate a return to completeness in Fionavar. 

While this might initially be seen as allowing the Dalrei to move outside the 

boundaries  prescribed  by  traditional  hierarchies,  the  implications  of  this 

promotion  remain  problematic.  Rather  than  a  development  and  evolution  in 

the  Dalrei’s  own  practice,  in  order  to  advance  Tabor  needs  to  leave  The 

Plain  and  the  tribe  behind  and  be  initiated  into  Western  systems  of 

knowledge,  practice  and  power.  Approval  and  pleasure  at  Tabor’s  good 

fortune is shown by the travellers; by Paul who is now a son of the God, and 

by  Kimberly,  Brennin’s  Seer.  On  learning  of  Tabor’s  apprenticeship  “Paul 

grinned and heard Kim laugh with delight”. It was a matter of genuine relief, 

giving  an  “access  to  joy”  (DR  410).    Again,  notions  of  destiny  are  used  to 

confirm  Tabor’s  new  role  as  “Paul  had  an  intuitive  sense  of  the  rightness, 

even the necessity of Tabor’s new path” (DR 410).  

Although  Gereint,  the  elder  Shaman  of  the  Dalrei,  is  rendered  as  an 

unequivocally  worthy  figure,  as  a  man  of  both  humour  and  intelligence  with 

access to impressive occult powers, Tabor is not marked to follow him in the 

traditional  mystical  ways  of  the  shaman.  Instead,  this  bright  young  man  is 

honoured  by  access  to  the  enlightenment  that  comes  with  a  learning  of 

Brennin’s skylore. Certainly, this is a far less brutal process than the blinding 

that  accompanies  the  Dalrei  initiation  into  shamanism.  Tabor’s  position  as 

apprentice  mage,  however,  is  also  tacitly  placed  above  that  of  a  Dalrei 

shaman. This becomes evident as Tabor explains to Kimberly that his “father 

Page | 258  

 
 
gave his consent after Gereint asked me to come back and teach him some 

new things next year” (DR 410).  Once more, the Dalrei are infantilised by a 

comparison  with  Brennin.  A  child,  an  apprentice mage  such as Tabor, after 

only  a  year  of  training,  will  explicitly  have  risen  above  the  elder  Shaman, 

making  Tabor  the  teacher  and  the  old  man  the  child.  Implicitly,  growing  up 

and  enlightenment  entails  a  leaving  of  The  Plain  to  become  a  man  of 

Brennin, accepting and adopting the High Kingdom’s superior ways.  

Having  examined  Western  privilege  in  my  discussions  of  the  Dalrei  and 

Cathal, I return to the fact that not all minority cultures in Fionavar are non-

Western. The depiction of Fionavar’s Dwarves uses many Nordic and Celtic 

markers  but  even  in  the  relationship  between  the  Dwarves’  realm  and  the 

High  Kingdom,  Brennin’s  privilege  is  clear.  Instead  of  being  rooted  in 

ethnicity,  in  this  instance  the  High  Kingdom’s  advantage  is  supported  by 

discourses  surrounding  class.  Rather  than  representing  a  high,  chivalric 

medieval past, the picture the Dwarves evoke is of a different, older, cruder, 

form of medieval pastness. The imagery is suggestive of a manual, working 

class society. As the mountainous region is reminiscent of the Celtic fringe, 

particularly  Wales,  it  at  once  conjures  both  an  older  Britain  and  a  working 

class Britain.   

Within  The  Fionavar  Tapestry  some  constructions  of  a  medieval  past  are 

upheld,  valued  and  granted  authority  while  other  renderings  of  the  Middle 

Ages  remain  suspicious.  As  noted  in  Chapter  1,  many  scholars  including 

Aronstein,  Eco  and  Brown,  argue  that  the  imaginary  Middle  Ages  are 

particularly plastic, and that varying medieval representations serve different 

purposes  for  contemporary  society.    Modern  identity  can  be  informed  by 

Page | 259  

 
 
 
alignment  with,  or  against,  different  imaginings  of  medieval  times.  In  his 

much  cited  “The  Return  of  the  Middle  Ages”  Eco  suggests  ten  contrasting 

constructions  of  the  medieval,  of  which  I  would  like  to  highlight  two.  These 

are  the  “Middle  Ages  as  a  barbaric  age”,  and  the  “Middle  Ages  of 

Romanticism” (68). The Fionavar Tapestry can be seen to utilise both these 

constructions.  Brennin,  given  its  associations  with  nobility,  chivalry  and 

enlightenment, fits the image of a romanticised and utopian Middle Age. By 

contrast,  the  Dwarves  fit  with  constructions  of  the  Middle  Ages  as  a  more 

retrograde, barbaric and superstitious Other.  

The  medievalism  of  the  Dwarf  culture  seems  to  predate  the  French-

influenced  chivalric  model  represented  by 

the  High  Kingdom.  The 

Dwarfmoot,  for  example,  evokes  the  early  Anglo-Saxon  folkmoot  which 

admitted all the free-men of a tribe to a moot’s deliberation. However, given 

the  decision-making  process  among  the  Dwarves  is  limited  to  a  select 

fifteen-or-twenty  senior  males  (Kay  DR  221),  the  Dwarfmoot  more  closely 

resembles  Witenagemot,  composed  of  higher  status  advisors  to  the  Anglo-

Saxon  Kings.  Cultural  historian  Billie  Melman  speaks  of  the  significance  of 

Anglo-Saxon traditions in the invention of a democratic British heritage. She 

argues  that  “because  of  its  remoteness,  the  pre-Norman  era  could  be 

reconstructed  as  an  inclusive  fiction”,  and  points  to  how  a  Saxon  character 

has  been  co-opted  and  favourably  attached  to  English  freedoms,  a  limited 

monarchy and to representative government (578).  

In  Kay’s  texts,  however,  the  Dwarves’  narrow  democracy  is  presented  in  a 

surprisingly  ambivalent,  even  negative  manner.  Standing  awkwardly 

alongside notions of destiny and divine right, it is portrayed as disrespect for 

Page | 260  

 
 
 
ordained  kingly  authority.  This  negative  casting  not  only  sits  at  odds  with 

positive British constructions of their Anglo-Saxon heritage, but also with the 

strong  liberal  humanist  undercurrents  discernible  in  The  Fionavar  Tapestry. 

Independence  and  freedom  of  choice  are  strong  themes  within  the  novels, 

with key characters such as Paul, Diarmuid, and Kimberly ultimately proving 

their  worth  and  winning  approval 

for  choosing 

to  step  outside 

the 

expectations of destined role and position. Indeed, Kay notes in his interview 

with Thomson that “[f]ree will is a fundamental theme in all of my writing. It's 

deeply important to me to believe in it” (Thompson online).  

The apparent internal inconsistency in ideological perspective is obfuscated, 

I suggest, by the malleability of medievalism, and by presenting the working 

classes  as  lacking  in  insight  and  discernment.    The  suspicion  of  the  moot 

system  arises  because  charismatic  Dwarf  brothers,  Kaen  and  Blöd,  use 

democratic  power  to  lead  the  Dwarves  away  from  the  Light.  Implicitly, 

Dwarves  are  not  sophisticated  enough  to  deal  with  the  manipulation  of 

political cunning, and would therefore be better off submitting to the direction 

of their ordained and wise king.   

Although  the  Dwarfish  community  has  fallen  into  wrong  because  of 

persuasive,  corrupt  leadership,  as  a  people  they  remain  in  a  morally 

ambiguous  position.  There  are  Dwarf  characters  that  are  respected  and 

admired  throughout  the  story;  particularly  Matt  Sören,  the  King  of  the 

Dwarves  in  self-exile,  and  Brock  who  remains  faithful  to  Matt  and  to  the 

Light.    Significantly,  however,  Matt  and  Brock  are  closely  aligned  with 

Brennin.  They demonstrate their wisdom, in part, by leaving Banir Tal in the 

mountains, and allying themselves with those in power in the High Kingdom. 

Page | 261  

 
 
 
Indeed,  in  the  explanatory  catalogue  of  characters  at  the  beginning  of  the 

novels, both Matt and Brock are listed under the italicised sub-heading “From 

Brennin”.  

Although  he  is  King  of  the  Dwarves,  Matt  turns  his  back  on  kingship  and 

deliberately takes on a subservient role in Brennin. He leaves the mountains 

and  ties  himself  to  the  great  mage  Loren  Slivercloak,  becoming  the  source 

for  Loren’s  mystical  abilities:  following  him,  serving  him,  and    submitting  to 

being drained of his own power to give Loren the magical strength to practice 

as a mage. Implicitly, it is better to be a servant to Brennin than king of the 

Dwarves. Leaving his land without moral leadership, for Matt the cost of his 

abdication entails complex guilt and grief. His heart suffers the constant pull 

of tide of Calor Diman, the Dwarves’ sacred Crystal Lake. Matt, however, is 

still able to articulate to Loren, the privilege of being the mage’s source: 

‘I  regret  nothing:  not  a  breath,  not  a  moment,  not  the  shadow  of  a 

moment.  […]  There  is  no  weaving  the  Loom  could  have  held  to  my 

name that I can imagine to be richer than the one I have known.’(Kay 

DR 213) 

The  relationship  between  Matt  and  Loren  provides  a  remarkable  metaphor 

for the role other cultures play in relation to Brennin (and by extension, to the 

modern, sophisticated Western world). The strengths of Cathal, of the Dalrei 

and  of  the  best  of  the  Dwarves  ultimately  and  primarily  serve  to  enhance 

Brennin’s own standing and authority. 

Interestingly, Matt Sören, himself utilises the past in inconsistent ways, both 

to condemn and to justify. He casts Blöd and Kaen’s desire for old spells and 

powers as backward looking and degraded, whilst simultaneously validating 

Page | 262  

 
 
 
his  own  claim  for  kingship,  power  and  authority  by  appealing  to  ancient 

traditions  and  ancient  powers.  Indeed,  Matt  was  first  crowned  after,  in 

conformity  to  tradition,  he  formed  a  crystal  to  be  offered  to  the  powers  of 

Calor Diman, the mountain’s sacred lake. Matt himself explains: 

‘he  who  would  rule  under  the  twin  mountains  must  first  lie  at  full 

moon  night  beside  the  lake.  If  he  lives  to  see  the  dawn  and  is  not 

mad, he is crowned under Banir Lok. It is a dark ordeal, though, and 

many of our greatest warriors and artisans have been broken shards 

when the sun rose on their vigil […].’ 

‘I saw the full moon rise above that lake,’ he said. ‘I saw many things 

besides. I . . . did not go mad. In the end I offered and was bound to 

the waters. They crowned me King two days after.’ (Kay ST 394) 

Although traditions and stories of the past possess great worth and authority 

in  the  world  of  Fionavar,  there  are also  points  within  the  novels  where  they 

become associated with the obsolete and the base. Kaen is condemned for 

“combing  the  oldest  books”  after  being  ordered  to  stop  by  a  young  Matt 

Sören, who desires to move the Dwarves away from the “spells and powers 

of the old ways” to seek the light he was shown at the lake (ST 395). There is 

a clear ambivalence here, as Blöd and Kaen’s nostalgic desire for old spells 

and  powers  is  named  as  a  thing  of  darkness,  implicitly  evil,  while  Matt’s 

authority to condemn such activities is confirmed by his enduring an ancient 

trial, described as a "dark ordeal" (ST 394).  

Such disparate uses of antiquity create an unresolved tension within the text. 

The  manner  in  which  the  desire  for  knowledge  is  represented  in  The 

Fionavar  Tapestry  provides  another  example  of  inconsistent  standards  of 

judgement.  Although 

learning  and 

the  acquisition  of  knowledge 

is 

represented  as  an  admirable  thing  for  the  travellers  from  modern  Canada 

Page | 263  

 
 
and for the kings, princes, seers and mages of Brennin, it is portrayed as a 

dangerous thing in the hands of the more archaic, less refined, working-class 

Dwarfish  peoples.  As  miners  and  craftsmen,  the  Dwarves  are  described  as 

possessing  “a  knowledge  of  secret  things  in  the  earth  and  a  lust  to  know 

more”  (ST  395).  The  lexical  choice  of  ‘lust’  to  express  this  yearning  for 

greater knowledge is pertinent. It is a word with more base connotations than 

synonyms  such  as  ‘aspiration’,  ‘longing’  or  ‘desire’.  It  is  this  “lust  to  know 

more”  that  precipitates  the  Dwarves’  disgrace  as  Kaen  and  Blöd’s  yearning 

to  know  more  is  corrupted.  Their  longing  for  power  and  secret  knowledge 

moves past simple lust and desire, becoming a passion, and then a crusade 

as they become obsessed with finding and unlocking “the secrets of a dark 

thing:  The  Cauldron  of  Khath  Meigol”,  with  its  power  to  raise  the  dead  (ST 

395).  

As  noted  Chapter  6,  the  Cauldron  of  Khath  Meigol  draws  from  Celtic 

mythology. Cauldrons, such as Dagda’s in Irish myth, and the cauldron in the 

Welsh  tale  of  “Branwen  Daughter  of  the  Llyr”,  were  reputed  to  be  able  to 

restore the dead (Dixon-Kennedy 60, 119). The Cauldron of Khath Meigol is 

a  mystical  relic,  created  by  the  Paraiko,  a  cloistered  and  ancient  race  of 

pacifist giants. Despite the life giving power of the Cauldron, it is considered 

a thing of the Dark, and the making of the cauldron by Connla, the mightiest 

of  the  Paraiko’s  ancestors,  is  cast  as  a  transgression,  as  “a  wrong  beyond 

remedy”  (Kay  DR  72).  The  use  of  Arthurian  and  Celtic  mythology  in  this 

subplot contributes to the novels’ mythic ambience and also adds nuances of 

meaning.  

Page | 264  

 
 
 
The  dark  connotations  that  Kay  attaches  to  the  Cauldron  are  primarily 

imported from earlier myths.  In “Branwen Daughter of the Llyr”, the cauldron 

was  used  to  raise  dead  Irish  fighting  men  during  a  war  between  King 

Matholwch  of  Ireland  and  King  Bendigeid  Vran,  the  Welsh  giant,  over 

Matholwch’s  mistreatment  of  his  wife,  Branwen,    who  was  also  Bendigeid 

Vran’s sister (Guest 44). A Welsh victory was achieved after the destruction 

of  the  cauldron,  but  only  seven  of  the  Welsh  army  survived,  and  only  five 

pregnant  Irish  women.  Bendigeid  Vran  himself  was  mortally  wounded  and 

Branwen  died  of  a  broken  heart  at  the  destruction  wreaked  on  her  behalf 

(Guest 33-48).  Kay also draws from Arthurian derivatives of this earlier tale. 

This  is  clear  in  the  undisguised  appropriation  of  the  quest  narrated  in  the 

tenth-century  poem,  attributed  to  Taliesin,  The  Spoils  of  Annwn.  The  poem 

tells  the  story  of  Arthur’s  voyage  to  the  otherworld  in  quest  of  a  magical 

cauldron. This is mirrored in The Fionavar Tapestry as a re-awakened Arthur 

leads  a  voyage  to  the  mystical  island  of  Cader  Sedat  in  search  of  The 

Cauldron of Kath Meigol. Arthur’s ship is named Prydwen, just as it is in the 

Welsh  poem.    Like  the  tale  of  Branwen  the  medieval  story  has  a  tragic 

outcome,  with  only  seven  of  Arthur’s  party  returning  alive  (Dixon-Kennedy 

20). Kay directly refers to the disastrous consequences of the mythic quest to 

create  a  mood  of  trepidation  and  disquiet  for  both  his  characters  and  his 

readers:  

[Paul] and Arthur looked at each other. ‘I have a question’ said Paul. 

The Warrior lifted his head. ‘When you were there last, how many of 

you survived?’ 

‘Seven,’ said Arthur softly. ‘Only seven.’ (Kay WF 271) 

The  transfer  of  negative  overtones  from  Celtic  and  Arthurian  mythology  to 

The  Fionavar  Tapestry  shows  the  strength  of  older  tales.  Because  of  their 

generic  nature fantasy  texts  do  not  stand  alone;  a  great deal of meaning  is 

Page | 265  

 
drawn  from  expectation,  from  the  knowledge  and  ambience  of  pre-existing 

tales.  Just  as  The  Spoils  of  Annwn  inherits  from  earlier  Welsh  tales,  The 

Fionavar Tapestry, too, appropriates meaning from preceding versions of the 

story.  Kaen  and  Blöd’s  desire  to  discover  and  understand  the  Cauldron 

inherits a sense of dark foreboding from its predecessors.  

While  Kaen  and  Blöd’s  quest  for  esoteric  knowledge  is  presented  as  evil, 

manual  labour  is  shown  to  be  a  fitting  pursuit  for  the  peoples  who  dwell 

under  the  Twin  Mountains;  the  Dwarves  are  approved  and  respected  for 

working with their hands. In a paradoxical way, the works of their hands both 

lift the Dwarves to a more sophisticated plane, whilst simultaneously binding 

them  to  the  material.  Dwarfish  artefacts  are  works  of  incredible  beauty, 

wonderful to the point that Kimberly, on travelling within the caverns of Banir 

Tal, is overwhelmed by magnitude and splendour of the Dwarves’ creations:   

crystalline  works  of  art,  exquisite  and  strange.  Most  were  abstract 

shapes that caught and reflected the light of the corridors, but some 

were  not:  she  saw  a  spear,  imbedded  in  a  mountain  of  glass;  a 

crystal eagle, with a wingspan fully five feet across; and, at a junction 

of many hallways, a dragon looked down from the highest pedestal of 

all. (Kay DR 216) 

There is no question as to the profundity of the “art and mastery of the crystal 

sculptures” or “the casual power inherent in the vanishing doorways and the 

corridor  lighting”  under  their  mountain.  The  grandeur  in  scale  invites  awe, 

causing Kimberly to become “dumbfounded” (DR 217). 

The  ceiling  of  the  chamber  was  so  high,  and  the  light  all  around  so 

convincingly  natural,  that  it  seemed  to  Kim  as  if  they  might,  indeed, 

be outside, in the clear cold air of the mountains. 

Page | 266  

 
 
Caught  in  that  illusion,  still  gazing  upward,  she  saw  that  there 

seemed  to  be  birds  of  infinite  variety  wheeling  and  circling  in  the 

huge bright spaces high above the hall. Light flashed, many-colored, 

from their shapes, and she realized that these too were creations of 

the Dwarves, held aloft and in apparent freedom of flight by a craft or 

art beyond her comprehension. (Kay DR 217-218) 

The  intrinsic  worth  of  the  Dwarves  then,  becomes  rooted  in  labour  and 

tangible creation – in material works of aesthetic beauty; it is not sourced in 

abstract  enlightenment.    Their  greatest  worth  is  earthbound.  Their  artworks 

and the wondrous beauty of their creation are contained in the underground 

caverns.  They  can  create  a  vision  of  the  sky  in  a  marvellous  way,  but  this 

remains  illusion;  it  is  not  the  true  sky,  or  the  true  light  of  the  sun.  It  is 

intrinsically bound by the earth, both materially and metaphorically.  

The  Dwarves’  highest  achievements  then,  inescapably  anchor  the  Dwarves 

to the earth, and implicitly, the Dwarves ultimate good is to find fulfilment in 

their  works,  not  desiring  more  like  Kaen  and  Blöd.  Kimberly,  in  awe  of  the 

diamond  eagles  that  appeared  to  circle  overhead,  asks  “How  could  the 

people who were able to place them there, who wanted them there, be allies 

of the Dark?” (DR 218). Indeed, as Kaen and Blöd are among the “foremost” 

(ST  395)  of  the  Dwarf  artisans,  part  of  their  tragedy  is  that  their  ‘proper’ 

talents  are  neglected  in  order  to  follow  an  improper  desire  for  esoteric 

knowledge.  Indeed,  stepping  outside  one’s  appropriate  place  is  seen  to  be 

intrinsically perilous. Kimberly reflects that the Dwarves “could do marvelous 

things  with  stone  under  their  mountains.  They  could  also,  under  Kaen  and 

Blöd, be servants of the Dark such as Maugrim had never had before” (DR 

214).  Her  judgement  evokes  essentialist  notions  of  place  and  role.  To  be 

Page | 267  

 
 
 
good,  to  approach  full  potential,  one  needs  to  know  one’s  place  and  to 

accept the appropriate boundaries of position, class and ethnicity; tacitly, the 

Dwarves need to remain true to their manual roots.  

The very system of confirmation of Dwarf kingship proves the importance of 

the  works  of  one’s  hands  within  their  culture.  As  mentioned  above,  the 

would-be  King  is  required  to  fashion  a  crystal  to  offer  to  the  powers  of  the 

lake. Implicitly, the created work holds something essential about the creator 

within  it.    This  is  most  evident  in  the  final  contest  between  Kaen  and  Matt 

over who has a right to rule in the Kingdom, where both are required to offer 

works to the lake. Not only does this incident tie individual dwarves’ worth to 

the products of their physical labour, it also suggests that, for them, there is a 

greater  worth  in  rawness,  in  simplicity,  than  in  attempts  at  brilliance, 

sophistication and refinement. 

The challenge between Kaen and Matt at the lake is the outcome of a word-

striving between them before the elders of the Dwarfmoot – a striving which, 

in  the  text’s  narration,  reinforces  a  suspicion  of  Dwarfish  sophistication  and 

brilliance, and affirms the plain and the unpretentious.  The corrupted Kaen 

speaks  first  in  the  word-striving.  Kimberly,  who  is  already  familiar  with  the 

eloquence  of  Brennin’s  court,  is  almost  overwhelmed  by  Kaen’s  articulate 

persuasiveness. 

she learned how words could be claimed and mastered, brought to a 

scintillant, glorious apex—turned into diamonds, truly—and all in the 

service of evil, of the Dark. 

Kaen  spoke,  and  she  heard  his  voice  rise  majestically  with  the 

passion  of  a  denunciation; she  heard  it  swoop  downward  like  a  bird 

Page | 268  

 
 
 
of  prey  to  whisper  an  innuendo  or  offer  a  half-truth  that  sounded—

even, for a moment, to her—like a revelation from the warp and weft 

of the Loom itself; she heard it soar with confident assertions of the 

future  and  then  shape  itself  into  a  cutting  blade  to  slash  to  ribbons 

the  honor  of  the  Dwarf  who  stood  beside  him.  Who  had  dared  to 

return and strive a second time with Kaen. (DT 225) 

Matt Sören’s genuine authority, however, is established in the very simplicity 

of his reply.  

Blunt words, sharp, prosaic, unadorned. Cold and stern, they slashed 

into the Hall like a wind, blowing away the mists of Kaen’s eloquent 

imagery.  Hands  on  his  hips,  his  legs  spread  wide,  seemingly 

anchored  in  the  stone.  Matt  did  not  even  try  to  lure  or  seduce  his 

listeners. He challenged them. And they listened. (Kay DR 228) 

The  persuasive  danger  of  Kaen’s  sophisticated  expression  is  clear,  it  is 

swaying  people  with  illusory  tricks;  it  is  not  ‘real’  but  rather  the  ‘mists’  of 

‘eloquent  imagery’.  Matt’s  bluntness,  alternatively,  is  shown  as  honest;  it  is 

solid  and  substantial,  rooted  in  the  earth  itself.  By  contrast,  however, 

eloquence appears right and appropriate in Brennin’s court. There it does not 

signify  trickery  or  danger.  When  exposed  to  Kaen’s  superior  oratory  skills 

Kimberly  compares  it  to  “Diarmuid  dan  Ailell  in  the  Great  Hall  of  Paras 

Derval” and the “power of his light, sardonic, riveting words”. She recalls Na-

Brendel of the lios alfar who was able to “take speech to the edge of music 

and beyond”, and she “held close the sound of Arthur Pendragon speaking to 

command or to reassure—with him, somehow, the two became as one” (DR 

224-225).  Clearly,  eloquent  persuasiveness 

in 

the  High  Kingdom 

is 

something  to  be  esteemed;  it  does  not  signify  danger  and  pretention  as  it 

does when Kaen speaks to the Dwarfmoot. 

Page | 269  

 
 
The  lesson  that  the  Dwarves  should  remain  grounded  and  humble  is 

reinforced  as  Kaen  and  Matt  present  the  ritual  offering  of  their  works  to  the 

ancient  and  sacred  Crystal  Lake  of  Calor  Diman.    Kaen’s  “resonate  and 

beautiful  voice”  (DR  282)  is  matched  by  the  sophisticated  artistry  of  his 

crystal  creation,  a  replica  cauldron  –  “a  glittering  delicate,  ineffable  glorious 

thing  of  crystalline  light”  (DR  283).  Matt’s  offering,  by  contrast,  is  “roughly 

worked,  all  planes  and  sharp  angles,  not  polished.  Where  Kaen’s  cauldron 

glittered brilliantly in the starlight, Matt’s crafted dragon seemed dull beside it. 

It  had  two  great,  gouged  eyes,  and  its  head  was  turned  upward  at  an 

awkward, straining angle” (DR 284).  

Within the text, the symbolism of these offerings goes to the very heart of the 

essential  nature  of  the  Dwarves.  Kaen’s  sophistication  represents  an 

aberration  of  the  nature  of  his  people.  His  too  perfect  creation  reflects  “the 

soul of an artist carried too far. The search, the yearning for knowledge and 

creation  taken  to  a  point  where  madness  began”  (DR  283).  His  desire  for 

knowledge  is  dangerous  because  it  departs  from  the  material.  “It  was  all 

abstract, internalized, and so all consuming” (DR 283). The abstract is clearly 

not a fitting sphere of interest for the Dwarves. Implicitly, they should remain 

earthbound;  for  the  Dwarves,  conceptual  genius  is  almost  conflated  with 

madness. Kaen “was a genius, and mad. He was self-absorbed to the point 

where  that  could  no  longer  be  separated  from  evil,  and  yet  he  held  this 

beauty within himself, pitched to a level Kim had never thought to see or ever 

imagined could be seen” (DR 283).   

Just  as  Kaen’s  polished  genius  becomes  an  implicit  indicator  of  hubris  and 

insane  evil,  Matt’s  material  bluntness  becomes  a  signifier  of  appropriate 

Page | 270  

 
 
 
humility and solidness of character; his is an understanding of the essential 

nature of the Dwarves.  In the roughness of his carving “there was a power 

beyond  words,  rising  from  the  soul  and  the  heart,  from  an  awareness  not 

sourced  in  the  conscious  mind”;  in  its  lack  of  sophistication  Matt’s  rough 

dragon  approaches  an  “ancient,  primitive  power”  (DR  284).  Paradoxically, 

particularly given the disapproval previously shown to Kaen and Blöd’s quest 

for knowledge of “the spells and powers of the old ways” (ST 395), antiquity 

here gives authority. The difference seems to be that the brothers’ quest was 

for an esoteric understanding founded in the abstract, while Matt’s carving is 

solidly anchored in the material. It is “hearthstone, bedrock, root” (DR 285). 

The judgement between Kaen’s abstract beauty and Matt’s earthy roughness 

is  confirmed  by  the  choice  of  the  Dragon  of  the  Lake,  “the  power  of  Calor 

Diman. It was the heart of the Dwarves, their soul and their secret” (DR 283). 

The summary execution of Kaen, who is completely and utterly consumed by 

Dragonfire,  and 

the 

restoration  of  Matt  Sören’s  kingship,  make 

unquestionable  the  rightness  of  Matt Sören. This  incontestably  exposes the 

folly of Kaen and Blöd’s quest for knowledge and power within Fionavar.  

Significantly, the Dragon recognises Matt’s growth during his time of service 

to Brennin.  

Then  the  Dragon  spoke.  ‘You  should  not  have  gone  away,’  it  said 

with an ancient sorrow.  So deep a sadness after so wild a blaze of 

power. Matt lowered his head. 

‘I  accepted  your  gift  that  night,’  the  Dragon  said,  in  a  voice  like  a 

mountain  wind,  cold  and  clear  and  lonely.  ‘I  accepted  it,  because of 

the  courage  that  lay  beneath  the  pride  of  what  you  offered  me.  I 

Page | 271  

 
 
 
made  you  King  under  Banir  Lok.  You  should  not  have  gone  away.’ 

[…] 

‘Nevertheless,’  said  the  Dragon  of  the  Lake,  and  there  was  a  new 

timbre in its voice, ‘nevertheless, you have changed since you went 

from  here,  Matt  Sören.  You  have  lost  an  eye  in  wars  not  properly 

those  of  your  people,  but  you  have  shown  tonight,  with  this  second 

gift, that with one eye only  you still see more deeply into my waters 

than  any  of  the  Kings  of  the  Dwarves  have  ever  done  before.’  (Kay 

DR 289) 

It is only through going away from Banir Lok, through becoming a servant of 

Brennin,  through  gaining  wisdom  during  his  time  in  the  High  Kingdom,  that 

Matt  is  able  return  and  realise  his  true  self  and  potential.  This,  too,  is 

confirmed by the ancient and divine power of the Dragon: “Be welcome back, 

Matt Sören, and hear me as I name you now truest of all Kings ever to reign 

under Banir Lok and BanirTal” (DR 289).  

Once  more,  just  as  is  the  case  with  Cathal  and  with  the  Dalrei,  value  is 

attached to knowing and accepting one’s place. ‘Knowing one’s place’ in The 

Fionavar Tapestry, however, has more than one meaning, and Kay is able to 

pick  and  choose  from  among  them.  In  dealing  with  the  various  cultures  in 

Fionavar  Kay  slips  between  one  that  ties  a  person  to  his  or  her  cultural  or 

ethnic roots, and one that indicates an awareness of the overall authority and 

superiority of the culture of the High Kingdom. Both these constructions are 

conflated in the character of Matt Sören. Matt’s leaving and time as source to 

Loren  Silvercloak  indicates  an  acknowledgement  of  the  supremacy  of 

Brennin,  and  his  return  as  a  better,  truer  man  shows  a  submission  to  his 

essential  self  and  Dwarfish  destiny.  Ideas  of  place  and  role  are  not  only 

embedded  in  portrayals  of  class  and  ethnicity.  The  following  chapter  will 

discuss  how  they  can  also  be  informed  by  constructions  of  gender.

Page | 272  

 
 
Chapter 8 

Archetypes and Myth. 

Just  as  constructions  of  the  Other  and  class  continue  to  exert  an  influence 

within  the  genre  of  fantasy,  so  too  can  longstanding  constructions  of 

masculinity  and  femininity.  As  noted  in  Chapter  1,  Brian  Attebery  draws 

attention to fiction’s use of “traditional storytelling forms and motifs”, warning 

that  this  might  also  entail  an  unquestioning  acceptance  of  the  past’s  social 

structures  (87).  Through  my  discussion  on  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles  I 

have  argued  that  conservatism  in  regard  to  gender  roles  is  by  no  means 

inevitable. Still, the generic nature of fantasy fiction can bring with it, both for 

author  and  reader,  certain  traditional  expectations  in  regard  to  ‘appropriate’ 

gendered  behaviour,  propagating  and  confirming  archetypes  of  femininity 

and masculinity.  

The  influence  of  medievalism  on  the  high  fantasy  genre  has  done  much  to 

perpetuate  the  medieval  tropes  of  women  as  either  the  Madonna  or  the 

whore.  There  is  the  inaccessible  perfect  Lady  or  the  dangerous  woman, 

entrapping  men  with  her  beauty,  luring  them  from  the  pathway  of  chivalry 

and  higher  purpose.  In  The  Allegory  of  Love  C.S.  Lewis  comments  on  the 

inherent  misogyny  of  both  these  constructions,  saying  “the  truth  is  that 

Page | 273  

 
 
 
 
 
 
‘cynicism’  and  ‘idealism’  about  women  are  twin  fruits  of  the  same  branch—

are the positive and negative poles of a single thing” (145). Such recognition, 

however, did not prohibit Lewis from employing these archetypes in his own 

fantasy fiction, with characters such as Ramandu's daughter in The Voyage 

of the Dawn Treader filling the role of the ideal woman, and the White Witch 

in The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe and Lady of the Green Kirtle in The 

Silver Chair embodying the dangerous woman. 

The  equating  of  powerful  women  with  danger  is  an  exceedingly  strong 

gesture in literature and mythology. It is seen in stories of succubi and sirens, 

in  Circe  &  Calypso  in  the  Odyssey,  Guinevere,  Niniane  and  Elaine, 

Morgause  or  Morgan  le  Faye  in  Arthurian  myth,  in  Spencer’s  Acrasia,  in 

Keats’s La Belle Dame sans Merci and in the modern femme fatale. Sandra 

Gilbert and Susan Gubar, in the Mad Woman in the Attic, speak of the mythic 

masks  male  artists  have  fastened  over  women’s  human  faces,  identifying 

women with “eternal types” that men “have themselves invented to possess 

her  more  thoroughly”  (17).  This  mythical  masking  of  women  is  reinforced 

when  generic  representation  and  traditional  tropes  draw  from  textual  forms 

with an historical lineage of engagement in misogyny. 

The  mythological  antecedents  that  Kay  employs  are  worthy  of  attention, 

particularly  in  his  representation  of  Dana,  Fionavar’s  Mother  Goddess,  and 

the  God,  ‘Mörnir  of  the  Thunder’.  Rather  than  primarily  casting  the  story  in 

The Fionavar Tapestry as a Manichean battle between Light and Darkness, 

Paul  Kincaid’s  entry  on  Kay  in  the  Encyclopedia  of  Fantasy  comments  that 

the Canadian travellers “find themselves amid a conflict between a patriarchy 

and a matriarchy” (531). Indeed, this dichotomy underlies much of the series. 

Page | 274  

 
 
 
Fionavar’s  mythology  blends  ancient  Greek  and  even  earlier  Semitic  myth 

with  later  Celtic  and  Arthurian  and  Norse  myth.  As  indicated  in  Chapters  6 

and  7,  Fionavar’s  differing  cultures,  pasts  and  traditions  are  not  seen  as 

possessing  equal  validity  or  worth.    Similarly,  more  ancient  mythologies, 

such  as  those  evoked  by  Dana,  the  Mother,  tend  to  be  feminised  and 

presented more equivocally than mythologies with medievalist and masculine 

associations  such  as  the  Norse  myth  called  to  mind  by  Mörnir  of  the 

Thunder.  This  disparate  value  exists  despite  both  Dana  and  Mörnir  being 

aligned  with  the  light,  and  despite  Dana  more  actively  intervening  for  the 

Light’s cause.  

Kay’s Dana is sourced in deities such as the Semitic goddess, Astarte, and 

the Greek deity Aphrodite. Sir James George Frazer, who Kay describes as 

a “formative influence” (Thompson online), asserts in The Golden Bough that 

these mother goddess figures are “the personification of all the reproductive 

energies of nature” (Frazer 139).  They are incarnations of nature, sex, death 

and blood. Consequently, Dana and her priestesses are associated with raw, 

libidinal, corporeal practices and desires that pose a threat to the rationality 

which  is  aligned  with  the  God  and  masculinity  in  Kay’s  tale.    A  boding  of 

danger permeates representations of the Mother Goddess and her adherents 

from very early on in The Summer Tree. The priestesses are first mentioned 

in  whispered  conversation  as  Prince  Diarmuid  tells  the  mage,  Silvercloak, 

"There  was  a  Gathering[…]  Seven  nights  past  at  the  full  of  the  moon.  A 

secret one. They invoked the Goddess as Dana, and there was blood" (Kay 

ST 58). It is pertinent that this uneasy exchange is between powerful men. 

Page | 275  

 
 
 
In  Salome  and  Judas  in  the  Cave  of  Sex,  Ewa  Kuryluk,  like  Gilbert  and 

Gubar, comments on the extent to which constructions of femininity are from 

a  male  perspective.    She  argues  these  constructions  are  “male  fantasies 

which  for  millennia  have  likened  women  to  matter—the  earth,  the  moon—

and  men  to  sources  of  energy—the  spirit,  the  sun”  (191).  These  pervasive 

conceptions  are  evident  in  Kay’s  texts.  Dana  is  associated  with  both  the 

moon  and  the  earth,  while  Mörnir  is  associated  with  the  sky  and  with 

enlightenment. Historically, Kuryluk asserts, “masculinity has been conceived 

as  a  force  which  animates  and  illuminates  passive,  dark  femininity,  while 

woman  was  generally  described  as 

lacking  something—spirit,  mind, 

intelligence, reason, a name, or a penis” (191).  

Dana’s  association  with  the  earth  is  emphasised,  as  the  province  of  Gwen 

Ystrat  is  not  only  home  to  the  priestesses’  Temple  in  Morvran  and  Dun 

Maura but also to the most sacred caves of the Goddess. In her discussion 

on the iconography of caves, Kuryluk notes their association with the womb, 

asserting  that  because  of  this  connection  “closed  spaces  tend  to  be 

perceived  as  female  and  associated  with  both  security  and  threat”.  She 

argues that the “ambiguity of the cave arises from the fact it offers protection 

but  imprisons  as  well.  That  it  rapidly  turns from  a  shelter  to  a trap”  (20-21). 

The  association  of  the  cave  with  the  material  female  body  increases  the 

ambivalence of its symbolism. As a symbol of the womb and birth, the cave 

is  associated  with  life  but,  as  it  is  devoid  of  the  natural  light  that  is 

“universally  equated  with  life,  with  reflection  and  consciousness,  and  with 

growth  and  development”,  it  can  also  evoke  ignorance  and  death  (Kuryluk 

21).  The  ambiguity  deeply  ingrained  in  the  image  of  the  cave  as  female  is 

Page | 276  

 
 
present  in  Kay’s  portrayal  of  Dana,  and  this  hinders  a  complete  trust  in  the 

Goddess.  

Alongside the symbol of the cave, Kay also employs an intense image of the 

moon  to  represent  the  Mother  Goddess. Dana’s  moon,  like  the  cave,  is  not 

insubstantial.  It  is  depicted  as  material,  embodied  and  elemental.  It  is 

incredibly powerful when Dana sets an impossible full moon in the sky on the 

night Paul dies on the Summer Tree, a night there should only have been the 

sliver  of  a  new  moon.  Intended  as  a  message  of  defiance  to  Rakoth 

Maugrim, Dana’s moon is described as “red, like fire or blood” and as shaped 

by power (Kay ST 246). Although associated with power and beauty, there is 

a  symbolic  ambivalence  attached  to  the  moon.  Clearly,  a  tacit  secondary 

status is accorded to the feminine moon as it is set in contrast to the strength 

and light of the masculine sun. Where the sun is a “greater light to rule the 

day”  the  moon  is  the  “lesser  light  to  rule  the  night”  (Genesis  1:16). 

Masculinity  is  associated  with  the  sun’s  strength,  with  illumination,  and  with 

the  clarity  of  day,  while  femininity  is  aligned  with  the  weaker  moon,  night, 

darkness  and  secrecy.  Negative  connotations  are further heightened by  the 

symbolism attached to the shifting nature of the moon’s waxing and waning. 

While  the  sun  remains  constant  the  moon  is  characterised  by  an  essential 

capriciousness  in  temperament,  waxing  and  waning,  never  remaining  the 

same.   

In The Fionavar Tapestry, suspicion of the priestesses reflects a suspicion of 

the  Goddess.  The  texts’  introduction  to  Jaelle,  the  High  Priestess,  confirms 

male  apprehensions  regarding  Dana  and  Goddess  worship.  Jaelle  appears 

as  the  archetype  of  the  dangerous  woman,  being  physically  stunning  but 

Page | 277  

 
 
 
sans  merci.    It  is  worth  noting  that  Jaelle’s  first  appearance  is  focalised 

through  the  insightful  and  empathetic  Kimberly,  who  sees  Jaelle  as  a 

dangerous intruder in a male domain. Significantly, Kay situates the negative 

judgement  of  this  powerful  and  assertive  woman  in  the  mind  of  a  woman. 

Kimberly  perceives  that:  “She  is  all  malice,  Jaelle,  all  bright,  bitter  malice” 

(Kay  ST  154).  Her  fiery  beauty  “was  not  a  beauty  that  warmed  one.  It  cut, 

like a weapon” (ST 76). Not only in the the eyes of Brennin’s powerful men, 

but  in  the  eyes  of  a  modern Western  woman, Jaelle’s  demands for  respect 

and  reverence  in the name of  the  Goddess,  her  very  dignity  and bearing  in 

her  performance  as  Dana’s  representative,  are  simultaneously  represented 

as intimidating and outrageous. Brennin’s aged King Ailell describes Jaelle to 

Paul  as  a  trouble  maker,  stirring  up  tensions  to  exploit.  He  calls  her 

“ambitious  beyond  belief”  (ST  83).  From  the  king’s  perspective,  Jaelle’s 

desire  to  “return  to  the  old  ways  of  the  Goddess  ruling  through  her  High 

Priestess”  is  implicit  treachery  against  the  kingdom  (ST  83).  He  also  casts 

Jaelle’s  ambitions  as  reactionary,  nostalgic  impertinence.  The  manner  in 

which the priestesses source their power in Dana and the earth is particularly 

delegitimised as it is labelled archaic. The king explains to Paul that Dana’s 

priestesses  could  have  legitimately  claimed  authority  in  the  bygone  days 

“when  the  wild  magic  could only  be  reached  underground,  and usually  only 

with  blood”,  when  power  was  “drained  from  the  very  heart  of  the  earth  […] 

the province of the Mother” (ST 84). In the High Kingdom, however, women’s 

power  has  been  supplanted  by  the  implicitly  more  civilised  and  enlightened 

power  of  men.  The  feminine  primitive  has  made  way  for  the  masculine 

medieval.  

Page | 278  

 
 
Fionavar’s new magical power is in the hands of the mages who support and 

uphold the rule of Brennin’s kings. The mages’ authority was established by 

the learning of skylore, achieved through a combination of a human quest for 

enlightenment  and  divine  revelation.  Skylore  is  overtly  associated  with  the 

God  and  is  separate  from  the  Goddess.  The  first  mage,  Amairgen,  learned 

skylore “from the God, from Mörnir” who “taught to Amairgen the runes of the 

skylore  that  freed  the  mages  ever  after  from  the  Mother”  (ST  313).  This 

imagery  sets  up  a  significant  opposition  between  the  ways  of  the  Goddess 

and  the  ways  of  the God. Women’s  power might  be  strong  and  substantial, 

but it attracts fear, derision, and the resentment of men.  Loren Silvercloak’s 

thoughts  as  he  passes  by  the  sacred  region  of  the  Goddess  exemplify  the 

texts’  suspicion  of  women’s  power;  he  shakes  his  head  at  the  thought  of 

blood  magic  as  his  “very  soul  rebelled  against  the  darkness  of  this  power” 

(ST 34). 

Men’s  power,  on  the  other  hand,  is  tacitly  depicted  as  liberated;  it  is  of  the 

sky, and not bound by the earth. It speaks not only of the favour of the God, 

but of man’s ingenuity in his quest for enlightenment. This makes Brennin’s 

medievalism  remarkably  modern.  The  triumph  of  Amairgen’s  valiant  quest 

not only frees men from a dependence on the Mother; ironically, it also frees 

them from the God. Where women’s magic is fundamentally tied to the earth 

and  the  Mother,  and  can  never  be  separated  from  the  material,  the  mages 

have been taught the runes. Through their knowledge of the runes they are 

able to source their power not in the God himself, but in the mage’s source, 

another  mortal  being.  As  King  Ailell  explains  to  Paul,  this  gives  men 

independence from the gods: 

Page | 279  

 
 
If a mage were to use his magic to start a fire in that hearth, it would 

require power to do it. Once all our magic belonged to the Goddess 

and  that  power  was  tapped  straight  from  the  earthroot;  and  being 

both drained and expended in Fionavar, the power would find its way 

back to the earth – it would never diminish. […] But since Amairgen 

freed the mages from the Mother, the power will be drained from the 

source  only,  and  he  rebuilds  it  in  himself  over  time.  […]  That  is  the 

anchoring law of the skylore. (Kay ST 84) 

Unlike  the  priestess’  elemental  power,  which  is  materially  inseparable  from 

the  Goddess,  the  knowledge  given  by  Mörnir  to  the  mages  effectively 

removes the God from the picture; it relinquishes power to men. Ultimately, it 

is men who are able to act apart from the gods, men who have the fortitude 

to  defy  divine  destiny  and  create  their  own  story,  and  men  who  gain  most 

honour within The Fionavar Tapestry.  

This masculine freedom reveals a strongly liberal humanist undercurrent that 

creates  ideological  tensions  within  Kay’s  texts  because  contemporary 

notions  of  freedom  are  entangled  with  powerful  images  of  destiny  and 

obligation to the deities. Clearly is it easier to negotiate this tension within the 

paradigm of skylore, which empowers men to act on their own, than it is to fit 

the  ideals  of  individual  agency  with  the  integral  and  material  nature  of  the 

Goddess. Kay’s alignment of skylore with enlightenment allows men’s power 

to plausibly fit within contemporary humanist models.  

In  The  Disorder  of  Women  Carole  Pateman  strongly  links  liberal  humanist 

discourse  to  patriarchal  power.  She  argues  that  a  “belief  in  the  essential 

subversiveness  of  women  is  of  extremely  ancient  origin  and  deeply 

embedded  in  our  mythological  and  religious  heritage”  (17).  Women’s 

Page | 280  

 
 
 
association with nature, and men’s with culture, is tied to a view that women 

“cannot  transcend  their  bodily  natures  and  sexual  passions”,  making  them 

“unable  to  develop  political  morality”  (Pateman  4).  Alternatively,  men 

“possess the capacities required for citizenship, in particular they are able to 

use their reason  to sublimate their passions, develop a sense of justice and 

so uphold the universal, civil law” (Pateman 4).  Although modern democratic 

ideals admit women as part of civil society, historically their bodily difference 

was  used  to  situate  them  in  the  private  sphere,  “separated  from  the  public 

world  of  freedom  and  equality,  rights,  contract,  interests  and  citizenship” 

(Pateman  4).  Pateman  argues  that  this  continues  to  inform  the  manner  of 

women’s inclusion even in contemporary citizenship (4).  

An example of this hierarchical discourse’s persistence can be seen in Kay’s 

differing representations of men and women. The historical setting becomes 

an  excuse  for  tethering  the  priestesshood,  and  by  extension  womankind 

generally,  firmly  to  a  more  retrograde  image  of  the  past.  By  contrast, 

however,  a  masculine  Brennin,  through  associations  with  enlightenment, 

freedom  and  individuality,  becomes  a  form  of  medievalised  present.  This 

once  more  demonstrates  the  valency  in  images  of  the  distant  past.  The 

contrast  between  the  arcane  past  of  the  Goddess  and  the  enlightened 

medievalism  of  the  God  gives  the  imagery  of  feminine  power  an  edge  of 

perversity.  

This  perverse  edge  is  present,  for  example,  in  the  sensual  elements  of  the 

midsummer  celebrations  of  Maidaladen  where,  the  grey-robed  priestesses 

“must  go  into  the  streets  [...]  to  any  man  who  wants  them”  (Kay  WF  222). 

Again,  Kay  sources  this  image  in  mythology  and  folklore.  With  its  revelry, 

Page | 281  

 
 
 
Maidaladan invokes the Greek festival of Dionysus, and Bakhtin’s carnival29 

with  its  festivity  and  sexual  abandon;  it  conjures  the  pagan  in  its  echoes  of 

the temple prostitution associated with the worship of Astarte, Aphrodite and 

Artemis; it also suggests celebrations such as the Celtic festival of Beltane30 

which rejoiced in anticipation of summer as a time of fertility and growth. 

A  mix  between  the  vulgar  abandonment  of  carnival  and  the  seriousness  of 

religious  duty  is  present  within  Kay’s  depiction  of  Maidaladan;  titillation  is 

counterbalanced by  the  appearance of  reverent  gravity.  For  the priestesses 

the prostituting of their bodies is not represented as vulgar or even erotic, but 

as  a  spiritual  act  of  worship  to  the  Goddess.  Maidaladan  touches  the 

priestesses  as  “restlessness”  rather  than  lust  or  desire  (WF  221).  For  the 

men,  however,  the  spiritual  appears  irrelevant.  Worship  of  the  Goddess  is 

sidelined  as  the  focus  is  on  “supercharged  eroticism”  (WF  204);  it  is  an 

occasion  for  “rough,  boisterous  humour”  (WF  217),  camaraderie,  and  for 

crude jokes about bedding “a priestess or three” (WF 204).  Respect for the 

Goddess seems absent from the occasion as the men assert that free sex is 

the “only good part” of the Goddess’ rites (WF 204).  

The  text  goes  further  still  in  its  ambivalent  representation  of  the  occasion, 

showing  an  overt,  even  official,  disdain  of  what  is  due  to  the  Goddess.  

Esteemed  men  within  the  story  eschew  the  pull  of  Maidaladan,  either 

practising  abstinence  or 

finding  sexual  satisfaction  away 

from 

the 

29  Bakhtin’s  carnival  is  concerned  with  plebeian  and  folk  culture  rather  than  the  divine.  An 
association, however, can be made with Maidaladan’s transgressive nature, its clear concern with 
“sex, and with death”, and through “its images infused with an ‘obvious sensuous character’” (Murfin 
and Ray 48). 
30 “A Celtic festival held on 1 May, which marked the beginning of the Celtic summer […] Fires lit on 
the night preceding the festival were held to purify the land after the ravages of winter and to herald 
a time of regeneration and regrowth”. (Dixon Kennedy 49) 

Page | 282  

 
 
 
                                                           
priestesses. Jaelle, understanding the erotic draw of the occasion, expresses 

a  satisfaction  at  the  men’s  presence  in  the  Temple  during  Maidaladen,  as 

Brennin’s  kings  consciously  abjured  all  but  obligatory  deference  to  the 

Goddess. She takes pleasure in reminding Aileron that his presence breaks 

established  royal  practice:  “Long  years  have  passed  since  last  a  King  of 

Brennin  came  to  Gwen  Ystrat  for  Midsummer’s  Eve”  (WF  188).  She  is, 

however, immediately put in her place by Loren Silvercloak who announces 

that the men have other purposes in mind and are not concerned with rites of 

the  Goddess.  His  declaration  that  “the  rituals  of  Maidaladan  are  not  to 

interfere” with their mission is straight away backed by Aileron, who asserts 

that  as  High  King  he  holds  ultimate  authority  over  Gwen  Ystrat,  before 

charging  Jaelle  to  obey  the  First  Mage’s  commands  (WF  188-189).      As 

Loren  Silvercloak  is  the  focaliser  for  this  incident,  the  reader  is  given  a 

privileged, male  and  antagonistic  perspective  of  Jaelle,  Maidaladan  and  the 

precinct of the Goddess. 

Loren  Silvercloak,  being  “braced  by  his  training  to  resist”  the  lure  of  the 

Goddess, uses his every strength in an attempt to “deny the power of Dana 

in  Gwen  Ystrat”  during  Maidaladan  (WF  187).  Prince  Diarmuid,  who  has 

previously  proved  himself  licentious  in  practice,  declares  he  does  “not  like 

the  passion  of  Maidaladan”.  Preferring  his  own  passion  he  seeks  out 

Princess  Sharra,  asking  “Could  we  not  pretend  it  was  not  Maidaladan?  To 

see where our own inadequate desire carried us?” (WF 230). Tacitly, it is a 

sign  of  masculine  strength  to  eschew  the  lure  of  the  Goddess.  Although 

Maidaladan is a strong expression of the feminine authority of the Goddess, 

it  is  unable  to  overwhelm  masculine  authority.  The  very  material  urges 

associated  with  the  Goddess  are  made  subject  not  to  the  God,  but  to  the 

Page | 283  

 
 
discipline  and  self-command  of  the  greater  men  within  Kay’s  tale,  elevating 

them above the pull of the material.   

A privileging of masculinity can also be found in the character of Kevin who 

takes  on  the  role  of  Liadon,  the  Adonis  figure  from  the  myth  of  Adonis  and 

Aphrodite. 31 As Liadon he sacrifices himself to the Goddess in order to end 

the  unnatural  winter  afflicting  Fionavar.  The  character  of  Kevin  exemplifies 

masculine  accomplishment.  He  is  popular,  physically  attractive,  athletic, 

good humoured, optimistic and socially adept. He is “known to be bright and 

accomplished,  a  star  in  law  school  and  one  in  the  making,  everyone  said, 

when he got to the courts. He had respect and friendship and he had been 

loved,  more  than  once.  His,  a  woman  had  told  him  years  ago,  was  a  face 

made for good fortune” (WF 206).  

Significantly, Kevin does not even feel the erotic pull of Maidaladan. Despite 

his  reputation  and  prowess  as  a  lover,  the  “truth  was  that  nothing  of  the 

desire  that  every  other  man  in  the  company  was  feeling  had  even  touched 

him. None of it. [...] whatever was happening wasn’t bothering to include him” 

(WF  204).  His decision  to  offer himself  to  the  Goddess  is not  one rooted  in 

ardent, uncontrolled passion, but one made in coolness, one made with the 

head.  His  choice  to  go  to  the  Goddess  comes  from  a  piecing  together  of 

evidence, an almost pragmatic understanding of who he is and what needs 

to  be  done.  It  is  the  decision  of  a  lawyer,  not  a  bewitched  lover.  This 

demonstrates a transcendence of masculine rationalism over erotic desire.  

31 In his interview for The Camelot Project Kay states that within The Fionavar Tapestry the Adonis 
story is “incarnated in Kevin” (Thompson online). 

Page | 284  

 
 
 
 
                                                           
The  novel,  however,  contains  recurrent  indications  that  Kevin  is  attuned  to 

the Goddess, ambivalently imbuing Kevin’s decision with a sense of destiny 

alongside rationality. A key example is the extent to which he loses himself in 

the act of lovemaking. The first intimation of this arises in Chapter 1 of The 

Summer  Tree  when  Jennifer  “found  herself  remembering  what  love-making 

used to do to him” (ST 25). The novel reveals the weight of Kevin’s intense, 

driving and never sated sexual desire. Indeed, one of his lovers in Fionavar 

comments  that  he  carries  Dun  Maura,  the  Goddess’  sacred  cave,  within 

himself  (WF  77).    To  this  Kay  adds  the  mythical  imagery  of  Kevin  being 

gored by a bull in a hunting incident on the eve of Maidaladan. This mirrors 

the  Semitic  myth  of  Tammiz  and  Ishtar,  and  also  the  Greek  myth  of 

Aphrodite in which the Adonis figure is annually wounded to death by a boar 

before rising again in the spring (Frazer IV, vol. I, 11 and 225). It is certainly 

not irrelevant that one of the armful of prizes Kevin had won during his legal 

studies was the Award for Evidence (Kay ST 25). It is through his evidentiary 

skills  that  he  comprehends  the  combined  significance  of  all  these  signs.  “It 

was  coming  together.  The  boar.  The  moon.  Midsummer.  The  winter  they 

could  not  end.  It  had,  in  fact,  come  together.  From  within  the  quiet,  Kevin 

finally  understood”  (WF  219).  He  recognises  that  while  the  unnatural  winter 

lasts,  Arthur  and  his  companions  are  unable  to  voyage  to  Cader  Sedat  to 

face the traitorous mage, Metran, and destroy the Cauldron of Khath Meigol. 

He understands that as a sacrifice, as Liadon, he has the power to usher in 

spring.  Consequently,  though  Kevin’s  sacrifice  is  cloaked  in  images  of 

destiny, it is masculine rationality that is privileged.  

Even as Kevin he presents himself to the guardian of the Goddess’ caves of 

Dun Maura, he remains unmoved by the supernatural allure of Maidaladan. 

Page | 285  

 
 
Even more than the other key men of Brennin in the novel he has withstood 

its  appeal.  Despite  the  text’s  overtones  of  destiny,  Kevin  gives  himself 

without  compulsion.  Although  his  sacrifice  takes  the  form  of  an  all-

consuming,  libidinal,  material,  orgasmic  coupling  with  the  Goddess,  his 

offering  is  an  act  of  his  will;  it  is  a  decision  made  with  reason,  as  he 

knowingly  exchanges  his  life  for  the  small  possibility  of  victory  in  the  war 

against  the  Dark.  Traditional  masculine  attributes  are  upheld  as  the  text 

makes it clear that Kevin’s driving force is not desire, but a nobler, altruistic 

chivalry. He deliberately sacrifices his civilised, erudite and sophisticated self 

to satisfy the primitive and ancient embodied in the Goddess. In doing so he 

makes way for the medieval heroism represented by Arthur and the men of 

the Prydwen as, with the coming of spring, they can sail to the otherworld in 

a perilous quest for the Cauldron. 

Significantly, as the Goddess ends the winter, it is Kevin who is praised and 

it is the act of a man that is exulted.  Kay’s text re-enacts the grieving of the 

women  for  Adonis  where  “the  death  of  the  god  was  annually  mourned  with 

bitter  wailing”  (Frazer  part  IV  vol.  1  224).  Here  all  the  priestesses  of  Dana 

join with Jaelle in lament:  

‘Rahod  hedai  Liadon!’  Jaelle  cried  again,  feeling  it  rise  within  her, 

demanding  utterance.  The  Mormae  were  all  there  now;  she  saw 

them begin to tear their own robes, to rend their faces in a wildness 

of  grief  and  she  heard  them  lift  their  voices  to  lament  as  she  had 

done. (Kay WF 239-40) 

Given Kay’s statement that he intended the Adonis story to be “incarnated in 

Kevin”  (Thompson  online),  it  is  interesting  to  note  a  key  difference.  Frazer 

Page | 286  

 
 
 
asserts  that  those  who  grieved  for  Adonis  “sorrowed  not  without  hope,  for 

they sang that the lost one would come back again” (Frazer IV. Vol. 1. 225). 

Kay’s retelling significantly departs from the Adonis myth at this point, as no 

corresponding  hope  of  resurrection  can  be  found  in  the  priestesses’ 

expression of grief for Kevin. Kimberly, both as Brennin’s seer and as Kevin’s 

intuitive friend, understands the finality of his sacrifice to bring about the end 

of the unnatural winter: 

The snow was melting everywhere—in the morning it would be gone 

[. . .]. There had been a victory, a showing forth of Dana’s power to 

balk the designs of the Dark. The power had been paid for, though, 

bought  with  blood,  and  more.  There  were  red  flowers  growing 
everywhere.32 They were Kevin’s, and he was gone. (Kay WF 262) 

There is no corporeal resurrection for Kevin. Kay’s choice to deviate from the 

cycle  of  sacrifice  and  bodily  resurrection  reinforces  the  association  of 

women’s  power  with  danger,  as  a  threat  to  even  such  an  exemplar  of 

masculine success as Kevin was. 

Kay argues that appropriate payment is necessary for the balance of a story. 

He asserts that he hates fiction “where victory appears too easy. It's another 

theme--the  price  of  power,  the  price  of  victory.  If  we  want  something,  we 

have  to  pay  for  it”  (Thompson  online).  Still,  within  The  Fionavar  Tapestry 

there are significantly different consequences attached to offering oneself to 

the  Goddess,  as  opposed  to  offering  one’s  self  to  the  God.  Where  Kevin’s 

sacrifice  to  the  Mother  in  the  caves  of  Dun  Maura  is  irrevocable  and  total, 

Paul’s  sacrifice  to  Mörnir  on  the  Summer  Tree  is  empowering;  Kevin’s 

sacrifice to the Goddess entails a losing of self, while sacrifice to the God is 

32 This draws again draws on the Adonis myth, as the “scarlet anemone is said to have sprung from 
the blood of Adonis” Frazer, part 4. vol.I, 226). 

Page | 287  

 
 
                                                           
rendered  as  a  trial  of  self-examination,  as  a  finding  of  self;  Kevin  is 

completely consumed by the Goddess, where Paul is not only given back his 

life by the God, but is granted a form of participation in divinity itself. “He felt 

the presence of Mörnir then, within himself, latent, tacit” (Kay ST 352-353). 

Enlightenment  is  again  coupled  with  the  God.  Rather  than  bringing  about 

oblivion, Paul’s sacrifice gains him access to the twin ravens of Thought and 

Memory.  This  image  is  taken  from  Nordic  mythology,  in  which  Odin’s  two 

ravens, Huginn (thought) and Muninn (memory), are released each day to fly 

over the world and return in the evening to tell Odin all they have seen. The 

method of Paul’s sacrifice on the Summer Tree further aligns him with Odin 

who  hanged  himself  on  Yggdrasil,  the  World  Tree,  in  a  quest  for  wisdom. 

Like Odin, Paul gains access to the power that comes with knowledge. “He 

was the Twiceborn, he had seen the ravens, heard them speak, heard Dana 

in  the  wood,  and  felt  Mörnir  within  him.  He  was  the  Arrow  of  the  God,  the 

Spear. He was Lord of the Summer Tree” (WF 106). As discussed in Chapter 

2,  Britain’s  increased  cultural  affinity  with  its  Celtic  and  Anglo-Saxon 

heritage,  and 

the  concomitant 

interest 

in  Nordic  mythology,  was 

accompanied by a decreased sympathy with Classical mythology (Burns 15). 

Medieval  Norse  myth,  when  juxtaposed  with  ancient  Greek  mythology,  can 

appear modern and vibrant, and inversely, classical mythologies can appear 

darkly  occult  and  primitive.  Kay’s  depictions  of  the  God  and  the  Goddess 

reflect  and  reinforce  this  dichotomy,  re-emphasising  the  privilege  of  a 

masculine progressiveness. 

Curiously,  impressed  by  Paul’s  strength  and  endurance  on  the  Summer 

Tree,  it  is  the  Goddess  who  intercedes  on  his  behalf  as  he  strives  to  give 

Page | 288  

 
 
 
himself over in total submission, and impossible vulnerability, to the demand 

of the God to bare all on the Summer Tree. The raw nakedness of the soul 

required  for  such  a  sacrifice  was  so  great  that  “brave  Kings  of  the  sword, 

wise ones, gallant princes, all would turn away from so much nakedness and 

die  too  soon”  (Kay  ST  239).    By  showing  Paul  that  that  human  fallibility  is 

excusable, Dana enables him to endure the test.  

Even  while  depicting  the  Goddess’  grace  to  Paul,  however,  the  text  tacitly 

implicates  her  as  a  one  who  cannot  quite  be  trusted,  as  one  not  beyond 

manipulation  for  her  own  purposes.  Indeed,  Dana  herself  owns  that  all  her 

gifts are “double edged” (ST 253). When directly questioned by the God over 

her  interference  with  his  sacrifice,  Dana  blatantly  uses  her  sexual  allure  to 

distract  him.  Dana’s  voice  is  “woven  of  hearth  smoke  and  caves”  as  she 

evades the God’s enquiry; it is “gossamer like the Dawn”, and like the “finest 

lace”  (ST  252-3).  The  Goddess  asks  Mörnir  to  intercede  to  save  Paul’s  life 

and gains the God’s co-operation with the promise of sex: 

‘I have interceded, Lord, will you not do so?’ 

‘For them?’ 

‘And to please me,’ said the moon. 

‘Might we please each other?’ 

‘We might so.’ 

A roll of thunder then. Laughter. 

‘I have interceded,’ Mörnir said. (Kay ST 253) 

The  God,  though,  and  not  the  Goddess,  receives  the  credit  and  Paul’s 

honour  for  the  gift  of  his  life.  Paul  even  condescendingly  informs  Jaelle,  “it 

was  Mörnir  who  saved  me.  It  was  his  to  choose.  The  Summer  Tree  is  the 

Page | 289  

 
 
God's, Jaelle" (ST 354). Although the Mother Goddess intervenes on behalf 

of  forces  of  light  in  the  war  against  darkness,  the  honour  is  constantly 

rerouted to men— to Paul, to Kevin, and to the God.   

The  privileging  of  masculinity  that  is  evident  in  the  broader  mythological 

frame of the novel is also evident in the characterisation of individual women. 

In  a  1999  interview  with  Charlene  Brusso,  for  Marion  Zimmer  Bradley’s 

Fantasy  Magazine  Kay  notes:  “One  area  I  always  wrestle  with  is  finding 

plausible  roles  for  women  in  historical  periods.  I  dislike  'cheating'  too  much 

and hate the sort of fantasy that gives women a broadsword. Too a-historical 

for me” (Brusso online). The imperative of ‘plausibility’ makes it unsurprising 

that  Kay’s  female  characters  conform  to  literary  archetypes  of  women: 

Kimberly  is  a  seer;  Jaelle,  as  high  priestess,  is  a  powerful,  therefore 

dangerous, woman; Sharra is the beautiful, feisty princess and lover; Vae is 

the  mother;  Jennifer  is  literally  the  personification  of  Arthurian  Guinevere, 

caught between love and duty.  

The  Madonna/whore  dichotomy  is  also  clearly  discernible  within  the  texts. 

The good women become wives – adjuncts to men. The women who are not 

wives  are  the  whores.  Some  are  represented  sympathetically  like  the 

promiscuous tavern girls at the Black Boar and the unmarried women of the 

Dalrei  tribe.  Some,  like  Lady  Rheva  and  the  women  competing  for  the 

attention of key men in court, are represented less than sympathetically. The 

priestesses  provide  an  interesting  amalgamation  of  the  two  sides  of  the 

binary.  They  stand  between  the  virgin  and  the  whore  as  they  generally 

eschew  men  as  part  of  their  calling  but,  as  part  of  the  rites  of  Maidaladan, 

indiscriminately offer sex to men once a year on Midsummer’s Eve.  

Page | 290  

 
 
 
Despite  the  prevalence  of  free-sex  within  the  novels,  hetero-normative 

marriage provides the resolution to relationships. In keeping with convention, 

the central women in the tale become wives, ultimately situating them on the 

traditionally  virtuous  side  of  the  binary.    Indeed  the  happy  resolution  of  the 

novels  is  sealed  with  the  long-established  trope  of  marriages  and  unions. 

“There had been a number of marriages all over Fionavar that summer after 

the  war,  and  a  great  many  proposals”  (DR  400).  Jennifer/Guinevere  is 

reconciled to Arthur. Chief Ivor’s daughter, Liane, marries Torc (no longer an 

outcast)  who  has  long  loved  her.  Although  just  hinted  at  the  end  of  The 

Darkest  Road,  Kimberly  pairs  with  Dave;  their  marriage  is  confirmed  in 

Ysabel,  a  later  novel  by  Kay.  Most  significantly,  as  it  is  symbolic  of  the 

marriage  between 

the  God  and 

the  Goddess,  Jaelle 

forsakes 

the 

priestesshood  in  order  to  be  with  Paul,  just  as  Ysanne,  Brennin’s  former 

seer, had earlier abandoned the role of High Priestess in order to be with the 

Raederth, a First Mage of Brennin. ‘Promoting’ his women characters to the 

role of wife conforms to Kay’s desire to remain plausible; ‘true’ to the pseudo-

medieval timeframe of The Fionavar Tapestry. 

Kay, however, appears selective with the historical realities he adheres to in 

regard  to  women  and  historical  authenticity.  Kay  chooses  not  to  allow  his 

women  to  wield  broadswords  because  he  feels  this  sits  outside  historical 

plausibility (Brusso online), but he appears not to suffer similar reservations 

about  a-historicism  when  it  comes  to  casting  ‘medieval’  women,  almost 

indiscriminately,  as  sexually  promiscuous  and  as  desiring  the  sexual 

attention  of  men.  The  historical  reality  of  a  Catholic  Middle  Ages  which 

placed  a  high  spiritual  value  upon  virginity  is  ignored,  as  is  the  social  and 

Page | 291  

 
 
 
commercial value attached to virginity in a patriarchal society.  Moreover, the 

very  real  risk  of  pregnancy  in  a  period  prior  to  reliable  birth  control,  seems 

not to impress Kay to the same extent as does the a-historicism of a martial 

woman.  

The  choices  that  Kay  makes  in  regard  to  the  constructions  of  ‘historic’ 

womanhood  highlight  a  difference  between  historical  authenticity  and 

historical plausibility. The strength of archetypal characterisations of woman 

as temptress and whore trumps other practical and historical considerations, 

allowing  his  representations  to  meet  certain  conditions  of  plausibility.  The 

women of the court are cast less as individuals than as a set; as a “gaggle of 

court  ladies  whose  principle  yearning  in  life  seemed  to  be  to  elicit  all  they 

could  from  [Jennifer]  about  Kevin  Laine  and  Paul  Schafer,  with  special  and 

explicit focus on their sexual predilections” (Kay ST 135). Their interest and 

sexual  involvement  with  men  is  by  no  means  covert.  Indeed,  Lady  “Rheva 

made it clear, that she'd spent the night before with Kevin. It was evidently a 

triumph in a continuing game of one-upmanship, and Rheva was exploiting it 

for all it was worth” (ST 136). Jennifer’s “effortless dislike” entails an implicit 

negative  judgement  of  these  women’s  promiscuity.    Like  the  women  of  the 

court, Brennin’s servant classes are presented as similarly desiring, but with 

less of the competitive ‘cattiness’ apparent at court. Upon visiting a tavern it 

takes little time at all for Kevin and Paul to bed two of the serving girls, as the 

rowdy atmosphere “greatly facilitated a rapid acquaintance” (ST 172). As will 

be  discussed  in  greater  detail  in  Chapter  9,  in  the  exotic  culture  of  Cathal 

sensuality  and  eroticism  are  presented  as  even  more  intense  and  intrinsic. 

An exotic sexuality is also evident in representations of the Dalrei, depicting 

the feminine Other as essentially desiring.  By the end of the first night that 

Page | 292  

 
 
Dave spends with the tribe, a night of celebration after the hunt, “Three girls, 

no less, had made their way through Ivor’s doorway to the room were Dave 

slept.  Or  didn’t,  after  all,  sleep”  (ST  297).  This  suggests  an  almost 

indiscriminate sexual commodification of women.   

Curiously,  however,  the  text  is  almost  silent  on  the  possibility  of  pregnancy 

outside  marriage.  Indeed,  Fionavar’s  families  seem  to  fit  comfortably  within 

traditional  Western  family  structures.  Although  unmarried  women  in  the 

Dalrei  tribe  can  chose  to  have  sexual  relations  with  any  man  they  wish, 

calling “the shots with anyone they like until they decide to marry” (WF 148), 

all families mentioned within the text appear as fixed nuclear groupings such 

as Ivor, Leith and their children and Torc and his parents. In Brennin, Darien 

is  fostered  within  a  family  comprised  of  mother,  father  and  children.  In 

Cathal,  too,  Sharra  and  her  now  deceased  brother,  Marlen  appear  to  be 

products of a traditional Western family structure. Regardless of the extent of 

extra-marital  sexual  activity  described  within  the  text,  the  text  mentions  no 

tensions  or  confusions  in  regard  to  paternity.  Princes  Diarmuid  and  Aileron 

have  no  bastard  siblings.  There  is  no  suggestion  that  Diarmuid  has  left 

behind a trail of illegitimate children; the welcoming Tavern girls seem free of 

progeny;  there  are  no  children  sitting  alongside  the  unmarried  women  at 

court;  the  priestesses  go  about  their  duties,  seemingly  unencumbered  by 

children.  This  does  not  fit  with  Kay’s  stated  aversion  to  a-historical 

representation; 

indeed, 

the  silence  on 

the 

logical  consequences  of 

widespread practice of casual sex seems conspicuous.  

Kay  seems,  whether  by  conscious  choice  or  oversight,  unwilling  to 

undermine  the  titillation  of  transgressive  sexual  practices  and  the  sexual 

Page | 293  

 
 
 
commodification  of  the  women  within  his  novels’  sexual  fantasy.  A  general 

silence  on  historical  complications,  such  as  the  value  of  chastity,  the 

possibility of illegitimacy and unsupported children, and uncertainty in regard 

to inheritance and succession, allows most of the extramarital sex within the 

text to remain uncomplicatedly pleasurable and erotic. Kay does not disturb 

the  story  or  indeed,  the  reader,  with  questions  of  moral  or  physical 

responsibility for either male or female participants.   

The  text  only  admits  the  possibility  of  moral  and  physical  consequences 

when these are integral to the larger arc of story that Kay wishes to present, 

as in the case of the rape of Jennifer by the evil god Rakoth Maugrim. This 

rape  results  in  the  conception  and  birth  of  Darien,  upon  whom  the  fate  of 

Fionavar will ultimately depend. This exception for the sake of the story sits 

outside 

the  representation  of  consequence-free  sex  otherwise  seen 

throughout the novels. The only other conception alluded to within the novel 

also  involves  a  union  between  a  mortal  and  a  deity  –  Dave  and  Ceinwen, 

Goddess of the Hunt. Like  the union between Kevin and the Goddess, these 

incidents  hark  back  to  ancient  stories depicting  relations  between gods  and 

mortals, such as Zeus and women including Io, Europa, and Callisto, or Eos 

and  her  many  mortal  lovers.  Kay  says  in  his  Thompson  interview  that  the 

rape  of  Jennifer  also  consciously  references  Guinevere’s  abduction  by 

Meleagant  or  Melwas  (Thompson  online),  versions  which  can  be  found  in 

medieval  texts  including  Chrétien  de  Troyes's  Lancelot  or  the  Knight  of  the 

Cart, The Life of ST. Gildas by Caradoc of Llancarfan, and “The Knight of the 

Cart”  in  Sir  Thomas  Malory’s  Le  Morte  Darthur.  The  mythic  weight  of 

classical  and  medieval  stories  can  work  to  obfuscate  Kay’s  selective 

application  of  the  laws  of  conception;  the  realm  of  the  gods  can  be  treated 

Page | 294  

 
 
differently  from  the  realm  of  mortals.  As  Jennifer,  Dave  and  Kevin’s  stories 

work  within  paradigms  established  by  earlier  tales,  they  have  access  to  a 

form of mythical plausibility.  

Just as paradigms established in earlier stories can grant plausibility, so too 

can  archetypal  characterisation. As  evident  in  Kay’s  opinion  on  the  need  to 

find historically plausible roles for women in medieval fantasy fiction (Brusso 

online), he validates his anchoring of women’s roles to traditional stereotypes 

through  an  appeal  to  historical  authenticity.  Kay  responds  to  praise  for  his 

textual  representation  of  women  in  an  interview  for  Sci  Fi  Channel  Europe 

with the comment: 

I  used  to  be  flattered  when  people  said  I  did  convincing  female 

characters,  but  lately  I  confess  it  bemuses  me.  The  implied  idea 

underlying  the  comment  is  that  it  is  startling  that  a  man  can  do 

plausible  women  characters  [...].  Creating  characters  is,  in  a  large 

way, an act of imaginative empathy, and I'm resistant to the idea that 

there are absolute borders to that. (Auden online) 

Plausibility  in  characterisation  is,  however,  a  different  creature  from  multi-

dimensional,  empathetic  characterisation.  Kay’s  women  seem  to  conform 

more  firmly  to  nostalgic  and  patriarchal  notions  of  the  past  where  women 

play not just a different, but a secondary role to men. Their primary function 

is to confirm the value and position of men. Though ostensibly powerful, the 

central women in the story ultimately find their place through attachment and 

submission to men. Although Kay’s texts actively include strong and dynamic 

women  characters  such  as  Kimberly,  Jaelle,  Leila  and  Jennifer,  they  are 

made  subordinate  to  both  the  men  in  the  tale  and  to  the  paradigms  that 

mould what is acceptable for women.  

Page | 295  

 
 
 
Strong  parallels  exist  between 

the  romantic  subplots  ubiquitous 

in 

contemporary  fantasy  fiction,  and  the  genre  of  romance  fiction.  As  Janice 

Radway  notes  in  her  influential  Reading  the  Romance,  despite  strong 

characterisations  of  women  and  proclamations  of 

female  superiority, 

romance  is  “an  active  agent  in  the  maintenance  of  the  ideological 

[patriarchal] status quo”: 

Because  the  romance  finally  leaves  unchallenged  the  male  right  to 

the public spheres of work, politics and power, because it refurbishes 

the  institution  of  marriage  by  suggesting  how  it  may  be  viewed 

continuously as a courtship, because it represents real female needs 

within  the  story  and  then  depicts  their  satisfaction  by  traditional 

heterosexual 

relations, 

the 

romance  avoids  questioning 

the 

institutionalised  bias  of  patriarchal  control  over  women.  (Radway 

217) 

Through an examination of the dynamics between Touchstone and Sabriel, I 

argued  in  Chapter  5  that  it  is  possible  for  genre  fantasy  to  step  outside 

entrenched  gender  hierarchies,  even  in  the  representation  of  romantic 

relationships. The  relationships  in The  Fionavar  Tapestry, however,  confirm 

rather  than  challenge  traditional  gendered  hierarchies.  Indeed,  Kay’s 

romantic subplots fit well within the romantic dynamic described by Radway. 

As  a  medical  intern  in  Toronto,  Kimberly  is  advantageously  situated  to 

embark  on  a  career  in  a  socially  and  economically  powerful  profession.  In 

Fionavar,  however,  her  role  as  seer  is  one  more  firmly  associated  with  the 

feminine. As seer, Kimberly holds great knowledge of both the future and the 

past, but her actions are directed by her sight and by the power of a magical 

ring, the Baelrath, also known as the Warstone. Significantly, Kimberly’s first 

role  as  seer  is  to  validate  the  rightness  of  a  man’s  authority,  confirming 

Page | 296  

 
 
Aileron  as  the  new  King  of  Brennin  and  as  leader  in  the  war.  Despite  the 

strength attached to her gifts, power comes at the expense of her autonomy. 

The Baelrath compels her to act against her character and even her will. It is 

“wild, allowing no compunction or pity, knowing only the demands of war, the 

dictates  of  absolute  need”  (DR  68).  For  Kimberly  this  is  “deeply  unsettling, 

but  when  had  there  been  anything  reassuring  or  easy  about  the  ring  she 

bore?  In  every  single  thing  she  had  ever  done  with  the  Baelrath,  there  was 

pain” (DR 56). Although her gifts of the sight and the ring give her authority, 

she feels corrupted and stripped of her nature by their demands.  

When Kimberly ultimately exercises her own choice in refusing the Baelrath’s 

command to bind the Crystal Dragon of Calor Diman, the ring withdraws its 

power  (DR  291).  This  suggests  a  mutual  exclusivity  between  power  and 

Kimberly’s moral disposition, and also between the exercise of authority and 

female  autonomy.  Her  assertion  of  self  leaves  her  “powerless,  empty  of  all 

save  pity  and  grief,  which  didn’t  count  for  anything”  (DR  376).  Although 

Kimberly  is  ultimately  approved  for  her  moral  choice,  there  remains  a 

suggestion  that  there  is  a  fundamental  incompatibility  between  weighty 

power and characteristics that are culturally more associated with femininity, 

such  as  nurturing  and  sympathy.  This  implies  that  authority  and  femininity 

are ill-fitted. Although Kimberly’s character holds substantial power within the 

story,  the  restoration  of  rightness  at  the  end  of  the  trilogy  entails  an 

abdication of this power and conformity to domestic tradition. This is seen in 

her  marriage  to  Dave  and  in  the  renunciation  of  larger  aspirations  in  the 

medical  and  professional  realm  in  favour  of  the  commonplace  of  family 

practice. 33  

33 See Guy Gavriel Kay Ysabel Simon and Schuster, London, 2007 

Page | 297  

 
 
                                                           
The  incompatibility  between  femininity  and  power,  implied  in  the  story  of 

Kimberly,  is  more  strongly  reinforced  in  the  story  of  Jaelle.    Like  Kimberly, 

Jaelle  is  another  undeniably  strong  woman  character  within  The  Fionavar 

Tapestry.  As  high  Priestess  to  the  Goddess,  Jaelle  holds  a  position  of 

authority that explicitly refuses full submission to male incarnations of power 

in  the  form  of  Brennin’s  monarchy  and  mages.  There  is  a  disdain  for  men 

shown in both her beliefs and her behaviour. Although, with the ascendancy 

of skylore, the priestess’ power has been marginalised and often reduced to 

mere symbolism, Jaelle demands precedence on behalf of the Goddess, not 

only  in  the  formal  situations  of  ceremony  in  Court,  but  also  in  matters  of 

decision making. It is Jaelle who performs the duty of crowning the new High 

King  and  who  is  appointed  co-governor  of  the  realm  alongside  Brennin’s 

Chancellor while King Aileron is absent due to the war. As representative of 

the Goddess she has access to supernatural powers. “Hers was the duty and 

the  power,  both,  to  shape  the  spun  webs  of  Dana’s  will”  (DR  23),  and  she 

draws upon this power to actively participate in the war against the Dark. 

Jaelle’s power, however, is tied to the image of her as bitter and hate-filled in 

her  dealings  with  men.  Despite  her  authority,  her  competence  and  her 

position,  Jaelle’s  strength  is  represented  not  as  a  positive  value,  but  as 

evidence  of  an emotional  lack.    Her  hostility  is  not  only  directed  toward  the 

men  of  Brennin  but  also,  perhaps  even  more  strongly,  toward  women  who 

support  them.  A  prime  example  of  this  is  her  attitude  to  Ysanne,  who  had 

forsaken the privilege high priestesshood in the order to become the lover of 

Raederth, a First Mage of Brennin: “Jaelle spoke again, her voice bitter, cold. 

Page | 298  

 
 
 
‘She  sold  herself  for  a  body  at  night.  May  the  hag  die  soon  and  lie  lost 

forever’" (ST 146). 

It is easy to read Jaelle’s attitude as something of a caricature of the modern 

angry,  ‘extreme’  feminist.  Kay’s  almost  didactic  censuring  of  this  attitude  is 

clear in the challenging exchange between Jaelle and Jennifer at the temple. 

This  occurs  after  Jennifer’s  bodyguard  objects  to  his  charge  entering  the 

sanctuary,  a  place  where  he  as  a  male  is  not  allowed  to  follow.  Jaelle’s 

ensuing  criticism  of  men’s  control  is  not  validated,  but  rather  cast  as 

dangerous and duplicitous manoeuvring. Moreover, paternalistic authority is 

reinforced:  

‘Ah!’ said Jaelle, her eyebrows arched maliciously. ‘It seems that the 

men here are already saying what you can or cannot do. Forgive me 

my invitation. I thought I was dealing with a free visitor.’ 

Jennifer was not oblivious to the manipulation, and she remembered 

Kevin's words that morning as well: ‘There's some danger here,’ he'd 

said  soberly.  ‘Trust  Diarmuid's  men,  and  Matt,  of  course.  Paul  says 

be careful of the Priestess. Don't go anywhere on your own.’ (Kay ST 

143)  

As  a  clever  woman,  Jaelle  is  cast  as  malicious  and  manipulative,  while  the 

males,  Kevin,  Diarmuid,  Matt  and  Paul  are  presented  as  intrinsically 

trustworthy. Significantly, Kay uses a female character, Jennifer, as focaliser, 

as  the  moderate  voice  that  labels  Jaelle’s  position  as  both  excessive  and 

perverted:  "‘I'm  not  happy  about  male  control  in  my  world,  either,  but  I've 

never in my life met anyone as screwed up on the subject as you are.’” (ST 

148). Jennifer becomes the vessel through which a man’s texts can question 

Jaelle’s feminist rhetoric. By implication Jennifer situates men as essential to 

a  fulfilled  complete  womanhood,  as  she  goes  on  to  question  if  Jaelle  can 

Page | 299  

 
 
“even  guess  what  [love]  feels  like”  (ST  148).  This  tacitly  equates  an 

autonomous  and  independent  womanhood  with  being  emotionally  stunted, 

twisted and bitter. While Jaelle is censured within the text, Jennifer is tacitly 

approved  within  the  text’s  narration  for  her  feminine  empathy,  and  also  for 

her intuition to trust Paul, Kevin and Diarmuid’s men over Jaelle.  

The  conservative  and  paternalistic  overtones  within  the  text  are  justified  by 

the  extreme  representation  of  Jaelle’s  disdain  for  male  power,  and  further 

disguised by Kay voicing his ‘moderate’ views through a female mouthpiece. 

Jennifer is a character who gives lip service to feminist views while ultimately 

submitting  to  patriarchal  authority.  This  represents  a  tacit  legitimisation  of 

conservative models of gender relations. It calls upon a positive nostalgia for 

times past, a nostalgia that adheres to notions of a gendered, essential order 

in  which  men  hold  authority  as  loving  protectors.  In  order  to  achieve 

fulfilment  and  gain  her  happy  ending,  Jaelle  is  made  to  submit  to  these 

nostalgic models, and to the power of heteronormative romantic love.  

Jaelle’s driving passion for the goddess, coupled as it is with her disdain for 

masculine  pretentions,  is  broken  down.  In  a  rare  moment  of  narrative 

focalisation  through  Jaelle,  she  finds  herself  uneasy  with  her  power.  Her 

certainty  is  first  shaken  by  Kevin’s  sacrifice  to  the  Goddess,  and  ultimately 

undone by feelings of love for Paul.  

For  all  Jaelle’s  knowledge,  all  her  immersion  in  the  nature  of  the 

Goddess,  Kevin’s  had  been  an  act  so  overwhelming,  so 

consummately gallant, it had irrevocably blurred the clarity with which 

once  she’d  viewed  the  world.  He  was  a  man,  and  yet  he  had  done 

Page | 300  

 
 
 
this thing. It was, since Maidaladan, so much harder to summon the 

old anger and bitterness, the hate. (Kay DR 25) 

Following  the  tempering  of  bitterness  that  begins  with  Kevin’s  sacrifice, 

Jaelle  cannot  help  but  be  impressed  by  Paul  and  his  power  as  Lord  of  the 

Summer  Tree.  She  tells  Paul  “I  fell  in  love  with  you  on  the  beach  at 

Taerlindel. When you stood in the waves, speaking to [the sea god] Liranan” 

(DR 414). At Taerlindel Paul appeals to Liranan as a brother, as a fellow son 

of Mörnir, the god of Thunder.  This displays Paul’s divine aspect above his 

mortal one.    A  recognition  of  Paul’s  power  makes  Jaelle hold  less  tightly  to 

her own.  

It  is  not  insignificant  then,  that  a  full  realisation  of  her  love  for  Paul  comes 

when Jaelle again sees him at the pinnacle of his power, facing Galadan, the 

Wolflord, lieutenant to Rakoth Maugrim, and at the end of the final battle.   

Jaelle  looked  upon  his  face  and  saw  power  written  there  so  deeply 

and so clearly that she was afraid. And it was as Lord of the Summer 

Tree the Twiceborn of Mörnir that he spoke. […]  

He walked past her, slowly, […]. Jaelle followed after Pwyll, carrying 

her silver circlet in her hand. Above her head as she walked down to 

the plain she heard the quick, invisible wings of his ravens, Thought 

and  Memory.  She  didn’t  know  what  he  was  about  to  do,  but  in  that 

moment she knew another thing, a truth about the depths of her own 

heart […] (Kay DR 384-5) 

The silver circlet that designates Jaelle as high priestess has fallen from her 

head; her carrying it in her hand rather than wearing it as a coronet not only 

a foreshadowing of her power passing to Leila; it also symbolically suggests 

that the she is no longer ruled by her position. Instead of having the symbol 

of the high priestess of the Goddess above her head, Jaelle now senses the 

Page | 301  

 
 
ravens above her which represent the essence of Paul’s power. Tacit within 

this imagery is that power and high status as a woman are incompatible with 

a  romantic  partnership;  in  such  a  relationship  masculine  authority  naturally 

supersedes the feminine. It is significant that this scene of capitulation is also 

focalised  by  Jaelle,  conflating  male  authority  and 

female  desire. 

Contrastingly,  the  passage  where  the  couple  declare  their  love  and 

consummate  their  relationship  is  focalised    Paul:  “he  was  sure  […]”,  “the 

world  shifted  within  him  and  around  him  […]”,  “He  took  one  step,  another 

[…]”,  “he  lowered  his  mouth[…]”,  “He  was  clear  at  last  […]”  (DR  414).  This 

provides an example of the manner in which sexuality, as represented within 

the novel, is fantasised from a masculine perspective.  

Kay  argues  that  a  significant  part  of  the  happy  ending  of  The  Fionavar 

Tapestry is the “fusing of the skylore and the earth goddess magic that takes 

place  symbolically  in  Paul  and  Jaelle”  (Thompson  online).  On  the  surface, 

this  symbolic  joining  of  the  God  and  the  Goddess  through  Paul  and  Jaelle 

seems to represent conciliation, balance, and unification— creating a sense 

of  completeness,  good  will  and  romantic  fulfilment.  This  reconciliation, 

however, is only achieved at the expense of Jaelle’s power and at the cost of 

her  position  as  high  priestess  of  the  Goddess.    Jaelle  expresses  her 

willingness to give up everything Paul, “I will die to have you” (DR 415).   

Within the story, fate conveniently intervenes to remove all obstacles to Paul 

and Jaelle’s union.  It is happily revealed that Jaelle is now High Priestess in 

name only, as she is being succeeded by the young priestess, Leila, whose 

Page | 302  

 
 
 
 
actions during the war meant she was “marked by the Goddess to the white 

of  the  High  Priestess”  (DR  416).  This  leaves  Jaelle  with  no  option  but  to 

relinquish  her  place  and  serendipitously  frees  her  to  find  true  fulfilment 

through  romantic  love,  without  any  crisis  of  loyalty.  Indeed,  implicitly,  this 

romantic ending is the will of the Goddess, as Jaelle notes that “Dana moves 

in ways no mortal can understand, nor even the others among the gods” (DR 

416).  Again,  however,  credit  is  rerouted  to  a  man,  to  Kevin,  as  Paul  “could 

see a pattern shaping here, only a glimmering of it, but it seemed to him that 

the  warp  and  weft  of  this,  followed  back  to  their  source,  would  reach  Dun 

Maura and a sacrifice made on the eve of Maidaladan” (DR 416).  

In  another  symbolic  representation  of  apparent  balance  between  the  God 

and  Goddess,  Jaelle  agrees  to  live  with  Paul  in  the  seer  Ysanne’s  cottage 

“halfway  between  the  Temple  and  the  Tree”  (DR  416).  This  serves  to 

highlight the irony of Jaelle’s former hatred of Ysanne for abdicating as High 

Priestess  for  the  love  of  a  man.  But,  as  Paul  remains  Pwyll  Lord  of  the 

Summer Tree while Jaelle gives up her power, the overriding imagery of an 

equal union obscures the undercurrent of inequity and elides the continuing 

power of traditional and hierarchical gender paradigms.  

Even  Leila’s  ascension  to  position  of  High  Priestess  is  something  akin  to  a 

consolation prize. Her acceptance of a life within the temple is one made in 

grief  after  Finn,  her  true  love,  is  destined  by  fate  to  leave  humanity  behind. 

When Finn relinquishes his earthly life to lead the ghostly Wild Hunt of Owein 

and his shadowy kings,34 Leila laments: “I’ve lost the only man I’ll ever love!” 

34 Common  throughout  European  folklore,  the  Wild  Hunt  is  a  supernatural  hunt  in  which  spectral 
hunters can be seen riding by, and the thundering of their horse’s hoofs and baying of their hounds 

Page | 303  

 
 
 
                                                           
(WF 183). Devotion to the priestesshood is a second choice, a substitute for 

the  true  fulfilment  of  romantic  love.  Leila  readily  admits  this,  saying:  “At 

midwinter full of moon, half a year from now, they will ask me if I wish to be 

consecrated to these robes. I will accept. I will never love another man” (WF 

184).  Finn  is  ultimately  and  tragically  killed  in  the  final  battle  while  trying  to 

answer Leila’s summons of love, expediently leaving Leila completely free to 

fully  devote  herself  to  the  role  of  High  Priestess.  In  both  High  Priestesses, 

Jaelle and Leila, we see the power of archetypal representation, and also the 

power  attached  to  the  fairy-tale  motif  of  romantic  love  where  passionate, 

heteronormative,  and  ultimately  patriarchal,  love  and  relationships  are 

privileged above other formulations.  

The  story’s  resolution  of  the  Arthurian  tragedy  of  the  triangulated  love 

between Guinevere, Arthur and Lancelot, also redeems Guinevere/Jennifer.  

This  involves  a  reworking  of  the  medieval  character  of  Guinevere,  relying 

upon  reader  familiarity  with  medieval  and  medievalist  texts,  especially  the 

story  of  Guinevere’s  love  for  and  adultery  with  Lancelot  which  precipitated 

the  downfall  of  Camelot.  Kay’s  story  breaks  the  cycle  of  infidelity,  of 

“absolute love and absolute betrayal” (DR 82), that these three were cursed 

to play over and over in many different worlds in the conceit of Kay’s story, 

mirroring  the  repeated  infidelity  in  many  retellings  from  medieval  sources 

from Chrétien's Lancelot to the Vulgate Cycle to Malory’s Le Morte Darthur, 

to  modern  texts from Tennyson’s  Morte d’Arthur  to T.  H. White’s  The  Once 

and  Future  King. The importance of  these  background  stories  to  a  reader’s 

understanding  of  the  Arthurian  threads  of  The  Fionavar  Tapestry  is  clear. 

Indeed, Kay comments that he had to “introduce a few small glosses to flesh 

heard”(  Dixon  Kennedy  408).      Kay’s  Wild  Hunt  is  comprised  of  spectral  kings  who  engage  in 
indiscriminate slaughter. 

Page | 304  

 
 
                                                                                                                                                                    
out the story of the love triangle for the reader who might not be familiar with 

it”.  He  notes  that  he  “wanted  to  use  the  resonances  of  the  triangle,  but  I 

found  that  I  had  to  pluck  a  few  chords  of  the  original  resonance  to  jog 

memories in readers” (Thompson online). 

While  Guinevere  and  Lancelot  repeatedly  suffer  the  pain,  guilt  and 

consequences  of  their  ill-fated,  transgressive  love,  Arthur  too,  unremittingly 

pays  for  his  sins  against  the  innocents.  In  this  story,  from  the  post-Vulgate 

Suite du Merlin, and popularised by Malory in Le Morte Darthur, Arthur, in an 

attempt  to  kill  his  bastard  son  Mordred  and forestall  a  prophesy  concerning 

the downfall of the kingdom, collects all the children born on May day, setting 

them adrift of a ship which founders on rocks, with no survivors but Mordred. 

Thinking  it  less  likely  that  a  modern  educated  readership  “would  remember 

Arthur's  role  as  child  slayer”,  Kay’s  text  “gave  a  fairly  clear  description  of 

what  happened  at  that  point  in  the  myth”  (Thompson  online).  Without  this 

intertextual understanding of Arthurian myth the reworking and resolution of 

these stories in The Fionavar Tapestry has a vastly reduced impact. In Kay’s 

tale  Guinevere’s  relationship  with  Arthur  is  restored  and  not  broken,  even 

when  Arthur  returns  from  his  quest  for  the  Caldron  to  Cader  Sedat  with  an 

awakened Lancelot. Lancelot’s protection of Guinevere is displaced onto her 

half-god  son  Darien,  as  Guinevere  sends  Lancelot  away  to  guard  her  son 

while  he  chooses  his  own  road  (DR  134).  This  action  is  one  that,  almost 

surprisingly, places Guinevere’s role as mother above that of lover.  

Although her pregnancy and Darien’s birth mean that Guinevere is no longer 

the  barren  woman  from  Arthurian  myth,  there  is  a  pathetic  irony  in  Kay 

making  this  the  result  of  a  demeaning,  emotionally  and  physically  tortuous, 

Page | 305  

 
 
 
almost  soul-destroying,  rape.  In  these  circumstances,  Jennifer’s  refusal  to 

perform the role of mother is, at the very least, understandable. Instead, she 

fosters her child with the motherly Vae because, as Jennifer says, “I need a 

mother  who  knows  how  to  love  her  child”  (WF  32).  The  implication  that 

Jennifer  feels  inadequate  for  motherhood  is  made  more  plausible  by  the 

historical  weight  of  repeated  representations  of  Guinevere  as  barren,  “an 

empty vessel, the shore without the sea” according to T.H White in The Once 

and  Future  King  (White  498).  Greater  ambivalence  attaches  to  Kay’s 

Guinevere as mother, through the fearful threat that Darien poses as the son 

of Rakoth Maugrim. There is an almost literal sense in which Darien could be 

a realisation of Tennyson’s lines about Guinevere in Idylls of the King: “Well 

is it that no child is born of thee. / The children born of thee are sword and 

fire, / Red ruin, and the breaking up of laws” (421-423). 

When  Jennifer  returns  to  Fionavar,  her  child  has matured  at  a  supernatural 

rate,  but  she  does  not  seek  him  out  or  attempt  to  talk  with  her  son.  On 

receiving  news  of  him  from  Paul,  Jennifer  “listened,  remote  and  regal, 

virtually  untouched”  (Kay  WF  258).  Her  disinterest  is  such  that  it  almost 

moves  Paul  to  anger.  Moreover,  when  Darien  comes  to  Jennifer,  lonely, 

frightened  and  confused  about  the  path  he  should  take,  Jennifer  overtly 

rejects the role of mother. “There was ice in her voice, and steel. Hard and 

cold  and  carrying,  her  tone  knifed  through  the  wind”  (DR  118),  as  she 

refuses to accept a gift he offers in an attempt to please her. 

‘What,’ he heard Darien’s mother say, ‘are you doing here?’ 

The boy’s head jerked as if she’d struck him. ‘I—she [Kimberly] told 

me. The one with white hair. She said you were . . .’ His words failed 

him. Whatever else he said was lost in the tearing wind.  

Page | 306  

 
 
‘She said I was here,’ his mother said coldly, very clearly. ‘Very well.  

She was right, of course. What of it? What do you want, Darien? You 

are  no  longer  a  baby—you  arranged  for  that  yourself.  Would  you 

have me treat you like one?’ (Kay DR119) 

Believing  Darien  is  a  random  thread,  outside  destiny,  Jennifer,  having 

personally  suffered  from  numberless  returns  of  the  cycle  of  fate,  refuses  to 

bind him to herself, even with a mother’s love.  

Darien  said,  ‘Finn  told  me  . .  .  before  . .  . that my  mother  loved  me 

and that she had made me special.’ 

And  now,  as  if  involuntarily,  Jennifer’s  hands  did move,  up from  her 

sides, to clutch her elbows tightly in front of her. 

‘Acushla machree,35 she said—or so Brendel thought. She started to 

go on, then seemed to pull herself up short, as on a tight, harsh rein. 

After  a  moment  she  added,  in  a  different  voice,  ‘He  was  wrong… 

about  making  you  special.  You  know  that  now.  Your  power  comes 

from  Rakoth  when  your  eyes  go  red.  What  you  have  of  me  is  only 

freedom and the right to choose, to make your own choice between 

Light and Dark. Nothing more than that.’ (Kay DR 121) 

Although  Jennifer’s  distance  from  Darien  is  shown  to  be  at  the  cost  of 

significant personal grief, her rejection of the role of mother effectively shifts 

the character from Toronto’s Jennifer to the medieval, childless Guinevere. In 

remaining  firm  in  her  determination,  and  in  maintaining  the  remote  public 

face of regal coolness, despite the emotional pull exerted by Darien’s desire 

for  a  mother’s  love,  she  is  placing  the  needs  of  the  land  above  personal 

needs,  electing  to  perform  the  role  of  queen.  In  sending  both  Darien  and 

Lancelot away, holding resolutely to her commitment to Arthur, her choice is 

35 From the Irish: a chuisle (moi chroi) 'O pulse (of my heart)!'  http://oxforddictionaries.com 

Page | 307  

 
 
                                                           
an inversion of her behaviour at Camelot where surrender to feelings of love 

was key in the downfall of the kingdom. 

As Darien’s ultimate choice of the Light over the Dark leads to victory within 

the  war,  Guinevere  is  proved  right;  his  death,  in  turn,  allows  her  to  at  least 

grieve as a mother.  

Kim  exclaimed  […]  ‘Oh,  Jen.  You  were  right  after  all.  You  were  so 

terribly  right.’  She  was  crying,  and  Dave  saw  that  Jennifer  Lowell, 

who was Guinevere, was weeping now as well, though silently. 

In mourning for her child, who had taken the Darkest Road and had 

come at last to the end of it, alone, and so far away. (Kay DR 370) 

Through this Guinevere is redeemed from the curse of her barrenness, and 

the taint associated with her refusal to act the role of mother. Moreover, her 

resolute fidelity to Arthur and to the land breaks the cycle of fate, of adultery 

and  ruin.  Culturally  sanctioned  behaviour,  seen  in  submitting  to  Arthur  both 

emotionally  and  sexually,  provides  Guinevere  with  fulfilment  and  healing, 

even  to  the  point  that  sex  with  her  husband  immediately  undoes  the 

psychological trauma of her rape, leaving her “open to desire” (WF 273).  In 

a parallel thread in the story, Diarmuid undermines the dictates of fate as he 

takes  Arthur’s  death  on  Fionavar’s  battlefield  of  Camlann,36 leaving  Arthur 

alive to fight in the final battle. This, in turn, allows Arthur to save the life of 

Tabor, a child, in a symbolic reversal of the killing of the innocents. Indeed, in 

the Thompson interview (online) Kay states that his release of the Arthurian 

characters from fate constitutes the eucatastrophe of the story, the “sudden 

joyous  ‘turn’”  (Tolkien  68).  The  resolution  of  the  Arthurian  story  is 

multifaceted, allowing not only Arthur but also Guinevere, Lancelot and even 

36 The 10th Century Annales Cambriae records the battle of Camlann as the place of Arthur’s death. 

Page | 308  

 
 
                                                           
Arthur’s dog, Cavall, to sail home to the Weaver’s Halls; a key component of 

their  release,  however,  is  Guinevere’s  refusal  of  the  role  of  whore  and  her 

concession to her obligations as wife and queen.  

The  stories  of  Kimberly,  Jaelle,  Leila  and  Guinevere  demonstrate  how  the 

depiction  of  strong,  ostensibly  liberated,  women  characters  can  be  folded 

back into traditional gender paradigms through the employment of archetype 

and  myth.  Fulfilment  and  happiness  is  achieved  in  conformity  to  patriarchal 

paradigms and wifely submission. While the strength of older stories lends a 

great  deal  of  significance,  and  adds  nuances  of  meaning  to  The  Fionavar 

Tapestry,  literary,  mythological  and  archetypal  precedents  can  also  lead  to 

conservatism.  

Page | 309  

 
 
 
 
Chapter 9 

Romance, Seduction and the Other  

Where  Chapters  6  and  7  focussed  upon  the  implications  of  ethnic 

representation  in  The  Fionavar  Tapestry  and  Chapter  8  on  dynamics 

attached  to  gender  paradigms  and  archetypal  representation,  this  chapter 

unites these two themes. Generic expectation and the pleasure of romance 

are  able  to  play  a  significant  role  in  disavowing  power  imbalances  attached 

to gender and even ethnicity. The following discussion considers another of 

the  text’s  central  romantic  subplots,  that  of  Prince  Diarmuid  and  Princess 

Sharra,  which  begins with  the  romantically  and erotically  charged seduction 

of  Sharra.  I  argue  that  the  romance  of  this  story  elides  an  inherent  sexual 

exploitation  and  the  underlying  sexual  objectification  of  Sharra  within  Kay’s 

tale.  This  romance  encapsulates  many  of  the  key  issues  considered  in  the 

previous pages of this thesis. It demonstrates the weight of mythical allusion 

and the authority that can adhere to images and stories of past, and it allows 

an  examination  of  the  gendered  power  imbalances.  Moreover,  in  this 

romance  there  is  a  doubling  of  meaning,  as  the  gender  implications  of 

Diarmuid,  Prince  of  Brennin,  courting,  manipulating  and  conquering  Sharra, 

Princess  of  Cathal,  has  metonymic  resonance.  As  Diarmuid  stands  for  the 

West  and  Sharra  for  the  East,  the  West  is  again  shown  as  dominant  and 

masculine while the East is subjugated and feminised.  

Page | 310  

 
 
 
 
 
Older stories carry inferences, connotations and authority with them. As the 

story  of  Diarmuid  and Sharra  evokes older  texts  it  draws  on their  influence. 

Literary  and  cultural  echoes  are  able  to  contribute  to  the  ineffable  sense  of 

‘rightness’ in a story. Intertextual aspects possess a resonance that adds to 

the plausibility of newer stories as they draw from the influential stories and 

tropes  that  preceded  them.  Moreover,  readers  themselves  can  be  seduced 

by the generic familiarity, and by the historical and nostalgic overlay, to feel 

comfortable about the dynamics and themes present within. It can reassure 

to  the  point  that  readers  overlook  problematic  subtexts.  The  ambience  and 

the  literary  resonance in The  Fionavar  Tapestry,  aided by  Kay’s  knowledge 

and  use  of  mythic  and  medieval  tropes  and  traditional  narrative  patterns, 

obscure  the  ethnic  and  gender  imbalances  present  in  the  episode  of 

Diarmuid’s seduction of Sharra. 

There is a clear legacy of earlier tales in this couple’s relationship: Sharra’s 

seduction  parallels  the  medieval  French  poem  Le  Roman  de  la  Rose,  “The 

Romance of the Rose”; as a love that crosses East and West it has echoes 

of the medieval French chantefable, Aucassin and Nicolette; and it also uses 

biblical imagery.  Sharra’s name is strongly evocative of “the rose of Sharon” 

the “beloved” from the erotic Song of Solomon of the Old Testament (2:1, 1:2 

SoS).  The  garden  tryst,  the  descriptive  exoticism,  the  lushness  of  the 

vegetation, the sensuality and physicality of the garden’s beauty and aromas, 

and the narrative of passionate desire, all evoke the lovers’ meetings in the 

Song of Solomon.  

Page | 311  

 
 
 
  
The cultural distinction between Brennin and Cathal brings with it echoes of 

forbidden  love  that  the  French  Aucassin  holds  for  the  Saracen  Nicolette  in 

the late-twelfth/early-thirteenth-century chantefable. Although Diarmuid’s and 

Sharra’s  story  has  significant  departures  from  this  medieval  text,  there  are 

also  many  similarities.  Sharra  is  the  Princess  of  Cathal  and  Nicolette  is 

revealed  to  be  the  daughter  of  the  King  of  Carthage.  Both  Aucassin  and 

Diarmuid are reluctant heirs, Aucassin to his father, the Count of Beaucaire, 

and Diarmuid to King Ailell of Brennin. Although love never renders Diarmuid 

ineffectual in his martial duty (as it does Aucassin), there is suggestion that 

passion  leads  to  civic  irresponsibility  (Kline  online).  Diarmuid’s  desire  for 

Sharra  is  at  the  risk  of  the  safety  of  Brennin.  If  discovered  in  the  garden 

Diarmuid could be killed; it “might even start a war” (Kay ST 125). Diarmuid 

also reveals to Sharra the details of how he breached Cathal’s security (ST 

130).  Other  resemblances  can  be  found  in  the  heroines  both  refusing  all 

other suitors, and in their dressing up as men to escape social confinement 

and achieve their aspirations. While Nicolette disguises herself as a minstrel 

to return to Beaucaire (Kline online), Sharra disguises herself as one of the 

Honour  Guard  in  her  father’s  army  in  order  to  return  to  Paras  Derval  (WF 

118). 

The  seduction  of  Sharra  contains  even  stronger  parallels  to  much  of 

Guillaume  de  Lorris’  early-thirteenth-century  poem  Le  Roman  de  la  Rose 

and,  perhaps  more  so,  to  Jean  de  Meun’s  later  continuation  of  the  work 

which  allows  the  young  man  to  pluck  the  rose.  The  episode  mimics,  in  a 

more realist form, the allegorical poem set in the Garden of Pleasure.  Prince 

Diarmuid crosses the river and breaches the exotic gardens of Larai Rigal to 

court  and  seduce  Sharra  through  both  romance  and  deception,  ultimately 

Page | 312  

 
 
plucking “the fairest rose in Shalhassen’s garden” (ST 132).  The setting and 

dynamics of the encounter evoke romance, with the walled garden protecting 

and sheltering the beautiful princess, and the Prince risking danger in order 

to gain access to her beauty and her person.  

The  conflicting  emotions  and  justifications  that  take  place  in  Sharra’s  mind 

during  the  encounter  recall  the  psychological  tensions  demonstrated  by  the 

varying  personifications  of  the  Lady  within  Le  Roman  de  la  Rose.  These 

personifications  include  those  favourable  to  love  such  as  Bel  Accueil  (fair 

welcome),  Pitié  (pity),  Franchise  (openness)  and  Courtoisie  (courtliness). 

They  also  include  some  that  work  against  the  lover  such  as  Dangier 

(resistance),  Peur  (fear),  and  Honte  (shame). 37  Before  the  tryst  Sharra 

determines  to  treat  Diarmuid  with  “the  courtesy  due  to  his  rank  and  the 

secrecy  the  passion  in  him  deserved  of  her”  (ST  125),  mirroring  the  fair-

welcome, pity and courtesy shown to the young lover in the medieval poem. 

Just as in the Le Roman de la Rose, Diarmuid, as lover, takes advantage of 

courtly  manners  and  expectations  regarding  welcome,  pity  and  courtesy,  to 

undermine the protection of the Lady’s aloofness. Diarmuid’s taking of a kiss, 

however,  sets  up  her  defenses.  It  alerts  her  to  her  precarious  position, 

warning  her  of  the  possibilities  of  danger  and  shame,  and  awakening  her 

resistance and pride. Characters like Rebuff, Fear and Shame are all present 

before False Seeming’s trickery allows success in the conquest of the rose. 

The influence of themes and patterns in older stories, seen as overt allegory 

in  Le  Roman  de  la  Rose,  is  subtly  realised  in  Kay’s  scene  in  Cathal’s 

gardens at Larai Rigal. 

37 I have gleaned character name translations from C.S. Lewis’s The Allegory of Love and Frances 
Horgan’s introduction and translation of Guillaume De Lorris and Jean De Muen’s The Romance of 
the Rose. 

Page | 313  

 
 
                                                           
In  the  entry  about  Guy  Gavriel  Kay  in  The  Encyclopedia  of  Fantasy,  Paul 

Kincaid speaks of the range of mythological and historical sources that Kay 

draws  from  in  his  writing,  noting  Kay’s  “willingness  to  seek  widely  for 

inspiration”. He comments that The Fionavar Tapestry “draws from a host of 

sources, notably British and Norse myth” (531). Scholarship on these novels 

tends  to  focus  upon  myth, 38 somewhat  overlooking  how  other  literary  and 

medieval sources might inform the series. Although Kay provides a selected 

bibliography of key sources for his later novels, he simply cites “a decade's 

worth  of  reading  in  myth  and  legend,  Arthuriana,  and  Celtic,  Norse,  or 

shamanistic  traditions”  as  his  influence  for  The  Fionavar  Tapestry  (Kay 

Bibliographies  online).  In  his  interview  with  Thompson  for  “The  Camelot 

Project”,  however,  the  extent  of  Kay’s  interest  and  familiarity  with  medieval 

literature  becomes  apparent.  He  reveals  his  reading  of  many  medieval 

works,  including  Sir  Orpheo,  The  Song  of  Roland,  The  Neibelungenlied, 

Gawain and the Green Knight, Pearl, and the chronicle histories of Geoffrey 

of Monmouth, Gildas, and Giraldus Cambrensis (Thompson online).  

Whether  deliberate  or  unconscious  references,  appropriations  from  and 

allusions  to  earlier  literatures  such  as  medieval  tales  and  biblical  texts  are 

able  to  inform  and  enhance  a  modern  tale,  creating  a  literary  resonance 

recognisable  to Western  readers.  In  her  study  of  Medievalism  in  Australian 

Literature,  Old  Songs  in  the  Timeless  Land  (OS),  Louise  D’Arcens  takes 

Peter Bailey’s notion of “knowingness” from the realm of Victorian music hall, 

and applies it to a reader’s understanding of medieval references in popular 

text (126).  Bailey’s “knowingness” describes a general rather than informed 

38 See compiled scholarship on Bright Weavings: The Worlds of Guy Gavriel Kay – The Authorized 
Website, http://www.brightweavings.com/scholarship/index.htm 

Page | 314  

 
 
 
                                                           
engagement  with  widely  accessible  cultural  information.  Addressing  the 

medievalism in the popular poetry of colonial Australia, D’Arcens argues that: 

Those  readers  who  were  in  possession  of  greater  knowledge  could 

engage  with  the  medievalist  allusions  in  these  poems  at  a  deeper 

level, and enjoy their own sense of distinction in doing so; but for the 

knowing, rather than erudite, public, the Middle Ages became, to use 

Bailey’s  incisive  phrase,  ‘what  everybody  knows,  but  which  some 

know better than others’. (D’Arcens OS 127) 

Kay’s  medievalist  appropriations  and  allusions  invite  similar  levels  of 

engagement. While the whole readership may not be aware of the range or 

nature  of  Kay’s  sources  they  are  still  able  to  participate  in  a  “knowingness” 

about  stories,  myth  and  the  Middle  Ages.  Northrop  Frye  makes  a  similar 

observation  in  regard  to  the  reading  of  romance  that  harks  back  to  older 

stories and myth, saying: “If we are reading the story as critics, with an eye to 

structural principles we may make the association […]. If we are reading the 

story for fun, we need not bother: that is, some murky ‘subconscious’ factor 

in our response will take care of the association” (188). Reader engagement, 

whether  based  upon  a  more  detailed  knowledge  or  a  ‘knowingness’, 

facilitates  a  sense  of  shared  participation,  of  communal  ownership  over  the 

underlying stories. 

Before  moving  on  to  a  more  detailed  discussion  of  the  sexual  dynamics 

between Diarmuid and Sharra, I wish to reiterate the doubling of meaning in 

this  relationship  in  regard  to  the  East  and West.  Following  the  death  of  her 

brother  in  a  hunting  accident  the  year  previous,  Sharra,  as  the  only  living 

child of Shalhassan, is his heir. As such she is not simply an individual; there 

is  a  manner  in  which  she  represents  Cathal.  This  is  made  explicit  in  an 

Page | 315  

 
 
 
exchange between Sharra and Diarmuid where Sharra emphasises that she 

should not be treated as though she is just any woman; “She was a princess 

of  Cathal”  with  a  primary  duty  to  her  people.  It  is  not  insignificant  that 

Diarmuid replies “Am I not heir to a throne, just as you are?” (Kay ST 130). 

The story of Diarmuid’s conquering and ravishment of Sharra then, works on 

two levels, an individual one, with all its gender implications, and one where 

Sharra  stands  as  a  metaphor  for  the  East  and  Diarmuid  for  the  West.  This 

episode  sits  as  a  precursor,  or  as  a  pair,  to  the  story  of  Shalhassan’s 

humbling and submission discussed in Chapter 6. Furthermore, this incident 

reinforces  the  novel’s  feminisation  of  the  East  in  comparison  to  the 

masculine West  represented  by  Brennin.  This  dynamic,  however,  is  hidden 

behind generic, popular romantic imagery. 

Romantic  language,  too,  particularly  when  combined  with  sensual  and 

nostalgic  settings,  can  assist  in  presenting  as  romance  what  I  argue  is  a 

manipulative  and  coercive  scene.  Diarmuid’s  seduction  of  Sharra  contains 

familiar echoes of earlier romantic and erotic texts, and does not immediately 

appear non-consensual. His approach is not one of physical force, but rather 

one  that  relies  on  the  language  of  love  and  desire.  Steven  Rendall  (2008) 

pertinently comments that: 

The distinction between seduction and rape parallels, and is in large 

measure  based  on,  a  distinction  between  language  and  physical 

force,  between  saying  and  doing.  […]  To  a  considerable  extent, 

seduction  and  rape  have  the  same  goal,  not  merely  in  the  banal 

sense that they seek sexual intercourse, but also, and perhaps more 

fundamentally,  in  the  sense  that  they  seek  to  establish  power  over 

another individual. The coercive force of language, and particularly of 

argumentative 

language, 

is  of  course  not 

identical  with 

the 

Page | 316  

 
 
coerciveness of sheer physical force, but it is perhaps not so different 

from it as we would like to imagine. (Rendall 74) 

Through  historical,  romantic 

tropes,  a  manipulative  situation  can  be 

constructed  so  as  to  appear  one  of  love  rather  than  control,  cloaking  the 

parallels between the dynamics of seduction and of coercion.  

Coercion  is  further  elided  when  women  are  constructed  as  unconsciously 

willing.  As  discussed  in  Chapter  8,  Kay  generally  portrays  women  as 

desiring.  The  implications  of  Sharra  being  cast  as  desiring  and  willing  are 

amplified by the overtones that accompany Sharra’s embodiment of both the 

East  and  femininity,  and  also  by  Diarmuid’s  embodiment  of  the  West  and 

masculinity.  Although  framed  as  romance,  there  is  a  manner  in  which  the 

woman’s body becomes the site on which cultural dominance is enacted.  

The story’s fantastic exoticism allows Kay to draw on literary and discursive 

constructions of the libidinous female. That which Andy Martin, in his article 

“Willing Women” (2006), identifies as a trope in colonial writings of the exotic 

Other,  is  also  present  in  Kay’s  fantasy.  Within  The  Fionavar  Tapestry 

“women  are  already  possessed  by  a  latent  [sexual]  appetite  that  can  be 

triggered  by  any  passing  stranger”  (153).  Martin  argues  that  literary 

representation  adds  to  discourses  in  which  “manifest  power  and  violence” 

become  “translated  into  a  miasma  of  latent  sexual  desire  and  pleasure” 

(158).  

The historical examples Martin considers, a combination of both artistic and 

nonfiction texts concerning the exotic feminine Other, demonstrate how texts 

Page | 317  

 
 
 
 
can  have  a  significant  impact  on  belief  and  behaviour.  The  combined 

strength  of  journals,  novels,  artworks  and  even  scholarly  texts  is  able  to 

create and reinforce discourses that construct exotic women as, in essence, 

willing. Indeed, Martin points to Freud’s assertion that there is no such thing 

as an unconscious 'No.' “The unconscious always says ‘Yes’. Only the self-

denying duplicity of the conscious mind is capable of saying ‘No.’” (158).  

The discursive strength of such constructions allows sexual coercion to more 

plausibly  be  rewritten  as  a  romantic  encounter.  In  “Hymeneal  Acts: 

Interrogating  the  Hegemony  of  Rape  and  Romance”,  Nina  Puren  observes 

that  the  economy  of  rape  can  be  “indistinguishable  from  the  economy  of 

romance”  (18).  Puren  points  to  how  discursive  transformation  is  achieved 

through a tacit implication that the female has agency. This is achieved when 

resistance  is  narrated  as  desire.  The  woman,  because  of  her  sexual 

attractiveness and through the assumption of her desire, is construed as “the 

precipitatory agent of the sexual event” (Puren 19).   

Considering examples in Mills and Boon romance novels, Puren argues that 

a  woman’s  ‘no’  holds  an  important  place  in  maintaining  the  “temporal 

threshold  of  romance”  (21).    Resistance,  she  argues,  is  both  a  trope  and 

condition of the romance genre, marking the woman as a respectable subject 

(21). The woman’s capitulation to the hero’s sexual advances after repeated 

‘no’s, therefore, shows how  

[the]  romance  economy  produces  woman  as  a  liar  –  her  necessary 

no, which preserves the romantic threshold, and is a mark of her own 

legitimacy,  must  always  have  as  a  signified,  a  desiring  body. 

Otherwise, what happens to it is rape and not romance”. (Puren 21).  

Page | 318  

 
 
 
Certainly  this  pattern  is  evident  in  both  Le  Roman  de  la  Rose  and  in  the 

seduction of Sharra in The Fionavar Tapestry. 

The  tension  in  virgin/whore  dichotomy,  evident  in  both  medieval  and 

medievalist  texts,  is  intensified  by  the  combination  of  youth  and  erotic 

exoticism  in  Sharra.  Jeana  Jorgensen,  in  an  analysis  of  female  agency  in 

eroticised  retellings  of  fairy  tales  (2008),  comments  on  the  problematic 

ambivalence  that  arises  from  contradictory  demands  within  representations 

of  womanhood.  There  is  an  inherent  contradiction  in  the  coupling  of  an 

expectation  of  innocence  with  the  construction  of  a  willing  and  desiring 

woman.  Jorgensen  argues  that  this  “duality  is  a  manifestation  of  the 

virgin/whore complex” (34). She asserts that it represents a commodification 

of  innocence,  where  innocence  “becomes  a  trope  meant  to evoke  desire  in 

the  reader,  because  within  the  story,  innocence  signifies  sexual  eagerness 

that  is  ready  to  be  exploited”  (34).  In  The  Fionavar  Tapestry  Sharra  sits 

within  this  trope.  She  is  just  past  that  awkward  “long  limbed  coltish”  stage 

(Kay ST 120). At seventeen she is not only sexually innocent, but even “not 

yet  accustomed  to  men  calling  her  beautiful”  (ST  120).  She  remains 

unmoved by “the men who had knelt before her father’s throne seeking her 

hand” (ST 121).  

Significantly,  the  language  Kay  employs  in  his  introduction  to  Sharra  is 

infused with sexual overtones. There is the repeated motif of a smouldering, 

heated  longing:  “Within  her,  too,  there  flickered  yet  a  secret  flame  of 

rebelliousness…”;  “Even  now  the  flame  burned…”;  “Memories  that  fired 

her…”;  “burning  like  a  liena  in  the  gardens  at  night…”  (ST  121).  Although 

Sharra  embodies  innocence,  the  suggestiveness  of  both  the  lexis  and 

Page | 319  

 
 
 
broader  sensual  imagery  encodes  this  innocence  as  nascent  sexual 

eagerness.  Consequently,  Diarmuid’s  sophisticated  seduction  can  be 

understood  as  not  simply  awakening  her  longings  but,  rather,  as  his 

response to them, as his answer to her innate desires. With this literary and 

discursive  sleight  of  hand  agency  is  transferred from  him as  seducer  to  her 

as desirer.  

The  suggestion  that  Sharra  is  complicit  in  her  own  seduction  is  also 

confirmed by her actions. It is present in the revelation that she keeps secret 

the  unsigned  letters  of  love  that  begin  to  appear  in  her  room. These  letters 

express  a  longing  that  “sang  to  her”  and  “awoke  within  her  breast  […] 

longings  of  her  own”  (ST  121).  When  Diarmuid’s  final  letter  arrives  with  a 

signature,  it  proves  Sharra’s  “burning”  suspicion  that  Diarmuid  is  her 

audacious  admirer,  giving  “shape  and  certainty  to  what  she  had  long 

guessed  and  held  in  her  heart  as  a  talisman”  (ST  121-2).  Diarmuid, 

therefore, is depicted as the object of Sharra’s desire, prior to her even laying 

eyes  upon  him.  Returning  to  the  ethnic  metaphor,  it  is  significant  that  her 

desire is for a Western lover, not for one of her many suitors from Cathal.  

Kay  continues  to  use  suggestive  language  in  his  description  of  Sharra.  On 

the evening that Sharra receives this final letter the sexual imagery is evident 

in  passages  like;  she  “did  not  dream  of  childhood  or  of  childhood  games 

when at length sleep found her, twisting from side to side all night, her hair 

loose  and  spread  across  the  pillow”  (ST  123).  The  sexual  implications  are 

not  difficult  to  recognise  in  the  picture  of  her  tangled  in  her  bed,  and  in  the 

lexis such as ‘loose’, and ‘spread’. This goes further than configuring Sharra 

as desiring; she appears almost wanton as innocence is again conflated with 

Page | 320  

 
 
 
sexual readiness. Consequently, before Sharra and Diarmuid even meet, the 

strength  of  language  and  of  archetypal  representation  of  woman  as  both 

virgin and whore, construct Sharra as ready, as desiring. This creates a lens 

through which Diarmuid’s coercive actions can be seen, not as predatory, but 

as answering Sharra’s own, albeit yet unacknowledged, needs. It is as Martin 

notes  in  his  paper  on  ‘willing  women’:  “no  crime  has  been  committed  since 

he  was  only  responding  to  an  implicit  invitation:  all  along  he  has  done 

nothing but provide the supply to her demand” (151). 

Moreover, the text suggests that, although Sharra is sexually innocent, she is 

by no means naïve. It depicts her as sophisticated in her dealings with men. 

This  is  clearly  seen  in  her  cool,  controlling formality  with  one  of  her  suitors, 

the young Vanassar of Gath, and in her cold dismissal of his leering father. 

She is cast as someone who is not only schooled in propriety and behaviour, 

but as someone possessed of natural intelligence. In Sharra, Kay is able to 

mix  aspects  of  the  ingénue  on  the  cusp  of womanhood,  but  still  longing  for 

the  freedom  of  childhood,  with  the  image  of  a  sophisticated,  knowing  and 

ready  woman.  This  idea  is  reinforced  by  Diarmuid’s  response  on  first 

meeting her.  

‘Fools,’  said  Diarmuid  dan  Ailell.  ‘They  told  me  you  were  beautiful. 

Said it in six different ways.’ 

‘And?’ She stiffened, anger ready as a lash. 

‘And, by Lisen’s eyes, you are. But no one ever told me there was a 

cleverness  in  you.  I  should  have  known.  Shalhassan’s  heir  would 

have to have subtlety.’ (Kay ST 127) 

Ironically,  Diarmuid’s  admission  of  Sharra’s  cleverness  gives  him  an 

advantage.  Recognition  of  her  cleverness  proves  his  own.  It  immediately 

Page | 321  

 
 
unsettles  her  expectations,  and  in  turn,  her  sense  of  control:  “She  was 

completely unprepared. No one had ever said this. Off balance, she fleetingly 

remembered all her Venassars, so effortlessly handled” (ST 127). Diarmuid’s 

understanding  of  Sharra’s  intelligence  becomes  part  of  his  seduction  whilst 

simultaneously  absolving  his  behaviour.  An  acknowledgement  of  Sharra’s 

power  paradoxically  works  toward  her  disempowerment;  it  elides  the  moral 

implications  attached 

to  Diarmuid’s  seduction  of  an 

inexperienced 

seventeen-year-old. Diarmuid is able to argue that Sharra is not a girl: “not in 

the ways that matter” (ST 127). 

The  problematic  character  of  Sharra’s  seduction  is  further  cloaked  by  the 

text’s  subtle  change  in  narrative  register.  In  his  writing  of  Diarmuid  and 

Sharra’s encounter Kay adopts a more formal, faux archaic style, evocative 

of fable and romance. Rather than utilising more conventional phrasing such 

as  ‘She  had  been  a  pretty  child’,  ‘She  remained  proud’,  or  ‘They  spoke  of 

desire’, Kay employs a syntax more evocative of the mythic – “A pretty child 

she  had  been…”  (ST  120),  “Proud  she  remained…”,  and  “Of  desire  they 

spoke…”  (ST  121).  The  Fionavar  Tapestry  is  already  somewhat  distanced 

from  the  reader  by  its  placement  in  a  medieval  secondary  world.  The 

adoption  of a more formal  register for  this  particular  episode appeals  to  the 

cultural  legacy  of  older  tales.  It  attaches an even  greater  sense  of  distance 

and further mythic gravitas to this section of Kay’s tale.   

The weight of this archaic ambience is further enhanced by the sensuality of 

the physical setting of the tryst, adding more romantic distance from modern 

‘reality’. Indeed, the reader is informed that the “gardens were another world” 

(ST  125). This  sets  up  a further  degree of distance. The  garden  is  ‘another 

Page | 322  

 
 
 
world’ inside the fantasy ‘other world’ of Fionavar. Here “the disturbing night 

scents  of  the  flowers”,  the  “starlight  and  the  crescent  illumination  of  the 

moon”,  the  “soft  chirping  of  insects  and  the  splashing  of  the  sculptured 

waterfalls” contribute to the sensual overload of the scene. So too, does the 

idea of a man waiting in the garden; one who had written to Sharra “of what 

lips and hands might do” (ST 125). Utilising motifs of exoticism, romance and 

of  fairy  tale,  the  remove  of  other-worldliness  becomes  a  further  mediating 

factor in Diarmuid’s seduction. It invites the reader to approach this incident 

as  a  romance,  cloaking  the  manipulation  and  the  power  imbalance  that  a 

closer consideration of the incident might expose.  

Medievalism,  romanticism  and  exoticism  therefore  work  together  to  create 

something of a moderating remove between the reader and the action taking 

place within the story. In “Guilty Pleasures” (2008) Linda J. Lee argues that 

historical  settings  in  genre  romance  allow  readers  to  enjoy  fantasies  of 

forced  sexual  encounters  from  “a  safe  distance”,  able  to  distinguish  the 

eroticised  fantasy  from  real  life  brutalities  (55).  Still,  despite  the  spatial  and 

temporal remoteness associated with the story of Diarmuid and Sharra, there 

is  little  sense  of  emotional  distance.  Janice  A.  Radway  argues  that 

identification with the characters is fundamental to the attraction of romance 

fiction (113). Consequently, the notion of ‘distance’ is not straightforward.  

Moreover,  reader  expectations  for  genre  romance  of  the  popular,  highly 

formulaic  variety  that  Radway  and  Lee  discuss,  will  be  of a different  nature 

from  those  brought  to  reading  a  complex  fantasy  trilogy  of  almost  1200 

pages. There is also significant difference in the gender constitution of both 

authors  and  readers  of  each  genre.  While  readers  and  writers  of  genre 

Page | 323  

 
 
 
romance are predominantly female, there is, comparative to romance fiction, 

a much stronger male representation in the readership and authorship of the 

genre fantasy. These factors complicate the simple transference of concepts 

from  the  abovementioned  studies  on  romance  fiction  across  to  romantic 

episodes in fantasy fiction.  An awareness of the genre’s male readership, for 

example, frustrates the interpretation of fantasies of sexual coercion as mere 

escapist  pleasure  or  as  collective 

feminine 

fantasies  of 

“female 

empowerment” where “the heroine tames her arrogant, domineering, ruthless 

mate” (Lee 62).  

Generic  expectation,  too,  can  play  a  role  in  justifying  behaviours  that  tread 

upon  or  even  overstep  the  line  of  coercion,  manipulation  or  domination.  It 

provides  a  route  via  which  readers  can  dismiss,  or  reinterpret  as  romantic, 

events  that  might  in  a  different  literary  context  cause  alarm  or  at  least 

disquiet. There  is  an anticipation  that  the  text  will  bring  about  a  romantic  or 

fairy-tale conclusion to the relationship, whether it be one of tragedy or one 

of  happy  resolution.  The  fairy-tale  ending  works  to  provide  a  retrospective 

justification  for  transgressive  interaction  between  the  romance’s  hero  and 

heroine.  In  her  discussion  of  mass  produced  romances,  Loving  With  A 

Vengeance  (2008),  Tania  Modleski  argues  that  readers’  knowledge  of  the 

generic formula allows them to “understand the hero’s behaviour in terms of 

the  novel’s  ending”  (33).    She  asserts  that  this  enables  detachment  and 

identification to work together. 

Since the reader knows the formula she is superior in wisdom to the 

heroine  and  thus  detached  from  her.  The  reader  then  achieves  a 

very  close  emotional  identification  with  the  heroine  partly  because 

she  is  intellectually  distanced  from  her  and  does  not  have  to  suffer 

the heroine’s confusion. (Modleski 33)   

Page | 324  

 
 
Moreover,  the  tension  created  by  the  combination  of  romance  and 

transgression, rather than unsettling, can work to increase reader enjoyment. 

Rick  Altman,  in  “Film/Genre”  (1999)  asserts  that  pleasure  arises  from 

behaviour  that  exceeds  or  pushes  against  the  boundaries  of  social 

acceptability. Within  the  generic  economy,  Altman  states,  “generic  pleasure 

is  always  preferable  to  social  correctness”  (147).  He  also  suggests  that 

viewer  pleasure  increases  in  proportion  to  the  extent  of  the  transgression. 

This pleasure, however, is contingent upon a text’s ability to ultimately right 

the  wrongs  and  return  to  the  comfort  of  cultural  norms.  Transgressions,  he 

maintains: 

undermine the very foundations of the culture limiting our free range 

–  and  that  is  precisely  what  pleases  us.  It  is  only  through  this 

escalating denial of cultural values that we reach the highest levels of 

generic pleasure.  

Yet  genre  films  almost  never  end  at  their  greatest  distance  from 

cultural  norms, the  point  where  generic  pleasure  is  at  its  height.  On 

the  contrary,  genre-based  films  virtually  always  follow  a  long  period 

of  intensification  with  a  rapid  and  definitive  restoration  of  cultural 

values. (Altman 155) 

A viewer’s anticipation of recovery and reintegration into cultural expectation 

becomes integral to the enjoyment of transgressive behaviour. Paradoxically, 

transgression  is  used  to  confirm  consensus  morality,  as  the  story  is 

ultimately folded back into cultural conformity.  

Although  Altman  is  speaking  of  generic  expectation  within  film,  his 

observations  on  the  power  of  genre  can  be  transferred  to  the  reading  of 

fantasy  fiction.  In  The  Fionavar  Tapestry  romantic  pleasure  is  on  offer,  but 

Page | 325  

 
 
 
there is also titillation at the transgressive elements of Diarmuid’s conquest; 

in his audacious and artful taking of Sharra’s virginity. Pleasure is acceptable 

as  the  genre  fosters  the  expectation  that  there  will  be  a  “restoration  of 

cultural  values”  (Altman  155).  Indeed,  this  expectation  is  not  misplaced  in 

The  Fionavar  Tapestry,  as  ultimately  the  romance  returns  to  cultural 

conformity through an understanding of their mutual love, underscored by a 

formal  engagement.  There  remains,  however,  a  tension  between  the 

expectations  attached  to  generic  romance  and  those  that  arise  from  the 

story’s  medievalist  context  and  lineage.  Within  this  historical  context,  the 

interracial  aspect  of  Diarmuid  and  Sharra’s  romance  adds  to  the  sense  of 

transgression,  hinting  at  miscegenation.  In  the  same  way  as  the  pairing 

between Paul and Jaelle is symbolic of reconciliation between the God and 

the Goddess, this union suggests a marriage of East and West. However, as 

will  be  discussed  in  greater  detail  later  in  this  chapter,  Diarmuid’s  death 

decisively  shuts  down  the  possibility  of  such  a  union.    Thus  the  text  once 

again conforms to conservative cultural expectations. 

There is a clear escalation of the transgressive pleasure on offer throughout 

the encounter between Diarmuid and Sharra. At first there is just a hint that 

propriety  is  being  tested.  There  are  the  smuggled,  secret  letters,  initially 

containing  suggestions  of  desire,  but  becoming  increasingly  “bold  as  time 

went  by”  (Kay  ST  121).  Still,  this  remains  within  the  realms  of  words  and 

dreams.  Sharra’s  going  out  to  meet  Diarmuid,  however,  raises  the  level  of 

transgression  from  one  of  words  to  one  of  action.  Sharra’s  intention  in 

engaging  in  a  secret  tryst,  however,  is  not  similarly  transgressive.  She 

wishes to demonstrate grace and treat him with becoming courtesy, but she 

makes  it  clear  that  she  has  no  intention  of  allowing  his  sexual  advances. 

Page | 326  

 
 
Although Sharra’s behaviour in permitting the meeting breaches propriety, it 

does not fully strain the bounds of morality. 

A  further  escalation  of  the  risk  and  rupture  of  propriety  comes  with  the 

meeting.  Diarmuid’s  slightly  mocking  and  unconventional  behaviour 

intensifies  the  sense  of  danger  in  the  scene.  His  challenges  and  his 

backhanded  flattery  unsettle  Sharra,  as  this  behaviour  is  outside  her 

expectation. To this is added the physical aspect of the touch of his hand on 

her arm and the surreptitious movements where his fingers graze the edge of 

her breast. Although Sharra still feels she will be able to maintain control of 

the  situation,  there  is  a  subtle  shift  in  her  plans,  an  easing  of  her  aloof 

severity,  as  she  considers  graciously  granting  Diarmuid  a  goodbye  kiss  on 

the  cheek  (ST  128).  Although  only  a  slight  concession,  this  suggests  a 

capriciousness 

in  Sharra’s 

intentions, 

implying 

that  she 

lacks  an 

understanding of her own mind and wishes in relation to Diarmuid and, once 

more, intimating she is inherently willing. 

When  unsettled,  Sharra  finds  safety  in  convention  and  distant  politeness, 

giving Diarmuid the structured and familiar tour of the gardens she has given 

many  suitors.  Diarmuid’s  uncompromising  disparagement  of  Sharra’s 

formality,  however,  delegitimises  her  means  of  distancing  herself  from  his 

sexual pursuit. Her agency and sense of control are destabilised as he labels 

her  behaviour  a  pretence,  and  characterises  her  propriety  as  emptiness, 

accusing her of “speaking like someone scarcely a person”, merely playing at 

being a “gracious Princess” (ST 129). Diarmuid undermines Sharra’s options 

for  culturally  appropriate  behaviour,  intensifying  the  danger  of  her  position. 

He portrays her formality as immaturity, in one breath – “I expect to see and 

Page | 327  

 
 
 
hear the woman” – and in the next he implies that she is acting at odds with 

her  essential  self,  and  should  let  go  of  the  adult  façade:  “Who  was  the  girl 

who  climbed  the  trees  in  this  garden.  The  Princess  in  her  role  bores  me, 

hurts me. Demeans tonight” (ST 129).  

Diarmuid,  the  embodiment  of  masculinity  and  the  West,  claims  superior 

perception and assumes the power of definition. His characterisation places 

Sharra in an almost untenable situation. Her propriety is cast as pretence, as 

childishness  and  as  cruelty.  Diarmuid  claims  to  understand  the  real  Sharra 

better  than  she  does  herself.  Male  authority  is  naturalised  as  he  alone 

declares  the  night  theirs,  and  presumes  the  right  to  take  her,  his  arms 

suddenly  “around  her  waist  in  the  shadows  of  the  lyren,  and  his  mouth 

descending […]” (ST 129). 

Sharra  strongly  attempts  to  reassert  control  but  she  is already  situated  in a 

place  of  disadvantage.    Her  rejection  of  his  sexual  advances,  however, 

appears unequivocal – “‘No!’ She broke way violently, and almost fell”. When 

he  steps  toward  her  she  repeats  her  refusal.  “‘No!’  Her  hands  were  up  to 

ward  him”.  The  demands  of  form  and  appearance  are  shown  to  still  exert 

considerable  influence  on  Sharra,  as  she  holds  to  a  semblance  of  dignity, 

despite an instinct to flee. She clearly expresses her position.  

She shook her head. Some voice within was wildly telling her to run, 

but instead she spoke, as carefully as she could. 

‘You  must  not  think,  my  lord  Prince,  to  win  the  daughter  of 

Shalhassan, merely by coming here and –’ (Kay ST 130) 

Page | 328  

 
 
 
Her seemingly unambiguous refusal, however, is weakened by the narration 

that  constructs  her  as  liar,  as  acting  against  her  own  will.  “Her  heart  was  a 

mad, beating winged thing she had to control. Had to. She was Sharra” (ST 

130). Her bodily reaction is privileged above her mind and her reason as the 

narration  focuses  on  the  physical:  “breathing  was  difficult.  She  was 

conscious of her breasts, of the wind about her, the nearness of him, and the 

dark warmth at her centre” (ST 130).  

Again, Sharra is portrayed as desiring. Diarmuid is, therefore, proved to hold 

superior  knowledge.  Because  he  is  represented  as  understanding  Sharra’s 

wants better than she does herself, his coercive behaviour can be construed 

as  answering  her  needs.  This  works  to  justify  the  trickery  he  uses  to 

ultimately  claim  her.  Ironically,  Diarmuid  employs  an  impression  of  Sharra’s 

empowerment  and agency  to disempower  her;  he  argues  that Sharra  holds 

the power over his life or death, and this becomes a weapon of manipulation 

in his hands. He makes it very clear that if Sharra calls for help or exposes 

him in an attempt to escape his sexual advances, that she will be responsible 

for  his  death.  This  brings  a  twofold  increase  to  danger,  creating  a  tension 

between  sexual  risk  on  Sharra’s  side,  and  mortal  risk  on  Diarmuid’s. 

Diarmuid  emphasises  with  finesse  the  physical  danger  he  faces.  His  letter 

requesting the tryst makes good use of the emotive power attached to risk. It 

simultaneously  highlights  his  own  courage  and  prowess,  while  flattering 

Sharra and ostensibly placing her in a position of control.  

I  must  come.  Death  is  a  dark  I  seek  not  to  find,  but  if  I  must  walk 

within  its  provinces  to  touch  the  flower  of  your  body,  then  I  must. 

Promise only that should the soldiers of Cathal end my life it will be 

your hands that close my eyes, and perhaps it is – too much to ask, I 

know – your lips that touch my cold ones in farewell. 

Page | 329  

 
 
[…]  You  hold  my  life  as  a  small  thing  between  the  fingers  of  your 

hands. (Kay ST 122) 

When  it  appears  the  palace  guard  is  nearby,  Sharra  believes  that  if  she 

continues to argue with Diarmuid she will reveal his presence and their tryst. 

Diarmuid makes it abundantly clear that discovery under such circumstances 

would make her responsible for his death. His refusal to leave Sharra despite 

the risk, effectively attaches action to his words, appearing to prove both his 

sincerity and the extent of his love. 

‘If they find me they kill me,’ said Diarmuid. ‘If they can. Perhaps you 

will close my eyes, as I once asked.’ The expression changed then, 

the  voice  roughened.  ‘But  I  will  not  leave  you  willingly,  though  all  of 

Cathal come calling for my blood.’ 

And gods, gods, all the gods, his mouth on hers was so very sweet, 

the  touch  of  his  hands  so  blindingly  sure.  His  fingers  were  at  the 

fastenings  of  her  bodice,  and  dear  Goddess,  her  own  hands  were 

behind his head, pulling him down to her, her tongue sought his in a 

hunger  so  long  denied.  Her  breasts,  suddenly  released  strained 

toward his touch, and there was an ache in her, a burning, something 

wild being set free […] (Kay ST 131) 

Clearly,  despite  her  stated  rational  choice,  her  cool  propriety,  her  practised 

aloofness,  her 

repeated 

‘No!’,  and  her  denunciation  of  Diarmuid’s 

presumption, Sharra is proved a liar; she is shown not to understand her own 

needs.  She  becomes  a  titillating  mixture  of  the  naïve  child,  needing  to  be 

shown  her  true  self  by  a  man,  and  the  awakened  and  sexualised  woman, 

configured as unconsciously wonton.  

Page | 330  

 
 
 
This, as mentioned earlier, is not simply a matter of sexual politics. Although 

the  intimate  sphere  affects  to  be  outside  cultural  and  ethnic  politics,  this  is 

belied  by  these  lovers’  embodiment  of  East  and  West.  This  episode  is  not 

simply a metaphor for, to put it crudely, the West ‘screwing’ the East. It also 

works  as  a  covert  naturalisation  of  ethnic  hierarchies.  The  story  locates 

Sharra’s ‘true’ nature in her body, in her sexual response which overwhelms 

her  rational  mind.  Diarmuid,  by  contrast,  although  indulging  his  bodily 

desires, is engaged in a game of strategic manipulation and one-upmanship. 

His  ‘truth’  is  located  in  his  sharp,  clever  mind.  This  incident,  therefore, 

exemplifies the text’s feminising of the East and a masculinising of the West. 

Sharra’s  eventual  submission  is  inevitable,  innate  and,  as  revealed  by  her 

body’s  instinctive  response  to  Diarmuid,  inscribed  in  her  ‘true’  self.  The 

dichotomies  in  the  tale  are  reinforced;  Masculine  over  feminine;  West  over 

East.  Woman and the East are again aligned with the body, with instinct and 

emotion,  while  man  and  the  West  are  confirmed  as  rational  and  naturally 

dominant. The realm of sexual politics, therefore, participates in the ultimate 

essentialisation  of  the  novels’  ethnic  hierarchies,  further  strengthening  the 

novels’ tacit justifications of Western dominance.  

In  the  same  way  that  sexual  politics  can  participate  in  understandings  of 

ethnicity,  beliefs  about  ethnicity  can  reciprocally 

inform  a  reader’s 

interpretation  of  sexual  politics.  Martin  discusses  the  ease  with  which 

discursive constructions of Otherness naturalise portrayals of exotic women 

as  libidinous  and  willing.  He  observes  that  “a  presumption  of  desire  and  at 

least  the  promise  of  pleasure”  becomes  integral  to  eliding  coercion:  “Every 

verbal  "no"  is  therefore  only  a  tease,  a  rhetorical  ornament,  a  lure, 

concealing an implicit but overwhelming "yes" (62).  

Page | 331  

 
   
The discursive strength of such constructions are such that reader alignment 

and  admiration  remain  with  Diarmuid;  it  may  even  evoke  desire  in  female 

readership, despite the dénouement proving the garden encounter to be an 

exercise in bravado and homosocial point scoring. Moreover, this alignment 

survives the revelation that his life was not in any immediate danger, that the 

threat  of  being  discovered  by  guards  was  no  more  than  a  ruse  enacted  by 

Diarmuid’s  own  men  outside  the  garden  walls.  Diarmuid  rejoins  his  waiting 

men with a thumbs-up, a flamboyant leap and roll, his eyes flashing with an 

“intoxicated hilarity”: “‘Done!’ he said, […] “I have plucked the fairest rose in 

Shalhassen’s garden’” (ST 132).  

Moreover, Sharra’s distress, her anger and her humiliation upon learning of 

Diarmuid’s  deceit,  is  rendered  as  a  somewhat  overdramatic  wilfulness.  The 

punishment  she  metes  out  to  Cathal’s  Captain  of  the  Guards,  blaming  him 

for  his  failure  in  security,  is  not  constructed  as  an  indication  of  hurt  and 

mortification. It is portrayed as little more than an undisciplined tantrum, “rash 

and  precipitous”  (ST  192).  This  unsympathetic  characterisation  of  Sharra’s 

reaction is transferred to her attempt to kill Diarmuid, enabling the reader to 

interpret this incident as prideful petulance above hurt and humiliation, even 

though her actions are likely to cost her life. Rather than signalling Sharra’s 

suffering or highlighting the serious weight of Diarmuid’s mendacious taking 

of  her  virginity,  the  novel  uses  Sharra’s  attempt  on  Diarmuid’s  life  as  an 

opportunity  for  understated  humour.  It  becomes  a  tension  breaker  in  the 

scene  where  Diarmuid  and  Aileron  face  each  other  over  the  question  of 

accession to Brennin’s throne. The scene reinstates the bond of brotherhood 

as  Aileron  literally  throws  the  crown  at  Sharra,  destabilising  her  as  she 

Page | 332  

 
 
 
pitches her dagger in Diarmuid’s direction. The episode then becomes more 

about Diarmuid than Sharra, as his response demonstrates his magnanimity, 

cleverness and elegant charm. Even with Sharra’s dagger still in his arm he 

unperturbedly  moves  to  justify  Sharra’s  action  and  to  guard  her  reputation 

and life.  

‘We will treat this lady,’ Diarmuid was saying, ‘with all the dignity due 

to her. If I am not mistaken she comes as a vanguard of an embassy 

from  Shalhassan  of  Cathal.  We  are  honoured  that  he  sends  his 

daughter and heir to consult with us." […] 

‘I  stole  a  flower  from  Larai  Rigal  four  nights  ago  in  such  a  way  that 

the  Princess  would  know.  It  was  an  irresponsible  thing,  for  those 

gardens, as we all know, are sacred to them. It seems that Sharra of 

Cathal valued the honor of her country above her own life - for which 

we in turn must honor her.’ (Kay ST 370) 

So  instead  of  being  Sharra’s  despoiler,  Diarmuid  takes  on  the  role  of  her 

saviour  and  protector,  both  of  her  life  and  her  reputation.  Sharra  is  once 

more  in  the  subordinate  position  as  her  strong  assertion  of  agency, 

demonstrated in her attempt on his life, is undermined. Instead of being able 

to  enact  revenge,  Sharra  becomes  obliged  to  Diarmuid for  his  grace  in  this 

situation. This image also fits the model of a knight protecting the reputation 

of  his  lady,  nostalgically  appealing  to  chivalric  notions  of  romance.  The 

generic strength of such imagery appears to override the role Diarmuid has 

played  in  the  potential  loss  of  Sharra’s  reputation,  and  his  responsibility  for 

the circumstances that precipitated the actions that place her life at risk.  

Sharra and Diarmuid’s final understanding, however, plays the crucial role in 

reshaping  this  story  as  romantic  rather  than  abusive.  It  provides  the  “rapid 

Page | 333  

 
 
 
 
and  definitive  restoration  of  cultural  values”  that  Altman  sees  as  necessary 

for  pleasure  (155).  The  generic  reversal  that  restores  the  safe  order  takes 

place  at  the  Goddess’  temple  on  midsummer’s  eve,  during  the  erotically 

charged  festival  of  Maidaladan.  The  most  striking  difference  between  this 

tryst  and  the  encounter  in  the  gardens  of  Larai  Rigal  is  Diarmuid’s 

consideration of Sharra’s wishes.  

Unsurprised  by  Diarmuid’s  insouciant  proposition  implicit  in  the  one  word, 

“Later”,  Sharra  is, however,  taken  aback  by  the fact the proposition  was  an 

appeal, not a demand: “What didn’t fit, what had unnerved her so much, was 

that he had made it a question, a quiet request, and had looked for a reply 

from  her”  (WF  226).  This  repositions  Diarmuid’s  behaviour  within  a 

chivalrous,  courteous  model  of  behaviour  toward  women,  though  there 

remains a characteristic audacity in his stealing into her chambers disguised 

in  the  robes  and  hood  of  a  priestess.  This  time,  as  he  finds  himself  once 

more facing the blade of her drawn dagger, his flippant and sardonic manner 

is replaced by an appropriate reverence, demonstrated by his observation of 

the temple’s rites of propitiation.  

Eschewing the transgressive forwardness that marked his previous manners, 

Diarmuid  maintains  a  respectful  distance  from  Sharra  as  he  claims  that, 

despite  the  passion  of  Maidalaidan,  “I  did  not  come  to  bed  you”  (WF  229). 

There  is  a  raw  vulnerability  in  his  voice  as  he  addresses  her,  showing 

respect for both her rank and the expectations of formal courtship: 

‘Princess,  these  are  evil  times,  for  the  war  imposes  its  own 

constraints  and  this  war  may  mean  an  ending  to  all  that  we  have 

known.  Notwithstanding  this,  if  you  will  allow,  I  would  court  you  as 

Page | 334  

 
 
 
formally as ever a Princess of Cathal has been courted, and I will say 

to  your  father  tomorrow  what  I  say  to  you  tonight.’  […]  ‘Sharra,’  he 

said, ‘the sun rises in your eyes’. 

So  many  men  had  proposed  to  her  with  these,  the  formal  words  of 

love.  So  many  men,  but  none  had  ever  made  her  weep.  (Kay  WF 

229) 

The deceptive manipulation used to overwhelm Sharra’s refusal and take her 

virginity in the gardens is replaced by a respectful sincerity. He responds to 

her  silence  by  making  to  leave,  promising  he  will  not  speak  to  her  father 

without  her  permission.  His  earlier  coercion  is  overwritten  with  his  present 

deference, and there is no question of force as Sharra herself becomes the 

one to propose he stay with her that night, asking “Whom else should I ever 

love?” (WF 230). This scene rewards the readers for their faith in the generic 

formula; their trust in Diarmuid as a worthy romantic hero is proved sound.  

This romantic resolution increases the affective poignancy of the tragic death 

of Diarmuid. Fitting with Kay’s belief that within fantasy fiction there needs to 

be payment to balance victory, Kay sacrifices the figure that “readers appear 

to  find  the  most  charismatic  and  sympathetic  and  glamorous”  (Thompson 

online).  Diarmuid’s  heroism  and  worth  is  enhanced  as  he  takes  Arthur 

Pendragon’s place and death in single combat against Uathach, champion of 

the  dark  forces.  Grief  and  loss  is  intensified  as  the  love  story  between 

Diarmuid  and  Sharra  is  brought  to  the  forefront  with  the  narrative  role  of 

focaliser  for  the  battle  moving  between  Diarmuid  and  that  of  Sharra.  Their 

story ends in a demonstration of eternal love, transcending even death, as a 

weeping Sharra implores Diarmuid to “Wait for me by the Weaver’s side” (DR 

325).  

Page | 335  

 
 
 
A  different  reading  of  this  tragic  and  romantic  denouement,  however,  can 

arise from an historical perspective of intercultural relationships, and the (in a 

medieval  context,  transgressive)  suggestion  of  miscegenation.  Although 

Sharra  and  Diarmuid’s  relationship  holds  out  the  promise  of  racial  and 

cultural  unification,  it  stops  short  of  allowing  its  fulfilment.  Instead  it 

transforms this promise into an unrealised utopian ideal, not wholly rejected, 

but deferred to an abstract ethereal future in the after-world of the Weaver’s 

Halls.  This  follows  a  pattern  identifiable  in  other  medievalist  tales  that  flirt 

with  idea  of  miscegenation, 39 an  exemplar  of  which  is  Sir  Walter  Scott’s 

Ivanhoe. As Scott does with Wilfred of Ivanhoe and Rebecca, Kay courts the 

idea  of  intercultural  union,  but  ultimately  circumvents  its  realisation.  The 

Fionavar Tapestry is able to imagine the romance, but not the marriage.  

While  Sharra  and  Diarmuid’s  romance  appeals  to  the  idealism  of  ethnic 

unification,  Diarmuid’s  death  allows  the  story  to  evade  the  political  and 

cultural  complexities  attached  to  its  enactment. 40 Significantly,  Diarmuid’s 

death also marks a virtual absence of Sharra from the rest of the novel, with 

only a mention in the final chapter of how many proposals were made “after 

the  old  fashion”  in  tribute  to  “Diarmuid  dan  Ailell,  who  had  revived  the 

tradition  by  proposing  in  this  way  to  Sharra  of  Cathal”  (DR  400).  It  is  as 

though,  without  the  possibility  of  marriage,  the  novel’s  ending  has  no  place 

for  her.  In  Ivanhoe  the  abnegation  of  the  romance  between  Rebecca  and 

39 See,  for  example,  Michael  Ragussis’  discussion  of  miscegenation  in  Scott’s  Ivanhoe,  “Writing 
Nationalist  History:  England,  the  Conversion  of  the  Jews,  and  Ivanhoe”  (200-205)    and  Louise 
D’Arcens  examination of  the foreclosed  relationship  between  a  Half-Aboriginal  girl  and the  Anglo-
Saxon  protagonist  of  A  Sydney-Side  Saxon,  “Inverse  Invasions:  Medievalism  and  Colonialism  in 
Rolf Boldrewood’s A Sydney-Side Saxon” (173-179) 
40 Ragussis  (above),  for  example,  discusses  how  marriage  for  Rebecca  would  have  entailed  a 
renunciation of her religious and cultural identity. In the story of Nicolette and Aucassin, Nicolette is 
baptised into Christianity and eschews her Saracen origins. 

Page | 336  

 
 
 
                                                           
Wilfred of Ivanhoe enables a safer, more culturally sanctioned union between 

Wilfred  and  Rowena.  Similarly,  as  Diarmuid  takes  Arthur’s  predestined 

death, the sacrifice of Diarmuid and Sharra’s relationship allows for fulfilment 

in the relationship between Guinevere and Arthur, enabling the restoration of 

their  marriage  as  the  story  folds  transgression  back  into  cultural  and  moral 

conformity.  

Even  with  its  tragic  ending,  the  story  of  Diarmuid  and  Sharra  fulfils  the 

promises implicit in tropes such the meeting of a prince and princess, youth 

and  beauty,  romantic  and  exotic  settings,  and  formal,  evocative  narrative 

style. Romantic expectations are met in their discovery of mutual love, again 

confirming 

the  constancy  of 

the 

traditional 

fairy-tale  romance.  The 

assumptions  and  faith  of  the  reader  are  not  disappointed,  and  the  special 

licence  granted  for  Diarmuid’s  transgressive  behaviour  is  validated  by  the 

dénouement of the tale.  

Wrapped  as  it  is  in  exotic  and  romantic  imagery  and  situated  in  a  temporal 

space that evokes ‘pastness’, the vignette of Sharra’s seduction may at first 

seem  little  more  than  an  amorous  lark,  a  ‘boys’  own’  adventure,  with  an 

erotic edge to it. Indeed, the familiarity of the tropes Kay employs makes this 

an almost comfortable love story. There is the daring prince on a quest, the 

beautiful princess secluded in the walled castle, the exotic garden, and even 

the  touch  of  magic  in  the  use  of  mage’s  arrows  and  rope  to  breach  the 

seemingly  impenetrable  fortifications  of  Cathal.  This  is  promoted  to  high 

romance  with 

the  resolution, 

the  declaration  of  undying 

love, 

the 

engagement, and the tragic, untimely death that parts Sharra and Diarmuid. 

Page | 337  

 
 
 
These  things,  however,  elide  the  questionable  undertones  of  narcissism, 

misogyny, objectification, and Orientalism discernible within this incident.  

Allusion to archaic literatures such as Aucassin and Nicolette, Le Roman de 

la  Rose,  and  Song  of  Solomon  within  this  medievalist  tale  further  grant  a 

certain  historical  validation,  holding  out  a  template,  a  precedent,  to  offer 

moral  immunity  to  Kay’s  depiction  of  Sharra’s  seduction.  Despite  the  tragic 

ending,  just  as  in  the  stories  of  Paul  and  Jaelle,  Kimberly  and  Dave,  and 

Guinevere  and  Arthur,  a  ‘right’  ending  is  achieved  through  feminine 

recognition  of  and  submission 

to  masculine  worth.  Moreover,  Kay’s 

employment  of  strong,  gifted,  and  ostensibly  independent  women  is 

undermined  by 

the  undercurrent 

that  privileges 

traditional  gendered 

hierarchies. Even romantic, nostalgic constructions of the past, however, do 

not  necessarily  indicate  a  detachment  from  contemporary  concerns  and 

ideological  debates.  They  can  be  utilised  in  an  apologistic  fashion  to  justify 

and  reassert  the  current  continuation  of  hegemonic  masculine,  Western 

control.  

Page | 338  

 
 
 
 
Conclusion 

This thesis responds to popular and even scholarly conceptions that fantasy 

fiction  is  essentially  escapist,  often  reactionary,  and  removed  from  modern 

concerns.  Through  a  close  reading  of  Garth  Nix’s  The  Old  Kingdom 

Chronicles  and  Guy  Gavriel  Kay’s  The  Fionavar  Tapestry,  I  have  argued 

that, rather than being culturally disengaged, medievalist fantasy discursively 

intersects  with  contemporary  ideological  issues  of  cultural  significance.  My 

particular  focus  has  been  on  the  pressure  that  British  and,  more  broadly, 

Western  influence  continues  to  exert  on  fantasy  fiction  from  former  British 

settler  cultures.  I  explore  how  modern  British/Western  perspectives  are 

enacted in the novels’ representations of ethnicity, class and gender.  

I  have  situated  this  discussion  in  the  evolving  areas  of  fantasy  and 

medievalism studies. Historically, with the notable exception of Tolkien’s “On 

Fairy  Stories”,  fantasy  studies  were  largely  constrained  by  an  academic 

privileging  of  realist  fiction  and  by  a  focus  on  generic,  structural  elements 

above the aesthetic value and cultural implications of works of fantasy. The 

last  two  decades  of  the  twentieth  century  saw  a  discernible  movement 

toward  a  greater  inclusion  of fantasy  in  literary  scholarship.  This  movement 

included  defences  of  fantasy  such  as  that  by  Ann  Swinfen,  new  theoretical 

perspectives  such  as  those  offered  by  Brian  Attebery,  and  comprehensive 

reference  volumes  such  as  The  Encyclopedia  of  Fantasy  edited  by  John 

Page | 339  

 
 
 
 
 
Clute  and  John  Grant.  The  twenty-first  century  has  seen  a  continued 

increase in both the volume and the respectability of fantasy literature within 

scholarship, although there remains a residual suspicion of its popularity, its 

generic  nature  and  its  ahistoricism.  Similarly,  medievalism  studies  also 

reveal  anxieties  associated  with  popular  engagement  and  ahistoricism; 

postcolonial medievalisms perhaps even more so. These anxieties, however, 

combined  with  attachment  to  a  British  heritage,  reflect  cultural  and  national 

experiences in former British settler cultures such as Australia and Canada. 

They expose the tensions between the pull exerted by cultural heritage and 

contemporary aspirations for modern and distinct national identities. 

However,  the  things  that  cause  anxieties  –  that  is  ahistoricism,  the  unreal, 

and  popular  engagement  –  are  the  very  things  that  provide  medievalist 

fantasy  fiction  with  its  much  of  its  power.  Freed  from  the  constraints  of 

historical  authenticity  and  natural  possibility,  medievalist  and  fantastic 

imaginings  can  be  co-opted  for  many  purposes  and  attached  to  diverse 

ideological  perspectives.  Although  British  medievalism  might  seem  out  of 

place  in  modern  postcolonial  societies,  it  reaches  back  through  cultural 

lineage  to  access  the  affective  weight  of  ‘pastness’  and  heritage.  Although 

Australia  and  Canada  are  physically  separated 

from  Britain 

their 

medievalisms,  reflected  in  their  literature,  architecture,  ritual  and  popular 

culture, 

imbue 

these  nations  with  a  certain 

‘Britishness’. 

Indeed,  a 

medievalist ‘Northernness’ retains resonance, even in the ‘Great South Land’ 

of  Australia,  appealing  to  a  quality,  rather  than  a  geographical  North. 

However, despite The Old Kingdom Chronicles and The Fionavar Tapestry’s 

underlying  legacy  of  Britishness,  each  series  has  particular  nuances  that 

distinguish its Australian or Canadian roots and reflect its modern origins and 

Page | 340  

 
 
concerns.  Although  grounded 

in  a  cultural  attachment 

to  heritage, 

medievalist  fantasy’s  use  of  the  past  is  neither  essentially  conservative  nor 

inherently backward-looking (though even reactionary texts reveal something 

of contemporary debates and ideological contestations). Indeed, the flexibility 

of  medievalism  enables  the  past  to  be  appropriated  and  attached  to 

contemporary ideals. 

The  adaptable  utility  of  the  Middle  Ages  as  a  resource  to  buttress  various 

ideological  perspectives 

is  apparent 

in  Nix’s  and  Kay’s  dissimilar 

representations  of  progress.  Like  fantasists  such  as  Morris  and  Tolkien 

before  him,  Nix  demonstrates  a  cynicism  toward  industrialisation.  He  uses 

the contrast between a medieval Old Kingdom and a modern Ancelstierre to 

highlight  the  substance  and  value  of  the  past,  questioning  unfettered 

progress  and  a  naïve  faith  in  scientific  rationalism.  Kay,  contrastingly,  uses 

the contrast between the civilised Medievalism of Brennin and more primitive 

forms of pastness to privilege human ingenuity above belief systems bound 

by  nature  and  the  earth.  These  varied  depictions  may  represent  the 

individual ideological bents of the authors, but they might also be reflective of 

the  times  in  which  the  texts  were  produced.  Kay’s  The  Fionavar  Tapestry 

was  produced  in  the  early-to-mid-1980s,  when  concerns  surrounding  global 

warming  were  only  just  making  their  way  into  the  mainstream  media, 

whereas The Old Kingdom Chronicles was written in the late 1990s and early 

2000s  after  the  issue  of  human-caused  climate  change  had  damaged 

confidence in the benefits of scientific, industrial progress. 

Many elements of the novels are inflected by the context of their production. 

Both  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles  and  The  Fionavar  Tapestry  aspire  to 

Page | 341  

 
 
 
modern  liberal  ideals  of  equity  in  the  manner  in  which  they  include  and 

represent Other cultures in their texts, but these aspirations are only realised 

with  limited  success.  The  quintessential  Britishness  of  Nix’s  setting,  and 

particularly  the  medieval  temporality  of  the  Old  Kingdom,  allows  him  to 

sidestep  colonial  anxieties  relating  to  the  displacement  and  oppression  of 

Aboriginal populations. Moreover, as Kim Wilkins argues, the medievalism in 

genre  fantasy  makes  it  an  inapt  means  of  engagement  with  Australian 

Indigenous  issues  (Wilkins  CotH  140).  Conversely,  however,  appropriations 

of Indigenous motifs can entail ethically fraught complexities of their own, as 

non-Indigenous  writers  utilise  Native  images  and  themes  as  resources  for 

Western  literature.  Although  Kay’s  use  of  the  Dalrei  demonstrates  an 

attachment  to  Canadian  identity  and  a  recognition  of  the  importance  of  the 

Native  American  culture  in  Canada’s  national  narratives,  he  is  unable  to 

escape discourses that privilege the coloniser over the colonised. Moreover, 

the  physical  separateness  of  the  realms  of  Brennin  and  the  Plain  also 

obfuscates 

the  uncomfortable 

realities  of 

colonial  displacement, 

dispossession and oppression. 

The  Fionavar  Tapestry’s  inclusion  of  the  peoples  of  Cathal,  of  Eridu,  the 

Dwarves,  the  Paraiko  and  the  lios  alfar,  along  with  the  peoples  of  Brennin 

and  the  Dalrei,  reflects  the  significance  of  a  progressive  multiculturalism  to 

Canada’s  self-image.  Indeed,  the  fact  that  these  cultures  are  all  ultimately 

aligned with the Light shows a fundamentally positive and hopeful rendering 

of intercultural politics and relations. Western tropes of enlightened progress 

and  medievalist  notions  of  place  and  destiny,  however,  work  to  situate  a 

Western Brennin above the Other worldly cultures of Fionavar. At the same 

time,  Orientalist  representations  of  Cathal,  the  noble  savage  imagery 

Page | 342  

 
 
attached to the Dalrei, and the rudimentary, manual roots of the Dwarves all 

reinforce the rightness of an enlightened and civilised Brennin’s authority. 

Nix’s  engagement  with  Otherness  is  primarily  seen  in  his  depiction  of  the 

Southerling refugee crisis. His rendering of this crisis reflects political issues 

at the fore of Australian politics during the period in which Nix was writing the 

series;  that  is  Australia’s  own  refugee  crisis  and  the  rise  of  popularist, 

xenophobic politics. Despite clearly condemning populist politics that feed on 

cultural  anxieties  and  fears,  Nix’s  texts,  like  Kay’s,  do  not  escape 

conventional Western paradigms of power.  The medieval trope of destiny – 

particularly  when combined with representations of the protagonists’ natural 

aristocracy,  enlightened  appreciation  and  acceptance  of  Otherness,  and  an 

edge  of  protective  paternalism  –  works  to  uphold  a  Western  Anglo-Celtic 

centrality.  Both  Kay’s  and  Nix’s  series  demonstrate 

the  power  of 

uninterrogated assumptions of Western superiority and the difficulty attached 

to attempts to transcend entrenched paradigms of Western power.  

Although both The Old Kingdom Chronicles and The Fionavar Tapestry have 

medieval  monarchies  and  hierarchies,  the  manner  in  which  class  is 

represented demonstrates differing Australian and Canadian nuances. Nix’s 

novels  work  hard  to  negotiate  the  tensions  between  medieval  hierarchies 

and  egalitarian  national  ideals.  An  Australian  dislike  of  ‘tall  poppies’  and 

formality,  and  a  concomitant  suspicion  of  authority,  is  mediated  through 

elements  such  as  the  protagonists’  humility  and  their  reluctance  to  accept 

high  office,  by  informality  in  clothing  and manner,  and  through  representing 

them  as  ‘underdogs’  within  the  story.  The  privilege  of  class  is  further 

occluded by uniting the notions of destiny and the performance of sacrificial 

Page | 343  

 
 
 
service.  Indeed,  sacrificial  service,  although  reflective  of  enduring  and 

longstanding Western ideals, has been appropriated in national discourse as 

a  particularly  Australian  trait.  The  conflation  of  authority  with  sacrifice, 

therefore, admits the Old Kingdom’s aristocracy into paradigms of Australian 

values.  

Whereas  in  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles  destiny  is  used  to  excuse  the 

distinction of high class, in The Fionavar Tapestry it us used to uphold it. In 

keeping  with  Canadian  national  aspirations,  in  Fionavar  there  is  an 

aristocracy of the civil and deserving. The association of the High Kingdom of 

Brennin  and  its  rulers  –  the  kings  and  mages  –  with  enlightened 

progressiveness  justifies  an  ordered  and  civil  governance  for  the  common 

good.  As  an  intelligent,  resourceful,  methodical  and  determined  man,  King 

Aileron  suffers  no  insecurity  or  compunction  in  claiming  the  throne  of 

Brennin. His authority is further naturalised by the way in which he embodies 

the Canadian ideal of White, masculine, civil Britishness. This also validates 

Aileron’s  headship  over  the  Alliance  of  the  Light.  His  civilised  Westernness 

vindicates  his  authority  over  the  exoticism  and  decadence  of  Cathal,  the 

primitiveness of the Dalrei, and the unrefined roughness of the Dwarves.  

There  is  also  a  difference  in  how  gender  roles  are  approached  by  Nix  and 

Kay. Both series demonstrate deference to modern Western ideals of gender 

equity  in  that  they  not  only  have  strong  male  protagonists,  but  also  strong 

and  central  female  protagonists.  In  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles,  however, 

Nix  utilises  medievalism  to  provide  a  retrospective  authority  for  an  active 

female  agency,  whereas  Kay’s  representation  of  women  in  The  Fionavar 

Tapestry  is  constrained  by  his  medieval  frame.  Nix  naturalises  female 

Page | 344  

 
 
 
participation  in  a  range  of  disciplines  and  activities  traditionally  tied  to 

masculinity.  Moreover,  he  does  so  without  making  this  feel  exceptional  or 

anomalous  within  the  realm  of  the  Old  Kingdom.  The  idea  of  a  female 

Abhorsen,  regent,  soldier,  mage  or  Wallmaker  passes  without  particular 

comment.  In  modern  Ancelstierre,  however,  traditional  gender  paradigms 

appear  to  be  in  place.  Nix’s  alignment  of  gender  equity  with  his  privileged 

medieval,  rather  than  his  degraded  modern,  situates  an  authority  for 

contemporary  active  female  agency  in  the  past.  It  provides  it  with  a  history 

and pedigree from a time and place depicted as more ‘real’ and substantial 

than today. Nix thus offers a broad and positive image of female participation 

in the public sphere. 

Likewise, Nix’s portrayal of his heroes also demonstrates a shift in paradigms 

of what constitutes masculine behaviour. Both Touchstone and Sam take on 

supporting  roles  to  female  protagonists,  but  without  the  sacrifice  of  their 

masculinity. Indeed, both men prove necessary to the safety of the kingdom 

and  to  victory  in  their  battles  against  evil.  Nix  does  not  so  much  invert  the 

active/passive  dichotomy  often  attached  to  male  and  female  roles,  as 

complicate it. Indeed, the novels aspire to a balance in relationships between 

male and female protagonists, whether romantic or platonic. Prince Sameth’s 

role as Wallmaker, reflecting as it does the image of the contemporary geek 

or  nerd,  also  reflects  and  reinforces  the  broadening  category  of  acceptable 

and valued attributes of masculinity.  

Contrastingly,  Kay’s  stated  aversion  to  ahistoricism  and  his  quest  for 

‘plausible’  roles  for  his  heroines  within  his  medieval  timeframe  sees  his 

strong  women 

limited  by  conservative  expectation  and  archetypal 

Page | 345  

 
 
 
representation.  Moreover, 

the  romantic  subplots  within  The  Fionavar 

Tapestry  also  bind  women  to  traditional  paradigms  that  privilege  the 

masculine  over  the  feminine.  Indeed,  power  and  feminine  fulfilment  are 

implicitly  shown  to  be  incompatible,  as  the  happiness  and  ‘rightness’  at  the 

end of the story is dependent on women’s wifely submission.  

The marriages  at  the series’  ending  echo  the  privileging  of  Brennin  through 

its association with an enlightened, progressive, Western masculinity. This is 

seen most clearly in the romances between Prince Diarmuid and Sharra, and 

Paul  and  Jaelle.  Although  Paul  and  Jaelle’s  union  seems  to  reflect  modern 

liberal  aspirations  in  its  representation  of  a  marriage  between  the  God  and 

the  Goddess,  the  fact  that  this  is  only  achieved  at  the  sacrifice  of  Jaelle’s 

power undermines the symbolism of gender equity. Moreover, her marriage 

sees  Jaelle  removed  as  a  frustration,  as  an  irritant  whose  practice  and 

persistence  has  previously  inhibited  complete  domination  by  male  authority 

in  Brennin.  The  relationship  between  Diarmuid  and  Sharra  mirrors  the 

masculinity of Brennin and the West and the feminisation of Cathal and the 

East.  Kay,  however,  obscures  problematic  and  exploitative  subtexts  by 

presenting the story as romance. Like the marriage between Paul and Jaelle, 

the engagement between Diarmuid and Sharra demonstrates modern liberal 

thought as  it  holds  out  the promise  of a  union  between East and West,  but 

this is cut short by Diarmuid’s untimely death.  

Kay’s  representations  of  gender  might  ultimately  fold  back  into  conformity 

with  entrenched  paradigms  of  Western  masculine  power,  but  as  Nix’s 

representation of gender demonstrates, fantasy need not be constrained by 

its medievalism. Indeed, the malleability of medievalist representation is even 

Page | 346  

 
 
 
seen  in  Kay’s  ahistorical  portrayal  of  indiscriminately  sexually  available 

women. 

Imaginings  of 

the  Middle  Ages  can  be  utilised 

to  contest 

conservative  power  structures  and  patterns  as  well  as  to  uphold  them. 

Moreover, conservatism should not be equated with cultural detachment, as 

this  often  reflects  tensions,  fears  and  anxieties  present  within  a  dynamic 

contemporary  culture.  In  this  way  medievalist  fantasy  fiction  is  no  different 

from realist fiction as it engages discursively with contested issues of cultural 

significance.  It  can  challenge,  subvert  or  reinforce  hegemonic  power 

structures; it might even seek to challenge or uphold these things but fail to 

do  so,  or  it  might  simply  passively  reflect  certain  elements  of  the 

contemporary zeitgeist.  

My  discussion  of  The  Old  Kingdom  Chronicles  and  The  Fionavar  Tapestry 

has  presented  just  some  examples  of  the  discursive  flexibility  and  cultural 

power offered by fantastic medieval imaginings. I have argued that, although 

medievalist fantasy fiction might initially seem misfitted in postcolonial states 

that  are  both  spatially  and  temporally  removed  from  Britain  and  the  Middle 

Ages,  it  is  very  much  a  product  of  the  place  and  time  of  its  production.  To 

return  to  where  I  began  my  argument,  the  very  popularity  of  fantasy  fiction 

attests  to  the  continued  resonance  of  medievalist  constructions  in  former 

British settler cultures. Indeed, I would argue that broad claims which seek to 

relegate an entire genre to the province of nostalgic, reactionary or culturally 

detached  literature  are  naïve  or  perhaps  even  wilfully  ignorant.  Scholarship 

would  be  considerably  impoverished  if  it  allowed  anxieties  over  ahistorical, 

non-realist,  popular  and  medievalist  representations  to  impede  a  wider 

consideration  of  the  social,  cultural  and  political  implications  within  the 

diverse and flexible genre of fantasy fiction.  

Page | 347  

 
 
Works Cited 

“About  Australia:  People,  culture  and  lifestyle”.  About  Australia  fact  sheet 

Series.  April  2008.  Australian  Government:  Department  of 

Foreign Affairs and Trade. 24 January 2012. 

<http://www.dfat.gov.au/facts/people_culture.pdf>   

Aldred,  Lisa.  “Plastic  Shamans  and  Astroturf  Sun  Dances:  New  Age 

Commercialization  of  Native  American  Spirituality.”  The 

American Indian Quarterly 24.3 (2000): 329-352. 

Alexander, Michael. Medievalism: The Middle Ages in Modern England. New 

Haven, London: Yale University Press, 2007. 

Altman, Rick. Film/Genre. London: British Film Institute, 1999. 

Althusser,  Louis.  “Ideology  and  the  Ideological  State  Apparatus.”  Literary 

Theory:  An  Anthology.  Ed.  Julie  Rivkin  and  Michael  Ryan. 

Malden, Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 1988: 294-304. 

Anderson,  Benedict.  Imagined  Communities:  Reflections  on  the  Origin  and 

Spread of Nationalism. London, New York: Verso, 1991. 

Apter, T. E. Fantasy Literature: An Approach to Reality. London: Macmillan, 

1982. 

Aronstein,  Susan  Lynn.  Hollywood  Knights:  Arthurian  Cinema  and  the 

Politics of Nostalgia. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005. 

Page | 348  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ashkanasy,  Neal  M.  "The  Australian  Enigma."  Culture  and  Leadership 

Across the World: The GLOBE Book of In-depth Studies of 25 

Societies (2007): 299-333. 

Ashley,  Mike.  “Fisher  King.”  The  Encyclopedia  of  Fantasy.  Ed.  John  Clute, 

John Grant. London: Orbit, 1997: 353-354. 

---  “Dwarfs.”  The  Encyclopedia  of  Fantasy.  Ed.  John  Clute, 

John Grant. London: Orbit, 1997:  304-305. 

---  “Folktale.”  The  Encyclopedia  of  Fantasy.  Ed.  John  Clute, 

John Grant. London: Orbit, 1997: 359-360 

--- “Grail.”  The  Encyclopedia  of  Fantasy. Ed.  John  Clute,  John 

Grant. London: Orbit, 1997: 427-428. 

Attebery,  Brian.  Strategies  of  Fantasy.  Bloomington,  Indianapolis:  Indiana 

University Press,1992. 

---  “Romance.”  The  Encyclopedia  of  Fantasy.  Ed.  John  Clute, 

John Grant. London: Orbit, 1997: 820-821. 

Auden,  Sandy.  “A  Question  of  Character:  Interview  with  Guy  Gavriel  Kay.” 

2002.  Bright Weavings: The Worlds of Guy Gavriel Kay – The 

Authorized Website. 1 July 2008. 

<http://www.brightweavings.com/ggkswords/sfchannel.htm> 

Bailey, Peter. “Conspiracies of Meaning: Music-Hall and the Knowingness of 

Popular Culture.” Past & Present 144 (1994): Oxford University 

Press: 138-170.  

Ball, Martin.  “The Pleating of History: Weaving the Threads of Nationhood.” 

Cultural Studies Review 11.1 (2005): 158-173. 

Page | 349  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Beare, Rhona. “A Mythology for England.” The Silmarillion – Thirty Years On. 

Ed.  Allan  Turner.  Cormarë  Series  No.15.  La  Vergne:  Walking 

Tree Publishers, 2007: 1-31.  

Betts,  Katharine.  “Boatpeople  and  the  2001  Election.”  People  and  Place, 

10.3, (2002): 36-54. 

Borroff,  Marie.  Sir  Gawain  and  the  Green  Knight,  Patience  and  Pearl.  New 

York, London: W.W. Norton & Company, 2001. 

Boym, Svetlana. The Future of Nostalgia. New York: Basic Books, 2001. 

Birmingham,  John,  with  Elicia  Murray.  “Hit  and  Myth.”  The  Sydney  Morning 

Herald.  30 July 2011: Spectrum, 6. 

Brown,  Catherine.  “In  the  Middle.”  Journal  of  Medieval  and  Early  Modern 

Studies 30.3 (2000): 547-574. 

Brusso, Charlene. “Interview with Guy Gavriel Kay.” 1999. Bright Weavings: 

The Worlds  of  Guy  Gavriel  Kay –  The  Authorized  Website,  30 

June 2008 

<http://www.brightweavings.com/index.htm>. 

Burns, Marjorie. Perilous Realms: Celtic and Norse in Tolkien’s Middle-earth. 

Toronto, Buffalo, London: University of Toronto Press, 2005. 

Burrow, J.A. “The Alterity of Medieval Literature.” New Literary History, 10.2 

(1979): 385-390. 

Byatt, A.S. "What Grown-Ups Read." New York Times. Jul 12 2003 

Page | 350  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Campbell,  Raewyn.  “Penny  and  the  Politics  of  Plausibility”,  The  Big  Bang 

Theory and Gender Politics. Forthcoming publication. 

“Category:  Fantasy  writers  by  nationality.”  31  March  2011.  Wikipedia.  15 

April 2011. 

<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Fantasy_writers_by_nati

onality>. 

Chance,  Jane.  “Introduction,  A  Mythology  for  England.”  Tolkien  and  the 

Invention  of  Myth,  Ed.  Jane  Chance.  Lexington:  University 

Press of Kentucky, 2004. 

Chaucer,  Geoffrey.  The  Riverside  Chaucer.  Third  Edition.  Ed.  Larry  D. 

Benson, F.N Robinson. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988. 

Clute,  John.  “Fantasy.” The  Encyclopedia of  Fantasy. Ed.  John  Clute,  John 

Grant. London: Orbit, 1997: 337-339 

---“High  Fantasy.”  The  Encyclopedia  of  Fantasy.  Ed.  John 

Clute, John Grant. London: Orbit, 1997: 466 

---  “Heroic  Fantasy.”  The  Encyclopedia  of  Fantasy.  Ed.  John 

Clute, John Grant. London: Orbit, 1997: 464 

Clute,  John,  David  Lanford  &  Roz  Kaveney  “Sword  and  Sorcery.”  The 

Encyclopedia of Fantasy. Ed. John Clute, John Grant. London: 

Orbit, 1997: 915-916 

Clyne,  Michael.  “The  use  of  exclusionary  language  to  manipulate  opinion: 

John Howard, asylum seekers and the reemergence of political 

incorrectness  in  Australia.”  Journal  of  Language  &  Politics  4.2 

(2005): 173-196.  

Page | 351  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Coleman,  Daniel.  White  Civility:  The  literary  project  of  English  Canada. 

Toronto, Buffalo, London: University of Toronto Press, 2006. 

Connell, R.W. Masculinities. Crowsnest: Allen &Unwin, 2005. 

Craik,  Jennifer.  “Is  Australian  fashion  and  dress  distinctively  Australian?” 

Fashion  Theory  The  Journal  of  Dress,  Body  &  Culture  13.4 

(Dec. 2009): 409-442. 

“Cronulla Riots (The) – The Sequence of Events” Reporting Diversity Project. 

31 October 2012. 

<http://www.reportingdiversity.org.au/cs_four.html>  

D’Arcens,  Louise.  “Deconstruction  and  the  Medieval  Indefinite  Article:  The 

Undecidable Medievalism of Brian Helgeland’s A Knights Tale.” 

Parergon 25.2 (2008): 89-98. 

---  “’The  Past  is  a  Foreign  Country’:  The  Australian  Middle 

Ages.” Revista de Poetica Medieval, 21 (2008): 319-356. 

--- Old  Songs  in  the  Timeless  Land:  Medievalism  in  Australian 

Literature  1840–1910,

Turnhout,  Belgium:  Brepols  Publishers, 

2011. 

---  “Inverse  Invasions:  Medievalism  and  Colonialism  in  Rolf 

Boldrewood’s  A  Sydney-Side  Saxon.”  Parergon,  22.2  (2005): 

159-182 

---  ““Most  Gentle  Indeed,  But  Most  Virile”  the  medievalist 

Pacifism  of  George  Arnold  Wood.”  Medievalism 

in  a 

Postcolonial  Word.  Ed.  Kathleen  Davis,Nadia  Altschul. 

Baltimore, Maryland: John Hopkins University Press, 2009: 80-

108. 

Page | 352  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Davis  Kathleen  and  Nadia  Altschul.  “The  idea  of  ‘the  Middle  Ages’  Outside 

Europe.”  Medievalism  in  a  Postcolonial Word:  The  idea  of  ‘the 

Middle  Ages’  Outside  Europe.  Medievalism  in  a  Postcolonial 

Word. Ed. Kathleen Davis,Nadia Altschul. Baltimore, Maryland: 

John Hopkins University Press, 2009: 1-24. 

De Lorris, Guillaume and Jean de Meun. The Romance of the Rose. Trans. 

Frances Horgan. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994 

Dixon-Kennedy,  Mike.  A  Companion  to  Authurian  and  Celtic  Myths  and 

Legends. Stroud: Sutton Publishing, 2006. 

Drout,  Michael  D.C.  “The  Problem  of  Transformation:  The  Use  of  Medieval 

Sources in Fantasy Literature.” Literature Compass 1.1 (2004): 

1-24 

Dundes,  Alan.  “Introduction  to  the  Second  Edition.”  Morphology  of  the 

Folktale.  Ed.  Louis  A.  Wagner.  Trans.  Laurence  Scott.  Austin 

Texas:  University  of  Texas  Press  for  the  American  Folklore 

Society  and  the  Indiana  University  Research  Center  for  the 

Language Sciences, 1968: xi-xvi 

Dyer, Richard. White. London, New York: Routledge, 1997. 

Eco,  Umberto.  “Dreaming  of  the  Middle  Ages.”  Travels  in  Hyper-Reality. 

London: Pan Books Ltd, 1987. 

---  “The  Return  to  the  Middle  Ages.”  Travels  in  Hyper-Reality. 

London: Pan Books Ltd, 1987.  

Evans, Christine. ““Asylum Seekers and "Border Panic" in Australia.” Peace 

Review: A Journal of Social Justice, 15:2 (2003): 163-170. 

Page | 353  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“First Tuesday Book Club: Jennifer Byrne Presents – Fantasy.” 12 July 2011. 

Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 9 August 2011. 

<http://www.abc.net.au/tv/firsttuesday/s3267666.htm>. 

Fiske,  John.  “Culture,  Ideology  and  Interpellation.”  Literary  Theory:  An 

Anthology. Ed. Julie Rivkin and Michael Ryan. Malden, Oxford: 

Blackwell Publishing, 1988: 305-311. 

Flieger,  Verlyn.  “A  Mythology 

for  Finland:  Tolkien  and  Lönnrot  as 

Mythmakers.”  Tolkien  and  the  Invention  of  Myth.  Ed.  Jane 

Chance.  Lexington:  University  Press  of  Kentucky,  2004:  277-

284  

Francis, Daniel.  The Imaginary Indian: The Image of the Indian in Canadian 

Culture. Vancouver: Arsenal Pulp Press, 1992. 

Frazer,  James  George,  Sir.  The  Golden  Bough:  A  study  in  Magic  and 

Religion, London:  Macmillan, 1976. 

Frye,  Northrop.  Anatomy  of  Criticism:  Four  Essays,  Princeton:    Princeton 

University Press, 1971. 

“Garth Nix-Award Bibliography.” The Internet Speculative Fiction Database. 2 

January 2013. <http://www.isfdb.org/cgi-bin/eaw.cgi?2237>. 

George,  Rosemary  Marangoly.  The  Politics  of  Home:  Postcolonial 

Relocations  and  Twentieth-Century  Fiction.  Cambridge,  New 

York, Melbourne: Cambridge University Press, 1996. 

Gibbings, Beth. “Remembering the SIEV X: Who Cares for the Bodies of the 

Stateless, Lost at Sea?.” The Public Historian 32.1 (2010): 13-

30. 

Page | 354  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gibert, Sandra and Susan Gubar. The Madwoman in the Attic: The Woman 

Writer  and  the  Nineteenth-Century  Literary  Imagination.  New 

Haven: Yale University Press, 1979. 

Gillman, Sarah. “Heroes, Mates and Family: How Tragedy Teaches Us 

About Being Australian.” Cultural Studies Review 16. 1 (2010): 
240-250.  

Gombrich, E. H. The Story of Art. London, NewYork: Phaidon Press Limited, 

2007. 

Goot, Murray, and Tim Sowerbutts, “Dog Whistles and Death Penalties: The 

Ideological  Structuring  of  Australian  Attitudes 

to  Asylum 

Seekers.” 

Australasian 

Political 

Studies 

Association 

Conference,  29  September  -  1  October,  2004,  Adelaide,  SA. 

University of Adelaide. (2004) 

Grant, John. “Genre Fantasy.” The Encyclopedia of Fantasy. Ed. John Clute, 

John Grant. London: Orbit, 1997: 396 

Guerin  v.  The  Queen,  1984  CanLII  25  (SCC),  [1984]  2  SCR  335,  21  May 

2012. <http://canlii.ca/t/1lpfn>. 

Guest,  Lady  Charlotte  (Trans)  The  Mabinogion.  London:  J.M.  Dent  &  Co, 

London, E.P Dutton & Co New York, 1906.  

--“Branwen  Daughter  of  the  Llyr”.  The  Mabinogion.  London: 

J.M. Dent & Co, London, E.P Dutton & Co New York, 1906: 33-

48. 

Gunn, James. “The Other Side of the Mirror: Tigana.” 1998. Bright Weavings: 

The  Worlds  of  Guy  Gavriel  Kay  –  The  Authorized  Website.  8 

July 2009. 

Page | 355  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<http://www.brightweavings.com/scholarship/eastonpress.htm>. 

“Guy  Gavriel  Kay  -  Award  Bibliography.”  The  Internet  Speculative  Fiction 

Database. 2 January 2013.  

<http://www.isfdb.org/cgi-bin/eaw.cgi?415>. 

Hage, Ghassan. "Anglo-Celtics today: Cosmo-multiculturalism and the phase 

of the fading phallus." Communal/Plural 4 (1994): 41-77. 

-- White Nation: Fantasies of White supremacy in a multicultural 

society.  New  York:  Routledge,  in  Association  with  Pluto  Press 

Australia, Annandale, 2000 . 

Haley  Guy.  “Interview  with  SFX  (UK  magazine)  SFX  #93”.  July  2002. 

Reproduced  in  Bright  Weavings:  The  Worlds  of  Guy  Gavriel 

Kay – The Authorized Website. 19 August 2010. 

<http://www.brightweavings.com/ggkswords/sfx.htm>. 

Hanson,  Pauline.  Commonwealth  of  Australia,  Parliamentary  Debates, 

House  of  Representatives,  Official  Hansard,  Tuesday,  10 

September 1996: 3859. 

Haydock,  Nikolas.  “The  Unseen  Cross  Upon  the  Breast:  Medievalism 

Orientalism  and  Discontent.”  Hollywood  in  the  Holy  Land.  Ed. 

Nickolas  Haydock,  &  E.L  Risden.  London:  McFarland  & 

Company, Jefferson, 2009: 1-29 

“History,  Centre  for  Medieval  Studies.”  University  of  Toronto.  18  January, 

2013. <http://medieval.utoronto.ca/about/history/>. 

hooks, bell. “Eating the Other: Desire and Resistance.” Feminist Approaches 

to  Theory  and  Methodology.  Ed.  Sharlene  Hesse-Biber, 

Page | 356  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Christine  Gilmartin,  Robin  Lydenberg.  Oxford,  New  York: 

Oxford University Press, 1999: 179-194 

Horne,  Donald.  The  Lucky  Country  Revisited.  Knoxville:  J.M.  Dent  Pty  Ltd, 

1987. 

Huber,  Emily  Rebekah.  “Mordred.”  The  Camelot  Project.  2012.    The 

University of Rochester. 20 September, 2012. 

<http://www.lib.rochester.edu/camelot/mordmenu.htm>. 

Hughes, Juliette. “Meeting Mr Pratchett.”The Age, Section A2 – Books, 17 

February 2007: 23 

Hume  Katherine,  “Critical  approaches  to  Fantasy.”  Fantasy  and  Mimesis: 

Responses to Reality in Western Literature. London, New York: 

Methuen & co. 1984. 

Hunt, Peter.  “Introduction Fantasy and Alternate Worlds,” Alternative worlds 

in Fantasy Fiction. London, NewYork: Continuum, 2001: 1-41 

Ingstad,  Helge  and  Anne  Stine  Ingstad.  The  Viking  Discovery  of  America: 

The Excavation of a Norse Settlement in L'Anse Aux Meadows, 

Newfoundland, Ontario: Breakwater Books, 2000. 

Jackson, Aaron Isaac. “Authoring the Century: J.R.R Tolkien, The Great War 

and  Modernism”,  English  59:224  Oxford  Journals,  (2010):44-

69. 

Jackson,  Rosemary.    Fantasy:  the  Literature  of  Subversion.  London: 

Routledge, 1988. 

Page | 357  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JanMohamed, Abdul R. "The Economy of Manichean Allegory: The Function 

of  Racial  Difference  in  Colonialist  Literature."  Critical  Inquiry 

(1985): 59-87.  

Jameson, Fredric. Postmodernism, or The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism, 

Durham: Duke University Press, 1995:16-25. 

Janke, Terri and Robyne Quiggin. Background Paper on Indigenous cultural 

and  Intellectual  Property  and  Customary  Law,  Law  reform 

Commission of Western Australia, March 2005 

Jauss,  Hans  Robert.  "The  Alterity  and  Modernity  of  Medieval  Literature." 

Trans.Timothy Bahti. New Literary History (1979): 181-229. 

Jones,  Gwyn  and  Thomas  Jones  (Trans.).  “Gereint  Son  of  Erbin”  The 

Mabinogion. London, New York: Dent & Sons, 1970: 229-273 

--  “Culhwch  and  Olwen”  The  Mabinogion.    London,  New  York: 

Dent & Sons, 1970: 95-136 

Jorgensen, J.   “Innocent  Initiations:  Female  Agency  in  Eroticized  Fairy 

Tales.” Marvels & Tales. 22.1 (2008): 27-37. 

Kapferer,  Bruce  and  Barry  Morris,  “The  Australian  Society  of  the  State: 

Egalitarian  Ideologies  and  New  Directions  in  Exclusionary 

Practice.” Social Analysis 47.3 (2003): 80-107 

Kay,  Guy  Gavriel.  “Bibliographies.”  2002.  Bright  Weavings:  The  Worlds  of 

Guy  Gavriel  Kay  –  The  Authorized  Website,  15  September 

2012, 

<http://www.brightweavings.com/bibliographies/index.htm>. 

Page | 358  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--- The Summer Tree. London: HarperCollins, 2006. 

--- The Wandering Fire, London: HarperCollins, 2006. 

--- The Darkest Road, London: HarperCollins, 2006. 

Kendall, Lori. Hanging Out in the Virtual Pub: Masculinities and Relationships 

Online, Berkeley, Los Angeles, London: University of California 

Press, 2002 

 ---  “Nerd  Nation:  Images  of  Nerds  in  US  Popular  Culture.” 

International Journal of Cultural Studies 2.2 (1999): 260-283. 

Kincaid,  Paul  “Kay,  Guy  Gavriel,”  The  Encyclopedia  of  Fantasy.  Ed.  John  

Clute, John Grant. London: Orbit, 1997: 530-531. 

Kirby,  Michael,  Hon.  “The  Australian  Republican  Referendum  1999  -  Ten 

Lessons.”  Address  to  the  Faculty  of  Law,  University  of 

Buckingham UK. 3 March 2000. Law and Justice Foundation. 8 

February 2012 

<http://www.lawfoundation.net.au/ljf/app/&id=DF4206863AE3C

52DCA2571A30082B3D5>. 

Kline  A.  S.  (Trans).  “Aucassin and Nicolette.” 2001. Poetry in Translation. 13 

August 2012. 

<http://www.poetryintranslation.com/PITBR/French/Aucassinan

dNicolette.htm> 

Kuryluk,  Ewa.    Salome  and  Judas  in  the  Cave  of  Sex:  The  Grotesque—

Origins,  Iconography,  Techniques.  Evanston:  Northwestern 

University Press, 1987. 

Page | 359  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kymlicka,  Will.  Liberalism,  Community  and  Culture.  Oxford,  New  York, 

Toronto: Clarendon Paperbacks, 1991.  

Lackoff,  George,  and  Mark  Johnson.  Metaphors  We  live  By.  Chicago: 

University of Chicago Press, 1980. 

Lazo,  Andrew,  “Gathered  round  Northern  Fires:  The  Imaginative  Impact  of 

the  Kolítar.”  Tolkien  and  the  Invention  of  Myth.  Ed.  Jane 

Chance.  Lexington:  University  Press  of  Kentucky,  2004:191-

226 

Lee,  Linda  J.  “Guilty  Pleasures:  Reading  Romance  Novels  as  Reworked 

Fairy Tales” Marvels & Tales. 22.1 (2008): 52-66.  

Lewis CS, The Allegory of Love: A study In Medieval Tradition. New York: A 

Galaxy Book, Oxford University Press, 1958. 

---  The  Abolition  of  Man.  Glasgow:  Collins  Fount  Paperbacks, 

1978 

---  The  Great  Divorce.  Glasgow:  Collins  Fount  Paperbacks, 

1980 

--- The Last Battle. Glasgow: Fontana Lions, 1981   

--- Surprised by Joy. Glasgow: Collins Fount Paperbacks, 1982. 

Lyall,  Sarah  “Wizard  vs.  Dragon:  A  Close  Contest,  but  the  Fire-Breather 

Wins.”  The  New  York  Times,  Arts  &  Ideas/Cultural  Desk, 

Section B, 29 January 2000: 9 

Page | 360  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Macintyre,  Stuart.  :Forward.”  Creating  Australia.  Ed.  Wayne  Hudson  and 

Geoffrey Bolton. ST Leonards: Allen and Unwin, 1997: ix-xiii. 

Madsen,  Deborah.  “’The  Exception  that  Proves  the  Rule?’:  National  Fear, 

Racial  Loathing,  Chinese  Writing  in  "UnAustralia".”  Antipodes 

23.1 (2009): 17-22. 

Malory,  Sir  Thomas.  Le  Morte  Darthur:  Tales  seven  and  eight.  Ed.  Greg 

Waite. Dunedin: Dept. of English, University of Otago, 2007. 

Manlove,  Clifford  T.  “Visual  ‘Drive’  and  Cinematic  Narrative:  Reading  Gaze 

Theory in Lacan, Hitchcock, and Mulvey.” Cinema Journal 46.3 

(2007): 83-108 . 

Martin, Andy “Willing Women: Samoa, Tahiti, and the Western Imagination.” 

Raritan 25.4 (2006): 144-163. 

McDonald,  Matt.  ““Lest  We  Forget”:  The  Politics  of  Memory  and  Australian 

Military Intervention.” International Political Sociology 4.3 (2010) 

287–302. 

Melman, Billie. “Claiming the Nation's Past: The Invention of an Anglo-Saxon 

Tradition.” Journal of Contemporary History 26.3/4 (1991): 575-

595  

Mendlesohn,  Farah.  Rhetorics  of  Fantasy,  Wesleyan  University  Press, 

Middletown, 2008  

Mendlesohn, Farah and Edward James. A Short History of Fantasy. London: 

Middlesex University Press, 2009. 

Page | 361  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Miller,  Jennifer  L.  From  Water  Margins  to  Borderlands:  Boundaries  and  the 

Fantastic  in  Fantasy,  Native  American,  and  Asian  American 

Literatures. Diss. University of Minnesota, 2009. 

Modleski,  Tania.  Loving  with  a  Vengeance:  Mass-Produced  Fantasies  for 

Women. New York, London: Routledge, 2008.  

Morris,  William.  “The  Early  Literature  of  the  North  –  Iceland.”  Lecture 

delivered  9th  October  1887.  The  William  Morris  Internet 

Archive: Works. Ed. Nick Salmon. 1 February 2012. 

<http://www.marxists.org/archive/morris/works/1887/iceland.htm>. 

--  “The  Revival  of  Handicraft.”  Lecture  delivered  9th  October 

1887.  The  William  Morris  Internet  Archive:  Works.  Ed.  Nick 
Salmon. 1 February 2012. 

<http://www.marxists.org/archive/morris/works/1888/handcrft.htm>

.  

--  “Art  and  Labour.”  Lecture  delivered  9th  October  1887.  The 

William  Morris  Internet  Archive:  Works.  Ed.  Nick  Salmon.  1 

February 2012. 

<http://www.marxists.org/archive/morris/works/1884/art-lab.htm>. 

Mulvey,  Laura.  “Visual  Pleasure  and  Narrative  Cinema.”  Visual  and  Other 

Pleasures. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1989: 14-26.  

Murfin, Ross, Supryia M. Ray. The Bedford Glossary of Critical and Literary 

Terms. Boston, New York: Bedford, 2003. 

“My  Favourite  Book.”  5.  December  2004.  ABC.  Australian  Broadcasting 

Corporation. 

15 

March 

2008. 

<http://www.abc.net.au/myfavouritebook/top10/100.htm>. 

Page | 362  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nagy,  Gergely.  “Saving  the  Myths:  The  Re-creation  of  Mythology  in  Plato 

and  Tolkien.”  Tolkien  and  the  Invention  of  Myth.  Ed.  Jane 

Chance. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 2004. 

Nix, Garth.  Abhorsen. Allen & Unwin, Crows Nest, 2003. 

--- Lirael. Crows Nest: Allen & Unwin, 2003. 

---  “Nicholas  Sayre  and  the  Creature  in  the  Case.”  Across  the 

Wall. Crows Nest: Allen & Unwin, 2005. 

--- Sabriel. Crows Nest: Allen & Unwin, 2003. 

Northrup, Clyde B. “The Qualities of a Tolkienian Fairy-Story.” MFS, Modern 

Fiction Studies 50. 4 (2004): 814-837.  

Noyes,  John  K.  “National  Identity,  Nomadism  and  Narration  in  Gustav 

Frenssen’s  Peter  Moor’s  Journey  to  South  West  Africa.”  The 

Imperialist  Imagination:  German  Colonialism  and  its  Legacy. 

Ed.  Sara  Friedrichsmeyer,  Sara  Lennox,  Susanne  Zantop. 

Michigan: University of Michigan Press, 1998: 87-106. 

“Old  Kingdom  Podcast:  Parts  1,  2  and  3.”  The  Hidden  Kingdom:  Garth  Nix 

Official UK Website. 7 November 2008. 

<http://www.garthnixbooks.co.uk/podcasts/>. 

Pateman,  Carole.  The  Disorder  of  Women:  Democracy  Feminism  and 

Political Theory. Cambridge, Oxford: Polity Press and Blackwell 

Publishing, 1995. 

Patterson,  Lee.  Negotiating  the  Past:  The  Historical  Understanding  of 

Medieval  Literature.  Madison:  University  of  Wisconsin  Press. 

1987. 

Page | 363  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
---“On the Margin: Postmodernism, Ironic History, and Medieval 

Studies.” Speculum 65.1 (1990): 87-108. 

Philadelphoff-Puren,  Nina.  “Contextualising  Consent:  The  Problem  of  Rape 

and  Romance.” Australian  Feminist  Studies 20: 46  (2005):  31-

42. 

Phillips, Tim and Philip Smith. “What is 'Australian'? Knowledge and Among 

a  Gallery  of  Contemporary  Australians.”  Australian  Journal  of 

Political Science 35:2 (2000): 203-224. 

“Politics 2001: John Howard’s Election Speech.” 2010. Immigration Museum. 

Museum Victoria. 7 March 2012. 

<http://museumvictoria.com.au/immigrationmuseum/discoveryc

entre/identity/identity-blog/nov-2010/what-was-your-response-

to-john-howards-election-speech-we-will-decide-who-comes-to-

this-country-/ > 

Pratchett, Terry. Oxford Dictionary of Quotations (5th Ed). New York: Oxford 

University Press, 1999: 591. 

Prendergast,  Thomas  A,  and  Stephanie  Trigg,  “What  is  happening  to  the 

Middle Ages?” New Medieval Literatures 9 (2007): 215-29. 

Propp, Vladimir. Theory and History of Folklore. Trans. Ariadna Y. Matin and 

Richard  P.  Martin.  Manchester:  Manchester  University  Press, 

1984. 

---    Morphology  of  the  Folktale.  Ed.  Laurence  Scott.  Trans. 

Louis  A.  Wagner.  Austin  Texas:  University  of  Texas  Press  for 

the  American  Folklore  Society  and  the  Indiana  University 

Research Center for the Language Sciences, 1968. 

Page | 364  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Puren,  Nina.  “Hymeneal  Acts:  Interrogating  the  Hegemony  of  Rape  and 

Romance.” Australian Feminist Law Journal 5 (1995): 15-26. 

Radway, Janice A. Reading the Romance. London, New York: Verso, 1987. 

Ragussis, Michael.  “Writing Nationalist History: England, the Conversion of 

the  Jews,  and  Ivanhoe.”  ELH:  English  Literary  History  60.1 

(1993): 181-215 

Randles,  Sarah.  “Rebuilding  the  Middle  Ages:  Medievalism  in  Australian 

Architecture.” Medievalism and the Gothic in Australian Culture. 

Ed.  Stephanie  Trigg.  Turnhout,  Belgium:  Brepols  Publishers, 

2005: 147-170 

Reid,  Jennifer.  “The  Doctrine  of  Discovery  and  Canadian  Law.”  The 

Canadian Journal of Native Studies 30. 2 (2010): 335-359. 

Rendall,  Steven.  “Force  and  Language:  Heptameron  10.”  Comparative 

Literature 60.1 (2008): 74-80.  

Risden,  E.L.  “Nobody  but  the  Other  Buddy:  Hollywood,  the  Crusades,  and 

Buddy  Pictures.”  Hollywood  in  the  Holy  Land.  Ed.  Nickolas 

Haydock,  &  E.L  Risden.  London:  McFarland  &  Company, 

Jefferson, 2009: 186-199. 

Ruskin,  John. On  the Nature  of  Gothic  Architecture: and herein  of  the  True 

Functions of the Workman in Art, Smith Elder and Co, London, 

1854.  Google  Books  scanned  copy.  10  October  2012. 

<https://play.google.com/books/reader?id=XdsDAAAAYAAJ&pr

intsec=frontcover&output=reader&authuser=0&hl=en&pg=GBS.

PA1>. 

Page | 365  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Said,  Edward.    Orientalism.  London,  New  York,  Camberwell,  Ontario: 

Penguin Books, 2003. 

Salter,  Colin,  Whiteness  and  Social  Change:  Remnant  Colonialisms  and 

White  Civility  in  Australia  and  Canada.  Newcastle  upon  Tyne: 

Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2013. 

Sampson, Fay. “Mabinogion.” The Encyclopedia of Fantasy. Ed. John Clute, 

John Grant. London: Orbit, 1997: 600-601 

Schick,  İrvın  Cemıl.  “Representing  Middle  Eastern  Women:  Feminism  and 

Colonial Discourse.” Feminist Studies 16.2 (1990): 345-380  

Selling,  Kim  Liv,  Nature,  Reason  and 

the  Legacy  of  Romanticism: 

Constructing  Genre  Fantasy.  Doctoral  Thesis.  Sydney: 

University of Sydney, 2005. <http://hdl.handle.net/2123/2565>. 

Simmons, Clare A. Reversing the Conquest: History and Myth in Nineteenth-

Century  British  Literature.  New  Brunswick,  London:  Rutgers 

University Press, 1990. 

Sinfield,  Alan.  Fautlines:  Cultural  Materialism  and  the  Politics  of  Dissident 

Reading.  Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press. 1992. 

Skeers,  Jake.  “Australian  asylum  seekers  in  desperate  hunger  strike.”  10 

July 2002, Project SafeCom.inc.  20 March 2012. 

<http://www.safecom.org.au/media-250602.htm>. 

Smith,  Kimberly  K.  “Mere  Nostalgia:  Notes  on  a  Progressive  Paratheory.” 

Rhetoric & Public Affairs 3.4 (2000): 505-527. 

Page | 366  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Stephens  John.  “Always  Facing  the  Issues  –  Preoccupations  in  Australian 

Children’s Literature.” The Lion and the Unicorn 27.2 (2003): v-

xvii. 

---  Language  and  Ideology  in  Children’s  Literature.  Harlow, 

Essex; New York: Longman, 1992.  

Stephens,  John  and  Robyn  McCullum.  Retelling  Stories,  Framing  Culture: 

Traditional  stories  and  Metanarratives  in  Children’s  Literature. 

New York, London: Garland Publishing, Inc. 1998 

Swinfen,  Ann.  In  Defence  of  Fantasy:  A  Study  of  the  Genre  in  English  and 

American  Literature  since  1945.  London,  Boston,  Melbourne: 

Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1984. 

“Tampa and all that, one year on” Sydney Morning Herald [Late Edition] 27 

Aug 2002: 10. 

“Teen's  Top  Ten  -  2003  selections.”  Awards  and  Grants  and  Scholarships, 

Chicago:  American  Library  Association.  2  January  2013 

<www.ala.org/awardsgrants/awards/53/winners/2003>. 

Tennyson,  Alfred  Lord,  “Guinevere”  Idylls  of  the  King.  Ed.  J.M  Gray. 

Middlesex, New York: Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1996. 

“The  2010  Booklovers’  Best  Top  101  List”.  2010.  Dymocks.  23  September 

2011. 

< http://www.dymocks.com.au/pdf/BOOKLOVERBEST_2010.pdf>. 

Thompson,  Raymond  H.  “Interview  with  Guy  Gavriel  Kay.”  30  July  1989. 

Taliesin's  Successors:  Interviews  with  Authors  of  Modern 

Arthurian  Literature:  The  Camelot  Project.  9  July  2008. 

<http://www.lib.rochester.edu/camelot/intrvws/kay.htm>.  

Page | 367  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Todorov, Tzvetan. The Fantastic: A Structural Approach to a Literary Genre. 

Trans.  Richard  Howard.  Ithaca,  New  York:  Cornell  University 

Press, 1975. 

Tolkien,  Christopher.  “Foreword.”  The  Silmarillion.  J.R.R.  Tolkien,  Ed. 

Christopher Tolkien. London: Unwin Paperbacks, 1979. 

Tolkien,  J.R.R.   “On Fairy-Stories.” Tree and Leaf, Smith of Wootton Major, 

The  Homecoming  of  Beorhtnoth  Beorhthelm’s  Son.  London: 

Unwin Paperbacks, 1975.   

Tolmie,  Jane.  “Medievalism  and  the  Fantasy  Heroine.”  Journal  of  Gender 

Studies 15.2 (2006): 145-148.  

Trigg, Stephanie. “Introduction: Medieval and Gothic Australia.” Medievalism 

and  the  Gothic  in  Australian  Culture.  Ed.  Stephanie  Trigg. 

Turnhout, Belgium: Brepols Publishers, 2005:  xi-xxiii. 

Trudel,  Jean-Louis.  “Interview  with  Solaris.”  1995.  Bright  Weavings:  The 

Worlds  of  Guy  Gavriel  Kay  –  The  Authorized  Website.19  July 

2009. <http://www.brightweavings.com/ggkswords/trudel.htm>  

White, Richard. Inventing Australia. Sydney: George Allen and Unwin, 1984. 

White T.H. The Once and Future King. New York: Ace Books, 1996. 

Wilkins, Kim. “Bell, Book, and Battleaxe.” Australian Popular Medievalism ST 

Lucia, QLD: Auslit. 2010: 1-20.  

<http://www.austlit.edu.au/common/fulltext-

content/pdfs/BellBookandBattleaxe/BellBookAndBattleaxe.pdf>. 

Page | 368  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
---"’Cutting  of  the  Head  of  the  King’:  Sovereignty,  feudalism, 

fantasy.” Australian Literary Studies 26.3-4 (2011): 136-149.  

--“Popular  Genres and  the  Australian  Literary  Community:  The 

Case  of  Fantasy  Fiction.”  Journal  of  Australian  Studies  32:2 

(2008): 265-278. 

Wills,  Sara.  “Un

stitching  the  Lips of a  Migrant  Nation.” Australian Historical 

Studies 33:118 (2002):71-89 

‐

Workman,  Leslie.  “Medievalism  and  Romanticism”,  Medievalism  and 

Romanticism 1750-1850. Poetica 39&40, 1994 1-44,  

Zumthor,  Paul.  “Comments  on  H.  R.  Jauss’s  Article.”  New  Literary  History 

10.2 (1979): 367- 376) 

Page | 369  

 
 
 
 
 
