"Now and then: traces of the present in medievalist fantasy fiction" by Narelle Campbell

 Home 

 Search 

 Browse Communities 

 My Account 

 About 

 Digital Commons Network™ 

 Skip to main content 

 My Account 
 Contact Us 
 FAQ 
 Home 

 Home 

 > 
 Theses 

 > 
 theses 

 > 
 3910 

 University of Wollongong Thesis Collection 1954-2016 

 Now and then: traces of the present in medievalist fantasy fiction 

 Author

 Narelle Campbell , University of Wollongong 

 Year

 2013

 Degree Name

 Dcotor of Philosophy

 Department

 School of Arts, English and Media

 Recommended Citation

 Campbell, Narelle, Now and then: traces of the present in medievalist fantasy fiction, Dcotor of Philosophy thesis, School of Arts, English and Media, University of Wollongong, 2013. https://ro.uow.edu.au/theses/3910

 Abstract

 This thesis examines two medievalist fantasy series by authors from former British settler cultures – The Old Kingdom Chronicles (1995- 2003) by Australian writer Garth Nix, and The Fionavar Tapestry (1985-1986) by Canadian author Guy Gavriel Kay. I argue that although these texts are firmly situated in the realm of the imaginary, they are far from being culturally irrelevant. They are inescapably contemporary cultural products, strongly informed by the moments and places of their production, and revelatory of present aspirations and anxieties. I discuss the British and, more broadly, Western inflections at the centre of medievalist genre fantasy and examine how these impact on representations of ethnicity, gender and class within my chosen texts. This entails a consideration of how colonial legacies continue to inform the ways in which postcolonial settler cultures construct their own identities and view other cultures. I argue that the medieval temporal and spatial settings utilised by Nix and Kay create a privileged space, imbued with a sense of greater power, authority and authenticity than the present. Moreover, I argue that the power available to imaginings of the Middle Ages is appropriated by the authors as these fantasy texts engage discursively with debates of contemporary ideological significance.

 FoR codes (2008)

 200205 Culture, Gender, Sexuality, 200209 Multicultural, Intercultural and Cross-cultural Studies, 200502 Australian Literature (excl. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Literature), 200599 Literary Studies not elsewhere classified

 Download

 DOWNLOADS

 Since October 24, 2013

 Share

 COinS 

 Unless otherwise indicated, the views expressed in this thesis are those of the author and do not necessarily represent the views of the University of Wollongong. 

 Search

 Enter search terms:

 Select context to search:

 in this series 

 in this repository 
 across all repositories 

 Advanced Search

 Notify me via email or RSS 

 Browse

 Communities 

 Authors 

 UOW Authors 

 Links

 Digital Theses @ UOW

 University of Wollongong

 Library

 Digital Collections

 Elsevier - Digital Commons 

 Home | 
 About | 

 My Account | 
 Accessibility Statement 

 Privacy 

 Copyright
