
===== PAGE 1 =====
ЖУРНАЛ ФРОНТИРНЫХ ИССЛЕДОВАНИЙ (2018, №1)
– 17 –
HISTORICAL GRAND NARRATIVES OF THE SEVEN KINGDOMS OF 
WESTEROS: FROM INVENTION TO DECONSTRUCTION OF A 
TRADITIONAL MEDIEVAL HISTORIOGRAPHY
Kyrchanoff M.W.
Kyrchanoff Maksim W. Voronezh State University, 
Voronezh, Russia, 394000, Pushkinskaia 16
e-mail: maksymkyrchanoff@gmail.com
The article is focused on the problems of medieval images in modern mass 
culture in the contexts of simulation and imitation of grand historical narratives. The 
author analyses the text of "The World of Ice and Fire: the Untold History of the 
Westeros and the Game of Thrones" in the contexts of historical and political 
imaginations and the inventions of alternative identities. The author believes that 
medievalism lost its academic isolation because modern mass culture uses various 
images of the Middle Ages actively. Representatives and creators of mass culture use 
the achievements of academic medieval studies. The imagined universe of George 
Martin has real medieval prototypes. The author of the article, on the one hand, 
analyses the historical narratives of "The World of Ice and Fire: the Untold History of 
Westeros and the Game of Thrones" as an attempt to form historical and political 
memories. On the other hand, the problems of the features and type of Westeros 
feudalism are also analysed in this article.
Keywords: George Martin, Westeros, Seven Kingdoms, historical imagination, 
narratives, feudalism, political rituals
Introductory remarks. The destinies of history in the 20th century 
were unenviable because politicization, ideologization and mythologization 
victimized academic science repeatedly. History fell victim to nationalist 
speculations and manipulations. Authoritarian political regimes, right and 
left, despite their ideological and doctrinal contradictions, were united in 
their pathological aspirations and desires to subordinate history, unify it, 
integrate it into official political and ideological canons, use it to mobilize 
the masses and legitimize undemocratic political experience. History in the 
20th century lost the status of science gradually and turned into an 
instrument of political struggle and ideological confrontations. History in 
the 20th century became a victim not only of politicians who sought to use 
it and used it really to achieve political goals. History in the last decades of 
the 20th century and at the beginning of the 21 centuries became one more 
victim of mass culture. Orientalism probably became the first victim of the 
expansion of mass culture and its attempts to challenge the status of 
academic sciences because oriental plots and motifs became one of the 
central themes and plots of mass culture. The image of the Middle Ages, as 
Russian historian Pavel Uvarov believes, “is a very interesting thing”
===== PAGE 2 =====
ОБЩЕТЕОРЕТИЧЕСКИЕ ВОПРОСЫ
– 18 –
(Uvarov, 2016). Therefore, the expansion of mass culture into the sphere of 
academic medieval studies and its primitivization, simulation and imitation 
actually became inevitable. Medievalism (Alexander, 2007) became the 
second victim of a mass culture in its attempts to use history in the struggle 
for consumers.
From medieval studies to medievalism, or how the Middle Ages 
became an element of mass culture. The Russian historian Evgenii 
Savitskii, summing up the results of theoretical discussions, debates and 
reflections, believes that medievalism develops as
images of the Middle Ages, scientific and popular, existing in the modern 
times, as well as institutions engaged in their production or their use, including 
literature, cinema, computer games, sports, health (images of diseases), fast food 
restaurants, etc (Savitskiy, 2015). 
Medievalism is close to formal imitations of the Middle Ages and it 
occupies new areas of modernity, including consumption and the Internet
(Panfilov, 2016), but 
the new movies are products of a completely different era and another 
society… and attempts to find the features of the Middle Ages in the unpleasant 
aspects of modern life are some typical examples of the perception of the Middle Ages
(Panfilov, 2014). 
Russian intellectuals, including Aleksandr Filiushkin, state the 
existence of a public request for medieval stories (Filyushkin, 2017). 
Therefore, “the expectation of a new Middle Ages”, as Russian critic 
Evgenii Pozhidaev argues, became “the usual entertainment of Russian 
intellectuals since Nikolai Berdiaev” (Pojidaev, 2011). Several factors 
stimulated this sad fall of medievalism, the erosion of its academic purity, 
the mutation from the academic historiography to the structural element of 
the culture of mass consumerism and transformation into one of the 
numerous fields of modern pop culture and culture of mass consumption. 
Romantic writers of the 19th century did a lot for the idealization and 
mythologization of the Middle Ages, imagining them as the golden age of 
knights and beautiful ladies. Fantasy in the 20th century did the same with 
medievalism with the difference that romantics imagined the relatively real 
and historical Middle Ages as an ideal world, the authors of the fantasy 
texts were virtually free and the fetters of real medieval history did not 
limit their imagination. The literature of the fantasy genre in the 20th 
century gave birth to a new kind of medievalism that became an alternative 
to the academic historiography of the Middle Ages (Bloch, 2014), 
===== PAGE 3 =====
ЖУРНАЛ ФРОНТИРНЫХ ИССЛЕДОВАНИЙ (2018, №1)
– 19 –
stimulating and provoking progress and the triumph of visualized 
medievalism for mass consumption.
The newly invented Middle Ages: textual and visual. George 
Martin’s fantasy project became one of the most successful and notable 
projects of new non-academic Mediaevalism that defines the main vectors 
and trajectories of the transformations of the medieval heritage in the 
contexts of mass culture. году Cambridge University Press published the 
book of the English historian of law Frederic William Maitland “Domesday 
Book and Beyond” in 1897 (Maitland, 1897). The concept of beyond
(Rijkovskiy, 2009) became one of the central in intellectual history and 
archaeology of knowledge gradually. It is extremely difficult to determine 
what “beyond” is, but the author presumes that various intellectual 
practices and strategies, attempts to form heterogeneous identities, features 
of imagination and invention, tactics and strategies of actualization and 
silence form those cultural and intellectual environments and spaces that 
can be defined as “beyond”. The literary project inspired by George Martin 
became so successful because the writer’s texts about the Seven Kingdoms 
of Westeros had their own unique “beyond” and did not become a primitive 
imitation and stylization, the integration of medieval themes and motifs 
into heterogeneous contexts and spaces of the contemporary culture of 
mass consumerism. If we assume that “beyond” of modern mass literature 
consists of market laws and the desire of authors, publishers and literary 
agents to get their profit percentage, then “beyond” of George Martin’s 
prose provides for various motivations, including commercial and 
intellectual ones. Medievalism made “story with medieval or medieval-like 
settings, locales and societies” (Jakovljevic & Loncar-Vujnovic, 2016, pp. 
97-116) an inevitable characteristic of modern mass literature. Several 
factors inspired the successful promotion of George Martin’s ideas in the 
symbolic markets of exchanges and communications of modern consumer 
society. Firstly, George Martin belongs to those authors of mass and 
formally “low” literature who have certain literary skills and even talents. 
Secondly, the literary texts of George Martin cannot be defined as pure and 
classical fantasy because their author is relatively well-oriented in the real 
history of the Western European Middle Ages and his texts are filled with 
historical motifs and allusions, and these dimensions of George Martin’s 
narrative are easily readable for professional historians. Thirdly, the screen 
version of George Martin’s texts dragged on for several seasons (Panfilov, 
2014, pp. 193-208) and promoted the rise of their popularity and successes 
simultaneously, stimulating the genesis and development of a particular 
subculture. This subculture became a component of the wider context of 
mass culture. Some critics (Rudoy, 2015) presume that George Martin’s 
===== PAGE 4 =====
ОБЩЕТЕОРЕТИЧЕСКИЕ ВОПРОСЫ
– 20 –
texts became the raw material for several television projects that integrate 
medieval images into the worlds and spaces of modernity. The success of 
the project stimulates its commentators and critics to express different 
viewpoints. The range of opinions is varied from cultural to Marxist. The 
authors of the project assumed that its audience would be wide enough and 
they were right in this context because mass culture trained several 
generations of potential viewers and consumers. Successful promotion of 
the project required new texts, which complemented the prose of George 
Martin. Therefore, the author himself and several fans of his texts initiated 
a project of history writing of the imagined worlds, which appear in the 
prose of an American writer. These activities led to the emergence of a 
new “historical” narrative, which in fact was an attempt to transplant, 
imitate and simulate the tactics and strategies of medieval history writing 
into the contexts and spaces of modern mass culture.
Aims and objectives of the article. The author will try to analyse 
these imitations and simulations of the historical narrative in this article. 
This article has several tasks, including an analysis of the genesis of the 
imitational historical narratives of George Martin’s universe, the study of 
the features of the historical and political imagination of the invented 
worlds, the analysis of the forms and features of transplantation of 
historical knowledge and collective narratives in pseudo-historical sources 
of the world of the Seven Kingdoms, an attempt to analyse political, social, 
economic and cultural institutions mentioned in the historical grand 
narrative of the imagined universe of Westeros.
Methodology. Methodologically, this text is based on ideas and 
approaches proposed in intellectual history, the history of ideas and 
intellectual archaeology. The author of the article, on the one hand, 
believes that it is necessary to use both classical and modern 
interdisciplinary approaches to medieval studies. On the other hand, the 
methods proposed for the analysis of nationalism, including the ideas of 
Benedict Anderson and Eric Hobsbawm, presented in their classic texts 
“Imagined Communities” (Anderson, 1983) and “Invention of Traditions”
(Hobsbawm & Ranger, 1983) are applicable to the analysis of the imitation 
of historical narratives also because George Martin’s prose and his texts 
inspired active use the resources of imagination and invention because 
world of George Martin is one of the most successful invented ones
(Ekman & Taylor, 2016, pp. 7-18) and a classic example of their 
imagination and construction.
===== PAGE 5 =====
ЖУРНАЛ ФРОНТИРНЫХ ИССЛЕДОВАНИЙ (2018, №1)
– 21 –
Historiography. The imagined worlds of George Martin, which 
imitate the processes and institutions of the Middle Ages, were able to 
become the object of academic analysis in Western historiography
(Larrington, 2016) (Pavlac, 2017) (Johnston & Battis, 2015) (Attewell, 
2014) (Mondschein, 2017) (Perpinya, 2016) (Young, 2015) (Caroll, 2017), 
but the number of academic texts focused on the analysis of social, 
economic, political and cultural histories of Westeros remains extremely 
insignificant. If we erase the phrase of Pavel Uvarov that “the 
historiographical happy end was not very convincing” (Uvarov, 2000) from 
the context then it will illustrate the situation with the studies of fiction in 
the medieval studies fairly. Most of the texts are written and published in 
English in international journals and the assertion that the prose of George 
Martin, on the one hand, inspired by the images of the European Middle 
Ages, became a commonplace (Carroll, 2015) (Young, 2015) (Marques, 
2016). Umberto Eco, an Italian writer and historian, in the 1980s 
proclaimed that “We are dreaming the Middle Ages” (1986, p. 64) and this 
statement inspired several waves of non-academic manipulations and 
speculations that entered the “Middle Ages” and “feudalism” into a number
of the central collective imagined and invented heroes of modern fantasy. 
On the other hand, the narrative of the American writer differs 
significantly from earlier attempts to map feudalism in the modern fantasy 
genre because the images suggested by George Martin are both artistic, but 
they are much closer to the imagined and invented Middle Ages than, for 
example, the prose of Ursula Le Guin, which became part of the classical 
canon. Russian historian Pavel Uvarov presumes that 
now there is no single or at least prevailing way of history writing. But at the 
same time, ‘practising historians’ still do not doubt that it should be written with use 
of sources (Uvarov, 2004)
but in this article, the author uses special sources. These sources can 
change the vectors of historical studies and expand their horizons 
significantly, especially in the case of social history. The process of 
renewal of social history, as Paul Uvarov believes, “is necessary and 
inevitable, but its success is not guaranteed automatically” (Uvarov, 2011). 
George Martin’s texts that actualize the images of the invented Middle 
Ages found their admirers and first historians in Western historiography 
because its methodological and theoretical backgrounds are radically 
different from Russian ones. The Russian historian Evgenii Savitskii, 
commenting on this historiographic situation, presumes that 
American professional historians, philologists, and art historians produce 
books that would outrage the researcher who was brought up in respect of the principle 
===== PAGE 6 =====
ОБЩЕТЕОРЕТИЧЕСКИЕ ВОПРОСЫ
– 22 –
of historicism. These texts are little known in Russia because they look strange and do 
not correspond to academic criteria, which are still reproduced in Russian universities
(Savitskiy, 2016). 
The dominance of historiographic culture that is a qualitatively and 
meaningfully different from Russian one, turned George Martin's prose 
into a source, although the writer offers idealized Middle Ages. Despite 
this, Western intellectuals and the few historians in Russia, including the 
author of this article (Kyrchanoff, 2017), use them as an excuse for 
postmodern and constructivist speculations and reflections. Russian 
medievalists, unfortunately, prefer to ignore the interdisciplinary potential 
and perspectives of the academic analysis of the imagined and invented 
alternative Middle Ages. Attempts of philologists who specialize in the 
analysis of fantasy and modern mass culture and literature are also not 
effective. Therefore, the author, on the one hand, is forced to note with 
regret that there is a cultural vacuum in studies of George Martin’s 
imagined worlds in contemporary Russian intellectual history. On the other 
hand, the author hopes that possible studies of non-existent medieval and 
alternative feudal worlds and land spaces will promote the rise of the 
popularity of social history (Uvarov, 2010) which in the last two decades 
began to give up its positions in competition with constructivist 
approaches.
The Middle Ages and feudalism: what exactly, which one? It is 
very debatable to answer the question what feudalism exactly existed in 
Westeros? This question automatically involves a few more ones: did the 
imagined author of the history of the Seven Kingdoms live in the mature or 
late Middle Ages? These issues are partly questionable, partly 
controversial in the contexts of attempts by some intellectuals to prove that 
the world imagined by George Martin became not a world where 
traditional feudal relations and natural agrarian economies dominated, but 
the world that came close to the threshold of a new era, the era of early 
modernity. Some intellectuals (Efimov, 2017) believe that the feudal world 
of the Seven Kingdoms, imagined and described by the American writer in 
the smallest details, exists as a world where the old feudal order, relations 
and institutions are gradually dying out because they cannot compete with 
new alternative models of political, social and economic behaviour 
successfully and effectively. Our hypothetical recognition of the crisis of 
feudalism in Westeros, emphasizes the urgency of our attempts to answer 
questions about the nature and type of local feudal relations. What type of 
feudalism in general and feudal relations and institutions in particular did 
exist in the Seven Kingdoms? Was feudalism a universal and inevitable 
===== PAGE 7 =====
ЖУРНАЛ ФРОНТИРНЫХ ИССЛЕДОВАНИЙ (2018, №1)
– 23 –
type of organization of social, economic and political relations? Were the 
Seven Kingdoms the only and unique preserve of feudalism or other 
variations of the feudal development existed in the imagined world of 
George Martin outside of Westeros? These questions are not interesting to 
fans of the texts of the American writer, but academic historians and other 
intellectuals tried to answer these debatable questions. George Martin’s 
texts can cause disappointment to orthodox and true believing social and 
economic historians because his books cannot provide them with 
information about the real size of estates, the relationship of the domain 
with other territories, the terms of service, the number of dues, corvee, the 
pace of commuting rents. The absolute predominance of the rural 
population makes it possible to define the type of economic and social 
relations of the Seven Kingdoms as feudal. Dependence of the inhabitants 
of the Seven Kingdoms was naturally felt and understood by them so 
strongly that the image of the world they lived in and they created for 
themselves included many features that actualized their inability to 
separate themselves from the natural environment and the class restrictions 
of those political and economic institutions that dominated in their world. 
Paul Mason, an English critic, publicist and political commentator, 
believes that the Seven Kingdoms exist in the world of the Middle Ages of 
the late feudalism, arguing that
the elite are in trouble, their sources of wealth exhausted, their civilisation 
assailed by crazed fanatics from without – while, within, the masses are in open revolt. 
No, it’s not the eurozone – it is Westeros, the mythical venue for Game of Thrones…. 
But why do so many of these secondary worlds resemble feudalism in crisis?... In 
modern fantasy fiction there is always a crisis of the system: both of the economic 
order and of the auras of power… But there is also more clearly systemic doom 
hanging over the economy of Westeros… If you apply historical materialism to 
Westeros, the plot of season five and six becomes possible to predict. What happened 
with feudalism, when kings found themselves in hock to bankers, is that – at first –
they tried to sort it out with naked power. The real-life Edward III had his Italian 
bankers locked up in the Tower of London until they waived his debts… Feudalism 
gave way to a capitalism based on merchants, bankers, colonial plunder and the slave 
trade. Paper money emerged, as did a complex banking system for assuaging problems 
like your gold mine running dry (Mason, 2015). 
The Middle Age of Westeros in this historical situation is the era of 
decline and fall of feudal relations. Feudalism of the Seven Kingdoms is no 
longer stable and not developed feudalism, but the late feudalism, where 
social, economic and political institutions fallen into a state of protracted 
crisis and cannot compete with new more successful and rational economic 
and political competitors. The trajectories of social, political and economic 
history of the West in the 16th century, on the one hand, led to the fact that 
===== PAGE 8 =====
ОБЩЕТЕОРЕТИЧЕСКИЕ ВОПРОСЫ
– 24 –
new rationally thinking first generations of representatives of the 
bourgeoisie became more successful in their historical conflict and 
confrontation with old feudal elites who could not adapt to new market 
rules and relationships successfully and effectively. On the other hand, 
these transformations became possible because political elites for several 
centuries or even decades earlier could limit the power of the king power, 
but the social world of the Seven Kingdoms did not know such social
transformations and in fact late economic feudalism existed in conditions 
of domination of political feudalism that did not know political 
competition and alternatives. The world imagined by George Martin, on 
the one hand, is unstable politically, and the dominant political groups are 
also not stable because they are in a state of constant competition with 
other representatives of social group they belonged to. On the other hand, 
the feudal war, George Martin wrote about, may inspire factors that will 
stimulate the genesis and the emergence of social and economic changes. 
Mass death of representatives of feudal elites in the civil war will free 
significant number of their peasants from their feudal lords. In fact, feudal 
lords who survive will be forced to seek new forms of relations with 
dependent peasants. The situation, George Martin constructs in a cycle of 
his novels, has much in common with the conditions that existed in 
England after the “black death” and became an incentive for the erosion of 
feudal relations and the genesis of capitalism. The imagined feudalism of 
the Seven Kingdoms in these intellectual, social and economic contexts is 
the feudalism of the sunset period and feudalism on the eve of the fall. As 
for the other two issues, including “Was feudalism a universal and 
inevitable type of organization of social, economic and political relations?” 
and “Were the Seven Kingdoms the only and unique preserve of feudalism 
or other variations of feudal development did exist in George Martin’s 
imagined world outside Westeros?”, absolutely different answers are 
possible. Aron Gurevich, a Soviet and Russian medievalist, analyzing the 
difficulties in determining feudalism wrote:
I tend to see Western European phenomenon in feudalism predominantly, if 
not exclusively. In my opinion, feudalism developed as a result of a unique 
constellation of development trends. The feudal system is not a phase of a world -
historical process, it arose as a result of a combination of specific conditions emerged 
as the result of the collision between the barbaric world and the Mediterranean world 
of the late Antiquity. This conflict gave impetus to the synthesis of the German and 
Roman origins, and gave birth to conditions for the emergence of Western European 
civilization at the end of the Middle Ages beyond the traditional social order, beyond 
the limits in which all other civilizations remained (Haritonovich, 2000). 
===== PAGE 9 =====
ЖУРНАЛ ФРОНТИРНЫХ ИССЛЕДОВАНИЙ (2018, №1)
– 25 –
This remark of Aron Gurevich is quite applicable to the analysis of 
hypothetical trajectories and developments tendencies of those regions that 
were not part of the Seven Kingdoms geographically and were located 
outside of Westeros. Paraphrasing Aron Gurevich’s words, it is logical to 
ask “Was feudalism the only phenomenon that existed exclusively in the 
Seven Kingdoms of Westeros?”. The specific content of the answers will 
depend on our perceptions and understandings what feudalism is in 
general? If we perceive feudalism in a Marxist spirit and we insist 
orthodoxly that feudalism is a social and economic formation between 
slavery and capitalism, then we can automatically identify other regions of 
George Martin’s world of as feudal. If we assume that the society of the 
Seven Kingdoms is feudal, then it is logical to assume that this is Western 
feudalism in our understanding. Creators of fantasy worlds, including 
George Martin, are extremely uncertain outside the Western Middle Ages 
and therefore avoid to stylize and imitate peripheral European feudalisms, 
including Byzantine and Slavic ones. Sergei Ivanov, a Russian Byzantinist, 
commenting on these intellectual preferences, believes that 
the world of fantasy is always the world of the Middle Ages, but the Middle 
Ages are just western. The “Game of Thrones” is Roman-Germanic Middle Ages. In 
fantasy there is no place for stylization in Byzantium, Byzantium fell into an image 
hole (Ivanov, 2015).
Soviet historians, recognizing the existence of feudal relations and 
institutions, projected these explanations into the history of Oriental 
societies and imagined the different types and forms of Chinese, Japanese 
or any other feudalisms. If we use this methodology based on the 
assumption that feudalism was universal, but developed as different and 
heterogeneous in social, political and economic contests, the Free Cities, 
including Lorath, Norvos, Qohor, Pentos, Volantis, Braavos, and others 
regions including Yi Ti and Asshai-by-the-Shadow can be imagined as 
feudal. If a historian or anthropologist who analyses the imagined worlds 
of George Martin wants to feel like an orthodox Marxist, he or she can 
imagine and invent feudal relations even among Dothraki. It is normal for 
post-post-modern historiographical situation and intellectuals who have 
Soviet historians as their predecessors to find feudal relations in Dothraki 
society. Soviet intellectuals proposed the theory of nomadic feudalism, 
ignoring the social and economic realities of Mongolian society. Therefore, 
the concept of feudalism can be used for explanation of any society in 
George Martin’s universe because it will allow modern intellectuals to 
imagine feudalism in all regions of the world of George Martin, although 
===== PAGE 10 =====
ОБЩЕТЕОРЕТИЧЕСКИЕ ВОПРОСЫ
– 26 –
academic ethics can stop some of them and they will limit themselves to 
the mental feudalization of the Seven Kingdoms only. 
Periodization and the invention of progress. The historical grand 
narrative in its imagined forms in the world of the Seven Kingdoms 
differed from the real trajectories of the development of historical 
knowledge and collective ideas of the past significantly. The imagined 
author of the official history of the Seven Kingdoms lived in a relatively 
successful era for knowledge and those who can be called medieval 
intellectuals. In comparison with earlier epochs 
the written word begins to play a completely different role than in the previous 
era. Elites (first of all they were a real and potential audience of various historical 
works) begin to form their memory on other backgrounds, they have written, recorded 
memory. They start to use texts more than oral tradition (Sidorov, 2017). 
The official history of Westeros in this context can be defined as an 
attempt to invent and fix historical and political memory. The imagined 
author of the official history of the Seven Kingdoms did not know what a 
religiously centric consciousness was and therefore the history in his 
understanding did not have strict and rigid bindings and connections with 
religious transformations and changes. Therefore, the imagined author of 
the historical chronicle allowed himself reasoning about the age of the 
world and his estimates ranged from 40 to 500 thousand years. The 
periodization of the history of the Seven Kingdoms’ world in its official 
version is, on the one hand, linear. The linear character of grand historical 
narrative became the result of the absence of a religiously centric picture of 
the world that provides intellectuals with the imagined division of history 
into “before” and “after”. On the other hand, the imagined author of the 
history of the Seven Kingdoms acted in traditional medieval cultural 
contexts and imagined his “linear time” as torn apart. The timeline of the 
world of the Seven Kingdoms, unlike real history, is based on the 
classification of events in their chronological order and sequence. The 
imagined author understood clearly the differences between ancient history 
and its modernity (although his modernity from the viewpoint of the 
modern intellectual is the past because it is Middle Ages), preferring to 
divide the history into several stages, including periods of “the Dawn 
Age”, “the Coming of the First Men”, “the Age of Heroes”, “the Long 
Night”, “the Rise of Valyria”, “Valyria’s Children”, “the Arrival of the 
Andals”, “Ten Thousand Ships”, “the Doom of Valyria”. Several parallels 
between these imagined stages of invented history and real epochs in the 
history of terrestrial civilization are possible and plausible. “The Dawn 
===== PAGE 11 =====
ЖУРНАЛ ФРОНТИРНЫХ ИССЛЕДОВАНИЙ (2018, №1)
– 27 –
Age” and “the Coming of the First Men” played in the historical worldview 
of the imagined author roles that were the same to the pre-history. “The 
Rise of Valyria” and “Valyria's Children” are Antiquity and its Byzantine 
relapses. “The Arrival of the Andals”, “Ten Thousand Ships”, “the Doom 
of Valyria” are analogous to the fall of the Roman Empire and the 
Migration Period in the history of Western Europe. Aegon Targaryen and 
his aggressive policy have the conquest of England by Wilhelm in 1066 by 
their historical prototypes (Martin, Antonsson, & Garcia, 2014, pp. 73-75). 
The subsequent stages of the Targaryen Kings have some parallels with the 
history of the European Middle Ages. The imagined author in his attempt 
to write the history of the known world believed that this history was a 
history of a gradual complication of culture and social institutions and 
relationships. Imagining the world as a world of gradual complication, 
development and actually progress, the imagined author of the history of 
the Seven Kingdoms perceived it as a heterogeneous world. The historical 
imagined grand narrative of Westeros in this intellectual situation 
actualizes its constructivist character, because the real authors of the text 
actually imitated the style of the medieval chronicle, synthesized it with 
modern simplistic historical representations. The author of the official 
history of Westeros in this context, on the one hand, believes that 
the eastern lands were awash with many peoples – uncivilized, as all the world 
was uncivilized but numerous. But on Westeros, from the Lands of Always Winter to 
the shores of the Summer Sea, only two peoples existed: the children of the forest and 
the race of creatures known as the giants (2014, p. 19)
and offers, on the other hand, more progressive viewpoints than his 
real colleagues, who wrote medieval Western chronicles, because progress 
and development were the main criteria that reflected the level of 
development of peoples and states, he wrote about. For example, the 
historical grand narratives of Westeros fix the simultaneous coexistence of 
several biological species of people, which indicates that its imagined 
author was familiar with early versions of the local theory of evolution or 
came close to its discovery.
Political rituals and symbolic communications. It is very 
tempting and probably appropriate to define the society, social and 
economic and institutions and relationships that the imagined author of 
history fixed as feudal but real creators of this text, including George 
Martin and his co-authors, are aware of the history of the medieval West 
and transplanted some processes and institutions from the real history of 
===== PAGE 12 =====
ОБЩЕТЕОРЕТИЧЕСКИЕ ВОПРОСЫ
– 28 –
the European Middle Ages into imagined historical contexts of Westeros. 
Just as 
the West, concealed from the Great Steppe, could afford the luxury of 
feudalism (Mehanik, 2011)
Westeros separated from its competitors geographically existed in 
the feudal system of social and economic coordinates. Despite the fact that 
the history of the Seven Kingdoms is nothing more than an imagined and 
imagining construct, George Martin, in his cycle of novels, was able 
to create one of the most convincing neo-medieval worlds. If Dumas used the 
history as a nail for the painting, then Martin mixes the colours on the basis of history
(Panfilov, 2014). 
The history of Westeros is mainly the history of relations between 
regional dynasties of local feudal lords. Westeros, as a feudal society, 
belonged to the number of agrarian communities and the levels of 
urbanization in these regions were significantly lower in comparison with 
other lands of the world imagined by George Martin. Climatic and natural 
factors (Tarly, 2017, pp. 1-9) determined the vectors of social and 
economic development partially, promoting feudalization of society, 
actualizing the natural character of its agrarian economy and minimizing 
the role of the eradication processes. The cities in the world of the Seven 
Kingdoms were formal and nominal political and military centres because 
peripheral and deep regions were the basis of the economic stability of this 
agrarian society despite the fact that the natural and climatic conditions did 
not favour the progress in agriculture. The imagined author of the history 
of the Seven Kingdoms records some political rituals and ceremonies that 
formed the basis of the official ceremonial and political mythology of the 
Seven Kingdoms. The coronation was among the most important political 
rituals in symbolic communication between representatives of the elites of 
the Seven Kingdoms. Coronation as “one of the variants of the rites of 
passage” (Boytsov, 2014) was an extremely important act for the political 
clan of Targaryens because the kings who belonged to this dynasty sought 
to legitimize the seizure of the Seven Kingdoms but it was extremely 
difficult to do without invented political traditions and rituals, including 
rituals of the coronation. These imagined institutions and relations in forms 
they emerged and developed in the Seven Kingdoms managed to become 
the object of research in Western historiography (Riggs, 2017) (Attali, 
2017) (Clasby, 2017) (Polack, 2017) (Muhlberger, 2017) (Pavlac, 2017)
(Cowlishaw, 2015). The coronation was among the central political rituals 
and the author of the history of Westeros described it in the following way: 
===== PAGE 13 =====
ЖУРНАЛ ФРОНТИРНЫХ ИССЛЕДОВАНИЙ (2018, №1)
– 29 –
Three days later, in the Starry Sept, His High Holiness himself anointed 
Aegon with the seven oils, placed a crown upon his head, and proclaimed him Aegon 
of House Targaryen, the First of His Name, King of the Andals, the Rhoynar, and the 
First Men, Lord of the Seven Kingdoms, and Protector of the Realm. (“Seven 
Kingdoms” was the style used, though Dorne had not submitted. Nor would it, for 
more than a century to come) (Martin, Antonsson, & Garcia, 2014, p. 79). 
Mihail Boitsov, the Russian historian, believes that 
political rituals rallied the political community, especially when people with 
power gathered together (Boytsov, 2014). 
The desire to actualize and emphasize the continuity of the 
statehood of Aegon Targaryen with earlier states attests, on the one hand, 
to the considerable political ambitions of the dynasty, which sought to 
integrate legends and rudimentary political memories of the historical 
states that preceded the Seven Kingdoms into its collective political myth. 
Despite the fact that Aegon Targaryen had nothing in common with the 
Andals, the Rhoynar, and the First Men, he sought to integrate them into an 
imagined political body, but these attempts were radically different in 
comparison with modern tactics and strategies of national construction and 
nationalistic imagination. Political ceremonies and rituals of Targaryens 
became an attempt to institutionalize relationships of dependence in the 
form of patronage, suzerainty and vassalage because the loyalty was 
regionalised and localised. These regional loyalties were more important 
for political elites than ethnic, linguistic and religious identities of the local 
population because these political categories and ideal constructs were 
unknown in the feudal era, the imagined author of the official history of 
the Seven Kingdoms wrote about. 
The author of this official historical narrative of Westeros mentions 
facts of the multiple coronations of Aegon Targaryen, who was crowned 
twice. The first coronation became an actual claim to the acquisition of 
political power, and the second one was an attempt to legitimize the 
conquest, seizure and usurpation of power in the Seven Kingdoms. The 
constant travels of Aegon Targaryen over the conquered lands and 
territories of Seven Kingdoms became one more political ritual which in 
fact was an attempt to unite the disparate parts of the new state and form a 
myth about the unified state political body and promote the image of the 
king as its supreme suzerain, but these trips did not stimulate political 
integration because the king did not dare to change radically regional and 
even local political institutions and rules and norms of law: 
===== PAGE 14 =====
ОБЩЕТЕОРЕТИЧЕСКИЕ ВОПРОСЫ
– 30 –
rather than attempting to unify the realm under one set of laws, he respected 
the differing customs of each region and sought to judge as their past kings might have
(Martin, Antonsson, & Garcia, 2014, p. 87). 
The king could ascribe himself the role of a supreme judge only, 
although decisions were made according to local norms and customs.
Feudalism in the Seven Kingdoms existed as a heterogeneous world of 
sacred gestures and symbolic communications that actually had a political 
character. Westeros feudalism was a world where the oral tradition 
dominated, despite attempts to document historical and political experience 
in written form, the role of the recorded word was low in comparison with 
those spheres where oral culture, customs and traditions prevailed and 
dominated. The number of opponents of royal power, as the imagined 
author of the history of the Seven Kingdoms wrote, was significant and 
included representatives of the feudal aristocracy and nobility, as well as 
religious groups, including the High Septon and various religious orders, 
such as Poor Fellows. Religion in the world of the Seven Kingdoms played 
a role that was no less significant than in the history of the real western 
Middle Ages with the only difference that the religious situation in the 
invented world of George Martin was more heterogeneous (Tucker, 2017)
(Wittingslow, 2015) (Johnston & Battis, 2015) (Ramon Ruiz, 2016). 
The official history of the Seven Kingdoms mentions numerous 
facts of mutual violence of both royalists and their religious opponents, 
which culminated in the formal victory of the king, who actually 
institutionalized a compromise between the monarch and his religious 
enemies. The victory of the king in a confrontation with religious 
opponents of power did not mean a radical of the monarch’s power, 
because he was forced to rule, taking into account the opinions of the 
leaders of the feudal aristocracy. In fact, the institutional compromise 
between the king and the feudal houses that controlled the territories of the 
formally united Seven Kingdoms expressed in the appearance of a post of 
Lord Protector of the Realm and Hand of the King (Martin, Antonsson, & 
Garcia, 2014, p. 103), who was advisor and mediator in the relationship of 
the ruling king with political and religious elites. The imagined author of 
the official history of the Seven Kingdoms recognizes that King Jaehaerys 
I tried to break this institutional compromise between the royal power and 
the feudal elites because he appointed Septon Barth as Hand of the King 
despite the fact that he was “no man of humble birth” (2014, p. 104). The 
violation of the compromise between the royal power and the regional 
elites of the former Seven Kingdoms provided the king with the 
opportunity to unify the political spaces and make the imagining political 
body of the state more visible because 
===== PAGE 15 =====
ЖУРНАЛ ФРОНТИРНЫХ ИССЛЕДОВАНИЙ (2018, №1)
– 31 –
where his grandsire, King Aegon, had left the laws of the Seven Kingdoms to 
the vagaries of local tradition and custom, Jaehaerys created the first unified code, so 
that from the North to the Dornish Marches, the realm shared a single rule of law
(2014, p. 104). 
The imagined author of the official history of the Seven Kingdoms 
believes that Jaehaerys I sought to change the relationships of power with 
religious groups and elites because the orders became influential economic 
actors. King Jaehaerys I was interested in a compromise with secular 
regional feudal elites because 
the Poor Fellows and Warrior’s Sons, no longer hunted as they had been in 
Maegor’s day, were much reduced and officially outlawed thanks to Maegor, but they 
were still present. And still restless, in their eagerness to restore their orders. More 
pressingly, the Faith’s traditional right to judge its own had begun to prove 
troublesome, and many lords complained of unscrupulous septries and septons making 
free with the wealth and property of their neighbours and those they preached to
(2014, p. 105). 
The origins of this conflict were predominantly economic because 
the interests of religious orders and septons did not coincide with the 
interests of secular feudal lords. The imagined author of the official history 
of the Seven Kingdoms, on the one hand, believes that the royal power and 
religious elites could reach an agreement and institutionalize a compromise 
between secular and religious authorities: 
Jaehaerys instead dispatched Septon Barth to Oldtown, to speak with the High 
Septon, and there they began to forge a lasting agreement. In return for the last few 
Stars and Swords putting down their weapons, and for agreeing to accept outside 
justice, the High Septon received King Jaehaerys’s sworn oath that the Iron Throne 
would always protect and defend the Faith (2014, p. 106). 
On the other hand, the history of the Seven Kingdoms records 
attempts of institutional restraint of royal power, but they were in fact 
temporary and unsuccessful because council of seven (2014, p. 141), 
mentioned by the author of the history of Westeros, was a council of 
regents and it did not become a permanent political institution, but the 
author of history recognizes that several groups, including council 
members and a hand of the king, could simultaneously limit the power of 
the king Aegon when he was young (2014). The imagined author of the 
history of the Seven Kingdoms mentions the existence of small council 
during the reign of Daeron II (2014, p. 170). This factor suggests that the 
conditions for the restriction of royal power existed during the Regency
===== PAGE 16 =====
ОБЩЕТЕОРЕТИЧЕСКИЕ ВОПРОСЫ
– 32 –
period, but feudal groups could not use this opportunity effectively and 
provide representative institutions with a permanent character, but the 
official history of the Seven Kingdoms records the case when an uncle of 
King Daeron became the Hand (2014, p. 147). 
The compromise nature of the distribution of power functions 
among representatives of the political elites of the Seven Kingdoms 
actualizes the simultaneous coexistence and co-operation of the principles 
of intra-natal and intra-dynastic suzerainty, despite attempts to affirm the 
primacy of the first one. The imagined author of the official history of 
Westeros, despite all attempts by the kings to centralize the state, 
recognized that these aspirations were not very successful in general and in 
Dorne in particular. Daeron II, according to the official history of the 
Seven Kingdoms, was forced to cede Dorne and recognize its rights which 
were more significant than the same ones of other kingdoms: 
the lords of Dorne held significant rights and privileges that the other great 
houses did not – the right to keep their royal title first among them, but also the
autonomy to maintain their own laws, the right to assess and gather the taxes due to 
the Iron Throne with only irregular oversight from the Red Keep, and other such 
matters (2014, p. 172). 
Probably it does not make sense to state that Daeron II granted such 
wide rights to the Dorne Kingdom. It is more logical to assume that Dorne 
has never been under the full control of the Kings of the Iron Throne and 
the actions of Daeron II, on the one hand, became a recognition and 
institutionalization of the historical situation. On the other hand, such 
significant concessions testified that the seven kingdoms were not a 
centralized and regular state, but they developed as a quasi-federation or 
even a confederation of seven kingdoms despite the fact that local kings 
recognized the suzerainty of the Kings of the Iron Throne. 
The concept of suzerainty in the world of the Seven Kingdoms was 
plural. Aegon Targaryen, the first king of this dynasty, could not unite and 
consolidate the territories of the conquered kingdoms and was in fact 
forced to recognize the local dynasties as regional social, political and 
economic institutions. This policy led to the virtual coexistence of the 
principles of intra-dynastic and intra-generic suzerainty, when the kings of 
the Targaryens dynasty, as formal seniors among the peers, were forced to 
coexist and cooperate with representatives of regional dynasties despite 
Targaryens could be younger or elder than local kings or their relatives. 
The relations and connections between the Targaryens and the regional 
kings varied and ranged from forced co-operation to an apparent political 
confrontation, but all kings had the right to “call the banners” (2014, p. 
328), which actualized the heterogeneous relations of suzerainty and 
===== PAGE 17 =====
ЖУРНАЛ ФРОНТИРНЫХ ИССЛЕДОВАНИЙ (2018, №1)
– 33 –
vassalage, dependence and independence among representatives of the 
ruling class.
Seven Kingdoms: post mortem or in memoria. The imagined 
history of the Seven Kingdoms is an attempt to unify and fix historical and 
political narratives, create the first versions of national and historical 
memory, but it is widely known that collective narratives that form a 
national or nationalizing history are not stable. It is more logical to assume 
that such narratives that determine the main vectors of Westeros history 
writing will inevitably become victims of deconstruction and revision 
because the world described by the author of this history is in a state of 
deep crisis and civil war that became harbingers of radical changes and 
transformations. If we assume that Westeros feudalism is late and dying, 
then it is logical to assume that in a few decades later the text of history 
will be imagined as a historical source because this feudal and estate grand 
narrative will be replaced by nationalizing or national narratives that will 
form new versions of Westeros history in general and each of the Seven 
Kingdoms in particular. How can the historical imagination in the 
Westeros world change after radical economic and political 
transformations? Firstly, several simultaneously coexisting and competing 
national historical narratives or nationalized versions of the past will 
replace a single archaic narrative that dominated in the official history of 
the Seven Kingdoms. Secondly, these new national histories will be 
political and ideological constructs, despite the fact that their authors and 
formers will use a single body of sources including the text analysed in this 
article. Thirdly, these new versions of history will simultaneously construct 
and deconstruct historical narratives and facts because their potential 
authors and their political customers will be interested in mythologization 
of ancestral past that will differ from the same historical subjects of 
neighbours. Fourthly, it cannot be ruled out that the feudal conflicts 
described in George Martin’s cycle will be imagined as a symbolic 
boundary or frontier in mental transition from one historical epoch to 
another. Fifthly, all these national or nationalized histories will inevitably 
use the image of Otherness and the concepts of the enemy. It cannot be 
ruled out that Dorne can be this politically and ideologically motivated 
Other for the North. Targaryens and Lannisters can become positive or 
negative collective heroes and their images will depend on political and 
ideological preferences of authors of new histories. Historians of the 
modernising Westeros will not be burdened by class stereotypes, but they 
will be voluntary captives and hostages of the national myths of nations as 
the imagined communities they will belong to. If Targaryens and 
Lannisters can become political and ideological Others and antiheroes, 
===== PAGE 18 =====
ОБЩЕТЕОРЕТИЧЕСКИЕ ВОПРОСЫ
– 34 –
then the history of the feudal civil war, George Martin wrote about, 
provide historians of future national or nationalizing states with a universal 
and inevitable Other. Dothraki will become this universal Other who will 
consolidate the historical imaginations of the national historiographies of 
the former Seven Kingdoms. Dothraki who after the end of the war may 
remain in Westeros will stimulate the political and historical imagination 
of politicians and intellectuals and none of them will be indifferent because 
Dothraki motives will be permanent incentives for historiographic 
confrontations and battles for history. It does not matter who will win in 
the late feudal war in Westeros, but it is also obvious that Dothraki will be 
among the ethnic and cultural marginalized losers in the world where 
neighbouring communities will become nations, when Dothraki were 
doomed to be a political and ethnic minority and a socially oppressed 
group. Fifthly, the history of the world after the Game of Thrones will 
become a political commodity and ideological construct simultaneously, 
and local intellectuals will inevitably actualize the servillist and 
instrumentalist dimensions of the past. The extreme politicization of 
historiography, the monopolization of historiographical production and the 
high degree of politicization of historical debates can be the main factors 
that will determine vectors and trajectories of the imagination of the 
history of the Seven Kingdoms in a few decades or some centuries later. 
The history of the Seven Kingdoms of Westeros will move to the centre of 
ideological debates and will inevitably be a victim in the hands of political 
entrepreneurs from the hypothetically possible Society of Valyria 
Restoration, Society of True Andals, Society for the Praise and Promotion 
of Merit of Aegon II, Society of glorification of Aerys II… Historians in 
this world will not be a single community: some of them will analyse the 
features of genesis and local variations in the development of feudalism, 
the terms and sizes of duties, rates and features of rent commutation in the 
contexts of social, cultural or agrarian histories; others will use the history 
and facts of the past to legitimize political processes, states and institutions 
actively. Eddard Stark and Robert Baratheon can turn into short-sighted 
political reactionaries in historical imagination who defended the dying 
institutions of the feudal estate society, and Tyrion Lannister and Petyr 
Baelish can be invented and imagined as heralds of a new capitalist era.
Preliminary conclusions. An alternative historical grand narrative 
which emerged as an attempt to write a universal and synthesis history of 
imagined worlds and their social and political spaces, invented in George 
Martin’s texts and in their television adaptation did not arise in a vacuum. 
Russian historian Fiodor Panfilov believes that “a fantastic world where 
there are not so many fiction and magic” became the consequence of “the 
===== PAGE 19 =====
ЖУРНАЛ ФРОНТИРНЫХ ИССЛЕДОВАНИЙ (2018, №1)
– 35 –
total conversion of the Middle Ages” (Panfilov, 2014). This grand 
narrative has real historiographic, cultural and intellectual prototypes that 
stimulated the historical imagination of George Martin and the invention of 
political, social, economic, cultural and religious institutions that "exist" in 
the universe of Westeros. 
Medieval chronicles were the first incentives for the emergence of 
alternative imagined medievalism in the texts of the American writer. Later 
historiographic attempts to interpret and explain medieval texts also 
stimulated and inspired George Martin in his desires to imagine a synthetic 
grand narrative of a formally medieval but virtually never existing history 
writing. Many subjects, including processes, institutions, social and 
economic relations and even ethnic groups that appear in George Martin’s 
historical grand narrative have real predecessors and prototypes in a 
history of Europe. Actually, George Martin repeated the historical scheme 
of periodization and mental division of history into antiquity and the 
Middle Ages. The various invasions of formally barbaric ethnic groups, on 
the one hand, in the imagined history of George Martin, as it was in the 
real history of the West, stimulated radical changes in social and political 
institutions and relationships, inspired feudalization. 
On the other hand, the worlds imagined and invented by George 
Martin, actualize unrealized alternative scenarios of the real history of the 
Middle Ages. In George Martin’s texts, we deal with protracted and 
prolonged feudalism burdened by climatic features that slow down the 
speeds and paces of social and economic changes in the traditional agrarian 
society significantly. Analysing the imagined medieval worlds of George 
Martin, we can presume that the social and cultural spaces, the American 
writer writes about, retained more dimensions of heterogeneity and 
diversity than the real historical spaces of the European West because the 
Christianization in the late antiquity and the subsequent conversion of 
barbarians to Christianity greatly assisted to the unification of the Christian 
cultural code. The imagined worlds of George Martin, unlike the real and 
plural European medieval ones, did not know what Christianization was 
and therefore they could maintain their heterogeneous character. 
The actual situation of religious pluralism, the simultaneous 
coexistence of pagan cults, cultures and identities with attempts of 
religious unification, influenced the main vectors and trajectories of the 
historical imagination, the invention of the past and the history writing in 
the worlds of George Martin. The American writer suggested that cultures 
without Christianization were able to preserve more knowledge of previous 
civilizations and historical traditions than unified and religious identity. 
Therefore, the histories written by imagined and never living chronists of 
the world of the Seven Kingdoms are more rational than real attempts of 
===== PAGE 20 =====
ОБЩЕТЕОРЕТИЧЕСКИЕ ВОПРОСЫ
– 36 –
historical description of European medieval authors. The religious situation 
of heterogeneity and simultaneous coexistence of pagan cults with 
religions that seek to unify world allowed the "writing" of history of 
Westeros as an attempt to systematize and generalize the historical facts 
and various sources. The imagined author of the history of the Seven 
Kingdoms approached the rational and proto-positive versions of history 
several centuries earlier than the intellectuals of the real western Middle 
Ages.
The emergence and success of the history of the Seven Kingdoms, 
which simulates real historical narratives and imitates a variety of tactics 
and strategies of history writing. It reaffirms that the history in the age of 
post-post-modern as other forms of human knowledge is subject to 
falsification, construction and deconstruction. In fact, George Martin 
deconstructing motifs and themes of western feudalism history, constructs 
new historical narratives are inevitably mutate and transform into a grand 
narrative that imitate the tradition of European history writing. The grand 
narrative of the history of the Seven Kingdoms has a mixed and partly 
transitional character, actualizing the elements of several historiographical 
traditions and forms of historical imagination simultaneously. On the one 
hand, the official history of Westeros imitates the forms of the traditional 
European historical worldview, but, on the other hand, these historical 
narratives became attempts to comprehend and rationalize the historical 
process. 
The mixed nature of the grand narrative in the official history of the 
Seven Kingdoms actualizes its post-modernist nature of the construct and 
the invented tradition because the authors of this text imitated the style of 
academic discourse consciously and intentionally and simulated the 
traditional and archaic versions of the historical consciousness of the 
Middle Ages. This text could arise only in the depths of consumption of 
post-post-modern era, because the authors realized the limitations of 
traditional forms and modern attempts of history writing and tried to 
connect the various forms of historical imaginations and offer a grand 
narrative that satisfy supporters of academic historiography and popular 
mass literature. The success and triumph of history as fiction, history as the 
imagination, history as the invention, history as speculation actualizes 
constructivist character of modern historical knowledge including 
medievalism. 
The constructivist nature of the modern historical consciousness 
dooms society to develop in a vicious circle of historical imagination, 
where construction and deconstruction, imagination and inventions became 
the main forms, tactics and strategies for the formation and dissemination 
of collective and individual knowledge of the past, including the Middle 
===== PAGE 21 =====
ЖУРНАЛ ФРОНТИРНЫХ ИССЛЕДОВАНИЙ (2018, №1)
– 37 –
Ages. Medievalism repeated the intellectual faith of Orientalism in this 
cultural situation, because it mutated into several simply recognizable 
images. Medievalism became a victim of the consumerism and henceforth 
market logic. Commercial rationality replicates the simplified and 
primitivized images of the Middle Ages, but despite it, academic medieval 
studies will exist in the following decades, co-operating with medievalism 
as a simplified and non-academic version of knowledge. Medievalism of 
mass consumerism will use the achievements of academic historiography, 
but academic historians will prefer to ignore it, but as academic 
Orientalism ignores the forms of mass Hollywood Orientalism, ignorance 
will become the main tactic and strategy of the academic community 
instead of peaceful coexistence with the numerous forms of fantasy 
medievalism.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests. The author declares no 
potential conflicts of interests with respect to the authorship and/or 
publication of this article. 
Funding. The author received no financial support for the research 
and/or authorship of this article.
References:
Alexander, M. (2007). Medievalism: the Middle Ages in modern England.
New Haven: Yale University Press.
Anderson, B. (1983). Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin 
and Spread of Nationalism. NY: Verso.
Attali, M. (2017). Religious Violence in Game of Thrones: An Historical 
Background from Antiquity to the European Wars of Religion. In B. 
A. Pavlac, Game of Thrones versus History: Written in Blood (pp. 
185-194). NY: Wiley-Blackwell.
Attewell, S. (2014). Race for the Iron Throne: Political and Historical 
Analysis of "A Game of Thrones". Blue Buddha Press.
Bloch, H. (Ed.). (2014). Rethinking the New Medievalism. Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins University Press.
Boytsov, M. (2014). "Ritualy - ehto i est vlast". Intervyu s istorikom 
Mihailom Bojcovym ob obryade srednevekovoj koronacii praktike 
pomazaniya i statuse korolevskoj vlasti v Evrope. Retrieved from 
https://postnauka.ru/talks/35978
Boytsov, M. (2014). Koronacii v srednevekovoj Evrope. Istorik Mihail 
Bojcov o roli inauguracionnyh ritualov istokov tradicii pomazaniya i 
===== PAGE 22 =====
ОБЩЕТЕОРЕТИЧЕСКИЕ ВОПРОСЫ
– 38 –
rabote medievista s istochnikami. Retrieved from 
https://postnauka.ru/video/32882
Cantor, N. (1991). Inventing the Middle Ages: The lives, works and ideas 
of the great medievalists of the twentieth century. New York: 
William Morrow.
Caroll, S. (2017). Medievalism in a Song of Ice and Fire and Game of 
Thrones. Boydell & Brewer.
Carroll, S. (2015). Fantasy and Science Fiction Medievalisms: From Isaac 
Asimov to A Game of Thrones. Rewriting the Fantasy Archetype: 
George R. R. Martin, Neomedievalist Fantasy, and the Quest for 
Realism, Young, Helen. Amherst: Cambria Press.
Clasby, D. (2017). Coexistence and Conflict in the Religions of Game of 
Thrones. In B. A. Pavlac, Game of Thrones versus History: Written 
in Blood. (pp. 195-208). NY: Wiley-Blackwell.
Cowlishaw, B. (2015). What Maesters Knew: Narrating Knowing. In S. 
Johnston, & J. Battis (Eds.), Mastering the Game of Thrones: Essays 
on George R.R. Martin's A Song of Ice and Fire (pp. 57-70). NY: 
McFarland.
Eco, U. (1986). Dreaming of the Middle Ages, Travels in Hyperreality.
Orlando: Harcourt.
Efimov, A. (2017). Urbanizaciya i drakony. Retrieved from 
https://batenka.ru/aesthetics/cinema/got/
Ekman, S., & Taylor, A. I. (2016). Notes Toward a Critical Approach to 
Worlds and World-Building. Fafnir: Nordic Journal of Science 
Fiction and Fantasy Research, 3(3), 7-18.
Filyushkin, A. (2017). Kak nam privlech Ivana Vasilevicha Nevskogo 
Istorik-diagnost noosfera i geroicheskie mify proshlogo Narrativy 
proshlogo i budushchego Rossii. Retrieved from 
http://gefter.ru/archive/23407
Haritonovich, D. (2000). Sovremennost Srednevekovya. Novyj mir(10), 
Retrieved from http://magazines.russ.ru/novyi_mi/2000/10/sovr.html.
Hobsbawm, E., & Ranger, T. (1983). The Invention of Tradition.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ivanov, S. (2015). Gumanitarnaya nauka vse pereotkryvaet. Retrieved 
from https://arzamas.academy/materials/191
Jakovljevic, M., & Loncar-Vujnovic, M. (2016). Medievalism In 
Contemporary Fantasy: A New Species Of Romance. Imago 
Temporis. Medium Aevum(10), 97-116.
Johnston, S., & Battis, J. (Eds.). (2015). Mastering the Game of Thrones: 
Essays on George R.R. Martin's A Song of Ice and Fire. NY: 
McFarland.
===== PAGE 23 =====
ЖУРНАЛ ФРОНТИРНЫХ ИССЛЕДОВАНИЙ (2018, №1)
– 39 –
Kyrchanoff, M. W. (2017). “New wine into old wineskins”: the other 
horizons of frontier studies and performative turn in fantasy between 
medievalism and traditional poetics. Journal of Frontier Studies(4), 
81-109.
Larrington, C. (2016). Winter is Coming: The Medieval World of Game of 
Thrones. NY: I.B.Tauris.
Maitland, F. W. (1897). Domesday book and beyond: three essays in the 
early history of England. Cambridge University Press,.
Marques, D. (2016). The Haunted Forest of “A Song of Ice and Fire”: a 
space of otherness. Fafnir: Nordic Journal of Science Fiction and 
Fantasy Research, 3(3), 31-40.
Marsden, R. (2018). Medievalism: New discipline or scholarly norman's 
land. History Compass, 16(1), 1-9.
Martin, G., Antonsson, L., & Garcia, E. (2014). The World of Ice & Fire: 
the Untold History of Westeros and the Game of Thrones. Bantam: 
Bantam: Harper Voyager.
Mason, P. (2015, April 6). Can Marxist theory predict the end of Game of 
Thrones? The Guardian, Retrieved from 
https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/06/marxist￾theory-game-of-thrones-lannisters-bankers-sex-power-feudal￾westeros-revolution .
Mehanik, A. (2011). Zaverit u Klio Zapadnoj Evrope fantasticheski 
povezlo s istoriej... schitaet istorik chlen-korrespondent RAN Pavel 
Uvarov. Ekspert(11), Retrieved from 
http://expert.ru/expert/2011/11/zaverit-u-klio/.
Mondschein, K. (2017). Game of Thrones and the Medieval Art of War.
McFarland.
Muhlberger, S. (2017). Chivalry in Westeros. In B. A. Pavlac (Ed.), Game 
of Thrones versus History: Written in Blood (pp. 47-56). NY: Wiley￾Blackwell.
Panfilov, F. (2014, Февраль 11). Rycar kaminnogo kovrika Igra prestolov i 
drugie obrazy srednevekovya na ehkrane s tochki zreniya istorika￾medievista. Kolta, Retrieved from 
http://www.colta.ru/articles/media/1997.
Panfilov, F. (2014). Telemedivalizm srednevekovye serialy konca XX -
nachala XXI veka. Logos(6), 193-208.
Panfilov, F. (2016). Telemedivalizm srednevekovye serialy konca XX -
nachala XXI veka. Neprikosnovennyj zapas(3), Retrieved from 
http://magazines.russ.ru/nz/2016/3/srednevekovye-pesochnicy￾medievalizm-v-kompyuternyh-igrah-nacha.html.
Pavlac, B. A. (2017). Game of Thrones versus History: Written in Blood.
NY: Wiley-Blackwell.
===== PAGE 24 =====
ОБЩЕТЕОРЕТИЧЕСКИЕ ВОПРОСЫ
– 40 –
Pavlac, B. A. (2017). Of Kings, Their Battles, and Castles. In B. A. Pavlac 
(Ed.), Game of Thrones versus History: Written in Blood (pp. 57-70). 
NY: Wiley-Blackwell.
Perpinya, N. (2016). Ruins, Nostalgia and Ugliness: Five Romantic 
perceptions of the Middle Ages and a spoonful of Game of Thrones 
and Avant-garde oddity. Logos Verlag.
Pojidaev, E. (2011). Staroe i novoe srednevekove Desyatye gody. Russkij 
zhurnal, Retrieved from http://www.russ.ru/Mirovaya￾povestka/Staroe-i-novoe-srednevekov-e.
Polack, G. (2017). Setting up Westeros: The Medievalesque World of 
Game of Thrones. In B. A. Pavlac (Ed.), Game of Thrones versus 
History: Written in Blood (pp. 251-260). NY: Wiley-Blackwell.
Ramon Ruiz, J. L. (2016). The Favor of the Gods: Religion and Power in 
George R. R. Martin’s A Song of Ice and Fire. Fafnir: Nordic 
Journal of Science Fiction and Fantasy Research, 3(3), 41-50.
Riggs, D. (2017). Continuity and Transformation in the Religions of 
Westeros and Western Europe. In B. A. Pavlac (Ed.), Game of 
Thrones versus History: Written in Blood (pp. 173-184). NY: Wiley￾Blackwell.
Rijkovskiy, V. (2009). Sovetskaya medievistika i Beyond (k istorii odnoj 
diskussii). Novoe literaturnoe obozrenie(97), Retrived from 
http://magazines.russ.ru/nlo/2009/97/ry4-pr.html.
Rudoy, A. (2015). "Igra prestolov": istoricheskij materializm seks i smert. 
Vestnik buri, Retrieved from http://vestnikburi.com/igra-prestolov￾istoricheskiy-materializm-seks-i-smert/.
Savitskiy, E. (2015). Novyj medievalizm chetvert veka spustya. Novoe 
literaturnoe obozrenie(135), 346-354.
Savitskiy, E. (2016). Preposterous History: anahronicheskoe Srednevekove 
na rubezhe XX i XXI vekov. Sociologiya vlasti, 28(2).
Sidorov, A. (2017). Karolingskoe istoriopisanie Istorik Aleksandr Sidorov 
o zhanre deyanii politicheskih aspektah istoriopisaniya i 
sochineniyah. Retrieved from https://postnauka.ru/video/73561
Tarly, S. (2017). The Climate of the world of Game of Thrones. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of King’s Landing, 
1(1), 1-9.
Tucker, K. (2017). Violence, Politics, and Religion: Cosmic War in Game 
of Thrones. Fafnir: Nordic Journal of Science Fiction and Fantasy 
Research, 1(1), 54-66.
Uvarov, P. (2000). Apokatastazis ili Osnovnoj instinkt istorika. Kazus 
Individualnoe i unikalnoe v istorii(3), 15-32.
===== PAGE 25 =====
ЖУРНАЛ ФРОНТИРНЫХ ИССЛЕДОВАНИЙ (2018, №1)
– 41 –
Uvarov, P. (2004). Istoriya istoriki i istoricheskaya pamyat vo Francii. 
Otechestvennye zapiski(5), Retrived from 
http://magazines.russ.ru/oz/2004/5/2004_5_17.html.
Uvarov, P. (2010). Revansh socialnoj istorii. Retrieved from 
http://polit.ru/article/2010/03/23/history/
Uvarov, P. (2011). CHlen-korrespondent RAN Pavel YUrevich Uvarov 
rasskazal na seminare IGITI ob osobom meste socialnoj istorii v 
sovremennoj nauke. Retrieved from 
https://igiti.hse.ru/news/37709881.html
Uvarov, P. (2016). Pryamaya rech Pavel Uvarov Istorik Pavel Uvarov o 
lyubimyh knigah puti k professii i obraze Srednevekovya. Retrieved 
from https://postnauka.ru/talks/64678
Wittingslow, R. M. (2015). "All Men Must Serve": Religion and Free Will 
from the Seven to the Faceless Men. In J. Battis, & S. Johnston 
(Eds.), Mastering the Game of Thrones: Essays on George R. R. 
Martin’s "A Song of Ice and Fire" (pp. 113-131). NC: McFarland.
Young, H. (2015). Fantasy and Science Fiction Medievalisms: From Isaac 
Asimov to A Game of Thrones. Cambria Press.
ИСТОРИЧЕСКИЕ ГРАНД НАРРАТИВЫ СЕМИ КОРОЛЕВСТВ 
ВЕСТЕРОСА: ОТ ИЗОБРЕТЕНИЯ К ДЕКОНСТРУКЦИИ ТРАДИЦИОННОЙ 
СРЕДНЕВЕКОВОЙ ИСТОРИОГРАФИИ
Кирчанов М.В.
Кирчанов Максим В. Воронежский государственный университет
Воронеж, Россия, 394000, Пушкинская 16
e-mail: maksymkyrchanoff@gmail.com
Статья сфокусирована на проблемах средневековых образов в 
современной массовой культуре в контекстах симуляции и имитации «больших» 
исторических нарративов. Автор анализирует текст “The World of Ice & Fire: the
Untold History of Westeros and the Game of Thrones” в контекстах исторического и 
политического воображения и изобретения альтернативных идентичностей. 
Автор полагает, что медиевализм утратил академическую замкнутость , потому 
что современная массовая культура активно использует различные образы 
средневековья. Представители и творцы массовой культуры активно используют 
достижения академической медиевистики. Воображенная вселенная Джорджа 
Мартина имеет реальные средневековые прототипы. Автор статьи, с одной 
стороны, анализирует исторические нарративы “The World of Ice & Fire: the
Untold History of Westeros and the Game of Thrones” как попытку сформировать 
историческую и политическую память. С другой стороны, проблемы 
особенностей и типа феодализма Вестероса также анализируются в этой статье.
===== PAGE 26 =====
ОБЩЕТЕОРЕТИЧЕСКИЕ ВОПРОСЫ
– 42 –
Ключевые слова: Джордж Мартин, Вестерос, Семь Королевств, 
историческое воображение, нарративы, феодализм, политические ритуалы
Список литературы
Alexander, M. (2007). Medievalism: the Middle Ages in modern England.
New Haven: Yale University Press.
Anderson, B. (1983). Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin 
and Spread of Nationalism. NY: Verso.
Attali, M. (2017). Religious Violence in Game of Thrones: An Historical 
Background from Antiquity to the European Wars of Religion. In B.
A. Pavlac, Game of Thrones versus History: Written in Blood (pp. 
185-194). NY: Wiley-Blackwell.
Attewell, S. (2014). Race for the Iron Throne: Political and Historical 
Analysis of "A Game of Thrones". Blue Buddha Press.
Bloch, H. (Ed.). (2014). Rethinking the New Medievalism. Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins University Press.
Бойцов, М. (2014). "Ритуалы - это и есть власт". Интервью с 
историком Михаилом Бойцовым об обряде средневековой 
коронации, практике помазания и статусе королевской власти в 
Европе. Retrieved from https://postnauka.ru/talks/35978
Бойцов, М. (2014). Коронации в средневековой Европе. Историк 
Михаил Бойцов о роли инаугурационных ритуалов истоков 
традиции помазания и работе медиевиста с источниками. 
Retrieved from https://postnauka.ru/video/32882
Cantor, N. (1991). Inventing the Middle Ages: The lives, works and ideas 
of the great medievalists of the twentieth century. New York: 
William Morrow.
Caroll, S. (2017). Medievalism in a Song of Ice and Fire and Game of 
Thrones. Boydell & Brewer.
Carroll, S. (2015). Fantasy and Science Fiction Medievalisms: From Isaac 
Asimov to A Game of Thrones. Rewriting the Fantasy Archetype: 
George R. R. Martin, Neomedievalist Fantasy, and the Quest for 
Realism, Young, Helen. Amherst: Cambria Press.
Clasby, D. (2017). Coexistence and Conflict in the Religions of Game of 
Thrones. В B. A. Pavlac, Game of Thrones versus History: Written in 
Blood. (стр. 195-208). NY: Wiley-Blackwell.
Cowlishaw, B. (2015). What Maesters Knew: Narrating Knowing. In S. 
Johnston, & J. Battis (Eds.), Mastering the Game of Thrones: Essays 
on George R.R. Martin's A Song of Ice and Fire (pp. 57-70). NY: 
McFarland.
===== PAGE 27 =====
ЖУРНАЛ ФРОНТИРНЫХ ИССЛЕДОВАНИЙ (2018, №1)
– 43 –
Eco, U. (1986). Dreaming of the Middle Ages, Travels in Hyperreality.
Orlando: Harcourt.
Ефимов, А. (2017). Урбанизация и драконы. Retrieved from 
https://batenka.ru/aesthetics/cinema/got/
Ekman, S., & Taylor, A. I. (2016). Notes Toward a Critical Approach to 
Worlds and World-Building. Fafnir: Nordic Journal of Science 
Fiction and Fantasy Research, 3(3), 7-18.
Филюшкин, А. (2017). Как нам привлечь Ивана Васильевича Невского. 
Историк-диагност, ноосфера и героические мифы прошлого. 
Нарративы прошлого и будущего России.. Retrieved from
http://gefter.ru/archive/23407
Харитонович, Д. (2000). Современность Средневековья. Новый мир
(10), Retrieved from 
http://magazines.russ.ru/novyi_mi/2000/10/sovr.html.
Hobsbawm, E., & Ranger, T. (1983). The Invention of Tradition.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Иванов, С. (2015). Гуманитарная наука всё переоткрывает. Retrieved
from https://arzamas.academy/materials/191
Jakovljevic, M., & Loncar-Vujnovic, M. (2016). Medievalism In 
Contemporary Fantasy: A New Species Of Romance. Imago 
Temporis. Medium Aevum(10), 97-116.
Johnston, S., & Battis, J. (Eds.). (2015). Mastering the Game of Thrones: 
Essays on George R.R. Martin's A Song of Ice and Fire. NY: 
McFarland.
Kyrchanoff, M. W. (2017). «New wine into old wineskins»: the other 
horizons of frontier studies and performative turn in fantasy between 
medievalism and traditional poetics. Journal of Frontier Studies(4), 
81-109.
Larrington, C. (2016). Winter is Coming: The Medieval World of Game of 
Thrones. NY: I.B.Tauris.
Maitland, F. W. (1897). Domesday book and beyond: three essays in the 
early history of England. Cambridge University Press,.
Marques, D. (2016). The Haunted Forest of “A Song of Ice and Fire”: a 
space of otherness. Fafnir: Nordic Journal of Science Fiction and 
Fantasy Research, 3(3), 31-40.
Marsden, R. (2018). Medievalism: New discipline or scholarly norman's 
land. History Compass, 16(1), 1-9.
Martin, G., Antonsson, L., & Garcia, E. (2014). The World of Ice & Fire: 
the Untold History of Westeros and the Game of Thrones. Bantam: 
Bantam: Harper Voyager.
Mason, P. (2015, April 6). Can Marxist theory predict the end of Game of 
Thrones? The Guardian, Retrieved from 
===== PAGE 28 =====
ОБЩЕТЕОРЕТИЧЕСКИЕ ВОПРОСЫ
– 44 –
https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/06/marxist￾theory-game-of-thrones-lannisters-bankers-sex-power-feudal￾westeros-revolution .
Механик, А. (2011). Заверить у Клио. Западной Европе фантастически 
повезло с историей... считает историк член-корреспондент РАН 
Павел Уваров. Эксперт(11), Retrieved from 
http://expert.ru/expert/2011/11/zaverit-u-klio/.
Mondschein, K. (2017). Game of Thrones and the Medieval Art of War.
McFarland.
Muhlberger, S. (2017). Chivalry in Westeros. В B. A. Pavlac (Ред.), Game 
of Thrones versus History: Written in Blood (стр. 47-56). NY: 
Wiley-Blackwell.
Панфилов, Ф. (2014, Февраль 11). Рыцарь каминного коврика. Игра 
престолов и другие образы средневековья на экране с точки 
зрения историка-медиевиста. Кольта, Retrieved from
http://www.colta.ru/articles/media/1997.
Панфилов, Ф. (2014). Телемедивализм. Средневековые сериалы конца 
XX – начала XXI вв. Логос (6), 193-208.
Панфилов, F. (2016). Телемедивализм. Средневековые сериалы конца 
XX – начала XXI вв. Неприкосновенный запас (3), Retrieved from
http://magazines.russ.ru/nz/2016/3/srednevekovye-pesochnicy￾medievalizm-v-kompyuternyh-igrah-nacha.html.
Pavlac, B. A. (2017). Game of Thrones versus History: Written in Blood.
NY: Wiley-Blackwell.
Pavlac, B. A. (2017). Of Kings, Their Battles, and Castles. В B. A. Pavlac 
(Ред.), Game of Thrones versus History: Written in Blood (стр. 57-
70). NY: Wiley-Blackwell.
Perpinya, N. (2016). Ruins, Nostalgia and Ugliness: Five Romantic 
perceptions of the Middle Ages and a spoonful of Game of Thrones 
and Avant-garde oddity. Logos Verlag.
Пожидаев, E. (2011). Старое и новое средневековье. Десятые годы. 
Русский журнал, Retrieved from http://www.russ.ru/Mirovaya￾povestka/Staroe-i-novoe-srednevekov-e.
Polack, G. (2017). Setting up Westeros: The Medievalesque World of 
Game of Thrones. В B. A. Pavlac (Ред.), Game of Thrones versus 
History: Written in Blood (стр. 251-260). NY: Wiley-Blackwell.
Ramon Ruiz, J. L. (2016). The Favor of the Gods: Religion and Power in 
George R. R. Martin’s A Song of Ice and Fire. Fafnir: Nordic 
Journal of Science Fiction and Fantasy Research, 3(3), 41-50.
Riggs, D. (2017). Continuity and Transformation in the Religions of 
Westeros and Western Europe. В B. A. Pavlac (Ред.), Game of 
===== PAGE 29 =====
ЖУРНАЛ ФРОНТИРНЫХ ИССЛЕДОВАНИЙ (2018, №1)
– 45 –
Thrones versus History: Written in Blood (стр. 173-184). NY: 
Wiley-Blackwell.
Рыжковский, В. (2009). Советская медиевистика и Beyond (к истории 
одной дискуссии). Новое литературное обозрение (97), Retrived
from http://magazines.russ.ru/nlo/2009/97/ry4-pr.html.
Рудой, А. (2015). «Игра престолов»: исторический материализм. Секс 
и смерть. Вестник бури, Retrieved from
http://vestnikburi.com/igra-prestolov-istoricheskiy-materializm-seks￾i-smert/.
Савицкий, Е. (2015). Новый медиевализм четверть века спустя. Новое 
литературное обозрение (135), 346-354.
Савицкий, Е. (2016). Preposterous History: анахроническое 
Средневековье на рубеже XX и XXI веков. Социология власти, 
28(2).
Сидоров, А. (2017). Каролингское историописание. Историк 
Александр Сидоров о жанре деянии, политических аспектах 
историописания и сочинениях. Получено из
https://postnauka.ru/video/73561
Tarly, S. (2017). The Climate of the world of Game of Thrones. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of King’s Landing, 
1(1), 1-9.
Tucker, K. (2017). Violence, Politics, and Religion: Cosmic War in Game 
of Thrones. Fafnir: Nordic Journal of Science Fiction and Fantasy 
Research, 1(1), 54-66.
Уваров, П. (2000). Апокатастазис или Основной инстинкт историка. 
Казус: Индивидуальное и уникальное в истории (3), 15-32.
Уваров, П. (2004). История, историки и историческая память во 
Франции. Отечественные записки (5), Retrived from
http://magazines.russ.ru/oz/2004/5/2004_5_17.html.
Уваров, П. (2010). Реванш социальной истории. Retrieved from
http://polit.ru/article/2010/03/23/history/
Уваров, П. (2011). Член-корреспондент РАН Павел Юрьевич Уваров 
рассказал на примере ИГИТИ об особом месте социальной 
истории в современной. Retrieved from 
https://igiti.hse.ru/news/37709881.html
Уваров, П. (2016). Пряма речь. Павел Уваров. Историк Павел Уваров о 
любимых книгах, пути к профессии и образе Средневековья. 
Retrieved from https://postnauka.ru/talks/64678
Wittingslow, R. M. (2015). "All Men Must Serve": Religion and Free Will 
from the Seven to the Faceless Men. In J. Battis, & S. Johnston 
(Eds.), Mastering the Game of Thrones: Essays on George R. R. 
Martin’s "A Song of Ice and Fire" (pp. 113-131). NC: McFarland.
===== PAGE 30 =====
ОБЩЕТЕОРЕТИЧЕСКИЕ ВОПРОСЫ
– 46 –
Young, H. (2015). Fantasy and Science Fiction Medievalisms: From Isaac 
Asimov to A Game of Thrones. Cambria Press.