 
 On Farmer Giles - by Noah Huisman - The Lumenorean 
 The Lumenorean Subscribe Sign in On Farmer Giles The Reluctant Hero and Knights of 'All Mail, No Mettle' Noah Huisman Aug 09, 2026 4 Share [Greetings, friends, from Austin! I’ve slowly been working my way through Tolkien’s lesser-known works ( Farmer Giles of Ham, Smith of Wootton Major , Roverandom , Mr. Bliss ) and will eventually have essays prepared on each of them to go with the ones already done: The Fall of Arthur (see On the Fall of Arthur ) and Leaf by Niggle (usually called Tree and Leaf these days—see On the Art of Subcreation ). Part of my reason for doing this is that I’ve found that while I’m working on my book (currently in the editing stage), what I consume affects what comes out—meaning whatever I’m reading starts to show up in my writing (and editing). Tolkien’s short stories allow me to read something a little lighter while still absorbing his prose. 1 Since finishing Farmer Giles a few weeks ago, I haven’t been able to get it out of my mind. It’s a sort of parody of knighthood, 2 like Don Quixote or Chaucer’s Sir Thopas ( parodying his own Knight’s Tale), at a time when Tolkien was simultaneously revising his translation of Sir Gawain and the Green Knight (see On Gawain and the Green Knight ). It tells the story of a farmer, interested only in his farm and his food, who becomes an accidental hero in a world where the King gives away an ancient and powerful sword because his court can’t read the runes, and the knights are all mail and no mettle. It is an incredible illustration of a world where the motto is: Videri Quam Esse. To seem rather than to be. 3 It seems to me likely that Tolkien wrote this story, in part, to poke fun at the academic institutions and intellectual elites surrounding him and the irony of “possessing” tradition through inspection and dissection while disregarding or dismissing it as unnecessary, old-fashioned, or out of style. But in highlighting the unfortunate state of a society where show is preferred over substance, he holds up an eternal mirror—the same one Plato raises in The Republic (see On Being & Seeming ). So it is to Farmer Giles of Ham , and the comic, cautionary tale that Tolkien tells, that we devote the rest of today’s essay.] Figure: Illustration of Farmer Giles and the dragon Chrysophylax by Pauline Baynes (1949). Tolkien’s Farmer Giles of Ham is laced through in its entirety with the theme of things, once great, gone hollow. Because it is everywhere at work in the tale, what follows is a summary of the story with some commentary as we go (as opposed to waiting until the end to offer reflections). There are three moves in particular to keep in mind. The first to observe is the rituals that outlive (and forget) the virtues and tradition they were established to celebrate. The second is how credentials and dress are substitutes for substance and capability—many bear only the signs of power but lack real power. And third, as a parody of the knight and comic hero, Giles is not some blameless and upright saint—he postures, delays, and tries his best to stay out of anything that does not concern himself or his land. It is only by chance, and with great reluctance, that he becomes the hero of Little Kingdom. Part of Tolkien’s honesty about the nature of heroism is how often it falls short (see, e.g., Frodo failing to throw the ring into Mount Doom). Thanks for reading The Lumenorean! Subscribe for free to receive new posts and support my work. Subscribe Keep these things in mind as we go; we’ll return to them in the end. Now, to Farmer Giles and Ham. The comic tone is established in the first paragraph, where we learn that Farmer Giles, who lives in the Little Kingdom in the small village of Ham, 4 has a long (and distinguished) Latin name. Ægidius de Hammo was a man who lived in the midmost parts of the Island of Britain. In full his name was Ægidius Ahenobarbus Julius Agricola de Hammo; for people were richly endowed with names in those days, now long ago, when this island was still happily divided into many kingdoms. There was more time then, and folk were fewer, so that most men were distinguished. However, those days are now over, so I will in what follows give the man his name shortly, and in the vulgar form: he was Farmer Giles of Ham, and he had a red beard. Ham was only a village, but villages were proud and independent still in those days. 5 The comedy of the long name introduces us to the theme of theory versus practice. The long, Latin name is a title and a source of prestige, but largely impractical. Farmer Giles is not nobility, and so we are introduced to him by his vulgar name; he is a simple man, not unlike Bilbo in The Hobbit , who is perfectly content to be fat and happy with his lot. “[Giles] was a slow sort of fellow, rather set in his ways, and taken up with his own affairs. He had his hands full (he said) keeping the wolf from the door: that is, keeping himself as fat and comfortable as his father before him.” 6 Farmer Giles is thrust from his secluded life when a large, deaf and daft giant from the north wanders down to Little Kingdom, leaving a wake of destruction, and stumbles onto his land in Ham (where we’re told nothing memorable has happened for quite a long time). The giant is spotted late at night by the Farmer’s talking dog, Garm, who alerts his master of the monster. Giles, skeptical that a giant is, in fact, on his land, nonetheless grabs a blunderbuss from his wall, fills it with scrap metal, and marches out to meet whatever intruders have trespassed onto his property. Giles crests a hill and finds the giant staring at the moon, oblivious to the Farmer’s approach. “He pulled the trigger without thinking, and the blunderbuss went off with a staggering bang. By luck it was pointed more or less at the giant’s large ugly face… by chance and no choice of the farmer’s [much of the shot] struck the giant.” Convinced he had been stung by a nasty dragonfly that could bite like hot pincers, the giant picks up a few sheep from the hillside to eat when he got home, and returns to the north. As it turns out, many of the people of Ham had been watching through their windows, and they celebrate Giles as a hero. Word of his deeds spread across Little Kingdom until news reaches the ears of the King, who sends a letter of gratitude and a gift: a belt and a long sword. We’re told the King himself had never used the sword and, indeed, thought very little of it—believing it to be the sort of “[p]lain heavy sword[]” that was “out of fashion at court just then.” Here we get the first portrait of the court’s values. The King offers what he believes is a performative gift (because none in the court know its history or can read its markings). Fashion has so supplanted function that the most powerful sword in the realm is labeled plain and heavy. After this episode, the next few seasons go well for Giles and the village of Ham. But then we learn that the giant, on returning home, told his friends of the Little Kingdom he found—a land with plenty to eat for the taking, without “a knight to be seen or heard,” pleasant if you could get past the stinging flies. The dragons overhear the giant’s words and take interest. “So knights are mythical!” say some of the younger dragons, even as the people of Ham had thought the same of dragons—it had been a long time since the two species had clashed. It is here that we learn the history of knights and dragons in that world: In those parts once upon a time there had dwelt a number of dragons of one kind and another, and they had made raids far and wide. But the Middle Kingdom was in those days famous for the daring of the King’s knights, and so many stray dragons had been killed, or had returned with grave damage, that the others gave up going that way. It was still the custom for Dragon’s Tail to be served up at the King’s Christmas Feast; and each year a knight was chosen for the duty of hunting. He was supposed to set out upon St. Nicholas’ Day and come home with a dragon’s tail not later than the eve of the feast. But for many years now the Royal Cook had made a marvellous confection, a Mock Dragon’s Tail of cake and almondpaste, with cunning scales of hard icing-sugar. The chosen knight then carried this into the hall on Christmas Eve, while the fiddles played and the trumpets rang. The Mock Dragon’s Tail was eaten after dinner on Christmas Day, and everybody said (to please the cook) that it tasted much better than Real Tail. We must pause here because this paragraph captures the emblem of the entire story. We see the ceremony preserved as the essence is removed. The real Dragon’s Tail becomes a Mock Dragon Tail as real knights are replaced with shells of chivalry, and everyone goes on pretending (to please the cook) that it beats the real thing. 7 Returning to the story, the giant’s report of the Little Kingdom is enough to convince one particular dragon, Chrysophylax Dives, of ancient and imperial lineage, to spread his wings a week before Christmas and journey south. He makes the decision because he has concluded that knights survive only in songs. As soon as he arrives, he does a great deal of damage: “smashing and burning, and devouring sheep, cattle, and horses.” And it is once again Garm, Giles’ dog, who finds the beast and carries a cry for help back to the Farmer. Word spreads of the dragon’s appearance, and the call for aid is relayed to the King, who sends for his useless knights. But the knights did nothing; their knowledge of the dragon was still quite unofficial. So the King brought the matter to their notice, fully and formally, asking for necessary action at their early convenience. He was greatly displeased when he found that their convenience would not be early at all, and was indeed daily postponed. Yet the excuses of the knights were undoubtedly sound. First of all, the Royal Cook had already made the Dragon’s Tail for that Christmas, being a man who believed in getting things done in good time. It would not do at all to offend him by bringing in a real tail at the last minute. He was a very valuable servant… and most unfortunately a grand tournament had been arranged for St John’s Day: knights of many realms had been invited and were coming to compete for a valuable prize. It was obviously unreasonable to spoil the chances of the midland Knights by sending their best men off on a dragon-hunt before the tournament was over. By calling the excuses “undoubtedly sound,” Tolkien is calling attention to the irony of a world where the inner workings and machinery of chivalry exist chiefly to prevent any real act of chivalry from happening. Why do the actual, inconvenient work, when the reward is already offered, and you can just have the celebration? This is how the counterfeit comes to replace the real and the court is made hollow. Once the people of Ham realize the King’s knights will not help, they turn to Farmer Giles, who is made uncomfortable by the villagers’ insistence that he is practically a knight and therefore ought to go and face the beast. Giles denies their requests and the dragon moves closer to the village. Then the village priest (the parson) visits Giles in his home and discovers the supernatural nature of the sword given to the Farmer by the King, who had no idea of the ancient and legendary weapon’s worth, because the “King’s armourer [ ] was so accustomed to runes, names and other signs of power and significance upon swords and scabbards that he had not bothered his head about them; he thought them out of date, anyway.” The sword, we learn from the parson (whose knowledge is put to practice for a living), is actually the old dragon-slaying sword called Caudimordax (or, “Tailbiter”)—a weapon of renown they all knew as belonging to Bellomarius, the greatest of all the dragonslayers of the realm. “The sword,” says the parson, “will not stay sheathed, if a dragon is within five miles; and without doubt in a brave man’s hands no dragon can resist it.” Learning the identity of the sword, the villagers make one final plea to Giles, whose will is split: on one hand, “[h]e had been very fond of tales about Bellomarius when he was a boy and before he had learned sense he had sometimes wished that he could have a marvellous and heroic sword of his own. So it came over him all of a sudden that he would take Tailbiter and go dragonhunting”; on the other, “he had been used to bargaining all his life, and he made one more effort to postpone the event” on account of having no armor. But Giles runs out of excuses when the villagers band together and have the gloomy blacksmith stitch for him a makeshift set of old and rusty steel rings on a leather shirt—fit for business “and not for showing off at court.” (His armor is, of course, the court’s values turned inside out: ugly, but useful.) At last, Giles walks out to meet the dragon jingling in a poor set of armor, with his old dog and his lame mare, holding in his hand the sword that would not stay in its sheath. Note, here, the function of the sword, which is the object that will not pretend in a world where everyone is pretending—it will not stay in its scabbard when a dragon is near, regardless of the wishes of the one who bears it. When they finally find the dragon sleeping, his dog bolts and his mare sits down, sending Farmer Giles backward into a ditch and his sword from his hand. By the time Giles rises, the dragon is awake and staring at him. The two exchange words, and the dragon, with his “wicked heart (as dragons all have)… was waiting until the old fool was off his guard.” When Giles stoops and picks up Tailbiter, the sword springs to action. “As soon as it was in the farmer’s hand, it leaped forward with a flash, straight at the dragon’s eyes.” The dragon recognizes the sword at once and cries foul before turning to flattery. “What can I do for your honour?” asks the dragon. Giles responds by telling him off and waving his hands, a signal Tailbiter takes as a battle cry. “That [motion] was quite enough for Tailbiter. It circled flashing the air; then down it came, smiting the dragon on the joint of the right wing, a ringing blow that shocked him exceedingly.” The strike is enough to turn Chrysophylax away, but when the dragon finds it cannot fly, it is forced to run on foot and is chased by Giles and his mare into the town center. “Just outside the church the dragon gave up.” Surrounded by the villagers, the dragon surrenders and begs for his life, promising to pay for all the damage he has done and for all the funerals of the people he has killed. And because “[t]hey knew very little of the ways of the wide and wicked world” and “no one now living in all the realm [ ] had had any actual experience in dealing with dragons and their tricks,” the villagers (including the parson as their spokesman) bargained with the beast and let him leave on the oath that he would return on January the fourteenth with the treasure he promised. Shortly after the dragon’s departure, the King hears the news and quickly takes a financial interest in the matter—journeying to Ham, declaring that the wealth of the dragon belonged to himself as the lord of the land, and so he sets up pavilions in Farmer Giles’ fields while they waited for Chrysophylax to return. The royal retinue ate up nearly all the bread, butter, eggs, chickens, bacon and mutton, and drank up every drop of old ale there was in the place in the next three days. Then they began to grumble at short commons. But the King paid handsomely for everything (in tallies to be honoured later by the Exchequer, which he hoped would shortly be richly replenished); so the folk of Ham were well satisfied, not knowing the actual state of the Exchequer. The details of the King here only serve to further illustrate his lack of substance. His tallies draw on an empty treasury to be made full by the deeds of other men; he claims the hoard by right and contributes nothing. But January the fourteenth came and went, and there was no sign of the dragon. Nor was there the next day, and the King, who wanted his money, flew into a rage and took leave with his knights, canceling half his debt owed to the village when they went. A week went by, and a message from the King came: all knights, including Farmer Giles, were commanded to come to the King’s court at once so they could ride forth and bring Chrysophylax to justice for violating his oath. Giles goes reluctantly, and when he arrives at court, he is tired and dusty, and the knights in their polished mail and shining helmets are annoyed and embarrassed to have the farmer among their distinguished company. The knights leave on their quest almost as soon as Giles arrives, but “they did not go far. The knights were in no hurry, once they had started. They rode along at their leisure, in a straggling line…” The knights are, to twist a cliché, all mail and no mettle. They cannot read the tracks of the dragon and fail to see the signs precisely because they are too distracted with decorum. When eventually signs of the dragon begin to appear, “[t]he knights were discussing points of precedence and etiquette, and their attention was distracted. Otherwise they would have observed that dragon-marks were now obvious and numerous.” 8 Then at midday, the dragon swooped without warning out of its cave and fell on them, killing or scattering all of the knights but Giles. At the sight of Tailbiter, Chrysophylax stops his attack and appeals to the Farmer, who calls the dragon to answer for failing to honor the oath to the people of Ham. The two fall into bargaining. “And so they kept on for a while, chaffering and arguing like folk at a fair. Yet the end of it was as you might expect; for whatever else might be said, few had ever outlasted Farmer Giles at a bargaining.” In the end, Chrysophylax fetches from his cave the treasure (after multiple attempts to shortchange Giles), and the dragon strikes a deal: if the Farmer will let him keep but a little, then he will carry the treasure back to Ham and, what’s more, help him keep it. Giles agrees, where “[a] knight would have stood out for the whole hoard and got a curse laid upon it.” Part of Tolkien’s parody is seen here in which virtues, if they can be called that, win victory for Giles. He is not like the Hercules that slays the Lion, but like the Hercules that outwits Atlas; it takes practical intelligence and bargaining, and the insight to see through deception—“be ye therefore as wise as serpents and simple as doves.” 9 With the deal struck, together Giles and the dragon set off back to Ham, picking up several of the knights’ former servants on the journey back, who were excited by the idea of earning better wages than the knights they served before. After three days, they arrive back at the border of the Little Kingdom and are greeted with free food and drink. “[T]he news of the return of Master Ægidius spread like fire from the West.” Everywhere they went, Giles was cheered, and the dragon was booed. Word reaches the King, whose concern only extends to the treasure. He calls for Giles to come and pay tribute, but the call is ignored. The King, in his rage, summons his horse and men-at-arms, and they ride for Ham. They find Giles waiting for them on a bridge. The King demands the treasure and the return of his sword; Giles, in return, asks for the King’s crown. Just as a fight is about to ensue, Chrysophylax climbs out from under the bridge and claws the King’s white horse, sending all the King’s men scattering. [F]rom that day the power of the Little Kingdom came to an end in that neighbourhood. For many a mile round about men took Giles for their lord. Never a man could the King with all his titles get to ride against the rebel Ægidius; for he had become the Darling of the Land, and the matter of song… 10 So ends the story of Farmer Giles—a story in which Tolkien offers us a parody to point out a feature of society that exists everywhere and at all times. A position is elevated to a place of value by worthy people. This elevated position attracts others more interested in the praise and status it confers than in the work required to be worthy of it. To say again what was said earlier: this is how the counterfeit comes to replace the real and things are made hollow. Every institution drifts this way. People of substance are replaced by the illusory until the whole thing lacks what it was meant to keep alive and sacred. And it always takes the fool (like Perceval or Farmer Giles) to restore the wasteland. For all his waffling and delaying, Giles is, at heart, a man of substance—one who cares little about appearing to be something other than that which he is. He is who he is, sometimes blundering, and always unpolished. But when it matters, he does what needs doing. And in doing, he reminds us: How often heroic deeds are done by the ordinary and plain. — P.S. This recent note by my friend, Spencer Klavan , is the only reminder you need to know that the academic world Tolkien was critiquing in Farmer Giles is alive and well. “The answer seems to be that people think of scholarship as instrumental to the prestige and other goodies they can attain by faking it. And obviously the credential system has been colonized by overseers who do, in fact, conceive of it as a complicated slot machine for dispensing in-group favors. Which is how you end up with this kind of hooey again, and again, and again.” 1 Because of this, it’s mostly Tolkien and Lewis books for me these days, but I have added a little bit of Dungeon Crawler Carl . Yes, it’s mostly for entertainment, but it gives my brain a break, and Dinneman is great at something I struggle with: writing fight and battle scenes in an engaging, interesting way. 2 In the mock-editorial Foreword, Tolkien does something I recently heard Brandon Sanderson speak to: the author positions themselves as the finder, editor, and translator of an ancient and lost manuscript. 3 An inversion of Cicero’s Esse Quam Videri , “to be rather than to seem,” from his essay On Friendship . 4 Tolkien places The Little Kingdom and Ham in a mythic version of Britain, not unlike my Albion, and sets it sometime between the time that Brutus settled the lands and King Arthur. 5 J.R.R. Tolkien, Farmer Giles of Ham (available here ) (“ Farmer Giles ”). Unless otherwise noted, all quotes in this essay come from Farmer Giles . 6 In The Hobbit , Bilbo tells Gandalf: “We are plain quiet folk and have no use for adventures. Nasty disturbing uncomfortable things! Make you late for dinner! I can’t think what anybody sees in them.” 7 In The Present Age , Kierkegaard warns about a society that cares about and celebrates appearances over reality. See On the Present Age . 8 This scene riffs on the ending of Beowulf —here, the knights scatter and one unlikely figure (Giles and his mare) stands his ground; in Beowulf , all but Beowulf and Wiglaf break and run when the dragon fight comes. 9 Matthew 10:16. 10 In the denouement, we’re told a few things. Chrysophylax remained long in Ham (despite begging often for his liberty), much to the profit of Giles. Giles, being fabulously rich, “built himself a hall of great magnificence, and gathered great strength of men-at-arms. Very bright and gay they were, for their gear was the best that money could buy…” In the end, Giles became the King of the Little Kingdom, and was crowned in Ham in the name of Ægidius Draconarius. After some years, when Giles felt himself securely established, he let the poor worm (Chrysophylax) go back home, and the two “parted with many expressions of mutual esteem, and a pact of non-aggression upon either side. In his bad heart of hearts, the dragon felt as kindly disposed towards Giles as a dragon can feel towards anyone.” Thereafter, the dragon returned home to his cave and his “mort of treasure,” fighting off a young dragon to reclaim it. The end. 4 Share Discussion about this post Comments Restacks Top Latest Discussions No posts Ready for more? Subscribe © 2026 Noah Huisman · Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection notice Start your Substack Get the app Substack is the home for great culture 
