 
 Farmer Giles of Ham: Comedy in Faërie? | Dr. Philip Irving Mitchell | Dallas Baptist University 
 Dallas Baptist University 
 Quick Links 
 Logins Student Faculty/Staff 
 Library Campus News Visit DBU Confirm Enrollment 
 More 
 Apply Now 
 About 
 Glorifying God Above All Else 
 About DBU 
 DBU at a Glance 
 History 
 Mission & Vision 
 Integrated Faith & Learning 
 Community 
 Core Values 
 President's Welcome 
 DBU Leadership 
 Quick Facts 
 Campus 
 Upcoming Events 
 Campus News 
 Campus Map 
 Directions to DBU 
 Social Media 
 Email Us 
 Visit DBU 
 Contact Us 
 Academics 
 Study Your Passion. Grow Your Faith. 
 Academics 
 Programs 
 Undergraduate 
 Graduate 
 Doctoral 
 Degree Completion 
 Online 
 Dual Credit 
 Colleges & Schools Accreditation 
 Academic Resources 
 Academic Calendar 
 Academic Planning Hub 
 Advising Center 
 Library 
 Registrar's Office 
 Bookstore 
 Center for Baptist History & Heritage 
 Explore Majors 
 Apply Now 
 Admissions 
 Find Your Place at DBU 
 Admissions 
 Undergraduate 
 First-Year Students 
 Transfer Students 
 Homeschool Students 
 Degree Completion 
 CFNI Students 
 Hillsong Students 
 YWAM Students 
 Veterans 
 Online 
 Parents & Families 
 How to Apply 
 Financial Aid 
 Cashier's Office 
 Graduate 
 Master's 
 Doctoral 
 Online 
 International 
 Undergraduate Students 
 Graduate Students 
 Apply Now 
 Request Info 
 Confirm Enrollment 
 New Patriot Orientation 
 Campus Life 
 Find Your Home on the Hill 
 Campus Life 
 Prospective Students 
 Student Life 
 Spiritual Life 
 Greek Life 
 International Students 
 University Housing 
 Campus Information 
 Current Students 
 Student Life 
 Student Affairs 
 International Students 
 Career & Professional Development 
 Counseling Center 
 Health Services 
 University Housing 
 Prayer Ministry 
 Email DBU 
 Contact Us 
 Athletics 
 Producing Champions for Christ 
 Athletics 
 DBU Patriots at a Glance 
 Mission, Vision & Core Values 
 Patriot Traditions & Student Groups 
 Sport Camps 
 Patriot Athletic Fund 
 Prospective Student-Athletes 
 Game Day 
 Shop DBU Gear 
 Buy Tickets 
 Directions to DBU 
 #Champions4Christ 
 DBU Athletics 
 Buy Tickets 
 Give 
 Join Us in Developing Christ-Centered Leaders 
 Advancement 
 Give 
 Ways to Give 
 Impact of Giving 
 Fundraising Priorities 
 Upcoming Events 
 Campus News 
 Update Information 
 Donor 
 Alumni 
 Connect 
 Alumni Association 
 Churches 
 Women's Auxiliary Board 
 Update Alumni Information 
 Give Now 
 Contact Us 
 Home 
 Dr. Philip Irving Mitchell 
 Tolkien and Medieval Tradition Resources 
 Farmer Giles of Ham: Comedy in Faërie? 
 Farmer Giles of Ham: Comedy in Faërie? 
 J.R.R. Tolkien had a cat called Grimalkin: once a familiar of Herr Grimm now he spoke the law to him. --clerihew by Tolkien 
 We were TALKing of DRAGONS, | TOLkien and I In a BERKshire BAR. | The BIG WORKman Who had SAT SILent | and SUCKED his PIPE ALL the EVEning, | from his EMPTy MUG With GLEAMing EYE | GLANCED toWARD us; 'I SEEN'em mySELF,'| he SAID FIERCELy. --C.S. Lewis,  Rehabilitations  122 
 Tolkien suggests in "On Fairy-Stories" that the magic of the world of Faërie must not be mocked, even if comic elements are present in the story: 
 Faerie itself may perhaps most nearly be translated by Magic - but it is magic of a peculiar mood and power, at the furthest pole from the vulgar devices of the laborious, scientific, magician.  There is one proviso: if there is any satire present in the tale, one thing must not be made fun of, the magic itself.  That must in that story be taken seriously neither laughed at nor explained away. 
 In part, he believes this is so because true Faërie requires readers who desire the magic of its world and believe, which is not the same as a suspension of disbelief. The world must, indeed, be desirable for it to work its charm.  Farmer Giles of Ham , while it originated in the 1920's as a tale for Tolkien's children, much like  Roverrandom  or  Mr. Bliss ,  was expanded by 1938 into a tale that clearly included mock elements which a learned society, such as the Lovelace Society, could appreciate. And by its publication in 1949, it had acquired the mock-scholarly forward and the delightful comic illustrations by Pauline Baynes. It had clearly become a tale appreciated best on a number of levels. The Russian literary theorist Mikhail M. Bakhtin has observed that mock-genres tend to bring a realistic corrective to the more idealistic works they parody. Mock genres reduce the hallowed distance that a work like an epic, tragedy, or grand romance introduce to hold readers in its power. Instead, their laughter brings the foibles of life up-close for examination: 
 As a distanced image a subject cannot be comical; to be made comical, it must be brought close. Everything that makes us laugh is close at hand, all comical creativity works in a zone of maximal proximity. Laughter has the remarkable power of making an object up close, of drawing it into a zone of crude contact where one can finger it familiarly on all sides, turn it upside down, inside out, peer at it from above and below, break open its external shell, look at its center, doubt it, take it apart, dismember it, lay it bare and expose it, examine it freely and experiment with it. . . . Parodic-travestying literature introduces the permanent corrective of laughter, of a critique on the one-sided seriousness of the lofty direct word, the corrective of reality that is always richer, more fundamental and most importantly  too contradictory and heteroglot  to be fit into a high and straightforward genre. 
 In other words, parodies, mock-genres, force us to see the complex, contradictory nature of life as it is really lived. The literary world that is  Farmer Giles  is not the same as most of Tolkien's literary fiction. It is a medieval world set somewhere in 9th-century England, though one not easily identified on any map. It is not the Middle-Earth of The Silmarillion,  The Hobbit , or LOR. What then, if any, is relationship of these two fictional worlds? 
 Discussion Questions 
 Should  Farmer Giles of Ham  be classified as a fairy-story? Why or why not? 
 Likewise, does it possess any elements of Faerie? Why or why not? 
 Is it classifiable as a genre or mock-genre? 
 Can the plot, characterization, and/or setting of  Farmer Giles  be said to possess the heteroglossiac qualities that Bakhtin attributes to parody? Explain. 
 How does Tolkien's story compare with the world of The Silmarillion? 
 Is its humor comparable to that in  The Hobbit  or LOR? 
 Should Giles be understood as a comic hero? What kind of world does that imply? 
 How (or where) does  Farmer Giles  fit into Tolkien's poetics? (cf. "Mythopoeia") 
 Dr. Philip Irving Mitchell 
 Bibliography 
 Christ and Composition 
 Christian Worldview and Literature 
 20th Century Christian Poets 
 Modern Poetry Resources 
 Theology of Poetry 
 Reflections on Faith and Film 
 History of Comedy 
 Global Film Resources 
 Theodicy Overview 
 Historical Judgement Overview 
 Ancient Christian Resources 
 Medieval Resources 
 Early Modern Resources 
 Age of Revolutions Resources 
 Modern Resources 
 Freud Resources 
 Post Colonial Resources 
 C. S. Lewis Resources 
 Chesterton Resources 
 The Third Spring: Anglican and Roman Catholic Authors in the Twentieth-Century 
 Tolkien and Medieval Tradition Resources 
 American Literature II 
 Colonial American Literature Lectures 
 "All manner of thing shall be well/ When the tongues of flame are in-folded/ Into the crowned knot of fire/ And the fire and the rose are one." -- T.S. Eliot, Little Gidding 
 © 2001‑ Dallas Baptist University | Legal Notice | Title IX Legal Notice Title IX 
 