
<<<PDFPAGE 1>>>
 1 
The authors of Middle Earth:   
Tolkien and the mystery of literary creation 
Giuseppe Pezzini (University of St Andrews)1 
 
 
Who wrote The Lord of the Rings? And the Hobbit? And the Silmarillion?  And in general, 
who is the author of the large corpus of texts, published or unpublished, which give life to Middle 
Earth’s imaginarium? To answer ‘J.R.R. Tolkien’ would not only mean to miss a crucial feature 
of the literary fabric of these books, which associates them with a long-standing literary tradition, 
from James’ The Turn of the Screw  to Manzoni’s The Betrothed. More importantly, such an 
answer would mean to overlook an important dimension of Tolkien’s poetics, grounded on his 
literary convictions, and ultimately rooted in his deep Christian faith. The aim of this article is 
to try to give a more precise answer to the above  questions, and thereby discuss some of  the 
literary sophistication of Tolkien’s work s, unjustly obscured by their commercial success,  as 
well as delve into the depths of his Christian poetics. Before that, however, I need to make a n 
apology to Tolkien himself, as I suspect that he would not have approved the sort of exercise that 
I will be carrying out in this work, to disclose what should remain veiled, as an atmosphere to be 
felt, rather than as an  ‘evidence’ to be scrutinised by  critical analysis. As Gandalf  warns 
Saruman, “he that breaks a thing in order to find out what it is has left the path of wisdom” (LotR 
2.2 [Tolkien 2004: 259]). 
 
1. THE HIDDEN META-TEXTUAL FRAME OF MIDDLE EARTH 
 
It is clear that in the writing and editing process Tolkien took care to conceal the identity of 
the authors of Middle earth  and in general to conceal the object of  this research, which I will 
henceforth refer to as  the ‘meta-textual frame’ , i.e. the fictional history of composition, 
transmission and publication of his books 2. Scholars have recently begun to highlight the 
underlying and unifying meta-textual narrative of Middle Earth and its literary significance (see 
in particular Nagy 2003, Flieger 2005: 55 –84, Flieger 2007, Nagy 2007, Brljak 2010, Thiessen 
2014; cf. also Oberhelman 2008, Lee 2014b: 61, Nagy 2014: 112 –6). This article will build on 
these recent work s, aiming to expand on the literary complexity of the meta -textual frame, as 
well as to delve its possible meaning and symbolism. This study is  indebted above all to 
Flieger’s works, with which it has  some points of affinity, especially in its first part. However, 
it fundamentally disagrees with her scepticism about the possibility of considering the meta-
textual frame as a ‘substantial structural factor’, rather than a mere ‘authorial conceit’. In this 
article I will construe narrative elements, such as multiple focalisations and interlaced narratives, 
cited by Flieger as counter-evidence to the meta-textual frame, as depending on or constructing 
that very frame, together with the number of explicit hints scattered throughout his published 
works3. 
                                                      
1 I warmly thank Anthony Errington, George Corbett, Stefano Rebeggiani and Roger Sylvester for their helpful 
comments and criticism. This article was first given as a paper at the Seminar of the Institute for Theology, 
Imagination and the Arts, University of St Andrews. I thank all participants for their questions and the engaging 
discussion, as well as the editors of this journal for their kind support and encouragement.  
2 Much evidence related to this is indeed found in external sources, such as in particular the earlier manuscript drafts 
of his works collected by Christopher Tolkien in the monumental History of Middle Earth. For instance, in its earlier 
versions, The Lord of the Rings ended with an epilogue featuring Sam Gamgee writing on and/or reading excerpts 
from the Red Book to his (numerous) children (cf. Tolkien 1983 –1996: 9.9, Flieger 2005: 77 –80). Similarly, t he 
Book of Lost Tales includes several unpublished passages openly narrated in the first-person by Frodo (cf. below n. 
17).  
3 This article will on ly focus on the ‘published’ meta -textual frame, i.e. on the meta -textual frame  that can be 
reconstructed on the basis of Tolkien’s published works, including in particular The Lord of the Rings  and The 
<<<PDFPAGE 2>>>
 2 
1.1 The Paratext of LotR 
 
In fact, t he most explicit  and comprehensive evidence about the  writing of Tolkien’s works  
(the ‘meta-textual frame’) is not found in external or unpublished sources, but in The Lord of the 
Rings itself (henceforth LoTR), both in the paratextual sections (Prologue and Appendixes) and 
in the main text4. Just before his final journey to the Grey Havens and beyond, the Hobbit Frodo 
hands over all his possessions to his friend Sam. These include: 
 
LotR 6.9 [Tolkien 2004: 1026–7]  
“a big book with plain red covers; its tall pages were now almost filled. At the beginning there 
were many leaves covered with Bilbo’s thin wandering hand; but most of it was written in 
Frodo’s firm flowing script. It was divided into chapters but Chapter 80 was unfinished, and 
after that were some blank leaves. The title page had many titles on it, crossed out one after 
another, so: 
My Diary. My Unexpected Journey. There and Back Again. And What Happened After. 
Adventures of Five Hobbits. The Tale of the Great Ring, compiled by Bilbo Baggins from his 
own observations and the accounts of his friends. What we did in the War of the Ring. Here 
Bilbo’s hand ended and Frodo had written: 
 
THE DOWNFALL OF 
THE LORD OF THE RINGS 
AND THE 
RETURN OF THE KING 
 
(as seen by the Little People; being the memoirs of Bilbo and Frodo of the Shire, 
supplemented by the accounts of their friends and the learning of the Wise.) 
Together with extracts from Books of Lore translated by Bilbo in Rivendell. 
 
This cryptic passage is a mine of informat ion, a  ‘fortunate crack’ giving a glimpse of an 
elaborate meta-textual frame, which underlies the novel and indeed the whole imaginarium of 
Middle Earth, pivoting on this ancestral ‘big book with plain red covers ’, or more simply ‘ Red 
Book’5.  
 
1.2 The first author of the Red Book: Bilbo Baggins  
  
From this fictional paratext we learn that Bilbo Baggins is the first writer of the ‘Red Book’, 
authoring its opening text; although the heading ‘the Hobbit’ does not appear in  the list of 
provisional titles “crossed out one after another” by Bilbo, there are few doubts that  the ‘many 
leaves covered with Bilbo’s thin wandering hand ’ form the textual archetype of  what is now 
                                                      
Hobbit, but also The Silmarillion  and The Adventures o f Tom Bombadil . Before its publication, the Silmarillion 
originally featured a number of different, elaborate frame narratives, which evolved in time  but consistently 
involved an (old -)English traveller compiling oral stories, directly recorded from elves living in Tol Eressëa (cf. 
Noad 2000, Flieger 2007). Another variant of this archetypal textual frame is found in Tolkien’s unfinished and 
unpublished time-fictions, the Lost Road and Notion Club Papers (on which see Flieger 2014).  
4 This analysis will not consider any meta-textual reference (such as e.g. the famous meta-textual dialogue between 
Sam and Frodo on the Stairs of Cirith Ungol (LotR 4.8 [Tolkien 2004: 711–13]), but only those that depend on and 
evoke the underlying frame narrative. 
5 The paratext also introduces the important epithet ‘of Westmarch’, which refers to the place where the book was 
preserved by Sam’s descendants, as stated in the Appendixes and Prologue. Cf. LoTR Appendix B: [Sam] comes to 
the Tower Hills, and i s last seen by Elanor, to whom he gives the Red Book afterwards kept by the Fairbairns.  
[Tolkien 2004: 1097]; LotR Prologue [Tolkien 2004: 14]: That most important source for the history of the War of 
the Ring was so called because it was long preserved at Undertowers, the home of the Fairbairns. 
<<<PDFPAGE 3>>>
 3 
known as ‘The Hobbit’. Tolkien explicitly confirms that, at the very beginning of the Prologue 
to LoTR. 
 
LotR Prologue [Tolkien 2004: 1]: 
Further information [sc. ‘Concerning Hobbits’] will also be found in the selection from the Red 
Book of Westmarch that has already been published, under the title of The Hobbit. That story 
was derived from earlier chapters of the Red Book, composed by Bilbo himself, the first Hobbit 
to become famous in the world at large, and called by him There and Back Again (…) 
 
More indirect hints to Bilbo’s authorship of ‘the Hobbit’ (or rather of his ‘diary’, ‘there and 
back again’), are also scattered across LoTR itself, normally in the form of references to Bilbo’s 
‘secret’ book, only read by Frodo and (surreptitiously) by Merry. 
 
LotR 1.5 [Tolkien 2004: 105] 
“I must be the only one in the Shire, besides you Frodo, that has ever seen the old fellow’s secret 
book .’ ‘You have read his book!’ cried Frodo. ‘Good heavens above! Is nothing safe?’ ‘Not too 
safe, I should say,’ said Merry. ‘But I have only had one rapid glance, and that was difficult to 
get. He never left the book about. I wonder what became of it. I should like another look.(…) 
Have you got it, Frodo?’ ‘No. It was not at Bag End. He must have taken it away.’ 
 
There is even a direct quote from the Hobbit, explicitly ascribed to Bilbo. 
 
LotR 2.1 [Tolkien 2004: 225] 
That house was, as Bilbo had long ago reported, ‘a perfect house, whether you like food or sleep 
or story-telling or singing, or just sitting and thinking best, or a pleasant mixture of them all’. [= 
Hobbit 3]. 
 
There is an event from the Hobbit (or rather from Bilbo’s diary) that receives particular meta-
textual attention in the LoTR, which is Bilbo’s narrative of the finding of the ring and his escape 
from Gollum’s cave. In several points it is said that two variants of this narrative existed: a ‘fake’ 
one told by Bilbo to the dwarves at the time of the event and eventually written down in his book, 
according to which the ring was given by Gollum to him as a present6; a second, accurate one, 
revealed only to his closest friends and eventually to all members of the Council of Elrond, which 
is essentially the version one can now read in Chapter 5 of the Hobbit (‘Riddles in the Dark’)7. 
According to Tolkien’s meta-textual frame, this second version remained at oral stage for a long 
tome, and was not included in the Red Book. And yet, it was eventually written down, as stated 
in the Prologue to the LoTR: 
 
LotR Prologue [Tolkien 2004: 13]  
This account Bilbo set down in his memoirs, and he seems never to have altered it himself, not 
even after the Council of Elrond. Evidently it still appeared in the original Red Book, as it did in 
several of the copies and abstracts. But many copies contain the true account (as an alternative), 
derived no doubt from notes by F rodo or Samwise, both of whom learned the truth, though they 
seem to have been unwilling to delete anything actually. 
                                                      
6 Cf. Cf. LotR 1.1 [Tolkien 2004: 40] ‘Which story, I wonder,’ said Gandalf. ‘Oh, not what he told the dwarves and 
put in his book,’ said Frodo. ‘He told me the true story soon after I came to live here. He said you had pestered him 
till he told you, so I had better know too. “No secrets between us, Frodo,” he said; “but they are not to go any 
further. It’s mine anyway.”’ ‘That’s interesting,’ said Gandalf. ‘Well, what did you think of it all?’ ‘If you mean, 
inventing all that about a “present”, well, I thought the true story much more likely, and I couldn’t see the point of 
altering it at all’. 
7 Cf. LotR 2.2 [Tolkien 2004: 249] ‘[…] I will now tell the true story, and if some here have heard me tell it 
otherwise’ – he looked sidelong at Glóin – ‘I ask them to forget it and forgive me’. 
<<<PDFPAGE 4>>>
 4 
 
What is thus the point of this double version, which accordingly resulted in a textual variance? 
First, from a narrative point of view, the existence of a ‘fake’ version of the story helps to shroud 
the ring with a shadow of deception and evil, and to characterize his finder Bilbo as haunted by 
a morbid obsession to justify his ownership8. This is, however, only a post-event exploitation of 
something that is first of all a real fact. The two aforementioned narratives do exist, and firstly, 
in the real or ‘primary’ world (to use Tolkien’s terminology). In fact, the former narrative is the 
one found in the first edition of The Hobbit (1937) whereas the second is the one  printed from 
its second edition onwards, which resulted from the revisions Tolkien made in 1951 in order to 
harmonise The Hobbit with the forthcoming LoTR.9 We can thus begin to introduce a key feature 
of Tolkien’s meta-textual frame: real, primary literary events or features (such as the revision of 
a chapter  of The Hobbit ’s first edition ) are symbolically (and covertly) expressed in  the 
secondary world , as narrative elements  (a lie engendered by the ring’s corrupt ing power 
originated as a variance in the fictional transmission of the texts). I will come back to this point 
later on, since the whole meta-textual frame can be described in similar terms.  
 
1.3 The second author of the Red Book: Frodo Baggins  
 
With its reference to ‘notes by Frodo’, the above passage introduces the second important 
author of the Red Book, the hobbit Frodo. The paratext of LoTR indeed reveals that Frodo wrote 
the main text contained in the Red Book (“most of it was written in Frodo’s firm flowing script”), 
i.e. the account of the War of the Ring 10. Moreover, according to  Frodo’s intention, this 
secondary text would form a unity (“the memoirs of Bilbo and Frodo”) with the other, preceding 
text written by Bilbo. In contrast with Bilbo’s authorship, there are not many explicit references 
to Frodo’s authorial role  in LoTR; nevertheless, his authorial role is often foreshadowed or 
alluded to. In his first visit to Bree, for instance, Frodo introduces himself as a writer:  
 
LotR 1.9 [Tolkien 2004: 155]  
“he was thinking of writing a book (at which there was silent astonishment), and that he and his 
friends wanted to collect information about hobbits living outside the Shire, especially in the 
eastern lands.” 
 
And this self-presentation is realized on his way back, at the end of the book, where it becomes 
an allusive reference to the actual writing of his account of the War during his final years in the 
Shire11. 
 
LotR 6.7 [Tolkien 2004: 995]  
Bree memories being retentive, Frodo was asked many times if he had written his book. ‘Not yet,’ he 
answered. ‘I am going home now to put my notes in order.’ He promised to deal with the amazing 
events at Bree, and so give a bit of interest to a book that appeared likely to treat mostly of the remote 
and less important affairs ‘away south’. 
                                                      
8 Cf. LoTR 1.1 [Tolkien 2004: 34]  “What is it all about? It is mine isn’t it? I found it, and Gollum would have killed 
me, if I hadn’t kept it. I’m not a thief, whatever he said.” 
9 For a comparison between the two versions cf. http://www.ringgame.net/riddles.html (accessed 20th September 
2017). 
10 Given its heading and content, this text  seems to correspond to what is now known  as The Lord of the Rings, 
although the two titles are not identical (a detail to which I will return) 
11 Frodo began and concluded this writing activity,  both editorial and authorial, during his final couple of years in 
the Shire (1420 –1). Cf. LotR 6.9 [Tolkien 2004: 1027] When the labours of repair had all been planned and set 
going he took to a quiet life, writing a great deal and going through all his notes. ‘Why, you have nearly finished it, 
Mr. Frodo!’ Sam exclaimed. ‘Well, you have kept at it, I must say.’ ‘I have quite finished, Sam,’ said Frodo. 
<<<PDFPAGE 5>>>
 5 
 
One might thus be tempted to  conclude that the author of the Hobbit is Bilbo, and that the 
author of the LoTR is Frodo: Tolkien’s meta-textual frame, however, is much more complex. It 
is not obvious at all that the two archetypal texts of the Red Book (‘Bilbo and Frodo’s memoirs’) 
neatly coincide with their ‘real’ counterparts, The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings , nor that 
Bilbo and Frodo are their only two respective authors.  
 
1.4 Bilbo’s extended and incomplete authorial role 
 
First, there are plenty of references in the novel to the incomplete status of the first text, Bilbo’s 
diary, the supposed source of ‘The Hobbit’. At the beginning of LoTR, before his departure from 
Rivendell, Bilbo reveals that he has still to finish his book: 
 
LotR 1.1 [Tolkien 2004: 32] 
‘[…] I can finish my book. I have thought of a nice ending for it: and he lived happily ever after 
to the end of his days.’  
 
Despite Bilbo’s ambitions , his diary is still  incomplete at the time of the Council of Elrond , 
after several years spent by Bilbo in Rivendell. 
 
LotR 2.1 [Tolkien 2004: 269] 
‘[…] Don’t adventures ever have an end? I suppose not. Someone else always has to carry on 
the story. Well, it can’t be helped. I wonder if it’s any good trying to finish my book?’ 
 
LotR 2.2 [Tolkien 2004: 269] 
‘[…] I was very comfortable here, and getting on with my book. If you want to know, I am just 
writing an ending for it . I had thought of putting: and he lived happily ever afterwards to the 
end of his days. It is a good ending, and none the worse for having been used before. Now I shall 
have to alter that: it does not look like coming true; and anyway there will evidently have to be 
several more chapters, if I live to write them. It is a frightful nuisance. When ought I to start?’ 
 
LotR 2.2 [Tolkien 2004: 277] 
Then Bilbo would read passages from his bo ok (which still seemed very incomplete), or scraps 
of his verses, or would take notes of Frodo’s adventures. 
 
An important  reason for the book’s ‘incompleteness’, as shown by the above passages, is 
Bilbo’s realisation that ‘the tale went on’, i.e. that someone else (Frodo) was called to ‘carry on 
the story’: new chapters should have been added  to his fi rst tale, and initially Bilbo considers 
himself the one charged with that task. That the old hobbit started (or intended) to draft also the 
initial chapters of LotR is indeed confirmed by the same paratext of  LotR, where Bilbo’s own 
hand mentions the tale of ‘What Happened after’ the events of his ‘unexpected journey’, 
compiling ‘from his own observations and the accounts of his friends’. There are  many 
references in LotR to Bilbo’s wish to add ‘new chapters’ to the previous story, which yet remains 
‘our story’. 
 
LotR 2.1 [Tolkien 2004: 238] 
‘I began to wonder if I should live to see your chapters of our story.’ 
 
LotR 2.2 [Tolkien 2004: 249] 
‘I tried to make a few notes, but we shall have to go over it all again together some time, if I am 
to write it up. There are whole chapters of stuff before you ever got here!’ 
 
<<<PDFPAGE 6>>>
 6 
Frodo’s chapters, as Bilbo calls them, are thus part of the same Hobbit story initiated by Bilbo, 
and written down by him ; at the same time , they belong to a new, second book, including, in 
Bilbo’s initial intention, the events now recounted in Book 1 of the Fellowship of the Ring, up 
to Frodo’s arrival in Rivendell. 
 
LotR 2.3 [Tolkien 2004: 273] 
‘We can have many a good talk. What about helping me with my book,  and making a start on 
the next? Have you thought of an ending?’ 
 
LotR 2.3 [Tolkien 2004: 278] 
‘I should like to write the second book, if I am spared.’ 
 
Thanks to Gandalf’s explicit warning, Bilbo realises, however, that it is too soon to think of an 
ending for this second book , and that the new story is only at its beginning: this is not just a 
second book, but a real sequel, and Frodo’s  journey to Rivendell is only  the first step of a 
long adventure: 
 
LotR 2.2 [Tolkien 2004: 270] 
‘I should say that your part is ended, unless as a recorder. Finish your book , and leave the 
ending unaltered! There is still hope for it. But get ready to write a sequel, when they come back.’ 
 
Despite Gandalf’s words , Bilbo’s authorial role is often highlighted  in the LoTR, also in 
connection with his role as a poet and/or adaptor of Elvish poems12. Moreover, Bilbo continues 
to be described as the intended ‘recorder’ of the hobbits’ new adventure13. And at the end of the 
novel, when the victorious Hobbits come back to Rivendell, with the ring destroyed, it is still 
Bilbo who is supposed to write down the full story of the War of the Ring, ‘compiling’ it from 
the reports of his friends. 
 
LotR 6.6 [Tolkien 2004: 986]  
Sitting round the fire they told him in turn all that they could remember of their journeys and 
adventures. At first he pretended to take some notes; but he often fell asleep; and when he woke 
he would say: ‘How splendid! How wonderful! But where were we?’ Then they went on with the 
story from the point where he had begun to nod. 
 
In the end Bilbo did not fulfil his role as recorder: he did not edit his notes nor, apparently, 
finalize his first book. Both tasks were entrusted to Frodo: 
 
LotR 6.6 [Tolkien 2004: 988]  
‘I don’t think, Mr. Frodo, that he’s done much writing while we’ve been away. He won’t ever 
write our story now .’ At that Bilbo opened an eye, almost as if he had heard. Then he roused 
himself. ‘You see, I am getting so sleepy,’ he said. ‘And when I have time to write, I only really 
like writing poetry. I wonder, Frodo my dear fellow, if you would very much mind tidying things 
up a bit before you go? Collect all my notes and papers, and my diary too, and take them wit h 
you, if you will. Get Sam to help, and when you’ve knocked things into shape, come back, and I’ll 
run over it. I won’t be too critical.’ ‘Of course I’ll do it!’ said Frodo. 
 
1.5 Frodo and the ‘collective’ narratives of LotR 
 
                                                      
12 Cf. e.g. LotR 2.3 [Tolkien 2004: 277], quoted above. 
13 Cf. LotR 6.4 [Tolkien 2004: 956]  ‘You will get almost a chapter in old Bilbo’s book, if ever I get a chance to 
report to him. ‘And then Frodo will have to be locked up in a tower in Minas Tirith and write it all down. Otherwise 
he will forget half of it, and poor old Bilbo will be dreadfully disappointed.’  
<<<PDFPAGE 7>>>
 7 
Frodo accepts Bilbo’s investiture and will dedicate his last few years in the Shire to writing the 
account of the war and to ‘tidying up’ Bilbo’s first book. We can thus note that Bilbo’s authorial 
voice is not the only one in the Hobbit, which was polished up  by Frodo, nor should it be 
completely discounted from LotR, since this was partly compiled from Bilbo’s notes, including 
above all those taken at the time of the Council of Elrond, and covering the events up to there14. 
Frodo’s role in the  writing of the Account of the War is firstly intended  by Bilbo  as an 
editorial one, aiming to ‘knock things into shape’, i.e. to compile different notes into a coherent 
narrative: these include Bilbo’s notes, but not just those. As explicitly declared in the paratext,  
Bilbo and Frodo’s memoirs are ‘supplemented by the accounts of their friends and the learning 
of the Wise’ (see above). Just like Bilbo, Frodo is thus first of all a ‘compiler’, who puts together 
the reports and accounts of the characters involved in the story, and above all of the other three 
hobbits (Sam, Merry and Pipin). 
 
The ‘collective’, ‘compiled’ nature of LoTR is another important feature of the meta-textual 
frame, which is evoked in the text by many narrative devices. A most common one is the 
‘remembering’ formula, which presents parts of the narrative ‘as memories’. Cf. e.g. 
 
LotR 1.3 [Tolkien 2004: 82]  
Pippin afterwards recalled little of either food or drink (…). Sam could never describe in words, 
nor picture clearly to himself, what he felt or thought that night, though it remained in his memory 
as one of the chief events of his life.15  
 
Most of the ‘ remembering formulas’ belong to passages in which Frodo is not present, and 
indeed abound in particular in books three and five of the LoTR, which are narr ated from the 
perspective of other characters, such as in particular Merry and Pippin 16. All these ‘memories’ 
should thus be construed as being recalled at a later stage by one of characters, who is reporting 
to Frodo (and Sam) . There are even some references to such narrative ‘reporting moments’ in 
the LoTR17.  
 
LotR 6.4 [Tolkien 2004: 955]  
‘Bless me! But I can see there’s more tales to tell than ours’ ‘There are indeed,’ said Pippin turning 
towards him. ‘And we’ll begin telling them, as soon as this feast is ended. (…) and they talked deep 
into the night with Merry and Pippin and Gandalf, and after a while Legolas and Gimli joined them. 
There Frodo and Sam learned much of all that had happened to the Company after their fellowship 
was broken on the evil day at Parth Galen by Rauros Falls; and still there was always more to ask 
and more to tell. 
 
                                                      
14 I.e. the events now included in the First Book of the Fellowship of the Ring  
15 Cf. also LotR 1.7 [Tolkien 2004: 128] (…) As far as he could remember , Sam slept through the night in deep 
content, if logs are contented ; LotR 3.3 [Tolkien 2004: 450] Neither Pippin nor Merry remembered much of the 
later part of the journey; LotR 3.4 [Tolkien 2004: 463] Often afterwards Pippin tried to describe his first impression 
of them. LotR 5.2 [Tolkien 2004: 787] Gimli remembered little. 
16 There are a few cases in which the ‘remembering-formula’ is applied to Frodo himself. Cf. e.g. LotR 2.3 [Tolkien 
2004: 282] Frodo remembered little of it, save the wind. LotR 2.7 [Tolkien 2004: 359] It was Frodo who first put 
something of his sorrow into halting words though his memory was stored with many things that others had made 
before him. Yet when he tried to repeat it to Sam only snatches remained, faded as a handful of withered leaves. 
LotR 2.8 [Tolkien 2004: 377] The way of Elvish words, they remained graven in his memory, and long afterwards 
he interpreted them, as well as he could . These references, however, also point to the same meta -textual frame: in 
coherence with it, the non-omniscient narrator of LoTR has not only to rely on the accounts of the other characters 
to fill up gaps in the story in which he was not directly involved; he also must recall at a later stage the events that 
happened to him. 
17  
<<<PDFPAGE 8>>>
 8 
Although there are few allusions to it in the published text, the most important one of these 
reporting moments took place in Minas Tirith, after Aragorn’s crowning. As Frodo recounts, in 
a passage not-included in the LoTR, and now printed in Unfinished Tales:  
 
Unfinished Tales [Tolkien 1998: 329] 
After the crowning we stayed in a fair house in Minas Tirith with Gandalf, and he was very 
merry, and though we asked him questions about all that came into our minds his patience 
seemed as endless as his knowledge. I cannot now recall most of the things that he told us; often 
we did not understand them. But I remember this conversation very clearly.  
 
An interesting feature of this passage is also the first-person narrative. As Christopher Tolkien 
notes: The ‘He’ of the opening sentence is Gandalf, ‘we’ are Frodo, Peregrin, Meriadoc, and 
Gimli, and ‘I’ is Frodo, the recorder of the conversation; the scene is a house  in Minas Tirith, 
after the coronation of King Elessar. The first-person narrative is never used in the LoTR, which 
always uses the third narrative parson; this fact itself should be related to its intended ‘choral’ 
nature, meta-textually justified by presenting Frodo as first of all a recorder of accounts. 
 
Together wit h the remembering formulas these reporting moments should be construed as 
depending on and underpinning the underlying meta -textual frame, as well as justifying  one of 
the most distinctive features of the narrative fabric of the novel, i.e. the extensive use of multiple 
focalisations and interlaced narratives18. 
 
1.6 Sam’s authorial voice: narrative/style and the meta-textual frame 
 
Bilbo and Frodo cannot be considered the only , independent authors of the two texts of the 
Red Book, also because of another important tessera of the meta-textual mosaic. In addition, the 
Hobbit Sam plays an  important authorial part, both as an editor and reviser  (as declared by 
Bilbo), but also as a writer of the final chapters of the book. The paratext of LoTR indeed reveals 
that the manuscript handed over by Frodo to Sam is  unfinished, with the writing of the  few 
remaining leaves entrusted to Sam to write19.  
There is also a clue to the exact starting point of Sam’s authorial hand, which is the number of 
his supposedly unfinished chapter (80). Since the Hobbit  includes 19 chapters  and LoTR 63 
chapters, one can infer that the final chapter of the novel, i.e. the one including the paratext, is 
the 81st, of the Red Book and thus that the unfinished 80 th chapter is the previous one, ‘The 
Scouring of the Shire’. More than that cannot be said  with certainty, although I am inclined to 
think that Frodo’s hand is supposed to conclude with the Horn-cry of Buckland (Awake! Awake! 
Fear, Fire, Foes! Awake! Fire, Foes! Awake!), right after Sam’s departure to Cotton’s farm and 
before the battle properly begins. In fact, what follows is mostly told from Sam’s perspective20. 
Moreover, in contrast, with Frodo’s leading part in the first part of the chapter21, Frodo’s role in 
                                                      
18 On interlaced narratives, their nature, ancestry and parallels see in particular Rosebury 2003: 27–8, Shippey 2003: 
chapter 5. 
19 Cf. LotR 6.9 [Tolkien 2004: 1026–7] It was divided into chapters but Chapter 80 was unfinished, and after that 
were some blank leaves. (…) ‘I have quite finished, Sam,’ said Frodo. ‘The last pages are for you.’  
20 Cf. LotR 6.8 [Tolkien 2004: 1007] ‘ Behind him Sam heard a hubbub of voices and  a great din and slamming of 
doors.’ [ibidem 1008] ‘Sam hurried to the house.’ [ibidem 1014] ‘Into the middle of this talk came Sam, bursting in 
with his gaffer.’ [ibidem 1016] ‘Even Sam’s vision in the Mirror had not prepared him for what they saw. ’ [ibidem 
1020] ‘I shan’t call it the end, till we’ve cleared up the mess,’ said Sam gloomily. ‘And that’ll take a lot of time and 
work.’.  
21 Cf. LotR 6.8  ([Tolkien 2004:  1001] ‘I am going where I please, and in my own time .’ [ibidem 1003] ‘He won’t 
be so eager when Mr. Frodo has finished with him ’ [ibidem 1005] ‘Indeed. I am glad to hear of your plans,’ said 
Frodo. ‘I am on my way to call on Mr. Lotho, and he may be interested to hear of them too. ’ 
<<<PDFPAGE 9>>>
 9 
the action explicitly decreases after this point ([ibidem 1016] ‘Frodo had been in the battle, but 
he had not drawn sword’); Frodo is not interested at all in the battle of Hobbiton (and thus, one 
should assume, in its narrative). A formal feature of the text (the apparent change of the narrator’s 
perspective) is thus meta-textually justified by a supposed authorial change in the writing of the 
text. It is not the only one. Another formal feature related to the meta-textual change of narrator 
concerns style: in the second part of the chapter, after Merry’s battle cry, one can clearly notice 
a lowering of register, with plenty of contractions and  analogous colloquial forms and words22, 
which are characteristically attributed to Sam throughtout the book. To focus on one example: 
the low-register hypocoristic term ‘lad’, is never used in the LotR except in direct speeches by 
hobbits or orcs23. The only three real exceptions are found in this chapter, and indeed only in its 
second half24. These sort of stylistic changes are supposed to reflect the supposed identity of the 
author of the passage, i.e. the hobbit Sam, whose language is characterised throughout the novel 
as low-register. 
There is thus a  concealed correlation between narrative and stylistic features  and the 
underlying meta-textual frame. This correlation is not only found in these final  chapters, but 
is a widespread feature of the literary fabric of  the LoTR, discernible above all in its stylistic 
diversity25. For instance, the first book of the Fellowship of the Rings  displays a considerably 
lower register than the later books , which is more similar to that of the Hobbit 26. Applying 
Tolkien’s meta -textual frame, we can link this stylistic feature with the intense presence of 
Bilbo’s authorial voice in this very book, through the notes taken by him in Rivendell . There 
would be much to say also on the abundance of ‘light talk’ in the chapters of the story concerning 
(and allegedly reported by) the hobbits Pippin and Merry, or on the use of authorial empathy and 
focalisation, but this would be in itself a topic for another work. 
We can thus sum up the meta-textual narrative reconstructed above in the following way: what 
are now known as the Hobbit and the Lord of the Rings originally formed a single volume of 81 
chapters, written by three intermingling  hobbit hands (‘as seen by the little people’) : Bilbo 
Baggins, who drafted (but did not finalise) the first 19 chapters  (The Hobbit’s archetype), and 
sketched notes for the following 12 ones  (book 1 of LoTR); Frodo Baggins, who presumably 
polished up Bilbo’s early chapters, and wrote the main bulk of the text, compiling from Bilbo’s 
and his own notes, and incorporating the (oral) accounts of his friends, especially his fellow 
hobbits; Sam Gamgee, who completed chapter 80 of the book, left unfinished by Frodo ,  wrote 
the final one and perhaps incorporated some minor editorial changes to the whole volume.  
 
1.7 The other volumes of the Red Book and its textual history 
 
This account, already quite elaborate, is still only a small part of the meta-textual frame of 
Tolkien’s works. First of all, the Red Book did not only consist in the above text of 81 chapters, 
                                                      
22 Cf. e.g. LotR 6.8 [Tolkien 2004: 1009] the ruffians can’t come at ’em. 
23 Cf. e.g. LotR 3.3 [Tolkien 2004: 458] Evidently Mauhúr and his ‘lads’ had been killed or driven off. An Irrelevant 
exception: Bergil of Minas Tirith is referred to as ‘lad’, but the term here is not hypocoristic.  
24 LotR 6.8 [Tolkien 2004: 1010] Pippin rode off with half a dozen lads on ponies. [ibidem 1007] Before he got to 
the lane’s end there was Farmer Cotton with three of his lads, Young Tom, Jolly, and Nick, hurrying towards him. 
[ibidem 1008] When Sam got back he found the whole village roused. Already, apart from many younger lads more 
than a hundred sturdy hobbits were assembled with axes. 
25 On intertextual and intra-textual stylistic variation of Tolkien’s works see recently Turner 2014.  
26 Tolkien himself often noted that there  is a great stylistic variety in the LoTR, with a general ascending trend of 
‘heightening’ of the linguistic register while the story proceeds (cf. e.g. Letter 193 I paid great attention to such 
linguistic differentiation as was possible , LotR Appendix F [ Tokien 2004: 1133 –4]; cf. also Letter 131 on the 
stylistic differentiation in the Hobbit, (…) in fact (as a critic has perceived) the tone and style change with the 
Hobbit’s development, passing from fairy-tale to the noble and high and relapsing with the return). 
<<<PDFPAGE 10>>>
 10 
but also included ‘ extracts from Books of Lore translated by Bilbo in Rivendell ’27. More 
information about these ‘books of lore’, abridged by Frodo in the ‘appendix’ to his memoirs, are 
scattered throughout the LoTR; from these one learns that Bilbo’s  books were three in number 
and were ‘made at various times’, and they  were given by Bilbo to Frodo  on his last visit to 
Rivendell.  
 
LotR 6.6 [Tolkien 2004: 986–7]  
Then he gave Frodo his mithril -coat and Sting, forgetting that he had already done so; and he 
gave him also three books of lore that he had made at various times, written in his spidery hand, 
and labelled on their red back: Translations from the Elvish, by B.B. 
 
There are also a couple of references to the original Elvish versions of these translated Books 
of Lore28, and one of these reveals his very author, Elrond himself. 
 
LotR 2.2 [Tolkien 2004: 242]  
Then through all the years that followed he traced the Ring; but since that history is elsewhere 
recounted, even as Elrond himself set it down in his books of lore, it is not here recalled. For it 
is a long tale, full of deeds great and terrible, and briefly though Elrond spoke, the sun  rode up 
the sky, and the morning was passing ere he ceased. 
 
These ‘three books of lore’ dealt with the tales from the forging of the ring to the last alliance29, 
and also with the events of the ‘First Age of the World’, that is, one must conclude, with what is 
now the content of the Silmarillion 30. The Red Book  thus also included Silmarillion material, 
originally authored by Elrond,  but abridged, translated, and edited  by Bilbo 31. Given its 
‘translated’ and ‘abridged’ nature, one must infer that this material was only an approximate 
rendering of the original version, and contained  simplifications and misunderstandings , as 
Tolkien himself points out32. I will come back to this point in the second part of my analysis.  
We have thus added another important author of the Red Book, the elf Elrond himself, as well 
as another important facet of Bilbo’s role , that of translator. But the meta -textual frame is not 
complete yet, since, in Tolkien’s vision, this frame did not only encompass the redaction of the 
Red Book, but its subsequent textual history. In this case there is no need for reconstructions, as 
this textual history is sketched out by Tolkien in a detailed note appended to the Prologue of the 
LoTR (the ‘Note on the Shire Records’)33. Tolkien’s account is intricate but clear, and can here 
                                                      
27 Bilbo’s role as a ‘translator’ of Elvish poetry is also often alluded to in the work and some of his translated poems 
are even recited by characters in parts of the story: cf. e.g. LotR 1.11 [Tolkien 2004: 186] It is part of the lay that is 
called The Fall of Gil -galad, which is in an ancient tongue. Bilbo must have translated it. I never knew that.  It is 
plausible that these oral texts were imagined to be eventually included in Bilbo’s ‘Translations from Elves’.  
28 LotR 2.3 [Tolkien 2004: 277] Aragorn and Gandalf (…) pondered the storied and figured maps and books of 
lore that were in the house of Elrond.  
29 I.e. the content of the very last chapter of the Silmarillion (‘Of the Rings of Power and the Third Age’)  
30 Cf. LotR Prologue [Tolkien 2004: 15] These three volumes were found to be a work of great skill and learning in 
which, between 1403 and 1418, he had used all the sources available to him in Rivendell, both living and written. 
But since they were little used by Frod o, being almost entirely concerned with the Elder Days , no more is said of 
them here. One can thus reasonably link Bilbo’s Books of Lore  with the Silmarillion, even if it would be too far -
fetched to make them coincide, also given the fact that the Silmarillion was published posthumously. 
31 As noted by Nagy (2014: 112), in his published works Tolkien therefore modified the original frame -narratives 
of the Silmarillion (cf. n.1) and made this ‘the work of Bilbo Baggins, collecting and translating Elvish Texts  in 
Elrond’s house in Rivendell’.   
32 On this cf. Agøy 2007, 144–5, Nagy 2014: 112–3. 
33 Cf LotR Prologue [Tolkien 2004: 14–15] This account of the end of the Third age is drawn mainly from the Red 
Book of Westmarch. That most important source for the history of the War of the Ring was so called because it was 
long preserved at Undertowers, the home of the Fairbairns, Wardens of the Westmarch. It was in origin Bilbo’s 
private diary, which he took with him to Rivendell. Frodo brought it back to the Shire, together with many loose 
<<<PDFPAGE 11>>>
 11 
be paraphrased as such: Frodo’s original book was later appended by four supplemental volumes, 
the full three books of Bilbo’s translations from Elves, and a final volume  featuring 
miscellaneous material, written or compiled at different times by a number of authors,  which 
includes Merry Brandibuck and Gimli the Dwarf . The original Red Book was lost, but many 
copies were made of it, partial or complete, including in particular  a full 5 -volume edition 
(‘Thain’s Book’), which was emended, annotated and supplemented in Minas Tirith. The LoTR 
is derived from a copy of this edition,  incorporating Frodo and Sam’s chapters from the 
first volume and ‘selections’ from the fifth volume34, including the Tale of Aragorn and Arwen, 
redacted in Gondor by Faramir’s grandson. 
Just as the early part  of the meta -textual frame is evoked by  narrative and stylisti c changes, 
also this latter part is duly  harmonised in the text  through the use of formal features ; the 
appendixes are indeed full of scribal glosses, later notes, and editorial references that are meant 
to match the elaborate textual history detailed in the Note on the Shire Records35. 
                                                      
leaves of notes, and during S.R. 1420 –1 he nearly filled its pages with his account of the War . But annexed to it 
and preserved with it, probably in a single red case, were the three large volumes, bound in red leather, that Bilbo 
gave to him as a parting gift. To these four volumes there was added in Westmarch a fifth containing commentaries, 
genealogies, and various other matter concerning the hobbit members of the Fellowship. The original Red Book 
has not been preserved, but many copies were made, especially of the first volume, for the use of the descendants of 
the children of Master Samwise. The most important copy, however, has a different history. It was kept at Great 
Smials, but it was written in Gondor, probably at the request of the great-grandson of Peregrin, and completed in 
S.R. 1592 (F.A. 172). Its southern scribe appended this note: Findegil, King’s Writer, finished this work in IV 172. 
It is an exact copy in all details of the Thain’s Book in Minas Tirith. That book, was a copy, made at the request of 
King Elessar, of the Red Book of the Periannath, and was brought to him by the Thain Peregrin when he retired to 
Gondor in IV 64. The Thain’s Book was thus the first copy made of the Red Book and contained much that was later 
omitted or lost. In Minas Tirith it received much annotation, and many corrections, especially of names, words 
and quotations in the Elvish languages ; and there was added to it an abbreviated version of those parts of The 
Tale of Aragorn and Arwen which lie outside the account of the War. The full tale is stated to have been written by 
Barahir, grandson of the Steward Faramir, some time after the passing of the King . But the chief importance of 
Findegil’s copy is that it alone contains the whole of Bilbo’s ‘Translations from the Elvish’. These three volumes 
were found to be a work of great skill and learning in which, between 1403 and 1418, he had used all the sources 
available to him in Rivendell, both living and written.  But since they were little used by  Frodo, being almost 
entirely concerned with the Elder Days, no more is said of them here. Since Meriadoc and Peregrin became the 
heads of their great families, and at the same time kept up their connexion with Rohan and Gondor, the libraries at 
Bucklebury and Tuckborough contained much that did not appear in the Red Book.  In Brandy Hall there were 
many works dealing with Eriador and the history of Rohan. Some of these were composed or begun by Meriadoc 
himself, though in the Shire he was chiefly remembered  for his Herblore of the Shire, and for his Reckoning of 
Years, in which he discussed the relation of the calendars of the Shire and Bree to those of Rivendell, Gondor, and 
Rohan. He also wrote a short treatise on Old Words and Names in the Shire, showing special interest in discovering 
the kinship with the language of the Rohirrim of such ‘shire-words’ as mathom and old elements in place names. At 
Great Smials the books were of less interest to Shire -folk, though more important for larger history. None of them 
was written by Peregrin, but he and his successors collected many manuscripts written by scribes of Gondor: mainly 
copies or summaries of histories or legends relating to Elendil and his heirs. Only here in the Shire were to be found 
extensive materials for the history of Númenor and the arising of Sauron. It was probably at Great Smials that The 
Tale of Years was put together, with the assistance of material collected by Meriadoc. Though the dates given are 
often conjectural, especially for the Second  Age, they deserve attention. It is probable that Meriadoc obtained 
assistance and information from Rivendell, which he visited more than once . 
34LotR Appendix A [Tolkien 2004: 1033] ‘only selections from them [the sources], in most places much abridged, 
are here presented’. 
35 Narrative formulas, for instance, imply that parts of the Appendi ces are authored by Hobbits (presumably living 
in Brandibuck Hall or the Great Smials). Cf. e.g. LotR Appendix A [Tolkien 2004: 1039] ‘as they had done for long 
years before we came to the Shire’. Other references instead point to Gondor and to Findegil, the scribe of the king 
(cf. e.g. ibidem 1043 n. 1 The sceptre was the chief mark of royalty in Númenor, the King tells us; ibidem 1050 n. 
1 as we have learned from the King). In general, a complex system of diacritics, explained by Tolkien in the opening 
section, is used to evoke the variety of ‘sources’ available to the ‘compiler’ of LoTR. Cf. LotR Appendix A [Tolkien 
2004: 1033] Actual extracts from longer annals and t ales are placed within quotation marks. Insertions of later 
date are enclosed in brackets. Notes within quotation marks are found in the sources. Others are editorial.  
<<<PDFPAGE 12>>>
 12 
 
1.8 The hidden presence: Tolkien’s own authorial/editorial voice 
 
The most important  feature of the  Note, however, is precisely the  presence of Tolkien’s 
authorial voice, which connects  the meta -textual frame outlined above  with Tolkien’s actual 
writing of the LoTR (or rather, according to the narrative, compiling and translating). In the above 
passage, just as in the prologue in general, Tolkien is indeed speaking in his own authorial 
(hobbit) persona; this is shown by the statement that ‘[t]his account of the end of the Third age  
is drawn mainly from the Red Book of Westmarch ’ and also by the reference to the publication 
of the Hobbit, which is said to have been ‘derived from the earlier chapter of the Book’  and 
above all to have been ‘already published’. What the Note does not say explicitly, but is clearly 
implied, and indeed underlies the whole meta-textual frame reconstructed above, is that Tolkien 
is in possession of a manuscript descending from the Red Book, and more specifically of one of 
the descendants of the ‘Thain’s book’ , allegedly revised in Gondor. This is the point where the 
meta-textual frame of the LoTR is developed, through Tolkien’s authorial persona, into  a full 
frame narrative, featuring Tolkien himself, where the primary and secondary planes meet . This 
narrative is never articulated explicitly by Tolkien, but is hinted at  in several places. First, in 
Appendix F of the book Tolkien claims to have transcribed the ‘ancient scripts’ and translated 
their content into English 36. Moreover, there are a few remarks in the LoTR itself where the 
narrator cannot be Frodo, and presumably not even Sam, but the very compiler of LoTR, i.e. 
Tolkien himself: 
 
LotR 6.8 [Tolkien 2004: 1016] 
In consequence, though it happily cost very few lives, it has a chapter to itself in the Red Book, 
and the names of all those who took part were made into a Roll, and learned by heart by Shire -
historians. 
 
However, the most explicit reference is hidden in the dust jacket of The Hobbit and the title 
pages of LotR, in the friezes of runic letters, which respectively transliterate as:  
 
The hobbit or there and back again being the record of a year’s journey made by Bilbo Baggins 
of Hobbiton, compiled from his memoirs by J.R.R. Tolkien and published by George Allen and 
Unwin Ltd. (The Hobbit 1937, Dust Jacket) 
 
The Lord of the Rings translated from the Red Book of Westmarch by John Ronald Reuel Tolkien. 
Herein is set forth the history of the War of the Ring and the Return of the King as seen by the 
Hobbits (LotR 1954–5, Title Pages) 
 
Besides confirming the ‘Hobbito -centrism’ of the book (see below), this hidden paratextual 
material reveals that Tolkien considered himself as a ‘compiler’, not an author. This is another 
important element of the frame narrative of Tolkien’s works, which introduces a further layer of 
complexity to the (fictional) transmission of the text, and above all associates Tolkien, the author 
in the primary world, with the authors of his secondary wor ld, also described as ‘compilers’ or 
‘recorders’. This is not the only quality that Tolkien shares with his fictional authors: the second 
frieze reveals that just like Bilbo, Tolkien is also, and most importantly, a ‘translator’. Tolkien’s 
                                                      
36 Cf. LotR Appendix E [Tolkien 2004: 1113]  The Westron or Common Speech has been entirel y translated into 
English equivalents. (…) In transcribing the ancient scripts I have tried to represent the original sounds (so far as 
they can be determined) with fair accuracy, and at the same time to produce words and names that do not look 
uncouth in modern letters. 
<<<PDFPAGE 13>>>
 13 
translating role is in fact obsessively emphasised in both the Hobbit and the LoTR37, as well as 
in his other writings 38. This is another key feature of the meta-textual frame of LoTR: not only 
does it add a further stage to its already complex meta-textual history but above all it presents 
Tolkien’s works (already described as ‘abridgements’ ) as ‘mediated’, ‘approximate’ texts, in a 
word as ‘translations’.   
 
1.9 Summing up 
 
We can now try to summarise the complex meta-textual frame narrative underlying Tolkien’s 
works: Tolkien has come into possession of a manuscript  copy of an old book in an ancient 
language (‘the Westron’),  consisting of miscellaneous accounts about the first ‘Three Ages of 
this World’ in five volumes. The book originally focused on the end of the Third Age and was 
written by three contemporary authors of Hobbit race (Bilbo, Frodo, Sam) , but was  soon 
supplemented by a large bulk of miscellaneous material, of different origin, authorship, and 
content. Tolkien is now translating extracts of this book into English and  compiling them into 
separate volumes (the Hobbit and LoTR,  as well as, at least according to this versio n of the 
frame, the incomplete Silmarillion).  Going back to my opening questions: the Hobbit was 
originally authored by Bilbo, but was partly emended by Frodo; the LoTR was authored by Frodo 
and Sam, but incorporated  accounts of Bilbo and several other characters; the Silmarillion (or 
more precisely its archetype) was written by Elrond, and later translated by Bilbo. All three 
original works were later heavily  edited, through a process which  included emendation, 
supplementing, and abridgement , and whose last stage consists in Tolkien’s own compilation 
and translation. 
Now that this journey of exploration is over, we still have to deal with several other important 
questions, no less complex than the ones with which we started. And the first question is: why? 
Why did Tolkien develop such an elaborate meta -textual frame? And in addition, why did he 
eventually conceal it, while leaving a large number of hints and traces? This will be the focus of 
the second part of this article. 
 
2. THE SYMBOLISM OF THE META-TEXTUAL FRAME 
 
                                                      
37 LotR Appendix E [Tolkien 2004: 1113] The Westron or Common Speech has been entirely translated into English 
equivalents. (…) In transcribing the ancient scripts I have tried to represent the original sounds (so far as they can 
be determined) with fair accuracy, and at the same time to produce words and names that do not look uncouth in 
modern letters. LotR Appendix F [Tokien 2004: 1133]  In presenting the matter of the Red Book, as a history for 
people of today to read, the whole of the lin guistic setting has been translated as far as possible into terms of our 
own times. (…) The Common Speech, as the language of the Hobbits and their narratives, has inevitably been turned 
into modern English. In the process the difference between the variet ies observable in the use of the Westron has 
been lessened. [ibidem 1134] Translation of this kind is, of course, usual because inevitable in any narrative dealing 
with the past. It seldom proceeds any further. But I have gone beyond it. I have also transl ated all Westron names 
according to their senses. When English names or titles appear in this book it is an indication that names in the 
Common Speech were current at the time, beside, or instead of, those in alien (usually Elvish) languages. Moreover, 
as stated at the very beginning of the shor t ‘Author’s note’ of the Hobbit:  This is a story of long ago. At that time 
the languages and letters were quite different from ours of today. English is used to represent the languages.  
38 Cf. LotR Appendix F.2 (‘on Translation) and e.g. Letter 144 [to Naomi Mitchison, April 1954] For the story has 
to be told, and the dialogue conducted in a language; but English cannot have been the language of any people at 
that time. What I have in fact done is to equate the Westron or wide-spread Common Speech of the Third Age with 
English; and translate everything, including names such as The Shire, that was in the Westron into English terms, 
with some differentiation of style to represent dialectal differences. (…) The name [Gamgee] is a ‘translation’ of 
the real Hobbit name, derived from a village (devoted to rope-making) […].   
 
<<<PDFPAGE 14>>>
 14 
In order to  address these questions, we need first of all to distinguish between two different 
levels of possible answers. Indeed, Tolkien’s meta-textual frame can and must be explained from 
two different perspectives, one internal and the other external to the stories. By this I mean that 
the meta-textual frame is meaningful on two different planes at the same time, the fictional world 
of the story (the ‘secondary world’, according to Tolkien’s terminology) and Tolkien’s real world 
(‘the primary world’). Using a key notion of Tolkien’s poetics, we  can affirm that  this meta-
textual frame is ‘symbolic’, and should be explained as such, i.e. both from a perspective internal 
to the secondary fictional world, and from one external to it, that  is from the  ‘real world’ 
perspective. A symbol, in Tolkien’s terms , may be defined as  a piece of truth which is 
experienced (or experienceable) in the real world  and expressed in a transformed form in  the 
fictional world39. A couple of quotations from Tolkien’s letters to his son will help to clarify this 
notion. 
 
(Letter 66, to Christopher Tolkien, May 1944)  
I sense amongst all your pains (some merely physical) the desire to express your feeling about 
good, evil, fair, foul in some way: to rationalize  it, and prevent it just festering. In my case it 
generated Morgoth and the History of the Gnomes. 
 
(Letter 73, to Christopher Tolkien, June 1944)  
So I took to ‘escapism’: or really transforming experience into another form and symbol, with 
Morgoth and Orcs and the Eldalie (representing beauty and grace of life and artefact) and so 
on; and it has stood me in good stead in many hard years since and I still draw on the conceptions 
then hammered out40.  
 
The words ‘experience’ and ‘feeling’, ‘rationalise’ and ‘express’ are critical: Tolkien does not 
conceive his work as an intellectual act, consisting in the assertion of pre -existing convictions 
under the veil of  literary fiction, but rather as the artistic (or ‘sub -creative’, ‘mythological’, 
‘literary’) expression of non-rationalised experiences. The  expression is ‘artistic’ in the sense 
that it involves the transformation or codification of experience s within a specific expressive 
code, i.e., in Tolkien’s case, the  literary code of his novels, which incl udes the aesthetical, 
narrative, and even linguistic features of Middle-Earth universe.  
This literary conviction explains Tolkien’s notorious aversion for allegory 41, his passionate 
apology for  his secondary world ‘in its own right’,  and his persistent prioritising of the 
‘coherence’ and ‘beauty’ of the Story over its possible ‘allegorical’ meanings.  
 
(Letter 165, To the Houghton Mifflin Co., June 1955)  
There is a great deal of linguistic matter (…) included or mythologically expressed in the book. 
It is to me, anyway, largely an essay in ‘linguistic aes thetic’ as I sometimes say to people who 
ask me ‘what is it all about?’. It is not ‘about’ anything but itself. Certainly it has no allegorical 
intentions, general, particular, or topical, moral, religious, or political.   
 
(Letter 181, To Michael Straight, January/February 1956) 
[A story] must succeed just as a tale, excite, please, and even on occasion move, and within its 
own imagined world be accorded (literary) belief.  (…) something of the teller’s own reflections 
and ‘values’ will inevitably get worked in. This is not the same as allegory.   
 
                                                      
39 That is, in Tolkien’s case, the narrative universe of Middle Earth (without the latter being necessarily subsequent 
to the former). 
40 All quotations of Tolkien’s letters are from Tolkien 1995b. 
41 And we might add for ‘metaphors’ and ‘similes’ etc. 
<<<PDFPAGE 15>>>
 15 
A full exegesis of these beautiful passages, and a discussion of Tolkien’s underlying concept 
of sub-creation are not the scope of this work . However, in the light of the se passages one can 
simply point out that w ithin Tolkien’s framework, a symbol is a narrative element  that is 
perfectly coherent within the economy of the secondary world, but which  has also a  hidden 
meaning in the primary wor ld, deriving from its being an artistic expression of  a ‘real’ 
experience. To give an example, and at the same time  to return to the focus of my talk, let me 
again refer to the already-mentioned case of the two versions of the  finding of the Ring: within 
the LotR’s ‘secondary’ world it is perfectly credible (and, indeed, it is ‘necessary’)  that Bilbo 
should have given a false version of the story to the dwarves, under the corruptive effects of the 
Ring, and that this should have been  the version that first entered the textual tradition of his 
diary42. But at the same time, the  alternative versi on of the story actually exists  in the ‘real 
world’, being in fact the one printed in the first edition of the Hobbit43. This element of the meta-
textual frame is thus ‘true’ and ‘meaningful’ in both the secondary and the primary reality, that 
is, in Tolkien’s understanding, it is a symbol. What makes a symbol different from an allegory, 
in Tolkien’s sense, is that its origin is literary-aesthetic rather than intellectual. Thus the symbol’s 
significance in the secondary world takes priority over its significance in the primary world: in 
the example quoted, Tolkien does not intentionally and deliberately introduce the concept of a 
narrative (and textual) variant in order to reveal a piece of the editorial history of the Hobbit, but 
simply and primarily to justify the existence of a ‘false’ version of the narrative  in the original 
Red Book (on which the first edition of The Hobbit was fictionally based) . This meta-textual 
variance does reflect (and can reveal) in fact a ‘real’ editorial history, but this is not its foremost 
purpose or starting point , which is rather to add coherence and verisimilitude  within the 
secondary reality.44 The difference between a symbol and allegory are thus, paradoxically, at the 
level of realism: a symbol is an allegory that aspires to be ‘accorded literary belief’, that is, which 
is fully ‘realistic’ according to the reality of the fictional world.  This is also the reason why  a 
symbol, such as indeed the meta -textual frame  itself, must be  explained first of all from a 
perspective internal to the secondary reality, as a ‘realistic’ tessera of  Middle Earth’s world. 
 
2.1 The internal function of the meta-textual frame 
 
2.1.1 Realism and the mythopoetic ambition 
 
The double-narrative of the finding of the ring can thus be explained first of all an instance of 
a necessary, ‘realistic’ element within Tolkien’s universe, and the same can be said, analogically, 
for all the other features of Tolkien’s meta-textual frame, and indeed for its very existence. The 
first explanation for the meta -textual frame is thus its necessity within the secondary plane. A 
coherent story, in order to be ‘real’ and accorded belief, needs a ‘textual history’, and especially 
a story which claims to be set in the same world as  ours, in an imagined past. The meta-textual 
frame thus provides first of all internal realism. In this sense it plays a similar role to that of the 
(aesthetically) ‘invented’ languages of Middle Earth, which, as Tolkien often remarked, aimed  
                                                      
42 Since the effects of the ring did not disappear with its destruction. 
43 Later revised by Tolkien before the publication of the LoTR, and incorporated into it almost by chance.  
44 On the distinction between Allegory and (symbolic) Story cf. Letter 109 [to Sir Stanley Unwin, July 1947] 
Allegory and Story converge, meeting somewhere in Truth. So that the only perfectly consistent allegor y is a real 
life; and the only fully intelligible story is an allegory. And one finds, even in imperfect human ‘literature’, that the 
better and more consistent an allegory is the more easily can it be read ‘just as a story’; and the better and more 
closely woven a story is the more easily can those so minded find allegory in it. But the two start out from opposite 
ends. Letter 131 p. 144 [to Milton Waldman, late 1951] I dislike Allegory – the conscious and intentional allegory 
– yet any attempt to explain the purport of myth or fairytale must use allegorical language. (And of course, the more 
‘life’ a story has the more readily will it be susceptible of allegorical interpretations: while the better a deliberate 
allegory is made the more nearly will it be acceptable just as a story). 
<<<PDFPAGE 16>>>
 16 
to give ‘an air of reality’45. The ‘realistic’ function of the meta-textual frame and its ‘necessity’ 
become even clearer if one takes into account Tolkien’s mythopoetic ambition, i.e. his desire to 
create a national epic for England, on the model of Homer’s poems, and more recently for him, 
of Elias Lönnrot’s Kalevala, the Finnish national poem46. 
The comparison with the Kalevala is illuminating: despite most of Kalevala being his own 
work, Lönnrot always posed as a mere ‘compiler’ of collective tales, handed over from the distant 
past and embodying the spirit of Finnish tradition. As we have seen already, Tolkien also (along 
with Bilbo) described himself  as a compiler of collective tales, and ‘collectiveness’ is a key 
feature of the ‘meta-textual’ frame of the LoTR47. Moreover, as Flieger explains well, the meta-
textual frame, featuring a single archetypical book translated by Tolkien at different stage s, 
allows Tolkien to integrate its works into a unified mythological corpus48. In fact, although most 
of the meta-textual references are found in the LoTR they often allude to other works, integrating 
them into the same frame narrative (as discussed below). Moreover, although in fewer numbers, 
meta-textual references are in fact found also in all its other Middle -Earth-related works: apart 
from the already-discussed cryptic para-text of the Hobbit, there are several meta-textual hints 
also in The Silmarilli on49 and The Adventures of Tom Bomba dil50, all referring to the same 
unifying frame. All these contribute to the ‘internal’ realism of the works,  since, on the model 
of real mythology 51, they convey a sense of ‘wholeness’ and unity of their underlying 
‘secondary’ reality. 
 
2.1.2 Stylistic and narrative realism 
 
The ‘realistic’ function of the meta-textual frame is not only valid at a large scale, but it affects 
the literary fabric of the text, down to the level of its stylistic and narrative features. For instance, 
the meta-textual frame reflects and justifies the stylistic variety of Tolkien’s works, both intra -
textually (as already shown) and inter-textually: for instance, there is an evident contrast between 
                                                      
45 Letter 15 [to Allen and Unwin, August 1937] The magic and mythology and assumed ‘history’ a nd most of the 
names (e.g. the epic of the Fall of Gondolin) are, alas!, drawn from unpublished inventions, known only to my 
family, Mis s Griffiths and Mr Lewis. I believe they give the narrative an air of ‘reality’  and have a northern 
atmosphere. But I wonder whether one should lead the unsuspecting to imagine it all comes out of the ‘old books’, 
or tempt the knowing to point out that it does not?; Letter 19 [to Stanley Unwin, December 1937] (…) personally I 
believe (…) [the names] are good, and a large part of the effect. They are coherent and consistent and made upon 
two related linguistic formulae, so that they achieve a reality  not ful ly achieved to my feeling by other name -
inventors (say Swift or Dunsany!).  
46 On the link between the meta -textual frame and Tolkien’s mythopoetic ambition see recently Flieger 2005: 63, 
Thiessen 2014: 199–200.  
47 Both Lönnrot and Tolkien devised a meta -textual narrative frame to emphasise the ‘authentic’ quality of  their 
works, but one might say that Tolkien is more honest, as he did not expect his readers to believe in  that narrative, 
but simply to use it as a further means to convey an ‘air of reality’. On the literary (and linguistic) influence of 
Kalevala on Tolkien’s work see Kahlas-Tarkka 2014. 
48 Cf. Flieger 2005: 83 –4, in particular (84) “[I]f we are to take Tolkien’s work as he wrote it and as he clearly 
wanted his audience to read it – as a true myt hology, with all the layering and multiple narrators and overlapping 
texts and variant versions that characterize mythologies in the real world –then we must allow that, like those real -
world mythologies, all the parts, even the apparently inconsequential ones, are in in the greater service of the whole. 
49 Cf. e.g. The Silmarillion [Tolkien 1977:  312] But those who saw the things that were done in that time, deeds of 
valour and wonder, have elsewhere told the tale of the War of the Ring, and how it ended both in victory unlooked 
for and in sorrow long foreseen.  
50 Cf. in particular [Tolkien 2008b: 7] The Red Book contains a large number of verses. A few are included in the 
narrative of the Downfall of The Lord of the Rings, or in the attached stories and chronicles; many more are found 
on loose leaves, while some are written carelessly in margins and bl anks. Of the last sort most are nonsense, now 
often unintelligible even when legible, or half-remembered fragments. 
51 Lee (2014b: 61) also points out the similarity between the meta -textual frame, especially as regards the fictional 
history of transmission , and medieval antiquarianism, with which Tolkien was well acquainted thanks to his 
academic work. 
<<<PDFPAGE 17>>>
 17 
the high-flown and archaising  tone of the Silm arillion, the simple, fairy-story-like style of the 
Hobbit, and the stylistic medley which is used in LoTR. These stylistic variations find a ‘realistic’ 
justification in the meta -textual frame, and in particular in the identities of the author of the 
different works, an elf for the S ilmarillion, the down-to-earth hobbit Bilbo for the Hobbit, and 
the ennobled, ‘elvenized’ Hobbit Frodo for LoTR. Similarly, on the narrative level, the multiple 
focalisations that can be identified in  different parts of the LoTR match the ‘collectiveness’ of 
the meta -textual frame,  with Frodo compiling from Bilbo’s notes and the memories of his 
friends, as we already pointed out. 
 
2.1.3 Hobbito-centrism: narrative and themes 
 
Despite this collectiveness, however, in one important sense the narrative perspective remains 
the same throughout the book, and this  is that it is  a hobbit perspective , a fact which is aptly 
justified by the hobbit identity of the book’s author(s) . This is probably the most importa nt 
‘internal’ function of the meta-textual frame: i.e. to emphasise and justify the ‘hobbito-centrism’ 
of the book. This Hobbito-centrism is not just a narrative accident, but a fundamental feature of 
the novel, related to one of its key underlying themes, as Tolkien often repeats in his letters:  
 
(Letter 131 p. 160, to Milton Waldman, late 1951])  
(…)  But as the earliest Tales are seen through Elvish eyes, as it were, this last great Tale (…) , 
coming down from myth and legend to the earth, is seen mainly through the eyes of Hobbits: it 
thus becomes in fact anthropocentric. But (…) through Hobbits, not Men so-called, because the 
last Tale is to exemplify most clearly a recurrent theme: the place in ‘world politics’ of the 
unforeseen and unforeseeable acts of will, and deeds of virtue of the apparently small, ungreat 
forgotten in the places of the Wise and Great.  
 
(Letter 181, to Michael Straight, January/February 1956) 
[The structure of the narrative] is planned to be ‘hobbito-centric’, that is primarily a study of the 
ennoblement (or sanctification) of the humble.52 
 
The LoTR is written by a hobbit because the whole book is about hobbits, and more precisely 
about their ‘ennoblement’ and their contribution to the history of the world. Both these  themes 
were most dear to Tolkien53. 
 
2.1.4 Merging myth into history: the symbolism of the hobbits (and their narrative) 
 
The ‘hobbito-centrism’ of the book, however, is important not only from a narrative, stylistic 
and thematic point of view: it also has a crucial (meta-)literary function, that is, using Tolkien’s 
words, to ‘merge myth into history’. 
 
(Letter 131 p. 144, to Milton Waldman, late 1951) 
The Hobbit, which has much more essential life in it, was quite independently conceived: I did 
not know as I began it that it belonged. But it proved to be the discovery of the completion of the 
whole, its mode of descent  to earth, and merging into ‘history’. As the high Legends of the 
                                                      
52 Cf. also Letter 186 [to Joanna de Bortadano, March 1956] This story [Aragorn and Arwen] is placed in an 
appendix, because I have told the whole tale more o r less through hobbits; and that is because another main point 
in the story for me is the remark of Elrond in Vol. 1 ‘Such is oft the course of deeds that move the wheels of the 
world’ (…). 
53 Cf. e.g. Letter 165 [to the Houghton Mifflin Co., June 1955] There are of course certain things and themes that 
move me specially. The interrelations between the ‘noble’ and the ‘simple’ (or common, vulgar) for instance. The 
ennoblement of the ignoble I find especially moving.  
<<<PDFPAGE 18>>>
 18 
beginning are supposed to look at things through Elvish minds, so the middle tale of the Hobbit 
takes a virtually human point of view–and the last tale blends them.  
 
What does Tolkien mean by ‘descend to earth’ and ‘merge into history’? A full answer to this 
question would require more than one article54. Here I’ll simply say that the Hobbits introduce a 
point of view with which Tolkien and his readers can identify, that is first of all an 
‘anthropocentric point of view’, and secondarily the point of view of ‘simple’ hum an beings 
living in a non -heroic age, like that of Tolkien’s twentieth century England. Tolkien himself 
often describes himself and (some of) his contemporaries as Hobbits, and even the meta-textual 
frame implies that the compiler was himself of Hobbit race. The Hobbits are therefore the most 
symbolic characters of the LoTR in the sense that they  only have a full life  (‘a more essential 
life’) in both the primary and secondary world; they help the merging of myth and history 
because they link the secondary with the primary world, that is the mythical universe of Middle 
Earth, with its elves, gods, and heroes, with Tolkien’s real contemporary world. 
 
2.2 The ‘external’ meaning of the meta-textual frame 
 
This leads me at last to the final part of this article, in which I will investigate the meaning of 
the meta -textual narratives on the ‘primary  plane’. So far I have only discussed ‘internal’ 
justifications for the meta-textual frame, which are all somehow related to the  need for internal 
realism and mythopoetic ambition. But this meta-textual frame is clearly symbolic, and it has a 
meaning also in the primary, real world,  by being a codified expression of real experience s: to 
put it simply, what sort of ‘real’ experience is expressed by the meta-textual narrative? 
 
2.2.1 The Hobbit’s intrusion: meta-textual frame and inspiration 
 
The starting point for this de-codification is again the hobbits, or more precisely ‘the Hobbit’. 
We already read above (Letter 131) that Tolkien considered The Hobbit as  ‘an unexpected  
discovery’, and this point is often repeated in his letters55. 
 
(Letter 164, to W.H. Auden, June 1955) 
The Hobbit was originally quite unconnected, though it inevitably got drawn in to the 
circumference of the greater construction; and in th e event modified it. (…) On a blank leaf I 
scrawled: ‘In a hole in the ground there lived a hobbit’. I did not and do not know why.  I did 
nothing about it, for a long time, and for some years I got no further than the production of Thor’s 
Map.  
 
(Letter 17, to Stanley Unwin, October 1937)  
I have only too much to say, and much already written, about the world into which the hobbit 
intruded.   
 
(Letter 257, to Christopher Bretherton, July 1964)  
The Hobbit was not intended to have anything to do with it. 
 
The origin of the Hobbits and above all their ‘intrusion’ with the world of Middle Eart h were 
unplanned. Tolkien did not consciously invent the hobbits, but the hobbits’ story, suddenly and 
unexpectedly, ‘happened to him’, like the discovery of a  mysterious manuscript from a distant 
past (indeed written by and about Hobbits). The ‘hobbito-centrism’ of the meta-textual frame of 
LoTR does not simply have narrative, thematic, and literary  connotations, but is connected to a 
                                                      
54 On this see in particular Shippey 2003: chapter 3. 
55 On the ‘unexplained’ inspiration of the Hobbit cf. also Carpenter 1977: 230, Shippey 2003: 65 –70.  
<<<PDFPAGE 19>>>
 19 
fundamental experiential reality related to the writing of his stories: it is not Tolkien who decided 
to write about Hobbits, but it is , from this perspective,  the Hobbits who  decided to make him 
write about them. Tolkien’s self -description as a ‘compiler’ and ‘translator’ is therefore an 
accurate, symbolic, expression of his experience as a writer of an ‘unplanned’ story, a story that 
he discovered rather than  devised or invented .56 This is the first, main ‘external’ (or primary) 
function of the meta-textual frame: it symbolically expresses the actual history of composition 
of the works. Just  as the fictional ‘variant narrative’ of the finding of the ring reflect s real 
‘editorial variants’, so the meta-textual notion of Tolkien’s ‘discovery of a hobbit’s manuscript’ 
reflects the unplanned ‘inspiration’ of his hobbits’ stories.  
 
2.2.2 Meta-textual frame and composition: the ‘self-unfolding’ of the story  
 
There are other ‘real’ features of Tolkien’s writing history and practice which are symbolically 
expressed in the book: the description of Bilb o’s writing room in Rivendell, for instance, could 
equally describe the real Oxford study  where Tolkien drafted his notes and books . Similarly, 
Bilbo’s tendency to procrastinate his writing and his obsession about the unfinished status of his 
diary is easily mirrored in real elements of Tolkien’s writing life57. Also, the meta-textual frame, 
with Bilbo unable to go much beyond the drafting of the initial chapters of the ‘new story’, 
accurately reflects the actual chronology of the LotR’s composition, with Tolkien lingering over 
the first chapters of the Fellowship of the Ring58. However, the most important ‘real’ feature of 
the meta-textual frame is related to the already-mentioned ‘unexpectedness’ of the stories, their 
‘happening’ as unplanned, independent events.  
 
That Tolkien considered his stories unplanned, is indeed true both at the level of the inspiration, 
and at each stage of the process of writing. Often Tolkien admitted, for instance, that ‘the story 
unfolded itself’, without sketches or synopses, as ‘given things’: 
 
(Letter 131 p. 145, to Milton Waldman, late 1951) 
The mere stories were the thing. They arose in my mind as ‘given’ things, and as they came, 
separately, so too the links grew. (…): yet always I had the sense of recording what was already 
‘there’, somewhere; not of ‘inventing’.  
 
(Letter 199, to Caroline Everett, June 1957) 
From time to time I made rough sketches or synopses of what was to follow, immediately or far 
ahead; but these were seldom of much use: the story unfolded itself, as it were. The tying-up was 
achieved, so far as it is achieved, by constant re-writing backwards. 
 
Similarly, Tolkien declares that he did not have to anticipate knowledge of characters and 
scenes, before they were actually put in writing59.  
                                                      
56 Cf. also Letter 199 [to Caroline Everett, June 1957] though praised for ‘invention’ I have not in fact any conscious 
memory of sitting down and deliberately thinking out any episode. 
57 To confirm Tolkien’s belief that symbols are not always necessarily subsequent to their  primary referents, there 
are even cases in which meta -textual features anticipate reality: for instance, Bilbo’s handing over his  unfinished 
notes to Frodo closely for eshadow the posthumous editorial  history of the Silmarillion, compiled by his heir 
Christopher Tolkien (on cf. Nagy 2014: 114 ‘Christopher Tolkien inserted himself in the functional place of Bilbo, 
thus reinforcing the mythopoeic effect with the keystone that locks the whole into place. The 1977 Silmarillion does 
everything Bilbo’s work is supposed to do, and ultimately in conception conforms to Tolkien’s governing 
intention’).  
58 On the history of composition of Middle Earth see Whittingham 2007. 
59 Cf. also Letter 247 [to Colonel Worskett, September 1963] There were no Ents in the older stories –because the 
Ents in fact  only presented themselves to my sight, without premeditation or any  previous conscious knowledge, 
<<<PDFPAGE 20>>>
 20 
 
Letter 91 [to Christopher Tolkien, November 1944] What happens to the Ents I don’t yet know. 
It will probably work out very differently from this plan when it gets written, as if the truth comes 
out then, only imperfectly glimpsed in the preliminary sketch. 
 
There is a metaphor in particular which Tolkien uses to express this experience of his work as 
something ‘other’. This is the metaphor of the Tree:  
 
(Letter 64, to Christopher Tolkien, April 1944) also I hope to see him [CS Lewis] tomorrow and 
read some more of ‘the Ring’. It is growing and sprouting again (I did a whole day at it yesterday 
to the neglect of many matters) and opening out in unexpected ways.  
 
(Letter 241, to Jane Neave, September 1962) 
I was anxious about my own internal Tree, The Lord of the Rings. It was growing out of hand, 
and revealing endless new vistas. 
 
This metaphor was later developed by Tolkien into the full narrative of ‘Leaf by Niggle’,  in 
Tolkien’s words a ‘symbol of Tale -telling60, which can be considered as  Tolkien’s literary 
manifesto, and which would also deserve a full investigation (unfortunately outside the scope of 
this article). Tolkien thus considered their stories as  something ‘other’ from him, something 
‘given’, free from the control of his rational mind. This also explains why he refers to his books 
as a puzzle, as the work of ‘a strange’ hand, written by ‘someone else’, why he often declares a 
fundamental ‘ignorance’ about many details of the background story, and also why he indulges 
in an apparently absurd self-exegesis of or research on his own books:  
 
 
(Letter 211, to Rhona Beare, October 1958) 
I do not ‘know’ all the answers. Much of my own book puzzles me; and in any case much of it 
was written so long ago (…) that I read it now as if it were from a strange hand. (…) I have not 
named the colours because I do not know them.  
 
(Letter 294, to Charlotte and Denis Plimmer, February 1967) 
If it is of interest, the passages that now move me most – written so long ago that I read them 
now as if they had been written by someone else – are the end of the chapter Lothlórien and the 
horns of the Rohirrim at cockcrow.  
 
(Letter 59, to Christopher Tolkien, April 1944) 
I have seriously embarked on an effort to finish my book, and have been sitting up rather late: a 
lot of re-reading and research required. 
 
2.2.3 Writing as a ‘labour pain’: discovering, recording and reporting (imperfectly) 
 
There is a text in particular in which Tolkien delves into this experience of ‘writing as 
discovery’, which is a long letter dating to 1955 and written to the poet W.H. Auden, a great 
admirer of Tolkien’s work. A couple of short extracts deserve to be quoted in full. 
 
(Letter 163, to W. H. Auden, June 1955) 
The last two books were written between 1944 and 48. That of course does not mean that the 
main idea of the story was a war -product. (…) It is really given, and present in germ, from the 
                                                      
when I came to Chapter IV of Book 3. Just like the narrative of LoTR, also its characters are according to Tolkien 
largely ‘independent’ from him. 
60 Cf. Letter 263. 
<<<PDFPAGE 21>>>
 21 
beginning, though I had no conscious notion of what the Necromances s tood for (…) nor of his 
connexion with the Ring. (…) So (…) the essential Quest started at once. But I met a lot of things 
on the way that astonished me. Tom Bombadil I knew already; but I had never been to Bree. 
Strider sitting in the corner at the inn was a shock, and I had no more idea who he was than had 
Frodo. (…) Fangorn Forest was an unforeseen adventure. I had never heard of the House of Eorl 
nor of the Stewards of Gondor. Most disquieting of all, Saruman had never been revealed to me, 
and I was as mystified as Frodo at Gandalf’s failure to appear on September 22. I knew nothing 
of the Palantiri though the moment the Orthanc-stone was cast from the window I recognized it, 
and knew the meaning of the ‘rhyme of lore’ that had been running in my mind: seven starts and 
seven stones and one white tree.  (…) I have yet to discover anything about the cats of Queen 
Beruthiel. (…)  
 
(Letter 163 n., to W. H. Auden, June 1955) 
I had very little particular, conscious, intellectual, intention in mind at any point. Take the Ents, 
for instance. I did not consciously invent them at all. The chapter called ‘Treebeard’, from 
Treebeard’s first remark on p. 66, was written off more or less as it stands, with an effect on my 
self  (except for labour pains) almost like reading some one else’s work. And I like Ents because 
they do not seem to have anything to do with me. I daresay something had been going on in the 
‘unconscious’ for some time, and that accounts for my feeling throughout, especially  when 
stuck, that I was not i nventing but reporting (imperfectly) and had at times to wait till ‘what 
really happened’ came through. (…)  
 
It should be clear by now tha t Tolkien’s meta-textual self-representation as a decipherer and 
translator of someone’s else story has a meaningful correlation with the way Tolkien experienced 
his real writing experience. In particular, the adverb ‘imperfectly’ in the second passage quoted 
above is crucial, and helps to introduce another key element of Tolkien’s writing experience, 
which is symbolically expressed through the meta -textual frame. This is the ‘imperfection’, 
‘approximateness’ or ‘incompleteness’ of his writing. As shown by the above passages Tolkien 
conceives his writing as originating in an ‘event’, of which he only presents a ‘report’: Tolkien 
often points out in his letters that this report is ‘imperfect’ and incomplete, that he has a ‘limited 
understanding of the things revealed’ to him61. Cf. e.g. 
 
(Letter 187, to H. Cotton Minchin, April 1956)  
It [the Appendix] will be a big volume, even if I attend only to the things revealed to my limited 
understanding!  
 
(Letter 109, to Sir Stanley Unwin, July 1947) 
Yet the chief thing is to complete one’s work, as far as completion has any real sense. 
 
Similarly, on the linguistic side, Tolkien often remarks that the ‘English’ language of his novels 
is ‘approximate’, a ‘not very accurate’  rendering of the  original (fictional) languages of his 
texts62. Cf. e.g. 
 
Letter 24 [to the editor of the ‘Observer’, January/February 1938] In any case, elf, gnome, goblin, 
dwarf are only approximate translations of the Old Elvish names for beings of not quite the same 
kinds and functions. 
 
                                                      
61 Cf. also Letter 115 [to Katherine Farrer, June 1948(?)] The long tales out of which it is drawn (by ‘Pengolod’) 
are either incomplete or not up to date.  
62 Cf. also Letter 17 [to Stanley Unwin, October 1937] Perhaps my dwarf –since he and the Gnome are only 
translations into approximate equivalents of creatures with different names and rather different functions in their 
own world (…). Letter 114 [to Hugh Brogan, April 1948] A history of the Eldalië (or Elves, by a not very accurate 
translation).  
<<<PDFPAGE 22>>>
 22 
A complex philosophy of language and linguistic aesthetics underlies these beliefs, inspired 
by Owen Barfield’s works, according to which  modern languages of fallen men  are no longer 
able to express the ‘truth’ of reality.  For this reason, they are no longer ‘beautiful’, having lost 
the capacity to express with accuracy and precision the beauty of truth63. This is not the place to 
delve into these theories , of Stoic ancestry : let me only emphasiz e here how the meta-textual 
frame, presenting Tolkien as a compiler and translator, is perfectly coherent with his experience 
of writing as a n ‘incomplete’ and ‘linguistically inaccurate’ report of event s that remain  
inherently ‘ineffable’, ‘mysterious’. 
But what kind of events are we talking about? If for Tolkien writing is just an ‘imperfect report’ 
of what ‘really happened’, what is the nature of this ‘happening’? What has happened? There is 
no easy answer to these questions, but, with a degree of simplification, we might say that a ll 
these ‘events’ can be grouped together under a single word, Truth: writing, for Tolkien, is an 
imperfect report or ‘reflection’ of a True event, of Truth64. Cf. e.g 
(Letter 181, to Michael Straight, January/February 1956) 
I think that fairy story has its  own mode of reflecting ‘truth’, different from allegory, or 
(sustained) satire, or ‘realism’, and in some ways more powerful. 
 
And for Tolkien, a man of d eep Christian faith, Truth ultimately  has a divine origin. Truth 
transcends human understanding and i s inherently something Other, which cannot be fully 
expressed in the imperfect language of  fallen human beings. This explains both why (human) 
writing is inherently ‘approximate’65 and why Tolkien’s stories felt to him as ‘written by others’, 
an ‘unexpected adventure’, ‘a given thing’.  
 
2.2.4 The Mystery of literary creation 
 
In fact, Tolkien would never have claimed to be the origin of the Truth of his stories: as in the 
meta-textual frame, he was simply a ‘reporter’, ‘a  compiler’ a ‘translator’ of a Story that was 
given to him. In the story ‘Leaf by Niggle’ it is not Niggle who gives life to his wonderful Tree: 
he is only able to pain t lifeless and disconnected leaves, with a longing desire for a  vision that 
he can only imperfectly picture in his mind. The Divine powers who govern his world decide to 
bless and transfigure this desire, and create a wonderful flourishing Tree out of it. The Tree has 
thus something divine in it, and yet it also has something of Niggle’s ‘artistic’ ambition.  
                                                      
63 For an extensive discussion of Barfield’s influence on Tolkien’s thought and works see especially Medcalf 1999 
and Flieger 2002. 
64 Elaborations of Tolkien’s belief that myth and art (must) express ‘truth’ in ‘symbolic’ (i.e. non -explicit, not -
allegorically) forms are found especially in the lecture ‘On Fairy Stories’ (Tolkien 2008a), originally delivered at 
the University of St Andrews, and his poem ‘Mythopoeia’ (in Tolkien 2001), which originated in a momentous 
conversation with C.S. Lewis (on which see recently Phelpstead 2014). Cf. also Letter 131 p. 144 [to Milton 
Waldman, late 1951] Myth and fairy -story must, as all art, reflect and contain in solution elements of moral and 
religious truth (or error), but not explicit, not in the known form of the primary ‘real world’  (…) [ibidem 147] I 
believe that legends and myths are largely made of ‘truth’, and indeed present aspects of it that can only be received 
in this mode. It would be interesting to investigate why for Tolkien a symbolic Story could be at the same time a 
non-intellectual event, originating in an aesthetic process of discovery, and at the same time an expression of Truth. 
I hope to try to give a full answer in another work; here I will only say that the answer lies in Tolkien’s ‘Sacramental’ 
vision of reality (and art), grounded in his Catholic faith, and the related belief in the unity of beauty and truth.  
65 It also explains  why the ‘most moving’ stories for Tolkien are the one s untold, that is the ones that are not 
‘mediated’ by human imperfection; cf. also Letter 96 [to Christopher Tolkien, January 1945] One that moves 
supremely and I find small difficulty in evoking: the heart-racking sense of the vanished past  (best expressed by 
Gandalf’s words about the Palantir); and the other the more ‘ordinary’ emotion, triumph, pathos tragedy of the 
characters. That I am learning to do, as I get to know my people, but it is not really so near my heart, and is forced 
on me by the fundamental literary dilemma. A story must be told or there’ll be no story, yet it is the untold stories 
that are most moving.  
<<<PDFPAGE 23>>>
 23 
The birth of the Tree, and by analogy of Tolkien’s literary work, originates thus in a mysterious 
interplay between human and divine  forces. This is the reason why Tolkien always considered 
literary creation as a ‘mystery’. 
 
(Letter 180, to Mr Thompson, January 1956) 
I have long ceased to invent (…) though even patronizing or sneering critics on the side praise 
my ‘invention’): I wait till I seem to know what really happened. Or till it writes itself. (…) I 
am interested in mythological ‘invention’, and the ‘mystery’ of literary creation (or sub -
creation as I have elsewhere called it) . (…) I would build on the hobbits. And I saw that I was 
meant to do it (as Gandalf would say), since without thought, in a ‘blurb’, I wrote for The Hobbit, 
I spoke of the time between the Elder Days and the Dominion of Men.  
 
Literary creation is a ‘mystery’ because its occurrence and offspring cannot be fully explained, 
for Tolkien,  in rational terms, as purely human activities , performed by individual human  
beings66. In fact, Tolkien never thought himself ‘alone’ in his writing, never considered himself 
as the only author of his stories 67. A funny anecdote exemplifies  this, in which Tolkien reports 
his fortuitous encounter with an eccentric old fellow:  
 
(Letter 328 [to Carole Batten-Phelps, Autumn 1971]) 
He was struck by the curious way in which many old pictures seemed to him to have been 
designed to illustrate LotR long before its time (..) Suddenly he said ‘Of course you don’t suppose, 
do you, that you wrot e all that book yourself?’ Pure Gandalf! I  was too well acquainted with 
Gandalf to expose myself rashly, or to ask what he meant. I think I said: ‘No, I don’t suppose so 
any longer’. An alarming conclusion (…) but not one that should puff any one up who considers 
the imperfections of ‘chosen instruments’ and indeed what sometimes see ms their lamentable 
unfitness for the purpose.   
 
It is important to note that Gandalf is for Tolkien a divine entity, a symbol of divine grace 68: 
in this anecdote it is  thus God himself, divine ‘Truth’, who claims ‘co -authority’ of Tolkien’s 
stories and reminds him of his purely ‘instrumental’ role. Tolkien often described himself as an 
instrument of God, and indeed aspired to be such from his very early years: 
 
(Letter 15 [to G.B. Smith, August 1916]) 
The greatness I meant was that of a great instrument in God’s hands–a mover, a doer, even an 
achiever of great things, a beginner at the very least of large things.  
 
And eventually Tolkien did consider himself (and was grateful  for) having become an 
‘instrument in His hands’, chosen to provide, through the beauty of his literature, ‘a drop of water 
on a barren stony ground’ and offer ‘a tribute to the infinity of God’s potential variety’. 
 
(Letter 87, to Christopher Tolkien, October 1944) 
                                                      
66 Letter 328 [to Carole Batten-Phelps, Autumn 1971] The book was written to please me (…) it was written slowly 
and with great care for detail and finally emerged as a Frameless picture : a searchlight, as it were, on a brief 
episode of History (…) Very well: that may explain to some extent why it feels like ‘history’: it does not fully explain 
what has actually happened. (…) I feel as (..) if indeed the horns of Hope had been heard again, as Pippin heard 
them suddenly at the absolute nadir of the fortunes of the West. But How and Why?  
67 In fact, within his fiction evil is defined as the  attempt at creating ‘on one’s own’, which is what, for instance, 
Morgoth, Sauron and Saruman do. Similarly, one of the main causes of the fall of the Noldor in the Silmarillion is 
the ‘artificer’ Fëanor’s prideful refusal to recognize the divine origin of the beauty of his fateful Silmarils. 
68 Cf. e.g. Letter 109 [to Sir Stanley Unwing, July 1947] I think that there is no horror conceivable that such 
creatures [the Hobbits] cannot surmount, by grace (here appearing in mythological forms) combined with a refusal 
of their nature and reason at the last pinch to compromise or submit.  
<<<PDFPAGE 24>>>
 24 
What thousands of grains of good human corn must fall on barren stony ground, if such a very 
small drop of water should be so intoxicating! But I suppose one should be grateful for the grace 
and fortune to have allowed me to provide even the drop. 
 
(Letter 153, to Peter Hastings, September 1954)  
I should have said that liberation ‘from the channels the creator is known to have used already’ 
is the fundamental function of ‘sub -creation’, a tribute to the infinity of His potential variety,  
one of the ways in which indeed it is exhibited. 
 
For Tolkien literary creation is thus another form of God’s creative power, channelled through 
the imperfect ‘code’ of a human instrument. Just like Niggle’s Tree, Tolkien considers his own 
work as the offspring of his artistic, sub-creative aspiration and the vitalising power of God, an 
offspring which Tolkien ‘delivered’ with ‘labour pains’. Tolkien’s stories are thus not only his 
own stories, just as a translation belongs to the translator but primarily to its original author. In 
fact, the true  Author of  Tolkien’s stories , returning to  our starting question, is not Tolkien 
himself, but rather an Unnamed Person. 
 
(Letter 192 [to Amy Ronald, July 1956]) 
The Other Power then took over: the Writer of the Story (by which I do not mean myself) ‘that 
one ever-present Person who is never absent and never named’.  
 
Why does this person remain Unnamed? The reason is the same  as why Tolkien eventually 
concealed the meta-textual frame, whose ultimate  (perhaps unintended) function , to put it in a 
nutshell, is to express in symbolic forms the ‘ Otherness’ and ‘multi-authoriality’ of his stories. 
It was not Tolkien’s ambition (or vocation) to articulate truth in  the imperfect language  of 
fallen human beings, but rather to express it in a more unfamiliar, and thus more powerful (and 
accurate) form69, under the cloak of symbols and stories70. 
Following Tolkien’s example, let me  thus conclude this article with a story, which I think 
provides a good symbolic summary  of the journey I have made , and that I  will leave for  the 
reader to interpret. This is from the Silmarillion and concerns the creation of the dwarves  by 
Aulë, the semi-god of ‘sub-creation’:   
 
The Silmarillion 2 [Tolkien 1977]    
Aulë made the Dwarves (…) but fearing that the other Valar might blame his work, he wrought 
in secret: and he made first the Seven Fathers of the Dwarves in a hall under the mountains in 
Middle-earth. Now Ilúvatar [God] knew what was done, and in the very hour that Aulë’s work 
                                                      
69 On the beneficial ‘unfamiliarity’ of  the symbolic code cf. e.g. Letter 153 [to Peter Hastings, September 1954] I 
would claim (…) to have as one object the elucidation of truth, and the encouragement of good morals in this real 
world, by the ancient device of exemplifying them in unfamiliar embodiments, that may tend to ‘bring them home’.  
70 On Tolkien’s ‘hiding’ effort in his work cf.  e.g. Letter 156 [to Robert Murray SJ, Novembe r 1954] I have 
purposely kept all allusions to the highest matters down to mere hints , perceptible only by the most attentive, or 
kept them under unexplained symbolic forms. So God and the ‘angelic’ gods, the Lords or Powers of the West, only 
peep through in such places as Gandalf’s conversation with Frodo: ‘behind that there was something else at work’ 
(…) or in Faramirs’ Numenorean grace at dinner. Letter 163 [to W.H. Auden, June 1955] (…) the author, the most 
modest (or at any rate retiring) of men, whose instinct is to cloak such self-knowledge as he has, and such criticisms 
of life as he knows it, under mythical and legendary dress (…)  Letter 250 [to Michael Tolkien, November 1963] At 
any rate as a key to dons’ behaviour. Quite true, but not the whole truth. (The greater part of the truth is always 
hidden, in regions out of the reach of cynicism). Letter 142 [to Robert Murray SJ, December 1953] The Lord of the 
Rings is of course a fundamentally religious and Catholic work; unconsciously so at first, but  consciously in the 
revision. That is why I have not put in, or have cut out, practically all references to anything like ‘religion’, to 
cults or practices in the imaginary world. For the religious element is absorbed into the story and the symbolism. 
(Letter 142). 
 
<<<PDFPAGE 25>>>
 25 
was complete, and he was pleased, and began to instruct the Dwarves in the speech that he had 
devised for them, Ilúvatar spoke to him; and Aulë heard his voice and was silent. And the voice 
of Ilúvatar said to him: ‘Why hast thou done this? Why dost thou attempt a thing which thou 
knowest is beyond thy power and thy authority? For thou hast from me as a gift thy own being 
only, and no more; and therefore the creatures of thy hand and mind can live only by that being, 
moving when thou thinkest to move them, and if thy thought be elsewhere, standing idle. Is that 
thy desire?’ Then Aulë answered: ‘I did not desire such lordship. I desired things other than I 
am, to love and to teach them, so that they too might perceive the beauty of Eä, which thou hast 
caused to be. For it seemed to me that there is great room in Arda for many things that might 
rejoice in it, yet it is for the most part empty still, and dumb. And in my impatience I have fallen 
into folly. Yet the making of things is in my heart from my own making by thee; and the child of 
little understanding that makes a play of the deeds of his father may do so without thought of 
mockery, but because he is the son of his father. But what shall I do now,  so that thou be not 
angry with me for ever? As a child to his father, I offer to thee these things, the work of the hands 
which thou hast made. Do with them what thou wilt. But should I not rather destroy the work of 
my presumption?’ Then Aulë took up a g reat hammer to smite the Dwarves; and he wept. But 
Ilúvatar had compassion upon Aulë and his desire, because of his humility; and the Dwarves 
shrank from the hammer and were afraid, and they bowed down their heads and begged for 
mercy. And the voice of Ilú vatar said to Aulë: ‘Thy offer I accepted even as it was made. Dost 
thou not see that these things have now a life of their own, and speak with their own voices? Else 
they would not have flinched from thy blow, nor from any command of thy will.’ Then Aulë cast 
down his hammer and was glad, and he gave thanks to Ilúvatar, saying: ‘May Eru bless my work 
and amend it!’ But Ilúvatar spoke again and said: ‘Even as I gave being to the thoughts of the 
Ainur at the beginning of the World, so now I have taken up thy  desire and given to it place 
therein; but in no other way will I amend thy handiwork, and as thou hast made it, so shall it be”. 
 
References List 
 
Primary Sources 
 
Tolkien, J.R.R. (1977), The Silmarillion. Edited by Christopher Tolkien. London.  
Tolkien, J.R.R. (1983–1996), The History of Middle Earth. Edited by Christopher Tolkien. 12 volumes. London.  
Tolkien, J.R.R. (1995a), The Hobbit. Rev. edn. London. HarperCollins. [1st edition 1937, 2nd revised edition 1951].  
Tolkien, J.R.R. (1995b), The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien. New edn. Edited by Humphrey Carpenter. London. 
Tolkien, J.R.R. (1998), Unfinished Tales of Númenor and Middle-earth. Edited by Christopher Tolkien. London. 
Tolkien, J.R.R. (2001), Tree and Leaf, including the Poem Mythopoeia . Edited by Christopher Tolkien. London 
[1st edition 1964]. 
Tolkien, J.R.R. (2004), The Lord of the Rings. 3 vols. 50th anniversary edn. London. 
Tolkien, J.R.R. (2008a), On Fairy-stories. Expanded edn. Edited by V. Flieger and D. A. Anderson. London.  
Tolkien, J.R.R. (2008b), Tales from the Perilous Realm. Includes Farmer Giles of Ham, “Leaf by Niggle,” Smith 
of Wootton Major , The Adventures of Tom Bombadil [originally published in 1997] , and Roverandom. 
London. 
 
Secondary Sources 
 
Agøy, N. I. (2007), ‘Viewpoints, Audiences and Lost Texts in The Silmarillion.’, in Turner (2007), 139–163. 
Atherton, M. (2012), There and Back Again: J. R. R. Tolkien and the Origins of The Hobbit . London and New 
York. 
Brljak, V. (2010), ‘The Book of Lost Tales: Tolkien as Meta ctionist.’, Tolkien Studies 7: 1–34.  
Caldecott, S. (2005), The Power of the Ring: The Spiritual Vision Behind the Lord of the Rings. New York.  
Caldecott, S. and Honegger, T. (eds.) (2008), Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings: Sources of Inspiration. Zurich and 
Jena. 
Carpenter, H. (1977), J. R. R. Tolkien – A Biography. London. 
Drout, M.D.C. (2007), J.R.R. Tolkien Encyclopedia. New York. 
Eden, B. L. (ed.) (2014), The Hobbit and Tolkien's Mythology. Jefferson, NC. 
Flieger, V. and Hostett er, C.F. (ed.) (2000), Tolkien’s Legendarium: Essays on The History of Middle -earth. 
Westport, CT.  
Flieger, V. (2002), Splintered Light: Logos and Language in Tolkien's World, 2nd ed. Kent and London. 
Flieger, V. (2005), Interrupted Music. Kent and London. 
<<<PDFPAGE 26>>>
 26 
Flieger, V. (2007), ‘Frame Narrative’, in Drout (2007), 216–218.  
Flieger, V. (2014), ‘“The Lost Road”  and “The Notion Club Papers”: Myth, History, and Time -travel’, in Lee 
(2014a), 161–172. 
Hanks, D.T.J. (2012), ‘Tolkien’s “Leaf by Niggle”:  A Blossom on the Tree of Tales ’, Journal of Inklings Studies 
2, 23–48. 
Kahlas-Tarkka, L. (2014), ‘Finnish: The Land and Language of Heroes’, in Lee (2014), 259 –271. 
Lee, S. D. (ed.) (2014a), A Companion to J. R. R. Tolkien. Malden, MA. 
Lee, S.D. (2014b), ‘Manuscripts: Use, and Using’, in Lee (2014a), 56–75. 
Medcalf, S. (1999), ‘The Learned Language of Elves: Owen Barfield, The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings’, 
Seven 16, 31–53. 
Nagy, G. (2003), ‘The Great Chain of Reading: (Inter-)textual Relations and the Technique of Mythopoesis in the 
Túrin Story’, in Chance, J. (ed.), Tolkien the Medievalist (London), 239–258.  
Nagy, G. (2007), ‘Authorship’, in Drout (2007), 44–45. 
Nagy, G. (2014), ‘The Silmarillion’, in Lee (2014), 107–118. 
Noad, Charles. 2000. “On the Construction of The Silmarillion.” In Flieger and Hostetter (2000), 31–68.  
Oberhelman, D. (2008), ‘A Brief History of Libraries in Middle -earth: Manuscript and Book Repositories in 
Tolkien’s Legendarium’, in Himes, J. B. (ed.) , Truths Breathed Through Silver: The Inklings' Moral and 
Mythopoeic Legacy (Newcastle), 81–92. 
Pezzini, G. and Taylor, B. (forthcoming), Language and Nature in the Classical Roman World. 
Phelpstead, C. (2014), ‘Myth-making and Sub-creation’, in Lee (2014), 79–91. 
Rosebury, B. (2003), Tolkien: A Cultural Phenomenon. Basingstoke  
Shippey, T. (2003), The Road to Middle-earth, 2nd ed. Boston and New York. 
Thiessen, D. (2014), ‘A Baggins Back Yard: Environmentalism, Authorship and the Elves in Tolkien’s 
Legendarium’, in Eden, B. L. (ed.), The Hobbit and Tolkien's Mythology (Jefferson, NC), 195–207. 
Turner, A. (2007), The Silmarillion: Thirty Years On. Zurich and Bern. 
Turner, A. (2014), ‘Style and Intertextual Echoes’, in Lee (2014a), 389–403. 
Whittingham, E.A. (2007), The Evolution of Tolkien’s Mythology: A Study of the History of Middle -earth. 
Jefferson, NC.  