   
 
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for personal use only.      Dungeoncraft Adventures Guide 1 
 
   
D&D® ADVENTURERS LEAGUE 
DUNGEONCRAFT DESIGN GUIDE 
 
Effective Date: May 2025. Version 1.9c (updated June 23, 2025)   
You can create your own Dungeons & Dragons® adventures for many of the D&D Adventurers League 
Campaigns. Each campaign has slightly different selections of Resource books, useable monsters, and magic 
items rewards. However, there are some aspects that are the same for all Dungeoncraft adventures. The first 
section of this document addresses those issues, followed by sections unique to each campaign. To create your 
adventure, you also need the adventure template and style guides used for the Dungeoncraft program. 
Familiarize yourself with the D&D Adventurers League Player's Guide and D&D Adventurers League DM's 
Guide.* D&D Adventurers League Resources & Links can be found in the D&D Beyond forum. Community 
members on the official D&D Discord server have early access to guidance updates and an opportunity to review 
documents before their release on D&D Beyond. 
CREATING A DUNGEONCRAFT ADVENTURE  
GENERAL GUIDELINES 
Dungeoncraft adventures must take place in the 
world of the featured campaign setting. They may 
not cross over into other settings or worlds unless 
specifically included in that campaign’s rules, as 
listed below. Using a dreamscape or mindscape is 
not allowed unless the option is included in the 
specific campaign setting description. While 
characters suffering from poor choices is certainly 
reasonable, adventures should not foster an 
atmosphere of competition between the DM and 
the players.* 
TECHNICAL INFORMATION 
A template is provided for use, including the 
Community Created D&D Adventurers League 
logo. You must use this template and follow the 
formatting standards as presented in the 
template. This logo must appear on your 
adventure (see “Additional Guidelines” below). 
You should be familiar with the D&D Style Guide 
(also provided) as well. Please review the Wizards 
and the DMsGuild Content Guidelines. Only you 
(or a co-designer) can Dungeon Master your 
adventure until it is published in the Dungeon 
Master's Guild.  
 Definitions.  In Dungeoncraft, a designer is the 
creative decision-maker who authors the story 
and game design. There are other roles that polish 
the designers’ words though layout, art, 
translating, editing, playtest suggestions, et cetera, 
but designers decide how or if they'll make those 
changes. Designers have creative control and the 
final say in their adventure. 
 Playtesting by Others. You can have one DM at 
a time run a playtest of your adventure at the 
same location (including online). They cannot 
playtest as part of a special event (convention, 
charity event, etc.).* 
 Publishing. You have the option to publish your 
adventure on the Dungeon Masters Guild. If you 
choose to do so, some Dungeoncraft campaigns 
have specific end dates; those without an end date 
must appear for sale within six months of when 
you first run it for players (not play-testers). 
There are no exceptions to this rule. When there is 
a deadline, the time/date given is for the Eastern 
US time zone. If you do not publish your 
adventure, you can continue to Dungeon Master it 
for one year from the first time you run it. After 
that time, unpublished adventures are no longer 
available in the D&D Adventurers League. All 
versions must be sold together, such as 
translations, accessible, and VTT. If there is an 
issue with a specific VTT version including a pdf 
then you need to add a link to your DMsGuild pdf 
version. 
 Accessibility. You may create accessible 
versions in your upload. The template must be 
one of your downloads, adjusted to use tags, 
bookmarks, alt text, and accessibility 
improvements that don't change anything about 
the appearance. Additionally, you may create a 
version that does not use the template, using 
fonts, sizing, formatting, and layout as advised by 
accessibility experts.   
    Art and Graphic Design. Your adventure must 
follow the template provided for layout but may 
include art and other graphic design elements 
subject to the terms and conditions of the 
DMsGuild support site, which has information on 
 
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for personal use only.      Dungeoncraft Adventures Guide 2 
 
content, format, art,* and various other common 
creator questions.  
CRAFTING YOUR ADVENTURE 
 Adventure Duration.  Your adventure should 
ideally be written for a two-hour or four-hour 
play time, not both. Longer adventures are 
allowed, but they are treated as four-hour 
adventures for purposes of rewards. You must 
note your adventure play time in the description 
of the adventure. One-hour long adventures are 
limited to Tier 1 (levels 1-2). They may be 
bundled together when published but should also 
have separate DC codes.* 
 Using Monsters. Each campaign has a list of 
allowed resources for monsters. However, if a 
monster is included in the Monster Manual 2024 
that version must be used, this includes using the 
Monster Conversion list. Those monsters/NPCs 
that appear in an allowed resource (for a 
campaign) and have not been included can be 
used, however if a Campaign Setting is updated 
and includes monsters those versions are to be 
used.* Note that if you are using an NPC stat block 
and need to add racial abilities and /or access to 
your adventure's magic item, you can annotate it 
in the body text similarly to as follows: "Hurgett is 
a gnome cult fanatic with the following 
characteristics: size Small, speed 25 feet, 
darkvision 60 feet, and knows the languages 
Gnomish and Common. A rope of climbing is 
within her reach." If a monster possesses spells 
and you want to swap one or more spells of 
equivalent level, the new spells must come from 
the Player’s Handbook 2024* as well as being of 
the same level. Innate spellcasting features cannot 
have their spells swapped.  
 Include the spell changes in your annotated 
summary of changes –
 do not change the stat 
block. This information may also be presented as 
a sidebar below the stat block. Changes that 
impact the challenge rating of the monster/NPC 
are not allowed, nor are new creatures. You must 
use the most recent version or any errata of a 
product. If you are including Sidekicks in your 
adventure, they must be from that DC campaign's 
available resources and appear as published.  
 Adventure Setting.  Your adventure must take 
place in the setting designated and cannot destroy 
major locations or NPCs. Most campaign worlds 
can have villages/small towns added. If Wizards 
of the Coast publishes a new version of the 
campaign setting you are writing in, then that 
version becomes useable on the day it is available 
globally.* 
 Adventure APL . Adventures are created for a 
specific tier and APL. The APL for Tier 1 
adventures (levels 1-4) is APL 3, for Tier 2 (levels 
5-10) it is APL 8, Tier 3 (levels 11-16) it is APL 13, 
and for Tier 4 (levels 17-20) it is APL 18. 
 The Book of Many Things . The traps, riddles 
and puzzles can be used in any Dungeoncraft. The 
Deck can be used as inspiration for any adventure. 
Rules with game effects, like Inspiration Hand, 
cannot be used. The adventure locations cannot 
be DC settings. 
 Ghosts of Saltmarsh. The equipment, ships and 
monsters described in this book can be used in 
any DC setting. 
 Vecna Eye of Ruin.  This adventure takes place 
across several campaign worlds. The Monster 
descriptions in Appendix A: Bestiary include lore 
that indicates which world (and thus which 
campaign) they belong to. For example, while 
both the warforged warrior and whirling 
chandler are constructs the former creature is 
described as being created originally in Eberron, 
while the latter is not described as such. The stat 
block for the warfordge warrior can only be used 
in the Eberron campaign while the whirling 
chandler can be used in any DC campaign. 
Creatures not described as being from a specific 
campaign world/location can be used in any DC. 
 Quests from the Infinite Staircase . All 
constructs and those creatures whose lore 
connects them to the Cynidicean civilization 
specifically are not allowed in any DC. All others 
are available for any DC except Zargon the 
Returner which is limited to FR DC.* 
REWARDS 
All campaigns use one of the reward options 
below for rarity of item awarded (no firearm 
magic items). In addition, all adventures may 
reward a Common magic item. Tier limits for each 
campaign are listed in that campaign appendix.* 
Consumables can be from any allowed resource 
for that campaign. The lists below dictate the 
number and rarity of the magic rewards for the 
adventure. You may choose a lower rarity item 
but keep players’ enjoyment in mind.* 
 
Reward Option. 
• 1-hour tier 1 Intro (levels 1-2): choose 1 
Common permanent magic item or 1 healing 
potion and gold is limited to 25 gp.* 
• 2-hour tier 1 (levels 1-4): choose 1 Uncommon 
permanent magic* item and up to 3 common 
consumables or 1 uncommon consumable 
 
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for personal use only.      Dungeoncraft Adventures Guide 3 
 
• 4-hour tier 1 (levels 1-4): choose 1 Uncommon 
permanent magic * item and up to 3 common 
consumables or 1 uncommon consumable. 
• 2-hour tier 2 (levels 5-10): choose 1 Rare 
permanent magic * item and up to 3 common 
consumables or 1 uncommon consumable. 
• 4-hour tier 2 (levels 5-10): choose 1 Rare 
permanent magic* item, and up to 3 common or 
uncommon consumables. 
• 2-hour tier 3 (levels 11-16): choose 1 Rare 
permanent magic* item and up to 3 common or 
uncommon consumables. 
• 4-hour tier 3 (levels 11-16): choose 1 Very Rare 
permanent magic* item, and up to 3 uncommon 
or rare consumables. 
• 2-hour tier 4 (levels 17-20): choose 1 Very Rare 
permanent magic* item and up to 4 rare (or 
lower) consumables. 
• 4-hour tier 4 (levels 17-20): choose 1 
Legendary or Very Rare permanent magic* 
item, and up to 4 rare (or lower) consumables. 
• Blessings/Charms. You may replace 2 rare 
consumables with a blessing or charm. Only 1 
blessing or charm may be awarded in the 
adventure. The blessing/charm cannot 
permanently increase an ability or grant access 
to wish or a similar spell. These 
blessing/charms* are restricted to those in the 
Dungeon Master’s Guide 2024* or The Book of 
Many Things. However, the Charm of Many 
Things and Blessing of Unearned Riches are not 
allowed. 
• Rewarding items of lower rarity: If for some 
reason you feel it is necessary for plot/logical 
reasons to reward an item of lower rarity than 
allowed you may do so on a 1 for 1 basis. This is 
not recommended. 
You may add 1 minor property or quirk to each 
non-consumable magic item (see the Dungeon 
Master’s Guide 2024, page 223
*). Properties must 
come from the tables in the Dungeon Master’s 
Guide 2024.* Rewards cannot include wish or 
similar spells, nor can they permanently increase 
an ability score. If a designer adds a minor 
property to an item, you must include all 
necessary information (for example, if using the 
“key” minor property you must specify which 
container, chamber, vault, or door it unlocks).* 
 Determining which Magic Item to choose . 
All Dungeoncraft campaigns now use the Random 
Magic Items tables in the DMG 2024 that start on 
page 326 when choosing which item to include. 
 Consider your adventure plot when 
determining the item. Is the item something that 
is found in the lair of the villain or is it part of the 
reward from the NPC that hired the party to solve 
a problem/perform a task? The Monster Manual 
2024 includes a Treasure Theme listing for each 
monster/NPC and can be used as a guide for what 
would be appropriate for similar creatures/NPCs 
that are not included. The item chosen cannot 
include wish or similar spells, nor can they 
permanently increase an ability score. 
• If a Treasure Theme is listed, then you choose 
an item from the appropriate theme and rarity. 
• If it lists “Any” then you can use any of the 
tables of the appropriate rarity in that section. 
• If it lists Individual the coins/gems found are 
part of the Gold Reward (see section below) 
Hoard/Lair Reward Option (4-hour adventures 
only). If the villain is fought in its lair and the 
creature used has a Treasure listed (some 
creatures don’t) then you can offer more than one 
item. These items must come from the creature’s 
treasure list. The item cannot permanently 
increase an ability or grant access to wish or a 
similar spell. Note these do not automatically 
duplicate. For example, if you have a T2 adventure 
you can offer up to 3 items (items A, B and C) if 
there are 5 players 2 of them might choose A, 1 
chooses B and the other two choose C. This 
information and explanation MUST be included in 
the adventure. 
• Tier 1: 2 Uncommon permanent magic items 
• Tier 2: 3 Rare permanent magic items 
• Tier 3: 4 Very Rare permanent magic items 
• Tier 4: 3 Very Rare items and 2 Legendary 
permanent magic items* 
Reward consumables in the same amount and 
rarity as those listed by hours and tier in 
“Rewards Option.” * 
 Treasure . Treasure such as coins, gems, art 
objects, and any other portable mundane 
valuables with no other practical use than as 
currency count toward the gold rewards listed. 
Other portable items listed in the Equipment 
section of the Player’s Handbook 2024* may also 
be obtained during the adventure (weapons, 
armor, and tools). The portable budget for these 
items is 1,000 gp per tier of play for a four-hour 
adventure and 500 gp per tier of play for a two-
hour adventure. Adventuring Gear from the PH 
2024 valued at less than 50 gp may be awarded. 
Mounts listed in the PH 2024 valued at less than 
 
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for personal use only.      Dungeoncraft Adventures Guide 4 
 
100 gp may be awarded. The value of these items 
in total cannot exceed the budget for that tier. 
Mundane equipment listed in your adventure’s 
stat blocks should also not exceed the budget or 
be noted in the adventure as not rewardable.* 
Trade goods and vehicles are story items when 
placed in adventures.   
 Gold Rewards.  These are based on tier and 
time. This is total gold for the group, not 
individual rewards. Treasure such as gems, coins, 
art objects, and anything else portable that isn’t 
adventuring gear counts towards the gold 
rewards listed. Note that the max gold for a 1-
hour adventure is 25gp.* 
 
GROUP MONETARY REWARDS BY ADVENTURE TIER  
(2-HOUR PLAY) 
Tier Min.    Max. 
1    50 gp   250 gp    
2 500 gp   2500 gp 
3 5000 gp  25,000 gp 
4 25,000 gp 50,000 gp 
GROUP MONETARY REWARDS BY ADVENTURE TIER  
(4-HOUR PLAY) 
Tier Min.    Max. 
1    100 gp   500 gp    
2 1000 gp  5000 gp 
3 10,000 gp 50,000 gp 
4 50,000 gp 100,000gp 
 
 Story Awards.  These can never provide a 
mechanical benefit or be used to get around limits 
to rewards listed above. Frequently it is better to 
have a note in a sequel adventure for the DM (if 
the character has played X then they know Y) than 
to give the player a story award.  
 Spellbooks. If a creature is an arcane caster, the 
spells in their book must reflect those in the stat 
block. If the creature used is from the Monster 
Manual 2024 and the creature is CR6 or above you 
can add 2 spells to their book that is not listed 
(max spell level of 5) in the stat block.* 
ADDITIONAL GUIDELINES:  
THE FINE PRINT 
• At your option, you can publish your adventure 
on the Dungeon Masters Guild. Until published, 
only the designers (maximum two individuals) 
can run the adventure.  
• The D&D Adventurers League Content 
Managers do not need to review your adventure 
for you to run or publish it. 
• Please include stat blocks for any monster you 
use in your adventure that does not appear in 
the Monster Manual. 
• Adventures must use the template provided.  
• When published on the Dungeon Masters Guild 
(or listed in an event program), your adventure 
must use an adventure code that reflects the 
setting; for example, an adventure code that 
starts with EB-DC code identifies it as a 
Dungeoncraft Adventure intended for use as 
part of the Eberron campaign. This code should 
appear in the upper left corner of your cover (If 
you intend to write multiple adventures, then 
we suggest that you consider using a three-
letter identifier in your code, such as the 
domain name, so people can quickly find them. 
For example, EB-DC-WAR-01 for the first 
adventure in a series set during a minor border 
war between Breland and Thrane.) 
• The DDAL Community Created logo and the 
DMsGuild logo must appear on the cover. No 
other logos should appear on the cover. 
• All Dungeoncraft Adventures published on the 
DM’s Guild must abide by the rules provided by 
the DM’s Guild in terms of content that can be 
published in that marketplace. 
• Adventures must be written for a single table of 
players. These cannot be epics/multi-table 
events. 
IMPORTANT: Dungeoncraft Adventures can be 
removed from the DMsGuild at any time for failing 
to meet these standards, those prescribed by the 
DMsGuild, or for any other reason deemed 
necessary by Wizards of the Coast. Additionally, 
any designer(s) publishing a Dungeoncraft 
Adventure on the Dungeon Masters Guild or 
running one that does not follow these rules can 
have their ability to continue to create and publish 
sanctioned content under these rules suspended 
or revoked. 
  
 
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for personal use only.      Dungeoncraft Adventures Guide 5 
 
DRAGONLANCE 
You can create your own Dungeons & Dragons® 
adventures for the D&D Adventurers League 
Dragonlance Campaign. To create your own 
adventures, you’ll need Dragonlance Shadow of the 
Dragon Queen in addition to the Dungeon Master’s 
Guide. The plot of your adventure must include 
some aspect of the current situation in Krynn as an 
integral part. Using monsters from Dragonlance 
Shadow of the Dragon Queen does not fulfill that 
requirement by itself.  
 The Adventure code Dragonlance Dungeoncraft 
must start with DL-DC.  
ALLOWED RESOURCES 
 Monsters  Dragonlance Shadow of the Dragon 
Queen, Monstrous Compendium Vol 1 and Vol 2 (D&D 
Beyond exclusive), Fizban’s Treasury of Dragons, the 
Monster Manual 2024,* and Mordenkainen Presents: 
Monsters of the Multiverse can be sources for 
creatures and NPCs. 
 Adventure Setting.  Your adventure must take 
place in the world of Krynn, whether that is on the 
continent of Ansalon or any of the distant lands in 
that world. These stories must all occur in the 
current timeline of that world as presented in 
Dragonlance Shadow of the Dragon Queen. Your 
adventure is not required to have specific 
connections to previously published novels or 
campaign adventures. However, your adventure 
also cannot kill major NPCs presented in the 
hardcover adventure or other published adventures.  
 Tiers.  Adventures can be created for either Tier 1, 
2, or 3 in this campaign. 
 Rewards.  Consumables can be from Dragonlance 
Shadow of the Dragon Queen, Fizban’s Treasury of 
Dragons, the Dungeon Master’s Guide 2024,* Tasha’s 
Caldron of Everything and Xanathar’s Guide to 
Everything. Rare and lower rarity permanent magic 
items from Fizban’s Treasury of Dragons may be 
used instead of an item from the tables in the 
DMG2024.* 
 Gear from page 188 of Dragonlance Shadow of the 
Dragon Queen can be included in the mundane item 
budget.* 
 The Kagonesti Forest Shroud can be used instead 
of picking an item from the Implements-Rare table.* 
Rewards of any type* cannot include wish or similar 
spells, nor can they permanently increase an ability 
score. 
EBERRON 
 
To create your own adventures for the D&D 
Adventurers League Eberron Campaign, you’ll need 
Eberron: Rising from the Last War. Adventures in the 
Eberron campaign must take place in the world of 
Eberron. They may not cross over into other settings. 
The plot of your adventure must include some aspect 
of Eberron as an integral part. Using monsters from 
Eberron: Rising from the Last War does not fulfill that 
requirement by itself.  
 The Adventure code for Eberron must start with 
EB-DC.  
ALLOWED RESOURCES 
 Monsters.  Monsters from Monstrous Compendium 
Vol 1 (D&D Beyond exclusive), Eberron: Rising from 
the Last War, Fizban’s Treasury of Dragons, the  
Monster Manual 2024, * Mordenkainen Presents: 
Monsters of the Multiverse, The Book of Many Things 
and Bigby Presents: Glory of the Giants can be sources 
for creatures and NPCs.  
 Adventure Setting.  Your adventure must take 
place in the world of Eberron, whether that is on the 
continent of Khorvaire or any of the distant lands on 
that world. These stories must all occur in the current 
timeline of that world, post-Last War. Eberron 
stories typically include pulp adventure, noir intrigue, 
or occasionally war stories focused on the aftermath 
of the Last War on lands and people. Your adventure 
is not required to have specific connections to 
previously published Eberron: Oracle of War  
campaign adventures. 
 Tiers.  Adventures can be created for either Tier 1, 
2 ,3 or 4 in this campaign. 
 Rewards.  Consumables can be from Eberron: 
Rising from the Last War , Fizban’s Treasury of 
Dragons, the Dungeon Master’s Guide  2024,* Tasha’s 
Caldron of Everything, Xanathar’s Guide to Everything.  
Permanent Uncommon, Rare and Very Rare magic 
items from Eberron: Rising from the Last War can be 
be used instead of the lists in the DMG2024.* Rewards 
of any type* cannot include wish or similar spells, nor 
can they permanently increase an ability score. 
  
 
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for personal use only.      Dungeoncraft Adventures Guide 6 
 
FORGOTTEN REALMS  
To create your own adventures for the D&D 
Adventurers League Forgotten Realms Campaign 
you may need a number of books, including the 
Sword Coasts Adventurer’s Guide. Not all of those 
listed in the Allowed Resource section are necessary 
for any individual adventure. Adventures set in the 
Forgotten Realms campaign must take place in the 
world of Toril. The plot of your adventure must 
include some aspects of Forgotten Realms as an 
integral part. The purpose of this part of the 
Dungeoncraft program is to explore the world of the 
Forgotten Realms.  
 The Adventure code for Forgotten Realms 
Dungeoncraft must start with FR-DC.  
 While Spelljammer and Planescape campaigns 
may cross over into Toril these adventures may not 
cross into those or any other settings. All 
Adventures must be set after 1489. 
ALLOWED RESOURCES.  
 Monsters . Fizban’s Treasury of Dragons, the 
Monster Manual 2024,* The Book of Many Things, 
Bigby Presents: The Glory of Giants, and 
Mordenkainen Presents: Monsters of the Multiverse 
can be sources for creatures and NPCs. Creatures 
that appear in a Forgotten Realms hardcover 
adventure may also be used.  
 Adventure Setting. The Sword Coast Adventurer’s 
Guide, and any Wizards of the Coast 5e adventure or 
Starter Set that occurs in a location within the 
Forgotten Realms can be used. The criteria for 
determining if the book is included for setting 
purposes is: does it describe a location that is 
exclusive to the Forgotten Realms setting? If that 
book also includes locations that did not originate in 
the Forgotten Realms, then those locations, while 
available for campaign play, are not available 
locations for FR-DC. Other Forgotten Realms 
Campaign setting sources published on the 
DMsGuild may also be used as long as they do not 
contradict official products. Your adventure is not 
required to have specific connections to previously 
published Forgotten Realms campaign adventures. 
There are a few regions in the Forgotten Realms 
where you may not place your adventure, the 
Moonshae Isles, the Border Kingdoms, Evereska, 
Najara and Murghôm. Additional areas may be 
added to this list, but adventures already published 
will be grandfathered in that instance. Hardcover 
adventures that may be included in the DDAL 
Forgotten Realms campaign but as such are not 
included. Also note that the Acquisitions 
Incorporated book is not included (for legal 
reasons). 
 Tiers.  Adventures can be created for either Tier 1, 
2, 3, or 4* in this campaign. 
 Rewards.  Consumables can be from Phandelver 
and Below: The Shattered Obelisk, The Book of Many 
Things, Sword Coasts Adventurer’s Guide, Fizban’s 
Treasury of Dragons, the Dungeon Master’s Guide 
2024,* Tasha’s Caldron of Everything, and Xanathar’s 
Guide to Everything. Permanent magic items that are 
Very Rare and below from Tasha’s Cauldron of 
Everything or items that are Rare and below from 
Phandelver and Below: The Shattered Obelisk may be 
substituted for an item from the Random Magic Item 
tables.* Rewards of any type* cannot include wish or 
similar spells, nor can they permanently increase an 
ability score.  
 
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for personal use only.      Dungeoncraft Adventures Guide 7 
 
PLANESCAPE  
To create your own adventures for the D&D 
Adventurers League Forgotten Realms Campaign 
you need Planescape: Adventures in the Multiverse. 
The Adventure code for Planescape Dungeoncraft 
must start with PS-DC.  
 Planescape is considered to be part of the larger 
Forgotten Realms campaign for Player Characters. 
Dungeoncraft adventures must focus on the 
Planescape setting. Encounters on Toril are limited 
to Adventure Hooks, Call to Action, and Conclusions. 
The focus should be on Sigil and the Outlands, 
though travel to other planes can be included. 
Remember, IP that belongs to other companies, such 
as Blizzard Entertainment’s Azeroth, or author's IP, 
such as Terry Pratchett’s Ankh-Morpork, can’t be 
used. 
 The Adventure code for Planescape Dungeoncraft 
must start with PS-DC. 
ALLOWED RESOURCES 
 Monsters.  Morte’s Planar Parade, Fizban’s 
Treasury of Dragons, and the Monster Manual 2024.* 
The Book of Many Things, Bigby Presents: Glory of the 
Giants, and Mordenkainen Presents: Monsters of the 
Multiverse can be sources for creatures and NPCs. 
 Adventure Setting Resources.  Planescape: 
Adventures in the Multiverse is your source for this 
campaign setting; however, you should not be 
writing adventures that intersect with the adventure 
in the set. While earlier Planescape books can be 
used for flavor or inspiration, do not contradict the 
information presented in the current version. Also, 
do not destroy a plane. Consider the themes 
presented and the philosophies of each plane when 
creating your adventure. 
 Tiers.  Adventures can be created for either Tier 1, 
2 ,3, or 4 in this campaign. 
 Rewards.  Consumables can be from Planescape: 
Adventures in the Multiverse, the Dungeon Master’s 
Guide 2024, The Book of Many Things, Tasha’s 
Caldron of Everything, and Xanathar’s Guide to 
Everything. Uncommon or Rare permanent items 
from Planescape: Adventures in the Multiverse, may 
be used instead of an item from the tables in the 
DMG2024.* Rewards of any kind* cannot include 
wish or similar spells, nor can they permanently 
increase an ability score. 
RAVENLOFT  
Adventures in the Ravenloft campaign must take 
place in the Domains of Dread and may not cross 
over into other settings. The plot of your adventure 
must include some aspect of Ravenloft as an integral 
part. Using monsters from Van Richten’s Guide to 
Ravenloft does not fulfill that requirement by itself. 
 The Adventure code for Ravenloft Dungeoncraft 
must start with RV-DC.  
ALLOWED RESOURCES 
 Monsters.  Monsters from Monstrous Compendium 
Vol 1 (D&D Beyond exclusive), Van Richten’s Guide to 
Ravenloft, Curse of Strahd, Fizban’s Treasury of 
Dragons, the Monster Manual 2024, The Book of 
Many Things (Undead Only, no Grim Champions),* 
Mordenkainen Presents: Monsters of the Multiverse, 
Bigby Presents: Glory of the Giants and Tomb of 
Annihilation can be sources for creatures and NPCs. 
If a monster/NPC has been updated the most recent 
version must be used. 
 Ravenloft Lineages as NPCs. For this series of 
adventures, NPC stat blocks that have the 
requirement that the creature is humanoid may also 
swap to hexblood in addition to any humanoid races. 
 Adventure Setting Resources.  Your adventure 
must take place in the domains of Ravenloft, as 
described in Van Richten’s Guide to Ravenloft, or a 
Domain of Dread of your own creation using the 
rules provided in Chapter Two of that book. Your 
adventure is not required to have specific 
connections to the previously published DDAL 
Ravenloft: Mist Hunters campaign adventures. 
 Additional Concerns.  
Ravenloft stories frequently 
deal with mature themes. As such, you are 
encouraged to use safety tools and discuss with your 
players ways to minimize the chances of negative 
experiences for you and your players. 
 Tiers.  Adventures can be created for either Tier 1, 
2, or 3 in this campaign.  
 Rewards.  Consumables can be from any allowed 
Ravenloft Campaign source. Only two consumables 
per adventure can be smokepowder (Which is 
awarded in a packet of five shots and includes 
bullets. While the bullets are not magical, in this 
instance, they are included with the smokepowder. 
To simplify accounting, deduct 6 gp (the cost of 20 
bullets) from the portable item budget explained in 
the Creating a Dungeoncraft Adventure, Rewards 
section above when awarding this consumable. 
Uncommon permanent items from Van Richten’s 
Guide to Ravenloft may be used instead of an item 
from the tables in the DMG2024.* 
 Firearms. See PH2024 for mundane firearms that 
may be included. The value of the firearm is included 
in the adventuring gear budget discussed above.*
 
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for personal use only.      Dungeoncraft Adventures Guide 8 
 
SPELLJAMMER  
You can create your own Dungeons & Dragons® 
adventures for the D&D Adventurers League 
Forgotten Realms Campaign using Spelljammer: 
Adventures in Space. To create your own 
adventures, you’ll need the Astral Adventurer’s 
Guide and Boo’s Astral Menagerie from that 
product. The Adventure code for Spelljammer 
Dungeoncraft must start with SJ-DC.* 
ALLOWED RESOURCES 
 Monsters.  Monsters from Monstrous 
Compendium Vol 1 (D&D Beyond exclusive), Boo’s 
Astral Menagerie (part of the Spelljammer: 
Adventures in Space product), Fizban’s Treasury of 
Dragons, The Book of Many Things, Bigby Presents: 
Glory of the Giants, the Monster Manual 2024,* and 
Mordenkainen Presents: Monsters of the 
Multiverse can be sources for creatures and NPCs. 
You are allowed to add “Unusual Nature: Creature 
does not need air” to a creature (as stated in Boo’s 
Astral Menagerie) without changing CR. This 
change should not be made in the stat block as per 
normal. 
 Spelljammer Races as NPCs. For this series of 
adventures, NPC stat blocks that have the 
requirement that the creature is humanoid may 
also swap to any of the following races in addition 
to any humanoid races: autognome, plasmoid, and 
thri-keen.  
 Adventure Setting.  While your adventure might 
start or end in the Forgotten Realms, traveling to 
places outside of Toril via Wildspace and/or the 
Astral Sea must be a primary aspect of the 
adventure. You may use Realmspace. a Wildspace 
system(s) you create, or the ones presented in the 
Spelljammer adventure. The adventure could take 
place entirely in Wildspace or the Astral Sea.  
 Tiers.  Adventures can be created for either Tier 
1, 2, or 3 in this campaign.  
 Rewards.  Consumables can be from 
Spelljammer: Adventures in Space, the Dungeon 
Master’s Guide 2024,* The Book of Many Things, 
Tasha’s Cauldron of Everything, and Xanathar’s 
Guide to Everything. Only two* consumables per 
adventure can be smokepowder (Which is 
awarded in a packet of five shots and includes 
bullets). While the bullets are not magical, in this 
instance they are included with the smokepowder. 
To simplify accounting deduct 6 gp (the cost of 20 
bullets) from the portable item budget explained 
in the Creating a Dungeoncraft Adventures, 
Rewards section above when awarding this 
consumable. The following items from 
Spelljammer: Adventures in Space may be 
substituted for an item of that rarity from the 
Random Magic Item tables: Wildspace Orrery 
(Uncommon) or Fish Suit (Very Rare).* Rewards 
of any type* cannot include wish or similar spells, 
nor can they permanently increase an ability 
score. 
 Firearms. See PH2024 for mundane firearms 
that may be included. The value of the firearm is 
included in the adventuring gear budget discussed 
above.* 
THE WILD BEYOND THE 
WITCHLIGHT 
The original Dungeoncraft season for this 
adventure included an experiment for some 
design elements which had some uneven results 
for everyone involved. New adventures in the 
Feywild can be set in the areas described in The 
Wild Beyond the Witchlight adventure, a domain 
you previously published or a more generic 
Feywild location. However, new WBW adventures 
have restrictions: 
• No Fey Pacts 
• No new Domains. If you created a Domain and 
published the adventure, you can continue 
using it 
• No new archfey 
When published on the Dungeon Masters Guild 
(or listed in an event program), your adventure 
must use the WBW-DC code to identify it as a 
Dungeoncraft Adventure. 
 Monsters.  You can use monsters suggested in 
the Domain Denizens table that are in the Monster 
Manual 2024, The Book of Many Things (Fey only), 
Mordenkainen Presents: Monsters of the 
Multiverse,*  and The Wild Beyond the Witchlight. 
You cannot use the archfey presented in Domains 
of Delight. 
 Canonical Elements.  It is important to note that 
while your adventure can use locations presented 
in the TWBTW adventure, you cannot significantly 
change locations or major NPCs.  
 Tiers.  Adventures can be created for either Tier 
1, 2, or 3 in this campaign.*   
 
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for personal use only.      Dungeoncraft Adventures Guide 9 
 
 Rewards.  Consumables can be from The Wild 
Beyond the Witchlight, The Book of Many Things,  
Fizban’s Treasury of Dragons, the Dungeon 
Master’s Guide 2024,* Tasha’s Caldron of 
Everything, and Xanathar’s Guide to Everything. 
Permanent magic items that are Rare and below 
from The Wild Beyond the Witchlight may be 
substituted for an item from the Random Magic 
Item tables.* Rewards of any type* cannot include 
wish or similar spells, nor can they permanently 
increase an ability score 
*CHANGE LOG 
April 2025 
• Replace all references of DMG to DMG2024 
• Replaced all references of PH to PH2024 
• Replaced all references of MM to MM2024 
• In General section: updated effective date,  
• Added option for 1-hour adventures with 
guidance for bundling when published. 
• Updating guidance on magic items for tier & 
length of adventure using DMG2024 
• Guidance for magic item selection based on 
MM2024 and DMG2024 
• Added option for I hour tier 1 adventures. 
• Added option for hoard treasure items 
• Removed tables from each section 
• Add campaign specific options for permeant 
magic items 
• Those campaigns that include smokepowder as 
an option for consumable reward can now 
reward 2 sets. 
• Revised verbiage in Ravenloft appendix (yes 
you can still use the Tarroka Deck, it is part of 
Ravenloft and doesn’t really require a specific 
call out IMO). 
• Removed Planescape publishing dates 
• Returned Spelljamming and The Wild Beyond 
the Witchlight with some adjustments 
 
May 2025 
• Added missing information (SJ-DC, WBW-DC's 
tiers, no firearm magic items, DMG2024 minor 
property example)  
• Corrected spelling errors and Moonshae Isles as 
an unavailable setting 
• Added the BMT and MPMM as monster 
resources. 
• Added SJ firearm guidance 
 
June 2025 
• Rewards: Added al-rules-compendium guidance 
on rewarding lower rarity items. 
• Hoard/Lair Reward Option: Corrected treasure 
list number of items 
• Clarified permanent item rewards 
 