 
 asoiafanalysis 
 asoiafanalysis 
 Menu 
 Skip to content 
 Home About 
 Fan Fiction 
 Welcome to ASOIAF Analysis 
 Featured by Lyanna Spearwife 
 The “About” page explains the content of this blog in more detail, so I won’t bore you by repeating exactly the same information. 
 To understand and enjoy this blog you will need to have read the first 5 books of George RR Martin’s A Song of Ice and Fire, and probably have your copies nearby. I have found www.asearchoficeandfire.com to be an invaluable search tool. Although I have given page references for quotes, they are for my copy of the books, and yours may be a different edition. 
 While I’ve been an avid reader of various fanpages and sites, and recommend www.westeros.org , these analyses are my own, not from “inside information”. Therefore, things that may seem to be “spoilers” for the unpublished chapters are probably lucky guesses, and may not, in fact, be true. 
 (Image is hyperlinked to source) 
 The first 13 posts are a summary/analysis of the chapters of Jon in Ball of Beasts ( all of which are contained in A Dance with Dragons), which I wrote as part of a group “re-read/chapter summary” project. The style and questions somewhat reflect the target audience of that group. It is likely that I will follow these 13 with an analysis of the earlier chapters of Jon, and perhaps eventually a chronological analysis of other characters, but I give no assurances of time frame. Feel free to offer suggestions for chapters/topics, but please don’t be offended if I don’t take up your suggestion immediately, or at all. 
 To write a summary of every chapter in A Song of Ice and Fire would be an epic task, which I may never complete. Beyond what I’ve already promised: let’s find out together 🙂 Winter is coming , but it’s not here yet! 
 I hope that you enjoy my writing, and I look forward to continuing to post, as time and interest allows. 
 Sunny smiles, 
 Lyanna 
 Disclaimer: Any advertising on this blog, outside of actual posts, is nothing to do with me 🙂 
 Posted in A Song of Ice and Fire , ASOIAF , Jon Snow , Literary Analysis 
 Tagged A Song of Ice and Fire , ASOIAF , Jon Snow , Literary Analysis 
 Leave a comment 
 House Wyley Backstory v 1.7 
 Link posted on July 11, 2018 July 16, 2018 by Lyanna Spearwife 
 “The world is amazing. When you piece together the story of your family throughout time and space it all makes sense, much more sense than seeing it from your own small part. It took me more than a century to fit all the pieces together, from what was passed on to me and from what I saw through the weirwoods. Sometimes it was quite perplexing, but finally I have it. It’s a pity I won’t last much longer, and that I haven’t been able to write this down to send to our House Library. It’s safer in the trees & tunnels, though. Men have a history of destroying what is precious, even our own noble House. Now that you’re here Willa, you’ll understand. The past feeds the future.” 
 Lady Sheira Wyley seemed to fall asleep then, weakened by speech, or perhaps her mind was simply swept up by the Weirwood network she was so intrinsically a part of. The network I was soon to join. 
 I shuddered involuntarily. It had always seemed such an adventure! Such a noble calling to be one of the few to live out my days as an all-seeing being, at the same time a mere bud on the branch. Unlike Sheira, though, I brought paper & quills to write, kept safe in waxed cloth until I got here. Even if my books stay “safe” in these tunnels, there will be a clear record for those that find them. Now though, looking at the shrivelled, dried remains of Lady Sheira, my ancient aunt of sorts, I was thinking perhaps I should have stayed home and produced descendants to carry on the work instead. Why was I so keen to “Leap High, Dive In”? 
 Our Words have been faithfully passed down through the ages, although no-one remembers exactly their original meaning. Some say they reflect the Wyley enthusiasm for life, living vibrantly every day. The Words, “Leap High, Dive In” are said to refer to the Arctic Fox on the House Sigil, and its method of hunting by leaping in the air to plunge into the snow. Also like the playful Arctic Fox, Wyleys are generally quite small in stature, similar to the Crannogmen, the Reeds of Greywater Watch. Some say we’re descendants of the Children of the Forest. Those less kind say we’re stunted from living in such a harsh environment. We find our size an advantage for navigating the tunnels under the castle, Westeros and the Land of Always Winter. 
 House Wyley was founded before the First Men, so long ago that there are no longer any written records of its formation. Nor are there records of building the great Castle Sedon (Sea-Den) long before the Bridge of Skulls was built over the Gorge, or Westwatch-by-the-Bridge and The Wall built on the other side of it. It is protected by the sea, the mountains, the Gorge and the fact that it is so far North that none venture there without cause. Stories say that Wyleys have always moved freely throughout what is now Westeros & the Land of Always Winter, known to the Free Folk & Others without enmity. Some whisper that House Wyley made some evil deal thousands of years ago to be so blessed in such a harsh environment. 
 Sedon Castle is in Free Folk territory, not Westeros. One legend claims that the original Free Folk were a group of young people from House Wyley, who went North on a hunting trip and decided to stay, living freely in the far North, with knowledge of secret tunnels and caves, warm springs and secret magics. 
 House Wyley is counted as Westerosi, and sends taxes to Kings Landing, but a deal was struck with Aegon the Conqueror, and we remain Kings of our own domain, proud, independent and unchallenged. For thousands of years we have maintained a neutral position, with no need for more power or territory. We aim to bring civility and enjoyment to life in the North, refraining from entering battles, while maintaining strong links with the Northern Houses, the Night’s Watch and the Free Folk. We smile sagely at the various people who proclaim themselves King and shake our heads at the destruction that accompanies the unnecessary battles. 
 Our wisdom stems from centuries of gathered knowledge on every topic, for which we are widely respected. Our Library has been seen by few outside of our House, but easily rivals the Citadel’s. Over the years, many young Wyleys studied at the Citadel, in Essos, and even at Asshai, sending home artefacts and hand-copied manuscripts and sharing their knowledge with their family. 
 Like other Houses of Westeros, our young people have training with Maesters, Masters at Arms & Septas, but they also train with our elders. At their coming of age, young Wyley Lords & Ladies receive a sacred pendant made of milky-white moonstone, called an Opnalina. The Opnalina has special powers in the hands of a true Wyley. 
 Our Castle was built and extended over many generations and is said to contain secrets long forgotten. It has stood strong and secure, designed with cunning and secret tunnels beneath, much like the labyrinthine dens of Arctic foxes. The nearby natural heated springs enable hot water supply to the castle, & this is piped through the walls to give summer warmth even in the dead of winter. The hot springs also keep vegetables and other food growing in the glass gardens which have made House Wyley a source of wealth and strength in the area, which the Night’s Watch, Bear Island and even Free Folk rely on and protect. House Wyley trains skilled gardeners and horticulturalists to tend the gardens and ensure optimal produce yield. The nearby river gives Sedon access to transport and fish, but it is far enough away from the castle walls to not be a vulnerablility. Unknown to all but the most trusted in the House, there is a tunnel connecting to the river, with boats moored inside a hidden entrance. To the outside observer there are merely a few unremarkable overhanging trees at a bend in the river. To those who know, a tributary runs from within the hillside, along the floor of a naturally formed cave, which House Wyley cleverly extended to join their tunnel network, accessed through an unimposing root-cellar door. Unknown to many gold also washes down that tributary. Due to their clever engineering, river water is also piped to the castle, but from a different point from the hidden connecting tunnel. 
 Similarly, another rivulet tunnel under the Castle joins the sea at the Bay of Ice. There is also a well-kept road traversable by donkeys to ensure that no-one finds the tunnel. House Wyley maintains a small port and well-protected dry docks in the Bay of Ice, with 2 sea-fishing boats and 2 ships they use for trade and travel when the seasons allow. 
 Jeor Wyley is Captain of Winter’s Secret, the oldest and best-loved of the fleet. She sails boldly to trade, and legend says she even sailed around to Essos when Summer melted the ice and gave Northern passage. Such a summer is only legend and would mean that Winter’s Secret is tens of thousands of years old, so must be a tale for children. Captain Wyley will tell you that it’s true, and that the original Winter’s Secret has been repaired and rebuilt so many times there’s only one part left that is original, but he won’t say which part. 
 The House is well regarded in trade, sailing South to Bear Island and Deepwood Motte, but rarely as far as the Iron Islands. About once a year, members of House Wyley arrive at Eastwatch-by-the-Sea with wagons, and sail to Essos for trade and sightseeing in the warm weather. People joke that they must be silent and invisible as the arctic fox of their emblem, because the Night’s Watch has never seen them passing their Castles on the way. Despite daily monitoring of The Wall, the sentries never see them until they are almost at Eastwatch. House Wyley laughs this off, reminding them that they travel South of the Wall, and the Watchers are looking North. 
 Young Tidus Wyley was one of those who travelled to Essos. He loved the stories of the Second Sons and Golden Company, and was determined to make his fortune as a sellsword before returning to the frozen North. “A bit of warmth for my body & soul to remember in my old age!” he laughed with a gleam in his eye and the confidence of youth. 
 He was among the many young Wyleys who left the safety of Sedon. Nyx Skulk was an independent and rebellious teen of the Wylie clan. A Mummer’s boy, Jacob, lured her away with promises of an adventurous life, followed by lots of babies with his golden hair & green eyes & her winsome smile. 
 With the Mummers’ Troupe she adopted her stage name, Nyx Revontulet. However, Jacob was a cad. By the time the Troupe had meandered South to Kings Landing he’d had his way with her affections and moved on. Heartbroken, Nyx ran away from the Troupe, getting herself lost in Flea Bottom. 
 Nyx was an easy target for a local brothel owner and she soon found herself living a nightmare in the daytime and dreaming of home when sleeping. An arctic fox started chasing Nyx in her dreams, reminding her that she was a scion of an ancient and proud family. He challenged her to use her guile and intelligence to improve her circumstances. 
 Nyx Rose to the challenge, eventually taking over the brothel, and elevating her co-workers to highly desired courtesans, who all excelled in the arts of music, literature & politics as well as the finer points of seduction. They repaid her with loyalty, and she never lost one to Littlefingers’ poaching attempts. Nyx became a refined woman, rich in both gold and information. When her courtesans bought her out, she returned home, her pride salvaged by wealth. 
 It was not quite the happy ending she had envisioned: Despite their education, her family and friends found her mannerisms foreign and incomprehensible, and blamed her father’s Skulk blood. Nyx was longing to fit in again but was besieged by doubts that she had become just far too different. Determined as ever, she knew she could overcome these too. Half her blood was Wyley. She was of the North. 
 House Wyley is so much part of the North that the Free Folk have no need to steal their women. Some young men and women freely join them after they come of age. They often disappear on rangings within a few years, but the Free Folk life is not usually long. Some say they disappear into the same tunnels that Gendel and Gorne used. Sometimes we are spotted standing amongst some stones one moment, but disappeared the next, our companions unable to find any trace of a cave or tunnel opening. 
 I had joined the Free Folk five years hence, and enjoyed many an adventure and rollicking party in their company. They had helped me hone my skills in the wilderness, and saved my life more than once. I volunteered for a hunting trip which would go passably near one of the ancient tunnel entrances. I made sure the others chosen were also strong, healthy & numerous enough that I could leave them without fear for their survival. I managed to herd them closer to where I needed to go by leaving tracks in the night, using skinchanged animals, whom I helped escape. It’s hard to eat a body when you’ve shared its mind. There were plenty of other game for food. Besides: I might have need of the skinchangable ones, or their future offspring, again. 
 When we were close to the area, I used an eagle to check the landscape & that there were no Others in sight. Knowing my companions would be safe, I prepared to leave them. In the afternoon, pretending to toilet behind a tree, I skinchanged a buck & had him lead his herd within view of our camp. I only just got back in time, as Gorndol excitedly came to fetch me for the hunt. Such a good friend: He didn’t want me to miss a moment’s excitement! I joined the hunt & made sure I brought down a deer. I needed to take some meat with me. Gorndol, named for the brother kings of old, predictably stayed to help me skin and gut the deer. I was grateful for his help, but it meant he was with me the whole time! I sent him to see where our companions were & managed to hide extra meat in my pack before he returned. The rest were behind a hill gutting their kill & starting a fire to cook the rest of mine for us to eat. We dragged ours over to them, and I distributed the packs of meat I’d sliced. Slices froze quickly out here, preserving them, and were faster to cook. As planned, and by Wyley tradition, I’d made this my practice. They’d come to expect it & wouldn’t notice when I cut up a beast in preparation to leave. 
 With full bellies, we celebrated our good fortune with some mead. With the usual drunken display, I lay down to sleep early, finding a nearby owl to seek out the tunnel entrance. There were only two mounds of rocks which seemed likely, making it relatively easy. Nevertheless, I asked the owl to stay in the area for me. When they were asleep, I left the camp with my pack, lighting a torch from the fire, and made my way to the first possible entrance. My Opnalina didn’t glow at all. There was still the second mound to try. I made my way there, and almost immediately, I felt my Opnalina warm. I said the words and the glow intensified. It quickly spread to cast a pool of light on the snow-dusted stones before me. I stepped this way and that, watching for the light to point out the door. There it was! I drew closer and the light became the doorway itself, making the solid rock appear translucent. It was at that moment that I heard him coming. I’d know Gorndol’s footsteps anywhere, his eager gait approaching me. It was too late to turn back! I turned my head towards him as I stepped into the doorway and smiled my thanks for the years of friendship we’d shared. As soon as I was inside, I quickly took the Opnalina off my skin and pocketed it to close the door. I’d have liked Gorndol’s company, but he couldn’t join me. Gorndol had once picked up my Opnalina and commented on its warmth. I covered it with my hand quickly before he saw the glow. If he could activate the Opnalina, he has Wyley blood, but blood alone does not make a Wyley, no matter how talented. I keep a non-human eye out for him, but I wish I’d been able to teach Gorndol about the many gifts of Wyley blood, like skinchanging. 
 Skinchanging is always useful. I remember long ago, a group of Houses banded together and laid siege to Sedon. Miserable in their tents, they stayed several months, sending wagons back for supplies. One day a young woman rode out on horseback. She paused, & the war-leaders grinned gleefully: she must be terrified of them! She rode on purposefully towards the township of tents established on the road between Sedon and the Bridge of Skulls. Reaching the closest man, she asked with a wave of her hand: “Is there someone in charge of all this?” He nodded, pointing to where the Lords were gathered. 
 Riding up to them, and without dismounting, said in a voice just as much warrior as Princess: “I am Lady Visenya Wyley of Sedon. Can I help you?” 
 With some harrumphing, Lord Lothson, one of those gathered, replied: “We are besieging the castle, my Lady.” 
 “Really?” she replied, puzzled, “Did you arrive today?” 
 Turning red with annoyance, Lord Tarly spat: “We’ve been here for months!” 
 “Oh!” the Lady replied in surprise. “We hadn’t noticed!” 
 She paused in thought for a moment before continuing, 
 “I’m off to join the Free Folk, so perhaps you could send a messenger up to Sedon to let them know how long you’re staying? My Lord father is very generous, but perhaps you’ve spent enough time on our land now? I’m sure he’ll enjoy the opportunity to give you a lovely departure feast – we have so few visitors!” 
 By this time some of the men were laughing nervously. The kind of laughter that escapes men who realise that their efforts have been futile. 
 “He’d give us a feast?” Lord Lothson exclaimed incredulously, “There have been no wagons in or out!” 
 Lady Visenya blinked. “Why would there be wagons? We have ice cellars for storing our hunt, we trade by sea, and grow our own vegetables.” 
 By now the Lords could hardly contain themselves, and the men were stealthily moving back to their tents to start packing up, talking quietly amongst themselves, trying to escape the wrath which they knew was about to explode. With their pride in tatters, the Lords packed up and went home. 
 Unknown to the would-be conquerors, Lord Wyley was aware all along. His children had seen them while out playing as warged Arctic foxes & reported all the Sigils. Members of the house had monitored the assembled host, completely unnoticed against the snow in their little white furry bodies. 
 Lord Wyley sent a raven to each of the Lord’s Castles announcing their return, and the families assumed that this meant victory. The Lords and their men were greeted as heroes, then had to admit that they weren’t! Crossly they ordered no-one speak of it, guaranteeing that it became songs and fireside tales passed amongst the smallfolk since. 
 The past feeds the present, and the present feeds the past. Time is not linear, and neither is my writing. I look at the roots in which I am enmeshed, & at the papers scattered mostly out of my reach & can’t quite recall when they became filled with words from my hand. 
 Don’t eat the paste. 
 ( Acknowledgements / the backstory of the backstory) 
 Posted in A Song of Ice and Fire , ASOIAF , FanFiction , Fantasy , Fiction , Uncategorized 
 Tagged FanFiction , Fantasy , Fiction 
 Leave a comment 
 ‘A Ball of Beasts’: ‘A Feast for Crows’ and ‘A Dance with Dragons’ combined 
 Posted on May 1, 2016 May 1, 2016 by Lyanna Spearwife 
 In 2011, George RR Martin published a book called “A Ball of Beasts”, via Bantam Books (Random House). This book is the chapters of ‘A Feast for Crows’ and ‘A Dance with Dragons’ interspersed as one book. 
 For those who have ‘A Feast for Crows’ and ‘A Dance with Dragons’, but wish to read them as a continuity, this is the ‘Ball of Beast’ chapter order. Some have said that this is the original order that Martin intended them to be read. Some have said that this makes the story clearer than reading the two books separately. (As with many things ASOIAF, some disagree.) 
 So: The Prologue of ADWD becomes “BB1”, and the Prologue of AFFC becomes “BB2”, The Prophet in AFFC becomes “BB3” etc. through to the end with Daenerys X as “BB 117” and ADWD Epilogue as “BB118”. 
 In order to use this list, I wrote the “BB” chapter numbers in pencil in my copies of the two books, and used a bookmark in each. You will need to swap back and forth between books, following this chapter list. I also wrote in the chapter numbers for each book (eg. AFFC 1, AFFC2 etc), to help me to find them, but you may not need to do that. 
 Key: 
 AFFC = A Feast for Crows 
 ADWD = A Dance with Dragons 
 Page numbers are not given, because different editions of the books may have different page numbers. 
 Chapter titles are given Roman numerals to differentiate them, and indicate progression through these two books. (This numbering begins from AFFC, ignoring the previous books.) 
 Note: some chapters seem “out of order” eg. Ch. 43 & 44, but this is correct. Locate with care. 
 *Special note: these two chapters essentially are the same chapter/ contain the same information. 
 Ball of Beasts Chapter Number (Mark in book) 
 Chapter Title 
 Book chapter, chronological order 
 (i.e. Find it here) 
 1 
 Prologue ADWD 
 ADWD 1 
 2 
 Prologue AFFC 
 AFFC 1 
 3 
 The Prophet 
 AFFC 2 
 4 
 The Captain 
 AFFC 3 
 5 
 Cersei I 
 AFFC 4 
 6 
 Tyrion I 
 ADWD 2 
 7 
 Daenerys I 
 ADWD 3 
 8 
 BrienneI 
 AFFC 5 
 9 
 Jon I 
 ADWD 4 
 10 
 Bran I 
 ADWD 5 
 11 
 Tyrion II 
 ADWD 6 
 12* 
 Samwell I 
 AFFC 6 
 12* 
 Jon II 
 ADWD 8 
 13 
 Arya I 
 AFFC 7 
 14 
 Cersei II 
 AFFC 8 
 15 
 Jaime I 
 AFFC 9 
 16 
 Brienne II 
 AFFC10 
 17 
 Sansa I 
 AFFC 11 
 18 
 The Kraken’s Daughter 
 AFFC 12 
 19 
 Tyrion III 
 ADWD 9 
 20 
 Davos I 
 ADWD 10 
 21 
 Jon III 
 ADWD 11 
 22 
 Daenerys II 
 ADWD 12 
 23 
 Cersei III 
 AFFC 13 
 24 
 Reek I 
 ADWD 13 
 25 
 Bran II 
 ADWD 14 
 26 
 The Soiled Knight 
 AFFC14 
 27 
 Tyrion IV 
 ADWD 15 
 28 
 Davos II 
 ADWD 16 
 29 
 Brienne III 
 AFFC 15 
 30 
 Samwell II 
 AFFC 16 
 31 
 Daenerys III 
 ADWD 17 
 32 
 Jon IV 
 ADWD 18 
 33 
 Tyrion V 
 ADWD 19 
 34 
 Davos III 
 ADWD 20 
 35 
 Jaime II 
 AFFC 17 
 36 
 Cersei IV 
 AFFC 18 
 37 
 The Iron Captain 
 AFFC 19 
 38 
 The Drowned Man 
 AFFC 20 
 39 
 Brienne IV 
 AFFC 21 
 40 
 The Queenmaker 
 AFFC 22 
 41 
 Arya II 
 AFFC 23 
 42 
 Alayne I 
 AFFC 24 
 43 
 The Princess in the Tower 
 AFFC 41 
 44 
 The Merchant’s Man 
 ADWD 7 
 45 
 Cersei V 
 AFFC 25 
 46 
 Reek II 
 ADWD 21 
 47 
 Jon V 
 ADWD 22 
 48 
 Tyrion VI 
 ADWD 23 
 49 
 Daenerys IV 
 ADWD 24 
 50 
 The Lost Lord 
 ADWD 25 
 51 
 The Windblown 
 ADWD 26 
 52 
 The Wayward Bride 
 ADWD 27 
 53 
 Brienne V 
 AFFC 26 
 54 
 Samwell III 
 AFFC 27 
 55 
 Jaime III 
 AFFC 28 
 56 
 Tyrion VII 
 ADWD 28 
 57 
 Jon VI 
 ADWD 29 
 58 
 Davos IV 
 ADWD 30 
 59 
 Cersei VI 
 AFFC 29 
 60 
 The Reaver 
 AFFC 30 
 61 
 Daenerys V 
 ADWD 31 
 62 
 Melisandre/ The Red Priestess 
 ADWD 32 
 63 
 Jaime IV 
 AFFC 31 
 64 
 Brienne VI 
 AFFC 32 
 65 
 Reek III 
 ADWD 33 
 66 
 Tyrion VIII 
 ADWD 34 
 67 
 Cersei VII 
 AFFC 33 
 68 
 Jaime V 
 AFFC34 
 69 
 Cat of the Canals 
 AFFC 35 
 70 
 Samwell IV 
 AFFC 36 
 71 
 Cersei VIII 
 AFFC 37 
 72 
 Brienne VII 
 AFFC 38 
 73 
 Jaime VI 
 AFFC 39 
 74 
 Cersei IX 
 AFFC 40 
 75 
 Bran III 
 ADWD 35 
 76 
 Jon VII 
 ADWD 36 
 77 
 Daenerys VI 
 ADWD 37 
 78 
 The Prince of Winterfell 
 ADWD 38 
 79 
 The Watcher 
 ADWD 39 
 80 
 Jon VIII 
 ADWD 40 
 81 
 Tyrion IX 
 ADWD 41 
 82 
 The Turncloak 
 ADWD 42 
 83 
 The King’s Prize 
 ADWD 43 
 84 
 Daenerys VII 
 ADWD 44 
 85 
 Alayne II 
 AFFC 42 
 86 
 Jon IX 
 ADWD 45 
 87 
 Brienne VIII 
 AFFC 43 
 88 
 Cersei X 
 AFFC 44 
 89 
 Jaime VII 
 AFFC 45 
 90 
 The Blind Girl 
 ADWD 46 
 91 
 A Ghost in Winterfell 
 ADWD 47 
 92 
 Tyrion X 
 ADWD 48 
 93 
 Jaime VIII 
 ADWD 49 
 94 
 Jon X 
 ADWD 50 
 95 
 Daenerys VIII 
 ADWD 51 
 96 
 Samwell V 
 AFFC46 
 97 
 Theon VII 
 ADWD 52 
 98 
 Daenerys IX 
 ADWD 53 
 99 
 Jon XI 
 ADWD 54 
 100 
 Cersei XI 
 ADWD 55 
 101 
 The Queensguard 
 ADWD 56 
 102 
 The Iron Suitor 
 ADWD 57 
 103 
 Tyrion XI 
 ADWD 58 
 104 
 Jon XII 
 ADWD 59 
 105 
 The Discarded Knight 
 ADWD 60 
 106 
 The Spurned Suitor 
 ADWD 61 
 107 
 The Griffin Reborn 
 ADWD 62 
 108 
 The Sacrifice 
 ADWD 63 
 109 
 Victarion/The One of Two Gods 
 ADWD 64 
 110 
 The Ugly Little Girl 
 ADWD 65 
 111 
 Cersei XII 
 ADWD 66 
 112 
 Tyrion XII 
 ADWD 67 
 113 
 The Kingbreaker 
 ADWD 68 
 114 
 The Dragontamer 
 ADWD 69 
 115 
 Jon XIII 
 ADWD 70 
 116 
 The Queen’s Hand 
 ADWD 71 
 117 
 Daenerys X 
 ADWD 72 
 118 
 ADWD Epilogue 
 ADWD 73 
 If you find errors in this list, please let me know, and I will check and update it accordingly. 
 It took some effort to put this together, so please include my name when you share it. 
 If you would prefer to download a pdf to save/print, here it is: 
 Chapter Order Ball of Beasts 
 Happy reading! 
 Lyanna 
 The first 5 books (in 6 volumes) 
 P.S. One other suggestion: 
 After you have read the entire ASOIAF series, you may like to read one character’s chapters from start to finish, & make notes for yourself. 
 I did this with Jon (for a group reading project – the chapter summaries are in this blog) and found that it helped understand his character development. A drawback is in losing track of where other characters are in the timeline, which mostly doesn’t matter if your purpose is to understand the character that you are reading. 
 Posted in A Song of Ice and Fire , ASOIAF , Uncategorized 
 Tagged A Ball of Beasts , A Dance with Dragons , A Feast for Crows , A Song of Ice and Fire , ASOIAF , George RR Martin , Literary Analysis , Reading 
 Leave a comment 
 Jon’s death: On further thinking… 
 Posted on August 3, 2015 August 3, 2015 by Lyanna Spearwife 
 As is inevitable, reading things that other people have said in online group discussions, and reading over the chapters again to check details, I’ve thought some more about the possible outcomes for Jon, after A Dance With Dragons . 
 The Prologue of the book is from the perspective of Sixskins, a powerful Wildling Skinchanger. The chapter shows us some of the awesome and awful power of being a practiced Skinchanger. We learn many details about Skinchangers, including that skinchaging a Direwolf is such a specific type of skinchanging that it has it’s own name” “warging”. In the rest of the book, “Warg” is applied as the common/slang for a skinchanger generally. 
 When SIxskins eventually dies (the last page of the chapter, p.15), it is AFTER “his last thought as a man”. 
 “True death came suddenly; he felt a shock of cold …” 
 Compare this with the last paragraph of Jon’s last chapter (p.1064): 
 Jon fell to his knees. He found the dagger’s hilt and wrenched it free. In the cold night air the wound was smoking. “Ghost,” he whispered. Pain washed over him. Stick them with the pointy end . When the third dagger took him between the shoulder blades, he gave a grunt and fell face-first into the snow. He never felt the fourth knife. Only the cold… 
 I have used bold to illustrate the similarity. When Sixskins’ body dies, and his spirit leaves it, he feels icy cold. Jon also feels nothing but cold. 
 Of course, Jon’s body may only be unconscious. His spirit may be travelling to take refuge in Ghost. Sixskins does seem to end up inside One Eye, the wolf (p.15). This is certainly what I will continue to hope is happening: that Jon will survive as Bran survived. George RR Martin will let us all know eventually, in the next books. 
 If this does, in fact, tell us that Jon is dead, at least we have the comfort of knowing from Sixskins prologue that after death the spirit soars over the land, and through everything: “His spirit borne on some cold wind.” We also know that there is a belief amongst woods witches in Westeros that when a person dies, they become part of everything, with the Old Gods: 
 “Your little one is with the gods now, ” the woods witch told his mother, as she wept. “He’ll never hurt again, never hunger, never cry. The gods have taken him down into the earth, into the trees. The gods are all around us, in the rocks and streams, in the birds and beasts…He’ll be the world, and all that’s in it.” 
 Posted in Uncategorized 
 Leave a comment 
 Jon 13 in ADWD (pp. 1048-1064) 
 Posted on May 1, 2015 May 7, 2015 by Lyanna Spearwife 
 Plans for Hardhome, & The Pink Letter 
 Jon discusses the Hardhome situation with Selyse. Her response is “Let them die,” and she will not be moved from that. Quite possibly, that is the reality of the situation: it is so desperate and dire, involving long, difficult travel, that there really is no point in sending help. 
 Yet, Jon cannot abandon his own people who went to Hardhome on a rescue mission, nor the wildlings that they went to save. Selyse warns Jon that he will answer to Stannis for the decisions that he has made, indicating that she believes that many of his decisions are wrong. 
 Patchface offers to lead the rescue to Hardhome, and talks of riding seahorses under the sea. Perhaps, if he is an agent of the Drowned God, or some other sea deity, he is serious, and his offer should have been accepted. He may have had some influence over the stormy seas which were causing the problem. Of course, no-one takes his offer seriously. 
 Selyse approves Jon’s leading the rescue, indicating that he will die and a bard will write a song about him, and they will then elect a “better” Lord Commander of the Night’s Watch. It is possible, of course, that Jon actually shares this sentiment: he is unsure that he has made the right decisions and feels the need to accept the consequences of his decisions with his own death, and leave the way open for someone older and wiser to take over leadership. Such a pity he doesn’t have Maester Aemon and Sam, or anyone, really, to give him reassurance and support. 
 Gerrick Kingsblood has convinced Selyse that he is King of the Wildlings due to his ancestry, which was already questionable. Selyse does not care that the wildlings themselves do not recognise him as their King. Jon notes that since he has been groomed and dressed, Gerrick does look the part of a Southron Lord. Selyse announces the marriages of all three of Gerrick’s daughters: to Ser Axell Florent (saving Val from that threat), and two other Knights, not including Ser Patrek. 
 Patchface observes that “Under the sea, men marry fishes.” (p.1050) Apart from being his usual “under the sea” commentary, perhaps this is a reference to the fact that these men are marrying false princesses. 
 Selyse goes on to say that Ser Patrek will marry Val. Jon tells them that it is wildling custom for a man to steal the woman, to prove that he is worthy of her, and that if he is not, her kin (and herself) will beat him. Ser Patrek says that no woman will have cause to question his courage. Selyse asks Jon to send Val to her for instruction on her “duties…to her lord husband.” (p.1050) 
 In conversation with Melisandre we learn that Ghost is kept locked in Jon’s chambers because of Borroq and his boar. Melisandre says that everyone at Hardhome is already lost. “Not a man shall return.” (p.1052) Melisandre tells Jon to “look to the skies” for answers to his questions about Stannis, Mance and Arya, and that she is his only hope. Jon calls that “A fool’s hope.” (p.1052) 
 Leathers is waiting for Jon, and it is clear that plans are already underway for a Hardhome rescue. Leathers tells Jon that Tormund and eighty fighting men will arrive in the afternoon, as part of the rescue party, and Jon refers to a meeting of leaders this evening. A logistical problem is the need to carry food to Hardhome, where the starving wildlings have been eating their own dead. 
 Torreg is with Val and ‘the monster’. Leathers says he has taken a liking to one of the milk-maids. Jon thinks he has taken a liking to Val, and that Torreg would not be a bad King of the Free Folk, and certainly better than Gerrick. In saying so: is Jon thinking of Val as the “Queen of the Free Folk”, even though she’s not? Jon leaves Torreg to his courting and returns to his rooms. 
 Jon’s guards are outside because Ghost is strangely vicious, “All wild-like”. (p.1053) He even bares his teeth at Jon and won’t let him near. Jon thinks: “It’s that bloody boar”. (p.1053) Jon seems not to realise (perhaps he doesn’t know?) that a skinchanger can take the animal of another skinchanger. Perhaps Borroq is taking over Ghost. This would explain why Ghost is suddenly wild & aggressive, like Borroq and his boar, who prefer to live in the Crypt, instead of with other people. The raven is also distressed, and unusually, doesn’t ask for corn. 
 Jon has Satin light a fire, and bring him Marsh and Yarwyck, as well as wine and 6 cups. Three of the cups are for Satin and the guards, showing Jon’s care for his men. 
 Yarwyck complains that he needs more builders, because of the bad weather making things more difficult. Jon tells him to use the Free Folk, but Yarwyck says that they are more trouble than they’re worth. Jon pointed out that the buildings would be repaired, or the Free Folk “will live in ruins”, indicating a way to motivate the Free Folk. 
 Jon reflects to himself that he needed honest, trustworthy men around him, and at least Marsh and Yarwyck would be mostly honest, but they weren’t actually any help, and didn’t seem to ever have any new thoughts. Marsh and Yarwyck agree with Selyse and Melisandre: “Let them die.” (p.1055) Yarwyck’s comment was to let the wildlings save the wildlings. When pressed for advice on whom to send, Marsh adds: “Send them all. The more we lose, the fewer mouths we’ll have to feed.” Jon thanked them for their counsel, seeming not to show his immense frustration at being left to decide all the details by himself. Ghost bristled as he sniffed at them as they left. Normally this would indicate that Jon shouldn’t trust them, but with Ghost behaving oddly, it’s probably hard to tell. 
 Jon’s thinking of taking spearwives to Hardhome to reassure Mother Mole of their intentions is probably a good one. It might also be a good idea, since Melisandre says “Not a man shall return.” Perhaps women, giants & mammoths (who are already at Eastwatch) will be a successful group. 
 The southerly wind was blowing snow against the Wall, burying the Ice cells. Jon has the 4 living prisoners, including a very hostile Cregan Karstark, moved to the cellars under the ruined Lord Commander’s Tower. The two dead bodies, which had “stubbornly remained dead”, are left chained in their ice cells. 
 Tormund arrives with 50 men, and laughs about Gerrick being “King”, explaining yet again that Gerrick is descended from the former King’s brother who had fled the battle in which the king died. Clydas is ushered in, terrified of a letter that has arrived, addressed only: “Bastard”. 
 This is “The Pink Letter” oft discussed by fans. This letter demands a LOT. 
 The contents are intriguing. It appears to come from Ramsay Bolton at Winterfell, and to be written with the express purpose of provoking Jon. Jon is, indeed, provoked. Perhaps Jon is more susceptible to an emotional reaction from being in the company of Tormund Tall-talker, and having been under the strain of trying to arrange a rescue for Hardhome, to save both the wildlings and his own men and ships. However, even if he had been calm before the letter, it would have elicited some emotion from him. 
 The writer of the letter (for which there are several theories) infers the following knowledge: 
 That Stannis has a “red woman” that some people believe he has sex with 
 That Stannis has a “magic sword” 
 That Abel is Mance Rayder, who was “King of the Wildlings” 
 That Mance was supposedly burned at The Wall but that Jon knew he wasn’t 
 That Jon sent Mance to Winterfell to steal Ramsay Bolton’s bride 
 That Mance had six women with him at Winterfell 
 The writer makes the following claims: 
 After 7 days battle, Stannis was defeated and his sword taken 
 Mance and the Spearwives were caught 
 (Fake) Arya “his bride” escaped and has gone to The Wall, presumably with Reek 
 The spearwives are dead, their heads on Winterfell’s wall, their skins a cloak around Mance 
 Ramsay Bolton is trueborn Lord of Winterfell 
 The writer demands the following: 
 (Fake) Arya (his bride) 
 Selyse 
 Shireen 
 Melisandre 
 Val 
 ‘the monster’/ Mance’s baby son 
 Reek 
 What we know from other chapters: 
 Mance wasn’t burned: Melisandre lied, and later confessed to Jon 
 Mance and 6 women did go to Winterfell to rescue Arya 
 Reek and Fake Arya did escape, with Mance and the women left behind 
 Stannis has been snowed in, the battle for Winterfell has not yet occurred 
 Fan theories that I have read (there may be many others) suggest that any of the following could be the writer of the pink letter: 
 Ramsay 
 Mance 
 Asha 
 Theon 
 Stannis 
 Melisandre 
 Really: Anyone at all who wants to provoke Jon, and who has been gathering the snippets of information 
 I am currently (and may change my opinion) thinking that the letter was written by Bowen Marsh, in order to distract Jon from his plan to take a group of men to Hardhome. Marsh is First Steward, so able to read and write, and with access to supplies of quills, ink and parchment. He has been upset for a long time about the Night’s Watch appearing to favour Stannis as King, bringing the wildlings through the Wall, about the shortage of supplies. Marsh has previously declared himself loyal to King Tommen, which, technically, is correct, since Tommen’s right as Robert’s son has not yet been publicly/officially disproven. Marsh also commands hundreds of stewards, who move throughout Castle Black and Mole’s Town (where Mance’s spearwives were from), so could have heard gossip about Mance and the spearwives. Possibly Jon’s reaction to the letter is a test of the truth, and determines what happens next. Problem: How would he know about Reek? 
 OR 
 I think it was written by Melisandre. She wants Jon to “turn to” her, believing that she is his “only hope”. She has admitted to using tricks before. It would be odd for Ramsay to want Mance’s baby. What possible purpose could that serve? Why would Mance or the Spearwives even have mentioned the baby? Melisandre knows about the baby. Problem: even if she saw him escape in her fires, how would she have known Reek’s name? 
 OR 
 It was written by Asha Greyjoy. Theon has told her about Ramsay, Mance and the Spearwives and Jeyne. Problem: how would she know about Mance’s baby? 
 Which brings me to: Stannis knows about all of the letter’s contents. Perhaps Stannis wrote the letter. 
 BUT : maybe I’m overthinking it, and Ramsay wrote the letter. He has no need to sign off as “Trueborn Lord of Winterfell”, but he may assume that Jon is as unhappy with being called a bastard as Ramsay had been, and if his intent is to provoke Jon to anger, that would another provocation. Problem: Even if the baby is to torture Mance, and Stannis’ wife, child and “mistress” are to coerce Stannis, why would he bother asking for Val? 
 Tormund can’t read, but Jon clearly counts him as an equal, and reads him the letter, having first sent away Clydas, Mully and Satin, to avoid them hearing the sensitive content. Tormund sensibly points out that the letter may not be true, and anyone with parchment and quill can write what they want. Jon points out the truth of Mance and the 6 women going to Winterfell to save Arya. He fixates on “I want my bride back”. He then talked to Tormund about a new plan for two hours. If he had sought advice from Marsh, Yarwyck, any Night’s Watchmen, they would have reminded him of his vows. However, he already knew this, and couldn’t be bothered hearing it. Actually hearing someone say it might have made a difference. It would probably have stopped him reading the letter publicly, because he might have been “arrested” and beheaded as a deserter sooner. 
 As Jon and Tormund left his chambers to go to the meeting, Ghost was going to follow, but Jon “wrestled” him back inside, to avoid a possible fight with Borroq’s boar. This shows that at that time, Ghost was his normal self. It also shows that he is locked inside the building this evening. 
 There are about 5 wildlings to each Night’s Watchman in the hall. 
 Jon reading the entire letter to the gathered men was foolish. In doing so, he is admitting it to be true: that he and Melisandre lied to them all. (It’s not completely true: Jon hadn’t known about the deception.) In announcing that he is taking men to Winterfell, he is deserting his post at The Wall, a crime punishable by death. 
 Tormund congratulates Jon when there is riotous support from many wildling leaders, saying “We’ll make a wildling o’ you yet.” (p.1062) This is exactly what Marsh and Yarwyck see as the problem: Jon acting as a wildling, instead of Commander of the Night’s Watch. 
 Jon notices that Selyse’s 2 guards and Melisandre have left the hall, and would be telling Selyse. Belatedly he realises that he should have told Selyse first about Stannis’ reported death. Even Selyse’s and Melisandre’s comments about the letter may have been useful, even if Jon doesn’t want their advice. Jon leaves Tormund and the hall full of men to drink some ale, and heads for Selyse, with 2 guards in tow. He never arrives. 
 He and his men hear a roar and the scream of “a man in mortal agony” from Hardin’s Tower. Wun Wun is dangling a dead and battered Ser Patrek. The same Ser Patrek who drew his sword intending to attack Wun Wun at their first meeting. The same Ser Patrek that Jon told to steal Val, who lives in Wun Wun’s tower, if he intends to marry her. Wun Wun is cut and bleeding. 
 Jon tries to calm the situation, and to keep the men from attacking Wun Wun further. Before he can make any difference, though, he is attacked himself. 
 It is the head Stewards who stab Jon: including Wick, the storeroom key-keeper we met in Jon 4, and Bowen Marsh. They had always said that: the Wildlings should not be south of the Wall, there wasn’t food to feed them, they should not be helping Stannis, and that the gate should be sealed. Marsh was crying as he did so, but buried a dagger deep in Jon’s belly, saying “For the Watch.” 
 Jon calls Ghost after the second stabbing, is stabbed in the back, then doesn’t feel the fourth blade, but he could feel the cold. 
 I’ve read a theory that “people don’t die in their own Point of View”. Let’s hope it’s true. 
 Questions: 
 What do you think was happening with Ghost? 
 Why do you think Wun Wun and Ser Patrek fought? 
 What do you think is the significance of Jon’s wound “smoking”? 
 Why do you think that Jon doesn’t feel the fourth blade, but is still able to tell us that there was one, and that he is face down in the snow (since it’s his POV)? 
 Do you think that Jon will survive? 
 Posted in Jon Snow 
 Tagged A Song of Ice and Fire , ASOIAF , Jon Snow , Literary Analysis 
 Leave a comment 
 Jon 12 in ADWD (pp 895-910) 
 Posted on May 1, 2015 May 7, 2015 by Lyanna Spearwife 
 Jon is having a nightmare: alone atop the Wall, he fights and kills wights: foes, but also friends including Quorin, Ygritte and Robb. Interestingly: “Jon was armoured in black ice, but his blade burned red in his fist.” (p.895) … “a gnarled hand seized Jon roughly by the shoulder. He whirled… and woke with a raven pecking at his chest.” (p.896) 
 It is pre-dawn (“the hour of the wolf”) on the day that Tormund’s Free Folk will come through the Wall. Jon is anxious. He thinks of all the great leaders & wise men who should have done the negotiating instead of him. However, he accepts the risks and consequences of his actions with remarkable maturity: “He would play the game to its conclusion.” (p.896) Perhaps Jon is just so miserable that he has a death wish. 
 The raven calls him “Jon Snow”: the first time that he has used Jon’s full name. What the raven actually says is: “Corn, King, Snow, Jon Snow, Jon Snow” (p.896) 
 Unusually, but sensibly, Jon eats breakfast with his “officers”, going over final details. They all agreed to follow his commands, loyal despite their reluctance and misgivings. 
 Dolorous Edd was at breakfast, having brought 6 wagons to collect spearwives for Long Barrow. Jon lingers to chat with him, no doubt enjoying the camaraderie. As usual, Edd provides welcome comic relief as he fills Jon in on the Long Barrow gossip, and begs Jon not to let all the chickens be eaten, because he likes eggs. 
 The weather is beautiful: warm and sunny. The Wall was weeping. Dolorous Edd says this is a bad sign. (He also says that if it were snowing, that would be a worse sign.) We are yet to learn what exactly makes the Wall weep, as we have seen previously that it is not just because of the weather. 
 This is truly a momentous day. As Jon observes, by the end of it, the “world [would be] forever changed”. Today, the horn blown atop the Wall called the Free Folk to their new homes. Although the previously captured Free Folk has already experienced something similar, this is an entirely voluntary migration, wrought by genuine agreement. 
 Jon had planned to look impressive to the wildlings: he rode a stallion and had 8 men “in their prime”, well-dressed & armoured as guards to accompany him. He was also guarded by bowmen atop the Wall, and accompanied by Stewards to count the wildlings and collect their treasures. 
 Jon met Tormund, who was also accompanied by men, including his remaining two sons. Tormund explained that his people were terrified of the Night’s Watch, having been told as children that if they didn’t behave, the Night’s Watchmen would eat them. However, Jon needed to maintain their fear, in order to have some hope of preventing riots and attacks once the Free Folk were South of the Wall. He whistled for Ghost, who “came racing” to him, and made Tormund’s horse shy. Tormund said: “You are a black-hearted bastard, Lord Crow,” before blowing his horn to signal the 100 hostage boys to come to the gate. 
 Stewards recorded the names of all the Free Folk, as well as itemising the surrendered treasures. Tormund pointed out to Jon the sons of notable men, including a son of Varamyr. Jon noticed that two of the boys were actually girls in disguise. Jon said he would send them to join the spearwives, but he needed two more boys as hostages. They were provided. 
 Tormund showed his cunning and friendly distrust of Jon in the strategic order of groups passing through the Wall: after the boys came warriors (men and women), before the mothers and children. As Tormund said: “A few fighters on t’other side…the gate stays open…” (p.903) Tormund had also kept a rear-guard in reserve, in case something went wrong. 
 Even among Tormund’s group of people, there were tribes making up sub-groups, who did not get along. South of the Wall was becoming a melting-pot of multiculturalism, bound only by common enemy and a promise. 
 Tormund told Jon that the horn Melisandre burned was not really the Horn of Joramun: Mance had been bluffing because (as Ygritte had said) they had never found the real horn. 
 As the day wore on and night approached, the Free Folk were rushing to get through the gate. They were afraid. Tormund and Jon discussed The Others, and Jon wondered if his Valyrian steel sword would kill them, as Sam’s books had suggested. One of the last to come was Borroq, whom Jon recognised as a skinchanger with a boar, who stopped in front of Jon, and seemed about to attack, (Ghost also moved in front of Jon, snarling silently) but instead, called him “brother”. Finally, all 3,119 Free Folk were through the Wall, those who had (literally) died waiting in the camp were burned, and Jon was the last through the Wall before the gates were once again sealed. Now it was snowing. 
 Bowen Marsh reported on progress so far: 60 of the boy hostages had gone to Eastwatch and the Shadow Tower (presumably 30 to each), leaving 40 at Castle Black. Edd had taken the 6 wagons full of women to Long Barrow, the remaining women were still at Castle Black, until they were sent elsewhere. 
 Jon explained that Tormund would take his people to Oakenshield within a couple of days, and others would make their camps at other castles as soon as it could be organised (refer to list in previous post), no doubt hoping that this would reassure Marsh somewhat. 
 When Jon looked around Castle Black, he realised that instead of something like a ghost-town, it was now vibrant and bustling: full of people, and many of those people were happy. He even saw grown men having a snowball fight like children. 
 At the end of this huge day, Jon returned to his cold dark chambers before the promised evening feast. Clydas brought him a message from Hardhome. It was not good news. “ Dead things in the wood. Dead things in the water. Six ships left, of the eleven that set sail…Night falls,…and now my war begins. ” (p.910) 
 Little things worth mentioning: 
 Jon’s burned hand is mentioned again in this chapter, and throughout the books. GRRM clearly wants us to remember that his hand is burned. Presumably, this might be significant later? Dany is “unburnt” and believes Viserys was “not a true dragon” because he died from heat. But: dragons have eaten Targaryens before (and they always burn their food before eating) so: Targaryens can be burned. 
 Jon promises Tormund that his son Dryn will be Jon’s own page. Perhaps we will hear more about Dryn in future chapters. 
 Seeing the spearwives gave Jon flashbacks of Ygritte. 
 Many of the men gave Jon (not the Night’s Watch) their oath as they passed. 
 Gerrick Kingsblood presented his daughters as princesses: Jon noted that they weren’t really princesses, but Selyse would like them, and that their father was a fool. 
 Questions: 
 1 Is the raven calling Jon Snow the King? 
 2 Is it Bran talking to Jon through the raven, as he was talking to Theon through the tree? The first Bran chapter in A Game of Thrones showed that Bran was as fond of Jon as Jon was of him. Bran had used Summer to help Jon at Queenscrown. It would not be unusual for Bran to want to help Jon. 
 Posted in Jon Snow 
 Tagged A Song of Ice and Fire , ASOIAF , Jon Snow , Literary Analysis 
 Leave a comment 
 Jon 11 in A Dance With Dragons (pp. 815-833) 
 Posted on April 27, 2015 May 7, 2015 by Lyanna Spearwife 
 Jon was right: Tormund Giantsbane has come to the Wall. Val has succeeded, and returned. 
 Jon and Tormund spend a day in Tormund’s tent negotiating an agreement, with lots of yelling and throwing of tankards by Tormund, indicating Jon’s courage and stubbornness, as he remains calm. 
 Jon is mentally adding to the refrain of his Night’s Watch vows: “I am the guard who opened the gates and let the enemy march through”. (p.816) He is worried about what he is doing, and hopes it is the right thing. It is understandable then, that some of the Night’s Watch are even less sure about it. 
 Tormund is equally concerned: “Some of my own will spit on me when they hear these terms.” (p.816) Jon replies: “A fair bargain leaves both sides unhappy, I’ve heard it said.” (p.816) It is clear from the snippets of conversation that there is friendship and understanding in their relationship: During his time with the Free Folk, Jon had paid attention to who was in Tormund’s family, and asked after them now. Tormund tells Jon quite personal details. 
 The agreement is that Tormund’s people will give up their gold and valuables to pay for food and lodging, and the boys will join the Watch in defending the Wall (without taking vows as Night’s Watchmen). The Mammoths will go via Eastwatch. (Flagging a warning here: if the Eastwatch Commander doesn’t follow Jon’s instructions, or there is a communication problem, there is potential for unnecessary battle with 200 Giants and 80 Mammoths at Eastwatch.) 
 The day is uncharacteristically sunny, and the Wall is shimmering with rainbows. Jon remembers the men talking about the Wall having “moods”. It seems that the weather and the state of the Wall might be symbolic. Achieving peace with Tormund seems to “please” the Wall, while Alys marrying Sigorn, and Mance/Rattleshirt being burned make the Wall unhappy. If the Wall is on the same “side” as Jon, then perhaps Alys’ wedding will have unexpectedly bad consequences? Perhaps, though, it is Melisandre and her fires (at both occasions) that make the Wall weep? Not because of their heat (they are too small for that), but because of their opposing magic. The Wall does not weep just because of the weather: it is cold and snowing at Alys’ wedding, but the Wall weeps. Today the weather is warm, but the Wall is not weeping. 
 However, Jon is appreciating the beauty of the Wall and the weather, and the satisfaction of his agreement. He seems happy. He actually strokes the raven, instead of shooing it away. 
 Although Jon had taken Leathers and Horse with him, “Ghost was the only protections Jon needed; the direwolf could sniff out foes, even those who hid their enmity behind smiles.” (p.818) Catelyn had known this about Grey Wind, and warned Robb to pay attention to it, but he didn’t, at his peril. The fact that Jon trusts Ghost gives him an advantage over Robb. 
 Right now, Ghost is with Val, and Jon thinks they “belong together”. “It had been a long while since Jon Snow had seen a sight so lovely.” (p.819) Jon also respects her skills, and reflects that “ she would make a worthy wife for any lord .”… “But that bridge had been burned a long time ago, and Jon himself had thrown the torch.” (p.819) He teases Val: “Have you been trying to steal my wolf?” She later teases him right back: “Lord Snow is welcome to steal into my bed any night he dares. Once he’s been gelded, keeping those vows will come much easier for him.” The banter continues between Jon, Val and Tormund, who concludes that his son should stay away from Val after all. 
 Val’s eyes are blue. (p.818) There has been at least one comment that since, prior to this, Val’s eyes were always described as “grey”, this indicates that she has been touched by the Others, and is actually a type of wight. However, her breath is visible in the cold air, whereas ColdHands (the only talking wight we’ve seen so far) has no breath. Her blue eyes may be an indication of her happiness: her eyes were grey while she was a prisoner in gloomy weather, but on this glorious day, her eyes are shining blue with the reflected sunlight, and her own happiness. In our world, people’s eyes are also known to change colour with their moods, and lighting. 
 Jon explains that Val must remain a prisoner, but with freedom to move around the castle, with new accommodation in Hardin’s Tower, with Night’s Watch guards (not Selyse’s men) & Wun Wun sleeping in the entry hall. Val seems reasonably pleased: “A giant as protector? Even Dalla could not boast of that.” (p.820) 
 As well as Jon’s good natured, protective generosity, we see his compassion and concern for others: “If Tormund’s band were starved and sick, [they’d had “large herds of sheep and goats and swine” to start with] what of the thousands who had followed Mother Mole to Hardhome [with nothing]?” (p.820) He hopes Cotter Pyke’s mission has been successful, but clearly hasn’t heard yet. 
 Jon tells Val that “the hard part” will be convincing his own people that his agreement with Tormund is a good thing. Val offers to help, and promises to “be a proper wildling princess for your queen.” (p.821) Jon remarks that “This is no game”, in contrast to others in ASOIAF who refer to politics as “a game”. 
 A small crowd of Nights Watchmen are waiting inside the gate, and Ulmer of the Kingswood asks if it would be peace or “blood and iron”. We would assume that the men want peace, but perhaps many are hoping for “blood and iron” against their lifelong foes. Jon tells them that the wildlings will be joining them as friends, and “It will be for us to make them welcome.” 
 Jon visits Selyse with Val. He addresses Val as “my Lady”, but she replies: “The crow commands, the captive must obey.” (p.822) Given their previously friendly conversation, while she is clearly still bantering with him, perhaps she used those words for the benefit of the nearby men, and Jon’s reputation. Val goes on to speculate about Selyse’s fearsomeness, and that she’s heard she has a beard. Jon can’t stop himself from smiling at that, correcting her with “Only a mustache (sic).” (p.822) 
 Val is dressed all in white. Jon is dressed all in black. They must make a striking pair, walking together with common purpose, a white wolf at their heels. Two people of such similar character, but different temperament: she is playful, he is serious. 
 Ser Patrek is commanding the guards at the King’s Tower. He kneels to kiss Val’s glove and tell her that she is more beautiful than he has heard. She pats him on the head, calls him “Ser Kneeler”, and tells him to get up “as if she were talking to a dog.” (p.822) Again, Jon wants to laugh (but this time doesn’t). 
 Ghost must wait outside, as Selyse fears him. Patchface sings as Jon enters: “Under the sea the crows are white as snow.” As Patchface takes Shireen to her room, he sings “Come with me under the sea”, but he omits the “I know”s and “oh”s. (p.823) Is Patchface making a reference to The Others being the equivalent of white “crows”, guardians of the realm North of the Wall? 
 Unsurprisingly, Selyse does not approve of the giants and mammoths, but disdainfully accepts them as a necessity, referring to them as “beasts”. Selyse concedes that Jon “probably” knows what he is doing, and that bringing the wildlings through the Wall was part of Stannis’ plan. The difficulty is that Selyse wants them to swear fealty to Stannis and R’hllor. When Val tells her that “Free Folk do not kneel”, Selyse replies: “Then they must be knelt!” Val returns in kind: “Do that, Your Grace, and we will rise again at the first chance…with blades in hand.” (p.822) Selyse’s solution to Val’s “insolence” is: “We must find you a husband who can teach you courtesy.” Selyse warns Jon that Stannis will not be pleased with him. 
 Jon had come to inform her, not seek her approval. Instead of saying that he will reconsider the negotiations, as Selyse wants, Jon merely says, diplomatically: “I am sorry my actions have displeased you. I did as I thought best. Do I have your leave to go?” 
 Once they were safely away from the Queen’s guards, Val shows Jon that she had been extremely self-controlled in Selye’s presence, as promised. She is furiously angry that Gilly’s babe and his wetnurses are in the same tower as Shireen, who she calls “the dead girl”. She wants them moved, and is so insistent that she claims that Jon owes her a debt, instead of just asking. Val explains that “the grey death” sleeps, but wakes again later, and North of the Wall, sufferers are killed, as a mercy. Val storms off, and Jon is so rattled by her anger that he wants “two cups” of hot spiced wine. 
 Instead, Jon goes to the meeting he had called of the Castle Black leaders, at the top of the Wall at sunset (remembering that the weather is beautiful and they will see the Wildling camp): 
 Bowen Marsh – First Steward 
 Othell Yarwyck – First Builder 
 Septon Cellador – Septon 
 Clydas – substitute Maester “until Sam returns” (p.821) 
 Leathers – Master-at-Arms, 
 Also: Flint and Norrey, the Northmen who came to Castle Black after being rallied by Stannis. 
 Leathers is waiting for him at the winch cage, indicating his staunch loyalty to Jon. At the top of the Wall, as Jon greets the various men on duty, we are reminded that Ned taught him “ A good lord must know his men ”, (p.826) and that Jon is so familiar with his men, he can recognise them without seeing their faces. However, Ned probably meant that he needs to know their hearts and minds, and Jon is about to meet with men whose hearts are not currently aligned with his own. 
 Jon walked to the edge of the Wall and looked down, seeing the “killing field” where Mance’s men died. He thinks of Mance, full of doubt. He thinks of Arya, and the sword he had Mikken make for her. “ Stick them with the pointy end …Wisdom for her wedding night” (p.826) He thinks that Mance owes him “ this one little girl ”, as he saved Mance’s son from Melisandre, and is about to save 4,000 Free Folk. (pp.826-827) As the sun sets and the stars come out, Jon “flexed the fingers of his sword hand, remembering all he’d lost”, thinking: “ A lord commander has no friends .” 
 The other men arrived for the meeting. Jon tells them that the wildlings will come through the wall to join them in 3 days. He points out that they are “scrawny… weary…hungry…far from home”, attempting an appeal to their compassion and calming of their fears by reinforcing that they are weak and pitiful, in need of help. Of course, Yarwyck and Marsh are resistant. Marsh (Edd has called him “the counter”) says there are only 3,000, not 4,000. He also says there are twice as many at Hardhome, and “great camps” in the mountains above the Shadow Tower. Jon confirms that he has been told The Weeper plans to attack the Bridge of Skulls (near the Shadow Tower) again. Marsh has a scar from The Weeper’s previous attack at the same bridge. 
 The Weeper had left Jon three heads of his men, and Jon had not forgotten, but was determined to make peace with all. “He could not avenge them…” (p828) However, it may have been more prudent for Jon to indicate that he would consider The Weeper later, right now they must deal with Tormund. Instead, Jon says: “We cannot pick and choose amongst the free folk, saying this one may pass, but this one may not. Peace means peace for all.” 
 There is unanimous, well-earned hatred of The Weeper: “All The Weeper knows is rape and murder”, “…he blinds the girls he does not take”, “Even other raiders do not trust him”, “The Weeper will not say the words” (p.828) None of Jon’s arguments move them. Reminding them that many Night’s Watchmen are former criminals, forgiven, doesn’t help, such is their hatred and distrust. 
 Septon Cellador suggest that they pray together, to overcome the squabbling between them, but is ignored. That was an opportunity to build harmony missed, and a slight to one of only two men (the other is Leathers, himself a former wildling, perhaps remaining diplomatically silent) not resisting Jon at that time. 
 When Clydas asks that the wildlings give up their arms (which would reduce the threat to the Night’s Watch) Leathers refers to the wildlings as “us”, even though he has taken the Black and said the vows. Leathers points out that they can only fight the Others if they have weapons. 
 When Marsh asks how all these thousands will be fed, Jon tells them that they will import food via Eastwatch, from wherever they can buy it, and that the wildlings will be funding this with their gold, silver, amber, gems, carvings, anything of value, to be sold in The Free Cities. Norrey points out that “All the wealth of the wildlings” won’t buy much, but Jon does not tell them about the Iron Bank’s loan. 
 Jon points out that it is a condition of passage to their side of the Wall that the free folk swear to serve with the Night’s Watch until Spring. He reassured them that the free folk will stay at the Wall, and explains the planned accommodations: Table below . 
 They still do not trust the wildlings to keep that oath, especially The Weeper. When Septon Cellador calls them “savages”, Leathers points out that: “I was on t’ other side, remember? Now I wear your blacks and train your boys to kill. Some might call me Turncloak…but I am no more savage than you crows. We have gods too. The same god they keep in Winterfell.” (p.830) This reference to Jon’s family, and the links between him and the Wildlings is perhaps not helpful, when Jon’s loyalty to the Night’s Watch is being questioned. 
 Jon vouching for Tormund’s oath just serves to remind them that Jon had been with the wildlings, some thought him a turncloak, and possibly wonder which side he is on now, as he brings all these wildlings through the Wall. 
 “…they love their children, will you admit that much?…I insisted on hostages.” Jon finally demonstrates serious strategy, “One hundred boys…a son from each of the chiefs and captains, the rest chosen by lot. The boys will serve as pages and squires, freeing our own men for other duties…hostage for the loyalty of their sires.” (p.831) This satisfies the Northmen, as they recall Winterfell demanding hostages from them for generations. When asked if Jon could follow through (and kill hostage boys if required) he reminds them that he is still the son of Eddard Stark. This satisfies the Northmen, but not Marsh, who asks if the boys will be trained at arms. Jon says that they will, as part of their other duties. It would be unwise to have them helpless in the event of an attack. 
 A major concern is that once all these wildlings are South of the Wall, they will far outnumber the Night’s Watch, and “end [it] in a single night.” It is a realistic fear that all the men who serve The Watch, and all the traditions and knowledge would be lost, and they would have failed their vows. As Marsh points out: “What you propose is…treason. For 8,000 years the …Night’s Watch have …fought these wildlings. Now you mean to let them pass, to shelter them…to feed… and clothe them and teach them how to fight…must I remind you? You swore an oath .” (p.832) 
 Jon, in turn, reminds Marsh exactly what that oath says. He asks if he’d missed out some words about “the king and his laws,…defend[ing] every foot of … land and cling[ing] to each ruined castle.” (p.832) 
 “I am the shield that guards the realms of men”(p.832) Jon reminds them, sharing his realisation that free folk are men, and therefore also to be shielded from a greater common enemy. 
 “Winter is coming…and with it the white walkers…The Wall was made to stop them….but the Wall must be manned. This discussion is at an end.” (p.833) He assigned tasks to prepare for Tormund’s people. 
 Even as these men agreed to their tasks, Jon thinks of Melisandre’s prophesy: “ Ice…and daggers in the dark. Blood frozen red and hard, and naked steel . His sword hand flexed.” (p.833) At the end of this glorious day, “the wind was rising”. 
 Little things worth mentioning: 
 Tormund uses Jon’s analogy of “ducklings in a row” (p.817) for men moving in an orderly fashion, perhaps that’s where Jon learned the phrase that he uses mockingly? 
 Planned occupants of the Castles at The Wall. 
 The number in brackets is the Castle number on the map in the books. 
 Details are added from other chapters as well. 
 (1) Westwatch-by-the-Bridge 
 Wildling families, elderly, ill/injured, women who didn’t want to, and orphans who were too young to, fight 
 (This seems to be a vulnerable position, and may need to be reconsidered) 
 (11) Castle Black 
 Headquarters of the Night’s Watch 
 (2) The Shadow Tower 
 Night’s Watch major garrison 
 (12) Oakenshield 
 Tormund Giantsbane & his people 
 (3) Sentinel Stand 
 Wildling families, elderly, ill/injured, women who didn’t want to, and orphans who were too young to, fight 
 (13) Woodswatch-by-the-Pool 
 Wildling families, elderly, ill/injured, women who didn’t want to, and orphans who were too young to, fight 
 (4) Greyguard 
 Night’s Watch garrison with a Steward from The Shadow Tower as Commander + currently 30 men: 20 NW & 10 Stannis’ 
 (14) Sable Hall 
 Night’s Watch garrison 
 (5) Stonedoor 
 Soren Shieldbreaker leading. Wildling families, elderly, ill/injured, women who didn’t want to, and orphans who were too young to, fight 
 (15) Rimegate 
 Wildling families, elderly, ill/injured, women who didn’t want to, and orphans who were too young to, fight 
 (6) Hoarfrost Hill 
 Wildling families, elderly, ill/injured, women who didn’t want to, and orphans who were too young to, fight 
 (16) The Long Barrow 
 Spearwives and wildling girls, under Iron Emmett and Dolorous Edd 
 (7) Icemark 
 Night’s Watch garrison with Giant Bedwyck as Commander 
 (17) The Torches 
 Wildling families, elderly, ill/injured, women who didn’t want to, and orphans who were too young to, fight 
 (8) The Nightfort 
 Stannis’s proposed seat 
 (18) Greenguard 
 Sealskinner’s clan. 
 (9) Deep Lake 
 Night’s Watch garrison 
 (19) Eastwatch-by-the-sea 
 Night’s Watch major garrison 
 (10) Queensgate 
 Morna White Mask leading. Wildling families, elderly, ill/injured, women who didn’t want to, and orphans who were too young to, fight 
 Questions: 
 1 When Jon muses that Val is: “ A warrior princess…not some willowy creature who sits up in a tower, brushing her hair and waiting for some knight to rescue her ”, is he comparing her to Sansa (as unlike Val) or Arya (like Val)? 
 2 It may be completely insignificant, but: the raven flies up (hundreds of feet) over the wall, instead of going through the tunnel in the Wall, even though it lives happily inside buildings, and rides on men’s shoulders and horse’s saddles. Rather than a fear of confined spaces, is this because of the Wall’s magic? 
 3 Patchface’s song about white crows: Do you think it is a reference to Val wearing white, the White Walkers as defenders of the North (as the Night’s Watch defends the South), or something else? 
 4 Ghost left Jon during his discussion with Val about Shireen’s greyscale. Does he flee conflict? Are Jon’s feelings too painful or bewildering in their complexity for Ghost to be around? Has anyone made a study of the times that Ghost leaves and returns? Are there any common features? 
 Posted in Jon Snow 
 Tagged A Song of Ice and Fire , ASOIAF , Jon Snow , Literary Analysis 
 Leave a comment 
 Jon 10 in A Dance With Dragons (pp.753-768) 
 Posted on April 27, 2015 May 7, 2015 by Lyanna Spearwife 
 There is a wedding at the Wall. Othell Yarwyck and Bowen Marsh are noticeably absent. Melisandre’s flames battle the icy wind and falling snow. 
 GRRM makes it seem that Jon is marrying Alys, matching the tension from the end of Jon 9. 
 Queen Selyse and her retinue attend this ceremony conducted by Melisandre, and Jon Snow is giving Alys Karstark in marriage to the Magnar of Thenn. When Jon asked Alys if she was afraid, she replied: “Let him be scared of me,” and on seeing the Magnar’s face as his bride approached to wed him, Jon thought: “Alys was more right than she knew.” (p.755) It seems that the Magnar is smitten. Alys’ eagerness indicates that the feeling may be mutual. 
 For the bride’s cloak, Jon had his men improvise a sigil for House Thenn: “The echo of the Karstark sunburst was there for those who cared to look, but differenced to make the arms appropriate for House Thenn.” It seems that Jon’s influence goes further than giving the bride away, and providing her clothes: “…this marriage is mine own work, after all.” (p.757) By marrying Alys to the Magnar, he is achieving both protection for Alys (assuming the Magnar is a good husband) and providing the Magnar (emperor/king) with the kind of respect and position that he and his people expect, making them part of society South of the Wall, and thereby strengthening their allegiance. 
 Jon notes that Selyse would “walk into the flames willingly” in fervent worship of R’hllor. (p.754) Selyse goes on to say that “I know I could give His Grace more children if we were bound in fire.” (p.757) It seems that Selyse also feels the coldness in her marriage, and doesn’t want it to be so. 
 Alys’ cousin and proposed groom-to-be had hunted her with men and dogs, like “a deer”. (p.756) Jon had strategically met him on the Kingsroad, before he could claim guest right at Castle Black. One of the men had shot a crossbow bolt at a Night’s Watchman, and was shot in return. Cregan Karstark and his 4 men were now in Castle Black’s ice cells. Surely this is not a “neutral” act? It is probably another reason for Marsh and others to feel that Jon is not keeping to the purpose of the Night’s Watch, and instead using it for his own purposes. 
 Patchface sings: “Under the sea the mermen feast on starfish soup, and all the serving men are crabs.” (p.758) This means nothing to me. I read somewhere that Patchface has two types of songs: some are accurate prophesies, and some are not important. This seems to be the latter. 
 Melisandre says that Patchface is dangerous. She has seen him in her fires with “skulls about him…lips are red with blood.” (p.758) Jon doesn’t seem perturbed, perhaps because of his scepticism of Melisandre . 
 Jon , like Ned, has clearly pinned hopes on Stannis, and he is worried. Jon asks Melisandre about Stannis. She says that all she sees is snow, but that he is not dead. For Mance she also sees snow. Jon suggests that she is not really seeing visions, and reminds her that “Alys is not Arya” (p.759), but Melisandre points out that the vision was true, and her misinterpretation was because “I am as mortal as you”. 
 Melisandre warns him again about “daggers in the dark”, and that the time for it is “very close now”. She reminds him to keep Ghost at his side. 
 Jon’s conversation with Cregan Karstark in his cell once again shows his quick-wittedness. After calling Jon a “baseborn get”, Cregan says: “If you mean to kill me, do it and be damned for a Kinslayer. Stark and Karstark are one blood.” Jon replies: “My name is Snow.” Touché. 
 Jon is negotiating still. Two of Cregan’s men have confirmed what Alys said, and sworn their loyalty to her. Jon tries to convince Cregan to yield the castle to Alys and Sigorn, but he refuses. Jon is stuck: “Behead [him] and they will say I’m beheading northmen to give their lands to wildlings. Release him, and he will [undo] all I’ve done with Lady Alys and the Magnar.” (p.761) He reminds Cregan that a while in the cells may change his mind, and that Stannis will eventually return and behead him. He offers Cregan a place in the Night’s Watch: an option for Cregan, and a brave, magnanimous move for Jon. He would have another treacherous, angry man under his command. Fortunately for Jon, Cregan stubbornly refuses. 
 Jon joins the wedding feast, where there are signs of harmony between the various factions. Music is played by a Night’s Watch fiddler with wildling pipes and drums. The Clansmen Norry and Flint drank the toast to R’hllor, not overturning their cups in contempt, even though they worship the Old Gods. 
 Jon refuses to dance with Alys, but talks with her at some length. When Jon explains the background of the Thenns, Alys notes that they are different from other wildlings, and more like “us”. Jon certainly knows how to manipulate charmingly: Alys promises to send old men and boys to the Wall to take the black, when her castle’s food supplies run low, “Karhold remembers”. (p.765) Alys eventually gets her new husband to dance for the first time. 
 The Hardhome rescue had been unable to leave Eastwatch due to rough seas, but the raven announcing their departure arrives during the wedding feast. Jon is pleased they have departed, but not pleased with the choice of man to command Eastwatch in Pyke’s absence: he is a friend of Alliser Thorne’s and Janos Slynt’s, who had pulled Jon from his bed and kicked him in the ribs when Slynt wanted to kill Jon as a traitor. 
 At the wedding feast, Jon noted that Ser Patrek was “looking for some provocation” to “shed a bit of blood”. Ser Axell tells Jon that Ser Patrek feels that he should have been given Alys to compensate him for losing his Southron lands by following Stannis. Jon is not sympathetic. Ser Axell makes more loathsome requests for “the wildling princess” as his own bride, and accuses Jon of keeping her for himself. Jon is leaving in disgust when they hear the sound of a horn from the Wall. Two blasts means Wildlings. Jon hopes that it is Val and Tormund Giantsbane. 
 Little things worth mentioning: 
 Ghost is again by Jon’s side. Selyse doesn’t like him. 
 One of the Queen’s Men went to refer to Satin as something other than Jon’s steward, and Jon knows full well what some people think: “ Pet? Whore ?” Jon doesn’t seem bothered by this. Perhaps a lifetime of being accused of bad character traits (because of his illegitimate birth) that he did not have, has made him impervious. 
 Questions: 
 What is Patchface singing about? 
 Patchface died on the way to Westeros, and “came back alive” after about 3 or 4 days in the water, but has a different mind/personality. Lady Stoneheart had a similar experience. Do you think Patchface serves the Drowned God (since he died by drowning), or is he alive for some other reason? 
 Posted in Jon Snow 
 Tagged A Song of Ice and Fire , ASOIAF , Jon Snow , Literary Analysis 
 Leave a comment 
 Jon 9 in A Dance With Dragons (pp.674-689) 
 Posted on April 27, 2015 May 7, 2015 by Lyanna Spearwife 
 Selyse and her retinue of “Queen’s Men” (faithful to R’hllor through Melisandre), lady companions and serving girls arrived at Castle Black on their way to the Nightfort. Melisandre had warned Jon a day before a raven’s message announced it. Elsewise, it seems, Cotter Pyke had kept Jon well informed about the people in Selyse’s retinue. 
 Jon was aware of the need to show the authority of his position to Selyse, and met her surrounded by smartly dressed guards, his steward and Bowen Marsh. Even though, when he greeted her, she asked him to take her to his Lord Commander. I can feel GRRM chuckling as he wrote the scene. 
 Selyse and her knights demonstrate their arrogance and disdain, and Ser Patrek draws his sword on meeting WunWun, and says that he intended to use it. Clearly, he’s stupid-brave, as well as rude and obnoxious. Shireen is fascinated with, but afraid of, Wun Wun. Wun Wun is amused by Patchface. 
 Patchface’s songs are usually correct prophesy. Today he sings: “In the dark the dead are dancing.” (p.677) Presumably, this is a general reference to the wights raised by the Others, not to the specific bodies Jon has in the cells. 
 Jon is particularly pleased that a representative of the Iron Bank (Tycho) has come to meet with Stannis. Jon has his own plans for him. (In Jon IV & VII he was thinking about needing money for the Night’s Watch.) 
 From Jon’s discussions with Tycho we learn that the Iron Bank is going to do something about the fact that Cersei stopped their repayments. Jon recognises the folly of her actions, even if she didn’t. The cost of Cersei’s disregard for the Bank is that the Bank will now “lend [Stannis] whatever help he needs.” Jon reflects that Stannis “may just have won the Iron Throne”. (p.684) 
 Tycho prompts Jon to wonder who he serves. Does he still serve the Iron Throne? Jon doesn’t seem to think so, and his “neutral” support of Stannis indicates, in reality, an opposition to the current King. 
 Jon tells Tycho where to find Stannis, but warns him of the risk. Jon also offers him an escort and provisions, at a “price”. During the negotiations, Jon remembers Stannis’ comment that he haggles “like a crone with a codfish”. (p.680) Two hours later, when Jon signed the Bank’s contract, “both of them were half-drunk and quite unhappy. Jon thought that a good sign.” (p.681) Jon now has the use of the three Braavosi ships to add to the Hardhome rescue mission, as well as money to import provisions from Essos or Southern Westeros as needed. 
 Tycho also mentions that there have been “strange black sails” and “talk of dragons”. Jon suggests that a dragon at the Wall “might warm things up a bit.” Tycho reminds him that the Braavosi are descended from those who fled Valyria, and they don’t jape about dragons. It seems like an important reminder of the Valyrian connection with Braavos. The Braavosi escaped and hid from the Dragon Lords, their city’s location chosen for its literal obscurity: the fogs hide it from vision. 
 It is mentioned that Satin is “not as diligent” in his work, i.e. in his care of Jon, such as keeping the fire burning in Jon’s rooms. There is no mention of doing anything to improve this, though. Here is a weakness of Jon’s: accepting less for himself. It’s likely that Catelyn Tully is responsible for this acceptance. 
 Jon appraises Ser Axell Florent, with the knowledge that he watched Melisandre burn his brother, and that he is the Queen’s Hand and Uncle. He shows himself to be unpleasant in his attempts to have Val brought for his appraisal. While it might be, as Jon suspects, because he knows that Val is not currently at Castle Black, it is also lecherous and arrogant. Jon successfully avoids revealing where Val is, and leaves. Jon falls asleep in the chair at his desk. He is very tired, and we don’t see Ghost in this chapter at all. 
 Mully wakes Jon because the “grey girl on a dying horse” has been brought to the Maester’s rooms at Castle Black. Jon is excited at the prospect of seeing Ayra. He thinks through the options of keeping her safe as he walks to meet her. Interestingly, he decides that the best thing to do is to send her to Braavos, or further, but that she would need someone to protect her, because “She was only a child.” (p.686) 
 Jon wonders about Mance and the Spearwives, who are not with the girl, and whether Melisandre actually had some other plan for them. 
 The girl reminds Jon of Arya (possibly partly because Starks and Karstarks had common ancestors) but she is actually Alys Karstark, seeking Jon’s protection as a kinsman, even though her father had disdained him as “a bastard [and therefore of bad character]”, and when she danced with him about 10 years ago, he was sullen. She observed that he was still sullen. (R+L=J moment: Barristan told Dany that Rheagar seemed unable to be happy. Jon is “sullen”.) 
 As Alys is heir to Karhold, her Great-Uncle wants her to marry her much older cousin, so that he becomes Lord of Karhold. Alys knows that once she produces the next heir, she will be disposable, and her husband-to-be has “buried two wives already”. 
 Jon reminds Alys that he cannot intervene, other than to write to Stannis, as it is a matter for the King, not the Night’s Watch. (Noticeably, he doesn’t refer the matter to King Tommen.) At this point Alys reveals the extent of Karhold treachery: although he had declared for Stannis, hoping to provoke the Lannisters to kill Harry (Alys’ brother, current Lord of Karhold, hostage of the Lannisters), and Stannis is expecting his help at Winterfell, Arnolf Karstark is really working with Roose Bolton. 
 The chapter ends without giving us Jon’s response to this set of predicaments: What to do about Alys, and what to do about Karstark’s intended betrayal of Stannis, all while maintaining the neutrality of the Night’s Watch. 
 Things we learn: 
 Wun Wun had never tasted wine before coming to the Wall, but likes it too much. Jon does not let him have any to avoid having to deal with a drunken, out-of-control, Giant. 
 There were Wildlings who “ran off down the Kings Road”, but were brought back. There is a containment issue. With their overcrowded living conditions, and living mostly on meagre handouts from the Watch, Mole’s Town must be unbearable for the Free Folk. 
 Questions: 
 Where do you think Ghost is? 
 Do you think Melisandre had a dual purpose for Mance, or was she just trying to save Arya to convince Jon to join her “side”? 
 Posted in Jon Snow 
 Tagged A Song of Ice and Fire , ASOIAF , Jon Snow , Literary Analysis 
 Leave a comment 
 Jon 8 in A Dance with Dragons (pp.600-610) 
 Posted on April 27, 2015 May 7, 2015 by Lyanna Spearwife 
 Jon lets Val go, alone, to find Tormund Giantsbane, and ask him to join them at the Wall. Many people are worried about this, including Jon. Val and Jon have a friendly, almost intimate conversation, showing an appreciation and understanding of each other. Val kisses Jon on the cheek. They also spoke about the baby as “Craster’s son”, and Mully and Edd may, or may not, have heard this. 
 Val reminds Jon that her sister warned him against magic. Jon reassures Val by confirming that he remembers, but thinks to himself that magic is necessary when there is no other weapon. 
 It seems that, despite his internal doubts, Jon is becoming less diplomatic, and more arrogant, in his dealings with his men. Perhaps it is due to being raised as a Lord’s son, when Lords are not chosen, as a Lord Commander is, and must be obeyed. 
 Bowen Marsh (First Steward), Othell Yarwyck (First Builder) & Septon Cellador (clearly an alcoholic that GRRM laughed in naming) visited Jon to express the concerns of the men about numerous things. They are angry at Iron Emmett and Dolorous Edd being sent to command a castle of women. They have served well at Castle Black, and want to keep them. They also disapprove of Leathers’ appointment to replace Iron Emmett as master-at-arms, who teaches fighting to new recruits, and as Satin as Jon’s Steward. The Lord Commander’s Steward is usually someone being groomed for leadership, as Jon was. Jon trusts and respects these men, but the other men don’t think they’re suitable for these leadership positions. Considering that there are hundreds of men, presumably Jon could have made more politically suitable appointments, and made use of Leathers and Satin elsewhere. 
 Marsh was even more angry (if that were possible) when Jon confirmed that he would let Tormund Giantsbane and all his followers come through the Wall to join them. Jon becomes angry with them when they want the FreeFolk at Hardhome to die, as they consider them enemies. Jon intends to send ships from Eastwatch to save the FreeFolk, because they are people . He points out that if these people die, they will rise again to kill the living. Jon sends the men away. They are very angry, and probably don’t understand Jon’s reasoning. 
 Mormont’s Raven (should I call it Jon’s raven now?) seems to call out more words these days. Sometimes there seems to be no meaning or significance, but other times it does seem that he is trying to warn Jon. 
 For example: (p.606) Jon is talking about Leathers teaching new recruits some things about Free Folk culture, and the raven says: “Free. Corn. King.” Is he calling Jon the new King of the Free Folk? 
 When Marsh, Yarwyck and Cellador are silent but angry with Jon, the Raven says: “Corn, corn, kill.” Is he warning Jon that the men are so angry that they’re thinking of killing him? (p.607) 
 It was perhaps not such a good idea for Jon to point out that if Stannis killed him for the treachery of “releasing” Val, they could soon “choose a new commander more to your liking”. (p.608) 
 Things we learn in this chapter: 
 Giants are vegetarian (or Wun Wun is). 
 Jon thinks Wun Wun is half as clever as Hodor , (think about that) although Wun Wun communicates verbally. 
 There is hardly any wildlife left on The Gift (a large tract of land) for Ghost (or anyone else) to hunt. 
 Queen Selyse wants to move from Eastwatch to the Nightfort “her husband’s new seat”. 
 The 2 dead men are being kept chained and under guard in ice-cells, and Jon hopes they rise so that they can study them. Perhaps he thinks they might be an early warning system: they might rise when the Others get close enough. 
 Mother Mole had a vision of ships taking them to the safety of Essos from Hardhome, so thousands of FreeFolk went there. 
 Hardhome was a town until it experienced an event not unlike the “doom of Valyria” 600 years ago, and was totally destroyed, with all inhabitants. It had never been reinhabited, except by “burning ghosts with a taste for blood” (p.609). These almost sound like “fire-wights”, the matching opposite for the wights raised by the Others. 
 Questions: 
 Where do you think Mother Mole gets her visions from? (We know from future chapters that they turn out to be remarkably accurate) 
 What do you think about Jon’s raven? 
 What do you think destroyed Hardhome? 
 What is at Hardhome now? 
 Posted in Jon Snow 
 Tagged A Song of Ice and Fire , ASOIAF , Jon Snow , Literary Analysis 
 Leave a comment 
 Jon 7 in A Dance With Dragons (pp.537-551) 
 Posted on April 27, 2015 May 7, 2015 by Lyanna Spearwife 
 Jon 7 (BoB 76, ADWD 36, pp 537-551) 
 Jon is full of good ideas: progressive thinking, innovative and practical planning for the future. He doesn’t seem to share these ideas with anyone, so they remain unknown, except to us. The phrase “leaders communicating their vision” springs to mind. Mayhaps if the men knew what he was planning they could better understand what a great leader they have. On the other hand, mayhaps they would be more sceptical until the plans are concretely achieved. Jon’s immediate need is “gold”: the funds to put these plans into action, the funds to feed the increased numbers of people at the Wall, when food is scarce throughout the country. 
 Two of the Free Folk had chosen to “take the black”, both men with children and grandchildren. Jon Snow had collaborated with Bowen Marsh to assign the new recruits to their roles: 3 Rangers (including the 2 Free Folk), a Builder & 2 Stewards. 
 Around noon, after 7 days of darkness and snow, Jon commands 10 rangers armed with dragonglass, to escort him and the new recruits to say their vows before the Old Gods in the Haunted Forest, North of the Wall, planning to return by midnight. Dolorous Edd warned him that it might be best for the Lord Commander to stay safe, but Jon arrogantly ignored that. Bowen Marsh also objected, arguing that the men could say their vows in the sept. Jon demonstrated his respect for personal freedom & his religious tolerance: “I do not tell men which god to worship. They were free to choose…with all the perils that entails.” (p.539) Jon also demonstrates that he does understand the importance of traditions to the Night’s Watch (sometimes it seems like he doesn’t): “The words matter, and so do these traditions. They bind us all together, highborn and low, young and old, base and noble. They make us brothers.” (p.539) Jon is clearly very attached to the men at the Wall: “Every name was graven on his heart. They were his men, his brothers.” (p.540) Joining these men gave Jon the opportunity for reciprocal relationships that his own family life had denied him: he had always been separated because of his “bastard” status. 
 Dolorous Edd observed that Ghost was going with Jon, but that he was not, and he congratulated Jon on his judgement: “A clever lord, you. Ghost’s the better choice.” Jon expressed his confidence in Ghost in response to Bowen Marsh’s reminders that seasoned rangers had not come back: “I have something they did not… Ghost .” (p.539) 
 Jon observed that Ghost loved rolling in fresh snow. Since little is irrelevant, perhaps this will mean something later. Once through the Wall, Ghost ran into the forest, hunting something which Jon could not see. Later, Jon muses that recently he feels like he and Ghost “are one, even awake” (p.543), although that doesn’t seem to be consistently the case. Perhaps Ghost projects things to Jon when it’s important? Later, when they are in the forest, Jon puts his arm around Ghost and literally sees through Ghost’s eyes: “When he looked across the grove at the woman with her child, the two greybeards, the Hornfoot man with his maimed feet, all he saw was men.” (p.546) 
 During their journey North, Iron Emmett and Jon discuss the issues at Castle Black arising from having wildling women living there. Although Jon had assigned them all to one tower, and he knew the 12 spearwives were capable of defending themselves and the younger girls, there were men who still thought their accommodation was (or should be) a brothel. Three of those men had been in ice cells since last night because of it. Jon tells Emmett that the women are to be relocated to their own Castle: Long Barrow, and “The look of mingled horror and delight that passed across Iron Emmett’s face was worth more than a sack of gold” when Jon told him that he would be their Commander. “What have I done to make you hate me so, my lord?” (p.541). He also assigned Dolorous Edd as the second in command (although he doesn’t seem to have told Edd yet), and Steward. This is probably a good choice for that group, but a bad choice for Jon. Dolorous Edd is one of the people who is familiar and comfortable for Jon, and Jon doesn’t realise how much he needs him. 
 Jon and Emmett also discuss Sigorn, Magnar of Thenn, and Halleck (Harma Dogshead’s brother) & their followers, who are not being so cooperative. Jon needs to open more castles, but can’t yet because of a lack of builders. 
 Jon thinks of Ygritte several times. “ I know nothing, Ygritte , he thought, and perhaps I never will .” (p.542) 
 At sunset they find a group of 9 Wildlings (including a giant and a child) sleeping inside a circle of 9 weirwood trees with faces, around a campfire. (It has been mentioned elsewhere that 9 is a significant number, and Robb’s crown had 9 points.) Jon and his men were prepared to fight, but hoping not to. Fortunately, Leathers, one of the FreeFolk who was to say his vows, was able to speak the Old Tongue to the Giant, and there was no fighting. 
 Jon learned that the FreeFolk group had been strangers to one another until they ended up in the Weirwood grove, after all those who were with them had died on the journey from the Wall, and these were now waiting to die in the presence of their gods. Some had already died where they lay. They had been afraid to go to the Wall because they heard that those who yielded had been burned. After privately cursing Melisandre, and reassuring these people, Jon invited them travel home with them to Castle Black. 
 While the men said their vows, Jon prayed silently. This is the first time we’ve seen him pray for Arya, now that he (falsely) knows that she is alive. As she actually is alive, perhaps this is an opportunity for the Old Gods to help her (assuming they can hear Jon’s thoughts). It would be interesting to know what is happening in Arya’s story at this time. According to this timeline , (from ASOIAF.Westeros.org) this is about a month after Arya started training at The House of Black and White, she is (or is about to become) “Cat of the Canals”, and about 3 weeks before she becomes “The Blind Girl”. 
 Returning to the Wall, they took the dead bodies as well, because Jon “[has] a use for them.” It was slow going, with 2 people per horse, a plodding Giant and a walking, wounded Thenn, who is afraid of horses. They were several hours late: it was almost dawn when they reached the Wall. The bodies were put into ice cells, and Leathers put in charge of the giant. The remaining FreeFolk were given medical care, food & clothes, and presumably: quarters to live in. 
 The first really good news Jon has had for a while came in a letter from Stannis. Jon’s advice had proven good: all the mountain clans had joined Stannis, as had Alysane Mormont, (united against their common foe) and Deepwood Motte was theirs. Stannis now had 5,000 men, as Northmen who had fled the Greyjoys and Boltons had come to join him. Further, Stannis pledged to save Arya if he could, and make her a better marriage than Ramsay, as well as stop Roose from having Winterfell. “Jon…could not help but feel a certain satisfaction.” (p.548) He also observed, however, that Winterfell was now just “the ghost of Winterfell”, with no Starks to defend it. 
 As Robb’s legitimised heir, Jon is actually the “King in the North, whose name is STARK”. Stannis is acting on Jon’s instructions, and Northmen are joining him. Do any of them, or even Lyanna Mormont, (her letter in Jon 1) know of Robb’s will? 
 This was really an incredibly successful day: Jon managed dissent from his advisers (Marsh and Edd), added 6 more people to their community (and surely a giant would be handy?), had new recruits become fully-fledged Men of The Watch, they all returned to the Wall alive, he gained the dead bodies for whatever they’re for, has the gratification that his advice and strategy was overwhelmingly successful for Stannis and the North, and Stannis was looking out for his ancestral home and favourite sister. This has to be the best day Jon Snow has ever had! Yet, sadly, it ends with Jon depressingly thinking that while he has largely achieved his childhood dream of leading heroes, “all he had were [distrust and unconquerable] doubts”. 
 Questions: 
 What on earth is Jon going to do with 2 frozen dead men? 
 Do you think Jon and Ghost really are functioning “as one”? 
 Why do you think Jon, Lord Commander of 19 castles, thousands of men, and successful adviser to King Stannis, is so doubtful of himself? 
 Posted in Jon Snow 
 Tagged A Song of Ice and Fire , ASOIAF , Jon Snow , Literary Analysis 
 Leave a comment 
 Post navigation 
 ← Older posts 
 Blog at WordPress.com. 
 asoiafanalysis 
 Create a free website or blog at WordPress.com. 
 Privacy & Cookies: This site uses cookies. By continuing to use this website, you agree to their use. 
To find out more, including how to control cookies, see here:
 Cookie Policy 
 Subscribe 
 Subscribed 
 asoiafanalysis 
 Sign me up 
 Already have a WordPress.com account? Log in now. 
 asoiafanalysis 
 Subscribe 
 Subscribed 
 Sign up 
 Log in 
 Report this content 
 View site in Reader 
 Manage subscriptions 
 Collapse this bar 
 Loading Comments... 
 Write a Comment... 
 Email (Required) 
 Name (Required) 
 Website 
 Design a site like this with WordPress.com Get started 
