 
 “I Rarely Remember a Book About Which I Have Had Such Violent Arguments” — W.H. Auden Reviews J.R.R. Tolkien – Biblioklept 
 Skip to content 
 Biblioklept 
 ☰ Menu 
 About 
 “I Rarely Remember a Book About Which I Have Had Such Violent Arguments” — W.H. Auden Reviews J.R.R. Tolkien 
 Posted on April 13, 2011 April 12, 2011 by Biblioklept 
 From the Oh, This Exists? Department — W.H. Auden’s 1956 New York Times review of J.R.R. Tolkien’s The Return of the King . It’s a fantastic review that defends Tolkien’s literary authenticity against his many haters, using Erich Auerbach’s groundbreaking work Mimesis as a central arguing point. Here’s Auden’s intro, but again, I recommend reading the whole review— 
 In “The Return of the King,” Frodo Baggins fulfills his Quest, the realm of Sauron is ended forever, the Third Age is over and J. R. R. Tolkien’s trilogy “The Lord of the Rings” complete. I rarely remember a book about which I have had such violent arguments. Nobody seems to have a moderate opinion: either, like myself, people find it a masterpiece of its genre or they cannot abide it, and among the hostile there are some, I must confess, for whose literary judgment I have great respect. A few of these may have been put off by the first forty pages of the first chapter of the first volume in which the daily life of the hobbits is described; this is light comedy and light comedy is not Mr. Tolkien’s forte. In most cases, however, the objection must go far deeper. I can only suppose that some people object to Heroic Quests and Imaginary Worlds on principle; such, they feel, cannot be anything but light “escapist” reading. That a man like Mr. Tolkien, the English philologist who teaches at Oxford, should lavish such incredible pains upon a genre which is, for them, trifling by definition, is, therefore, very shocking. 
 Share this: 
 Share on X (Opens in new window) 
 X 
 Share on Tumblr (Opens in new window) 
 Tumblr 
 Share on Reddit (Opens in new window) 
 Reddit 
 Share on Pinterest (Opens in new window) 
 Pinterest 
 Share on Facebook (Opens in new window) 
 Facebook 
 Share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window) 
 LinkedIn 
 Email a link to a friend (Opens in new window) 
 Email 
 Print (Opens in new window) 
 Print 
 Like Loading... 
 Related 
 Posted in Books , Literature , Writers Tagged Erich Auerbach , J. R. R. Tolkien , Lord of the Rings , Return of the King , Review , W. H. Auden 
 Published by Biblioklept 
 View all posts by Biblioklept 
 Post navigation 
 Previous Post Vampire — Edvard Munch Next Post Melville House Publishes Imre Kertész’s “Missing” Novel, Fiasco 
 4 thoughts on ““I Rarely Remember a Book About Which I Have Had Such Violent Arguments” — W.H. Auden Reviews J.R.R. Tolkien” 
 P.T. Smith 
 April 13, 2011 6:49 pm 
 Reply 
 Wonderful, thanks for this. It’s nice to see smart people backing up Tolkien, even though I frankly wouldn’t care much if smart people were tearing him down. This also serves as a nice little reminder that I need to read Mimesis, even if I am currently trying to avoid buying books. 
 Like Like 
 J.R.R. Tolkien Links | Biblioklept 
 January 3, 2014 10:39 am 
 Reply 
 […] “I Rarely Remember a Book About Which I Have Had Such Violent Arguments” — W.H. Auden Reviews … […] 
 Like Like 
 randomkhaos 
 January 4, 2014 12:29 pm 
 Reply 
 By any definition reading is ‘escapist’. Even shop manuals for mechanics and cookbooks can be said to be ‘escapist’. Reality is that which is, not that which is inside one’s head. What I noticed about readers of Mr. Tolkien’s stories is that they identified with the stories. That seems more than escapism. 
 Like Like 
 JunkChuck 
 November 23, 2015 8:40 pm 
 Reply 
 It takes an exquisite collision of cynicism and stunted imagination, fertilized by a heaping lump of grumpiness, to avoid being mesmerized by this story. That it engages me just as deeply as a 49-year-old man as it did when I first discovered it at the tender age of 13 speaks volumes. Of course, back then I skipped over the songs and poetry. No longer. 
 Like Like 
 Your thoughts? Cancel reply 
 Δ 
 This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. Learn how your comment data is processed. 
 Search Search 
 Search Search 
 Create a website or blog at WordPress.com 
 Comment 
 Reblog 
 Subscribe 
 Subscribed 
 Biblioklept 
 Join 28,297 other subscribers 
 Sign me up 
 Already have a WordPress.com account? Log in now. 
 Biblioklept 
 Subscribe 
 Subscribed 
 Sign up 
 Log in 
 Copy shortlink 
 Report this content 
 View post in Reader 
 Manage subscriptions 
 Collapse this bar 
 %d 
