 
 Tolkien: Medieval and Modern: Tolkien's Use of Poetry and Prose 
Tolkien: Medieval and Modern
 Pages
 Home 
 Syllabus 2026 
 The Forge of Tolkien 
 Further Reading 
 Syllabus 2011-2023 
 Friday, April 18, 2014 
Tolkien's Use of Poetry and Prose 
I feel comfortable assuming that all of us bloggers and
bibliophiles agree that Tolkien really nailed it on the style front in the Lord
of the Rings. His style (flexible, clear, simple) feels so effortless, it is
almost possible to believe Tolkien when he says that the stories of Middle
Earth simply popped into his head and fell onto paper fully formed. However, as
we've come to know, Tolkien never put anything on paper without considering the
appropriateness of each syllable. His clear and intimate style, the only one
that the LOTR could have been written in (not, as mentioned in class, because
of Tolkien's inability to write in other ways, but rather because no other
style would have felt 'authentic'), was the result of years of experimentation;
irrefutable proof of the commonplace 'practice makes perfect'. Our discussion
on Wednesday covered a lot of ground (as style is the most important element in
crafting a story) but what struck me most, and what I'd like to reflect on
here, was the (inter)relationship of poetry and prose, and how Tolkien used various
styles of both to convey the broader cultural characteristics and individual
personalities of the hobbits, men, dwarves, elves, and wizards of Middle Earth.
As LeGuin says, the style of a piece IS the piece; without
it, there's nothing but a plot. Therefore, the poetry he developed so
determinedly must be integral to the success of the storytelling. But I
wondered, as I read it (being, admittedly, not a huge poetry lover), if it is
actually anything more than window dressing. How necessary was the inclusion of
poetry? Would LOTR have been the same book, or had the same depth and power, with
out it?
Tolkien's style changed a great deal over the course of his
writing career: Brian Rosebury, in his chapter 'Fiction and Poetry', traces the
evolution of Tolkien's writing style from 1914-1973, a period of time that he divides
into thirds: 1914-1937, 1937-1955, and 1955-1973. The first period,
corresponding to his entrance and early years in Academia, was mostly taken up
by academic work, but much of his personal stories and poetry have survived and
been published. However, as Rosebury ably demonstrates in his chapter, these
writings just aren't very good. His style is not yet his own: his poems are all
imitations of the nineteenth century romantics, like Keats or early Tennyson
(Rosebury, 91). His prose uses 'a sustained archaism' that harked back to
William Morris (Rosebury, 95). Although he was still searching for his own
style, it is clear that he experimented and wrote in prose and poetry in equal
measure, and considered them equally important in developing the mythology and
history of his secondary universe; they were both necessary in equal measures for
completing a unified piece of writing. He polished his prose and poetry in
tandem, and when Tolkien finally achieved the 'intimate paternal story-telling'
style in his composition of the LOTR, his poetry was no longer conventional
pastiche and his prose no longer weighed down by impossibly heavy archaism
(Rosebury, 117). 
Tolkien's full command of his mature prose style is evident,
as we read in Shippey's excerpt, in the Council of Elrond, where he smoothly
shifts between styles to characterize and contextualize each of the speakers. Gloin
(and by extension dwarves) is curt, which readers in our primary reality know
by his use of short, broken sentences and apposition (Shippey, 71). Bilbo and
Frodo speak little, but when they do, it is in simple rhymes ( all that is gold does not glitter…) and
quick exclamations that contain Old Gamgees rustic simplicity with none of his
(as Shippey calls it, 72) stupidity; they are clearly hobbits of 'book
learning'. Aragorn slips easily between speaking like Elendil's heir and
Strider, and Boromir adopts a lofty 'relatively Elrondian' pattern of speech
(Shippey, 72). These speakers are further characterized later in the text by
the way in which they recite poetry; or perhaps, Tolkien continues his work of
characterization by electing to use poetic styles that complement the prose.* Gimli
(who, as the son of Gloin and a dwarf, speaks in the same taciturn, appositive
way as his father) chants the tale of Moria while the fellowship rests in its halls.
His poetry is simple, curt, much like the speech of his father in Elrond's
hall: it is a tragic historical ballad composed of pared down rhyming couplets.
After his speech is done Gimli falls silent: 'Having sung his song he would say
no more' (LOTR, 317). Like Gloin's careful and guarded manner of telling the
account of the visitor from Mordor, Gimli is a closed book: he says his peace
and no more. Aragorn, entertaining the hobbits at Weathertop, sings the lay of
Beren and Luthien; after which, he proceeds to repeat the story in straight
prose (LOTR 193-4). When he enters Rohan, Aragorn sings a heroic Rohirrim poem to
Legolas, Gimli, and Gandalf, and once again, upon completion, explains plainly
that 'thus spoke a forgotten poet (…) recalling how tall and fair was Eorl the
Young (…)' (LOTR, 508). 
Each of these poems completes the characterization: each
character has a poetic style appropriate to his (there are no hers) history and
culture: Gimli's poem is brief and stern, deeply proud of Dwarvish history.
Aragorn's poetic style fluctuates: he can recite Elvish (high) lays and knows
the poetry of fellow men. His recitations, and further explanations, have him
moving between The King and Strider just like he does in his conversation with
Boromir at the Council. The poetry is not simply an instrument of pleasure or
entertainment. The above examples were all chanted (and in Aragorn's case
explained in prose) as efforts to edify 'foreign' people. The hobbits cannot
understand what Moria means to Gimli and all dwarves, and he can only explain
it in a dwarvish style. The poetry, thus, appears to complement the prose; it
was a necessary (as well as effective) stylistic choice on Tolkien's part. 
It seems that poetry might also be interchangeable to the
prose, and that this interchangeability works as long as both are written in
corresponding styles. When the men of Rohan leave Dunharrow for Gondor, they
leave in silence 'without horn or harp or music of men's voices' (LOTR, 803).
Their progress, however, is described in lovely alliterative verse (Old English
style) before the story commences in prose again. The alliterative verse and the
heroic-style prose that follows it are interchangeable, because Tolkien can
alternate between their styles without the reader sensing a break in the story.
Ultimately, it seems to me that the stylistic variation,
between poetry and prose, is of ultimate importance in the success of the LOTR.
The two styles are sturdy enough to carry all of the different cultures of
Middle Earth inside them, but flexible enough to differentiate between these
cultural differences authentically. The interactive use of poetry and prose gives
depth to the secondary universe; the historicity and culture that poetic and
dialogue styles indicate don't recall explicitly our primary reality, but they
do remind one of a lived cultural experience. 
* I'm just drawing from the readings we did for class,
although I'm sure this experiment could be extended throughout the books!
-mcs
By
 "Tolkien: Medieval and Modern" 
at
 April 18, 2014 
 Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest 
Labels:
 Style 
 3 comments:
 Blaine Talbut 
said...
I'm not sure I believe that "stylistic variation, between poetry and prose, is of ultimate importance in the success of the LOTR." If the poetry serves only to further the characterization of Tolkien's men and elves and dwarves, I'm sure it's not necessary: we already knew, before Gimli's ballad, that dwarves were curt, stout, and proud, and we know that Aragorn straddled the line between men and elves through many ways other than his songs: his ability to converse with elves, his love of Arwen, and so on. Indeed, the very fact that, as you point out, "poetry might be interchangeable to the prose," suggests that it is not necessary for this purpose at all. 
In fact, I don't think we're asking the right question when we ask, "How necessary was the inclusion of poetry? Would LOTR have been the same book, or had the same depth and power, with out it?" The Lord of the Rings remains a stirring tale of heroism and faith and the epic potential of mankind even if, as Professor Fulton Brown pointed out many readers do, you skip over the poems and songs completely. Moreover, asking a scholar of Old English what alliterative verse has to contribute to a prose novel--or asking a devout Catholic what a psalm has to contribute to a work of fiction--seems badly off-base. We know that Tolkien's project was to provide England with a legendary cultural history. But legends are neither novels nor historical narratives, whichever you want to call the Lord of the Rings. They are songs and poems and chants, and these have their own value. I think a better question to ask would be: "How necessary is the novel, The Lord of the Rings, to the poetry that appears within it?"
By way of answer, I'd like to suggest that the book does for the poems and songs much the same thing it does for "Hey Diddle Diddle" and other cultural artifacts that appear in it. In fact, in their similarity to real-world poetic traditions, I think many of the poems that appear might qualify as cultural artifacts of that sort. Consider the eagle's psalm on page 963. It is joyous and uplifting, but at the point when it appears we have already had an entire chapter of joy and lifting-up: Frodo and Sam were saved by the eagles and cheered for by a great host of men, and Aragorn himself bowed before them. The psalm could be omitted entirely without the eucatastrophe being any less complete. At the same time, it is because we have already experienced the eucatastrophe of Tolkien's story that we are able to appreciate the psalm in its fullest: the joy and fervor of the song is not lost on us, who have ventured with Frodo and Sam into the depths of fear and doubt and emerged again the better for it. It is the story that deepens the effect of the psalm, not vice-versa. Tolkien's book teaches us to appreciate the power of a great psalm: and if, the next time we hear a hymn we think of such eucatastrophe, or the next time we read alliterative verse we think of rolling fields meeting stern mountains, the book will have served its use. I think it's precisely in this way that Tolkien succeeds in connecting the secondary and primary worlds.
April 18, 2014 at 4:18 PM
 "Tolkien: Medieval and Modern" 
said...
This is a wonderful analysis of the ways in which Tolkien's poetry contributes to his characterizations (in your words, "Tolkien continues his work of characterization by electing to use poetic styles that complement the prose."). Thank you for the brief account of Rosebury's argument, which supports your point that the prose and the poetry work in tandem--of course they do, for they were developed in tandem! I very much like your reading of the poetic recitation styles of the hobbits, dwarves, and men. 
I too was one of the people who skipped the psalms and ballads and rhymes when I young, and I have found it to be an entirely different and richer experience to read it all. I agree that even beyond characterization there is something in the poems that resonates with our primary reality--as you say beautifully,"the historicity and culture that poetic and dialogue styles indicate don't recall explicitly our primary reality, but they do remind one of a lived cultural experience."
--Jenna
April 20, 2014 at 9:17 PM
 Liz B 
said...
Like you, I am not a huge fan of poetry. The first time I read Lord of the Rings, I skipped over a lot of the poetry and songs because I just wanted to read for the plot. It wasn't until I went back and read the songs and poems that I realized how important they were to the book. Tolkien uses these to tie things into our world (Hey Diddle Diddle example) and to tell things about the different cultures. The first time I read the books I also didn't pick up on the subtle differences in the way the races talk, but once I read Shippey, it was pretty apparent. Tolkien is really successful in adopting a bunch of different voices to evoke aspects of his characters without having to explicitly state them. Even if like me, you don't initially pick up on them, they definitely influence your thoughts about the characters. Tolkien's style is also pretty hard to imitate. I had to write some small limericks for my final project in a Tolkien-esque style and I definitely struggled to be as clever as he is! 
ECB
June 3, 2014 at 2:22 PM
 Post a Comment 
 Newer Post 
 Older Post 
 Home 
Subscribe to:
 Post Comments (Atom) 
 About this course
"Tolkien: Medieval and Modern"
 J.R.R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings is one of the most popular works of imaginative literature of the twentieth century. This course seeks to understand its appeal by situating Tolkien's creation within the context of Tolkien's own work as both artist and scholar alongside its medieval sources and modern parallels. Themes to be addressed include the problem of genre and the uses of tradition, the nature of history and its relationship to place, the activity of creation and its relationship to language, beauty, evil and power, the role of monsters in imagination and criticism, the twinned challenges of death and immortality, fate and free will, and the interaction between the world of "faerie" and religious belief. 
 View my complete profile 
 But my horn shall be exalted like that of the unicorn
 Themes
 Creativity and Free Will I: Aulë and Fëanor 
 (51) 
 Creativity and Free Will II: Númenor 
 (41) 
 Creativity and Free Will III: Frodo and the Ring 
 (47) 
 Death and Immortality I: Elves and Men 
 (55) 
 Death and Immortality II: Men and Hobbits 
 (51) 
 Fantasy and Fairy Tale 
 (21) 
 Fragments and Elf-Friends 
 (28) 
 History and Place 
 (50) 
 Jewels and Trees I 
 (42) 
 Jewels and Trees II 
 (42) 
 Language and Dreams 
 (48) 
 Language and Names 
 (46) 
 Monsters and Critics 
 (51) 
 Style 
 (40) 
 The Meaning of Life I: Worship 
 (49) 
 The Meaning of Life II: Cult 
 (19) 
 The Music of Creation 
 (51) 
 Visits to Middle-earth
 Followers
 Nolwë ola, ar cuila lohta
Course designed and taught by Rachel Fulton Brown 
 Associate Professor of History 
 The University of Chicago 
 Search This Blog
 Upon an instrument of ten strings
 Blog Archive
 ► 
2026
 (78) 
 ► 
June
 (1) 
 ► 
May
 (36) 
 ► 
April
 (37) 
 ► 
March
 (4) 
 ► 
2023
 (68) 
 ► 
May
 (39) 
 ► 
April
 (25) 
 ► 
March
 (4) 
 ► 
2020
 (105) 
 ► 
June
 (14) 
 ► 
May
 (54) 
 ► 
April
 (36) 
 ► 
March
 (1) 
 ► 
2017
 (120) 
 ► 
June
 (1) 
 ► 
May
 (60) 
 ► 
April
 (56) 
 ► 
March
 (3) 
 ▼ 
2014
 (218) 
 ► 
June
 (26) 
 ► 
May
 (110) 
 ▼ 
April
 (82) 
 Creation Myth and the Canon: What It Means to be S... 
 A Concern About Hobbits 
 Ainulindalë is to Elves as Genesis is to Men 
 Literalism and the Problem of Evil 
 The Origin of Evil and If God Is Good 
 Religious Fragmentation in Tolkien's Legendarium 
 Relative realities, framing, and religion 
 Why Music? 
 String Theory: Creation, Music, and Humanity 
 Eru and Eden: How Tolkien's Creation Myth Exemplif... 
 Fragments from Wednesday's Discussion 
 True Names: A Counterexample 
 Some Thoughts on Languages 
 Dream Tongue 
 The Creations of the Valar and Valarin 
 Name and Language in Tolkien 
 Tom is the Master 
 The Sub Creative Art of Language 
 "O felix peccatum Babel!" and the Function of Lang... 
 The Aesthetics of Language 
 Orc-language and why it is corrupt 
 Asterisk History 
 Names and History: the Development of Language 
 The Role of Place and History in the Creation of t... 
 The Past Recedes 
 History, Fantasy and Historical Relativism 
 Between Reality and History in Time, Mythology 
 When the Value of Myth and History Lies in Action ... 
 The History Within Myths 
 An Anachronistic History 
 Seeds and Gardeners: Patterns of Characterization ... 
 History as Myth and a Few Other Things As Well 
 Giving the Ordinary Meaning 
 Historical Fantasy, and Fantastical History: The S... 
 Holly and Ruin 
 Taking Root: Tolkien and the Land 
 How Can History Be Real If Our Myths Aren't Real 
 The World Is Flat, and How We Can Avoid It: Farmer... 
 Translation, Style, and Historical Narrative 
 A Far-off Gleam of Evangelium 
 To Make a Soul: Tolkien and Variations of Speech i... 
 A Hobbit Book: The Simplicity of Style 
 Self-Stylin': Gandalf the Grey 
 Tolkien's Mastery of Words 
 The Style of the Elf-Friend 
 Tolkien's Use of Poetry and Prose 
 Tolkien's Style: Fluidity between the Humble and t... 
 Translating the Red Book of Westmarch 
 Poetry, Peoples, and Memory 
 The Uses of Poetry in Lord of the Rings 
 On Devices, Dreams, and Dumbledore, or, "Of course... 
 The Importance of Machine 
 Spaceships: On Travel Between Primary and Secondar... 
 Paths to a Tangible Legend 
 The Machine that Conquered Time 
 The Author in the Work 
 Tolkien and Time Travel 
 Private languages and Communication in Tolkien's L... 
 Dream-Language Interactions across Tolkien's Work 
 Breaching the Secondary Reality 
 Reincarnation in Tolkien 
 Fragments Within the Works of Tolkien 
 Falling Asleep Again: Frodo's Experience 
 Atlantis and Atalantie 
 Language and People 
 The Route to the Lost Road: Tolkien's Application ... 
 The Reality of the Imagined 
 Whence and why a story? Art and Allegory in Tolkie... 
 Immortality through Fragmentation 
 Our Need for Elf-friends 
 The Inevitable Homecoming 
 Keepers of Faerie 
 The Agency and Destiny of Elf Friends 
 Building Bridges to Faerie 
 The End of the Story 
 On Fragments, Soup, and Rapunzel 
 Elf-friends and Credibility 
 Tom Bombadil and Fantasy as Reason 
 Rissik and the Literary Value of Creation 
 Meditations 
 Our Right: Used and Misused 
 Who Are Fairy Stories Written For? Come, Tom Bomba... 
 ► 
2011
 (176) 
 ► 
June
 (9) 
 ► 
May
 (74) 
 ► 
April
 (89) 
 ► 
March
 (4) 
 In the works of thy hands, I shall rejoice
 Guides to Arda
 Ansible 
 Elvish Linguistic Fellowship 
 Family Tree of the Tolkien Legendarium 
 Glǽmscrafu 
 Internet Sacred Text Archive 
 J.R.R. Tolkien and WWI 
 LotR Project 
 Planet Tolkien 
 The (Other) Tolkien Professor 
 The Cambridge Tolkien Society 
 The Catholic Imagination of J.R.R. Tolkien 
 The DM of the Rings 
 The Forge of Tolkien 
 The Grey Havens 
 The One Ring 
 The Tolkien Estate 
 The Tolkien Meta-FAQ 
 The Tolkien Music List 
 The Tolkien Shop 
 Tolkien Collecting Resources 
 Tolkien Collection, Marquette University 
 Tolkien Gateway 
 Tolkien Library 
 Tolkien Sarcasm Page 
 Tolkien Society 
 Tolkien's The Notion Club Papers 
 Tolkienian Fonts for Windows 
 Useful Elvish Phrases 
Images from the Stuttgart Psalter, Stuttgart, Württembergische Landesbibliothek, Cod.bibl.fol. 23. Theme images by caracterdesign . Powered by Blogger .
 