 
 In Class with Brandon Sanderson - by Heba Hallak 
 The Humanities Notebook Subscribe Sign in In Class with Brandon Sanderson A practical guide to the 'Writing Science Fiction and Fantasy' course Heba Hallak Apr 15, 2026 16 9 4 Share “I would bet that there are a million people in the world who want to write a book. And I would bet that less than 1% of them do. If you finish a novel, you are among the elite, and you are my colleague.” This is how best-selling author Brandon Sanderson parted with one of his classrooms at Brigham Young University (BYU) last year. It was a day in April as today is, and several young writers sat for the final session of Writing Science Fiction and Fantasy . While it’s likely that some of the students were only there for course credit, or for the prestige of attending a famous novelist’s lectures, or to satisfy a casual curiosity about the craft of storytelling, others were there out of passion—passion and ambition. They wanted to break into the literary world and had chosen to learn the basics from someone who has done it (and done it well). Sanderson does not sugarcoat it. In fact, he opens and closes the course with the same acknowledgement: making a living as a SF&F author nowadays is not impossible, but it is seriously challenging. The market is too crowded, it’s become harder to sound original, and publishers are pickier than ever. “But I’m also here to inspire,” he adds. “It can be done. It is not a one-in-a-million shot […] You can do it. And if you can’t control the market (which none of us can), what you can control is the satisfaction you get from writing, getting better with every story, building good habits, and being proud of the things you create.” Writing to sell, however, is not enough. You’re allowed to want this (and most of us do), but it must not be the sole reason you’re writing. Sanderson claims that if someone from the future approaches you this very moment and says, “Look, you’re never going to publish. However, your friends and family will very much enjoy the books you’ll write. Do you still want to pursue this?” your answer should be yes. It should be yes. A thousand times over. Whether or not you like him and his fiction doesn’t change the fact that Sanderson has been doing the writing community good service. Every lecture from his Writing Science Fiction and Fantasy (Spring 2025) course is available on his YouTube channel, free of charge, with four extra FAQ videos exclusive to those watching from home. The course provides an extensive exploration of four major topics: plot theory , characterization , worldbuilding , and publishing . But it feels less like a formal classroom and more like a sit-in with a friend who just happens to be a successful novelist. Sanderson is quick-witted and charismatic, his sense of humor both lightening the atmosphere and making complex concepts digestible. He is also humble in how he conveys his knowledge. Through anecdotes from his early days, he lays bare the difficulties of the craft, acknowledges his past mistakes, and offers genuine advice. His instruction is rather detailed (I can’t remember how many times the poor guy picks up his water bottle while speaking!) but purposeful. Every idea contributes something new. I admit I haven’t read any of his works, but the enthusiasm he displays in these lectures has convinced me to pick up a novel or two of his in my next bookstore visit (Sanderson fans: where do you suggest I begin?). Writing Science Fiction and Fantasy is a part of my personal curriculum this year. For several weeks, I attended each session from the comfort of my sofa and wrote comprehensive notes on every main idea—and this is what this post is. Below is a compendium of study notes; it may come as a useful resource for those intending to start the course themselves, or as a thorough summary for those interested in the learning outcomes but unable to commit to the entirety of the series. A short notice before we begin : although the course targets speculative fiction, much of the advice Sanderson offers is applicable to other literary genres. I have also found that some of the writing tips may not suit everyone, for writers are diverse not in just what they create but also in how they go about their creating. These tips are what have worked for Sanderson over the course of his career. You are free to disagree with him, just as you are free to give his methods a try. With that said, happy learning! 📚 Sanderson in the final lecture, An Ending and a Beginning (April 2025) For more on creative writing, subscribe to The Humanities Notebook ! Subscribe Plot theory basics → What is, after all, a plot? A plot is not a sequence of events; it is what happens to characters emotionally as events unfold. It functions to provide conflict and force development into the characters as they struggle with internal or external factors. Plotting involves thinking of the three Ps: promises , progress , and payoff . A promise is any expectation the story establishes in the reader’s mind about what kind of experience they will have—this includes tone, genre, character arcs, central conflicts, and thematic direction. From the very start, readers are likely to ask themselves, “What kind of story is this, and what am I going to get out of it?” This is why these expectations are set early on through elements such as the opening scene, setting, character goals, and narrative voice, and they function as an implicit agreement that these elements will matter and be meaningfully addressed as the story evolves. Sanderson offers two examples: George R. R. Martin naming his viewpoint character Bran Stark in the first chapter of A Game of Thrones is a tone promise. The name Stark implies a bleak and grim mood that remains consistent throughout the novel. In J.R.R. Tolkien’s The Fellowship of the Ring , the opening chapter sets up a conflict that later intensifies: the contrast between the significance of the quest (the destruction of the One Ring) and the perceived incapability of person entrusted with it (a hobbit). Progress is the development of these promises across the narrative. It entails deepening conflicts, complicating character goals, and expanding the story’s universe in ways that keep the readers engaged while still aligning with the initial expectations. Obstacles and plot twists fall under this category, but they must exist to contribute to or reinforce the original promises rather than distract from them. A payoff refers to a satisfying fulfillment of the story’s promises, whereby the expectations set earlier are resolved in a way that feels both surprising and inevitable. It occurs near the climax or resolution, delivering emotional or plot-based closure that justifies the reader’s investment and makes earlier setups feel purposeful. An illustration of The Fellowship (as found on Pinterest) While working on progress , ensure that every obstacle you add into the plot does one (or more) of these things: Force growth into a character. Verify some knowledge previously attained, or show that the character has learned something new. Demonstrate a failure. This can be either that the character is not yet ready to overcome a problem, or that they have discovered a new difficulty within that problem. Introduce a new narrative element (a character, location, skill, and so on). Writing an obstacle that does not serve any of those purposes and is there just for the sake of it is not recommended, as it can easily derail the reader’s attention from the central plot and unnecessarily lengthen the story. Sanderson swears by a particular method for narrative escalation: the Yes, but— versus No, and — technique. At the end of every chapter or section you write, ask yourself, “Has my character achieved their goal?” Your answer should be either, “Yes, but some complication has happened along the way, which has in turn brought a new problem into the spotlight,” OR “No, and some complication has happened along the way, which has added on top of the first problem another problem.” The purpose of escalation is to make matters worse and worse for the characters—and this technique does just that. Depending on how the story progresses, promises made earlier can be edited and changed. New promises can also be made in later chapters or sections—as long as there remains enough space for them to be explored and fulfilled. → Are popular plot structures (such as The Hero’s Journey, Save the Cat, and the Three-Act Structure) recommended? They can be useful, but do not over-rely on them. When the structure begins to feel rigid, allowing little flexibility, such that you begin following its every instruction even when it doesn’t serve or suit your story anymore, you should discard it. Opt for what works for your story, not what someone else (no matter how experienced and qualified) says might work. A concern you might have while following a popular plot structure is that your story will sound ‘tropey.’ But Sanderson insists that all stories have tropes. Avoiding them altogether can be difficult and ultimately harm your story. Think of how Shakespeare’s Hamlet and Disney’s The Lion King are essentially the same tale, revolving around a similar revenge-of-blood trope. But people hardly see them as one and the same, don’t they? This is because they possess distinct setting and characterization, allowing each to feel fresh and original. Plot, argues Sanderson, is actually the hardest aspect of a story to innovate—and one doesn’t always have to. A story with a familiar plot but well-written characters can still be a good one; inversely, a story with an original plot but uninteresting, clichéd characters is often a bad one. To figure out which plot structure works best for you, consume a variety of books and films whose plot adheres to the structure you’re interested in. Notice what attracts you and what doesn’t. Study what previous writers have done and ask yourself what else you can do with it. Only then will you be able to make different combinations that cater to your character arcs and storylines. Hamlet’s father appears as a ghost (photo by Getty) A last note on tropes: do not be afraid to transition from one trope to another as the tale unfolds, but make sure you do it in a way that makes sense. For example, in the 2019 film Knives Out (a personal favorite of mine!), the trope changes from whodunit to cat-and-mouse halfway through. As in, we find out who the murderer is, but then switch to their perspective as they avoid getting discovered and caught. The transition is done smoothly. In the end, it comes down to trying. Try different combinations of tropes and structures until you find the one that serves your purposes best. You will fail several times before succeeding. Characterization essentials → What makes a main character compelling? A captivating protagonist possesses, in varying degrees, three core qualities: proactivity , relatability , and capability . Proactivity refers to their ability to move the story by making decisions and executing them, even if the decisions are wrong and the motion is really a regression. Readers tend to bond with proactive characters because they are the ones making the story happen; whereas they get frustrated with those that are obstacles, slowing or stalling progress. Proactivity is, in other words, readability. To make a character proactive is to make them want something. Kurt Vonnegut has famously given this advice before: “When I used to teach creative writing, I would tell the students to make their characters want something right away—even if it’s only a glass of water. Characters paralyzed by the meaninglessness of modern life still have to drink water from time to time.” ( Advice to Writers , as collected by Jon Winokur) Your character may desire multiple conflicting things, and that is not a problem. This in fact makes them more human and therefore more interesting. Whether it is a glass of water or conquering the universe that they desire, it is this desire, and any else they may have, that should inform their actions. If your protagonist is initially not proactive (i.e., if they resist the call to adventure), you should make them so in a different area—such as in their domestic or family life. Have them care so deeply about this other area, until there inevitably comes a time when their proactivity there results in proactivity in the impending adventure. Sanderson uses Disney’s Mulan to illustrate this point. She doesn’t start out wanting to go to war and save the kingdom; rather, Mulan is only a young woman who loves her father. But when she realizes that she’ll lose him if he fights, she jumps in his place and partakes in battle. Her proactivity in the family leads to her proactivity in something bigger. Relatability , on the other hand, refers to making a character likeable, such that readers are able to step into their shoes and care about them. This is especially important in sci-fi and fantasy. Some readers tend to feel detached because of a story’s futuristic and fantastical elements; a relatable character, however, gives them someone or something to stay and root for. Sanderson suggests several ways to make a character relatable, including: Making them liked by other characters. Giving them a moral compass that aligns with the morality of most readers. Giving them flaws they are aware of and aspire to rectify. Ideally, character flaws should not disturb the story’s progress too much, but should still be given the time and space to be explored—and, in the best cases, overcome. Sanderson warns that flaws should not make a character’s whole personality; they should have aspirations and motivations beyond fixing them. Lastly, and most obviously: making them feel and do things the majority of the audience can relate to. Have you ever asked yourself what business Garfield the Cat has hating Mondays? He’s a cat. All days are the same for him. But he’s allowed to hate Mondays because most people do—and that makes him, perhaps, one of the most relatable feline characters in popular culture. The third quality, capability , refers to characters doing things competently. High capability in several areas is not advisable, as it lowers relatability (your character can’t be good at everything!). What Sanderson recommends is having them be skilled at one or two things, but poorly informed and trained in something else that matters to the story. The former can move the story forward, whereas the latter acts as a flaw or limitation that stalls progress—but also humanizes the character. The flaws should generally balance the strengths out. A character is expected to move up and down the scale in the aforementioned qualities, making up their internal arc. No character should possess each in full. They may be very proactive, somewhat relatable, but incapable of most things. The intensity of those qualities is something you decide and change as the story advances. Your character’s desire (or motivation) is interconnected with two other matters: their personality and values. Motivation asks, “What does this character want?” whereas personality asks, “ How do they express what they want?” and values, “What is this character willing to do or give up to get what they want?” To answer these questions, Sanderson turns to backstory. Establishing and understanding his character’s history allows him to figure out what he can use to inform their decisions and shape their attitudes. This history does not need to be tragic, by the way. Once he moves on from backstory, Sanderson likes to make (or find) himself a dossier, i.e., a questionnaire that explores aspects of the character’s personality that he might not have thought of before. Different versions of these questionnaires are available online. An example is pictured below: Taken from Ingrid’s Notes (find the rest of it here ) Lists such as these not only help you pinpoint what makes every one of your characters distinct and unique, but also gets you thinking as they would—so much so that, imagining them in a particular scenario, you can anticipate how they would respond. Sanderson claims that the best stories happen when your protagonist’s motivations change as they discover information and go through experiences. But in order to be realistic and believable, such change should happen slowly. Allow your character to have their values tested again and again, and even acquire new values, until their motivation begins to change. This change can be negative as well as positive; in the case of the former, the character may acquire a new goal that is detrimental to who they are. Bilbo Baggins of The Hobbit demonstrates a change of motivation. Before his grand adventure, all he wants to do is stay home and taste cheese. After he’s forced out of the comfort of his hole and thrown into a life-threatening quest, he realizes he loves adventuring. He ends up writing a book about what he experienced and desiring more of it. New value acquired (liking adventures) and thus a new motivation (wanting to go on more of them). → What should I consider when creating side characters? When it comes to side characters, quirks are usually what show up first—and what readers remember. Quirks can be physical descriptors (like being the only character wearing eyeglasses) or personality-based (such as liking a particular thing, or repeating a certain phrase or expression). One way to know whether a quirk is working is to check whether it reinforces a theme or character arc in one way or another. Adding quirks for the sake of quirkiness is not something Sanderson advises. It can be distracting (at best) and awkward (at worst). To flesh out background characters and give them depth, either shift to their viewpoint or have them have a heart-to-heart with the protagonist, through which the readers get to understand them better and figure out why they are the way they are. But take caution when switching viewpoints, because the moment you do, you are allowing the character in question to be empathized with. If said character is a villain you do not want your readers to empathize with, avoid writing from their perspective. Instead, keep the readers wondering—and that may be a scary kind of wonder or an inviting one, depending on how you present this villain and on the character arc you intend them to have. Viewpoint is actually a form of characterization. You need to make sure that there is a contrast in the way each character thinks of the world and people around them, such that when one of them describes something or someone, you do not need to ask who’s talking or search for a name—you just know it from the way they’re describing it. Each character needs to have a voice that is unique to themselves. In any given chapter, deciding which character’s viewpoint to use can be tricky. There are two rules of thumb Sanderson relies on for this: Going for the character who is taking the actions, the one with the highest investment and emotional stakes. Ensuring that the first name he mentions in any particular chapter or scene is the character whose perspective he’s using for that chapter or scene. Regardless of whether it is a main or side character you’re creating, there is one crucial reminder to keep to: do not employ and perpetuate stereotypes. Authenticity should always be your goal—so do the legwork. In addition to reading, Sanderson likes to watch videos that deliver first-person accounts of specific experiences. For example, if he’s creating a character who is diabetic, he would find some of those videos that go, “I’m diabetic. Here’s what most people get wrong about my condition”—that is, if he cannot find a diabetic person to talk to in real time. On worldbuilding well Of the three core aspects of storytelling in SF&F, worldbuilding is the least important. A story with a strong plot and compelling characterization but weak worldbuilding can still be, according to Sanderson, a good story. In other words, worldbuilding should be done in service to plot and character. Fantasy features a key worldbuilding element: magic. In any given narrative, the magic system is either hard or soft (or a mixture of both). A hard magic system is one in which the reader understands the rules of the magic, which are internally consistent, and the story revolves in some way around the characters mastering those rules to their advantage, often turning it into a new branch of science. A soft magic system, on the other hand, is a system in which the reader doesn’t—and can’t—know all the rules. It is a system where a sense of wonder or horror accompanies the use of something magical. It’s a system that has no internal logic, and whose results you can’t anticipate. Most stories create magic systems that fall somewhere in between. It’s more of a spectrum than an either-or situation. The Lord of the Rings is a good display of both kinds at work. The One Ring is hard magic, because the rules associated with it are established from the very beginning: it makes you invisible when worn, but it corrupts you, and while wearing it Sauron and his followers can detect you; and if it falls in Sauron’s hands, the world comes to an end. But Gandalf, as both a character and narrative tool, represents soft magic. We don’t know what exactly he is, how his magic works, and what the ramifications of his magic are. Sometimes his magic complicates the plot (ex. he saves the Fellowship from the Balrog, but falls, which causes said Fellowship to shatter) and sometimes serves it. That is precisely the power of soft magic systems: you know little about it, and the most important aspect, which is the ramifications, remains vague. In a hard magic system, when presenting the rules to the readers, be careful not to info-dump. Don’t give too much away at once at the risk of spoiling the story; however, don’t withhold too much, either. The trick to finding the right balance lies in conveying information to the readers in a way that doesn’t make them feel that information is being conveyed. You can do this by ensuring that there is something else happening in the scene besides the conveying of the information; ensure an action is happening, and while it does, a rule or two gets presented (through or alongside it). That would show a little of the magic at play while educating the readers of its rules and conventions. An example I can think of is the scene in Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban where Hermione and Harry use the Time Turner. Harry has no clue how it works, and Hermione doesn’t bother explaining—neither to him nor the audience. They are pressed for time and need to act, and so we are forced to see how the unstable magic of the device works rather than hear it. Information is conveyed while action takes place. While designing his own magic systems, Sanderson relies on three laws he refers to as the three laws of magic . You don’t necessarily have to follow them, but they act as rules of thumb that facilitate his own brainstorming. They go accordingly: The first law : your ability to solve problems in a satisfying way with magic is directly proportional to how well said reader understands such magic. The second law : flaws are inherently more interesting than powers. Instead of focusing too much on creating ‘cool’ and innovative magic, focus on creating ‘cool’ limitations that hinder the characters’ use of such magic. The limitations may be of the characters themselves, of the setting, or of the nature of the magic system. Characters will be more compelling in what they cannot or cannot let themselves do. What are the costs of using this magic (this can be economic, natural, spiritual, physical, or psychological)? Does the character overcome this limitation? If yes, how? If not, what then? Remember that some limitations may not be solvable at all. The third law : before adding something new (to the magic system, or plot, or setting, or characterization), ask yourself if there’s more you can do with what you already have. Ensure everything that already exists in your world is fleshed out before making additions—i.e., make sure your story is not an ocean one inch deep. Concurrently with magic systems, Sanderson brainstorms for setting. This has two dimensions: the physical and the cultural. Physical setting refers to all the things that would still exist in the world if sapient beings weren’t there messing with it. It would include the world’s geography, topography, climate and weather, natural disasters, disease, flora and fauna. That last one is often the most fun to think of, as you can establish a food chain, evolution, adaptation to the world in question, and so on. Cultural setting , on the other hand, refers to all the things sapient beings create—all the worldbuilding that has to do with the way people think and interact. You may want to focus on history, religion, technology, craft, social morays (taboos and conventions, for example), law and government, educational systems (formalized schools or apprenticeships), languages and dialects, fashion, traditions and gender roles, festivals and celebrations, relationship with nature—and on and on. Take caution against what Sanderson calls worldbuilder’s disease . This is a term he has coined to describe a situation in which a writer spends too much time brainstorming for one or more of those elements that they get paralyzed by the sheer amount of worldbuilding to do. Each of these elements is a rabbit hole that one can spend months or years on (think of how it took Tolkien years to finalize the Elven languages). Writers who come to experience worldbuilder’s disease eventually become so daunted by what’s left to do that they end up getting no writing done at all. I’ve found a sad/funny instance of such writers while scrolling: One way to avoid that, according to Sanderson, is to choose a couple of those elements first—preferably those you already have some expertise on. Once done, choose a couple more and begin researching and brainstorming. But give yourself a deadline. After the deadline, start writing—yes, even if the lore is not complete yet. You can figure it out as you go. The point is to stop worldbuilding from stalling your progress. Dig into the things you’re passionate about first, make them relevant to your characters in some way, then figure out the rest as you go. In other words, spend your time worldbuilding the things that are going to influence the decisions your characters make and the challenges they face. When worldbuilding in our real world (i.e., using real locations for fictional events), making mistakes becomes easier. There is always a chance that an expert in, say, geography, is reading your book—someone who knows more than you do about the particular location you’re using as setting. This is why you ought to doublecheck the small details; because, when inaccurate, they can ruin the overall aesthetic of the story for that reader. You need to put extra effort into researching locations, historical events, and fundamental facts about whatever it is you’re writing about in our world. However, there is a trick to allow inaccuracies to pass, uncriticized by your readers—and that is to create bonehead characters, i.e., characters who essentially don’t know anything about said thing or place. An example is how Kaladin, from Sanderson’s The Way of Kings, doesn’t like horses. It’s expected and understandable, then, that he makes mistakes when talking about them or describing them. Like characterization, an important matter to keep in mind is to worldbuild consciously. Worldbuilding can easily become damaging (to your readers and yourself). This refers to being respectful in your depictions (of religions, specific communities, and so on). On publishing Sanderson begins with an overview of the history of SF&F in the publishing industry. The current divide in prestige that we see between literary fiction and genre/popular fiction can be dated back to the 1800s. Science fiction (which was an umbrella term that also included fantasy, horror, and in some locales, detective fiction) was perceived as “low-brow” writing and published only as paperback serials. Literary fiction was deemed more serious and published in hardbacks, mostly by rich and sophisticated publishers for similarly rich and sophisticated audiences. Eventually, people who grew up reading these “juvenile” works of science fiction became adults who craved more mature literature that possessed the same imagination. In fact, at the time, most science fiction publishers were grassroots groups: people who, out of shared passion for the genre, published it to the masses and made profit from them. However, by the mid-1900s, authors like J.R.R. Tolkien (in fantasy), Isaac Asimov (in science fiction), and Agatha Christie (in detective fiction) began to change the scene. The success of their tales made science fiction profitable—often more so than the average work of literary fiction. They were the authors who served as inspiration for later blockbuster films (think E.T. and Star Wars ). Eventually, the big publishers realized that the paperback ones were making as much (if not more) money than them. Many of the former began buying the latter, or collaborating. There was consolidation happening. Sanderson talks about how, around the time sci-fi and fantasy (and other popular genres) began to grow, many writers used to break into the industry by writing short fiction. They would submit short stories to the pulp magazines that published these “low-brow” genres, and by the time they wanted to pitch in their debut novel, they would have the credential of having been published here and there. He proceeds to mention that later, however, publishing short fiction was no longer a necessity to break into the industry—one could submit their debut novel immediately to those consolidating, growing companies and it would be considered. He offers encouragement for writers who are working on short fiction today, but emphasizes that they should be doing it because they love writing and reading short fiction, not because they think it’s necessary to make it as an author. It’s no longer the only path to success. → Should I go for indie or traditional publishing? Nowadays there are good arguments for both indie and traditional publishing, but Sanderson prefers doing it traditionally. Indie today is significantly harder for three reasons: You have total responsibility over the marketing of your books (it is up to you to make them go viral online), There are significant costs for getting the books professionally edited and have their cover art professionally made (he mentions paying $8,000 for a cover, but it depends on the artist and other factors. You can get it for cheaper), and You have to be releasing a large number of books because Kindle readers will want to go through your catalog (if they read just the one book you have on Amazon, you’ll make close to nothing in revenue; but if you are regularly releasing a new title, they will come back and you’ll be making a lot more money. He mentions that many indie authors today release books in a matter of weeks). For those going traditional, Sanderson does not recommend publishing with small presses. The writer should go for either a medium-sized press like Scholastic or Bane, or one of the big five. This is because small presses give small advances, their distribution tends to be more limited, and it’s very hard to earn a living with them. It’s not impossible for small presses to leverage their authors into becoming best-selling authors; but generally, he advises those hoping to publish traditionally to go for the top first. Technically, publishing with a small press in today’s current environment would be the equivalent or near equivalent to indie publishing, because you would have to do most of the marketing and advertising for your book. In this case, you might as well go fully for indie publishing and save yourself the hassle of contracts. If you’re indie publishing and the company offers to do certain services for you (cover design, substantive editing, and copy editing), reject the offering and do it (or pay for it) yourself. This significantly lowers your chances of being scammed. Do not pay publishers. → What is a literary agent and what can they do for me? If you go traditionally, you will need an agent. They can do four things for you: They sell your book. They take your book as a new author and target it at the right publishers. They are, in a small part, business managers. They will give you career advice and guidance. Many agents also may do developmental editing for your book, but most writers do not allow that—for two reasons. First, they don’t believe they should change parts of their book for an editor who is not guaranteed as a buyer. And second, they see in it a conflict of interest: many agents try to maintain good relationships with the usual editors, and so they might feel the obligation to present only the best books—they might want to edit your book according to that editor’s known preferences. So, it starts to feel like the agent is fulfilling not the author’s needs, but the editor’s potential needs. They are an expert in contract negotiations. You usually won’t need a separate attorney for handling contracts, unless you get big enough that Hollywood starts to eye you. The agent can be your friend in the publishing industry. You should try to maintain a good relationship with your editor, but always remember that the editor works for the publisher, not for you. Therefore, when an editor suggests a modification on your book that you do not like, your agent will be your friend, or the one to tell the editor that you’re not complying. When choosing an agent, make sure they meet two conditions to qualify: 1) that they have recently published new authors and 2) that the authors who have worked with them have spoken well of them. Watch out for scams in agenting. Agents are generally not supposed to ask for reading fees; as in, you should not be asked to pay to have them read your book. → How do I go about pitching my work to an agent? Pitching a novel nowadays is through query letters or query forms. It’s basically an elevator pitch—a single paragraph that should convince the agent to choose your book. It is impossible to describe the whole book in that paragraph, and you shouldn’t try to. You should focus on the thing that you believe will make your novel stand out from the others. Some querying tips Sanderson shares are: Avoid including too many proper nouns (1-2 character/setting names should be more than enough, otherwise the agent will feel overwhelmed, detached, and then lose interest. Not mentioning a single name is also an option; it means you’d be focusing on the concept of the novel and not the characters. Some agents prefer that. Others are more character-oriented. You need to figure out their preference and target it), Include a little bit about yourself (not much), Include comp titles (as in, a statement saying something like: this novel will appeal to fans of X, then list a few books. Avoid listing the most popular books ever), If you happen to have published in the short fiction market (literary magazines and journals), mention that and list the magazines/journals, If you have something that qualifies you to write about your novel’s niche/particular theme, mention it (for example, if you’re writing a military science fiction book, mentioning that you are, say, an ex-Marine would be very helpful. Certainly don’t mention experiences that will make you sound like a clout chaser). When seeking an agent, never ask “What are you looking for?” Instead, ask “What have you recently bought by a new author and why?” This gets them talking about what they like, gets you reading the latest book they helped publish, and thus gets you figuring out what they are looking for. When an agent asks you to send sample chapters, send the beginning chapters, not the ones midway through the novel that you think are best written. If they ask for an outline of your book, it’s a two-page document-ish that includes short paragraphs-within-paragraphs describing the plot of your novel. That means you must include the ending. The outline includes the whole book. In other words, the usual “package” agents ask for is: a query, three sample chapters, and an outline. → What should I look out for in publishing contracts? If your book is accepted and there comes the time for you to sign the contract, make sure to remember that: 1) You should keep rights to your world and characters (some presses might try to earn the rights for your characters and fictional world to make sequels), 2) You should keep film rights (some publishers might want 50% of film rights so they can make free money should any studio adapt your book, but your film rights should be totally yours), 3) They shouldn’t keep your foreign rights (you should try your best to keep your European-Spanish and South American rights because these are good markets. Some publishers might not let you keep World English rights, as in earning from the markets in English-speaking countries beyond America and the UK), 4) They absolutely shouldn’t include a “non-compete” clause, i.e., a clause that prevents an author from publishing a similar work, with another publisher or self-published, that could “compete” with or hurt sales of the contracted book. → Is there any miscellaneous publishing advice from Professor Sanderson? Absolutely, and the first of which is rooted in his own past mistakes. While trying to break in, he made the error of reaching out to agents he hadn’t done extensive research on—something that delayed his success for some time. Another thing he regrets from those years is not learning and getting into the habit of revising his books (he would finish a first draft then move on to start writing the sequel. He recommends having at least a second or third draft of the first book before starting the next one). The best way to learn revision is trial and error. You should take the feedback given on your story (by beta readers, agents, and friends), apply it, and see whether it has made it better. If not, you can always try again with different feedback and/or your own hunches. Another miscellaneous piece of advice has to do with online presence and AI. It is highly important to create a mailing list (which you might have compiled from the subscription list on your blog or page) and to make minimal use of social media, as it is time consuming. It is ideal to choose one social media platform and do a good job of talking about your writing there, having a few interactions with your followers—and that’s it. Beyond that, once your audience has grown, create a website that includes a few sample chapters of your latest book. On the topic of AI, Sanderson strongly advises writers to steer clear—whether it’s for writing or cover design. It not only raises significant ethical concerns, but also makes you look lazy and unprofessional. There is no telling what kind of influence AI writing can have on your voice. As a writer, protecting your voice and prose style should come above all else. It mirrors what you consume. And if AI writing is what you consume, you will inevitably start to sound like a machine. So read widely. Read outside your genre—but not only outside it. Pay attention to what works and what catches your liking. Think critically about what you consume. Ask yourself how similarly and how differently you can do something another novelist has done. And watch yourself improve with every story you write. “There will always be those wanting you to give them money in order to learn the secrets of publishing,” says Sanderson. “There aren’t any. OK? The secrets of publishing are: work hard, be diligent over a long period of time, then get lucky.” And may we all get lucky. These notes are only those touching on the main ideas discussed in the lectures. There remain those on side topics and tangents Sanderson goes on as he elaborates. I have not included them for fear that this would become a 60-minute read! Attending this course was a pleasant experience, and I already find myself applying some of his tips to my fiction. If you’re looking to add a creative writing course or workshop to your personal curriculum, let this be the one. But at the end of the day I stand by something Sanderson says in the final lecture: courses, workshops, and books on fiction can teach you only a fraction compared to what you can teach yourself by just writing. He compares it to playing the piano. How good can you really get at it if all you’re doing is reading on how to play? You need to practice at some point. “95% of what you learn about writing comes from forming good habits and writing regularly.” I hope his words inspire you to become diligent and consistent in writing. They sure have inspired me. Until next time, Heba Additional free resources to complement your study of this course The Hero with a Thousand Faces by Joseph Campbell (borrow it from Internet Archive or access this free PDF copy ). The Three-Act Structure: The King of Story Structures (access blog post ). Save the Cat Beat Sheet: The Ultimate Guide (+ Template) (access blog post ). Life, the Universe, and Everything: A Writing Symposium by Dan Wells (access 5-part lecture on YouTube ). Fun fact: Dan and Brandon are very close friends, longtime collaborators, and former roommates! Have you studied Brandon Sanderson’s lecture series? If yes, what are your thoughts on it? Leave a comment Know a writer who might find this useful? Share the post with them: Share 16 9 4 Share Discussion about this post Comments Restacks duā Apr 27 Liked by Heba Hallak A very interesting read, I have his books in my tbr and now I rlly want to read them. Reply Share Lilarwrites Apr 17 Liked by Heba Hallak I adore Brandon Sanderson and had not come across this course yet - huge thank you! Also would agree Mistborn is a great place to start. It's part of the wider Cosmere but stands alone as a mangeable trilogy. You don't risk getting fully sucked in as much (from someone who has ended up buying every single book in the Cosmere). Reply Share 1 reply by Heba Hallak 7 more comments... Top Latest Discussions No posts Ready for more? Subscribe © 2026 Heba Hallak · Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection notice Start your Substack Get the app Substack is the home for great culture 
