 Check out this awesome linguistic analysis of A Song of Ice and Fire Skip to main content Game of Thrones 
 Fantasy 
 Sci-Fi 
 Books 
 Editorial 
 Take the Black 
 Newsletter 
 About 
 Sitemap 
 What Should I Binge? 
 FanSided ENTERTAINMENT Sites 
 Follow Us 
 Share on X 
 Game of Thrones A Knight of the Seven Kingdoms 
 House of the Dragon 
 Fantasy Avatar: The Last Airbender 
 Harry Potter 
 Interview With The Vampire 
 Lord of the Rings 
 One Piece 
 Outlander 
 The Kingkiller Chronicle 
 The Wheel of Time 
 The Witcher 
 Sci-Fi Alien: Earth 
 Doctor Who 
 Dune 
 Fallout 
 Star Trek 
 Star Wars 
 Stranger Things 
 The Boys 
 The Last of Us 
 The Walking Dead 
 Books Brandon Sanderson 
 George R.R. Martin 
 Editorial Reviews 
 Interviews 
 Take the Black 
 Newsletter 
 About 
 Sitemap 
 What Should I Binge? 
 FanSided ENTERTAINMENT Sites 
 Share on X 
 Check out this awesome linguistic analysis of A Song of Ice and Fire 
 By Dan Selcke | 
 Share on Facebook Share on X Share on Reddit Copy Article 
 Add us as a preferred source 
 You guys, this is so cool. This is so cool, you guys.
--> You guys, this is so cool. This is so cool, you guys.
 Alright, this may only be cool if you're a language nerd, but I'll let you all decide for yourself. Blogger Dimitris Spathis has created a wonderfully detailed linguistic analysis of several of the most popular book series of the past 60 years, including The Lord of the Rings , Harry Potter , The Hunger Games , and A Song of Ice and Fire . He breaks down what kinds phrases the authors commonly use, their top choices when it comes to nouns and verbs, and how easy their prose is to read. Spathis' intention was to see if incredibly successful authors use language in similar ways, but I think it's more interesting to see how these authors differed when it comes to their prose.
--> Alright, this may only be cool if you're a language nerd, but I'll let you all decide for yourself. Blogger Dimitris Spathis has created a wonderfully detailed linguistic analysis of several of the most popular book series of the past 60 years, including The Lord of the Rings , Harry Potter , The Hunger Games , and A Song of Ice and Fire . He breaks down what kinds phrases the authors commonly use, their top choices when it comes to nouns and verbs, and how easy their prose is to read. Spathis' intention was to see if incredibly successful authors use language in similar ways, but I think it's more interesting to see how these authors differed when it comes to their prose.
 And yes, Spathis labels the Song of Ice and Fire books as the Game of Thrones series. Like it or not, most of the general public knows Martins novels as "the Game of Thrones books," which is reflected here.
--> And yes, Spathis labels the Song of Ice and Fire books as the Game of Thrones series. Like it or not, most of the general public knows Martins novels as "the Game of Thrones books," which is reflected here.
 First up, a look at the phrases the various authors use when writing, conveniently arranged in word clouds.
--> First up, a look at the phrases the various authors use when writing, conveniently arranged in word clouds.
 Notice how J.R.R. Tolkien ( The Lord of the Rings ) and George R.R. Martin ( A Song of Ice and Fire , duh) favor plot-centric phrases ("the ring," "the wall") whereas J.K. Rowling ( Harry Potter ) and Suzanne Collins ( The Hunger Games ) use more general phrases more often. Does this mean that Tolkien and Martin tell more focused stories than Rowling and Collins, or that they're preoccupied with plot over character? I don't know, but if someone wanted to write a graduate thesis on the question, that would be great.
--> Notice how J.R.R. Tolkien ( The Lord of the Rings ) and George R.R. Martin ( A Song of Ice and Fire , duh) favor plot-centric phrases ("the ring," "the wall") whereas J.K. Rowling ( Harry Potter ) and Suzanne Collins ( The Hunger Games ) use more general phrases more often. Does this mean that Tolkien and Martin tell more focused stories than Rowling and Collins, or that they're preoccupied with plot over character? I don't know, but if someone wanted to write a graduate thesis on the question, that would be great.
 Spathis created separate charts to track the most common nouns, verbs, adverbs, and adjectives used in the four series, but the adverb chart is the most interesting, especially as it relates to A Song of Ice and Fire .
--> Spathis created separate charts to track the most common nouns, verbs, adverbs, and adjectives used in the four series, but the adverb chart is the most interesting, especially as it relates to A Song of Ice and Fire .
 What does this chart tell us? That George R.R. Martin hates adverbs. As Spathis notes, adverbs are sometimes considered a crutch among professional writers (Stephen King has said that "[T]hey seem to have been created with the timid writer in mind"), so we can take Martin's apparent distaste for them as an endorsement of his writing ability.
--> What does this chart tell us? That George R.R. Martin hates adverbs. As Spathis notes, adverbs are sometimes considered a crutch among professional writers (Stephen King has said that "[T]hey seem to have been created with the timid writer in mind"), so we can take Martin's apparent distaste for them as an endorsement of his writing ability.
 Finally, look at this analysis of each series' Automated Readability Index (ARI). Basically, ARI measures how easy a book is to read. The results may surprise you.
--> Finally, look at this analysis of each series' Automated Readability Index (ARI). Basically, ARI measures how easy a book is to read. The results may surprise you.
 We think of the Song of Ice and Fire books as complex, but according to Spathis' analysis, they're far easier to read than the books in the Harry Potter series. According to the ARI measurements (see Spathis' post for the calculations), you only need to be 10 years old to understand A Song of Ice and Fire , but 15 years old to understand Harry Potter .
--> We think of the Song of Ice and Fire books as complex, but according to Spathis' analysis, they're far easier to read than the books in the Harry Potter series. According to the ARI measurements (see Spathis' post for the calculations), you only need to be 10 years old to understand A Song of Ice and Fire , but 15 years old to understand Harry Potter .
 If that seems counterintuitive (and it does, considering that millions of children read the Harry Potter books before reaching the age of 15), there are other ways of looking at the data. For example, just because Martin's language is easy to understand doesn't mean that the story he's telling isn't dense and layered.
--> If that seems counterintuitive (and it does, considering that millions of children read the Harry Potter books before reaching the age of 15), there are other ways of looking at the data. For example, just because Martin's language is easy to understand doesn't mean that the story he's telling isn't dense and layered.
 Anyway, this is all delightful. To see the rest of Spathis' analysis, head over to his blog .
--> Anyway, this is all delightful. To see the rest of Spathis' analysis, head over to his blog .
 Next: HBO Now gets clever, combines The Wire with Game of Thrones 
--> Next: HBO Now gets clever, combines The Wire with Game of Thrones 
 Add us as a preferred source on Google 
 Follow 
 Loading recommendations... Please wait while we load personalized content recommendations
 Home / A Song of Ice and Fire 
 About 
 Openings 
 Contact 
 Our 300+ Sites 
 FanSided Daily 
 Pitch a Story 
 Privacy Policy 
 Terms of Use 
 Cookie Policy 
 Legal Disclaimer 
 Accessibility Statement 
 A-Z Index 
 Cookie Settings 
 © 2026 Minute Group - All Rights Reserved. The content on this site is for entertainment and educational purposes only. Betting and gambling content is intended for individuals 21+ and is based on individual commentators' opinions and not that of Minute Group or its affiliates and related brands. All picks and predictions are suggestions only and not a guarantee of success or profit. If you or someone you know has a gambling problem, crisis counseling and referral services can be accessed by calling 1-800-GAMBLER. 
 