 
 The Literary Crimes of George R.R. Martin | The Erstwhile Philistine 
 Skip to content 
 The Erstwhile Philistine 
 High and Low. Here and There. Now and Then. 
 Primary Menu 
 Home About 
 Honorary Philistines 
 Submissions 
 Newest Post! Check out the freshest droppings from The Erstwhile Philistine. Bon Appetit! 
 The Literary Crimes of George R.R. Martin 
 Posted on March 21, 2012 by Asher Gelzer-Govatos 
 After months of on again, off again slogging, I am almost caught up with George R.R. Martin’s hulking fantasy series  A Song of Ice and Fire (I’m about a third of the way through the fifth and thusfar most recent entry,  A Dance with Dragons ).  Fantasy fans take note: there is a lot to like in the series.  The best aspect of Martin’s work is his meticulous world building; in Westeros and the surrounding continents he has created a deep. rich world full of lore, intrigue, and memorable characters.  Many of his characters, even minor ones, sparkle with personality.  His villains and anti-heroes are particularly memorable, from the utterly loathsome Roose Bolton to the power mad Queen Cersei to the scheming, frequently soused dwarf Tyrion, one of the most memorable characters in all fantasy literature.  In addition to the world he has built, Martin moves the books along with breathless pacing and endless plot twists, which usually land on the side of impressive and natural rather than forced and groan-worthy. 
 For all his talents as a creator and crafter of stories, Martin leaves a lot to be desired in the prose department.  Indeed, at times I have found myself choking back disgust at a choice turd of a passage in my quest to forward the story.  Most of the time his prose borders on the servicable, but there are times when his faux-medieval flourishes go a bridge too far.  Below I have listed some of his worst offenses. 
 Terrible Turns of Phrase Which Are Repeated Over and Over 
 Martin’s philosophy of prose can be summed up thusly: if a phrase has worked once, it’ll work even better the 537th time.  He has words and phrases he rides like a hobbyhorse, and not normal, bread and butter words.  No, in order to embellish his tales with a sense of the grandiose, Martin leans on words that I presume he thinks sound archaic and exotic.  In reality they just sound ridiculous.  To mention but a few: 
 1.  Whenever he talks about someone joking around, he uses the word “jape” instead of joke.  Jape, aside from its pretentiousness, is a singularly displeasing word.  I think it’s something about the “ape” sound.  It reminds me of a bunch of monkeys breaking out of jail.  Either that, or a Frenchman claiming ownership of a baboon.  Nah, I’m just japin’ ya’ll. 
 2.  His number one most abused phrase, used to describe a ridiculous or showy situation: mummer’s farce.  Ok George, we get it – Medieval setting, they had mummers in the middle ages, yada yada.  Do you really need to describe every king’s council and meeting between frenemies as a “mummer’s farce”?  Seriously, the phrase comes up at least ten times in every book.  Let it go, George. 
 Annoying Speech Mannerisms 
 This is somewhat tied to the above, but it merits its own category.  In an attempt, no doubt, to give each character a bit of individuality, Martin frequently employs particular speech patters.  On the whole this is admirable, but sometimes his choices are inexplicable.  For example: 
 1. One of the characters is a mentally handicapped stable boy who can only say his own name, Hodor.  This would perhaps be acceptable if Hodor stuck around for a few chapters then faded into the obscurity of taking care of the horses.  Instead, he features prominently in one of the storylines, which means that those chapters which follow that storyline frequently go like this. 
 Character 1: I’m really scared that we are in this forest. 
Hodor: Hodor. 
Character 2: I know exactly what you mean Hodor.  I sure am hungry too! 
Hodor: Hodor Hodor Hodor. 
Character 3: Look out – wolves! 
Hodor: HOOOOOOODOOOOOOOOR. 
 2.  Another character, Reek, has gone a little mad.  In order to remind himself of his place, he repeats a rhyme to remember who he is.  It goes like this: Reek, my name is Reek, it rhymes with [random word that rhymes with Reek].  Martin uses slight variations to oh so subtly give us a glimpse of Reek’s frame of mind.  When Reek is reminding himself not to be bold: Reek, my name is Reek, it rhymes with weak.  When Reek is afraid to speak: Reek, my name is Reek, it rhymes with squeak. 
 May I submit a few suggestions for further use?  When Reek is reminding himself of how annoying he is: Reek, my name is Reek, it rhymes with pique.  When Reek is reminding himself that his storyline is going nowhere and will likely end badly: Reek, my name is Reek, it rhymes with bleak. 
 And the Worst Thing Ever, the Sex Scenes 
 Alright, on this one I’m willing to cut Martin a little slack.  It is notoriously hard to write sex scenes that are anything other than awkward and offputting (I’m honestly not sure why authors keep trying; they almost never serve to improve the book).  Honestly the best most authors can hope for is to reach a level of adequodequacity.  Still, even by these lax standards Martin’s scenes are particularly dire.  It doesn’t help that they are obviously completely extraneous, thrown in only to titillate.  This makes them just seem slimy.  It doesn’t help that Martin looks like the consummate dirty old man: 
 His life partner's name is Parris. Is anyone at all surprised by this? 
 Above and beyond that, the scenes themselves are clunky to the extreme.  They usually involve someone being drunk with desire for the other person, their head swimming with the wine of lust or some such nonsense.  Reference to male anatomy as a man’s “Gift”.  Then fill in the obligatory mention of naughty body parts being touched/kissed/caressed/otherwise put upon, and end scene.  If in most other areas Martin’s prose acheives a level of adequatulence, in his sex scenes he dips to what I imagine is the level of writing found in those books in the corner of the bookstore featuring shirtless corsairs and hunky cowboys, with titles like  The Incredible Hunk  and  Beefcakes Ahoy!  It’s always a shame when an author fails to live up to his potential of adequasivity. 
 What’s scary in all this is that Martin has been hailed by some as the American Tolkien.  In some very limited sense that may be true; his world building is exquisite, though I’d say Westeros still falls far below Middle Earth in its vision and creativity.  But his prose holds him back from being a truly great author.  Not that Tolkien himself was any John Banville , but he never let his prose get in the way of the story he was telling.  Martin’s books, for now, are a bit like a Double Down : you want to have experienced it, but you rush through it as quickly as possible and don’t stop to savor the bites. 
 Share this: 
 Share on Facebook (Opens in new window) 
 Facebook 
 Share on X (Opens in new window) 
 X 
 Like Loading... 
 Related 
 Tags: A Dance With Dragons , A Song of Ice and Fire , Cersei Lannister , George R.R. Martin , mummer's farce , Roose Bolton , Tyrion Lannister Categories: Books 
 29 thoughts on “ The Literary Crimes of George R.R. Martin ” 
 gtgood says: 
 March 22, 2012 at 1:05 am 
 At first, I thought “adequodequacity” was some sort of unholy Frankenstein of a word that you concocted. Then I watched the clip. 
 I haven’t read Martin since high school. (I never finished “Crows” and “Dragons” wasn’t published then. Now, I don’t feel like rereading the series until Martin finishes it.) Years after the fact, I still remember my favorite (and least favorite) characters, the brutal plot twists, etc. For the most part, the series worked for me. If nothing else, Martin was good at eliciting strong emotional reactions (both positive and negative) to his characters. And yet… it wasn’t that simple. I remember one character I hated more than anything. So much, in fact, that I found myself wishing for his untimely demise. Then Martin had to go and make his end so thoroughly wretched that I pitied him in spite of myself. That’s a pretty impressive accomplishment, in my opinion. 
 That being said, the only thing I remember about the sex scenes was wondering why they were included. There was one I remember that “maaaaaaybe” had plot significance — and, even then, only in the loosest symbolic sense — but mostly they felt distracting. Here’s the funny thing: the sex operates in exactly the same way in the HBO series. That is to say, it feels tacked on, gratuitous, and not relevant to the story. Throw it in anyway because, after all, sex is provocative and provocative television is good television. Therefore, sex = good television. 
 Reply 
 Asher Gelzer-Govatos says: 
 March 22, 2012 at 2:18 am 
 Grant, if I had invented that word, I could die a happy man. Alas, the quest continues… 
 And I agree: certain characters and scenes will be forever burned on my brain (I’m thinking particularly of a scene 2/3 of the way through Storm of Swords). He really is great at setting up intricate plots and then twisting you topsy-turvy. And if you are talking about the character I am thinking of, then you will enjoy reading some of the fallout from that in DwD. 
 But man, those sex scenes. So. Bad. 
 Reply 
 davidekavanaugh says: 
 April 11, 2012 at 3:43 pm 
 I suspect that one of the reasons we create fiction is to make sex exciting. 
– Gore Vidal 
 I agree it seldom works 
 Reply 
 Jen King says: 
 May 15, 2012 at 9:15 am 
 I looked for an article of this nature to see if anyone else was as annoyed as myself about the incessant use of “mummer” in Dance with Dragons. I’m noticing it every half dozen pages and am starting to get angry about books that I love. Didn’t this book have editors? Why didn’t someone at Bantam say “enough’s enough, George!” for at least fifty of what must be at least a hundred instances of the word “mummer” in one book, and make him PICK A DIFFERENT WORD! I love you, George, but you’ve turned a great book into a mummers farce. 
 Reply 
 Asher Gelzer-Govatos says: 
 May 15, 2012 at 11:33 am 
 Glad I’m not the only one to feel this way, Jen. If I had to pick his most annoying tendency, it would probably be his use of that word. 
 Reply 
 Pingback: The Illustrative Man: Remembering Ray Bradbury « The Erstwhile Philistine 
 TerryfromToontown says: 
 September 4, 2012 at 4:19 pm 
 “Indeed, at times I have found myself choking back disgust at a choice turd of a passage in my quest to forward the story.” Now THAT’s writing! Especially the richly metaphoric “choice turd of a passage” and the carefully chosen “my quest to forward the story.” After lavish praise of story, pacing, characterization, and world-building – “Martin moves the books along with breathless pacing and endless plot twists, which usually land on the side of impressive and natural rather than forced and groan-worthy” – your silly piece turns, unapologetically, to cherry-picking a half-dozen examples in three picayune categories for ridicule. Aren’t we superior!? “Erstwhile”? Hardly. Once, now, and future would be more like it. Sorry, neither very thoughtful nor very insightful. I guess you expected Faulkner? Or the revered Tolkien. (Frankly, isn’t every self-respecting adult who read him in middle school by now bored of the Rings?) 
 That is, however, a superb one-shot of Martin. I do believe he writes those lousy sex scenes with the intent of goading life into his own dead flesh, but that’s not much to the point of the matter at hand. 
 Reply 
 Asher Gelzer-Govatos says: 
 September 4, 2012 at 7:02 pm 
 Terry, 
 I’m getting the vague sense that you didn’t like this piece very much. (: That’s fine, and if you love Martin’s writing, more power to you, but I think you misrepresent my piece in several ways. Let me address them in reverse order: 
 1. You seem to imply that I revere Tolkien’s prose, which I don’t. I think it is at times clunky and more than a bit dry. That being said, it only rarely distracts from the experience of reading his story. Frankly your cheap shot at Tolkien doesn’t even warrant response; plenty of thinking, “self-respecting” adults return to Lord of the Rings again and again because of the richness of Tolkien’s world. 
 2. I don’t think I ever made the demand that Martin be a great author or wordsmith, nor did I approach SoIaF expecting Faulkner or anyone else more “literary” in nature. But the prose in Martin’s books frequently drove me to distraction as I read them. You may not like my choice of imagery, but I did frequently have to will myself into continuing to read after a particular poor section of writing. 
 3. You imply that I am putting myself in a position of superiority to Martin. Not at all. The guy is a well respected, prolific, and very rich author; I’m a two cent nobody on the Internet. Clearly the guy is doing something right. This site, however, is based around cultural criticism. I make no apologies for criticizing things I find faulty, not because I think I am better than creatives but because that is the task I have set before me. I felt like I was very fair to Martin, praising many aspects of his work. 
 4. You accuse me of “cherry-picking” and creating “picayune” categories. I’m not sure what you expect from a blog length article; I’m regrettably not able to highlight every terrible example or habit of Martin’s. I picked examples that are far from “cherry picking”; his use of words like “mummer’s farce” and the Hodor gimmick occur again and again and again. As for creating “picayune” categories, I’d say that poor writing which affects dialogue is fairly important, as is the repetition of words throughout a book which distract the reader. The sex scenes wouldn’t be as important if they didn’t occur with such frequency. 
 5. You very apparently do not like my writing style, which is fine. Nothing I can do there. 
 Anyway, thanks for your thoughts. I do appreciate your comments; any feedback is helpful. Would you mind posting a brief defense of Martin’s writing, since you felt my criticism was so off base? 
 Best, 
 Asher 
 Reply 
 gtgood says: 
 January 2, 2013 at 12:03 am 
 I had to come back to see what the “noise” was about. I’m just surprised it was in the (plainly informal, humorous) Martin critique. 
 Reply 
 Kevin says: 
 June 16, 2015 at 2:32 am 
 I don’t particularly like Martin as an author either (though for very different reasons) but if you’re going to rake the man over the coals at least stand by your raking. And definitely don’t hide behind the false humility and the “what did you expect from a blog length article?” bit. Stand by your critique if you its your honest analysis (just leave the man’s physical appearance out of it, it cheapens every point you are trying to make). 
 Reply 
 Pingback: The Best of The Erstwhile Philistine in 2012 « The Erstwhile Philistine 
 Jonathan says: 
 August 18, 2013 at 6:33 pm 
 Criticizing the man’s work is one thing, but I didn’t find the mention of his spouse, nor the reference to his personal appearance as necessary. In my opinion, comparing his looks to that of “the consummate dirty old man” was rude and unprofessional. Then again, I only came for this article so I don’t really know if that’s the overall narrative style of this site. 
 Reply 
 Asher Gelzer-Govatos says: 
 August 18, 2013 at 7:18 pm 
 Jonathan, 
 Sorry I offended you. Those lines were throwaways designed as jokes. If you’d read more of my stuff you might be more familiar with the cadence of my writing. I don’t feel like G.R.R. has any reason to feel bad about himself – doubt he’ll ever read it, and if he does I’m sure he can sob himself to sleep on the piles of money he’s made. But yeah, this isn’t the New York Review of Books. I mostly write to amuse myself, which means sometimes I succumb to the temptation to be “rude and unprofessional”. If you’re willing to pay me large sums of money, I will gladly eliminate that side of me from my writing. 
 Best, 
 Asher 
 Reply 
 Jonathan says: 
 August 18, 2013 at 7:32 pm 
 Fair enough. Perhaps I should have taken a look around the site more before commenting in such a way. Thanks for the reply. 
 Reply 
 Asher Gelzer-Govatos says: 
 August 18, 2013 at 7:36 pm 
 No problem man! I know I sometimes get carried away (and I’m usually not as funny as I think I am), but I do try to avoid personally attacking people maliciously. Have a great day! 
 Reply 
 Fred says: 
 September 11, 2013 at 9:42 am 
 I came here to see a real critique about what, if anything, is wrong with Martin’s prose. However, what you describe as “bad writing” is simply a style you don’t care for. I find all those things you hate as immersive. People *do* repeat themselves in real life. Be glad we’re spared the very real phenomenon of people repeating the same stories over and over. The phrase “mummer’s farce” never stood out to me. In a modern world of Westeros, a person reading a realistic story about us would certainly grow tired of our common phrases (e.g. “just let it go”, etc.). 
 Reply 
 Asher Gelzer-Govatos says: 
 September 12, 2013 at 11:26 am 
 I’m not sure what you would consider a “real critique”. As far as I know there’s not a mathematical formula for figuring out if writing is good or bad. I mentioned my objections to his writing and tried to explain them – that’s what criticism is. And yeah, it will always have an element of subjectivity to it. 
 And yeah, I get that Martin is trying to create a world with its own cliches, tics, etc, but for all his prowess as a world builder I find his use of language one of the least successful parts of that. It’s one thing to set up commonalities of phrase and quite another to use them ad nauseum. At a certain point it ceases to be immersive and becomes distracting. 
 Also: those sex scenes. 
 Reply 
 Kristopher says: 
 July 16, 2014 at 1:56 pm 
 “However, what you describe as ‘bad writing’ is simply a style you don’t care for.” 
 LOL 
 What did you expect? Tastes in literature are subjective, including yours. 
 Reply 
 David Parington says: 
 March 16, 2014 at 12:02 am 
 I find his prose beautiful and some of your points are led by biased or simply ridiculous claims. Being bothered by “Ape” when you read “Jape” is your own problem and does not hinder his work but only brings it back to older times. You cannot complain over his reused terms because those can easily be passed off as frequent terms at the time, even as common as the phrase “Oh my God”. Your points are, in all due respect, invalid and I would very much like to hear back from you when you’re a multi-millionaire book writer on the verge of literary history like George R.R Martin or ,as you know him, the “consummate dirty old man”. 
 Reply 
 kadenby says: 
 July 16, 2014 at 2:12 pm 
 What is wrong with you Martin fanatics? Is it possible for you to put aside your love for something for one second and think about how ridiculously stupid and infantile your comments sound? 
 Biased? Do you know what bias is? Allow me to provide you with a definition: 
 Bias 
1. prejudice in favor of or against one thing, person, or group compared with another, usually in a way considered to be unfair. 
 Entiendes? 
 Of course the author is biased. He prefers good prose over bad prose. If you possessed a reading comprehension above the level of baboon, you would understand this. 
 He CAN complain about the word jape because this is HIS blog. Furthermore, exactly what “older times” are you referring to? These novels are set in an imaginary, fantasy world. They are not historical fiction. 
 His points are not invalid because literary criticism is SUBJECTIVE (you can look the definition of that word up for yourself). Your comment about being a multimillionaire author doesn’t even deserve comment. Complete nonsense. 
 Reply 
 Pointless says: 
 April 1, 2014 at 8:54 pm 
 My favorite repeated Martin turn of phrase: “has the right of it,” as in “All could see that Ser Hornswoggle had the right of it.” He uses that one over, and over, and over, apparently feeling that it sounds real old-timey when it’s really just hacktastic. 
 Reply 
 raven2278 says: 
 April 8, 2014 at 5:14 pm 
 I don’t think Martin’s writing style is that bad. In fact, compared to most fantasy writers I find him quite good. I’m gonna be honest, as a Literature grad student I read a lot and I find that 95% of fantasy writers simply can’t write, their stories might be good (and most of them aren’t) but finding a good story well-written is extremely rare. Their books are written like movie-scripts with 90% of dialogues and 10% of poor descriptions and a style so simplistic it makes chick-lit looks like Jane Austen. I don’t have this feeling with Martin. He certainly is not a great stylist and it’s true he makes repetitions, but his writing has a huge post-modernist vibe that I never encountered before in this type of fiction. Moreover, if like I said most fantasy writers write like “script writers”, Martin does the opposite: he uses some of the codes of tv writing but gives it a literal density. A Song of Fire and Ice is almost like a pastiche of television in this respect (which is probably why it works very well as a tv show), it’s an improbable post-modernist mix of soap-opera television’s codes and medieval/antiquity’s famous myths re-adapted with a good sense of irony. It’s clever that it looks. 
 As for the “it’s impossible to write good sex scenes” part, I disagree. I’m guessing you only read fantasy and maybe it’s true in this genre, but I could make a list of writers who can make great sex scenes in their books. 
 Reply 
 Pingback: Is George R.R. Martin’s Moral Vision Really More Complex Than Tolkien’s? | The Erstwhile Philistine 
 J says: 
 November 11, 2014 at 9:06 pm 
 Great article! It has taken me almost two years to finish the series, and I am still finishing Number 5. His writing style is abysmal. I agree, most fantasy authors have an abysmal style, and unfortunately, Martin is in their ranks. Anyone who is familiar at all with Medieval history or the usage of English before 1950 would find his dialogue laughable. Although my favorite bad writing trope of his is this: names. Can anyone not read “Lord Jason” and not snicker? How about the character named Cletus? I find these hilarious and so off putting that it is hard to suspend my disbelief and keep reading. 
 Reply 
 Tyrion Lannister says: 
 November 26, 2014 at 2:15 am 
 Where do whores go? 
 Reply 
 The horn says: 
 January 29, 2015 at 10:48 pm 
 You left out all the endless horn “ahhhhrrrruuuuuuu”s, and the animal sounds, and bells jingle-jangling. 
 Martin is a terrible writer. 
 But I will be damned if I can put the books down. 
 Reply 
 Maguerite says: 
 June 15, 2015 at 7:15 pm 
 Unfortunately the prolific bad sex scenes can only come from an old man’s hand. It’s his own dreams of yonks ago, before viagra or whatever and I am just so tired of everyone’s fanny in my face in every series. If thise story got into David Gemmel’s head it would have been masterly. Not a single character in GoT’s is built to fruition. It’s a violation of the public at large – and no we don’t care that it’s more like real life, why would I want to watch real life at any phase of my existence. It feel to me like he built this world and once the bricks and mortar and families were in place, he wrote on the fly. 
 Reply 
 Liz says: 
 November 18, 2015 at 9:01 pm 
 I have noticed a lot of times he will come upon a phrase or word he particularly likes, then use it 3-4 times all in one chapter. It drives me nuts when I notice it. Just random words sometimes like in Crows, in one chapter he used the word “temerity”, not a very common word, and then it was repeated like 3x in the next 2 pages, but then not used in the rest of the book. For some reason this drove me nuts LOL. Like he has to use his latest vocabulary word a couple of times in a row and then moves on to a new one. There’s lots of instances of this but can only remember that one right now. Mummer’s farce is definitely over used (references to mummers in general really), FWIW I agree with you about “Japes”. But I don’t mind the series overall and love the HBO show. 
 Reply 
 Javier says: 
 December 6, 2015 at 6:51 pm 
 “I’m honestly not sure why authors keep trying; they almost never serve to improve the book.” 
 I thought I was the only person that felt like this about sex scenes. 
 Sex scenes don’t work, no matter the book, period. Narrative should get rid of them and, certainly, it doesn’t help that Martin doesn’t know how to deal with them other than using cliches. 
 Reply 
 Leave a comment Cancel reply 
 Δ 
 Asher Gelzer-Govatos is the founder and editor of The Erstwhile Philistine, an online publication exploring issues of art, culture, and faith. He is a graduate student in Comparative Literature at Washington University in St. Louis. He is the film critic for the Columbia Daily Tribune, and has written for Paste, Books & Culture, and Christianity Today. 
 Post navigation 
 ←  Previous Post Next Post  → 
 Blog at WordPress.com. 
 Privacy & Cookies: This site uses cookies. By continuing to use this website, you agree to their use. 
To find out more, including how to control cookies, see here:
 Cookie Policy 
 Comment 
 Reblog 
 Subscribe 
 Subscribed 
 The Erstwhile Philistine 
 Join 2,742 other subscribers 
 Sign me up 
 Already have a WordPress.com account? Log in now. 
 The Erstwhile Philistine 
 Subscribe 
 Subscribed 
 Sign up 
 Log in 
 Copy shortlink 
 Report this content 
 View post in Reader 
 Manage subscriptions 
 Collapse this bar 
 Loading Comments... 
 Write a Comment... 
 Email 
 Name 
 Website 
 %d 
 Design a site like this with WordPress.com Get started 
