 
 Don't use AI to write your query letter 
 Subscribe Sign in 
 Don't use AI to write your query letter
 What you should do instead
 Naomi Jones and James Jones 
 Mar 09, 2026 
 ∙ Paid
 8
 4
 Share
 According to The Bookseller, Literary Agents are seeing a 'change in the nature of submissions' as writers and illustrators use AI to write their query letters. 
 This is something our own agent mentioned to us last summer. She said she'd started to receive almost identical query letters that used the same voice, language and content. 
 She said this was happening even when the manuscripts/illustrations being submitted appeared to be 100% made by humans.
 Appeared is of course the key word in that sentence, because how can anyone know for sure? If a writer is using AI to write a query letter, what else have they used it for? 
 Over the last year we've interviewed several editors, publishers, literary agents and art directors . 
 When asked what they're looking for, all of them said the same thing - originality. 
 Publishing is extremely competitive and most literary agents receive hundreds if not thousands of submissions a year.
 If you want to stand out in a crowded market, it is more important now than ever before to be yourself. 
 Writing a query letter can be hard, I get it, but is a skill that can be learned just like any other.
 We shared exactly how to write a query letter along with the one that secured us an agent in 2018 in this post here. 
 We've also written posts about how to write an elevator pitch and what exactly you should send out on submission. 
 As AI gets more sophisticated, I wonder if literary agents will find it harder to tell the difference between an AI generated query letter and one written by humans?
 Some agents including Greene & Heaton, RCW and Felicity Bryon Associates now specify on their website that they won't accept submissions written and edited by artificial intelligence.
 Maybe the software to tell if AI has been used will develop alongside AI? Who knows.
 To me using AI feels like cheating, even if you're just asking it to improve on a rough draft. 
 I don't use AI for anything, partly due to the environmental cost and because of all the author's stolen work that has been used to train it. 
 But mostly I don't use AI because I have spent my whole life developing my own writing style. Why would I outsource the very thing that I have worked so hard to create a career around?
 I always tell children during school visits that being good at writing is the same as being good at anything else. Just like football, gymnastics or riding a bike, it takes practice.
 I am still practicing. I learn something every time I write a new story, whether it actually gets published or not.
 My writing may not always be perfect - I'm dyslexic and despite my best proof reading attempts, I still make mistakes. 
 But I think my writing sounds like me. It sounds like it was written by a person because it was. 
 I don't want to read books, or look at illustrations created by AI and neither do most literary agents or publishers.
 If you've spent time and agency developing a manuscript or portfolio, you are doing yourself a disservice not spending time on your query letter.
 Using AI to help you write your query letter might feel like a quick fix if you're struggling with it, but it won't do you any favours in the long run.
 If you want an agent to represent you - write to them in your own voice. It doesn't have to be perfect but it does have to be personal.
 Here are my top ten query letter writing tips to help get you started:
 My top ten query letter writing tips 
 Keep it short and snappy. A query letter is not an essay. The aim of it is to introduce yourself and your work so that the agent actually wants to read your manuscript/take a look at your illustrations. 
 Continue reading this post for free, courtesy of Naomi Jones.
 Claim my free post 
 Or purchase a paid subscription. 
 © 2026 Naomi and James Jones · Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection notice 
 Start your Substack Get the app 
 Substack is the home for great culture
