 
 Write On! Crowding and Leaping, according to LeGuin - Daily Kos 
 Search Sign Up Log In Write Story News All News National White House Congress Justice Elections From Markos Community All Community Stories Community Spotlight All Stories Site Announcements Groups Tags Subscribe to Daily Kos Manage Newsletters Get Out the Vote Old Home Page Help Cartoons Support us 
 Search 
 News All News National White House Congress Justice Elections From Markos Community All Community Stories Community Spotlight All Stories Site Announcements Groups Tags Subscribe to Daily Kos Manage Newsletters Get Out the Vote Old Home Page Help Cartoons Support us 
 Write Story 
 Sign Up 
 | 
 Login 
 Daily Kos Community 
 Write On! Crowding and Leaping, according to LeGuin 
 by not a lamb 
 Community 
 This content is not subject to review by Daily Kos staff prior to
 publication. 
 January 12, 2023 at 5:00 PM 
 Recommend Story 
 Share: 
 Share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook 
 Share on Bluesky (Opens in new window) Bluesky 
 Share on X (Opens in new window) X 
 Share using Native tools Share Copied to clipboard 
 Save 
 80 Comments 
 Add Daily Kos to Google 
 Hello all. Welcome back to our weekly series on writing. We’re in the second week of our annual Daily Kos Writing (& Other Artistic Pursuits) Month. It’s a choose your own adventure/goal sort of thing, so if you missed the first week and want to join in the gentle encouragement/accountability check-ins, please chime in in the comments, and we’ll add you to the goal list. 
 For what it’s worth, I’ve been doing poorly at my goal of five minutes of writing per day. But! I am definitely counting writing this diary in my minute count, so after tonight, I’m going to call the early part of January adequately covered. 
 DaKoWriMo Goals 
 bonetti – check stuff off ToDo list 
 dconrad – “editing my mess-in-progress. What goes in which chapter.” 
 Mercy Ormont – “rewrite and try to finish my memoir, Thirty-Nine Years On The Street.” (1/12 — Verified 39K words, updated to pandemic) 
 mettle fatigue – “make progress, any kind” (1/12 — progress! being made) 
 NoBlinkers – 20k more words 
 not a lamb – write at least 5 minutes a day. (1/12 — wrote a diary, still working on the 5 min/day) 
 RiveroftheWest – add factoids, four paintings and a dozen sketches to illustrate WIP. 
 ThurzdaysChild – one dedicated writing day per week, ready for beta reader by March or so. (1/12 — revising and reorganizing, good progress) 
 wandering in samsara – rough draft of third quarter of WIP (1/12 — aiming for 5 min/day) 
 Work is beyond crazy, and I’m exploring purchasing something through a low-income housing program. My brain is tired. Tired. 
 So, tonight I’m going to let Ms. Le Guin take the wheel. In keeping with the chapter and diary title, we’re leaping over a number of other chapters and going with Chapter 10 from Steering the Craft . I’ve referenced Chapters 2 ( Punctuation — but really only the challenge) and 4 ( Repetition ) in other Write On diaries from yesteryear, and it’s been awhile since I last picked up Steering the Craft. 
 As the workshop went on [Steering the Craft came about after a writing workshop Le Guin led] , I began to think about an aspect of narrative technique that I hadn’t originally seen clearly. It has to do with what details are included, what omitted. It has to do with focus — the focus of the sentence, the paragraph, the piece as a whole. I call it Crowding and Leaping because those words describe the process in a physical way, which I like. 
 Crowding is what Keats meant when he told poets “to load every rift with ore.” It’s what we mean when we exhort ourselves to avoid flabby language and clichés, never to use ten vague words where two will do, always to seek the vivid phrase, the exact word. By crowding, I mean keeping the story full, always full of what’s happening in it; keeping it moving, not slackening, and wandering into irrelevancies; keeping it interconnected with itself, rich with echoes forward and backward. (slight snip) 
 But leaping is just as important. What you leap over is what you leave out. And what you leave out is infinitely more than what you leave in. There’s got to be white space around the word, silence around the voice. Listing is not describing. Only the relevant belongs. (snip) 
 Tactically speaking, I’d say go ahead and crowd in the first draft — put everything in. Then in revising decide what counts and what tells; then cut and recombine until what’s left is what counts. Leap boldly. (snip) 
 (from the first two pages of the chapter) 
 There’s more to this chapter, but I’m going to stop here and maybe use the rest some other time. Possibly even next week, unless one of our stalwarts or a newbie would like to contribute a diary. (Schedule’s a bit bare, folks.) 
 Given that this is the last chapter of the book, the exercise instructs the reader to choose a passage written in one of the other chapter exercises (about 400 words give or take 100 will do tonight) — and then cut the word count by half, while “keeping the narrative clear and the sensory impact vivid.” Also, strike the word ‘somehow’ wherever it has poked its head into your writing. Dialogue or long speeches get just as viciously chopped. Herein we create the above-mentioned ‘leaps.’ 
 Tonight’s Challenge 
 If you’ve written a Write-On challenge in the past (month, season, year, etc.), go back and pull one up (300-500 words is all that’s necessary). Chop as described above. If you like, share the original word count and the whittled word count along with the shortened piece. 
 If you haven’t written a Write On challenge before or would like to write something new to take apart, feel free to use some of the following prompts to generate a 300-ish word piece — then slash as above. 
 Silly Prompts 
 Along with Steering the Craft , I dug out The Toughguide to Fantasyland , the charming, hysterical actual guidebook companion to Dianna Wynne Jones’ wonderful book, The Dark Lord of Derksholm . You must always first consult the map… 
 1. Forest of Doom, Nine Apes Mountains, Island of Dragons (where your characters are) 
 2. Confrontation type and flavor: small, medium, or large AND friendly, ambiguous, or hostile 
 3. Including: an elf, a dragon, or a sprite 
 4. An unlikely magical object. 
 Write On! will be a regular Thursday night diary (8 pm Eastern, 5 pm Pacific) until it isn’t. 
 Before signing a contract with any agent or publisher, please be sure to check them out on Preditors and Editors, Absolute Write and/or Writer Beware . 
 READERS & BOOK LOVERS SERIES SCHEDULE 
 DAY 
 TIME
 EST/EDT
 SERIES 
 EDITOR(S) 
 SUNDAY 
 6:00 PM 
 Young People’s Pavilion 
 The Book Bear 
 (LAST SUN OF THE MONTH)
 7:30 PM 
 LGBTQ Literature 
 Chrislove 
 MONDAY 
 8:00 PM 
 The Language of the Night 
 DrLori 
 TUESDAY 
 8:00 PM 
 Contemporary Fiction Views 
 bookgirl 
 10:00 PM 
 Nonfiction Views 
 DebtorsPrison 
 WEDNESDAY 
 8:00 PM 
 Bookchat 
 cfk et al. 
 THURSDAY 
 8:00 PM 
 Write On! 
 SensibleShoes 
 (FIRST THURS OF MONTH) 
 2:00 PM 
 Monthly Bookpost 
 AdmiralNaismith 
 FRIDAY 
 7:30 AM
 WAYR? 
 Chitown Kev 
 (OCCASIONALLY) 
 8:00 PM 
 Books Go Boom! 
 Brecht 
 9:30 PM 
 Classic Poetry Group 
 Angmar 
 SATURDAY 
 Noon 
 You Can’t Read That! or
 Paul’s Book Reviews 
 pwoodford 
 9:00 PM 
 Books So Bad They’re Good 
 Ellid 
 If you’re not already following Readers and Book Lovers, please go to our homepage (link) , find the top button in the left margin, and click it to FOLLOW GROUP. Thank You and Welcome, to the most followed group on Daily Kos. Now you’ll get all our R&BLers diaries in your stream. 
 We'll get straight to the point: The financial hardships that Daily Kos is facing this year are tough. 
 We continue to be paywall-free. We continue to be supported by our readers, not billionaires or corporations. But we need to bring in more revenue. We are leaning on our community more than ever to help make ends meet. 
 One-time 
 Monthly 
 $5 
 $15 
 $25 
 Other 
 $ 
 Donate $5 
 OR 
 Donate with 
 Power matters. 
 Sign up for our daily top stories newsletter so you don't miss how it's being used—and what comes next. 
 This content was created by a Daily Kos Community member. 
 Make YOUR voice heard! 
 WRITE YOUR OWN STORY 
 12 Tags #Community #dakowrimo #R&BL #R&BLers #Readers&BookLovers #ReadersandBookLovers #SteeringtheCraft #Teaching #UrsulaKLeguin #Wr0-guest #WriteOn #Writing 
 1 Group Republished 
 Readers and Book Lovers 
 Was this story worth reading? 
 Recommending and sharing stories helps us decide which stories are most important to show our readers. 
 Recommend Story 
 Share: 
 Share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook 
 Share on Bluesky (Opens in new window) Bluesky 
 Share on X (Opens in new window) X 
 Share using Native tools Share Copied to clipboard 
 Comments didn't load? 
 It could be because of network issues or a problem with our commenting provider, or your browser or an extension may be blocking them. This can happen with Firefox Strict mode, uBlock Origin, Brave, or ad blockers. Try reloading the page, disabling your ad blocker for this site, or switching Firefox's Enhanced Tracking Protection to Standard mode. 
 Trending Stories 
 Abbreviated Pundit Roundup: High points and low lights 
 by Chitown Kev 
 Community 
 44 
 64 
 September 6, 2026 at 4:00 AM 
 GNR Sunday 9/5 ☀️ Good News Roundup ☀️ 9 Pips from Bill and 53 from Jess 
 by 2thanks 
 Community 
 18 
 9 
 September 6, 2026 at 4:02 AM 
 10 Gems of Bluesky Today – Day 455 
 by OzPerspective 
 Community 
 26 
 6 
 September 6, 2026 at 12:05 AM 
 US is lone objector to map showing Africa’s true size 
 by TheCriticalMind 
 Community 
 159 
 101 
 September 5, 2026 at 1:01 PM 
 Top Ten Reasons the Felon Is So Unpopular 
 by chloris creator 
 Community 
 9 
 6 
 September 6, 2026 at 4:35 AM 
 Ukraine Invasion Day 1,655: UKR and RU reach a temporary agreement halting long-range strikes for three days 
 by annieli 
 Community 
 31 
 6 
 September 5, 2026 at 9:02 PM 
 Russian stuff blowing up: Limited ceasefire declared for Witkoff, Kushner visit 
 by quaoar 
 Community 
 256 
 58 
 September 5, 2026 at 9:35 AM 
 They Are Afraid. Make Them More Afraid. 
 by chloris creator 
 Community 
 229 
 135 
 September 5, 2026 at 6:06 AM 
 Power matters. 
 Sign up for our daily top stories newsletter so you don't miss how it's being used—and what comes next. 
 Daily Kos is independent, reader-funded progressive media rooted in a partisan
 community. 
 Daily Kos 
 About Daily Kos Subscribe Newsletter Code of Ethics Rules of the Road (Community Guidelines) Masthead 
 Legal 
 Terms of Service Privacy Policy Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information DMCA Copyright Notice Accessibility 
 Business 
 Advertising Jobs Merchandise 
 Connect 
 Contact Us RSS 
 Facebook 
 X 
 Threads 
 Instagram 
 Bluesky 
 © 2002 – 2026 Kos Media,
 LLC. 
 Daily Kos publishes its content
 for broad public use so that ideas and information can spread as widely as possible. Unless
 otherwise specified, site content may be reused or republished for any purpose without explicit
 permission. “Kos” and “Daily Kos” are registered trademarks of Kos Media, LLC. 
