 
 Let’s Read A Game of Thrones! Part 1: Prologue | The Dark Jackel's Howl 
 Skip to content 
 The Dark Jackel's Howl 
 Echoes from the Shadow of the Gate 
 Menu 
 Jackel’s Mini-Reviews 
 The Anubai Hero TOC 
 Other 
 La Mulana 2: The Eg-lana Diaries 
 This Week’s Game: Video Game Reviews 
 Pretty Pretty Cakes! 
 Metal Earth Models 
 Let’s Read Archive 
 A Living Will TOC 
 About Me / Disclaimer 
 Let’s Read A Game of Thrones! Part 1: Prologue 
 August 19, 2015 August 18, 2015 ~ Dark Jackel 
 By the by. Anything posted, mentioned, or derided on this blog, is in fact the property of its respective owner and copyright holder, and is used for purposes of entertainment, edification, and the advancement of bad taste, not profit. If you feel anything of yours is being unfairly used and maligned, please feel free to line up right behind Mr. George R. R. Martin. 
 Couple more things: for those interested in truly meaningless data, the version of A Game of Thrones I will be reviewing is the Bantam Spectra mass market reissue edition, August 2005. I don’t anticipate actually calling out pages, but if I do, they will match this edition. Also, this will be a blind read-thru, by which I mean that I will not be jumping ahead or spoiling future events, except so far as my imperfect memory of the last time I tried to read the book goes, with the gaps alloyed with rampant cynicism. (By the way, ‘blind read-thru’ seems like it should be an oxymoron but isn’t, and let me apologize up front to any blind people who happen to be unfortunate enough to read this; and let me just say those skills you have with the braille screens is freaking awesome. Ahem.) 
 Let’s begin, then. 
 Prologue: 
 Our story opens upon three rangers, dressed in black and mounted on horses, pursuing a group of “wildlings” through a frozen forest. They are members of the Night Watch, eight or nine days away from the Wall. 
 Gared, the grizzled veteran, insists that the wildings are dead, and that they should return immediately. Will, a younger man and ex-poacher, found them motionless, to the point of death; even the one placed up a tree as a watcher.  Both experienced men feel something is wrong, and want to be well away. 
 However, Ser Waymar Royce, 18-year old knight and lordling, insists on checking the bodies personally, and commands Will to lead him on. Neither of the other two are happy about this, but their honor compels them to follow orders. Leaving Gared behind, Will and Royce head back to the wildling camp. Will is shocked upon arrival to find the bodies gone, leaving even valuable weapons behind them. 
 Royce orders Will up a tree to find traces of the escaped wildlings. As Will climbs, he notices the air becoming colder, and a feeling of terror assaults him. On the ground, Royce finally notices something is wrong, and he calls out for Will. It is then that the Others appear: tall, pale figures with inhumanly blue eyes, wearing color-shifting armor and carrying ice-like swords. 
 Will sees the approaching Others, but does not dare call out to Royce. The young knight fights one of the beings until his sword shatters against his opponent’s, and then all the Others join together in slashing the lordling to death. 
 When Will dared look again, the Others had departed. Hurriedly he climbed down and moved to collect Royce’s sword, as evidence to show what had happened here. But when he stood up, Ser Waymar Royce already stood over him. His body still showed his death wounds, but his remaining eye glowed an inhuman blue. Will’s last sensation was the dead man’s fingers closing around his throat. 
 Well. I’ve reconfirmed that summarizing is hard, so, well done me. Seriously though, I’m obviously leaving out important beats in the narrative, like Royce’s final battle cry ‘For Robert!’ or Will’s POV mentioning other people who might know what’s going on (‘that old bear Mormont’ even has a character trait, how nice), and I especially like how the Others talk amongst themselves and Will can’t understand them; but unless I care to repost the entire chapter (which I don’t) some things have get to be left out. Que Sera, right? 
 Anyway, I think this prologue functions very well as a prologue, that is, providing hooks to draw you deeper into the narrative. Who are these rangers, you might ask, and what is their history? What are the wildings, and what are the Others? Are they related? There are multitudinous questions raised in just eleven pages, and the prospect of about another 800 pages to answer them. 
 If only, huh? 
 I find myself comfortable with the expositional style here, as it’s pretty minimalist: some character makes a comment or observation, which prompts memories and reactions from the POV character, Will. The characters seem fairly stock at this point (grizzled veteran, young hotshot commander, and ex-con Will stuck somewhere in between) but that helps get them established quickly enough to move on to the true meat of the chapter: the Others. 
 I don’t know about anyone else, but the impression I’m getting of these guys is of some sort of cold-aspect elf (there’s that Tolkien influence again): tall, aloof, mysterious, powerful, and vicious as hell. So ok, maybe not so much Tolkien, more folktale, but you get the idea. Personally, I love the design, and the implication that they can make humans into others by murdering them (so maybe we’ll see Royce again someday, yeah? Maybe even Will, who knows.) So these guys will be appearing again soon, right? 
 Right? 
 I don’t have much else to say about the actual structure of the chapter, as the beats work pretty well. A little hinky around the introduction of the Others, but nothing too glaring (and hell, given Will’s state of mind, it might be completely intentional.) So, good job, R.R. 
 As to my personal reaction to this chapter, I like it a lot. Honestly, its this prologue that makes me keep trying to read this series. Its like, I know that something awesome is going to happen here, but then we cut away to follow some completely different story. Even if that story is, itself, awesome (and given my past reactions, this is not a given for me) I’m already invested in this one, and not learning what happens next is extremely disappointing to me. So maybe this prologue is, in fact, too effective. 
 But you know, its been years since I read this prologue last, and perhaps I wasn’t fair to the rest of the book. Maybe my questions will be answered, if I can just stick it out and get this thing read. It’s possible, right? 
 …. 
 Yeah. Not gonna hold my breath. 
 By the way, the chapters in this book aren’t numbered, so I did a little math. 11 pages in this chapter (with ~10 seeming typical at least in the first few) and 807 in the book (excluding the appendix, which I happily exclude). That’s something like 73-80 chapters, and at one chapter a week, that would be something like a year and a half to a year and two thirds. Ho hum. 
 No promises, but I’m going to be trying to shave those numbers a bit. 
 Share this: 
 Share on X (Opens in new window) 
 X 
 Share on Facebook (Opens in new window) 
 Facebook 
 Like Loading... 
 Posted in Beginnings , LRAGoT , Review 
 #LetsReadAGameOfThrones 
 Post navigation 
 < Previous A Modest Preamble (…modest?) Next > Let’s Read A Game of Thrones! Part 2: Bran 1 
 3 thoughts on “ Let’s Read A Game of Thrones! Part 1: Prologue ” 
 rubberlotus says: 
 August 20, 2015 at 11:38 pm 
 Hum. I remain tentatively interest in ol’ GRRM (though I suspect Pratchett or Adams – who I haven’t read either – would be more my speed). Sally on forth! 
 Like Like 
 Reply 
 Dark Jackel says: 
 August 22, 2015 at 6:20 pm 
 If you are going to read Pratchett (and you really, really should) I would suggest starting with Small Gods, which is beyond excellent. Honestly, some of his earliest novels hit the parody aspect of his writing a lot harder, while his world building is at its best throughout the middle of his run, and end up being a lot more fun. Opinions differ, of course. Oh, and the Tiffany Aching series should be read in its entirety, for it is pure gold. 
As for Adams, I really liked the Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy, along with his Dirk Gently novels (which in my opinion are unsung gems.) His later Hitchhiker books…well, they’re not bad, really, but its fairly obvious that the author was losing interest in them. 
By the by. It is interesting, to me, that the two authors you chose to mention were both parodists; I’ve been having some thoughts along those lines about AGoT…but that is a subject for a much later post, possibly even the last one. Well. Should I make it that far 😛 
 Like Like 
 Reply 
 rubberlotus says: 
 August 22, 2015 at 8:10 pm 
 What can I say? There’s nothing I like more than a good comedy. 
 Like Like 
 Reply 
 Leave a comment Cancel reply 
 Δ 
 Search for: 
 Recent Posts 
 Wherein I randomly begin ranting about alchemy stories 
 About Some Games That I’ve Been Playing 
 The Sealed God Meets the Champion 
 Nothing today 
 About Call Of The Sea 
 Recent Comments 
 Satoyama on Wherein I randomly begin ranti… Satoyama on About nothing Satoyama on About The Messenger Dark Jackel on About Disco Elysium Satoyama on About Disco Elysium 
 Categories Categories 
 Select Category 
 ALivingWill 
 AnubaiHero 
 Beginnings 
 JaMiRe 
 La-Mulana 2 
 LRAGoT 
 Monster Hunter March 
 Nanowrimo ’16 
 Nanowrimo ’18 
 Nanowrimo ’20 
 Preview Chapter 
 Random Stuff 
 Review 
 Short Stories 
 Sunday Digests 
 This Week’s Game 
 Uncategorized 
 WWIRBR 
 Archives Archives 
 Select Month 
 March 2021 
 February 2021 
 January 2021 
 December 2020 
 November 2020 
 August 2020 
 December 2019 
 November 2019 
 October 2019 
 September 2019 
 August 2019 
 July 2019 
 April 2019 
 March 2019 
 February 2019 
 January 2019 
 December 2018 
 November 2018 
 October 2018 
 September 2018 
 August 2018 
 July 2018 
 June 2018 
 May 2018 
 April 2018 
 March 2018 
 February 2018 
 January 2018 
 December 2017 
 November 2017 
 October 2017 
 September 2017 
 August 2017 
 July 2017 
 June 2017 
 May 2017 
 April 2017 
 March 2017 
 February 2017 
 January 2017 
 December 2016 
 November 2016 
 October 2016 
 September 2016 
 August 2016 
 July 2016 
 June 2016 
 May 2016 
 April 2016 
 March 2016 
 February 2016 
 January 2016 
 December 2015 
 November 2015 
 October 2015 
 September 2015 
 August 2015 
 Meta 
 Create account Log in 
 Entries feed 
 Comments feed 
 WordPress.com 
 Create a free website or blog at WordPress.com. 
 Privacy & Cookies: This site uses cookies. By continuing to use this website, you agree to their use. 
To find out more, including how to control cookies, see here:
 Cookie Policy 
 Comment 
 Reblog 
 Subscribe 
 Subscribed 
 The Dark Jackel's Howl 
 Join 53 other subscribers 
 Sign me up 
 Already have a WordPress.com account? Log in now. 
 The Dark Jackel's Howl 
 Subscribe 
 Subscribed 
 Sign up 
 Log in 
 Copy shortlink 
 Report this content 
 View post in Reader 
 Manage subscriptions 
 Collapse this bar 
 %d 
 Design a site like this with WordPress.com Get started 
 