 
 Customer Experience with AI-Generated Content Within Titles – DriveThruRPG 
 Skip to main content 
 Help Center
 Return to DriveThruRPG
 Send a request
 English (US)
 Deutsch
 Español
 Français
 Italiano
 日本語
 한국어
 Português
 What can we help you with?
 DriveThruRPG 
 Site Information 
 Account Settings 
 Customer Experience with AI-Generated Content Within Titles
 October 28, 2024 19:51 
 Hiding AI-Generated Content 
 We have recently deployed two browsing options on our new DriveThruRPG marketplace. Using these, customers can now choose to either view or filter out AI-Generated content in their Account Settings . (AI-Generated content is set to viewable by default.) This will apply to when you are logged into your account. 
 From the main page, select MENU > My Account > Account Settings > Additional Preferences and toggle Show AI Content to the OFF position. 
 AI-Generated Creation Method Filter 
 While exploring the website, titles are also now clearly labeled as Handcrafted or AI-Generated if the publisher has selected one of those options. 
 What do the different filters mean? 
 Handcrafted → Artwork was made by an artist practicing their craft, without the use of AI-generation programs. 
 Contains AI-Generated Content → AI-Generation Programs such as Midjourney were used in creating some or all of the art in the title. 
 Creation Method Not Chosen by Publisher → The Publisher has not yet selected one of the above options. 
 Was this article helpful? 
 Yes 
 No 
 227 out of 246 found this helpful 
 Can't find what you're looking for?
 Let us help you right now!
 Send a request
 The Roll20 team is dedicated to enabling gamers to unite across any distance via our easy-to-use gaming tools. This means we strive to lessen the technical burden on the participants, facilitate the formation of new gaming groups, and to make barriers to entry as few as possible when gathering around a table for camaraderie. To accomplish these goals we seek to create a service that is sustainable and will be a resource to the gaming community as long as it is needed. 
 -->
 -->
 -->
 © 2021 The Orr Group, LLC. All rights reserved. 
 Terms of Use | Privacy Policy | DMCA Sitemap 
 Roll20® is a Registered Trademark of The Orr Group, LLC. All rights reserved.
 Support | Contact Us 
 -->
 Type your question here... 
 Powered by Zendesk 
 