 
CS Lewis’ Response to Critics of The Lord of the Rings: The Dethronement of Power | Earth and Oak 
 Earth and Oak 
 On Hiking, Nature, Storytelling and Tolkien. 
 Skip to content 
 Home 
 About 
 Artwork 
 ← Reading and Drawing the Lord of the Rings Part 3: On Being an Oddity 
 Tolkien’s Art and How it Influenced His Writing: Drawing to Discover → 
 CS Lewis’ Response to Critics of The Lord of the Rings: The Dethronement of Power 
 Posted on January 6, 2018 by Earthoak 
 C. S. Lewis’ defence of Tolkien’s work gives insight into the types of criticism it elicited. Chief among those criticisms were its supposed lack of realism, and lack of character development or moral complexity. Lewis robustly argues against both allegations, and with characteristic succinctness states “we know at once that it has done things to us.” Notably this review came only 2 days after Tolkien’s final instalment was published, in response to criticism that was clearly already in full flow since the earlier volumes. It demonstrates the extent to which even a great piece of work will encounter rejection and snobbery, but also demonstrates the value of even one strong ally who supports your work. Below is Lewis’ essay in full. 
 ‘When I reviewed the first volume of this work, I hardly dared to hope it would have the success which I was sure it deserved. Happily I am proved wrong. There is, however, one piece of false criticism which had better be answered: the complaint that the characters are all either black or white. Since the climax of Volume I was mainly concerned with the struggle between good and evil in the mind of Boromir, it is not easy to see how anyone could have said this. I will hazard a guess. “How shall a man judge what to do in such times?” asks someone in Volume II. “As he has ever judged,” comes the reply. “Good and ill have not changed…nor are they one thing among Elves and Dwarves and another among Men.” (II, 40-41). 
 This is the basis of the whole Tolkinian world. I think some readers, seeing (and disliking) this rigid demarcation of black and white, imagine they have seen a rigid demarcation between black and white people. Looking at the squares, they assume (in defiance of the facts) that all the pieces must be making bishops’ moves which confine them to one colour. But even such readers will hardly brazen it out through the last two volumes. Motives, even on the right side, are mixed. 
 Those who are now traitors usually began with comparatively innocent intentions. Heroic Rohan and imperial Gondor are partly diseased. Even the wretched Smeagol, till quite late in the story, has good impulses; and by a tragic paradox, what finally pushes him over the brink is an unpremeditated speech by the most selfless character of all. 
 There are two Books in each volume and now that all six are before us the very high architectural quality of the romance is revealed. Book I builds up the main theme. In Book II that theme, enriched with much retrospective material, continues. Then comes the change. In III and V the fate of the company, now divided, becomes entangled with a huge complex of forces which are grouping and regrouping themselves in relation to Mordor. The main theme, isolated from this, occupies IV and the early part of VI (the latter part of course giving all the resolutions). But we are never allowed to forget the intimate connection between it and the rest. On the one hand, the whole world is going to the war; the story rings with galloping hoofs, trumpets, steel on steel. On the other, very far away, two tiny, miserable figures creep (like mice on the slag heap) through the twilight of Mordor. And all the time we know that the fate of the world depends far more on the small movement than on the great. This is a structural invention of the highest order: it adds immensely to the pathos, irony, and grandeur of the tale. 
 This main theme is not to be treated in those jocular, whimsical tones now generally used by reviewers of “juveniles.” It is entirely serious: the growing anguish, the drag of the Ring on the neck, the ineluctable conversion of hobbit into hero in conditions which exclude all hope of fame or fear of infamy. Without the relief offered by the more crowded and bustling Books it would be hardly tolerable. 
 Yet those Books are not in the least inferior. Of picking out great moments, such as the cock-crow at the Siege of Gondor, there would be no end; I will mention two general, and totally different, excellences. One, surprisingly, is realism. This war has the very quality of the war my generation knew. It is all here: the endless, unintelligible movement, the sinister quiet of the front when “everything is now ready,” the flying civilians, the lively vivid friendships, the background of something like despair and the merry foreground, and such heavensent windfalls as a cache of choice tobacco “salvaged” from a ruin. The author has told us elsewhere that his taste for fairy-tale was wakened into maturity by active-service; that, no doubt, is why we can say of his war scenes (quoting Gimli the Dwarf), “There is good rock here. This country has tough bones'” (II, 137). The other excellence is that no individual, and no species, seems to exist only for the plot. All exist in their own right and would have been worth creating for their mere flavour even if they had been irrelevant. Treebeard would have served any other author (if any other could have conceived him) for a whole book.. His eyes are “filled up with ages of memory and long, slow, steady thinking” (II, 66). Through those ages his name has grown with him, so that he cannot now tell it; it would, by now, take too long to pronounce. When he learns that the thing they are standing on is a hill, he complains that this is but “a hasty word” (II, 69) for that which has so much history in it. 
 How far Treebeard can be regarded as a “portait of the artist” must remain doubtful; but when he hears that some people want to identify the Ring with the hydrogen bomb, and Mordor with Russia, I think he might call it a “hasty” word. How long do people think that a world like his takes to grow? Do they think it can be done as quickly as a modern nation changes its Public Enemy Number One or as modern scientists invent new weapons? When Tolkien began there was probably no nuclear fission and the contemporary incarnation of Mordor was a good deal nearer our shores. But the text itself teaches us that Sauron is eternal; the war of the Ring is only one of a thousand wars against him. Every time we shall be wise to fear his ultimate victory, after which there will be “no more songs.” Again and again we shall have good evidence that “the wind is setting East, and the withering of all woods may be drawing near” (II, 76). Every time we win we shall know that our victory is impermanent. If we insist on asking for the moral of the story, that is its moral: a recall from facile optimism and wailing pessimism alike, to that hard, yet not quite desperate, insight into Man’s unchanging predicament by which heroic ages have lived. It is here that the Norse affinity is strongest: hammerstrokes, but with compassion. 
 “But why,” some ask, “why, if you have a serious comment to make in the real life of men, must you do it by talking about a phantasmagoric never-never-land of your own?” Because, I take it, one of the main things the author wants to say is that the real life of men is of that mythical and heroic quality. One can see the principle at work in his characterisation. Much that in a realistic work would be done by “character delineation” is here done simply by making the character an elf, a dwarf, or a hobbit. The imagined beings have their insides on the outside; they are visible souls. And Man as a whole, Man pitted against the universe, have we seen him at all till we see that he is like a hero in a fairy-tale? In the book, Eomer rashly contrasts “the green earth” with “legends.” Aragorn replies that the green earth itself is “a mighty matter of legend” (II, 37). 
 The value of the myth is that it takes all the things we know and restores to them the rich significance which has been hidden by “the veil of familiarity.” The child enjoys his cold meat, otherwise dull to him, by pretending it is bufalo, just killed with his own bow and arrow. And the child is wise. The real meat comes back to him more savoury for having been dipped in a story; you might say that only then is it real meat. If you are tired of the real landscape, look at it in a mirror. By putting bread, gold, horse, apple, or the very roads into a myth, we do not retreat from reality: we rediscover it. As long as the story lingers in our mind, the real things are more themselves. This book applies the treatment not only to bread or apple but to good and evil, to our endless perils, our anguish and our joys. By dipping them in myth we see them more clearly. I do not think he could have done it any other way. 
 The book is too original and too opulent for any final judgment on a first reading. But we know at once that it has done things to us. We are not quite the same men. And though we must ration ourselves in our rereadings, I have little doubt that the book will soon take its place among the indispensables.’ 
 C. S. Lewis, “The Dethronement of Power” first published in Time and Tide , 22 October 1955, reprinted in Tolkien and his Critics: Essays on J.R.R. Tolkien and the Lord of the Rings (University of Notre Dame Press, 1968) 
 Share this: 
 Share on X (Opens in new window) 
 X 
 Share on Facebook (Opens in new window) 
 Facebook 
 Email a link to a friend (Opens in new window) 
 Email 
 Share on Reddit (Opens in new window) 
 Reddit 
 Share on Tumblr (Opens in new window) 
 Tumblr 
 Like Loading... 
 Related 
 This entry was posted in Literature , Tolkien and tagged Criticism , Critics , CS Lewis , Fantasy , Realism , The Lord of the Rings , Tolkien . Bookmark the permalink . 
 ← Reading and Drawing the Lord of the Rings Part 3: On Being an Oddity 
 Tolkien’s Art and How it Influenced His Writing: Drawing to Discover → 
 21 Responses to CS Lewis’ Response to Critics of The Lord of the Rings: The Dethronement of Power 
 Pingback: CS Lewis’ Response to Critics of The Lord of the Rings: The Dethronement of Power | Earth and Oak | Khanya 
 stephencwinter says: 
 January 8, 2018 at 8:41 am 
 Thank you so much for sharing this fine essay. Reading it has enriched my day. It shows the value of criticism from a good friend who has shared the very process of creation. I particularly liked Lewis’s argument that it is only through the prism of mythology that we learn to see things as they really are. I will practice that consciously today. 
 Reply 
 Earthoak says: 
 January 8, 2018 at 1:07 pm 
 You’re very welcome, Stephen. Thank you for your comment, I too found that particular part of the review inspiring – it deepens one’s understanding of why mythology can have such a profound and fruitful impact on our lives. So very glad to hear your day has been enriched! 🙂 
 Reply 
 Olga Polomoshnova says: 
 January 8, 2018 at 12:58 pm 
 Lewis is so spot on in his words. That’s a very wise essay to have written. Thank you for sharing it! 
 Reply 
 Earthoak says: 
 January 8, 2018 at 1:09 pm 
 My pleasure, and many thanks for your comment, Olga. Wise words indeed from Lewis, he has a gift for conveying potentially complex ideas with such clarity. 
 Reply 
 Ariel Hudnall says: 
 January 15, 2018 at 3:39 pm 
 Man, Lewis really knew how to write, even when it wasn’t fiction. I love this entire essay, especially the part the defends against the idea that Tolkien’s book was an allegory for the war. “How long do you think it takes for worlds like his to grow?” is a fantastic retort. Thank you so much for sharing! 
 Reply 
 Earthoak says: 
 January 15, 2018 at 4:01 pm 
 Absolutely! A pithy, straight to the point retort from someone who had unique insight into the whole process. Thank you for coming by and reading 🙂 
 Reply 
 Zoi Koufalexi says: 
 January 20, 2018 at 9:22 am 
 Middle Earth isn’t a phantasmagorical never never land of his own. It’s this Earth. 
 Reply 
 Earthoak says: 
 January 20, 2018 at 10:18 pm 
 Indeed, Tolkien said as much. Thanks for coming by, Zoi. 
 Reply 
 Tim Fisher says: 
 March 5, 2018 at 4:12 pm 
 Too bad CSL did not live long enough to read the published Silmarillion! His insights would have certainly proved of inestimable value! 
 Reply 
 Earthoak says: 
 March 9, 2018 at 8:24 am 
 Absolutely right. Thanks for coming by! 
 Reply 
 timholman says: 
 March 8, 2018 at 3:28 am 
 What a jewel of a find with Lewis’ comments. Great post! 
 Reply 
 Earthoak says: 
 March 9, 2018 at 8:23 am 
 Yes, isn’t it great to read such candid and insightful comoments from Lewis! Thanks for coming by and reading. 
 Reply 
 Anduril says: 
 April 16, 2018 at 4:47 pm 
 WOW! I am quite taken aback by the sheer genius of CSL’s arguments for Tolkien. Thank you for sharing them with us. Also, don’t you ponder, what a friend CSL would have been??? 
 Reply 
 Earthoak says: 
 April 19, 2018 at 8:07 am 
 It’s a very articulate, clear and persuasive defence – i am with you in admiration of it! Also yes, I do reflect on the friendship between the two, and how exciting it must have been to have a group of friends to be able to share a passion with in such a sincere and constructive way. That is rare nowadays – maybe it always has been. A good book to read would be ‘The Company They Keep’ by Diana Glyer – it’s about the Inklings and considers how the process of regular feedback and ability to discuss their ideas helped to shape their stories. 
Thanks for reading 🙂 
 Reply 
 John.Y says: 
 April 16, 2018 at 4:57 pm 
 I have just recently finished reading the set of volumes 🙂 and I remembered this blog, I found this article and was fascinated by how valuable CSL’s criticisms must have been thank you for sharing this interesting essay with us. 
 Reply 
 Earthoak says: 
 April 19, 2018 at 8:09 am 
 Remarkable achievement! Well done! Well….finishing the book is a difficult thing to describe, all the emotions – sadness too, I expect, that the journey is over. I look forward to having the opportunity to discuss it with you properly – well done again! I hope you wrote down your thoughts, if not you should! 
 Reply 
 Pingback: From the Trenches to Mordor and Back: World War I and British Fantasy Literature 
 nickolasurpi says: 
 December 3, 2019 at 4:07 pm 
 Reblogged this on Pen to Paper . 
 Reply 
 Pingback: Not Another Fucking Elf – The Last Estate 
 Pingback: CS Lewis was Right - Vox Popoli 
 Leave a comment Cancel reply 
 Δ 
 Recent Posts 
 Golden Pothos 
 “There is Good Rock Here” 
 ‘Constable Country’ Walk – Manningtree Circular 
 Pentland Regional Park: Glencorse Reservoir Walk 
 Frodo and the Tyranny of Being Watched 
 Categories 
 Art (13)
 Hiking (15)
 History (1)
 Journeys (1)
 Literature (7)
 Mysterious Cities of Gold (7)
 Nature (26)
 Tolkien (24)
 Writing (3)
 Follow Earth and Oak on WordPress.com 
 Follow Blog via Email 
 Enter your email address to follow this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email. 
 Email Address: 
 Follow 
 Copyright © earthandoak.wordpress.com 2021 
 Meta 
 Create account Log in 
 Entries feed 
 Comments feed 
 WordPress.com 
 Archives 
 January 2023 (1) 
 October 2021 (1) 
 September 2021 (2) 
 June 2021 (1) 
 December 2020 (1) 
 April 2020 (2) 
 September 2018 (1) 
 March 2018 (1) 
 February 2018 (1) 
 January 2018 (1) 
 December 2017 (1) 
 November 2017 (3) 
 August 2017 (1) 
 November 2015 (2) 
 September 2015 (1) 
 August 2015 (3) 
 July 2015 (2) 
 June 2015 (3) 
 May 2015 (2) 
 April 2015 (5) 
 March 2015 (4) 
 October 2014 (1) 
 June 2014 (3) 
 April 2014 (3) 
 September 2013 (1) 
 August 2013 (1) 
 May 2013 (4) 
 April 2013 (1) 
 March 2013 (5) 
 February 2013 (1) 
 Earth and Oak 
 Blog at WordPress.com. 
 Privacy & Cookies: This site uses cookies. By continuing to use this website, you agree to their use. 
To find out more, including how to control cookies, see here:
 Cookie Policy 
 Comment 
 Reblog 
 Subscribe 
 Subscribed 
 Earth and Oak 
 Join 121 other subscribers 
 Sign me up 
 Already have a WordPress.com account? Log in now. 
 Earth and Oak 
 Subscribe 
 Subscribed 
 Sign up 
 Log in 
 Copy shortlink 
 Report this content 
 View post in Reader 
 Manage subscriptions 
 Collapse this bar 
 Loading Comments... 
 Write a Comment... 
 Email (Required) 
 Name (Required) 
 Website 
 %d 
 Design a site like this with WordPress.com Get started 
