=== PAGE 1 ===
GNOMIC UTTERANCES. These are traditional, and are set at the 
head of each section of the Guidebook. The reason for them is lost 
in the mists of HISTORY. They are culled by the Management from 
a mighty collection of wise sayings probably compiled by a SAGE—
probably called Ka’a Orto’o—some centuries before the Tour begins. 
The Rule is that no Utterance has anything whatsoever to do with the 
section it precedes. Nor, of course, has it anything to do with GNOMES.
— Diana Wynne Jones, The Tough Guide to Fantasyland
In her satire on quest fantasy, The T ough guide To F anTasyland, 
Diana Wynne Jones addresses the topic of world-intrinsic epigraphs (80). 
Such epigraphs, she suggests, are vague and cryptic texts with no relevance 
to the story that they accompany. However, the T ough Guide’s own “gnomic 
utterances” are connected to the section they precede by beginning with the 
letter of their section, and each constitutes a tiny story. Through their various 
viewpoints, voices, and themes, Jones’s epigraphs form a small fantasy world 
that provides a foil to the parodic world constructed in the book’s introduction 
and main entries. For the attentive reader, the T ough Guide demonstrates 
the world-building power of epigraphs. In this article, we will establish the 
importance of world-intrinsic epigraphs in analyzing a secondary fantasy world 
by showing how they work through four key functions.
The more different a fictional world is from the actual world in which 
we (authors, readers, critics) live, the greater the effort required to bring the 
world to life—to build it. The term “world-building” has come to take on a 
variety of meanings depending on what activity the user is interested in. In 
creative-writing workshops, computer-game construction, and role-playing 
game discussions, it is often equated with the creative work of producers 
(authors, video-game writers, game masters). Literary critics and philosophers 
concern themselves with the cognitive re-creation of consumers (readers, 
Between World and Narrative: Fictional 
Epigraphs and Critical World-Building
Stefan Ekman and Audrey Isabel Taylor
Vol. 32, No. 2, Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts
Copyright © 2021, International Association for the Fantastic in the Arts.
=== PAGE 2 ===
Between World and Narrative · 245
journal of the fantastic in the arts
players, audiences). But in order to critically analyze a fictional world, whether 
it is presented in a text, a film, a game, or any other medium or combination of 
media, scholars also need to assemble the world from its various elements. We 
have previously referred to this activity as “critical world-building” and have 
demonstrated how it can provide the basis for fruitful scholarly interpretation 
(Ekman, “Entering”; “Map”; “Vitruvius”; Ekman and T aylor; T aylor, Patricia A. 
McKillip; T aylor and Ekman).
In this article, we employ a critical world-building perspective to address 
an element of world-building that has been given very little attention in 
previous scholarship. While the functions of epigraphs have been discussed 
by previous scholars (most notably Gérard Genette), epigraphs in fantasy 
and genre literature generally have been much neglected. This is particularly 
true for scholarship on the function of fictional epigraphs that are presented 
as part of secondary worlds. Our aim is to specifically analyze the functions 
of secondary-world epigraphs as world-building elements by examining their 
paratextual and intertextual characteristics.
W e will begin by briefly discussing critical world-building and epigraphs, 
before more closely examining the epigraph’s multiple functions as elements 
of critical world-building. W e focus our examinations on four overarching 
functions. The first two functions concern how the epigraphs contribute 
information about the world in approximately the same way that the main text 
does, although the epigraph contributions gain relative prominence through 
the epigraph’s position at the edge of the work. One function, which we 
believe is all but unavoidable for all epigraphs, has to do with how epigraphs 
impact the world’s mood and set expectations for the development of that 
world in the main text. The other function is also ubiquitous and pertains to 
how epigraphs provide, and highlight, various details in the world. The other 
two functions we address concern epigraphs that give rise to effects in their 
relation between epigraph and main text. Of these two functions, one deals 
with how epigraphs provide multiple perspectives of the fictional world and 
the other addresses the many ways in which the fictional epigraph takes on 
a double nature with regard to itself, the fictional world, and the main text. 
The overall movement in presenting the functions of epigraphs is thus from 
atmosphere to description and then from perspective to ontology.
By analyzing these four functions, we demonstrate how fictional epigraphs 
are not only relevant in interpreting secondary worlds but can be key in 
understanding the world’s composition. The themes and world elements 
foregrounded by an epigraph’s mood and details bring out dominant or 
central aspects of the world’s universe, a universe that can transform into a 
“polyverse” through the alternative voices and perspectives introduced from 
the edge of the main text. That edge, in turn, becomes blurred and indistinct 
=== PAGE 3 ===
246 · Stefan Ekman and Audrey Isabel Taylor
journal of the fantastic in the arts
when the text, in the guise of a world-intrinsic epigraph, masquerades as its 
own intertext. These transformative functions are valuable in analyzing world-
intrinsic epigraphs and secondary worlds, but we submit that they can also be 
useful when looking at other kinds of epigraphs in other types of worlds. The 
functions might not be as common nor as world-defining as in the cases we 
examine in this article, but we have added some comments regarding possible 
broader applications of our findings for each function.
Fictional Worlds and Critical World-building
Fictional worlds are artistic creations that are, in a sense, treated as having 
an existence beyond the medium through which they are created. “W orld” is 
used here to refer not only to a (fictional) physical space; in keeping with, for 
example, Marie-Laure Ryan and Mark J. P . W olf, we consider a fictional world 
to consist of its physical space along with everything contained in this space, 
such as flora and fauna, weather and history, and peoples and their cultures. 
Ryan observes that for fictional worlds
the text is apprehended as a window on something that exists outside of 
language and extends in time and space well beyond the window frame. To 
speak of a textual world means to draw a distinction between a realm of 
language, made of names, definite descriptions, sentences, and propositions, 
and an extralinguistic realm of characters, objects, facts, and states of affairs 
serving as referents to the linguistic expressions. (91)
According to Ryan, fictional worlds are treated as if they are described 
(referentially) in a medium rather than created by the use of that medium. The 
distinction between the “realm of language” and the perceived “extralinguistic 
realm” that linguistic expressions simultaneously bring into being and refer to 
is even more pronounced in so-called secondary worlds (T olkien 132; Zahorski 
and Boyer 59-61). The term “secondary world” has a long history in fantasy 
theory, dating back to J. R. R. T olkien’s expressing world-building in terms 
of “sub-creation”: the author creates a “Secondary W orld” (as opposed to 
the “Primary W orld” of the author and reader) into which the reader’s mind 
can enter and according to whose laws the story is “true” (132). The binary 
division between primary and secondary worlds has been called into question, 
with some critics arguing that there is a spectrum of fictional worlds, from close 
copies of the actual one to fully secondary worlds (W olf 26; Piatti 137, 141). 
This article focuses primarily on fictional worlds that are largely secondary 
and demonstrates how a particular paratextual element can contribute to the 
critical construction and analysis of a fully realized secondary world.
W orld-building can be approached from several directions or discussed 
as different, if overlapping, types of processes. The creative processes of 
=== PAGE 4 ===
Between World and Narrative · 247
journal of the fantastic in the arts
an author writing a world differ from the cognitive processes of a reader 
re-creating it, and both of these are, arguably, different from the fan’s detailed 
compilation of information. Our main interest is the critical methods that 
a scholar uses in constructing a world out of a work of fiction in order to 
analyze and interpret it. Such “critical world-building” keeps the text in 
focus, rather than the methods through which the author imagines a world 
or the processes through which a reader reimagines it (Ekman and T aylor 
10-11). In critical world-building, the fictional world is constructed as a 
composite, by relating the mainly sequential presentation of the world in 
text and images to a more holistic perspective. The world is also placed in a 
critical context of genre conventions and theoretical discourses (Ekman and 
T aylor 11-12). The building blocks—“elements”—of such a composite, critical 
world have a dynamic rather than a static relationship to each other (Ekman, 
“Vitruvius” 119). Combining one detail with another in the analysis, (re-)
interpreting something in light of a new genre trope, or adopting a different 
theoretical perspective could cause a chain of new realizations of how the 
world functions in relation to its narrative(s). In this article the term “world-
building” is thus understood as “critical world-building.”
Epigraphs
In his work on paratexts (material that exists on, or constitute, the threshold 
between a text and the not-text that surrounds it), Genette defines the 
epigraph
roughly as a quotation placed en exergue [in the exergue], generally at the 
head of a work or a section of a work; literally, en exergue means off the work, 
which is going a little too far. Here the exergue is, rather, at the edge of the 
work, generally closest to the text—thus, following the dedication, if there 
is one. (144)
Genette’s definition does not specify what kind of quotation constitutes an 
epigraph, only where it can (generally) be found in the physical structure of 
the work. As quotations, epigraphs consist of a quoted text and an attribution 
of that text, which in this article will be referred to as the epigraph’s “text” and 
its “source.” Epigraphs, according to Genette, are paratexts, types of texts that 
establish the boundary between the world of the text and the world outside 
it. His focus is largely on the relation between the epigraph and the narrative, 
although the first two functions of epigraphs that he mentions involve 
comments on title and text (156-57) rather than on story or narrative. Instead 
of focusing on narrative, this article focuses on the functions that epigraphs 
have in relation to the worlds of the text and more specifically on secondary 
worlds and epigraphs intrinsic to these worlds. W e leave to others to explore 
=== PAGE 5 ===
248 · Stefan Ekman and Audrey Isabel Taylor
journal of the fantastic in the arts
how fictional epigraphs relate to narrative and story and how they function in 
genre literature more broadly.
Not all works set in secondary worlds use world-intrinsic epigraphs, 
however. Some include quotations from actual-world sources, often as 
epigraphs to the entire work or to longer sections. They function more in 
line with how Genette discusses epigraphs. W e do not focus on these kinds of 
epigraphs, but as demonstration, a few examples are addressed briefly. Philip 
Pullman’s Northern Lights (1995; US title The Golden Compass) opens with a 
stanza from John Milton’s Paradise Lost (1667), Steph Swainston’s The Y ear of 
Our War (2004) with a line from T . S. Eliot’s “Gerontion” (1920), and Sylvia 
Kelso’s Amberlight (2007) with quotations from both William Shakespeare’s 
Anthony and Cleopatra (1623) and T olkien’s The Lord of the Rings (1954–55). 
Pullman and Swainston place their epigraphs before the main text, while 
Kelso introduces each of her two parts with an epigraph. These epigraphs 
provide a thematic commentary on the text they precede (and, in the case of 
Northern Lights, establish Milton’s text as a foil to the novel), a function that 
Genette refers to as canonical (157). More obliquely, each epigraph is also “a 
signal [...] of culture, a password of intellectuality. [...] With it, [the author] 
chooses his peers and thus his place in the pantheon” (Genette 160). The 
references to canonical works at the beginning of genre novels thus encourages 
the reader to take the texts and their authors seriously, while emphasizing the 
difference between the actual world of the sources and the secondary worlds 
of the stories. Kelso in particular uses her epigraphs to blur the border between 
canonical and non-canonical by equating Shakespeare and T olkien and by 
implying that both authors have relevance for her own text.
Functions of World-intrinsic Epigraphs
In Genette’s definition cited above, it should be noted that he only considers 
the epigraph to be “roughly” a quotation. In fact, he acknowledges that the 
“quotation” could be what he calls “autographic,” made up by the author 
(145). In a text set in a secondary world the autographic epigraph is usually 
attributed to a source within that world rather than to a source in the actual 
world. Such world-intrinsic references can potentially contribute to the world 
either by extending it through new information or by offering alternative 
perspectives on world elements that are established in the main text. At the 
very least, the epigraphs establish a particular mood or atmosphere, or can 
guide reader expectations.
Function One: Setting the Mood
Regardless of whatever else an epigraph contributes to the secondary world, 
it helps set the mood. That paratexts can affect reader expectations has been 
pointed out by other critics. Genette discusses how they can be “puzzling” for 
=== PAGE 6 ===
Between World and Narrative · 249
journal of the fantastic in the arts
the reader and “more affective than intellectual” (158); according to Mike 
Cadden, epigraphs can “communicate thematic expectations” (137); and 
Joseph Besa suggests that literary elements have a “presence,” that is, they 
directly influence the reader’s sensibilities (323). Such influence, Besa claims, 
includes the way in which titles can either confuse or control the expectations 
of the reader (325). W e argue that other paratexts, such as epigraphs, can have 
the same effect, which we summarize under the term “mood” for simplicity.
The challenge that the mood poses in critical world-building lies in 
its intangibility. All epigraphs set some mood, like a first chord before an 
orchestra launches into a symphony. Through its position at the front of the 
text, this mood can accentuate, clarify, or boost a particular theme or aspect 
of the world. Like any world element, the mood of the epigraph should be read 
in relation to the world as a whole, and the mood conveyed by the entire text.
A well-known example of an epigraph that sets the mood for the world is 
the verse that precedes the text in Ursula Le Guin’s A Wizard of Earthsea (1968): 
“Only in silence the word, / only in dark the light, / only in dying life: / bright 
the hawk’s flight / on the empty sky” (6). The verse is given the source “The 
Creation of Éa.” Not much detail about the secondary world is provided, 
apart from the name “Éa,” which is not specified but could, for instance, 
be interpreted to be the name of the world. It is confirmed that the world 
contains hawks; the other concepts are so common that their absence from 
a world would have been more noteworthy than their presence is. With 
its four yin-and-yang-like images contrasting nothingness and presence, its 
repetition of “only” suggesting simultaneously exhortation and acceptance, 
and its contrast between three abstract nouns and the final concrete image of 
a hawk in flight, the verse suggests a philosophical context similar to Daoism. 
There is a sense of balance and duality as well as movement. The source 
title suggests a creation myth or other story central to the secondary world’s 
culture, and the Daoist-like worldview communicated by the verse can be 
taken to have a prominent position in the world. The main text confirms that 
The Creation of Éa is “the oldest of all songs” (Le Guin, Wizard 33), and the 
epigraph’s contemplative mood and sense of balance parallels the wise master 
wizards in the book, whose magic can overturn the balance of the world and 
who therefore strive to maintain that balance. The mood established by the 
epigraph permeates the world, reinforcing the focus on balance.
Le Guin’s epigraph can be used to demonstrate how the mood of the 
epigraph is connected to the mood of the world as a whole. Our contention 
is that although there is nothing in The Creation of Éa text that does not exist 
in almost every secondary world, the mood it communicates nevertheless 
makes it difficult to conceive of it as an epigraph to a great many other fantasy 
worlds. For all that T olkien’s world is called Eä (a fairly close match), for 
instance, the sense of balance and acceptance in the epigraph would be a bad 
=== PAGE 7 ===
250 · Stefan Ekman and Audrey Isabel Taylor
journal of the fantastic in the arts
fit for his world as presented in The Lord of the Rings or The Silmarillion (1977). 
In T olkien’s world, strife and oppositions dominate, and themes of light in 
darkness and life in death, although present, are not as prominent. Adding the 
Earthsea epigraph would shift the thematic focus of T olkien’s world.
Some epigraphs are so brief and general in nature that their presence 
likely contributes nothing but a vague mood regarding the world. In Steven 
Brust’s Jhereg (1983), each chapter is introduced by a short aphorism, maxim, 
or motto, and most of them only add to the general atmosphere of the world 
(although they are usually notionally connected to the events of the chapter). 
They comprise a wide range of styles, from formal, old-fashioned, and poetic 
to modern and colloquial. Examples include “There is no substitute for good 
manners—except fast reflexes” (29), “One man’s mistake is another man’s 
opportunity” (117), and “T read lightly near thine own traps” (143). Especially 
when considered together, they produce a mood suitable to a world of larceny, 
assassination, and general skullduggery. The epigraphs convey a sense of 
what Lisbeth Klastrup and Susana T osca call a world’s ethos, “the explicit and 
implicit ethics of the world and (moral) codex of behaviour” (412). (Klastrup 
and T osca discuss transmedial worlds, but we suggest that their concepts can 
be applied to monomedial worlds as well.) A world’s ethos is a core element for 
analyzing the moral and ethical dimensions of a world and its inhabitants, and 
the mood of the epigraphs can offer a basis for identifying that ethos.
Apart from the ethos they communicate, Brust’s epigraphs are slightly 
humorous in tone. A comedic mood is another function of some epigraphs, 
as observed by for instance Margarete Rubik (170) with regards to Jasper 
Fforde’s The Eyre Affaire (2001; explored in more depth below). Humorous 
epigraphs (apart from invoking a mirthful mood in a reader) can be used to 
draw attention to genre tropes or social conventions through satire or parody 
(Jones, in her Gnomic Utterances entry in The T ough Guide to Fantasyland, 
exemplifies this). In this way, an epigraph can indicate that, and possibly 
which, particular intertexts should be brought into the critical construction of 
the world. At the very least, a comedic mood signals that the world does not 
necessarily conform to, for example, traditional logic, psychological realism, or 
genre conventions. Even the world’s internal consistency, that central tenet 
of the fantasy world (Irwin 27; Ekman, Here 5-6), might be sacrificed at the 
altar of levity.
T o some extent, this function applies to all epigraphs in all genres of 
fiction. Genette observes how an epigraph has a “sense of indirect backing that 
its presence at the edge of a text gives rise to” (159). That sense of indirect 
backing amplifies the mood of the epigraph and provides that opening chord 
that accentuates the dominant themes. This chord might not always be as 
loud or as clear as the fictive epigraph, which harmonizes by virtue of being 
designed specifically for a particular world, but it is still present.
=== PAGE 8 ===
Between World and Narrative · 251
journal of the fantastic in the arts
The epigraph’s mood is a vital, underlying part of a world and by failing 
to take it into account, one risks failing to see the entirety of the world. The 
mood established by the epigraph, either by complementing or contrasting 
the mood foregrounded by the main text, can draw attention to those minor 
themes that are eclipsed by the dominant themes. At the very least, epigraphs 
indicate a mood that can function as an interpretive lens through which the 
world can be analyzed.
Function Two: Adding Details
Arguably, all epigraphs contribute to setting the mood of a secondary world 
in some way, but many if not most epigraphs also add more specific details to 
the world. Details can be added through the epigraph text, through the source 
given for that text, or through the combination of source and text. Regardless 
of what particular topic the epigraph addresses, or to what extent it deals with 
that topic, details about the world can be gleaned from studying it.
A fictional world is made up from the totality of the explicit details given 
in the text, along with their implications. As we outlined above, in critical 
world-building details are analyzed in relation to each other, to the totality of 
the world, and to a generic and critical context (for a practical example, see 
T aylor and Ekman). The details that an epigraph affords to the world come 
with that “sense of indirect backing” that, Genette observes, an epigraph 
acquires from its liminal position (159); epigraphs may not be pivotal to a 
particular interpretation, but they should not be blithely ignored. Like the 
mood, they indicate a possible focus or emphasis to the world-building.
Epigraphs can contribute marginally or substantially to the world depending 
on the extent of the epigraph and its source. Such contributions can be of a 
general nature, such as the existence of a type of creature, form of government, 
or religious practice, or provide fairly specific information, for instance the 
name of a city, the history of a given person, or a description of a geographic 
feature. For example, the chapter epigraph “The bite of the yendi can never 
be fully healed” (Brust 159) includes the fact that in this world there is a 
creature called “yendi” and adds information about its bite. On its own, this 
piece of information may appear inconsequential, but reading it in relation to 
the broader context of the novel and its world tells us more about the creature 
as a cultural entity. The yendi is mentioned only a handful of times in Jhereg, 
twice in epigraphs. The first is a poem listing noble Houses that are named 
after various creatures, in which the yendi “coils and strikes, unseen” (17). The 
second epigraph, cited above, is a saying like all chapter epigraphs in Jhereg. 
In the main text the yendi is referred to once in an idiom (55) and once in a 
metaphor (114). The web of relations between details and implications bring 
out the cultural meaning of the creature (its importance is confirmed by the 
next novel in the series, Y endi [1984]).
=== PAGE 9 ===
252 · Stefan Ekman and Audrey Isabel Taylor
journal of the fantastic in the arts
Close readings of an epigraph can uncover a great deal even before its 
details are introduced into and related to the entirety of the world. The text 
preceding Sean Russell’s The One Kingdom (2001), “T o my children I bequeath 
my hatred of the Renné, for all the atrocities they have committed against 
us, and all that they will commit,” in combination with its source, “The final 
testament of Abril Wills,” offers some specifics about the feud that exists 
between the Renné and Wills families. Even more detail about the world is 
provided by an epigraph such as:
Here we find further argument for Gotagga’s supposition that the world is 
round. How else could all men stand higher than their brothers?
— Ajencis, Discourse on War (Bakker 54)
T wo people are mentioned by name along with a work written by the second 
person. But the text is also clearly a part of a wider philosophical discussion 
that combines the geographical theories of Gotagga with Ajencis’s discourse 
on a different subject. The state of science and learning in R. Scott Bakker’s 
world is, partially, revealed through the epigraph. The spherical nature of the 
world has neither been proven nor disproven but it is a subject for discussion. 
Through linguistic markers such as “further argument,” “supposition,” and 
“discourse,” the writing suggests a philosophical treatise and thus hints at a 
form of society in which such treatises are written. And through the stress on 
“men” and “brothers” a patriarchal society, or at least a society in which war 
is a male concern, is implied. In both cases the details and their implications 
foreground central characteristics and themes of the world.
The linguistic form of an epigraph can in itself provide details about the 
secondary world. The meter and rhyme scheme of a song or poem and the 
style and stylistic devices used in a text add to the world. The epigraph called 
“Caspro’s Hymn” that precedes the text in Le Guin’s Voices (2006) is metered 
and has distinct stylistic traits, including a final rhyme (thee/liberty):
As in the dark of winter night
Our eyes seek dawn,
As in the bonds of bitter cold
The heart craves sun,
So blinded and so bound, the soul
Cries out to thee:
Be our light, our fire, our life,
Liberty!
Apart from identifying a person, Caspro (a character in the book), the negative 
connotations of cold and darkness and the positive connotations of light, sun, 
=== PAGE 10 ===
Between World and Narrative · 253
journal of the fantastic in the arts
and fire provide information about the cultural and physical setting. The word 
“hymn” implies a religious context, but it is unclear whether the hymn invokes 
a deity or just the concept of liberty—or both. The epigraph thus adds to 
the religious and temporal conflict between colonizers and colonized that is 
central to both world and narrative in the novel.
The epigraph source, as well as the epigraph itself, can provide information 
that indicates a way to approach a secondary world. Naming customs, titles, 
and social positions, and what text genres exist in the world can be determined 
from the sources given. Bakker’s Ajencis and the Discourse on War have been 
discussed already, and Bakker further includes a wide range of fictional persons 
and text genres in his epigraphs, from religious and philosophical treatises to 
proverbs and anonymous letters. Some of the writers are characters named in 
the story, but many more are not. Instead, they populate the secondary world 
with people who extend the social world beyond the story by providing access 
to a larger intellectual tradition and cultural history. In Gate of Ivrel (1976), 
C. J. Cherryh expands the world of what appears to be a fantasy novel with 
three epigraphs cast as a prologue, with the sources “Journal, Union Science 
Bureau, V ol. XXX, p. 22,” “Book of Embry, Hait-an-Koris,” and “Annals of 
Baien-an.” The first source indicates a scientific journal with page numbers, 
carefully cited in a way appropriate for scientific discourse, and adds the idea 
of some sort of modern political unit (a union) with organized bureaucracy. 
It is a source that as a fictional epigraph would have suggested science fiction 
rather than fantasy, were it not for the sharp contrast with the sense of story 
and history that the other two sources communicate through “book of” and 
“annals of.” Even without reading the texts of the epigraphs, it is possible to 
determine that the secondary world contains a conflict between science and 
tradition, suggesting that mix of genres sometimes referred to as “science 
fantasy.” Regardless of how the text portrays the world, the epigraph points 
out the generic context in which the world should be constructed for analysis.
This function is particularly consequential when the world in question is a 
secondary world. For non-genre fiction set in a version of the actual world, an 
epigraph from The Lord of the Rings does not mean that there are orcs, hobbits, 
or magical rings in the world. However, the epigraph can still accentuate 
particular details of the world or offer analytical routes into the text.
The details afforded by an epigraph are part of the entirety of the world, 
and as such cannot simply be left out of the world-building endeavor. On 
the contrary, their position at the edge of the text suggests that they deserve 
critical attention, although not every detail or implication is relevant to every 
interpretation of the world.
=== PAGE 11 ===
254 · Stefan Ekman and Audrey Isabel Taylor
journal of the fantastic in the arts
Function Three: Adding Perspectives
Epigraphs can reveal background facts that explain and familiarize a strange 
world. Fforde extends the secondary world beyond what is created through the 
first-person narrative by using chapter epigraphs that reflect a wide range of 
text genres, from biographies and press interviews to parliamentary speeches 
and scholarly works. The many sources add to the appearance of completeness 
of the world, particularly as they all seem to be authoritative nonfiction 
sources. In other words, the epigraphs introduce a make-believe reference 
world for the novels (Rubik 170).
The numerous sources of the Fforde epigraphs not only provide solidity 
to the world, they offer several different voices through which the world is 
described, a multitude of perspectives similar to what Mikhail Bakhtin calls 
“polyphony” (6). Even the antagonist of The Eyre Affaire is afforded his own 
epigraphs, though the main narrative is largely told from the viewpoint of the 
protagonist. In his discussion of Fyodor Dostoevsky’s works, Bakhtin argues 
that Dostoevsky’s characters are given their own independent voices with 
which they describe their world.
[T]he utterly incompatible elements comprising Dostoevsky’s material are 
distributed among several worlds and several autonomous consciousnesses; 
they are presented not within a single field of vision but within several fields 
of vision, each full and of equal worth; and it is not the material directly but 
these worlds […] that combine in a higher unity, a unity, so to speak, of the 
second order, the unity of the polyphonic novel. (16)
Epigraphs with different sources and voices similarly provide several fields 
of vision although these fields of visions are generally not “full and of equal 
worth”: usually the world of the main novel text offers the fuller, more “worthy” 
vision of the world, made more complex by the perspectives promoted by the 
epigraphs. That paratexts can create counter-narratives has already been 
suggested (McCormack 38-39), and as demonstrated by Jones’s epigraphs, 
paratexts such as epigraphs can even offer “counter-worlds” that destabilize 
the world constructed in the main text. The variety of sources as well as 
content of the Fforde epigraphs means that quite different aspects of the text 
are highlighted. In chapter 8, the epigraph reads:
“... There is no point in expending good money on the pursuit of an engine 
that can power aircraft without propellers. What is wrong with airships 
anyway? They have borne mankind aloft for over a hundred relatively 
accident-free years and I see no reason to impugn their popularity …”
Congresswoman Kelly, arguing against parliamentary funds for the 
development of a new form of propulsion, August 1972. (Fforde 77)
=== PAGE 12 ===
Between World and Narrative · 255
journal of the fantastic in the arts
This epigraph, predating the main narrative by thirteen years, provides 
information about the air-travel technology of the fictional world and 
establishes an alternative perspective on air travel. While the main text 
describes travel by airship as peaceful, idyllic, and completely accepted by the 
narrator, the epigraph gives an impression of airship travel as being contested. 
Congresswoman Kelly’s voice defends the traditional way of flying against 
possible new technologies, implying that airships are under threat. Her success 
becomes clear from the narrator’s description: more than a decade later, 
airships are the standard means for long-distance travel, their popularity clearly 
not impugned. Through the epigraph, the “contemporary but counterfactual 
Britain” (Mikkonen 117) of the novel gains a dynamism that the main 
narrative alone does not provide. Airships as the primary form of air travel is 
not the unchanging and unquestioned situation that the narrative implies; it is 
a situation that has been challenged and defended. Other epigraphs add other 
perspectives to the world, for example suggesting that the exact nature of time 
is irrelevant (Fforde 11), extolling “true and baseless evil” (31), and implying 
that Britain has characteristics of an autocratic police state (107). Ultimately, 
these perspectives combine into that “higher unity […] of the second order” 
that Bakhtin mentions, creating what could be called a textual “polyverse” 
rather than a “universe.”
In Deadhouse Gates (2000), Steven Erikson produces just such a fictional 
polyverse by supplying epigraphs from a variety of sources. One third of the 
chapters are preceded by epigraphs referring to works of an informative or 
factual nature, often histories, and another third describe events or places in 
verse form. A typical example is the excerpt from Ilem T rauth’s Lives of the 
Conquered preceding chapter 3:
The Red Blades were, at this time, pre-eminent among those pro-Malazan 
organizations that arose in occupied territories. Viewing themselves as 
progressive in their embrace of the values of imperial unification, this quasi-
military cult became infamous with their brutal pragmatism when dealing 
with dissenting kin…(86)
The voice of Ilem T rauth maintains a distance to its subject, placing the 
violent and fanatical group in a historical and political context. At the 
same time, it emphasizes history’s judgment of the group as a “quasi-military 
cult [...] infamous [for] brutal pragmatism,” as well as how they viewed 
themselves. Erikson’s epigraphs in Deadhouse Gates present a variety of 
perspectives, based both on the identity of the source and the genre of the 
epigraph text. Distanced historical or factual prose accounts are mixed with 
more emotive verse descriptions, and the sources include unfamiliar people 
as well as characters who appear in the text. Some sources occur more than 
=== PAGE 13 ===
256 · Stefan Ekman and Audrey Isabel Taylor
journal of the fantastic in the arts
once, emphasizing their perspectives even when these are voiced only through 
the epigraphs.
Epigraphs can determine the reliability of the main text (or its narrator) 
by either implying that the epigraph is the less reliable retelling (a ballad, 
prophesy, or tale for instance) and the main text is a more reliable version of 
events; or vice versa,
1 in which the epigraph is a more objective account (for 
instance a scholarly or even scientific text) and the main text is more biased. 
An example that conspicuously constructs this kind of multiple perspectives 
through its epigraphs is Patricia A. McKillip’s The Bards of Bone Plain (2010). 
This is not the first instance of McKillip questioning the nature and shaping of 
story, poetry, and song (T aylor, Time 116-21) but it is the only time in which 
she uses epigraphs to do so. Every second chapter in the book begins with an 
extract from something that reads like a research paper (revealed near the 
end of the main text to be written by one of the characters). This section is 
followed by additional epigraphs, snippets from what are presumably its world-
intrinsic “source material,” before the rest of the chapter continues to narrate 
the events.
2 In the second chapter, for example, the epigraph reads:
Across a thousand years of poetry, we have come to know Nairn the 
Wanderer, the Fool, the Cursed, the Unforgiven intimately through 
hundreds of poems, ballads, tales… But of the man behind, within the music 
and the poetry, who cast his unending shadow across a millennium and more, 
we know astonishingly little. (14)
The style is that of a scholarly treatise that emerges from within the fictional 
world, introducing Nairn and his various epithets, outlining the sources 
through which he is known, and establishing (like so many scholarly papers 
of the actual world) that the subject, Nairn, is important but that there is 
a lack of knowledge about him. The text sets itself up as an authoritative 
source while at the same time suggesting that the poems, ballads, and tales by 
or about Nairn do not convey a true picture. There are details about Nairn, 
indicating his fame (he has been represented in multiple ways and thus has 
multiple epithets) and, through the negative connotations of the epithets, 
that he has not led an easy life: “the Fool,” “the Cursed,” “the Unforgiven.” 
The references to Nairn’s immortality seem to place place the epigraphic 
text within the secondary world; immortality comes across as a matter of fact 
rather than poetic conceits. The epigraph’s scholarly perspective thus offers a 
perspective of the world of Bone Plain that complements that of the main text.
The extract from the research paper is followed by a second epigraph with 
a different style and perspective, which adds to the polyverse of Bone Plain. 
It seems to be a part of the paper’s “source material,” a snippet from a ballad, 
similarly from within the world.
=== PAGE 14 ===
Between World and Narrative · 257
journal of the fantastic in the arts
Dark his hair, darker his eye,
Sweet as cream and honey his voice,
O the charm in it, O the lure of it,
He could wile a smile from the moon.
Fragment of “Ballad of the Pig-Singer,” Anonymous (McKillip 15)
Through its two contrasting perspectives, this epigraph is given a double 
function. The text is from a ballad, with stylistic features (short lines, 
repetitions, parallelisms, strong imagery) to support that, as well as having 
the function as scholarly source material (presumably for the paper it follows) 
through the epigraph’s source. The juxtaposition of the two epigraphs imply 
that Nairn and the Pig-Singer of the ballad are the same person, but the 
descriptions offered of him in the latter are more focused on positive traits 
than are the epithets in the paper extract. The portrayal is more romantic, 
appropriately for a ballad, with emphasis on the Pig-Singer’s ability to enchant. 
The contrast between, on the one hand, the title’s reference to the prosaic 
pig and the less than romantic job of singing to them, and, on the other, 
the melodious, positive attributes of the epigraph text mirrors the contrast 
between the different perspectives of the two epigraphs.
McKillip’s epigraphs are in dialogue with each other, as well as with the 
narrative as a whole, a conversation that builds a more complex world than 
a single voice would. According to Graham Allen, “[a]ll utterances depend 
on or call to other utterances; no utterance itself is singular; all utterances are 
shot through with other, competing and conflicting voices” (27). Allen makes 
a point regarding intertextuality, but it is also illuminating in the context of 
McKillip’s epigraphs. The epigraphs in her novel offer a particularly striking 
example of “competing and conflicting voices.” The various types of “source 
material” produce a multifaceted portrayal of Nairn by themselves, a portrayal 
that is analyzed and examined in the scholarly extracts. The dual perspective 
of cultural artefacts and scholarly analysis is then combined with the rest of the 
main text, creating complementary as well as sometimes conflicting worldviews.
A dual or multiple perspective can be constructed even with regular 
epigraphs in a non-fantasy work. Epigraphs from actual newspapers can 
be used for a fictional account of a historical event; a story about another 
writer’s minor character can be provided with epigraphs from the original 
writer’s texts (e.g. a story focalizing Irene Adler using quotes from the 
original Sherlock Holmes stories); or a police procedural can offer a dual 
perspective through epigraphs from police investigation manuals. If fictional 
epigraphs are used, alternative perspectives can be established in the same 
way as for secondary worlds.
The various alternative perspectives carried by McKillip’s, Fforde’s, and 
Erikson’s epigraphs do not arise solely from world-intrinsic interrelations. 
=== PAGE 15 ===
258 · Stefan Ekman and Audrey Isabel Taylor
journal of the fantastic in the arts
Complementary and competing ways of seeing the world emerge from 
references to the fictional world as well as to text genres and situations of 
the actual world in which different views can be proposed or argued. The 
epigraphs are parts of the work of fiction while mimicking text genres that are 
not fiction, such as the research paper, the parliamentary debate, the historical 
treatise. Their many voices can thus rely on both polyphony and mimicry to 
build a more complex world.
Function Four: Double Nature
The combination of secondary worlds and world-intrinsic epigraphs means that 
the epigraphs lose the paratextual characteristic of constituting a threshold, 
while remaining in the exergue position that Genette uses to define them. 
They acquire a double nature that in itself contributes to world-building: 
the secondary world leaks into the paratext, establishing itself as part of the 
outside perspective on the text and thus lending strength to the proposition 
that the secondary world exists as more than an aesthetic artefact. Using 
world-intrinsic paratexts is a well-established way to connect the fantastic to 
the actual world. Examples include T olkien’s prefatory “On Hobbits” in The 
Lord of the Rings and Jonathan Swift’s maps in Gulliver’s T ravels (1726), on 
which the imaginary lands are located near or in actual geographic places.
W orld-intrinsic fictional epigraphs are constructed to give the impression 
of being paratextual and intertextual while in fact being part of the text. They 
are internal references to the text-world rather than external references to 
other texts, other worlds. Genette argues that “[autographic] epigraphs that 
are (almost) openly accepted by authors as their own belong [...] to authorial 
discourse, and for this reason [he] would readily say that their function is that 
of a succinct preface” (153). He cites Walter Scott’s introduction to Chronicles 
of Canongate (1827), in which Scott claims that he “drew on [his] memory as 
long as [he] could, and, when that failed, eked it out with invention” (qtd. 
in Genette 147). In secondary-world fantasy such change of function is less 
straightforward. Fantasy fiction is founded on the tacit agreement between 
writer and reader that although the contents of the book are not “real” or 
“possible,” they will be treated as if they were (Ekman, Here 5; Irwin 9). By this 
generic agreement the epigraphs are (or should be) accepted to be autographic 
while at the same time being treated as if they were not.
This doubleness in fictional epigraphs, where they are known to be fictional 
but read as factual, blurs the boundary between the actual and fictional 
worlds. McKillip provides a clear example of this. Formally and stylistically, the 
epigraphs signal particular text types, such as research paper and ballad, and 
must be read in terms of these. In particular the former text type encourages 
a reading as if it were factual, a scholarly text based on a substantial source 
material, with claims to “objectivity” and “truth,” whereas the main narrative 
=== PAGE 16 ===
Between World and Narrative · 259
journal of the fantastic in the arts
is “only” a story. On the other hand, the narrative focus of the main text gives 
it more authority than do its epigraphs, and the paper extracts of the epigraphs 
are in fact written by a character in the main narrative. The boundary between 
epigraph and main text thus becomes blurred.
This blurring happens not only between epigraph and main text but 
between the actual and the fictional. Epigraphs that cite actual, nonfiction 
sources can be used to extend the fictional world outwards into the actual 
(Thomas 305), and fictional epigraphs can create a similar extension of the 
fictional world. This effect can be explained by understanding world-intrinsic 
epigraphs in terms of “fraudulent artifacts,” that is
a text purporting to be a particular form of writing—a journal entry, a note, 
a yearbook letter, an e-mail, a transcript of a speech, a grocery list, a musical 
score, a screenplay—which also tells a story, stirs thought and emotion, 
inspires inquiry, initiates action, and/or calls into question that which is—or 
has purported to be—real. (Shields and Vollmer 13)
The use of fraudulent artifacts in fantastic fiction in the sense of one text type 
taking the form of another is neither uncommon nor limited to text types 
easily shaped into stories, as illustrated by examples such as Garth Nix’s “Read 
It in the Headlines!” (2005), Lisa Goldstein’s “Reader’s Guide” (2008), and 
Kat Howard’s “Choose Y our Own Adventure” (2011). Shields and V ollmer 
use the term for entire stories written according to the conventions of a non-
narrative or nonfiction text type, but we would extend the usage to cover 
parts of a document as well, such as epigraphs. The fictional epigraph is doubly 
fraudulent. It is fiction that takes on the form of a particular kind of paratext, 
but it is also fraudulent in the sense that it purports to quote from some 
existing, world-intrinsic source, in effect bringing that source into existence 
by implication. Through this double “fraud,” epigraphs add dimensions to the 
world that can provide information on world elements, such as geography, 
history, culture, scholarship, or naming practices, but they also extend the 
experience of the world, contributing to what Farah Mendlesohn and Edward 
James refer to as the “depth” of the world, a feeling of there being more world 
around the corner, to use their image (44).
Where the sustained counter-world built by McKillip’s epigraphs derives 
its complexity from the contrasts between the epigraphs (the scholarly paper 
and the ballads, poems, and songs it analyzes) and the main text, other texts 
provide a multitude of fraudulent text types without providing any unifying 
perspective. Even more than in the case of Fforde, some of these other 
epigraphs adhere strictly to the conventions of factual text types. The extract 
from “The Sha’ik Rebellion,” by Cullaran, is deceptively similar to a scholarly 
text:
=== PAGE 17 ===
260 · Stefan Ekman and Audrey Isabel Taylor
journal of the fantastic in the arts
To this day it remains easy to ignore the fact that the Aren High Command 
was rife with treachery, rivalry and malice…The assertion that [the Aren 
High Command] was ignorant of the undercurrents in the countryside is, 
at best naive, at worst cynical in the extreme… (Erikson 40; elisions and 
brackets in the original)
The voice of Cullaran is that of a historian looking back on events. It 
expresses an articulated political position, as evidenced by the negative “rife 
with treachery, rivalry and malice,” and the emphatic rhetorical figure used 
to describe the naïveté or cynicism of an assertion. Cullaran’s worldview is 
not that of the book’s omniscient and dispassionate narrator; it offers an 
alternative perspective on the world and the events in it. But the epigraph is 
“double-voiced” (Bakhtin 185); a second voice is present in it. Cullaran’s work 
has been quoted only in part. The two elisions and the clarification within 
square brackets imply the presence of both an epigrapher and an epigraphed 
(Genette 151). The perspective provided is not only Cullaran’s but that of an 
unidentified sender who, by selectively omitting parts of the text, has imposed 
their own worldview as well. The double voices and the conventions used 
to construct them help perpetrate the “fraud” by giving the impression both 
of a source from which the text is quoted and of a person who has done the 
quoting. Through these fraudulent references to an original source and to 
someone who has quoted from it, the epigraph extends Erikson’s world.
The multiple voices and multiple worlds, or polyphony and polyversality, 
that fictional, world-intrinsic epigraphs can give rise to undermine a totalizing 
critical world-building. Georg Stanitzek observes that paratexts can promote 
textual unity, but “they can only accomplish this without hindrance when they 
are not read in the strict sense of the word as such, that is, when no questions 
are asked about details” (34). The polyversality that critical world-building can 
give rise to has to take the world’s simultaneous unity and lack of unity into 
account when analyzing fictional epigraphs in relation to the fictional world.
The non-fictional epigraph is by definition a non-fraudulent paratext. 
But for all that Genette dismisses the “autographic” epigraph as a form of 
preface, it can achieve the same blurring between the actual and the fictional, 
not least if it takes on a fraudulent nonfiction guise. As such, an epigraph 
can give rise to a polyphonic polyverse regardless of genre and type of world. 
Imaginary intertexts and fictive facts can be evoked by an epigraph, supporting 
or undermining any fictive world.
Like the intertextual paratexts that they mimic, fictional epigraphs offer 
a choice of analytical path: to build the world of the main text or that of 
the intertext. Where actual epigraphs can create important, even crucial, 
intertextual resonances for a reader (Allen 105), fictional epigraphs can 
imitate such resonances. And while these resonances are only imitations on 
=== PAGE 18 ===
Between World and Narrative · 261
journal of the fantastic in the arts
one level, they also bring the resonating intertexts into (fictional) being by 
insisting on their existence. The critical world-building endeavor not only 
allows but encourages the (re)construction of fictional source-texts and an 
analysis of what those texts contribute to the world. The critic is invited to 
explore the epigraph source, but the intertext is absent, knowable only by 
chains of implications. In the readerly building of the world, the epigraph 
offers what Laurent Jenny regards as the alternative of all intertextual 
references, to either proceed in the text or to follow the intertext (113); in 
critical world-building, by its nature a holistic task (Ekman and T aylor 11-12), 
there is no saying which fork is of greater importance, along which path we 
can learn more about the world. Ultimately, any scholar who engages critically 
with world-building would be wise to take fictional epigraphs seriously.
Conclusion
Like many paratextual elements, the usefulness of world-intrinsic epigraphs 
to critical world-building is easily overlooked. Their contributions to the 
secondary world are often glossed over or ignored. When given due 
consideration, however, the ways in which they function with regard to world-
building can have significant impact on the interpretation of the fictional world 
through a wealth of details and alternative perspectives, even introducing a 
counter-portrayal of the world. At the very least, the world-intrinsic epigraph 
sets a mood for the world that helps emphasize particular themes developed 
in the main text.
T o analyze world-intrinsic epigraphs as paratexts requires an awareness 
of their fraudulent nature. They must be read both as texts from within the 
fictional world and as references to external sources. Through this doubleness, 
the details they contain extend the world. When the epigraphs are subjected 
to the combination of sequential, holistic, and layer analysis that is critical 
world-building, the fictional universe fractures into a polyverse. Several paths 
for understanding the world—and the work—appear, adding to its complexity 
and enabling a richer scholarly interpretation.
The four world-building functions that we have discussed for epigraphs do 
not necessarily cover all functions that epigraphs can have, but they are the 
ones that we observed over and over again in the world-intrinsic epigraphs 
of numerous secondary-world fantasy novels. Neither are these functions 
necessarily limited to epigraphs in secondary fantasy worlds, either; as we have 
pointed out, the four functions are conceivable for epigraphs in various forms 
of fiction. Furthermore, epigraphs can have other functions in other genres 
and other types of worlds. Our main assertion is ultimately that epigraphs 
are deserving of thoughtful analysis in any critical world-building enterprise. 
Whether they set a mood, foreground crucial or interesting details, offer 
alternative perspectives, add to the illusion that there is more world just out 
=== PAGE 19 ===
262 · Stefan Ekman and Audrey Isabel Taylor
journal of the fantastic in the arts
of sight, or contribute to the world in other ways, the value of world-intrinsic 
epigraphs should not be underestimated.
Acknowledgements
Matthew Oliver and Christine Mains helpfully pointed out how to proceed 
when we thought we had said all there was to say about moods, details, 
and broader applications. Helen W edham provided valuable assistance with 
the mood function. W e gratefully acknowledge the useful comments and 
suggestions from the JFA editors and the anonymous reviewers.
Notes
1. We have been unable to find examples of the latter, though it seems probable that 
they exist.
2. What “counts” as an epigraph? What length is too long (McKillip’s often run 
to one and a half pages), and what utterance is too small? Like the paratext more 
generally, epigraphs are formatted differently from the standard narrative to stand 
apart. Epigraphs (and paratexts in general) create a threshold between the text and 
what is beyond the text, not least by layout and formatting. It is beyond the scope of 
this article to explore this issue. We have decided arbitrarily that in McKillip’s case, 
the non-narrative texts are epigraphs, but in a book such as Jane Yolen’s Sister Light, 
Sister Dark (1988), the sections titled, for example, “The Myth” and “The Legend” 
are not epigraphs to the sections titled “The Story.” Someone else might have made a 
different choice and we would welcome further discussion on this.
Works Cited
Allen, Graham. Intertextuality. Routledge, 2000.
Bakhtin, Mikhail. Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics, edited and translated by Caryl 
Emerson, U of Minnesota P, 1984.
Bakker, R. Scott. The Thousandfold Thought. Orbit, 2007.
Besa, Joseph. “Title, Text, Meaning.” Textual Practice, vol. 11, no. 2, 1997, 
pp. 323-30.
Brust, Steven. Jhereg. Ace, 1983.
Cadden, Mike. “Rhetorical Technique in the Young Adult Verse Novel.” The Lion 
and the Unicorn, vol. 42, no. 2, 2018, pp. 129-44.
Cherryh, C. J. Gate of Ivrel. 1976. In The Chronicles of Morgaine. Methuen, 1985, 
pp. 7-195.
=== PAGE 20 ===
Between World and Narrative · 263
journal of the fantastic in the arts
Ekman, Stefan. “Entering a Fantasy World through Its Map.” Extrapolation, vol. 59, 
no. 1, 2018, pp. 71-87.
—. Here Be Dragons: Exploring Fantasy Maps and Settings. Wesleyan UP, 2013.
—. “Map and Text: World-Architecture and the Case of Miéville’s Perdido Street 
Station.” Literary Geographies, vol. 4, no. 1, 2018, pp. 66-83.
—. “Vitruvius, Critics, and the Architecture of Worlds: Extra-narratival Material 
and Critical World-Building.” Fafnir: Nordic Journal of Science Fiction and 
Fantasy Research, vol. 6, no. 1, 2019, pp. 118-31.
—, and Audrey Isabel Taylor. “Notes Toward a Critical Approach to Worlds and 
World-Building.” Fafnir: Nordic Journal of Science Fiction and Fantasy Research, 
vol. 3, no. 3, 2016, pp. 7-18.
Erikson, Steven. Deadhouse Gates. Tor, 2000.
Fforde, Jasper. The Eyre Affair. Hodder, 2001.
Genette, Gérard. Paratexts: Thresholds of Interpretation. Translated by Jane E. Lewin, 
Cambridge UP, 1997.
Irwin, W. R. The Game of the Impossible: A Rhetoric of Fantasy. U of Illinois P, 1976.
Jenny, Laurent. “The Strategy of Forms.” French Literary Theory Today: A Reader, 
edited by Tzvetan Todorov, Cambridge UP, 1982, pp. 34-63.
Jones, Diana Wynne. The Tough Guide to Fantasyland. 1996. Revised ed., Firebird/
Penguin, 2006.
Kelso, Sylvia. Amberlight. Juno, 2007.
Klastrup, Lisbeth, and Susana Tosca. “Transmedial Worlds—Rethinking Cyberworld 
Design.” 2004 International Conference on Cyberworlds, 2004, pp. 409-16, https://
doi: 10.1109/CW.2004.67.
Le Guin, Ursula K. Voices. Orion, 2007.
—. A Wizard of Earthsea. 1968. In The Books of Earthsea: The Complete Illustrated 
Edition, Saga Press, 2018, pp. 1-130.
McCormack, Leah. “Reclaiming Silenced & Erased Histories: The Paratextual 
Devices of Historiographic Metafiction.” Making Connections, vol. 14, no. 2, 
2013, pp. 37-42, 44-54.
McKillip, Patricia A. The Bards of Bone Plain. Ace, 2010.
Mendlesohn, Farah, and Edward James. A Short History of Fantasy. Middlesex UP, 
2009.
Mikkonen, Kai. “‘There Is No Such Thing as Pure Fiction’: Impossible Worlds 
and the Principle of Minimal Departure Reconsidered.” JLS, vol. 40, 2011, 
pp. 111-31.
Piatti, Barbara. Die Geographie der Literatur: Schauplätze, Handlungsräume, 
Raumphantasien. Wollstein Verlag, 2008.
Pullman, Philip. Northern Lights. Scholastic UK, 1995.
=== PAGE 21 ===
264 · Stefan Ekman and Audrey Isabel Taylor
journal of the fantastic in the arts
Rubik, Margarete. “Invasions into Literary Texts: Replotting and Transfictional 
Migration in Jasper Fforde’s The Eyre Affair.” A Breath of Fresh Eyre: Intertextual 
and Intermedial Reworkings of Jane Eyre, edited by Margarete Rubik and Elke 
Mettinger-Schartmann. Rodopi, 2007, pp. 167-80.
Russell, Sean. The One Kingdom. HarperCollins, 2001.
Ryan, Marie-Laure. Narrative as Virtual Reality: Immersion and Interactivity in 
Literature and Electronic Media. Johns Hopkins UP, 2001.
Shields, David, and Matthew Vollmer. Introduction. Fakes: An Anthology of Pseudo-
Interviews, Faux-Lectures, Quasi-Letters, “Found” Texts, and Other Fraudulent 
Artifacts, edited by David Shields and Matthew Vollmer, Norton, 2012, pp. 
11-19.
Stanitzek, Georg. “Texts and Paratexts in Media.” Critical Inquiry, vol. 32, no. 1, 
2005, pp. 27-42.
Swainston, Steph. The Year of Our War. Golancz, 2004.
Taylor, Audrey Isabel. Patricia A. McKillip and the Art of Fantasy World-Building. 
McFarland, 2017.
—. Time in the Secondary World Fantasies of Patricia A. McKillip. 2015. Anglia Ruskin 
University, PhD dissertation. https://arro.anglia.ac.uk/id/eprint/579919/1/
AITthesis.pdf.
—, and Stefan Ekman. “A Practical Application of Critical World-Building.” 
Foundation: The International Review of Science Fiction, vol. 47, no. 3, 2019, 
pp. 15-28.
Thomas, Bronwen. “Kicking the Hornet’s Nest: The Rhetoric of Social Campaigning 
in Stieg Larsson’s Millennium Trilogy.” Language and Literature, vol. 21, no. 3, 
2012, pp. 299-310.
Tolkien, J. R. R. “On Fairy-stories.” 1947. The Monster and the Critic and Other 
Essays, edited by Christopher Tolkien, HarperCollins, 1997, pp. 109-61.
Wolf, Mark J. P. Building Imaginary Worlds: The Theory and History of Subcreation. 
Routledge, 2012.
Yolen, Jane. Sister Light, Sister Dark. 1988. The Books of Great Alta. Tom Doherty, 
1997, pp. 1-205.
Zahorski, Kenneth J., and Robert H. Boyer. “The Secondary Worlds of High 
Fantasy.” The Aesthetics of Fantasy Literature and Art, edited by Roger C. 
Schlobin, U of Notre Dame P, 1982, pp. 56-81.
=== PAGE 22 ===
Between World and Narrative · 265
journal of the fantastic in the arts
Abstract
Secondary worlds are constructed from a wide range of building blocks. In 
this article, epigraphs that refer to fictional sources in secondary worlds are 
analyzed in terms of their world-building characteristics. The analysis starts 
from the (implied) paratextual and intertextual properties of epigraphs that 
are part of and refer to a secondary world. Four functions of such world-
intrinsic epigraphs are explored: the way in which they (1) set a mood that 
indicate the world’s dominant themes or ethos; (2) give details that extend, 
explain, and familiarize the fictional world; and (3) provide perspectives with 
complementary or conflicting worldviews. Finally, (4) how the double nature 
of fictional epigraphs, as fictional paratexts and as purported quotations from 
world-intrinsic sources, extends and solidifies the world is addressed. These 
four functions lead us to conclude that fictional epigraphs deserve thoughtful 
analysis in any critical world-building endeavor.