Written on the Dark by Guy Gavriel Kay (Ace. To be released May 27, 2025.)

By Paul Weimer: Thierry Villar is a tavern poet, a writer of verse in dark inns and taverns, and is almost notorious within that sphere. So he is surprised when he is called to help gather information for the murder of a noble. What business is that of him? That’s not the circles he inhabits or frequents. And yet, the choice of Thierry and his immersion into worlds and with characters he might not have otherwise ever met hangs the fate of a King, a Queen, and a nation.

Such is the story of Guy Gavriel Kay’s Written on the Dark.

The novel is set in Ferrieres, in the “Two Moons” verse that many of his novels are set in, particularly lately (the duology based on Medieval China seems to be the only exceptions in recent years). Although he does not use a specific set of dating in his works, they do fall into a chronology that one can follow based on world events, and, also, the analogues and rhyming the events in the Two Moons verse has with our own world. With that in mind, Written on the Dark takes place roughly between A Brightness Long Ago and Children of Earth and Sky. The great city of Sarantium in the east has not yet fallen to the Osmali (although that does happen in the denouement of the book as we learn the final fate of characters). Batiara is still the Renaissance Italy analogue that we know from those two books–the scheming mercantile power of Seressa, the holy city of Rhodias, and many more.

But Written on the Dark switches the setting entirely. The novel is set in Ferrieres, which might be usefully compared to a 15th century French analogue. (A France that, importantly, has not yet absorbed its Burgundy-analogue.) Theirry lives in the city of Orane, roughly analogous to our Paris, with correspondences in geography and culture. There is even a huge holy sanctuary that is analogous to our own Notre Dame. But the genius of Kay’s writing is the rhyming and allusion and reflection on our history, rather than simple substitution. Thierry gets wrapped up in the murder of a noble, and soon goes from tavern poetry to being witness and participant in an incipient civil war, as an ambitious noble wants to take the throne for himself from a King who is certifiably mad.

And did I mention that a peasant girl in the countryside dresses in armor and claims to have visions and a mission from Jad (God)? Oh, and that Ferrieres is being invaded by its neighbor from across a sea channel.

So you can see the historical furniture of what Kay borrows in this novel and remakes to his own purposes. Since the sequence of novels that began with The Lions of Al-Rassan, this has been the template and model and methodology that Kay has employed. Use these building blocks, turn twists and variations on the historical theme, and set loose his main character and those they encounter within it. There is a real sense, as always of the historical perspective, both on the personal and on the societal level.

There is a fillip to Kay’s writing that he employs numerous times, enough that you start watching for it. It’s a brief pull back from the close third person into a no longer time bound omniscient third, as he relates what the effect of a seemingly small choice by the character will have on the years and decades of their life. We get that brief “zoom” of their fate, usually contained in less than a paragraph, spooling out a life in a brief moment, before returning to the main narrative. It helps show the warp and the weft of history in his novel, and it shows that history is the sum total of these smaller histories. And he does it at the macro level when we see things from the past coming back to life. It’s clear to me that Kay was and is moved by the mosaics of Ravenna, the analogue of that mosaicist and his creation is detailed in The Sarantine Mosaic novels. And yet, this is yet another novel set in this world where a character encounters them, and is moved by them.

But let’s go back to Thierry Villar. Kay’s model for him is the medieval French poet François Villon. Villon for the uninitiated was a raconteur of a poet. Villon had lots of criminal connections, was involved with the underworld of Paris, got involved in a couple of robberies, published poetry, and eventually disappeared. His ultimate fate is unknown. In the world of the Two Moons, Thierry is a tavern poet, a poet of the people, just like Vlllon in our own world. Like many other Kay novels, a very unlikely protagonist and main point of view, but that’s part of the genius of Kay’s work and writing.

It is from this small acorn, to investigate what people that have seen of the murder of a Duke on the streets of Orane, that Thierry is swept up in intrigues and adventures. We learn much more about him and the current situation, the fact that his stepfather is in the church, that word of his poetry has reached noble courts, and the ears of those who apparently have supernatural powers (or do they?) As matters progress, we get a window into the true situation facing Ferrieres as a kingdom, and what role Thierry might play in it. Kay seems fascinated and loves to use these small moves, these small turns to divert mighty rivers of history. Kay’s history is not of how the great leader fought the great battle to do the Great thing, it is instead the small choice made by the leader three days before that, unbeknownst to anyone, turns the fate of the world. So, too, Thierry, caught up in the murder investigation, by chance, by a miracle of Jad¹, or the pen of the author, winds up influencing history, without realizing that is going to happen. But we, the reader, and Kay the author is very concerned about it and likes to show it.

I happened to read this book at the same time that I was listening to an audiobook of a Will Durant history, specifically as I was reading this the history of the era of Louis XIV, although not too long ago I had read earlier books that cover the historical analogues to Kay’s secondary world fantasy verse. I was struck time and again as I was listening to Stefan Rudnicki, the narrator, spill out Durant’s prose, that when Kay pulls from describing actual action and goes philosophical and reflective, as he did in the quoted section above, there is a resonance, a harmony between Kay’s reflection upon the history of his secondary world, and how it resonances back on our own world’s history. One might almost want to say that the Two Moons verse is the Sun, and our World and its history is the moon, but in the multiverse of Kay’s work, both our world and the world of the Two Moons, are but shadows of another.²

That tiny fragment of the book, though, just shows one of the other reasons to read Kay’s work. The histographic nature of the text, the warp and weft of characters, the immersive nature of the Two Moons verse are all there and already seen. But it is his presentation, production and his language that is the real secret sauce to his writing, and what elevates it from merely excellent secondary world fantasy with only the bare hints of magic (again, lots of magic is a province of Fionavar, not here) It’s his prose. (There are also some bits of poetry here, just like he did with the Under Heaven duology, but it is more European-style poetry). Kay’s prose is transportative, be it describing Thierry trying to get information, or a deadly confrontation in a tavern, or his philosophical musings, Guy Gavriel Kay’s word choice and style are some of the best of any writer I’ve read, in any genre. I know of readers who wish writers to aim for styless prose, just to convey the ideas of the work. This is not that. Kay’s word choice and full investment in his world, characters, philosophy and story shine with a distinct voice that I find immensely readable, thoughtful and engaging. I loved to follow the adventures of Thierry, got a crush on the noblewoman poet Marina, and although I understood his motivations to begin with, I developed an irrational hatred of the antagonist, especially when he decided to cross a moral line for me. Kay doesn’t write simple and uncomplicated people, people are a mess of contradictions, and none are all good or all bad, and that prose makes it clear. Even the antagonist is given his due.

And it would behoove you, to give Kay his due, and if these words have moved you so, to give Written on the Dark a try. To your library, bookstore, website, do not tarry, but fly!

¹ For those uninitiated, Kay’s Two Moons world has rough analogues to Christianity (Worship of Jad, the Sun), Islam (Worship of the Stars, the Asharites) and Judaism (Worship of the Moons. The Kindath). They get along as well as they did in our own world and history.

² For those unfamiliar with Kay’s work, the world of Fionavar is the One True World of which all others are but shadows. Although he hasn’t done it recently, in some of his earlier works, he has made references and allusions to Fionavar. It’s his Amber, but he’s told that story and, instead, is much more concerned with other worlds instead.

Share this:

Share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook

Share on X (Opens in new window) X

More

Share on Reddit (Opens in new window) Reddit

Share on Threads (Opens in new window) Threads

Share on Mastodon (Opens in new window) Mastodon

Share on Bluesky (Opens in new window) Bluesky

Like this:

Discover more from File 770

Subscribe to get the latest posts sent to your email.

Type your email…

Subscribe