 
 Robin Hobb Interview | GamesRadar+ 
 Skip to main content 
 Join The Community 
 - Join our community
 JOIN NOW 
 11 Premium Benefits
 24/7 Access Available
 21K+ Active Members
 Commenting
 Join the discussion
 Exclusive Articles Coming Soon
 Member-only articles
 Weekly Newsletters
 Weekly gaming & entertainment news
 Member Badges
 Earn badges as you go
 Exclusive Competitions
 Members-only prize draws
 Curated Deals Coming Soon
 Tech and gaming deals worth grabbing
 GET COMMUNITY ACCESS QUICK
 For the quickest way to join, simply enter your email below and get access. We will send a confirmation and sign you up to our newsletter to keep you updated on all your gaming news.
Contact me with news and offers from other Future brands
By submitting your information you agree to the
 Terms & Conditions 
and
 Privacy Policy 
and are aged 16 or over.
 FIND OUT ABOUT OUR MAGAZINE
 Want to subscribe to the magazine? Click the button below to
find out more information.
 Find out more 
GET Community ACCESS QUICK
Join the GamesRadar community for quick access. Enter your email below and we'll send confirmation, and sign you up to our newsletter.
Contact me with news and offers from other Future brands
Sign Up
By submitting your information, you confirm you are aged 16 or over,
have read our
 Privacy Policy 
and agree to the
 Terms & Conditions . Geographical rules apply.
 Welcome 
to
GamesRADAR+ Community 
!
 Hi 
 ,
Your membership journey starts here.
Keep exploring and earning more as a member.
MY ACCOUNT
Earn your first
badge
Read 1 article to unlock your first badge.
Keep earning badges
Explore ways to get more involved as a member.
 Latest Games News
 Breaking gaming news and updates
Read Now
 Latest Games Reviews
 Expert verdicts on the newest releases
Read Now
See what you’ve unlocked.
Explore your membership benefits.
Explore
Member Exclusives
Stay Ahead with GamesRadar+
Get the biggest gaming news, reviews, and releases straight to your inbox.
Explore
 Sign Out 
 Your movies and TV digest from the team at GamesRadar+
 Sign up to The Watchlist newsletter for a weekly digest of the movie and TV news that matters, direct to your inbox. From first-look trailers, interviews, reviews and explainers, we’ve got you covered.
 Become a Member in Seconds
 Unlock instant access to exclusive member features.
Contact me with news and offers from other Future brands
Receive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsors
By submitting your information you agree to the Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy and are aged 16 or over.
 You are now subscribed
 Your newsletter sign-up was successful
 Want to add more newsletters?
 Every Friday
 GamesRadar+
 Your weekly update on everything you could ever want to know about the games you already love, games we know you're going to love in the near future, and tales from the communities that surround them.
 Signup + 
 Every Thursday
 GTA 6 O'clock
 Our special GTA 6 newsletter, with breaking news, insider info, and rumor analysis from the award-winning GTA 6 O'clock experts.
 Signup + 
 Every Friday
 Knowledge
 From the creators of Edge: A weekly videogame industry newsletter with analysis from expert writers, guidance from professionals, and insight into what's on the horizon.
 Signup + 
 Every Thursday
 The Setup
 Hardware nerds unite, sign up to our free tech newsletter for a weekly digest of the hottest new tech, the latest gadgets on the test bench, and much more.
 Signup + 
 Every Wednesday
 Switch 2 Spotlight
 Sign up to our new Switch 2 newsletter, where we bring you the latest talking points on Nintendo's new console each week, bring you up to date on the news, and recommend what games to play.
 Signup + 
 Every Saturday
 The Watchlist
 Subscribe for a weekly digest of the movie and TV news that matters, direct to your inbox. From first-look trailers, interviews, reviews and explainers, we've got you covered.
 Signup + 
 Once a month
 SFX
 Get sneak previews, exclusive competitions and details of special events each month!
 Signup + 
 Join the club
 Get full access to premium articles, exclusive features and a growing list of member rewards.
 Explore 
 An account already exists for this email address, please log in.
Share 
Copy link
Facebook
X
Pinterest
Flipboard
Email
Share this article
Join the conversation
Follow us
Add us as a preferred source on Google
Newsletter
Subscribe to our newsletter
 Blood Of Dragons , the final book in the Rain Wilds Chronicles , is out in hardback and Kindle formats now.
 There’s a great quote from George RR Martin on the back of Blood Of Dragons : “Robin Hobb’s books are like diamonds in a sea of zircons.” You both obviously share a fascination with dragons: Why do you think such majestically mythical beasts command such interest amongst fantasy fans? 
 Latest Videos From GamesRadar+ 
 Watch full video here: 
 “Dragons, to my way of thinking, are just another ‘race’ of sapient characters. We see lots of elves, dwarves, orcs, goblins, giants and, of course, dragons. When we introduce these other intelligent beings into fantasy worlds, we are asking one of the big ‘what ifs’ of fantasy: What if the human race had to contend with another set of intelligent beings, ones that would compete with them for territory, treasure, food, etc? What if they didn’t respect our claims to own things any more than we respected the claims of elephants or wolves or – dare I say it? – indigenous, so-called primitive people?
 “But there is more to it than that. There have always been tales of dragons and dragon-like beings. Sometimes dragons are feasting on maidens and sleeping on piles of treasures, and other times they are ancient creatures of great wisdom. I think when writers play with dragons, we are simply doing what fantasy writers have always done.”
 You may like
 House of the Dragon showrunner on season 3 and the Game of Thrones spin-off he wants to see next 
 The Blood of Dawnwalker's modern-day twist promises an RPG "saga" with carried-over saves, devs say 
 The Winds of Winter release date speculation, plot, and everything else we know about George R.R. Martin's new book 
 Were there any challenges in bringing The Rain Wild Chronicles to a close with Blood Of Dragons and tying up all the different plotlines?
 “The challenge is always to find the good place to end the book. The rule I follow with myself is that every book should end where the next book would logically begin. I know that some readers wish that literally all of the threads would be neatly tied off and snipped, but life just doesn’t work that way. So there are always some threads left dangling, with a hint or two of what might come next. I think the only way to completely tie up all the plotlines at the end of the book is for the story to end with, ‘And then the giant asteroid hit!’”
 Your movies and TV digest from the team at GamesRadar+
 Subscribe for a weekly digest of the movie and TV news that matters, direct to your inbox. From first-look trailers, interviews, reviews and explainers, we’ve got you covered.
 Contact me with news and offers from other Future brands Receive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsors 
 You first wrote about the world of Rain Wilds in the Liveship Traders series in 1998. Has it changed dramatically over the years and indeed decades? 
 “All places change with the passage of years. So of course the Rain Wilds have changed. The population has increased, and there are more outlying villages along the rivers. As recounted in the Liveship Traders trilogy, there has been an influx of Tattooed, and that affects what had previously been a rather homogenous culture. And then there are the dragons… Things change dramatically when you add a major predator to the top of the food chain.”
 The Rain Wild Chronicles runs concurrently with the events of your previous series, The Tawny Man trilogy. Do the two series end at the same point of time and is there any crossover between them?
 You may like
 House of the Dragon showrunner on season 3 and the Game of Thrones spin-off he wants to see next 
 The Blood of Dawnwalker's modern-day twist promises an RPG "saga" with carried-over saves, devs say 
 The Winds of Winter release date speculation, plot, and everything else we know about George R.R. Martin's new book 
 “It’s a bit of a spoiler but The Tawny Man trilogy ends with the emergence of IceFyre from the glacier on Aslevjal Island. So actually, although some of the events at the beginning of Dragon Keeper happen before that, there is quite a span of time passing in the four volumes, and the events in Dragon Haven , City Of Dragons and Blood Of Dragons all happen after the events in Fool’s Fate by several years. There are definitely crossovers from the Liveship Traders trilogy but how could there not be? Given the roles that the Khuprus family played in the return of the serpents and the offer of asylum to the Tattooed. Some familiar characters from that trilogy will be in evidence, some merely popping in for a few paragraphs and others as part of the major plotlines.”
 The concept of memory walking is central to Blood Of Dragons and you also have the possibility of the legendary blue dragon Tintaglia’s memories vanishing if she dies… 
 “Memory is extremely important to the dragons as they have ancestral memories, in the sense that they inherit the memories of their lineage. Now the Rain Wild dragon-keepers do not have ancestral memories, but with memory walking, they are acquiring information about the past of the city and the Elderlings who once lived there. They are re-establishing a culture, so to speak. When we excavated Pompeii, we gained a tremendous amount of knowledge simply by looking at the abandoned artefacts that were left in place, and the wonderful mosaics there. So, in a sense, we used their stone to memory walk back to that time.
 “Imagine if you could set a hand to one of those mosaics and know the thoughts of its creators. How much deeper a knowledge would you acquire? And if you were in a situation where you had to live in Pompeii, with the same climate, soil, and other resources, you might gain important insights into what works there and what doesn’t. But of course there would be a cost for that knowledge. There is always a cost…”
 Does the title Blood Of Dragons refer to how that and other dragon ingredients are used as powerful medicines? 
 “The ‘Blood’ in the title refers to many things! I always think that titles should serve multiple roles. So you can think of it as the blood being sought for medicinal purposes, or the bloodlines of the dragons being preserved, or the Dragon Keepers and their role in preserving the bloodlines of the dragons.”
 So do you like to depict magic as a positive force? 
 “I’m not sure… Do you see technology as a positive force? It’s the same question. In fantasy, magic is often the ‘high technology’ of the day, often available only to a privileged few, much like this computer that I’m composing on right now. So, shall I use this computer to access information on golden-backed spiny ants for my grandson’s report, or shall I use it to prey on other people’s children? Magic is exactly like that. I don’t think any sort of power is essentially good or evil. It’s all in what use it is put to.”
 The success of the A Song Of Ice And Fire books and the Game Of Thrones TV series – along with the Lord Of The Rings and The Hobbit films – have introduced fantasy to a whole new audience and made the genre much more acceptable in wider literary terms. Do you think your books would work equally well on television or in the cinema?
 “In my opinion, the successful transition of A Song Of Ice And Fire and The Lord Of The Rings to film is rare and wonderful. Even so, many nuances had to be shed along the way, and there were places where characters had to explain to the viewers things that the readers knew by virtue of the medium of the storytelling. I actually think that short stories transfer to film much better than novels do. So if I were given the opportunity to see one of my works become film, either for television or the big screen, I would choose to start with a much shorter work and see how the characters and plot lines survived.”
 Now that the series has finished do you intend to return in the future to the Rain Wilds world? 
 “How does anyone know what he is going to do until they’ve done it? I love that line! I have a huge line of possible books in my head, including some Lindholm ones, and they are all shouting, ‘Pick me, pick me!’ So it’s hard to say what comes next. I have several mostly-finished stories on my computer, and by that I mean, ‘Work on this for another six months and you won’t be embarrassed to show it to someone.’ Will I ever return to the world of the Rain Wilds? I’ll say what I always say about that. If a truly compelling story line comes to me, one that demands to be in that setting for it to work, then I won’t hesitate. But I wouldn’t write a story about what happens next to someone’s grand-daughter for the sake of setting it in that world just so previous readers will pick up the next book.”
sfx
 Magazine
 SFX Magazine is the world's number one sci-fi, fantasy, and horror magazine published by Future PLC. Established in 1995, SFX Magazine prides itself on writing for its fans, welcoming geeks, collectors, and aficionados into its readership for over 25 years. Covering films, TV shows, books, comics, games, merch, and more, SFX Magazine is published every month. If you love it, chances are we do too and you'll find it in SFX.
 Read more
 Fantasy Shows 
 House of the Dragon showrunner on season 3 and the Game of Thrones spin-off he wants to see next 
 RPGs 
 The Blood of Dawnwalker's modern-day twist promises an RPG "saga" with carried-over saves, devs say 
 Fantasy Shows 
 The Winds of Winter release date speculation, plot, and everything else we know about George R.R. Martin's new book 
 Fantasy Shows 
 House of the Dragon season 3, episode 3 recap and Easter eggs: long live the queen 
 Fantasy Shows 
 House of the Dragon season 3, episode 3 is the best yet because it fits perfectly with George R.R. Martin's philosophy 
 Fantasy Shows 
 House of the Dragon season 3 ending explained: who dies and how does it set up the final season? 
 Latest in TV
 Sci-Fi Shows 
 Silo Season 4 release date revealed with action-packed first trailer 
 DC TV Shows 
 Lanterns is HBO's third most successful new show ever, behind only House of the Dragon and The Last of Us 
 Sci-Fi Shows 
 One eagle-eyed Silo fan has spotted a clue in season 3 that reveals how many silos are remaining 
 Drama Shows 
 Neil Druckmann doubles down on distancing Naughty Dog from The Last of Us season 3 
 Sci-Fi Shows 
 Apple's mind-bending sci-fi series Silo just aired a wild season 3 finale, and fans are calling it "phenomenal" 
 Live Action Shows 
 Neflix orders Dungeons and Dragons TV show based on Ravenloft from Alfonso Cuarón 
 Latest in Features
 The Elder Scrolls 
 Game of the Week – Oblivion Remastered is a weekend-killer on Switch 2 
 Action Games 
 We don't get action games like Tides of Annihilation very often, and this is better than I expected after going hands-on 
 Marvel Movies 
 Captain America: The First Avenger is still Marvel's best movie about uncomplicated heroism 
 RPGs 
 The GamesRadar+ RPG Club is sinking its fangs into The Blood of Dawnwalker – here's your invitation 
 Desktop PCs 
 Hands-on with DLSS 5 in NBA 2K27: Here's what works and what doesn't work 
 MMO Games 
 With wall-running and surprisingly weighty combat, Guild Wars 3 is aiming high: "If we hadn't been making MMOs for 26 years I don't think we could have built this" 
LATEST ARTICLES
 1
Court sentences Old School RuneScape dev who stole players' gold and "banked more than £364,829"
 2
Silo Season 4 release date revealed with action-packed first trailer
 3
Bungie's studio is up for sublease after heavy layoffs, which doesn't bode well
 4
FromSoftware's first player romance builds on "the maidens in Elden Ring," says Hidetaka Miyazaki
 5
How to play N64 games
 Close 
Please login or signup to comment
 Please wait...
Login
Sign Up
