 Fire And Blood Review: a fantasy history that's as dry as the real thing | British GQ | British GQ Skip to main content British GQ's weekly emails: Sign up to Hot Wash and Intermission FASHION CULTURE SHOPPING WATCHES FITNESS WELLNESS GROOMING GQ SPORT Subscribe Menu Menu Subscribe Menu Menu FASHION Expand Style Advice Trainers Celebrity Style Style Buyers Guide All Fashion CULTURE Expand Film TV Music Games Books All Culture SHOPPING Chevron WATCHES FITNESS WELLNESS Expand Sex & Relationships Mental Health Sleep Health All Wellness GROOMING Expand Hair Fragrances Celebrity Style Grooming Buyers Guide All Grooming GQ SPORT VIDEO MORE MOTY Lifestyle Gift guides GQ Heroes GQ Hype GQ Shops Newsletters Search Search Subscribe Culture George RR Martin's Fire And Blood is a dry textbook about a subject of no importance Martin, seemingly incapable of delivering his next book, has given us one of two volumes on the history of the Targaryen kings. It's torpid, fussy and unaware of its own moments of brilliance. We'll be going through it chapter by chapter to see if there's anything worth highlighting for Game of Thrones fans. By David Levesley 20 November 2018 George RR Martin, in the scam of the century, refuses to finish his next book in the A Song Of Ice And Fire series – more popularly known by the name of its TV adaptation, Game Of Thrones – but does keep releasing... what is the word for Fire And Blood ? Appendices? Homework? Regardless, we are back in the world of the series and no plots are advancing anywhere. It's 700 hundred pages of backstory and, to make matters worse, it's one of two. There is a time and a place for fantasy apocrypha and mid-series does not feel like it. I, a man who has written about the televised version of Martin’s opus more times than I care to count, have been tasked with talking about Fire And Blood . A note: I am a reluctant but relatively well informed disciple of the Game of Thrones series. I was never the ideal target market. But here I am, on assignment. It’s my job. I am ready. The problem is, Fire And Blood is not inspiring reading. It’s a history book about a world we have no actual investment in because, spoiler alert, we do not live in it. It was hard to get through in a few days and so instead we’ve decided to keep a rolling review of the book: I’ll deepdive into a chapter or two every week and keep it updated with what comes out of it. Let’s be honest, you won’t be doing much different. Aegon’s Conquest If you read any section of the book as a fan of Game Of Thrones , it’s safe to say – from general responses to the 706-page tome in front of you – that it’s the first chapter. It’s got the fewest characters with duplicate names, the most logical narrative arc and is entirely pertinent to the books and show we endure and/or love. “Aegon’s Conquest” goes from the moment Aegon Targaryen lands in Westeros to the birth of King’s Landing and the Iron Throne. Not much of it, however, is all that new: we already know that Aegon I made the throne from the swords of his enemies during the conquest. We already know that King’s Landing became his stronghold over Oldtown or Dragonstone. We even know the birth of the big houses that the chapter features: that it was Aegon that gifted Highgarden to the Tyrells, how the Starks became wardens rather than kings of the north. None of it is new, though it is nice to read a brief guide to how the world came to be as it is in one digestible sitting. Digtestible, actually, is a strong term. Martin is really, really committed to a dry, dusty historical screed for his style of writing. The dust jacket compares it to the “scope and grandeur of Gibbon’s  The History Of The Decline And Fall Of The Roman Empire ”, and... well, yes, they are both long. But at least the Roman Empire actually happened, and actually required that level of detail, and has repercussions for you and I who live in its shadow. In this case, Martin has decided on his own accord to pack his text as full as he has and he doesn't always curate the most focus onto the most important bits. When he deliberately obfuscates moments of interesting characters meeting – at least twice, elder sister Velenya engages in diplomatic parleys with powerful Westerosi women and these fascinating situations are over in sentences – whereas indistinguishable men get pages of bluster. The fault of the maester’s voice the piece is written in? A statement on how history brushes over women’s impact? Almost certainly, considering Martin loves creating fully fleshed out women characters. But they're also the most enticing set pieces and we don’t get any of them to sink our teeth into, because these women engaged in their subterfuge behind closed doors. When armies have to fight fire-breathing reptiles, we all know where the winner lies. While Gibbon is one possible comparison, I was also reminded of The Iliad – which, combined with The Odyssey , is about the same length as this book – though at least that was partially based on the history of antiquity. Just like Homer, Martin relishes a pageant of almost indistinguishable names to show the scope of combat. But, unlike Homer, he’s not a big fan of generating much narrative tension: this chapter can be condensed into Aegon arriving in various places, various men believing they can fight the dragons and then realising they cannot. When armies have to fight fire-breathing reptiles, we all know where the winner lies. The more interesting instances are ones of diplomacy, or rebellion against the systems of Westeros that the Targaryen offer freedom from. But those instances are often the ones given the least detail. Most annoyingly of all, for me at least, the book gives us only miniscule details of the Valyrian world the Targaryens existed in pre-Westeros. Valyria remains wildly underexplored in Martin’s work and yet it’s Atalantean promise continues to make it the most exciting thing in its lore. Instead, the city of spells and technology and wonder is but a footnote for the family who prophecised its downfall and we are left to wonder more about it. Which raises a problem that, frankly, Martin has made clear was never his intention to solve: why do we keep going back to Westeros? The same stories, over and over again, of warring kingdoms and families in a nation where the levels of magic, invention or political structure never seem to change at any point, beyond a different number of kings in different cities. Dorne remains the most interesting and unexplored part of the island, even here in its two or three paragraphs of appearance, and that’s because it’s the least painfully Anglo-Saxon of the realms. Valyria, Essos and everywhere beyond remain unexplored and tantalising, and the Targaryens provide many bridges to these worlds without providing much in the way of information. The new HBO Game Of Thrones prequel series is also Westeros focused and it feels like maybe it's time to stretch out into the weirder parts of the world that Martin has meticulously crafted. What we need is something different. Something sunnier, sandier, more lustrous and less shambolic than the way the TV show did Dorne. Fire And Blood , already, proves that’s not what this book has any intention of being. At least give us some plot to keep us interested in the meanwhile. **Read more:
**
 A Game Of Thrones prequel will be taking place a thousand years before the show you know and love What news from Westeros? Everything we know about Game Of Thrones season 8 The best books to read for men Keywords Culture Entertainment Books Game of Thrones Read More Fashion What does a Galliano theme mean for guys at the Met Gala? By Carmen Bellot Fashion The best men’s hoodies are the only sweatshirts you'll ever need By Gerald Ortiz 10 Coolest 10 Coolest things of the week By Josephine Binta Judd Fashion Graphic tees are back with a vengeance By Louis Cheslaw Fashion The best men’s suit sales for tailoring on a budget By Faye Fearon Fashion The best oversized T-shirts for larger than life 'fits By Bemi Shaw Christmas The best gifts for dads that are definitely on his wishlist for his birthday in 2026 By Jessie Atkinson Fashion The best summer suits for showing the heatwave who's boss By Marcus Mitropoulos Facebook Instagram X YouTube VERO See More Stories Fashion Grooming Culture Watches Recommends Lifestyle GQ Sports Fitness GQ Heroes How We Test Condé Nast Britain CN Traveller Glamour House & Garden Johansens Tatler Vanity Fair Vogue Wired World of Interiors Privacy Policy & Cookie statement Code of conduct Terms & Conditions Contact Editorial Complaints Policy Careers Newsletter Subscribe Site Map © 2026 Condé Nast Select international site Britain LargeChevron Australia Brasil China España France Germany Hong Kong India Italia Japan Korea México Middle East Portugal South Africa Taiwan Thailand The Netherlands Türkiye United States 