
===== PAGE 1 =====
Journal of Tolkien Research Journal of Tolkien Research 
Volume 18 Issue 1 Article 7 
2023 
George R.R. Martin and the Fantasy Form (2019) by Joseph Rex George R.R. Martin and the Fantasy Form (2019) by Joseph Rex 
Young and Tweaking Things a Little: Essays on the Epic Fantasy Young and Tweaking Things a Little: Essays on the Epic Fantasy 
of J.R.R. Tolkien and G.R.R. Martin (2023), by Thomas Honegger of J.R.R. Tolkien and G.R.R. Martin (2023), by Thomas Honegger 
Andrew Higgins 
asthiggins@me.com 
Follow this and additional works at: https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch 
 Part of the American Literature Commons, and the Literature in English, British Isles Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Higgins, Andrew (2023) "George R.R. Martin and the Fantasy Form (2019) by Joseph Rex Young and 
Tweaking Things a Little: Essays on the Epic Fantasy of J.R.R. Tolkien and G.R.R. Martin (2023), by 
Thomas Honegger," Journal of Tolkien Research: Vol. 18: Iss. 1, Article 7. 
Available at: https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol18/iss1/7 
This Book Review is brought to you for free and open access by ValpoScholar. It has been accepted for inclusion in 
Journal of Tolkien Research by an authorized administrator of ValpoScholar. For more information, please contact 
a ValpoScholar staff member at scholar@valpo.edu. 

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
 
George R.R. Martin and the Fantasy Form, by Joseph Rex Young. New York 
and London: Routledge, 2019. x, 219 pp. $170.00 (hardcover) ISBN 
9781138502161; $52.95 (trade paperback) ISBN 9781032093482. Also 
available in ebook format. 
 
Tweaking Things a Little: Essays on the Epic Fantasy of J.R.R. Tolkien and 
G.R.R. Martin, by Thomas Honegger. Zurich and Jena: Walking Tree 
Publishers, 2023. [x], xxiv, 435 pp. $38.90 (trade paperback) ISBN 
9783905703504. 
 
If there is a contemporary living author of fantasy and speculative literature who 
is mostly likely to mentioned in the same breath as arguably the founder of 
modern fantasy J.R.R. Tolkien—then it has to be George R.R. Martin. Indeed, 
in 2005 writer Lev Grossman in an article in Time magazine dubbed Martin “the 
American Tolkien” (13 November 2005) and starting with the similarity in their 
names and moving on to both their bodies of work, the adaptations and active 
engagement by scholars and fans (as well as both their annoying habits of not 
finishing their works). Tolkien and Martin are without question comparable 
giants of the modern fantasy genre. Therefore it is great news for students and 
academics that we now have two compelling and contrasting critical 
monographs about both these authors bodies of work for review and study.  
It was interesting to read and review both these works side by side as they 
each offer some interesting insights into Tolkien and Martin and the sources of 
inspirations and the techniques they both used to build their self-contained 
secondary worlds. Joseph Rex Young’s George R.R. Martin and The Fantasy 
Form focuses on the texts Martin wrote and analyses them using several key 
critical frameworks for fantasy and speculative literature texts. Thomas 
Honegger’s Tweaking Things a Little: Essays on the Epic Fantasy of J.R.R. 
Tolkien and G.R.R. Martin focuses more on Tolkien and Martin’s act of 
authorial world-building and the elements that both authors focused on to 
construct their worlds. Most of Young’s material is published for the first time 
in this monograph. In Honegger’s case much of the material is adapted from 
previously published works; resulting in what Honegger calls a collection of 
essays.  
Young’s book has an introduction, six chapters, conclusion, bibliography 
and index. This is Young’s first monograph and I was overall very impressed 
with the way he interweaves his close reading of Martin’s texts with theoretical 
analysis using several key critical frameworks. Throughout his cogent and 
convincing analysis Young brings in such theories as Farah Mendlesohn’s 
Rhetorics of Fantasy, John Clute’s trope of the “Thinned World” in Fantasy, 
Thomas Weiskel’s Three Staged-Structure of Romantic Transcendence, 
Todorov’s theory of hesitation and David Sandner’s concept of the moments of 
breakage and recovery in Fantasy. Therefore, Young not only provides an 
excellent close reading and analysis of Martin’s narrative form but also provides 
1
Higgins: George R.R. Martin and the Fantasy Form (2019) and Tweaking Things a Little (2023)
Published by ValpoScholar, 2023

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
 
the reader with a good foundation in some of the key corpus of fantasy discourse 
that have grown from Tolkien’s seminal talk On Fairy-stories. 
Young’s main point in his exploration, which I thought he proves time and 
time again, is that as opposed to the popular view that Martin was subverting or 
abandoning the conventions of the fantasy genre in his Song of Ice and Fire 
novels, what he actually was doing is using these traditional tropes of fantasy to 
a subtly powerful effect to depict human emotion, ambition and morality. In 
each of the chapters that follow Young explores different aspects of how Martin 
achieves this.  
In the first chapter “The American Pratchett—Muck and Modality,” Young 
explores how Martin tends to use a “low mimetic” register in both his characters 
and descriptions to bring his fantasy closer to reality. For this analysis, Young 
brings in Northrop Frye’s theory of modes to suggest that while Tolkien tends 
to communicate in a high narrative register where we look up to characters, 
Martin uses more irony and ambiguity; two elements that pervade his work and 
characters. Young convincingly cites several contrasting examples. For me the 
one that really drove this point home is the comparison of Tolkien and Martin’s 
depiction of a boat funeral. Young cites the high mimetic style Tolkien uses to 
portray the boat-funeral of the fallen Boromir who is set adrift on the River 
Anduin accompanied by the noble songs of Aragorn, Legolas and Gimli. He 
then compares this to the low mimetic nature of the description of a similar boat-
funeral in Song of Ice and Fire when the son of the dead Lord of Riverrun Hoster 
Tully is too hungover from the funeral feast to aim the fire arrow that will set 
his father’s funeral boat aflame. After cursing at the boat as it is passing out of 
view he tries one more arrow that finally hits the boat. In this respect, Young 
makes the very interesting observation that the British author Martin most 
resembles in terms of the irony of his narrative is not J.R.R. Tolkien but the 
writer and inventor of worlds Terry Pratchett. Young explores Pratchett’s 
Discworld as an interesting parallel to Martin’s. Both of these authors color their 
worlds with the low mimetic filth and muck that we do not get in Tolkien. As 
Young argues, “Martin’s narrative closely parallel’s Pratchett whose smelly 
dragons, earthy witches and accident-prone pale riders similarly deflate Frye’s 
higher modes and the pretensions of those who fail to grasp the purpose of such 
notions” (38). True, Tolkien never gives us great details about what the refuse 
situation must have been like in a besieged Gondor.  
In the next chapter Young continues this by exploring how Martin uses the 
low mimetic register in his treatment of sex and sexual violence, which critics 
of both the novels and the television adaptation have branded as gratuitous. 
Young suggests that Martin’s use of sex creates nuance in his characters, giving 
both positive and negative aspects to point-of-view characters like Tywin and 
Tyrion Lannister, Theon Greyjoy and Catelyn Stark. In the case of the young 
Daenerys Targaryen and savage Dothraki Khal Drago, Young demonstrates that 
Martin is using a trope of Gothic novelists of the late 1700’s to visit sexual and 
bestial barbarities on characters of high mimetic register who display 
discernibly modern manners and attitudes so that the reader can understand the 
2
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 18 [2023], Iss. 1, Art. 7
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol18/iss1/7

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
 
enormity of what they were suffering (although in the case of Daenerys she 
certainly turns this to her own advantage). Put simply Martin uses sex as a way 
of encouraging readers to think about how his characters interact with this 
world. Young concludes this chapter with the intriguing statement, “In short, 
sex sells A Song of Ice and Fire not because it leaves nothing to the imagination, 
but because it gives the imagination something to do” (66).  
In the remaining chapters Young shifts to demonstrating how Martin is 
using, not subverting, traditional tropes of fantasy in his narrative framework. 
This is where Young really does a stellar job of bringing in some key critical 
frameworks to explore the forms of Martin’s narrative. The first of these is his 
use of Farah Mendlesohn’s taxonomy of invented worlds as she outlined in her 
work Rhetorics of Fantasy (2008). Young suggests that Martin’s world is an 
example of what Mendlesohn calls “immersive fantasy” in which the characters 
are in a self-contained world with no links to “the primary world.” However, 
within this immersive world Martin (like Tolkien) also creates examples of the 
other two types of Mendlesohnian fantasy—the portal and intrusion fantasies. 
Young explores Bran Stark’s journey from Winterfell into the unknown places 
and his encounter with The Children of Forest as an example of a portal fantasy 
not unlike the Hobbits’ journey out of the Shire into the unknown lands of 
Middle-earth. For intrusion fantasy, Young explores the appearance of the 
Others which serve throughout the novels as an unfocused cosmic evil and 
Young characterises as “appear[ing] in the prologue of the first volume and 
gradually infect the narrative via the creeping, visceral and dread of 
Mendlesohnian intrusion.” (157).  
The other critical fantasy trope Young explores is John Clute’s “thinned” 
world concept, where magic has leaked out of the land. Young suggests that 
Martin’s narrative “is shot through with references to and insinuations of a 
cleaner, nobler past of morality and good sense” (67). He cites a good example 
of this with mention of the now-past Targaryen dynasts who had the blood of 
Old Valyria which once soared and swooped through the skies on the dragons 
that adorned their banners. Young argues Martin here is utilising a key trope of 
the fantasy genre that was certainly used by Tolkien in his Middle-earth with 
Númenor and the fading of the Elves in the Third Age. As Young says, 
“Martin’s entire written world appears to be a shadow of its former self, subject 
to precipitous decline from past glories” (69).  
In the final chapter Young explores themes of recovery and what David 
Sandner in his Critical Discourses on the Fantastic, 1712-1831 (2011) calls “the 
moments of breakage,” a period of crisis and tension which will completely 
shape the emotional course and impact of the tale. What each of these very well-
argued chapters demonstrate is Martin’s clear knowledge and use of key fantasy 
tropes in his narrative. As Young says “the narrative achieves perfect Tolkienian 
and Clutean affect by dint of judicious authorial choices of Mendlesohnian 
rhetoric. A Song of Ice and Fire could be used as a textbook example of some 
of the core features of modern fantasy literature in action” (128).  
3
Higgins: George R.R. Martin and the Fantasy Form (2019) and Tweaking Things a Little (2023)
Published by ValpoScholar, 2023

===== PAGE 5 =====
 
 
Turning to Thomas Honegger’s book, this is divided into five chapters 
which are each further subdivided into several sections that are somewhat linked 
to each other (although some do go off on diverting—but interesting—
tangents). This volume has some wonderful and interesting pictures, 
illustrations and art—starting with the stunning cover by Jay Johnstone. It 
includes a forward by Carolyne Larrington (who has written two books on 
Martin), and a conclusion and bibliography. Unlike Young who focuses 
specifically on Martin’s texts, Honegger opts to explore the core works, the 
prequels and the HBO adaptation Game of Thrones—using the collective term 
“Martinverse” (shades of the MCU); whereas he fixes his Tolkienian analysis 
on The Lord of the Rings ignoring the Jackson films as Tolkien was not directly 
involved with them (so no ‘Tolkienverse’). The degree of Martin’s actual 
involvement with the HBO series has been a matter of debate. In a 2022 
interview in The New York Times, Martin stated that he was not as involved in 
the later seasons of the show stating that by seasons 5 and 6 and certainly 7 and 
8 he was pretty much out of the loop.  
Honegger’s overall analysis is focused on exploring the shared themes, 
similarities and differences of Tolkien and Martin’s world-building. The five 
chapters that follow each focus on elements that go into authorial world-
building, including creating the perception of historic depth in a world, naming 
and language invention, narrative and the ethical and metaphysical frameworks 
of a world. In “World-Building, Icebergs, Depth and Enchantment” Honegger 
explores how each author created depth in their narratives to give a sense of a 
vast historic weight to their worlds. Honegger explores Ernest Hemingway’s 
concept in his essay “The Art of the Short Story” (1959) of the “literary iceberg” 
in which stories are strengthened by leaving things or events out. This gives the 
sense that behind the story there are elements that are not told but which exist 
under the surface like an iceberg. Of course, with Tolkien and Martin we are 
dealing with two very different icebergs. In Tolkien’s case the published stories 
of The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings sat at the top of a vast “iceberg” of 
myth and language invention which Tolkien had been creating since the 1910’s. 
Whereas Martin started writing A Song of Ice and Fire in the 1990’s and 
invented his world from the top down—his “literary iceberg” was invented 
coterminous with the stories, with the backstories being invented after the main 
narratives. Honegger provides the reader with lots of background material on 
the sources both Tolkien and Martin would have been aware of in creating this 
sense of depth (Beowulf, Norse Sagas, etc.). Honegger argues that one of the 
key ways Martin achieved this sense of depth is through his use of poems in the 
narrative which tell of an older time (of course Tolkien did the same thing but 
the poems he wrote told of times that already existed in narrative form). 
Honegger explores three of the major poems in the narrative: “The Rains of 
Castermere,” “The Bear and the Maiden Fair,” and “The Doom of Valyria,” 
which each in themselves create the sense of an older transmitted oral tradition 
and of lost tales from the past. In the case of “The Doom of Valyria” Honegger 
goes off on a bit of tangent with comparing the ancient doomed city of Valyria 
4
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 18 [2023], Iss. 1, Art. 7
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol18/iss1/7

===== PAGE 6 =====
 
 
with Tolkien’s doomed island of Númenor—interesting but a bit diverting from 
the topic at hand.  
In the next two chapters Honegger explores the key role that language and 
language invention plays in world-building. In Part Two he focuses specifically 
on the role names and naming play in world-building and compares and 
contrasts both Tolkien and Martin’s invention and use of names. For Tolkien, 
world-building and story-telling started with a name; indeed the inspiration for 
the entire Middle-earth mythology came from Tolkien’s interest in one specific 
name found in an Old English poem and Honegger goes into great depth about 
this discovery and how both the languages and stories grew from this discovery. 
There is a lot of good theory in this chapter about both language invention and 
name making. Honegger makes this interesting point that while Tolkien’s 
world-building was inspired by a name and the story followed, Martin—like 
C.S. Lewis—was inspired by an image and vision. As Martin stated in a 2014 
Rolling Stone interview, it was while working on another science fiction story 
that he had the vision from Bran’s point of view of a man beheaded and the 
finding of some dire-wolf pups in the snow. Honegger explores this further 
through many pictures of shields and sigils to emphasise the strong visual 
quality of Martin’s world. Of course, it should not be forgotten that Tolkien too 
employed the visual in his world-building through maps, art and drawings, 
heraldry and sigils very much like Martin’s.  
Honegger then moves from names to more about language and language 
invention as elements of world-building in general. I would say this section is 
heavy on Tolkien and lite on Martin. Honegger does well with an exploration 
of Tolkien’s coeval language invention with his myth-making and how he 
sought through the found manuscript trope and The Red Book of Westmarch to 
create parallels with the languages of Middle-earth and the primary world. 
Tolkien’s work on his languages created a precedent in fantasy world-building 
with readers expecting similar nexuses of language invention in other works of 
fantasy; suggesting almost an “anxiety of influence” for future authors of 
fantasy and speculative literature. Martin was quite clear as he said in an 
interview that Honegger cites, “Tolkien was a philologist, and an Oxford don, 
and could spend decades laboriously inventing Elvish in all its detail. I, alas, am 
only a hardworking SF and Fantasy novel[ist] and I don’t have a gift for 
languages” (159). At best in A Song of Ice and Fire Martin created a very 
rudimentary form of language invention, primarily with a handful of invented 
words for the Dothraki. Honegger compares this to other writers of modern 
fantasy like Christopher Paolini in his Eragon series where the reader is given 
“a modern stock of words and phrases and some very rudimentary information 
on the grammar of the language” (158). An interesting point Honegger makes 
is while Martin was not focused on inventing languages, he, like Tolkien, did 
establish through his narrative a series of cultures and peoples for which 
distinctive languages could be invented to reflect their cultures, traditions and 
peoples. When it came to adapting A Song of Ice and Fire, the HBO show-
runners for Games of Thrones brought on linguist David Peterson to do just that 
5
Higgins: George R.R. Martin and the Fantasy Form (2019) and Tweaking Things a Little (2023)
Published by ValpoScholar, 2023

===== PAGE 7 =====
 
 
and from the network of peoples Martin created in the narrative and a handful 
of words invented by Martin, Peterson invented a series of languages (Dothraki, 
High Valyrian) and a linguistic network that interrelated them all (as in 
Tolkien’s Tree of Tongues) for which Honegger provides some good 
illustrations (164). Honegger concludes this section with this intriguing 
statement, “Again, we can note that while Tolkien created his legendarium 
together with its concomitant languages as a one-man show, Martin 
concentrated right from the beginning on the narrative construction of his world 
and wisely opted for outsourcing the work on his languages. And while 
Tolkien’s legendarium grew in tandem with his languages, Martin’s narratives 
have always taken precedence and the development of his languages came 
second—also chronologically” (165). I also was doubly intrigued by 
Honegger’s interesting contrast between the study of Tolkien’s language 
invention and Martin’s: “So while Tolkien language scholars are like 
archaeologists busy unearthing and making sense of the rich linguistic heritage 
that the Professor has bequeathed to posterity, those investigating Martin’s 
languages are more like architects and builders who are in the process of 
erecting and developing structures merely sketched by the author—yet both 
groups are contributing aspects vital to the secondary worlds of Arda and 
[Martin’s] Known World respectively” (166). 
Honegger returns to the narrative elements of world-building in the next 
chapter, “Riders, Chivalry and Knighthood,” in which he explores in great detail 
how both authors use concepts of knighthood and chivalry in their works. 
Honegger argues through close text reading and examples that, while Tolkien 
and Martin approach this topic differently, they are united in what lies behind 
the acts of chivalry. Honegger suggests that Tolkien did not like the high-
Medieval concept of chivalry. He does refute a critic’s claim that the word 
“knight” does not appear The Lord of the Rings by reporting on a word-search 
and proving that the word “knight” appears eight times, “knights” forty-nine 
times, and once for “knighthood” (291). But clearly the image of the Knight in 
Shining armour is largely absent from Tolkien’s description (he clearly 
preferred the word “rider” to “knight”) and Honegger suggests that like 
organised religion, the chivalric element is absorbed by Tolkien into the story 
and symbolism through the subtext of Tolkien’s portrayal of courage based on 
the concept found in The Battle of Maldon of the Northern Spirit—courage in 
the face of defeat and death. Honegger suggests that Martin too was not keen 
on chivalry but this was because of ethical and ideological reasons. Martin’s 
Knights are a mixed bag, including ideal knights, new knights and flawed 
knights and they all display some of the more low mimetic and realistic human 
nature that Young refers to in his monograph.  
In the concluding chapter Honegger explores the role that ethics plays in 
Tolkien and Martin’s world-building through the types of choices and decisions 
characters make in the narratives. Honegger covers a lot of ground here 
exploring ethics, politics, fate, philosophy and religious beliefs. Honegger 
explores both authors worldviews, suggesting that while Tolkien’s world seems 
6
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 18 [2023], Iss. 1, Art. 7
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol18/iss1/7

===== PAGE 8 =====
 
 
to have more of teleological structure that finds its climax in eucatastrophe and 
the return of the king, Martin’s story seems to lack an underlying purpose with 
events happening with no specific reason. He explores in great depth the concept 
of the wheel of fate, and different characters movements on this changing and 
shifting wheel, and Martin’s meaningless and random cosmic elements such as 
the appearance of the Others (White Walkers) as opposed to the more focused 
Tolkienian concept of the Dark Lord.  
Taken together I think both these volumes offer a good source of analysis 
and inspiration for further study for students and scholars of both Tolkien and 
Martin. Young offers some really interesting insights into Martin’s text and 
examples of how to employ key critical frameworks to explore what Martin is 
doing in his narratives. Honegger brings his Tolkien chops to the table in 
exploring how Martin’s world-building is similar and also different from 
Tolkien’s, with some interesting threads for scholars to pick up and explore 
further. Therefore these volumes both continue the academic discourse on the 
works of J.R.R. Tolkien and also add to the growing discourse on the works of 
George R.R. Martin—perhaps not so much the “American Tolkien” as he has 
been hailed, but a living writer of fantasy and science fiction in his own right.  
 
Dr. Andrew Higgins  
Balham, London 
7
Higgins: George R.R. Martin and the Fantasy Form (2019) and Tweaking Things a Little (2023)
Published by ValpoScholar, 2023