 Fire and Blood, George RR Martin, review: New Game of Thrones book is exhaustive but often tedious | The Independent | The Independent Thank you for registering Please refresh the page or navigate to another page on the site to be automatically logged in Please refresh your browser to be logged in Jump to content Open full menu US Edition UK Edition Edición en Español Log in Log in News Sports Culture Lifestyle Money Travel Premium Climate More Swipe for next article Culture Books Reviews Fire and Blood, George RR Martin, review: New Game of Thrones book is exhaustive but often tedious Martin appears to have made the assumption that historical writing should be dry and clinical, but fans will likely be left frustrated with this extensive, exhaustive history of the Targaryen family and their dragons Roisin O'Connor Thursday 22 November 2018 07:39 EST Bookmark Comments Go to comments Bookmark popover Removed from bookmarks Close popover George RR Martin may irritate fans by releasing an extensive history of a Game of Thrones family – instead of the long-awaited sequel ‘The Winds of Winter’ ( Getty ) Your support helps us to tell the story Read more Support Now From reproductive rights to climate change to Big Tech, The Independent is on the ground when the story is developing. Whether it's investigating the financials of Elon Musk's pro-Trump PAC or producing our latest documentary, 'The A Word', which shines a light on the American women fighting for reproductive rights, we know how important it is to parse out the facts from the messaging. At such a critical moment in US history, we need reporters on the ground. Your donation allows us to keep sending journalists to speak to both sides of the story. The Independent is trusted by Americans across the entire political spectrum. And unlike many other quality news outlets, we choose not to lock Americans out of our reporting and analysis with paywalls. We believe quality journalism should be available to everyone, paid for by those who can afford it. Your support makes all the difference. Read more Many Game of Thrones fans will be wondering why George RR Martin decided to write his latest book, Fire and Blood , at this particular time. Rather than attempt to finish his long-awaited, and oft-delayed, book The Winds of Winter – the penultimate novel in his A Song of Ice and Fire fantasy series – Martin has chosen to publish an extensive history of one of its main families: House Targaryen. Even more frustrating: this is only the first volume, the synopsis reveals. Billed as a history of the Targaryen Kings, from Aegon the Conqueror to Ageon III, Fire and Blood – which takes its title from the noble family’s house words – take place 300 years before those in the Song of Ice and Fire series. Unlike those books, Fire and Blood is written as an in-universe account (purportedly) by the Archmaester Gyldayn of the Citadel, in a style that Martin’s publisher describes as possessing the “scope and grandeur of Gibbon’s The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire ”. Recommended George RR Martin ‘struggling’ to finish The Winds of Winter Everything we know so far about Game of Thrones season 8 Season-by-season guide to Game of Thrones The Targaryens are arguably the most intriguing of Martin’s Ice and Fire families, and why wouldn’t they be? Dragons are awesome. Somehow, though, Martin manages to make these warring kings and queens and exiled princes, with their dragons and purple eyes and white-blond hair... dull. Martin appears to have made the assumption that historical writing should be dry and clinical, and that the excitement of the events themselves should be left to do the talking. Yet the prose is so dry that even descriptions of a battle in the sky between two brothers manages to fall as flat as the losing Targaryen and his dragon. Asides from the writing style, the main problem with Fire and Blood lies not in its length (an eye-watering 706 pages) but in its complexity. The first 100 pages are OK, but as the history continues, the reader struggles to keep up. It doesn’t help that several characters have incredibly similar names (at least six are called Aegon), or that it is considered common among the Targaryens to marry their siblings, who also make a habit of having more than one wife at the same time – all of whom seem to pop out heirs at an alarming rate. Martin also has a habit of rumbling off on tangents about knights who fail to materialise later on, apparently having little relevance to the story arc, as much as he would like his readers to believe they do. These lengthy passages are only interrupted by Doug Wheatley’s beautifully detailed illustrations. Game of Thrones: 'The Dragon and the Wolf' finale images Show all 14 Fire and Blood is ideal for fans of the stories who love to obsess over the most minute of details, and it’s fun to see the ancestors of other popular characters – from the Starks to the Lannisters – turn up along the way. But the sheer scale and exhaustive detail in Fire and Blood makes reading it feel more like you’ve been assigned a mildly interesting, but often tedious, piece of homework. More about Game of Thrones George RR Martin A Song of Ice and Fire Join our commenting forum Join thought-provoking conversations, follow other Independent readers and see their replies Comments Most popular Popular videos Bulletin Read next Get in touch Contact us Our Products Register Newsletters Donate Today’s Edition Install our app Archive Other publications International editions Independent en Español Independent Arabia Independent Turkish Independent Persian Independent Urdu The Standard Extras Puzzles All topics Free bets offers Latest deals Competitions and offers Independent Advertising Independent Ignite Syndication Working at The Independent Legal Code of conduct and complaints Contributors Cookie policy Donations Terms & Conditions Privacy policy User policies Modern Slavery Statement Thank you for registering Please refresh the page or navigate to another page on the site to be automatically logged in Please refresh your browser to be logged in 