 

 Some Moments with the Magus: An Interview with Gene Wolfe - infinity plus non-fiction 

 Some Moments with the Magus: 

 An Interview with Gene Wolfe

 by Nick Gevers , Michael 
 Andre-Driussi , and James Jordan 

 INTRODUCTION, BY NICK GEVERS

 I have interviewed Gene Wolfe before, early 
 in 2002, for SF Site . Here is the summary of his literary career 
 I offered then, together with an estimation of the uncertainties inherent 
 in interviewing so consummately subtle a literary artist: 

 "Gene Wolfe (born in 1931, an engineer by 
 training, and long resident in Illinois) has been described as the 
 best or most significant of contemporary SF writers; and to those 
 well acquainted with his work, the judgement is hard to fault. Since 
 the mid-1960s, he has contributed to SF and Fantasy a host of stories 
 and novels of profound depth and provocative ambiguity; a Roman Catholic 
 of Thomist inclination, he tests his readers' insight and attention 
 to detail like the subtlest of theologians, weaving dense webs of 
 allusion, implication, and sheer wonder. A master parodist, he possesses 
 an extraordinary stylistic breadth, writing alternately with limpid 
 simplicity and with a formidable baroque density of diction; and all 
 this in the service of oblique, many-layered, endlessly surprising 
 and beautifully structured fictions. He is simultaneously the Dickens 
 and the Nabokov of the speculative genres: the author of huge, memorious 
 novels of great psychological and spiritual penetration, and the ludic 
 confectioner, the playful deployer of every trick in the literary 
 compendium. Chesterton, Borges, and Kipling, John Fowles and Jack 
 Vance and Damon Knight might equally be cited in analogy; but ultimately 
 Gene Wolfe is sui generis , an ineffable magus of prose. Kim 
 Stanley Robinson and Tim Powers may vie with him for supremacy as 
 novelists within the genres of the fantastic; Lucius Shepard and Michael 
 Swanwick may have his measure in the short fiction field; but across 
 the full spectrum of textual length, Wolfe has no authentic qualitative 
 equal -- his multi-volume novels and his intricately crafted short 
 stories are all of a commanding piece. 

 "This said, there are perhaps three distinct 
 threads running through the Wolfe oeuvre, embodied respectively in 
 the vast neo-classical novels, the contemporary fantasies, and the 
 puzzles in miniature. The first bracket: Wolfe has a fascination with 
 paganism and the rise of Christianity that eclipsed it, and has worked 
 this into a series of related epics: The Book of the New Sun , 
 made up of The Shadow of the Torturer (1980), The Claw of 
 the Conciliator (1981), The Sword of the Lictor (1982), 
 and The Citadel of the Autarch (1983), along with a sequel, 
 The Urth of the New Sun (1987), collectively the account of 
 the rise to power on a dying Urth of an itinerant torturer, Severian, 
 messianic bringer of a New Sun; The Book of the Long Sun , composed 
 of Nightside the Long Sun (1993), Lake of the Long Sun 
 (1994), Caldé of the Long Sun (1994), and Exodus 
 From the Long Sun (1996), relating the parallel reluctant ascendancy 
 of an obscure priest, Patera Silk, on board the generation starship 
 Whorl ; and The Book of the Short Sun -- On Blue's Waters 
 (1999), In Green's Jungles (2000), Return To The Whorl 
 (2001) -- in which Silk and his biographer, Horn, achieve a mysterious 
 communion on the colony worlds at journey's end. This huge twelve-volume 
 cathedral of words is of infinite fascination, one of the most complex 
 religious allegories ever set to paper; the incomplete Latro series, 
 set in Ancient Greece and so far consisting of Soldier of the Mist 
 (1986) and Soldier of Arete (1989), covers not dissimilar ground 
 with no less ingenuity and focus. And the 1972 novella cycle The 
 Fifth Head of Cerberus , Wolfe's first major book, hangs ominously 
 in the background of all these series, an experimental foundation 
 or doubtful master key. 

 "Even though the neo-classical novel cycles 
 have probably attracted most attention, Wolfe's books with a roughly 
 contemporary setting (call them, with minimal accuracy, his 
 fantasies, his second career thread) are also of some note. Peace 
 (1975), his early, vaguely autobiographical novel, is an intense sinister 
 labyrinth of meanings; Free Live Free (1984) is the story of 
 Oz retold with many a compelling bizarre spin; There Are Doors 
 (1988) is a brilliant sexual fable in which nothing is what it seems; 
 and Castleview (1990) is a weird Midwestern-Arthurian screwball 
 comedy of recruitment ... perhaps. It is always hard to pin Wolfe 
 down. Indeed: his numerous stories, collected in The Island of 
 Doctor Death and Other Stories and Other Stories (1980), Gene 
 Wolfe's Book of Days (1981, later incorporated into the 1992 omnibus 
 Castle of Days ), Storeys From the Old Hotel (1988), 
 Endangered Species (1989), and Strange Travelers (2000), 
 form a third thread of entrancing formal deviousness, the most intellectually 
 intriguing and exacting body of short fiction to appear since the 
 heyday of Borges. In the Wolfe canon, all the mature texts, novels 
 or tales, plainly or baroquely narrated, are rich with recomplicated 
 significance; and even after many readings, the ferments of speculation 
 they cause will never truly close. 

 "When I interviewed Gene Wolfe by e-mail 
 in January 2002, I came to the conversation aware that Wolfe the person 
 is not unlike his books: genial (of course), accommodating, plain-spoken 
 at times to a surprising degree; and yet a magician, a poser of paradoxes 
 that, however simple on the surface, are in fact like the Labyrinth 
 at Knossos, the mazes so many of his characters tread, as enormously 
 involved and logically convoluted as reality itself. One cannot expect 
 direct answers, at least about his books: they will speak for themselves, 
 or not at all, and any candour is deceiving. But on certain practical 
 topics (publishing, possibly engineering problems), all is clarity. 
 For allowing me to be the latest interviewer errant to tilt at the 
 windmills of his mind, a tourney of much fascination, I am very grateful 
 to Mr. Wolfe." 

 And I'm doubly grateful to Mr. Wolfe now, for 
 permitting not only a second such tilt, but one by a trio of enthusiasts 
 and critical scholars of his works: Michael Andre-Driussi, author of 
 the noted Lexicon Urthus , a major glossary to the Urth novels, 
 and a number of penetrating articles and chapbooks centring on the Wolfe 
 oeuvre; James Jordan, erudite theologian and extensive commentator on 
 religious motifs, meanings, and allusions in Wolfe's novels; and, again, 
 myself. The present focus is partly on Wolfe's previous writings, which 
 continue to excite fascinated interpretation and debate; partly on The 
 Wizard Knight , a notable new epic, of which Book One, The Knight , 
 appears from Tor in January 2004; and partly on Wolfe's current thinking 
 and personal circumstances ... 

 We conducted the following interview with Gene 
 Wolfe by e-mail between August and October of 2003. Henceforward, Wolfe 
 is GW, Michael Andre-Driussi is MAD, James Jordan is JJ, and I am my 
 familiar NG. 

 -- Nick Gevers . 

 THE INTERVIEW

 MAD : Read any good 
 books lately?

 GW : Yes. Adventures Among Books , 
 by Andrew Lang; Being Gardner Dozois , by Michael Swanwick; and 
 The New Wave Fabulists , edited by Peter Straub.

 MAD : What would you 
 do with NASA?

 GW : What would I do with NASA? Obviously 
 that would depend on how much money I had to work with. But basically 
 I'd put more effort into spaceboat development and less into flying 
 missions of dubious worth. NASA has suffered two disastrous crashes, 
 the Challenger and the sainted Columbia . Both were vehicle 
 failures. It needs a better boat.

 MAD : What conventions 
 are you planning to attend? Would you go to one overseas?

 GW : The only convention on my schedule 
 now is Windycon. That's quite near here, in November. I wouldn't attend 
 an overseas con, or any distant con. Rosemary isn't up to travelling, 
 and I'm not about to go away and leave her here alone.

 MAD : Tell us about 
 your dogs.

 GW : We only have one dog now. Calamity 
 Jane had to be put down. She was very old, and her medicine no longer 
 controlled her seizures. Dilly is five now, I think. He's a neutered 
 American Pit Bull Terrier, very gentle, about the color of buckskin.

 MAD : What are your 
 thoughts on the US military actions going on around the world (Afghanistan, 
 Iraq, Liberia)?

 GW : The US military is already spread 
 too thin. Sending American troops into Liberia was not only foolish 
 but foolhardy.

 MAD : 
 In the last few years world events have brought a new urgency to a few 
 stories that you wrote in the 1970s: "The Blue Mouse" (1971, collected 
 in Gene Wolfe's Book of Days ); "Hour of Trust" (1973, collected 
 in The Island of Doctor Death and Other Stories and Other Stories ); 
 and "Seven American Nights" (1978, also collected in IODDAOSAOS ). 
 "The Blue Mouse" is, in part, about the willingness to fight in murky, 
 international conflicts; "Hour of Trust" involves the same, but adds 
 suicide bombers; "Seven American Nights" is set in a fallen America 
 that could well be a result of the conflict in "Hour of Trust." "Hour 
 of Trust" is the most haunting: it shows not only suicide bombers, but 
 also their recruitment from an incoherent mass of variously disaffected 
 people, and how they are used as tools for a coherent policy of terror; 
 it shows a schism between Europe and the US; it shows the power of amateur 
 video being broadcast. These stories were all written before the hostages 
 were taken in Iran (1980), another moment which seems a part of the 
 same picture. What inspired "Hour of Trust" in particular, and do you 
 think that this 30-year-old nightmare is unfolding today in the post-September 
 11 world?

 GW : "Hour of Trust" was inspired by a 
 Damon Runyon story, "A Light in France." It's basically an early WWII 
 story, written when most people expected that world war to be much like 
 the first one. (We tend to forget that the first and second world wars 
 were only about twenty-five years apart. We are losing the last WWII 
 veterans; when Hitler's army marched into France, there were still a 
 whole lot of WWI vets around, including Hitler.) Anyway, I read "A Light 
 in France" and started playing with the idea in an SF setting.

 I think you're the only person who has ever asked me about that story, 
 Michael.

 MAD : You've had several 
 stories published online -- how do you like it? Is the technology up 
 to speed, really "consumer-ready"? Is there a stigma or barrier about 
 online publications with regards to reviews and award considerations, 
 or does it seem like it is equal with print sources?

 GW : Online publication is fine with me, 
 in part because I hope to collect those stories later. Whether the medium 
 is ready for consumers is better judged by those consumers. I sometimes 
 read online -- but not often. The stigma is attached to pay scales. 
 Much online publication is no pay or small pay.

 NG : Is ambiguity a 
 necessary property of your work? Does the richness of a Gene Wolfe novel 
 or story depend, to some extent, on its simultaneous stimulation of 
 multiple interpretations in the reader's head, so that thematic closure 
 is never attainable?

 GW : Ambiguity is necessary in some of 
 my stories, not in all. In those, it certainly contributes to the richness 
 of the story. I doubt that thematic closure is never attainable.

 NG : A number of your 
 readers have speculated on how your Korean War experience has fed into 
 your writing. Certainly the events of 1950-1953 seem to find resonance 
 in the war of Severian's Commonwealth against the Ascians, and in the 
 war of Blanko against Soldo in In Green's Jungles . Your comments?

 GW : My whole life experience feeds into 
 my writing. I think that must be true for every writer. Clearly the 
 Army and combat were major influences; just the same, you need to understand 
 that many of the writers we have now couldn't load a revolver. I've 
 crossed the Atlantic and the Pacific on ships. I've crewed on a sailboat. 
 I've ridden a lot of horses and one camel -- his name was Tank, and 
 we loped across the Australian desert. I've flown in a light plane and 
 a helicopter. (As a passenger. I'm not a pilot.) I've boxed, though 
 not professionally. And so on and so forth.

 NG : An 
 interesting distinction between the New Sun and Long Sun 
 novels relates to the directness of divine presence or intervention. 
 Severian learns the will of the Increate via intermediary beings -- 
 Hierodules, Hierogrammates -- while Silk appears to communicate directly 
 with the Outsider, as his people term God or the Increate. Is Silk more 
 intrinsically holy than Severian?

 GW : I don't think anyone is more intrinsically 
 holy. People experience God in many ways; and it seems to me that God 
 does what the rest of us do: He chooses the means that best gets His 
 message across. He's not rewarding us by talking to us. He's talking 
 to us because He has something to say to us directly, as opposed to 
 the things He says to all humanity.

 NG : At the recent Readercon, 
 many observers were impressed by your impromptu rendering of the inner 
 nature of a "bad man". In your view, does evil genuinely, consciously, 
 exist? Can you perhaps expand on the points you were making at Readercon?

 GW : You seem to think that the only genuine 
 existence evil can have is conscious existence -- that no one is evil 
 unless he admits it to himself. I disagree.

 NG : Although the Latro 
 novels have no declared connection with the New Sun/Long Sun/Short 
 Sun sequence, the gods of Latro's Hellenic world do recur to some 
 extent in the Long Sun and Short Sun books, the same pagan 
 archetypes acquiring far future flesh as prevailed before Christianity. 
 Pas is Zeus, or aspires to be, etc. Is this recurrence simply a reflection 
 of inevitable similarities between pagan pantheons, or is a more literal, 
 material, continuity of "divine" pagan personae involved? Is Pas Zeus 
 indeed?

 GW : Pas is certainly not Zeus. (No doubt 
 he would like to be.) The classical gods are, in general, not as people 
 today imagine them. Ares is the soldier god, not the war god, for example. 
 Aphrodite is the sex goddess, not the love goddess; the love god is 
 Eros, her son.

 NG : There's a lot of 
 uncertainty as to how the twelve New Sun/Long Sun/Short Sun volumes 
 should collectively be titled. Would The Briah Cycle be an acceptable 
 overall moniker? 

 GW : The Briah Cycle seems to me 
 to be as good a label as anyone is apt to find.

 JJ : Angel-like creatures 
 interact with Severian; the Outsider grants direct illumination to Silk; 
 the Narrator of the Short Sun books is applying Silk's life in 
 multiple ways. This looks like an extended "spin" on the Old Testament, 
 the New Testament, and the Church afterwards. There are numerous parallels 
 between Jesus and Silk, and after Silk's burial and "resurrection" we 
 find in Exodus From the Long Sun long sections of "evangelism" 
 for the "message of Silk," finishing with a fiery apocalypse -- all 
 of which looks like the Gospels, the Book of Acts , and the Apocalypse. 
 Did you have this kind of overall scheme in mind, either at the very 
 beginning or when you came to write Long Sun and Short Sun ? 
 And if not, do you think it is a useful way to think about these works?

 GW : No, the Biblical parallel had never 
 occurred to me. I think it may well be a useful way to look at those 
 books, however.

 JJ : J. K. Rowling is 
 writing fairly sophisticated stories for young people in her "Harry 
 Potter" series, reflecting her attachment to C. S. Lewis. Have you read 
 these? Do you have any comments on their literary quality and general 
 worth?

 GW : I have read only the first "Harry 
 Potter" book. I thought it excellent, perhaps the best thing written 
 for older children since The Hobbit . I wish the books had been 
 around when my kids were the right age for them.

 JJ : Could you tell 
 us about your and Rosemary's general health these days?

 GW : Rosemary is diabetic and has difficulty 
 walking any great distance. Stairs are very hard for her. I have glaucoma. 
 We're well otherwise.

 JJ : What things inspired 
 you to move into writing the "Wizard Knight" books? Was this a long-time 
 desire, or were you jogged into doing it by one thing or another, as 
 thinking about costumes jogged you into creating Severian?

 GW : I met a nice little boy named Nick. 
 (He's not quite so little now.) He was very, very bright, and crazy 
 about knights and the whole medieval scene. I tried to figure out what 
 attracted him to it so much, and began to write a book. 

 JJ : 
 Many of your books, particularly the Latro and Briah books, portray 
 a dimly-seen conflict or at least interaction of "higher powers" that 
 is in part "behind" the human events. One sees the same kind of thing 
 in the Book of Daniel , chapter 11, and also in the Iliad . 
 I'm wondering about the origin of this interesting theme in your writing, 
 how you came to think of writing this way.

 GW : No comment.

 JJ : Could you comment 
 on some of the things that motivated your creation of the story of Patera 
 Silk -- such as (possibly) (a) disappointment over people's misunderstanding 
 of the Severian narrative; or (b) a desire to write your own version 
 of The Diary of a Country Priest ; or (c) some specific event 
 in your life; or (d) something else altogether?

 GW : None of those you suggest. I began 
 with the idea of writing about a good man in a bad religion. That's 
 all.

 JJ : Aww, why not? I 
 might as well at least ask one of the $64,000 questions, so I'll 
 just go for broke. (Hmm. I've gotta be very precise here. Okay, here 
 goes:) Which of the following, if any, are physically (not in some merely 
 literary or symbolic sense) the same planets as Blue and Green, in the 
 same order?:

 Ushas and Lune

 Urth and Lune

 Lune and Ushas

 Lune and Urth

 Two Urths

 Two Ushases

 Two Lunes

 GW : None. 

 On 
 The Wizard Knight :

 NG : Apart from your 
 aforementioned meeting with young Nick, what first got you interested 
 in writing a novel incorporating knightly chivalry and Teutonic myth?

 GW : The short answer is that I don't 
 know. I started thinking about knighthood, and wondering why that period 
 has an eternal fascination for us. Greek myth is laid in the Golden 
 Age. The Dark Ages are our Golden Age; most fairy tales, and all the 
 best ones, are laid there. I start thinking about a lot of things, including 
 dinner, but I needed a new book just then and wanted to get away from 
 the universe of the New Sun books.

 NG : Why did you choose 
 to make the narrator of The Knight a contemporary American? More 
 broadly, why in your opinion are so many authors of Arthurian fantasy 
 (from Mark Twain in A Connecticut Yankee to Poul Anderson in 
 Three Hearts and Three Lions ) inclined to insert modern viewpoint 
 characters into novels set in the Dark Ages?

 GW : I've no good answer. I felt I needed 
 to bring in someone from outside, who would not have heard about the 
 Aelf and Angrborn from childhood.

 NG : You have narrated 
 a number of stories and novels from the perspectives of children, but 
 The Wizard Knight is by far your most ambitious exercise in a 
 youthful vein. What, for you, are the particular challenges of assuming 
 a young, or teenage, narrative voice?

 GW : A youthful American voice isn't particularly 
 challenging -- I've been a young American, and they're all around me. 
 I can walk from my house to Barrington High School.

 NG : The Knight 
 describes a hierarchy of worlds, the two highest very possibly the realms 
 of God and the angels, the lowest hellish terrains like Muspel. Does 
 this scheme emanate from Teutonic and Celtic myth, from the Kabbalah, 
 or primarily from Christian theology?

 GW : I began with Teutonic Myth: Valhalla 
 above, the elves below. When I needed another layer, I added one. The 
 lowest is not Muspel.

 NG : Although The 
 Knight is very much a Gene Wolfe novel, packed with cunning clues, 
 oblique touches, unusual viewpoints, searching dialogues, and brilliant 
 prose, it seems more transparent, less veiled, than your previous epics. 
 Could The Wizard Knight be employed as a sort of explicatory 
 Rosetta Stone for the wider Wolfe oeuvre, your open statement of themes 
 explored with greater disguise in the Briah and Latro books? 

 GW : Perhaps it could be. I'll be interested 
 to see whether anyone does it.

 © Nick Gevers, Michael Andre-Driussi, and 
 James Jordan 2003 . 

 The Knight is published by Tor in the US in January 2004. 

 Order online using these links and infinity 
 plus will benefit: 

 from 
 Amazon.com / from 
 Amazon.co.uk 

 Elsewhere in infinity plus : 

 fiction by Gene Wolfe - The 
 Arimaspian Legacy . 
 non-fiction - reviews 
 of Gene Wolfe's work . 

 Elsewhere on the web: 

 Gene Wolfe links abound, but a good place 
 to start is the Wolfe studies site, Ultan's 
 Library . 

 Let 
 us know what you think of infinity plus - e-mail 
 us at:

 sf@infinityplus.co.uk 

 support this site - buy books through these 
 links:

 A+ 
 Books: an insider's view of sf, fantasy and horror 

 amazon.com 
 (US) | Internet 
 Bookshop (UK) 

 top 
 of page 

 [ home page | fiction 
 | non-fiction & features 
 archive | other 
 stuff | A 
 to Z ]

 [ infinity 
 plus bookshop | search 
 infinity plus ] 

 © Nick Gevers, Michael Andre-Driussi, 
 and James Jordan 20 December 2003

