 
 A different kind of naturalism | Jim Nelson 
 Jim Nelson 
 Author of Chandler & West: A Story of Los Angeles and A Man Named Baskerville 
 Follow me on Facebook 
 Follow me on Twitter 
 Follow me on Goodreads 
 Menu 
 Widgets 
 Search 
 Skip to content 
 Newsletter & free ebook 
 Chandler & West: A Story of Los Angeles 
 A Man Named Baskerville 
 More books… 
 According to Cain 
 About & contact 
 Subscribe to Jim's blog 
 Two of Los Angeles’ greatest writers in the Golden Age of Hollywood 
 "Nelson constructs a fictional origin story for L.A. noir itself." – Literary Los Angeles 
 NOW AVAILABLE IN KINDLE & PAPERBACK 
 Recent 
 “Chandler & West” now at San Francisco Public Library 
 Hammett’s voice in the Flitcraft Parable 
 Touring the Golden Gate Park Commission Vault 
 “In My Memory Locked” for $1.99 
 Trending 
 Sherlock Holmes, footloose and copyright-free 
 The New American Regionalism 
 “Use three senses to make a scene come alive” 
 The big secret of “Chinatown” 
 Search for: 
 Topics 
 Announcements 
 Books 
 A Concordance of One's Life 
 A Man Named Baskerville 
 Bridge Daughter 
 Chandler & West: A Story of Los Angeles 
 Edward Teller Dreams of Barbecuing People 
 Everywhere Man 
 Hagar's Mother 
 In My Memory Locked 
 Man in the Middle 
 Stranger Son 
 Current 
 Elsewhere 
 Influences 
 Twenty Writers, Twenty Books 
 Interactive Fiction 
 According to Cain 
 Past Present 
 Under the Cognomen of Edgar Allan Poe 
 Longform 
 Miscellanea 
 Reviews & Criticism 
 Writing & Craft 
 Ten Years of Blogging 
 Three-act Fiction Structure 
 Search for: 
 A different kind of naturalism 
 12 February 2020 Jim Nelson 
 Original cover of The Village of Hommlet 
 My previous posts on the blogs Monsters and Manuals and Grognardia led me to look back on Dungeons & Dragons , a game whose influence on me is pronounced, even if I haven’t played it since I was a teenager. 
 One topic blogger James Maliszewski explored in depth was “Gygaxian Naturalism,” his term for D&D’s co-creator Gary Gygax’s aesthetic sensibilities: 
 The intention behind Gygaxian Naturalism is to paint a picture of a “real” world, which is to say, a world that exists for reasons other than purely gaming ones. The implication is that monsters have lives of their own and thus go about their business doing various things until they encounter the player characters. … I don’t mean to imply that [D&D] is realistic in any meaningful sense, only that its fantasy follows “natural” laws of a sort, much in the way that, for example, I know that there are squirrels and raccoons and rabbits in my neighborhood who go about their business when I’m not seeing them in my yard or chasing them away from my recycling bins. 
 Before Grognardia I’d never heard anyone describe D&D as naturalistic, and yet the moment I read this post I knew exactly what Maliszewski was referring to. Gygax breathed an internal logic into his game. His fantasy world is a dynamic and mutable place rather than a static backdrop. 
 The creatures that inhabit this fantasy world don’t merely exist as wooden cut-outs in a shooting gallery. They coexist within an ecosystem. Minotaurs prefer solitary existences while goblins live in tribes. There’s a pecking order. In Against the Giants , the players discover the Hill Giants answer to the Frost Giants, and the Frost Giants answer to the Fire Giants…and all the giants answer to the elves underground. 
 Gygax’s The Village of Hommlet is an exemplar of D&D naturalism. The village is a medieval Winesburg, Ohio of nosy innkeepers and petty intrigues and split alliances—oh, and there’s an evil-worshiping death cult ten miles outside of town. One reviewer notes Hommlet “is a place with history and its history shapes and affects its layout, mood and inhabitants.” 
 Those inhabitants don’t exist merely to impart exposition or direct the adventurers to the dungeon entrance. They have ambitions, suspicions, and secrets. They share useful and baseless rumors. A widower farmer and his spinster daughter live in town. They are the black sheep of the village and not well-liked. They’ve stashed seventy-three silver coins in the hollow of a tree—there could be a story within all these details, a story within the larger story. Another farmer’s son likes his brew a bit too much and will wag his tongue if drunk under the table, while the town brewer’s nephew can hold his ale and then some. One elderly farmer is ex-military but would rather talk about any matter other than fighting. More question marks, more history. 
 And yet, it’s possible, even likely, none of these inhabitants or their situations will be faced by the players. Like Hemingway’s iceberg , Gygax’s inclusion of these details make the setting richer even if little of it is presented in-game. The players may never meet the farmer’s daughter, they may never drink at the inn, and they may never become involved in Hommlet’s inner squabbles. But if these details do become relevant, the game referee is expected to honor the villagers’ best interests and play to their strengths and weaknesses the way a character actor might develop a backstory for his brief role. 
 How does this correspond to naturalism in literature, especially American literature? In work like McTeague or The Awakening , characters are cursed to accede to the drives of base instincts rather than follow established civilized norms. Greed is innate. Lust cannot be tamed. (Brew cannot be avoided.) 
 Naturalism presents “nature as an indifferent force acting on the lives of human beings.” Gygaxian Naturalism certainly meets this criteria. Man is of no concern not only to animals, but also bugbears, dragons, and gods, demigods, and demons. The infamous D&D dice act as passionless Fates that hold the players’ futures in their hands. The players start as insignificant creatures in the great chain of being, only becoming a problem when they burst into a lair bearing swords and torches. A player character’s death is mourned by few, if anyone. 
 When I was in grade school, two of my favorite short stores were “Leinigen Versus the Ants” and “The Most Dangerous Game.” Both are high naturalism, and both are very D&D-like in their telling. 
 In the introduction to The Village of Hommlet , Gygax writes “there are wheels within wheels in Hommlet and the lands around, and behind each character there is another, the circles growing wider and the figures shadowy but very powerful.” It’s not deep, nuanced stuff, but it’s enough sophistication to give players a lurking sense they are but minor actors in a larger drama. Gygaxian Naturalism is a big reason why playing D&D felt like acting within a story rather than playing a sword & sorcery video game sans computer. 
 Published 12 February 2020 . Last updated 14 August 2020 . Related Computer programming & writing fiction: Art as a recruiting poster Oracular dice Gary Gygax's Appendix N 
 dungeons and dragons ernest hemingway gary gygax grognardia iceberg theory james maliszewski leinigen versus the ants naturalism roleplaying games the most dangerous game the village of hommlet 
 Post navigation 
 ← → 
 Comments Cancel reply 
 This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. Learn how your comment data is processed. 
 Proudly powered by WordPress 
 | 
 Theme: Fictive by WordPress.com . 
