
 Literary Hub » W. H. Auden's 1954 review of The Fellowship of the Ring. 
 Literary Hub 
 Craft and Criticism Literary Criticism 
 Craft and Advice 
 In Conversation 
 On Translation 
 Fiction and Poetry Short Story 
 From the Novel 
 Poem 
 News and Culture History 
 Science 
 Politics 
 Biography 
 Memoir 
 Food 
 Technology 
 Bookstores and Libraries 
 Film and TV 
 Travel 
 Music 
 Art and Photography 
 The Hub 
 Style 
 Design 
 Sports 
 Become A Member 
 Lit Hub Radio The Lit Hub Podcast 
 Awakeners 
 Fiction/Non/Fiction 
 The Critic and Her Publics 
 Windham-Campbell Prizes Podcast 
 Memoir Nation 
 Beyond the Page 
 First Draft: A Dialogue on Writing 
 Thresholds 
 The Cosmic Library 
 Culture Schlock 
 Reading Lists 
 Reading Challenge 
 Book Marks Best Reviewed Books 
 CrimeReads True Crime 
 The Daily Thrill 
 Log In 
 Craft and Criticism 
 Fiction and Poetry 
 News and Culture 
 Lit Hub Radio 
 Reading Lists 
 Reading Challenge 
 Book Marks 
 CrimeReads 
 Log In 
 The Fellowship of the Ring .">
 W. H. Auden's 1954 review of The Fellowship of the Ring .
 "No fiction I have read in the last five years has given me more joy"
 Book Marks 
 July 28, 2026 
 Seventy-two years ago this week, the godfather of high fantasy, John Ronald Reuel Tolkien, published the first novel in a proposed three-volume epic "largely concerned with hobbits."
 The Fellowship of the Ring has, in the decades since publication, shifted over 150 million copies and spawned perhaps the most successful film trilogy (when box office numbers generated, Oscars won, and rave reviews received are all taken into account) of all time.
 Long before it became the most iconic novel in the now-storied history of the genre, however, it was reviewed in the pages of the New York Times by no less a literary critic than W. H. Auden.
 Here's what the "Funeral Blues" author had to say about Frodo and Co.
 *
 One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to find them, 
 One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them. 
 "Seventeen years ago there appeared, without any fanfare, a book called The Hobbit which, in my opinion, is one of the best children's stories of this century. In The Fellowship of the Ring , which is the first volume of a trilogy, J. R. R. Tolkien continues the imaginative history of the imaginary world to which he introduced us in his earlier book but in a manner suited to adults, to those, that is, between the ages of 12 and 70. For anyone who likes the genre to which it belongs, the Heroic Quest, I cannot imagine a more wonderful Christmas present. All Quests are concerned with some numinous Object, the Waters of Life, the Grail, buried treasure etc.; normally this is a good Object which it is the Hero's task to find or to rescue from the Enemy, but the Ring of Mr. Tolkien's story was made by the Enemy and is so dangerous that even the good cannot use it without being corrupted.
 …
 "The hero, Frodo Baggins, belongs to a race of beings called hobbits, who may be only three feet high; have hairy feet and prefer to live in underground houses, but in their thinking and sensibility resemble very closely those arcadian rustics who inhabit so many British detective stories. I think some readers may find the opening chapter a little shy-making, but they must not let themselves be put off, for, once the story gets moving, this initial archness disappears.
 For over a thousand years the hobbits have been living a peaceful existence in a fertile district called the Shire, incurious about the world outside. Actually, the latter is rather sinister; towns have fallen to ruins, roads into disrepair, fertile fields have returned to wilderness, wild beasts and evil beings on the prowl, and travel is difficult and dangerous. In addition to the Hobbits, there are Elves who are wise and good, Dwarves who are skillful and good on the whole, and Men, some warriors, some wizards, who are good or bad. The present incarnation of the Enemy is Sauron, Lord of Barad-Dur, the Dark Tower in the Land of Mordor. Assisting him are the Orcs, wolves and other horrid creatures and, of course, such men as his power attracts or overawes. Landscape, climate and atmosphere are northern, reminiscent of the Icelandic sagas.
 The first thing that one asks is that the adventure should be various and exciting; in this respect Mr. Tolkien's invention is unflagging, and, on the primitive level of wanting to know what happens next, The Fellowship of the Ring is at least as good as The Thirty-Nine Steps . Of any imaginary world the reader demands that it seem real, and the standard of realism demanded today is much stricter than in the time, say, of Malory. Mr. Tolkien is fortunate in possessing an amazing gift for naming and a wonderfully exact eye for description; by the time one has finished his book one knows the histories of Hobbits, Elves, Dwarves and the landscape they inhabit as well as one knows one's own childhood.
 Lastly, if one is to take a tale of this kind seriously, one must feel that, however superficially unlike the world we live in its characters and events may be, it nevertheless holds up the mirror to the only nature we know, our own; in this, too, Mr. Tolkien has succeeded superbly, and what happened in the year of the Shire 1418 in the Third Age of Middle Earth is not only fascinating in A. D. 1954 but also a warning and an inspiration. No fiction I have read in the last five years has given me more joy than The Fellowship of the Ring ."
 -W. H. Auden, The New York Times , October 31, 1954 
 A version of this post was published in 2023 
 Classic Reviews 
 J.R.R. Tolkien 
 The Fellowship of the Ring 
 W.H. Auden 
 Book Marks
 Visit Book Marks, Lit Hub's home for book reviews, at https://bookmarks.reviews/ or on social media at @bookmarksreads.
 Lit Hub Daily 
 August 31 - September 4, 2026
 Do booksellers think this is the end of reading? 
 Emily Witt reports on Operation Metro Surge 
 Anne Carson having a "Rosalía hangover" 
 More News 
 The Best International Fiction of the Month: September 2026 September 4, 2026 by Molly Odintz 
 How Harry Kurnitz Conquered Hollywood, Broadway, and the Biblio-Mystery September 4, 2026 by Nicholas A. Basbanes 
 How the New T.J. English Reader Mines the Dark Soul of America September 4, 2026 by David Masciotra 
 The Best Reviewed Books of the Week 
 "A maximalist s banquet It is humane blood-flecked disturbing and sustaining James has written a…" 
 The Latest 
 Is Time Even Real? Does It Even Flow? 
 10 Literary Science Fiction and Fantasy Novels That Offer Hope for the Future 
 What Should You Read Next? Here Are the Best Reviewed Books of the Week 
 How Fordism and Fascism Gave Birth to Modern Car Culture 
 Literary Hub
 Created by Grove Atlantic and Electric Literature
 Masthead 
 About 
 Sign Up For Our Newsletters 
 How to Pitch Lit Hub 
 Advertisers: Contact Us 
 Privacy Policy 
 Support Lit Hub - Become A Member 
 If you buy books linked on our site, Lit Hub may earn a commission from Bookshop.org , whose fees support independent bookstores.
 