Written on the Dark, Guy Gavriel Kay (Ace 978-0593953983, $29.00, 400pp, hc) May 2025.

For the first-time reader, there comes a point in almost every Guy Gavriel Kay novel where you need to decide on your own personal reading strategy: Am I going to approach this as historical fiction with a twist of fantasy, or as fantasy overlaid on an historical template? For readers of the first sort, especially those who fancy themselves history buffs, part of the game is puzzling out his alternate names for places and people – Esperaña for Spain, Firenta for Florence, etc. – and unpacking the parallels with actual historical events. The second kind of reader might feel a frisson of relief upon realizing that this is a fantasy world after all, with two moons and a dominant religion involving a sort of sun-god named Jad. It may match the real map of Europe (or China, in the case of River of Stars or Under Heaven), but it’s not necessary to start diving down Google rabbit-holes to figure out who’s who. The many devoted Kay readers, of course, realize that his fiction occupies a liminal space all its own between fantasy and history, bound neither by the constraints of straight historical fiction nor the conventions of classic fantasy worldbuilding. Kay is fascinated by the processes of history, and how smaller intimate stories shape the larger ones. Describing a poem by one of the characters in his new novel Written on the Dark, Kay writes, “That poem was Marina di Seressa’s truth superimposed on the absence of knowing what had happened. Or, more properly, it was her invented tale. Not quite the same thing. Not quite. But near enough to make such stories one of the things we use to carry us through the uncertainty of our own days.”

It’s no news that the uncertainty of our own days is much on people’s minds the last few months, and in an odd way it lends an unusual relevance to Written on the Dark, despite its remote setting in Kay’s alternate version of 15th-century France and its central character based pretty clearly on the poet François Villon, whose actual biography is sketchy at best. Like Villon, Kay’s Thierry Villar is a well-known tavern poet, reciting his often-impromptu verses in places with names like the Lamb or the Fife in the city of Orane (I was briefly reminded of Allan Ginsberg reading poems in Greenwich Village bars in the 1950s). Much to his surprise, he is recruited by the local provost to assist with the investigation of the brutal murder of the king’s brother, the idea being that Thierry could pick up gossip from those taverns where guards would be less welcome. As with many historical murder mysteries, the investigation quickly reveals broader conspiracies involving a potential plot to usurp the kingdom from the “mad king” Roch, and Thierry finds himself thrust into increasingly fraught social and po­litical situations that may be leading toward civil war. Meanwhile, the country of Ferrieres itself is about to be attacked by King Hardan of Angland (another of Kay’s thinly coded place names). Along the way, he encounters a few enemies and allies, including a pair of mediocre rival poets, a more well-connected court poet named Marina di Seressa, the young girl Jeanette the Maiden (whose own story is a moving variant on Joan of Arc), and the novel’s central villain, the Duke de Barratin, an ambitious cousin of the king. At one point, de Barratin’s self-righteous claims to authority earn him a rebuke from a roadside cleric, whom he then tries to have assassinated (a scene which for me carried more than a whiff of contemporary politics, but I might be projecting). Much of the novel’s slight nod toward the supernatural comes from the reclusive Gauvard Colle, whose proleptic visions suggest his connection to the “half-world.”

It’s almost a trademark of Kay’s fiction to dem­onstrate how the day-to-day decisions of ordinary characters create domino-like effects (or more often butterfly effects) in the larger historical record, and to give those characters a vivid life of their own. Since the principal character here is a poet, the role of the arts is also a recurring theme in the novel, not only by showing us ex­amples of poems and speeches by Thierry and Marina (as well as those lousy rival poets), but by considering other arts such as painting. As if to underline the notion of the ordinariness of history, a particularly striking passage describes a fresco depicting the fall of Heladikos – this culture’s version of Icarus – which seems a clear allusion to the famous Brueghel painting (and perhaps to Auden’s poem about it), showing shepherds, farm­ers, and weavers going about their daily business, not even noticing that a god’s son has fallen into the sea. While Written on the Dark has its share of brutal murders, historic battles, royal schemes, and even really bad weather, that image seems to encapsulate much of what Kay is up to in his fic­tion. “So much uncertainty lies in art, and what endures,” he tells us in a rather melancholic tone. “Where and when the lightning flash of brilliance will strike. What is valued in a given time, or over time. And what is lost, forgotten.” I think it’s fair to say that there are more than a few flashes of brilliance in Written on the Dark, as well as some profoundly moving insights and some of Kay’s most memorable characters.

Interested in this title? Your purchase through the links below brings us a small amount of affiliate income and helps us keep doing all the reviews you love to read!

This review and more like it in the April 2025 issue of Locus.

While you are here, please take a moment to support Locus with a one-time or recurring donation. We rely on reader donations to keep the magazine and site going, and would like to keep the site paywall free, but WE NEED YOUR FINANCIAL SUPPORT to continue quality coverage of the science fiction and fantasy field.

©Locus Magazine. Copyrighted material may not be republished without permission of LSFF.

← Previous Casual by Koji A. Dae: Review by Alex Brown

The Potency of Ungovernable Impulses by Malka Older: Review by Alexandra Pierce Next →

You May Also Like...

2023 World Fantasy Awards Finalists

Julian May (1931-2017)

Justin E.A. Busch (1959-2022)

Leave a Reply Cancel reply

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Comment *

Name *

Email *

Website

Δ