 
 Gene Wolfe Interview 
 Gene Wolfe Interview 
 conducted 3/20/94 
 by Brendan Baber 
 Q: What is the difference between science fiction and fantasy? 
 GW: Plausibility, really. Science fiction is what you can make people
believe; fantasy is what people have to suspend disbelief for. Many
physicists believe that there will never be a faster-than-light drive -- it's
impossible. But you can make people believe in one, since they don't know
much physics. And there are some physicists who believe it is possible. If
you talk about somebody genetically engineering unicorns, it's probably
fantasy, because people don't believe in it. But it's so close that you can
almost touch it; we're almost at the point where we can make a unicorn.
 So it's all a matter of plausibility. Do people think, "The future
might be like this?" If so, it's science fiction. If they think, "This could
never happen," that's fantasy.
 Q: Magic realism? 
 GW: Magic realism is fantasy written by 
 people 
who speak Spanish .
 Q: Horror? 
 GW: Horror is all over the map. It's one of those umbrella 
things, where you
can write any type of material with "horrific" elements, call it horror and
sell it as horror. Read the complete works of Stephen King, and you'll find
fantasy written as horror, science fiction written as horror, horror written
as horror, autobiography written as horror, and so forth.
 Q: Why write books at all? 
 GW: The easy, cheap answer is, "To make money."
 Q: There are better ways to make money. 
 GW: Yes. If you're trying to make money you 
shouldn't do anything as chancy and hard as writing books.
 The only real answer is that you can't help it. A real writer writes
for the same reason a real songbird sings. Somehow it's in them to do it, so
they do it. A human singer, for that matter, who can't make a dime singing,
will sing in the church choir, sing at parties and sing every chance he or
she gets. They like doing it.
 I like writing. It's hard work. I get tired doing it. I've been writing
five pages a day, and that is a lot; it takes a lot out of me. But I can come
back to it the next day and still like it.
 Q: How have you contributed to or changed science fiction? 
 GW: Oh lord, I don't know that I have. That's the kind of 
thing you ought to
ask John Clute, for example. I've tried to do things that seemed to me should
be done and nobody had done yet. But everybody who's worth reading is trying
to do exactly that.
 Q: What are those things that you've tried to do? 
 GW: Oh for heaven's sake -- I had to lead with my chin like that.
 I've tried to use a lot of standard scenery and props of science
fiction in a new way, and I have tried to rip off a lot of rubbish we
inherited from the utopian and dystopian novels.
 Q: Rip off? 
 GW: I don't mean steal; I mean tear it off and throw it away.
 Utopias in the utopian novels work because everyone is good and
reasonable. But everybody is never going to be good and reasonable and want
utopia to work.
 Q: Except on Star Trek. 
 GW: There you are. The dystopian novel is just the other side of that:
Everybody is lousy and rotten in all their relationships, and they're lousy
and rotten to everyone they know. There are probably some people who really
are that bad, but there aren't very many of them, and most rotten people are
only rotten selectively. They're not lousy and rotten to their kids, or they
are, but they're nice to their drinking buddies.
 Q: So the goal is to make complex character?
 How would you describe that? 
 GW: I think that's what real human character is. I used to argue 
this with Damon Knight when we were still friends. Damon felt that you 
should write
science fiction primarily by reading other science fiction and thinking about
how the author should have done it. I felt that you should write science
fiction primarily by sitting in a place like this and looking out in the
street -- looking at the real world and saying, "What's going to happen, what
might happen, what would happen if."
 Both approaches can produce good stories, and I honestly think that
Damon was using my approach some and I used Damon's some. There were some
instances where I had read a story, and I said, "Gee, that's a great story,
but what he should have done is ..." And then I sit down and write that
story. Why not? And of course the other people are doing that to me. Why not?
That's the way we play the game. I hit the ball over the net and they hit it
back.
 Q: But you're specifically interested in cross-pollination? 
 GW: Oh yeah -- to my detriment, at times. I wrote a book called 
 Free Live Free ; 
it's a science fiction novel, a time-travel novel, and there's a
private eye. People say, "You can't do that. This is a science fiction novel!
You can't have a private eye."
 So I say, "Look, there are real private eyes. Look in the phone book."
My father used to have a business partner who was a private eye. This is a
real business; it isn't just in the novels of Dashiell Hammett. As a matter
of fact, Hammett was a former private eye -- he was a Pinkerton.
 And they say, "Well, you can't. And there's a witch in here! You can't
have a witch in a science fiction novel!"
 And I say, "Yeah, well I've had witches give me their business cards."
They're real people. They're around here. Go to the nearest occult bookstore,
strike up conversations with the customers. I'll bet you hit a witch within
the first ten conversations. Okay, so I've got one in my story.
 And they say, "Oh, you can't do that. You're mixing genres."
 I'm not trying to write genres, I'm trying to write a book.
 Q: And yet the genre of science fiction has been good to you. 
 GW: Oh sure. Absolutely. So what? I write a book or a story, 
and I write it the way I think it ought to be written. 
Then I say, "Where can I sell this?"
 Q: What's available to an adult, adventurous reader 
in science fiction? Why should they read that genre? Why should
they move past realism? 
 GW: The adventurous reader has probably already moved past realism. I realize
that sounds like a smart remark, but I mean past the kind of fiction that is
called "realism" as a literary genre, and that's what it is: a literary
genre. It is archtypically the story about the college professor who is
married to the other college professor.
 Did you 
 read Ursula 
 K. LeGuin's novel, The 
Dispossessed ? It was about
the college professor who's married to a college professor, only science
fiction, and this planet is Russia and this planet is the United States. When
I read it I was so disappointed. I'd had a dozen people tell me how wonderful
it was.
 Q: Yeah, I heard that too. Then I read it. 
 GW: I've read that book before; I've read it as realism many a time. It's a
John Updike kind of book. I've read that story so many times ... now I read a
book until I can recognize the story, and say, "This is what it is," and
that's as far as it goes, since I have no urge to finish it. I'm long past
feeling so guilty that I have to finish everything I start. I don't finish
ninety percent of what I start.
 Look, the reason someone should go past that sort of realism is that it
is narrow, stultifying and ultimately false.
 Q: And the fantastic genres aren't? 
 GW: No, not the better stuff. We're dealing with the truth of the human
experience, as opposed to what we are willing to accept from other people.
 Q: Wait, I don't see that distinction. The truth of experiences
 versus other people's experiences? 
 GW: That you are willing to accept.
 Q: You must forgive me; I don't follow that. 
 GW: I mean that if you were to tell me the pivotal events of your life, as
they actually occurred, I wouldn't believe you. And vice-versa.
 Q: [laughs] That's a pretty radical viewpoint! 
 GW: I think it's the truth. Have you ever tried telling people the pivotal
events of your life, as they actually occurred?
 Q: Usually edited down so they'll believe it. 
 GW: See? See? Okay.
 Q: But that's a pretty radical point. 
 GW: You're dumbing it down for the audience! 
Let's write literature in which
we don't dumb it down. Let's "smart" it up.
 Q: That's a wild spin on reality ... 
 GW: Yeah. There's a great scene in one of 
[Neil Gaiman's] Sandman books. Do
you remember the Emperor of America?
 Q: Emperor Norton the first. 
 GW: Yes. And there's a scene in one of the 
Sandman books where he and Death
are walking off into the sunset, and she's wearing his hat. That's real.
Yeah.
 Q: So realism is dumbed-down reality? 
 GW: It's a dumbed-down part of reality -- an acceptable part. It's
mid-twentieth century upper-middle-class reality.
 Q: Would you call it "materialism"? 
 GW: It is materialistic, but it's not materialism. Materialism is one of
those things that's so barren you can't do much with it.
 There was a materialist philosophy student who used to write to me, and
would argue all of this stuff. He'd get enormously mad. (Do you know Tree's
Law? Sir Tree, the famous British actor, coined the law, "Madmen write
eight-page letters.") So this guy would send me these philosophical tracts,
and they were full of outrageous pieces of bullshit, like, "Everybody wants
to live!"
 And I would say, "A guy jumps off an eighteen-story building. What
could he do to convince you that he wants to die?" I tried to get him to
answer that question, and of course he wouldn't. He'd dodge around, and he'd
get madder and madder.
 So he'd say, "A piece of paper is really just hydrogen and oxygen and
six other elements, and that's all it is."
 And I said, "I believe it's actually a piece of paper."
 And he'd say, "No no no, it's a bunch of elements!"
 So I wrote him, and said, "Okay, but remember now, every day of your
life you'll have to adopt my viewpoint to live, to go down to the store and
buy a ream of paper."
 Then he said, "We cannot get along without logic."
 Hell, half the people I know are getting along without logic! Most of
'em are doing just fine! All of the animals do it, except on a very basic
level. No, the one thing that we really can't get along without is the
realization that a piece of paper is a piece of paper. If you're a mouse
you've got to say, "That's cheese. Nobody's fooling me about that. That's not
chemicals, it's not gas, it's not some sort of fake cheese. I know cheese."
 That's what you've got to do to live on the animal level.
 Q: Identifying things in their relationships?
 On a "thing" level? Knowing
what's useful, what's functional, what you need? 
 GW: Knowing what it is. It is paper. It is cheese.
 What I realized -- years after this correspondence was over -- the
thing that made him the way he was, was that he had never tried to take the
piece of paper, and reduce it into carbon and hydrogen and whatever. If he
had done that he would have learned that it was really a piece of paper,
because he would have found out how resistant it was to being broken down.
 Go into a laboratory, start working on it with re-agents or heat or
whatever, and break it down into its constituent elements. That's how you
learn that the theoretical stuff is all very well, but you're going to get an
awful lot of glassware dirty.
 It's a thing garage mechanics know. It's the difference between them
and politicians.
 Q: Who's exciting in science fiction right now? 
 GW: You're asking the worst person in the world. Just possibly, 
 Robert
Devaroux . He's written a kind of pornographic horror novel, and a wonderful
story about a divorce between two clowns. The clown story is perfect as it
stands, a monument for all time. The horror novel has all sorts of stuff
wrong with it, but it's the kind of stuff you get when somebody has so much
talent that they get published before he really ought to be. You know what I
mean? Things are going too easy for him. Sometimes that's fatal, of course,
but I hope not. He has an enormous amount of talent.
 Q: Who are the science fiction authors living in Chicago? 
 GW: Phyllis Eisenstein is here. 
Algis Budrys is here. He's
editing his own magazine now -- Tomorrow -- and I've been told that many of
the stories are Budrys writing under pseudonyms. I don't know it for a fact,
but when I look at the table of contents there are a lot of names I don't
recognize.
 Budrys was involved in the Writers of the Future Contest for years and
years. 
 Q: So he'd have the resources. 
 GW: He's in contact with tons of people
 who won prizes in it and never made a mark since.
 Q: That's too bad. 
 GW: In most cases it's simple justice. The stuff they were writing and
sending around wasn't that good. People do that, and they do it for years.
Sometimes they make a breakthrough, and they do a good deal better.
 Q: You had that period, didn't you? 
 GW: Oh sure, absolutely -- something like six years between the time I
started writing and the time I sold anything. For one thing, I was sending
stuff to markets where I had absolutely no chance. You know, I was sending
fantasy and science fiction stories to 
 Atlantic Monthly . 
With new writers,
you're so close to the material that you can't see it for what it is.
 Q: Seeing it for what it is ... that goes back to the point 
you were making earlier. 
 GW: Oh, yes, it does. You see it as hydrogen or something -- floats right off
the table! 
 Q: [laughs] Hmmm ... what do you think of Chicago? Do you like the place?
Does being a writer in Chicago do anything for you? 
 GW: I like it as much as any city I know. I have an urge to get away from it
and be a rural writer, but that's not Chicago's fault; that's something in
me. The Tribune shines and stinks. It may be the worst thing about Chicago,
but Dan Rostenkowski is a runner-up.
 Q: He got re-elected, you know. 
 GW: Oh yes, I know he did. But Chicago has a great deal going for it. A lot.
All you have to do is visit St. Louis and you realize what Chicago has going
for it. You know? It's paradaisical!
 We used to have the most wonderful supermarket in the world in
Barrington. It was called Bockwinkles, and I'm sure you never heard of it. It
was like you had stepped into a higher order of reality. It was absolutely
incredible -- unbelievable. They moved in a baby grand piano and had a man in
evening clothes playing Christmas carols. They had a waterfall -- and this is
a supermarket. Everybody who worked there was good-looking.
 Q: They only hired beautiful people? 
 GW: Yeah! Absolutely! The box-boy was handsome; the check-out girls looked
like they could be models or actresses! It closed, of course. It was too good
for the area it was in.
 So Chicago is probably as good as it can be without going the way of
Bockwinkles. You've got to have a certain amount of dirt and noise and so
forth or else people are going to say, "This is fake." People would look at
that store, and say, "This is very high-priced," but it wasn't. It wasn't any
more expensive than anyplace else. But it was too good for them to shop
there.
 Chicago is about as good as it can be without being so good that
something in us -- the thing that hates things that are extraordinarily good
-- destroys it. The same thing is true of Sydney, Australia, which is a
beautiful city. I can't think of another American city that compares.
Seattle, perhaps.
 Q: The thing in us that destroys the exceptionally good? 
 GW: Sure. It's a part of original sin. It's the desire for
ugliness and evil in human beings. Who was it that said, 
"Sex is only dirty if you do it right?"
 Q: Woody Allen. 
 GW: Ah! I didn't know who said it, but it's a great 
line. And it embodies that entity. I wonder what Mia Farrow
 has to say about that. 
 What are the movies worth seeing?
 Q: Hmmm ... I've missed most of the first-run films. I should make it out to
see them. Schindler's List is supposed to be very good. 
 GW: It's supposed to be great.
 Q: The Piano is supposed to be very good. 
 GW: It's a very good romance novel done as cinema. If you're 
familiar with the romance novel genre, you'll recognize all sorts 
of genre mechanisms in it. It's very much a genre piece of writing.
 But people who aren't familiar with the genre don't recognize it.
 It's like the revenge play. Hamlet is a revenge play, but nobody knows
revenge plays. It's a genre work.
 Back to Gene Wolfe 
Web Comments to: Paul Duggan 
 pduggan@op.net 
All contents copyright © 1994 Brendan Baber 
email: HerrBaber@aol.com 
Used with permission 
HTML and links by Paul Duggan
Revised: August 20, 1996 
 URL: http://world.std.com/~pduggan/wolfeint.html 
