 
 Game Of Thrones' George R.R. Martin On Sex Versus Violence | The Mary Sue 
 Skip to main content 
 Subscribe Login 
 News 
 Movies & TV 
 Books 
 Big on the Internet 
 Comics 
 Space 
 Gaming 
 About 
 Store 
 Subscribe Login 
 News 
 Movies & TV 
 Books 
 Big on the Internet 
 Comics 
 Space 
 Gaming 
 About 
 Store 
 A Michigan Couple Confronted a Pregnant Woman Over Parking, Then Dismissed Her Racism Claim as ‘Playing the Race Card’ 
 Jon Ossoff Challenges Pete Hegseth Over Claims About Iran, Says He’s ‘Lied Non-Stop’ About the War 
 Charity Shop Rejects Massive Donation Box Over Absurd 1 PM Rule, Then the Woman Opened Their Reviews: ‘He Saw Us Come and Walked Off’ 
 Target Shopper Decides to Ignore Couple Staring at Her. Then the Girl Takes Out Her Phone and Does Something Outrageous: ‘Honestly was Shaking’ 
 The Prime Suspect in a Historic $100 Million Jewel Heist Is Detained. Then ICE Offers Him a Way Out To Avoid Criminal Charges 
 Game Of Thrones’ George R.R. Martin On Sex Versus Violence 
 The Boob Tube 
 By 
 Jill Pantozzi 
 Jul 27th, 2012, 3:32 pm 
 Save us as a preferred source in Google 
 Share 
 Share 
 Share 
 “I can describe an axe entering a human skull in great explicit detail and no one will blink twice at it. I provide a similar description, just as detailed, of a penis entering a vagina, and I get letters about it and people swearing off. To my mind this is kind of frustrating, it’s madness. Ultimately, in the history of [the] world, penises entering vaginas have given a lot of people a lot of pleasure; axes entering skulls, well, not so much.” – A Song of Ice and Fire author, George R.R. Martin on American readers’ reactions to his sex scenes. Well, he’s got a point. The author also went on to fill us in about his novel-writing future once The Winds of Winter and A Dream of Spring are released (sometime, in the next 100 years). “I have many books that I want to write, I’d like to think that I’ll be around for another 20 years or so and write another dozen novels, probably some sort of imaginative literature,” he said. “Never again another seven volume saga.” (via BoingBoing ) Previously in Game of Thrones Frodo (Elijah Wood) Sits On The Iron Throne Actress Discusses Female vs. Male Nudity on Game of Thrones Write Like the Wind, George R.R. Martin! Are you following The Mary Sue on Twitter , Facebook , Tumblr , Pinterest , & Google + ? Have a tip we should know? [email protected] 
 Filed Under: 
 A Song of Ice and Fire Game of Thrones George R.R. Martin The Winds of Winter 
 Follow The Mary Sue: 
 Jill Pantozzi - Editor in Chief 
 Jill Pantozzi is a pop-culture journalist and host who writes about all things nerdy and beyond! She’s Editor in Chief of the geek girl culture site The Mary Sue (Abrams Media Network), and hosts her own blog “Has Boobs, Reads Comics” (TheNerdyBird.com). She co-hosts the Crazy Sexy Geeks podcast along with superhero historian Alan Kistler, contributed to a book of essays titled “Chicks Read Comics,” (Mad Norwegian Press) and had her first comic book story in the IDW anthology, “Womanthology.” In 2012, she was featured on National Geographic’s "Comic Store Heroes," a documentary on the lives of comic book fans and the following year she was one of many Batman fans profiled in the documentary, "Legends of the Knight." 
 More Stories by Jill Pantozzi 
 Most Popular 
 A Man Bit Into Fried Chicken From a Florida Publix, then He Took a Closer Look Inside: 'I'm Pretty Sure That's Blood in There' 
 Florida Domino’s driver delivers pizza. Then the customer hands him $30—there’s just one problem: ‘I’m gonna knock him out’ 
 Three Legends Gone in One Heartbreaking Week: Peter Cullen, Dolly Parton and Tim Curry Leave Behind Unforgettable Legacies 
 Massachusetts Man Uses Restroom at Target. Then He Comes Out, Sees the Store Has Closed: ‘I Can’t Get Out’ 
 You may also like: 
 A New Contractor Steps In To Save the Algae-Ridden Reflecting Pool, but Its CEO Comes With His Own Legal Baggage 
 Oklahoma Couple Arrested for Child Neglect After Leaving Their 8, 5 and 1-Year-Olds Home Alone To Play Pickleball 
 Trump Mocks His ‘Obese’ Friend on Ozempic, Says He Told Him He Looks ‘Like Sh**’ 
 ‘You Leave It In A Place That’s Impossible For Me To Get’: Paralyzed Man Says His DoorDash Order Was Deliberately Left Out Of Reach 
 As Trump Decides to Skip the 25th Anniversary of 9/11 Ceremony, JD Vance Says He’s Looking Forward to ‘Hanging Out’ With Joe Biden 
 Rosie O’Donnell Recruits Epstein Survivors for a Pointed Musical Takedown, Directly Challenging Trump’s Dark Ties to the Disgraced Financier 
 Tips 
 Have a tip or story idea? Email us. 
 Or to keep it anonymous, click here .
 © 2026 The Mary Sue 
 About Us 
 Advertise 
 Newsletter 
 -->
 Privacy 
 Terms of Service 
 Accessibility 
 User Agreement 
 Ethics & Diversity Policy 
 Corrections Policy 
 Fact Checking Policy 
 Ownership 
 Contact 
 