
===== PDF PAGE 1 =====
 
1 
 
A Wizard of Earthsea 
 
by Ursula K. Le Guin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

===== PDF PAGE 2 =====
NEA Big Read      The National Endowment for the Arts 
 
 2 
 
 
About the Book.................................................... 3 
About the Author ................................................. 5 
Historical and Literary Context .............................. 7 
Other Works/Adaptations ..................................... 9 
Discussion Questions.......................................... 10 
Additional Resources .......................................... 11 
Credits .............................................................. 12 
 
 
 
Preface 
Ursula K. Le Guin's A Wizard of Earthsea has become a classic 
coming-of-age novel. Originally published as a young-adult 
fantasy novel in 1968, Le Guin's adventure tale proved so 
imaginatively engaging and psychologically profound that it 
captivates readers of all ages. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
What is the NEA Big Read? 
A program of the National Endowment for the Arts, the NEA 
Big Read broadens our understanding of our world, our 
communities, and ourselves through the joy of sharing a good 
book. Managed by Arts Midwest, this initiative offers grants to 
support innovative community reading programs designed 
around a single book. 
A great book combines enrichment with enchantment. It 
awakens our imagination and enlarges our humanity. It can 
offer harrowing insights that somehow console and comfort 
us. Whether you’re a regular reader already or making up for 
lost time, thank you for joining The Big Read. 
 
  
Table of Contents 
A Wizard of 
Earthsea 
“To me a novel can 
be as beautiful as 
any symphony, as 
beautiful as the 
sea.” 
 
===== PDF PAGE 3 =====
NEA Big Read      The National Endowment for the Arts 
 
 3 
Introduction to the 
Book 
Ursula K. Le Guin's A Wizard of 
Earthsea (1968) is arguably the 
most widely admired American 
fantasy novel of the past fifty 
years. The book's elegant 
diction, geographical sweep, 
and mounting suspense are 
quite irresistible. Earthsea—
composed of an archipelago of 
many islands—is a land of the 
imagination, like Oz, Faerie, or 
the dream-like realm of our 
unconscious. Earthsea may not 
be a "real" world but it is one that our souls recognize as 
meaningful and "true." Actions there possess an epic 
grandeur, a mythic resonance that we associate with 
romance and fairy tale.  
Songs, poems, runes, spells—words matter a great deal in 
Earthsea, especially those in the "Old Speech" now spoken 
only by dragons and wizards. To work a spell one must know 
an object or person's "true name," which is nothing less than 
that object or person's fundamental essence. In Earthsea, to 
know a person's true name is to gain power over him or her. 
"A mage," we are told, "can control only what is near him, 
what he can name exactly and wholly."  
Understanding the nature of things, not possessing power 
over them, is the ultimate goal of magic. Indeed, the greatest 
wizards do all they can to avoid using their skill. They 
recognize that the cosmos relies on equilibrium, 
appropriateness, and "balance"—the very name Earthsea 
suggests such balance—and that every action bears 
consequences. To perform magic, then, is to take on a heavy 
responsibility: One literally disturbs the balance of the 
universe. 
The young Ged is born—a fated seventh son—on the island of 
Gont and, by accident, discovers that he possesses an innate 
talent for magic. Even as an untrained boy he is able to use 
his nascent powers to save his town from marauders. Soon, 
though, he goes to study with gentle Ogion the Silent, whom 
he foolishly fails to appreciate. Sent to complete his studies at 
the Archmage's school for wizards on the island of Roke, Ged 
grows increasingly proud, over-confident, and competitive. To 
display his much-vaunted skills, he rashly attempts a 
dangerous spell—with dire consequences for Earthsea and 
himself. Hoping to repair the damage he has caused, the 
chastened Ged embarks on a series of journeys around 
Earthsea—and eventually beyond the known world. 
Major Characters in the Book 
Ged 
The hero of A Wizard of Earthsea is called Duny by his family 
and known to the world as Sparrowhawk. But Ged is his 
hidden true name, disclosed to him in an adolescent rite of 
passage. He must learn self-discipline, humility, and the 
power of silence. By so doing, he gradually acquires the inner 
balance and wisdom that will make him, in due course, 
worthy of two other names: Archmage and dragonlord.  
Ogion the Silent 
This quiet, philosophical magician is Ged's first teacher. He 
lives on the island of Gont in utter simplicity, yet his powers 
are formidable. Ogion urges moderation and restraint to the 
impetuous Ged—to no avail. His manner recalls that of a 
Taoist master, practicing stillness and non–interference (wu–
wei).  
Jasper and Vetch  
At Roke, where Ged has gone to learn magic, he makes an 
enemy of the quicksilver Jasper and a friend of the stolid 
Vetch. These two boys pull Ged in different directions: Jasper 
taunts him to demonstrate just how good a magician he 
really is; Vetch, hoping to temper the rivalry, repeatedly 
urges restraint and caution. Jasper eventually leads Ged into 
overestimating his powers, with terrible consequences.  
Serret and Yarrow 
These are the two principal female figures in the novel, one 
reminding Ged of the dark allure of great power, the other of 
the satisfactions of an ordinary life. Serret is the seductive 
chatelaine of a strange castle, who nurses a ravaged Ged 
back to health—but for purposes of her own. By contrast, 
Vetch's sister, the kind-hearted Yarrow, offers the even 
greater temptation of a family, home, and children.  
The Shadow 
When Ged works a summoning spell over which he doesn't 
have full control, he releases a dark formless power of 
"unlife" into the world. It apparently seeks to take over his 
body and wreak evil through him. Much of the second half of 
A Wizard of Earthsea focuses on the contest between the 
young magician and this creature of darkness. But what, 
really, is the Shadow? 
 
 
 
 
 
About the Book 

===== PDF PAGE 4 =====
NEA Big Read      The National Endowment for the Arts 
 
 4 
Sources of Inspiration 
The Language of Fantasy 
A writer, like a wizard, creates with words. Throughout A 
Wizard of Earthsea Le Guin's language is plain, strong, and 
exact; her tone grave and slightly formal; and the rhythm of 
her sentences carefully balanced and musical. Note the 
occasional touches of alliteration and assonance—reminiscent 
of Old English verse—in such phrases as this: "Forest rises 
ridge behind ridge to the stone and snow of the heights." 
Taoism 
This ancient Chinese philosophy pervades Le Guin's work. Lao 
Tzu's poetic meditation on how to live, the Tao-Te-Ching—
roughly "The Classic Book of Integrity and the Way"—
emphasizes silence, peace, and non-violence. It rejects 
dualism—good vs. evil, light vs. dark—for mutual 
interdependence, typically represented by the yin–yang 
symbol, made up of interlocking light and dark semi-circles.  
The Journey into the Self 
Le Guin's work draws on several ideas and symbols used in 
cultural anthropology (see, especially, Arnold van Gennep's 
1909 classic, The Rites of Passage). Some of these elements 
include rites of initiation, night–sea voyages, rituals of death 
and rebirth, and what the psychologist Carl Gustav Jung 
called archetypal images: the wise old man, the helpful 
animal, the Shadow.  
Dragons 
Dragons are ambiguous creatures in Earthsea. They are 
fearsome and destructive yet they possess great wisdom. 
While most literary dragons are creatures of darkness—
William Blake's horrific red dragon, the covetous Smaug of 
Tolkien's The Hobbit, the devil serpent defeated by St. 
George—Le Guin's dragons are great forces of nature, 
dangerous and sublime. 
 
  
===== PDF PAGE 5 =====
NEA Big Read      The National Endowment for the Arts 
 
 5 
Ursula K. Le Guin 
(b. 1929)   
Ursula K. Le Guin spent her 
childhood in California, mainly 
in Berkeley, where her 
anthropologist father (Alfred 
L. Kroeber) was a professor, 
but also in the Napa Valley, 
where her family owned a 
ranch. As a child she heard 
Native American myths as 
bedtime stories, while also 
having the run of her parents' 
library. The young Le Guin 
read voraciously. Her favorite 
books included the Norse myths, retellings of folktales and 
legends from J.G. Frazer's The Golden Bough (1890), and the 
fantasy stories of Lord Dunsany. Such a background may 
explain, in part, Le Guin's own approach to literature: She is a 
world–builder. Indeed, just as an anthropologist reports on an 
indigenous people in as much detail as possible, so a science 
fiction or fantasy author will build up an elaborate picture of 
an alien culture and its inhabitants. 
In her teens, Le Guin read fantasy and science fiction 
magazines but also devoured many of the classics of world 
literature. She once listed her influences as Percy Bysshe 
Shelley; John Keats; William Wordsworth; Giacomo Leopardi; 
Victor Hugo; Rainer Maria Rilke; Edward Thomas; Theodore 
Roethke; Charles Dickens; Leo Tolstoy; Ivan Turgenev; Anton 
Chekhov; Boris Pasternak; Charlotte, Emily, and Anne Brontë; 
Virginia Woolf; and E. M. Forster. Among science fiction 
authors, she has spoken with admiration about the fiction of 
Cordwainer Smith (Paul M.A. Linebarger); James Tiptree, Jr. 
(Alice B. Sheldon); and Philip K. Dick. A lifelong interest in 
Lao Tzu and Taoism eventually led her to translate the Tao-
Te-Ching (1999). 
Le Guin attended Radcliffe College and then Columbia 
University, where she earned a master's degree in Italian and 
French, with a focus on Renaissance literature. While on a 
trip to France, she met her future husband, the historian 
Charles A. Le Guin. The couple settled in Portland, Oregon, 
with their three children. Le Guin has said that she enjoys a 
very regular life there and prefers things to be "kind of dull, 
basically," so that she can get on with her work as a writer.  
While preferring a quiet routine and privacy, Ursula K. Le 
Guin does speak out strongly on matters she cares about—
American politics, the value of fantasy and science fiction, the 
importance of reading, and, above all, the condition of 
women in the arts and society. During much of the 1970s and 
'80s, she was a frequent speaker and instructor at writing 
workshops around the country.  
Over the years Le Guin has won numerous awards for her 
novels and stories, including the Hugo and Nebula for science 
fiction, but also the Boston Globe–Horn Book Award (for A 
Wizard of Earthsea) the National Book Award, and the 
National Book Foundation Medal for Distinguished 
Contribution to American Letters. She is perhaps the most 
honored living writer of science fiction and fantasy—and one 
of America's finest writers.  
 
An Interview with Ursula K. Le Guin 
On January 7, 2008, Dan Stone of the National Endowment 
for the Arts interviewed Ursula K. Le Guin at her home in 
Oregon. Excerpts from their conversation follow. 
Dan Stone: What does fantasy allow you to do that realistic 
fiction doesn't?  
Ursula K. Le Guin: Fantasy has a much larger world to play 
with than realism does. Realism is stuck pretty much with the 
here and now because as soon as you get more than a 
century in the past, you're writing historical fiction, which is a 
form of fantasy. Fantasy has all the past and all the future to 
play with, if it wants to call it the future. It opens all the 
doors and windows of the house of fiction and says, "Look, 
you can go out any door here and come in a different one."  
DS: You've talked before about wizardry being akin to 
artistry. Do you see A Wizard of Earthsea being about artistry 
itself?  
UKL: What a wizard does is like what a writer does. He or 
she is making things out of words and making things happen 
with words. I saw the parallel. But I don't know where it goes 
or really what to do with it. I've always been talking about 
language, about speech, about words, about books, as a 
great power in our lives. This is obviously one of my themes. 
DS: How were wizards depicted in literature before A Wizard 
of Earthsea?  
UKL: I believe I'm the first who described a wizard having to 
learn his trade and go to school to do it. I started thinking 
that wizards can't have always been old guys with white 
beards. So what were they like when they were fourteen? 
And that opens up a world, doesn't it? 
DS: Is it true that when you wrote the novel, you had not yet 
read Carl Jung?  
UKL: Yes. That was an amazing coincidence, if you want to 
see it as such, how two incredibly different minds arrived at 
About the Author 
Ursula K. Le Guin (Copyright 
Marian Wood Kolisch) 
===== PDF PAGE 6 =====
NEA Big Read      The National Endowment for the Arts 
 
 6 
the same point by incredibly different routes. Jung came to 
his idea of the Shadow through psychology; I came to it 
through pure fictional imagination. Ged has a darkness in him 
that he couldn't handle. Ged and I learned how to face his 
enemy as I wrote the book. I was not certain what the end 
would be until I got to it.  
DS: Some of those same ideas are found in Taoist 
philosophies, the ideas of balance, equilibrium, light and dark.  
UKL: Yes, you could say that A Wizard of Earthsea is full of 
Taoist imagery. The whole idea of a vital balance which is 
never still, which is not at rest. The wise wizards are working 
for a kind of balance. Young Ged gets out of balance. He's 
got to fix it or else it'll kill him.  
DS: For what age group did you write this book?  
UKL: In 1968, young-adult fiction was a category, but it 
wasn't particularly noticed. The first-edition cover flap says 
"eleven and up," which I think is about right. Fantasy crosses 
generation lines like no other literature. People who like 
fantasy tend to begin liking it as kids, and then twenty years 
later, they will go back to these books and find a whole new 
joy in them. Fantasy has an incredible availability to a 
grandfather and granddaughter at the same time. As a writer, 
it's wonderful, because if you write it with all your heart and 
all your art, you'll have readers that will be coming back to it 
the rest of their lives. 
 
  
===== PDF PAGE 7 =====
NEA Big Read      The National Endowment for the Arts 
 
 7 
Fantasy, Science Fiction, and    
Ursula K. Le Guin 
 
1920s 
 1922: E. R. Eddison brings out his epic fantasy The 
Worm Ouroboros.  
 1926: Book-of-the-Month Club is founded.  
 1929: Ursula Kroeber is born in Berkeley, California, on 
October 21. 
1930s 
 Ursula Kroeber grows up surrounded by books and 
three older brothers, and passes her summers on a 
ranch in the Napa Valley.  
 1938: T. H. White publishes his beloved Arthurian 
fantasy, The Sword in the Stone.  
 1939: The first Worldcon—science fiction's annual 
convention—takes place.  
1940s 
 This is the great decade of the science fiction and 
fantasy magazines, including Amazing Stories, 
Astounding Science Fiction, Startling Stories, and 
Thrilling Wonder Stories.  
 1947: Ursula Kroeber enters Radcliffe College.  
 Mervyn Peake creates his expressionist Gothic 
masterpiece, Titus Groan in 1946, followed by 
Gormenghast in 1950 and Titus Alone in 1959.  
1950s 
 This is the heyday of flying saucers, alien invaders, the 
space race, comic-book heroes, and fears of atomic 
disaster.  
 1953: Ursula Kroeber continues her studies in romance 
languages at Columbia; marries historian Charles Le 
Guin.  
 1954–1955: J. R. R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings is 
published.  
 
 
1960s 
 The Twilight Zone, The Outer Limits, and Star Trek 
become hit television shows. 
 1963: Maurice Sendak revolutionizes children's picture 
books with Where the Wild Things Are.  
 Ursula K. Le Guin begins to publish science fiction and 
fantasy. A Wizard of Earthsea receives the Boston 
Globe-Horn Book Award in 1968. 
1970s 
 Le Guin grows increasingly active as a teacher, mentor, 
and example to younger writers of fantasy and science 
fiction, particularly women.  
 1979: Angela Carter's The Bloody Chamber re-imagines 
classic fairy tales from a feminist perspective.  
 Fantasy becomes a dominant aspect of much 
innovative fiction around the world, notably in the work 
of Italo Calvino, Jorge Luis Borges, John Barth, Donald 
Barthelme, and many others.  
1980s 
 1981: John Crowley creates a genuinely American 
fantasy classic, Little, Big.  
 1985: Le Guin creates the dossier-like Always Coming 
Home, the portrait of a peaceful, cooperative culture. 
She also brings out a series of fairy tales and picture 
books for young children.  
 More and more women publish science fiction and 
fantasy, including Joanna Russ, C.J. Cherryh, Octavia 
E. Butler, Tanith Lee, Karen Joy Fowler, and Connie 
Willis.  
1990s 
 Author websites, fan groups, and online discussions of 
fantasy and science fiction proliferate on the Internet.  
 1990: Le Guin returns to Earthsea with Tehanu.  
 1996: Philip Pullman publishes The Golden Compass, 
followed by The Subtle Knife in 1997, and The Amber 
Spyglass in 2000.  
 
 
Historical and Literary Context 
===== PDF PAGE 8 =====
NEA Big Read      The National Endowment for the Arts 
 
 8 
2000s 
 Le Guin continues to write innovative fiction and essays 
about literature, politics, and the imagination.  
 2003: Peter Jackson's The Return of the King wins the 
Oscar for best picture.  
 2007: With Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, J. K. 
Rowling completes her seven-volume series about the 
education of a young wizard. 
 
The Fantasy Tradition 
Myths, folktales, animal fables, medieval romances, Arabian 
Nights entertainments, Celtic accounts of the Other World, 
fairy tales and tall tales, ghost stories, horror fiction, and 
much of our greatest children's literature might all be loosely 
thought of as fantasy. In such works impossible or surreal 
things happen—and no one seems at all surprised. Animals 
talk. Wishes are granted. Predictions come true. This is, in 
truth, the realm of dream, of the unconscious manifesting 
itself in story. Such narratives hint at our hidden desires, 
reveal unacknowledged aspects of ourselves, and usually 
teach us some good lessons, too. The truest fantasies are 
never frivolous—the smallest action, the least word spoken or 
unspoken may prove consequential, dire, even fatal. As 
Ursula K. Le Guin writes, "Fantasy is the natural, the 
appropriate language for the recounting of the spiritual 
journey and the struggle of good and evil in the soul." 
People sometimes imagine that fantasy offers mere escapism, 
whimsical adventures full of improbabilities or elves. In fact, 
the great modern fantasies possess a brilliant purity, often 
denied to modern realist fiction. They show us the natural 
world's mystery and holiness, the grandeur of noble men and 
women, the need for integrity, the beauty of self–sacrifice. 
Little wonder that fantasy is a cousin to the fairy tale, 
parable, and religious allegory. As in the medieval Arthurian 
romances or John Bunyan's The Pilgrim's Progress (1678–
1684), heroes are tested, confronted with painful ethical 
dilemmas and difficult moral choices.  
Certainly the great modern fantasies—whether by J. R. R. 
Tolkien, C. S. Lewis, or Philip Pullman—often externalize what 
are, in fact, psychological or spiritual battles that go on inside 
each of us. The clashes of armies in Middle Earth are, in part, 
symbols of the ashen and weary Frodo's inner fight against 
the growing power of the evil Ring. Even in a cinematic 
fantasy such as Star Wars (1977), Luke Skywalker must put 
his trust in the force that flows through the universe.  
Yet while fantasies look at life steadily and hard, they don't 
end in despair: these narratives of spiritual education, set in 
what Tolkien called a "secondary world," describe a hero's 
journey from ignorance and bondage to wisdom and an 
earned, if unexpected, happiness. A Wizard of Earthsea is 
more than just an exciting story. Like so many other great 
fantasies, it is, as Le Guin has written, "a journey into the 
subconscious mind, just as psychoanalysis is. Like 
psychoanalysis, it can be dangerous; and it will change you."  
 
  
===== PDF PAGE 9 =====
NEA Big Read      The National Endowment for the Arts 
 
 9 
Le Guin and Her Other Works 
Like Ray Bradbury or Philip K. Dick, Ursula K. Le Guin is 
among the few writers of fantasy and science fiction to 
escape (partially) the genre label and be regarded as simply a 
major American author. She is, moreover, as much a woman 
of letters as a storyteller and poet. Her collections of essays, 
especially The Language of the Night (1979) and The Wave in 
the Mind (2004), offer not only shrewd commentary on 
fantasy, but also feisty arguments about women and writing, 
contemporary fiction, and the processes of the imagination.  
Le Guin has published many novels and short stories, several 
of them multiple award-winners. Readers enchanted by A 
Wizard of Earthsea should obviously go on to its sequels, all 
of which take up, with variations, the coming-of-age theme. 
The Tombs of Atuan (1970) deals with the young priestess 
Tenar who, with the help of Ged, breaks free of a sterile 
underground existence to discover her real self as a woman 
and human being. The Farthest Shore (1972) investigates the 
purpose of mortality, as Ged—now Archmage—aids a young 
prince in discovering his destiny, while together the two seek 
to understand why Earthsea's magic has begun to fade. All 
three of these novels appeared within a short space of time 
and form a unified sequence. Much later, Le Guin continued 
the story of Ged and Tenar in Tehanu (1990), a somewhat 
somber yet powerful look at old age, the place of women in 
society, and what it is to lack, rather than possess, power. 
Further aspects of Earthsea are explored in The Other Wind 
(2001) and Tales from Earthsea (2001). This last volume 
includes Le Guin's "A Description of Earthsea," a kind of 
ethnographic account of the archipelago's history and culture.  
Apart from her Earthsea fantasies, Ursula K. Le Guin's best 
known works are her short story "The Ones Who Walk Away 
from Omelas" and her two science fiction novels, The Left 
Hand of Darkness (1969) and The Dispossessed (1974). In 
the short story—virtually a philosophical parable—Le Guin 
shows us the wonderful utopian society of Omelas, but then 
reveals what it truly costs, hardly anything really, to maintain 
its citizens' comfort and cultivated lifestyle. 
Perhaps the best-known and most taught of all modern 
science fiction novels, The Left Hand of Darkness is written in 
a tone even more gravely austere than A Wizard of Earthsea. 
Sent to a wintry planet called Gethen, the black envoy from 
the Ekumen discovers a world where the people are 
androgynous, becoming at certain times either male or 
female. Upon this framework Le Guin builds an intricate and 
moving study of politics, cultural chauvinism, friendship, and 
love. The Dispossessed is even more overtly about social 
ideals, contrasting two civilizations, one essentially capitalist, 
the other anarchist. Its hero, the scientist Shevek, isn't at 
home in either world, and Le Guin—with her Taoist belief in 
balance—makes it clear that there are pluses and minuses to 
each system. She returned to world-building in her most 
ambitious vision of utopia, Always Coming Home (1985), as 
much a dossier as a novel, since the work presents the 
customs, myths, rituals, and even music (on a cassette) of 
the Kesh people. 
Though each of her novels and stories stands alone, Ursula K. 
Le Guin has created a body of work, an oeuvre, of great 
range and moral seriousness. Her many books—from the 
briefest children's picture album to her most recent novel—
testify to the commitment she feels to such themes as social 
and ecological responsibility, the nature of personal identity, 
the condition of women, and the importance of the 
imagination. Her writing is self–assured and wise, sometimes 
provocative, and always beautiful. 
 
Selected Works by Ursula K. Le Guin 
 A Wizard of Earthsea, 1968 
 The Left Hand of Darkness, 1969 
 The Tombs of Atuan, 1970 
 The Farthest Shore, 1972 
 The Dispossessed: An Ambiguous Utopia, 1974 
 The Wind's Twelve Quarters, 1975 
 The Language of the Night: Essays on Fantasy and 
Science Fiction, 1979 
 Always Coming Home, 1985 
 Dancing at the Edge of the World: Thoughts on 
Words, Women, Places, 1989 
 Tehanu, 1990 
 Tales from Earthsea, 2001 
 The Other Wind, 2001 
 The Wave in the Mind: Talks and Essays on the 
Writer, the Reader, and the Imagination, 2004  
 Lavinia, 2008 
 Cheek by Jowl, 2009 
 Cat Dreams, 2010 
 The Unreal and the Real: Selected Stories of Ursula 
K. Le Guin, 2012 (2 volumes) 
 Steering the Craft: A 21st-Century Guide to Sailing 
the Sea of Story, 2015 
Other Works/Adaptations 
===== PDF PAGE 10 =====
NEA Big Read      The National Endowment for the Arts 
 
 10 
1. What are some characteristics of a young-adult 
novel?  
2. Why is this world called Earthsea? Why might Le 
Guin have decided to set her story in such a world?  
3. On the first page of the novel, we learn that Ged will 
eventually become Archmage and dragonlord. 
Doesn't this undercut a certain amount of suspense? 
Why would Le Guin tell us this?  
4. The language of A Wizard of Earthsea is often quietly 
poetic. Comment on three sentences that you find 
particularly beautiful or moving. In what ways is a 
writer or artist like a wizard?  
5. The young Ged tends to be impulsive, getting into 
trouble like the sorcerer's apprentice. Point out 
occasions in the book when Ged loses control of 
himself or his magic.  
6. Why do Ged and Jasper quarrel? Who is to blame? 
Why do Ged and Vetch become friends?  
7. There are several mentions of shadows even before 
Ged's attempt to raise the dead Princess Elfarran. 
List them. What do these various shadows suggest 
about Ged?  
8. Discuss the meaning of Ged's two encounters with 
the Doorkeeper of Roke.  
9. Compare the evil of the Shadow with the evil of the 
Stone of Terrenon. Are they evil in the same way? 
How do they differ?  
10. What does Ged learn from his encounter with the 
dragon Yevaud?  
11. Why do Ged and Vetch avoid using magic on their 
last voyage?  
12. Were you surprised by what happens when Ged 
confronts the Shadow? Would you say that his 
realization is true of all human experience?  
Discussion Questions 
===== PDF PAGE 11 =====
NEA Big Read      The National Endowment for the Arts 
 
 11 
Other Works about Fantasy, Science 
Fiction, and Ursula K. Le Guin 
 Bucknall, Barbara J. Ursula K. Le Guin. New York: 
Ungar, 1981.  
 Clute, John, and John Grant. The Encyclopedia of 
Fantasy. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1997.  
 Clute, John, and Peter Nicholls. The Encyclopedia of 
Science Fiction. 2nd ed. New York: St. Martin's Press, 
1993. 
 Cummins, Elizabeth. Understanding Ursula K. Le 
Guin. Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina 
Press, 1990. 
 Spivack, Charlotte. Ursula K. Le Guin. Boston: 
Twayne, 1984. 
 Waggoner, Diana. The Hills of Faraway: A Guide to 
Fantasy. New York: Atheneum, 1978.  
If you want to read other fantasy 
novels for young people, you might 
enjoy:  
 Philippa Pearce's Tom's Midnight Garden, 1958 
 Alan Garner's The Weirdstone of Brisingamen, 1960 
 Norton Juster's The Phantom Tollbooth, 1961 
 Madeleine L'Engle's A Wrinkle in Time, 1962 
 Russell Hoban's The Mouse and His Child, 1967 
Website 
The Ursula K. Le Guin Website 
The official website of Ursula K. Le Guin includes a blog, 
biographical information, maps, interviews, and more. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Additional Resources 
===== PDF PAGE 12 =====
NEA Big Read      The National Endowment for the Arts 
 
 12 
Works Cited 
Excerpts from A WIZARD OF EARTHSEA by Ursula K. Le Guin. 
Copyright © 1968, 1996 by The Inter-Vivos Trust for the Le 
Guin Children. Reprinted by permission of Houghton Mifflin 
Harcourt Publishing Company. All rights reserved. 
The Wave in the Mind: Talks and Essays on the Writer, the 
Reader, and the Imagination. Boston: Shambhala 
Publications, 2004. 
 
Works Consulted 
Bucknall, Barbara J. Ursula K. Le Guin. New York: Ungar, 
1981. 
Cummins, Elizabeth. Understanding Ursula K. Le Guin. 
Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 1990. 
Oziewicz, Marek. "Prolegomena to Mythopoeic Fantasy." The 
Chesterton Review XXXI, (3 & 4). South Orange: Seton Hall 
University, 2005.  
Spivack, Charlotte. Ursula K. Le Guin. Boston: Twayne, 1984. 
Storr, Anthony, ed. The Essential Jung. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 1983. 
Tolkien, J. R .R. "On Fairy-Stories." Tree and Leaf. London: 
Allen and Unwin, 1964. 
Waggoner, Diana. The Hills of Faraway: A Guide to Fantasy. 
New York: Atheneum, 1978.  
 
Acknowledgments 
Writer: Michael Dirda 
Cover image: Derivative of "Black Dragon" by MoonManxO, 
CC BY-SA 3.0 via DeviantArt. Cover image licensed under CC 
BY-SA 4.0 by Arts Midwest. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The National Endowment for the Arts was established by 
Congress in 1965 as an independent agency of the federal 
government. To date, the NEA has awarded more than $5 
billion to support artistic excellence, creativity, and innovation 
for the benefit of individuals and communities. The NEA 
extends its work through partnerships with state arts 
agencies, local leaders, other federal agencies, and the 
philanthropic sector. 
 
 
Arts Midwest promotes creativity, nurtures cultural leadership, 
and engages people in meaningful arts experiences, bringing 
vitality to Midwest communities and enriching people’s lives. 
Based in Minneapolis, Arts Midwest connects the arts to 
audiences throughout the nine-state region of Illinois, 
Indiana, Iowa, Michigan, Minnesota, North Dakota, Ohio, 
South Dakota, and Wisconsin. One of six non-profit regional 
arts organizations in the United States, Arts Midwest’s history 
spans more than 30 years. 
 
 
The Big Read Reader Resources are licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License. 
© Arts Midwest 
 
 
 
 
Credits 