 
 What’s Really Wrong with ‘A Song of Ice and Fire’ - Ordinary Times 
 Skip to content 
 Ordinary Times 
 A place of politics, culture, and discourse 
 Primary Menu 
 Entry 
 Welcome! 
 Masthead 
 Inquiries 
 Guest Posting Policy 
 About Feature Images 
 Community 
 State of the Discussion (beta) 
 Commentareum 
 Commenting Policy 
 The 500kth Ordinary Comment 
 The 750kth Ordinary Comment 
 Follow Us 
 On Facebook 
 On Twitter 
 Entries RSS 
 Comments RSS 
 Friends 
 Arc Digital 
 Outside the Beltway 
 Splice Today 
 Elections Daily 
 Liberal Currents 
 The Bulwark 
 Conservative Pathways 
 Misfits Politics 
 American Creation 
 Blog Archives 
 Blinded Trials 
 Mindless Diversions 
 Bookclubs! 
 Not a Potted Plant 
 Dutch Courage 
 Journeys in Alterity 
 The 49th 
 Jubilee 
 Safe Depository 
 Search for: 
 Home 2011 August 31 What’s Really Wrong with ‘A Song of Ice and Fire’ 
 What’s Really Wrong with ‘A Song of Ice and Fire’ 
 Guest Authors 
 August 31, 2011 
 55 
 ~ by Ryan B. 
 Lots of spoilers for the whole series, up to and including A Dance with Dragons. Reader beware. 
 Now that we’re past our contretemps of the last few days, maybe it’s time to talk about things that are actually are kind of problematic in A Song of Ice and Fire. Sean T. Collins over at All Leather Must Be Boiled kicks it off : 
 The main problem with Martin’s depiction of the Dothraki and the other Eastern cultures isn’t that they’re shown to be inherently barbaric or decadent as opposed to the Seven Kingdoms. 
 I’m not sure if this misses the mark or not. To some extent, the Dothraki are shown to be barbaric in a way the Westerosi aren’t. Rape and pillage are tolerated to some extent in Westeros as the wages of war, but they are never quite sanctioned from above, as they say. In the first book, Ned Stark considers the antics of Gregor Clegane monstrous enough to declare him a traitor and sentence him to death. On the other side of the Narrow Sea, the only person who even bothers to make note that raping the conquered isn’t kosher is Dany, the white lady. 
 This goes for slavery as well. Jorah Mormont goes into exile rather than die for the crime of enslaving others (a sentence declared, again, by Ned Stark, which raises the possibility that the major difference between Westeros and Essos is… Ned). Again, the only person in Essos who is ever particularly troubled by the existence of slavery is… Dany (notice a pattern?). 
 Beyond that, Drogo is a pretty quintessential Noble Savage . Of all his people, he is the one who seems to want consent before sex (in the book, at least; the TV show doesn’t even bother). He is the one who accedes to Dany’s demand that Mirri Maz Duur be spared from her rapists. And so on. 
 Collins addresses two more points quickly at the end of his post as well: 
 1) I think Dany’s experiences in Slaver’s Bay are riddled with enough mistakes and bad acts that she’s at least as much destroyer as savior; 2) It’s okay to root for a villain now and then, especially one whose villainy is complicated by her obvious, realistically portrayed mental illness . 
 It’s somewhat difficult for me to put my finger on exactly what is wrong with Dany’s character, but it’s a gigantic thing nonetheless. She is sort of a white savior, as noted above, but she’s also an idiot, in that everything she touches blows up in her face (Mirri Maz Duur, the freeing of the slaves, sticking around in Meereen instead of pushing through to Westeros). There’s nothing wrong with being an idiot, either (in the sense that a lot of characters – *cough* Ned * cough* – are idiots), but she never suffers much for it. Sure, some friends die, but she more or less comes out of it okay, dragons intact, etc. And the entire Daario subplot throughout A Dance with Dragons is just plain squicky. Again, I’m not sure exactly what the issue is, but a feminist icon she ain’t. 
 Finally, speaking of feminist icons, one of Martin’s biggest misses has to be Cersei. She is quite possibly the only viewpoint character who is completely unsympathetic. Jaime, the Kingslayer, is transformed into a kind of anti-hero , but Cersei – who is pretty well-placed to become an actual feminist icon in the story – is just thoroughly rotten. She claims to love her kids, but she never does much to demonstrate it. She claims to love Jaime, but she clearly doesn’t. She is awful to her other brother, paranoid in the extreme, and clinically insane to boot. I don’t know if it says more about Martin or me that her shaming in ADWD left me completely cold. That would have been wrenching if it were any other female character, but for Cersei? She tried to use the staggeringly unjust law that says a queen can’t be unfaithful to a king, while his infidelity goes completely unpunished, against another woman and was punished when the entire plan blew up in her face. The law and its consequences may be horrible, but the wronged party here is much more Margaery than it is Cersei. 
 The Problem of Cersei is actually the thing that bothers me the most. Having watched the TV show, I see the ways in which she can be made a real character. Robert was a thoroughgoing bastard, she was essentially forced to marry someone who didn’t love her and didn’t even give her a chance to love him, she is always second fiddle to the men around her, and so on. But this is not necessarily the case in the books. We can infer that her relationship with Robert embittered her, but it’s not clear that she ever made an effort either. We are told repeatedly in her POV chapters that she wouldn’t have as much trouble if she were a man, but it’s never clear how much trouble she has as a woman. She rules the realm for substantial portions of the series, gets her way pretty much all the time, and the subplot with the church is largely her own fault. 
 These books are great. They hold up a mirror to our own world and invite discussion of its faults. But they aren’t perfect. They also suffer from the faults they are often trying to expose. There’s nothing wrong with that, as long as we’re willing to talk about it. I’m hopeful that there are civil ways for us to do this. 
 Continue Reading 
 Previous: Misguided Attack on Libertarians (Prompts Some Reasonable Discussion) Next: The economic hurdles of a left-libertarian alliance 
 55 thoughts on “ What’s Really Wrong with ‘A Song of Ice and Fire’ ” 
 Kim says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 11:25 am 
 Drogo, and the Dothraki fit under: 
 http://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/ProudWarriorRaceGuy 
remember, drogo thinks that rape is “fun timez” and that stealing from the lambkin is a good thing. 
 I don’t think that rape is quite as prevalent among the Dothraki as a people (raping other villages is one thing, but raping your own is improbable, as it would lead to way too many babies to take care of.) 
 Yes, Ned and Dany seem to be our two touchstones for a version of morality… that nobody else seems to share. 
 I hate Dany’s storylines, because she is so blasted isolated. Tyrion INTERACTS, so does Sansa, so does Theon, for goodness sakes! Jon interacts, even when he’s *spoiler* *spoiler*. 
 Cersei in the book isn’t someone you’re supposed to like. However, I think it is apparent the ways that she doesn’t have power, that if she was a man she would. 
1) If she was a man, she could speak and everyone would obey (they did robert, mind). 
2) If she was a man, she wouldn’t have to hide behind her sons, and get them to do her will. (that she’s good at that is rather immaterial) 
3) If she was a man, she could kill people herself, not have them poisoned or need to rely on champions. 
 A man is self sufficient in that society (look at The Blackfish), and a woman is not (normally, Mormont and Brienne the exception that proves the rule) 
 Ryan B in reply to Kim says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 11:35 am 
 See, I get those facts about Cersei, but she never really sells them. I’m never convinced that her problem is more that she’s a woman than that she’s utterly awful all the way down. And the whole “I wish I were a man, so now I’m going to have sex with a lady?” thing? Egad. 
 Kim in reply to Ryan B says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 11:40 am 
 Oh, I do agree. 
But I think Cersei’s problem is that she’s modeled herself after fucking Tywin, who seems to have had all his humor/positive-emotions destroyed when his wife died. 
 James K in reply to Kim says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 2:59 pm 
 And worse, she’s modelled herself after Tywin’s worst qualities – his ruthlessness and indifference to suffering. 
 His best qualities – his intelligence and commitment to a goal, you need to look toward Tyrion. 
 Mike Schilling in reply to James K says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 3:08 pm 
 And Tywin’s restless spinning of plans to undermine his enemies, i.e. everyone who is opposed to or even competes with House Lannister. The main difference being that he’s good at it. Cersei plots against minor or imagined enemies and ignores or even befriends the real ones. Tywin would understand viscerally that the Faith is dangerous. Tyrion would know it from history. Cersei is clueless. 
 Will Truman in reply to James K says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 3:08 pm 
 I don’t think that intelligence is really at issue. I think her biggest problem is experience. Her mind seems to kind of work in a vacuum. Given time and proper grooming, I think that she could be a very good leader. I agree that it all comes more naturally to Tyrion. We don’t really know how Tywin was groomed, but we can assume that he was preparing for it with encouragement from a much younger age. 
 Kim in reply to Will Truman says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 3:11 pm 
 … we know his father was a wastrel, and not exactly faithful, don’t we? Tywin’s a self-made man in an age when those are… rare? Maybe not. Littlefinger is certainly self-made. 
 Ryan B in reply to Kim says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 3:13 pm 
 As, it would seem, is Varys. 
 Mike Schilling in reply to Kim says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 3:13 pm 
 Self-made as the heir to a place fell of goldmines , that is. 
 ~trumwill in reply to Kim says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 7:08 pm 
 Actually, I didn’t know that! I stand corrected. 
 North in reply to Kim says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 11:35 am 
 Mind you if she were a man I don’t think she’d have likely been married to the new King of the Seven Kingdoms; she’d probably have been some sort of Jaime clone. 
 Ryan B in reply to North says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 11:36 am 
 Unless Renly got the Iron Throne! 
 North in reply to Ryan B says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 11:39 am 
 He was a touch young to toss onto that sword-chair when Aerys vacated it. 
 Brett in reply to North says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 2:46 pm 
 I agree. Both Jaime and Cersei seem to share some particular negative traits. They’re both arrogant, impatient, reckless, and short-tempered. Boy-Cersei likely would have been the same way, with the same problems. 
 James K in reply to North says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 3:01 pm 
 She says it herself “If I were a man, I’d be Jaime”. And she is a lot like Jaime, impulsive with a poor grasp on long-range consequences. 
 Kim in reply to James K says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 3:04 pm 
 … except that Jaime seems much, much more romantic than she does. Jaime joins the kingsguard, jaime tries to do right by people (even Ned, most of the time) 
 Ryan B in reply to Kim says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 3:06 pm 
 Notably, Jaime actually evinces some concern for the realm and sacrifices his honor in the process. I can’t even imagine Cersei doing something as selfless. 
 North says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 11:26 am 
 A question: has it ever been made clear in anything Martin has commented, supplemental writings or even readings of the book that I haven’t thought of how Mirri Maz Duur was involved in Drogo dying? I mean I know he had a wound, it festered and he would have died from it. My question is did she try to heal it and fail, simply not try to heal it while saying she was trying or try to make it worse and succeed? 
 As for Daeny, it bears remembering that she was/is a very young woman. I actually kind of liked the Daario subplot in that it showed her consciously choosing bedmates for herself and claiming some agency in her relationships. 
 Ryan B in reply to North says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 11:32 am 
 I’m not sure if Mirri takes credit for killing Drogo specifically, but she certainly takes credit for effing up Dany’s life. She gives that awesome little speech about how the rape wasn’t exactly the worst part of having your people wiped out or enslaved, and then raped. 
 The Daario thing strikes me as particularly grody because she’s so submissive. She won’t make decisions without him, she is constantly moping about him, etc. It’s not that she chooses him so much as it’s that she can’t function without him. 
 North in reply to Ryan B says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 11:38 am 
 Well Daario and Daeny strike me as being somewhat stereotypical of a normal teenage girl thing. He’s her first chosen boyfriend and her behavior about him is kindof stereotypically typical of a teenage girl with her first crush. 
 As for Mirri I agree she certainly takes credit for unleashing her revenge on her tormenters. I’d submit that Dany’s life being effed up was more an incidental side effect than a goal of Mirri’s actions. 
 DensityDuck in reply to North says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 12:02 pm 
 “Daario and Daeny strike me as being somewhat stereotypical of a normal teenage girl thing. ” 
 It did occur to me, reading the first book, that we were basically reading a lengthy treatise on why you don’t let teenagers run the world. 
 Ryan in reply to DensityDuck says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 12:15 pm 
 Oy . No kidding. 
 Ryan says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 12:23 pm 
 I’m not really sure about the implications of Cersei for feminist thought. It’s as if Martin has gone out of his way to show us a character who clearly believes that her “problems” are because she’s a woman. But despite the fact that this is a rather uncomfortably probable belief given the setting, it’s also completely wrong . Cersei’s “problems,” to the extent that they’re real at all, have far more to do with her own incompetence and paranoia than they do with her gender. Yes, people resist her commands, but that’s because the vast majority of the time they’re idiotic. This isn’t that different from what happens to men in similar positions of authority. Hell, Aerys II was overthrown basically for being nuts, gender be damned. 
 But then we get to Asha, a character who really does seem to get the short end of the gender stick, but who is nonetheless almost entirely admirable. It’s almost as if Martin is saying that yes, this world really does give women a raw deal, but that this is not a sufficient condition to explain their situations on an individual level. The only reason Cersei didn’t fulfill her ambitions is because she was a fool, not because she was a woman, and despite the fact that Asha’s gender probably will prevent her from fulfilling her ambitions, she remains an important character with the potential for greatness. 
 A story that unflinchingly depicts a world where women are socially oppressed yet still recognizes their agency? What are the feminists complaining about? 
 Kim in reply to Ryan says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 1:13 pm 
 I saw a few feminists turning off the show with teh comment “too much rape” (first ep. their perogative. it’s not for everyone). 
Then I saw ten million (yes, exaggeration) “I love this new feminist show!” posts. 
Then there was Sady Doyle, who appears to be having a “but there was no knife” argument about Tyrion (social psychology: referencing how much time someone thought a kniferobber ought to get in prison being directly related to how long they thought the knife was. The lenght of the knife not being mentioned in story). 
And then there’s the fifteen people after her, saying “I like this story, lets talk about problems!” 
 FWIW, the TV show has been so over the top in it’s sexposition that everyone seems sick of it. And taht includes the people who found it hot. 
 carr1on in reply to Kim says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 2:20 pm 
 “FWIW, the TV show has been so over the top in it’s sexposition that everyone seems sick of it. And taht includes the people who found it hot.” 
 Umm, no. Did you see Rome? Deadwood? Spartacus? Not to sound like a perv, but I don’t think it’s over the top. Just my opinion. 
 Kim in reply to carr1on says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 2:33 pm 
 … did you really like the Littelfinger scene? 
(… what’s wrong with being perverted?) 
 Brett in reply to Kim says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 2:52 pm 
 I can sort of understand the point of the Littlefinger scene. It shows that he’s not aroused (hinting at his romantic fixation), and it involves him basically laying out his philosophy on life. 
 That said, it is really, really over-the-top. I’m glad there wasn’t another one like that in the rest of the season. 
 carr1on in reply to Kim says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 2:53 pm 
 His speech wasn’t in the book. I thought it was an attempt by the writers to more fully explain Littlefinger’s motives. It seemed a bit contrived to me. 
 Did I mind the lesbian scene as the backdrop to his speech? Not at all. 🙂 
 carr1on in reply to carr1on says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 2:55 pm 
 Hopefully this won’t make me the target of a feminist blog…LOL. 
 Kim in reply to carr1on says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 3:03 pm 
 sex positive and feminist are not countervailing trends! 
 Kim in reply to carr1on says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 3:09 pm 
 did you read the books before seeing the show? I’ve been seeing criticism mainly from people getting the story fresh, where “not being able to hear teh talky bits” is really, really aggravating. [may also be getting a lot more female/gay folks, dunno. Certainly it was only the book-walkers who went koala over the Renly/Loras scene (oh, I guess there were a few viewers who said icky, but didn’t seem to be many)] 
 Kim in reply to carr1on says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 3:02 pm 
 I think one thing that a lot of people objected to,was that the lilty speech was hard to hear over the moaning. also that we got the point of the “background” and wanted to look at littlefinger’s emotions, not the girls. 
 Brett says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 2:41 pm 
 Again, the only person in Essos who is ever particularly troubled by the existence of slavery is… Dany (notice a pattern?). 
 That’s not true. Braavos (the richest and most powerful of the Free Cities) is explicitly anti-slavery, having been founded by escaped slaves from the Valyrian Empire. That comes up several times in A Dance with Dragons : 
 1. Braavosi merchants won’t stop in Slavers’ Bay. 
 2. When a ship carrying slaves drifts into Braavos following a storm, all the slaves are liberated and the captain is executed IIRC. 
 3. Braavos forced Pentos to give up slavery as part of a peace treaty 100 years earlier (Pentos hasn’t been entirely honest in its compliance). 
 She is sort of a white savior, as noted above, but she’s also an idiot, in that everything she touches blows up in her face (Mirri Maz Duur, the freeing of the slaves, sticking around in Meereen instead of pushing through to Westeros). 
 These are all very understandable decisions on her part, though (and it’s important to remember that she’s 16, and had basically no experience or training to rule before ending up as Drogo’s wife). It wasn’t all bad, either – she has an army of former Unsullied who will pretty much follow her to hell and back. 
 I disagree about Cersei, too. I think she’s entirely understandable . . . even if you think she’s a vile, evil person. She does love Tommen, but it’s tainted by the protectiveness and paranoia that she has developed due to her first son being murdered right in front of her (a murder that Margaery had her part in, no doubt). 
 But this is not necessarily the case in the books. We can infer that her relationship with Robert embittered her, but it’s not clear that she ever made an effort either. 
 Part of that is true (I don’t think Cersei ever loved Robert, and she was never faithful to him), but it’s not as if Robert was ever really faithful or kind to her. He ignored her most of the time, and then more or less tried to drunkenly rape her on occasion. 
 North in reply to Brett says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 3:25 pm 
 Re: Margaery. While it seems possible that young Margaery may have been in on her Grandmother’s plotting (in fact it might speak well of the Tyrells if she is taking after the Queen of Thorns) I don’t recall reading anything that suggests that she did. 
 Brett in reply to North says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 4:39 pm 
 At the very least, she knew it was going on. Her grand-mother would have warned her not to drink from the same goblet as Joffrey. 
 Mike Schilling says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 3:03 pm 
 [Dany] never suffers much for it 
 Other than losing her husband and child, becoming sterile, and losing her position as Khalesi to become a refugee, you mean? 
 Ryan B in reply to Mike Schilling says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 3:07 pm 
 It’s a somewhat fair point, and I think part of why that stuff doesn’t register with me is that Drogo isn’t really a person; he’s a stereotype. So it doesn’t feel like a loss when he dies. 
 Also, she’s almost certainly not sterile any more. 
 North in reply to Ryan B says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 3:24 pm 
 Oh? Why do you say that? Did I miss the chapter in Dance where the seas dried up and the mountains blew around like leaves? 
 Ryan B in reply to North says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 3:32 pm 
 Yes, apparently. 
 “When the sun rises in the west and sets in the east” = Quentyn Martell 
 “When the seas go dry” = the Dothraki Sea dying at the end of ADWD 
 “and mountains blow in the wind like leaves” = the destroyed pyramid in Meereen 
 All that answers the prophecy, but more importantly, she pretty clearly miscarries at the end of ADWD. 
 Ryan in reply to Ryan B says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 3:44 pm 
 If Martin goes with that kind of weaksauce literalness in Maz Duur’s prophecy, I will be so annoyed . 
 Ryan B in reply to Ryan says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 3:46 pm 
 Right, I have no idea. And, of course, it’s worth pointing out that the prophecy says “When all this happens and then you have another baby, that’s when Drogo will come back to life”, so it’s not exact anyway. 
 In any case, she does really seem to miscarry at the end of ADWD, so she doesn’t seem to be sterile any more. 
 Kim in reply to Ryan B says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 3:47 pm 
 miscarriage == sterility? 
 Ryan B in reply to Kim says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 3:49 pm 
 Miscarriage implies the egg was fertilized, or at least implanted. Which in turn implies “probably not sterile”. 
 Kim in reply to Ryan B says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 3:52 pm 
 … I think this is overthinking a fantasy a bit (the idea of Lysa being “sterile” because of so many miscarriages… I guess I think of sterile as “can’t have babies”). Maybe Martin wants you to do that, maybe he doesn’t. 
 Ryan B in reply to Kim says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 3:53 pm 
 Even Dany comments on how weird it is that she hasn’t had her period, right? I’m not really pulling at straws here, I don’t think. Her whole last chapter basically screams, “Dany is going to have a baby!!!!111!1” 
 Kim in reply to Kim says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 3:54 pm 
 Ryan, your reading of the text isn’t the issue. My issue is “sterile” as interpreted as “can’t have babies” may mean “always miscarries.” 
GRRM may or may not have meant that meaning. 
 North in reply to Kim says: 
 September 1, 2011 at 10:32 am 
 I totally missed all o’ that. Really changes the dynamic if she can still have kids. 
 Brett in reply to Ryan says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 4:40 pm 
 Why? Prophecies have always been rather vague and prone to misinterpretation in ASOIAF. Think of the “sea rising up to Winterfell” that Jojen saw in ACoK. 
 Ryan Davidson in reply to Brett says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 8:00 pm 
 Yes, but that was a pretty straightforward metaphor which, if Jojen had been a little more mature, he probably could have figured out for himself. Either way, it was clear that something bad was happening and the metaphor was clearly intended to mean something about the future. 
 But there’s no real reason to read Maz Duur’s saying as a prophecy at all. It could be read as simply meaning “You will never bear children.” And going all homophonic on “sun/son” is just weak. One thing symbolizing another, okay. But word games like that? Martin’s a better writer than that. 
 Brett in reply to Ryan Davidson says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 9:50 pm 
 I’m not sure what you mean. Quentyn is the “sun” in the prophecy because he’s of House Martell, whose sigil is the Sun on their banner. 
 E.D. Kain in reply to Brett says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 9:55 pm 
 Yeah I think it’s pretty damn clever personally. 
 Mike Schilling says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 3:11 pm 
 I don’t know if it says more about Martin or me that her shaming in ADWD left me completely cold. 
 What struck me is that the worst part of the shaming for Cersei is that people realized that she’s starting to look middle-aged. I hadn’t realized before how much of her hatred of Margery is not wanting to be supplanted by a younger woman as the beautiful queen. 
 Ryan in reply to Mike Schilling says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 3:45 pm 
 I thought that was pretty clear. She’s been obsessed with that fortune teller’s prediction for at least half her life at this point, the key line of which was “Queen you shall be . . . until there comes another, younger and more beautiful, to cast you down and take all that you hold dear.” 
 Pavel says: 
 August 31, 2011 at 8:21 pm 
 Just read your post, which I think is interesting, but I have a couple criticisms. 
 A. I thought Dany’s objection to slavery had more to do with personal experience of essentially being sold by her brother than being “white” or westerosi. Notably both Viserys and Jorah enthusiastically participate in slavery and they are significantly more westerosi than she is. 
 B. To a certain extent the dothraki are more “barbaric” than westeros, but by the same extent Qarth and Braavos are shown to be more advanced. Further the dothraki have certain customs that seem preferable to westerosi ones, the idea that the khal is chosen by merit, unlike kings and lords who are chosen by birth. That a culture can have more raping and pillaging then westeros isn’t necessarily wrong, no more than that other essos cultures seemed to have less. 
 I totally agree with what you said about cersei however. I enjoyed the character in the first book, but found her portrayal especially in book 4 to be really weak. 
 LarryM says: 
 September 1, 2011 at 10:40 am 
 I think that’s what missing in this discussion is the extent to which Martin’s treatment of women is part and parcel of his overall approach, which is to subvert the reader’s expectations & the conventions of the genre. He has been prasied for this, and also (rightly, IMO) criticized for doing these things almost gratutitiously. But the depections of women would, I think, be more objectionable in an otherwise more conventional fantasy novel. 
 Along the same lines, the whole series represents a pretty cynical take on humanity & human nature generally. Women simply aren’t exempted from that vision. 
 Comments are closed. 
 Related Stories 
 On Ad Hominems Part 1: The Messy World 
 gabriel conroy 
 August 7, 2016 
 76 
 The Pain of Tradition 
 Mike Dwyer 
 November 25, 2015 
 13 
 The Montauk Catamaran Company Chronicles 10/23/15: Well begun is half done…? 
 David Ryan 
 October 23, 2015 
 5 
 Search for: 
 New DevCat Report! Today could be the day for a software upgrade at Ordinary Times. Be ready for disruptions and quirks.
 Doesn't look like it will be safe to bring back the commenter archive features any time soon. Recent Comments Andrew S. in reply to Jaybird on Saturday Morning Gaming: Seriously, Yet Another Zombie Survivors is Pretty Good My first Endurance run ended around minute 35, which wasn't too bad. The second one was a few runs f… Jaybird in reply to rexknobus on Weekend Plans Post: Waltzing Through the Third Gate of Summer I just googled that and, holy cow, it's absolutely gorgeous. Beautiful! Jaybird in reply to Michael Cain on Weekend Plans Post: Waltzing Through the Third Gate of Summer This goes back to the 1800s, Google tells me. The Pueblo fairs back in the 1870s were successful and… Jaybird in reply to Andrew S. on Saturday Morning Gaming: Seriously, Yet Another Zombie Survivors is Pretty Good I haven't really played with Endurance more than once or twice. Yesterday, we had a bunch of appoint… rexknobus on Weekend Plans Post: Waltzing Through the Third Gate of Summer Three nights at The Old Faithful Inn (!). Further touring of mountain west dark skies for star/galax… Andrew S. on Saturday Morning Gaming: Seriously, Yet Another Zombie Survivors is Pretty Good I have about 15 hours in this so far, although split across two save files. My sense is that early o… Michael Cain on Weekend Plans Post: Waltzing Through the Third Gate of Summer I've always wondered why the Colorado State Fair is in Pueblo, all the way at the south end of the F… 
 Featured Posts 
 Imperialism If You Can Keep It 
 September 4, 2026 
 POETS Day! The Scoundrel Sir John Suckling 
 September 4, 2026 
 How Would US Presidents Fair as Hunger Games Tributes 
 August 31, 2026 
 Cape Town Flyover Near Catastrophe 
 August 30, 2026 
 Saturday Morning Gaming: Yet Another Zombie Survivors 
 August 29, 2026 
 More Comments Jaybird in reply to North on Imperialism If You Can Keep It It more has to do with the imperial chauvinism tha… North in reply to Jaybird on Imperialism If You Can Keep It Not particularly on a category layer. Some accusat… InMD in reply to Marchmaine on The Lindsay Clancy Verdict Open Thread I have 0 commitment to (or knowledge of) the presu… Marchmaine on The Lindsay Clancy Verdict Open Thread Now that it's over (for now), my obvious take is t… Jaybird in reply to North on Imperialism If You Can Keep It Do you see how it's possible to see accusations of… North in reply to Chris on Open Mic for the Week of 8/31/26 I'm happy for him and proud of him. North in reply to GeoRod on Open Mic for the Week of 8/31/26 Agreed, the general vibe I get is it's just a bit… North in reply to OG Jaybird on Imperialism If You Can Keep It I mean, it is wildly, nakedly, hypocritical for Ru… Jaybird in reply to GeoRod on Open Mic for the Week of 8/31/26 "FTE" stands for "full time employee". So, like, i… GeoRod in reply to Jaybird on Open Mic for the Week of 8/31/26 You're moving the goalposts. Your original content… ICYMI The Iran Deal and the Midterms June 17, 2026 27 Comments David Thornton Billionaires Aren’t the Problem and Your Solutions Won’t Work June 16, 2026 49 Comments Michael Siegel Giving Presidents an Epithet June 14, 2026 No Comments SarahStook Watching “AI” in the Age of AI June 12, 2026 2 Comments Alex M. Parker POETS Day! Sir Philip Sidney Didn’t Get the Girl June 12, 2026 No Comments Ben Sears Fat Girl Diaries: So I finally made it to Paris June 10, 2026 9 Comments Merrie Soltis Getting Lost in The Backrooms June 7, 2026 16 Comments Jaybird 
 August 2011 
 S 
 M 
 T 
 W 
 T 
 F 
 S 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 
 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 
 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 
 28 29 30 31 
 « Jul 
 Sep » 
 Meta 
 Log in 
 Entries feed 
 Comments feed 
 WordPress.org 
 You may have missed 
 Saturday Morning Gaming: Seriously, Yet Another Zombie Survivors is Pretty Good 
 Jaybird 
 September 5, 2026 
 3 
 Why Some Men Go to the Game Instead 
 Clare Briggs 
 September 5, 2026 
 Weekend Plans Post: Waltzing Through the Third Gate of Summer 
 Jaybird 
 September 4, 2026 
 4 
 To School Again! 
 Clare Briggs 
 September 4, 2026 
 Recent Comments Andrew S. in reply to Jaybird on Saturday Morning Gaming: Seriously, Yet Another Zombie Survivors is Pretty Good Jaybird in reply to rexknobus on Weekend Plans Post: Waltzing Through the Third Gate of Summer 
 Recent Comments Andrew S. in reply to Jaybird on Saturday Morning Gaming: Seriously, Yet Another Zombie Survivors is Pretty Good Jaybird in reply to rexknobus on Weekend Plans Post: Waltzing Through the Third Gate of Summer Jaybird in reply to Michael Cain on Weekend Plans Post: Waltzing Through the Third Gate of Summer Jaybird in reply to Andrew S. on Saturday Morning Gaming: Seriously, Yet Another Zombie Survivors is Pretty Good rexknobus on Weekend Plans Post: Waltzing Through the Third Gate of Summer Ordinary Twitter Tweets by Ordinarians 
 Recent Comments Jaybird in reply to GeoRod on Open Mic for the Week of 8/31/26 GeoRod in reply to Jaybird on Open Mic for the Week of 8/31/26 Jaybird in reply to GeoRod on Open Mic for the Week of 8/31/26 GeoRod in reply to Jaybird on Open Mic for the Week of 8/31/26 Jaybird in reply to GeoRod on Open Mic for the Week of 8/31/26 GeoRod in reply to Jaybird on Open Mic for the Week of 8/31/26 Jaybird in reply to Burt Likko on Imperialism If You Can Keep It Burt Likko in reply to Chris on Open Mic for the Week of 8/31/26 Burt Likko in reply to OG Jaybird on Imperialism If You Can Keep It Michael Cain in reply to Saul Degraw on Open Mic for the Week of 8/31/26 DensityDuck in reply to GeoRod on Open Mic for the Week of 8/31/26 OG Jaybird in reply to Saul Degraw on The Lindsay Clancy Verdict Open Thread OG Jaybird in reply to GeoRod on Open Mic for the Week of 8/31/26 OG Jaybird in reply to Burt Likko on Imperialism If You Can Keep It GeoRod in reply to DensityDuck on Open Mic for the Week of 8/31/26 
 -->
 Copyright © All rights reserved. | 
 MoreNews by AF themes. 
 -->
 