 That J.R.R. Tolkien / George R.R. Martin feud is something made up by trolls says Game of Thrones author (and not the Lord of the Rings kind) | Popverse Trending Every Omega Level X-Men mutant ranked from weakest to strongest at Marvel Comics Critical Role's Laura Bailey recorded "almost the whole game" of Dispatch as Blonde Blazer before becoming Invisigal Kentaro Miura wanted Berserk readers to feel "even the layers of air" CELEBRATING THE BEST OF TV, MOVIES, AND COMICS PAX West Rick Remender Dispatch Popverse Memberships Menu News Features Film & TV Comics Gaming Literary Members only Comic Cons If you click on a link and make a purchase we may receive a small commission. Read our editorial policy . Home News That J.R.R. Tolkien / George R.R. Martin feud is something made up by trolls says Game of Thrones author (and not the Lord of the Rings kind) The most influential writer of George R.R. Martin's life is J.R.R. Tolkien. Full stop. News by Jim McDermott , Contributing writer Published on Wed Nov 05 2025 Popverse's top stories 
 The Wile E. Coyote AMA on Reddit turned out to be the most inspirational thing you'll read today 
 We're having a Labor Day sale on pre-signed celebrity items from Florida Supercon, and more... and Popverse members get first dibs! 
 One of VIZ Media's parent companies, Shogakukan, committed "human rights violation" by secretly rehiring sex offender, according to independent third-party investigator it hired 
 “If J.R.R. Tolkien is the grandfather of modern fantasy,” writer Joe Hill said to George R.R. Martin at New York Comic Con’s spotlight panel on him, “then I guess that makes you the father.” 
 And yet, to read some stories, Martin hates Tolkien and always has, a point Martin himself brought up. 
 “The internet is constantly running these…I’m trying to phrase this in a way that isn’t obscene…stories, ‘George R.R. Martin blasts Tolkien, George R.R. Martin attacks Tolkien, George R.R. Martin bombs Tolkien,’” Martin complains. “Tolkien is the most influential writer in my life.” 
 “So when I say ‘Eh, Gandalf should have stayed dead,’ that’s not an attack on Tolkien," Martin went on. "That’s a discussion of a literary decision. If J.R.R. was here on the panel, we would debate it.” 
 Martin also acknowledged his debt to other fantasy writers. 
 “Even before I discovered Tolkien I was occasionally reading sword and sorcery dominated by the ghost of Robert E. Howard and Conan the Barbarian. And there were others in that tradition, Fritz Leiber’s Fahfrd & the Gray Mouser; Jirel of Joiry by C.L. Moore.” Hill agreed, noting “I always thought the Game of Thrones books was very much in conversation with those earlier works.” 
 He noted the importance of historical fiction, too. 
 "I read Ivanhoe and the works of Thomas Costain, a big historical writer of the 1950s, and Nigel Tranter, the amazing Scottish fiction writer, who just died. I like the grittiness of historical fiction.” 
 If Tolkien perhaps gave him some sense of a world to play in, historical fiction showed Martin different ways of playing. 
 “I thought, Let’s see if I can combine some Tolkien things with some of the grittiness and hard edge of the best historical fiction.” 
 Here's how to watch all the big panels from New York Comic Con 2025 . About New York Comic Con 2025 Welcome home, hero. This is your event where you can feel unafraid to geek out. Where you’re accepted and embraced for being yourself, regardless of your cultural background, physical ability, personal identity, or self-expression. Where you can experience the best in pop culture, be inspired, get star struck, treat yourself, and create all of those memories with the people you care about the most. Dates Oct 10 - Oct 13 Location New York City United States Visit the event page × Follow Popverse for upcoming event coverage and news Jim McDermott : Jim is a magazine and screenwriter based in New York. He loves the work of Stephen Sondheim and cannot take a decent selfie. Comments Want to join the discussion? Please activate your account first. Visit Reedpop ID if you need to resend the confirmation email. View Comments ( 0 ) Find out how we conduct our review by reading our review policy Let Popverse be your tour guide through the wilderness of pop culture Sign in and let us help you find your new favorite thing. Sign in with Google Sign in with email Related Topics New York Comic Con 2025 Literary George R. R. Martin J.R.R. Tolkien More on New York Comic Con 2025 The Walking Dead creator Robert Kirkman kept the suprise ending of the comic not only from fans, but also TWD showrunner Scott Gimple Jurassic World: Chaos Theory actor Kiersten Kelly is excited to be voicing a character with a limb difference just like her AMC's upcoming The Vampire Lestat has a moment so wild it made star Sam Reid throw his computer Romance sitting aside darkness: How Anne Rice’s Interview with the Vampire blends love and horror “Does vampire ejaculate go through leather?”: Inside AMC's Interview with the Vampire writers room Popeye is public domain, but there's one heartwarming reason why Genndy Tartakovsky said he'll never try to make his unmade Popeye movie The star of HBO’s next Game of Thrones prequel is also a Roblox kid Bonding over Mario Kart: How the Nintendo racing game made the Game of Thrones spinoff A Knight of the Seven Kingdoms become a better show Featured events PAX West Sep 04 - Sep 07 New York Comic Con Oct 08 - Oct 11 MCM Comic Con Oct 23 - Oct 25 PAX Unplugged Dec 04 - Dec 06 ComicsPRO Industry Conference Feb 17 - Feb 20 Emerald City Comic Con Mar 04 - Mar 07 Celebrating the best of tv, movies, and comics Popverse is owned by RX, a division of RELX Inc. d/b/a ReedPop © 2026 RX, a division of RELX Inc., 401 Merritt 7, 5th Floor, Norwalk CT, 06851. All rights reserved. No part of this website or its content may be reproduced without the copyright owner's permission. Explore News Features Film & TV Comics Gaming Literary Members only Comic Cons Popular Now PAX West Rick Remender Dispatch Helpful links About Us Contact us Archive Authors Code of Conduct Corporate Site Editorial Policy RSS Feeds Terms & Conditions Popverse Links Our Events Send Popverse a Tip Popverse Memberships Membership Terms of Service Membership Attendee Use Policy ReedPop Events BookCon C2E2 Emerald City Comic Con Florida Supercon MagicCon New York Comic Con PAX East PAX Unplugged PAX West Star Wars Celebration Advertise Media Kit Contact us Privacy Links Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Your Privacy Choices Cookie Settings RX’s Accessibility Statement 