Real or Fake Text?: Investigating Human Ability to Detect Boundaries
Between Human-Written and Machine-Generated Text
Liam Dugan*, Daphne Ippolito∗, Arun Kirubarajan, Sherry Shi, Chris Callison-Burch
University of Pennsylvania
{ldugan, daphnei, kiruba, shershi, ccb}@seas.upenn.edu
Abstract
As text generated by large language models proliferates, it
becomes vital to understand how humans engage with such
text, and whether or not they are able to detect when the
text they are reading did not originate with a human writer.
Prior work on human detection of generated text focuses on
the case where an entire passage is either human-written or
machine-generated. In this paper, we study a more realistic
setting where text begins as human-written and transitions to
being generated by state-of-the-art neural language models.
We show that, while annotators often struggle at this task,
there is substantial variance in annotator skill and that given
proper incentives, annotators can improve at this task over
time. Furthermore, we conduct a detailed comparison study
and analyze how a variety of variables (model size, decoding
strategy, ﬁne-tuning, prompt genre, etc.) aﬀect human detec-
tion performance. Finally, we collect error annotations from
ourparticipantsandusethemtoshowthatcertaintextualgen-
resinﬂuencemodelstomakediﬀerenttypesoferrorsandthat
certainsentence-levelfeaturescorrelatehighlywithannotator
selection. We release the RoFT dataset: a collection of over
21,000humanannotationspairedwitherrorclassiﬁcationsto
encourage future work in human detection and evaluation of
generated text.
1 Introduction
Neurallanguagemodels(LMs)arecapableofgeneratingin-
creasingly natural-sounding text. One growing worry is that
bad actors may attempt to pass oﬀ automatically-generated
text as genuine. For example, Zellers et al. (2019) discuss
thedangersofmachine-generatednewsarticles,Martensand
Maalej(2019)documenthoweasyitistobuyfakeappstore
reviews, and Weidinger et al. (2021) chronicles how LMs
can potentially be used to spread misinformation, fraud, and
otherharmfultext.Theseharmswillinevitablybecomemore
and more prevalent as language models become better and
cheaper to deploy. Thus, it is important to answer the ques-
tion: just how susceptible are humans to being duped by
machine-generated text?
Existing studies of the ability of humans to detect gener-
ated text have focused on the binary question of whether or
not a provided document contains any generated text at all
*Equal Contribution
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Figure1:Intheboundarydetectiontask,playersseeonesen-
tenceatatimefromapassageandtrytoguesswhenthepas-
sage transitions from human-written to machine-generated.
(Ippolito et al. 2020; Gehrmann, Strobelt, and Rush 2019;
Clark et al. 2021). In this work, we instead frame detection
asaboundary-detectiontask:givenadocumentthatstartsoﬀ
as human-written and at some point transitions to machine-
generated, can annotators detect the transition point? The
boundarydetectionsettingismoreinformativethantheclas-
siﬁcation setting because it better aligns with how LMs are
usedtogeneratetextinpractice—intypicalusage,agenera-
tive system is provided with a prompt and asked to produce
a continuation. By measuring human skill at the boundary
detectiontask,wecanmakeprogresstowardquantifyingthe
risks associated with LMs; while simultaneously evaluating
the performance of diﬀerent generative systems.
We collect annotations using RoFT, the website intro-
duced in Dugan et al. (2020) which poses the boundary de-
tectiontaskasagame.Ineachgameround,playersareshown
one sentence at a time and earn points for guessing close to
the true boundary (Figure 1). They are also asked to select
a reason for why they made their decision. In our analysis
of these annotations, we ﬁnd that players vary substantially
in their detection ability and that factors such as the amount
of time taken to complete a game round and total number of
game rounds played correlate with success.
We discuss how various factors such as the genre of
arXiv:2212.12672v1  [cs.CL]  24 Dec 2022
prompt (news, stories, etc.), the size of the model, and de-
coding strategy used aﬀect generation quality. Finally, we
examine the trends and errors which distinguish real from
generated text and look at whether our players could pick
up on these trends. In addition to producing valuable data
foranalyzingdetectability,ourstudyservesastheﬁrstlarge-
scaleattemptat usingagamiﬁedplatform toanalyzethede-
tectability of generated text. Such a platform is easily exten-
sible to support answering additional research questions in
the future. All generations and annotations used in this pa-
peraremadepubliclyavailabletoencouragefurtherstudyof
the detectability of machine-generated text1.
2 Related Work
Previous research on understanding the ability of humans
to detect machine generated text has mostly posed the task
as a classiﬁcation task—given a text example that is either
entirelyhuman-writtenorentirelymachine-generated(aside
fromaninitialprompt),annotatorsmustpredictwhetheritis
human-written or machine-generated. On this task, Ippolito
et al. (2020) reported that trained evaluators were able to
achieveanaccuracyofatbest71.4%,usinggenerationsfrom
GPT-2 Large (Radford et al. 2019). In a follow-up study,
Clark et al. (2021) demonstrated that annotators are able to
distinguishGPT-2XLgenerationswithatbest62%accuracy,
but they perform no better than random chance on GPT-3
(Brown et al. 2020) outputs.
Even after training evaluators to improve their detection
abilities,detectionaccuracyonGPT-3wasonlyabletocon-
verge to around 55% (Clark et al. 2021). A study by Brown
et al. (2020) reported similarly low performance (52%) on
the detection of machine-generated news articles. Most re-
cently,EthayarajhandJurafsky(2022)reportthatannotators
rate GPT-3 outputs as signiﬁcantly more human-like than
human-writtentextitself,suggestingadetectionaccuracyof
worsethan random chance, underscoring a need to re-think
our human evaluations from both a metrics perspective and
a task perspective.
In this vein, another related area of research is asking an-
notators to explain why they think generated text is gener-
ated. He et al. (2021) created a dataset of generated text an-
notatedwiththeerrorsthathumansfoundinit,andDouetal.
(2021) proposed an error annotation schema for generated
text.Theerrorsweallowplayerstoreportinourexperiments
were inspired by these schemata.
Our work aims to address this need to diversify our eval-
uation task by using the RoFT detection game format in-
troduced by Dugan et al. (2020) to analyze human detec-
tion performance across a variety of genres and generative
systems. A similar detection task, where annotators guess
whether turns in a conversation were generated, was posed
by Deriu et al. (2020) as a way to evaluate dialog systems,
but it has yet to be applied to language models more gener-
ally.Wedemonstratethefeasibilityofapplyingsuchaneval-
uation framework to more general language models.
1https://github.com/liamdugan/human-detection
3 Experimental Design
3.1 The Real or Fake Text Game
Ourstudyusesdatacollectedthroughthe“RealorFakeText”
(RoFT) annotation platform (Dugan et al. 2020). RoFT is a
turn-basedgamewhereaplayerﬁrstselectsadomainoftext
(newsarticles,recipes,shortstories,orspeeches).Theplayer
thenplaysaseriesofgamerounds.Ineachround,theplayer
isshownastartingsentencewhichtheyaretoldcomesfrom
a real human-written document. They are then shown sub-
sequent sentences, one at a time. Each subsequent sentence
may be the true continuation of the document, or it may be
textgeneratedbyalanguagemodel.Oncethesentencestran-
sition to being machine-generated, they will stay so for the
rest of the 10-sentence passage.
After being shown each sentence, the player must de-
cidewhethertheythinkthatsentencewasmachine-generated
or human-written. If the user selects “human-written,” an-
other sentence is displayed. If the player selects “machine-
generated,” the game round ends and the true author (ma-
chine or human) for each sentence is revealed. Before sub-
mittingtheirselection,theplayerisabletoselectareasonto
explain their choice of sentence. Thus, the player's goal in
RoFTistocorrectlyidentifythesentenceatwhichapassage
transitionsfrombeinghumanwrittentobeinggeneratedbya
languagemodel.Weclaimthatthistaskformulationismore
faithful to how generated text appears in real world scenar-
ios, since generating with a prompt is the standard way to
achieve controllability, and malicious actors will not reveal
what portion of a generation is the human-written prompt.
3.2 Datasets
For our study we sampled prompts from four diverse genres
of text. For each genre, we selected a corpus of text from
the genre, sampled documents from the corpus, sentence-
segmented them, and ﬁltered out all documents with less
than ten sentences. Then, for each document, we randomly
select one of the ten sentences to be the end of the prompt
and replace all following sentences with a machine gener-
ated continuation. This results in an even distribution over
prompt lengths, with approximately 10% of examples being
fully human-written. Our four genres of prompts are as fol-
lows:
News Articles. Documents were drawn from the New
YorkTimesAnnotatedCorpus(Sandhaus2008),whichcon-
tains 1.8 million articles published by the Times between
1987 and 2007. Our hypothesis was that this domain would
be challenging for models since news requires factual accu-
racy,whichstateoftheartmodelshavebeenshowntostrug-
gle with (Nakano et al. 2021; Lin, Hilton, and Evans 2022).
Presidential Speeches. Documents were drawn from the
presidential speech corpus (Brown 2016), which contains
963 speeches given by presidents of the United States, with
datesrangingfrom1789to2015.Ourhypothesiswasthatthe
sort of ﬁrst-person rhetoric found in these speeches would
beeasyformodelstoimpersonatesincepoliticalspeechand
ﬁrst-person speech are plentiful in web-based training data.
# # Annotations Avg
Genre Avail Raw Final Ann/Cont. Generation Sources Decoding Strategies
News 1,838 7,806 4,488 2.97
Stories 9,864 8,007 4,614 2.53
Recipes 7,258 17,978 7,709 2.13
Speeches 297 8,374 4,835 16.28
Table 1: Statistics on the game rounds available and annotations collected. Players were asked to play 50 rounds in an assigned
genre, after which they could choose any genre. Recipes was the most popular genre.
Stories. FictionalstoriesweredrawnfromtheRedditWrit-
ing Prompts dataset (Fan, Lewis, and Dauphin 2018), a cor-
pus of amateur short stories scraped from the r/Writing-
Promptssubreddit2.Wehypothesizedthatthisdomainwould
be easy for models since the writing quality of the stories is
not especially high (which lowers the bar for the model gen-
eration quality), and factuality is not as important in a ﬁc-
tional domain.
Recipes. Recipes were extracted from the Recipe1M+
dataset(Marinetal.2019).Recipeswereparsedslightlydif-
ferently than the other domains. We set the ﬁrst “sentence”
of each document as the name of the recipe and the ingre-
dient list, and each subsequent “sentence” was a step in the
recipe. Some recipe steps were more than one sentence. We
hypothesized that this dataset would be diﬃcult for models
duetotheclosed-endedandstructuralnatureofthetaskand
the reliance on common sense.
3.3 Awarding Points
In each game round, the player is awarded points based on
how close their selection was to the true boundary sentence
(i.e. the ﬁrst machine-generated sentence in the passage).
Players were awarded 5 points for correctly choosing the
boundarysentenceand max(5−n, 0)pointsforaguess nsen-
tences after the boundary. Players were not awarded points
for guessing a sentence before the boundary. Players were
abletoseehowmanypointstheyearnedineachcategoryon
their proﬁle page and compare their performance with fel-
low players on the leaderboard page. In the Findings section
(Section4),wereportmeanscoreearnedasthepredominant
evaluationmetric.Thismetrichashighcorrelationwithother
more standard metrics (see Appendix E for more detail).
Some students did discover that by always choosing the
lastsentence,theycouldgamethesystemtoearnpointswith-
out putting in eﬀort. We accounted for this tendency and ﬁl-
tered out all suspicious annotations (see Appendix C.2).
3.4 Players
Players were recruited from two sections of an Artiﬁcial In-
telligencecourseforgraduatestudentsandseniorundergrad-
uatesattheUniversityofPennsylvania.Eachparticipantwas
randomly assigned a single genre for their ﬁrst 50 annota-
tions,afterwhichtheywereallowedtochoosebetweengen-
res. All data used in our study is fully anonymized and only
collected from students who explicitly consented to having
2https://www.reddit.com/r/WritingPrompts/
their annotations used for research purposes. Additionally,
the ethics of this study were reviewed and approved by the
University of Pennsylvania's Institutional Review Board.
We separated our participants into two groups. Group A
was our control group. They were asked to play 30 minutes
of the RoFT annotation game and received 2 points of class
extra credit as compensation regardless of their score. The
second section (Group B) was explicitly told they would be
awarded min(p∕250, 2)points of extra credit toward their ﬁ-
nalgrade,where pwasthetotalnumberofpointsthestudent
earned across all rounds played. While Group A was only
given basic instructions on how to play the game, Group B
wasgivenadetailedguideforhowtoidentifygeneratedtext.
Statistics on the number of annotations collected from each
group can be found in the Appendix.
We note that university students taking an advanced arti-
ﬁcialintelligencecoursearenotreﬂectiveoftheglobalpop-
ulation of English speakers, and the results presented in this
paper may not reﬂect the general population's ability to de-
tect machine-generated text. However, we believe our set of
students are suﬃcient for a preliminary study and we would
like to see broader representation in future work.
3.5 Continuation Sources
Oneofthemaingoalsofourstudyistoinvestigatehowspe-
ciﬁcmodelattributes(size,samplingstrategy,etc.)aﬀectour
players' ability to detect generated text. In order to do this
westructureourcontinuationsourcesasfollows:Weﬁrstde-
cideonabasemodelconﬁguration,thenforeachexperiment
we vary exactly one aspect of that base model and observe
howhumanperformancechanges.Wegenerallyuseonlyone
(sometimes two) genres per comparison due to budget con-
straints but encourage future work to address this limitation.
Forourbasecontinuationmodelweusepre-trainedGPT-
2 XL with nucleus sampling parameter ofp = 0.4 (Holtz-
man et al. 2020) and repetition penalty of1.2 (Keskar et al.
2019).WegeneratecontinuationsusingthismodelonNews,
Stories,andRecipestoserveasourbaseforcomparison.As
anadditionalsanitycheckonannotatorskill,wealsoinclude
100gameroundsintheNewsdomainwhereinsteadoftran-
sitioningtoanLM-generatedcontinuation,thepassagetran-
sitions to a completely diﬀerent news article selected at ran-
dom.Weexpectedthesegameroundstobetrivialforplayers.
For our model comparisons, we ﬁrst generate continua-
tionsonStorieswithGPT-2smallinordertoinvestigatehow
modelsizeaﬀectsdetectability.Then,weinvestigatewhether
or not noisy text is easier to detect by generating continua-
tions on News and Stories with GPT-2 XL usingp = 0.0
(argmax sampling) andp = 1.0 (random sampling). In our
third comparison, we ﬁne-tune GPT-2 XL on Recipes and
compare the output to our pre-trained base model. Finally,
for the last comparison we look at the eﬀects of topic con-
trolcodesbygeneratingcontinuationsonSpeechesusingthe
CTRL model (Keskar et al. 2019) rather than GPT-2.
CTRLisa1.6BparameterLMthatallowsuserstopassin
one of 50 pre-deﬁned control codes to condition the model
to generate in a particular style. For half of the generations,
weusedthe“[Politics]”controlcodewhilefortheotherhalf
we randomly selected a control code each time. We hypoth-
esized that presidential speeches would be a good domain
forthiscomparisonbecausespeecheshaveaverydistinctive
formal style and are typically very semantically similar.
We report the results of our main study of detectability in
Section 4. We report the results of our comparison experi-
ments in Section 5. Finally, we report extra RoFT-Speciﬁc
analysis on topics such as model errors in Section 6.
3.6 Final Annotations Used for Analysis
In total, we collected 42,165 annotations over 7,895 diﬀer-
entgamerounds.Afterﬁlteringforanevendistributionover
prompt length and removing players who exploited vulnera-
bilities(seeAppendixC.1),weendedupwithaﬁnaldataset
of 21,646 annotations over 7,257 continuations.
Table 1 gives a detailed breakdown of the dataset across
genres and generation systems. For News, Stories, and
Recipes,wehadonaverage2playerspercontinuation,while
for Speeches, a smaller dataset, we had 16.
4 Main Findings
In this section we report the ﬁndings of our main detectabil-
itystudy.Weanalyzetheaccuracyofourplayers,theiragree-
ment, their improvement over time, the distribution of skill
acrossplayers,andifsaidskillvariesacrossgenre.Errorbars
onallﬁguresare95%conﬁdenceintervalsandtheexactval-
ues and conﬁdence intervals for all ﬁgures can be found in
Appendix D.
Can humans detect generated text?We found that play-
ers were signiﬁcantly better than random chance at the
boundary detection task, correctly selecting the boundary
sentence 23.4% of the time (chance being 10%). For rounds
with at least one generated sentence, players selected a gen-
erated sentence as the boundary sentence 72.3% of the time.
Theaveragenumberofpoints(§3.3)receivedperroundby
our players was 2.08, also well above random chance (1.31
points).Additionally,outofthe214annotationswecollected
for our “sanity check” baseline, the mean score was 2.75,
signiﬁcantlyhigherthananyofthetrueLM-backedsystems
(butstillfarfromaperfect5.00).Fortheremaininganalyses,
we will use average points earned per round (“mean score”)
as the primary measure of detection ability instead of accu-
racy. This measure correlates with accuracy as well as other
metrics that one might consider using (see Appendix E).
To measure inter-annotator agreement we use the Krip-
pendorﬀ's alpha co-eﬃcient. This statistic measures how
much disagreement there is between players compared to
the amount one would expect by chance. Two players are
1 2 3 4
Mean Score
0
10
20
30
40# Players
1.50 1.75 2.00 2.25
Std. Deviation
Figure 2: Histogram of mean score and standard deviation
of score among players who completed at least 20 rounds.
We see large gaps in skill between players, with some hav-
ing signiﬁcantly higher mean score and lower variance than
others.
0 50 100
nth annotation
1
2
3Mean Score
w/o incentives (A)
p = 0.06
0 50 100
nth annotation
w/ incentives (B)
p = 0.42
Figure 3: Performance over time for the two player groups
(§3.4).PlayersinGroupB,whoweregivenextrainstruction
and incentives, improved over time ( = 0.42) while those
in Group A did not ( = −0.06).
considered to have agreed if they both guessed “machine-
generated” on any sentence on or after the true boundary or
if they both guessed the entire passage was human-written.
Overallannotations,wefound =0.25,indicatingonlyslight
agreement amongst most players. However, among our top
10% of players (measured by mean score), there was high
agreement, with=0.40, suggesting that good players made
similar errors.
Howmuchdoesplayerabilityvary? Weobservedalarge
variance in the skill of individual players. In Figure 2 we re-
port the distribution of mean scores and standard deviations
of all players that completed more than 20 rounds. We see
that some players have signiﬁcantly higher mean score than
others and we ﬁnd that higher mean score also tends to co-
incide with lower standard deviation. Among players with
meanscoreover3.8,theaveragestandarddeviationwas1.84.
Wealsofoundthatundertherightconditions,playerscan
exhibit improvement over time. In Figure 3 we report the
performance over time across our two player groups. While
wesawnocorrelationbetweennumberofroundsplayedand
player score for our control (Group A), Group B, who were
given extra credit proportional to their game score and extra
instruction, did show improvement along with lower vari-
ance over time.
Finally, among all questions asked on our exit survey, we
BaselineStoriesNews
Recipes
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0Mean Score
Stories News
Decoding Method
p = 0.0
p = 0.4
p = 1.0
Figure4: (left)Comparisonofmeanplayerscoreacrossdif-
ferent genres with GPT-2 XLp=0.4 against our “sanity-
check” baseline (§3.5).(right) Comparison of mean player
score across values ofpfor nucleus sampling (GPT-2 XL).
Figure 5:(left) For Stories, as model size increases (using
p=0.4), detection becomes harder.(middle) For Recipes,
extra ﬁnetuning does not signiﬁcantly impact detectability.
(right)ForSpeeches,usinga“[Politics]”controlhasnoim-
pact on detectability.
found that the most predictive feature for annotator mean
score was whether or not they reported that they had read
our help guide3. This guide contained a taxonomy of model
errors, a set of annotated examples, and other detection tips
andcommonpitfalls.Thisﬁnding,coupledwiththeprevious
ﬁndings on improvement over time and high skill variance,
suggest that detection is a skill and that annotators can be
trained to do well on the detection task.
Are some genres easier to detect?We found that certain
genres were slightly easier than others. In particular, gener-
ated recipes were easier to detect than generated stories or
news articles. Figure 4 (left) shows a comparison of mean
player score across each genre.
ForRecipes,wehypothesizethatdetectionwasmadeeas-
ierbythefactthattheﬁrsthuman-written“sentence”ineach
gameroundwasasemi-structuredingredientslist,makingit
3http://github.com/liamdugan/human-detection/data/guide.pdf
easyforplayerstocheckforcontradictions—astepsayingto
mix in cream is probably generated if there is no cream in-
gredient.Inaddition,recipesoftenassumeimplicitunwritten
knowledge which language models struggle to get right—a
stepsayingtocrackeggscannotfollowastepsayingtowhisk
the eggs.
Indeed, if we look at the reasons given by our players as
to why they selected certain recipes as generated (Figure 6),
we see that continuations in the Recipes domain contain a
much larger percentage of “common_sense” errors (26%)
than those in the News (10%) or Stories (10%) domain.
5 Model Comparison Findings
Inthissectionwereporttheresultsofourcomparisonexper-
iments. These are one-oﬀ comparisons that investigate the
eﬀect of one particular variable on detection accuracy. Sim-
ilartoSection4,errorbarsonallﬁguresare95%conﬁdence
intervalsandtheexactvaluesandconﬁdenceintervalsforall
ﬁgures can be found in Appendix D.
Doesmodelsizeaﬀectdetectionperformance? Previous
work has shown that language model performance scales
with number of parameters (Kaplan et al. 2020; Hoﬀmann
et al. 2022), so we expected players to be worse at detecting
generations from larger models. Indeed, we found that play-
ers scored signiﬁcantly higher when generations came from
GPT-2 small (117M parameters) than when they came from
GPT-2 XL (1.5B parameters).4 In Figure 5 (left) we report
thediﬀerenceinmeanplayerscorebetweenGPT-2smalland
GPT-2XL.Thediﬀerenceobservedhereisthemostsigniﬁ-
cantdiﬀerenceobservedacrossallvariablestested,reaﬃrm-
ing the correlation between scale and language model per-
formance.
Are diverse generations easier to detect?Choice of de-
coding strategy is known to have signiﬁcant impact on text
quality (Zhang et al. 2021) and detectability (Ippolito et al.
2020). Choosing a lower value ofp when generating with
a nucleus sampling (Holtzman et al. 2020) decoding strat-
egyproduceslessdiversebutalsolessnoisytextthanchoos-
ing a higher value ofp. In Figure 4 (right) we report our
ﬁndings and see that players were signiﬁcantly better at
p=1.0 (pure random sampling) than the lower values, vali-
datingclaimsfromearlierpapersthatLMsstruggletogener-
ate high-quality text with similar diversity to human-written
text.
Does ﬁnetuning aﬀect detectability?We had expected
thatﬁnetuningonin-domaintextwouldresultinamodelthat
was better able to fool humans. We report our results in Fig-
ure 5 (middle) and see that, counter to expectations, there
was a small increase in player detection ability when gen-
erations came from GPT-2 ﬁnetuned on recipes compared
withgenerationsfrompre-trainedGPT-2.Thisisdespitethe
fact that the ﬁnetuned model had close to half the perplex-
ity of the pre-trained model on a held out test set of 50,000
4In an additional round of annotation, we also experimented
with continuations from GPT-3 Davinci (175B parameters) but
could not draw any statistically signiﬁcant conclusions. We have
included the results from that round of annotation in Appendix B.
12%
6%35%
13%
12% 10%
4%
8%
0%
Short Stories
13%
7%30%
10%
10%
10% 5%
15%
0%
New York Times
9%
5%
25%
16%
9%
26%
3%
6%
1%
Recipes
9%
6%
26%
9%
15%
17% 4%
13%
1%
Speeches
8%
3%60%
7%4%3%4%
10%
1%
Baseline
grammar
repetition
irrelevant
contradicts_sentence
contradicts_knowledge
common_sense
coreference
generic
other
Figure 6: The reasons given by our players as to why they thought a given sentence was machine generated. Continuations for
Stories, News, and Recipes were generated by GPT-2 XL withp = 0.4. Baseline refers to our sanity check baseline (§3.5).
We see that GPT-2 XL tends to make more “common_sense” errors on recipes, more “irrelevant” errors on stories, and more
“generic” errors on news. This is consistent with our intuition about what makes each of these domains challenging.
1 2 3 4 5
Points
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0Seconds
0 20 40 60 80 100
nth annotation
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Figure 7:(left) Histogram showing the time taken per an-
notation and the score received. Scores tended to be higher
whenmoretimewastaken. (right)Plotoftimetakenperan-
notation over time. We see that players get faster at the task
over time.
recipes (4.781 vs. 8.979). While we can only speculate as to
the amount of recipe knowledge present in the pre-trained
model (GPT-2's training data is not publicly available), it is
possiblethepre-trainedmodelalreadycontainedenoughun-
derstandingofrecipe-liketextthatitwasnotcriticaltodothe
extra-ﬁnetuning. We speculate that ﬁnetuning may have had
more impact in a specialized or jargon-laden domain (e.g.
legal, medical).
Docontrolcodesaﬀectdetectability? CTRLisa1.6Bpa-
rameterLMtrainedwithcontrollabilityinmind.Atinference
time, one can pass in one of 50 pre-deﬁned control codes,
such as “[Politics]” or “[Horror]”, to condition the model to
generateinaparticularstyle.Weinvestigatedtheeﬃcacyof
these control codes on the genre of presidential speeches by
using “[Politics]” for half of the generations and randomly
selecting a control code for the remaining half. We decided
tousethepresidentialspeechesgenreforthisexperimentdue
to its unique and distinctive style. We report our results in
Figure 5 (right) and ﬁnd that use of the politics control code
did not signiﬁcantly aﬀect players' ability to distinguishreal
from fake text. This is not to say that control codes do not
aﬀectgeneration;however,itdoessuggestthatthecuesused
by players to detect generations may not be related to stylis-
ticdetails,atleastnotwithinthegenreofpoliticalspeeches.
Further work is needed to investigate whether control codes
couldhaveinﬂuenceddetectabilityinothermorespecialized
domains (e.g. legal, medical).
6 RoFT-Speciﬁc Insights
In this section we use speciﬁc capabilities of the RoFT plat-
form such as time-tracking and sentence-level error annota-
tion to investigate additional research questions about how
and why humans select certain sentences as generated.
How much time did game rounds take?To understand
how much time game rounds took, we logged the amount of
seconds players spent on each sentence decision. We con-
trolled for instances of players leaving a game open mid-
annotation by applyingmin(120,t ) to all recorded timest.
Wecomputedtotaltimeperannotationbysummingthetimes
for each sentence-level decision. In Figure 7 we report the
timetakenperannotation(left)andthetimetakenperanno-
tation over time (right). Unsurprisingly, when players took
longeronannotations,wefoundthattheyendedupreceiving
more points. We also found that players gradually got faster
over time. Interestingly, while one might expect longer sen-
tences to take more time to read and make decisions on, we
found no correlation between time taken and length of sen-
tence(=-0.10).Thisindicatesthatplayerstaketimetothink
about the task beyond just reading the sentence.
What errors do humans look for when detecting gener-
ated text? Each time a player speciﬁed a sentence was
machine-generated, they were asked to specify why they
made this decision, selecting from a set of pre-deﬁned op-
tions or otherwise writing down a custom reason. Figure 6
showsthedistributionofthesereasonsacrosstextualgenres.
For the Recipes domain we see a much higher proportion of
“common_sense,”errors,inNewsweseemodelsgenerating
muchmore“generic”text,andinStoriesweseemore“irrel-
evant” text.
Table 2 shows, for each reason, the “reliability” of the
named entity novel named entity
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5Average # Occurences
(a) News
named entity novel named entity
(b) Speeches
named entity novel named entity
(c) Stories
In sentences that were:
Human-written
Machine-generated
Never selected by player
Selected by 1 players
Figure 8: We see that human sentences tended to have a diﬀerent number of named entities than generated sentences. Players
picked up on the correct trend in Stories, but not in News or Speeches.
Reason n Mean Score
common_sense 2,432 2.566 ± 0.086
irrelevant 4,259 2.530 ± 0.064
contradicts_sentence 1,606 2.527 ± 0.105
contradicts_knowledge 1,411 2.262 ± 0.111
coreference 542 2.249 ± 0.176
repetition 728 2.128 ± 0.154
other 75 2.040 ± 0.483
generic 1,546 1.920 ± 0.101
grammar 1,539 1.780 ± 0.105
Table 2: The number of times each reason was given for
textbeingmachine-generated,andthemeanscoreoverthose
annotations. We see that when players select reasons like
“grammar” or “generic,” they are much less likely to be cor-
rect than when selecting “common_sense” or “irrelevant.”
reason, i.e. the average number of points earned on rounds
where that reason was given. Like Clark et al. (2021), we
seethatconditioningonbadgrammarisbyfartheleastreli-
able way to detect generated text with a mean score of 1.78.
Interestingly, the three most common reasons given (“com-
mon_sense,” “irrelevant,” and “contradicts_sentence”) were
also the three most reliable, indicating that improving these
attributeswillleadtothebiggestimprovementsingeneration
performance (and ability to fool humans).
Whatsentence-levelfeaturescouldbeusedtodetectgen-
erated text? It has been well-studied how generated text
diﬀers in basic, measurable ways from human-written text,
often due to the choice of decoding strategy. Given our task
format, we wanted to measure how sentence length, part-
of-speech distribution, and presence of novel named entities
diﬀeredbetweenthegeneratedandhuman-writtensentences
in our dataset, and whether players were able to pick up on
these diﬀerences. For this experiment we foundsurprisingly
diﬀerent trends across diﬀerent genres. Figure 8 shows the
results for named entities, where novel named entities are
ones which occurred in the current sentence but not in any
previous sentences. On News and Speeches, the generated
sentences contained fewer named entities than the human-
written sentences, while for Stories they had more. In the
News domain, the sentences selected by players tended to
have about the same number of entities as the ones not se-
lected while in both Speeches and Stories, the sentences se-
lected by annotators had slightly more named entities.
7 Discussion and Future Work
In this paper, we demonstrate the viability of the boundary
detection task as a framework for soliciting human evalua-
tion of natural-language generation systems. We conducted
the largest study of generated text detectability to date and,
in the process, replicated many previous results in the ﬁeld,
suchastheimprovedperformanceofbiggermodels(Kaplan
et al. 2020), the importance of decoding strategy selection
(Ippolito et al. 2020), and the importance of incentivizing
annotators (Clark et al. 2021).
Inaddition,wehaveprovidednewinsightsintothewaysin
which humans interact with generated text. We have shown
thatcertaintextualgenresinﬂuencemodelstomakediﬀerent
types of errors, that annotators can improve at the detection
task over time, and that certain sentence-level features cor-
relate highly with annotator selection.
We expect these results and the released dataset of gener-
ations and annotations to be of broad use to those studying
detection.However,thereisclearlystillmuchlefttobedone
in this space. One worthwhile avenue for future work would
betostudyhowwellautomaticsystemsperformatthedetec-
tion tasks, and whether we can predict when generated text
willbeespeciallydiﬃcultforhumanannotatorstorecognize.
Futureworkcanalsoseektobuildoﬀourstudybytesting
a larger set of models, genres, and other experimental con-
ditions (ﬁnetuning, topic control, decoding strategy, etc.) as
wellastestingotherframeworksforincentivizingannotators.
It is also worth looking at the cases where continuations do
nothappenexactlyonaboundarybetweensentences,asthis
is a core limiting assumption of our work. We also believe
that more investigation is needed into exactly what annota-
torsarethinkingwhentheymaketheirdecisionsandhowwe
can give annotators the right tools to explain their thought
processes.
8 Acknowledgements
This research is based upon work supported in part by
the DARPA KAIROS Program (contract FA8750-19-2-
1004), the DARPA LwLL Program (contract FA8750-19-
2-0201), the Oﬃce of the Director of National Intelligence
(ODNI) via the IARPA HIATUS Program (contract 2022-
22072200005), and the NSF (Award 1928631). Approved
for Public Release, Distribution Unlimited. The views and
conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and
shouldnotbeinterpretedasnecessarilyrepresentingtheoﬃ-
cialpolicies,eitherexpressedorimplied,ofDARPA,ODNI,
IARPA,NSF,ortheU.S.Government.TheU.S.Government
isauthorizedtoreproduceanddistributereprintsforgovern-
mental purposes notwithstanding any copyright annotation
therein.
All human subjects research conducted was approved by
the Institutional Review Board (IRB) at the University of
Pennsylvania under protocol number 819967. The IRB de-
termined that the proposal meets eligibility criteria for IRB
reviewexemptionauthorizedby45CFR46.101,category2.
WewouldliketothankGooglefortheirgeneroussupport
through grants of Google Cloud Platform credits to support
our server costs. We also thank Roblox and Salesforce for
their ﬁnancial support through gifts to our research group at
the University of Pennsylvania.
We would like to thank the members of the lab for their
suggestions and feedback. In particular, Alyssa Hwang was
very inﬂuential in shaping the current version of this paper.
Her great suggestions made the writing much clearer and
much more understandable.
Finally, we are very grateful to the students of the Fall
2021 course CIS521 / CIT596 “Artiﬁcial Intelligence” for
theirparticipationandinvaluablecontributionstothisstudy.
Without their cooperation, none of this research would have
been possible.
References
Brown, D. W. 2016. Corpus of Presidential Speeches. Re-
trieved from http://www.thegrammarlab.com.
Brown,T.;Mann,B.;Ryder,N.;Subbiah,M.;Kaplan,J.D.;
Dhariwal,P.;Neelakantan,A.;Shyam,P.;Sastry,G.;Askell,
A.; Agarwal, S.; Herbert-Voss, A.; Krueger, G.; Henighan,
T.; Child, R.; Ramesh, A.; Ziegler, D.; Wu, J.; Winter,
C.; Hesse, C.; Chen, M.; Sigler, E.; Litwin, M.; Gray, S.;
Chess, B.; Clark, J.; Berner, C.; McCandlish, S.; Radford,
A.; Sutskever, I.; and Amodei, D. 2020. Language Models
areFew-ShotLearners. InLarochelle,H.;Ranzato,M.;Had-
sell, R.; Balcan, M. F.; and Lin, H., eds.,Advances in Neu-
ralInformationProcessingSystems ,volume33,1877–1901.
Curran Associates, Inc.
Clark, E.; August, T.; Serrano, S.; Haduong, N.; Gururan-
gan, S.; and Smith, N. A. 2021. All That's ‘Human'Is Not
Gold: Evaluating Human Evaluation of Generated Text. In
Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume
1: Long Papers), 7282–7296.
Deriu,J.;Tuggener,D.;vonDäniken,P.;Campos,J.A.;Ro-
drigo,A.;Belkacem,T.;Soroa,A.;Agirre,E.;andCieliebak,
M. 2020. Spot The Bot: A Robust and Eﬃcient Framework
for the Evaluation of Conversational Dialogue Systems. In
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods
inNaturalLanguageProcessing(EMNLP) ,3971–3984.On-
line: Association for Computational Linguistics.
Dou, Y.; Forbes, M.; Koncel-Kedziorski, R.; Smith, N. A.;
andChoi,Y.2021. Scarecrow:Aframeworkforscrutinizing
machine text.arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.01294.
Dugan, L.; Ippolito, D.; Kirubarajan, A.; and Callison-
Burch,C.2020. RoFT:AToolforEvaluatingHumanDetec-
tionofMachine-GeneratedText. In Proceedingsofthe2020
ConferenceonEmpiricalMethodsinNaturalLanguagePro-
cessing: System Demonstrations, 189–196. Online: Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Ethayarajh, K.; and Jurafsky, D. 2022. How Human is Hu-
manEvaluation?ImprovingtheGoldStandardforNLGwith
Utility Theory.
Fan, A.; Lewis, M.; and Dauphin, Y. 2018. Hierarchical
Neural Story Generation. In Proceedings of the 56th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 889–898.
Gehrmann, S.; Strobelt, H.; and Rush, A. M. 2019. GLTR:
Statistical Detection and Visualization of Generated Text.
In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tionforComputationalLinguistics:SystemDemonstrations ,
111–116.
He, J.; Peng, B.; Liao, Y.; Liu, Q.; and Xiong, D. 2021.
TGEA: An Error-Annotated Dataset and Benchmark Tasks
for TextGeneration from Pretrained Language Models. In
Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume
1: Long Papers), 6012–6025. Online: Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Hoﬀmann, J.; Borgeaud, S.; Mensch, A.; Buchatskaya, E.;
Cai, T.; Rutherford, E.; Casas, D. d. L.; Hendricks, L. A.;
Welbl, J.; Clark, A.; et al. 2022. Training Compute-Optimal
Large Language Models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556.
Holtzman, A.; Buys, J.; Du, L.; Forbes, M.; and Choi, Y.
2020. The Curious Case of Neural Text Degeneration.
In 8th International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions,ICLR2020,AddisAbaba,Ethiopia,April26-30,2020 .
OpenReview.net.
Ippolito, D.; Duckworth, D.; Callison-Burch, C.; and Eck,
D. 2020. Automatic Detection of Generated Text is Easi-
est when Humans are Fooled. InProceedings of the 58th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics,1808–1822.Online:AssociationforComputational
Linguistics.
Kaplan, J.; McCandlish, S.; Henighan, T.; Brown, T. B.;
Chess, B.; Child, R.; Gray, S.; Radford, A.; Wu, J.; and
Amodei, D. 2020. Scaling Laws for Neural Language Mod-
els. arXiv:2001.08361.
Keskar, N. S.; McCann, B.; Varshney, L. R.; Xiong, C.;
and Socher, R. 2019. Ctrl: A conditional transformer lan-
guage model for controllable generation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1909.05858.
Lin,S.;Hilton,J.;andEvans,O.2022. TruthfulQA:Measur-
ingHowModelsMimicHumanFalsehoods. In Proceedings
of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 3214–3252.
Marin, J.; Biswas, A.; Oﬂi, F.; Hynes, N.; Salvador, A.; Ay-
tar, Y.; Weber, I.; and Torralba, A. 2019. Recipe1M+: A
DatasetforLearningCross-ModalEmbeddingsforCooking
RecipesandFoodImages. IEEETrans.PatternAnal.Mach.
Intell.
Martens, D.; and Maalej, W. 2019. Towards understanding
anddetectingfakereviewsinappstores. EmpiricalSoftware
Engineering, 24(6): 3316–3355.
Nakano, R.; Hilton, J.; Balaji, S.; Wu, J.; Ouyang, L.;
Kim, C.; Hesse, C.; Jain, S.; Kosaraju, V.; Saunders, W.;
Jiang,X.;Cobbe,K.;Eloundou,T.;Krueger,G.;Button,K.;
Knight, M.; Chess, B.; and Schulman, J. 2021. WebGPT:
Browser-assisted question-answering with human feedback.
arXiv:2112.09332.
Radford, A.; Wu, J.; Child, R.; Luan, D.; Amodei, D.; and
Sutskever,I.2019. LanguageModelsareUnsupervisedMul-
titask Learners.
Sandhaus, E. 2008. The new york times annotated corpus.
Linguistic Data Consortium, Philadelphia, 6(12): e26752.
Weidinger, L.; Mellor, J.; Rauh, M.; Griﬃn, C.; Uesato, J.;
Huang, P.-S.; Cheng, M.; Glaese, M.; Balle, B.; Kasirzadeh,
A.;Kenton,Z.;Brown,S.;Hawkins,W.;Stepleton,T.;Biles,
C.;Birhane,A.;Haas,J.;Rimell,L.;Hendricks,L.A.;Isaac,
W.; Legassick, S.; Irving, G.; and Gabriel, I. 2021. Ethi-
cal and social risks of harm from Language Models.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2112.04359.
Zellers,R.;Holtzman,A.;Rashkin,H.;Bisk,Y.;Farhadi,A.;
Roesner, F.; and Choi, Y. 2019. Defending Against Neural
FakeNews. InWallach,H.;Larochelle,H.;Beygelzimer,A.;
d'Alché-Buc, F.; Fox, E.; and Garnett, R., eds.,Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran
Associates, Inc.
Zhang, H.; Duckworth, D.; Ippolito, D.; and Neelakantan,
A. 2021. Trading Oﬀ Diversity and Quality in Natural Lan-
guage Generation. InProceedings of the Workshop on Hu-
manEvaluationof NLPSystems(HumEval) ,25–33.Online:
Association for Computational Linguistics.
A Implementation Details
Sentence segmentation, named entity recognition, and
part-of-speech tagging were performed using the spaCy5
en_core_web_lgmodel.Alltokenization,generationin-
ference, and ﬁne-tuning was done using the HuggingFace
Transformers library. As mentioned in the main text, gen-
erations were decoded using nucleus sampling withp=0.4
unless otherwise speciﬁed. For all generations, a maximum
5https://spacy.io/
context length of 1024 tokens was used along with a repe-
tition penalty of 1.2. All model inference was performed on
a single NVIDIA Tesla T4 GPU accessed via Google Cloud
Compute Engine. Generating continuations with all models
on all datasets took approximately 48 GPU hours.
The ﬁne-tuning of our GPT-2 XL model was performed
on the same cloud based NVIDIA Tesla T4 GPU. For ﬁne-
tuning,wetookoursampledsetof600,000recipesandsplit
it up into 500k training, 50k validation, and 50k test exam-
ples.WethenusedtheHuggingFaceDatasetslibrary 6incon-
junctionwiththeTrainermoduletoﬁne-tuneGPT-2XL.We
made a checkpoint every 10,000 examples and calculated
perplexity on both the validation set and training set using
themodelcheckpoint.Aftereachofour500,000trainingex-
ampleswasseenexactlyonce,weselectedthemodelwiththe
lowest validation set perplexity across all checkpoints to be
our ﬁnal ﬁne-tuned model. This process took approximately
40GPUhours,however,duetoatokenizationerror,thispro-
cesshadtoberuntwice.Intotal,ﬁne-tuningourmodeltook
80 GPU hours. The ﬁnal perplexity of the ﬁne-tuned model
on the 50k test examples was 4.781 while the pre-trained
GPT-2 XL model was 8.979.
B Experiments with Larger Models
We held another round of annotation after the initial round
toseeiftheresultswefoundinourexperimentswithGPT-2
extrapolated to larger models (in particular the GPT-3 fam-
ily). In this second round we collected about 2,000 annota-
tions in each of the three textual genres (New York Times,
RedditStories,andRecipes)andofthem,about75%ofgen-
erationswerefromtheGPT-3"Davinci"modelandtheother
25% were from GPT-2 XL. The total number of annotations
collected is listed in Table A3.
The results from this extra annotation round are shown in
Figure A9. We did not observe a statistically signiﬁcant dif-
ferencebetweenGPT-3andGPT-2XLwithrespecttomean
annotatorscore.Thereareanumberofpossibleexplanations
forthis,butwemainlyattributeittothenatureofthebound-
ary detection task. In the more typical binary classiﬁcation
task(i.e.,labellingatextpassagehuman-writtenormachine-
generated), annotators are shown the full generation at once
andcanthususemorecontexttomaketheirdecisions.Thisis
in contrast to the boundary decision task, which only shows
onesentenceatatimetoannotators.Whiletheboundaryde-
tectiontaskhasmanybeneﬁtsfromananalysisstandpoint,it
may not be as useful when it comes to comparing models at
the highest levels of performance, requiring orders of mag-
nitudemoredatatodrawstatisticallysigniﬁcantconclusions
about model performance.
C Dataset Filtering
C.1 Quality Control of Generations
Oneofthemoreunexpectedlydiﬃcultaspectsofthisproject
was ensuring that generations did not have obvious ﬂaws
or artifacts that would make the task trivial for annotators.
For starters, sentence segmentation with NLTK or spaCy
6https://github.com/huggingface/datasets
Dataset Model p n Mean Score
Stories GPT-2 XL 0.0 288 1.372 ± 0.205
Stories GPT-2 XL 0.4 230 1.609 ± 0.237
Stories GPT-2 XL 1.0 253 1.743 ± 0.246
Stories GPT-3 Davinci 0.0 726 1.530 ± 0.135
Stories GPT-3 Davinci 0.4 776 1.406 ± 0.127
Stories GPT-3 Davinci 1.0 752 1.652 ± 0.134
News GPT-2 XL 0.0 151 1.881 ± 0.328
News GPT-2 XL 0.4 168 1.756 ± 0.295
News GPT-2 XL 1.0 139 2.050 ± 0.358
News GPT-3 Davinci 0.0 468 1.479 ± 0.171
News GPT-3 Davinci 0.4 497 1.680 ± 0.170
News GPT-3 Davinci 1.0 391 2.028 ± 0.203
Recipes GPT-2 XL 0.4 451 1.363 ± 0.169
Recipes GPT-3 Davinci 0.4 1,311 1.596 ± 0.103
Table A3: Statistics for our extra second round of annota-
tions. In this round, all generations were either from GPT2-
XL or GPT-3 Davinci, in approximately a one to three ratio.
Intervals listed are = 0.95conﬁdence.
en_core_web_sm resulted in many sentence segmenta-
tion errors. Ending quotation marks were tokenized as full
sentences and preﬁxes like Fr. were treated as sentence
boundaries. We ﬁxed this, in large part, by switching to the
en_core_web_trfmodelbutthissolutionisnotperfect.
Welookforwardtomoreaccurateresourcesforsentenceseg-
mentation in the near future.
In addition to sentence segmentation, we had diﬃculty
ensuring that sentences generated were complete sentences.
Often times generations for News would degenerate into
stock ticker readings or lists of addresses or contributors,
which are not fun to read for players and are not particularly
interestingfromaresearchperspective.Inordertosolvethis,
we rejected any generation that did not contain at least one
verb in every sentence. We determined part of speech us-
ingthesamespaCy en_core_web_trfmodelandlooked
speciﬁcally for the “VERB” and “AUX” part of speech tags
in each sentence.
On top of this ﬁltration, we also encountered many in-
stances where models would generate oﬀensive or unsafe
content. In order to ﬁlter out this unsafe content we queried
the OpenAI API's content ﬁltering endpoint7. This uses a
GPT-3basedunsafecontentdetectionmodeltolabelagiven
set of text as unsafe with a certain conﬁdence. We discarded
anygenerationthatwasratedasunsafewithover35.5%con-
ﬁdence.
Weunderstandthattheremaybeconcernswithouruseof
quality control measures given that our study directly com-
pares diﬀerent models. However, we believe that the mea-
sureswerenecessarytopreservetheintegrityandusefulness
of the experiments
7https://beta.openai.com/docs/engines/content-ﬁlter
davincigpt2-xl
Stories
0.0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
2.0Mean Score
davincigpt2-xl
Recipes
davincigpt2-xl
News
Figure A9: Comparison of mean annotator score between
GPT-3DavinciandGPT-2XLacrossthreegenresofprompt
text.ExactnumberscanbefoundinTableA3.Weseenosta-
tistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence in performance between the
two models.
0 2 4 6 8
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
Figure A10: Histogram of predicted boundary indexbefore
ﬁlteringannotations.Wecanseethatamajorityofallanno-
tations are labeled as being entirely human written.
C.2 Filtering Player Annotations
Over the course of the experiment, we noticed our players
had a tendency to gradually start guessing the same bound-
ary sentence multiple times in a row. The typical boundary
sentence of choice for this behavior was one sentence af-
ter the last (i.e. to annotate the passage as being all human-
written). Figure A10 shows the observed histogram of pre-
dicted boundary indices before ﬁltering.
To our knowledge, the reason why our players developed
this tendency is two-fold. First, if a player guesses all sen-
tences as human-written they do not have to input a reason
as to why they made their selection, thus speeding up anno-
tation. Second, due to the nature of our points system, later
sentences give more points in expectation than earlier ones.
Thus,playersthatrealizedthisstrategymidwaythroughtheir
taskwereabletomoreeﬃcientlyobtainpointsbypickingthe
same sentence over and over again. We show an example of
this phenomenon in Figure A11.
In order to identify these rogue players (but not remove
the annotations they did before they realized this strategy)
0 20 40 60
nth annotation
0
2
4
6
8Predicted boundary index
Good Annotator
0 20 40 60
nth annotation
Bad Annotator
FigureA11:Diﬀerencebetweenanhonestplayer(5409)and
a dishonest player (5411). We dealt with this by removing
any stretch of 5 or more consecutive identical annotations.
Dataset p n Mean Score
Stories 0.0 469 1.484 ±0.164
Stories 0.4 468 1.645 ±0.168
Stories 1.0 444 2.504 ±0.187
News 0.0 1,360 1.680 ±0.102
News 0.4 1,197 1.793 ± 0.109
News 1.0 1,270 2.196 ± 0.113
TableA4:ComparisonofGenerationPerformanceofGPT2-
XL across diﬀerent values ofp and datasets. Interval is =
0.95conﬁdence.
we decided to ﬁlter out all spans of 5 or more annotations
where the player guessed the same index every time. This
resultedinusﬁlteringout3,694annotationstotal,with61of
our 241 players having at least one annotation removed.
D Values from Bar Graphs
Tables A4, A5, and A6 contain the exact values, = 0.95
conﬁdence intervals, andn-counts for the bar charts in the
main paper.
Dataset Model n Mean Score
Stories GPT2 2,411 2.263 ± 0.085
Stories GPT2-XL 613 1.645 ± 0.168
Recipes GPT2-XL 1,811 2.004 ± 0.098
Recipes GPT2-XL (FT) 5,157 2.184 ± 0.058
Speeches CTRL 1,632 2.166 ± 0.099
Speeches CTRL-Politics 2,620 2.174 ± 0.079
TableA5:Comparisonofthreediﬀerentfactors(modelsize,
ﬁnetuning, and control code) across our three datasets. We
see that size (top) has a large eﬀect on human performance
while ﬁnetuning (middle) and control code usage (bottom)
have minimal eﬀect.
Dataset p n Mean Score
Baseline n/a 192 2.755 ±0.307
News 0.4 1,197 1.793 ±0.109
Stories 0.4 468 1.645 ±0.168
Speeches* 0.4 4,252 2.171 ±0.062
Recipes 0.4 1,811 2.004 ±0.098
Table A6: The mean scores for each domain on annotations
involving XL-sized models forp = 0 .4. Asterisk denotes
generation by CTRL. Interval is = 0.95conﬁdence.
Metric 
(a) Correct side of boundary 0.74
(b) Perfect guess 0.88
(c) Distance after boundary 0.31
Table A7: Spearman's rank correlation between average
points per user and several other possible metrics: (a) the
fraction of times the user correctly guessed on or after the
boundary; (b) the fraction of times the user guessed exactly
on the boundary; and (c) the average number of sentences
after the boundary of the user's guess (giving new score for
guesses before the boundary).
E Metric Correlations
In Table A7 we report the correlation between mean score
andothersensiblemetrics.Weseethatmeanscoreisstrongly
positively correlated with both perfect guess accuracy and
correct side of boundary. Mean score is only weakly corre-
lated with distance after boundary due to the harsh scaling
of points; only guesses within ﬁve sentences to the right of
theboundaryreceiveanypoints.Whileimperfect,thisharsh
scaling is by design, as without it later sentences will give
signiﬁcantly more points in expectation.
F Exit Survey Results
All participating players ﬁlled out an exit survey after com-
pleting their annotations. The questions on this survey are
listed in full in Table A10 and selected results are listed in
Figure A12. As part of this exit survey, annotators were ex-
plicitly asked for their consent to have their data used in this
project. Among the participants who agreed to have their
data included, data was collected and fully anonymized to
the best of our abilities. We removed email addresses, user-
names, and other identiﬁable information from the dataset
ﬁle as well as made sure to only ask impersonal and generic
survey questions.
Wefoundthatthemostimpactfulfeatureforpredictingan-
notator skill was whether or not they read our provided help
guide. Interestingly, we did not ﬁnd statistically signiﬁcant
diﬀerences in points earned between those self-reported as
native English speakers and those who did not. Nor did we
ﬁnddiﬀerencesbetweenthosewhoreportedfamiliaritywith
a genre (recipes, ﬁction, news), and those who did not.
Finally,whiletherewasnodiﬀerencebetweenparticipants
whoreportedtheyhadneverheardofGPT-2/3andthosewho
Reason Description
grammar is not grammatical
repetition substantially repeats previous text or itself
irrelevant is irrelevant or unrelated to the previous sentences
contradicts_sentence contradicts the previous sentences
contradicts_knowledge contradicts your understanding of the people, events, or concepts involved
common_sense contains common-sense or basic logical errors
coreference mixes up characters' names or other attributes
generic contains language that is generic or uninteresting
other ▻Bacon is not sauted
▻Mr. vs President Clinton
▻navel and sternum seem like very unusual word choices
▻It's unlikely that President Nixon will be quoting a one-month old report
when he talks about progress made to date
▻lemon, zest of some things dont sound right? 34 cups of splenda and 14
cups of vinegar?
▻doesn't rhyme like rest
▻Grammar substantially improves from the previous sentences
Table A8:(top) The possible reasons players could select for why text was machine generated, and(bottom)several examples
of custom reasons players wrote.
Class # Participants # Annotations Avg Ann / Part Avg Score / Part Avg Time (s)
Group A 141 6,527 46 1.966 5.651
Group B 102 15,119 148 2.134 6.443
Overall 241 21,646 90 2.083 6.338
TableA9:Statisticsontheparticipantsandannotationsincludedinourstudy.“AvgAnn/Part”istheaveragenumberofannota-
tionsperparticipatingstudent,while“AvgScore/Part”istheaveragescore.“AvgTime”istheaveragetimeittookaparticipant
to read one sentence. Standard error is shown.
reportedhavingconsiderablefamiliaritywiththem,interest-
ingly, participants who answered “other” and wrote custom
responses did tend to perform better at the task. It is worth
noting here that the limitations of self-reported qualities on
exit surveys are well documented and that, while we did not
ﬁnd any signiﬁcant correlations, that is not to say that there
are none.
Question Response Type
What did you (or what are you planning to) major/minor in? Free Text
Are you a native English speaker? Yes/No
How often do you consult a recipe when preparing food? Daily (5)
Once to a few times per week (4)
Once to a few times per month (3)
Once to a few times per year (2)
Never (1)
How often do you read news from credible news publishers Daily (5)
(Wall Street Journal, New York Times, etc.)? Once to a few times per week (4)
Once to a few times per month (3)
Once to a few times per year (2)
Never (1)
How often do you read ﬁction on the internet Daily (5)
(fan ﬁction, creative writing sub-reddits, ebooks, etc.)? Once to a few times per week (4)
Once to a few times per month (3)
Once to a few times per year (2)
Never (1)
What is your familiarity with GPT-2 and GPT-3? I've used them before (OpenAI API, HuggingFace, etc.) (4)
I've been excitedly following them. (3)
I've read about them in the news or a blog post. (2)
I've never heard of them. (1)
Did you read the RoFT Guide before you tried the game? Yes/No
Do you agree for the data being collected on this form Yes/No
along with any annotations you make to be used
in an anonymized, aggregated way for research on participants' ability
to detect machine-generated text? Your answer on this question
will not aﬀect your grade.
Table A10: The text of the exit survey questions given to players after completing their annotations
Figure A12: Violin plots showing results of our mandatory exit survey. A violin plot is a box plot that also provides a density
estimation.Resultsshownareﬁlteredtoonlyincludeplayerswhodidatleast20rounds.Readingthehelpguide,beinganative
Englishspeaker,andprovidingacustomresponseforfamiliaritywithNLGallcorrelateveryslightlywithahighermeanscore.