 

 The SF Site Featured Review: Greywalker 

 Greywalker 

 Kat Richardson 

 Narrated by Mia Barron, unabridged 

 Recorded Books, 12.25 hours

 Kat Richardson 

Kat Richardson
was born in California, growing up in a small college town near LA.
She earned a BA in Magazine Editing from Cal. State Long Beach.
She worked in the magazine business in LA for a while, then moved on to
curriculum writing and editing for the Gemological Institute of America. Later,
she moved to Seattle and added Technical Editing to her skills.
She currently lives on a sailboat in Seattle with her husband

 Kat Richardson Website 

 ISFDB Bibliography 

 A review by Jennifer McCann 

 Advertisement 

After dying from a brutal beating and then "miraculously" returning to life, Harper Blaine starts seeing things. The
likeable Seattle P.I. discovers that she is a Greywalker, a person who can see and crossover into the next realm,
known as the "Grey." The Grey is a layer of reality that coincides with ours and is inhabited by the dead, undead and
some pretty scary creepy crawlies. With the help of Ben and Mara Dansinger, specialist in the occult and a witch
respectively, Harper tries to gain control of the nausea inducing, exhausting slips into the Grey. It's all quite
an ordeal, especially while working on a missing person case and trying to locate an antique parlor organ for a
mysterious client.

Harper is hired by the mother of Cameron, a financially lush young man who has gone missing from his unusual party
spots around Pioneer Square. Interviewing everyone from the bartender at Cameron's bar of choice to Cameron's
ousted Goth wannabe sister, Harper finds herself drawn into a world of semi S & M "pets" and the Undead who keep them.

And then there's the spooky Serge, a man who is capable of entering Harper's office undetected by modern
technology. For some unknown reason, he wants her to track down a parlor organ. While working on this assignment
she meets Will, an auctioneer who lends a hand in the search and also adds a romantic touch to the story.

Narrator Mia Barron takes on the Herculean task of giving voice to a large cast of characters with few
distractions. Her portrayal of Cameron is the main complaint, as this character's whiney, little boy sound has
a tendency to grate. Barron does excel in bringing vivid personalities to the people that walk Richardson's
world. Her vocal style ranges from Goth girl disinterest to the New Jersey, gum-chewing sound that Melanie
Griffith made famous in the movie, Working Girl , to the musical lilt of an Irish brogue.

This mystery with a supernatural twist does get bogged down in a few places, but overall is great fun. The
listener, as well as Harper, is often lost for a brief time in the explanations of the paranormal phenomenon
and the bizarre and seemingly unrelated sightings from the Grey. Fortunately, the author does a terrific
job of ironing out the two story lines and sews them up nicely.

 Copyright © 2009 Jennifer McCann 

A belly dancing, dyslexic wife and mother who in her spare time works as a library clerk. A full and rich
life is lead through the books she listens to and/or reads. Dyslexics Untie!

If you find any errors, typos or anything else worth mentioning,
please send it to editor@sfsite.com .

 Copyright © 1996-2009 SF Site All Rights Reserved Worldwide

