 
 The SF Site Featured Review: Goblin War 
 Goblin War 
 Jim C. Hines 
 DAW, 352 pages 
 Jim C. Hines 
Jim C. Hines began writing in the early 90s, while working on a degree in psychology from Michigan State University.
His first professional sale was the award-winning "Blade of the Bunny," which took first place in the 1998 Writers
of the Future competition and was published in Writers of the Future XV.
His first published fantasy novel was Goblin Quest .
He lives in mid-Michigan with his wife and children.
 Jim C. Hines Website 
 ISFDB Bibliography 
 SF Site Review: Goblin Hero 
 SF Site Review: Goblin Quest 
 A review by Sherwood Smith 
 Advertisement 
It's war between the orcs and the humans!
Only this time, we are on the side of the orcs.
Or . . . are we?
The humans are led by Princess Genevieve, daughter of the King Wendell whose elder sons Jig faced in his first
adventure. She captures all the best goblin warriors in order to provide slave labor to protect the town of Avery
against the rumored army of Billa the Bloody, an orc leading a massive army of monsters.
Jig, the runty, nearsighted goblin hero of the previous adventures ( Goblin Quest and Goblin Hero ) is taken
along, even though no one, including Jig himself, thinks of him as much of a warrior... except that he's called Jig
Dragonslayer because in a previous conflict between Jig and a dragon, it was the goblin who survived. And he did
seem to outlive a host of other fierce enemies, from princes to pixies. And oh yes, there's Relka, the goblin girl
who loudly proclaims Jig's greatness to anyone who will listen.
Especially to enemies. Because she knows that Jig is first with Shadowstar, a god.
So Jig is forced along to help pluck thorny flowers from the walls of the city. Naturally he's miserably allergic. However,
Jig has his trusty fire-spider, Smudge, riding in his clothes, and he discovers that his old
friend, the dwarf Darnak, is present, advising the princess. Jig is also
being telepathically advised by Tymalous Autumnstar, otherwise known as Shadowstar. The problem is, this god has lost
most of his power, forgotten most of his past, and can only help Jig with healing powers -- some of the time.
Jig knows that in any war, the goblins are going to be targets to both sides. He figures his only chance of getting home
is to capture the princess and force her to let them go. In the course of getting his sometime allies (Braf, his
fellow-priest, Relka, who will not compromise as Shadowstar's and Jig's greatest devotee, and Trok, a big, ugly, mean
goblin) to help him, Jig discovers bit by bit that Billa the Bloody has a lot more going for her than just
monsters. Meanwhile, Shadowstar begins recovering his memory. And King Wendell, who will not listen to his smart,
practical daughter, sends his elf-loving son Theodore to clean things up, and then comes himself. With his entire army.
Of course Jig is caught right in the middle.
I think new readers could figure out the backstory and thoroughly enjoy it.
In this third book, Jim C. Hines solves the mysteries raised in the previous installments after he does an excellent job of sketching
in the main points, but to appreciate some of the inside jokes and references, the reader familiar with all three will get
maximum fun. Look out also for slyly dropped-in references to other works, and to common fantasy tropes, for instance, an
aggrieved observation about how you just can't take humans prisoner. They just always miraculously escape, either by
discovering some tunnel, or some overlooked farm boy will sneak in and spring everybody.
The characterizations are wonderful. Even Billa the Bloody has a personality and strong motivation for what she does -- besides
being an enormous orc who loves to fight. Gratz, the anal-retentive barracks lawyer, Quickbottom, the walking tree, Darnak
the Dwarf, Princess Ginny, Relka, and the gods are all wonderfully drawn, with believable goals and emotions of their own.
Midway through Goblin War , even though I was laughing out loud at the jokes, it occurred to me that Hines is a phenomenal
world builder. It's too easy for some funny fantasy writers to resort to being silly, distorting character, situation, and
plot in favor of the joke. Hines never does that.
His goblins always behave like goblins. His humans behave like humans. The elves are suitably elvish -- though seen from the
goblin point of view, their food is weird, they are cruel without the least compassion against life forms they obviously
regard as worthy only of derision. Elves are definitely bad guys with a superiority attitude, despite their long glossy
hair, slim forms, and pointy ears.
 The humor partly depends on the vivid stinks, foods, and habits that you'd expect from a goblin story, but Hines does not
 confine himself to gross stuff. A surprising amount of comedy derives from the goblins' way of seeing the world -- their
 puzzled reactions to others' customs, and the others'
reactions to the verities of goblin life. When you add in Shadowstar's point of view, Goblin War becomes unexpectedly
complex and the wit can turn quite dry and dark.
Hines is not only inventive, and funny, his people and his world are convincing. That's amazing, when you stop to
think about it. He makes you believe in, and care about, these muck-flinging, garbage-devouring, cowardly, yowling
blue goblins. That's magic of the most powerful kind.
 Copyright © 2008 Sherwood Smith 
Sherwood Smith is a writer by vocation and reader by avocation. Her webpage
is at www.sff.net/people/sherwood/ .
If you find any errors, typos or anything else worth mentioning,
please send it to editor@sfsite.com . 
 Copyright © 1996-2008 SF Site All Rights Reserved Worldwide
 