 
 If you are using AI in your queries to agents, stop! 
 Slushpile Mountaineering Subscribe Sign in If you are using AI in your queries to agents, stop! Literary agents are looking to represent writers who write their own work, not writers who are machine-assisted. Kate Nash Feb 23, 2026 35 9 15 Share This is an important message and it needs to get out as widely as possible into the writersphere so I was pleased to see it highlighted in today’s Bookseller. Literary agents are looking to represent writers who write their own work, not writers who are machine-assisted. My eureka moment as an agent that AI-assisted work was seeping into queries happened a few months ago. I had previously been thinking how writers were getting better at query letters generally but the problem was that too many were formulaic. I blamed a rise in diligence (good) but perhaps a little too fuelled by fear whipped up in internet writing communities ( “follow this rule or agents won’t consider your query” ). Blanding out because that seems the safe option? We live in a dangerous world so…? Then I found myself staring at a query letter where the formula, or should I say AI prompt, was there right at the top, before the letter even started. Unmissable. The prompt was simple, it said, “Rewrite my query letter for Kate Nash including a comp to a writer she represents.” Thank you, writer for your cut and paste human error! Now I knew. Writers were not blanding themselves out because of fear, except they were but they were instructing a machine to do it. Once seen I couldn’t unsee the AI-assisted/written queries again. It’s called the uncanny valley for a reason: it appears real but it isn’t and the fakery is a problem. Why? Why really? Two reasons: 1) Your writing, your voice, is uniquely you. If anyone could do you, writing wouldn’t be in the creative industries and I wouldn’t be here since there would be no author talent to represent. Your voice should be heard in your query letter. It should be polished yes, but buffed only by hand, by you so the patina and grooves are not sanded out and made formulaic. What you include is your signals: your sparks and your stakes. Agents want to see a glimpse at the reality of you, curated by you. This will be obscured by machine interference. 2) Trust and copyright. If you are using AI to help write one creative piece of work, your query letter, are you likewise using it to write elsewhere in your work? Why does this matter? If parts of your work have been generated from systems trained on vast bodies of text including those from which permission has not been obtained by the copyright holders, you may be circulating language whose provenance you can’t verify. Publishers are, rightly, alert to potential infringement risks, and require work to be wholly original so you, and they, are protected by copyright law. Original photograph taken by me of a bowl of cherries. Because I like to use my own photographs here at Slushpile Mountaineering. An extra share of something unique. © Kate Nash, 2026 Literary agents are never just looking at text, we are really seeking the subtexts. If you tell me life is a bowl of cherries, that could go so many ways to render it meaningless without contexts. The bond between reader and writer is likewise based on trust; the engagement can operate on many levels but most of all, it must be meaningful . This first-discovered AI query letter made sense on one level, although it did comp me to a writer I’d never heard of, let alone represented. What it failed to do was provide any kind of hook for the book. Or tell me anything much about the writer. When I read a query letter and the only thing that feels personal to the author is their name, I am nonplussed. Have they something to hide? And I couldn’t say how it attempted to personalise to me aside from providing a (wrong) comp. For example, as a UK based agent, sometimes writers from overseas express a particular wish to be represented by a UK agent. Human-written query letters might reference something I’ve actually done or said that’s brought me favourably into the orbit of consciousness of the querying writer. But, most of all, human-written query letters might deliver a killer pitch or other hook that makes reading more irresistible. Readers trust writers. Writers need to continue to trust themselves over machines. The AI cannot do you better. Links: Literary agents urge writers to avoid AI as they see ‘change in nature of submissions’ The Bookseller 23 Feb 26 Thanks for reading Slushpile Mountaineering! Subscribe to receive new posts and support my work. Subscribe 35 9 15 Share Discussion about this post Comments Restacks Paul Chase Feb 23 > The prompt was simple, it said, “Rewrite my query letter for Kate Nash including a comp to a writer she represents.” Wow. I think one of the worst things about AI here is how it breaks trust. Now you never know if you’re even looking at something sincere. You’re constantly second guessing. I think it also encourages people to be lazy about things that do not need optimizing. Either personalize your query letter by actually researching the agent. Or don’t. Don’t have the machine generate insincere personalization! How is that helping anyone? Reply Share Anna Davidson Feb 23 I’m finding editing work where the writer has used AI similarly discombobulating. It’s clean but sort of hollow because while the sentences are good the meaty narrative thread is absent. Reply Share 7 more comments... Top Latest Discussions No posts Ready for more? Subscribe © 2026 Kate Nash · Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection notice Start your Substack Get the app Substack is the home for great culture 
 This site requires JavaScript to run correctly. Please turn on JavaScript or unblock scripts
