 
 The Red Book: Giuseppe Pezzini on Tolkien's Meta-Textual Frame 
 The Perilous Realm Subscribe Sign in The Red Book: Giuseppe Pezzini on Tolkien's Meta-Textual Frame The Tolkien Society 'Big Read': Session 5 Erik Jampa Andersson Jun 16, 2026 7 1 Share Two weeks ago (apologies for the delay!), the Tolkien Society’s ‘Big Read’ programme said namárië to The Hobbit and began our long journey through J.R.R. Tolkien’s epic masterpiece, The Lord of the Rings. I was particularly looking forward to the June 1st session with Professor Giuseppe Pezzini, who is one of my absolute favourite Tolkien scholars — and the presentation did not disappoint. Giuseppe discussed the meta-textual framing narrative underlying Tolkien’s core works, centred around the multi-layered and surprisingly complex question: ‘Who Wrote The Lord of the Rings ?’ Screenshot from The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King, dir. Peter Jackson (New Line Cinema, 2003). As usual, in this post, I will recap and respond to some of Giuseppe’s arguments, preceded by some of my own context for this key bit of text: namely the Foreword, Prologue, and first five chapters of The Lord of the Rings. For those who are unaware, The Tolkien Society’s ‘Big Read’ programme is a read-along and seminar series for members of The Tolkien Society, hosted by myself and Clare Moore. In our first year, we are working through Tolkien’s ‘core Legendarium’: including The Hobbit, the Lord of the Rings, and The Silmarillion (with a few additional essays and short works included for good measure). If you are already a member of the Society, you can sign up by going to the Members’ page on The Tolkien Society website — and if you’re not already a member, then this is a very good time to fix that by signing up here . Another important note: while I serve on the Board of Trustees for The Tolkien Society as an Officer without Portfolio, the views expressed on my Substack are strictly my own, and are not in any way formally endorsed by The Tolkien Society. I also do not financially benefit in any way from The Big Read, nor from my trustee position as a whole. The use of my personal Substack to promote this event emerges strictly out of a desire to share the wonderful research on display in this programme, and to encourage my dear readers to consider joining the Society and taking part in this truly wonderful initiative. That said, I am profoundly grateful for my paid subscribers, who help to make this (often laborious) work a bit more sustainable. If you are already a paid subscriber to The Perilous Realm, thank you! And if not, please do consider signing up for a monthly or yearly subscription, so that I can continue to produce articles (like these write-ups) for the world at large. The Perilous Realm is a reader-supported publication. To receive new posts and support my work, consider becoming a free or paid subscriber. Subscribe Revealing a Masterpiece: The Composition Journey of The Lord of the Rings In this session, we’ve officially left the relative ‘comforts’ of The Hobbit behind to begin our long journey through The Lord of the Rings . To me, personally, reading LOTR always feels like ‘coming home’. This is especially true of Book I, which so beautifully integrates the fairy-story tone of The Hobbit with the deep lore of the wider mythology. Even though there’s the looming threat of the shadow, there’s a certain buoyancy to these early chapters that I find immensely comforting. In fact, this is usually what I listen to if I’m having trouble sleeping — I just turn on an audiobook rendition of Three is Company , A Conspiracy Unmasked , or A Short Cut to Mushrooms and drift off into the Shire. Truly one of my very favourite sections of the entire text, though, is Tolkien’s 1965 Prologue, which our presenter (Prof. Giuseppe Pezzini) spoke about at length. I’ll come to this shortly, but first I want to take some time to ‘set the stage’, as it were —and talk about the fascinating primary-world history of this text’s composition. A ‘Hobbit Sequel’ Due to the immense (and relatively unexpected) success of The Hobbit , Tolkien was requested in 1937 to compose a sequel to his bestselling novel — a prospect that he initially found profoundly daunting. On the 16th of December, 1937, he wrote to Stanley Unwin that “it is plain that […] a sequel or successor to The Hobbit is called for”, and promised “to give this thought and attention.” But he continues to say, “I am sure you will sympathize when I say that the construction of elaborate and consistent mythology (and two languages) rather occupies the mind, and the Silmarils are in my heart”. He goes on to ask, “what more can hobbits do? They can be comic, but their comedy is suburban unless it is set against things more elemental” (Letter 19, Letters, 35-36). Indeed, Tolkien repeatedly noted that The Hobbit was never intended to have a sequel — and that it really wasn’t fit for one. In an attempt to find a different thread to follow, he even put forth a story about Tom Bombadil, “the spirit of the (vanishing) Oxford and Berkshire countryside”, as an alternative proposition (36). As a side note: I will be discussing this further in the next session of the Big Read, where I’ll be sharing some of my own research on the origins and function of Tom Bombadil in Tolkien’s work. But despite his light protestations and seeming disinterest, it wasn’t long at all before he sat down to try and accommodate the request. He wrote to Charles Furth (at Allen & Unwin) only three days later, telling him that he had written the first chapter of a new story about hobbits, ‘A Long Expected Party’. It’s worth pointing out that this was all happening at a rather critical (and undeniably stressful) moment for Tolkien. Not long before, he had sent off an unfinished manuscript of The Silmarillion to Allen & Unwin, and was anxiously waiting to hear back, certainly hoping that they might be willing to take it to publication. One external reader, Edward Crankshaw, had been given some of these materials to read, and responded favourably to the prose version of the Quenta Silmarillion , but criticised the “eye-splitting Celtic names”. Tolkien, of course, took issue with this latter comment, but told Stanley that he was pleased to find that The Silmarillion was not flatly rejected “with scorn”, writing — quite vulnerably — “I have suffered a sense of fear and bereavement, quite ridiculous, since I let this private and beloved nonsense out; and I think if it had seemed to you to be nonsense I should have felt really crushed” (35). But despite this measured praise, it was unavoidable that the people wanted more hobbits — and Tolkien was acutely aware of this. So rather than abandon them outright, or ignore the elves and men of the First Age, he instead began devising ways to marry his two most fertile mythic threads. Given that the hobbits had already “intruded” upon the outer reaches of his mythology, he simply had to figure out the specifics of their intersection in mythic history. The Composition of Book I Looking at the actual composition of the text, we are confronted (much like The Hobbit ) with multiple phases of development: The First Phase The ‘First Phase’ began in December 1937, when Tolkien composed that first draft of ‘A Long Expected Party’. He spent about a month and a half writing four different versions of this chapter, toying with an array of ideas. For a time, he considered marrying Bilbo off, leaving space for one of his ‘descendants’ to take centre stage — a new hobbit originally known as Bingo (and later, of course, our Frodo). At the beginning, he actually imagined Bingo as Bilbo’s son; but by the fourth version, he had become his nephew (then his cousin), and adopted ward. But even after all this tinkering, Tolkien still had “no confidence” in the new tale by February 1938, and asked whether Stanley Unwin’s son Rayner — the original reader for The Hobbit , now all of twelve years old — might be willing to read over a typed manuscript of the chapter. While Rayner reported that he loved the new chapter, Tolkien wrote to Charles Furth on the 17th of February 1938 that he had “only the vaguest notions of how to proceed”, and claimed that he had “squandered all my favourite ‘motifs’ and characters on the original ‘Hobbit’” ( Return of the Shadow, 43 ). A day later, he wrote to Stanley Unwin that he found it “only too easy to write opening chapters”, but that the story simply wasn’t “unfolding”, remarking that having “squandered so much on the original ‘Hobbit’ (which was not meant to have a sequel) … it is difficult to find anything new in that world” (43-44). But fortunately for us all, his moment of self-doubt seems to have passed relatively quickly — or, indeed, it seems that the story finally began to reveal itself to him. Only a couple of weeks later, he reported to Stanley Unwin that he had completed the third chapter. “But stories tend to get out of hand,” he writes, “and this has taken an unpremeditated turn” (44). Upon the appearance of a mysterious sniffing rider on the road to Buckland — originally intended to be Gandalf — Tolkien abruptly decided, or came to discover, that this was someone else entirely: a Black Rider, searching for Bilbo’s ring. He wrote in a note to himself around this time, “Make return of ring a motive” — likely suggesting that Bingo should be tasked with returning the Ring to Bilbo, who had disappeared. But he also writes: The Ring: whence its origin. Necromancer? Not very dangerous, when used for good purpose. But it exacts its penalty. You must either lose it, or yourself. Bilbo could not bring himself to lose it. He starts on a holiday [struck out: with his wife] handing over ring to Bingo. But he vanishes. Bingo worried. Resists desire to go and find him — though he does travel round a lot looking for news. Won’t lose ring as he feels it will ultimately bring him to his father. (41-42) At the time, Tolkien couldn’t have foreseen the significance of this passing consideration. He seems to have known that the ring would have some role to play in the events of the book, but it remained — at this stage — a mere relic of Faery, complete with its benefic utilities and its perilous risks. It was probably in late February or early March of 1938 that its real significance began to clarify. Bilbo’s ring, we are told, was one of many magic rings given by the Dark Lord to the peoples of Middle-earth. While the notion of it being the ‘Ruling Ring’ didn’t emerge until a bit later, already he was toying with the idea that it was the “most precious and potent” of the magic rings, and the only one of them still at large (87). Finally gaining some glimpse of where the story was headed, Tolkien brought his hobbit travellers to Buckland; but once they were settled into the house prepared by Marmaduke (later Merry) Brandybuck, he stopped writing for around six months. This ‘break’ was a tremendously stressful time — both for Tolkien and for the world at large. Germany invaded and annexed Austria in March of that year, and a few months later Tolkien received a letter from a German publisher interested in producing a translation of The Hobbit — but only after checking to see whether Tolkien was ‘Aryan’ or of Jewish descent. Many of you will, hopefully, be familiar with his beautifully snarky response (Letter 30, Letters, 48). Meanwhile, he was up against multiple looming deadlines: with three or four linguistic works in the pipeline, a research fellowship rapidly approaching its end, and students from Belgium and Canada coming to work with him through the summer break. The Hobbit sequel could not have been further from Tolkien’s mind, and he told Charles Furth at the end of July that it had “lost his favour”, and that he simply had no idea what to do with it (Letter 31, Letters, 49). By the end of August, Tolkien found himself at “the edge of a breakdown”, and was actually ordered by his doctor to do “nothing” for a week or two (Letter 33, Letters, 51). This was, of course, something of a blessing in disguise. With the “benefit of idleness and open air, and the sanctioned neglect of duty”, Tolkien was finally able to return to his Hobbit sequel, which he had now tentatively titled ‘The Lord of the Ring’ (Ibid.). The story was now “flowing along, and getting quite out of hand” (52), having reached Bree. Over just a few days of ‘doing nothing’, Tolkien had taken his hobbits through the Old Forest, the House of Tom Bombadil, and the Barrow-downs, and in the weeks that followed — on a family holiday to Sidmouth, in Devon — he had made it up to the Council of Elrond in Rivendell. Probably while on this holiday, he also jotted down some ‘Queries and Alterations’ (found in Chapter 13 of The Return of the Shadow ), where he prodded at some questions and plot-lines which led to the story as we now know it. In addition to concluding that he had introduced “too many hobbits”, he pondered the real identity of Trotter/Strider, explored possible reasons for Gandalf’s abrupt departure, considered whether or not the elves should be in possession of their own “Necromancer-rings”, and came to the important conclusion that Bilbo’s ring was “more powerful than all the other[s]” ( Return, 226). This marked the end of the ‘First Phase’ of the text’s composition — from very uncertain beginnings to a newly clarified conception of what this story was really about. The Second and Third Phases A couple of weeks later, Tolkien began on the ‘Second Phase’ of composition, starting anew at the beginning and bringing the hobbits once more to the house of Tom Bombadil. Sam Gamgee finally came into being, and Tolkien introduced a second chapter, ‘A Shadow of the Past’, where the true significance of the rings — especially Bilbo’s Ruling Ring — and the link between the Elder Days and the present tale finally became clear. By the end of December, he had completed a ‘Third Phase’, reaching Chapter 12 with over 300 manuscript pages. But here he left the project for a while, in part because he had yet another big project on his hands — the Andrew Lang Lecture at St Andrews in Scotland. This was, of course, Tolkien’s lecture (and later essay) ‘On Fairy-stories’, which we discussed in our very first session . By the time he was invited to deliver this lecture (on the 25th of November 1938), Tolkien was very much engrossed in the process of composition, working and reworking what we now know as ‘Book I’. But having done a good deal of research — and thinking — about the identity, nature, and functions of fairy-stories (including their positionality to children), it seems that Tolkien had some complicated feelings about his new narrative venture. While Humphrey Carpenter says that after delivering the lecture on the 8th of March, Tolkien “returned with new enthusiasm to the story whose purpose he had justified” ( Biography, 255 ), this isn’t quite the case. In fact, he didn’t return to The Lord of the Rings until months later, and whatever “new enthusiasm” he had was very much matched by what seemed to be an immense amount of insecurity and doubt. He seemed, as Christopher writes, to be “at a halt, even a loss, to the point of a lack of confidence in the radical components of the narrative structure that had been built up with such pains” ( Return, 370). He began toying with some rather dramatic alternative approaches — including scrapping most of what he had produced and starting over again with Bilbo as the main hero. Fortunately, these doubts eventually passed, and the story started flowing again at great speed. By the end of the year, he had reached the middle of what would become Book II, and much of it in a form where, as Christopher writes, “one could read the greater part of it and scarcely suspect any difference from FR without careful comparison” ( Treason of Isengard, 18). While further periods of refinement certainly followed in the twelve years that Tolkien took to compose The Lord of the Rings , we’ll save most of that for future sessions. But I did want to draw attention to the mysterious ways in which many components of the story emerged. Discoveries Along the Way As Tolkien wrote in his 1955 letter to W. H. Auden (Letter 163, Letters, 216-17): …I met a lot of things on the way that astonished me. Tom Bombadil I knew already; but I had never been to Bree. Strider sitting in the corner at the inn was a shock, and I had no more idea who he was than had Frodo. The Mines of Moria had been a mere name; and of Lothlórien no word had reached my mortal ears till I came there. Far away I knew there were the Horse-lords on the confines of an ancient Kingdom of Men, but Fangorn Forest was an unforeseen adventure. I had never heard of the House of Eorl nor of the Stewards of Gondor. Most disquieting of all, Saruman had never been revealed to me, and I was as mystified as Frodo at Gandalf’s failure to appear on September 22nd. I knew nothing of the Palantíri , though the moment the Orthanc-stone was cast from the window, I recognized it, and knew the meaning of the ‘rhyme of lore’ that had been running in my mind: seven stars and seven stones and one white tree. These rhymes and names will crop up; but they do not always explain themselves. I have yet to discover anything about the cats of Queen Berúthiel. But I did know more or less all about Gollum and his part, and Sam, and I knew that the way was guarded by a Spider. Indeed, as I’ve talked about a lot in these introductions, there were certain motifs or archetypes that were always a part of the ‘soup’ from which Tolkien was drawing — but there were, equally, many things that emerged unexpectedly, through the process of writing itself … or perhaps in other moments. Tolkien once remarked in 1956 (in Letter 180) that: …I think a lot of this kind of work goes on at other (to say lower, deeper, or higher introduces a false gradation) levels, when one is saying how-do-you-do, or even ‘sleeping’. I have long ceased to invent (though even patronising or sneering critics on the side praise my ‘invention’): I wait till I seem to know what really happened. Or till it writes itself. Thus, though I knew for years that Frodo would run into a tree-adventure somewhere far down the Great River, I have no recollection of inventing Ents. I came at last to the point, and wrote the ‘Treebeard’ chapter without any recollection of any previous thought: just as it now is. And then I saw that, of course, it had not happened to Frodo at all. ( Letters, 231) The very nature of the Ring is one of these things — a key to the narrative drama of his work which had, until this point, been quite unconsidered. This is one of the reasons why attempts to locate a specific ‘inspiration’ for the One Ring in older literary or mythic works are somewhat of a fool’s errand — if only for the simple reason that, at its inception, Bilbo’s golden ring was quite dissimilar to, say, the ‘Ring of Gyges’ from Plato’s Republic . The significance of this object emerged both slowly and unexpectedly. Tolkien’s ‘Translation Conceit’ One element of Tolkien’s Legendarium which was present from essentially the very beginning is his ‘meta-textual’ framing narrative, or his ‘translation conceit’: basically the notion that the materials which make up the Legendarium are ‘real’ found documents from the distant past, which Tolkien mysteriously received, translated, and edited for publication. This was once a rather popular trope in contemporary fiction (and, of course, also in many global mythic and religious traditions) but Tolkien went much further than most modern writers in ensuring that the conceit was water-tight. While his original framing narrative for the materials on the Elder Days didn’t make it into the published Silmarillion , you can still read about Eriol or Ælfwine the Mariner in The Book of Lost Tales and the History of Middle-earth series. It’s quite possible that Tolkien always intended for this framing story to remain ‘active’ — though it’s equally possible that he imagined the more mature Silmarillion to come from a different transmission lineage entirely (which Prof. Pezzini touches on in our presentation). But by far the most developed meta-textual frame used by Tolkien is the Red Book of Westmarch , which is the fictional primary ‘source’ from which Tolkien ‘derived’ both The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings as translated and edited texts. This is, on the surface, a ‘conceit’ indeed — and one which had already been used by numerous contemporary authors, from Bram Stoker and Mary Shelley to Nathaniel Hawthorne. But with Tolkien (and perhaps also with some others) I think there is more to it. Tolkien seemed quite adamant that his compositional process was not wholly centred around ‘invention’, but was rather a kind of ‘revelation’ of sorts (with a lower-case r ). That is, he often remarked, as we’ve just heard, that he often felt that certain materials came ‘through’ him, or were the product of investigation and discovery, rather than mere invention. While he was too shrewd, too modest, and ultimately too rational to ever explicitly or publicly suggest that his works of fiction were “actually true” — and he was naturally opposed to having his works compared to ‘Revelation-with-a-capital-R’ — it’s clear that he regarded his experience of literary creation as something rather mysterious . In a paper I presented a couple of years ago at the TS seminar on ‘ Tolkien and Religion in the 21st Century ’, I argued that — on the level of personal lived experience — Tolkien must have been quite unsure about the ‘true’ provenance of his work. Across the world and through the millennia, many similar myth-makers have employed a wide array of explanatory frameworks to make sense of their creative products — and I do think that many of them truly believed these frameworks to be true. Some regarded their stories as emerging from divine or semi-divine intelligences, others perceived them as memories from past lives, while most modern secular writers simply accepted them as a fortunate stroke of human genius. While we ‘moderns’ are compelled to accept the last option as most ‘true’, the fact remains that — for the artists themselves — the actual truth of the matter may be a mystery indeed. I, for one, am not positive that Tolkien was completely convinced by the strictly empirical explanation. All this to say, it would appear that Tolkien’s development of these multiple, highly complex framing narratives was more than a mere artistic flourish for the sake of the reader. It would seem that he was trying to speak to a very real dimension of his process which may otherwise go unnoticed: a profound and enduring sense that these stories were not strictly ‘his’, but rather something that he stumbled upon, and was somehow fated to deliver to the world. To utilise — once again — the Buddhist trope that I cited in the last post (speaking of ‘outer, inner, and secret’ dimensions of meaning): we might say that on an ‘outer’ level, Tolkien the genius author created a compelling and fascinating framing story for his literary corpus, which made it seem as if it were all derived from a very ancient body of texts, in order to inculcate his audience with a deeper sense of enchantment and ‘secondary belief’. On an ‘inner’ level, it would seem that Tolkien developed this meta-textual frame to honour his own lived experience of ‘revelatory’ sub-creation, acknowledging that these stories were not merely the result of careful construction, but also of an almost ‘mystical’ experience of discovery. And on a ‘secret’ level, The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings were in fact translated and edited from a now-lost prehistoric textual collection known as the Red Book of Westmarch , largely based on the travel diaries and accounts of Bilbo and Frodo Baggins, with further input provided by their friends and other scholars. This Week’s Presenter: Professor Giuseppe Pezzini Speaking on this topic in particular, I was tremendously pleased to introduce our speaker for the evening — a dear friend, and, at least in my view, one of the greatest living Tolkien scholars: Professor Giuseppe Pezzini. You may know Giuseppe from his recent publication, Tolkien and the Mystery of Literary Creation , which is easily one of my favourite scholarly works on Tolkien from the past ten years (and perhaps ever!). If you don’t yet know this book, I would highly recommend procuring a copy. For those unfamiliar with his work: Prof. Pezzini is Tutorial Fellow at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, which he joined in 2021, after five years of teaching at St Andrews (2016–2021), and research fellowships at Magdalen College Oxford (2013–2015) and the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton (2016). He worked as an assistant editor for the Oxford Dictionary of Medieval Latin , and has published especially on Latin language and literature, the philosophy of language, the reception of the Classics, and the theory of fiction, ancient and modern. His publications include five books — among them a monograph on Tolkien’s theory of fiction (Cambridge University Press, 2025) — five edited volumes (two of them Tolkien-related), and more than fifty peer-reviewed articles. He is also the Tolkien Editor for the Journal of Inklings Studies , one of the founders of the Oxford Tolkien Network (a research centre based at the University of Oxford), and the main Tolkien Consultant for The Hunt for Gollum . Giuseppe’s presentation began with a discussion of the prologue to The Lord of the Rings , focusing on the “Note on the Shire Records”, which Tolkien added to the 1965 edition and which introduces, in the most explicit terms, the complex meta-textual frame underlying the work, centred on the concept of the Red Book of Westmarch. After outlining the history of this ancestral book — from its original composition to Tolkien’s own reception of it — Beppe concluded by exploring the literary implications of this framing device, and how it applies to the first five chapters of The Lord of the Rings . Who Wrote The Lord of the Rings? Giuseppe opened with a question that sounds simpler than it actually is: “who wrote The Lord of the Rings ?” As he notes, the most obvious answer (“J.R.R. Tolkien, of course”) would miss something rather crucial about the literary fabric of Tolkien’s work, and a very real dimension of his poetics. The whole of the Legendarium is built around a key set of meta-textual frames: the fictional histories of how the ‘source’ materials themselves were composed, transmitted, and published. Particularly when it comes to The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings, the most important of these ‘source’ materials is known as the Red Book of Westmarch. The Red Book given by Frodo Baggins to Sam Gamgee, we are told, was divided into eighty chapters, with the eightieth left unfinished, trailing off into a run of blank leaves. This book, importantly, had not one author but several (with a good deal of additional ‘contributors’). Most of Giuseppe’s talk was dedicated to reconstructing those various hands. The First Author: Bilbo Our first ‘author’ is, of course, Bilbo Baggins, who was solely responsible for the first major section of The Red Book (published by The Hobbit ). But what is often less-frequently acknowledged is that Bilbo also seems to have been principally responsible for ‘composing’ the first chapters of The Lord of the Rings . This is largely confirmed in the Prologue (’Concerning Hobbits’), and references to Bilbo’s authorship are scattered across The Lord of the Rings itself. One meta-textual detail is of particular note, namely Tolkien’s handling of the Gollum affair, which famously survives in two versions. There’s the ‘false’ (and rather propagandistic) story, told by Bilbo to the dwarves at the time and written into the original edition of The Hobbit (first published in 1937); and there’s the ‘true’ version, revealed at the Council of Elrond and used for the corrected Red Book — the revised account, written in 1951, that appears in all subsequent editions. So the text actually contains, within itself, the fictional record of its own correction. There are, of course, multiple ways that one could go about ‘explaining’ this important evolution. On an ‘outer’ level, Tolkien was simply seeking to harmonise his original novel with the plot lines that he developed in his sequel. But on our ‘inner’ and ‘secret’ levels — i.e. in terms of in-world history — this was a reflection of real variations between our ancient source texts. The Second Author: Frodo The second (and most important) author is Frodo Baggins. Most of the text, we learn, was “written in Frodo’s firm flowing script” ( LOTR, 1065). While the text itself is, of course, not written in first person, there are numerous allusions to Frodo’s own authorial career, including the moment in Bree when he lets slip that he’s writing a book. Frodo’s authorship is, of course, made far more explicit in the Prologue and Appendices (which are, themselves, securely written by ‘Tolkien the editor/translator’), and in the final chapter (‘The Grey Havens’), where Sam reads the title page of the “big book with plain red leather covers” given to him by Frodo. It reads (1065): My Diary. My Unexpected Journey. There and Back Again. And What Happened After. Adventures of Five Hobbits. The Tale of the Great Ring, compiled by Bilbo Baggins from his own observations and the accounts of his friends. What we did in the War of the Ring. Here Bilbo’s hand ended and Frodo had written: THE DOWNFALL OF THE LORD OF THE RINGS AND THE RETURN OF THE KING (as seen by the Little People; being the memoirs of Bilbo and Frodo of the Shire, supplemented by the accounts of their friends and the learning of the Wise.) Together with extracts from books of Lore translated by Bilbo in Rivendell. Even this excerpt makes clear the fact that the Red Book is not simply Bilbo’s The Hobbit with Frodo’s The Lord of the Rings tacked on after it. The reality is far more complex, pointing to many contributors and, importantly, supplementary knowledge based on “the learning of the Wise”. This excerpt also makes it quite clear that Bilbo never finished his first text. It still “seemed very incomplete” at the time that hobbits were in Rivendell ( LOTR, 294), and Bilbo directly asks Frodo if he would be willing to assist him in the project, including “making a start on the next” (Ibid.). In the end, Frodo does seem to have had a direct hand in finishing The Hobbit itself — both he and Sam were likely involved in the so-called ‘second edition’, especially the materials pertaining to Gollum. It is interesting that Bilbo himself was originally meant to write the ‘sequel’, and this is attested more than once. He actually began this process during the Council of Elrond, where he took careful notes while Frodo talked through the events leading them to Rivendell. But he never sees the job through, and the responsibility falls --largely by necessity — to Frodo. After the Fellowship departs on their quest, we’re told that Bilbo gets as far as some of the opening chapters of Fellowship before realising that he “only really like[s] writing poetry”. He tells Frodo, after the War of the Ring had concluded, to “collect all my notes and papers, and my diary too, and take them with you […] and when you’ve knocked things into shape, come back, and I’ll run over it. I won’t be too critical” ( LOTR, 1024). So Frodo ends up as much an editor and compiler as an author, with his own text “supplemented by the accounts of their friends and the learning of the Wise”. And this shared authorship is something the narrative keeps drawing attention to. There are, first, what Giuseppe calls the ‘remembering’ formulas: like when, after the meeting with Gildor in ‘Three is Company’, we are told that “Pippin afterwards recalled little of either food or drink” (95), and “Sam could never describe in words, nor picture clearly to himself, what he felt or thought that night, though it remained in his memory as one of the chief events of his life” (96). Memories like these are, in effect, meant to have been ‘reported’ to Frodo and the others — especially when Frodo himself wasn’t there for the event in question. Then there are the more direct ‘reporting’ moments, i.e. occasions when the hobbits, having been split up, come back together and recount what happened. In Chapter 5 of Book I, Merry reports the events of the previous chapter to the rest of the hobbits, with Sam chipping in with supporting nods and exclamations (while Frodo stays silent). When we read Chapters 3 and 4 especially, Giuseppe argued, we really seem to be hearing Pippin’s voice, with those chapters being largely focalised through Pippin and Sam. And, of course, in chapters like The Uruk-hai and Treebeard (chapters 3 and 4 of Book III) , we are again entirely dependent upon Merry and Pippin’s accounts. The Third Author: Sam And then, of course there’s Sam. Chapter 80 was left unfinished precisely so that Sam could complete it — the last hand to join what Giuseppe refers to as the “authorial mosaic” of The Lord of the Rings . His influence is, at turns, both explicit and subtle — with the most obvious authorial influences present in the unpublished Epilogue, which can be found in Sauron Defeated. Style, Focalisation, and the Frame As Giuseppe repeatedly stated, none of this is just a conceit concocted to entertain the reader. It actually shows up in the texture and style of the book. I would add that, in some cases, this seems to have been somewhat reactive — that is, we could certainly read the lighter ‘tone’ of the opening chapters of The Lord of the Rings as being a consequence of its inception as a similarly-styled sequel to The Hobbit, which was (only later) ‘justified’ by the invention of a multi-authorial frame. Giuseppe notes that Book I of The Lord of the Rings (i.e. the first half of The Fellowship of the Ring ) does indeed sit at a noticeably lower register than the later books, which Tolkien remarked on himself. In Letter 131, he writes that the characters’ “adventures start on a plane and in a style resembling that of The Hobbit but rise steadily to a higher level. All the characters are slowly revealed in their nature and in their change” (Letter 131, Letters, 224). But in other cases, Tolkien seems to have been far more proactive in taking focalisation — the point of view from which a story is told — into real consideration during the process of composition itself: considering, for instance, the many chapters based on events at which Frodo (and/or Sam) were not present. Even late into the process of composition, when The Lord of the Rings had securely moved past the lighter Hobbit- like tone, the voice of the text sometimes shifts markedly, suggesting that Tolkien was actively thinking about the myriad ‘sources’ from which the chapters would have derived. In short, what we now know as The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings originally formed a single volume of eighty-one chapters, written by three overlapping hobbit hands. Bilbo Baggins drafted (but didn’t finalise) the first nineteen chapters (the ‘source’ for The Hobbit ), and sketched some notes for the following twelve chapters (Book I of LOTR ). Frodo then polished up Bilbo’s early chapters and wrote the bulk of the ‘sequel’ text, working from Bilbo’s notes and his own while folding in the recorded accounts from his friends (especially the other hobbits). Sam completed Chapter 80, which Frodo had left unfinished, and wrote the final chapter himself. To this I would add that a good deal of additional information (especially historical context) was added well after Frodo’s departure to the Undying Lands, in part based on Merry and Pippin’s continued research in Rohan and Gondor, respectively. The Other Volumes of the Red Book Of course, The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings are only part of the Red Book collection. Appended to it were three volumes of “translations from the Elvish” supplied by Bilbo, likely based (according to Giuseppe) on the works of Elrond. Their contents were, of course, some combination of the Silmarillion materials (though precisely which three works these include is a matter of speculation). As Tolkien tells us in the Prologue, these “three volumes were found to be a work of great skill and learning in which, between 1403 and 1418, [Bilbo] had used all the sources available to him in Rivendell, both living and written. But since they were little used by Frodo, being almost entirely concerned with the Elder Days, no more is said of them here” ( LOTR, 27). In addition to these “four volumes”: i.e. The Hobbit+The Lord of the Rings and three volumes of Elvish legends/histories, there was one final volume added in Westmarch (the archive where the original Red Book was held) consisting of “commentaries, genealogies, and various other matter concerning the hobbit members of the Fellowship” (26). This also, importantly, included a collection of hobbit poetry, which was published in The Adventures of Tom Bombadil. It’s worth clearly stating, as Giuseppe did, that the books we have access to are presented by Tolkien has his own edited and abridged translations of the original works — not a direct copy of what was originally found in the Red Book . This further adds to the foundational unreliability of the narration —given that huaman(oid) recorders are in no way omniscient, and are sometimes compelled by personal motives (like Bilbo) to present accounts with a certain degree of revisionism — by reminding us that our final story is in some ways approximate, reaching us only through translation, which itself introduces a great deal of complexity. All of this is set out in the “Note on the Shire Records” in the Prologue to The Lord of the Rings , which lays out the intricate history of how the Red Book was transmitted and preserved in the centuries following the end of the War of the Ring. The Red Book itself, as a physical object, is only the visible part of a much more complicated frame. Bilbo and Frodo’s original book, which was eventually given to Sam, was apparently lost rather early on — but many copies had (fortunately) been made. The so-called Thain’s Book, the most important of these copies, was amended, annotated, and added to over time — and it’s this version which stands as the direct textual ‘ancestor’ of The Lord of the Rings as we now read it. Tolkien’s Own Authorial Voice Of vital importance is the fact that Tolkien, in constructing this ‘frame’, does bring himself into the picture — effectively ‘stepping inside’ his own fiction. While he never explains how he came into possession of this remarkable collection of (fictional) prehistoric texts, he does repeatedly speak to his own ‘role’, not as ‘author’ but as ‘editor/translator/compiler’. This is achieved in a few distinct ways, some explicit and some less so. In the Prologue, he mentions that some of the Red Book has already been published (as The Hobbit) , effectively bridging primary- and secondary-world history. But this is made most evident in the appendices, which are largely compiled by Tolkien in the fashion of an edited academic volume. In Appendix E, he speaks on the actual process of ‘translating’ the work from its original Westron tongue, noting that “The Westron or Common Speech has been entirely translated into English equivalents”, and that “in transcribing the ancient scripts I have tried to represent the original sounds (so far as they can be determined) with fair accuracy” ( LOTR, 1147). There are also, of course, the inscriptions found on the title pages (and some covers) of The Lord of the Rings , which identifies the work as: The Lord of the Rings, translated from the Red Book of Westmarch by John Ronald Reuel Tolkien. Herein is set forth the history of the War of the Ring and the Return of the King as seen by the hobbits. Here, Tolkien explicitly casts himself as the ‘translator’ of this work — his official ‘role’ within his own meta-textual frame. But beyond merely deepening the sense of enchantment and secondary belief (which it certainly does), posing as translator does have other advantages: namely allowing the author to account for their own mistakes. Any inconsistencies or ‘inaccuracies’ can, within this frame, be absorbed back into the fiction as a flaw in the transmission or translation. Pulling It Together To summarise the structure: these works are presented as Tolkien’s edited translations of a mysteriously-acquired manuscript, written in a long-extinct language, comprised of five volumes of accounts from the first three ages of the world. The original text was principally composed by three hobbit authors: The Hobbit by Bilbo Baggins (emended and edited by Frodo Baggins); The Lord of the Rings by Frodo and Sam Gamgee (drawing in accounts from elsewhere); the Silmarillion materials, originally written by the Elves (potentially codified by Elrond) and later translated by Bilbo; and a book of miscellaneous hobbit materials, collected by Sam’s descendants and other hobbit scholars. This frame is, to me, one of the most fascinating elements of Tolkien’s entire literary project. As a lover of Tolkien’s works, I find it immensely enchanting and compelling, but as a historian , I also find this to be a fascinating example of how real-world histories, legends, and myths are transmitted. As a scholar of Tibetan studies, in particular, there is no shortage of parallels to be drawn between Tolkien’s conceit and the transmission lineages concocted by treasure-revealers or tertöns, and similar commonalities can be found in many of the world’s mythic and religious traditions. Questions for Discussion As usual, below are some questions worth pondering, based on Giuseppe’s presentation. Feel free to respond in the comments below. When do you remember becoming aware of the meta-textual ‘frame’ of Tolkien’s Legendarium? What impact did it have (if any) on your experience of his work? While the meta-textual frame underlies the whole of The Lord of the Rings, it is only made explicit outside of the narrative itself – e.g. in the Prologue and Appendices. Why do you think Tolkien did this, and how does its impact differ from more explicit framing devices (as seen in novels like Dracula or Frankenstein )? Which do you prefer? We often think of writing (or editing/compiling) as a solitary, individual activity, but the writing, compiling, and editing of The Red Book of Westmarch was a communal effort involving multiple people. Professor Pezzini notes how this creates a collective memory, communicated and preserved through the book. How does the communal nature of this process change how we think about or experience The Lord of the Rings ? What would be different if it was the product of just one author? Tolkien employs numerous framing devices throughout the many layers of the Legendarium – including the Eriol transmission in The Book of Lost Tales , dream revelation in The Notion Club Papers, and The Red Book. How do these approaches differ in their impact on the reader? Which do you prefer? And why do you think Tolkien was so adamant about establishing a compelling frame? Our Next Session Given my tardiness in getting this post online, our subsequent session has already come and gone. Fortunately, this was one of my sessions: where I presented on the mysteries of the Old Forest, Tom Bombadil, and Tolkien’s ‘Luxuriant Animism’. Given that I have already posted on these topics numerous times, I think it might be best to simply provide some links to my past presentations on these matters: ‘Tolkien’s Luxuriant Animism’ — a lecture for the Oxford Tolkien Network, which I delivered on the 10th of February, 2026. You can find a recording of this talk here , and I’m very pleased to announce that a written version of this paper will be published in a forthcoming edited volume on Environmentalism in Middle-earth, which will be released later this Summer. ‘The Shaman of the Old Forest: Bombadil, Väinämöinen, and the Animistic Spirit’ — my presentation for Oxonmoot 2024, where I go into somewhat greater depth on the potential Finnish roots of Tom Bombadil. You can find a recording of my presentation here . And if you’d prefer a written version, you can find one on my Substack here . ‘The Lost Spirits of Arda: Eco-daemonology and New Animism in Tolkien’s Legendarium’ — my paper for the 2025 Tolkien Society Seminar, focusing on Tolkien’s evolving animistic paradigms, from the nature spirits of his early works to the more mature paradigms found in The Lord of the Rings. You can watch a video of my presentation here . Our actual next session will take place on the 29th of June, with what is sure to be a fascinating presentation from Dr. Kristine Larsen, who will be talking to us about the ways that the deep-time memories of Tolkien’s elves in The Lord of the Rings act as a bridge between the First and Third Ages of the world. Until next time, please take care, and I hope to see you soon! The Perilous Realm is a reader-supported publication. To receive new posts and support my work, consider becoming a free or paid subscriber. Subscribe 7 1 Share Previous Discussion about this post Comments Restacks Top Latest Discussions No posts Ready for more? Subscribe © 2026 Erik Andersson · Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection notice Start your Substack Get the app Substack is the home for great culture 
 This site requires JavaScript to run correctly. Please turn on JavaScript or unblock scripts
