 
 Prologue (The Lord of the Rings) - Tolkien Gateway 
 Toggle search 
 Search 
 Powered by Elasticsearch 
 Select item 
 ↑ ↓ 
 Open search 
 / 
 Exit search 
 Esc 
 Toggle menu 
 13.4K 
 16.9K 
 10K 
 480.8K 
 Navigation
 Main Page Recent changes Random page Community Portal To-do Forums Chat Help Special pages Upload file 
 Portals
 Adaptations Books Characters Games Images Languages Locations Music People Timeline Writings 
 External
 sidebar-icon-discord sidebar-icon-bluesky sidebar-icon-x sidebar-icon-facebook sidebar-icon-reddit sidebar-icon-instagram sidebar-icon-youtube 
 Toggle preferences menu 
 Notifications
 Toggle personal menu 
 Not logged in 
 Please sign up or log in to edit the wiki. 
 user-interface-preferences
 Personal tools
 Talk Contributions Create account Log in 
 Prologue (The Lord of the Rings) 
 From Tolkien Gateway 
 Share this page 
 Views
 Read View source View history 
 associated-pages
 Page Discussion 
 More actions 
 More
 Tools
 What links here Related changes Printable version Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code 
 The name Prologue refers to more than one character, item or concept. For a list of other meanings, see Prologue (disambiguation) . 
 Chapter of The Fellowship of the Ring Prologue Information Number 0 Navigation Preceded by The Lord of the Rings Foreword Followed by A Long-expected Party 
 Prologue , labeled Prologue Concerning Hobbits, and Other Matters in some editions, is the opening section to The Lord of the Rings that provides background to the nature of Hobbits and The Hobbit . It includes the A Part of the Shire map.
 Synopsis 
 Concerning Hobbits 
 A brief history of Hobbits from their origins in the Vales of Anduin , to their movement into Eriador , their trusteeship of The Shire , and the events leading up to the War of the Ring . Concerning Hobbits also provides a broad description of the physical characteristics of Hobbits, as well as their manners, customs and important families.
 Concerning Pipe-weed 
 Explanation of the Hobbits ' fascination with pipe-weed , its history (as laid out in Meriadoc Brandybuck 's Herblore of the Shire ) and the notable varieties of Old Toby , Longbottom Leaf and Southern Star . 
 Of the Ordering of the Shire 
 Describes the division of The Shire ( North , South , East and Westfarthings ; with Buckland and Westmarch ), as well as the governing of The Shire (the Thain , the Mayor of Michel Delving and the Shirriffs ).
 Of the Finding of the Ring 
 Covers the chapters in The Hobbit which deal with Bilbo 's finding of the One Ring .
 Note on the Shire Records 
 Details the documentation in The Shire on the history of the War of the Ring .
 This entire section entered the Prologue only with the second edition of The Lord of the Rings . [1] 
 History of composition 
 Christopher Tolkien published a detailed description of how his father composed this text in The Peoples of Middle-earth , in the first chapter " The Prologue ".
 "Concerning Hobbits" derives from a text providing background information on the Hobbits, written in the latter half of 1938 , while rewriting The Lord of the Rings . [2] It was further worked with more background material, during Tolkien's final proofreading in 1949 . [3] 
 The basis of "Concerning Pipe-weed" was a lengthy speech of Merry about pipe-weed in a draft of the chapter The Road to Isengard , eventually removed and reworked. [4] 
 The "Prologue" would include a description of hobbit gift-giving customs and the ribadyan (birthday celebrant) but it was dropped, being too lengthy. [5] 
 Portrayal in adaptations 
 2001 : The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring : 
 In the first scene, titled " Prologue: One Ring to Rule Them All... ", there is a brief description of how Bilbo Baggins found the One Ring, clearly related to "Of the Finding of the Ring". 
 "Concerning Hobbits" is the name of the second scene of the Extended Edition wherein "Concerning Hobbits" is the first chapter of Bilbo's book , in which he describes the nature of Hobbits. The audience hears Bilbo reading this aloud as a voiceover on top of scenes of life in The Shire . The scene's soundtrack composed by Howard Shore is also called "Concerning Hobbits" and is used as a primary theme of the Shire. 
 References 
 ↑ Wayne G. Hammond and Christina Scull (eds), The Lord of the Rings: A Reader's Companion , p. 40 
 ↑ Wayne G. Hammond and Christina Scull (eds), The Lord of the Rings: A Reader's Companion , p. xxi 
 ↑ Wayne G. Hammond and Christina Scull (eds), The Lord of the Rings: A Reader's Companion , p. xxviii 
 ↑ Wayne G. Hammond and Christina Scull (eds), The Lord of the Rings: A Reader's Companion , p. xxiv 
 ↑ J.R.R. Tolkien ; Humphrey Carpenter , Christopher Tolkien (eds.), The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien , Letter 214 , (undated, written late 1958 or early 1959 ) 
 The Lord of the Rings 
 Foreword · Prologue · The Fellowship of the Ring · The Two Towers · The Return of the King · Appendices · Index 
 Retrieved from " https://tolkiengateway.net/w/index.php?title=Prologue_(The_Lord_of_the_Rings)&oldid=418922 " 
 Last modified
 23 February 2025 
 Contents 
 Back to top 
 Contents 
 1 
 Synopsis 
 1.1 
 Concerning Hobbits 
 1.2 
 Concerning Pipe-weed 
 1.3 
 Of the Ordering of the Shire 
 1.4 
 Of the Finding of the Ring 
 1.5 
 Note on the Shire Records 
 2 
 History of composition 
 3 
 Portrayal in adaptations 
 4 
 References 
 Categories : Pages with ignored display titles The Lord of the Rings chapters 
 Last modified 
 This page was last edited on 23 February 2025, at 11:59. 
 Copyright 
 Content is available under Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License unless otherwise noted. 
 The largest encyclopedia dedicated to J.R.R. Tolkien and The Lord of the Rings. 
 Privacy policy 
 About Tolkien Gateway 
 Speak friend and edit 
 