 
[5e] – Lost Mine of Phandelver | tenfootpole.org 
 Skip to content 
 tenfootpole.org 
 I bought these adventure and review them so you don't have to. 
 Home My Favorite of the new old school adventurers 
 The Black Maw 
 The Book Introduction 
 About Bryce … 
 Bryce’s ToDo List of reviews 
 Review Standards 
 ← Dungeon Magazine #35 
 Dungeon Magazine #36 → 
 [5e] – Lost Mine of Phandelver 
 Posted on July 7, 2014 by Bryce Lynch 
 EDIT: For you new readers, I have VERY high standards. This adventure is one of the best to be published by WOTC in a LOOONNNNGGGGG time. 
 Are you seriously reading this review in order to figure out if you should buy 5e? Our long nightmare is over … D&D is back! Go buy it, play it, and enjoy! 
 The first segment of the adventure puts DMs through the basics of asking for checks and saving throws, as the characters venture into a goblin lair on a rescue mission. Once the adventurers have dealt with the goblins, they have free reign to explore the region around the village of Phandalin. Three more dungeons and five other adventure locations provide novice DMs with plenty of material to keep a campaign going for months. 
 This is the beginning adventure(s) from the D&D 5e starter set. D&D finally has it’s head (mostly) out of its ass in a set of adventures that provides a framework for the players to have fun in. This is not the “D&D turned up to 11” of some of the recent editions, but rather a solid 7, 8, or 9 that keeps delivering over and over and over again. It provides a pretty solid foundation from which a DM can build on, with a rough outline of action and some interesting, but not set-piece, encounters. It suffers more than little on the mechanistic way magic items are treated and in the lack of evocative descriptions … especially for monsters.Overall though this is a VERY solid adventure in the high-C/Low-B “Bryce has unrealistically high expectations” grading scale … even if “months of material” may be stretching things. 
 The adventure comes in four parts. The first is a small ambush and cave lair. It serves mainly as a hook. The second is a town. This serves mostly as home base with several quests that can be picked up. The third is an exploration of the region, driving by the quests in town, where several clues can be picked up as to … the fourth part: the Evil Bad Guy’s Lair. The adventure is written in a progressive rules learning style, with more rules presented inline with the adventure near the beginning and things flowing little more streamlined near the end. Embedded in the adventure is advice for the DM, most of whig is pretty decent. Things like “ham It up” and ‘don’t go on too long” and “let the players do what they want.” 
 This seems like a good time to cover something important. The starter set is intended for new players. New players will learn how to play D&D from this set. I believe VERY strongly that the tenor & tone of of an RPG derives mostly from the published adventures. The published adventure is what the masses will think is ‘normal’ or ‘how the game is played’ and thus the published adventure from the company has a vast opportunity to influence the direction of the game. If it involves 3 straight up combat encounters,no roleplaying, and a skill challenge, then people are going to play that way at home, published adventure or no. The RPGA and con games will do the same thing. If all you publish are dungeon crawls then people will think that’s what the game is about and play that way. These beginning adventures are important. Balanced against this is the very real fact that this is, essentially, a programmed exploration of the rules set for people who have never played before. Some things are going to be a bit clunky as the adventure holds your hand. I usually don’t give a shit, an adventure has to stand on its own merits. Im going to try and walk a finer line with this one, attempting to recognize and be generally ok with the hand-holding while still attempting to uphold standards of good adventure writing. 
 Part 1 – The most generic hook possible: you’re caravan guards 
This was my introduction to this adventure. A cute little one column background that an entirely appropriate length followed by a couple of sentences explaining that the party are caravan guards. That hook was NOT a strong start. It recalls every crappy adventure ever written in which there was a throw-away line about the party being caravan guards. No details. You’re guards. Move along. Caravan guard is a classic trope. The classics got to be classics for a reason: when well done they are REALLY good. I recall an adventure in Dungeon Magazine in which the party were caravan guards. It included a short section that was a nice little realistic depiction of the duties during the day and what goes on the campfire at night and gave the (three?) merchants a personality and some wares to sell and they interacted with the PC’s, all described in a section that wasn’t overly long and used some strongly evocative language. This ain’t that. The whole purpose of the caravan guard thing is to put you on the road to the frontier town that will serve as the parties base … so you can be ambushed. Lame. LAME LAME LAME. Now, it turns, out, that the pre-gens all have some little hooks on their character sheets that motivate them to get involved in the adventure. Those hooks are pretty decent. The thief was part of the gang in town, they were framed and set up and now want revenge. There’s a do-gooder, a guy who has an ancestral tie to the land, and so on. These are pretty well done and should serve as some strong motivations to get to the town. The pre-text then, the caravan guard duty, is just the surrounding glue that motivates them to journey together at the same time. It is at this point I should disclose that I have DEEP scars about character motivations. I’ve seen them used to justify some pretty crappy PC behavior, all on the grounds of “that’s what my character would do.” This includes a player having their character sit out the ENTIRE adventure because ether character wouldn’t do that. I’m VERY suspicious of this stuff. In this case the written text seems to work well with the glue of the hook … EXCEPT FOR THE ELEPHANT, which I’ll talk about later. 
 So, goblins ambush you on the road. You chase them back to a cave, kill everything, take their stuff, rescue a dude, and continue on the way back to town, ending part 1. The purpose here is really to bind you to the town. There are looted caravan goods to return to the rightful owners. The dude to be rescued is moderately important in the town. There are other clues present that can bind you to the town and kick off that next part of the adventure. It’s very well constructed from this standpoint … EXCEPT FOR THE ELEPHANT. Things link together without shoving you down a railroad. It’s presented as things for you to explore, and secrets for you to uncover instead of GO TO POINT A AND THEN POINT B AND THEN SKILL CHALLENGE AND THEN POINT C YOU WIN YEAH YOU. The encounters themselves try very hard. They mostly succeed. The ambush has a couple of dead horses blocking the road, with black-feathered arrows sticking out of them. Nice! The goblins in the cave lair have some wolves chained up, with the wolves straining against their chains. And a goblin on a bridge overhead keeping lookout. Have a light?! He signals to have some flood gates broken open to flood out the streamed you are coming up! One of the goblins will talk to you if you try, and bargain with you so you’ll go get rid of the guy bullying the tribe. There are a lot of nice little things to ensure that every encounter feels like a unique challenge. There are notes about what the goblins can tell you if captured/charmed and you can talk and bargain with one of the goblins! In a completely sickish move the goblins betrays you … which sends TOTALLY the wrong message. Why ever bargain with a monster if they all betray you? Just kill them and move on. Is that really the behavior you want to encourage? Yeah, I’m sure it’s a deceitful little creature but … it’s not stupid. I’m sick of every monster you can talk to betraying their end of the deal. 
 Part 2: Welcome to Adventurehookville. Population: YOU 
At some point you are going to make it to the small frontier town that will serve as your base. There you will be herded towards “the best inn in town.” Once there you’ll get an opportunity to be exposed to several rumors, which will lead to many of the other seven or eight locations in town. From there you can pick up quite a few rumors and/or quests of things to investigate or expire. Some are tasks and some are things the party might be interested in. It’s good mix and the locations do a better than average job of being connected and interrelated. That’s not exactly high praise since the vast majority don’t do anything at all like this, but, they tried and the effort shows. In particular, the adventure gives a brief summary of the major NPC’s, where they hang out, and what their objectives/quests are. That’s done in just a sentence or so each. I find these sorts of references INVALUABLE. Read through the adventure once and then use the summary to trigger your memory of what you read earlier. More adventures need to do this. In addition, the rumors from the main inn lead to other locations, which sometimes lead to other locations. That sort of interrelationship is a nice touch. The major NPC’s have some small personalities and many of them, besides keying the characters to quests, can offer membership in a secret societies of sone sort of another. There’s also some brief mentions of the vibe of the town. It’s described in terms that make you think of the ‘camp’/town from the Deadwood series. IE: a western frontier town. It doesn’t explicitly give you that character or vibe, it just says it has a frontier like character with prospectors, etc hanging out in town. I wish it had gone a little more in to some detail of some of those terrific Deadwood street scenes: the hawkers, characters, etc. The whole town is quite light on descriptive and evocative language/scenes outside of the core locations (and, I will assert later, IN the core locations as well.) Finally the town is lacking on interpersonal relationships. I would have liked to see a web of personal relationships between the various people living in town. What does the guild master think of the innkeeper, or the innkeeper of the trading company, or the trading company of the guild master … that sort of thing. These sorts of social environments THRIVE on the web of relationships between the parties. This will help make the town seem alive and to exist outside of the interactions of the party. “Welcome to Mortistown”, a zombie sourcebook for a town, did this masterfully. It suggested reactions, gave the starting positions, and suggested a timeline based on the motivations on the motivations of the NPC’s. I’m not saying that a town supplement/section needs to go to the lengths Mortistown did, but it’s a good example to learn from. 
 There’s a major encounter in town that could have been done much better. There’s a gang in town that kind of controls things and is bullying/extorting people. The NPC’s in the adventure provide some vague references to them being neer-do-wells, but there’s not much beyond that. The major introduction to them is going to be a fight between them and the party. That’s pretty poor. The gang needed more of a build-up. SHOW, don’t TELL. Show us scenes of their petty evil … evil not enough to deserve a sword-thrust to the gut but more than enough to tell us they are unsavory. You have to build up these sorts of things. Their hideout is under an old manor home and the exploration of that ‘dungeon’ is one of the major town events. It kind of feels … I don’t know … lost? Tacked on? The bandits/gang don’t really react to intrusions very well. They all sit in their rooms and wait to be hacked down by the party. Intelligent creatures should have some sort of order of battle for their lair. How do they react? Who calls who for reinforcements? The dungeon is a small one but has a couple of nice physical features, like a crevasse and a couple of other interesting features. A few of the rooms are mostly empty while most of the rooms have something going on in them. Undead. Slave pens. But it all just seems a little flat. 
 Part 3: Hex Crawl 
Most of those rumors and quietists from Adventurehookville can be followed up on in the small hex crawl presented. There are six to eight locations scattered throughout the region. One is medium-sized, one large, and the others smaller single-encounter type locations. They are all within about a 2.5 day circle of travel. This allows for … Wandering Monsters! Once a day and once a night you check for wanderers on a d20 with a 17+ indicating a monster. I’m not sure about this working. Traditionally these served the role of sucking down the party resources but I’m not sure how effective that is when all your HP come back after a single nights rest. I’m going to have to play to get a better view of this but it seems to me, on first impression, that someone threw in wanderers because they were traditional. Given the new rules on healing I suspect there needs to be some work done to make the wanderers “fit” again with a decent purpose. The game is no longer about treasure, so that’s not it. You can heal in a single night, so that’s night it. So if the wanderers are no longer a ‘risk’ then what purpose to do they service? IDK. I will say that the wanderers are kind of lame. Only a grow of hobgoblins has any flavor to them. I would have liked to have seen a little more flavor, or the monsters doing something instead of the generic “they attack!” 
 I really liked the various locations though. You can talk to monsters and they have a decent mix of The Fantastic present. I want to mention a couple of points in particular that I liked. The first location is with a banshee. It talks to you and serves as a kind of oracle. That’s pretty sweet! It described near a ruined town/village that a major east-west trail runs through. Just the few words they use on the town paints a wonderful picture of some abandoned post-apoc-like setting with an important road still running through it. This whole thing was done really well. There’s another location with someone that is evil … or at least is known as the villain in most previous Forgotten Realms adventures: a red wizard. In this location he’s not really interested in the party and isn’t really doing anything particularly evil. it’s a great example of the party encountering someone or something that can help them … if you’re willing to pay the cost. These sorts of set up are SOOOOO much more interesting than a pure “THEY PUKE EVIL AND ATTACK!” encounters. Look, you can always hack the dude down later, because he’s evil or because he’s got some nice loot, but, first, TALK to them. There’s another location, the medium one in size that I referred to earlier, that is another ruined little village with nine or ten little locations to explore. And there’s a dragon! And it’s in an interesting location! Alas, the dragon is given no personality AT ALL and the location i.e. Barely described. I understand and support a terse style, but some suggesting for dragon-fighting in a ruined tower would have been great. Collapsing floors, stairs, loose timbers, rubble, etc. This would have been a great place for a little more detail on the encounter. The dragon should have had a personality as well, for exactly the same reasons cited above. Additionally … ITS A DRAGON. It’s your FIRST dragon. It should be impressive and full of life and personality and talk. Smaug is SO much more interesting because it talks to Bilbo. The final location, the major one, is a small ruin with fifteen or so locations. The entryway is one of the only interesting parts of this. A little set piece if you come through the front door, the rest of the site is pretty much just “room with a monster, room without a monster, room with a monster.” At best you can sneak around or maybe try to bluff through some of them. I guess I was expecting more … weirdness? Instead it’s more like a little tactical assault. Except, again, there’s no order of battle. The notes on who reacts to assaults and how are essentially nonexistent once you get past the gate guards. That’s quite disappointing, especially given the layout of the site. There’s a lot of doors and rubble and hallways to ambush and be ambushed and sneak past and so on. There are some nice notes about some monsters showing up back home at the end, after he major fights are over, and how the party can deal with them. That’s a nice little touch I appreciated. It makes it seem like the place is alive and exists as place instead of everyone just coming out of stasis once a PC opens a door. 
 Part 4: Dungeon 
Nope, not gonna spoil this. Decent map, nice variety of features. A couple of good descriptions. Some interesting encounters. Overall, not enough to play with. There needs to be more weird and more stuff to fool around with. There seems to be a lot more risk than reward. This might be an apt summary for most post-“gold as XP” D&D’s. Why do this? I will note that the Evil Bad Guy, in this dungeon, doesn’t EXACTLY suffer from Lareth syndrome. He’s referred to in several places by several people before you hit the dungeon. What you don’t get, though, is a sense that the dude is E V I L. Again, this goes to the “Show, don’t Tell” stuff. He’s abstract, you know he’s there but the evidence of his evil acts is … almost nonexistent? Sure, he got some goblins to raid some stuff. Yawn. Where’s the beef? I don’t need gore but you do need to set the dude up better. Make the PLAYERS want to track him down instead of forcing them to make their CHARACTERS go after him “because it’s the right thing to do.” 
 Nice time to transition. The elephant is the moral worldview enforced by the designers. In most of the adventure you are expected to go do something Because It’s the Right Thing To Do. Chase the goblins? Clean out the lair? Return the stolen trade goods? Follow up on almost all of the hooks? BECAUSE … GOOD! In fact, for the trade goods, no other option is presented. The trade goods get you a reward for returning them but nowhere is the value otherwise mentioned, or an literate hook if you come in to town clearly selling something looted from a caravan. That sort of view is present over and over again in the adventure. Options and paths of play are just shut down. In the case of the trade goods, it could have been an excellent option to infiltrate the local bandit gang, or use in other creative ways. But none of this exists because the designer has decided you can’t do that. The designer should EMPOWER and ASSIST the DM, not enforce their plot or views upon them. Brand new players are often, in my experience, the MOST creative and providing the framework to support that creativity IS the designers job. 
 The monsters in this adventure suck. There should be wonder and fear when you encounter something. Do you say “you see three ghouls.”? No, of course not. You describe them and what they are doing. You leave the party guessing. What kind of thing is that? What does it do? What do they want? Can it kill us? That’s the kind of monsters encounter I want to see, ones that encourages the players to soil themselves over THE OTHER. Instead we get “you see three goblins” or something similar. Uncool WOTC. The monster descriptions are boring as hell, with almost no attention paid to what the DM actually needs: what the PC’s EXPERIENCE when they meet them. Stink like the grave? Matted patchy fur? None of that is present. And the monsters attacks are generally disassociated. Bugbears get a surprise damage bonus that is presented completely mechanically: if you get surprise you do 2d8 more. Yeah. Mechanics. How about something like “Their dark fur allows them to blend in to shadows well, giving them a plus 2d6 to damage as they leap out in the surprise round.” Again, you are teaching new players how to play and you just taught an entire generation of DM’s to say “you see two gricks.” Bull. Shit. That’s not the D&D I want to play. That a board game. Deliver the wonder! It’s not that hard. We don’t need a page, or a column, or a paragraph. Just one sentence. The free Dragonsfoot “Where the fallen jarls sleep” has a GREAT description of the undead, one of the best ever. 
 In a similar vein, the magical items generally are none too great. They tend to be very mechanical. ‘+1 sword, deals max damage to plant creatures.” Ok, That’s not as awful as just a +1 sword, and they generally do present a little backstory/history for each item. That’s very nice; they don’t go on for too long but they do provide a … grounding? For the characters to know what it is they are carrying and add a nice bit of the non-generic. The issue is that the items are all grounded in the mechanics. Pluses, maximums, additions, rerolls … it’s all very board gamey. In a game where you can ANYTHING, literally ANYTHING, you give us an item that gives +1 to defense? Ok, that’s a little hyperbolic, but the mechanical way magic is treated is much closer to 4e than it is to OD&D or T&T. Gems that you swallow and turn you in a beaver? The gem in the first level of the darkness beneath that shoots out flames? GREAT items without a whiff of the generic or mechanical. Effects are described instead of mechanics. It’s like someone is TERRIFIED of the ambiguity that this sort of non-mechanical thing may introduce. Another word for the DM is Judge. Let the Judge handle the ambiguity … that why they exist! There is a GREAT magic item in the hex crawl, a little statue that gives everyone an augury once. That’s a nice little touch and exactly the sort of magic item I’m looking for. It’s NOT straight out of a book and it oozes wonder and mystery. THAT’S what magic items should do. 
 Finally, I want to cover the user of descriptive language. There’s not a lot. The encounters and place just don’t seem to pop. They are generally interesting enough, like the goblin on the rope bridge or the flood they release or the wolves on their chains, for example. But they don’t don’t pop. They don’t do a very good job of springing to life in your mind. I think it’s because of the lack of descriptive language. While reading through the adventure I was struck by the goblin lair seeming a bit generic … but then when I looked back over it it was clear that the situations were interesting. But they didn’t stay with you. They didn’t seem … exciting? And I think what I mean by this is that the encounter didn’t get ME, the DM, excited about running it. In the town section this really stood out. It was either in the rumors section or somewhere else when it hit me. There were nouns and verbs but the adjectives and adverbs were not used very well. “The farmers wife tells you … “ instead of the “the prim farmers wife tells you …” There’s was nothing of the FAVLOR being communicated. Floods should be raging torrents. The NOC’s should have personalities, or flavors, to assist the DM and bring the encounter to life in your mind. Farmers Wife leaves a lot open. Granny, prim, biddy, lusty, stoic, proper … all of those give you, the DM, something to work with. They conjure a NON-generic image in your mind that you can build on. There’s WAY not enough of this in the adventure. Hence the kind of “generic’ vibe. Generic goblin. Generic cave. Generic wolves. This lack of descriptive material, just a word or two really, is a reall killer. 
 You don’t get it both ways. You can’t claim to be a Starter Set and then not include GREAT magic items and monster descriptions. You gotta make this thing pop. You gotta make people want more More MORE. The monsters, magic items, and descriptions don’t really do that. In the end you get a serviceable adventure/set of adventures. They are nicely connected with a home base that is better than usual. This is a decent adventure, it delivers over and over again in a non-sucky way. In an above average way. But it doesn’t hit the highs, consistently, that the best products do. I’m disappointed in that. I wanted this to knock your socks off. It’s big. It’s long. Both of those are great. But the quality isn’t what I was hoping for. But, in spite of the Starter Set adventure not being the second-coming of Dave Bowman or Calithena, it does put D&D back on SOLID ground again. I’d be happy to run this. I fucking love D&D, and D&D is now back! 
 Now for some self-promotion: 
Did you seriously just read all of that? Wow. You should be playing D&D instead. If you’re in/near Indianapolis then you should check out the Indy Gaming meetup. My wife runs the group. We’re running an all-day play through of the starter set on July 19th. RSVP and come along! 
 Want to celebrate the return of D&D by being a butthead? Drop me a line! We’re having a bonfire to celebrate the evening of July 11th. Feel free to bring the old edition; we’ll need fuel for the fire. 
 This is available on Amazon. 
 https://www.amazon.com/Dungeons-Dragons-Starter-Wizards-Team/dp/0786965592/ref=sr_1_1?keywords=phandelver&amp;qid=1550494610&amp;s=gateway&amp;sr=8-1&_encoding=UTF8&tag=tenfootpole-20&linkCode=ur2&linkId=cfc3967b9a107b31429d26273b785565&camp=1789&creative=9325 
 This entry was posted in Reviews . Bookmark the permalink . 
 ← Dungeon Magazine #35 
 Dungeon Magazine #36 → 
 18 Responses to [5e] – Lost Mine of Phandelver 
 aemmel says: 
 July 7, 2014 at 4:50 pm 
 Nice review. It’s sitting at home for me to read later. 🙂 
 I agree with your view on the Elephant. It’s what made many of the 2e Forgotten Realms modules useless to me: the players were assumed to be good. 
 I just started a new campaign set in old tired Hommlet. While cleaning the moathouse might presume good, it’s not necessarily so. The current group is headed by a PC thief (with an assassin muscle–also PC) who was sent with the mission by the Guild to either get the bandits to join up or eliminate them. The way motivations are set up with Phandelver, that really wouldn’t work. 
 Reply 
 Anonymous says: 
 July 8, 2014 at 6:51 am 
 Thanks for another great review. It’s really sad that they assume a heroic disposition on the part of the PCs as it devalues the very thing they want: a heroic feel to the proceedings! 
 If the PCs had the choice between fencing the caravan goods for 300 XP and returning them for a warm handshake and the eternal gratitude of the merchants, their heroism would actually mean something. Alternatively, they could feel smart and like badass scoundrels. What a waste. 
 Reply 
 Pontisser Winterbottom says: 
 July 10, 2014 at 12:01 am 
 I will get the Starter Set next Tuesday and am very excited, despite the criticisms in this review. It sounds great but could have been even better. 
 As I read all your criticisms (a bit railroady in places, not enough leeway, monsters waiting to be found and fought, etc.), I wonder how easliy these things could be added. 
 I know the point you are making is “Brand new DMs and players will experience this as what D&D is supposed to be like.” Those new DMs are not going to know they can go off script, but would it be possible to do so? Is the adventure written in such a way to make this hard to do? 
 Could the DM add something that encourages the party to consider fencing the goods they find instead of just returning them to the townspeople? Or is there no info on the bandit gang to allow them to pursue that route? 
 Of course you could add a descriptor to “flesh out” the farmer’s wife? 
 And add descriptors for the monsters? 
 I guess I’m asking if a more experienced DM could address some of your concerns with a little rewriting or a few simple additions? 
 Thanks for the review! 
 Reply 
 Anonymous says: 
 July 11, 2014 at 10:30 am 
 Is the presumption of good any surprise though? Good has basically been the official default alignment since at least 1989. That said, they should have hired you as a consultant for their adventures. 
 Reply 
 Adam W says: 
 July 12, 2014 at 2:17 am 
 Wow I was not expecting to see this adventure here. Good review, very informative. 
 Reply 
 joelastowski says: 
 July 19, 2014 at 1:56 pm 
 Lovely review. I like the good and the bad. I’m running this at my FLGS, and so far we’ve just done part 1 (part 2 will be this Monday)… but I agree. I had to add in lots of my own flavor on the fly to make the monster encounters more descriptive and evocative. I’ve started working on my own NPC interactions web for the town to make them feel more connected, as well. As with the last 3 D&D Encounters seasons, it feels like Lost Mine… is part of this new “let the DM do lots of work” mentality. While I love getting super involved in the games I run, I also like it when the publisher provides me with enough material that I don’t have to create vast bits of information from nothing. This adventure is very playable, but I can’t imagine it’d be fun for players if I was a new DM who didn’t know how to ad-lib descriptions of ambush scenes and goblin appearance. 
 I’m super hopeful for the Tyranny of Dragons stories, as they were written by Kobold Press, who do AMAZING stuff. Lost Mine…, though, feels more like the first few episodes of a new TV show, where they’re trying to get the feel of how to present an adventure still. 
 The rest of the stuff was good, though. Especially the player motivations on the pregens. That gave me enough tools to get around the presumption of Goodness in my players (all of whom were experienced players of several editions already), though, so nobody felt particularly railroaded. 
 Reply 
 Anonymous says: 
 July 29, 2014 at 4:52 am 
 Good review, with many insightful comments that could improve the module. There is a snivelling 
goblin the PCs can capture in the gang’s dungeon that does give useful information, and doesn’t 
immediately betray the party. I find the mixture in the gang too motley – wouldn’t the monsters kill 
the bandits? 
The pregen backgrounds are written with a nice light touch, enhancing rather than railroading 
player actions. 
Some echoes of B10 Night’s Dark Terror (your employer kidnapped, searching the countryside 
for clues) without the same excellence. However a most promising start for 5e modules (and I 
do agree modules are very important in establishing the tone/style of an edition). 
 Reply 
 Steve Muchow says: 
 August 5, 2014 at 3:05 pm 
 Thanks for the review. Based on your comments, I began some extra boxed text for the NPCs in Pandalin. For example…. 
 Toblen Stonehill 
The proprietor, a smallish, young man with blond hair and a gentle smile sees you from from afar and quickly bends down to say something to a boy holding his hand. The exchange is brief and the youth runs off with a giggle. Gracefully, the innkeeper strides across the floor, deftly dodging a pretty barmaid delivering a savory-looking dish to a patron. “Greetings to you all!”, the keeper says as he arrives, “My name is Toblen, owner of the Stonehill Inn. Make yourself comfortable and Elsa will attend to you right away. I would love to chat a while, but it must wait until after I spend a few moments with my son. He and one of his friends have been sharing some interesting stories!”. He makes a small bow, extends his arms and continues, “So, until then, please accept my hospitality, and once again, welcome!”. 
Elsa comes forward just as he turns away. Clearly harried, but smiling and in control of her demeanor, the pretty blond woman greets you.”Friends, welcome to the Stonehill Inn! You must be tired from travel and I have the perfect place for you to rest and recover! Follow me!”. She broadens her smile, raises her arm and gestures you to follow as the rest of her twirls and moves toward an empty table to your right… 
 Linene Graywind 
As you enter, you see a good looking, but mature woman hovering over a young man who is listening to her, but clearly wishing to be away. She notices you and continues her conversation, “I know my mother said I should go for younger men since they never mature anyway, but you’re like a bank account, without a lot of money, you don’t generate much interest! I suggest you leave.” On cue, the patron scrambles away and blows past you through the door. The woman, smiling, looks your way, raises her hands and says with a chuckle, “I know, I know, I don’t have to be sarcastic, but this town has given me so much material to work with… and I’m not one to be wasteful! I’m Linene, welcome to Lionshield Coster.” 
 Halia Thornton 
The familiar crossed pickaxe design of a miners’ trading post is prominently displayed at the building’s entrance. The title underneath states in common, Phandalin Miner’s Exchange. Entering through the iron door, you see a few of prospectors inside, studying the wares offered. Sitting at a table to the left is a woman of exotic beauty, raven-haired with large brown eyes and full mouth. She is smiling at a prospector across from her as she hands over a parchment to him. Then, lifting a pen and looking down at a ledger, she remarks to the man, “Thank you for the claim declaration Rathik, I hope to do business again with you soon!”. The middle-age man replies, “No, thank you Halia! Things are so much better now than they were before you came here! No one’s jumped my claims since you started recording them and Harbin is useless when it comes to disputes. I’m happy to deal with you!” 
Halia smiles as she starts writing and then speaks without looking up, “I’m flattered Rathik, truly, I am, but, my pleasure is to serve, just remember that, and all will be fine.” The prospector smiles back and begins to fold the claim as he strides away, “Yes Halia! With you, I know all will be fine!” 
 Reply 
 Steve Muchow says: 
 August 5, 2014 at 3:16 pm 
 A few more 
 Daran Edermath 
As you walk the path towards the humble house that is your destination, the nearby orchard’s perfume is redolent of apple pie, warm summers and a nostalgic childhood. Your senses relish the pure aromas and tranquility away from the center of town. It’s peaceful here, almost solitary, except for the half-elf wending amongst the trees and vines of his orchard. His hair is silver and though old, he is fit an apparently ready for any threat as he wears a sword. “Well met travelers”, he calls while picking a few apples from a nearby tree. “Come meet with me and enjoy the day and it’s fruits”. Before you can even respond, he tosses one of the apples your way… 
 Elmar Barthen 
Hustle and bustle barely describe the frenetic activity in Barthen’s Provisions. Standing in the center of the establishment, an old, balding man with a white beard, moustache and mirthful eyes directs two younger assistants while simultaneously haggling with a couple of prospectors. In an orchestration of humor, hard-bargaining and barked orders, Elmar Barthen runs his store like a benevolent pirate captain. Even deep in negotiations, he surveys every inch of shelving and watches you. In a single breath, while bargaining with one customer over the price of a backpack, he assents to another’s offer with a wink and a nod and manages to call, “Ander”. One of the boys looks up, sees Barthen pointing to the customer and signaling an agreed price with his fingers, and the youth rushes to the patron to finish the sale. Without hesitation, Barthen continues his trading with the other, finally completing the sale with a laugh, a handshake and a pat on the back. His business done, he walks towards you, barking out “Thistle, help load Joril’s wagon”, and then puts his full attention on you – though you get the feeling he is still keenly aware of everything else happening in the store. He thrusts out his hand, “Welcome to Barthen’s! You can buy what you want, but you’ll never leave without what you need! How may I help you today?” 
 Quelline Alderleaf 
Looking more like a child, you see a halfling woman sweeping her porch; the swish of her broom is halcyon even against the slight breeze rustling through the nearby trees. She sees you approach and stops a moment, surveys her progress so far, shrugs her shoulders and stands the broom aside. With a very matter-of-fact voice, you hear her call out, “Carp! Come boy and pull a pitcher of milk. We have company!”. She then looks your way, points to a picnic table about fifty feet to your right, and continues, “Ho there! Seat yourselves if ye be friendly, otherwise leave before you get hurt! I’ll be over in a minute.” With that, the elder Alderleaf opens the cabin door and disappears, shutting it behind her. 
 Reply 
 Steve Muchow says: 
 August 5, 2014 at 6:19 pm 
 The last two big NPCs 
 Sister Garaele 
A humble abode where Sister Garaele lives stands to the left of the small shrine to Tymora. The front door is open and you see she is sitting with a man and tending his wounds. Her speech is liquid and soft as befits most elves and the patient is clearly calmed from her ministrations. As you enter, she softly, yet forcefully directs one of you to retrieve a flask from a shelf at the far end. To the rest, she asks for silence while she treats her ward. Despite his calm, the miner complains, “I paid Brakus to leave me alone and he came back with three more men today. Said his rates were old and he needed the new amount. Harbin needs to do something and quick or he’ll have a rebellion.” 
“I am sorry you are hurt, and I wish I knew how to rid this town of them too,” replies Garaele. “We shall see what side Tymora’s coin lands on tonight.” She then looks at you, “Maybe something new will appear to guide us.” 
 Harbin Wester 
Harbin Wester watches you carefully as you enter the hall. Standing near a door with steps leading down, he harrumphs and lets out a low chuckle as he closes and locks the door. “I hope you aren’t here for any trouble,” he exclaims as he puts the keys into his waistcoat pocket and waddles over to a desk that seems a bit small compared to his girth. Leaning back in his chair, he points to the just locked door, “The last two who created trouble here are locked away until they cool down, or when I decide they’ve paid enough. You can never trust miners including what they say… they always have an angle.” 
 Reply 
 Returning GM says: 
 August 25, 2014 at 9:35 pm 
 @Steve Muchow – I really like your expanded NPC descriptions box text. I will definitely use them in my upcoming starter box game. 
 Reply 
 Barry Wilson says: 
 February 3, 2015 at 11:15 am 
 I’ve got to disagree – a bit – with some of your concerns. Most of the magic weapons found as treasure are *very* well fleshed out. Hew, for example, the axe that does max damage to plant creatures includes this line; “Whoever carries the axe feels uneasy whenever they travel through a forest.” That’s a fantastic role play hook, there. IMC, the Barbarian ended up with Hew, and the Barbarian feels very strongly that trees are sacred. She’s starting to justify using the axe with “plant creatures are unnatural.” Roleplaying is happening. 
 Nearly every magic weapon found here includes a little bit of back story. And that’s fantastic. 
 The adventure could really, really, really use another dozen or so pages. That would allow some of your concerns to be addressed. It would allow more of the NPCs to be further fleshed out. It would allow more pointers for new DMs, more on what to do if your PCs are more neutrally inclined ( or even evil.) 
 I’ve been hard at work on making a bunch of changes to this adventure, and hope to add to the wealth of supplemental info that has appeared here and there on the Internet to expand and enhance this adventure. 
 Reply 
 Quasar says: 
 August 27, 2015 at 8:30 pm 
 Here is how to make wandering monsters “fit” again with a decent purpose. A pitiless reading of the ambiguous 5th edition rule concerning a “long rest” says that if it’s interrupted by fighting, it doesn’t take and the players have to start over. A long rest takes 8 hours. If the players are travelling in a dangerous wilderness, making frequent random encounter checks, they may be very uncertain when they’ll next get 8 uninterruped hours in which to sleep. If their night gets interrupted by an attack, say on the 4th watch (the rulebook implies 4 watches), the players then have to decide whether to risk travelling on in a weakened state – risking themselves against daytime encounters – or try to rest through the day and then be forced to either travel at night or wait the night out and expose themselves to even more wanderer checks. They might sometimes go several days without a decent rest. It’s a resource management game in which the party’s strength peaks and then rapidly declines, and has the side effect of making the more desperate battles with a weakened party rarer and separated by the easier ones – good for dramatic tension. 
 Reply 
 Lost Mine of Phandelver says: 
 September 27, 2015 at 11:18 am 
 It’s a great starter campaign. You can get the PDF for the Lost Mine of Phandelver here: Lost Mine of Phandelver 
 Reply 
 Kobey says: 
 November 18, 2016 at 11:16 am 
 Could it be better?…everything can always be better. 
 Having said that…I just saw a group of kids at the public library muddling though Phandelver on their own each for the first time. 
 I don’t know when the last time in almost 4-decades I saw that… 
 For whatever faults the starter set might have…think back to the very fist time you ever played and what you had to work with and whom ran it… 
 This set is hands down the best thing I have ever seen for new players and bluntly the hobby as a whole. 
 Reply 
 Michael Johnston says: 
 December 23, 2016 at 12:23 pm 
 Good review. I’m just over half way through the starter set with a group of teenagers (2 of them my fault) and myself 30 years and more from their same enthusiasm and wonderment. I really like the set and have been making up my own hooks into later possible plot lines – once they had determined that they would continue after the first few sessions. I agree with the comments on fleshing out the story and have been really entertained by the few accounts I have found from others making the same journey. I think, however, that it does occasionally prompt the new DM to do what they think is appropriate and not just be rules monkeys. 
The lack of background for the NPCs in Phandalin is allowing me to decide what kind of world this adventure sits in and how some of the introduced groupings (Zhentarim etc) might operate and develop. Too much backstory might inhibit some lines of that development. 
I appreciate there is a difficult balance to make in these things. Too much information and DMs will bow under the weight. Too little and it becomes too loose for the newcomers. These things can always be improved and enhanced but I really appreciate the off the shelf opportunity given to a grizzled old gamer to open the door of that world to some newbies. 
Now they are hooked they are addressing the gaps in their backstory with their own characterisation and talking to me about possible branches off. Not too shoddy a start I think. 
 Reply 
 DreadfulDungeons says: 
 December 21, 2017 at 9:07 am 
 Great review thank yah! I loved DMing this adventure with my group of newbies and you capture quite a lot of what I thought as I plowed through the content. 
 Many thanks! 
 Reply 
 Anonymous says: 
 March 11, 2024 at 11:54 am 
 This review is a decade old 
 Reply 
 Leave a Reply Cancel reply Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked * Comment * Name * 
 Email * 
 Website 
 Notify me of follow-up comments by email. Notify me of new posts by email. 
 My Patreon 
 Emupad 
 RSS https://tenfootpole.org/ironspike/?feed=rss2 
 Bryce’s Adventure Design Forum – Featuring… Book Talk! 
 Search Archive: 
 Search for: 
 Recent Comments Reason on The Swan Hollow Intrigue AG on The Swan Hollow Intrigue rekalgelos on The Swan Hollow Intrigue Kubo on AA#18 – The Forsaken Sepulcher Slipjoint on AA#18 – The Forsaken Sepulcher Beoric on The Swan Hollow Intrigue Slipjoint on AA#5 – The Flaming Footprints of Jilanth Lycaon on The Swan Hollow Intrigue Lycaon on The Swan Hollow Intrigue Slipjoint on Wheel of Evil Stripe on The Swan Hollow Intrigue Beoric on Stronghold of the Mad Dwarf mudcore on Stronghold of the Mad Dwarf DangerousPuhson on Stronghold of the Mad Dwarf DangerousPuhson on Stronghold of the Mad Dwarf "It's dark and you can't see" on The Doom of the Dark Beoric on Stronghold of the Mad Dwarf Beoric on Stronghold of the Mad Dwarf DangerousPuhson on Stronghold of the Mad Dwarf DangerousPuhson on Stronghold of the Mad Dwarf Blogroll 
 Dungeon Categories 
My ongoing attempt to identify good dungeoncrawls. The reviews are just a byproduct.
0 
 Categories 
 2 out of 10 
 5e 
 Adventurers League 
 ArtPunk Shovelware 
 Colored Lights May Hypnotize 
 Do Not Buy Ever 
 Dungeon Magazine 
 Dungeons & Dragons Adventure Review 
 God Effort 
 It fucking sucks, man 
 Level 0 
 Level 1 
 Level 12 
 Level 2 
 Level 3 
 Level 4 
 Level 5 
 Level 6 
 Level 8 
 Level 9 
 Meh. It's fine 
 Millions and Millions of its Babies 
 My Life is a Living Fucking Hell 
 No Regerts 
 No, seriously, the worst EVAR? 
 Pathfinder 
 Reviews 
 ribbet, ribbet 
 SciFi 
 The Best 
 The Worst EVAR? 
 Uncategorized 
 The link to the product in this review is probably an affiliate link. If you follow the link and buy the product, I make some money. Just thought you should know. 
 Archives 
 September 2026 
 August 2026 
 July 2026 
 June 2026 
 May 2026 
 April 2026 
 March 2026 
 February 2026 
 January 2026 
 December 2025 
 November 2025 
 October 2025 
 September 2025 
 August 2025 
 July 2025 
 June 2025 
 May 2025 
 April 2025 
 March 2025 
 February 2025 
 January 2025 
 December 2024 
 November 2024 
 October 2024 
 September 2024 
 August 2024 
 July 2024 
 June 2024 
 May 2024 
 April 2024 
 March 2024 
 February 2024 
 January 2024 
 December 2023 
 November 2023 
 October 2023 
 September 2023 
 August 2023 
 July 2023 
 June 2023 
 May 2023 
 April 2023 
 March 2023 
 February 2023 
 January 2023 
 December 2022 
 November 2022 
 October 2022 
 September 2022 
 August 2022 
 July 2022 
 June 2022 
 May 2022 
 April 2022 
 March 2022 
 February 2022 
 January 2022 
 December 2021 
 November 2021 
 October 2021 
 September 2021 
 August 2021 
 July 2021 
 June 2021 
 May 2021 
 April 2021 
 March 2021 
 February 2021 
 January 2021 
 December 2020 
 November 2020 
 October 2020 
 September 2020 
 August 2020 
 July 2020 
 June 2020 
 May 2020 
 April 2020 
 March 2020 
 February 2020 
 January 2020 
 December 2019 
 November 2019 
 October 2019 
 September 2019 
 August 2019 
 July 2019 
 June 2019 
 May 2019 
 April 2019 
 March 2019 
 February 2019 
 January 2019 
 December 2018 
 November 2018 
 October 2018 
 September 2018 
 August 2018 
 July 2018 
 June 2018 
 May 2018 
 April 2018 
 March 2018 
 February 2018 
 January 2018 
 December 2017 
 November 2017 
 October 2017 
 September 2017 
 August 2017 
 July 2017 
 June 2017 
 May 2017 
 April 2017 
 March 2017 
 February 2017 
 January 2017 
 December 2016 
 November 2016 
 October 2016 
 September 2016 
 August 2016 
 July 2016 
 June 2016 
 May 2016 
 April 2016 
 March 2016 
 February 2016 
 December 2015 
 November 2015 
 October 2015 
 September 2015 
 August 2015 
 July 2015 
 June 2015 
 May 2015 
 April 2015 
 August 2014 
 July 2014 
 June 2014 
 May 2014 
 April 2014 
 March 2014 
 February 2014 
 January 2014 
 December 2013 
 November 2013 
 October 2013 
 September 2013 
 August 2013 
 July 2013 
 June 2013 
 May 2013 
 April 2013 
 March 2013 
 February 2013 
 January 2013 
 December 2012 
 November 2012 
 October 2012 
 September 2012 
 August 2012 
 July 2012 
 June 2012 
 May 2012 
 April 2012 
 March 2012 
 February 2012 
 January 2012 
 December 2011 
 November 2011 
 October 2011 
 September 2011 
 August 2011 
 The link to the product in this review is probably an affiliate link. If you follow the link and buy the product, I make some money. Just thought you should know. 
 tenfootpole.org 
 Proudly powered by WordPress. 
