 
 #writing – @asoiafuniversity on Tumblr 
 Explore Communities Change palette Sign up Log in ASOIAF University @ asoiafuniversity / asoiafuniversity.tumblr.com A collection of metas (critical essays or analysis), gathered from across tumblr, about George R.R. Martin's book series A Song of Ice and Fire (ASOIAF) and its television adaptation Game of Thrones. For more information about this blog, please read our FAQ . Follow Clear Posts Comments Search all of Tumblr asoiafuniversity Reblogged mylestoyne Anonymous asked: Top 5 poorly written sex scenes mylestoyne answered: Shfjshk my controversial opinion is that the sex scenes in asoiaf aren’t really poorly written, like yeah they’re not titillating erotica out of a fanfic or anything but like. I don’t get the sense they’re meant to be? Myrish swamp and fat pink mast are the two scenes people always bring up as being weird and poorly written but.... in my opinion these scenes are supposed to serve as insights into the characters, just as any other scene would be. “Fat pink mast” is supposed to sound funny and awkward because sam is an awkward virgin and he literally describes said fat pink mast as looking “silly” and almost laughs. And “myrish swamp” is a kind of weird and unpleasant term to describe, well, what it’s describing, but then again I find the scene as a whole to be kind of weird and unpleasant but above all it’s character insight into Cersei’s mind. I know people like to say that the cersei/taena scene is like, fetishy or written just cause heheh grrm thinks women sleeping together is hot but I don’t get that impression. What stands out most to me in that scene is cersei 1. putting herself in the place of robert with taena as cersei herself being used, and 2. putting herself in the place of the boar that killed robert with taena as the one getting gored. This says SO much about cersei and her sexuality and her trauma and her mentality, it’s such a telling character moment, but to just be like “haha myrish swamp” and not examine it further imo kind of does a disservice to her as a character and grrm as a writer #asoiaf #asoiaf meta #valyrianscrolls #sex #writing #characterization #samwell tarly #cersei lannister #themes 3 21 147 asoiafuniversity Reblogged goodqueenaly Follow Jaime read it in the window seat, bathed in the light of that cold white morning. Qyburn’s words were terse and to the point, Cersei’s fevered and fervent. Come at once , she said. Help me. Save me. I need you now as I have never needed you before. I love you. I love you. I love you. Come at once . He nodded. “Last of all, and worst of all, there are some who say your children were not fathered by King Robert, that they are bastards born of incest and adultery.” “Stannis says that,” Cersei said at once. “A lie, a lie, a palpable lie. Stannis wants the Iron Throne for himself, but his brother’s children stand in his way, so he must needs claim that they are not his brother’s. That filthy letter … there is no shred of truth to it. I deny it.” I don’t know if GRRM intended this to be a deliberate parallel/contrast, but it certainly reads that way to me. The first quote shows Cersei at her nadir, her most desperate. Fallen from the height of power, in the hands of enemies, with no ally except Qyburn, Cersei is resorting to the one person she thinks will never - could never - abandon her. The terms in which she frames her call to Jaime are not those of a mere sister to a brother, much less a queen to her knightly champion, but a lover to her lover. It is love, Cersei’s words insist, that proves that she really needs him in this moment; her love for him, “fervent” in its repetition, must compel him in turn to come to her, help her, save her. They had parted on an uncertain note - the last expression of love had been a sarcastic one, from Jaime to Cersei - made worse in Jaime’s mind by the ostensible revelation of Cersei’s infidelity, but this letter would seem to make certain that Cersei loves no one else but Jaime. Yet when the High Septon explicitly asks her about Jaime - asks her to confirm or deny that she and Jaime had had a sexual relationship - Cersei denies it. She emphasizes the point with the same triple repetition that she used in her letter to Jaime, but in completely different language: here is not the expression of love but the condemnation of falsehood. Now it is not she herself, as Cersei claims, who would say that Jaime fathered her children - to admit, in other words, that she and Jaime had been lovers - but Stannis, the outsider enemy, spreading the “lie”. Their relationship had always existed in the context of a cover story - Cersei’s children had to be passed off as Robert’s to have any sort of claim to a Baratheon throne - but in this moment, specifically questioned on the truth of the relationship, Cersei officially denies everything - not just the relationship, but her love for Jaime. I’m not trying to condemn Cersei for her words to the High Septon: she had undergone a form of torture, and had every reason to know or believe that by admitting to sex with Jaime both she and her surviving children would likely be killed. I only want to highlight what I see as a linguistic parallel/contrast in Cersei’s attitude toward her relationship with Jaime. Having insisted to Jaime that she loved him three times - and even specifically instructed Qyburn to repeat the phrase three times - Cersei then denied him three times when put to the question. (I wonder if that’s more of GRRM’s lapsed Catholicism coming through, sort of reversing the Peter-Jesus dynamic.) #jaime lannister #cersei lannister #jaime x cersei #parallels #rhetoric #writing #literary analysis 34 95 asoiafuniversity Reblogged daisyedens Follow please-dot asked: In agot it seems like grrm fleshed out Sansa flaws more than other starks. Jeyne, cat n even septa m are all potrays negative manner. It seems like Sansa had internal flaws whereas Jon n Arya have none only society had. I think other books fleshed out Sansa character but the ambiguity remain in agot. Also he creates conflicts between sisters but not between brothers despite Jon being bastard. daisyedens answered: I wouldn't say Arya and Jon are made out to be perfect people in AGOT. Jon behaves initally abysmally at the Wall to his fellow recruits because he quote felt "better than them." He thinks dismissively of Mrycella, who we know turns out to be a sweetheart. He has a sense of entitlement, with the way he gets insulted when given the position of steward. Arya on the other hand has a habit of saying things without thinking - when she blurts out Jon's insult about Joffrey. She is jealous of Sansa, and hot tempered. She is also stubborn and wilful. However, I think the problem with Jon and Arya (more so) is that the flaws they have are like you said, a result of their society being unfair rather than it being their own fault (think Tywin's inability to properly nurture his children & thus causing a poisoned legacy) For example, Arya's jealousy of Sansa is due to the unfair pressures their society places on them to conform. Her traits of being stubborn and wilful can be described as endearing. Regarding Jon, his dismissive thoughts of Mrycella occur because he feels understandably angry over being made to sit somewhere else - because of Westerosi customs. In contrast, Sansa is absolutely a sympatheic and nuanced character in AGOT (I don't care what anyone says) the problem is that she definitely feels more like a realistic child in contrast to Arya and Jon (and Bran) who fit the fantasy archetype (i.e. tomboy heroine - while also challenging it). She lies to herself about Cersei and Joffrey and wrongly blames Arya. She forces herself to ignore her instincts. She was too sheltered, and that ended up hurting her. When told suddenly that her Dad is basically taking her and Arya (with no information as to why to be fair, so it's not surprising she does act this way) from the place of her dreams, she well- throws a tantrum because well she is a realistic child character and children don't always act reasonably. This is why I get it when people say that reading the first book definitely makes them feel Arya was being pitted against Sansa. For instance, Arya's POV is set first and it's already been discussed before how people fallen into Arya's POV trap because of that. When angry about the Trident, she tells Ned that she hates Sansa- but it's in private. This is after she is having some pretty heartbreaking inner thoughts about Mycah. In contrast, he has Sansa yell at Arya that she should have died instead of Lady. Of course, it's also worth pointing out that Sansa isn't processing her grief for Lady properly and this was the result of months of built up anger. However, the issue is that I think when reading this for the first time - a lot of people don't yet recongise how significant and traumatic this loss was for Sansa, or worse they blame her for it. Finally, I do agree that it's just uninspired that George needed the girls to have a conflict, and not the boys. Furthermore, he could have had Robb being disapproving of Arya's unladylike behaviour. But I do think people need to take his comments with a grain of salt. I never got the impression that OG Sansa was a villian. It specifically says that when the crunch comes, she will choose her husband and son. It is not wrong to choose your child over your parents and siblings. I don't think it's outlandish to say that it would have been an immensely difficult decision to make - the Sansa George ended up writing loves her family deepy. Even if you think he's still keeping to the original outline (ie Jonryas), Sansa is devastated over her father's death, is fearful of what will happen to Catelyn and Robb, "used up all her tears" for Bran, clearly admires her mother, and there is a longing for a better relationship with Arya in her first chapter. But that being said though, this was her child. I mean, @books-laughter-love made a good point about what if Hoster Tully sided with the Lannisters instead. Should Cat side with her father and brother, instead of her children? (ie supporting her son Robb) Of course not! People would actually have a reason to call Cat a bad mother then. #sansa stark #arya stark #jon snow #writing #tropes 22 69 asoiafuniversity Reblogged dwellordream Follow Anonymous asked: do you think there is any significance to the choice of bran, catelyn, and arya being first introduced in their own pov chapters, while ned, sansa, and jon are introduced from other perspectives? dwellordream answered: To be honest not really, though maybe there are some convincing arguments out there otherwise? I think GRRM wrote it that way for the purposes of how he wanted the plot to unfold; we see the execution from Bran’s eyes because it’s his first brush with death, and because he is obviously going to wind up as the sibling most connected with his direwolf in terms of weirwood magic, so it’s telling that he is the one who narrates the discovery of the pups with childlike wonder. Catelyn informs Ned of Jon Arryn’s death because then we get to see his reaction through her, someone who knows him best, and because she allows GRRM to introduce the godswood and the concept of the old gods and how the northerners worship them through a convenient ‘outsider’ POV, so it feels less like pointless exposition. And Arya’s chapter establishes her as what she feels to be an outlier among her siblings, believing she has more in common with Jon than with the rest of them because of her struggles to conform to the expectations of what a lady should act like and be interested in. It also sets up her tense relationship with Sansa and how outside forces like Septa Mordane make those relations even worse through constant criticism and comparison of the two. We then get a private scene between her and Jon before both depart Winterfell that we would not have gotten to see if Sansa had narrated the sewing room scene and Arya’s dramatic exit. #house stark #a game of thrones #pov characters #writing 6 25 asoiafuniversity Reblogged weirwoodking Follow You may be as different as the sun and the moon , but the same blood flows through both your hearts. You need her, as she needs you … and I need both of you, gods help me ." - Arya II, A Game of Thrones When he thought of his daughters, he would have wept gladly , but the tears would not come. Even now, he was a Stark of Winterfell, and his grief and his rage froze hard inside him. When he kept very still, his leg did not hurt so much, so he did his best to lie unmoving. For how long he could not say. There was no sun and no moon . - Eddard XV, A Game of Thrones #ned stark #arya stark #sansa stark #a game of thrones #writing 132 292 asoiafuniversity Reblogged hylialeia nooooooooooooooooooooone Follow “How is it that you did not wed?” Jaime asked him. “Why, I went to Tarth and saw her. I had six years on her, yet the wench could look me in the eye. She was a sow in silk, though most sows have bigger teats. When she tried to talk she almost choked on her own tongue. I gave her a rose and told her it was all that she would ever have from me.” Connington glanced into the pit. “The bear was less hairy than that freak, I’ll–” Jaime’s golden hand cracked him across the mouth so hard the other knight went stumbling down the steps. His lantern fell and smashed, and the oil spread out, burning. “You are speaking of a highborn lady, ser. Call her by her name. Call her Brienne.” still the hottest thing I have ever read TALK SHIT GET HIT Jaime III, A Feast for Crows chickren no one understands this is grrm at his most deft. because jaime’s feelings for brienne are so close to the breaking point he literally cannot allow jaime to have so much as an internal aside about anything that is happening other than the “surprise” at Brienne’s betrothals. and i mean (LOL) we are talking about JAIME of the ever-running hilarious inner commentary. but not here. not with red ronnet. jaime’s smart-mouthed inner voice is absolutely SILENT about his feelings about brienne. all we get is action. things like: connington lauged. jaime did not. so jaime lets this play out. lets ronnet exposit a bunch of brienne’s backstory for him. and like, the first time you read it you don’t realize that jaime’s inner snarkbot has gone silent. you’re just coasting along. and then *thwack* grrm goes ahead and cracks the reader across the mouth. like george is not “”””hinting””” here, he wants that jolt, he wants to shake you. he wants you to NOTICE. this is what he wants you to remember when jaime makes his move in twow. #jaime lannister #brienne of tarth #ronnet connington #jaime x brienne #grrm #writing 2 431 1,047 asoiafuniversity Reblogged onionjulius amaximumtastemakercollection Follow Dany, Catelyn and the Seven Colours of the Rainbow. RED: “We will have it all back someday, sweet sister,” he would promise her. Sometimes his hands shook when he talked about it. “The jewels and the silks, Dragonstone and King’s Landing, the Iron Throne and the Seven Kingdoms, all they have taken from us, we will have it back.” Viserys lived for that day. All that Daenerys wanted back was the big house with the red door, the lemon tree outside her window, the childhood she had never known. (Daenerys I, AGOT) Catelyn found her husband beneath the weirwood, seated on a moss-covered stone. The greatsword Ice was across his lap, and he was cleaning the blade in those waters black as night. A thousand years of humus lay thick upon the godswood floor, swallowing the sound of her feet, but the red eyes of the weirwood seemed to follow her as she came. “Ned,” she called softly. (Catelyn I, AGOT) ORANGE: The heart was steaming in the cool evening air when Khal Drogo set it before her, raw and bloody. His arms were red to the elbow. Behind him, his bloodriders knelt on the sand beside the corpse of the wild stallion, stone knives in their hands. The stallion’s blood looked black in the flickering orange glare of the torches that ringed the high chalk walls of the pit. (Daenerys V, AGOT) Flickering torchlight danced across the walls, making the faces seem half-alive, twisting them, changing them. The statues in the great septs of the cities wore the faces the stonemasons had given them, but these charcoal scratchings were so crude they might be anyone. The Father’s face made her think of her own father, dying in his bed at Riverrun. The Warrior was Renly and Stannis, Robb and Robert, Jaime Lannister and Jon Snow. She even glimpsed Arya in those lines, just for an instant. Then a gust of wind through the door made the torch sputter, and the semblance was gone, washed away in orange glare. (Catelyn IV. ACOK) YELLOW: The trickle he started soon swelled to a flood. Trader captains brought lace from Myr, chests of saffron from Yi Ti, amber and dragonglass out of Asshai. Merchants offered bags of coin, silversmiths rings and chains. Pipers piped for her, tumblers tumbled, and jugglers juggled, while dyers draped her in colors she had never known existed. A pair of Jogos Nhai presented her with one of their striped zorses, black and white and fierce. A widow brought the dried corpse of her husband, covered with a crust of silvered leaves; such remnants were believed to have great power, especially if the deceased had been a sorcerer, as this one had. And the Tourmaline Brotherhood pressed on her a crown wrought in the shape of a three-headed dragon; the coils were yellow gold, the wings silver, the heads carved from jade, ivory, and onyx. (Daenerys III, ACOK) As the long fingers of dawn fanned across the fields, color was returning to the world. Where grey men had sat grey horses armed with shadow spears, the points of ten thousand lances now glinted silverly cold, and on the myriad flapping banners Catelyn saw the blush of red and pink and orange, the richness of blues and browns, the blaze of gold and yellow. All the power of Storm’s End and Highgarden, the power that had been Renly’s an hour ago. They belong to Stannis now, she realized, even if they do not know it themselves yet. Where else are they to turn, if not to the last Baratheon? Stannis has won all with a single evil stroke. (Catelyn IV, ACOK) GREEN: Somewhere beyond the sunset, across the narrow sea, lay a land of green hills and flowered plains and great rushing rivers, where towers of dark stone rose amidst magnificent blue-grey mountains, and armored knights rode to battle beneath the banners of their lords (Daenerys I, AGOT) In the south the last weirwoods had been cut down or burned out a thousand years ago, except on the Isle of Faces where the green men kept their silent watch. Up here it was different. Here every castle had its godswood, and every godswood had its heart tree, and every heart tree its face. (Catelyn I, AGOT) BLUE: . Glowing like sunset, a red sword was raised in the hand of a blue -eyed king who cast no shadow. A cloth dragon swayed on poles amidst a cheering crowd. From a smoking tower, a great stone beast took wing, breathing shadow fire… . mother of dragons, slayer of lies … Her silver was trotting through the grass, to a darkling stream beneath a sea of stars. A corpse stood at the prow of a ship, eyes bright in his dead face, grey lips smiling sadly. A blue flower grew from a chink in a wall of ice, and filled the air with sweetness… . mother of dragons, bride of fire … (Daenerys IV, ACOK) “Lady Catelyn, you are wrong.” Brienne regarded her with eyes as blue as her armor. “Winter will never come for the likes of us. Should we die in battle, they will surely sing of us, and it’s always summer in the songs. In the songs all knights are gallant, all maids are beautiful, and the sun is always shining.” (Catelyn II, ACOK) INDIGO: Viserys, was her first thought the next time she paused, but a second glance told her otherwise. The man had her brother’s hair, but he was taller, and his eyes were a dark indigo rather than lilac. “Aegon,” he said to a woman nursing a newborn babe in a great wooden bed. “What better name for a king?” (Daenerys IV, ACOK) The eastern sky was rose and gold as the sun broke over the Vale of Arryn. Catelyn Stark watched the light spread, her hands resting on the delicate carved stone of the balustrade outside her window. Below her the world turned from black to indigo to green as dawn crept across fields and forests. Pale white mists rose off Alyssa’s Tears, where the ghost waters plunged over the shoulder of the mountain to begin their long tumble down the face of the Giant’s Lance. Catelyn could feel the faint touch of spray on her face. (Catelyn VII, ACOK) VIOLET: “A gift from the Magister Illyrio,” Viserys said, smiling. Her brother was in a high mood tonight. “The color will bring out the violet in your eyes. And you shall have gold as well, and jewels of all sorts. Illyrio has promised. Tonight you must look like a princess.” (Daenerys I, AGOT) And they told how afterward Ned had carried Ser Arthur’s sword back to the beautiful young sister who awaited him in a castle called Starfall on the shores of the Summer Sea. The Lady Ashara Dayne, tall and fair, with haunting violet eyes. It might be interesting to note that Dany and Catelyn are the only two POV characters, (as far as I can tell, I only had a quick check, so I could be wrong) who have all seven colours of the rainbow referenced at least once in their chapters. #daenerys targaryen #catelyn stark #colors #writing 7 30 asoiafuniversity Reblogged racefortheironthrone Follow Anonymous asked: Other than "to get the plot moving", do you think there is a reason GRRM placed the red wedding in the middle(ish) of ASOS, rather than towards the end as a grand climax, even though its a very Ned-gets-executed-ish event in the story? racefortheironthrone answered: I think there are a couple reasons. From a plot perspective, a lot of the stuff that happens in the second half of ASOS needs the Red Wedding to have happened first - and it wouldn’t hit nearly as hard if it was separated by the distance between two gaps. It would be like a setup without the punchline. From a thematic perspective, ending ASOS at the Red Wedding would make it too much a story about Lannister triumph - that’s why GRRM has the Purple Wedding, Tyrion’s trial, the Mountain and the Viper, and the death of Tywin in the second half, so that you see the Lannister regime destroying itself at the very moment it achieves its ambitions. #the red wedding #a storm of swords #writing #themes 23 96 asoiafuniversity Reblogged warsofasoiaf Follow Sowing the Greyjoys Into the Narrative: How GRRM Patchworked the Ironborn into ASOIAF Sowing the Greyjoys Into the Narrative: How GRRM Patchworked the Ironborn into ASOIAF Introduction In 1993, George RR Martin wrote to his agent about an exciting new proposal for a trilogy of books . Before getting to the meat of his proposed plot, he talked about his writing process: As you know, I don’t outline my novels. I find that if I know exactly where a book is going, I lose all interest in writing it. I do, however, have some strong notions as to the overall structure of the… View On WordPress #house greyjoy #grrm #theon greyjoy #euron greyjoy #victarion greyjoy #asha greyjoy #writing 9 26 asoiafuniversity Reblogged omgpurpleann kallypsowrites Follow A lot has been said about D&Ds terrible dialogue writing, but I think the greatest sign of their weakness is that they straight up don’t write the most important parts of their conversations. Jaime arrives at Winterfell and sees Bran for the first time? Cut away and go straight to the trial! Why actually write that first remeeting or Jaime getting caught at all? Just skip to the trial. Arya and Sansa finding out about Jon’s parentage? Cut it before the actual reveal. It’s not like this is mind blowing info we would love to see the characters react to or anything. Sansa asks Jon if he bent the knee for love or for the north? Cut before he responds. Did he just walk out? What did he say? Tyrion pulls up a chair to hear Bran’s story which is, presumably, what convinces him to later suggest Bran as king? Cut before the actual story, which means we don’t actually know what convinced Tyrion. Sansa decides to tell Tyrion about Jon’s heritage which is a VERY MAJOR MOMENT for EVERYONE in the story? Cut before she actually reveals it. Jon kills Daenerys and assumedly some major shit happens? Cut before anyone discovers it and just skip to later so that we don’t have to deal with that scene. And do you know why they do it? Its so they can avoid the most difficult bits to write and instead let YOU imagine the conversation. It forces the audience to fill in the gaps and do most of the work while they get to just fuck off to the next scene. And this problem shows in their writing on a larger scale because they are allergic to emotional pay off in any fashion, which is why so many character arcs feel weak and so many plot threads are left hanging because they just do not feel the need to tie things up. They’d rather everyone else do the work for them and then praise them for their genius. #game of thrones #got criticism #writing 24 2,268 3,854 asoiafuniversity Reblogged poorquentyn Follow Anonymous asked: The question about "why people like Jorah" is fascinating. Again, I really think it comes back to selective empathy. Jorah comes across as genuinely empathetic and decent toward his peers. Most readers probably unconsciously self-identify as the peers of the characters, rather than their underlings. And we are conditioned to like people who empathize with us. When viewed as a peer, Jorah can be seen as a "nice guy" who sometimes gets "out of hand" with those beneath him. It says alot about us. poorquentyn answered: But Jorah’s peers demanded his head. That’s what I’ve been saying; even within his exploitative context, he’s infamous. Also, he knocks Tyrion’s teeth out, and creeps on Dany and lies to her and tries to isolate her from all other men. Who exactly is it he’s all nice and empathetic toward? nobodysuspectsthebutterfly Granted, he’s terrible. But in Dany’s POV alone, initially at least, he is portrayed as empathetic and decent . When you see Ned’s POV and find out exactly what Jorah’s crime is, then you go “oh shit”, and you may re-evaluate your opinion of the man – but many many readers never get beyond the first impression. Which saddens me, especially in how GRRM’s writing and development of characters* are being sold so short, but it happens. *I distinguish “character development” from “development of characters” – to me, the former is how the characters grow and change throughout the story, the latter is how the reader is shown more and more of a character’s backstory and inner life (especially non-POV characters), which gives much more depth to a reread. For character development, think Sansa and Theon. For development of characters, see Sandor Clegane, whose first impression is no more than a thug and a killer, but becomes much more deeply layered; I find the the slow reveal in ASOS that he has entirely given up on the Lannisters (differing from the show where his “fuck the king” is at Blackwater; in the books he doesn’t truly say he’s done with them until ASOS Chapter 47) one of the more interesting applications of this. Of course, Sandor has character development too. But the distinction is especially useful in the case of Jorah, about whom it could be argued (as you have) that he’s barely changed at all from the start. (BTW as long as I’m comparing Sandor and Jorah, I need to link to this , as it’s perfect.) Anyway, it’s this slow development and reveal of Jorah’s character that’s probably the cause of this liking Jorah thing… by the time we find out about how he thinks Dany looks like his ex, by the time he actively creeps on her, the impression of “kind knight who helps Dany when Viserys is mean, her sweet old bear” is hard to shake. It makes his actions in previous books far more creepy – and Dany herself had to deal with that (much like a woman who finds out her best platonic male friend has only been hanging out with her for years because he’s been waiting for her to give up on bad boys and choose him, the nice guy who’s been there all along) – but it also is why the “aww, Dany shouldn’t be so mean and just forgive him” trend is so strong. (Also, patriarchy.) But really, ASOS is where by all rights that people should definitely realize Jorah’s not what they think he is – from his “just buy a slave army, Dany” that arguably leads to the whole Meereenese knot and also shows he’s learned no lessons about slavery from his exile, to the aforementioned creeping, to the stubbornness to admit wrong when his previous spying is revealed, etc. And yet. First impressions, man. asoiafuniversity #i love grrm's manipulation of the readers when it comes to how we think of characters #but those first impressions stick so hard for so many people sadly #ah well #btw the fact that jorah's so blase about slavery when it's anathema in westeros is really weird come to think of it #i mean where did he pick up that attitude? not from anyone in his family or culture (via @nobodysuspectsthebutterfly ) #jorah mormont #sandor clegane #grrm #writing #character development 63 162 asoiafuniversity Reblogged goodqueenaly Follow Anonymous asked: Why do you think GRRM named Sansa's chapters "Alayne", but didn't name Tyrion's "Hugor"? goodqueenaly answered: “If he’s half as clever as a sheep pellet, you would think so. Ser Lothor knows as well. But Oswell has been in my service a long time, and Brune is close-mouthed by nature. Kettleblack watches Brune for me, and Brune watches Kettleblack. Trust no one, I once told Eddard Stark, but he would not listen. You are Alayne, and you must be Alayne all the time.” He put two fingers on her left breast. “Even here. In your heart. Can you do that? Can you be my daughter in your heart?” Littlefinger’s question lies at the heart of Sansa’s FeastDance story. Since her time in the Vale represents a sort of training montage where she learns the political deviousness which Littlefinger has mastered, so her identity during this time has to reflect her new position at his side. Sansa, like her sister across the Narrow Sea, has found herself in a strange environment which demands that she adopt a new, unfamiliar role - a role directly in contrast with her former personality and training. What’s more, both sisters have their training mentors stressing to them the importance of taking this role to heart. Sansa cannot just appear as Alayne Stone; she has to believe she is that girl, even when no one else is looking. So in naming Sansa’s last two Feast chapters (as well as at least the first of her TWOW chapters) “Alayne”, the author forces his audience to consider that question as well. The readers experience the same struggle which Sansa faces, trying not simply to act in a role but to subsume her whole identity into this newly invented one, to forget all that made her “Sansa” and proceed as if she had never been more than the lately recognized bastard of the Vale’s new Lord Protector. However, just as the chapters, though boldly titled “Alayne”, contain strong indications that Sansa has not yet forgotten her Stark past (including the rather pointed “correction” of “her father" to “Lord Eddard”), so we come to understand that the “Sansa Stark” side will in the end win out over the “Alayne Stone” side. Sansa is presented with this struggle, this demand to be in heart as well as in her appearance someone she is not, but it is not a struggle which will result in the rejection of her Stark character - even if, for now, Sansa is taking on that role. When she ultimately rejects Littlefinger, and all he would have had of her, it will be precisely because of her identity as a Stark , a rejection made all the more powerful because she was faced with this struggle. Compare that to Tyrion’s adoption of the “Hugor Hill” moniker: “Some might wonder that a duck can talk at all. No matter, Griff. You are no knight and I am Hugor Hill, a little monster. Your little monster, if you like. You have my word, all that I desire is to be leal servant of your dragon queen.” Tyrion knows, and even states in no uncertain terms, that this is all an act for him. He sees right through Jon Connington’s (rather thin) disguise, but he’s willing to play along with it because it suits his purposes. At his heart, he is and always will be Tyrion Lannister; it was as Tyrion Lannister that he was brought on to this mission, and if he is not called “Tyrion” while on the Shy Maid , it is because everyone aboard the vessel has secrets of his or her own, identities abandoned in the past or buried for the present. There is never a struggle for him, pressed upon him by exterior forces, to abandon the identity of Tyrion Lannister, to become someone else in his heart as well as to the onlooking world. “Hugor Hill” is just an invention of his - one he likes elaborating on, of course, to keep Haldon guessing and himself amused - which he is prepared to drop without any internal conflict when the time calls for it. #sansa stark #tyrion lannister #pov characters #writing #themes 20 91 asoiafuniversity Reblogged secretlyatargaryen Follow One of the things I noticed when I was reading ADWD was that it seemed to me that there was a change in the way Tyrion’s narrative was written, and it may seem small but it’s noticeable to someone who notices this kind of thing in anything I read. It seemed to me that in ADWD Martin uses “the dwarf” as a descriptor for Tyrion in the narrative a lot, where it did not stick out in earlier books. As a writer and as a teacher of writing this kind of thing is noticeable because it’s generally bad writing. We’ve all probably read those fanfictions where the author is too afraid to use the character’s name too often and therefore gets overly creative with placeholders - “the male”, “the female”, “the blonde” - it’s bad writing and it’s jarring, because people generally don’t think of themselves that way in their own personal narratives. There’s nothing wrong with repeating a character’s name. In fact, something I noticed in earlier books is that GRRM loves using Tyrion’s name, his whole name, in the narrative in Tyrion’s POV, even when it isn’t necessary: “Tyrion Lannister looked up from his books” “Tyrion Lannister was not much a one for sleeping.” “‘I pray he does,’ Tyrion Lannister replied” “Tyrion Lannister felt the anger coiling inside him” The effect is that every sentence is a declaration of Tyrion’s will, no matter how mundane. At first I thought that the use of “the dwarf” was because Martin’s writing had gotten worse (or his editors had gotten more lax) since AFFC, but then I thought perhaps Martin is doing this on purpose to reflect Tyrion’s negative view of himself and his inflated awareness of himself as a dwarf in ADWD. So I searched a bit on asearchoficeandfire, and there are two instances, only two, of Tyrion’s narrative referring to him as “the dwarf” as an objective description in A Game of Thrones . This excludes scenes where someone is talking to or about him (he is almost exclusively referred to as “the dwarf” or “the Imp” by other characters) or when he is reflecting on being “ a dwarf”, or calling himself “dwarf” in a self-deprecating way. One is the scene where he is imprisoned in the Vale and Mord is abusing him: The dwarf climbed stiffly to his feet, every joint aching. “Must we play the same fool’s game with every meal?” He made another grab for the beans. And the other is during the Battle of the Green Fork, when his father purposely puts him in the Vanguard hoping that he’ll fall in battle. Dazed, the dwarf knelt and lifted the blade. Pain hammered through his elbow when he moved his arm. Both of these are scenes where Tyrion is hyper-aware of his physical body. In contrast, “the dwarf” as a descriptor appears ten times in the narrative in Tyrion’s first chapter in ADWD alone, at a time where his headspace is full of depression and self-loathing and internalized ableism. Maybe Martin does know what he’s doing here, after all. #tyrion lannister #a dance with dragons #pov #grrm #writing #ableism tw #depression tw 2 36 92 asoiafuniversity Reblogged cassokingofseals-blog Follow Rhoyne excerpt Piggybacking on a poorquentyn post ( link ). Because sometimes it’s nice when you don’t have to pick the excerpt. ~~ Spoilers: Everything ASOIAF ~~ ADWD, during a Tyrion, Shy Maid chapter. “Boat,” a voice called across the water, faintly.
“Who are you?”
“Shy Maid,” Yandry shouted back.
“Kingfisher. Up or down?”
“Down. Hides and honey, ale and tallow.”
“Up. Knives and needles, lace and linen, spice wine.”
“What word from old Volantis?” Yandry called.
“War,” the word came back.
“Where?” Griff shouted. “When?”
“When the year turns,” came the answer. “Nyessos and Malaquo go hand in hand, and the elephants show stripes.” Consonance: ale, tallow. “al” sounds. Alliteration: hides, honey, knives, needles, lace, linen. Also, this alliteration is used here while describing a classic city-hinterland mercantile type relationship. The outer areas supply more natural, raw goods. Here, hides, honey, candlewax. The city provides higher-end finished goods, metal worked knives and needles, lace, and higher end wine instead of ale. I’m not sure boaters on the Royne all speak this way to each other all the time, but as a reader all the alliteration (and parallel structure) just helps smooth out the conversation. Also, there’s a nice character beat when Griff suddenly jumps in at the mention of war. It’s a subtle little shift from what was being said to who was saying it. And for all the grief grrm gets about his verbosity, this exchange exhibits a definite economy (word count = 71), as needed during a brief encounter of passing ships. The change in language is driven by the characters and their situation. #rhetoric #writing #literary analysis #the rhoyne #the shy maid #yandry #jon connington #a dance with dragons 4 20 asoiafuniversity Reblogged cassokingofseals-blog Follow Look at Victarion TWOW Spoilers – all ASOIAF , GoT, TWOW So, here’s a look at the released sample of the Victarion portion of TWOW. source text: https://www.reddit.com/comments/r1v01/transcript_of_the_excerpt_from_the_victarion/ Keep reading #rhetoric #writing #literary analysis #victarion greyjoy #the winds of winter #twow spoilers 3 19 asoiafuniversity Reblogged turtle-paced Follow Anonymous asked: Maybe it's presentism influencing me, but don't you think GRRM too often relies on characters making drastic mistakes to move the plot forward? E.g. Joffrey (sends a killer to end Bran's life without proper care), Cat (frees Jaime), Sansa (tells Cersei about Ned's plans), Tywin (supposes Robb will fall on his trap in the Battle of the Green Fork), Dany (leaves the masters of Yunkai's wealth intact), Oberyn (fight with Gregor), Ned (could've swept up the small council) and so on. turtle-paced answered: I actually think you’ve picked good examples to show that GRRM tries to minimise the role of coincidences (which do have their place) and move his plot along through plausible character action. Joffrey’s not real bright, this is amply established - and so he doesn’t even know what “proper care” is when arranging an assassination. Cat spends two books losing more and more family members while seeing the hopes of reuniting with her living loved ones diminish, and takes drastic, disastrous action. Sansa acted in naive ignorance and trusted the wrong people for bad reasons - though again, Ned’s plans were already known and Sansa’s telling Cersei resulted only in her own capture. Tywin in his arrogance consistently misreads Robb’s military strategy all through the War of Five Kings, until he resorts to non-military means of dealing with the problem. Dany’s inexperience and general desire not to wantonly trash entire cities means she doesn’t appreciate the butterfly effects of not dismantling the mastery. Oberyn’s priorities were firmly established from his first appearance. Ned just doesn’t think of power in terms of institutions, but his focus on personal relationships shows its strengths in other areas of the plot. Each and every mistake is grounded in flaws, motivations, or patterns of thinking we already knew about before the drastic mistake occurred. They don’t come out of nowhere, they don’t occur in a vacuum, and we often see the characters learn from those mistakes. GRRM drives his plot on the strength of his character writing, and I personally think he does it very well. #grrm #writing #character action #character choices 41 144 asoiafuniversity Reblogged secretlyatargaryen Follow George R R Martin, The American Homer atseajournal.com Before this study, I’d never reread AGOT, and was curious if it held up. In the interval between AGOT and ADWD I graduated middle school, high school, and college, so I had no real memories of the first book. But the sequels, released every few years and read on my end with a ratcheting skepticism of the prose, put me on guard for formulaic descriptions. If you wonder why critics can be so darn critical, think of it this way: it’s draining to love books and not love the book you’re reading. Tracking errors makes a disheartening activity into a game: you stalk through the text, following a trail of breadcrumbs that are in fact bullets, ammo for an essay like this one. And that’s what I did, merrily underlining lame sentences. Then I came across these two lines, and reconsidered Martin’s style: The rising sun sent fingers of light through the pale white mists of dawn. … Pale crimson fingers fanned out to the east as the first rays of the sun broke over the horizon. Each is an allusion to Homer, who writes in the Odyssey: When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, they hurried down to the ship and brought their cauldrons with them. Homer, whether he was one man or many, is well known for the use of epithets, stock phrases that attend a character or concept. Dawn is always rosy-fingered; Athena is grey-eyed; Odysseus is wise. More famous than that rosy-fingered dawn is the wine-dark sea. There’s an old NYT article about it that relates a hypothesis from one Dr. Cattley. Dr. Cattley, though he shared authorship of the blue-wine idea, believes that as a phrase the wine-dark sea was less a description than a useful poetic device. This is the traditional interpretation by classical scholars. Throughout the Iliad and the Odyssey phrases and descriptions are repeated, the wine-dark sea being only one of the most familiar and poetic of these. This is presumably the legacy of the generation of minstrels who first told the tales that Homer later transcribed and embellished. The minstrels fell back on such stock phrases to give their audience time to absorb what had just been sung and to give themselves a moment to think about what they were going to sing next. I now think of Martin as one of those minstrels, a Marillion or a Symon Silver Tongue. If there’s any doubt about this point, let’s not forget the series’ name: A Song of Ice and Fire. And this song is stuffed with other songs, and myths, and old wives’ tales; all vehicles of an oral tradition that Martin embraces completely, warts and all. #grrm #the odyssey #homer #writing #the writing process #oral tradition 13 38 Sponsored 
 