 
 All Dead Generations 
 PAGES 
 Home 
 The Classic Dungeon Crawl 
 Plague Ships - Design Notes and Practice 
 PDF Adventure Archives 
 Saturday, July 25, 2026 
 "Jaquays Your Dungeon" - Another OSR Maxim 
 Be Cautious of Maxims As I've written before , the "OSR" loved its maxims, short phrases that try to describe shared principles and act as a way of mutual recognition among OSR folks. At the same time ... these are maxims, and they don't really capture what they might, they aren't sufficient alone. Often, without deeper understanding and outside of their original context OSR maxims become dogma, undermining the goals and principles they are trying to capture. An OSR maxim that I think needs a bit of explanation these days is: “Jaquays your dungeon” 
 The phrase “Jaquaysing” comes from a 2010 post on the Alexandrian post (since renamed for perhaps ill-considered reasons), but that post itself is the result of a series of discussions on various old school forums. The idea itself is a reference of course to Jennell Jaquays, the highly influential adventure, dungeon (and 3D video game level) designer and fantasy artist. Jaquays is likely most famous for “Caverns of Thracia”, a revolutionary 1979 dungeon adventure that asks the then novel question of “What would a dungeon look like if it was a real, archaeological ruin?” The full implications of Jaquays’ design work are huge, and undoubtedly influences the way we perceive fantasy spaces today and games as a whole, but it is likely most consistently evident in digital games - especially shooters and “soulslikes”*. One of Jaquays' Paintings Used for Spell Jammer In the context of OSR maxims “Jaquaysing” is usually reduced to a map design principle (or set of map design principles), which might actually be traceable back to the 1974 edition of D&D - though Jaquays’ work fully explored them in a way that even Gygax, whose excellent adventure designs seems to have largely been concerned with setting up infiltration/commando raid type scenarios rather than exploration, did not. The Alexandrian’s post, and its source material were concerned with dungeon map layout and design - and focused on these elements of Jaquays’ work. This means that more than some other OSR maxims “Jaquaysing” or “Jaquays your dungeon” has been reduced even more than its full meaning could imply. Rather than an exhortation to read and take lessons from the work of Jenell Jaquays, maxim today largely means: 
 “Dungeon maps shouldn’t be linear, you need to design them so the rooms are looping” “Looping” here is the idea that a map should consist of “loops”, likely several … each a series of keyed areas with a lot of paths that connect them to each other, and usually circular paths, allowing the party to find themselves back where they started exploring. This is contrasted with “linear” map design, where keyed locations lead down a single (or even branching path) from an entrance to a final climactic conflict, usually with a “dungeon boss”. The contention is that through looping paths and locations that don’t have a linear path through them, exploration of the dungeon will be required. 
 Read more » 
at
 July 25, 2026 
6 comments:
 Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest 
Labels:
 Design Principles ,
 Old Games 
 Saturday, June 20, 2026 
 The Tyrant's Hand 
 The Ruins of Fantasy 
 Every fantasy RPG world I know, or more certainly every one I want to run a dungeon crawl game in is filled with huge ruins. Above ground, underground … that’s just an aesthetic choice… The question always comes up though about the source of these ruins. Why is a usually pseudo-medieval world filled with massive abandoned structures … mostly haunted or infested by fell beasts. Of course crumbling ruins weren’t absent from the medieval world, and the fall of Rome - either the Western European, or mostly English conception of a sudden and apocalyptic collapse or the slow apocalypse and decline of Byzantium is the model for this idea. Given that though, what are these ruins? What are they filled with treasure and what does it say about our game worlds? A golden dictator stands atop this,.. The biggest and best ruins of both the medieval world and pulp fiction are the legacies of tyrants … The pyramids of ancient Egypt, the ruins of Rome … both represent the legacies of absolute power and the compulsion it can levy to produce monuments. I find this explanation of dungeons and haunted ruins for RPGs compelling, and it’s about the extent of politics and elegiac tone I want to put in my games and settings … not didactic, but perhaps inevitably political as it’s illustrative of the way I see history and the world. This idea that bad stewardship and sick societies create enduring, if ruinous monuments is not absolute, everyone creates monuments of some kind … religious monuments for example tend to be created from far more positive and collective impulses … but the monuments of tyrants lend themselves to abandonment and fear, becoming adventure locations. Likewise some of the most egregious of tyrant’s constructions are just so dungeon like! The goals of megalomaniacal building … maximalism, “ruin value” and building on an anti-human scale are useful ones to keep in mind for dungeon construction. Tyrants (and of course good rulers, good systems) always fall. Sometimes they manage to stick around for a long time, but let’s take the optimistic approach here … tyrants fall and their monuments become ruins because no one cares to preserve them. They become markers of past evil … shunned, even haunted, likely literally in a fantasy context, and are a convenient place to hide treasures and artifacts of the past … they aren’t systematically often disassembled (though blowing them up has a few fans in the 20th century). Usually they are defaced and abandoned, broken in war or revolution, and ignored as much as possible by the survivors of their makers. It follows that years later disreputable tomb robbers, the kind of antisocial degenerates that like to call themselves “adventurers”, would come along and loot them - it’s not something polite society necessarily approves of, but by that time the treasures of the tyrant aren’t something to destroy and owning them isn’t necessarily worthy of punishment … so the market for loot exists, even if the looters aren’t welcome in polite society. The monuments of tyrants also provide us plenty of real world examples to start from. Here are several with their Crystal Frontier version… 
 Read more » 
at
 June 20, 2026 
6 comments:
 Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest 
Labels:
 Crystal Frontier ,
 Design ,
 Nonsense 
 Saturday, May 30, 2026 
 A FEW CRYSTALS MORE 2 - IMPERIAL NOBLE CLASS 
 A FISTFUL OF CRYSTALS SUPPLEMENTARY CLASS NEW CLASS - IMPERIAL NOBLE Note: Imperial Nobles are a sort of “advanced class”, a substitute form the traditional “elf” and reference to OD&D’s confusing fighter or Magic-User method of leveling elves. Creating a noble is a more complex task than creating most characters, and even requires a light form of “character building” … a decision or two and a few extra rolls, both at creation and during advancement. Don’t worry though, neither these choices or the character creation process will take more than a few minutes of time. 
The PDF for the details of the Imperial Noble class is found here: IMPERIAL NOBLE 
For a more complete explanation of how the rules for this class work please see the "Fistful of Crystals" document in this post: A FISTFULLOF CRYSTALS To be a noble of the Successor Empire is to stand at the pinnacle of human achievement: half god, half human. You are the product of thousands of years of marriages and liaisons, aimed towards perfection of the bloodline… though admittedly the results are still less than godly...
The lucky are broken gods in the sickly, warped, frame of frail humanity. A nobility burdened by thousands of years of incomprehensible rituals, strictures, and courtesies. Nor does wealth remain and the young will only inherit an eccentric education, a handful of trinkets, and the magic poisoned blood that is the legacy of an unwholesome, eldritch lineage. While Imperial nobles have some advantages over regular people, the “craftsmen” and “toilers” of lower Imperial orders, and the subjects of the vibrant resurgent Kingdoms, few of the nobility are capable of coherent speech or normal movement. Most are at the edge of destruction from the excesses of their ancestors: wracked by strange, unique disease, minds subsumed by the screaming demands of ancestral generations, or teetering on porcelain brittle bones. The majority remains immured in the great mansion spires of the capital, suffering for the magical transgressions of distant ancestors and dreaming of fortunes and privileges now illiquid, untouchable, and useless. Few nobles venture beyond the walls of their curse shrouded compounds, but those that do, find the world unforgiving, and even if they have valuable skills, a code of honor and family strictures forbid them useful work. War, genteel theft, or magical exploration are the Imperial Noble’s only available paths through the world beyond rakish debauch -- choices that drive most into adventure. Despite the disadvantages of their class, Imperial Nobles are well suited to the dangerous lives of tomb robbers. Most have been trained from birth in some form of combat, most often dueling or hunting with exotic or heirloom weapons, and almost all have an innate faculty with sorcery. Many have also been tutored in esoteric knowledge and skills such as: arcanism, engineering, chemics, dead languages. 
at
 May 30, 2026 
2 comments:
 Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest 
Labels:
 Crystal Frontier ,
 Nonsense 
 Tuesday, April 14, 2026 
 Every Angel is Terrifying... 
 Reskinning the Beholder This is an attempt to reskin Dungeons & Dragons classic weird and terrifying monster the Beholder in a way that works for less generic fantasy settings… Instead of a floating arcane eye with stalks that each shoot magical rays, I’ve written the creature up as a Galagalim, the strangest of the order of angels… The “wheels within wheels” of biblical tradition. Angels in RPGs are best if they are the angels of Rilke … “ Every angel is terrifying […] almost deadly birds of the soul, [who] perilous, from behind the stars, [takes] even one step down toward us: our own heart, beating higher and higher, would beat us to death.” I don't hate beholders as a monster - they are incredibly charming, but like most of the original D&D monsters they are themselves a meme, or at least iconic enough to be very well-known, and so more likely to create furious flights of metagaming rather then wonder among players who encounter them. This is itself an interesting theory question - "what do we want players to experience from monsters?" On the one hand there is the excitement and fear of the novel ... and on the other there is the joy of learning the game, of players able to develop a set of knowledge about creatures and their abilities, because D&D monsters are shared and known phenomenon. I still remember many of the statlines (or at least the special abilities, weakness, HD and AC ranges from pouring over the 1E monster manual as a child, and having this sort of knowledge was valued as part of player skill by some parts of the OSR and continues to be in the POSR, especially among those aiming for "revival", or playing RPGs as closely as possible to the RAW or the the playstyle "intended" in the 1970's or 1980's. This is an interesting exercise, and an interesting approach to player skill - where knowledge of the game's rule text is essential for character survival and player success. I suspect it is very close to the way that old games were played in the first few decades of the hobby (at least it is similar to how we played them as children), and it does offer an interesting approach to challenge, where player knowledge of monsters (also magic items and spells) acts as a sort of substitute for character knowledge of the game world.
Personally though I have always followed the other OSR approach, the idea that challenge should be novel and unknowable to the players without their characters' observing, scouting, listening to rumors , guessing and trying out schemes. Monsters should inspire fear and wonder, with the limitation that their special abilities and weaknesses should be discernible, or at least not contrary, to their description and appearance. In the case of "Biblically accurate angels", they make good stand-ins for the more terrifying and dangerous D&D creatures. In this case the weirdest o these, Ezekiel 1:15–21's "ophanim" or "galagalim " the beholder is ideal. Below are the stats and description of a Galagalim, a celestial wheel or sphere, written up for OSE or similar B/X D&D clones. Galagalim (Celestial Wheel) 
A servant of the Celestial Thrones, pulled from the eternal choir to serve the Imperial war machine. This divine being has escaped its entrapment, but it remains here - lost in the painfully protean terrestrial universe. To approach it is to inflict pain on it through change and disorder. It will respond in kind, sating its hunger for beauty through destruction. 
 Read more » 
at
 April 14, 2026 
8 comments:
 Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest 
Labels:
 Design ,
 Nonsense 
 Friday, January 2, 2026 
 The Future - 2026 
 A Dyson Logos Classic This post was written as a "Secret Santicore" response to the Dododecahedron's request : " What are your hopes for the future of the OSR/NSR? " 
 What is the OSR? What is the NSR … or the POSR even? Where, assuming they exist, are they headed, and what will the future of “old school gaming” look like? Damned if I know…I just like to write up location based adventures and play games about dungeon crawling … 
My OSR Of course that’s not entirely true. I’ve been involved in the old school role playing game scene for 15 plus years, and have seen changes, personalities, trends, and innovations come and go. I could write a whole book on this nonsense, but here a brief and personal reminiscence should suffice. For me it all started around 2010. Back then the scene didn’t really have a name - at least not on the blogs and forums I read. Five years later the identity of the “OSR” had come together a bit, but in those early days of blogging and playing online a collective sense of identity was still growing. For the purpose of looking backwards I will still use the term OSR, though it’s worth noting that there’s never really been an entirely clear and broadly adopted definition of the term … even its basic meaning … is it a “revival”, “renaissance”, or even “rules”... In 2009 through 2013 or so the term OSR was thrown around from time to time, but it wasn’t a label a lot of people used. In roughly 2009 I found myself thinking about getting back into role playing games. I started playing in the early 1980's, as a kid and hadn’t played since the late 1990’s ... but due to the economic downturn and related changes in my career, I suddenly had a lot of free time and not a lot of money. I also had a group of friends that were in similar circumstances. I started looking around online, and found the then new 4th edition of Dungeons & Dragons and the legacies of 3.5E… Mostly I read play reports that felt like chemical formulas or technical documentation … and that wasn’t something that interested me much. To me spreadsheets are for making money, not evoking fantasy and wonder. Overly complex combat had been what drove me away from 2E AD&D and other RPGS back in the 1990’s, first toward systems like Mekton and Ars Magicka and then to Warhammer 40K and fantasy wargames. In 2009 and 2010 the OSR consisted largely of blogs, the early days of the “Forum OSR” was still interacting with them, but to me it was blogs that drove engagement and acted as the primary platform for sharing ideas and enthusiasm. I found “Henchman Abuse” by Patrick Wetmore, along with “Sorcerer’s Skull”, and other key blogs of that time. They had an approach to games that I wanted to get involved with, and started me on my first OSR campaign … running Anomalous Subsurface Environment (“ASE”) for a bunch of other 30 something junior technocrats. We had fun, and I started my first blog “Dungeon of Signs” during this time. In 2011 and 2012 the scene was extremely welcoming and very hobbyist focused. While people were publishing adventures and a few retro clones, the attitude was generally a sort of shock that one could produce a decent looking book and maybe get beer money from sharing it with friends. Patrick Wetmore hired me to draw some art for ASE 2 and insisted on sending me a check (I promptly spent it all on good Scotch and a nice bottle of wine for my dad). Somewhere in 2012 Google Plus (G+) started to take over the burgeoning OSR scene - bloggers found a place to talk to each other directly and began to do so. Online play followed shortly. This is one key aspect of the OSR that I don’t think gets enough attention. The OSR adapted older style rules to online play from an early date, and did so almost entirely distinct from the streaming/performance style Youtube RPG style. There’s nothing wrong with “actual play” shows and such, but back in 2012 the OSR was using social media and online meeting software for an entirely different, organic, and rather democratic style of play. Through G+ dozens of long term campaigns were active with a “drop in” approach to player involvement. My own HMS Apollyon campaign was typical of these - a setting widely at variance with traditional Dungeons & Dragons (or Gygaxian vernacular fantasy) that I ran using Moldvay Basic (“B/X”) and then the 1974 edition of the rules(“OD&D”). House rules were frequent, published and updated regularly on my blog. Many others created long term campaigns using the same technologies of online play. Some of these did cling close to TSR and Gygax’s vision of Dungeons & Dragons, but most were distinctive and creative - drawing on a wide range of fantasy influences, or at least the referee’s own idiosyncratic take on fantasy. I often wish that the OSR was better known for these innovations - designing for online play, and utilizing simpler ruleset as a basis for customization without losing cross-compatibility … rather than for its maxims, grimdark aesthetics, or a focus on nostalgia. Jump to the Present I no longer consider my current work (or anyone else’s) to be “OSR”. Not because there’s anything wrong with the term, but because the OSR was essentially an arts movement of a particular time and place… one that has passed. The innovations and various concepts of OSR design persist, but it no longer has a center, instead consisting of a variety of smaller scenes and styles that I broadly lump under the term “Post OSR”, or as Prismatic Wasteland and Papers & Pencils called it “POSR”. I consider my own focus within this wide space to be “procedural dungeon crawling” - games focused on the room by room exploration of fictional spaces with an emphasis on procedures backed with simple mechanics. There are lots of other subscenes and design movements within the Post-OSR, they're all the inheritors of the same set of principles, but they're different and distinct. I think it benefits everyone to think of them that way. So, my design goals are only one of many varieties of Post OSR design … and not a big one. There are entire Post OSR scenes focused around various design principals, such as the “NSR”, as well as those focusing on specific games and publishers, such as Shadowdark, Mork Borg, OSE’s or Mothership’s communities. This tendency towards community built around an Idiosyncratic creator or game like Chris McDowall’s “Into the Odd/Bastionland” has its roots in the late-OSR of the 2015 or so, but each community is its own within the larger Post-OSR framework. Because of this variety, and to respect the clear shared lineages these games and communities have going back to the OSR, I reject recent efforts to both define the OSR as an ongoing concern that covers everything, and efforts to exclude games like Mythic Bastionland from the space of obviously OSR derived systems. The OSR in its heyday was never only about cross compatibility with older Dungeons & Dragons (this is a 4chan definition - and when you use it you ride with Pepe), though Moldvay Basic/Expert did become its go-to set of rules. 
 Instead I propose viewing the present crop of games and scenes derived from OSR designs and OSR spaces as new approaches to indie RPG design and play, loosely linked by the Post-OSR umbrella. 
No one gets to wear the rotting crown of “THE” OSR - but we’re all its horrible little children and can certainly say things have "OSR design elements". The OSR is like punk rock - it's been dead since 1978 when Crass sang "Yes that's right, punk is dead, It's just another cheap product for the consumers head." We can still enjoy it though. Sit with your discomfort for a moment, enjoy the duality and the chaos of the real. 
 Read more » 
at
 January 02, 2026 
27 comments:
 Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest 
Labels:
 A Note ,
 New Games ,
 Old Games 
 Saturday, November 15, 2025 
 Dungeon Design Note: Obstacles Support Exploration 
 Less Combat ... More Obstacles
 I’ve been talking about dungeon crawling as a play style here for years, and I’m not alone among RPG bloggers to do so. Most of the points All Dead Generations focuses on, such as the importance of turnkeeping, supply mechanics, random encounters, navigating dungeons, and threats to characters that don’t involve hp loss, are fairly well understood in the Post-OSR space or at least fairly well represented. Yet… I don’t see a lot of focus on the play style itself … especially in the adventures released. Perhaps dungeon crawling just feels old and boring compared to the popular subjects of “high level play”, “wilderness crawling”, or “mass combat” … but rather then complain about what people like at the moment, I think something more is at work. Just as you can’t bake much of a cake without eggs, flour, and sugar, you can’t run much of an exploration based dungeon crawl without a dungeon that supports exploration ... and yes, I am aware of flourless cakes. As I’ve mentioned before, writing good dungeons is hard, especially good exploration focused ones, and this means too many dungeon based adventures, old and new, aren’t designed for dungeon crawling, instead they usually focus on combat encounters and sometimes complex puzzles … This won’t do it, not alone. Set piece combat and a complex room puzzle can’t make for a solid exploration adventure, because they so easily become a series of disconnected scenes. The core of "Dungeon Crawling" as a form of play is players making informed choices about where to go in a location and what “obstacles” to overcome to get there. An obstacle here is a relatively simple challenge that impedes further exploration or makes it risky in some other way. The obstacle can be something as simple as a locked door because obstacles are smaller in scale, less complex, and less threatening then set piece puzzles or hidden traps. They aren’t intended to offer a serious threat or difficulty and likewise don’t protect significant treasure. Obstacles are a challenge that requires player intervention or resources to move past, but isn’t likely to create a permanent obstacle. The function of obstacles is largely to root the adventure in the location and offer alternative challenges along the potential routes of exploration. For example … the party might head North in the dungeon and encounter a locked steel door. Not having one of the obvious tools to pass it (a thief with lockpicking skills or the knock spell) they have the options of retreat (returning next session with tools/spells), to search for a key, or to seek an alternate path through the dungeon that bypasses the door. The first of these options (full retreat) is costly and discouraged by the risks of random encounters, including that of restocking between sessions and the equipment or supplies expended to reach the obstacle. Full retreat is of course undesirable, the reverse side of the long despised “15 minute adventuring day”. While this undesirable situation can happen when players fetishize caution but it is usually the result of problems in adventure design. If one’s players have decided to deal with risk by retreating after every encounter or to perfect thier approach to every puzzle and obstacle the best course as a referee is to increase the risk of delay and the cost of slow exploration … rival adventuring parties that sweep in and loot areas the party is “saving for latter”, rile up dungeon inhabitants or set traps for the party are an effective way of doing this. In most cases a party will choose one of the other two options: to search for a solution to the obstacle or blaze an alternate route. This depends on the availability of either clues and suitable materials, or alternate routes, and makes obstacles an issue for designers even more then one for players. A well designed adventure must provide these alternative and tools, rather then offer a single linear path or insufficient tools. To put it another way - when the party finds a locked steel door they should also find clues as to where the key for the door can be found and/or have passed other potential routes. Of course alternate routes will themselves lead to obstacles and tools may require over coming some challenge to obtain. Trying to bypass the locked door might mean taking another route past a guard post … or perhaps backtracking to one and obtaining a set of keys from the guards. Obstacles can have this interplay or remain independent, but collectively they make it useful for players to understand the dungeons layout and offer a variety of challenges that different parties may choose among to reach the same goals or locations within the adventure. 
 Read more » 
at
 November 15, 2025 
5 comments:
 Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest 
Labels:
 A Note ,
 Design Principles ,
 Exploration 
 Tuesday, June 3, 2025 
 Dungeon Design Note: Defining Interactivity 
 A lot of dungeon design advice focuses on “interactivity”, and to a degree this word can be a meaningless substitute for “stuff I personally like”. Yet one should strive to write locations with “interactive elements”. In the context of location based (or dungeon crawl) adventure design interactivity in an adventure means the degree to which there are obstacles and dangers beyond inimically hostile monsters and simple traps. An interactive adventure describes things in the area or room “key” that the players can ask questions about and do stuff with… STEP INTO THE DUNGEON DRESSING ROOM
 Interactive design offers elements of the adventure that aren’t a superstructure for simple die rolls - something beyond simple traps to “save” against and monsters ready to “fight until killed”. The more reliant one’s adventure is on these sorts of purely mechanical challenges the more the RPG becomes a sort of dice and board game. It’s likely that to some degree this was how Dungeons & Dragons was originally envisioned. That the dungeon adventure was originally intended to be played from something like the “zoomed out”, impersonal perspective of a wargame. OD&D reads like this at times, and one can imagine a referee running it who rolls each turn and declares new mechanical challenges or events … “You encounter three Ogres” or “One of your hired footmen falls into a pit trap as you go down the hallway.” Players then roll dice to fight the monster and remove resources such as their missing footman from their sheets, then they collect any treasure, move a few squares on the map and the next turn begins. To run such an adventure you would need basically a map and set of random encounter tables, or a location with keys like this: AREA 1 5 Orcs, 50 GP There’s not a lot for designers to do with this kind of adventure, the dungeon generation tables at the back of the AD&D Dungeon Master’s Guide can generate a decent version of this sort of adventure. However, this isn’t how RPGs have ended up being played by most, not even in the early days of the hobby. Some outliers like Dave Megary’s DUNGEON! and the amazingly charming Rules for the Game of DUNGEON by then teenage Craig VanGrasstek seem to have sprouted from Arneson’s Twin Cities game, but for most, and certainly in 2025, this style of dungeoneering board game is not considered an RPG. Gygax also recognized this over time and didn’t want to play a board game. The few pages of “Solo Play” dungeon generation tables he originally published in the first issue (Spring 1975) of Strategic Review Magazine were included in the Dungeon Masters Guide as Appendix A, but had added random generation tools in Appendices C, G, H, I, J, K, L, and M - mostly adding description and specifics to the bare halls of the earlier version. Appendix H even includes “Dungeon Dressing” - the sounds, smells, air movements and mundane objects that might be found in a dungeon. This, along with Gygax’s dungeon design, show an appreciation for “interactivity” and a step away from the board game possibilities of early D&D. Gygax may have written more military or wargame style scenarios then some other designers, but he wasn’t playing a board game like adventure limited to mechanical challenges. 
 FROM PROCEDURAL GENERATION TO BESPOKE 
Of course these type of random tables suffer a lot of issues - the most important being that the more complex randomly generated spaces become the less thematic and interactive they can be… that is the octagonal room filled with ... a feculent smell, mushroom patches, a chasm, 5 orcs and a portcullis trap doesn’t do much more than the ultra-minimalist room. The smells, sounds, trap, and room contents are only incidentally related to the room’s inhabitants and the contents of surrounding rooms. They are disparate descriptive elements that players can interact with by asking questions about, but they don’t “do” or “mean” anything that will help the players. All these sorts of dungeon dressing accomplish is to give a vague sense of the real to the dungeon - it is full of things and fixtures, just like real spaces. 
 Read more » 
at
 June 03, 2025 
10 comments:
 Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest 
Labels:
 A Note ,
 Design 
 Older Posts 
 Home 
Subscribe to:
 Posts (Atom) 
 Old Games 
Let’s talk about old tabletop roleplaying games - specifically the kind of games played in the 1980’s and recently depicted in the nostalgia...
 The Future - 2026 
 A Dyson Logos Classic This post was written as a "Secret Santicore" response to the Dododecahedron's request : " What a... 
 7 Maxims of the OSR 
 Back in the aughts and the 2010’s, a decade ago now, there was a movement in older RPGs that I was part of - the “ Old School Renaissance ” ... 
 Dragon of Icespire Peak - A Review 
 A REGRETTABLE WASTE OF OPPORTUNITIES Icespire GM's Screen - that almost makes up for sparse art. This blog isn't often kin... 
 Latest Publication 
 Available in PDF from Drivethru RPG 
 Upcoming Publication 
 It's Done when it's Done 
 All non-art content here is free to use under License: 
 Creative Commons BY SA NC 4.0 
 Blog List 
 Bones of Contention 
 Buildings Are People 
 DIY and Dragons 
 Dungeon Antology 
 Dyson's Dodecahedron 
 Elfmaids & Octopi 
 From the Sorcerer's Skull 
 Goblin Punch 
 Hereticwerks 
 Hypertext Corner 
 I Cast Light 
 Jay Dragon's Possum Creek 
 Marcia's Blog 
 Mazirian's Garden 
 Mindstorm 
 Necropraxis 
 Papers & Pencils 
 Permanent Cranial Damage 
 Prismatic Wasteland 
 Retired Adventurer 
 Save vs. Total Party Kill 
 Throne of Salt 
 Uncaring Cosmos 
 Search This Blog 
 Blog Archive 
 July 2026 (1)
 June 2026 (1)
 May 2026 (1)
 April 2026 (1)
 January 2026 (1)
 November 2025 (1)
 June 2025 (1)
 April 2025 (1)
 March 2025 (3)
 February 2025 (1)
 November 2024 (1)
 August 2024 (1)
 June 2024 (1)
 March 2024 (1)
 January 2024 (1)
 October 2023 (1)
 August 2023 (2)
 April 2023 (1)
 December 2022 (3)
 September 2022 (1)
 June 2022 (1)
 March 2022 (1)
 February 2022 (1)
 January 2022 (2)
 November 2021 (2)
 October 2021 (1)
 August 2021 (1)
 July 2021 (1)
 June 2021 (1)
 March 2021 (1)
 February 2021 (1)
 January 2021 (2)
 December 2020 (2)
 October 2020 (2)
 September 2020 (2)
 May 2020 (1)
 April 2020 (3)
 March 2020 (2)
 February 2020 (3)
 January 2020 (1)
 December 2019 (1)
 October 2019 (1)
 September 2019 (1)
 July 2019 (1)
 March 2019 (1)
 January 2019 (1)
 December 2018 (3)
 Labels 
 A Note 
 Bones of Bronze 
 Crystal Frontier 
 Design 
 Design Principles 
 Dungeon23 
 Ethics of Play 
 Exploration 
 Gygax '75 
 Mt. St. Bec 
 New Games 
 Nonsense 
 Old Games 
 Orienteering 
 Plague Ships 
 Play Report 
 Proceduralism 
 Published Items 
 Review 
 Supply 
 Terms 
 Threat 
 Time 
 Tombrobbers 
 Rootring 
 rootring 
 Prev 
 Random 
 Directory 
 Next 
All content Content liscensed under https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/. Simple theme. Theme images by nicodemos . Powered by Blogger .
 