 
 Luke Gearing 
 Luke Gearing
 Home 
 Archives 
 Search 
 Feed 
 Mailing List 
 Wolves Upon the Coast 
 Published Works and Downloads 
 Contact 
 Books I’ve Read 
 Violence. 
 Recent entries 
 Wizards 
 Plastic Venus 
 Writing For Violence 
 Camp Corinth 
 Violence at the Street Level 
 Contacts and Favours 
 Weapons & Armour for 1HD Groups 
 Grand Unified Theory of Magic & Religion (for Fantastic Medieval Wargames) 
 Obligations 
 The Beer Seller & The Bierkellar 
 Contacts Table for Swyvers 
 Writing Wages 
 Travel Too! 
 Reputation Tables 
 You Don’t Need Hooks, You Have Been Lied To 
 d100 Carousing 
 Man-Suits of the Flatboat People 
 When Entering a Polity… 
 Split Initiative 
 Mentorship Applications Open 
 Traveller Animals for the Jungles 
 Prison Planet Review 
 Men 
 Sag River Extreme Cold Research Facility, Alaska. 
 Pariah Hexfills 
 Inhuman Violence 2 
 Supplement V: Carcosa 
 Wolves Upon the Coast Grand Retrospective 2 
 Clerics 
 Wolves 3rd Party Shit 
 Writing NPCs 
 August 21, 2026 
 Wizards 
 Wizards are suspicious and paranoid. They operate in the dark forest of the occult underworld; trust is a short road that ends only in death. They sequester themselves, operating at a remove from life. Dwelling in the margins of society, the places no-one wants to look, is an attempt at security through obscurity. Poverty is endemic amongst them. Escape exists through criminality, although wealth brings attention of a more mundane kind. Those born to wealth do not become wizards: at best, they are dilettantes. Ignorant to the dangers of flaunting their power, few last long enough to learn fear. 
 Wizards are unable or unwilling to live in society. This is not for lack of trying. 
 All wizards prefer to operate through others. Any with plans of survival first learn the methods of hiding their presence, cleaning their assets of the markers of influence. Then these unfortunates are set about their work. Wizards delight in engendering dependence but settle for leverage. An asset that is not bound is like a rabid dog on a fraying cord. 
 Fuad Olsen 
 The left side of his body is a ruin of asphalt tattoos. His right leg supports no weight, and his skull is a spiderweb of scars. He shaves his head smooth. Tangled in the remains of a bicycle as night fell, he dragged himself through the unlit dark. The doctors told him that his leg might still work if they had got there sooner. Long months of recovery and short conversations with the police; no cameras, no evidence. You weren’t wearing a helmet? Well. Time enough to brood. Time enough to grow desperate. 
 The first dozen rituals did not work. Fakes. Etsy witches and LARP grimoires. From disparate lies he synthesised something like truth; an intuitive working for finding. An overhead projector and a map of the city printed on a transparent sheet. A mouse, fed on his blood for a week and maimed with a hammer of virgin steel, painted white. Watch it crawl. Watch where it dies. 
 The accessible taxi service charges more. This is now illegal, but the practice continues. Passing the address, Fuad saw the white Toyota Hilux that maimed him. The bonnet and bumper are new. Fuad did not get the window down in time. Cleaning surcharge, lost business. Never call me again. 
 Reverse the finding ritual to hide yourself. A mouse baited with blood, lured into a labyrinth wherein it dies. A PI hired, a name found, a photo produced. Fuad, sweating, crying, jerking off through the nerve damage and visualising a Ford Ranger, triumphant, rearing up against the asphalt-black sky before bearing down upon him. As his jism splatters the photograph, the vehicle in his mind crashes upon him like a storm-tossed wave. 
 In the years since, no incantation of healing has mended his body. He tests each one on someone else first, each of whom walk away estatic, their diseases cured and injuries closed. Cancers are made in clay, baked and destroyed with a hammer. Diseased organs are rebuilt as flowers, planted in gardens and watered with dilute blood. Gunshots are diagrammed and erased. Broken limbs formed as wet loaves which bake straight and whole. Still, these spells find no purchase on his body. 
 All of his assets are dying, or else know the dying. They are recruited for that job, and that job alone - Fuad heals the sick and disappears each time. He is hidden from mortal seekers, cursed to die in a labyrinth of false leads. Those attempting to find him magically instead find one of a flock of crows he has ritually maimed and fed from his flesh. None of these crows can fly. Eight remain. 
 His assets are marked with temporary tattoos, each a string of letters and numbers corresponding to a licence plate belonging to a vehicle reported stolen and yet to be found. As long as their association terminates before the vehicle is found, the assets cannot be used to find Fuad either. 
 Fuad has found sigils encoded in the proposed Newfield Community Project. He wonders if a ritual of building could repair him. He seeks assets to find the source of these sigils that he might add their knowledge to his own. 
 Chloe Baraan 
 Beneath the bridge, a tent of faded green and purple. Within is Chloe Baraan and nothing else. Her clothes are left outside the tent, no matter the weather. She is short and thin and bruised. Anything left near her sleeping form disappears. Using a talisman or effigy, she can also obliviate memories, feelings and sensations. This is how she forgot how she learnt to forget. 
 She has left a great wasteland in her mind. Unable to find herself, others in turn are unable to find her unless they too seek oblivion. A stream of the regretful, the lovelorn, sufferers of chronic pain and the traumatized find her tent. Before she helps them forget, she sets them to work. She hunts other wizards, seeking their methods of remembering. She gathers information and using her network of desperates. Many have seen her dozens of times, the need to forget re-emerging without memory of her prior work. 
 Those who use her to remove evidence she sets to stealing and murder and kidnap. They do not ask questions, and she ensures they forget anything that might stop them helping her in future. 
 She has learnt of a mirror that reflects desired things, and sets her supplicants to find it. They have failed thus far. She hopes to find her past in it. 
 July 28, 2026 
 adventure violence 
 Plastic Venus 
 Also on itch.io. 
 The heatwave has stretched on for three long weeks and will go on for another two. People step quick and quiet between buildings to avoid the heat. AC units strain. Those working outside burn a deep red. At night, it remains hot. There is no escape. 
 You. 
 One of you is cousin to Orsino Bepette. He has been missing for weeks, and his student flat rendered only a single clue; his work being exhibited at The Curtained Gallery. You and your friends know that the police will do nothing. The money that the family has pooled, that might have gone to a private investigator, is for you and the gang - if you can find out what happened and do something about it. 
 You are all between 16 and 30, have shitty (if any) jobs and 3-4 skills each. At most, you might be experienced in violence. None of you can afford to turn down the money. 
 Or. 
 An anonymous tip; mystical sex rituals in student gallery? Far too juicy to turn down. All of you contribute to The Eye Unclouded , an e-zine covering conspiracies, magic and Fortean phenomena. Since the expose on the Voor’s Head Device group last year, no leads have amounted to anything. 
 You come from all walks of life, though none of you are rich nor respected. You have a job and 2d4 skills each. Characters with more than 6 skills are beginning to slow down with age. You are self funded. 
 Or. 
 There are rich old men in this world. Anything that exists outside of their power must be yoked, desecrated or destroyed. Through mystic lottery they have determined that something happens in the city. They are the Patriarchs, and you work for one of them. He knows your road begins at the gallery. 
 You are trained in violence, firearms and grappling. You have 6 skills, all related to your quiet, professional approach. You have a daily operational budget of $1000. You have access to the cars and guns you need. 
 The Curtained Gallery. 
 The gallery sits, incongruent with its neighbours. China Garden is open until 11pm, the drivers racing their mopeds up and down the industrial estate. The Hospice Vets and two competing prototyping manufacturies keep more regular hours. Missing pet posters plaster the window of Hospice Vets. 
 The gallery is open 3pm-8pm Wednesday to Friday, 1pm-10pm Saturday. The building is a single story bunker like all the rest. A corrugated asbestos roof and thick glass windows complete with grilles. 
 The gallery space is filled with the output of the City College’s Arts program. None of it is representational. Deconstruction and alienation run throughout as themes. During the day, 1d6 of the students are present. They are desperate to talk to people showing any interest. None of the art has sold in months. 
 A “ STAFF ONLY ” door leads to a cramped office and kitchenette. Letters and applications from artists sit unopened. An expensive Mac accumulates a thin layer of dust. The kitchenette fridge holds milk and white wine. 
 The remaining room is The Arena; a performance art space. The schedule sheet beside the door is black with bookings: solid with rehearsals for the next month. Beneath the top sheet, this extends backwards for five weeks prior. The time slot is 9pm-12pm during weekdays. 
 Artist Biographies & Their Work 
 1 Albert Lam is a photographer. His work interrogates the relationship between place and history; especially how this manifests in youth subcultural practices. Grainy photographs of parties in old-money mansions. 
 2 Alice Bailey is a performance artist and singer. Her work reflects upon the Chorus, and the use of the female form as ornamentation and accessory to masculine performance. Her previous work, The Libation Bearers, is documented above. A cloaked man with a sword stands above a heap of women, playing dead. The women are brightly lit; he is not. 
 3 Jess Mosconi is a painter and poet. Her work explores the act of self creation and curation through digital interfaces and online spaces. Her blending of user interfaces and classical techniques highlights a cultural stagnation and an self-referential loop. Printouts out of classic paintings, with an Instagram-style frame painted over the top. 
 4 Eli Marin is a performance artist and videographer. His work broaches the taboo, and how some bodies are marked as both untouchable and desirable. His previous work, Duck Mouth, is documented here. A line of women, each wearing a Donald Duck mask and nothing else. They dance. 
 5 Pritam Archer is a sculptor. His current series, What is left behind? presents the sculpture-in-absentia. We are left with only the material removed to create the piece. A series of pedestals, each with a heap of rubble. 
 6 Aruna Melnik is a multi-disciplinary artist. Her current work in textiles recaptures “ women’s work” through the radical use of outsourced labour. Her pieces interrogate the changing face of labour. Simple rugs and peasant garments recreated using high-polyester blends. 
 7 Zane Luain is a photographer. A series of black and white street photos, empty of people. 
 Located in a skip next to the gallery, a discarded biography and body of work. Orsino Bepette is a painter. His hyper-detailed work is a reflection on modernities obsession with the details, and how false worlds become replacements for our own. Large, detailed landscapes pulling on popular videogames. 
 Sebastien Webster 
 Sebastien Webster, tall and thin, runs the gallery on behalf of the Webster Arts Endowment. Bags accumulate under his eyes, and he is pale. His designer clothes, purchased in the blood of the enemies of empire, no longer flow effortlessly. They are stained and dirty. He smokes an entire disposable vape every day. He is present whenever the gallery is open, and during the rehearsal hours. He drives a black 2011 Vauxhall Insignia, travelling between the gallery and his flat, out in Garden Quarter. 
 His flat is in a low-rise apartment block filled with finance workers and IT consultants. It is a cyst of filth in the affordable-luxury surrounds. Detritus is general, as are heaps of unwashed clothes and an infestation of empty wine bottles. Expensive art books are soiled, used as plates for cheap pizza. Unopened packages sprawl by the door. All contain luxury clothes, crystal glassware, rare whiskeys. All have arrived in the past two weeks. A bed, unchanged for weeks, stinks of sweat. Fruit flies swarm. 
 Asked about Orsino Bepette, he feigns ignorance before excusing himself to make a phonecall. He calls Eli Marin, and explains that people are asking about Bepette. He is terrified of the consequences, berating Eli for allowing this to happen. He protests the suggested solution before acquiescing. He will find his questioners and tell them that some people at the rehearsal might be able to help. After this, he paces the gallery before locking himself in the office. He goes through three vapes in his office, filling it with a sickly-sweet stink. He does not emerge until the rehearsal. 
 Threatened, he flees the city, trusting in the wealth of his parents to protect him. He dies on a country road, having crashed into a tree despite favourable conditions. Cornered and pressed, he breaks down crying, body wracked with tremors. Through the choking and spitting, the words Eli, Alice and Child are intelligible. If not under guard, The Child kills him in three hours time. 
 The Performance 
 The script of the performance is the same, every night. The performers are animated by a desperation that was not there before; all wish to send away the thing that answered. If the party attend, Webster greets them and bids them to sit - plenty of time for questions after. No-one else is in the audience. 
 Cameras fill the audience seating. All face towards the performance space. Within the round is a black faux-leather sofa, beaten and stained with PVA glue. A folding table sits adjacent, laden with six banana cream pies. 
 It begins as the woman enters. Alice Bailey, sleepless, exhausted, covered in small cuts as if dragged through a bramble. Naked, she lies on the sofa, body presented to the audience and the cameras. Livid, recent stretchmarks stripe her stomach. Three men join her: Sebastien, Eli Marin and Zane Luain. This last sports nothing but an erection. He is thin and unassuming, contrasting with Eli’s heavyset frame. 
 “ I’m so hungry. Feed me your cock.” The sex that follows is unsimulated. The clothed men insult her body. They call her fat. They call her disgusting. This begins as a weary recitation, but grows in intensity of feeling. Eli Marin uses a spoon to feed her whilst the sex continues. Sebastien mimes masturbating into another of the pies, before dousing it in Magic Money Shot Kum. As the sex and verbal abuse approaches a crescendo, Alice is pied with the tainted food. The lights cut. 
 A metallic rasp from the seats. The Child always attends the ritual, drawn to re-witness the circumstances of its birth. The sound is something like laughter. Eli yells at it to kill the party. The performers flee for the doors, hoping to barricade the party in. 
 The Child 
 The skin of a huge hairless man, draped over a barbed-wire sculpture of a thin man. It speaks in a rasp, quiet. It promises pain and demands attention and affection and gifts. 
 Evasion: -2. The Child is fast. 
Shooting: N/A. 
Melee: 2d8. Veteran. Reach 2. Anyone fighting it takes an Injury automatically from the barbs. It binds victims in a spray of barbed-wire. They are considered pinned, and take 1d4 injuries every round. Harm: Whenever it would be injured or make an injury check, roll 1d20 on the table below. Track injuries, adding +2 for each. 
 1d20 
 Harm 
 1-12 
 The sound of taut wire snapping. The skin is torn open, revealing the coiling, grinding mass of wire within. No injury. 
 13-24 
 A section of the thing is ripped or cut free. The Child takes 2 Injuries, but the section remains animate. 1 
 25+ 
 A section of the thing is destroyed, and barbless spools of wire pour forth like blood. It cries, the sound that of a child trapped in a metal tube. It flees. 
 After fleeing, the Child attacks again in 1d4+1 days, fully healed. It always attacks at night. 
 If the party flee, escaping through a window or similar, the Child will attack again in 1d2 days. It always attacks at night. 
 If they drive off the Child, Eli flees in his red 2007 Vauxhall Corsa. The rest beg the party to help them. They explain that Eli promised the performance - a ritual - would elevate Alice to a divine being. Three weeks ago, they instead found the Child amongst the audience. It has systematically ruined their lives, demanding the purchase of useless luxuries, social isolation and total dedication to performing the ritual. Any deviation from its demands are met with pain. It has hurt all of them. It has killed Alice’s cat. They do not know what it does during the day, or how to get rid of it. Eli insisted that repeating the ritual might grant control over the thing. Alice is able to provide Eli’s address, reciting it with venom. 
 Asked about Orsino Bepette, they admit the Child killed him. He stumbled into a rehearshal, looking for Alice. It attacked without provocation. All of them worked to hide the body, cutting it into pieces and hiding it amongst the Chinese takeout’s food waste. The Child watched and laughed the entire time. 
 Eli Marin 
 Eli Marin lives in a dilapidated townhouse, converted into student accommodation. Despite this, none of other men living there attend City College. Two unknowingly work for the same security company, their schedules conspiring to ensure they do not meet. They are out from 8pm to 3am every night. The third is out of work; his TA contract for a nearby primary school ending with the school year. He is on his third re-watch of Neon Genesis Evangelion, his laptop fans straining in the relentless heat. He does not leave the house. 
 Eli’s room is filled with printed-out stills from a pornographic film. The printouts flutter as a fan circulates hot air. A fat woman lies on a black couch whilst having sex with a man. Another two men yell and gesture. In one still, she is being pied. All are covered in measurements, ratios and notes. The notes break down everything visible in exacting detail. Beneath the pornography, unframed Man Ray prints and posters. 
 A high-end computer, built for video editing, hides beneath photocopied pages from “ The White Goddess” by Robert Graves. A 8” hunting knife, the blade unmarked, sits by the unmade and sweat-stained bed. Beneath the bed, print-on-demand copies of demonological grimoires, the spines already failing. The sections on banishing and binding are striped yellow, pink and blue. 
 If Eli fled the gallery, he is here, throwing his clothes, printouts and books into bags to flee the city. He has no plan. Threatened, he crumbles. 
 He learnt of the ritual from Kay Ekens. They met whilst Eli was working as a secondary camera-man for a porn shoot. They were not friends. Despite this, four weeks ago Kay reached out. He insisted Eli met at his house, where he showed him Fat Ugly Bitches 7. The unreleased film follows the same format as the performance, albeit with greater cruelty and production value. At the point of the pieing, the woman begins to emit glowing golden light. All of men fall to their knees, weeping. She smiles at the camera before it shuts off. Kay told Eli that this process was repeatable, and he would pay him $1500 a month to replicate the performance until it worked. Eli agreed instantly, feeling a sense of purpose like never before. 
 When the Child appeared, Eli called Kay. After the explanation, Kay hung up and blocked his number. Eli has not attempted to visit him in person, terrified of the man. He explains that Kay is “ some kind of fucking Nazi” and has at least one gun in his house. Eli has no idea how to drive off the Child, but hopes Kay might know. 
 Kay Ekens 
 Kay Ekens 2 is a broad man. He wears his hair long and his shirts sleeveless, revealing a large tattoo of the Dying Gaul on one arm and a gauntlet holding a whip on the other. He does not smoke or drink, running every morning with a weighted vest. His bungalow - previously his grandmothers - is identical to the rest on the street. The old folk wave at him, and he nods in return. He has helped with their groceries. He will never co-operate with the party. 
 The bungalow contains two scarred Rottweilers, Michael and Jackson. 3 They attack anyone entering but Kay. He locks them in the kitchen when he has visitors, causing the dogs to bark and leave gouges in the door. The interior of the house remains grandmotherly but for the loaded sawn-off pump-action shotgun in the living room, the two-handed fitness club (as Baseball bat) in the kitchen and the dual-screen set-up in the dining room. The computer is set to never power down, and so can be accessed without a password. He runs two X accounts. One, Cancer Of The West, decries the “ horizontal collaboration” of liberal women. The other reposts pornographic “ Black New World Order” caption gifs fetishising the Great Replacement theory and the feminisation of white men. The overlap between the followers of the accounts is substantial. His instagram account has an extensive DM history with a number of teenage
girls. He plans to use them to recreate the Fat Ugly Bitches 7 ritual. There is no sign of Fat Ugly Bitches 7. His mail consists only of payslips from Mustang Movies - a porn production and distribution company based near the city. His closet contains a growkit for Golden Tutor magic mushrooms and $3735 in $5s, $10s and $20s. His dream is to create a new ethno-religion based on a reborn indo-european fertility goddess. 
 The Employees 
 There are many Patriarchs. They despise one another. Such a position is defended and proven time and time again through the bloodletting of employees. If the players are employees, they work for a different Patriarch. 
 Three black 2024 Mercedes E-Class Saloons are parked on the roads approaching Mustang Movies. They are spread out, three minutes of drive-time between each. In each, two employees 4 . Each car contains a suppressed hunting rifle and two suppressed shotguns. Each employee carries a suppressed 9mm pistol. They coolly note any passing them by. They are happy to let others act first, and then descend upon the survivors like wolves. 
 Within the car is no trace of their employer. He speaks in encoded radio transmissions. 
 Mustang Movies 
 Beyond the great roads that tie the city of the rest of the country are the innumerable threads that bind each settlement to the whole. From one of these threads, a gravel road lazily switchbacks down the hill. Halfway down, the valley rolling down past it, is the Mustang Movies Warehouse. 
 The parking lot has three Romahome campervans alongside a pair of 2014 Mitsubishi Outlanders. The crew sleep in these vehicles, holding all things in common in light of their greater purpose. Each vehicle stinks, heated to intolerable levels by the relentless sun. 
 The building is a large brick warehouse with a metal roof. Small windows are clustered to one side, whilst AC units stud the rest of the wall. The metal shutter doors to the warehouse section are always closed. The main door is locked. Every hour or thereabouts, three of the crew leave through the firedoor to smoke. 
 Every screen in the building plays the rough-cut of Fat Ugly Bitches 7 on loop. During the filming, something beautiful happened. For a single moment, the sordid surrounds fell away. The abuse and cruelty were transmogrified into a shining moment of communication with a divinity repressed but not forgotten. The nameless goddess recreated a hundred times in faceless figurines poured into this woman, her name destroyed in turn. All fell to worshipping her in that moment. None of the crew have stopped. She was allowed to leave before any realised how deep their need had become, and now all think of nothing else. All crave to be in her presence once more. 
 They are divided on how best to achieve this. The director, Richard Yurchenko, leads those who believe they must bring back their goddess through devotion. Yurchenko is dedicated to his new goddess utterly. He has cycled through cults, MLMs and fringe political parties; none have provided such a sense of belonging. Two of this group - Christian Ravenna (sound) and Constantine Floyd (hair & makeup) have castrated themselves in her honour 5 . All of the group recreate her moment of apotheosis, with the castrated members alternating who takes her place. Darren Zajac 6 (craft services) joins these performances, but does not think it will work. He enjoys fucking men he considers less masculine than himself - a taste he developed during deployment in Afghanistan as an army chef. 
 The other five prepare to reclaim their goddess by force. Through such a masculine demonstration, they hope to curry favour with her. Marcus Hall (lighting) has tracked her down to the Gran Pecan Hotel, a luxury building in the city centre. The rest have spent their time running a fire-sale on their porn stocks to buy guns and ammunition. They have acquired six pump-action shotguns, six rifles with bump-stock modification, five handguns and four bullet-proof vests. Oliver Henson (admin) and Eugene Gerbern (wardrobe tech) 7 advise a cautious approach, thinking back to their training in the army reserves. Marcus insists that only a full-frontal violent approach will impress their goddess, and is joined by Josef Shire (runner) and Bereket Burnham 8 (sound tech) in this. Bereket spent five years in the French Foreign Legion,
though none know of this. 
 They use the production whiteboard to map out the hotel, planning routes. Their goddess waits them in the penthouse suite. 
 If the group as whole is threatened, both sides of this schism unite to defend the sacred grounds of Mustang Movies. All are willing to fight to the death. Those who would not be already left the group, such as Kay Ekens. 
 If approached peacefully, and asked to help with The Child, they insist that their goddess can help. The demand the party help them recover her. Both sides insist their route is the only true way. 
 The Child cannot enter the grounds of Mustang Movies. 
 Gran Pecan Hotel 
 A thorn of wealth and luxury erupts from the concrete. At the heart of the city it resides, glass and brass and brick and an unceasing appetite for flesh to clean the rooms and serve the drinks and call the taxis. The air inside is always refrigerator cold. They take no more reservations for now: a plague has befallen their staff. That plague is devotion. They accumulate in the penthouse, dedicated to their mute goddess. 
 In that room she suffers divine transformation. Her flesh has become plastic and unfixed. Her arms atrophy, becoming little more than framing for her breasts, hips, stomach and thighs. Her face has disappeared, left smooth, a canvas upon which her devotees paint their desires with each furtive glance. If she still has desires of her own, she is unable to communicate them. 
 Discarded furs, diamonds, shoes and bags fill the rooms - all trappings of femininity paling in comparison to her form. Amongst these squat seventeen of the hotel staff, identities abrogated through proximity to the divine. They worship through masturbation, sex and feasting. With bottles, forks, knives, trays and chairs, they will defend her. Any who look upon her faceless face have a 5-in-6 chance of joining them. Her visage destroys demons, such as The Child, utterly. 
 Her vessel is mortal. It can be killed like any other. None of those devoted to her are released, but instead fight for her corpse. Captured, those mediating access would wield immense power. 
 The animate sections only roll 1d8 for melee, striking at Range 3 with Lethality 3. They are destroyed by a single injury. ↩︎ 
 Experienced in violence. ↩︎ 
 They are experienced in violence. They have Reach 2 and Lethality 3. ↩︎ 
 Employees are Veterans of violence. ↩︎ 
 They are blessed, although they do not know it. They can only die when impaled with spears, swords and the like. ↩︎ 
 Drilled in violence. ↩︎ 
 Both trained in violence. ↩︎ 
 Veteran of violence. ↩︎ 
 June 20, 2026 
 violence advice 
 Writing For Violence 
 With the Violence in July jam upon us, I figured this would be useful. I have tried to avoid general scenario writing advice here. These are as much for me as they are for you. 
 Give people names and identities. You can get a surprising amount out of two contrasting facts or three elements in juxtaposition. Further, when someone breaks the rule and all facts point in a single direction, those individuals stand out more. Everyone is doing things for a reason; even if that’s just the fear of going hungry. You don’t always need to spell that out, but bear it in mind. 
 Relatedly, be specific. Less cars, but lots of Honda Civics or Vauxhall Insignias or Ford Raptors. Every mundane item is a vehicle to say something. If we must be assaulted with cultural associations born of advertising, we may as well take advantage. These are a great source of character and juxtaposition too; a hitman in a cream Fiat 500 means a lot more than a hitman in a car. If there is a painting or sculpture, describe it. Think about what it means that someone owns this, or has it in their office. 
 Where possible, use natural language to convey meaning. You can encode almost everything into a description of a person or place. Trust the reader to read and understand that someone who is a veteran will take an Advantage when shooting a gun. 
 The levels of training refer to hand-to-hand combat alone. Use the two different types of terms to tell us something about the character. A blooded fighter means something different to a trained one, both in how they fight and in who they are. 
 Injuries are a catch-all term. This is another time and place to be specific where you can be. A nail through the foot is an Injury, and certain to cause disadvantage when running. Having your hand cut off is one injury. The rapid blood loss is a second one. 
 The dis/advantage system is for use with the d20 rolls. Given the tighter spread of the d12s, the assumption there is simple modifiers. 
 The Inhuman Violence is a tested approach to adapting the system to fighting inhuman things. If you have supernatural beings, or a lot of animals, take a read through. The big element here is Harm; this is the most impactful element to how fighting things other than humans feels. 
 If you’re looking to move backwards in time, Nate of PressTheBeast has a fantasy adaption of the the Violence melee system here. He has also done some work providing animals in the Inhuman Violence format here. 
 Avoid systemising things. There are times when you will need to, either to abstract something unimportant or out of sheer space and time considerations, but it should be a tool used sparingly. When you do, make the systemic element as specific as possible; the more general the model, the more detail you lose. 
 June 11, 2026 
 violence adventure 
 Camp Corinth 
 Written for use with Violence. 
 Get the pdf here. 
 You 
 Desperate. Hungry. Poor. Perhaps you have read your Malatesta or Marx or Macdonald, and this is a strike against the oppressor. In any case; kidnapping a child of the Baas family and holding them to ransom. You have heard he will be away from home and vulnerable. 
 Or. 
 In the world of whispers there are those who silence. You are one such individual. Three men, taking their teachings and conducting experiments which unsettle the others. A small matter. Three photos. An address. $10,000. 
 House Baas 
 New money. New cars. New house. Tens of millions from dark money investors buying up a language processing company, the product vanishing like a stone in a pond. Gyles argues with his fund managers. Ayda arranges Activities for the children; Abraham, Cydney and Ronan. Neither parent attends. Both make the time to read the feedback given by the professionals they pay to raise their children. 
 Cleaners, caterers and nannies stream in from the town nearby. The Baas family pay, but they do not pay well. The eldest, Abraham, has spoken back to his father for the last time. Two nights ago, men entered the estate, past the high walls and camera-riddled gates. The private security nodded and smiled, professionals greeting one another. They talked guns a little, shared a cigarette. The intruders donned masks, and took Abraham away in their van; to a place for troubled teens to learn discipline and the meaning of hard work. 
 Camp Corinth 
 A single road gives access to Camp Corinth. The last two miles are just a trail. Before this point, it bifurcates; a switchback leads up the valley wall, ill-maintained and unused. It is quicker to turn around and drive back out of the valley. The trails of hikers criss-cross the road, near indistinguishable from the deer paths. 
 Down in the valley, nestled by the creek. Mountains jacketed by trees press close either side. The mountains would be hidden if not for the clearcut stubble upon the hills. Now, five log buildings join one built of more conventional fare. The valley holds the sounds of animals and birds and burbling water and children crying into pillows. 
 Jason’s House 
 The oldest building is the home of Jason, owner and operator of Camp Corinth. He is 42 and divorced; she took herself and the kids to “ Jew York”. Having failed as a father, Jason must not fail again. His clients must learn the values of discipline and embrace the restorative power of wilderness survival skills. Before founding Camp Corinth, Jason worked as a military dentist. He stays in the house alone. His bedroom contains a safe with $28,632 in mixed bills. Downstairs are two shotguns still wrapped in paper, four semi-automatic carbines and twenty worn hunting rifles. There are 48 shells, 256 5.56 rounds and 796 .308 rounds. All staff have keys for the gun safe. 
 Outside, Jason’s black F150 Raptor. He keeps the keys on him at all times. He wakes up from his dreams holding the keys, their imprint angry and red in his palm. 
 Jason is trained in violence. 
 Admin 
 The smallest of the log buildings is an admin office, used by Athena and Hera. They travel as a pair, chainsmoking and continuing a conversation uninterrupted for thirty years. Asked, neither particularly likes the other. Jason only cares about the activities the camp offers; Athena and Hera decide everything else. They have no guilt about the business they have found themselves in. The office holds spare keys for all log buildings, as well as the keys for the eight quadbikes. Athena is paying for her grand-daughter to go to college. Hera does not spend anything. The money accumulates like scum atop a pond. Her children no longer call. 
 Proctor’s Cabin 
 The six proctors share a single cabin. Each has a simple bed and a locked chest for personal possessions. At night, three of the six are asleep here; the other three are watching the client cabins. 
 This cabin doubles as storage for the dangerous tools - hatches and axes are plentiful. 
 Meleager. A recovered opiate addict, militant about drug use. He thinks the kids deserve anything that happens to them - that Camp Corinth is about punishment. A boar once broke his leg in four places, and he still walks with a limp. Hunting and shooting instructor. Blooded in violence. 
 Tiphys. A small man, hirsute and scowling. He never feels bigger than when a child cries. He is here to make them suffer, and knows nothing about wilderness skills. Navigation and hiking instructor. 
 Heracles. He claims to have been special forces in Iraq, discharged for violent insubordination against an officer. His records show eight incidents of him firing on civilians without provocation. He has not been sober since arriving at Camp Corinth. General Assistant. Trained in violence. 
 Lynceus. Quiet and withdrawn. After the death of his parents, he joined a Voor’s Head Device group. The long hours of contemplation of the Black Ocean have brought him here to enact a closer communication, much to the chagrin of the rest of the group. Quadbike instructor. 
 Admetus. An ex-convict with scars where once affiliations sat. Since his release, he exchanged emails with Lynceus about the Voor’s Head Device - a practice he discovered in prison. General Assistant. Experienced in violence. 
 Castor. Previously a firefighter, he cannot get the screaming out of his head. The Voor’s Head Device releases him from the burning ghosts. He joined Lynceus in leaving their parent group to conduct their experiments. Kayak instructor. 
 The Voor’s Head Device devotees, when all three are on night shift, will choose a cabin to conduct a Night March. This practice alone is not unusual, used to punish uncleanliness or talking back. The devotees cut the march short, arranging their clients in a circle. Each has a Voor’s Head Device placed over their head. The three observe their panic, and strike any attempting to remove the hood. They are waiting for something to happen from this forced experience of the Black Ocean. They do not know it already has. 
 The Client Cabins 
 Each of the cabins has a single door which locks from the outside. The windows are small and barred. Each has ten beds, and at night is nominally watched over by a single proctor. Few clients try and escape; they do not know where they are, and correctly fear violent reprisal. These are the children of families willing to pay strangers to abduct and correct their progeny. 
 One cabin holds the girls; the other two the boys. In residence are 8 girls and sixteen boys. 
 Kittie Jaworski. 16. Wants to go home. 
 Cornelia Berger. 14. Wants to go home. 
 Avilda Matthewson. 13. Wants to go home. 
 Cecilia Nagle. 15. Doesn’t want to go home. 
 Salomea Banes. 16. Doesn’t want to go home. 
 Louise Mclaughlin. 15. Doesn’t want to go home. 
 Radelle Kyle. 16. Doesn’t want to go home. 
 Earline Aalfide. 17. Wants to go home. 
 Boys 1-8 are in Cabin A. The rest are in Cabin B. 
 Abraham Baas. 15. Wants to go home. 
 Alfie Alders. 16. Doesn’t want to go home. 
 Brandon Woodrow Jonker. 13. Wants to go home. 
 Norwood MacDaniel. 16. Doesn’t want to go home. 
 Derrick Klerks. 14. Wants to go home. 
 Charley Swift. 16. Wants to go home. 
 Connor Hampson. 15. Wants to go home. 
 Cohen Walmsley. 14. Doesn’t want to go home. 
 Timothy Ververs. 14. Wants to go home. 
 Llewelyn John. 13. Wants to go home. 
 Virgil Mencher. 17. Doesn’t want to go home. 
 Mo Chadwick. 16. Doesn’t want to go home. 
 Dorain Wavey. 15. Doesn’t want to go home. 
 Slade Radston. 14. Doesn’t want to go home. 
 Roswell Slaski. 15. Wants to go home. 
 Cornelius Hardy. 14. Doesn’t want to go home. 
 Faced with violence, children are likely to flee. Those 16+ add +1 to the roll. 
 1d12 
 Response to Violence. 
 1-4 
 Freeze. 
 5-11 
 Flee. 
 12 
 Fight. 
 The Creek 
 The Black Ocean has bled through, and pools beneath the water. To fall in is to be destroyed utterly. Once the body is destroyed, memory follows. Physical evidence remains as a haunting; inexplicable photographs, rooms for children unrecognised. History is not changed, even as memory is riddled with cigarette burns where once people resided. 
 The waters of the Black Ocean are able to flow freely, travelling up sheer surfaces like creeping damp. Otherwise, it is normal water. It has no strength, and cannot grasp. With time, it can create mudslides. It can flow ahead of you, uphill, and then flow back down to wash you away. In sunlight, it can do none of these things. 
 The repeated, forced use of the Voor’s Head Device has paired the teenagers with the Black Ocean. It wants to take them all into itself, and any trying to remove one from this place will rouse it to jealous anger. Lynceus, Admetus and Castor will try to aid the Black Ocean. It does not recognise them, and will destroy them as it would anyone else. 
 Ransoming Baas 
 The family will pay up to three million. They prefer to not involve police, due to the dubious legality of ongoing investments. They will, in any case, hire a semi-legal paramilitary group to find and destroy the kidnappers. 
 November 15, 2025 
 violence rules nasty weapons 
 Violence at the Street Level 
 Special thanks to CK and Nate for this one: my loyal hauscarls. 
 Update uhhhhhhhhhhhh march something: i liked this so much that i made it a core part of violence and update d it. i also simplified it a bit, taking out Threat. go read it there instead. 
 Violence assumes the main conflict is with guns. The hand-to-hand is quick and dirty - usually over in a round. The below slows it down, and makes it more detail orientated. It’s a modification of the Pseudohistorical Violence procedure. It’s a little more flexible in some ways. 
 Both combatants roll a d12 and add relevant modifiers. Highest roll wins. Combatants compare their relative levels of effectiveness, however it is derived. The difference between them is added to the more skilled combatant. 
 0 Untrained. 
1 Drilled/Blooded. 
2 Trained/Experienced. 
3 Veteran. 
4 Elite/Hardened. 
5 Trained with Masters/Natural Born Killer. 
 If multiple opponents engage a single person, all roll d12s. The highest roll is taken for the team with the numerical advantage. If they win, both inflict Injuries and cause Injury Checks. 
 Weapons have four values. 
 Reach. Compare the Reach values of both weapons. The difference between them is added to the d12 roll the combatant with the longest weapon. 
 Lethality. Applied to any Injury Checks caused by the weapon. 
 Threat. How scary the weapon is. Against opponents with a training level lower than the Threat of the weapon, this is added to the d12 roll of the wielder. 
 Fragility. This is the chance that the weapon breaks. This is rolled each round the weapon is used. 
 Weapon 
 Reach 
 Lethality 
 Threat 
 Fragility 
 Fist 
 0 
 -5 
 0 
 1-in-10 
 Keys in a Fist 
 0 
 -4 
 1 
 2-in-6 
 Knuckle Dusters 
 0 
 -3 
 2 
 1-in-12 
 Brick 
 1 
 -2 
 1 
 2-in-6 
 Bottle, Broken 
 1 
 0 
 3 
 3-in-6 
 Baton, Kosh 
 2 
 -2 
 1 
 1-in-10 
 Rock in a Sock 
 2 
 -3 
 1 
 3-in-6 
 Bottle, Whole 
 2 
 -2 
 2 
 4-in-6 † 
 Wrench 
 2 
 -2 
 1 
 1-in-8 
 Chair Leg 
 3 
 -3 
 1 
 3-in-6 
 Hammer 
 3 
 0 
 2 
 1-in-8 
 Length of Pipe 
 3 
 -1 
 2 
 2-in-6 
 Baseball Bat 
 4 
 -1 
 2 
 1-in-8 
 Length of Chain 
 4 
 -2 
 2 
 2-in-6 
 2x4, Pool Cue 
 5 
 -2 
 2 
 3-in-6 
 2x4 with Nails In 
 5 
 -1 
 3 
 4-in-6 
 Chair 
 5 
 -3 
 1 
 4-in-6 
 Trash Can 
 5 
 -3 
 1 
 2-in-6 
 Pocket Knife 
 1 
 0 
 2 
 1-in-8 
 Knife 
 2 
 2 
 3 
 1-in-12 
 Dagger 
 2 
 3 
 3 
 1-in-20 
 Machete 
 3 
 4 
 4 
 1-in-12 
 † If a bottle breaks the same turn it hits someone, the attack has a lethality of 2. The wielder has a 3-in-6 chance of taking an injury as their hand is filled with glass, reduced by their training to a minimum 1-in-6. 
 Obviously, there are many more improvised weapons. For example, a pint glass might be like a bottle with less reach and lethality. 
 Once these modifiers are determined, both parties roll 1d12 and compare. 
 If the difference between them is 1 or less, both are Injured and make an Injury Check. 
 If the difference is 2-3, the victor is Injured. The defeated is Injured and makes an Injury Check. 
 Is the difference is 4+, the defeated is Injured and makes an Injury Check. 
 Combatants using fists can elect to not cause injury checks. See below. 
 Victorious unarmed combatants can elect to grapple instead of causing an Injury Check. When grappling, they roll 1d6 and consult the table below. They may do any of the actions listed at the value rolled or below. (e.g. rolling a 4 means actions 1,2,3 or 4 can be done.) Skilled grapplers add +1. 
 Shove or Go to Ground. 
 Slam. 
 Throw. 
 Joint Lock. 
 Pin. 
 Choke. 
 Shoving does just that - propels the victim away. If they collide with any object, there’s a 3-in-6 they fall, possibly injuring themselves. 
Going to Ground means both combatants hit the ground. The victor gets a +2 on the next round of combat against that combatant. 
Slams involve striking objects with the grappled person and maintaining a grip. This triggers an Injury Check, with the referee determining lethality 1 . The victor gets +3 on the next round of combat against the grappled combatant. 
Throws launch the grappled combatant. They have a 5-in-6 chance of falling, and anyone else they hit has a 3-in-6. Those falling take Injury Checks, modified by their environment. 
Joint Locks disable a limb - usually one holding a weapon. A break can be forced on a 2-in-6. This, of course, is an injury. 
Pins disable the victim totally. They are disarmed in the process. 
Chokes Down the grappled if not interrupted immediately. They are powerless in this process. 
 Bonus: Heroic Resolve. 
 Heroes (of the Bloodshed variety, or otherwise) start with a pool of Resolve Dice. These are d6s. Whenever they would be injured or downed, they may roll any number of Resolve Dice. On a 1 or 2, the dice is removed and does nothing. On a 3+, the result is downgraded 1 step. (Downed -> Injury -> Flesh Wound.) 
 Resolve Dice are earnt through the following: 
 Training montage. 
 Having a mentor killed. 
 Having a romantic partner killed or kidnapped. 
 Finally accepting the family tradition of violent duty. 
 Defeating a rival. 
 Being defeated by a rival. 
 Swearing an oath to defend the weak. 
 etc. 
 Wood, furniture -3. Concrete, brick, floors, walls, -2. Metal -1. Glass 0. ↩︎ 
 September 23, 2025 
 rules 
 Contacts and Favours 
 Player Characters can call on their contacts for help. Often this is just information, but it might be muscle, gear or setting up a meeting with someone they know. Whenever the PCs ask for a favour, note it down. 
 Contacts who are owed a favour will regularly contact the PCs for favours in turn. The PCs don’t have to do it, but this degrades the quality of the contact. 
 When contacts ask for a favour, offer the PCs two options. The smaller favour equalises the relationship. The bigger one puts the debt on the Contact; the next favour the PCs ask for is free. 
 When money is exchanged, it stops being a favour. Similarly, mates rates aren’t a favour either. 
 Dice Pervert Shit 
 Each contact has a rating between 1 and 6. When a favour is asked, roll 1d6. If it’s equal to or lower than the rating, they’ll do it. Modify the roll as follows. This should be further modified in accordance with the contact’s personality and situation. 
 The favour requires no real work or risk for the contact: -1. 
 The PCs already owe the contact a favour: +1. 
 The favour is outside of their usual wheelhouse: +1. 
 The favour puts them at substantial risk, or requires a lot of work: +2. 
 The favour hurts an enemy the contact shares: -1. 
 The period of time between favours will vary depending on your campaign and the specific contact. For each reasonable period, there’s a 2-in-6 chance a contact asks a favour. 
 If the contact asks for a favour and is denied, reduce their rating by 2. If the value drops below 1, they stop being someone the players can ask for favours. 
 If the players are owed a favour by a contact but tell them not to worry about it, increase the rating by 1. 
 Older Entries → 
 Subscribe to the RSS feed for Luke Gearing 
 