 
 Techniques to Write Adventures - Luke Gearing 
 Luke Gearing
 Home 
 Archives 
 Search 
 Feed 
 Mailing List 
 Wolves Upon the Coast 
 Published Works and Downloads 
 Contact 
 Books I’ve Read 
 Violence. 
 Recent entries 
 Wizards 
 Plastic Venus 
 Writing For Violence 
 Camp Corinth 
 Violence at the Street Level 
 Contacts and Favours 
 Weapons & Armour for 1HD Groups 
 Grand Unified Theory of Magic & Religion (for Fantastic Medieval Wargames) 
 Obligations 
 The Beer Seller & The Bierkellar 
 Contacts Table for Swyvers 
 Writing Wages 
 Travel Too! 
 Reputation Tables 
 You Don’t Need Hooks, You Have Been Lied To 
 d100 Carousing 
 Man-Suits of the Flatboat People 
 When Entering a Polity… 
 Split Initiative 
 Mentorship Applications Open 
 Traveller Animals for the Jungles 
 Prison Planet Review 
 Men 
 Sag River Extreme Cold Research Facility, Alaska. 
 Pariah Hexfills 
 Inhuman Violence 2 
 Supplement V: Carcosa 
 Wolves Upon the Coast Grand Retrospective 2 
 Clerics 
 Wolves 3rd Party Shit 
 Writing NPCs 
 September 14, 2021 
 technique 
 Techniques to Write Adventures 
 There’s a random adventure jam you could join! 
 Obviously these will not work for everyone, are not universal and is very incomplete. 
 Ideation 
 This is the thing I can help the least with - coming up with ideas is very personal. You hopefully know best what works for you. For me, this is heavily rooted in history, geography, poetry and the visual aspects of film. 
 When you do have an idea, if you can’t use it right now write it down somewhere. When you’re stuck in the middle of something else, a record of snippets and phrases like this can be a goldmine. 
 One general piece of advice for this is to cultivate boredom. Allow yourself time to be bored - this is when you start thinking. I used to write a lot on trains because what else was I going to do? 
 Switchup 
 If I’m stuck on something, I stop typing and write it down physically. Something about changing how I am writing helps me immensely. Some of this might be that a physical pad and pen is much less distraction rich than a computer. I often turn off the Wi-Fi when trying to get something done. 
 Outline To Fuck 
 Use your outline (that is, your headings) to build a skeleton - then your words, the details, are the meat. Map First is similar, albeit using an actual map. 
 Markdown is great for this because you don’t break flow, you just hit # a few times. I used this technique to write this piece. If you’re quite scatterbrained like me, it’s good to be able to quickly jump elsewhere in a document, type a heading and then go back to what you were working on before. 
 !! detail 
 If you don’t know the specifics of something (name, relationship, geography) just mark it with a !! and move on. When you’re done, search !! in the document and fill in the blanks. Many will have suggested themselves as you worked on the rest. 
 After reading through this I went to add some words when I saw the !! - you quickly internalise it means “ incomplete”. 
 Structures 
 These are some structures for the development of an adventure. Move between them as you see fit. 
 Mental Dig/Exploration 
 If you have a good sense of the vibe and tone of a physical space, I often just close my eyes and imagine being there. This works for fine-tuning the vibe/tone, finding those touchstones which communicate the tone, and for finding out what else is there. I find this especially useful for dungeons - moving from room to room, the contents of physical space begin to suggest themselves to me. 
 Map First 
 I often have a map of a physical space before anything else. The map will change, but it acts as a framework to hang everything else from. 
 Pearl 
 Take your single (or most important) concept, element, vibe or (shudder) theme. Note down everything you can about it in an unstructured format. Now add another element, a complication or destabilisation - note down everything that changes next to the destabilised element. Repeat this as many times as you want. 
 Resonance & Conflict 
 List all of your concepts, elements, vibes or (retch) themes. Identify and highlight all conflicts and resonances. Many of these conflicts are where the adventure could lie. The resonances are good for building settings and factions. 
 Timeline 
 If you have a situation, write down a rough timeline of what will happen if the players never turn up. This will often help clarify details about the situation, about the factions and the stakes. This feeds back in - you might end up doing a few of these. 
 Previous post 
 2d20 Bandits 
 On an encounter table, the entry 2d20 Bandits pulls a lot of work. Bandits are human beings. This makes them harder to deal with - when you lean in 
 Next post 
 Mentorship 1 - Retrospective 
 This was the first round of an ongoing commitment to mentor ttrpg writers with the goal of growing the space and helping others get published. At 
 Subscribe to the RSS feed for Luke Gearing 
