The Best Introduction to the Mountains

by Gene Wolfe

There is one very real sense in which the Dark Ages were the 
brightest of times, and it is this: that they were times of defined and 
definite duties and freedoms. The king might rule badly, but 
everyone agreed as to what good rule was. Not only every earl and 
baron but every carl and churl knew what an ideal king would say 
and do. The peasant might behave badly; but the peasant did not 
expect praise for it, even his own praise. These assertions can be 
quibbled over endlessly, of course; there are always exceptional 
persons and exceptional circumstances. Nevertheless they 
represent a broad truth about Christianized barbarian society as a 
whole, and arguments that focus on exceptions provide a picture 
that is fundamentally false, even when the instances on which they 
are based are real and honestly presented. At a time when few 
others knew this, and very few others understood its implications, J. R. R. Tolkien both knew and understood, and was able to express 
that understanding in art, and in time in great art.
 
That, I believe, was what drew me to him so strongly 
when I first encountered The Lord of the Rings . As a child I had 
been taught a code of conduct: I was to be courteous and 
considerate, and most courteous and most considerate of those less 
strong than I -- of girls and women, and of old people especially. 
Less educated men might hold inferior positions, but that did not 
mean that they themselves were inferior; they might be (and often 
would be) wiser, braver, and more honest than I was. They were 
entitled to respect, and were to be thanked when they befriended 
me, even in minor matters. Legitimate authority was to be obeyed 
without shirking and without question. Mere strength (the corrupt 
coercion Washington calls power and Chicago clout ) was to 
be defied. It might be better to be a slave than to die, but it was 
better to die than to be a slave who acquiesced in his own slavery. 
Above all, I was to be honest with everyone. Debts were to be 
paid, and my word was to be as good as I could make it.
 
With that preparation I entered the Mills of Mordor, 
where courtesy is weakness, honesty is foolishness, and cruelty is 
entertainment.
 
I was living in a club for men, a place much like a 
YMCA. I was thoroughly wretched in half a dozen ways (much 
more so than I had ever been in college or the Army), but for the 
first time in my life I had enough money to subscribe to magazines 
and even buy books in hardcover. Planet Stories , Thrilling 
Wonder Stories , Weird Tales , and Famous Fantastic 
Mysteries -- pulps I had read as a boy while hiding behind the 
candy counter in the Richmond Pharmacy -- were gone; but 
 Astounding Stories lingered as a digest-size magazine a bit less 
costly than most paperback books. There was also The Magazine 
of Fantasy & Science Fiction , put out by the same company that 
had published Curtains for the Copper and other Mercury 
Mysteries that my mother and I had devoured. I subscribed to 
both, and to any other magazines dealing with science fiction or 
fantasy that could locate.
 
Here I must do someone (quite likely the late Anthony 
Boucher) a grave injustice. I no longer recall who wrote the review 
I read in Fantasy & Science Fiction . It was a glowing review, 
and I would quote at length from it if I could. It convinced me then 
and there that I must read The Lord of the Rings . In those days 
(the middle 1950s, if you can conceive of a period so remote) the 
magazine offered books for sale -- one might write enclosing a 
cheque, and receive the book one had ordered by mail. 
Accustomed as you are to ordering from Amazon.com, you will 
deride so primitive a system; but you have never been a friendless 
young man in a strange city far from home. Now that you have 
enjoyed yourself, please keep in mind that the big-box stores we 
are accustomed to did not exist. There was no cavernous Barnes & 
Noble stocking a thousand titles under Science Fiction and 
Fantasy, no two-tiered Borders rejoicing in a friendly coffee shop 
and a dozen helpful clerks. There were (if the city was large and 
one was lucky) one or two old-line book shops downtown; they 
carried bestsellers, classics like Anna Karenina , cookbooks, and 
books of local interest, with a smattering of other things, mostly 
humour and books about dogs. The city in which I was living also 
boasted a glorious used-book store, five floors and a cellar, in 
which one might find the most amazing things; but these things did 
not include science fiction or much fantasy -- the few who were 
fortunate enough to own those books kept them. There may have 
been speciality shops already in New York; there very probably 
were. But if there were, they could not have specialized in fantasy 
or science fiction. Or in horror, for that matter. It was a surprise, a 
distinct departure from the usual publishing practices, whenever any 
such book appeared.
 
An example may make the reason clear. In 1939, 
August Derleth and Donald Wandrei had published twelve hundred 
copies of H. P. Lovecraft's The Outsider and Others , at their 
own expense. Fanzines had publicized their effort widely and with 
enthusiasm; but selling those twelve hundred books, which cost 
three dollars and fifty cents before publication and five dollars after, 
took four years.
 
The copy of The Fellowship of the Ring that I 
received from Fantasy & Science Fiction lies on my desk as I 
write. It is, I suppose, the first American edition; it was issued in 
1956 (the year in which I bought it) by the Houghton Mifflin 
Company of Boston. It is gold-stamped, and is bound in cloth the 
colour of slightly faded denim. Its elegant dust jacket vanished long 
ago, though I still recall it. Its back board holds a much-folded map 
of Middle-earth, sixteen inches on a side, showing among other 
places the Shire, the Lost Realm of Arnor, Mirkwood, the Brown 
Lands, Rohan, and Gondor. On its half-title there is now a 
quotation from Thoreau that I inscribed in blue ink many years ago. 
I give it because its presence on that slightly yellowed page should 
convey to you more of what this book meant to me in those days 
than anything that I might write in my little essay possibly could.
 Our fabled shores none ever reach,

No mariner has found our beach,

Scarcely our mirage is seen,

And Neighbouring waves of floating green,

Yet still the oldest charts contain

Some dotted outline of our main.

You are not likely to believe me when I say that I still 
remember vividly, almost 50 years later, how strictly I disciplined 
myself with that book, forcing myself to read no more than a single 
chapter each evening. The catch, my out, the stratagem by which I 
escaped the bonds of my own law, was that I could read that 
chapter as many times as I wished; and that I could also return to 
the chapter I had read the night before, if I chose. There were 
evenings on which I reread the entire book up the point -- The 
Council of Elrond, let us say -- at which I had forced myself to 
stop.
 
Naturally I had sent for The Two Towers as soon as 
I could. Eventually it came, bound and typeset as beautifully as 
 The Fellowship of the Ring , with the same map (I confess that I 
had hoped for something new) in its back. Just as I inscribed that 
quotation from Thoreau in Fellowship , I put one from Conrad 
Aiken on the half-title page of Two Towers :
 
There was an island in the sea

That out of immortal chaos reared

Towers of topaz, trees of pearl

For maidens adored and warriors feared.

Long ago it sunk in the sea;

And now, a thousand fathoms deep,

Sea worms above it whirl their lamps,

Crabs on the pale mosaic creep.

By the time I received Two Towers , I had learned 
my lesson -- I ordered The Return of the King at once. That, 
too, is on my desk. With one other thing, its back holds a 
delightfully detailed map of Rohan, Gondor, and Mordor. The 
quotation I inscribed on its half-title is from Robert E. Howard. 
You have my leave to quarrel with me, but I think it the finest of the 
three, indeed one of the finest things have ever read.
 
Into the west, unknown of man,

Ships have sailed since the world began.

Read, if you dare, what Skelos wrote,

With dead hands fumbling his silken coat;

And follow the ships through the wind-blown wrack--

Follow the ships that come not back.

If you remember the end of this last volume, how 
Frodo rides to the Grey Havens in the long Firth of Lune and 
boards the white ship, never to be seen again in Middle-earth, you 
will understand why I chose that particular quotation and why I 
treasure it (and the book which holds it) even today. But there is 
one thing more.
 
You see, ten years later I wrote J. R. R. Tolkien a fan 
letter. He answered it, and I tipped his answer into the back with 
the map. The body of his letter is typewritten (I would judge on an 
electric typewriter) but the footnote is in script. I would like to 
express my appreciation to Douglas A. Anderson, who is familiar 
with Tolkien's hand and has very kindly corrected my missreadings 
of it.

 7th November 1966 
 Dear Mr Wolfe, 
 Thank you very much for your letter. The 
etymology of words and names in my story has two sides: (1) their 
etymology within the story; and (2) the sources from which I, as an 
author, derive them. I expect you mean the latter. Orc I derived 
from Anglo-Saxon, a word meaning demon, usually supposed to be 
derived from the Latin Orcus -- Hell. But I doubt this, though the 
matter is too involved to set out here. Warg is simple. It is an old 
word for wolf, which also had the sense of an outlaw or hunted 
criminal. This is its usual sense in surviving texts.* I adopted the 
word, which had a good sound for the meaning, as a name for this 
particular brand of demonic wolf in the story. 
 Yours sincerely, 
 J. R. R. Tolkien 

 *O.E. wearg 

 O. High German warg-- 

 O. Norse varg-r (also = "wolf", espec. of legendary kind) 

Surely I need not tell you that I read and reread these 
books. I married in November of that wonder-filled 1956; and 
Rosemary and I read them to each other, most often while driving. 
A note in The Return of the King indicates that my older son Roy 
and I read them together, reading the final page on April 20, 1967. 
(Roy was born in 1958.) Eventually I feared that I would read my 
Houghton Mifflin hardcovers to pieces and bought paperbacks, 
putting the hardcovers away in the old, glass-fronted bookcase 
where they will stand again when I have completed this tribute to 
their author.
 
Yet in a sense, it is complete now. I have shown you, I 
hope, what these books have meant to me. If you find echoes of 
them in my own books and stories (and particularly in The Wizard 
Knight , with which I have struggled for the past year) you will not 
have discomfited me -- I am proud of them. Terry Brooks has 
often been disparaged for imitating Tolkien, particularly by those 
reviewers who find his books inferior to Tolkien's own. I can say 
only that I wish there were more imitators -- we need them -- and 
that all imitations of so great an original must necessarily be inferior.
 
What, then, did Tolkien do? And how did he come to do it?
The second question can be more easily answered than 
the first. He was a philologist (Greek philo-logos, a lover of 
words), and he had somehow escaped the modern cast of mind 
that makes us glory in ignorance and regard our forebears, who 
somehow muddled along without washing machines and air 
conditioning, with contempt. I have quoted a great deal already. I 
hope that you will permit me this one, too:
 
 ... The stupid, strong
 Unteachable monsters are certain to be victorious at last,
 And every man of decent blood is on the losing side.
 Take as your model...
 ...Him who as the death spear entered into his vitals
 Made critical comments on its workmanship and aim.
 Are these the Pagans you spoke of? Know your betters and crouch, dogs;
 You that have Vichy-water in your veins and worship the event,
 Your goddess History (whom your fathers called the strumpet Fortune). 

The author is Tolkien's close friend, C. S. "Jack" Lewis.
 
It is said with some truth that there is no progress 
without loss; and it is always said, by those who wish to destroy 
good things, that progress requires it. No great insight or 
experience of the world is necessary to see that such people really 
care nothing for progress. They wish to destroy for their profit, and 
they, being clever, try to persuade us that progress and 
 change are synonymous.
 
They are not; and it is not just my own belief but a 
well-established scientific fact that most change is for the worse: 
any change increases entropy (unavailable energy). Therefore, any 
change that produces no net positive good is invariably harmful. 
Progress, then, does not consist of destroying good things in the 
mere hope that the things that will replace them will be better (they 
will not be) but in retaining good things while adding more.
Here is a practical illustration. This paper is good and 
the forest is good as well. If the manufacture of this paper results in 
the destruction of the forest, the result will be a net loss. That is 
mere change; we have changed the forest into paper, a change that 
may benefit some clever men who own a paper mill but hurts the 
mass of Earth's people. If, on the other hand, we manufacture the 
paper without destroying the forest (harvesting mature trees and 
planting new ones) we all benefit. We engineers will tell you that 
there has been an increase in entropy just the same; but it is an 
increase that would take place anyway, and so does us no added 
harm. It is also a much smaller increase than would result from the 
destruction of the forest.
 
I have approached this scientifically because Tolkien's 
own approach was historical, and it is a mark of truth that the same 
truth can be approached by many roads. Philology led him to the 
study of the largely illiterate societies of Northern Europe between 
the fall of Rome and the beginning of the true Middle Ages (roughly 
AD 400 to 1000). There he found a quality -- let us call it Folk 
Law -- that has almost disappeared from his world and ours.
It is the neighbour-love and settled customary goodness 
of the Shire. Frodo is "rich" in comparison to Sam, though no 
dragon would call Frodo rich; Sam is poor in comparison to Frodo, 
though Sam is far richer than Gollum, who has been devoured by 
the tyranny and corruption of the One Ring. Frodo does not 
despise Sam for his poverty, he employs him; and Sam does not 
detest Frodo for his wealth, but is grateful for the job. Most central 
of all, the difference in their positions does not prevent their 
friendship. And in the end, poor Sam rises in the estimation of the 
Shire because of his association with Frodo, and rich Frodo 
sacrifices himself for the good of all the Sams.
 
A different illustration is found among the elves of 
Lorien, in their love of beauty and their love of nature. They are 
Sylvan Elves (East Elves) but the rulers they choose to obey are 
Eldar (West Elves). They choose to be ruled by people better than 
themselves, in other words, exactly as we choose to be ruled by 
people worse. Most clearly of all it is shown in their will to preserve 
the wisdom of the First Age.
 
Earlier I asked what Tolkien did and how he came to do it; we 
have reached the point at which the first question can be answered. 
He uncovered a forgotten wisdom among the barbarian tribes who 
had proved (against all expectation) strong enough to overpower 
the glorious civilizations of Greece and Rome; and he had not only 
uncovered but understood it. He understood that their strength -- 
the irresistible strength that had smashed the legions -- had been the 
product of that wisdom, which has now been ebbing away bit by 
bit for a thousand years.
 
Having learned that, he created in Middle-earth a 
means of displaying it in the clearest and most favourable possible 
light. Its reintroduction would be small -- just three books among 
the overwhelming flood of books published every year -- but as 
large as he could make it; and he was very conscious (no man has 
been more conscious of it than he) that an entire forest might spring 
from a handful of seed. What he did, then, was to plant in my 
consciousness and yours the truth that society need not be as we 
see it around us.
 
Sam Rayburn, a politician of vast experience, once said 
that all legislation is special-interest legislation. Of our nation, and of 
the 20th century, that is unquestionably true; but it need not be. We 
have -- but do not need -- a pestilent swarm of exceedingly clever 
persons who call themselves public servants when everything about 
them and us proclaims that they are in fact our masters. They make 
laws (and regulations and judicial decisions that have the force of 
laws) faster and more assiduously than any factory in the world 
makes chains; and they lay them on us.
 
It need not be so. We might have a society in which the 
laws were few and just, simple, permanent, and familiar to 
everyone -- a society in which everyone stood 
shoulder-to-shoulder because everyone lived by the same 
changeless rules, and everyone knew what those rules were. When 
we had it, we would also have a society in which the lack of wealth 
was not reason for resentment but a spur to ambition, and in which 
wealth was not a cause for self-indulgence but a call to service.
We had it once, and some time in this third millennium 
we shall have it again; and if we forget to thank John Ronald Reuel 
Tolkien for it when we get it, we will already have begun the slow 
and not always unpleasant return to Mordor. Freedom, love of 
neighbour, and personal responsibility are steep slopes; he could 
not climb them for us -- we must do that ourselves. But he has 
shown us the road and the reward.
 
Copyright © Gene Wolfe, 2001

 note added by Andy Robertson 

This essay was offered by Mr Wolfe to the anthology
 " Meditations on Middle-Earth" , edited by Karen Haber, 
but was rejected. We published it in 
 INTERZONE magazine in December 2001. 
 
 I thought it would bear 
furthur distribution, and contacted Mr Wolfe, who 
allowed me to purchase the right to post it on this site. 
 
If you should wish to contact Mr Wolfe, please use his agent: 

Virginia Kidd Agency Inc.

Box 278

Milford 

PA 18337 

USA

to Andy Robertson's home page 
 
 to MATTERS 
 
 contact Andy Robertson