 
 Gene Wolfe Interview 
 Gene Wolfe Interview 
 conducted by James B. Jordan 
 Contents 
 Religion 
 Influences 
 Politics 
 Transportation 
 Science 
 Being a Novelist 
 The Book of the New Sun 
 Women 
 Peace 
 Awards 
 The Soldier Series 
 The Ancient World 
 Castleview 
 The New Sun Series 
 JJ: A lot of what you publish comes out from small presses and
sources. If you are not an insider to the SF fantasy world, you
would not know where to get it or even know it had come out. Is
there any comprehensive outlet for Gene Wolfe's stuff? 
 GW: Not that I know of. 
 Mark Ziesing 
 handles some of it, but 
he's probably as close as they come, and he has far from everything. I
just don't think there is a good answer to that. I have done some
stuff with Dan Knight's United Mythologies in Canada. 
 JJ: Is he the one that did Young Wolfe ? 
 GW: Yes, he did Young Wolfe and Letters Home . 
And we may do another one, I am not sure. And then there was Cheap Street. 
The problem with Cheap Street is that they are anything but cheap!
 I would like to
subscribe---get the Cheap Street series of books and so forth---and to
be honest, I cannot afford it. I can't afford every few months to
spend $75-$100 on a collector's piece, or at least I don't think I
can. I have got better uses for the money. 
 Religion 
 JJ: My audience---the people that I write for---as I guess you've
gathered is what is usually called evangelical Christians, a
conservative, Protestant audience. And I am interested first of all
is discovering a little bit about your religious beliefs, if you're
willing to talk about that. Were you brought up within the Catholic
Church? 
 GW: No I am a convert. I was raised in a rather lax fashion as a
Presbyterian. I don't think my father had any particular religious
convictions. My mother had been raised as a Presbyterian and so I
was nominally a Presbyterian. It was largely an answer to give when
people asked you. 
 JJ: And how did you become a member of the Roman Catholic Church? 
 GW: I married a Roman Catholic and had to take instruction in it in
order that we could have a Catholic wedding. I think that is still
a rule of the church, although those things are so laxly administered 
that you cannot always be sure. I became interested in it,
read and studied, and talked to people about it and so forth, and
eventually converted. 
 JJ: Became persuaded of the truth of it? 
 GW: Yes. 
 JJ: At that time what kind of theologians did you read, or did you
read theology as such. 
 GW: I didn't read a lot of theology. I read some modern books of
explications of Catholic theology for laymen and that sort of
thing. I would like to be able to say I read St. Thomas Aquinas in
the Latin and so forth, but I didn't. It would be a lie. I read
some books of Thomistic theology and autobiographies of St. Thomas
Aquinas. 
 JJ: Chesterton's? 
 GW: Yes, I read Chesterton's book on St. Thomas Aquinas. I
discovered Chesterton and ended up reading everything of Chesterton's 
that I could find. I had gone through very much the same
thing earlier with C.S. Lewis. 
 JJ: Ignatius Press is reprinting all of Chesterton in a whole set.
Are you collecting those? 
 GW: That is right, so they are. In fact they have reprinted a lot
of newspaper columns that I had not seen in my initial sweep
through Chesterton when I read everything I could find. 
 JJ: I imagine at that time it was hard to find. 
 GW: It was fairly difficult to find. I have also since discovered
that some of those newspaper columns had been heavily edited by
someone other than Chesterton for book publication. I detest that
sort of thing, particularity when there is no indication given in
the book that it has been done, because you think that you are
reading what Chesterton wrote for a newspaper in 1905, and in fact
the history paragraphs have been changed almost out of recognition. 
 JJ: That has happened with C.S. Lewis too, according to Catherine
Lindskoog, and she seems to have the facts to back it up. 
 GW: Oh, yes, The C.S. Lewis Hoax . With Lewis it is 
posthumous 
stuff that apparently is not Lewis at all. I was one of those people who
read The Dark Tower and got very suspicious because I was familiar
with Lewis and I think I am pretty good at spotting styles. I used
to belong to a chain letter that included Gardner Dozois, Jack
Dann, Chelsea Quinn Yarborough, Mike Bishop. And we would write
long newsletters about our doings and then put them in a packet and
they would be sent around. This was before they had computer
bulletin boards and all that sort of stuff. And I could almost
invariably identify the writer from the first paragraph or two. The
writer was only overtly identified with the signature, because it
was done in letter form. But the styles of the people who were
writing were sufficiently different that I could very easily pick
out most of them without difficulty. And I am a good imitator. I
could write imitation Shakespeare that you would think was probably
legitimate Shakespeare because there is a lot of Shakespeare for me
to look at. I have sort of knack for doing that sort of thing. I
think I could write much better imitation C.S. Lewis than a lot of
this supposedly posthumous stuff that is coming out. I could do it
better than this guy does and I think practically any decent writer
could do it better that this guy does. The reason that there is not
more of that than there is, is that the people who can do it would
rather write under their own name and take the credit for them-
selves. Why should they waste their talent in forging work for a
dead man? 
 Influences 
 JJ: You have used a variety of styles in each of your novels. That
is one of the characteristics of your work. I assume you will keep
going. Is the series you are working on now,
 Starcrosser's
Landfall , to be in any of the particular styles you have used
before? 
 GW: I don't think so. It isn't a highly stylized series at
all, largely because it is third person. I basically feel that you
should write the story in the style that corresponds to the story
that you have to tell, and I have tried to do that; but it comes
out as a pretty much straightforward journalistic prose, I think. 
 JJ: Was Jack Vance's style an influence on the style of the
Severian novels? 
 GW: Oh, I'm sure. I'm sure. A lot of that was my deciding to
rewrite The Dying Earth from my own standpoint. 
 JJ: Wonderful book. 
 GW: Yes it is wonderful. And of course when you read wonderful
books sometimes you think, "Gee, I would like to do that"; and you
go off and do it, trying to make it different enough that you are
not really ripping off the author, but rather writing something in
the same vein using some of the same ideas. I have never concealed
a debt to Jack Vance and a debt to Clark Ashton Smith as far as
that goes. I think Vance is very much in the debt to Clark Ashton
Smith. 
 JJ: Do you know Vance? 
 GW: I have met him twice I think. I certainly don't know him in the
sense of being on friendly terms with him. 
 JJ: I gather he is not an active participant in the SF world. 
 GW: As far as I know he is not. A lot of it, from what I understand, 
is that he has severe eye problems. He is very nearly blind.
I had him sign a book for me one time and I was wearing a name
badge and he was asking how I spelled my name. I held out the name
badge to him and he asked me again how I spelled my name, and I
realized that although it was fairly large type, he couldn't make
it out. His vision was that bad. Maybe it is better by now. I
certainly hope so. 
 JJ: So Lewis and Chesterton would have been among the formative
influences in your paradigm. 
 GW: Oh yes, very definitely. 
 JJ: Could you name others, within the area of theology and
Christianity. 
 GW: The problem with this it is hard to see where to stop. Later
you say, "Gee, I should have included so and so," and you didn't
think of that person at that time. J.R.R. Tolkein, just to start
with. Charles Williams, not as much as the others, but to some
extent. David Lindsay's A Voyage to Arcturus , which is really
strange, and I think very theologically oriented. Much of the
theology I disagree with, but I thought it was marvelous as a work
of fiction. It is a marvelous example of someone's expressing his
theological beliefs in a novel. 
 JJ: Now you are reading George McDonald? 
 GW: Yes, Lilith. I had not read anything except Curdie and the
Goblin and At the Back of the North Wind and those types, and they
are quite good but they are basically fairy stories. I had read
others that were about that good, but I don't think they had any
great theological impact, any great feeling from that standpoint. 
 Politics 
 JJ: Let me turn to political philosophy if I might. Your first
novel, Operation Ares , really has that as something of a theme.
John Castle: I guess that "J.C." is deliberate somehow. Does that
novel reflect your ideas? 
 GW: I think it reflected them at the time that I wrote it. I don't
think it does now. I think I was much more like you said you were.
I was much more a doctrinaire conservative when I was a good deal
younger. You said that was true of you and it was true of me. I
reacted away from the general political current in this country
post-Roosevelt and became pretty much a "William F. Buckley
conservative" for a while, and then kind of split off from that. I
am now in the unhappy position of finding no one that I agree with. 
 I am big on freedom. Freedom is the bedrock political value
that we need to hold on to. Patrick Buchanan said that in his
speech at the Republican convention, and he is about the only
person that I have heard saying it. Today I think people are so
used to being free---to having some degree of freedom---that they don't
appreciate it; but people are noticeably less free now than they
were, say, thirty years ago. 
 JJ: Buchanan opposed the war in the Middle East, and I tended to
agree. It seemed to me to become involved in a conflict between two
Islamic nations was not wise. 
 GW: The war in the Middle East was fought for oil. The idea was to
keep oil at market prices available to the United States. Saddam
Hussein was also fighting for oil. His idea was that if he could
corner a large proportion of the world's oil market he could pretty
much set prices himself and get a great deal of money with which to
finance his war machine. He was right; he could have done that if
he had succeeded. Like so many dictators including Hitler, he tried
to be his own strategist. Remember the man that, when asked if he
could play the saxophone, said "I don't know; I've never tried." If
you have never done strategy---if you have never meddled around with
it---you can't do it because there is a whole science that has to be
acquired to be a decent strategist, and he didn't have it. He very
clearly didn't have it. Hitler didn't have it either. And instead
of leaving these things to people who are competent, the people
with the power try to do it themselves. One of the great things
that is wrong with American business is that whose with the power
to make decisions are often not those with the ability to make
those decisions correctly. 
 Transportation 
 JJ: From things you have written in the past, I wonder if you feel
it might be just as well to have the price of oil double or triple
so that we would be forced to come up with different sources of
energy. 
 GW: I think we might very well say, fifty years down the road,
"Boy, that was a good thing that happened to us." I think the
private automobile has been a disaster, quite frankly. You saw Gay
Haldeman last night who came up to our table. Her mother has just
been killed in a automobile accident. The private automobile has
squandered enormous resources and enormous energy and I think it
has developed a very ugly civilization in which everything has to
be built around automobile roads and parking---which isn't necessary;
it just happens to be what we've got. 
 JJ: What could we have as an alternative in our kind of society? 
 GW: In our kind of society? Well obviously we could have public
transportation for the longer range: railroad, some air, although
I think we have too much air now. We could have less travel,
because I think we have an awful lot of unnecessary traveling
going on now. And bicycles for shorter range. All of those are very
viable alternatives. I once wrote a little piece on this and I am
not sure where it appeared. The thing that most people don't
understand about it is that you can't rely wholly on public
transportation, because if you rely wholly on public transportation
you are at the mercy of the unions who control the mechanism. So
you have to have private transportation; but I don't think you have
to have one man sitting in 5000 pound machine, which is the system
that we have today. 
 JJ: Are there people who write in the area of politics that you
read now, or do you spend your time reading fiction and doing
research for your novels, and let that mainly pass by? 
 GW: I don't read a lot of political essays because I find most of
them very predictable. I know by and large what these people are
going to say after I have read a little bit of it and I generally
disagree with them violently. So no, I don't read much in that
area. What I read is much more news than political essay. 
 Science 
 JJ: In the Castle of the Otter 
you mentioned Lamarckianism and I
had written down here to ask if you've kept up with the scientists
who were working with that area today. 
 GW: I didn't know that anybody was working in the Lamarckian area,
today to be honest with you. I think somebody should be because I
have never been convinced that Lamarck was wrong. I have never seen
any convincing evidence that Lamarck was wrong. What we do is we
set up Lysenkoism, which is a straw man, and we call it Lamarckianism 
and then we disprove it---and it is very easily disproved and is
in fact very unpersuasive to begin with---and then we say Lamarck was
wrong. Or we say Darwin was right and therefore Lamarck cannot be
right, which is not true at all because the two theories are not
mutually exclusive. It's like saying that Newton was wrong because
Einstein was right. Newtonian physics really is the way that you
calculate a whole lot of things. Billiard balls and bullets and
railroad trains and so forth are all answerable in terms of
Newtonian physics. So to put Einstein against Newton says something
that Einstein himself would never have said. 
 JJ: I'd actually asked you about Rupert Sheldrake's work, with
which you are not familiar, but in his second book, The Presence of
the Past , he critiques the modern atomistic view of causality. He
argues, from research and testing, that aside from genetics there
is also the form and shape of things, a sort of platonic doctrine
of form, but one that is embedded in history. He presents evidence
to show that there are ways in which plants, animals, crystals,
etc. can undergo changes as a result of changes in the environment.
I'd thought you might be familiar with that. 
 GW: It certainly sounds interesting and probably like something
that I would tend to agree with. Because though I think that Darwin
was right, I don't think that Darwin had the whole answer and I
don't think he has it now. The kind of thing that he postulated
does take place but it seems to me clearly that there are other
mechanisms involved as well. 
 JJ: I asked in the letter if you were familiar with Frances Yates's
book The Art of Memory , which is a treatise on the entire business
of building a house in the mind and the impact of that in the
renaissance, particularly in the pre-literate world. 
 GW: I am familiar with the memory palace concept, which originally
derives from Simonides, a Greek poet of the fifth century B.C. I
have made use of the memory palace system in the Soldier books, of
course. I have The Memory Palace of Matthew Ricci, and have read
parts of it. 
 Being a Novelist 
 JJ: Let me ask you about being a southern Catholic novelist. You
wrote me one time that you do like to see yourself as a southern
novelist, or perhaps a Catholic novelist. Those can be two
different things, though overlapping. How would you define a
southern novelist, and how you see your work in that school? Or is
that a fair question? 
 GW: It is the kind of question that a critic would answer much
better than I can. I think there is a great deal of regional
background that southerners tend to have that northerners don't.
There is the experience of growing essentially as part of a
conquered population, which is something that northerners frankly
deny. But nevertheless it is quite true. As for being a Catholic
novelist, I think the interesting thing about the Catholic novelist
today---or maybe I should say should be the interesting thing about
the Catholic novel today---is that it is the Christian tradition
which is urban rather than rural. And I think that your type of
Christians are very largely rural people. I think my type of
Christians are very largely urban people. 
 JJ: Among Catholic novelists who would you consider in that field?
Francois Mauriac? Shusaku Endo? Or are you thinking mainly of
Walker Percy, Flannery O'Connor? 
 GW: The latter, I suppose. I haven't read widely---I haven't read the
Catholic novels specifically as a genre. Perhaps I should. The
problem I have is that there are a thousand directions in which I
ought to be going, and I generally can't go terribly far in any of
them. 
 JJ: Urban versus rural: I wonder if you would continue with that. 
 GW: I think the Catholic tradition is derived largely from people
who got here after the farms had been claimed. The early 
settlers---some Irish but mainly Scotch, English, German and so forth---came
here, and being intelligent and reasonable people staked out claims
to the good land and started growing corn and such. The Catholic
strain in the American life comes from Poles and Italians and so
on, and the later wave of Irish immigration during the potato
famine, who arrived after the good farms were pretty much owned
already. You couldn't go out and get those, and so these later
people became policemen and hod carriers and building contractors
and school teachers and so forth. And that is where the American
urban Catholic tradition is located, as far as I can see. Father
Andrew Greeley, whom I have never met, is probably nevertheless my
favorite priest, and he is very much aware of that and tends to
write about it. I think he is right. 
 JJ: Does that conviction show up in any of your writings, or is
that just what you believe a "mainstream" Catholic novelist should
devote his attention to? 
 GW: I think that the mainstream Catholic novelist is not going to
be able to avoid that completely even if he tries. If you are a
Christian you cannot help writing as a Christian. You can disguise
it, but there are still acute people who will see through the
disguise and say, "Aha, back in here is a Christian background."
And I think if you're Catholic the same thing is true: people will
say, "Back in here is a Catholic background." Somebody was describing 
a Brian Lumley novel to me today and I said, "Is he Catholic?"
I have not read the novel. (I have read very little Brian Lumley;
I wish I had read more. I intend to read more after meeting him
here at this convention.) But the outline as it was being presented
to me made it sound so much as if he were writing from an English
Catholic tradition. 
 Of course, before I ever went to England I thought that there
were no Catholics there, and if there were they would reflect the
same kind of thing that we have in Northern Ireland today, which is
just horrible. Incredibly awful stuff: people putting bombs in cars
and killing little kids in the name of Jesus Christ on both sides!
You can't imagine a more unchristian thing than this 
neighbor-killing-neighbor thing that Northern Ireland goes through! But when
I went to England I found there were plenty of Catholic churches
and that nobody was scrawling graffiti over them or throwing rocks
at the people who went to Mass, or any of that sort of thing. Mary
and I went to Mass whenever we were so inclined. So Lumley might
very well be Catholic. Chesterton obviously was and so was Tolkein:
both were English Catholics. 
 The New Sun Books 
 JJ: In the Urth Cycle (let's call it that), obviously memory is a
large theme and you have brought the sacraments, at least the
sacrament of baptism, into play repeatedly in the book. There are
an awful lot of occasions where people pass through water and
experience some type of death and resurrection. There also seem to
be images of the eucharist. 
 GW: There are diabolical eucharists: people who are eating corpses
in order to get the memory of the dead person. And of course when
the Catholic receives communion he is receiving the flesh of Christ
in a mystical sense. He is doing what Christ asked him to do, which
is to absorb a little piece of Christ into himself to make himself
more Christlike; and so we go forward in the Mass and we consent to
that, saying that I wish to be more like Christ. Whoever is giving
out communion, the priest or someone assisting the priest says,
"The body of Christ" and holds up the host, and you say Amen,
meaning "Yes, I agree this is the body of Christ," and then you
take it and eat it. 
 JJ: Now the climax of that inversion seems to be when Severian
actually eats the brains of the preceding autarch. Did you see that
as another form of the diabolical communion? Or something that was
necessary? It seems to be necessary to the novel. 
 GW: What I was doing was to say that in order to be a good ruler
you must be familiar with the tradition of that rule---of that
country and of the people in the past who have administered that
rule. No, not diabolical in that case. The diabolical thing is more
Vodalus and the graverobbers. 
 JJ: Who are into it just for thrills. 
 GW: Well, yes they are doing it for trivial reasons. Evil is always
a distortion or an exaggeration of something that is good. People
don't understand that now. 
 JJ: Are the other sacraments of the Catholic church present in the
novel? Are Severian's various liaisons along the way false forms of
matrimony, or in some sense symbolic of it? 
 GW: They are more manifestations of the search for love, which I think
is a great quest of life. What we go into life really looking for
is love. And as you've said in your letters, I don't think of
Severian as being a Christ figure; I think of Severian as being a
Christian figure. He is a man who has been born into a very
perverse background, who is gradually trying to become better. I
think that all of us have somewhere in us an instinct to try and
become better. Some of us defeat it thoroughly. We kill that part
of ourselves, just as we kill the child in ourselves. It is very
closely related to the child in us. 
 JJ: Is Valeria the ideal love for him? 
 GW: No. 
 JJ: Where would you say it lies in the novel? 
 GW: I think that the true ideal of love for any person is God. It
isn't another human being. If my wife were here she would be deeply
offended by that. (laughter) I don't mean that God is the only
thing that a person can love. I think the final object of love is
God. 
 JJ: Right. But within the horizons of a human life, is Severian
still searching in the end? 
 GW: Very much so. 
 JJ: "Man is a wolf to man." You actually quote that in Soldier of
Arete . You've traded on the wolf idea a lot, obviously, but that
brings up the question of horror fiction. Both of the panels you
have participated in at this convention have been about horror. You
are not really a horror writer, though, and you don't write just to
shock. But there are many times in your novels that you have
deliberately brought the reader to the place where he is shocked or
horrified in order to, hopefully, invoke a reaction against what
you are presenting: This is bad and you should be shocked. 
 So, on the wolf-theme: In your story "The Hero as Werewolf,"
what were you hoping to get the reader to think here? 
 GW: I was trying to get the reader to think about the real nature
of love between man and woman. In the first place, the girl in "The
Hero as Werewolf" is retarded and cannot speak. And, secondly, in
the end she has to damage very badly the man she loves in order to
set him free. I think I was trying to say, first, that you must not
think that the person you love has to be a whole lot like you in
order for that love to be real and working. And second, that we
all, if we are going to be honest, have to hurt people in order to
do them good. We have to tear away parts of them in order to do
them good. 
 JJ: The young man in "Hero" has a wounded foot, as does Severian.
Does that come from the Bible, as a sign of the kind of character
who receives the foot-wound rather than head-crushing, as Genesis
3 speaks of it? 
 GW: I'm not sure. If so it was unconscious. I don't think I did
that consciously. I think it may very well reflect Biblical reading. 
 JJ: That is a theme in the Scripture, and Jacob winds up with a
limp in Genesis 32. It is as if, as you have pointed out in
especially in the Severian novels, it is necessary for God to
bruise and wound us in order to make us grow. 
 GW: This is the same thing. God is the ultimate Lover above the
human lover, and God has to do that. It would be very nice for me,
I think, if I didn't have to work, and if I never got into any kind
of trouble, and everybody thought that I was wonderful, and so
forth and so on. In the long-range view, that isn't how you make a
larger and better person. You meet people who have really been
through it and really, truly suffered---who have been, let's say, a
prisoner in the Hanoi Hilton for years, or something like that.
Then you discover, yes, they got something out of it that I don't
have. 
 I don't mean that I don't flee from pain and so forth just as
all of us do. I'm at least as cowardly as the average, probably
worse. 
 JJ: I don't think we are supposed to embrace pain. On the other
hand, we understand the purpose of it when it comes,... 
 GW: We try to. 
 JJ: ...whether the dark night of the soul or something else. 
 GW: You always tend to say, "Why this? Couldn't it have been
something else?" It is the problem of pain, which C.S. Lewis has an
essay on. I still run across people who talk about pain as if
nobody had ever dealt with it before. The idea of pain is to keep
you from doing those things that are destructive. And they say
"Surely there is another way that God could teach us." Yes, there
are other ways, but you would complain about those other ways, too,
just as you complain about pain. It would only change the dressing
of the situation, not the situation itself. 
 JJ: And if you believe that God has good intentions, then whatever
the pain was, it was indeed actually the best remedy. Now, along
these lines, is the torturer of which Severian is the shadow, is
that God? Is Severian the shadow of The Torturer? 
 GW: No, I think the idea there is that of the torturer coming
between the victim and God and casting a shadow, serving as the
oppressor or as a satanic figure. Severian is engaged in working
his way out of his profession, which is torture. 
 JJ: So although there are analogies between what God has to put us
through and what a torturer does, that was not your view. It was
rather an inversion at that notion? 
 GW: Well, I wasn't seeing the torturer as the hand of God, if that
is what you mean. No, I don't think so. I think that Satan does
what God wishes him to do; it is just that he doesn't want to. And
I think the torturer is in the same position. He is frequently
doing what God wants him to do but he is not trying to please God
by doing it. 
 JJ: Right. He is the Assyrian that God brings in against the
Israelites. 
 GW: Yes, as the book of Habakkuk teaches. 
 Women 
 JJ: Now, in my letter I asked a question that I figured you would
not like. I wrote that there seemed to be a number of women who are
less sympathetic than male characters in many of your books. You
strongly disagreed, which I expected. 
 GW: Well, as regards some of the characters. 
 JJ: Let's begin with Ann Schindler. What struck me about her in
 Castleview was this section where one woman is saying the rosary
and Ann Schindler starts to "pray" by thinking through a recipe.
What came to my mind was the Biblical phrase "whose god us their
belly." It seemed to be a form of idolatry. 
 GW: But I wasn't showing that Ann was a bad person; I was showing
that she was in a barren culture. That the only thing that she
could come up with was this, and I intended this to be humorous
rather than condemnatory. I thought Ann was basically a good
person. I am sensitive about this because a reviewer called her a
pitiless satire of the middle aged housewife or something like
that, which was in no means what I had intended. 
 JJ: She is a woman who hasn't taken her husband's name, so I would
not think that she is your average middle-age housewife 
 GW: No, she certainly is "liberated" in some degree. But she is
also courageous, intelligent, inquisitive, and she quite genuinely
loves her husband and her daughter. She is not faking that. She
actually loves Will, not as much as Will would like, but she loves
him. And she loves her daughter Mercedes enormously, fiercely. 
 JJ: I want to ask you about Laura in There Are Doors .
Having only been through it once and scanned it yesterday, I'm still not
exactly sure about what Laura is. 
 GW: Laura is my idea of what a pagan goddess might be who survived
into the Christian world. One of the places where I probably split
off from conventional Catholic thinking is that I believe that the
gods of paganism were real. I don't think that they are entitled to
the worship that they received from the pagans. I think what many
of the biblical writers are saying is, "Yes, these are real powers,
but it is wrong for you to give to them the honors that are due to
God alone." And I think that that is exactly correct. Now, if
Aphrodite were to survive into the contemporary world, what would
she be like? Well, Laura was a shot at trying to show what she
might be like. 
 JJ: Is there an attempt to redeem Laura on the part of the church. 
 GW: On the part of the author, not on the part of the church. 
 JJ: I ask because the Italian restaurant is one of the doorways
between the two worlds. 
 GW: Yes. You said that Mama wanted Laura to marry Green, and she
does want her to marry Green. That is because she thinks that Green
is a nice guy, which he is. He is kind of dumb, but he is a nice
guy. Laura is a nice girl, which is kind of true. And she would
like to see them get together. She has that maternal married woman
desire to see more married couples and children and so forth. 
 In There Are Doors I wanted to do something that I think has
only rarely been done. It certainly has been done, but it isn't
done very often. I wanted to present a protagonist who isn't very
intelligent. Green isn't. He has almost no virtues. By that I don't
mean that he has many vices, but he is not outstanding in any good
way. He is a man of very limited intelligence, not terribly
courageous, not terribly energetic or enterprising or any of those
other things. He is the sort of man who would be quite content to
work all his life in a dead end job and never try to get very far
outside of that---except that he meets Laura. That is what changes
him. Laura is looking for lovers, but Green is looking for love and
he has found it, or he thinks he has found it. And whether she
loves him or not, he loves her enormously. He can deal with the
idea that she doesn't love him, that she doesn't have any particular 
feeling for him. It makes no difference to him; he still loves
her. 
 JJ: Now, as I read the novel the first time, it appeared to me that
Tina and the dolls like her were given to train the men of that
world in an idolatrous worship of Laura as the goddess, and that
would be an anti-christian idea. And that Green's affection for her
and his overwhelming pursuit of her would be similarly problematic. 
 GW: This is the Christian world. That world is not the Christian
world. That world is kind of a warmed-over pagan world. And that is
what I tried to show it as. People always fault me on it by saying
I did not work out what a world would be like in which men died
after intercourse, but I feel that I did. 
 JJ: You raise that question in the book itself. 
 GW: How different would it be? I don't think it would be as
different as a lot of people want to think it would be. You would
have a lot of men who would refrain from intercourse either
throughout their life or at least until the very end of their
lives. And you would have a more feminine oriented society. A
feminine viewpoint would have more influence than it does in our
society. Although it does have a great deal in our society, it
would have still more there. 
 JJ: And you believe that there are significant differences between
feminine and masculine viewpoints. 
 GW: Absolutely. We're too biologically different not to have
differences in viewpoint. Of course, we have to get away from the
idea that one side is good and the other bad, which we have been
struck on now throughout recorded history. The great majority of
men have held that women are somehow innately evil; and the great
majority of women saying when they dared, and often thinking when
they dared not speak it aloud, that men were all beasts and brutes
and so forth. The terrible thing is that so much of the bad stuff
we say about each other is true. But we keep yelling for other
people to be good without trying to be good ourselves. We are the
only people we can make good. I can make me good, or I can at least
try, and you can make you good; but neither one of us can do much
for the other. 
 JJ: At the end of the novel Green goes off in pursuit of Laura in
Manea near Overwood, and that leaves the novel open. Do you intend
to come back to it? 
 GW: I might. I didn't intend to go back to it at the time I wrote
it. 
 JJ: Does he make any mistake running after her? 
 GW: Oh no, no. I don't think he's making a mistake. I think he is
making a great correct decision of his life, which is to go after
such love as he sees. 
 JJ: Even if what is there at the end is likely to be hollow?
Because she doesn't really love, does she? She just wants lovers. 
 GW: But how is going to be at the end, and how much is that going
to matter to him? He has found something to love. I think the
trouble with a whole lot of people in this world is that there is
nothing at all that they care deeply about. And it is certainly the
trouble with Green. But now he has found something to care deeply
about and he is making the correct decision. He has not made the
mistake of saying, "It is too much trouble and so I'm not going to
do it." I have a friend named Paul Marksa who is only a little bit
younger than I am. I am 61. Paul must be about 50. And he is
training now to be a missionary and he is going to go most likely
into South America and do missionary work. And I think he is
absolutely right. I know Paul, and he has finally found what he
needed to find all his life and he is making the right decision. It
is not going to be comfortable and it might be painful, and it is
darn hard for a man his age to throw off everything and start
studying all the things he has to study in order to be ordained in
his church, the Church of Christ, and become a missionary, but that
is what he is going to do. That is the right decision for him. 
 JJ: North in this book reminded me of Gordon Liddy. 
 GW: Very much so, very deliberately so. I originally started out
with the idea of modeling him on Oliver North. He had a different
name at that time. And I later came to realize that North was not
the sort of person I thought he was. But Liddy really was and I
read Liddy's book Will , which is an astonishingly good book, and I
sort of caricatured Liddy to some degree. 
 They aren't very many of them, but there really are people
like North. North is unconsciously oriented to a death-wish that he
can't control. He is trying to get himself killed. Because he is,
he raises every confrontation to the level of a life and death
struggle. He is the sort of man who shoots the policeman who stops
him to give him a speeding ticket. 
 Peace 
 JJ: Another thing that I raised that you didn't like at all was
from the novel Peace . Let me make a case and then you show me where
I am wrong and we can maybe discuss how this comes about. But as I
reread Peace, I reread a lot of it and I found that you have a
story in there, you have four suitors for Olivia. Olivia is Olive
Branch Peace. That reminds me of the fairy stories where several
brothers pursue something. 
 GW: Well, we do on those fairy stories in the course of the book. 
 JJ: Julius Smart is the one who wins her hand. He is a man who
takes over a pharmacy. A pharmacy dispenses drugs. Dispenses grace.
The man who was there before was giving out drugs that were very
damaging and Smart doesn't like that idea. He cleans the place up.
She is unfaithful to him but he forgives her. He is said to be a
symbolic figure and the central figure in the book. He owns the
company for which Weir works but when he comes around to inspect
Weir and all of the fellows fake up as if they were doing good work
and are not willing to be seen for what they really are. And all of
those things pointed in the direction that Julius Smart would have
symbolic weight attached to him and is something of a revelation of
a Christ figure. However you objected to that idea. I wonder why... 
 GW: I certainly wasn't conscious of doing it while writing the
book. I guess that is about the best that I can say. 
 JJ: Is he symbolic and central to the book? 
 GW: I didn't intend him as a symbolic figure I don't believe. I
intended him as an ordinary, middle class American. If he symbolizes 
anything he symbolizes the mass of ordinary working class,
lower-middle class America. 
 JJ: Okay. I wanted to ask you this about this book too. It
came up in the discussion yesterday when one of the panelists said
that he tried to write a main stream novel and when he finally
added a fantasy element to it then it took off in his mind. So
often this novel has been interpreted not as a ghost story or as
having any supernatural elements but simply the ruminations of an
old man. Why isn't it that? Why didn't you just write it as an old 
man thinking over his life. What
added dimension is there to it that caused you to want to make it
a man who is already dead thinking over his life? 
 GW: Because I wanted it to lend to the memories certain
supernatural strengths that ordinary memories that the old man thinking over
his life wouldn't have. I wanted to do the rooms that were
recreations and rooms that he had known as a very young man and I
didn't think that anybody would actually do that. That it had to be
a supernatural stick or a mental quirk or something of that sort.
I wanted some interplay between the remembered figures and the
present reality. And so on that I could not have gotten with just
reminiscence. 
 JJ: Okay. It is a very Proustian novel all the same I 
suppose. 
 GW: I think it is Proustian and I am a great Proust fan. I have 
read Remembrance of Things Past I think about two and a half 
times. I don't read it more because when I start reading it I stop reading
everything else. Unfortunately I am in a position of having a lot
of things that I have to read or owe it to other people to read so
that I can give them promotional quotes or things that I need to
read to research something I am writing currently: non-fiction and
so on. 
 Awards 
 JJ: I know you have to make a decision among the novels to be
awarded prizes at this conference so you have to read all of them. 
 GW: Well, I had to at least start all of those. The World Fantasy
Award was not only for best novel but for best non-fiction and for
best story collection and for best short story as well. 
 JJ: Oh, my, you had a lot to read. 
 GW: All that. And the only way that you can possibly do it is to
begin each work and stop as soon as you say to yourself I am not
going to vote a prize for this work and then go on to the next one.
And if you find that you can't stop then you had better rethink
this decision I am not going to vote a prize for this work because
if it is not that good how come you can't put it down? But I
finished very few of the books that I started for that. The best
one by the way which is a very Christian (very Catholic though) novel
is Mojo and the Pickle Jar which was my top pick for the World
Fantasy Award and I couldn't convince any of the other judges it
should even be in the running, I think probably because it is too
Christian. 
 JJ: Who is the author of that? 
 GW: A man named Douglas Bell who lives down in Texas around Dallas
somewhere who I have never met and know nothing about him except
his name and that I saw a jacket picture of him on the book. But it
is about a young, not very good man in Texas who has worked in his
uncle's road side cafe when a Mexican girl comes in with something
in a jar, in a pickle jar. The heart of a saint. And she is being
pursued by the minions of a cocaine baron because she has been
involved in a drug deal that has gone wrong. And the young man
Mojo, the girl's Jane I think, is Juanita. Right out he tries to help
her. They go on the lam from the people who are trying to kill
them. But they are carrying with them this miracle working
religious relic and it is a good piece, I would have been very
happy to have written it, I didn't. 
 JJ: Do you read Timothy Powers or James Blaylock much? 
 GW: I certainly haven't read Blaylock much. I have read Powers a
little bit more than Blaylock. 
 JJ: Just curious: is this man in purgatory working toward peace? 
 GW: Yeah, I think probably he is. 
 JJ: Is that something you thought about when you wrote it or... 
 GW: That was not the way I conceived it when I wrote it. I
conceived it more that he was a ghost trying to make sense of his
own life. And I think that is another way of saying that. Goodness
knows we don't know much about heaven and we know even less about
hell and we hardly know anything about purgatory at all. What is
it? And if you believe in ghosts, and I happen to believe in
ghosts, what's going on with them? Long, long ago, was it ________-
_____ one of Shakespeare's contemporaries said that hell is not a
place it is a state: wherever I am hell is. Dr. Faustus: who wrote
that? 
 JJ: Faustus, that was written by... you asked so I can't think of
it. Marlowe. 
 GW: Marlowe, yes that is who it was, Christopher Marlowe. And I think
that he is right. The old attempts to locate heaven, you know, above
the clouds, and hell in the bowels of the volcano and so forth. I
think are not only obviously naive but they are fundamentally wrong
in that they are looking for countries in the sense that North
America or Ireland or whatever are countries and I don't think that
is what those things are. They are states. 
 JJ: The book of Revelation uses the image of the lake of fire in
front of the throne of God which I think implies that everyone
winds up in the same place except some like it and some don't. 
 GW: Well, I think that may very well be. 
 JJ: At least in part. That is an image that at least in part
explains. 
 GW: Its a question I think of the souls relationship with God after
death. If that relationship is fundamentally good then the soul is
in heaven. Jesus kept saying the kingdom of heaven is here. It is
not in the far future, it is here and now. And it is here and now
for those whose relationship with God is correct. 
 The Soldier Series 
 JJ: Let me ask you about Soldier of the Mist and 
 Soldier of Arete .
Are those historical novels or fantasy novels? 
 GW: Well, they are historical fantasy. What I tried to do. 
 JJ: Which is another way of saying, do we have fallen
angels here or some type of power that really was operative in the
world before the kingdom of God? 
 GW: That is my personal belief. I think that the gods of paganism
were real. But what I tried to do was to write about that pagan
world as the pagans themselves wrote about it. If we read modern
historians we are reading a very rationalistic viewpoint of this
which says that all of these people were absolutely wasting their
time by building temples to Ares or Apollo or you name it. And by
offering sacrifices in worship and all that it was nothing there.
Nothing at all there and that whether it is true or not that
certainly is not the way the people who were doing it felt.
They were convinced that there was something there and they had all
sorts of legends and so forth about the appearances of the god and
in fact there is one place in the Acts where Paul and another one
of the apostles are mistaken for Zeus and Mercury. Zeus and Hermes,
we are mixing the Latin and the Greek which is what I was trying to
get away from. They are mistaken for Zeus and Hermes in human form
because people in those days expected that you could see Zeus and
Hermes in human form. I am not so sure they were wrong. I am not
convinced that they were wrong. We love to think how much smarter
we are than people of ancient times or biblical times or so forth
but I am very dubious about that. 
 JJ: I agree with you. There aren't so many people who think that
any more, we have the influence of rationalism in our society. I
think that what most of us are taught about the ancient world is
largely nonsense. One of the primary things being the fact that the
church fathers say that the Hebrew scriptures were known around the
ancient world and I imagine that they were. They weren't secret
documents. People like Aristotle were curious for anything they
could get their hand on. 
 GW: People like Aristotle read any book that they could find
because books were rare. When I was a kid reading fantasy and
science fiction and that sort of thing it was hard to find that
type of material and anything that you could find you read. 
 JJ: Yes I agree, even when I was young it was still that way.
Okay, you do seem to have some symbolic overtones in The Soldier of
Arete . Certainly with Latro, or `Lucius,' I guess that was a real name
and that means wolf, there is a wolf aspect in him being from Rome
being a descendant of Romulus or at least in some way and then
Ares being primary agricultural and marshall god of Rome, Marias.
He actually seems to incarnate Ares on occasion. In the mythology
Aphrodite although she is married to Hephaestus she is carrying on
an affair with Ares she seems to come to him one night. These
things happen... 
 GW: I thought she was married to Ares. 
 JJ: She is married to both of them. She cheats with Ares. Vulcan
catches them in the net and there is a certain amount of punishment
that Ares goes through as well. 
 GW: Okay, I still think there are other poets in which she is
married to Ares. 
 JJ: There may be other poems. 
 GW: Anyway. 
 JJ: Is there a larger picture here. I raise the question when
Lucius leaves Greece he leaves Io and Polos in the care of Pindar.
 Polos means a small horse. Io, at least for you,
means "joy". Is he leaving joy and myth in the care of poetry? Is
there a symbolic dimension? 
 GW: Yeah, there is. Every once in a while you say "Gee, that is neat;
I will do this". And you do it. I wasn't writing the whole book that
way. The book isn't intended as an allegory but what the book
really is intended is to show the problems faced by genuinely good
man who can't remember because it seems to be that is the problem
of our society. We have a genuinely good society, by that I mean it
is made up of people who by and large are quite decent individuals.
But our society has no memory of this. It has no awareness of
history. 
 JJ: Right. 
 GW: And so we have this America blundering around on the world
stage more or less as Latro does. Latro is strong and able and
tries to be a force for good but he can't remember. 
 JJ: That is an interesting perspective on it, I hadn't thought of
at all. My wife had one of her professors that taught in a Moslem
country for a while and said he woke up one day and saw the
children had a bunch of kittens they were throwing up in the air
and hitting them with a baseball bat against the wall and the mothers just
sat by and watched. He said "I am not a Christian, I am an atheist,
but I am a Christian in that I could not tolerate that." There has
been an influence in our society that has made us different from pagans. 
 GW: We vastly underestimate the importance of Jesus. We think we
don't. We have all these churches and we say how can we be
underestimating Jesus? We don't until we start trying to figure out
what it would be like if he had never lived. When you really start
trying to figure out what it would be like if He never lived you
realize that He is a much more pivotal figure than we give him
credit for. All of these people, everybody at this convention is in
that sense a Christian although most of them would tell you that
they are not and some of them would tell them quite truthfully that
they were Jews who practice Judaism in one of its various forms and
so on and so forth. Nevertheless they have been influenced by
Christ much more than they realized. We are very lucky to have had
Him. We are very fortunate. A friend of mine learned to read
Turkish. And he got hold of a Turkish joke book and read it. And I
said, "What were the jokes like?" He said it was horrible. They were
all about ugly tricks that were being played on blind people and things
like that. This is what we have escaped from and we don't realize
that it is there and we came very close to falling into it. We very
easily could have and we still may. 
 JJ: It is a striking thing if you read the book of Leviticus and it
is right there that you will never put a stumbling block in front
of a blind person, you will never curse him to death. That kind of
thing is unique. But as you say it is common in other cultures. In
the preface to Soldier of the Mist you tell us that Latro knows a
little bit of Hebrew but the only people like that he runs into are
Phoenicians. I wondered if the fact that the Phoenicians are the
ones who rescue him in the end and take him home had a symbolic
overtone to you. 
 GW: Not tremendously. It was just at the time I was planning a
third book and I wanted to get him into the Semitic world. [Moving from]
 the Hellenic world that these two books were laid in very largely and to
involve him with the Phoenicians and the Jews and the Syrians and
that part of the world. When I originally conceived the series I
wanted to do a tour of the ancient world so to speak. And I had
hoped in fact to get him into the new world where there were the
Mayan and the so on the various American Indian civilizations. They
really dislike the term Native American, Indians. I realize Indians
is not a very good term for them I don't think Native Americans is
a good term either. I wanted to do all those things and 
after the second book David Hartwell, my editor, called me up
and told me not to write the third one. He now denies that by the
way but he did. 
 JJ: He thought this was so difficult to read? 
 GW: David said it was too difficult to sell well and David is as
good at self deception as most of us, maybe better than most of us,
so I didn't; I went off and did something else. Now I don't know if
I will ever write, what I was going to write Soldier of Sidon.
Sidon or Siddon, I would pronounce it Sidon.
[short discussion on how to pronounce, I didn't know how to spell
the different pronunciations - JBJ] 
 JJ: My impression is that words that are used commonly you say in
the Anglicized forms and ones that are uncommon you try to say it
in the way they would in the ancient world. 
 GW: That is certainly a good rule but the question then is what is
common and what isn't. 
 JJ: That's right. Especially nowadays. 
 GW: Who is to do the determining? People today, half of them have
no idea who Julius Caesar was. They have heard the name but if you
asked them what did Caesar do why is he an important historical
figure they wouldn't be able to give you much of an answer. 
 JJ: Latro's world seems to be a really horrible world and one that
you would want to escape from. Was that, were you just be ruthlessly 
honest there or were you seeking to invoke that in the reader?
This is not where we want to be, we want to be in a world that is
more Christian. 
 GW: I think certainly that is true. I think I was reacting against
an idealization of the ancient world that many people have. One of
the ancient authors has this story, I think it is an ancient
author, about the woman who goes to Plato or some, one of the great
philosophers and describes this ideal society that she and her
friends are going to set up. And they are going to play music and
they are going to have ritual dancing and do all these Ursula
LeGuin things and he says but who is going to do all the work?
You are going to need food and so forth. She says, oh, we are going
to have slaves. 
 JJ: Of course. 
 GW: That was very much the idealism of the ancients. Ideally
someone else will do it. 
 JJ: Right. But then, a gradually diminution of slavery and the
development of liberty is a long term impact of Christianity. 
 GW: Well, also machinery, simple technology. I'm an engineer and I
intend to take credit for what we can. I think the steam engine
probably did more to free slaves than any human being. More than
Abraham Lincoln did or U.S. Grant. 
 JJ: And so many of these fundamental technological advances were
made in the so called Dark Ages when the church was in charge of
things. 
 GW: Well, the church very largely saved ancient civilization. We
know much of what we do know about ancient civilization because the
Church preserved that for us. That is one of things we owe the
Church. I am not one of those people who try and say the Church has
never done anything wrong. The Church is an organization made up of
human beings, has existed for 2,000 years, it has enormous
opportunities to go wrong and it often has but the thing that I
think separates the Church from most other human institutions is
that the Church has always tried to go right, it just hasn't always
succeeded. Most of our human institutions are very willing to
strike a bargain with the devil if they think they can get good
enough terms. That is always a bad thing to do. 
 JJ: The Soldier of Arete is even more than 
 Soldier of the Mist a bit
hard to follow in terms of his plot. And I remember, in fact I
remember when it came out Orson Scott Card really complained that
(it was in Analog or Astounding; one of those magazines) he had a
review that said "Nobody reads Gene Wolfe with more care and
affection than I do but I can't figure out what this book is about."
What is wrong with this author? Does that kind of complaint
bother you or do you feel as if you wish you could leave more clues
or do you feel: Hey, read the book and look at it again and you
will find the answers. 
 GW: I try not to leave a clue more than once. It bothers me a lot
when it is left more than once in somebody else's book. If you told
me once that the hero is left handed, I have registered it or at
least I hope I have registered it or whatever this may be and if
you told me five times then I feel that you are writing to somebody
that is a lot dumber than I am. So I try and leave my clues once
and generally try and leave all the clues that I think the reader
is going to require, sometimes more than they require because you
don't generally find situations in which you have exactly as much
information as you need to solve the thing. If it is solvable at
all you probably have more. If you have only a very few items then
it probably isn't solvable with the information that you have. What
you need to do in a real life situation is to go out and get more
clues. If you know anything about actual police work very little of
it consists of reasoning from clues and the great majority or it
consists of finding more clues. Because when you have found enough
then you have got, you have very little difficulty in understanding
what they mean. 
 JJ: In the Solider novels you seem to have in the background a war
between the moon and the earth. Is that, is there anything there
except the fact that those who worship the moon and conquered
territory that formerly belonged to Gaia? 
 GW: I was trying to show the difference between the old matriarchal
or more female oriented society which had in fact been displaced by
a more patriarchal society. I think that the majority of the things
that the women's libbers write is nonsense, but every once in a
while they are right like everybody else. Everybody is right once
in a while and this is one of the things they are right about.
There really was a much more female-oriented mother goddess worship
and the obvious key point is Delphi and if you read about Delphi in
classic times you were very clearly reading about a shrine which a
goddess has been displaced by a god. The priests at Delphi in
classical times were not permitted to wear shoes and they had to
sleep on the ground. And they were priests of Apollo and this makes
no sense for priests of Apollo. It makes a great deal of sense for
priests of the earth goddess which is what they originally were who
carried these traditions through. And I was trying to show that war,
that struggle, in terms of its divinity. 
 JJ: So the moon goddess is actually allied with her brother. 
 GW: She was. And she was a part of the new mythology who was
displacing the old mythology. Basically the Zeus centered mythology
was displacing the Gaia centered mythology. 
 JJ: Okay. I was not sure why, what was happening at the initiation
of Sparta at the end, if you don't mind. 
 GW: That was all real. That all happened. What they did. 
 JJ: What the Spartans did. 
 GW: Yes, The Spartans were the most totalitarian people that I have
ever come across. They made the Nazis look like Boy Scouts and they
really did it, and they did it for it for a hundred years and they
were so totalitarian as to be almost unbelievable. One of the
strange things about Sparta was they had the two kings and I am
sure you realize. I don't know of anybody else that had a double
monarchy that was two kings that the Spartans did. One of the
strange things is that the kings really represented the good past
in Sparta. They were relics from the time when Sparta was a Greek
state much like other Greek states. They were slowly being
constricted and crowded out by the totalitarian ethic.
It was like they had G. Gordan Liddy as an immortal dictator that
seized and effectually ruined Sparta. They had this king who died
at Thermopoli, Leonidis, who armed the Helots. It was death for Helot to
touch a weapon. If you saw a Helot with his hand on your bow you
were supposed to kill it and Leonidis who was one of the Spartan
kings and was certainly a very brave leader in war. As general he 
may have been 
a little too theoretically oriented but there is no question that
he was a man of immense physical courage also had the immense moral
courage to say "we are going to lead these men, let's stop this
nonsense, arm them and use them as troops because we need every man
that we can get." And he did, so when the Spartans were fighting
the Persians, they were fighting them with their light infantry, and
their skirmishers and so forth were bands of armed Helots. At the
end of the war they said, we are going to reward you Helots by
giving those who did most in the war their freedom. And they will
be not equals __________who would be able to run for office and
vote and so on and take part in the government but they would be
free individuals living in Sparta and free as such people were. And
so you are to name for us those Helots who were your leaders in the
late war who should be rewarded like this. Then they held a
ceremony which I described in detail, exactly as it was and they
gave each Helot who was to be awarded his freedom as a climax of
the ceremony a young Spartan as his companion to lead him through
the ceremony. And at a given signal each companion killed that
Helot that he was responsible for. And they were all killed except
Latros who they did not intend to kill because he wa not really a
Helot. And he survived and all of the rest of them who had gone in
the ceremony were butchered. And they really were, this took place.
This is the reason that I say that these people were totalitarians.
University of Michigan's football team were called the Spartans.
And you could have no clearer indication that the University of
Michigan does not really understand what was going on in the
ancient world. No way would they allow that if the people who are
running the university of Michigan understood what the real
Spartans were like. They were certainly not like our football
players by any means. 
 JJ: I thought that was what was going on but I wasn't sure. And I
wasn't sure why Latro was there but I can see it now. That
depresses him terribly. 
 GW: Oh yeah, yeah. Latro is under tremendous psychological pressure
because of the fact that he can't _____________ and this has added
an enormous burden of guilt because he survived. Remember now that
this ceremony with the ancient gods is very significant to him. He
is an ancient man and he belongs in all this and now when all the
others have died and he is the sole survivor and he gets an
enormous amount of guilt out of this and goes into clinical
depression. 
 JJ: Does the novel anywhere explain why Latro has been struck in
the head? 
 GW: I don't think it does. My idea as I said originally was that he
desecrated the temple during the Battle of Plateo. There was hand to hand
fighting in the temple and it occurred to me that the temple
couldn't have been kept in very good order when a bunch of Persians
and Greeks were trying to kill each other in it. Of course the
initial idea for the whole series of books was that Xerxes would
get a band of Roman exiles and enlist them as mercenaries in his
army. If you have read Herotidus you know that there were enormous
catalogs. There were ancient tribes that we know only because there
was a group of them serving as mercenaries in these armies or sent
by tributary kings and so forth. Xerxes seems to have gathered
every fighting man he could scrape up. Of course what happened, I
guess I am going far off the subject, but what happened was he lost
the battle of Salamus which meant that he lost control which means
he lost the ability to supply this huge army that he had put into
the field and he had to withdraw most of it because he couldn't
feed the troops. And you know a small band of raiders is something
that could live off the land but when you are talking about
hundreds of thousands of men they cannot do it, the land hasn't got
that much food. 
 JJ: So that was something that might have come up in the third
volume if you had not been discouraged from writing it? 
 GW: Absolutely. The black man who nobody ever talks about but I
intended as a major figure was an Ethiopian and Xerxes actually had
Ethiopians who were armed with stone age weapons. Spears tipped
with Antelope horn and this sort of thing and he had these people
in his army. So the black man was one of these Ethiopians who was
sent by the King of Ethiopia as mercenaries. The King of Ethiopia
was paid to send warriors to the army that Xerxes was going to
invade Greece with. 
 The Ancient World 
 JJ: He could have had American Indians in his army from what I can
tell about the ancient world. 
 GW: I think you are saying that there were a lot more interaction
between the ancient world than we in the New World give them credit
for. Absolutely right. 
 JJ: They have found Peregrene Irish monk inscriptions in places in
America but the establishment view just will not admit that it
could be true. 
 GW: I know one of the leading scholars, Cyrus Gordon, I had dinner
with him, well I have had dinner with him twice. Once in a
restaurant, but the one I was thinking of he had us over for dinner,
and we ate with him. He had a friend who is now deceased, Sharon
Baker, talented writer that was really just getting started and she
was 55 or so when she died of cancer. But Sharon was his niece so
she introduced me to him. He is a pariah because he keeps bringing
up this stuff and saying but look, look at the evidence. And they
are all saying oh he is an old crackpot, send him off. That nut. He
is saying but why was the army of Yucatan arranged just like an
Assyrian army? They say that is just coincidence. He says but why
was the Loom used in the Yucatan just like the loom that was used
in the Mediterranean about 1000 B.C. Oh well, that is a coincidence
that they developed the same sort of loom. 
 And can I tell you, this is a hobby horse of mine, I shouldn't 
 shoot up your tape with it but
I am an engineer by trade. We know how the wheel was invented,
archeology has established how the wheel was invented. The wheel
was invented by people who started out by laying down logs and
putting big stones on the logs and pushing. When you do that you
have to pick up the end log and you have to carry it around to the
front so that it feeds in under the stone. When you do this, your
log takes on a coke bottle shape. There are engineering reasons for
why it wears in this pattern. I could describe, well, say that
there is a rock here and here is our log and it is going to go over
the rock. Now if the rock is the middle then the full weight of the
load is right here on the rock. If the rock is over on one side
only one half of the load is on the rock so the middle wears faster
and you get coke bottle shaped logs. And you learn eventually that
the coke bottle shaped logs work better than new logs. You start
getting guys with hatchets to carve the coke bottle shape into them
from the beginning because it is easier than wearing them in.
Because if there is a stone in the middle and your log is coke
bottle shape you just go over it. You don't have to push the load
over it. You just sail over it. That makes the load easier to push. 
Then somebody said well, we've got all these baskets full of gravel
and stuff that we also need to build the pyramid. Instead of
carrying them on our backs why don't we put them on top of the rock
and push everything. Well, that works, that is easier than carrying
the gravel in a basket on your back. So they do that. Then they
have all the big rocks in place and they say gee we really miss
those big rocks because it was easier than carrying the basket.
Let's make a fake rock out of wood, it won't be very heavy and we
can put our baskets on them. Okay that is easier again, now you
could do it. Then somebody says, well, look, suppose we have posts
going right down here so that that last log couldn't get out, well
you try that and the log rubs against the post. You learn if you
put the post inward where the log is coke bottle shaped it doesn't
rub up as much and you can take mutton fat out of the sheep,
everybody knows that makes things slippery, and grease it and then
it doesn't hardly drag at all. And what you end up with is a very
big, very clumsy four wheeled cart. And this is how the wheel is
invented. 
 If you read the anthropologists about the Indians they
will tell you the Indians did not have the wheel. But they did. The
thing is that the only wheel that they had was tiny little wheeled
toys. A little animal on a little platform and four wheels.
Obviously they did not evolve the wheel. They got it from somebody
who had already evolved. And this somebody could not put a cart or
chariot aboard the ship. It took up too much room. You could put a
hundred little wheeled toys aboard the ship and trade them. Right?
Well the Indians had never seen anything, well, gee that is neat.
You can pull it along and it follows the kid around and that is a
nice trade item and you can carry hundreds of them aboard your
Phoenecian ship. And the Indians never got it any farther. They
were not able to look at the wheeled toy and say why we can't we
make a big one like that? They never took that step. 
 JJ: I am tempted to say there was a book a few years age by a
chemist who argued that the Pyramids in Egypt were not made of
stones dragged up but they were bricks cast in place with a
chemical regent to fill it and they were a box with shelves pour in
a regent and make the brick right there in place. He is saying they
had the technology to do this. That we have cut these stones open
and that is what they look like. And there is no reason to believe
people in the ancient world didn't understand this. I don't know
the chemistry well enough to remember... 
 GW: I don't either. I hadn't known of the book. It is certainly a
very interesting idea. There are stones in South America so closely
fitted that you wonder if somebody hasn't been doing something like
that. Now maybe they just very laboriously carved these stones so
that they fit right into each other, but you would think they would
just carve them flat like Joe blocks so they would do that but they
don't. They wave round and so forth but they fit. They key into
each other nicely. 
 Castleview 
 JJ: What were you regarding 
as the theme in Castleview ? You told me
that the castle is a Winnebago. 
 GW: From Morgan LeFay's perspective it is a travelling home. She
can send her house, her castle whatever you want to call it. 
 JJ: Is this a pure fantasy novel? 
 GW: Oh yeah, I would say it is a purely fantasy novel. I was trying
to show really the connection of the modern world to the medieval
world I think more than anything else that is the theme. 
 JJ: And it has a lot to do with perception? For some people the
band that runs through the town are cowboys and indians, for others
they are Arthur and his knights, for others it seems like it is a
spaceship. 
 GW: This is, when you research these anomalous stories and accounts
and so forth, the anomalous things that happen, you get this sort of
thing. You get two witnesses who have very different stories
depending on how they perceived some third thing that we don't know
what it was. So I tried to show it like that. 
 JJ: So basically you have Arthurian characters in the modern world
who are some way or other archetypes of the characters in the
twenty century characters that we see? 
 GW: Yeah, they are twentieth century characters who are rather like
the people of the middle ages. The people of the middle ages
weren't that different. And I was thinking of the old business
about everybody being descendant from Charlemagne, you are and so
am I. You know that if you look at the number of ancestors both of
us have had to have we come up with some number by the time we get
back to the time of Charlemagne it is something like eight times
the actual population of Europe at that time. Europe only had
something like 12 million people in Charlemagne's time and our
number of grandparents and great grandparents double with every
generation. It works out to an enormous number and so anybody who
was living in Europe at that time and who did in fact have
descendants and Charlemagne had something like 14 children is
almost certainly (the almost is really a weasel word) is
statistically certain to be descendent to Charlemagne. Okay, if
there really was an Arthur and there was because he is mentioned in
ancient chronicles and he left a number of descendants, which is at
least plausible, then we are probably all descended from Arthur.
And what Morgan LaFay is looking for is a descendent who is a
satisfactory Arthur figure for her. But not only is Wrangler
descended from Arthur, and Will Shield is descended from Arthur but
Bob Roberts is descended from Arthur and Ann Findler is descended
from Arthur because we all are, we all derive from this. I was
telling my wife I am what is called a free lance. A real free lance
was a medieval knight who had no feudal obligations and could hire
himself out. And he hired his lance and you had one more lance in
your heavy calvary charge when you hired this man. You also got
whatever retainers he brought along with him. But now somebody like
me is called a free lance. I work mostly for Tor Books. Tor
Books is owned by St Martin's Press. St. Martin's Press is owned by
the British McMillian Corporation which is owned by the McMillian
family which is headed up by the Duke of something or other who is
the head of the McMillian family and I am really a free lance in
the employ of this Duke. And things have not changed nearly as much
a we would like to think that they have and I was trying to show
some of that. 
 JJ: Well, we have really discussed this and you have answered it
because a number of reviewers assume that you are writing a modern
type of novel that everything is a matter of perspective and it is
supposed to be confusing and somehow or other that is a profundity.
But actually the clues are there and you are not writing that
type of novel. There might be puzzles but the reader is supposed to
figure them out. 
 GW: Yeah. Everything may be confusing but that is how things are.
It is not true that you can't get through the confusion and figure
out certain things that are happening. Life seen superficially has
very little pattern to it. There is a lot of confusion and so
forth. That doesn't mean that you can't learn some things about it
and see things in it if you are willing to look at what is going on
and think about what is going on. It seems to me this is a puzzle
that we are all set. This is one of the principle things that
distinguish us from the beasts. I know perfectly well that animals
can reason in a very limited degree. I think that animals are self
aware; I have no question that animals are self aware. I am talking
about higher animals, not snakes and lizards and such. But animals
I don't think are reflective. I don't think that animals try and
make sense of things in the way that we do. The animal may be under
the stars every night for all of its life but I don't think it ever
looks up at the stars and wonders what that is. I don't think that
there is, that animals see anything analogous to the constellations
and so forth that human beings see in the sky. 
 JJ: In Free Live Free were you pointing to inner 
moral freedom as the true freedom that the characters come to in a society 
that seems to have mysterious conspiratorial forces operating in the
background of it? Or were you getting something else. 
 GW: I suppose in a way. One of the things that I was trying to say
was that America is not free and is becoming less so. And that we
have to realize it and we have to resolve within ourselves to be
free and to oppose the forces that are enslaving us. 
 JJ: So this is really a follow up, a more mature version of
 Operation Ares ? 
 GW: I suppose yeah. Yes. Somewhat the same concern. I tried to give
the four borders, I tried to give each sort of a besetting sin.
Madame Serpantina, it's pride. Candy, it is gluttony. Stub, I forget
now. Osgood Barnes, sexuality of course. 
 JJ: And you drew them somewhat from the _________ 
 GW: Envy, envy I think is Stubbs. And I wasn't trying to write
allegory. I wasn't saying he was a personification of envy. I
wanted to show men and women who were actually beset by these sins.
Trying to, given an opportunity to become something bigger and
better than they had been by defeating the sin to some degree.
Candy of course gets what she wants. She stuffs herself to the
point that she can't stuff herself no more. And finds that 
this is not really paradise, it is not heaven, even though she
has achieved it. Osgood Barnes comes to see sex as something more
than the physical act. He comes to see the possibilities of love
and sacrifice and so on. That is what I tried to do at least. 
 The New Sun Series 
 JJ: Okay. I'll pass on that. I don't want to keep you too much
longer. I wanted to ask you a few questions about the Severian
novels. I have tried very hard to find out, find the meaning of the
word Ushas [Yesod?] but I haven't succeeded, so would you? You didn't make
up any words? 
 GW: No, but some of them are typos. Ushas [Yesod?] is not one of them
though. Okay, that is Cabalistic term for one of the circles of the
cabala and as I say I don't want to try to answer questions on the
cabala. I never knew a great deal about it and I have forgotten
most of what I knew. But to find out what it is that is the place
to look. Read cabalic literature. I have the great disadvantage of
not believing in it and so I can't get so caught up in it as
cabalist really do. To me it was someplace that I could steal ideas
and names from. 
 JJ: Okay. Well that is an important consideration because of one of
the questions that came to my mind and it has to others is were
you, does this indicate... 
 GW: I think it is a cabalist name for the new earth after, you know,
it has been cleansed by God or some such thing, but check it out in
cabalistic literature. 
 JJ: This universe that you set in Briah, or part of it--is that 
our universe? Or is that a universe that resurrected saints
 have set up
in the world to come as part of the cities that they made? 
 GW: No. I thought of it as a long past universe. Something that we
are repeating rather than something that we are. 
 JJ: I don't know that I have any other questions. It is a universe
in which angelic like things actually have physical control over
the universal stars and suns. I noticed that you had scarabs in the
great machine in Yesod. Severian goes through and sees that 
 GW: Oh yeah, yeah. 
 JJ: Scarabs push the suns. But that is a past world just in your
imagination. 
 GW: Yes, I was looking at what past universes might have been like
really and that is how...I began with the idea of what is going to
happen to us if we just keep going the way we are going and
continue to live on the continent of Earth without ever really
going into the sea or going into space and we just wait for the
money to run out. The do nothing future and thinking about what
that would be. And then I got into the idea of universal cycles.
And decided that I would show that this might be a past cycle. Some
physicists at least think that the Big Bang is eventually going to
be followed by a Big Gnab in which the whole universe coalesces
again which will be followed by another Big Bang which is sort of
like a succession of universe as piston impulses in an internal
combustion engine. I certainly don't have any great emotional
investment in that idea but I do think it is a useful idea to play
around with. Physics is coming nearer and nearer and nearer
mysticism. It has been doing this now for over 50 years and it
seems to me that is a fascinating thing that much too little
attention has been given to. 
 JJ: That poses something of a difficulty in terms of Christian
eschatology if there is to be a time and there is a resurrection
where the world comes to an end. Are you making an attempt to unify
those two ideas or just to play with the idea of a gnostic universe? 
 GW: I was toying with those ideas, I think, rather than trying to
make sense of them. Is our resurrection going to be in another
universal cycle? Well, yes, maybe it is. I don't know. We don't know
what is really meant by the world coming to an end, and God rolling
up the sky like a carpet and all that. It is all picturesque
language. Figurative language to try to give a general idea to an
audience that would not be capable of understanding the actuality.
And I am not sure we are more capable of understanding that
actuality than they were. It is like the Genesis story. I don't
believe in a literal apple and I don't believe that literally
biting into the fruit had this effect but if you have to explain to
a bunch of primitives how men differ from animals and where men
went wrong in differing from animals, this is a pretty good way to
do it. 
 JJ: Who is on trial in The Urth of the New Sun ? 
Severian or Tzadkiel? Because Tzadkiel tells him as the captain of the ship
______________mind. 
 GW: Severian is really on trial. Tzadkiel is pretending to be on
trial as a part of Severian's trial as I remember. 
 JJ: Tzadkiel means the Righteousness of God. 
 GW: He is an angel of justice. 
 JJ: He passes judgement there. Apheta, that would mean opheta with
an eta: that is speechless. Was that your idea? Opheta with an
epsilon could mean forgiveness. 
 GW: No it is speechless. They talk by centering the sounds that you
hear so that you think that you are hearing a voice but they are
actually speechless. In a completely silent atmosphere they would be
unable to speak. 
 JJ: Right. 
 GW: It was just a physical idea that I decided to play with and it
has certain philosophical reasons to it. 
 JJ: As if the universe of words is on one level and there is
something higher or above that. 
 GW: Well, the idea of selection. That we can make ourselves clear to
somebody else by selecting things to which they pay attention. 
 JJ: Okay. Oh... Severian's sexual relationship with her.
What is the purpose of that? He is a married man so at one level he
is cheating on his wife. He gets aboard ship and immediately takes
a cabin near Gunnie and the way you have it written he thinks to
himself well it has been 10 years since I have had anybody since
Valaria. It seems to be one of his lapses in virtue at that point. 
 GW: Yeah, I was not trying to show him as being that virtuous a
man. 
 JJ: But here you have an angelic being takes him for the night.
What is going on there? Is that an idea of a celestial marriage
between heaven and earth? 
 GW: I think that the ideal of the higher being trying to raise the
lower being to a greater height perhaps. And also the attraction
that the lower being at least properly should feel toward the
higher being. 
 JJ: So we could interpret that more symbolic than a moral level? 
 GW: Oh yeah, yeah. Well he is there to be morally judged but that
does not mean that everything... The fact that he is acquitted
doesn't mean that everything that he does or will do is right. If
that is the criteria then none of us are going to make it. None of
us are without sin which I realize is a platitude but it is also
truth and it is very important truth. There are, if that is what we
mean by good people then there are no good people. What we have to
mean by good people is people who are bad but are trying at times
to be good with mixed success because that is the closest that we
get. 
 JJ: The holy slaves [Heirodules], 
Famulimus or one of them tells Severian that
he is the center of his race, the savior of his race. That is such
Christlike language you can see why interpreters would say, Well
Severian is a Christ figure. But is there a Christ figure in the
book, or is he simply for this universe? 
 GW: In so far as there is a Christ figure it is Severian. That
doesn't mean he has to be identified with Christ. He is in a
position similar to that of Christ. But really it is a different
position because Christ really is both God and man. Severian is
not. Severian is a Christian rather than a Christ. But he has been
taken as the representative of humanity by whom humanity is to be
judged. This I think is what has happened perhaps with the actual
human Jesus. He is or was as fully human as you or I and we are
saved by Him. By the fact that he passed. That the corruption did
not destroy Him. I think that St. Paul is absolutely correct when
he says that Jesus was tempted in all the ways that we are tempted.
I think that Jesus was tempted to commit murder or any other sin
that you want to name just as the rest of us are. And the difference 
is that He did not sin. 
 JJ: Well, thank you very much. 
 Back to Gene Wolfe 
Web Comments to: Paul Duggan 
 pduggan@op.net 
All contents copyright © 1992 James B. Jordan 
Used with permission 
HTML and links by Paul Duggan
Revised: December 9, 1996 
 URL: 
http://world.std.com/~pduggan/wolfejbj.html 
