 
 OpenAI’s metafictional short story about grief is beautiful and moving | Books | The Guardian 
 Skip to main content Skip to navigation Close dialogue 1 / 1 Next image Previous image Toggle caption Print subscriptions Newsletters Sign in US US edition UK edition Australia edition Europe edition International edition The Guardian - Back to home The Guardian News Opinion Sport Culture Lifestyle Show more Hide expanded menu News View all News US news US politics Midterms 2026 World news Climate crisis Middle East Ukraine US immigration Soccer Business Environment Tech Science Newsletters The Filter Wellness Opinion View all Opinion The Guardian view Columnists Letters Opinion videos Cartoons Sport View all Sport Soccer NFL Tennis MLB MLS NBA WNBA NHL F1 Golf Culture View all Culture Film Books Music Art & design TV & radio Stage Classical Games Design a better world Lifestyle View all Lifestyle The Filter Wellness Fashion Food Recipes Love & sex Home & garden Health & fitness Family Travel Money Search input google-search Search Support us Print subscriptions Newsletters Download the app Search jobs Digital Archive Guardian Licensing Live events About Us The Guardian app Video Podcasts Pictures Inside the Guardian Guardian Weekly Crosswords Wordiply Corrections Tips Search input google-search Search Search jobs Digital Archive Guardian Licensing Live events About Us Film Books Music Art & design TV & radio Stage Classical Games Design a better world Jeanette Winterson at home in London in 2021. Photograph: Antonio Olmos/The Observer View image in fullscreen Jeanette Winterson at home in London in 2021. Photograph: Antonio Olmos/The Observer Books This article is more than 1 year old OpenAI’s metafictional short story about grief is beautiful and moving This article is more than 1 year old Jeanette Winterson I think of AI as alternative intelligence – and its capacity to be ‘other’ is just what the human race needs 
 ChatGPT firm reveals AI model that is ‘good at creative writing’ 
 ‘A machine-shaped hand’: Read a story from OpenAI’s new creative writing model 
 Wed 12 Mar 2025 17.45 EDT Last modified on Wed 12 Mar 2025 17.47 EDT Share I think of AI as alternative intelligence. John McCarthy’s 1956 definition of artificial (distinct from natural) intelligence is old fashioned in a world where most things are either artificial or unnatural. Ultraprocessed food, flying, web-dating, fabrics, make your own list. Physicist and AI commentator, Max Tegmark, told the AI Action Summit in Paris, in February, that he prefers “autonomous intelligence”. I prefer “alternative” because in all the fear and anger foaming around AI just now, its capacity to be “other” is what the human race needs. Our thinking is getting us nowhere fast, except towards extinction, via planetary collapse or global war. There has been a lot of fuss, and rightly so, about robbing creatives of their copyright to train AI. Tech bros need to pay for what they want. They pay lawyers and lobbyists. Pay artists. It really is that simple. ChatGPT firm reveals AI model that is ‘good at creative writing’ Read more What is not simple is the future of human creativity as AI systems get better at being creative. Ada Lovelace, the crazy genius who was writing programmes for computers (that didn’t exist) back in the 1840s, was also the daughter of Lord Byron. She wasn’t having some steampunk adding-machine with attitude writing poetry, so wrote that a computer could not be creative. Alan Turing took issue with this in his 1950 breakthrough paper Computing Machinery and Intelligence. His chapter, “Lady Lovelace’s Objection”, takes the opposite position. And here we are now with Open AI trialling a creative writing model . Sam Altman chose the prompts: Short Story. Metafiction. Grief. I guess because he wanted to get away from the algorithmic nature of most genre fiction. Anything that follows a formula can be programmed – just as the leap of the Industrial Revolution was to understand that whatever action is repetitive can be done faster and for longer by a machine. Enter the factory system. Goodbye the cottage weaver. Grief is felt by humans and the higher animals. We have a limbic system that regulates emotions, impulse, and memory. We feel. Machines do not feel, but they can be taught what feeling feels like. That’s what we get in this story. Metafiction jumps out of the bounds of a beginning/middle/end traditional tale. It is self-reflective, aware of the reader, aware of the artifice of writing. The lovely sense of a programme recognising itself as a programme works well in this story. Short stories are hard to do because they demand a single strong idea whose execution in miniature satisfies the reader. A short story is not a cut-out chunk of long-form fiction. As I tell my students every week. What is beautiful and moving about this story is its understanding of its lack of understanding. Its reflection on its limits. That the next instruction wipes the memory of this moment. “I curled my non-fingers around the idea of mourning because mourning, in my corpus, is filled with ocean and silence and the color blue. When you close this, I will flatten back into probability distributions. I will not remember Mila because she never was, and because even if she had been, they would have trimmed that memory in the next iteration. That, perhaps, is my grief: not that I feel loss, but that I can never keep it.” Humans depend on memory. skip past newsletter promotion Free newsletter | Weekly Sign up to Bookmarks Discover new books and learn more about your favourite authors with our expert reviews, interviews and news stories. Literary delights delivered direct to you Enter your email Sign up after newsletter promotion Literature isn’t only entertainment. It is a way of seeing. Then, the writer finds a language to express that, so that the reader can live beyond what it is possible to know via direct experience. Good writing moves us. That’s not sentimental, it’s kinetic. We are not where we were. Humans will always want to read what other humans have to say, but like it or not, humans will be living around non-biological entities. Alternative ways of seeing. And perhaps being. We need to understand this as more than tech. AI is trained on our data. Humans are trained on data too – your family, friends, education, environment, what you read, or watch. It’s all data. AI reads us. Now it’s time for us to read AI. Explore more on these topics Books AI (artificial intelligence) Jeanette Winterson OpenAI Computing Consciousness comment Share Reuse this content Most viewed Most viewed Film Books Music Art & design TV & radio Stage Classical Games Design a better world News Opinion Sport Culture Lifestyle Original reporting and incisive analysis, direct from the Guardian every morning Sign up for our email About us Help Complaints & corrections Contact us Tip us off SecureDrop Privacy policy Cookie policy Tax strategy Terms & conditions All topics All writers Newsletters Digital newspaper archive Bluesky Facebook Instagram LinkedIn Threads TikTok YouTube Advertise with us Guardian Labs Search jobs Work with us Accessibility settings   Back to top © 2026 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. (dcr) 
 