Version 1.08a ©2018 Wizards of the Coast 1 
D&D Style Guide: Writing and  Editing 
We have two primary resources for the house 
style of DUNGEONS & DRAGONS products: 
The Chicago Manual of Style, 17th edition 
Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary, 11th edition 
This guide takes both of those works as its 
foundation, so it focuses on matters of style and 
spelling that are particular to D&D products, 
where we depart from or expand on the 
recommendations of those works. 
Using Chicago 
The Chicago Manual of Style is a gold mine of 
guidance for writers and editors. If you aren’t 
familiar with it or have used only an earlier 
edition, start with the following chapters and 
sections: 
• Section 5.250, “Glossary of Problematic Words 
and Phrases.” Not sure whether to use 
“alternate” or “alternative”? Feeling as if 
“indicate” appears a bit too frequently in D&D 
rules? This section addresses these matters, 
among many others. 
• Chapter 6, “Punctuation.” This chapter is the 
authoritative reference for how to correctly use 
commas, colons, semicolons, dashes, and other 
punctuation in our publications. 
• Chapter 7, “Spelling, Distinctive Treatment of 
Words, and Compounds.” The whole chapter is 
worth skimming, but the treasure trove is at the 
end: section 7.89. That section addresses the 
many conundrums related to compound words. 
• Chapter 9, “Numbers.” When to use numerals 
and when not to—that’s the meat of this 
chapter. 
If you’re the copyeditor of a D&D manuscript, 
make sure to look at section 2.77, a useful 
checklist of things to tidy up before you dive into 
your copyediting. 
General Rules 
The rules in this section apply to all D&D 
products, whether RPG books, board games, 
novels, or something else. 
Titles and Trademarks 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS 
In a print publication, set the name of our brand 
in small caps: DUNGEONS & DRAGONS. The 
ampersand should be the same size as the capital 
letters. If the font you’re using makes the 
ampersand smaller, don’t set the ampersand in 
small caps. 
 On the web and in any other context where 
small caps are unavailable, capitalize the brand 
name with no special typographic treatment: 
Dungeons & Dragons. 
 The abbreviation, D&D, is neither set in small 
caps nor italicized. 
 D&D Not Synonymous with the RPG. Bear in 
mind that DUNGEONS & DRAGONS encompasses 
various games, novels, and worlds. The brand 
name is not synonymous with the tabletop 
roleplaying game. That game is the DUNGEONS & 
DRAGONS Roleplaying Game. Inside a product for 
that game, it is acceptable to refer to the game as 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS or D&D. 
 Editions of the RPG. In a departure from 
previous usage, we spell out and lowercase 
Texts about D&D Settings 
Your main references for our worlds, such as the 
Forgotten Realms and Dragonlance, should be guides 
that we provide or official products published for the 
fifth edition of the D&D roleplaying game. 
 Don’t rely on Internet searches to give you the right 
answer to questions about a D&D setting. The Internet 
contains contradictions, misinterpretations, and 
outright fabrications. Both Wikipedia and the Forgotten 
Realms Wiki, for instance, contain some unreliable 
information. 
 Also, beware of relying solely on D&D products from 
previous editions. They often present conflicting or 
outdated information about a setting. 
 If you have a question that isn’t answered in one of 
our guides or products, please contact us. 
 
Version 1.08a ©2018 Wizards of the Coast 2 
references to editions of the roleplaying game. 
We write “fifth edition,” for instance, not “5th 
Edition.” We prefer to use an edition designation 
as a modifier of another term—“the fifth edition 
Dungeon Master's Guide,” for example. 
 Our internal documentation occasionally uses 
edition abbreviations like 4E and 5E. In other 
contexts, such abbreviations should appear only 
in a table, a conversion document, or in an 
informal text. 
Typographic Treatment of Product 
Names and Other Trademarks 
The name of a publication, board game, or 
miniatures set is capitalized and italicized. 
Examples include Castle Ravenloft (board game) 
and Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting (book). 
Another example is the Basic Rules, the free 
version of the game available online. Initially we 
didn’t italicize it; we do now. 
 Any other trademark of ours is capitalized and 
romanized. Examples include computer games, 
campaign settings, play programs, and product 
lines, such as Forgotten Realms (setting), D&D 
Encounters (play program), and D&D Dungeon 
Tiles (product line). 
Symbols 
A trademark symbol (™ and ®) appears the first 
time a trademark appears on packaging, on a 
cover, or in marketing material. 
 Trademarks appearing on the web or in the 
interior of books don’t receive trademark 
symbols. The titles of most recent products are 
trademarked. A list later in this guide presents 
some of our trademarks with their symbols. 
Issue Numbers 
When referring to an issue of a magazine, write 
the italicized title followed by a numeral that is 
not italicized. For example, you would write 
Dragon 100, not Dragon #100 or Dragon 100. 
Adventure Codes 
Many classic adventures for the tabletop 
roleplaying game have codes, such as I6 and DL1. 
Such a code is not part of the adventure’s title and 
is not italicized. The code is a short way to refer 
to an adventure and should not be used in a 
context where the adventure’s title has not been 
stated. 
Gender 
We expect gender neutrality whenever the 
gender of a person is unknown or irrelevant. We 
don’t assume that our readers are of a particular 
gender identity. 
Achieving Gender Neutrality 
See Chicago 5.255 for tips on achieving gender-
neutral language. Use “he or she” sparingly, and 
avoid “he/she” and “s/he” altogether. Also, don’t 
alternate between “he” and “she” in an attempt to 
be inclusive. 
 In rules text, we prefer to achieve gender 
neutrality by writing in the second person 
whenever possible. 
 In a departure from our past usage, we allow 
the use of “they” and “their” as singular pronouns, 
but don’t abuse this liberty. Rely on this device 
only when you have no other reasonable or 
pleasing alternative. See Chicago 5.256 for a 
discussion of this topic. 
Gender and Fantasy Races 
“Man,” “woman,” and their plurals are reserved 
for describing humans only. For example, we 
write “male dwarf,” not “dwarf man” or “man 
dwarf.” 
High Fantasy 
A typical D&D story or adventure is part of the high 
fantasy subgenre of fantasy fiction, with the epic 
scope characteristic of that subgenre. 
 D&D is about small bands of characters embarking 
on adventures together. Teamwork and friendship 
are a huge part of what makes D&D distinct as a 
brand. The lone knight fighting a dragon is less 
characteristic of D&D than an adventuring team 
fighting a dragon. People on their own get into 
trouble; a team that works together can triumph. 
 Elements of humor or tragedy are fine, so long as 
they are true to the facts of the brand and don’t 
overtake the general tone. When in doubt, think 
about properties like the Lord of the Rings or Game of 
Thrones. If a situation would seem out of place there, 
it probably doesn’t belong in D&D. For instance, there 
are moments of humor with the hobbits, but ring 
wraiths aren’t used for gags. 
Version 1.08a ©2018 Wizards of the Coast 3 
 This rule can be broken in dialogue and first-
person narrative, since a character doesn’t 
necessarily follow our editorial style! 
Gender-Specific Suffixes 
Avoid gender-specific suffixes whenever possible. 
For example, we write “priest” or “actor” whether 
the person is male or female. Use a word like 
“priestess” or “actress” only if it’s part of a 
person’s title or an in-world organizations’ titles. 
 Another example: use “god” whether the deity 
is male or female. Again, in-world uses of 
“goddess” are fine. 
 See Chicago 5.257 for more on this matter. 
Headings 
We expect headings to be used logically and 
consistently throughout a manuscript. Work your 
way down the heading hierarchy without 
skipping steps (each heading has an associated 
style in our Word and InDesign templates): 
Chapter Title 
Heading 1 
Heading 2 
Heading 3 
Inline Subhead [aka Heading 4] 
Use a heading for a structural reason, not an 
aesthetic one. Moreover, don’t use a bunch of 
inline subheads out of a desire to avoid having 
more than one Heading 1–3 on the page. If you 
aren’t happy with the headings in your 
manuscript, restructure the text. Don’t misuse 
headings. 
Inline Subheads 
The lowest level of our heading hierarchy is the 
inline subhead. It functions as our heading 4. 
Contrary to past D&D usage, this subhead should 
be followed by terminal punctuation, not a colon. 
Use a period, an exclamation point, or a question 
mark. 
 If you’re using our styles in Word or InDesign, 
apply the Inline Subhead style to the subhead 
(including the terminal punctuation). If you don’t 
have access to the style, set the subhead in bold 
italics to distinguish it from text that is simply 
bold. 
 Here’s an example of doing it correctly: 
 
 Keen Senses. You have proficiency in the 
Perception skill. 
 
 Here’s an example of doing it incorrectly: 
 
 Keen Senses: You have proficiency in the 
Perception skill. 
 
 Don’t confuse an inline subhead with the 
bolded title of a stat block entry or other data 
field. Such an entry rarely contains a complete 
sentence. The entry takes the form of a bolded 
variable name—sometimes followed by a colon—
and then the variable’s value. Here are examples: 
Speed 30 ft. 
Child Names: Ara, Bryn, Del, Eryn, Faen, Innil, Lael, Mella 
Range: 60 ft. 
 
 Finally, don’t use an inline subhead when you 
simply want to emphasize a word or phrase. Use 
bold for such emphasis, unless the emphasized 
term or phrase appears in the section’s heading. 
Then, no emphasis is required. For example, if a 
Heading 3 says “Ki Points,” don’t bold “ki points” 
in the associated running text. 
Exceptions in the RPG 
One thing in the RPG defies the heading 
hierarchy: the name of a spell at the top of a 
spell description always uses the Heading 3 style, 
even if preceded by Heading 1 or Chapter Title. 
Given this fact, a section of spells shouldn’t be 
introduced by a Heading 3. 
 Some adventures contain other exceptions to 
the heading hierarchy, but such exceptions are 
nonstandard and shouldn’t be mimicked without 
the managing editor’s approval. 
Sidebars 
Avoid overusing sidebars. If a sidebar must follow 
a particular section of text to be intelligible, it 
probably shouldn’t be a sidebar. The best 
sidebars can appear anywhere on a page and still 
make sense.  
Version 1.08a ©2018 Wizards of the Coast 4 
Spelling and Punctuation 
We use American style for spelling and 
punctuation. The word list later in this guide lists 
unusual words and variant spellings that appear 
in D&D products. 
 When Webster’s and Chicago provide no 
guidance on how to spell something, we refer to 
the New Oxford American Dictionary (installed on 
all recent Macs) as a backup resource. 
Punctuation, Boldface, and Italics 
Refer to Chicago 6.2 and 6.3 for how to deal with 
punctuation that follows bold or italics. 
 The following examples follow our style: 
The Glory of Style. The previous period is bold italics 
because the entire inline subhead is bold italics. 
The room is home to three hobgoblins, each of whom 
loves to collect books on editorial style. 
The wizard has prepared burning hands, magic missile, 
and shield. 
 The following examples don’t follow our style: 
Inside the hovel lurk five goblins, who have no regard for 
typographic tidiness. 
The cleric prepared cure wounds, shield of faith, and 
flurry of italics. 
The Serial Comma 
We require the serial comma. Here’s an example: 
“The apprentice expressed gratitude to his 
parents, Mystra, and Elminster.” We don’t write, 
“The apprentice expressed gratitude to his 
parents, Mystra and Elminster,” unless Mystra 
and Elminster are the apprentice’s parents. 
Variant Spellings 
Many words have variant spellings. If a word has 
variants in Webster’s, we use the one printed first 
(regardless of alphabetical order), except as 
noted in the D&D word list. For example, we use 
“toward,” not “towards,” and we use “backward,” 
not “backwards.” 
Compounds and Hyphenation 
See Chicago 7.81–89 for extensive guidance on 
using compounds—open, closed, or hyphenated. 
When in doubt, lean on the multipage table in 
7.89, an especially valuable resource. 
 Use of “Non-.” Although Chicago says that 
“compounds formed with prefixes are normally 
closed,” our use of “non-” is often an exception to 
this rule. The prefix is hyphenated in front of 
many of our fantasy races: non-elf, non-dwarf, 
non-orc, non-drow (but nonhuman, as in 
Webster’s). 
 Numbers and Abbreviations. A rule that’s easy 
to miss in 7.89 is that we don’t hyphenate a 
compound composed of a numeral and an 
abbreviation. So, it’s a “100 gp treasure,” not a 
“100-gp treasure.” 
Contractions 
We encourage the use of contractions formed 
with “not,” such as “don’t,” “can’t,” and “wasn’t” 
(see Chicago 5.105). Use other contractions with 
care, especially any contraction that can be 
misread. For example, “who’s” can be read as 
“who is” or “who has.” 
Possessives 
Chicago has given different recommendations 
over the years on how to treat possessives, 
particularly those that involve words that end 
with an unpronounced s, as in “Descartes.” We 
follow the approach in the seventeenth edition 
(see Chicago 7.16–29). 
Words Used as Words 
Our style for words used as words is to enclose 
them in quotes if the words are English (see 
Chicago 7.63). For example, “The alchemist’s 
favorite word was ‘pumpkin,’ so he knew exactly 
what to name his golem: Pumpkin.” 
 A non-English word, whether from the real 
world or a D&D world, is italicized when used as 
a word. For example, “She whispered the word 
ebrath, Elvish for ‘friend.’” 
 In contrast, a letter used as a letter is set in 
italics (see Chicago 7.64–68). 
Bulleted Lists 
When you create a bulleted list—or any other 
vertical list, such as a numbered one—introduce 
it with a complete sentence ending with a colon 
(see Chicago 6.130). 
 We begin each list item with a capital letter. Use 
closing punctuation in an item only if the list is 
composed of complete sentences. 
Version 1.08a ©2018 Wizards of the Coast 5 
Numbers and Math 
Numerals versus Words 
We follow the general rule for numerals that is 
presented in Chicago 9.2. In short, we spell out 
whole numbers from zero to one hundred, as well 
as numbers that are formed by adding “hundred,” 
“thousand,” or “hundred thousand” to one of 
those numbers. 
 Exceptions to the Rule. Chapter 9 of Chicago 
spells out many exceptions to this rule, instances 
when numerals are used even when a number is 
less than 101. The exceptions that are most 
relevant to our work are summarized here: 
• Percentages {45 percent, 53%} 
• Abbreviations and symbols used as units of 
measure {6′3″, 5 gp, 3 lb.} 
• Parts of a book or other work {chapter 2, part 3, 
page 34, scene 6, table 9, encounter 9, area 4} 
• Volume and issue numbers {volume 3, Dragon 
125, Dungeon 75} 
• Currency {$15, £4} 
• Dates {1299 DR; Marpenoth 12, 1113; October 
31} 
• Times {10:15 a.m., 12:30 p.m.}, but use “noon” 
and “midnight” 
 Numerals in Rules. In rules writing, we use 
numerals more often. See “Numerals in Rules 
Text” later in this guide. 
Mathematical Symbols 
When a mathematical symbol appears, we expect 
the correct mathematical character to be used. 
+ Plus sign 
− Minus sign (Unicode 2212, not a hyphen or an en 
 dash) 
÷ Division sign 
× Multiplication sign (Unicode 00D7, not the letter x) 
= Equals sign 
Fractions 
Spell out a simple fraction, such as two-thirds, but 
when you combine a simple fraction with a 
numeral, use the appropriate fraction symbol, as 
in 4⅔. 
¼ One-fourth 
⅓ One-third 
½ One-half 
⅔ Two-thirds 
¾ Three-fourths 
When a fraction stands on its own in numeral 
form, as in a table, don’t use the fraction’s symbol. 
For example, write “1/2,” not “½.” But do write 
“1½.” 
Percentages 
Use the word “percent,” rather than the symbol %, 
to express a percentage (“5 percent,” for 
example). You can break this rule in a table, as 
well as in a list where space is tight. 
 Also, the abbreviation we use for percentile 
dice is d100, not d%. 
“Half” vs. “One-Half” 
When halving a quantity or game statistic, write 
“half,” not “one-half.” So, you would write “half 
your level,” not “one-half your level.” 
Cross-References 
Use cross-references judiciously. They are useful 
tools that can be easily overused. 
Chapter References 
When you refer to a chapter, use its number. If 
referencing a chapter’s title would increase 
clarity, include the title in quotation marks. But 
chapter number alone usually suffices. Here are 
examples: 
• See chapter 2 for how to make your character. 
• Chapter 8, “The Rules of Magic,” explains how 
spellcasting works. 
• Consult chapter 3 of the Dungeon Master’s 
Guide for further advice on adventure creation. 
Appendix References 
We use letters, not numbers, for appendices. 
References to appendices should follow the same 
principles that we follow for chapter references. 
Here are examples: 
• See appendix A for definition of each condition. 
• The game statistics for each creature are 
provided in appendix C. 
Version 1.08a ©2018 Wizards of the Coast 6 
Subsection/Table References 
When you refer to a subsection, including a 
sidebar, use its title in quotes. A table title is not 
enclosed in quotes. Here are examples: 
• The “Roleplaying the Dragon” sidebar gives tips 
on how to bring the dragon fully to life in the 
story. 
• See the “Actions in Combat” section for more 
examples of things you can do in battle. 
• The Cleric table lists the features your cleric 
gains at each level. 
As in those examples, make sure a reference is 
clear about what it’s referring to—whether it’s 
referring to a sidebar, a section, or a table, for 
instance. 
Page References 
We avoid page references as much as possible. 
They are labor-intensive (they must be added by 
hand during galley review), and they invite error. 
 A page reference is usually superfluous if it 
points to text in an alphabetized section (a 
monster in the Monster Manual, for instance). 
 Referencing a particular page in another 
product is especially ill-advised; that product’s 
pagination could change in a reprint or a new 
edition. 
 Use a page reference only if the text you want 
to reference doesn’t appear in a product’s index 
and can’t be referred to by chapter or subsection. 
 Before galley review, write a page reference as 
“page xx.” 
Unspoken Discourse 
In D&D fiction, authors are free to use italics, 
quotation marks, or no distinguishing typography 
to present a character’s thoughts or psionic 
communication (see Chicago 13.43). Aesthetics 
and clarity should dictate appropriate usage. 
(This is a change from our previous policy.) 
Planes of Existence 
A character is on a plane of existence. For 
example, “He was trapped on the Plane of Fire.” 
But a character is in a plane when it is referred to 
by name without the word “plane.” For example, 
“She is in Elysium.” 
Style Rules for the RPG 
The following style rules apply to the tabletop 
roleplaying game and to products based on it. 
 When it comes to familiarizing yourself with 
the game’s terms and customs of wording, there 
is no substitute for reading the rules of the game 
themselves. 
Formatting Game Terms 
In the RPG, certain terms receive special 
typographic treatment. Examples here are given 
in curly brackets. 
Terms to Capitalize 
Ability scores {Strength, Intelligence} 
Action names {the Attack action, the Dash action} 
Armor Class 
Artifacts {Axe of the Dwarvish Lords} 
Class features {Sneak Attack, Rage} 
Difficulty Class 
Dungeon Master 
Feats {Loremaster} 
Languages {Common, Dwarvish, Elvish} 
Planes of existence {the Abyss, the Nine Hells, the 
Ethereal Plane, the Plane of Air} 
Skills {Arcana, Perception} 
Traits in races and monsters {Aquatic, Keen Senses} 
Terms to Set in Bold 
Stat block names in running text {three hobgoblins, one 
drow mage, two fire elementals} 
By default, a bold stat block name refers to a stat 
block in the Monster Manual. If you’re referring to 
a stat block in your manuscript, instead of in the 
Monster Manual, use a parenthetical to make that 
fact clear. Here’s an example: “Four air 
elemental myrmidons (see chapter 7) lurk here.”  
 Make sure no text gets between the number of 
monsters appearing and the name of the stat 
block. For example, write “four goblins,” not 
“four loud goblins”; that adjective needs to go 
somewhere else in the sentence. 
 Set a monster’s name in bold only the first time 
it appears in an encounter area or other 
subsection. 
Terms to Italicize 
Artifacts {Axe of the Dwarvish Lords} 
Magic items {flame tongue} 
Spells {magic missile} 
Version 1.08a ©2018 Wizards of the Coast 7 
The italicized terms are treated as titles, even 
when they don’t use title capitalization. Don’t 
confuse one of these titles with an effect it creates 
(see Chicago 8.174). For example, the wall of fire 
spell produces a wall of fire, not a wall of fire (the 
latter would imply an infinite loop). 
Numerals in Rules Text 
Use numerals for points, scores, damage 
expressions, and any game trait with a numerical 
value. 
• Anyone who touches the orb regains 3 hit 
points. 
• Someone with a speed of 25 feet will not be 
able to keep up. 
• A character must have an Intelligence of at least 
13 to understand the script. 
• The cursed glyph deals 10 necrotic damage to 
anyone who touches it. 
Use numerals for units of time that quantify the 
duration of a game effect, a condition, or a state of 
affairs in a tactical situation. 
• The spell lasts for 1 round. 
• No one can use the door for 10 minutes. 
But: 
• After winning the fight, the characters slept for 
six hours. 
• For three days, they wandered aimlessly in the 
forest. 
Use numerals for units of distance that quantify 
the size or extent of game effects. 
• The attack has a range of 30 feet. 
• The protective circle extends 5 feet beyond the 
doorway. 
Use numerals for dimensions and distances in the 
game world on a tactical scale, including height 
and weight. 
• The room is 20 feet square. 
• She stands 6 feet tall and weighs 150 pounds. 
But: 
• The two cities are fifty miles apart. 
• The tower is nearly three hundred feet tall. 
Verb Usage 
You cast a spell. 
You deal damage. 
You drop to 0 hit points. 
You finish a short or long rest. 
You gain temporary hit points. 
You make an ability check, and it succeeds or fails. 
You make a saving throw, and it succeeds or fails. 
You make an attack (or you attack), and your attack hits 
or misses (it doesn’t succeed or fail). 
You reduce a target to 0 hit points. 
You regain hit points. 
You restore hit points to a target. 
You score a critical hit. 
You take an action, or you use your action to do 
something. 
You take damage. 
You use a feature. 
Common Pitfalls 
Making a Roll vs. Succeeding on One 
Don’t mistake making an ability check, a saving 
throw, or other roll with succeeding on it. The 
following sentence gets it right: “You must 
succeed on a DC 15 Strength check to clamber up 
the wall.” Don’t write, “You must make a DC 15 
Strength check to clamber up the wall,” unless 
that sentence is immediately followed by a 
description of what happens on a success or 
failure. 
Saving Throws 
 Save. “Save” can be used as a synonym for 
“saving throw,” but use it sparingly, preferably 
only in a stat block or when preceded by “saving 
throw.” In 4E, we used “save” as a synonym for 
“successful saving throw.” We have abandoned 
that practice. 
 “Must Make . . .” When a creature is subjected 
to an effect that requires a saving throw, we 
prefer “the target must make a saving throw . . .” 
over “the target makes a saving throw . . .” 
 Rolling a Saving Throw. Writing “roll a saving 
throw” is redundant, since a saving throw, by 
definition, involves a throw of a die. You make a 
saving throw. 
 
Version 1.08a ©2018 Wizards of the Coast 8 
Passive Perception 
Use passive Wisdom (Perception) when the check 
is made passively, but use regular Wisdom 
(Perception) when the check is made actively. 
Advantage and Disadvantage 
You make a roll with advantage or disadvantage, 
or you have advantage or disadvantage on a roll. 
 Also, an attack roll, not an attack, has 
advantage or disadvantage. 
“Result” and Die Rolls 
In 3E and 4E, the word “result” was sometimes 
used as a synonym for “the number rolled on a 
die.” We have abandoned that practice. 
 When you need to refer to the number rolled on 
a die, do so idiomatically. Here are examples: “If 
you roll at least a 10, you succeed,” “You score a 
critical hit if you roll a 20,” and “Add the number 
you roll to any bonuses or penalties.” 
 “Result” can legitimately refer to the sum of a 
die roll and any modifiers. “Compare the result to 
the DC to determine whether you succeed,” for 
example. We often prefer the word “total” in such 
a context. 
“Magic” vs. “Magical” 
We use “magic” as an adjective to describe an 
object that has magical qualities (a magic item, a 
magic sword, a magic trap). 
 The adjective can be used for other things, but 
we use “magical” more often than “magic” for 
them. And “magic item” and its variants should 
never be “magical item.” 
Points of Damage 
Avoid referring to points of damage. For example, 
write, “The spell deals 10 fire damage,” not “The 
spell deals 10 points of fire damage.” 
Extra Damage 
We write “an extra 1d4 fire damage,” not “1d4 
extra fire damage.” We like to keep the die 
expression with the damage type. 
Hit Point Maximum 
When you write about a creature’s hit point 
maximum, avoid “maximum hit points.” 
 Writing in the singular allows for natural, 
precise wording, such as “If the target's hit point 
maximum is 25 or more . . .” or “If the target’s hit 
point maximum is less than 50 . . .” 
Proficiency 
Here are the rules of thumb for using the right 
preposition with the words “proficient” and 
“proficiency”: 
• You are proficient, or have proficiency, in a skill, 
language, or other activity that is learnable and 
repeatable. 
• You are proficient, or have proficiency, with a 
tool, weapon, type of armor, or other object. 
For example, you might be proficient in Elvish 
and Arcana, and you might be proficient with 
longswords and heavy armor. 
“At Will” vs. “At-Will” 
This compound is open. For example, “You can 
cast this spell at will.” The compound takes a 
hyphen only when it appears before a word that 
it modifies. For example, “That character has 
three at-will spells.” 
“Dungeon Master” Isn’t a Verb 
This term is a noun, not a verb. A person is a 
Dungeon Master. The person doesn’t Dungeon 
Master. This rule can be broken in an informal 
context, such as in a blog or a web article that has 
a conversational tone. 
Avoid “Week” and “Month” 
The lengths of weeks and months vary in 
different D&D worlds. A week is ten days long in 
the Forgotten Realms, for instance, and is called a 
tenday. 
 Because of this fact, don’t express durations or 
other lengths of time in weeks or months when 
you’re writing rules. For example, say a game 
effect lasts for 7 days, not 1 week. 
 The length of the year varies as well, but you 
may use years for durations and the like. 
Misusing “Human” and “Humanoid” 
Beware of using “human” as a synonym for 
“mortal.” Many of the people in the mortal world 
of D&D aren’t human. Similarly, be cautious when 
using the word “humanoid,” given the fact that it 
refers to a creature type. For example, a giant has 
Version 1.08a ©2018 Wizards of the Coast 9 
humanlike features, but it isn’t a humanoid in the 
game. 
Word List 
aarakocra (singular and plural) 
adamantine (a noun and an adjective that refers to a 
special material in the worlds of D&D) 
a.m. (not AM or A.M.) 
axe (sec. var.) 
Bladesinger 
bosun 
copyeditor 
councilor (sec. var.) 
dao (singular and plural) 
djinni (singular; plural djinn) 
doppelganger 
dragonfire (fire produced by a dragon’s breath weapon) 
dragonkind 
drow (singular and plural) 
dryly (sec. var.) 
duergar (singular and plural) 
dwarven (adjective) 
dwarves (not dwarfs) 
Dwarvish (language) 
ebook 
efreeti (singular; plural efreet) 
eladrin (singular and plural) 
elven (adjective) 
Elvish (language) 
email 
erinyes (singular and plural) 
foulspawn (singular and plural) 
genasi (singular and plural) 
giantkind 
Gnomish (language) 
goblinkin 
goblinoid 
hell-spawned (adjective) 
hellspawn (noun) 
kenku (singular and plural)  
larva (singular; plural larvae) 
lizardfolk (singular and plural) 
lock pick (noun) 
lorekeeper (by extension from gamekeeper, bookkeeper, 
goalkeeper, etc.) 
magic-user 
merfolk (singular and plural) 
merrow (singular and plural) 
mithral (not mithril) 
multiverse (not capped) 
oni (singular and plural) 
packmate 
pickaxe 
p.m. (not PM or P.M.) 
roleplay/roleplaying 
rulebook 
sahuagin (singular and plural) 
scry/scries/scried/scrying/scryer (one who scries) 
sellsword 
shapechange/shapechanger 
shapeshifter (avoid “shapeshift”) 
slaad (singular; plural slaadi) 
spell duel 
spell scroll 
spell trap 
spell ward 
spell-shield 
spellbook 
spellcaster/spellcasting (but not “spellcast”) 
spellcraft (noun) 
spellfire 
stablemaster 
staffs 
sunrod 
svirfneblin (singular and plural) 
swordmaster 
swordsmith 
tavernkeeper 
thri-kreen (singular and plural) 
timeline 
war band (not warband) 
weaponsmith 
worshiped/worshiper/worshiping (secondary variant in 
Webster’s) 
xorn (singular and plural) 
yuan-ti (singular and plural) 
Forgotten Realms Terms 
Goodman/Goodwoman (a title or form of address, usu. 
capped) 
godsforsaken (established in the Realms, but not 
necessary in other polytheistic settings; “godforsaken” 
has no necessary connection to monotheism) 
goodsir (a form of address, not capped) 
Adventuring Parties 
The word “fellowship” has strong connections with The 
Lord of the Rings and doesn’t represent the typical D&D 
adventuring party well. “Fellowship” might be used in-
world in the name of an adventuring band (the 
Fellowship of the Griffon), and a group of adventurers 
who appeared to be good friends might be referred to 
as a fellowship by someone speaking of them. However, 
D&D adventuring companies are often fractious or 
more mercenary than the word “fellowship” implies. In 
most in-world contexts and all other contexts, use 
“group,” “band,” “company,” or, especially, “party.”  
  
 
 
Version 1.08a ©2018 Wizards of the Coast 10 
magecraft (noun) 
magelight 
magelord 
magesight 
the Realms (should be preceded by “the Forgotten 
Realms”) 
Editions of the Tabletop RPG (AD&D) 
first edition 
second edition 
third edition 
third edition (v.3.5) 
fourth edition 
fifth edition 
Abbreviations 
Abbrev. Brand or Product 
D&D DUNGEONS & DRAGONS 
PH Player's Handbook 
DMG Dungeon Master's Guide 
MM Monster Manual 
v.3.5 version 3.5 
Abbrev. Ability Score 
Str Strength 
Dex Dexterity 
Con Constitution 
Int Intelligence 
Wis Wisdom 
Cha Charisma 
Abbrev. Coin 
gp gold piece(s) 
ep electrum piece(s) 
cp copper piece(s) 
sp silver piece(s) 
pp platinum piece(s) 
Abbrev. Die 
d4 four-sided die 
d6 six-sided die 
d8 eight-sided die 
d10 ten-sided die 
d12 twelve-sided die 
d20 twenty-sided die 
d100 percentile dice 
Abbrev. Other Term 
AC Armor Class 
DC Difficulty Class 
DM Dungeon Master 
XP experience points 
HD Hit Die/Dice 
hp hit points 
NPC nonplayer character 
Trademarks 
The titles of most recent publications are trademarked. 
Refer to a product to see if it was trademarked. In 
addition, refer to this list. 
AD&D® 
Advanced Dungeons & Dragons™ 
Alternity® 
Blackmoor 
Castle Ravenloft® 
Chainmail® 
D&D® 
D&D Encounters™ 
D&D Insider™ 
D&D Miniatures® 
D&D Dungeon Tiles® 
d20 Modern™ 
d20 System™ 
Dark Sun® 
DCI® 
Dragon® 
Dragonlance® 
Dungeon® 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS® 
Eberron® 
Forgotten Realms® 
Gamma World™ 
Greyhawk® 
Lords of Waterdeep® 
Neverwinter™ 
Planescape™ 
Ravenloft® 
RPGA® 
Armor 
chain mail 
dragon leather 
dragon scale 
hide armor 
leather armor 
mithral plate 
mithral scale 
mithral shirt 
padded armor 
ring mail 
scale mail 
studded dragon leather 
studded leather armor 
Weapons 
battleaxe 
blowgun 
Version 1.08a ©2018 Wizards of the Coast 11 
greataxe 
greatclub 
greatsword 
hand crossbow 
handaxe 
heavy crossbow 
light crossbow 
light hammer 
longbow 
longsword 
morningstar 
polearm 
quarterstaff (pl. quarterstaffs) 
shortbow 
shortsword 
unarmed strike 
war pick 
warhammer 