 
Version 1.04a ©2013 Wizards of the Coast 1
D&D Style Guide: Writing and Editing 
We have two primary resources for the house 
style of DUNGEONS & DRAGONS products: 
The Chicago Manual of Style, 16th edition 
Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary, 11th edition 
Because this guide takes both of those works as 
its foundation, it focuses on matters of style and 
spelling that are particular to D&D products, 
where we depart from or expand on the 
recommendations of those works. 
Using Chicago 
The Chicago Manual of Style is a gold mine of 
guidance for writers and editors, but the tome 
can be daunting. If you aren’t familiar with it or 
have used only an earlier edition, start with the 
following chapters and sections: 
 Section 5.220, “Glossary of Problematic Words 
and Phrases.” Not sure whether to use 
“alternate” or “alternative”? Feeling as if 
“indicate” appears a bit too frequently in D&D 
rules? This section addresses these matters, 
among many others. 
 Chapter 6, “Punctuation.” This chapter is the 
authoritative reference for how to use commas, 
colons, semicolons, dashes, and other 
punctuation correctly in our publications. 
 Chapter 7, “Spelling, Distinctive Treatment of 
Words, and Compounds.” The whole chapter is 
worth skimming, but the treasure trove is at the 
end: section 7.85. That section addresses the 
many conundrums related to compound words. 
 Chapter 9, “Numbers.” When to use numerals 
and when not to—that’s the meat of this 
chapter. 
If you are the editor of a D&D manuscript, make 
sure to look at section 2.77, a useful checklist of 
things to tidy up before diving into your editing. 
References for D&D Lore and Rules 
Your main references for D&D lore and rules should be 
guides that we provide, as well as official products 
published for the D&D roleplaying game (5th Edition). 
 Please don’t rely on Internet searches to give you the 
right answer to questions about D&D lore or rules. The 
Internet contains contradictions, misinterpretations, and 
outright fabrications. Both Wikipedia and the Forgotten 
Realms Wiki, for instance, contain some inaccurate 
information.  
 Also, beware of relying solely on D&D products from 
previous editions. They often present conflicting or 
outdated information.  
 If you have a question that isn’t answered in one of our 
guides or products, please contact us. 
General Rules 
The rules in this section apply to all D&D 
products, whether RPG books, board games, 
novels, or something else. 
Titles and Trademarks 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS 
In print, set the name of our brand in small caps: 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS. The ampersand should be 
the same size as the capital letters. If the font you 
are using makes the ampersand smaller, don’t set 
the ampersand in small caps. 
 On the web and in any other context where 
small caps are unavailable, just capitalize the 
brand name: Dungeons & Dragons. 
 The abbreviation, D&D, is neither set in small 
caps nor italicized. 
 Bear in mind that DUNGEONS & DRAGONS 
encompasses various games, novels, and worlds. 
The brand name is not synonymous with the 
tabletop roleplaying game. 
 That game is the DUNGEONS & DRAGONS 
Roleplaying Game. When you are writing about 
the current edition of the game, don’t refer to the 
edition, unless you are pointing out a difference 
between it and a previous edition. 
 An edition of the RPG is referred to with an 
ordinal set as a numeral and the word “Edition,” 
so 1st Edition and 5th Edition. Our internal 
documentation occasionally uses edition 
abbreviations like 4E and 5E. Such abbreviations 
should appear only in a conversion document or 
 
Version 1.04a ©2013 Wizards of the Coast 2
in an informal article that discusses differences 
between editions. 
Typographic Treatment of Product 
Names and Other Trademarks 
The name of a product—including a book, a 
magazine, a board game, a computer game, or a 
particular miniatures set—is capitalized and 
italicized. Examples include Castle 
Ravenloft (board game), Forgotten Realms 
Campaign Setting (book), and Neverwinter 
(computer game). 
 Any other trademark of ours is just capitalized. 
Examples include campaign settings, play 
programs, and product lines, such as Forgotten 
Realms (setting), D&D Encounters (play 
program), and D&D Dungeon Tiles (product line). 
Symbols 
A trademark symbol (™ and ®) appears the first 
time a trademark appears on packaging, on a 
cover, or in marketing material. 
 Trademarks appearing on the web or in the 
interior of books don’t receive trademark 
symbols. The titles of most recent products are 
trademarked. A list later in this guide presents 
some of our trademarks with their symbols. 
Issue Numbers 
When referring to an issue of a magazine, write 
the italicized title followed by a numeral that is 
not italicized. For example, you would write 
Dragon 100, not Dragon #100 or Dragon 100. 
Adventure Codes 
Many adventures for the tabletop roleplaying 
game have codes, such as I6 and DL1. Such a code 
is not part of the adventure’s title and is not 
italicized. The code is a short way to refer to an 
adventure and should not be used in a context 
where the adventure’s title has not been stated. 
Gender 
We expect gender neutrality whenever the 
gender of a person is unknown or irrelevant. We 
also assume that our readership includes both 
men and women. 
Achieving Gender Neutrality 
See Chicago 5.225 for tips on achieving gender-
neutral language. Use “he or she” sparingly, and 
avoid “he/she” and “s/he” altogether. 
 Don’t use “they” or “their” as singular pronouns, 
except in an informal context like dialogue. And 
don’t alternate between “he” and “she” in an 
attempt to be inclusive. 
 In rules text, we often achieve gender neutrality 
by writing in the second person. 
Gender and Fantasy Races 
“Man,” “woman,” and their plurals are reserved 
for describing humans only. For example, we 
write “female dwarf,” not “dwarf woman” or 
“woman dwarf.” 
 This rule can be broken in dialogue and first-
person narrative. 
Inline Subheads 
The lowest level of our heading hierarchy is the 
inline subhead. It functions as our heading 4. 
 Contrary to past D&D usage, this subhead 
should be followed by terminal punctuation, not a 
colon. Use a period, an exclamation point, or a 
question mark. 
 If you are using the 5E Template in Word, apply 
the Inline Subhead style to the subhead 
(including the terminal punctuation). If you don’t 
have access to the style, set the subhead in bold 
italics to distinguish it from text that is simply 
bold. 
 Here’s an example of doing it correctly: 
 
 Keen Senses. You have proficiency in the 
Perception skill. 
 
 Here’s an example of doing it incorrectly: 
 
 Keen Senses: You have proficiency in the 
Perception skill. 
 
 Don’t confuse an inline subhead with the 
bolded title of a stat block entry or other data 
field. Such an entry rarely contains a complete 
sentence. The entry takes the form of a bolded 
variable name, sometimes a colon, and then the 
variable’s value. Here are examples: 
 
Version 1.04a ©2013 Wizards of the Coast 3
Speed 30 ft. 
Child Names: Ara, Bryn, Del, Eryn, Faen, Innil, Lael, Mella 
Range: 60 ft. 
 
Spelling and Punctuation 
We use American style for spelling and 
punctuation. The word list later in this guide lists 
unusual words and variant spellings that appear 
in D&D products. 
 When Webster’s and Chicago provide no 
guidance on how to spell something, we refer to 
the New Oxford American Dictionary (installed on 
all recent Macs) as a backup resource. 
The Serial Comma 
We require the serial comma. Here’s an example: 
“The apprentice expressed gratitude to his 
parents, Mystra, and Elminster.” We don’t write, 
“The apprentice expressed gratitude to his 
parents, Mystra and Elminster,” unless Mystra 
and Elminster are the apprentice’s parents. 
Variant Spellings 
Please refer to the “Variants” section in Webster’s, 
page 11a, for basic information on variant 
spellings. 
 If a word has two equal variants, we use the 
one printed first (regardless of alphabetical 
order), except as noted in the D&D word list. This 
principle holds when referring to the New Oxford 
American Dictionary. 
Compounds and Hyphenation 
See Chicago 7.77–85 for extensive guidance on 
using compounds—open, closed, or hyphenated. 
When in doubt, lean on the multipage table in 
7.85, an especially valuable resource. 
 Although Chicago says that “compounds formed 
with prefixes are normally closed,” our use of 
“non-” is often an exception to this rule. The 
prefix is hyphenated in front of many of our 
fantasy races: non-elf, non-dwarf, non-orc, non-
drow (but nonhuman, as in Webster’s). 
Contractions 
We encourage the use of contractions formed 
with “not,” such as “don’t,” “can’t,” and “wasn’t” 
(see Chicago 5.103). Use other contractions with 
care, especially any contraction that can be 
misread. For example, “who’s” can be read as 
“who is” or “who has.” 
Possessives for Words Ending in S 
Use the possessive s even with a word ending 
with an s (see Chicago 7.17 and 7.21). We write 
“Asmodeus’s lair,” not “Asmodeus’ lair.” 
Words Used as Words 
Our style for words used as words is to enclose 
them in quotes if the words are English (see 
Chicago 7.58). For example, “The alchemist’s 
favorite word was ‘pumpkin,’ so he knew exactly 
what to name his golem: Pumpkin.” 
 A non-English word, whether from the real 
world or a D&D world, is italicized when used as 
a word. For example, “She whispered the word 
ebrath, Elvish for ‘friend.’” 
 In contrast, a letter used as a letter is set in 
italics (see Chicago 7.59–63). 
Vertical Lists 
When you create a vertical list—whether it has 
bullets, numbers, or no ornamentation—
introduce it with a complete sentence ended by a 
colon (see Chicago 6.124). 
 We begin each list item with a capital letter. Use 
closing punctuation in an item only if the list is 
composed of complete sentences. 
Numbers and Math 
Numerals versus Words 
We follow the general rule for numerals that is 
presented in Chicago 9.2. In short, we spell out 
whole numbers from zero to one hundred, as well 
as numbers that are formed by adding “hundred,” 
“thousand,” or “hundred thousand” to one of 
those numbers. 
 Exceptions to the Rule. Chapter 9 of Chicago 
spells out many exceptions to this rule, instances 
when numerals are used even when a number is 
less than 101. The exceptions that are most 
relevant to our work are summarized here: 
 Percentages {45 percent, 53%} 
 Abbreviations and symbols used as units of measure 
{6′3″, 5 gp, 3 lb.} 
 
Version 1.04a ©2013 Wizards of the Coast 4
 Parts of a book or other work {chapter 2, part 3, page 
34, scene 6, table 9, encounter 9, area 4} 
 Volume and issue numbers {volume 3, Dragon 125, 
Dungeon 75} 
 Currency {$15, £4} 
 Dates {1299 DR; Marpenoth 12, 1113; October 31} 
 Times {10:15 a.m., 12:30 p.m.}, but use “noon” and 
“midnight” 
 Numerals in Rules. In rules writing, we use 
numerals more often. See “Numerals in Rules 
Text” later in this guide. 
Mathematical Symbols 
When a mathematical symbol appears, we expect 
the correct mathematical character to be used. 
+ Plus sign 
− Minus sign (Unicode 2212, not a hyphen or an en 
 dash) 
÷ Division sign 
× Multiplication sign (Unicode 00D7, not the letter x) 
= Equals sign 
Fractions 
Spell out a simple fraction, such as two-thirds, but 
when you combine a simple fraction with a 
numeral, use the appropriate fraction symbol, as 
in 4⅔. 
¼ One-fourth 
⅓ One-third 
½ One-half 
⅔ Two-thirds 
¾ Three-fourths 
Percentages 
Use the word “percent,” rather than the symbol %, 
to express a percentage (“5 percent,” for 
example). You can break this rule in a table, as 
well as in a list where space is tight. 
 Also, the abbreviation we use for percentile 
dice is d100, not d%. 
Halving 
When halving a quantity or game statistic, write 
“half,” not “one-half.” So, you would write “half 
your level,” not “one-half your level.” 
Cross-References 
Use cross-references judiciously. They are useful 
tools that can be easily overused. 
Chapter References 
When you refer to a chapter, use its number. If 
referencing a chapter’s title would increase 
clarity, include the title in quotation marks. But 
chapter number alone usually suffices. Here are 
examples: 
 See chapter 2 for how to make your character. 
 Chapter 8, “The Rules of Magic,” explains how 
spellcasting works. 
 Consult chapter 3 of the Dungeon Master’s Guide for 
further advice on adventure creation. 
Subsection/Table References 
When you refer to a subsection, including a 
sidebar, use its title in quotes. A table title is not 
enclosed in quotes. Here are examples: 
 The “Roleplaying the Dragon” sidebar gives tips on 
how to bring the dragon fully to life in the story. 
 See the “Actions in Combat” section for more 
examples of things you can do in battle. 
 The Cleric table lists the features your cleric gains at 
each level. 
As in those examples, make sure a reference is 
clear about what it’s referring to—whether it’s 
referring to a sidebar, a section, or a table, for 
instance. 
Page References 
We avoid page references as much as possible. 
They are labor-intensive (they must be added by 
hand during galley review), and they invite error. 
 A page reference is usually superfluous if it 
points to text in an alphabetized section (a 
monster in the Monster Manual, for instance). 
 Referencing a particular page in another 
product is especially ill-advised; that product’s 
pagination could change in a reprint or a new 
edition. 
 Include a page reference only if the text you 
want to reference doesn’t appear in a product’s 
index and can’t be referred to by chapter or 
subsection. 
 
Version 1.04a ©2013 Wizards of the Coast 5
 Before galley review, write a page reference as 
“page xx.” 
Unspoken Discourse 
In D&D fiction, authors are free to use italics, 
quotation marks, or no distinguishing typography 
to present a character’s thoughts or psionic 
communication between characters (see Chicago 
13.41). Aesthetics and clarity should dictate 
appropriate usage. (This is a change from our 
previous policy.) 
High Fantasy 
A typical D&D story or adventure is part of the high 
fantasy subgenre of fantasy fiction, with the epic scope 
characteristic of that subgenre. 
 D&D is about small bands of characters embarking on 
adventures together. Teamwork and friendship are a 
huge part of what makes D&D distinct as a brand. The 
lone knight fighting a dragon is less characteristic of D&D 
than an adventuring team fighting a dragon. People on 
their own get into trouble; a team that works together 
can triumph. 
 Elements of humor or tragedy are fine, so long as they 
are true to the facts of the brand and don’t overtake the 
general tone. When in doubt, think about properties like 
the Lord of the Rings or Game of Thrones. If a situation 
would seem out of place there, it probably doesn’t 
belong in D&D. For instance, there are moments of 
humor with the hobbits, but ring wraiths aren’t used for 
gags. 
Style Rules for the RPG 
The following style rules apply to the tabletop 
roleplaying game and to products based on it. 
 When it comes to familiarizing yourself with 
the game’s terms and customs of wording, there 
is no substitute for reading the rules of the game 
themselves. 
Formatting Game Terms 
In the RPG, certain terms receive special 
typographic treatment. Examples here are given 
in curly brackets. 
Terms to Capitalize 
Ability scores {Strength, Intelligence} 
Armor Class 
Artifacts {Axe of the Dwarvish Lords} 
Class features {Sneak Attack, Rage} 
Difficulty Class 
Dungeon Master 
Feats {Loremaster} 
Languages {Common, Dwarvish, Elvish} 
Planes of existence {the Abyss, the Nine Hells, the 
Ethereal Plane} 
Skills {Arcana, Perception} 
Traits in races and monsters {Aquatic, Keen Senses} 
Terms to Italicize 
Artifacts {Axe of the Dwarvish Lords} 
Magic items {flame tongue} 
Spells {magic missile} 
The italicized terms are treated as titles, even 
when they don’t use title capitalization. Don’t 
confuse one of these titles with an effect it creates 
(see Chicago 8.172). For example, the wall of fire 
spell produces a wall of fire, not a wall of fire (the 
latter would imply an infinite loop). 
Numerals in Rules Text 
Use numerals for points, scores, damage 
expressions, and any game trait with a numerical 
value. 
 Anyone who touches the orb regains 3 hit points. 
 Someone with a speed of 25 feet will not be able to 
keep up. 
 A character must have an Intelligence of at least 13 to 
understand the script. 
 The cursed glyph deals 10 necrotic damage to anyone 
who touches it. 
Use numerals for units of time that quantify the 
duration of a game effect, a condition, or a state of 
affairs in a tactical situation. 
 The spell lasts for 1 round. 
 For the next 10 minutes, no one can use the door. 
But: 
 After winning the fight, the characters slept for six 
hours. 
 For three days, they wandered aimlessly in the forest. 
Use numerals for units of distance that quantify 
the size or extent of game effects. 
 
Version 1.04a ©2013 Wizards of the Coast 6
 The attack has a range of 30 feet. 
 The protective circle extends 5 feet beyond the 
doorway. 
Use numerals for dimensions and distances in the 
game world on a tactical scale, including height 
and weight. 
 The room is 20 feet square. 
 She stands 6 feet tall and weighs 150 pounds. 
But: 
 The two cities are fifty miles apart. 
 The tower is nearly three hundred feet tall. 
Verb Usage 
You cast a spell. 
You deal damage. 
You drop to 0 hit points. 
You finish a short or long rest. 
You gain temporary hit points. 
You make a saving throw, and it succeeds or fails. 
You make an attack (or you attack), and your attack hits 
or misses (it doesn’t succeed or fail). 
You reduce a target to 0 hit points. 
You regain hit points. 
You restore hit points to a target. 
You score a critical hit. 
You take an action, or you use your action to do 
something. 
You take damage. 
You use a feature. 
Common Pitfalls 
Making a Roll vs. Succeeding on One 
Don’t mistake making an ability check, a saving 
throw, or other roll with succeeding on it. The 
following sentence gets it right: “You must 
succeed on a DC 15 Strength check to clamber up 
the wall.” Don’t write, “You must make a DC 15 
Strength check to clamber up the wall,” unless 
that sentence is immediately followed by a 
description of what happens on a success or 
failure. 
Saving Throws 
 Save. “Save” can be used as a synonym for 
“saving throw,” but use it sparingly, preferably 
only in a stat block or when preceded by “saving 
throw.” In 4E, we used “save” as a synonym for 
“successful saving throw.” We have abandoned 
that practice. 
 “Must Make . . .” When a creature is subjected 
to an effect that requires a saving throw, we 
prefer “the target must make a saving throw . . .” 
over “the target makes a saving throw . . .” 
 Rolling a Saving Throw. Writing “roll a saving 
throw” is redundant, since a saving throw, by 
definition, involves a throw of a die. You make a 
saving throw. 
Advantage and Disadvantage 
You make a roll with advantage or disadvantage, 
or you have advantage or disadvantage on a roll. 
 Also, an attack roll, not an attack, has 
advantage or disadvantage. 
“Result” and Die Rolls 
In 3E and 4E, the word “result” was sometimes 
used as a synonym for “the number rolled on a 
die.” We have abandoned that practice. 
 When you need to refer to the number rolled on 
a die, do so idiomatically. Here are examples: “If 
you roll at least a 10, you succeed,” “You score a 
critical hit if you roll a 20,” and “Add the number 
you roll to any bonuses or penalties.” 
 “Result” can legitimately refer to the sum of a 
die roll and any modifiers. “Compare the result to 
the DC to determine whether you succeed,” for 
example. We often prefer the word “total” in such 
a context. 
“Magic” vs. “Magical” 
We use “magic” as an adjective to describe an 
object that has magical qualities (a magic item, a 
magic sword, a magic trap). 
 The adjective can be used for other things, but 
we use “magical” more often than “magic” for 
them. And “magic item” and its variants should 
never be “magical item.” 
Points of Damage 
Avoid referring to points of damage. For example, 
write, “The spell deals 10 fire damage,” not “The 
spell deals 10 points of fire damage.” 
 
Version 1.04a ©2013 Wizards of the Coast 7
Hit Point Maximum 
When you write about a creature’s hit point 
maximum, avoid “maximum hit points.” 
 Writing in the singular allows for natural, 
precise wording, such as “If the target's hit point 
maximum is 25 or more . . .” or “If the target’s hit 
point maximum is less than 50 . . .” 
Proficiency 
Here are the rules of thumb for using the right 
preposition with the words “proficient” and 
“proficiency”: 
 You are proficient, or have proficiency, in a skill, 
language, or other activity that is learnable and 
repeatable. 
 You are proficient, or have proficiency, with a 
tool, weapon, type of armor, or other object. 
For example, you might be proficient in Elvish 
and Arcana, and you might be proficient with 
longswords and heavy armor. 
“At Will” vs. “At-Will” 
This compound is open. For example, “You can 
cast this spell at will.” The compound takes a 
hyphen only when it appears before a word that 
it modifies. For example, “That 4th Edition 
character has three at-will powers.” 
“Dungeon Master” Isn’t a Verb 
This term is a noun, not a verb. A person is a 
Dungeon Master. The person doesn’t Dungeon 
Master. This rule can be broken in an informal 
context, such as in a blog or a web article that has 
a conversational tone. 
Avoid “Week” and “Month” 
The lengths of weeks and months vary in 
different D&D worlds. A week is ten days long in 
the Forgotten Realms, for instance, and is called a 
tenday. 
 Because of this fact, don’t express durations or 
other lengths of time in weeks or months when 
you’re writing rules. For example, say a game 
effect lasts for 7 days, not 1 week. 
 The length of the year varies as well, but you 
may use years for durations and the like. 
Word List 
aarakocra (singular and plural) 
adamantine (a noun and an adjective that refers to a 
special material in the worlds of D&D) 
a.m. (not AM or A.M.) 
axe (sec. var.) 
bladesinger 
councilor (sec. var.) 
dao (singular and plural) 
djinni (singular; plural djinn) 
doppelganger 
dragonfire (fire produced by a dragon’s breath weapon) 
dragonkind 
drow (singular and plural) 
dryly (sec. var.) 
duergar (singular and plural) 
dwarven (adjective) 
dwarves (not dwarfs) 
Dwarvish (language) 
ebook 
efreeti (singular; plural efreet) 
eladrin (singular and plural) 
elven (adjective) 
Elvish (language) 
email 
erinyes (singular and plural) 
forward (adverb, not “forwards”) 
foulspawn (singular and plural) 
genasi (singular and plural) 
giantkind 
Gnomish (language) 
goblinkin 
hell-spawned (adjective) 
hellspawn (noun) 
larva (singular; plural larvae) 
lizardfolk (singular and plural) 
lock pick (noun) 
lorekeeper (by extension from gamekeeper, bookkeeper, 
goalkeeper, etc.) 
magic-user 
merfolk (singular and plural) 
merrow (singular and plural) 
mithral (not mithril) 
multiverse (not capped) 
oni (singular and plural) 
packmate 
pickaxe 
p.m. (not PM or P.M.) 
roleplay/roleplaying 
sahuagin (singular and plural) 
scry/scries/scried/scrying/scryer (one who scries) 
 
Version 1.04a ©2013 Wizards of the Coast 8
sellsword 
shapechange/shapechanger 
shapeshifter (avoid “shapeshift”) 
slaad (singular; plural slaadi) 
spell duel 
spell scroll 
spell trap 
spell ward 
spell-shield 
spellbook 
spellcaster/spellcasting (but not “spellcast”) 
spellcraft (noun) 
stablemaster 
staffs 
sunrod 
svirfneblin 
swordmaster 
swordsmith 
tavernkeeper 
thri-kreen (singular and plural) 
war band (not warband) 
weaponsmith 
worshiped/worshiper/worshiping (secondary variant in 
Webster’s) 
xorn (singular and plural) 
yuan-ti (singular and plural) 
Forgotten Realms Terms 
Goodman/Goodwoman (a title or form of address, usu. 
capped) 
godsforsaken (established in the Realms, but not 
necessary in other polytheistic settings; “godforsaken” 
has no necessary connection to monotheism) 
goodsir (a form of address, not capped) 
magecraft (noun) 
magelight 
magelord 
magesight 
Editions of the Tabletop RPG (AD&D) 
1st Edition 
2nd Edition 
3rd Edition 
3rd Edition (v.3.5) 
4th Edition 
5th Edition 
Abbreviations 
Abbrev. Brand or Product 
D&D D UNGEONS & DRAGONS 
PH Player's Handbook 
DMG Dungeon Master's Guide 
MM Monster Manual 
v.3.5 version 3.5 
Abbrev. Ability Score 
Str Strength 
Dex Dexterity 
Con Constitution 
Int Intelligence 
Wis Wisdom 
Cha Charisma 
Abbrev. Coin 
gp gold piece(s) 
ep electrum piece(s) 
cp copper piece(s) 
sp silver piece(s) 
pp platinum piece(s) 
Abbrev. Die 
d4 four-sided die 
d6 six-sided die 
d8 eight-sided die 
d10 ten-sided die 
d12 twelve-sided die 
d20 twenty-sided die 
d100 percentile dice 
Abbrev. Other Term 
AC Armor Class 
DC Difficulty Class 
DM Dungeon Master 
XP experience points 
HD Hit Die/Dice 
hp hit points 
NPC nonplayer character 
Trademarks 
The titles of most recent publications are trademarked. 
Refer to a product to see if it was trademarked. In 
addition, refer to this list. 
 
AD&D® 
Advanced Dungeons & Dragons™ 
Alternity® 
Blackmoor 
Castle Ravenloft® 
Chainmail® 
D&D® 
D&D Encounters™ 
D&D Insider™ 
D&D Miniatures® 
D&D Dungeon Tiles® 
 
Version 1.04a ©2013 Wizards of the Coast 9
d20 Modern™ 
d20 System™ 
Dark Sun® 
DCI® 
Dragon® 
Dragonlance® 
Dungeon® 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS® 
Eberron® 
Forgotten Realms® 
Gamma World™ 
Greyhawk® 
Lords of Waterdeep® 
Neverwinter™ 
Planescape™ 
Ravenloft® 
RPGA® 
Armor and Weapons 
The following quick-reference list details house 
preference for open and closed compounds. 
 
Armor and Shields 
chain mail 
dragon leather 
dragon scale 
hide armor 
leather armor 
mithral plate 
mithral scale 
mithral shirt 
padded armor 
ring mail 
scale mail 
studded dragon leather 
studded leather armor 
 
Weapons 
battleaxe 
blowgun 
greataxe 
greatclub 
greatsword 
hand crossbow 
handaxe 
heavy crossbow 
light crossbow 
light hammer 
longbow 
longsword 
morningstar 
polearm 
quarterstaff (pl. quarterstaffs) 
shortbow 
shortsword 
unarmed strike 
war pick 
warhammer 