 

 Contact Verification Suspension Page 

 Action Required: Complete Your Email Verification

 This domain name is currently inactive or suspended because the required
 verification of the registrant’s email address has not been completed.

 To ensure your domain remains active and in good standing, you need to complete the email
 verification process, as detailed in the verification email sent to the address listed in your
 registration record.

 Why This Verification Is Required

 Accurate and up‑to‑date domain registration data is required under applicable law and industry rules to support the security and stability of the internet .
 This includes maintaining contactability of the domain holder through a valid and reachable email address .

 General Legal Requirements

 Under applicable government regulations – including the EU NIS2 Directive (Directive (EU) 2022/2555)
 and its national implementations (as well as under ICANN and registry policies) -
 domain name registrars are required to collect and maintain accurate, complete, and reliable registration data 
 and to apply
 verification measures to ensure its correctness. These obligations support
 the security, stability, and resilience of the Domain Name System (DNS).

 Until verification is completed, this domain cannot be fully activated.

 Why Has This Domain Been Suspended?

 One of these reasons may apply:

 This is a new domain registration and the registrant’s email address has not been verified yet. 

 Every new domain registration requires the associated email address to be verified.

 The email address of the domain registrant has been modified or changed but not verified yet. 

 Changing the email address of the domain registrant requires a verification.

 The domain has recently been transferred and the domain registrant’s email address has not yet been verified at the new registrar. 

 Registrars are required by regulation and policy to verify domain registrant’s email addresses,
 even after incoming transfers.

 Someone has complained about the accuracy of the data provided for publication in the public registration database, triggering a re‑verification of the email address of the domain registrant but the address has not been verified yet. 

 Any reasonable complaint regarding WHOIS accuracy triggers a requirement for the registrar to
 re‑verify the email address.

 If You are the Owner of This Domain, You Can Reactivate It

 Click the link provided in the verification email sent to you by your Registrar or direct service provider. 

 After registering, transferring or modifying the registrant contact data of your domain, you should
 have received the verification email under the email address you provided for the holder of this
 domain name. Please click the included link and your domain will be unsuspended within 30 minutes.
 Please make sure to check your spam folder if you cannot find that mail.

 You can request to resend the verification email through your domain provider. 

 The verification mail will be sent to the registrant’s email address used for this domain. If you
 are the registrant of this domain and unsure which email address is used, try log into your account
 at your domain provider to view or modify registrant contact data information.

 If you have the trigger code, enter it on http://emailverification.info 

 The trigger code to verify your registrant contact data is contained in the verification mail.
 However, your domain provider might provide the respective trigger code under certain conditions.
 This trigger code can be entered on http://emailverification.info 
 to verify your registrant contact data and remove the suspension on your domain.

 Frequently Asked Questions

 Why are domains with unverified registrant email addresses suspended? 

 To ensure that the registrant is contactable, registrars and other entities providing registration
 services are required to verify registrant email addresses and contact information after
 registration and incoming transfers as well as data updates.

 How can I prevent deactivation of my domain in the future? 

 This requires the completion of the verification process within 15 days of the verification mail
 being sent to you. Make sure the email address you provide works, and that your mailbox is reviewed
 regularly. Make sure to expect a verification mail when making an update to your data, registering a
 domain with new data or transferring a domain between registrars.

 How can I reactivate my domain and remove the suspension? 

 This requires the completion of the verification process. You can resend the verification mail
 through your domain provider. Also, if desired, you can update your registrant contact information
 at your domain provider and afterwards you will receive a verification email.

 How long does it take until my website comes back online after the suspension is removed? 

 After the verification has been successfully completed the suspension should be removed within 30
 minutes. Keep in mind that populating new DNS servers might take a bit longer due to DNS caching.

 I’m not the owner of this domain. What can I do? 

 If you are a visitor to this website, please try accessing this domain again later.

 Next Steps

 Check your inbox (and spam/junk folders) for the verification email from your registrar.

 Click the verification link or follow the instructions provided.

 If you did not receive the email or the address is incorrect, contact your registrar immediately to update your contact information and request a new verification email.

 If verification is not completed, your domain may remain suspended.

 Need Help?

 Contact your domain registrar’s support team for assistance with verification or updating your registration contact details.

 Legal Notice 

