Democracy Dies in Darkness 

 Sections 

 Subscribe 
 Username 
 Sign In 
 Account 
 Profile 
 Newsletters & Alerts 
 Gift Subscriptions 
 Contact Us 
 Help Desk 

 Subscribe 
 Account 
 Profile 
 Newsletters & Alerts 
 Gift Subscriptions 
 Contact Us 
 Help Desk 

 Accessibility for screenreader 

 THE TWILIGHT OF AN AGE OF MAGIC 

 The inside track on Washington politics. 
 
 Be the first to know about new stories from PowerPost. Sign up to follow, and we’ll e-mail you free updates as they’re published. 
 You’ll receive free e-mail news updates each time a new story is published. 
 You’re all set! 
 
 Sign up 
 *Invalid email address
 
 Got it 
 Got it 

 By Michael Dirda By Michael Dirda February 25, 1990 
 TEHANU
 The Last Book of Earthsea
 By Ursula K. Le Guin
 Atheneum. 226 pp. $15.95
 "THE ISLAND of Gont," begins A Wizard of Earthsea, "a single mountain that lifts its peak a mile above the storm-racked Northeast Sea, is a land famous for wizards. From the towns in its high valleys and the ports on its dark narrow bays many a Gontishman has gone forth to serve the Lords of the Archipelago in their cities as wizard or mage, or, looking for adventure, to wander working magic from isle to isle of all Earthsea. Of these some say the greatest, and surely the greatest voyager, was the man called Sparrowhawk, who in his day became both dragonlord and Archmage."
 Perhaps no modern work of fantasy has been more honored and loved than Ursula Le Guin's Earthsea trilogy. Though marketed as young-adult novels, A Wizard of Earthsea (1968), The Tombs of Atuan (1971) and The Farthest Shore (1972) are as deeply imagined, as finely wrought, as grown-up as any fiction of our time. They deserve that highest of all accolades: Everyone should read them. Tehanu: The Last Book of Earthsea unexpectedly turns the trilogy into a tetralogy; though less sheerly exciting than the earlier books, it may be the most moving of them all.
 The earlier novels describe the life of Sparrowhawk, whose secret name is Ged, from youth to maturity, each installment in the sequence focusing on a particular moment of crisis. In A Wizard of Earthsea, for instance, young Ged must master his dark half, so as to pass from childhood to maturity. The other two books deal with -- what else? -- sex and death. Archetypal imagery predominates -- light and dark, labyrinths, night journeys. The prose is grave and elevated, a style of moral seriousness to match these soundings into the soul's journey through life, the voice that of the chronicler or mythmaker: "But in the Deed of Ged nothing is told of that voyage nor of Ged's meeting with the shadow, before ever he sailed the Dragon's Run unscathed, or brought back the Ring of Erreth-Akbe from the Tombs of Atuan to Havnor, or came at last to Roke once more, as Archmage of all the islands of the world."
 At the conclusion of The Farthest Shore, Ged journeys to the land of the dead, battles his greatest enemy and heals a crack in the world's fabric. In so doing, he uses up all his mage-power. He returns to the wizards' stronghold at Roke clinging to the back of the ancient dragon Kalessin, bestows a blessing on the young companion who will become king, and then vanishes into the mists of legend.
 Or does he? This is where Tehanu begins. A mage no longer, Ged is a broken, emptied vessel, another poor guy whose lost his job after 30 years and doesn't know what to do with himself or what remains of his life. All he can think to do is go back to his childhood home on the island of Gont. But what becomes of a hero, a superman once he's grown old and lost his power?
 In Tennyson's poem the old Ulysses sails off into the sunset, to certain death, proclaiming heroic verse: "To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield." But Ged feels nothing of this, only shame and fearfulness. His particular powerlessness Le Guin naturally associates with the general condition of women. As a result, Tehanu enlarges its focus to take up again the story of Tenar, once priestess of the Tombs of Atuan, but now a middle-aged farmer's widow who has put all magery behind her and chosen the classic path to happiness: To live unknown.
 An artist who has lost his power, a woman who has refused any: Together they shape Tehanu into a study of two people coming to terms with age, weakness, mortality. In the book's opening chapters Tenar's husband, the farmer Flint, and her substitute father, the mage Ogion, both die. Then Ged nearly dies. A little girl is discovered raped and half burnt to death, left with one eye blind, one hand a claw, one side of her face forever scarred. Tenar adopts the child Therru and nurses Ged back to health, but these little acts of kindness and of love bring her again into conflict with the world she has tried to escape: Smooth courtiers from the king appear seeking the archmage; a corrupt young wizard places a curse on her; the truly evil men who violated little Therru come prowling; and finally her own narrow-minded son returns from the sea.
 Throughout the earlier Earthsea books Le Guin emphasized the importance of balance, of integrating shadow and self, of trust; she examined the nature of power and how it shapes us, seducing us to its own ends. These same themes reappear in Tehanu, but with a darker, more realistic edge. We are done with journeying and boy's adventures. This is a woman's world, a realm of socially imposed weakness and of male stupidity, of child abuse and evil with a human face. It is also a tale, not of an individual hero, battling to save himself or his realm, but of a family in the making, trying to live quietly, coming to terms with what abides after much is taken. It is consequently meditative, somber, even talky.
 As such, Tehanu may be a little too autumnal for many young people. It is in fact a kind of pastoral, almost a woman's novel like Cranford, where most of the characters are women: the naughty old witch Aunty Moss (right out of Frost's "Witch of Coos"), the kind-hearted Lark, the bright as a button Apple, the envious crone Ivy. All, though, are finally "good" where most of the men prove wanting at best and usually actively malevolent. And for all its quietness, Tehanu builds to a climax of almost pornographic horror, nearly too shocking for its supposedly young adult pages.
 Yet, maybe because it is a fantasy, all comes right in the end. Therru turns out to be much more than a burned little girl: As Ogion said on his deathbed, "They will fear her." But then sharp readers will have suspected as much, those who remember that Odin paid for wisdom with an eye, that dragons, the wisest of beasts, live in fire, and that wholeness embodies a balance of light and dark. The least shall be made great.
 Some critics feel that in recent books Le Guin's writing has grown windy and soft, too feminist, too mythic, too preachy. Certainly this book is pointedly feminist and the motivation of its male villains a little fuzzy. But make no mistake. Le Guin can still stand your hair on end with her sentences. At one point Ged and Tenar balance on the edge of a stony cliff high above the sea, awaiting almost certain death. Made mute by a spell, Tenar unexpectedly points up to the sky. Her enemies mumble something about an albatross. Then Tenar "laughed aloud.
 "In the gulfs of light, from the doorway of the sky, the dragon flew, fire trailing behind the coiling, mailed body. Tenar spoke then."
 " 'Kalessin!' she cried, and then turned, seizing Ged's arm, pulling him down on the rock, as the roar of fire went over them, the rattle of mail and the hiss of wind in upraised wings, the clash of the talons like scytheblades on the rock."
 At the end of Tehanu a new world seems dawning, and there is obviously much more to tell, especially of Therru. But we can guess her future, as well as Ged's and Tenar's. Still, it would be wonderful if this were not in fact our last visit to Earthsea.
 Michael Dirda is a writer and editor for Book World.

 Close video player 
 
 Now Playing