 
 Chapter 14: Social Construction of Reality 
 contents bibliography sfra home page 
 Transition: 
 The Social Construction of Reality 
 (Background for Four Ways to Forgiveness and A Fisherman 
 of the Inland Sea ) 
 Readers approaching the novellas collected in Ursula K. Le Guin's Four Ways 
 to Forgiveness and, much more so, the major stories in A Fisherman of 
 the Inland Sea will benefit from knowing that many in the original audience 
 for these tales could see them in terms of a debate on "the social construction 
 of reality." In terms of that debate, the doctrine that "All human knowledge 
 is local" in Four Ways can be seen as a "weak," epistemological form 
 of the idea that reality is locally created. And in Fisherman , "Newton's 
 Sleep," "The Shobies' Story," and "Dancing to Ganam" may be read as rather realistic 
 fiction: not merely as literalizations of a figure of speech concerning how 
 our psychologies, stories, and interpretations "construct reality" but instead 
 as representations of a pure case of the social construction of reality in action, 
 with social construction seen as the most real of phenomena. Below I tell several 
 stories showing why "social constructivism" should be taken seriously and (in 
 its "weak" form) accepted. Readers who dislike philosophy as gyring narratives 
 or who are offended by nontechnical sources, readers suspicious of the sciences 
 and who dislike reformulations of subtle theories for "first-approximation" 
 popularization in altered frames of reference-such readers should definitely 
 consider moving on to my discussion of Le Guin's fiction in the 1990s. Readers 
 without a background in philosophy should note that I usually clarify technical 
 terms within my text, but you still might want to have a dictionary handy. 
 So, again, CAUTION, another Kulturkampf zone: a discussion by someone with 
 little training in philosophy attempting to render a fictional premise plausible. 
 College students in courses stressing social construction should keep in mind 
 that their instructors may find the social construction of reality the only 
 truth there is, and my approach to that sole truth repugnant. 1   
 * 
 Physics/Philosophy of Science: 
 I was taught at the outset of Chemistry 101 (in 1961) the scientific principle, 
 "The observer is part of the system." I.e., in no science can one talk of some 
 phenomenon in itself but only the phenomenon as observed. Most famously, it 
 is impossible to determine simultaneously both the location and (vector) velocity 
 of an electron. I would later learn that this indeterminacy means that the universe 
 is not a machine whose future can be (theoretically) predicted; so Enlightenment 
 scientists like Pierre Simon Laplace (math, astronomy, 1749-1827) and other 
 really strict determinists will be disappointed in their hopes for at least 
 theoretical certainty and predictability (Capra 45; ch. 4). But I was not doing 
 philosophy in Chem. 101, and The Uncertainty Principle is still beyond me; what 
 we could understand as first-year students is that all observations either potentially 
 change the thing observed or are necessarily limited by the range of capabilities 
 of the observer. An ethnographer cannot effectively observe "the village as 
 such," but only the village plus an ethnographer living in the village. Astronomers 
 cannot objectively observe the Crab Nebula, not because they change a nebula 
 by observing it but because they are limited in their observations by being 
 human astronomers on Earth or (later) sending instruments from Earth. The most 
 interesting things about the Crab Nebula may have to do with phenomena not detectable 
 on Earth and/or which humans have not evolved to perceive, not even with instruments 
 we can conceive and build. More generally, we can say along with the followers 
 of the eighteenth-century philosopher Immanuel Kant that no one can observe 
 and report on any "thing in itself" because we must observe the thing and perceive 
 it in terms of human categories ("Kantianism," DoP ). 
 If strict objectivity is impossible in the sciences, then even scientific knowledge 
 is in some degree "constructed." If even scientific knowledge is constructed, 
 in some sense (if not yet necessarily an important one), our entire vision of 
 reality, to a significant degree may be not passively perceived but actively 
 constructed. This much could be clear even to an orthodox materialist and empiricist 
 in Chem. 101. Modern physics, however, goes farther. 
 When dealing with the exceedingly small, in the quantum world of the subatomic, 
 "The observer is part of the system" can have a very strong meaning. This is 
 a world in which particles are processes and arise and disappear out of a quantum 
 field Fritjof Capra can present quite convincingly as philosophically equivalent 
 to Dao, Brahman, Dharmakaya or Tathata: the Void of myth and mystics ( Tao 
 of Physics ch. 13, p. 175; ch. 14, esp. 198-201). "The crucial feature of 
 atomic physics," in Capra's statement of orthodox doctrine out of Werner Heisenberg 
 et al., "is that the human observer is not only necessary to observe the properties 
 of an object, but is necessary even to define these properties. In atomic physics, 
 we cannot talk about the properties of an object as such. They are meaningfully 
 only in the context of the object's interactions with the observer" (126; ch. 
 10). In the "S matrix" interpretation of subatomic particles, this "impossibility 
 of separating the scientific observer from the observed phenomenon" appears 
 "in its most extreme form. It implies, ultimately, that the structures and phenomena 
 we observe in nature are nothing but creatures of our measuring and categorizing 
 mind"-i.e. those structures and phenomena are maya in Hindu terms: "illusion" 
 (Capra 266; ch. 17). 
 The unity of observer and observed can go at least three steps further. Stepping 
 in one direction, one could come to solipsistic Idealism, where we each individually 
 dream the world between our ears, or we come to a shared, corporate Ideal: what 
 we may call in a good sense, a consensus reality (Jrgen Habermas, Antonio 
 Gramsci), or, hostilely, "Collective solipsism" (George Orwell). Stepping in 
 another direction, the more wildly Idealistic among speculative cosmologists 
 have noted that the universe took many unlikely evolutionary twists to get to 
 a state that could sustain human life-and have added to that unimpeachable assertion 
 the idea from quantum theory that an observer is necessary to collapse probability 
 waves and get quantum events to happen. The steps from there can lead to the 
 idea that the universe evolved to allow for humans to observe quantum events, 
 thereby allowing the universe to evolve. In that case, human consciousness does 
 not just construct reality but is the literal cause of the physical universe. 
 The Greeks had a label for such a notion, hubris (noble pride, leading 
 to a fall); Ashkenazi Jews call it chutzpah (comic arrogance); still, 
 it is not quite absurd, and it is, paradoxically, a wildly woolly, Idealist 
 idea arising out of the "hard," material science of modern physics: the Universe 
 may exist because people perceive it; the Universe may exist so that people 
 can perceive it. 
 Biology, Physiology, Psychology: 
 It is axiomatic in the biology I was taught that (ignoring free will), 
 environment 
 genotype-----------------------> phenotype. 
 time 
 That is, the genetic complement of an organism interacting with the environment 
 over time yields what that organism is, at least is in terms of what 
 can be observed and measured. The most immediate environment for any human organism 
 is the person's society, and (with trivial exceptions) all of the environment 
 is mediated by the person's culture. Hence, in a formulation of Arnold Gehlen, 
 quoted with strong approval by the ethologist Konrad Lorenz, we humans are by 
 nature (with trivial exceptions) creatures of culture (Lorenz, On Aggression 
 256; ch. 13). Our being creatures of culture is significant for our ways of 
 perceiving the world. 2   
 In the late nineteenth and early twentieth century, the American psychologist 
 William James postulated that the world to human infants is, initially, a "blooming, 
 buzzing confusion." 3   
This doesn't seem to be the case, "Rather, even infants one or two days old 
 are capable of refined visual discriminations" (Dember, "Perception" 41). One 
 reason for this is summed up in a line by the character Forest in Le Guin's 
 "Dancing to Ganam": ". . . we filter out most of what our senses report" 
 ( FIS 132). I.e., we individually filter out much of what we are capable 
 of perceiving; to this add that there has been a historical filtering of data 
 reaching us because our perceptions start out highly limited by the highly evolved 
 organs we are born with: we see only a small part of the electromagnetic spectrum, 
 hear only a range of sounds, and smell a millionth or far less of what an olfactorily 
 well-equipped animal such as a dog smells. And the data received and used 
 by the brain are fewer still (the lab frog starving to death in the midst of 
 minced flies both does and does not perceive the fly meat). 
 As human infants grow into adulthood, our perceptions become even clearer, 
 if not necessarily more reliable, in part because of training and expectations. 
 Among older children and adults, there are variations in perceptions-experimentally 
 testable variations-according to age, sex, and culture. For an example highly 
 relevant for Le Guin, there are "differences in the style with which people 
 perceive" as seen in "extremes of response to context." Some people perceive 
 "the world as highly differentiated" and tend "to resist contextual influences" 
 and are "said to be field independent"; people who perceive "in an extremely 
 diffuse style" are called "field-dependent" and tend "to be highly susceptible 
 to contextual effects. Thus, field-independent people are superior in locating 
 a simple visual figure (e.g., a triangle) embedded in a complex pattern" or 
 adjusting a rod to vertical in the absence of visual background cues. In North 
 American, older people tend to be more field-independent than younger people; 
 girls, "especially after puberty," and women tend to be more field-dependent 
 than boys and men. "Perhaps these results are distinctive of cultures in which 
 females are at least implicitly trained to be passive and perceptually diffuse, 
 and in which males are encouraged to assume an active, perceptually articulated 
 stance" (Dember, "Perception" 44). And perhaps some Daoists, Romantics, 
 and ecoFeminists are right in seeing children and women more embedded in nature 
 and the world, in which case being relatively "field-dependent" would simply 
 correlate with women's and children's reality. What is significant here is that 
 the world appears differently to people in even slightly different subcultures: 
 North Americans of different age and/or gender. Little girls are more likely 
 to perceive things as part of a whole more than boys will; little boys will 
 see contexts-usually-more readily than old men. "Beyond sex differences," psychologists 
 have found evidence that "the type of physical environment people construct 
 for themselves or choose to inhabit can influence their style of perceiving," 
 e.g., traditional Zulus and Bushmen, "whose environments are virtually lacking 
 in rectangular forms" see things somewhat differently-literally see things differently-from 
 people brought up in "the carpentered, right-angled world of people in Western 
 cultures" (Dember, "Perception" 44). 
 Sociology: 
 We shape each other to be human . . . .-Le 
 Guin, "Coming of Age in Karhide" (1995) 
 In 1966, the same year as Jacques Derrida "subversively declared that structuralism 
 was finished" and to be supplanted by poststructuralism (Lehman 97), Peter L. 
 Berger and Thomas Luckmann published The Social Construction of Reality: 
 A Treatise in the Sociology of Knowledge . For Berger and Luckmann, "reality," 
 in quotation marks, is the subjective world that we human are "biologically 
 predestined to construct and to inhabit," a social world of self and others. 
 For each human, this subjective, learned world "becomes . . . the 
 dominant and definitive reality. Its limits are set by nature, but once constructed, 
 this world acts back upon nature," e.g., determining what of all the biologically 
 possible foods people (ordinarily) will actually eat, what of all the possible 
 sexual acts most people in a culture will actually perform. "In the dialectic 
 between nature and the socially constructed world the human organism itself 
 is transformed. In this same dialectic man produces reality and thereby produces 
 himself" (183 [see also 180])-i.e., produces our social selves, our roles, our 
 identities. Burger and Luckmann present an excellent and persuasive analysis 
 of a "weak" form of social construction of reality, but still a powerful thesis. 
 Human beings are socialized into human identities in specific societies, and 
 those primary socializations give us, if not our worlds, at least our initial, 
 and very strong worldviews: "The child does not internalize the world of his 
 [initial] significant others as one of many possible worlds. He internalizes 
 it as the world, the only existent and only conceivable world . . ." 
 ; these primary socializations give each of us, "the world of childhood . . . . 
 the 'home world' (134, 136; ch. 3). 
 Myths of Origin: 
 According to a very early account of Creation, that of Hesiod, "First of all 
 the Void," Chaos , "came into being, next broad-bosomed Earth, the solid 
 and eternal home of all, and Eros [Desire], the most beautiful of the immortal 
 gods . . . ." From Earth comes Sky, parthenogenetically, and 
 then mountains and "the barren waters." Then Earth lies with Sky and produces 
 Ocean and the first generation of gods ( Theogony II.116-53 [56]). Later 
 creation myths had less symbolic sexual action, and more dialog. According to 
 the Fourth Gospel of Christian Scripture, "In the beginning was the Word," the 
 Logos , "and the Word was with God, and the Word was God," and "all things 
 were made through him" (John 1.1-3). That is, out of nothing came all, via the 
 Word. According to the P-code, in one Hebrew version, "When God," Elohim , 
 "began to create heaven and earth-the earth being unformed and void, with darkness 
 over the surface of the deep and a wind from God sweeping over the water-God 
 said, 'Let there be light'; and there was light . . . " (Gen. 
 1.1-5, Tanakh ). I.e., language for the P-code authors and for John, "is 
 not only a means of communication but also [is] an operational agent destined 
 to produce being-it has an ontological value," and perhaps still does (Vajda 
 10.184). Doing some very rough and ready creative comparative mythology, then, 
 one could say that in the beginning was Void, Chaos-a very active and potential 
 Nothingness-out of which came All. Mediating the shift from nothing to all was 
 either Desire and a Yin-Yang-like mystic marriage of the primal deities, or 
 there was the Word or words: the Logos or logoi or, I will suggest, 
 a conversation among elohim : the gods (see Gen. 1.26). 
 Alternatively-and a very significant alternative it is-that which was at the 
 beginning and is now and is all that truly is is Brahman, "the one Being," 
 that than which there is nothing greater ("Indian Philosophy" 9.316). "Not this 
 . . . not that" but Being itself, what is left over after all things 
 are removed, as opposed to maya , illusion, the "relative" world of appearances 
 ( Bhagavad-Gita 74-75; VIII. 73-74; VII. 39; II). 59-60; V), the world 
 of "individual and separate things" (Capra 85; ch. 6). If we would free ourselves 
 from maya , some mystic disciplines tell us, we must free ourselves from 
 the chatter of the world, pre-eminently the chatter of our own stream of consciousness: 
 "to silence the thinking mind" (Capra 25; ch. 2), to end "the mind's endless, 
 idiot monologue" (Huxley 217; ch. 15). If the task at hand, though, is to recreate 
 maya after immersion in Brahman, then, perhaps, the way is through chatter 
 seen much more positively: the word as human conversation, social narrative, 
 the telling of stories. As Le Guin suggests in her image of us "huddling about 
 the campfire" telling tales: In the beginning of the human world, and so even 
 now, was and is the human word, telling our stories, re-forming the (human) 
 world, if not creating ourselves, at least preventing "our dissolution into 
 the surroundings." 4   
 * 
 According to the J-code version of creation, ". . . the Lord God 
 formed man from the dust of the earth. He blew into his nostrils the breath 
 of life, and man became a living being" (Gen. 2.7). I.e., human beings are one, 
 psycho/somatic being: earth plus breath. Still, in spite of the resistance of 
 the Temple elite, and, apparently, that of some of the delegates to the Council 
 of Nicea, both Judaism and Christianity took "the breath of life" and made it 
 into soul : a separable soul, dwelling in the body as a god in a temple, 
 or a prisoner in a dungeon, with Christianity going for the soul big time. 5 
 Secularized, this split became, in Gilbert Ryle's phrase, "the ghost in the 
 machine": mind within body. To resolve the split, one could become a materialist, 
 and say that mind is a product of matter. Alternatively one could say-and Bishop 
 George Berkeley did say in the eighteenth century-that "'To be,' said 
 of the object, means to be perceived; 'to be,' said of the subject, means to 
 perceive" ("Berkeley, George" 2.847). Among simple souls-and to the author of 
 the Encyclopaedia Britannica 's Micropaedia's entry for Berkeley-Berkeley's 
 insight got simplified to "to be is to be perceived." More specifically, in 
 the Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge , Part I (1710), 
 Bishop Berkeley "brought all objects of sense, including tangibles, within the 
 mind," rejecting the possibility of "material substance" ("Berkeley" 847). So 
 if materialism is one extreme, balancing it after Bishop Berkeley is idealism: 
 the world as idea, and the being of matter a function of its being perceived. 
 Hence, as our ideas of the world change, the world changes: necessarily changes, 
 ontologically changes, really changes. 
 Linguistics/Feminism/Physics: 
 Daphne Patai and Noretta Koertge call attention to the Sapir-Whorf, or Whorfian 
 hypothesis (republished 1956), "according to which the structure and lexicon 
 of a language," its set of grammar plus vocabulary, "both molds and reveals 
 a culture's basic categories of thought and perception." In Edward Sapir's formulation, 
 "Human beings do not live in the objective world alone, ... but are very much 
 at the mercy of the particular language which has become the medium of expression 
 for their society ... The fact of the matter is that the 'real world' is to 
 a large extent unconsciously built up on the language habits of the group ... 
 We see and hear and otherwise experience very largely as we do because the language 
 habits of our community predispose certain choices of interpretation" (Bright 
 13.212). Obviously, there are limits to the theory: "German has no single word 
 for what we call 'efficiency,' but one can hardly claim that Germans have no 
 such concept. The Hungarian language has no gender, yet patriarchy exists in 
 Hungary nonetheless" (Patai and Koertge 133). Still Patai and Koertge note that 
 the Whorfian hypothesis and other forms of social construction have been applied 
 in very strong forms in a fair amount of recent academic work: They cite the 
 assertion by Michel Foucault in History of Sexuality that there were 
 no homosexuals before the late nineteenth century and the invention of the term/category 
 "homosexual." 
 But what are we to make of certainly followers of Foucault? Bruno Latour, 
 for example, contends that no anthrax existed before Pasteur, and Ian 
 Hacking says there were no battered babies before 1962. . . . 
 [Patai and Koertge give rational explanations: Pasteur added isolated 
 anthrax to the "material culture of science"; Hacking may have] merely 
 intended to make an assertion similar to Joel Best's [in Threatened 
 Children ], namely, that the battering of babies was not regarded as 
 a serious social problem until physicians defined it as a syndrome in 
 1962. But each author, in the argument he makes, seems to do his best 
 to block such a charitable interpretation of his words. (137). * * * 
 [Patai and Koertge note] much more startling assertions, such as the 
 insistence of Women's Studies students in a class taught by one of us 
 that the pain of childbirth is socially constructed by patriarchy and 
 would not happen in a feminist society. (139) 
 Both Le Guin and many of her SF readers would know about the Whorfian hypothesis, 
 including the possibility of very strong formulations, wherein language structures 
 the world. Benjamin Whorf (1897-1941) was a famous student of Native American 
 languages, and the daughter of Alfred and Theodora Kroeber would be unlikely 
 to have missed exposure to his thoughts as she got informally socialized into 
 what Carol D. Stevens has called "the family business": anthropology, starting 
 with the ethnography of Native Americans. Additionally, anyone sophisticated 
 in science fiction would get an introduction to Sapir-Whorf. The restructuring 
 of reality by language is a strong theme in Robert A. Heinlein's Stranger 
 in a Strange Land (1961); and Peter Nicholls cites a number of other works 
 using Sapir-Whorf, including Jack Vance's The Languages of Pao (1958) 
 and Samuel R. Delany's Babel-17 (1966). According to Nicholls, in the 
 1975 essay "Towards an Alien Linguistics," Ian Watson has used the linguistic 
 theories of Noam Chomsky-with S.F. expansion-to suggest "that there may be 'a 
 topological grammar of the universe, which reflects itself in the grammars of 
 actual languages.'" And, Nicholls concludes his article, Watson has "used arguments 
 from quantum mechanics to support the solipsistic view that the Universe exists 
 as an external structure only through the consciousness of its participants 
 and observers; language, in Watson's scheme, is reflexive, Nature sending a 
 message to itself. . ." ("Linguistics"). 
 Marxism: 
 Writing in 1909, E. M. Forster could see and foresee a world in flight from 
 the human body and the world of matter. In the beginning of the third and last 
 section of his far-future dystopia, "The Machine Stops," moving toward the end 
 of the imagined world of the Machine, Forster presents "one of the most advanced" 
 of future intellectuals, an antiEmpiricist historian who warns his audience 
 to "Beware of first-hand ideas!" and asserts that "First-hand ideas do not really 
 exist. They are but the physical impressions produced by love and fear, and 
 on this gross foundation who could erect a philosophy?" Forster's crank exhorts 
 his audience to let their ideas "be second-hand, and if possible tenth-hand, 
 for then they will be far removed from that disturbing element-direct observation." 
 Actually, the crank isn't all that crazy in suggesting getting a number 
 of different points of view on a historical event, in this case, his specialty, 
 the French Revolution. What is disturbing, though, even to those of us who want 
 knowledge carefully located, is his idea that the farther away from events we 
 get the better we can judge, until ". . . there will come a generation 
 that has got beyond facts, beyond impressions, a generation absolutely colourless, 
 a generation 'seraphically free / From taint of personality,' which will see 
 the French Revolution not as it happened, nor as they would like it to have 
 happened, but as it would have happened, had it taken place in the days of the 
 Machine," i.e., in their own time, as ideologically constructed. "Tremendous 
 applause greeted this lecture," Forster's Narrator tells us, because it "did 
 but voice a feeling already latent in the minds of men-a feeling that terrestrial 
 facts must be ignored" (Forster 191). 
 Not very much later in the century, advanced thinkers will bring back the idea 
 that "terrestrial facts" don't even exist. 
 According to Roy Bhaskar, there is "abundant textual evidence" for Karl Marx's 
 " simple , commonsense realism ," the sort of everyday, colloquial 
 realism that asserts "the reality, independence, [and] externality of objects": 
 i.e., that the "real" world we see out there is really there. 6 
Most modestly stated, as a character in "Dancing to Ganan" puts it, simple realism 
 is "the notion that there is, somewhere, if one could just find it, a fact" 
 ( FIS 118), maybe even many facts. There is also evidence, Bhaskar says, 
 for Marx's "scientific realism": i.e., his belief in the reality of "the objects 
 of scientific thought" and structures scientifically inferred-but scientific 
 realism need not concern us. What should concern us is that "an entire tradition" 
 of Marxism, i.e., much of "Western Marxism," has "interpreted Marx as rejecting" 
 simple realism and has very influentially tended toward "some variety of epistemological 
 idealism, normally anti-naturalistic and judgmentally relativistic" ("Realism" 
 407, 408). 
 Bhaskar traces this tradition back to Gyrgy Lukcs's 1923 History and Class 
 Consciousness , where Lukcs rejects "any distinction between thought and 
 being as a 'false and rigid duality.'" This anti-realist tradition "proceeds 
 down to the extraordinary claims made on behalf of Marx by e.g. [Leszek] Kolakowski 
 that the very existence of things comes into being simultaneously with their 
 appearance in the human mind' (1958 . . .) and [Alfred] Schmidt that 
 'material reality is from the beginning socially mediated' [1962]" ("Realism" 
 408). According to Bhaskar, no less a figure than Antonio Gramsci found "the 
 very idea of a reality-in-itself . . . a religious residue." In his 
 Prison Notebooks (1929-35), Gramsci redefined "the objectivity of things 
 . . . in terms of a universal intersubjectivity of persons; i.e. as 
 a cognitive consensus, asymptotically approached in history but only finally 
 realized under communism." Pushing the matter, Gramsci, in Bhaskar's reading, 
 holds "that human history is not explained by the atomistic theory, but that 
 the reverse is the case: the atomistic theory, like all other scientific hypotheses 
 and opinions, is part of the superstructure,'" i.e., part of the cultural superstructure 
 raised up upon a deeper and more significant (human) reality. Suggesting that 
 we take Gramsci on atomic theory quite literally-that atomic reactions happen 
 because humans theorize atomic reactions-Bhaskar says that Gramsci's remark 
 here "reminds one of Marx's jibe against [Pierre-Joseph] Proudhon that like 
 'the true idealist' he is, he no doubt believes that 'the circulation of the 
 blood must be a consequence of Harvey's theory" of the circulation of blood 
 ( Poverty of Philosophy , ch. 2, sect. 3). Bhaskar finds Gramsci and some 
 other Western Marxists "in favour of a historicized anthropomorphic monism," 
 maintaining that "nature, as we know it, is part of human history." I.e., Bhaskar 
 says these Western Marxist teach that the world is One and that One is centered 
 in and made by humanity and our history ("Knowledge" 258-59)-an idea Bhaskar 
 does not seem to like. Alternatively, we can see these Western Marxists returning, 
 ironically, to the German Idealism of Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel (1770-1831), 
 where "The categories of human thought are . . . at the same time 
 objective forms of Being, and logic is . . . ontology"-a path I will 
 not follow (Fetscher 198). 7   
 Whatever its sources, it is something like Gramsci's vision of reality as the 
 "intersubjectivity of persons" and "cognitive consensus" that George Orwell 
 attacks in what is sometimes called The Grand Inquisitor section of Nineteen 
 Eighty-Four (III.3-III.5). Orwell's immediate concern was the falsification 
 of history under Hitler and Stalin (see Crick 119); still, at least for satiric 
 purposes, Orwell in Nineteen Eighty-Four comes down squarely for old-fashioned 
 British commonsense empiricism against the extreme idealism of Winston Smith's 
 Inner Party torturer and instructor, O'Brien. O'Brien tells Smith, 
 The first thing you must realize is that power is collective. The individual 
 only has power in so far as he ceases to be an individual. . . . 
 [I]f he can make complete, utter submission, if he can escape from his 
 identity, if he can merge himself in the party so that he is the 
 Party, then he is all-powerful and immortal. 8   
 The second thing for you to realize is that power is power over human 
 beings. Over the body-but, above all, over the mind. Power over matter-external 
 reality as you would call it-is not important. Already our control over 
 matter is absolute. * * * 
 . . . We control matter because we control the mind. Reality 
 is inside the skull. . . . You must get rid of those nineteenth-century 
 ideas about the laws of nature. We make the laws of nature. * * * 
 . . . Before man there was nothing. After man, if he could 
 come to an end, there would be nothing. Outside man there is nothing. 
 * * * 
  . . . This is not solipsism. Collective solipsism, if 
 you like. But that is a different thing; in fact the opposite thing." 
 (218-19; III.3) 9   
 I doubt that Orwell's criticisms had much effect, but there was this much change 
 in Western Marxism in the generation following Orwell: Jrgen Habermas, in Knowledge 
 and Human Interests (1972), at least according to Bhaskar, allowed for the 
 origin of "the human species as a purely natural process" even while seeing 
 "reality, including nature, as constituted in and by human activity." And Theodor 
 Adorno, a little earlier- Negative Dialectics (1966)-advised giving up 
 trying to resolve objectivity and subjectivity "and argues against any attempt 
 to base thought on a non-presuppositionless [sic] foundation and for the immanence 
 of all critique" ("Knowledge" 260). 
 I'll put the matter that, by the 1970s, there was a long-standing debate on 
 the Left that had pretty well concluded on the impossibility of finding transcendent 
 epistemological "Archimedean points" outside the world from which to observe 
 the world. This meant the inevitability of "the immanence of all critique." 
 We judge situations more or less from within them and cannot get a godlike overview; 
 we are located at certain points in space-time, and that is that. So our judgments 
 are relative. At least among people with a lot of academic philosophy-including 
 those coming from very unMarxist positions-this lead to a kind of crisis in 
 epistemology. Matters soon got worse. In the words of my friend and colleague 
 John H. Crow, Modernism's "Epistemological uncertainty yielded (to) ontological 
 instability"-postmodernism. 
 Linguistics/Postmodernism-Poststructuralism/Feminism: 
 In the 5th century BCE, in Elea, in southern Italy, the Greek philosopher Parmenides 
 reacted against Heraclitus's theory of flux by, among other things, composing 
 a poem "On Nature," privileging among the "ways of research" the "absolutely 
 noncontradictory way that says only what is, Being, is really true." If you 
 think something, you assert its existence (an idea that will get a lot of play 
 later, with the Cartesian variation that one must first think oneself). Reality, 
 then, is that which can be truly thought: grasped and communicated, and that 
 which can be thought and communicated is reality. "The primal source of the 
 Eleatic philosophy thus lies in the archaic sense of language, according to 
 which one cannot pronounce 'yes' and 'no' without deciding upon the reality 
 or unreality of the objects of the statements." So human language is not merely 
 symbolic but "corresponds to reality in its structure," and it is "From the 
 premise of the essential coalescence of language and reality follows Parmenides's 
 theory of Being . . . " (Calogero and Starkey 6.526; see also Benjamin 
 8-10). Parmenides and his school, then, introduced into philosophy ideas similar 
 to those in magic, myth, and mysticism. 10   
 By the early twentieth century, the linguistic ideas of Parmenides et al. were 
 again very fashionable in philosophy. Fritz Mauthner, one of the founders of 
 modern linguistic analysis in philosophy, could hold that "Every attempt to 
 tell what is true just leads back to linguistic formulations, not to objective 
 states of affairs"-a position that "bears some affinities to the views expressed 
 in Ludwig Wittgenstein's Tractus Logico-Philosophicus (Popkin 16.855), 
 another road I decline to travel. By the middle of the twentieth century, there 
 was a good deal of emphasis among the intelligentsia for placing reality in 
 words, but there was some hope that "The Age of Analysis" could produce, a science 
 of "semiology" or a grounded philosophy of language, or (at least) an exposition 
 of structures, that could serve well enough as a philosophy of the world. 
 As David Lehman tells the story-hostilely, among other things-that hope was 
 called into question at Johns Hopkins in 1966 with Jacques Derrida's paper "Structure, 
 Sign and Play and the Discourse of the Human Sciences" (coll. and trans. Writing 
 and Difference 1978). The key passage, according to Lehman, takes precisely 
 the view that can easily, and I stress can , lead to a vision of social 
 construction. The moment came, Derrida asserts, in the development of the concept 
 of structure "when language invaded the universal problematic, the moment when, 
 in the absence of a center of origin, everything became discourse . . . 
 that is to say, a system in which the central signified, the original or transcendental 
 signified, is never absolutely present outside a system of differences. The 
 absence of the transcendental signified extends the domain and the play of signification 
 infinitely" ( Writing and Difference 278-80). Lehman paraphrases this-usefully 
 for us, though arguably-as "Nothing exists ahead of language or outside it; 
 there are no things or ideas except in words." 11   
Alternatively put, "Il n'y a rien hors du texte," which Andreas Huyssen renders 
 "there is nothing outside the text." Possibly looking to J. Hillis Miller's 
 statement that "Language . . . thinks man and his 'world' . . . 
 if he will allow it to do so" (Miller 224), Huyssen couples Derrida on the textuality 
 of reality with the "insight that the [perceiving] subject is constituted in 
 language" (Huyssen 259). 12   
Or in Lehman's unnuanced reading, " Words speak us ," whether we "allow" 
 them or not: ". . . we are merely passive conductors of language" 
 (106). Le Guin may agree; at least she does in a 1988 poem "For Helene Cixous" 
 ( Wild Oats 60). 
 Human beings, according to such theories, seem to be in a Westernized, secularized, 
 language-centered version of the relationships among "the personal self and 
 the Self that is identical with Brahman, between the individual ego and the 
 Buddhawomb or Universal Mind." For the individual human mind, the mystic Huang 
 Po taught, to go into the state of "no-mind," one "must not try to think it, 
 but rather permit ourselves to be thought by it" (paraphrased Huxley 73; ch. 
 4). As the comedian George Carlin could state as part of his early-1970s act, 
 "All we have is words," except Carlin's we in this sentence may also be 
 constructed by words, so that instead of Universal Mind thinking us, we are 
 spoken by language. 
 In modernism of the J-P Sartrean Existentialist variety, there was no God to 
 create us; our existence preceded any essence we might have, which was our job 
 to create. Philosophically, the action was in the perceiving subject rather 
 heroically making something of himself (and that's him self: Existentialism 
 is masculinist). Roughly speaking, consciousness was king. 
 Seyla Benhabib can sum up for the (post)modern philosophers-and help illustrate 
 why I have avoided technical sources: 
 Whether in analytic philosophy, contemporary hermeneutics, or French 
 poststructuralism, the paradigm of language has replaced the paradigm 
 of consciousness. . . . [T]he focus is no longer on the 
 epistemic subject [a potential knower] nor on the private contents of 
 its consciousness but on the public, signifying activities of a collection 
 of subjects. . . . The identify of the epistemic subject 
 has changed as well: The bearer of the sign cannot be an isolated self-there 
 is no private language as Wittgenstein has observed; it is a community 
 of selves whose identity extends as far as their horizon of interpretations 
 ([Hans-Georg] Gadamer) or it is a social community of actual language 
 users (Wittgenstein). This enlargement of the relevant epistemic subject 
 is one option. A second option, followed by French structuralism, is to 
 deny that, in order to make sense of the epistemic object [something external, 
 potentially knowable], one need appeal to an epistemic subject at all. 
 The subject is replaced by a system of structures, oppositions, and diffrances {sic} 
 which, to be intelligible, need not be viewed as products of a living 
 subjectivity at all. (112) 
 If our (post)moderns are correct, there is no single, unified, perceiving "I"; 
 if the crucial structure is language, perhaps there is no world outside of the 
 discourse among many "subject positions"-the people who say "I" and construct 
 themselves and the world(s) they talk about. Again George Carlin: "All we have 
 is words"-literally, except the words may have us even more. If this theory 
 is correct, all we can do (and do do) to create the facts of our world is 
 tell one another fictions, stories. This is an idea Le Guin is willing to play 
 with seriously, and possibly believe; but I think Le Guin remains with what 
 Aldous Huxley has called "The Perennial Philosophy"- and remains (as a 
 pretty consistent Daoist) a romantic affirming the worth of anarchic individuals. 13   
With her favorite old mystics, I believe Le Guin believes in the ultimate reality 
 indeed of only the Dao, the Brahman, but of the validity also of individual 
 life among the "ten thousand things," illusory or not, the validity of living 
 with others in the world of maya . 
 Transition: 
 Social Construction: Endnotes   
 1 My thanks to Dennis McGucken for making clear to me in a long e-mail message 
 the limits of my sources on Western Marxism (Roy Bhaskar) and Jacques Derrida 
 (David Lehman).   McGucken does 
 a beautiful job locating Derrida in terms of a highly nuanced philosophical 
 debate, but Lehman may be more helpful for the ideas that entered the more 
 popular discourse of the academy and America's bicoastal intelligensia.
 2 See Erlich, "On the Necessary Uncertainty of Historical Criticism."
 3 The William James line is quoted in Le Guin's "The Field of Vision" 
 ( WTQ 231).
 4 "It Was a Dark and Stormy Night," esp. DEW 28-29. 
 5 The Nicene Creed insists upon affirmation that the believer looks "forward 
 to the resurrection of the dead, and the life of the world to come," 
 which allows one to be a "mortalist" and believe that even when 
 good Christians are dead, they are dead, and remain dead until the end of 
 history and the universe, when, again one thing, body/breath are joined for 
 "the life of the world to come."
 6 Bhaskar carefully defines the realism 
 he refers to because of the ongoing debate that got formulated in the Middle 
 Ages as nominalism vs. Realism, where the Realists are what many would call 
 Idealists.   I.e., Realists believe 
 in the real reality of abstract Forms, Universals.   Nominalists (like me) say that those "Universals" 
 or forms are just names (Latin nomen ) 
 people give to abstractions, mere categories of the human mind.   
 See below for highly radical nominalists becoming poststructuralists, 
 postmodernists.
 7 We might also see them returning to a formulation by Oscar Wilde (d. 1900) 
 complementing his idea of life imitating art: "Nature is no great mother 
 who has borne us.   She is our 
 creation" (qtd. David Denby, "In Darwin's Wake," The 
 New Yorker 70.2 [21 July 1997]: 60).   
 Denby quotes Wilde, "Decay" (40 [my colleague J. Kerry Powell 
 noted "Decay" as a probable source for the quotation and recommended 
 that essay and also Wilde's "The Critic as Artist]).   
 As with Orestes in Sartre's Flies a 
 murderer of his mother, acquitted by an argument privileging fathers in reproductionnote 
 the sexual and gender implications in the lines quoted.
 8 Cf. and much more so contrast 
 merging with the Dao or Brahman, attaining Nirvana.   
 Cf. Le Guin's highly negative view of merging with some "Unist"falsely 
 Onemovement; and strongly contrast Le Guin's favorable imagery of occasional , 
 fleeting touch with Reality.   The 
 temptation to lose self through merging with a Party, Church, or other mass 
 movement is discussed in detail in Hoffer's The 
 True Believer .   The Grand 
 Inquisitor section of 1984 can 
 be read usefully for Le Guin's presentation of such villains as Dr. Haber 
 in LoH , Cob in FS , and Aspen in Tehanu .
 9 I am not the only one to cite Orwell against contemporary Idealists.  
 Cf. Tzvetan Todorov, "Crimes Against Humanities," New 
 Republic 3 July 1989, cited Lehman 45-46.  Lehman's Index cites Orwell 
 eight times (314).
 10 And which would go from 
 philosophy back into systems of western mysticism; e.g., the ongoing "ontological 
 value" of language in Jewish mysticism may derive from Greek philosophy 
 as much as from the Hebraic idea of the mshl 
 (language working in the world).
 11 Some of the philosophically sophisticated may spot a figurative 
 cloven hoof in my "usefully" in this sentence.   My one philosophy instructor was appalled to infer that I was 
 a pragmatist .   And I still am, in part, but nowadays I''ll make that a vulgar 
 pragmatist to differentiate myself from such respectable thinkers of "a 
 resurgent pragmatism" (in Daniel Callahan's phrase) as Richard Rorty 
 and Linda J. Nicholson.
 12 I get the quotation from Writing 
 and Discourse from Lehman 97 (my emphasis); the Miller quotation is from 
 Lehman 106.
 13 Huxley got the "Perennial Philosophy" phrase from Gottfried Wilhelm 
 von Leibnitz (vii).
 contents bibliography sfra home page 
