 
 Introduction 
 contents bibliography sfra home page 
 Introduction 
 Throughout human history, stories have been the preferred 
 form for expression of moral commitments.... Narrative is a primary 
 means for testing with concrete particularizations the benefits and 
 disadvantages of specific ethical decisions. Narrative retellability 
 and rereadability ensure that such examinations will not too easily 
 crystallize into mere dogma. 
 --Karl Kroeber, Retelling and Rereading (189; 
 qtd. Le Guin, Norton 24). 
 One who does not honor the teacher . . . is 
 greatly confounded though knowledgeable. ( Tao te Ching ch. 27) 
 Coyote's Song is mostly a close reading of a 
 large number of the narrative works of Ursula K. Le Guin. It does not exactly 
 have a thesis, but it does have a title, some controlling ideas and, arguably, 
 an agenda. 
 " In his title "Persuading Us To Rejoice and 
 Teaching Us How to Praise," James W. Bittner is not only alluding to a line 
 by W. H. Auden but also making clear that a significant part of Le Guin's project, 
 from her first published work on, is teaching. Eric S. Rabkin has described 
 Le Guin's The Left of Darkness as "clearly didactic" ("Determinism" 5), 
 and other readers of Le Guin have noted what Elizabeth Cummins has called "the 
 didactic Le Guin" (166). I accept Le Guin's didacticism as a given in 
 her writing, but I knew enough people find the word "didacticism" negative that 
 I avoided it in my title. I will avoid the word "didactic" in my text as well 
 because Le Guin's works are didactic in a fairly unusual way, what we might 
 call "dialogic didacticism," or "teaching by dialectics (i.e., argument)"; most 
 simply put, Le Guin's works are usually good teachers. The problem with 
 most didactic works I've encountered is that the teachers are cock-sure that 
 they have Truth and are duty-bound to ram it down the throats of children and 
 the unwashed masses. Le Guin has her certainties, but they are rare, and, ordinarily, 
 she debates with herself. So instead of coming up with long phrases modifying 
 "didacticism," I offer the image of this book's title: Coyote, the great Trickster 
 figure, teaching in raucous antiphony and polyphony. 
 " The first controlling idea should not be controversial. 
 Art means in contexts, contexts that includes its perceivers (in the 
 scientific formulation, "The observer is part of the system"). I give my students 
 the image of the rainbow. The colors are created by the interaction of a portion 
 of the electromagnetic spectrum with the vision of humans who can see colors. 
 Different cultures define the colors differently. And there are an indefinitely 
 large number of possible colors that can be perceived; still, somewhere along 
 the way one gets into the ultraviolet or infrared one gets to colors merely 
 normal humans cannot see. Similarly, there are an indefinitely large number 
 of meanings we can legitimately perceive in works of art, and that meaning is 
 created by an interaction of the work and its perceivers but some place along 
 the line an interpretation can figuratively go into the ultraviolet or infrared 
 (or beyond), and one's fellow perceivers can say, "I just don't see it." Changing 
 the metaphor, even one perceiver is likely to see even one work differently 
 in different contexts, as differing figures against different "grounds"; e.g., 
 I read Le Guin's "Vaster Than Empires and More Slow" somewhat differently in 
 the context of the stories collected in The Winds Twelve Quarters than 
 I read it collected in Buffalo Gals . . .  . Much 
 of the work I do in Coyote's Song is putting Le Guin in the context of 
 Le Guin: closely reading her works individually I have publicly admitted to 
 doing compulsively close readings and reading them as a canon, an opus , 
 an interrelated set whose individual members are mutually illuminating and defining. 
 To a lesser extent, I read the works as historical 
 documents. In the clich of historical criticism of all varieties, every artistic 
 work is produced in a specific time and place, and all literature needs to be 
 read (in part) in terms of its historical contexts. Especially for younger readers, 
 especially with the earlier works, Le Guin's work needs to be "historicized." 
 Older readers, too, can be helped with historical context. E.g., almost all 
 readers who were in the United States and at least teenagers during the 1960s 
 will understand that Le Guin's The World for Word Is Forest comments 
 quite directly on American warfare in Indochina, what was called in the United 
 States, "The Viet Nam War." Until late in the first draft of this book, however, 
 I missed the implications for American warfare in Viet Nam implicit in the Earthsea 
 trilogy (1968-72). The trilogy deals extensively with the importance for using 
 power without pride, with the importance of avoiding arrogance, of observing 
 limits. I knew that. It took a long time, though and reading other critics for 
 me to put that fact together with two well-known book titles from the 1960s: 
 Sen. J. William Fulbright's The Arrogance of Power (1966/1967) and Sen. 
 Eugene J. McCarthy's The Limits of Power: America's Role in the World 
 (1968). 
 I hope to help younger readers a bit with historicizing 
 Le Guin's earlier works, and some aspects of the later ones. But I refer all 
 readers to the work done by James Bittner, Charlotte Spivack, Elizabeth Cummins, 
 and others for offering different histor ies to form the context of Le 
 Guin's work, including biographical material on Le Guin for the personal history 
 of a very active and complex human being whose life is still very much a work 
 in progress. 
 " The second, and related, controlling idea is 
 continuity. Looking at various entities (things, objects, organisms, people) 
 some people will see mostly differences; other people will see mostly similarities. 
 E.g., in various works, Le Guin has used the symbol of "the Circle of Life" 
 (an almost complete circle), the Yin-Yang, open and closed doorways, and the 
 hinged spiral of the heyiya-if. One may note that Le Guin uses symbols, that 
 they are similar symbols, that they are symbols familiar in but more often foreign 
 to Western religions and attitudes: similarities and continuities; or one may 
 note that Le Guin changes her symbols: difference and change. 
 1 Some will value difference and change, others similarity 
 and continuity. I tend to see and value similarities and continuities, and I 
 will argue for a strong tendency toward continuity in Le Guin's work. In her 
 poetry, picture books, and short stories, Le Guin is more experimental, but 
 in her science fiction and fantasy novels up until the mid-1980s, Le Guin's 
 works are analyzable in terms of a limited number of themes and patterns. 
 2 
 One continuity for Le Guin's writing, then, is the 
 return to such perennial themes as the role of art and the artist and variations 
 on the theme of (usually heterosexual) love, and varieties of friendship: human 
 bonding. Another of her repeated themes is hard for many readers to accept in 
 the world and therefore difficult to recognize in literature they like. As we 
 will soon see, Le Guin denies a transcendent One-God and with that god Christianity 
 and "the Judaeo-Christian-Rationalist West" ( LoH 82; ch. 6). Very emphatically, 
 Le Guin denies the separable soul as contemporary monotheists usually see it, 
 and insists on the finality of death. Insofar as Le Guin allows an "afterlife" 
 at all, it is a "Dry Land" like Hades, as the most ancient Greeks saw it, or 
 Sheol as viewed by Job or Koheleth ("the Preacher" in Ecclesiastes) or it is 
 "The Four Houses of the Sky," which also include abstractions and the unborn 
 ( ACH 44, [47]). Basically, when you are dead you are dead, for Le Guin, 
 and this mortalist view makes very urgent her concerns with lethal violence 
 generally and war specifically. 3 
 In ways that are varied and historically conditioned, but frequently, Le Guin 
 returns to the theme of war and the problem of violence, leading in turn to 
 the question of utopia: How might we get not The Great Society but a good society? 
 What might make for, at least, a nonviolent society? Le Guin finds the best 
 hope for human society in some variety of communist anarchy, with a feminist 
 emphasis that increases from the earlier works to the later, and a Daoist emphasis 
 most explicit in the earlier works but maintained throughout. 
 Le Guin's continuity, however, is flexible. If one 
 sees Always Coming Home as central to Le Guin's canon and the motion 
 of the Dao as her sustaining image (and I do), decorously central also are Le 
 Guin's debates with herself. Her consistency lies less in taking position X 
 or Y or Z than returning to the XYZ axis system, returning to these issue 
 in a kind of reversal. 
 Le Guin's major patterns, by my count, are three or 
 four in number. 
 I'll begin with the pattern of Romantic Comedy. In 
 the Shakespearean form that permeates English-speaking culture, Romantic Comedy 
 moves toward a new and better world younger, more flexible, more hopeful, more 
 joyous coalescing around a central couple. That's Northrop Frye's formulation 
 in Anatomy of Criticism , except that I have corrected his chemistry. 
 (Frye had the new world crystallizing : too rigid an image.) 4 
 Using this pattern doesn't mean fulfilling it each time, offering an audience 
 every work, "As You Like It." The movement of the pattern can be frustrated, 
 with the plot moving toward tragedy. Instead of the wished-for happy ending 
 of union, integration, renewed life, and rejoicing, there can be somber endings 
 of isolation and separation. A newly integrated and peaceful world coalesces 
 around Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet, but they are dead. Rocannon in Rocannon's 
 World is able to destroy his enemies and bring to the League of All Worlds 
 a great gift; and Rocannon in the Epilogue finds a home, hearth, marriage, and 
 a people. But Rocannon's victory is at the cost of the life of a dear friend, 
 and Rocannon is dead before he can be told his new home world has been given 
 his name (135-36). 5 
 Rolery and Jakob Agat in Le Guin's Planet of Exile marry and will live 
 more or less happily ever after, but they go home together only after the death 
 and destruction of a major battle. And the potential Romantic Comedies of The 
 Word for World Is Forest and in Stone Telling's story in Always Coming 
 Home are utterly frustrated, yielding as happy an ending as we can hope 
 for in Word for World , with the survival of the Athshean peoples, but 
 for the point of view characters isolation, madness, and death. In Le Guin, 
 "Patterns of Integration" epitomized by marriages are usually good things (Crow 
 and Erlich), but, sometimes, the least bad upshot is integration's reversal: 
 separation, divorce. 
 Next, is the pattern of two abstractly philosophical 
 views of the world: immanence vs. transcendence. Le Guin has been an enthusiastic 
 participant in the immanence vs. transcendence debate in the form that goes 
 back, in the European tradition, to at least Augustine of Hippo and Boethius 
 in the 400s-500s CE. Is Ultimate Reality Out There and Up in some transcendent 
 God or Truth or Whatever, or inside things, over, under (especially under) around 
 and through immanent in the world? Le Guin is consistently Daoist in mostly 
 denying transcendence and emphatically denying a transcendent God and most Western 
 people's ideas of an afterlife, and this profound denial of monotheism in a 
 highly spiritual writer one who likes the Hindu deities Shiva and Kali is very 
 important for her work and is a subtext in much of the analysis of Le Guin's 
 works by others. 6 
 Less well recognized, by me certainly, has been more mundane, homelier , 
 meaning for immanence and transcendence. 
 * 
 In The Second Sex a book Le Guin 
 cites in "Is Gender Necessary?" Simone de Beauvoir explicitly uses "immanence" 
 and "transcendence" as central terms for her analysis of women's current situation 
 and proposals for women's liberation ("Gender?" DEW 8). 
 Beauvoir nowhere defines "immanence" and "transcendence," 
 but does say that "The domestic labors that fell to [woman's] lot . . . 
 imprisoned her in repetition and immanence" to which the translator supplies 
 a note that in Beauvoir immanence "always signifies, as here, the opposite 
 or negation of transcendence, such as confinement or restriction to a narrow 
 round of uncreative and repetitious duties; it is in contrast to the freedom 
 to engage in projects of ever[-]widening scope that marks the untrammeled existent" 
 (63). And earlier, in her Introduction, Beauvoir states: 
 [When] transcendence falls back into immanence, 
 stagnation, there is a degradation of existence into the . . . 
 brutish life of subjection to given conditions . . . . 
 The downfall represents a moral fault if the subject consents to it; 
 . . . inflicted upon him, it spells frustration and oppression 
 . . . . an absolute evil. Every individual concerned 
 to justify his existence feels that his existence involves . . . 
 [a] need to transcend himself, to engage in freely chosen projects. 
 Now, . . . woman a free and autonomous 
 being . . . nevertheless finds herself living in a world where 
 men compel her to assume the status of the Other. They propose to stabilize 
 her as object and to doom her to immanence since her transcendence is 
 to be overshadowed and forever transcended by [the male ego] . . . . 
 (xli) 
 And however much a human couple "is the original Mitsein " 
 (friendly society) and "a basic combination" (35), nowhere is "woman" more trapped 
 in immanence than reproduction and marriage. 7 To get out 
 of that trap "woman" must "seek self-fulfillment in transcendence": i.e., "lose 
 herself in her projects," becoming independent and free. "Woman" today "no longer 
 seeks to drag [man] into the realms of immanence but to emerge, herself, into 
 the light of transcendence" (51, 717; see also II.VII.xxv: 702, 715). 
 Le Guin wrote in "Is Gender Necessary?" (1976) that 
 she considered herself a feminist at least by the mid-1960s and repeats her 
 claim in her Introduction to Planet of Exile , concluding 
 there, famously, and, she says, unfashionably, with "Once I was asked what I 
 thought the central, constant theme of my work was, and I said spontaneously, 
 'Marriage'" (cf. Headnote "Good Trip", WTQ 109). 
 One way to help historicize the stories of Ursula K. 
 Le Guin, especially her early short fiction, is to place them in dialog with 
 Beauvoir's The Second Sex (and its philosophical tradition) 
 and with themselves on issues of immanence and transcendence, broadly defined. 
 In a number of works from Le Guin's first published story, "An die Musik" (1961), 
 through Tehanu , in 1990, Le Guin works through the immanence/transcendence 
 antithesis, literally re-evaluating the two terms and undermining the binary 
 opposition between them. Quite emphatically, she looks at immanence in several 
 forms, including domestic life, and at transcendence primarily as moving out 
 of Being and nature into action, culture, and history: into conflict, art (including 
 magic), saving people, and utopia building. 
 In Tehanu , the point-of-view character, Tenar, 
 explicitly and consciously gives up studying magic with the great mage Ogion: 
 "I left him," she says. "What did I want with his books? . . . . 
 I wanted to live, I wanted a man, I wanted my children, I wanted my life" (51) 
 not transcendence in Existentialist terms but simply life . Tenar's journey 
 is away from "the powers of learning and skill offered her by . . . 
 Ogion. She had turned her back on all that, gone to the other side, the other 
 room, where the women lived, to be one of them. A wife, a farmer's wife, a mother, 
 a householder, undertaking the power that a woman was born to, the authority 
 allotted her by the arrangements of mankind" ( Tehanu 30). Tenar gives 
 herself to immanence, and does womanly, life-sustaining, things therein, and 
 thereby helps change her world radically. 
 Or consider three clearly philosophical stories collected 
 in The Wind's Twelve Quarters (1975). 
 "Darkness Box" (1963) is a Pandora story, but here 
 the Pandora-figure is male and a prince, and the gods are replaced by the sea, 
 a female witch, and a little boy. It's not a bad world in the story: a world 
 of high fantasy, where the exiled prince returns to lay siege to the royal city 
 and be defeated by the loyal prince, true soldier to their father ( WTQ 
 59). It's a world with unicorns and witches' familiars and at least one griffin. 
 But it is a grey world, with no sun and no shadows and no darkness, a world 
 of stasis where the clocks always read 9:50 a.m. It is a world of immanence 
 but, in this world, the "narrow round of uncreative and repetitious duties" 
 is precisely the heroic project of loyal warfare. The prince serves the king, 
 fighting off again and again and again the attacks of the prince's brother. 
 "Serve and be served," the witch tells him, "rule and be ruled. Your brother 
 chose neither to serve nor rule ..." and then breaks off and warns the prince 
 to take care. Perhaps he does. For whatever motivation, the prince releases 
 darkness from the box, and so Time and shadow, chance, change, and death enter 
 his world. And this is a happy ending ( WTQ 64). There may be some Martin 
 Heidegger or Rainer Maria Rilke in there; there are certainly ideas consistent 
 with Le Guin's Daoism. Still the main point here is that in 1963 Le Guin asserted 
 in her fiction that the violent project of heroic warfare was what was repetitive 
 and boring. And she did so while associating warfare with subjugation and rule 
 and suggesting the need for an alternative to the subjugation/rule antithesis. 8 
 Undoubtedly Heidegger, Jean-Paul Sartre, and Albert 
 Camus are around in two stories from 1970, with maybe a touch of Sren Kierkegaard: 
 "Things" and "A Trip to the Head," juxtaposed in The Wind's Twelve Quarters . 
 "Things" is a story of "The End" (the title under which 
 Damon Knight ran the story). In a very low-tech country by the sea, The End 
 is expected, and the people divide into the Weepers up in Heights-Hall and the 
 Ragers down in the fields (148-49), all except for three: a brickmaker named 
 Lif, an unnamed widow, and an unnamed baby. Lif dreams of the Islands, and if 
 this were a hard, technological SF story, the plot would involve his invention 
 and building of a boat. But the Ragers have destroyed everything Lif can think 
 of to build a boat. In social SF, the plot would move toward an allegory where 
 the Ragers = the Weathermen and other young rebels (153) and the Weepers were 
 "The Great Silent [Christian] Majority," and the world would die with a bang 
 and a whimper. Within the story, that doesn't happen either. Lif takes up with 
 the widow and her child, and they live together for a while; he learns to float 
 and swim a bit and lays a causeway with his remaining bricks, a causeway heading 
 away from the country and its madfolk and toward the Islands. And then Lif and 
 the widow, with the baby, walk into the sea upon his causeway, going as far 
 as it goes and the taking the last step. Perhaps with a ship rescuing them and 
 taking them to the Islands, but probably not. 
 Heidegger, my encyclopedia tells me, said that Man 
 "stands out" from things, a project who will be occasionally absorbed 
 back into things, becoming "nobody in particular" (740). In "Things," two elderly 
 men coming from a Weeping say, "It is well to be free of Things" (sic: T, 154). 
 Maybe. Le Guin was to say so in The Dispossessed . But the bricklayer 
 is "a builder, not a floater" (152), and I think the line has symbolic meaning, 
 and the widow accounts for their (temporary) survival with "you had your things 
 your bricks and I had the baby...." (156). Lif's labor, while they're waiting 
 for The End, was Sisyphean: load after load of bricks. But he did his own thing, 
 and he produced a straight, heavy, earth-bound road in the right direction, 
 one leading away from the pointless and repetitive Weeping and Raging. To apply 
 a song from the period: they found an "also" in "a world of Either/Or." And 
 Le Guin supplies here an "also" to the antithesis of immanence and transcendence, 
 feminine domesticity and manly, heroic projects: the most free and creative 
 work we see is housekeeping, childcare, and hauling bricks. In the midst of 
 madness, where one cannot do much good, heroism may be impossible, and heroism 
 may be one of the sources for the madness, not the solution but part of the 
 problem; the best one might do, then, is just keep going with the everyday, 
 or just walk away. To mix some of Le Guin's metaphors, when nothing remains 
 to be done, one can be done with doing and walk away to rejoin the sea (or forest) 
 of Being. 
 "A Trip to the Head" (1970) is no story to try to summarize, 
 but it clearly moves away from "possession . . . [and] success," away 
 from a utilitarian view of people away from macho Existentialism and equally 
 macho sexuality. The story moves from defining oneself outside the world naming 
 oneself and willing oneself out of nature into culture and dominance toward 
 a forest Le Guin associates with shadows, myths, old wives' tales, and Blakean 
 tigers. As we will see, "A Trip to the Head" moves toward a forest that Le Guin 
 associates with philosophical Immanence, with Being. And in "A Trip to the Head," 
 Le Guin contrasts that immanence with a relationship that could lead 
 to a traditional heterosexual marriage. Fifteen years later, Le Guin tells a 
 similar story in "She Unnames Them" (1985). The protagonist-narrator there is 
 Eve, and the action is far more cosmic, but Eve, too, like the naming character 
 in "A Trip," ends up among trees, heading "down the path away from the house," 
 into immanence. It has been Eve's transcendent project to increase immanence: 
 she consciously unnames all the animals and then consciously unnames 
 herself (discussed in Khanna). 
 One last set of stories of the Immanence/Transcendence 
 Pattern. "The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas" (1973), "The Day Before the Revolution" 
 (1974), and "Sur" (1982; see Khanna 50-55). 
 Carol D. Stevens reminds us that the Omelites are "us" 
 (30), and Elizabeth Cummins reminds us of a slogan from our recent history: 
 "America Love It or Leave It" (22). I'll add Peter Biskind's reminder that in 
 many Cold-War era Hollywood movies, "the U.S.A., ca. 1955, was utopian enough 
 for anyone" (115). "The Ones Who Walk Away" is a most rigorous examination of 
 the highly transcendent "Let's get out there and perfect things , damn 
 it!" utopian project. Omelas is a good place, mostly almost entirely: 
 a place of happiness and joy, a place, it first seems, without guilt. What the 
 story turns into is a scapegoat fable and a reduction to the grotesque of the 
 hyper-rationalist, measuring , utilitarian doctrine of the greatest good 
 for the greatest number. The story attacks the ideal of the "Rationalist" part 
 of "Judaeo-Christian-Rationalist West: it attack the benevolent desire "to make 
 the world better for humanity" ( LoH 82-83); the story attacks idealism 
 insofar as idealism seeks an Archimedean point outside the world, from which 
 he can shove it toward an abstract, transcendent Good (see NA 88). The 
 Omelites, however much they are "mature, intelligent, passionate adults" ( WTQ 
 254) are gravely mistaken or, as Rebecca Adams suggests, a little crazy (41). 
 Either way, we can help privilege Those Who Walk Away from Omelas by associating 
 them with Lif and the widow and child in "Things," and Eve in "She Names Them." 
 If will and reason have created a transcendent project in Omelas, then it might 
 be well to leave Omelas. If some "transcendental power" has dictated the "sacrificial 
 'terms'" shown in the Omelas story (Adams 41), then it would also be well to 
 leave Omelas, rejecting such transcendental powers. 
 "[O]ne of the ones who walked away from Omelas," Le 
 Guin tells us in the headnote, is Odo from "The Day Before the Revolution" (260), 
 and so positive a revolutionary should give pause in privileging immanence over 
 Beauvoir's transcendence. What could be a more transcendent project than developing 
 the theory for a utopian revolution? Three points. First, at least into the 
 1970s, the utopian question was, "What will things be like the day after 
 the Revolution?" i.e., what are the goals of the Revolution? Le Guin's story 
 is about a fairly ordinary day, the day before the revolution. Second, 
 the story is about Odo, "the famous revolutionary," except it is not just that, 
 because Odo is not just that: Odo is also a woman who had married and 
 loved her husband. She was and is her whole history, which included being, a 
 "swimmer in the midst of life": an image of immanence in the world (275). Third, 
 Odo is the theoretician of people on the bottom, at "the foundation, the reality, 
 the source"; her wisdom comes from knowing people are, at bottom, mud ( WTQ 
 274), part of the Earth. 9 
 Finally, let's look at the great project of polar exploration 
 and making of a temporary utopia in "Sur" (1982; see Khanna 51-55). 
 In "Sur," nine women we will see many nines in Le Guin's 
 work nine women in 1909-1910, are the first people to reach the South Pole (although 
 they probably shouldn't have made that last part of the trip [ WTQ 267-8].) 
 They select leaders in case of grave emergency, but never have an emergency, 
 and so act in near-perfect anarchy (257); they practice good housekeeping, "the 
 art of the infinite" (260); Berta creates beautiful sculptures (262-3); and 
 Teresa has a baby (269-70). They have their goal and "success crowned our efforts." 
 They are world-class explorers, and they are very responsible wives and 
 mothers: "those who wished to evade" the claims of family "were not the companions 
 we wanted in hard work, risk, and privation" (256). They claim no reward, not 
 even fame. They achieve their transcendent goal, but they renounce any sort 
 of victory and don't leave at the South Pole for a memorial so much as a single 
 human footprint. 
 * 
 The last pattern is the political complement of the 
 immanence / transcendence antithesis: a pattern of opposition and political 
 philosophy had been worked out by the Daoists and which appears in Le Guin's 
 work as early as A Wizard of Earthsea (1968) and continued into Always 
 Coming Home (1985), A Fisherman of the Inland Sea and "Solitude" 
 (1994), but not, significantly, Tehanu (1990). Le Guin herself implies 
 most of the opposition in her very important essay "Is Gender Necessary": not 
 only in the original 1976 version but retained in the 1988 form, "Is Gender 
 Necessary? Redux." In this social opposition, the people on the right path are 
 in some sense anarchistic: "communal, independent, and somewhat introverted." 
 Their populations are stable and they tend not to "move in large masses, or 
 rapidly. Their migrations have been slow . . . . They have no 
 nomadic peoples, and no societies that live by expansion and aggression . . . . 
 Nor have they formed large, hierarchically governed nation-states, the mobilizable 
 entity that is the essential factor in modern war." Competition is ritualized, 
 and, when ritual breaks down, any resulting violence "does not become mass violence, 
 remaining limited, personal." The people going wrong are organized into 
 "hierarchically governed nation-states" or their future analogs, and they will 
 organize for war ( DEW 10), modern or premodern war. In The Left Hand 
 of Darkness (1969), the culture farthest along the wrong way tends toward 
 transcendent belief. In Always Coming Home (1985), the wrong-headed people 
 are explicitly defined as monotheists, worshipping the transcendent One and 
 basing their social structure on or at least justifying it in terms of their 
 theology and cosmography. 
 * 
 Le Guin is not a formulaic writer in any derogatory 
 sense, but she is a highly prolific popular artist with a strong ethical sense 
 and strong interests. Like William Shakespeare, Charles Dickens, and other popular 
 writers who are producing high art making problematic, and interesting the old 
 forms she has used both generic patterns and more personal patterns; like Shakespeare 
 and, more recently with some film auteurs, she has looked at some recurring 
 issues from different angles in different works, sometimes "arguing" different 
 sides of a question. Most important, like the Greek dramatist Euripides and 
 some of the inventors of American literature, she has performed the highly radical 
 work of moving society toward change by examining and shifting archetypes and 
 (re)inventing myths, trying to "re-vision" our inherited formulas ( ER 
 1993), to find new "Legends for a New Land" (1988). 
 Introduction: End Notes 
 1  
 The 
 heyiya if is from Always Coming Home ( ACH ); analogs to its open 
 spiral form may be found in (unhinged) Keltic gyres and Jewish Havdalah candles.   
 The open and closed doorways are from The Farthest Shore and 
 Tehanu , using a symbol from, among other places Western places, Rome: 
 Janus bifrons has his two faces 
 because doorways and gates necessarily "look" in two directions. 
 2 
 For continuities nd consistency in Le Guin's works from a contemporary 
 psychoanlytical point of view, see Bernard Selinger, Le Guin and Identity .    
 (see esp. Selinger 145). 
 3 The 4th edn. of The MLA Handbook 
 . . . (1995) calls for "quotation marks around a word or 
 phrase used in a special sense or purposefully misused" ( 2.2.8).   
 Since the close reading I do requires extensive quotation from Le Guin 
 (and others), and I want to differentiate real quotations from special senses, 
 I shall use for special senses European-style quotation marks: . 
 4 ". . . the movement of comedy is 
 usually a movement from one kind of society to another.   
 At the beginning of the play the obstructing characters are in charge 
 of the play's society, and the audience recognizes that they are usurpers.   
 At the end of the play . . . [a] device in the plot   
 . . . brings hero and heroine together [and] causes 
 a new society to crystallize around the hero . . . " (Frye 
 163). 
 5 Cost is 
 a major issue in Le Guin.   Cf. 
 and contrast the death of Mogien in RW with the death of Estraven in 
 LHD (1969) and with the intentionally deformed life of the imprisoned 
 scapegoat child in "The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas" (1973).  
 6 Shivais the creative Destroyer in the Hindu pantheon, 
 gendered male, who dances the worlds into being; Kali is the creative Destroyer 
 gendered female.   Following Aldous 
 Huxley in The Perennial Philosophy , and Capra on creation/destruction 
 in The Tao of Physics , we can see 
 Shiva/Kali, along with the goddess Shakti (also Sakti), as the mythic figuring 
 of the Dao, as the Being and nonBeing from which all things come and to which 
 all return. 
 7 See e.g., in Second 
 Sex 147, 173-5, 187; II.V.xvi: esp. 429-30, 447-48, 451-54, 456; II.V.xvii: 
 513, 521; 555-6, 594; II.V.xxi: esp. 598-99, 602 (see also 618-21). 
 8 For Heidegger, Rilke, et al., see Bitner, Approaches , 
 Index: Dinge .   
 Cf. and contrast the dialog between the prince and the witch in "Darkness 
 Box" with that between King Ashthera and the Priestess in Le Guin's 1985 
 film script King Dog (90-92; Part 4). 
 9 See Tzu Yu on death: Chuang 
 Tzu , ch. 6 (Giles 79), and Kurt Vonnegut, Jr., in Cat's 
 Cradle (1963):   99, "Dyot 
 meet mat" ("God made mud" [149]). 
 contents bibliography sfra home page 
