 
 Chapter 8: Violence, Utopia, Ethics, Sex 
 contents bibliography sfra home page 
 On Violence, Utopia, Ethic and Sex: 
 The Left Hand of Darkness , The Word for World Is Forest , 
 The Dispossessed , and Related Short Fiction 
 It is by losing the egocentric life that we save the hitherto latent and undiscovered 
 life which, in the spiritual part of our being, we share with the divine Ground. 
 This new-found life is "more abundant" than the other, and of a different and 
 higher kind. Its possession is liberation into the eternal, and liberation is 
 beatitude. Necessarily so; for the Brahman, who is one with the Atman, is not 
 only Being and Knowledge, but also Bliss, and after Love and Peace, the final 
 fruit of the spirit is Joy. Mortification is painful, but that pain is one of 
 the pre-conditions of blessedness. Aldous Huxley, The Perennial Philosophy 
 (106; ch. 6) 
 From 1969 through 1985, Ursula K. Le Guin published several important works 
 that deal significantly with large-scale violence: "Winter's King" (1969), The 
 Left Hand of Darkness (1969), The Word for World Is Forest (1972), 
 The Eye of the Heron (1978), Stone Telling's story in Always Coming 
 Home (1985), and, to a lesser extent, The Dispossessed (1974). For 
 one of the bases of violence, "Vaster than Empires and More Slow" (1971) is 
 useful, as is "Nine Lives" (1969). And "The New Atlantis" (1975) and Tehanu 
 (1990) are important for smaller-scale violence and for Le Guin's rethinking 
 the question in more feminist terms. In this chapter, I wish to look at Le Guin's 
 extended investigation of the roots of war and lesser forms of highly organized 
 mass murder dystopian topics; and, true to Le Guin's frequent use of comparison 
 and contrast, I'll examine also Le Guin on the opposite of dystopia ("bad place"), 
 eutopia (a "good place"). 
 Violence was a pressing topic in the United States of the late 1960s and 
early 1970s. Putting the matter crudely, human beings in general and Americans 
in particular were running out of excuses. Most of us, most of the time are 
peaceful enough, but a fair number of Americans every generation or so marched 
off to kill large numbers of other human beings, ordinarily to the applause of 
the fellow citizens of the killers. 
 Why? 
 Utopia was not a hot topic through the 1960s. The Right and Center in the American-led 
 West have been militantly antiutopian for much of the twentieth century, and, 
 as one radical in the late 1960s put it, the New Left was also very reluctant 
 to talk about what things would be like the morning after the Revolution: "The 
 two great utopians of the twentieth century were Hitler and Stalin ... ." 1 
 "Second wave" feminism seems to have changed that; whatever the cause, the early 
 1970s on have been a major period of utopian writing, especially works that 
 include feminist utopias, often contrasted with masculinist dystopias: for notable 
 examples, Joanna Russ's "When It Changed" (1972) and The Female Man (1975), 
 Suzy McKee Charnas's "diptych" Walk to the End of the World (1974, dystopia) 
 and Motherlines (1978, utopia), Marge Piercy's Woman on the Edge of 
 Time (1976), and Samuel R. Delany's Triton (1976). 2 
 Triton , subtitled "A Heterotopia," is most directly a response to Le 
 Guin's The Dispossessed , "An Ambiguous Utopia," but all these works, 
 and others, may be usefully seen, or heard, in a multi-voiced dialog occasionally, 
 an argument. I'll suggest here only the obvious point that Le Guin until recently 
 generally offered the liberal (feminist) ideal of integration, symbolized in 
 the androgyne (and Daoist Yin-Yang), while Russ and Charnas preferred thought 
 experiments using (and therefore making thinkable) more radical, separatist, 
 women-only utopias. 
 SHORT STORIES: "Nine Lives" (1969 [again briefly]), "Vaster than Empires and 
 More Slow" (1971 [first pass]), "Winter's King" (1969 [first pass])," "The Ones 
 Who Walk Away from Omelas" (1973) 
 "Nine Lives" has no human-against-human violence, nor does it analyze any 
societies, either utopian or dystopian. But "Nine Lives" makes one of Le Guin's 
most explicit statements about evolution and deals very elegantly with the 
problem of the stranger and our dread at meeting the stranger. Both points are 
important. 
 In Le Guin's future history, the near future of us Terrans is (generally) not 
good: it is a time of ecological disaster, of famine, plague. In "Nine Lives," 
the worst is famine: 
 The United Kingdom had come through the Great Famines well, losing less than 
half its population: a record achieved by rigorous food control. Black 
marketeers{sic} and hoarders had been executed. Crumbs had been shared. Where in 
richer lands most had died and a few had thriven, in Britain fewer died and none 
throve. They all got lean. . . . When civilization became a 
matter of standing in lines, the British had kept queue, and so had replaced the 
survival of the fittest with the survival of the fair-minded. Owen Pugh was a 
scrawny little man. All the same, he was there. ( WTQ 
123) 
 Following Peter Kropotkin in Mutual Aid (1902) and putting the 
 matter in more orthodox Darwinist terms, it is the fit who survive (by definition); 
 and, in times of stress, the fittest social animals are those who are most sociable, 
 the most cooperative as we civilized people are pleased to flatter ourselves, 
 the most civilized (P. E. Smith 80-83; Bittner, Approaches 149 n. 49). 
 In Le Guin's future worlds, White Americans and our descendants are rarely among 
 the survivors. As a culture, the great White West has usually prized competitiveness 
 over cooperation; when under grave pressure, we aren't in the habit of queuing 
 up. In truly lean times, then, we are far less likely to survive than peoples 
 who practice solidarity and mutual aid. [ 3] 
 The question of the stranger is crucial for the problem of violence. For human 
 violence, there must be an "I" and an "Other" an Other the "I" sees as both 
 similar enough to be a competitor and different enough to be a threat. One temptation 
 for utopia is to reduce the likelihood for violence between people by radically 
 reducing differences: "There's the terrible thing: the strangeness of the stranger" 
 any stranger ( WTQ 121). A false utopian possibility, then, is 
 to eliminate strangers. Within itself the John Chow tenclone accomplishes exactly 
 that. The ideal of the melting-pot has been realized in the ten genetically 
 identical and phenotypically very similar men and women of the self-sufficient 
 clone: "Always to be answered when you spoke; never to be in pain alone. Love 
 your neighbor as you love yourself.... That hard old problem was solved. The 
 neighbor was the self: the love was perfect" (126). [ 4] 
 Pugh's thinking here of the teaching on love of neighbor in the Holiness Code 
(Leviticus 19.18), quoted with approval by Jesus (Matthew 13.39). It is 
unfortunate that Jesus did not quote further: "The stranger who resides with you 
shall be to you as one of your citizens; you shall love him as yourself, for you 
were strangers in the land of Egypt . . ." (19.33-34). An even harder 
assignment than love of neighbor, someone like you: an injunction to love 
someone different. In any case, the clone eliminates differences, within the 
clone; and it eliminates active hostility toward those outside the clone: a 
self-sufficient entity can usually just ignore outsiders ( WTQ 129-30). 
 If "Nine Lives" were a philosophical essay, Le Guin would have to justify why 
 cloning "is all wrong" beyond the practical problem of a higher fatality rate 
 if they all tend to do the same wrong thing (142, 134-36) and the social utility 
 problem cited in Martin's rhetorical question, "What are a lot of duplicate 
 geniuses going to do for us when they don't even know we exist?" (142). "Nine 
 Lives" is not a philosophical essay, and homogenized humanity comes across as 
 wrong because lack of difference eliminates sympathy (130), love (146-47), and 
 manners (142). Manners are not more important than love but they are important. 
 A. L. Kroeber comments on the Luiseo specifically, and (California) Indians 
 more generally: "The Indian, beyond taboos and cult observances, centers his 
 attention on the trivial but unremitting factors of personal intercourse;{sic} 
 affability, liberality, restraining of anger and jealousy, politeness. He . . . 
 sets up an open, even, unruffled, slow, and pleasant existence as his ideal. 
 He preaches a code of manners rather than morals. He thinks of character, of 
 its expression in the innumerable but little relations of daily life, not of 
 right or wrong in our sense. It is significant that these words do not exist 
 in his language" ( Handbook 684; ch. 47). A. L. Kroeber's daughter, rejecting 
 absolutes of "right" and "wrong," agrees (see Chuang Tzu ch. 23 [Giles 
 229]). . 
 For Le Guin circa 1969, the simplest model for a utopian community is not the 
tenclone but Martin, Pugh, and Kaph as we last see them: lonely individuals, 
whose pain in isolation is their motivation to reach out to one another, to 
attempt, in the darkness, human touch (147). 
 * 
 "Vaster than Empires and More Slow" (1971) takes a situation similar to that 
 of "Nine Lives" a small group on an isolated, threatening planet but keeps in 
 general shape close to old SF formulas. 5 
 Instead of a tenclone, we have ten literally mad scientists on a planet two 
 lightcenturies beyond human exploration ( WTQ 174), one where "All lifeforms 
 were photosynthesizing or saprophagus, living off light or death, not off life. 
 Plants: infinite plants . . ." (175). And then the isolated humans 
 are threatened by something, something large and dangerous, where there are 
 no intelligent creatures, no dangerous animals, nothing with voluntary movement 
 no possible threats! A familiar enough SF premise, even one presented with some 
 psychological sophistication in Forbidden Planet (1956), a film whose Monster 
 from the Id lurks in the speculations about "psychic projections" and "Dark 
 Egos" by "Vasters" mad explorers (182). The movement of the plot of "VEMS" identifies 
 the threat as the planet's forest, one vast semi-sentient. The forest has sensed 
 the fear and aggression of the humans and projected it back upon them, frightening 
 them more and contributing to a vicious cycle. The forest is not conquered in 
 the story but contacted by the human explorers' "Sensor," Osden, the hypersensitive 
 empath of the group. 
 "'As Jean-Paul Sartre has said in his lovable way, 'Hell is other people'" 
 ("A Trip to the Head," WTQ 160) and this statement is literally true 
 for Osden, who has no "skin," so to speak, to keep other people out, so "touch" 
 becomes for him a violation. Osden is most sensitive to the fear of his fellow 
 humans, and to that of the forest. Osden resolves his own problems and those 
 of the group, when he takes "the fear into himself, and, accepting, had transcended 
 it. He had given up his self to the alien," to the forest, "an unreserved surrender, 
 that left no place for evil. He had learned the love of the Other, and thereby 
 had been given his whole self" which "is not the vocabulary of reason" but is 
 the language of the Perennial Philosophy, and is the resolution of this story 
 ( WTQ 199). 
 As a teaching story, "Vaster than Empires" makes explicit some important Le 
Guinian points on the human Shadow, Being, macho, aggression, and the 
 one , the desperately egocentric individual man. 
 "What one fears," the Narrator tells us, "is alien. . . . not 
one of us. The evil is not in me!" (187). In "Vaster than Empires" the forest is 
radically alien, but it is not evil or a murderer. The forest is, on the 
contrary, associated symbolically with connectedness and identified with the 
ground of all connections. The forest is described as "Presence without mind. 
Awareness of being, without object or subject. Nirvana" (191) and explicitly 
called "the forest of being" (198). Indeed, what initially terrifies the forest 
is recognizing the mere existence of the humans: in its wholeness, the forest 
had never before encountered an Other. The forest is not conquered by the humans 
and hardly could be; the relatively happy resolution of the story comes in 
contacting, getting in touch with, the forest. Like City of Illusions , 
"Vaster than Empires" takes a standard sort of tale and retells it with 
radically different values, climaxing in a different idea of victory than 
defeating the Other; as in A Wizard of Earthsea , such victory as is 
possible comes not from conquering the apparent enemy, but the "mortification" 
of embracing the enemy. 
 This is a very unmacho idea, supported by some aspects of "Vaster than Empires." 
 The Surveyors who go out exploring "Where no man has gone before" (in the classic 
 Star Trek formulation) are "escapists, misfits" and "nuts" ( WTQ 
 167), described early in the story as "wriggling through the coupling tube one 
 by one like apprehensive spermatozoa trying to fertilize the universe" (167-68). 
 So much for the Daniel Boone tradition and the central SF ideal of expansion 
 into the Galaxy and for the image of the phallic rocket ship penetrating and 
 impregnating space! (As in, for a highly relevant example, Stanley Kubrick's 
 film, 2001: A Space Odyssey.) 6 
 On a more personal level, Osden tells one of his women colleagues that his "choice 
 is to be hated or to be despised. Not being a woman or a coward, I prefer to 
 be hated." Osden is at his sickest here, and in case we especially a male "we" 
 miss that point, Le Guin goes on to undermine Osden by having him immediately 
 go on to deny his humanity: "But I am not a man. . . . There 
 are all of you. And there is myself. I am one " (177-78). 7 
 Osden has set up false oppositions, a false dilemma, and a false association 
 of "woman" or the feminine with cowardice or weakness. He has identified himself 
 against the group as a God-like One . He has yet to live the paradox of 
 victory in "unreserved surrender" ( WTQ 199), "losing the egocentric life." 
 I will discuss the nature of that surrender in the discussion of "Vaster" in 
 its context in Buffalo Gals . Here I wish to caution readers that Le Guin's 
 self-description as an "unconsistent Taoist and . . . consistent unChristian" 
 is somewhat modest; she is more consistent than most of us. 8 
 So we should be careful not to think of Osden's surrender as Christ-like sacrifice 
 and Christian paradoxical triumph over an adversary. Osden is not imitating 
 Christ, and he is not sacrificing himself; Le Guin does not approve of sacrifices 
 in any religion, or self-sacrifice as an ideal. 9 
 Osden fulfills himself by finding in solitude relationship with the forest: 
 with Nature, Being, the Dao. 10 
 "Vaster than Empires" is not a story of Christ-like love, nor is it one of the 
 analyses of the late 1960s and early 1970s that would find the solution to all 
 problems in better communication or more sensitivity. Osden's problem is that 
 he is too sensitive. The standard-issue human being is far from "a well of loving-kindness" 
 (177), and "Vaster than Empires" makes even clearer than "Nine Lives" that some 
 aggressiveness is a standard part of human interaction. Mannon, "the Soft Scientist," 
 tries to explain Osden's obnoxiousness: 
 . . . the normal defensive-aggressive reaction between strangers 
 meeting . . . is something you're scarcely aware of . . . 
 you've learned to ignore it, to the point where you might even deny it 
 exists. However, Mr{Sic: "Mr"} Osden, being an empath, feels it. Feels 
 his feelings, and yours, and is hard put to say which is which. Let's 
 say that there's a normal element of hostility toward any stranger in 
 your emotional reaction to him when you meet him, plus a spontaneous dislike 
 of his looks, or clothes, or handshake it doesn't matter what. He feels 
 that dislike. As his autistic defense has been unlearned [as he was cured 
 of childhood autism], he resorts to an aggressive-defense mechanism, a 
 response in kind to the aggression which you have unwittingly projected 
 onto him. ( WTQ 169) 
 This speech gives us an approximate statement of Le Guin's position that aggressivity 
 (as at least mild hostility to strangers) is a normal human trait: aggressivity 
 the capacity for anger, even violent rage is part of the human repertoire. As 
 with any trait, discounting for a moment free will, different people will be 
 for aggressivity to greater and lesser degrees; as with any trait, aggressivity 
 will be expressed in ways determined by the environment, most specifically for 
 humans always and necessarily our cultures. The question then becomes, What 
 are we going to do about it? What in human societies increases the probability 
 of actual violence, especially large-scale violence? Can we build better and 
 saner societies if not utopias, where violence is rare and war unknown? 
 * 
 Again, one way to such a utopia would be to eliminate the biological and 
cultural bases for violence: the differences that make people strangers to one 
another, the masculinity that provides the anatomy, hormone systems, and 
indoctrination that support macho violence. We know from The Lathe of 
Heaven that Le Guin dislikes a grey world without racial problems because it 
is without racial differences, but race is a minor matter genetically and by 
itself determines nothing culturally; there are other ways in which humanity 
could be homogenized. In The Left Hand of Darkness (1969), and Le Guin's 
writing about it, Le Guin deals at length with the more ancient question of 
gender. What if that were eliminated? Before getting to the complexities 
of Left Hand , however, it will be well to look briefly at "Winter's 
King," written, Le Guin says a year before she began The Left Hand of 
Darkness but published the same year, and then revised for The Wind's 
Twelve Quarters (1975) to change the pronouns for the Gethenians to the 
feminine, while keeping masculine titles, as one way to suggest their androgyny 
( WTQ 85). I will discuss "Winter's King" more completely in the context 
of Le Guin's three visits to the Karhidish city of Rer. 
 "Winter's King" is a Hainish story, set far into the future, two generations 
 after The Left Hand of Darkness , which is itself set on the planet Gethen 
 ("Winter"), ca. 4780 CE and long after the League of All Worlds has evolved 
 into the Ekumen ("household") of Known worlds. 11 
 The narrative's plot involves a political plot. King Argaven XVII of Karhide 
 is kidnapped and brainwashed: "An induced paranoia. You might well have become 
 a remarkably vicious ruler . . . . Not overnight, of course. . . . 
 It would have taken several years for you to become a real tyrant . . ." 
 ( WTQ 100). To avoid this plot, Argaven leaves Gethen and goes to the 
 Ekumenical world of Ollul and is cured of her incipient paranoia and then goes 
 to school. Argaven's child, Emran, becomes king, and a bad one. When Argaven 
 returns to Karhide, she comes to lead the rebellion against her child and regains 
 her throne. 
 Three points here. 
 First, Argaven returning from her kidnapping has "Abdication, suicide, or escape" 
 as "the only acts of consequences" she could choose of her own free will. Argaven's 
 physician on Hain notes that her kidnapper's "counted on your moral veto on 
 suicide" a major taboo on Gethen "and your Council's vote [veto] on abdication. 
 But being possessed by ambition themselves, they forgot the possibility of abnegation, 
 and left one door open for you" (101). That is, Argaven can renounce her rights 
 to kingship and does (abnegation) and goes to Ollul for treatment as simple 
 "Mr Harge." Such renunciation of egotistical demands for status and power is 
 beyond the mindset of people possessed by ambition, by the desire for 
 power, and it is the right answer for Argaven. She turns her back on kingship 
 and walks away from dominion, and this path leads her to true power and proper 
 usefulness to her people (103). 
 The second point is in a dialog between King Argaven and Mr. Axt, the Mobile 
 of the Ekumen on Winter. Axt tells Argaven of ancient Hainish seeding of the 
 galaxy with humans, and alludes to loss of contact among the worlds during the 
 Age of the Enemy. Argaven asks, "The dream of the Ekumen, then, is to restore 
 that truly ancient commonalty; to regather all that peoples of all the worlds 
 at one hearth?" Axt agrees, saying, "To weave some harmony among them, at least. 
 Life loves to know itself, out to its furthest limits; to embrace complexity 
 is its delight. Our difference is our beauty. All these worlds and the various 
 forms and ways of the minds and lives and bodies on them together they would 
 make a splendid harmony." Young Argaven replies, mostly correctly, "No harmony 
 endures"; Axt responds, "None has ever been achieved . . . . 
 The pleasure is in trying" (97). 
 In 1960s sociological language, Le Guin's ideal is integration, not assimilation. 
 She wants to bring the (human) family together in our "commonalty," not in some 
 sort of homogeneous unity. She wants "a splendid harmony" a figure of speech 
 from music, where harmony requires at least two different notes. 
 And she's willing to allow some dissonance. Less figuratively, there is 
violence among the humans on Gethen, much of it in this story lead by Le Guin's 
hero, Winter's true King; and this violence is no less in the version of the 
story Le Guin revised to make the Gethenians androgynous. People will fight to 
put down a tyrant, especially an incompetent tyrant; people will follow Argaven 
against Emran; under enough political pressure, a mother will pursue the child 
of her body even to the child's dishonorable death ( WTQ 107-08). Putting 
the matter more positively, "when our sense of justice is offended," as Hannah 
Arendt argued in On Violence (1969, 1970), we may react with rage and 
with violence. Such violence "is neither beastly nor irrational" but possibly 
legitimate when we are "confronted with outrageous events or conditions," when 
violence "is the only way to set the scales of justice right again" (Arendt 63, 
64). Such violence is simply never good. 
 * 
 I do not like to see the word 'liberal' used as a smear word. That's mere newspeak. 
 If people must call names, I cheerfully accept Lenin's anathema 
 as suitable: I am a petty-bourgeois anarchist, and an internal 
 emigree{sic}, O.K.? Le Guin, "A Response to the Le Guin 
 Issue" (45) 
 Gethen during the struggle between Argaven XVII and Emran is far from utopia; 
 Omelas is a utopia: a place of almost perfect peace, of high art and science, 
 profound kindness, natural religion (and no clergy), a place without guilt, 
 of pleasure, happiness, joy ("The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas," 1973, WTQ 
 252-55). Having established this beautiful place, at the Festival of Summer 
 no less, Le Guin's Narrator asks us, "Do you believe? do you accept the festival, 
 the city, the joy? No? Then let me describe one more thing" (265) and she describes 
 the cost of this utopia: the scapegoat, one child kept miserable in a 
 locked room. "It is naked. Its buttocks and thighs are a mass of festered sores, 
 as it sits in its own excrement continually." We are never told how the child's 
 misery allows the happiness of Omelas how its mortification and pain 
 allows Omelas's joy but we are told explicitly that this is the case. All the 
 people of Omelas "understand that their happiness, the beauty of their city, 
 the tenderness of their friendships, the health of their children, the wisdom 
 of their scholars, the skill of their makers, even the abundance of their harvest 
 and the kindly weathers of their skies, depend wholly on this child's abominable 
 misery" (257). Now that the Narrator has made Omelas more credible, she has 
 only "one more thing to tell, and this is quite incredible." Sometimes adolescents 
 who go to see the child, sometimes older adults, "go out into the street, and 
 walk down the street alone. They keep walking, and walk straight out of the 
 city of Omelas . . . . into the darkness, and they do not come 
 back. The place they go towards is a place even less imaginable to most of us 
 than the city of happiness. I cannot describe it at all. It is possible that 
 it does not exist. But they seem to know where they are going, the ones who 
 walk away from Omelas" (259). 
 This "psychomyth" ( WTQ 251) is among my favorite short stories and has 
 been immensely popular among anthologists and critics, and that may represent 
 a failure of faith by many of us: a failure to believe in the possibility of 
 "the city of happiness," our insistence that there must be a catch somewhere. 
 Indeed, "There ain't no such thing as a free lunch" (or free pizza delivery, 
 to bring the saying up to date) but there are free gifts, starting with 
 the universe and one's life, and large-scale human happiness, pretty-good societies, 
 may be possible. 12 
 However readers resolve the question of eutopia, it is clear Le Guin intends 
 for us to consider seriously the philosophical question the story raises in 
 the manner she raises it, as the parenthetical description under the title puts 
 it, "Variations on a theme by William James." 13 
 In The Wind's Twelve Quarters headnote, Le Guin quotes from James's 
 "The Moral Philosopher and the Moral Life," most relevantly James's idea that 
 James and his readers would find it "hideous" if utopian happiness for millions 
 were achieved "on the one simple condition that a certain lost soul on the far-off 
 edge of things should lead a life of lonely torment" (251). Le Guin follows 
 James in reducing to its most radical case the Utilitarian doctrine of "The 
 greatest good for the greatest number," and she attacks the "hard-headed" notion 
 that in a nasty world one must sometimes use evil means to achieve good or, 
 to multiply slogans: "The end justifies" or "will justify" "the means." 
 Le Guin suggests for etymologies for "Omelas," initially, "Salem, O[regon]," 
read backwards, but also " O melas ," and " Homme hlas " ("Man, 
alas!"; WTQ 252). I will add to the possibilities, French homme 
plus Latin Hellas , for "man of Greece," and relate the name to the 
"Rationalist" part of the reference in The Lathe of Heaven (1971), to the 
"Judaeo-Christian-Rationalist West." Dr. Haber, after all, was, in that novel "a 
benevolent man. He wanted to make the world better for humanity" (82-83), which 
means, ideally, finding an Archimedean point outside the world from which to see 
the world objectively and analytically, and push it around rationally: giving it 
a shove toward an abstract, transcendent Good, finally to utopia (cf. "The New 
Atlantis" 88). 
 If its basic rationalism is one possible problem with Omelas, another is that 
 the Omelites, however much they are "mature, intelligent, passionate adults" 
 (254) might be gravely mistaken or, as Rebecca Adams suggests, a little crazy 
 (41). Either way, we can help privilege Those Who Walk Away from Omelas by noting 
 Le Guin's counting Odo among them ( WTQ 260), and by associating them 
 with a line of Le Guin's people who, if they could not be part of the solution 
 where they were, at least walked away and ceased being part of the problem, 
 or, if very lucky, went to better places to be : Lif and the widow and 
 child in "Things," Luz in The Eye of the Heron , and Eve in "She Unnames 
 Them" plus, in different ways, Leese Webster (the exiled, dispossessed spider) 
 and "blank" in "A Trip to the Head." If will and reason have created a transcendent 
 project in Omelas, then it might be well to leave Omelas. If some "transcendental 
 power" has dictated the "sacrificial 'terms'" shown in the story (Adams 41), 
 then it would be even more imperative to leave Omelas: Le Guin rejects the "Judaeo-Christian" 
 and all similar transcendental powers. 
 I'll suggest that this far, if no further, we should put "The Ones Who Walk 
 Away" in the tradition of Sir Thomas More's Utopia (1516) and also Jonathan 
 Swift's "A Modest Proposal" (1729): More's Utopia should shame Europeans 
 by showing how much more ethical Utopians are with only reason than Christian 
 Europeans with both reason and revelation (J. H. Hexter, More's Utopia , 
 1952). The final turn of "A Modest Proposal" shows us that the Projector is 
 a monster who would sell human baby meat to solve Ireland's economic problems 
 and that he is more ethical than his rich Irish and English readers. 
 Even so, we may, and should, identify with those who walk away from Omelas until 
 we're "ambushed" by the thought that those who stay in Omelas are better people 
 than Le Guin's generally privileged readers. 14 
 The Omelites live well from the suffering of only one child, and they are all 
 conscious of the child's suffering ( WTQ 257). The economy that sustains 
 most of Western prosperity is based on the exploitation of many more, and those 
 who suffer are virtually invisible to the privileged (see Le Guin's "Non-Euclidian 
 View" 83-84). 
 Exploitation is one form of and one reason why there is violence among real-world 
 humans, although in Omelas violence is limited to the victimization of one child. 
 However mad the bargain of the Omelites, within the terms of the bargain, this 
 is rational victimization, if we note that "rational" and "reason" come 
 from ratio , "reckoning," and a simple calculation might indicate that 
 the good of very many could outweigh the good of the one (to paraphrase a central 
 thematic concern of the Star Trek movies). 15 
 Among those who believe in immortal souls of infinite value, the salvation of 
 one such could outweigh all of human life. Would the goal of utopia, if achieved, 
 justify violence against even one child? "The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas," 
 in a rigorously constructed teaching story, says it would not. 
 Still, the dissidents on the road from Omelas exiles, migrs do not try to 
 overthrow the "city of happiness." They do not try to rescue the child. They 
 do not resort to violence, perhaps because they know the anarchist teaching 
 "that the means you use to attain your object soon themselves become your object" 
 (Berkman 113) or "The means justify the end." It's unclear just what the Omelite 
 exiles are going toward, although they "seem to know where they are going" (259). 
 What is clear is that they reject the terms of Omelas's bargain: violence as 
 a mysterious but rational price for utopia, even violence against one, the idea 
 that good intentions can justify evil actions. In The Left Hand of Darkness , 
 Therem Harth rem ir Estraven writes, "To oppose something is to maintain it" 
 and quotes the saying of a foreign people s/he is now among that "all roads 
 lead to Mishnory." S/he continues, ". . . if you turn your back on 
 Mishnory and walk away from it, you are still on the Mishnory road. To oppose 
 vulgarity is inevitably to be vulgar. You must go somewhere else; you must have 
 another goal; then you walk a different road" I assume even while on the road 
 away from Mishnory or away from Omelas. We will see below more of the possibilities 
 of minimally turning and walking away from evil, and the possibility of, perhaps, 
 even finding a new road, to "go somewhere else, and break the circle" and go 
 free ( LHD 153; ch. 11). 16 
 * 
 The Left Hand of Darkness (1969) 
 The "female principle" has historically been anarchic; 
 that is, anarchy has historically been identified as female. 
 The domain allotted to women "the family," for example is 
 the area of order without coercion, rule by custom not by 
 force. Men have reserved the structures of social power 
 to themselves (and to those few women whom they admit to 
 it on male terms, such as queens, prime ministers); men 
 make the wars and peaces, men make, enforce and break the 
 laws. On Gethen, the two polarities we perceive through 
 our cultural conditioning as male and female are neither, 
 and are in balance: consensus with authority, decentralizing 
 with centralizing, flexible with rigid, circular with linear, 
 hierarchy with network. Ursula K. Le Guin, "Is Gender 
 Necessary (Redux)" (1976/1988, Language of the Night 
 [1989]: 164) 
 Let's begin with some jargon useful for discussing science fiction: "foregrounding 
 the background" and "textualizing the subtext." In "realistic," down-to-Earth 
 stories ("mundane fiction," in Samuel R. Delany's formulation), our main interest 
 is in the characters and what they do; the setting is background. In what Northrop 
 Frye called the modes of Romance and Satire, the characters and their doings 
 must compete for our interest with the settings. So, in the modes where we usually 
 find SF and emphatically in utopias and dystopias what is background in Comedy 
 and Tragedy, the mere settings of narratives, may get a good deal of attention, 
 be drawn, figuratively, into the foreground. Add to this the idea of the subtext 
 of a play as all the things the director and actors have to know that the playwright 
 doesn't tell us. For a classic instance, Shakespeare's script tells us nothing 
 about Hamlet and Ophelia's sex life, if any; the actors playing Hamlet and Ophelia, 
 however, must know the sub textual details; whether or not they have been 
 physically intimate is important for how they react to one another. Similarly, 
 SF authors need to know a great deal about the worlds they create that they 
 don't have to tell us directly: history, geography, myths, customs all the things 
 we usually teach aspiring writers to sneak in and not present in big, undigested, 
 expository lumps. 
 Not as much as in Always Coming Home (1985; a downright future 
ethnography), but still to a great extent, The Left Hand of Darkness 
foregrounds the background and textualizes subtexts, expanding a simple plot to 
twenty chapters and an appendix by insisting that we look very closely at the 
world Le Guin has made and which Genly Ai presents to us in his "Report." 
 The plot falls into three parts correlating with the story's three main settings, 
 followed by a brief conclusion. In the beginning of the story, Genly Ai is in 
 Erhenrang, the capital of Karhide, a country on the planet Gethen, nicknamed 
 Winter because it is at the cold end of the range in which human societies can 
 survive. Ai's status is First Mobile of the Ekumen ("Household," League) of 
 Known Worlds, and his mission is to invite the Gethenians to enter the Ekumen, 
 re-establishing contact with the other known human species of the Galaxy. Ai 
 believes he is about to have an audience with King Argaven XV, ruler of Karhide, 
 to present the case. The audience has been arranged by Therem Harth rem ir Estraven, 
 prime minister to Argaven and a supporter of Ai's mission. Ai has dinner with 
 Estraven, who implies strongly that Ai might want to leave Karhide for Orgoreyn, 
 the other country on Gethen's Great Continent. To just advise Ai to leave would 
 be to insult him: adults do not advise other adults in Karhidish culture. 17 
 Ai gets his audience with King Argaven, but they meet only moments after Ai 
 hears the announcement of Estraven's banishment, in part for trying to help 
 Ai but more for becoming "Estraven the Traitor" for attempting the peaceful 
 resolution of a border dispute with Orgoreyn (29-30; ch. 3 [and ch. 9]). Ai's 
 audience with Argaven does not go well, and he soon goes off to see the countryside 
 of Karhide -and see if there was anything to tales of Gethenian Foretellings; 
 and then Ai crosses over into Orgoreyn, hoping his offer will be better received 
 by the Orgota. 
 Estraven also has gone to Orgoreyn, just ahead of assassins sent by Pemmer 
Harge rem ir Tibe, Estraven's successor as "King's Ear." Ai's mission soon 
becomes urgent. Tibe is pressing Karhide's claim in the border dispute, and 
Karhide and Orgoreyn are approaching a breakthrough in Gethenian history: war. 
Entry into the Ekumen by one of the countries would drag in the other, and it 
would be necessary for the two to cooperate in bargaining with the Ekumen. The 
Orgota leadership lacks the insight and courage to go a new way; so they go a 
very old way and have Ai arrested and sent to a "voluntary farm," a forced-labor 
camp. 
 Estraven rescues Ai, and the two of them attempt to return to Karhide the 
only way they can, across the Gobrin Ice that separates and connects Karhide and 
Orgoreyn. It is a long trip: the third section of the novel. 
 Surviving the journey on the Ice and arriving back in Karhide, Ai calls down 
 his colleagues in their ship in orbit; and Estraven is betrayed by a person 
 s/he has aided and has asked for help and skis into the guns of Tibe's agents. 
 Since the Orgota had announced Ai's death, his arrival, alive, in Karhide is 
 sufficiently embarrassing to require a rearrangement of the Orgota leadership, 
 bringing into power those more in favor of peace with Karhide and entry into 
 the Ekumen. Tibe resigns after learning of Estraven's death; Ai's ship lands 
 safely; Karhide prepares to enter the Ekumen; and Argaven refuses at least just 
 yet to revoke the order of exile on Estraven and rehabilitate Estraven's reputation. 
 The book ends with Gethen at peace and Ai leaving the Karhidish capital and 
 visiting Estraven's family and telling them his and Estraven's story. 
 What I have left out of this plot summary is that the Gethenians are androgynes: 
 neither male nor female five-sixths of the time; either male or female when 
 they go into kemmer: estrous, heat, rut and, of course, remaining female through 
 pregnancy and nursing if they enter kemmer as female and get pregnant. 18 
 The key goal of the protagonists, Genly Ai and Estraven, is to prevent a war 
 between the great nation-states of Karhide and Orgoreyn; and androgyny is second 
 only to the climate among the reasons the Gethenians as yet have had 
 no wars. Commenting on The Left Hand of Darkness in "Is Gender Necessary? 
 Redux" (1976/1987), Le Guin says " At the very inception of the whole book, 
 I was interested in writing a novel about people in a society that had never 
 had a war. That came first. The androgyny came second. (Cause and effect? Effect 
 and Cause) " ( DEW 11). 19 
 Gethenian androgyny is not necessary and probably not sufficient for their lack 
 of warfare, but it is the biological basis for much in their culture that has 
 made warfare unlikely. 
 Warfare anywhere on our Earth is a biological luxury item, possible only among 
 peoples who have surpluses to destroy. As Ong Tot Oppong, an Ekumenical Investigator 
 notes, "The weather of Winter is so relentless, so near the limit of tolerability 
 even to . . . [Gethenians], that perhaps they use up their fighting 
 spirit fighting the cold. The marginal peoples, the races that just get by, 
 are rarely the warriors. And in the end, the dominant factor in Gethenian life 
 is not sex or any other human thing: it is their environment, their cold world. 
 Here man has a crueler enemy even than himself" ( LHD 96; ch. 7). On Gethen, 
 humankind have a constant reminder, that "Heaven and Earth are not humane." 
 20 
 Androgyny by itself might not have been sufficient to prevent war; the severe 
 climate certainly helped limit large-scale violence, as did the relatively small 
 numbers of Gethenians (96): mass violence requires masses. Also, Gethenian technology, 
 like that of the Chinese, developed at a slow rate, their Machine Age having 
 started up "gradually, without any industrial revolution, without any revolution 
 at all. Winter hasn't achieved in thirty centuries what Terra once achieved 
 in thirty decades. Neither has Winter ever paid the price that Terra paid" ( LHD 
 99; ch. 8). 21 
 No industrial revolution suddenly and blatantly put a nation far enough ahead 
 of the climate that warfare made sense. No industrial revolution made one Gethenian 
 nation suddenly superior to another technologically. And androgyny by itself 
 wouldn't preclude war any more than the production of a subspecies of XYY, testosterone-crazed 
 supermales would guarantee war; warfare is not an instinct or behavior. As Konrad 
 Lorenz argued in On Aggression (1966), war is an institution (275). Still, 
 human beings are biological creatures, and (spiritual matters aside?) everything 
 we are and do has to have biological bases. On Gethen, the biological basis 
 for the cultural constellation that has prevented war and made for a rather 
 good place in Karhide has been androgyny. Everything in Gethenian society "is 
 shaped to fit the somer-kemmer cycle" of sexual latency and rut. "Room is made 
 for sex, plenty of room; but a room, as it were, apart," as the Ekumenical Investigator 
 Ong Tot Oppong, initially saw and elegantly expressed it. "The society of Gethen, 
 in its daily functioning and in its continuity, is without sex" (93; ch. 7). 
 And where there is sex among Gethenian humans, one's role might be female or 
 it might be male; the Masculine and the Feminine, as defining categories, simply 
 wouldn't exist and the "tendency to dualism that pervades human thinking" and 
 is reinforced by Female/Male divisions is somewhat "lessened, or changed, on 
 Winter" (94). 22 
 Le Guin makes her points about gender, violence, and war in Left Hand 
 by explicitly foregrounding background and textualizing subtexts. In Planet 
 of Exile (1966), Le Guin had divided her narration among three point-of-view 
 characters; but in The Left Hand of Darkness we not only have Ai and 
 Estraven getting different chapters but the remainder going to still other voices, 
 making explicit a good deal of what is usually implicit background and subtext. 
 Of 20 chapters, Ai gets 10 (50%), Estraven gets 4 (20%), and miscellaneous others 
 get 6 (30%) plus the appendix on "The Gethenian Calendar and Clock" (302-04). 
 Of the "other voices," two of the chapters are identified as tales (chs. 2 and 
 9), and one as a story (ch. 4). Of interest to me here are the scientific report 
 on "The Question of Sex," the theological piece "On Times and Darkness," and 
 "An Orgota Creation Myth" of great antiquity. 
 Each of these chapters provides a transition in, and interruption of, the plot. 
 "The Question of Sex" (ch. 7) is central in the section getting Genly Ai to 
 Orgoreyn and the Orgota capital of Mishnory and rather more abruptly getting 
 the exiled Estraven safely to Orgoreyn (chs. 6-8). "On Time and Darkness" (ch. 
 12) is central to the sequence of chapters moving Ai from Mishnory to the labor 
 camp "Down on the Farm" and then his rescue by Estraven and their movement "To 
 the Ice" (chs. 10-15). "An Orgota Creation Myth" (ch. 17) is told as Estraven 
 and Ai move "Between Drumner and Dremegole," a geologically active area, and 
 then "On the Ice" on their way home to Karhide and the resolution of the plot 
 (chs. 16-19). 
 I will state directly what I see as Le Guin's answer to The Question of Sex, 
 and Violence and War her basic answer from 1969 to at least 1985. As on Joanna 
 Russ's Whileaway (1972, 1975), or among Suzy McKee Charnas's Riding Women in 
 Motherlines (1978), violence is indeed possible in worlds without men, 
 but it will tend to be direct, emotional, personal. What is specifically man ly 
 is not violence but warfare, which tends to be indirect, unemotional, impersonal: 
 indeed, ideally, professional (see Arendt 62 n. 83). 23 
 Alternatively, zealous soldiers, fighting for a cause, are willing to kill huge 
 masses of total strangers as a means to the end of the kingdom of God or utopia 
 or some abstract, ideal whatever so long as their zeal lasts. What is necessary 
 for war is the mobilization of a large numbers of men to do the job of killing 
 large numbers of strangers. For modern total war it is necessary to mobilize 
 at least one entire society. 
 In "The Domestication of Hunch" (ch. 5), Genly Ai observes that Prime 
Minister Tibe 
 was going to press Karhide's claim to . . . [the Sinoth Valley]: 
precisely the kind of action which, on any other world at this stage of 
civilization, would lead to war. But on Gethen nothing led to war. Quarrels, 
murders, feuds, forays, vendettas, assassinations, tortures and abominations, 
all these were in their repertory of human accomplishments; but they did not go 
to war. They lacked, it seemed, the capacity to mobilize . They behaved 
like animals, in that respect; or like women. They did not behave like men, or 
ants. At any rate they never yet had done so. What I knew of Orgoreyn indicated 
that it had become, over the last five or six centuries, an increasingly 
mobilizable society, a real nation-state. The prestige-competition, heretofore 
mostly economic, might force Karhide to emulate its larger neighbor, to become a 
nation instead of a family quarrel, as Estraven had said; to become, as Estraven 
had also said, patriotic. If this occurred the Gethenians might have an 
excellent chance of achieving the condition of war. (48-49; ch. 5) 
 This is clear enough, and it is a theme upon which Le Guin will work variations 
 for at least the next sixteen years. For the variation in The Left Hand of 
 Darkness , picture Karhide and Orgoreyn on the Great Continent of Gethen 
 as a giant geographical Yin-Yang symbol, with Karhide more toward Yinnish darkness 
 and Orgoreyn more in Yangish light (see Barbour, "Wholeness" 167). Now picture 
 the movement of Yin-Yang (and the Dao behind it) affecting or effecting obscurely 
 all that happens on Gethen, right down to the Yin-Yang balance in Gethenian 
 androgynes: " On Gethen, the two polarities we perceive through our cultural 
 conditioning as male and female are neither, and are in balance . . . . 
 and at the moment of the novel . . . [the balance] is wobbling precariously " 
 (Le Guin, "Gender . . . Redux" 12); and this time, as the balance 
 wobbles toward what we perceive as male, the civilized people of Gethen have 
 the wherewithal for war. 
 Insofar as the question of warfare in The Left Hand of Darkness is a 
 question of sex which is a great amount the placement of The Question of Sex" 
 (ch. 7) is significant. 
 In chapter 5, "The Domestication of Hunch," Ai leaves Erhenrang for the countryside 
 in contemporary American terms he goes to see "the real Karhide," beyond 
 the Karhidish equivalent of the Washington, DC, Beltway. 24 
 There Ai gets to experience Karhide at its economic roots, in its anarchic splendor 
 at the old capitol of Rer (53), and at its most impressive: the ancient Fastness 
 of Otherhord, where he attends a Foretelling. Ai asks the Weaver and the foretelling 
 group whether Gethen will be part of the Ekumen in five years. 25 
 The climax of the Foretelling shows Faxe, the Weaver, "in the center of all 
 darkness," appearing as "a woman, a woman dressed in light. . . . 
 And she screamed aloud in terror and pain, 'Yes, yes, yes!'" (66) "not so much 
 a prophecy as an observation," and Ai is certain the "observation" is correct 
 (67). 
 Chapter 6 gives a less good impression of Karhide: it is Estraven's first 
turn at narrating, and we get the story of Estraven's escape from Karhide and 
entry "One Way into Orgoreyn." 
 And then, chapter 7, the field notes of Ong Tot Oppong on Gethenian sexuality, 
 giving us a large expository lump and repeating that the Gethenians "have never 
 yet had what one would call a war. They kill one another readily by ones and 
 twos; seldom by tens or twenties; never by hundreds or thousands" and asking, 
 Why? (96). One possible reason: the Ancient Hainish colonizers had planned it 
 that way, deliberately setting up a fairly elegant experiment in which they 
 seeded Gethen with normally competitive humans but made them androgynes. But 
 the experiment got sloppy over time when the Hainish had to withdraw and a new 
 ice age came on. 
 Finally, as I'm dividing the chapters: chapter 8, significantly called "Another 
 Way into Orgoreyn." The literal meaning of this title refers to Genly Ai's physical 
 movement from Karhide to Orgoreyn important in the symbolic journey in the novel. 
 More important, though, is Ai's description of the Karhide he's leaving and 
 the Karhide coming into being under the regency of Tibe during King Argaven's 
 pregnancy (100-01). 26 
 Karhide is not a nation, not "a social unit, a mobilizable entity" (100); Tibe 
 intends to make it one. Besides acting in the Sinoth Valley, Tibe propagandizes 
 the people. Somewhat oddly for a Gethenian politician, Tibe did not talk about 
 shifgrethor : "personal pride or prestige," etymologically and metaphorically, 
 the shadow one casts, related to one's status, one's clout. 27 
 Tibe "was deliberately avoiding talk of shifgrethor because he wished to rouse 
 emotions of a more elemental, uncontrollable kind, He wanted to stir up something 
 which the whole shifgrethor pattern was a refinement upon a sublimation of. 
 He wanted his hearers to be frightened and angry. . . . He talked 
 a great deal about Truth also, for he was, he said, 'cutting down beneath the 
 veneer of civilization.'" Ai denies that there is a veneer of civilization, 
 denies "that civilization, being artificial, is unnatural: that it is the opposite 
 of primitiveness .... Of course there is no veneer, the process is one of growth," 
 perhaps, I'll add, part of human evolution, "and primitiveness and civilization 
 are degrees of the same thing. If civilization has an opposite, it is war" and 
 the peoples of Gethen had long ago chosen against war. Tibe wants a nation-state 
 to rule, one like Orgoreyn, an "efficient centralized state," and s/he wants 
 one now. One "means of mobilizing people rapidly and entirely is with a new 
 religion; none was handy; he would make do with war" (102-03), although, of 
 course, Tibe lacks both the word and a firm concept of what a war might be. 
 Tibe's way into Orgoreyn toward a modern authoritarian or totalitarian state 
 is through the human Shadow: a sense of national superiority, hatred of the 
 alien, fear disguised as courage, brutal anger rhetorically transmuted into 
 something noble (102; ch. 8). But what justifies such a poor opinion of Orgoreyn, 
 and how did Orgoreyn get to be what Orgoreyn is? 
 Politically, Orgoreyn is soon revealed as a nasty blend of oligarchy and bureaucracy, 
 with a typically nasty secret police. Also, older readers might superimpose 
 over the struggle between Karhide and Orgoreyn a historical model. Tibe comes 
 across like Joseph Goebbels, the head of Nazi propaganda for the Third Reich. 
 If that makes Karhide parallel to Hitler's Germany (1933-45), then Orgoreyn 
 can be cast as Stalin's USSR and the Stalinist-Russia analogy holds when we 
 finally see Orgoreyn, starting with the scene of docile people imprisoned by 
 their own government in a cellar (111-112; ch. 8). Still, younger readers would 
 probably do better seeing Tibe as a more generic demagogue, scaring the hell 
 out of the people and making them feel brave to go off killing strangers with 
 whom they have no quarrel. 
 How Orgoreyn got that way is handled by a couple of very direct satirical 
maneuvers and one subtle one. The Orgoreyn section of The Left Hand of 
Darkness is "Conversations in Mishnory" from Genly Ai's point of view and 
"Soliloquies in Mishnory" from Estraven's journal (chs. 10-11), and then "Down 
on the Farm," where Ai recounts his capture, transportation, and imprisonment in 
the Orgota forced labor camp, and "The Escape," a straight narration by Estraven 
of his rescue of Ai (chs. 13-14). 
 The first satirical move is having the Orgoreyn sequence begin with Ai in a 
 cellar with Orgota refugees with no papers, then betrayed in tidy, sunny, Mishnory, 
 sent to prison in a slow truck full of other prisoners, and then end up the 
 sequence getting rescued from death in the "Pulefen Commensality Third Voluntary 
 Farm and Resettlement Agency." Now, in "The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas," 
 we probably should accept the festival and the good sex, good drugs, and good 
 life as real and significant, and balance against them the child kept miserable 
 in the room. Le Guin balances the good of Omelas against the evil done to the 
 child. She is not so fastidious in The Left Hand of Darkness . As George 
 Slusser said in 1976, the real reality of Orgoreyn is the dark cellar and the 
 truck (24) and slow death in the labor camp. 
 The subtle maneuver is preparing for the opening of the sequence (Ai's 
strained meeting with Estraven in Mishnory) with a visit to Ai from Estraven's 
ex-kemmering, Foreth, who wants Ai to bring money to Estraven in exile (104-06; 
ch. 8). Foreth asks Ai if Ai feels in Estraven's debt for Estraven's having 
supported Ai's mission. Ai replies that he does feel indebted, "in a sense. 
However, the mission I am on overrides all personal debts and loyalties." Foreth 
responds, "If so . . . it is an immoral mission." Foreth not only 
presents a view that might be expressed by "an Advocate of the Ekumen," but 
formulates a basic principle of Le Guin's moral system. The lesson here is that 
no abstract Mission, no transcendent project, should override the personal. To 
get people to allow loyalty to abstractions, particularly patriotic loyalty to 
the abstract State, routinely to override personal obligations, requires that 
they be rigorously trained in abstraction and conditioned to place value upon 
transcendence. 
 The second satiric move is the placement of chapter 12, "On Time and Darkness." 
 In chapter 12 we find an excerpt from "The Sayings of Tuhlme the High Priest , 
 a book of the Yomesh Canon, composed in North Orgoreyn about 900 years ago. " 
 In chapter 13 we have Genly Ai's arrest and mistreatment in Orgoreyn. Preeminently, 
 we have the "Voluntary Farm," with its grotesquely euphemistic name, chemical 
 spaying/castration of its prisoners, and slow attempted murder of Genly Ai and, 
 for Le Guin, or any anarchist, the central damning fact of the "Farm" as a prison. 
 The juxtaposition of "On Time and Darkness" and "Down on the Farm" (chs. 12/13) 
 is significant. The juxtaposition is a post hoc : After this, therefore 
 because of this a fallacy in logic but a standard device in literature. Accept 
 the world-view of the Yomesh, the chapter order implies, accept their ideas 
 on time, darkness, and epistemology, and you are only a few hundred years away 
 from a mobilizable, patriotic Orgota State, the obscenity of the Sarf (the Orgota 
 secret police), and prison farms. 
 From Goss at the Otherhord Fastness, we have learned that the Lord of Shorth 
had forced a group of Foretellers to attempt to answer the unanswerable 
question, " What is the meaning of life? " The Weaver of that Foretelling 
group was Meshe (60; ch. 5), and, according to the Yomeshta, the result of 
trying to answer that question was Meshe's enlightenment, Meshe's being placed 
"in the Center of Time": 
 In answering the Question of the Lord of Shorth, in the moment of the 
 Seeing, Meshe saw all the sky as if it were all one sun. Above the earth 
 and under the earth all the sphere of the sky was bright as the sun's 
 surface, and there was no darkness. 28 
 For he saw not what was, nor what will be, but what is. . . . 
 Darkness is only in the mortal eye, that thinks it sees, but sees not. 
 In the Sight of Meshe there is no darkness. 
 Therefore those who call upon the darkness ["the Handdarata"] are made 
 fools of and spat out from the mouth of Meshe, for they name what is not, 
 calling it Source and End. 29 
 There is neither source nor end, for all things are in the Center of 
 Time. . . . There is neither darkness nor death, for all things 
 are, in the light of the Moment and their end and their beginning are 
 one. 
 One center, one seeing, one law, one light. 30 
 Look now into the Eye of Meshe! (163-64; ch. 12). 
 Such a look, Le Guin has warned us, may be very dangerous: "Apollo, the god 
 of light, of reason, of proportion, harmony, number Apollo blinds those who 
 press too close in worship. Don't look straight at the sun. Go into a dark bar 
 for a bit and have a beer with Dionysios{sic}, every now and then" (Introd. 
 to 1976 edition). 31 
 And the problem is not with just rationalist, pagan Apollo. God's first line 
 in the Jewish creation myth is "Let there be light" and God sees "the light 
 was good" (Genesis 1.3-4); and in The Revelation to John we learn that in the 
 New Jerusalem "there shall be no night" (21.25). 
 If it were true that we really did live in a world without darkness, without 
 shadows, with total certainty, action would be impossible; life would be impossible. 
 So Faxe, the Weaver, who knows so much about the "eternal present," has told 
 Genly Ai (71; ch. 5). So we see during the days of white weather, when Ai and 
 Estraven "need the shadows in order to walk" on the Ice (260-61, ch. 18 ; 265-67, 
 ch. 19). The Yomesh philosophy gives its followers a pernicious half-truth. 
 With all that light they can think themselves certain of their knowledge, sure 
 of their "way." They can know the ends and need not take much care in selecting 
 means. As Eric Hoffer argues in The True Believer , such certainty is 
 the foundation of the fanaticism of True Believer leaders and followers (75-82). 
 With perfect rationality and calm, they can order and carry out atrocities. Unlike 
 Terran anarchists and Le Guin's Ekumen and opposed to Le Guin's urDaoists, the 
 Handdarata such people readily adopt "the doctrine that the end justifies the 
 means" (259; ch. 18 [see Berkman 113]). 
 "Meshe is the Center of Time. . . . And in the Center there 
 is no time past and no time to come. . . . The life of every man is 
 in the Center of Time, for all were seen in the Seeing of Meshe, and are in 
 his Eye. . . . Our doing is his Seeing: our being his Knowing" (162-63; 
 ch. 12). 32 
 For Meshe and all who see through his "Eye," there is no change: no history 
 and no sequency; all is simultaneous. 33 
 Being and doing are not balancing and reinforcing aspects of mortal life but 
 are conflated together in the purely rational Seeing and Knowing of Meshe. Such 
 a view can greatly simplify politics. Given such a vision, people can set up 
 a rational, orderly, efficient state, such as Orgoreyn. Anyone with views differing 
 from Truth does not deserve to be heard. Anyone who cannot or will not fit into 
 such a perfect institution is obviously a "defective" or an enemy of the people. 
 Such a view of things, Le Guin suggests, is a step toward the dark cellar in 
 which "nameless" people are imprisoned by their fellow citizens, and accept 
 their imprisonment without complaint or protest (111-12; ch. 8) and toward the 
 Sarf truck, where light has again given way to darkness and the perfect "commensality" 
 is achieved: where naked prisoners have nothing left but their pain and a terrible 
 kindness and merge into "one entity occupying one space" (170; ch. 13 [see also 
 109; ch. 8]). Most emphatically, we move toward the Voluntary Farm, with its 
 "excess of light," where "social purpose" is achieved through the dehumanization 
 of one's fellow human beings (174, 176-77; ch. 13). 34 
 In The Left Hand of Darkness , Le Guin has used not merely post hoc 
ergo propter hoc but also but the subtle, satiric, indirect "proof" of 
reduction to the grotesque. If Meshe is correct, Le Guin strongly implies, then 
we have no logical complaint if the Orgota embody Meshe's Truth in their New 
Epoch regime. If the New Epoch regime sickens us, we would do well to reject 
Meshe's view as a species of dangerous insanity. 
 * 
 The center of The Left Hand of Darkness , however, is not in Orgoreyn 
or Karhide but on the Ice between the two countries. It is time then to turn to 
the Ice and to the straightforward fact that chapter 17, "An Orgota Creation 
Myth" falls in the center of the story of the winter journey, in the balance 
point of chapters 15-16 and 18-19. In these chapters, Le Guin brings together in 
a series of significant juxtapositions her views on Being and becoming, 
patriotism and friendship (and treason), manhood and humanness, time and 
darkness (rightly understood), epistemology, ecology, evolution, death, pain, 
and ethics. 
 The origins of the Orgota creation myth " are prehistorical; it has been 
recorded in many forms. This very primitive version is from a pre-Yomesh written 
text . . ." (237; headnote to ch. 17). The creation myth, then, is 
part of the common cosmological heritage of all Gethen. For my purposes, there 
are four significant statements in it: (1) The ice-shape that says "I bleed" 
creates from the excrement of the sun "the hills and valleys of the earth." (2) 
The ice-shape that says "I sweat" creates in one act "trees, plants, herbs and 
grains of the field, animals, and men." (3) The ice-shapes sacrifice themselves 
to produce milk to wake the sleeping humans. (4) The entire last paragraph: 
 Each of the children born to them [the Gethenian first parents] had a piece 
of darkness that followed him about wherever he went by daylight. Edondurath 
[the mother] said, "Why are my sons followed thus by darkness?" His kemmering 
said, "Because they were born in the house of flesh [produced by Endondurath's 
murders of his/her later-waking siblings and then piling up the bodies], 
therefore death follows at their heels. They are in the middle of time. In the 
beginning there was the sun and the ice, and there was no shadow. In the end, 
when we are done, the sun will devour itself and shadow will eat light, and 
there will be nothing left but the ice and the darkness. (239) 
 In creating hills and valleys, especially if we imagine the hills in sunlight 
and valleys in shade, "I bleed" has created two of the most primitive 
manifestations of Yang and Yin. In creating all living things in one act and 
from one source (soil plus sea-water), "I sweat" has established the 
interconnectedness of the web of life, including (in a way that would please Luz 
in Eye of the Heron ) making people of mud. In sacrificing themselves, in 
allowing the sun to melt them to form milk, the three ice-shapes enact a little 
allegory of the sacrifice involved in the rise of consciousness. Human 
consciousness, since the myth informs us that ". . . milk is drunk by 
the children of men alone and without it they will not wake to life" (238). And 
the words to Edondurath of the nameless "younger brother, the father" point our 
way to the proper understanding of shadows and shifgrethor and several key 
images and themes in the journey on the ice. 
 In terms of this myth, we can say in general that the relatively young doctrine 
 of the Yomeshta manages to get just about everything wrong; the really old-time 
 religion of the Handdarata not only manage to understand the myth correctly 
 but to improve upon it. As Tuhlme, the Yomesh High Priest, tells us, the Handdarata 
 recognize that the darkness is "Source and End," that the world will not only 
 fall into darkness at the end of time but also arose out of darkness in the 
 beginning. In Daoist terms, the Handdarata recognize that beyond the Named Dao 
 (Being) there is the darkness of the Unnamed Dao, Unbeing, the Void, in a continuing 
 dynamic of creation and dissolution. 35 
 The Yomeshta do not err in valuing human consciousness, the consciousness for 
 which the ice-shapes sacrificed themselves. Their error comes from valuing consciousness, 
 the light, exclusively, and in failing to see that consciousness has its costs. 
 If all we were were pure being, like the ice, then we would be eternal. To differentiate 
 into individuality, to awake into consciousness, however, is to enter time, 
 to become mortal. And to be mortal is to be part of the web of life. Here Meshe 
 and his followers make their gravest error: they are blind to humanity's place 
 as part of the scheme of things, blind to the true significance of our living 
 "in the middle of time." 36 
 Estraven comments that "The Yomeshta would say that man's singularity is his 
 divinity." Ai replies, "Lords of the Earth, yes. Other cults on other worlds 
 have come to the same conclusion. They tend to be cults of dynamic, aggressive, 
 ecology-breaking cultures. Orgoreyn is the pattern, in its way; at least they 
 seem bent on pushing things around" (233; ch. 16). On the other hand, the Handdarata, 
 as Estraven tell us, "are less aware of the gap between men and beasts, being 
 more preoccupied with the likenesses, the links, the whole of which living things 
 are a part" and then Estraven goes on to quote Tormer's Lay, the "source" of 
 the title for The Left Hand of Darkness (233-34; ch. 16). The Yomeshta, 
 seeing humans as "Lords of the Earth," misinterpret totally the basic fact of 
 human existence. We are indeed in "the Center of Time" but that means that we 
 are mortal, subject to pain and death. 37 
 Our mortality is the shadow that follows us, and it is that shadow that gives 
 substance to our lives. 38 
 Moreover, each of us (even clones) must die individually, moving beyond the 
 touch of our closest loves; and, as stressed particularly in The Dispossessed , 
 it is that loneliness and pain of mortality that moves us to join with others. 
 And in joining with other people (and with the world), we can perhaps move through 
 pain to joy or at least reduce the pain enough to remain sane. 39 
 * 
 The themes of the Orgota creation myth are worked out and expanded in the 
winter's journey in The Left Hand of Darkness chapters 15-16 and 18-19. 
These five chapters, taken together, give us an insight into the ethical norms 
of Left Hand and of Le Guin's early canon in general. 
 Chapter 15 is narrated by Genly Ai and is parallel to the first part of Estraven's 
 journal in chapter 16; the rest of chapter 16 is parallel to Ai's narration 
 in chapter 18. The sequence begins with Ai's awakening and seeing Estraven "as 
 he was" really seeing Estraven, in a kind of James Joycean "epiphany," 
 especially seeing Estraven's face (200; ch. 15). 40 
 The movement of the sequence is toward Ai's and Estraven's acceptance of each 
 other and their touching in what may be the only way possible for them (or possibly 
 for Le Guin at that stage of her development) through love and through mindspeech, 
 not sexually. 41 
 Ai's vision of Estraven leads to his growing insight into Estraven's wholeness 
 (202 and 203). Estraven is like a Daoist sage, like Ogion in the Earthsea series, 
 George Orr in The Lathe of Heaven or like Faxe of the Handdarata: the 
 simplicity of an uncarved block, the completeness of an animal (71; ch. 5). 
 To be whole requires being part, and to be as whole as Estraven requires being 
 in close touch with the universe. Genly Ai surprises us a bit by telling us 
 that Estraven saw Estraven "so slow-thinking" s/he "had to guide his acts by 
 a general intuition of which way his 'luck' was running, and that this intuition 
 rarely failed him. . . . the gift is perhaps not strictly or 
 simply one of Foretelling, but is rather the power of seeing (if only for a 
 flash) everything at once : seeing whole" (203-04; ch. 15). 
 With such temporary vision, as opposed to Meshe's permanent Enlightenment, 
 Estraven can see (feel?) what s/he must do, right down to he "vile crime" of 
 theft, when s/he and Ai need food (205; ch. 15). Even so, Ai will later break 
 custom and teach Estraven mindspeech and call his ship before he can be sure 
 the Karhidish government will allow it to land in safety. 42 
 All we can get is a "general intuition" of how our "luck" runs, of how the great 
 wheel turns, but following this intuition, against convention or even law, is 
 of crucial importance. It is how noncontemplatives can find the Dao and not 
 have to depend upon abstract theories. If we deceive ourselves in the Yomesh 
 fashion and hold that the wheel doesn't turn and that we can know with certainty 
 what is , then it is just a step to a masculinist, Platonic, Apollonian 
 True Belief of the sort that Le Guin shows us in Orgoreyn. But there is another 
 way to go, a more utopian possibility shown in Estraven in him/herself and in 
 the love that develops between Estraven and Ai (see Slusser 26). 
 When Estraven takes up the narration in chapter 16, the first point of discussion 
 is Time and exile (221-22). Disjunction in time has alienated Ai from his homeworld. 
 This alienation establishes the esthetic appropriateness for Ai's name as "a 
 cry of pain" (229; ch. 16). 43 
 Disjunction in time, then, leads to isolation and pain; and, as in "Nine Lives" 
 and The Dispossessed , and, allegorically, in The Farthest Shore , 
 pain leads to the possibility of human touch, relationship (Remington, ". . . 
 Suffering"). More immediately, the timejumping discussion leads to a couple 
 of brief allusions to geological evolution and from there to organic evolution 
 and the contrast and relationship between singularity and isolation. Out on 
 the Ice, Estraven and Ai are both "singular, isolate," cut off from their societies 
 and social rules. Estraven writes that they "are equals at last, equal, alien, 
 alone" (ch. 16, p. 232). Ai speaks of the "isolation and loneliness," of themselves 
 and of Estraven's species. He is especially impressed that the Gethenians developed 
 a theory of evolution given the "unbridgeable gap" between them and "the lower 
 animals" (233; ch. 16). This mention of evolution moves the discussion on to 
 the differences between the Yomeshta and the Handdarata on ecology, and then 
 on to Tormer's Lay. 
 Time and loneliness, evolution and ecology, wholeness and dualism, " myself 
 and the other ," "I and Thou" all come together in chapter 16 and are 
 repeated in part in chapters 18 and 19 (from Ai's point of view). In chapter 
 18, Ai looks upon Estraven in kemmer in kemmer necessarily as a woman, since 
 Ai is a "Pervert": in his case always male. Ai looks at this woman and does 
 not deny the (now) obvious: "And I saw then again, and for good, what I had 
 been afraid to see . . . in him: that he was a woman as well as a 
 man. Any need to explain the sources of that fear vanished with the fear; what 
 I was left with was, at last, acceptance of him as he was." A few minutes later 
 they consummate their love by symbolically marrying, communicating in mindspeech 
 (248-53). 
 When they are close to Karhide, to home, Ai will symbolize his union with Estraven, 
 without totally realizing it, in the figure of Yin and Yang: " Light is The 
 Left Hand of Darkness ... how did it go? 44 
 Light, dark. Fear, courage. Cold, warmth. Female, male. It is yourself, Therem. 
 Both and one. A shadow on snow" (267; ch. 19). Yin-Yang also symbolizes Estraven 
 and Ai Female and Male when Estraven was in kemmer, two human beings who have 
 reached enough unity in themselves to be able to balance each other, and thereby 
 achieve further unity, wholeness, and balance (Barbour). 
 In the central philosophical chapters of The Left Hand of Darkness , 
 Le Guin posits a universe based on nonbeing, Darkness in Western mythology, 
 Chaos and Old Night. Out of this ultimate Darkness comes the primal Light and 
 the Ice; out of nonbeing comes Being, the Dao that can be called at least, "the 
 Way," the world of the eternal now. Out of Being come shadows and balance, Yin-Yang: 
 the world of becoming, of "Mutabilitie," life, death, history, process, change, 
 and evolution. 45 
 As Ged has assured Arren in The Farthest Shore , there is no danger in 
 the flux itself including the evolution and acts of unconscious species (66; 
 ch. 4, "Magelight"). The only potential problem is with conscious creatures, 
 with human beings (cf. LoH 161; ch. 10). We do have moments in which 
 we can see or feel past the flux to the roots of Being, and these moments are 
 important: they are the moments that allow us individual wholeness and the brief 
 fullness of the I-Thou relationship. These are, however, only moments, and we 
 have neither the power nor the right to take a subjectively eternal moment and 
 turn it into a permanent insight into the workings of the Whole. We have no 
 right to attempt to freeze or deny time and stop change to deny flux and death 
 and darkness and attempt to set up a New Epoch society of (anti-)utopian perfection. 46 
 We also have no right to try to push things around and try to consciously force 
 change, to force the world, and other people, to obey our wills. 47 
 Which brings us back to the questions of war, violence, aggression, utopia, 
dystopia, and sex. 
 No Gethenian "is quite so thoroughly 'tied down' . . . as women, 
 elsewhere, are likely to be psychologically or physically" by childbearing and 
 child raising. More important for my concerns, no Gethenian is "quite so free 
 as a free male anywhere else" (93-94; ch. 7 [see Russ, "Image" 39]). Anyway, 
 no Gethenian is as free as a privileged Terran male from what Simone de Beauvoir 
 discusses, quite negatively and at length, as the immanence of the life 
 of women. Gethenians cannot give themselves totally to masculine transcendent 
 projects because normal Gethenians go into kemmer every month (more or less), 
 and all who are healthy have the privilege and risk of pregnancy, birthing, 
 and nursing. Less so than Hainish-normal women but much more than Hainish-normal 
 men, Gethenians are embedded in the world. And when you are in the world, 
 it is hard to picture pushing it around. Gethenian anatomy and physiology did 
 not determine the philosophy of the Handdarata but it made it easy to think 
 that philosophy. And it took someone "blinded by the light," Meshe, to think 
 transcendence. And with transcendence, large-scale violence is possible. People 
 can then think abstractions like The State, The Nation, National Honor abstractions 
 that dwarf our puny little existences and are worthy of dying for (see Trumbo, 
 ch. 10). People can then dream up schematic utopias and push around others to 
 try to build them. 48 
 The Yomeshta started playing such a wide-scale push-and-shove game some 2202 
years before the action of The Left Hand of Darkness . But from their most 
ancient times the Gethenians have known they "were born in the house of flesh" 
and "death follows at their heels" (239; ch. 17); they know they are mortal and 
part of the world. And they are reminded of the flesh frequently. They may, 
indeed, be mobilizable for war. Tibe almost succeeds; the Orgota have 
established a real nation-state. But their violence is, so to speak, of the 
flesh, and it proves hard to idealize it and turn it toward warfare. More 
immediately important, there is the underlying basis for Karhidish culture in 
the views of the Handdara, especially as embodied in their "Old Men" at the 
Fastnesses: "It was an introverted life, self-sufficient, stagnant," from Genly 
Ai's rather American kind of view, "steeped in that singular 'ignorance' prized 
by the Handdarata and obedient to their rule of inactivity or noninterference. 
That rule," like wu wei for the Daoists is the Handdarata nusuth : 
"no matter," which "is the heart of the cult." Ai won't "pretend to understand 
it. But I began to understand Karhide better, after a halfmonth in Otherhord. 
Under that nation's politics and parades and passions runs an old darkness, 
passive, anarchic, silent, the fecund darkness of the Handdara" (60; ch. 5). 
Gethen may find an Ekumenical peace because war, however rationally conducted, 
is always somewhat mad, and deep in the culture of Gethen lies a very ancient 
sanity. 
 * 
 In most of her canon, ethical action for Le Guin moves toward contact with 
 the Dao, multiple integrations, and away from hatred and war. Ethical action 
 in Le Guin's early and middle works is fairly explicitly based upon a vision 
 of the world that accepts both simultaneity and sequency, Being and becoming 
 and it is based upon a vision of reality that sees more than just one country 
 or race or world. In short, ethical action with a lot of luck will move toward 
 an Ekumen: a human society in which we can fulfill the Dao of Humanity and of 
 nature a society in which we can be fully human. A society, perhaps, in which 
 we "follow one law, only one, the law of human evolution" ( TD , ch. 7, 
 p. 177). A society in which we can consciously extend "the evolutionary tendency 
 inherent in Being" ( LHD , ch. 15, p. 211). Which thought, after I finish 
 discussing Le Guin's work of the 1960s, will take us to The Dispossessed 
 (1974). 
 * * 
 CRITIQUE: Kulturkampf ing on the Left with The Left Hand of 
Darkness 
 In a 1979 review-essay for Salem Press, I called The Left Hand of 
Darkness "one of the best literary works to come out of America in the late 
1960's," and I stand by that assessment, although I will now admit that I've 
read far too few of the works of the 1960s to make so broad a statement. 
 Le Guin's major SF novels are clearly teaching stories and political works, 
and one criterion for judging them is whether or not the politics are correct, 
not "politically correct" but correct : right, decent. The Left Hand of 
Darkness , I think, is almost completely right: it promotes peace and freedom 
and attacks betrayal, autocracy, warmongering, authoritarian oligarchy, and 
bureaucracy. It offers an elegant analysis of war as an institution. It is an 
excellent book for helping male readers accept women as adult human beings and 
helping girls and women readers learn that they can be active, competent adults. 
 Still, there was sufficient controversy of The Left Hand of Darkness 
 that Le Guin wrote "Is Gender Necessary?" (1976) and then reissued that essay 
 with glosses as "Is Gender Necessary? Redux" (1987). 49 
 I shall very briefly epitomize that debate so that younger readers will have 
 some idea of what the fuss was about. This is important to do. First, the end 
 of the twentieth century and beginning of the twenty-first seem likely to combine 
 capitalist triumphalism with nationalistic and fundamentalist-religious reaction. 
 In such a context, and from such a distance, liberal and radical feminists of 
 the 1970s and 1980s may look indistinguishable. Second, Le Guin has accepted 
 much of the criticism and has modified (arguably radicalized) her writing accordingly 
 and, simultaneously, the women's movement has moved to accommodate a range of 
 feminism s and welcome more enthusiastically heterosexual, married, liberal 
 feminists. Third, the debate is significant for changing definitions of, or 
 at least changing focuses for, politics in the United States, as the saying 
 "The personal is the political" shifted from advice against hypocrisy, the injunction 
 to live one's politics to an assertion of the political dimensions of issues 
 in people's personal lives, especially the lives of women. 
 Let's examine, then, the 1976 Ace re-issue of the text. 
 The front and back covers feature what seem to be ice versions of Caribbean 
 androgyne statues rising out of a glacier. Such imagery was probably unexceptionable 
 with most feminists in 1976: in that year Pamela Sargent could hope that as 
 more women write science fiction and "as more men deal thoughtfully with their 
 female characters," SF will "become a more androgynous and human literature" 
 (13). By 1978, however, Mary Daly had argued against androgyny as an ideal ( Gyn/Ecology 
 386-88 and passim; ch. 10). Few feminists moving into the 1980s would be offended 
 by the cover, but after Daly's book, some might not be reassured. The front 
 blurbs announce that The Left Hand of Darkness has won both the Hugo 
 and Nebula awards, as has Le Guin's The Dispossessed . Joanna Russ won 
 her first Hugo for a novella in 1983, and women, other than Le Guin, did not 
 start winning Hugos regularly under their own names until the 1980s. The situation 
 is somewhat different for the Nebula Russ's "When It Changed" won the short 
 story award in 1972, and Suzy McKee Charnas's "Unicorn Tapestry" won in 1980 
 but the pattern is the same. Especially before "James Tiptree, Jr." revealed 
 herself as Alice Sheldon in 1977, it could seem like the major awards in SF 
 were won by Men, Misc. Women, and Ursula K. Le Guin ( The Ency. of S.F. 
 "Hugo," "Nebula" and passim). 50 
 The dedication for Left Hand is "For Charles, sine quo non ." The 
 book is dedicated to Charles Le Guin, Ursula Le Guin's husband, "without whom, 
 not; an indispensable requisite or condition." This is a loving and poetic thought, 
 and readers familiar with Le Guin's work would recognize the valorizing of marriage, 
 in a very wide sense. For a major relevant example, readers familiar with The 
 Lathe of Heaven (1971) will know that little condemns Dr. William Haber 
 as much as his being "a lone wolf," who wanted neither "marriage nor close friendships," 
 prizing far too highly his unfettered will and "independence" (112; ch. 8). 
 A suspicious reader, however, less immersed in Le Guin's canon than in the historical 
 moment of the late 1970s through the 1980s, might see in this dedication to 
 Charles Le Guin an unfeminist degree of dependence. 
 Moving into the text, one might ask, "Where are the women?" Genly Ai, whose 
 point of view we get in half the chapters, is a man; and the Gethenians aren't 
 women. They're androgynes, but they tend to come through, as Joanna Russ pointed 
 out, as men: "It is . . . a deficiency in the English language that 
 these people must be called 'he' throughout, but put that together with the 
 native hero's personal encounters in the book [primarily with Foreth], the absolute 
 lack of interest in child-raising, the concentration on work, and what you have 
 is a world of men." 51 
 One might also ask, "Where are the Black people?" since Genly Ai is as much
<<ethnized>> White for most White readers as Estraven is gendered male, but Terran ideas 
 of ethnicity are far less immediately relevant than gender on a planet of androgynes. 
 Coming to Chapter 5, we get the Foretelling at Otherhord, which includes, in 
 a formal role, a "Pervert." That Hainish-Normal people, like us, would be perverts 
 in Gethen is a very useful suggestion, but note the analogy Genly Ai uses. Gethenian 
 perverts "are not excluded from society, but they are tolerated with some disdain, 
 as homosexuals are in many bisexual societies" (64). In the year 3850 CE, at 
 the earliest, Genly Ai is aware of many societies in which homosexuals are contemned, 
 behavior Ai might better know about from his "criminal ancestors," not from 
 current events in the Ekumen. And Ai's use of "bisexual" for sexually dimorphic 
 (basically two-sexed) societies eliminates a handy word for people who like 
 sex with both men and women, and may be seen as an ignoring of that category 
 of twentieth-century Terrans. 52 
 In the 1987 re-issue of "Is Gender Necessary?", Le Guin notes correctly that 
 she " quite unnecessarily locked the Gethenians into heterosexuality. It is 
 a naively pragmatic view of sex that insists that sexual partners must be of 
 opposite sex! " ("Gender . . . Redux" 14). At the Foretelling itself, 
 the Pervert is a male; therefore the Celibate in kemmer becomes female, and 
 their part of the Foretelling, with the Pervert importuning the Celibate for 
 sex, can be read as one long scene of sexual harassment. And the rest of the 
 people at the Foretelling perceive this extended interaction as intentional 
 or inadvertent voyeurs (64, 65-66); and we, figuratively, watch them watching. 
 When we get to ch. 7, "The Question of Sex," we learn that Le Guin is serious 
 about biology: the climax word in the chapter title isn't "Gender" a word from 
 grammar in the 1960s, not politics but Sex . Some feminists of the 1970s 
 and 1980s may still have had qualms about biology: Betty Friedan and others 
 worked hard in the 1950s and 60s attacking "The Sexual Solipsism of Sigmund 
 Freud" (ch. 5 of Feminine Mystique ) and the whole idea that biology, 
 if not strictly anatomy, was destiny. We also learn in this chapter that Karhidish 
 culture privileges socially enforced heterosexual marriage just with changes 
 in who is male during kemmer this month and who is female. Good anarchist fashion, 
 there are no legal marriages; but still, "The whole structure of the Karhidish 
 Clan-Hearths and Domains" is built upon the institution of monogamous marriage 
 as we are told by Ong Tot Oppong; we do not see the Clan Hearths at work in 
 Left Hand (92; ch. 7). We do see them, in "Coming of Age in Karhide" 
 in 1995, where we see a hearth with a clan that does not vow kemmering and raises 
 its children without fathers and, to a great extent, communally. Looking back, 
 the Gethenians in 1969's Left Hand of Darkness do seem locked into what 
 Adrienne Rich called "compulsory heterosexuality," and gays, lesbians, and the 
 asexual (outside of the Handdarata) do not seem welcome. 
 Which gets us back to homosexuality and to the question, just why don't Ai 
 and Estraven physically make love? They are intimate in their conversations 
 on the Ice, and that comes through even in the audio cassette version of the 
 story, where Le Guin cuts their mindspeech communication. Why not consummate 
 their love in the flesh, however much they might feel at the moment that "to 
 meet sexually would be" for them "to meet again as aliens" (248-49; ch. 18). 
 The decision not to couple is plausible enough, but in context, Patricia Lamb 
 and Diana Veith have found it suspect (229). If Lamb and Veith (et al.) are 
 correct, Le Guin and her readers may be picturing Estraven as a man even when 
 she is in kemmer with Ai in their tent and it might have been too daring, ca. 
 1969, to show or suggest a quasi-homosexual sex scene (248-49; ch. 18). Le Guin, 
 as critic, notes that the sex here " would  have been heterosexual 
 after all" and as author says "that it was ultimately an aesthetic choice" to 
 avoid sex here. "To 'marry' them" on the Ice "would have defused the story . . . . 
 The story-energy would have gone into that story; and it wasn't the one 
 I had to tell" (personal communication). 
 More basic problems for some readers would be Le Guin's anarchism and Daoism. 
 In "Is Gender Necessary? Redux," Le Guin notes that anarchy " has historically 
 been identified as female. The domain allotted to women 'the family,' for example 
 is the area of order without coercion, rule by custom not by force " (12). 
 Part of the radical feminist project has been resisting the traditional family 
 precisely as an area of coercion and force, and many recent feminists have approved 
 of using State power in support of that project. Additionally, feminists who 
 wish to use the police powers of even the patriarchal State against rapists, 
 pornographers, and other abusers of women, who wish to use the courts to force 
 child support payments such feminists should feel at least ambivalent about 
 ideals of anarchy. And the Daoist ideal of unaction is going to seem very problematic 
 to women who have resisted the Freudian idea of "the male road of exploit" versus 
 "the female road of nurture," the idea of "feminine passive" and "masculine 
 active." 53 
 Le Guin's Daoism privileges much of the traditional feminine over the masculine, 
 but the basic Daoist categories of Yin and Yang themselves reinforce division 
 into " two polarities we perceive through our cultural conditioning " that 
 make for a mischievous dualism ("Gender . . . Redux" 12). And moving 
 into the 1980s, poststructuralist academics would be increasingly upset by any 
 theory involving binary opposites, seen as basic to "the hierarchical relations 
 that ground capitalist notions of power, desire, and value." 54 
 My last point on Daoism I will make quite tentatively. 
 Daoism is among the least "totalizing" and most dynamic of belief 
systems, but it is a total system: all that is is produced by the action of the 
Dao and the waxing and waning of Yin and Yang. And in the 1970s and 1980s 
"totalizing" and "closed system" were used as criticisms by many academics in 
the humanities, sometimes even smear words. Total systems and binaries were 
stressed in Structuralist teaching of the 1950s and 1960s and were out of date 
and, postStructuralists argue, politically dangerous. A major symbol of Daoism 
and the controlling symbol of The Left Hand of Darkness is the Yin-Yang: 
a closed circle containing that most famous of binary (if dynamic) 
opposed pairs. 
 We should note, though, that Le Guin was well aware of the problem of total 
 systems she showed one very negatively among the Orgota and did not limit herself 
 to the Yin-Yang symbol. In The Dispossessed the image became the unclosed 
 circle of The Circle of Life; in Always Coming Home , the organizing symbol 
 is the hinged spirals of the heyiya-if. As Le Guin's character Stone Telling 
 will put it in Always Coming Home : "We must . . . remain mindful 
 that our knowledge not close the circle, closing out the void" (29). 
 * 
 The Left Hand of Darkness , and other early works by Le Guin, may indeed 
 be "Feminism for Men," as Craig and Diana Barrow say, but "The Women Problem," 
 is, at its core, a problem among men. Moreover, The Left Hand of Darkness 
 is also feminism for nonfeminist women, and the generation I teach includes 
 many women who begin sentences "I'm not a feminist, but." The Left Hand of 
 Darkness was pretty radical stuff for nonfeminist readers in 1969, and for 
 the generation raised in the Reagan-Bush years for students of mine who find 
 The Song of Songs rather daring (with its very active female protagonist and 
 extramarital love) it is still radical. To rephrase, then, my own conclusion 
 on this book: of the works with which I'm familiar, The Left Hand of Darkness 
 is one of the best and most important novels to come out of America in the late 
 1960's. 
 * 
 A Note on Mindspeech : 
 The condensation of The Left Hand of Darkness Le Guin herself read for 
the audio tape of the novel, and the play based on Left Hand both quietly 
dropped mindspeech, and Le Guin has not used the trope of mindspeech in her SF 
or fantasy since the late 1960s. She may prove me wrong by returning to it 
later, but I think I can suggest some straightforward reasons why we should note 
but not make too much of the lack of mindspeech after Left Hand . 
 Into the 1960s, those of us trained in scientific method could say that the 
 proper attitude toward moderate claims of telepathy was an open-minded skepticism. 55 
 Moving into the 1970s, however, matters had changed. Several of the parapsychologist 
 J. B. Rhine's "best performers were ultimately exposed as frauds" ("ESP"); and 
 it was getting around that the idea that we humans used only 10% of our brains 
 leaving a lot of spare capacity for telepathy and other paranormal skills was 
 based on seriously flawed research: anesthetized rats used perhaps 10% of their 
 brains, not waking, undrugged humans, and the whole idea of percentage of usage 
 was losing meaning as memory and other brain functions were thought of increasingly 
 less in metaphors of filing cabinets and more in terms of holographic pictures. 
 After the 1960s, telepathy and other psi powers became more and more the province 
 of Scientology and others who wished humans not to fulfill humanity but to transcend 
 humanity, an occult association Le Guin seems unlikely to like. 
 Additionally, mindspeech had come across as a method of and metaphor for honest 
 and direct, almost transparent communication, a communications system in which 
 only the Shing the Enemy could lie. As literal telepathy became less plausible 
 as a scientific concept, the metaphor of nonproblematic communication became 
 more problematic. Men and women may speak "In a Different Voice," at least on 
 ethical issues, as Carol Gilligan's book title suggests; and Gilligan may herself 
 oversimplify by leaving out "perspectives such as class, sexual orientation, 
 race, and ethnicity" i.e., to the extent she had women
<<speaking>> in " a different 
 voice," from men, even just in terms of moral development, Gilligan herself 
 may greatly oversimplify (Fraser and Nicholson 32). Communication between two 
 individuals of the same gender may never be anywhere near transparent; even 
 communication between two monozygotic siblings ("identical" twins et al.) may 
 be far less than transparent; and so telepathy as a metaphor for unambiguous, 
 true communication may include in itself a bit of a lie. 
 Perhaps more important, the period between the 1960s and 1990s saw what we 
 might call <<a crisis in relationship(s)>> in the United States. Among my friends, anyway, a commonsensical 
 and often-suggested first step toward resolving this crisis was summarized by 
 joking about <<a failure in telepathy>>. I.e., we mockingly assigned blame in a relationship to person 
 "B" for failing to read person "A's" mind when person "A" seemed to expect such 
 mindreading. The joke was a reversal: people are not telepathic, and 
 the fault here lay with person "A" for not speaking his or her mind. 
 Some people really are close enough to others that they can anticipate the other's 
 thoughts and desires very accurately; most of us are not, and you really 
 loved me, you'd know what I want without my having to tell you! came to be seen, 
 by my group (and some recovery groups), as a useful joke but a very bad idea 
 in earnest. 56 
 Further, anticipating needs and desires is a virtue for servants, and 
 it became an increasingly open question whether men should be good chivalric 
 servants to mistresses (as in courtly love), and increasingly objectionable 
 to say that women should be socialized to be sensitive servants to anyone. 
 In any event, between the late1960s and the 1990s, telepathy as fact, symbol 
or metaphor became problematic in biology, linguistics, politics, and everyday 
human relations. And during this period Le Guin dropped mindspeech from her 
Hainish universe. 
 * * * 
 THE WORD FOR WORLD IS FOREST (1972) 
 Le Guin returned to questions of violence and war, treason and patriotism 
 in The Word for World Is Forest . The plot of The Word for 
World begins near the end of the story, with a massacre of Terran colonists 
at a location they call Smith Camp on a planet they call New Tahiti. In 
chronological order, the story goes like this. 
 Not very long from now, our Earth is in the midst of an ecological disaster, 
 and we Terran humans are saved by the humans from Hain-Davenant, who, among 
 other things, give us Nearly As Fast As Light (NAFAL) ships to allow colonizing 
 other worlds. Some twenty-seven lightyears from Earth is World 42, New Tahiti. 
 The Terrans plant a colony, almost all males, under military organization and 
 authority, to prepare the world for permanent settlers. The planet is mostly 
 water, and the land is heavily forested. Preparation of the land for farmers 
 means clearing the forests at great profit since wood is more prized on Earth 
 than gold (7; ch. 1). 57 
 Aiding the Terrans is "The Voluntary Autochthonous Labor Corps" (63; ch. 3) 
 enslaved men and women from the native species of humans: literally little green 
 men (and women), who call their world Athshe , "Forest." 
 One of the Terran officers, Captain Don Davidson, rapes Thele, an Athshean 
 woman, a rape from which she dies. "[A]cting without argument or speech," or 
 only a bit of speech, Selver Thele, her husband, attacks Davidson and attempts 
 to kill him: an act we may see, in Hannah Arendt's words, as "the only way to 
 set the scales of justice right again" ( On Violence 64 2). Davidson 
 is a big "euraf" ( WWF 79; ch. 4) from Cleveland and a professional soldier; 
 he is hurt and scared by Selver's attack but defeats him in the fight and prepares 
 to kill him. He is stopped by Raj Lyubov, an anthropologist who had worked with 
 Selver, with Selver as a native informant. Selver leaves for the North Isle 
 and lives on the coast of Kelme Deva where he sees the Terrans destroy the city 
 of Penle, enslave some hundred of its inhabitants, and cut open the world (30; 
 ch. 2). Commanding the Terrans at Kelme Deva Smith Camp is Captain Davidson. 
 Selver organizes the Athsheans, and "after long talking, and long dreaming, 
 and the making of a plan, we went in daylight, and killed the yumens of Kelme 
 Deva with arrows and hunting-lances, and burned their city and their engines," 
 killing some two hundred of the Terrans. Davidson gone to colonial headquarters 
 at Centralville, mostly to get laid by one of the newly arrived women returns 
 to find his camp destroyed. Selver attacks Davidson and is wounded by Davidson, 
 but brings down the Terran and sings over him (19-20,ch. 1; 30-32, ch. 2). 
 There is an investigation at which we learn Athsheans are supposed to be 
"intraspecific nonaggressive" and have no real history of violence. The Terrans 
learn from visiting Cetian and Hainish officials that there is now a League of 
worlds, communicating by ansible, an instantaneous communication device. The 
brutal ways of Terran exploitation of Athshe are over. 
 Davidson is sent off to a distant outpost where he organizes a quiet atrocity 
 against the local Athsheans. Lyubov continues his work, eventually encountering 
 Selver at the Athshean town of Tuntar. Selver tells Lyubov to leave Centralville 
 two days hence (96), and Lyubov forgets that advice and semiconsciously omits 
 mentioning Selver in his report on his trip to Tuntar (109-10; ch. 5). Selver 
 leads the Athsheans against Centralville, killing all the women thus "sterilizing" 
 the Terrans and capturing most of the men. Lyubov is killed in the battle and 
 Selver sees the body and/or the dying Lyubov (117-18; ch. 6). 
 Davidson kills his local commanding officer and refuses to stop fighting the 
Athsheans. Finally his position is over-run, and his men are killed. Selver and 
his comrades capture Davidson and handle him as they would an Athshean 
psychotic: they isolate him on an uninhabited island. Plot and story end with 
the return of a Terran ship and League representatives to pick up the remaining 
Terrans; the ship's commander and a League representative tell Selver that, in 
large measure because of Lyubov's work, Athshe "has been placed under the League 
Ban" and will no longer be subject to Terran colonizing or any other alien 
interference (165-67; ch. 8). Ironically, the least conventionally heroic of the 
trio of potential heroes in this book, the intellectual Dr. Lyubov, turns out to 
be highly effective; Lyubov's "inactive action" of anthropological scholarship 
is crucial for the long-term survival of the Athsheans. 
 * 
 The Word for World Is Forest might be seen as Planet of Exile 
 (1966) shifted out of Romance and into the modes of Tragedy and Satire. Both 
 stories use third-person, limited narration from the points of view of three 
 main characters. In Planet , old Wold does what old people are supposed 
 to do in Romances: he shuffles off on "his last foray," leading the women and 
 children to a well-protected fort (87; ch. 10) and then shuffles off this mortal 
 coil (123-24; ch. 14), leaving the stage clear for the (relatively) young couple 
 of Rolery and Jakob Agat to consummate their marriage in fertility, and for 
 a new and better world to coalesce around them: a world in which the native 
 humans and the Terrans will integrate and prosper. 58 
 Jakob Agat looks around in joy at the end of the story and sees "his fort, his 
 city, his world; these were his people. He was no exile here"; and he says to 
 "the alien, the stranger, his wife" (122) the last words of Planet of Exile , 
 "come, let's go home" (124). 
 The Word for World emphatically does not end in joy, integration, and 
coming home. 
 Selver in The Word for World corresponds to Rolery in Planet of Exile : 
 the point of view nonTerran, native human; Davidson corresponds to Agat: a leader 
 among the Terran colonists; and much less exactly Lyubov corresponds to Wold: 
 the third member of a triangle. In Planet , we have a love triangle with 
 the key apex occupied by Rolery, daughter to Wold and later wife to Agat, with 
 Wold coming to love both his Summer-born daughter and son-in-law. In The 
 Word for World , we get two love-hate triangles, with Selver emphasized. 
 The first triangle is Selver-Thele-Davidson. Again, Davidson rapes and (indirectly) 
 murders Thele, for which Selver tries to kill him. Lyubov saves Selver, earning 
 Davidson's enmity. When the action of the plot begins, then, Selver and Davidson 
 hate one another; Lyubov and Selver have come to love one another; Lyubov intensely 
 dislikes Davidson, and Davidson despises Lyubov. To make The Word for World 
 into a kind of Romantic Comedy would be easy enough: the "marriage" of the Athshean 
 Selver and the Terran Lyubov would be central to a plot moving toward the conversion 
 or defeat and expulsion of Davidson and reconciliation and friendship between 
 the two peoples. We get a hint of this possibility in a savior motif in the 
 central triangle. Lyubov saves Selver; Selver tries to save Lyubov by warning 
 him of the attack on Central, and Selver does save his people; and Davidson 
 consistently sees himself as a Messiah for the Terrans on Athshe. Which fits 
 his name: Don , "world ruler," plus Davidson , "son of David" suggesting 
 a descendent of King David, as a Messiah should be (see Matthew 1.1-17). 
 The plot moves away from integration and toward alienation and isolation: 
Lyubov is killed in the attack on Central; Davidson ends up isolated on an 
island; and the Athsheans will be isolated by the League for generations. And 
that is as happy an ending as we are going to get. 
 In her introduction to The Word for World Is Forest , Le Guin tells how 
 she wrote the story under the title of The Little Green Men in 1968, 
 while in England, "a guest and a foreigner" with "no outlet" for her anger at 
 the war in Vietnam ( LoN [1979]:151). I have suggested that Le Guin's 
 inability to demonstrate directly her anger with her government and people led 
 her take action in the old-fashioned Prophetic way of writing a mshl 
 (plural: mshlim ): "a likeness; . . . 'taunt,' or 'satire.' Whatever 
 the translation, the 'likeness' in question is either the aptly stated analogue 
 of a previously experienced reality, or it is the quasi-magical, verbal prefiguring 
 of reality in the shape, for good and for ill, in which the utterer would like 
 to encounter it" (Rabinowitz 320). The Word for World Is Forest is, in 
 part, a mshl of the war in Indochina in the late 1960s. It is also 
 the aptly stated analog of a long series of encounters between people sophisticated 
 in the technology and political organization of violence (civilized people) 
 and people with far fewer means for killing other people ("primitives"). In 
 the physical and psychological territory of "Frontierland," we meet the Others 
 and "the normal defensive-aggressive reaction between strangers meeting" can 
 get very bloody (Erlich, ". . . Le Guin and . . . Clarke" 
 111). Le Guin's Narrator places an early scene in the book in a pretty clearing 
 that "might have been Idaho in 1950 . . . . Or Kentucky in 1830. 
 Or Gaul in 50 B.C." (see Siciliano 76). Or, I will add, the upper waters of 
 Mill Creek in California, a few weeks after 15 August 1865, where White men 
 under the command of R. A. Anderson ambushed one of the few remaining groups 
 of Yahi Indians. 59 
 The limited action in the scene in the clearing in Word for World includes 
 a distant bird saying, "Te-whet" (9; ch. 1). Kentucky and Gaul are among the 
 many places where Terran tribal peoples were slaughtered by the civilized, and 
 the immediate response to thoughts of Kentucky and Gaul is what Kurt Vonnegut, 
 Jr., has assured us is the one decorous comment on massacres: 
 . . . there is nothing intelligent to say about a massacre. 
Everybody is supposed to be dead, to never say anything or want anything ever 
again. Everything is supposed to be very quiet after a massacre, and it always 
is, except for the birds. 
 And what do the birds say? All there is to say about a massacre, things like 
" Poo-tee-weet? " ( Slaughterhouse-Five 19; ch. 1 [see also 19, 23, 
215]). 
 The best Le Guin can see for Indochina is, in a geopolitical sense, about 
what happened: that the United States would lose the war, and we would have to 
go home. 
 Where Le Guin proved optimistic was in the suggested body counts: Le Guin's 
 imaginary war was far less bloody than the Terran reality (over 58,000 Americans 
 killed, over two million Vietnamese and others). Where Le Guin was highly optimistic 
 was in her utopian vision of the Athsheans, and in her Anarchistic faith that 
 such a utopian culture could defeat a high-tech army. The Vietnamese did, indeed, 
 defeat the U.S. military, but, as Le Guin well knew, they had a good deal of 
 experience fighting off invaders. The Terran commanding officer in Word 
 for World , Col. Dongh, a Vietnamese, mentions his people's spending "about 
 thirty years fighting off major super-powers one after the other in the twentieth 
 century" (133; ch. 6): the Japanese, the French, and then the USA, 1940s on. 60 
 * 
 Athshe is like an Earthsea where the Immanent Grove has spread out over the 
 Archipelago to create a huge Yin-Yang symbol: "Ocean: forest. That was your 
 choice on New Tahiti. Water and sunlight, or darkness and leaves" (7; ch. 1). 
 And the people there are peaceful; like the Gethenians, they've never had a 
 war. Unlike the Gethenians, they additionally don't have "assassinations, feuds, 
 forays"; Athshean murders are committed only by extraordinarily rare psychopaths; 
 even fights are rare and usually limited to adolescents ("Gender . . . 
 Redux" 10; WWF 58, ch. 3). Most important, the Athsheans are Hainish 
 Normal in their sexual anatomy and physiology: our Terran standard-issue, sexually 
 dimorphic human beings. 61 
 A bit more than the Gethenians, the Athsheans are sane and relevant . 
 With the Terran conquest, we see on Athshe a pattern of opposition Le Guin 
 began as early as A Wizard of Earthsea " (1968) and continued into Always 
 Coming Home (1985). The Athsheans are technologically primitive and organizationally 
 simple, anarchistic, "communal . . . and somewhat introverted." 62 
 Their populations are stable in size and stay put. "They have no nomadic peoples, 
 and no societies that live by expansion and aggression . . . . 
 Nor have they formed large, hierarchically governed nation-states" that can 
 be mobilized for war. "Competition is ritualized, and, when ritual breaks down, 
 the resulting violence does not become mass violence, remaining limited, personal." 
 The Terrans are from a "hierarchically governed" world-state and are under military 
 law and discipline. 63 
 And the Terrans are heavily armed and dangerous. 
 What the Terran officials have done is familiar enough and takes little interpretation: 
 they have sent men (mostly) organized militarily and have given them rules, 
 regulations, and orders. They are like US Army units on the Western frontier 
 during the Indian Wars, the period my US military history book called the "nadir" 
 of US Army history. One cause for some US war crimes in the Indian Wars was 
 units operating independently under ambitious commanders, with George Armstrong 
 Custer as the best-known example. 64 
 But the telegraph came through fairly early on in the American West, and Lyndon 
 Johnson "micromanaged" US warfare in Vietnam; even so Le Guin introduces the 
 ansible and Le Guin supplies a League government that is competent (as LBJ was), 
 but also moral, relatively peace-loving, and well-intentioned. In the mshl 
 of Vietnam, the League can be read as a wish for something like the United Nations 
 to attempt to undo US damage in Indochina. In political terms, the point may 
 be that a strictly political analysis is insufficient: even if the Terran military 
 were absorbed into a good system with sane, ethical people giving orders from 
 Earth the frontier and/or military culture would undermine the new system. 
 More concretely, a charismatic traitor like Don Davidson could get enough support 
 to cause a lot of trouble; and, of course, in Word for World he does. 
 Whether 1849ers going to California for gold or future loggers going to New 
 Tahiti for lumber, men who flee civilization and strike out for riches are not 
 going to let native peoples stand in their way; as they think necessary, the 
 invaders will destroy inconvenient natives through "disease, malnutrition, forced 
 removal, massacre, aggravated rape . . ." (Buckley 438). Military 
 organization and armaments mean that when an intelligent psychopath like Don 
 Davidson takes over a group, he has a group organized and equipped for carnage 
 (84; ch. 4). 65 
 And, finally, militarism, macho, and racism ("speciesism" here) can be mutually 
 reinforcing. Davidson, anyway, believes that "The fact is, the only time a man 
 is really and entirely a man is when he's just had a woman or just killed another 
 man" (81; ch. 4). A macho mind, tightly compartmentalized, can feel both manly 
 and guiltless raping human females not seen as really women and killing human 
 males not seen as really men. In Davidson's head, such a mind can allow him 
 to disobey orders and thereby endanger the Terran colony, assassinate his commanding 
 officer, lead armed men to massacre a village generally engage in murder and 
 treason and atrocities and still feel himself the only true patriot, the only 
 truly sane, morally, and manly man. 
 And here I will stop discussing Don Davidson and the Terrans, whom Le Guin 
anatomizes in great detail. That's the dystopian satire in Word for 
World. The violated utopia of the Athsheans is equally interesting. 
 How do we get decent behavior out of human beings, a genus not notably "primitive, 
 harmless, and peace-loving" (63; ch. 3)? One answer, as we've seen in The 
 Left Hand of Darkness , is to be sure that they organize themselves anarchistically. 
 In Left Hand , however, war was prevented (as things worked out) by the 
 presence of outsiders: Ai and the Ekumen. War on Gethen would have been between 
 two Gethenian peoples with sufficient sense of identity to have " two polarities 
 we " and the Gethenians " perceive through our cultural conditioning " 
 as patriot and traitor ("Gender . . . Redux" 12), and two polarities 
 that the Gethenians through their cultural conditioning and we through 
 reading Le Guin's novel perceive as Karhide and Orgoreyn. Genly Ai knows "the 
 love of one's homeland" but beyond that he's not sure, from his own experience, 
 what patriotism is. Estraven, soon to be exiled for treason explains it to him: 
 "No, I don't mean love, when I say patriotism. I mean fear. The fear of the 
 other. And its expressions are political not poetical: hate, rivalry, aggression" 
 (19; ch. 1). 66 
 In the United States ca. 1969, Estraven's comments were highly relevant: lack 
 of patriotism was a standard charge against the Peace Movement, the people trying 
 to end US military adventures in Indochina; since antiwar actions were necessarily 
 "giving aid and comfort to the enemy" in time of war however undeclared by Congress 
 movement people were also traitors. The Left Hand of Darkness as a whole 
 goes even further than just problematicizing words like "patriotism" and "treason"; 
 as a whole, Left Hand emphatically puts personal loyalties and love of 
 home over attachments to any abstraction (true treason is to betray a 
 friend), but Le Guin gives us technologically sophisticated people on Gethen, 
 living in a complex civilization: there is on Gethen the possibility for conflict 
 between personal loyalty or loyalty to home and the loyalty patriotism requires 
 to the State. 
 The Athsheans have not had to deal with conflicts in loyalty between concrete 
 people and abstracts commonwealths because they have never had abstract states 
 to be loyal to; they are not civilized people: i.e., they don't have cultures 
 based on cities in the ways ancient Terrans developed civilization from city 
 life. 67 
 What Athsheans call cities we'd call villages or towns, and the Gethenians might 
 call Hearths; and no conqueror or other consolidator has come along to bind 
 the villages into a confederation, set up his royal seat in a city, and continue 
 expanding until he or a successor ran into another royal thug with similar ideas. 68 
 So: the immediate reason the Athsheans don't have big wars is that they can't; 
 their social groups are too small. But those groups are small because they have 
 no history of consolidation, and one reason they have no consolidation is they 
 have no history of feuds and forays that could be organized into rational warfare 
 for the purpose of large-scale theft. Apparently, it has never occurred to Athsheans 
 to organize into groups to murder, maim, wound, and (thereby) terrorize others 
 in order to steal the property or labor of those others. Put in such terms, 
 this hardly appears a mystery, but it is a mystery. In Le Guin's Hainish universe, 
 warfare has been fairly common; and the Hainish universe is a legitimate extrapolation 
 from and fabulation upon human history on our Earth where, I believe, warfare 
 began as highly organized theft with violence (see discussion of ACH ). 
 Why are there no feuds and forays on Athshe? Why are even fist fights uncommon? 
 Why are they really nonviolent, really peaceful? Putting the matter formally: 
 As human beings the Athsheans have as a trait aggressivity ; to a greater 
 or lesser degree they all are capable of getting very, very angry, so angry 
 they desire to lash out. Further, "The Athsheans are carnivorous, they hunt 
 animals" and can hunt in groups; and they have their rare psychotics and the 
 concepts of rape and murder (61; ch. 3) and weapons. Why then is there so little 
 aggression ? 69 
 One reason is that politics among the Athsheans is controlled by old women, 
 the Head Women of the villages: ". . . old women are different from 
 everybody else, they say what they think" (98; ch. 5). In Earthsea terms, politics 
 on Athshe are conducted in a True Speech. A second reason is that fights will 
 not move into deadly violence because the Athsheans have "aggression-halting 
 gestures and positions" ( WWF 60) like those of Terran wolves and jackdaws 
 (Lorenz 123-28). And it is highly unlikely a conflict would ever get to physical 
 combat. Among men, anyway, they have a custom like Terran Inuit and use ritualized 
 "singing to replace physical combat." Any Athshean man can, when angry, sublimate 
 aggressivity into art and sing a song against his opponent a very literal mshl , 
 in the sense of "taunt," "satire" the quality of the song depending upon the 
 man's talent. Like the appeasement gestures, the singing contests also "might 
 have a physiological foundation . . . ." However deep their roots 
 (and there has to be a biological basis somewhere), Athshean aggression-halting 
 and aggression-ritualizing customs make "an effective war-barrier," especially 
 since there is relatively little positive motivation for warfare (60-61; ch. 
 3). The Athsheans have little wealth, so there is little to steal. The Athsheans 
 also have no tradition of hating outsiders and are slow to learn group enmity. 
 They are literally in touch with one another, with an entire grammar and vocabulary 
 of "touch-exchanges" filling that vast gap in Terran culture (US culture) "between 
 the formal handshake and the sexual caress" (94-95; ch. 5). Possibly most important, 
 the Athsheans are incredibly well integrated into their world. They can go with 
 the unconscious, with the Dao. To a remarkable degree, they are sane. Athsheans 
 can take their dreams and, according to their abilities, shape, analyze, react 
 to, and reshape them. As a folk art they can dream while awake and "balance 
 . . . sanity not on the razor's edge of reason but on the double support, 
 the fine balance of reason and dream" (99; ch. 5). 70 
 Bright water and dark forest balance on Athshe. Even so, intellect that clear 
 light of reason balances the maze-like, forest-like unconscious among Athsheans 
 (25-26; ch. 2). "They're a static, stable, uniform society" from Lyubov's somewhat 
 limited point of view, "Perfectly integrated and wholly unprogressive. You might 
 say that like the forest they live in, they've attained a climax state" but 
 they can adapt and apparently have adapted rather spectacularly to the Terran 
 colony with their massacring the Terrans at Smith Camp (61-62; ch. 3). 71 
 Lyubov notes that the Athsheans have "recognized us as members of their species, 
 as men. However, we have not responded as members of their species should respond. 
 We have ignored . . . the rights and obligations of non-violence. 
 We have killed, raped, dispersed, and enslaved the native humans, destroyed 
 their communities, and cut down their forests. It wouldn't be surprising if 
 they'd decided that we are not human." The Cetian, Mr. Or, completes the logic: 
 "And therefore can be killed, like animals . . ." (62; ch. 3). 
 What it takes a long time for Lyubov to figure out is the mechanism for change 
 among the Athsheans. He has to be told directly and then mull it over: "Selver 
 is a god," he's told (97, [100], 105; ch. 5). Then he thinks, Selver is "a link 
 between the two realities, considered by the Athsheans as equal, the dream-time 
 and the world-time . . . . A link: one who could speak aloud 
 the perceptions of the subconscious. To 'speak' that tongue is to act. To do 
 a new thing. To change or to be changed, radically, from the root. For the root 
 is the dream." Selver was such a link, a literal translator , one who 
 carries over. "He had done a new deed. The word, the deed, murder. Only a god 
 could lead so great a newcomer . . . across the bridge between the 
 worlds" (106-7; ch. 5). 72 
 When Selver tells the story of the Smith Camp massacre to the old Dreamer, 
 Coro Mena, Coro Mena replies, "Before this day the thing we had to do was the 
 right thing to do; the way we had to go was the right way and led us home. Where 
 is our home now? For you have done what you had to do, and it was not right. 
 You have killed men" (33-34; ch. 2). From a Daoist perspective, and for Le Guin, 
 these are powerful lines. A classical Daoist talks little of right and wrong 
 but of following the way and, in Le Guin's formulation, doing as one must 
 do which is right. 73 
 Coro Mena here admits the Western paradox that sometimes one must do evil which 
 makes evil unavoidable, but no less evil. And Coro Mena has, all together, an 
 optimistic view of Selver (47-48; ch. 2)! The more pessimistic possibility is 
 suggested by Lyubov's asking himself whether Selver was "speaking his own language, 
 or . . . Captain Davidson's" (107; ch. 5). Selver may not be a god; 
 he may just be a charismatic man who has learned that a possible political means 
 to desirable ends is massacres. Either way could fit into the story. The point 
 of view characters are a trinity of two saviors and Davidson as Messiah-manqu. 
 There are also two clear traitors: Davidson and Lyubov (110; ch. 5). Selver 
 could complete the threesome of traitors. Selver's gift to his people is guerrilla 
 warfare, which requires group enmity. Athsheans must think of themselves as 
 Athsheans, with a cause to press against the Terrans; this sets up the possibility 
 for Selver of a conflict of loyalties. In attacking Central, Selver endangers 
 his friend Lyubov; in warning Lyubov, Selver endangers the cause of his people 
 and the lives of those who have chosen to follow him in the attack. Selver fails 
 to save Lyubov, which may be a betrayal. It would elegantly reinforce the theme 
 of treason if Selver were to betray his own nature in learning murder from Davidson 
 and teaching mass murder to his people. But this is not my reading. The Change 
 Selver brings the Athsheans is, I think, a true Change, just deeply, and appropriately, 
 problematic. 
 At the end of the story, Selver tells Lepennon, from Hain, that a god "brings 
a new way to do a thing, or a new thing to be done. . . . He 
brings this across the bridge between the dream-time and the world-time. When he 
has done this, it is done. You cannot take things that exist in the world and 
try to drive them back into the dream, to hold them inside the dream with walls 
and pretenses. That is insanity. What is, is. There is no use pretending, now, 
that we do not know how to kill one another" (168; ch. 8). 
 The book ends with Selver with the memory of Lyubov they remain in touch and 
 the knowledge that Davidson is on an island, still alive. It is not a totally 
 tragic vision of isolation, but its vision of Athshe figuratively walled off 
 from the galaxy is decorously bleak for the years of war and reaction in which 
 it was written (1968) and published (1972). 
 ** 
 The Dispossessed (1974) 
 Emigration offers some of the things the frustrated hope to find when they 
join a mass movement, namely change and a chance for a new beginning. The same 
types who swell the ranks of a rising mass movement are also likely to avail 
themselves of a chance to emigrate. Thus migration can serve as a substitute for 
a mass movement. (Hoffer 28; 17 in Part One) 
 Time is awakened when one is faced with freedom of choice. Satosi Watanabe, 
 in Voices of Time (561) 
 The teaching of The Dispossessed , its thematic content, complements 
 and balances The Lathe of Heaven but fits in more closely with The 
 Word for World Is Forest and The Left Hand of Darkness . In Lathe 
 it is the villain, Haber, who says that "Life evolution the whole universe of 
 space/time, matter/energy existence itself is essentially change " and 
 the hero, Orr who corrects with, "That is one aspect of it. . . . 
 The other is stillness" (135; ch. 9). In the debate between the active and contemplative 
 life, Lathe comes down sturdily on the side of meditatively and carefully 
 dealing with things as they are and mostly just leaving them be. The Dispossessed 
 gives more than equal time to that other aspect life, and the Way as change 
 ( ACH 485), evolution, and, indeed, as the Human Way, revolution. 
 Left Hand takes place in the far future, in the days of the well-coordinated 
 and highly evolved Ekumen of known human worlds colonized by the ancient Hainish; 
 Word for World and The Dispossessed are set in the 
 near future, when just a League is getting started. Word for World , Left 
 Hand , and The Dispossessed all deal with conflict, violence, and 
 warfare and with ways to organize human societies to keep conflict more or less 
 nonviolent. 
 Again, in Word for World , the overarching symbol for integration is 
 the world-wide Yin-Yang of Athshe before the arrival of the Terrans: "Ocean: 
 forest. . . . Water and sunlight, or darkness and leaves" (7; 
 ch. 1). That symbol remains far in the background, however, replaced by the 
 forest vs. the deserts of the lands clear-cut by the Terran loggers: and this 
 is decorous, since there is no integration in Word for World . In Left 
 Hand , the thematic symbol is the androgyne, explicitly connected with the 
 Yin-Yang symbol (267; ch. 19). The major symbol in the plot of Left Hand 
 is the arch. At the beginning of Left Hand we see the King of Karhide 
 mortaring a keystone into an arch, with the mortar pinkish from the traditional 
 blood and bones mixed in. "Without the bloodbond the arch would fall, you see," 
 Estraven tells Ai. At the time of the story, the blood and bones are those of 
 nonhuman animals, but at one time it was "Human bones, human blood" (5; ch. 
 1). 74 
 Estraven's death at the end of Left Hand provides the bloodbond that 
 will bring together his world. 75 
 In The Dispossessed , there is the double Ioti arch (like a complete or 
 partial McDonald's arch), but the thematically significant image of integration 
 is that of the double planets Urras and Anarres themselves the "Cetian" planets 
 forever circling about each other as they revolve about their common center 
 of gravity. 76 
 Tightly associated with the planetary image is the image of the circle of life: 
 the almost-complete circle that is the symbol of the Odonian anarchist movement 
 and which is the shape of the wall around the Port of Anarres, given much stress 
 at the opening of the novel and with walls used for an important figure of speech 
 throughout. This is also the shape of the quest of Shevek, the hero of The 
 Dispossessed , as we see it in The Dispossessed : the novel is "open 
 ended," leaving Shevek just before he completes a circular journey back home 
 to Anarres, a return that may result in his death, the closing of Shevek's individual 
 circle. 
 Placing The Dispossessed with Word for World and The Left 
 Hand of Darkness is also useful for putting the works very tentatively into 
 the context of broad-scale political discussion in the USA in the late 1960s 
 and early 1970s. Word for World and Left Hand were salvos in the 
 Kulturkampf associated with the war in Vietnam; The Dispossessed 
 has to do with "the Revolution." 
 As the War continued, and as the war-fighting American government had little 
 time nor inclination to deal with domestic problems, preeminently the long unanswered 
 demands of Black Americans, more radical elements split off from the mainstream 
 peace and civil rights groups ("the Movement") and called for a second American 
 revolution, this time a truly radical one. Looking back from even the middle 
 1970s, it was obvious that the Movement, let alone the Revolution, had been 
 mortally wounded in Chicago in 1968 and 1969 and finally killed by gunfire at 
 Jackson State and Kent State Universities in May of 1970, had twitched for a 
 couple of years, and then received indecent burial in a landslide: Richard Nixon's 
 victory over George McGovern in the Presidential election of 1972. 77 
 Still, in 1968 revolution had been possible though unachieved in France and 
 had seemed plausible to many people in the USA into the early 1970s. And by 
 1973, with the war "winding down" and the Nixon administration teetering, people 
 began to look forward to 1976 and the Bicentennial of the American Revolution 
 of 1776. 
 The Dispossessed , then, may be read in historical context as an immediately 
 relevant meditation on revolution, one of many such meditations at the time. 
 The Dispossessed is a rather indirect meditation and speaks very cogently 
 to a couple of questions not considered sufficiently in the 1960s and 1970s 
 and then forgotten as "revolution" once again became a taboo word in American 
 political discourse. The first question was, "What do you want the world to 
 be like the day after your revolution?" In The Dispossessed , Le Guin 
 pictures a utopia worth struggling for. The second question is, "Why another 
 revolution What went wrong with the first American Revolution?" In The Dispossessed , 
 Le Guin endorses the political accuracy of Thomas Jefferson's reckoning "that 
 one rebellion in thirteen States in the course of eleven years, is but one for 
 each State in a century and a half. No country should be so long without one." 
 Shevek says the Anarresti have enjoyed a fully-functioning anarchy "for one 
 hundred and fifty years now" (183; ch. 7); the Odonian colony on Anarres has 
 been recognized under the Terms of the Settlement with the Urrasti governments 
 for 170 years (275, ch. 11; 286, ch. 12); and the demonstration Shevek attends 
 in the Ioti city of Nio Esseia occurs on the 200th anniversary of the Insurrection 
 that began the Odonian Revolution (239-40; ch. 9 [also 188; ch. 8]). By Mr. 
 Jefferson's schedule, the Cetian planets are due for an uprising. Even in Odonian 
 society on Anarres, a communist anarchy conceived as a permanent revolution, 
 there must be some revolutionary anarchist activists every now and then, acting 
 like anarchists and waking up the social organism. "A little rebellion now and 
 then is a good thing," in the Jeffersonian view of things, and probably a necessary 
 thing if people are to stay free. 78 
 * 
 The plot of The Dispossessed gives us the biography of Shevek, a physicist, 
 parent, and Odonian of Anarres, from infancy through his journey in middle age 
 to the capitalist archist county of A-Io on Urras where he develops the General 
 Temporal Theory bringing together Sequency and a Theory of Simultaneity, which 
 allows the ansible and the instantaneous transmission of data over interstellar 
 distances (276; ch. 11) and, finally, his return home, almost to his landing 
 on Anarres (ch. 13). As in most SF, much is at stake: the ansible is necessary 
 for the formation of a League of Worlds, so Shevek's work ultimately helps in 
 the creation of the Ekumen. As in The Left Hand of Darkness , there is 
 conflict, but in The Dispossessed it is good to move into that conflict, 
 and to try to move it onto a nonviolent and productive path. And also as in 
 Left Hand , Le Guin complicates her narration by refusing to tell her 
 tale from the beginning through the middle to the end. Here, though, the narrative 
 voice and point of view remain constant; Le Guin appropriately rearranges the 
 time scheme. 
 Shevek is a student of time, and in a central discussion in the central chapter 
 of the novel and that's both metaphorically and literally central Shevek explains 
 how time is both linear and circular (ch. 7). As James Bittner has very elegantly 
 demonstrated, Le Guin uses a similar structure for her novel ( Approaches 
 121-25). The novel has thirteen chapters: six set on Anarres, five set on Urras, 
 two involving both; in ch. 1 Shevek goes from Anarres to Urras; in ch. 13 he 
 leaves Urras to return to Anarres. The arrow of time takes Shevek from infancy 
 to what may be his death at forty or so (244, ch. 9). 79 
 The circle takes him on a typical quest journey, in this case, to Urras and 
 back again, with some oscillations. If we follow Bittner's schema and see chapter 
 1 as a fictional present, chapter 2 is a long flashback taking us to Shevek's 
 infancy and early youth; except that it is the kind of flashback where we don't 
 return any time soon to the present. Instead, the succeeding even-numbered chapters 
 move us forward in time from Shevek's youth until Shevek decides at the end 
 of chapter 12 that he is not going to Urras, and Takver (his partner in a monogamous 
 heterosexual reproductive relationship) tells him in a spousal way that he is, 
 too, going to Urras, and will return. From the end of ch. 1 on, the odd-numbered 
 chapters move from Shevek's arrival on Urras, through his adventures there, 
 to his trip from Urras almost to Anarres in ch. 13: moving us from the present 
 of chapter 1 into the future. Past, present, and future, all exist simultaneously 
 in the physical book, The Dispossessed ; and we encounter past, present, 
 and future (though not necessarily in that order) as we read and yet what is 
 happening in The Dispossessed , as we first read The Dispossessed , 
 is always happening "now." This is the case with any book, but Le Guin's time-switches 
 defamiliarize the experience and should make us recognize how all written narratives 
 exist both simultaneously (in the volume) and in sequence (as read). 
 * 
 To repeat a clich from Shakespeare criticism: from A Midsummer 
 Night's Dream to As You Like It and 
 Twelfth Night , William Shakespeare perfected his technique of 
 doing variations on a comic pattern. To put the same statement into popular 
 culture terms, Shakespeare worked out his versions of the formulas of the genre 
 of dramatic romantic comedy. By the early 1970s and The Dispossessed , 
 Le Guin had her formulas worked out. 80 
 Corresponding with the balanced symbolism mentioned earlier, there's the 
balance and contrast between the "Yangish" archists of Urras and the "Yinnish" 
communist anarchists of Anarres. Viewed from a metaphorical distance, 
 Urras/Anarres = Terrans/Athsheans = Orgoreyn/Karhide. 
 But, as always, Le Guin offers variations on themes by Le Guin. To start with 
biology, this time around, all the people involved are "Hainish normal": exactly 
like us, as far as we're told, with only the trivial difference of having more 
body hair than even White Terrans. And this time around Le Guin spends little 
time attacking the USSR. We hear of the Stalinist country of Thu and see a 
Thuvian agent or two, but the one country on Urras we see is A-Io, which is 
strongly capitalistic and clearly modeled on America ca. 1970: just more sexist, 
nonracist (apparently lacking racial differences), more efficiently organized, 
less republican in origins, and more responsible in preserving the natural 
environment. 
 Like America, A-Io is a highly centralized and powerful state with a capitalist 
 economy on Urras, with that planet's magnificent, complex environment, great 
 natural wealth, great beauty. Culturally, A-Io is also very similar to the United 
 States, e.g., in having a university system, radio and newspapers (with intellectuals 
 getting their news from the Ioti equivalent of NPR), and in their combining 
 excessiveness and endemic vices combined with observance of strong taboos. Early 
 in his stay, the rather puritanical Shevek had noted "that the Urrasti lived 
 among mountains of excrement, but never mentioned shit" (120; ch, 5). 81 
 Urras, however, is also like Europe: the Old World, with a long history, and 
 a real aristocracy. And Anarres is also like America, at least the Americas 
 as viewed by Europeans: the New World, but truly empty this time, lacking human 
 inhabitants or any animal inhabitants above the level of fish; and on Anarres 
 the Odonian colonists from Urras have founded a new society, formed in revolution 
 and accepting the revolutionary values the French formulated as Liberty, Equality, 
 Fraternity, or, to phrase the matter in more properly anarchist terms: freedom, 
 equality, solidarity, responsibility, and mutual aid. The Odonians on Anarres 
 have created a good society, but even they might have done better to have stayed 
 home on Urras and ensured the Revolution on Urras. Even as the American and 
 other colonies, and later the United States, provided a home for trouble-makers 
 and relieved the European ruling classes of troublesome opposition, even so 
 with Anarres and Urras. And, again, the Anarresti and Urrasti in the political 
 fable in The Dispossessed have a much simpler ethical situation: the 
 success of a Cetian colony on Anarres did not rest upon the twin evils of slavery 
 and the extermination of native peoples. 82 
 Alongside the beauty of A-Io and Urras not beneath it and denying it, but alongside 
 it is the military force of the Ioti State: force we see used in an attack upon 
 political demonstrators (Odonians, Syndicalists, Socialist Workers) at the climax 
 of The Dispossessed (241-46; ch. 9). Along with the wealth and beauty 
 of A-Io is a capitalist system that alienates people from the products of their 
 labor, from the truth, other people, honest sexuality, and themselves (e.g., 
 105 ch. 5). On Anarres we have a radical alternative to any polity we've ever 
 had on Earth: a long-functioning, high-technology, communist anarchy. On Anarres, 
 then, we get "The ABC of Communist Anarchism" (to use a title from Alexander 
 Berkman); and we also get an analysis of the threats to communist anarchism 
 or any utopia, or even to a modest republican experiment like the United States 
 of America. It is much to give people a vision of a world the day after the 
 revolution; it is a great gift to political analysis to deal with problems arising 
 some 170 years after establishment of Odonian society, as utopian a revolutionary 
 society as theorists have pictured. 
 * 
 In Odo's theory and initially among the Anarresti, there was no government 
 of people by other people but only the administration of things (136; ch. 6). 83 
 No hierarchy of rank, and no hierarchies of property since no one on Anarres 
 can own anything: even use of the grammatical possessive case is limited in 
 their invented language, Pravic. With the exception of personal items, everything 
 is held in common. There is no money, no property: when Shevek gets to Urras, 
 he arrives "like a good Odonian, 'with empty hands'" (56; ch 3), and if they 
 want Anarres, the future, he tells potential revolutionaries, "you must come 
 to it with empty hands" (241; ch. 9). 
 Religion for Odonians "is one of the Categories: the Fourth Mode." Few people 
 use every Mode, but the Modes are intrinsic to "the natural capacities of the 
 mind," and Anarresti, have a "religious capacity" need one to do physics, in 
 fact, since religion is "the profoundest relationship man has with the cosmos" 
 (12; ch. 1). Anarresti religion, however, is invisible in Shevek's narrative: 
 not in churches, nor established, organized, ritualized, nor prayed. The Odonian 
 stress on coming "with empty hands" can be taken in this context as a rejection 
 of any transcendental religion requiring sacrifices or material support. The 
 slogan of the sky gods has been "none shall appear before Me empty-handed," 
 at least when they got houses for themselves: ceilings, walls, and attendant 
 priests, expenses, property, and hierarchy. 84 
 If we like, what (un)religion we see in The Dispossessed we can interpret, 
 applying Fritjof Capra's title, as "The Tao(ism) of Physics," for Shevek, especially, 
 but also for him the Perennial Philosophy in trying to work through pain to 
 Joy. And Takver is a kind of natural Daoist as well as good Odonian and biologist 
 in her relationship with the world. 
 Jobs among the Odonians, called "postings," are requested at and assigned by 
 "Divlab," the Division of Labor office (121; ch. 5); resources are divided up 
 by the "PDC" (Production and Distribution Coordination) among syndicates, partnerships, 
 individuals, or other combinations of people working together (61; ch. 3). And 
 people do work: as the Daoists observed, ". . . men are always doing 
 something; inaction to them is impossible" without a lot of training ( Chuang 
 Tzu ch. 23 [Giles 237]); or, in the formulation of modern ethologists, "The 
 healthy animal is up and doing." The Anarresti are "Hainish normal" aggressive 
 and status-seeking, and we see plenty of conflict and one fist fight (41; ch. 
 2) but no lethal violence and certainly no warfare. There are no states to establish 
 armies and no reason to form gangs: there is no property to steal nor the sort 
 of authority physically weaker folk can be forced to submit to (see 120-21; 
 ch. 5). Leadership is provided by people with "inherent authority," emperors, 
 so to speak, who "actually have new clothes" (45; ch. 2). 85 
 The development of bureaucratic machinery, of an apparat , is prevented, 
 in theory, by democratic structuring of PDC and other possible hierarchies, 
 but primarily by the sort of public vigilance that Thomas Jefferson noted as 
 the price (the minimal price we know today) of liberty: Jefferson, however, 
 said "eternal vigilance" and eternal is much longer than 150 or 170 or 200 years 
 (136; ch. 6). 
 Could Odonian anarchism work? The great advantage to the writer of a utopia 
is that she can point to her imaginary world and say, "Can it? Look; it 
 does work!" What we can demand of a utopian writer is that the better new 
world work plausibly and instructively, and Anarres does. 
 In addition to handling the objections to utopias alluded to above, Le Guin 
 just eliminates three major objections to an anarchist society. The first she 
 expresses through the comments of Shevek's Urrasti colleague Demaere Oiie that 
 the Anarresti could get by as "primitive populists . . . because there 
 were so few of them and because they had no neighbor states" (163; ch. 7). Not 
 recognizing Shevek as an anarchist from a working anarchy is Oiie's problem, 
 but the rest of his objection is valid. Anarchy's main problem might, indeed, 
 be "the neighbors," but it is relatively easy to be anarchists on a world without 
 nation-states, or even armed city-states. There are no guns or states on Anarres, 
 and everyone has been raised an Odonian. The second objection is the idea I 
 learned through folklore and which Oiie may allude to that anarchy might work 
 well on Tahiti or some other abundant place but would be in major trouble amid 
 scarcity. Anarres is a rather harsh planet, poor in resources; but, contrary 
 to folk belief, that is exactly where we should expect anarchy to work. 
 That anarchy would work amid relative hardship will not seem odd if we recall 
 Owen Pugh in "Nine Lives" and that he is alive to star in a story because the 
 English could cooperate even during a time of famines. And more is working than 
 a kind of racial altruism or Affirmative Action ( ER 12) in Le Guin's 
 having her future heroes generally people of color: White folks are currently 
 a minority on Terra, and Western White folks belong to cultures that work against 
 solidarity and mutual aid. It is consistent for Le Guin to believe that when 
 the biological going gets tough, tough-minded, competitive cultures will be 
 going, dying out more quickly than some of the currently marginal, but cooperative, 
 cultures. More immediately relevant for Anarres, consider the beasts of a coral 
 reef or any of the biologically abundant places Charles Darwin examined for 
 his idea of the origin of new species by natural selection of the fittest. In 
 such rich, crowded areas, the fittest can well be the most competitive indeed, 
 the most aggressive and Darwin might be forgiven for stressing competition. 
 Petr Kropotkin studied animals in the stressed environment of Siberia and Northern 
 Manchuria. The one law Shevek and the Anarresti follow is that of human evolution, 
 and the "law" of evolution for social species is solidarity and mutual aid, 
 a point very clear in stressed environments in which individuals in social species 
 either aid one another or die (see TD 6, 177; chs. 1, 7). 86 
 The third objection Le Guin deals with is that anarchism and other philosophies 
 of what has been called "the soft-hearted school" (vs. "hard-headed") are both 
 unrealistic and unmanly. Oiie puts the raw power struggle on Urras between A-Io 
 and Thu in terms of "the politics of reality" (164; ch. 7) and the old aristocrat 
 Atro comments significantly that "The trouble with Odonianism . . . 
 is that it's womanish. It simply doesn't include the virile side of life [i.e., 
 warfare]. . . . It doesn't understand courage love of the flag" 
 (230; ch. 9). That is, for now, Odonianism and other idealistic creeds might 
 work, but only if people were essentially altruistic, nice . 
 Le Guin goes to some length to establish that she is not so naive to build a 
utopia upon a premise of human niceness. On Urras she notes territoriality and 
primitive possessiveness in birds (166; ch. 7), and the culturally evolved human 
behaviors based on such traits; and on Anarres she shows us that even in utopia 
there are some fairly firm givens, and not all of them the impulse to solidarity 
and mutual aid. In an important chapter of the book, Bedap, a close friend of 
Shevek's, tells him how power centers develop on Anarres, "anywhere that 
function demands expertise and a stable institution." For any stability in an 
institution gives scope to the authoritarian impulse: 
 In the early years of the Settlement we were . . . on the lookout 
for it. People discriminated very carefully then between administering things 
and governing people. They did it so well that we forgot that the will to 
dominance is as central in human beings as the impulse to mutual aid is, and has 
to be trained in each individual, in each new generation. Nobody's born an 
Odonian any more than he's born civilized! But we've forgotten that. We don't 
educate for freedom. Education, the most important activity of the social 
organism, has become rigid, moralistic, authoritarian. Kids learn to parrot 
Odo's words as if they were laws -the ultimate blasphemy! (136; ch. 6) 
 Eternal vigilance is always the first installment payment on liberty in part 
because of "The Iron Law of Oligarchy": experts tend to hang on to jobs and make 
themselves indispensable as they monopolize both knowledge of how things are 
(traditionally) done and also dominate the means of communication: finding out 
what's going on from the rank and file and communicating to (not with) the rank 
and file (Nicos 489). Shevek comes to agree with Bedap's analysis: 
". . . every emergency, every labor draft even, tends to leave behind 
it an increment of bureaucratic machinery within PDC . . . " (264; ch. 
10). Famine on Anarres almost pushed Odonian society to violence when there 
wasn't enough to share (206; ch. 8), but things did not get very violent. The 
greater dangers were more subtle. 
 The first danger is somewhat personal and personalist: during crises where 
severe rationing is required, lists must be made of who gets what, including who 
gets food and who gets to starve. Shevek had such a job, and he quit it. "But 
someone else took over the lists at the mills in Elbow. There's always somebody 
willing to make lists" ( TD 250-51; ch. 10). Figuratively, Shevek joined 
Odo and the ones who walk away from Omelas and refused to benefit from other 
people's being sacrificed (Finch 42), or even other people's sacrifices. There 
is, however, another "but": but at a moment of high tension in the debate at PDC 
over the plan for Shevek to go to Urras a visiting delegate from a miners' 
syndicate, and a person who has obviously suffered during the famine, quotes Odo 
on how ". . . we each of us deserve everything" and nothing 
because we have "eaten while another starved," nor can people claim virtue for 
having starved while others ate. Odo's point is "Free your mind of the idea of 
 deserving , the idea of earning . . . " (288; ch. 
12), and the quotation, in retrospect, should make it difficult to judge 
Shevek's walking away from list making, and to judge the person who 
replaced him (see Benford, "Reactionary Utopias" 16). 
 The second subtle danger from social stress is also richly problematic. The 
 urge to solidarity itself, the carefully reinforced trait that allowed Odonian 
 society to survive even the famine solidarity itself can be a danger (109; ch. 
 5). Where there are no official hierarchies, no state, and no law, one is left 
 with one's own "private conscience" and "the social conscience," then "the opinions 
 of one's neighbors becomes a very mighty force" (121; ch. 5). 87 
 Shevek believes, and he's at least half correct, that some 200 years after the 
 Revolution the Anarresti social conscience "completely dominates the individual 
 conscience, instead of striking a balance with it. We don't cooperate we obey " 
 (265; ch. 10). Shevek and his friends start the Syndicate of Initiative to continue 
 the permanent revolution of Odonian society: to be anarchists, to change 
 things that must be changed if the society is to remain anarchistic. And this 
 is where the personal comes together with the professional, and the professional 
 for Shevek the study of Time is profoundly political. 
 But how do you change things in a permanent revolution? How do you rearrange 
the mechanism of government when there is (in theory) no mechanism but only the 
social organism? Indeed, how does one dare "tinker" with the social organism at 
all when the organic image is so useful to conservative thinkers precisely 
because it is so dangerous to tinker with living organisms? Which returns us to 
the Le Guinian theme of true change: In a world without a transcendent god to 
set up means-justifying goals and moral laws, how can people achieve ethical, 
responsible change? Le Guin's answer in The Dispossessed is connected 
slightly with dreams (as in WWF ) but mostly with time. 
 Among the Greek philosophers before Socrates, Pythagoras taught "All is number." 
 Parmenides taught, "Nothing changes"; and Parmenides's student Zeno (of Elea) 
 pushed the point logically to "Nothing moves," and came up with Zeno's Paradox, 
 where rocks never hit trees and fast runner Achilles never passes tortoises 
 (see TD 23-27; ch. 2). And Heraclitus, profoundly disagreeing, insisted 
 that "All is change," "All is flux." In a world of Simultaneity, Parmenides 
 is right: nothing changes, all is constant, all is Being. We don't toss a stone 
 and watch it hit the tree because the stone has already hit the tree when we 
 tossed it (182; ch. 7) indeed, we have already been born and have died, as has 
 our species; all is now . In a world of Sequency, all is becoming, and 
 change is continuous. Either way, there is little possibility for ethics or 
 politics. 88 
 When finally developed, at an epiphany in the novel (224-26; ch. 9), Shevek's 
 General Temporal Theory brings together Simultaneity and Sequency: dream-time 
 and world-time, natural cycles and natural evolution (179-80; ch. 7). And it 
 bases ethics solidly in physics, in number our dual sense of linear and cyclical 
 time and this basis in number (if C. G. Jung is correct) relates ethics 
 to a primary human instrument "to bring order into the chaos of appearances," 
 an essential "instrument for either creating order or apprehending" a pre-existent 
 order in nature, perhaps a true archetype. 89 
 At a party on Urras, drunk, Shevek explains the importance of our everyday 
sense of linear time: 
 . . . chronosophy does involve ethics. Because our sense of 
 time involves our ability to separate cause and effect, means and end. 
 The baby, again, the animal, they don't see the difference between what 
 they do now and what will happen because of it. They can't make a pulley, 
 or a promise. 90 
 We can. Seeing the difference between now and not now , we 
 can make the connection. And there morality enters in. Responsibility. 
 To say that a good end will follow from a bad means is just like saying 
 that if I pull a rope on this pulley it will lift the weight on that one. 
 To break a promise is to deny the reality of the past; therefore it is 
 to deny the hope of a real future. If time and reason are functions of 
 each other, if we are creatures of time, then we had better know it, and 
 try to make the best of it. To act responsibly. (181; ch. 7) 
 Sober and on Anarres, in bed with his beloved partner, Shevek talks with Takver 
 about his old friend Tirin, a satiric playwright and Odonian anarchist driven 
 insane by people who couldn't stand a real rebel. 91 
 The conversation moves on to the ethics of Shevek's having allowed his book 
 to be edited and presented to the worlds as by Shevek and Sabul, Shevek's boss 
 in a society where, in theory, there are no bosses. "It did get the book printed," 
 Shevek notes, and Takver responds, "The right end, but the wrong means!": which 
 gets Shevek thinking here the ends/means problem and Takver's belief that she 
 made the decision for both of them on compromising with Sabul. Shevek handles 
 the second assertion first, declaring that neither of them made a real choice 
 on publishing the book. "We let Sabul choose for us. Our own, internalized Sabul 
 convention, moralism, fear of social ostracism, fear of being different, fear 
 of being free!" (266; ch. 10). 92 
 Shevek notes that "Those who build wall are their own prisoners" and asserts 
 his "proper function in the social organism": "to go unbuild walls," eventually 
 having a go at unbuilding the wall between Anarres and Urras, and between Anarres 
 and the rest of the galaxy. Huddling together with Shevek under the blankets, 
 Takver says, "It may get pretty drafty" (267). 93 
 With Takver asleep, Shevek begins a meditation in a section that repeats some 
variation on "responsibility" at least four times in two pages, and one that 
begins and ends significantly with the idea that "one must work with time and 
not against it" (267; ch. 10 [see 269, 249]). 
 What this might mean is suggested by Shevek's thought that for Takver and for 
 him, and for Odonians, Daoists, and anarchists in general, there can be no separation 
 of ends and means. There can be "no end. There was process: process was all," 
 which suggests to me time's circle and cycles, as opposed to time's arrow, which 
 we must picture with a beginning and direction, and usually picture with an 
 end (a shot arrow more or less hits or misses). 94 
 That's not what Le Guin intends however: the next line is "You could go in a 
 promising direction or you could go wrong, but you did not set out with the 
 expectation of ever stopping anywhere. All responsibilities, all commitments 
 thus understood took on substance and duration" apparently life-long duration. 
 This open-ended obligation is much of what Le Guin means by "responsibility," 
 and she says here exactly what she means. To Le Guin as to Odo, a promise is 
 a promise, even a "promise of indefinite term," and it is promises that bind 
 past, present, and future and which make freedom meaningful. "A promise is a 
 direction taken, a self-limitation of choice. As Odo pointed out, if no direction 
 is taken, if one goes nowhere, no change will occur. One's freedom to choose 
 and to change will be unused, exactly as if one were in jail, a jail of one's 
 own building, a maze in which no one way is better than any other" (197; ch. 
 8). Indeed, Le Guin assigns meaningless circularity to what Hedonists and Utilitarians 
 and other practical sorts have seen as rational, goal-seeking, linear behavior: 
 seeking pleasure and avoiding pain. As what Aldous Huxley has called "The Perennial 
 Philosophy" teaches (106), evading suffering means also evading "the chance 
 of{sic} joy," the chance for fulfillment. "The search for pleasure is circular, 
 repetitive . . . . [and] always ends in the same place. It has 
 an end. It comes to the end and has to start over. It is not a journey and return, 
 but a closed cycle, a locked room," and, repeating an important image in The 
 Dispossessed , "a cell," as in prison cell. Opposed to such end-seeking 
 is "promising" action: "Outside the locked room is the landscape of time, in 
 which the spirit may, with luck and courage, construct the fragile, makeshift, 
 improbable roads and cities of fidelity: a landscape inhabitable by human beings" 
 a landscape in which one can "know what it is to come home," which seems to 
 be the one goal or end Le Guin unequivocally accepts. "Loyalty, which asserts 
 the continuity of past and future, binding time into a whole, is the root of 
 human strength; there is no good to be done without it" (268-69; ch. 10). 
 The relationship of individual to society is reciprocal, with society offering 
 literal "security and stability" and figurative warmth and stillness, and the 
 individual offering the "power of moral choice the power of change." In The 
 Dispossessed , part of Dr. Haber's view is favored over George Orr's: change 
 is "the essential function of life." Change is also the metaphorical essence 
 of revolution, and Odonian society is supposed to be "a permanent revolution," 
 with revolutionary activity seen in theory and in the plot of this novel as 
 individual (267, ch. 10; see also 135, ch. 6). Le Guin has Shevek think here 
 ". . . revolution begins in the thinking mind." Later in the story, 
 though earlier in the book, Shevek tells a demonstration, "You cannot buy the 
 Revolution. You cannot make the Revolution. You can only be the Revolution" 
 (242; ch 9). Granted, but, What are Odonians to do ? 
 A good, eclectic Daoist might respond to that question with the Buddha's wu 
 (or mu ) short-form translation, "Wrong question" and note the doctrine 
 ". . . the Quiet of the Taoists produces . . . a power 'that 
 could shift Heaven and Earth' . . . . For 'to a mind that is 
 "still" the whole universe surrenders'" (Waley, 58). 95 
 A good Daoist does not make big plans, but acts spontaneously: ". . . 
 from inaction comes the potentiality of action" ( Chuang Tzu , chs. 5, 
 6, 13 [Giles 67, 71, 132]). 96 
 If one is the Revolution, one will do what must be done at the right 
 time. Such an idea requires a lot of faith, but it gets support from a surprising 
 source, the very nonmystical, very European political theorist, Hannah Arendt: 
 Textbook instructions on "how to make a revolution" in a step-by-step 
progression from dissent to conspiracy, from resistance to armed uprising, are 
all based on the mistaken notion that revolution are "made." In a contest of 
violence{,} the superiority of the government has always been absolute; but this 
superiority lasts only as long as . . . [governmental] commands are 
obeyed and the army or police forces are prepared to use their weapons [against 
the opponents of the government]. When this is no longer the case, the situation 
changes abruptly. Not only is the rebellion not put down, but the arms 
themselves change hands . . . . Only after . . . the 
disintegration of the government in power has permitted the rebels to arm 
themselves, can one speak of an "armed uprising," which often does not take 
place at all or occurs when it is no longer necessary. Where commands are no 
longer obeyed, the means of violence are of no use; and the questions of this 
obedience is not decided by the command-obedience relation but by opinion, and, 
of course, by the number of those who share it [numbers = power for Arendt]. 
Everything depends on the power behind the violence. The sudden dramatic 
breakdown of power that ushers in revolutions reveals in a flash how civil 
disobedience . . . is but the outward manifestation of support and 
consent [granted: "civil" and denied: "disobedience"]. 
 Where power has disintegrated, revolutions are possible but not necessary. 
( On Violence 48-49; II). 
 Coups can be accomplished with a small, elite, vanguard; the Revolution 
bubbles up from the masses who produce a "revolutionary situation," where "power 
is already in the streets." What is needed then is conscious people "prepared to 
seize power and the responsibility that goes with it" (Arendt 50) and give 
direction. Or, as I think Odo and Le Guin would prefer, allow oneself to be 
seized by power and take responsibility for how one directs that power (see 
 TD 152; ch. 6). Meanwhile, what one does is what Shevek and his friends 
do: they organize and educate. 
 Le Guin isn't going to start favoring Dr. Haber over Mr. Orr generally, and 
 her Revolution, in 1960s terms, is more Countercultural than narrowly political: 
 relational more than goal-seeking. At the center of her Revolution, central 
 even to the Syndicate of Initiative, is the inaction that allows potential right 
 action, and the loyalty, fidelity, "marriage" that allows time-binding through 
 human promises. 97 
 If we are to picture Shevek and Takver in bed when Shevek has his long interior 
 monolog to decide to unbuild walls, then at the very center of the vision of 
 The Dispossessed is a pair of a life-bonded, child-producing, child-rearing 
 people. In a variation on the comic romance theme, a new and better world will 
 (probably) coalesce around them at the end of the novel. In any event, Shevek 
 is central to the plot, and Shevek and Takver are established as central symbolically 
 when Shevek returns from the famine years in the Dust and he and Takver make 
 love: ". . . the third time they were both half asleep, and circled 
 about . . . each other's being, like planets circling blindly . . . 
 about the common center of gravity, swinging, circling endlessly" (258; ch. 
 10). If one can talk of an Odonian duty, it would be to be like Shevek and Takver, 
 living complex lives of partnership and parenthood, domestic jobs and political 
 work: Takver as partner, biologist, and mother; Shevek with more stress as "not 
 only a physicist but also a partner, a father, an Odonian, and finally a social 
 reformer. . .  [H]e had not been sheltered, and had expected 
 no shelter" (104; ch. 5). 98 
 Beyond that, one can modify the arrow analogy by putting the bow in the hands 
 of a Zen adept one loyal to spouse, family, and friends! There is no target; 
 the archer works with time and Being and knows where to shoot and, more important, 
 when (see Tehanu 175 ; ch. 11). 
 CRITIQUE: Kulturkampf ing on the Left with The 
Dispossessed 
 The artistic merit of The Dispossessed is, I think unquestionable. 
What has been questioned is parts of the politics, and here I'll express some of 
my own political reservations. Then, with political reservations earnestly 
expressed, we can move on. Le Guin did. 
 First, again, I find The Dispossessed vague about how to bring change 
 to societies, especially societies like that of A-Io, where even peaceful demonstrators 
 are likely to get machine-gunned by military establishments ideal for such uses. 99 
 If the idea is to just Be It and Do It!, we still need more details. Shevek 
 and the Syndicate of Initiative do pretty much just do it on Anarres, 
 but we never learn how or what plans they have if PDC had refused to assign 
 resources to activities perceived by many of their Odonian sibs as dangerous, 
 subversive, counterrevolutionary, and/or unOdonian. 
 Second, taking "politics" more generally, there are a number of attacks in 
 The Dispossessed against moralizing, puritanical hardness, and 
narrow-minded, second rate, moralistic people, including the young Shevek (e.g., 
78-81, 96 in ch. 4; 126, 128 in ch. 6). Indeed, part of the ambiguity of the 
ambiguous utopia of the Anarresti is how unnecessarily harsh they've made parts 
of life by applying Odo's dictum, "Excess is excrement" on the biologically poor 
world of Anarres (80; ch. 4). Getting specific, and dealing with sexual 
politics, we're told that Odo "provided better for the promiscuous than for 
those who tried long-term partnership" (198; ch. 8). She certainly provided 
better than we have in America in the 1970s or today. There are no laws of any 
sort, of course, and no social disapproval of any "sexual practice of any kind, 
except the rape of a child or woman" and both heterosexual and homosexual 
partnerships are accepted (198; ch. 8). Well, perhaps "statutory rape" 
 should have some meaning and social enforcement even where there are no 
statutes, and rape is a bad thing, even if the victim is a man. Still, my 
feeling is that the surface level of The Dispossessed is antipuritanical, 
while much of the text is pretty severe. Vokep is the one man we see with the 
sexual philosophy of "Touch and go," and he has a low opinion of women and one 
small scene on two pages of a novel of over 300 pages (42-43; ch. 2). The one 
promiscuous woman we see on Anarres is Beshun, and she is treated fairly 
sympathetically in bringing Shevek "into the heart of sexuality" (42), but we're 
told that Shevek now and then during sex felt he possessed Beshun, "And she had 
thought," for a while, that she "owned him" (43). In a society where 
"propertarian" is an insulting epithet, what little we learn of Beshun does not 
speak well of her. 
 In terms of the treatment of homosexuality, and of a single, socially dedicated 
 life, there are problems. We see no lesbians, and we do see one gay man: Bedap. 
 Bedap is important to the plot, highly visible and has a brief, fully-adult 
 sexual relationship with Shevek and helps change Shevek's life (138-40; ch. 
 6); and in some ways Bedap is more important even than Shevek in establishing 
 the Syndicate of Initiative and renewing utopia on Anarres. Such treatment of 
 a gay man is progressive even today watching the immensely popular film Independence 
 Day (1996) will drive home that point and more progressive in 1974. And 
 Thomas Remington has correctly pointed out in a discussion of Planet of Exile 
 that "homosexual devotion . . . represents the yearning for a 'bond 
 of sameness' rather than one 'of difference'" ("Other Side" 157), which would 
 help justify Le Guin's privileging of heterosexual bonds. Still, some readers 
 are legitimately troubled by the treatment of Bedap. 
 During the agitation over the Syndicate of Initiative, Shevek and Takver's 
 daughter is tormented by other children and ends up crying in Shevek's arms. 
 Bedap is present but leaves almost immediately, not wanting to intrude on "the 
 one intimacy which he could not share . . . the intimacy of pain. 
 It gave him no sense of relief or escape to go; rather he felt useless, diminished." 
 And then he has his mid-life crisis, asking himself at thirty-nine years "What 
 have I done? What have I been doing? Nothing. Meddling. Meddling in other people's 
 lives because I don't have one." And he reaches his recognition "that all his 
 hope was in that understanding that if he would be saved he must change his 
 life" (298; ch. 12; see Bedford 17). 100 
 Now a gay can certainly become a workaholic "political" and mess up his life; 
 but we see only one adult gay, and arguably only truly political person in the 
 novel, and that's Bedap; and he is not partnered and is not happy; and in utopia, 
 even a highly ambiguous utopia, readers may well see this as his fault. Bedap 
 seems to see it as his fault, and we do not learn how he goes about mending 
 that fault. Rulag, Shevek's mother (as we shall see) is also unpartnered, unhappy, 
 politically active, and dangerous. Odo may have indeed "provided better for 
 the promiscuous than for those who tried long-term partnerships" Shevek and 
 Takver undergo long separations but The Dispossessed , like the Karhidish 
 Hearths, privileges partnership: from what we see, it comes down in favor of 
 monogamous, heterosexual marriage (Lefanu 141). In its explicit ideology and 
 in the maturing of Shevek, The Dispossessed is antipuritanical; in the 
 sum of its incidents, readers seem to be told to change our lives, take responsibility, 
 marry, have kids, work hard and that pain, damn it, is good for you, 
 including the pain of trying to make a partnership work on Anarres (48-50, ch. 
 3; 140, ch. 6; 269, ch. 10). 
 Shevek discovers for himself the First Noble Truth of the Buddha that "Suffering 
 is the condition on which we live" in Shevek's words and he and his friends 
 recognize that small "p," individual pains and pain, is one of the roots of 
 society. And he comes close to the idea that one should get through pain to 
 the "place where the self ceases" (48-50; ch. 2). As Aldous Huxley says the 
 Perennial Philosophy teaches: "Mortification is painful, but that pain is one 
 of the pre-conditions of blessedness," if it leads to "losing the egocentric 
 life" (106; ch. 6). What blessedness we see in terms of the plot of The Dispossessed , 
 though, on Anarres and on Urras, is purified but fairly traditional family life. 
 And for some readers, memories of their families may suggest not blessedness, 
 just pain. 
 Which brings me to my third reservation. I find Sarah Lefanu's harsh tone unfortunate 
 and unfair, but she has some legitimate points in her section on The Dispossessed 
 in the 1988 book Feminism and Science Fiction (132-33, 140-43; ch. 12). 
 I do not have a problem with The Dispossessed 's appeal to liberal male 
 readers or with its binary oppositions (Lefanu 140-41); or with Le Guin in general 
 having male central characters in her early work Lefanu does not mention anything 
 later than "The Diary of the Rose" (1976). Nor do I mind that Le Guin writes 
 in "the tradition of the bourgeois novel with its construction rather than deconstruction 
 of the subject as hero" (Lefanu 143, 142). Le Guin has good insights into male 
 perception, and I enjoy seeing with the kind of double vision one gets looking 
 through a male's eyes as a woman and brilliant writer Le Guin imagines the view. 
 And if the subject or Self is a mere myth of middleclass culture, it is a myth 
 useful for ethical behavior: establishment of "I-Thou" relationships require 
 an "I"; and I-Thou relationships are a good starting point for ethics, however 
 unfashionably Structuralist they must be. 101 
 Lefanu is highly suggestive and useful though in dealing with Le Guin's treatment 
 of her political people and with The Dispossessed 's three major female 
 characters, "the treacherous temptress," Vea, who is "part of the evils of capitalism" 
 (Lefanu 132), Shevek's career-woman mother, Rulag, and Shevek's partner, Takver 
 "the token strong woman, [who] keeps the home fires burning while Shevek is 
 off changing the future of mankind . . ." (141). 102 
 I wish to go father than Lefanu on Shevek's encounter with Vea at that highly 
stressed party on Urras (ch. 7). 
 At Vea's party, Shevek gets to expound his theories on time to a lay audience. 
 More, when he tries to intimidate a know-it-all with physics jargon, Vea stops 
 him: "'Now stop trying to scare Dearri, and tell us what that means in baby 
 talk,' Vea said. Her acuteness made Shevek grin" (178) so we get Shevek's cocktail-party 
 lecture in language we can understand. We also see Shevek's first experience 
 with alcohol, and his getting drunk. After the discussion of time and philosophy, 
 after a profound comment on Anarres vs. Urras (184) Shevek gets dizzy and goes 
 with Vea into a bedroom. Vea says "I've got to kiss you for that!" and does 
 kiss Shevek, lifting "herself on tiptoe, presenting him her mouth, and her white 
 throat, and her naked breasts." Shevek misunderstands. Le Guin notes, as a critic, 
 "They can't read each other's cultural signals" (personal communication). 
 "Now stop," she said. "No, now listen, Shevek, it won't do, not now. I haven't 
 taken a contraceptive . . . . No, let me be," but he could 
 not let her be; his face was pressed against her soft, sweaty, scented 
 flesh. . . . "Wait just wait, we can arrange it . . . . 
 I do have to be careful of my reputation . . . . Not now! 
 Not now!" Frightened at last by his blind urgency, his force, she pushed 
 at him as hard as she could, her hands against his chest. He took a step 
 backward, confused by her sudden high tone of fear and her struggle; but 
 he could not stop, her resistance excited him further. He gripped her 
 to him, and his semen spurted out against the white silk of her dress. 
 (185) 
 Shevek returns groggily to the party and vomits on a silver pastries platter 
on a fancy table. 
 Shevek is drunk; he does misunderstand Vea's intentions; but there is a problem 
 with this scene similar to the problem with the Pervert and the kemmerer in 
 the Foretelling scene in The Left Hand of Darkness (64-66; ch. 5). If 
 one wishes to complain on feminist grounds about The Left Hand of Darkness 
 and The Dispossessed , one need not get into such subtleties as objecting 
 to the "attempted syntheses of binary oppositions" in "romances of integration" 
 (Lefanu 139, Jackson 154) or a "subject-centered view of the novel" (Lefanu 
 136) or "Man" for humankind and the generic "he." In Left Hand Le Guin 
 was too casual with the imagery of sexual harassment; in the scene in Vea's 
 bedroom she is too casual with what most of us would understand, after Vea's 
 "No," as a sexual assault. 
 That said, there I will stop my own criticism of The Dispossessed and 
shift into another mode. 
 Lefanu is bothered by Vea as "the treacherous temptress" (132); more exactly, 
 we have the presentation of Vea as an informal government agent ( TD 186; 
 ch. 7), and more importantly as a "body profiteer" ( TD 256; ch. 10): 
 "'A body profiteer,' Takver called women who used their sexuality as a weapon 
 in a power struggle with men" and, of course, Vea is "the body profiteer to 
 end them all" (171; ch. 7). That Vea would use her sexuality any way she can 
 among the sexist, capitalist, objectifying, and commodifying Ioti is no criticism 
 of women or The Nature of Woman; it is not even much of a criticism of Vea. 
 The problem would be that Takver has the concept of body profiteering: one may 
 feel that the Odonian utopia should be free of any sort of prostitution or use 
 of sex or sexuality for power or advantage in some war of the sexes. I don't 
 see a problem in this, unless one thinks a war of the sexes inevitable, which 
 Le Guin does not. If there is a flaw in this aspect of The Dispossessed , 
 it is in limiting "body profiteering" to women and to "sexuality" unless we 
 understand "sexuality" very broadly. Men and boys in our world learn early and 
 well whether or not their bodies can be exploited for sex as well as for money 
 and power (e.g., as athletes). 103 
 I expect in utopia much less exploitation, period, in every sense; of the residue 
 that remains, utopia should allow both men and women to take their advantages 
 equally. If we wish to avoid binary oppositions, and especially hierarchical 
 binary oppositions, where it is "A" vs. "B", hence "A" superior to "B" then 
 one opposition to be avoided is "mind"/"body." As Odo thinks, "A proper body's 
 not an object, not an implement, not a belonging to be admired, it's just you, 
 yourself" ("Day Before," WTQ 262); it is a fault, not a virtue of "'Civilized 
 Man'" to go "climbing up into his head" and cut himself off from other animals 
 and the world ( BG 11; Introd.), and from his body. If smart people have 
 a right to use our brains to get status, then graceful, beautiful, athletic, 
 and sexy people have a right to use their gifts. 104 
 In utopia the gifted in any way and like everyone else just may not use their 
 gifts to gain power over other people. 
 But in critiquing the critique of Lefanu et al., there is an "on the other 
hand" to recognize in The Dispossessed 's presentation of women, its 
general politics, and its teaching about teaching. 
 (1) Takver does indeed make a speech on "pregnant women have no ethics. Only 
 the most primitive kind of sacrifice impulse . . . " (266; ch. 10), 
 but Takver makes this speech; it is not a series of aphorisms from the Narrator, 
 and I take it as a general warning against the "sacrifice impulse." The Narrator 
 has told us early in the novel that "However pragmatic the morality a young 
 Anarresti absorbed, yet life overflowed in him, demanding altruism, self-sacrifice, 
 scope for the absolute gesture" (75; ch. 4), and we know from elsewhere in The 
 Dispossessed and Le Guin's canon generally that she is well aware of the 
 dangers for any him and his or her society from impulses toward sacrifice, 
 self-sacrifice, and even altruism. (2) The Dispossessed is dedicated 
 " For the partner ": Le Guin is a married woman; she believes in marriage; 
 and she has the right to celebrate her decision and her way of life. (3) The 
 partnership between Takver and Shevek is utopian in that it is significantly 
 better than most people, especially most female people, get in our society. 
 Takver is a scientist; she travels; and she has daycare and a male partner who 
 really shares rearing the kids. Indeed, in terms of Le Guin's overarching norms, 
 Takver is rather like Tenar in Rosemarie Arbur's observation that Tenar reaches 
 Ged's "goal in life that of being rather than doing about two 
 decades before he does" ( Proceedings 151). Indeed, Shevek recognizes 
 Takver as one of those "souls . . . whose umbilicus has never been 
 cut." Changing the metaphor, he thinks Takver and people like her "never got 
 weaned from the universe. They do not understand death as an enemy" but, as 
 the Daoist philosopher Chuang Tzu advised, "look forward to rotting and turning 
 into humus" ( TD 150; ch. 6). 105 
 The legitimate complaint here is that The Dispossessed is not Takver's 
 story; Le Guin has not yet written an "Affirmative Action" story for Takver 
 as she has written Tehanu for Tenar. (4) Last: Rulag, Takver, and Vea 
 are not the only women in The Dispossessed . 
 There is Sewa Oiie, sister-in-law to Vea (157; ch. 7) and pretty much neutral: 
 a good mother in Ioti society. There's Bunub, "Mother Envy" a rather paranoid, 
 selfish, envious person, but a very nicely drawn minor character and comment 
 on the limits of utopia; like aggressivity and the authoritarian impulse, envy 
 and some other bad traits are human givens (261, ch. 10; 208-10, ch. 8). One 
 may disagree with the givenness of such givens or any human givens, but Bunub's 
 faults are more than balanced by worse faults among men, and the argument here 
 would not be with her gender. Finally, as Shevek tells the physicists on Urras, 
 his teachers Mitis and Gvarab were women and, as all the characters know and 
 we should not forget, so was Odo (60; ch. 3). This point is important, and ambiguous: 
 three of the central people in Shevek's life, in the formation of his character, 
 were women and teachers; and one of them, of course, founded his society. 
 On the one hand, these women are definitely minor characters in The 
 Dispossessed : they are important in the story primarily because of their 
 effect upon Shevek; on the other hand, any feminism that excludes teaching and 
 nurturing as honored activities loses many women supporters and a fair number 
 of men fellow-travelers. Odo was the teacher to a whole society, and from Moses 
 of the Exodus unto Moses Maimonides unto Odo the revolutionary, teachers have 
 been important. Education and teachers, in fact, seems central to Le Guin's 
 theory of revolution (see "A Woman's Liberation" in FWF , esp. 197 f. 
 [and FWF 125 f.]). Mitis was "a splendid teacher" and Gvarab, also, just 
 unfortunate to have lived too late to develop the General Temporal Theory (58; 
 ch. 3) on her own: Gvarab's work lived on in Shevek's. Our usual hierarchizing 
 of achievement puts the mere teachers Mitis and Gvarab far below Odo and puts 
 Sewa Oiie even lower, or Takver in her role as mother. But, then, such hierarchizing 
 puts Ursula K. Le Guin's "partner" down pretty far as a college teacher (plus 
 much of the rest of Le Guin's family) plus Ursula K. Le Guin in her role as 
 housewife and mother and I also am pretty far down on the status chain, among 
 Le Guin's other critics with academic jobs. The point, I would hope, is to value 
 all sorts of achievements on the way to eliminating such arranging of people 
 into hierarchies. 
 And on that point, Ursula K. Le Guin was very much ahead of the curve by 
1974. 
 Whatever flaws recent critics have or future critics will find in The Dispossessed , 
 I recall it in 1974 offering a vision of an alternative to two pernicious hierarchies: 
 both class-ridden, authoritarian capitalism and centralized, authoritarian Communism. 
 It offered and still offers particularly to Americans an analysis of the ways 
 revolutions get stopped or rolled back. At a time in which the bicentennial 
 of the American Bill of Rights went by with hardly a word in celebration, approaching 
 a new millennium in which the United States may go from a secular republic to 
 a Christian nation, that analysis is still highly relevant. With that analysis 
 in a work of such elegant structure, The Dispossessed earned its Hugo 
 and Nebula in the 1970s. During times in which respectable discourse in much 
 of the world excludes not only anarchists -who are used to it but even democratic 
 socialists and liberals, The Dispossessed continues to be an important 
 book and an important book on the political Left. 
 "THE DAY BEFORE THE REVOLUTION" (1974) 
 In the headnote to her story, Le Guin describes as " one of the ones who 
walked away from Omelas " Odo, the anarchist philosopher whose theories are 
shown in The Dispossessed (1974) and whose last day is narrated in "The 
Day Before the Revolution" (1974 [ WTQ 260]). 
 At least in terms of the works I'm stressing, "The Day Before the Revolution" 
can be seen as a (figurative) hinge, recapitulating important themes that 
proceeded it and foreshadowing developments to come. 
 For one thing, so positive a revolutionary should give us pause in privileging 
 immanence over Simone de Beauvoir's transcendence, Daoist unaction over heroic 
 striving. What could be a more transcendent project than a utopian revolution? 
 Few things, actually, but I would raise three points on the Le Guinian favoring 
 of immanence that critics since Douglas Barbour (1974) have stressed in pointing 
 out Le Guin's Daoism. First, at least into early 1970, the utopian question 
 was, "What will things be like the day after the Revolution?" i.e., what 
 are the goals of the Revolution? Le Guin's story is about a fairly ordinary 
 day, the day before the revolution. Second, the story is about Odo, "the 
 famous revolutionary," except it is not that, in part because Odo is not just 
 that. She is also a wife and lover. She was her life, which included being, 
 a "swimmer in the midst of life" ( WTQ 275). Third, Odo is the theoretician 
 of people on the bottom, at "the foundation, the reality, the source"; her wisdom 
 comes from knowing people are, at bottom, mud (274), part of the Earth. 
 The plot of "The Day Before the Revolution" may be summarized thus: On the 
 day before the Revolution in A-Io, as news arrived of rebellion in Thu, Laia 
 Asieo Odo had a dream, awoke, dressed, ate breakfast, fixed her hair a bit and 
 answered letters (with some help), spoke with visiting students, went out for 
 a walk, returned home (with help), and died. If you know Le Guin's The Dispossessed , 
 you know that A-Io and Thu are on the planet Urras; if you don't, you don't. 
 If you know Le Guin's early SF and fantasy, you know she has always been quite 
 capable of telling stories with many physical incidents and you know that in 
 "The Day Before the Revolution" Le Guin has chosen to keep the world-shaking 
 events offstage. As she says in her introduction to "Vaster than Empires and 
 More Slow," her interest " is in what goes on inside. Inner space and all 
 that. We all have forests in our minds. Forests unexplored, unending. Each of 
 us gets lost in the forest, every night, alone " ( WTQ 166). I.e., 
 in dream, where Le Guin begins "The Day Before the Revolution," as she had begun 
 The Lathe of Heaven (1971). And Le Guin deals here with an old person 
 on the edge of death, as she had dealt with Wold in Planet of Exile (1966) 
 a book that also uses an image much like the Circle of Life ( WTQ 272). 
 Both Odo and Le Guin note the dangers of "Dualizing" (267) and altruism (270) 
 deal briefly with marriage, touch (contact with the Other), doing what one must 
 do, names (273), freedom, liberty, discipline, and responsibility constants 
 in Le Guin's writing and maybe in much of Odo's. In "The Day Before the Revolution," 
 Le Guin makes explicit her intuition into her use, at least, of the Return 
 as a human imperative: "If you wanted to come home you had to keep going on, 
 that was what she meant when she wrote 'True journey is return,'. . ." 
 at least that was what she, Le Guin as well as Odo, meant to the extent that 
 one can "rationalize" meaning out of an intuition (266). 106 
 Old Wold, however, was a man, and Odo is a woman: the point-of-view character 
 and protagonist in what is emphatically and wholly her story. And Odo is an 
 unambiguously attractive character (if hardly perfect), clarifying in Le Guin's 
 fiction that Le Guin means what Le Guin says about anarchy: she's for it. Not 
 anarchism as terrorism nor " the social-Darwinist economic 'libertarianism' 
 of the far right; but anarchism as prefigured in early Taoist thought " the 
 advice to the Emperor to do nothing " and expounded by [Percy Bysshe] 
 Shelley and [Petr] Kropotkin, [Emma] Goldman and [Paul] 
 Goodman. " That is, she disapproves of " the authoritarian State (capitalist 
 or socialist) ," and she approves of anarchism's " principal moral-practical 
 theme " of " cooperation (solidarity, mutual aid) " ( WTQ 260). 107 
 But Le Guin is not so concerned with any over-arching philosophy that she privileges 
 it over the thoughts of a rather rough-edged "drooling old woman" (if one "who 
 had started a world revolution" [265]) moving toward her death at seventy-two, 
 never having learned the names of the one set of flowers we see in the story 
 (277); "The Movement was not strong on names" (273). Dead center in the story 
 is Odo as individual. Odo is "the famous revolutionary" (275), but also the 
 sexual being who still cares how she looks to a young man who attracts her. 
 She's the troublemaker who once "kicked policemen, and spat at priests, and 
 pissed in public on the big brass plaque in Capitol Square" and who rejects 
 the role of "sweet old monument" and "Big Sheltering Womb." Most especially 
 she is "The one who loved Taviri," her husband, long dead, but that's not enough 
 either (275). She is her history, as the Existentialists have said; and finally, 
 there is what she is at her foundation, sitting in a doorway in the city, asking 
 who she is. "There was nothing left, really, but the foundation. She had come 
 home; she had never left home. 'True voyage is return.' Dust and mud and a doorstep 
 in the slums" ( WTQ 268, 271-72, 275-76). 
 Odo is an anarchist, " One who, choosing, accepts the responsibility of choice " 
 ( WTQ 272). Her choices in life were very different from those of her 
 fellow author, Ursula K. Le Guin. Le Guin accepts and accepts responsibility 
 for the choices she made and does not repudiate them. But her work evolves. 
 Odo is a hinge in Le Guin's canon, simultaneously separating and connecting 
 the works through the early 1970s with the later works. These works are still 
 Daoist: Odo is in touch with her world (270), follows the Dao of revolution. 
 But Odo regrets "Dualizing again" (267), setting up mind/body as binary opposites 
 or perhaps any binary opposites and is a woman moving toward defining 
 a new kind of heroism: with her Le Guin moves toward works more explicitly informed 
 with contemporary feminism. 
 On Violence, Utopia, Ethicsand
Sex: End Notes 
 1 Quoting from memory a man who talked to my Rhetoric 108 class at the
 University of Illinois (Urbana-Champaign), ca. 1969.  
 The unspaced dots indicate that his voice trailed off.  
 2 Charnas has continued but not completed her story in The Furies (1994).   For
 Le Guin and the renewal of the American utopian tradition, see A. I. Berger
 548-49.   
 3 It took Le Guin a while to realize fully that "civilization" 
 is too problematic to use casually in a complimentary sense.   In terms of large-scale violence, it's usually been city folkcivilized 
 peoplewho have done the most damage; we have the technology, organization, 
 philosophy, and discipline.   
 4 Unspaced dots represent ellipsis mark in original.     
 5 I discuss VEMS below, as collected in BG . 
 6 The apprehensive spermatazoa of Woody Allen's Everything 
 You Wanted to Know About Sex . . . weren't released into 
 popular culture until 1972, a year after "VEMS."   
 7 Cf. 
 Shakespeare's formula for a villian, pronounces by Richard of Gloucester, 
 later to be King Richard III: 
 I
 have no brother, I am like no brother; 
 And
 this word "love," which greybeards call divine,  
 Be
 resident in men like one another, 
 And 
 not in me.   I am myself alone.   
 ( 3 Henry VI 5.6.80-83) 
 8 Le Guin's self-characterization 
 is from SFS #6 = 2.2 (July 1975): 
 139, her comments on David "Ketterer on The Left Hand of Darkness ."   
 9 See my discussions of ". . .  
 Omelas" (1973), EoH (1978), and BP (1980) 
 10 Cf. Le Guins much 
 later story, Solitude (1994).   
 11 For Hainish history date for LHD , see Briggs, "Hainish
 Chronology" 18.   For "Ekumen,"
 see Kroeber, Cultural Patterns . . . 
 175 231: "The Greeks had a name for the central area of higher
 civilization: oikumen {^
 = macron} . . . .   the
 region in which people lived in cities in organized states . . ."
 (231; ch. 19).   By the late 1960s,
 however, "ecology" and "ecological" had come into general
 use among the educated, and many knew their etymology from oikos , the Greek word for "house"; see, e.g., in J. T.
 Fraser's Voices of Time [1966],
 JTF's reference on 280, and J. L. Cloudsley-Thompson's section title on 308.  
 I will stick with "household" for "Ekumen," but see
 Bittner, Approaches 103, 107, and
 also Joseph Needhams reference to the Chinese oikoumene (Time and
 Knowledge . . . in Fraser's Voices 
 115; see Bittner, Approaches 148, n.
 45).   In "Dancing to Ganam"
 (1993), the (anti)hero Dalzul juxtaposes to "Ekumen" the phrase
 "the household of humankind" ( FIS 112).  
 12 See the debate centering around Kenneth M. Roemer's essay, "The Talking 
 Porcupine . . ." in Utopian 
 Studies 2.1 &2.   
 13 In her headnote in WTQ , Le Guin says that the scapegoat idea comes 
 up in Fyodor Dostoyevsky's The Brothers 
 Karamazov but she hadn't read any Dostoyevsky in a long time and "had 
 simply forgotten he used the idea" (251).   
 Some readers add to the list of "sources and analogs," Shirley 
 Jackson's scapegoat story, "The Lottery" ( New Yorker , 1948, coll. 1949; rpt. Just an Ordinary Day [NY: Bantam, 1996]).   For a literal ritual of the scapegoat, see Leviticus 16.   
 14 "Ambushed" from R. Silverberg's "Happy Day in 2381" 
 (1970). 
 15 See my discussion of BP for sacrifices and bad bargains.   
 16 See A. L. Kroeber 247 for a discussion of cooperation and competition 
 as two poles on the axis of interpersonal relations; societies such as the 
 Inuit and the Ojibwas neither affirm nor deny competition but take a different 
 path, individualism, and so avoid this 
 dichotomy ( Biology and Race , esp. 
 184).     
 17 This rule of shifgrethor (see below)
 is implicit in LHD and made explicit in Le Guin's "Coming of Age
 in Karhide" (481); cf. her "Solitude" (143).  
 18 For the possibility of kemmer as "an ironic comment on male
 sexuality," see, Lamb and Veith (223), who are themselves extending a
 suggestion by Barbara Bucknall (77).   
 19 I retain the italics, indicating that this is a comment 
 added in 1987 to Le Guin's 1976 essay "Is Gender Necessary?", or 
 a revision of a statement already there.   
 Note that the time of the "inception of the whole book" would 
 have been during US warfare in Indochina.   
 The 1995 production of a dramatized Left Hand of Darkness by 
 the Lifeline Theatre in Chicago eliminated the consideration of war, an important 
 datum for students of SF in theatre, and for cultural studies.   
 20 "Lao Tse: V," quoted as the headnote to LoH 
 ch. 8 (110).  
 21 For the "leisurely rate" of Chinese technological advance, see
 Needham, "Time and Knowledge" 120.  
 22 Human biology includes more than sex., and the biological bases of dualism go
 beyond sex.   Our bodies are far
 more bilaterally symmetrical than radially symmetrical, and this make it easy
 to think of left vs. right and on the one hand and the other; our "encephalization"
 makes it easy to think of head vs. tail.  
 Our constant struggle against gravity as upright terrestrial creatures
 makes it easy to think of up vs. down, higher and lower.  
 Etc.   For the necessary duality of I/Other, see LHD 234; ch.
 15 .   
 23 As Stanley Kubrick drives home very effectively in Full
 Metal Jacket (1987)tap into a persecuted recruit's "killer
 instinct," and he'll kill his drill instructor, not total strangers half
 a world away. 
 24 Cf. Havzhiva's trip to Hayawa Tribal Village in "A Man of the
 People" (1995; in FWF 131 f.).  
 Note the slogan in that story, "All knowledge is local" and
 the conversation between Shevek and the Terran ambassador on the
 "real" Urras in TD ch. 11.  
 For a real-world anthropologist on one's not 
 finding "the real article" of real-world cultures, see Heilman, xv-xix.  
 v
 25 Foretelling involves nine people, with Ai perceived as the tenth when the
 empathic and "paraverbal forces at work" draw him into the circle.  
 Cf. "Nine Lives," the Nine Masters of Rokeor ten with the
 Archmage and the Doorkeeper ( WE )and the ten members of the
 expedition in "Vaster than Empires and More Slow."  
 My best guess for "nine" is a reference to Chuang Tzu's
 association of water, the abyss, and nine (ch. 7).  
 Le Guin wrote me, "I just like 
 the number 9" and points out that nine is "one of the central
 organizing devices in ACH , too."  
 In addition to the number of human fingers, and toes (hence, base-10
 for our numbers), ten is the number of days in a Chinese week (Needham,
 "Time and Knowledge" 100), an Anarresti decad ( TD ), and a dcade 
 in the French Republican calendar.   
 26 Two women in my classes have stated strongly that they would not like
 gender-free titles and pronouns in LHD and the commentary thereon if
 that meant losing lines like "The king was pregnant" ( LHD 
 100) and "unless he's pregnant" ("Gender . . . Redux"
 DEW 12; see italicized revised text, top of 13).  
 27 In all its complexity, shifgrethor is similar to "face" in Japanese
 and, more so, Chinese usage; see Mao, esp. 460-61.   Since shifgrethor is significant to Gethenians in somer, not
 kemmeri.e., when they are not sexedit is presented as relevant for
 humans generally, not just for men or women: humans as status-seeking,
 face-maintaining female and/or male animals.  
 28 Le Guin has a note to the all-bright sky referring to "one of the
 theories used to support the expanding-universe hypothesis."  
 See Whitrow's comments in Voices 
 that a theory of an expanding universe "enables us to resolve Oblers'
 paradox concerning the background brightness of the universe" (572).  
 29 Note the Handdarata blessing "Praise then darkness and Creation
 unfinished" ( LHD 246; ch. 18).  
 In 1990, Le Guin provided the balancing Handdarata blessing:
 "Praise also the light, and creation unfinished" ("Shobies'
 Story" [ FIS 99]); note also, "In the act of creation
 praise" ("Coming of Age in Karhide" [481, 482]).  
 30 Cf. the triplets: Justinian's "One 
 empire, one church, one law" (Swain 2.613), and the Nazi slogan "One 
 people, one Leader, one empire."   
 31 Students looking up "Dionysios": look under "Dionysos" or
 "Dionysus," and note that there is more to him than just "the
 god of wine and revelery," as my desk dictionary identifies him.  
 Dionysos is one of "The Two Great Gods of Earth," the male
 complement to the goddess Demeter (see Hamilton, ch. 2).  
 32 "Meshe is in the Center of Time," includes Meshes having
 "lived on earth thirty years" up to the Seeing, "and after it
 he lived on earth again thirty years": cf. Dante character in the Inferno opening his story with "In the middle of the journey of
 our life {,} I came to myself in
 a dark wood where the straight way was lost" (I.1).  
 Le Guin might have advised Dante to stay in the woods.  
 33 For my discussion of Time in LHD I am esp. indebted to Nudelman,
 "Approach to the Structure . . . ."  
 See also Fraser, "Note Relating to a Paradox of the Temporal
 Order," Voices 524-25, and its
 hypothesizing a world of logic and being, where "the unexpected cannot
 happen."   My discussion of
 chapter placement in LHD is from my "'Praise then Darkness'"
 essay, which I wrote while consulting with Jenkins on her essay on LHD 
 for our course in College Composition.   
 34 For "excess of light," cf. the Ministry of Love as "the place
 where there is no darkness" in Orwell's 1984 (24-25, 87, 147, 189).   
 35 For the Last Days in the Orgota Creation Myth, cf. image in Norse vision of
 Ragnark of the sun darkening and stars falling from sky (Hamilton, Mythology 
 313).   For Ragnark, creation,
 and dissolution in D. H. Lawrencefor a highly intriguing comparison and
 contrast with Le Guinsee Erlich, "Catastrophism and Coition . . . ." 
 36 In commenting on A. L. Kroeber's collection of Yurok Myths , the folklorist Alan Dundes comments that "the
 'middle' in [the] Yurok worldview," esp. as reflected in the myths and
 tales Kroeber collected, is of "paramount importance," as both a
 "place of distinction" and "also a place of danger" (xxxxvi).   Cf. use of
 "central" in Pravic language on Anarres in TD ; contrast
 Urrasti and Terran use of "higher" for "better" (12; ch.
 1). 
 37 The First Noble Truth of the Buddha is the Truth of Suffering: "Existence
 is pain" ( Ency. of Religion 
 "Buddhist Terminology," "Buddhism" I [p. 95]).  
   38 Cf. Ged's Shadow in WE , esp. 197-81; ch. 10, recapitulated Tehanu 
 72; ch. 6.    
 39 See Remington's discussion of "The Other Side of Suffering."  
 See below, the Athsheans in WWF and the Kesh in ACH as
 sane societies.   
 40 For the continuing importance of faces in Le Guin, see the descriptions in Tehanu ,
 esp. those of Flint and Spark, and in TD Shevek's line at Vea's party
 on Urras, "Everything is beautiful, here.  
 Only not the faces. On Anarres nothing is beautiful, nothing but the
 faces" (184; ch. 7).   In John
 Keats's The Fall of Hyperion ,
 "those 'who feel the giant agony of the world' and 'Labour for mortal
 good' . . . 'seek no wonder but the human face'" (I.162
 f., qtd. Duerksen 15).   
 41 For the significance of touch and pain, see Remington, "A Touch of
 Difference" and "The Other Side of Suffering."  
 For sex and gender in this scene, see Russ, "Image" 39.  
 For the lack of sex between the always-male Genly Ai and Estraven in
kemmer, see Lamb and Veith 224-31.   
 42 For the importance of telepathy in Le Guin's early works, see Darko Suvin's
 "Parables of De-Alienation: Le Guin's Widdershins Dance" (269).  
 43 Ai is both envoy and exile: see Spencer.  
 For "Ai!" as an emotional exclamation, cf. and contrast A. L.
 Kroeber's explicit exclusion from language animal sounds and "a man's
 moan" (20, "Animal Communication," Biology and Race rpt. 41).   See
 also Abberkam's "crying like an animal" in "Betrayals" in FWF 
 (11-12),   
 44 Cf. Chuang Tzu ch. 22, in Giles
 trans. "Light is born of darkness" (213).   
 45 For evolution and revolution in Le Guin's work, see Suvin, "Parables" 
 271.     
 46 For "the collision between the processes of history and utopianizing," see Theall 261.   
 47 See Heinlein's Sgt. Zim on "The purpose of war": to make your enemy
 "do what you want him to do" ( Starship
 Troopers 52; ch. 5); this is standard military doctrine.  
 Cf. Bertrand de Jouvenel and Francoise Voltaire on Power (Arendt, On
 Violence 36; I).   
 48 There is one exception to Le Guin's dislike of transcendence, indicated by the
 opening of Susan Wood's "Discovering Worlds": "Ursula K. Le
 Guin makes maps" and the reference to the worlds "she
 presents," necessarily after first creating (Bloom 183).  
 The privileged, transcendent overview of worlds Le Guin allows is that
 which authors can give readers.   We
 have godlike vision of worlds we cannot affect.  
   49 Russ's criticisms in "The Image of Women in Science Fiction" (1970)
 were early, respectful, and very sensible.  
 Susan Wood says that "The criticism 'that the Gethenians seem like
 men instead of menwomen' was raised most notably by Polish critic Stanislaw
 Lem, in an essay published in the German journal Quarber Merkur and translated, revised, and published in the
 Australian fanzine SF Commentary 24
 (November 1971)," to which Le Guin replied in SF Commentary 26 (April 1972)Introduction to part III of LoN 
 (1979): 131.   For a discussion of
 Le Guin as "this female writer who" up to the mid-1980s
 "seem[ed] to appeal to everyonewith the exception of feminists,"
 see Marleen Barr's 1987 review of Bittner's Approaches
 . . . (112-14).   
 50 The same could be said for literary criticism and prominence of reviews.  
 E.g., in literary criticism, note the Special Le Guin issues of SFS 
 (Nov. 1975) and of Extrapolation 
 (Fall 1980), for two out of two of the major academic SF journals at the time
 in North America.   For rough
 comparisons, note also the sheer physical size of Elizabeth Cummins Cogell's Ursula
 K. Le Guin: A Primary and Secondary Bibliography in the G. K. Hall series
 Masters of Science Fiction and Fantasy, compared with the volumes on other
 authors.   
 51 Russ, "Image" 39; see "Gender . . . Redux" 15.  
 See "Winter's King" in the WTQ version, and,
 especially, "Coming of Age in Karhide" for responses in fiction to
 these criticisms.   
 52 Benford (17) contends there is "unconscious condescension" toward
 Bedap in TD .   Priority for
 Le Guin on homosexuality may go to Samuel R. Delany, whom Bedford cites,
 "To Read The Dispossessed " in The
 Jewel-Hinged Jaw (1977).   See
 also, though, Remington on Huru Pilotson's "homosexual devotion to
 Jakob" Agat in Planet of Exile ("Other Side" 157).  
 See below for Bedap in TD .  
 53 Freudian formulations quoted by Friedan 120-21 (see all of ch. 5, "The
 Sexual Solipsism of Sigmund Freud").  
 54 Sobchack, Screening Space 302; see
 also 300; ch. 4.   
 55 My basic information on Psi Powers and ESP in SF is from Nicholls and
 Stableford, "ESP" and "Psi" in the Ency. of S.F. and my own casual reading of SF and in Extrapolation 
 and other journals.   
 56 This joke is used in Greg Howard's Sally
 Forth   cartoon for Sun., 9
 Feb.: 1997.   Sally explains to her
 husband, Ted about the "process" involved in finding out what's
 bothering someone else.   The
 dialog includes, "First I give you some obscure hint that you miss
 entirely.   Then I expect you to
 read my mind."   When Ted asks
 if it wouldn't be easier if she just told 
 him what was bothering her, Sally responds "Then you wouldn't get a
 chance to show me you love me by reading my mind."  
 57 For readers familiar with what Carol D. Stevens has called "Le Guin and
 the Family Business," the gold 
 reference, within a page of "Conquistador" (6) should be a cue:
 crucial to the destruction of the Californian Indians studied by Le Guin's
 parents were Spanish, Mexican, and US conquest, Christian missionizing, White
 American ranching and farmingand the 1849 Gold Rush.   See esp. T. Kroeber's Ishi 
 books and A. L. Kroeber's Handbook 
 ch. 57, "Population," esp. 883, 886-90.   
 58 I use here and elsewhere N. Frye's theory of Modes in Anatomy of Criticism and his idea that at the end of a Romantic
 Comedy a better world forms around a central couple: concluding the comic
 action, "a new society crystallizes on the stage around the hero and his
 bride" (44; see also 163).   
 59 See Heizer and T. Kroeber, Ishi the Last
 Yahi , 123-26: in their rpt. of T. T. Waterman's "The Last Wild Tribe
 of California (1915)," from Popular
 Science Monthly (March 1915): 233-44; Heizer and Kroeber 142-43: in their
 rpt. of Waterman's "The Yana Indians (1918)," from University
 of California Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology 13.2
 (1918): 35-102: the section The Yahi Meet Disaster, excerpting from the
 account of Anderson.   See also
 Maslen 69, who reminds us of this massacre.  
 See Heizer and T. Kroeber, Ishi the Last
 Yahi , 123-26: in their rpt. of T. T. Waterman's "The Last Wild Tribe
 of California (1915)," from Popular
 Science Monthly (March 1915): 233-44; Heizer and Kroeber 142-43: in their
 rpt. of Waterman's "The Yana Indians (1918)," from University
 of California Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology 13.2
 (1918): 35-102: the section The Yahi Meet Disaster, excerpting from the
 account of Anderson.   See also
 Maslen 69, who reminds us of this massacre.  
 60 The local superpower in historical times has been China, so the Vietnamese
 came to the 20th c. with a tradition of armed resistance going back to at
 least to 39 CE and the revolt under the Ladies Trung Trac and Trung Nhi
 ("Vietnam, History of" 122).   
 61 We learn almost nothing about the sexual behavior 
 of Athsheans, and most heterosexual readers will unconsciously "fill in
 the blank" by generalizing from Thele and Selver's idealized marriage to
 a straight Athshean culture contrasted with the (mostly negative) Terrans,
 where the rule is male homosexuality and heterosexual prostitution.  
 62 See Needham, "Time and Knowledge . . . ," 11-12 for
 Daoist reverence for "a Golden Age of primitive communalism," an
 "ancient paradise of generalized tribal nobility, of cooperative
 primitivity, of spontaneous collectivism" before social differentiation
 into "lords, priests, warriors {,} 
 and serfs" ( Tao te Ching ch.
 80).   On introversion vs.
 extroversion as part of "National Temperament or Types," see A. L.
 Kroeber 244 ( Biology and Race 
 171-72); for folk/tribal culture vs. sophisticate/urban culture see Kroeber 
 121 ( Culture Patterns and Processes 
 esp. 89-91).   
 63 WWF 4; ch. 1.   See
 "Gender . . . Redux" ( DEW 10-11), "Gender"
 in LoN (1979): 166; Erlich, "Le Guin/Clarke" 115.   
 64 The US is far from unique here.   Examples
 of massacres by other imperial peoples are easy to find, e.g., the Romans'
 producing impressive body counts by all except the most rigorous Early Modern
 and modern standards for slaughter.   For more recent examples, see Arendt, "Race and
 Bureaucracy," Origins of
 Totalitarianism , ch. 7.   
 65 Maslen instructively compares Davidson with "an earlier manifestation 
 of American colonialism, a man called Anderson who was the most prominent 
 of the Indian killers in Kroeber's narrative" (69)i.e., T. Kroeber's 
 Ishi in Two Worlds 63-68 and passim.   
 Maslen refers to R. A. Anderson, "sometime sheriff of Butte County" 
 and author of the 1909 pamphlet, "Fighting the Mill Creeks," and 
 one whom an early commentator indicated was among the "very considerable 
 proportion of our 'Indian fighters' in this state [who] deserved, in strict 
 justice, to be hung" (quoting T. T. Waterman, in Heizer and Kroeber 126, 
 124).   For Anderson's account 
 of a crucial massacre, see Heizer and T. Kroeber 142-43.   
 66 For more on patriotism and treason in LHD , see ch. 3, pp. 30-39; 
 ch. 9; ch. 15, pp. 211-212; ch. 19, pp. 278-82.   
 67 For Le Guin's more positive view of "The City as goal and Dream,"
 see "Introduction to City of Illusions ," LoN (1979):
 147, and "Coming of Age in Karhide."  
 68 See my discussion of ACH .   Also
 note that my speaking harshly of kings should not imply an idealized vision of
 more democratic constitutions.   
 69 For more on aggressivity and aggression, see Erlich, "Le
 Guin/Clarke" 114.   
 70 For Athshean sanity, cf. the Kesh in ACH and see Barbour,
 "Wholeness" 172.   For
 dreaming, cf. "the Senoi people of Malaysia," whom Le Guin hadn't
 even heard of when she wrote WWF ; see Synchronicity Can Happen . . .
 section of Introd. to WWF ( LoN [1979] 152-54).  
 A. L. Kroeber had a lower opinion of cultures that put high value upon
 dreams: "Backward peoples assume as actual certain phenomena to which we
 grant only a mental or subjective existence . . . .  
 Certain things we classify as unreal the primitive considers superreal
 . . . " ( 127; Culture
 Patterns . . . 107; ch. 7.  
 71 Cf. and contrast the "unprogressive" native peoples in California
 and Australia.   Among both groups
 the pattern for all times was set in the mythic past: the primordial Dream
 Time among the Australians (Eliade 40) during the time of the Ixkareya among the Karok, of the woge among the Yurok   (e.g.,
 A. L.   Kroeber, Karok 263, Yurok 18,
 271-81, 289-91; see Erlich, "Le Guin and Clarke" 113).  
 To the Mohave-Yuman peoples along the Colorado, "dreaming is
 moving back in time and in understanding to the beginnings of things when gods
 walked the new earth" (T. Kroeber, Inland
 Whale 193).   See Franz, 221-23
 for primordial time, dreams, and "synchronicity" in significant
 dreams.   
   72 I eliminated the phrase "as Death."  
 Lyubov got excessive in the last sentence: Death was no newcomer among
 the Athsheans.   What Selver had
 introduced was mass murder.   Note
 "link" for hinge imagery in ACH .   
 73 See Chuang Tzu ch. 6 (Giles 74).  
 74 In response to my query of what work is alluded to in the blood-bonded
 archguessing, on the basis of James Bittner's work, it might be a poem of
 W. H. Auden'sDennis McGucken sent me by e-mail the message (1 Nov. 1996)
 that The allusion is to the last lines of Audens poem Vespers from
 the sequence Horae Canonicae.   * * *
 For without a cement of blood (it must be human it must be innocent) no
 secular wall will safely stand .   [See]
 W.H. Auden, Collected Poems  
 (Random House, 1976 (pp. 482-485)."  
 McGucken is correct, but students of the question of allusions should
 note that Le Guin said she didn't think she had read the poem (personal
 communication).   
 75 This is a standard interpretation: see e.g., Cummins, Understanding . . . Le Guin (86; ch. 3).  
 76 For a later handling of two-planet relationships and the exploitation of a
 nearby planet, and of people, see Werel and Yeowe in the novellas collected in
 Le Guin's Four Ways to Forgiveness (1995).  
 For the imagery of the circling planets, see Erlich "On Barbour . . . ."
 77 Chicago, 1968: Violent confrontations and police riot at the Democratic
 National Convention; Chicago, 1969: police killing of Black Panthers Fred
 Hampton and Mark Clark.   Jackson
 State/Kent State: in violence associated with student strikes in May of 1970,
 two students were killed by police at Jackson State University in Mississippi,
 and four students were killed by the Ohio National Guard at Kent State
 University in Ohio, plus other significant student casualties (Miller 309-11,
 Herring 232, memory).   
 78 The quotations on rebellion are from Jefferson's correspondence with James
 Madison (30 Jan. 1787 ) . {For
 143 yrs also? &.980?} The phrase "permanent revolution"
 is usually associated with Leon Trotsky, the Bolshevik revolutionary and
 commissar for war under Lenin.   
 79 The phrase "time's arrow" is attributed to Sir Arthur Eddington by
 Richard Schlegel in "Time and Thermodynamics" in Voices of Time (1996): 505, citing Eddington's The Nature of the Physical World (1929), ch. 4.  
 For time's arrow and other symbols of time, see 8 "The
 Symbolization of Time" in Meerloo, esp. 248.  
 For more on the "arrow of time," see Voices
 of Time , Index 692.   
 80 Le Guin herself has spoken against the formulaic as writing in obedience to
 external standards, or for a market: "On Theme," Those Who Can 206, and "The Stone Ax and the Muskoxen," LoN 
 (1979): 232-33.   PostRomantic
 moderns have tended to rate quite highly originality, novelty, and individual,
 "self-sufficient" achievement, which is a legitimate preference but
 only a preference, or but one criterion for artistic quality.  
 81 In the Odonian saying, "Excess is excrement," not
 "shit": Pravic, their invented language, lacks body-reference
 taboos.   "Pravic was not a
 good swearing language.   It is
 hard to swear when sex is not dirty and blasphemy does not exist" ( TD 
 208; ch.8).   See and contrast A.
 L. Kroeber on how " retarded 
 cultures seem infantile both in their unabashed preoccupation with bodily
 functions and in their disregard of other human lives" ( 128, Culture
 Patterns 109; ch. 7, my emphasis).   
   82 For endorsements of getting out, as opposed to staying and resisting, see Le
 Guin's ". . . Omelas," BP , and EoH .  
 See also in her Introd. to The Norton Book of Science Fiction 
 (42), the praise for the story that ends the Norton : John Kessel's
 "Invaders."   
 For endorsements of getting out, as opposed to staying and resisting, see Le
 Guin's ". . . Omelas," BP , and EoH .  
 See also in her Introd. to The Norton Book of Science Fiction 
 (42), the praise for the story that ends the Norton : John Kessel's
 "Invaders."   
 83 Chuang Tzu may have priority on the anarchist ideal of the management of
 things, not people: ". . . man . . . must not be
 managed as if he were a mere thing; though by not managing him at all he may
 actually be managed as if he were a mere thing" ( Chuang Tzu ch. 11 [Giles 114-15]).  
 84 Exodus 23.15; see also Ex. 34.20 and Deuteronomy 16.16-17 ( Tanakh ).   
 85 Le
 Guin alludes to the fine story by Hans Christian Anderson, "The Emperor's
 New Clothes" (ca. 1835).  
 86 For Kropotkin's influence on TD , see P. E. Smith, "Unbuilding 
 Walls . . ." esp. 80-83; Bittner, Approaches 
 149 n. 49.     
 87 Good opinion is necessary for what an Anarresti can hope for.   Even 
 as traditional Chinese built "beautiful votive temples dedicated not 
 to Taoist gods or to Buddhas . . . but to ordinary men and women 
 who conferred benefits upon posterity" (Needham, "Time and Knowledge 
 . . ." 119), even so among the Anarresti: a Shevek from the 
 early years of the Settlement earned a "good immortality" by designing 
 "a kind of bearing they use in heavy machinery, they still call it a 
 'shevek,'" naming it after her (160; ch. 7).   
 88 For simultaneity and sequency, see Franz, esp. 220-22: time's arrow vs.
 "primordial time"Eliade's illud
 tempus (similar to Australian or Athshean Dream Time).  
 The Simultaneous view and its ethical implication of Quietism is
 critiqued in Kurt Vonnegut, Jr.'s Slaughterhouse-Five 
 (1969).   Like Slaughterhouse-Five ,
 The Dispossessed offers a gentle antidote to Transcendent views (such
 as the Tralfamadorians' god-like simultaneity) that kill compassion.  
 For a Daoist view of cyclical time, see Chuang
 Tzu ch. 25 (Giles 257): "Exhaustion leads to renewal.  
 The end introduces a new beginning." 
 89 I quote here Franz, 231, paraphrasing Jung's The Structure and Dynamics of the Psyche , in Collected Works (1960), vol. 8: 456.   See Also Franz's notes, Voices
 of Time 633-42: Franz is highly useful for Le Guin's work in the 1970s.  
 90 Cf. Le Guin's poem "Tenses" ( Wild Oats [1988]: 81) where 
 madness traps the Speaker in the "cage of the present tense," where 
 part of the "interminable pain" is a life of "No promise kept."   
 91 Cf. Tenar and Ged's thematically significant kitchen 
 conversation in Tehanu , 195-201 (ch. 12).   
 92 Cf. Vea's remarks on Shevek's having a royal 
 tyrant, "a Queen Teaea inside you" (177; ch. 7).   
 Note Escape from Freedom 
 (1941) as the title of a well-known book by Erich Fromm and later a clich 
 (a powerful, true, and useful clich) among mid-century analysts of totalitarianism.   
 93 Unbuilding walls is a positive thing in TD 
 and getting outside of walls a major motif in Le Guin, a Romantic and Daoist 
 return to nature, the Way: from "An die Musik" (1961) through Leese 
 Webster (1975) to "Solitude" (1994); walls and safety within 
 a good City are valued in "Coming of Age in Karhide" (1995).   
 For two in bed, cf. and contrast Ishmael and Queequeg at the end of 
 ch. 10 of Moby Dick , "A Bosom Friend," significantly juxtaposed with 
 Father Mapple at the end of ch. 9, "The Sermon" (for relationship 
 vs. transcendent projects).   Le 
 Guin indicates Moby Dick wasn't 
 a source for her ("Response to the Le Guin Issue" 46), but the image 
 is an obvious one and goes back at least to Koheleth:   
 ". . . if two lie together, they are warm; but how can 
 one be warm alone?" (Eccl. 4.11).   
 94 "The means are the end.   Odo 
 said it all her life" ( TD 238; ch. 9).   
 95 The Way and Its Power . . . 
 ; Waley is bringing together the Confucian Mencius and Chuang Tzu ch. 13 (opening).   
 See also Welsh's trans. of Tao 
 te Ching ch. 43, in the section on water, on the value of "action 
 that is actionless"and how difficult that teaching is to get across 
 to people (Waley 197).   
 96 Also Welch, Parting 15 (ruler's 
 wu wei), 33 (returning to roots to practice wu wei and save the world). 
 97 For time-binding, see Meerloo 237-40, section 2, 
 Evolutionary Time and Time-binding Processes.   
 98 Cf. image of unsheltered male "artist" 
 in "An die Musik"; cf. image of radically unsheltered female author 
 in Le Guin's essay "The Fisherwoman's Daughter."   
 99 TD 245; ch. 9.   See 
 Lefanu 141.   
 100 "You must change your life" is what Rainer Maria Rilke said 
 a statue of Apollo said to himquoted by Le Guin in "Myth and Archetype 
 in Science Fiction," LoN (1979): 77-78.   
 The line is used at least twice elsewhere in TD : rather ironically 
 on p. 126 (ch. 6) and as part of a tribute to Bedap for changing Shevek's 
 life: 140; ch. 6.   See also, "The 
 Child and the Shadow," LoN (1979): 59-71.   
 For Bedap's sex life outside of his relationship with Shevek, see 44; 
 ch. 2.   
 101 Again, binary oppositions are central to Structuralism, 
 a major approach to anthropology and other academic subjects in the 1950s-70s; 
 from the mid-1970s on, cutting-edge thought in the humanities and social science 
 moved toward a PostStructuralist (postmodern, postcolonial) paradigm.   
 102 For Rulag, see TD ch. 4, esp. 100, her line, "The work comes 
 first, with me"i.e., she chooses work over her family.   Cf. Stone Telling's father in Always Coming Home , when 
 he leaves North Owl and Willow, following his military "work"; contrast 
 Shevek's balancing of family, physics, and politics.   Lefanu usefully notes Tom Moylan on Shevek and sex: Lefanu 
 141, quoting Tom Moylan, Demand the 
 Impossible: Science Fiction and the Utopian Imagination (1986): 110.   
 103 See below, discussion of "The Matter of Seggri."   
 104 Note Bob in "Pathways of Desire," whose physical beauty is part 
 of his kingliness ( CR 189).   
 105 Chuang Tzu ch. 6, Giles 79.   
 106 Especially an intuition by someone not overtly spiritual: 
 More cosmologically, Return is the action of the Dao: ACH 485the last 
 word under THE WAY as a "Generative Metaphor" is "return"; 
 also Tao te Ching ch. 40: "In 
 Tao the only motion is returning" (Waley 192). 
 107 For TD 's principles as "feminist, communal, centrally coordinated, 
 anarchist and Taoist" (as opposed to Robert A. Heinlein's anarchist but 
 also masculinist, individualist, Capitalist, and ultimately Christian (?) 
 revolutionary society on the Moon in The 
 Moon Is a Harsh Mistress [1966]), see Williams, "The Moons of Le 
 Guin and Heinlein."   
 contents bibliography 
 sfra home page 
