 
 Chapter 7: Explicity Daoist Works 
 contents bibliography sfra home page 
 Explicitly Daoist Works: 
 City of Illusions , The Lathe of Heaven , the 
 Earthsea Series 
 City of Illusions (1967) 
 In the chronology of Le Guin's Hainish cycle, the action of City of Illusions 
 comes about six hundred years after the action of Planet of Exile , when 
 the descendants of Rolery and Jakob Agat send an expedition from Werel ("the 
 world") to reestablish contact with Earth (Bittner, Approaches 99). 
 Symbolically and philosophically, however, City of Illusions goes with 
 the West Coast tale The Lathe of Heaven (1971): both begin where "A 
 Trip to the Head" (1970) begins; both turn inside out the ending of "The 
 Word of Unbinding." 1 
 Both start with a man's coming to consciousness, in City of Illusions , 
 coming to consciousness at the margin of a literal forest. 
 The plot of City of Illusions is straightforward, and James W. Bittner 
 has demonstrated that it is quite conventional, even while undermining its own 
 conventionality ( Approaches 98-101). I'll argue for its conventionality 
 and anti-conventionality even more strongly than Bittner, since City of Illusions 
 retells, very differently, Philip Francis Nowlan's late 1920s stories "Armageddon 
 2419 A.D." and "The Airlords of Han." These old stories were 
 emphatically "around" in comics and movies in mid-century America, 
 and in 1962 the two original stories were cleaned up a bit, combined, and reissued 
 as what the 1978 redaction would call "THE SEMINAL 'BUCK ROGERS' NOVEL." 
 However she knew the stories (or whether she consciously knew them at all), 
 Le Guin gives Nowlan's "Yellow Peril" propaganda an ironically just 
 Chinese twist, presenting in City of Illusions a story I've described 
 as "Buck Rogers Goes Taoist." 
 Before the action of the story, the people of Werel have sent a starship to 
 Earth to reestablish contact. The ship is intercepted by the Shing, a humanoid 
 species that can tells lies telepathically ("mindlie"). They were 
 the Enemy feared in the earlier Hainish stories, and it turns out they won. 
 But it was a pathetic victory since the Shing seem incapable of creating and 
 simply rule Earth, keeping Terrans separated into small groups, isolated and 
 powerless. The Shing present themselves, when necessary, as "the self-sacrificing 
 Lords," holding "the torch of civilization alight" on the "dark 
 barbaric earth" (165, ch. 8; 118, ch. 6), but their benignity is only marginally 
 more noble than that of the liberals in the Belgian Congo at the end of the 
 nineteenth century in our history: whose most famous representative is Joseph 
 Conrad's Mr. Kurtz, a would-be hero picturing himself the Knight serving Lady 
 Civilization holding aloft a torch ( Heart of Darkness 27-28; I). The 
 Shing do better than genocidal Europeans in that they will not kill, at least 
 not human beings or complex animals ( CI 196 and passim), but they do 
 "mind raze" all of the captured Werelians, except one child (Har Orry). 
 At least one adult survives, and the story begins with his awakening: 
 Imagine darkness. 
 In the darkness that faces outward from the sun a mute spirit woke. Wholly 
 involved in chaos, he knew no pattern. He had no language, and did not 
 know the darkness to be night. 
 [Dawn. The creature begins to move.] . . . He had no way through 
 the world in which he was, for a way implies a beginning and an end. All 
 things about him were tangled, all things resisted him. The confusion 
 of his being was impelled to movement by forces for which he knew no name: 
 terror, hunger, thirst, pain. Through the dark forest of things he blundered 
 in silence till the night stopped him, a greater force. (1) 
 This "blank," however, is luckier than Lewis D. Charles of "A 
 Trip to the Head"; the Other who finds him (the girl, Parth) takes him 
 home, and merciful Terran people decide to keep him and care for him even if 
 he might be a Shing agent. They name him "Falk" -"yellow" 
 in their language -"for his sallow skin and opal eyes" (7; ch. 1), 
 and they raise him, necessarily, as they would raise a baby. Children, though, 
 grow up and must eventually leave home, and Falk reluctantly leaves partner 
 (again Parth) and Forest home on that most basic of quests, to find out who 
 he is, to find his "name and nature" as he puts it, to go the "way" 
 to his "true name," in the words of a wise Prince (99, 100; ch. 5). 
 He intends to go to Es Toch, the one city of the Shing, in the far west. After 
 a number of adventures and what turns out to be the (apparently) good advice 
 to go alone, he is brought to Es Toch by a human agent of the Shing, the Terran 
 woman Estrel. The adventures are significant. 
 One is among the Nation of the Basnasska (ch. 4), a post-catastrophe Plains 
 Indians society -but not literally descended from Indians with customs like 
 those of a primitive Condor people, and views on ghosts very similar to the 
 Fox Indians discussed by Claude Lvi-Strauss (31). 2 
 In his escape from the Basnasska, Falk kills a man: "Without thought, reflex-quick 
 and certain" (73), an act that follows the Dao, and can therefore be done 
 with "Spontaneity. Sureness" ( ACH 485). 3 
 Falk also encounters a small gang of thugs who define themselves an "Men, 
 free men, killers" (34; ch. 2), and a "Thurro-dowist" hermit 
 (47-57; ch. 3), an overly sensitive empath who lives like Henry David Thoreau 
 at Walden Pond, except with far more consistency and dedication. The hermit 
 reads "the Old Canon of Man (the Tao te Ching ) and gives his departing 
 guest a "slider" hovercraft, good advice to beware singing hens the 
 femme fatale who both betrays and aids him -and the important "news and 
 wisdom and advice" that "There are not very many of the Shing" 
 (54-55); like the British Raj in India, or most colonizers, the few rule, with 
 local aid. On the Great Plains, Falk finds the Bee-Keepers, clothed all alike 
 "in long shifts of yellow winter cloth marked with a brown cross on the 
 heart." Almost all of the Bee-Keepers range in age from about twelve to 
 forty, and Falk thinks them "a strange community, like the winter barracks 
 of some army encamped here in the midst of utter solitude in the truce of some 
 unexplained war; strange, sad, and admirable." In their order and frugality, 
 Falk is reminded of his own Terran home in the Forest, and he finds their "hidden 
 but flawless, integral dedication" to be "restful to him. They were 
 so sure, these beautiful sexless warriors, though what they were so sure of 
 they never told the stranger" ( CI 89), certainly not a stranger 
 accompanied by one they suspect to be an Enemy agent. Estrel tells him (truly 
 or falsely we do not learn) that the Bee-Keepers maintain their numbers by kidnapping 
 and "breeding . . . savage women like sows, and bringing up the 
 brats in groups. They worship something called the Dead God, and placate him 
 with sacrifice murder"; Estrel dismisses them as "nothing but the 
 vestige of some ancient superstition." The Bee-Keepers are hospitable, 
 though; one of their leaders tells Falk that they find solitude "soul's 
 death," believing that "man is mankind"; but they will trust 
 no one "but brother and hive-twin, known since infancy," as the only 
 safe rule (see Remington, "Other Side" 159). Falk though has "no 
 kinsmen, and no safety" (89-90; ch. 5). A bit later Falk encounters the 
 "Prince and God" of the Kansas Enclave and their leader in "one 
 of the great games. King of the Castle it's called." The Prince is bound 
 by the rules of the game, and by no other rules. This Everyman as King, ruling 
 by consent (102-03), does, though, consult his "patterning-frame" 
 as one might consult the I Ching (precisely as one might consult the 
 I Ching , the Chinese "Book of Changes," for philosophy to fortune-telling), 
 which allows him to foreshadow a good deal of City 's remaining plot (99-103; 
 ch. 5). 
 The two-person quest across the middle of a continent prefigures the movement 
 at the center of The Left Hand of Darkness (1969), and other elements 
 in this section of City will be used to good effect in later works: the 
 privileging of solitude as a choice by those who can use solitude for contact 
 with nature and the Way; the problematicizing of both sacrifice and safety; 
 the idea of royalty as "risk and grace" and a natural king as both 
 a rare fact and a possibility for anarchistic leadership; Daoism, and the I 
 Ching or intuition as a way to find how the Way goes, how the great Wheel 
 turns; "one's name and nature" as, possibly the proper quest, even 
 if they take one to "The Place of the Lie" (99), here Es Toch. 
 At Es Toch, the Shing produce young Orry of Werel and tell Falk that he, Falk, 
 is really Ramarren, the Navigator of the Werelian ship Alterra, "a decisive 
 and potent person" (190; ch. 9). The Shing tell Falk there never was an 
 Enemy; there was civil war, and some humans took over in order to run Earth 
 until peace came, and now use the lie that there is an Enemy to get the populace 
 to accept their rule. The Shing are lying, and what they want from Ramarren 
 is the True Name of the sun of Werel the name in Galaktika so they can find 
 the Werelians and neutralize them. Neutralizing the Werelians is important to 
 the Shing; Werelian telepathic discipline is good enough that Werelians can 
 know that the Shing can mindlie, and with this knowledge, resist them. The Shing 
 offer Falk an operation that will bring Ramarren back to consciousness but only 
 at the cost of Falk, who will disappear. With a little help from his friend, 
 more or less, Orry, and a lot of help from the opening lines of the Tao te 
 Ching , Falk is not sacrificed but survives; and Falk and Ramarren together 
 become Falk-Ramarren, a "double man" who is strong enough to mentally 
 overpower a Shing, steal a ship, and escape with Orry and a Shing captive to 
 tell the tale on Werel. 4 
 The Nowlan Buck Rogers story begins in 1927 when Anthony Rogers (not yet "Buck") 
 enters an abandoned mine near Scranton, PA, inhales radioactive gas, and sleeps 
 in suspended animation for about five hundred years. He awakes in a forest world, 
 where he is discovered by a beautiful and highly competent young woman (Wilma 
 Deering) and adopted by the Wyomings, a gang of Americans. He gets integrated 
 into the gang with amazing speed, marries Wilma Deering, and proceeds to aid 
 the gang and their allies fight the tyrannical Han, "fierce Mongolians, 
 who . . . had in their blood a taint not of this earth, and who with 
 science and resources far in advance of those of a" United States nearly 
 bankrupt after warfare with a Bolshevik Europe "had swept down from the 
 skies in their great airships" to kill most of the "American race" 
 and drive the survivors into the forest that had regrown over America. Rogers 
 leads a commando raid on the Han city of Nu-Yok to get intelligence on American 
 collaborators and then helps attack a nearby American tribe called the Sinsings, 
 who have treacherously joined forces with The "hereditary enemies and oppressors 
 of the White Race in America" ("Airlords" 1106). Rogers is a 
 World War I veteran, and his knowledge of artillery barrages and hand-to-hand 
 fighting helps the Wyomings and the other loyalists totally exterminate the 
 Sinsings, for the climax of "Armageddon 2419" (445). 
 In "Airlords," Rogers attacks a Han airship in his "swooper" 
 fighter craft, crash lands, gets captured, and is taken across the continent 
 to Lo-Tan, the Rocky mountain capital of the Han in America. The Han treat Rogers 
 quite well physically, but they use coercive psychological methods in an attempt 
 to get from him some sort of information; he guesses they want to learn about 
 American science (1118). In general, Rogers gets a full tour of Lo-Tan, the 
 Magnificent, but at heart a thoroughly dystopian city. Rogers is rescued after 
 a couple of months, most directly by Wilma. 
 The Americans have nuked Nu-Yok and invested the other Han cities, and 
 the story ends with the destruction of Lo-Tan . . . and the 
 killing of Lo-Tan's 10,000 survivors by rocket barrage and hand-to-hand 
 fighting . . . . In the last paragraph of the story proper, 
 we . . . learn that the remaining Han cities "were destroyed 
 and their populations hunted down, thus completing the reclamation of 
 America" and beginning the "most glorious and noble era of scientific 
 civilization in the history of the American race" (1134). (Kalish 
 et al. 305) 5 
 The American example leads to world-wide revolt and the killing of every man, 
 woman, and child among the Han, "that monstrosity among the races" 
 (1134-35). 
 In her introduction to the 1978 reissue of City of Illusions , Le Guin 
 notes that she has "villain trouble" in the book, primarily that the 
 Shing are unconvincing. Just possibly, Le Guin has villain problems because 
 she presents as rather positive the City in City of Illusions , at least 
 potentially, and allows some validity to "the Yaweh Canon" (54; ch. 
 3): at least parts of Jewish and Christian Scriptures in City present 
 some newfangled beliefs with some truth or usefulness. 6 
 The monotheistic Nation of the Basnasska on the American Plains is pretty negative, 
 and the Shing talk of a singular "Creator" and "God" (143; 
 ch. 7); but the Bee-Keepers are ambiguous, and City of Illusion mostly 
 lacks the constellation of City-Monotheism-Transcendence-Immortality-Sexism-Militarism 
 we will see in later works. That makes City an interesting part of Le 
 Guin's canon, but probably contributes to the inadequacy of the villains. 7 
 Perhaps equally important, Le Guin refuses to work out the logic of what to 
 do with a bad people like the Shing, who have done and continue to do great 
 evil and will always be capable of great evil at least as long as their culture 
 exists, possibly as long as they exist. Philip Francis Nowlan had no such qualms, 
 and that far his work is more logically and esthetically elegant than City 
 of Illusions : one possible, very final solution to this villain problem 
 is enthusiastically narrated genocide. 
 If Le Guin in City of Illusions "mocks her own use of the hackneyed 
 machinery of space opera" of the galactic empire variety (Bittner, Approaches 
 101), the book can also be read as taking Nowlan's blood-thirsty bit of racist 
 war obscenity and rehabilitating it as a philosophical tale of a quest for wholeness 
 and simultaneously a critique of any attempt at dominion and rootless self-sufficiency 
 (see TD 68; ch. 3). 
 Anthony Rogers has nearly no internal life except anger and sloppy sentiment; 
 his actions are almost all external and active actions, frequently killing people. 
 Falk will kill if he has to, and in good Daoist fashion does so when he must: 
 "Without thought, reflex-quick and certain Falk fired his laser at pointblank 
 range . . ." (73; ch. 4). Still, his struggle with the Shing 
 is almost entirely internal, literally mental. Falk must first survive by asserting 
 his existence in the personality of the awakened Ramarren; then the yielding 
 Falk and the over-active Ramarren must balance one another and become an integrated 
 whole. They do this in the manner of the Daoist mystic, starting with Falk losing 
 himself and becoming "utterly, everlastingly himself: nameless, single, 
 one" (171-73; ch. 8). And then Falk and Ramarren balance and integrate, 
 remaining two and becoming one: a microcosm of Yin-Yang in contact with the 
 Dao (188-90; ch. 9). Falk-Ramarren's external victory comes because of Ramarren's 
 mental abilities, including, I think, his indoctrination in the Kelshak concept 
 of Rale, "the right thing to do . . . like a river following 
 its course," following the Dao ( CI 136; ch. 7). But this victory 
 owes more to Falk's ability to wait and be still, acting at need and at the 
 right moment. Ramarren plays for time and 
 sought with all his trained intelligence some way in which he could turn 
 his situation about and become the controller instead of the one controlled: 
 for so his Kelshak mentality [disciplined as a high-status man on Werel] 
 presented his case to him. Seen rightly, any situation . . . 
 would come clear and lead of itself to its one proper outcome: for there 
 is in the long run no disharmony, only misunderstanding, no chance or 
 mis-chance but only the ignorant eye. So Ramarren thought, and the second 
 soul within him, Falk, took no issue with this view, but spent no time 
 trying to think it all out, either. For Falk had seen the dull and bright 
 stones slip across the wires of the patterning-frame, and had lived with 
 men in their fallen estate, kings in exile on their own domain the Earth, 
 and to him it seemed that no man could make his fate or control the game, 
 but only wait for the bright jewel luck to slip by on the wire of time. 
 Harmony exists, but there is no understanding it; the Way cannot be gone. 
 So while Ramarren racked his mind, Falk lay low and waited. And when the 
 chance came he caught it. 
 Or rather . . . he was caught by it. (208; ch. 10). 8 
 Ken Kenyek, the Shing expert at mindscience, insinuates himself 
 into Ramarren's mind and carefully seizes control, but, unknown to him, Falk 
 is there, and pounces: "ambush and re-ambush" (209-11; ch. 10). 
 The original Buck Rogers story inculcates the masculinist and racist lesson 
 of loyalty to the White Race in America and joy in helping to eradicate any 
 "yellow incubus," "inhuman yellow blight," or similar threat 
 (see Kalish 314). In City of Illusions , Falk is yellow, and yellow is 
 mostly a positive color. Aside from racial tolerance or even a celebration of 
 difference a constant in Le Guin's canon City prefigures a number of 
 important ideas in Le Guin's later work. Clearly, City inculcates the 
 Daoist lesson of the strength of quietness, solitude, wholeness, balance, and 
 patience: of what the Daoists call wu wei , action through stillness. 
 The story also privileges self-preservation, starting with avoiding suicide, 
 over self-sacrifice, whether hypocritical or real (165, 172; ch. 8), primarily 
 by finding a way out of an intolerable dilemma, possibly through what Le Guin 
 will later call "the possibility of abnegation" ("Winter's King," 
 WTQ 101). Most important, I think, especially for City in relationship 
 to Buffalo Gals , Always Coming Home , and the rest of Cummins's 
 West Coast grouping, is the isolation of the Shing and Es Toch. 9 
 As Thomas J. Remington stresses, the Shing keep to themselves, out of touch. 10 
 Their city is appropriate to such a people. Nowlan's Han 
 are racist, nationalist, and villainous, and Lo-Tan is the place of tyranny. 
 Es Toch is the place of the lie, most centrally, I think, the "Lords of 
 the Earth" lie the Shing have told themselves ( LHD 233; ch. 16): 
 thinking themselves above all, hence putting themselves out of touch with the 
 Dao of humanity, of nature, of the world. Though it is "wonderful, timeless" 
 though it dances its being over the abyss (usually a good thing with Le Guin) 
 Es Toch is radically "alien" in a very negative way. The towers of 
 Es Toch, "jutted up, hardly based on earth at all"; a "wall closed 
 the city off" (113; ch. 6). 
 This was not a Place of Men. Es Toch gave no sense of history, of reaching 
 back in time and out in space, though it had ruled the world for a millennium. 
 . . . Though there were said to be so many of the Lords, yet 
 on Earth they kept only this one city, held apart, as Earth itself was 
 held apart from the other worlds that once had formed the League. Es Toch 
 was self-contained, self-nourished, rootless; all its brilliance and transcience{sic} 
 of lights and machines and faces, its multiplicity of strangers, its luxurious 
 complexity was built across a chasm in the ground, a hollow place. It 
 was the Place of the Lie. (159; ch. 8). 
 The lie that power over other people can lead to a good world even utopia produces 
 in City of Illusions as it produced in George Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four 
 (1949) and will produce in Le Guin's work at least into the 1980s the literally 
 or figuratively walled, towered, dystopian city and "the awful darkness 
 of the bright lights of Es Toch" (55, ch. 3; 118, ch. 6). 
 The Lathe of Heaven (Novel, 1971) and The Lathe of Heaven 
 (TV Film, 1979/80) 
 Towers of ancient bridges 
 contain the bones of children, nestled 
 in the mortar like mousebones{sic} in the dry scat of coyotes 
 * * * 
 What I discovered when the bridge fell 
 was that towers are build of the bones of children. 
 Ursula K. Le Guin, "What I Discovered After 
 the Earthquake / October 17, 1989" 
 Ursula K. Le Guin's novel The Lathe of Heaven (1971), opens in a manner 
 similar to that of City of Illusions (1967) and "A Trip to the Head" 
 (1970) with coming into consciousness. In The Lathe of Heaven , however 
 as in the Atlantean section in the West Coast story "The New Atlantis" 
 (1975) -the forest of being has been replaced by the ocean as "the sea 
 of being" (170; ch. 11); the human mind is imaged as a jellyfish, and we 
 are reminded that this figurative jellyfish gets stranded "on the dry sand 
 of daylight" every morning when people awake (7; ch. 1). 11 
 In one sense, we are in a much more familiar world than Fomalhaut II in Rocannon's 
 World or Werel of Planet of Exile or the far-future America in City 
 of Illusions : the setting in Lathe is mostly Portland, Oregon, in 
 the near future. But even as Le Guin has made strange "defamiliarized" 
 the familiar act of waking up, even so this is a Portland that will be made 
 very strange indeed. Among its inhabitants is George Orr, an abnormally normal 
 man (dead center on all the graphs) with only one rare trait. 
 In April of 1998, the human world came to an end. Among the people dying of 
 radiation sickness after this nuclear apocalypse was George Orr. Orr passes 
 out, or falls asleep, and has a dream, and the dream he dreams is the world 
 of the story. And in the world Orr made, Orr can dream effectively. That is, 
 when he has very powerful dreams, his dreams change reality for everyone: change 
 reality completely, radically, from its roots, all the way back into the distant 
 past, so only Orr (and people very near him during the change) even notice. 
 For everyone else there is one single, coherent, new reality, complete with 
 appropriate memories. Orr does not want to change the world (18; ch. 2). He 
 tries to avoid dreaming by borrowing Pharmacy Cards and getting more than his 
 "allotment of pep pills and sleeping pills from the autodrug" (12). 
 Some time in 2002, Orr has a very bad drug episode, gets caught and is sent 
 to "Voluntary Therapeutic Treatment" (which is, of course, compulsory) 
 with Dr. William Haber, an oneirologist, a dream specialist (13; ch. 2). Orr 
 tells Haber his problem, and Haber comes to believe Orr; and then Haber uses 
 Orr (assisted by the Augmentor, a machine to augment dreams) to improve the 
 world, to create Haber's idea of a Utilitarian utopia. 12 
 The plot thereafter is a series of dreams induced by Haber on an ever more 
 reluctant Orr until Haber can coerce Orr to have one last effective dream to 
 produce a world in which Orr doesn't dream effectively, and Haber does (159-61; 
 ch. 10). Orr, though, has found marriage with Heather Lelache, his attorney 
 in the initial world of the novel, and he gets a little help from his wife and 
 other friends including some aliens he has literally dreamed up. When Haber 
 tries to dream effectively, the nightmare out of the hollowness of his being 
 threatens disaster for at least the Earth. Orr turns off the dream machine which 
 he sees as his one real action and saves the world (165-68, 170; chs. 10, 11). 
 Haber ends up mad and institutionalized, and the world ends up in a mess; indeed, 
 it's a mess where Heather Lelache had not married George Orr but a man killed 
 in the war in the Near East, and the novel ends with Orr's moving toward renewing 
 his marriage with Lelache, a return to a true relationship (172-75; ch. 11). 
 The complexity of the narrative, film as well as novel, derives from the fourteen 
 significant effective dreams, each dream changing the reality of the world of 
 the story. And the complexity comes in with the ethical implications of the 
 conflict between Orr and Haber. Haber is an active man, a mover and shaker: 
 an idealist, with a vision of the way the world ought to be and a desire to 
 play hero and savior and make it that way. When Haber discovers Orr's talent, 
 he has a way to make the world as it ought to be, to make everything right. 
 In many narratives, Haber would be a hero. In a conservative film of the 1950s, 
 Haber might be a villain, but not because he is overactive and intellectually 
 macho but because he is a scientist and an intellectual, period and a utopian; 
 in such a film he would probably be defeated by a military man even more aggressive 
 than he is. 13 
 Elizabeth Cummins neatly sums up Haber's reduction of 
 "principles to three mottoes: The proper study of mankind is man; The greatest 
 good for the greatest number; and The end justifies the means" (1993: 158) 
 which is a serviceable summary of the philosophy of many heroes in U.S. popular 
 culture. Orr is passive, a dreamer, the "uncarved block" of the Daoists. 14 
 In most stories he'd be a minor character, and a major bore. 
 Le Guin both uses and mocks the idea of Haber as "a Mad Scientist with 
 an Infernal Machine" (47; ch. 4). In the late 1960s, when Le Guin was writing 
 Lathe , Haber could be read as a more immediate threat: a reduction to 
 the grotesque of corporate liberals like Robert McNamara who were demonstrating 
 dramatically the costs of "nation building" utopian or otherwise in 
 Viet Nam and other exercises in American "toughness": "By attempting 
 to impose its will on a chaotic world . . . the United States had 
 fallen victim to the 'arrogance of power' and was flirting with disaster." 15 
 The fall of William Haber was a mid-twentieth-century 
 fable for Americans. 
 Opposed to Haber is Orr, emphatically the hero, if an unlikely one, in both 
 novel and film. In the novel he is the hero because the novel accepts a Daoist 
 world-view and ethic. The Lathe of Heaven , as novel, is an attack not 
 only on Haber and his immediate political implications but also on most of what 
 Haber stands for: much of the ethics and ideal of heroism of "the Judaeo-Christian-Rationalist 
 West" (82; ch. 6). The PBS film is courageous, but not that courageous. 
 In the film Haber is still not a clich Mad Scientist, but, as in one place 
 in the novel, a man who would "play God with masses of people" (150; 
 ch. 10), a victim of immoderation, yet another dramatic example of the danger 
 of overweening pride. Thus he comes across in the film's dialog and much of 
 its imagery. He is, in the film, not a SciFi villain but an SF builder of Moloch-machines 
 that engulf and metaphorically devour people, finally engulfing their inventors . 16 
 The film Haber is the direct descendent of the builders 
 of great cities like Sodom and Gomorrah, and of great buildings such as the 
 Tower of Babel. But there is more to the film that just excellent use of such 
 familiar motifs and prejudices; the film also picks up some important dialog 
 and much of the imagery of the novel and thereby suggests, fairly subtly, the 
 Eastern ideal of balance. Balance as a secondary norm in the film works against 
 not only the immoderate urge to tinker with society and the universe, as if 
 they were machines, but also against the film's more explicit norm of the grey 
 mediocrity of "moderation in all things" a very nonDaoist, Greek rationalist 
 slogan Orr uses in the film. 
 In the dialog of the film, Orr makes explicit his charges against Haber. They 
 include a rather daring and vigorous assertion of passivity on Orr's part and 
 his denial of human purpose ideas Le Guin stresses; most of the accusations, 
 however, are more familiar: Haber is playing God in using Orr; Haber is immoderately 
 "tinkering" with dangerous powers; Haber refuses to take responsibility 
 for his actions and misunderstands the place of humans in the universe; Haber 
 is overconfident in the power of reason and is much too dedicated to will, power, 
 and control. 
 Orr in the film is quite correct in his accusations, and his accusations are 
 reinforced by the imagery of coerced containment within a mechanism, the Augmentor, 
 and by Haber's utopian building. When Orr (or Haber) is within the Augmentor, 
 we have an image of the superimposition of the mechanical not only upon Orr 
 or Haber but the superimposition of the mechanical and electronic upon the unconscious 
 dreams and, in effective dreaming, the superimposition of the machine upon the 
 world. 17 
 The Augmentor by itself changes nothing, but its augmenting 
 aids Haber in making hypnotic suggestions to Orr that do change the world. In 
 a sense, then, as Haber augments the Augmentor by having Orr dream him bigger 
 and better machines a process stressed in the film he puts more and more of 
 his world effectively within the machine he controls. 18 
 In novel and film, the utopias Haber creates have problems. 19 
 Most spectacularly, Haber tells Orr to eliminate overpopulation, 
 and Orr's subconscious takes a very direct route: a Plague dream that kills 
 some six billion people. When Haber becomes more accomplished at instructing 
 Orr, the results are much less brutal and very darkly comic but still bad. Haber's 
 world is a better world, in many ways, but a grey, lifeless world, bureaucratized 
 and unfree, what we would expect from the imposing of hubristic rationalism, 
 via a machine, upon the stuff of dreams. Haber's last utopia in the film is 
 also a world without Heather Lelache. Lelache is African-American, brown in 
 color; she cannot exist in a grey world literally a grey world for human beings. 
 Haber tells Orr to solve the race problem, and Orr's subconscious produces a 
 human species with bodies "the color of a battleship" (127; ch. 9). 
 But Haber will not be satisfied with any version of utopia. As the Narrator 
 in the novel tells us, "The quality of the will to power is, precisely, 
 growth. Achievement is its cancellation. To be, the will to power must increase 
 with each fulfillment, making the fulfillment only a step to a further one. 
 The vaster the power gained, the vaster the appetite for more" (128; ch. 
 9). To improve the world until it is really right, Haber needs a better tool 
 than Orr. So he cures Orr and prepares to substitute himself. 
 For Le Guin, Haber is preeminently unsuitable as a dreamer perfecting the world: 
 any dreamer who would want to exert such control is disqualified because he 
 radically misunderstands the nature of dreams. Haber is especially unsuitable 
 because for Le Guin the dream goes to the heart of our being, and Le Guin's 
 Narrator makes clear that Haber is like a dried onion; at his center there is 
 a void (127-28, 82; chs. 9 and 6). Just as bad, Haber is out of touch with the 
 world (150; ch. 10): a loveless loner, someone who sees people only as things 
 to be used or dependent clients to be helped or used (112, 32; chs. 8 and 3). 20 
 Haber "never wanted marriage nor close friendships" 
 and is promiscuous and bisexual, his sex life "almost entirely . . . 
 one-night stands, semipros, sometimes women and sometimes young men" (112). 21 
 No film can get into such complexities of psychology as Le Guin's analysis 
 of Haber; but The Lathe of Heaven as film does suggest Haber as a loner, and 
 it certainly shows that Haber's effective nightmare is a disaster for the world. 
 The film shows quite well how different Haber is from Orr, who is capable of 
 love, and therefore capable of saving the world. Twice: first in his dream in 
 April 1998 and again in his one conscious act of turning off the Augmentor and 
 ending Haber's effective nightmare. 
 The film, then, unlike the novel, does not explicit condemn, generally and 
 forcefully if with bitter comedy the ethics and heroic ideal of the "Judaeo-Christian-Rationalist 
 West" but instead uses explicitly some of our Western norms to justify 
 Orr and condemn Haber. 22 
 Some dialog and visuals, however, do condemn the busy-ness of Western utopianism 
 and the ethical superficiality of a doctrine of improving the world: When we 
 see a large sign with what is clearly Haber's favorite slogan "THE GREATEST 
 GOOD FOR THE GREATEST NUMBER" we can be sure there is a satiric attack 
 against the doctrine of Utilitarianism that promulgated that slogan as philosophy 
 (see LoH 132; ch. 9). Indeed, several shots suggest our need to accept 
 and go with the world, to find our way from Haber's over-bright, Utilitarian 
 ways back to the dark Great Way of Being, of the Dao. "When the Great Way 
 is lost, we get benevolence and righteousness" Le Guin quotes from ch. 
 18 of the Tao te Ching (headnote to LoH ch. 5). Le Guin's point 
 comes across in the film: Haber has lost his way, and his attempts at benevolence 
 and righteousness will not yield good. 
 The film develops these points visually. Le Guin's image for Being in Lathe 
 is the sea; and opposed to the impressive buildings and machinery (and a couple 
 of muscular thugs) we see with Haber in the film is a series of images associating 
 Orr and Lelache with water, the yielding but yet very powerful water that wears 
 away rock and is the favored element of the Daoists. 23 
 To oversimplify, water especially in the film, dark, sparkling, 
 and/or misty water stands for Namable Dao: Being, the Absolute, "the 
 milk of the Mother / the Way " ( CI 51; ch. 3). 24 
 Out of the sea (in the film) comes Lelache. Out of one 
 in Daoist theory comes two: Yin-Yang, all opposites in dynamic equilibrium, 
 represented schematically at their instant of exact balance: the Yin-Yang figure 
 in black and white, centrally (perhaps) female and male in balance embodied 
 in the film in the image of Lelache and Orr making love. 25 
 The social and political implications of the Lelache/Orr relationship Le Guin 
 handles when Lelache first meets Orr (narrated from Lelache's point of view): 
 "He liked her. He was a poor damn crazy psycho on drugs, he would like 
 her. She liked him. She stuck out her brown hand, he met it with a white one, 
 just like that damn button her mother always kept in the bottom of her bead 
 box, SCNN or SNCC or something she'd belonged to way back in the middle of the 
 last century, the Black hand and the White hand joined together. Christ!" 
 (52; ch. 4). 26 
 The Lathe of Heaven is part of Le Guin's "marriage group" 
 and a rather somber romantic comedy: a new and chastened world coalesces around 
 Orr and Lelache as they exit to woo again, and I think it is that basic romantic 
 pattern that comes through most clearly in the film. We may read the film as 
 a love story featuring a triangle with Orr at the apex, contested over by Lelache 
 who loves him and Haber who wants to use him. For good and for ill, esthetically, 
 what comes through more strongly in the novel is the ongoing debate between 
 the men, both literal debates and a comparison and contrast between two radically 
 different truly "Either/Or" approaches to life. And it is a familiar 
 one: we have come out of the forest, climbed out of the sea, and we ask with 
 that urExistentialist Koheleth, the Preacher in Ecclesiastes, What is good for 
 the sons of men to do in our few days under the sun? (2.3). Or, in the nonsexist 
 formulation of the Kesh play of Chandi , " How shall a human being 
 live well, then? " 27 
 Except that here the answer is the very nonExistentialist, nonWestern one of 
 Daoist wu wei: Ordinarily, do nothing (Watson, "Le Guin's Lathe " 
 70). And in the novel there is a third point of view character: Heather Lelache. 
 In The Lathe of Heaven the ideal is not the masculinist one of "having 
 and acting" ( WTQ 163) but the more traditionally "feminine," 
 Daoist one of "unaction" doing nothing unnatural, nothing against 
 the Dao, nothing to control others and the world, nothing to move one out of 
 the world, out of touch. 
 The narration of The Lathe of Heaven is third person, limited omniscient 
 (or selective omniscient) from the points of view of George Orr (chs. 1, 3, 
 6, 9, the first part of 10, and 11), William Haber (chs. 2, 5, and 8), and Heather 
 Lelache (4, 7, the second part of 10) a division of points of view we have seen 
 in Planet of Exile (1966) and will see again, perhaps most closely paralleled 
 in The Word for World Is Forest (1972). 28 
 In general, Le Guin uses the divided points of view to ensure a positive image 
 of Orr and a negative view of Haber. Orr's thoughts are generally attractive; 
 Haber's are not. Lelache has a relatively positive view of Orr at first, and 
 a strongly positive view later; her view of Haber is negative. Lelache's view 
 of herself starts negative spider, coward (45, 91, 94; chs. 4, 7) and improves. 
 Indeed, it is arguable that Heather Lelache is the only character in the novel 
 to really change. In the novel, Orr returns to what he essentially is, and Haber 
 works out the logic of his villain role, finally (in the dried onion image) 
 having the last layers stripped from him to reveal the void at his core. But 
 such an argument for change in Lelache gets complicated in a world where realities 
 keep changing; different realities may just produce different Heather Lelaches. 29 
 The constants are Orr and Haber, and the novel form allows a good deal of elaboration 
 of what they stand for aided by Lelache's insights and gnomic comments by the 
 Narrator. In the manner of the Germanic scops, Le Guin's early narrators sometimes 
 pause to insert a pithy assertion summarizing the "moral" of the preceding 
 episode. For a central and highly instructive example, consider the Narrator's 
 comments speaking of Lelache, that "A person who believes, as she did, 
 that things fit: that there is a whole of which one is a part, and that in being 
 a part one is whole: such a person has no desire whatever, at any time, to play 
 God. Only those who have denied their being yearn to play at" being (106; 
 ch. 7) or to play God. Such a statement aids Lelache's credibility in her judgments 
 of Orr and Haber, and in its immediate context the comment helps us approve 
 of Lelache even when she is about to move the plot along by making the mistake 
 of giving Orr a hypnotic suggestion on what to dream. A transcendent God isn't, 
 in the universe of The Lathe of Heaven ; immanent Dao is: Dao is the ultimate 
 "whole of which one is a part," and only as part of the Dao, and in 
 touch with other people, can one achieve personal wholeness, know one's being. 
 Those who try to exist outside of Nature deny human nature, their human being. 
 Such people necessarily will be more or less out of contact with themselves, 
 and therefore, when in authority, will be dangerous. 
 When Haber still won't admit he knows Orr dreams effectively, Orr suspects 
 that Haber "might be compartmenting his mind into two hermetic halves," 
 so that he both knows and uses and doesn't know Orr's power. Given his own wholeness, 
 Orr has trouble understanding how Haber might have gotten so "out of communication 
 with himself." Like anyone who grew up in America after Vietnam and the 
 whole series of twentieth-century wars, Orr must recognize the possibility of 
 people high in the hierarchy with compartmentalized minds: "He had grown 
 up in a country run by politicians who sent pilots to man the bombers to kill 
 the babies to make the world safe for children to grow up in" (87; ch. 
 6). 30 
 Orr doesn't know the word, Dao, or Eastern philosophy (83; ch. 6), but he is 
 in touch with the Dao. Indeed, his dreams may aid Dao in the process by which 
 reality is constantly "replaced, renewed" (71; ch. 5); certainly, 
 when Orr and Lelache make love, they aid in the remaking of love in the world. 
 Like the Dao and Daoist reality, "Love doesn't just sit there, like a stone, 
 it has to be made, like bread; re-made all the time, made new" (153; ch. 
 10). Being in and in touch with the world, Orr can appear to Heather Lelache 
 and be the Daoist ideal, the "block of wood not carved. The infinite possibility, 
 the unqualified wholeness of being of the uncommitted, the nonacting . . . 
 : the being who, being nothing but himself, is everything." For Heather 
 Lelache, who frequently sees herself as a black widow spider, what is most impressive 
 about her insight into the mild-mannered Orr is Orr's strength: "He was 
 the strongest person she had every known, because he could not be moved away 
 from the center" (95; ch. 7). 
 As we would expect from Rocannon's World and City of Illusions , 
 mind and stillness are going to be very important in The Lathe of Heaven 
 . But in Rocannon's World the Daoist hermit, the Ancient One, was decidedly 
 nasty in the pricing of gifts to suppliants, and in City of Illusions 
 there was something of a fair debate between the still and active lives, at 
 least in the person of Falk-Ramarren and in the balanced characters of the Thurro-dowist 
 hermit and the equally Daoist Prince of Kansas Enclave (chs. 3 and 5). Le Guin 
 does not demonize Haber, or she gives this devil his due, but she is not about 
 to give him a fair chance. By the time of The Lathe of Heaven , the danger 
 of men like Haber had become far too clear (most spectacularly in Indochina) 
 for responsible writers on the Left to stage a dispassionate, objective confrontation 
 between two legitimate approaches to life. By the time we reach their crucial 
 philosophical confrontations in Lathe chapters 7-9, we know that Orr 
 will be right, Haber mostly (but not entirely) wrong. 
 Shortly before she really sees him, Heather Lelache had thought of Orr as "that 
 little bastard . . . . Mr. Either Orr" (90; ch. 7). 31 
 Moving into the center of their debate, Haber talks about 
 Orr's test results in the now loaded terms of "Both, neither. Either, or. 
 Where there's an opposed pair, a polarity, you're in the middle; where there's 
 a scale, you're at the balance point." Haber doesn't see Orr's scores as 
 indications of a healthy adjustment, wholeness, or harmony, but a kind of "self-cancellation" 
 that accounts for Orr's lackluster life (134; ch. 9). 32 
 And accounts for Orr's resistance to change: 
 What's wrong with changing things? Now, I wonder if this self-canceling, 
 centerpoised personality of yours leads you to look at things defensively. . . . 
 You are afraid of losing your balance. But change need not unbalance you; 
 life's not a static object, after all. It's a process. There's no holding 
 still. Intellectually you know that, but emotionally you refuse it. Nothing 
 remains the same from one moment to the next, you can't step into the 
 same river twice. Life evolution the whole universe of space/time, matter/energy 
 existence itself is essentially change." 
 "That is one aspect of it," Orr said. "The other is stillness." 
 "When things don't change any longer, that's the end result of entropy, 
 the heat-death of the universe. The more things go on moving, interrelating, 
 conflicting, changing, the less balance there is and the more life. I'm 
 pro-life, George. Life itself is a huge gamble against the odds, against 
 all odds! You can't try to live safely, there's no such thing as safety. 
 Stick your neck out of your shell, then, and live fully! It's not how 
 you get there, but where you get to that counts. . . . 
 We're on the brink of discovering and controlling, for the good of all 
 mankind, a whole new force, an entire new field of antientropic energy, 
 of the life-force, of the will to act, to do, to change!" 
 Haber has just stated some major ideas from Daoism and the Perennial Philosophy, 
 and some favorite Le Guinian themes: life as process, life as a gamble (see 
 King Dog ), the lack of safety, flux at the heart of things. Orr acknowledge 
 these truths but insists that, "We're in the world, not against it. It 
 doesn't work to try to stand outside things and run them that way. It just doesn't 
 work, it goes against life. There is a way but you have to follow it. The world 
 is, no matter how we think it out to be. You have to be with it. You have to 
 let it be" (135-36; ch. 9). 
 After a kind of day dream of encountering an Alien who gives him good Hindu 
 advice "Self is universe" and the phrase "Er' perrehnne!" 
 for summoning "auxiliary forces" (138; ch 9), Orr moves into his direct 
 confrontation with Haber, his just saying "No" 1960s style, challenging 
 authority and force. Orr set his teeth and faced Chaos and Old Night. 33 
 But they were not there. . . . He remained sitting on the comfortable 
 couch . . . . And, quiet as a thief in the night, 
 a sense of well-being came into him, a certainty that things were all 
 right, and that he was in the middle of things. Self is universe. He would 
 not be allowed to be isolated, to be stranded. He was back where he belonged. . . . 
 This feeling did not come to him as blissful or mystical, but simply as 
 normal. . . . [I]t was his natural mode of being. . . . 
 He knew this was nothing he had accomplished by himself. (139-40; ch. 
 9) 
 But it wasn't Haber's Augmentor that did it. Presumably, he got a little help 
 from his friends, from the other "gods": "nameless and unenvious, 
 asking neither worship not obedience" (140), the other people in touch 
 with the universe (145; ch. 9). Without debating the matter with himself, Orr 
 tells Haber firmly that he won't let Haber use his effective dreams any more 
 (140). 
 Haber appeals to Orr's sense of guilt, without success (142). 34 
 Haber then tries a literally rational appeal "Reason 
 will prevail" and notes all the good he and Orr have done. Orr notes the 
 evil, including the nonexistence in this world of Heather Lelache, which is 
 fine with Haber, and he tells that to Orr: Haber finds both Orr and Lelache 
 irresponsible; Orr lacks a social conscience, displays "no altruism," 
 acts the role of "a moral jellyfish" (143; ch. 9). Haber's attitude 
 toward Lelache makes him appear especially villainous here, and that is useful 
 to point for us Le Guin's point that in this book (as in The Dispossessed 
 [1974]) a social consciences is an ambiguous thing, and altruism rather negative: 
 again, "When the Great Way is lost, we get benevolence and righteousness" 
 (53; ch. 5) 35 
 But also, altruism just is suspect as a motivation 
 for political actions. With President Lyndon Johnson and others into the 1970s 
 presented American warfare in Indochina as altruistic, it was clear to anyone 
 thinking seriously that the personal virtue of altruism would easily become 
 a vice when applied abstractly, impersonally, politically. When applied on mass 
 scale, altruism soon becomes just another justification for pushing people around. 
 Opposing the benevolent busy-ness of Haber, Orr recognizes that he has a gift 
 and an obligation to "use it only when I must. When there is no other alternative. 
 There are alternatives now" (143; ch. 9). Haber, though, intends to go 
 on, to where Earth "will be like heaven, and men will be like gods!" 
 Orr says, "We are, we are already" (145; ch.9). 
 In the climactic chapter 10, Orr receives a gift from an Alien, the Beatles' 
 "With a Little Help From My Friends," drinks some weak cannabis tea 
 and dreams back Heather Lelache. The two of them go together to Haber's lab 
 for one last dream: Orr dreams he's no longer capable of effective dreaming 
 Haber is. Orr advises Haber to consult with the Aliens, who are more experienced 
 than we "At dreaming at what dreaming is an aspect of. They've done it 
 for a long time. For always, I guess. They are of the dream time." In line 
 with the teaching that those who know the Way don't talk about it, and the commonplace 
 that the mystic experience is ineffable, Orr says he does not rationally understand 
 his insight, not can he express it verbally, but, 
 Everything dreams. The play of form, of being, is the dreaming of substance. 36 
 Rocks have their dreams, and the earth changes. 
 ....But when the mind becomes conscious, when the rate of evolution speeds 
 up, then you have to be careful. Careful of the world. You must learn 
 the way. You must learn the skills, the art, the limits. A conscious mind 
 must be part of the whole, intentionally and carefully as the rock is 
 part of the whole unconsciously. Do you see? Does it mean anything to 
 you? 
 It really doesn't mean anything to Haber. For Haber, Orr's great speech on 
 "Everything dreams" is all mysticism, and mysticism is not "acceptable" 
 for sensible people. And saying Er' perrehne to "get a little help from 
 your friends" is not acceptable to an egoistic loner like Haber (161; ch. 
 10). 
 Using his Augmentor on his own dream, Haber dreams his effective dream, the 
 nightmare Orr stops. In the novel and (perhaps more briefly) in the film, Orr 
 tells an Alien, "I did a lot today. That is, I did something. The only 
 thing I have ever done. I pressed a button. It took the entire will power, the 
 accumulated strength of my entire existence, to press one damned OFF button." 
 The Alien replies, "You have lived well." Orr's one action, out of 
 his stillness, has saved the world (170; ch. 11). 
 At the end of the novel, Orr sleeps and has normal dreams, "like waves 
 of the deep sea far from any shore," coming and going, "profound and 
 harmless, breaking nowhere, changing nothing. They danced the dance among all 
 the other waves in the sea of being" (170; ch. 11). Orr awakes to visit 
 Haber in an asylum and then meet again, for the first time in this new reality, 
 Heather Lelache. 
 * 
 The Earthsea Series (1968-72, 1990) 
 All the world says, 
 "I am important; 
 I am separate from all the world. 
 I am important because I am separate, 
 Were I the same, I could never be important." 
 TaoDeChing - Lao Tze, ch. 67. Unimportance 1992-1995 
 Peter A. Merel (on the World Wide Web, with Chinese text 
 [Webmaster: Ming L. Pei]) 
 Introductory Comments 
 I agree with Le Guin's assessment in her Response to the 1975 Le Guin issue 
 of Science-Fiction Studies that the ideas in her Earthsea trilogy "are 
 more totally incarnated, less detachable from the sounds, rests, and rhythms, 
 less often stated as problems and more often expressed in terms of feeling, 
 sensations, and intuition" than in some of her other work up to that time 
 (45) hence, I would say, probably better art and I follow a fairly widespread 
 consensus that the Earthsea trilogy is among Le Guin's best art. A Wizard 
 of Earthsea won the 1968 Boston Globe -Horn Book Award; The Tombs 
 of Atuan got the 1972 Newbery Silver Medal Award; The Farthest Shore 
 won the 1972 National Book Award for Children's Books. As the back blurbs on 
 the Bantam editions of 1975 note, "This trio of novels, a recognized classic 
 of high fantasy, has been compared with [J.R.R.] Tolkien's Lord of the Rings 
 and C. S. Lewis's Narnia stories." But classifying the Earthsea trilogy 
 with The Lord of the Rings and the Narnia stories, however meant as a 
 compliment, makes it easier for Rosemary Jackson to place the trilogy, plus 
 City of Illusions and The Left Hand of Darkness , among "conservative 
 vehicles for social and instinctual repression" (Jackson 154-55). There 
 are political problems with the trilogy, but not particularly those Jackson 
 identifies. If you accept Jackson's psychoanalytical framework, you should also 
 accept Jackson placing a significant sampling of Le Guin's work along with Tolkien's 
 and Lewis's and to the political right of Charles Dickens whose demonizing of 
 working class movements Jackson documents (131-32) and even Fyodor Dostoevsky 
 (133-36, 154-55), to whom my encyclopedia devotes a full subsection under "Conservatism," 
 for his attacks in later life upon "Socialism, liberalism, materialism, 
 and atheism," preaching instead "Greek Orthodox tsarism, Slavic traditionalism, 
 and the redemption of mankind by 'Holy Russia'" (Viereck 5.65-66). I like 
 Dickens and Dostoevsky, and I will join in insisting upon the liberatory potential 
 and immediate goodness of their "compassion for . . . 'the insulted 
 and injured'" (Viereck 66); but to prefer on Leftist political grounds 
 an antirevolutionary reformer like Dickens and any variety of Czarist over Le 
 Guin is to take Theory and disgust with "an outworn liberal humanism" 
 (Jackson 155) into the perverse. I think it is more accurate to start with the 
 observation that, like Tolkien's trilogy and the Narnia stories, Le Guin's Earthsea 
 trilogy is high fantasy, and then immediately add that Tolkien's work comes 
 out of Christian tradition and Lewis's work is firmly within the Christian tradition 
 and powerfully inculcates significant parts of Christian doctrine. Le Guin's 
 high fantasy is unChristian specifically and more generally outside of the tradition 
 of all institutionalized religions and transcendental theologies. From what 
 we see, the people of Earthsea realize the positive parts of their "religious 
 capacity" in popular celebrations of the high points of the astronomical 
 year; the institutionalized religions we see at Atuan in the trilogy are not 
 positive. Le Guin has shown in Earthsea a Time of Legend that gets along quite 
 nicely without sky gods common enough in science fiction and fantasy but a world 
 not totally desacralized; indeed, at moments in Earthsea we see its key 
 characters in very profound "relationship . . . with the cosmos" 
 ( TD 12; ch. 1). And Le Guin provided this elegant counter to Tolkien, 
 Lewis, et al. in a trilogy that is accessible to children, receives Establishment 
 awards, and gets past (apparently) even the Right-wing types who catch on that 
 The Lathe of Heaven might be a dangerous book. The Earthsea series, then, 
 is sophisticated art and serious literature and a nicely subversive contribution 
 to an early round of the most recent Kulturkampf . 
 * 
 Moving into the end of the1990s, the Earthsea series consists of four books: 
 A Wizard of Earthsea (1968), The Tombs of Atuan (1971), 
 The Farthest Shore (1972) "the Earthsea trilogy" and Tehanu : 
 The Last Book of Earthsea (1990). The temptation, obviously, is to see the 
 series as the trilogy (1968-72) plus Tehanu , with Tehanu as a 
 late addition to, and a correction of, the trilogy. I shall succumb to that 
 temptation shortly, in my chapter on Tehanu ; I'll indicate now, though, 
 why Tehanu is a very appropriate "Last Book" for the series, 
 analyzing the series as a Daoist construct. 37 
 We may legitimately see the trilogy as a portrait of an artist in magic, Ged, 
 from birth until he sacrifices his magic power at the beginning of old age. 
 The three books of the trilogy make a Knstlerroman (artist novel) with magic 
 as the art and the story told in third-person, limited-omniscient narration 
 from the points of view of three people: (1) Ged, who starts the novel as the 
 boy Duny, and then goes on to become the wizard Sparrowhawk, and then fully 
 himself as an adult Ged ( Wizard ); (2) Tenar, the priestess of the Nameless 
 ones ( Tombs ); and (3) Arren, who goes on to become King ( Shore ) 
 and rule Earthsea under his true name, Lebannen ( Tehanu ). 
 The esthetic world of the trilogy is classic high fantasy and Romance: male-centered, 
 heroic, aristocratic, concerned mostly with youth and the great story of "coming 
 of age" to the first "age" of the (male) hero, adulthood, and 
 the only physiologically marked coming of age for a human male, lacking, as 
 men do, menopause (see "Coming of Age in Karhide"). That far, and 
 not a step farther, the trilogy uses the sort of world Le Guin mocks in "The 
 Pathways of Desire" (1979): a story set in a boy's world (indeed, the world 
 of "Pathways" is dreamed up between a boy's ears), whose native society 
 lacks leading roles for women, a world where old people without power are nearly 
 invisible. As such, the world of the trilogy is out of balance. Tehanu 
 moves toward achieving a better balance, at least addressing what Holly Littlefield 
 correctly identifies as the "fundamental imbalances of power and gender" 
 (252). 
 As a four-novel series, the odd-numbered books are narrated from the points 
 of view of boys becoming men ( Wizard and Shore ); the second book 
 is told from the point of view of a girl becoming a woman ( Tombs ); and 
 the fourth book ( Tehanu ) is narrated from the point of view of the girl 
 of Tombs grown into a middle-aged widow switching at the very end to 
 a split point of view between the woman, Tenar, and Tehanu: a being both girl 
 and dragon. 38 
 Wizard begins on Gont Island, the birthplace of 
 Ged, and then moves on to extensive sailing about Earthsea. Tombs is 
 quite static: except for an opening out at the end, limited to the place of 
 the Tombs of the Nameless Ones on Atuan; put more positively, Tombs adheres 
 fairly closely to the Neoclassical unities of place and action. Shore 
 shows extensive sailing and offers two endings. The official one, so to speak, 
 from The Deed of Ged , ends has Ged return to the center of events, for 
 Arren's crowning in Havnor and then sailing off "westward over sea" 
 to be heard from no more. The version told on Gont is less romantic. Ged returns 
 to Gont and retires to the forest, truly "done with doing," off on 
 the margin of the world of doing, but in the heart of one of Le Guin's forests 
 ( WE 196-97), a place to be . In good quest fashion, and following 
 the movement of the Dao ( Tao te Ching 40), Tehanu returns Ged 
 to Gont and shows only one short sea trip from one Gontish port to another with 
 the rest of the traveling on foot on Gont. 
 Further unity of the series is suggested by Wizard and Tehanu 's 
 both begin with the same poetic epigraph: 
 Only in silence the word, 
 only in dark the light, 
 only in dying life: 
 bright the hawk's flight 
 on the empty sky. 
 In this epigraph, some key opposites insisted upon in the Judeo-Christian tradition 
 get yoked together in good Daoist fashion, with the careful Yin-Yang balancing 
 of polarities in the first three lines broken only by the denial of any transcendent 
 sky-god(s) of the final two lines. Yin-Yang, indeed, is a unifying symbol in 
 the trilogy. In Wizard , there is a Yin-Yang symbol in the white scars 
 on the dark face of Ged, and again when Ged merges with his Shadow. In Tombs 
 the Yin-Yang symbol is suggested at the climax of the novel, when white-skinned 
 Tenar moves close to Ged, initially intending to kill him, and then bonds with 
 him (140; "Voyage," ch. 12). 39 
 In Tehanu , Yin-Yang is suggested when Ged asks 
 Tenar for a job on her farm and Tenar resolves the sleeping arrangements by 
 asking Ged if he wants her in his bed (189; "Winter," ch. 12). He 
 does, and when they couple his dark skin is balanced against her white skin. 40 
 There is an even more powerful symbol of balance, wholeness, 
 and integration in Tehanu herself, and her people. In one aspect, Tehanu is 
 a young girl, Therru, who has been horribly abused and scarred far worse than 
 Ged. In another aspect, she is a dragon, one of "those among us who know 
 they once were dragons," connected with those "among the dragons . . . 
 who know their kinship with us" (12; "Going to the Falcon's Nest," 
 ch. 2). And the dragon she is closest to is Kalessin, the Eldest, who turns 
 out to be Segoy, the demiurge who spoke the Word of Making and brought forth 
 the islands of Earthsea (222-24; "Tehanu," ch. 14). 
 The Yin-Yang balance, then, of human and dragon leads back to Kalessin, who 
 is Segoy; and that is useful for a Daoist Earthsea. Segoy, a demiurge, had been 
 something of an embarrassment for a Daoist reading of the trilogy, since Segoy 
 could be pictured as transcending the world Segoy made. That embarrassment is 
 eliminated in Tehanu . In the legends of Coyote (e.g., among the Miwok 
 Indians of California), Coyote is a coyote, and emphatically a wily animal in 
 the world and Coyote made the world. 41 
 In The Lathe of Heaven , George Orr dreams up his 
 worlds, and is within each world. And in Tehanu , Segoy remains the creator 
 of the world, but is clearly shown living in the world as the oldest dragon, 
 Kalessin. 42 
 With a little pushing of the point, we can see Kalessin/Segoy 
 as a descendent of Ouroboros as the crowned dragon eating its tail: a symbol 
 in the West for the unity of all things, perpetually mutating one into another 
 in a never-ending cycle of creation and destruction: the mythological embodiment, 
 in our culture, of the idea of the Dao, or Shiva Nataraja dancing the worlds 
 into existence, and he and Kali destroying them. 43 
 Most important, Tehanu goes far to resolve the problem of magic. As 
 Robert Galbreath has argued, there is indeed "Taoist Magic in the Earthsea 
 Trilogy" but it is only relatively Daoist, only restrained and passive 
 and in the tradition of "unaction" relative to western magic. In the 
 trilogy, magic is still essentially power. In Tehanu , Tenar asks Ged, 
 "Is there something besides what you call power that comes before 
 it, maybe? Or something that power is just one way of using. . . . 
 Ogion said of you once that before you'd had any learning or training 
 as a wizard at all, you were a mage. Mage-born, he said. So I imagined 
 that, to have power, one must first have room for the power. An emptiness 
 to fill. And the greater the emptiness the more power can fill it. . . . 
 "Emptiness is one word for it. Maybe not the right word." 
 "Potentiality?" he said, and shook his head. "What is 
 able to be ... to become." 
 "I think . . . [a significant coincidence happened to 
 Ged] because of that because that is what happens to you. You didn't make 
 it happen. You didn't cause it. It wasn't because of your 'power.' It 
 happened to you. Because of your emptiness." 44 
 After a while he said, "This isn't far from what I was taught as 
 a boy on Roke: that true magery lies in doing only what you must do. But 
 this would go further. Not to do, but to be done to...." 
 "I don't think that's quite it. It's more like what true doing rises 
 from. (193-94; "Winter," ch. 12) 
 On Roke, Ged has learned the lesson of Chuang Tzu, that to do right "allow 
 yourself to fall in with the dictates of necessity. For necessity is the TAO 
 of the Sage," which Herbert A. Giles paraphrases, "Do nothing save 
 what you cannot help doing" (Giles 231). 45 
 Tenar proposes a theory to appropriate and redefine a phrase from John Keats 
 of "negative capability" for the art of magic, and of life. As Arha, 
 Priestess of the Nameless Ones in The Tombs of Atuan , Tenar had been 
 taught "that to be powerful she must sacrifice. Sacrifice herself and others. 
 A bargain: give, and so get" and Tenar denies neither her life as Arha 
 nor the truth of this lesson. But in her maturity Tenar's soul "cannot 
 live in that narrow place this for that, tooth for tooth, death for life.... 
 There is a freedom beyond that. Beyond payment, retribution, redemption beyond 
 all the bargains and the balances, there is freedom." Ged replies, "The 
 doorway between them," and says no more ( Tehanu 194). 
 Tenar's denial of sacrifice, and questioning the lex talionis (law of 
 retaliation and retribution) and payment and redemption in both capitalist and 
 theological senses are themes Le Guin develops in The Dispossessed , Eye 
 of the Heron , The Beginning Place , and elsewhere. The image of emptiness 
 is the Daoist one of the absence that allows some important existences: the 
 hub as the absence at the center of the wheel, allowing the existence of the 
 wheel, the empty space that is a doorway. 46 
 Before Tenar and Ged can get to such an insight, however (whatever it means) 
 before they can get "beyond . . . balances" and understand 
 positive doorways Ged must learn the necessity of balances and how opening some 
 doorways can be very bad. 
 Which returns us to the trilogy. 
 * 
 Margaret P. Esmonde has called the trilogy "straightforward stories [that] 
 deal in strong colors and plain fabrics," works that readily show "the 
 design the master patterner has woven, not just in Earthsea but throughout the 
 entire fabric of her work." The main pattern Esmonde sees is "the 
 psychological journey" passing "through pain and fear" to "the 
 integration of personality that Carl [G.] Jung wrote about" (16 and 34). 
 Esmonde implies that the individual integration of Ged is paralleled by integration 
 of Earthsea politically and cosmically; in an essay ending the anthology Esmonde's 
 begins, John H. Crow and I examine such "Patterns of Integration" 
 explicitly, and I still see in the trilogy, but not Tehanu , patterns 
 of integration on the levels of the individual, society, and the cosmos. 47 
 The Earthsea novels, then, are set on Earth in a legendary time in which consolidation 
 of power under a king might be the least bad political option. 48 
 It is a time when magic works and there are still dragons, but otherwise a plausible 
 world for moving into a second age of kings (rather like the Mycenaean Age as 
 recalled by Homer). Backward places like Ged's home island of Gont are pretty 
 much in the Bronze Age at the beginning of the story and some forty to fifty 
 years later have as their technological high points the spinning wheel, soap, 
 and a large ship like King Lebannen's Dolphin . 49 
 It is an archipelago world of islands and water, a politically 
 simple world where power is generally visible and often quite personal a world 
 where King Lebannen can say "I will forbid," and be convinced that 
 that will be that ( Tehanu 147; ch. 10). It is a world moving toward integration, 
 starting with individuals (see Crow and Erlich 202). The integration is most 
 spectacular with Ged in Wizard , but psychological integration is also 
 central to Tombs and Shore in the initiation into adulthood of 
 Arha/Tenar and Arren/Lebannen. 
 Political integration is less obvious, but it is there as a kind of goal for 
 the trilogy. Near the beginning of Wizard , Gont is raided by Viking-like 
 warriors from the Kargad Lands, and the political situation does not get much 
 better over the next fifty or so years: no wars, but raids, piracy, and slaving 
 make for a political world that could use (arguably) a strong central authority. 
 "Unhappy a land where heroes are needed," as Bertolt Brecht's Galileo 
 put it, but, I will add, unhappier still to need a hero and not get one. 50 
 In Wizard , Ged becomes a hero who can oppose the evils of his world. 
 And in Tombs and Shore he does so. In Tombs Ged does find 
 and free Tenar even as Tenar in the plot finds Ged and helps him escape and 
 that coming to freedom is what is most important in Tombs , Tenar's book; 
 still Ged's goal for his quest in Tombs is reuniting the Ring of Erreth-Akbe, 
 thereby completing the Rune of Peace, peace through the dominion of a King. 51 
 In Shore , the goal of the quest is closing a gap in nature that is draining 
 the vitality from the world, but the quest accomplishes not only this task but 
 also the making of Arren into King Lebannen: Arren is initiated into manhood, 
 brings Ged back to life through pain and the Dry Land of death, and thereby 
 fulfills the prophecy that the true inheritor of the throne will be one " who 
 has crossed the dark land living and come to the far shores of the day " 
 ( Shore 17; ch.2). 
 The One of the Dao that can be named one of the relatively few good "One's" 
 in Le Guin's canon produces the two of Yin-Yang, which in turn produces the 
 many things of the world. 52 
 In Wizard , Ged achieves wholeness oneness which 
 allows him to become the hero in Tombs , where Tenar will bond with him, 
 and the two of them will reunite the Ring. The Ring they return to the world 
 bears the sign under which Lebannen will rule when he and Ged return to Earthsea 
 and Lebannen begins the task of uniting the many. 
 Integration on the cosmic level is a theme more explicit in the trilogy than 
 the politics. There is no problem of integration with most of the cosmos of 
 Earthsea: it is just a small, wholly material world. Ged can know about stars 
 and the fire at the core of the Earth, but as a practical matter the world of 
 the trilogy consists of the islands of the archipelago and the sea, covered 
 by "the empty sky" i.e., just the dome of the sky, without a heaven 
 or transcendent gods. No heaven above, and no hell below, just the Old Powers 
 of the Earth, close enough to the surface to be an immediate problem only in 
 the area of The Tombs of Atuan and at the Court of the Terrenon ( WE 
 ch. 7 [see Erlich, in Survey , 450-51]). Where the cosmos gets problematic 
 is with death. No heaven, no hell: but there is Sheol, a Realm of Hel or Hades, 
 "the Dry Land" of the dead. The Dry Land touches Earthsea and is reached 
 by a spirit journey. 53 
 Those desiring to make most of the journey while embodied, head west, toward 
 the setting sun, but the last part of the journey must be made in spirit. "There 
 is a wall of stones . . . at a certain place on the bourne. Across 
 it the spirit goes at death, and across it a living man may go and return again, 
 if he is a mage" ( FS 75; "Sea Dreams," ch. 5) or if he's 
 Arren. 
 Perhaps we can get a better image of the problem Ged confronts with a damaged 
 cosmos if we drop for a moment the psychological and political term "integration" 
 and use Douglas Barbour's phrase, "Wholeness and Balance." Ged tells 
 Arren that "Death and life are the same thing like the two sides of my 
 hand, the palm and the back. And still the palm and the back are not the same.... 
 They can be neither separated, nor mixed" ( FS 74; ch. 5; see also 
 WE 80-83; ch. 5). Death and life must be like the clasped hands on the 
 SNCC button described in The Lathe of Heaven , or like George Orr and 
 Heather Lelache making love, or two hands left and right placed together palm 
 to palm: one whole (new) thing possible because two things are both similar 
 and different, touching and separate, complementary: Yin-Yang. 54 
 More generally, the principle of the cosmos is Balance. This point is repeated 
 at key moments in the trilogy, most emphatically in a lesson Ged teaches Arren: 
 . . . an act is not, as young men think, like a rock that one 
 picks up and throws, and it hits or misses, and that's the end of it. 
 When that rock is lifted, the earth is lighter; the hand that bears it 
 heavier. When it is thrown, the circuits of the stars respond, and where 
 it strikes or falls the universe is changed. On every act the balance 
 of the whole depends. The winds and seas, the powers of water and earth 
 and light, all that these do, and all that the beast and green things 
 do, is well done, and rightly done. All these act within the Equilibrium. 
 From the hurricane and the great whale's sounding to the fall of a dry 
 leaf and the gnat's flight, all they do is within the balance of the whole. 
 But we, insofar as we have power over the world and one another, we must 
 learn to do what the leaf and the whale and the wind do of their own nature. 
 We must learn to keep the balance. Having intelligence, we must not act 
 in ignorance. Having choice, we must not act without responsibility. 55 
 On Ged's level of power, the important balance is between the worlds of life 
 and death. 
 In all things, but especially in matters literally of life and death, the nature 
 of the world of Earthsea makes imperative following the rule Ged suggests to 
 Arren for a mage to advise a king: "My lord, do nothing because it is righteous 
 or praiseworthy or noble to do so; do only that which you must do and which 
 you cannot do any other way" ( FS 67; ch. 4 ). 56 
 To oversimplify one must act with the Dao, while necessarily within the Dao, 
 embedded in the world; and one must understand the consequences of one's actions. 
 One must act on what one knows, which means acting locally, on the smallest 
 scale possible, and preferably spontaneously, depending upon one's intuition. 
 To attempt large-scale, violent, deadly impositions of will upon the world would 
 be "The Arrogance of Power," a failure to know "The Limits of 
 Power" as local wars taught the Daoist philosophers during China's Warring 
 States period (481-221 B.C.E.), as twentieth-century history had made and was 
 again making very clear. 57 
 Most importantly, we do not and cannot "know what life is or what death 
 is," as Ged tells Arren. "To claim power over what you do not understand 
 is not wise, nor is the end of it likely to be good" ( FS 74; ch. 
 5). On great matters, then, the proper (in)action of wu wei would be to do nothing 
 but "that which you must do." Or so the matter must be put if one 
 acts consciously. Alternatively, one might— if one is an adept join oneself 
 with the Dao and be acted through. Ogion rather cryptically explain this to 
 Ged: "A man would know the end he goes to, but he cannot know it if he 
 does not turn, and return to his beginning, and hold that beginning in his being. 
 If he would not be a stick whirled and whelmed in the stream, he must be the 
 stream itself, all of it, from the spring to its sinking in the sea" ( WE 
 128; ch. 7). Ultimately, only mystic union with the Dao allows full being and 
 right action, ultimately, even a hero must be a sage. 58 
 * 
 In each of the books of the trilogy there is a balance that must be restored, 
 an integration to be made, and a doorway to be shut. 59 
 A Wizard of Earthsea gives Ged's early years, starting with his 
 childhood as a goatherder and witch-child and then his time as apprentice to 
 Ogion the Silent, the Mage of Re Albi on Gont, and Ged's most important teacher. 
 Ged very much needs to learn what Ogion has to teach: silence, patience, humility 
 before nature, unaction. 60 
 Not long into Ged's apprenticeship, Ogion offers Ged a choice: to stay with 
 him or to go to the school for wizards on Roke. Ged later sees this offer as 
 the choice between "the life of being and the life of doing" and tells 
 Arren that he "leapt at the latter like a trout to a fly." That "fly," 
 however, had a hook in it: actions have consequences to which one is bound and 
 every act "makes you act again and yet again" ( FS 34; "Hort 
 Town," ch. 3). 61 
 Ged goes to Roke, does very well in his studies, and then acts indeed. He gets 
 into a magic contest with an aristocratic youth and in his anger, envy, and 
 pride summons up the spirit of Elfarran, "the fair lady" from a famous 
 heroic song. But the millennium-dead Elfarran appears only for a moment, "Then 
 the sallow oval between Ged's arms grew bright. It widened and spread, a rent 
 in the darkness of the earth and night, a ripping open of the fabric of the 
 world. Through it blazed a terrible brightness. And through that bright misshapen 
 breach clambered something like a clot of black shadow, quick and hideous, and 
 it leaped straight out at Ged's face" (60-61; ch. 4). This is "The 
 Loosing of the Shadow," and the act results in Ged's facial scars, and 
 provides the plot of Wizard (plus a favorite Le Guinian image: "the 
 fabric of the world," here torn with "a terrible brightness"). 
 For the rest of the novel Ged is bound to "act again and yet again" 
 as he recovers from his wounds, then avoids his shadow and then flees, desperately 
 trying "to choose his way, to plan where he should go, what he should do; 
 but each choice, each plan, was blocked by a foreboding of doom" (98; ch. 
 6). 
 The middle of Wizard stresses three temptations of Ged. In one, he succumbs, 
 trying, "with no thought for himself" to bring back to life a dead 
 child. Whatever other allusions we can find, this action would imitate Christ's 
 raising from the dead the daughter of Jairus (Luke 8.49-56). Going after the 
 child was a bad idea on Ged's part not because it is blasphemous to imitate 
 Christ that literally but because Le Guin's thinking suggests that Christ did 
 ill in self-sacrifice generally and, more specifically here, enforcing his will 
 over nature in ignoring the rule "let the dying spirit go" ( WE 
 80; ch. 5). Ged also confronts the Dragon of Pendor and the Terrenon Stone, 
 where the lure in both cases is telling Ged the name of his shadow. It is well 
 that Ged resists since the Shadow's name is "Ged," and saying "Ged" 
 would give the dragon or the Stone power over him (92, ch 5; 120, ch. 7). 
 After the confrontation with the would-be mistress and master of the Terrenon, 
 at his psychological low-point in the story, Ged returns in the form of a hawk 
 to Ogion, who changes him back to a man and gives him the advice that he "must 
 be the stream itself." And for the turning point of the novel Ogion notes 
 that Ged returned to Gont and to him and now must "turn clear round, and 
 seek the very source, and that which lies beyond the source." That is, 
 Ged must seek both nameable and unnameable Dao, and, far more immediately, stop 
 fleeing for safety (for there is none in a universe in flux), and instead turn 
 around and hunt his hunter. He must stop allowing his shadow to gain strength 
 from him but instead hunt down and gain strength from his shadow (128; ch. 7). 
 This is a frightening thought, since the shadow somehow knows Ged's true name, 
 and Ged doesn't know the shadow's name, but Ged faces his fear and goes hunting 
 (ch. 8 f.). Along the way he gets help from two strangers and repays their kindness 
 as well as he can, and receives as a gift half of the Ring of Erreth-Akbe. Finally 
 he gets a little help from his friend Vetch and confronts the shadow. 
 Ged and Vetch are in a boat at sea, and yet dry land appears around them— the 
 Dry Land. Ged lifts his wizard's staff and produces light that "harrowed 
 even that ancient darkness." As they approach one another, the shadow "became 
 utterly black in the white mage-radiance that burned about it, and it heaved 
 itself upright. In silence, man and shadow met face to face, and stopped." 
 Simultaneously, they say one word, "'Ged.' And the two voices were one 
 voice." Ged reaches out and "took hold of his shadow, of the black 
 self that reached out to him. Light and darkness met, and joined, and were one." 
 Ged tells Vetch that "The wound is healed," in the world and in Ged: 
 "I am whole, I am free," and Vetch understands "that Ged had 
 neither lost nor won but, naming the shadow of his death with his own name, 
 had made himself whole: a man: who, knowing his whole true self," including 
 the evil in it, and his mortality, "cannot be used or possessed by any power 
 other than himself, and whose life therefore is lived for life's sake and never 
 in the service of ruin, or pain, or hatred, or the dark" (178-81; ch. 10). 
 Ged has integrated his shadow into himself and become a balanced whole: one 
 hero. 
 * 
 In her headnote to "The Good Trip" in The Winds Twelve Quarters 
 (1975), Le Guin jokes about her " infallible talent for missing whatever 
 boat all the fashionable people are on " (109), and I'll somewhat flippantly 
 apply this line to The Tombs of Atuan . Tombs appeared in 1971; 
 in 1972 Joanna Russ's "When It Changed" appeared in Harlan Ellison's 
 Again Dangerous Visions, and Russ's story may be usefully set in dialog 
 with Tombs and read as a friendly but firm response to Tombs . 62 
 "When It Changed" presents Whileaway, a feminist separatist utopia 
 whose doom (apparently) is announced with the arrival of men. Other separatist 
 works were to follow in the early 1970s, in imaginative literature doing significant 
 thought experiments asking what women's societies might be like, societies without 
 men. Other works investigated the possibility of women's religion. The value 
 system of Tombs is not separatist in terms of gender but strongly integrationist, 
 and against institutionalized religion, period, whether worshipping a Godking 
 or the more feminine, "chthonic" powers of the earth. As we will see, 
 the most politically powerful woman at Atuan is the High Priestess of the Godking 
 and definitely a man-identified woman, and the sexual and religious politics 
 of Tombs may be somewhat problematic. 63 
 In A Wizard of Earthsea , the imbalance to be corrected was Yangish 
 over-action, over-assertion, over-intellectuality, too much desire for life 
 and power: in Daoist (and traditional patriarchal) symbolism, too much light. 
 In The Tombs of Atuan , the balance to be redressed is too much stasis, 
 darkness, "cyclical" reincarnation. In Wizard the doorway to 
 the Dry Land was shut when Ged merged with his shadow. In Tombs , the 
 doorway is rather more literal, the Place of The Tombs of Atuan , where 
 the powers of darkness have irrupted into the light and hold that which is not 
 theirs: the Ring of Erreth-Akbe and Tenar, plus other women and eunuchs who 
 have a chance to escape at the end of the novel, or choose not to escape. 
 The plot of Tombs starts when the infant girl Tenar is found and declared 
 to be the incarnation of the One Priestess of the Nameless Ones (a process similar 
 to the one for finding a new Dalai Lama). In the ceremony of the Remaking of 
 the Priestess, Tenar has her name taken from her and becomes only Arha, "the 
 Eaten One," a vocational title only, not a name (Prologue, and ch. 1). 
 Arha comes into her full powers as priestess, theoretically, at fourteen, but 
 nothing really changes, and she still cannot act against the power of Kossil, 
 the Priestess of the Godking. More important, Arha finds it impossible to not 
 act when Kossil presents her with prisoners accused of plotting against the 
 Godking and says it is Arha's choice how they will die (see Crow and Erlich 
 210). Arha chooses to have them die of thirst and starvation (31-33; "The 
 Prisoners," ch. 3), faints at the conclusion of this episode (35), and 
 has bad dreams (38; "Dreams and Tales," ch. 4). As time slowly passes, 
 all Arha has to do she does, primarily learning her domain: the Undertomb and 
 the Labyrinth, which she explores almost entirely by touch, since light is forbidden 
 in the Undertomb, the heart of the realm of the Old Powers, whom she thinks 
 her "Masters." 
 And then something happens. Change is introduced with the arrival of Ged, who 
 momentarily brings light to the Undertomb with his wizard's staff, revealing 
 the underworld as an exquisite cave (58-59; "Light Under the Hill," 
 ch. 5). Ged brings change and a possibility of beauty that includes Arha's own 
 when Ged creates an illusion showing her as Tenar, in a beautiful dress (88; 
 "Great Treasure," ch. 7). 64 
 Arha captures Ged and then saves his life, a politically dangerous move that 
 Kossil discovers. Ged has half of the Ring of Erreth-Akbe, and the other half 
 is buried in the Great Treasury of the Nameless Ones. Arha has a choice: accept 
 her name back from Ged and escape with him and the Ring to the Inner Lands, 
 or return to being Arha and let Ged die. She takes back her name; Ged unites 
 the Ring and they escape, eventually bringing the Ring to Havnor, the central 
 city of Earthsea. During their escape, however, Tenar momentarily repudiates 
 the pain of her freedom and considers killing Ged (139-40), and Ged promises 
 to take Tenar away from Havnor to Ogion on Gont, so she can live quietly and 
 decide whether or not to enter the larger world beyond Gont (145; "Voyage," 
 ch. 12). 
 In terms of Ged's Jungian individuation, Tombs tells the "rescue 
 of the Anima," where the Hero takes his missing feminine portion from some 
 representative of the Great Mother. In terms of restoring balances and closing 
 doors, the key part of the story is Ged's bringing light to the Undertomb, which 
 eventually results in an earthquake from the angered Nameless Ones, an earthquake 
 that causes the fall of the monoliths that mark the Tombs, and the destruction 
 of their temple. Most important, there is the rejoining of the Ring and the 
 symbolic marriage of Ged and Tenar: Ged's masculinity balancing Tenar's femininity, 
 Ged's dark skin balancing Tenar's white, Ged's associations with light balancing 
 Tenar's associations with darkness. 65 
 All these themes, however, get a very different twist from being told from 
 the point of view of Tenar as "a feminine coming of age" story with 
 the subject of "sex." 66 
 Viewed this way, the imbalance is in the life of Arha; in Simone de Beauvoir's 
 terminology, Arha is trapped in immanence and in very great need of a project 
 (see Crow and Erlich 205). And this imbalance is corrected when Tenar accepts 
 Ged's offer of her name (her being) and with it true choice, true action, and, 
 most important, escape. Together Ged and Tenar escape from the underworld and 
 get away from the forces of darkness, dryness, and sterility when they reach 
 a very literal door, and Ged uses his magic, a word, and his phallic wizard's 
 staff to blow the door open (121-22; "The Anger of the Dark," ch. 
 10). As a critic of Tombs , Le Guin stresses the escape together: Tenar 
 cannot "get free of the Tombs without him," but then "neither 
 can Ged get free without her. They are interdependent," with Le Guin redefining 
 her hero to be more part of, in balance with, the world and other people: "dependent, 
 not autonomous" ( ER 9), half of "the original Mitsein " 
 (friendly society), a human couple (Beauvoir 35). 
 For Tenar, personal balance is restored when she gets out of a constricting, 
 terminally boring life without sex and enters the wider world of men, women, 
 freedom, and significant action. Contrary to the macho theory of "No retreat, 
 no surrender" and self-sacrifice as an ideal (especially for women) Le 
 Guin frequently endorses walking away: from a doomed world in "Things" 
 (1970), from the finally corrupt utopia of Omelas (1973), from dysfunctional 
 relationships in The Beginning Place (1980), from the threat of serfdom 
 in Eye of the Heron (1978). What sort of life Tenar can find on Gont 
 or in any of the Inner Lands, given the low status of women in Earthsea, is 
 a question that waits for Tehanu (Littlefield 249-50), but it will be 
 an improvement over the life of a priestess at Atuan even the highest of priestesses 
 serving real powers but very false gods. Giving her highly personal view, Tenar's 
 friend Penthe says she would "marry a pigherd and live in a ditch," 
 if she could, rather than stay "buried alive" as a priestess (40; 
 ch. 4), and, however unraised her consciousness, Penthe has a point. Expressed 
 in consciously political terms, Le Guin as critic says her "view is that 
 the Place in the desert is a community of women (and eunuchs) totally controlled 
 by men a subservient element in the totally male-dominant regime of the 
 godkings. Ged's society is also male-dominant, but not so repressive, and so 
 he can offer her a (relative) freedom" (personal communication). 
 The Farthest Shore returns to more explicit dealing with the Balance 
 and doorways, but it reverses much in The Tombs of Atuan (Crow and Erlich 
 206-07). 
 In Shore , Arren, Prince of Enlad, has been sent by his father to Roke 
 to seek the counsel of the Archmage Sparrowhawk and his colleagues. There has 
 been a loss of magic in the remote areas of Earthsea. Later Ged and Arren will 
 learn of increasing piracy and slave-taking, drug use, and a decline in the 
 arts and crafts. More generally, joy, vividness, and light are draining from 
 the world. Arren and Ged set off to discover why. Ged believes that one man 
 is responsible for this strange contagion, what he sees as a radical imbalance, 
 outside of the natural order. Ged is correct. A sorcerer named Cob has found 
 a way to immortality by dying and returning, opening a door between the realms 
 of life and death. 
 To search for Cob, Ged needs a guide: Ged is satisfied with the power of his 
 art and has long been reconciled to his own death. For Ged it is well that his 
 body will return to the natural cycles (as Chuang Tzu taught) and that the being 
 the acts and choices of his life have created will go to the Dry Land. 67 
 Arren, though, hears Cob very well, and the temptation for him is to become 
 a servant to Cob, serving the Anti-King. The appeal, Ged tells Arren, is made 
 "In our minds," an appeal to "The traitor, the self; the self 
 that cries I want to live; let the world burn so long as I can live! The little 
 traitor soul in . . . . all of us. But only some understand him. 
 The wizards and the sorcerers. The singers; the makers. And the heroes, the 
 ones who seek to be themselves. To be one's self is a rare thing and a great 
 one. To be one's self forever: is that not better still?" (135; "Orm 
 Embar," ch. 9). 
 Ged, then, needs someone who can hear Cob's appeal and resist it. Arren is 
 a good candidate: he fiercely wants to live, but will listen to Ged's lesson 
 that "Nothing is immortal" and that our mortality is the source of 
 our selfhood. Ged tells Arren the Perennial Philosophy "That selfhood . . . 
 does not endure. It changes; it is gone, a wave on the sea" and asks rhetorically, 
 "Would you have the sea grow still and the tides cease, to save one wave, 
 to save yourself?" (122; "Children of the Open Sea," ch. 8). 68 
 Conveniently for Le Guin's teaching purpose, but very plausibly, Arren is hard 
 to convince and demands to know why he shouldn't desire immortality. Ged is 
 pleased that Arren argues seriously and allows that Arren should desire immortality, 
 but he should beware lest he get his desire and the world suffer even worse. 
 There are two, Arren, two that make one: the world and the shadow, the 
 light and the dark. The two poles of the Balance. Life rises out of death, 
 death rises out of life; in being opposite they yearn to each other, they 
 give birth to each other and are forever reborn. And with them all is 
 reborn, the flower of the apple tree, the light of the stars. In life 
 is death. In death is rebirth. What then is life without death? Life unchanging, 
 everlasting, eternal?— What is it but death death without rebirth?" 
 (136; ch. 9) 69 
 Arren objects that if so much depends on "the Balance of the Whole," 
 surely "it would not be allowed" and here he stops, but we can fill 
 in that surely one mere human would not be allowed to disturb the Balance. Ged 
 pounces on the passive voice, deleted agent and asks rhetorically, "Who 
 allows? Who forbids?" Arren does not know, and neither does Ged. There 
 are no transcendent gods in the universe of Earthsea to allow or forbid, no 
 God or gods to command. Ged is sure that he was able to upset the Balance greatly: 
 "I have done the same evil, in the same folly of pride. I opened the door 
 between the worlds just a crack, just a little crack, just to show that I was 
 stronger than death itself. . . . Oh, the door between the light 
 and the darkness can be opened . . . . But to shut it again, 
 there's a different story" (137; ch. 9). 70 
 It is the story of almost all of the rest of their quest, and of Shore . 
 Ged and Arren go to Selidor, as far west as Earthsea goes, and then go in spirit 
 to the Dry Land of death. At the climax of Shore , Arren and Ged confront 
 Cob at the Dry River (176-84; "The Dry Land," ch. 12). There is an 
 agon at the Dry River: a struggle in words, a physical struggle (though in spirit), 
 and a magical struggle as Ged strives to close the door between the worlds. 
 In a significant paraphrase of a graffito attributed to Percy Bysshe Shelley, 
 that door was "a way that led nowhere" (183; ch. 12). 71 
 Shelley, the story goes, was expelled from Oxford for painting "THIS WAY 
 TO HEAVEN" on the wall forming the end of a dead-end alley. Any religious 
 way promising immortality, including the Christian Way, Shelley and Le Guin 
 hold, is a way going nowhere. Arren and Ged succeed: Ged closes the door and 
 gives Cob back his true name, and a real death. The cost of this victory to 
 Ged is all his power as a mage, and most of his physical strength. Arren—or 
 Lebannen, now, the King who goes by his true name must carry Ged over the Mountains 
 of Pain. They arrive on Selidor and the Eldest dragon Kalessin flies them back 
 to Roke. 
 On Roke, Ged kneels to Lebannen, acknowledging him King of All the Isles. And 
 then Kalessin takes Ged back to Gont. Again, Le Guin offers alternative endings. 
 The heroic Deed of Ged has Ged go to Havnor for the coronation and then 
 take his boat, Lookfar , "from harbor and from haven, westward among 
 the isles, westward over sea; and no more is known of him." That is, when 
 he has spent his power and has reached old age he makes a heroic exit and— 
 like a combination of Alfred, Lord Tennyson's Ulysses and a hero in a Western 
 movie sails off into the sunset. They tell the story differently on Gont. In 
 that version the King comes to Gont to seek Ged but learns he's gone off to 
 the "into the forests of the mountain." The King forbids seeking Ged 
 out, saying, "He rules a greater kingdom than I do." That is, Ged 
 takes the route of a Sage and leaves the life of doing for a forest, Le Guin's 
 favorite image for Being (196-97; "The Stone of Pain," ch. 13). 
 Tehanu goes with the version told on Gont, but corrects it. Ged returns 
 to Gont and finds Tenar, and in old age finds love and a domestic life— 
 and, for the first time, a sex life. Yin-Yang can symbolize the balance of Life 
 and Death and cosmic Equilibrium, or the human and dragon in Tehanu. Le Guin 
 insists in her last book-length visit to Earthsea that the image for the mystic 
 Yin-Yang (re)creation of the world is also the mundane but complex intertwining 
 of dark and light as Ged and Tenar make love. 
 CI , LoH , Earthsea : Endnotes 
 1 For an elegant 
 analysis of the four major settings of Le Guin's stories (Earthsea, The Hainish 
 World, Orsinia, and The West Coast [of North America]), see Cummins, Understanding 
 Ursula K. Le Guin , ch. 5 for "The West Coast"). 
 2 For the Condor 
 People, see below, the section on Always Coming Home . 
 3 In the section 
 of ACH (1985) entitled "Some Generative Metaphors." 
 4 Students of 
 recent literary theory might want to apply to Falk-Ramarren, and Le Guin on 
 the idea of Balance more generally, the theories of Mikhail Bakhtin. Margaret 
 Lee Zoreda describes Bakhtin's idea of monologism as "the impossibility 
 to achieve a harmonious understanding within the same being, 'of two consciences 
 and two subjects' at the same time ("Problem [of the Text . . .] 
 111)." She paraphrases Bakhtin's idea of dialogism as "the 
 encounter-juxtaposition of autonomous entities, whether words, sentences, 
 discourses, subjects[,] or cultures that without merging conserve their identities 
 in a mutually enriching bond" (paraphrasing "Response to a Question 
 . . ." 7) (Zoreda 55, 59). Falk-Ramarren has achieved a dialogic 
 existence. 
 5 I am one of 
 the "others" in "Kalish et al." The Kalish article stemmed 
 from a project I directed in two of my SF courses at Miami U. 
 6 In CI , 
 the Tao te Ching is the "Old Canon" that is complemented 
 by the newer "Yahweh Canon." The texts in Hebrew scripture 
 are probably older than the Tao te Ching , but philosophical Daoism 
 is part of the very ancient "The Perennial Philosophy," most especially 
 the tradition of immanence and the Mother, against relatively new, personalized, 
 masculine, transcendent sky-gods. 
 7 For different 
 evaluations, see Spivack's criticism of EoH for making "too explicit," 
 too neat, the confrontation of values and peoples in the evil folk of Victory 
 City against the "gentle people" of the town of Shantih (114). Spivack 
 may underestimate Falco, a major Boss of the City, but her point is legitimate, 
 as is her valuing the ambiguity that leads to complexity in LHD and 
 TD over the clarity of EoH . 
 8 For "the 
 Way cannot be gone," note Le Guin's rendering of the opening to Tao 
 te Ching as " The way that can be gone / is not the eternal Way " 
 ( CI 187; ch. 9). For acting at need and at the right moment, cf. Ged 
 to Tenar in Tehanu (1990): "You did what you could. What you did 
 was right. Timed right" (175; "Home," ch. 11). See Conclusion 
 to Coyote for Rosemary Jackson on this passage in CI . 
 9 See CI 
 170, ch. 8, for "the drowned lands" west of the Sierras from Es 
 Toch, drowned in "the cataclysms of two thousand years ago." California's 
 slipping into the sea is an old fear and joke, but I think it significant 
 if the coastal geography of CI turns up again in ACH . 
 10 Remington, 
 "The Other Side of Suffering" 158-59. See CI 152-53; ch. 
 8. I am indebted to Remington for my understanding of "touch" in 
 Le Guin. 
 11 For Lathe 
 as familiarly Daoist but otherwise "somewhat of an anomaly" in Le 
 Guin's fiction, see Spivack, ch. 5 (quote from 60), who refers readers to 
 Watson's "Le Guin's Lathe ." For the initial work on Daoism 
 in LoH , see Barbour's ". . . Taoist Dream" article. 
 12 For a brief 
 discussion of Le Guin's background in the scientific study of dreams, see 
 Bucknall 90. 
 13 I depend 
 here on Biskind, ch. 3, "Pods and Blobs," esp. 115-17, 123-44, for 
 Biskind's taxonomy of 1950s "centrist" and "extremist" 
 films. 
 14 Arthur Waley 
 commenting on Tao te Ching ch. 19: "The Uncarved Block is the 
 symbol of the primal undifferentiated unity underlying the apparent complexity 
 of the universe" (167). 
 15 Herring 172, 
 paraphrasing J. William Fulbright, whose 1966 work attacking US adventurism 
 was called The Arrogance of Power . 
 16 I allude 
 to the vast machine in Metropolis that is called "Moloch" by the 
 hero: i.e., in colloquial usage, a god to whom children are sacrificed. 
 17 The idea 
 of "the superimposition of the mechanical upon the organic," specifically 
 upon the human, is from Henri Bergson, applied to quite a bit of SF by Dunn 
 and Erlich, e.g., "A Vision of Dystopia." 
 18 Note that 
 neither the machine as such nor control are in themselves Bad Things. A wise 
 Aldebaran Alien finds an electroencephalograph "Worthy" in LoH 
 (119; ch. 8), and controlled dreaming is central to Athshean culture in WWF 
 (e.g. 99-101; ch. 5). 
 19 For LoH 
 as a commentary on utopias: Dr. Haber puts George into effective dreaming 
 with the word "Antwerp" (25; ch. 2), which is never explained and 
 doesn't particularly mean anything in the story; Antwerp, however, is the 
 setting for Book I of Sir Thomas More's Utopia (1516). 
 20 See Remington, 
 "Other Side" 169. 
 21 Le Guin's 
 point here is Haber's perverse need to be free of "any kind of need for 
 the other" ( LoH 112), and this is highly important for Le Guin 
 on marriage, touch, relationship with the world: Le Guinian marriage is a 
 human good, understood to included a wide range of connections, and not just 
 a tender trap for women. Still, see my discussions of LHD and TD 
 for the cultural skirmishes over the treatment of homosexuality in Le Guin's 
 canon, and Le Guin's increasing openness over time toward homosexuality and 
 relatively casual sex while still valuing highly "the body's obscure, 
 inalterable dream of mutuality"—esp. woman/man mutuality—in 
 the 1990s stories "Seggri," "Solitude" and, "Coming 
 of Age in Karhide (quoting here "The Matter of Seggri" [1994]: 29). 
 22 In conversation, 
 Le Guin pointed out that she found dreaming up a series of worlds funny in 
 itself. Also, literal-mindedness such as shown by Orr's unconscious is a source 
 of comedy in Golem stories; more exactly, it's a source of danger for people 
 within the stories, comedy for listeners or readers. 
 23 "What 
 is of all things most yielding," water (or perhaps air [Chen 161]) "Can 
 overwhelm that which is most hard," i.e. rock ( Tao te Ching ch. 
 43 [Waley trans. 197]). Water is also important among Native Americans ("Legends" 
 8), and, I will add, in George Carlin's philosophically sophisticated satiric 
 routine on "Water don't give a shit." 
 24 In his presentation 
 on ". . . The Lathe of Heaven as Novel and Film," 
 Andrew Gordon called attention to the film's "repeated images of water 
 and light, developed from the images in the novel"; my interpretation 
 of those images differs from Gordon's, but I have profited from his work on 
 the film. 
 25 For the Yin-Yang 
 pictured vertically, with Yin on the right, see Cummins (1993): 33; for the 
 horizontal version, Yin on top, see printer's marks in WTQ . 
 26 It's "SNCC": 
 Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee," pronounced [snIk]. 
 27 ACH 
 236; Dramatic Works (I have retained the italics indicated a fixed line in 
 an otherwise improvided play). 
 28 Roughly speaking, 
 in WWF Selver is to Davidson as Orr is to Haber; Lyubov is to Selver 
 and Davidson as Lelache is to Orr and Haber. LHD (1969) and EoH 
 (1978) have significantly modified versions of this triangle. For a different 
 interpretation of point of view in LoH , see Cummins (1993): 157, 165. 
 29 I'm skirting 
 here a Kulturkampf skirmish. Male authors of bourgeois novels and some 
 dramas attempted to create characters who mirrored selves in the real world. 
 Typically in such works, the (male) hero was a Self, capable of change, and 
 women Others, and constant. By the 1990s, some key terms in my last two sentences 
 were contested. Is LoH a more feminist novel if Lelache changes? Change 
 is privileged in most postRomantic thought, and in much of Le Guin's canon, 
 but LoH privileges stillness. Christian doctrine—and some other 
 doctrines developed in Christian cultures—celebrates change and the New 
 Man: rebirth; some nonChristians believe most of us are born all right initially 
 and should develop decent personalities and stick with them. (For an excellent 
 introd. to Self, Other, and change, see Bamber ch. 1.)cCf. the Terran 
 military men in WWF , esp. 67; ch. 3. 
 31 For Either/Or, 
 note Sren Kierkegaard's Either/Or (1843), and Fear and Trembling 
 (1843), Kierkegaard's analysis of the Binding of Isaac (Genesis 22), where 
 Abraham is either a knight of faith or a fanatical murderer. 
 Le Guin rejects either/or but accepts the Kierkegaardian Existentialist belief 
 in the necessity for conscious choices among the options in life. 
 32 See Remington, 
 "Other Side" 170. 
 33 Sri Krishna 
 tells Arjuna "When we consider Brahman as lodged within the individual 
 being, we call Him the Atman" ( Song of God 74; Bhagavad-Gita 8). 
 Alternatively, the doctrine of Atman-Brahman: "Brahman is in all things 
 and is the Self (Atman{long initial A}) of all things" ("Hinduism" 
 8.889). Or, "Atman is Brahman": Self is universe. 
 34 Cf. Selver 
 in WWF , 124; ch. 6. This far Le Guin's protagonists are good Existentialists 
 like Sartre's Orestes in The Flies : authority figures fail in most 
 attempts to send them off on guilt trips. 
 35 Tao te 
 Ching ch. 18. 
 36 Le Guin 
 noted on my ms here "The language and ideas are straight from Victor 
 Hugo." I pass this information on for the use of those who know Hugo. 
 Unspaced dots in the next sentence represent an ellipsis mark in original. 
 37 Following 
 Le Guin's comments in "Is Gender Necessary? Redux" and elsewhere, 
 throughout this book, I use "Daoist" in talking about Le Guin's 
 ontology, epistemology, politics, etc. Note, however, that the Dao is a generally 
 Chinese idea, as is Odo's "To be whole is to be part" ( TD 
 68, ch. 3; "The Day Before the Revolution"). See LoN (1989) 
 164-65, and Chung-Ying Cheng esp. 27-28, 31, 33, 38. For discussions of Le 
 Guin's use of Daoism in various works see Spivack, here 26, and passim (see 
 Index 181). 
 38 For other 
 switches in point of view, see WE 123-25, ch. 7 (Ogion's) and 179-80, 
 ch. 10 (Vetch's point of view). For Le Guin on switching POV, see "On 
 Theme," 208. 
 39 The chapters 
 in WE are numbered; those of the other three books are not, so I have 
 supplied the chapter numbers. Those wishing to look up several or many of 
 my citations will find it time-saving to number the chapters. 
 40 For skin 
 colors in Earthsea, consult WE 7 and 39; chs. 1 and 3: Ged is "red-brown." 
 For other symbols in Earthsea, see Spivack 30-31. 
 41 Coyote's 
 making or causing the world is an idea Le Guin works with in "Buffalo 
 Gals, Won't You Come Out Tonight" in Buffalo Gals And Other Animal 
 Presences (1987) 22, 43. 
 42 Contrast 
 the transcendent Dreamer, adolescent demiurge in "Pathways of Desire." 
 43 A picture 
 of Ouroboros as "Crowned dragon as tail eater," from Uraltes 
 Chymisches Werk (1760) can be found under "Ouroboros," Encyclopaedia 
 Britannica (1974), Micropaedia VII. 
 44 Contrast 
 the very negative emptiness in Dr. Haber (see above). 
 45 Chuang 
 Tzu ch. 23; see also ch. 6 (Giles 74). 
 46 Strongly 
 contrast the tone of Koheleth's opening line, trans. in NEB, "Emptiness, 
 emptiness, says the Speaker, emptiness, all is empty" (Eccl. 1.2). Vulgate 
 trans. into Latin: "Vanitas vanitatum, dixit Ecclesiastes; Vanitas vanitatum, 
 et omnia vanitas." The Geneva Bible and those derived from it just English 
 Jerome's Vanitas as "Vanity"; Tanakh renders the image 
 into idiomatic English and supplies appropriate punctuation: "Utter futility!—said 
 Koheleth—Utter futility! All is futile!" 
 47 In the Conclusion 
 to Coyote's Song I deal with Rosemary Jackson's objections to the idea 
 of integration, objections underlying, I think, some of Sarah Lefanu's problems 
 with Le Guin's early work: Jackson 154-55, Lefanu 139-40 and passim in the 
 section on Le Guin. 
 48 One could 
 also see Earthsea in an alternative universe or on another planet; I follow 
 Remington in seeing the series on our Earth (". . . Cyclical 
 Renewal" 278). 
 49 Esmonde 
 sees WE covering Ged's life from birth to age seventeen or so and TA 
 set ten or fifteen years later (20), with Ged forty to fifty years old in 
 FS and Archmage for about five years (27). I discuss the cultural setting 
 in Survey 447, 450-51. 
 50 Brecht, 
 Life of Galileo (Scene 13, 98), quoted by Grixti (223). 
 51 On royal 
 dominion, contrast "the Flowering of Rer, the Summer Century" when 
 "Sedern Geger, the Unking, cast the crown" of Karhide into the River 
 Arre and proclaimed "an end to dominion" ("Coming of Age in 
 Karhide" [1995]: 470). 
 52 "Tao 
 gives birth to one, / One gives birth to two . . . / Three gives 
 birth to ten thousand beings"—i.e., everything ( Tao te Ching , 
 ch. 42, Chen trans. 157 f.). 
 53 For the 
 spirit journey as "one of the themes of the philosophical Taoists," 
 see Welch 94. For one example of a real-world view of spirit journeys, cf. 
 and contrast the beliefs of the Twana people of western Washington State (Elmkendorf 
 with A. L. Kroeber 483-84). The idea of a spirit journey, however, is enough 
 of a commonplace even in our culture to be central to the parodic premise 
 of Bill & Ted's Bogus Journey (1991). 
 54 See Remington, 
 "Other Side" esp. 162-63, Crow and Erlich 201. 
 55 FS 
 66-67; "Magelight," ch. 4. See also WE 44; "The School 
 for Wizards," ch. 3. 
 56 See Chuang 
 Tzu ch. chs. 6 and 23 (Giles 74 and 231). 
 57 See bibliographic 
 entries for J. W. Fulbright and E. McCarthy. 
 58 Hero and 
 sage can be seen as binary opposites, but probably shouldn't be. Even in the 
 Latin West, the formula for a hero was Fortitudo et Sapientia , covering 
 meanings from "strength and cunning" through "fortitude and 
 wisdom"; and even Hercules, god of jocks, got transmuted by the Renaissance 
 into an intellectual. 
 59 On equilibrium 
 and balance, see Chuang Tzu ch. 11, Giles trans. p. 106. 
 60 Significantly 
 Ogion also names Ged in a ceremony that takes Ged at age thirteen "Nameless 
 and naked" across "the cold springs of the Ar" ( WE 14; 
 ch. 1). Before seeing unChristian Le Guin alluding to Christian baptism, note 
 that Hesiod says that "The daughters of Tethys and Ocean are the holy 
 race of nymphs who, with the help of Lord Apollo and their brothers the Rivers, 
 bring young boys to manhood . . . ," apparently in some 
 long-preChristian rite of baptism ( Theogony 63; v.337-82). 
 61 Cf. and contrast 
 Tenar's leaving Ogion for marriage and a family in Tehanu (see below, 
 my chapter on Tehanu ). Ged leaps at power; Tenar turns her back on 
 it; and, with all respect for Ogion, the good as well as the Silent—and 
 with great respect for power wisely used and more wisely not used—in 
 that turning away and renouncing Tenar joins The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas 
 (see below). 
 62 Note that 
 it is irrelevant for such an exercise whether or not Russ intended a response 
 or had even read Tombs . It is unlikely Shakespeare ever read Machiavelli; 
 Macbeth and King Lear are still responses to Machiavellian theories 
 of Realpolitik ; Le Guin said she had not read Jung before she wrote 
 WE ; WE still features "Jung's Shadow" ("Response" 
 45). In a very useful review essay on James Bittner's Approaches , Marleen 
 Barr suggests in a footnote setting other Le Guin texts in dialogs: "Mary 
 Gentle's The Golden Witchbreed (1985) . . . can be read as 
 a feminist version of" LHD , and Sheila Finch's Triad (1986) 
 "can be read as a feminist version" of WWF ( SFS #41: 
 112 n.). 
 63 Again, see 
 Littlefield for "The fundamental imbalances of power and gender" 
 (252), not addressed until Tehanu . 
 64 Later, Ged 
 will tell her she'll have a hundred dresses like that—but real ones—in 
 Havnor (131-32; "Western Mountains," ch. 11). See Tehanu 
 (155; ch. 11) for Tenar as dressmaker for Therru. See Littlefield for a very 
 negative interpretation of the hundred dresses, as an ineffective bribe (249). 
 65 Barrow and 
 Barrow found a letter from Le Guin to Theodora Kroeber indicating Le Guin 
 didn't marry off Ged and Tenar because "a 'happily married wizard just 
 won't do'—an archetype must ' behave like an archetype'" (Letter, 
 8 July 1971, qtd Barrow 36). 
 66 Le Guin, 
 "Dreams Must Explain Themselves" 55. See also Esmonde 22-26, Littlefield 
 249-50. 
 67 Chuang 
 Tzu ch. 6 (Giles 79). 
 68 "Especially 
 in Hindu symbolism, time is portrayed as a placid, silent pool within which 
 ripples come and go. The ripples are our temporary lives from which we must 
 go down into the great, eternal Nirvana" (Meerloo 248). Water with waves 
 is also a good image for the Dao, and as an alternative image of the great 
 Void can correlate with ultimate physical reality as a quantum field (Capra 
 ch. 14, "Emptiness and Form"). 
 69 For rebirth 
 as a positive thing earlier in the trilogy, in TA , see Barrow 37. Note 
 Waley's rendering of the opening of Tao te Ching ch. 50: "He who 
 aims at life achieves death" (p. 203). 
 70 See also 
 Ged's speech on "the kingdom of life," ending rather hopefully with 
 "Deep are the springs of being, deeper than life than death....": 
 165, "Selidor," ch. 11. 
 71 See headnote 
 to "The Field of Vision," WTQ 222). 
 contents 
 bibliography sfra 
 home page 
