 
 Chapter 9: New Heroes 
 contents bibliography sfra home page 
 New Heroes: 
 Young Adult, The Eye of the Heron , "Pathways," The New 
Atlantis 
 I'll repeat here some of what I've inferred to be the basic patterns for 
Ursula K. Le Guin's SF and fantasy. 
 First, there is the pattern of two philosophical views of the world: transcendence 
 vs. immanence (in its Eastern, "Perennial Philosophy" form): most generally 
 the argument over whether Ultimate Reality is Out There in some transcendent 
 God or Ultimate Truth reached through a semi-divine Reason, or is within the 
 world, to be felt out inside things-immanent. Le Guin has come out for immanence 
 in terms of this philosophical debate, but she has also been willing to endorse 
 immanence in more worldly, political ways. In The Second Sex 
 (1949), Simone de Beauvoir uses "immanence" and "transcendence" as central terms 
 for her analysis of women's current situation and proposals for women's liberation, 
 and finds that the "domestic labors that fell to [woman's] lot . . . 
 imprisoned her in repetition and immanence" a clearly bad thing. For Beauvoir 
 a human couple "is the original Mitsein " (friendly society), but still, 
 nowhere is "woman" more trapped in immanence than reproduction and marriage. 1 
 Le Guin may deny church and state and the sanction of either for personal relationships, 
 but she can speak well of friendship, love, commitment to a promise and, in 
 those senses, speak well of "marriage." 
 Which leads to the pattern of Romantic Comedy. 2 
 In the Shakespearean form that permeates English-speaking culture, Romantic 
 Comedy moves toward a new and better world younger, more flexible, more hopeful, 
 more joyous coalescing around a central couple. The Shakespearean pattern also 
 allows for variations, even such extreme variations as the tragedy of Romeo 
 and Juliet and the trashing of Romance in love and war in Shakespeare's Troilus 
 and Cressida . The Shakespearean precedent also includes the contrasting 
 of two worlds as in the dream-time forest vs. the orderly palace of Theseus 
 in A Midsummer Night's Dream , the green world of the Forest of Arden 
 vs. the authoritarian Court in As You Like It or the golden world of 
 Belmont vs. the early-capitalist world of Venice in The Merchant of Venice . 
 Two worlds in instructive contrast are also common in utopias and dystopian 
 satires; as the anti-hero says in Frederik Pohl and C. M. Kornbluth's The 
 Space Merchants , " . . . things are invisible except against a 
 contrasting background" (173; ch. 14). In Sir Thomas More's Utopia (1516) 
 there is Utopia vs. "all the other states which flourish today," which seem 
 to Raphael Hythloday (the voyager to Utopia) to be "nothing but a conspiracy 
 of the rich, who pursue their own aggrandizement under the name and title of 
 the Commonwealth" (Hythloday's closing speech). In Yevgeny Zamiatin's We 
 (ca. 1920), it is the anti-Christian, Scythian-like rebels the "Mephi" vs. the 
 over-rational, Euclidean, "Taylorized" City-dwellers of the United State. 3 
 In Aldous Huxley's Brave New World (1932), there is the Savage Reservation 
 vs. the civilized lands of the World State. In E. M. Forster's "The Machine 
 Stops" (1909), the contrast is between machine-using subterrestrials and surface-dwellers 
 closer to nature. 4 
 As Le Guin, I, and others have noted, Le Guin's variation on this common pattern 
 has the good society in the story in some sense anarchistic: "communal, independent, 
 and somewhat introverted." Their populations are stable and they tend not to 
 "move in large masses, or rapidly. Their migrations have been slow . . . . 
 They have no nomadic peoples, and no societies that live by expansion and aggression 
 . . . . Nor have they formed large, hierarchically governed nation-states, 
 the mobilizable entity that is the essential factor in modern war." Competition 
 is ritualized, and, when ritual breaks down, the resulting violence does not 
 become mass violence, remaining limited, personal." Bad societies are organized 
 into "hierarchically governed nation-states" or their future analogs, which 
 Le Guin sees correctly as "the mobilizable entity that is the essential factor 
 in modern war" and, I'll add, premodern war ("Gender . . . Redux" 
 10-11, "Gender" in LoN [1979]: 166). If religion is an issue in 
 the story, the good people favor an immanent, noninstitutionalized spirituality, 
 putting them into the world and connecting them with the world; the bad people 
 favor transcendence and immortality and organized religion as we have 
 seen in The Left Hand of Darkness , and which can be inferred from The 
 Dispossessed : one of Shevek's first lines to the Urrasti is "You admit no 
 religion outside the churches, just as you admit no morality outside the laws" 
 ( TD 12; ch. 1). 
 With these patterns in mind, I wish to examine here five of Le Guin's works 
from the mid-1970s to 1980 and point out variations on these themes from the 
work of the 1960s and early 1970s. 
 YOUNG ADULT STORIES 
 Very Far Away from Anywhere Else (1976) 
 Very Far Away from Anywhere Else is a mundane ("realistic," 
"mainstream") novella telling, according to the front cover blurb on the Bantam 
1978 edition, "A Different Kind of Love Story." The story is set in our world, 
on the west coast of the USA, and covers some six months of fictive time and one 
basic "action" (1). 
 Owen Thomas turned seventeen "last November," and the plot kicks in five days 
 after his birthday, a birthday on which Owen's father gave him a car (6-7). 
 Owen is a contemporary American intellectual with strong interests in biology 
 and psychology, and the protagonist-narrator of the novella. For college he 
 wants to go to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, California Institute 
 of Technology, or Princeton (in that order); his mother very much wants him 
 to go to "State" (see 22-23). Shortly after getting the car, Owen, still walking 
 to and from school, guiltily takes a bus to get out of the rain and meets Natalie 
 Field, a fellow student, about a year older than he. Natalie is also an intellectual, 
 and an artist. Owen and Natalie become best friends. Owen clowns, doing an ape 
 act for Natalie; Natalie lets Owen stay with her while she practices the viola. 5 
 Natalie tells Owen about her desire to become a composer and lets him know she 
 feels insecure in that ambition an insecurity that contrasts with her confidence 
 as a performer and her rock-steadiness (18, 33, 41-42). And, when Natalie tells 
 Owen about the Bront family, Owen tells her about the land of Thorn he invented, 
 his own country, "a very long way from anywhere else" (49). All goes well until 
 Owen decides he must desire sex with Natalie, hence must love her (43-45). At 
 an outing to Jade Beach, Owen makes a sexual advance upon Natalie and is rebuffed 
 (52-57). Having dropped Natalie off at home, Owen drives away, drives around, 
 and drives his new car off the road, "totaling" the car and giving himself some 
 serious bruises, a dislocated shoulder, and a concussion (58). Fortunately, 
 the car is completely insured; unfortunately Owen avoids Natalie, cuts himself 
 off from people, lives in a figurative "fog," and starts lying about small things 
 (67). This goes on until spring, when Owen sees an announcement of an evening 
 of music with the civic orchestra that will include performances by Natalie 
 and others of her settings for three poems (65). Owen goes to the concert, is 
 greatly moved (69-71), and he and Natalie reconcile and become friends again. 
 At the end of the novella, she goes off to Tanglewood, and he will soon go to 
 MIT. Their "touch" is relatively chaste kisses mostly, but they are now going 
 beyond the six-second limit they thought decorous for friends (85-87). 
 At the start of his story, Owen tells us, "Sports are neat to do, but dull to 
talk about. Anyhow there won't be much about sports in this" (1). Nor is there 
any coming of age through sex or violence or going through basic training or 
cruising with the guys or spectacular car chases or getting drunk, getting high, 
or rescuing the heroine. Instead we get a young male protagonist on the border 
of manhood making some points about relationships. Very Far Away offers a 
different kind of romantic comedy or romance: one that ends in friendship strong 
enough to stand separation, one that examines very deeply the complexities of 
young love. 
 * 
 Very Far Away is interesting in itself in its participation in the 
"debate" on the possibility of boy/girl and woman/man friendship, and on sex. 
 Michael Moffatt, an anthropologist who has studied college students only 
slightly older than Owen and Natalie, repeats some true clichs about friendship 
in America: 
 Until recently in American culture, friendships usually formed between 
 men and men or between women and women; they did not ordinarily occur 
 between the sexes [after childhood]. As late as 1970 a sociologist could 
 generalize about American gender relations: "Except during courtship, 
 [American] men and women are not expected to pursue interaction voluntarily 
 with one another. And they are not expected to form friendships with one 
 another, but to try to find a marriage partner, thus the assertion that 
 'men and women can be lovers but never friends.'" (45) 6 
 According to Moffatt's studies, norms for male/female relationships had 
changed enough by the late 1970s and 1980s, at least among young people, that 
"over a third of hundreds of reciprocated close friendships reported 
. . . by students in the Rutgers [University] coed dorms were 
cross-sex relationships" (45). But such relationships were still sufficiently 
problematic into the 1990s to be material for television situation comedies like 
 Seinfeld and Friends and for theatrical films such as Rob Reiner's 
When Harry Met Sally (1989). Very Far Away in 1976, then, was dealing 
centrally with a topic important for its Young Adult target audience and beyond. 
Also significant is the question of sex. Moffatt notes that "The direct sources 
of the students' sexual ideas were located almost entirely in mass consumer 
culture," from films and television to Penthouse , Playgirl , 
Harlequin romances (females only), and occasional pornography (Moffatt 194). All 
together, these sources produce what the Leftist British critic Stephen Heath 
calls 
 a "new sexual orthodoxy," one that is in some ways as coercive as older, 
 rejected western sexual codes. 7 
 If pre-Victorians associated sex with sin and guilt but nevertheless often 
 enjoyed it quietly as a private pleasure, Heath argues, and if the Victorians 
 discovered sexuality and then repressed it, contemporary Anglo-Americans 
 almost must celebrate it. Sexuality almost must be central 
 to one's sense of self. And the essence of sexuality itself, in currently 
 established conventions, is a technique-centered act of intercourse to 
 orgasm . . . . If the archetypal Victorian novel ended 
 in a good marriage . . ., the archetypal contemporary romance 
 ends in the explicitly described perfect orgasm . . . . 
 Much in these student sexual self-reports [collected by Moffatt] was 
 consistent with Heath's . . . interpretation of the contemporary 
 mass culture of sex. It was virtually impossible, for instance, for any 
 writer of these papers, woman or man, to say, Sex is incidental, or I'm 
 too young to think about such things, or To tell you the truth, I don't 
 like sex very much. Sex had to be important, even for the sexually 
 inactive . . . . And those few students who tried to move 
 away from the orthodoxy, who tried to say something idiosyncratic, were 
 in the end "controlled by the discourse." In the end . . . they 
 virtually had to cop out for the centrality of sex and for sexual pleasure 
 as an ideal . . . . (195) 
 So says a professional anthropologist studying students at Rutgers University. 
 It is more effective with young readers, I suspect perhaps with readers generally 
 to have similar views expressed by a credibly presented seventeen-year-old boy: 
 ". . . the way a lot of people talk, and the way a lot of movies and 
 books and advertising and all the various sexual engineers, whether they're 
 scientists or salesmen, tell you the way it is is all the same. Man Plus Woman 
 Equals Sex. Nothing else." But Owen goes a bit beyond the idea of popular culture's 
 sexual orthodoxy to get to an older orthodoxy; the person who most got him thinking 
 about sex with Natalie Field was her father, the rather fundamentalist, church-going 
 Mr. Field (32, 42-43). After their fashion, puritanical sorts, too, are obsessed 
 with sex. Further, Owen honestly responds to Natalie as exciting: "Physically, 
 and mentally, and spiritually exciting." And from this excitement he draws a 
 conclusion: "But what I thought, because of what everybody, even Freud, says, 
 was that it must be Love. They all say that sex is the real thing, and Love 
 is what you call it when you are slightly more civilized than a gorilla. Sex 
 isn't something you do when you're in love, love is what you call it when you 
 want sex," which, of course, "the toothpaste commercials and the cigarette ads 
 and the porno movies and the art movies and the pop songs, or Mr. Field" all 
 agree you do (44). 
 In Very Far Away Le Guin is getting into a major debate on sexuality 
and endorsing "Just Say 'No'" in a very nuanced way. Locating in popular culture 
and (ironically) in conservative religion some of the motivation for "Just Say 
'Whoopee!'" is one tactic Le Guin uses here. A second is Owen's observation that 
he "had decided that I was in love with Natalie. I hadn't fallen in love with 
her, please notice that I didn't say that; I had decided that I was in 
love with her." Owen goes on to allude to the work of psychologists who stress 
"front-back differences" in the brain "rather than left-right differences." In 
this case his decision to love Natalie "would be an example of the 
frontal lobes trying to run the whole show, and fouling up the poor old 
hind-brain. This is a foul-up intellectuals are liable to. At least, stupid 
mixed-up intellectuals like me" (44-45). Owen is getting his ideas from Robert 
Evan Ornstein's work, but Le Guin could have found them in also D. H. Lawrence 
or other very late Romantic celebrants of the power of passion and "the blood" 
and suspicion of the intellect. Or from Daoist reversals of the clichs of most 
civilized folk in valuing the spontaneous and intuitive and animal over 
planning and scheming. 
 Of more interest to me is why Natalie just said "No." One reason is 
straight-forward: a bad experience with a (male) oboist (77-78). The other 
reasons will get us into the relationship of Very Far Away with other 
works in Le Guin's canon. 
 Owen is quite exact in his description and analysis of Natalie's "No"; a 
little after he "took hold of her really hard and kissed her" there is a crucial 
dialog, with Owen beginning, brokenly: 
 . . . "Natalie, why can't we're not kids don't you " 
 She said, "No, I don't. I don't Owen. I love you. It isn't right." 
 She didn't mean morally right. She meant right the way the music or the 
thought comes right, comes clear, is true. Maybe that's the same thing as moral 
rightness. I don't know. 
 It was she who said, "I love you." Not me. I never did say it to her. 
(55-56) 
 Le Guin rightly recognizes, and says in her own voice, that "Sex is a great 
 mana" and therefore "there is always a code" for sex in any society. 8 
 An "immature society" or immature individual psyche will set "great taboos about 
 it. The maturer culture, or psyche, can integrate these taboos or laws into 
 an internal ethical code," with true maturity allowing "great freedom" but forbidding 
 "the treatment of another person as an object" ("Is Gender Necessary?" LoN 
 [1979]: 166). But what about Natalie? She is a very mature eighteen-year-old 
 living in a society that is radically conflicted about sex. She is "a religious 
 person" with a "grim, fundamentalist type" father who is "a very churchgoing 
 man," "extremely Biblical about young men who cast their eyes upon his daughters" 
 (32, 38-39). Natalie goes against much of the social flow, but she goes with 
 "rale" ( CI ), the Way, the Dao, the music: music as "another way of thinking, 
 or maybe thinking . . .  [as] another kind of music" (28), music 
 from "the silent half of the brain" (42). And going consciously , intentionally , 
 in good anarchist fashion, with the real Way of things, she can make proper 
 decisions for herself and recognize, perhaps paradoxically, that "People make 
 the real choices together" (57). 
 Music and dance have been a Le Guinian theme since her first published story, 
 "An die Musik" (1961) and continue through her poetry and fantasies to "Dancing 
 to Ganam" (1993) and "Coming of Age in Karhide" (1995). So especially when we 
 look at Very Far Away 's near contemporary, The New Atlantis (1975) 
 and its handling of music, a music/Dao association will seem very familiar. 
 There is more though, and a re-reading of Very Far Away shows it to be 
 a very elegant brief compendium of Le Guinian themes from Orsinia and her science 
 fiction and fantasy and certainly from her surrealist philosophical exercise 
 "A Trip to the Head" and its attack on the more philosophical formulations of 
 ". . . sex is real, . . . really real-it's having 
 and acting in its intensest form," the manly way of proving his masculine being 
 ( WTQ 163). 
 Owen's invented country of Thorn is not only a fictional parallel to the Bront 
 children's "long, involved romances about [the] non-existent countries" of Angria 
 and Gondal but also to Ursula K. Le Guin's Orsinia. And Owen's development of 
 Thorn's "flora and fauna . . . landscape and . . . cities 
 . . . economy and the way they lived, their government and history" 
 closely parallels SF's worlds and world-building (48-50). 9 
 There is a brief defense of housekeeping in Very Far Away and of being 
 "a good wife and mother" as a legitimate choice for an intelligent woman (Owen's 
 mother), but with a warning against being "afraid of doing anything else, of 
 being anything else" (19): which could serve as a defense of Takver in The 
 Dispossessed (1974) as partner, mother, biologist, and social activist. 
 But Owen also offers some comments on his parents' views of "woman's work" that 
 indicate things to come in Le Guin's canon (20-21). On their first trip to Jade 
 Beach, on "the day before New Year's Eve," in the "Heart of winter," Owen and 
 Natalie "talked about life" and "decided that it was no good asking what is 
 the meaning of life, because life isn't an answer, life is the question, and 
 you, yourself, are the answer." The "sea was there," and "it was cold, and it 
 was the high point of my life," Owen says. He'd had other high points, including 
 once "out in the desert, under the stars, when I turned into the earth turning 
 on its axis," but he'd always been alone. "This time I was not alone. I was 
 on the high mountain with a friend. . .  . there is nothing 
 that beats that. If it never happens again in my life, still I can say I was 
 there once" (41). 10 
 The climactic epiphany in Very Far Away occurs when Owen hears Natalie's 
 setting of an Emily Bront poem (70) and starts crying: "There was a glory in 
 it.  . .  And it was partly love. I mean real love. In the song 
 I had seen Natalie whole, the way she really was, and I loved her. It was not 
 an emotion or desire, it was a confirmation, it was a glory, like seeing the 
 stars" (71). Owen finally sees Natalie as Genly Ai finally sees Estraven 
 ( LHD 248; ch. 18), Heather Lelache sees George Orr's wholeness ( LoH 
 95; ch. 7) or Mary Pannis had seen her husband, Nick ( BP 102; ch. 4). 11 
 Also clear are the more casual connections with Le Guin's more popular science 
 fiction and fantasy: the motifs of introversion / extroversion (30), loneliness, 
 pain, touch (61), useful methodicalness (50), mechanical philosophies and psychologies 
 (36), taking risks, plain speaking, coming home (62), and speaking one's mind 
 as old women do in The Word for World Is Forest and small children are 
 said to do in Very Far Away (3) and an attack (similar to the one in 
 The Dispossessed ) on "leveling," including the male-chauvinist sort that 
 made it necessary for women to be first-class to get as far as third-class men: 
 "Anti-intellectualism seemed to be part of it," Owen argues, "but not all of 
 it; it was this sort of pulling things all down to the level where everybody 
 is the same, like ants, that I called leveling, although these days it gets 
 called by some fancy names like anti-elitism, and some really out of place names 
 like democracy, names you shouldn't even say unless you're willing to think 
 about them" (35). 
 We have, then, in Very Far Away from Anywhere Else a "Different Kind 
 of Love Story" indeed: one that postpones sex and of marriage in any sense, 
 an unpopular ending since Shakespeare tried it with Love's Labors Lost . 
 A love story from the boys point of view commercially risky with girls as the 
 target audience for romances a story for ordinary kids, defending the right 
 of other kids to be intellectuals, talented, and chaste. 
 The Beginning Place (1980) 
 [The anarchist cultural critic Paul] Goodman once expressed the dilemma of 
 modern existence this way: "If we conformed to the mad society, 
 we became mad; but if we did not conform to the only society 
 that there is, we became mad." . . . [In the 1950s,] 
 . . . he worked his way through this dilemma. He would 
 not conform to the mad society, as Freudianism would have demanded, 
 but neither would he simply deny it . . . . Rather, 
 he would do as he would have patients do, cope with the society 
 as it was, take the mad society seriously, confront it and find 
 space for autonomy and self-affirmation within it.-Kirkpatrick 
 Sale, "Countercultural Elite" (498-99) 
 As Charlotte Spivack says in her excellent analysis of the book, " The Beginning 
 Place in effect takes the central situation presented in Very Far Away 
 from Anywhere Else , the alienation of two contemporary adolescents, and 
 imposes on it the allegorical narrative of the Faerie Queene " (123). 
 Or an allegorical form of some sort. 12 
 At first readings, Very Far Away and The Beginning Place seem 
 quite different. The central characters are only a little older in The Beginning 
 Place , but they are working class, not middle class, and they are both currently 
 out of school; and the kids in Very Far Away come from far more functional 
 families. Perhaps more noticeably, if there is any secondary or alternative 
 world in Very Far Away , it must be the imaginary country of Thorn or 
 the future country, so to speak, of MIT, Tanglewood, and the Eastman School 
 of Music in "the East." With The Beginning Place , we get a much more 
 substantial alternative world and in it a psychological allegory that makes 
 for a very interesting variation on other of Le Guin's patterns (see Spivack 
 118). 
 The plot of The Beginning Place is straightforward. 13 
 Hugh Rogers, the male hero and male point-of-view character, is a fairly tall, 
 overweight checkout clerk at a suburban grocery store; at twenty-one years old, 
 he has no life outside of his work and making sure that he is home most of the 
 time so that his mother does not return from work to an empty apartment, especially 
 at night. 14 
 Hugh's father deserted his mother and Hugh long ago, and Hugh is unwillingly 
 the dependable man of the house. Hugh's mother is all he has, but she abuses 
 him, not physically which she couldn't do but emotionally, still angry at her 
 desertion by Hugh's father (see though 18; ch. 1). Hugh would like to hug his 
 mother or pat her head or show her some sign of affection, but "she hated to 
 be touched . . . " (30; ch. 1). In the course of the story, Hugh's 
 mother makes a friend we never see and becomes quite interested in spiritualism. 
 As far as we can see, Hugh starts the story with no friends beyond Donna, a 
 middle-aged fellow-worker at Sam's Thrift-E-Mart, who calls him "Buck" after 
 "Buck Rogers in the twenty-first [sic] century," adding "I bet you're too young 
 to remember the real one" (20-21; ch. 1). 15 
 The female hero and point-of-view character is called Irene by everybody in 
the everyday world except her mother, and Irena by her mother (Mary) and by the 
people in the twilight world: the secondary world of the novel. In the world of 
the American suburbs, ca. 1980, Irene's life is even worse than Hugh's. She 
works as an "errandperson," delivering mail and memos, blueprints and "stuff" 
(226; ch. 8). Irena's father (Nick Pannis) died of leukemia when she was two 
years old and her brother Michael three months old. Irene's family lived with 
her father's sister until the aunt retired to Florida, leaving a farmhouse and a 
half-acre of tree nursery to her sister-in-law, Mary. Soon after that, Mary 
Pannis married Victor Hanson, bringing into the family a real "ogre" of a 
step-father (Spivack 119). Vic is a ne'er-do-well who apparently deals in stolen 
bicycles, definitely had a small-time drug-dealing business, and currently has 
an alcohol problem. He beats his wife, hits his younger children, and molests 
Irene, on one occasion nearly raping her (97, 99; ch. 4). "Victor was a big, 
well-made, handsome man, much concerned with his body and its functions and 
appearance  . . . [against the] central reality of which the rest 
of the world and other people were mere reflections without substance: the 
self-concern of the athlete or the invalid, though he was neither, being strong 
and inactive" (97; ch. 4). 
 Mr. Hanson is like Mrs. Rogers in disliking darkness -he works on the car 
outside at night, by floodlight -but he contrasts with her and balances her in 
other ways. Mrs. Rogers's problem is associated with spirit; Vic's problems are 
associated with that nice looking but ill-used body of his, plus his highly 
ill-used mind. Vic is a theorist of macho: "Victor had theories about many 
things, including sex, and liked to expound them to people: "See, if the man 
doesn't get rid of the fertile material, you understand what I mean, the fertile 
cells, they back up and cause the prostrate gland [sic]. That material has to be 
cleared out regularly or they make poison, same as anything doesn't get cleared 
out regularly. Same as clean bowels, or blowing your nose" (97; ch. 4). After 
four pregnancies in five years, and three of them ending in miscarriages, Mary 
was "on the pill" but kept that from Victor because he thought that 
contraception, also, "'blocked the fertile material up in the glands" and did 
not want her using contraceptives; but Irene got her to by making "a woman's 
mystery of it" (100; ch. 4). 
 As children, Irene and her younger brother Michael had been close; but when 
he was eleven or so he started rejecting her, and "as he came into full 
adolescence his rejection of her had become absolute. He spent his time with a 
male clique, adopting all their manner and rhetoric of contempt for the female, 
and sparing her none of it" (99; ch. 4). So Irene feels she cannot tell her 
brother about Victor's advances and the rape attempt, since Michael would blame 
her. "Michael already despised her for . . . being a woman, therefore 
subject to lust, therefore unclean" (100; ch. 4). So Irene's brother would be no 
help if he were around, and he is not around, having left home a couple of years 
earlier (99; ch. 4). 
 And Mary, although a positive character, can give Irene little help. Her life 
 centers around her family, and to destroy her family bonds would destroy her 
 (100; ch. 4). And Mary's loyalty is not some mere neurotic attachment but based 
 in part upon her experience in her previous marriage to Nick: a true Le Guinian 
 marriage of being whole through being part, a participation in glory. But all 
 that glory "can happen and be done with by the age of twenty-two," and Mary 
 Hanson is thirty-nine (102, 97; ch. 4). 16 
 As a practical dilemma for Irene, if her mother had to choose, was "forced to 
 it," she would side with Irena rather than Vic, and then Vic would "have all 
 the excuse to punish her he wanted." After Michael had gone, Irene's only way 
 out was to just get out, too, but she cannot being herself to make the break. 
 "Her mother had to have someone around to depend on" (100; ch. 4). A little 
 short of half-way through the novel, Irene summarizes her view of her situation 
 in one highly emotional but succinct thought-paragraph: 
 Everybody I know just hurts each other. All the time. I have to get out. 
 I can't keep coming home. Next time Victor trie[s] to cop a feel or even 
 touches me or treats her like shit I'm going to blow, I can't shut up 
 any more, and that'll just make it worse and hurt her more, and I can't 
 do anything, and I can't take it. Love! What good is love? I love her. 
 I love Michael, just like she does. So what? God help me, I'll never fall 
 in love, never be in love, never love anybody. Love is just a fancy word 
 for how to hurt somebody worse. I want to get out. Clear out, clear out, 
 clear out. (104; ch. 4). 17 
 The parents in The Beginning Place , then, are mostly what Irena and 
 Hugh are striving a bit too strenuously not to become: Irena trying too hard 
 to "clear out" and be free of men; Hugh trying too hard to be dependable and 
 stay with his mother (83; ch. 3). 18 
 At the start of the novel, both Hugh and Irene feel they can never find love, 
feel alone and isolated, desperate to escape but trapped. And then they find the 
beginning place. 
 Irene found the gate long before Hugh had, and had gone through the gateway 
 and the beginning place into a changeless land of continual evening twilight 
 what she calls her "ain countrie," her own country. She got as far as Tembreabrezi, 
 "Mountain Town," a place she felt accepted, at home (57; ch. 2). She had learned 
 the language, made friends, and most important, had found a father figure in 
 Sark, the mayor or "Master" of Mountain Town, and master of Irena: "He was her 
 law"; "If she had spoken at all"- could speak to him intimately Irena 
 could only have said, "'I have always loved you,' but she could not, and there 
 was no need to. He knew his power. He was the Master" (57, 55; ch. 2). 19 
 The action of The Beginning Place begins with Hugh's fleeing home and 
 finding the gateway into the twilight world. Here he drinks pure water, gets 
 naked, swims, and is free to think and just move about unthinking in a world 
 where there are no clocks, and where all time except the metabolic runs at 1/24th 
 the speed of clock-time. It is a world in which he can find Romantic Love infatuation 
 with a fairy-tale princess, the daughter of Horn, Lord of the Manor of Mountain 
 Town. And it is a world in which he can be the Romantic Hero in a quest: the 
 people of Mountain Town and the land generally are subject to a great fear (a 
 curse?), and the people cannot travel their roads. As Stephanie Bradford noted 
 in one of my classes, most significantly the people of Mountain Town cannot 
 take "the road north, the road that led down to the City" (164; ch. 6). 20 
 The people think Hugh is their hero, their savior. 
 For Irena, Hugh is an affront: a thief, a stranger, an intrusion into her changeless 
 world. What one of Le Guin's characters describes as "the normal defensive-aggressive 
 reaction between strangers meeting" is very strong when Irena meets Hugh. 21 
 She wants to stay in the grey, twilight world, but has trouble finding her way 
 into it; annoyingly, Hugh cannot always find his way out but can quite reliably 
 find the gateway in. After Hugh's getting to Mountain Town and his acceptance 
 there, Irena feels she's been reduced to a translator, and a barely necessary 
 one at that: translating between her friends and newcomer Hugh. 22 
 She sees him as a minotaur (129; ch. 4), and orders, "Don't ever touch me!" 
 (151; ch. 5). 
 Before they leave Mountain Town on the Quest to end the fear, to free the 
roads, there is a ceremonial moment when Master Sark asks Lord Horn, "What will 
you give him to take, my lord?" and Lord Horn offers "The sword I was given, if 
he wants it." Hugh takes the sword. The next question is "What will you give him 
to give, my lord?" And there follows a confrontation between Sark and Horn, on 
an issue of long standing (169; ch. 6). In context of the chapter (161-63) and 
still more clearly later on (173; 194, ch. 7), the "to give" can refer to a 
sacrifice, a human sacrifice. Sark's great-grandfather had been a Master of 
Tembreabrezi and had struck the bargain, "with the price in his hand" (162), 
apparently giving his daughter in sacrifice to some monster; Sark believes the 
bargain should be remade, the price paid yet again. 
 In the context of Le Guin's canon generally, this confrontation repeats and 
 very elegantly epitomizes an important Kropotkinesque point made at length in 
 The Left Hand of Darkness . For all the potential and actual tyranny of 
 the Kings and lords of Karhide or most of medieval Europe, each of their "seeming" 
 nations "was a stew of uncoordinated principalities, towns, villages . . . 
 a sprawl and a splatter of vigorous, competent, quarrelsome individualities 
 over which a grid of authority was insecurely and lightly laid" ( LHD 
 100; ch. 8). In the microcosm of Mountain Town, Lord Horn reflects hazily traditional, 
 quasi-feudal, aristocratic ways, and Master Sark a more modern, utilitarian, 
 capitalistic approach to life: what I've called in discussing Job and King 
 Lear , the double-entry bookkeeping view of the world. The more loosely-structured 
 medieval system, explicitly based in personal loyalty in its feudal part, associated 
 with one's land and lord in the manorial, is rather favored by anarchists in 
 Petr Kropotkin's tradition, and favored by Le Guin over theories of rationalized, 
 systematic exploitation. In terms of The Beginning Place itself, the 
 confrontation between Horn and Sark helps mark Hugh and Irena's disillusionment 
 with their loves in Mountain Town, especially Irena's love for "the Master." 
 When Hugh and Irena leave town on their trek north and their monster-quest, 
 they leave behind them their infatuations. They need to depend upon one another 
 to survive. 
 After much hard travel, described in some detail, Hugh and Irena come to the 
 place they seek on the mountain: "not ground but stone, a shieldlike expanse 
 of rock. . . . Iron rings were bolted into the stone, four of them, 
 making a rectangle several feet long." On one of the rings, there remains a 
 "strip of rawhide thong" still knotted (194; ch 7). But "This was the wrong 
 place" (195). In the forest there is a crying, and they move toward it, going 
 through the forest's maze when they glimpse and hear the monster and are too 
 terrified to move on (195-97). Hugh weeps; in his own eyes he's run away again 
 (202), lacked courage. Hugh and Irena debate Hugh's going alone (201). They 
 stay together and do what they must do, "toiling" up the mountain to a cave: 
 "There it was, of course; this was the place. . . . At last. Again. 
 He had been coming here all his life and had never left it in the beginning" 
 (208; ch. 7). Hugh moves toward the dark cave: "Not twilight: darkness. From 
 the beginning of time until the end"-and Irena rushes past him, daring 
 the monster to come out. Which the monster does, and is dispatched by Hugh in 
 one short paragraph, and the traditional sword-thrust "upward into the white, 
 wrinkled belly" (209; ch. 7) of the ambiguous or androgynous dragon: male to 
 Hugh, female to Irena. 23 
 There are two remaining chapters of the book, for nine chapters. In chapter 
8, Irena must get Hugh out from under the dragon-beast (211), get them off "the 
dragon's way" (223), the clear way that seems the fastest way back, and go east, 
not west, through the forest, toward increasing light and the beginning place 
and the gateway to the everyday world (224-25). And in chapter 8 Irena goes back 
on her "never touch" order, and she and Hugh make love, somewhat perfunctorily 
the first try, but with richly symbolic description throughout: 
 He held her to him, but awkwardly and timidly, until she put up both her 
arms, feeling herself go as soft and quick as water. Then he held her and 
mounted on her, overcoming; yet her strength held and contained his 
strength. 
 As he entered her, as she was entered, they came to climax together, and then 
they lay together, mixed and melded, breast against breast and their breath 
mingled, until he rose in her again and she closed on him, the long pulse of joy 
enacting them. (229) 
 A little later, Hugh touches Irena's hair and kisses her (231). 
 The last chapter of The Beginning Place has Irena lead Hugh (237) into 
 the daylight world, except it is not a hot, bright summer's day they return 
 to but "across the threshold into night and rain" (240). And Irena needs help. 
 She gets it from an anonymous man she simply thinks of as "Redbeard" (242). 
 The rain is significant water imagery, cleansing, the Daoist element of constancy 
 and change and so is the help from Redbeard. Irena's biological father "deserted" 
 her by dying; her step-father is an abusive brute, her brother a worse than 
 useless sexist. She's even had a close woman friend raped by a gang of men (104; 
 ch. 4); and Rick, the male of the couple she's been living with is no major 
 villain but still a loser putting the make on her (94-95; ch. 4). Redbeard is 
 like the Portuguese sea captain, Pedro de Mendez, who befriends Gulliver at 
 his return from his "Voyage to the Land of the Houyhnhnms" in Jonathan Swift's 
 Gulliver's Travels (1726, 1727). The Portuguese sea captain represents 
 simple human decency when we may have lost hope for it, and Gulliver certainly 
 has. Even so, Redbeard, a male with a pirate's appellation, turns out to be 
 a decent human being; but, unlike the crazy Gulliver with Mendez, the sane and 
 now regenerate Irena can appreciate him. 
 The end of The Beginning Place has Hugh's mother rejecting Hugh, and 
Hugh and Irena finding an apartment in the city to start their a lawful 
marriage. 
 The beginning place is a place to begin; for Irena and Hugh, the city and life 
 in the everyday immanence of everyday things is the immediate goal at the end 
 of the book, with a strong hope of library school for Hugh and a more adult 
 job maybe teaching, maybe nursing, "Or kids" for Irena (226-27; ch. 8). The 
 book ends with the line, "There is more than one road to the city" (246), in 
 this case, I think, The City of Man viewed positively, as against the suburbs 
 or dysfunctional families, or as opposed to St. Augustine of Hippo's City of 
 God. This is "The City as goal and dream" as opposed to the grey changelessness 
 of the twilight world beyond the beginning place or most of Le Guin's cities, 
 as opposed to towns or forests or icy wastes or mountains. 24 
 * 
 I find in The Beginning Place three basic jobs for a critic; in order 
of increasing importance, they consist of one riddle, one central question for 
 The Beginning Place itself, and one overarching question. 
 " The riddle is, Why can Hugh easily get into the twilight land and not out 
(dependably), and Irena can get out but not in? 
 " The central question for this novel itself, I'd formulate this way: In a 
story that seems to have strong didactic statements to make, what might those 
statements be? What should we learn from The Beginning Place ? 
 " The overarching question is the place of The Beginning Place in Le 
Guin's canon. 
 I'm not very good at riddles, but I think the answer to the one in The 
Beginning Place is this: Hugh can find the gateway in, and Irena can find 
the way out because Le Guin wanted them to have complementary talents, and the 
binary opposition of IN vs. and OUT pretty well limits the choices to the ones 
Le Guin used. That Owen can get them in and Irena can get them out is necessary 
if Le Guin wants to show for the climax of the novel Irena leading. If we want 
to see in The Beginning Place something of a reworking of the Earthsea 
trilogy, and I'll soon make clear I want to do that, then Irena here is in 
structural position parallel to Arren's in The Farthest Shore : the leader 
to the lair of the monster, the one who gets the hero home, and the hero for the 
future. So her specialty needs to be exits. 
 The teaching agenda of The Beginning Place I find in the 
ethical/theological issues it raises and in its family and gender-politics. 
 Recall Charlotte Spivack's comment (123) that The Beginning Place uses 
 the allegory of Edmund Spenser's Faerie Queene , Book 1. In paralleling 
 The Beginning Place to Faerie Queene , Book 1, Hugh -who is explicitly 
 (though comically) compared to St. George (182; ch. 6) -corresponds to the Red 
 Cross Knight slaying Error and, eventually the Satanic dragon; and Irena corresponds 
 to Una (One), who "represents truth, true religion, and the true church. Her 
 name . . . implies the qualities of truth and of the true church; 
 it admits of no contradiction and no relativity" (Kellogg and Steele 15, 16, 
 44-45). Opposed to Una is Duessa: "As one (Una) represents truth, goodness, 
 beauty, order, and whatever is perfect and eternal in Platonic thought ( Timaeus ); 
 so two (Duessa) represents all that is imperfect, chaotic, earthly, and evil" 
 (Kellogg and Steele 20). Red Cross falls away from Una and goes with Duessa 
 to the House of Pride, which Kellogg and Steele identify as "St. Augustine's 
 City of Man as opposed to the City of God" (26). At the House of Pride, Red 
 Cross must also fight Sansjoy, another old lover of Duessa's: i.e., allegorically, 
 he must fight Joylessness, despair. There are other parallels, including forests, 
 but I think we should modify Spivack on The Beginning Place this far: 
 The Beginning Place is to The Faerie Queene even as it is to the 
 Buck Rogers story and C. S. Lewis's second book in the Narnia series, The 
 Lion, the Witch{,} and the Wardrobe : a "gentle antidote to," a critique 
 of, prime examples of a world-view Le Guin has problems with. 25 
 My student Ian D. Bby's observed that the greyness of Le Guin's twilight land 
 parallels the winter-world of Narnia under the witch's curse in The Lion 
 . . .  . 26 
 Both the world of Faerie Queene and the world of Narnia are undergirded 
 by the central Christian myth of the Sacrifice, and there is a very explicit 
 sacrifice of the Christ-figure Lion, Aslan, in The Lion , on a "Stone 
 Table" very like Le Guin's "shieldlike expanse of rock" (Lewis 150-55, ch. 14; 
 Le Guin 194, ch. 7). And, in the background, the Christian vision of the Apocalypse, 
 presided over by "the dragon, that ancient serpent, who is the Devil and Satan" 
 (Revelation 20.2, RSV) except that the dragon in The Beginning Place 
 "is a dragon of the psyche," not some cosmological, apocalyptic force (see Minkowitz 
 26). Also in the background, behind even the Christian myth, is the pattern 
 of the masculinist Hero: "quest, contest, and conquest as the plot, sacrifice 
 as the key" ( ER 13). In Le Guin's Beginning Place , the twilight 
 world in its changelessness is a necessary place to visit and a place to begin 
 from, but not a place for adult humans to live. 
 These large issues have implications for ethics and family politics. If part 
 of the moral of The Faerie Queene , The Lion, The Witch{,} and the 
 Wardrobe , and Christian sermonizing generally is to encourage the imitation 
 of Christ, including self-sacrifice, part of Le Guin's intention in The Beginning 
 Place is to discourage such sacrifices. The theological point of The 
 Beginning Place , so far as it has one, and a strong ideological point, is 
 that one should not make such sacrifices: not as Christ-like sacrifice, 
 nor in the Jewish form of Abraham's willingness to sacrifice Isaac in The Binding 
 of Isaac story (Gen. 22.1-14), nor in any other form. 27 
 Self-sacrifice is a very bad idea in politics, and for Le Guin, the political 
 is the personal as well as the personal, the political: sacrifices whatever 
 the religion, whatever the ideology are problematic, period (see Hoffer, Part 
 Three). 28 
 Hugh overcame guilt sufficiently to keep returning to the twilight land the 
 land of the unconscious, perhaps the collective unconscious (McLean 132-33) 
 and gets a bit of a life independent of his mother and against his mother's 
 will (143; ch. 5). In the twilight land, Irena calls forth an eminently killable 
 dragon-monster, which Hugh kills. Not Error in Spenser's Christian allegory, 
 but Horrible Parent in a psychological allegory. And it is Hugh and Irena together 
 who kill the dragon, not the Christ-figure Aslan, helped by the boys defeating 
 the White Witch, as in Narnia (with Lewis's featured girl character, Lucy, getting 
 to nurture, not kill). In The Beginning Place , though not as much as 
 in the Christian stories, the magic works (see Attebery 118). Hugh comes back 
 to the daylight world with a woman, and his mother rejects him, freeing him 
 to leave her (243, 245-46; ch. 9). And Irena overcomes guilt enough to "clear 
 out" and leave her mother and stepsiblings in an abusive relationship. Such 
 desertions are not good things; they are also not what unselfish, self-sacrificing, 
 good boys and girls do. 29 
 But that, I think, is Le Guin's point: Given their powerlessness to cure dysfunctional 
 relationships, "Clear out" may be the least bad choice Hugh and Irena can make. 
 And their living together and trying to find suitable, adult work are positive 
 goods. 
 The powerlessness of Irena, in the everyday, "realistic" part of the novel 
 stems from the mindless macho and misogyny of her stepfather and her brother; 
 there isn't even any explicit sexist doctrine to attack. Irena's family is sick 
 from a complex disease endemic in our culture, sick in ways Irena cannot hope 
 to cure. Mrs. Rogers is also sick, and her illness is both common (perhaps also 
 endemic to technological civilization) and one to which both Hugh and Irena 
 would be very susceptible: "a kind of getting out of gear, out of synch. The 
 engine made a noise but no power got to the wheels. They were stuck. They got 
 nowhere." Pulling up roots and changing towns doesn't help: ". . . 
 the oftener she moves" Hugh thinks, "the more she doesn't get anywhere" (79-80; 
 ch. 3). "Sick is when you drove the car in neutral. The place she couldn't get 
 away from was home"-one of Le Guin's rare uses of "home" in a negative 
 sense the more Mrs. Rogers "left it the worse she was stuck; could not bear 
 to be alone in the house . . . lived in terror of waking up at night 
 with no one else there." And for good reason: her husband deserted her, and 
 Hugh is well aware of the effect on himself of that desertion and intuits the 
 effect on her, and he knows his duty: "There's nothing I can do. She hasn't 
 got anybody but me" (79-81; ch. 3). There is also nothing he can do for 
 his mother, and it is a relatively happy ending, given the options, when Mrs. 
 Rogers rejects Hugh. 
 * 
 As much as Mrs. Rogers finds happiness at all, it is making friends with 
Durbina and researching their "previous lives," usually as "princesses or high 
priestesses" in interesting places like Ancient Egypt (80; ch. 3); and Mrs. 
Rogers's hobby can help us place The Beginning Place in Le Guin's canon, 
establish its relationships with other works and to Le Guin's basic patterns. 
Starting from the hint of Mrs. Rogers's spiritualism, we can see that one 
obvious relationship is with The Tombs of Atuan , where Tenar is "eaten" 
and made into Arha, the reincarnation of the "One Priestess of the Tombs of 
Atuan" (10; ch. 1 [see McLean 140]). It's hard to take Mrs. Rogers's 
reincarnations seriously, but Irena's life in the evening land is both quite 
similar to and different from Arha's situation in Atuan. Arha leads what is 
nominally a women's religion, the worship of the Nameless Ones, and Irena 
practices a kind of Earth religion in a changeless place. Entering her "ain 
country," Irena 
 dropped down on all fours and kissed the dirt, pressing her face against it 
like a suckling baby . . . . then went to the water's edge, knelt 
. . . drank, answered the waters loud, continual singing, "So you are, 
so I am, so." She sat down crosslegged on the shelving rock, sat still, shut her 
eyes to contain her joy. 
 It had been so long, but nothing had changed, nothing ever changed. Here was 
always. She could do what she always did when she was a kid, thirteen, when she 
first found the beginning place, before she had even crossed the river [going 
in-country]; she could do the things she used to do, the fire worship and the 
endless dance . . . . her burnt offering, the wooden figure she 
had carved, in the center. That had all been silly, kid stuff. The things people 
did in church were silly too. There were reasons for doing them. She would dance 
the endless dance if she felt like it; keep it going; that was the thing about 
it, it didn't end. This was the place where she did what she felt like. This was 
the place where she was her self, her own. (40, ch. 2; see also 146-47, ch. 5.) 
 Like Arha, and Le Guinian characters from the Earthsea trilogy through "Coming 
 of Age in Karhide," Irena dances; unlike Arha, Irena doesn't even chant ( TA 
 24; ch. 2). Both Irena and Arha are mostly alone; but, unlike Arha, Irena can 
 leave her changeless, evening land without help it's just that she has only 
 the hot, dry, Wasteland suburbs to go to, no real home. Both girls are ready 
 for something different; and in both works, the new thing Le Guin gives them 
 is a man, and a crossing over into womanhood via a variation on the pattern 
 of Comic Romance. 
 Le Guin returns to the romantic comic pattern in The Beginning Place 
 strongly: as Spivack points out, one of the analogs here is Shakespeare's As 
 You Like It , especially the idea that "there is no clock in the forest" 
 of Arden (see Spivack 118; I quote AYL 3.2.300-01). As You Like It 
 is a kind of Shakespearean experiment in pure Romantic Comic form: seeing how 
 much play one can get out of the Romantic pattern with just about no plot using, 
 highlighting, mocking, undermining, and (paradoxically) reinforcing romantic 
 comedy. In both The Beginning Place and As You Like It , the movement 
 is from a corrupt place of civilization into a changeless forest world and then 
 back to the everyday. The very everyday, entirely mundane, "moral" of both works 
 may be that young people can use a kind of natural-world time-out between childhood 
 and adulthood: time to just be , get their heads together, and find an 
 appropriate partner and appropriate work ideas Le Guin makes explicit in The 
 Farthest Shore (1972) and Always Coming Home (1985). 
 The "time-out" worlds in The Beginning Place and As You Like 
It , though, are more different than similar. 
 Shakespeare's Forest of Arden is, mostly, a bright, happy place, full of music 
 especially songs and life. The evening, twilight land in The Beginning Place 
 is without song, without visible animal life, and emphatically grey. And however 
 much Le Guin personally likes grey and book publishers find grey appropriate 
 for paperbacks of her books, grey is often a negative color in Le Guin's work. 30 
 As in the world of "Darkness Box" (1963), the twilight land is under a kind 
 of curse, and color and music and change must come to it for it to be an appropriate 
 place not just to visit at the end of youth, but to live. In "A Trip to the 
 Head" (1970), the forest is a better place to be alone and avoid the true Other 
 than to find partner; in The Beginning Place , the forest is a place to 
 find a partner, then go home. 
 More politically and symbolically in Atuan, more mythically in The 
Beginning Place , the source of the greyness of the worlds is related to 
sacrifice. And the theme of the sacrifice in turn relates both works to Omelas 
and "The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas" (1973). The Omelites' bargain is one 
intelligent people can argue about, and have argued about at length at a 
conference of the Society for Utopian Studies and in its journal. The sacrifices 
in Atuan and the twilight world of The Beginning Place are simply bad. In 
 The Beginning Place , the sacrifice, whatever its details, made the 
inhabitants, "The children of fear." They are "bound," their "right hands 
useless," sold; so says Lord Horn (169; ch. 6). More significantly, when Irena 
talks of "A scapegoat" and looks for the word "sacrifice," Hugh interrupts with 
"They're stuck," his image of mental illness, his mother's problem, and much of 
the wrong of the world (79-80; ch. 3). As Simone de Beauvoir has stressed, 
people can get stuck in immanence; if there is no way out, a woman is 
 stuck at home. 
 Le Guin habitually contrasts two societies, and she usually favors the more 
 "Yinish," less active society; and, possibly, she does so here: the American 
 suburbs, ca. 1980, are hardly a world of positive transcendent action. Also, 
 there is silence in the twilight world, "the silence that gave words meaning, 
 the center that gave the world a shape" ( BP 76; ch. 3), and we know from 
 the Earthsea trilogy that such silence is necessary. 31 
 Still, it is difficult to get too caught up with the problems of the twilight 
 world, and I think Le Guin discourages overly enthusiastic identification with 
 the twilight town. Consider just the imagery. Ordinarily, Le Guin wants balance, 
 often black/white balance, not greys. The only place of symbolic balance in 
 the twilight world is at the cave of the dragon: the blackness of the darkness 
 of the cave-an image of the womb of Mother Earth against which stands 
 the whiteness of the dragon. And then there's the extraordinary muting of the 
 heroic dragon-slaying. Irena summons the dragon, and Hugh succinctly kills the 
 dragon-with no reveling by the Narrator whatever in the details of the 
 fight and we see no regeneration of the twilight world in consequence: no spring 
 thaw, no rain on the wasteland, no loosing of the waters: none of the action 
 and flowers and Carl Orff's Carmina Burana that John Boorman gives so 
 spectacularly in the healing of the King sequence in his exuberantly romantic 
 film, Excalibur (1981); more immediately relevant here: no speeding up of time 
 and movement toward nightfall. At the climax of The Beginning Place there 
 isn't even the pro forma political restoration of As You Like It . 32 
 The magic does work for Irena and Hugh; but it is a very low-key and slow regeneration 
 if the magic works for the twilight world. 
 What we get for narrative are two working-class kids making love and getting 
 out, with much effort and pain: first getting out of the twilight world out 
 into the reviving dark and rain of our world then getting out of dysfunctional 
 homes. No Buck Rogers-style heroism here. The heroism is the stoic, relatively 
 "feminine" heroism of determination and active endurance, and appropriate 
 action ( wu wei ), a form of quiet, toiling heroism Le Guin has celebrated 
 in The Left Hand of Darkness (1969) and The Eye of the Heron (1978) 
 and will celebrate again in "Sur" (1982) and, in a different way, in "Coming 
 of Age in Karhide" (1965). 33 
 We get two kids saving a fantasy world indeed, but more importantly each other: 
 two kids finding each other, marriage, and a way to home in the city. 
 The Eye of the Heron (1978) 
 Nobody but the dead know whether all these things people talk about are worth 
 dying for or not. And the dead can't talk. So the words 
 about noble deaths sacred blood and honor and such are all 
 put into dead lips by grave robbers and fakes who have no 
 right to speak for the dead. * * * He could tell 
 all these high-talking murdering sonsofbitches who screamed 
 for blood just how wrong they were. He could tell them mister 
 there's nothing worth dying for . . . . There's 
 no word worth your life.-Dalton Trumbo, Johnny 
 Got His Gun (1939), ch. 10 
 Some time after the year 2027 (16; ch. 2), and 111 years before the start of 
 the story of Eye of the Heron , "the Government of Brasil-America{sic } 
 sent several thousand people" to a penal-colony world called "Victoria." Fifty-six 
 years before the start of the story "the Government of Canamerica sent two thousand 
 more" (37; ch. 3). The first group were criminals and their families, and they 
 founded "the City"; the second group were peace-movement activists in the tradition 
 of Mohandas K.{sic} Gandhi and Martin Luther King, Jr., and they founded "the 
 Town": Shantih, a set of villages with a central Meeting House. The City has 
 about 8000 inhabitants, Shantih, 4320; all are necessarily exiles from Earth, 
 permanent exiles. 34 
 The two communities have remained distinct but are "deeply interdependent" (37; 
 ch. 3): the Town supplying agricultural goods and the City providing the Town 
 with "tools and machinery made by the Government ironworks, fish caught by the 
 City fleet, and various other products which the older-established colony could 
 more easily provide. It had been an arrangement satisfactory to both." As Heron 
 begins, the arrangement is strained. The Town has kept its part of the bargain; 
 the City has taken more and given less (53; ch. 4). The Town has continued "communal 
 . . . somewhat introverted," egalitarian, nonsexist, anarchic; the 
 City has remained macho (and nominally Christian?) and has become "hierarchically 
 governed"; and, as the story begins, the City is developing a military. 35 
 The City, of course, will produce "the bad guys," and the Town the good, but 
with intriguing variations. Indeed, Heron offers highly significant 
variations on familiar Le Guinian themes. 
 * 
 Under the leadership of Councillor{sic} Luis Falco ("falcon") the ruling men 
 of the City plot to establish "latifundia": "Big farms; large fields, planted 
 in one crop, for efficiency. . . . an estate . . . peasants 
 to work it." To get the cleared land and the peasants, they will provoke into 
 rebellion against the "government" of the City the people of "Shanty Town," 
 and put down the rebellion with "a troop of elite soldiers," the Black Guards 
 under Herman Macmillan: armed "young aristocrats, brave intelligent, and properly 
 commanded. Men who love fighting, like our brave ancestors of Earth" (65-67; 
 ch. 5). In a sense, Falco wishes to continue what Yevgeny Zamiatin's character 
 D-503 tells us was "the Great Two Hundred Years War . . . between 
 the city and the village," what Zamiatin sees as a deeply-rooted struggle between 
 literally civilized people, living within city walls, and what such urban and 
 urbane sorts see as "primitive peasants" ( We 21; 5th Entry). In another 
 sense, Falcos plan would reenact "Earth's oldest conflicts on the soil of an 
 alien world" (Back cover blurb of 1984 Bantam edn.). The political givens at 
 the opening of Heron recapitulate and epitomize produce a mshl 
 of-some crucial moments in human history: the transition "from the wholly 
 rural, hamlet-dwelling, undifferentiated society and self-sufficient economy 
 of the Near Eastern Neolithic of 5000 B.C. and before" to the city-states and 
 proto-empires of early Mesopotamia and Egypt (Kroeber, Anthropology 705; 
 286), the creation of the great latifundia in the late Roman Empire (Swain 
 2.512), the Spartan division into aristocrats, resident semi-aliens ( perioikoi ), 
 and helots-public slaves (Swain 1.315-16), the reduction of free peasants 
 to serfs with the establishment of feudalism and manorialism in early medieval 
 Europe (Thompson & Johnson 326-29). Closer to home, Heron refers 
 to the establishment of the hacienda and peonage system in much of Spanish America, 
 the estancia and fazenda in Argentina, Uruguay, Brazil a system 
 that lasted in some places into the 1990s. 36 
 For their part, the people of Shantih have already planned to settle a new area 
 and move a large part of their population out of danger from the City. In one 
 historical analogy, the People of the Peace resemble some California Indian 
 tribes. A. L. Kroeber notes that the area of "the lower Colorado [River] almost 
 exactly parallels the Nile in valley, flood, silt, and climate; but the historical 
 Cocopa, Yuma, and Mohave tribes, though they regularly farmed the overflow bottoms, 
 never multiplied, urbanized," or grew so urbanely sophisticated that they renounced 
 their "egalitarian primitive democracy" ( Anthropology 708; 287). In 
 perhaps a closer analogy, James W. Thompson and Edgar N. Johnson find it "highly 
 significant that whenever pioneer conditions existed in medieval Europe . . . 
 the peasants stoutly, and generally with some success, resisted manorial organization" 
 (Thompson & Johnson 328). 37 
 Or, most closely 
 At the beginning of the story, an expedition from the Town has returned with 
news of a good area to settle in the north. A Town meeting is interrupted by 
Falco, who commands the Shantih Towners to submit their plans to the government. 
Lev Shults, a young leader in the Town, says "No," but the Town will send a 
delegation to the City to negotiate. When the Town delegates try to negotiate 
rather than just submit information, they are arrested. Among the delegates is 
Vera Adelson, who is held at Casa Falco under a loose house arrest: i.e., her 
promise not to escape. There she meets Luz Marina Falco Cooper, Luis Falco's 
daughter, and the two women become friends. In terms of their given names, "sea 
light" (Luz Marina) has met "truth" (Vera), and they've gotten along. 
 Luz is a privileged aristocrat, slated to marry well -probably Herman Macmillan 
 and continue a life of genteel femininity. Looking at her life, she sees "A 
 prison. All Victoria was a prison, a jailhouse. And no way out. Nowhere else 
 to go." And then she thinks of her childhood friend Lev, who has said "No" to 
 her father (29-30; ch. 3). 
 Luz comes to thoroughly detest Herman Macmillan, but what gets her out of that 
 prison is overhearing her father telling Macmillan the plot to subjugate Shantih 
 and reduce the Shantih Towners to an agricultural proletariat or serfs (65, 
 91-93; chs. 5 &7). 38 
 Vera refuses to break her promise and escape the City, not even to bring to 
 her people word of the plot against them (93-95; ch. 7). Instead, Luz walks 
 out and brings the news to Shantih and stays with the Townspeople. Falco comes 
 to get his daughter, who refuses to return with him to the City. Macmillan leads 
 his Black Guards toward the Town, and the People of the Peace meet the armed 
 forces of the City in a great demonstration of nonviolent resistance. 
 Falco had begun speaking, but there was still a lot of noise, and his dry 
voice did not carry. Lev stepped forward and took the word from him. His voice 
silenced all others, ringing out in the silvery, windy air of the hilltop, 
jubilant. 
 "The People of the Peace greet the representatives of the City in 
comradeship! We have come to explain to you what we intend to do, what we ask 
you to do, and what will happen if you reject our 
decisions. . . . First, our hostages must be set free. Second, 
there will be no further forced work drafts. Third, representatives from Town 
and City will meet to set up a fairer trade agreement. Finally, The Town's plan 
to found a colony in the north will proceed without interference from the City, 
as the City's plan to open South Valley along the Mill River to settlement will 
proceed without interference from the Town. These four points have been 
discussed and agreed upon by all the people of Shantih, and they are not subject 
to negotiation. If they are not accepted by the Council, . . . all 
cooperation in work, all trade, all furnishing of food, wood, cloth, ores, and 
products will cease . . . . We will in no case use violence 
against you; but until our demands are met we will in no way cooperate with you. 
Nor will we bargain with you, or compromise. I speak the conscience of my 
people. We will hold fast." (131-32; ch. 9) 
 Then Macmillan shoots Lev, killing him; Falco grabs a rifle and clubs 
Macmillan to death; and, in the ensuing melee, seventeen People of the Peace are 
killed, eight people of the City (138-41; ch. 10). 
 This is the climax of the novel and the end of Lev's story; if we apply Sren 
 Kierkegaard's definition of the phrase, Lev dies a tragic hero, following the 
 "universal": honorable ideals. 39 
 The rest of the story works out the results of the confrontation and killings. 
 Falco is arrested for killing Macmillan, and the City and Town begin painful 
 and ambiguous negotiations: compromises and more compromises, threatening betrayal 
 of the Town's ideals and "permanent bondage to the City" (144; ch. 10), but 
 promising also that "There won't be forced labor, or 'estates' and all that" 
 (153; ch. 10). We do not learn the results of the negotiations, since the final 
 chapter follows Luz and others from Shantih as they take up again the "Long 
 March" of the People of the Peace and find a place where they can start a new 
 settlement, far from the City. 
 The narration of The Eye of the Heron is similar to that of Planet 
of Exile (1966), The Lathe of Heaven (1971), and The Word for 
World Is Forest (1972). We are told the story from the points of view of the 
major characters, alternating among Lev (chs. 1, 4, 6, 8), Luz (chs. 2, 7, 10, 
11), Vera (chs. 3, 9 [shared somewhat with Falco]), and divided: Luz and Falco 
(ch. 5), Lev and Luz (ch. 8). But Heron does not move toward the romantic 
happy ending of the integration of two people in Planet of Exile , nor 
even the chasten romanticism of Lathe ; Heron moves toward the 
separation of The World for World Is Forest . As in the earlier stories, 
one of the major point-of-view characters drops out: old Wold dies in Planet 
of Exile ; Haber goes mad from his power-dream in The Lathe of Heaven ; 
Lyubov is killed in the attack on Central in The Word for World Is 
Forest . But in Eye of the Heron , Le Guin kills off her one male hero: 
a young, attractive, revolutionary hero. The act of "heroicide" in Heron 
is significant. Lev dies; Luz and Vera survive, and the future will be with the 
women and what they represent, and what they represent both complements and 
opposes what Lev represents. 
 Lev's death is part of a hard teaching in The Eye of the Heron , and 
 I'm going to ease into the topic with a slightly easier teaching, with a key 
 passage on imperialism Roman imperialism in ancient Britain here from Joseph 
 Conrad, Heart of Darkness : 
 "They were no colonists [the Romans] . . . . They were 
 conquerors, and for that you want only brute force . . . . 
 They grabbed what they could get for the sake of what was to be got. It 
 was just robbery with violence, aggravated murder on a great scale, and 
 men going at it blind as is very proper for those who tackle a darkness. 
 The conquest of the earth, which mostly means the taking it away from 
 those who have a different complexion or slightly flatter noses than ourselves, 
 is not a pretty thing when you look into it too much. What redeems it 
 is the idea only. An idea at the back of it; not a sentimental pretence{sic} 
 but an idea; and an unselfish belief in the idea something you can set 
 up, and bow down before, and offer a sacrifice to ...." (4; part I) 
 Reading Heart of Darkness in 1902, a genteel, white Englishman could 
 balance the "abomination" of Roman (and Belgian and British) imperialism against 
 "the idea" and might be willing to "offer a sacrifice" to that idea, perhaps 
 to the ideal of Western Civilization fulfilled, of course, in a genteel, 
 white Englishman ca. 1902. Nearly a century later, such balancing is itself 
 an abomination. European imperial adventures in Africa "resulted in the most 
 terrible massacres in recent history . . . and finally . . . 
 it resulted in the triumphant introduction of such means of pacification"-mass murder "into ordinary, respectable foreign policies" (Arendt, Origin 
 of Totalitarianism 185; ch. 7). Looking back over the holocausts of the 
 late nineteenth through the twentieth centuries, it is clear that the "idea 
 at the back" of imperialism or racial purity can be very dangerous to "sacrifice 
 to." 
 This is the easy part; what Le Guin asks us to deal with in the life and 
death of Lev Shults is the danger of good ideas and noble ideals, of the danger 
in the best in the masculine tradition of striving to heal, improve, perfect the 
world. 
 After the arrest of their delegation to the City, the leaders of Shantih 
prepare for a mass meeting of the Town. 
 As Lev was about to leave, Sam, who had serenely stood on his head throughout 
 the discussion, came upright in a single graceful motion and said to Lev, 
 smiling, "Arjuna, it will be a great battle." 40 
 * * * The campaign which the people of Shantih were undertaking 
 was a new thing to them, and yet a familiar one. All of them, in the Town 
 school and the Meeting House, had learned its principles and tactics; 
 they knew the lives of the hero-philosophers Gandhi and King, and the 
 history of the People of the Peace, and the ideas that had inspired those 
 lives, that history. In exile, the People of the Peace had continued to 
 live by those ideas; and so far had done so with success. * * * 
 The children and grandchildren of the exiles, now grown men and women, 
 had never seen the technique of conflict and resistance, which was the 
 binding force of their community in action. But they had been taught it: 
 the spirit, the reasons, and the rules. (52-53; ch. 4 [I have eliminated 
 paragraphing]). 
 Having grown up in "the Judaeo-Christian-Rationalist West" ( LoH 82; 
ch. 6), most of Le Guin's readers will view positively here acting according to 
"the spirit, the reasons, and the rules" and will not notice the military 
metaphors embedded in "campaign" and "tactics," nor object to the idea of 
reverencing such true hero-philosophers as Gandhi and M. L. King. Middle-aged, 
sensible, indeed, normative Vera had talked about the stubbornness of the 
People of the Peace, "And when that meets up with another stubbornness, it can 
make a kind of war, a struggle of ideas, the only kind of war anybody ever wins" 
(44; ch. 3). Still, from Rocannon's World on, Le Guin has insisted upon 
the price of the heroic gesture, and the explicitly Daoist works should get us a 
little suspicious of spirit, reasons, rules, and conscious technique. 
 Subtlety being an overrated virtue in art, Le Guin soon gets more explicit. 41 
 Vera, as in "Truth," has a long conversation with Luz. They start with Falco, 
 the best of the men of the City: "He's a king, a real one," Vera says, "strong 
 of soul," but he's trapped "inside walls that he's been building stronger and 
 higher all his life." 42 
 He's also trapped within "the roof and walls of this City that his fathers built 
 as a fortress against the unknown" (Spencer 40). And Luz is "part of that City, 
 part of his roofs and walls, his house, Casa Falco. So is his title, Senhor, 
 Councillor, Boss. So are all his servants and his guards, all the men and women 
 he can give orders to. They're all part of his house, the walls to keep the 
 wind off him." Falco, then, and the men of Victoria City generally, "made a 
 bad mistake." They refuse to "come outside into the rain" (73-74; ch. 5). 43 
 Lev and the men of the Peace have made no such mistake the Town is not "gathered 
 in, walled, protective, like the City" (98; ch. 7), but Vera sees a problem 
 with even such obviously good men, perhaps with all men: 
 "I like men very much, but sometimes ... they're so stupid, so stuffed 
 with theories.... They go in straight lines only, and won't stop. It's 
 dangerous to do that. It's dangerous to leave everything up to the men, 
 you know. That's one reason why I'd like to go home . . . . 
 To see what Elia with his theories, and my dear young Lev with his ideals, 
 are up to. I get worried they'll go too fast and too straight and get 
 into a place we can't get out of, a trap. You see it seems to me that 
 where men are weak and dangerous is in their vanity. A woman has a center, 
 is a center. But a man isn't, he's a reaching out. So he reaches out and 
 grabs things and piles them up around him and says, I'm this, I'm that, 
 this is me, that's me, I'll prove that I am me! And he can wreck a lot 
 of things trying to prove it. That's what I was trying to say about your 
 father. If he'd only be Luis Falco. That is quite enough. But no, he has 
 to be the Boss, the Councillor, the Father, and so on. What a waste! And 
 Lev, he's terribly vain too, maybe in the same way. A great heart, but 
 not sure where the center is." (76-77; ch. 5) 44 
 Shortly before the story reaches its violent climax, there is a debate among 
some of the young people in the Town. Luz wants an end to the talk and rules and 
fighting and advises flight. "Go north, to the valley you found. Just go. Leave. 
It's what I did" (113; ch. 8). Now just going was probably a bad idea for the 
Odonian ancestors of the Anarresti in The Dispossessed ; it was probably a 
bad idea for the European ancestors of Americans: all us "wretched refuse" 
probably would have done better to stay home, raise hell, and foment an 
effective revolution. But Luz's advice is followed by a comment by the Narrator 
indicating why Luz's counsel will not be followed: "They all thought of the same 
thing: the wilderness. It was as if the wilderness came into the cabin, as if 
the walls fell down, leaving no shelter" (113). Since "An die Musik" Le Guin has 
liked the idea of getting those walls down; more relevantly, Luz and Vera have 
effectively "poisoned the well" on walls: they're prisons, traps; they're what 
make Falco become a villain; as will become absolutely clear in Always Coming 
Home , such walls are essential for the evil incarnation of City of Man (see 
Spencer 40-41). 
 Luz is eventually answered by a woman, Southwind, whose lover died in the wilderness 
 during the exploration trip north. "'Freedom's won by sacrifice,' Southwind 
 said." And Luz responds, significantly: "I hate that idea, sacrifice!" (115). 
 Lev implies Luz sacrificed herself by coming to warn them of the impending attack. 
 Luz says she has "Not sacrificed myself for any idea! I just ran away don't 
 you understand? And that's what you all ought to do!" 45 
 Southwind surprises Lev by agreeing with Luz: "'You may be right,' she said. 
 'So long as we stand and fight, even though we fight with our weapons, we fight 
 their war'" (115; ch. 8). 
 Lev is shocked by Southwind's saying "something irresponsible" and "an 
affront to their perfect unity." He responds by starting a dialog that leads up 
to his truly seeing Luz and feeling confirmed by her, but one in which Lev is 
generally wrong and Luz is right: 
 "To run away and hide in the forest -that's a choice?" Lev said. ". . . . 
 Not for human beings. Standing upright and having two hands doesn't make 
 us human. Standing up and having ideas and ideals does! And holding fast 
 to those ideals. Together. We can't live alone. Or we die alone like animals." 
 Southwind nodded sadly, but Luz frowned straight back at him. "Death is 
death, does it matter whether it's in bed in the house or outside in the forest? 
We are animals. That's why we die at all." 
 "But to live and die fo for the sake of the spirit that's different, 
 that's different from running and hiding, all separate, selfish, scratching 
 for food, cowering, hating, each alone " (116; ch. 8) 
 And Lev stammers and stops, seeing "Praise" in Luz's eyes. Still, on a world 
named by Luz "Mud," in a life immanent in mud, there's much to be said for 
denying ideals, rejecting sacrifice, and, when necessary, lighting out for the 
wilderness (110, 116-17; ch. 8). 
 Lev holds fast to his ideals and so leads his people to the confrontation with 
 Herman Macmillan's armed thugs. In Luz's words, ". . . Lev stood up 
 there facing the men with guns and defying them and got killed" for the same 
 reason Luz's father killed Macmillan: "Because he was a man, that's what men 
 do. The reasons come afterward" (143; ch. 10). Fighting is fighting and a problem 
 even if one tries to "fight" for peace. Lev and what he stands for will not 
 be at the center of Eye of the Heron as a whole. No man will. 46 
 The end of The Eye of the Heron has a group of Towns-folk walking away 
 from both Town and City in a very antiMacho escape. The escape motif here is 
 important. Their jobs done, cowboy heroes can ride off into the sunset or Mad 
 Max can walk and still remain heroes. A hero in Northrop Frye's "second phase 
 of comedy" doesn't transform his "humorous society but simply escapes or runs 
 away from it" ( Anatomy 180 "Theory of Myths," essay 3). And from Henrick 
 Ibsen's Nora in A Doll's House (1879) to George Bernard Shaw's Eliza 
 Doolittle in Pygmalion (1912) to Gary Trudeau's Joan Caucus (1970s f.) 
 to Thelma and Louise (Thelma & Louise, 1991), at least male authors and 
 auteurs can imply that brave women did well to just walk away from unsatisfactory 
 situations they can't change. Still, both the macho and mach a ideal is 
 to stand and fight, or at least return to kick ass, like Rambo or Charnas's 
 free fems (all ironies admitted) in The Furies (1994). Le Guin is doing 
 gutsy cultural work in Eye of the Heron , and elsewhere, getting us to 
 take seriously the option chosen by those who walk away from Omelas. Positively 
 stated, the people of the Peace, as Lev reminds us are "outcasts" and "the children 
 of outcasts," and, as "the Founder" said, "the outcast is the free soul, the 
 child of God." At his most connected with the world, Lev knows that being again 
 outcast, going on yet another long march going north, into the wilderness is 
 the one way his people will be free (14; ch. 1). 
 In the world of Eye of the Heron , Luz's escape plan is a better idea, 
 but not, emphatically not, a universal truth or ideal. An exodus is an 
 option, a true way in certain times, certain places, not a cure-all. Immanent 
 in the world, one finds only specific courses of action or inaction in specific 
 situations specific ways to go with the Dao; there are no universal rules; all 
 ethics are contextual. 47 
 * 
 At the end of the escape sequence, the Towns-folk find what Luz calls, "a new 
 place . . . . a beginning place." When Andre responds "God willing," 
 Luz answers back, "I don't know what God wants" and takes up some "damp, half-frozen 
 earth": "'That's God,' she said, opening her hand on the half-molded sphere 
 of black dirt. 'That's me. And you. And the others. And the mountains. We're 
 all ... it's all one circle" (176; ch. 11). Luz comments that she really doesn't 
 know what she's talking about here a good Daoist observation; I'll say Luz is 
 talking about mud and immanence, and using an unChristian figure of speech. 48 
 In the city of the Lamb, ". . . nothing unclean shall enter." There 
 are no seas or forests or night in the New Jerusalem, and where cleanliness 
 is next to godliness, there will be no mud (Revelation 21.27, 21.2-22.5). The 
 symbols in Heron are very different. 
 Most generally, as Jewel, "a beautiful, dark woman, tells Lev, Victoria is 
 "a world of shadows" (14; ch. 1), especially the shadows of the wilderness. 
 A more specific symbol is that of the title. After recalling his grandmother's 
 story of her cat, Lev sits on the root of a ringtree and looks at the Meeting 
 Pool, thinking of Lake Serene in the lands of the north he'd helped explore, 
 thinking of mountains he would like to climb, through the mists and rain "into 
 the brightness of the summits." Lev thinks in images of transcendence, and he 
 thinks too much; he is not good at stillness, and "Only for a moment did he 
 find quiet"; but in that moment, "One of the herons walked silently out into 
 the water . . . . Lifting its narrow head it gazed at Lev. He 
 gazed back, and for an instant was caught in that round transparent eye, as 
 depthless as the sky clear of clouds; and the moment was round, transparent 
 silent, a moment at the center of all moments, the eternal present moment of 
 the silent animal" (50-51; ch. 4). In a small epiphany, Lev touches the Dao, 
 sloughs off ego; for a moment he comes "into animal presence"; and "An old joy 
 returns in holy presence." 49 
 The other, connected controlling symbol for most of Heron is the ringtree, 
 a tree with a "double life." It begins "as a single, fast-growing seedling," 
 that matures quickly and flowers. The flowers get fertilized, and fold into 
 seeds, all of which drop off, apparently dying, "leaving at last one single 
 seed on a high central branch." The tree withers, and then, some hot autumn 
 afternoon , the seed explodes, sending out "several hundred seedlets" in a circle, 
 and plant competition working until "Ten years later, and for a century or two 
 after that, from twenty to sixty copper-leaved{sic} trees stood in a perfect 
 ring about the long-vanished central stem. Branch and root they stood apart, 
 yet touching, forty ringtrees, one tree-ring." Where the trees of the tree-ring 
 are numerous enough to touch, and live a long time, they "so exhausted they 
 central ground that it might sink and form a hollow, which filled with ground 
 seepage and with rain, and the circle of high, old dark-red trees was then mirrored 
 in the still water of a central pool. 50 
 The center of a tree-ring was always a quiet place" (46; ch. 4). It is at such 
 a pool that Lev sees and is caught by the eye of the heron. 
 The ringtree in Heron corresponds to the rock-pounding circle in Planet 
 of Exile (1966), the Yin-Yang in Left Hand of Darkness (1969), the 
 Circle of Life in The Dispossessed (1974), the heyiya-if in Always 
 Coming Home 1985). It is clearly a symbol of individuality and wholeness; 
 it can have water the favorite element in "the Perennial Philosophy" and among 
 some Native Americans in a still place at a center, a center specifically said 
 to be hollow: the Daoist nothingness, lack, like the hole in the center of a 
 wheel allowing the existence of the wheel. And the Meeting House ringtree is 
 old enough to have at its center the Meeting Pool, with herons: imaging wholeness, 
 an appropriately anarchic society within the world, in touch with nature, the 
 Dao, and animals. 
 Luz's symbol is mud. She is in good company, and such views are significant 
 for a very important debate one scene of Kulturkampf in our world. 
 Le Guin sees "Civilized Man" as "climbing up into his own head" and talks of 
 the "soul-fortress" Church "towering over the dark abysms" of all which is not 
 soul: all that can be associated with the complex, "bestial/mortal/World/Hell" 
 ( BG 11; Introd.). In Le Guin's correct summary of antiSocial-Gospel Christianity, 
 "The world has no value except as a sort of waiting room or testing ground for 
 the soul of Man, a passage from eternity to eternity" ("Legends " 8). Humans 
 = Man = "the soul of Man." There is another tradition in the West. In the J-Code 
 version of creation, after bringing forth water to "well up from the ground 
 and water the whole surface of the earth the Lord God formed man [ adam ] 
 from the dust of the earth [ adamah ]. He blew into his nostrils the breath 
 of life, and man became a living being" (Genesis 2.6-7; Tanakh). I.e., Man = 
 dirt/breath, one thing. Le Guin here stresses the dirt, and adds water. 51 
 In The Tombs of Atuan , a character describes the people outside of Atuan 
 as "the color of dirt" ( TA 18; ch. 2). In The Lathe of Heaven , 
 George Orr tells Heather Lelache that she's brown, and she snaps back, "Shit 
 color." Orr responds with "The color of the earth" ( LoH 103; ch. 7). 
 In the Orgota creation myth that is chapter 17 in The Left Hand of Darkness , 
 the ice-shape that creates all life uses soil plus sea-water. As Le Guin's writing 
 career was getting started, other authors had taken earth and added Daoist water 
 rather than the J-Code's air to get humans. Kurt Vonnegut, Jr., in Cat's 
 Cradle (1963) has as the first foma of The First Book of Bokonon 
 i.e., the initial harmless lie that God got lonely and so made "living creatures 
 out of mud," of which one was man. "Man as mud alone could speak" and asks "What 
 is the purpose of all of this?" God didn't know everything has to have 
 a purpose, but man insists. "'Then I leave it up to you to think of one for 
 all this,'" said God" and went away (117; 118). In the section "Dyot meet 
 mat" ("God made mud", 99), the first human gets to sit up and look at creation 
 and says, "Lucky me, lucky mud" and gets to feel pretty insignificant compared 
 to God but mildly important when thinking "of all the mud that didn't even get 
 to sit up and look around." Le Guin might agree that if we must feel superior, 
 an acceptable form might be the expression of gratitude: "I got so much, and 
 most mud got so little" (Vonnegut, Cat's Cradle 149-50). Finally, in 
 Brian Aldiss's The Dark Light Years (1964), Sir Mihaly Pasztor says, 
 "To our way of thought . . . civilization is reckoned as the distance 
 man has placed between himself and his excreta" (44; ch. 5). The statement is 
 made more exact a bit later when Sir Mihaly has it "that civilization was the 
 distance man had placed between himself and everything else . . . ." 
 A minor character offers comfort to a rattled Sir Mihaly by telling him that 
 we humans are "coming away from the mud, away from the primeval slime, away 
 from the animal, towards the spiritual." Since what's rattled Pasztor is the 
 death by torture of one of the wise, dirty aliens of the novel, we sympathize 
 when Pasztor asks "Oughtn't we to have stayed in the mud? Mightn't it be more 
 healthy and sane down there?" (99; ch. 10). 
 Luz's stress on mud, just before the climax of The Eye of the Heron 
 (117; ch. 8) and almost at its end (176; ch. 11), makes clear what this novel 
 is up to right down to its recurring symbolism. The Eye of the Heron 
 denies even the best forms of masculinist, transcendent idealism in favor of 
 a feminist-inflected immanence, including the necessity, now and then, to get 
 down into the mud. 
 "Pathways of Desire" (1979) 
 "Pathways of Desire" enters "into the midst of things" some forty-one days 
 into an anthropological expedition by three Terrans of the Ethnographic Corps 
 of the Space Service to the Ndif people of the planet Yirdo (a moon actually, 
 of the gas giant Uper [ CR 180-81]). The story is set in an indeterminate 
 future, but we're told it is eight years after an interstellar Exploratory Survey 
 visited the system containing Yirdo and thirty years after the development of 
 Faster Than Light (FTL) space flight (198). FTL or no, however, the anthropologists 
 are pretty much Terrans like us, and the Ndif are, in several ways, "natives" 
 no different from us. 52 
 Incredibly not different biologically: miraculously, totally improbably 
 no different from us biologically. This remarkable biological similarity is 
 not remarked upon by anyone in the story, and that is significant: either (1) 
 we're in the Hainish universe or (2) Le Guin has gotten sloppy with world-building 
 or (3) "Pathways of Desire" isn't SF extrapolation but fabulation. There's no 
 indication we're in the Hainish universe, and Le Guin is firmly in control of 
 her material; and "Pathways of Desire" is indeed the stuff of fable. 
 The story features the Terran anthropologists: Tamara, a twenty-eight year 
 old dark-skinned "configurationist" ( CR 178,188, 190); Ramchandra ("Ram"), 
 a forty-year old male Brahmin linguist from a suburb of Calcutta (181, 207); 
 and Bob: "big, beautiful blond Bob, lean tanned tough Bob, perfect hero of male 
 wish fulfillment {sic}"(176) Bob, God of Ohio, in the formulation I'll offer 
 the student of myths in the group ( CR 185). Narration is third-person 
 limited from the point of view of Tamara, giving the vision (and some thoughts) 
 of a woman trained in anthropology, but still willing to judge a youth-based, 
 masculinist culture from the point of view of a "Middle-Aged Woman." 
 The plot involves a death, a mystery, and a love story, more or less in that 
 order. The death is Bob's. He's been "Sleeping with informants and stuff" and 
 has been challenged to a duel (187). He fights the duel and throws and knocks 
 out his opponent, but not before his opponent stabs him with a poisoned knife. 
 The mystery is how the culture on a planet thirty-one light-years from Earth 
 can be so totally un-alien generally less alien to Bob and Tamara than Ramchandra 
 is alien to them (188-89) and, more specifically, how the Young Ndif language 
 can be a "direct derivation . . . from Modern Standard English" (196). 
 The solution to the mystery is that "Man made the world * * * In his 
 head, between his ears" (192), and "Man," in the case of Yirdo and the Ndif, 
 is Bill Kop man :: 
 "A fifteen-year-old boy, with glasses, probably also acne and weak ankles. A 
skinny boy, lazy, shy. He reads stories, he daydreams, about the great blond 
hero who can hunt and fight and make love all day and night. His head is full of 
the hero, himself, and so it all comes to be." * * * "He doesn't 
understand desire. He is entirely caught in it, bound by it, he sees and knows 
nothing but his own immense desire. And so he makes the world." * * * 
"He writes it all down . . . his fantasies about the Ndif. Maps and 
everything. A lot of kids do that. And some adults ...." * * * "There 
is room. There is time [for all the worlds humans dream]. All the galaxies. All 
the universes. That is infinity. The worlds are infinite, the cycles are 
endless. There is room. . . . for all the dreams, all the 
desires." (204-05). 
 So Ramchandra tells Tamara, ending with, "Bill Kopman dreams . . . 
and the God dances. And Bob dies, and we make love"; for that is the final part 
of the plot: the romance and love of Ramchandra and Tamara ( CR 205). 
 So, in our universe, the author Ursula K. Le Guin dreams up a universe where 
young, horny, bored Bill Kopman of, say, Topeka, Kansas, dreams up the moon 
Yirdo and the Ndif people and develops a language and culture for them, and, lo, 
they come to be. And three Terrans go to this world and work and solve a 
mystery, one dies and the remaining two find love. 
 The plot in "Pathways of Desire" is interesting but not really the point. The 
point is about story-telling, culture, and teenage boys, about science fiction 
as a genre, about old women; plus lot about ontology, theories of reality. 
 I'll start with ontology and work backwards. "Pathways of Desire" is a Hindu 
 version of what Brian W. Aldiss has called a "Shaggy God" story ( S.F. Ency. 
 500). As Nataraja, the Lord of the Dance, the God Shiva brings movement into 
 the cosmos, dancing the worlds into existence. 53 
 Or perhaps the worlds are dreamed, by Indra, or perhaps Krishna or Brahma. Ramchandra 
 asks the question: "Who dreamed the Earth?" He answers only, "A greater dreamer 
 than you or I." In "Pathways," the immediate world is dreamed by a kid in Topeka 
 (or wherever), who created Yirdo "between his ears." This much is a joke, based 
 on the idea of the Universe as a dream of God. But Ramchandra adds a "but" and 
 goes on: "but we are the dreamer, Shakti, and the worlds will endure as long 
 as our desire" (207). Shakti (also Sakti), is the divine mother, sometimes seen 
 as wife to Shiva. 54 
 Ram sees himself and Tamara as Shiva and Shakti. As in The Lathe of Heaven 
 (1971), humans are the gods, and, somewhat like George Orr, we can dream worlds. 
 Part of what's going on in "Pathways" is use of contemporary (capital "T") 
 Theory in which world-creation is mental. Ramchandra says that the Old among 
 the Ndif "seem to be engaged in creating the world. Humans beings do this primarily 
 by means of language, music, and the dance" (197). I.e., we do at least semiconsciously 
 what the god Bill Kopman does mostly unconsciously. This "creating the world" 
 can mean that human beings organize our sense perceptions in culturally determined 
 ways to create the cosmos the ordered universe we deal with; or 
 it can mean that we humans individually or collectively create the universe 
 in our minds precisely in the manner of George Orr. Such world creation is a 
 possibility made plausible by, among other ideas, the "Whorfian Hypothesis" 
 in linguistics and by the idea in quantum theory "that quantum states are not 
 definite until they are observed." As a couple of Greg Bear's characters put 
 it, such quantum states 
 "fluctuate, interact, as if two or more universes-each containing a potential 
 outcome-are meshed together, until the physicist causes the collapse into 
 the final state by observing. Measuring." 
 "Doesn't that give consciousness a godlike importance?" Fausch asked. 
 "It does indeed," said Frederik. Modern physics is on a heavy power trip." 
 (Bear 479) 55 
 Fortunately, however, we don't need to get into any modern theories or 
postmodern / poststructuralist Theory for "Pathways of Desire"; old Indian 
philosophy is quite sufficient. I shall justify this cop-out from serious 
Theorizing with a reference to two quotations. 
 One of the aliens Orr dreams up in The Lathe of Heaven tells him 
"Speech is silver, silence is gold. Self is universe. Please forgive 
interruption, crossing in mist" (138 [also 139]; ch. 9). "Self is universe" is 
the Hindu "Brahman = Atman" equation read from right to left ("Indian 
Philosophy" 9.316). More immediately relevant, one of the Old Men of the Ndif 
tells Ram and Tamara, "Nothing is wood, nothing is stone, nothing is water, 
nothing is blood, nothing is bone; all things are sanisukiarad" (192), where 
"sanisukiarad" is, I think, the "Not this . . . not that" of Brahman: 
Being is what's left over after all creation is removed. The "mist" in the 
 Lathe quotation may be the "relative" world of appearances: maya 
in Indian philosophy, and in the original introduction to "Vaster Than Empires 
and More Slow" (1971). 
 Indian philosophy is varied and difficult, so I'm going to defer here to a 
work cited by Le Guin in her "Introductory Note" to King Dog : the 
 Bhagavad-Gita ( The Song of God ), specifically Lord Krishna's 
primer for his friend and student Arjuna. Krishna tells Arjuna that Brahman is 
constant and uncaused, totally Itself. Within an individual, Brahman is the 
Atman. Brahman as creative energy caused and causes all "existences" to exist. 
 The nature of the relative world is mutability. The nature of the individual 
man is his consciousness of ego. I alone am God [Krishna, embodying Brahman,] 
* * * the Lord, who is the light-giver, the highest of the high. 
* * * Shining sunlike, self luminous. (74-75; VIII) 
 How hard to break through 
 Is this, my Maya, 
 i.e., the necessary but necessarily delusion-causing forces/matter of the perceived 
 world. It is possible to take "refuge" in Krishna, and "pass beyond Maya," but 
 this passing beyond can be difficult. As embodied Brahman, Krishna describes 
 himself as "veiled" in Maya and hard to recognize. "All living creatures are 
 led astray as soon as they are born, by the delusion that the relative world 
 is real. This delusion arises from their own desire and hatred. But the doers 
 of good deeds, whose bad karma is exhausted, are freed from this delusion * * * 
 [A]t the hour of death, their whole consciousness is made one with mine" (73-74; 
 VII). By following the proper yoga people can "break the chains of desire" and 
 get free "from the terrible wheel of rebirth and death," no longer "a prisoner, 
 / Enslaved by action" and dragged about by our desires (39; II). Krishna denies 
 that God deludes humans. The delusion is our dreams: "You dream you are the 
 doer, / You dream that action is done, / You dream that action bears fruit." 
 The problem is our ignorance and the delusion built into the world that gives 
 us these "dreams." To do right in this system is to strive for the time "When 
 the light of the Atman" in oneself "Drives out our darkness," to "find the place 
 of freedom, / The place of no return"--i.e., the merging with the Real 
 so that one need never again return to the karmic wheel. In being "Absorbed 
 in Brahman" one "overcomes the world" and becomes "Changeless, untouched by 
 evil." Krishna asks of personified Brahman, "What home have we but Him?" (59-60; 
 V). 
 It may be dangerous to answer a rhetorical question posed by God, but Le Guin 
has not been shy these last three decades in replying to a transcendent God; 
among other things, "Pathways" is her more polite answer to a mostly absent 
transcendent god, and to Ultimate Immanence. 
 Tamara dreams of Bill Kopman, "Standing in front of me. Sort of filling everything, 
 taking up all the room, so that I couldn't get past him or around him"; she 
 tells Ram the dream, and he has immediate enlightenment. Tamara asks him if 
 anything is wrong, and he responds that nothing is wrong; "Go back to sleep. 
 You talked to God." She asks if "God's name is Bill?", and Ram names God: "Bill 
 Kopman, or Kopfman, or Cupman," anyway, "Bill Kopman, who made this world through 
 his desire" ( CR 204). Ramchandra understands this desire very well. He 
 was raised in "The great teaching tradition of the Brahman caste" and knows 
 "Nothing is real" in the world of perception, that all is Maya (181); he is 
 a hunter of "peremensoe"-"Understanding" (191, 195)-and knows that desire is 
 to be transcended. The goal of a Brahmin should the Understanding that allows 
 him to be "Absorbed in Brahman," to never return to the wheel, to go home to 
 God. Not in a story by Le Guin, though. 56 
 A widower, Ram returns instead to human love, going to Tamara: "Listen, Tamara, 
 you set me free, your hands free me. And bind me. Tighter to the wheel, never 
 in this life now will I get free, never cease to desire you, I don't want 
 to cease." "Confusion" he finally whispers, "Illusion," and he will yield to 
 it (203). He sees the better wisdom of going with the folly of human relationships. 
 In the speech ending the story, Ramchandra tells Tamara, "I speak my native 
 tongue, because you have brought me home" (207), not home to God, but to a Le 
 Guinian marriage. 
 Le Guin's concluding gesture in favor of desire should condition, I think, 
our reading of this whole story. 
 Tamara's final vision of Bill Kopman is a very negative one: his "blind yearning 
 face before her, filling the world, no way around it, no path"; the last references 
 to him are Ramchandra's reminder that it is highly unlikely he will awake to 
 reality--"Once in a thousand thousand years does a soul wake up"-and a 
 reference to "Bill's wet dreams" (206). Not very dignified in the mind of any 
 reader, and such a description should be especially unsettling for people familiar 
 with Le Guin's work. Victor Hanson fills his world, and is a very negative character 
 in The Beginning Place , as is the world-filling Big Man in the Kesh story 
 "Big Man and Little Man" ( ACH 157). Especially in The Lathe of Heaven , 
 a work with obvious connections to "Pathways of Desire," "no way," implies the 
 loss of the Dao. James Bittner, a reader very familiar with Le Guin's work, 
 takes Kopman as an intentionally stereotyped SF fan and relates him to Le Guin's 
 possibly feeling "in the late seventies that her path/way/tao was blocked, and 
 chose then to go on exploring by paths other than science fiction" ("Serpent" 
 2). 
 Again, though, Bill Kopman isn't the only one with sexual desires in this story, 
 and the image of the blocked way has been undercut a bit by the entrance of 
 Bob: "The light of Uper haloed his thick fair hair; the importance of his return 
 filled the entire biosphere as the bulk of his body filled the doorway. 'I just 
 got back,' he announced" (186). Again, in my formulation: Bob-God of Ohio, with 
 whom, I think, Le Guin is having some fun. Le Guin may also be having a little 
 bit of fun when Ramchandra tells Tamara solemnly, and thematically, "You must 
 take words seriously. They are all we have" (182); "Words are all we have" is 
 an important idea from modern philosophy, but it's also a line from George Carlin's 
 seriously philosophical and very funny comedy routines on language (most famously 
 "Seven Words You Can't Say on Television"). 
 With these warnings against over-earnestness, let us look at the world Bill 
Kopman made, and the reactions to it of the three adult Terrans. 
 The world itself is beautiful: bright sunshine, no rain until after sundown 
 (as in Camelot in Camelot [film version 1967]), consistent warm weather. 
 Food is readily available: "boneless poro meat and the mushy sweet fruit of 
 the lamaba tree," a kind of ready-made "hot dogs and milkshakes" ( CR 
 175). Disease is rare. Socially there is no war, and violence is limited-entirely, 
 as far as we see-to formal knife-duels (one-on-one) among the young men (187), 
 plus some wrestling (188). Social structure is simple: male dominance and division 
 into sex/age groups. I assume infants and girls. We learn of the formal groups 
 of Juvenile Males: nine- to twelve-years old, Young Women: 12-23, Middle-Aged 
 Women: 23-40, Young Men: 13-40. Old Men/Women: anyone over 40. The Juvenile 
 Males run around and play. The Young Men hunt poro, watch the Young Women dance, 
 and have sex with the Young Women. The Young Men also get together and brag 
 about their hunting and sex. The Young Women dance and have sex with the Young 
 Men; they do not have children, because becoming fertile makes one a Middle-Aged 
 Woman (179). In addition to child-bearing, only briefly discussed in the story, 
 the Middle-Aged Women cook and clean and serve communal meals. The Old are mostly 
 invisible, but they have their own house and are developing their own language 
 and dances and myths about "Bik-Kop-Man." 
 And that's pretty much it. No art. No history. No legends. No family life, 
 no affiliation patterns, just about no customs. Indeed, Bob ends up engaging 
 in sex with quite so many of the Young Women because he looks "just like" the 
 Ndif and he'd be offending local custom to refuse, and "It's practically the 
 only custom they've got" (187). Sleeping around, plus any duels that develop 
 from sleeping around: Bob feels he must reject Tamara's excellent advice to 
 "Beg off" on the knife fight--"We can just move on"--because there 
 is at least the sense of local honor, and a desire for entertainment (188-89). 
 The Ndif also have no manners. 
 All together "It's a teenage society" of "Locker-room aliens!" (188-89), 
where ". . . they all talk like Hemingway characters" (185). The most 
severe judgments of the Ndif are made by Tamara: 
 So far . . . working in three widely separate localities, we've 
found the same language, without major dialectical variations, and the same set 
of very rudimentary social and cultural patterns. Bob hasn't found any legends, 
any expressions of the archetypes, any developed symbology. I haven't found much 
more social structure than I'd find in a herd of cattle, about what I might find 
in a primate troop. Sex and age determine all roles. The Ndif are culturally 
subhuman; they don't exist fully as human beings. The Old Ndif are beginning to. 
(197) 
 Bob objects, "That's missionary talk!" and suggests that the Ndif have become 
 stagnant from lack of environmental challenges, "and they don't have sexual 
 hangups-" Tamara interjects, here, to Bob's annoyance, "That's in human" 
 (198-99). 
 If it is true that we learn to be human, then one might ask at what age most 
 people have learned enough to be judged human, and living in a college town, 
 around the corner from a high school, I'm willing to consider the suggestion 
 that teenagers, especially teenage boys are, ordinarily, "subhuman." Still, 
 the subhumanity of teenage boys is a necessary assumption of the war-making 
 classes (who usually really regret, I think, killing women and children and 
 old people), and I think we should find any judgment of cultural subhumanity 
 suspect. Le Guin problematicizes the "culturally subhuman" issue not only by 
 having Bob (who may be ignored as male wish-fulfillment) object to Tamara's 
 view but also by having Tamara earlier raise the issue herself, "'Why shouldn't 
 there be a South-Sea-Island world?' she argued with herself. 'Why does it seem 
 too simple--phony? Am I a Puritan, am I looking for original sin?'" (181). 57 
 The Ndif culture is phony, in a sense, and Tamara's is not just being 
 a Puritan. What is troublesome about Ndif sexuality is not that it is promiscuous 
 but that it's so damn simple. As Le Guin says in "Is Gender Necessary?" (and 
 does not change in the "Redux" version), "Sex is a great mana," and "there is 
 always a code" (166). Even high-school cliques and college dorm floors and fraternities 
 have codes, and it very strange that the Ndif mostly lack one. 
 And here, I think, we come to Le Guin's serious critique of the Ndif. It's 
 not evil that they lack a sexual code; it's boring. They have a sexist society, 
 but, as patriarchal societies go, they are not an evil people: almost no crime 
 and punishment, no hunger, no war, no domestic violence, no prisons, no genital 
 mutilation, no rape, no incest, no prostitution, no pornography or taxes, no 
 slavery, no economic classes, no capitalist exploitation, no state tyranny, 
 no destruction of the environment, no alienation from one's body or one's community, 
 no loneliness-they're not a people most Americans should criticize on moral 
 grounds. Tamara gets it right when she finds the Ndif "like a stage play, a 
 movie, the island paradise," except it is a movie she doesn't like: "But I don't 
 like them!" she finally asserts. "They're boring! No kinship systems, no social 
 structure except stupid age-grading and detestable male dominance, no real skills 
 no arts . . . once they grow up, they're bored" (184). Boring , 
 however, is only marginally an ethical category. If people have the opportunity 
 to make their lives more interesting--and the Old among the Ndif are doing 
 that quite nicely (rediscovering the Perennial Philosophy)-being boring is only 
 a minor cultural failing. 58 
 Degree of interest, however, is a crucial esthetic category. To say a human 
 or a culture is boring is no major accusation; to say that a work of art is 
 boring is to damn it utterly. Bill Kopman isn't a bad boy-we see nothing of 
 his life on Earth-just a lousy author. 
 "Pathways of Desire" is a relatively "gentle antidote" to the varieties of 
 SF that takes readers thirty-one light-years to find a culture No Different 
 from macho wish-fulfillments that could be set on any southsea island on Earth-or 
 southsea battlefield or Chicago southside street for those who want to Make 
 War, Not Love and romanticize violence. 59 
 A classic example of such bad SciFi would be one of the 
 original Flash Gordon movies, where Flash and Dale Arden and Dr. Zarkov land 
 on Mongo or Mars and find the Hawk Men and the Lion Men and the Shark Men, but 
 very few significant women and almost no Old Men or anything except White Men. 60 
 And everyone speaks English, without even "You wonder 
 how I can speak your language." All that way to Mongo or Mars, and "no difference"! 
 One might conclude from that lack of difference that the culture of the USA 
 in the 1930s (for Flash Gordon) is, in its basics, literally universal. Worse, 
 the imaginative creation of a world without some human group can be a wishing 
 away of the existence of that group; and the imagined subordination of a group 
 can work similarly. In America we lack the word mshl , but many writers 
 can still produce "quasi-magical, verbal prefiguring[s] of reality in the shape, 
 for good and for ill, in which the utterer would like to encounter it" (Rabinowitz 
 320). "Pathways" reminds us of the wishing-away in much SF of non-Whites, the 
 invisibility of the Old, and the reduction of women to servants and playthings. 61 
 Such SF is not so much conservative as small-minded and imaginatively timid, 
and it may be "filling the world" of the imagination of many readers and viewers 
of SF. In that sense there is "no way around it, no path" for SF as an esthetic 
experience or endeavor. Whether such stories are good or is not the point here; 
they're legitimately "detestable" to a conscious woman like Tamara; and a 
truth-telling Old Woman like Le Guin insists they're (eventually) just plain 
boring to any conscious adult. 
 * 
 As in Lathe of Heaven (1971) and in the stories of what I'll present 
 as The Churten Group in Fisherman of the Inland Sea (1994), Le Guin in 
 "Pathways" plays seriously with the "strong" version of constructed reality. 
 But this may be the final meaning of "Ndif": It makes no difference how the 
 moon Yirdo or the planet Terra and their cultures got structured; the world 
 is , and the human job is to live in the world: responsibly, consciously, 
 lovingly, and joyously. Tamara and Ramchandra do right to accept and love each 
 other, and, generally, let the world they find be . Where "Pathways" offers 
 a critique it is of the wet-dreams of nerdy adolescent male humans-when, and 
 only when, those wish-fulfillment's are written by grown people, who 
 get them published and/or filmed and receive money for them and thereby profit 
 from providing role models and paradigms for imagining highly destructive realities. 
 When stories go out into the world and encourage boys to live the macho fantasy, 
 and not grow up, and for girls to accept a world ruled by such boys, they are 
 spreading a figurative poison in need of an antidote. 
 5. "The New Atlantis" (1975) 
 . . . [T]he contemporary trend [is for] other 
 cultures to assimilate themselves to Occidental civilization 
 . . . to "Westernize"  . . . . 
 Mankind . . . is not yet unitary; but at the moment 
 it is traveling fast that way. . . . Suppose 
 we attain a single, essentially uniform, world-wide civilization 
 that has supplanted the many diverse ones of the past. And 
 suppose that in attaining this one civilization we achieve 
 its aims, realize the values potential in its patterns. 
 What then when the exhausted, repetitive stage is reached, 
 and there is no new rival culture to take over responsibility 
 and opportunity and start fresh with new values in a different 
 set of patterns--what then?- A. L. Kroeber, Anthropology 
 161 
 * * * * * 
 "[T]hou met'st with things dying, I with things new-born."- William Shakespeare, 
 The Winter's Tale 4.1.113-14 
 "The New Atlantis" repeats the Le Guinian pattern of two worlds separated and 
in communication, but with major differences. 
 The primary world of the story is a very dystopian West Coast of the United 
 States in the near future: a world that is poor, environmentally degraded, totalitarian, 
 linguistically corrupt-a world edging toward George Orwell's Oceania in Nineteen 
 Eighty-Four (1949), or the more explicitly named United States in Frederik 
 Pohl and Cyril Kornbluth's The Space Merchants (1952) or in John Brunner's 
 The Sheep Look Up (1972; see Suvin 268). The second world of the story 
 is the world of the rising continent, which I'll call "Atlantis"; but note that 
 the story posits "the emergence of new--or, possibly, very old-continents in 
 the Atlantic and Pacific," not just the Atlantic ( NA 67-68), plus Charlotte 
 Spivack's correct observation that "the new Atlantis" is also the sinking United 
 States ( Le Guin 88). The West Coast world is presented in first-person 
 singular ("I") narration by Belle, the protagonist of the West Coast sections, 
 whose journal we are reading; the Atlantis portions are narrated in first-person 
 plural ("we") by the citizens of the rising Atlantis: what Elizabeth Cummins 
 perceptively labels "the first-person collective voice" (173). Spivack (87-88), 
 and Darko Suvin note the similarity between the alternation between the US and 
 Atlantean sections of "The New Atlantis" and the alternation between Anarres 
 and Urras in The Dispossessed (1974), adding that thematically and politically 
 the associations are between Urras and the US, Anarres and Atlantis (see Suvin 
 268). Cummins finds the closest analogy in narrative structure to that of The 
 Left Hand of Darkness . 62 
 For a close precursor for the Atlantis sections themselves, 
 my suggestion is Samuel Beckett's The Lost Ones (1972), which I interpret 
 as a rigorous exercise in empiricism: the exact description of a very impoverished 
 environment-in the sense in which people on a space probe would be in an impoverished 
 environment, with much less to perceive than in a forest or on a city street. 
 The people of Atlantis literally rise to consciousness, moving up from the depths 
 (of unconsciousness, Nameless Dao, nonBeing, the deepest sea) with very little 
 to sense except the pressure of the ocean, toward the world of light and sound-and 
 of Becoming and action and the 10,000 things of our world. 
 The structure of "The New Atlantis" is obvious in the original publication 
 in The New Atlantis and Other Novellas of Science Fiction : the US parts 
 are printed in roman type, the Atlantean in indented italics . (No italics 
 in the reprint in The Compass Rose .) There are six sections to the story, 
 each section divided into two parts. 63 
 To stress the similarity to The Dispossessed , I 
 label the sections 1.U for the opening in the USA, 1.A for the first section 
 in "Atlantis," 2.U/2.A, etc. 
 The story's opening paragraph introduces us to the "I" (not yet named), hints 
 about her world, and ends with the news from a pamphlet that "a new continent 
 is rising from the depths of the sea" ( NA 67). The rest of 1.U moves 
 the "I" from her Wilderness Week among the few remaining trees of the National 
 Forest Preserve back home to Portland, Oregon, where she finds her husband, 
 Simon, in bed (67-68), back from "the Rehabilitation Camp" (70). So far we've 
 learned that "a Supersonic Superscenic Deluxe Longdistance coal-burner, with 
 Home Comfort" is a slow, dilapidated bus with a toilet (67) and that the "Longhorn 
 Inch-Thick Steak House Dinerette" serves meatless hamburgers (69), so we can 
 be quite sure the "Rehabilitation Camp" is a labor camp in the tradition of 
 the Stalinist Gulag or the Pulefen Commensality Third Voluntary Farm and Resettlement 
 Agency "camp" ( LHD 175; ch. 13). 64 
 Simon's "crime"-and in totalitarian states crime 
 is a particularly tricky word-is only hinted at in this section, but it is clear 
 that he is important enough in the sciences or mathematics (math as it turns 
 out) that someone "published his proof of Goldbach's Hypothesis in Peking" (70), 
 a parallel to Shevek in The Dispossessed (Suvin 168). 
 Section 1.A is the start of a (re)creation myth: as Atlantis rises, the pressure 
 lessens (subliminally sensed by the Atlanteans), and " 'then' there was the 
 light ," an event that creates time and confirms consciousness (71). 65 
 The first light is followed by a second: 
 It did not occur to us that there might be another moment. There was no 
reason to assume that there might be more than one. One was marvel enough: that 
in all the field of the dark, in the cold, heavy, dense, moveless, timeless, 
placeless, boundless black, there should have occurred, once, a small slightly 
blurred, moving light! Time need be created only once, we thought. 
 But we were mistaken. The difference between one and more than one is all the 
difference in the world. Indeed, that difference is the world. ( NA 
 71-72) 
 Seeing the light, the Atlanteans think of the stars and then the planets: 
" Like the stars, yes, but not stars. It is not the great Existences we are 
seeing, but only the little lives " (73). Less poetically put, they see 
luminescent fish. 
 Section 2.U begins the morning following the protagonist's coming home to find 
 Simon. The protagonist tells us about Simon's condition after the Camp-"[H]e 
 moved like a ninety-year old. . .  all bent out of shape"-and 
 Simon tells her a bit about the Camp. The protagonist finds her husband "changed 
 out of recognition, a different man," yet still the same: "It is enough to make 
 you understand why most languages have a world like 'soul.' There are various 
 degrees of death, and time spares us none of them. Yet something endures, for 
 which a word is needed" (74). 66 
 We learn the protagonist's name, here, "Belle," and that 
 she has a job under "the Full Employment Act": four hours a day as an inspector 
 at a recycled paper bag factory, backing up an electronic inspection system 
 that has yet to make an error she has caught. This is not Belle's true work 
 however; that is music (75). Belle gets a black-market doctor to look at Simon, 
 and gets him some aspirin (76-77). These two actions give us more information 
 about the USA of the story, a "corporative State," that Suvin correctly identifies 
 as a well-known "American variation of . . . fascism . . . 
 integrating into a seamless government totality all the already existing bureaucracies 
 . . . with interstices for regulated and parasitic 'private enterprise'" 
 (267-68). The doctor-an assistant to a jeweler in town-gives Belle an occasion 
 for some indirect exposition on the laws of her world, and some quite direct 
 gender commentary: "She gathered very soon that Simon and I were married, and 
 it was funny to see her look at us and smile like a cat. Some people love illegality 
 for its own sake. Men, more often than women. It's men who make laws, and enforce 
 them, and break them, and think the whole performance is wonderful. Most women 
 would rather just ignore them. You could see that this woman, like a man, actually 
 enjoyed breaking them" ( NA 76). As Cummins stresses (171-72), this passage 
 connects "The New Atlantis" with The Dispossessed , where Shevek thinks 
 "[M]en have to learn to be anarchist. Women don't have to learn" ( TD 
 42-43; ch. 2). 
 The section ends with Belle's going out "to register Simon as temporarily domiciled 
 at my address and to apply for Temporary Unemployment Compensation ration stamps 
 for him," and a brief meditation on how law enforcement "must have been simpler 
 . . . back when marriage was legal and adultery was what got you into 
 trouble" (77). The point here is an important one: whether marriage is required 
 or forbidden, "there is always a code," and where there's an authoritarian state, 
 or worse, the state will enforce a code. 67 
 Section 2.A raises Atlantis more and brings more " lantern-creatures ": 
 They were not pretty. They were dark colored, most often a dark red, and they 
were all mouth. They ate one another whole. Light swallowed light, all swallowed 
together in the vaster mouth of the darkness. * * * Poor ragged, 
hunchjawed dwarfs squeezed to the bone by the weight of the darkness, chilled to 
the bone by the cold of the darkness, tiny monsters burning with bright hunger, 
who brought us back to life! (77-78) 
 Darko Suvin rather dislikes the luminescent fish, finding them "Luciferic" in 
their light-bearing (Suvin 268), which is sound etymology (Lucifer = 
Light-Bearer, The Bright One), but rather demonizing biology; so I will view the 
fish as Luciferic, but with sympathy for the devil. Picture very carefully 
darkness, and then a hand-sized, luminescent creature settling down toward, 
something, and then: 
 We saw the pavement beneath the creature and the wall beside it, 
heartbreaking in its exact, clear linearity, its opposition to all that was 
fluid, random, vast, and void. . . . 
 So we knew that the wall was there; and that it was an outer wall, a 
housefront perhaps, or the side of the one of the towers of the city. 
 We remembered the towers. We remembered the city. We had forgotten it. We had 
forgotten who we were; but we remembered the city, now. (78-79, end of the 
section) 
 In her Daoist works, Le Guin pays her respects to all that was and is "fluid, 
 random, vast, and void," but there is something to be said for the city and 
 human memory-as in "The Eye Altering" (1976/1978) and "A Woman's Liberation" 
 and "Coming of Age in Karhide" (1995)-and there is much to be said for a little 
 light in the midst of the void, illuminating a " clean angle where the foot 
 of a wall rose from the pavement " (78). Beginnings are important with Le 
 Guin's Ekumen ( LHD 259; ch. 18), and, I infer, to Le Guin, and the beginning 
 sketched out for the rising Atlantis is a beautiful one. Bereshit -In 
 the beginning, of this cycle, there was darkness and a decrease of pressure, 
 and out of the darkness, not a God saying "Let there be light" but a light-bearing 
 fish. Then more fish, which allowed the reborning Atlanteans a defining vision: 
 darkness, biological light, a fish, an angle, and the memory of the City: the 
 archetypal City of right angles, walls, and towers, bringing form, human will, 
 and transcendence into, and into balance with, the void. And if funny-looking, 
 highly carnivorous fish seem an odd replacement for a transcendent god, they 
 may be, perhaps, decorous, deep-aquatic incarnations of Coyote--or more 
 mundane animal presences (see chapter on BG ). 
 Section 3.U elides Belle's workday but takes up as soon as she returns home 
 from work, where the US Federal Bureau of Investigation had been over to question 
 Simon and to plant an electronic listening device in the bathroom. The rest 
 of the section mentions "a new continent emerging" and very elegantly offers 
 more exposition on a USA of shortages, warfare abroad, and violence at home 
 that has escalated to where the Neo-Birch insurgents-i.e., Right-wing guerrillas 
 -hold Phoenix, Arizona, with the help of tactical nuclear weapons supplied by 
 the Weathermen in Los Angeles (79-80), i.e., Left-wing radicals. The point is 
 also driven home that this totalitarian government not only outlaws marriages 
 but encourages "healthy group sex" (80). The section ends with Belle's listening 
 to Simon's breathing "like the sound of soft waves far away," and she goes out 
 "to the dark sea on the sound of them." This leads Belle to recall going "out 
 to the dark sea, often, as a child, falling asleep," something she'd almost 
 forgotten in the conscious part of her mind. As a grownup, she experienced "the 
 great depths, rocking" only "rarely, as a great gift. To know the abyss of the 
 darkness and not to fear it, to entrust oneself to it and whatever may arise 
 from it-what greater gift?" (81, end of section). 68 
 In section 3.A, the Atlanteans continue to perceive the creation of the world, 
 and participate through their perception. Watching the luminescent fish, they 
 come to sense "space and direction-near and far, at least, and higher and lower." 
 They hear the whales singing, "Where are you? I am here," "Where are you? Where 
 have you gone?"; but the whales do not sing to the Atlanteans, nor do the Atlanteans 
 remember the word "whale." The unanswered songs of the whales brings self-awareness 
 to the Atlanteans: they now know, " because we heard, because we felt, because 
 we wept, we knew that we were; and we remembered other voices " (82-83). 
 Section 4.U brings on stage Max, mentioned in 2.U (73, 75) and shows us Belle 
practicing on her viola in the bathroom (83). Belle gets to muse a bit about 
artists and intellectuals as Simon and Max get very excited over formulas for 
electron emission (83-84). This is the high point in the USA part of the 
story: 
 . . . Max had solved the problems that were bothering them before 
Simon was sent to Camp, and had fitted Simon's equations to (as Simon put it) 
the bare facts, which means they have achieved "direct energy conversion." Ten 
or twelve people have worked on it at different times since Simon published the 
theoretical part of it when he was twenty-two. The physicist Ann Jones had 
pointed out right away that the simplest practical application of the theory 
would be to build a "sun tap," a device for collecting and storing solar energy, 
only much cheaper and better than the U.S.G. Sola-Heetas that some rich people 
have on their homes. (84) 
 Simon hadn't exactly published since he's not a government employee and lacks 
 clearance, but his theory had been distributed in "Sammy's-dot" (from the Russian 
 samizdat "self-published" -- usually illegally). 
 The political implications of the sun tap are made explicit: "You could call 
it Flower Power," Simon says, using a phrase from the counter-cultural, hippie 
part of the peace movement, ca. 1968. 
 "The State owns us," he said, "because the corporative State has a monopoly 
on power sources, and there's not enough power to go around. But now, anybody 
could build a generator on their roof that would furnish enough power to light a 
city." * * * "We could completely decentralize industry and 
agriculture. Technology could serve life instead of serving capital. We could 
each run our own life. Power is power! ... The State is a machine. We could 
unplug the machine, now. . . . When groups can keep the power to 
themselves; when they can use physical power-to in order to exert spiritual 
power-over; when{sic} might makes right. But if power is free? If everybody is 
equally mighty? Then everybody's got to find a better way of showing that he's 
right ...." 
 Belle answers, "That's what Mr. Nobel thought when he invented dynamite 
. . . . Peace on earth." Simon accuses her of being the "Skull at 
the banquet," the "finger writing on the wall" (85). Except the skull at the 
banquet always speaks true: all the guests will die; and in the story of 
Belshazzar's feast the words written on the wall, as interpreted by Daniel, also 
come true (Daniel 5). "But it was cruel," Belle thinks, "to be shown this great 
hope, and to know that there was no hope for it. He did know that. 
. . . He knew that there was no mountain" for him to be on that top 
of; Simon knew "that he was skiing on the wind" (86). 
 In 4.A the Atlanteans see dawn, but a dawn still seen from great depth, " only 
 color: blue. * * * no compass bearing to it. It was not brighter in 
 the east. There was no east or west. There was only up and down, below and above ." 
 And the Atlanteans can contrast this dawn with those of memory: dawn in a world 
 in the air, with territorial and self-assertive birds like those of our Earth, 
 or Urras ( TD 166; ch. 7): " . . . the chorus, voice by voice: 
 This is my nest, this is my tree, this is my egg, this is my day, this is my 
 life, here I am, here I am, hurray for me! I'm here! " (86). 69 
 The climax of "The New Atlantis" comes in 5.U with a gathering of scientists 
 in Belle and Simon's apartment and the unveiling of a solar cell that the engineer 
 in the group had actually built. The scientists celebrate in a low-key kind 
 of way, and it grieves Belle that "they couldn't rejoice aloud over a job done 
 and a discovery made, but had to hide there and whisper about it" (88). 70 
 Belle's refusal to judge is important for the tone of 
 "The New Atlantis," which neither celebrates technology nor denigrates it (Suvin 
 268). The scientists speculate on the ethical issues themselves, "Could it be, 
 " asks Clara Edmonds, alluding to physicists' knowing sin in atomic weapons 
 research, "that we physicists have known sin-and have come out on the other 
 side?" 71 
 Max catches the allusion and notes that the solar cell 
 wouldn't be useful for bomb production. The engineer, however, has the last 
 word on this topic: "Bombs are obsolete. Don't you realize that we could move 
 a mountain with this kind of power. . . . We could thaw Antarctica, 
 we could freeze the Congo. We could sink a continent. Give me a fulcrum and 
 I'll move the world. Well, Archimedes, you've got your fulcrum. The sun" (88). 
 But Archimedes cannot move the world because he can never find an "Archimedean 
 point" outside of the world on which to stand. As the Daoists insist more strongly 
 than most, one cannot move the universe with an external machine because, by 
 definition, there is no place outside the universe, which was Archimedes's point, 
 if Archimedes was joking. Nor can Archimedes even move the Earth; as a practical 
 matter, the quotation attributed to Archimedes as other than a profound joke 
 is a nice example of technological hubris, and the "We can" series in also hubristic, 
 and in the world of the story just wrong. "We" human beings may be able to move 
 mountains and sink continents, but we humans could not do so without great, 
 unforeseeable costs. And "we" as the scientists in the story cannot do any of 
 these things at all-can't even light up their own rooms-because they lack the 
 political power to oppose the State's monopoly over electrical power. The line 
 immediately following the ode to techno-power is Simon's "Christ . . . 
 the radio, Belle!"-i.e., turn on cover noise so the FBI won't hear the conversation. 
 Belle goes to the bathroom and doesn't turn on the radio but instead 
practices her viola, ending up improvising in the dark of yet another power 
outage. 
 Without light, when your couldn't see all the hard shiny surfaces of 
 things, the sound seemed softer and less muddled. I went on, and it began 
 to shape up. All the laws of harmonics sang together when the bow came 
 down. The strings of the viola were cords of my own voice, tightened by 
 sorrow, tuned to the pitch of joy. The melody created itself out of air 
 and energy, it raised up the valleys, and the mountains and hills were 
 made low, and the crooked straight, and the rough places plain. 72 
 And the music went out to the dark sea and sang 
 in the darkness, over the abyss. 
 Belle comes out of the bathroom to find Simon and the guests quiet and greatly 
 moved. Finally Rose Abramski speaks: "'I saw it. I saw the white towers, and 
 the water streaming down their sides, and running back down to the sea. And 
 the sunlight shining in the streets, after ten thousand years of darkness." 
 Out of the shadows of the room, Simon says that he heard them, heard their voices 
 ( NA 89). Simon asks Phil if they could "raise up the white towers, with 
 our lever and our fulcrum?", and Phil tells him that they have the power to 
 do it. Simon asks, "What else do we need, besides power?" He gets no answer. 73 
 In section 5.A, the Atlanteans see the water change from deep blue to 
turquoise; then from turquoise to colors like jade, sapphire or emerald: New 
Jerusalem naturalized, the bride-perfect, walled city, made of jewels, with a 
"radiance . . . clear as crystal," submerged and now emerging from the 
depths (Revelation 21.2-22.5). With the changes come thoughts of dreams and then 
the memory " of the thunder and the tremor and the fire and the towers 
falling, long ago ," the fall of the first Atlantis (90). After the memory, 
three things happen. First, something moves, " something not composed of 
planes and angles, but of curves and arcs ." The Atlanteans turn and look: 
willed motion. They see a cuttlefish, next to an engraving of a cuttlefish, the 
Atlantean " cherished sign": "Did it recognize its image? " (91). 
Second, they all turn and look at a school of silver fish, and the shadows the 
fish make. " There were shadows, now " (91-92). The Atlanteans see the 
towers of their city, and above, sunlight on the sea's surface. 
 We are here. When we break through the bright circle into life, the water 
will break and stream white down the white sides of the towers, and run down the 
steep streets back into the sea. . . . 
 We are here. 
 Whose voice? Who called to us? 
 As Spencer notes, this is a "powerful shared vision," connecting the Atlanteans 
 and the Americans-momentarily ("Exiles" 37). 
 Section 6.U ends the US story. Simon is arrested and hauled off to the federal 
 hospital in Salem, O(regon)--"Omelas," spelled backwards-and, in the larger 
 world, rising land masses in the South Atlantic and Western Pacific contribute 
 to the subsidence of the US coasts, including Oregon. Belle tries to walk to 
 Salem, taking with her her journal, a "tiny camp stove powered with the solar 
 cell," and a half pint of brandy. When she finishes the brandy, she plans to 
 put the journal in the bottle and let it float off. Clearly, Belle has been 
 successful in her attempt "to preserve her voice" (Cummins 173); we are reading 
 her journal. Cummins (173) and Spencer (37) assume that Belle has drowned, and 
 they are correct. Her words go "out to the dark sea," and to us. 
 Section 6.A is just two lines, three sentences, the Atlanteans' version of 
the whales' song: 
 Where are you? 
 We are here. Where have you gone? (93) 
 * 
 In terms of Le Guin's canon, there are the similarities noted above between 
 "The New Atlantis," The Left Hand of Darkness, and The Dispossessed . 
 To these we can add joy: Belle's joy at being reunited with Simon-"joy" is the 
 climax word of the first section-fits in with a motif that runs from Rocannon's 
 World (113; ch. 8), through The Left Hand of Darkness (220; ch. 16) 
 to "Hernes" in Searoad (184 [1991]). There are also similarities to "An 
 die Musik" (1961), The Lathe of Heaven (1971), and other of Le Guin's 
 works. 74 
 The similarity to "An die Musik" has to do with the importance 
 of artistic creation over immediate political effectiveness. To repeat a quotation 
 in an earlier chapter, "An die Musik" teaches that "Music will not save us." 
 It has no use-value. On the contrary, "To the world and its states and armies 
 and factories and Leaders, music says, ' You are irrelevant'; and, arrogant 
 and gentle as a god, to the suffering man it says only, 'Listen.' For being 
 saved is not the point. Music saves nothing. Merciful, uncaring, it denies and 
 breaks down all the shelters, the houses men build for themselves, that they 
 may see the sky" ( Orsinian Tales 144-45; my emphasis). In "The New Atlantis," 
 Belle's music doesn't move transcendentally to the sky, but immanently to the 
 sea, uniting for a moment Simon and his guests and the Atlanteans (89-90, 92). 
 The moment of communication "saves nothing," but, I think, it is a good in itself, 
 and, along with Belle and Simon's love, is the best that we will see among the 
 dying Americans in the story. 
 Locating "The New Atlantis" in terms of the themes of Le Guin's canon is one 
of the projects of Darko Suvin in his "Parables of De-Alienation" essay; and I 
think this locating is both gotten completely right and a bit wrong. In this 
excellent article, Suvin suggests that ". . . the centre of Le Guin's 
creation is the double star of identifying the neo-capitalist, individualist 
alienation and juxtaposing to it a sketch of a new, collectivist and harmonious, 
creation . . ." (267). Le Guin's method, like that of serious SF 
generally is analogy through parable, but not allegory, where X in the story = Y 
in our world: In Suvin's words, Le Guin "does not substitute one thing for 
another"; instead, Le Guin's method " sets one thing by the side of 
another , the explicit by the side of the implicit." The meaning of such 
parables is clear, but, Suvin insists, "there may be several levels of meaning; 
a parable is usually polysemous," multi-meaning (269). Suvin sees the unity in 
"The New Atlantis" in the contrast between "the emerging new City" and "the 
dying American society, a new republic, community or life-form germinating up 
for the depths, symmetrically opposed, as it were, to the perishing republic of 
the first strand" of narration, the sinking USA. 
 The ascending narration is in the first person plural, the "we" being 
 a new community . . . which relates to that of the U.S.A. as 
 collectivism does to individualism and also--in view of the cognition 
 and color imagery-as beauty and knowledge to pollution and ignorance of 
 both self and universe. The Atlantis collective has been submerged and 
 unconscious for ages, just as the idea of a true and beautiful collective 
 or classless society; the Fall of Atlantis, then, is here something like 
 the fall from tribal into class society and the concomitant alienation 
 of man into social institutions. A condition of pristine unity is presupposed 
 in the whole of Le Guin's opus as a past Golden Age; it echoes through 
 the present alienation from the unsplit Ancient One in RW [ Rocannon's 
 World ], through the direct, unalienated communication he gives to 
 Rocannon--mind-speech . . . to Selver's integral forest 
 in WWF [ The World for Word Is Forest ] and the other forest-minds 
 and tree images in her opus. But by 1975, in NA, there is a New Atlantis 
 rising: the forces of de-alienation are on the rise in Le Guin's writing. 
 (269) 
 I will say that "The New Atlantis" is not an allegory or even a mshl 
 but a modernist, symbolist, philosophical parable, indeed, more parabolic-indirect-than 
 Suvin allows in the details of his interpretation. The USA of the story is dystopian, 
 and it is undoubtedly contrasted with Atlantis: Atlantis as the City as hope, 
 the good City arising out of the depths of the ocean and the unconscious, not 
 one "coming down out of heaven from God" after a horror-show, divine apocalypse 
 (Revelation 21, 6-20). Belle's first-person narration is undoubtedly contrasted 
 with the Atlantean "we." But: it is a good thing that Belle says "I" and has 
 an individual voice. As Elizabeth Cummins notes, it is "the voices of the oppressors" 
 that we do not hear (170); and those silenced American bureaucratic oppressors 
 might very well speak as a " we. " The "corporative State" ( New Atlantis 
 75) is corporate and, in a Stalinist sense, collectivist. The Atlantean collective 
 is recognizably human, but not us. Our hope, if any, is in the descendants of 
 the survivors of the geological and ecological catastrophes on the West Coast: 
 the Kesh and other anarchistic, sane peoples of Always Coming Home , who 
 regain tribal consciousness and establish a very beautiful society.  
 New Heroes: End Notes 
 1 See
 e.g., in Second Sex 1 35, 47, 173-5,
 187; II.V.xvi: esp. 429-30, 447-48, 451-54, 456; II.V.xvii: 513, 521; 555-6,
 594; II.V.xxi: esp. 598-99, 602 (see also 618-21). 
 2 Implicit
 in my use of the terms "Comedy," "Romance,"
 "Tragedy," and "Satire" is my simplification of an image
 from Northrop Frye of a cycle of pre-generic modes following the cycle of the
 seasons.   See Frye, "Theory
 of Myths," esp. 162. 
 3 That's
 capital "C" City .  
 For the City in We , see Aldridge 76.   Le
 Guin's works can be placed in a very fruitful dialog with We and the other dystopias I mention.   For Le Guin and Zamiatin, see end of "The Stalin in the
 Soul," coll. LoN (1979): 220-21. 
 4 Comparison
 and Contrast is a traditional "mode" in rhetoric, and from the early
 1960s into the 1970s, binary oppositions were popular in various structuralist
 theories and other intellectual work.   See
 Lvi-Strauss 139, 161 and passim; note comparison/contrast methodology in
 Elmendorf with A. L. Kroeber, or for that matter, comparative anatomy,
 comparative linguistics, and much of the tradition of 19th- into early 20th-c.
 science. 
 5 For clowning, cf. and contrast the ritual clowns and occasional clowning
 in ACH (e.g. 384). 
 6 Moffatt
 quotes here Suzanne B. Kurth's essay "Friendship and Friendly
 Relationships," in George J. McCall, S. B. Kurth, et al., Social
 Relationships (Chicago: Aldine, 1970): 145. 
 7 Stephen
 Heath, The Sexual Fix (New York:
 Schocken, 1982).   
 8 Cf. A. L. Kroeber, Anthropology 
 28, for the assertion "that soon after the time when men began to
 possess institutions at all . . . they have never seriously swerved
 from an insistence on some sort of a social limitation on the natural sex
 impulse" ( Biology and Race 60).  
 9 And
 SF fantasizing, although, undoubtedly, Owen's Thorn is far more interesting,
 if on an ontologically vaguer standing, than Bill Kopman's Yirdo (see below,
 discussion of "Pathways of Desire"). 
 10 For places and times of
 power, compare WE ; for exultation in the cold, see RW , and LHD ,
 where " What is the meaning of life? " is a very destructive question
 (60; ch. 5 & passim).  For turning with the planet, see
 "Solitude," and contrast the valuing in that story of solitary
 experience. 
 11 See
 also TD 146; ch. 6.   
 12 In
 English 112 A, Miami University, Fall Semester 1994, some of my students
 usefully compared BP with Alan Jay Lerner's 1953 play Brigadoon 
 (Katheryn A. Snowberger) and C. S. Lewis's 1953 The
 Lion, the Witch {,} and the Wardrobe (Ian D. Bby and Scott Rocke).     
 13 The
 plot summary is based on work originally done by Denise Miller in "Love
 and Acceptance in The Beginning Place ," essay in Miami English 112
 A, used with permission.   I have
 modified Miller's summary. 
 14 As frequent in Le Guin, the point of view is third-person, limited (or
 selective) omniscient, with Hugh and Irene alternative as point-of-view
 characters. 
 15 The "real one" was in the comic strip Buck Rogers 2429 and following years, staying 500 years ahead of
 present, "until eventually the strip was stabilized as Buck
 Rogers in the Twenty-Fifth Century " ("About 'Buck Rogers'
 ...").   
 16 See
 also Edna in "Ether, OR" (1995) who claims to have made her soul for
 "glory," and is grateful to have known a good deal of glory.  
 "But it doesn't last.   It
 doesn't come together to make a place where you can live, a house.  
 It's gone and the years go" ( UA 109).     
 17 HarperPaperbacks edn. has
 "trie d to cop a feel"; I
 emend the tense from the 1981 Bantam edn., p. 76.  
 18 Following Adrienne Rich, who herself follows here Lynn Sukenick, Carol
 Franko talks of "matrophobia": the fear of becoming one's mother.  
 I'll add patriphobia: male fear of becoming one's father.  
 The ideas are now common in popular culture and have appeared in comic
 strips ( Sally Forth and Boomers ), on the TV show Friends 
 [1994], and alluded to in the commercial telling potential customers, this is not 
 your father's car.   
 19 See
 next to last chapter of Tehanu , "The Master" (ch. 13).   
 20 E-mail
 message, 18 November 1995, on the ListServ for English 113E, First Semester
 1995-96, Miami University, Oxford (Ohio).   
 21 Mannon, "the Soft Scientist," in "Vaster than
 Empires and More Slow" ( WTQ 168-69.)  
 22 Cf. and more so contrast
 Selver as translator in WWF . 
 23 Carol Franko points out (in "Acts of Attention . . ."
 [read 27/II/95]), the dragon leaves an odor that smells to Hugh like semen;
 from Hugh's point of view, the dragon "runs like a man" (203).  
 Brian Attebery sees the monster as a fairly pure incarnation of the
 Jungian Shadow: "a sort of undifferentiated essence of monster.  
 Its weapon is raw fear {,} 
 and its form . . . is dependent upon the beholder."  
 Irena sees the monster as female, Hugh as a male threatening Irena (Attebery
 116-17, in Bloom 238).   Le Guin
 says her intention was Hugh to kill the monster in the male form, as he sees
 it, with Irena seeing it as female (personal communication).  
 24 For
 the positive City, see Introd. to City of Illusions , rpt. LoN 
 (1979): 147.   For the negative
 City, see my discussions of EoH and ACH .   
 25 Le Guin's
 "gentle antidote" line is quoted in Smith 79.  
 26 As a
 practical matter, C.S. Lewis's work is the important target: Buck Rogers is no
 longer well-known, and few people generally and very few children read The
 Faerie Queene ; The Lion, the Witch {,} 
 and the Wardrobe is still popular and influential.     
 27 See McLean 140, Finch 42,
 Talbot 14.  Talking to me on 13 May 1996, Le Guin stressed that sacrifice
 is valued in many religions, not just Christianity.  I'll add that
 martyrdomself-sacrificeis also valued.  Contrast Luz on sacrifice
 in EoH .  In TD , Takver warns against the will to sacrifice
 in pregnant women (266; ch. 10); we need not agree with Takver, but we should
 take the idea seriously.  
 28 Le
 Guin handles living for others with instructive irony in "The
 Fisherwoman's Daughter" ( DEW 216), and gives similar treatment to
 "the self-sacrificing Lords" of the Shing in CI (165; ch. 8). 
 For a more direct attack on women trying to be self-sacrificing angels, see
 "Fisherwoman" 225, 232 -33. 
 29 Other readers have found Hugh's and
 Irena's actions far less problematic than I do.  My students weren't
 troubled by the monster-slaying, and neither were such sophisticated critics
 of young-adult literature as Lukens and Cline ( Critical
 Handbook 70).  
 30 For the seriously pedantic on such matters: black, white, and grey are
 not colors, but  "achromatic colors"; I have compromised with colors 
 in European quotation marks.  
 31 My thanks to Amy Howell of English 113E,
 Miami University, Fall 1995, for reminding me of the "silence"
 quotation.  
 32 From Beowulf to Faerie
 Queene to the latest Alien 
 movie, audiences have come to expect an exciting fight with interesting
 monsters.   That Le Guin does not give such thwack-by-thwack
 descriptionsnot even in the Earthsea trilogyis a highly significant
 silence in her work.   
 33 In addition to the specific allusion by Donna to Buck Rogers, note that
 Hugh originally thinks Irena a boy (69-70; ch. 3).   The motif is a commonplace when Romance heroes discover a
 heroic chivalric opponent is a warrior-maiden, but still note the scene of
 Antony Rogers (not yet "Buck") first meeting Wilma Deering:
 "The 'boy' was, I found, a girl," and an aggressive one ( Armageddon 2419 4; ch. 1).   
 34 And at one time or another, all the major characters in EoH are
 envoys; note Spencers title and discussion of "Exiles and
 Envoys."   Cf. and contrast
 Estraven in LHD , the Jewish exiles in "The Eye Altering," the
 Terrans in PE , and Ekumenical envoys exiled by the time-dilation of
 NAFL flight.   
 35 Beyond some confused expletives"Oh, hesumeria! " (42; ch.
 3)there is no indication of religion in Victoria City.  
 A director filming EoH might want some crucifixes on the walls,
 a church in the City square, a man garbed as a priest at Falco's dinner party,
 etc.   Le Guin says she assumed no
 priests went with the convicts (personal communication).  
 See, though, debate on ordaining priests in T. More's Utopia ,
 Book II (71).   
 36 I consulted here the entry "hacienda" in the Micropdia, Encyclopdia
 Britannica (1974).   In her
 rev. of Columbia: The Genocidal Democracy , by Javier Giraldo, S.J., Ana
 Carrigan writes that Colombian paramilitary troops, "trained . . .
 by the Colombian Army, and funded by large landowners (frequently mafia
 bosses)" go into "rural areas . . . [and] savagely
 'cleanse' the land"present tense"of recalcitrant, small
 peasant owners, and create feudal enclaves where the subdued populations that
 remain work as serfs for the new landowners" (40).  
 37 See Thompson & Johnsons chapters 11 and 12: "Feudalism"
 and "Manorialism"or similar chapters in any competent
 introduction to medieval history.   
 38 Reduction
 of free workers to serfs or slaves is not 
 one of the aspects of the Middle Ages that would be appreciated by
 Kropotkinesque anarchists.     
 39 [1] "The tragic hero renounces himself in order to express the
 universal, the knight of faith," Kierkegaard's theistic Existentialist
 hero, "renounces the universal in order to become the individual"
 (86; Problem II).   
 40 The Bhagavad-Gita , The Song of
 God, is a conversation between Arjuna and Krishna just before the Battle of
 Kurukshetra (see my discussions of FWF and King Dog) .  
 41 To clarify my tone, note Northrop Frye's observation that "Mr. E. M.
 Forster speaks with disdain of Dickens's Mrs. Micawber, who never says
 anything except she will never desert Mr. Micawber: a strong contrast is
 marked here between the refined writer too finicky for popular formulas, and
 the major one who exploits them ruthlessly" ( Anatomy
 of Criticism 168-69).   The
 ability to produce nuanced writing is a good thing; as Anthony Burgess said
 about the Beatles, so is the capacity for simplicity.  
 There is nothing subtle about Job on his dung heap, Pentheus's acting
 sacrificial goat-boy in Euripides's The
 Bacchae , the attack on comfortable theology in King Lear , or the sexual politics of Joanna Russ's The
 Female Man etc.   
 42 For Le Guin on natural kingship, note J. Needham on "the ancient
 paradise of generalized tribal nobility" in the Daoist version of the
 Golden Age ("Time and Thought" 112).  
 43 Cf. David Crosbys 1960s song, "Mind Gardens," the allegory
 of a man who plants a garden, then walls it in and covers it to keep it safe.  
 When the garden starts to die, he learns he must unbuild the walls.  
 44 Since some men have been Daoist sages and anarchists and tribesmen; and
 since some women have been Christian saints and Abolitionist, Suffragette,
 and/or Prohibitionist idealistsVera overgeneralizes a bit; cf. and contrast
 presentation of essentialist views by Moss in Tehanu (see ER 
 16).   
 45 For a damning attack on the desire for self-sacrifice as central to
 fanaticismfor a sacrifice of Self as the central act of becoming a
 fanatic see Hoffer, esp. 21, 35-36, and all of Part Three, "United
 Action and Self-Sacrifice."   
 46 Le Guin commented on my ms. in through here that  
 EoH is her "first book . . . that doesn't have
 men/a man at the center.   It was a
 breakthrough for me."   
 47 Fictional meanings are also influenced by immediate contexts.  
 In Millennial Women (1978), a
 collection of feminist SF, readers might well catch on to Luz as the hero of EoH 
 earlier than in reading the story independently, in the novel publication of
 1984 (Spivack 109).   My thanks to Meghan Braidish for stressing the Millennial
 Women context of EoH, and Spivack on Lev vs. Luz as centers (Spivack
 112).   
 48 Le Guin would stress immanence here: "I think she's talking about
 immanence, no?" (personal communication).  
 49 Denise Levertov, "Come into Animal Presence" (1961); the poem
 is quoted as a headnote / introd. to Buffalo Gals and Other Animal
 Presences (1987 [ BG 14]).   
 50 For dark red, cf. the palace at Erhenrang and the Un-Palace of Rer in LHD 
 53; ch. 5, and ch. 3, passim.   See
 below for "dark red," aggressively carnivorous fish ("NA"
 77-78).   In LHD and
 "NA," Le Guin seems to associate deep red with anarchy, grandeur,
 power, and danger.   
 51 In "NA" she allows more for soul; see below.  
 52 Ndif : "Natives"Le Guin (personal
 communication), "No difference"Bittner, "Serpent"
 presentation.     
 53 My sources on Indian philosophy are Encyclopaedia
 Britannica 1974, articles on "Buddha," "Buddhism,"
 "Buddhism, History of," ""Buddhist Mysticism," "Heracleitus,"
 "Hinduism," "Indian Philosophy," "Nataraja,"
 "Siva"; The Song of God: The
 Bhagavad-Gita ; A. L. Kroeber, Anthropology 306; Watts, The
 Way of Zen ; and Bittner's PCA presentation, "The Serpent Spits Out
 Its Tail."   
 54 For
 Shiva and Shakti, see Le Guin's poetry collected in Hardwords (1981).   
 55 See below, my discussion of "the social construction of
 reality," preceding chapter on stories in FIS .  
 56 One of Le Guin's sources in valuing the world of "Mutabilitie"
 may be the teaching of Master Dgen, a Japanese Buddhist teacher of the 13th
 c. and possibly the founder of the St-Zen sect.  
 "For Master Dgen, impermanence is itself the absolute state, and
 this impermanence is not to be rejected but to be valued.  
 'Impermanence is the Buddhahood ....'" (Nakumura, in Voices 
 86).   
 57 See A. L. Kroeber, Anthropology 
 248, "Inhibition and Puritanism"; see also Le Guin's "Omelas,"
 and my discussion thereof.   
 58 And, of course Serenity in "Solitude" (1994) would chide the
 Terrans for being bored among such wonders: a whole new physical world, in a
 wondrous universe, with people (to mostly avoid).   The Thurro-dowist Listener in CI (ch. 3) would agree  
 59 "Pathways" looks very gentle put next to Norman Spinrad's The
 Iron Dream (1972): a satire purporting to be an SF novel written by Adolf
 Hitler in a reality only slightly alternate to our ownwith Hitler's fiction
 shown to be not all that different from "the considerable body of
 pathological literature published within the science fiction field" in
 our world (252).   
 60 For the gender issue in much SF, see Russ's "The Image of Women in
 Science fiction."   Note that
 in the original Flash Gordon comic
 strip, all the Mongonians, not just the villainous Ming, were Asian; the
 films, that far, are less actively racist than the strips.  
 61 There is, though, an "on the other hand" here: On the other
 hand, all art is selective, and we should be careful in dealing with what is
 not in any individual work of art (see Frye 235.)   
 62 See Cummins's, Understanding 
 (1990/1993): 170-71.   Contrast Ayn
 Rand's Anthem (1938/1946), where
 coming to political consciousness moves one from "we" to
 "I."   
 63 See
 Suvin 270, Cummins 167, Spivack 88-91.    
 64 Le Guin's strong dislike of euphemism appears also in WWF (1972)
 and is readily understandable in the context of the Viet Nam War and much of
 20th-c. politics.   Readers who
 have grown up on euphemism and are not bothered by it, should see the classic
 analysis of euphemism as political obscenity, George Orwell's "Politics
 and the English Language," coll. Shooting
 and Elephant and Other Essays (1950).  
 65 Cf. The opening of LoH , and note Le Guinian motif of coming into
 consciousness and returning to unconsciousness and/or dream.  
 66 Luz
 in EoH may overstate in having humans only "mud": dirt +
 water; there may also be a problem in postmodern theories that deny a subject,
 or anything else, for that "something" that endures.     
 67 The totalitarian states in Y. Zamiatins We , A. Huxleys Brave New
 World , and G. Orwells 1984 
 have significantly different regulations about sex; but all of them regulate
 sex stringently.   
 68 Cf. Le Guin's LoH (1971), "Solitude" (1994), and Owen's
 turning into and with the Earth in Very Far Away (41).  
 69 For these territorial birds, cf. Tolfink, an author whose one surviving
 work is preserved in Carlisle Cathedral in England: a line of runes Le Guin
 quotes in translation in "It Was a Dark and Stormy Night" (1979):
 "Tolfink carved these runes in this stone" ( DEW 29).  
 70 Cf. singing of former slaves at celebration in "A Man of the
 People" ( FWF 133).   
 71 Cf. Shevek and Takver on suffering and the need to "get through it,
 go beyond it" ( TD 48-49; ch. 2).  
 72 Quoting Isaiah 40.3-4, set to music by George Frederick Handel in The Messiah 
 (1742).   This section of Isaiah is
 near the beginning of the "Book of the Consolation of Israel" (chs.
 40-55); it begins, in the AV trans. of 1611 (the one used by Handel):
 "Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith your God.  
 Speak yet comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare
 is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned . . ."which
 is hopeful in Le Guin's context, or ironic.  
 Quoted and paralleled by J. Needham with the Daoist teaching that
 "The great highway (of the Tao of justice and righteousness)
 . . . is broad and level" ("Time and Knowledge" 114).   
 73 For power as insufficient, see the dialog between Ged and Cob at the
 climax of FS (179-80; ch. 12).   
 74 See Spivack 91 for "New Atlantis" privileging hearing over
 seeing and valuing most of all sound in the darkness.   Cf. and contrast "Field of Vision."  
 contents bibliography sfra home page 
