 
 Chapter 6: Daoism 
 contents bibliography sfra home page 
 Transition: Daoism, Magic, and Getting in Touch 
 I read Lao-tzu and the Tao Te Ching at 14. My father had it around the 
 house in the old edition with the Chinese text. I sneaked a peak and was and 
 remain fascinated. Taoism is still an underlayer in my work. It begins talking 
 about what we can't talk about an old mysticism that intertwines with Buddhism 
 and is practical and not theistic. Before and beyond God. There's a humorous 
 and easygoing aspect to it that I like temperamentally and that fits in with 
 anarchism. Pacifist anarchism and Lao-tzu have a lot of connection with each 
 other, especially in the 20th century. 
 (Le Guin on "Summer Reading," Mother Jones May/June 1995: 34) 
 Possibly the best way into the worlds of Le Guin's Daoist and magical works 
 is through the early short stories. 
 1 I'll suggest the philosophical stories "Field of Vision" 
 (1973), "A Trip to the Head" (1970), and "Darkness Box" (1963); the stories 
 in the "marriage group" "April in Paris" (1962) and "Nine Lives" (1969); and 
 the Earthsea stories "The Word of Unbinding" and "The Rule of Names" (both 1964). 
 2 
 "Field of Vision" (1973) 
 The science-fiction story "Field of Vision" makes a useful starting place, 
 logically, not chronologically since it handles very explicitly a question usually 
 made moot or only handled indirectly in much of Le Guin's work until Always 
 Coming Home (1985): God. The story also deals with the important themes 
 of light and darkness, reason and certainty, literal and metaphorical touch, 
 and with how we organize reality. 
 3 
 In "Field of Vision," God exists, "the one true God, immanent in all things. 
 Everywhere, forever." Geraint ("Gerry") Hughes, the protagonist of the story 
 has "learned to see God," at an archeological site on Mars, and Joe Temski, 
 one of his colleagues, has learned to hear God. In the manner of prophets who've 
 heard the Word, Temski goes off to preach and become First Apostle of the holy 
 and universal Church of God, based on the Revelation of the Ancients who had 
 visited Mars 600 million years ago ( WTQ 239, 242-43). Before the Church 
 can be formed, Hughes kills himself, and his motivation for suicide a negative 
 act for Le Guin is important. 
 When Hughes looks at his therapist, Sidney Shapir he sees "A blot. A shadow. 
 An incompleteness, a rudiment, an obstruction. Something completely unimportant." 
 Shapir asks him what he sees when he looks at himself, and Hughes answers, "Just 
 the same. A hindrance, a triviality. A blot on the field of vision" (241). 
 4 Hughes will not preach and refuses to be a missionary 
 because he does not want God for himself and certainly doesn't want God for 
 his world. The logic of the story is impeccable: If God is, then "Only God is" 
 truly is , is in a meaningful way. Nothing about human beings matters 
 except to know the truth of our worthlessness: "that we are trivial vehicles 
 of the great truth" of God. "The earth doesn't matter, the stars don't matter, 
 death doesn't matter, nothing is anything" at least nothing is anything significant 
 (242). After his time in the "conversion" room on Mars, all Hughes has to do 
 is open his eyes and look and he can "see the Face of God. And I'd give all 
 my life just to see one human face again, to see a tree . . . a chair 
 . . . . They can keep their God, they can keep their Light. I 
 want the world back. I want questions, not the answer. I want my own life back, 
 and my own death!" (243). He gets only his death. 
 Le Guin uses in "Field of Vision" a variation on the method of Reductio 
 ad absurdum . Assuming the existence of God does not lead to literal 
 absurdities in logic, but it does lead to conclusions Le Guin does not like, 
 conclusions which will not go over well with humanist readers. Let's examine, 
 briefly, the God here rejected. 
 First, this is less the transcendent Creator-God who says "Let there be light" 
 (Genesis 1.3) than the immanent God who is Light. Le Guin may be alluding to 
 the opening of the Gospel of John and to John 8.12, where Jesus proclaims himself 
 "the light of the world." Still, it may be more useful to see the God in "Field 
 of Vision" as the God who spoke to Moses out of the burning bush and responded 
 to Moses's request for a name: that God who calls himself "Ehyeh-Asher-Ehyeh," 
 with the short form of just "Ehyeh" ("I Am" or "I Will Be"). My most recent 
 and textually sophisticated English bible refuses to try to translate the name 
 of God, but notes the centrality to its meaning of the Hebrew verb for to 
 be . The True Name of God may be, then: The One Who Can Say I Am and 
 Have It a Significant Statement. That is, God is Being, immanent and eternal 
 and such a God is a problem for humans when personified, when made one, given 
 a personal name, and assigned a pronoun. Indeed, "Field of Vision" could even 
 be seen to critique any of the schools of Buddhism that stress seeing the ground 
 of Being. Ch'an Buddhism, Fritjof Capra writes, is the Chinese version of Zen, 
 and the formula in Ch'an for enlightenment is "the vision of the Tao." Capra 
 concurs, with reservations, with D. T. Suzuki's assertion that "Buddhist philosophy 
 . . . ultimately points toward seeing reality as it is" (Capra 22; 
 ch. 2, "Knowing and Seeing"). Capra can cite other Eastern sources to the same 
 effect, so perhaps we should say that "Field of Vision" critiques all theories 
 that stress seeing and relating to an Absolute One as opposed to living 
 in the multitudinous world of everyday. 
 Later, I will deal in some detail with the rather overwrought confrontation 
 between Jean-Paul Sartre's Orestes and Zeus in The Flies (1943), 
 but a more decorous repetition of what Le Guin is getting at in terms of Western 
 thought can be found in the quieter separation between God and at least part 
 of humanity at the end of Paddy Chayefsky's Gideon (1961). About to follow 
 the word of the Lord and kill the elders of Succoth, Gideon 
 felt a shaft of terror that chills me even now. It was as if the nakedness 
 of all things was exposed to me, and I saw myself and all men for what 
 we truly are, suspensions of matter, flailing about for footholds in the 
 void, all the while slipping back screaming into endless suffocations. 
 That is the truth of things, I know, but I cannot call it truth. It is 
 too hideous, an intolerable state of affairs. I cannot love you, God, 
 for it makes me a meaningless thing. 
 Gideon wants a divorce. 
 5 
 The Angel reviews Gideon's position: "You would pretend 
 God is not although you know that he is, so that you might be a significant 
 creature which you know you are not. . . . And you do not love 
 me!" (Chayefsky 64-65). 
 If God is and is a person, God is all, and we are nothing. If there is no God, 
 though, then there are other problems. 
 Le Guin will accept Shiva and Kali, especially Shiva Nataraja, dancing the 
 worlds into being, and nonbeing, and Kali as goddess of creative destruction: 
 these two deities nicely symbolize a mythologized Dao. But a monotheistic One, 
 a "Judaeo-Christian-Rationalist" God does not exist in Le Guin's work, with 
 part of her rationale for this rejection stated plainly in "Field of Vision." 
 Another part of the rationale of rejection is the way monotheism, especially 
 with a transcendent God, correlates with macho, imperialist civilization but 
 that is a matter for later. For now, Le Guin denies "the one true God" and writes 
 as an atheist, as she ambiguously says in the 1976 introduction to the re-issue 
 of The Left Hand of Darkness , and an honest and intelligent atheist; 
 she knows that getting rid of God, singular, can be "extremely embarrassing" 
 (Sartre, "Existentialism" 294). With no One, personal God, one might be left 
 in the Sartrean vision: Man alone, abandoned on a vast plain, with each of us 
 trapped in our own skins and, in extreme cases, nauseated by the world; most 
 importantly for such a vision, "Hell is other people" ( No Exit 47). 6 
   In Earthsea, from one point of view, when Le Guin 
 gets cosmological, she presents in part a metaphysical and physical universe 
 not far from that of Sartre: a relatively flat world of human beings pretty 
 much between an empty heaven and the Dry Land of the dead, with human people 
 necessarily incapable of being part of nature in the unconscious way of leaves 
 and whales and rocks. What we must learn in Earthsea is the Daoist lesson that 
 one is either tossed about on the surface of the "stream" or one becomes 
 the stream (or river or ocean or goes deep into the forest): i.e., one merges 
 with the Dao. 7   
 Le Guin, though, usually wants to keep such merging short-term. She wants us 
 embedded in what is , indeed, but ordinarily what is in terms of everyday, 
 domestic realities. 
 It is a central fact of Le Guin's work that she accepts the problem of "skin" 
 as a real problem: it is difficult to really get in touch with another person, 
 but it is by no means impossible. 8   Indeed, 
 as Gerry Hughes brings home quite clearly, the desire to get in touch with other 
 human beings and with the world "just to see one human face again, to see a 
 tree . . . a plain wooden chair" may be stronger than the desire to 
 see God, to have the mystic vision and achieve certainty (243). Or, so it is 
 for most people, the unsaved of Henry Vaughn's poem "The World" (1650), excerpts 
 from which Le Guin uses to open and close the story. The Speaker of Vaughn's 
 poem accuses worldlings of folly "thus to prefer dark night / Before true light"; 
 but one of them replies in a whisper and implies that Eternity is, indeed, a 
 divine gift only for the elect: " This Ring the Bride-groome did for none 
 provide / But for his bride ." And the rest of us (the great "preterite" 
 majority if Calvinist Christians are correct) may not want this Ring the transcendent 
 God but prefer the physical world and other people. Le Guin would not have a 
 Chayefskian divorce from God but would have us reject the Groom (if any Groom 
 there be) and call off the wedding. 
 "April in Paris" (1962), "Nine Lives" (1969): First Pass 
 The problem of "skin" is stated succinctly by Kislk in "April in Paris" (Le 
 Guin's first professional story) explaining why in 15,000 years of recorded 
 history one magical spell and only one in one place over a brief period of time 
 worked to bring together four strangers and a puppy. "People bored me," Kislk 
 tells us. "All like me on the outside, all alien to me on the inside. When everything's 
 alike," as it is in her world some 6500 years in our future, "which place is 
 home?" However, in the late medieval Paris of the story she's met a man she 
 likes, shorter than she is, "with bad teeth and a short temper. Now I'm home, 
 I'm where I can be myself, I'm no longer alone!" ( WTQ 35). Loneliness 
 is the problem, a constant human problem. The first-time magician who has summoned 
 three new friends (and a dog) tells us "Loneliness is the spell, loneliness 
 is stronger .... Really it doesn't seem unnatural" (35; unspaced ellipsis mark 
 in original). Loneliness may be even stronger than natural law, and a primary 
 human desire may be to be where one is not alone but with friends and lovers: 
 truly at home. 
 A similar point is made in "Nine Lives" (1969). The plot there shares a premise 
 with Le Guin's future history for our Earth from "Nine Lives" through "Newton's 
 Sleep" and the Hainish stories of the early 1990s: there has been a major ecological 
 and social collapse on Earth. Some space flight survives the collapse in "Nine 
 Lives," and early in the years of our expansion into the galaxy, a mining colony 
 is set up on the planet Libra, manned, at the beginning of the story by Alvaro 
 Guillen Martin, a healthy, extroverted Argentinean, and Owen Pugh, a scrawny 
 Welshman ( WTQ 123). To start the plot, in good dramatic fashion, Owen 
 and Pugh soon must deal with the arrival of newcomers: the John Chow tenclone, 
 all named John Chow, but having for middle names letters of the Hebrew alphabet. 
 And then Le Guin does something very undramatic; she interrupts the arrival 
 scene with a paragraph of general doctrine, and then follows that with another 
 paragraph applying the doctrine to the situation on Libra. 
 It is hard to meet a stranger. Even the greatest extravert{sic} meeting 
 even the meekest stranger knows a certain dread, though he may not know 
 he knows it. Will he make a fool of me and wreck my image of myself invade 
 me destroy me change me? Will he be different from me? Yes, that he will. 
 There's the terrible thing: the strangeness of the stranger. 
 After two years on a dead planet, and the last half year isolated as 
 a team of two, oneself and one other, after that it's even harder to meet 
 a stranger, however welcome he may be. You're out of the habit of difference, 
 you've lost the touch; and the fear revives, the primitive anxiety, the 
 old dread. (121) 
 The plot works to set up the plausibility of a clone as "the first truly stable, 
 self-reliant human being," a corporate individual like a beehive, that "would 
 need nobody's help. It would be sufficient to itself physically, sexually, emotionally, 
 intellectually" ( WTQ 129). And then Le Guin stages a quake and a collapse 
 in a mine and kills off all the clones except Kaph. 
 Now this is isolation: three men alone on a planet, under a dome under 
 a Godless sky, over a planet that kills those who go beneath her skin. (I put 
 the matter melodramatically but stay faithful to the imagery of the story.) 
 The action of the plot is Kaph's isolation from his clone, and then learning 
 to make contact, to touch, Pugh and Martin. 9   Kaph 
 asks Pugh if Pugh loves Martin and, after a moment's anger, Pugh answers that 
 Martin is his friend, and then realizes he has answered Kaph's question indirectly 
 so does so directly: "Yes, I love him. Why did you ask that?" For later, note 
 Pugh's anger at what he takes as a suggestion of homosexuality: it fits into 
 Le Guin's wrestling with one orientation of the angels of feminist consciousness. 10   
 For now note Kaph's answer to Pugh's wanting to know why he asked; Kaph needs 
 to know how people can love, how we do love. Pugh cannot answer such a question, 
 but he can say that ". . . it's practice, partly. . . . 
 We're each of us alone, to be sure. What can you do but hold your hand out in 
 the dark?" ( WTQ 146-47). 
 That's about all we can do, and that is what most of us try to do, with whatever 
 success we find. And that, basically, is Le Guin's answer to J-P Sartre and 
 the dozens of lesser thinkers of the 1940s and 1950s who (unlike Sartre) rather 
 exalted in isolation and tragedy and irony and detachment and a sort of "manly" 
 acceptance of what a small horde of social critics was identifying as the pathological 
 alienation and "atomization" of people in technologically sophisticated cultures 
 in general and the United States in particular. 
 But Le Guin was not quite finished with her respectable target, J-P Sartre; 
 that came the following year in "A Trip to the Head," a story she describes 
 in the headnote in The Wind's Twelve Quarters as "definitely a Bung Puller," 
 a story that got her writing again. 
 "A Trip to the Head" (1970) 
 "A Trip to the Head" is a surreal, philosophical work, and I'm not sure it 
 would be useful to try to talk about its plot, but the situation of "A Trip 
 to the Head" is a man finding himself with another person at the edge of a never-named 
 forest. 11   
 The other is an Other a person the Self encounters and the forest both symbolizes 
 and literally is the unconscious, plus nature and the Dao, as both Being and 
 nonBeing. 12   
 The man is called "blank" at first by the Narrator, finally identified as Lewis 
 D. Charles, who then becomes "blank" again. Somehow the man has stumbled out 
 of the forest and into consciousness. There is some action in the head of the 
 man, but much of the story is a dialog between this newly-conscious Self and 
 the Other. 
 Blank's first question is whether or not he's on Earth, and the Other tells 
 him he is with an allusion to the famous line, "Why this is Hell, nor am I out 
 of it" from Christopher Marlowe's Dr. Faustus (1.3.76). The allusion 
 is apt since blank is there and the Other "the one beside him" is there and 
 "As Jean-Paul Sartre has said in his lovable way, 'Hell is other people'" (Garcin's 
 line in the last moments of No Exit , quoted by the Other). 13   
 Blank wishes to hell J-P Sartre and again wants to know where he is, to which 
 the Other asks who he is. He doesn't know, apparently because they stand 
 "at the edge of the forest" and in the forest out of civilization, again home 
 in nature and Being things lose their names (see "She Unnames Them" and King 
 Dog [1985]). 
 So blank is but remains unnamed: in good Existentialist fashion his existence 
 precedes his personal essence. Nor does he know what type of thing he is, aside 
 from similar to the Other; if there is no God to determine human nature (as 
 Sartre asserts) it is up to men Sartre's is a masculinist theory to define "Man." 
 Blank ask, "How can I say who I am when I can't say what I am?" and he determines 
 to do something, to get the basics: ". . . it doesn't matter what 
 name you're called by . . . it's what you do that counts. . . . 
 I will exist. . . . I will call myself Ralph" (162). Existence 
 precedes essence; human action (in Existentialist theory) creates human being, 
 our only authentic , really real being. 
 And then, segue into a parody of a "women's romance" scene in which Yankee 
 carpetbagger Mr. Ralph proposes to aristocratic, probably White, now-poor but 
 always-proud Amanda, ending in a passionate kiss "But it did not seem to help 
 at all." So jump forward in time a bit for a brief sex scene and a longer philosophical 
 discussion afterward. The Self and the Other decide that gender is important; 
 the Other is less sure about sex. "'Oh, Hell,' said the other with a flare of 
 temper, 'brisleworms have sex, tree-sloths have sex, Jean-Paul Sartre has sex 
 what does it prove?" And then a very important dialogue: 
 "Why, sex is real, I mean really real it's having and acting in its intensest 
 form. When a man takes a woman he proves his being!' 
 "I see. But what if he's a woman?" 
 "I was Ralph." 
 "Try being Amanda," the other said sourly. (162-63) 
 And here, Le Guin says in her headnote in The Wind's Twelve Quarters , 
 here she stopped writing this story had " been stuck " in her writing for 
 a year or so (159). 
 Shortly after blank had come to consciousness, he had looked at the also-nameless 
 Other and wondered, "What good was it?" (161). Sex is one answer to that question: 
 one utilitarian use of another is as a sex object. More important is the suggestion 
 of sex as man's way of proving "his being": it would be the "intensest form" 
 and primal paradigm of "having and acting." But should one make utilitarian 
 demands on people insist that they be good for something, of use to me ? 
 Is sex always and necessarily "having and acting"? Is sex always that way even 
 for men? Is "having and acting" the usual view of sex among women? "'Try being 
 Amanda,' the other said sourly" and consider also the implications "if Amanda 
 was black" ( WTQ 163). 
 The rest of "A Trip to the Head" shows shadows coming over the world in what 
 may be night, during or after which blank experiences a dream or vision. The 
 Other asks blank to check his memory, and blank finds "old toys, nursery rhymes, 
 myths, old wives' tales, but no nourishment for adults, no least scrap of possession, 
 not a crumb of success" (164). Blank finds no comfort in being merely human, 
 with "no name, no sex, no nothing. I might as well be a bristleworm or a tree-sloth," 
 or, the Other significantly suggests, he might as well be Jean-Paul Sartre. 
 "'I?' said blank, offended. Driven to denial by so nauseous a notion, he stood 
 up and said, 'I certainly am not Jean-Paul Sartre'"; he is himself: Lewis D. 
 Charles. Charles names himself in that moment and sees himself before a forest 
 emphatically there, "root and branch," but the Other has disappeared. 
 He had got it all wrong, backwards. He had found the wrong name. He turned, 
 and without the least impulse of self-preservation plunged into the pathless 
 forest, casting himself away so that he might find what he had cast away. 
 Under the trees he forgot his name again at once. He also forgot what 
 he was looking for. What was it he had lost? He went deeper and deeper 
 into shadows, under leaves, eastward, in the forest where nameless tigers 
 burned. (165) 
 Blank's finding the thought of being J-P Sartre "so nauseous a notion" is a 
 joke; Nausea (1938) is the title of Sartre's first famous work, a novel 
 with a narrator radically alienated from other people, the physical world, and 
 even his own body. The burning tigers in the last line of "A Trip to the Head" 
 are lifted from William Blake's "The Tyger" ( Songs of Experience , etched 
 1789-94). In the poem, Blake raises the question of what sort of God "Could 
 frame" the "dreadful symmetry" of a tiger. We should not make too much of a 
 joke and an allusion, but one thing is very clear in "A Trip to the Head": the 
 movement is away from a utilitarian view of people and a macho Existentialism 
 in the manner of Sartre and into a forest Le Guin has associated with shadows, 
 myths, old wives' tales, and Blakean tigers and has identified as the unconscious, 
 where names are lost. Such a trip may be very negative, as it is at the conclusion 
 of Le Guin's "Semley's Necklace" (1964); in later works, it will be mostly positive. 
 Do not insist, then, upon an Existentialist either/or e.g., Sartre or Blake 
 with the comfortable stasis of a fixed position. Definitely don't look for some 
 sort of "golden mean": a grey blending of, e.g., Sartre and Blake. Do, however, 
 note the movement , the vector toward the unconscious, toward so many 
 things most people in the Western world have associated with the dark, the movement 
 away from a supposed victory of culture and civilization over savage 
 nature. Like Romantics generally, Blakean and otherwise, Le Guin would have 
 us get back home to the forest, into relationship with tigers, Nature, trees, 
 and the dark, labyrinthine wilderness. 
 Le Guin is different from most people in the West, different from all of us 
 who've grown up in the tradition of revelation of Judaism, Christianity, and 
 Islam, in the rationalist tradition of Greece, the legalist tradition of Rome, 
 in the tradition going back to at least ancient Egypt that validates the desire 
 for immortality, that celebrates spirit over body, light over the dark. The 
 difference will be more explicit some fifteen years later when Le Guin publishes 
 Always Coming Home and, the complement to "A Trip to the Head," her (anti)myth 
 of Creation and denial of separation, "She Unnames Them" (1985). 
 * 
 Transition: Daoism (First Pass) 14 
 Tao gives birth to one, 
 One gives birth to two, 
 Two gives birth to three, 
 Three gives birth to ten thousand beings [= the world]. 
 ( Tao te Ching 42 [Chen 157 f.]) 
 For our first pass at Daoism I shall start with Sartrean Man, more specifically 
 Orestes in his climactic confrontation with Zeus in The Flies . 15   
 With Zeus in front of him, Orestes will not deny the existence of God, but he 
 does deny God's relevance. God is "the king of gods, king of stones and stars, 
 king of the waves of the sea. But you are not the king of man," because God 
 erred and created us free; indeed, we are our freedom (120-21). Before 
 achieving consciousness and the recognition of his freedom, Orestes had felt 
 he had a purpose: serving the good by serving God; he felt gentle and a part 
 of the Whole. And then, "Suddenly . . . . Nature sprang back 
 . . . and I knew myself alone, utterly alone in the midst of this 
 well-meaning little universe of yours. I was like a man who's lost his shadow. 
 And there was nothing left in heaven, no right or wrong, nor anyone to give 
 me orders. * * * [I am] Foreign to myself . . . . Outside 
 nature, against nature, without excuse, beyond remedy, except what remedy I 
 find within myself. . . . Nature abhors man, and you too, god 
 of gods, abhor mankind. * * * You are God and I am free; each of us 
 is alone, and our anguish is akin ( The Flies 121-22). Orestes claims 
 one human connection: the people of Argos are his people, and he feels he must 
 open their eyes with the gift of truth. Zeus says it's a gift "of loneliness 
 and shame." They will see through the veils a merciful God has placed over their 
 eyes and "will see their lives as they are, foul and futile, a barren boon." 
 What will they make of themselves, the people who'll accept Orestes's gift? 
 Orestes says, "What they will. They're free, and human life begins on the far 
 side of despair" (123). 
 So Man is out there, free, alone, utterly alienated. In theory and in the 1940s 
 through the 1960s a very invigorating theory it was. Still, though, only a French 
 philosopher living a stereotype could be totally content with a picture of the 
 human condition that was both so bleak (if not pathological) and so obviously 
 counter to a fair amount of human experience. We do make friends; we do form 
 bonds with other people; we do love; and we do form human communities from time 
 to time, and most of us, on at least rare occasions, can sense a relationship 
 with Nature and the world, and feel at home in the universe. How does one return 
 to the theory the experience of many men and, quite possibly, most women? 
 Allow God, and the problem had been solved long before Le Guin started to write, 
 or Sartre, for that matter. In I and Thou (1923, 1937), 
 Martin Buber argued that relationship with God, the great and eternal Thou, 
 allows human relationship with one another and other creatures. Quite emphatically, 
 however, Le Guin will not allow God. How, then, to make possible I-Thou relationships 
 in a Godless world? 
 One way is to take the God who says "I AM" and delete the "I" get rid of the 
 personal and transcendent in God and leave only immanence, the Being within 
 things, that underlies things. And this was not something Le Guin had to do: 
 the idea of immanent Being may well be far older than named transcendent gods, 
 and is central to the religious and philosophical thought of the East and well 
 developed in "The Perennial Philosophy" what Aldous Huxley sees as almost a 
 natural approach to the universe perhaps most austerely embodied in philosophical 
 and mystic Daoism. 16   Note 
 carefully (and again) that is the philosophical and mystical Daoism stemming 
 from Tao te Ching ("The Classic of the Way and its Power") 
 associated with the name Lao Tzu, and the later teachings of Chuang Tzu; the 
 Daoist religion is more recent, different, and not relevant. 
 The Daoists are the source of the saying that "Those who know will not say; 
 those who say do not know," so one should be reluctant to discuss Daoism: philosophically, 
 the Dao itself precedes names and categories and can't be discussed, 
 and true knowledge in a mystic discipline comes not from discourse but mystic 
 experience. But the basics are easy enough if one recognizes throughout that 
 any discussion of serious mysteries or ultimate metaphysics has to be figurative, 
 indirect, and partly wrong. I'll tell the Daoist story as I explain it to my 
 students, somewhat mythically and numerologically. 
 In the beginning that never was, there was/is/will be the Zero: Nothing, 
 Not-Being, the Immense, the Matrix, the Mother, the Void, the Nameless. 
 Out of this unnamable Zero came the one, Being, that which we can nickname 
 "Dao" (the Way). Out of the one came and comes the two: Yin and Yang in 
 constant flux and momentary balance: the dark side and light side of a 
 hill, then dark and light, female and male, heights and valley then all 
 things that can be viewed dualistically, by two's: binary opposites that 
 can complement and/or oppose one another. The Two, though is one: 
 Yin and Yang form the Yin-Yang: the dynamic circle with a curved line, 
 traditionally imaged at the moment of balance (a kind of equinox), before 
 the relationship changes and Yin or Yang comes to predominate. Within 
 the Yin is a speck (a seed) of Yang, and within the Yang there is a seed 
 of Yin, and when Yin seems about to take over the world when, say, nights 
 have grown longest the seed of Yang sprouts, and the year turns: the winter 
 solstice. Even so, when it appears that Yang will take over: again, there 
 is a reversal, as, in the cosmic example, the summer solstice. The one 
 of Yin-Yang, though, is one of black and white (or orange and azure): 
 balanced opposites, not a compromised grey. Out of the flux of 
 the Two came the five elements ("agents," "phases," "powers"), and from 
 the interactions of the five elements come the Ten Thousand Beings: everything, 
 the universe, nature including human beings firmly embedded within nature, 
 woven into the world. (Or you can leave out the five "agents" and just 
 picture the flux of Yin-Yang producing the universe.) So as it was at 
 the beginning, so it is now since there was no beginning as the Nameless 
 and the Dao grow out of and become one another and in their flux move 
 the universe through the natural cycles and smaller-scale fluctuations. 17 
 In such a view, human beings are part of the universe; even the most alienated 
 of us dies and returns to the cycles of nature. That view of humanity as part 
 of nature is a radical difference between Daoism and Existentialism, and the 
 major source of radical differences between the ancient habits of thought preserved 
 in Daoism versus most of the light-enamored thought of "the Judaeo-Christian-Rationalist 
 West" ( LoH 82; ch. 6). 18   We 
 will be returning to this theme, but for now note that if we are part of the 
 universe we cannot get outside the universe to see how it runs, but we can get 
 in touch with the universe (contact the Dao) and momentarily feel 
 certain of the nature of things. In such a scheme, right action is never going 
 against nature never trying to force people or things to one's will but always 
 going with nature, going with the Dao. 
 Le Guin summarizes "THE WAY" almost at the end of Always Coming Home 
 (1985), in her last entry of seven ". . . Generative Metaphors" at 
 The Back of the Book (483-85): 
 The Metaphor: THE WAY. 
 What it generates: CHANGE. 
 Universe as the way: Mystery; balance in movement. 
 Society as the way: Imitation of the nonhuman, inaction. 
 Person as wayfarer: Caution. 
 Medicine as keeping in balance. 
 Mind as wayfarer : Spontaneity. Sureness. 
 The relationship of human with other beings on the way: Unity. 
 Images of the Way: Balance, reversal, journey, return. (485) 19 
 Now for people who grew up in the macho 1950s and 1960s, or 1980s, Daoist philosophy 
 may sound rather feminine, and the feminine emphasis (in terms of traditional 
 patriarchal dualities) was insisted upon by the founders of Daoism, who lived 
 during China's Warring States period and knew a thing or two about the costs 
 of macho. More important, though, this quietism the celebration of wu wei 
 'inaction (action through stillness)' seems to put the lie to the title to Arthur 
 Waley's explanation of Daoism, The Way and Its Power . 
 What power?! Well, for one thing the power to know when to act and how to act 
 so that one's action is in rhythm with the universe so a small human act could 
 have great consequences, a touch on a Great Wheel that changes its direction 
 ( LHD 189, 192, 203). One might have, then, the power of the wise diplomat. 
 Or of great athletes when they have entered the rhythm of the game, or dancers 
 who momentarily embody the music and become the dance. Anna K. Seidel, however, 
 suggests that "The philosophical notion of Tao expressed the religious sympathy 
 and complete solidarity that unites nature and man. In the magical arts that 
 influenced Taoism, Tao designated the magical feat of bringing Heaven and Earth, 
 the sacred powers and man, into communication with each other. In this sense, 
 Tao was an art and a power, specifically the power of the magician and the king" 
 (1035). 20 
 And I will use that observation as a transition to magic. 
 "The Rule of Names" (1964) and "The Word of Unbinding" (1964) 
 We will get powerful presentations of magicians and kings (if only one literal 
 king) in The Lathe of Heaven and the Earthsea series, but I want to get 
 to them by way of some transitional works, starting with the two promised Earthsea 
 stories, "The Rule of Names" and "The Word of Unbinding" (both 1964). "The Rule 
 of Names" is a nice bit of dark comedy about the dragon Yevaud and a treasure 
 hunter. After the manner of dragons, Yevaud has picked up some treasure, but 
 there has arisen a problem: peace has broken out in Earthsea, and the human 
 people have formed a League that wants the treasure enough to send out a mage-equipped 
 fleet sufficiently strong to threaten even an ancient dragon. So Yevaud goes 
 off, possibly commits a murder to stage his own "death" at least some dragon 
 other than Yevaud turns up conveniently dead to discourage the hunt and shows 
 up on Sattins Island disguised as a mediocre wizard who picks up the usename 
 "Mr. Underhill," since he lives in a small, Hobbit-style house under a hill. 21 
 While out walking, Mr. Underhill answers the question of the local school mistress 
 why one must be careful to conceal one's truename: "Because the name is the 
 thing . . . and the truename is the true thing. To speak the name 
 is to control the thing" ( WTQ 76). 22   
 This point is illustrated, with a twist, later, when the current Sealord of 
 Pendor, nicknamed Blackbeard, comes for the treasure that will make his title 
 real and not a mockery. Blackbeard has a great advantage: he knows the truename 
 of the thief and uses it at the climax of a wizards' duel to trap Yevaud in 
 his true shape. The name of a thing, or person, is the essence of the thing, 
 and to know the name means you can summon the thing and hold it there in its 
 true shape. Unfortunately for the arrogant Blackbeard, Yevaud is right there 
 and wants to be there, and Yevaud's true shape is that of a very large dragon 
 with experience killing lesser thieves, like a Sealord and his garrison (79). 
 Very shortly, all that is left of Blackbeard on the island is "a reddish-blackish 
 trampled spot" (83). 
 "The Rule of Names" introduces Earthsea as an Archipelago (islands and sea: 
 Earthsea) and gives us the rules for magic in the world of Earthsea. It's a 
 rather generic sort of magic, by no means specifically Daoist, but it is a kind 
 of magic compatible with Daoism (see Galbreath, "Taoist Magic . . ."). 
 Most important, it teaches a strong lesson all the stronger for its being comic 
 against using magic to force one's will on the world in the manner of Blackbeard: 
 the world is much too complicated to be forced. The story also associates magic 
 with the unconscious or subconscious: in psychoanalytic theory, "true speech" 
 is the unconscious, and the language of dreams and symbols and other manifestations 
 of the human unconscious is true speech. 23   
 In psychoanalysis and more generally, the unconscious is the place of our primary 
 thoughts/feelings; however uncanny, (unHome-y, unhiemlich ), the unconscious 
 may seem to our consciousness, it and its language may be basic to us and to 
 our Selves being in the world and acting on the world. The language of the unconscious 
 may be like art, irrelevant for power and still, paradoxically, provide great 
 power. 
 * 
 "The Word of Unbinding" (1964) very specifically associates magic with homecoming 
 ( WTQ 70) and introduces us to the Dry Land, the land of the dead, far 
 to the west in Earthsea (71-72). As Le Guin says in her headnote, "It also reveals 
 a certain obsession with trees, which . . . keep cropping up in my 
 work" (65). The quadruple association is significant. 
 The hero of "The Word of Unbinding" is a warlock named Festin, who, like Dante 
 at the beginning of The Divine Comedy (ca. 1302, printed 1472) is "in 
 the middle of his life" and in a woods. But it's a positive woods for Festin, 
 since he wants to learn patience, and so has "gone to converse with trees, especially 
 oaks, chestnuts, and the grey alders whose roots are in profound communication 
 with running water" (66). Festin is captured by the wicked wizard Voll the Fell 
 and imprisoned. Up to the final brief episode, "The Word of Unbinding" is the 
 story of Festin's attempts to escape. 
 In the next to last episode, Festin is exhausted, injured, and very sad over 
 his failure to protect his land and people: "Trusting his power too much, he 
 had lost his strength." Unable to act, he wishes himself a fish "in the forest 
 in the shadow of the trees, in the clear brown backwater under an alder's roots" 
 and he becomes a fish. The Narrator tells us explicitly that "This was a great 
 magic," but Festin hadn't exactly performed this magic no more than anyone else 
 "in exile or danger" who "longs for the earth and waters of his home. . . . 
 Only in dreams do any but the great Mages realize this magic of going home. 
 But Festin . . . gathered his will together till it shone like a candle 
 in the darkness of his flesh, and began to work the great and silent magic" 
 until "He got free. He was home" and then gets captured again, trapped by his 
 own spell in the shape of a fish ( WTQ 69-70). 
 Back in his dungeon, Festin wanders why Voll hasn't killed him, and makes a 
 shrewd guess why Voll doesn't want him dead. If Festin chooses to live, it is 
 as a perpetual prisoner, "But if one chose not to live?" And "So Festin made 
 his choice," in one nicely Existentialist gesture and speaks the word of unbinding. 
 "This was not transformation. He was not changed," and he walks "slowly down 
 the far slope of the hill of being, under new stars" and summons Voll by Voll's 
 name (71). Like Cob later, in The Farthest Shore , Voll and "death had 
 found a way back into the other land," the land of the living, of fish and water, 
 change and trees. Festin easily defeats Voll, forcing him to die truly, and 
 then Festin waits for Voll's corpse to finally rot and thereby render Voll incapable 
 of further evil. He waits "in the heart of the country which has no seacoast. 
 The stars stood still above him; and as he watched them, slowly, very slowly 
 he began to forget the voice of streams and the sound of rain on the leaves 
 of the forests of life" ( WTQ 72). 24   
 Renouncing his power as a magician abnegation, as it will be put in "Winter's 
 King" (1969/1975) Festin comes into his strength, a strength associated with 
 water ("The softest thing on earth / overtakes the hardest thing on earth" [ Tao 
 te Ching I.43; Wilhelm p. 47]). Renouncing still more, renouncing even his 
 life, Festin gets the only victory he can get over his enemy. Summarizing "The 
 Perennial Philosophy" on mortification and non-attachment, Aldous Huxley writes 
 that "It is by losing the egocentric life that we save the hitherto latent and 
 undiscovered life which, in the spiritual part of our being, we share with the 
 divine Ground" (106; ch. 6). Le Guin here is both more rigorous and downbeat: 
 by losing his life, period, Festin joins with Being and gets as much as he can 
 get: freedom, victory, and justification of his life as a wizard; he has, finally, 
 protected the people he serves. Pure Being, though, in Earthsea is the Dry Land, 
 devoid of "streams and the sounds of rain on the leaves of the forests of life," 
 and Festin's is a somber victory for a tragic hero. 
 Impermanence, Le Guin is convinced, especially that of human mortality, is 
 central to human life, and the source not only of our pain, but of love and 
 joy (Huxley 106-07). And death is a terrible thing: "I have learnt that death 
 exists," says Arren to Ged in The Farthest Shore (1972), "and that I 
 am to die. But I have not learnt to rejoice in the knowledge . . . . 
 If I love life, shall I not hate the end of it?" (136; ch. 9). It is a question 
 Le Guin will continue to debate with herself into the 1990s. 
 Reference Table: Le Guin and the Tao te Ching 
 I tabulate below chapters in Lao Tzu's Tao te Ching (in Pinyin: The 
 Dao De Jing of Lao Zi) useful for various themes in Le Guin's canon. Note 
 that these are very brief chapters, usually shorter than an English sonnet. 
 I rely on Arthur 
 Waley [1934] and "The Richard Wilhelm Edition": the Wilhelm translation, 
 translated from German into English by H. G. Ostwald (1910/1978), supplemented 
 with the translations of Ellen Chen and "TaoDeChing - Lao Tze . . . 
 (with hyperlinks to Chinese text) / Version 2.07 - Copyright (C) 1992, 
 1993, 1994, 1995 Peter A. Merel" -on the World Wide Web. (I put some doubtful, but interesting, 
 items in parentheses.) 
 Themes Chapter numbers in Tao te Ching 
 abyss: 4 
 acting (on a world too big to handle: 
 a bad idea): 29 
 actionless activity ( wu wei ) / 
 wordless teaching: 2, 3, 29, 30, 37, 43, 48, 57, 58, 63, 64, 67 (81). [[Also 
 Chuang Tzu 23.6] 
 anarchism (recommended) / leaving off 
 (withdrawal) / "Let be": 3, 9, 17, 29, 30, 32, 57, 58, 75 
 balance / harmony: 32, 42 
 beginning: 52 
 Being / Non-being: 1, 2, 6, 14, 40, 43 
 below: 61, 66, 68 
 benevolence / holiness, morality, 
 humane behavior, duty / good & evil / 
 justice, rights / ruthlessness: 5, 8, 18, 19, 20, 38, 79 
 [Also Chuang Tzu 22.1] 
 bent, twisted (a good thing): 22 
 chance / luck: 50 
 change / changelessness: 25 
 child, infant / uncarved block: 10, (19), 20, 28, 55 
 communism / no property / 
 being "dispossessed": 3, 7, 9, 19, 22, 44, 46, 64, 77, 81 
 Dao (Way): 1, 4, 16, 25, 32, 34, 37, 40, 41, 46, 51, 53, 62, 73 
 dark(ness) / chaos (positive as aspects of Dao): 14, 21, 41, 42 
 desire / desirelessness: 19, 37, 46, 55, 57, 64 
 doorway / gateway: 6 
 duration, eternity, lastingness 
 of Heaven and Earth) / deathlessness: 7, 16, 25, 37, 52, 59 
 ego(izing), boasting: 24 
 emptiness / nothingness (positive, useful): 4, 5, 11, 16 
 environment (shaping humans): 51 
 evil / good: 13 
 far (away): 25 
 fate: 16 
 female / Mysterious Female / male:6, 28, 61 
 flow / flux: 4, (16), 45 
 flowing abundance (wealth): 45 
 foreknowledge (= folly): 38 
 forgiveness: 62, 63 
 form / formless(ness): 14 
 freedom: 17 
 Themes Chapter numbers in Tao te Ching 
 gender (male/femaleness): 28 
 glory: 26, 56 
 God, gods (Dao preceding): 4, 39 
 greatness (including human): 25 
 home (as Dao): 62 
 ignorance / learning, knowledge, 
 cleverness (a bad idea): 18, 19, 20, 48, 64, 65, 71, 81 
 joy (gladness): 23 
 judging: 54 
 king (ruler): 16, 25 
 knowledge / wisdom (positive): 47, 52, (71) 
 left / right: 31, 34 
 life / death: 23, 38, 41, 50 
 light: 42, 52, 56 
 limits: 59 
 living well: 54, 56, 57, 59, 64, 66, 67, 68, 71, 77, 79 
 love: 8, 38, 56, 67 
 low(liness), baseness / humility: 39, 56, 66, 68 
 loyalty / promise-keeping, faithfulness: 38, 49 
 Mother (cosmic): 20, 25, 52, 59 
 Name(s) / nameless (Self-so) / true name: 1, 25, 32 
 nature: (Used by Merel and others for "heaven and earth," "the world," 
 "Dao," and other words and formulations.) 
 nothing: 11 
 One, oneness / undifferentiated unity: 10, 19, 22, 39, (60), 
 origins / continuity: 14 
 pain, suffering: 13, (16), 71 
 peace: (16), 31, 66, 68, 81 
 progress, advance: 41 
 return (circle, cycle): 16, 22, 25, 40, 52 
 rock: 43, 78 
 root: 6, 16, 26, 39 
 sea / brooks, streams, rivers (like Dao): 32, 66 
 Self (vs. ego ): 7, 13, 24 
 shame / purity: 41 
 simplicity: 19, 28, 32, 37, 57 
 soft(ness) / hard (soft better): 10, 43, 76, 78 
 Source (Dao as [older than God]): 4 
 stillness / quiet, silence (vs. busy-ness, 
 claiming to know, leading the world: 15, 16, 23, 26, 49, 53, 56, 57, 61, 
 67 
 strength (true strength): 55 
 things (hoarding them): 9, 44 
 thread: 14 
 traces (tracks): 27 
 use, usefulness / purpose: 11, 20, 40, 67 
 utopia (primitive, and small): 80 
 valley, gorge / Valley Spirit (valley stream): 6 32, 28, 41 
 violence, conquest (advised against) / 
 nonviolence: 29, 30, 31, (67), 68, 69 
 water / dryness: 6, 8, 43, 74, 78 
 weakness (advised): 28, 36, 40, 76, 78 
 wholeness: 22 
 words: 70 
 Dao/Magic: End Notes 
 1 The word "Tao" 
 is pronounced [dao], and is now often spelled with a "D," in the 
 same reform that took "Peking" to "Beijing."   
 I retain the older spelling in titles and quotations.   
 2 "The 
 Marriage Group" is a term from Chaucer criticism, referring to the Canterbury 
 Tales dealing with literal marriage.   In Le Guin's usage and that of her critics, "marriage" 
 means close, life-long pair bonds: the close personal relationships of friends 
 and lovers, of which legally married couples are a subset.   
 Again, Le Guin has said that most of he work deals with "marriage," 
 but some works deal with "marriage" more directly than others, and 
 I'll occasionally group together such works.  
 3 For "Field 
 of Vision" in Le Guin's canon, see Abrash, esp. 12-13.  
 4 In Robert Browning's 
 dramatic monolog "Fra Lippo Lippi" (1853/1855), the world is not 
 a "blot" to the artist Fra Lippo but "means intensely, and 
 means good" (see lines 313-15).   Le Guin agrees here with Browning's Fra Lippo, that it is wrong 
 "To let a truth slip" of the wondrous details of everyday life (see 
 "Lippo" lines 286-309). 
 5 I use "divorce" 
 advisedly: the word is quite explicit in Gideon ; 
 it fits in with Le Guin's emphasis on marriage; and it is a Judaic point Chayefsky, 
 significantly, would make and Le Guin would not.   
 Among the Jewish images for relationship with God are a wrestling match, 
 betrothal, and marriage; Gideon's rejection of God is both intellectual and 
 as emotionally laden as the breakup of a marriage.  
 6 No 
 Exit is useful background for some touches in Le Guin: e.g., the formulation 
 "Hell is _____" ( TD ); and for "You areyour life, and 
 nothing else" (45; "Existence precedes essence" in nondramatic 
 prose), an important idea in the first three books of Earthsea.   
 Note, though, that Moby Dick 
 is also useful for studying Le Guin, and it is not a book she has looked at 
 since 1947 (Le Guin, "Response" 46): I am not 
 suggesting Le Guin's sources here or most other places in Coyote's Song but readings useful for readers of Le Guin (who have 
 their own work to do in establishing the meaning of Le Guin's texts). 
 7 For Ogion 
 to Ged on becoming the stream, see WE 128, ch. 7; for Ged to Arren, 
 see FS 122, ch. 8. 
 8 For touch imagery, 
 see Remington, "The Other Side of Suffering: Touch as Theme and Metaphor. . ." 
 and "A Touch of Different, A Touch of Love:. 
 9 The isolation 
 of Kaph is implicitly compared to that of Ishi upon coming into the modern 
 world in Maslen's essay, ". . . Theodora Kroeber and Ursula 
 K. Le Guin" 67. 
 10 To anticipate: 
 From 1970 through the 1980s, Le Guin had occasional problems with fellow feminists.   
 The publication in Playboy 
 in Dec. 1990 of Ursula K. Le Guin's "Unlocking the Air" can be justified 
 on feminist grounds: bringing unto the un converted, 
 the readers of a very slick, very high-class "girlie magazine," 
 a strong woman character like "Air's" Fana Fabbre and a good, radical 
 message.   The 1969 publication 
 of "Nine Lives" in Playboy 
 by "U.K. Le Guin," though, with a by-line disguising her identity, 
 was an issue.   The bigger issues 
 were Le Guin's use of male heroes (in "Nine Lives," all the female 
 John Chow's are soon killed off) and an issue that seriously divided liberal 
 feminists and radical feminists: lesbianism and heterosexism.   
 As of TD in 1974, Le Guin could present worlds in which consenting 
 homosexual sex was accepted; it was not until ACH (1985) and really 
 the 1990s, that Le Guin would write stories in which gay and lesbian sex would 
 be praised . 
 11 The title, 
 "A Trip to the Head," is a complex pun on "head trip," 
 "drug trip," and "head" as a slang term (and fairly standard 
 naval usage) for toiletroom. 
 12 For classic imaging of a forest as Self, especially 
 the unconscious portions of the Self, note the forest near Athens in Shakespeare's 
 A Midsummer Night's Dream (ca. 1594-95) and the entry of Washizu into 
 the labyrinthine forest in the fourth scene of Akira Kurosawa's Kumonosu-Djo 
 (1957), The Castle of the Spider's Web , 
 released in the USA as Throne of Blood 
 (Jorgens 238, Davies 18 [after J. Blumenthal]).   
 13 Le Guin compliments Philip K. Dick by saying that 
 in his work ". . . other people are not (as they are to Sartre) 
 hell, but salvation" ("The Modest One," coll. LoN [1979] 
 176).   Sartre on Justice comes 
 across better: Orestes's line "Justice is a matter among men" is 
 presented in paraphrase in King Dog (16) and just possibly alluded 
 to by Ged and Arren in their ignorance of who might allow or forbid human 
 actions ( FS 137; ch. 9).   
 14 See Dena C. Bain, "The Tao Te Ching as Background 
 to the Novels of Ursula K. Le Guin" for a brief summary of relevant Daoist 
 doctrines.   For an excellent brief 
 bibliography, see Robert Galbreath, "Taoist Magic," 267-28.   
 See passim in James W. Bittner's Approaches 
 to the Fiction of Ursula K. Le Guin , and his ch. 5 and appendix on Daoism 
 in his 1979 U of Wisconsin diss. "Approaches to the Fiction of Ursula 
 K. Le Guin."   I have not 
 seen it, but Susan Wood's 1992 MA thesis, "Taoism: a Study of Balance 
 in the Hainish Novels of Ursula K. Le Guin"   
 from San Francisco State University is now listed on WorldCat on the 
 Internet and, I assume, available.   
 15 We will return to Orestes in my discussion of ACH , 
 where being "Outside nature, against nature" is central to what 
 I call The Big Mistake in the development of civilized cultures.   
 16 See Huxley, The 
 Perennial Philosophy (1944, 1945), Introd.   
 (Huxley credits Philosophia perennis 
 as a phrase to Leibniz [i.e., the Baron Gottfried Wilhelm von Leibniz, 1646-1716]).   
 For the naturalness of connection and Daoist ideas on the complexity 
 of all action, note the maxim of the 1970s Ecology Movement, "Everything 
 is connected to everything else" and the corollary, "You can't change 
 just one thing."   (Even in 
 the Eden myth, the natural state of humanity is in close connection with the 
 ground, plants, and animals; alienation and separation is the heart of the 
 Fall: Gen. 2.4-3.19).   
 17 From various sources, including Waley (esp. Tao 
 te Ching , ch. 42), Bittner diss., Seidel.   
 See also FS 137; ch. 9.   
 18 For an imagined (very negative) critique of Americanism 
 by Lao Tzu, see Holmes Welch, Parting 
 of the Way (1957), Part Four: "Tao Today," esp. 169-74 and, 
 for evolution, 187.   Le Guin refers 
 to this book in "Response" (45).   
 19 "In Tao the only motion is returning; / The 
 only useful quality, weakness": Tao 
 te Ching ch. 40 (Waley trans. 192).   
 In Wilhelm's trans. (45; II.40), conflated with Chen's trans. 
 Return is the movement of DAO.    
 Weakness is the effect of DAO.     
 All things under Heaven come about in existence 
 [Chen: "are born of being ( yu )"] 
 Existence comes about in non-existence  
 ["Being is born of non-being ( wu )"] 
 20 A. L. Kroeber had a lower opinion of magic.   
 Though insisting upon what many today would call the historical construction 
 of the theory of progress, he suggested some criteria for objective ranking 
 of progressed, "higher cultures" and "lower cultures," 
 retarded in their beliefs.   "The 
 first is the criterion of magic and 'superstition.'   
 In proportion as a culture disengages itself from reliance on these, 
 it may be said to have registered an advance.   
 In proportion as it admits magic in its operations, it remains primitive 
 or retarded.   This seemingly dogmatic 
 judgment is based on the observation that beliefs in magic, such as are normal 
 in backward societies, do recur in cultures that by profession have discarded 
 magic, but chiefly among individuals whose social fortune is backward or who 
 are psychotic, mentally deteriorated, or otherwise subnormal" ( 127, 
 Culture Patterns . . . 
 106; ch. 7). 
 21 Adult dragons in Earthsea are talking, intelligent 
 creatures, so a human's killing one is always at least "dracocide" 
 and a bad actif usually justifiable.   
 Yevaud's killing another dragon to hide his (her?) tracks, though, 
 definitely is a murder (the killing of a member of one's own [intelligent] 
 species).   
 22 For ancient belief in the power of names, see Gen. 32.24-30: Jacob's 
 getting his name changed to Israel, and the refusal of the divine being Jacob 
 wrestled with to give Jacob his name.   
 Oxford Annotated RSV notes: "In antiquity it was believed that 
 a person's self was concentrated in his name. . . .   Jacob's new name signified a new self. . . .   
 The divine being refuses" to tell Jacob his name "lest Jacob, 
 by possessing the name, gain power over him (compare Ex. 3.13-14, Jg. 13.17)."   
 For the power of an adept at Daoist Quietism "to move and transform 
 matter" see Waley 46.   
 23 Vivian Sobchack refers to 
 "the 'true speech' that [Jacques] Lacan sees as the unconscious" 
 ("Virginity" 57).   The idea, of course, is general to psychoanalytic views of 
 what is truest in human personality (although usage of "unconscious" 
 and "subconscious" variesand I apologize if my conflating of the 
 two gives offense).   
 24 I'm 
 not sure what to make of "no seacoast" beyond the obvious: you can't 
 just sail off to the land of the dead.   
 Note that in the Revelation of John at the end of Christian Scriptures, 
 there's a new heaven and new earth, "and there was no longer any sea" 
 (21.1).   Contrast more generally 
 the forest as a place for human life, with John's vision of a city for eternal 
 life: a square (21.16) world of eternal day (22.5) done in gold and jewels 
 and semiprecious stones (21.11-21).   
 Le Guin prefers water, a central Daoist symboland popular among Native 
 Americans (see Le Guin's "Legends" 5)and she prefers life, trees, 
 and forests.   
 contents bibliography sfra home page 
