Literary Hub 

 Craft and Criticism Literary Criticism 

 Craft and Advice 

 In Conversation 

 On Translation 

 Fiction and Poetry Short Story 

 From the Novel 

 Poem 

 News and Culture History 

 Science 

 Politics 

 Biography 

 Memoir 

 Food 

 Technology 

 Bookstores and Libraries 

 Film and TV 

 Travel 

 Music 

 Art and Photography 

 The Hub 

 Style 

 Design 

 Sports 

 Become A Member 

 Lit Hub Radio The Lit Hub Podcast 

 Awakeners 

 Fiction/Non/Fiction 

 The Critic and Her Publics 

 Windham-Campbell Prizes Podcast 

 Memoir Nation 

 Beyond the Page 

 First Draft: A Dialogue on Writing 

 Thresholds 

 The Cosmic Library 

 Culture Schlock 

 Reading Lists 

 Reading Challenge 

 Book Marks Best Reviewed Books 

 CrimeReads True Crime 

 The Daily Thrill 

 Log In 

 Craft and Criticism 

 Fiction and Poetry 

 News and Culture 

 Lit Hub Radio 

 Reading Lists 

 Reading Challenge 

 Book Marks 

 CrimeReads 

 Log In 

 Take a virtual tour through Ursula K. Le Guin's gorgeous California home.

 Aaron Robertson 
 
 September 3, 2020 

 If you want to understand the deep well of creativity author Ursula K. Le Guin drew from at a young age, you should probably start at home.

 Le Guin, the California-born author known for her Earthsea fantasy series and novels like The Left Hand of Darkness , thought fondly of her childhood home in Berkeley, memorably writing of it in one essay entitled “Living in a Work of Art.”

 The airy, 3,700-square foot Swiss Chalet-style residence, which is currently on sale for $4 million , was designed by another famous Bay Area creative, the architect Bernard Maybeck. Maybeck was known for working in a variety of architectural styles, including the Arts and Crafts aesthetic that emphasized use of natural materials, folksy designs, and artisanal caprice (rather than industrial monotony).

 “If I recall my childhood, I recall that house,” Le Guin once wrote. “Writing this, I wonder if much of my understanding of what a novel ought to be was taught to me, ultimately, by living in that house. If so, perhaps all my life I have been trying to rebuild it around me out of words.”

 Here you have a wonderful example of an artist assimilating the characteristics of her surroundings in her own life and work. The video above leads you through a sprawling home ensconced in trees. A balcony affords a great view of distant San Francisco, and the interior is just all the right shades of red(wood).

 You can see echoes of the estate’s openness and light, and its harmoniousness with surrounding nature, in some of Le Guin’s best writing. Le Guin was known for writing about fluid identities and the search for idyll places, reverence for the natural world and the innocence of sheltered children.

 These connections aren’t that much of a leap.

 As Le Guin herself said, “I wish we could all live in a big house with lots of rooms, and windows, and doors, and none of them locked.”

 Share 
 Save 
 
 -->
 
 houses 
 science fiction 
 Ursula Le Guin 
 writers' homes 

 Aaron Robertson

 Aaron Robertson has written for The New York Times , The Nation , Foreign Policy , and elsewhere. His translation of Igiaba Scego's novel Beyond Babylon (Two Lines Press, 2019) was shortlisted for the PEN Translation Prize and Best Translated Book Award.

 Lit Hub Daily 
 August 31 – September 4, 2026

 Do booksellers think this is the end of reading? 

 Emily Witt reports on Operation Metro Surge 

 Anne Carson having a “Rosalía hangover” 

 More News 

 The Best International Fiction of the Month: September 2026 September 4, 2026 by Molly Odintz 

 How Harry Kurnitz Conquered Hollywood, Broadway, and the Biblio-Mystery September 4, 2026 by Nicholas A. Basbanes 

 How the New T.J. English Reader Mines the Dark Soul of America September 4, 2026 by David Masciotra 

 The Best Reviewed Books of the Week 
 "A maximalist s banquet It is humane blood-flecked disturbing and sustaining James has written a…" 

 The Latest 

 Is Time Even Real? Does It Even Flow? 

 10 Literary Science Fiction and Fantasy Novels That Offer Hope for the Future 

 What Should You Read Next? Here Are the Best Reviewed Books of the Week 

 How Fordism and Fascism Gave Birth to Modern Car Culture 

 Literary Hub

 Created by Grove Atlantic and Electric Literature

 Masthead 

 About 

 Sign Up For Our Newsletters 

 How to Pitch Lit Hub 

 Advertisers: Contact Us 

 Privacy Policy 

 Support Lit Hub - Become A Member 

 If you buy books linked on our site, Lit Hub may earn a commission from Bookshop.org , whose fees support independent bookstores.