Sitemap 
 Open in app Sign up 
 Sign in 

 Write

 Sign up 
 Sign in 

 Adam’s Notebook

 · 

 Various jottings and thoughts. 

 Ursula Le Guin, ‘A Wizard of Earthsea’ (1968)

 Adam Roberts 

 14 min read · 
 Feb 5, 2023 

 -- 

 Listen

 Share

 Asked by her publisher in the late 1960s to write a book for older children Le Guin revisited a couple of short stories she had previously written set in a Fantasy archipelago. The resulting novel, A Wizard of Earthsea (1968), and its five sequels, constitute one of the most celebrated of all the works of post-Tolkienian Fantasy. Margaret Atwood calls the book a “wellspring” of modern fantasy. Amanda Craig praises it as ‘the most thrilling, wise and beautiful children’s novel ever.’ [Amanda Craig, ‘Classic of the month: A Wizard of Earthsea ’, The Guardian September 24, 2003]. It owes a lot to Tolkien, although it is also its own thing, distinctive, wondrous, beautiful, perhaps the finest Fantasy ever written. My saying so is personal, for I fell in love with this novel when I first read it as a child, and each re-reading only beds-in that love more deeply.
 The story is set upon a spread of islands set in what appears to be a global ocean on a world that lacks continents — or perhaps the sea goes on forever, beyond the reach of the archipelago.
 Press enter or click to view image in full size 

 The title character in A Wizard of Earthsea is Duny, known as ‘Sparrowhawk’, who grows up on a small island called Gont in the north-east of Earthsea. When he manifests magic power — he summons a fog that baffles and defeats an invading force of Viking-like ‘Kargad’ raiders — he is trained, first by a local wizard, who gives him his ‘true name’: Ged. After this he travels to the school for wizards in the centrally-located island of Roke. The true name thing is important, for magic in this realm is radically nominalist, and knowing the true name of a person or a thing gives a wizard power over it.
 On Roke Ged improves his skills, but, youthfully arrogant, he also undertakes a magic duel with a rival student, thereby inadvertently unloosing a hideous entity from some other dimension. The shadow-being attacks Ged, wounding and scarring him, before rushing away. This incursion is very dangerous, for the shadow-entity is malign, and has the power to possess and hollow-out people turning them into wraiths. If it can do this to Ged, with his prodigious magic ability, it could make him into a dreadfully, perhaps apocalyptically harmful figure. So Ged flees from the shadow creature until, passing from island to island, having adventures on each, he comes to understand that he must turn the tables, and pursue the entity, which he does, eventually passing beyond all the islands and across the deep sea. Here he finally encounters his nemesis.
 The entity has evolved. When it first emerged from the rip in reality Ged’s improvident spells had wrought ‘it had no head or face, only the four taloned paws with which it gripped and tore.’ [61] By the end of the novel it has acquired a human form, mimicking Ged himself — it is, we realise, Ged’s Jungian anima, his shadow-self. As such it possesses the same ‘true name’ as Ged who, naming it, defeats it — and assimilates it into himself.
 Many languages are spoken across Earthsea, but there is one aboriginal, ‘true’ language: the language out of which the world was originally spoken into being. Only dragons, the other intelligent species with whom humans share the world (somewhat uneasily), speak this tongue; but wizards learn it as part of their training. Knowing the true name of something enables magic, although the usage is hard, both difficult and draining, and wizards do not undertake it trivially. We are several times told that any magic act entails the risk of upsetting the cosmic ‘balance’, which wizards in all things serve.
 In Tolkien wizards are rare; they are individuals not fully integrated into human society, beings (in fact) of a different species. There is no larger population of wizards, cunning-men, or — for that matter — witches, sorceresses, wizardesses in Middle Earth. In Le Guin’s Earthsea however wizards are common. They are human, like everyone else, and live not apart but within human communities, with a social role to play and a broad level of acceptance. The ability to wield magic exists on a spectrum, with many people able to cast certain spells, although only a few wizards have access to the bigger, more fundamental or impressive magic. Women are able to cast spells as well, although, in a ratio inferior to men: ‘weak as woman’s magic, wicked as woman’s magic’ is a proverb in this world, and in A Wizard of Earthsea (1968) the struggle between good and evil is implicitly, and sometimes explicitly, gendered. Le Guin’s reexamination and reconfiguring of the sexist logic underlying this structure of belief informs the later novels in the Earthsea sequence, and by the time we get to Tehanu (1990) women’s magic is revealed as neither weak nor wicked, though it is different to men’s.
 There is a seriousness, an absolute belief, in the way Le Guin renders her world, and it compels the reader, draws her into Earthsea not as a merely ludic or flippantly tossed-off fantasia but a genuine location: the attention to detail, as much anthropological (a pseudo-anthropology that draws on and mimics real-world anthropological research — Le Guin’s parents were both anthropologists) as mythographic, as much linguistic as geographical. The Earthsea books are careful to render their world as a believable, lived-in space, the existence of magic, dragons and wraiths notwithstanding.
 Not that Le Guin is po-faced in her worldbuilding. On the contrary, she plays a number of games with her source material. On Roke, the master wizard displays how magic works to Ged:
 The Master Hand looked at the jewel that glittered on Ged’s palm, bright as the prize of a dragon’s hoard. The old Master murmured one word, “Tolk,” and there lay the pebble, no jewel but a rough grey bit of rock. The Master took it and held it out on his own hand. “This is a rock; tolk in the True Speech,” he said, looking mildly up at Ged now. “A bit of the stone of which Roke Isle is made, a little bit of the dry land on which men live. It is itself.” [ 43 ] 

 The stuff out of which the islands of Earthsea are made is tolk : knowing its true name means that a wizard can manipulate it, for instance turn it into a jewel — although this alters only its accidence, not its essence: it remains in itself tolk . A little later we discover that the ‘True Speech’ word for sea is: inien . Le Guin is saying that Earthsea is tolk - inien , that is, Tolkienian: an elegant way of acknowledging her major influence.
 Other kinds of games with words are at play in these novels. Ged is first introduced to us as ‘Duny’; and after he acquires his ‘True Speech’ name Ged he is known to most by the name ‘Sparrowhawk’. (It doesn’t do to allow too many people to know your true name, lest they use magic against you).
 Dun , from the Middle English dunne , means brown soil, and the colour thereof (it also means soil in the sense of excrement: as in the term for an outside toilet, dunny ). Ged is a word for pike or luce, and a sparrowhawk , obviously, is a bird — three names covering three of the four elements, earth, water and air. The fourth, fire, is the province of the dragons. In Tehanu (1990) the titular girl-child has passed through fire, and been scarred by it (her father, a wandering vagabond, had pushed her into a campfire and left her for dead). She is revealed at the end to be half-human half-dragon, and to command draconic magical power. She ends the novel living with elderly Ged (and Tenar, from The Tombs of Atuan ) under the name Therru, which we are told means ‘flame’. Tehanu was published under the rubric ‘The Last Book of Earthsea’ (although other books did subsequently appear) and there is a nice harmony in a conclusion that homes ‘flame’ with earth/water/air Ged.
 Another intertextual game in A Wizard of Earthsea concerns the door of the School for Wizards on Gont. When Ged first comes to the school he cannot get inside: ‘it seemed to him that he had passed through the doorway, yet he stood outside on the pavement where he had stood before’. He is told by the doorkeeper that he must say his true name in order to pass, which he does. The door is made of two substances, somehow both at once: ‘the door through which he had come was not plain wood, but ivory without joint or seam’, yet ‘the door that the old man closed behind him was of polished horn, through which the daylight shone.’ [35] (When he leaves the school at the end of his education, he steps back through ‘the door of horn and ivory’; 74). How can it be both?
 The allusion, of course, is to Vergil’s gates of the underworld in Aeneid 6 , and behind that to the gates of dreaming in Homer’s Odyssey . Le Guin, who is too scrupulous in her worldbuilding to leave this detail as it is — since Earthsea has no elephants — adds a gloss: the ivory is actually ‘a tooth of the Great Dragon’.
 In Homer and Vergil there are two separate gates: one of horn, through which ‘true dreams’ pass out into the mortal world, and the other of ivory, through which come deceptive dreams. By combining them Le Guin suggests that Ged, trained in the ways of magic and passing out into the world, is somehow both ‘true’ and ‘false’ — a dualism very much of a part with Le Guin’s vision in the novel. This is more than the ‘balance’ (‘the Balance and the Pattern which the true wizard serves’): it is a way of talking about Fantasy as such, as a mode: its bivalve truth and unreality, its admixture of mimesis and fantastica.
 I’m going to say a little more about the doors of ivory and horn, though it involves a short digression from Le Guin. In Book 19 of the Odyssey , Penelope — ‘wise Penelope’ the poem calls her, at this moment — explains that ‘dreams verily are baffling and unclear of meaning, and in no wise do they find fulfilment in all things for men.’ She goes on:
 δοιαὶ γάρ τε πύλαι ἀμενηνῶν εἰσὶν ὀνείρων:
αἱ μὲν γὰρ κεράεσσι τετεύχαται, αἱ δ᾽ ἐλέφαντι:
τῶν οἳ μέν κ᾽ ἔλθωσι διὰ πριστοῦ ἐλέφαντος,
οἵ ῥ᾽ ἐλεφαίρονται, ἔπε᾽ ἀκράαντα φέροντες:
οἱ δὲ διὰ ξεστῶν κεράων ἔλθωσι θύραζε,
οἵ ῥ᾽ ἔτυμα κραίνουσι, βροτῶν ὅτε κέν τις ἴδηται. [Odyssey , 19:562–7 ] 
 For two are the gates of shadowy dreams, and one is fashioned of horn and one of ivory. Those dreams that pass through the gate of sawn ivory deceive men, bringing words that find no fulfilment. But those that come forth through the gate of polished horn bring true issues to pass, when any mortal sees them. [this is A.T. Murray’s 1919 Loeb translation] 

 This passage gets echoed, or repurposed, in Vergil’s Aeneid . In Book 6 of that poem Aeneas descends through a cave at Avernus into the Underworld. This is easy to do: as the poet reminds us — facilis descensus Averno — for after all, we all do it, sooner or later. The tricky thing is coming back from the dead. And how does Aeneas come back to life, after seeing the punishments meted out to the wicked in Tartarus, and tarrying in the Elysian fields with the shade of his father and other noble notables? Through one of the two Homeric gates. Here’s Vergil:
 Sunt geminae Somni portae, quarum altera fertur
 cornea, qua veris facilis datur exitus umbris,
 altera candenti perfecta nitens elephanto,
 sed falsa ad caelum mittunt īnsomnia Mānēs.
 Hīs ibi tum nātum Anchīsēs ūnāque Sibyllam
 prōsequitur dictīs portāque ēmittit eburnā. [Aeneid 6:893–8 ] 
 Two gates of Sleep there are, whereof the one, they say, is horn and offers a ready exit to true shades, the other shining with sheen of polished ivory, but delusive dreams issue upward through it from the world below. Thither Anchises, discoursing this, escorts his son and with him the Sibyl, and sends them forth by the ivory gate.

 The seemingly-arbitrary distinction between these two gates in Vergil makes more sense in Greek, where there is a play upon the words linking κέρας, ‘horn’ to κραίνω, ‘fulfil’, and linking ἐλέφας, ‘ivory’, and ἐλεφαίρομαι, ‘deceive’. Puns, puns everywhere. Hard to capture that in English, but hard too in Latin: horn is cornū , which means both horn and the crescent moon; ivory is elephantus , which word also means ‘elephant’; though Vergil also uses the different word, eburna , which also means ivory. Nobody knows why Vergil brings his hero back to the real world via the ivory, not the horn, gate. It does rather imply that the Aeneas of the rest of the poem is some kind of a lie. We could English this celebrated passage as
 There are two twinned gates of Sleep, of which one is made
 of the moon’s crescent horns, through which true shades exit easily;
 the other gleams with sheen of polished elephantine-tusk,
 but through here the spirit-sent dreams are all a phantom task.
 So Anchises attends his son and the Sibyl,
 dismisses them with these words through the gate of ivory.

 Maybe elephant/all phantom is too cheesy. My theory is that the crucial thing here is not the true shades/false dreams thing. It’s the easy ( facilis ) passage of the one, and the implicit hard passage of the other. Facilis descensus Averno , remember. It’s not that Aeneas is a false dream: it’s that he is true and false, first off easily descending, like a moonbeam sliding down; and then elephantishly clambering back up, like Hannibal’s war-beasts ascending the Alps, to his mortal skies.
 Anyway: Le Guin’s use of this detail in A Wizard of Earthsea is more Vergillian than Homeric, I think: for she is more interested in the border between the lands of the dead and the living than in dreams as such. In Earthsea the realm of the dead, with desert lands and lightless cities under unfamiliar constellations, lies alongside the realm of the living, separated by a low wall (Le Guin has a fondness for low walls as boundaries). In Wizard , Ged travels into the dead lands, as wizards can, chasing a young girl who has died. He lets the girl go and returns to the boundary wall only to see his shadow-being waiting on the other side. ‘Either he must go down the hill into the desert lands and lightless cities of the dead,’ the novel tells us: ‘or he must step across the wall back into life, where the formless evil thing waited for him.’ He chooses life, but there is always that balance between the truth — of power, of desire, of life itself — and falsehood.
 In this I differ from Francis Spufford’s account of the novel, in his (brilliant) memoir of childhood reading The Child That Books Built .
 Later, I discovered and cherished Ursula Le Guin’s Earthsea novels. They were utterly different in feeling [to Tolkien], with their archipelago of bright islands like ideal Hebrides, and their guardian wizards balancing light and dark like yin and yang. All they shared with Tolkien was the deep consistency that allows an imagined world to unfold from its premises solidly, step by certain step, like something that might really exist. Consistency is to an imaginary world as the laws of physics are to ours. The spell-less magic of Earthsea gave power to those who knew the true names of things: a beautifully simple idea. Once I had seen from the first few pages of the first book, A Wizard of Earthsea , that Le Guin was always going to obey her own rules, I could trust the entire fabric of her world. [ Francis Spufford, The Child That Books Built (2002), 84–85 ] 

 I would put it slightly differently. As I say above, Le Guin is indeed careful in her worldbuilding: taking care in the craftsperson sense that her imaginary world coheres and works according to its specified logic, and also having a care, in the Heideggerian Sorge sense of the word, for the power of words and the worlds they create. But at the same time Le Guin is in consistent, un truthful, in her worldbuilding — openly, directly so, I think.
 Part of Ged’s training upon Roke involves him studying under the ‘Master Namer’, a wizard ‘who was called by a name that had no meaning in any language, Kurremkarmerruk’. This sage lives in a tower and devotes his time to compiling a huge list of all the names in the True Language. Pupils come to learn these names: ‘writing down lists of names that must be learned before the ink faded at midnight leaving the parchment blank again’. From Kurremkarmerruk we discover that true names proliferate endlessly, a kind of Derridean différance that surely leaves magic as such no place on which, finally, to stand — no pou sto from which to leverage the actual world. It is not enough to know that the True Name of sea is ‘inien’: ‘he who would be Seamaster must know the true name of every drop of water in the sea.’ Quite the task!
 Here is the reason. The sea’s name is inien , well and good. But what we call the Inmost Sea has its own name also in the Old Speech. Since no thing can have two true names, inien can mean only ‘all the sea except the Inmost Sea.’ And of course it does not mean even that, for there are seas and bays and straits beyond counting that bear names of their own. So if some Mage-Seamaster were mad enough to try to lay a spell of storm or calm over all the ocean, his spell must say not only that word inien , but the name of every stretch and bit and part of the sea through all the Archipelago and all the Outer Reaches and beyond to where names cease. Thus, that which gives us the power to work magic, sets the limits of that power. A mage can control only what is near him, what he can name exactly and wholly. [ 48 ] 

 Of course, this is impossible: the ‘exact and whole’ naming is on these terms inachievable. How to turn a cup of brine to clear potable water — a magic act Ged himself manages — without naming every single drop, every saline molecule, every atom? Yet, of course, Ged does perform the magic. The magical ‘system’ in Le Guin’s novel, her worldbuilding, both is and is not consistent, at one and the same time. It is true-horn and false-ivory, it is the ‘good’ Ged and his wicked shadowy anima, combined into one person as at the novel’s end. This is the whole point of her story. And, though I have just disagreed with Francis here, I very much agree with what he goes on to say about the novel — that the heart of its artistic vision is moral, to do with humanity. Though this was something younger Francis found hard to accept:
 I resisted its lessons. The student wizard Ged cracks open the surface of the night and releases a shadow version of himself into the world, a Jungian clot of personal darkness, that hunts him till he turns to face it and incorporates it back into himself where it belongs, by naming it with its true name: his own. I resolutely thought of the shadow as a bogey alien to Ged, and wondered why he wasn’t different at the end of the book when that dark thing was inside him. You cannot outrun yourself, the story said: a deeply unwelcome thought to me. I didn’t go to the worlds of story to be reminded that on a dark road your anger and your cruelty pace just behind you, daring you to turn your head, unless you let them travel safely within you.

 Ursula Le Guin
 
 Wizard Of Earthsea

 -- 

 -- 

 Published in Adam’s Notebook 
 163 followers 
 · Last published Aug 10, 2025 

 Various jottings and thoughts. 

 Written by Adam Roberts 
 655 followers 
 · 28 following 

 Writer and academic. London-adjacent. 

 No responses yet

 Help
 
 Status
 
 About
 
 Careers
 
 Press
 
 Blog
 
 Privacy
 
 Rules
 
 Terms
 
 Text to speech