International Journal of Linguistics, Literature and Culture 
Available online at https://sloap.org/journals/index.php/ijllc/   
Vol. 6, No. 4, July 2020, pages: 16-26 
 ISSN: 2455-8028  
           https://doi.org/10.21744/ijllc.v6n4.902  
  
 
16 
 
Gender Discourse Analysis in Ursula K. Le Guin’s Earthsea Series 
and its Turkish Translation  
 
 
  
Deniz Özgün a   
Article history:  Abstract 
 
 
Submitted: 18 April 2020 
Accepted: 09 May 2020 
 
 
  
This study aims to analyze the Earthsea Series, written by Ursula K. Le Guin, 
regarding how language is used by the author and its transference in Turkish 
translation in terms of cultural and linguistic elements of gender. Since the 
series was written in 23 years, they might, within themselves, indicate a 
considerable amount of differences in language used. Therefore, the 
translation of the series might adapt those differences following the target 
culture’s transformation in that time shift . The source text and the target text 
are both examined with the Critical (Gender) Discourse Analysis approach 
concerning linguistic and cultural gender. The target text is also analyzed 
through source text adaptation in Turkish translation as well as fema le 
translation strategies. The fact that there are significant differences not only 
in languages of the source text and the target text but also in their cultures. 
Thus, this study demonstrates those significant differences in the source text 
and their transference in Turkish translation. 
 
 
Keywords: 
critical discourse analysis; 
Earthsea series; 
gender discourse analysis; 
linguistic and cultural gender; 
Ursula K. Le Guin; 
International journal of linguistics, literature and culture ©  2020. 
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license. 
Peer-review under responsibility of International Association for 
Technology, Education and Language Studies (IATELS) 
(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/). 
 
Corresponding author: 
Deniz Özgün,  
Translation Department, Cultural Translation Studies 
Hacı Bayram Veli University, Ankara (HBVA), Turkey. 
Email address: denizozgunn@gmail.com   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
a Translation Department, Cultural Translation Studies, Hacı Bayram Veli University, Ankara (HBVA), Turkey 

IJLLC                 ISSN: 2455-8028   
Özgün, D. (2020). Gender discourse analysis in Ursula K. Le Guin’s Earthsea series and its Turkish translation. 
International Journal of Linguistics, Literature and Culture, 6(4), 16-26.  
https://doi.org/10.21744/ijllc.v6n4.902 
17 
 
1   Introduction 
 
The first wave of feminist movements which is also known as women’s liberation movements started in the late 19th 
century and have accelerated during the  first half of the 20th century in the United States. Women were seeking 
equal rights and they were not going to stop until they got these rights. Even though women sought equality in arts 
and literature, it was not seemed to be accomplished with ease. In men, dominated societies, women’s writing has 
been seen as inferior until the second wave of the feminist movement which peaked in the 1960s and 1970s. After 
World War II, thanks to technologic al improvements, women’s lives have changed significantly in de veloped 
countries. Due to the growth in the service sector, lots of women found jobs that didn’t require physical power. 
By the help of feminist movements, female translation gained momentum during the post -war period, after many 
protest movements have bee n demonstrated in Western Europe and North America. Even though in 1949, Simon de 
Beauvoir wrote “on ne nait pas femme, on le deviant” translated by E.M. Parshley as “one is not born, but rather 
becomes a woman” which were existed almost two decades ago, f emale writers and theorists referred to these works 
towards 1970. Biological sexual difference was extended because the new concept of gender came to surface trough 
Beauvoir’s work and Parshley’s translation. Scholars developed and practiced other means an d analytical 
predicaments to comprehend these contradictions. According to Beauvoir’s suggestion, “a baby born with female 
reproductive organs does not simply grow up to be a woman. She has to turn herself into a woman or more 
correctly”. Then culture invo lved in these discrepancies and the term gender was associated with the fruit of social 
process which has to do a lot with the female her later life.  (Flotow, 1997). In the 1980s, culture was regarded as a 
significant dimension to translation. Preoccupyin g questions like “how should we translate, what is a correct 
translation?” have been changed into questions that have more focus on a descriptive approach like “what do 
translations do, how do they circulate in the world and elicit a response?” (Simon, 1996). As a result of adopting the 
term culture in Translation Studies, scholars and theorists came up with new ideas, theories , and approaches. 
Gender, as in other fields, always plays an important role in Translation Studies. Between 1750 -1830 gender 
system in European translation underwent an important series of transformations. First, women aimed to change 
linguistic and cultural gender issues which are still ongoing debates amongst scholars. Today and in the last quarter 
of the 20th century, it is also po ssible to talk about Feminist Translation Studies having some strict differences from 
the earlier male -dominated translation for which female writing, translation , and other pieces of artwork have been 
seen inferior for centuries. Feminist translators have  certainly been rebelling against patriarchal and sexist language 
both in society and translation since the first wave of the feminist movement started, therefore, they consciously 
manipulate the language itself while translating.  
In the late 20th century  female and especially feminist writing gain momentum in the USA and Western Europe. 
One of the well-known American feminist writers is Ursula Kroeber Le Guin who was born on October 21, 1929, in 
Berkeley, California, United States. She was a well -known American sci-fiction and high fantasy works writer who 
grew up with four brothers. She had an intellectual family but in her early works , she confronted some publishing 
problems. Her best -known published books are City of Illusions, The Left Hand of Darkness , and the Earthsea 
Series. However, thanks to her early novels such as Rocannon's World, Planet of Exile , and City of Illusions Le Guin 
gained the title of sci -fiction writer who has also written essays on feminist issues. Her worldly known fantasy book 
Earthsea Series which was written for children but later on it also attracted a broad adult readership. There are almost 
23 years between her first book of the series A Wizard of Earthsea written in 1968 and the last book The Other Wind 
written in 2001. She died on January 22, 2018, in Portland, United States (Britanica, 2018).  
 
Literature review 
    
'Discourse' had its traditional meaning until the last part of the twentieth century: the intended meaning of a specific 
subject in writing or speech and writer s such as Descartes and Machiavelli were linked to this practice. The term has 
been used with increasing frequency and new meanings in recent decades, reflecting the effect on the critical 
vocabulary of work done within and across the boundaries of differe nt disciplines of discourse: linguistics, 
philosophy, literary criticism, history, psychoanalysis, and sociology. The term is now the meeting ground for 
various inquiries within the nature and use of language (Peter Childs, The Routledge Dictionary of Lite rary Terms, 
2006).  
     According to Foucault’s (Grace, 2002) concept of discourse(s), the term(s) is held as bodies of knowledge. His 
concept moves away from the linguistics and grammatical notions to the concept of discipline. Discipline used in 
          Special Issue in International Association for Technology, Education and Language Studies (IATELS)  
IJLLC   Vol. 6, No. 4, July 2020, pages: 16-26 
18 
two per ceptions refers to scholarly disciplines (such as science, medicine, psychiatry, sociology, etc.) and 
disciplinary institutions of social control to illustrate; schools, prisons, hospitals, and so on. Foucault’s idea of 
discourse historically demonstrates the particular relations between discipline and disciplinary institutions. 
Foucault’s concept of discourse has been taken into account in many different theories and disciplines.  
     Fairclough (2003) sees “discourses as ways of representing aspects of t he world— the processes, relations , and 
structures of the material world, the `mental world' of thoughts, feelings, beliefs and so forth, and the social world” 
and associates different discourses with different perspectives on the world due to different ba ckground and relations 
of people which affect the ways we understand and comprehend the discourses. Representation of discourses 
includes not only the actual world where we live but also imaginary, projective , and possible worlds.  
The relationships between different discourses are one element of the relationships between different people — they 
may complement one another, compete with one another, one can dominate others, and so forth. Discourses 
constitute part of the resources whi ch people deploy in relating to one another — keeping separate from one another, 
cooperating, competing, dominating — and in seeking to change how they relate to one another (Fairclough, 2003). 
     There is no widely accepted definition for discourse anal ysis, but we may talk about two mainstream remarks 
which are approved by many scholars and theorists. On the one hand, discourse is defined as examining the patterns 
of a language in the unit or units of a text which can be a phrase or utterance , on the other hand, it is the analyses of 
the patterns of a language across the texts as a whole unit , in other words, it focuses on context. There are also many 
other different points of views on discourse or discourses and its definition, but they somehow refer to  the same 
frame. 
     Feminist Critical Discourse Analysis (CDA) developed in the last decades under several branches of discourse 
analysis and the notion of feminist is explicitly used by feminist scholars studying in these fields (Lazar, 2005). As in 
this area, it is possible to talk about other feminist branched areas such as; ‘feminist stylistics’ (Mills, 1995), 
‘feminist pragmatics’ (Christie, 2000), and ‘feminist conversation analysis’ (Kitzinger, 2000). In all these fields, the 
very objective of the feminist scholars is to challenge with gender -related bias and male -centered world. Cameron 
wrote and clearly explained in 1992 that one of her most important goals was to “question the whole scholarly 
objective bias of linguistics and to show how assumpti ons and practices of linguistics are implicated in patriarchal 
ideology and oppression” (1992: 16). According to Spender (1981) the feminist scholars have also striven and 
criticized male dominancy across other disciplines, to illustrate; disciplines in hu manities, social sciences , and 
sciences.   
     The vagueness in defining discourse emerges in feminist CDA as well. The question of whether to analy ze the 
linguistic components of a text i.e. even an utterance may have a discourse(s) in itself or to analy ze the text as a 
whole unite i.e. not analy zing the small unites like words or utterance but dealing with it holistically. Jørgensen and 
Phillips (2004), however, emphasi ze that texts cannot be analy zed discursively through its linguistic components , in 
other words, grammatical structures or unites, there has to be also social and cultural analysis of the texts. Therefore; 
beside linguistic analysis, texts also need social and cultural consideration s to analy ze concerning discourse. 
Jørgensen and Phillips s tated that feminist CDA aims to reveal the ties between language use and social practice 
(2004: 66). “The focus is on the role of discursive practices in the maintenance of the social order and social 
change”. Extensively, CDA is a social -constructivist ap proach which carries that representation of world are 
somewhat linguistic -discursive, implications are generally and socially explicit and information is made through 
social collaboration while social development of knowledge has social results. Since some  scholars like Faiclough, 
Wodak (1997) and van Dijk (1994), instead of narrowing the social inequality to gender, preferred coping with all 
forms of social inequality and injustice, they are not labeled as explicit feminist critical discourse analysts (Laz ar, 
2005). There are several reasons why there is a need for explicit feminist CDA and in the following paragraphs , three 
major reasons will be discussed.  
      Why is Feminist Critical Discourse Analysis needed? First and one of the most important reason s is that even 
though critical discourse practitioners adopt a feminist critical perspective and analy ze texts accordingly, they avoid 
using the word feminist explicitly. Lazar (2005) critici zes them for not working collectively and contributing 
feminist perspectives in the academic world. Secondly, there are CDA analysts who are thought to be feminist as 
Cameron (1998) who stated that all the pioneers and important figures in feminist CDA are white men from the USA 
and Europe and this statement was given c redit and also particularly used by Wilkinson and Kitzinger (1995). 
However, on the contrary of this thought, it is possible to say that there are also women, in different geographical 
locations, contributing feminist research in CDA (Lazar, 2005). As ment ioned in the previous paragraphs that in their 
works, Chouliaraki and Fairclough (1999) include and draw upon feminist research among other sources but citing 
feminist works is not an adequate effort in feminist CDA and there must be more than this. Thus, a distinctive 
IJLLC                 ISSN: 2455-8028   
Özgün, D. (2020). Gender discourse analysis in Ursula K. Le Guin’s Earthsea series and its Turkish translation. 
International Journal of Linguistics, Literature and Culture, 6(4), 16-26.  
https://doi.org/10.21744/ijllc.v6n4.902 
19 
feminist view is required within CDA. Thirdly, feminist scholars do not work as a unit because they are dispersed 
around the world. To have significance in CDA as the feminist branch they need to work collectively. 
      Originally discourse analysis has flourished in applied linguistics since the 1970s and two decades later, its 
practice was seen significant by the scholars of translation studies and used in the functionalist theories of translation 
targeting the analysis of text types, langu age function, the impact of translation and the participants of the translation 
event (Munday, 2001). Translation of choices within the textual metafiction, which has taken special attention from 
the scholars of translation studies with special focus on th e function of Theme and its effect on the thematic 
development in the text, is one of the most essential topics in discourse analysis. Several types of research have been 
done considering this new insight in to translation studies. Thanks to the development  of this field, discourse analysis 
that had previously been substantially neglected ha ve become prominent in translation studies (House, 2015). In 
translation studies, discourse analysis was applied through Halliday’s register analysis model focused on bot h the 
source text and target text by analyzing the pragmatic functions of linguistic elements.  
      According to Halliday who built the bridge between CDA and TS with his works, such as the three features of 
the context of the situation, register analysi s and systemic functional linguistics (grammar) which were mainly used 
in early CDA oriented TS studies and current studies, sees language as an event of communication and identifies 
three stages of functional meaning as ideational, intertextual and interp ersonal meaning. Here the interpersonal 
meaning is the language use d to constitute the relationship between the text producer and text receiver and while 
analyzing the interpersonal meaning, power is one of the fundamental types of relationship (M. A. K. H alliday, 
1989).  
     Although CDA primarily means analyzing one text i.e. one language and one culture at a time, in TS objecting to 
analyze CDA in both the source text and the target text which is to say two languages and two cultures at a time. To 
analyze ST and TT in terms of CDA, both ST and TT have to be seen as a social, cultural , and political activity and 
combined these three acts. Most of the studies have been carried out in TS by using CDA concentrate on translation 
as social action and try to an swer these questions; who is translating for whom, what is being translated, when is it 
being translated and what are the effects on the receiving culture? (Schaffner, 2002). Depending on the choices of 
translators, CDA has optional status in translation s tudies and is generally practiced as a supportive means in the 
current methodological approaches to provide an understandable reflection on language and culture of the texts both 
ST and TT. Mostly in the translation strategy, CDA has become a practical ins trument to make decisions of the ST 
and TT context concerning cultural and social differences between the source language and target language societies. 
Furthermore, CDA assists translators to be aware of the cognitive process of translation and their cont ribution to the 
interpretation of the ST as well as understanding the meaning in the ST text that has not been overtly identified in 
translation studies (Valdeon, 2007).   
      Since the texts and discourses are the products of the human activity for communication in socio-cultural settings 
which is prevalent in CDA and TS, translators are not just a kind of mediators rendering a language into other 
languages, but, they rather produce new texts with the boundaries and limitations of their knowledg e of linguistic, 
social and cultural background in the source texts and the target texts (Hatim & Mason, 1990). Depending on the 
socio-cultural context of the source texts, translations are seen as target texts with a new socio -cultural context. 
Therefore, translators convey information by translation or interpreting the source text into the target text with some 
inevitable changes which are indispensable for a target text to be understood by the audiences of the target text and 
as a result of that CDA is needed both in the source text and the target text (Schäffner, 2004). 
 
 
2   Materials and Methods 
 
This study aims to analy ze feminist discourse in Le Guin’s Earthsea Series and its transference into the Turkish 
language. There are six connected novels in the series which have thirty -three years of the time difference between 
the first book written in 1968 and the last one written in 2001. However, in study three of the novels are subjected 
regarding years when there were written. Therefore, the first book A Wizard of Earthsea 1968, the fourth one Tehanu 
1990, and the last book of the series The Other Wind 2001 were chosen to analy ze. The reason behind the selection 
of the novels is the impact of feminist m ovements in literature in which though there have been several insufficient 
feminist attempts for centuries, they could not gain momentum until the late 1970s. (Simon, 2005), (Flotow, 1997), 
(Jouve, 1991), (Camus, Gastro , and Camus, 2017), (Leonardi, 2013) , and (Godard, 1990). Thus, it is unlikely to see 
dominant feminist writing and discourse in the first book of Earthsea Series while the fourth and the last book might 
have examples of feminist perspective and deconstruction.  
          Special Issue in International Association for Technology, Education and Language Studies (IATELS)  
IJLLC   Vol. 6, No. 4, July 2020, pages: 16-26 
20 
In this research, data is gathered concerning how feminist and non-feminist language is used in these three novels 
as well as their Turkish translations. Two different approaches such as Norman Fairclough Dimension of Critical 
Discourse Analysis and M. A. K. Halliday’s Tripartite Divi sion of Discourse is applied to analyze data. First, the fact 
that language has the power to challenge and change perceptions and it has been tooled by feminist writers and 
scholars to claim their existence in literature and translation, Fairclough’s CDA h as become a broad and primary 
discourse analysis approach in the academic field. Mainly in the analysis of the source text and the target text , the 
Fairclough CDA approach is adopted. In this interdisciplinary approach of CDA, Fairclough sees the language as a 
form of social practice , and any case of language is assumed as a communicative event. He has developed a model 
called dimensions which, in short, consists of three categories, such as text, discursive practice , and social practice. 
The first-dimension text can be speech, writing , and images or a mixture of all three forms of communication and it 
is called an analysis at the word level. The second-dimension discursive practice comprises the production of texts or 
the constitution of texts and in this d imension, the analysis takes place in the next level. The last dimension  of social 
practice is about standards of society or the organi zations in effect social structures and here the analysis is made at 
the norm level. The s econd approach is the Hallidayan Tripartite Division of Discourse applied to analy ze 
conversations selected in the source texts and the target texts. According  to Halliday, discourse analysis is based on 
the “systemic functional grammar” seeing the language as communication and  suggesting that meaning is hidden in 
what the writer intentionally chooses, and these deliberate systematic choices should be analy zed regarding social 
and cultural perspective. Moreover, Halliday b orrowed and advanced Bührer’s three division s of language functions 
which are field, tenor, and mode of discourse. In conversation analysis, in sum, the field is the actions taking place, 
the tenor is the participants and mode is the language use. 
Translation of a literary work, such as drama, poem, novel, novel la, etc. requires not only adequate linguistic 
knowledge in both source and target language but also cultural awareness of both languages. In general, there are 
two types of translators while dealing with a literary text, the first group strictly attached to the source text and save 
its structure at the cost of losing meaningful equivalence or the manipulating the message in its transference, while 
the second group somehow detached from the source text and rewrite or interpret what is given to them. Thus, t his 
study researches feminist, non -feminist, and anti-feminist perspectives in ST as well as its transference to Turkish. 
Whether the translator adapts the feminist point of view or transfers the ST equally through literal translation is 
subjected.  
The fact that this study is a descriptive one, the TT is examined through Gideon Toury’s poly  systems theory to 
assess its equivalence with the ST. First of all, Itamar Even -Zohar (1978), borrowing from the Russian Formalist of 
1920, has studied poly  systems that deal with literature not as a single part or unit but as a combination of other 
branches such as social, cultural, literary and historical framework. According to Even -Zohar, literature is the parts 
of social and cultural study fields and he believed it must be studied t hrough these other related branches. Later on, 
Gideon Toury was affected by Even -Zohar’s poly  systems theory and developed it as a descriptive study in 
translation. In that new concept of study in translation as its name suggests, Toury de scribes what a translator is or 
what s/he does and made a description upon translators instead of giving a prescription about what s/he should be, or 
s/he should do. According to Toury, all target texts, which have similarities with the source texts, are i n equivalence 
with the start texts and this relation of equivalence helps translators to find their path in translating initial norms. 
However, this equivalence is unique, and it changes from translator to translator because each translator employs 
different equivalence measurement s between the source and the target texts. Thus, a literary work can be translated 
considering both Even-Zohan’s poly systems theory and Toury’s more sophisticated descriptive translation theory.  
A gender study cannot be done with out grasping feminism. Besides applying CDA, CA , and Toury’s poly  
systems theory, since the study is conducted to analy ze ST and TT concerning linguistic and cultural gender in 
language, feminist post -structuralist discourse analysis (FPDA) is used to anal yze the findings. FPDA differs from 
CDA and CA in terms of using feminist etiquette and analy zing the language through a feminist perspective. FPDA 
is “a feminist approach to analyzing how speakers negotiate their identities, relationships and positions in  their world 
according to how they are located by competing  for yet interwoven discourses” (Baxter, 2003, p.1). As feminist 
movements have taken place during the last century, FPDA also challenges conventional patriarchy in which women 
and women’s works are seen as inferior to men and their works.  
The main sources of this study are the original version of Earthsea Series written by Ursula K. Le Guin which 
contains six separate books such as A Wizard of Earthsea (1968), The Tombs of Atuan (1971), The Farthest Shore 
(1972), Tehanu (1990), Tales from Earthsea (2001), and The Other Wind (2001) published by Saga Press. However, 
only three of these books such as; A Wizard of Earthsea, The Farthest Shore , and The Other Wind will be examined 
concerning linguistic and cultural gender. Besides, the Turkish translation the series translated by Çiğdem Erkal as 
IJLLC                 ISSN: 2455-8028   
Özgün, D. (2020). Gender discourse analysis in Ursula K. Le Guin’s Earthsea series and its Turkish translation. 
International Journal of Linguistics, Literature and Culture, 6(4), 16-26.  
https://doi.org/10.21744/ijllc.v6n4.902 
21 
Yerdeniz Öyküleri contains six books which are Yerdeniz Büyücüsü (2017), Atuan Mezarları (2017), En Uzak Sahil 
(2017), Tehanu (2017), Yerdeniz Öyküleri (201 7), and Öteki Rüzgar (2018) published by Metis Yayınları. As in the 
ST, in translation also three of these books as the first one, the second one the last one will be analy zed. 
 
 
3   Results and Discussions 
 
Quote 1: A Wizard of Earthsea 
 
ST 1:  
The name he bore as a child, Duny, was given him by his mother, and that and his life were all she could give 
him, for she died before he was a year old. His father, the bronzesmith of the village, was a grim unspeaking 
man, and since Duny's six brothers w ere older than he by many years and went one by one from home to 
farm the land or sail the sea or work as a smith in other towns of the Northward Vale, there was no one to 
bring the child up in tenderness (p.1) 
 
The child was named by his mother which on the one hand shows that the mother has the right to name her children. 
On the other hand, it is understood that the child’s father is an unspeaking man, therefore; the mother takes her 
husband’s responsibility for  naming his children. There is the cultural stereotype of gender roles that imposes some 
conventional and also universal commitments upon both men and women. As in the passage taken from the first 
book, men have the duty of making a living, and women stay at home and raise children.  
      Men are known for their lack of affection not only in literature but also in the real world while women, in 
general, show their compassion towards their children and husbands. It is possible to talk about another stereoty pical 
gender difference between men and women i.e. women are expected to be more tender than men and even for their 
children, men do not demonstrate any sorts of high compassion due to their conventional roles and virile attitudes.    
 
Quote 2: A Wizard of Earthsea 
 
ST 2:  
A sister of his dead mother lived in the village. She had done what was needful for him as a baby, but she had 
business of her own and once he could look after himself at all she paid no more heed to him. (p. 2)  
 
In the first book of the Earthsea Series, women have no names even though the women, who are close to the 
protagonist and they have significant roles in the story, do not possess a name while the main male characters are 
named by the author. The mother of the protagonist and his aunt are mentioned through certain descriptions that refer 
to their relationships with him. Even though our writer is known as a feminist author she wrote A Wizard of 
Earthsea, the first book of the cycle, in 1968 before feminist wr iting started to have an impact on literature. The 
feminist point of view started to take its part in literature in the late 1970s. Therefore, she did not indicate her 
feminist authorship in that first novel of the series.  
     The main purpose of feminis t deconstruction is to bypass or eliminate the conventional language which praises 
men and men’s works but underestimates women and puts them in a secondary position. However, in the first book 
of the series one cannot talk about any trace of a feminist perspective. 
 
Quote 3: A Wizard of Earthsea 
 
ST 3:  
As her sister's son , he had been nothing to her, but now she looked at him with a new eye. She praised him 
and told him she might teach him rhymes he would like better, such as the word that makes a snail look out of 
its shell, or the name that calls a falcon down from the sky.  
"Aye, teach me that name!" he said, being clear over the fright the goats had given him and puffed up with 
her praise of his cleverness. 
          Special Issue in International Association for Technology, Education and Language Studies (IATELS)  
IJLLC   Vol. 6, No. 4, July 2020, pages: 16-26 
22 
The witch said to him, "You will not ever tell that word to the other children if I teach it to you."  (p. 4-5) 
 
As in males writing or traditional writing, in which women play secondary roles and they are mostly bound to men, 
female characters are seldom protagonists, but they have a significant impact on main characters. Since women are 
not called by their names, t he narrator uses some adjectives and nouns to describe them. ‘witch’ is one of those 
nouns referring to the protagonist’s aunt, his mother’s sister, attributes unwilling and wicked notion. Although there 
are other terms to define a female person who casts spells in the English language such as; magician, enchanter, 
sorcerer, necromancer, conjurer, occultist, charmer, etc. that do not indicate as negative meaning as a witch does, the 
author did not use any of them. 
 
Quote 4: A Wizard of Earthsea and its Turkish translation 
 
ST: 
 As her sister's son, he had been nothing to her, but now she looked at him with a new eye. She praised him and 
told him she might teach him rhymes he would like better, such as the word that makes a snail look out of its 
shell, or the name that calls a falcon down from the sky (p. 4-5). 
TT:  
Kız kardeşinin oğlu olarak ona hiçbir şey ifade etmeyen bu oğlana, artık başka bir gözle bakmaya başladı. 
Onu övdü ve ona daha çok hoşlanacağı tekerlemeler öğreteceğini söyledi. Bir salyangozu kabuğundan dışarı 
bıraktıracak bir sözcük veya bir şahini gökyüzünden çağıracak bir isim gibi (p. 12).  
 
 
Even though Ursula K. Le Guin was a feminist writer in her early novels in Earthsea Cycle Series, women do not 
have names. Especially in her first book of the series, A Wizard of Earthsea, the author does not give names to 
women even if they have significa nt roles in the novel. As in the example which has taken from the first book, the 
woman who is the aunt of the protagonist in the narrative does not possess a name. 
      In the target text (TT) due to lack of third -person singular pronouns and possessive adjectives in the language of 
TT, translation of the source text (ST) cannot be equal. And also using subject pronouns is not necessary for the TT 
which creates another equivalent issue. 
 
Quote 5: A Wizard of Earthsea and its Turkish translation 
 
ST: 
"Aye, teach me that name!" he said, being clear over the fright the goats had given him and puffed up with 
her praise of his cleverness. 
The witch said to him, "You will not ever tell that word to the other children if I teach it to you" (p. 5).  
TT: 
"Evet, öğret bana o ismi!" dedi keçilerin uyandırdığı korkudan kurtulup, teyzesinin, ne kadar akıllı olduğu 
yolundaki övgüleriyle kasılmakta olan Duny. 
Cadı kadın "Eğer sana öğretirsem, hiçbir zaman o sözcüğü diğer çocuklara söylemeyeceksin," dedi.  
 
 
No matter what their roles are in the stories, witches are seen  as bad and cruel in every society. The narrator calls the 
boy’s aunt as ‘the witch’ she also attributes a lot of good features to her such as; weather changer for the sake of 
villagers, healer, protector from bad spells, and so on. 
      In the translation, ‘the witch’ is translated as ‘cadı kadın’ to soften the discourse because the witch in the story is 
not bad but necessary for her village. The impact of patriarchy can easily be seen in both the ST and the  TT. To 
avoid bias, the narrator could have used ‘sorcerer’, ‘enchanter’ , or ‘magician’ for a female person who casts spells. 
However, for a male magician ‘wizard’, which conventionally does not refer to any sorts of wicked attributions, it is 
used in the story. 
 
 
 
 
IJLLC                 ISSN: 2455-8028   
Özgün, D. (2020). Gender discourse analysis in Ursula K. Le Guin’s Earthsea series and its Turkish translation. 
International Journal of Linguistics, Literature and Culture, 6(4), 16-26.  
https://doi.org/10.21744/ijllc.v6n4.902 
23 
Quote 6: A Wizard of Earthsea 
 
ST:  
There is a saying on Gont, Weak as woman’s magic and there is another saying, Wicked as woman’s magic (p. 7). 
 
 
In a fictional world of Earthsea, we have an omniscient narrator and this sample is not taken fr om a conversation or a 
monologue, so it is the narrator’s voice. Certain phrases humiliate women and the magic done by women. It can be 
said that there is an obvious misogynistic discourse in the first book. Phrases such as, “Weak as woman’s magic” and 
“Wicked as woman’s magic” show direct inferiority of women in the wor ld level and a lso there are numerous of 
other illustrations which are full of sexist and misogynist language, therefore; the inferiority of women is in the next 
level as well. Furthermore, the sentence starts with “There is a saying on Gont” that suggests women are disd ained 
by the society. Thus, downsizing women is on the social level. 
 
Quote 7: A Wizard of Earthsea 
 
ST: 
Now the witch of Ten Alders was no black sorceress, nor did she ever meddle with the high arts or traffic 
with Old Powers; but being an ignorant woman among ignorant folk, she often used her crafts to foolish and 
dubious ends. She knew nothing of the Balance and the  Pattern which the true wizard knows and serves, and 
which keep him from using his spells unless real need demands. She had a spell for every  circumstance and 
was forever wearing charms. Much of her lore was mere rubbish and humbug, nor did she know the true 
spells from the false. She knew many curses and was better at causing sickness, perhaps, than at curing it. 
Like any village witch she cou ld brew up a love -potion, but there were other, uglier brews she made to serve 
men's jealousy and hate. Such practices, however, she kept from her young prentice, and as far as she was 
able she taught him honest craft (p. 7) 
 
 
In the quote above, there is  a characteristic description of the witch who is the aunt of our protagonist. While at first, 
the narrator says she is not interested in dark magic, the following depictions not only humiliates her as an individual 
but all witches. The attributions she ha s are evil and foolish. While comparing her to a true magician the narrator 
does not say ‘a true witch’ instead says ‘a true wizard’ as if there cannot be a true witch. The following descriptions 
are like a reflection of the general view towards witches. T hus, as mentioned in the previous quotes that this village 
witch is helpful and necessary for her village but she mainly possesses wicked features and she is not welcomed by 
the villagers as well. 
 
Quote 8: A Wizard of Earthsea 
 
ST: 
Some of the villagers fled up the ravines and hid in the forest, and some made ready to fight for their lives, 
and some did neither but stood about lamenting. The witch was one who fled; hiding alone in a cave up on 
the Kapperding Scarp and sealing the cav e-mouth with spells. Duny's father the bronze -smith was one who 
stayed, for he would not leave his smelting-pit and forge where he had worked for fifty years (p. 10) 
In this band of the invading horde there were about a hundred men, which is not many; but in the village 
were only eighteen men and boys (p. 12) 
 
  
Here in the quotes above, people of the village are under attack of some invaders from a distant land. Some villagers 
run away and hide, but some other villagers stay and fight for their village who are only male people stated as 
“eighteen men and boys”. T here are not many women or girls to protect the village from invaders because women 
need to be protected. Moreover, despite her supernatural power, the witch also runs away and hides when there is a 
need for her. Regardless of his age, our child wizard app rentice stays and helps the men who have the will of 
          Special Issue in International Association for Technology, Education and Language Studies (IATELS)  
IJLLC   Vol. 6, No. 4, July 2020, pages: 16-26 
24 
protecting their land. There is a deliberate comparison between men and women, wizards and witches to demonstrate 
the general patriarchal perspective in the story. 
 
Quote 9: A Wizard of Earthsea 
 
ST:  
Someone else was there before him, a girl, whom he knew by sight as the daughter of the old Lord of Re Albi 
(p. 23). 
"You do not remember what I told you, that that girl's mother, the Lord's wife, is an enchantress?" (p. 28)  
 
 
Another example of nameless women in the story. First, there is a girl whom we know her with her father’s name. 
Second, the girl’s mother is known with her husband’s name. Whether those examples are coincidences, or the 
narrator deliberately avoids giving the name to female characters regardless of their roles in the story, women have 
no names and they are introduced with some adjectives or called by the name of their male relatives.  
 
 
4   Conclusion 
 
In the first book of the Earthsea Cycles, which was writ ten in 1968, it is not possible to talk about the feminist 
perspective because the author used conventional non-feminist language in literature. Even though the writer of these 
series, Ursula K. Le Guin, is known as a feminist author, she did not write at least the first book with a feminist view. 
First of all, the book is full of anti -feminist examples that are given in the data analysis part. For instance, women, in 
the story, do not possess any names despite their significant roles. The narrator calls th em by the names of their 
relatives such as Lady of O, the wife of Re Albe or sometimes she describes them with some adjectives. Secondly, 
women of the story are highly stereotypical women as in real life. Therefore, gender roles show great similarities lik e 
women stay at home and raise children while men are out -side to earn money for their family. Thirdly, there are 
some word level  of anti-feminist illustrations that humiliate women but praise men. For example; people with the 
unnatural superpower are called wizards and witches. Male ones are called wizards which attribute good 
characteristics while female ones are called witches that generally have negative meaning and attribution in almost 
all societies.  
All in all, the book was written by a non -feminist language and in some cases, the language can be considered as 
anti-feminist or misogynist. Although the story takes place in a fictional world, it is full of real -life ref erences in 
terms of gender roles. Whereas women are mai nly depicted as the representation of weakness and evilness, men 
mostly possess good features and they represent the power and goodness. Since the study has not been finalized, the 
last conclusion will be made after analyzing the following selected books of the series and their Turkish translations. 
 
Conflict of interest statement 
The author declared that he has no competing interests.  
 
Statement of authorship 
The author has a responsibility for the conception and design of the study. The author  has approved the final article. 
 
Acknowledgments 
The success of this study was due to many contribut ors who had given valuable contributions to this study. This 
study could not be accomplished without th eir contributions.  Therefore,  sincere gratitude goes to  the head , the 
secretary, and all lecturers of the research center,  Hacı Bayram Veli University, Translation Department. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IJLLC                 ISSN: 2455-8028   
Özgün, D. (2020). Gender discourse analysis in Ursula K. Le Guin’s Earthsea series and its Turkish translation. 
International Journal of Linguistics, Literature and Culture, 6(4), 16-26.  
https://doi.org/10.21744/ijllc.v6n4.902 
25 
References 
Basil Hatim, I. M. (1990). Dsicourse and The Translator. New York/London: Longman. 
Beauvoir, Simone de (1949) Le Deux ieme Sexe , Paris: Gallimard, trans, by Howard Parshley as The Second Sex ,  
New York: Knopf, 1952. 
de Beauvoir, S. (1949). Le deuxième sexe París, Gallimard.  Textos seleccionados de la versión en español: El 
segundo sexo, 1, 47-64. 
Cameron, D. (1985). Feminism and Linguistic Theory. New York: St. Martin's P. 
Camus, C. C., Castro, C. G., & Camus, J. T. W. (Eds.). (2017).  Translation, Ideology and Gender . Cambridge 
Scholars Publishing. 
Chamberlain, L. (1988). Gender and the Metaphorics of Translation.  Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and 
Society, 13(3), 454-472. https://doi.org/10.1086/494428  
Diaz-Diocaretz, M. (1985).  Translating poetic discourse: questions of feminist strategies in Adrienne Rich  (Vol. 2). 
John Benjamins Publishing. 
Van Dijk, T. A. (Ed.). (1985). Discourse and literature (Vol. 3). John Benjamins Publishing. 
Even-Zohar, I. (1990 b). Polysystem Theory, Poetics Today 11(1): 9–26. 
Fairclough, N. (2003). Analysing discourse: Textual analysis for social research. Psychology Press. 
Florio, J. (1603). Translators Preface; Montaignes Essayes. London. 
Von Flotow, L. (1991). Feminist translation: contexts, practices and theories.  TTR: traduction, terminologie, 
rédaction, 4(2), 69-84. 
Von Flotow, L. (1991). Feminist translation: contexts, practices and theories.  TTR: traduction, terminologie, 
rédaction, 4(2), 69-84. 
Von Flotow, L. (1997). Translation and Gender: Translating in the Era of Feminism. Manchester: St.  Jerome Pub. 
Fowler, R. (1989). Linguistics and The Novel. London, New York: Routledge. 
Georgakopoulou, A. D. (2015). The Handbook of Narrative Analysis. West Sussex: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Godard, B. (1990). Theorizing Feminist Discourse/Translation. W: S. Bassnett, A. Lefevere, eds.: Translation, 
History. Culture. London—New York, Pinter Publishers. 
Grace, A. M. (2002). A Foucault Primer Discourse, Power and the Subject. Melbourne: Melbourne University Press. 
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1989). Language, context,  and text: Aspects of language in a social -semiotic 
perspective. 
Meyerhoff, M., & Holmes, J. (2003). The handbook of language and gender. Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 
House, J. (1977). A model for translation quality assessment (Vol. 88). John Benjamins Pub Co. 
House, J. (2015). Translation Quality Assessment. Oxon: Routledge. 
Internet: Encyclopaedia Britannica, (2018). Ursula K. Le Guin. Encyclopaedia Britannica, inc.  
https://www.britannica.com/biography/Ursula-K-Le-Guin 
Jouve, N. W. (1991).  White woman speaks with forked tongue: Criticism as autobiography  (p. 193). London: 
Routledge. 
Lazar, M. M. (2005). Feminist Critical Discourse Analysis. Singapore: Palgrave Macmillian. 
Lazar, M. M. (2005). Politicizing gender in discourse: Feminist critical discourse  analysis as political perspective and 
praxis. In  Feminist critical discourse analysis  (pp. 1 -28). Palgrave Macmillan, London.  
https://doi.org/10.1057/9780230599901_1   
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1989). Language, context, and text: Aspects of language in a social -semiotic 
perspective. 
Maria Tymoczko, E. G. (2002). Translation and Power. Massachusetts: University of Massachusetts Press. 
Munday, J. (2001). Introducing Translation Studies. Theories and applications, Routledge. 
Munday, J. (2016). Introducing translation studies: Theories and applications. Routledge. 
Paltridge, Brian. (2012). An Introduction to Discourse Analysis. 2nd ed. London: Bloomsbury. 
Childs, P., & Fowler, R. (Eds.). (2006). The Routledge dictionary of literary terms. Routledge. 
Schäffner, C. (Ed.). (2002).  The role of discourse analysis for translation and in translator training . Multilingual 
Matters. 
Schäffner, C. (2004). Political discourse analysis from the point of view of t ranslation studies. Journal of language 
and politics, 3(1), 117-150. https://doi.org/10.1075/jlp.3.1.09sch  
Simon, S. (1996). Gender in Translation, London and New-York. Routledge, 1(996), 7. 
Simon, S. (2005). Gender in Translattion. London & New York: Routledge. 
Stefan, V., & Weckmueller, B. (1994). Shedding and Literally Dreaming. Feminist Press at CUNY. 
          Special Issue in International Association for Technology, Education and Language Studies (IATELS)  
IJLLC   Vol. 6, No. 4, July 2020, pages: 16-26 
26 
Tajfel, H. E. (1978).  Differentiation between social groups: Studies in the social psycho logy of intergroup relations . 
Academic Press. 
Tajfel, H. (1982). Social Identity and Intergroup Relations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Toury, G. (1995). Descriptive Translation Studies –and beyond John Benjamins Publishing 
Company. Amsterdam/Philadelphia. 
Valdeón, R. A. (2007). Ideological independence or negative mediation: BBC Mundo and CNN en Español’s 
(translated) reporting of Madrid’s terrorist attacks. In  Translating and interpreting conflict  (pp. 97 -118). Brill 
Rodopi. 
Von, F. L. (1997). Translation and Gender—Translating in the “Era of Feminism”. 
 