 
 Curse of Strahd - Wikipedia 
 Jump to content 
 Main menu 
 Main menu 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 Navigation
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us 
 Contribute
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages 
 Search 
 Search 
 Appearance 
 Donate 
 Create account 
 Log in 
 Personal tools 
 Donate 
 Create account 
 Log in 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 (Top) 
 1 
 Contents 
 Toggle Contents subsection 
 1.1 
 Curse of Strahd: Revamped 
 2 
 Publication history 
 Toggle Publication history subsection 
 2.1 
 Revamped edition 
 3 
 Reception 
 Toggle Reception subsection 
 3.1 
 Revamped edition 
 4 
 References 
 5 
 External links 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 Curse of Strahd 
 3 languages 
 Español Suomi Français 
 Edit links 
 Article 
 Talk 
 English 
 Read 
 Edit 
 View history 
 Tools 
 Tools 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 Actions
 Read 
 Edit 
 View history 
 General
 What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Switch to legacy parser 
 Print/export
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 In other projects
 Wikidata item 
 Appearance 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 D&D 5e adventure module 
 Curse of Strahd Rules required Dungeons & Dragons 5th edition Character levels 1–10 Authors Jeremy Crawford , Laura Hickman , Tracy Hickman , Adam Lee , Christopher Perkins , Richard Whitters First published March 15, 2016 ISBN 978-0786965984 
 Curse of Strahd is an adventure book for the 5th edition of the Dungeons & Dragons role-playing game . It was released on March 15, 2016 and is based on the Ravenloft module published in 1983. 
 Contents [ edit ] 
 Adventurers are mysteriously drawn to the realm of Barovia which is surrounded by deadly mist and ruled by the vampire wizard Strahd von Zarovich . This gothic horror adventure takes the players on a course through Barovia that culminates with a vampire hunt inside Castle Ravenloft. Using a deck of tarokka cards, the Dungeon Master can randomize parts of the adventure such as the identity of a powerful ally, the placement of important magic items across Barovia, and Strahd's location within Castle Ravenloft. This adventure module is designed to take four to six player characters from 1st level to 10th level. 
 Curse of Strahd: Revamped [ edit ] 
 In addition to a softcover adventure book, the boxed set includes the following: [ 1 ] 
 The Creatures of Horror book, describing new monsters 
 A tarokka deck and booklet 
 A themed dungeon master's screen 
 A double-sided poster-sized map of Barovia and Castle Ravenloft 
 12 postcards themed around locations in the adventure 
 Publication history [ edit ] 
 Curse of Strahd was written by Jeremy Crawford , Laura Hickman , Tracy Hickman , Adam Lee , Christopher Perkins , Richard Whitters , and was published by Wizards of the Coast in 2016. [ 2 ] It acts as an adaptation of the original Ravenloft module for the 5th edition of Dungeons & Dragons . [ 3 ] Charlie Hall, for Polygon , explained that "Instead of reinventing the wheel, principle [ sic ] designer Chris Perkins brought in the module's original writers — the husband and wife team of Tracy and Laura Hickman — to create the very best version of the famous module yet. [...] Tracy and Laura have been hosting nearly annual sessions of the original Ravenloft at their home, for friends and family, over the course of decades. When Perkins asked for their input, they flew out to meet with the team. The result was a torrent of ideas for new locations, characters and encounters". [ 4 ] On the development process, Perkins said: "Without the Hickmans, this project would've died on the vine" and that "the Hickmans envisioned Strahd differently than he's depicted in the original Ravenloft adventure. Their image didn't match the Bela Legosi [ sic ] vampire quite so much. Tracy found an old daguerreotype [an early type of photograph captured on a silvered copper plate] [ sic ] that captured the look of Strahd in his mind, and we used that image as a reference to create a new look for the vampire". [ 5 ] The tarokka deck was released as a supplement by Gale Force 9. [ 6 ] 
 Revamped edition [ edit ] 
 Revamped edition comes in a coffin-shaped display box. 
 In July 2020, Wizards of the Coast announced a new edition of the Curse of Strahd module, entitled Curse of Strahd: Revamped . [ 1 ] It was released on October 20, 2020. [ 7 ] This module is the first released with the publisher's new focus on diversity and inclusion. [ 8 ] Wizards of the Coast stated that "the adventure includes the latest errata and a revised depiction of the Vistani" who are based on stereotypes about the Romani people . [ 9 ] Beadle & Grimm, a Wizards of the Coast licensee, released a limited run special "Legendary Edition" which included physical props for the Dungeon Master to use such as handouts, maps, props and encounter cards. [ 8 ] 
 Chris Perkins , Dungeon & Dragons Principal Narrative Designer, in an interview with IGN said, "We don't do a tremendous number of box sets. [...] It was always my wish that at some point we could put a version of the adventure together that actually had the cards with it, and it's out of that idea that this boxed set emerged. We did want to make sure that if Beadle and Grimm [a company that specializes in high-end D&D box sets like this one or this one] [ sic ] , for instance, were doing their own version of it, we wouldn't eventually be duplicating what they would do. They tend to go [...] in the hundreds of dollars. So this is kind of filling in middle space between what they would normally do and what we would normally sell". [ 10 ] 
 Reception [ edit ] 
 Publishers Weekly included the book in their "Best-selling Books Week Ending March 28, 2016", in which Curse of Strahd was #6 in "Hardcover Fiction". [ 11 ] [ 12 ] The book was generally well received, earning the 2016 ENnie Awards for Best Adventure and Best Art/Cover and runner up for Product of the Year. [ 13 ] 
 In 2016, Henry Glasheen, for SLUG Magazine , highlighted the legacy of the original Castle Ravenloft and wrote " Curse of Strahd carries on this legacy admirably, diving deeper into the bloody past of Count Strahd. Before you even get to the module itself, there is a whole section devoted to Strahd, his personality, and his goals in the adventure. [...] In fact, there really are no pre-scripted Strahd moments in the early stages of the adventure—only various opportunities for him to appear and test the party's mettle. In keeping with the logical structure of the original campaign, Curse of Strahd also finds countless ways to intertwine the larger themes of the campaign into its side adventures. There is, as always, a driving main quest that keeps the action moving forward, but each stop along the way brings moral and ethical dilemmas to the party—and Strahd is always watching, waiting to see which party members evidence a dark side that he can play off the others". [ 14 ] 
 Rory Bristol, for GeekDad , wrote "Fair warning: the book features a lot of death, blood, and general horror. Descriptions and events can be too much for young kids, so beware running this campaign with little ones. For groups that ride the thrill of horror and intrigue, however, this is 100% the book for your party. [...] Reading through The Curse of Strahd was a thrilling visit to the tortured land of Barovia. As with many pre-written adventures for D&D , it was a bit like reading a choose-your-own-adventure book from front to back, rather than following the breadcrumbs. [...] Play is easy, and intuitive, given you've familiarized yourself with the adventure ahead of time. If the DM hasn't read the full adventure, be prepared for a bored party. There's too much intrigue to wing your way through this adventure". [ 15 ] 
 In 2017, Cecilia D'Anastasio, for Kotaku , highlighted the inclusion of queer characters in Curse of Strahd and wrote "what was a scattering of queer characters throughout the years formalized into a guiding principle with 2016's Curse of Strahd , an adventure that has players take down the vampire Count Strahd. [...] Every adventure since Curse of Strahd has included one or several queer characters, and Crawford assured Kotaku that this will be a constant into future adventures [...]. Weaving queer plotlines into D&D games is not hard to do. A passing mention of a same-sex couple might be enough to assert that queer sexuality is a natural part of the D&D universe. And instead of relying on stereotypes or fixating on their sexuality, these characters' fleshed-out backstories make them people, not icons". [ 16 ] 
 In a review of Curse of Strahd in Black Gate , Andrew Zimmerman Jones said " Curse of Strahd is really a mix of setting manual and adventure module in one, with a storyline that is extremely open-ended, with endings that (assuming the players survive) allow for continued adventures centered around the consequences of the players' actions in Castle Ravenloft." [ 17 ] 
 Revamped edition [ edit ] 
 The new boxed set was included on The Mary Sue ' s 2020 "Gift Guide for the Dungeons & Dragons Fan". [ 18 ] Christian Hoffer, for Comicbook , wrote "while it doesn't have enough extra material to justify a second purchase, Curse of Strahd Revamped is a great box set for the DM/player group that hasn't traveled to Ravenloft and wants to commit to the campaign with a grim flourish. The box set definitely will enhance your Curse of Strahd experience, and the box alone makes for a great display piece on top of your bookshelf or in the D&D corner of your room". [ 19 ] 
 Julie Muncy, for Io9 , criticized the "granular changes" to the Vistani people as not very extensive and that "while there's a real opportunity here to do better work—the aforementioned diversity pledge also mentioned future works that will feature the Vistani people and aim to complicate their depictions—starting that work with a fancy collector's edition feels less like a promise to do better and more like a victory lap". [ 20 ] Muncy highlighted that the errata and the Revamped edition "sought to undo some of the harmful stereotyping of the Vistani people, along with revising the book's approach to a specific character's disability to avoid ableist stereotypes. [...] While modifications do fix things like the stereotyping of the Vistani people as 'uncivilized' and heavy drinkers, the module still gives the Vistani abilities to curse and hypnotize players or cast spells like Evil Eye , which, along with unrevised art that heavily conjures stereotyped imagery of the Romani, leans into tropes that suggest the Romani have mystical, dangerous powers, tropes that have been used in the past to target Romani for persecution". [ 20 ] 
 Jon Ryan, for IGN , wrote "the updates to the adventure itself mostly consist of previously-published amendments to the book, such as tweaks to an additional character option or corrections of printing errors, but the most notable updates are to some items that were deemed insensitive or offensive after the original publishing [...]. It's worth noting that the book's illustrations of the Vistani still evoke Romani culture, and some players may still associate certain abilities (such as their ability to cast curses or hypnotize players using an 'Evil Eye') with outdated cultural stereotypes". [ 10 ] 
 References [ edit ] 
 1 2 Doke, Shunal (2020-07-29). "Dungeons & Dragons: Curse of Strahd Revamped Announced for October Release" . IGN India . Archived from the original on 2020-10-27 . Retrieved 2020-10-23 . 
 ↑ "Curse of Strahd - RPGnet d20 RPG Game Index" . index.rpg.net . Archived from the original on 2025-04-17. 
 ↑ "Curse of Strahd" . Wizards of the Coast. Archived from the original on January 21, 2016. 
 ↑ Hall, Charlie (2016-01-18). "D&D's Ravenloft returns with the help of its original creators" . Polygon . Archived from the original on 2020-08-06 . Retrieved 2020-08-21 . 
 ↑ Kerzner, Liana (March 8, 2016). "Curse Of Strahd Interview With Chris Perkins" . CGMagazine . Archived from the original on 2022-06-28 . Retrieved 2020-08-21 . 
 ↑ "Ravenloft Returns: Curse of Strahd is Coming – Black Gate" . 18 January 2016. 
 ↑ "Curse of Strahd Revamped" . Wizards of the Coast . Archived from the original on August 3, 2020 . Retrieved 2020-11-21 . 
 1 2 Hall, Charlie (2020-07-31). "One of Dungeons & Dragons' best campaigns is getting two extravagant new reprints" . Polygon . Archived from the original on 2020-10-27 . Retrieved 2020-10-23 . 
 ↑ Macgregor, Jody (2020-08-03). "Popular D&D tabletop campaign Curse of Strahd is being re-'vamped' " . PC Gamer . Archived from the original on 2020-10-14 . Retrieved 2020-11-21 . 
 1 2 Ryan, Jon (July 27, 2020). "Exclusive: First Look at D&D's 'Curse of Strahd Revamped' Collector's Edition" . IGN . Archived from the original on 2020-11-30 . Retrieved 2020-11-21 . 
 ↑ Juris, Carolyn (March 25, 2016). "This Week's Bestsellers: March 28, 2016" . www.publishersweekly.com . Archived from the original on 2022-11-11 . Retrieved 2020-08-21 . 
 ↑ "Best-selling Books List | Back issue 03/28/16" . www.publishersweekly.com . Archived from the original on 2020-09-01 . Retrieved 2020-08-21 . 
 ↑ "2016 ENnie Award Winners" . Archived from the original on 2017-01-19 . Retrieved 2017-02-28 . 
 ↑ Glasheen, Henry (2016-03-18). "Review: Dungeons & Dragons: Curse of Strahd" . Slug Magazine - Salt Lake Underground . Archived from the original on 2021-03-03 . Retrieved 2020-08-21 . 
 ↑ Bristol, Rory (2016-03-15). "Feel the Horror in 'The Curse of Strahd' " . GeekDad . Archived from the original on 2020-07-28 . Retrieved 2020-08-21 . 
 ↑ D'Anastasio, Cecilia (August 24, 2017). "Dungeons & Dragons Promises To Make Its Adventures More Queer" . Kotaku . Archived from the original on 2020-09-10 . Retrieved 2020-08-21 . 
 ↑ Jones, Andrew Zimmerman (17 March 2016). "Dungeons, Dragons, and Vampires: Curse of Strahd – Black Gate" . Archived from the original on 2021-07-24. 
 ↑ Kane, Vivian (November 20, 2020). "The Mary Sue Gift Guide for the Dungeons & Dragons Fan" . www.themarysue.com . Archived from the original on 2020-11-20 . Retrieved 2020-11-21 . 
 ↑ Hoffer, Christian (October 15, 2020). "Dungeons & Dragons Returns to Ravenloft With Curse of Strahd Revamped" . ComicBook.com . Archived from the original on 2020-11-19 . Retrieved 2020-11-21 . 
 1 2 Muncy, Julie (July 27, 2020). "D&D's Culturally Sensitive Strahd Revamp Is Here, But It'll Cost You [ Updated ] " . io9 . Archived from the original on 2020-10-23 . Retrieved 2020-11-21 . 
 External links [ edit ] 
 Official website 
 A selection of untagged maps of Barovia 
 Official Dungeon Master handouts 
 Official player options 
 v t e Dungeons & Dragons rulebooks and accessories TSR modules · Wizards of the Coast adventures Original Dungeons & Dragons Core 
 Dungeons & Dragons 
 Chainmail 
 Supplements 
 Supplement I: Greyhawk 
 Supplement II: Blackmoor 
 Supplement III: Eldritch Wizardry 
 Supplement IV: Gods, Demi-Gods, and Heroes 
 Swords & Spells 
 Basic Dungeons & Dragons Core 
 Basic Set 
 Expert Set 
 Companion Set 
 Master Rules 
 Immortals Rules 
 Rules Cyclopedia 
 Supplements 
 Battlesystem 
 Creature Catalogue 
 The Shady Dragon Inn 
 Wrath of the Immortals 
 Modules 
 Adventures in Blackmoor 
 Castle Amber 
 Castle Caldwell and Beyond 
 City of the Gods 
 Combat Shield and Mini-adventure 
 Curse of Xanathon 
 Death's Ride 
 The Duchy of Ten 
 Earthshaker! 
 The Endless Stair 
 The Gem and the Staff 
 Ghost of Lion Castle 
 Horror on the Hill 
 In Search of Adventure 
 In Search of the Unknown 
 The Isle of Dread 
 The Jade Hare 
 The Keep on the Borderlands 
 The Kidnapping of Princess Arelina 
 Legacy of Blood 
 The Lost City 
 Master Player Screen 
 Mystery of the Snow Pearls 
 Night's Dark Terror 
 Palace of the Silver Princess 
 Queen's Harvest 
 Rahasia 
 The Revenge of Rusak 
 Sabre River 
 Temple of the Frog 
 Test of the Warlords 
 The Tree of Life 
 The Veiled Society 
 War Rafts of Kron 
 Where Chaos Reigns 
 Advanced Dungeons & Dragons Core 
 Players Handbook (1978) 
 Dungeon Masters Guide (1979) 
 Monster Manual (1977) 
 Supplements 
 Battlesystem 
 Deities & Demigods 
 Dragonlance Adventures 
 Dungeoneer's Survival Guide 
 Empires of the Sands 
 Fiend Folio 
 Forgotten Realms Campaign Set 
 Greyhawk Adventures 
 Lords of Darkness 
 The Magister 
 Manual of the Planes 
 Monster Manual II 
 Moonshae 
 Oriental Adventures 
 The Savage Frontier 
 Unearthed Arcana 
 Waterdeep and the North 
 Wilderness Survival Guide 
 World of Greyhawk Fantasy Game Setting 
 Modules 
 Against the Cult of the Reptile God 
 Against the Giants 
 The Assassin's Knot 
 Assault on the Aerie of the Slave Lords 
 The Bane of Llywelyn 
 Beyond the Crystal Cave 
 Blood of the Yakuza 
 Bloodstone Pass 
 The Bloodstone Wars 
 Castle Greyhawk 
 Conan Against Darkness! 
 Conan Unchained! 
 Danger at Dunwater 
 Day of Al'Akbar 
 Deep Dwarven Delve 
 Descent into the Depths of the Earth 
 Dragonlance modules 
 Dragons of Despair 
 Dungeonland 
 Dwellers of the Forbidden City 
 The Final Enemy 
 The Forest Oracle 
 Forgotten Temple of Tharizdun 
 The Gauntlet 
 The Ghost Tower of Inverness 
 Glacial Rift of the Frost Giant Jarl 
 Hall of the Fire Giant King 
 The Hidden Shrine of Tamoachan 
 Isle of the Ape 
 The Land Beyond the Magic Mirror 
 Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth 
 The Lost Island of Castanamir 
 Lost Tomb of Martek 
 The Mines of Bloodstone 
 Oasis of the White Palm 
 Pharaoh 
 Queen of the Demonweb Pits 
 Queen of the Spiders 
 Ravager of Time 
 Ravenloft 
 Ravenloft II: The House on Gryphon Hill 
 Red Sonja Unconquered 
 Ruins of Adventure 
 Scourge of the Slave Lords 
 The Secret of Bone Hill 
 The Sentinel 
 Shrine of the Kuo-Toa 
 Sinister Secret of Saltmarsh 
 Swords of Deceit 
 Swords of the Undercity 
 The Temple of Elemental Evil 
 The Throne of Bloodstone 
 To Find a King 
 Tomb of Horrors 
 Tomb of the Lizard King 
 Treasure Hunt 
 Under Illefarn 
 Vault of the Drow 
 The Village of Hommlet 
 White Plume Mountain 
 Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 2nd edition Core 
 Player's Handbook (1989) 
 Dungeon Master's Guide (1989) 
 Monstrous Manual 
 Monstrous Compendium (1989) 
 Supplements 
 Anauroch 
 Arms and Equipment Guide 
 Battlesystem 
 Book of Artifacts 
 The Code of the Harpers 
 The Complete Book of Dwarves 
 The Complete Book of Humanoids 
 The Complete Fighter's Handbook 
 The Complete Psionics Handbook 
 The Dalelands 
 Demihuman Deities 
 Draconomicon 
 Drow of the Underdark 
 Dwarves Deep 
 Earth, Air, Fire, and Water 
 Faiths & Avatars 
 Forgotten Realms Adventures 
 The Forgotten Realms Atlas 
 Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting 
 From the Ashes 
 Greyhawk: The Adventure Begins 
 A Guide to the Astral Plane 
 Hall of Heroes 
 Heroes' Lorebook 
 Iuz the Evil 
 Jungles of Chult 
 Legends & Lore 
 The Marklands 
 Monster Mythology 
 Old Empires 
 The Ruins of Undermountain 
 The Shining South 
 Tome of Magic 
 Villains' Lorebook 
 Adventures 
 Against the Giants: The Liberation of Geoff 
 The Bloodstone Lands 
 Border Watch 
 The City of Skulls 
 Crypt of Lyzandred the Mad 
 Die Vecna Die! 
 The Doomgrinder 
 Doom of Daggerdale 
 Fate of Istus 
 Five Shall Be One 
 Gargoyle 
 Greyhawk Ruins 
 Halls of the High King 
 House of Strahd 
 Howl from the North 
 Mordenkainen's Fantastic Adventure 
 Night Below 
 Patriots of Ulek 
 Rary the Traitor 
 Return of the Eight 
 Return to the Keep on the Borderlands 
 Return to the Tomb of Horrors 
 Return to White Plume Mountain 
 Slavers 
 The Star Cairns 
 Treasures of Greyhawk 
 Vecna Lives! 
 Dungeons & Dragons 3rd edition Core 
 Player's Handbook (2000) 
 Dungeon Master's Guide (2000) 
 Monster Manual (2000) 
 Supplements 
 Arms and Equipment Guide 
 Book of Challenges 
 Book of Vile Darkness 
 Defenders of the Faith 
 Deities and Demigods 
 Enemies and Allies 
 Epic Level Handbook 
 Faiths and Pantheons 
 Fiend Folio 
 Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting 
 Ghostwalk 
 Hero Builder's Guidebook 
 Living Greyhawk Gazetteer 
 Lords of Darkness 
 Magic of Faerûn 
 Monsters of Faerûn 
 Manual of the Planes 
 Masters of the Wild 
 Monster Manual II 
 Oriental Adventures 
 Psionics Handbook 
 Races of Faerûn 
 Savage Species 
 Song and Silence 
 Stronghold Builder's Guidebook 
 Sword and Fist 
 Tome and Blood 
 Adventures 
 Bastion of Broken Souls 
 City of the Spider Queen 
 Deep Horizon 
 The Forge of Fury 
 The Fright at Tristor 
 Heart of Nightfang Spire 
 Lord of the Iron Fortress 
 Return to the Temple of Elemental Evil 
 The Speaker in Dreams 
 The Standing Stone 
 The Sunless Citadel 
 Dungeons & Dragons v3.5 Core 
 Player's Handbook (2003) 
 Dungeon Master's Guide (2003) 
 Monster Manual (2003) 
 Dungeons & Dragons Basic Game (2004) 
 Supplements Eberron 
 An Adventurer's Guide to Eberron 
 City of Stormreach 
 Dragonmarked 
 Dragons of Eberron 
 Eberron Campaign Setting 
 Faiths of Eberron 
 Five Nations 
 The Forge of War 
 Sharn: City of Towers 
 Forgotten Realms 
 City of Splendors: Waterdeep 
 Dragons of Faerûn 
 Drow of the Underdark 
 The Grand History of the Realms 
 Lost Empires of Faerûn 
 Shining South 
 Underdark 
 Other 
 Book of Exalted Deeds 
 Cityscape 
 Complete Adventurer 
 Complete Arcane 
 Complete Champion 
 Complete Divine 
 Complete Mage 
 Complete Psionic 
 Complete Scoundrel 
 Complete Warrior 
 Draconomicon 
 Dragon Magic 
 Dungeon Master's Guide II 
 Dungeonscape 
 Elder Evils 
 Exemplars of Evil 
 Expanded Psionics Handbook 
 Fiendish Codex I: Hordes of the Abyss 
 Fiendish Codex II: Tyrants of the Nine Hells 
 Frostburn 
 Heroes of Battle 
 Heroes of Horror 
 Libris Mortis 
 Lords of Madness 
 Magic Item Compendium 
 Magic of Incarnum 
 Miniatures Handbook 
 Monster Manual III 
 Monster Manual IV 
 Monster Manual V 
 Planar Handbook 
 Player's Handbook II 
 Races of Destiny 
 Races of the Dragon 
 Races of Stone 
 Races of the Wild 
 Rules Compendium 
 Sandstorm 
 Spell Compendium 
 Stormwrack 
 Tome of Battle: The Book of Nine Swords 
 Tome of Magic 
 Unearthed Arcana 
 Weapons of Legacy 
 Adventures Eberron 
 Eyes of the Lich Queen 
 Grasp of the Emerald Claw 
 Shadows of the Last War 
 Voyage of the Golden Dragon 
 Whispers of the Vampire's Blade 
 Expedition series 
 Expedition to Castle Ravenloft 
 Expedition to the Demonweb Pits 
 Expedition to the Ruins of Greyhawk 
 Expedition to Undermountain 
 Fantastic Locations 
 City of Peril 
 Dragondown Grotto 
 Fane of the Drow 
 Fields of Ruin 
 The Frostfell Rift 
 Hellspike Prison 
 Other adventures 
 Barrow of the Forgotten King 
 Fortress of the Yuan-Ti 
 Red Hand of Doom 
 Scourge of the Howling Horde 
 The Shattered Gates of Slaughtergarde 
 The Sinister Spire 
 Dungeons & Dragons 4th edition Core 
 Player's Handbook (2008) 
 Dungeon Master's Guide (2008) 
 Monster Manual (2008) 
 Sourcebooks Supplements 
 Arcane Power 
 Divine Power 
 Dungeon Master's Guide 2 
 Draconomicon (Chromatic Dragons & Metallic Dragons) 
 Martial Power 
 Martial Power 2 
 Monster Manual 2 
 Monster Vault 
 Player's Handbook 2 
 Player's Handbook 3 
 Primal Power 
 Psionic Power 
 Essentials 
 Dungeon Master's Kit 
 Heroes of the Fallen Lands 
 Heroes of the Forgotten Kingdoms 
 Monster Vault 
 Rules Compendium 
 Settings 
 Dark Sun Campaign Setting 
 Eberron Campaign Guide 
 Eberron Player's Guide 
 Forgotten Realms Campaign Guide 
 Forgotten Realms Player's Guide 
 Manual of the Planes 
 Adventures 
 Assault on Nightwyrm Fortress 
 Demon Queen's Enclave 
 Keep on the Shadowfell 
 King of the Trollhaunt Warrens 
 Madness at Gardmore Abbey 
 Marauders of the Dune Sea 
 Orcs of Stonefang Pass 
 Prince of Undeath 
 Pyramid of Shadows 
 Thunderspire Labyrinth 
 Tomb of Horrors 
 Dungeons & Dragons 5th edition Core 
 Player's Handbook (2014) 
 Dungeon Master's Guide (2014) 
 Monster Manual (2014) 
 Sourcebooks Supplements 
 Volo's Guide to Monsters 
 Xanathar's Guide to Everything 
 Mordenkainen's Tome of Foes 
 Tasha's Cauldron of Everything 
 Fizban's Treasury of Dragons 
 Mordenkainen Presents: Monsters of the Multiverse 
 Minsc and Boo's Journal of Villainy 
 Bigby Presents: Glory of the Giants 
 The Deck of Many Things 
 Settings 
 Sword Coast Adventurer's Guide 
 Guildmasters' Guide to Ravnica 
 Acquisitions Incorporated 
 Eberron: Rising from the Last War 
 Explorer's Guide to Wildemount 
 Mythic Odysseys of Theros 
 Van Richten's Guide to Ravenloft 
 Strixhaven: A Curriculum of Chaos 
 Spelljammer: Adventures in Space 
 Planescape: Adventures in the Multiverse 
 Adventures 
 Tyranny of Dragons 
 Hoard of the Dragon Queen 
 The Rise of Tiamat 
 Princes of the Apocalypse 
 Out of the Abyss 
 Curse of Strahd 
 Storm King's Thunder 
 Tomb of Annihilation 
 Waterdeep
 Dragon Heist 
 Dungeon of the Mad Mage 
 Baldur's Gate: Descent into Avernus 
 Icewind Dale: Rime of the Frostmaiden 
 The Wild Beyond the Witchlight 
 Critical Role: Call of the Netherdeep 
 Dragonlance: Shadow of the Dragon Queen 
 Phandelver and Below: The Shattered Obelisk 
 Vecna: Eve of Ruin 
 Anthologies 
 Tales from the Yawning Portal 
 Ghosts of Saltmarsh 
 Candlekeep Mysteries 
 Journeys through the Radiant Citadel 
 Keys from the Golden Vault 
 Quests from the Infinite Staircase 
 Starter sets 
 Lost Mine of Phandelver 
 Dragon of Icespire Peak 
 Dragons of Stormwreck Isle 
 Dungeons & Dragons 5.5 edition Core 
 Player's Handbook (2024) 
 Dungeon Master's Guide (2024) 
 Monster Manual (2025) 
 Sourcebooks Supplements 
 Arcana Unleashed 
 Settings 
 Forgotten Realms: Heroes of Faerûn 
 Eberron: Forge of the Artificer 
 Ravenloft: The Horrors Within 
 D&D: World of Warcraft 
 Adventures 
 Arcana Unleashed: Deadfall 
 Anthologies 
 Dragon Delves 
 Forgotten Realms: Adventures in Faerûn 
 Starter & boxed sets 
 Heroes of the Borderlands 
 Stranger Things: Welcome to the Hellfire Club 
 Magazines 
 Dragon 
 Dungeon 
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Curse_of_Strahd&oldid=1357479220 " 
 Categories : Dungeons & Dragons modules ENnies winners LGBTQ-related tabletop games Role-playing game supplements introduced in 2016 Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Official website not in Wikidata 
 This page was last edited on 2 June 2026, at 22:08  (UTC) . 
 Page was rendered with Parsoid . 
 Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Legal & safety contacts 
 Code of Conduct 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 Mobile view 
 Search 
 Search 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 Curse of Strahd 
 3 languages 
 Add topic 
 