
 Is there an update to the D&D Style Guide: Writing and Editing document yet? - Dungeon Masters Guild - Dungeons & Dragons Discussion - D&D Beyond Forums - D&D Beyond 
 This site works best with JavaScript enabled. Please enable JavaScript to get the best experience from this site. 
 Skip to Content 
 Play D&D My Characters Create a character My Campaigns Beta Maps VTT More Tools D&D Beyond Mobile App Avrae Discord Bot Browse Homebrew My Homebrew Collection My Homebrew Creations Encounters My Dice Rules Browse Classes Backgrounds Species Feats Spells Equipment Magic Items Monsters Resources How to Play D&D D&D Beyond Basic Rules Rules Glossary D&D Character Sheets System Reference Document (SRD) Unearthed Arcana Featured Article Updating Your Campaign to the 5.5e D&D Rules Article Running Lairs: How to Make the Most of a Monster's Place of Power Library Free books View all Sign in to view your
library & saved
favorites. Sign in Community Support Help Portal Articles Support Forum Changelog Roadmap Creator FAQ Connect Community Update Forums Organized Play Find Players Discord Legends of Greyhawk Follow Us Featured Article Dungeon Masters: The New D&D Actual Play Marketplace Open search Toggle mobile navigation Sign in Create Account Play D&D Back Play D&D My Characters Create a character My Campaigns Maps VTT More Tools D&D Beyond Mobile App Avrae Discord Bot Browse Homebrew My Homebrew Collection My Homebrew Creations Encounters My Dice Rules Back Rules Browse Classes Backgrounds Species Feats Spells Equipment Magic Items Monsters Resources How to Play D&D D&D Beyond Basic Rules Rules Glossary D&D Character Sheets System Reference Document (SRD) Unearthed Arcana Featured Article Updating Your Campaign to the 5.5e D&D Rules Article Running Lairs: How to Make the Most of a Monster's Place of Power Library Back Library Free books Monstrous Compendium Vol. 1: Spelljammer Creatures Frozen Sick D&D Beyond Basic Rules Basic Rules (2014) Sign in to view your
library & saved
favorites. Sign in Community Back Community Help Portal Articles Support Forum Changelog Roadmap Creator FAQ Connect Community Update Forums Organized Play Find Players Discord Legends of Greyhawk Follow Us Featured Article Dungeon Masters: The New D&D Actual Play Marketplace Sign in Create an Account 
 Home 
 D&D Beyond Forums 
 Dungeons & Dragons Discussion 
 Dungeon Masters Guild 
 Is there an update to the D&D Style Guide: Writing and Editing document yet? 
 Is there an update to the D&D Style Guide: Writing and Editing document yet?
 Search
 Search all Forums
 Search this Forum
 Search this Thread
 Tools
 Jump to Forum
 Is there an update to the D&D Style Guide: Writing and Editing document yet? 
 #1 
 Jun 13, 2025 
 Saracenus 
 Saracenus 
 View User Profile
 View Posts
 Send Message
 Adventurer 
 Join Date:
 3/20/2017
 Posts:
 6
 Member Details 
 I recently downloaded the D&D Style Guide from the DMs Guild website and it hasn't been updated since 2019. There were a bunch of style updates and changes in the intervening years culminating in the 2024 core rulebooks. 
 At the very least, what is the proper way to reference firth edition now that there are two versions, 2014 and 2024. 
 Also, are you still using the 17th Edition of the Chicago Manual of Style? There is now an 18th Edition. 
 Thanks, 
 Bryan "Saracenus" Blumklotz 
 Last edited by Saracenus : Jun 13, 2025 
 Rollback Post to Revision 
 RollBack 
 To post a comment, please login or register a new account. 
 Posts Quoted: 
 Reply 
 Clear All Quotes 
 Home 
 D&D Beyond Forums 
 Dungeons & Dragons Discussion 
 Dungeon Masters Guild 
 Is there an update to the D&D Style Guide: Writing and Editing document yet? 
 Previous Thread 
 Jump to Forum 
 Next Thread 
 Our Terms of Service and Privacy Notice have recently been updated to provide greater clarity as to how disputes are handled and transparency regarding the collection and use of personal data. Please review them here:  Terms of Service ,  Privacy Notice . By continuing to use the services, you agree to the new Terms.
 Support 
 Help Portal 
 Support Forum 
 System Status 
 Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information 
 Your Privacy Choices 
 Cookie Notice 
 System Reference Document (SRD) 
 About 
 Contact Us 
 Careers 
 Wizards of the Coast 
 Credits 
 Find us on social media 
 Download the D&D Beyond App 
 © 2017- 2024  Wizards of the Coast LLC | All Rights Reserved 
 Dungeons & Dragons, D&D Beyond, D&D, Wizards of the Coast, the dragon ampersand, and all other Wizards of the Coast product names, campaign settings, their respective logos, and The World's Greatest Roleplaying Game are © and trademark Wizards of the Coast in the U.S.A. and other countries. © 2024 Wizards. 
 Privacy Policy
 Terms of Service
