‘A Milestone in BBC History? The 1955-56 Radio Dramatization of The 
Lord of the Rings’ 

Stuart D. Lee 

The 1955-56 BBC radio dramatization of The Lord of the Rings often only receives a minor 
mention in studies around the dramatization of Tolkien’s works1. The first series (‘Series 
One’), entitled ‘The Fellowship of the Ring’, was broadcast through November-December 
1955 and covered the first volume. Series Two (November/December 1956, by now entitled 
‘The Lord of the Rings’), completed the story by attempting all of The Two Towers and The 
Return of the King. Both series consisted of six episodes (c. 30-minutes each). Now 
overshadowed by the seminal BBC radio drama by Brian Sibley and Michael Bakewell in 
1981, and the films of the books, this adaptation is often only remembered for Tolkien’s 
intense dislike of it2. Moreover, as no recordings survive, it would seem there is little to 
discuss. This article will attempt to redress this using the scripts of the original series3, and 
correspondences held in the BBC Written Archives4. However, by way of an opening, this 
was the first attempt to portray any of Tolkien’s fiction through mass media5, and 
importantly it took place during Tolkien’s lifetime when the books were more or less ‘hot off 
the shelf’ (FR published July 1954, TT November 1954, and RK October 1955).  

The Lord of the Rings: Series One 

Tolkien had a long and strained relationship with the BBC dating back to his first 
interaction in 1936 (when part of his translation of Pearl was read on regional radio). The 
late 1940s and 1950s saw failed projects (e.g. a broadcast on Richard Rolle in 1949, or a 
biographical piece on Joseph Wright in 1955) and successful ones (e.g. his translation of Sir 
Gawain and the Green Knight aired 6/12/53, and The Homecoming of Beorhtnoth 
Beorhthelm’s Son, 3/12/54)6. This level of activity alone would be sufficient to demonstrate 
an ongoing, if often frustrating relationship between the broadcaster and Tolkien. However, 
in the middle of this there was the first ever dramatization of The Lord of the Rings. The 

1 The notable exception being Scull and Hammond – Reader, pp. 11-17. 
2 See his letter to Molly Waldron (30/11/55, Letters #175) where he wrote he had not 
enjoyed the broadcasts, describing Norman Shelley’s Bombadil as ‘dreadful’ and a mistaken 
description of Goldberry and Willowman as ‘worse still’. See also Letters #176, plus the 
comment in June 1957 (Letters #198) describing the BBC’s ‘sillification’. 
3 Scripts for Series One survive in paper (R71/289) and microfilm (R. P. Nos. TLO 16820, -
822, -821, TLO 17626, -643, 18653) at the BBC Written Archives, Caversham. I am extremely 
grateful to Samantha Blake, BBC Archivist, for her assistance. 
4 BBC Written Archives, R19/2194/2. 
5 Strictly speaking the first adaptation of The Return of the King at least was by Silvia Goodall 
School Scripts: Adventures in English (BBC Home Service, 19/1 - 22/3/56). This consisted of 
ten episodes: The Hobbits; The Old Forest; Strider; The Ring Goes South; Treebeard the Ent; 
Riders of Rohan; The Way to Mordor; The Siege of Minas Tirith; The Last Battle; Mount 
Doom. 
6 The latter was not liked by Tolkien though, see Letters #152. 

 
 
 
 
producer, Terence Tiller, may have first encountered Tolkien when he had been approached 
about producing Homecoming in 1954 (which he declined). However, what is clear is that by 
late 1954 (only a few months after the publication of FR and TT) a successful pitch was made 
to dramatize FR because on 25th January 1955 Tiller was already engaging the services of E. 
H. Wakeham (BBC Rights Department) to negotiate the necessary approvals and fees.  

Even at this stage Tolkien was voicing concerns about covering ‘390 pages’ in under 
five hours broadcast time but due to being ‘bogged down in the business of term, and the 
labours of producing VOL III’ he was unable to comment further (26/1/55, see Reader, p. 
12). He did add though that Rayner Unwin had given his approval. Tiller replied (2/2/55) 
noting Tolkien’s understandable request for more details before giving consent, explaining 
that ‘the dialogue of the original book would be preserved as far as possible’. A Narrator 
would be used to link scenes7, assisted by newly commissioned music8 for background and 
leit-motifs, as well as sound-effects. Importantly, at this stage it was envisaged that each of 
the six episodes would last 45 minutes (e.g. 4.5 hours in total), but even so Tiller 
acknowledged this could cover only a third of FR. Cutting would be necessary, especially for 
most of the songs, but he preferred this to excessive ‘summarising’. Tiller promised not to 
alter the narrative except ‘where the ear requires more information than the eye’ and cited 
his previous radio adaptions of Lewis’s ‘The Great Divorce’ and ‘The Pilgrim’s Regress’ as 
examples. 

Matters were seemingly resolved, permissions agreed, as well as a fee of £30 per 

performance (BBC memo, 1/3/55). By June drafts were ready (Tiller to Tolkien, 1/6/55) and 
both men met at the BBC Club to discuss progress (24/6/55). Allen & Unwin also sent Tiller 
draft versions of the Appendices and Maps for The Lord of the Rings (acknowledged 29/7/55 
thus 2-3 months before publication of RK). 

Importantly in the correspondences we have two interesting examples of Tolkien’s 

direct engagement with the script, giving further insights into his work. First, in a letter 
(stamped ‘5 Feb 1955’9) having noted he will instruct Allen & Unwin to approve, Tolkien 
recognised the need to cut the songs noting they were ‘seldom contributors to the action, 
but a means of depicting character or providing decorative background’. He added that 
though the songs ‘have no special music … one or two are written to ‘tunes’’, giving two 
examples – Sam’s ‘Troll-song’ which ‘goes to the old tune assoc. with “The Fox went out on 
a Winter’s night10”’ and the ‘Elvish chant (p.394) has in mind the tones used in the 
Lamentatio of Tenebrae11’. This indicates that when writing the ‘verse’ pieces scattered 

7 Brian Sibley explained that whilst the ‘Narrator’ has gone out of fashion in radio 
dramatizations, he also used one in 1981 (Gerard Murphy) as it allowed you to ‘capture the 
authorial voice of the book’, convey a sense of place and passing of time, move you across 
scenes (especially useful when the Fellowship splits up), and gave the listener a sense of the 
vastness of Middle-earth (Sibley, 2019).  
8 The composer Anthony Smith-Masters of Marlborough College was engaged. Some of this 
still survives and can be heard in ‘Tolkien: The Lost Recordings’ (see references). 
9 See Chronology, p.473. 
10 A traditional English folk song also called ‘The fox went out on a chilly night’. The structure 
is very similar to Sam’s with the refrain ‘down-o, down-o’ (and similar). See, for example, 
Peter Adamson: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SDTBV3lppQQ. 
11 ‘Tenebrae’ is the service of darkness leading up to Easter. A Gregorian reciting tone is 
traditionally used that conjures up a feeling of sadness. 

 
throughout The Lord of the Rings, most did not have a defined music to accompany them, 
but at least two did drawing their inspiration from English folk-music and Catholic reciting 
tones. 

Second, is a letter sent to Tiller (10/9/55 – see Figure 1-3, and also Reader, pp. 12-

13). Tolkien is responding to a request about accents to help the actors12. Referencing ‘Vol iii 
p 408 and 411’ and ‘characterization in my text’ he observed ‘the Hobbit ‘gentry’ should not 
be made rustical in actual tones and accents’, adding their ‘divergence from High Speech is 
cast rather in forms of grammar and idiom: they just speak unstudied modern English’. 
Merry and Pippin (‘two young hobbits of the highest birth in the land’) should sound like 
Frodo (whose ‘superior linguistic skill would be exhibited only in Elvish’), and he was 
vehemently against ‘anything more than the merest tinge of “country” (if any) in their 
speech’. Comparing ‘gentlehobbits’ with ‘the Great’ the difference is more ‘one of period … 
than dialect’ with the Great using ‘a more archaic language (when functioning as the Great)’ 
and speaking ‘with greater solemnity and precision’, whereas Hobbits ‘just use our own 
rather slack colloquial’.  

Tolkien noted Sam and Butterbur (‘Breelandians, Men and Hobbits were in the same 

linguistic position’) could be given ‘a “country accent” of some kind – fairly but not too 
strongly marked’ but was concerned at a mention of “West-Country” which ‘since 
Elizabethan days … seems to have been favoured as ‘stage dialect’ though not often with 
any local or historical accuracy’. Whilst he recognised the text purports to be a ‘translation 
into modern terms of a vanished past’ any ‘accent’ should be consistent and could be 
‘vaguely “countrified”’ but at all costs it should be noted he had avoided making ‘the 
dropping or misuse of h a feature of any kind of hobbit-speech’ and wanted this observed. 
Moreover Tolkien would ‘passionately’ not want any ‘supposedly ‘Zummerzet’ z/v for s/f’. 
To help, Tolkien suggested ‘the pronunciation of r as a main characterizing detail’ with 
‘Hobbit-gentry’ speaking as we do ‘at our most unstudied’; Sam, ‘in addition to a rustic tone 
and vowel-colouring should use the burred (or reverted) r’; The Great, and the Elves, ‘should 
sound their rs as a trill (though not with a Scots extravagance) in all positions’ which he 
observed was ‘a great enhancement of English, as well as now having an archaic flavour.’ 

12 See Chronology, p.500. Tolkien obviously had an ear for such things– see his comments on 
the dialect tones in Homecoming in a letter (22/9/54) to Heppenstall – Letters #152, and 
also his ‘parlour game’ recorded in Quirke, 2016. 

 
 
Figures 1-3: Letter from Tolkien to Tiller (10/9/55). © The Tolkien Estate. 

 
 
Tiller sent Tolkien the scripts (21/9/55) with the news of enforced further 
compression as each episode had now been reduced to 30-minutes. He expected shock ‘at 
the extent of the cutting’ and noted that ‘inevitably a great deal of the flavour of your work 
has been lost.’ Tiller had therefore ‘telescope[d]’ incidents and simplified ‘geographical 
details and similar intricacies’ concluding – ‘I hope that the main themes of your work have 
not been totally obscured or mutilated beyond reason’. Tolkien replied (27/9/55, see 
Reader, p. 13-14), remarking that ‘I do not think that with the time at your disposal you 
could have done any better’. He admitted that ‘a weakness of the books is the necessity of 
historical build-up concurrent with the tale of the events’ and that this presents an even 
greater weakness in dramatic form. That said the script now read as ‘much more of a “fairy 
tale” in the ordinary sense’ and the Hobbits seemed ‘sillier’ and others ‘more stilted’. As the 
author he now realised there were few, if any, ‘unnecessary details in the long narrative’ 
and their cutting deprived ‘the story of significance at some later point.’ Whilst it couldn’t 
‘be helped’ Tolkien provided suggestions for the abridgements in Episodes two and six13. In 
the archives the former survives, relating to the attack on Weathertop. Figure 4 shows 
Tolkien’s suggestions and the subsequent script (note Director’s timings) is in Figure 5. 
Tolkien offered two solutions (A and B) with ‘A’ preferred ‘because F.[rodo] was in no 
condition to give a detailed description, and because Narrator can do it better anyway.’ 
Someone has written ‘Please Type’ across Version A (‘giving description of Wraiths to 
Narrator’) and Figure 5 confirms that Tolkien’s suggestions were used. A comparison with 
the original text in FR (FR, I, xi) shows that Tolkien also recognised the need, when 
dramatizing, to balance the Narrator with the characters, and to speed the action along. 

Tiller replied (6/10/55) relieved at Tolkien’s ‘tolerant and understanding letter’, and 

agreed that nothing in the books was ‘superfluous’ and cutting had been ‘painful’. Tiller 
hoped it would not come across as a ‘mere “fairy-tale”’ or ‘empty fantasy’ but in an odd 
disregard for Tolkien’s letter of the 10th September (above) suggested that Sam, Merry, and 
Pippin would have strong ‘West-country accents’.  

Scripts were then sent out to the actors, studios booked, and the production was in 

full swing. Rehearsals were on the weekend of broadcast (Tolkien was invited to attend 
these but never did). Tiller clearly recognised the importance of the work, and writing to 
Frank Phillips (11/11/55) he remarked: 

The implications of The Lord of the Rings are far deeper than those of a fairy-tale. The 
trilogy has created a totally new mythology, with great relevance to the contemporary 
spiritual situation. 

13 See also Chronology, p.501. 

 
 
 
Figure 4: Tolkien’s suggestions for changes to the script. ©The Tolkien Estate 

 
 
Figure 5: Extract from Director’s script. ©BBC. 

 
 
 
 
 
Series One: Episode Summaries 
The following presents a brief description and commentary on each episode. The timings 
are from the paper scripts assumed to be the Director’s (as they contains notes such as 
‘check pronunciation of Gloin’). Numbers in parenthesis are the script page numbers – each 
page would have taken on average around 90 seconds to read. 

1.  ‘The Meaning of the Ring’. The Narrator introduces ‘Hobbits’, cutting to Bilbo (2-3) 

who summarises The Hobbit and the episode with Gollum. Bilbo invites Frodo to stay 
(3-4) and we move quickly to the Birthday party. The Narrator explains Bilbo’s 
vanishing (4-6), Bilbo discusses his plans with Gandalf, departs, and Gandalf meets 
Frodo (7-9). The Narrator is used to summarise Frodo’s time in The Shire, and then 
introduces ‘strange happenings’ linked to ‘Mordor’. Gandalf comments ‘Mordor. 
There it was said, the Dark Tower had been rebuilt …’, he returns and discusses the 
Ring with Frodo (11-19, c.14 minutes). Sam is discovered eavesdropping, and Frodo 
resolves to go to Rivendell.  

2.  ‘Black Riders and Others’. The Narrator describes the selling of Bag End, and the 

departure from the Shire. The Hobbits hide from the Nazgûl (2-3) and the action is 
conveyed through dialogue14: 

Pippin: That’s not Gandalf! Look at Him. 
Sam: Not in that black hood. You can’t see his face, even; only his boots. 
Pippin: He’s not looking for us – he’s – smelling for us. Sniffing …  
Frodo: Don’t let him see us. Don’t breathe. 

Gildor and the Elves arrive (3-5), the Hobbits then meet Farmer Maggot (6), and then 
Merry at the river-ferry (8). They discuss plans (9-11) and set off into the Old Forest. 
They encounter Old Man Willow (13), are saved by Tom Bombadil and taken to his 
house to meet Goldberry (13-16). They spend time with Tom (c.6 minutes). 

3.  ‘Aragorn’. The Hobbits leave Tom but fall asleep on the Downs. Frodo gets lost, 
wakes in a Barrow (2), and a Wight calls to him. The Narrator provides the 
description (drawn from FR, I, viii):  

A tall figure … like a shadow against the stars. He [Frodo] thought there were 
two eyes, very cold though lit with a pale light that seemed to come from some 
remote distance. 

Frodo sees the other Hobbits asleep. The directions note this should be 
accompanied by a song ‘immeasurably sad and dreary, cold and miserable and 
horrible, sometimes high in the air and thin, sometimes like a low moan from the 
ground’. The Barrow-wight sings: ‘Cold be hand and heart and bone …’ (FR, I, viii), 
and Frodo sees the moving dismembered arm (4) and strikes it. Frodo (clumsily) 
remarks ‘Oh dear! I still haven’t killed the Barrow-Wight …’. He summons Tom, who 

14 Italics indicates this dialogue is not in the original text. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
arrives (‘Frodo: Daylight! And the barrow has fallen wide open! And here’s Tom 
Bombadil himself!’). Tom dismisses the Wight, frees the Hobbits, and gives them 
daggers from the hoard. The Hobbits leave (7) and arrive at The Prancing Pony (8) 
where they meet Aragorn (8-15) ending with Merry saying he has seen the Black 
Riders. They leave Bree after the attack by the Nazgûl and arrive at Weathertop. The 
fight on Weathertop is described by the Narrator (19 – see above). They fly to 
Rivendell, meet Glorfindel, and Frodo encounters the Nazgûl at the Ford (24).  

4.  ‘Many Meetings’ –Frodo wakes and discusses events with Gandalf (c. 7 minutes). He 
meets Sam, Glóin, and Bilbo (5-9) and the rest of the episode covers the Council of 
Elrond (see below). Characters such as Galdor and Glorfindel are given speaking 
parts, and the episode ends with Frodo volunteering to take the Ring. 

5.  ‘The Moria Gate’ – The Fellowship forms and departs Rivendell (1-4). They journey to 
Caradhras, are attacked by Wargs (5-7), then go to Moria (9) and are attacked by the 
lake creature before entering the gates (11). The remainder of the episode is the 
journey through Moria but the whole Chamber of Mazarbul scene is omitted. They 
arrive at bridge of Khazad-dûm, Gandalf fights the Balrog, and the remnants of the 
Fellowship escape. 

6.  ‘The Breaking of the Fellowship’ – The Fellowship arrives at Lórien (1), they meet 

Haldir (1-5), and then Galadriel and Celeborn. The scenes of the Mirror of Galadriel 
(6-7), Galadriel’s gift-giving (9), and the departure (10) are covered. Legolas shoots at 
the Winged Beast (11), and then the Fellowship rests. Boromir attempts to take Ring 
(13), but Frodo escapes and he departs with Sam. The episode ends with the 
Narrator saying:  

So Frodo and Sam set off on the last stage of the Quest together; and the River 
bore them swiftly away. At length they came to the southern slope of the 
dividing mountains. They drew their boat out, shouldered their burdens, and set 
off – down into the Land of Shadow. 

Directions indicate ‘Ring music’ at the close, which changes to ‘Mordor music’ but 
ends on ‘hopeful fade’.  

The Lord of the Rings: Series Two 
The idea of commissioning a dramatization of the remaining two volumes appeared 
relatively early on. In a note from Tiller to the composer Smith-Masters (11/1/56) he 
observed ‘Tolkien was not wildly enthusiastic about the programmes, but he is at least 
willing to let me adapt Volumes 2 and 3 … so he can’t have been really displeased.’ A week 
later C. Holme (Chief Assistant, Third Programme) wrote to Tiller, commenting on the 
success of Series One (though he noted he was ‘the only enthusiast over here for Tolkien’s 
book’), but that the chances of securing another 12 programmes were slim. Holme asked if 
‘the rest cannot be done in six of 30 minutes each’ observing that: 

Volume 2 is more homogeneous than Volume 1, and could therefore be represented 
by fewer episodes, whereas Volume 3 is not only shorter in itself than the other two, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
but could be shorter still in adaptation by ending it with the victory and restoration of 
Gondor …15 

He suggested the return to the Shire and final departure to the West could be treated as an 
epilogue, omitted altogether, or ‘disposed of in a few lines of narration’. 

Tiller (25/1/56) was ‘appalled at the cutting that would be necessary’ but agreed six 
programmes would be better than leaving the whole thing unfinished. Approval was gained 
in March, but in the archives all that then survives is a letter from Tiller to Tolkien (17/9/56) 
where the former admits ‘cuts would have to be more drastic’. The first three scripts were 
sent to Tolkien (1/11/56) with Tiller noting the task had been ‘formidable’, as he felt he 
could not simply concentrate on Frodo and Sam, and he was therefore forced to ‘script-in’ 
his own narration more than in the first series. Tiller concluded by asking about the accents 
of the Rohirrim, Orcs, and the people of Minas Tirith. Tolkien replied on the matter of the 
accents the next day (Letters #193, and Reader, pp.16-17); and on 6th November he 
followed up with comments on the three scripts (Letters #194, Reader, p. 17). Tolkien 
resignedly accepted that Tiller had done his best, but asked ‘why this sort of treatment was 
allowed’ as he felt the text now came across as ‘simple-minded’ and would be confusing 
(exactly the reaction recorded by listeners – see below). Whilst he admitted he lacked 
experience ‘in the medium’ he felt more could be made of the Narrator through the reading 
of longer descriptive passages. Fundamentally Tolkien clearly was having second thoughts 
as to whether the books could be dramatized at all – even though he had been reasonably 
complementary about Series One to Tiller. The epic scale of the text suggested to him that it 
could not, but he concluded by noting Tiller ‘had a very hard task’.  

Series Two: Episode Summaries16 

1.  ‘Fangorn’. The Narrator summarises Series One and then cuts to Boromir’s death 

(who dies without speaking to Aragorn). The hunt for Merry and Pippin is described 
in a single paragraph and by p.3 the Riders of Rohan have appeared followed by a 
conversation with Éomer. Pippin and Merry are held by the Orcs until the attack by 
the Riders (7-8). The Hobbits escape and meet Treebeard, followed swiftly by the 
Moot (9-14). The episode closes with Aragorn, Legolas, and Gimli meeting Gandalf 
who describes his fight with the Balrog. 

2.  ‘Rohan and Isengard’. The Narrator describes the approach to Edoras, and the 

meeting with Théoden and Wormtongue (1-3). Within two pages (4-5) Théoden has 
escaped his bewitchment, the Rohirrim have ridden to Helm’s deep, and the battle is 
waged and completed. Pages 6-13 give more time to the ride to Isengard, meeting 
Merry and Pippin, and the exchanges with Saruman. The company return to Helm’s 
Deep and Pippin looks into the Palantir (14-15). Aragorn takes the Palantir and a 
winged Nazgûl is sighted.  

15 See Reader, pp.15-16. It is worth noting that this is the ending, in a sense, that Peter 
Jackson also chose, i.e. omitting The Scouring of the Shire. 
16 Scripts only survive on Microfilm. 

 
 
 
  
 
 
3.  ‘Into the Dark’. The Narrator begins by describing Frodo and Sam ‘on the brink of a 

tall cliff’. Sam remarks (1): 

What a fix! That’s the one place, in all the lands we’ve heard of, that we don’t 
want to see any closer; and that’s the one place we’re trying to get to. (TT, IV, I) 

With Frodo supplying ‘Mordor!’. They meet Gollum and then journey (4-5) to Cirith 
Gorgor where Gollum reveals there is ‘another way’. The Narrator quickly covers the 
journey and adds bluntly ‘And there they were captured by a band of tall men’. 
Faramir, Mablung, and Frodo talk (7-10) and Gollum is discovered at the waterfall. 
The Hobbits depart, fight Shelob (12-16), and Frodo is taken by Gorbag and Shagrat 
(17). The episode ends with Sam beating at the doors (in effect the end of The Two 
Towers) and the Narrator saying ‘Frodo was alive but taken by the Enemy’. 

4.  ‘The Siege of Gondor’. Gandalf and Pippin ride to Minas Tirith, meet Denethor, and 
Pippin swears his oath of allegiance (2). Pippin meets Beregond (3), and plays with 
Bergil (4-5). The Narrator cuts back to the Rohirrim, where the troops meet Halbarad 
and the Rangers who remind Aragorn ‘If thou art in haste, remember the Paths of 
the Dead’. They ride to Dunharrow and enter the Paths of Dead (7-8). The Narrator 
describes Théoden meeting Hirgon, the messenger from Minas Tirith with the Red 
Arrow, and Éowyn/Dernhelm equips Merry (10). In Gondor Pippin and Beregond see 
the Nazgûl (11), there is Faramir’s flight and Gandalf’s intervention (described by the 
Narrator). Faramir, Gandalf, and Denethor meet with the latter becoming more 
sinister (‘witless halfling’). The Narrator says that ‘battle was joined beneath the 
walls of the City itself’ and Faramir is wounded (13). Denethor builds his pyre, and 
the Lord of the Nazgûl enters the city at which point Rohan arrives (14-16). 

5.  ‘Minas Tirith & Mount Doom’. The Narrator summarises the action so far, followed 
by the dramatized death of Théoden, and a narrated end of the battle. We move to 
the Houses of Healing (4-5), and Gimli and Legolas tell Merry and Pippin of their 
journey. The Council (in effect a short speech by Gandalf) meets and then the 
Narrator describes the approach to the Gates of Mordor (6), the Mouth of Sauron 
(7), followed by a description of the battle and Pippin’s fight with the Troll. We 
return to Sam (8), and the action in the tower and discovery of Frodo (9-11). The two 
dress as Orcs with a suggestion that Frodo and Sam hear the death of the Witch King 
(11-12). They arrive at Mount Doom and the Ring is destroyed (13-14); the whole 
action with Gollum is covered in a less than a minute. The episode concludes with 
Frodo’s ‘Here at the end of all things’. 

6.  ‘Many Partings’. The Narrator describes the end of the battle and the fall of Sauron 
(2). Sam wakes to find Gandalf and Frodo (2). Aragorn is crowned at the Fields of 
Cormallen (3-4); then Aragorn and Arwen, and Éowyn and Faramir are married 
(narrated). This is followed by the departure of the company for Isengard where they 
meet Treebeard (5). Aragorn, Galadriel, and Celeborn depart (6) and the remainder 
arrive at Rivendell. They head for Bree and meet Butterbur (7); and then we have the 
Scouring of the Shire and death of Saruman (8-13). The Narrator describes the 
rebuilding process, the marriage of Sam and Rosie, and Frodo asking Sam to join him 

 
 
 
 
 
(14). They journey to the Grey Havens, Frodo departs (15-16), and Sam returns to 
the Shire. The episode closes with Sam’s ‘Well, I’m back …’. 

Reception 
The broadcast of the two series was without publicity (certainly compared with 198117). The 
Radio Times ran no feature, and the shows were simply listed with a tagline, and credits. 
Both series also suffered from inconsistent broadcast times and were up against stiff 
competition – Series One went out at the same time as ‘Quatermass II’ and ‘What’s my 
line?’ on television, and ‘The Archers’ and other shows on radio; whilst Series Two coincided 
with the opening of the Melbourne Olympics. 

But how were they received by critics, Tolkien, and listeners? Beginning with the 

1955 broadcasts Paul Ferris of The Observer (20/11/55, p.10) described it as ‘the best light 
listening for the next five weeks’ having the ‘pure quality of fairy-tale … charming without 
being slight’. In an uncatalogued newspaper clipping in Caversham another review (‘The 
Meaning of the Ring’ 15/11/55) noted Tolkien’s ‘relaxed, vivid, and masculine style with its 
rich coinages in the names of the creatures’ adapted naturally to radio and his ‘power of 
unfolding the matter holds the attention even when he is being expository.’  

Tolkien himself appeared balanced in his views (at least to Tiller). In a letter 
(8/12/55) he observed The Times ‘was appreciative’18, but he was angered by the BBC show 
‘The Critics’ (‘they were intolerable with a superiority that only ignorance can maintain’19). 
He noted he had received many letters expressing enjoyment with the production and that 
‘non-readers got a great deal out of it’. It had gone down especially well with older children 
with the only complaint being the late time of broadcast20. Tolkien thought most of the 
criticism he had seen was ‘silly’ (especially that the Hobbits should ‘pipe and squeak’ asking 
rhetorically ‘Why should tones rise with fall in stature?’). He felt the Elves were ‘managed 
excellently’ as was the Council of Elrond (‘masterly’), but criticised Bilbo (he sounded 
‘bored’), and the announcer’s mistake in stating Goldberry was Tom’s daughter and that Old 
Man Willow was an ally of Mordor21. He liked Glóin’s accent but added it was a bit ‘heavily 
laid on’ noting ‘dwarves spoke the Common Tongue natively, like Jews, but they had a 
uvular back R’. He pondered about another series suggesting ‘Vol ii might go even better in 
this form.’ 

Tiller replied (12/12/55) taking full responsibility for the Announcer’s mistake over 

Goldberry’s relationship with Tom Bombadil, but he noted it was never fully explained in the 

17 See, for example, Eric Fraser’s specially designed cover for the Radio Times - 
https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p01h96nf/p01gz0qt. 
18 Though this may be referring to the review in The Times on the 3rd November for RK. See 
Reader, p.14. 
19 ‘The Critics’ seemingly discussed the dramatization (20/11/55) but no recording survives. 
See also Letters #177 where, writing to Rayner Unwin, Tolkien notes he agreed with their 
view of the dramatization (but no indication of whether this was positive or negative) but 
was annoyed when they admitted they had not read the book. 
20 Other correspondences to Tiller from listeners make the same complaint. For timings see 
‘Programme Details’ below. 
21 The offending lines were ‘Opening Announcement: … He [Sauron] has other allies too, 
from one of which the hobbits have been rescued by the strange and ancient power of Tom 
Bombadil. With Bombadil and his daughter Goldberry, the hobbits find temporary shelter.’ 

 
 
 
book asking ‘Who is she?’. Tiller also agreed that the reaction ‘without the BBC’ had been 
very positive and he would submit a proposal for ‘Volume Two’. Tolkien replied (15/12/55) 
acknowledging ‘that not all is in the ‘book’’ and that he had quite forgotten ‘that Bombadil’s 
adventures as set out in the Oxford Magazine of 1934 (!) were not included’ (in effect 
excusing Tiller of the Goldberry mistake). He added that ‘Gimli was v. good, and C. S. Lewis 
who heard the last ‘fit’ agreed’. Again, positively, he concluded he would ‘like to have the 
thing continued – if you are the producer.’ This balanced praise does seem at odds, 
however, with Tolkien’s more private criticisms in his letters noted earlier.  

When it comes to the reaction of listeners there are full reports attached to the 

scripts – results of surveys by the BBC’s Audience Research Department. Four survive for 
Series One (episodes 1, 2, 3, and 6) and two for Series Two (episodes 1 and 6). These list 
audience size, an ‘appreciation index’, and a summary description complete with 
anonymised feedback. For both series it was estimated that 0.1% of the adult population 
heard them, and the appreciation index for Series One began at 56 rising to 64 by episode 
six (against an average for a Third Programme drama of 65), but Series Two never rose 
above 59.  

Considering the direct feedback recorded there is a clear difference between Series 

One and Two. With Series One, whilst compression was commented on it (especially in 
terms of reducing the atmosphere) it is notable how positive most comments were 
especially around the performances. One reader, in a direct letter to Tiller, described it as 
‘’The Archers’ of the Third Programme, a milestone in BBC history’. Some expected the 
Hobbits to have ‘high pitch voices’ though (see Tolkien’s comments on this noted earlier) 
and a few objected to Victor Platt’s Sam (with his ‘BBC Mummersetshire’ accent). Most 
interestingly though was the clear divide the programme engendered. There were those 
who simply objected to time wasted on a ‘children’s story’ (‘if we must occupy the Third 
Programme with fairy tales then let us have Enid Blyton’ – ‘Chemical Manager’). Then there 
were the comments from listeners who were frustrated because they simply did not ‘get it’. 
Was it an allegory, for example? ‘One expected satire, or recognisable symbolism’ 
complained a ‘Lecturer in English’ and a ‘Clerk in Holy Orders’ found it without ‘mythological 
overtones, or anything, so far as I could see.’ As the series closed it was noted as a ‘brave 
effort’, with some listeners having now found ‘a pertinent allegorical meaning’ (good versus 
evil) and wanting more (‘You just can’t leave it at this point!’). But again there were 
criticisms. The summary reports some listeners disliking ‘the naive acceptance of witchcraft 
and the convenient intervention of various ‘Dei ex machine’ at crucial points’ and, as they 
saw it, ‘stereotyped characters of the conventional fairy-story’. 

Series Two was criticized much more. Added to those who saw it as childish, were 
non-readers of the book who were just confused, or fans of Tolkien who described it as an 
‘absolute ruin’, ‘a farce’, with ‘ignominious’ compression that resulted in a ‘juvenile 
adventure story’. As one reader commented (a ‘Civil Servant’) ‘The result was the 
conversion of a glorious, rich, detailed, and self-consistent narrative into a footling and 
ridiculous sounding adventure story of the “with one bound Jack was free” type.’ 

1981 and all that 
Is it possible to compare the 1955-56 dramatization with Sibley and Bakewell’s or, indeed, 
the films of Peter Jackson? At first, due to the lack of recordings this may seem pointless – 
outside of the reader reports we have no way to compare Ian Holm’s 1981 Frodo, for 
example, with that of Oliver Burt; or Ian McKellen’s Gandalf with Norman Shelley’s. 

 
 
 
Furthermore, the enforced compression of Series Two that so enraged listeners would 
suggest any comparison would be aligning apples with pears. However, considering Series 
One alongside the equivalent episodes from 1981 and the 2001 film is more fruitful. In 
terms of running time the six episodes in 1955 equated to just under three hours in total 
before Frodo and Sam’s departure at the end of the first volume. In 1981 ‘The Breaking of 
the Fellowship’ was the tenth episode (of 26 thirty-minute broadcasts, or in the one-hour 
episode versions the sixth episode of thirteen). So 1981 allotted five hours to what was 
covered in three hours in 1955. Interestingly, Jackson covered the same in 2 hours 58 
minutes in 2001 (cinema version).  

As noted Tolkien singled out for praise the 1955 dramatization of The Council of 

Elrond which when reading feels more like a play cutting back and forth between dialogue. 
In the dramatization this begins in effect with the Narrator stating ‘Next morning, the 
Council of Elrond assembled’ at just around 16 minutes in, and ended (28’15”) with Sam’s ‘A 
nice little pickle we have landed ourselves in, Mr Frodo!’ – so running to 12’15”. In 1981 the 
‘Council’ began with Elrond’s ‘Welcome, welcome …’ and again ran until Sam’s comment 
(total length  16’14”). In the film, however, the scene only runs for 6’30” (although some of 
the back-story of the Ring covered during the Council in the book had appeared in earlier 
scenes).  

As a rule of thumb then Series One in the 1955 dramatization was compressed by 
about two-thirds compared with 1981, but tended to match the filmed version in length 
(though lengthy descriptions of landscape and action can, of course, be dispensed with 
through images and pan shots). Notably though 1955 did include the dramatization of Tom 
Bombadil and the Barrow-wights which, despite Tolkien’s criticism of Shelley’s performance, 
still reads reasonably well (but, as a consequence, gave even less time for the rest of the 
book). Bombadil was cut in the 2001 film, and also in 1981 (though Sibley did offer a 
dramatisation in ‘Tales from the Perilous Realm’ for Radio 4, 1992). Sibley (2019) noted that 
Bombadil had been omitted partly out of necessity (he felt to do it properly would have 
required one hour), partly because it was possible to do so without affecting the text, but 
most importantly because from the point where the Black Riders appear in the Shire the 
‘story is set and running’ and there is a ‘sense of chase’ up to Rivendell. Bombadil would 
have felt like a lull in this. Moreover with the 30-minute episode format each one required a 
cliff-hanger ending and it was not clear how to do this. 

In summary, 1955-56 should certainly be seen as a first ‘brave attempt’ (noted by a 

listener) but also a lost opportunity. The performances, on the whole, were well received 
and the script (apart from a few clumsy interventions) showed signs of promise dashed 
mainly by the need for compression. Had the books been out longer and become more 
established then perhaps the BBC senior managers would have agreed to each episode 
lasting 45 minutes, and even running to three series. This in turn may have encouraged 
Tolkien to be more engaged with the process and to have led to more insights from him on 
the adaptation; but alas, it was not to be. Even then Tolkien, despite some obvious 
reservations, found Series One well done in places. One can only imagine the delight he 
would have had in hearing the 1981 version with its much longer running time, better 
writing, and better production quality. 

Programme Details 
For cast list see - 
http://tolkiengateway.net/wiki/The_Lord_of_the_Rings_(1955_radio_series). 

 
 
 
 
Figure 6: The Radio Times entry for 14th November, 1955 

First Series (1955) 
Broadcast BBC Third Programme: 14/11, 21/11, 29/11, 4/12, 11/12, 18/12 (10.10pm, 9.50pm, 
7.10pm, 9.30pm, 8.00pm, 7.20pm; repeated 15/11, 23/11, 30/11, 5/12, 12/12, 21/12 (6.40pm, 
7.00pm, 9.40pm, 6.35pm, 6.20pm, 7.20pm) 

Second Series (cast as First Series but with additions) (1956) 
Broadcast BBC Third Programme: 19/11, 26/11, 2/12, 9/12, 16/12, 23/12 (10.30pm, 10.40pm, 
8.45pm, 8.05pm, 5.25pm, 10.05pm); repeated 22/11, 29/11, 7/12, 12/12, 18/12, 27/12 (7.50pm, 
6.45pm, 7.20pm, 6.15pm, 7.10pm, 6.00pm).  

References 
‘Archive on 4 – Tolkien: The Lost Recordings’, BBC Radio 4 (2016), 
https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b07mvd5z 

Quirke, Antonia. ‘The Wizard of Oxford’. New Statesman, 145(5327), 12-18 August 2016, p. 
55. 

Scull, Christina, and Hammond, Wayne G. The J. R. R. Tolkien Companion and Guide. 3 vols. 
Reader’s Guide Parts 1 and 2, and Chronology. (London: HarperCollins, 2017). Referred to as 
Reader and Chronology. 

Sibley, Brian. Telephone Interview with Stuart Lee, unpublished. (6th September, 2019). 

–  Blog, http://briansibleytheworks.blogspot.com/ 

Tolkien, J. R. R. The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien. Ed. H. Carpenter (London: HarperCollins, 2002).  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
