 Tolkien on Film - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Essay summaries 3 Publication history 4 Reception Toggle Reception subsection 4.1 Of the whole book 4.2 Of specific essays 5 See also 6 References 7 Sources Toggle the table of contents Tolkien on Film Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Switch to legacy parser Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scholarly book Tolkien on Film: Essays on Peter Jackson's Lord of the Rings First edition, with a drawing of a strip of film emerging from Tolkien's pipe Editor Janet Brennan Croft Author see text Language English Subject Tolkien studies Genre Scholarly essays Publisher Mythopoeic Press Publication date 2004 Media type Paperback Pages 323 ISBN 978-1-887726-09-2 Tolkien on Film: Essays on Peter Jackson's Lord of the Rings is a 2004 collection of literary studies essays edited by Janet Brennan Croft . It discusses Peter Jackson's interpretation of The Lord of the Rings in his 2001–2003 film trilogy based on J. R. R. Tolkien 's fantasy book. The collection was seen as quite negative by scholars. The film scholar Kristin Thompson felt that the book's denigration of Jackson was disappointing, and that too many of the essays were catalogues of differences between film and book, complete with adverse commentary. In her view, these made the error of assuming that Jackson was trying to be as faithful as possible to the book and failing, while Thompson argued that Jackson was aiming to please a modern audience, making intentional changes to achieve this goal. Other scholars gave mixed responses, while noting that the collection represents the many Tolkien scholars and fans who do not feel that the films succeeded in representing Tolkien's book. Background [ edit ] J. R. R. Tolkien was an English philologist and professor of English interested in medieval literature at the University of Oxford , and a Roman Catholic . [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] In 1954–55, he published the three volumes of his fantasy The Lord of the Rings ; sales have exceeded 150 million copies. [ 4 ] In 2001–2003, the New Zealand film director Peter Jackson released a big-budget film trilogy of The Lord of the Rings . His interpretation of the book differed markedly from the themes expressed by Tolkien , evoking strong reactions from film-goers, Tolkien fans, and scholars alike. [ 5 ] The essay collection Tolkien on Film was the first to be produced in reaction to the film trilogy, appearing in 2004. [ 6 ] In a note to the Second Printing, the book's editor Janet Brennan Croft wrote that "This collection remains, we feel, the most important gathering of criticism on the film from a literary studies perspective, as opposed to a film studies perspective. Film studies has different aims and concerns, a different vocabulary, and different theoretical underpinnings from those a reader will encounter in this book." [ 7 ] Accordingly, the essays in the book are mostly written by scholars, not film critics (J. E. Smyth excepted); apart from Croft herself, the authors include the Tolkien scholars David Bratman and Jane Chance , the scholar of fantasy Amy H. Sturgis , and the fantasy author Diana Paxson . [ 6 ] Essay summaries [ edit ] The essays Part Author Discipline Title Summary Introduction Janet Brennan Croft Tolkien scholar Introduction The editor states that the "blockbuster" films generated varied reactions from viewers, readers of Tolkien's book, and scholars. Views range from delight at the films' success and awards, to finding them "profoundly antithetical, or even sacrilegious, to Tolkien's text and themes and almost too painful to watch." She states that "we tried to solicit strong and convincingly argued opinions on all sides", accepting that "not all the views ... will be to every reader's taste." Film history J.E. Smyth Film critic The Three Ages of Imperial Cinema from the Death of Gordon to The Return of the King Smyth compares the themes of Jackson's films to those of the 1939 The Four Feathers by Alexander and Zoltan Korda , and to the 1962 Lawrence of Arabia by David Lean . She states that the Great War and the fall of the British Empire marked these films, and that Jackson's films mark the rebirth of "heroic imperialism" facing enemies in the East. Adaptation / Revision David Bratman Tolkien scholar Summa Jacksonica: A Reply to Defenses of Peter Jackson's The Lord of the Rings Films, after St. Thomas Aquinas Bratman presents points made by others in defence of Jackson's approach, and attempts to refute each one in the style of Aquinas. He criticises numerous aspects of the book, but states that he likes Jackson's Boromir , and his handling of the Wormtongue - Éowyn relationship, and especially Frodo and Gandalf 's discussion of "the moral question of Gollum ", and Éowyn's "defiant speech on fearing being locked up in a cage". Janet Brennan Croft Tolkien scholar Mithril Coats and Tin Ears: "Anticipation" and "Flattening" in Peter Jackson's The Lord of the Rings Trilogy Croft notes that fans of the book were often "deeply disappointed" by the films. She suggests that the reason is that where Tolkien subtly builds tension, Jackson "habit[ually]" gives away what will happen, just like Morton Zimmerman's script, which Tolkien disliked. Croft argues that both men "flatten[ed]" Tolkien's characters, dialogue, and plot. Diana Paxson Fantasy author Re-vision: The Lord of the Rings in Print and on Screen Paxson writes that people usually "receive a book or a film as holy writ, direct from the mind of the maker, but it takes time for a work's creator to see it thus." She compares Tolkien's and Jackson's creative processes , noting that both, as seen in Christopher Tolkien 's The History of The Lord of the Rings and the extended versions of Jackson's films, continually "re-vision[ed]" the story. Heroes and Leaders Kayla McKinney Wiggins Scholar of Folklore The Art of the Story-Teller and the Person of the Hero Wiggins writes that "If Tolkien's novel is epic fantasy, Jackson's interpretations of it are epic films." She finds their vision and execution "grand", and the extensive battle scenes "quite impressive". But she feels that Tolkien's focus on "narrative and the gradual evolution of character" is "largely lost" in the film version. In her view, Jackson misses Tolkien's treatment of Aragorn as an "epic hero" and of Frodo as an " Everyman " "fairy tale hero". Instead, Jackson "offers the conflicted, modern protagonist, smaller in scope and lesser in nature." Daniel Timmons Tolkien scholar Frodo on Film: Peter Jackson's Problematic Portrayal Timmons writes that Jackson's portrayal of the Hobbit protagonist Frodo, played by Elijah Wood , "diverges from the letter and spirit of Tolkien's book". Timmons suggests that this is to appeal to filmgoers, "used to frenetic melodrama and staged suspense". Frodo's "humble and heroic trials" are replaced by "a reconstructed and flawed" account, making him "a common individual", "divested ... of his unique and noble character". However, the final scene of the film trilogy, Timmons writes, goes back to "Tolkien's great book" for its "poignant and powerful ending", as Frodo sails off into the West , to what Tolkien calls "a far green country under a swift sunrise". Judith Kollmann Scholar of English Elisions and Ellipses: Counsel and Council in Tolkien's and Jackson's The Lord of the Rings Jackson's versions of the Council of Elrond at Rivendell , and Gandalf's council at Minas Tirith ("The Last Debate"), are "abbreviated" and radically modified. The Council of Elrond is compressed to a short argument, emphasising a reluctant Aragorn, not Frodo. The Last Debate, without the Princes of Gondor, becomes a casual meeting of friends within the Fellowship of the Ring ; and it is Aragorn, not Gandalf, who sets out the seemingly reckless approach, to go and fight Mordor at the Black Gate . A Woman's Part Jane Chance Tolkien scholar Tolkien's Women (and Men): The Films and the Book In Chance's view, Jackson shifts the story's "focus from Frodo's hero-journey ... to the love story of Arwen and Aragorn". This "subordinates and devalues ... Tolkien's key theme of the ennoblement of the ordinary to the more ordinary marriage of the nobility." She notes that this gives women a more central place than in Tolkien , taking " The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen " from an appendix to centre stage. In her view, this does honour a "central concern" of Tolkien's mythology. Cathy Akers-Jordan Writing instructor Fairy Princess or Tragic Heroine? The Metamorphosis of Arwen Undómiel in Peter Jackson's The Lord of the Rings Films In Akers-Jordan's view, the film Arwen may seem to be unlike Tolkien's, but she is presented as a "true descendant of her heroic ancestors, such as Lúthien , Eärendil , and Galadriel ." Victoria Gaydosik Scholar of English "Crimes Against the Book"? The Transformation of Tolkien's Arwen from Page to Screen and the Abandonment of the Psyche Archetype Examining Jackson's treatment of Arwen, Gaydosik quotes screenwriter Fran Walsh 's joking remark "Crimes against the book!". She notes that the heroine's journey is less familiar than the hero's ; Tolkien uses " Psyche , a passive love-object" as archetype for Arwen. Jackson is informed instead by cinema's " pumped-up action-adventure heroine ", though the second film, The Two Towers , backed away from presenting Arwen wielding a sword in battle, informed by fans' reaction to the first film. Gaydosik suggests that the films succeed in developing the mythology that Tolkien had wished to create, indeed that a mythology consists of "stories that keep being told and retold". Maureen Thum Scholar of English The "Sub-Subcreation" of Galadriel , Arwen , and Éowyn : Women of Power in Tolkien's and Jackson's The Lord of the Rings Thum notes that Tolkien describes people who tell fairy tales as sub-creators . In her view, Jackson succeeds in this role, portraying Galadriel, Arwen, and Éowyn as powerful women, just as Tolkien did , without "falsification or distortion ... as some critics have argued". She examines Yavanna , Varda , and Lúthien from The Silmarillion and Unfinished Tales , showing that in his Legendarium, Tolkien, far from being "anti-feminist", placed women in "pivotal roles". She argues that in The Lord of the Rings , the female figures are much more important than their "relatively brief appearances" might suggest. Fan Fiction Susan Booker Arts Librarian Tales Around the Internet Campfire: Fan Fiction in Tolkien's Universe Booker examines Tolkien fan fiction inspired by Jackson's films. Commenting that "Some colleagues cringe" at her subject, she states that by 2004 there were around 300,000 fan websites of stories set in Middle-earth , and that to "study alligators" one needs to visit "treacherous bayous ". She notes that some fan authors have never read Tolkien, relying entirely on Jackson's narration. Booker notes, too, that despite Christopher Tolkien's 12-volume The History of Middle-earth , there are plenty of gaps that fans can enjoy filling in. She attempts to characterise these authors, and their readership. Amy H. Sturgis Scholar of Fantasy Make Mine "Movieverse": How the Tolkien Fan Fiction Community Learned to Stop Worrying and Love Peter Jackson Sturgis notes that fan fiction, conventionally dated to a Star Trek fanzine in 1967, could be said to have started in the Middle Ages, when authors "embellished and explored" Arthurian legend . Tolkien fandom too has a long history . Fanfiction.net alone had over 30,000 Middle-earth stories by 2004; and there were hundreds of Tolkien forums and online groups, not all following Jackson. Some traded in stories, others in images, poetry, or songs. The Lucky Number Mark Shea Catholic writer The Lord of the Rings : A Source-Critical Analysis Shea ends the book with a parody of a learned work of philological scholarship. He states that "Experts in source-criticism now know that The Lord of the Rings is a redaction of sources ranging from The Red Book of Westmarch (W) to Elvish Chronicles (E) to Gondorian records (G) to orally transmitted tales of the Rohirrim (R)," each with "their own agendas", like "the 'Tolkien' (T) and 'Peter Jackson' (PJ) redactors". He notes confidently that "we may be quite certain that 'Tolkien' (if he ever existed) did not write this work in the conventional sense, but that it was assembled over a long period of time..." Shea adds that "T is heavily dependent on G records and clearly elevates the claims of the Aragorn monarchy over the House of Denethor ." He comments that "Of course, the ' Ring ' motif appears in countless folk tales and is to be discounted altogether", while "the 'Gandalf' narratives" seem to be shamanistic legends, recorded in W "out of deference to local Shire cultic practice." Publication history [ edit ] Tolkien on Film was published in 2004 in paperback by the Mythopoeic Press . The book is not illustrated. [ 8 ] A "Second Printing" appeared in 2010 with a brief note by Croft; the table of contents and ISBN were unchanged. [ 7 ] Reception [ edit ] Of the whole book [ edit ] See also: Peter Jackson's interpretation of The Lord of the Rings Reviewing the book for Tolkien Studies , the film scholar Kristin Thompson wrote that the book came out before the authors could see the special extended edition of the last film of the trilogy, making its publication appear somewhat hasty, if not unscholarly. Thompson notes that "several of the contributors" dislike Jackson's film trilogy, and that few of the contributions are by film scholars, so that not many are "actually about Jackson's film as such." [ 9 ] She notes that the field of " cinema studies " has diverged from older literary criticism with its "adaptation studies" that existed until the 1970s; and that some of the essays in the book are "more like lists of complaints" than "classic adaptation studies". [ 9 ] She suggests that the "frequent denigration" of Jackson will disappoint film fans who read the book. [ 9 ] Some years later, Janice Bogstad and Philip Kaveny, introducing their 2011 scholarly collection on the same subject, Picturing Tolkien , wrote that Croft's edited collection found Jackson's films "wanting", adding that the book "speaks both to and from the sizable body of Tolkien scholars and enthusiasts who do not believe this film series succeeded, and/or that any film version could succeed." [ 10 ] Thompson noted in her essay in that collection that a contributor on TheOneRing.net described the book as "a mix of pro/con articles related to the films, mostly con though as I recall." [ 11 ] Thompson immediately continued by saying that "the condescension and dismissal that the film has sometimes met in scholarly circles reminds me somewhat of the disdain many of Tolkien's colleagues felt for his fiction ", as to them the point was not whether his books were any good, but that "they were broadly popular and hence frivolous." [ 11 ] Of specific essays [ edit ] On the contributions, Thompson finds Smyth's essay odd, only focusing on the film in its last two pages, and disagreeing with its view that the film is imperialist; she contends that it is the opposite, as Sauron not Aragorn is the imperial aggressor. She comments that an overview of the background to the film's making, or its relationship to the fantasy genre, would have been more useful. She thinks Bratman's and Croft's essays are regrettable catalogues of differences between film and book, complete with "adverse commentary thereon". She notes that Paxson's analysis is more positive, seeing "changes as revision rather than adaptation" and welcoming the sequence on the lighting of the beacons (to warn Rohan of the attack on Gondor). She finds Wiggins and Timmons just as "disapproving" as Bratman and Croft, stating that all of them suppose that Jackson was trying to be as faithful as possible to Tolkien's "story, tone, and meaning", but "largely failed". In Thompson's view, Jackson's team instead aimed to please a modern audience, so they made changes intentionally, and explained their rationale in interviews on the extended DVDs. She criticises the reviewers as naive for not grasping the "corporate forces and financial pressures" on Jackson. [ 9 ] Thompson is more accepting of the essays on women in the films, finding them thoughtful, except for Chance's, which she thinks makes the trying-to-be-faithful assumption. [ 9 ] She thinks the two fan fiction essays richly informed and apparently the first to focus exclusively on The Lord of the Rings . She finds their introductions to fan fiction terminology useful, but doubts whether their Google searches have yielded accurate statistics. [ 9 ] Thompson concludes that rather than trying to "catch flies with vinegar", Croft and her authors would do better to tell fans that if they like the films, they may also enjoy the book if they try reading it, stating "Many [of them] already have." [ 9 ] James Davis praises Thum for seeking to show that the films can help people understand the book, in contrast to taking one side or the other on Jackson's merits. He notes Thum's well-argued case that Arwen is following in the footsteps of Lúthien, "who was indeed a 'Warrior Princess'", and that Jackson brings out her place in Middle-earth better than Tolkien does in The Lord of the Rings . [ 12 ] Yvette Kisor writes that in her essay Mithril Coats and Tin Ears , Croft focuses narrowly on the "immediate effects" of Jackson's changes, such as the "loss of dramatic irony" from Jackson's intercutting in place of Tolkien's suspenseful interlacing . Kisor contrasts Croft here with Cara Lane's "less outwardly negative ... assessment ... [but] perhaps more significant losses to the core meaning of the novel", namely that interlace "allows plot threads to dangle for prolonged periods and forces readers to make connections between events on their own", whereas intercutting "substantially alter[s] the structure and tone of the story." The activity required of the reader makes them share the confusion and incomplete knowledge of the characters, bringing out "an important theme of the novel". [ 13 ] [ 14 ] Tobias Hock and Frank Weinreich note that Bratman finds the films' emphasis on violence excessive, largely replacing "Tolkien's moral sense". They dispute the excessiveness, while agreeing that some instances of the loss of Tolkien's moral attitude, like Aragorn's "Show them no mercy" before the Battle of Helm's Deep are "serious" because these "go completely against the religious and ethical worldview " of the book. They similarly endorse Bratman's argument about Gandalf's character. [ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Picturing Tolkien , a 2011 essay collection edited by Janice M. Bogstad and Philip E. Kaveny References [ edit ] ↑ Carpenter, Humphrey (1978) [1977]. J. R. R. Tolkien: A Biography . Unwin Paperbacks . pp. 111, 200, 266 and throughout. ISBN 978-0-04928-039-7 . ↑ Lobdell, Jared (2013) [2007]. "Criticism of Tolkien, Twentieth Century". In Drout, Michael D. C. (ed.). J. R. R. Tolkien Encyclopedia . Routledge . pp. 109– 110. ISBN 978-0-415-96942-0 . ↑ Shippey, Tom (2005) [1982]. The Road to Middle-Earth (Third ed.). HarperCollins . pp. 175, 201– 203, 363– 364. ISBN 978-0261102750 . ↑ Wagner, Vit (16 April 2007). "Tolkien proves he's still the king" . Toronto Star . Archived from the original on 9 March 2011 . Retrieved 8 March 2011 . ↑ Croft 2004 , p. vii. 1 2 Croft 2004 , pp. vii–ix. 1 2 Croft 2010 , p. x. ↑ Croft 2004 , p. vi. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Thompson 2006 , pp. 222–228. ↑ Bogstad & Kaveny 2011 , p. 8. 1 2 Thompson 2011 , p. 43. ↑ Davis 2008 , pp. 55–71. ↑ Kisor 2011 , p. 104. ↑ Lane 2005 , pp. 67–69. ↑ Hock & Weinreich 2014 , pp. 15–17. Sources [ edit ] Bogstad, Janice M.; Kaveny, Philip E., eds. (2011). Picturing Tolkien: Essays on Peter Jackson's 'The Lord of the Rings' Film Trilogy . McFarland . ISBN 978-0-7864-8473-7 . Croft, Janet Brennan , ed. (2004). Tolkien on Film: Essays on Peter Jackson's The Lord of the Rings . Mythopoeic Press . ISBN 978-1-887726-09-2 . Croft, Janet Brennan , ed. (2010) [2004]. Tolkien on Film: Essays on Peter Jackson's The Lord of the Rings (2nd Printing ed.). Mythopoeic Press . ISBN 978-1-887726-09-2 . (added note by Croft, p. x; contents and ISBN unchanged) Davis, James G. (2008). "Showing Saruman as Faber: Tolkien and Peter Jackson". Tolkien Studies . 5 (1): 55– 71. doi : 10.1353/tks.0.0009 . Hock, Tobias; Weinreich, Frank (2014). Fornet-Ponse, Thomas (ed.). "Splatter in Middle-earth? War and Violence between Book and Screen – a comparison" (PDF) . Hither Shore - Interdisciplinary Journal on Modern Fantasy Literature . 10 (Adaptations of Tolkien´s 'Lord of the Rings'): 44– 61. Kisor, Yvette (2011). "Making the Connection on Page and Screen in Tolkien's and Jackson's The Lord of the Rings " . In Bogstad, Janice M.; Kaveny, Philip E. (eds.). Picturing Tolkien . McFarland . pp. 102– 115. ISBN 978-0-7864-8473-7 . Lane, Cara (2005). "The Ring Returns: Adaptation and the Trilogy". Film & History: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Film and Television Studies . 35 (1): 67– 69. doi : 10.1353/flm.2005.0020 . Thompson, Kristin (2006). "Tolkien on Film: Essays on Peter Jackson's 'The Lord of the Rings' (review)" . Tolkien Studies . 3 : 222– 228. doi : 10.1353/tks.2006.0035 . S2CID 170135592 – via Project Muse . Thompson, Kristin (2011). "Gollum Talks to himself" . In Bogstad, Janice M.; Kaveny, Philip E. (eds.). Picturing Tolkien . McFarland . pp. 25– 45. ISBN 978-0-7864-8473-7 . v t e The Lord of the Rings J. R. R. Tolkien Constructing The Lord of the Rings About Volumes The Fellowship of the Ring The Two Towers The Return of the King Stories " The Shadow of the Past " " The Council of Elrond " " The Scouring of the Shire " " The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen " Translating list Swedish Reception Impact Literary Fandom Fan fiction Oxonmoot Tolkienmoot Works inspired Tolkien's impact on fantasy Annotation A Reader's Companion Elements Languages Black Speech Elvish Quenya Sindarin Khuzdul Westron Poetry A Elbereth Gilthoniel Namárië Song of Eärendil The Man in the Moon Stayed Up Too Late The Road Goes Ever On A Walking Song Other Artwork Family trees Heraldry Maps Proverbs Scripts Cirth Tengwar Analysis Themes Addiction to power Ancestry as guide to character Architecture Company of the Ring Death and immortality Decline and fall Divination Dreams and visions Economy England Environmentalism Evil Feudal allegiance Forests Geology Hell Heroism Luck and fate Magic Mental illness Moral dilemma Music Naming of weapons Northern courage Paganism Plants Prophecy Psychological journeys Quests Race Sexuality Sound and language Time Trees Women Influences Antiquarianism Beowulf Celtic Christianity Classical world Edwardian adventure stories First World War Norse Medieval Modern sources Modernism William Morris A mythology for England Philology Shakespeare Techniques Anachronism Character pairing Editorial framing Frame stories Pseudotranslation Impression of depth Narrative structure Interlacing Storytelling Prose style Ambiguity Epic Pooh Peoples Maiar Balrogs Sauron Wizards Gandalf Radagast Saruman Free peoples Dwarves Balin Gimli Elves Galadriel Glorfindel Half-elven Arwen Elrond Legolas Thranduil Ents Treebeard Hobbits Bilbo Frodo Merry Pippin Sam Men Beornings Drúedain Dúnedain Aragorn of Gondor Boromir Denethor Faramir of Rohan Éomer Éowyn Théoden Wormtongue Monsters Barrow-wight Gollum Nazgûl Witch-king of Angmar Old Man Willow Orcs Shelob Trolls Wargs Watcher in the Water Other Eagles Goldberry Tom Bombadil World Geography Middle-earth Eriador Bree Old Forest Rivendell The Shire Bag End Gondor Minas Tirith Harad Lothlórien Mirkwood Moria Mordor Rohan Isengard Undying Lands Battles Helm's Deep Pelennor Fields Morannon Things Mithril Oliphaunts Palantírs Phial of Galadriel Rings of Power One Ring List of weapons and armour Related works The Hobbit The Adventures of Tom Bombadil Errantry Fastitocalon The Sea-Bell Donald Swann The Road Goes Ever On Bilbo's Last Song The Silmarillion Unfinished Tales The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien The History of Middle-earth The Children of Húrin The History of The Hobbit Beren and Lúthien The Fall of Gondolin The Nature of Middle-earth Adaptations and derivative works Books Bored of the Rings (1969) The Last Ringbearer (1999) Muddle Earth (2003) Illustrations A Map of Middle-earth Pauline Baynes Barbara Remington John Howe Alan Lee Margrethe II of Denmark Ted Nasmith Theatre Fellowship! (2005) The Lord of the Rings (2006) Music Bo Hansson Music Inspired by Lord of the Rings (1972) Johan de Meij Symphony No. 1 The Lord of the Rings (1988) Led Zeppelin " Ramble On " (1969) " Misty Mountain Hop " (1971) " The Battle of Evermore " (1971) Radio The Lord of the Rings ( BBC , 1955) The Lord of the Rings ( NPR , 1979) Hordes of the Things (1980) The Lord of the Rings (BBC, 1981) Der Herr der Ringe (1992) Film Animated The Lord of the Rings ( Bakshi , 1978) The Return of the King ( Rankin/Bass , 1980) The War of the Rohirrim ( Kamiyama , 2024) Peter Jackson series The Fellowship of the Ring (2001) The Two Towers (2002) The Return of the King (2003) Music " Concerning Hobbits " " Into the West " " May It Be " The Music of the Lord of the Rings Films (2010 book) Approach Production Hobbiton Movie Set Peter Jackson's interpretation Picturing Tolkien Tolkien on Film Other Sagan om ringen (1971) Khraniteli (1991) Hobitit (1993) The Rings of Power (2022) music The Hunt for Gollum (2027) Fan-made The Hunt for Gollum (2009) Born of Hope (2009) Video games Journey to Rivendell Game One Game Two: Shadows of Mordor War in Middle Earth Vol. I (1990) Vol. I (SNES) Riders of Rohan Elendor Vol. II: The Two Towers The Fellowship of the Ring The Two Towers The Return of the King War of the Ring The Third Age GBA The Battle for Middle-earth Tactics The Battle for Middle-earth II The Rise of the Witch-king Conquest Aragorn's Quest War in the North Lego The Lord of the Rings Guardians of Middle-earth Shadow of Mordor Shadow of War Gollum Return to Moria The Lord of the Rings Online Mines of Moria Siege of Mirkwood Rise of Isengard Riders of Rohan Helm's Deep Mordor Minas Morgul War of Three Peaks Fate of Gundabad Before the Shadow Tabletop role- playing games Middle-earth Role Playing The Lord of the Rings Roleplaying Game The One Ring Roleplaying Game Adventures in Middle-earth Board games Middle Earth War of the Ring Gondor: The Siege of Minas Tirith Sauron Lord of the Rings War of the Ring Card games Middle-earth Collectible Card Game The Lord of the Rings Trading Card Game The Lord of the Rings: The Card Game Other games Middle-earth Strategy Battle Game Lego The Lord of the Rings v t e J. R. R. Tolkien Bibliography Letters Poetry and songs Songs for the Philologists (1936) " Bagme Bloma " The Homecoming of Beorhtnoth Beorhthelm's Son (1953) " A Walking Song " (1954) The Adventures of Tom Bombadil (1962) " Errantry " " Fastitocalon " " The Sea-Bell " " The Man in the Moon Stayed Up Too Late " The Road Goes Ever On (1967) Bilbo's Last Song (1974) The Legend of Sigurd and Gudrún (2009) The Fall of Arthur (2013) The Collected Poems of J.R.R. Tolkien (2024) List of Tolkien's alliterative verse Fiction The Hobbit (1937) " Leaf by Niggle " (1947) The Lay of Aotrou and Itroun (1945) Farmer Giles of Ham (1949) The Lord of the Rings The Fellowship of the Ring (1954) The Two Towers (1954) The Return of the King (1955) Tree and Leaf (1964) The Tolkien Reader (1966) Smith of Wootton Major (1967) Posthumous fiction The Father Christmas Letters (1976) The Silmarillion (1977) Unfinished Tales (1980) Mr. Bliss (1982) The History of Middle-earth (1983–1996) The Book of Lost Tales The Lays of Beleriand The Shaping of Middle-earth The Lost Road and Other Writings The History of The Lord of the Rings Morgoth's Ring The War of the Jewels The Peoples of Middle-earth Roverandom (1998) The Children of Húrin (2007) The History of The Hobbit (2007) The Story of Kullervo (2015) Beren and Lúthien (2017) The Fall of Gondolin (2018) The Nature of Middle-earth (2021) The Fall of Númenor (2022) Academic works Sir Gawain and the Green Knight (Middle English text, 1925) " The Devil's Coach Horses " (1925) " Ancrene Wisse and Hali Meiðhad " (1929) " Sigelwara Land " (1932–34) " Chaucer as a Philologist: The Reeve's Tale " (1934) " Beowulf : The Monsters and the Critics " (1936) " On Fairy-Stories " (1939) Eucatastrophe " On Translating Beowulf " (1940) Sir Orfeo (1944) Ancrene Wisse (1962) " English and Welsh " (1963) Jerusalem Bible (as translator and lexicographer, 1966) Posthumous academic Sir Gawain and the Green Knight , Pearl , and Sir Orfeo (translations, 1975) Exodus (1981) Finn and Hengest (1982) The Monsters and the Critics, and Other Essays (1983) Beowulf and the Critics (2002) Beowulf: A Translation and Commentary with " Sellic Spell " (2014) A Secret Vice (2016) Scholars (works) Biographers Humphrey Carpenter J. R. R. Tolkien: A Biography (1977, authorized biography) John Garth Tolkien and the Great War The Worlds of J. R. R. Tolkien Catherine McIlwaine Tolkien: Maker of Middle-earth Charles Moseley Christian Stratford Caldecott Matthew T. Dickerson Colin Duriez Peter Kreeft Holly Ordway Joseph Pearce Fleming Rutledge Ralph C. Wood Literary critics Douglas A. Anderson The Annotated Hobbit Nicholas Birns Bradley J. Birzer Janice Bogstad & Philip Kaveny Picturing Tolkien David Bratman Janet Brennan Croft Tolkien on Film Patrick Curry Bradford Lee Eden Dimitra Fimi Tolkien, Race and Cultural History Jason Fisher Verlyn Flieger Interrupted Music A Question of Time Splintered Light Michael Foster Nick Groom Wayne G. Hammond & Christina Scull J. R. R. Tolkien: A Descriptive Bibliography The Lord of the Rings: A Reader's Companion J. R. R. Tolkien: Artist and Illustrator The J. R. R. Tolkien Companion and Guide Randel Helms Thomas Honegger Charles A. Huttar Paul H. Kocher Master of Middle-Earth Stuart D. Lee The Keys of Middle-earth Jared Lobdell A Tolkien Compass John D. Rateliff Robin Anne Reid Brian Rosebury Tolkien: A Cultural Phenomenon Amy H. Sturgis Anna Vaninskaya Richard C. West Elizabeth Whittingham Rose Zimbardo Understanding The Lord of the Rings Linguists Anthony Appleyard Helge Fauskanger Carl F. Hostetter Tom Loback David Salo Arden R. Smith Allan Turner Medievalists , Classicists Marjorie Burns Perilous Realms Jane Chance Tolkien and the Invention of Myth Tolkien's Art: 'A Mythology for England' Michael D. C. Drout J. R. R. Tolkien Encyclopedia Jonathan Evans Vincent Ferré Gergely Nagy Tom Shippey J. R. R. Tolkien: Author of the Century The Road to Middle-Earth Anna Smol Elizabeth Solopova Sandra Ballif Straubhaar Hamish Williams Tolkien and the Classical World Popular Lin Carter Robert Foster Glen GoodKnight Michael Martinez Charles Noad J. E. A. Tyler Related Family Francis Xavier Morgan Influences Artwork Languages constructed by Tolkien Impact of Tolkien's Middle-earth writings Inklings Coalbiters Milton Waldman Mythopoeic Society Elvish Linguistic Fellowship Tolkien's impact on fantasy Tolkien and the modernists Tolkien Estate Tolkien fandom Tolkien fan fiction Tolkien Gateway The Tolkien Society Awards Memorials Reception Tolkien research Mythlore Tolkien Studies Works inspired by Tolkien Tolkien (biographical film) Poems and Songs of Middle Earth (album) Language and Human Nature The Ring of Words: Tolkien and the Oxford English Dictionary Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tolkien_on_Film&oldid=1315802251 " Categories : Middle-earth books 2004 non-fiction books Middle-earth parodies Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Good articles Use British English from August 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in British English Use dmy dates from August 2024 This page was last edited on 8 October 2025, at 19:01 (UTC) . Page was rendered with Parsoid . Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Legal & safety contacts Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tolkien on Film Add languages Add topic 