 The Lord of the Rings (1979 radio series) - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Production 2 Recordings 3 Cast 4 References Toggle the table of contents The Lord of the Rings (1979 radio series) 2 languages Español Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Switch to legacy parser Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1979 radio series For other uses, see The Lord of the Rings . National Public Radio broadcast a dramatization of J. R. R. Tolkien 's The Lord of the Rings in 1979. It was produced by The Mind's Eye . It was produced by Bob Lewis and adapted for radio by Bernard Mayes . [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Production [ edit ] The radio script of The Lord of the Rings was written by Bernard Mayes . It is notable for including the Tom Bombadil scenes (with the character voiced by Mayes himself), unlike many other adaptations of the book. [ 1 ] The broadcasts totaled more than 11 hours. The SF-Worlds review commented that the local Virginia theater players had difficulty pronouncing the names of characters and places, and that the unsophisticated mid-20th century style production would seem "remote" to fans of Peter Jackson 's films. [ 1 ] Recordings [ edit ] The most widely circulated US edition comes in a wooden box, whether on compact discs or cassette tapes. [ 3 ] The newer editions of the drama on compact disc and MP3 have a somewhat shorter running time than the original cassettes, omitting or condensing a considerable amount of dialogue and narration. [ citation needed ] Cast [ edit ] James Arrington - Frodo Baggins , Saruman Lou Bliss - Sam Pat Franklyn - Merry , Ioreth Mac McCaddon - Pippin , Galadriel Ray Reinhardt - Bilbo Baggins Bernard Mayes - Gandalf , Tom Bombadil Tom Luce - Strider/Aragorn , Treebeard , Denethor Gail Chugg - Narrator, Gimli , Gollum , Barliman Butterbur John Vickery - Legolas , Faramir , Wormtongue , Mouth of Sauron Bob Lewis - Wild Man , Glorfindel Erik Bauersfeld - Boromir , Theoden Carl Hague - Elrond , Beregond Matthew Locricchio - Eomer Karen Hurley - Eowyn References [ edit ] 1 2 3 "Mind's Eye The Lord of the Rings (1979)" . SF Worlds . August 31, 2014 . Retrieved April 15, 2020 . ↑ "Lord of the Rings Radio Drama" . audiotheater.com . Archived from the original on February 8, 2008. ↑ "Lord of the Rings (Wood Gift Box Edition) by J.R.R. Tolkien - NPR Dramatization - HighBridge Audio" . highbridgeaudio.com . Retrieved April 15, 2020 . v t e The Lord of the Rings J. R. R. Tolkien Constructing The Lord of the Rings About Volumes The Fellowship of the Ring The Two Towers The Return of the King Stories " The Shadow of the Past " " The Council of Elrond " " The Scouring of the Shire " " The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen " Translating list Swedish Reception Impact Literary Fandom Fan fiction Oxonmoot Tolkienmoot Works inspired Tolkien's impact on fantasy Annotation A Reader's Companion Elements Languages Black Speech Elvish Quenya Sindarin Khuzdul Westron Poetry A Elbereth Gilthoniel Namárië Song of Eärendil The Man in the Moon Stayed Up Too Late The Road Goes Ever On A Walking Song Other Artwork Family trees Heraldry Maps Proverbs Scripts Cirth Tengwar Analysis Themes Addiction to power Ancestry as guide to character Architecture Company of the Ring Death and immortality Decline and fall Divination Dreams and visions Economy England Environmentalism Evil Feudal allegiance Forests Geology Hell Heroism Luck and fate Magic Mental illness Moral dilemma Music Naming of weapons Northern courage Paganism Plants Prophecy Psychological journeys Quests Race Sexuality Sound and language Time Trees Women Influences Antiquarianism Beowulf Celtic Christianity Classical world Edwardian adventure stories First World War Norse Medieval Modern sources Modernism William Morris A mythology for England Philology Shakespeare Techniques Anachronism Character pairing Editorial framing Frame stories Pseudotranslation Impression of depth Narrative structure Interlacing Storytelling Prose style Ambiguity Epic Pooh Peoples Maiar Balrogs Sauron Wizards Gandalf Radagast Saruman Free peoples Dwarves Balin Gimli Elves Galadriel Glorfindel Half-elven Arwen Elrond Legolas Thranduil Ents Treebeard Hobbits Bilbo Frodo Merry Pippin Sam Men Beornings Drúedain Dúnedain Aragorn of Gondor Boromir Denethor Faramir of Rohan Éomer Éowyn Théoden Wormtongue Monsters Barrow-wight Gollum Nazgûl Witch-king of Angmar Old Man Willow Orcs Shelob Trolls Wargs Watcher in the Water Other Eagles Goldberry Tom Bombadil World Geography Middle-earth Eriador Bree Old Forest Rivendell The Shire Bag End Gondor Minas Tirith Harad Lothlórien Mirkwood Moria Mordor Rohan Isengard Undying Lands Battles Helm's Deep Pelennor Fields Morannon Things Mithril Oliphaunts Palantírs Phial of Galadriel Rings of Power One Ring List of weapons and armour Related works The Hobbit The Adventures of Tom Bombadil Errantry Fastitocalon The Sea-Bell Donald Swann The Road Goes Ever On Bilbo's Last Song The Silmarillion Unfinished Tales The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien The History of Middle-earth The Children of Húrin The History of The Hobbit Beren and Lúthien The Fall of Gondolin The Nature of Middle-earth Adaptations and derivative works Books Bored of the Rings (1969) The Last Ringbearer (1999) Muddle Earth (2003) Illustrations A Map of Middle-earth Pauline Baynes Barbara Remington John Howe Alan Lee Margrethe II of Denmark Ted Nasmith Theatre Fellowship! (2005) The Lord of the Rings (2006) Music Bo Hansson Music Inspired by Lord of the Rings (1972) Johan de Meij Symphony No. 1 The Lord of the Rings (1988) Led Zeppelin " Ramble On " (1969) " Misty Mountain Hop " (1971) " The Battle of Evermore " (1971) Radio The Lord of the Rings ( BBC , 1955) The Lord of the Rings ( NPR , 1979) Hordes of the Things (1980) The Lord of the Rings (BBC, 1981) Der Herr der Ringe (1992) Film Animated The Lord of the Rings ( Bakshi , 1978) The Return of the King ( Rankin/Bass , 1980) The War of the Rohirrim ( Kamiyama , 2024) Peter Jackson series The Fellowship of the Ring (2001) The Two Towers (2002) The Return of the King (2003) Music " Concerning Hobbits " " Into the West " " May It Be " The Music of the Lord of the Rings Films (2010 book) Approach Production Hobbiton Movie Set Peter Jackson's interpretation Picturing Tolkien Tolkien on Film Other Sagan om ringen (1971) Khraniteli (1991) Hobitit (1993) The Rings of Power (2022) music The Hunt for Gollum (2027) Fan-made The Hunt for Gollum (2009) Born of Hope (2009) Video games Journey to Rivendell Game One Game Two: Shadows of Mordor War in Middle Earth Vol. I (1990) Vol. I (SNES) Riders of Rohan Elendor Vol. II: The Two Towers The Fellowship of the Ring The Two Towers The Return of the King War of the Ring The Third Age GBA The Battle for Middle-earth Tactics The Battle for Middle-earth II The Rise of the Witch-king Conquest Aragorn's Quest War in the North Lego The Lord of the Rings Guardians of Middle-earth Shadow of Mordor Shadow of War Gollum Return to Moria The Lord of the Rings Online Mines of Moria Siege of Mirkwood Rise of Isengard Riders of Rohan Helm's Deep Mordor Minas Morgul War of Three Peaks Fate of Gundabad Before the Shadow Tabletop role- playing games Middle-earth Role Playing The Lord of the Rings Roleplaying Game The One Ring Roleplaying Game Adventures in Middle-earth Board games Middle Earth War of the Ring Gondor: The Siege of Minas Tirith Sauron Lord of the Rings War of the Ring Card games Middle-earth Collectible Card Game The Lord of the Rings Trading Card Game The Lord of the Rings: The Card Game Other games Middle-earth Strategy Battle Game Lego The Lord of the Rings Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Lord_of_the_Rings_(1979_radio_series)&oldid=1350438199 " Categories : Radio programmes based on Middle-earth 1970s American radio programs American radio dramas Fantasy radio programs NPR programs 1979 radio dramas Works based on The Lord of the Rings Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from March 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2020 This page was last edited on 21 April 2026, at 23:36 (UTC) . Page was rendered with Parsoid . Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Legal & safety contacts Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Lord of the Rings (1979 radio series) 2 languages Add topic 