7KH2QFHDQG)XWXUH&KLOGVOD\HU*X\*DYULHO.D\૷V
,QYHUVLRQRI0DORU\૷V0RUWH'DUWKXU
.DWK\&DZVH\
Arthuriana, Volume 25, Number 2, Summer 2015, pp. 67-83 (Article)
3XEOLVKHGE\6FULSWRULXP3UHVV
DOI: 10.1353/art.2015.0020
For additional information about this article
                                                    Access provided by Dalhousie University (20 Nov 2015 19:09 GMT)
http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/art/summary/v025/25.2.cawsey.html

67
once and future childslayer
arthuriana 25.2 (2015)
The Once and Future Childslayer:
Guy Gavriel Kay’s Inversion of 
Malory’s Morte Darthur
kathy cawsey
Guy Gavriel Kay’s Fionavar T apestry interprets Arthur’s return not as a 
reward or honor, but as a punishment for killing the children on Mayday. 
This reinterpretation links the ‘Mayday’ incident with the famous ‘May 
passages’ and provides a rewriting of the Morte Darthur’s stance on 
prophecy, predestination, and free will. (KC)
T
he range of responses to the Arthurian legends in modern fantasy 
fiction is overwhelming. From momentary ‘grace-notes’ to whole-sale 
adaptation of the legend, late-twentieth-century fantasy writers have made 
Arthur a staple of the fantasy genre. The Arthur story has been used in almost 
every way imaginable, though some aspects have proven more fruitful than 
others. The Grail legend, the symbol of the Fisher King, and the doomed 
love-triangle of T ristan and Iseult loom large; many fantasy and science-fiction 
writers also capitalize on the ‘time travel’ element opened up by Sir Thomas 
Malory’s ‘once and future king’ phrase in The Morte Darthur.
1 Interestingly, 
Merlin and other characters travel in time more often in modern fantasy than 
Arthur himself, the original ‘once and future’ character.
2  Guy Gavriel Kay, a 
Canadian fantasy writer, does use a time-traveling Arthur in his fantasy trilogy 
The Fionavar T apestry; however, unlike many fantasy authors, Kay uses the 
Arthurian story and the ‘return of the king’ angle not just as a popular legend 
or trendy motif, but as a means of staking out a philosophical argument about 
the nature of freedom and free will. Guy Gavriel Kay’s Fionavar T apestry is 
unique among modern fantasy in its reading of Malory’s rex quondam rexque 
futurus prophecy: Kay reads the return of Arthur not as an honor but rather, as 
a curse.
3 Moreover, the Lancelot-Guinevere-Arthur love triangle is envisioned, 
in the series, not as a cause of the fall of Camelot but as a punishment for the 
young Arthur’s killing of the boatload of children on Mayday in his attempt 
to forestall Merlin’s prophecy about Mordred. A minor incident in Malory 
is thus reinterpreted by Kay as the defining moment in Arthur’s reign.
4 Most 
importantly, these changes are not merely ‘plot’ revisions or ‘updatings’ of the 
story. Rather, through these changes Kay offers a profound commentary on 
key themes of Malory’s work: the roles prophecy, fate, and free will play in 
68
arthuriana
the lives of both commoners and kings. In Malory, fate is inevitable and the 
characters are inexorably moved to the tragic ending; in Kay, the characters 
have free will and can choose to act against prophecy or ‘fate’. Kay thus both 
points up the feeling of inevitability in the Morte Darthur and shows that 
actually, Arthur did make choices that could have averted the tragedy. 
thomas malory’s ‘other’ may passage
In Thomas Malory’s Morte Darthur, two key stories open with the invocation 
of the month of May, when ‘every lusty harte begynnyth to blossom and to 
burgyne.’
5 The importance of the ‘May passages’ is a commonplace among 
scholars of the Morte Darthur. The significance or meaning of the passages 
is debated; nonetheless, few Malory scholars would dispute the claim that 
one’s interpretation of at least the first ‘May passage’ fundamentally colors 
one’s interpretation of the love of Lancelot and Guinevere and, ultimately, 
the causes of the fall of Camelot.
6 Both ‘May passages’ draw on the trope, 
pervasive in medieval literature, of the ‘May morning,’ which links the 
renewal of springtime with the onset of human romantic love.
7 The first 
passage explicitly connects the ‘May morning’ literary trope with the love of 
Lancelot and Guinevere, calling Guinevere a ‘trew lover’ (Vinaver III.1120.12, 
Field I.842.11); the second passage inverts the trope to increase the shock to 
the reader when ‘wynter wyth hys rowghe wyndis and blastis’ metaphorically 
interrupts the May morning, and the ‘floure of chyvalry’ is destroyed and 
slain (Vinaver III.1161.4–8; Field I.870.6–10). 
What few scholarly critics have noted, however, is that there are not two 
but three ‘May’ passages in the Morte Darthur. The first one comes well before 
the later, better-known passages, well before Lancelot and Guinevere are even 
introduced, and stands in stark contrast to the later passages. When Arthur 
is still a young king, Malory tells us, he
lette sende for all the children that were borne in May-day, begotyn of lordis 
and borne of ladyes; for Merlyon tolde kynge Arthure that he that sholde 
destroy hym and all the londe sholde be borne on May-day. Wherefore he sente 
for hem all in payne of dethe, and so there were founde many lordis sonnys 
and many knyghtes sonnes, and all were sente unto the kynge. And so was 
Mordred sente by kynge Lottis wyff. And all were putte in a shyppe to the se; 
and som were four wekis olde and som lesse. And so by fortune the shyppe 
drove unto a castelle, and was all to-ryven and destroyed the moste party, save 
that Mordred was cast up, and a good man founde hym, and fostird hym tylle 
he was fourtene yere of age, and than brought hym to the courte. (Vinaver 
I.55.19–32; Field I.46.7–18)
This passage, often mentioned but rarely analyzed by scholars, is strange on 
a number of levels. It draws on numerous literary tropes and motifs only to 
confound the reader’s expectations of them. Most obvious is the bewildering 
69
once and future childslayer
use of the ‘May morning’ trope: in medieval literature Mayday is supposed to 
be a time for romantic and erotic love, not for the killing of babies. 8 Other 
tropes are similarly overturned. The ‘Killing of the Innocents’ is an incident 
familiar to medieval audiences from mystery plays and biblical stories, but 
it is perpetrated by one of history’s worst villains, King Herod—a strange 
role in which to cast the great King Arthur, however young at the time. 
Mordred, moreover, is hardly a Jesus-figure! The ‘innocents adrift’ is likewise 
a familiar medieval motif or plot device; but again, it is usually the saintly 
hero or heroine of the tale who is cast adrift and saved by providence, not 
the eventual villain. Mordred is a strange bedfellow (boatfellow?) for the likes 
of St Kentigern, St Gregory, Constance, Emaré, or King Horn. As Helen 
Cooper notes, this seeming paradox can be resolved with reference to the 
widely-distributed medieval tradition of Judas being set adrift in a boat—
Malory may be connecting Mordred to the most famous traitor of Christian 
history.
9 This connection is further strengthened by the legend’s Oedipal 
plot that Judas killed his father and married his mother, as Mordred does 
with Arthur and attempts to do with Arthur’s wife (albeit not his mother). 
Such a connection, however, does not exonerate Arthur of the crime of child 
murder, especially since in the Legenda Aurea Judas is set adrift alone, not in 
a boatload of innocents.
 
Few critics have commented on this passage, other than to note its 
problematic nature. 10 As Elizabeth Archibald writes, ‘This ought to be a 
key episode, one would have thought, since Mordred is fated to be Arthur’s 
nemesis. Yet Malory devotes curiously little space to it.’
11 No one has suggested 
that there might be a link between this ‘Mayday passage’ and the later ‘May 
passages.’ Yet both the ‘Mayday passage’ and the last ‘May passage’ invoke 
the ‘May morning’ trope only to invert it: in both cases May becomes a time 
not of love but of killing, and the killing is all the more shocking because 
of its unexpected timing. Moreover, both the first ‘Mayday’ passage and the 
later ‘May passages’ are implicated in the ending of the Morte Darthur and 
the downfall of Camelot: the first by Merlin’s prophecy of the role Mordred 
would play in the death of Arthur and the destruction of ‘all the londe,’ the 
second by the way Lancelot and Guinevere’s adultery instigates the rumours 
and faction-fighting in the last book of the Morte. Implicitly, then, the 
‘Mayday passage’ about Mordred and the ‘May passages’ about the love of 
Lancelot and Guinevere are linked, both through the common motif of the 
May morning and through a common foreshadowing of the destruction of 
Arthur’s kingdom.
No scholarly critic that I know of has made the argument that these 
passages are connected in this way. However, fiction writers are ‘readers’ 
and ‘interpreters’ of Malory just as much as academics are. As Neil Sinyard 
argues, adaptation can be a ‘critical essay on its source.’
12 Guy Gavriel Kay’s 
70
arthuriana
Fionavar T apestry presents a reading of Malory that implicitly argues for a 
connection between the three ‘May passages’—for an interpretation of the 
Morte Darthur which sees the killing of the Mayday children, the love of 
Lancelot and Guinevere, and the fall of Camelot not as discrete incidents, 
but as intimately, and causally, connected.
high fantasy and the legend of arthur
Guy Gavriel Kay deliberately drew on the Arthurian legends in his first fantasy 
work as a kind of challenge to himself. Having worked with Christopher 
T olkien on The Silmarillion, and thus having been thoroughly steeped in 
the T olkien-style fantasy tradition, Kay felt the need to counteract the more 
escapist kind of popular fantasy that he felt was ‘debasing the genre’ in the 
post-T olkien years. He says, ‘The [Fionavar] T apestry was a conscious decision 
…to work squarely in the T olkien tradition while trying to allow room for 
character development and plausibility that I tended to find missing in most 
post-[T olkien] High Fantasy. In a way it was a challenge to the debasing of 
the genre.’
13 In another interview he comments,
Fionavar was very much a conscious attempt to—the phrase I’ve sometimes 
used is—‘throw a gantlet [sic] down to the barbarians in the temple.’ I was so 
irritated by the lazy imitations of T olkien that had been coming out through 
the seventies, and into the early parts of the eighties. It seemed to me that the 
writers of fantasy I respected had abandoned high fantasy, they’d sort of thrown 
up their hands and said, ‘Well, this is only going to be for the hacks, doing 
derivative work!’ and they were writing small precise fantasies, or introducing 
urban fantasy, the modern urban fantasy tradition, and I felt to some degree 
that that was abdicating. There was such a long, illustrious tradition to high 
fantasy that it seemed an abdication to abandon it to people doing nothing but 
imitative work. So writing the [Fionavar] T apestry was a very conscious effort 
to say that the elements of high fantasy; the magic weapons, the enchanted 
jewelry, the races of dwarves and the lios alfar, the equivalent of elves, that all 
of these things could still, if done right, have some vitality.
14 
Drawing on the Arthurian legend allowed Kay to follow T olkien’s practice 
of incorporating myth into his high fantasy world without being merely 
derivative, since the Arthurian legend is arguably the medieval legend that 
T olkien least uses in The Lord of the Rings.
15 Kay’s work touches on Arthurian 
sources beyond Malory—from Welsh sources such as the Mabinogion to T .H. 
White—but it is Malory’s version which forms the core of the Arthurian 
material in The Fionavar T apestry.
For a work in which the Arthurian legend plays such a large role, the story 
does not even enter the trilogy explicitly until the second book, The Wandering 
Fire. In the first book, Kay’s five protagonists, Kim, Jennifer, Paul, Kevin, and 
Dave, travel from T oronto to Fionavar, the ‘first of all worlds,’ and become 
71
once and future childslayer
involved in the age-long fight against the world’s manifestation of absolute 
evil, Rakoth Maugrim. Each of the five characters begins to take on archetypal 
and mythological roles and resonances, from Odin to Adonis to the Celtic 
Morrigan, and it is around the character Jennifer that the Arthurian legend 
(unbeknownst to the reader) begins to coalesce. At the end of the first book of 
the series, Jennifer is captured and taken to Rakoth Maugrim’s fortress in what 
becomes a re-enactment of Guinevere’s capture by Meleagant in Malory—a 
rewriting the reader only realizes retrospectively, after discovering Jennifer’s 
alternate identity as Guinevere. Jennifer is raped by Maugrim, and after being 
saved and pulled back to ‘our’ world, she decides to bear the resulting child. 
The second book begins with another character, Kim, resurrecting Arthur, 
‘The Warrior,’ in order to gain his help in the battle against evil. Arthur, we 
are told, has been eternally doomed to return to life, fight, and die over and 
over again as punishment for killing the children on Mayday. When Arthur 
encounters Jennifer, both realize she is Guinevere, and she becomes drawn 
into the Arthurian narrative. Later Arthur raises Lancelot from the dead, 
and when Lancelot returns with Arthur to Jennifer/Guinevere, the reader 
learns that the perfectly-balanced love triangle is a further aspect of Arthur’s 
doom and punishment: ‘The grief at the heart of a dream, the reason why 
[Guinevere] was here, and Lancelot. The price, the curse, the punishment 
laid…on the Warrior in the name of the children who had died.’
16 
In the final battle in the third book, The Darkest Road, Arthur discovers that 
the battle is to be fought at a place called Camlann, and concludes that it was 
for this fight that he was meant to return and die, as a champion for the side 
of the light. However, the endless replaying of Arthur’s doom is broken when 
another character, Diarmuid, decides to take the fight on himself instead. 
Arthur therefore survives the final battle, the cycle of punishment is broken, 
and Arthur, Guinevere, and Lancelot are allowed to sail together into the 
West in an echo of Frodo’s sailing from T olkien’s Grey Havens. 
Bare, bald plot summary can never re-create the power of the full tale; 
and such a summary of the Arthurian material omits the greater part of the 
narrative of The Fionavar T apestry. The Arthurian story is merely one strand, 
albeit an important one, in the overall epic, and this was quite deliberate on 
Kay’s part. He says, ‘I wanted to find my own avenue into working with the 
Arthurian material, to see if I could find a way to create a scaffolding or a 
canvas for a book which would be large enough for that material to be a central 
part, but not the whole story.’
17 Other strands involve the story of Odin and 
the Yggdrasil tales from Norse mythology, the cauldron myth from the Welsh 
Cauldron of Annwn, the Irish goddesses Macha and Nemain, and the Greek 
myth of Adonis, among others; nevertheless, the Arthurian material in The 
Fionavar T apestry constitutes a significant re-working of the legend, which 
also stands as a critical interpretation of Malory’s Morte Darthur. 
72
arthuriana
the once and future king
The phrase rex quondam rexque futurus, found in earlier texts such as the 
Alliterative Morte Arthure, but known to most readers from Malory, 18 has 
proven to be unremittingly resonant in the five centuries since Malory. The 
phrase has been endlessly fruitful in its spawning of other stories, some only 
tangentially related to the original medieval legends.
 From the title of T .H. 
White’s epic Arthurian series, to Peter David’s re-incarnation of ‘Arthur 
Penn’ as mayor of New York City, to Andre Norton’s space-traveling Arthur 
who has been preserved by a half-alien Merlin until future space travelers 
can heal him, the idea that Arthur will return someday, somewhen, has had 
enduring appeal.
19 Almost all writers, however, interpret Arthur’s exclusion 
from the normal cycle of mortality as a positive thing, an honor given to a 
peerless hero. At the start of the tradition, Malory reports that some men say 
that ‘kynge Arthure ys nat dede, but had by the wyll of oure Lorde Jesu into 
another place’ (Vinaver III.1242.22–3; Field I.928.23–24) so that he might 
return and win the Holy Cross on Crusade. T .H. White too, reports that 
‘the old King felt refreshed, clear-headed, almost ready to begin again,’ and 
that he believed that ‘there would be a day—there must be a day—when 
he would come back to Gramarye with a new Round Table which had no 
corners, just as the world had none.’
20 The narrator shares a hopeful vision 
of the return of Arthur: 
I am inclined to believe that my beloved Arthur of the future is sitting at this 
very moment among his learned friends…and that they are thinking away in 
there for all they are worth, about the best means to help our curious species: 
and I for one hope that some day…they will issue from their rath in joy and 
power: and then, perhaps, they will give us happiness in the world once more 
and chivalry.
21
Numerous other examples of the way in which the ‘once and future king’ is 
seen as a positive and honorable reward for Arthur’s greatness could be given.22 
Raymond H. Thompson perhaps summarizes it best: ‘What all these returns 
offer is hope. Just as he once led the heroic resistance against barbarian invaders 
who assailed a crumbling civilization at the beginning of the Dark Ages, so 
Arthur once again rallies us to defy the gathering darkness that threatens to 
overwhelm all that is precious.’
23
Few authors, however, trouble themselves with wondering what Arthur 
himself might think of this fated return. Guy Gavriel Kay explains that it 
was this question—of what Arthur might think of the whole thing—which 
inspired his inversion of the Malorian ‘once and future king’ motif: 
This came about in part because of a chance, almost wry, reflection on what it 
must feel like to be always on call. Dial 911 in time of need and your champion 
must answer! The only time you’re around is when there’s a dismal, violent, 
73
once and future childslayer
destructive, dangerous crisis! Furthermore, as part of the received material 
of the legend, Arthur does not see the end of such conflicts. I found myself 
thinking, that’s not much of a state of grace; that is a burden and a duty and 
a responsibility.
24
In The Fionavar T apestry, Arthur’s return is not an honorable reward, but a 
curse. When Kim re-awakens Arthur, she ‘set[s] once more in motion the 
workings of a curse so old it made the wind seem young’ (284). In punishment 
for Arthur’s killing of the Mayday children, the Weaver—Fionavar’s name for 
God—had ‘marked [Arthur] down for a long unwinding doom. A cycle of 
war and expiation under many names, and in many worlds, that redress be 
made for the children and for love’ (285). Indeed, the name which summons 
Arthur to his doom is ‘Childslayer,’ as though that one deed forged his identity 
despite all his later great deeds. Kay explains, ‘What was vital for me was to use 
the notion of Arthur as child slayer. . . . That was my innovation: the notion 
of being condemned to be the Once and Future King, the Warrior, by virtue 
of a crime in youth. The crime was not the incest, because I’m not coming 
out of a religious tradition where unknowing incest is a great crime. It’s the 
sentient ordering of the death of the children.’
25  Kay’s reinterpretation of the 
Morte Darthur, his reading of it, solves the question of what/who caused the 
fall of the round table—Mordred or Lancelot/Guinevere? Instead he suggests 
that Arthur himself, in being responsible for an evil deed more typical of 
Herod than one of the great Christian ‘Worthies,’ ultimately caused his own 
downfall, and that Mordred and Lancelot and Guinevere were all part of the 
punishment, rather than being the cause.
Enhancing the impact of the notion of Arthur as Childslayer is the 
importance that children play in the Fionavar T apestry. Although the main 
characters are all adults, some of the key secondary characters—and, indeed, 
some of the most tragic figures in the books—are children. Finn is called 
from his family to lead the Wild Hunt, a cold, inhuman destiny in which 
he kills people at random and must leave everyone he loves. Leila is the girl 
who ‘called’ Finn to his destiny, and is forced, painfully, to witness Finn’s 
actions through her second sight. Tabor is a young boy whose destiny is to 
ride a winged unicorn, a creature of war, and he too grows distant from his 
family and becomes almost inhuman because of the fighting and killing he 
must do. Darien, the youngest of the children in the book, is Jennifer’s child 
by Rakoth Maugrim. Darien is rejected by everyone, including (seemingly) 
his own mother, and spends most of the narrative journeying towards his 
father, who kills him in the end. Darien pushes himself onto a dagger held 
by his father in an echo of the way Mordred pushes himself on Arthur’s lance 
in order to reach and kill his father in Malory, but in doing so Darien saves 
the world rather than destroying it.
26 By the end of the trilogy, Finn and 
Darien have died, Tabor narrowly escapes death, and Leila has witnessed her 
74
arthuriana
beloved Finn’s death and has become the youngest High Priestess in history. 
Although Kay does not spell it out explicitly, the specific tragedies of the lives 
of these children individualize and particularize the nameless children killed 
on Mayday by the ‘Childslayer.’ Moreover, the importance of these children 
to the story and to the fate of the world implicitly points up the monstrosity 
of the young Arthur’s actions—what might those individual children in the 
boatload of children have accomplished had they lived?—and rounds out 
the reader’s understanding of the appropriateness of the curse laid upon the 
once and future king. 
Part of the curse is that Arthur does not even know if his efforts have any 
impact: he always dies before the end of the battle, so he never knows who 
wins (335). The other part of the curse is, of course, the repetition of the love-
triangle between Arthur, Lancelot and Guinevere. Lancelot and Guinevere 
themselves do not remember any life but their first, because the original crime 
was not theirs: ‘No curse so dark as [Arthur’s] had been given [Guinevere], 
for no destiny so high, no thread of the Tapestry, had ever been consigned to 
her name. She was, instead, the agent of his fate, the working out of his bitter 
grief’ (366). Nonetheless, they are there every time Arthur reappears, as part 
of the doom laid upon him. Unlike some Arthurian writers, both pre- and 
post-Malory, Kay insists on the perfect balance of the love triangle. Both in 
The Fionavar T apestry and in his unrelated poem ‘Guinevere at Almesbury,’ 
Kay portrays Guinevere as loving both Lancelot and Arthur equally. In 
‘Guinevere at Almesbury,’ Guinevere says, ‘We cannot be other than / we 
are. I loved two men. A kingdom / broke for it.’
27 In the Fionavar T apestry, 
after Jennifer meets Arthur for the first time, she remembers her former life: 
‘She had only fallen in love twice in her life, with the two shining men of her 
world. Nor was the second less golden than the first. He was not, whatever 
might have been said afterwards. And the two men had loved each other, 
too, making all the angles equal, shaped most perfectly for grief’ (366). Had 
Guinevere loved either Arthur or Lancelot more than the other, the reader 
senses, or had Arthur and Lancelot had less love and respect for each other, 
the situation would have been resolved and the tragedy would have been less. 
prophecy, free will and fate
By interpreting the return of Arthur as a curse rather than an honor, and by 
focusing on the childslaying incident of the Morte, Kay provides a reading of 
the ending of Malory’s tale which challenges the feeling of inevitability that 
pervades the Morte. Fate and prophecy are hugely important in the Morte 
Darthur, especially in the first book. Merlin repeatedly makes prophecies 
about the results of Arthur’s actions and the future of Camelot. In addition 
to the Mayday prophecy about Mordred, Malory includes prophecies about 
Balin; a prophecy of Arthur’s conquest of Wales, Scotland, and Ireland; 
75
once and future childslayer
numerous prophecies about the Grail quest; minor prophecies about random 
knights and various events; and a key prophecy about Guinevere’s love 
for Lancelot. Some of these prophecies come true, and act as linking and 
structuring devices for the narrative. Others vanish from the narrative, and 
the reader never finds out if they come true or not. 
In Malory, prophecy seems to serve three main functions. First, as Jane 
Bliss has argued, it serves as a structuring device which connects the whole of 
the Morte Darthur and sets the tale firmly within an overarching ‘Matter of 
Britain,’ which contains stories and connections that may or may not be retold 
in Malory’s tale itself.
28 Second, it adds to the mystery and magic of the tale, 
especially in terms of Merlin’s character and role.29 Most importantly, however, 
prophecy opens the narrative to an exploration of free will, destiny, and fate 
that swirls around and adds poignancy to the tragedy of the final books of the 
Morte. As Bliss writes, ‘prophecy is also a thematic device by which Malory 
shows human free will in conflict with divine will and with fate or destiny 
…Prophecy as theme is used by Malory to set up a wall of predestination 
(divine or fated, mindful or mindless) against which human will is shown to 
react.’
30 As Rachel Kapelle has cogently argued, prophecies in the Morte fall 
into two categories, contingent and categorical.31 Contingent prophecies are 
open-ended: the actions of the characters can affect the outcome. For example, 
near the beginning of the narrative, Merlin warns Arthur that if he continues 
to fight the eight kings, God will become displeased and the tide of battle will 
turn; Arthur withdraws and thus forestalls the foretold consequence (Vinaver 
1.36.26–32; Field I.29.25–33). This kind of prophecy is therefore a useful guide 
to action. Other prophecies, by contrast, are categorical: no matter what the 
characters do, the outcome will be the same. Arthur has slept with his sister; 
therefore God is displeased and the child of the union will destroy Arthur and 
all the knights of the realm (Vinaver 1.44.16–19; Field I.36.15–17). Nothing 
Arthur can do can change this outcome: the action setting the foretold events 
in motion has already been taken. Such prophecies are useless as guides to 
action—although Arthur nonetheless acts as though the prophecy were 
contingent and attempts to avert destiny by killing the Mayday children.
32
I believe a third category of prophecy is at work in the Morte, which 
Kapelle does not discuss. These prophecies are, to my mind, the most 
interesting: they are contingent prophecies which become categorical because 
of the nature or personality of the participants.
33 For example, many of the 
prophecies about Balin could theoretically have been averted. The damsel 
says to Balin that if he keeps the sword from her he shall kill his best friend 
with it; Balin responds merely that he shall ‘take the adventure…that God 
woll ordayne for me’ (Vinaver 1.64.12–13; Field I.50.5–6). Within the code 
of Balin’s chivalry and his understanding of ‘worship,’ a contingent prophecy 
becomes categorical, since Balin will not change the way he acts. Similarly, 
76
arthuriana
scholars have commented on the lack of response Arthur gives to Merlin’s 
prophecy that ‘Gwenyver was nat holsom for hym to take to wyff’ (Vinaver 
1.97.29–30; Field I.76.25–26), yet the explanation for Arthur’s inability or 
unwillingness to change his actions in the face of this prophecy is given a few 
lines earlier: ‘thereas mannes herte is sette he woll be loth to returne’ (Vinaver 
1.97.26–27; Field I.76.23). Again, a contingent prophecy becomes essentially 
categorical, since the characters would have to abandon the essence of their 
selves in order to avert the prophecy.
34
It is this third kind of prophecy—the theoretically-contingent-but-
practically-categorical—that is most important in Guy Gavriel Kay’s 
reworking of Malory. Kay makes it clear throughout, in a way that it never 
is in the Morte Darthur, that the individuals in Fionavar’s universe have free 
will, and are not completely controlled by destiny. Indeed, the importance 
of free will is literally woven into the ruling metaphor of the universe: the 
‘Weaver’ has allowed a ‘random thread’ to enter the ‘Tapestry,’ so that he 
does not and cannot control everything that happens. This randomness 
opens up space for the free will of individuals, since there is always the chance 
that it might disrupt ‘fate’ or ‘destiny.’ The full explanation comes near the 
beginning of book three: 
The [Wild] Hunt was placed in the Tapestry to be wild in the truest sense, to 
lay down an uncontrolled thread for the freedom of the Children who came 
after. And so did the Weaver lay a constraint upon himself, that not even he, 
shuttling at the Loom of Worlds, may preordain and shape exactly what is to 
be. We who came after…we have such choices as we have, some freedom to 
shape our own destinies, because of that wild thread of Owein and the Hunt 
slipping across the Loom, warp and then weft, in turn and at times. They are 
there…precisely to be wild, to cut across the Weaver’s measured will. T o be 
random, and so enable us to be. (558)
The sense of inevitability that feels so strong towards the end of the Morte 
Darthur is continually undercut in the Fionavar T apestry: phrases such as 
‘and it appeared that there was nothing inevitable after all’ (236) are scattered 
throughout the books. This message comes through most forcefully with 
regards to Jennifer: she is told by another character, ‘we are not slaves to the 
Loom. Nor are you only Guinevere—you are Jennifer now, as well. You bring 
your own history to this hour…It need not be now as it has been before!’ 
(417). Unlike in the Morte, there is a chance that Arthur’s destiny can be 
averted: ‘if all this is true, if the Weaver put a check on his own shaping of 
our destinies, it would follow—surely it would follow—that the Warrior’s 
doom is not irrevocable’ (558). 
Ironically, however, despite the repeated message about individual freedom, 
Arthur himself does not feel that he has free will. When Kim first summons 
him, she promises she will never tell anyone the summoning name, but 
77
once and future childslayer
Arthur responds, ‘Others will, though, as others have before’ (285). Jennifer 
tries to tell Arthur that this time things are different, that Lancelot is not 
here this time; but Arthur answers, ‘It cannot be so…I killed the children, 
Guinevere’ (420). Before the final battle, Arthur asks the name of the place, 
and when told that it used to be called ‘Camlann,’ he answers, ‘I thought it 
might be’ (700). When another character tries to take the fight upon himself, 
Arthur tells him, ‘The name…made things clear: there has been a Camlann 
waiting for me in every world. This is what I was brought here for’ (701). 
When Guinevere tries to protest, Arthur says simply, ‘we are caught in a 
woven doom of no escape’ (701). 
Yet what becomes clear from the narrative, despite Arthur’s own feeling of 
doom and inevitability, is that he does in fact have free will. He could choose 
to avert his destiny—but if he were to do so, he would be someone other 
than himself. Kay’s Arthur is caught in the contingent-yet-categorical kind of 
prophecy that Malory gives when the Morte’s Arthur simply cannot, or will 
not, heed Merlin’s prophecy about Guinevere and Lancelot. When Arthur 
goes to wake Lancelot from the dead, another character tells him, ‘My lord 
Arthur…you do not have to do this. It is neither written nor compelled.’ 
Arthur responds, ‘He will be needed…He cannot but be needed.’ ‘You are 
willing your own grief,’ he is told, and he responds simply, ‘it was willed long 
ago.’ Yet despite Arthur’s feeling that these actions were ‘willed long ago,’ Kay 
makes it clear that it is Arthur’s personality, his moral values, that make him 
act this way, and not ‘fate’ or ‘destiny’: ‘Looking on Arthur Pendragon’s face 
in that moment, Paul [one of the five Canadians] saw a purer nobility than 
he had ever seen in his days.…Here was the quintessence, and everything 
in him cried out against the doom that lay beyond this monstrous choice’ 
(465–66; emphasis mine). What seems to be doom—fate—is in fact choice. 
The point is driven home even further: when Lancelot wakes, the first thing 
he says is, ‘Why have you done this, my lord, to the three of us?’ and Arthur 
responds, ‘Because there are more at risk than the three of us’ (466). This 
vision of Arthur is implicitly a reading of Malory: Kay says when reading 
Malory as a boy, he felt ‘such a sense of grief and frustration when Arthur is 
warned against the marriage by Merlin but proceeds nonetheless.…Arthur 
knows that certain actions will engender the destruction of his kingdom, and 
he proceeds nonetheless.’
35 As in the Morte, Kay’s Arthur is caught by destiny 
because he cannot act differently and remain true to himself.
In the end, Arthur is freed from his doom in The Fionavar T apestry: he 
survives the final battle and sails into the west with Guinevere and Lancelot. 
This release from destiny, however, comes about not because of Arthur’s 
own actions, but because of the actions of another character, Diarmuid. 
Throughout the series Diarmuid has been linked linguistically to the ‘wild 
thread’ of ‘Owein’s Hunt’—he is called ‘a little wild’ (230), ‘feral and fey’ (71), 
78
arthuriana
‘mercurial’ (221), ‘irresponsible’ (312), ‘frivolous’ (328) and ‘unreliable’ (221), 
and he is often associated with freedom (71). Diarmuid is also the character 
who tells Arthur that it is ‘neither written nor compelled’ that he must wake 
Lancelot (quoted above).
36 Diarmuid is in many ways the human embodiment 
of the ‘wild thread’ which grants free will to other individuals, and so even 
though Arthur, according to the Weaver’s planned pattern, is destined to 
die in the battle, Diarmuid is able to exercise his free will and change the 
predestined pattern. While Arthur and Guinevere are arguing over whether 
Arthur should fight the final battle, Diarmuid simply rides off and takes the 
battle upon himself. Diarmuid, therefore, is the one who dies in the battle, 
and Arthur is released from his fate. It results in a paradox: we all have free 
will, yet only the actions of another character, and not his own actions, can 
free Arthur from his fate. 
This ‘displacement’ (Kay’s word) of price is a very Christian eucatastrophe 
in an ostensibly non-religious book.
37 Kay says, ‘The Fionavar T apestry was 
a deliberate attempt to work within the traditions of high fantasy, which 
incorporates the idea, in T olkien’s word, of the eucatastrophe, the reverse of 
the catastrophe. The resolution of the Arthurian love triangle, the unbinding 
of that curse, would be central to the eucatastrophe at the end of the book.’
38 
As in the Christian story, the original sin—in this case, Arthur’s killing of the 
children—must be paid for; as in the Christian story, an innocent person can 
take the punishment onto himself. Diarmuid is not Jesus; nonetheless, the 
Christian concept of sacrifice and redemption is very much at work here.
39 
Through Diarmuid’s sacrifice and payment of Arthur’s sins, Arthur is freed 
for redemption and salvation. Because he survives the final battle, Arthur can 
save the life of a child, Tabor, who otherwise would have died. The saving of 
this particular child thus symbolically redeems Arthur for the original killing 
of the children; in Kay’s words: ‘that is the symbolic expiation of the child 
slayer: he becomes the child saver at that moment.’
40
Kay’s re-reading and re-writing of Malory, therefore, draws out connections 
and themes left latent in the Morte. The re-interpretation of the Mayday 
passage as intimately connected both to the love of Lancelot and Guinevere 
and to the fall of Camelot, as well as the revision of Arthur’s return not as 
a glorious triumph but as a punishment, allows Kay to comment upon the 
themes of fate and predestination pervasive in the Morte Darthur. By bringing 
to light the hitherto unnoticed connections between the May passages—both 
in terms of the use and inversion of the traditional ‘May morning’ trope, and 
in their dual implication in the fall of Camelot, Kay offers a new reading of 
Malory that challenges the conventional arguments over the reasons behind 
the fall of Arthur. The sense of inevitability that faces Arthur and the other 
characters of the Morte is present in Kay’s Arthur as well, but it is more 
explicitly shown to be an inevitability that comes about as much because of 
79
once and future childslayer
the characters’ personalities and values—their inability to act in any other 
way and remain true to themselves—as because of prophecy or destiny. Most 
importantly, the eucatastrophe that never manages to come in the Morte 
becomes possible because of the actions of individuals; because of their free 
will and freely-made choices.
41 The same freedom of choice that allowed 
Arthur to kill the Mayday babies in Malory frees Arthur, in Kay, from the 
‘once and future’ destiny that is at once his glory and punishment. Kay thus 
shows that Camelot’s seemingly immutable destiny—the fall of the Round 
Table because of the love of Lancelot and Guinevere combined with the 
treachery of Mordred—was actually not immutable at all. Arthur himself, in 
Malory’s tale, made conscious choices that set in motion both strands of his 
final doom, and the doom of all of Camelot. This radical re-reading of Arthur 
and the Arthurian legend suggests that although the feeling of inevitability 
and fate seems so strong in Malory’s telling of the tale, maybe the fall was 
less foreordained, more contingent, than both characters and readers think. 
dalhousie university
Kathy Cawsey is an Associate Professor of Middle English Literature at Dalhousie 
University in Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada. 
notes
I owe thanks to the audience of the ‘Arthur in the Americas’ panel at Kalamazoo’s 
International Medieval Conference, 2011, where an earlier version of this paper was 
given, for questions and thoughtful comments, and to the anonymous reviewers of 
this paper, for advice and further references to 20
th-century Arthuriana, especially 
comics. I also owe heartfelt thanks and beer to Kevin Whetter and Cory Rushton, 
who responded immediately to my panicky requests for Field’s page numbers 
while the new edition was still on order at my library.
 1 
 F
or surveys, see Alan Lupack and Barbara T epa Lupack, King Arthur in America 
(Cambridge, UK: D.S. Brewer, 1999), especially chapter 8, ‘Arthurian T radition 
and Popular Culture’; Norris J. Lacy, ‘The Arthur of the twentieth and twenty-first 
centuries’ in The Cambridge Companion to the Arthurian Legend, ed. Elizabeth 
Archibald and Ad Putter (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2009), 
pp. 120–135; Raymond H. Thompson, ‘Arthurian Legend in Science Fiction 
and Fantasy,’ in King Arthur Through the Ages, vol. 2, ed. Valerie M. Lagorio 
and Mildred Leake Day (New York: Garland, 1990), pp. 223–39; Raymond H. 
Thompson, ‘Conceptions of King Arthur in the T wentieth Century,’ in King 
Arthur: A Casebook, ed. Edward Donald Kennedy (New York: Garland, 1996), 
pp. 303, 310 [pp. 299–311]; Michael A. T orregrossa, ‘Once and Future Kings: 
The Return of King Arthur in the Comics’ in Adapting the Arthurian Legends for 
80
arthuriana
Children, ed. Barbara T epa Lupack (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004), pp. 
243–262.
 2  L
upack and Lupack, Arthur in America, p. 289; see Thompson, ‘Arthurian Legend,’ 
in King Arthur Through the Ages, pp. 224–227; Thompson, ‘Conceptions,’ in King 
Arthur: A Casebook, pp. 303–310; Dominick Grace, ‘The Future King: Camelot 
3000,’ The Journal of Popular Culture 41.1 (2008), p. 21 [pp. 21–63].
 3 
 D
ena Taylor, ‘The Double-Edged Gift: Power and Moral Choice in The Fionavar 
T apestry,’ http://www.brightweavings.com/scholarship/denafionavar.htm (accessed 
Feb. 24, 2015); Susannah Clements, ‘From Middle Earth to Fionavar: Free Will and 
Sacrifice in High Fantasy by J.R.R. T olkien and Guy Gavriel Kay,’ http://www.
brightweavings.com/scholarship/clementsfionavarlotr.htm (accessed Feb. 24, 2015); 
Adam Roberts, Silk and Potatoes: Contemporary Arthurian Fantasy (Amsterdam: 
Rodopi, 1998), p. 89; Raymond H. Thompson, ‘The Arthurian Legend in Canada’ 
in Medievalism in North America, ed. Kathleen Verduin (Cambridge: Boydell and 
Brewer, 1994), p. 91 [pp. 85–99]; Raymond H. Thompson, ‘Kay, Guy Gavriel’ in 
The New Arthurian Encyclopedia, ed. Norris J. Lacy (New York: Garland, 1996), 
p. 260; Allan Weiss, ‘Destiny and Identity in Canadian Urban Fantasy’ in Literary 
Environments: Canada and the Old World, ed. Britta Olinder (Brussels: Peter Lang, 
2006), p. 111 [pp. 109–130]; Thompson, ‘Conceptions,’ in King Arthur: A Casebook, 
p. 310. Other writers have used the Mayday incident (see Marie Nelson, ‘King 
Arthur and the Massacre of the May Babies,’ Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts 11.3 
(2001): 266–81; Thompson, ‘Conceptions,’ in King Arthur: A Casebook, p. 300), 
but few have made it so central: ‘Much is made [in Kay] of the fact that Arthur 
slaughtered children in his attempt to kill Mordred, and because of this act he 
is fated to return and repeat the pattern of his death’; Alan Lupack, The Oxford 
Guide to Arthurian Literature and Legend (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007), 
p. 199. In the comic book series Camelot 3000 Arthur attempts to drown the baby 
Mordred with his bare hands, rather than setting him adrift, and in the future 
expiates this crime by saving a mother and child; however, his return is ‘to rid the 
earth of invading alien hoards’ and not a punishment for his crime; on this, see 
Sally Slocum, ‘King Arthur is Alive and Well: Camelot 3000 and the Comics’ in 
Moderne Artus-Rezeption 18–20. Jahrhundert, ed. Kurt Gamerschlag (Göppingen: 
Kümmerle Verlag, 1991), pp. 307–309 [305–319]; Grace, ‘The Future King,’ pp. 
33–34; see also Charles T . Wood, ‘Camelot 3000 and the Future of Arthur,’ in 
Culture and the King: The Social Implications of the Arthurian Legend, ed. Martin 
B. Shichtman and James P . Carley (Albany: State University of New York Press, 
1994), pp. 297–313.
 4 
 I hav
e been unable to find another fantasy writer who re-interprets the ‘once 
and future king’ motif in the same way as Kay, although admittedly I have not 
read all the Arthurian fantasy fiction available (an impossible task!). Guy Gavriel 
Kay himself said in a 1989 interview that ‘to the best of [his] knowledge, no one 
[else] has ever inverted 180 degrees the idea of the Once and Future King’; post-
1989 writers who reinterpret the motif are as likely to be imitating Kay as doing 
something original; Guy Gavriel Kay, interview with Raymond H. Thompson, 
81
once and future childslayer
30 July 1989, T aliesin’s Successors: Interviews with Authors of Modern Arthurian 
Literature, http://www.lib.rochester.edu/camelot/intrvws/kay.htm (accessed 
February 24, 2015).
 5 
 The 
Works of Sir Thomas Malory,  3 vols., 3rd edn., ed. Eugène Vinaver, rev. P .J.C. 
Field (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1990), vol. III, p. 1119, l. 4; Sir Thomas Malory, 
Le Morte Darthur, 2 vols., ed. P .J.C. Field (Cambridge: D.S. Brewer, 2013), vol. 
1, p. 841, l. 21. Further references will be to these editions and will be noted by 
volume, page and line number in brackets; where there are editorial differences 
I will use Vinaver’s edition.
 6 
 E
ugène Vinaver’s edition notoriously skewed the importance of the first ‘May 
passage’ by placing it at the beginning of the ‘Knight of the Cart’ story, a move 
attested in neither the Winchester Manuscript or Caxton’s edition; nonetheless, the 
passage remains of crucial importance in Malory criticism. For scholars who think 
the ‘May passage’ shows Lancelot’s and Guinevere’s love is sinful, see R.T . Davies, 
‘Malory’s “Vertuouse Love,”’ Studies in Philology 53 (1956): 469 [459–69]; Stephen 
Knight, The Structure of Sir Thomas Malory’s Arthuriad (Sydney: Sydney UP , 1969), 
p. 69; Irene Joynt, ‘Vengeance and Love,’ in Arthurian Literature III, ed. Richard 
Barber (Cambridge: Brewer, 1983), p. 111 [pp. 91–112]; Rachel Jurovics, ‘The 
Definition of Virtuous Love in Thomas Malory’s Le Morte Darthur,’ Comitatus 
2 (1971): 28 [27–43]. For opposing views, see Betsy Taylor, ‘Malory’s Launcelot 
and Guinevere abed togydirs,’ in Words and Wordsmiths, ed. Geraldine Barnes, 
et al  (Sydney, Sydney University Press, 1989), pp. 141–2 [pp. 137–46]; Beverly 
Kennedy, ‘Adultery in Malory’s “Le Morte d’Arthur,”’ Arthuriana 7:4 (1997): 78 
[63-91]; Beverly Kennedy, ‘Malory’s Lancelot: “T rewest Lover, of a Synful Man,”’ 
Viator 12 (1981): 436-9 [409-456]; Beverly Kennedy, ‘Love, Freedom and Marital 
Fidelity in Malory’s Morte Darthur,’ Florilegium 10 (1988–91): 184 [197–92]; Harry 
Cole, ‘Forgiveness as Structure,’ The Chaucer Review 31 (1996): 42 [36–44]; Peter 
Waldron, ‘“Vertuouse Love” and Adulterous Lovers,’ in Sir Thomas Malory: Views 
and Re-views, ed. D. Thomas Hanks, Jr. (New York: AMS Press, 1992), pp. 55–6 
[pp. 54–62].
 7 
 Catherine 
Batt, Malory’s Morte Darthur: Remaking Arthurian Tradition (New York: 
Palgrave, 2002), p. xiv; p. 160.
 8  The paradigm was set b
y the Roman de la Rose, but can be found in romances 
ranging from Sir Orfeo to Thomas of Erceldoune to King Edward and the Shepherd 
to Chaucer’s Knight’s T ale. 
 9 
 H
elen Cooper, The English Romance in Time (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2004) pp. 106–136. See also Paull Franklin Baum, ‘The Mediaeval Legend of Judas 
Iscariot,’ PMLA 31.3 (1916): 481–632, esp. 591–2; Sebastian Sobecki, The Sea and 
Medieval English Literature (Cambridge: D.S. Brewer, 2008), p. 101. 
10 
 
See Batt, Malory’s Morte, pp. 58–59; P .J.C. Field, ‘Malory’s Mordred and the Morte 
Arthure’ in Romance Reading on the Book, ed. Jennifer Fellows et al (Cardiff: 
University of Wales Press, 1996), pp. 77–93; Beverly Kennedy, Knighthood in the 
Morte Darthur, 2
nd ed. (Cambridge: D.S. Brewer, 1992), p. 175.
82
arthuriana
11  E lizabeth Archibald, ‘Beginnings,’ in A Companion to Malory, ed. Elizabeth 
Archibald and A.S.G. Edwards (Cambridge: D.S. Brewer, 1996), p. 137 [pp. 
133–152].
12  
Sinyard, Neil. Filming Literature: The Art of Screen Adaptation (London: Croom 
Helm, 1986), p. 117.
13  G
uy Gavriel Kay, interview with Andrew A. Adams, 1995. http://www.
brightweavings.com/ggkswords/andrews.htm (accessed February 24, 2015).
14  G
uy Gavriel Kay, interview with Jean-Luis T rudel for Solaris, 1995. http://www.
brightweavings.com/ggkswords/trudel.htm  (accessed February 24, 2015).
15  The r
ecently-published incomplete alliterative poem The Fall of Arthur shows that 
T olkien was not immune to or resistant to the power of the Arthurian legend; on 
the contrary, he consciously eliminated it from his Middle-Earth mythology in 
part because it was too well-known, as well as being too overtly Christian and too 
French/continental for his purposes in The Lord of the Rings. J.R.R. T olkien, The 
Fall of Arthur, ed. Christopher T olkien (New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 
2013); J.R.R. T olkien, ‘Letter 131,’ in The Letters of J.R R. T olkien, ed. Humphrey 
Carpenter (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1981), p. 144 [pp. 143–61].
16 
 G
uy Gavriel Kay, The Fionavar T apestry: omnibus edition (T oronto: HarperCollins, 
1995 [1984, 1986, 1986]), p. 571. Further references will be to this edition and will 
be noted in brackets.
17 
 Kay
, Thompson interview. 
18 
 V
inaver III.1242.20; Field 1.928.28.
19  S
ee Lupack & Lupack, Arthur in America, pp. 287–89. Some writers, such as T .H. 
White, seem to envision Arthur returning only once, whereas others (mostly in 
science fiction stories) describe a continual returning. Thanks go to the second 
anonymous reviewer of this article for this distinction.
20 T .H. White, The Once and Future King: The Complete Edition (London: 
HarperCollins, 1996 [1939, 1940, 1958, 1977]), pp. 696–97.
21 
 
White, Once and Future King, p. 812.
22  A par
tial list can be found in Raymond H. Thompson, ‘Introduction: Does One 
Good Return Deserve Another?’ in King Arthur’s Modern Return, ed. Debra N. 
Mancoff (New York: Garland, 1998), pp. 7–10 [pp. 3–30].
23 
 Thompson, ‘I
ntroduction,’ p. 10.
24 
 Kay
, Thompson interview.
25 
 Kay
, Thompson interview.
26  D
arien is in many ways an inversion of Mordred: both are born out of sinful 
copulations (though Darien is the result of rape rather than incest) and both kill 
their fathers, but Darien’s patricide saves the world/civilization rather than ending 
it. Thanks go to the first reviewer of this article for pointing out this connection; 
see also Roberts, Silk and Potatoes, p. 93.
27 
 G
uy Gavriel Kay, Beyond this Dark House (T oronto: Penguin, 2003), p. 44.
28 
 J
ane Bliss, ‘Prophecy in the Morte Darthur,’ Arthuriana 13.1 (2003): 1–16.
29 
 Kathy Cawsey
, ‘Merlin’s Magical Writing,’ Arthuriana 11.3 (2001): 91 [89–109].
30 
 B
liss, ‘Prophecy,’ p. 1; p. 9.
83
once and future childslayer
31  Rachel Kapelle, ‘M erlin’s Prophecies, Malory’s Lacunae,’ Arthuriana 19.2 (2009): 
58–81.
32 
 Kapelle, ‘M
erlin’s Prophecies,’ 76.
33 
 S
ee Bliss, ‘Prophecy,’ p. 11.
34  F
or discussion, see Roberts, Silk and Potatoes, pp. 91–2; Taylor, ‘Double-Edged 
Gift’; and Clements, ‘From Middle Earth.’ One could argue that if one cannot 
act differently because of one’s personality, then that personality is simply an 
instrument of fate; yet this view necessitates an understanding of personality that 
is immutable and set, rather than one which develops out of one’s choices and 
values. Being unable to change one’s behavior because of external forces—Oedipus’ 
ignorance over the identities of his father and mother, for example—seems to me 
to be fundamentally different from refusing to change one’s behavior because to 
do so would result in a loss of identity. Balin could always choose not to ‘take the 
adventure,’ but he finds himself unable to do so while remaining the knight he 
envisions himself to be. 
35 
 Kay
, Thompson interview.
36  Kay mistakenly says in an inter
view that it is Paul who says this; perhaps Paul 
was the original speaker and Kay made the change to Diarmuid in a later draft. 
Whatever the case, Diarmuid is much more appropriate. Kay, Thompson 
interview.
37 
 Kay
, Thompson interview. See discussion in Roberts, Silk and Potatoes, p. 90.
38 
 Kay
, Thompson interview.
39  S
ee Clements, ‘From Middle Earth.’ The concepts of sacrifice and redemption are 
not limited to Christianity, of course, but are fundamental to many other religions, 
to which Kay often gestures in the Fionavar T apestry. Paul, for example, steps into 
the role of Odin, the ‘Hanging God,’ in his self-sacrifice on the Summer T ree. 
Kevin, Kim, and even Darien play similar self-sacrificing roles which echo other 
mythic traditions. Thanks go to Jim Weldon who pointed this out to me.
40 Kay insists that he had not originally planned to have Arthur save Tabor: he says, 
‘I knew that [Tabor] would survive, but not how until I actually wrote the episode. 
I remember smiling as I was writing, and knowing that something had worked, 
that I’d done something right’; Kay, Thompson interview.
41 
 Although see 
Thomas Hanks, ‘“A far green country under a swift sunrise”: T olkien’s 
eucatastrophe and Malory’s Morte Darthur,’ Fifteenth-Century Studies 36 (2011): 
63–4 [49–64], who argues that the ending of the Morte Darthur is, actually, a 
‘T olkienian happy ending.’ 