Words to Works 162 

Petra Pugar 

University of Zagreb 

A Marvellous (Hi)story: An Analysis of Tigana by Guy 

Gavriel Kay 

Tigana, a 1990 novel by the Canadian author Guy Gavriel Kay, is an exemplary 

work  of  the  fantastic  which  simultaneously  follows  already  established  rules  of  the 

genre  and  sets  foundations  for  new  perspectives  within  fantasy,  thus  standing  out 

from  the  generic  boundaries.  This  analysis  will  deal  firstly  with  the  way  in  which  the 

world of the novel is depicted as new, original and fantastic, with a special focus on 

the manner of introducing this fantastic world into the story. It will point out the most 

prominent  elements  of  the  fantastic  in  the  novel,  such  as  magic,  which  support  the 

argument that Tigana can be considered a marvellous text. Apart from being set in a 

fantastic world, Tigana is at the same time based on the elements of medieval Italy, 

which  are  vividly  exemplified  in  the  particular  context  of  medieval  musicians  and 

religion. This paper will explore the relation of the fantastic text to the ‘real world’ of 

the Middle Ages, but also to the relevant issues present in the contemporary world. It 

will  take  into  consideration  Rosemary  Jackson’s  theory  according  to  which  fantasy 

emerges  from  the  real  world,  at  the  same  time  problematizing  and  subverting  it. 

Finally,  the  paper  will  enumerate  the  main  thematic  spheres  in  the  novel  and  the 

ways in which they are emphasized from the point of view of the marvellous and the 

historical. 

 
 
 
	
	
	
	
 
 
 
 
Words to Works 163 

Kay’s Fantastic World-Building 

Tigana tells the story of a group of individuals fighting to regain their province 

on  an  imaginary  peninsula  of  the  Palm,  which  is  based  on  medieval  Italy.  The 

peninsula  is  divided  between  two  foreign  sorcerers,  one  of  which  destroyed  the 

protagonists' homeland and erased other people’s memory of it. In order to analyse 

how the world of Tigana is built, there have to be initial generic demarcations which 

imply awareness of direction and purpose of literary devices. This paper claims that 

the  novel  is  a  representative  work  of  the  marvellous,  which  is  a  sub-genre  of  the 

fantastic. According to the thematic division of fantasy, Tigana can be labelled as a 

piece  of  historical  fantasy,  where  “a  true  historical  setting  is  tweaked,  given  a  new 

name and usually an unobtrusive magical framework” (Barnard n.p.). This part of the 

paper  will  discuss  the  magical  and  imaginary  framework  as  an  essential  component 

of the marvellous. 

The genre of Tigana 

In his book The Fantastic. A Structural Approach to a Literary Genre, Tzvetan 

Todorov develops the theory of the fantastic, which he views as a genre “located on 

the frontier of two genres, the marvellous and the uncanny” (41). What is necessary to 

examine when attributing a fantastic work to one of these sub-genres is the reaction 

which  the  supernatural  elements  present  in  the  text  provoke  in  the  implicit  reader 

and  in  the  characters.  In  the  literature  of  the  marvellous,  according  to  Todorov, 

“supernatural  elements  provoke  no  particular  reaction  either  in  the  characters  or  in 

the  implicit  reader.  It  is  not  an  attitude  towards  the  events  described  which 

characterizes the marvellous, but the nature of these events” (54). Therefore, fantastic 

events in marvellous texts are not presented as extraordinary, but rather as a given. 

 
 
 
	
	
	
	
 
 
 
 
Words to Works 164 

The  same  can  be  observed  in  Tigana,  where  the  marvellous  element  is  already 

introduced at the very beginning of the novel, in the prologue: 

Both  moons  were  high,  dimming  the  light  of  all  but  the  brightest  stars.  The 

campfires  burned  on  either  side  of  the  river,  stretching  away  into  the  night. 

Quietly flowing, the Deisa caught the moonlight and the orange of the nearer 

fires  and  cast  them  back  in  wavery,  sinuous  ripples.  And  all  the  lines  of  light 

led  to  his  eyes,  to  where  he  was  sitting  on  the  riverbank,  hands  about  his 

knees, thinking about dying and the life he'd lived. (Kay 2, emphasis mine) 

The  mention  of  the  existence  of  the  moons,  which  signals  the  improbability  of  the 

novel  being  located  in  an  Earth-like  world,  is  followed  by  what  seems  to  be  a 

standard realistic description of a location, almost cinematically descending from the 

sky towards a river (although no river called Deisa exists in our world, and even if it 

did, it would still be a fictionalized river). The character does not express wonder at 

the  existence  of  the  moons,  which  already  confirms  to  the  reader  that  (s)he  can 

expect  a  marvellous  narrative  and  accept  the  alternative  world  which  it  offers  as  a 

realistic  one.  Christine  Brook-Rose  also  mentions  this  interconnection  of  the 

marvellous and the realistic: “the marvellous is often more akin . . . to realistic fiction: 

witness  the  heavy  over-determination  of  the  referential  and  symbolic  codes  in 

Tolkien's  trilogy,  which  has  all  the  trappings  of  the  realistic  novel”  (123).  This  is 

proven by the fact that the narrator of the marvellous offers only “a minor (and over-

determined)  hermeneutic  code,  which  can  generate  only  a  monological  and  minor 

metatext”  (Brook-Rose  123).  In  this  way,  the  reader  is,  similarly  as  in  Tigana,  over-

encoded, and as Rosemary Jackson argues, “merely a receiver of events which enact 

a  preconceived  pattern”  and  does  not  play  an  active  role,  especially  since  (s)he 

ought to become a listener of a self-proclaimed realistic story (33). 

 
 
 
	
	
	
	
Words to Works 165 

The marvellous narrator 

The  role  of  the  narrator  is  crucial  for  the  establishment  of  the  sub-genres  of 

the fantastic and in the creation of a convincing world. The voice telling a marvellous 

story, according to Jackson, 

has  absolute  knowledge  of  completed  events,  its  version  of  history  is  not 

questioned  and  the  tale  seems  to  deny  the  process  of  its  own  telling⎯it  is 

merely  reproducing  established  ‘true’  versions  of  what  happened.  The 

marvellous is characterized by a minimal functional narrative, whose narrator is 

omniscient and has absolute authority. (33, emphasis in the original) 

Even  though  the  omniscient  narrator  is  presenting  the  supernatural,  (s)he  is  very 

similar  to  a  historian,  not  only  by  presenting  the  events  as  true,  but  also  by  setting 

them  into  a  distant  past  which  is  subsequently  perceived  as  being  fixed  and 

unalterable. In Tigana's prologue, the already introduced character is soon revealed 

as Saevar, a renowned sculptor for the Prince who accompanies him on the riverbank. 

Saevar becomes the first focalizer in the novel: 

The Prince called him a friend. It could not be said, Saevar thought, that he 

had lived a useless or an empty life. He'd had his art, the joy of it and the spur, 

and had lived to see it praised by the great ones of his province, indeed of the 

whole peninsula. Then he'd turned, quickly, . . . and had ridden away with his 

Prince to war against those who had come upon them from over the sea. (3) 

This paragraph announces that a war is about to happen on the imaginary peninsula, 

but  also  implicitly  demonstrates  the  narrator's  means  of  persuading  the  implied 

reader that they are dealing with a true account, giving evidence of the past, which is 

the most valid narratorial element of reality. After the prologue, the reader discovers 

that the described events were in themselves another past, 18 years before the story-

 
 
 
	
	
	
	
 
Words to Works 166 

now,  when  an  entire  province  called  Tigana  was  destroyed  by  a  conqueror  named 

Brandin and its citizens were punished by erasing Tigana's name from history. 

Supernatural elements in the novel 

The weapon which enables Brandin to commit such atrocities is magic, which 

is  another  essential  element  of  the  marvellous.  Brandin  is  not  the  only  character  in 

the novel who has magical powers; there is another sorcerer called Alberico, and also 

the riselka, a creature perceived as supernatural by the characters. It is a mythological 

being to whom a legend is attributed, which says that if one man sees her, there will 

be a fork in his path, and if two see her, death will occur. The riselka is described by 

Brandin  as  not  being  “entirely  human  .  .  .  Skin  so  white  I  swear  I  saw  blue  veins 

beneath . . . And her eyes were unlike any I've ever seen. I thought she was a trick of 

light, the sun filtering through trees” (189). The mythological basis for this character is 

used on purpose in order to upgrade the novel’s the reality effect of medieval times 

which were embedded in superstition, albeit appropriated from another culture. The 

riselka is an important plot device as well, appearing in front of three men at the very 

end  of  the  novel  and  inherently  giving  it  an  open  ending.  The  existence  of 

supernatural beings in a text is, according to Todorov, 

one of the constants of the literature of the fantastic: the existence of beings 

more  powerful  than  men.  Yet,  it  is  not  enough  to  acknowledge  this  fact,  we 

must  further  seek  its  significance.  We  can  say,  of  course,  that  such  beings 

symbolise  dreams  of  power;  but  we  can  go  no  further.  Indeed,  in  a  general 

fashion, supernatural beings compensate for a deficient causality. (110) 

Todorov claims that this “deficient causality” propels the human need to explain the 

events characterized by chance as having a predetermined cause. In the literature of 

 
 
 
	
	
	
	
 
 
 
Words to Works 167 

the  marvellous,  this  is  made  possible  because  new  laws  of  nature  are  introduced 

which  do  not  exist  in  our  world,  such  as  the  consequence  of  one  of  two  people 

seeing the riselka in Tigana. This element of the supernatural is explained by Jackson 

as a consequence of a predominant culture, in this case a “supernatural economy,” 

where  “otherness  is  transcendent,  marvellously  different  from  the  human”  (24). 

Jackson  claims  that  a  culture’s  definitions  of  that  which  can  be  are  exposed  by 

presenting that which cannot be (23). The fact that the riselka determines the future 

of the characters questions the reader's own idea of fate and causality. 

Geographical map as a paratext 

Another  recurring  element  which  indicates  “that  which  cannot  be,”  and  yet 

exists  in  the  works  of  the  marvellous,  and  especially  of  high  fantasy,  is  the 

geographical  map  of  the  imaginary  world.  Kay’s  use  of  it  represents  a  part  of 

Tolkien’s literary legacy: 

In  the  field  of  fantasy,  eras  are  measured  as  B.T.  or  A.T.⎯before  Tolkien  or 

after  Tolkien.  Certainly  that  is  true  in  high  fantasy,  with  its  autonomous, 

secondary worlds. And it has particular application to the work of Guy Gavriel 

Kay,  who  helped  J.R.R.  Tolkien's  son  Christopher  edit  The  Silmarillion  in  the 

1970s. (Gunn n.p.) 

Inspired  by  Tolkien,  Kay  uses  geographical  maps  for  a  more  clear  depiction  of  the 

secondary  worlds  of  the  marvellous.  Tigana  is  one  of  the  nine  provinces  on  the 

peninsula  of  the  Palm,  a  land  evoking  Italy.  Other  than  the  shape,  the  difference 

between them is the fact that the Palm is a mirror image of Italy, extending towards 

the north. When the reader opens the book, (s)he is faced with the rules governing 

the world of the novel, and by looking at the map (s)he can more easily visualize this 

 
 
 
	
	
	
	
 
 
 
Words to Works 168 

world  and  willingly  suspend  disbelief.  The  narrator  often  refers  to  places  without 

explaining  where  they  are  located,  almost  forcing  the  reader  to  return  to  the  map, 

which creates a feeling of reading a historical text with geographical references. The 

map  adds  up  to  the  narrator’s  implied  claim  that  this  fantastic  world  is  a  legitimate 

one, as real as the Earth, which is the key to the marvellous. 

Tigana’s Relation to History and Reality 

However,  this  new  world  is  not  built  for  its  own  sake.  Although  it  is  new  and 

different,  it  has  a  relation  to  the  real  and  the  present.  The  topography  of  the 

marvellous is, according to Jackson, considerably different from the one of the ‘pure’ 

fantastic,  which  is  “bleak,  empty,”  with  “indeterminate  landscapes,  which  are  less 

defined  as  places  than  as  spaces”  (42).  The  places  of  the  marvellous,  including 

Tigana,  belong  to  something  that  Jackson  calls  a  “secondary,  duplicated  cosmos,” 

which  is  “relatively  autonomous”  (42)  and  relates  to  the  ‘real’  and  its  values  only 

“retrospectively  or  allegorically.”  Since  this  new  world  is  constructed  using  the 

elements  of  the  real  one,  is  an  “exemplification  of  a  possibility  to  be  avoided  or 

embraced”  (43).  Building  this  world  of  possibilities,  as  observed  by  Ordway,  Kay 

draws  elements  from  the  primary  world,  making  a  collage  of  its  mythology,  history 

and  literature,  all  of  it  moulded  by  his  own  imagination,  which  makes  it  new  and 

original, rather than a copy of pre-existing elements. 

Mirroring history 

The reality which Tigana refers to is Italy, more specifically the Italy of the late 

Middle-Ages and early Renaissance. The 'Italianness' is achieved by the use of names 

that  are  non-existent,  but  evoke  the  Italian  ones  with  their  phonological  quality. 

 
 
 
	
	
	
	
 
 
 
Words to Works 169 

David Ketterer notes that “like Tolkien, Kay has a gift for inventing appropriate and 

evocative  names  and  conveying  the  sense  that  these  foreign  words  are  part  of  an 

entire functioning language” (115). Such nouns are trialla, an imaginary bird; Chiara, a 

province  on  the  Palm;  and  names  like  Catriana,  the  love  interest  of  Devin,  who  is  a 

singer in a troupe of musicians and one of the novel's protagonists. 

The musical troupe traveling around the Palm trying to get a job in esteemed 

people's  houses  is  one  of  the  elements  used  to  depict  the  timeframe  of  the  novel. 

They participate in a large festival, evoking late-medieval festivals in Italy such as the 

Venetian  one,  which  was  world  famous  already  before  the  1500s,  emerging  from 

three holidays which 

were  also  (and  perhaps  fundamentally)  civic  festivals,  patriotic  occasions  that 

brought  together  in  a  showy  procession  the  entire  active  citizenry.  By  the 

fifteenth  century,  the  three  holidays  had  to  some  extent  flowed  into  one:  “a 

vast spring festival complete with public entertainments,” including a fifteen-

day  fair,  held  in  the  piazza  and  along  the  adjoining  merchants’  streets,  the 

Mercerie. (Davis 25-26) 

A  similar  festive  atmosphere  is  depicted  in  Tigana,  including  the  elements  of  the 

entertainment—the  secular—showing  the  lives  of  musicians  going  to  taverns  and 

khav  rooms9,  drinking  and  betting.  But,  Kay  does  not  stop  at  the  secular  and  the 

profane.  He  completes  the  picture  of  a  ‘medieval’  world  by  inventing  a  religious 

system, which was the centre of the medieval life in the real Europe. One of the basic 

rules  of  high  fantasy,  according  to  Janeen  Webb,  is  “the  fictional  validity  of  the 

9 Kay tends to blend in numerous motifs from various sources to add to the medieval 

atmosphere. The khav room motif comes from the Ottoman world. 

 
 
 
	
	
	
	
																																																													
Words to Works 170 

tenets that underpin the world in which the characters move and act, and one of the 

most  difficult  areas  in  which  to  achieve  this  is  the  system  of  religious  belief  that 

guides the imagined society” (n.p.). Kay is successful in achieving the validity of this 

system, where the Triad of the goddesses Eanna and Morian and the god Adaon and 

his priests is deeply embedded in the workings of the social system on the Palm. Kay 

founds the religious system of Tigana on Mesopotamian mythology: 

[t]he  mythological  basis  for  Tigana's  Triad  recalls  the  story  of  the  love  of  the 

mother-goddess  Ishtar  for  the  youthful  Tammuz,  whose  yearly  death  is 

mourned  to  the  music  of  flutes,  and  whose  resurrection  revives  the  natural 

world.  The  Semitic  word  Adon  simply  means  Lord.  (Webb  n.p.,  emphasis  in 

the original) 

Religion adds up to the novel’s clear vision of the late-medieval mindset. This makes 

Tigana in itself not significantly different from the history which it tries to mirror, since 

history, too, can only be accessed through its texts. It is in itself a text which 

historiographers organize by the means of emplotment (White 29), using literary 

devices. 

An  example  of  how  Tigana  reuses  and  changes  history  can  be  seen  in  the 

events  on  the  island  of  Chiara.  A  Tiganian  woman  named  Dianora,  daughter  of  the 

sculptor  Saevar  from  the  prologue,  is  sworn  to  avenge  her  father  killed  by  the 

sorcerer Brandin, but falls in love with him in the process. There is a legend on the 

island  which  says  that  Grand  Dukes  used  to  throw  a  ring  to  the  sea  and  a  woman 

would dive for it “to reclaim the ring from the waters and marry her Duke” (Kay 134). 

A similar tradition can be found in actual history books telling about late 15th-century 

Venice,  where  the  doge’s  Marriage  to  the  Sea  would  be  performed  by  the  doge 

“throwing a wedding ring into the water, to the accompaniment of fireworks, music, 

 
 
 
	
	
	
	
 
Words to Works 171 

and  general  aquatic  splendour”  (Davis  127).  Kay  adapts  this  historical  source  by 

giving  it  more  pronounced  legendary  grounds  in  the  history  of  the  Palm  and 

rendering it an important element of the plot, when a ring Dianora sees in the water 

prevents her from drowning and gives Brandin legitimacy to rule his part of the Palm. 

Medieval Italy is mirrored by the Palm not only geographically and culturally, 

but  also  politically:  they  are  not  unified  countries,  but  consist  of  a  number  of 

provinces. However, this is not the only extraliterary place and society referred to in 

Tigana.  The  Tyrants,  two  sorcerers  that  hold  two  halves  of  the  peninsula,  are 

foreigners;  Brandin  and  his  harem  evoke  the  Ottoman  Empire,  while  the  other 

sorcerer Alberico might represent the Spanish, who actually ruled over parts of Italy 

in the Middle Ages (Findlen 21). 

Subverting the real 

Another reality which Tigana reflects and subverts is the reality of the present 

moment, contemporary both to the author and his readers. Kay is not only a prime 

example of a post-Tolkien high fantasy writer, but also of a Canadian fantasy author. 

What  encourages  the  Canadians  to  be  more  inclined  to  write  fantasy  than  SF  is, 

according  to  Andrea  Paradis,  “the  fact  that,  unlike  the  nation  of  pragmatic 

technocrats to the south, Canadians tend to be more concerned with preserving our 

past⎯our  separate  cultural  ties  and  heritages⎯than  with  speculating  on  our 

somewhat dubious future” (44). Fantasy is the more historical one of the two genres, 

notwithstanding  the  fact  that  this  history  is  imaginary—the  idea  of  cherishing  the 

fixed past remains. 

The problem faced by Kay’s contemporaries, reflected in Tigana and recurring 

in high fantasy, is “the late twentieth century sense of innocence lost” (Webb n.p.). 

 
 
 
	
	
	
	
 
 
 
 
Words to Works 172 

Webb  argues  that  there  has  been  an  erosion  of  the  Romantic  belief  in  the 

importance and value of the human identity, a subjectivity which “no longer expects 

transcendence.” The novel reflects this pessimism by thematizing the lost identity of 

a community. The magician cursed an entire province to the loss of its history, which 

is  symbolized  by  the  loss  of  the  memory  of  its  name.  When  put  into  the  Canadian 

context,  the  novel  discusses,  in  the  framework  of  fantasy,  cultural  memory  and 

constructions of Canadian identity, reflecting one of the key concerns of Anglophone 

Canadians—how to assert themselves against the American identity (Ketterer 3). The 

novel  gives  voice  not  only  to  the  particular  communities  forced  to  replace  their 

country  and  identity,  but  perhaps  also  to  the  globalized  world  and  the  loss  of 

individual identity, of a person and of a country. 

Kay himself wrote about the relation between historical fantasy and reality, and 

the positive aspects of the imaginary: 

It  takes  incidents  out  of  a  very  specific  time  and  place  and  opens  up 

possibilities  for  the  writer⎯and  the  reader⎯to  consider  the  themes,  the 

elements of a story, as applying to a wide range of times and places . . . And, 

paradoxically, because the story is done as a fantasy it might actually be seen 

to apply more to a reader’s own life and world, not less. (n.p.) 

This  claim  can  be  expanded  to  fantasy  in  general.  Being  a  very  malleable  genre,  it 

offers the possibility of a universal perspective, detaches itself from the particular and 

makes the reader focus on the general human issues, themes and values, regardless 

of their country of origin and socio-cultural status. The following part of the paper will 

analyse such universal themes illustrated in Tigana. 

 
 
 
	
	
	
	
 
 
Words to Works 173 

Thematic Spheres: Memory, Power, Gender 

The  marvellous  and  the  historical  are  both  employed  to  emphasize  the  main 

themes in the novel, most prominent of which being the ones of memory—which is 

connected  to  the  idea  of  the  name—and  history.  The  secondary  themes  are  the 

question  of  gender  and  morality  of  power.  The  abovementioned  use  of  history  for 

the  purposes  of  establishing  the  genre  is  not  its  only  use  in  the  novel.  It  is  also 

present  on  the  plot  level.  When  Brandin  decides  to  erase  people's  memory  of 

Tigana's history, he is performing a conscious act of violence, aware of the fact that 

names and memory are “the fabric of identity” (Kay 153). Helen Siourbas claims that 

“[t]he sorcerer, . . . knowing that history can ensure the survival of identity, uses his 

power  over  language  to  rob  his  victims  of  both”  (75).  The  Tiganians  which  survived 

remember  their  home,  but  those  who  were  not  born  there  cannot  even  hear  the 

word Tigana. As a vengeance for his son's death in the battle 18 years ago, Brandin 

made sure that the memory of Tigana would die together with the last of its survivors. 

Devin,  one  of  the  two  main  focalizers  in  the  novel  (the  other  one  is  Dianora)  was  a 

child when Tigana was destroyed. He does not know the name of his province until 

Alessan,  Tigana's  exiled  Prince  and  the  leader  of  the  group  of  revolutionaries,  tells 

him  the  story.  Devin  finally  feels  completed  after  a  lifetime  of  being  identified  as 

someone from another province, troubled by an inexplicable sense of displacement. 

For  the  revolutionaries,  memory  is  the  only  weapon  left.  In  the  second 

epigraph of Tigana, Kay quotes George Seferis: “[w]hat can a flame remember? If it 

remembers  a  little  less  than  is  necessary,  it  goes  out;  if  it  remembers  a  little  more 

than is necessary, it goes out. If only it could teach us, while it burns, to remember 

correctly” (2). This is an underlying idea in Tigana. Apart from being a talented singer, 

 
 
 
	
	
	
	
 
 
Words to Works 174 

Devin has a gift of extraordinarily accurate memory, which stands in contrast with the 

brutality  done  to  his  people.  The  novel  also  deals  with  side-effects  of  having 

remarkable memory because Devin is forced to relive all negative experiences, such 

as  losing  a  friend  due  to  plague.  Cobb  claims  that  Tigana  is  “a  meditation  on  the 

psychological importance of remembered and shared history” (n.p.). It contemplates 

the line dividing history from the past. The difference between the two, according to 

Cobb, is that “the past cannot be changed, but history—the memory and the record 

of the past—can most definitely and most destructively be changed” (n.p.). Tigana's 

protagonists  are  set  on  a  quest  of  making  the  past  that  they  remember  equal  to 

history. The enemy sorcerer's action can be read as an extreme version of something 

that historians do all the time—recording a history different from the past. 

The  second  thematic  sphere  of  the  novel  exemplifies  the  question  of  how 

immoral a person can be in order to do the right thing. The ‘villain’ and the ‘hero’ in 

the novel are not complete opposites. Other than being a tyrant who erases an entire 

community, Brandin is a human being, observed from the point of view of his sworn 

enemy who falls in love with him. His actions can be justified by the profound grief he 

feels for the loss of his son. The fact that he is a sorcerer and that he can wield great 

power enables him to express his sorrow and have his vengeance. On the other hand, 

Alessan, the Prince of Tigana, uses his power to bind a wizard to himself, practically 

making him a slave, because he can be useful to him in the fight against Brandin. He 

shows no remorse for making that decision, but he explains his reasons to the wizard: 

“only because I have no home. Because Tigana is dying and will be lost if I do not do 

something”  (Kay  252).  Those  who  have  power  are  faced  with  more  difficult  moral 

dilemmas and forced to make choices, and both Brandin and Alessan use the power 

at hand to achieve their personal goals. In the first epigraph of the novel, Kay quotes 

 
 
 
	
	
	
	
 
Words to Works 175 

Dante Alighieri's words about exile from Paradiso, which signals his adapting of “the 

idea that a rational person may make a conscious choice that will make a difference 

for  all  eternity”  (Webb  n.p.).  The  motif  of  magic  makes  the  theme  of  power  even 

more pronounced in the novel because the repercussions of moral choices are more 

far-reaching than in reality. 

The  theme  of  power  is  connected  with  the  question  of  gender.  This  can  be 

observed  in  Dianora’s  chapters,  and  it  is  even  more  articulated  in  a  dialogue 

between  her  and  Brandin,  after  she  claims  that  a  powerful  woman  is  only 

complimented  for  her  beauty:  “'Do  you  think  you  have  power,  my  Dianora?'  She’d 

expected that. 'Only through you, and for the little time remaining before I grow old 

and  you  cease  to  grant  me  access  to  you'”  (Kay  137).  In  the  harem,  which  is  called 

saishan  in  Kay’s  world  and  which  Dianora  describes  as  an  “enclosed,  over-intense, 

incense-laden world of idle, frustrated women, and half-men” (146), Dianora is one of 

the most powerful people whom everyone turns to when they want something from 

Brandin. This raises the question of whether she actually has the power over Brandin 

(and, through him, over half of the Palm) or only as much he allows it. According to 

Webb,  “[a]lthough  Tigana  is  not  specifically  feminist,  it  is  certainly  pro-female:  its 

female  characters  are  active,  taking  the  initiative,  and  determining  the  course  of 

events” (Webb n.p.). These women have agency, but they are still confined within the 

borders  of  a  male-governed  world.  Dianora’s  actions  mostly  consist  of  using  sex  to 

manipulate  Brandin.  Similarly,  Catriana,  another  strong  female  character  in  Tigana 

and a member of Alessan’s group of rebels, seduces Devin so that he would not hear 

some  secret  information.  In  the  end,  both  of  these  women  die,  the  first  one 

committing  a  suicide,  and  the  second  one  fighting  for  her  province.  However,  their 

deaths  are  not  in  vain;  the  quest  for  Tigana  ends  successfully  and  its  name  can  be 

 
 
 
	
	
	
	
 
Words to Works 176 

heard  again  because  both  sorcerers  are  killed  and  the  identity  of  the  Tiganians  is 

reconquered.  This  happy  ending  is  highly  unrealistic,  which  is  certainly  not  a  flaw, 

since fantasy does not aspire to conform to the rules of the extraliterary world. 

Conclusion 

The novel Tigana is an example of how post-Tolkien high fantasy continues to 

set the story in an alternative and distant history, but does not fail to portray themes 

and characters relatable to the contemporary readership. This particular novel is set 

in  an  ‘Italy’  of  the  late  Middle  Ages,  called  the  peninsula  of  the  Palm,  and  its  plot 

revolves around a group of rebels trying to reconquer their province, Tigana, and to 

defeat  a  mighty  magician  who  erased  the  name  of  the  province  from  history. 

Supernatural  elements,  beings  like  the  riselka  and  extraordinary  humans  like 

sorcerers  and  wizards,  intertwined  with  the  elements  of  mythology  and  religion, 

create  a  magical  atmosphere.  This  enables  the  marvellous  to  depict  a  world 

abundant of elements that can function only there, contrasting the real world and the 

phenomena  which  cannot  exist  in  it  and  challenging  the  reader's  beliefs  and 

attitudes. Set in an alternative world of the marvellous, fantasy can detach itself from 

the  particular  and  talk  about  universal  matters.  In  Tigana,  such  an  issue  is  the 

question  of  name,  gender,  power  and  memory,  which  is  observed  in  parallel  with 

history.  Apart  from  raising  universal  issues,  Kay’s  novel  reflects  Canadian  cultural 

identity  and  the  contemporary  world  characterized  by  individuals  unsatisfied  with 

their lives, experiencing loss of innocence. 

 
 
 
	
	
	
	
 
 
 
 
Words to Works 177 

Works Cited 

Barnard,  Ashley.  “The  World  of  Guy  Gavriel  Kay.”  Fantasy  Faction.  16  Mar  2011. 

Web. 15 Feb 2016. 

Brook-Rose,  Christine.  A  Rhetoric  of  the  Unreal.  Cambridge:  Cambridge  UP,  1991. 

Print. 

Cobb,  Christopher.  “Guy  Gavriel  Kay  and  the  Psychology  of  History.”  Bright 

Weavings. 2005. Web. 6 Feb 2016. 

Davis,  Robert  C.  “Pilgrim-Tourism  in  Late  Medieval  Venice.”  Beyond  Florence:  The 

Contours  of  Medieval  and  Early  Modern  Italy.  Eds.  Paula  Findlen,  Michelle  M. 

Fontaine and Duane J. Osheim. Stanford, California: Stanford UP, 2003. Print. 119-32. 

Findlen Paula. “In and Out of Florence.” Beyond Florence: The Contours of Medieval 

and  Early  Modern  Italy.  Eds.  Paula  Findlen,  Michelle  M.  Fontaine  and  Duane  J. 

Osheim. Stanford, California: Stanford UP, 2003. Print. 13-28. 

Gunn, James. “The Other Side of the Mirror: Tigana.” Bright Weavings. 30 Jul 1998. 

Web. 6 Feb 2016. 

Jackson, Rosemary. Fantasy. The Literature of Subversion. London: Routledge, 1981. 

Print. 

 
 
 
	
	
	
	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Words to Works 178 

Kay, Guy Gavriel.  “Home and Away.” Bright Weavings. 2002.  Web. 15 Feb 2016.  

---. Tigana, New York: Roc, 1991. Print. 

Ketterer,  David.  Canadian  Science  Fiction  and  Fantasy,  Bloomington:  Indiana  UP, 

1992. Print. 

Ordway, Holly E. “The World-Building of Guy Gavriel Kay.” Bright Weavings. 13 May 

1998. Web. 6 Feb 2016.  

Paradis, Andrea, ed. Out of This World. Canadian SF and Fantasy. Kingston: Quarry 

Press, 1995. Print. 

Siourbas,  Helen.  “More  Than  Just  Survival:  The  Successful  Quest  for  Voice  in  Guy 

Gavriel Kay’s Tigana and Randy Bradshaw’s The Song Spinner.” Worlds of Wonder: 

Readings  in  Canadian  Science  Fiction  and  Fantasy  Literature.  Eds.  Camille  R.  La 

Bossière and  Jean-François Leroux. Ottawa: Ottawa UP, 2004. Print. 

Todorov,  Tzvetan.  The  Fantastic.  A  Structural  Approach  to  a  Literary  Genre.  Ithaca, 

New York: Cornell UP, 1973. Print. 

Webb, Janeen. “Myth and the New High Fantasy: Guy Gavriel Kay's Tigana.” Bright 

Weavings. 1991. Web. 6 Feb 2016. 

 
 
 
	
	
	
	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Words to Works 179 

---.  “Post-Romantic  Romance:  Guy  Gavriel  Kay's  Tigana  and  A  Song  for  Arbonne.” 

Bright Weavings. 1994. Web. 6 Feb 2016. 

White,  Hayden.  Metahistory:  The  Historical  Imagination  in  Nineteenth-Century 

Europe. JHU Press: Baltimore, 1975. Print. 

 
 
 
	
	
	
	
 
 
 
 
