Tigana - Wikipedia 

 Jump to content 

 Main menu 

 Main menu

 move to sidebar 
 hide 

 Navigation

 Main page 
 Contents 
 Current events 
 Random article 
 About Wikipedia 
 Contact us 

 Contribute

 Help 
 Learn to edit 
 Community portal 
 Recent changes 
 Upload file 
 Special pages 

 Search 

 Search 

 Appearance 

 Donate 

 Create account 

 Log in 

 Personal tools 

 Donate 

 Create account 

 Log in 

 Contents

 move to sidebar 
 hide 

 (Top)

 1 
 Setting 

 Toggle Setting subsection 

 1.1 
 Mythology 

 1.2 
 Riselka 

 2 
 Plot 

 3 
 Awards 

 4 
 References 

 5 
 External links 

 Toggle the table of contents 

 Tigana 

 6 languages 

 Español 
 Suomi 
 Français 
 Gaeilge 
 Italiano 
 اردو 

 Edit links 

 Article 

 Talk 

 English 

 Read 

 Edit 

 View history 

 Tools 

 Tools

 move to sidebar 
 hide 

 Actions

 Read 

 Edit 

 View history 

 General

 What links here 
 Related changes 
 Upload file 
 Permanent link 
 Page information 
 Cite this page 
 Get shortened URL 
 Switch to legacy parser 

 Print/export

 Download as PDF 
 Printable version 

 In other projects

 Wikidata item 

 Appearance

 move to sidebar 
 hide 

 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

 1990 novel by Guy Gavriel Kay

 For the French-Malian football (soccer) player and manager, see Jean Tigana . For the town in Mali, see Tigana, Mali .

 Tigana First edition cover

 Author Guy Gavriel Kay 
 Cover artist Mel Odom 
 Language English 
 Genre Fantasy 
 Publisher Penguin Canada 
 Publication date August 1990 
 Publication place Canada 
 Media type Print 
 Pages 673 pp. 
 ISBN 0-451-45028-0 
 Online Computer Library Center number</span>"}]]}'>OCLC 21332269 

 Tigana is a 1990 fantasy novel by Canadian writer Guy Gavriel Kay . The novel is set in a region called the Peninsula of the Palm, which somewhat resembles Renaissance Italy as well as the Peloponnese in shape.

 Setting
 [ edit ] 

 The world where Tigana takes place is a planet orbited by two moons. Kay notes that some of his readers tried to connect Tigana with A Song for Arbonne by speculating the stories take place on the same fictional world ; [ 1 ] Kay explained that he only repeated the same idea rather than attempting to expand his canon . [ 2 ] 

 Action is centered on the Peninsula of the Palm, which shares a common culture and language, but, like medieval Italy , is not a unified nation, comprising instead nine provinces with a long history of internecine struggle . The provinces are: Asoli, Astibar, Certando, Chiara, Corte, Ferraut, Senzio, Tigana, and Tregea. With great subtlety, Kay conveys the fact that all this takes place in the Southern Hemisphere of the unnamed world.

 This internal conflict facilitates the conquest of the region by two powerful sorcerers : Brandin, the King of Ygrath, and Alberico, an independent warlord from the empire of Barbadior. The two sorcerers conquered simultaneously but independently the peninsula, and have divided it in an uneasy balance of power.

 In an interview, Kay noted that the title of the book inadvertently coincided with the football player Jean Tigana . Because of this, the Italian translation of the novel used the title Tigane instead. [ 3 ] 

 Mythology
 [ edit ] 

 The religion of the Palm is centered on a triad of deities, a God and two Goddesses; the one being his sister-wife and the other being their daughter. An annual feast celebrates the torment and deicide of the God by his sister-wife and daughter, their eating of his flesh, and his rebirth.

 Riselka
 [ edit ] 

 The "riselka" is the only supernatural creature of the book. Based on the rusalka of Slavic folklore and mythology , its appearance in Kay's world is a token of some portent. A portion of it reads as follows:

 One man sees a riselka: his life forks there. 
 Two men see a riselka: one of them shall die. 
 Three men see a riselka: one is blessed, one forks, one shall die. 
 One woman sees a riselka: her path comes clear to her. 
 Two women see a riselka: one of them shall bear a child. 
 Three women see a riselka: one is blessed, one is clear, one shall bear a child. 

 Plot
 [ edit ] 

 A group of rebels attempting to overthrow both tyrants and win back their homeland. Many of the rebels are natives of the province of Tigana, which was the province that most ably resisted Brandin; in a crucial battle, Brandin's son was killed. In retaliation for this, Brandin attacked Tigana and crushed it more savagely than any other part of the Palm; then he used his magic to remove the name and history of Tigana from the minds of the population. Brandin named it Lower Corte, making Corte, their traditional enemies to their north, seem superior to a land that was all but forgotten.

 Only those born in Tigana before the invasion can hear or speak its name, or remember it as it was; as far as everyone else is concerned, that area of the country has always been an insignificant part of a neighbouring province, hence the rebels are battling for the very soul of their country.

 In the end the rebels engineer a battle between their two enemies hoping they will defeat each other. After victory, the magic preventing others from remembering the province of Tigana is removed.

 Awards
 [ edit ] 

 Tigana was nominated for the 1991 World Fantasy Award—Novel and Aurora Award for Best Novel , winning the latter.

 References
 [ edit ] 

 ↑ "Fiction Book Review: Tigana by Guy Gavriel Kay, Author Roc $21.95 (0p) ISBN 978-0-451-45028-9" . PublishersWeekly.com . Retrieved 2017-08-09 . 

 ↑ Interview to Andrew A. Adams 

 ↑ Jean-Louis Trudel. "Interview with Solaris" . Solaris / Bright Weavings . Retrieved 5 May 2017 . 

 External links
 [ edit ] 

 Tigana at Guy Gavriel Kay's authorized website 

 v 
 t 
 e 

 Works by Guy Gavriel Kay 

 Novels 
 Fionavar Tapestry 
 The Summer Tree (1984)

 The Wandering Fire (1986)

 The Darkest Road (1986)

 The Sarantine Mosaic 
 Sailing to Sarantium (1998)

 Lord of Emperors (2000)

 Others 
 Tigana (1990)

 A Song for Arbonne (1992)

 The Lions of Al-Rassan (1995)

 The Last Light of the Sun (2004)

 Ysabel (2007)

 Under Heaven (2010)

 River of Stars (2013)

 Children of Earth and Sky (2016)

 A Brightness Long Ago (2019)

 All the Seas of the World (2022)

 Written on the Dark (2025)

 Poetry 
 Beyond This Dark House (2003)

 Authority control databases Open Library 

 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tigana&oldid=1367868230 "

 Categories : 1990 Canadian novels 
 Novels by Guy Gavriel Kay 
 1990 fantasy novels 
 Rusalki 

 Hidden categories: Articles with short description 
 Short description matches Wikidata 

 This page was last edited on 5 August 2026, at 17:41 (UTC) .

 Page was rendered with Parsoid .

 Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization.

 Privacy policy 

 About Wikipedia 

 Disclaimers 

 Contact Wikipedia 

 Legal & safety contacts 

 Code of Conduct 

 Developers 

 Statistics 

 Cookie statement 

 Mobile view 

 Search 

 Search 

 Toggle the table of contents 

 Tigana 

 6 languages 

 Add topic