fey ancestry 

 a d&d campaign blog

 A Guide to Icewind Dale: Rime of the Frostmaiden – Chapter 1: Ten-Towns

 January 18, 2022 / feyancestry 

 This is the first in a series of guide articles that will finally close out my coverage of the Icewind Dale: Rime of the Frostmaiden , after I have played through the most of the adventure with my group. We went through the campaign by playing with rotating Dungeon Masters , info about that idea is here , and experience of such play will be recapped, eventually.

 This article is about the complete first chapter of the book and the flesh and bones of the towns and adventures in the 80 pages of it. Hopefully, it will help you with DMing the beginning of this adventure.

 Running This Chapter 
It is easy to find your way around and about this huge chapter because its parts are tiny enough and alphabetized. There is a good Starting Town table which gives you a preview of the quest tied to that town, and it also gives you the opportunity to randomize the start of the adventure (although you’d maybe want to read through the whole chapter to do that properly). There is also a Ten-Towns Rumors table which you can use to point your group towards a certain quest, or again randomize it all with a roll.

 Character Advancement 
The characters will have to finish five quests in this chapter to reach 4th level : just one to reach 2nd level, and two for each next level. After that, Chapter 2 opens up for them with new quests. However, if you feel confident enough in your DMing skills, you could start sharing the rumors from the Tall Tales in Ten-Towns table in Chapter 2 when the characters reach 3rd level, and start garnering some local reputation. Again, either use the rumors you want, or roll for a random result.

 NPCs 
There are a lot of NPCs in this adventure in general. Icewind Dale is a lively place. So, be sure to note which of these from the starting quests, or any other quests, made an impact and develop them further and use them in your campaign more often .

 Cold Open – Starting Quests 
The adventure offers two quests not tied to a particular town. Use those to your discretion, but I would suggest those quests are more to get your party to travel around the towns and explore more. If you introduce them, then their resolution should be in another town, which is not necessarily the next town.

 Cold-Hearted Killer. This is a pretty straightforward quest, and the reward is pretty hefty in comparison to other quests here. However, the villain is a potentially deadly threat for a 1st level party so you might want to prepare the info for an investigation. That’s a lot of info, on the victims and the MO of the killer, and potentially a lot of NPCs, but it could turn into a great payoff of the atmosphere and the world-building at play here. Another idea is to turn one of the victims into an acquaintance of one of the PCs , before Hlin approaches the party to give them the quest. This is also a solid boss fight for a larger 2nd level group, or a smaller 3rd level group.
 Appropriate Level: 3rd , just to be sure.

 Nature Spirits. This is a really cute quest, which in my opinion lacks a bit of meat on its bones. You could basically play for like fifteen minutes, finish it and get to level up. On some bad rolling of the percentile chance to find those elusive chwingas, the party could visit four towns before solving this quest. So consider allowing the rolls in the wilderness locations the party is visiting as well, if they are using the lantern of course.
 Appropriate Level: any. 

 Bremen (Quest: Lake Monster) 
This is one of the two ideal starting towns (the other is Bryn Shander, just below), because the threat is appropriate enough for 1st level. The innkeeper can share a sad story which can lead to another quest. The rest of the town lacks a bit of flavor. But that’s okay, Bremen’s one of the smallest towns of the ten.

 Lake Monster. The intro is really cool, and the random events on the lake are fun. It’s up to you and your players how to play the rest of it. This is also the opportunity for fishing, and using those rules! The freezing lake waters might be dangerous if you play by the rules and the boat gets capsized. The whole quest is a bit short, but if you start here and play through the setup, some rumors, some starting quest hooks, it could amount for a good first session.

 Again, I repeat my reminder for the NPCs from above.
 Appropriate Level: 1st. 

 Bryn Shander (Quest: Foaming Mugs) 
The informal capital of Ten-Towns and biggest town in Icewind Dale, Bryn Shander has everything. Although, you will have a DM’s freedom to fill in a bunch of that info, because not much is presented here. I am a big fan of Forgotten Realms fluff, and you should know there is more info on Bryn Shander in the Storm King’s Thunder adventure , and also in the Legacy of Crystal Shard adventure (which is all fluff and no rules, because it’s from just before 5e publication).

 Foaming Mugs. This is another short quest, but it ties good to the Blackiron Blades shop in town, and the larger goblin presence in the region later on (see Karkolohk in Chapter 2). Also, the yeti that killed the dwarf is not in this one, but it is the same yeti from the Targos quest. The small community of Ten-Towns is growing and connecting through the book pretty organically.

 This quest also has a good reward, and the characters could decide to rob the dwarves. There are suggestions for handling the killing of the dwarves, and you should reward their potential creativity, but this could or should get them in a lot of trouble. This quest also introduces snowshoes ! An important piece of equipment, along with crampons, in Icewind Dale.
 Appropriate Level: 1st. 

 Caer-Dineval (Quest: Black Swords) 
One of the four towns I didn’t get to play, but this one was on my list to DM (potential second pick, after Easthaven). The town itself is small, but it has a keep. It has an atypical quest tied to it, and it depends on your party being active to investigate it.

 Black Swords. If you have tiefling or warlock characters in your group this could tie to them . There is also a Character Secret that helps here. Chardalyn clues point to here, but that is a lot of set up work for any DM. Still, it might be a great payoff for the whole campaign.

 The cult is very cool, and the location is great. This is the quest that can open the larger campaign , depending on what you plan to do. In any case it presents the duergar invasion as a danger that is soon to come. It also gives the characters a very real choice of actually destroying the cult or allying with them, so the keep and the cult could become a very regular feature in your campaign.

 There are so many NPCs here that you might want to scale it down or be careful to not overwhelm yourself or your players.
 Appropriate Level: 2nd , but 1st is also totally okay if you have a roleplaying group that tends to avoid combat.

 Caer-Konig (Quest: The Unseen; also possibly Mountain Climb, see Targos below) 
Welcome to another small town with the silliest speaker there is . I love the potential for Trovus in any campaign, and he also has this traumatic story which helps with his drinking problem after the events in Chapter 4. For anyone going up Kelvin’s Cairn, Frozenfar Expeditions is the shop to visit – it is also, the town and the shop, a potential stop in the Targos quest.

 The Unseen. This quest also reveals the duergar presence and potentially their plans for the Dale. It’s a fairly traditional D&D quest: invade a small outpost and find stuff or whatever is going on there. If you use too many of those duergar quests or encounters, it might become a bit underwhelming later on in the adventure when the duergar actually become the real threat. However, one of these might become useful to introduce the duergar, their powers, methods, and the dangers they present . So when the time comes, the party can prepare properly.
 Appropriate Level: Definitely 3rd , but you can maybe go 2nd with a bigger or a sneakier group.

 Dougan’s Hole (Quest: Holed Up) 
Not much here in the smallest and weirdest of towns whose speaker later survives the chardalyn dragon attack in Chapter 4, and thus might become a valuable source of information then. But otherwise, this is completely skippable, and I’m not a fan of the quest either. It is rather hard, and it’s set in wilderness that might belong more in Chapter 2 than here, and there are even suggestions of (rolling for) random encounters from the Chapter 2 table.

 Holed Up. Sweet-talking monsters, and avoiding massive damage – this is what this quest might amount to. Winter wolves are cool NPCs, but if you consider their evil nature, and that they are wolves, it’s really a dangerous situation that can become disastrous if that other monster turns hostile.
 Appropriate Level: 3rd , and this is potentially deadly even for a large 3rd level party.

 Easthaven (Quest: Toil and Trouble) 
Judging by the detail provided here, Easthaven is the main town for this adventure. Three locations described here, and one of them mapped, have encounters. The seance can provide clues to stuff and more mysterious rumors. The burned wizard ties in to another quest in Chapter 2 you might play. There are also duergar skulking about . But it’s up to you how, if, and when to use it all. Just a note: use the séance to introduce the magic cauldron , if you want it to play a role. I DMed my part by the book, and the séance turned ugly quickly with a bad die roll.

 Toil and Trouble. This quest is pretty straightforward, but if your party gets the cauldron it opens up a whole new world of inter-town politics and winter troubles . The cauldron could also yield the first proper payday for ambitious parties, along with some moral quandaries. You could get some help with bargains with hags from the latest adventure The Wild Beyond the Witchlight , because this hag’s motivations aren’t really fleshed out. I tried to prepare for every option, and had trouble parsing all the elements. If you didn’t play Lake Monster in Bremen, you could adapt the Lake Events table to add to the investigation part, before the party spots the lost boat and caves.
 Appropriate Level: 3rd , it is also potentially deadly, but it’s easier to go easy on the party.

 Good Mead (Quest: The Mead Must Flow) 
I love everything about Good Mead, and I’m a bit sad no one picked this quest and town for our campaign. The power vacuum in town creates some good opportunities for political struggles, roleplaying, and ambitious characters.

 The Mead Must Flow. The stolen supplies of mead could ruin the whole of Ten-Towns, and it’s up to the characters to save the day. It’s a lovely opportunity for silly roleplaying and some unexpected twists, presenting the verbeegs in this adventure. You know the shenaningans with giants from the Hobbit . Also the combat might be epic, as the monsters can be deadly, but everything should still stay in control if the party is 3rd level, and there are enough of them.
 Appropriate Level: 3rd , just to be sure things don’t get out of control with those potential 3d8+4 damage rolls.

 Lonelywood (Quest: The White Moose) 
Another of the tiny towns, but somewhat notorious in reputation based on the population and (the type of) people who settled here, with a really nice speaker.

 The White Moose. This one ties in to the Lake Monster quest from Bremen . And it’s also a great wilderness adventure that has some random encounters in the forest which are great fun for the trip there and back. It has a ruin that the characters can explore and maybe use later in the campaign to make divinations. The moose is strong enough, but the frost druid can be a really hard fight if the party’s resources are depleted. If the druid escapes, she can turn into a recurring villain.
 Appropriate Level: 3rd , the second level spell slots should help a lot, and hopefully the DM won’t put the frost druid’s fifth level spell slot to deadly use.

 Targos (Quest: Mountain Climb) 
The big walled Zhent controlled town makes me miss factions in adventures. Some are mentioned and present, but they gave up on them being active in published campaigns after Waterdeep. Targos is a nice town, and should have been treated more like Easthaven. Especially because the quest only starts there, then veers off far away . On the other hand the Speaker’s plots can have repercussions on quests in Good Mead and Easthaven.

 Mountain Climb. This is a great and fun quest. It will introduce you to the rules for avalanches . The downside is that it takes place on Kelvin’s Cairn, and Targos is like the seventh farthest town away from it , eighth if you count the distance by air from Good Mead, out of a total of ten towns! The urgency of the events loses steam if you count all the hours it takes to finally reach Kelvin’s Cairn, via Caer-Konig or any other way. And this “plot hole” keeps nagging on my brain. You basically start the quest in one town, where the party has to make decisions what to do, and then the trek to another town to start the investigation and eventually the action.

 But when you finally climb the mountain, there’s fun and danger in heaps, and no matter how much I complained in the paragraph above I highly recommend this one . Also remember that one yeti here is the same yeti who killed the dwarf from the Foaming Mugs quest in Bryn Shander.
 Appropriate Level: 2nd , should be enough to deal with one yeti, the second might make the characters flee.

 Termalaine (Quest: A Beautiful Mine) 
We visited Termalaine at the end of the last campaign, and it kinda grew on me, and some of the players too I guess, since Herbert decided to retire there . There is some nice folklore stuff there, in a similar vein to Easthaven, but with no quest or séance for the follow up. Though, players intrigued by this stuff, who invest their characters and roleplay, could be in for a treat that is a useful magic item.

 A Beautiful Mine. This is also one of my favorite adventures in the book . The mine location and map is great. The kobolds come with a twist, which resolves into a tragedy in any way the characters involve themselves. And then there is the horror monster in there, too.
 Appropriate Level: 2nd , it is also suitable for 1st level parties; however, the grell, the ghost, and the deep shaft to the Underdark amp up the dangers of very real death.

 In Conclusion 
This is probably one of my favorite opening chapters of any published campaign . There is enough meat here for a full campaign, and it all ties together nicely. It is a proper living sandbox , with enough adventures to level up any party to any level. It’s easy to scale up, or switch up quests from town to town depending on the interests of your group.

 One of the best features here is that every quest has a paragraph at the end that gives you further developments . This creates a living world, and provides DMs with a nice framework for the nearer future in those towns, of those NPCs or monsters.

 Don’t forget to use the introduction to this chapter, and the introduction to the book to get even more atmosphere and ideas.

 Don’t forget that your party meets a bunch of NPCs every time in every town and on every quest . And the players and the DM could contact or search out any of them again . Some are scholars, some are guides, some are merchants – they all live in this inhospitable frozen land and suffer together. And remember, every town is sacrificing something to Auril to ease their collective suffering – this could also put the party and characters at odds with people and towns. Consider also introducing NPCs from Chapter 2 early enough , so by the time characters start earning a reputation, they might meet faces they already know offering them quests or telling them more rumors. Some examples might include: Mylbor Tafferac the best hunter in Icewind Dale, and Yselm Bloodfang a druid and Reghed tribeswoman who might act as a guide (see pages 103-104 in the book).

 Share this:

 Share on X (Opens in new window) 
 X 

 Share on Facebook (Opens in new window) 
 Facebook 

 Like Loading... 

 Leave a comment Cancel reply 

 Δ 

 Search for: 

 Archives
 Archives 

 Select Month 
 September 2023 (2) 
 August 2023 (1) 
 July 2023 (1) 
 June 2023 (6) 
 February 2023 (2) 
 November 2022 (1) 
 September 2022 (8) 
 August 2022 (1) 
 July 2022 (3) 
 June 2022 (1) 
 April 2022 (5) 
 March 2022 (3) 
 January 2022 (6) 
 November 2021 (2) 
 October 2021 (2) 
 September 2021 (1) 
 August 2021 (2) 
 July 2021 (2) 
 May 2021 (2) 
 April 2021 (16) 
 March 2021 (7) 
 February 2021 (1) 
 January 2021 (2) 
 December 2020 (2) 
 November 2020 (3) 
 October 2020 (3) 
 September 2020 (4) 
 August 2020 (1) 
 July 2020 (1) 
 May 2020 (6) 
 April 2020 (13) 
 March 2020 (24) 
 January 2019 (6) 
 December 2018 (1) 
 November 2018 (4) 
 October 2018 (3) 
 September 2018 (3) 
 August 2018 (23) 
 September 2017 (10) 
 May 2017 (5) 
 April 2017 (6) 
 March 2017 (7) 
 February 2017 (5) 
 January 2017 (1) 
 December 2016 (4) 
 November 2016 (5) 
 October 2016 (4) 
 September 2016 (4) 
 July 2016 (3) 

 Other Sites
 fey ancestry 
 Discover WordPress 
 The Daily Post 
 WordPress.com Blog 

 fey ancestry a d&d campaign blog 

 Discover WordPress A daily selection of the best content published on WordPress, collected for you by humans who love to read. 

 The Daily Post The Art and Craft of Blogging 

 WordPress.com Blog News, Tips & Website Tutorials 

 Privacy & Cookies: This site uses cookies. By continuing to use this website, you agree to their use. 

To find out more, including how to control cookies, see here:

 Cookie Policy 

 Comment 

 Reblog 

 Subscribe 

 Subscribed 

 fey ancestry 

 Sign me up 

 Already have a WordPress.com account? Log in now. 

 fey ancestry 

 Subscribe 

 Subscribed 

 Sign up 

 Log in 

 Copy shortlink 

 Report this content 

 View post in Reader 

 Manage subscriptions 

 Collapse this bar 

 Loading Comments... 

 Write a Comment... 

 Email (Required) 

 Name (Required) 

 Website 

 %d 

 Design a site like this with WordPress.com
 Get started
