Table of Contents - A handy way to check out my articles by topic 

 My most recent Guides: 
 Icewind Dale: Rime of the Frostmaiden 
 Baldur's Gate: Descent Into Avernus 
 Waterdeep: Dragon Heist 

 As an Amazon Associate I earn from qualifying purchases.

 You can reach me at : powerscorerpg@gmail.com 

 Friday, March 25, 2016 

Dungeons & Dragons - A Guide to Curse of Strahd

Welcome to what will hopefully be a useful guide to running Curse of Strahd. My goal here is to provide a resource for all of us DMs to use. I am going to go through the book and try to organize things, figure out any confusing sections, and possibly provide cheat sheets for any scenes with a lot of moving parts.

I made a .pdf of this guide and added in a bit of new material. You can get it here at the DMs Guild. It is in a print-friendly format.

You can buy this adventure and the tarokka deck on amazon here:

 Curse of Strahd: A Dungeons & Dragons Sourcebook (D&D Supplement) 

 D&D: Curse of Strahd Tarokka Deck 

 Official Links :

 Death House A pdf of the level one adventure from Curse of Strahd 

 New Character Options Revenant race, Monster Hunter and Inquisitive 

 Haunted One Background and Trinkets 

 Table of Contents 

 Barovian Souls 

 Blinsky Toys These are great. Each has its own art. 

 Story Bible 

 Curse of Strahd Walkthrough Map Get this! 

 Black and White Free Maps (untagged) 

 All of the Maps by Mike Schley 

 Handouts 

 Volo's Visit to Barovia A great story/overview of Barovia by Ed Greenwood 

 Adventurers' League DM and Player Guides 

 Adventurer's League Launch Page 

 Dice, Camera, Action! This is a stream of the adventure's author running Curse of Strahd. If you have the time, definitely check this out. 

 Buy the Tarokka Deck Here 

 Other Links :

 An Enhanced Version of Strahd 

 List of the Deadliest Encounters in Curse of Strahd 

 Enhancing Curse of Strahd 

 Merric Blackman Curse of Strahd Playthrough 

 The Id DM Death House Notes and Ideas 

 Learning DnD Curse of Strahd Playthrough 

 My Links :

 How to Run Curse of Strahd 

 My Review/Rundown of Death House 

 Guide to Strahd von Zarovich 

 Guide to Vampires 

 Planning 

You should definitely check out the Adventurers League DM Guide for Curse of Strahd, as it has a number of fun things you might want to include in your game.

 Jenny Greenteeth : This hag can help out the adventurers and she is the only spellcaster who offers services in Barovia. The heroes have to pay her in gold and will also have to do a random hilarious chore for her.

 Death in Ravenloft : This rule option says that if a character is under 5th level and they die, the Dark Powers of Ravenloft will resurrect them! The adventurer will rise up the very next round, but they will have to roll on a chart for a "dark gift." They will also be Touched by the Mists. " You're tainted by evil. Cats hiss as you approach, milk sours at your touch... " The character also gains..

 Resurrection Madness : Souls of the dead are trapped in Barovia. When the character is 
resurrected they gain a form of indefinite madness from realizing that their 
spirit is trapped in Ravenloft, possibly forever. This is discussed in the Curse of Strahd book on page 24.

 Curse of Strahd Level Guide 

 Roaming Barovia : This adventure is wide open. It is possible that the heroes will end up in a place way too dangerous for them. If this is something you don't normally do, you might want to alert your players before the first session of this fact. Some players go into a campaign with the assumption that everything is scaled to their level. Here is the areas by level chart (page 6) with page numbers for each area:

(Level 3) Village of Barovia: Flavor page 33 (the heroes will likely hit A, B and C before arriving at Barovia),

(Level 4) Town of Vallaki: Page 95

(Level 4) Old Bonegrinder: Page 125

(Level 5) Village of Krezk: Page 143

(Level 5) Wizard of Wines Winery: Page 173

(Level 6) Van Richten's Tower: Page 167

(Level 6) Yester Hill: Page 197

(Level 7) Argynvostholt: Page 129

(Level 7) Werewolf Den: Page 201

(Level 8) Tsolenka Pass: Page 157

(Level 8) The Ruins of Berez: Page 161

(Level 9) Castle Ravenloft: Page 49 

(Level 9) The Amber Temple: Page 181

 Appendix A: Character Options 

(Page 209) Don't forget, there's a free pdf of this section here . I am putting this appendix here because this background stuff should be handled before the campaign even starts. All of the "Haunted One" options can be linked to entities in the adventure. 

 Harrowing Event : For most of these, the vestiges in the Amber Temple seem like the natural choice. Definitely check out pages 191-196.

 The monster could be linked to one of the vestiges (page 191-196).

 The "dark star" is probably a reference to a vestige - Zhudun the Corpse Star on page 196.

 Not sure about this one. Maybe it's Strahd's dead brother Sergei, reaching out for someone to rescue Tatyana/Ireena.

 Again, this sounds like it calls for a vestige (pages 191-196). 

 I just realized that the best choice for this is that the sibling is Izek Strasni (pages 231-232). It fits perfectly. I guess you could go with Ezmerelda (page 231). If you want to go real dark, you could say that the sibling died and many of her body parts were used to create the flesh golem bride (read S13. Main Hall on pages 150-151).

 You should probably link this to the werewolf clan in chapter 15 (page 201). You can use the "Werewolves in the Mist" hook on page 21. The werewolves have been able to creep into the Misty Forest and go back to Barovia.

 This should definitely be Baba Lysaga (stats on page 228, her home is on page 163). Remember that the creeping hut is a new development, it hasn't been around for long.

 This tome might be a book in the Amber Temple library. It might relate to Vecna or one of the vestiges.

 I'd probably go with a cacodemon servant of Shami-Amourae (page 192) or Seriach the Hell Hound Whisperer (page 193). Maybe the hero can summon a weak hell hound, or become one for a short time.

 You could say that the murderers were vistani. They come and go from Barovia as they please. Maybe pick one of the vistani in the camp on page 119 as a murderer who got away. Ezmerelda (page 230) was a vistani who went rogue, maybe she helped this character escape. 

 List of Blinsky Toys 

 Toys from Curse of Strahd (compiled by Brian McDaniel) 

 Malformed Doll. Strange leer and sackcloth dress; hand-me-down from Mad Mary to daughter Getruda. (Barovia Village E3 p.44)

 Plush
 Werewolf. Stuffed with sawdust and wood-carved babies; blade claws and 
retractable teeth. (Castle Ravenloft Random Encounter p.50) 

 Jester Marionette. Tangled strings and copper bells. (Castle Ravenloft Random Encounter p.50) 

 Wooden Puzzle Box. Carved with clown faces; rattles but is empty. (Castle Ravenloft Random Encounter p.50) 

 Faceless Doll. Aged wedding dress. (Castle Ravenloft Random Encounter p.50) 

 Coffin Jack-In-The-Box. Contains Strahd puppet. Plush Werewolf. (Castle Ravenloft Random Encounter p.50)

 Wooden Teeth with Fangs. Spring-loaded and will chatter for 1 minute when wound. (Castle Ravenloft Random Encounter p.50)

 Marionette
 Puppet Theater. Includes king, queen, prince, princess, executioner, 
tax collector, dunce, vampire, and vampire hunter. (Vallaki N20 p. 102)

 Toy Vistani Wagon. Includes horse and Vistani figures. (Vallaki N20 p. 102)

 Pair of Clown Masks. One scowling, one frightened. (Vallaki N20 p. 102)

 Wooden Top. Shows scarecrows chasing children. (Vallaki N20 p. 102)

 Stuffed Bat. Puppet strings. (Vallaki N20 p. 102)

 Ireena Dolls. Pretty little dolls with white skin and auburn hair. Made for Izek to obsess over. (Vallaki N3j p.107)

 Torn-Up Vistani Doll. Colorful clothing. Used by Rictavio to train tiger. (Vallaki N5 p.116) 

 Headless Doll with Attachable Heads. Includes head with eyes and mouth sewn shut. Gadof Blinksy stock. (Vallaki N7 p. 118)

 Miniature Gallows. Includes weighted “hanged man.” Gadof Blinksy stock. (Vallaki N7 p. 118)

 Wooden Nesting Dolls. Innermost doll is mummified corpse. Gadof Blinksy stock. (Vallaki N7 p. 118)

 Bat Mobile. Wings flap. Gadof Blinksy stock. (Vallaki N7 p. 118)

 Musical Merry-Go-Round. Winds=up; wolves chase children. Gadof Blinksy stock. (Vallaki N7 p. 118)

 Strahd Ventriloquist Dummy. Gadof Blinksy stock. (Vallaki N7 p. 118)

 Nightmare Rocking Horse. “Bucephalus” carved on it. (Wizard of Wines W19 p. 179)

 Zombie Doll. Resembles a PC. (Werewolf Den Z5b p. 203)

 Toys from Dice, Camera, Action 

 Strahd Doll. Scry/Dream focus for Strahd ? (Dice, Camera, Action episode 13)

 Selected Toys from Dragon+ 

 Eye Marbles. Eyes appear to be looking at roller. (Dragon+ Issue 207 #14)

 Bone Slide-Whistle. Carved skeletal figure. (Dragon+ Issue 207 #14)

 Hag Doll. Three child-dolls in stomach. (Dragon+ Issue 207 #14)

 Hunter/Wolf Doll. Plush hunter doll turns inside out into black wolf. (Dragon+ Issue 207 #14)

 Bone Dominos. Domino set carved from bones. (Dragon+ Issue 207 #14)

 Stitched Teddy Bear. Made of different parts of other teddy bears. (Dragon+ Issue 207 #14) 

 Before You Start the Campaign 

Here's some stuff you might want to do before you begin the first session. You might also want to check out my "How to Run Curse of Strahd" article which gives details on how to plan out your campaign.

 Decide Between Level One or Level Three : If you want to run "Death House" (page 211) start the group at level one. If you want to jump right in to the main adventure, have the group make level three characters. 

 Do a Tarokka Reading : This reading might be supplanted if the heroes visit Madame Eva. The Tarokka rules are on page 11. 

 Handout : Print out the handout called "Version Two" on page 256 in case the heroes find the body in the Svalich Woods (page 34). 

 Notes : Check out page 7 and maybe jot down a few little moments like a sight only the hero with the highest passive perception sees, an example of age, etc.

 Page 35 is Your Friend : Put a tab or bookmark or something on page 35. It's got the map of Barovia and descriptions of all the weird little random areas. You'll be flipping to this a lot. 

 The Mists : Make sure you understand how the mists work (page 23) and have those elusive exhaustion rules ready (Player's Handbook page 291). When you're in the fog, you're heavily obscured (PH page 183) which means you are blinded - attacks rolls against the blinded person have advantage, and the blinded person's attack rolls have disadvantage.

 Souls : Make sure you understand Barovian Souls (page 24). Only 1 in 10 Barovians have a soul!

 The Dark Powers : Check out the mysterious evil entities in the Amber Temple (pages 191-196). These creatures offer the heroes dark gifts that might turn the character evil. If you think you have a player who would get a kick out of this, consider having a chosen entity reach out to the hero throughout the adventure, calling them to the amber temple. Personally I would try to work Tenebrous or Shami-Amourae into this any way I could. You could do a variation on the 2e "dark powers check" rules.

 NPCs : Make a list of Barovian names (use the name list on page 25). There are a lot of points in this adventure where the heroes will interact with someone, and it's up to you to name them. I think you should have the first and last names of at least five men and five women ready.

 Roll Treasure : Roll on the treasure chart on page 37, in case the group gets to the Tser Pool Encampment. This way you don't have to stop the game to roll dice and possibly look up a magic item at the table. 

 Special Items : There are items in the castle that can be used in locations to get stuff. The thing about this is, once you've dealt with the castle, the campaign is over. So you should look at those places and see if you want to change where the adventurers find the item, so they can actually use some of this stuff before the adventure is over. The heroes can free the revenants on page 142 and get permanent bonuses, and they can get a ring of regeneration on page 148. 

 Trinkets : To save game time and to maximize trinket-ness, pick out some trinkets (page 210) that you want the heroes to have. There's a few points in the adventure where the heroes will find a trinket. 

 Zombies : Make sure you have Strahd Zombie stats ready, maybe roll out how many zombies there are in a house or two. There are zombies in houses in Barovia, the first place the heroes are likely to explore.

 Yikes : Check out/absorb the night hag stats just in case things get hairy when the heroes get to page 48.

 Marching Order : When you sit down to play, ask your players to establish a marching order. Tell them that unless you are told differently, this is the order you will assume they are traveling in. There are a number of traps that will hit the person first in line, so you need to be clear on who that is beforehand. 

 Gay Stuff : There are a number of gay NPCs in this adventure. 
Where I live in New York this isn't a big deal, but if you think there 
might be problems you should mention this to your group before you even 
start the adventure. You don't want one person making jokes that offend 
others. It could get out of hand really fast. If you are running this in
 a public game store, be extra mindful! The last thing you want is for a
 closeted, shy player who has chosen D&D as a way to connect 
socially have insults shoved in their face. 

 Ezmerelda : Ezmerelda is an NPC who may accompany the group on the adventure. Almost every chapter has a way to get her to meet the party. Personally, I think she should join the group in Chapter 11 (see page 172). Her stats are on page 231. 

 Once You Start : Write down a deed each PC has done, either in the adventure or as part of their background. Madame Eva will know these things (page 37) and players might get a kick out of it when she meets them. 

 It's Always Cloudy in Barovia : Remember that it is always raining or cloudy. The sun does not come out until the very end of the adventure, once Strahd is defeated.

 Use Ravens to Guide the Group : Throughout this adventure, ravens (wereravens - the Keepers of the Feather - page 98) try to help the heroes and lead them to places, or warn them off. It is entirely possible that the heroes will end up heading to a place that is way too deadly for them. You can use the ravens to warn them. You might want to use Muriel Vinshaw (see page 165) if the heroes are in a pinch.

 How to Start the Adventure 

1. Adventure Hooks : Pick a hook from the pile on pages 18-22 and run it. Here's the three that I think are kind of the "main" ones:

 Plea For Help (page 18): A gypsy gives the group an invite to Ravenloft. These people are scum (check out the whipping scene on page 121). 

 Creeping Fog (page 22): The heroes are camping, the mists take them to Ravenloft . 

 Mysterious Visitors (page 19): The group investigates gypsies, are escorted through Barovia. 

2. The Lands of Barovia : Go to the map of Barovia on page 35. The heroes come in on the far right of the map and experience these encounters in order:

 A. The Road (page 33): Creepy forest. The heroes walk for 5 hours and then... 

 B. Gates of Barovia (page 33): Headless statues, gate swings open. The image of this place is on the bottom of page 34. 

 C. Svalich Woods (page 34): Where they might find a dead guy with a letter. 

 3. The Village of Barovia : Once the group gets to town, there are some choices to make:

 If the heroes are level 1 : and you are going to run "Death House", skip to page 211 and read that flavor text. Once this adventure is done, then proceed... 

 If the heroes are level 3 : read the flavor text on page 41 (Mad Mary's weeping).

 As the Group Begins to Explore the Town :They see an old lady selling dream pastries (she does her best to avoid the heroes). This one is a bit weird and dangerous. 

 Follow the Weeping : Checking out the weeping will bring the group right by Bildrath's Mercantile and the Blood of the Vine Tavern. A major NPC awaits the heroes in the tavern, so put a neon sign on it or something.

 Exploring : The group will probably check out Mad Mary (page 44), then buy some stuff at Bildrath's (page 43) and check out the tavern (also page 43).

 The Tavern : The heroes can meet Ismark. If you did the "Pleas for Help" hook, Ismark says the letter is a forgery. Ismark wants the heroes to come to his mansion to help his sister...

 Burgomaster's Mansion (page 44): The heroes meet Ireena and see that their father needs to be buried in the cemetery...

 Church (page 45): There's a vampire spawn and some shenanigans.

 Chapter 1: Into the Mists 

 Strahd's Plans : Strahd has got three goals:

 Turn Ireena : Strahd thinks she is his love Tatyana reborn. He has already drank her blood twice. The next time he does so, he will kill her and turn her into his vampire consort.

 Find Dr. van Richten : Strahd wants to find him and break his spirit.

 Search for a Successor/Consort : Strahd will test the heroes to see if they are worthy. The more challenges they overcome, the more he is interested in them.

 Strahd Should Interact with the Characters Multiple Times : I would suggest that you have Strahd meet the characters when they are level 4 and see how it goes. I would be a little worried as a DM of 7th/8th level heroes taking Strahd down with some clever trick.

 Bonus Hit Points : As far as I can tell, the Heart of Sorrow (check out page 59) absorbs Strahd's damage, up to 50 hit points. This gives you a nice buffer. Strahd can show up and do something evil. The heroes might hit him a few times, and it will seem like he takes no damage at all. The he turns into mist and heads back to his castle. I'm still reading up on the heart of sorrow, but this is my understanding so far.

 Beucephalus : Remember, Strahd can ride his nightmare! It flies, it can go ethereal, it's very handy. Strahd could hover far above the heroes and drop level 4 fireball spells on the heroes if he wanted to. Beucephalus, "the Wonder Horse" is detailed on page 93. 

 Fortunes of Ravenloft 

 Crowns in corners = High Deck 

You will need the Tarokka deck or playing cards. You could also just narrate the scene and predetermine what cards are drawn based on how you want it to go. Make sure you write down the results of the reading.

 When to Do the Reading : You should do the reading once before you run the adventure. Then, if the characters meet Madame Eva, do it again and have that reading be the "official" one. You can also have Ezmerelda do a reading if the heroes don't meet Madame Eva.

 Card Reading : This reading determines all of the important details of this adventure. Let's go through it step by step:

 1. Make Two Decks : You are going to take 14 cards and make the high deck. The rest of them are the common deck:

 High Deck : Artifact, Beast, Broken One, Darklord, Donjon, Ghost, Executioner, Horseman, Innocent, Marionette, Mists, Raven, Seer, Tempter.

 Common Deck : All the other cards.

 2. Set Up : Shuffle each deck. Check out the diagram on page 11. Then:

 Draw three cards from the common deck and put them in positions 1, 2, and 3.

 Draw two cards from the high deck. Put them in positions 4 and 5. 

 3. Do the Reading : Now you're going to flip them over in number order, and match up the cards with the entries on pages 12-17. 

 Common Deck 

 Card 1 : Match this up with the entry on pages 12-15. This determines where the Tome of Strahd is. 

 Card 2 : Match this up with the entry on pages 12-15. This determines where the Holy Symbol of Ravenkind is.

 Card 3 : Match this up with the entry on pages 12-15. This determines where the Sunsword is.

 High Deck 

 Card 4 : Match this up with the entry on pages 15-17. This is Strahd's Enemy, an NPC that can help you.

 Card 5 : Match this up with the entry on page 17-18. This determines where Strahd can always be found.

 Write down the results! It is extremely important ! There you go. Reading done. 

 Notes on the Cards :

 NPC Aid : Remember that the NPC who is Strahd's Enemy has a special power that can give a character inspiration.

 Drawing the Darklord Card for Strahd's Enemy : This one is kind of a bummer. The heroes have no NPC ally. I think if I drew this I'd change it - I'd just pick the NPC I want (Rictavio or the Mad Mage).

 Adventure Hooks 

 Mysterious Visitors (page 19) : Keep in mind that the group will be with the Vistani. They'll pass through the gates (page 33), Barovia (page 41) and River Ivlis (page 35). 

It's kind of weird to go through the town of Barovia with the Vistani. Do they stop or do they pass through? Or do the vistani wait outside town and let the heroes wander? The vistani would probably know the three women who own the Blood of the Vine Tavern.

 Faction Info : Here's the faction NPCs for those using the Forgotten Realms or running in the Adventurers League:

 (Harpers) Zelraun Roaringhorn : Human mage who gives each Harper PC a scroll of remove curse (PH page 271). He can have the characters' weapons silvered, too. 

 (Order of the Gauntlet) Lanniver Strayl : Human knight, follower of Tyr . Gives each faction PC a potion of heroism (For 1 hour you gain 10 temporary HP and the effects of a bless spell - PH page 219).

 (Emerald Enclave) Nobody : Nobody! 

 (Lords' Alliance) Eravien Haund : Half-elf noble who knows a lot. He gives Lords' Alliance PCs a scroll of magic weapon (PH page 257) and a mark of prestige - letter of recommendation (DMG page 228).

 (Zhentarim) Davra Jassur : Human assassin - her husband was killed by the werewolves. She can give the Zhentarim PCs a mark of prestige - special favor (DMG page 229).

 Spell Scrolls : Spell scrolls are detailed on DMG page 200. I have a hard time remembering all the ins and outs of these, so here's everything you need to know:

 Who Can Use Scrolls : If the spell is on your class's spell list, you can use an action to cast it off the scroll (no components needed). 

 Who Can't : If the spell isn't on your class list, it is unintelligible to you.

 High Level Spells : If the spell is a higher level than you can cast, you make an ability check: DC = 10 + the spell's level. Fail means the scroll is wasted! You might want to use the Scroll Mishap table (DMG page 140). 

 Determine DC and Bonus : Check the chart on DMG page 200 to see what the Save DC and attack bonus is.

 How to Copy a Scroll Into a Spell Book : You can copy a spell off of a scroll into your spell book. Make an Intelligence (Arcana) check, DC = 10 + the spell's level. The scroll is destroyed whether the roll is a success or not. Once the magic is invoked, it crumbles to dust. 

 Chapter 2: The Lands of Barovia 

 Demiplane : Barovia is a demiplane formed by Strahd's consciousness and surrounded by fog. No creature can leave without Strahd's permission.

 Setting DCs : A good rule of thumb when you're figuring out a DC on the fly: When in doubt, it's a 15. Check the bottom right of page 33. It's almost all 15's. 

 Things the Heroes can Learn : Barovians can tell the characters useful info from the lists on page 26.

 Magic & Etherealness : Check page 24 for all of the little changes to magic. You can go ethereal in Barovia, but once you leave the ethereal, you appear back in Barovia no matter where you went. So I guess if you go in the ethereal and you find an ethereal curtain (portal to another plane), when you go through you just pop out in Barovia.

 Resurrection : If you die, your soul is trapped in the mists. If you are dead 24 hours before being raised, you gain indefinite madness (DMG page 260).

 Clerics : Clerics do still get their spells. 

 Mists of Ravenloft : The Mists are important (see page 23). Here's the deal:

 Deadly : If you start your turn in the mists, make a DC 20 CON save. Fail means you gain a level of exhaustion (PH page 291). You can't reduce this exhaustion until you leave the mists. Once you hit level 5 exhaustion, you can't move. Level 6, you're dead!

 No Escape : Wandering in the mists always ends up with you back in Barovia.

 Pea Soup : The area in the fog is heavily obscured (you're blind - you have disadvantage to hit things, and things have advantage to hit you). 

 Souls : 1 in 10 Barovians have a soul. When someone dies in Barovia, their soul is trapped. After decades, the soul is reincarnated into a newborn. If Strahd is defeated, they can leave Barovia.

 Shells : The rest are "shells" - mindless, depressed people. They can and do have children, who sometimes have souls. Even if Strahd is defeated, shells cease to exist if they try to leave Barovia.

 Strahd can't Feed on Shells : Strahd can tell who has a soul and who doesn't. He gains no nourishment from shells. 

 Two "Gods" Exist in Barovia : Mother Night and the Morninglord. I don't really know anything about these two. The Morninglord rules the day. The people believe Mother Night sent Strahd to punish them for their ancestors' offenses.

 Vistani : They're gypsies, secret spies for Strahd. Strahd lets the Vistani come and go from Barovia as they wish. They know some lore, found on page 27. They have powers:

 Vistani Curses : Vistani can curse people who are within 30 feet (see page 28). The curse goes like this: WIS save DC 13? Madame Eva has a DC of 17. The curses range from making it impossible to tie a rope, to going blind and deaf. I guess this is a power to use when the heroes mistreat a vistani.

 Evil Eye : (page 28) This can charm person or hold person, save each round. 

 Random Encounters : (page 29) Check every 30 minutes of travel. Roll a d20. 18+ means an encounter. My favorites are Corpse, Revenant, Skeletal Rider and Trinket. Here's some notes:

 Creepy Thieves : I love the idea of a spy trying to steal hair and pieces of clothing from the characters, to enable Strahd to scry them better.

 Corpse : Finding a corpse of yourself.. awesome.

 False Trail : Spiked Pit (DMG page 123). Save DC is 12-15 (you pick). Damage = 11 (2d10). 

 Hunting Trap : (PH page 152) DC 13 DEX save, d4 damage and stop moving. Escape = DC 13 STR check. Fail = 1 point of damage. It's like a bear trap - it clamps on your foot/leg and is attached to a chain that is held in the ground by a spike.

 Revenant : This might be a cool NPC to jump in and help the heroes fight some of Strahd's wolves. Revenant stats - MM page 259. 

 Skeletal Rider : This could be fun to use fairly regularly. Maybe you could make it where the rider is eternally looking for a way out of Barovia. They might spot the skeleton near the mists, poking around, trying to find a way through.

 Trinket : The trinkets (page 210) are awesome. Pick a few in advance!

 Areas of Barovia (page 33) 

 Gates of Barovia : (page 33) When I read about the gates, I had a picture in my head. When you look at the art of this place on page 34, it's quite more grand than the flavor text suggests. Definitely check that picture out, it will help make the beginning of this adventure bigger. Remember, the gates open and close on their own.

 Svalich Woods : The letter is on page 256. The heroes may eventually learn that the letter was forged by Strahd. Dire Wolves are on MM page 321. Wolves are on MM page 341.

 Tser Pool Encampment : (page 36) This place is important. This is where Madam Eva is, so we'll do the Tarokka reading here. The wizard in the vistani's story is the Mad Mage on page 39. You might want to roll the treasure in advance (page 37) so if it's a magic item, you can select what it is without slowing the game down.

 Gates of Ravenloft : (page 38) There's a thousand foot drop so.. you know, you're dead. Green slime is on DMG page 205: DC 10 DEX save, 5(d10) acid damage. It does 11 acid to wood or metal. It does this damage until scraped off. You might want to have the slime damage the boots of some of the PCs to set up my idea for Helga (page 64). The gates lead to the Front Courtyard (page 52).

 Lake Zarovich : (page 38) Wow. A drunk guy puts a little girl in a sack and chucks her into the lake. She demands that the heroes bring her to the Vistani Camp (it is "N" on the Barovia map, description on page 119). She is Luvach's daughter (page 122). Luvach will ask the heroes to find her, if they don't find her on their own.

 Mad Mage of Mount Bartok : Wow. The Mad Mage is D&D famous! Stuff to consider:

 Prepare Spells : You should definitely make notes on a few spells you want him to use - Time stop? Cone of cold? A lightning bolt cast at an 8th level slot? And definitely counterspell. Read up on them, maybe write down what they do and a page number in advance. 

 Mansion : The magnificent mansion is on PH page 261. 

 Reward : If the heroes help him shake off his nuttiness, he gives them each a charm of heroism: It gives the effect of a potion of heroism. Let me save you the comedy of references that is the charm of heroism. Here is what it does: +d4 to attack rolls and saving throws for one minute (10 rounds). 10 temporary hit points for one hour. Wow.. imagine having this guy as Strahd's Enemy.

 Chapter 3: The Village of Barovia 

 This area is scaled for level 1-3 characters. 

 When the Heroes Arrive : (page 41) Read the flavor text out loud. The group can hear Mad Mary weeping (page 44). They spot a lady in rags (page 48). Ultimately the group is going to want to get to the Blood of the Vine Tavern (page 43) to meet Ismark.

 Strahd Zombies : You might want to cook up an encounter in a house with some Strahd Zombies (page 241). The zombies are fun - you can cut their limbs off when you do 5 damage or more. If you have a group that likes combat, this is an entertaining way to keep them satisfied as they explore.

 Dream Pastries : (page 48) When exploring, the heroes are meant to notice a hunched figure in rags. She sells dream pastries (see page 125). They are 1 gp each. The pastries put you in a happy dream-trance: DC 16 Con save, fail = incapacitated and 0 speed for d4+4 hours. The secret ingredient: Bones of innocent children! Seriously! This old lady is actually a hag named Morgantha. She lives in the windmill (see page 127). She can see through an eye that Cyrus Belview is wearing on a necklace in Castle Ravenloft (Cyrus is on page 77). She probably knows quite a bit about the interior of Castle Ravenloft. If the adventurers get in a fight with her, they will probably die.

 Parriwimple's Stats : He might need to rough up the heroes in Bildrath's Mercantile (page 43).

 Parriwimple : (Gladiator, MM page 346) AC 14 HP 112! +7/+7/+7 13(2d8+4)

 Parry : +3 to AC against one melee attack.

 Morbid Molly, Gertruda's doll 

 Mad Mary : (page 44) She's a creepy lady whose daughter, Gertruda, is gone. The heroes don't know it, but they will eventually meet Gertruda in Strahd's Castle (page 68. The doll Mad Mary is holding is detailed here . 

 Blood of the Vine Tavern : (page 43) Two things to keep in mind here. One is that the sisters suggest that the heroes meet Madame Eva. The other thing is that the heroes can meet Ismark here. Ismark wants the group to meet his sister Ireena, who plays a gigantic role in this adventure.

In his article in Dragon Plus issue 6, Ed Greenwood wrote about the menu of this tavern: "Stews and ale and warm round loaves of dark nut bread with strong yellow-green cheeses of unfamiliar local varieties." 

 Ireena 

 Burgomaster's Mansion : (page 45) Our heroes meet important people. Here's stuff to keep in mind:

 Strahd's Army : Strahd had wolves and zombies attack the house for weeks. The stress caused their father, the Burgomaster, to die.

 Strahd got to Ireena : Strahd visited her twice, but the memories are hazy. She remembers the blazing hunger in his eyes. 

 We Need to Bury the Dad : Ireena and Ismark want to bury their dad, but there are screams coming from the church. The heroes need to bury the dad. Ireena and Ismark won't do anything until this is done. 

 Church : Keep note of what time it is in the game. If it is midnight, the march of the dead happens (page 48). If you've ever played or run Ravenloft before, maybe have old characters as some of the ghosts, just for fun. You could also have these ghosts be the spirits of the dead adventurers found in the cells on pages 80-82.

 Chapter 4: Castle Ravenloft 

 This area is scaled for level 9 characters. 

I am using art from Jason Thompson's walkthrough poster. This gigantic map is a great way to get a look at what is actually in each room. You can buy a print of this map here . I photoshopped in the room numbers and added some words to some of these images for the sake of clarity.

Make sure you are prepared before the group goes in: 

 Marching Order : Make sure you know the marching order of the party before you go in here. You will need to know who is in front and back at certain times. Also, there is a trap on page 80 where it will be important to know if your group is single file or not.

 Write Down the Weight of Each Character : There are a few traps which are triggered by weight. It is particularly important for the trap on page 80.

 Lots of Perception Stuff : Write down the characters' passive Wisdom (Perception) scores.

 Tarokka Placement : Don't forget to implement the tarokka results. Strahd will be in a specific area and there might be a magic item or two here depending on the cards you drew.

 What Time is it? Make sure you establish what time of day it is when the group enters. There's at least one room (K50. on page 70) where it matters if it is day or night. 

 Make a Map : You might want to draw or make a map of room k84 (page 85). The group might spend a lot of time in there, and it is important to know who is standing where. There's a million traps and monsters, and positioning will matter. There is a top-down map here . The 3e isometric map is here .

 NPC Prep : The heroes might end up with a buddy or two. Maybe have stats handy for Sir Klutz (page 91), Gertruda (page 68) and Pidlwick II (page 236).

 Random Encounters : (page 49) Roll a d20. 18+ means there is a random encounter. Check at these times:

 Every ten minutes when resting in the castle. 

 When the heroes enter an unoccupied area for the first time.

You might want to roll the unoccupied room ones ahead of time so it doesn't slow the game down at the table. There are a ton of unoccupied areas. 

Here's some notes on some of the encounters:

 Black Cat : You might want to do what they did in one of the older Ravenloft modules. If the black cat crosses a character's path, something bad happens to them soon. Maybe they have disadvantage on certain rolls for a short time.

 Blinsky Toy : The Strahd coffin jack-in-the-box is awesome.

 Ezmerelda D'Avenir : I love the tap on the shoulder.

 Strahd : This is cool, but be careful. You can have him turn to mist after he gets a shot or two in. I find surprise to be a little tricky. First, roll to see who is surprised. Then, roll initiative. Then proceed in order. The people who are surprised can't do anything until their next turn. No movement, no actions, no reactions. 

 Unseen Servant : See PH page 284. AC 10 HP 1. It can't attack. Creatures have disadvantage to hit it. I really like the goblet of wine.

 Entering : The group is likely to enter the castle in K7 (page 54). They'll go in, see the dragon statues, move on to K8 and meet Rahadin coming down the stairs.

 K1. Front Courtyard : (page 52) You might want to do a thing where some of the characters mess up their boots in the mud. Maybe there are some broken bones half-buried in the mud that tear open the sole of someone's boots. This way, Helga (page 64) can offer to repair them and maybe make friends with the party. You could also use the green slime back at the gate (page 38) to damage boots as well.

 K8. Great Entry : (page 55) Rahadin's stats are on page 236: AC 18 HP 135. Remember that those who are within 10 feet of him hear deathly screams and may need to make a save. He is completely loyal to Strahd. He wants to lead the group to K10.

 K10. Dining Hall : (page 56) This room is so great. Make sure you get all the little details. The players will be quite freaked out. 

 Mace of Terror 

 K13. Chapel : There are great items in here:

 Icon of Ravenloft : (page 222) It can heal! That is always useful. Augury is on PH page 215. Remember that Strahd can choose to answer this (see page 24).

 Mace of Terror : (DMG page 180) It can frighten! Pretty cool, great art for it.

 Heart of Sorrow 

 K20. Heart of Sorrow : (page 59) It says that the heart absorbs Strahd's damage. So, if you hit Strahd, the heart takes damage, not him. The heart has 50 hit points, and then it shatters. 

Ten Animated Halberds: (MM page 20) flying sword AC 15 HP 17 +3 d10+1

 K27. King's Hall : (page 62) Roll initiative! Strahd acts on initiative count 5. This is very haunted house-y. 

 K30. King's Accountant : (page 62) You might want to roll on the chart in advance so you have the stats all prepared. Lief Lipsiege knows where the Holy Symbol of Ravenkind is. You might want to run Lief as an older version of John Harker from the Dracula movies. Maybe an older Kianu Reeves (in my opinion, Bram Stoker's Dracula is mandatory viewing for anyone planning on running this adventure). 

Manual of Bodily Health: (DMG page 180) Read this for 48 hours and gain +2 CON. Not too shabby!

 K31. Trapworks : (page 63) This leads down through K31b down to K61 (page 74). The sound of this elevator moving can be heard all throughout the castle. I am not clear on how the trap works. Check out page 74. The elevator fills with sleep gas. Now, I am not sure if that means when this elevator comes up, the doors open and the sleep gas pours out? Or does it only affect those in the elevator? Let me know what your thoughts are on this. Those asleep in the elevator are prime targets for Strahd, who can get to this elevator from K47.

 K31a. Elevator Shaft : Not sure what the DC is to climb. It says climb is impossible without a climber's kit due to the greasy chains and smooth walls. Seems to me that this is a case where the DC would be a 30. Check DMG page 238. A 30 is described as "nearly impossible," which is what climbing this shaft is supposed to be. You should make that clear to a player thinking of climbing in there. 

 K32. Maid in Hell : (page 64) What an awesome NPC! You can do a lot of cool stuff with Helga. You could go with the pathetic peasant villager angle, or you could give her a sexy maid outfit. As the bootmaker's daughter she could help the party by tricking out their footwear somehow during a rest, maybe attaching little spikes to the soles or something.

 K36. Dining Hall of the Count : (page 65) This is another really fun room. I feel like there might be a cooler effect for the cake, but I can't quite come up with it yet. Pidlwick is amusing. 

 Invisible Stalker : (MM page 192) AC 14 HP 104 +6/+6 10(2d6+3)

 Doss Lute : (DMG page 176) If you play this without being attuned, you might take damage. This thing is loaded with spells! Fly, invisibility, protection from fire, and a pile more. This is a major boost for a bard.

 K37. Study : You might want to play up the age of the painting of Tatyana. You also might want to flesh out the book titles, maybe tie them in to old Ravenloft products. Here's some ideas I had:

 Bestiary of Strange Beasts : Van Richten's guide to ghosts, vampires, etc. Maybe the vampire one is damaged, as Strahd found it insulting and he chucked it.

 Book of Military Strategy : This might refer to the Tergs, the barbarian horde that Strahd and his brother battled before Strahd became a vampire.

 Epic Novel : There is a famous author who lives in Sigil. Her name is Jeena Ealy (In the Cage: A Guide to Sigil page 72). Stuff she's written:

 In Darkest Sigil : A novel that exposes how poor the quality of life is in the Hive Ward.

 History of the Blood War : The war between devils and demons.

 Guide to Wines : You could do a book on planar wines, I have a short list in my guide to Food and Drinks .

You might also want to place some of the books from page 21 of the original AD&D Ravenloft adventure. They might be too goofy depending on how you run your games:

 Identifying Blood Types: A Beginner's Handbook

 Masonry and Woodworking

There's two others from the 1e Ravenloft: Embalming: The Lost Art, Life Among the Undead: Learning to Cope. But much to my amusement, they are in Curse of Strahd on page 70 along with two new books.

 K41. Treasury : (page 67) Lots of loot:

 Daern's Instant Fortress : (DMG page 160). Only Strahd knows the command word. 

 Alchemy Jug : (DMG page 150) It can make liquids like acid, beer, mayonnaise and poison. Maybe even poison mayonnaise!

 Helm of Brilliance : (DMG page 173) This thing can cast spells, make your weapon a flaming weapon, and piles more. 

 K42. King's Bedchamber : (page 68) Gertruda is here, She is Mad Mary's daughter (see page 40). Gertruda thinks Strahd is a great guy. 

 K46. Parapets : (page 69) If the heroes spend five minutes out here, they will have to deal with Strahd's animated armor (page 227). Remember that it has blindsight and that it has a pretty nice ranged attack.

 K47. Portrait of Strahd : (page 69) You might want to creep the players out by having Strahd be in a different pose the next time they look at it. 

 Rug of Smothering : (MM page 20). Remember that whoever is being smothered takes half of the damage if the other heroes start attacking the rug.

 Guardian Portrait : (page 227) It has counterspell! Use it!

 K49. Lounge : Escher will run and try to to lure them to wherever Strahd is. Remember that he has spider climb, which will help him survive a chase. He might want to climb out onto the rooftop (K53. page 71). Spider climb makes it easy for him and hard for the heroes. Escher seems to have a special role in this adventure, as it is noted that Escher will make an effort to become a vampire lord once Strahd is slain (see "Consorts Unleashed," page 208). 

 K56. Cauldron : (page 72) Barovian Witch stats are on page 229. I was nervous looking at this room. Fighting seven witches sounds deadly, but then you look at their stats and see that they have 16 hit points. 

 If the Heroes are Defeated : I'll tell you what, though. If the witches are invisible and surprise the heroes, and they all cast Tasha's hideous laughter, your group is in huge trouble. I would say that if the witches defeat the heroes, they could tie them up and put them in the cauldron, slow-cooking them to perfection. The witches would leave to let them simmer. The heroes can escape and creep around in their underwear looking for their gear. 

 K59. High Tower Peak : (page 73) Pidlwick II stats are on page 236. Roll a stealth check at +2 and compare to the group's passive perceptions. Remember Pidlwick II badly wants someone who will enjoy his company, and also remember he has a penchant for pushing people down stairs. 

 K60a. North Tower Rooftop : (page 74) Swarms of bats are on MM page 337.

 K61. Elevator Trap : (page 74) I found this room very confusing, so I broke it down in a way that makes it easy for me to understand it:

 Trigger : 400 pounds of pressure on the plate triggers the trap. It also triggers if someone raises the lever in K31 (page 63).

 The Trap : Solid steel portcullises seal the people standing on the plate in a compartment. The portcullises can't be lifted. It's actually an elevator. It goes up to K31a as magic sleep gas fills the compartment. 

 Sleep Gas : DC 15 CON save or fall unconscious for one minute. You can use an action to shake someone awake. Once the save is made, those in the elevator need to roll for initiative.

 The Counterweight : This comes down and lands next to where the elevator was. If you are under this thing and don't move, you are "pulverized."

 Roll Initiative : The heroes must roll initiative. The elevator goes all the way up in one round. They could use this time to wake up an ally, cast a spell, etc. (there's a secret door in the ceiling of the elevator, but if you climb onto the top you will get squashed for 44 damage at the end of the round!)

 Arrival : Once at the top, the portcullises retract. The heroes are at K31 (page 63). 

 Strahd : Strahd can hear the elevator - it's loud. He may make his way here to pummel the heroes.

 Return : One round after the elevator comes up, the portcullises lower again and it goes back down.

 K62. Servants' Hall : Mongrelfolk stats are on page 234. Hag Eye info is on MM page 176. Remember that Morgantha the hag (the dream pastry lady, page 127 and 48) can see through this. Cyrus will try to lead the group to the elevator and trigger the trap. Then he'll drag their bodies to Escher's lounge (page 70). You can also do a thing where Cyrus leads the group to their guest room. A lot of the rooms in this area have special things that happen if Cyrus is with the party.

 K63. Wine Cellar : (page 77) Yellow mold is on DMG page 105. Touch it: 10 foot cube of spores. DC 15 CON save or 11 damage and poisoned. You take 5 damage per round until you make your save. Black pudding is on MM page 241. 

 K65. Kitchen : (page 78) Zombies are MM page 316. 

 K66. Butler's Quarters : (page 78) Desecrated ground is on DMG page 110. Undead have advantage on saves. 

 K69. Guards' Quarters : (page 79) Skeletons are on MM page 272. 

 K72. Chamberlain's Office : (page 79) Rahadin stats are on page 237. Remember that he has that scream aura that does a lot of damage. Shadow demon stats are on MM page 64. Rahadin has a special scene when Strahd dies (see page 207) so really play up his slavish devotion to Strahd.

 K73. Dungeon Hall : The group has no chance of detecting these traps unless they use magic or are extremely clever. Remember that each trap goes off once, then they need to recharge for 24 hours. Refer to the map on page 75 to get a nice look at where the victims are teleported to. Notes on the side-prisons:

 K74c. Rotting Corpse : Potion of heroism is on DMG page 188. 10 temporary hit points and +d4 to attack rolls and saving throws for an hour

 K74g. Gray Ooze : Gray ooze in on MM page 243.

 K74h. Lost Sword : Crusader's mantle is on PH page 230. For one minute, you and your allies do +d4 radiant damage.

 K75a. Prisoner : Remember that he will betray them when it is advantageous. Werewolf stats are on MM page 211. His wife, Zuleika, is on page 204. She has some child prisoners, and she will gladly set them free in exchange for Emil.

 K76. Torture Chamber : (page 82) Strahd zombies are on page 241.

 K78. Brazier Room : (page 82) Iron golems are on MM page 170. Remember that if the heroes attack something in here, the doors shut and magically lock. To breath weapons, heroes must save for each. 

Teleportation page numbers:

 Red : Page 66

 Orange : Page 74

 Yellow : Page 93

 Green : Page 118 

 Blue : Page 195

 Indigo : Page 152

 Violet : Page 157

 K84. Catacombs : (page 85) Lots of notes. This is a very crucial area:

 Doors : The crypt doors require a DC 15 STR check to move them. 

 Bats : The bats don't attack unless provoked. 

 Trap : This teleport trap sends an adventurer into crypt 14 (page 88) with 14 wights! One wight is teleported out and appears where the hero was. I marked it on the map below.

 Catacombs, page 85 

Crypt notes:

 Crypt 4 : (page 86) Ghost is on MM page 147.

 Crypt 6 : (page 86) Poison darts are on DMG page 123. +8 to hit, 2 damage and a DC 15 CON save: 11 poison damage, half on save. St. Markovia's thighbone is on page 222. It's like a mace of disruption (DMG page 179).

 Crypt 7 : (page 87) Gargoyle is on MM page 140.

 Crypt 9 : (page 87) Deck of illusions is on DMG page 161.

 Crypt 14 : (page 88) This is real nasty if a PC gets teleported in from the trap (see above). Wights are on MM page 300. Remember, when a wight is slain, it becomes 2d6 skeletons! Skeletons are on MM page 272.

 Crypt 15 : (page 88) Staff of power is on DMG page 202. Remember, the first time it is grabbed it does piles of damage, CON save for half.

 Crypt 20 : (page 89) Sasha Ivliskova seems like an awesome NPC. Vampire Spawn is on MM page 298.

 Crypt 21 : (page 89) Banshee is on MM page 23. Archmage spells are on MM page 342. Time stop! She has been visiting her brother (see page 121). Patrina is mentioned on page 208 ("Consorts Unleashed"). If she survives this adventure, she is going to try to become Barovia's new master.

 Crypt 27 : (page 90) Giant wolf spider is on MM page 330.

 Crypt 29 : (page 91) Brown Mold is on DMG page 105. DC 12 CON save, 22 cold damage, half on save. Fire makes it expand. Luck blade is on DMG page 179. Read up on wishes on PH page 288. Wish duplicates any 8th level spell or lower, heal 20 people, undo a single recent event, etc.

 Crypt 31 : (page 91) Spiked pit is on DMG page 122. DEX save DC 12? 11 damage plus 3d6 falling damage. The trap doors close. You need to make a DC 20 STR check to open them (locking pit DMG page 122).

 Crypt 33 : Sir Klutz might not fit the tone of your game, so you might want to rename him if you think it won't go over well. Have his stats ready, as he is a potential NPC ally. Phantom warrior stats are on page 235.

 Crypt 34 : (page 92) Imp is on MM page 76.

 Crypt 35 : (page 92) Ghoul is on MM page 148.

 Crypt 38 : (page 92) Hell hound is on MM page 182.

 Wraith is on MM page 302.

 Crypt 39 : (page 39) Beucephalus the Wonder Horse! Strahd will be really angry if they kill it. Nightmare is on MM page 234.

 K85. Sergei's Tomb : (page 93) If Ireena is with the group, maybe have her have a vision or something. After all, this is the body of the dude she was in love with in a past life.

 K86. Strahd's Tomb : (page 93) Strahd's brides! Vampire spawn are on MM page 298.

 Chapter 5: The Town of Vallaki 

 This area is scaled for level 4 characters. 

There's a lot of fun stuff in this chapter, but there is an awful lot of organizing to do. I have tried to list the plots and NPCs as succinctly as possible so you can make sense of this rather dense chapter. But first..

 Poison Needle Traps : (DMG page 123) This chapter is full of poison needles! If you fail to pick the lock: 1 point of damage, 11 poison damage and a DC 15 CON save. Fail = poisoned 1 hour (one of the needles in this chapter knocks you unconscious).

 Organize Your NPCs : You're going to have to decide what NPCs to "feature." You have a million options. Lady Wachter has an imp and a spy that you could do a lot with, or nothing at all. The group should probably meet Blinsky , as his toys are strewn all throughout the adventure and his toy shop is very amusing. Don't forget to check out this page for more toy options . The heroes should definitely meet Rictavio - he's a big deal. I get a kick out of Stella (Lady Wachter's daughter) so you might want to send the heroes into her house for some snooping around. Also, Izek Strazni is really cool (page 231). He's been dreaming about Ireena and he will abduct her if he sees her.

 Why Are We Here? 

Remember that Ismark wanted to try to bring Ireena here for safe-keeping, but in the end Ireena is going to have to stick with the group to prevent Strahd from killing her. Rictavio is an important PC who can help the group figure out their tarokka reading and he can point them in the direction they should go.

The group might also be here looking for one of the treasures, depending on your tarokka reading results. Once the adventurers arrive, there's a number of plots for you to unleash on them. Finding a treasure will put them through one "quest" of some kind. It's up to you to use the other ones if you want. The main one seems to be:

 The Coffin Maker 

 The Bones : There were magic bones (page 97) in the church that did keep Strahd away, but Milivoj 
the local weirdo stole them. The group needs to go to the coffin maker 
to get them back. It turns out that the coffin maker cut a deal with 
Strahd. He's got vampire spawn hanging out at his place (page 116). They
 are getting ready to attack the church. If the heroes don't deal with this within three days, then an "event" happens:

 St. Andral's Feast : (page 124) 3 days after the heroes arrive in town 
and haven't dealt with the bones at he church yet, the vampire spawn 
attack the church. It's a pretty crazy attack. In the middle of a 
service, the spawn and bat swarms attack the congregation! Strahd comes 
in and attacks the priest! People blame the burgomaster and set his home
 on fire. 

On that same day as the vampire attack (which is 3 days after the heroes arrive in Vallaki), there is a festival:

 The Festival of the Blazing Sun : (page 123). A guard laughs at the burgomaster and is tortured as punishment. If the heroes intervene, they are banished and may befriend the Keepers of the Raven.

There are other events and likely scenarios you can utilize as you wish: 

 The Tiger : (page 123) Rictavio's tiger gets loose. This one is best used after the heroes meet Rictavio and befriend him. Rictavio will flee to the tower (page 167).

 Dinner Party : (page 124) The heroes are invited to Lady Wachter's place for dinner. She wants to see if the heroes can kill the Burgomaster. She'll probably end up enlisting the Vistani to kill the heroes once they leave Vallaki. The Vistani are scared to do it, so they contact Strahd, who may decide to ambush the adventurers.

 The Keepers of the Feather : (page 98) The heroes will probably meet these lawful good people if they go to the inn, or if they oppose the Burgomaster in some way. They are wereravens (stats on page 242) that oppose Strahd. They protect the Blue Water Inn. It is possible that the heroes befriend the keepers if they try to free the poor people in the stockade (page 119).

 Vistani Camp 

 The Vistani : (page 119) This camp also has dusk elves, who aren't happy with Strahd. Their leader Kasimir (page 121) can tell the heroes about the Amber Temple and how the secret to ending Barovia's curse might be there. Luvash (page 122) will want the heroes to find his daughter (see page 38, a guy wants to drown her). A dusk elf named Savid went looking for her, but he never returned (he's on page 133 - he's wounded and hiding in Argynvostholt).

 The Wedding Gown of The Baroness : The adventurers can loot a wedding dress on page 108. This gown is needed for a quest on page 155. A crazy guy made a flesh golem bride for Strahd. So just keep that in mind. If the heroes loot this thing, it will help them out quite a bit.

 Important Location 

 The Blue Water Inn : (page 98) There's a lot of people that can be found in the inn, and time of day is a bit important. Here is a quick cheat sheet:

 Morning : No patrons. At dawn Rictavio brings food "to Blinsky."

 Noon to Dusk : 2d4 locals. At dusk, Rictavio brings food "to Blinsky."

 Dusk to Midnight : 2d8 locals.

 (Owners) Urwin & Danika Martikov : Wereravens, lawful good.

 Brom & Bray Maritkov : Children of the owners, also wereravens.

 1d4 Wereravens : In raven form on roof, or in taproom in human form.

 Szoldar Szoldarovich & Yevki Kruhkin : Wolf hunters.

 Nikolai & Karl Wachter : Brash drunkards. 

 Rictavio : A "carnival ringmaster from a distant land." (see below)

 Missing Ravens : If they befriend the heroes, you might want the Keepers to mention that animated scarecrows have been attacking them and snatching ravens. This is the work of the hag Baba Lysaga (page 161). Just be careful when doing this, because the heroes might decide to go investigate - that area is meant for level 8 characters. Lysaga has extremely powerful spells and her hut is no joke, either. 

 NPCs 

There are a few important NPCs in this chapter that have a lot of little details to keep straight. Here they are:

 Rictavio : (stats page 238) He's got a sword cane, which is very cool. Remember that he can cast cure wounds spells, which will really help the heroes. He's also got a scroll of raise dead! I wrote more about this guy in my guide to Strahd .

 He's actually Dr. Van Richten in disguise.

 He's trying to learn about the wereravens. He wants to kill the Vistani.

 He was cursed by a Vistani seer long ago: Doom comes to all those he befriends.

 He has a pet sabretooth tiger that wears armor (AC 17) and is trained to hunt evil Vistani.

 Hat of Disguise : (DMG page 173) It casts disguise self (PH page 233) at will. 

 Ring of Mind Shielding : (DMG page 191). Remember, he can make this ring invisible. When you die wearing this, your soul is sucked into it. Almost seems like a way to smuggle a soul out of Barovia via the Vistani. Maybe there's already a soul in it. If Van Richten dies in your game, this might be a cool thing to take advantage of.

 He stays in the guest room at the inn on page 102.

 His wagon is on page 115.

 Baron Vargas Vallakovich 

 He runs a festival every week - he thinks they keep the devil Strahd away.

 Thinks everyone is beneath him. Those who speak ill of the festivals are arrested.

 He lives in a mansion on page 104.

 His butler and a lady-in-waiting have gone missing (his son accidentally killed them, see page 109).

 (Wife) The Baroness : She has daily tea and sandwich parties for locals. The priest, Lucian Petrovich, is her brother.

 (Son) Victor : Creepy guy. He stays in the attic, and is trying to use 
magic to escape Barovia. His workroom is on page 109. He has six undead skeleton cats. 

 (Henchman) Izek Strazni : (stats on page 231) Has an evil, barbed arm that conjures fire. He forces the toymaker to make him dolls that look like Ireena (page 118). 

 (Pets) Two mastiffs (MM page 332).

 Lady Fiona Wachter 

 She is loyal to Strahd, wants to take over Vallaki.

 Her home is on page 110.

 She started a cult of devil worshipers.

 Her daughter is locked in the attic.

 She sleeps with the corpse of her dead husband!

 (Daughter) Stella : She acts like a cat, is locked in the attic. She's actually chaotic good and will latch on to any character that is nice to her.

 (Sons) Nikolai & Karl : Local troublemakers.

 (Imp) Majesto : Her invisible servant who eavesdrops (page 115).

 (Spy) Ernst Larnak : Keeps Fiona informed, willing to blackmail her. 

 Chapter 6: Old Bonegrinder 

 This area is scaled for level 4 characters. 

This is really crazy. Three hags live here. They steal children, kill them, put their bone dust in their dream pastries and sell them for people to eat! 

 Deadly : Be aware that these hags are really powerful and can easily kill a party of 4th level characters. They do not attack right away - they assume the heroes want to buy dream pastries. You can have NPCs like Ireena warn the heroes about the hags. The raven also tries to warn them.

 Green Hags : The author himself changed these to green hags when he ran this, so you might want to do so as well. He had Morgantha away to start. The heroes crept in, battled the daughters, and the daughters jumped out the window to escape. Then Morgantha pulled up at the door with dream pastries and a freshly-captured child named Emmerich.

Once the heroes see the captured kids, they are probably going to want to save them. These hags have an AC of 17 and 112 HP each! In one round they can fire off three lightning bolts. The party could die before they even get to go once. You could have it where the group chats up the daughters while a hero frees the kids and they make a run for it.

All of them are night hags (MM page 178). They are:

 Morgantha : The mother in room O2 on page 127.

 Bella Sunbane : Daughter in room O3 on page 127.

 Offalia Wormwiggle : Daughter in room O3 on page 127.

They have two captive children that parents gave to the hags. The daughters are pricking with needles (page 127):

 Freek : 7 years old.

 Myrtle : 5 years old.

 Night Hag Int mod is +3, so: DC 15 and +7 spell attack 

 Hag Coven : The three hags use the "hag coven" rules on MM page 125. They share a bunch of spells.

 List of Stuff in Area O1 : Lots of stuff in here. This is a concise list:

 12 dream pastries baking in an oven.

 Barrel of greenish black ichor (Morgantha can use it to scry and summon dretches).

 Bowls of herbs, flour, sugar, powdered bone.

 12 locks of hair.

 Chicken coop with three chickens, 1 rooster, and a few eggs.

 Wooden trunk containing 100 harmless croaking toads.

 Various concoctions ( Check out this list for ideas on what the other concoctions might do ), including three labeled elixirs...

 Elixir of Youth : You look younger and more attractive for 24 hours.

 Elixir of Laughter : Gives you cackle fever (DMG page 257). It kicks in d4 hours after imbibing. DC 13 Con save, fail = 5 damage and incapacitated with mad laughter for one minute. It can spread to other people within 10 feet.

 Mother's Milk : It's pale tincture (DMG page 258) DC 16 Con save, fail = 3 damage and poisoned. Save against poisoned every 24 hours. Even when you make your save, you need to keep saving each day for a long time.

 Chapter 7: Argynvostholt 

 This area is scaled for level 7 characters. 

This has an interesting backstory. This chapter is about revenant knights who served a silver dragon slain by Strahd. The knights feel Strahd is being punished and thus they have nothing to do but seethe with anger.

 The Beacon : The main idea here is for the heroes to get the dragon's skull from Castle Ravenloft (it's in the Hall of Bones on page 78) and bring it here to the dragon's mausoleum (page 134). Once lit, the beacon puts the revenants to rest and gives the heroes a bonus to AC and saves. It's kind of weird, because Castle Ravenloft is the final destination, right? So coming here is nice, to free the revenants, but the bonus isn't really helpful because the game is over. 

 This Might Bore Players : Honestly, reading through this place, you should probably avoid running this like a dungeon crawl. There's a lot of empty, dull rooms. This is more of a ponderous place where the heroes learn about the knights and have encounters with the ghostly spirit of a dragon. It's cool, but it could really be a drag if you don't cut to the chase. You should read this thoroughly, note the cool places and get the heroes there. Don't forget about how the spirit leads the heroes to the revenants, it's very cool and different.

 Angry Knights : The revenants will immediately attack the heroes. Remember that if they are slain, they are reborn elsewhere in Barovia (roll on the chart on page 130) and will come for revenge.

 Vladimir Horngaard : (Vlad's stats on page 241) If he has a treasure determined in the tarokka reading, you should look it up and let him use the item's powers.Definitely read pages 241-242. His revenant stats are adjusted. 

 Sir Godfrey Gwilym : Fun fact: Chris Perkins said on twitter that Godfrey is related to a character in the novel I, Strahd , Alek Gwilym . (Spoilers incoming) Alek was Strahd's fiercely loyal right hand man when Strahd was mortal. Strahd actually killed Alek to hide the fact that he had become a vampire.

 Revenants : Stats are in the MM on page 259. They regenerate, they are immune to turning, and they have a paralyzing glare!

 Phantom Warriors : Stats on page 235.

 Potion of Invulnerability : (DMG page 188) This is found in the Knights' Quarters on page 136. For one minute, you have resistance to all damage.

 Chapter 8: The Village of Krezk 

 This area is scaled for level 5 characters. 

 If Ireena is With the Party : Once the group is in Krezk and near the pool, run "Something Blue." (page 156) Sergei's spirit will actually have a chance of stealing her away! Strahd will flip out and show up, very cool.

 Special Events : There's some quests on page 155-156. Most of them have a variation of: The Abbott wants a wedding dress, and he'll raise the dead son of the burgomaster in exchange. 

 Deva Stats : The Abbot is a deva (MM page 16). Deva stats are actually a little confusing to find. 

 Roll in Advance : There are around 100 mongrelfolk in the abbey. You should roll on the madness table (DMG page 260) for some of the mongrelfolk (page 147). You should also roll their "special ability" on the chart on their stat block on page 234. It'll give you a chance to develop them a little bit, rather than stopping the game and rolling on two charts in two different books.

 Getting In : Just getting in to Krezk is hard. The guards won't let the heroes through the gate. The burgomaster comes and will tell the heroes he'll let them in if they go get wine from the Wizard of Wines (page 174).

 S4. Pool and Shrine : (page 146) Drinking the water has the effects of lesser restoration (PH page 255). It ends a disease or one certain condition: blindness, deafness, paralyzed, or poisoned.

 Gazebo : This gazebo is badly wounded, so the heroes actually have a chance to take it down. A treasure might be beneath it.

 Mongrelfolk : Stats on page 234. Remember, they can mimic voices. That might be handy for leading heroes into an ambush.

 Mongrelfolk NPCs : Here's a list of the mongrelfolk NPCs so you can get the essential info at a glance:

 Otto Belview : (page 147) Sleeping guard.

 He has a wolf's snout. 

 Standing leap

 Madness: He thinks he is the best

 Zygrek Belview : (page 148) Sleeping guard.

 Half her face has scales, the other half fur 

 She has darkvision.

 Madness: She doesn't like people judging her.

 Mishka Belview : (page 150) Creepy guy hiding in a well.

 She has three red spider eyes on the right side of her face.

 He has spider climb.

 Madness: He enjoys killing people.

 Marzena Belview : (page 150) She's chained to a post and skittish. 

 She has bat wings and spider mandibles instead of a mouth.

 Madness: She thinks she's being watched by powerful enemies all the time.

 Clovin Belview : (page 153) The Abbot's Manservant

 Two heads, one is basically a baby with a snake tongue. That head only hisses. 

 The others want him to starve to death, he's a food hoarder.

 Madness: "Being drunk keeps me sane."

 S7. Graveyard : (page 148) Here's another one of those deals where an item you loot in the castle can be used. This time it's a holy symbol (page 87). You can use it to get a ring of regeneration (DMG page 191) which lets you regain d6 hit points every ten minutes.

 Wights : MM page 300. Life drain! Yikes.

 S13. Main Hall : This is awesome. The Abbot is trying to make a bride for Strahd using corpse parts. Remember, she can't speak and the stitches/seams aren't visible until she is closely inspected. she's got a lot of powder on her. 

 The Dress Quest : The Abbot wants a wedding dress. If the heroes bring him on, he'll use raise dead for them 3 times if they end up needing it. Check out page 155. There's a quest involving the dress. The heroes will need to escort the burgomaster's wife to Vallaki, and will need Lydia Petrovna's wedding gown (page 108)

 Stat Stuff : 

 The Abbot : He's a deva (MM page 16). He also has stats on page 225. He thinks he's good, but he's lawful evil. He does a lot of damage. 25 points! 

 Flesh Golem : MM page 169. 

 Potion of Superior Healing : DMG page 188, top left of the page. Heals 8d4+8!

 Scroll of Heroes Feast : PH page 250. Once you eat it, increases HP Max by 2d10 for 24 hours, immune to poison, etc. 

 Shadows : MM page 269.

 Chapter 9: Tsolenka Pass 

 This area is scaled for level 8 characters. 

The group will have to traverse this pass to get to the Amber Temple.

 Heading to the Pass : Don't forget to read the flavor at the raven river crossroads, page 40.

 Extreme Cold at Night : Extreme cold is on DMG page 110. Each hour, roll a DC 10 CON save. Fail = gain one level of exhaustion (page 291).

 Crossing the Bridge : It's a 500 foot drop! A roc (MM page 260) attacks, see "Roc of Mount Ghakis" on page 159.

 Vrocks : MM page 64.

 Snow Maidens : (page 159) Stats of a specter (MM page 279) with additional traits:

 Immune to cold

 Life Drain does cold damage

 The Giant Goat : (page 160) As the group travels on the pass, a...
 giant evil goat (MM page 327) attacks and tries to headbutt a hero 
over the side. They plummet 100 feet. 

 Chapter 10: The Ruins of Berez 

 This area is scaled for level 8 characters. 

Berez is a village that was flooded and abandoned and now an evil hag lives in the middle of the ruins. You'll probably want to have her hut attack the heroes, check out the special event on page 166. Creeping Hut stats are on page 226.

In Berez, there's a statue of a woman who was the previous incarnation of Tatyana. There's also a potential ally here named Muriel Vinshaw, a wereraven (stats on page 242).

Scarecrow stats are on MM page 268. 

 Baba Lysaga : This chapter is all about Baba Lysaga. She's a great villain. Here's the essential info:

 Stats on page 228. 

 Stole a magic gemstone that has animated her hut. Does everything she can to keep the heroes from getting the gem.

 Flies around in a giant skull (effectively giving her AC 20). 

 If she has time to prepare before a battle, she could summon d4 insect swarms (stats on MM page 338)

 You should look up some of her powerful spells, like power word stun and finger of death (!!).

 She helped raise Strahd and considers herself to be his true mother.

 She is allied with the barovian witches in Castle Ravenloft (page 72).

 Sacrifices beasts to Mother Night and collects their blood, bathes in the blood to stave off old age.

 Makes animated scarecrows that attack the ravens and wereravens. 

 U3. Baba Lysaga's Hut : (Page 163)

 It's easy to sneak up to it without alerting Lysaga because the trapped ravens in here are making a lot of noise.

 Giant Skull : Remember, nobody else can use this except Lysaga. She can fly around in it and it gives her three-quarters cover (+5 to AC and DEX saves).

 Programmed Image : PH page 269. Physical objects pass through it. Disbelieve: INT (Investigation) check DC 17.

 Crawling Claws : MM page 44.

 The Creeping Hut : Remember, once the group gets in the hut, they're probably going to get the gem and de-animate it. So if you want the heroes to fight the hut, have it attack before they get in it. Also remember that Lysaga does everything she can to stop the heroes from getting the gem. Here's essential info on the hut: 

 Stats on page 226.

 Everything in it is bolted down.

 The heroes can see a glowing green thing under the floorboards. 

 The hut contains a cage of captured ravens, a "baby Strahd" in a crib and a pile of treasure

 The hut lurches from side to side when it walks and it shakes the ground with every step.

 It's powered by a gem stolen from the Wizard of Wines. Removing it incapacitates it.

 Remember that it has blindsight 120 feet!

 It does double damage to objects and structures.

 U6. Standing Stones : These stones can boost druids who wild shape, and they can also protect you from those who scry. 

 Chapter 11: Van Richten's Tower 

 This area is scaled for level 6 characters. 

 Ezmerelda Intro : This might be the best place to introduce 
Ezmerelda to the heroes. Check out "Ezmerelda's Retreat" on page 172. She shows up here badly wounded. Her stats are on page 231. Remember, she
 has a prosthetic leg, she's looking for van Richten even though they 
don't get along, and she has got a lot of powerful spells that can help 
the heroes big time. I think she's a really cool NPC.

This chapter is about exploring a tower once owned by a lich. The heroes might come here with van Richten, in which case there will be no danger because this is his home. This is a really crazy place with some extremely deadly but awesome traps.

 The symbol on the door, page 169 

 The Door : You should print out or draw the symbol on the door pictured on page 169. 

 V1. Ezmerelda's Magic Wagon : (page 168) Wow. What a nasty trap! Be ready for this! If it goes off, remember that a horde of werewolves will be here in one hour (see "Pack Attack" page 171).

 V2. Tower Door : This is a part where the party's marching order matters big time. Be sure to establish where people are beforehand. If the trap goes off and there's not a clear idea of who was standing where, there could be problems. If this trap goe off, werewolves attack ("Pack Attack" on page 171).

 Young Blue Dragon : Stats on MM page 91.

 Animated Armor : Stats on MM page 19.

The tower has a spell drain effect:

 Antimagic Field : (PH page 213) Spells can't be cast, magic items become mundane!!

 Chapter 12: The Wizard of Wines 

 This area is scaled for level 5 characters. 

When the heroes show up here, they see a horde of twig blights rampaging all over the place. The family who owns the place (wereravens) are hiding in the woods. They ask the heroes to help. 

 Lots of Variables : This is a scenario that can go a million different ways. The group might end up fighting up to 60 monsters at once, or they might creep through the place and take them out piece by piece. 

 Best Possible Option : The quickest way to take them out is to destroy the Gulthias staff, wielded by the druid in room W16 (page 178). Once the staff is destroyed, all of the blights within 300 feet wither and die.

 Needle Blights : (MM page 32) Remember that they have blindsight.

 W15. Brown Mold : Brown mold is on DMG page 105. CON save DC 12 or 22 cold damage, half on save. Fire causes it to expand into aten foot square area. Cold damage wipes it out.

Once the group has dealt with the hordes, the family then tells them about the gems...

 The Gems : This place was powered by three magic gems, but all of them have been stolen. Where the gems are:

 Gem 1 : Stolen ten years ago. 

 Gem 2 : Stolen 3 weeks ago by Baba Lysaga. The gem has animated her creeping hut (see page 163).

 Gem 3 : Stole 5 days ago by blights, placed inside the statue on page 198.

 Another Attack : If the group goes to get a gem and comes back here, you could have the huge, evil tree attack (see page 180). 

 When it's All Over : If the heroes wipe out the blights and return two of the gems, they might be asked to do a delivery (page 180).

 Chapter 13: The Amber Temple 

 This area is scaled for level 9 characters. 

Here's the deal with this location. It is a giant dungeon and it feels sort of out of place in this adventure. If you have a group who loves hacking and slashing, then this will work out great for you. If not, you may want to shrink this down.

Also, this place is loaded with magic items.

I must say that the final rooms with the imprisoned vestiges are awesome and you should take a good look at them. This place is devoted to a "faceless god of secrets." Vecna !

There are two "special events" for this chapter on page 196.

 Extreme Cold : This place is freezing. Characters need cold weather gear or they have to deal with extreme cold (DMG page 110). DC 10 CON save each hour. Fail = a level of exhaustion (PH page 291).

 Wand of Secrets : DMG page 211. It finds secret doors or traps within 30 feet.

 X5. Temple of Lost Secrets : (Page 183) Remember that the arcanaloth is in the form of a confused old wizard named Heinrich Stolt. Once he is dropped to half hit points, he will say he was just guarding the temple, then turn invisible and flee.

 Arcanaloth : Stats on MM page 313.

 He's in the statue firing spells out of the eyeholes. He has three-quarters cover (PH page 196). That's +5 to AC and DEX saves.

 If he hears the group coming, he can get mirror image going.

 Remember, he has counterspell and shield.

 He could drop a chain lightning on the heroes.. yikes. 10d8 lighting damage! 

 Also don't forget he can teleport up to 60 feet as an action.

 Flameskulls : Stats on MM page 134. Remember, they can cast fireball. 

 Robe of Useful Items : Stats on DMG page 195. 

 X15. Southwest Annex : You might want to make names for Helwa's five berserkers. In theory the group could befriend these people. Remember that the wolf is Strahd's eyes and ears.

 Staff of Power : DMG page 202. It's loaded with spells and has all sorts of special powers.

 Tome of Understanding : DMG page 209. Read it for 48 hours, gain +2 Wisdom.

 X24. West Shrine : Sympathy Effect (Antipathy/Sympathy on PH page 214) WIS save DC 16 or get close to target and refuse to leave. Duration: 10 days!

 X30. Preserved Library : The books appear to be empty but the heroes might be able to figure out how to read them. These books are full of "vile, forbidden lore."

You might want to brainstorm some topics/examples of the lore because the players will probably ask.

 Forbidden Lore Ideas: 

 Ordinary Necromancy : A tome written by Vecna, according to wikipedia.

 Souls and the Undead : A book about how souls leave the body and thus undead have no souls - they are powered by an "animus." (check out the 4e Open Grave book, page 7)

 Theories on the Tome of Shadow : The Tome of Shadow is an artifact (also from Open Grave) that contains secrets about the Shadowfell, including the location of secret planar portals. 

 Maybe something relating to The Tome of Shared Secrets or the Compendium Maleficarium both mentioned here . 

 The Head of Vecna : If you are a jokey kind of DM, maybe include something about the Head of Vecna.. maybe hype up its powers and get the players excited about finding it.

 X33. Amber Vaults 

These chambers allow the heroes to connect with with different vestiges. A character can get a different 'dark gift' from each of them. Accepting a gift means a DC 12 CHA save. Fail = alignment shifts to evil. Most of the gifts are spells the character can cast three times.

 What is a Vestige? On page 181, a vestiges are defined as " remnants of dead, malevolent entities.. " In the 3e Tome of Magic, vestiges are entities that exist outside of the rules of reality. They are untraceable, untouchable and they defy powers that try to define them. The Tome of Magic lists a ton of vestiges, a few of which appear in Curse of Strahd as well. 

These vestiges and their gifts are so cool that you might want to use them for villains or NPCs in whatever campaign you are running. Seriach the Hell Hound Whisperer - that's clearly an NPC you want in your campaign, right?

 Shami Amourae : One vestige that sticks out to me here is Shami Amourae . Shami Amourae is one of the four original succubi. She got on Demogorgon's bad side and he imprisoned her in the Wells of Darkness (see Dungeon magazine issue 148). She is meant to be freed at the end of that adventure. I don't understand how she ended up as a vestige. It seems like a waste of an awesome NPC.

Here's a list of the vestiges and the major details:

 Fekre, Queen of Poxes : Gift = Contagion three times. Character reeks of filth.

 Zrin-Hala, the Howling Storm : Gift = Cast lightning bolt three times. One side of the character's face sags and loses all feeling.

 Sykane, the Soul Hungerer : Gift = Raise dead three times. The character's eyes glow sickly yellow and they expect to be paid if they help someone. 

 Savnoke the Inscrutable : Gift = Mind blank three times. Character's eyes melt but they can still see.

 Tarakamedes the Grave Wyrm : The character grows skeletal wings and a fly speed of 50. This character must eat one pound of bones or grave dirt each day or die.

 Shami Amourae, the Lady of Delights : Gift = Suggestion three times. Character gains an extra finger on each hand and can't get enough pleasure.

 Driznash, the Nine-Eyed Spider : Gift = Permanent spider climb ability. Character grows an extra eye which is blind and alway open.

 Dahlver-Nar, He of the Many Teeth : Gift = When slain the character instantly reincarnates (three times total). The character loses all of their teeth.

 Zantras the Kingmaker : Gift = +4 to Charisma! Character won't take no for an answer.

 Delban, the Star of Ice and Hate : Gift = Cone of cold 7 times. Character is terrified of fire.

 Khirad, the Star of Secrets : Gift = Scry three times. Character's voice becomes a low whisper.

 Yrrga, the Eye of Shadow : Gift = Truesight for one month. Character's eyes become starry voids and believes that all life is pointless.

 Great Taar Haak, the Five-Headed Destroyer : Gift = Fire giant strength for 10 days. Character likes to bully others.

 Yog the Invincible : Gift = +30 hit points for 10 days. Oily black fur covers the character's face and body.

 Norganas, the Finger of Oblivion : Gift = Finger of death three times. Character's blood becomes like black tar.

 Vaund the Evasive : Gift = powers of ring of evasion and amulet of proof against detection for 10 days. Character becomes twitchy and won't give straight answers. 

 Seriach the Hell Hound Whisperer : Gift = power to summon and control 2 hell hounds one time. Character knows the Infernal language.

There's a couple more important vestiges on page 196. One of them is Tenebrous! That's undead Orcus! 

 Tenebrous 

If Orcus is alive during Out of the Abyss, how the heck is Tenebrous locked away in a crypt? Tenebrous is the bad guy in the classic Planescape adventure Dead Gods. I did some digging and in Dragon Magazine #417 we learn this:

" A few even whisper that when Orcus was reborn yet again, whatever vestige of his divine spark that had given form to Tenebrous remained behind, and that the shadow's essence is still out there somewhere on the planes. "

So there you go. Tenebrous and Orcus might be seperate entities now. Here's the other vestiges:

 The Vampyr : Evil creatures become vampires. The character becomes an NPC. 

 Tenebrous : Gift = Evil creatures gain the knowledge of how to become a lich. This is the sarcophagus that Exethanter the lich touched. If you have it, check out Dragon Magazine 417 for a nice article on the story of Tenebrous. 

 Zhudun, the Corpse Star : Gift = Bring a dead creature to life one time. The character looks like a corpse.

 Chapter 14: Yester Hill 

 This area is scaled for level 6 characters. 

This one is real short. The Ritual (page 200) is cool. Strahd shows up on his nightmare, and the druids begin their ritual. The group has ten rounds to put a stop to it, or else Wintersplinter the evil tree is born and rampages down to the Wizard of Wines.

 Blood Spear : If one of the heroes is a ranger, druid or barbarian, you should definitely use "Blood Spear of Kavan" (page 200). The stats are on page 221. It gives temporary hit points when you kill someone and the chosen character gain +2 to hit and damage.

 Gem : One of the magic gems from the Wizard of Wines is in the statue on page 198.

 Y5. Wall of Fog : (page 200) The Mists rules are on page 23. DC 20 CON save each round or gain a level of exhaustion (PH page 291). When you're in the fog, you're heavily obscured (PH page 183) which means you are blinded - attacks rolls against the blinded person have advantage, and the blinded person's attack rolls have disadvantage

 Chapter 15: Werewolf Den 

 This area is scaled for level 7 characters. 

Of all the stuff in this book, this chapter feels the most "optional." I guess it really comes down to whether you want to throw werewolves into the mix.

You might want to set this up so that the prisoner kids are actually fighting in the Ring of Stone (page 205). Yikes.

 Raven : You also might want to establish that there's a wereraven here watching the den (see Die Kinder, page 205). I personally like the idea of using Muriel Vinshaw (page 165), as she has a small role in this adventure and thus she is easy fodder to use for whatever.

 Lycanthropy : (MM page 211) A hero might be bitten and become a werewolf.
 DC 12 CON save. There's a big blurb about the curse of lycanthropy on 
MM page 206. 

 Z5b. North Cave : (page 203) You might want to think in advance about Kellen's doll. It looks like one of the heroes, but it's in zombie form. If a hero was nearly killed by a certain attack, maybe give the doll the same wound.

 Z7. Shrine of Night : Zuleika has 8 children as prisoners. She will want the heroes to rescue her husband Emil, who is imprisoned in Castle Ravenloft (on page 81). You might want to figure out the age (d6+6 years old) and names of the kids in advance.

 Epilogue 

Patrina and Escher are called out by name on page 208 as NPCs with schemes once Strahd is dead.

 Appendix B: Death House 

I wrote a whole separate article about this adventure here .

 Appendix C: Treasures 

 Tome of Strahd : (page 221) Remember that Strahd will want to kill whoever has this tome. There's a whole article about the Tome of Strahd in Dragon Magazine issue 348. It uses 3rd edition rules, but maybe you'll want to adapt some of the material. The tome has a bunch of new spells:

 (lvl 4) Bloodstone's Frightful Joining : Your soul attempts to invade the body of an undead creature, leaving your own body lifeless. This lasts for one hour per level

 (lvl 2) Curse of the Gypsies : You can choose from three curses..

 Bad Luck : Whenever the target rolls a natural 20, they must re-roll and take the second result. 

 Mark of the Gypsies : The victim has a permanent mark on their
 forehead that's invisible to all but the person's closest family and 
companions. This mark causes negative reactions, and some NPCs may shun 
them.

 Unnatural Aura : Animals can sense the victim from 30 feet away. They panic and regard the victim with fear. 

 (lvl 3) Rain of Terror : You cause unnatural rain (hot blood or writhing snakes) to fall from the sky that causes a fear effect.

 (lvl 4) Strahd's Baneful Attractor : You cause spells to divert 
from their original paths to strike a new target. So, magic missile or 
scorching ray would be diverted. 

 (lvl 4) Wraithform : This is like gaseous form, except the target can move faster. Mindless undead do not perceive you as a threat. 

Guess what? I'm finally done! I'll update this if new info comes out, or if you have some cool idea, etc.

Posted by

 Sean 

at

 3:55 AM 

 119 comments:

JPUK
said...

thanks for your work so far on this

March 25, 2016 at 2:25 PM

Philosobro
said...

I really feel like Old Bonegrinder being level 4 isn't appropriate. A single night hag is CR5, and there are 3 in a coven, which brings them each up to CR7.

March 26, 2016 at 8:38 PM

 Some guy 
said...

On Mother Night and the Morning Lord. Mother Night is largely unkown, but it's possible she is based on Shar.

The Morninglord is Lathander the god of Dawn from FR. In the original Ravenloft setting he came about when some people from his church came into Ravenloft and spread his teachings. Though his name as Lathander was forgotten eventually. 

April 2, 2016 at 8:42 PM

 Unknown 
said...

Since Bildrath is such a shady dude, I plan on having him attempt to sell the characters a bogus map of the land of Barovia for an outlandish price. I found an old map someone made from the AD&D Ravenloft, so it at least looks somewhat authentic. I figure it will add to the "charm" of the Village.

April 4, 2016 at 12:35 PM

 Xander Bennett 
said...

Just wanted to say thank you for this! Incredible work.

My group is two sessions in and has just arrived at Vallaki. They returned the bones but now there's the issue of how do they deal with the vampire spawn in the attic. I'm wondering how this is supposed to work. They can't just knock a hole in the roof and let in sunlight, because there is no true sunlight in Barovia. So... burn down the building? I don't know. Thoughts?

April 13, 2016 at 10:45 AM

 jerry247 
said...

I had to adjust stats and send in town guards after they blew the corner out of the room. Ended up being almost a 2 hour fight.

April 13, 2016 at 3:09 PM

 Sean 
said...

JPUK: You are welcome, I like writing these things.

Philosobro: Yeah! That area is wayyyy too deadly. I get that they want to make sure the players understand that the world is not always "balanced," but this area is an almost certain TPK. TPKs can kill campaigns, depending on the players. 

Some Guy: Vool, thank you! I'll add this info in.

Jason Ingersoll: Hah! Awesome.

Xander Bennett: OK.. let's see. The heroes could lure the vampires out of the building, while one rogue creeps in and steals the bones. They could try impersonating Strahd and ordering the vampire spawn to go on some bogus mission. Maybe the heroes could whip the townsfolk into a frenzy and have an angry mob descend on the place. In the chaos, they could steal the bones. The heroes could also recruit the Knights of the Feather for an asault. They have a bunch of wereravens who could take on some of the vampire spawn. Thank you! Good luck! 

jerry247: Wow, two hours..

April 13, 2016 at 6:33 PM

Anonymous
said...

Thank you so much for doing this and the effort you are putting into it – I'm starting Curse of Strahd next week with my group and the information you are providing will make my job so much easier as the DM. Kudos!

April 15, 2016 at 5:51 PM

 baticeer 
said...

Great post! This will be a big help to me. I love the content of Curse of Strahd, but the book is very confusingly organized IMO.

I'm curious about the "gay stuff" you mention-- where is it? It's not a problem for my group as 3/5 of us are queer, haha, but I'm curious because I didn't notice anything except for a line implying that Strahd might attempt to seduce PCs regardless of gender.

April 16, 2016 at 6:56 PM

 Sean 
said...

Anonymous: You are welcome! Good luck with the campaign! If you have time, check out Dice Camera Action. After watching it, I am pretty sure that I could run curse of strahd without the book.

Baticeer: Gay stuff so far (I'm up to chapter 10)... Escher(page 70) is one of Strahd's consorts. Strahd is getting bored with him. On pages 138-139, we learn that Vladimir Horngaard and Sir Godfrey were together in life. Now they are revenants. "Hatred so clouds Vladmir's mind that he can't remember that Sir Godfrey was his beloved in life." Thanks!

April 16, 2016 at 9:30 PM

Anonymous
said...

Thanks for writing this up! It's been great for prepping for weekly sessions at my LFGS! I'm having my players run through Vallaki this week, and your section on it gave me much needed insight and clarity. 

April 19, 2016 at 12:18 PM

 Sean 
said...

Anonymous: You're welcome! Vallaki is so full of cool stuff, you could get quite a few sessions out of it if you wanted to.

April 20, 2016 at 3:29 AM

Anonymous
said...

The bride in crypt 20 does have a name - check the headline!

(Her name is Sasha Ivliskova)

April 21, 2016 at 3:54 AM

Todd
said...

Sorry if this is a dumb question, but if I purchase the Ravenloft Walkthrough Map you point to, could I con you into providing your photoshop version with the room numbers added for a cost? I appreciate it.

April 21, 2016 at 11:31 AM

 Sean 
said...

Anonymous: Good catch! I fixed it. Thank you!

Todd: Ha! That sounds like something the artist should do. I'll try emailing him and suggesting it and I'll see what he says. That's not a dumb idea at all - that map is extremely useful!

April 21, 2016 at 6:18 PM

Radical
said...

Hey Sean, GREAT blog! This was a huge help getting my game going. It's super concise, and for me, it highlights a lot of things that I might have overlooked during my first read-through.

I just started running this campaign myself, two sessions in. My group just (barely) escaped Death House. I had them start (lvl 1) on an open road headed to some other town, when they were surrounded by a dozen bandits. After a brief back and forth dialogue, I had the mists creep in, killing all the bandits but one - a poor sap named Nestor. Broke, shoeless, on the wrong side of 50, and regretful of the life he ended up in, he ended up diving out of the mists and getting transported to Borovia with the party. He accompanied them through some of Death House, and they kind of got attached to him, which is what I wanted because ultimately, I want Strahd to kill him. 

Per the module, Strahd should encounter the group a couple of times. What was your group's first encounter with Strahd? Any subsequent encounters? I figure the first should be "civil", in that there's no combat, if maybe a little coarse. 

I figure I should wait until the group crosses (inadvertently, or otherwise) Strahd, but a senseless killing to taunt the party and gauge their reaction, might also be a nice twist. 

What do you think?

April 25, 2016 at 2:11 PM

 Nathaniel 
said...

This blog is awesome and I was crushed when it came down. Very happy to see it back up. For what it's worth, I would pay for this content on DMs Guild.

April 27, 2016 at 6:01 AM

 Sean 
said...

Radical: Thanks, I'm glad it is useful. I am not running this adventure! I plan on adding a section in this guide detailing possible ways for Strahd to interact with the heroes. In the book it says he'll send packs of wolves after the heroes to sort of test them. Maybe in one of these battles, Strahd should snatch Nestor and bite him. It might be fun to have Nestor become a vampire spawn to further torment the heroes. 

You also might want to consider leaving the chance open that Nestor doesn't get killed. If the heroes like him a lot, maybe they are willing to go to great lengths to keep him alive. It might be very dramatic and lead to a situation where Nestor commits some kid of heroic sacrifice to save the heroes.

Nathaniel: Thanks! Blogger said I violated their terms of service, and then told me it was a mistake. They said they have an automated system for this kind of thing and it was a glitch. I haven't thought about putting this stuff on the DMs Guild, maybe I will look into that.

April 27, 2016 at 10:56 AM

Radical
said...

Sean: I think that would be useful - a Strahd interaction guide/flowchart, or list of planned encounters that would help drive the story. My group is now with Ireena on their way to Vallaki (session ended just outside of Tser Camp), so I'm going to wait until she's somewhere safe(r). It wouldn't make sense for him to approach them in the wild and not just snatch up one of the main plot devices in the story. But aside from antagonizing them with a few summoned beasts, what do you think the conversation looks like?

April 29, 2016 at 7:40 AM

 Sean 
said...

Radical: Maybe Strahd just plain tries to convince Ireena to come with him. He makes an impassioned plea, and he becomes enraged when she rejects him. He might try to charm her. He might try to get the group to convince her (and if they don't, he swears revenge). Maybe he won't want to attack the heroes in front of Ireena because it will just make her hate him more. What's interesting is he has bitten her twice before, and in many D&D books this process is described as pleasurable. Maybe part of her likes him and is drawn to him (you could play up the "abusive boyfriend" subtext). I think there's a couple of things I need to add to this guide: 1. Strahd Encounters 2. An outline/template of one way a DM could map out the adventure. Thanks!

May 3, 2016 at 11:10 PM

Todd
said...

Hey Sean, did you ever hear anything on the chance of getting a map with room numbers? If I can prove that I bought the map would you reconsider providing the photoshop layers with the room numbers? I appreciate it.

May 6, 2016 at 7:15 AM

 Sean 
said...

Todd: I asked mockman on twitter the other day and he told me he didn't think wizards legal would allow it. Maybe some day they'll let him go back and do it.

May 8, 2016 at 9:17 PM

Todd
said...

Thanks for check, Sean. Ah well... I guess I'll just have to dive in and do the same thing :)

Thanks for the response.

May 9, 2016 at 7:11 AM

Anonymous
said...

Thanks for this. This book is something else, and I was really confused and couldn't figure out where to really start. This is a really great guide.

May 11, 2016 at 8:04 AM

 Nathaniel 
said...

A question about CoS: how do the players learn they are in Ravenloft? I've read through CoS a couple of time and havent found the moment when they get the exposition about the fact they aren't in Kansas anymore. Is it supposed to be in the Tavern in the village? Is there a "Welcome to Ravenloft" sign I missed somewhere?

May 11, 2016 at 8:57 AM

 Sean 
said...

Anonymous: Check out my "How to Run Curse of Strahd" article too, as it gives a general idea of how to put things together and I tried to gear it to newer DMs, of which there seem to be a lot of lately (which is awesome). Thanks for the kind words, I appreciate it!

Nathaniel: They enter the realm of "Ravenloft" (which I believe is referred to as just "Barovia" in this adventure) as soon as they pass through the mists. So if you decide to bring the group to the realm of Barovia using the Creeping Fog hook (page 22) it is right in the read-aloud text: "...you notice these aren't the same trees that surrounded you the night before." That's pretty much it! Maybe you can write your own paragraph, pulling descriptions from the boxed text on page 33.

May 11, 2016 at 12:13 PM

 Unknown 
said...

This page and your How to Run CoS are well done! Thanks so much for doing this, it's an excellent resource and your shadow idea is going in my next game. Excellent, excellent stuff.

Good gaming, brother!

June 8, 2016 at 1:39 PM

 Sean 
said...

Daniel W. Cisek: Daniel W. Cisek: Awesome, I am glad it is useful! I hope the shadows work out for you. Thanks for the kind words.

June 8, 2016 at 10:43 PM

Radical
said...

Question for Sean, or anyone running this campaign.

Regarding the Mad Mage, my group just encountered him at level 4, and ran after he dropped a Bigby's fist on them. They tried to reason with him, but obviously that's not going to work. The text prompts a discussion after a failed Greater Restoration spell (level 5 Cleric spell!), but that's going to be a while before they have access to that. I don't want them to be able to reason with him after a couple of good Cha rolls, but I also feel like waiting until our Cleric is level 10 *AND* they piece together that they'd need a Greater Restoration spell, is a bit much. What are your thoughts on how to have the players engage with the Mad Mage, and not get fried in the process?

June 28, 2016 at 12:56 PM

 Sean 
said...

Radical: It says on page 39 that he lost his staff and spellbook (!!) when he fell over Tser Falls. If the group found that book that might be a big help. Maybe the mad mage wrote down his plan in his spellbook to battle Strahd and maybe even the idea of using mind blank on himself. 

If you don't want the group to have access to all of his spells, you can say that parts of the spellbook were destroyed when it fell over Tser Falls.

I am amused by the idea that the group might find the book by a corpse of a vistani who was killed by a glyph of warding that protected the book. Maybe the hags in Old Bonegrinder found the spell book.

I think he took a bunch of Barovians with him when he attacked Strahd. One of them might know some things that would clue the group in, too.

You could have the group find a scroll of greater restoration. They'll need to make a roll to cast it successfully off of the scroll (see DMG page 200), but if they use some gimmick to give themselves advantage they will have a good shot at casting it.

Whatever you do, hope it works out! Thanks!

June 28, 2016 at 11:27 PM

Sam
said...

Thank you so much Sean! I'm a new DM who's going to try to run Curse of Strahd and this will be super helpful. I've got a couple of questions for anyone who has ideas!
1. Does anyone have any ideas about how to spice up the first two floors of the Death House? It seems like a super fun mini-dungeon that introduces the gothic horror mood but I think that my players might get bored with so little happening before the 3rd floor!
2. Can I run this adventure with 3 PCs if I give Strahd two enemies? I was thinking some combination of Donavich, Sir Godfrey Gwilym and Victor Vallakovich because I want the NPC to be useful in battles (Donavich would give them an extra healer, Victor would be another spellcaster, and Sir Godfrey would be a good fighter), but not be the Mad Mage because he's too powerful. 
3. How to I roleplay Ireena? She has so much potential, but I can't think of a good way to make her connection with Strahd come out in the story. Any tips?

A couple of ideas that I.m going to use:
1. Radical, I absolutely love the idea of Nestor the former bandit. I'm going to have him help the characters fight their way through the Death House, but be engulfed by the Shambling Mound. Strahd saves him, and immediately after they get out of the Village of Barovia, appears with Nestor and gives him back to the party. This gives Strahd fun roleplaying ammunition. Eventually, I'd like to have Strahd kill him and turn him into vampire spawn, or if the characters find an ingenious way to keep him alive, let him stay with the party. I'm giving him the stats of a Scout for the purpose of battles.
2. I'd like Sasha Ivliskova join the party for a bit and then try to rip apart Ireena after a battle or something. Maybe she comes back later and begs for forgiveness to the most chivalrous PC? 
3. The shadows will really add to the spirit of Barovia! Great idea!

July 2, 2016 at 10:53 AM

 Sean 
said...

Sam: Thanks! 1. Honestly, I'd cut a bunch of rooms out of Death House. The idea there is to slowly creep your players out, but a lot of groups are going to want some action and they will get bored in there. Just use a few rooms that you like. 2. Three PCs is fine. You shouldn't worry about scaling too much, as 5th edition is supposed to be flexible. The group will have Ireena and her brother along, so that should help. If you feel like the group is having a hard time, you can always give them a wereraven sidekick or even a revenant ally! 3. I personally would run Ireena as a tortured soul, dreaming of Strahd at night, but trying her best to forge on and defy him. Maybe also have her sense Sergei at certain points. You could always give her some fun traits, like maybe she's obsessed with sharpening her sword, or she's a picky eater, or maybe she hates cats. Those little things usually go over really well with players. I hope your game goes well! I'm glad my ideas were of use!

July 4, 2016 at 6:59 PM

 Brian McDaniel 
said...

 List of Blinsky Toys 
 Toys from Curse of Strahd 
Malformed Doll. Strange leer and sackcloth dress; hand-me-down from Mad Mary to daughter Getruda. (Barovia Village E3 p.44)
Plush Werewolf. Stuffed with sawdust and wood-carved babies; blade claws and retractable teeth. (Castle Ravenloft Random Encounter p.50) 
Jester Marionette. Tangled strings and copper bells. (Castle Ravenloft Random Encounter p.50) 
Wooden Puzzle Box. Carved with clown faces; rattles but is empty. (Castle Ravenloft Random Encounter p.50) 
Faceless Doll. Aged wedding dress. (Castle Ravenloft Random Encounter p.50) 
Coffin Jack-In-The-Box. Contains Strahd puppet. Plush Werewolf. (Castle Ravenloft Random Encounter p.50)
Wooden Teeth with Fangs. Spring-loaded and will chatter for 1 minute when wound. (Castle Ravenloft Random Encounter p.50)
Marionette Puppet Theater. Includes king, queen, prince, princess, executioner, tax collector, dunce, vampire, and vampire hunter. (Vallaki N20 p. 102)
Toy Vistani Wagon. Includes horse and Vistani figures. (Vallaki N20 p. 102)
Pair of Clown Masks. One scowling, one frightened. (Vallaki N20 p. 102)
Wooden Top. Shows scarecrows chasing children. (Vallaki N20 p. 102)
Stuffed Bat. Puppet strings. (Vallaki N20 p. 102)
Ireena Dolls. Pretty little dolls with white skin and auburn hair. Made for Izek to obsess over. (Vallaki N3j p.107)
Torn-Up Vistani Doll. Colorful clothing. Used by Rictavio to train tiger. (Vallaki N5 p.116) 
Headless Doll with Attachable Heads. Includes head with eyes and mouth sewn shut. Gadof Blinksy stock. (Vallaki N7 p. 118)
Miniature Gallows. Includes weighted “hanged man.” Gadof Blinksy stock. (Vallaki N7 p. 118)
Wooden Nesting Dolls. Innermost doll is mummified corpse. Gadof Blinksy stock. (Vallaki N7 p. 118)
Bat Mobile. Wings flap. Gadof Blinksy stock. (Vallaki N7 p. 118)
Musical Merry-Go-Round. Winds=up; wolves chase children. Gadof Blinksy stock. (Vallaki N7 p. 118)
Strahd Ventriloquist Dummy. Gadof Blinksy stock. (Vallaki N7 p. 118)
Nightmare Rocking Horse. “Bucephalus” carved on it. (Wizard of Wines W19 p. 179)
Zombie Doll. Resembles a PC. (Werewolf Den Z5b p. 203)

 Toys from Dice, Camera, Action 
Strahd Doll. Scry/Dream focus for Strahd ? (Dice, Camera, Action episode 13)

 Selected Toys from Dragon+ 
Eye Marbles. Eyes appear to be looking at roller. (Dragon+ Issue 207 #14)
Bone Slide-Whistle. Carved skeletal figure. (Dragon+ Issue 207 #14)
Hag Doll. Three child-dolls in stomach. (Dragon+ Issue 207 #14)
Hunter/Wolf Doll. Plush hunter doll turns inside out into black wolf. (Dragon+ Issue 207 #14)
Bone Dominos. Domino set carved from bones. (Dragon+ Issue 207 #14)
Stitched Teddy Bear. Made of different parts of other teddy bears. (Dragon+ Issue 207 #14)

July 8, 2016 at 7:54 PM

 Thomas S. 
said...

I just wanted to follow up on the chorus saying this was super helpful now that I finished running Curse of Strahd. There was some great inspiration, but it was still a lot of work. I think I need to run it a second time to really reap the rewards of all that prep.

July 10, 2016 at 7:03 AM

 Sean 
said...

Brian McDaniel: Wow. This list is absolutely fantastic. Do you mind if I add it to the guide? 

Thomas S.: Thank you! If you haven't seen it, you should definitely check out Dice Camera Action. When you see Chris run it, you "get" his vision of how everything unfolds. 

July 11, 2016 at 5:52 PM

Anonymous
said...

Thanks again for great outline! Having fun with this adventure, although starting to get a little concerned about finale with Strahd. The party doesn't have the holy symbol or sunsword yet, and I think when they do they are going to mop the floor with him! I read all about hit & run tactics etc but still . . . it could be irritating for the group to have wave after wave of minions set at them with the obvious intent of wearing them down before Strahd himself steps in and then destroys them when they have nothing left! I guess that's part of the horror - the end is coming and all that!
I was surprised as anyone when my party wiped Baba Lysaga out with a well placed silence spell! She couldn't cast anything (I was flipping like mad through the PHB trying to find something she could do!) and they basically swarmed her and wiped her out. She 'summoned' her hut mentally but they were able to climb into it after getting relentlessly clobbered and shut it down.

July 22, 2016 at 7:47 AM

 Sean 
said...

Anonymous: You could have Strahd wait as the group makes their way through the castle. When the group gets into an encounter where they take a lot of damage or they're in big trouble, maybe have Strahd jump them and make things a million times worse.

He could flee after giving the group a beating. Then they can go find him and kill him. This way, you get a challenging fight with Strahd and then the end battle would be more of them dispensing their own brand of justice and they feel good because they got revenge on him.

The creeping hut looked really tough. That's interesting that Lysaga was beaten easily. That's a bummer.. I think she's really cool.

Just the fact that you guys are almost all the way through the adventure means you are doing a great job as a DM, so don't let this stuff get you down! Challenging the heroes is always a weird little game of turning dials and knobs behind the scenes. 

Hope it goes well!

July 22, 2016 at 8:56 PM

Brian
said...

Thank you for this guide. I know it's been a while since this article came out, but I wanted to thank you directly for your work on it. This certainly helped me in understanding the world and how it connected together better than two solid readthroughs of the book itself did. It's a great adventure, but it was missing a few things that, in their absence, made it kind of inscrutable rather than usable.

I agree the chapters could be organized by expected level, but I'd like to add two more. The first is a note that this book is full of threads, rather than a full true "path"; it's up to the DM to weave these threads into a story (I had to learn how much of the narrative I'd have to improvise by reading your outlines, which are an example of doing this sort of weaving). That's obvious to experienced DMs, but less so for consumers of adventure paths. The same note could have pointed out that the randomness of the original I6 adventure meant that it was designed to be replayed , rather than exhaustively explored each time. Many of the threads will actually cancel out, and it's an exercise in filtering: once you've got the reading (or have chosen the results you like), the DM's job becomes filtering out what isn't useful, and then spinning a tale from what's left.

The second thing it really could have used is a collection of sample Strahd encounters that aren't linked to particular locations - possibly organized by the progression of his mood towards the party (from amused to intrigued to emnity to controlled fury). As it stands, the only information we get about how to set up a Strahd encounter is a bunch of monsters and some fight strategy - a storyless random encounter. This stands in stark contrast to the (good!) planned encounters: St Andral's Feast and the pool in Krezk work in some characterization, and the Yester Hill encounter manages to show so much by showing so little. I would have loved a few bottled Strahd scenarios to learn from, particularly at the beginning and end of his arc. I'm reduced to taking notes from other DMs (you and Perkins' run of DCA), which seems weird for an adventure as driven by character as Strahd.

Also, a minor note. The explanation for why Tenebrous and Orcus both exist at the same time is given in 3.5's Tome of Magic, where Tenebrous appears as a vestige (which, in that book, is.... kind of hard to explain, but basically, their existence is divided by 0). In a nutshell, Orcus lost his divinity and resumed his role as a demon prince, but the tattered remnant of his divinity still remained - believed in but not sustained. It wound up going nowhere , and eventually "coalesced into a bitter sentience... a shadow of a shadow". (The same book also referenced Dahlver-Nar and Savnok.)

September 4, 2016 at 10:17 AM

 Sean 
said...

Brian: You are most welcome! I'm glad it helped. The weird thing about the 'designing to be replayed' thing is.. do people really run a long campaign/adventure more than once? I personally do not like running the same adventure more than once. I try to make it so that everything that I run "counts" and that whatever they do in the place changes the place permanently. I totally agree with you on the Strahd encounters, too. They needed more. The 3.5 Tome of Magic! I didn't know that stuff about Tenebrous. That definitely fills in some gaps. Thanks!

September 6, 2016 at 4:23 AM

 Brian McDaniel 
said...

Sean, (re the list of blinsky toys) Sure. That's why I left the list. I thought someone else might find it useful.

September 16, 2016 at 12:17 AM

 Sean 
said...

Brian McDaniel: Awesome, thank you! I'll put it up there right now.

September 16, 2016 at 4:29 PM

 jerry247 
said...

Rereading this as we are about to enter the castle and the sub heading "gay stuff" still cracks me up because it sounds so 'bro-y' but is actually not. Thanks again for these write ups.

October 23, 2016 at 12:02 PM

 Sean 
said...

jerry247: You are welcome! Going into the castle seems like it will be the best of the adventure.

October 23, 2016 at 7:04 PM

Anonymous
said...

Your guide to 'Curse of Strahd' is among the best I did read within the last two decades. Thanks for sharing it.

A homebrew trinket:
https://issuu.com/andrem.pietroschek/docs/dnd5_acolyte_arcane_variant_backgro

January 23, 2017 at 10:16 PM

 Unknown 
said...

I've looked high and low for a high quality printable version of the Barovia area. I liked your version where it doesn't have the different points of interest, but do you have one with the points of interest? All the ones I've tried printing off are illegible!

March 18, 2017 at 1:44 PM

 Sean 
said...

Andre: Thank you!! I appreciate it.

Wayne: You can buy it here for $2 right from the artist:

http://prints.mikeschley.com/p996068422/h6375C967#h61f20e42

March 19, 2017 at 6:29 PM

Anonymous
said...

Hello from France,

Would you mind if I translate and post on a french forum your excellent guide ?

Papyrolf from France

April 23, 2017 at 2:25 AM

 Sean 
said...

Anonymous: Sure! Send me a link to it and I'll add it to the guide!

May 9, 2017 at 2:37 PM

 Nalfien 
said...

The link you have provided to the Mock Man art is great, but it only shows the castle interior. Where are you getting his art for the surrounding areas of Barovia? I think these would make great gifts to my players once the campaign is done.

December 27, 2017 at 8:55 AM

 Juju 
said...

Regarding the Elevator Trap:

"Arrival: Once at the top, the portcullises retract. The heroes are at K31 (page 63)."

Where in the book does it say this? My understanding is that the portcullis would not retract unless the trap was reset and the elevator went back to the bottom. Even if it did retract, it'd just be stone walls on all sides. The only way out is through the trapdoor in the ceiling that leads to K47. 

The place where the ledge is, K31, I think the elevator goes past this when it goes up. It doesn't stop there. 

April 22, 2018 at 10:16 PM

Anonymous
said...

I gladly shared a LINK to this work of yours. Hardcore fans might appreciate this LINK added, though I think the time for it is over: http://www.fraternityofshadows.com/Library.html

October 9, 2018 at 9:51 PM

 Unknown 
said...

If a tone is currently running the COS campaign and want to set the tone with a haunting read of the Tome of Strahd then please pick the link below:
https://youtu.be/Mlt8caF081g

February 17, 2019 at 1:22 AM

 Lord Mark 
said...

Are you tired of being human, having talented brain turning to a vampire in a good posture in ten minutes, Do you want to have power and influence over others, To be charming and desirable, To have wealth, health, without delaying in a good human posture and becoming an immortal? If yes, these your chance. It's a world of vampire where life get easier,We have made so many persons vampires and have turned them rich, You will assured long life and prosperity, You shall be made to be very sensitive to mental alertness, Stronger and also very fast, You will not be restricted to walking at night only even at the very middle of broad day light you will be made to walk, This is an opportunity to have the human vampire virus to perform in a good posture. If you are interested contact us on Vampirelord7878@gmail.com

March 15, 2019 at 7:28 PM

Marty G
said...

Hey i LOVE this guide. Its been nothing but helpful to my campaign! 
Just a heads up: the guide says that in X15 of the Amber Temple there is a Staff of Power which is not the case. in X17 there is a Staff of Frost, and in Castle Ravenloft there is a Staff of Power. Just clarifying, i almost wanna give it to my PCs anyway, but it makes sense in the Castle.

Thanks for your hard work!

March 26, 2019 at 6:17 AM

John Phillips
said...

I turn to a vampire any time i want to. i become a vampire because of how people treat me, this world is a wicked world and not fair to any body. at the snack of my finger things are made happened. am now a powerful man and no one step on me without an apology goes free. i turn to human also at any time i want to. and am one of the most dreaded man in my country. i become a vampire through the help of my friend who introduce me into a vampire kingdom by given me their email. All thanks to Lord Shaka for your empowerment if you want to become a powerful vampire kindly contact the vampire kingdom on their Email: ( lordshakavampirekingdom@gmail.com )

May 28, 2019 at 8:09 PM

 Pham Tan Thanh 
said...

I have previously expressed my reservations about the Curse of Strahd Adventure Path (AP) (published by Wizards of the Coast in March 2016), but I never intended to expand them into a full blog post, since my focus here is directed toward analyses of fantasy worlds in general, and my own Lukomorye setting in particular. However, I decided to return to this topic after encountering an academic article in the online journal Analog Game Studies called “The Psychological Abuse of Curse of Strahd”, by Shelly Jones. Jones explores this adventure as a “site for witnessing and performing the psychology of trauma, and specifically the psychology of abuse.” The author finds game play in this particular AP therapeutic because, unlike the traditional D&D module, which tends to be instrumental, and to overfocus on themes of conflict resolution through violence and plunder, the Curse of Strahd has, in her estimation, a rich thematic and emotional backdrop which opens players up to experiences of overcoming emotional trauma, as well as diversity and otherness – thus - to a variety of role-playing experiences. These experiences, according to her, are encoded both into the narrative structure, as well as the actual mechanics of game play.

February 21, 2020 at 7:38 AM

 Alandre 
said...

I always turn to Vampire any time I want to. I became a Vampire because of how people treat me, this world is a wicked world and not fair to anybody. at the snack of my finger things are made happen. I am now a Powerful Man and no one steps on me without an apology. I turn to Human beings also at any time I want to. and am one of the most dreaded Man in my Town. I became a Vampire through the help of my friend who introduced me into a Vampire Kingdom by giving me their email. if you want to become a Powerful Vampire kindly contact the Vampire Kingdom on their Email: Vampirelord7878@gmail.com

February 4, 2021 at 6:10 AM

 Jessica L. Smith 
said...

After being in relationship with Wilson for seven years,he broke up with me, I did everything possible to bring him back but all was in vain, I wanted him back so much because of the love I have for him, I begged him with everything, I made promises but he refused. I explained my problem to someone online and she suggested that I should contact a spell caster that could help me cast a spell to bring him back but I am the type that don’t believed in spell, I had no choice than to try it, I meant a spell caster called Dr Zuma zuk and I email him, and he told me there was no problem that everything will be okay before three days, that my ex will return to me before three days, he cast the spell and surprisingly in the second day, it was around 4pm. My ex called me, I was so surprised, I answered the call and all he said was that he was so sorry for everything that happened, that he wanted me to return to him, that he loves me so much. I was so happy and went to him, that was how we started living together happily again. Since then, I have made promise that anybody I know that have a relationship problem, I would be of help to such person by referring him or her to the only real and powerful spell caster who helped me with my own problem and who is different from all the fake ones out there. Anybody could need the help of the spell caster, his email: spiritualherbalisthealing@gmail.com or WhatsApp him +15068001647 you can email him if you need his assistance in your relationship or anything. CONTACT HIM NOW FOR SOLUTION TO ALL YOUR PROBLEMS

February 28, 2021 at 3:59 PM

 SIMON PATCHIN 
said...

I was married for 16 years to a loving wife. We had 2 children together who are now 11 & 13. I reconnected with an old girlfriend from college on Facebook and we began an affair and I left my wife. The woman I had an affair with is a wonderful woman and I love her too and our kids had begun accepting the situation and my wife has kind of moved on, but not in love with the man she is seeing. I thought I fell out of love with my wife and I felt terrible about what I did to her - she is a good woman and I don't know what came over me. I decided to try and get her back and I was recommended to Lord Zakuza for help to get reunited with my wife and within 48 hours after I made contact with Lord Zakuza my wife decided to work things out with me and now we are back together with our children living as one happy family. I really don't know the words to use in appreciation of what Lord Zakuza did for me but I will say thank you sir for reuniting I and my family back. For those in trying times with their marriages or relationship can WhatsApp Lord Zakuza for help or text with this number +1 740 573 9483 or you can send him an email to Lordzakuza7@gmail.com

April 5, 2021 at 5:10 AM

 MARGARET DALEY 
said...

Looking for your love life back, that person that you love and can’t let go off? Well I know a person who is good at what he does and a person that keeps his word to get you and your husband, wife, partner back together for good and that is Lord Zakuza! I lost my partner and we have been together almost 5 years and was going REAL good! My partners family had something to do with us breaking apart and I felt like I couldn’t go on in life because my partner meant the world to me !! I cried and couldn’t sleep nor eat but I never gave up on my partner! I started researching and I was reading numerous articles about Lord Zakuza and how his love spells work and you could get your partner back within 24 to 48 hours! I contacted Lord Zakuza and told him everything that was going on and he told me not to worry at all!! I followed and did everything that he told me to do and within 24 hours after he did his work my partner was back in my arms and I am the happiest person on this earth he got my love life back and I feel like a brand new person! Trust me he is the best and he’s on WhatsApp with this number +1 740 573 9483 and on Email via lordzakuza7@gmail.com you can contact him.

April 17, 2021 at 4:36 AM

 Jessica L. Smith 
said...

After being in relationship with Wilson for seven years,he broke up with me, I did everything possible to bring him back but all was in vain, I wanted him back so much because of the love I have for him, I begged him with everything, I made promises but he refused. I explained my problem to someone online and she suggested that I should contact a spell caster that could help me cast a spell to bring him back but I am the type that don’t believed in spell, I had no choice than to try it, I meant a spell caster called Dr Zuma zuk and I email him, and he told me there was no problem that everything will be okay before three days, that my ex will return to me before three days, he cast the spell and surprisingly in the second day, it was around 4pm. My ex called me, I was so surprised, I answered the call and all he said was that he was so sorry for everything that happened, that he wanted me to return to him, that he loves me so much. I was so happy and went to him, that was how we started living together happily again. Since then, I have made promise that anybody I know that have a relationship problem, I would be of help to such person by referring him or her to the only real and powerful spell caster who helped me with my own problem and who is different from all the fake ones out there. Anybody could need the help of the spell caster, his email: spiritualherbalisthealing@gmail.com or WhatsApp him +15068001647
you can email him if you need his assistance in your relationship or anything. CONTACT HIM NOW FOR SOLUTION TO ALL YOUR PROBLEMS

April 27, 2021 at 2:33 AM

 Marianella Cordero 
said...

It's a privilege to share this miraculous testimony to the world. My name is Marianella Cordero, My husband divorced me 8 months back and I have been filled with remorse for I didn't know what to do to amend issues with my husband. I searched for help on the internet on how I could get help in my marriage and I discovered great testifiers about DR JOHN SOCO who has been progressive with his spells. I got in touch with him and behold, DR JOHN SOCO, told me that he will prepare a spell for me that will bring back my husband. I was skeptical but I had no other option but to work with him. 3 days later, my husband called me that he's coming back home and from that day till this moment, we have been living peacefully. He is back now with so much love and caring. today i am glad to let you all know that this spell caster has the power to bring lovers back and the most surprising thing is that our love is very strong now, every day is happiness and joy. and There is nothing like being with the man you love. I will highly recommend DR JOHN SOCO to anyone one out there who needs help whatsoever. If you have any problem contact DR JOHN SOCO, i give you 100% guarantee that he will help you!!. Email: Drjohnsoco@gmail.com or whatsApp number: +1 706 871 4571 ..

April 27, 2021 at 11:14 PM

 SIMON PATCHIN 
said...

I was married for 16 years to a loving mother and wife. We had 2 children together who are now 11 & 13. I reconnected with an old girlfriend from college on Facebook and we began an affair and I left my wife. The woman I had an affair with is a wonderful woman and I love her too and our kids had begun accepting the situation and my wife has kind of moved on, but not in love with the man she is seeing. I thought I fell out of love with my wife and I felt terrible about what I did to her - she is a good woman and I don't know what came over me. I decided to try and get her back and I was recommended to Lord Zakuza for help to get reunited with my wife and within 48 hours after I made contact with Lord Zakuza my wife decided to work things out with me and now we are back together with our children living as one happy family. I really don't know the words to use in appreciation of what Lord Zakuza did for me but I will say thank you sir for reuniting I and my family back. For those in trying times with their marriages or relationship can browse through his website via: lordzakuzaspells.com or WhatsApp Lord Zakuza for help or text with this number +1 740 573 9483 or you can send him an email to Lordzakuza7@gmail.com

May 12, 2021 at 12:37 AM

 Daily Bloggers 
said...

Great informational article! I have to thank you for making this available. I like your point of view and how engaging your article is written. emerald omegle 

May 22, 2021 at 9:08 PM

 JOYCE BANG 
said...

This year has been so blissful to me for God has given me a reason to live happily again after been heart broken for 3 months when my husband neglected me and went back to he's mistress. I suffered and went through all types of emotional tortures for I couldn't get any help to get my man back not until I was refereed to Lord Zakuza by my co-worker who gave me her full assurance about him that he can be of help to me. I got in touch with Lord Zakuza and I hearken to his words and followed the instructions given to me by him. Could you believe that my husband got back home within 48 hours as said by him and today, my marriage is restored & I'm so thankful, appreciative & grateful to God for using Lord Zakuza to get my man back after 3 months of broken marriage. Is there anyone out there who needs to get back to he's or her lover back or needs any help of any kind? Then, I suggest that you get in touch with Lord Zakuza now through his Email ID: Lordzakuza7@gmail.com or WhatsApp him on + 1 (740) 573–9483 and for more information, here's his website: lordzakuzaspells.com

May 28, 2021 at 1:59 AM

Anonymous
said...

I can't stop saying thank you to LORD ZAKUZA for helping me to win my ex lover back after lots of fights and quarrels but now there's so much love, care and happiness in my relationship and I wanna say LORD ZAKUZA is best known for what he does with his spells. WhatsApp him now to get yours back through + 1 740 573 9483.

Email: lordzakuza7@gmail.com
Website: lordzakuzaspells.com

June 5, 2021 at 6:24 AM

 Tonia Anderson 
said...

I'm Tonia Anderson by name, I am from the States, Suffolk county to be precise. I am here today to testify of the good works LORD ZAKUZA has done in my life, I never knew great men still exist until I found him. I have been suffering from heart break for the past 3 years, my partner who I invested on cheated on me with my best friend on my matrimonial bed, I was yet to recover from this terrible shock until I meant LORD ZAKUZA, a friend of mine directed me to him , I doubted him at first but as things went further, I had to give him my trust and did exactly as he told me to do. Ever since then, I have been happy all my life and my love life with my partner has been so wonderful. You can also need his help and here's his contact information. WhatsApp: +1 740 573 9483, Email: lordzakuza7 @ gmail. com, Website: lordzakuzaspells.com

June 18, 2021 at 11:21 AM

 Jessica L. Smith 
said...

After being in relationship with Wilson for seven years,he broke up with me, I did everything possible to bring him back but all was in vain, I wanted him back so much because of the love I have for him, I begged him with everything, I made promises but he refused. I explained my problem to someone online and she suggested that I should contact a spell caster that could help me cast a spell to bring him back but I am the type that don’t believed in spell, I had no choice than to try it, I meant a spell caster called Dr Zuma zuk and I email him, and he told me there was no problem that everything will be okay before three days, that my ex will return to me before three days, he cast the spell and surprisingly in the second day, it was around 4pm. My ex called me, I was so surprised, I answered the call and all he said was that he was so sorry for everything that happened, that he wanted me to return to him, that he loves me so much. I was so happy and went to him, that was how we started living together happily again. Since then, I have made promise that anybody I know that have a relationship problem, I would be of help to such person by referring him or her to the only real and powerful spell caster who helped me with my own problem and who is different from all the fake ones out there. Anybody could need the help of the spell caster, his email: spiritualherbalisthealing@gmail.com or WhatsApp him +15068001647
you can email him if you need his assistance in your relationship or anything. CONTACT HIM NOW FOR SOLUTION TO ALL YOUR PROBLEMS

June 18, 2021 at 2:55 PM

 Precious Kurlan 
said...

Yes it is true that Dr John is the best to restore broken homes and relationships. My name is precious kurlan , and i was a client for DR John and i must tell you that he is a real spell caster. When i contacted this spell caster my boyfriend had left me for 7 years and i have always wanted him back to me. I contacted DR John to help me about a three weeks ago and i have reconnected with my boyfriend. When my ex boyfriend left me it was turmoil for me. This became a disaster for me that i had a physiological trauma and my family were very worried about my health. After 4 years, I met DR John through a testimony also and he told me to calm myself that no matter what the problem is, he is well and ready to help anyone who comes to him. Just in 3 days, my ex called me and wanted to meet. I agreed and made preparations to meet him and he told me how he had felt guilty for what he did and he wanted me back. I praised DR John for his marvelous handiwork and i will recommend him to anyone who needs a spell caster. Contact him to help you and fast at his email: drjohnsoco@gmail.com , You can also WhatsApp him on +1 706 871 4571 .. 

June 22, 2021 at 10:43 PM

 Gabriel Floyd 
said...

Hello, I bring you good news. Do you need black magic spells to get rid of your husband's mistress ? Do you want to fix your marriage or relationship or you want to get back with your ex after the breakup or you want to put a stop to that Divorce? Do you want revenge on your enemies or do you want a death spell cast on someone who has wronged you in the past ? If yes then let me recommend a tested and trusted voodoo man called Dr noble who has helped me to destroy my enemy (Donald) that almost ruined my life just because I got promoted before him at our place of work. I contacted Dr Noble for his powerful death spell and in 48 hours Donald died in an accident. It was the greatest news to me that day. Finally my enemy is out of the way thank you Noble. Here is Dr Noble's website noblesolutiontemple. com 

June 23, 2021 at 2:49 AM

 Felipe Dylan 
said...

To everyone out there who thinks love spells don't work, I’m here to tell you that Lord Zakuza love spell is the best and most powerful. I am a wealthy man who has lots of assets and possessions but I have difficulty with women. Whenever I try to settle down with any, we end up breaking up and I had no idea of why I was going through such an experience in my relationship. It was so worrying that I couldn’t be myself anymore and I started searching for help everywhere even at my place of work. I was going through my work activities online and I came across a testimony of a lady called ( Febe Anouk ) regarding how Lord Zakuza helped her to restore her relationship with his love spell, I had to give it a try because I needed my Ex lover back that I love so much. I visited Lord Zakuza website online and I told him everything I was going through. Lord Zakuza consoled me and promised to help me out with my situation by preparing a love spell for me. I followed the instructions given by him to me and within 48 hours, my Ex lover came looking for me and pleaded for forgiveness. Since I came in contact with Lord Zakuza, things have changed for good in my life and right now, I am married with two beautiful kids and my home is blessed. All thanks to Lord Zakuza I am forever thankful to you. Visit his website for any help via lordzakuzaspells.com or WhatsApp him on +1 740-573-9483. Try him and your life will be blessed.

July 9, 2021 at 6:06 PM

 Felipe Dylan 
said...

To everyone out there who thinks love spells don't work, I’m here to tell you that Lord Zakuza love spell is the best and most powerful.. I am a wealthy man who has lots of assets and possessions but I have difficulty with women. Whenever I try to settle down with any, we end up breaking up and I had no idea of why I was going through such an experience in my relationship. It was so worrying that I couldn’t be myself anymore and I started searching for help everywhere even at my place of work. I was going through my work activities online and I came across a testimony of a lady called ( Febe Anouk ) regarding how Lord Zakuza helped her to restore her relationship with his love spell, I had to give it a try because I needed my Ex lover back that I love so much. I visited Lord Zakuza website online and I told him everything I was going through. Lord Zakuza consoled me and promised to help me out with my situation by preparing a love spell for me. I followed the instructions given by him to me and within 48 hours, my Ex lover came looking for me and pleaded for forgiveness. Since I came in contact with Lord Zakuza, things have changed for good in my life and right now, I am married with two beautiful kids and my home is blessed. All thanks to Lord Zakuza I am forever thankful to you. Visit his website for any help via lordzakuzaspells.com or WhatsApp him on +1 740-573-9483. Try him and your life will be blessed.

July 14, 2021 at 6:01 AM

 Amanda Douthitt 
said...

I want to acknowledge Lord Bubuza for helping me restore my relationship, he has made my cheating boyfriend stop cheating with his spell. My boyfriend was cheating and disrespectful, Our relationship was stressful and we broke up 3 times before I contacted lord Bubuza for help via WhatsApp: +1 505 569 0396. I told him my relationship problems and he promised to help me with his spell and told me what I needed to do. It was very surprising and shocking because 15 hours after I did as lord Bubuza instructed, my boyfriend came back begging me on his knees to forgive and accept him back. My boyfriend doesn't cheat or disrespect me anymore. I am making this testimony because I made a vow to myself that if lord Bubuza helps me that I will testify about him to the world. He is a god on Earth, He can help you too. Contact him via WhatsApp: +1 505 569 0396 or via email: lordbubuzamiraclework @ hotmail . com

July 19, 2021 at 1:15 PM

Anonymous
said...

i am giving this testimony cos l am happy My name is Mrs. Santana Valdez from Houston,taxes.i never believed in love spells or magic until i met this spell caster once. when i went to Canada in June 28th 2021 this year on a business summit. i meet a man called Dr Zuma zuk.He is powerful he could help you cast a spells to bring back my love's gone, misbehaving lover looking for some one to love you, bring back lost money and magic money spell or spell for a good job. i'm now happy & a living testimony cos the man i had wanted to marry left me 3 weeks before our wedding and my life was upside down cos our relationship has been on for 2 years. i really loved him, but his mother was against me and he had no good paying job. so when i met this spell caster, i told him what happened and explained the situation of things to him.. at first i was undecided, skeptical and doubtful, but i just gave it a try. and in 6 days when i returned to taxes, my boyfriend (is now my husband ) he called me by himself and came to me apologizing that everything had been settled with his mom and family and he got a new job interview so we should get married..i didn't believe it cos the spell caster only asked for my name and my boyfriends name and all i wanted him to do. well we are happily married now and we are expecting our little kid, and my husband also got a new job and our lives became much better. in case anyone needs the spell caster for some help, email address spiritualherbalisthealing@gmail.com Great Zuma zuk i thank you very much thank you in 1000000 times.. if not you i would have been losted and wasted thank you. Email Him Through his email address... spiritualherbalisthealing@gmail.com please make sure you contact him for any financial difficulties okay...What a powerful man such as Dr Zuma zuk.. he is so much powerful..\\ email him for any difficulties.. spiritualherbalisthealing@gmail.com His whatsapp +15068001647

August 6, 2021 at 5:25 AM

 pooja 
said...

 paypal login 

August 31, 2021 at 3:47 AM

 Sarah Nicky 
said...

What would i have done to get my husband back if not for the help of DR JOHN SOCO. my name is Sarah Nicky and I was in totally confused when my husband divorced me and said he was tired of me. My life was nothing without him and i tried all i could to make him cancel the divorce but he said his mind was made up and we went our separate ways. when my friend when searching for help and i was told to get in touch with DR JOHN SOCO for help by an New friend of mine when she heard what i was going through and i hurriedly contacted DR JOHN SOCO and explained everything to him and he told me that my husband will come back to me begging me to accept him back all within 24 hours just like everyone he had helped. DR JOHN SOCO restored the love and connection between me and my husband he truly returned back to me after 24 hours and it still amazes me. For more enquires on how to get in touch with DR JOHN SOCO, Email: drjohnsoco@gmail.com or WhatsApp him on +1 (706) 871 4571..

September 2, 2021 at 6:57 AM

 Spy Camera India 
said...

Thank you so much for posting this type of blog!
Spy Playing Card is the best dice cheating devices wholesaler in India, you can buy different types of Spy Dice Cheating Devices Click Here to learn more and go to our official website at spyplayingcard.in today!

September 18, 2021 at 2:47 AM

 GetAjord 
said...

Get Ajord is an online exclusive store selling high quality traditional wet shaving products and Shaving Gifts . We are proud to offer a wide selection of the most beautiful, handcrafted Shaving razors , Best shaving brush , shaving sets, Shaving Kits for men and other grooming accessories.

October 6, 2021 at 10:42 PM

 Zainiseowriter 
said...

Thanks for sharing this awesome post it was very informative Plz share more post like this
 WOMEN LEATHER BOMBER JACKETS 

 Womens Leather Vest 

 Men Leather Vest 

October 8, 2021 at 3:24 AM

Anonymous
said...

RFX leather deals in quality leather products. we have been in leather clothing field for last 10 years.

 RFX Leather

 B3 BOMBER JACKETS 

 Harley Davidson Jackets

October 12, 2021 at 11:25 AM

 Vaastu Devayah Namah 
said...

Are You Looking a Best Vaastu Specialist Delhi-NCR And Top Consultant in India Here is The Best Vaastu Expert in India Acharya Chhaya Goyal is the Best Vaastu Consultant in India and leads the team of Vaastu Devayah Namah of Best Vaastu Experts & consultants in Delhi-NCR.She is a Vastu shastra specialist.
 Vastu Consultant India 

October 15, 2021 at 6:02 AM

 Historical Jacket Shop 
said...

Awesome Blog.. its Historical Jackets For Sale 

 Hussar Dolman Jackets For Sale 

 Hussar Military Jackets For Sale 

October 23, 2021 at 11:31 AM

 christa Sean 
said...

In 2001 my life was complicated, I felt like committing suicide because I was no longer getting the love and affection i deserve from my boyfriend. June 5, 2002 he said it was over between us, my heart was shattered. I spoke to my friend about it and she told me how Lord Bubuza restored her relationship with his spell so I contacted him immediately on WhatsApp: +1 505 569 0396, I told him my problem and he promised to help me with his spell. I followed his instructions and 16 hours after the spell was casted my boyfriend came back crying and begging to forgive and accept him back. It's 20 years today since lord Bubuza helped me and we are happily married with kids now. Don't give up on your lover, contact lord Bubuza for help via WhatsApp: +1 505 569 0396 or email: lordbubuzamiraclework @ hot mail . com or website: https://lordbubuzamiraculouswork.com ...

October 28, 2021 at 10:04 AM

 Martha Peterson 
said...

This is a testimony that I will tell everyone in the world. i have been married for 4 years and on the fifth year of my marriage, another woman had a spell to take my lover away from me and my husband left me and the kids and we have suffered for 2 years until i meant a post where this man Zuma Zuk have helped someone and i decided to give him a try to help me bring my love Husband home and believe me i just send my picture to him and that of my husband and after 48 hours as he have told me after doing everything he asked me to do, i saw a car drove into the house and behold it was my husband and he have come to me and the kids and that is why i am happy to make everyone of you in similar case to meet with this man and have your marriage fixed His email: spiritualherbalisthealing@gmail.com whatsapp him on this +15068001647..... thank so much Zuma Zuk.

November 22, 2021 at 4:18 AM

 Maud van Ree 
said...

I contacted lord Bubuza when all hope was lost, when no one could help me stop my cheating boyfriend from cheating, He left me for another girl because of this. I love him and didn't want him out of my life so i cried to my friend. she told me how lord Bubuza reunited her and boyfriend with his spell. I immediately contacted Lord Bubuza for help via WhatsApp: +1 505 569 0396. He responded and told me not to worry that my boyfriend will come back begging. I did as lord Bubuza instructed and he casted the spell. 14 hours after the spell was casted, I was so surprised when my boyfriend came begging me on his knees. This man save my relationship and we are happily married now. Contact lord Bubuza for help via WhatsApp: +1 505 569 0396 or email: lordbubuzamiraclework @ hotmail . com

November 27, 2021 at 5:16 PM

 Maud van Ree 
said...

 This comment has been removed by the author. 

November 28, 2021 at 8:09 PM

William Kruger
said...

I just want to thank lord Bubuza Again and again for helping me with his spell to win the Powerball jackpot of $169 million ($168,500,000). My name is William Kruger, I came across different testimonies of people thanking lord Bubuza for helping them win a lottery so I contacted him via WhatsApp: +1 505 569 0396. I told him how long I have been playing and trying to win a lottery without luck, lord Bubuza responded and promised to help me with his spell to win a lottery too. After casting the spell he gave me a lottery number and told me how and where to play the lottery, I did as he instructed and behold I became a jackpot winner of $169 million dollars($168,500,000). I just can't stop thanking Lord Bubuza, Are you seeking a loan? Are you bankrupt and need financial help? You can be a lottery winner too. Contact lord Bubuza for help to win a lottery via WhatsApp: +1 505 569 0396 or email: lordbubuzamiraclework@hotmail.com or website: https://lordbubuzamiraculouswork.com

November 28, 2021 at 8:11 PM

 Maud van Ree 
said...

I contacted lord Bubuza when all hope was lost, when no one could help me stop my cheating boyfriend from cheating, He left me for another girl because of this. I love him and didn't want him out of my life so i cried to my friend. she told me how lord Bubuza reunited her relationship with his spell. I immediately contacted Lord Bubuza for help via WhatsApp: +1 505 569 0396. He responded and told me not to worry that my boyfriend will come back begging. I did as lord Bubuza instructed and he casted the spell. 14 hours after the spell was casted, I was so surprised when my boyfriend came begging me on his knees. This man save my relationship and we are happily married now. Contact lord Bubuza for help via WhatsApp: +1 505 569 0396 or email: lordbubuzamiraclework @ hotmail . com

November 28, 2021 at 10:01 PM

 Shahbaz gul 
said...

so beautiful leather jacket 

November 29, 2021 at 11:23 PM

 US Leather Jacket 
said...

Thanks for sharing this informative post. We are selling online leather products at an affordable price & free shipping. 
 Men Aviator Leather Jacket 
 MotoGP Leather Jackets 
 MotoGP Leather Suits 
 V Bomber Leather Jacket 

January 3, 2022 at 6:11 AM

 Gavin Bloggs 
said...

I found my wife cheating 7 months after our marriage, I started wondering why she was cheating on me with her Ex boyfriend. She filed a divorce and left home. I cried to my friend for help because I didn't want to lose her to him. My friend told me how lord Bubuza fixed his relationship with his spell after 2 years of breakup so I spoke to lord Bubuza for help via WhatsApp: +1 984 240 7211. He responded and said my wife will come back to me begging on her knees for forgiveness. I did as he instructed. It was exactly 24 hours after lord Bubuza finish casting the spell and my wife started calling me and begging me to forgive and accept her back, We are happy together now. Lord Bubuza is a GOD on Earth, he has brought happiness back to our home with his spell. Are you heartbroken? Contact him via WhatsApp: +1 984 240 7211 or email: lordbubuzamiraclework @ hotmail . com

January 19, 2022 at 7:17 AM

Anonymous
said...

Whatsapp Number Call us Now! 01537587949
 outsourcing in Bangladesh 
USA pone web iphone repair USA 
USA SEX WEB careful 
bd sex video B tex 
bd sex video sex video 

February 2, 2022 at 3:33 AM

 Piet Roosen 
said...

Lord Bubuza is like a God on Earth, I have seen and experienced the reason why people call him a God on Earth, I never believed that men like him existed. I contacted lord Bubuza for help via WhatsApp: +1 984 240 7211 to win a lottery after reading different testimonies on the internet on how he predicted lottery winning and gave winning numbers to people to play and they won. He responded and said that he would cast a spell to predict my winning, I provided his requirements and did as he instructed. After casting the spell he gave me some numbers and a lottery website where to play the lottery game. After playing as he instructed I won $781,999,000 Euro. This man has made my life beautiful with his lottery winning number. I have made a vow to myself that I will testify of his miraculous spell for making me a millionaire. Contact lord Bubuza via WhatsApp: +1 984 240 7211 or e-mail: lordbubuzamiraclework @ hotmail . com

February 7, 2022 at 1:50 AM

Oumy Diaw
said...

I won $739,342,000 Million dollars with the help of lord Bubuza winning numbers, I have been playing lottery games for years and I have never been lucky but my Friend in the office won 496,800.000 million dollars and resigned from work so I beg him for help and he said lord Bubuza predicted his winning after casting a spell and gave him the winning number to play and he won so I spoke to lord Bubuza on WhatsApp: +1 984 240 7211 for help. He responded and said a reading had to be done and a spell cast to reveal my SIX winning numbers, I provided his requirements for the casting of the spell. After casting the spell, he gave me SIX numbers and told me when and where to play. I did as instructed and 24 hours later, I got a call that I won $739,342,000 million dollars, I thought it was a joke until i saw $739,342,000 Million dollars on my bank account. Is this not amazing ? Contact him via WhatsApp: +1 984 240 7211 or email: lordbubuzamiraclework @ hotmail . com

February 9, 2022 at 1:26 AM

 Katie Edgar 
said...

Lord Bubuza has done it for me, His predictions are 100% correct, He is real and can perform miracles with his spell. I am overwhelmed because I just won 336,000, 000 million Euro from a lottery jackpot game with the lottery number lord Bubuza gave me. I contacted lord Bubuza for help to win a lottery via WhatsApp: +1 984 240 7211, he told me that a spell was required to be casted so that he can predict my winning, I provided his requirements for casting the spell and after casting the spell he gave the lottery numbers and a website where I played and won 336,000,00 euros. How can I thank this man enough? His spell is real and like a God on Earth. Thank you for changing my life with your lottery winning numbers. Do you need help to win a lottery too? contact lord Bubuza via WhatsApp: +1 984 240 7211 or e-mail: lordbubuzamiraclework @ hotmail . com

February 18, 2022 at 2:08 AM

 Anonymous 
said...

I wan to publicly thank Dr Ilekhojie for what he did for my family. I have two sons who have gone to several football clubs for trials but they where never chosen. Ever since they were 7 years olds, people stopped me in the streets just to tell me how good my sons are and how they will be big professionals but they were never taken after so many trials. One agent who have seen my sons play arranged a trial for them in Molde FC and he also told me to contact Dr Ilekhojie who will help me perform a spell and make offerings to ensure that they are chosen. I did as he asked me to do and Dr Ilekhojie made the offerings. Today, I have two sons Molde FC. One is in the U14 and the other in U12 in Molde FC. I am happy that my sons will finally achieve their dreams. Contact Dr Ilekhojie for any kind of help you need. Direct phone number +2348147400259 or Email: gethelp05@gmail.com

February 23, 2022 at 8:48 AM

 SPACEBAR COUNTER 
said...

Our counter will show how many times you can click in 1 second or 5 seconds 10 seconds 15 seconds 30 seconds 60 seconds and 100 seconds. You Have Thirty Seconds. You can utilize this device for tik tok difficulties and rivalry and furthermore in numerous games the spacebar button is utilized.Many gamers have tested with this clicking mode. How many times can you hit the space bar in 2 seconds. Click over the click me button.
 space bar counter 

February 25, 2022 at 3:32 AM

 Rhonda Potter 
said...

I admire the work of DR AMBER that uses his spells for good. This man is a very strong Haiti Voodoo Doc who gives out numbers that can never fails. I am a winner of $200,000.00 dollars today because Dr Amber casted a lottery spell for me and I am very grateful to him for giving me the right numbers to play the lottery. Now my long awaited dream has finally come to pass and I thank Dr Amber for his help. If you need his help, you can email { amberlottotemple@yahoo.com } or call/text him with his current number +1 (808) 481-5132.

March 21, 2022 at 4:03 PM

 Joyce Mason 
said...

My relationship was like hell, We fought almost everyday because of my boyfriend's cheating Habit, We have a child together but his cheating habit was breaking our relationship. I was emotionally heartbroken knowing that my boyfriend was cheating on me, my friend felt my pain and told me how Lord Bubuza used his spell to restore her broken relationship. I spoke to lord Bubuza for help via: +1-507-400-0072 and he said my boyfriend will come back begging on his knees after casting his spell, I did as he instructed and 16 hours after casting the spell my boyfriend came back crying and begging me on his knees to forgive him, lord Bubuza spell was so fast and active. He has stopped cheating and I am so safe with him now. Do you need help to win your ex back? Contact lord Bubuza via Text/call: +1-507-400-0072 or e-mail: lordbubuzamiraclework@hotmail.com

March 24, 2022 at 6:07 PM

Claudia Limock
said...

I was paid $30 per hour at work and it was a stressful job, I was researching online for a better job when I saw testimonies of how lord Bubuza helped people with his spell to help a lottery. I have not played the lottery game before so I wondered how it works, I spoke to lord Bubuza via: +1 507 400-0072 asking for help to win the lottery game too. He responded and requested for my name and picture, he said it was needed to cast a spell so that his gods will reveal to him the site where i was destined to win. I did as he instructed and the items were bought to cast the spell, after the casting of the spell he gave me a lottery number and a website which was revealed to him by the gods when he was casting the spell. I played the lottery numbers and two days later I got an email that I won $139 million dollars($139,000,000). I thought it was a joke but behold I got paid without stress. Lord Bubuza is a great Psychic, join me thank him via Text/call: +1 507 400-0072 or email: lordbubuzamiraclework @ hotmail . com

March 24, 2022 at 6:08 PM

 John Wallman 
said...

I am a retired construction manager, my name is John Wallman. After retirement I started playing the lotto game but winning became a problem so I started researching online when I saw how people testified about lord Bubuza a great Psychic who has helped so many win the lotto game with his spell. I contacted him and told him how unlucky I was in my lotto games. Lord Bubuza said he will help me win the lottery game by casting a spell and revealing the right lottery winning numbers to me, I did as he instructed and the spell was casted. He gave me the lottery numbers and instructed me to play the game. It was like a dream when I got a notification from the national lottery app about my win, I called the lottery phone numbers and they confirmed to me that I won £1,000,000 pounds. I just couldn’t hold my joyous tears because I have payed the lotto game for long without luck but after playing with the numbers lord Bubuza game me I became a millionaire. All thanks to lord Bubuza, He is a great Psychic and testifying about you is my little way to appreciate you sir. His info: WhatsApp: +1 951 442 2214 or call: +1 507 400 0072 or email: lordbubuzamiraclework @ hotmail . com

April 15, 2022 at 2:59 AM

Anonymous
said...

URGENT LOAN IS AVAILABLE NOW

TODAY I GOT MY DESIRED LOAN AMOUNT $760,000.00 FROM A RELIABLE AND TRUSTED LOAN COMPANY LAST WEEK BUSINESS/HOME/COMPANY/PROJECT/PERSONAL LOAN? ARE NOW AFFORDABLE HERE FOR YOU TODAY CONTACT Whatsapp +1(541)279-1406 Email profdorothyinvestments@gmail.com

Hello, I'm here to testify of how i got my real estate business loan from PROF. MRS.DOROTHY JEAN INVESTMENTS (profdorothyinvestments@gmail.com) I don't know if you are in need of an urgent loan to pay bills, start business or build a house, they offer all kinds of loan Ranging from $5,000.00 to $2,000,000.00USD with a low interest rate of 2% and loan duration of 1 to 33 years to pay back the loan secure and unsecured. Are you losing sleep at nights worrying how to get a Legit Loan Lender? 
MRS.DOROTHY JEAN holds all of the information about how to obtain money quickly and painlessly without cost/stress via Contacts Whatsapp Number +1(541)279-1406 Email profdorothyinvestments@gmail.com 

April 21, 2022 at 10:57 AM

 Laarni Bibal 
said...

My name is Laarni Bibal the winner of $522 million dollars san Diego California lottery jackpot back in June 2019 with the help of a spell caster called lord Bubuza. Before winning the jackpot, I have played the lottery game without luck so I went online for research and saw how people praised lord Bubuza for giving them lottery winning numbers and they won a huge sum of money. I spoke to him for help via WhatsApp: +1 951 442 2214 he responded and said a spell will be cast and a good luck prayer will be done for me in his temple. I followed his instructions and after the spell was casted he gave me some numbers and said it was my winning numbers revealed to him by his Oracle. I went home and bought a $2 Mega Millions ticket at Sorrento Deli-Mart in San Diego. After buying the tickets, I felt luck coming my way because of lord Babura's spell and prayer so I hid the ticket in a secret place where no one knew about. Behold my heart was beating fast when I was notified that I won the $522 million dollars so I took the cash option of $340 million dollars. I am making the testimony because Lord Bubuza is a great PSYCHIC, His spell made me a millionaire. contact him via WhatsApp: +1 951 442 2214 or email: lordbubuzamiraclework @ hotmail . com

April 23, 2022 at 3:08 AM

Nang T
said...

Do you need help to get the right lottery winner numbers ? There is a spell caster called lord Bubuza, he reveal lottery winning numbers with the help of his spell. His spell is super active. My name is Nang T and I won $18.7 million with the help of his spell. Contact Lord Bubuza via WhatsApp: +1 951 442 2214 or email: lordbubuzamiraclework @ hotmail . com

April 23, 2022 at 3:09 AM

John Wallman
said...

I never thought that I would be a millionaire by winning a lottery but Lord Bubuza made it possible. He predicted my winning with his spell and gave me the lottery winning number after casting a spell and showed me a site where to play the game. I did as he instructed and I won £1,000,000 pounds. I can't stop thanking you sir, you are a God on Earth. Contact him for help to win a lottery too via WhatsApp: +1 984 240 7211 or email: lordbubuzamiraclework @ hotmail . com

April 23, 2022 at 4:29 AM

Anonymous
said...

Thanks for your efforts man.
You have provided us almost every resources.

For those who want to download pdf of any Dungeons And Dragons Books 
Visit the site clicking on link above..
We have PDF of newly launched book that is : Monsters of the Multiverse 

May 16, 2022 at 8:55 AM

 Islamic Info 
said...

Matchless and also alluring tactics gone over in this article. Hope it will definitely also be important for others as it makes up handy details for all. 
 url opener 
 online filmek 
 uwatchfree 

June 1, 2022 at 10:21 AM

 pc software 
said...

Fantastic post. Thanks For Sharing such an informative article. Good day! I just would like to give you a big thumbs up for the great info you’ve got here on this post. I’ll be coming back to your website for more soon. re-loader activator 
 SolidWorks 2022 Crack 
 AVG PC TuneUp Crack 

June 2, 2022 at 11:57 AM

 Adams kevin 
said...

To all who read this you must have faith. There are greater forces at work than you can imagine. It will get better and each of your situations will improve whether it is what intended to happen or not. Few days after consulting Dr Abaka for help my ex came back to me and today we are happy together as husband and wife, I highly recommend any one to Dr Abaka for whatever problems you are experiencing whether is love, protection, money or psychic powers, he is the real deal. {drabakaspelltemple@gmail.com} either Whats-app/call (+1)484-820-1518

June 5, 2022 at 8:11 AM

Anonymous
said...

We are offering an investment program where you can earn 5 times your investment in 7 days for example you invest $200 in 7 days you get $2500 It's 100% genuine and payouts are sent into your bitcoin wallet immediately after trade …. Stop falling for scams and start earning good profit with a help of a professional trader send a dm now +1(252)285-2093 OR Email: andersoncarlassettrade@gmail.com to get started

June 8, 2022 at 3:08 PM

Deborah
said...

Its a miracle that I am alive today. I encountered HERPES SIMPLEX VIRUS (HSV1/2) for good four (4) years, six (6) months and twelve (12) day with my calculations, before I met the great Dr Ibinoba. I am DEBORAH from Arrowhead California, united state of America and I was infected with herpes virus.Herpes is a viral infection cause by the Herpes simplex virus, marked by painful, watery blister in the skin or mucors membrane or on the genitals. This was what I suffered for good four years. I have visited CVS Pharmacy in Arrowhead for treatment but no improvement. I met Dr ibinoba online while I was searching for herpes cure,I read a testimony about his work. I gave him a try and that now becomes a testimony in my life. I contacted Dr.ibinabo WhatsApp +2348085240869

July 5, 2022 at 6:30 PM

 Islamic Info 
said...

Hopefully others will certainly also fancy to read through it. Wonderful suggestions gone over with spectacular pick of words as well as phrases.

 uwatchfree 
 Playtubes 

July 6, 2022 at 6:24 AM

 rashidhussain8125 
said...

Amazing post thanks for sharing with us 

 cockos reaper crack 

July 7, 2022 at 3:11 AM

Anonymous
said...

 B3 bomber jackets 
 aviator leather jackets 
 sheepskin leather jacket 
 flying leather jacket 

July 22, 2022 at 4:55 AM

 Katie Bennett 
said...

Good day to you reading this now. I am very happy to share my insight working with DR AMBER because his powerful spell made me financially buoyant that no bill scares me anymore after winning 87 MILLION DOLLARS from the lottery game I played with your sure winning numbers. I want to thank DR AMBER for his endless help and he's from the United States. For urgent response, Call or text +1 808 481 5132 or email: amberlottotemple@yahoo.com or visit: AMBERLOTTOTEMPLE.COM

August 3, 2022 at 4:10 PM

 Computer Xperts 
said...

Wow! This blog have outstanding information.

we offers a lot of web based services Visit us today.

 SEO Services in Lahore & Sialkot 
 Best Pakistan Logo Design Company Sialkot 
 Domain & Web Hosting in Sialkot 
 Web Xperts Portfolio 
 Web Development Services 
 Alibaba Official Partner In Sialkot 
 Alibaba Service Provider 

August 25, 2022 at 12:29 AM

 Dotleathers 
said...

oh, I just Loving the info on this internet site ,thanks for sharing with us.

we offers A wide of rang of Real leather Jackets with free shipping worldwide.

Visit us now

 A2 Flight Jacket Mens 
 Leather V-Bomber Jacket Men 
 Mens Leather Bomber Jackets 
 Biker Leather Jacket Mens 
 Fashion Jackets Mens for Sale 

August 25, 2022 at 12:33 AM

 Mark Clark 
said...

Nice content thanks for sharing with us. Read through this amazingly put data piece to learn about the Binance Chain Wallet , which is created to deliver utmost safety to the official Binance token.

August 25, 2022 at 8:40 PM

 Family Office Singapore 
said...

awesome blog 

August 26, 2022 at 3:33 AM

 Post a Comment 

 Newer Post 

 Older Post 

 Home 

Subscribe to:
 Post Comments (Atom) 

 A Guide to Icewind Dale: Rime of the Frostmaiden

 A Guide to Baldur's Gate: Descent Into Avernus

 A Guide to Waterdeep: Dragon Heist

 Full of stuff for your Tomb campaign!

 Guide to Tomb of Annihilation

 My D&D 5th Edition Devil Sourcebook!

 Part 3 of the Litany of Arrows adventure path!

 Part two of the Litany of Arrows path!

 Guide to Tales From the Yawning Portal

 It's done! Pick up a pdf of A Guide to Storm King's Thunder on the DMs Guild

 Pick up a pdf of my Guide to Curse of Strahd at the DMs Guild.

 Check out my adventure, The Castle of Corellon for the Litany of Arrows adventure path here

 Popular Posts

 Dungeons & Dragons - A Guide to Curse of Strahd 

 Elemental Evil - A Guide to Princes of the Apocalypse 

 Dungeons & Dragons - A Guide to Storm King's Thunder 

 Rage of Demons - A Guide to Out of the Abyss 

 Dungeons & Dragons - The Great List of Food & Drinks 

 Blog Archive

 ► 

2025

 (7) 

 ► 

December

 (6) 

 ► 

November

 (1) 

 ► 

2023

 (12) 

 ► 

May

 (3) 

 ► 

March

 (9) 

 ► 

2022

 (18) 

 ► 

September

 (18) 

 ► 

2021

 (17) 

 ► 

December

 (4) 

 ► 

May

 (2) 

 ► 

January

 (11) 

 ► 

2020

 (52) 

 ► 

December

 (7) 

 ► 

November

 (5) 

 ► 

October

 (10) 

 ► 

September

 (4) 

 ► 

April

 (1) 

 ► 

March

 (12) 

 ► 

February

 (13) 

 ► 

2019

 (17) 

 ► 

November

 (2) 

 ► 

October

 (11) 

 ► 

September

 (1) 

 ► 

May

 (3) 

 ► 

2018

 (70) 

 ► 

December

 (7) 

 ► 

September

 (1) 

 ► 

August

 (6) 

 ► 

July

 (9) 

 ► 

June

 (7) 

 ► 

May

 (7) 

 ► 

April

 (7) 

 ► 

March

 (12) 

 ► 

February

 (8) 

 ► 

January

 (6) 

 ► 

2017

 (187) 

 ► 

December

 (9) 

 ► 

November

 (24) 

 ► 

October

 (17) 

 ► 

September

 (15) 

 ► 

August

 (24) 

 ► 

July

 (14) 

 ► 

June

 (14) 

 ► 

May

 (17) 

 ► 

April

 (11) 

 ► 

March

 (18) 

 ► 

February

 (10) 

 ► 

January

 (14) 

 ▼ 

2016

 (191) 

 ► 

December

 (14) 

 ► 

November

 (18) 

 ► 

October

 (19) 

 ► 

September

 (22) 

 ► 

August

 (25) 

 ► 

July

 (21) 

 ► 

June

 (20) 

 ► 

May

 (17) 

 ► 

April

 (10) 

 ▼ 

March

 (11) 

 Well of Worlds - The Mazes 

 Dungeons & Dragons - A Guide to Curse of Strahd 

 Dice, Camera, Action: Episode 2 - Curse of Strahd 

 Nemesis - Shrine of Shaktari 

 Dice, Camera, Action: Episode 1 - Curse of Strahd 

 Adventuring in Eberron: The Bag of Beans 

 Dungeons & Dragons - A Guide to the Ethereal Plane 

 Dungeons & Dragons - A Guide to Emirikol the Chaotic 

 Nemesis - In the Hive 

 Dungeons & Dragons - Critical Misses 

 Dungeons & Dragons - A Guide to the Infinite Stair... 

 ► 

February

 (8) 

 ► 

January

 (6) 

 ► 

2015

 (87) 

 ► 

December

 (9) 

 ► 

September

 (1) 

 ► 

August

 (11) 

 ► 

July

 (11) 

 ► 

June

 (6) 

 ► 

May

 (12) 

 ► 

April

 (9) 

 ► 

March

 (6) 

 ► 

February

 (6) 

 ► 

January

 (16) 

 ► 

2014

 (163) 

 ► 

December

 (16) 

 ► 

November

 (8) 

 ► 

October

 (14) 

 ► 

September

 (7) 

 ► 

August

 (13) 

 ► 

July

 (17) 

 ► 

June

 (13) 

 ► 

May

 (15) 

 ► 

April

 (28) 

 ► 

March

 (24) 

 ► 

February

 (8) 

 ► 

2012

 (1) 

 ► 

September

 (1) 

 Dice, Camera, Action Subreddit 

 DMDavid 

 DMs Guild Subreddit 

 Dungeon Fantastic 

 Dungeon Master Assistance 

 Fey Ancestry 

 Fraim Brothers Art 

 Greyhawk Grognard 

 Grodog's Greyhawk 

 Merric's Musings 

 Sly Flourish 

 The Blackmoor Archives 

 The Dungeon Dozen 

 The Other Side 

 World Builder Blog 

 Tiny Logo

 Small Logo

 Wide Logo
