Sojourner's Awake 

 Subscribe Sign in 

 Sojourners Awake!
 The Rime of the Frostmaiden - 1 - Preview

 1×

 0:00
 Current time: 0:00 / Total time: -2:18

 -2:18

 Audio playback is not supported on your browser. Please upgrade. 

 The Rime of the Frostmaiden - 1 - Preview

 Sojourners Awake! 
 Jul 25, 2021 

 Share

 Hello Sojourners!
 This is the preview to Season 5 Adventure The Rime of the Frostmaiden. Follow along with this chilling adventure as the sojourners brave into the wild lands of Ten Towns. Explore rugged fronteir masked by a desolation of Auril, the goddess of winter. Brave the frozen north in this apocalyptic horrifying (and sometimes humorous) journey. And so our story continues!
 Dungeon Master - Will
 Silmarn, the wood elf ranger of the artic

 Risym, the drow fighter from the underdark

 Sugardumplin, the halfling chef and wizard

 Nesxan, the dragonborne paladin of Bahamut

 Thanks to TableTopAudio for wonderful background music and ambience! 
 Thanks to HalflingHobbies for incredible content for Dungeon Masters and Players alike! 

 Discussion about this episode
 Comments Restacks 

 Sojourners Awake!
 Hi, I'm Jonathan. We play Dungeons and Dragons 5th edition as we share stories around the table.

https://www.sojournersawake.com - for blogs and articles on table top roleplaying games and homeschooling

 Hi, I'm Jonathan. We play Dungeons and Dragons 5th edition as we share stories around the table.

https://www.sojournersawake.com - for blogs and articles on table top roleplaying games and homeschooling

 Subscribe 

 Listen on

 Substack App

 RSS Feed

 Appears in episode

 Sojourners Awake! 

 Recent Episodes

 The Black Dragon's Lair 
 Oct 30, 2023 • Sojourners Awake! 

 A Call to Pay Attention 
 Oct 14, 2023 • Sojourners Awake! 

 Interview with a Sojourner - Jenn 
 Feb 8, 2023 

 A Call to Pay Attention 
 Jan 18, 2023 • Sojourners Awake! 

 Tryina's Letter to Von 
 May 30, 2022 • Sojourners Awake! 

 Trust and our Imaginations 
 May 3, 2022 • Sojourners Awake! 

 Study is Only One Part of Life 
 Mar 18, 2022 • Sojourners Awake! 

 The Importance of The End 
 Mar 2, 2022 • Sojourners Awake! 

 Ready for more?

 Subscribe 

 © 2026 Sojourners, Awake! · Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection notice 
 Start your Substack Get the app 
 Substack is the home for great culture

 This site requires JavaScript to run correctly. Please turn on JavaScript or unblock scripts
