139
The Role of the Cosmographer
Abstract: This article suggests that the most distinctive element of role-playing games is not that they allow players 
to take on the role of fictional characters but that they represent a historically significant development of humanity’s 
capacity for imagining other worlds. It describes this development as an innovation in cosmographic technology, 
or interlocking procedures and techniques that enhance our ability to imagine and explore worlds. In other 
words, the most essential role that a player takes on in a role-playing game is that of cosmographer, or explorer of 
multiversal possibility. The novel cosmographic development represented by the first RPGs came from a synthesis 
of two imaginative technologies: the ironic imagination of early speculative fiction and the oracular simulations 
of wargaming. RPGs draw on technologies for simulating space and time, but most importantly they draw on the 
oracular technology of using probabilities and dice to propel games into cosmographic territory that the human 
players could not have imagined unaided. Through the synthesis of these elements RPGs enhance human imaginative 
capacities offering players the ability to take on the role of cosmographers utilizing powerful technologies to access 
vast and unexplored swathes of possible worlds.
Keywords: Cosmographer, TRPG, Cosmagraphic Technology, Oracular Simulation
Nicholas J. Mizer
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
mizern@rpi.edu
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 18    
1. INTRODUCTION
The 2025 Role-Play in Games Conference called on participants to think about the foundations 
of role-playing in a game, breaking that down by historical, cultural, theoretical, and critical 
angles. This included “alternative historical trajectories of other critical lines, events or ideas 
that came together to form role-playing in games as we know it” (Games As Art Center 2025). 
In this essay I put forward the notion that role-play, in the traditionally understood sense of 
taking on the role of a fictional character, is neither the most distinctive nor the most important 
element of role-playing games. Instead, I argue that tabletop role-playing games ( TRPGs) 
represent a historically significant development of humanity’s capacity for imagining other 
worlds. I describe this development as an innovation in cosmographic technology, or interlocking 
procedures and techniques that enhance our ability to imagine and explore worlds. In other 
words, I contend that the most essential role that a player takes on in a role-playing game is 
that of cosmographer, or explorer of multiversal possibility.
In the first section of the essay I will contextualize my use of the term “cosmography,” 
positioning it in relationship to other uses of the term, Curtis Carbonell’s (2019) concept of 
“realized worlds,” and Chloe Germaine’s (2025) eco-weird description of “co-worlding” with 
games. I position cosmography as exploration of a spatialized field of possibility, drawing on 
Mark JP Wolf’s (2012) model of imagined worlds, and considering the limits of our imagination 
as a horizon which we can expand. In the second section I argue for a definition of games as a 
cosmographic technology that harnesses play’s exploration of the possible, and present role-
playing games as a particularly powerful development of that technology. Having developed 
a model for conceptualizing TRPGs as cosmographic technology, I offer a brief retelling of 
their origins in that light, describing the particular developments that led to the publication 
of Dungeons & Dragons as a synthesis of different streams of cosmographic innovations. In 
the conclusion of the essay I suggest that this conceptualization of TRPGs provides a fruitful 
model for understanding their potential as tools for radical social change.
140
1.1 Cosmography
I describe the exploration of possible worlds as cosmography, a term used in various enough ways 
that it deserves clarification here. I do not intend to invoke the cosmography of Astrophysics, 
concerned with matter distribution in the empirically observable universe. Neither am I using 
the term as a synonym for cosmology, in the sense of a philosophical model of reality like Plato’s 
Timaeus. My meaning is closer to Peter Heylyn’s 1652 Cosmography, in which he describes a 
fusion of history and geography that promises “universal Comprehension of Naturall and 
Civill story,” in the sense that Heylyn the cosmographer sought to document not just gaia 
but cosmos (quoted in Gagné 2021, 39). My aims are both humbler and wider than Heylyn’s. 
Humbler, in that I do not expect any cosmographer to approach “universal Comprehension” 
of the cosmos; this is necessarily so, in that my wider conception of cosmos includes not only the 
actual world but all possible worlds. I might specify multiversal cosmography, but wherever 
and however possible worlds can be said to exist, they must exist in that totality which we 
can only call the universe. In most respects my meaning is closest to that developed by Renaud 
Gagné (2021), who defines cosmography as “the composition of possible worlds that coexist 
on a stage of conflicts and alternatives” (2021, 27). Gagné is concerned with the poetics of 
worlding and conducts a “slow reading” of how Greek cosmographers from Pindar forward 
composed possible worlds that intersect through the nexus of the land of Hyperborea.
Within role-playing game studies, Curtis Carbonell (2019) has developed a similar 
approach that describes “realized worlds” as a central feature of “the modern fantastic,” a 
reworking of Michael Saler’s (2012) argument that the 20
th century’s “ironic imagination” gave 
rise to a new kind of “virtual world.” Carbonell centers space as a key concept for understanding 
TRPGs and describes how the modern fantastic’s “geographies of imagination” (Anderson 
1991; Said 1997) “combine the imaginary with the real (Carbonell 2019, 24). “Realized” also 
emphasizes that ironic engagement with worlds involves a process of realization, allowing 
for a powerful synthesis with Deleuze’s concept of the virtual as that which “emerges out of 
‘actual’ material life as the ‘real’” (2016, 26). The resulting picture is of TRPGs as key tools in 
the modern fantastic’s “inflection of modernity, in which lived spaces oscillate between the 
real and the imaginary” (Carbonell 2019, 9). 
While my cosmographic model does not contradict Carbonell’s, it approaches role-
playing games from a different disciplinary angle, which produces a different inflection and 
set of affordances. Like Gagné, Carbonell approaches his subject from the angle of literature, 
conceptualizing TRPGs as, first and foremost, “literary gametexts” (2019, 3). This emphasis on 
poetics and composition is where my angle of entry into the subject differs from Gagné and 
Carbonell. Without denying the validity of this approach, I come to TRPGs from the perspective 
of anthropology and folklore, considering them first as a kind of verbal performance. While 
written text clearly forms a key piece of a form sometimes called “pencil and paper” games, I 
will argue the role-playing game emerges as a set of practices which are only later codified in the 
formulation of a gametext. This difference leads my conception of cosmography to emphasize 
the discovery and exploration, rather than the composition, of worlds. A cosmographer is not 
so much a worldbuilder as a world-hopper.
Although she doesn’t use the term cosmography, Chloe Germaine’s eco-weird 
description of “tabletop gameplay as a mode of co-worlding” resonates strongly with my 
conception of the cosmographic, especially when she speaks of TRPGs’ “potential to bring 
forth as-yet unrealized possibilities from the virtual into the actual” (2025, 182). In drawing 
on Deleuze’s concept of the virtual, Germaine differs from Gagné in one important matter: 
the ontological question of if and how these worlds exist. Whereas Gagné denies the existence 
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 18   
141
of Hyperborea outside of the discourses that construct it, like Carbonell Germaine draws on 
Deleuze’s concept of virtuality. Even more than Carbonell, Germaine emphatically asserts 
with Deleuze that the “virtual is ‘fully real,’ a realm of reality in which all objects partially 
exist, and from which actual objects, relations, and situations arise” (Germaine 2025, 185). The 
difference is more than a philosophical quibble and had real implications for our conception 
of RPGs.
Emphasizing, as Gagné does, the non-existence of imagined worlds pairs with his 
emphasis on rhetoric, the individual artist, and cosmography as the composing of worlds . 
Allowing for the existence of imagined worlds opens up new and fruitful ways of thinking 
and acting with RPGs. As Germaine says, “Games do not simply straddle the real and the 
imagined, paltry half-and-half things; they provide a passage between the virtual and the 
actual (2025, 185). Her use of the term “passage” here points towards one important shift: 
the virtual reality of other worlds raises the question of where these worlds exist, guiding us 
towards a fruitful spatial model for cosmography. Where Gagné’s cosmography is primarily 
a matter of composing worlds, the cosmographer of virtual worlds explores and discovers 
worlds rather than composing or creating them. More than a shift in metaphor or image, this 
spatialized, virtual cosmography has real implications for the ethical and political capacities 
of TRPGs. Germaine draws attention to the ethical dimension of this difference, noting that 
connecting the virtual and the actual “allows for thinking through the futural dimension 
of games. The virtual in games comprises possible forms that do not exist but that could 
give rise to new, transformed conditions of reality” (2025, 186). I have explored role-playing 
games’ cosmographic potential to catalyze real-world changes elsewhere (Mizer 2025), but 
like Germaine I argue that they can serve as assistive technology for exploring and realizing 
better worlds.
1.2 The Atomic Model of Possibility
In seeking to understand how games connect the virtual and actual, I have adapted a model 
developed by Mark JP Wolf in Building Imaginary Worlds (2012). While Wolf uses the model to 
explain his concept of secondary worlds as a distinct category of robustly described imagined 
worlds, I find the relationship between the possible and the imagined more fruitful in the 
context of cosmography. I describe this as an atomic model of the cosmos. 
Here I should note that while I find Germaine’s invocation of Deleuzean virtuality both 
compelling and useful, this atomic model works even if it is methodological and conceptual 
rather than ontological. That is, my primary intent here is to develop a useful way of thinking 
about other worlds, not to fully defend claims about the existence, non-existence, or virtual 
existence of other worlds.
That said, the model begins with “Prime Reality,” the world where if I stub my toe I feel 
the pain as a mandatory and direct experience. This world forms the nucleus, as central and 
defined and ultimately unknowable in the atom as in our experience. The set of all possible 
worlds surrounds our world like an electron cloud surrounding the nucleus of the real. In 
this spatialization of possibility, “near” worlds are more similar to our own and “far” worlds 
are dissimilar. One world over, my shirt is green instead of blue. Further out, the walls of 
my office are lined with semi-intelligent vines that serve me coffee when I need a break from 
writing. Between the borders of Prime Reality and the sum total of all possible worlds, the 
sphere of imagined worlds continues to expand just as it has ever since humans (or, more 
likely, pre-human hominids) first developed the capacity to imagine worlds different from 
our own. Here we find Gilgamesh, Izanagi and Izanami, Tolkien’s Arda, Gygax’s Oerth, and 
every dream a human has ever had.
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 18   
142
1.3 Imaginative Horizons
Presumably, the farthest reaches of possibility space extend beyond human comprehension 
or ability to imagine. Much closer to the actual, however, lie important regions of the possible 
that we cannot currently imagine. Just as each of us has an outer limit to how far away we 
can see, just as there is an upper limit to how fast a human can currently move, there exists 
an imaginative horizon, beyond which it is difficult or impossible to effectively imagine. While 
it might have been theoretically possible for a Haudenosaunee living in the 13th century 
to imagine the world of N. K. Jemisin’s Broken Earth series, practically speaking that world 
existed beyond the imaginative horizon of anyone alive until quite recently.
This cosmographic limitation applies beyond our ability to imagine “fictional worlds.” 
When we say that it is easier to imagine the end of the world than the end of capitalism, we 
are referring to our imaginative horizon. As Ursula K. Le Guin, a masterful cosmographer 
in her own right, said in her 2014 acceptance speech for the Distinguished Contribution to 
American Letters Award, “We live in capitalism. Its power seems inescapable. So did the 
divine right of kings.” In response to this “capitalist realism,” (Fisher 2022) Le Guin calls for 
those “who can see alternatives to how we live now … realists of a larger reality” (2014). Our 
challenges in imagining alternative worlds, the shape of our imaginative horizon, are not just 
natural states, but are in part the result of ideological power structures. The Marxist aesthetics 
approach of Jennifer Ponce de Léon and Gabriel Rockhill, which they call a “compositional 
model of ideology,” describes capitalism as “a multidimensional world-making mechanism” 
that “strives to impose its definition of reality as the only one possible, while seeking to 
destroy, discredit, or render inapprehensible all other worlds and possibilities of world-
making” (2020, 2-3). Effective imagination, imagination that can help humans find better ways 
of being, depends on understanding, utilizing, and advancing cosmographic technologies 
that can overcome the ideologically sedimented barriers that limit our imaginative horizons. 
Role-playing games are among such technologies.
2. COSMOGRAPHIC TECHNOLOGY
My use of “technology” here does not refer to video games, or even to particularly material 
human innovations. The common description of game rules as “mechanics” imply a general 
understanding of the interlocking systems of play as a kind of technology. Carbonell argues 
that “an engineering ethos invigorates the mechanics of realized worlds,” and describes the 
“modern fantastic” as combining the technocratic and literary modes (2019, 6). Germaine 
builds on this by describing role-playing games as operating in three modalities, one of which 
is as “ludic technologies … that generate potential.” (Germaine 2021, 129). Similarly, Ryan, 
Dixon, and MacCallum-Stewart describe games of emergent narrative as “narrative machines—
mechanical systems that create narrative experiences” (2020, 179). This more-than-material 
understanding of technology follows similar usage in some meditative traditions, such as 
Antonio de Nicolás’s (1986) analysis of Ignatian spiritual practice as a technological system. 
De Nicolás defines a primary technology as “the habituation in the ordering and repetition of 
certain mental acts and languages to extend the human sensorium as far as the technology is 
able to reach’ (1986, xxi). This approach is consonant with Heidegger’s definition of technology 
as a “mode of revealing” in which he points out the root term Technē refers not only to material 
crafts but to “the arts of the mind” (1977, 13). This understanding of technology synthesizes 
the aesthetic and the material. Ponce de León and Rockhill describe aesthetics as “the collective 
composition of a shared sensorium” while affirming that this composition is achieved through 
material sociohistorical practices (2020, 2).
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 18   
143
Although we might call these practices techniques, “cosmographic technology” has 
the benefit of drawing connections to media theorist Marshall McLuhan’s (2003) concept of 
technologies as enhancement of human capacities. The telescope serves as an extension of our 
ability to detect energy in the spectrum of visible light, a capacity we call “sight.” The hammer 
serves as an extension of our ability to move objects in space, a capacity we call “strength.” 
Similarly, cosmographic technologies enhance our capacity to explore the possible. In the 
following section I will argue that this capacity is best described as “play.” 
2.1 Games as Cosmographic Technology
Classical definitions of play are, as Aaron Trammell (2023) points out, fraught along many 
lines. Against saccharine, hegemonic portrayals of play as purely liberatory and uplifting, 
Trammell calls for a reparative understanding of play that “is as painful as it is pleasurable, 
as individual as it is universal, and as mandatory as it is voluntary” (2023, 8). Jaakko Stenros 
argues that the distinction between the activity of play and the attitude of playfulness helps 
to account for the existence of mandatory and painful play, and describes the “core of play 
that most conceptualizations agree on” as “playful play” (2015, 93). Surrounding this core 
are many types of play that might be excluded in some definitions, but that Stenros includes, 
such as describing bullying (or, to Trammell’s point, torture) as one-sided social play. This 
definition of play includes “all activity done for its own sake” intentionally affording a 
“wide conceptualization of play” that “lets us explore and discover, see connections and 
juxtapositions, and improvise and play with the theory of play” (2015, 78-79). In this spirit, 
I submit a working definition of play that considers play not only a “fundamental condition 
in human and animal life,” but as a fundamental feature of the cosmos: play is autotelic 
exploration of possibility.
This definition synthesizes Csikszentmihalyi’s (1975) emphasis on the autotelic nature 
of play (i.e., play as that which is done for its own end), the idea that exploration and play 
might be coterminous (Weisler and McCall 1976) and Sutton-Smith’s concept of adaptive 
variability (1997). Whereas Sutton-Smith’s biological definition can identify the evolutionary 
benefits of play, my definition would include evolution as play in that the process explores the 
full range of biological possibility. In other words, I do not conceptualize play as an activity 
so much as a force or phenomenon, a pneumatic tendency of reality to expand outwards into 
possibility space. This tendency is not dissimilar from what Teilhard de Chardin describes as 
“the law of complexification” (2008, 48)
When explaining this concept to my students, I draw two lines on the board. The first 
line is straight, the second line curves and bends across the chalkboard. When I ask my students 
which line is more playful, they inevitably choose the curvy line (unless, of course, they are 
offering a playful response). This is anecdotal evidence of course, but it connects to other 
definitions of play developed outside the central play studies canon. Germaine, for example, 
claims that “all play is movement forward and backward,” (2025, 191) and draws on Hans 
Georg Gadamer’s portrayal of play “as an impersonal agency,” even denying the necessity of 
a playing subject (Gadamer 1994, 106). A notion of play as movement is compatible with my 
concept of exploration of possibility. Conceived this way, play is a force or energy expanding 
outward into possibility space, some territories of which are full of oppression and others 
liberation. Play is essential to the human way of being in the world, but play is bigger than 
humanity. Huizinga begins Homo Ludens (1950) by reminding us that animals did not wait for 
humans to teach them play. Anthropologist David Graeber (2014), using a definition similar 
to my own, of play as autotelic exercise of “an entity’s most complex powers or capacities,” 
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 18   
144
even speculates about the play of electrons. Like sight, like strength, play is a capacity that 
humans use in particular ways but that is not unique to humanity.
If we are looking for the distinctively human use of play, we find games. Games harness, 
structure, and direct play’s exploration of possibility, like a water wheel redirecting the energy 
of a river. Games are technologies of play that allow us to perceive further into the possible 
than other living things seem to. In other words, games are cosmographic technologies that 
we use to navigate through possibility space.
 Our use of cosmographic technologies is distinctive to our way of being in the world, 
leading to Marx’s famous observation that the difference between the worst human architect 
and the best bee is that the human “raises his structure in imagination before he erects it 
in reality” (1887). The architect looks out from prime reality and sees a range of possible 
worlds that include variants of the structure they might build. To refine and focus their vision, 
they might use any number of cosmographic technologies. Language itself is a cosmographic 
technology, a structured play of symbols, that the architect can use to connect others to imagined 
worlds that include the new building. Language is the foundational technology for nearly all 
expansion of our imaginative range. In Tolkien’s words, “When we can take green from grass, 
blue from heaven, and red from blood, we have already an enchanter’s power—upon one 
plane; and the desire to wield that power in the world external to our minds awakes.” (2008, 
41). Fictional narrative is a development of the language technology, one that allows us to 
playfully assemble counterfactuals and create linkages between them. We could describe any 
number of human cultural patterns in this way, but these examples suffice to contextualize 
my claim that role-playing games are particularly powerful and significant developments of 
cosmographic technology.
2.2 Role-Playing Games as Cosmographic Technology
It may seem odd to argue that the most distinctive feature of “role-playing” games has little 
to do with “role-playing,” and my reference to the “role” of the cosmographer in the title 
to this essay is admittedly a dodge. However, in many ways it is an historical accident that 
emergent tradition of “Midwestern folk art of the 1970s” (Lawrie and Phipps 2019, 12) came to 
be called “role-playing games.” It is possible that this has led us to overemphasize characters 
and roles in our understanding of these games. A comparable accident occurred in the history 
of video games when games that emphasized exploration and puzzle were called “adventure” 
games, largely because the first major example of the genre was called Colossal Cave Adventure 
(Reed et al. 2020). The subject matter of an adventure game does not need to be particularly 
adventurous, nor does a narrative of adventure make a first-person shooter an adventure 
game. Similarly, “role-playing” is not necessarily the most distinctive feature of “role-playing 
games” simply because it is in the title.
The term “role-playing” entered English in 1925 when Jakob Moreno brought his 
Rollenspiel group psychotherapy techniques to the United States (Peterson 2012, 373). Its 
first application to hobby gaming, in 1973, referred to specific  Diplomacy-influenced games 
simulating “hypothetical crisis problems” (Peterson 2012, 457). Dave Arneson and the Twin 
Cities gamers do not seem to have described their Blackmoor games as “role-playing”, and 
when Arneson and Gygax collaborated in systematizing Blackmoor into the little brown books 
of 1974 Dungeons & Dragons, they used the famously awkward subtitle “Rules for Fantastic 
Medieval Wargames Campaigns Playable with Paper and Pencil and Miniature Figures.” The 
term “role-playing game” only came to be used in something like its current meaning when 
developers of other games, such as Tunnels & Trolls, needed a term to signal similarity to, but 
legal distinction from, Dungeons & Dragons (Peterson 2012, 556).
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 18   
145
Taking on the role of a fictional character is certainly an important aspect of RPGs, but 
it is hardly a unique feature. Humans have taken on the role of fictional characters for at least 
as long as theater has existed. Even within the sphere of games, players did not wait for the 
development of RPGs to take on roles in wargames, improvisational theater games, and any 
number of other games. Neither is taking on a character role a deciding criterion for inclusion 
in the fuzzy set (if not the strict definition) of RPGs. In The Quiet Year (Alder 2019), for example, 
players collaboratively imagine a small community of survivors but do not take on the role 
of any individual characters within the community. True, we might more accurately call  The 
Quiet Year a worldbuilding game than a role-playing game, but in everyday language most 
people are unlikely to pause at the misnomer. 
More important than the complicated Venn diagrams of role-taking and various games, 
it is fairly clear that early role-playing games offered little new assistance or techniques for 
developing more immersive role-taking or stronger connections between the player and 
the fictional character. This paucity of role-playing technology in early RPGs is precisely 
what drove players in the 1990s towards more character-immersive games like Vampire: The 
Masquerade (Bowman 2010). To understand the key innovation of “role-playing games” for 
the history of games, we must look away from roles and towards cosmography.
3. THE MIDWESTERN SYNTHESIS
The novel cosmographic development represented by the first RPGs came from a synthesis 
of two imaginative technologies: the ironic imagination of early speculative fiction and the 
oracular simulations of wargaming. The “ironic imagination” is Michael Saler’s term for a 
fundamental shift in approaches to imagination and worldbuilding which emerged in the 
speculative fiction of the early 20
th century (Saler 2012). The other half of the synthesis comes 
from wargames’ use of the oracular technology of probabilities and dice to propel players into 
cosmographic territory that they could not have imagined unaided. Through the synthesis of 
these elements RPGs enhance human imaginative capacities, offering players the ability to take 
on the role of cosmographers utilizing powerful technologies to access vast and unexplored 
swathes of possible worlds. Because these two threads of ironic imagination and oracular 
simulation came together through the experimentation of Midwestern wargamers who were 
fans of pulp literature, and because it is more fun to have catchy titles for ideas than not, I call 
this development The Midwestern Synthesis.
3.1 Oracular Simulation
The importance of wargaming for the development of role-playing games is well-established, 
and Peterson (2012) offers a particularly detailed tracing of rules and mechanics from the 
Taktisches Kriegs-Spiel cabinet that George Leopold von Reisswitz presented to the king of 
Prussia in 1812. It is easy to pass over the leap in cosmographic technology, however, because 
it has so fundamentally shaped ways of interacting with other worlds as to become almost 
invisible. Simply describing this innovation as simulation, as when Peterson describes “the 
game of the Reisswitz family” the first game “worthy to be deemed a simulation” (2016,10) 
is to shorthand the innovation so much as to obscure its components. Specifically, Kriegsspiel 
handled space, time, and probability such that it offered access to more fully realized worlds 
than perhaps any preceding cosmographic technology.
These changes are easier to see if we contrast Kriegsspiel with chess and the similar 
chaturanga-derived games that immediately preceded Reisswitz’s innovation. In chess, of 
course, it would be a category error to ask the scale of representation. A chess board is sixty-
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 18   
146
four square units of abstraction. Once Reisswitz departs from this and indicates that the scale 
is 1:2373 and specifies how far an infantry unit can move in a turn, then suddenly not only 
space but time leap into existence within the world accessed through the game.
Similarly, in chess there is never any question of what will happen when a black 
pawn moves into the space occupied by a white knight. In Kriegsspiel, an interaction between 
military units can lead to a number of possible worlds, depending on the roll of the dice. 
By introducing the probabilistically oracular dice and combat results table, Reisswitz adapts 
a powerful piece of technology to the imaginative enterprise of simulation, expanding the 
cosmographic technology of any given Kriegsspiel far beyond chess’s already quite large 
possibility space. Even further, the fact that a Kriegsspiel scenario can begin in any number of 
possible world states, compared to the singular origin point of a chess game, means that the 
wargame provides access to a near-limitless cosmographic territory. Of course, in every one 
of those worlds, generals lead men to kill each other on the battlefield for the sake of empire. 
Imagining worlds outside the cosmographic regions of warfare would take very different 
technology.
3.2 Ironic Imagination
In a middle way between Germaine and Gagné, Michael Saler describes a sort of methodological 
relativism towards the status of other worlds that emerged over the course of the 20
th century. 
This technology, which Saler calls the ironic imagination, involves “the willing activation of 
pretense” to act “as-if” imagined worlds are “real” without fully committing to such a stance 
(2012, 28). This, Saler says, offered “delight without delusion” (2012, 57) to readers of the 
genre fiction that emerged in the late 19th and early 20th century. This approach allowed 
them to access worlds even beyond those described by the stories they read. The Baker Street 
Irregulars, for example, playfully imagined themselves in a world where Sherlock Holmes 
was a real detective and Sir Arthur Conan Doyle was only Watson’s literary agent (Saler 2012, 
104).
The ironic imagination allows a cosmographer to leverage what Wolf calls “world 
gestalten” (2012, 52), using gaps in a world’s description to fill in details and imagine even 
further into possibility space. Tolkien’s maps of Middle-earth, for example, include places 
not described in The Lord of the Rings, inviting readers to speculate about them and thereby 
explore any number of worlds adjacent to Tolkien’s “canonical” world. Treating the world 
as if it is real aids in this effort; if we think that Arda only exists in Tolkien’s mind, we might 
speculate about what he will publish about it, but are less likely to speculate about details 
that Tolkien does not provide. Saler points to the importance of pulp authors like Robert 
E. Howard, H.P. Lovecraft, and Clark Ashton Smith in the development of this imaginative 
tradition. These very same authors were influential on Gary Gygax, Dave Arneson, and the 
broader hobby gaming community out of which Dungeons & Dragons and role-playing games 
as we know them emerged.
3.3 From Strategos to Blackmoor
The oracular cosmographic tradition of Reisswitzian Kriegsspiel came to the Twin Cities 
wargaming scene through David Wesely’s adaptation of Totten’s Strategos into Strategos N 
(Peterson 2016). This quickly led to the development of more free-form games that explored 
cosmographic territory far outside of the referees’ intent when players like Dave Arneson 
brought the ironic imagination to those campaigns. They began taking seriously the existence 
of villages placed on the battle map as more than obstacles to navigate units around, straining 
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 18   
147
the rules of the game by doing things like sending messengers to the villagers or using 
deconstructed structures to build bridges across rivers (Morgan and Graves 2019).
This cosmography of the ironic imagination led to Wesely’s development of the 
Braunstein games, in which players took on the roles of those villagers directly rather than 
interacting with them through the wargame lens. The resulting expanse of cosmographic 
territory opened up through this technology led the first game far out of Wesely’s control, 
leading him to what could be described as a kind of cosmographic agoraphobia. In the 
second Braunstein he tightened control of the cosmographic exploration so greatly that the 
players complained that the magic of the first experience had vanished (Morgan and Graves 
2019). Notably, the change was not in how immersively the players inhabited the roles of 
the characters but in how freely they were able to exercise their role as cosmographers of the 
possibility space that Wesely had sketched out for them.
Braunstein’s cosmographic range was still limited by a few factors: first, both the 
Strategos N  and the Braunstein games were in “realistic” rather than “fantastic” settings, 
not fully integrating the ironic imagination’s capacity for removing the tether to the actual. 
Second, although Wesely embraced the asymmetric goals and conflicts of n-player games, the 
possibility space was largely shaped by conflict between players. The possibility space being 
explored was the possibility space of the conflict, not primarily the possibility space of the 
imagined world. Finally, it was limited by Wesely’s limited utilization of oracular methods, 
limiting the imaginative range to what he and the players considered most probable rather 
than launching them outward into unknown, improbable territory and asking them to make 
sense of it.
The synthesis of the ironic imagination and oracular cosmography came to the point 
of exothermic fusion in Dave Arneson’s Blackmoor games. Arneson approached the oracular 
wargaming technology of Chainmail with a fully ironic imagination, leading his players into 
distant and unknown cosmographic territory where anything could be around the next corner 
and the players had no idea what world they were in. The exploration of conflict space was 
augmented with exploration of the ironically imagined world, and the more richly oracular 
approach drawn from Chainmail allowed for exploring cosmographic territory that neither the 
player nor the referee could have previously imagined.
In short, this fusion of imaginative technologies allowed for wider-ranging, more 
collaborative, more intersubjective cosmographic exploration than had ever been accessible. 
Here was a set of imaginative tools that could be easily operated by almost anyone, with no 
particular literary or artistic training necessary, a framework offering the promise of near-
limitless exploration of possible worlds.
4. CONCLUSION
Like any technology, like play itself, cosmographic exploration of worlds is not inherently 
liberatory. If TRPGs have the potential to help us discover and realize worlds that reveal new 
possibilities and ways of becoming, they can also be used to foreclose those same possibilities. 
Conceptualizing TRPGs as cosmographic technology does not solve the problem of how to 
use them to bring a better world into being. Indeed, that is only partly necessary; as Raúl 
Zibechi points out, this new world already exists, “built by indigenous people, peasants, and 
urban poor on conquered lands, woven into the base of new social relations between human 
beings.” The task at hand, he argues, is to help defend this “series of multiple realities, nascent 
and fragile” (2012, 20). To the extent that effective praxis succeeds through structuring the 
exploration of possibility, we might even consider cultural revolution as occurring through 
a series of cosmographic games showing “that another possible world is actual” (Ponce de 
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 18   
148
León and Rockhill 2020, 16). Again, calling games cosmographic technology or calling radical 
worldbuilding a kind of game does not do this work for us, but it does suggest important 
areas to shore up and provides a framework for understanding how TRPGs relate to that 
work. 
REFERENCES
Alder, Avery. 2019. The Quiet Year. Buried Without Ceremony.
 
Bowman, Sarah Lynne. 2010. The Functions of Role-Playing Games: How Participants Create 
Community, Solve Problems and Explore Identity. Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Co.
Carbonell, Curtis D. 2019. Dread Trident: Tabletop Role-Playing Games and the Modern Fantastic. 
Liverpool: Liverpool University Press.
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly. 1975. Beyond Boredom and Anxiety. Jossey-Bass Publishers.
De Nicolás, Antonio T. 1986. Ignatius de Loyola, Powers of Imagining: A Philosophical Hermeneutic 
of Imagining through the Collected Works of Ignatius de Loyola, with a Translation of These 
Works. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Fisher, Mark. 2022. Capitalist Realism: Is There No Alternative? Second edition. Zer0 Classics. 
Winchester, UK Washington, USA: Zero Books.
Gadamer, Hans-Georg. 1994. Truth and Method. 2nd rev. ed. New York, NY: Continuum. 
Gagné, Renaud. 2021. Cosmography and the Idea of Hyperborea in Ancient Greece: A Philology of 
Worlds. Cambridge Classical Studies. Cambridge, United Kingdom New York (NY): 
Cambridge University Press.
Games As Art Center. n.d. “Role-Play in Games Conference 2025.” Games As Art Center, n.d. 
Link here.
Germaine, Chloe. 2021. “Dark Forests and Doomed Adventurers: An Ecocritical Reading of 
Horror Roleplaying Games.” In Generation Analog: The Tabletop Games and Education 
Conference. Online: ETC Press. Link here.
Germaine, Chloe. 2025. “Tabletop Eco-Weird: Gameplay Experience and Ecological Ethics.” In 
The Call of the Eco-Weird in Fiction, Films, and Games, edited by Brian Hisao Onishi and 
Nathan M. Bell. Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland. Link here.
Graeber, David. 2014. “What’s the Point If We Can’t Have Fun?” The Baffler. June 12, 2014. 
Link here.
Gygax, Gary, and Dave Arneson. 1974. Dungeons & Dragons: Rules for Fantastic Medieval 
Wargames Playable with Paper and Pencil and Miniature Figures. Lake Geneva, WI: Tactical 
Studies Rules.
Heidegger, Martin. 1977. “The Question Concerning Technology.” In The Question Concerning 
Technology and Other Essays, translated by William Lovitt. New York: Garland Publishing.
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 18   
149
Huizinga, Johan H. 1950. Homo Ludens: A Study of the Play-Element in Culture . Boston: Beacon 
Press.
Lawrie, Kali and Dan Phipps. 2019. High Magic Lowlives.
Le Guin, Ursula K. 2014. “Ursula K Le Guin’s Speech at National Book Awards: ‘Books Aren’t 
Just Commodities.’” The Guardian, 2014, sec. Books. Link here.
Marx, Karl. 1887. Capital. Translated by Samuel Moore and Edward Aveling. Moscow: Progress 
Publishers.
McLuhan, Marshall. 2003. Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man. Edited by W. Terrence 
Gordon. Critical ed. Corte Madera, CA: Gingko Press. 
Mizer, Nicholas J. 2025. “Staying with the Weird: Apophatic Wonder and Cosmographic 
Exploration in Eco-Weird Games.” In The Call of the Eco-Weird in Fiction, Films, and 
Games, edited by Brian Hisao Onishi and Nathan M. Bell. Cham: Springer Nature 
Switzerland. Link here.
Morgan, Griffith M, and Chris Graves, dirs. 2019. Secrets of Blackmoor. The Fellowship of the 
Thing, Ltd.
Peterson, Jon. 2012. Playing at the World: A History of Simulating Wars, People and Fantastic 
Adventure, from Chess to Role-Playing Games. San Diego, CA: Unreason Press.
Peterson, Jon. 2016. “ A Game Out of All Proportions: How a Hobby Miniaturized War.” In 
Zones of Control: Perspectives on Wargaming , edited by Pat Harrigan and Matthew G. 
Kirschenbaum. Game Histories. The MIT Press. Link here.
Ponce De León, Jennifer, and Gabriel Rockhill. 2020. “Towards a Compositional Model of 
Ideology: Materialism, Aesthetics, and Cultural Revolution.” Philosophy Today 64 (1): 
95–116. Link here.
Reed, Aaron, John Murray, and Anastasia Salter. 2020. Adventure Games: Playing the Outsider. 
Approaches to Digital Game Studies 7. New York: Bloomsbury Academic.
Ryan, Malcolm, Robin Dixon, and Esther MacCallum-Stewart. 2020. “Narrative Machines: A 
Ludological Approach to Narrative Design.” In Rerolling Boardgames: Essays on Themes, 
Systems, Experiences and Ideologies , edited by Douglas Brown and Esther MacCallum-
Stewart, 179–94. McFarland & Co.
Saler, Michael T. 2012. As If: Modern Enchantment and the Literary Pre-History of Virtual Reality. 
Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press.
Stenros, Jaakko. 2015. Playfulness, Play, and Games: A Constructionist Ludology Approach . 
Tampere, Finland: Tampere University Press. Link here.
Sutton-Smith, Brian. 1997. The Ambiguity of Play. Harvard University Press.
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 18   
150
International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 18   
Nicholas J. Mizer is an Assistant Professor of Games and Experiential 
Media at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in Troy, New York. His 
anthropological research focuses on collaborative worldbuilding,  
place, and embodied play. He is the author of Tabletop Role-Playing 
Games and the Experience of Imagined Worlds. Living in the 
traditional and unceded territory of the Haudenosaunee Confederacy, 
his goal is to better imagine the life of the place where he dwells.
Teilhard de Chardin, Pierre. 2008. The Phenomenon of Man. 1st Harper Perennial Modern 
Thought ed. Harper Perennial Modern Thought.
Trammell, Aaron. 2022. Repairing Play. MIT Press.
Weisler, Ann & McCall, Robert B. (1976): “Exploration and Play. Résumé and Redirection”, 
American Psychologist. July 1976, Vol. 31, 492-508. Link here.
Wolf, Mark J.P. 2012. Building Imaginary Worlds: The Theory and History of Subcreation. Routledge.
Zibechi, Raúl. Territories in Resistance: A Cartography of Latin American Social Movements . 
Translated by Ramor Ryan. Oakland: AK Press, 2012.