eprints@whiterose.ac.uk
https://eprints.whiterose.ac.uk
Universities of Leeds, Sheffield and York
Deposited via The University of York.
White Rose Research Online URL for this paper:
https://eprints.whiterose.ac.uk/id/eprint/147044/
Version: Accepted Version
Book Section:
Deterding, Christoph Sebastian and Zagal, José P. (2018) The Many Faces of Role-
Playing Game Studies. In: Role-Playing Game Studies. Routledge, New York, p. 1. 
https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315637532
Reuse 
Other licence. 
Takedown 
If you consider content in White Rose Research Online to be in breach of UK law, please notify us by 
emailing eprints@whiterose.ac.uk including the URL of the record and the reason for the withdrawal request. 
 
 
 
This is an Accepted Manuscript of a book chapter published by Routledge in Role-Playing Game 
Studies: Transmedia Foundations on April 4, 2018, available online: 
https://www.routledge.com/Role-Playing-Game-Studies-Transmedia-Foundations/Deterding-
Zagal/p/book/9781138638907 
Please cite as: Deterding, Sebastian, José P. Zagal (2018). “The Many Faces of Role-Playing 
Game Studies”, in Zagal, José P. and Deterding, S. (eds.), Role-Playing Game Studies: 
Transmedia Foundations. New York: Routledge, 1-16. 
  
1 The Many Faces of Role-Playing Game Studies 
Sebastian Deterding; José Zagal 
 
We all role-play. Mere toddlers, we imitate the adult world around us, playing pretend by 
hosting stuffed animal tea parties and grocery visits. As young children, we become 
pirates and sorcerers and go on underwater expeditions in the living room, momentarily 
transcending the bounds of our bodies, skills, and parents. As adolescents, we discover 
the power of being someone else on a stage in drama class. We try on and shed social 
roles in quick succession in the desperate desire to become and be recognized as 
someone. When we go to the theater, read a book, or watch a movie, we imagine 
ourselves in the shoes of the protagonists, and bits of their fictional world may linger with 
us on the way home –the traffic light changing to green echoing a car chase scene, with 
us as the super-spy bringing the engine to a roar, for a moment transcending the norms of 
responsible adulthood. In our private life, our therapists ask us to re-enact traumatic 
episodes of our past, and we confide in sexual partners the scenarios that captivate and 
stoke our desire. In the working world, we partake in drills, dry-runs, team-building and 
‘leadership and communication’ exercises where we assume the roles of manager and 
under-performing employee, or emergency patient and doctor. We work hard to be taken 
 
 
  
seriously as ‘doctors’ or ‘managers’ or just ‘parents’ in social roles we are insecure we 
will succeed at. And in everyday life, we ‘put on a face’ and ‘play our part’ as required 
by the endless succession of social occasions, gatherings, and rituals until we reach the 
last act, our own funeral, where for once we only have to show up and can leave the 
acting to the others. 
Given the universality of role-play, it is little wonder that games, those trusty 
little mirrors of social life, have incorporated it into their form: a snow-globe version, 
safely packed, miniaturized, maybe a bit abstract, but strangely compelling. Starting with 
Dungeons and Dragons in the 1970s, role-playing games (RPGs) have turned the human 
practice of role-play into a contemporary leisure genre enjoyed by millions across the 
globe. RPGs have since spawned sub-genres and sub-cultures of their own: from sitting 
around a table narrating the actions of one’s characters to scouting the woods wearing 
chain mail and foam swords; from mourning the death of Aeris in Final Fantasy VII in 
front of the desktop screen to frantically using a headset and text chat to a lead team of 40 
players in defeating the Lich King in World of Warcraft. What people call “RPGs” today 
ranges from the gigantic – online RPGs connecting millions of players, live-action role-
plays played in a decommissioned warship refurbished as a spaceship travelling through 
space – to the minimalist: two players sitting motion-less improvising the dialogue of a 
chance encounter between two rocks, like a theater piece by Samuel Beckett. RPGs just 
as readily provide power fantasies as they afford artistic expression, education, or social 
activism. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Figure 1.1: Role-Playing Games at the Intersection of Roles, Play, Games, and Media 
Culture 
 
The Intersection of Roles, Play, Games, and Media Culture 
RPGs sit at the intersection of four phenomena – roles, play, games, and media culture 
(Figure 1.1). They take a fundamental form of play – make-believe – and a fundamental 
Role-Playing
Games
ROLES
PLAY GAMES
MEDIA CULTURE
 
 
  
aspect of social reality and identity – roles – and give them the structured form of a game. 
They arose from and sit at the heart of much of contemporary fandom, “geek”, and 
increasingly, mainstream media culture. To understand RPGs, their forms, origins, and 
social place, it is useful to examine them through the lens of these four phenomena in 
turn. 
 
Role-Playing Games as Play 
RPGs involve play. Play is a behavior universally found across all human cultures and in 
many animal species (Konner 2010, 507; Burghardt 2005). Play transforms and 
recombines other, functional behaviors – exaggerating, varying, rendering them 
incomplete so they lack their ‘serious’ consequences and thus, their obvious instrumental 
or survival value. Instead, play is performed voluntarily, intrinsically motivated, and 
autotelic, that is, performed ‘for its own sake’. Play is facilitated by a ‘relaxed’ field of 
familiar surroundings and others, with no immediate pressing threats or stressors 
(Pellegrini 2009, 8-20; Burghardt 2005, 68-82). Notably, transforming other behavior 
does not mean that play necessarily represents other behavior: in loco-motor or object 
play, the player often just relishes exploring repetitive engagement with a movement or 
thing (84-86). 
Symbolic play may be what set humans apart from other animals. Humans 
exhibit specific forms of play otherwise only rudimentarily found in higher primates, 
namely strong symbolic, as-if, or pretense play, socio-dramatic or role-play, and rule 
play involving explicit, predefined, and not spontaneously re-negotiable rules (Konner 
2010, 89-93). Developmental psychologists note that these forms typically occur in rough 
 
 
  
succession during a child’s development, potentially mirroring their evolutionary 
emergence: first comes pretense play, in which players jointly enact a script around a 
(non-existent or re-interpreted) object, like “going to bed” with a puppet and magazine as 
child and blanket. This evolves into role-play, where players stick to the scripts that make 
up a situational role (the mother, the child), and finally turns into rule play, where players 
fluidly re-enact and reshuffle existing scripts and also agree on explicit shared rules 
governing their actions (Oerter 1999, 93-103; Pellegrini 2009, 18-20).  
Similarly, philosopher Roger Caillois (2001) fashioned a four-fold typology of 
play with alea (roughly, games of chance), agon (contest, rule-based games), ilinx 
(vertigo, locomotor-rotation play), and finally, mimicry, where “the subject makes believe 
or makes others believe that he is someone other than himself” (19). Whereas 
developmental psychologists see rule play as a refined, more complex version of role-
play, Caillois set the two in opposition: games are “ruled or make-believe” (9, emphasis 
in original), and mimicry lacks “the continuous submission to imperative and precise 
rules” (22) that characterizes play more generally for Caillois. But Caillois’ model, first 
published in 1961, only considered the games of his day. Role-playing games proved it 
outmoded if not wrong since they merged role-play and rule play, “make believe” and 
“precise rules”, as anyone who has browsed the hundreds of pages of rulebooks of a 
contemporary tabletop RPG can attest. 
 
Role-Playing Games as Roles 
RPGs involve roles, another universal human phenomenon with more than a century of 
research (see Biddle 1986, Turner 2001 for reviews). Roles are patterns of behaviors and 
 
 
  
attitudes expected from a person occupying a given social position. As such, roles are a 
fundamental part of the power structures and processes of a society. Roles also provide 
resources and strategies to those occupying a position (Lynch 2007). During a ‘restaurant 
visit’, for instance, we expect the person acting as ‘server’ to do certain things like 
distribute menus, take orders, and care for our wellbeing. These expectations also provide 
a script for performing ‘waiting tables’, and certain rights (like interrupting our 
conversation to ask whether we’d like coffee). And, if we go along with it, the server may 
turn their role performance into an informal conversation among friends, a curt and 
formal affair, or something else entirely. 
Roles are fundamentally involved in people’s identities, selves, and self-concepts 
(Stets and Serpe 2013, Owens and Samblanet 2013). In our lives, we typically occupy 
and move between multiple – often conflicting – roles. Our identities are partially 
construed from the social roles we and others ascribe to ourselves. Similarly, our self and 
self-concept – the thoughts, emotions, identities, and motives we attribute to ourselves as 
what constitutes us, and the thoughts and feelings about this self – are formed from the 
experience of interacting in situational roles with others. 
In RPGs, people adopt situational roles of players and are free to play with – 
temporarily try on, explore, experience, act out, subvert – alternative roles, identities, and 
selves by enacting the character of a revered healer, a megalomaniac salesperson, a 
brooding scientist, etc. In a sense, to inhabit a specific role is to follow the social rules 
defining that role, some of which may be quite explicit and specify goals, progress, or 
failure for that role. Yet RPGs – like games in general – are played, which as we saw 
entails voluntary participation and reduced ‘serious’ consequences. This sets RPGs apart 
 
 
  
from ‘real’ social roles, which typically cannot be entered and left at will and whose rules 
are obligatory and can incur serious social consequences if broken. 
 
Role-Playing Games as Playing with Roles 
This also puts RPGs in the long cultural tradition of rituals, celebrations, theater, and 
others forms of performance where role-play (and rule play) are institutionalized to serve 
social functions in the adult world (Stephenson 2015; Schechner 2006) (see chapter 11). 
Consider rites of passage, weddings, funerals and other events that transform the social 
world and its actors; parades, religious processions, or other official proceedings that 
present an ideal order of things; or happenings, sit-ins, protests, or modern theater pieces 
that re-present and question the actual current social order. All performances help 
reproduce the social and moral bonds of a group by creating strong experiences of shared 
emotions, moral sentiments, and belonging. Compared with them, RPGs present the 
interesting case where ‘child’s play’ is institutionalized and prolonged into adulthood, but 
not for the ‘respectable’ purposes of rituals or celebrations. Instead, they emerged as a 
form of leisure and entertainment in affluent modern nation states (Fine 1983; Turner 
1982). 
 
Role-Playing Games as Games 
Beyond play and roles, RPGs involve rule play or games. The systematic scholarly study 
of games is relatively recent. It flourished with the use of simulations and serious games 
in the early 1970s (Abt 1971, Crookall 2012) and intensified with the rise of digital 
games in the early 2000s (Aarseth 2001). Although debates about the definition of 
 
 
  
“games” are ongoing (see Chapter 2), games are commonly seen as involving goals and 
rules that turn the attainment of those goals into a non-trivial challenge – e.g. overcoming 
a human opponent or material obstacle (Juul 2005).  
This game aspect is what distinguishes RPGs from children’s spontaneous role-
play, or activities like improvisational theater. In RPGs, a player typically enacts a single 
continuous character in one stable, continuous world, where actions and their outcomes 
are structured and decided by explicit rules. Also, by merging the enactment of roles with 
rule systems originating in wargaming, RPGs allow players to measurably ‘win,’ ‘lose,’ 
or advance thanks to design innovation like progress mechanics (Zagal and Altizer 2014). 
Through the migration of designers and players, RPGs deeply influenced the tropes and 
game mechanics of many other game genres (see Chapter 18). 
 
Role-Playing Games as Media Culture 
RPGs grew from and sit at the heart of contemporary media culture. Beyond deep 
sociological ties (play, games, performance), RPGs can be traced to several immediate 
cultural precursors (see Chapter 3) among ‘hobby’ wargaming and fantastic literature. 
Examples that influenced early RPGs include J.R.R. Tolkien’s Middle Earth, R.E. 
Howard’s Hyborian Age of Conan, Fritz Leiber’s Nehwon, or the Cthulhu Mythos 
created by H.P. Lovecraft and his literary friends. Early RPGs not only created their 
settings from liberal pastiches of Tolkien, Howard, and similar “sword and sorcery” 
authors: they catered to and attracted players from wargaming and science fiction and 
fantasy fandom, and through their popularity, helped solidify the tropes and market of the 
fantasy genre. This puts RPGs at the center of the modern phenomenon of “disenchanted 
 
 
  
enchantment” (Saler 2012, 12). As secularization, rationalization, and bureaucratization 
ridded our modern lifeworld of deeper experiences of spiritual, magical, or sublime 
meaning and awe, fiction authors reinstated imaginary worlds full of such enchantment, 
albeit with an ironic consciousness of their ‘as if’ status (see Chapter 12). 
 
 Figure 1.2: Forms of Role-Playing Games 
 
Role-Playing
Games
ROLES
PLAY GAMES
MEDIA CULTURE
TRPG CRPG
MORPG Larp
Other & 
impacts
Precursors
 
 
  
Role-play, wargaming, and fantasy literature all came together in 1974 in the shape of 
Dungeons & Dragons, the first tabletop role-playing game (TRPG), which then quickly 
proliferated into a myriad forms across cultures and media (Figure 1.2). TRPGs were 
played as a group sitting around a table, with players controlling and verbally describing 
the actions of their characters in a game world managed and described by a referee, using 
rule systems imported from war games and dice to decide the outcome of actions (see 
Chapter 4). Computer role-playing games (CRPGs, see Chapter 6) translated this setup 
into something that could be experienced individually sitting at a computer, where the 
player controlled one or more characters, and the game world was rendered and 
controlled by the computer. As the first instantiation of multiplayer online role-playing 
games (MORPGs, see Chapter 7), so-called multi-user dungeons (MUDs) turned CRPGs 
back into a group experience: players used computer networks – then mostly university 
networks and Internet-predecessor ARPANET – to play in and create a shared virtual 
world. In live-action role-playing games (larps, see Chapter 5), players embodied their 
characters, often dressing up and physically performing (when possible) their character’s 
actions. TRPGs, CRPGs, MORPGs and larps are the four most prominent of a plethora of 
forms, each with many sub-forms, cultural variations, and innovations.  
 
Box Insert 1.1: LARP, Larp, or larp? 
While LARP as an acronym stands for live action role-play, in recent years, “larp” is 
being used as a noun (and verb) by some player communities. For example, players 
might say “I designed this great larp” or “Let’s go larping tomorrow”. Like laser, radar, 
and scuba in the past, larp is in the process of turning from an acronym into its own 
 
 
  
meaningful lexical unit: a new word. We have decided to use it as such, not in all-caps, 
throughout this book. We recognize that this may be a bit confusing when seen side-by-
side with the other acronyms (TRPG, CRPG), but we hope you will bear with us. 
Despite of because of their popularity, RPGs quickly became the subject of moral panics 
(see Chapter 19). In the United States in the 1980s, TRPGs were accused of recruiting 
adolescent players into satanic cults and practices. Rumors spread of players who 
confused fiction and reality and died getting lost in underground tunnels playing larp. The 
2000s saw a second panic around MORPG ‘addiction’, with news stories of players dying 
from extended play or committing crimes over virtual game items. RPGs present an 
example of adult pretend play that lacks the legitimacy of tradition (like carnival) or 
recognized cultural function (like theater). Although this is changing, playing RPGs as an 
adult still carries stigma, even within fantasy and science fiction fandom (Deterding 
2017). 
However, RPGs are also part of the throbbing heart of fandom – a passage rite 
and secret language, a stigma to the outer world that signifies ‘true’ belonging and 
commitment to the inner group. A core aspect of fandom is participating in a fictional 
world by consuming and discussing media while also extending and co-creating it. RPGs 
make the shared creation and inhabiting of fictional worlds their focal practice. Large 
parts of the global population today immerse themselves in transmedia worlds like Star 
Wars, The Lord of the Rings, Harry Potter, or Game of Thrones. A significant subset of 
people also engage with these worlds in participatory ways: fan fiction, costume play, 
and more. In the age of convergence culture, fandom and its transmedia practices have 
gone mainstream (Jenkins 2006). Alternate and Augmented Reality Games that layer 
 
 
  
game rules and game world over everyday life are becoming the digital hope of media 
and advertising industries (Rose 2011). Many of the involved practices and forms were 
first developed in RPGs: Long before the Atlas of Middle-Earth, Discworld Companion, 
or Pop-Up Guide to Westeros, RPG authors and referees had to flesh out guides and maps 
to fictional worlds, learn to write scenarios rich with potential starting points and 
conflicts for emergent player action, and manage a fictional world in response to multiple 
players’ actions to give each a satisfying experience. This puts them at the cutting edge of 
contemporary transmedia authorship of franchises or alternate reality games. RPGs 
popularized the practice of genre-mixing like Science-Fantasy (Gamma World, 
Shadowrun) or Horror-Western (Deadlands). They spawned successful novelizations, 
comics, board and video games, and movies (see Chapters 9 and 21). 
 
Why Study Role-Playing Games? 
Examining RPGs through the lenses of its four constituent aspects (roles, play, games, 
media culture) helps us understand and put in perspective its origins and forms. It also 
highlights why scholars are (and should be) interested in studying them. 
In terms of play, RPGs provide insight into adult pretense and role-play, which 
occur in many places besides RPGs: many board, card, and video games have moments 
of emergent micro role-play. Contemporary cultural practices like cosplay, attending 
renaissance fairs, Steampunk events, theme parties, or increasingly high-profile, 
mainstream immersive theater productions by groups like Punchdrunk (see chapter 11) 
all entail role-play. Even in day-to-day life, we often engage in day-dreaming “barely 
games” (Davies 2009), little bouts of private role-play. Besides answering fundamental 
 
 
  
psychological and sociological questions regarding how adult pretense play works – how 
people create shared immersion (see Chapter 22) –, RPG literature provides great insight 
into designing for it. 
 
Figure 1.3: Issues in Role-Playing Game Studies 
 
Moving on to roles, RPG scholarship has developed a deep understanding of the many 
ways players, their identities, and selves relate to their in-game characters and avatars. 
Role-Playing
Games
Subculture
& Fandom
Immersion
Players & 
Characters
Transgressive
Role-Play
Erotic
Role-Play
Discrimination
ROLES
PLAY GAMES
MEDIA CULTURE
Worldbuilding
 
 
  
This work is relevant to any game researcher and designer interested in these dimensions 
of gameplay, as well as to sociologists and psychologists working on identity, self, and 
role-taking (see Chapters 12, 13, 23). Intimately connected to that is the rich work on 
framing in RPGs. RPG scholars have empirically and conceptually disentangled how the 
‘magic circle’ or ‘separateness’ of gameplay comes about – the special norms and 
understandings governing a gaming encounter (see Chapter 12). This has also led them 
to study deviant ‘dark play’: how actions considered deviant become acceptable within 
the frame of play, and how certain actions test and break the norms of play itself (see 
Chapter 24). This is valuable knowledge for any study of deviance and social norms in 
and beyond gameplay. 
Speaking of games, RPGs are an important transmedia genre of games which has 
explored and refined many aspects of game design and play that designers and scholars 
coming from other genres can draw rich inspiration from: world building (see Chapter 
20), the materiality of games (see Chapter 17), and the myriad ways of organizing and 
sharing control over game events between referees, players, and game systems (see 
Chapter 27). Many video game genres are deeply informed by RPG game mechanics 
like progression systems (see Chapter 18). Studying RPGs is essential to understand the 
history of video games and inform the future of game design across genres and media. 
RPG tropes not only deeply influenced games, but also media culture writ large, 
yet this historical legacy is still underexplored (see Chapter 9). RPGs have thriving fan 
subcultures of their own, while also connecting and pervading science fiction and fantasy 
fandom more generally (see Chapter 21). As such, RPGs are an exemplary site for 
studying and understanding stereotyping and discrimination in fan cultures (see Chapter 
 
 
  
26), or the way subcultural and adult play practices are cast as deviant in public discourse 
(see Chapter 24). The virtual-real economies of MORPGs are an essential site of 
experimentation with new forms of labor, intellectual property, business models, and 
governance (see Chapter 16). All this makes RPG research vital to understanding 
contemporary media culture and its economies.  
Last but not least, RPGs are a popular cultural form, practice, and industry of 
their own. They are increasingly used as a medium of artistic expression, forming and 
informing the vanguard of contemporary theater, media, and performance art as well as 
experience design (see Chapter 11). And for more than four decades, RPGs have been 
used for all kinds of serious purposes, including therapy (see Chapter 13), education (see 
Chapter 15), business planning and simulation (see Chapter 16), or activism.  
 
A (Brief) History of Role-Playing Games Research 
The first academic studies of adult role-play arose around the first wave of educational 
simulation and gaming beginning in the late 1960s, and presented at venues like the 
ISAGA conference or in the journal Simulation & Gaming (Abt 1970, Crookall 2012). A 
significant milestone of role-playing game research was sociologist Gary Alan Fine’s 
Shared Fantasy: Role-Playing Games as Social Worlds  (1983). His ethnography of RPG 
player groups, published when Dungeons & Dragons first gained mainstream attention, 
delivered an influential analysis of RPGs as “an urban leisure subculture”, the cultural 
context of RPGs, like fantasy literature; and the interplay of players’ selves and identities, 
their everyday life world, and the fictional characters and worlds they create. Fine’s work 
 
 
  
has been deeply influential for RPG scholars in performance studies (see Chapter 11) 
and sociology (see Chapter 12). 
As noted, the 1980s were also witness to a moral panic as studied by 
communication researchers (see Chapter 19). Journalists, religious spokespersons, and 
other moral entrepreneurs warned of the harmful effects of RPG play on youth, which 
triggered a counter-response of researchers, who, over the course of the 1980s and early 
1990s, questioned the negative effects of RPGs and in turn highlighted a number of 
potential positive therapeutic, educational, pro-social, and cognitive effects of playing 
them.
1 A firebrand in this debate was Patricia Pulling’s (1989) book The Devil’s Web: 
Who Is Stalking Your Children for Satan?, linking D&D to satanic rituals, insanity, and 
perversion, and author and game designer Michael A. Stackpole’s Pulling Report (1990), 
a meticulous deconstruction of Pulling’s book and its argument. Most other general 
audience books from this time period consist of introductions to the hobby of roleplaying 
(e.g. Butterfield, Parker, and Honigmann 1982; Livingstone 1982; Albrecht and Stafford 
1984); guides for improving RPG play (e.g. Plamondon 1982; Gygax 1987); or 
bibliographies (Schick 1991). 
Like much fandom research, RPG scholarship is characterized by intense para-
academic scholarship and aca-fandom: RPG designers and fans early on developed 
thoughtful and theoretical discourse of their own and many university academics 
studying RPGs either started out as fan-scholars ‘professionalizing’ their work, or are 
self-identifying RPG fans who turned their leisure time activity into their research subject 
(see Hills 2002, Mason 2004) (see Chapter 10). Already in the 1980s, designers and 
players began reflecting about the design and play of RPGs at conventions as well as in 
 
 
  
magazines and fanzines like Dragon, Different Worlds, Alarums & Excursions, or the 
short-lived Interactive Fantasy. This fan discourse flourished with the rise of the Internet 
and online communication tools in the 1990s, on Usenet discussion groups like 
rec.games.frp.advocacy or the online discussion board The Forge. Another focal point of 
fan theorizing and aca-fandom have been the Knutepunkt conventions, an annual 
gathering of the Nordic larp community. Knutepunkt has published proceedings and 
companion books since 2001 and is a source of much contemporary larp scholarship and 
design literature, as well as a culture of manifestos advancing larp as an artistic medium 
by articulating particular aesthetic visions (see Chapter 5). Today, RPG scholars, 
designers, and players actively promote the exchange between fandom and academia 
through panels and publications at events like WyrdCon, Intercon, Living Games, or 
NecronomiCon. Beyond general theories and models of RPGs and their design, this fan 
scholarship has shaped debates about play and design styles and the cultural role of RPGs 
(see Chapter 10). 
The rise of the Internet in the 1990s also spurred research that brought CRPGs 
and MORPGs to greater attention: Sherry Turkle’s Life on the Screen (1995) proposed 
that the multiple ‘windows’ and worlds of the Internet such as MUDs fostered new, fluid, 
multiple forms of identity. Janet Murray’s Hamlet on the Holodeck (1997) examined 
networked computing, including MORPGs, to analyze the forms, authorship, and 
aesthetic experience of digital interactive environments as a new medium of storytelling. 
And MUD pioneer Richard Bartle (1997) published “Hearts, Clubs, Diamonds, Spades: 
Players Who Suit MUDs” in the inaugural issue of the now-defunct Journal of Virtual 
 
 
  
Environments, then named Journal of MUD. Bartle’s paper spearheaded research around 
player personalities and motives in RPGs (see Chapter 10). 
 
Figure 1.4: Disciplines of Role-Playing Games Studies 
 
The 2000s saw game studies flourish as an interdisciplinary field, initially focused on 
digital games, with important waymarks like the founding of the journal Game Studies in 
2001 and the Digital Games Research Association (DiGRA) in 2003. RPG research 
Psychology
Education
LiteraryStudies
Game design
Economics
Designer & fan
theorizing
Communication
Sociology
Science & 
Technology Studies
Performance
Studies
Role-Playing
Games
ROLES
PLAY GAMES
MEDIA CULTURE
 
 
  
thrived with the rise of game studies in general, and RPG scholars have chiefly gathered 
within this community. Worthy of note are Pat Harrigan’s and Noah Wardrip-Fruin’s 
book trilogy First Person (2004), Second Person (2007), and Third Person (2009). These 
collections of essays, responses, case studies, design reflections, and games bridged new 
media and game scholarship, circling around role-play, performance, storytelling, and the 
authorship of fictional worlds and “vast narratives” found in RPGs. 
In the 2000s, scholars in fields such as sociology (see Chapter 12), 
communication research and media studies (see Chapter 19), and human-computer 
interaction followed Fine with ethnographies of RPG communities, their community 
dynamics, framing processes, or negotiations of the boundaries of work and play. They 
were joined by scholars who explored the psychology of player motives, immersion, 
player-avatar relations, and gaming addiction (see Chapter 13). These strands coalesced 
in the mid- to late 2000s when the success of MORPGs, particularly World of Warcraft 
(WoW), put MORPGs on the center stage of game studies for several years (e.g. 
Corneliussen and Rettberg 2008). Economists studied MORPGs (see Chapter 16) 
interested in their virtual economies and interactions with real-world economics. 
Simultaneously, education researchers in communities like the Games+Learning+Society 
conference began exploring the use and design of edu-larps, “massively multiplayer 
classrooms” fashioned in the style of an MORPG, and the educational potential of RPGs 
more generally (see Chapter 15). Literary and media scholars studied the forms of 
textuality, authorship, and narrative in RPGs (see Chapter 14). Starting with Mackay 
(2001), researchers have begun to use theater and performance studies as a lens for RPG 
aesthetics, design, and play (see Chapter 11). Design researchers became interested in 
 
 
  
describing the particular design patterns and practices of RPGs (see Chapter 18). 
Scholars informed by science and technology studies (see Chapter 17) have begun to 
disentangle the many roles of material artifacts in RPGs. And true to the intertwining of 
RPG fandom and scholarship, independent authors like Peterson (2012) and Appelcline 
(2015) have produced substantial historiographies of the emergence and evolution of 
TRPGs and RPGs more generally. 
Today, RPG studies is a small, but established and lively scholarly community 
with a diverse and growing body of organizations, conferences, journals, and 
monographs, including a DiGRA special interest group on roleplaying (formed in 2008), 
the International Journal of Roleplaying inaugurated in 2009 (Drachen 2009), and 
starting in 2014, the semi-regular summit of RPG Studies, hosted as part of the general 
DiGRA conference. 
 
Purpose and Plan of This Book 
Despite this lively community and a rich body of knowledge created over the past four 
decades, RPG Studies today face three challenges.  
First, while fans, designers, aca-fans, and scholars have developed theories, 
concepts, and tools around phenomena that hold great potential beyond RPGs, little of 
this work is known outside RPG circles. It is also often scattered across fan and academic 
venues, making it hard to find and access.  
Second, following the diversity of RPG forms and local cultures, RPG research 
itself has remained somewhat siloed. MORPG research doesn’t necessarily build upon 
TRPG research (and vice versa). CRPG scholars examine different questions and make 
 
 
  
different assumptions of RPGs than larp scholars. What is true for US-American CRPGs 
and MORPGs might not be true for Korean ones. The list goes on. Collecting, comparing, 
and contrasting findings across forms and cultures and disciplines not only enriches our 
understanding of each individual phenomenon: it is essential for constructing a holistic 
study of RPGs as an interdiscipline. Yet RPG scholars currently have no easy way of 
reviewing the state of research on other RPG forms, cultures, or disciplines. 
Third, the disciplines that have engaged with RPGs still have much to offer: 
Researchers have barely scratched the surface when it comes to e.g. applying sociological 
role theory to RPGs; exploring the experience of playing RPGs through the lens of 
performance studies; or unpacking the design process of RPGs with the concepts and 
methods of design research. Yet again, there are currently no easy entry points to relevant 
literatures across disciplines for interested scholars. 
The purpose of this book is thus to serve as an interdisciplinary, cross-cultural, 
and transmedia synthesis of the state of the art of RPG research. Its goals are to lay the 
transmedia foundations for RPG studies as a field, while also making RPG research 
concepts and findings easily accessible for other interested parties. We wrote the book 
with three main audiences in mind: advanced undergraduate students and up in game 
studies and other fields who want to study RPGs; scholars in game studies and other 
fields who want to do research on RPGs and need a quick reference book to get up to 
speed or look up key terms; and fans and professionals using RPGs for serious purposes 
that want to deepen their understanding of their pastime or make the case for RPGs. 
As such, this book is designed as a hybrid textbook and handbook: Each chapter 
provides a synthesis of the current state of research on a core perspective or aspect of 
 
 
  
RPG studies. That said, each chapter is written without expectations of prior knowledge 
and includes definitions of key terms and recommended further readings. A handy 
glossary at the beginning points to definitions of key RPG terms. 
The book is organized in four sections, which can be seen as concentric rings 
(Figure 1.4): At the center – Chapter 2 – sits the introduction and definition of RPGs. 
For novices unfamiliar with one or several RPG forms, it offers grounding narrative 
descriptions and exemplary vignettes of each. It then presents philosophical and linguistic 
considerations regarding what kind of definition is appropriate for RPGs. Rather than 
searching for one ‘true’ definition of the ‘essence’ of RPGs, the chapter advocates a 
pluralism of disciplinary perspectives and empirical attention to the variety of things we 
call “role-playing games”. 
Following this advice, the chapters in section II empirically describe the 
historical emergence, evolution, and cultural variety and impact of the main 
contemporary forms of RPGs: from their precursors and parallels (Chapter 3) to TRPGs 
(Chapter 4), larps (Chapter 5), CRPGs (Chapter 6), MORPGs (Chapter 7), the 
emergent online freeform (Chapter 8), all to the impact of RPGs on media culture 
(Chapter 9). Although there are other forms of RPGs, we focus on those that have been 
significantly influential due to their popularity, historical influence, and/or research 
attention they received. 
Section III includes disciplinary perspectives on RPGs and constitutes the outer 
ring of our conceptual map: performance studies (Chapter 11), sociology (Chapter 12), 
psychology (Chapter 13), literary studies (Chapter 14), education (Chapter 15), 
economics (Chapter 16), science and technology studies (Chapter 17), game design 
 
 
  
(Chapter 19), and communication research (Chapter 20). Given its prominent role in the 
formation of RPG studies, fan theorizing receives its own, extended treatment (Chapter 
10). Each of these chapters gives a short introduction into the field; explains how RPGs 
are seen in that field (as performances, markets, texts, etc.); describes what makes them 
interesting to that field; and surveys existing disciplinary work on RPGs. Any additional 
number of disciplines could have been brought to bear upon RPGs – art history or moral 
philosophy come readily to mind. But we highlight those disciplines that have already 
produced significant work on RPGs. 
Sitting at the intersection of forms and disciplinary perspectives are 
interdisciplinary issues, collected in section IV. These chapters address fundamental 
aspects of RPGs that have been studied across multiple disciplines and are of relevance to 
scholars in and beyond game research: how people author collective fictional worlds 
(Chapter 20); RPGs as a subculture and its place within media fandom (Chapter 21); 
how immersion in role-play works (Chapter 22); how players relate to their characters 
and avatars (Chapter 23); transgression in and through RPGs (Chapter 24); erotic and 
sexual role-play (Chapter 25); discrimination and representation in RPGs (Chapter 26); 
and finally, how power over the fictional world and its events is distributed between 
players, referees, and artifacts (Chapter 27).  
These last chapters reflect the emerging body of knowledge of RPG studies as an 
interdiscipline. If RPGs are characterized by a multitude of forms and cultures at the 
intersection of roles, play, games, and media culture, the future of RPG studies is 
likewise thousand-faced – and an exciting call to adventure. 
 
 
  
 
Figure 1.5: A Conceptual Map of the Book 
 
Summary 
RPGs sit at the intersection of four phenomena – play, roles, games, and media culture. 
They foreground a particular form and constitutive aspect of play, shared pretense or 
make-believe. Through pretense play, they allow players to temporarily step out of their 
ROLES
PLAY GAMES
MEDIA CULTURE
TRPG CRPG
MORPG Larp
Other & 
impacts
I. DEFINITIONS
Precursors
II. FORMS
IV. ISSUES
III. PERSPECTIVES
Psychology
Education
LiteraryStudies
Game design
Economics
Communication
Sociology
Performance
Studies
Subculture
& Fandom
Immersion
Players & 
Characters
Transgressive
Role-Play
Erotic
Role-Play
Discrimination
Worldbuilding
Designer & fan
theorizing
Science & 
Technology Studies
 
 
  
existing social roles and try on and explore alternative roles. This makes RPGs relevant 
to e.g. sociologists or psychologists interested in adult pretense or basic processes of 
situational sense-making and role-taking. As rule-play or games, they are structured by 
formal rules and goals and a rich source of influential and inspiring game design. As 
media culture, they sit at the heart of modern disenchanted enchantment and 
contemporary media fandom and prefigure increasingly mainstream media phenomenon 
like transmedia storytelling or virtual-real economics. Finally, RPGs are a popular 
cultural form, practice, industry, and artistic medium, forming and informing the 
vanguard of contemporary theater, media, and performance art as well as experience 
design. And for more than four decades, they have been used for non-entertainment 
purposes like therapy, training, or activism. 
However, RPG studies as a field faces three challenges. First, while RPG fans, 
designers and scholars have created knowledge with great potential beyond RPGs, little 
of this work is known outside RPG circles. Second, due to the diversity of RPG forms 
and local cultures, RPG research itself has remained dispersed. Third, a lot of existing 
RPG research hasn’t fully tapped or connected with the basic knowledge of relevant 
disciplines. To address these challenges, this book provides an interdisciplinary, cross-
cultural, and transmedia synthesis of the state of the art of RPG research. It seeks to lay 
the transmedia foundations for RPG studies as a field, while also making RPG studies 
concepts and findings easily accessible for other interested scholars. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Acknowledgments 
This work was partly conducted in the Digital Creativity Labs (digitalcreativity.ac.uk), 
jointly funded by EPSRC/AHRC/InnovateUK under grant no EP/M023265/1. 
 
References 
Aarseth, Espen. 2001. “Computer Game Studies, Year One.” Game Studies 1 (1). 
http://www.gamestudies.org/0101/editorial.html. 
Abt, Clark C. 1971. Serious Games. New York: The Viking Press. 
Albrecht, Bob, and Greg Stafford. 1984. The Adventurer’s Handbook: A Guide to Role-
Playing Games. Reston, VA: Reston Publishing. 
Appelcline, Shannon. 2015. Designers & Dragons [4 Volume Series]. 2nd ed. Evil Hat 
Productions. 
Bartle, Richard. 1997. “Hearts, Clubs, Diamonds, Spades: Players Who Suit MUDs.” The 
Journal of Virtual Environments 1 (1). 
https://web.archive.org/web/20060906080759/http://www.brandeis.edu/pubs/jove/H
TML/v1/bartle.html. 
Biddle, B. J. 1986. “Recent Developments in Role Theory.” Annual Review of Sociology 
12 (1): 67–92.  
Burghardt, Gordon M. 2005. The Genesis of Animal Play: Testing the Limits. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press. 
Butterfield, John, Philip Parker, and David Honigmann. 1982. What Is Dungeons & 
Dragons? New York, NY: Warner Books. 
 
 
  
Caillois, Roger. 2001. Man, Play, and Games. Urbana, Chicago: University of Illinois 
Press. 
Corneliussen, Hilde G., and Jill Walker Rettberg, ed. 2008. Digital Culture, Play, and 
Identity: A World of Warcraft® Reader. Cambridge, MA, London: MIT Press. 
Crookall, David. 2012. “The Founding of Modern Simulation/gaming: S&G and ISAGA 
for Decades on.” Simulation & Gaming 43 (1): 5–14. 
Davies, Russell. 2009. “Playful.” In This Is Playful 2009. London. 
http://russelldavies.typepad.com/planning/2009/11/playful.html. 
Deterding, Sebastian. 2017. “Alibis of Adult Play. A Goffmanian Account of Escaping 
Embarrassment in Adult Play.” Games and Culture, online first. 
Drachen, Anders. 2009. “Editorial.” International Journal of Role-Playing 1: 2. 
http://www.ijrp.subcultures.nl/wp-content/uploads/2009/01/editorial.pdf. 
Fine, Gary Alan. 1983. Shared Fantasy: Role-Playing Games as Social Worlds. Chicago, 
London: University of Chicago Press. 
Gygax, Gary. 1987. Role-Playing Mastery. New York, NY: The Putnam Publishing 
Group. 
Harrigan, Pat, and Noah Wardrip-Fruin, ed. 2007. Second Person: Role-Playing and 
Story in Games and Playable Media. Cambridge, MA, London: MIT Press. 
Harrigan, Pat, and Noah Wardrip-Fruin, ed. 2009. Third Person: Authoring and 
Exploring Vast Narratives. Cambridge, MA, London: MIT Press. 
Henricks, Thomas S. 2015. Play and the Human Condition. Champaign, IL: University 
of Illinois Press. 
Hills, Matt. 2002. Fan Cultures. London: Routledge. 
 
 
  
Jenkins, Henry. 2006. Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide. New 
York, London: New York University Press. 
Juul, Jesper. 2005. Half-Real: Video Games between Real Rules and Fictional Worlds. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Konner, Melvin. 2010. The Evolution of Childhood: Relationships, Emotion, and Mind. 
Cambridge, MA, London: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. 
Livingstone, Ian. 1982. Dicing with Dragons: An Introduction to Role-Playing Games. 
New York, NY: Plume. 
Lynch, Karen Danna. 2007. “Modeling Role Enactment: Linking Role Theory and Social 
Cognition.” Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour 37 (4): 379–399. 
Mason, P. 2003. “In Search of the Self: A Survey of the First 25 Years of Anglo-
American Role-Playing Game Theory.” In Beyond Role and Play. Tools, Toys and 
Theory for Harnessing the Imagination, edited by Markus Montola and Jaako 
Stenros, 1–14. Helsinki: Ropecon ry. 
Murray, Janet H. 1997. Hamlet on the Holodeck: The Future of Narrative in Cyberspace. 
New York: The Free Press. 
Oerter, Rolf. 1999. Psychologie des Spiels. Ein handlungstheoretischer Ansatz. 
Weinheim, Basel: Beltz. 
Owens, Timothy J., and Sarah Samblanet. 2013. “Self and Self-Concept.” In Handbook 
of Social Psychology, edited by John DeLamater and Amanda Ward, 2nd ed., 225–
250. Dordrecht: Springer. 
Pellegrini, Anthony D. 2009. The Role of Play in Human Development. New York: 
Oxford University Press. 
 
 
  
 
Peterson, Jon. 2012. Playing at the World: A History of Simulating Wars, People, and 
Fantastic Adventure from Chess to Role-Playing Games. Unreason Press. 
Plamondon, Robert. 1982. Through Dungeons Deep: A Fantasy Gamer’s Handbook. 
Reston, VA: Reston Publishing. 
Pulling, Patricia. 1989. Devil’s Web: Who Is Stalking Your Children for Satan? Vital 
Issues Press. 
Rose, F. (2011). The Art of Immersion: How the digital generation is remaking 
Hollywood, Madison Avenue, and the way we tell stories. New York, London: W.W. 
Norton & Company. 
Saler, Michael. 2012. As If: Modern Enchantment and the Literary Prehistory of Virtual 
Reality. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Schechner, Richard. 2006. Performance Studies: An Introduction. 2nd ed. New York, 
London: Routledge. 
Schick, Lawrence. 1991. Heroic Worlds. A History and Guide to Role-Playing Games. 
New York: Prometheus Books. 
Stackpole, Michael A. 1990. “The Pulling Report.” 
http://www.rpgstudies.net/stackpole/pulling_report.html. 
Stephenson, Barry. 2015. Ritual: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
Stets, Jan E., and Richard T. Serpe. 2013. “Identity Theory.” In Handbook of Social 
Psychology, edited by John DeLamater and Amanda Ward, 2nd ed., 31–60. 
Dordrecht: Springer. 
 
 
  
Turkle, Sherry. 1995. Life on the Screen: Identity in the Age of the Internet. New York: 
Simon & Schuster. 
Turner, Ralph H. 2001. “Role Theory.” In Handbook of Sociological Theory, edited by 
Jonathan H. Turner, 233–254. Dordrecht: Springer.  
Wardrip-Fruin, Noah, and Pat Harrigan, ed. 2004. First Person: New Media as Story, 
Performance, and Game. Cambridge, MA, London: MIT Press. 
Zagal, José P., & Altizer, Roger. 2014. “Examining ‘RPG Elements’: Systems of 
Character Progression. In Foundations of Digital Games 2014. Retrieved from 
http://www.fdg2014.org/papers/fdg2014_paper_38.pdf 
                                                
1 The website rpgstudies.net provides an excellent bibliography of the moral panic. 