Zenopus Archives - The Sample Dungeon aka The Tower of Zenopus 

 Search this site

 Embedded Files 

 Skip to main content 

 Skip to navigation 

 Zenopus Archives 
 Exploring the Underworld of Holmes Basic Dungeons & Dragons 

 J. Eric Holmes Bibliography and Historical Information 

 Gaming Artifact Gallery 

 Gygax on Holmes 

 Holmes on Holmes Basic 

 J. Eric Holmes Photo Gallery (under construction) 

 Modules, Scenarios and Settings 

 A Chronology of D&D Sample Dungeons 

 The Adventure in the Dungeon - AD&D Coloring Album (1979) 

 The Dungeons of the Ground Goblins 

 The Sample Level in Underworld & Wilderness Adventures 

 The Shrine of Kollchap 

 The Wizard's Tomb 

 B1 In Search of the Unknown 

 Lists of changes to B1, monochrome versus color cover 

 B2 Keep on the Borderlands 

 Gygax on B2 

 Further ideas for scenarios & settings 

 Greyhawk 

 Halls of the Lizard King 

 Morkendaine Dungeon 

 The Chapel of Silence 

 Adventures in the Far Isles 

 The Creature of Rhyl 

 The Great Stone Skull on Stone Mountain 

 The Halls of Tizun Thane 

 The Lichway 

 The Sample Dungeon aka The Tower of Zenopus 

 Sample Dungeon Simple Scenario 

 The Treasure of Barlawn 

 The Artists of Holmes Basic 

 Jim Roslof Art Bibliography 

 Holmes Ref - Reference Sheets for Holmes Basic Referees 

 Rules Expansions for higher level play 

 References in the rulebook that are not described 

 Typical Monster Dexterity Scores 

 Rules Variants 

 Judges Guild Weapon Priority 

 Warrior for Hire by J. Eric Holmes 

 Miscellaneous 

 A Dungeons & Dragons Adventure 

 Fiend Folio sources 

 Heroic Worlds 

 The Arduin Adventure 

 Your Personal Invitation to Adventure 

 Draw Your Own Floor Plan 

 Community 

 Blog Roundup - posts with Holmes-related content 

 Testimonials 

 Previous Updates to the site 

 Contact 

 Other Forums 

 Articles 

 Podcasts 

 Convention Games 

 Rulebook Printing Info and Trivia 

 Blue Book Easter Eggs 

 Tolkien & the Blue Book 

 Blue Book foreign editions 

 French translation of the Blue Book - Donjons et Dragons 

 Contemporary Reviews 

 Complete Book of Wargames (1980) 

 List of Changes Made to the Holmes Basic Rulebook 

 List of Changes to the Holmes Basic rulebook 

 Zenopus Archives 

 The Sample Dungeon aka The Tower of Zenopus 

 The last few pages of the Holmes Basic rulebook are filled with an introductory scenario simply titled, "Sample Dungeon". This basic level dungeon replaces the "Sample Map of Underworld Level" found on pages 4-5 of The Underworld & Wilderness Adventures (volume 3 of the original D&D set). While Dr. Holmes primarily served as editor of the Basic rulebook, he authored the Sample Dungeon first as confirmed by Gary Gygax on Dragonsfoot (in response to my query), and later as shown by the Holmes Manuscript . 
 The "Sample Dungeon" is colloquially known as the "Tower of Zenopus". This could be interpreted as a misnomer, since the wizard's tower is long destroyed, but is actually an appropriate name in the vein of "Castle Greyhawk", which is also used as the name of the dungeons below the ruin. 
 Holmes' original hand drawn map of the Sample Dungeon can be seen here in a side-by-side comparison with the published version. Note that the header on page 40 of the rulebook that reads "Sample Floor Plan, Part of First Level", actually refers to a different partial map that Holmes included in the Manuscript but that was cut by TSR for publication. 
 In the Manuscript series, Parts 46 through 54 compare Holmes' original text for the Sample Dungeon to the published version. In revising the dungeon, Gygax generally increased the strength of monster encounters while reducing the value of treasure. 
 Holmes' dungeon has a "circular route" layout (see this dungeon layout article ) that interacts well with the "outside environment" - there are at least three other "exits" from the dungeon in addition to the entrance (thaumaturgist's tower; pirate's sea cave; and the rat tunnels), a river entering the dungeon, a possible connection to ghoul-haunted tunnels under the graveyard, and a possible entrance to lower levels. Specifically, the coda of the adventure alludes to "(undiscovered) deeper levels". However, no entrances to the lower levels are shown on the map, and no clues have been found in the text. 
 The encounters in the Sample Dungeon contain several possible allusions to fantasy literature, as I originally noted in an article titled " Holmes Basic Easter Eggs " (this information was later incorporated into the various entries for the Manuscript series) 
 DM Resources: 
 "The Ruined Tower of Zenopus" is a conversion of the Sample Dungeon to Fifth Edition (5E) D&D, and is available on DMs Guild . It includes a full-page illustration by Chris Holmes (J. Eric Holmes's son) & a printer-friendly version of the dungeon map, and is joined by a separate dungeon map file optimized for use with Roll20 and suitable for other VTTs. On the blog, you can find notes for retro-converting it for use with Holmes/OD&D. 

 Sample Dungeon - wizards.com official download - part of a retrospective about Basic Sets from 2008 
 (As of 2021, these links are no longer available on wizards.com, but have been preserved at the Internet Archive) 

 Map of Portown by Paleologos 

 Portown Rumors - 3-page pdf detailing 20 rumors overheard in Portown - this can be found on the Holmes Ref page 

 More Portown Rumors at the Dungeons of Klang blog 

 Sample Dungeon Factions 

 A simple scenario for using the Sample Dungeon with beginners 

 The Tower of Zenopus by Badmike - a rewrite of the backstory 

 See also: 
 "Beneath The Ruined Tower of Zenopus" pod-play drama --- "An original scripted performance about a group of adventurers exploring the labyrinth beneath a magicians ruined tower! Dedicated to and influenced by John Eric Holmes' sample dungeon in the original blue book." 

 The room letters in the Sample Dungeon vertically spell out the initials of J. Eric Holmes 

 "[S]ufficient information across the board to enable play for a group for a limited period of time--enough to determine if the game is "right" for the group. That's what the Basic Set of D&D was for, and that was a good idea that J. Eric Holmes came up with." --- Gary Gygax, Dragonsfoot forum post , 2002 

 Google Sites

 Report abuse

 Google Sites

 Report abuse