 
 The Tales of Dunk and Egg by George RR Martin - Malazan Empire 
 Malazan Empire: The Tales of Dunk and Egg by George RR Martin - Malazan Empire
 Jump to content 
 Sign In » 
 New user? 
 Register Now! 
 Help 
 Enter your sign in name and password
 Username: 
 Password: 
 I've forgotten my password 
 Remember me
 This is not recommended for shared computers 
 Sign in anonymously
 Don't add me to the active users list 
 or Cancel 
 (IM) Sliding Quick Login © 2026, Invision Modding 
 Search 
 Search section: 
 This topic 
 This forum 
 Forums 
 Members 
 Help Files 
 Calendar 
 Gallery 
 Advanced 
 Website 
 Forums 
 Members 
 Calendar 
 Gallery 
 Chat 
 Encyclopedia 
 Malazan Empire 
 > OFF TOPIC 
 > Other Literature 
 > Featured Reviews 
 Code of Conduct 
 View New Content 
 Page 1 of 1 
 You cannot start a new topic 
 You cannot reply to this topic 
 The Tales of Dunk and Egg by George RR Martin
 Hedge knights, sworn swords and mystery knights. 
 #1 
 Werthead 
 God
 Group: 
 Malaz Regular 
 Posts: 
 4,291 
 Joined: 
 14-November 05 
 Posted 08 March 2010 - 10:29 PM 
 The Mystery Knight 
 Quote
 Two years ago, the Great Spring Sickness swept through the Seven Kingdoms, killing tens of thousands and leaving the realm battered and fragile. Beyond the narrow sea, the defeated but not destroyed Blackfyre Pretenders remain a significant threat, whilst the Stark in Winterfell has called his banners to deal with another enemy. As the realm seethes in discontent, the quiet, bookish King Aerys I Targaryen sits the Iron Throne but leaves the realm to be ruled decisively by his Hand, Lord Brynden Rivers, 'Bloodraven', a kinslayer who is said to be accursed in the sight of the gods and men.
However, such concerns seem far away for Ser Duncan the Tall, a hedge knight, and his squire Egg, when they stop at the castle of Whitewalls where Lord Butterwell is celebrating his marriage. Hedge knights and lords alike gather to wish the couple well and partake in the celebratory tourney, but beneath the surface Dunk discovers intrigue and conspiracies, feuds dating back decades and plans that will reverberate for years to come. For at this tourney, there is more than one mystery knight...
The 'Tales of Dunk and Egg' are a series of novellas that take place in the wider world of George R.R. Martin's A Song of Ice and Fire, decades before the events of the first novel in the series, A Game of Thrones. At this time the Targaryens are still secure (but not unopposed) on the Iron Throne and barely any of the characters from the main series have even been born. The most important event in Westeros' recent history is the Blackfyre Rebellion, when the eldest bastard son of King Aegon IV attempted to supplant his trueborn brother and seize the Iron Throne. He was defeated but he left behind brothers and sons to carry on the struggle. Readers of the novels will know that the 'Blackfyre Pretenders' remain a major problem for some considerable time, and from the prevalence of this backstory element in The Sworn Sword and now The Mystery Knight I'm going to hazard a guess their future exploits will also be chronicled in future instalments of the series (a fourth novella has been pencilled in for after A Dance with Dragons, and Martin projects as many as nine of the stories in total).
The Mystery Knight has been in gestation for a long period of time, with Martin completing most of the tale during the complex writing of A Feast for Crows before finally completing it for publication in the Warriors anthology (full review forthcoming). Surprisingly, for a story so long in the writing it's a pretty fast-paced tale, taking place over just a couple of days and focused on just a few core characters. At the same time there's some fairly complicated politicking going on, not to mention some excellent Easter eggs for fans of the main series (the excessively cautious nature of one character from the books is explained here by events that happened to his ancestor, for example) and several memorable characters that have to be drawn in a (relatively) constrained page-count.
Martin pulls this off surprisingly well. Of the three 'Dunk and Egg' tales published so far, The Mystery Knight comfortably slips into the middle in terms of quality. It lacks the elegant simplicity of The Hedge Knight but isn't as slight as The Sworn Sword. It also builds on the expositionary overload of The Sworn Sword, where the backstory about the Blackfyre Rebellion was fascinating but overdone compared to what was actually needed for the plot, whilst here it is actually essential to the story. There's more action, more intrigue and more carefully-nuanced characterisation than The Sworn Sword, but the story lacks the satisfying conclusion of The Hedge Knight, with an unusually neat ending by Martin's standards (although the final line is superb) that lacks the messy consequences he usually favours. There's also a slight leaning on prophetic dreams and visions (as indeed there also was in A Feast for Crows) that feels slightly over-convenient, considering the series' (relative) gritty realism in other areas.
The Mystery Knight (****) is a short but satisfying tale of the Seven Kingdoms that features many of Martin's hallmarks of solid writing, great characters, intrigue and action, but lacks the punch of The Hedge Knight and epic scope of the novels proper (although hinting intriguingly at a bigger picture beyond the confines of the story). The story will appear in Warriors, published by Tor Books next week. A UK publication deal has not yet been reached. A comic book version of the story is likely to appear, but not for two years (the period of the exclusivity contract on the stories in the collection).
 Visit The Wertzone for reviews of SF&F books, DVDs and computer games!
 "Try standing out in a winter storm all night and see how tough you are. Start with that. Then go into a bar and pick a fight and see how tough you are. And then go home and break crockery over your head. Start with those three and you'll be good to go."
- Bruce Campbell on how to be as cool as he is
 0
 Back to top 
 Back to top of the page up there ^ 
 #2 
 Malaclypse 
 Banned User
 Group: 
 Banned Users 
 Posts: 
 1,350 
 Joined: 
 24-August 16 
 Posted 09 March 2010 - 01:30 AM 
 Not remotely interested, which is a sad sad thing.
 Back to top 
 Back to top of the page up there ^ 
 #3 
 Werthead 
 God
 Group: 
 Malaz Regular 
 Posts: 
 4,291 
 Joined: 
 14-November 05 
 Posted 09 March 2010 - 11:07 AM 
 Malaclypse, on 09 March 2010 - 01:30 AM, said:
Not remotely interested, which is a sad sad thing.
I know it will be sad and traumatic for them, but I'm sure that Martin, like Sanderson before him, will be able to learn to live without your continued patronage.
 Visit The Wertzone for reviews of SF&F books, DVDs and computer games!
 "Try standing out in a winter storm all night and see how tough you are. Start with that. Then go into a bar and pick a fight and see how tough you are. And then go home and break crockery over your head. Start with those three and you'll be good to go."
- Bruce Campbell on how to be as cool as he is
 1
 Back to top 
 Back to top of the page up there ^ 
 Forum Home 
 Braven Tooth's Recruitment Yard 
 |-- New Members Start Here 
 |-- Announcements & Events 
 The Malazan Book of the Fallen and Novels of the Malazan Empire 
 |-- Gardens of the Moon 
 |-- Deadhouse Gates 
 |-- Memories of Ice 
 |-- House of Chains 
 |-- Midnight Tides 
 |-- The Bonehunters 
 |-- Night of Knives 
 |-- Reaper's Gale 
 |-- The Return of the Crimson Guard 
 |-- Toll the Hounds 
 |-- Stonewielder 
 |-- Dust of Dreams 
 |-- The Crippled God 
 |-- Orb, Sceptre, Throne 
 |-- Blood and Bone 
 |-- Forge of Darkness 
 |---- Forge of Darkness - for new Malazfans 
 |-- Assail 
 |-- Fall of Light 
 |-- Dancer's Lament 
 |-- Deadhouse Landing 
 |-- Kellanved's Reach 
 |-- The God is Not Willing 
 |-- Forge of the High Mage 
 Forthcoming Publications 
 |-- Forthcoming Malazan Novels 
 General Book Forum 
 |-- General Book Topics 
 |-- Malazan Art 
 |---- Photography 
 |-- Malazan Podcasts 
 |---- Podcast Staff Room 
 |-- Polls 
 |-- Malazan WIKI 
 |-- Malazan Wiki Forum 
 |-- Forum Help/Admin Support 
 Other Works by Steven Lundin/Erikson 
 |-- REJOICE! A Knife To The Heart!!! 
 |-- Willful Child 
 |-- Tales of Bauchelain & Korbal Broach 
 |---- Blood Follows 
 |---- The Healthy Dead 
 |---- The Lees of Laughter's End 
 |---- Crack'd Pot Trail 
 |---- The Wurms of Blearmouth 
 |---- The Fiends of Nightmaria 
 |-- Other works by Steven Erikson/Lundin 
 |---- Revolvo 
 |---- When She's Gone 
 |---- The Devil Delivered 
 |---- Fishin' with Grandma Matchie 
 |---- Quashie Trapp Blacklight 
 |---- This Rich Evil Sound 
 |---- Goats of Glory 
 |---- This River Awakens 
 OFF TOPIC 
 |-- The Phoenix Inn 
 |---- The Hall of Fame 
 |------ 20 Questions with a Forum Member 
 |-- Other Literature 
 |---- Featured Reviews 
 |---- Book Club 
 |---- Other Authors - Jim Butcher 
 |---- Other Authors - Brandon Sanderson/Robert Jordan 
 |---- Other Authors - George RR Martin (no, really!) 
 |-- Discussions 
 |---- Religion 
 |-- Movies, TV and Music 
 |-- Games 
 |---- Play-by-Forum 
 |---- MAFIA 
 |------ Mafia Addicts Anonymous 
 |---- Knoll Barrow 
 |------ Running Games (RPG) 
 |-- Sports 
 |-- Writing 
 ← Previous Topic 
 Featured Reviews 
 Next Topic → 
 Share this topic:
 Page 1 of 1 
 You cannot start a new topic 
 You cannot reply to this topic 
 1 User(s) are reading this topic
 0 members, 1 guests, 0 anonymous users 
 Delete Post
 Remove From View 
 The post may still be visible to moderators in this topic
 Reason: 
 Delete From Topic 
 The post will be removed from this topic completely
 Skin and Language
 Theme: 
 IP.Board 
 IP.Board Mobile 
 Grey 
 Grey Lustrous 
 Arcobaleno 
 Venom 
 Midnight Glow 
 Malazan Empire 
 Language: 
 English (USA) 
 Execution Stats
 Time Now: Sep 06 2026 05:53 PM
 Back To Top 
 Forum Home 
 Delete My Cookies 
 Mark Board As Read 
 Community Forum Software by IP.Board 
 