
===== PAGE 1 =====
Journal of Tolkien Research Journal of Tolkien Research 
Volume 15 Issue 2 Article 6 
2022 
Second Age, Middle Age Second Age, Middle Age 
Norbert Schürer 
California State University, Long Beach, norbert.schurer@csulb.edu 
Follow this and additional works at: https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch 
 Part of the Literature in English, British Isles Commons, Medieval Studies Commons, and the Modern 
Literature Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Schürer, Norbert (2022) "Second Age, Middle Age," Journal of Tolkien Research: Vol. 15: Iss. 2, Article 6. 
Available at: https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol15/iss2/6 
This Peer-Reviewed Article is brought to you for free and open access by ValpoScholar. It has been accepted for 
inclusion in Journal of Tolkien Research by an authorized administrator of ValpoScholar. For more information, 
please contact a ValpoScholar staff member at scholar@valpo.edu. 

===== PAGE 2 =====
Second Age, Middle Age Second Age, Middle Age 
Cover Page Footnote Cover Page Footnote 
A first (much shorter) version of this article was presented as a paper at the 18th Tolkien Seminar of the 
Deutsche Tolkien Gesellschaft (German Tolkien Society) at the Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena in 2022. 
I would particularly like to thank Prof. Thomas Honegger, Jonas Mertens, Jonathan Naumann, Prof. 
Robert Tally, Allan Turner, and Renee Vink for their feedback. Suggestions from the anonymous reviewers 
of the Journal of Tolkien Research vastly improved my essay. 
This peer-reviewed article is available in Journal of Tolkien Research: https://scholar.valpo.edu/
journaloftolkienresearch/vol15/iss2/6 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
The Second Age of Tolkien’s legendarium is currently in vogue.  The William 
Morrow imprint of HarperCollins Publishers recently released The Fall of 
Númenor, a chronological or annalistic account of the Second Age edited by Brian 
Sibley. The Fall of Númenor  does not introduce any new and  unpublished 
documents, but rather assembles and reorganizes material relating to the Second 
Age published in The Lord of th e Rings  (especially the appendices), The 
Silmarillion, Unfinished Tales, various volumes of The History of Middle -Earth, 
and The Nature of Middle-Earth. As the title suggests, the volume mostly focuses 
on Númenor rather than Middle -earth, though of course the exploits of the 
Númenóreans in Middle -earth mean that there are a number of stories about and 
references to that continent. At the same time,  Amazon Prime Video released the 
first season (eight episodes) of the series The Lord of the Rings: The Rings o f 
Power. As most Tolkien fans know, this series has very little to do with The Lord 
of the Rings—though there are some characters who are involved in the War of the 
Rings at the end of the Third Age , e.g., Elrond, Galadriel, and Sauron . But The 
Rings of Po wer is set in the Second Age, in Númenor and in Middle -earth, and 
features some figures from that time mentioned in Tolkien’s writings , e.g., Gil-
Galad, Celebrimbor, Durin III and IV, A r-Pharazôn, Míriel, Isildur, and Elendil. 
There are also freely invented characters such as a sister for Isildur named Eärien; 
a leader of the Uruk called Adar; a number of Elves; an entire group of proto -
Hobbits; and a mysterious individual who falls from the sky.  The plot of the first 
season of The Rings of Power  centered a round Galadriel’s search for Sauron, 
Sauron’s emergence, the discovery of mithril by the dwarves, the production of 
rings of power by Celebrimbor and others, and the travails of the band of proto -
Hobbits—all in the Second Age. This recent popularity of the Second Age, whether 
in Tolkien’s own words in The Fall of Númenor or in the imagination of the show-
runners of The Rings of Power, raises the question of what the significance of this 
period is for Tolkien’s legendarium as a whole. 
With The Silmarillion  and The Lord of the Rings , the major published 
narratives in Tolkien’s legendarium are set in the First and the Third Ages  
respectively. In contrast, the Second Age only has one major completed story, the 
“Akallabêth” or Fall  (or Downfall)  of Númenor , which Tolkien himself never 
published in fully developed form.  For that reason  among others, many scholars 
either ignore the Second Age entirely or dismiss it without much consideration. For 
instance, Toby Widdicombe writes in J.R.R. Tolkien: A Guide for  the Perplexed 
that “conceptually that [Second] age was always too tightly bound up with the 
Atlantis story” (95)—at the very least ignoring the Noachian echoes1—and asserts 
 
1 As Marie Barnfield explains, the Númenor  legend incorporates influence at least from Greek 
legend (Atlantis), Israel (in Númenor’s religion), ancient Egypt (culture), and Celtic myth (in the 
foundered kingdom, the link between the health of the king and the country, and the physical 
1
Schürer: Second Age, Middle Age
Published by ValpoScholar, 2022

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
that the story is “hackneyed” (95). In The Road to Middle -Earth, Tom Shippey 
reduces the Second Age to “that of Númenor” (226).  In writing about the 
“Akallabêth,” Brian Rosebury praises “[t]he simplicity and grandeur of its themes” 
(107), but he concludes that there is an “unfulfilled promise” (108) in the material 
on the Second Age in  The Silmarillion as well as Unfinished Tales. Even when 
Peter Grybauskas recognizes the “sprawling allusive web” of the Second Age and 
calls the Last Alliance “an untold tale essential to plot and theme” (26), he is 
contextualizing the era and story for The Lord of the Rings  rather than analyzing 
the Second Age for its own sake. 
Yet the Second Age is physically and geographically distinct from the other 
ages and carries its own meaning . As Widdicombe points out, “For almost all of 
the Second Age, much of Middle-earth looked markedly different from the Middle-
earth with which the general reader of Tolkien’s work is familiar from The Lord of 
the Rings ” (104). More specifically, at the beginning of the age “some is lands 
disappear and new ones are formed, hills are leveled, and rivers take new 
directions” (104). In addition, the Second Age stands out because it is actually the 
longest: The First Age (not counting the Years of the Lamps and Trees) only has 
590 years and the Third Age has 3021, but the Second Age counts 3441. In a review 
of The Fall of Númenor, Douglas Kane writes that the Second Age “is an important 
part of the legendarium in and of itself” (1).  What then is the significance of th is 
Second Age for Tolkien’s legendarium? 
The answer I propose to this question is premised on the conviction that the 
true significance of the legendarium lies not in itself, but in its application to our 
world. As is well-known, Tolkien rejected the idea that there was any all egory in 
The Lord of the Rings , and indeed I would submit that there are no  successful 
allegorical interpretations of that novel. Presumably, Tolkien would have extended 
his view of allegory to his entire legendarium. In the same foreword to the second 
edition of The Lord of the Rings  where he formulated his rejection of allegory, 
however, Tolkien offered the idea that his story could be ‘applied’ to the real world, 
and a similar ‘application’ might help us understand better the significance of the 
Second Age (Lord of the Rings xxiv). 
My exploration of th at significance proceeds in two steps. First, i n my 
opinion, the Second Age constitutes the Middle Ages or medieval period of 
Tolkien’s universe. Tolkien was a scholar of medieval language and literature, and 
it is quite possible that he considered this period central to any understanding of 
English culture and history. Whereas many scholars of his time interpreted the 
Middle Ages as an aberration between glorious antiquity and an even more glorious 
present, Tolkien himself saw it as the most important period  of history, or at least 
 
structure of the island). In spite of her subtitle “Númenor and the Second Age,” however, Barnfield 
hardly discusses the Second Age as such. 
2
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 15 [2022], Iss. 2, Art. 6
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol15/iss2/6

===== PAGE 5 =====
 
European history. If we ‘apply’ this understanding to the legendarium, it seems to 
me that the Second Age becomes the pivot around which all of Middle-earth moves. 
The second step of my answer to the question above has two parts. On the 
one hand, I argue, Tolkien sees the Second Age as central because, like the Middle 
Ages on our earth to which he devoted his academic career, it looks backwards and 
forwards in a unique way that helps us understand our own time better while 
anchoring our present in a distant past.2 As Grybauskas explains, here “[t]he author 
himself is in search of […] sour ce and import” (28).  On the other hand, in my 
interpretation, the Second Age can never fulfill Tolkien’s desire to give his 
legendarium and universe a center and meaning. Instead, it mostly consists of an 
absent center, and the few stories that exist demonstrate the decline and failure that 
are actually truly representative of the human condition.  As Rosebury puts it, 
Tolkien here presents a “dark, disillusioned view of human experience” (108).  
While the First Age and the Third Age end with a kind of redemption in the victories 
over Morgoth and Sauron respectively, the climax of the Second Age offers little 
optimism or hope for improvement. The stories show the failure and corruption of 
humanity both in their content, like the moral and geological fall of Númenor, and 
in their form, i.e., the fact that so many of them are fragmentary and unfinished. 
In a way, then, I am presenting a deconstructive interpretation here: I am  
looking at what the text and the critics marginalize, and I focus on what is not there 
rather than what is there. My argument proceeds in three main sections: I examine 
Tolkien’s assessment of the Middle Ages in our world in his correspondence and 
scholarly work; I investigate the place of the Second Age in several large 
frameworks or overviews that Tolkien constructed over the decades for his entire 
legendarium; and I analyze the significance of the few more or less developed 
narratives we have from the Second Age. 
 
Middle Ages 
 
The Middle Ages in our world are generally defined as beginning with the fall of 
the Roman Empire in 476 CE after a glorious past in antiquity. At the later end, the 
period moves into  the Reformation, the Early Modern Period, or the 
Enlightenment—a new period of glory . According to Chris Wickham, the Middle 
Ages were often treated by historians as transitional and dismissible, “a long period 
of random violence, ignorance and superstition” (4).  Many scholars were and are 
mostly interested in what followed the period, but as Wickham cautions: “History 
is not teleological: that is to say historical development does not go to; it goes from” 
(1). In addition, the adjective ‘medieval’ “was a negative word from the start, and 
has often remained one” (Wickham 3).  The Middle Ages were sometimes also 
 
2 I am not arguing that Tolkien consciously constructed his legendarium with this meaning in mind, 
only that this constitutes a legitimate interpretation of the published material on the Second Age. 
3
Schürer: Second Age, Middle Age
Published by ValpoScholar, 2022

===== PAGE 6 =====
 
referred to as the Dark Ages, introducing another adjective that Tolkien uses 
frequently in his legendarium. In linguistic terms, the Middle Ages in England in 
particular encompass the two historical stages of the English language on which 
Tolkien spent most of his professional career: Old English (then often called Anglo-
Saxon) and Middle English. Tolkien published one of his early academic essays, 
“Sigelwara Land,” in the journal Medium Aevum, which is a common Latin version 
of the term Middle Ages.3 
To my knowledge, Tolkien never really articulated why  exactly he found 
the Middle Ages so fascinating and why he made them the center of his academic 
career, and critics have not addressed the question head -on.4 There are two 
excellent collections on Tolkien and the Middle Ages, but Tolkien the Medievalist 
only dedicates its first part to Tolkien’s own medieval scholarship (mostly in 
relation to other scholars and friends), while Tolkien’s Modern Middle Ages focuses 
on ‘medievalism,’ i.e., the way Tolkien and other scholars use and instrumentalize 
the medieval period for other purposes. As Jane Chance and Alfred Siewers point 
out in their introduction to the latter  volume, Tolkien came from a Victorian 
tradition of medieval scholarship that “helped shape resistance and social responses 
to modernization, industrialization, and the development of modern gender and 
racial identities” (3) —so medieval scholarship served a contemporaneous 
ideological agenda rather than i nvestigating the Middle Ages on their own terms.  
Nevertheless, there seems to be a scholarly consensus that, as Thomas Honegger 
puts it, Tolkien’s “academic work determined the way he saw himself personally 
and professionally” (“Tolkien,” 51). 
In the absen ce of direct statements from Tolkien as well as pertinent 
scholarship, perhaps some hints as to why Tolkien was so excited about the Middle 
Ages can be gathered from his biography and his scholarly publications. I propose 
that the reasons for Tolkien’s fascination with the Middle Ages in our world suggest 
that the Second Age was central to his invented universe.  Humphrey Carpenter 
writes that at Oxford, where Tolkien had enrolled to study Classics, he was soon 
“bored with Latin and Greek authors and was far  more excited by Germanic 
literature” (62), though it remains unclear what form that excitement took  beyond 
 
3 In his letter to Milton Waldman (see below), Tolkien speaks of the Third Age of Middle-earth as 
“a Twilight Age, a Medium Aevum” ( Letters 154), but in my assessment that passage plac es the 
time of The Lord of the Rings  between the First Age and our time. Similarly, I am discounting the 
brief foray Tolkien made into a sequel to The Lord of the Rings  in the Fourth Age in “The New 
Shadow” (Peoples 409-21). 
4 Many, many critics have exami ned parallels and similarities between the Middle Ages and the 
legendarium, but mostly in order to illuminate the latter. To pick one classical example, Jane Chance 
writes: “Just as Tolkien the man in the primary world became attracted to an earlier age—the Middle 
Ages—instead of finding interest in the twentieth century, so Tolkien the sub -creator in the 
secondary world became attracted to its earlier age” (32) . Chance does not speculate, however, on 
any reasons for the first attraction. 
4
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 15 [2022], Iss. 2, Art. 6
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol15/iss2/6

===== PAGE 7 =====
 
his academic pursuits and clubs. In 1913, Tolkien officially changed from Classics 
to the Honour School of English Language and Literature. The spli t in th at name 
often indicated that a student focused either on comparative philology  (today 
usually called historical linguistics) or on modern literature —a fact that Tolkien 
bemoaned in his “Valedictory Address” ( Monsters 229-36). Tolkien for his part 
was certainly interested in languages, also studying Welsh and Finnish at the time, 
but additionally he read widely in literature from the linguistic periods he focused 
on. It is well known that one major inspiration for his entire legendarium was two 
lines from the Old English poem Crist I from the Exeter Book, written or compiled 
in the ninth or tenth century, that included the word or term ‘Earendel.’ 
In 1923, Tolkien wrote in a letter that “Middle English is an exciting field—
almost uncharted I begin to t hink” (Letters 11), so perhaps in addition to simple 
excitement professional opportunities were one of his motivations.  In 1937, he 
rejected the idea that studying Old English was “abstruse” —apparently a wide -
spread opinion even in the 1930s —and asserted i nstead that its literature touches 
on “human concerns” ( Letters 21). In 1944, he told his son Christopher that Old 
English was a “noble idiom” (Letters 102). Even later, in 1955, Tolkien wrote that 
it was “as much due to descent as to opportunity that Anglo -Saxon and Western 
Middle English and alliterative verse have been both a childhood attraction and my 
main professional sphere” ( Letters 218). This sentence reinforces the impression 
that Tolkien was interested in professional opportunities, and it introduces the idea 
of an inherited connection to specific earlier forms of the English language. 
As Honegger has noted  (“Academic Writings”) , Tolkien went on  
throughout his academic career to write extensively about two canonical texts: the 
Old English Beowulf and the Middle English Sir Gawain and the Green Knight . 
With regard to Beowulf, Tolkien wrote that the poem was successful “in creating in 
the minds of the poet’s contemporaries the illusion of survey ing a past, pagan but 
noble and fraught with deep significance—a past that itself had depth and reached 
backward into a dark antiquity of sorrow” (Monsters 27). Perhaps this passage can 
be adapted to explain Tolkien ’s fascination with the Middle Ages: they  look 
backwards towards a significant and noble antiquity, while they also look forwards 
to modernity. This liminal state, being  undetermined and in the middle, may have 
been exactly what Tolkien considered important himself. As Mark Atherton puts it 
(with regard to looking forwards) , Tolkien “came to appreciate the connections 
with the language of the present day; this was English, but English in an earlier 
form, familiar but distant” (217). Atherton also asserts that in Beowulf the story, the 
style, and the mythical treatment of important topics such as light and dark appealed 
to Tolkien. 
On a different level, Tolkien was interested in bringing Old and Middle 
English texts and knowledge about them  to wider audiences through editions, 
translations, and presentations. As Dimitra Fimi has shown, Tolkien provided radio 
5
Schürer: Second Age, Middle Age
Published by ValpoScholar, 2022

===== PAGE 8 =====
 
programs to the BBC as early as the 1930s. In December 1953, the BBC broadcast 
Tolkien’s translation of Sir Gawain  in four parts  (Solopova 234) , and th ose 
broadcasts were repeated in September 1954 (Letters 444, note 148.1). According 
to Tolkien himself, the BBC were “clamouring for Gawain” (Letters 183). At the 
same time, he published an article titled “A Fourteenth -Century Romance” in the 
popular Radio Times. Looking backwards, T olkien points out that the poem has 
“roots deep in the almost forgotten pagan past of north Europe, and of Ireland and 
Britain in particular” and that the “[t]he reshaping of the inherited material by a 
mind of the fourteenth century, concerned with the problems and ideals of conduct 
at that period, is as interesting to observe as is, say Shakespeare’s in similar cases, 
such as King Lear” (“Romance” 9). Specifically, the author(s) of Sir Gawain were 
trying to rescue Old English alliterative verse from the p ast and using antiquated 
vocabulary. Looking forwards, Tolkien argues that the merits of the poem “entitle 
it to a hearing still, some five hundred and fifty years since it was written” 
(“Romance” 9). 
On January 3, 1954, Tolkien gave a talk on Sir Gawain on the BBC, which 
Christopher Tolkien later used “in slightly reduced form” (Gawain ix) for the 
introduction to the published version of Tolkien’s translation s Sir Gawain and the 
Green Knight, Pearl, Sir Orfeo . Here, Tolkien praises the  Gawain author’s 
technical abilities, but also the construction of the hero : “in terms of literature, 
undoubtedly this break in the mathematical perfection of an ideal creature, inhuman 
in flawlessness, is a great improvement” ( Gawain 7). According to Tolkien, “the 
movements of the English mind in the fourteenth century” are important because 
“from [them] much of our sentiment and ideals of conduct have been derived” 
(Gawain 7f.). At the same time, he wrote in his more academic lecture on Sir 
Gawain—in language simil ar to the popular article in the Radio Times—that the 
poem “has deep roots in the past, deeper even than its author was aware. It is made 
of tales often told before and elsewhere, and of elements that derive from remote 
times, beyond the vision or awarenes s of the poet : like Beowulf” (Monsters 72). 
Here, once again but in a different way, the Middle Ages reach into the distant past, 
while they also form the foundation of our modern times. In addition, as Elizabeth 
Solopova notes, “Middle English literature reflects beliefs that humans share the 
earth with other races” (236), and Tolkien took  from medieval literature  his 
representation of the Elves as forceful rather than fanciful beings. 
For Michael Drout, the singular achievement of Tolkien’s medieval 
scholarship is that, “He could bring to bear a literary sensibility that was informed 
by philological knowledge and at the same time use the detail and rigor of philology 
to understand literary works” (151). It stands to reason that Tolkien intended to 
create for his own world a similar age that looked backwards and forwards, through 
etymological significance and rhetorical construction —and make that age the 
center of his universe. My argument, of course, is that this was the Second Age of 
6
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 15 [2022], Iss. 2, Art. 6
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol15/iss2/6

===== PAGE 9 =====
 
Middle-earth. At the s ame time, I submit, Tolkien was not and could not be 
successful in his project to create such a center for the legendarium. 
 
Frameworks and Overviews 
 
Tolkien located the Second Age of his legendarium in various frameworks and 
overviews that suggest different kinds of meaning and spell out connections 
backwards and forwards to varying degrees.  As Brian Sibley writes in the 
introduction to The Fall of Númenor , “readers had their first tantalizing glimps es 
of that past history, providing a richly tapestried backdrop to the struggle by the 
Free Peoples of Middle-earth against Sauron and the forces of Mordor” in The Lord 
of the Rings (xix). The first text in which readers encounter the Second Age directly 
(rather than in these glimpses ) is the appendices to The Lord of the Rings , 
specifically Appendix B, “The Tale of Years.” According to Widdicombe, Tolkien 
uses this appendix as an “opportunity to stress the camaraderie among peoples (in 
this case elves and dwarves)” (95). In my assessment, in contrast, the appendix 
presents a much less positive view of the world . For instance, Tolkien’s first 
paragraph about the Second Age reads:  “These were the dark years for Men of 
Middle-earth, but the years of the glory of Númenor. Of events in Middle-earth the 
records are few and brief, and their dates are often uncertain” ( Lord of the Rings  
1082). This paragraph immediately distinguishes two groups of humans: those in 
Middle-earth and those in Númenor. The two groups differ in their fates: the former 
experience “dark years,” the latter are at their most luminous height. In that sense, 
Shippey is correct in calling the Second Age “that of Númenor” ( Road 226), but 
that requires erasing the history of Middle-earth. It is probably no coincidence that 
“Dark Ages” is often used as a synonym for the Middle Ages, so Tolkien is aligning 
the men of Middle -earth with the period he studied  in his academic pursuits . 
However, Tolkien actually hardly ever talks about the Men of Middle -earth in his 
writings on the Second Age  and only sometimes refers backwards from The Lord 
of the Rings , as to the men of Dunharro w (Grybauskas 28). Instead,  he almost 
always focuses on Númenóreans or on Elves.  In my interpretation, this is a first 
instance of the absence at the center of the Second Age, one which Tolkien 
unsuccessfully tried to fill with his story “Tal-Elmar” (see below). 
The text in the appendices to The Lord of the Rings specifies that “records” 
of the Second Age are rare . Even when they exist, they are not much perused:  as 
Grybauskas points out , Isildur’s narrative regarding the One Ring, for instance, 
written at the very end of the Second Age, “sat unread for three millen nia” (26). 
Similarly, the various narratives of the Second Age emphasize again and again how 
many records are lost in the destruction of Númenor.  That leaves open the 
possibility that much more happened than the events enumerated in the following 
barely more than one-page list of years in the appendices. For instance, the story of 
7
Schürer: Second Age, Middle Age
Published by ValpoScholar, 2022

===== PAGE 10 =====
 
Aldarion and Erendis, published in Unfinished Tales, is not even mentioned in that 
list. Indeed, there are gaps in the chronology of three, four, or even five hundred 
years between 40 and 442, 1200 and c. 1500, c.1800 and 2250, 2350 and 2899, all 
of which suggest absences . Of course, for Tolkien, records are significant, since 
they can be studied. In contrast, it could be argued that the absence of records either 
demonstrates the contingency of writin g and language or symbolizes the absent 
transcendental signifier at the center of meaning that brings down any attempt to 
create stable significance—in this case, a coherent narrative of the Second Age. 
Tolkien presents a similar framework in his famous letter to Milton 
Waldman, an editor at Longman, from around 1951. Here, Tolkien calls the Second 
Age his “next cycle” after the First Age and uses similar language about this being 
a “dark age” (Letters 150) He specifies that “not very much of its history is (or need 
be) told” (Letters 150). The parenthesis deserves some exploration: Did the history 
the Second Age not need to be told because there were no stories, or because those 
stories were insignificant? In his letter, Tolkien goes on to name two stories for the 
Second Age: The Rings of Power , probably the inspiration for the title of the 
Amazon series, and the Downfall of Númenor. Tolkien allows that Sauron initially 
repents from his actions in the Firs t Age and  begins the Second Age “with fair 
motives: the reorganising and rehabilitation of the ruin of Middle-earth, ‘neglected 
by the gods’” (Letters 151)—before turning back to evil. Tolkien names three main 
themes for the Second Age: “The Delaying Elves that lingered in Middle -earth; 
Sauron’s growth to a new Dark Lord, master and god of men; and Numenor -
Atlantis” (Letters 151). I would argue, however, that these are not really themes, 
but episodes , and that the real themes of the Second Age are pride, corruption, 
decay, and failure. Tolkien writes that the Elves are trying to avoid decay, and he 
mentions “an inner weakness in Men” ( Letters 154) that in spite of  Númenor’s 
“days of Pride and Glory” ( Letters 155) ultimately leads to her downfall. In other 
words, even though Númenor temporarily experiences pride and glory, all of 
Middle-earth and Númenor eventually succumbs to the Dark Ages. 
In his letter to Waldman, Tolkien writes that The Rings of Pow er and the 
Downfall of Númenor are “dealt with annalistically, and in two Tales or Accounts” 
(Letters 151)—the structure that Sibley adopted for The Fall of Númenor . These 
tales or accounts are perhaps the annals collected in the section “The Tale of Years 
of the Second Age” in The Peoples of Middle -earth, which mentions seven 
manuscripts or typescripts, T(a) and T(b) as well as T 1 -5, most with additional 
annotations. These annals —meaning lists of years or spans with brief summaries 
of what happened during that time—also have significant gaps: For instance, both 
T1 and T4 simply list the years 2000-3000 as one entry where “Sauron’s dominion 
slowly extends over all Middle -earth” (Peoples T1, 169) and “The Númenóreans 
now make permanent dwellings on the shores of Middle-earth, seeking wealth and 
dominion; they build many havens and fortresses” ( Peoples T4, 175). The second 
8
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 15 [2022], Iss. 2, Art. 6
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol15/iss2/6

===== PAGE 11 =====
 
sentence here in particular suggests that Tolkien’s perspective is predominantly 
Númenoréan. 
Some of the gaps are filled out by “The Line of Elros: Kings of Númenor” 
in Unfinished Tales, which for instance lists Tár-Miriel, who more recently featured 
in Amazon’s The Rings of Power. What Tolkien mostly fleshes out here, though, is 
the slow descent of the Númenóre an kings, from Tar -Ciryatan, who is “greedy of 
wealth” (Unfinished Tales 221) and dies in 2029, to Tar -Atanamir, who “was the 
first of the Kings to refuse to lay down his life, or to renounce the scepter” and died 
in 2386 ( Unfinished Tales  221), to Tar -Calmacil, during whose time before his 
death in 2825 “the name of the King was first spoken in Adûnaic” (Unfinished Tales 
222), to Ar-Adûnakhôr, who took the blasphemous title “Lord of the West” before 
he died in 2962.  At the same time, Elves are banned from Númenor, and the 
connection between the Elves in Valinor and those in Middle-earth grows more and 
more tenuous. These developments contribute to the impression that the Second 
Age is a time of decay and decline, both among Elves and Men. 
Finally, the Second Age serves as the focal point for Tolkien’s “The Lost 
Road” and “The Notion Club Papers ,” incomplete stories that use time travel as a 
framework (and that are reprinted in part in The Fall of Númenor ). In “The Lost 
Road” (Lost Road 39-116) a father and a son turn out to be reincarnated over and 
over again with etymologically similar names, and towards the end of the surviving 
manuscript the twentieth-century British Alboin and Audoin Errol find themselves 
as Elendil and Herendil in the middle of the story of the downfall of Númenor. In 
“The Notion Club Papers”  (Sauron Defeated 143-327) two Oxford dons from a 
literary club suspiciously similar to the Inklings have a vision or dream that includes 
Númenor. In other words, in the few instances where Tolkien de liberately tried to 
tie his legendarium to our world, he did so through the Second Age. 
My conclusion from this brief analysis of the frameworks and overviews, 
then, is that Tolkien attempts to link the Second Age more closely to our time than 
any other pe riod in his legendarium, which I interpret as him giving it a special 
significance. He tries to explicate that significance with the rise of Númenor  and 
names stories he is developing. These stories look back to the First Age and 
forwards to the Third, for instance in the presence of Sauron. Yet ultimately the 
Second Age emerges as a time of decline, decay, corruption, and failure. Since these 
developments are not in Tolkien’s plan, they cannot be developed, which he 
explains with the construct that they  were not much recorded. That makes the 
Second Age dark in two senses: the developments were bad, and the record is bad. 
There are large gaps in the history of the Second Age, which leave it wide open to 
interpretation. The absence of a record, however, is not the same as an absence of 
significance, and in any case Tolkien did write some stories set in the Second Age, 
to which I turn next. 
 
9
Schürer: Second Age, Middle Age
Published by ValpoScholar, 2022

===== PAGE 12 =====
 
Stories 
 
If the Second Age of Middle-earth corresponds with the Middle Ages in our world, 
and if Tolkien considered the Middle Ages the most important era in our world, 
that raises the question: Why didn’t Tolkien write more stories set in the Second 
Age? On the one ha nd, it is possible that Tolkien was intentionally leaving the 
Second Age open so that others could insert into that period what they considered 
most significant about Middle -earth—as The Rings of Power  is arguably doing . 
Conversely, Tolkien may have been u ncertain himself about what he considered 
central to his imagined universe and hence uncertain about what stories to provide. 
In that vein, I argue that Tolkien consciously wanted to provide a positive view of 
humanity and a quasi-Christian teleology, but unconsciously found himself pulled 
back into darkness  again and again —and for that reason was unable to fully 
develop his stories. In the process, a darker view of human nature emerged. 
By my count, there are about six more or less  significant narratives set in 
the Second Age.5 The most extensive story, and really the only completed story, is 
the “Akallabêth” or “The Downfall of Númenor.” This was originally published in 
The Silmarillion (309-38), and various earlier versions are available in the section 
“The Drowning of Anadûnê” in Sauron Defeated (329-440) as well as the section 
“The History of the Akallabêth” from The Peoples of Middle-earth (140-65). Then 
there are three narratives in “Part Two: The Second Age” in Unfinished Tales (163-
267). These include the geographical and somewhat anthropological “Description 
of the Island  of Númenor ” and the annalistic “The Line of Elros: Kings of 
Númenor.” “Galadriel and Celeborn” consists of various parts and passages  from 
various periods in Tolkien’s life, but there is no sustained narration. “Aldarion and 
Erendis” is the lengthiest story from the Second Age (apart from the “Akallabêth”), 
but disappointingly lacks a developed ending. Finally, Tolkien’s fragment “Tal -
Elmar,” published in The Peoples of Middle -earth (422-38), is set in the Second 
Age. Still, Grybauskas is correct when he writes that the Second Age “in many 
regards remains only ‘sketched,’ never assuming the same depth and breadth of the 
legends of the Elder Days” (27). What then is the significance of these stories? 
The “Description of the Island  of Númenor” and “The Line of Elros”  are 
both rather short at 8-10 pages. The “Description” characterizes the geology and 
geography of Númenor , and there is some incidental information on the nature, 
agriculture, economy, infrastructure, art, and religion of the island. The description 
 
5 I refer to the original publications here rather than The Fall of Númenor because some of the stories 
are split up into different sections there, because not all of “The Lost Road” and “The Notion Club 
Papers” is included, and because “Tal-Elmar” is missing entirely. There are also several sections in 
The Nature of Middle -Earth that describe the aging of the Númenoréans, the anthropology and 
zoology of Númenor, and the end of the island, but in my assessment they make no major 
contributions to understanding the significance of the Second Age. 
10
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 15 [2022], Iss. 2, Art. 6
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol15/iss2/6

===== PAGE 13 =====
 
may be important because Númenor is geographically at the center of Arda in this 
age, halfway between Middle -earth to the east and Valinor to the west, as the 
Second Age forms the chronological center of the legendarium. “Elros,” as I 
discussed earlier, simply lists every king and queen of Númenor, with a brief  
description of their reign. Both of these texts flesh out the Second Age, at least with 
regard to Númenor, in areas that none of the other stories cover. In my assessment, 
they represent attempts on Tolkien’s part to connect the era to what preceded and 
followed it by way of geography and heritage. Neither of them, however, sheds 
much light on the significance of the Second Age. 
“The History of Galadriel and Celeborn” is more interesting in the context 
of the present argument because it reaches backwards and forwards in time, one of 
the main points of interest that Tolkien articulated for the Middle Ages in our world 
and in his frameworks and overviews of the legendarium. Galadriel’s story starts 
in the First Age, where she is apparently rather proud and strong-willed, though in 
most versions presented here at least she resists Fëanor. Notably, at the end of the 
First Age, “she refused the pardon of the Valar for all who had fought” (Unfinished 
Tales 230 f.) against Morgoth. On the other  (temporal) end, Galadriel’s 
involvement in the War of the Rings, her rule over Lothlórien, and her resistance 
to the temptation of the One Ring  are well -known. The story “Galadriel and 
Celeborn” mentions some of these details, but mostly it focuses on the movements 
of the couple in the Second Age. Here, I would argue, we see another possible 
significance of the Second Age: it is a time when individuals such as Galadriel can 
assess their past actions and determine what kind of person (or Elf , or Dwarf, or 
Hobbit) they want to be in the future. This is not to say that the Second Age is only 
important for beings that live across the ages, but rather that it reminds us  (when 
we apply it to our w orld), perhaps more than narratives from the First or Third 
Ages, that we are responsible for our own decisions and actions and can plot the 
course and meaning of our own lives. Interestingly, though, Tolkien was never able 
to give this arguably most posit ive story of the Second Age —a love story with a 
happy ending and a political tale with at least intermittent success —a completed 
form. I would speculate that the reason for this failure was that the story simply did 
not fit with the darker image of the human condition that was emerging in the texts 
about the Second Age. 
“Aldarion and Erendis” is fascinating because it traces some of the 
development of Númenórean imperialism and colonialism in Middle-earth. In fact, 
most critics who deal with “Aldarion and Erendis,” such as Elizabeth Hoiem and 
Alastair Whyte , focus on its postcolonial aspect s. But more importantly for the 
present argument, the story offers perhaps the most developed characters  (in the 
modern literary sense)  in all of Tolkien’s legendarium. The male protagonist is 
driven by ambition and passion, but he is not an evil person; the female protagonist 
is three-dimensional in a way that might come as a surprise to many readers of 
11
Schürer: Second Age, Middle Age
Published by ValpoScholar, 2022

===== PAGE 14 =====
 
Tolkien. At the same time, the imp licit feminism of the story may have disturbed 
Tolkien. If the story pointed forward s, it may have been towards what Tolkien 
probably would have considered the disturbing trends of women’s suffrage and 
empowerment in his twentieth century. For that reason, conceivably, he was unable 
to complete a story highlighting these developments. Along similar lines, the story 
(at least in my interpretation) portrays how two individuals who are both well -
meaning in their own way turn out to be incompatible, with sad co nsequences for 
both, not to mention their country . Once again, human darkness surfaces in a way 
that Tolkien consciously or unconsciously wanted to avoid. 
“Tal-Elmar” addresses similar topics, but from a different and much more 
confusing perspective. This is a story that only exists in an even more fragmentary 
state than “Galadriel and Celeborn”  or “Aldarion and Erendis,”  since there is 
neither a clear plot nor an ending. Instead, what is important for the present 
argument is the dizzying layering of people s and events. There are at least three 
layers of colonialism in this story (the conquest of the wild men by the people of 
Agar; the wars between the people of Agar and the people from the east; and the 
impending invasion by the Númenoréans) with the four p eoples involved. The 
situation is even more complicated, though, in that the eponymous hero and his 
grandmother seem to be mystically connected to Númenor, with Tal -Elmar 
speaking what Tolkien would in some linguistic writing call his ‘native tongue,’ 
i.e., a language anchored in his hereditary memory. 6 Here, the Second Age 
demonstrates the absence of a true center: each character in “Tal -Elmar” seems to 
have an identity, but in every case that identity is challenged or undermined  by 
revelations about the historical context, by decisions they make, or by events in the 
story. Arguably, Tolkien is here suggesting that the Second Age shows us that we 
never stand on firm ground. 
Similarly, the story of Númenor could be understood as the absent center of 
the Second Age, and of Tolkien’s entire legendarium. As Verlyn Flieger explains, 
the story of Númenor “redirected three important elements in the legendarium, 
notably the cosmology that shaped it, the theology that grew out of that cosmology, 
and the narrative structure that supported them both” (Fairy-Tale 214). At the same 
time, Tolkien was never quite able to sort and develop these elements of cosmology, 
theology, and narrative  to his satisfaction, so the story remained unfinished or at 
least unpublished. As a matter of fact, the story almost seems like a red herring  or 
dead end, since at the end of the Second Age, of course, the island disappears. In 
other words, Númenor is only an illusory anchor for the legendarium. This could 
be interpreted as the absence in the middle  of Tolkien’s mythology  that sets in 
motion the différance or supplementation throughout the legendarium. That in turn 
might explain Tolkien’s uncertainty about how to get to Númenor, for instance 
 
6 Tolkien explores this concept in his essay “English and Welsh” (Monsters 162-97). 
12
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 15 [2022], Iss. 2, Art. 6
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol15/iss2/6

===== PAGE 15 =====
 
through time travel in “The Lost Road” or reincarnation in the “ The Notion Club 
Papers.” It is interesting, though, that at least in one plan for “The Lost Road,” the 
fall of Númenor was supposed to be the end of the story (Flieger, Time 67). In other 
words, the Second Age here did not end with the victory of the Last Alliance over 
Sauron, but with the final corruption and destruction of Men, at least the Men who 
were supposed to be superior to the rest of Mannish creation. In my interpretation, 
this suggests that Tolkien saw the Second Age as demonstrating that the true nature 
of Men was to be morally bankrupt, easily corruptible by each other and even more 
easily by an evil power such as Sauron. This might be another explanation for why 
there are no more stories about the Second Age: it would have been more difficult 
for Tolkien to write about the dark side of humanity than compose more hopeful 
stories such as the victory over Morgoth in the First Age or the destruction of 
Sauron in the Third. 
 
Conclusion 
 
In my assessment, then, Tolkien’s view of the Middle Ages in our world, his various 
frames for the mythology of his legendarium, and the contents as well as  
fragmentary and unfinished nature of his stories point to a double conclusion  
regarding the significance of the Second  Age. For one, it seems that Tolkien was 
trying to put the Second Age at the center of his universe so that it could connect 
the First and Third Ages, both of which present quasi-Christian stories that end with 
sacrifice, but also hope and improvement. But secondly, Tolkien was never able to 
develop his time frame and stories fully because ultimately the Second Age always 
exposed the failure, decline, and corruption at the center of the human experience , 
which Tolkien as a Catholic Christian could not fully  accept or countenance. In 
other words, the Second Age presents the dark heart of the legendarium—not a 
pleasant conclusion, but one we need to face. 
 
References 
 
Atherton, Mark. “Old English.” A Companion to J.R.R. Tolkien . Ed. Stuart Lee. 
Malden, MA: Wiley Blackwell, 2014. 217-29. 
 
Barnfield, Marie. “More Celtic Influences: Númenor and the Second Age.” 
Mallorn #29 (August 1992): 6-13. 
 
Carpenter, Humphrey. J.R.R. Tolkien: A Biography (1977). Boston and New York: 
Houghton Mifflin, 2000. 
 
13
Schürer: Second Age, Middle Age
Published by ValpoScholar, 2022

===== PAGE 16 =====
 
Chance, Jane. Tolkien’s Art: A Mythology for England . Rev. ed. Lexington: 
University Press of Kentucky, 2001. 
 
Chance, Jane (ed.). Tolkien the Medievalist . New York and London: Routledge, 
2003. 
 
Chance, Jane and Alfred Siewers (eds.). Tolkien’s Modern Middle Ages. New York: 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2005. 
 
Drout, Michael.  “J.R.R. Tolkien’s Medieval Scholarship and Its Significance.” 
Tolkien Studies 4 (2007): 113-76. 
 
Fimi, Dimitra.  “Tolkien on 1930s BBC Radio  via Historical Issues of Radio 
Times.” <https://dimitrafimi.com/2019/01/03/tolkien-on-1930s-bbc-radio-
via-historical-issues-of-radio-times/>  
 
Flieger, Verlyn. A Question of Time: J.R.R. Tolkien’s Road to Fäerie . Kent, OH: 
Kent State University Press, 1997. 
 
—. There Would Always Be a Fairy-Tale: More Essays on Tolkien. Kent, OH: Kent 
State University Press, 2017. 
 
Grybauskas, Peter.  A Sense of Tales Untold: Exploring the Edges of Tolkien’s 
Literary Canvas. Kent, OH: Kent State University Press, 2021. 
 
Hoiem, Elizabeth Massa. “World Creation as Colonization: British Imperialism in 
‘Aldarion and Erendis.’” Tolkien Studies 2 (2005): 75-92. 
 
Honegger, Thomas. “Tolkien Through the Eyes of a Mediaevalist.” Reconsidering 
Tolkien. Ed. Thomas Honegger. [Zurich:] Walking Tree, 2005. 45-66. 
 
—. “Academic Writings.” A Companion to J.R.R. Tolkien. Ed. Stuart Lee. Malden, 
MA: Wiley Blackwell, 2014. 26-40. 
 
Kane, Douglas. Rev. of The Fall of Númenor (2022). By J.R.R. Tolkien, ed. Brian 
Sibley. The Journal of Tolkien Research 15.2 (2022): art. 5, 1-8. 
 
Rosebury, Brian. Tolkien: A Cultural Phenomenon . Houndsmill, Basingstoke and 
New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003. 
 
14
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 15 [2022], Iss. 2, Art. 6
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol15/iss2/6

===== PAGE 17 =====
 
Shippey, Tom. The Road to Middle -Earth. Boston and New York: Houghton 
Mifflin, 2003. 
 
—. “Tolkien As Editor.” A Companion to J.R.R. Tolkien. Ed. Stuart Lee. Malden, 
MA: Wiley Blackwell, 2014. 41-55. 
 
Solopova, Elizabeth. “Middle English.” A Companion to J.R.R. Tolkien. Ed. Stuart 
Lee. Malden, MA: Wiley Blackwell, 2014. 230-43. 
 
Tolkien, J.R.R.  “A Fourteen th-Century Romance.”  Radio Times  121.1569 
(December 6-12, 1953): 9. 
 
—. The Lord of the Rings (1954-55). 50th anniversary one-volume ed. Boston and 
New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2004. 
 
—. Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, Pearl, Sir Orfeo  (1975). Tr. J.R.R. Tolkien 
and ed. Christopher Tolkien. New York: Ballantine, 1980. 
 
—. The Silmarillion (1977). Ed. Christopher Tolkien. New York: Ballantine, 1979. 
 
—. Unfinished Tales of Númenor and Middle -Earth. Ed. Christopher Tolkien. 
Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1980. 
 
—. Letters. Ed. Humphrey Carpenter. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1981. 
 
—. The Monsters and the Critics and Other Essays  (1983). Ed. Christopher 
Tolkien. London: HarperCollins, 2006. 
 
—. The Lost Road and Other Writings  (1983) (=The History of Middle -Earth V). 
Ed. Christopher Tolkien. New York: Ballantine, 1987. 
 
—. Sauron Defeated (1992) (=The History of Middle -Earth IX). Ed. Christopher 
Tolkien. London: HarperCollins, 2002. 
 
—. The Peoples of Middle -Earth (1996) (=The History of Middle -Earth XII). Ed. 
Christopher Tolkien. London: HarperCollins, 2002. 
 
—. The Nature of Middle-Earth. Ed. Carl Hostetter. London: HarperCollins, 2021. 
 
—. The Fall of Númenor. Ed. Brian Sibley. New York: William Morrow, 2022. 
 
15
Schürer: Second Age, Middle Age
Published by ValpoScholar, 2022

===== PAGE 18 =====
 
Whyte, Alastair. “Many a Tale of Dread: The Dystopian Interface of 
Totalitarianism and Colonial Imperialism in the Númenor Narratives of 
J.R.R. Tolkien.” Journal of Language, Literature and Culture  67.2-3 
(2020): 83-96. 
 
Wickham, Chris. Medieval Europe . New Haven and London: Yale University 
Press, 2016. 
 
Widdicombe, Toby. J.R.R. Tolkien: A Guide for the Perplexed . London and New 
York: Bloomsbury Academic, 2020. 
16
Journal of Tolkien Research, Vol. 15 [2022], Iss. 2, Art. 6
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol15/iss2/6