

 CEEOL - Article Detail

Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies. Learn more. I agree

 All Content
 PDF Content
 Author Name
 Series Title
 Journal Title
 Book Title
 Grey Literature Title
 Publisher
 Key Words
 ISBN
 ISSN

 Advanced Search

 Download

 Między historią a fantazją. Mediewalizm i głos kobiet w "Pieśni dla Arbonne" Guya Guvriela Kaya

Between history and fantasy. Medievalism and the voice of women in Guy Gavriel Kay’s “A Song of Arbonne” 

Author(s): Sylwia Borowska-Szerszun
Subject(s): Studies of Literature
Published by: Ośrodek Badawczy Facta Ficta
Keywords: allohistory; medievalism; Guy Gavriel Kay; A Song for Arbonne; fantasy; women

Summary/Abstract: The article predominantly aims to examine the ways in which Guy Gavriel Kay’s construction of medievalism in A Song for Arbonne exposes the forgotten voice of women of the Middle Ages. The analysis is contextualized through presenting the parallels between the processes inherent in both medievalism and cultural memory to argue that medievalism in fantasy literature can be seen as a vehicle of popular remembrance. Diverting from the Tolkienian model of fantasy fiction, A Song for Arbonne – an example of allohistory – is read as a text that offers an alternative vision of the medieval period and undermines hegemonic views of the past, implying that medievalist fantasy may play a more active role as a medium of cultural memory, transforming rather than perpetuating a clichéd and male-centred image of the Middle Ages.

Details

Contents

Journal: Creatio Fantastica

Issue Year: 60/2019 

Issue No: 1

Page Range: 27-40 

Page Count: 14

Language: Polish

Content File-PDF

 Back to list

Related Content

 Fantastyczny tygiel
 A Fantastic Crucible
 0

 The Interplay of the Domestic and the Uncanny in Susanna Clarke’s Jonathan Strange and Mr Norrell
 The Interplay of the Domestic and the Uncanny in Susanna Clarke’s Jonathan Strange and Mr Norrell
 2015

 The giants beneath: Cultural memory and literature in Kazuo Ishiguro’s The Buried Giant
 The giants beneath: Cultural memory and literature in Kazuo Ishiguro’s The Buried Giant
 2016

 Fantastyczny tygiel. Synkretyzm gatunkowy i kulturowy w cyklu urban fantasy Bena Aaronovitcha "Rzeki Londynu"
 A Fantastic Crucible: Genological and Cultural Syncretism in Ben Aaronovitch Urban Fantasy Series “Rivers of London”
 2018

 Literatura Niewidocznego — wizje i rewizje urban fantasy
 Literature of the Unseen—Visions and (Re)visions of Urban Fantasy
 2018

 2026 © CEEOL. ALL Rights Reserved.
 Privacy Policy | Terms & Conditions of use | Accessibility

ver2.0.819

 ×Close

Login CEEOL

 ×

 Username (Email)

 Password

 My New User Account

 Forgot Password
 Register

 ×
 {{forgottenPasswordMessage.Message}}

Enter your Username (Email) below.

 Username (Email)

 Send

 Institutional Login

 Login
 Cancel

