 
 Altering the Familiar: Tigana by Guy Gavriel Kay | Tor.com 
 Tor.com 
 Science fiction. Fantasy. The universe. And related subjects. 
 Main menu 
 Skip to content 
 Fiction 
 Series 
 Publishing 
 Newsletter 
 Search 
 Search 
 Log In 
 Register 
 That Was Awesome 
 That Was Awesome! Writers on Writing 
 Altering the Familiar: Tigana by Guy Gavriel Kay 
 Joshua Palmatier 
 Wed Jul 6, 2016 12:30pm 
7 comments 
 1 Favorite [+] 
 As an aspiring writer and voracious fantasy reader years (and years) ago, the aspect that intrigued me most and kept me reading and writing fantasy was the uniqueness of the world that could be found among the pages of each book. The arcane magic, the otherworldly creatures, and the never-before-seen races and creatures that inhabited the world captured my imagination and took me to new realms of awe and wonder. That is why it’s called fantasy, after all, isn’t it? The “new” is why we enjoy it so much, right? 
 So imagine the utter shock while reading Tigana by Guy Gavriel Kay that it was the familiar that made the new so special. 
 It changed the way I wrote and the way I read fantasy novels. I realized that, as an aspiring writer, I’d been attempting to worldbuild the wrong way. I was trying to create worlds anew from whole cloth—new cultures, new races, new magic, new everything. But after this epiphany, I realized that the only reason all of the newness—all of the magic, all of the creatures—was so interesting was because it was being contrasted against a backdrop that was essentially 90 percent familiar. The idea that in order for fantasy to work well, to have as much power as it has, comes from the fact that the majority of the world where it’s set is essentially the real world was, frankly, stunning. 
 I didn’t need to create a new creature or new culture; I could take a setting from the real world—past or present—and make it the base for a creature or culture instead. All I needed to do to make the familiar new and fresh was change small aspects of that world, or add in something new and determine how the world would have to change in order to accommodate it. 
 In Tigana , Guy Gavriel Kay creates a world centered on the culture of Italy. No, the peninsula isn’t shaped like a boot, and no, the culture isn’t exactly like Renaissance Italy, but the flavor of Italy is there—in the word structure, the place names, the characters; in the gestures, the traditions, the everyday force of life moving people forward. Behind the fantasy façade is a real-world foundation that’s recognizable, and it’s that familiarity that grounds the reader and provides them with stability for when the true magic of the world begins. 
 Needless to say, I devoured Tigana and then A Song for Arbonne and The Fionavar Tapestry and the many other worlds created by Guy Gavriel Kay. He is a master at taking a recognizable setting from our world—a place or a culture—and transforming it into something otherworldly, while still retaining that sense of the familiar, that sense of having been there . And isn’t that one of the most essential elements of fantasy writing? Aren’t we all attempting to create a world that makes the reader feel as if they’ve lived there? 
 How he does is it arcane in and of itself, and I must confess that after years of study of not only Guy Gavriel Kay’s novels, but practically every other fantasy novel I’ve read, I have still not divined fully his art. Certainly there are obvious alterations to bring the reader out of the familiar world and into the fantasy realm, such as having two moons or changing the landscape, but these are mere cosmetic changes. Kay’s craft is much more subtle. He alters the familiar through all aspects of life, down to arbitrary everyday rituals, including myths and legends and superstitions, such as the extremely powerful lore of the riselka in Tigana . Even thinking of the riselka now sends shivers down my back, evoking so effectively the chilling end to Tigana . Kay manages to take each such change—cosmetic or otherwise—and incorporate it into the familiar seamlessly. Each change not only alters the world, making it feel more fantastic, but also informs the world, shaping it at such depths that the reader cannot fathom removing that aspect from the world at all. It becomes intrinsic and informs and plays off of every other aspect of the world, until it can only be viewed as a whole, without separate parts. And that whole is also wholly new, even with that base of familiarity. 
 Most writers, when speaking of Guy Gavriel Kay’s work, talk of his deft and lyrical skill with language. His writing is evocative, even impressionistic in places, and certainly transports one to a different world with simple word choices and turns of phrase. But for me, the true art of Kay’s work is not in the use of language, but in the subtle way he skews what is so obviously a familiar setting into something fantastical and mysterious and completely different. That is the power of Guy Gavriel Kay’s work, and it is nothing short of awesome. 
 Joshua Palmatier is a writer and a mathematician. He was born in Pennsylvania, but has lived in numerous states over his life and currently resides in Binghamton, New York, and is a tenured professor of mathematics at Oneonta. Threading the Needle , the sequel to Shattering the Ley , is available July 5th from DAW. 
 Share: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window) Click to share on Tumblr (Opens in new window) Click to share on Pinterest (Opens in new window) 
 citation 
 That Was Awesome! Writers on Writing ‹ previous index next › Guy Gavriel Kay That Was Awesome That Was Awesome! Writers on Writing Tigana worldbuilding 
 Ten Expansive SFF Worlds to Fall Into 
 5 SFF Books With Queernormative Worlds 
 Navigating Middle-earth Before the Bending of the Seas 
 Damn, That’s Good: Pseudo-Profanity as SFF Worldbuilding 
 Back to the top of the page 
7 Comments 
 skip to newest 
 skip to unread 
 More Comments 
 Check for New Comments 
 This post is closed for comments. 
 Latest Posts 
 Vanessa Armstrong 
 Sarah Michelle Gellar Finally Gets to Be the Giles in New Paramount+ Series Wolf Pack 
 3 days ago 
 Chris Szego 
 Romance, Zombies, and Magic: K-Dramas for SFF Fans 
 3 days ago 
 Molly Templeton 
 Mike Flanagan’s The Midnight Club Won’t Meet Again 
 3 days ago 
 Emmet Asher-Perrin 
 Terry Pratchett Book Club: The Fifth Elephant , Part I 
 3 days ago 
 Molly Templeton 
 The Mandalorian Returns In Just Three Months 
 3 days ago 
 James Davis Nicoll 
 Five SF Stories About Ghost Ships 
 3 days ago 
 Molly Templeton 
 Not All Is Well In Space in the Trailer for Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 3 
 3 days ago 
 New in Series 
 The Fifth Elephant , Part I 
 Why Villains Monologue: N.K. Jemisin’s The City We Became (Part 13) 
 Superhero Rewatch: Barbarella and Vampirella 
 Reading A Crown of Swords (Part 6) 
 Star Trek: Enterprise Rewatch: “Regeneration” 
 Five Speculative Fiction Books Featuring Tarot 
 Rhythm of War Reread: Chapter One Hundred 
 all series 
 Recent Comments pjameijs on Ten Classic Science Fiction Cartoons From the Last Century 1 hour ago ohdeve on Can Any Book Truly Be Timeless? 7 hours ago Pat Conolly on Five SF Stories About Ghost Ships 8 hours ago kareni on Five SF Stories About Ghost Ships 8 hours ago Mr. Magic on A Generation’s Final Journey. Star Trek Nemesis 8 hours ago jaimebabb on A Generation’s Final Journey. Star Trek Nemesis 9 hours ago mschiffe on 45 Years Ago, Rankin & Bass’ The Hobbit Predicted the Future of Pop Culture 10 hours ago ChristopherLBennett on A Generation’s Final Journey. Star Trek Nemesis 11 hours ago jaimebabb on A Generation’s Final Journey. Star Trek Nemesis 12 hours ago bookworm1398 on Terry Pratchett Book Club: The Fifth Elephant , Part I 13 hours ago more comments 
 About 
 Submissions 
 Advertise 
 Archive 
 Search 
Follow Tor.com 
 Twitter 
 Facebook 
 Instagram 
 RSS 
Follow Tor.com Germany 
 Tor Germany Home 
 Twitter 
 Facebook 
 Instagram 
 Privacy Policy 
 Ads and Cookies 
 Terms of Use 
 Contact 
 © 2022 Macmillan | All stories, art, and posts are the copyright of their respective authors 
 Back to top 
Our Privacy Notice has been updated to explain how we use cookies, which you accept by continuing to use this website. To withdraw your consent, see Your Choices . 
