52 School Library Journal JUNE 2004 www.slj.com
Edwards Award winner Ursula K. Le Guin talks about 
her celestial body of work    By Francisca Goldsmith
Le Guin’s superb science fiction has attracted a follow-
ing that would make any writer envious. In fact, looking at
her vast readership of children, teens, and adults, it’s
tempting to think that the term “crossover artist” was
coined just for Le Guin. But she wasn’t always interested
in writing for such a wide-ranging audience. For years, Le
Guin wrote adult science fiction. That changed in 1967,
when she received an invitation from Herman Schein,
publisher of Parnassus Press, to create a story for kids. Le
Guin says she “wrote the whole book in five or six weeks,”
and it was soon published “with only a little gentle edit-
ing.” With its black heroes, white villains, exotic archipel-
ago setting, and mythic culture, A Wizard of Earthsea
(1968) resembled no other book published for young
adults. The coming-of-age fantasy earned its creator the
Boston Globe–Horn Book Award, and Le Guin’s career as
a writer was off and running.
Since then, the 74-year-old author has seldom stopped to
catch her breath, winning a National Book Award and a
Newbery Honor in 1972, five Neb-
ula awards, a handful of Hugos,
and a slew of other literary honors.
Her many redoubtable titles in-
clude The Tombs of Atuan(1971),
The Farthest Shore (1972), and
Tehanu (1990, all Atheneum), all
part of the Earthsea saga; The Left
Hand of Darkness (Walker, 1969);
and The Beginning Place(Harper-
Collins, 1980; o.p.).
Le Guin can still remember every one of the 57 stuffed
animals she had as a girl, growing up in Berkeley, CA. Her
father, Alfred Kroeber, was an anthropologist, and her
mother, Theodora, became a writer a few years before her
daughter’s career took flight. Le Guin graduated from Rad-
cliffe College in 1951, and a year later, earned a master’s de-
gree in French and Italian literature from Columbia
University. She and her husband, historian Charles Le
Guin, have three children and three grandchildren. Le
Guin now lives in Portland, OR, and is actively involved
with her local library, an institution that has befriended her
since childhood. Although she recalls high school as a “liv-
ing death,” she says, “Stopping at the library on my way
home saved me.” I interviewed Le Guin in late March.
Growing up in a family where anthropology was a lively topic, did
you think about the possibilities of life in alternative worlds?
Being the anthropologist’s daughter, I was living in the
household of a person who didn’t prioritize one culture over
t’s hard to imagine a more remarkable writer than Ursula K. Le Guin—
or a more deserving recipient of the Margaret A. Edwards Award for
lifetime contributions to young people’s literature. During the past 40
years, Le Guin has written more than 60 books, including 20 novels, 13
books for children, six volumes of poetry, and four volumes of trans-
lation, as well as countless essays, criticism, and screenplays. And her latest
novel, Gifts (Harcourt), is due out in September.
slj0406feat_LeGuin.qxd  5/20/04  11:58 AM  Page 52
www.slj.com JUNE 2004 School Library Journal 53
another. He didn’t have a hierarchy—a “the way we do it is
right and the way other people do it is wrong.” Of course, I
didn’t know that that was unusual. I just thought that was
the way things were. And the thing is, my father was inter-
ested in absolutely everything, he had that scientific curios-
ity, that lively inquisitiveness about how people do things.
Material culture, technology, and social institutions—all
that was just presented to me as being extremely interesting,
and so I found it so. That’s why I write about it. But I do it in
fiction. He had to deal with the real world, which is some-
what harder, I think, in some ways.
Do you remember the first story you ever wrote?
It was about a man—a writer—who is in an upstairs
room writing. Some evil elves are trying to get in through
the keyhole. In the end, they get him. It didn’t have a
happy ending…. I was about nine or 10, and it was meant
to be a picture of a man going
mad. I bet I’d been reading Saki
[by H. H. Munro]!
What else did you read?
When I began writing as a kid, I
was reading lots of folk and fairy
tales because they were all over
the house—the Grimm brothers,
[Hans Christian] Andersen, as
well as some [American] Indian
stories, which weren’t so com-
mon then. [Will James’s] Smokey
the Cow Horse , Bambi—those
were great animal books. I read
the children’s classics, like [Ken-
neth Grahame’s] The Wind in the
Willows, and [Lewis Carroll’s] Al-
ice in Wonderland. Reading Lord
Dunsany was an enormous reve-
lation to me at 11 or 12. I opened
the little leather volume of A
Dreamer’s Talesand whoosh!
Tell us about your struggles as a
writer before the success of A Wizard
of Earthsea ?
I had been writing both prose and
poetry ever since I was a kid, a lit-
tle kid, I mean. I started seriously
to try to get things published in
my twenties. I got poetry pub-
lished, which you can do if you just keep at it, because there
are a lot of little poetry magazines. But the prose fiction got
nowhere for eight or 10 years. I wrote a good deal that never
has been published. You know, you go on.
I was submitting novels and so on, and my first two publi-
cations were almost simultaneous. One was in a little maga-
zine, a literary magazine. The other was in a science fiction
magazine. I realized that the editors of the science fiction
magazine weren’t as puzzled by what I was doing as the edi-
tors of the literary magazines often were. I was always writing
about things with an offbeat quality, things that were out of
the ordinary. So I sort of drifted into science fiction because
they would buy my stuff. I published a few stories and [a
novel] Rocannon’s World [Garland, 1975; o.p.] and two
small science fiction stories that followed it. Then I wrote
Left Hand of Darkness and A Wizard of Earthsea within a
couple of years there. I was beginning to hit my stride.
Illustration by Joe Ciardiello.
slj0406feat_LeGuin.qxd  5/19/04  5:15 PM  Page 53
What’s your writing routine nowadays?
I’m not very methodical. If an idea gets me then I try to
make time and room to work on it. Of course, I do have a
place in the house, a study. And the last 18 years or so we’ve
had a little beach house, which is a wonderful place to go
to hide. As life goes on, one does have to run away from
even the nicest demands on one’s time. To make room and
time to work you have to make time to be alone. I’m a
morning person. The earlier I get up, the better it is for
work. And if there’s work to be done, I will try to get to it.
But, you know, you don’t always have a story to write, so
you sort of have to hang around waiting. A lot of what artists
do is wait. I think people don’t always realize it; they call it
writer’s block. But what’s happening is you’re just waiting
for the well to fill or the story to come.
Are you a compulsive reviser?
It utterly depends on what I’m working on. My poetry I
have to wrestle with a lot. Some stories come as if they’ve
been dictated. I just type them up neat on the computer
and they’re ready to go. Others have to be thought over
and wrestled with a long time. I do write in notebooks, by
hand, because I love to write outdoors when the weather’s
nice. Then often I will shift over to the computer. It does-
n’t matter to me where I write. I can write in a notebook or
on a computer. I can compose anywhere, but the com-
puter is such a blessing for revising.
What do you enjoy reading?
I have been just an absolute fiction addict all my life. I can’t
imagine going anywhere without a couple of novels, be-
cause I’m a very fast reader so one won’t do usually. I do en-
joy popular science, and science made simple, or history.
Of course, the pleasure of learning languages and reading
in a foreign language I learned very early. And that’s still
with me. I learned Spanish about 10 years ago just for the
fun of it. And now I’m trying to do my Latin again. It was
hard when I was 12, and it’s hard now but very satisfying.
Virgil is worth it…, but people say, “What are you doing
that for?” …My great discovery of the last couple of years
would be José Saramago, who got the Nobel Prize [in Lit-
erature in 1998] and [Rohinton] Mistry, the Indian author.
How has reading influenced your writing over the years?
I think the one big shift may have been in the ’70s and ’80s,
when the second wave of feminism came along. I learned
how to both read and write as a woman rather than as a sort
of genderless receiver of almost entirely male literature. It
sounds like a narrowing but, of course, it was a great expan-
sion of my sort of receptivity to books. I read a whole lot of
women authors whom I’d never read before, and [now I]
continue often to look to see “What are the women doing?”
Back when I [first] was making this discovery, I read the
Norton Anthology of Literature by Women from cover to
cover. So many people in it were new to me. I was sort of
ashamed of that and also delighted to discover them. A lot
of them are old, you know, 19th-century writers, early 20th-
century writers. Women [authors] tend to be discarded
much more quickly than men. Even someone like Edith
Wharton, I didn’t know much about.
I know that you’re opposed to limiting kids’ access to information.
As a parent, what advice did you offer your own children when they
were selecting books?
Really, I just shoved the books at them. There were no
boundaries and no censorship. I have a strong sense that
kids need roughage in their reading diet. It’s not going to
hurt them to read the cruddier kind of children’s lit. And it’s
not going to hurt them to try something that’s way over their
heads, [such as] adult books. We did a lot of reading aloud,
too. Reading aloud was an evening thing. We read to the
kids until they got to be 11 or 12. I think once I was reading
Jane Austen to the girls and we sort of looked at each other
and [they] said, “This is silly. We could do this ourselves.”
What do you hope young people come away with after reading the
Earthsea saga?
I see myself as a storyteller and the story, in a sense, tells it-
self. I am responsible for telling it right and if I’m writing for
children, particularly for young children, I am certainly re-
sponsible for not hurting or frightening those kids with the
story. That to me is simply wrong. For a message or incul-
cating values, I don’t think this stuff out; I don’t put it into
words. The words that I work in are the words of the story.
I’m not a philosopher. I’m not a moralist. If my story seems
to begin preaching, I make it stop, if I notice it. I’m not a
preacher either. This sounds a little irresponsible. I don’t
think it is. My responsibility is to my art and to the people
who perceive it, the readers. That’s an aesthetic responsibil-
ity and if it’s aesthetically right, then it will probably also be
morally right. I’m saying what Keats said. I’m saying “Truth
is beauty and beauty is truth.” That’s a very rash statement.
But it goes so deep in me that I just can’t get around it.
Do you get a lot of letters from young readers?
Since I started, with great trepidation, writing for young
adults, I have found them to be the most wonderful
readers and responders. Oh, the letters that come—
from little children also, but from teenagers—are so
moving. They read so hard and with such passion. This
is a wonderful bunch of people to write for.
Little kids usually write to me about Catwings[Scholastic,
1988]. They’re making an immediate response and that’s a
joy! It’s like reading to a kid and watching them be interested
in what you are reading together. The ones from teens are on
Earthsea and are generally more troubling because the let-
ters often say the books got them through a hard time. Often,
these are boys writing: “I just had a horrible year andA Wiz-
ard of Earthsea got me through it.” It’s a big mistake to dis-
miss books and literature. Art can get you through bad times
and adolescents can have such horrible black times.
54 School Library Journal JUNE 2004 www.slj.com
Francisca Goldsmith is the collection management and
promotion librarian for the Berkeley (CA) Public Library.
slj0406feat_LeGuin.qxd  5/19/04  5:15 PM  Page 54