 Or as I might spell it: Wistþistle, is the first book of my fantasy trilogy— The Isles of Erþe . It takes place in a world of sea and islands that will remind readers of Earthsea. The symbol Þ comes from old English and is how the sound ‘th’, as in ‘moth’, was written. There was also the symbol ð, for the pronunciation of the ‘th’ in ‘mother’, but I’m not going to go so far as to use that. As an aside: This is the source of the ‘Ye’ in Ye Old Bookstore . For years—decades!—I thought that the ‘Ye’ was old English for ‘Your’. No. Ye is actually how printers, on the cheap, spelled ‘The’. The ‘Y’ in ‘Ye’ is actually the middle and early modern English version of ‘Þ’. My spelling of Earth, as Erþe, comes from Gawain and the Green Knight. My aim is twofold. First, I want to be sure that agents can continue rejecting my writing with a clear conscience. Second, because it’s fun and you only live once, I love Anglo-Saxon poetry and I want to lend my fantasy novel a little of that flavor. One of the features of Anglo-Saxon is the concatenation of words, like in modern German. Some modern translations will try to preserve some of that flavor so that in Edward L. Risden’s translatoin of Beowulf you’ll read a line like this: Among a monstrous folk he was betrayed into the power of enemies, speedily sent to death. Concerning him, sorrow-surgings troubled too long. One of my all time favorite poems is Ezra Pound’s translation, from the Anglo-Saxon, of The Seafarer . He brings a beautiful, rough and muscular rigor to the Anglo Saxon, reproducing its alliteration and sturdy rhythms in a way that has never, to my knowledge, been equaled elsewhere. My mood ’mid the mere-flood, Over the whale’s acre, would wander wide. On earth’s shelter cometh oft to me, Eager and ready, the crying lone-flyer, Whets for the whale-path the heart irresistibly, O'er tracks of ocean; seeing that anyhow My lord deems to me this dead life On loan and on land, I believe not That any earth-weal eternal standeth Save there be somewhat calamitous That, ere a man’s tide go, turn it to twain. Anyway, I wanted to bring some of that feel into the narrative of my novel. I noticed that Le Guin did the same. Every so often she will throw words together, like ‘sunreturn’, in ways that remind me of Pound and other Anglo-Saxon translations. I’ve thrown them into my own prose and have adopted the more oratorical style of writing one finds in the high fantasy of both Tolkien and Le Guin. I’ve never liked fantasy novels written in a modern vernacular (which typifies most modern fantasy novels). Any world building, for me, goes down in flames (and I do mean flames ) the instant some medieval character and his crossbow start using 21st century, idiomatic expressions. That includes the narrator/author. Anyway, I’m closing in on the novel being forty percent written. Unlike my first three, I actually wrote a complete and detailed outline this time and—Hark! I bring thee tidings! Took me two days and it’s doubled my daily word count to well over sixteen hundred words a day. Amazing what planning can accomplish. Who knew? But I just wanted to share a little of what I’ve written. Currently, the following is the brief introduction: “Hwat! The tale of warriors, heroes, noble houses and wizards is not what I come to tell.” So begins the tale of Ta’Ehto, also called Ohéto, the latter meaning Wistthistle in Hæthrymic. While the War of the Isles is told in noble gatherings, portrayed in hall-length tapestries and elaborately sung by court poets, the tale told here is the tale of a girl beloved by the common folk. For her no tapestries are woven and for her no court poets sing. She had no gift for magic, had no strength, and was not descended from the nobility, but girls dress in her likeness and her tale is preserved in the workaday poetry of Hæthrymic storytelling. I have translated their speech into an almost fairytale-like lilt and have tried to preserve their curious way with words if only, in some small way, to translate the lovely rhythms of the Hæthrymic language. The main character, Ehto, pronounced É-hé-tow, comes from the northernmost reaches of the Isles of Erþe, from a culture that compares to the Inuits. She possesses a profound genius for language that allows her, in her small way, to make huge changes in the course of that world’s history—a gift that turns out to be more powerful than sword, magic, or any other fantasy trope typifying the hero’s journey. She’s small. She hides, terrified, where there’s violence. She’s not strong. She’s not brave. She just wants to be in love with the world—a world in the throes of war. Sound familiar? Anyway, and so far, here are a couple of poems from the novel. I’ve tried to reproduce, in small ways, the rugged feel of Pound’s The Seafarer . But cast your net care-worn sailor; Be not heavy-hearted though windheave tell Of care and shipwrack. But cast your hopes Into the green coil and cleaving of the waters. Let not long days Nor nights dissuade But in love’s tide leaps the uncaught heart. Catch her with a kiss and keep her with kindness. Or how about a Troll’s Song? Trolls call me Tørgo, toll-taker Dweller in mountain and dale. I, toppler of trees, Fearless take my forest-strolls; am he That tumbles rocks from mountaintops, That rubs his back Against the sky till the raked clouds crack With thunder and the rooflightning leaps from heaven To Erþe. Swallower of the sun Am I; and what is a troll other than that? If you visit the Wikipedia page on Trolls, you’ll see what inspired the poem’s beginning and ending. But that’s all for now. I may post a little more in the next couple weeks. The Wistþistle, by the way, is a small thorn tree that flowers on the coast of Ehto’s village home, and is her namesake. up in Vermont | September 15 2023 Share this: Share on X (Opens in new window) X Email a link to a friend (Opens in new window) Email Print (Opens in new window) Print Share on Pinterest (Opens in new window) Pinterest Share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Share on Tumblr (Opens in new window) Tumblr Share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window) LinkedIn Share on Reddit (Opens in new window) Reddit Like Loading... Related Post navigation « Completely Wrong | Helen Vendler on Dickinson’s Poem 1539 Finally incoherent? | Helen Vendler on Dickinson’s Poem 243 » 2 responses 