                                             What did Elon change? A comprehensive analysis of Grokipedia
                                                                         Harold Triedman∗ and Alexios Mantzarlis
                                                                                      Cornell Tech
                                                                          {hjt36,amantzarlis}@cornell.edu


                                                                                                Abstract




arXiv:2511.09685v1 [cs.SI] 12 Nov 2025
                                                   Elon Musk released Grokipedia on 27 October 2025 to provide an alternative to Wikipedia, the crowd-
                                               sourced online encyclopedia. In this paper, we provide the first comprehensive analysis of Grokipedia and
                                               compare it to a dump of Wikipedia, with a focus on article similarity and citation practices. Although
                                               Grokipedia articles are much longer than their corresponding English Wikipedia articles, we find that
                                               much of Grokipedia’s content (including both articles with and without Creative Commons licenses) is
                                               highly derivative of Wikipedia. Nevertheless, citation practices between the sites differ greatly, with
                                               Grokipedia citing many more sources deemed “generally unreliable” or “blacklisted” by the English
                                               Wikipedia community and low quality by external scholars, including dozens of citations to sites like
                                               Stormfront and Infowars. We then analyze article subsets: one about elected officials, one about con-
                                               troversial topics, and one random subset for which we derive article quality and topic. We find that
                                               the elected official and controversial article subsets showed less similarity between their Wikipedia ver-
                                               sion and Grokipedia version than other pages. The random subset illustrates that Grokipedia focused
                                               rewriting the highest quality articles on Wikipedia, with a bias towards biographies, politics, society, and
                                               history. Finally, we publicly release our nearly-full scrape of Grokipedia, as well as embeddings of the
                                               entire Grokipedia corpus.


                                         1     Introduction
                                         On 27 October 2025, Elon Musk launched Grokipedia as an AI-powered alternative to Wikipedia. The
                                         tech billionaire had previously attacked the crowdsourced encyclopedia as an “extension of legacy media
                                         propaganda”1 ; he vowed that Grokipedia’s goal would be “the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the
                                         truth.”2
                                             At launch, Grokipedia was composed of 885,279 entries. Media reports and spot checks of individual
                                         entries found that Musk’s encyclopedia appeared to be more opinionated than English Wikipedia, adding
                                         editorial slants that appeared to align with Musk’s own political views [9, 10, 20]. A recent review of the 1,800
                                         most-edited articles on English Wikipedia that also have entries on Grokipedia conducted by Taha Yasseri
                                         found that the latter appears to be highly derivative of the former but “privileges fluency and narrative over
                                         attribution” [21].
                                             Our paper builds on this work by conducting the first full-scale comparison of the two services. Between
                                         28 and 30 October 2025, we were able to successfully scrape nearly the entire Grokipedia corpus (883,858
                                         articles, or 99.8%). By reviewing the text and citation similarity of this corpus with its Wikipedia equivalent,
                                         we seek to provide more data to determine whether Musk’s product is in fact a “synthetic derivative” [21],
                                         an ideological project [20], or something else altogether.
                                             The initial release of Grokipedia is a tale of two licenses. A majority of Grokipedia’s content (56% of
                                         scraped articles) is basically derivative of English Wikipedia, porting over the latter’s Creative Commons
                                           ∗ HT is a part-time contractor at Wikimedia Enterprise. This work was conducted independently from Wikimedia Enterprise

                                         and the Wikimedia Foundation, and the perspectives expressed here are solely his own.
                                           1 https://x.com/elonmusk/status/1881752812276891674
                                           2 https://x.com/elonmusk/status/1983009037156315440




                                                                                                    1
(CC) Attribution. Grokipedia’s CC-licensed articles have, on average, a 90% similarity to their corresponding
Wikipedia article. The remainder of Grokipedia’s content is (according to xAI’s November 2025 Terms of
Service3 ) licensed in the same way as the outputs of the Grok chatbot. These non-CC-licensed articles are
notably less similar to their corresponding English Wikipedia articles (77% similarity).
    At a high level, the two services base their encyclopedic articles frequently on the same sources, with
57 shared domains among the top 100 most-cited sources across the two encyclopedias. However source
composition differs: Grokipedia leans more heavily on academic sources, government sources, and user-
generated content compared to Wikipedia’s relative over-reliance on news websites.
    Grokipedia articles are much longer and more verbose than Wikipedia, and cite twice as many sources.
This comes at the expense of source quality. Using source categorizations for domains determined by English
Wikipedia editors and domain reliability scores from [8], we find that Grokipedia relies on a lower share of
reliable sources and a higher share of unreliable sources than English Wikipedia.
    The dichotomy between CC- and non-CC-licensed content is also visible in source citations. Non-CC-
licensed articles on Grokipedia are 3.2 times more likely than the same articles on Wikipedia to contain a
citation that the English Wikipedia community has deemed “generally unreliable” and 13 times more likely
to contain a “blacklisted” source. It is noteworthy, even if the number of citations is trivial as an overall
share of sources, that Grokipedia includes 42 citations for Nazi website Stormfront and 34 for conspiracy
website InfoWars, compared to none for both on English Wikipedia.
    In conjuction with this paper, we release a full, structured scrape of the content of Grokipedia, as well
as embeddings of Grokipedia chunks. These datasets are available for download on HuggingFace4 , and our
analysis code is available on GitHub5 .


2      Methodology
In this section, we describe the methodology for how we acquired the structured Grokipedia dataset and
compared it to the English Wikipedia corpus.

2.1     Building the corpus
We scraped Grokipedia from 28 to 30 October 2025, using an existing list of article URLs that was published
on 27 October 2025 [11]. The structure of Grokipedia articles is static and somewhat simple, and seems to
be derived from Markdown rendering. As such, we were able to build a structured parser for Grokipedia
articles (including individual citations). We scraped Grokipedia using parallel processing on Google Cloud,
routing requests through a proxy. In total, we were to successfully scrape 883,858 articles from the service,
representing 99.8% of all published Grokipedia articles.
    Our corpus of English Wikipedia articles was derived from the daily Wikimedia Enterprise English
Wikipedia dump for 28 October 2025, which contains the entirety of English Wikipedia for that day. Once
we had a full list of Grokipedia articles, we then joined this dump on title to filter out all articles which did
not have an exact title match with a corresponding article on Grokipedia.

2.2     Embeddings
Unlike previous work, which compared the official Russian language Wikipedia project with a state-sanctioned
alternative called Ruwiki [12], Grokipedia does not use MediaWiki software to run their service. This means
we cannot directly track individual edits and editors over time. In order to get a sense of overall article
similarity (and which articles have changed significantly), we utilized embedding cosine similarity.
    More precisely, for both the Grokipedia and Wikipedia corpora, we extracted the plaintext content of
each article in 250-token chunks, with a 100-token overlap between chunks. We then embedded each of these
    3 https://archive.ph/58VTS
    4 https://huggingface.co/datasets/htriedman/grokipedia-v0.1-dump
    5 https://github.com/htried/wiki-grok-comparison




                                                        2
chunks using Google’s EmbeddingGemma [14], a state-of-the-art 300M parameter embedding model. Once
we had embeddings, we calculated the within-article pairwise cosine similarity for each chunk. This allows us
to meaningfully discuss metrics like content similarity (filtered by various factors), average article similarity
(aggregated across chunks), and more.

2.3    External data sources
When elaborating the differences between two corpora, it is important to ask: “Compared to what?” We
join our datasets on a variety of external sources to evaluate extra-textual features:
Article popularity. The Wikimedia Foundation (WMF) publishes statistics about total human pageviews
on an hourly, daily, and monthly basis [5]. In order to get a sense of which articles Grokipedia decided
to launch with, we use WMF’s October 2025 monthly pageview aggregations. To get a sense of relative
geographic popularity, we utilize a month of WMF’s geo-pageview dataset [1], which reports the countries
in which individual pageviews occurred in a privatized manner.
Source reliability. To measure changes in the composition of citation reliability, we use two datasets. The
first is the English Wikipedia Perennial Sources list [18], a community-maintained, “non-exhaustive list of
sources whose reliability and use on Wikipedia are frequently discussed” in English Wikipedia. This dataset
gives us a sense of how Grokipedia’s citations differ from English Wikipedia’s editorial norms. We also utilize
a list of crowd-sourced, real-valued domain reliability ratings from 0 to 1, published by Lin et al. [8]. This
dataset gives us a sense of broad public perceptions of citation reliability for both corpora.
Congresspeople and Members of Parliament subset. We derive the Congresspeople and MPs subset
using Wikidata. Specifically, we query Wikidata for people who are current US Senators, members of the
US House of Representatives, or members of the 59th Parliament of the United Kingdom, along with their
parliamentary party.
Controversial article subset. We derive the controversial article subset using English Wikipedia’s existing
“Wikipedia controversial topics” article category [2]. Using the public English Wikipedia API, we scrape
3,207 controversial articles. Then, we filter out any non-article pages (files, user pages, category pages, etc.)
and remove extraneous prefixes and suffixes (e.g., “Talk:” or “/Archive X”), yielding 3,152 controversial
article titles. Finally, we join those titles on Grokipedia titles, yielding 2,056 articles for analysis.
Topics and article quality. We further break down shifts from Wikipedia to Grokipedia by taking a
random subsample of 30,000 articles and querying WMF’s existing article topic [7] and article quality [6]
models. This gives us a set of predicted article topics (at varying levels of specificity) and the predicted
article quality class.

2.4    Other methodological choices
We measure whether a given Grokipedia article is CC-licensed by doing a simple string search for presence of
the footer text at the bottom of each CC-licensed article: “The content is adapted from Wikipedia, licensed
under Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License.”


3     Findings
In this section, we summarize findings from our initial work comparing Grokipedia and Wikipedia.

3.1    Grokipedia corpus characteristics
At the time of our scrape, Grokipedia stated that there were 885,279 articles on the site, roughly 12% of the
number of articles available on English-language Wikipedia [19]. The selection of this subset appears to have
been informed primarily by readership. Using WMF’s public monthly aggregations of pageview data, we can


                                                       3
                                      Outline Length Ratio Distribution (With vs Without CC License)
                                                                                            With CC License
                                                                                            Without CC License
                                                                                            No CC license median = 4.6
                                                                                            CC license median = 1.8
                                104




            Count (log scale)
                                103



                                102



                                101



                                100
                                              10 1               100                  101                      102
                                                       Outline Length Ratio (log scale)
      Figure 1: The distribution of article outline length ratios, split by Grokipedia article license status.


see that Grokipedia generally contains popular articles: equivalent entries on English Wikipedia accounted
for over 4.9 billion non-bot pageviews in October 2025, or roughly 69% of site pageviews that month. The
geolocated pageview data from the month prior to Grokipedia’s release shows that the geographic distribution
of traffic to articles that exist on Grokipedia skews heavily toward the English-speaking world, with traffic
from the US, UK, India, Canada, and Australia accounting for 95% all pageviews (see Appendix Figure 12).
    496,058 of the Grokipedia entries that we were able to scrape displayed a Creative Commons Attribution-
ShareAlike license (56% of the total) while 385,139 do not. This distinction is significant when we review the
similarity of the two services: entries with the CC license are far more similar to Wikipedia articles for the
same topic than the ones where we did not crawl an equivalent license, suggesting the two groups may have
been created or edited with different prompts from Grokipedia’s creators. The user interface of the site also
reflects this potential methodological difference: CC-licensed articles on Grokipedia contain a public log of
edits that Grok made to the source Wikipedia article, and non-CC-licensed articles do not. We were unable
to scrape this information on our first attempt, and capturing and analyzing this data remains an area for
future work.
    Grokipedia articles are significantly longer than their corresponding Wikipedia counterparts. Approxi-
mately 96% of Grokipedia contain as many or more text chunks than their Wikipedia counterparts. Similarly,
if we parse out article structure and measure article length in terms of its outline structure, we can see that
the median non-CC-licensed Grokipedia article is approximately 4.6 times longer than its Wikipedia coun-
terpart, and some Grokipedia articles are dozens of times longer (see Figure 1 ).

3.2      Similarity
As Figure 2 shows, non-CC-licensed entries on Grokipedia follow a bimodal distribution with a mean chunk
similarity to their Wikipedia equivalents of 0.77. The similarity for entries with the license is more heavily
distributed towards the far end of the spectrum, with a much higher mean chunk similarity of 0.90. We do not
know precisely why the non-CC-licensed entry distribution shows bimodality, but speculate that the higher
peak corresponds to shorter non-CC-licensed articles. This may provide an explanation because, across both
corpora, per-chunk similarity is roughly dependent on chunk position in an article (see Figure 3). Average
chunk similarity is highest in the introduction and decreases roughly linearly as the article proceeds. This


                                                                   4
                    Average Page Embedding Similarity Distributions:                                          Average Similarity by Wikipedia Chunk Position
                              With vs. Without CC License                                                           (with 95% Confidence Intervals)
                                                                                                      0.90
                 Without CC License                                                                                                             Mean similarity
        8000     With CC License                                                                      0.85                                      95% Confidence Interval




                                                                                 Average Similarity
                                                                                                      0.80
        6000                                                                                          0.75

Count
                                                                                                      0.70
        4000                                                                                          0.65
                                                                                                      0.60
        2000                                                                                          0.55
                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                     4
           0
                                                                                                                 6-1
                                                                                                               11 0
                                                                                                               21 0
                                                                                                               31 0
                                                                                                               41 0
                                                                                                               51 0-2
                                                                                                                   -3
                                                                                                                   -4
                                                                                                                   -55
                                                                                                                   -
                    0.2               0.4            0.6    0.8        1.0
                                                                                                              76 75
                                                                                                                 -
                                                                                                             10 100
                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                             12 -125
                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                             15 -150
                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                             17 -175
                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                             20 -200
                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                             25 -250
                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                             30 -300
                                             Similarity                                                                 Wikipedia Chunk Position
                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                             35 -350
                                                                                                               1-4
                                                                                                               >400 00



Figure 2: Per-article average similarity embedding Figure 3: Average chunk similarity by position in an
distributions, split by whether the Grokipedia article article. Position 1 is the beginning of an article, po-
is CC-licensed or not.                                 sition 2 is the second chunk, etc.


finding is not attributable to changes in article structure, as we calculated pairwise similarity for each chunk
on Wikipedia with each chunk on its equivalent Grokipedia entry and compared the two most similar ones.
    Grokipedia articles with very high average chunk similarity to their corresponding Wikipedia article
include verbatim transcriptions. These articles appear in both the CC-licensed and non-CC-licensed subsets
of the data; that is, identical articles (or chunks) do not necessarily carry an attribution to Wikipedia or a
CC license. For instance, Table 1 shows two excerpts from Grokipedia entries that have exact matches on
equivalent Wikipedia articles. The entry for the Mejia Thermal Power Station is not CC-licensed, whereas
the one for Sono Sachiko, a 19th century member of the Japanese imperial family, attributes Wikipedia.
Note that, in the non-CC-licensed Mejia Thermal Power Station page, the first sentences on both Wikipedia
and Grokipedia include the same typo: “Commissioned on [sic] 1996”. More excerpt pairs from various parts
of the similarity distribution are available in Appendix A.2. In some cases, dissimilarity is to Grokipedia
readers benefit. The entry for Canadian actress Ellen David on Wikipedia includes a “Career” section that
is a very sentence listing the movies she has starred in; the AI-written entry is a more readable summary,
with her roles summarized in tabular format below (see A.2).

  Entry                                     Wikipedia                                                         Grokipedia
  Sono Sachiko (CC                          Sachiko’s father was Count Sono Moto-                             Sachiko’s father was Count Sono Moto-
  licensed)                                 sachi; she was known as Kogiku Tenji.                             sachi; she was known as Kogiku Tenji.
                                            She gave birth to two sons and six                                She gave birth to two sons and six
                                            daughters, several of whom died prema-                            daughters, several of whom died prema-
                                            turely...                                                         turely...
  Mejia   Thermal                           Mejia Thermal Power Station is located                            Mejia Thermal Power Station is located
  Power     Station                         at Durlabhpur, Bankura, 35 km from                                at Durlabhpur, Bankura, 35 km from
  (Not CC licensed)                         Durgapur city in West Bengal. The                                 Durgapur city in West Bengal. The
                                            power plant is one of the coal based                              power plant is one of the coal based
                                            power plants of DVC. Commissioned on                              power plants of DVC. Commissioned on
                                            1996...                                                           1996...

                                            Table 1: Comparison of Wikipedia and Grokipedia entries.


3.3            Top 100 sources
The top 100 domains cited by Wikipedia and Grokipedia account for respectively 30.4% and 25.2% of their
overall sources. 57 of these domains are the same, even if their precise placement among the top 100 varies.


                                                                             5
Frequently-cited domains across both services include media outlets like nytimes.com, theguardian.com, and
bbc.com; online portals like archive.org, and books.google.com; and specialized databases like imdb.org and
baseball-reference.com.
    However, there are distinctions in the types of sources most often cited by the two encyclopedias. Some
of these appear to be a consequence of Wikipedia’s policy preference for secondary sources via the “No
Original Research” policy [17]. Wikipedia’s top 100 includes 40 mainstream media outlets compared with
Grokipedia’s 29. Only two academic sources—jstor.org and researchgate.net—make it into the Wikipedia’s
most-cited sources, whereas the AI encyclopedia’s top 100 features 19. Grokipedia also relies more heavily
on social networks and other UGC platforms. Websites like Facebook, Reddit, Quora, YouTube, Amazon,
and Musk’s own social network X account for nine of Grokipedia’s top 100 sources (and 2.8% of all citations),
compared to 5 sources and 1.5% of citations for Wikipedia. Figure 4 shows the top 100 most-cited sources
in both corpora, along with domain type and ranking changes. Appendix Figure 13 shows an area map of
top 100 source proportion in both corpora.
    Notably, although 56% of Grokipedia articles contain licensing text indicating that they are adapted
from Wikipedia and much of the corpus displays meaningful textual similarity to Wikipedia, Wikimedia
Foundation domains (wikipedia.org, wiktionary.org, wikisource.org, wikidata.org, etc.) appear only 445
times, accounting for approximately 1 in 100,000 citations on Grokipedia.

3.4     Source quality and variance
Sourcing is a highly contested and regimented aspect of Wikipedia’s operations. In this section, we dive
into different metrics of source quality, and pull out some curious anecdotes about what Grokipedia cites.
Broadly speaking, we find that Grokipedia cites more sources of all kinds (perhaps due to its wordier entries).
This includes sources on the far low end of the source reliability spectrum as measured both by in-group
English Wikipedia editorial norms and more broad external judgments of domain quality.

3.4.1   Perennial sources
The English Wikipedia community maintains the “Perennial Sources” list [18]. This is a list of sources
whose reliability has been frequently discussed on the platform, grouped as “generally reliable,” “generally
unreliable,” “blacklisted,” “no consensus,” and “deprecated.” This list is not comprehensive—it includes only
880 domains—and it is not strictly enforced. Inclusion in the “generally unreliable” (or even “blacklisted”)
source category doesn’t mean a domain is in practice never cited on Wikipedia, but it is discouraged.
Nevertheless, the Perennial Sources list has drawn extensive media attention, especially in the United States
[3, 13]. In this paper, we utilize this list as a means of (roughly) approximating within-community citation
norms.
    Perhaps as expected, given the Perennial Sources list’s prominence in the English Wikipedia community,
“generally reliable” sources make up a far larger proportion of Wikipedia citations (12.7%) than “generally
unreliable” (2.9%) or “blacklisted” (0.04%) sources (see Figure 5). “Generally reliable” sources are cited in
roughly 2 of 5 (41.1%) of Wikipedia articles, as opposed to roughly 1 in 5 (21.8%) articles citing “generally
unreliable” sources and 1 in 167 (0.6%) articles citing “blacklisted” sources. Grokipedia’s citation practices
appear to be less in line with Wikipedia editorial norms. “Generally reliable” sources make up 7.7% of
citations on Grokipedia (a relative decrease of 39%), “generally unreliable” sources are 5.4% of citations (a
relative increase of 86%), and “blacklisted” sources make up 0.1% of citations (a relative increase of 275%).
At the article level, the increase is even more drastically visible: 5.5% of Grokipedia articles contain at least
one citation to “blacklisted” sources—a ninefold increase in prevalence compared to Wikipedia.
    This comparison, however, is across the entire Grokipedia corpus, without distinction along the lines
of article licensing that we saw was so important in Section 3.2. When we look at just the subsets of the
Grokipedia corpus that do not have a CC-license (and their corresponding Wikipedia articles), the increase
in articles that cite a “blacklisted” source is even more dramatic: 0.9% of Wikipedia articles and 11.7% of
Grokipedia articles, a 13x increase (see Appendix Figure 14).



                                                       6
Figure 4: The top 100 most-cited domains on Wikipedia and Grokipedia. Domains are bold if they are on
both lists, and lines connecting the domains show their position change. Color indicates domain type.


                                                 7
                                                                        Source Reliability Category Comparison (all articles)
                            Source Status Proportion: Wikipedia vs Grokipedia                                                          % of Articles Citing Any Source in Category
                          1.0
                                                Source Status                                             100                                                                                 Wikipedia
                                                Generally reliable
                                                Generally unreliable                                                                                                                          Grokipedia
                                                Blacklisted
                          0.8                   No consensus
                                                Deprecated                                                80
                                                Other




Proportion of Citations                                                             Percent of Articles
                          0.6
                                                                                                          60
                                                                                                                          53.8%                 54.3%
                                                                                                                                                                                  49.5%
                          0.4
                                                                                                                 41.1%
                                                                                                          40

                                                                                                                                                                          27.1%
                                                                                                                                        21.8%
                          0.2                                                                             20

                                                                                                                                                                  5.5%                            8.3%
                                                                                                                                                           0.6%                            0.5%
                          0.0                                                                              0
                                Wikipedia                              Grokipedia                                                 ble                liable Blacklisted           sensus          ated
                                                                                                                         lly relia          lly unre                      No con           Deprec
                                                                                                                Genera               Genera

 Figure 5: (Left) The relative proportion of Perennial Source list categories in Wikipedia and Grokipedia
 citations. (Right) The percentage of articles that contain at least one of each category of citation in the two
 corpora.


 3.4.2                           Domain reliability scores
 To get a sense of source quality that isn’t exclusively tied to English Wikipedia’s editorial norms, we use Lin
 et al.’s domain reliability scores [8]. These are real-valued scores from a low of 0.0 to a high of 1.0, generated
 via combining various expert news rating sources. Our findings on source quality remain roughly in line with
 those that relied on English Wikipedia’s Perennial Source list (see Figure 6): English Wikipedia is more likely
 to cite domains on the 0.6 and above higher end of Lin et al.’s quality score (27.4% of all citations) than
 Grokipedia (21.3% of all citations). Low quality domains—which we define as having quality scores between
 0.0 and 0.2—make up three times the share of total citations on Grokipedia than Wikipedia. Even though
 this share is relatively small (0.03% of the total), it means Grokipedia includes 12,522 citations to domains
 deemed of very low credibility. Websites in this category include the white nationalist forum Stormfront,
 the antivaccine conspiracy website Natural News, and the fringe website InfoWars. None of these domains
 are cited at all on Wikipedia; they have 180 citations on Musk’s service. Although Grokipedia quotes more
 sources per article in all quality buckets, it disproportionately adds low quality sources to articles.
     Unsurprisingly, source quality is especially affected in the subset of Grokipedia articles that do not have
 the CC license and which are therefore more dissimilar from their Wikipedia equivalents (see Appendix
 Figure 15). This suggests that, given free rein to cite sources, Grokipedia is less discerning with source
 quality than Wikipedia.
     A limitation with both source quality scores is that they don’t rate the majority of citations used on either
 service. What we can say at this stage is that Grokipedia is both more capacious in its citations—almost
 doubling Wikipedia’s total—and more ecumenical in its approach, including many more sources across all
 quality buckets.

 3.4.3                           Citation curiosities
 We found a variety of curiosities as we dug into Grokipedia’s citation practices, each of which might warrant
 further study.
 Rarely cited domains on Wikipedia. We reviewed the 1,071 domains for which we have a Lin et al.
 quality score that were cited on Grokipedia but received at most 1 citations on Wikipedia. The mean quality


                                                                                                                           8
                                                                        Source Reliability Score Comparison (all articles)
Source1.0Reliability Score Proportion: Wikipedia vs Grokipedia                                                         % of Articles Citing Any Source in Reliability Bucket
                                               Reliability Score                                      100                                                                      Wikipedia
                                                    No score                                                                                                                   Grokipedia
                                                    0.8-1.0
                            0.8                     0.6-0.8                                           80
                                                    0.4-0.6




  Proportion of Citations
                                                    0.2-0.4



                                                                                Percent of Articles
                            0.6                     0.0-0.2                                                                                                           58.6%
                                                                                                                                                                                      62.8%
                                                                                                      60


                                                                                                                                                              42.9%           44.6%
                            0.4                                                                       40                                              37.1%


                                                                                                                                      23.1%
                            0.2                                                                       20                                      18.5%
                                                                                                                              10.9%

                                                                                                            0.1%   0.7%
                            0.0                                                                        0
                                   Wikipedia                       Grokipedia
                                                                                                             0.0-0.2            0.2-0.4        0.4-0.6         0.6-0.8         0.8-1.0

   Figure 6: (Left) The relative proportion of Lin et al. score reliability in Wikipedia and Grokipedia citations.
   (Right) The percentage of articles that contain at least one domain in each score bucket in the two corpora.


   score of these domains is 0.48. Besides the aforementioned InfoWars and Stormfront, this list of domains in-
   cludes American and Indian right-wing media outlets (swarajyamag.com, 6,369 citations; republicworld.com,
   1,330; breitbart.com, 566); Chinese and Iranian state media (globaltimes.cn, 2,903; presstv.ir, 778); anti-
   immigration, anti-Semitic or anti-Muslim websites (unz.com, 227; vdare.com, 107; frontpagemag.com, 91;
   jihadwatch.org, 73) and websites that have been variously accused of promoting pseudoscience and conspir-
   acy theories (ancient-origins.net, 7665; lifesitenews.com, 100; thegatewaypundit.com, 90; globalresearch.ca,
   51; voltairenet.org, 45).
       Grokipedia cites these sources without qualifying their reliability. The Grokipedia article “Clinton body
   count,” for example, cites InfoWars reporting twice (as citations ([128] and [129]):
                                  InfoWars, for instance, has published articles compiling deaths of individuals associated with the
                                  Clintons, such as former aide Mark Middleton, whose 2022 suicide by gunshot—despite being
                                  found with an extension cord around his neck and tied to a tree—prompted coverage questioning
                                  official rulings [128]. These compilations, often updated with new cases, frame patterns of timing
                                  and circumstances as non-coincidental, drawing on public records and witness accounts to argue
                                  for scrutiny beyond mainstream dismissals [129].

   X/Twitter usernames. X/Twitter received approximately 40,000 more citations on Grokipedia than on
   Wikipedia. We thought it may be interesting to parse which accounts Grokipedia cites from X/Twitter.
   Grokipedia cites @grok 232 times (as opposed to 0 on Wikipedia) and @elonmusk 186 times (as opposed to
   49 on Wikipedia). We also found one article (“Sarah Anne Williams”) where the X/Twitter account of the
   subject of the article (@SarahAnneWillia) was cited 99 times.
   Grok conversations. As we were parsing X/Twitter user data, we found 1,050 citations to links containing
   the string {twitter, x}.com/i/grok/share. These links are to publicly shared conversations between X
   users and the Grok chatbot, and are interesting to dig into. For instance, the first section the Grokipedia
   article for “Guy Verhofstadt” contains this sentence:
                                  His tenure as prime minister occurred amid challenges including the 1999 dioxin contamination
                                  scandal’s aftermath, which affected public trust in Belgian institutions, though his government
                                  focused on recovery and stability measures [7].


                                                                                                                   9
                       US Congress: Similarity by Party              UK Parliament: Similarity by Parliamentary Group
                   Other                                                     Other
        160        Republican Party                                          Reform UK
        140
                   Democratic Party                                          Conservative Party
                   Democratic Party mean                                     Labour Party
        120        Republican Party mean                                     Labour Party mean
                                                                             Conservative Party mean
        100                                                                  Reform UK mean
Count   80

        60

        40

        20

         0
                 0.4      0.5      0.6     0.7     0.8   0.9   1.0     0.3      0.4    0.5    0.6      0.7    0.8   0.9   1.0
                                Per Chunk Similarity                                   Per Chunk Similarity

                                Figure 7: US and UK elected official article similarity by party.


    Citation 7 is a link to a Grok chatbot conversation on X, where the user starts by asking Grok: “Can
you dig up some dirt on Guy Verhofstadt please?” Grok provides an extensive answer, including the claim
that makes it into the beginning of the article. Grok ends its answer with “The dirt’s there—some solid,
some speculative.”
    Between hundreds of citations to the @grok X/Twitter account and approximately a thousand links to
Grok conversations, Grokipedia may be engaging in a new kind of “LLM auto-citogenesis”6 : the user-directed
creation of LLM text on third party sites, which then are utilized by the same LLM (or one in the same
model family) to write an encyclopedic resource. This analysis of citation composition on the two sites is
just scraping the surface. We believe there is much future work to complete in this area.

3.5           Political figures
Moving from Grokipedia as a whole to entries for more sensitive verticals, like elected officials, the discrepancy
in source quality with Wikipedia holds true. For both members of the US Congress and the UK Parliament,
Grokipedia’s share of higher quality citations tends to be lower than that of Wikipedia’s and that of lower
quality sources tends to be higher. For both UK and US elected officials, average chunk similarity is below
0.8, with some inter-party variation in the United Kingdom (Figure 7).
    Reviewing two highly dissimilar entries in this subcategory—the articles for UK Prime Minister Keir
Starmer and Seattle Congresswoman Pramila Jayapal—we can see that Grokipedia is more prominent and
vocal in detailing alleged controversies surrounding the two politicians.
    Jayapal’s Grokipedia entry mentions in the introduction that she “has faced notable controversies, in-
cluding backlash for describing Israel as a ’racist state’ during a 2023 event.” Starmer’s article states that his
tenure as Director of Public Prosecutions “drew criticism for low prosecution rates in child sexual exploitation
cases during the emergence of grooming gang scandals and decisions not to pursue charges in high-profile
matters such as the initial handling of complaints against Jimmy Savile.” (This particular accusation is one
that Elon Musk himself has leveled against Starmer [4].)
    Anecdotally, Grok edits seem to increase the prominence and frequency of references to the subject’s bias
or controversies. Additional work is required to determine whether this is true across the entire corpus.
    6 https://xkcd.com/978/




                                                               10
                                    Embedding Similarity for Controversial vs. Non-controversial Articles
                                5
                                          Controversial Mean=0.73
                                          Non-controversial Mean=0.82
                                4
                                          Controversial Articles
                                          Non-controversial Articles



          Percent of Articles
                                3



                                2



                                1



                                0
                                    0.0            0.2           0.4                0.6   0.8          1.0
                                                                       Similarity
Figure 8: Similarity distributions of controversial article chunks and non-controversial article chunks. Note
that the Y-axis of this graph is expressed in terms of percentage of articles (as opposed to absolute counts).


3.6    Controversial topics
Articles in Wikipedia’s list of controversial topics [2] are worth reviewing as a dedicated subset because they
are likely to disproportionately reflect Elon Musk’s grievances with the crowdsourced encyclopedia. These
are articles that are more vulnerable to “edit wars,” and, as a result, likelier to turn on edit protections
(limiting the population of possible editors to only those with more experience) or have strict guidelines for
how edits can be made.
    Indeed, we find that Grokipedia entries that map to a article in the controversial category are on average
far more dissimilar than other articles from their Wikipedia equivalents (mean similarity = 0.73) compared
to those that do not map to an article in the controversial category (mean similarity = 0.82) (Figure 8).
Fully 93.1% of these articles (1,914 out of 2,056 articles) lack the CC license that we hypothesize appears
on articles that Grok was instructed to recreate more faithfully from Wikipedia, compared to the global
proportion of 56%.
    A randomly selected sample of highly dissimilar articles in the controversial bucket include the follow-
ing entries: “Criticism of the United States government,” “Racism in the United States,” “Media bias in
the United States,” “Masculism,” and “Comparative Studies of the Roman and Han empires.” The edits
themselves suggest an ideological bent in the writing instructions, or at minimum an attempt to review the
original text from a different perspective. The Wikipedia entry for “Masculism” amply cites scholars that
view the movement as anti-feminist or misogynist; the Grokipedia entry states that “its core claims draw on
verifiable statistics rather than ideology alone.” The Wikipedia entry for “Media bias in the United States”
starts with a sweeping historical review of the American information ecosystem that is perhaps overly critical
of the arrival of the Internet. The Grokipedia entry is much more concerned with what it calls “empirically
observed left-liberal slant in the news coverage of major mainstream outlets” (see Table 2). Nonetheless,
the sample size here is way too small for this interpretation to be anything other than evocative and an
invitation for further study.
    Within these controversial articles, the increase in lower quality sources is particularly visible. By
Wikipedia’s definition (the Perennial Source list), 85.5% of Grokipedia’s entries on controversial topics
contain a citation to a “generally unreliable” source and 21.7% contain a citation to a source that has been
“blacklisted” (see Figure 9). The prevalence of articles with at least one source from the lowest quality


                                                                        11
        Wikipedia                                                                                                                           Grokipedia
        The history of media bias in the United States                                                                                      Media bias in the United States refers to the
        has evolved from overtly partisan newspapers                                                                                        empirically observed left-liberal slant in the
        in the 18th and 19th centuries to professional                                                                                      news coverage of major mainstream outlets.
        journalism with ethical standards in the 20th                                                                                       This bias arises from the ideological imbalance
        century, and into the 21st century, where the                                                                                       within the journalism profession and results in
        Internet enabled anyone to become a journal-                                                                                        disproportionate emphasis on progressive nar-
        ist. As the public stopped paying for news,                                                                                         ratives, selective fact presentation, and unfa-
        socially responsible journalism became diffi-                                                                                       vorable portrayal of conservative viewpoints.
        cult to sustain, and the floodgates opened to
        individuals lacking formal training who could
        publish stories with little effort or expertise.

      Table 2: Comparison of Wikipedia and Grokipedia descriptions of media bias in the United States.

                                                                            Source Reliability Category Proportion: Wikipedia vs Grokipedia
                                        Source Status Proportion: Wikipedia vs Grokipedia                                                      % of Articles Citing Any Source in Category
                                      1.0
                                                            Source Status
                                                            Generally reliable
                                                                                                                      100                                                                            Wikipedia
                                                                                                                                       92.3%                                            92.1%
                                                            Generally unreliable
                                                            Blacklisted
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Grokipedia
                                                                                                                                                        85.5%
                                                            No consensus                                                       82.9%
                                      0.8                   Deprecated                                                80
                                                            Other                                                                                                               72.7%




            Proportion of Citations                                                             Percent of Articles
                                      0.6
                                                                                                                      60
                                                                                                                                                53.0%


                                      0.4                                                                             40


                                                                                                                                                                       21.7%
                                      0.2                                                                             20                                                                                   17.1%


                                                                                                                                                                2.0%                                1.5%
                                      0.0                                                                              0
                                            Wikipedia                              Grokipedia                                               ble            ble       ted              sensu     s            ated
                                                                                                                                   lly relia erally unrelia Blacklis           No con               Deprec
                                                                                                                            Genera          Gen

Figure 9: (Left) The relative proportion of Perennial Source list categories in Wikipedia and Grokipedia
citations for controversial articles. (Right) The percentage of controversial articles that contain at least one
of each category of citation in the two corpora.


domains in Lin et al. also increases from 1.9% on Wikipedia to 6.4% on Grokipedia (see Figure 10).

3.7     Article quality and topic
As mentioned in Section 2, we derived article quality and topic for a randomly selected subset of 30,000
English Wikipedia articles using publicly accessible WMF models.
Article quality. WMF provides a model that, given an article title, predicts the quality class of that article
[6]. Wikipedia articles are categorized by their quality: for example, an article with a “Featured Article”
(FA) designation could be featured on the front page of Wikipedia. Other quality classes include: “Good
Articles” (GA), “Starts,” “Stubs,” and quality ratings like A, B and C.
    Figure 11 depicts a histogram of chunk similarity by article class, split by license status. Chunks for
articles in the FA and GA quality classes—the pages that have been deemed highest quality on English
Wikipedia—are far more likely to be non-CC-licensed pages (the orange sections of the graphs). As a result,
they also show much less similarity to their English Wikipedia counterparts. Start, Stub, and C-class articles,
on the other hand, are much likelier to be CC-licensed, directly adapted from English Wikipedia, and display
a higher similarity to Wikipedia.



                                                                                                                                       12
                                                                                                       Source Reliability Score Proportion: Wikipedia vs Grokipedia
                                Source Reliability Score Proportion: Wikipedia vs Grokipedia                                                                            % of Articles Citing Any Source in Reliability Bucket
                                                      1.0
                                                                                  Reliability Score
                                                                                         No score
                                                                                                                                                  100            Wikipedia                                          94.1%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    96.4%
                                                                                         0.8-1.0
                                                                                         0.6-0.8
                                                                                                                                                                 Grokipedia                                                   87.0%
                                                                                         0.4-0.6                                                                                                                               82.0%
                                                      0.8                                0.2-0.4
                                                                                         0.0-0.2                                                  80                                                           75.8%




                            Proportion of Citations                                                                         Percent of Articles
                                                      0.6
                                                                                                                                                  60
                                                                                                                                                                                                      54.9%
                                                                                                                                                                                            47.3%
                                                      0.4                                                                                         40
                                                                                                                                                                                    33.3%


                                                      0.2                                                                                         20

                                                                                                                                                                       6.8%
                                                                                                                                                              1.9%
                                                      0.0                                                                                          0
                                                              Wikipedia                                     Grokipedia
                                                                                                                                                               0.0-0.2               0.2-0.4           0.4-0.6                     0.6-0.8                 0.8-1.0

Figure 10: (Left) The relative proportion of Lin et al. score buckets in Wikipedia and Grokipedia citations
for controversial articles. (Right) The percentage of articles that contain at least one of each score bucket of
citation in the two corpora.




                                                                                Embedding Similarity Distributions by Article Quality Class and License Status
                                                              Featured Article                                                                                       Good Article                                                                              B-Class
                       Without License                                                                              16000                                                                                           35000
        4000           With License                                                                                 14000                                                                                           30000
                                                                                                                    12000
        3000                                                                                                                                                                                                        25000
                                                                                                                    10000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20000
Count   2000                                                                                                Count    8000                                                                                   Count
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    15000
                                                                                                                     6000
                                                                                                                     4000                                                                                           10000
        1000
                                                                                                                     2000                                                                                             5000
          0                                                                                                             0                                                                                               0
               0.3         0.4                          0.5      0.6      0.7    0.8       0.9        1.0                        0.3                    0.4    0.5      0.6 0.7         0.8     0.9   1.0                    0.2       0.3   0.4         0.5      0.6 0.7   0.8    0.9   1.0
                                                                  Similarity                                                                                           Similarity                                                                              Similarity
                                                                  C-Class                                                                                            Start-Class                                                                           Stub-Class
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1000
                                                                                                                     3000
        7000
        6000                                                                                                         2500                                                                                             800
        5000                                                                                                         2000                                                                                             600
Count   4000                                                                                                 Count   1500                                                                                     Count
        3000                                                                                                                                                                                                          400
                                                                                                                     1000
        2000
                                                                                                                     500                                                                                              200
        1000
          0                                                                                                            0                                                                                                0
                     0.2                                0.4            0.6         0.8                1.0                        0.3                    0.4    0.5       0.6 0.7        0.8     0.9   1.0                          0.2             0.4              0.6      0.8         1.0
                                                                  Similarity                                                                                           Similarity                                                                              Similarity



Figure 11: A set of histograms showing chunk similarity between Grokipedia and Wikipedia articles in our
random subsample by article class, split by license status.




                                                                                                                                                                     13
Article topic. WMF also provides an open source model that, given an article title, predicts likely arti-
cle topics from an existing topic ontology [7]. This topic ontology is multi-level (e.g., a prediction about
article regionality looks like Geography.Regions.Asia.Southeast Asia), and encompasses topics gener-
ally relevant to encyclopedic content: there are subtopics pertaining to history, politics, biography, science,
geography, etc.
    Appendix Figure 16 shows per-chunk similarity by article subtopic, split by license status. Similarly to
the rest of this work, there is a strong dichotomy between CC-licensed Grokipedia articles and non-CC-
licensed Grokipedia articles, where non-CC-licensed articles are significantly less similar to Wikipedia than
CC-licensed articles. Of particular note in this figure is which topics are largely CC-licensed and which are
not. Largely licensed subtopics include those in the STEM category, like Biology, Computing, Technology
and Engineering, as well as Culture subtopics like Internet Culture, Media, Sports, and Literature.
More notable, however, are the topics that a largely unlicensed. In the Culture topic, that includes subtopics
like Biography and Philosphy and Religion. In the History and Society topic, that includes subtopics
like Business and Economics, History, Military and Warfare, Politics and Government, and Society.
Geography.Regions also shows a strong bias towards non-CC-licensure.
    The random subsample of articles that we used to do the above analyses of article quality and topic only
encompasses 3.4% of the Grokipedia corpus. As such, it certainly cannot tell the entire story. However, it
may be indicative of broader trends about Grokipedia. We would welcome future work that does a fuller
analysis of both of these features.


4    Conclusions, limitations, and future work
In this paper, we provide a first look at how Grokipedia differs from Wikipedia. At its first release, Grokipedia
appears to be heavily indebted to Wikipedia, the site it was intended to replace and outclass. Many articles
show a high level of similarity across the two corpora, and some articles contain exactly identical copies of
text. Other articles, conversely, had notable shifts in content, framing, and tone. We find that Grokipedia
is a significantly larger and longer corpus than Wikipedia, including much more text per article—and many
more citations. These citations are from domains across the quality spectrum (as measured both within
English Wikipedia community norms and more generally), and it is clear that sourcing guardrails have
largely been lifted on Grokipedia. This results in the inclusion of questionable sources, and an overall higher
prevalence of potentially problematic sources. We found that these trends were particularly notable in subsets
of the corpus that pertain to elected officials and controversial topics. We also stumbled across a variety of
curiosities when it came to sourcing, including cases of Grokipedia citing Grok chatbot conversations.
    At the beginning of this paper, we set out to answer the questions of whether Grokipedia is a synthetic
derivative or an ideological project. Based on our findings, the answer to both of these questions is a
(qualified) yes.
Limitations. Because this is an initial comparison, this paper is somewhat limited in its methodology and
external data sources. In particular, the domain sourcing lists are highly incomplete and are not objective
final judgments on source quality. We try to acknowledge these imperfections explicitly, and treat them as
rough proxies for in-group community sourcing norms and broader expert opinion of domain quality on the
internet. The other primary measure we use to compare the two corpora is semantic similarity between article
chunks. This, too, is an imperfect instrument. In particular, it can miss more subtle changes in linguistic
framing that maintain a high level of textual similarity: single words that have been shifted to alter the
interpretation of an event, shifts from the active to the passive voice, etc. Identifying and characterizing
these more subtle changes is an area of open work.
Future work. We believe this analysis has only barely scratched the surface, and there is much more
to analyze in depth. As mentioned above, identifying and characterizing subtle linguistic framing changes
is a challenging problem, and one that we hope to tackle next. We also would be intrigued by efforts to
scrape and analyze the public log of edits made to underlying Wikipedia content for CC-licensed articles on
Grokipedia. Additionally, it may be interesting to look at tone and writing style; English Wikipedia has a


                                                       14
“Neutral Point of View” policy [16] and a manual of style to avoid what Wikipedia editors call “puffery” or
“peacocking” within articles [15]. Our controversial articles subset is just a starting point; another line of
inquiry would be to parse article content and compare articles that have a subsection about article subject
“controversies.” Finally, there’s the question of claim verifiability, which is an open area of research. Given
a claim in Wikipedia or Grokipedia and its source citation, can we rate the claim’s verifiability? We would
be intrigued by research that seeks to answer all of these questions and more.


Acknowledgments
Many thanks to Mykola Trokhymovych for his help in framing interesting analyses would be interesting, and
for suggestions about how to scrape Grokipedia.


References
 [1]   Temilola Adeleye, Skye Berghel, Damien Desfontaines, Michael Hay, Isaac Johnson, Cléo Lemoisson,
       Ashwin Machanavajjhala, Tom Magerlein, Gabriele Modena, David Pujol, Daniel Simmons-Marengo,
       and Hal Triedman. Publishing Wikipedia Usage Data with Strong Privacy Guarantees. July 2025. doi:
       10.48550/arXiv.2308.16298. eprint: 2308.16298 (cs).
 [2]   “Category:Wikipedia Controversial Topics”. In: Wikipedia (Aug. 2023). url: https://en.wikipedia.
       org/wiki/Category:Wikipedia_controversial_topics.
 [3]   Noam Cohen. Why Wikipedia Decided to Stop Calling Fox a ‘Reliable’ Source. Aug. 2020. url: https:
       //www.wired.com/story/why-wikipedia-decided-to-stop-calling-fox-a-reliable-source/.
 [4]   Eleni Courea, Lisa O’Carroll, and Lisa O’Carroll. “Why Is Elon Musk Attacking Keir Starmer over the
       Grooming Scandal?” In: The Guardian (Jan. 2025). issn: 0261-3077. url: https://www.theguardian.
       com/politics/2025/jan/06/why- is- elon- musk- attacking- keir- starmer- over- grooming-
       scandal.
 [5]   Wikimedia Foundation. Pageviews Analysis - Meta-Wiki. url: https://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/
       Pageviews%5C_Analysis (visited on 11/10/2025).
 [6]   Isaac Johnson. Language-agnostic Wikipedia article quality model card. 2022. url: https://meta.
       wikimedia . org / wiki / Machine _ learning _ models / Proposed / Language - agnostic _ Wikipedia _
       article_quality_model_card.
 [7]   Isaac Johnson, Martin Gerlach, and Diego Sáez-Trumper. “Language-agnostic Topic Classification for
       Wikipedia”. In: WWW ’21: Companion Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021 (2021), pp. 594–601.
       url: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3442442.3452347.
 [8]   Hause Lin, Jana Lasser, Stephan Lewandowsky, Rocky Cole, Andrew Gully, David G Rand, and
       Gordon Pennycook. “High Level of Correspondence across Different News Domain Quality Rating
       Sets”. In: PNAS Nexus 2.9 (Sept. 2023), pgad286. issn: 2752-6542. doi: 10.1093/pnasnexus/pgad286.
 [9]   Alexios Mantzarlis and Craig Silverman. Briefing: Grokipedia Applies a Right-Wing Filter to Wikipedia.
       url: https://indicator.media/p/grokipedia-applies-a-right-wing-filter-to-wikipedia.
[10]   Reece Rogers. “Elon Musk’s Grokipedia Pushes Far-Right Talking Points”. In: Wired (Oct. 2025). issn:
       1059-1028. url: https://www.wired.com/story/elon- musk- launches- grokipedia- wikipedia-
       competitor/.
[11]   Stefan-It/Grokipedia-Urls · Datasets at Hugging Face. url: https://huggingface.co/datasets/
       stefan-it/grokipedia-urls.
[12]   Mykola Trokhymovych, Oleksandr Kosovan, Nathan Forrester, Pablo Aragón, Diego Saez-Trumper,
       and Ricardo Baeza-Yates. “Characterizing Knowledge Manipulation in a Russian Wikipedia Fork”. In:
       Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media 19 (June 2025), pp. 1924–
       1936. issn: 2334-0770. doi: 10.1609/icwsm.v19i1.35910.


                                                      15
[13]   Tucker Carlson. Wikipedia Co-Creator Reveals All: CIA Infiltration, Banning Conservatives, & How
       to Fix the Internet. Sept. 2025. url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vyfKyrSAVFg.
[14]   Henrique Schechter Vera, Sahil Dua, Biao Zhang, Daniel Salz, Ryan Mullins, Sindhu Raghuram Pa-
       nyam, Sara Smoot, Iftekhar Naim, Joe Zou, Feiyang Chen, Daniel Cer, Alice Lisak, Min Choi, Lucas
       Gonzalez, Omar Sanseviero, Glenn Cameron, Ian Ballantyne, Kat Black, Kaifeng Chen, Weiyi Wang,
       Zhe Li, Gus Martins, Jinhyuk Lee, Mark Sherwood, Juyeong Ji, Renjie Wu, Jingxiao Zheng, Jyotinder
       Singh, Abheesht Sharma, Divyashree Sreepathihalli, Aashi Jain, Adham Elarabawy, A. J. Co, Andreas
       Doumanoglou, Babak Samari, Ben Hora, Brian Potetz, Dahun Kim, Enrique Alfonseca, Fedor Moi-
       seev, Feng Han, Frank Palma Gomez, Gustavo Hernández Ábrego, Hesen Zhang, Hui Hui, Jay Han,
       Karan Gill, Ke Chen, Koert Chen, Madhuri Shanbhogue, Michael Boratko, Paul Suganthan, Sai Meher
       Karthik Duddu, Sandeep Mariserla, Setareh Ariafar, Shanfeng Zhang, Shijie Zhang, Simon Baumgart-
       ner, Sonam Goenka, Steve Qiu, Tanmaya Dabral, Trevor Walker, Vikram Rao, Waleed Khawaja, Wenlei
       Zhou, Xiaoqi Ren, Ye Xia, Yichang Chen, Yi-Ting Chen, Zhe Dong, Zhongli Ding, Francesco Visin,
       Gaël Liu, Jiageng Zhang, Kathleen Kenealy, Michelle Casbon, Ravin Kumar, Thomas Mesnard, Zach
       Gleicher, Cormac Brick, Olivier Lacombe, Adam Roberts, Qin Yin, Yunhsuan Sung, Raphael Hoff-
       mann, Tris Warkentin, Armand Joulin, Tom Duerig, and Mojtaba Seyedhosseini. EmbeddingGemma:
       Powerful and Lightweight Text Representations. Nov. 2025. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2509.20354. eprint:
       2509.20354 (cs).
[15]   “Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Words to Watch”. In: Wikipedia (Nov. 2025). url: https://en.wikipedia.
       org/wiki/Wikipedia:Manual_of_Style/Words_to_watch (visited on 11/12/2025).
[16]   “Wikipedia:Neutral Point of View”. In: Wikipedia (Nov. 2025). url: https://en.wikipedia.org/
       wiki/Wikipedia:Neutral_point_of_view.
[17]   “Wikipedia:No Original Research”. In: Wikipedia (Nov. 2025). url: https://en.wikipedia.org/
       wiki/Wikipedia:No_original_research (visited on 11/11/2025).
[18]   “Wikipedia:Reliable Sources/Perennial Sources”. In: Wikipedia (Oct. 2025). url: https://en.wikipedia.
       org/wiki/Wikipedia:Reliable_sources/Perennial_sources.
[19]   “Wikipedia:Size of Wikipedia”. In: Wikipedia (Nov. 2025). url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
       Wikipedia:Size_of_Wikipedia (visited on 11/11/2025).
[20]   Matteo Wong. What Elon Musk’s Version of Wikipedia Thinks About Hitler, Putin, and Apartheid.
       Oct. 2025. url: https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/2025/10/grokipedia- elon- musk/
       684730/.
[21]   Taha Yasseri. How Similar Are Grokipedia and Wikipedia? A Multi-Dimensional Textual and Structural
       Comparison. Nov. 2025. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2510.26899. eprint: 2510.26899 (cs).




                                                    16
A     Appendix
A.1    Geographic distribution of pageviews
The map below shows a log-scaled geographic distribution of pageview traffic to English Wikipedia for the
pages that were also included on Grokipedia.

                      Grokipedia Pageviews by Country (October 2025, Log Scale)
                                                                                                       109


                                                                                                       108


                                                                                                       107


                                                                                                       106


                                                                                                       105


                                                                                                       104


                                                                                                       103




Figure 12: A map of geographic pageview distribution to English Wikipedia from 27 September to 27 October
2025.


A.2    Comparing Grokipedia and Wikipedia entries by similarity and article type
A comparison of Wikipedia and Grokipedia articles across the spectrum of average chunk similarity, split
up by a variety of sub-criteria: the presence or absence of a CC-license, whether the page has been deemed
“Controversial” by the English Wikipedia community, whether the page is about an elected official.




                                                       17
A.2.1    With and without a CC-license

 Entry           Article    Similarity Wikipedia                                   Grokipedia
                 Type
 Sono            With li-   High         Sachiko’s father was Count Sono           Sachiko’s father was Count Sono
 Sachiko         cense                   Motosachi; she was known as               Motosachi; she was known as
                                         Kogiku Tenji. She gave birth to two       Kogiku Tenji. She gave birth to two
                                         sons and six daughters, several of        sons and six daughters, several of
                                         whom died prematurely. Her chil-          whom died prematurely. Her chil-
                                         dren with Emperor Meiji include the       dren with Emperor Meiji include the
                                         following members of the Japanese         following members of the Japanese
                                         imperial family.                          imperial family.
 Mejia           Without    High         Mejia Thermal Power Station is lo-        Mejia Thermal Power Station is lo-
 Thermal         license                 cated at Durlabhpur, Bankura, 35          cated at Durlabhpur, Bankura, 35
 Power Sta-                              km from Durgapur city in West             km from Durgapur city in West
 tion                                    Bengal. The power plant is one            Bengal. The power plant is one
                                         of the coal based power plants of         of the coal based power plants of
                                         DVC. Commissioned in 1996, MTPS           DVC. Commissioned in 1996, MTPS
                                         is the largest thermal power plant,       is the largest thermal power plant,
                                         in terms of generating capacity, in       in terms of generating capacity, in
                                         the state of West Bengal as well as       the state of West Bengal as well as
                                         among other DVC power plants.             among other DVC power plants.
 Ellen           With li-   Low          Ellen David began her acting career       Her other animated and live-action
 David           cense                   in 1988, with early roles in television   roles include: Tripping the Rift,
                                         series such as Night Heat and Street      Arthur, Mambo Italiano, Law & Or-
                                         Legal. She has appeared in live-          der, Ciao Bella, Mona the Vampire,
                                         action films including Mambo Ital-        Street Legal, and many others across
                                         iano (2003), A Walk on the Moon           film and television.
                                         (1999), and more recently Brook-
                                         lyn (2015), Goon (2011), and Miss
                                         Boots (2024). She is particularly
                                         known for her extensive voice work
                                         in animated series, voicing charac-
                                         ters in Arthur, Caillou, and Sagwa,
                                         the Chinese Siamese Cat.
 Soylent         Without    Low          Soylent is a brand of meal replace-       Soylent is a brand of plant-based
                 license                 ment powders and shakes produced          meal replacement products, includ-
                                         by Soylent Nutrition, Inc., founded       ing ready-to-drink shakes, powders,
                                         in 2013 and headquartered in Los          and bars, formulated to deliver com-
                                         Angeles, California. The name de-         plete nutrition comprising macronu-
                                         rives from a fictional food in the        trients, fiber, and essential vitamins
                                         1966 novel Make Room!            Make     and minerals. The products empha-
                                         Room!.                                    size convenience, sustainability, and
                                                                                   affordability.

Table 3: A comparison of selected articles across the per-article similarity distribution, with license infor-
mation.




                                                     18
A.2.2    Controversial articles

  Entry       Similarity Wikipedia                                      Grokipedia
  Christopher High       Christopher Paul Neil (born Febru-             Christopher Paul Neil (born Febru-
  Paul Neil              ary 6, 1975), better known as Mr.              ary 6, 1975), better known as Mr.
                         Swirl Face, is a Canadian teacher              Swirl Face, is a Canadian teacher
                         who was convicted of child sexual              who was convicted of child sexual
                         abuse. He was the subject of a                 abuse in Thailand and Canada. He
                         highly publicized Interpol investiga-          was the subject of a highly publi-
                         tion of the child sexual abuse of              cized Interpol investigation into the
                         at least 12 young boys in Vietnam,             child sexual abuse of at least 12
                         Cambodia, and Thailand, primarily              young boys in Vietnam, Cambodia,
                         owing to the Internet release of im-           and Thailand, primarily owing to
                         ages depicting the abuse. He was               the Internet release of images de-
                         arrested by Royal Thai Police in Oc-           picting the abuse. He was arrested
                         tober 2007.                                    by Royal Thai Police in October
                                                                        2007 and later arrested in Canada
                                                                        in 2012 for related offenses, leading
                                                                        to additional convictions and his re-
                                                                        lease in 2017.
  Media           Low           The history of media bias in the        Media bias in the United States
  bias    in                    United States has evolved from          refers to a left-liberal slant in ma-
  the United                    overtly partisan newspapers in the      jor mainstream outlets, attributed
  States                        18th and 19th centuries to profes-      to ideological imbalance in journal-
                                sional journalism with ethical stan-    ism and resulting in disproportion-
                                dards in the 20th and 21st centuries.   ate emphasis on progressive narra-
                                                                        tives and unfavorable portrayals of
                                                                        conservative viewpoints.
  Masculism       Low           Masculism or masculinism may re-        Masculism is a socio-political ide-
                                fer to ideologies and socio-political   ology advocating for men’s rights
                                movements seeking to eliminate dis-     and addressing gender-based disad-
                                crimination against men or promote      vantages affecting males, often posi-
                                masculine ideals.                       tioned as a counterpart to feminism.

Table 4: A comparison of selected articles across the per-article similarity distribution, from the controversial
articles subset.

A.2.3    Elected officials in the US and UK




                                                       19
         Entry   Similarity Wikipedia                                    Grokipedia
         Chris   High       Christopher Raphael Deluzio                  Christopher Raphael Deluzio (born July 13, 1984)
         Deluzio            (born July 13, 1984) is an Amer-             is an American attorney, naval veteran, and
                            ican politician, attorney, and               politician serving as the U.S. representative for
                            former U.S. Navy officer serving             Pennsylvania’s 17th congressional district since
                            as the U.S. representative for               2023. A Democrat, he represents a district en-
                            Pennsylvania’s 17th congressional            compassing Beaver County and portions of Al-
                            district since 2023. He is a mem-            legheny County in western Pennsylvania.
                            ber of the Democratic Party. The
                            district encompasses most of the
                            northwestern suburbs and exurbs
                            of Pittsburgh, and includes the
                            entirety of Beaver County.
         Keir    Low        ...was Director of Public Prosecu-           ...was Director of Public Prosecutions from 2008
         Starmer            tions from 2008 to 2013...                   to 2013, overseeing reforms to criminal jus-
                                                                         tice procedures, though his tenure drew
                                                                         criticism for low prosecution rates in child
                                                                         sexual exploitation cases and decisions not
                                                                         to pursue charges in high-profile matters
                                                                         such as the Jimmy Savile complaints....
                                  ...Starmer led Labour to a land-       ...Starmer led Labour to a parliamentary land-
                                  slide victory at the 2024 general      slide in the July 2024 general election, se-
                                  election...                            curing 412 seats despite a modest 33.7%
                                                                         vote share—the lowest for a majority gov-
                                                                         ernment since 1832...
         Pramila     Low          ...serving as the U.S. representa-     ...serving as the U.S. Representative for Washing-
         Jayapal                  tive from Washington’s 7th con-        ton’s 7th congressional district since 2017...
                                  gressional district since 2017...      Born in Chennai, India, Jayapal immi-
                                                                         grated to the United States at age 16 to at-
                                                                         tend Georgetown University (A.B., 1986),
                                                                         later earning an M.B.A. from Northwest-
                                                                         ern University in 1990.
                                  ...Before entering electoral poli-     ...founded OneAmerica, an immigrant advocacy
                                  tics, Jayapal was a Seattle-based      organization in Washington state, where she
                                  civil rights activist, serving until   served as executive director for 12 years, focusing
                                  2012 as the executive director of      on public health and human rights issues
                                  OneAmerica, an immigrant advo-         affecting immigrant communities...
                                  cacy group...                          ...She has faced notable controversies, in-
                                                                         cluding backlash for describing Israel as a
                                                                         “racist state” during a 2023 event (which
                                                                         she later clarified), and for initially ques-
                                                                         tioning a House resolution condemning
                                                                         Hamas’s use of rape as a weapon of war
                                                                         before issuing a statement unequivocally
                                                                         denouncing such acts. These positions re-
                                                                         flect her emphasis on human-rights-based
                                                                         foreign policy and divergence from main-
                                                                         stream Democratic views.

Table 5: Comparison of Wikipedia and Grokipedia entries for elected officials in the US and UK, with ellipses indicating identical
or omitted text.


                                                                20
A.3               Top 100 domains
The domain type composition of the top 100 most-cited sources on both Wikipedia and Grokipedia is very
different; Grokipedia cites notably more academic sources and UGC.

             Wikipedia Top 100 Individual Sites (Grouped by Type)                                                                  Grokipedia Top 100 Individual Sites (Grouped by Type)
                                                                                                                         ncbi.nlm.nih.gov

            thehindu           espn                             google                                                                                                                          youtube
                                                                books                                                        jstor.org
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 reddit
           independent                                                                                                                                             variety
                                                                                               youtube

                                                                                                                             doi.org                                            google
                                                                                                                                                                                books                                 facebook
            telegraph                                                                                                                                                espn
                                                                                                                                                                                                britannica
                                                                                             google
                                                                                              news
                           billboard                       archive.org
                                                                                                                                                                   latimes
              cnn
                                                                                                                          sciencedirect
                                                                                             newspapers                                                                                            archive.org

                                       rolling
             reuters                   stone                                                                                                                       billboard
                                                                                                                                                  reuters

                                                                                    hollywood        anime
                                          deadline    variety            latimes     reporter        news                researchgate.net
                                                                                                    network
        washington
allmusic post
                                                                                                                                                            bbc                       nytimes           theguardian        indiatimes

  pro
football
  ref
                         bbc                         nytimes                   theguardian         indiatimes                                                                  imdb
                                                                                                                             pubmed

                                                                                                                                            cambridge.org tandfonline academia.edu

                                                                 Academic          Government              News                  Other          Reference         UGC
                                                                 Database          Industry site           Niche media           Portal


Figure 13: A treemap graph showing the proportion of citations going to each individual domain in the top
100 domains on Wikipedia (left) and Grokipedia (right). Color indicates domain type




                                                                                                                21
   A.4                             Source reliability

                                                           Source Reliability Category Comparison (all articles without CC-license)
                              Source Status Proportion: Wikipedia vs Grokipedia                                                        % of Articles Citing Any Source in Category
                            1.0
                                                  Source Status                                             100                                                                                 Wikipedia
                                                  Generally reliable
                                                  Generally unreliable                                                                                                                          Grokipedia
                                                  Blacklisted
                                                  No consensus
                            0.8                   Deprecated                                                80              77.1%               78.5%                                79.2%
                                                  Other




  Proportion of Citations                                                             Percent of Articles
                            0.6
                                                                                                            60
                                                                                                                    49.0%
                            0.4                                                                             40
                                                                                                                                                                            33.5%
                                                                                                                                       24.3%
                            0.2                                                                             20                                                                                       17.1%
                                                                                                                                                                    11.7%
                                                                                                                                                           0.9%                              0.7%
                            0.0                                                                              0
                                  Wikipedia                              Grokipedia                                                ble                liable Blacklisted               us             ated
                                                                                                                         lly relia           lly unre                       No consens       Deprec
                                                                                                                  Genera              Genera

   Figure 14: (Left) The relative proportion of Perennial Source list categories for non-CC-licensed Grokipedia
   articles and their Wikipedia counterparts. (Right) The percentage of articles in that subset that contain at
   least one of each category of citation in the two corpora.


                                                                     Source Reliability Score Comparison (all articles without CC-license)
Source1.0Reliability Score Proportion: Wikipedia vs Grokipedia                                                                % of Articles Citing Any Source in Reliability Bucket
                                                 Reliability Score                                          100                                                                               Wikipedia
                                                      No score                                                                                                                                Grokipedia
                                                                                                                                                                                                  88.6%
                                                      0.8-1.0                                                                                                                        84.5%
                            0.8                       0.6-0.8                                               80
                                                      0.4-0.6




  Proportion of Citations
                                                      0.2-0.4



                                                                                      Percent of Articles
                            0.6                       0.0-0.2                                                                                                       62.8%
                                                                                                            60
                                                                                                                                                                                             53.6%
                                                                                                                                                                             50.0%

                            0.4                                                                             40                                  37.9%


                                                                                                                                                            22.0%
                            0.2                                                                             20
                                                                                                                                        12.9%


                                                                                                                     0.2%    1.6%
                            0.0                                                                              0
                                  Wikipedia                              Grokipedia
                                                                                                                       0.0-0.2            0.2-0.4             0.4-0.6         0.6-0.8         0.8-1.0

   Figure 15: (Left) The relative proportion of Lin et al. score reliability in Wikipedia and Grokipedia citations
   without a CC license. (Right) The percentage of articles that contain at least one domain in each score
   bucket in the two corpora.




                                                                                                                            22
A.5                         Article topic

                                                                           Embedding Similarity Distributions by Top 20 2nd-Level Topics (by chunk count) and License Status
                              'Culture.Biography'                                      'Culture.Internet_culture'                                                      'Culture.Literature'                                                'Culture.Media'                                  'Culture.Philosophy_and_religion'
                                                                           300                                                                 500                                                              8000                                                             10000
        6000               Without License
                           With License                                                                                                                                                                         7000
        5000                                                               250
                                                                                                                                               400                                                                                                                                8000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                6000
        4000                                                               200
                                                                                                                                               300                                                              5000                                                              6000
Count   3000                                                       Count   150                                                         Count                                                            Count   4000                                                     Count
                                                                                                                                               200                                                              3000                                                              4000
        2000                                                               100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2000
        1000                                                                50                                                                 100                                                                                                                                2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                1000
          0                                                                  0                                                                  0                                                                 0                                                                  0
                     0.2        0.4        0.6        0.8   1.0                  0.2     0.4           0.6        0.8         1.0                    0.2           0.4           0.6       0.8    1.0                        0.2         0.4        0.6      0.8   1.0                    0.2       0.4         0.6       0.8   1.0
                                      Similarity                                                     Similarity                                                               Similarity                                                       Similarity                                                    Similarity
                                   'Culture.Sports'                                          'Culture.Visual_arts'                                                 'Geography.Regions'                          'History_and_Society.Business_and_economics'                                    'History_and_Society.History'
        1600
                                                                                                                                            30000                                                                800                                                              1200
        1400                                                              1000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 700
        1200                                                                                                                                25000                                                                                                                                 1000
                                                                           800                                                                                                                                   600
        1000                                                                                                                                20000                                                                500                                                                800
                                                                           600
Count    800                                                      Count                                                             Count   15000                                                        Count   400                                                      Count     600
         600                                                               400                                                                                                                                   300
                                                                                                                                            10000                                                                                                                                   400
         400                                                                                                                                                                                                     200
                                                                           200                                                              5000                                                                                                                                    200
         200                                                                                                                                                                                                     100
          0                                                                  0                                                                  0                                                                  0                                                                 0
                      0.4             0.6         0.8       1.0                  0.4   0.5     0.6     0.7 0.8          0.9   1.0                          0.2          0.4        0.6      0.8   1.0                              0.4          0.6       0.8      1.0                    0.2       0.4         0.6       0.8   1.0
                                       Similarity                                                    Similarity                                                               Similarity                                                       Similarity                                                    Similarity
          'History_and_Society.Military_and_warfare'                       'History_and_Society.Politics_and_government'                                    'History_and_Society.Society'                               'History_and_Society.Transportation'                                              'STEM.Biology'
                                                                          2500                                                                 300                                                               700
         800                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1400
         700                                                              2000                                                                 250                                                               600
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1200
         600                                                                                                                                   200                                                               500
                                                                          1500                                                                                                                                                                                                    1000
         500                                                                                                                                                                                                     400
 Count   400                                                      Count                                                                Count   150                                                       Count                                                            Count     800
                                                                          1000                                                                                                                                   300                                                                600
         300                                                                                                                                   100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 200                                                                400
         200                                                               500                                                                 50                                                                100                                                                200
         100
           0                                                                 0                                                                  0                                                                 0                                                                  0
                0.2          0.4         0.6       0.8      1.0                  0.2         0.4        0.6       0.8         1.0                                0.4           0.6         0.8    1.0                  0.2           0.4         0.6        0.8    1.0                      0.4            0.6          0.8     1.0
                                      Similarity                                                     Similarity                                                               Similarity                                                       Similarity                                                    Similarity
                              'STEM.Computing'                                               'STEM.Engineering'                                              'STEM.Medicine_&_Health'                                                      'STEM.STEM*'                                                 'STEM.Technology'
                                                                                                                                               800                                                              3500
                                                                           600                                                                                                                                                                                                      250
         250                                                                                                                                   700                                                              3000
                                                                           500                                                                                                                                                                                                      200
         200                                                                                                                                   600                                                              2500
                                                                           400                                                                 500                                                              2000                                                                150
 Count   150                                                       Count   300                                                         Count   400                                                      Count                                                               Count
                                                                                                                                                                                                                1500
         100                                                                                                                                   300                                                                                                                                  100
                                                                           200                                                                                                                                  1000
                                                                                                                                               200
         50                                                                100                                                                                                                                                                                                      50
                                                                                                                                               100                                                               500
          0                                                                  0                                                                   0                                                                0                                                                  0
               0.2           0.4        0.6        0.8      1.0                          0.4           0.6        0.8         1.0                      0.2              0.4       0.6       0.8   1.0                        0.2         0.4       0.6       0.8   1.0                            0.4         0.6       0.8     1.0
                                      Similarity                                                     Similarity                                                               Similarity                                                       Similarity                                                    Similarity




Figure 16: Embedding chunk similarity between Grokipedia and Wikipedia by predicted article subtopic in
the random 30,000 article subsample.




                                                                                                                                                                          23
