 
 Tolkien: Medieval and Modern: To Make a Soul: Tolkien and Variations of Speech in the Lord of the Rings 
Tolkien: Medieval and Modern
Pages 
 Home 
 Syllabus 2026 
 The Forge of Tolkien 
 Further Reading 
 Syllabus 2011-2023 
 Friday, April 18, 2014 
To Make a Soul: Tolkien and Variations of Speech in the Lord of the Rings
 According to Ursula Le
Guin, if a novel doesn’t have style, all that is left is a synopsis of the plot
(or, to use her example, “a recipe without a cake”). Style is what
characterizes both the novel and the author itself. As creator of the
Legendarium, Tolkien could have chosen to affect any style he wanted, and the
reader would be none the wiser. What I’m primarily interested in, following
Wednesday’s discussion, is why Tolkien chose to consciously forsake creating his
own consistent style when writing the Lord of the Rings, and instead why he
decided to use style as a tool to create realistic and distinct characters. Further,
I’m also interested in what consequences these decisions had upon the story.
Every aspect of Tolkien’s writing is heavily considered and conscious;
understanding his intentions are key to understanding the Lord of the Rings. 
 Le
Guin’s characterization of Tolkien’s writing style as journalism is consistent
with the way that he meant for The Lord of the Rings to be read. In Appendix F,
he stated that he did not write the Lord of the Rings himself; he simply
translated The Red Book of Westmarch from Westron to English. Tolkien altering
the text in any way or inserting his own stylistic tendencies would invalidate
his role as translator and observer and ruin the façade he had created. He
intentionally suppressed his own personality and stylistic tendencies in order
to allow the culture and behavior of his characters to shine through. As we
discussed in class, it’s not that Tolkien could only write in plain,
journalistic styles of speech – the poetry scattered throughout the Lord of the
Rings and in the Tom Bombadil reading is evidence of his ability to wear many
stylistic caps. His choosing to write plainly was a conscious decision. Instead
of making the bulk of the text heavily styled, he instead chose to insert
stylistic variations into the dialogue, speech, and tone of the different
characters. 
 While
other fantasy authors use archaisms and style to distinguish themselves,
Tolkien used variations in style as a tool to distinguish his characters.
Through word-choice, syntax, and tone, Tolkien managed to convey thousands of
years of culture, nationality, and personality through the speech of his
characters. He used style to create genuine-feeling identity. This is no small
feat, indeed. Tolkien calls these “human touches” in his letter to W.H. Auden,
and these small, deliberate touches are what elevate his style beyond the norm.
 Shippey
delved into Tolkien’s differentiation in characters’ speech in his close
analysis of Book II, Chapter 2: “The Council of Elrond.” Like many others in
the class, I was struck by how I didn’t 
notice the variations in the speech between characters the first few times I
read The Lord of the Rings. (Although, to be fair, I was mostly distracted by
Tolkien’s poetry and other more exciting chapters; I remembered this one being
particularly boring to my nine-year-old self.) The beauty of these variations is
that they are barely noticeable to the reader; one notices the character and
the speaker himself, not the speech. Tolkien uses syntax and archaisms to imply
aspects of the characters’ personality and culture without coming directly out
and stating these facts. Elrond’s age and sagacity are implied through his
archaic word order; the stubbornness of the dwarves is communicated through
Gloin’s oblique statements; Saruman’s duplicity can be felt through his
politically minded, abstract manners of speech. Tolkien even went to far as to
consider the tone and cadence with which the Rohirrim would speak C.S.; it
being their second language, he imagined it would be much slower and more
deliberate. These considerations not only support the reality of the world that
Tolkien has created; they also support Tolkien’s claim that he is only acting
as translator. Without these variations and style, the chapter on the Council
could have devolved into a mere listing of concerns, a cake without the
frosting or sugar. 
 Each
character consistently speaks like the most genuine version of themselves. Their individual tendencies and archaisms never sound forced or inauthentic. The result of this authenticity is that the reader readily accepts the reality and existence of the speaker. (The readers' acceptance, then, also supports Tolkien's claim that this is a work that he found and that he is just acting as translator.) Tolkien's commitment and consistency are his greatest strengths. While there are distinct variations in speech
and tone between characters, each character’s own speech is consistent
throughout the entirety of The Lord of the Rings. Tolkien himself acknowledged
this in his letter to Terrence Tiller. When responding to the notion of accents
with the characters, he stated that he “…paid great attention to such
linguistic differentiation as was possible: in diction, idiom, and so on…” (p.
254). Critics seem to get stuck on the distinctions between characters and call
these variations “a lack of consistency” without fully realizing that it is the
consistency in the variations that makes Tolkien’s writing so realistic. Shippey
noted this, stating “…Elrond’s archaism is consistent, achieved not just by
vocabulary (the first resort of the amateur medievalist), but also by grammar”
(p. 76). The consistency creates identity and reality. 
 Le
Guin says, “The greatness of soul shows when a man speaks” (p. 83). This was
Tolkien’s mission in creating differentiating styles and tones: to open wide
the pages and bare the souls of his key characters. He did not make stylistic
choices just for flourish and show; he made them purposefully and distinctly,
in order to flesh out and create a background and culture for each of his
characters. He did it to create souls, to create the impression that these
characters had histories and pasts that extended far beyond his translation of
The Red Book of Westmarch; I would argue that he succeeded. 
 -- K.G. 
By
 "Tolkien: Medieval and Modern" 
at
 April 18, 2014 
 Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest 
Labels:
 Style 
5 comments: 
 Hope 
said...
Hi KG, 
I’m glad that you didn’t notice the style variation when you first read Tolkien. I actually thought Tolkien’s dialogue was very dry and somewhat boring when I read it prior to this class. Le Guin discusses how many novice writers fail when writing fantasy because of their style, how they fake archaism, misuses words, and use too much ichor. I think that as a reader, I fell into some similar traps as novice writers. I failed to understand the intentionality of Tolkien’s style. Rereading the text however, it is much easier to notice the variation in character due to style—I think especially in the poetry. Le Guin however declares that style is most visible in dialogue. I’m curious what the impact of style not in dialogue and how that affects his story. We discussed in class that since the Lord of the Rings is a translation, then Tolkien tries to stay true to how the words are used and how characters would have talked. He has to capture the character and culture of each character in their syntax and mannerisms of speaking. However, how does his straightforward prose also develop his style? If the Red Book of Westmarch was written by Hobbits, can the style of prose be connected to the dialogue of the Hobbits? 
Hope
April 19, 2014 at 1:31 PM
 Unknown 
said...
Dear KG,
Thanks for a clear discussion of why Tolkien may have decided–and I think it is the right track to see it as an authorial decision–to adopt stylistic variance to bring out his characters. But I worry that this appears too much like summary of the texts and discussion. Be sure to foreground your own contribution to the topics at hand lest it get overshadowed and missed. 
I do like your attention to Tolkien’s framing device in compiling and translating from the Red Book. As you pointed out, he gave deep consideration to each character’s voice, speech, and names, but, as I think you implied, in his Prologue and Appendix tries to tuck that artistic attention aside as if he had only ‘Englished’ the styles and names. I wonder. Is this framing device necessary, do you think? Could the styles have held up (perhaps with an omniscient narrator) without the framing device of the Red Book?
~Robert
April 19, 2014 at 8:46 PM
 Megan 
said...
Some of my best friends denote Tolkien’s writing style and the evident density of The Lord of the Rings’ text as the primary reasons why they were unable to be drawn into Tolkien’s realm. In fact, a number of them--echoing many of the sentiments shared by Tolkien’s critics--question how works like The Hobbit could have been intended for children to read when many adults find them unbearable blocks of text. Conversely, I--and many others--have never Tolkien’s writing style to be an issue. Keeping that in mind, I wonder what potential implications writing style may have on the efficacy of creating secondary realities that are able to draw the spectator into another realm. Writing style that is similar to the way in which we communicate may be a potential means of making a secondary reality more grounded in a primary reality and discourse that we already know. If so, this would be in line with the already evident emphasis Tolkien places on the importance of language. Maybe it is for this reason that many people feel detached from the way Tolkien writes, as they are unable to relate to the word choice or manner of speaking of many of the characters. Maybe this is also why many people still find Tolkien’s writing to be enchanting, as it is as timeless and the stories.
- Megan Porter
April 20, 2014 at 11:12 AM
 "Tolkien: Medieval and Modern" 
said...
Le Guin and Shippey's writings on Tolkien's writing style and characterization in The Lord of the Rings were two of my favorite readings in the course. Le Guin's account of bad medieval fantasy writing is dead on, and Shippey's comments on the speech of different characters in LOTR drew my attention to the wonderful differences and distinctions between them. As a philologist and etymologist, concerned with the history of language, of course Tolkien would have paid great attention to the language of his characters, and it is part of what makes these characters so alive and real. After all, their people, land, and language all have histories in LOTR. In answer to Robert, I think the different styles of the characters would have held up without the framing device of the Red Book. As Le Guin pointed out, great authors enliven their characters by giving them different speech, as they are different people after all. With an omnipresent narrator, there can still be different styles of speech for different characters. What the framing device of the Red Book adds is history to the story that Tolkien is telling. He tells us the source of the story, as if he is just a translator, therefore also validating the existence of these stories outside of himself so that they are not just his creation.
--Jade 
June 6, 2014 at 11:18 AM
 MBM 
said...
I think it's a very that Tolkien's writing style is so quick to attract some and force others away. I'm so thrilled to have taken this class and encountered the readings we were assigned, because I think it has helped me immensely both as a reader and a writer. I sometimes feel annoyed when I'm reading and all the characters feel indistinguishable- they're all too clearly flowing from the author in some way or another, and they're representative of a single voice. Tolkien does an incredible job of distinguishing between each character speaking, making each unique, and I think the stylistic techniques he use are incredible (and something many writers fail to imitate, perhaps because it's so natural and I at least was not aware of it even when I was reading it). I greatly appreciate Le Guin's analysis of bad fantasy writing and language, although I also wonder about it on some level. Yes- there's something very beautiful about archaic and timeless language, but I also think there's something to be said for very plain speech in writing. I like the sense of communication and interaction that comes from reading a fantasy written without elevated style. Lord of the Rings can feel very, very distant at times. Tolkien does a wonderful job using language, but not every author is a philologist. I still think stories written with very plain language can be worth telling, and perhaps better and easier to connect with in some situations.
MBM
June 6, 2014 at 7:16 PM
 Post a Comment 
 Newer Post 
 Older Post 
 Home 
Subscribe to:
 Post Comments (Atom) 
About this course 
"Tolkien: Medieval and Modern"
 J.R.R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings is one of the most popular works of imaginative literature of the twentieth century. This course seeks to understand its appeal by situating Tolkien's creation within the context of Tolkien’s own work as both artist and scholar alongside its medieval sources and modern parallels. Themes to be addressed include the problem of genre and the uses of tradition, the nature of history and its relationship to place, the activity of creation and its relationship to language, beauty, evil and power, the role of monsters in imagination and criticism, the twinned challenges of death and immortality, fate and free will, and the interaction between the world of "faerie" and religious belief. 
 View my complete profile 
But my horn shall be exalted like that of the unicorn 
Themes 
 Creativity and Free Will I: Aulë and Fëanor 
 (51) 
 Creativity and Free Will II: Númenor 
 (41) 
 Creativity and Free Will III: Frodo and the Ring 
 (47) 
 Death and Immortality I: Elves and Men 
 (55) 
 Death and Immortality II: Men and Hobbits 
 (51) 
 Fantasy and Fairy Tale 
 (21) 
 Fragments and Elf-Friends 
 (28) 
 History and Place 
 (50) 
 Jewels and Trees I 
 (42) 
 Jewels and Trees II 
 (42) 
 Language and Dreams 
 (48) 
 Language and Names 
 (46) 
 Monsters and Critics 
 (51) 
 Style 
 (40) 
 The Meaning of Life I: Worship 
 (49) 
 The Meaning of Life II: Cult 
 (19) 
 The Music of Creation 
 (51) 
Visits to Middle-earth 
Followers 
Nolwë ola, ar cuila lohta 
Course designed and taught by 
 Rachel Fulton Brown 
 Associate Professor of History 
 The University of Chicago 
Search This Blog 
Upon an instrument of ten strings 
Blog Archive 
 ► 
2026
 (78) 
 ► 
June
 (1) 
 ► 
May
 (36) 
 ► 
April
 (37) 
 ► 
March
 (4) 
 ► 
2023
 (68) 
 ► 
May
 (39) 
 ► 
April
 (25) 
 ► 
March
 (4) 
 ► 
2020
 (105) 
 ► 
June
 (14) 
 ► 
May
 (54) 
 ► 
April
 (36) 
 ► 
March
 (1) 
 ► 
2017
 (120) 
 ► 
June
 (1) 
 ► 
May
 (60) 
 ► 
April
 (56) 
 ► 
March
 (3) 
 ▼ 
2014
 (218) 
 ► 
June
 (26) 
 ► 
May
 (110) 
 ▼ 
April
 (82) 
 Creation Myth and the Canon: What It Means to be S... 
 A Concern About Hobbits 
 Ainulindalë is to Elves as Genesis is to Men 
 Literalism and the Problem of Evil 
 The Origin of Evil and If God Is Good 
 Religious Fragmentation in Tolkien's Legendarium 
 Relative realities, framing, and religion 
 Why Music? 
 String Theory: Creation, Music, and Humanity 
 Eru and Eden: How Tolkien's Creation Myth Exemplif... 
 Fragments from Wednesday's Discussion 
 True Names: A Counterexample 
 Some Thoughts on Languages 
 Dream Tongue 
 The Creations of the Valar and Valarin 
 Name and Language in Tolkien 
 Tom is the Master 
 The Sub Creative Art of Language 
 "O felix peccatum Babel!" and the Function of Lang... 
 The Aesthetics of Language 
 Orc-language and why it is corrupt 
 Asterisk History 
 Names and History: the Development of Language 
 The Role of Place and History in the Creation of t... 
 The Past Recedes 
 History, Fantasy and Historical Relativism 
 Between Reality and History in Time, Mythology 
 When the Value of Myth and History Lies in Action ... 
 The History Within Myths 
 An Anachronistic History 
 Seeds and Gardeners: Patterns of Characterization ... 
 History as Myth and a Few Other Things As Well 
 Giving the Ordinary Meaning 
 Historical Fantasy, and Fantastical History: The S... 
 Holly and Ruin 
 Taking Root: Tolkien and the Land 
 How Can History Be Real If Our Myths Aren't Real 
 The World Is Flat, and How We Can Avoid It: Farmer... 
 Translation, Style, and Historical Narrative 
 A Far-off Gleam of Evangelium 
 To Make a Soul: Tolkien and Variations of Speech i... 
 A Hobbit Book: The Simplicity of Style 
 Self-Stylin': Gandalf the Grey 
 Tolkien's Mastery of Words 
 The Style of the Elf-Friend 
 Tolkien's Use of Poetry and Prose 
 Tolkien’s Style: Fluidity between the Humble and t... 
 Translating the Red Book of Westmarch 
 Poetry, Peoples, and Memory 
 The Uses of Poetry in Lord of the Rings 
 On Devices, Dreams, and Dumbledore, or, "Of course... 
 The Importance of Machine 
 Spaceships: On Travel Between Primary and Secondar... 
 Paths to a Tangible Legend 
 The Machine that Conquered Time 
 The Author in the Work 
 Tolkien and Time Travel 
 Private languages and Communication in Tolkien's L... 
 Dream-Language Interactions across Tolkien's Work 
 Breaching the Secondary Reality 
 Reincarnation in Tolkien 
 Fragments Within the Works of Tolkien 
 Falling Asleep Again: Frodo's Experience 
 Atlantis and Atalantie 
 Language and People 
 The Route to the Lost Road: Tolkien's Application ... 
 The Reality of the Imagined 
 Whence and why a story? Art and Allegory in Tolkie... 
 Immortality through Fragmentation 
 Our Need for Elf-friends 
 The Inevitable Homecoming 
 Keepers of Faerie 
 The Agency and Destiny of Elf Friends 
 Building Bridges to Faerie 
 The End of the Story 
 On Fragments, Soup, and Rapunzel 
 Elf-friends and Credibility 
 Tom Bombadil and Fantasy as Reason 
 Rissik and the Literary Value of Creation 
 Meditations 
 Our Right: Used and Misused 
 Who Are Fairy Stories Written For? Come, Tom Bomba... 
 ► 
2011
 (176) 
 ► 
June
 (9) 
 ► 
May
 (74) 
 ► 
April
 (89) 
 ► 
March
 (4) 
In the works of thy hands, I shall rejoice 
Guides to Arda 
 Ansible 
 Elvish Linguistic Fellowship 
 Family Tree of the Tolkien Legendarium 
 Glǽmscrafu 
 Internet Sacred Text Archive 
 J.R.R. Tolkien and WWI 
 LotR Project 
 Planet Tolkien 
 The (Other) Tolkien Professor 
 The Cambridge Tolkien Society 
 The Catholic Imagination of J.R.R. Tolkien 
 The DM of the Rings 
 The Forge of Tolkien 
 The Grey Havens 
 The One Ring 
 The Tolkien Estate 
 The Tolkien Meta-FAQ 
 The Tolkien Music List 
 The Tolkien Shop 
 Tolkien Collecting Resources 
 Tolkien Collection, Marquette University 
 Tolkien Gateway 
 Tolkien Library 
 Tolkien Sarcasm Page 
 Tolkien Society 
 Tolkien's The Notion Club Papers 
 Tolkienian Fonts for Windows 
 Useful Elvish Phrases 
Images from the Stuttgart Psalter, Stuttgart, Württembergische Landesbibliothek, Cod.bibl.fol. 23. Theme images by caracterdesign . Powered by Blogger .
 