
 : RevolutionSF - Epic Pooh : Feature 
 home 
: news 
: reviews 
: features 
: fiction 
: podcast 
: blogs 
: t-shirts 
: wtf? 
 Epic Pooh 
 © Michael Moorcock 
 Author's Note: 'Epic Pooh' was originally published as an essay by 
 the BSFA , revised for its 
 inclusion in the 1989 book Wizardry and Wild Romance, A Study of Epic Fantasy , 
 and slightly revised again for this publication. It was written long before the publication and much-deserved success of Philip Pullman's 'His Dark Materials' trilogy which, in my view, merits all the optimism I have expressed here. The essay did not attempt to deal with all fantasy, such as Alice in Wonderland or other children's fantasy, 
 but only epic fantasy from its origins in romance poetry to the present day. 
 Certain highlighted phrases indicate additional 
 comments from the author: mouse over the phrase to read the note. 
 Epic Pooh 
Why is the Rings being widely read today? At a time when perhaps the 
 world was never more in need of authentic experience, this story seems to 
 provide a pattern of it. A businessman in Oxford told me that when tired or 
 out of sorts he went to the Rings for restoration. Lewis and various 
 other critics believe that no book is more relevant to the human situation. 
 W. H. Auden says that it "holds up the mirror to the only nature we know, 
 our own." As for myself I was rereading the Rings at the time 
 of Winston Churchill's funeral and I felt a distinct parallel between the 
 two. For a few short hours the trivia which normally absorbs us was suspended 
 and people experienced in common the meaning of leadership, greatness, valor, 
 time redolent of timelessness, and common traits. Men became temporarily human 
 and felt the life within them and about. Their corporate life lived for a 
 little and made possible the sign of renewal alter a realisation such as occurs 
 only once or twice in a lifetime. 
 For a century at least the world has been increasingly demythologized. But 
 such a condition is apparently alien to the real nature of men. Now comes 
 a writer such as John Ronald Reuel Tolkien and, as remythologizer, strangely 
 warms our souls. 
 Clyde S. Kilby: "Meaning in the Lord of the Rings", 
 Shadows of Imagination , 1969 
 I have sometimes wondered how much the advent of steam influenced Victorian 
 ballad poetry and romantic prose. Reading Dunsany, for instance, it often occurs 
 to me that his early stories were all written during train journeys: 
 Up from the platform and onto the train
 Got Welleran, Rollory and young Iraine.
 Forgetful of sex and income tax
 Were Sooranard, Mammolek, Akanax:
 And in their dreams Dunsany's lord
 Mislaid the communication cord. 
 The sort of prose most often identified with "high" fantasy is the 
 prose of the nursery-room. It is a lullaby; it is meant to soothe and console. 
 It is mouth-music. It is frequently enjoyed not for its tensions but for its 
 lack of tensions. It coddles; it makes friends with you; it tells you comforting 
 lies. It is soft: 
One day when the sun had come back over the forest, bringing with it the 
 scent of May, and all the streams of the Forest were tinkling happily to find 
 themselves their own pretty shape again, and the little pools lay dreaming 
 of the life they had seen and the big things they had done, and in the warmth 
 and quiet of the Forest the cuckoo was trying over his voice carefully and 
 listening to see if he liked it, and wood-pigeons were complaining gently 
 to themselves in their lazy comfortable way that it was the other fellow's 
 fault, but it didn't matter very much; on such a day as this Christopher Robin 
 whistled in a special way he had, and Owl came flying out of the Hundred Acre 
 Wood to see what was wanted. 
 Winnie-the-Pooh , 1926 
 It is the predominant tone of The Lord of the Rings and Watership 
 Down and it is the main reason why these books, like many similar ones in 
 the past, are successful. It is the tone of many forgotten British and American 
 bestsellers, well-remembered children's books, like The Wind in the Willows , 
 you often hear it in regional fiction addressed to a local audience, or, in 
 a more sophisticated form, James Barrie ( Dear Brutus , Mary Rose and, 
 of course, Peter Pan ). Unlike the tone of E.Nesbit ( Five Children 
 and It etc.), Richmal Crompton (the 'William' books) Terry Pratchett or 
 the redoubtable J.K.Rowling, it is sentimental, slightly distanced, often wistful, 
 a trifle retrospective; it contains little wit and much whimsy. The humour is 
 often unconscious because, as with Tolkien , the authors take 
 words seriously but without pleasure: 
One summer's evening an astonishing piece of news reached the Ivy Bush and 
 Green Dragon. Giants and other portents on the borders of the Shire were forgotten 
 for more important matters; Mr. Frodo was selling Bag End, indeed he had already 
 sold it-to the Sackville-Bagginses! 
 "For a nice bit, too," said some. "At a bargain price," 
 said others, "and that's more likely when Mistress Lobelia's the buyer." 
 (Otho had died some years before, at the ripe but disappointed age of 102.) 
 Just why Mr. Frodo was selling his beautiful hole was even more debatable 
 than the price... 
 The Fellowship of the Ring , 1954 
 I have been told it is not fair to quote from the earlier parts of The 
 Lord of the Rings , that I should look elsewhere to find much better stuff 
 so, opening it entirely at random, I find some improvement in substance and 
 writing, but that tone is still there: 
Pippin became drowsy again and paid little attention to Gandalf telling him 
 of the customs of Gondor, and how the Lord of the City had beacons built on 
 the tops of outlying hills along both borders of the great range, and maintained 
 posts at these points where fresh horses were always in readiness to bear 
 his errand-riders to Rohan in the North, or to Belfalas in the South. "It 
 is long since the beacons of the North were lit," he said; "and 
 in the ancient days of Gondor they were not needed, for they had the Seven 
 Stones." 
 Pippin stirred uneasily. 
 The Return of the King , 1955 
 Tolkien does, admittedly, rise above this sort of thing on occasions, in some 
 key scenes, but often such a scene will be ruined by ghastly verse and it is 
 remarkable how frequently he will draw back from the implications of the subject 
 matter. Like Chesterton, and other orthodox Christian writers who substituted 
 faith for artistic rigour he sees the petit bourgeoisie, the honest artisans 
 and peasants, as the bulwark against Chaos. These people are always sentimentalized 
 in such fiction because traditionally, they are always the last to complain 
 about any deficiencies in the social status quo. They are a type familiar to 
 anyone who ever watched an English film of the thirties and forties, particularly 
 a war-film, where they represented solid good sense opposed to a perverted intellectualism. 
 In many ways The Lord of the Rings is, if not exactly anti-romantic, 
 an anti-romance. Tolkien, and his fellow "Inklings" (the dons who 
 met in Lewis's Oxford rooms to read their work in progress to one another), 
 had extraordinarily ambiguous attitudes towards Romance (and just about everything 
 else), which is doubtless why his trilogy has so many confused moments when 
 the tension flags completely. But he could, at his best, produce prose much 
 better than that of his Oxford contemporaries who perhaps lacked his respect 
 for middle-English poetry. He claimed that his work was primarily linguistic 
 in its original conception, that there were no symbols or allegories to be found 
 in it, but his beliefs permeate the book as thoroughly as 
 they do the books of Charles Williams and C. S. Lewis, who, consciously or unconsciously, 
 promoted their orthodox Toryism in everything they wrote. While there is an 
 argument for the reactionary nature of the books, they are certainly deeply 
 conservative and strongly anti-urban, which is what leads some to associate 
 them with a kind of Wagnerish hitlerism. I don't think these books are 'fascist', 
 but they certainly don't exactly argue with the 18th century enlightened Toryism 
 with which the English comfort themselves so frequently in these upsetting times. 
 They don't ask any questions of white men in grey clothing who somehow have 
 a handle on what's best for us.
 Continued . . . 
 © Michael Moorcock. 
London born Michael 
 Moorcock is one of the most prominent, prolific and popular writers in the 
 Western world. As the editor of New Worlds, Moorcock was a primary motivation 
 behind the 1960s "New Wave" literary movement. His prodigious output 
 includes rock songs, comics, screenplays, essays, and over seventy novels. Perhaps 
 best known for his interlocking heroic fantasy series, Moorcock's recurring 
 characters include Elric, Corum, Dorian Hawkmoon, Jerry Cornelius, the Eternal 
 Champion and others. A multiple winner of the British Fantasy Award, Michael 
 has won the Guardian Fiction Award (The Condition Of Muzak), the World Fantasy 
 Award (Gloriana), the John W. Campbell Memorial Award (Gloriana), Nebula Award 
 (Behold The Man) and was a finalist for the Whitbread Prize (Mother London). 
 He currently lives with his wife Linda in Lost Pines, TX. His work can also 
 be found at newworldsmagazine.com .
Illustrations are © Doug Potter. 
Comments 
 Name: 
 Comments: 
 What number appears here? 
Moorcock makes the mistake of concluding that Tolkien\'s tone of bittersweet nostalgia means his writing is pablum that lacks a meaningful social agenda. He couldn\'t be more wrong. Consider Tolkien\'s background: A man who put himself back together after being emotionally ravaged by the hellish experiences of the Great War (where many of his friends were killed), who sees his son has go off to battle the same enemy. Is it any surprise that Tolkien\'s writing combines a fierce nostalgia for a lost and better time with a warning that soldiers never come home to the same land they left? Consider when Tolkien\'s writing first \"came into its own\" in America: The 1960s, a time of overwhelming and bewildering social change. Instead of a comforting pablum, Tolkien wrote a despairing cry for the world\'s lost innocence.
 -- James MacKenzie, 3:40 PM, March 22, 2013 
I read the first three pages of this diatribe before I got bored out of my brain. MM may enjoy putting the boot into Tolkien and Milne but consider this - does anyone have any recollections of Tolkien or Milne ripping strips off any other authors simply because those authors didn\'t subscribe to their methodology of good story-telling? Who\'s being the intellectual thug here?
Speaking for myself, if I like a story, I like it. I can\'t be bothered concerning myself about deeper implications, literary styles, political overtones, social commentary or structural techniques. Whatever happened to simply enjoying a good story for its own sake? It\'s supposed to be an entertainment medium, and God help us if we can\'t simply relax with a good book without having to think it to death. I say to heck with all this highbrow intellectual analysis - it\'s boring and it\'s missing the point. Maybe I like to be lulled! Maybe a bit of mouth-music provides me with a bit of an escape from all the depressing mouth-disharmony in the world! Since when does literature have to be confrontational or shy away from being purely escapist to qualify as a good read? If LOTR is a childish, escapist fantasy, so what? A hell of a lot more copies of LOTR have been sold than have any MM novel, and that to me says it all. In fact, I can\'t help but detect a faint whiff of sour grapes emanating from the aforementioned diatribe.
I read to relax and to be entertained, not to be reminded of the ugly realities of the world or to have to consider the deeper implications of every paragraph. It\'s story-telling and it should be fun, not an intellectual chore. Life\'s too short to get that serious.
 -- Markus, 7:25 AM, February 03, 2013 
Moorcock represents everything that is trivial, juvenile and tedious about Sci Fi.
 -- John Carter, 10:46 AM, January 10, 2013 
@Ambidextor,On the seeming lack of religion in middle earth - The Valar (angelic beings/demi gods) are called upon a few times in LotR. I suppose the lack of religion generally among humans could be explained by the fall of Numenor, where men turned from worshiping the creator god and instead at the instigation of Sauron worshipped the original dark lord, Morgoth. Eventually their actions under Saurons instruction lead to the drowning of Numenor, and huge upheaval, destruction and flooding to parts of Middle-earth. Possibly enough to put the Numenoreans and cultures they had an influence on off religion. \'True\' worship of the creator in Middle-earth seems to have been very basic and simple.
 -- mirime, 11:20 AM, November 30, 2012 
I have read this essay several times. I agree totally with his points - yet I still love LOR. I remember first reading them when I was young - and finding the prose, well, different. As a pure writer maybe not in the class of a Conrad . . . or even Joyce. But it\'s more different and unique, than bad I think.
 -- C. Tusten Houchin, 1:24 PM, November 04, 2012 
>> Well read it again, and take notes this time! Moorcock is very generous in praising writers he likes: namely Robin McKinley, Gillian Bradshaw, Ursula K. Le Guin, Susan Cooper, and Alan Garner. He gives specific examples of passages frpm their books, and in most cases tells you specifically what he likes, eg: \"Bradshaw\'s writing is clear and vibrant, her story-telling has pace and verve.\" 
Those are just words and nothing more, they don\'t really tell what you he thinks fictional writing ought to be, because his examples don\'t really show clarity vs unclarity or pace vs lack of pace.
 -- Daniel B, 5:14 PM, November 01, 2012 
While it is clear the author has some deep-seeded antagonism towards Christianity, whether he realizes it or not, the criticisms he levels against the style of Tolkien and Lewis are accurate, at least on the surface.
Their writing is difficult to read, and the contrasting example Robin McKinley is excellent. I immediately downloaded the kindle version sample of one of her books.
I am not sure, however, I feel comfortable clicking on the affiliate links in the article. Perhaps, if the author had a less mocking tone and kept the criticism to the writing as opposed to some meanderings with supposed hidden knowledge about the inferiority of the other authors\' views, I might be inclined to support.
But, that was not what I read. Informative yes. Someone I want to keep in business other than by buying their works directly? I do not know.
 -- johann, 8:11 PM, September 05, 2012 
I find myself mostly confused by Moorcock\'s positions.
I\'m not going to argue about Lewis - I would be even less kind - but Susan Cooper shares many of the same faults and is just as preachy (even if she\'s less obnoxious about it, her old ones are agents of a very judeo-christian \'light\' all the same). Worse, the \'Dark\' in her best-known series is so poorly motivated as to make the adversaries forgettable. You literally have to assume they\'re the kind of evil that kicks puppies because that\'s just what evil does - they have no real motivations at all except to be not \'the light\'. And he considers this good writing? Entertaining when I was young and undiscriminating, sure, but as an adult the writings limitations are painfully obvious.
But what confuses me most about Moorcock\'s diatribe is his desire to somehow paint the LotR as \'comforting\'. That\'s certainly not the primary emotion I derive from it. That emotion would be sadness. To triumph over evil the heroes have to sacrifice the power and majesty of the past. The magic fades away. The elves diminish and go into the west or intermingle and disappear into men. The dwarves retreat into their halls and disappear.
Now, this is certainly anti-progressive, it expresses a conservative philosophy that the past is better than the future will be. But in Tolkien\'s world that\'s in many ways literally true. And I don\'t think its best read as an allegory for today, implying that our best age is also behind us. I think its best read as a metaphor for maturing. Just like the magic and wonder of middle earth, innocence fades and the magic goes away as we grow up. And we should be sad that we\'ll never reacquire the same wonder we had when we were younger. Is it any wonder that hobbits are like unto children, and that Frodo, who is forced to grow up during his quest, chooses not to tarry long in middle earth?
Maybe I\'m the one over-thinking it, but Moorcock\'s assessment of \'comfort\' can only lead me to conclude that he has read Tolkien poorly, because there is little comfort in victory for the one character who is truly changed by his journey.
 -- Squirrelloid, 12:26 AM, September 01, 2012 
Sorry guys, my internet screwed up.
Also, the enterbutton does not work apparently. All wall of text.
 -- Rednatto, 2:31 PM, May 01, 2012 
I'm not an expert on the matter or anything so just skip this whole comment if you want someone who thinks that the are.
But what's with this essay really? Who is it actually arguing with? It seems to assume that LOTR needs to be a part of a specific literary discipline or something like that. Perhaps that is what it is being pushed or labeled as, but in case that's the only problem I don't really care. To me it doesn't matter wether the book I'm reading fit into the definition of a style, not even if it is being pushed as such. Perhaps it's just me who's uneducated on the subject, but it seems like the essayist takes the genre way too seriously. Whichever discipline or genre the LOTR series is a part of, that just means we have decided that the genre should be in a specific way and that the book seams to match that definition. Perhaps it helps with sorting books or whatnot but it's hardly something to argue about, and it really doesn't give a good basis for criticism of society at large. 
"Good fiction should..." or things like that really doesn't sound good to me. I'll decide what I want to value, thank you very much. I do not read things for the same reason all the time, and think you would find few people agreeing totaly on what makes good literature. It does not always need to question stuff, sometimes being entertaining is enough. It does not need to be like another book, follow the style or use the same language to be a decent read. The point is, there isn't any Good Literature(tm), there's just what you, and others, find to be good, and discussion. Also; who said that LOTR was the only good fantasy, or the best even. Why would someone argue that, and if noone did, then why all the examples from other writers. Yes they are good, and yes they are different, what's the point? There is more than one way to write a good book, really.
So to the reset of the discussion; Yea it may be a bit simplistic at times. There is a clear evil, you don't really get to question it or something. But that was atleast not why I read it, I came for an awsome story and a magic world, and that I got. Not saying thats the only place to get it, but I can say it's one.
As for women, I don't know. There weren't Many women in there, but we can't require there to always be a female protagonist. Really, Galadriel and entwives seems to be about the level of woman-empowering you could do without breaking out of the story and imersion, don't you think?
There is things like prayer and such in the books too, isn't there, in some sense of the word atleast. Besides, it probably is rather hard to fit gods into a story. I mean, either they are deistic and do not change much, or some contrived excuse for them not just fixing everything is needed. I atleast never found it distracting thet the cultures lacked religions. Would it really be that unlikely you think, that in a world of actual magic, elves and dragons, people wouldn't have developed religion as we know it? Seriously, Gandalf is, like, more magical, than jesus, and his teachings are quite fancy too.
Reading both Narnia and the Dark Matter when young I seem to remember Narnia getting preachy at times, breaking the story for awhile to teach you something. Whileas analogy, perhaps being more subtle by nature, or perhaps being missed completly if the reference isn't known, didn't concern me much in either. The 'church' in the Dark Matter was evil because of what they did and Aslan wasn't a good guy because he was god. Honestly, I liked the deamons a lot the way they were used in that story tho.
Sorry 'bout all the bad spelling and grammar and stuff but seriously, What's so bad about Pooh really? 
 -- Rednatto, 2:29 PM, May 01, 2012 
I'm not an expert on the matter or anything so just skip this whole comment if you want someone who thinks that the are.
But what's with this essay really? Who is it actually arguing with? It seems to assume that LOTR needs to be a part of a specific literary discipline or something like that. Perhaps that is what it is being pushed or labeled as, but in case that's the only problem I don't really care. To me it doesn't matter wether the book I'm reading fit into the definition of a style, not even if it is being pushed as such. Perhaps it's just me who's uneducated on the subject, but it seems like the essayist takes the genre way too seriously. Whichever discipline or genre the LOTR series is a part of, that just means we have decided that the genre should be in a specific way and that the book seams to match that definition. Perhaps it helps with sorting books or whatnot but it's hardly something to argue about, and it really doesn't give a good basis for criticism of society at large. 
"Good fiction should..." or things like that really doesn't sound good to me. I'll decide what I want to value, thank you very much. I do not read things for the same reason all the time, and think you would find few people agreeing totaly on what makes good literature. It does not always need to question stuff, sometimes being entertaining is enough. It does not need to be like another book, follow the style or use the same language to be a decent read. The point is, there isn't any Good Literature(tm), there's just what you, and others, find to be good, and discussion. Also; who said that LOTR was the only good fantasy, or the best even. Why would someone argue that, and if noone did, then why all the examples from other writers. Yes they are good, and yes they are different, what's the point? There is more than one way to write a good book, really.
So to the reset of the discussion; Yea it may be a bit simplistic at times. There is a clear evil, you don't really get to question it or something. But that was atleast not why I read it, I came for an awsome story and a magic world, and that I got. Not saying thats the only place to get it, but I can say it's one.
As for women, I don't know. There weren't Many women in there, but we can't require there to always be a female protagonist. Really, Galadriel and entwives seems to be about the level of woman-empowering you could do without breaking out of the story and imersion, don't you think?
There is things like prayer and such in the books too, isn't there, in some sense of the word atleast. Besides, it probably is rather hard to fit gods into a story. I mean, either they are deistic and do not change much, or some contrived excuse for them not just fixing everything is needed. I atleast never found it distracting thet the cultures lacked religions. Would it really be that unlikely you think, that in a world of actual magic, elves and dragons, people wouldn't have developed religion as we know it? Seriously, Gandalf is, like, more magical, than jesus, and his teachings are quite fancy too.
Reading both Narnia and the Dark Matter when young I seem to remember Narnia getting preachy at times, breaking the story for awhile to teach you something. Whileas analogy, perhaps being more subtle by nature, or perhaps being missed completly if the reference isn't known, didn't concern me much in either. The 'church' in the Dark Matter was evil because of what they did and Aslan wasn't a good guy because he was god. Honestly, I liked the deamons a lot the way they were used in that story tho.
Sorry 'bout all the bad spelling and grammar and stuff but seriously, What's so bad about Pooh really? 
 -- Rednatto, 5:51 AM, May 01, 2012 
to ambidexter the point about the orcs being irradeemably evil is that orcs were the elves that were perverted by the word of morgoth meaning that if they weren\'t \"evil\" they wouldn\'t be orcs but i agree about the lack of women and religion and to kevin, i think you missed ambidexters point entirely, i believe he meant that nobody really pays attention to the gods and their lack of relevence in their culture as oppose to not believing in them.
 -- Fergus, 6:54 AM, April 19, 2012 
I’ve always found it curious how Michael Moorcock levels charges of "infantalism" against J. R. R. Tolkien while simultaneously demonstrating his own political immaturity at the time.
Moorcock spends a lot of time decrying classism, and comparing his adversary to Hitler, among other things, but it is the nihilistic lack of currency given to words like Good and Evil, and the desacralisation of the land, for example, that underpins so much injustice and destruction in our world. Moorcock’s principles and politics, particularly with regard to gender, are often admirable, but in this essay he seems confused – it is as if he wants a world of justice, of what is right, but wants to win himself and his books an audience of simpletons with the intellectual fortitude of disaffected youth who think the “bad guy” is the good guy, because he’s “cooler.”
To those of you who think the Lord of the Rings is "sexist", I'm no feminist, but my politics and principles with regard to gender are strong, having engaged with a lot of gender theory, and I have nothing but admiration for Tolkien's legendarium - in contrast, the "edgier" authors of fantasy fall into the trap of thinking anything that "subverts" or "transcends" the prudery they accuse Tolkien of is "progressive", "good", "better", no matter misogynist their "edginess" may be. They subvert and transcend nothing; liberal democracies are highly-sexualised cultures, wherein the dehumanisation of women is "normal", frequently functioning at the behest of market values, and these "edgier" authors are either far from mature, or targeting an immature audience, if they fail to see the fallacy of the dichotomy they promote to promote their works. It might fool simpletons who think the world is as simple as Judeo-Christian morality versus anything-goes nihilism, but anyone with an ounce of maturity, and engagement with cultural and historical studies knows it's a lie. Plain and simple.
I thoroughly enjoyed the Eternal Champion series, and I understand that this essay was written some time ago, and its author has probably matured, but it and its legacy online has dented my opinion of Moorcock considerably.
 -- M., 10:08 PM, March 14, 2012 
To Ambidexter:
On the contrary, I think Tolkien went to great lengths to show that no one was irredeemably evil. See the whole line of thought by Samwise wondering what lies or threats could have led the Haradrim to Sauron's service, and whether they were truly evil at heart.
It's implied there were good orcs, fighting with the Last Alliance against Sauron. They don't get much (or any, truth be told) "screen time" per se, but they are there. Sauron himself was not always wholly evil, nor the Haradrim or Easterlings, or even Gollum.
I am forced to agree with the lack of women--yes there is Eowyn, and perhaps Galadriel, and besides that, not much.
The Haradrim and Easterlings worship Sauron as a god of fire. The dwarves revere Aule, their maker. The elves, unless I am much mistaken, worship the Valar. I don't recall if there were any beliefs ascribed to the Rohirrim or Gondorians.
I do find it funny that Tolkien as a fervently religious man created some cultures that appear to be quite faithless. And "good" cultures at that.
Admittedly I last read the books probably also around 13ish, and haven't managed to read them since. My memory is poor and hazy. All opinions to be taken with a grain of salt.
 -- Kevin, 7:40 PM, March 08, 2012 
Yawn, talk about looking way to deep into something.
 -- Aaron, 3:53 AM, February 27, 2012 
fuck you bitches
 -- stocazzo, 7:26 AM, February 12, 2012 
Another intellectual trying to draw parallels between modernism and LotR. There weren't any as stated by the author himself. Bad stories? Bland? Maybe those writing such comments are used to the instant gratification so prevalent in today's writing. Tolkein et al, whether you liked their work or not, created something timeless. Let's see how many modern writers manage to pull that off.
 -- dave, 4:29 PM, January 29, 2012 
Little more than the rantings of a bitter old man jealous at the mainstream success of others. 
 -- Rii, 1:10 PM, January 29, 2012 
I loved "The Lord of the Rings"...when I was 13. After I saw the first Peter Jackson movie, I reread the books. The characters are one dimensional, the depiction of women was poor, and the elitism was strong. Whole races were totally, irredeemably evil. Three separate cultures were described yet none of them were religious, there were no temples or priests, no character even swore by the gods.
I like good fantasy. I'm a fan of authors like Steven Erikson, Joe Abercrombie and Terry Pratchett. Unfortunately Tolkien, while he may have pushed fantasy into mainstream literature, wasn't a good author. 
 -- Ambidexter, 2:32 PM, January 21, 2012 
Most of the comments here are due to people misreading the essay and then anger at Moorcock because they think he's attacking other authors, however this is not the case. Moorcock is within his rights and is right that these authors do write rather blandly, this is not a bad thing but these books are not as deep or layered as Moorcock or the authors he holds highly. Not to say that LOTR, Quenta silmarillion and the narnia books are bad stories(in fact i enjoyed them very much) i'm just agreeing that they weren't very easy to read.
 -- Fergus, 1:07 PM, January 18, 2012 
 I have read the works of Moorcock, Tolkien and Lewis and understood what they are Tolkien being an interpritation of historical events and cultures, Lewis being an interpritation of biblical and moral stories and Moorcock being an interpritation of societies and there interaction.
 -- Fergus, 5:04 PM, January 13, 2012 
 It is understandable that Moorcock doesn't like Tolkiens work, and he doesn't need to like it. Moorcock is not "on a high horse" And anyone making cracks at him purely because he doesn't like the same fantasyas them is nothing more than a child.
 -- Fergus, 4:56 PM, January 13, 2012 
"They don't ask any questions of white men in grey clothing who somehow have a handle on what's best for us."
Criticizing Tolkien for something like that (a world view that is derived from Tolkien's work beeing based on heroic epics like Beowulf) while praising Philip Pullman for shoving his atheist belief into one's face all the time in his "His Dark Materials" series seems pretty bigoted to me.
Of course no one questions if Aragorn is meant to be King or not. It's a romantic medieval worldview that fits TLOTR.
Just like feuds and infighting fit Elric.
I am kind of disappointed to learn that Micheal Moorcock (whose Elric novels I'm very much enjoying at the moment) is on such a high horse himself.
 -- Dan, 2:49 PM, December 30, 2011 
"Having read this article, I still don't know what Moorcock actually wants out of fiction. " Well read it again, and take notes this time! 
Moorcock is very generous in praising writers he likes: namely Robin McKinley, Gillian Bradshaw, Ursula K. Le Guin, Susan Cooper, and Alan Garner. He gives specific examples of passages frpm their books, and in most cases tells you specifically what he likes, eg: "Bradshaw's writing is clear and vibrant, her story-telling has pace and verve." 
 -- Oswald, 5:48 AM, October 31, 2011 
"Having read this article, I still don't know what Moorcock actually wants out of fiction. " Well read it again, and take notes this time! 
Moorcock is very generous in praising writers he likes: namely Robin McKinley, Gillian Bradshaw, Ursula K. Le Guin, Susan Cooper, and Alan Garner. He gives specific examples of passages frpm their books, and in most cases tells you specifically what he likes, eg: "Bradshaw's writing is clear and vibrant, her story-telling has pace and verve." 
 -- Oswald, 5:47 AM, October 31, 2011 
I've been reading some of the Elric stories and have found them mildly entertaining. I'm afraid my enjoyment may be diminished somewhat now that I know the author is a bit of a douchebag; doubtless this is why the article has so many confused moments when the argument flags completely.
 -- paradigm, 8:13 PM, August 24, 2011 
Young one here again! I am going about this in a very haphazard sort of way but please excuse my bad grammar and stuff. Anyway, to the objections:
You seem to accuse Tolkien of having a naive view of war, which he doesn't. He fought in WWI in the Infantry and saw first hand the brutality. 
Also, you accuse him of being consoled by his writing. Well, of course, consolation is a purpose of Fantasy. But it does not mean he ignores reality, or something. It consoles, because we need consoling naturally. It is not weak to see the brutality of the world and hate it. It is a sign of a sick mind to become engrossed in it and embrace it.
As for saying that Tolkien forces a happy ending upon us, I cannot but think you are hard of heart and unfeeling. The sensation imparted by the actual finish of the Sil and the LOTR is that of profound sadness and loss. The elves go, men are weaker, the world of beauty slips away into the mist.
Please, this is not a unrealistically happy ending. It is a classical notion of the very real failings of man.
Probably, more comments will follow...
 -- Chris, 7:35 PM, August 07, 2011 
Your criticism of Tolkien seems odd, since often enough you do not even deign to mention his arguments for his views. In other cases, you write utter misunderstandings of his work. Firstly, as anyone who has read the LOTR or at least the Sil can tell how far from the world of the carefree countryside is that of Fairy. No one would dare offer tea to the Valar,(unlike Terry Pratchett's books...) or to the noldor, or edain. But I think your great misunderstanding is that of the modern who does not at all understand the though processes of the middle ages, and also that of the Greek and Roman heros. Surely you do not read from Virgil, as Turnus groans lifting a stone none now-a-days could lift, and failing, as in a dream, or a night-mare. Really, it was not the industrial revolution that fostered the love of the "untarnished past", as Boethius fondly thinks of the times when men ate acorns (please, tell me you have read Boethius! I'm only 15, you know!) And to be fair to the Jewish and Christian traditions, they look forward to Jerusalem, and a NEW heavens and earth, thank you. Anyway, to me all your ranting seemed to be the anger of a shallow modern, shunning the beautiful and ancient for fear of its strangeness. I am very indignant, of you, for your treatment of a book and author that follows Beowulf and Homer more than Pooh.
 -- Chris, 10:17 PM, August 06, 2011 
Having read this article, I still don't know what Moorcock actually wants out of fiction. It seems basically an excuse to be vicious toward other writers. It is ironic that he complains about Tolkien and Lewis not being specific, when he is not specific himself. For the record, I read all those books he mentions as a kid, and I liked them all -- as a kid -- including Tolkien, Lewis, and Lloyd Alexander. Sure, I could tell that Alexander's characters were essentially the same cardboard cutouts from book to book. But I still enjoyed them. And I didn't start reading them thinking, "Is this author going to condescend to me?" Plenty of other books did that...
And what the hell is a provincial American literary snob? (I believe that quote is correct.) Yes, it's very nice that Moorcock can construct a sentence, but will he stop it with the personal attacks on everyone and everything?
 -- CB, 5:15 PM, July 28, 2011 
Michael Moorcock isn't exactly the household name that JRR or CS Lewis is, but Moorcock knew them both and like them as people. But he didn't like their works. He has a very negative outlook on good vs evil and that kind of stuff. 
But if you look at some of his other critiques, like the one on HP Lovecraft, you'll understand he is quite the hypocrite. Moorcoock is a good author some would even say great, but his personal views on most things are complete and utter bollocks.
 -- Bot, 12:24 AM, April 20, 2011 
What do I think of the article? It's an ad hominem attack on the author and a rather gross misreading of The Lord of the Rings.
 -- Brian, 4:56 PM, December 10, 2010 
How did ad spambots are able to post? Anyways, what do people think of this article?
 -- Tra, 4:44 PM, August 21, 2010 
Women in summer would like to become beautiful. Everything can grab other's eyes is their best friends.Products make them beauty and confident is their favourite. Look in the street,you can see many different types of make up to show women's personality.
Welcome to the shop, the following is our products, free shipping.
Soccer Shoes Cheap Soccer Shoes Nike Soccer Shoes Adidas Soccer Shoes Nike Soccer Shoes sale Adidas Soccer Shoes sale MBT MBT shoes MBT Men shoes MBT Women shoes MBT Chapa Chapa GTX MBT Chapa GTX MBT Changa Women UGG Women UGG boots ugg boots cardy ugg women ugg cardy boots Nike Air Nike Air Max Nike Air Max Shoes Nike Dunk Nike Dunk SB Nike Dunk SB Shoes Nike Shox Nike Shox Shoes Timberland Timberland sale Timberland boots Timberland boots online Timberland on sale New timberland boots Women Bags Women Bags Sale Women Handbags Women Handbags Sale Women New Bags Cheap Bags Cheap Bags On Sale UGG UGG boots UGG boots short Short ugg Short ugg boots Ugg boots tall New women bags New women bags sale New women bags sale online Louis Vuitton Handbags Gucci bags hair straighteners hair straighteners sales GHD straighteners GHD straighteners sales CHI iron CHI iron sales BOSE headphones discount cheap CHI iron Nike Nike Shoes Nike Shoes Sale Nike running Nike running shoes Nike trainers Nike trainers shoes Timberland boots Timberland boots sale Timberland boot Timberland boot sale Timberland boots cheap Men timberlands
Those who want to become most beautiful in the world should try them. Just ones can make you different. Girls who want to grab your boyfriends's heart is necessary to use them.
 -- qrs521, 9:16 PM, July 30, 2010 
We supply nfl jerseys cheap,nfl jerseys sale,discount nfl jerseys wholesale and discount|authentic nfl jerseys.Still hesitating? Our mlb jerseys sale will give you a surprise.also our store hot sale NFL Football Jerseys,Football Jerseys.All kinds of nfl jerseys,Nike Soccer Shoes are on sale.Fast shipping,cheap timberland boots for you,timberland boots clearance manufacturers directory - over 33200 registered importers and exporters. Timberland work Boots,timberland roll top boots ,Timberland Chukka Boots Mens ,50-70% Off, 100% timberland boots sale,Saving a lot at our Timberland Outlet Store. We assure you of our Best Services at all times.And you will like uggs classic cardy,The ugg classic cardy boots have hit the shelves.Whether you are looking to keep comfortable or keep with the fashion, UGG classic cardy boots clearance are must-have Sheepskin UGGs to you.
 -- Cheap nfl jerseys, 1:59 AM, April 24, 2010 
ugg, cheap ugg boot for sell.
wow gold, wow gold on line store.
压力表, Pressure Gauge
distribution box manufacturer
cardy ugg boots, cheap cardy ugg boots, ugg classic cardy boots, ugg classic cardy boots online, and ugg classic tall, ugg classic tall boot, ugg boots uk, cardy ugg boots are using 100% natural sheepskinugg boots, good ugg boots cheap ugg boots, that means you can buy ugg boot, cheap ugg boot, ugg cardy, ugg cardy for uk, cheap ugg cardy boots are popular,we sell real ugg boots, cheap ugg boots, ugg cardy, cheap ugg cardy boots,ugg boots uk at great prices to people, we are proud to offer you the high quality and low price ugg classic cardy,ugg classic cardy shop, We have been producing hydraulic tools,hydraulic crimping tool and other kinds of crimping tools
search engine marketing
プライバシーマーク
Zhejiang Dayuan Group is to be as a leading enterprise group for manufacturing swimming pool pump, 
switchesr and of related temperature sensor manufacturer,. If you are looking for an air compressor, We sell metallic yarn ... film Packing,metallized film, holographic foil,reflective yarn
Zeatin trans-zeatin Zeatin-riboside trans-zeatin-riboside Cas Good Speed Reducer, Speed Reducer provider, Speed Reducer at a cheap price. power inverter provider, also is a temperature sensor manufacturer, hot forging.Precision sheet metal fabrication: Click to learn more about custom,precision sheet metal fabrication, Aluminium foil
The Emergency Alert EAS System is a national warning system
 -- Zeatin, 12:49 AM, June 12, 2009 
WHAT THE F****
 -- killer, 10:53 AM, May 21, 2009 
 Recommend Us 
 Send to a Friend 
 Digg This 
 Reddit It 
 Add to del.ic.ious 
 Share at Facebook 
 Discuss! 
 Send Feedback 
 15 Authors Meme 
 will take them into the Wild 
 Dollhouse 
 Book Forum 
 Related Pages 
 Print This Page 
 Michael Moorcock + Doctor Who = Awesome 
 RevolutionSF Newsblast : Jack Trevor Story, Urban Fantasy, Comic Books 
 Elric : Stealer of Souls 
 Search RevSF 
 New on RevSF 
 Full Moon Streams Grindhouse Movies, Wins Internet 
 Apes of Wrath Contest: Win The All-Ape Anthology! 
 Book Probe: Ex-Heroes, Seal Team 666 
 Jack the Giant Slayer 
 RevSF Home 
Illustrated by
Doug Potter, © 2002. 
 Things to Buy 
 Yes, YOU can get more from the brains behind RevSF. 
 James Bond:
The History of the Illustrated 007 
 Search RevSF 
 Random RevSF 
 Angel: Fangs for the Memories 
 contact : advertising : submissions : legal : privacy 
 RevolutionSF is ™ and © Revolution Web Development, Inc., except as noted.
Intended for readers age 18 and above. 
 