 Tolkien as a Literary Artist: Exploring Rhetoric, Language and Style in The ... - Thomas Kullmann, Dirk Siepmann - Google Books 
 Sign in 
 Hidden fields 
 Books 
Try the new Your Library 
Classic My Library will soon be turned off. Visit the new Your Library experience to import your bookshelves. 
Go to Your Library 
Dismiss 
 Try the new Your Library 
 Try the new Google Books 
 My library 
 Help 
 Advanced Book Search 
 EBOOK FROM $39.28 
Get this book in print 
 Springer Shop 
 Amazon.com 
 Barnes&Noble.com 
 Books-A-Million 
 IndieBound 
 Find in a library 
 All sellers » 
 Tolkien as a Literary Artist : Exploring Rhetoric, Language and Style in The Lord of the Rings 
 Thomas Kullmann , Dirk Siepmann 
 Springer Nature , May 5, 2021 - Language Arts & Disciplines - 319 pages 
This book takes a fresh look at Tolkien’s literary artistry from the points of view of both linguistics and literary history, with the aim of shedding light on the literary techniques used in The Lord of the Rings . The authors study Tolkien’s use of words, style, narrative techniques, rhetoric and symbolism to highlight his status as literary artist. Dirk Siepmann uses a corpus stylistic approach to analyse Tolkien’s vocabulary and syntax, while Thomas Kullmann uses discourse theory, literary history and concepts of intertextuality to explore Tolkien’s literary techniques, relating them to the history of English fiction and poetry. Issues discussed include point of view, speeches, story-telling, landscape descriptions, the poems inserted into the body of the narrative, and the role of language in the characterization of the novel’s protagonists. This book will be of particular interest to students and scholars of literature, corpus linguistics and stylistics, as well as Tolkien fans and specialists. 
 Preview this book » 
 Selected pages 
 Title Page 
 Table of Contents 
 Index 
 References 
 Contents 
 Introduction 1 
 Tolkien as a Stylist Key Words and Key Collocations in The Lord of the Rings 39 
 The Narrative Syntax of The Lord of the Rings 70 
 Points of View 89 
 Landscape Descriptions 128 
 Speeches and Declarations 159 
 Storytelling 193 
 Poems and Songs 227 
 Language and Character 259 
 Tolkiens Position in Literary History 297 
 Index 308 
 Copyright 
 Other editions - View all 
 Tolkien as a Literary Artist: Exploring Rhetoric, Language and Style in The ... 
 Thomas Kullmann , Dirk Siepmann 
 No preview available - 2021 
 Tolkien as a Literary Artist: Exploring Rhetoric, Language and Style in The ... 
 Thomas Kullmann , Dirk Siepmann 
 No preview available - 2022 
 Common terms and phrases 
 ancient appears Aragorn archaic beauty Bilbo Boromir certainly characterized characters collocations corpus Council of Elrond dark direct speech discourse Dwarves Elves Elvish English Literature Éowyn epic evil example experience fantasy Faramir feelings follows Frodo Galadriel Gandalf Gimli Glóin Gollum Gondor heroes hobbits Intertextual J. R. R. Tolkien journey key words king lambic lambic tetrameter land landscape descriptions language Legolas light linguistic literary looked Lord Lórien Lothlórien magic Merry and Pippin metaphorical metonymic metre Minas Tirith Mordor motifs mountains mythological narrative narrator natural noun novel obviously Orcs Oxford passage phrases Pippin plot poem poetic poetry point of view pre-texts quest reader realistic refers rhetorical rhyme Riders Rings Rivendell Road to Middle-earth romance Rosebury Sam's Saruman Sauron sentences shadow Shippey Shire Siepmann Sméagol Smote song speaking story storytelling style stylistic tale tells Théoden Thomas Kullmann tion told traditions Treebeard trees twentieth-century verbs 
 About the author (2021) 
 Thomas Kullmann is Professor of English Literature at the University of Osnabrück, Germany. He has published widely on Shakespeare and the English Renaissance, English children’s literature and the nineteenth- and twentieth-century novel. 
 Dirk Siepmann is Professor of English as a Second Language at the University of Osnabrück, Germany. He has 25 years of experience in applied linguistics, with an extensive background in corpus linguistics and language teaching. He has authored 12 books, including two major monographs on translation studies and one on contrastive linguistics, and has co-authored or edited a further 14 volumes. 
Bibliographic information 
 Title Tolkien as a Literary Artist: Exploring Rhetoric, Language and Style in The Lord of the Rings 
 Social Sciences 
 Social Sciences (R0) 
 Authors Thomas Kullmann , Dirk Siepmann 
 Publisher Springer Nature, 2021 
 ISBN 303069299X, 9783030692995 
 Length 319 pages 
 Subjects 
 Language Arts & Disciplines › 
 Linguistics › 
 General 
 Fiction / General 
 Language Arts & Disciplines / Linguistics / General 
 Language Arts & Disciplines / Linguistics / Historical & Comparative 
 Literary Criticism / General 
 Literary Criticism / Modern / 20th Century 
 Export Citation BiBTeX EndNote RefMan 
 About Google Books - Privacy Policy - Terms of Service - Information for Publishers - Report an issue - Help - Google Home 