 
 Thomas Kullmann and Dirk Siepmann, Tolkien as a Literary Artist: Exploring Rhetoric, Language and Style in ‘The Lord of the Rings’ | Journal of Inklings Studies 
 Tolkien as a Literary Artist: Exploring Rhetoric, Language and Style in ‘The Lord of the Rings’ | Journal of Inklings Studies"/>
Cookies Notification 
 This site uses cookies. By continuing to browse the site you are agreeing to our use of cookies. Find out more. 
 Menu 
 Search in: 
 Anywhere 
 Title
 Author
 Keywords
 Advanced 
 Customer Services 
 Log In
 | 
 Register 
| 
 Journals 
 Browse 
 Librarians 
 Journal Ordering and Pricing 
 Subscription Activation 
 Open Access 
 Edinburgh Journals Archive 
 Journal Collections 
 Usage Statistics 
 Customer Services 
 Authors 
 Article Submissions 
 Proposal Guidelines 
 How to Subscribe 
 Open Access 
 Permissions 
 Early Career Researcher Hub 
 Customer Services 
 Societies 
 Publishing Partnerships 
 Benefits 
 Proposal Guidelines 
 Customer Services 
 Open Access 
 Open Access Policy 
 Open Access FAQs 
 Gold Open Access 
 Archiving and Social Sharing 
 Browse Open Access Articles 
 Browse Open Access Books 
 About Us 
 Company Information 
 Contact Us 
 Annual Report 
 Publication Ethics 
 Company Home 
 Blog 
 Books 
 Advanced Search 
 You are here: 
 Home
 / 
 Journal of Inklings Studies
 / 
 List of Issues
 / 
 Volume 12, Issue 1
 / 
 Thomas Kullmann and Dirk Siepmann, Tolkien as a Literary Artist: Exploring Rhetoric, Language and Style in ‘The Lord of the Rings’ 
 Share 
Thomas Kullmann and Dirk Siepmann, Tolkien as a Literary Artist: Exploring Rhetoric, Language and Style in ‘The Lord of the Rings’ 
 ...Show full title 
 Recommend to Library 
 Article Tools 
 Save to favourites 
 Email to a friend 
 Download citation 
 Track citations 
 Download PDF 
 Allan Turner 
 x 
Allan Turner 
 Search for articles by this author 
 ... 
 + Show all authors 
 Additional Info 
 Citation Information: Journal of Inklings Studies, Volume 12 Issue 1, Page 139-142, ISSN 2045-8797 Available Online Apr 2022 
( https://doi.org/10.3366/ink.2022.0144 ) 
 First Page
 Full Text
 PDF/EPUB 
Although there has been a small but steady increase in the number of articles and chapters in longer works devoted to Tolkien’s use of language, we have had a long wait for a detailed and methodical stylistic analysis. Perhaps this is because the means of linguistic expression seems to be a less pressing concern than the world-building, sources, theology, and political and philosophical outlooks with which most critical articles are concerned. Language, and particularly the language of novels, is often looked upon as a transparent medium, rather like the glass of a window, which is of interest only for the views that it affords, whereas the quality of the glass and the ingenuity with which it is fitted into its architectural surroundings is a topic fit only for glaziers, joiners, and the like. The only previous book-length study was that of Steve Walker, which offered a mosaic of insights into the means by which the narrative of The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings captures the reader’s imagination but had little to say about what creates an individual style: the choice of words and sentence structures. 
Now this gap has been filled by a monograph, based solely on The Lord of the Rings as Tolkien’s major completed work, which concentrates on precisely those areas specified in the title, working up from the lexical level to syntax and rhetorical structures. It should be well placed to carry out this task, at least in theory, because it is a collaboration between a corpus linguist (Siepmann) and a literary scholar (Kullmann), although in fact only three of the chapters are jointly authored: the introduction explaining the theoretical basis of the investigation, the conclusion, which attempts an assessment of Tolkien’s position in literary history, plus one other chapter, on ‘Language and Character’. Each of the others is written by one of the authors with a slant towards his own specialism. 
Chapters 2 and 3 by Siepmann provide a methodical basis by testing the present critical consensus, articulated by Shippey, Rosebury, and others, that although the tale is ostensibly a heroic romance, it also shares many features of vocabulary and structure with the traditional realistic novel rooted in the nineteenth century. He does this by means of a detailed statistical analysis, comparing key words and collocations from Tolkien with their incidence in two other extensive corpora, one of mainstream nineteenth century novels and the other of modern texts from 1945 onwards. The resulting list of keywords and key collocations shows significant correspondences, some with one test corpus and some with the other, but there are also many that are peculiar to Tolkien and therefore can be viewed as indicators of his personal style. However, Siepmann also notes that the three groups tend to belong to different semantic fields, which suggests that a stylistic analysis of The Lord of the Rings cannot treat the book as a homogeneous whole. 
Indeed it is the great merit of the following chapters by Kullmann that he recognises the several different types of discourse going on within the novel and treats them separately. In particular he distinguishes between pure narrative and the many sections of direct speech. His methodical analysis is based on the theory of intertextuality (or at least a particular aspect of it): since any text is necessarily created from the resources provided by those already in existence, it can be classified stylistically by relating it to the types of pre-text from which it is derived. Note that this is not the same as sources, which normally provide specific events or motifs in the plot, whereas ‘pre-texts’ here relates solely to the conventional features of linguistic expression which a text draws on: vocabulary, sentence structures, rhetorical tropes, and so on, and the literary effects thereby created. 
The narrative text is further subdivided into two headings. Chapter 4 concentrates on focalisation. For most of the story, Kullmann argues, the unfolding plot is told from the point of view of hobbits, whose down-to-earth outlook is reflected in the mostly everyday language of the narrative that was first highlighted by Rosebury. This psychonarration, in which events are filtered through the limited point of view of an individual, is typical of the realistic novel. However, in the episodes in which no hobbits are present to act as mediators, the focus on the more ‘archaic’ characters is reflected in narrative language more typical of an older, epic tradition which constitutes a contrasting set of pre-texts. Chapter 5 is concerned with the frequent, more static passages of nature description, a feature which entered English novel writing only in the late eighteenth century. Where nature acts as an amplifier to the mood of the characters, it brings an echo of Romantic pre-texts. 
The next three chapters are devoted to direct speech, of which, as Kullmann points out, there is a higher proportion than is usual in either nineteenth- or twentieth-century novels, since it serves more purposes than straightforward social conversation, and indeed it mostly evokes pre-texts from an older period. The longer speeches examined in the first of these often present a point of view or seek to persuade others, such as when Gandalf urges the destruction of the Ring at the Council of Elrond; they may even be directly manipulative, as in the case of Saruman. In these speeches the tropes of classical rhetoric are more common than elsewhere. Another chapter considers the embedded stories, events narrated by one character to another, either to recount events that have occurred offstage, such as the story of the Paths of the Dead, or to reveal a part of the underlying mythology, like Aragorn’s tale of Beren and Lúthien, for which Kullmann sees precedents in ancient epic, notably Homer. There is a separate chapter for the poems and songs, which were a feature found in narrative literature from classical antiquity to the eighteenth century. Finally there is the jointly authored account of the varying speech styles of the different characters and how this underlines their personalities. 
This brief outline cannot do justice to the methodical build-up of detail that Kullmann and Siepmann put into their analyses. Certainly they dispel any notion that there is any one ‘Tolkien style’ or that his writing has anything simplistic or amateurish about it, as some critics have claimed in the past. Instead they demonstrate that he made skilful use of a number of different styles which resonate with a broad cross-section of the last few hundred years of writing in English. Whether they are likely to achieve their stated aim of proving Tolkien worthy of inclusion in some notional literary canon is a different question, since canons are based on a variety of criteria, not all of which are rational. Nevertheless they have made a significant contribution to the understanding of the literary artistry that went into the making of his masterpiece. 
That is not to say that the study does not have its weaknesses too. Ingenious as the combination of literary and linguistic skills may be in theory, there is some lack of cohesion between the different contributions. The two chapters by Siepmann use a completely different style and methodology, which will probably be unfamiliar to many readers. As someone who was trained in general linguistics but has not kept up with developments in corpus linguistics, I certainly felt the need for more explanations of the rationale for the methods used, as well as elucidations of technical terms such as n-grams . I worked out for myself that when Siepmann says Tolkien ‘overuses’ certain words, that is a statistical evaluation and not a negative aesthetic judgement, but still I need to be told why branches , coasts , cities , boats , and even along and among can be classified as ‘comparatively rare in present-day English’ (53). Statistics, yes, but I require more indication of why this is significant for the present investigation when my instinct tells me that these are normal parts of my vocabulary. Why does it matter that December is a negative key word, that is to say Tolkien ‘tends to avoid’ it (54)? Why are blackroot , parth , rimmon , and wulf included in the analysis at all when they are (parts of) invented names, two of them in an invented language? It would be a great pity if anyone stopped reading at this point because they felt they had lost the plot. There is also some inconsistency in the use of terminology: Siepmann distinguishes, correctly from a linguistic point of view, between inversion and fronting, whereas Kullmann uses inversion for both according to the traditional terminology of rhetoric. Note that he also uses anaphora in its rhetorical and not its linguistic sense. 
However, these are minor niggles, to which I could add a good few more, since every few paragraphs I come across something that makes me want to say ‘Yes, but…’, as I so often do when reading. With some books, that means I think the author has missed the point completely. With others it means that I agree in principle but just differ over relatively minor questions of interpretation, which could be a spur to give further thought to the point. This book definitely falls into the latter category. I hope that those who read it will not simply regard the niche in the market as filled but will use their ‘yes buts’ as an incentive to further exploration of Tolkien’s complex use of language. 
 Back to Top 
 About this Journal 
 Editors and Editorial Board 
 Society 
 Indexing 
 About this Journal
The Journal of Inklings Studies provides a forum for rigorous academic engagement with the work of C.S. Lewis, J.R.R. Tolkien, Charles Williams, Owen Barfield, and their literary circle.
The journal’s two principal aims are 
to lead and support the growing field of C.S. Lewis and Inklings Studies, and 
to test and develop the potential of C.S. Lewis and his circle to be serious intellectual conversation partners for scholars in literature, philology, theology, and philosophy more widely. 
The journal pursues these aims by 
publishing original source materials by its subject authors, together with high-quality scholarly commentary and analysis, 
developing and publishing cutting-edge academic engagement with the thought of C.S. Lewis and his circle by scholars both within Inklings Studies and in other disciplines, and 
publishing free, open access book reviews of academic books published in the subject area. 
Further information about the journal, including a shop for purchasing 2011-2017 back issues, can be found here . 
 Editors and Editorial Board
General Editor (and Subject Editor for C.S. Lewis): 
Prof. Judith Wolfe (University of St Andrews) 
Managing and Reviews Editor: 
Dr Derek R. Keefe (University of St Andrews) 
Subject Editor for Charles Williams: 
Prof. Holly Ordway (Houston Baptist University) 
Subject Editor for Owen Barfield: 
Prof. Jacob Sherman (California Institute of Integral Studies) 
Subject Editor for J.R.R. Tolkien: 
Dr Giuseppe Pezzini (University of St Andrews) 
Editorial Advisory Board 
Stephen Barber, Treasurer, Charles Williams Society 
Owen A. Barfield, Executor, Owen Barfield Literary Estate 
Dr P.H. Brazier, independent scholar 
Prof. Mark Edwards, Professor, Christ Church, Oxford 
Prof. Eric Gregory, Professor, Princeton University 
Dr Brian Horne, President, Charles Williams Society 
Dr Michael Ward, Research Fellow, Blackfriars Hall, Oxford 
Dr Suzanne Wolfe, Professor, Seattle Pacific University, and author 
 Society
 The Journal of Inklings Studies is the official journal of the Oxford C.S. Lewis Society and can be subscribed to directly from Edinburgh University Press or as part of society membership . 
 Indexing
 Journal of Inklings Studies is abstracted and indexed in the following: 
Annual Bibliography of English Language and Literature (ABELL) 
ANVUR 
ArticleFirst 
ATLA Religion Database (ATLA RDB) 
British Library Zetoc 
BrowZine 
CNKI (China National Knowledge Infrastructure) 
cnpLINKer 
EBSCO A-to-Z 
EBSCO Discovery Service 
J-Gate 
JournalTOCs 
Meta Indexing 
MLAIB: Modern Language Association International Bibliography 
Norwegian Register for Scientific Journals, Series and Publishers 
Publication Forum (JuFo) 
ReadCube Discover 
Religious and Theological Abstracts 
Researcher 
Scopus 
Summon 
TDNet 
WorldCat Discovery 
Journal of Inklings Studies 
 Print ISSN: 2045-8797 
 Online ISSN: 2045-8800 
Published on behalf of the Oxford C.S. Lewis Society 
 About this Journal 
 Editors and Editorial Board 
 Society 
 Submit an Article 
 Subscribe / Renew 
 Table of Contents Alerts 
 Submit an Article | 
 Librarian Free Trial | 
 Mailing List 
Sample Issue 
 Journal of Inklings Studies Volume 10, Issue 1 
Featured Article 
 C.S. Lewis as a Research Supervisor 
A.C. Spearing
Published in Journal of Inklings Studies 12.1 
Recommended Articles 
 Stratford Caldecott and Thomas Honegger (eds), Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings: Sources of Inspiration 
 Faith Liu 
 Apr 2015 Journal of Inklings Studies 
 Deborah H. Higgens, Anglo-Saxon Community in J.R.R. Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings 
 Nelson Goering 
 Apr 2015 Journal of Inklings Studies 
 The Authors of Middle Earth: Tolkien and the Mystery of Literary Creation 
 Giuseppe Pezzini 
 Apr 2018 Journal of Inklings Studies 
 See more See less 
 This abstract is currently unavailable 
 Amy Amendt-Raduege, ‘The Sweet and the Bitter’: Death and Dying in J.R.R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings 
 Lance A. Green 
 Oct 2018 Journal of Inklings Studies 
 Paul E. Kerry, (ed.), The Ring and the Cross: Christianity and The Lord of the Rings 
 Shaun Blanchard 
 Apr 2013 Journal of Inklings Studies 
 Verlyn Flieger, There Would Always Be a Fairy Tale: More Essays on Tolkien 
 Simon J. Cook 
 Apr 2022 Journal of Inklings Studies 
 Nancy Bunting and Seamus Hamill-Keays, The Gallant Edith Bratt: J.R.R. Tolkien’s Inspiration 
 Giovanni Carmine Costabile 
 Apr 2022 Journal of Inklings Studies 
 Elvish Re-incarnation, Valinorian Time, and Aragorn’s BeardJ.R.R. Tolkien, The Nature of Middle-earth: Late Writings on the Lands, Inhabitants, and Metaphysics of Middle-earth 
 Thomas Honegger 
 Apr 2022 Journal of Inklings Studies 
 more 
Journal Subjects 
 Archaeology 
 Architecture 
 Film, Media & Cultural Studies 
 History 
 Islamic Studies 
 Language & Linguistics 
 Law 
 Literary Studies 
 Natural History 
 Philosophy 
 Politics 
 Religious Studies 
 Science & Social Science 
 Scottish Studies 
 All 
Librarian Services 
 Activation 
 Journal Ordering and Pricing 
 Registration 
 Renewals 
 Usage Statistics 
General Resources 
 Access Token Activation 
 Accessibility Statement 
 Author Services 
 Browse for Books 
 Catalogues 
 Contact Information 
 Early Career Researcher Hub 
 Journal Ordering and Pricing 
 Mailing List 
 Permissions 
 Search Journals 
 Website Feedback 
Copyright © 2022. Edinburgh University Press. 
 News 
 Blog 
 @EdinburghUP 
 Terms and Conditions | 
 Privacy Policy | 
 Contact Us 
