On February 13, 2023, Neil Clarke,  the editor of Clarkesworld, asked if I was being 
spammed with an increase in "AI" submissions. He had a chart that showed just how 
quickly these submissions were growing. I responded, "Yes, yes, yes!" I didn't have a 
chart, but I knew that my story submissions had grown from 712 in December 2022 
to 899 in January 2023, and that they were still on their way up. Neil designed and 
implemented Asimov's and Analog's online submission system. He was working on 
some projects that would flag suspicious submissions, but it would be a while before 
these steps could be implemented.  
On February 20, Neil tweeted that he was temporarily closing Clarkesworld to 
submissions due to the onslaught of ChatGPT generated subs. My submission rate 
was lower than Clarkesworld, so I didn't close Asimov's at that time. Yet, my final 
figure for February submissions was 1088. In an average month, I rarely see more 
than seven hundred fiction subs. Now, the shortest month of the year had given me 
a 55 percent increase in "stories," and every single AI submission was dreadful. 
Neil's tweet went viral and attracted attention across the media landscape. Once 
he explained that this problem was hitting a number of SF publications, a couple of 
reporters even tracked me down. F&SF's editor, Sheree Renée Thomas, called on 
February 21 to ask if she could pass along my contact information to the New York 
Times. The following day, Neil recommended me to The Verge. 
I was in a relatively optimistic mood when I spoke to those reporters. I even made 
a few lighthearted remarks that were quoted in these articles. I wanted to reassure 
readers, authors, reporters, and the general public that despite the heavy volume 
of submissions, there was no chance an experienced editor would mistake a Chat-
GPT sub for a tale created by a human being. My comments appear mostly at the 
end of NY Time's article "Science Fiction Magazines Battle a Flood of Chatbot-Gen-
erated Stories" https://www.nytimes.com/2023/02/23/technology/clarkesworld-
submissions-ai-sci-fi.html. My comments in The Verge Interview, "AI-generated Fic-
tion is Flooding Literary magazines--but not Fooling Anyone"  
https://www.theverge.com/2023/2/25/23613752/ai-generated-short-stories-liter-
ary-magazines-clarkesworld-science-fiction are more extensive.  
We've taken measures since then to improve our situation. We added language to 
our guidelines to make it clear that "We will not consider any submissions written, de-
veloped or assisted by these tools. Attempting to submit these works may result in be-
ing banned from submitting works in the future." By this statement we mean the use 
of ChatGPT to generate plot, character, setting, and other story development ideas. 
We don't mean long-standing tools like spell and grammar checks, dictionaries, or 
thesauruses.  
Toward the end of April, we closed Asimov's to submissions for a few days so Neil 
could upgrade our system. Neil's upgrade doesn't automatically ban anyone nor  
does it catch all the ChatGPT generated subs. It does flag a lot of suspicious subs, 
however. This is quite helpful. I'm the only person evaluating the submissions to 
Asimov's. I want to give the real storytellers as much of my time as possible. I don't 
want to waste it on the AI-assisted dreck. I still peruse everything and make the  
actual determination. I have access to a couple of online sites that can detect Chat-
GPT generated material. There are helpful for validating my suspicions. These  
sites don't always agree with each other or with me. Ultimately, I make the final 
call.  
4 Sheila Williams
CHATGPT AND ME
Editorial Sheila Williams
By now, I've seen hundreds, possibly thousands, of these "stories" and some "non-
fiction" articles. Although still pretty obvious, the cover letters have improved. In the 
beginning, most of the letters read like résumé cover letters. Now they tend to claim 
that the "author" has been working really hard on his or her "story." Despite the com-
mon assertion that they are long-time readers of the magazine, it's pretty clear that 
the "authors" of these "stories" had never heard of Asimov's or SF magazines in gen-
eral until they stumbled upon some "how-to-make-money" online resource.  
There is absolutely no sign of originality or creativity in ChatGPT-generated  
works. There's no sense of narrative, no character development, and the "plotting" is 
practically nonexistent. There is no indication that the "writers" of these works ever 
read a story, heard some folklore, or watched a TV show. I have never read an origi-
nal human-authored submission that was as poorly written or as uninteresting as 
these pieces are.  
People do worry that the ChatGPT material will improve. That's possible. ChatG-
PTs are a type of large language models (LLMs) that scrape enormous amounts of 
words from the internet. The more these LLMs absorb the works of published au-
thors, the more access they'll have to sophisticated language and ideas. There's a 
thorny legal problem, however. No one yet knows if the legal rights to the "story" 
generated by the ChatGPT will belong to the person who asked for it or to the cre-
ators of the ChatGPT. It's likely that a contract with the person who submitted the 
"story" would be meaningless.  
While wading through ChatGPT generated material has been an unhappy experi-
ence for me, there has been one significant silver lining. My admiration for people 
who take the time to write stories and send them my way has only grown. Every sin-
gle person who pens their own story has a unique way of looking at a situation. The 
creative process that goes into title ideas, settings, and every other aspect of a human-
generated story continuously tickles me. I will always look forward to reading  
through the seven hundred real monthly submissions while I hunt for the six or so 
that I can purchase for publication in Asimov's.
5
Asimov's
Editorial: ChatGPT and Me