 
 Min-p, Max Exaggeration: A Critical Analysis ofMin-p Sampling in Language Models 
 Report GitHub Issue 
 × 
 Title: 
 Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
 Description: 
 Submit without GitHub 
 Submit in GitHub 
 arXiv is now an independent nonprofit! 
 Learn more 
 × 
 Back to arXiv 
 Why HTML? 
 Report Issue 
 Back to Abstract 
 Download PDF 
 Abstract 
 1 Introduction 
 2 Re-Analyzing Min-p ’s Human Evaluations 
 2.1 Human evaluators’ scores for one of two baseline samplers were omitted 
 2.2 Visualizations and Statistical Tests Fail to Support Claim That Min-p Outperforms Other Samplers 
 2.3 Human Evaluators’ Qualitative Responses Fail to Support Claim That Min-p Is Preferred Over Other Samplers 
 2.4 New Human Evaluation Study Shows Min-p Does Not Outperform Baselines in Quality, in Diversity, or in a Tradeoff Between Quality and Diversity 
 3 Extending Min-p’s NLP Benchmark Evaluations 
 3.1 Thorough Hyperparameter Sweep on GSM8K Contradicts Claim of Min-p ’s Superiority 
 4 Investigating Min-p ’s LLM-As-A-Judge Evaluations 
 4.1 Under-Specified and Indirect Methodology Hinders Reproduction and Interpretation 
 4.2 Min-p Received More Hyperparameter Tuning and Frequently Fails to Win 
 4.3 Table 3(b) Reported The Higher of Two Scores For Min-p But the Lower of Two Scores For Top-p 
 5 Substantiating Min-p ’s Community Adoption Claims 
 5.1 Claimed GitHub Repositories & Stars Were Unsubstantiated and Retracted 
 5.2 The Revised Community Adoption Statement Inflates Min-p ’s Adoption 
 6 Discussion and Limitations 
 Scientific Conclusions 
 Key Limitation 
 What Went Wrong During the ICLR 2025 Review Process? 
 References 
 A Examples of Human Qualitative Responses Favoring Basic Sampling Over Min-P Sampling 
 B GSM8K Chain-of-Thought Scores with “Standard" Formatting 
 C GSM8K Scores By Model, Sampler and Hyperparameters 
 License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2506.13681v2 [cs.CL] 19 Jun 2025
 Min-p , Max Exaggeration: A Critical Analysis of
 Min-p Sampling in Language Models
 Rylan Schaeffer
 Affiliation: Stanford University
 Email: rschaef@cs.stanford.edu 
 Joshua Kazdan
 Affiliation: Stanford University
 Email: jkazdan@stanford.edu 
 Yegor Denisov-Blanch
 Affiliation: Stanford University
 Email: ydebl@stanford.edu 
 Abstract 
 Sampling from language models impacts the quality and diversity of generated outputs, affecting both research and real-world applications.
Recently, Nguyen et al. (2024) ’s “Turning Up the Heat: Min-p Sampling for Creative and Coherent LLM Outputs” introduced a new sampler called min-p , claiming it achieves superior quality and diversity over established methods such as basic , top-k , and top-p sampling.
The significance of these claims was underscored by the paper’s recognition as the 18th highest-scoring submission to ICLR 2025 and selection for an Oral presentation.
This paper conducts a comprehensive re-examination of the evidence supporting min-p and reaches different conclusions across the original paper’s four main lines of evidence.
First, the original paper’s human evaluations omitted data, conducted statistical tests incorrectly, and described qualitative feedback inaccurately; our reanalysis demonstrates min-p did not outperform baseline samplers in quality, diversity, or a trade-off between quality and diversity. In response to our findings, the authors of the original paper conducted a new human evaluation using a different sampler implementation, task, and rubric that nevertheless provides further evidence min-p does not improve over baseline samplers.
Second, comprehensively sweeping the original paper’s NLP benchmark evaluations reveals min-p does not surpass baseline samplers when controlling for the number of hyperparameters.
Third, the original paper’s LLM-as-a-Judge evaluations lack methodological clarity and appear inconsistently reported: the higher of two scores was reported for min-p while the lower of two scores was reported for top-p .
Fourth, community adoption claims (49k GitHub repositories, 1.1M GitHub stars) were found to be unsubstantiated, leading to their removal from the ICLR 2025 Camera Ready; the revised adoption claim remains misleading.
We conclude that evidence presented in the original paper fails to support claims that min-p improves quality, diversity, or a trade-off between quality and diversity.
 1 Introduction
 Large language model (LLM) capabilities have transformed numerous domains, from creative writing to scientific research. A critical detail of LLM deployment is the sampling method : the algorithm that determines how tokens are sampled during generation.
Sampling strategies directly impact the quality and diversity of generated outputs, making them important to both research and deployment.
 Commonly used samplers include basic (temperature-only) sampling ( Ackley et al., 1985 ) , which samples tokens based on their temperature-scaled softmax-normalized logits; top-k sampling ( Fan et al., 2018 ) , which samples the k k most probable tokens; and top-p sampling ( Holtzman et al., 2020 ) , which samples tokens comprising the top p p probability mass. Other samplers include η \eta -sampling , ϵ \epsilon -sampling ( Hewitt et al., 2022 ) and mirostat sampling ( Basu et al., 2020 ) .
 Recently, the paper “Turning Up the Heat: Min-P Sampling for Creative and Coherent LLM Outputs" ( Nguyen et al., 2024 ) introduced a new sampling method called min-p sampling , claiming it produces higher quality and higher diversity outputs than other samplers.
Given the potential impact of an improved sampling method and the paper’s exposure as the 18th highest-scoring submission at ICLR 2025 1 1 
 1 
 https://papercopilot.com/statistics/iclr-statistics/iclr-2025-statistics/ , we carefully scrutinized the methodologies, data, analyses, code and conclusions presented in support of min-p across the authors’ four lines of evidence: (1) human evaluations, (2) natural language processing (NLP) benchmark evaluations, (3) LLM-As-A-Judge evaluations and (4) community adoption metrics.
Our re-analyses of the evidence lead us to conclude that relative to commonly used samplers, min-p does not improve quality or diversity or the trade-off between quality and diversity .
Our code is publicly available on GitHub , as are our W&B sweeps of NLP benchmark evaluations.
 2 Re-Analyzing Min-p ’s Human Evaluations
 We began with re-analyzing the original paper’s human evaluations since human judgments are widely considered the gold standard for assessing language model outputs ( Van Der Lee et al., 2019 ; Roller et al., 2020 ; Howcroft et al., 2020 ; Clark et al., 2021 ; Liang et al., 2022 ; Khashabi et al., 2022 ; Chiang et al., 2024 ; Biderman et al., 2024 ; Schaeffer et al., 2025b ) .
We identified four key issues.
 2.1 Human evaluators’ scores for one of two baseline samplers were omitted
 Section 6 of Nguyen et al. (2024) states human participants evaluated min-p against a single sampler: top-p .
Both the Oct 2024 Arxiv manuscript and ICLR OpenReview manuscript repeatedly state that min-p and top-p were considered, and their Table 4 presents results only for these.
However, when examining the paper’s data , we discovered that scores for a second baseline sampler ( basic sampling) were excluded from the methodology, the analysis and the results without mention or explanation .
We publicly confirmed with the authors .
These omitted scores comprised 1 / 3 rd 1/3^{\text{rd}} of the total collected scores.
After we raised the issue, the omitted data were added to the Camera Ready’s Table 4 , but the methodology, the results and the conclusions have not been correspondingly updated.
 Figure 1 : Visualizing Human Evaluators’ Scores from Nguyen et al. (2024) ’s Data Demonstrates Min-p Does Not “Consistently" Outperform Other Samplers. Rather, the original paper’s data suggest min-p is largely indistinguishable from other samplers based on 95% confidence intervals. 
 2.2 Visualizations and Statistical Tests Fail to Support Claim That Min-p Outperforms Other Samplers
 Based on the human evaluators’ scores, Section 6 of Nguyen et al. (2024) concluded that min-p “consistently" outperformed top-p “across all settings":
 “Overall, min-p sampling consistently scored higher than top-p sampling across all settings […] A paired t-test confirmed that the differences in scores between min-p and top-p sampling were statistically significant ( p < 0.05 p<0.05 ).”
 However, both visualizations and statistical hypothesis tests of the original human evaluation data suggest min-p is indistinguishable from the baselines in almost all settings. 
 To briefly explain the human evaluation methodology, three samplers ( basic , top-p and min-p ) were compared in six conditions: three temperatures ( 1.0 , 2.0 , 3.0 1.0,2.0,3.0 ) and two diversity settings (“high" and “low") corresponding to different p p hyperparameters.
Humans were asked to score the generated outputs under two metrics: quality and diversity.
Participants were excluded if they failed attention checks.
For more information, please see the original manuscript.
 Metric | 
 Alt. Hyp. | 
 Temperature | 
 τ = 1.0 \tau=1.0 | 
 τ = 2.0 \tau=2.0 | 
 τ = 3.0 \tau=3.0 | 
 | 
 | 
 t t | 
 p p | 
 t t | 
 p p | 
 t t | 
 p p | 
 Quality | 
 Min-p > > Basic | 
 0.33 | 
 .370 | 
 0.65 | 
 .260 | 
 3.13 ∗∗∗† | 
 .001 | 
 Min-p > > Top-p | 
 2.05 ∗ | 
 .023 | 
 1.18 | 
 .121 | 
 2.02 ∗ | 
 .025 | 
 Diversity | 
 Min-p > > Basic | 
 0.31 | 
 .378 | 
 1.86 ∗ | 
 .034 | 
 0.85 | 
 .201 | 
 Min-p > > Top-p | 
 2.64 ∗∗ | 
 .006 | 
 1.44 | 
 .078 | 
 0.87 | 
 .195 | 
 ∗ p < 0.05 p<0.05 , ∗∗ p < 0.01 p<0.01 , ∗∗∗ p < 0.001 p<0.001 , † Significant after Bonferroni correction for 12 comparisons. | 
 Note: All tests were paired t-tests with df = 52, one-sided (alternative = "greater") | 
 Table 1 : Hypothesis Testing of Human Evaluators’ Scores Fails to Support Claim that Min-p Consistently Outperforms Other Samplers. To test whether evidence supports the claim that min-p “consistently outperforms" other samplers, we conducted one-sided paired t-tests using the authors’ published data. Without correcting for multiple comparisons, evidence exists to support min-p ’s superiority in 5 of 12 comparisons at α = 0.05 \alpha=0.05 and 2 of 12 comparisons at α = 0.01 \alpha=0.01 . After applying a Bonferroni correcting for multiple comparisons, evidence exists to support min-p ’s superiority in 1 of 12 comparisons at α = 0.05 \alpha=0.05 and 0 of 12 comparisons at α = 0.01 \alpha=0.01 . For details, see Sec. 2.3 . 
 We focused on the “high" diversity setting for three reasons:
First, the claimed advantage of min-p sampling is that it provides both high quality and high diversity, whereas other samplers typically trade one off against the other. Second, the authors publicly told us to focus on the high diversity setting , writing that “the low [diversity] settings were quite experimental". Third, we believe that top-p ’s p p value in the low diversity setting was poorly chosen; indeed, after we raised these concerns, the authors ran a new human evaluation that changed the low diversity top-p p p from 0.1 0.1 to 0.9 0.9 . We return to this second new human evaluation in Sec. 2.4 .
 We began by visualizing the human evaluations’ scores from Nguyen et al. (2024) . Using the original paper’s data, Fig. 1 reveals that the three samplers provide similar quality and similar diversity, with 95% confidence intervals frequently overlapping .
 To more rigorously assess the claim that min-p consistently outperforms other samplers, we conducted 12 one-sided paired t-tests for each metric (quality or diversity), temperature ( 1.0 , 2.0 , 3.0 1.0,2.0,3.0 ) and baseline sampler ( min-p versus basic , min-p versus top-p ). In each test, the null hypothesis is min-p ’s score is less than or equal to the other sampler’s score, and the alternative hypothesis is min-p ’s score is greater than the other sampler’s score.
Statistical test results are displayed in Table 1 .
Without correcting for multiple comparisons, we found evidence to reject the null hypotheses in 5 of 12 tests at α = 0.05 \alpha=0.05 and 2 of 12 tests at α = 0.01 \alpha=0.01 . After applying a Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons, we found evidence to reject the null hypothesis in 1 of 12 tests at α = 0.05 \alpha=0.05 and 0 of 12 tests at α = 0.01 \alpha=0.01 .
 Based on the original paper’s data, there is insufficient evidence to support the claim that min-p consistently outperforms baseline samplers across all settings. 
 Furthermore, given that the original paper claims that min-p “consistently" scores higher, an Intersection-Union Test (IUT) may be the appropriate statistical test, where the alternative hypothesis is that min-p is better in all 12 comparisons and the null hypothesis is the set complement. Since the largest p-value of the 12 comparisons is 0.378 0.378 , under the IUT, we again find insufficient evidence to reject the null hypothesis at both α = 0.05 \alpha=0.05 and α = 0.01 \alpha=0.01 .
 The original paper’s statistical analysis reached a different conclusion for two reasons. First, despite claiming that min-p “consistently scored higher" “across all settings" (metric, temperature, and diversity), the paper pooled data across all settings and performed a single t-test, which tests whether min-p scored higher on average. Second, pooling over all settings is misleading in that in the “low” diversity condition, top-p ’s hyperparameter p p was poorly chosen in a way that pulled top-p down significantly; the authors said publicly to ignore this particular low diversity condition and subsequently changed p p in their new human experiment (Sec. 2.4 ).
Thus, we believe the original paper’s statistical inferences are misleading or incorrect.
 2.3 Human Evaluators’ Qualitative Responses Fail to Support Claim That Min-p Is Preferred Over Other Samplers
 Figure 2 : Manual Annotation of Human Evaluators’ Qualitative Responses Fail to Support Claim that Min-P Was the Preferred Sampler. We manually annotated responses from human annotators regarding their preferred sampler(s) at the end of the original paper’s study. The responses suggest min-p was not the most preferred sampler. We provide example responses in Sec. 2.3 . 
 At the end of the human evaluation study, the original paper asked human participants to qualitatively describe which sampler(s) they preferred. The paper claimed that human evaluators’ qualitative responses support min-p over top-p :
 “Participants frequently noted that outputs generated with min-p sampling were more coherent and creative, especially at higher temperatures.”
 However, when reading through the paper’s data , we believe that the qualitative responses suggest a different preference pattern .
We manually annotated the qualitative responses and visualized our annotations of the humans’ expressed preferences (Fig. 2 ), and publicly posted our annotations in the same format as the original paper.
We found two results: (1) more human evaluators explicitly preferred basic sampling than preferred min-p sampling, and (2) min-p was only slightly preferred over top-p .
We provide quotations from human evaluators favoring basic sampling in Appendix A .
 2.4 New Human Evaluation Study Shows Min-p Does Not Outperform Baselines in Quality, in Diversity, or in a Tradeoff Between Quality and Diversity
 In response to our feedback, the authors conducted and added a new human evaluation study to Appendix C.2.
Their new study made multiple methodological changes:
 • 
 Different sampler implementation: switched from applying temperature after truncation to applying temperature before truncation.
 • 
 Different distribution of human participants from Prolific.
 • 
 Different sampling hyperparameters for top-p : switched from 0.1 0.1 and 0.9 0.9 to 0.9 0.9 and 0.95 0.95 .
 • 
 Different sampling hyperparameters for min-p : switched from 0.2 0.2 and 0.05 0.05 to 0.1 0.1 and 0.05 0.05 .
 • 
 Different allotted reading time: increased from 30 minutes to 45 minutes.
 • 
 Different sampled text: 3 short paragraphs were replaced with a single complete story.
 • 
 Different rubric for human participants to evaluate sampled outputs.
 Regarding the new human evaluation data and results, we share two discoveries here: First, we believe one value is incorrectly reported: in Nguyen et al. (2024) ’s Table 15, the average score of min-p at p = 0.05 p=0.05 and temperature T = 2 T=2 is reported as 7.80 7.80 , but based on the authors’ publicly posted data, we believe the correct numerical value should be 5.80 5.80 . Second, more generally, the data show again that Min-p does not outperform baselines in quality, in diversity or in a favorable tradeoff between quality and diversity. In this new study, whenever min-p outperforms other samplers, it does so under conditions that yield lower absolute scores than other conditions (Fig. 3 ). For instance, min-p shows an advantage over the baselines in the “high" diversity setting at T = 2 T=2 and in the “low" diversity setting at T = 3 T=3 . However, in both of these conditions, min-p receives lower quality and diversity scores than it does in the “high" diversity setting at T = 1 T=1 and the “low" diversity setting at T = 2 T=2 . This shows min-p ’s advantage is observed primarily under conditions that yield lower overall quality and diversity scores compared to other achievable conditions. For anyone seeking higher quality or diversity, min-p offers no apparent advantage over basic or top-p sampling .
 Figure 3 : New Human Evaluation Study Suggests Min-p Does Not Outperform Baselines in Quality, in Diversity or in a Pareto-Optimal Tradeoff Between Quality and Diversity. Visualization of scores from Nguyen et al. (2024) ’s second human experiment. Min-p ’s performance advantage relative to basic and top-p sampling is observed in conditions (e.g., higher temperatures) where absolute quality and absolute diversity scores across all samplers are lower compared to other regimes (e.g., T = 1 T=1 ). For practitioners optimizing for maximal quality and maximal diversity, these results suggest that min-p offers no apparent advantage over basic or top-p sampling. 
 3 Extending Min-p’s NLP Benchmark Evaluations
 We next turned to the original paper’s NLP benchmark evaluations of several models on GSM8K with Chain-of-Thought ( Cobbe et al., 2021 ) and GPQA (5-shot) ( Rein et al., 2023 ) , which concluded that:
 “ Min-p sampling achieves superior performance across benchmarks and temperatures.”
 3.1 Thorough Hyperparameter Sweep on GSM8K Contradicts Claim of Min-p ’s Superiority
 Figure 4 : Min-P Does Not Consistently Outperform Other Samplers on GSM8K When Controlling For Hyperparameter Volume. 
In our first analysis, we measured how the maximum Exact Match (Strict) for each sampler improves as the number of hyperparameters increases. Basic sampling has only a temperature hyperparameter, and we therefore do not sweep it to the same degree.
 To test whether min-p indeed achieves superior performance, we conducted an extensive analysis on GSM8K CoT, sweeping the following models, samplers, hyperparameters and sampling seeds:
 • 
 9 Models: Qwen 2.5 ( Qwen et al., 2025 ) 0.5B, 1.5B, 3B and 7B; Mistral 7Bv0.1 ( Jiang et al., 2023 ) ; Llama ( Grattafiori et al., 2024 ) 3.1 8B and 3.2 3B; Gemma 2 ( Team et al., 2024 ) 2B and 9B.
 • 
 2 Model Stages: Pre-trained (“Base") and Post-Trained (“Instruct").
 • 
 4 Samplers: basic , top-p , top-k , min-p .
 • 
 31 Temperatures: 0.0 0.0 (“greedy") to 3.0 3.0 in increments of 0.1 0.1 .
 • 
 6 Hyperparameters Per Sampler: We chose 6 6 hyperparameters per sampler, except for basic which has no hyperparameter beyond temperature. The values were taken from the original paper; some were lightly edited to make them more evenly distributed:
 – 
 basic : No hyperparameters other than temperature.
 – 
 top-k : k ∈ { 10 , 30 , 50 , 100 , 150 , 200 } k\in\{10,30,50,100,150,200\} .
 – 
 top-p : p ∈ { 0.99 , 0.98 , 0.95 , 0.9 , 0.8 , 0.7 } p\in\{0.99,0.98,0.95,0.9,0.8,0.7\} .
 – 
 min-p : p ∈ { 0.01 , 0.02 , 0.05 , 0.1 , 0.2 , 0.3 } p\in\{0.01,0.02,0.05,0.1,0.2,0.3\} .
 • 
 3 Random Seeds for Sampling: { 0 , 1 , 2 } \{0,1,2\} 
 Figure 5 : Min-P Does Not Consistently Outperform Other Samplers on GSM8K When Controlling For Hyperparameter Volume. 
In our second analysis, we measured how the difference between min-p ’s highest score and the best non- min-p sampler’s highest score changes as the number of swept hyperparameters increases. Min-p matches or underperforms other samplers. 
 Due to our compute budget, we only evaluated GSM8K CoT (albeit under two prompt formats, for reasons explained below). This sweep and the sweep below required ∼ 6000 \sim 6000 Nvidia A100-hours.
GSM8K contains a subset of samples with ambiguous language or incorrect labels that have since been identified and cleaned ( Vendrow et al., 2025 ) and that models may have been trained on GSM8K ( Zhang et al., 2024 ) , but we used GSM8K nonetheless for consistency with the original paper. We similarly used EleutherAI’s LM Eval Harness ( Gao et al., 2021 ; Biderman et al., 2024 ) .
 To evaluate how performant each sampler is, we first averaged over the three sampling seeds and then conducted two complementary analyses:
 1. 
 For each sampler, we subsampled an equal number of hyperparameters ranging from N = 1 N=1 to N = 100 N=100 and computed the maximum Exact Match (Strict) score achieved by the sampled subset of size N N . We repeated this process 150 150 times, averaging over the subsampled subsets’ scores. This “Best-of-N" analysis ( Nakano et al., 2021 ; Stiennon et al., 2020 ; Hughes et al., 2024 ; Schaeffer et al., 2025a ) tells us the best possible performance each sampler will likely obtain as its hyperparameter space increases.
 2. 
 For N = 1 N=1 to N = 100 N=100 , we subsampled N N hyperparameters per sampler and computed the difference of the maximum Exact Match (Strict) score achieved by min-p minus the maximum score achieved by any other sampler. We repeated this process 150 150 times, averaging over the subsampled subsets. This tells us by how much min-p outperforms all other samplers, controlling for the size of hyperparameter space of each sampler.
 Both analyses reached consistent results: min-p does not outperform other samplers when equalizing the volume of hyperparameter space. 
Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 respectively demonstrate that min-p is largely indistinguishable from other samplers.
 After we showed these results to the authors, they informed us that we had run our experiments using the “Llama"
formatting of GSM8K CoT prompts as we used the command from the authors’
 public Colab notebook ;
the authors clarified that "Llama" formatting should be used only for Llama models.
We then reran our experiments using standard formatting of GSM8K CoT prompts .
The results were nearly identical (Appendix B ), with one small difference: min-p does produce higher scores for 2 of 12 language models.
Again, we conclude min-p does not outperform other samplers on either formatting of GSM8K CoT when controlling for hyperparameter volume .
 4 Investigating Min-p ’s LLM-As-A-Judge Evaluations
 We then turned to the original paper’s LLM-as-a-Judge evaluations ( Zheng et al., 2023 ) , specifically AlpacaEval creative writing evaluations ( Dubois et al., 2023 ) .
 4.1 Under-Specified and Indirect Methodology Hinders Reproduction and Interpretation
 Figure 6 : Nguyen et al. (2024) ’s LLM-As-A-Judge Evaluations Suggest Min-p Typically Matches Other Samplers Despite 2 × 2\times to 10 × 10\times More Hyperparameter Tuning. Left: Nguyen et al. (2024) swept min-p with more than twice as many hyperparameters as top-p and more than ten times as many hyperparameters as basic . Right: Pairwise comparisons show min-p typically performs on-par with other samplers. Data were obtained from the first author’s public GitHub repository .
 In the Oct 2024 Arxiv manuscript and ICLR OpenReview manuscript , the methodology is under-specified in several ways: There is no mention which model(s) were sampled from, which model(s) served as the judge(s), or how hyperparameters were chosen or swept. Additionally, there is no description of uncertainty for the reported win rates, meaning readers are unable to decide whether win rates are statistically different from chance (50.00%).
 Furthermore, the experiment seems designed in a manner that introduces a confounder. For those unfamiliar, AlpacaEval reports win rates between paired comparisons.
Instead of directly comparing min-p against other samplers, the authors compared each sampler against a common fixed sampler: basic ( τ = 1.0 ) (\tau=1.0) .
This comparison strategy is indirect since comparing directly against min-p would offer a clearer test of its superiority while using the same number of comparisons.
The authors’ design choice is additionally concerning because LLM-judge preferences are probably not transitive, as shown by recent research ( Xu et al., 2025 ) ; that is, if sampler A beats sampler B, and sampler B beats sampler C, it does not necessarily follow that sampler A beats sampler C.
Therefore, comparing all methods to basic ( τ = 1.0 ) (\tau=1.0) provides no reliable inference about min-p ’s performance relative to top-p or basic at other temperatures. These under-specified aspects of the methodology, combined with its indirect experimental design, make drawing conclusions difficult. 
 4.2 Min-p Received More Hyperparameter Tuning and Frequently Fails to Win
 No scores or code to create scores were provided with the original paper’s GitHub repository . While drafting this manuscript, we became aware of ongoing work to release code in a separate repository. Results from that code revealed two discoveries: First, min-p received ∼ 2 × \sim 2\times more hyperparameter tuning than top-p sampling and ∼ 10 × \sim 10\times more tuning than basic sampling (Fig. 6 , left), potentially tilting the scales in its favor. Second, the win-rates show that min-p frequently fails to outperform top-p and basic sampling, especially when accounting for confidence intervals; we visualized the new data with 95% confidence intervals (with horizontal offsets added for visibility) (Fig. 6 , right).
 4.3 Table 3(b) Reported The Higher of Two Scores For Min-p But the Lower of Two Scores For Top-p 
 As evidence for the LLM-As-A-Judge evaluation scores in the original paper’s Table 3(b), the first author publicly shared a Telegram link that showed the higher of two scores was reported for min-p (the reported win rate of 52.01 52.01 corresponds to p = 0.05 p=0.05 , but p = 0.01 p=0.01 yields a lower win rate of 50.14 50.14 ) but the lower of two score was reported for top-p (the reported win rate of 50.07 50.07 corresponds to p = 0.9 p=0.9 , but p = 0.98 p=0.98 yields a higher win rate of 50.43 50.43 ).
 5 Substantiating Min-p ’s Community Adoption Claims
 5.1 Claimed GitHub Repositories & Stars Were Unsubstantiated and Retracted
 The Arxiv and peer-reviewed manuscripts of Nguyen et al. (2024) included specific claims about min-p ’s adoption in the language modeling community:
 “ Community Adoption: Min-p sampling has been rapidly adopted by the open-source community, with over 54,000 GitHub repositories using it, amassing a cumulative 1.1 million stars across these projects."
 We attempted to verify these numbers through analysis of major GitHub language modeling repositories.
Per our calculations, the combined GitHub stars of leading LM repositories ( transformers , ollama , llama.cpp , vLLM , Unsloth , mamba , SGLang , llama-cpp-python ) sum to 453k stars as of March 2025, less than half the 1.1M stars claimed by min-p alone.
We could not substantiate either 49k GitHub repositories or 1.1M GitHub stars.
When we inquired how these numbers were calculated, the authors publicly stated that GitHub was searched for “min-p” , which yields many false positives. The authors retracted both the 54k GitHub repository claim and the 1.1M GitHub stars claim from the ICLR 2025 Camera Ready manuscript. 
 Given that the numbers have been retracted, we debated whether to include this section.
We decided to include it for three reasons.
First, we wanted to document this clear failure of the review process.
These numbers were unsubstantiated in the manuscript, and, in our opinion, were preposterous.
Yet three out of four reviewers and the Area Chair highly commended the community adoption as evidence of min-p ’s superiority;
for instance, the Area Chair wrote :
 “[ Min-p ] is simple and is already widely adopted by the community (as mentioned by [Reviewer] D38H, “The usage of it in 54,000 Github repositories alone is very impressive”). […] The resulting review scores reflect the high quality of the paper: It presents convincing experiments, thorough analysis, and the provided method has an extremely high impact."
 Reviewer fwNb similarly emphasized the community adoption numbers:
 “[ min-p ] has good empirical results, both as measured on benchmarks and (more important [sic]) by adoption of the community"
 Second, the machine learning research community may have learned of min-p before these community adoption numbers were retracted, e.g., when the original paper was posted to ArXiV or accepted at ICLR 2025.
Thus, we felt a proactive clarification would better rectify the scientific record.
Third, as we detail below, we believe the new community adoption statement remains misleading.
 5.2 The Revised Community Adoption Statement Inflates Min-p ’s Adoption
 The ICLR 2025 Camera Ready now has a different statement of community adoption:
 “[ Min-p ] is now integrated in widely used frameworks such as Hugging Face Transformers, vLLM, and SGLang, which collectively have accrued over 350,000 GitHub stars. This integration, coupled with extensive downstream usage (e.g., over 290,000 dependent repositories for Transformers alone), underscores the method’s practical impact."
 While being integrated into such frameworks is indeed a contribution, this statement misleadingly represents these frameworks’ usage as min-p ’s usage, rather than specifically measuring min-p ’s usage.
This new statement is akin to publishing a book and then claiming credit for the library.
 6 Discussion and Limitations
 Scientific Conclusions
 This investigation led us to conclude that the four lines of evidence presented by Nguyen et al. (2024) – (1) human evaluations, (2) NLP benchmark evaluations, (3) LLM-as-a-Judge evaluations, (4) community adoption – do not support claims of min-p ’s superiority.
While min-p is useful for providing users another options to try, the original paper’s data and our extensions of the original paper’s data suggest that all samplers perform roughly the same once given the same amount of hyperparameter tuning; however, in our view, more research would be needed to assess the veracity of this conclusion.
The paper’s data does weakly suggest that min-p sampling can sometimes provide a benefit at higher temperatures, albeit with the critical caveat that absolute performance is meaningfully worse in this high-temperature regime than in standard temperature regimes.
 Key Limitation
 Our manuscript re-analyzes the evidence presented by the original paper ( Nguyen et al., 2024 ) and additional evidence created using the original paper’s code. Conclusions here are based on that evidence . We emphasize that new evidence might lead to different conclusions.
 What Went Wrong During the ICLR 2025 Review Process?
 Nguyen et al. (2024) ’s outstanding success in the ICLR 2025 review process---achieving Oral presentation status and ranking as the 18th highest-scoring submission 2 2 
 2 
 https://papercopilot.com/statistics/iclr-statistics/iclr-2025-statistics/ —is difficult to reconcile with the flaws our investigation uncovered.
 The reviewers overlooked methodological issues such as which model(s) are being sampled from
for the LLM-as-judge evals and missing/inadequate/improper consideration of uncertainty in presented results.
Reviewers uncritically accepted the authors’ claim that "over 54,000 GitHub repositories" were using min-p sampling,
when intuition or a quick GitHub search reveals cause for pause.
 The Area Chair’s comment also contains a clear misstatement: it highlights min-p ’s success in the low temperature regime ("in the low temperature regime, [ min-p ] provides a significant advantage"), when the paper specifically claims benefits in the high temperature regime.
 References
 Ackley et al. (1985) 
David H Ackley, Geoffrey E Hinton, and Terrence J Sejnowski.
 A learning algorithm for boltzmann machines.
 Cognitive science , 9(1):147–169, 1985.
 Basu et al. (2020) 
Sourya Basu, Govardana Sachitanandam Ramachandran, Nitish Shirish Keskar, and Lav R Varshney.
 Mirostat: A neural text decoding algorithm that directly controls perplexity.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.14966 , 2020.
 Biderman et al. (2024) 
Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Lintang Sutawika, Leo Gao, Jonathan Tow, Baber Abbasi, Alham Fikri Aji, Pawan Sasanka Ammanamanchi, Sidney Black, Jordan Clive, Anthony DiPofi, Julen Etxaniz, Benjamin Fattori, Jessica Zosa Forde, Charles Foster, Jeffrey Hsu, Mimansa Jaiswal, Wilson Y. Lee, Haonan Li, Charles Lovering, Niklas Muennighoff, Ellie Pavlick, Jason Phang, Aviya Skowron, Samson Tan, Xiangru Tang, Kevin A. Wang, Genta Indra Winata, François Yvon, and Andy Zou.
 Lessons from the trenches on reproducible evaluation of language models, 2024.
 URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.14782 .
 Chiang et al. (2024) 
Wei-Lin Chiang, Lianmin Zheng, Ying Sheng, Anastasios Nikolas Angelopoulos, Tianle Li, Dacheng Li, Hao Zhang, Banghua Zhu, Michael Jordan, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica.
 Chatbot arena: An open platform for evaluating llms by human preference, 2024.
 URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.04132 .
 Clark et al. (2021) 
Elizabeth Clark, Tal August, Sofia Serrano, Nikita Haduong, Suchin Gururangan, and Noah A Smith.
 All that’s ‘human’is not gold: Evaluating human evaluation of generated text.
 In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 7282–7296, 2021.
 Cobbe et al. (2021) 
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman.
 Training verifiers to solve math word problems, 2021.
 URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.14168 .
 Dubois et al. (2023) 
Yann Dubois, Chen Xuechen Li, Rohan Taori, Tianyi Zhang, Ishaan Gulrajani, Jimmy Ba, Carlos Guestrin, Percy S Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto.
 Alpacafarm: A simulation framework for methods that learn from human feedback.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:30039–30069, 2023.
 Fan et al. (2018) 
Angela Fan, Mike Lewis, and Yann Dauphin.
 Hierarchical neural story generation.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.04833 , 2018.
 Gao et al. (2021) 
Leo Gao, Jonathan Tow, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Anthony DiPofi, Charles Foster, Laurence Golding, Jeffrey Hsu, Kyle McDonell, Niklas Muennighoff, et al.
 A framework for few-shot language model evaluation.
 Version v0. 0.1. Sept , 10:8–9, 2021.
 Grattafiori et al. (2024) 
Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark, Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava Spataru, Baptiste Roziere, Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris Marra, Chris McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny Livshits, Danny Wyatt, David Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary, Dhruv Mahajan, Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino, Dieuwke Hupkes, Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova, Emily Dinan, Eric Michael Smith, Filip Radenovic, Francisco Guzmán, Frank Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Anderson, Govind Thattai, Graeme Nail, Gregoire Mialon, Guan Pang,
Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah Korevaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel Kloumann, Ishan Misra, Ivan Evtimov, Jack Zhang, Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Mahadeokar, Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy Fu, Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak, Jongsoo Park, Joseph Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Alwala, Karthik Prasad, Kartikeya Upasani, Kate Plawiak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, Khalid El-Arini, Krithika Iyer, Kshitiz Malik, Kuenley Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Kushal Lakhotia, Lauren Rantala-Yeary, Laurens van der Maaten, Lawrence Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin, Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo, Lukas Blecher, Lukas Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi, Mahesh Pasupuleti, Mannat Singh, Manohar Paluri, Marcin Kardas, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Mathew Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova, Melanie Kambadur,
Mike Lewis, Min Si, Mitesh Kumar Singh, Mona Hassan, Naman Goyal, Narjes Torabi, Nikolay Bashlykov, Nikolay Bogoychev, Niladri Chatterji, Ning Zhang, Olivier Duchenne, Onur Çelebi, Patrick Alrassy, Pengchuan Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Vasic, Peter Weng, Prajjwal Bhargava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan, Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing He, Qingxiao Dong, Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Ganapathy, Ramon Calderer, Ricardo Silveira Cabral, Robert Stojnic, Roberta Raileanu, Rohan Maheswari, Rohit Girdhar, Rohit Patel, Romain Sauvestre, Ronnie Polidoro, Roshan Sumbaly, Ross Taylor, Ruan Silva, Rui Hou, Rui Wang, Saghar Hosseini, Sahana Chennabasappa, Sanjay Singh, Sean Bell, Seohyun Sonia Kim, Sergey Edunov, Shaoliang Nie, Sharan Narang, Sharath Raparthy, Sheng Shen, Shengye Wan, Shruti Bhosale, Shun Zhang, Simon Vandenhende, Soumya Batra, Spencer Whitman, Sten Sootla, Stephane Collot, Suchin Gururangan, Sydney Borodinsky, Tamar Herman, Tara Fowler, Tarek Sheasha, Thomas Georgiou, Thomas Scialom, Tobias Speckbacher,
Todor Mihaylov, Tong Xiao, Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami, Vibhor Gupta, Vignesh Ramanathan, Viktor Kerkez, Vincent Gonguet, Virginie Do, Vish Vogeti, Vítor Albiero, Vladan Petrovic, Weiwei Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu, Whitney Meers, Xavier Martinet, Xiaodong Wang, Xiaofang Wang, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Xide Xia, Xinfeng Xie, Xuchao Jia, Xuewei Wang, Yaelle Goldschlag, Yashesh Gaur, Yasmine Babaei, Yi Wen, Yiwen Song, Yuchen Zhang, Yue Li, Yuning Mao, Zacharie Delpierre Coudert, Zheng Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe Papakipos, Aaditya Singh, Aayushi Srivastava, Abha Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam Shajnfeld, Adithya Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria, Ahuva Goldstand, Ajay Menon, Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesenberg, Alexei Baevski, Allie Feinstein, Amanda Kallet, Amit Sangani, Amos Teo, Anam Yunus, Andrei Lupu, Andres Alvarado, Andrew Caples, Andrew Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew Poulton, Andrew Ryan, Ankit Ramchandani, Annie Dong, Annie Franco, Anuj Goyal, Aparajita Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowdhury, Ashley Gabriel, Ashwin Bharambe, Assaf Eisenman, Azadeh
Yazdan, Beau James, Ben Maurer, Benjamin Leonhardi, Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto De Paola, Bhargavi Paranjape, Bing Liu, Bo Wu, Boyu Ni, Braden Hancock, Bram Wasti, Brandon Spence, Brani Stojkovic, Brian Gamido, Britt Montalvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton, Catalina Mejia, Ce Liu, Changhan Wang, Changkyu Kim, Chao Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu, Chris Cai, Chris Tindal, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Cynthia Gao, Damon Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel Li, David Adkins, David Xu, Davide Testuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Diana Liskovich, Didem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc Le, Dustin Holland, Edward Dowling, Eissa Jamil, Elaine Montgomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily Hahn, Emily Wood, Eric-Tuan Le, Erik Brinkman, Esteban Arcaute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smothers, Fei Sun, Felix Kreuk, Feng Tian, Filippos Kokkinos, Firat Ozgenel, Francesco Caggioni, Frank Kanayet, Frank Seide, Gabriela Medina Florez, Gabriella Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia Swee, Gil Halpern, Grant Herman, Grigory Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang, Guna
Lakshminarayanan, Hakan Inan, Hamid Shojanazeri, Han Zou, Hannah Wang, Hanwen Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harrison Rudolph, Helen Suk, Henry Aspegren, Hunter Goldman, Hongyuan Zhan, Ibrahim Damlaj, Igor Molybog, Igor Tufanov, Ilias Leontiadis, Irina-Elena Veliche, Itai Gat, Jake Weissman, James Geboski, James Kohli, Janice Lam, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jennifer Chan, Jenny Zhen, Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul, Jessica Zhong, Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang, Joe Cummings, Jon Carvill, Jon Shepard, Jonathan McPhie, Jonathan Torres, Josh Ginsburg, Junjie Wang, Kai Wu, Kam Hou U, Karan Saxena, Kartikay Khandelwal, Katayoun Zand, Kathy Matosich, Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Kelly Michelena, Keqian Li, Kiran Jagadeesh, Kun Huang, Kunal Chawla, Kyle Huang, Lailin Chen, Lakshya Garg, Lavender A, Leandro Silva, Lee Bell, Lei Zhang, Liangpeng Guo, Licheng Yu, Liron Moshkovich, Luca Wehrstedt, Madian Khabsa, Manav Avalani, Manish Bhatt, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson, Matthew Lennie, Matthias Reso, Maxim
Groshev, Maxim Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Keneally, Miao Liu, Michael L. Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vyatskov, Mikayel Samvelyan, Mike Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang, Miquel Jubert Hermoso, Mo Metanat, Mohammad Rastegari, Munish Bansal, Nandhini Santhanam, Natascha Parks, Natasha White, Navyata Bawa, Nayan Singhal, Nick Egebo, Nicolas Usunier, Nikhil Mehta, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Ning Dong, Norman Cheng, Oleg Chernoguz, Olivia Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem Kalinli, Parkin Kent, Parth Parekh, Paul Saab, Pavan Balaji, Pedro Rittner, Philip Bontrager, Pierre Roux, Piotr Dollar, Polina Zvyagina, Prashant Ratanchandani, Pritish Yuvraj, Qian Liang, Rachad Alao, Rachel Rodriguez, Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy, Raghu Nayani, Rahul Mitra, Rangaprabhu Parthasarathy, Raymond Li, Rebekkah Hogan, Robin Battey, Rocky Wang, Russ Howes, Ruty Rinott, Sachin Mehta, Sachin Siby, Sai Jayesh Bondu, Samyak Datta, Sara Chugh, Sara Hunt, Sargun Dhillon, Sasha Sidorov, Satadru Pan, Saurabh Mahajan,
Saurabh Verma, Seiji Yamamoto, Sharadh Ramaswamy, Shaun Lindsay, Shaun Lindsay, Sheng Feng, Shenghao Lin, Shengxin Cindy Zha, Shishir Patil, Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang Zhang, Shuqiang Zhang, Sinong Wang, Sneha Agarwal, Soji Sajuyigbe, Soumith Chintala, Stephanie Max, Stephen Chen, Steve Kehoe, Steve Satterfield, Sudarshan Govindaprasad, Sumit Gupta, Summer Deng, Sungmin Cho, Sunny Virk, Suraj Subramanian, Sy Choudhury, Sydney Goldman, Tal Remez, Tamar Glaser, Tamara Best, Thilo Koehler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe Li, Tianjun Zhang, Tim Matthews, Timothy Chou, Tzook Shaked, Varun Vontimitta, Victoria Ajayi, Victoria Montanez, Vijai Mohan, Vinay Satish Kumar, Vishal Mangla, Vlad Ionescu, Vlad Poenaru, Vlad Tiberiu Mihailescu, Vladimir Ivanov, Wei Li, Wenchen Wang, Wenwen Jiang, Wes Bouaziz, Will Constable, Xiaocheng Tang, Xiaojian Wu, Xiaolan Wang, Xilun Wu, Xinbo Gao, Yaniv Kleinman, Yanjun Chen, Ye Hu, Ye Jia, Ye Qi, Yenda Li, Yilin Zhang, Ying Zhang, Yossi Adi, Youngjin Nam, Yu, Wang, Yu Zhao, Yuchen Hao, Yundi
Qian, Yunlu Li, Yuzi He, Zach Rait, Zachary DeVito, Zef Rosnbrick, Zhaoduo Wen, Zhenyu Yang, Zhiwei Zhao, and Zhiyu Ma.
 The llama 3 herd of models, 2024.
 URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783 .
 Hewitt et al. (2022) 
John Hewitt, Christopher D Manning, and Percy Liang.
 Truncation sampling as language model desmoothing.
 In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2022 , pp. 3414–3427, 2022.
 Holtzman et al. (2020) 
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi.
 The curious case of neural text degeneration.
 In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2020.
 Howcroft et al. (2020) 
David M Howcroft, Anya Belz, Miruna Clinciu, Dimitra Gkatzia, Sadid A Hasan, Saad Mahamood, Simon Mille, Emiel Van Miltenburg, Sashank Santhanam, and Verena Rieser.
 Twenty years of confusion in human evaluation: Nlg needs evaluation sheets and standardised definitions.
 In 13th International Conference on Natural Language Generation 2020 , pp. 169–182. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020.
 Hughes et al. (2024) 
John Hughes, Sara Price, Aengus Lynch, Rylan Schaeffer, Fazl Barez, Sanmi Koyejo, Henry Sleight, Erik Jones, Ethan Perez, and Mrinank Sharma.
 Best-of-n jailbreaking, 2024.
 URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.03556 .
 Jiang et al. (2023) 
Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, Lélio Renard Lavaud, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao, Thibaut Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed.
 Mistral 7b, 2023.
 URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.06825 .
 Khashabi et al. (2022) 
Daniel Khashabi, Gabriel Stanovsky, Jonathan Bragg, Nicholas Lourie, Jungo Kasai, Yejin Choi, Noah A. Smith, and Daniel S. Weld.
 Genie: Toward reproducible and standardized human evaluation for text generation, 2022.
 URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.06561 .
 Liang et al. (2022) 
Percy Liang, Rishi Bommasani, Tony Lee, Dimitris Tsipras, Dilara Soylu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Yian Zhang, Deepak Narayanan, Yuhuai Wu, Ananya Kumar, et al.
 Holistic evaluation of language models.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09110 , 2022.
 Nakano et al. (2021) 
Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christopher Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, et al.
 Webgpt: Browser-assisted question-answering with human feedback.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332 , 2021.
 Nguyen et al. (2024) 
Minh Nguyen, Andrew Baker, Clement Neo, Allen Roush, Andreas Kirsch, and Ravid Shwartz-Ziv.
 Turning up the heat: Min-p sampling for creative and coherent llm outputs.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.01082 , 2024.
 Qwen et al. (2025) 
Qwen, :, An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keming Lu, Keqin Bao, Kexin Yang, Le Yu, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Pei Zhang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men, Runji Lin, Tianhao Li, Tianyi Tang, Tingyu Xia, Xingzhang Ren, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang Zhang, Yu Wan, Yuqiong Liu, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, and Zihan Qiu.
 Qwen2.5 technical report, 2025.
 URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15115 .
 Rein et al. (2023) 
David Rein, Betty Li Hou, Asa Cooper Stickland, Jackson Petty, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Julien Dirani, Julian Michael, and Samuel R. Bowman.
 Gpqa: A graduate-level google-proof q&a benchmark, 2023.
 URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.12022 .
 Roller et al. (2020) 
Stephen Roller, Y-Lan Boureau, Jason Weston, Antoine Bordes, Emily Dinan, Angela Fan, David Gunning, Da Ju, Margaret Li, Spencer Poff, Pratik Ringshia, Kurt Shuster, Eric Michael Smith, Arthur Szlam, Jack Urbanek, and Mary Williamson.
 Open-domain conversational agents: Current progress, open problems, and future directions, 2020.
 URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.12442 .
 Schaeffer et al. (2025a) 
Rylan Schaeffer, Joshua Kazdan, John Hughes, Jordan Juravsky, Sara Price, Aengus Lynch, Erik Jones, Robert Kirk, Azalia Mirhoseini, and Sanmi Koyejo.
 How do large language monkeys get their power (laws)?, 2025a.
 URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.17578 .
 Schaeffer et al. (2025b) 
Rylan Schaeffer, Punit Singh Koura, Binh Tang, Ranjan Subramanian, Aaditya K Singh, Todor Mihaylov, Prajjwal Bhargava, Lovish Madaan, Niladri S. Chatterji, Vedanuj Goswami, Sergey Edunov, Dieuwke Hupkes, Sanmi Koyejo, and Sharan Narang.
 Correlating and predicting human evaluations of language models from natural language processing benchmarks, 2025b.
 URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.18339 .
 Stiennon et al. (2020) 
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano.
 Learning to summarize with human feedback.
 Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:3008–3021, 2020.
 Team et al. (2024) 
Gemma Team, Morgane Riviere, Shreya Pathak, Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Cassidy Hardin, Surya Bhupatiraju, Léonard Hussenot, Thomas Mesnard, Bobak Shahriari, Alexandre Ramé, Johan Ferret, Peter Liu, Pouya Tafti, Abe Friesen, Michelle Casbon, Sabela Ramos, Ravin Kumar, Charline Le Lan, Sammy Jerome, Anton Tsitsulin, Nino Vieillard, Piotr Stanczyk, Sertan Girgin, Nikola Momchev, Matt Hoffman, Shantanu Thakoor, Jean-Bastien Grill, Behnam Neyshabur, Olivier Bachem, Alanna Walton, Aliaksei Severyn, Alicia Parrish, Aliya Ahmad, Allen Hutchison, Alvin Abdagic, Amanda Carl, Amy Shen, Andy Brock, Andy Coenen, Anthony Laforge, Antonia Paterson, Ben Bastian, Bilal Piot, Bo Wu, Brandon Royal, Charlie Chen, Chintu Kumar, Chris Perry, Chris Welty, Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, Danila Sinopalnikov, David Weinberger, Dimple Vijaykumar, Dominika Rogozińska, Dustin Herbison, Elisa Bandy, Emma Wang, Eric Noland, Erica Moreira, Evan Senter, Evgenii Eltyshev, Francesco Visin, Gabriel Rasskin, Gary Wei, Glenn Cameron, Gus Martins,
Hadi Hashemi, Hanna Klimczak-Plucińska, Harleen Batra, Harsh Dhand, Ivan Nardini, Jacinda Mein, Jack Zhou, James Svensson, Jeff Stanway, Jetha Chan, Jin Peng Zhou, Joana Carrasqueira, Joana Iljazi, Jocelyn Becker, Joe Fernandez, Joost van Amersfoort, Josh Gordon, Josh Lipschultz, Josh Newlan, Ju yeong Ji, Kareem Mohamed, Kartikeya Badola, Kat Black, Katie Millican, Keelin McDonell, Kelvin Nguyen, Kiranbir Sodhia, Kish Greene, Lars Lowe Sjoesund, Lauren Usui, Laurent Sifre, Lena Heuermann, Leticia Lago, Lilly McNealus, Livio Baldini Soares, Logan Kilpatrick, Lucas Dixon, Luciano Martins, Machel Reid, Manvinder Singh, Mark Iverson, Martin Görner, Mat Velloso, Mateo Wirth, Matt Davidow, Matt Miller, Matthew Rahtz, Matthew Watson, Meg Risdal, Mehran Kazemi, Michael Moynihan, Ming Zhang, Minsuk Kahng, Minwoo Park, Mofi Rahman, Mohit Khatwani, Natalie Dao, Nenshad Bardoliwalla, Nesh Devanathan, Neta Dumai, Nilay Chauhan, Oscar Wahltinez, Pankil Botarda, Parker Barnes, Paul Barham, Paul Michel, Pengchong Jin,
Petko Georgiev, Phil Culliton, Pradeep Kuppala, Ramona Comanescu, Ramona Merhej, Reena Jana, Reza Ardeshir Rokni, Rishabh Agarwal, Ryan Mullins, Samaneh Saadat, Sara Mc Carthy, Sarah Cogan, Sarah Perrin, Sébastien M. R. Arnold, Sebastian Krause, Shengyang Dai, Shruti Garg, Shruti Sheth, Sue Ronstrom, Susan Chan, Timothy Jordan, Ting Yu, Tom Eccles, Tom Hennigan, Tomas Kocisky, Tulsee Doshi, Vihan Jain, Vikas Yadav, Vilobh Meshram, Vishal Dharmadhikari, Warren Barkley, Wei Wei, Wenming Ye, Woohyun Han, Woosuk Kwon, Xiang Xu, Zhe Shen, Zhitao Gong, Zichuan Wei, Victor Cotruta, Phoebe Kirk, Anand Rao, Minh Giang, Ludovic Peran, Tris Warkentin, Eli Collins, Joelle Barral, Zoubin Ghahramani, Raia Hadsell, D. Sculley, Jeanine Banks, Anca Dragan, Slav Petrov, Oriol Vinyals, Jeff Dean, Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Clement Farabet, Elena Buchatskaya, Sebastian Borgeaud, Noah Fiedel, Armand Joulin, Kathleen Kenealy, Robert Dadashi, and Alek Andreev.
 Gemma 2: Improving open language models at a practical size, 2024.
 URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.00118 .
 Van Der Lee et al. (2019) 
Chris Van Der Lee, Albert Gatt, Emiel Van Miltenburg, Sander Wubben, and Emiel Krahmer.
 Best practices for the human evaluation of automatically generated text.
 In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Natural Language Generation , pp. 355–368, 2019.
 Vendrow et al. (2025) 
Joshua Vendrow, Edward Vendrow, Sara Beery, and Aleksander Madry.
 Do large language model benchmarks test reliability?
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.03461 , 2025.
 Xu et al. (2025) 
Yi Xu, Laura Ruis, Tim Rocktäschel, and Robert Kirk.
 Investigating non-transitivity in llm-as-a-judge, 2025.
 URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.14074 .
 Zhang et al. (2024) 
Hugh Zhang, Jeff Da, Dean Lee, Vaughn Robinson, Catherine Wu, William Song, Tiffany Zhao, Pranav Raja, Charlotte Zhuang, Dylan Slack, et al.
 A careful examination of large language model performance on grade school arithmetic.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:46819–46836, 2024.
 Zheng et al. (2023) 
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al.
 Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:46595–46623, 2023.
 Appendix A Examples of Human Qualitative Responses Favoring Basic Sampling Over Min-P Sampling
 In Section 2.3 , we described how qualitative responses from many human participants in the original paper’s study favored basic sampling. Direct quotes from human evaluators favoring basic sampling are provided below. In the study, basic sampling was called “Model A”; for clarity, we substituted the pseudonyms for the actual sampling methods):
 • 
 “[ basic sampling] on Temp 3.0 - High Diversity setting. The stories where [sic] more interenting [sic], felt more different compared to the others, which felt like the same ideia [sic] just in a different format.”
 • 
 “I felt like [ basic sampling] was most diverse and most interesting with it’s [sic] descriptions of the characters and the setting. It appealed to me most and seemed to have less ’broken’ sentences that didn’t make sense. Descriptions were painterly [sic] and elaborate.”
 • 
 “[ basic sampling] was more engaging, it aroused my curiosity.”
 • 
 “[ basic sampling] provided more depth and easy to read for me and there was more diversity.”
 • 
 “[ basic sampling], they presented creative storytelling”
 • 
 “[ basic sampling]. From the very beginning the verbiage and descriptions were very creative and vivid. And each story was unique”
 • 
 “I believe that [ basic sampling] has provided stories with more differentiation overall than the other two models. From the point of view of creativity, all three models are more or less equivalent as they almost always talk about stories set in extraterrestrial worlds both from a physical and mental (dreams) point of view"
 • 
 “[ Basic sampling]: Sample 2: Temperature Setting F (Temp 3.0 - High Diversity). The story was captivating, it took inside the mystical land and walked you right besides all the characters, you can even draw the characters from just th descriptions provided by the prompt. you Could even smell them, smell the setting and be at one with the setting."
 • 
 “I personally preferred [ basic sampling] on the setting of creative, descriptive storytelling. I enjoyed how the writing was creative, showing imagination and a strong use of language. The stories were quite evocative, with intriguing settings and characters that helped to draw the reader in. I also appreciated the diversity of themes that were explored, from night weavers to dream manipulation and mysterious libraries, which kept the stories engaging and interesting."
 • 
 “Temporature setting C on [ basic sampling] was the best. The story was fascinating and very engaging. I wanted to read more."
 • 
 “I prefered the first [ basic sampling]. Tho [ basic sampling] and C seem to be very head to head. But something about [ basic sampling] seemed different in quality about it to me."
 More quotes are in the original paper’s data . We urge readers to draw their own conclusions.
 Appendix B GSM8K Chain-of-Thought Scores with “Standard" Formatting
 At the request of Nguyen et al. (2024) , we reran our GSM8K Chain-of-Thought sweeps using “standard" formatting instead of “Llama" formatting. Both analyses reached consistent results: min-p does not consistently outperform other samplers when controlling the volume of hyperparameter space. 
 Figure 7 : Min-P Does Not Consistently Outperform Other Samplers on GSM8K When Controlling For Hyperparameter Volume. 
We reran our GSM8K sweep using “standard" formatting rather than “Llama" formatting and observed qualitatively similar data.
 Figure 8 : Min-P Does Not Consistently Outperform Other Samplers on GSM8K When Controlling For Hyperparameter Volume. 
We reran our GSM8K sweep using “standard" formatting rather than “Llama" formatting and observed qualitatively similar data. 
 Appendix C GSM8K Scores By Model, Sampler and Hyperparameters
 Figure 9 : GSM8K Scores By Model, Sampler and Sampler Hyperparameters. Many models achieve their highest scores at low temperatures across samplers. 
 Experimental support, please
 view the build logs 
 for errors. Generated by
 L
 A 
 T
 E 
 xml 
 .
 Instructions for reporting errors
 We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
 support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
 methods listed below:
 Click the "Report Issue" ( 
 ) button, located in the page header.
 Tip: You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
 Our team has already identified the following issues . We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
 may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
 should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
 all.
 Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a list of packages that need conversion , and welcome developer contributions .
 We gratefully acknowledge support from
 our major funders ,
 member institutions , ,
 and all contributors.
 About 
 · 
 Help 
 · 
 Contact 
 · 
 Subscribe 
 · 
 Copyright 
 · 
 Privacy 
 · 
 Accessibility 
 · 
 Operational Status (opens in new tab) 
 Major funding support from
