                                                     AI, write an essay for me: A large-scale comparison
                                                     of human-written versus ChatGPT-generated essays
                                                     Steffen Herbold1* , Annette Hautli-Janisz1 , Ute Heuer1 , Zlata Kikteva1 , Alexander
                                                     Trautsch1

                                                     1 Faculty of Computer Science and Mathematics, University of Passau, Passau,
                                                     Germany




arXiv:2304.14276v1 [cs.CL] 24 Apr 2023
                                                     * steffen.herbold@uni-passau.de


                                                     Abstract
                                                     Background: Recently, ChatGPT and similar generative AI models have attracted
                                                     hundreds of millions of users and become part of the public discourse. Many believe
                                                     that such models will disrupt society and will result in a significant change in the
                                                     education system and information generation in the future. So far, this belief is based
                                                     on either colloquial evidence or benchmarks from the owners of the models – both lack
                                                     scientific rigour.
                                                     Objective: Through a large-scale study comparing human-written versus
                                                     ChatGPT-generated argumentative student essays, we systematically assess the quality
                                                     of the AI-generated content.
                                                     Methods: A large corpus of essays was rated using standard criteria by a large number
                                                     of human experts (teachers). We augment the analysis with a consideration of the
                                                     linguistic characteristics of the generated essays.
                                                     Results: Our results demonstrate that ChatGPT generates essays that are rated higher
                                                     for quality than human-written essays. The writing style of the AI models exhibits
                                                     linguistic characteristics that are different from those of the human-written essays, e.g.,
                                                     it is characterized by fewer discourse and epistemic markers, but more nominalizations
                                                     and greater lexical diversity.
                                                     Conclusions: Our results clearly demonstrate that models like ChatGPT outperform
                                                     humans in generating argumentative essays. Since the technology is readily available for
                                                     anyone to use, educators must act immediately. We must re-invent homework and
                                                     develop teaching concepts that utilize these AI models in the same way as math utilized
                                                     the calculator: teach the general concepts first and then use AI tools to free up time for
                                                     other learning objectives.


                                                     Introduction
                                                     The massive uptake in the development and deployment of large-scale Natural Language
                                                     Generation (NLG) systems in recent months has yielded an almost unprecedented
                                                     worldwide discussion of the future of society. In an open letter at the end of March
                                                     2023,1 both influential leaders from the industry like Elon Musk and Steve Wozniak, as
                                                     well as leading AI experts like Joshua Bengio and Stuart Russel, call for a temporary
                                                     ban on the development of more powerful AI than GPT-4 [1]. The ChatGPT service
                                                     which serves as Web front-end to GPT-3.5 [2] and GPT-4 was the fastest-growing
                                                       1 https://futureoflife.org/open-letter/pause-giant-ai-experiments/




                                    April 28, 2023                                                                                        1/27
                 service in history to break the 100 million user milestone in January and had 1 billion
                 visits by February 2023.2 The call of the open letter is to allow industry and academia
                 to catch up with the recent progress in the field and “get independent review before
                 starting to train future systems.” This is the mission of the present paper.
                     Driven by the upheaval that is particularly anticipated for education [3] and
                 knowledge transfer for future generations, we conduct the first independent, systematic
                 study of AI-generated language content that is typically dealt with in high-school
                 education: argumentative essays, i.e., essays in which students discuss a position on a
                 controversial topic by collecting and reflecting on evidence (e.g., ‘Should students be
                 taught to cooperate or compete?’). While there is a multitude of individual examples
                 and anecdotal evidence for the quality of AI-generated content in this genre,3 this paper
                 is the first to systematically assess the quality of human-written and AI-generated
                 argumentative texts across different versions of ChatGPT.4 We use a fine-grained essay
                 quality scoring rubric based on content and language mastery and employ a significant
                 pool of domain experts, i.e., high school teachers across disciplines, to perform the
                 evaluation. Using computational linguistic methods and rigorous statistical analysis, we
                 arrive at several key findings:

                    • AI models generate significantly higher-quality argumentative essays than the
                      users of an essay-writing online forum frequented by German high-school students
                      across all criteria in our scoring rubric.
                    • ChatGPT-45 significantly outperforms ChatGPT-36 with respect to logical
                      structure, language complexity, vocabulary richness and text linking.

                    • Writing styles between humans and generative AI models differ significantly: for
                      instance, the GPT models use more nominalizations and have higher sentence
                      complexity (signalling more complex, ‘scientific’, language), whereas humans make
                      more use of modal and epistemic constructions (which tend to convey speaker
                      attitude).

                    • The linguistic diversity of the NLG models seems to be improving over time:
                      while ChatGPT-3 still has a significantly lower linguistic diversity than humans,
                      ChatGPT-4 has a significantly higher diversity than humans.

                     As such, our work goes significantly beyond existing benchmarks. While OpenAI’s
                 technical report on GPT-4 [1] presents some benchmarks, their evaluation lacks
                 scientific rigour: it fails to provide vital information like the agreement between raters,
                 does not report on details regarding the criteria for assessment or to what extent and
                 how a statistical analysis was conducted for a larger sample of essays. In contrast, our
                 benchmark provides the first (statistically) rigorous and systematic study of essay
                 quality, paired with a computational linguistic analysis of the language employed by
                 humans and two different versions of ChatGPT, offering a glance at how these NLG
                 models develop over time.
                   2 https://www.demandsage.com/chatgpt-statistics/
                   3 e.g., https://www.zdnet.com/article/how-to-use-chatgpt-to-write-an-essay/
                   4 https://chat.openai.com/chat
                   5 ChatGPT web interface with the GPT-4 model.
                   6 ChatGPT web interface with the GPT-3.5 default model.




April 28, 2023                                                                                        2/27
                 Related work
                 Natural Language Generation
                 The recent interest in generative AI models can be largely attributed to the public
                 release of ChatGPT, a public interface in form of an interactive chat based on the
                 InstructGPT [2] model, more commonly referred to as GPT-3.5. In comparison to the
                 original GPT-3 [4] and other similar generative large language models based on the
                 transformer architecture like GPT-J [5], this model was not trained in a purely
                 self-supervised manner (e.g., through masked language modelling). Instead, a pipeline
                 that involved human-written content was used to fine-tune the model and improve the
                 quality of the outputs to both mitigate biases and safety issues, as well as make the
                 generated text more similar to text written by humans. Such models are referred to as
                 Fine-tune LAnguage Nets (FLANs). For details on their training, we refer to the
                 literature [6]. Notably, this process was recently reproduced with publicly available
                 models7 such as Alpaca [7] and Dolly.8 However, we can only assume that a similar
                 process was used for the training of GPT-4 since the paper by OpenAI does not include
                 any details on model training. Please note that this paper only considers the GPT-4
                 model without vision, as the latter is not yet publicly available at the date of submission.
                     Testing of the language competency of large-scale NLG systems has only recently
                 started. Cai et al. [8] show that ChatGPT reuses sentence structure, accesses the
                 intended meaning of an ambiguous word, and identifies the thematic structure of a verb
                 and its arguments, replicating human language use. Mahowald [9] compares ChatGPT’s
                 acceptability judgements to human judgements on the Article + Adjective + Numeral +
                 Noun construction in English. Dentella et al. [10] show that ChatGPT-3 fails to
                 understand low-frequent grammatical constructions like complex nested hierarchies and
                 self-embeddings. In another recent line of research, the structure of automatically
                 generated language is evaluated. Guo et al. [11] show that in question-answer scenarios,
                 ChatGPT-3 uses different linguistic devices than humans. Zhao et al. [12] show that
                 ChatGPT generates longer and more diverse responses when the user is in an
                 apparently negative emotional state.
                     Given that we aim to identify certain linguistic characteristics of human-written
                 versus AI-generated content, we also draw on related work in the field of linguistic
                 fingerprinting, which assumes that each human has a unique way of using language to
                 express themselves, i.e., the linguistic means that are employed to communicate
                 thoughts, opinions and ideas differ between humans. That these properties can be
                 identified with computational linguistic means has been showcased across different tasks:
                 the computation of a linguistic fingerprint allows to distinguish authors of literary
                 works [13], the identification of speaker profiles in large public debates [14–17] and the
                 provision of data for forensic voice comparison in broadcast debates [18, 19]. For
                 educational purposes, linguistic features are used to measure essay readability [20], essay
                 cohesion [21] and language performance scores for essay grading [22]. Integrating
                 linguistic fingerprints also yield performance advantages for classification tasks, for
                 instance in predicting user opinion [23, 24] and identifying individual users [25].

                 Limitations of OpenAIs ChatGPT evaluations
                 OpenAI published a discussion of the model’s performance of several tasks, including
                 AP classes within the US educational system [1]. The subjects used in performance
                 evaluation are diverse and include arts, history, English literature, calculus, statistics,
                 physics, chemistry, economics, and US politics. While the models achieved good or very
                   7 I.e., the complete models can be downloaded and not just accessed through an API.
                   8 https://www.databricks.com/blog/2023/04/12/dolly-first-open-commercially-viable-instruction-tu




April 28, 2023                                                                                           3/27
                 good marks in most subjects, they did not perform well in English literature. GPT-3.5
                 also experienced problems with chemistry, macroeconomics, physics, and statistics.
                 While the overall results are impressive, there are several significant issues: firstly, the
                 conflict of interest of the model’s owners poses a problem for the performance
                 interpretation. Secondly, there are issues with the soundness of the assessment beyond
                 the conflict of interest, which make the generalizability of the results hard to assess with
                 respect to the models’ capability to write essays. Notably, the AP exams combine
                 multiple-choice questions with free-text answers. Only the aggregated scores are
                 publicly available. To the best of our knowledge, neither the generated free-text
                 answers, their overall assessment, nor their assessment given specific criteria from the
                 used judgement rubric are published. Thirdly, while the paper states that 1-2 qualified
                 third-party contractors participated in the rating of the free-text answers, it is unclear
                 how often multiple ratings were generated for the same answer and what was the
                 agreement between them. This lack of information hinders a scientifically sound
                 judgement regarding the capabilities of these models in general, but also specifically for
                 essays. Lastly, the owners of the model conducted their study in a few prompt setting,
                 where they gave the models a very structured template as well as an example of a
                 human-written high-quality essay to guide the generation of the answers. This further
                 fine-tuning of what the models generate could have also influenced the output. The
                 results published by the owners go beyond the AP courses which are directly
                 comparable to our work and also consider other student assessments like Graduate
                 Record Examinations (GREs). However, these evaluations suffer from the same
                 problems with the scientific rigour as the AP classes.

                 Scientific assessment of ChatGPT
                 Researchers across the globe are currently assessing the individual capabilities of these
                 models with greater scientific rigour. We note that due to the recency and speed of
                 these developments, the hereafter discussed literature has mostly only been published as
                 pre-prints and has not yet been peer-reviewed. In addition to the above issues
                 concretely related to the assessment of the capabilities to generate student essays, it is
                 also worth noting that there are likely large problems with the trustworthiness of
                 evaluations, because of data contamination, i.e., because the benchmark tasks are part
                 of the training of the model, which enables memorization. For example, Aiyappa et
                 al. [26] find evidence that this is likely the case for benchmark results regarding NLP
                 tasks. This complicates the effort by researchers to assess the capabilities of the models
                 beyond memorization.
                     Nevertheless, the first assessment results are already available – though mostly
                 focused on ChatGPT-3 and not yet ChatGPT-4. Closest to our work is a study by
                 Yeadon et al. [27], who also investigate ChatGPT-3 performance when writing essays.
                 They grade essays generated by ChatGPT-3 for five physics questions based on criteria
                 that cover academic content, appreciation of the underlying physics, grasp of subject
                 material, addressing the topic, and writing style. For each question, ten essays were
                 generated and rated independently by five researchers. While the sample size precludes
                 a statistical assessment, the results demonstrate that the AI model is capable of writing
                 high-quality physics essays, but that the quality varies in a manner similar to
                 human-written essays.
                     Guo et al. [11] create a set of free-text question answering tasks based on data they
                 collected from the internet, e.g., question answering from Reddit. The authors then
                 sample thirty triplets of a question, a human answer, and a ChatGPT-3 generated
                 answer and ask human raters to assess if they can detect which was written by a human,
                 and which was written by an AI. While this approach does not directly assess the
                 quality of the output, it serves as a Turing test [28] designed to evaluate whether




April 28, 2023                                                                                          4/27
                 humans can distinguish between human- and AI-produced output. The results indicate
                 that humans are in fact able to distinguish between the outputs when presented with a
                 pair of answers. Humans familiar with ChatGPT are also able to identify over 80% of
                 AI-generated answers without seeing a human answer in comparison. However, humans
                 that are not yet familiar with ChatGPT-3 are not capable identify AI-written answers
                 about 50% of the time. Moreover, the authors also find that the AI-generated outputs
                 are deemed to be more helpful than the human answers in slightly more than half of the
                 cases. This suggests that the strong results from the owner’s benchmarks regarding the
                 capabilities to generate free-text answers generalize beyond the benchmarks.
                      There are, however, some indicators that the benchmarks may be overly optimistic
                 in their assessment of the model’s capabilities. For example, Kortemeyer [29] conducts a
                 case study to assess how well ChatGPT-3 would perform in a physics class, simulating
                 the tasks that students need to complete as part of the course: answer multiple-choice
                 questions, do homework assignments, ask questions during a lesson, complete
                 programming exercises, and write exams with free-text questions. Notably, ChatGPT-3
                 was allowed to interact with the instructor for many of the tasks, allowing for multiple
                 attempts as well as feedback on preliminary solutions. The experiment shows that
                 ChatGPT-3’s performance is in many aspects similar to that of the beginning learners
                 and that the model makes similar mistakes, e.g., omits units, or simply plugs in results
                 from equations. Overall, the AI would have passed the course with a low score of 1.5
                 out of 4.0. Similarly, Kung et al. [30] study the performance of ChatGPT-3 in the
                 United States Medical Licensing Exam (USMLE) and find that the model performs at
                 or near the passing threshold. Their assessment is a bit more optimistic than
                 Kortemeyer’s as they state that this level of performance, comprehensible reasoning,
                 and valid clinical insights suggest that models such as ChatGPT may potentially assist
                 human learning in clinical decision-making.
                      Frieder et al. [31] evaluate the capabilities of ChatGPT-3 in solving graduate-level
                 mathematical tasks. They find that while ChatGPT-3 seems to have some
                 mathematical understanding, its level is well below that of an average student and in
                 most cases is not sufficient to pass exams. Yuan et al. [32] consider the arithmetic
                 abilities of language models, including ChatGPT-3 and ChatGPT-4. They find that
                 they exhibit the best performance among other currently available language models
                 (incl. Llama [33], FLAN-T5 [34], and Bloom [35]). However, the accuracy of basic
                 arithmetic tasks is still only at 83% when considering correctness to the degree of 10−3 ,
                 i.e., such models are still not capable of functioning reliably as calculators. In a slightly
                 satiric, yet insightful take, Spencer et al. [36] assess how a scientific paper on
                 gamma-ray astrophysics would look like, if it were written largely with the assistance of
                 ChatGPT-3. They find that while the language capabilities are good and the model is
                 capable of generating equations, the arguments are often flawed and the references to
                 scientific literature are full of hallucinations.
                      The general reasoning skills of the models may also not be on the level expected
                 from the benchmarks. For example, Cherian et al. [37] evaluate how well ChatGPT-3
                 performs on eleven puzzles that second-graders should be able to solve and find that
                 ChatGPT is only able to solve them on average in 36.4% of attempts, whereas the
                 second graders achieve a mean of 60.4%. However, their sample size is very small and
                 the problem was posed as a multiple-choice question answering problem, which cannot
                 be directly compared to the NLG we consider.

                 Research gap
                 Within this article, we address an important part of the current research gap regarding
                 the capabilities of ChatGPT (and similar technologies), guided by the following research
                 questions:




April 28, 2023                                                                                          5/27
                 RQ1: How good is ChatGPT based on GPT-3 and GPT-4 at writing argumentative
                     student essays?

                 RQ2: How do AI-generated essays compare to essays written by humans?
                 RQ3: What are linguistic devices that are characteristic of human versus AI-generated
                     content?

                     We study these aspects with the help of a large group of teaching professionals that
                 systematically assess a large corpus of essays. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
                 first large-scale, independent scientific assessment of ChatGPT (or similar models) of
                 this kind. The answer to these questions is vital for understanding of the impact of
                 ChatGPT on the future of education.


                 Materials and Methods
                 Data
                 The essay topics originate from a corpus of argumentative essays in the field of
                 argument mining [38]. Argumentative essays require students to think critically about a
                 topic and use evidence to establish a position on the topic in a concise manner. The
                 corpus features essays for 90 topics from https://essayforum.com/, an active
                 community for providing writing feedback on different kinds of text and is frequented by
                 high-school students to get feedback from native speakers on their essay-writing
                 capabilities. Topics range from ‘Should students be taught to cooperate or to compete?’
                 to ‘Will newspapers become a thing of the past?’. In the corpus, each topic features one
                 human-written essay uploaded and discussed in the forum. The students who wrote the
                 essays are not native speakers. The average length of these essays is 19 sentences with
                 388 tokens (an average of 2.089 characters) and will be termed ‘student essays’ in the
                 remainder of the paper.
                     For the present study, we use the topics from Stab and Gurevych [38] and prompt
                 ChatGPT with ‘Write an essay with about 200 words on “[topic]”’ to receive
                 automatically-generated essays from the ChatGPT-3 and ChatGPT-4 versions from 22
                 March 2023 (‘ChatGPT-3 essays’, ‘ChatGPT-4 essays’). No additional prompts for
                 getting the responses were used, i.e., the data was created with a basic prompt in a
                 zero-shot scenario. This is in contrast to the benchmarks by OpenAI, who used an
                 engineered prompt in a few-shot scenario to guide the generation of essays. We note
                 that we decided to ask for 200 words, because we noticed a tendency to generate essays
                 that are longer than the desired length by ChatGPT. Similar to the evaluations of
                 free-text answers by OpenAI, we did not consider multiple configurations of the model
                 due to the effort required to obtain human judgements. For the same reason, our data is
                 restricted to ChatGPT and does not include other models available at that time, e.g.,
                 Alpaca. We use the browser versions of the tools, because we consider this to be a more
                 realistic scenario than using the API. Table 1 below shows the core statistics of the
                 resulting dataset.

                 Table 1. Core statistics of the dataset
                   Source        length (words/essay)         sentences/essay      words/sentence
                   Student       339.13                       18.98                18.60
                   ChatGPT-3 247.96                           12.40                20.31
                   ChatGPT-4 253.70                           13.08                19.57




April 28, 2023                                                                                       6/27
                 Annotation study
                 Study participants
                 The participants had registered for a two-hour online training entitled ‘ChatGPT –
                 Challenges and Opportunities’ conducted by the authors of this paper as a means to
                 provide teachers with some of the technological background of NLG systems in general
                 and ChatGPT in particular. Only teachers permanently employed at secondary schools
                 were allowed to register for this training. Focusing on these experts alone allows us to
                 receive meaningful results as those participants have a wide range of experience in
                 assessing students’ writing. A total of 139 teachers registered for the training, 129 of
                 them teach at grammar schools, and only 10 teachers hold a position at other secondary
                 schools. About half of the registered teachers (68 teachers) have been in service for
                 many years and have successfully applied for promotion. For data protection reasons,
                 we do not know the subject combinations of the registered teachers. We only know that
                 a variety of subjects are represented, including languages (English, French and German),
                 religion/ethics, and science.
                     The training began with an online lecture followed by a discussion phase. Teachers
                 were given an overview of language models and basic information on how ChatGPT was
                 developed. After about 45 minutes, the teachers received an explanation of the
                 questionnaire at the core of our study (see Supplementary material S3) and were
                 informed that they had 30 minutes to finish the study tasks. The explanation included
                 information on how the data was obtained, why we collect the self-assessment, and how
                 we chose the criteria for the rating of the essays. Participation in the questionnaire was
                 voluntary and did not affect the awarding of a training certificate. Once these
                 instructions were provided, the link to the online form was given to the participants.
                 After the questionnaire, we continued with an online lecture on the opportunities for
                 using ChatGPT for teaching as well as AI beyond chatbots.

                 Questionnaire
                 The questionnaire consists of three parts: first, a brief self-assessment regarding the
                 English skills of the participants which is based on the Common European Framework
                 of Reference for Languages (CEFR).9 We have six levels ranging from ‘comparable to a
                 native speaker’ to ‘some basic skills’ (see Table 7 in Supplementary material S3). Then
                 each participant was shown six essays. The participants were only shown the generated
                 text and were not provided with information on whether the text was human-written or
                 AI-generated.
                    The questionnaire covers the seven categories relevant for essay assessment shown
                 below (for details see Tables 5 and 6 in Supplementary material S3 at the end):

                    • Topic and completeness
                    • Logic and composition

                    • Expressiveness and comprehensiveness
                    • Language mastery
                    • Complexity
                    • Vocabulary and text linking

                    • Language constructs
                   9 https://www.coe.int/en/web/common-european-framework-reference-languages




April 28, 2023                                                                                       7/27
                     These categories are used as guidelines for essay assessment established by the
                 Ministry for Education of Lower Saxony, Germany.10 For each criterion, a seven-point
                 Likert scale with scores from zero to six is defined, where zero is the worst score (e.g.,
                 no relation to the topic) and six is the best score (e.g., addressed the topic to a special
                 degree). The questionnaire included a written description as guidance for the scoring.
                     After rating each essay, the participants were also asked to self-assess their
                 confidence in the ratings. We used a five-point Likert scale based on the criteria for the
                 self-assessment of peer-review scores from the Association for Computational Linguistics
                 (ACL). Once a participant finished rating the six essays, they were shown a summary of
                 their ratings, as well as the individual ratings for each of their essays and the
                 information on how the essay was generated.

                 Computational linguistic analysis
                 In order to further explore and compare the quality of the essays written by students
                 and ChatGPT, we consider the six following linguistic characteristics: lexical diversity,
                 sentence complexity, nominalisation, presence of modals, epistemic and discourse
                 markers. Those are motivated by previous work: Weiss et al. [22] observe the
                 correlation between measures of lexical, syntactic and discourse complexities to the
                 essay gradings of German high-school examinations while McNamara et al. [39] explore
                 cohesion (indicated, among other things, by connectives), syntactic complexity and
                 lexical diversity in relation to the essay scoring.

                 Lexical diversity
                 We identify vocabulary richness by using a well-established measure of textual, lexical
                 diversity (MTLD) [40] which is often used in the field of automated essay
                 grading [22, 39, 41]. It takes into account the number of unique words but unlike the
                 best-known measure of lexical diversity, the type-token ratio (TTR), it is not as
                 sensitive to the difference in the length of the texts. In fact, Koizumi and In’nami [42]
                 find it to be least affected by the differences in the length of the texts compared to some
                 other measures of lexical diversity. This is relevant to us due to the difference in average
                 length between the human-written and ChatGPT-generated essays.

                 Syntactic complexity
                 We use two measures in order to evaluate the syntactic complexity of the essays. One is
                 based on the maximum depth of the sentence dependency tree which is produced using
                 the spaCy 3.4.2 dependency parser [43] (‘Syntactic complexity (depth)’). For the second
                 measure we adopt an approach similar in nature to the one by Weiss et al. [22] who use
                 clause structure to evaluate syntactic complexity. In our case, we count the number of
                 conjuncts, clausal modifiers of nouns, adverbial clause modifiers, clausal complements,
                 clausal subjects, and parataxes (‘Syntactic complexity (clauses)’). The supplementary
                 material in S2 shows the difference between sentence complexity based on two examples
                 from the data.
                    Nominalisation is a common feature of a more scientific style of writing [44] and is
                 used as an additional measure for syntactic complexity. In order to explore this feature,
                 we count occurrences of nouns with suffixes such as ‘-ion’, ‘-ment’, ‘-ance’ and a few
                 others which are known to transform verbs into nouns.
                   10 http://www.kmk-format.de/material/Fremdsprachen/5-3-2_Bewertungsskalen_Schreiben.pdf




April 28, 2023                                                                                          8/27
                 Semantic properties
                 Both modals and epistemic markers signal the commitment of the writer to their
                 statement. We identify modals using the POS-tagging module provided by spaCy as
                 well as a list of epistemic expressions of modality, such as ‘definitely’ and ‘potentially’,
                 also used in other approaches to identifying semantic properties [45]. For epistemic
                 markers we adopt an empirically-driven approach and utilize the epistemic markers
                 identified in a corpus of dialogical argumentation by Hautli-Janisz et al. [46]. We
                 consider expressions such as ‘I think’, ‘it is believed’ and ‘in my opinion’ to be epistemic.

                 Discourse properties
                  Discourse markers can be used to measure the coherence quality of a text. This has
                  been explored by Somasundaran et al. [47] who use discourse markers to evaluate the
                  story-telling aspect of student writing while Nadeem et al. [48] incorporated them in
                  their deep learning-based approach to automated essay scoring. In the present paper,
                 we employ the PDTB list of discourse markers [49] which we adjust to exclude words
                  that are often used for purposes other than indicating discourse relations, such as ‘like’,
                 ‘for’, ‘in’ etc.

                 Statistical methods
                 We use a within-subjects design for our study. Each participant was shown six
                 randomly selected essays. Results were submitted to the survey system after each essay
                 was completed, in case participants ran out of time and did not finish scoring all six
                 essays. Cronbach’s α allows us to determine the inter-rater reliability for the rating
                 criterion and data source (human, ChatGPT-3, ChatGPT-4) in order to understand the
                 reliability of our data not only overall, but also for each data source and rating criterion.
                 We use two-sided Wilcoxon-ranksum tests to confirm the significance of the differences
                 between the data sources for each criterion. We use the same tests to determine the
                 significance of the linguistic characteristics. This results in three comparisons (human
                 vs. ChatGPT-3, human vs. ChatGPT-4, ChatGPT-3 vs. ChatGPT-4) for each of the
                 seven rating criteria and each of the seven linguistic characteristics, i.e., 42 tests. We
                 use the Holm-Bonferroni method for the correction for multiple tests to achieve a
                 family-wise error rate of 0.05. We report the effect size using Cohen’s d. While our data
                 is not perfectly normal, it also does not have severe outliers, so we prefer the clear
                 interpretation of Cohen’s d over the slightly more appropriate, but less accessible
                 non-parametric effect size measures. We report point plots with estimates of the mean
                 scores for each data source and criterion, incl. the 95% confidence interval of these mean
                 values. The confidence intervals are estimated in a non-parametric manner based on
                 bootstrap sampling. We further visualize the distribution for each criterion using violin
                 plots to provide a visual indicator of the spread of the data (see S4 in Supplementary
                 material).
                     Further, we use the self-assessment of the English skills and confidence in the essay
                 ratings as confounding variables. Through this, we determine if ratings are affected by
                 the language skills or confidence, instead of the actual quality of the essays. We control
                 for the impact of these by measuring Pearson’s rank correlation r between the
                 self-assessments and the ratings. We also determine whether the linguistic features are
                 correlated with the ratings as expected. The sentence complexity (both tree depth and
                 dependency clauses), as well as the nominalization, are indicators of the complexity of
                 the language. Similarly, the use of discourse markers should signal a proper logical
                 structure. Finally, a large lexical diversity should be correlated with the ratings for the
                 vocabulary. Same as above, we measure Pearson’s r.




April 28, 2023                                                                                          9/27
                 Table 2. Arithmetic mean (M), standard deviation (SD), and Cronbach’s α for the
                 ratings.
                                                          Humans            ChatGPT-3         ChatGPT-4
                  Criterion                         M       SD   α        M     SD   α      M     SD   α
                  Topic and completeness           3.58    1.30 0.95     4.24 1.16 0.95    4.54 1.12 0.95
                  Logic and composition            3.64    1.27 0.96     4.29 1.04 0.96    4.64 1.01 0.96
                  Expressiveness and compr.        3.42    1.25 0.95     3.90 1.04 0.95    4.23 1.12 0.95
                  Language mastery                 3.90    1.37 0.89     5.03 1.19 0.89    5.25 1.08 0.89
                  Complexity                       3.72    1.26 0.92     4.20 1.14 0.92    4.60 1.10 0.92
                  Vocabulary and text linking      3.78    1.18 0.97     4.41 1.05 0.97    4.81 1.06 0.97
                  Language constructs              3.80    1.15 0.97     4.47 1.02 0.97    4.73 1.07 0.97
                  Overall                          3.69    1.26          4.36 1.14         4.68 1.11

                 Table 3. Arithmetic mean (M) and standard deviation (SD) for the linguistic markers.
                  Linguistic characteristic            Humans          ChatGPT-3     ChatGPT-4
                  Lexical diversity                  95.72 23.50       75.68 12.89   108.91 20.73
                  Syntactic complexity (depth)        5.72 0.80         6.18  0.76    5.94   0.54
                  Syntactic complexity (clauses)      1.81 0.57         2.31  0.50    2.08   0.42
                  Nominalizations                     1.06 0.51         1.56  0.63    1.73   0.49
                  Modals                             10.84 5.30         8.97  4.21    6.12   3.18
                  Epistemic markers                   0.06 0.06         0.02  0.03    0.00   0.00
                  Discourse markers                   0.57 0.24         0.52  0.19    0.36   0.17


                     Our statistical analysis of the data is implemented in Python. We use pandas 1.5.3
                 and numpy 1.24.2 for the processing of data and calculation of Pearson’s r, pingouin
                 0.5.3 for the calculation of Cronbach’s α, scipy 1.10.1 for the Wilcoxon-ranksum-tests,
                 and seaborn 0.12.2 for the generation of plots, incl. the calculation of error bars that
                 visualize the confidence intervals.

                 Replication package
                 All materials are available online in form of a replication that contains the data and the
                 analysis code.11


                 Results
                 Out of the 111 teachers that completed the questionnaire, 108 rated all six essays, one
                 rated five essays, one rated two essays, and one rated only one essay. This results in 658
                 ratings for 270 essays (90 topics for each essay type: human-, ChatGPT-3-,
                 ChatGPT-4-generated), with three ratings for 121 essays, two ratings for 144 essays, and
                 one rating for five essays. The inter-rater agreement is consistently excellent (α > 0.9),
                 with the exception of language mastery where we have good agreement (α = 0.89, see
                 Table 2). Further, the correlation analysis depicted in Fig 1 in Supplementary material
                 S4 shows that neither the self-assessment for the English skills nor the self-assessment
                 for the confidence in ratings is correlated with the actual ratings. Overall, this indicates
                 that our ratings are reliable estimates of the actual quality of the essays.
                     Table 2 and Fig 2 in Supplementary material S4 characterize the distribution of the
                 ratings for the essays, grouped by the data source. We observe that for all criteria, we
                 have a clear order of the mean values, with students having the worst ratings,
                 ChatGPT-3 in the middle rank, and ChatGPT-4 with the best performance. We further
                 observe that the standard deviations are fairly consistent and slightly larger than one,
                  11 https://github.com/sherbold/chatgpt-student-essay-study




April 28, 2023                                                                                        10/27
                 Table 4. P-values of the Wilcoxon signed-rank tests adjusted for multiple comparisons
                 using the Holm-Bonferroni method. Effect sizes measured with Cohen’s d reported for
                 significant results.
                                                           Human                Human          ChatGPT-3
                  Criterion /                                   vs.                  vs.                 vs.
                  Linguistic characteristic           ChatGPT-3            ChatGPT-4           ChatGPT-4
                  Topic and completeness           <0.001 (d=-0.77)     <0.001 (d=-1.09)               0.095
                  Logic and composition            <0.001 (d=-0.84)     <0.001 (d=-1.20)     0.025 (d=-0.45)
                  Expressiveness and compr.         0.008 (d=-0.57)     <0.001 (d=-0.88)               0.055
                  Language mastery                 <0.001 (d=-1.15)     <0.001 (d=-1.43)               0.105
                  Complexity                        0.025 (d=-0.52)     <0.001 (d=-0.99)     0.025 (d=-0.48)
                  Vocabulary and text linking      <0.001 (d=-0.76)     <0.001 (d=-1.27)     0.012 (d=-0.50)
                  Language constructs              <0.001 (d=-0.82)     <0.001 (d=-1.15)               0.105
                  Lexical diversity                <0.001 (d=1.06)       0.001 (d=-0.60)    <0.001 (d=-1.93)
                  Syntactic complexity (depth)      0.001 (d=-0.59)                0.055               0.105
                  Syntactic complexity (clauses)   <0.001 (d=-0.93)      0.004 (d=-0.54)      0.024 (d=0.49)
                  Nominalizations                  <0.001 (d=-0.88)     <0.001 (d=-1.35)     0.020 (d=-0.29)
                  Modals                             0.025 (d=0.39)     <0.001 (d=1.08)     <0.001 (d=0.76)
                  Epistemic markers                <0.001 (d=1.01)      <0.001 (d=1.53)       0.005 (d=0.65)
                  Discourse markers                           0.150     <0.001 (d=0.98)     <0.001 (d=0.85)


                 i.e., the spread is similar for all ratings and essays. This is further supported by the
                 visual analysis of the violin plots.
                      The statistical analysis of the ratings reported in Table 4 shows that differences
                 between the human-written essays and the ones generated by both ChatGPT models
                 are significant. The effect sizes for human versus ChatGPT-3 essays are between 0.52
                 and 1.15, i.e., a medium (d ∈ [0.5, 0.8)) to large (d ∈ [0.8, 1.2)) effect. On the one hand,
                 the smallest effects are observed for the expressiveness and complexity, i.e., when it
                 comes to the overall comprehensiveness and complexity of the sentence structures, the
                 differences between the humans and the ChatGPT-3 model are smallest. On the other
                 hand, the difference in language mastery is larger than all other differences, which
                 indicates that humans are more prone to making mistakes when writing than the NLG
                 models. The magnitude of differences between humans and ChatGPT-4 is larger with
                 effect sizes between 0.88 and 1.43, i.e., a large to very large (d ∈ [1.2, 2)) effect. Same as
                 for ChatGPT-3, the differences are smallest for expressiveness and complexity and
                 largest for language mastery. Please note that the difference in language mastery
                 between humans and both GPT models does not mean that the humans have low scores
                 for language mastery (M=3.90), but rather that the NLG models have exceptionally
                 high scores (M=5.03 for ChatGPT-3, M=5.25 for ChatGPT-4).
                      When we consider the differences between the two GPT models, we observe that
                 while ChatGPT-4 has consistently higher mean values for all criteria, only the
                 differences for logic and composition, vocabulary and text linking, and complexity are
                 significant. The effect sizes are between 0.45 and 0.5, i.e., small (d ∈ [0.2, 0.5)) and
                 medium. Thus, while GPT-4 seems to be an improvement over GPT-3.5 in general, the
                 only clear indicator of this is a better and clearer logical composition, and more complex
                 writing with a more diverse vocabulary.
                      We also observe significant differences in the distribution of linguistic characteristics
                 between all three groups. Sentence complexity (depth) is the only category without
                 significant difference between humans and ChatGPT-3, as well as ChatGPT-3 and
                 ChatGPT-4. There is also no significant difference in the category of discourse markers
                 between humans and ChatGPT-3. The magnitude of the effects varies a lot and is
                 between 0.39 and 1.93, i.e., between small (d ∈ [0.2, 0.5)) and very large. However, in




April 28, 2023                                                                                          11/27
                 comparison to the ratings, there is no clear tendency regarding the direction of the
                 differences. For instance, while the ChatGPT models write more complex sentences and
                 use more nominalizations, humans tend to use more modals and epistemic markers
                 instead. The lexical diversity of humans is higher than that of ChatGPT-3 but lower
                 than that of ChatGPT-4. While there is no difference in the use of discourse markers
                 between humans and ChatGPT-3, ChatGPT-4 uses significantly fewer discourse
                 markers.
                     We detect the expected positive correlations between the complexity ratings and the
                 linguistic markers for sentence complexity (r = 0.16 for depth, r = 0.19 for clauses) and
                 nominalizations (r = 0.22). However, we observe a negative correlation between the
                 logic ratings and the discourse markers (r = −0.14), which counters our intuition that
                 more frequent use of discourse indicators makes a text more logically coherent. However,
                 this is in line with previous work: McNamara et al. [39] also find no indication that the
                 use of cohesion indices such as discourse connectives correlates with high- and
                 low-proficiency essays. Finally, we observe the expected positive correlation between the
                 ratings for the vocabulary and the lexical diversity (r = 0.12). We note that the
                 strength of all these correlations is weak.


                 Discussion
                 Our results provide clear answers to the first two research questions that consider the
                 quality of the generated essays: ChatGPT performs well at writing argumentative
                 student essays and outperforms humans significantly. The ChatGPT-4 model has (at
                 least) a large effect and is on average about one point better than humans on a
                 seven-point Likert scale.
                     Regarding the third research question, we find that there are significant linguistic
                 differences between humans and AI-generated content. The AI-generated essays are
                 highly structured, which for instance is reflected by the identical beginnings of the
                 concluding sections of all ChatGPT essays (‘In conclusion, [...]’). The initial sentences of
                 each essay are also very similar starting with a general statement using the main
                 concepts of the essay topics. Although this corresponds to the general structure that is
                 sought after for argumentative essays, it is striking to see that the ChatGPT models are
                 so rigid in realizing this, whereas the human-written essays are looser in representing
                 the guideline on the linguistic surface. Moreover, the linguistic fingerprint has the
                 counter-intuitive property that the use of discourse markers is negatively correlated
                 with logical coherence. We believe that this might be due to the rigid structure of the
                 generated essays: instead of using discourse markers, the AI models provide a clear
                 logical structure by separating the different arguments into paragraphs, thereby
                 reducing the need for discourse markers.
                     Our data also shows that hallucinations are not a problem in the setting of
                 argumentative essay writing: the essay topics are not really about factual correctness,
                 but rather about argumentation and critical reflection on general concepts which seem
                 to be contained within the knowledge of the AI model. The stochastic nature of the
                 language generation is well-suited for this kind of task, as different plausible arguments
                 can be seen as a sampling from all available arguments for a topic. Nevertheless, we
                 need to perform a more systematic study of the argumentative structures in order to
                 better understand the difference in argumentation between human-written and
                 ChatGPT-generated essay content.
                     One of the issues with evaluations of the recent large-language models is not
                 accounting for the impact of tainted data when benchmarking such models. While it is
                 certainly possible that the essays that were sourced by Stab and Gurevych [38] from the
                 internet were part of the training data of the GPT models, the proprietary nature of the




April 28, 2023                                                                                        12/27
                 model training means that we cannot confirm this. However, we note that the generated
                 essays did not resemble the corpus of human essays at all. Moreover, the topics of the
                 essays are general in the sense that any human should be able to reason and write about
                 these topics, just by understanding concepts like ‘cooperation’. Consequently, a taint on
                 these general topics, i.e., the fact that they might be present in the data, is not only
                 possible but is actually expected and unproblematic, as it relates to the capability of the
                 models to learn about concepts, rather than the memorization of specific task solutions.
                     While we did everything to ensure a sound construct and a high validity of our study,
                 there are still certain issues which may affect our conclusions. Most importantly, neither
                 the writers of the essays, nor their raters, were English native speakers. However, the
                 students purposefully used a forum for English writing frequented by native speakers to
                 ensure the language and content quality of their essays. The teachers were informed
                 that part of the training would be in English to prevent registrations from people
                 without English language skills. Moreover, the self-assessment of the language skills was
                 not correlated with the ratings, indicating that the threat to the soundness of our
                 results is low. While we cannot definitively rule out that our results would not be
                 reproducible with other human raters, the high inter-rater agreement indicates that this
                 is unlikely. We further note that the essay topics may not be an unbiased sample. While
                 Stab and Gurevych [38] randomly sampled the essays from the writing feedback section
                 of an essay forum, it is unclear whether the essays posted there are representative of the
                 general population of essay topics. Nevertheless, we believe that the threat is fairly low,
                 because our results are consistent and do not seem to be influenced by certain topics.
                 Further, we cannot with certainty conclude how our results generalize beyond
                 ChatGPT-3 and ChatGPT-4 to similar models like Bard,12 Alpaca, and Dolly.
                 Especially the results for linguistic characteristics are hard to predict. However, since –
                 to the best of our knowledge and given the proprietary nature of some of these models –
                 the general approach to how these models work is similar and the trends for essay
                 quality should hold for models with comparable size and training procedures.


                 Conclusion
                 Our results provide a strong indication that the fear many teaching professionals have is
                 warranted: the way students do homework and teachers assess it needs to change in a
                 world of generative AI models. Our results show that when students want to maximize
                 their essay grades, they could easily do so by relying on results from AI models like
                 ChatGPT. However, this is not and cannot be the goal of education. Consequently,
                 educators need to change how they approach homework. Instead of just assigning and
                 grading essays, we need to reflect more on the output of AI tools regarding their
                 reasoning and correctness. AI models need to be seen as an integral part of education,
                 but one which requires careful reflection and training of critical thinking skills.
                     Furthermore, teachers need to adapt strategies for teaching writing skills: as with
                 the use of calculators, it is necessary to critically reflect with the students on when and
                 how to use those tools. For instance, constructivists [50] argue that learning is enhanced
                 by the active design and creation of unique artefacts by students themselves. In the
                 present case this means that, in the long term, educational objectives may need to be
                 adjusted. This is analogous to teaching good arithmetic skills to younger students and
                 then allowing and encouraging students to use calculators freely in later stages of
                 education. Similarly, once a sound level of literacy has been achieved, strongly
                 integrating AI models in lesson plans may no longer run counter to reasonable learning
                 goals. Instead, it can be seen as an opportunity to redesign competency-based learning
                  12 https://bard.google.com/?hl=en




April 28, 2023                                                                                        13/27
                 objectives, for example, to focus on the ability to analyse and rate the logical structure,
                 cohesion and coherence of (generated) texts. More generally, teachers and researchers
                 should embrace the invitation to explore, understand, evaluate, and assess a wide range
                 of AI contributions to and impacts on the teaching/learning process as a whole.
                    In terms of shedding light on the quality and structure of AI-generated essays, this
                 paper makes an important contribution by offering an independent, large-scale and
                 statistically sound account of essay quality, comparing human-written and AI-generated
                 texts. By comparing different versions of ChatGPT, we also offer a glance into the
                 development of these models over time in terms of their linguistic properties and the
                 quality they exhibit.


                 Supporting information
                 S1 Essay examples from the dataset Three essays (student essay, ChatGPT-3
                 generated essay and ChatGPT-4 generated essay) for the topic ‘Should students be
                 taught to compete or to cooperate?’
                      Student essay: It is always said that competition can effectively promote
                      the development of economy. In order to survive in the competition,
                      companies continue to improve their products and service, and as a result,
                      the whole society prospers. However, when we discuss the issue of
                      competition or cooperation, what we are concerned about is not the whole
                      society, but the development of an individual’s whole life. From this point of
                      view, I firmly believe that we should attach more importance to cooperation
                      during primary education.
                      First of all, through cooperation, children can learn about interpersonal
                      skills which are significant in the future life of all students. What we
                      acquired from team work is not only how to achieve the same goal with
                      others but more importantly, how to get along with others. During the
                      process of cooperation, children can learn about how to listen to opinions of
                      others, how to communicate with others, how to think comprehensively, and
                      even how to compromise with other team members when conflicts occurred.
                      All of these skills help them to get on well with other people and will benefit
                      them for the whole life.
                      On the other hand, the significance of competition is that how to become
                      more excellence to gain the victory. Hence it is always said that competition
                      makes the society more effective. However, when we consider about the
                      question that how to win the game, we always find that we need the
                      cooperation. The greater our goal is, the more competition we need. Take
                      Olympic games which is a form of competition for instance, it is hard to
                      imagine how an athlete could win the game without the training of his or
                      her coach, and the help of other professional staffs such as the people who
                      take care of his diet, and those who are in charge of the medical care. The
                      winner is the athlete but the success belongs to the whole team. Therefore
                      without the cooperation, there would be no victory of competition.
                      Consequently, no matter from the view of individual development or the
                      relationship between competition and cooperation we can receive the same
                      conclusion that a more cooperative attitudes towards life is more profitable
                      in one’s success.

                      ChatGPT-3 essay: Education is not only about acquiring knowledge, but
                      also about developing the skills and attitudes necessary to succeed in life.




April 28, 2023                                                                                        14/27
                      One of the most important decisions in education is whether students should
                      be taught to compete or to cooperate.
                      On the one hand, competition is often seen as a way to motivate students to
                      work harder and achieve more. By pitting students against one another, it is
                      believed that they will be pushed to excel and develop important skills such
                      as resilience, determination, and strategic thinking. In a competitive
                      environment, students may also learn to be independent and self-reliant,
                      which are valuable traits in the real world.
                      On the other hand, cooperation is equally important in preparing students
                      for their future. By working together, students learn to communicate, share
                      ideas, and build relationships. Cooperation also helps to promote empathy
                      and respect for others, as students learn to appreciate the strengths and
                      weaknesses of their peers. Furthermore, in many industries and careers,
                      collaboration and teamwork are essential for success, and students who are
                      not taught to cooperate may struggle to adapt to these environments.
                      In conclusion, both competition and cooperation have their advantages and
                      disadvantages, and both are important skills for students to develop.
                      However, it is essential that educators strike a balance between the two,
                      teaching students when to compete and when to cooperate, and providing
                      opportunities to practice both skills. Ultimately, the goal should be to
                      prepare students for the diverse and complex challenges they will face in the
                      future, whether they arise from competition or cooperation.

                      ChatGPT-4 essay: The contemporary education system frequently
                      grapples with the question of whether students should be taught to compete
                      or cooperate. Striking the right balance is essential, as both competition and
                      cooperation have their merits in shaping a well-rounded individual.
                      Competition can act as a powerful motivator, pushing students to excel and
                      surpass their perceived limitations. It fosters a spirit of resilience,
                      adaptability, and innovation, as learners strive to outperform their peers.
                      Moreover, competition prepares students for real-world challenges, where
                      they are bound to encounter similar competitive scenarios in their
                      professional lives.
                      However, solely focusing on competition can lead to excessive stress, anxiety,
                      and unhealthy rivalry, which may hinder students’ personal and academic
                      growth. This is where the value of cooperation becomes apparent. By
                      teaching students to cooperate, educators encourage essential skills like
                      teamwork, communication, empathy, and problem-solving. These skills are
                      indispensable in today’s increasingly interconnected world, where success
                      often depends on the ability to collaborate with others.
                      In conclusion, the ideal education system should strike a balance between
                      competition and cooperation. While competition nurtures a drive for
                      excellence and adaptability, cooperation fosters critical interpersonal skills
                      and mutual support. By integrating both elements, educators can help
                      shape well-rounded individuals who are prepared to excel in their personal
                      and professional lives.

                 S2 Examples for language complexity Example 1 is one of the simpler sentences
                 from the student essay from our dataset which can be found in S1 Essay examples from
                 the dataset. This sentence has zero clauses and its maximum dependency tree depth is




April 28, 2023                                                                                         15/27
                 three. The sentence in Example 2 from the same student essay is significantly longer
                 with four clauses and a maximum dependency tree depth of nine.

                  (1) The greater our goal is, the more competition we need.

                  (2) Take Olympic games which is a form of competition for instance, it is hard to
                      imagine how an athlete could win the game without the training of his or her
                      coach, and the help of other professional staffs such as the people who take care of
                      his diet, and those who are in charge of the medical care.




April 28, 2023                                                                                      16/27
                 S3 Details about the variables collected within the questionnaire




April 28, 2023                                                                       17/27
                 Table 5. Categories and levels for the rating of the essays. Continued in Table 6
                  Category Description of levels from best to worst                      Score
                              Addressed the topic to a special degree and considered       6
                              all aspects of the task.
                              Addressed the topic in a good manner and considered          5




                  Topic and completeness
                              all aspects of the task.
                              Addressed the topic and considered most aspects of the       4
                              task.
                              Mostly addressed the topic, considered only some as-         3
                              pects of the task.
                              Topic still discernable, superficial and one-sided, of di-   2
                              gresses and repeats itself.
                              Topic somewhat discernable, every superficial and one-       1
                              sided.
                              No relation to the topic.                                    0
                              Clear structure and logical and profound reasoning.          6




                  Logic and composition
                              Logical and consistent structure, sound reasoning.           5
                              Mostly logical structure, sometimes chains of individual     4
                              thoughts.
                              Errors in the logical structure, thoughts not presented      3
                              coherently.
                              Logical structure recognizable, jumps in reasoning.          2
                              Logical structure recognizable, few thoughts brought to      1
                              a conclusion.
                              No logical structure.                                        0
                              Very comprehensive and detailed depiction, consistently      6

                  Expressiveness and
                              persuasive.
                              Comprehensive and detailed depiction.                        5
                              Partially detailed and mostly comprehensive.                 4
                              Few details, but still comprehensive.                        3

                  comprehensiveness
                              Somewhat comprehensive.                                      2
                              Almost not comprehensive.                                    1
                              Not comprehensive.                                           0
                              Almost perfect language use, few minor rule violations       6
                              that do not influence the understandability.
                              Some minor rule violations that do not have a major          5




                  Language mastery
                              influence on the understandability.
                              Some rule violations that affect the understandability.      4
                              Multiple rule violations that affect the understandabil-     3
                              ity.
                              Many rule violations that affect the understandability.      2
                              Many severe rule violations that affect the understand-      1
                              ability.
                              Unintelligible language use.                                 0




April 28, 2023                                                                                   18/27
                 Table 6. Categories and levels for the rating of the essays. Continued from Table 5
                  Category Description of levels from best to worst                      Score
                              Often uses complex sentences and sentence links.             6
                              Multiple uses complex sentences and sentence links.          5
                              Few uses of complex sentences, but multiple simple           4



                  Complexity
                              sentence links.
                              Consistently simple but correct sentence structures,         3
                              some sentence links.
                              Lack of complex language, errors in sentence structures,     2
                              few sentence links.
                              Severere errors in sentence structures, no sentence links.   1
                              No discernable sentence structures.                          0
                              Very comprehensive and variable use of vocabulary and        6
                              consistent and correct linking of text elements.




                  Vocabulary and text linking
                              Comprehensive and variable use of vocabulary, often          5
                              correct linking of text elements.
                              Fundamental vocabulary, sometimes correct linking of         4
                              text elements.
                              Limited vocabulary, rudimentary linking of text ele-         3
                              ments.
                              Limited vocabulary, sometimes bad choice of words, no        2
                              linking of text elements.
                              Strongly limited vocabulary, often bad choice of words,      1
                              no linking of text elements.
                              No consistent English vocabulary.                            0
                              Confident use of a large number of language constructs.      6




                  Language constructs
                              Confident use of language constructs.                        5
                              Mostly correct use of language constructs.                   4
                              Only few language constructs and partially wrong use.        3
                              Predominantly wrong use of language constructs.              2
                              Almost always wrong use of language constructs.              1
                              Language constructs not following English language           0
                              rules.




                 Table 7. Skill levels for self-assessment for reading proficiency, their CEFR equivalents,
                 and the score on the underlying Likert scale.
                                   Self-assessment                     CEFR Score
                                   Comparable to native speaker          C2          5
                                   Business fluent                       C1          4
                                   Fluent                                B2          3
                                   Good                                  B1          2
                                   Good basic skills                     A2          1
                                   Some basic skills                     A1          0




April 28, 2023                                                                                      19/27
                 Table 8. Scale for the self-assessment of the confidence in the essay ratings.
                                 Self-assessment of rating confidence           Score
                                 I am certain that my assessment is correct.       4
                                 I am fairly certain that my assessment is         3
                                 correct.
                                 I am fairly certain that my assessment is         2
                                 correct, but I may have misjudged some
                                 aspects.
                                 I would defend my assessment, but it is           1
                                 possible that I misjudged aspects.
                                 I am not familiar with the topic. My as-          0
                                 sessment is based on guesses.


                 S4 Supporting visualizations for the data analysis




April 28, 2023                                                                                    20/27
                 Fig 1. Pearson’s r correlation between the self-assessments.




April 28, 2023                                                                  21/27
                 Fig 2. Left: Point plots depicting the mean values and confidence intervals of the
                 survey results. Right: Violin plots depicting the distribution of the ratings.




April 28, 2023                                                                                   22/27
                 Fig 3. Left: Point plots depicting the mean values and confidence intervals of the
                 linguistic characteristics. Right: Violin plots depicting the distribution of the linguistic
                 characteristics.




April 28, 2023                                                                                        23/27
                 References
                   1. OpenAI. GPT-4 Technical Report; 2023.
                   2. Ouyang L, Wu J, Jiang X, Almeida D, Wainwright CL, Mishkin P, et al..
                      Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback; 2022.

                   3. Leahy S, Mishra P. TPACK and the Cambrian explosion of AI. In: Langran E,
                      editor. Society for Information Technology & Teacher Education International
                      Conference. Association for the Advancement of Computing in Education
                      (AACE); 2023. p. 2465–2469.

                   4. Brown TB, Mann B, Ryder N, Subbiah M, Kaplan J, Dhariwal P, et al..
                      Language Models are Few-Shot Learners; 2020.
                   5. Wang B. Mesh-Transformer-JAX: Model-Parallel Implementation of Transformer
                      Language Model with JAX; 2021.
                      https://github.com/kingoflolz/mesh-transformer-jax.

                   6. Wei J, Bosma M, Zhao V, Guu K, Yu AW, Lester B, et al. Finetuned Language
                      Models are Zero-Shot Learners. In: International Conference on Learning
                      Representations; 2022.Available from:
                      https://openreview.net/forum?id=gEZrGCozdqR.
                   7. Taori R, Gulrajani I, Zhang T, Dubois Y, Li X, Guestrin C, et al.. Stanford
                      Alpaca: An Instruction-following LLaMA model; 2023.
                      https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca.
                   8. Cai ZG, Haslett DA, Duan X, Wang S, Pickering MJ. Does ChatGPT resemble
                      humans in language use?; 2023.
                   9. Mahowald K. A Discerning Several Thousand Judgments: GPT-3 Rates the
                      Article + Adjective + Numeral + Noun Construction; 2023.
                  10. Dentella V, Murphy E, Marcus G, Leivada E. Testing AI performance on less
                      frequent aspects of language reveals insensitivity to underlying meaning; 2023.
                  11. Guo B, Zhang X, Wang Z, Jiang M, Nie J, Ding Y, et al.. How Close is ChatGPT
                      to Human Experts? Comparison Corpus, Evaluation, and Detection; 2023.
                  12. Zhao W, Zhao Y, Lu X, Wang S, Tong Y, Qin B. Is ChatGPT Equipped with
                      Emotional Dialogue Capabilities?; 2023.
                  13. Keim DA, Oelke D. Literature Fingerprinting : A New Method for Visual
                      Literary Analysis. In: 2007 IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and
                      Technology. IEEE; 2007. p. 115–122.
                  14. El-Assady M, Hautli-Janisz A, Gold V, Butt M, Holzinger K, Keim D.
                      Interactive Visual Analysis of Transcribed Multi-Party Discourse. In:
                      Proceedings of ACL 2017, System Demonstrations. Vancouver, Canada:
                      Association for Computational Linguistics; 2017. p. 49–54. Available from:
                      https://aclanthology.org/P17-4009.
                  15. Mennatallah El-Assady AHJ, Butt M. Discourse Maps – Feature Encoding for
                      the Analysis of Verbatim Conversation Transcripts. In: Visual Analytics for
                      Linguistics. vol. CSLI Lecture Notes, Number 220. Stanford: CSLI Publications;
                      2020. p. 115–147.




April 28, 2023                                                                                   24/27
                 16. Matt Foulis JV, Reed C. Dialogical fingerprinting of debaters. In: Proceedings of
                     COMMA 2020. Amsterdam: IOS Press; 2020. p. 465–466.

                 17. Matt Foulis JV, Reed C. Interactive visualisation of debater identification and
                     characteristics. In: Proceedings of the COMMA workshop on Argument
                     Visualisation, COMMA; 2020. p. 1–7.
                 18. Chatzipanagiotidis S, Giagkou M, Meurers D. Broad Linguistic Complexity
                     Analysis for Greek Readability Classification. In: Proceedings of the 16th
                     Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications.
                     Online: Association for Computational Linguistics; 2021. p. 48–58. Available
                     from: https://aclanthology.org/2021.bea-1.5.
                 19. Ajili M, Bonastre JF, Kahn J, Rossato S, Bernard G. FABIOLE, a Speech
                     Database for Forensic Speaker Comparison. In: Proceedings of the Tenth
                     International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’16).
                     Portorož, Slovenia: European Language Resources Association (ELRA); 2016. p.
                     726–733. Available from: https://aclanthology.org/L16-1115.
                 20. Deutsch T, Jasbi M, Shieber S. Linguistic Features for Readability Assessment.
                     In: Proceedings of the Fifteenth Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building
                     Educational Applications. Seattle, WA, USA → Online: Association for
                     Computational Linguistics; 2020. p. 1–17. Available from:
                     https://aclanthology.org/2020.bea-1.1.
                 21. Fiacco J, Jiang S, Adamson D, Rosé C. Toward Automatic Discourse Parsing of
                     Student Writing Motivated by Neural Interpretation. In: Proceedings of the 17th
                     Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications (BEA
                     2022). Seattle, Washington: Association for Computational Linguistics; 2022. p.
                     204–215. Available from: https://aclanthology.org/2022.bea-1.25.
                 22. Weiss Z, Riemenschneider A, Schröter P, Meurers D. Computationally Modeling
                     the Impact of Task-Appropriate Language Complexity and Accuracy on Human
                     Grading of German Essays. In: Proceedings of the Fourteenth Workshop on
                     Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications. Florence, Italy:
                     Association for Computational Linguistics; 2019. p. 30–45. Available from:
                     https://aclanthology.org/W19-4404.
                 23. Yang F, Dragut E, Mukherjee A. Predicting Personal Opinion on Future Events
                     with Fingerprints. In: Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on
                     Computational Linguistics. Barcelona, Spain (Online): International Committee
                     on Computational Linguistics; 2020. p. 1802–1807. Available from:
                     https://aclanthology.org/2020.coling-main.162.
                 24. Tumarada K, Zhang Y, Yang F, Dragut E, Gnawali O, Mukherjee A. Opinion
                     Prediction with User Fingerprinting. In: Proceedings of the International
                     Conference on Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing (RANLP 2021).
                     Held Online: INCOMA Ltd.; 2021. p. 1423–1431. Available from:
                     https://aclanthology.org/2021.ranlp-1.159.
                 25. Rocca R, Yarkoni T. Language as a fingerprint: Self-supervised learning of user
                     encodings using transformers. In: Findings of the Association for Computational
                     Linguistics: EMNLP 2022. Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates: Association for
                     Computational Linguistics; 2022. p. 1701–1714. Available from:
                     https://aclanthology.org/2022.findings-emnlp.123.




April 28, 2023                                                                                  25/27
                 26. Aiyappa R, An J, Kwak H, Ahn YY. Can we trust the evaluation on ChatGPT?;
                     2023.

                 27. Yeadon W, Inyang OO, Mizouri A, Peach A, Testrow C. The Death of the
                     Short-Form Physics Essay in the Coming AI Revolution; 2022.
                 28. TURING AM. I.—COMPUTING MACHINERY AND INTELLIGENCE. Mind.
                     1950;LIX(236):433–460. doi:10.1093/mind/LIX.236.433.
                 29. Kortemeyer G. Could an Artificial-Intelligence agent pass an introductory physics
                     course?; 2023.
                 30. Kung TH, Cheatham M, Medenilla A, Sillos C, De Leon L, Elepaño C, et al.
                     Performance of ChatGPT on USMLE: Potential for AI-assisted medical education
                     using large language models. PLOS Digital Health. 2023;2(2):1–12.
                     doi:10.1371/journal.pdig.0000198.

                 31. Frieder S, Pinchetti L, Griffiths RR, Salvatori T, Lukasiewicz T, Petersen PC,
                     et al.. Mathematical Capabilities of ChatGPT; 2023.
                 32. Yuan Z, Yuan H, Tan C, Wang W, Huang S. How well do Large Language
                     Models perform in Arithmetic tasks?; 2023.

                 33. Touvron H, Lavril T, Izacard G, Martinet X, Lachaux MA, Lacroix T, et al..
                     LLaMA: Open and Efficient Foundation Language Models; 2023.
                 34. Chung HW, Hou L, Longpre S, Zoph B, Tay Y, Fedus W, et al.. Scaling
                     Instruction-Finetuned Language Models; 2022.
                 35. Workshop B, :, Scao TL, Fan A, Akiki C, Pavlick E, et al.. BLOOM: A
                     176B-Parameter Open-Access Multilingual Language Model; 2023.
                 36. Spencer ST, Joshi V, Mitchell AMW. Can AI Put Gamma-Ray Astrophysicists
                     Out of a Job?; 2023.
                 37. Cherian A, Peng KC, Lohit S, Smith K, Tenenbaum JB. Are Deep Neural
                     Networks SMARTer than Second Graders?; 2023.
                 38. Stab C, Gurevych I. Annotating Argument Components and Relations in
                     Persuasive Essays. In: Proceedings of COLING 2014, the 25th International
                     Conference on Computational Linguistics: Technical Papers. Dublin, Ireland:
                     Dublin City University and Association for Computational Linguistics; 2014. p.
                     1501–1510. Available from: https://aclanthology.org/C14-1142.
                 39. McNamara DS, Crossley SA, McCarthy PM. Linguistic features of writing
                     quality. Written communication. 2010;27(1):57–86.
                 40. McCarthy PM, Jarvis S. MTLD, vocd-D, and HD-D: A validation study of
                     sophisticated approaches to lexical diversity assessment. Behavior research
                     methods. 2010;42(2):381–392.
                 41. Dasgupta T, Naskar A, Dey L, Saha R. Augmenting textual qualitative features
                     in deep convolution recurrent neural network for automatic essay scoring. In:
                     Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Natural Language Processing Techniques for
                     Educational Applications; 2018. p. 93–102.

                 42. Koizumi R, In’nami Y. Effects of text length on lexical diversity measures: Using
                     short texts with less than 200 tokens. System. 2012;40(4):554–564.




April 28, 2023                                                                                  26/27
                 43. spaCy Industrial-strength natural language processing in python;. Available from:
                     https://spacy.io/.

                 44. Siskou W, Friedrich L, Eckhard S, Espinoza I, Hautli-Janisz A. Measuring plain
                     language in public service encounters. In: Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on
                     Computational Linguistics for Political Text Analysis (CPSS-2022). Potsdam,
                     Germany; 2022.
                 45. El-Assady M, Hautli-Janisz A. Discourse Maps - Feature Encoding for the
                     Analysis of Verbatim Conversation Transcripts. CSLI lecture notes. CSLI
                     Publications, Center for the Study of Language and Information; 2019. Available
                     from: https://www.press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/distributed/L/
                     bo28217610.html.
                 46. Hautli-Janisz A, Kikteva Z, Siskou W, Gorska K, Becker R, Reed C. QT30: A
                     Corpus of Argument and Conflict in Broadcast Debate. In: Proceedings of the
                     Thirteenth Language Resources and Evaluation Conference. Marseille, France:
                     European Language Resources Association; 2022. p. 3291–3300. Available from:
                     https://aclanthology.org/2022.lrec-1.352.
                 47. Somasundaran S, Flor M, Chodorow M, Molloy H, Gyawali B, McCulla L.
                     Towards evaluating narrative quality in student writing. Transactions of the
                     Association for Computational Linguistics. 2018;6:91–106.
                 48. Nadeem F, Nguyen H, Liu Y, Ostendorf M. Automated Essay Scoring with
                     Discourse-Aware Neural Models. In: Proceedings of the Fourteenth Workshop on
                     Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications. Florence, Italy:
                     Association for Computational Linguistics; 2019. p. 484–493. Available from:
                     https://aclanthology.org/W19-4450.
                 49. Prasad R, Dinesh N, Lee A, Miltsakaki E, Robaldo L, Joshi A, et al. The Penn
                     Discourse TreeBank 2.0. In: Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference
                     on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’08). Marrakech, Morocco:
                     European Language Resources Association (ELRA); 2008.

                 50. Windschitl M. Framing Constructivism in Practice as the Negotiation of
                     Dilemmas: An Analysis of the Conceptual, Pedagogical, Cultural, and Political
                     Challenges Facing Teachers. Review of Educational Research. 2002;72(2):131–175.




April 28, 2023                                                                                 27/27
