                                                                    International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4




      A Closer Look at the (Rule-) Books:
      Framings and Paratexts in Tabletop
              Role-playing Games
Popular Abstract - As texts which are based on collaborative and interactive narration, tabletop – also
known as “pen and paper” – role-playing games (TRPGs) are distinct in their technological simplicity.
Indeed, in their traditional form all they require is the physical presence of a group of players – commonly
around a table, hence “tabletop” – who collaboratively participate in developing a narrative; and a system
of rules which allow resolving the outcome of situations in which different levels of chance may be
involved – the need to write down statistic information making them “pen and paper”. Evidently, this
apparent lack of sophistication makes role-playing games – as a clearly contemporary cultural
phenomenon (cf. Punday, 2005; Nephew, 2004; Harrigan, 2007; Mackay, 2001) – stand out in the context of
a world that is becoming ever more dependent on technology. All the more so, considering the persistence
of TRPGs in the face of its “descendants” in other more technologically advanced media and despite what
has become the popular notion of “the bigger, the faster, the better.” Nevertheless, that which occurs
during a role-playing game session – the level of interactivity, player immersion in the narrative, flexibility
of the rules, etc. - generally surpasses, even today, what many of its “successors” achieve. How does this
occur? How is it possible; through what mechanisms do TRPGs allow such sophistication when relying
solely on the “old fashioned” technologies of (hand-) writing and oral narration? Approaching these
questions from the general perspective of literary studies, the following paper problematizes what can be
called a “naïve view” of communication technology by addressing the complex relationship between the
printed texts used for role-playing – such as rule- and sourcebooks – and the narratives created during
game-play. To do so, it addresses the fundamental influence that framings, such as rules, character sheets
and setting, as well as paratextual elements contained within or at the borders of these texts, such as cover
illustrations, prologues and epilogues, just to name a few – have on participants’ interpretation and, most
importantly, creation of TRPG narratives.



                                                David Jara
                                          University of Heidelberg
                                                 Germany
                                     david.jara@hggs.uni-heidelberg.de



ABSTRACT                                                  the reception of the diegesis (once it has come into
                                                          existence) but, because they temporally precede its
Approaching the subject from the general
                                                          actual    creation,   heavily      influence   player
perspective of literary studies, the following paper
                                                          expectations and are thus decisive for the
analyzes the impact that framings (as by Wolf,
                                                          subsequent production of text. This way of using
1999) and paratexts (as by Genette, 1987)2
                                                          fiction to create additional fiction has relevance to
contained within TRPG rule- and sourcebooks3
                                                          forms of readership beyond RPG play (Walton,
have on the construction and negotiation of
                                                          1990) and may account for the persistence of the
narratives during game-play. More specifically, the
                                                          face-to-face game in a technologically mediated
text argues for an unconventional use of such
                                                          age.
elements due to the fact that they not only affect



                                                                                                              39
                                                                                 International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4



1. INTRODUCTION                                                        works, Werner Wolf, has called attention to the
                                                                       “well known fact that literary texts, more than non-
From the perspective of literary studies, TRPGs
                                                                       literary ones, are usually accompanied by framings
present us from the beginning with an intrinsic
                                                                       referring to the specificity of the text and giving
theoretical dilemma: the fact that a “proper”, fixed,
                                                                       hints as to how to read it.” (1999: 102) Implicitly,
“main text” is unavailable. Indeed, the actual role-
                                                                       therefore, Wolf proposes a specific use of framing
playing game narratives only emerge during the
                                                                       devices (or ‘framings’) in literary texts which is to
game session itself and exist ephemerally within its
                                                                       be distinguished from their function in “normal” or
boundaries. Nevertheless, the session can also be
                                                                       stereotyped speech situations. In the latter cases,
seen as being “tertiary”, largely the product of
                                                                       “frames will be more or less taken for granted, as
other texts; those that establish the broad fictional
                                                                       such situations seem to call for certain frames
premises and the rules by which the fictional space
                                                                       automatically as default settings.” (Wolf, 2006: 5)
is to be negotiated (“primary texts”); and those that
                                                                       With fictional texts however, not only has the frame
establish the specific fictional premises that allow
                                                                       of reference first to be established (cf. Hruschovski,
for a particular game session to develop
                                                                       1984) but it has to be assigned a meaning as well;
(“secondary texts”) (Hammer 2007). But how
                                                                       In such cases, “special (additional) agreements
exactly does this textual “conversion” take place?
                                                                       between ‘senders’ and ‘receivers’ have to be made
While there are several accounts on how rules
                                                                       and signaled.” (ibid. 6) Because of the fact that the
enable and shape diegetic play (Punday, 2005), the
                                                                       most effective framing devices are those that
function of the rulebooks qua books is still greatly
                                                                       influence the reading of a text from its beginning,
under examined. The following paper explores
                                                                       focusing on those elements which precede the
their impact by looking at both the framing (Wolf,
                                                                       main text is recommended. According to this
1999) as well as the paratextual elements (Genette,
                                                                       approach, (literary) ‘framings’ are to be understood
1987) contained in these texts. Furthermore, I will
                                                                       as,
argue that TRPGs are a special instance of
textuality in which the construction of narratives
relies heavily on an unconventional2 use of such
                                                                          “[…] easily identifiable markers […] that exist
elements. Rather than functioning solely as
                                                                          in the immediate context or within a work of
mediators between the reader(s) and the framed
                                                                          fiction previous [emphasis in the original] to the
text – influencing the perception and interpretation
                                                                          reader’s framing activity and indeed serve as its
of the latter3 – these ‘genesic’ framing devices are
                                                                          most important basis. These framings are or
created prior to the main text, and serve thus the
                                                                          seem to be located on another level than the
function of extending (multi-) authorial control
                                                                          framed text, they contribute, for the reader, to
over the game by actively shaping the narrations
                                                                          the constitution or stabilization of a (real or
created during play. This is done not only
                                                                          imaginary) communicative situation in the
procedurally, but also by shaping the narratives’
                                                                          literary exchange and also help him or her to
“story space”, its genre conventions or ‘interaction
                                                                          select frames of interpretation or reference
codes’ (Fatland, 2006) that players draw upon to
                                                                          relevant       for     the      work       under
create their contributions to play.
                                                                          consideration.” (1999: 103)


2. FRAMINGS AND PARATEXTS
                                                                       In addition, Wolf also points out that there are four
Criticizing what he considers to be a general lack of
                                                                       “potential ‘agencies’” of such framing, adding to
academic research concerning framing in literary
                                                                       the authorial instance (‘sender’) that of the reader

1 The references to Genette in the following paper are based on the English translation of Seuils (1987)

2 For the purpose of this paper, I will be using mainly game material published by White Wolf due to their explicit focus

 on ‘storytelling’. (All material used under permission from the publisher: White Wolf © 2012 CCP hf. All rights
 reserved.)
3 At least in relation to their use in “traditional” literary forms.

4 Understood in the context of linguistic analysis, the term ‘frame’ (as by Goffman, 1974) may be described as “the sum of

various factors that influence and predetermine discursive exchanges, contribute to their coherence and meaningfulness
and distinguish specific discursive exchanges from other possible ones.” (Wolf, 1999: 98) As such, frames are generally
equated with “a ‘speech situation’ in its broadest sense including the rules and contexts stabilizing the meaning of the
discursive exchange.” (ibid.) Moreover, they are to be understood as cognitive meta-concepts that “generally function as
preconditions of interpretation.” (Wolf, 2006: 5) Because of

                                                                                                                          40
                                                                   International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4



(‘recipient’), the text (‘message’) and its context       using a term which could “in principle” apply to
(2006: 15). Of the four, however, it is primarily the     almost anything. In order to avoid such
textual and contextual framings that can be directly      recursiveness, Wolf proposes a principle of
observed and analyzed since ‘sender’ and                  contiguity to the definition of framing while
‘recipient’-based ones are mainly internal cognitive      redefining the term paratext as a framing sub-
processes (ibid.).                                        category:
Generally speaking, Wolf’s idea of a framing
device appears to correspond with what Gerard
                                                             “[I]n contrast to Genette, for whom ‘paratexts’
Genette (1997) has defined as the paratext. The
                                                             comprise both ‘contextual’ and ‘textual’
latter encompasses a wide variety of phenomena
                                                             framings, I would like to restrict ‘paratextual
such as the name of a book’s author, titles,
                                                             framings’, whether authorized or not, to a
subtitles, footnotes, prefaces, commentaries, and
                                                             variant of ‘textual’ framings, namely to [those]
illustrations; all of which, as Genette argues,
                                                             which are parts of individual works and are
surround and extend the text in order to make it
                                                             positioned at their borders, but are discernible
available, allowing its reception or, as he puts it, to
                                                             not only through their liminal position, but also,
“ensure the text’s presence in the world” (1).
                                                             and, above all, through their function as
Furthermore, because paratexts influence the way
                                                             introductory, explanatory etc. that forms the
in which a text is interpreted, Genette considers
                                                             ‘threshold’ to the main text of the work in
them to be defined on the most part “by an
                                                             question” (2006, 20)
authorial     intention    and     assumption        of
responsibility” (ibid. 3). Accordingly, such textual
phenomena may be considered to be an instance of          As Genette, Wolf also indicates that the main
authorial control; a point from which the author          function of framing in literature – of which the
can influence the way in which his text is read.          paratext is, indeed, a prominent form - is to guide
                                                          and control interpretations within the “abstract
                                                          cognitive frames” presented by fictional texts
   Indeed, this fringe (the paratext), always the
                                                          (2006: 6).
   conveyor of a commentary that is authorial or
   more or less legitimated by the author,                Not only is Wolf’s re-definition of the term
   constitutes a zone not only of transition, but of      ‘paratext’ necessary, but it is also an important one
   transaction [emphasis in original]: a privileged       to notice here, especially considering the fact that
   place of a pragmatics and a strategy, of an            the latter has been broadly used in game theory
   influence on the public, an influence that –           since its introduction to the field by Mia Consalvo
   whether well or poorly understood and                  in her influential book Cheating (2007). In it,
   achieved –is at the service of a better reception      Consalvo coins the term “paratextual industries”
   for the text and a more pertinent reading of it        stating that:
   (more pertinent, of course, in the eyes of the
   author and his allies) (ibid. 2)
                                                             “I believe that the peripheral industries
                                                             surrounding games function as just such a
Thus, the paratext is to be understood as secondary          paratext. Gaming magazines, strategy guides,
to the main text and as such, as “fundamentally              mod chip makers [etc.] work to shape the
heteronomous, auxiliary, and dedicated to the                gameplay experience in particular ways. Those
service of something other than itself that                  ways have played a significant role in how
constitutes its raison d'etre.” (ibid. 12)                   gameplay is now understood. […]The central
                                                             tendency remains though: the creation of a
While useful, Genette’s notion of the paratext
                                                             flourishing paratext has significantly shaped
proves to be a problematic one as well; a fact which
                                                             games and gamers in the process of creating
is not difficult to understand when considering
                                                             new markets.” (9)
that for him, “‘every context serves [in principle] as
a paratext’” (9) Thus, the paratext could include
even background information about the author              While Consalvo’s application of the term has
concerning such things as, for example, his age,          proved enlightening and useful in a general sense,
sex, etc. (ibid. 7) Clearly, there is little value in



                                                                                                            41
                                                                                    International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4



as it adds an important perspective to the study of                     Additionally, TRPG rulebooks in themselves also
games and the seemingly endless production of                           seem to comply with several of the criteria
text that surrounds them, a more detailed approach                      mentioned in Wolf’s definition of framings: they
must acknowledge that in order to determine                             exist in the immediate context of the diegesis and,
specific types of paratext and their functions, the                     since they precede the actual game playing, they
particularities of the medium itself must be first                      also exist prior to any reader/player’s input or
put under consideration. Additionally, it is                            framing activity. At the same time, they are
necessary to identify the nature (and location) of                      physically separated – and thus appear to be easily
the primary/main text. Only then will it be                             identifiable – from the diegesis of the game. Clearly,
possible to recognize and differentiate relevant                        these texts guide the interpretation of in-game
paratexts and framings. In the case of TRPGs, such                      events, either by laying out the rules which
a distinction has special importance due to the                         underlie the outcome of certain actions or by
complex nature of its text(s) (cf. Padol, 1996;                         providing a (fictional) context within which
Stenros, 2004). Since my approach to TRPGs is                           character action becomes meaningful.
mainly from the perspective of literary studies, I
will consider the diegetic level as the primary text
of the game session2. In a general sense then, TRPG                       Because TRPG rulebooks exemplify
framings can be understood as elements that serve                          how “primary authors” extend their
to ‘trigger’ relevant ‘meta-concepts’ (i.e. frames) for                  influence upon the game, it is through
the interpretation of discourses within the game’s
                                                                           them that we can better understand
diegesis3.
                                                                          how the different authorial instances
                                                                             involved in TRPGs negotiate the
3. FRAMING IN TRPGs                                                       shared fictional environment during
As mentioned previously, the lack of a fixed, “main                                       play. (3)
text” or diegesis is a major difficulty for the study
of the TRPG medium. However, as Hammer (2007)
has proposed, from the point of view of its                             However, because of the fact that the information
construction, the diegesis of the RPG session can                       they contain may be directly adopted in the
actually be seen as being “tertiary”, since it                          interface (Padol, 1996), becoming an integral part of
emerges greatly as a product of other texts. Where                      the diegesis, the nature of such information
the “primary” text serves to first establish the                        becomes ambiguous: is it within or without of the
broad fictional premises (setting) and the rules by                     diegesis? Or is it perhaps both? While rules are
which the fictional space is to be negotiated, the                      always formally external to the story, their
“secondary” text provides the specific fictional                        implementation has direct effects on the in-game
premises on which a particular game-session is                          events; setting and plot material, for their part, are
based      (plot).    Correspondingly,       Hammer                     always potentially diegetic. Evidently, far from
distinguishes three types of RPG authorship:                            being a singular text, the rulebook comprises in
primary, secondary and tertiary. Because TRPG                           itself a great amount of heterogeneous information
rulebooks exemplify how “primary authors”                               which is relevant for different levels of meaning
extend their influence upon the game, it is through                     within the complex system of information that is
them that we can better understand how the                              the TRPG session2. At the same time, not all of its
different authorial instances involved in TRPGs                         components must necessarily be seen as framing
negotiate the shared fictional environment during                       devices and, even if they are, do not have the same
play. Moreover, since both Genette as well as Wolf                      relevance. Thus, it becomes necessary to further
have stressed the importance of paratexts/                              reduce our focus within the rulebook itself. I
framings as an instance of authorial control over                       propose therefore a (very) general distinction of the
the text, the study of these elements is key to                         information contained in these texts which may be
understanding how this negotiation takes place.                         roughly classified into: rules, setting information
                                                                        and (meta)framing devices. Because of their
                                                                        explicit focus on ‘storytelling’, I will be drawing

5 This distinction, however, is done mainly for practical purposes: The fact that the TRPG game session is, in itself, a multi-layered

  text is one that is acknowledged and the necessity of such a reduction will be justified later on.
6 This notion ties in closely with Ilieva’s (2012) enlightening analysis of the negotiation of cultural codes in LARP discourse. My

 focus in this paper, however, is more directed towards the specific materiality of these triggering elements and their relationship to
 the negotiated, diegetic text.
                                                                                                                                    42
                                                                                   International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4



examples for the most part on games based on                            in terms of ‘virtues’, ‘vices’ and ‘morality’, thus
White Wolf’s World of Darkness (WoD) TRPG.                              triggering the frame ‘moral conflict’ as a guiding
                                                                        interpretive meta-concept of the potential stories
                                                                        created during game-play. By doing this, not only
 in their specific form - by including (or                              does the game implicitly encourage players to
    excluding) rules for certain actions                                create characters with psychological depth – thus
  instead of others – rules affect player                               creating stories which involve the portrayal of
   (as well as GM) expectations for the                                 inner conflict – but, because of the nature of the
   game, thus influencing their input in                                attributes it focuses on, it also influences the type of
             the narrative. (3)                                         inner conflict portrayed.
                                                                        It is important to point out, however, that
                                                                        quantification is not necessarily the only (although
3.1 Rules                                                               it is probably the most common) mode of
While rules constitute the basis of the textual                         representation within a RPG rules system (cf.
interface that allows for multiple player interaction                   Hitchens & Drachen, 2008). An example of this is
during role-playing games (Punday, 2005), we                            the fact that, while the ‘morality’ trait is indeed
must ask ourselves whether these elements are                           represented numerically, the ‘virtue’ and ‘vice’
merely constituents of the ‘game frame’ or whether                      attributes are expressed solely in qualitative form.
they are also a framing (i.e. whether they act as                       As stated in the WoD rulebook, “Virtues are not
frame ‘triggers’) of the diegesis. Necessarily, they                    extensions of a character’s Morality. Rather, they
are the first, since the idea of ‘rules’ is an essential                are ideals that inform his actions and provide a
part of the meta-concept ‘game’2; at the same time,                     framework by which he interacts with society [my
however, rules also allow player interpretation of                      emphasis].” (92)
in-game situations, functioning simultaneously as                       Still, the representation (statistic or otherwise) of
framing devices. In this respect, Will Hindmarch                        inner traits implies an important hermeneutic
has asserted that “TRPG rules help the players and                      inversion regarding most other types of fiction; that
the Storyteller understand and explain how their                        is, where in conventional fiction readers may
characters, as their agents in the game world, affect                   deduce and/or interpret a character’s inner
and respond to the actions that unfold in the                           feelings and struggles by his actions or - itself a
story.” (51) Furthermore, in their specific form - by                   classic example of a framing device - internal
including (or excluding) rules for certain actions                      monologues within the text, in TRPGs, the inner
instead of others – rules affect player (as well as                     characteristics have been (numerically) fixed to
GM) expectations for the game, thus influencing                         guide and help participants in understanding and,
their input in the narrative. Thus, the rules not only                  therefore, playing their characters.
allow the interpretation of in-game i.e. diegetic                              Fig. 1. Dungeons and Dragons Character Sheet
situations, but also shape them as they                                                           (1974)
meaningfully delimit the choices available to
players from the “outside”. Indeed, as Hayot and
Wesp (2004) have pointed out, “those elements of
the game that lay at the heart of the game’s
strategic considerations are also a form of
representation.” (410) This becomes especially
evident when considering the issue of character
construction (cf. Lankonski, 2004). For example,
games such as those published by White Wolf not
only have rules to statistically represent “physical”
elements and character attributes, but also for
representing a number of “inner” attributes such as
personality and, most interestingly, moral values
(see fig 2.). In the case of the World of Darkness
games, characters’ personalities are depicted partly

7 For an in depth analysis of   role-playing as a system of information, see Harviainen (2012)
8 In this respect, Wolf has stated that “a frame is, as a rule, designated by a single term and as such corresponds to one metaconcept

but usually governs a plurality of subconcepts and expectations.” (2006: 4)
                                                                                                                                   43
                                                                                International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4



This, as expressed in the Vampire Players’ Guide
represents a “convenient heuristic if a player isn’t                Thus, a “good” character might reasonably act in a
entirely certain how his character is likely to                     way that is contrary to his “nature” – the trait only
respond to a certain situation” (21). Thus, players                 determining the probability of a character acting in a
are expected to interpret in-game situations                        certain way -, resulting in a change in its statistic
concerning their characters in terms of a                           representation on the game level. This change, for
quantified/qualitative representation of inner                      its part, might then influence future actions of the
traits. To this extent, stat sheets are clearly framing             same character. The following passage of the
devices, but such that they not only guide                          rulebook makes this clear:
interpretations but also determine to a certain
extent that which they frame. It is important to
note, however, that the translation of a rating into                     “[M]ortals have a much greater penchant for
the game through character action is in itself also a                   change and growth than vampires. As living
matter of interpretation since not all characters                       things, they are free to change their courses at
with the same rating necessarily reveal it the same                     any time. Mortals can “turn over a new leaf,”
way. Take, for example, the trait of ‘Humanity’ in                      while vampires don’t really have that option. To
Vampire, a trait that represents “humankind’s                           reflect this, mortal characters regain humanity
better, more humane and caring aspect.” (ibid. 22)                      at a different rate than Kindred”3 (Requiem 23)
The players’ guide states that:
   “[M]oral decay does not affect everyone the                      This understood, one may describe the role-playing
   same way. Not every mortal with a Humanity                       game session as a constant “interpretive loop”
   of 2 [a very low rating] or less is going to                     between diegetic and game frame4. This is made
   become a Charles Manson, Adolf Hitler or                         especially evident in the character creation process;
   Joseph Stalin. Moral bankruptcy wears many                       more specifically, in the transition from the
   faces, and not all of them coincide with the                     character as a statistic entity to a narrative one.
   more simplistic expressions with which we may                    Indeed, after constructing the framework of a
   be familiar” (ibid.)                                             character, all a player has are “some traits and a
                                                                    general sense of who [his] character might
                                                                    be.” (Players’ Guide 23) However, in order to “flesh
Evidently, the way in which a trait is portrayed
                                                                    it out”, the player must be able to “make the leap
depends on how it is to be interpreted within the
                                                                    from seeing the character as a collection of
context of a specific game. Nevertheless, in-game
                                                                    numbers and begin to view him as a full-fledged
events can also modify the statistics that represent
                                                                    living, breathing individual.” (ibid.) This transition
them.
                                                                    is based on a fundamental need for providing
                                                                    inner-diegetic plausibility. In other words, it does
      Fig. 2. World of Darkness Character Sheet (2004)              not suffice that character stats have been
                                                                    appropriately chosen from a strategic point of view
                                                                    – which would make sense if a TRPG were truly
                                                                    only a game – if they cannot be explained in a
                                                                    logical way from a diegetic one. Therefore, the
                                                                    Vampire Players’ Guide recommends GMs
                                                                    (‘storytellers’) to “demand a certain degree of
                                                                    realism from the game [so] that players can suspend
                                                                    their disbelief and immerse themselves in their
                                                                    characters [my emphasis]” (ibid.). Failing to do so,
                                                                    the text warns, will have repercussions on the
                                                                    game as it “will never take on a feel of a shared
                                                                    world and […] always feel like a bunch of people
                                                                    sitting around a table rolling dice.” (ibid.)




9 Kindred being the self-designating term used by vampires in White Wolf’s Vampire setting (cf. Requiem 14).


                                                                                                                       44
                                                                                    International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4



3.2 SETTING INFORMATION                                                     “While each story has its own central theme, the
Setting information constitutes what can be seen as                         looming theme behind them all explores the
the “substance” of the TRPG rulebook; it consists                           dramatic ramifications of a world of
of information pertaining to the fictional world that                       supernatural secrets. Storytellers and players
can be selectively used and introduced into the                             alike should be mindful of this theme when
game interface2. Nevertheless, unless disputed or                           they feel the need to return to the roots of the
explicitly modified during the game, the setting                            game.” (ibid. 23)
can be seen as an implicit agreement constituting
the diegetic level’s frame of reference, i.e. the
“hypothetical primary framework” on which the                                 if the discursive interface of the
game is based. Thus, if the discursive interface of                       players is to be seen as the artifact of
the players is to be seen as the artifact of the role-                      the role-playing game, the setting
playing game, the setting information can be
                                                                             information can be considered a
considered a coding of the frame within which this
                                                                          coding of the frame within which this
discourse becomes meaningful. In this respect
setting information complies with the general
                                                                           discourse becomes meaningful. (5)
function     of     “substitut[ing],    simulat[ing],
modify[ing], add[ing] to, or […] represent[ing],
those frame constituents and framings which in                          Evidently frames such as genre and theme serve as
ordinary discursive exchange are implied in the                         guiding meta-concepts within which the TRPG
communicative       situation    or    are     agreed                   narratives develop. Their central importance is
upon.” (Wolf, 2006: 103)                                                highlighted by the fact that they are explicitly
Additionally, genre, theme and mood indications are                     triggered within the main text of the rulebook. In
among the most important framings for the                               the case of Vampire: The Requiem, the genre –
collaborative construction of narrations during                         “modern gothic storytelling game” – proves to be
role-playing game sessions. Clearly, the triggering                     important not only for the main theme of the game
of specific genre frames does not affect the reading                    (“morality”), but also for the aesthetic associated
of the rulebook – which, in itself, has no literary                     with it:
genre; or rather, whose “genre” is precisely that of                        “What you hold in your hands is a Modern
being a ‘rulebook’ – as much as it produces                                 Gothic Storytelling game, a roleplaying game
expectations as to the story possibilities of the                           that allows you to build chronicles that explore
game. As a consequence, players are guided into                             morality through the metaphor of vampirism.
creating narratives which are conceptually and                              In Vampire, you “play the monster,” and what
aesthetically more unified as they follow general                           you do as that monster both makes for an
literary genre conventions. For example, the WoD                            interesting story and might even teach you a
core-rulebook, which comprises the basic, common                            little about your own values and those of your
setting and rule information for most of the                                fellows […] The setting of Vampire borrows
company’s other games, is defined as a “horror                              greatly from gothic literature, not the smallest
game” (WoD 22, 23). Thus, by invoking the frame                             amount of which comes from the “set dressing”
of ‘horror fiction’ the rulebook invites players to                         of the movement. Key to the literary gothic
include motifs, tropes and topoi typical of this genre                      tradition are the ideas of barbarism, corruption
into their campaigns. The same can be said                                  and medieval imagery.” (14)
concerning its mood (“dread”) and theme (“dark
mystery”). As for the latter, the rulebook states:


10 Harviainen (2008) has defined this in terms of each player’s “personal hermeneutic circle” (75). Thus, the game can be considered

  a number of texts where “the gaming process itself can be treated as interpretation done by the participants, and analyzed as
  such.” (ibid.)
11 Borgstrom (2007) goes even further, arguing that the setting of the actual game is never the same as that contained within the

  published book:
          [T]he setting that one group plays in is not the setting that another group plays in. In effect, role-playing games in their
          static, published form do not describe a specific fictional world or story. They describe a large multidimensional space of
          fictional worlds and stories organized by unifying data (57).
12 The following examples are indeed only a very tiny fraction of the framings available in these texts. A thorough identification and

analysis of all of such elements would greatly surpass the scope of this article.
                                                                                                                                   45
                                                                   International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4



3.3 RULEBOOK (META-)FRAMING                                  “[s]tory structure can also come from the
DEVICES12                                                    game’s setting and the assumptions that people
Among the different elements of the rulebook, it is          take from a game’s components and packaging.
its own framing devices which present the most               If you buy a game called “Kill the Dragon,” you
interesting features concerning the framing of the           assume that there will be a dragon and to win
diegesis. Indeed, considered as an artifact in its           you must kill it, and that is the direction your
own right, the rulebook, as any other printed text,          play will take.” (77)
features a variety of framing elements such as a
“front and back cover, which usually displays its
title and the names of its designer and                     Rulebook covers are generally good
publisher” (Nephew, 2004: 21). However, as we              examples of how different paratextual
will see, these texts not only serve to stabilize the      elements may be combined to create
meaning and guide the interpretation of the                   what can be seen as a unified,
information contained within the rulebook itself but,         plurimedial framing device. (6)
in most cases, they are directly related to the
diegetic level of the game. Thus, they become
meta-framings of the potential diegesis, creating
expectations concerning the stories that may be           This can be described in terms of the double function
told during play. Considering the fact that one of        of the text’s framing devices explained previously,
the main functions of framings is to “mark an             as they mark both the artifactuality of the rulebook
artifact as such and distinguish it from its              as well as that of the potential interface/diegesis
surroundings by indicating the special rules              created by the players.
(frames) that apply in its reception,” (Wolf, 2006:
26) these framing devices can be said to have a           3.3.1 The cover
double function by marking two artifacts: the
                                                          Rulebook covers are generally good examples of
rulebook proper and the textual interface produced
                                                          how different paratextual elements may be
during play.
                                                          combined to create what can be seen as a unified,
The most evident examples of framing in rulebooks         plurimedial framing device. Thus, although we can
are those denominated paratexts in the narrower           generally deconstruct them into a verbal, a
sense, such as titles, prologues, epilogues,              typographical and a pictorial component, we must
illustrations, and so on. More specifically, these        keep in mind that they function as a framing unity.
elements correspond to what Genette has deemed            Furthermore, by observing the simplicity of the
‘peritexts’ – texts at the borders of a work – as         original cover of the D&D game from 1974 (See fig.
opposed to ‘epitexts’ – those texts which are             3), it becomes evident that the aforementioned
materially removed from the work in question.             “double use” of framing devices was notoriously
Among these framings, those which exist in initial        less prominent in early TRPGs (compare also figs. 1
position tend to have greater relevance in their          & 2).
influence      upon     reader     expectations    and
interpretation of a text (Wolf, 1999). Evidently,
because of their practically invariable position at
the beginning of a text, titles are one of the primary
mediators between work and reader. As such, they
are one of the main instances of influence upon a
text’s reception. Moreover, titles of role-playing
game rulebooks are interesting cases of initial
paratexts, because they do more than just referring
to the content of the book that they frame. Indeed,
if we consider games such as Dungeons and
Dragons, Vampire or Paranoia, it becomes evident
that their titles say less about the books as artifacts
than about the type of stories than can be told with
them. As Wallis (2007) has observed,




                                                                                                            46
                                                                                    International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4



        Fig. 3. Dungeons and Dragons Covers (1974)                      although the cover illustration might appear at first
                                                                        glance to be a quite “literal” translation, so to
                                                                        speak, of the title, it is actually an essential
                                                                        complementary element that expands the initial
                                                                        premise established in verbal form. Seen from
                                                                        behind, a solitary human figure is shown walking
                                                                        down a dim lit street at night.
                                                                                                     Fig. 4
                                                                             a) World of Darkness Cover (Left) and b) Inlay Cover
                                                                             (right)




Apart from the rulebook’s title and illustration, it is
clear that the subtitle refers primarily to the
strategic character of the information contained
within the text itself rather than its possibilities of
constructing an actual story within the fictional
                                                                        The picture is altogether full of dark shadows, with
world. Thus, these elements trigger the frame
                                                                        the lighter areas being merely a slight hue of blue
‘game’ rather than ‘narrative’ (i.e. ‘fiction’) as the
                                                                        or gray. Nevertheless, the image is actually less
governing frame of the TRPG session. This may be
                                                                        redundant than it seems. First of all, the “world” of
contrasted with fig. 4, which shows the cover and
                                                                        the title is now portrayed as a familiar one, not a
inlay cover respectively of the World of Darkness
                                                                        valley full of ‘orcs’ or a spaceship adrift in the vast
core-rulebook. Although the title in itself is still
                                                                        darkness of the cosmos, but an alleyway that does
relatively generic, it already conveys an ominous
                                                                        not appear to differ greatly from those in the real
feeling, a certain uneasiness that relies heavily on
                                                                        world. Additionally, there seems to be a
the general association that is made between
                                                                        concretization of the slight uneasiness implicit in
darkness and the fear of the unknown; of that
                                                                        the title, now heightened and transformed into
which may not be seen. Were it on its own,
                                                                        definite suspense by the almost topical motif of the
however, the title would still leave enough space
                                                                        lone figure in the dark alleyway. At the same time,
open to speculation: What kind of world is meant?
                                                                        there seems to be the implication that this now
What kind of darkness? Indeed, the “world of
                                                                        impending menace is not of a natural kind - not the
darkness” of the title could still refer to any
                                                                        “junkies” around the corner - but something more
number of settings, with “darkness” referring to,
                                                                        mysterious and unknown. This feeling is conveyed
for example, evil (i.e. “dark”) forces, the “dark
                                                                        by the blurred and “shaky” nature of the image
ages” of a particular fictional world, or a particular
                                                                        which resembles a badly taken picture. Within it,
“dark lord.” However, the title could also refer to
                                                                        the objects appear to lack definite borders, giving
an outer space setting or to a setting where the
                                                                        almost the impression of “seeing double”. It is
characters are all blind. Clearly, taken on its own
                                                                        precisely this idea that is further reinforced by the
the title is highly indeterminate. In this respect,
13 A similar framing strategy has been described by Roy Sommer (2006) in the context of film analysis:

Both the design of, and the information conveyed by, the titles and credits themselves make a significant contribution to the framing
process. For instance, paratextual devices such as the use of distinctive fonts in the title sequence of Star Wars: Episode III create
continuity between this episode and the other movies of the saga. (392)
14 Indeed, later on in the rulebook we find a passage that closely resembles our interpretation of the cover:

       Characters in the World of Darkness can blur the line between reality and the occult. Indeed, that’s what it’s all about.
       Exploring a world of mystery that tries to keep itself hidden. A world that punishes those who look too deep. But those
       who refuse to look suffer even worse. They’re rocked on seas of conspiracies of which they go unaware. Damned if you
       do, damned if you don’t. There are no easy answers, and knowing is not half the battle. It’s only the first shot in a long,
       grinding war against the shadows. (WoD 23)

                                                                                                                                     47
                                                                   International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4



typographical form of the title itself (fig 5.), whose
letters appear to be shifted and slightly displaced.     Contrasting with the rest of the illustration, this
Indeed, what appears at first almost like a printing     image displays a clearly contoured depiction of a
mistake is yet another indicator of the “otherness”      person – or rather his shadow – in a solitary
of the “world” presented by the game, giving the         alleyway. This image necessarily evokes the figure
idea of an underlying, “hidden” reality.                 on the cover page and by doing so produces
Considering the above mentioned, the inlay cover         questions, semantic blanks that may be filled
(fig 4. b) is to be seen as an extension of the front    during the game: “Is he afraid? Is this what is
cover, answering but also expanding to a great           awaiting him? Will he become - or is he already -
extent the expectations previously created by it.        one of ‘them’?” In a way then, the image represents
First of all, by recurring in the same position and      a window between (front and inlay) covers and,
form, the title reinforces the idea of unity between     therefore, between the “worlds” of the game.
the previous illustration and this one3.
                                                         Considering what has been discussed above, these
                                                         initial framing devices can be said to foreshadow
                                                         the whole concept of the World of Darkness setting
                 Fig. 5. WoD Title Graphic               in a nutshell4. This considered, the cover may be
                                                         described           as     an        “anticipatory
                                                         illustration” (Wandhoff, 2006: 210) that has the
                                                         function of “provid[ing] the narrative text with a
                                                         moralizing maxim or theme that is encapsulated in
                                                         a picture and put before the reader’s inner eye
                                                         before the narrative proper starts.” (ibid. 212)
                                                         Moreover, the cover triggers important frames of
                                                         reference, creating expectations as to the type of
In other words, because it has not been altered, the     narrative that can be developed during the game.
title calls our attention to the changes in the          As a matter of fact, one is under the impression
picture. As we can observe, the slight bluish hue of     that this framing alone is enough to engender the
the previous image has been reduced to black and         ideas to construct a story. In fact, as Genette (1997)
shades of grey. This fact may be correlated with the     has already pointed out, “a title hit upon all of a
absence of any source of light - in contrast to the      sudden, and sometimes well before the subject of
cover where, despite the darkness, there were still      the book is […] like an instigator: once the title is
streetlamps in the background. The solitary human        there, the only thing left to produce is a text that
figure, for its part, has now been replaced by           justifies it” (67).
several explicitly or implicitly non-human ones.
Again, boundaries here are not clearly cut and the       Another element of the cover page(s) which should
figures, as well as their background, appear only in     not go unattended is the caption “Storytelling
parts, as if covered by, or emerging from a              System Rulebook” which appears in the lower area
surrounding fog. It is only upon closer examination      of both illustrations and serves to trigger two major
that one may spot the “odd man out” in the upper         frames – i.e. meta-concepts – within which both the
right corner of the picture (see fig. 6).                rulebook as well as the potential diegesis are to be
                                                         understood: that of ‘game’ and that of ‘fiction.’
                                                         Paradoxically, by doing so, it simultaneously
                                                         creates a space for suspension of disbelief by
               Fig. 6. WoD Inlay Cover Detail            establishing that the diegetic level is based on “a
           !                                             set of transformation rules that indicates what is to
                                                         be treated as real and how it is to be treated as real
                                                         within the make-believe framework.” (Fine, 1983:
                                                         183) In other words, the denomination of a text as
                                                         “role-playing game rulebook” implies the
                                                         agreement “to ‘bracket’ the world outside the
                                                         game” (ibid.) during play. Indeed, more than
                                                         signaling its game character, the indication on a
                                                         printed text as “role-playing game” may be seen as
                                                         a more complex version of the original framing


                                                                                                            48
                                                                                    International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4



used in child’s play (i.e. “let’s make believe”). In                                   Fig. 7. Werewolf the Forsaken (2)
this last case, suspension of disbelief is easily
broken as soon as disagreements between
participants are encountered. However, by
including more complex, rule-based framings,
TRPG rulebooks allow a greater plausibility, a
reality, to a certain extent, of the diegetic world.
Moreover, the issue of the size of the font –
notoriously small in the first cover; slightly larger
in the inlay – is to be noted as well since it
represents the conscious decision to foreground, in
the first place, the atmosphere and tension
displayed in the cover while de-emphasizing the
ludic/fictional nature of the text. Obviously, this
may be seen as a strategy intended to augment the
suspense created by the cover, but also a framing
that indicates that, while the World of Darkness is a
game, it is a game to be taken seriously. In fact, the                       As has been previously mentioned, there is a
introduction to the players’ guide to Vampire                           notorious prominence of such elements in
begins with the following quote by MC. Escher in                        storytelling-based role-playing games. Indeed, if
its heading – indeed, yet another paratext!: “My                        we go back to our analysis of the games and
work is a game, a very serious game” (qtd. in                           sourcebooks published by White Wolf, we will
Vampire Players’ Guide 7). At the same time, this                       notice that practically all of them begin with a
subtitle also underscores the focus of the game in                      prologue consisting of a short narrative text that
producing interesting stories rather than just fun,                     provides an atmospheric introduction into the
“escapist” adventures. Again, this is meant to                          fictional setting of the specific game. In most cases,
influence the way in which the players create their                     such as Werewolf: The Forsaken (WF), Vampire: The
campaigns and the stories they tell since there is no                   Requiem (VtR) and Mage: The Awakening (MtA), the
great difference – at least in principle – between                      narrative is continued as an epilogue in the last
how a “storytelling game” is played and how any                         pages of the book. For example, in WF, the reader
other TRPG is.                                                          is presented at the beginning with a character’s
                                                                        (Mark) first transformation into a werewolf and the
3.3.2 Prologues, Epilogues                  and      Framing/           mysterious circumstances that surround it (fig. 7).
Embedded Narratives                                                     In the epilogue (fig. 8), after recovering
                                                                        consciousness in an alleyway, Mark is approached
Because of the explicit, salient nature that makes                      by a group of strangers – a “pack” of other
them clearly discernible from the rest of the text5,                    werewolves, in fact - who offer to give him
prologues,    epilogues     and    “framing”     or                     answers to his new condition:
“embedded” narratives6 offer us with further
examples of paratexts within the rulebook.




15 This explicitness is given by typographical, stylistic and spatial differences; as well as by the fact that these texts are generally

  surrounded by, or appear within, accompanying illustrations.
16 One must distinguish how both “framing” as well as “embedded” are to be understood: Indeed, these texts may be either embedded

  in, or framing, the rulebook as a text, however, this function may shift concerning the diegesis. In the latter case it is probably more
  accurate to consider these texts in general as framing narratives rather than embedded ones.

                                                                                                                                       49
                                                                                       International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4



                                                                          prologue proper, the reader is presented with a
              Fig 8. Werewolf the Forsaken (313)                          number of short, fragmentary narratives
                                                                          intercalated with considerations on the basics of
                                                                          storytelling. In general terms, these narratives
                                                                          serve a similar function to that of frame stories in
                                                                          literary texts (cf. Wolf, 2006: 179-206). However,
                                                                          because of the fact that the framed story – the one
                                                                          produced during play – is clearly the dominant text
                                                                          during a RPG session, the function of these texts
                                                                          can be described in terms of what Wolf has called
                                                                          ‘mise en cadre’:


                                                                              “In this case, rather than shed light through
                                                                              revelatory similarities in a ‘bottom up’ process –
                                                                              as in mises en abyme – the framing implicitly
                                                                              sheds light on the framed text in a ‘top down’
                                                                              process. As narratology has failed to provide a
    A hard, bitter smile creased Russell’s face, and                          separate term for this reversal of mise en
    he refused to back off. “First, I thought we’d                            abyme, I have proposed […] to baptize it ‘mise
    answer some of your questions for you, son. Tell                          en cadre’” (ibid. 198)
    you a little about what you are and what it
    means.”
                                                                              Furthermore, these stories, although mostly
    “What I’ve become.”
                                                                          fragmentary and unrelated, not only serve the
    “No, what you are,” Russell said. “After that,                        general function of establishing the mood and
    there’s people you have to meet and some hard                         genre of the game – both of which are explicitly
    tests you’ll have to pass. Then your life can                         stated in White Wolf’s games – but also exemplify
    finally get started and you can try to put it to                      how these frames can be translated into narratives.
    some good use.” “Or,” the Hispanic guy put in,
                                                                          .1(Intra-)textual, implicit framings
    “you can just get the hell out of our territory
                                                                          Although they are by far not as salient as the
    and fend for yourself.” (312, 313)
                                                                          previous examples, intra-textual7 framings also
                                                                          play a central role in the interpretation of the
                                                                          content of the rulebook. Moreover, because they
Evidently, the use of the framing narrative here
                                                                          are neither statistic, nor setting information in the
creates a bridge between levels of meaning since
                                                                          proper sense, these elements clearly serve a
the player is naturally led to identify with the
                                                                          different function than that of structurally (the
newborn Werewolf character, Mark. Thus, the
                                                                          rules) or materially (setting information)
framing allows a trespassing to a certain extent of
                                                                          grounding the game. Indeed, these framing devices
the borders between “worlds” and the invitation to
                                                                          influence how meaning is to be ascribed within the
Mark to “learn what [he is] and what it [all]
                                                                          “primary framework” of the fictional world. While
means”, becomes a beckoning to the players to take
                                                                          the rulebook provides a system of rules and
his place and investigate the setting by playing out
                                                                          information concerning elements, creatures and
their own adventures.
                                                                          phenomena of a fictional setting, this data still
     Apart from such cases of prologues/epilogues,                        portrays a fictional environment which is, to a
the use of “embedded” narratives in the WoD core-                         great extent, without meaning. As Fine (1983) has
rulebook is especially notorious. In fact, within the                     observed, since the events of the role-playing game
first 30 pages of the book, there is little mention of                    take place within a fictional ‘world,’ “[t]he creation
players, rules or characters. Instead, and after the                      of the broad outlines of a fantastic setting is not

17 Again, intra-textual refers in this case to the fact that these framing devices occur within the rulebook’s main text, as opposed to the

  previous examples such as the cover, prologues and epilogues which are at its borders. As in the previous cases of embedded/
  framing narratives, however, it remains difficult to determine whether these framings may be considered intra- or extra-textual in
  relation to the session’s diegesis.
18 This, of course is not a narrative instance in the proper sense, as there is no actual narration of ‘events’.



                                                                                                                                        50
                                                                                  International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4



sufficient to set the stage for a game.” (76) Because                 information concerning the way in which these
of this, it becomes necessary to also “establish a                    vampires relate to other Kindred. If it were indeed
world view that directs the game action and                           only setting information (i.e. data) that was being
represents the implicit philosophy or ideals by                       conveyed, it would suffice to mention the fact that
which the world operates.” (ibid.) This, precisely, is                other clans generally have little to do with
the main function of rulebooks’ intra-textual                         Nosferatu vampires. However, this information is
framings. In the following example, we may                            again intertwined with the portrayal of “intra-
observe how setting information is intertwined                        diegetic” systems of meaning.
with intra-textual framing in order to influence the
interpretation of the diegetic reality from “within”:
                                                                          “If they had their druthers, most other clans
                                                                          would prefer never to associate with the
    The Kindred gain most of their power and                              Nosferatu at all, yet the Haunts’ [i.e. the
    strength not from their own innate abilities, but                     Nosferatus’] inarguable talents and brute force
    from the influence they wield in the mortal                           make them too dangerous to ignore. So other
    world. […] Why risk one’s own potentially eternal                     Kindred offer them a tense hospitality, hide their
    existence, miserable as it might be at times, when one                unease behind wary diplomacies and pray that the
    can manipulate pawns into taking those risks                          Nosferatu leave as soon as possible. [my
    instead? [my emphasis] (Requiem 26)                                   emphasis]” (Players’ Guide 111)


Clearly, there are two types of discourse available                   Not only does this passage express the fact that
in this paragraph. On the one hand, the first half of                 Nosferatu are generally disliked, but expands its
it consists of the stating of information from an                     significance by portraying the attitude other
“uninvolved”, third person point of view.                             Vampire’s      have   toward     them   and     the
However, what immediately follows it is a sentence                    circumstances under which Kindred might seek
that portrays what can be interpreted as the                          Nosferatu assistance. Thus, this passage reinforces
thoughts of a vampire within the fictional world                      overarching themes (frames) of the game such as
itself. In narratological terms we could describe                     ‘deceit’ and ‘conspiracy’.
this as a transition of the “narrative8” instance from
an extra-, heterodiegetic perspective to an
apparently intra-, homodiegetic one. By creating                      4. CONCLUSION
                                                                      Throughout this paper I have argued that a close
the illusion of observing the fictional world from
                                                                      examination of TRPG rulebooks is central to
within, this transition – a beautiful case of ‘free
                                                                      understanding the way in which these games allow
indirect discourse’ in fact – frames the diegetic
                                                                      for the construction of highly complex,
world, thus adding new structures of meaning to it.
                                                                      collaborative and interactive narratives. To
A similar case of intra-textual framing can be
                                                                      demonstrate their impact, I have recurred mainly
observed in the next example where, after
                                                                      to Genette’s and Wolf’s considerations concerning
elaborating on the main characteristics concerning
                                                                      the specific use of paratexts and framings in works
the vampire clan of the Nosferatu – a central aspect
                                                                      of fiction. By distinguishing three basic rulebook
of which is the fact that they are generally
                                                                      components – namely, rules, setting and
repulsive, either because of their appearance, their
                                                                      (meta)framing devices - I have attempted to show
smell, or both –, the text goes on to add
                                                                      how these elements, in addition to their main

19 As Nephew (2004) has stated, “[t]he text necessarily presents the world as incomplete and fragmentary, as no sourcebook can

  describe every inch of a fantasy world.” (39)
20 Indeed, as he concludes in one of his reviews: “I hope I can play this one day, either with my current group or with a group I’ll

  have in the future” (Game Geeks #117 Houses of the Blooded) Doubtlessly, this type of commentary would be inconceivable in any
  other medium as it would appear nonsensical to seriously comment on a book one has not read, a film one has not seen, or a game
  one has not played.
21 In Das Fiktive und das Imaginäre (1991), Wolfgang Iser establishes the necessity of reformulating the traditional notion of reality

 and fiction as a binary system of opposed elements by adding the concept of the imaginary. Thus, he proposes a ternary system,
 arguing that all fictional texts are based on the triadic relationship between the spheres of the real, the fictive and the imaginary.
 Because of the fact that signs, which are used to refer to real elements or concepts – understood as those of the empiric, extra-
 textual world –, lose their original pragmatic determination in the fictional text, while the imaginary – understood by Iser as an
 experience which is “diffus, formlos, unfixiert und ohne Objektreferenz” (20) – is given substance and form by the text, the
 relationship between these spheres is one of ‘boundary crossing’. This crossing of boundaries occurs, according to Iser, by a
 conscious and intentional act he has called fictionalizing act (Akt des Fingierens).

                                                                                                                                    51
                                                                                    International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4



function, serve as framings to the potential                            the reader’s visualization of stories in potence.
diegeses created during game-play. In this respect,                     Indeed, Kurt Wiegel’s video reviews of TRPGs on
I have argued that setting and rules not only                           the internet are a good example of this. Wiegel,
provide the structural basis to the game but that                       who is an experienced game-master, discusses in
they also frame it as they invariably imply                             short video clips different role-playing games,
reductions of the imagined world2. Consequently,                        commenting on their playability and story
by including or excluding (hypothetical)                                possibilities. However, in many of these cases,
information, they create expectations concerning                        Wiegel’s commentary is done without any actual
the playing of the game much in the same way as                         playing experience of the game3. Likewise, it is not
initial framing devices used in “traditional” written                   uncommon for players to purchase rulebooks for
fiction. At the same time, rules and setting                            different games, not so much with the objective of
information affect the interpretation players make                      playing them, but rather as a mode of gathering
of diegetic events. Rulebook paratexts, for their                       ideas – be it rules, setting or storylines – for
part, are especially notorious for having a “double”                    campaigns already running in another game
framing function as they extend their influence                         system. In this respect, it is important to
from the rulebook towards the diegesis by                               distinguish       rulebooks      from   proto-diegetic
triggering important frames within which the                            phenomena such as the draft of a novel. In this last
                                                                        case there will regularly be a single text (i.e. one
                                                                        story) as an outcome, whereas a RPG sourcebook
    During the process of gaming the                                    may inform an indefinite number of narrations.
    players progressively reduce the                                    Thus, one could argue that RPG rulebooks are to be
   space of possible stories down to a                                  understood        as     an    incomplete    ‘act   of
     single story – one set of things                                   fictionalizing’ (Akt des Fingierens)4. Here, indeed,
   “happened,” while all other sets did                                 the imaginary has been fixed by giving it form as
                   not.”                                                setting information. In fact, it has been given an
                                                                        additional aspect of “reality” by the introduction of
                                                                        rules for its transformation into statistically
diegesis is to be constructed. In addition, the
                                                                        determined elements. However, the rulebook in
rulebook’s intra-textual framing devices serve to
                                                                        itself is still not a single complete story and is, as
add diegetic meaning to the otherwise purely
                                                                        yet, not completely ‘realized’ (realisiert). Indeed,
factual information given by the game setting.
                                                                        “the creation of world, character, and story become
                                                                        “real” when experienced during the course of a
In view of the aforementioned, perhaps the best                         game session, rather than on the reading of the
way to describe TRPG rulebooks would be as a                            game rulebook itself.” (Nephew, 2004: 39) Thus, the
system of framings. However, because of the fact that                   role-playing game rulebook is a text still imbued by
the diegesis only emerges during the actual                             the possibilities of the imaginary. It is only during
playing of the game, the framings provided in the                       game play that this fictionalizing act is completed.
rulebook are to be understood as surrounding a                          As Borgstrom (2007) has observed, “[b]efore the
diegetic void. This void, however, is not a                             game begins there is a large space of possible
completely abstract nothingness but, because                            stories defined by the initial premise. During the
framing devices are conveyors of meaning, it                            process of gaming the players progressively reduce
becomes what in Iserian terms is called a Leerstelle                    the space of possible stories down to a single story
or semantic blank. (In other words, a semantic                          – one set of things “happened,” while all other sets
blank can only exist within an established system                       did not.” (58) For this reason, the expectations
of meaning; only within it may a semantic vacuum                        triggered by a rulebook’s framing devices directly
be “filled”.) As Henry (2009) has stated, “the                          influence the formation of the story. Indeed, there
existence of these fictional worlds, written without                    is no actual ‘horror’ within the rulebook of the
their stories, is an invitation for stories to                          World of Darkness but, because its framings trigger
happen.” (7) Rulebooks are therefore texts that                         this specific genre frame, the players, as well as the
enable the visualization of potential diegeses. One                     GM, will be inclined to produce a text that matches
could say then, that the rulebook is also an artifact                   what is expected from it5.
that produces an aesthetic object, the object being

22 In this respect, Wallis (2007) has pointed out that “all stories must follow the rules of their genre and of storytelling in general if

  they are to satisfy an audience.” (78) Consequently, a “game’s mechanics must take into consideration the rules of the genre that it
  is trying to create: not just the relevant icons and tropes, but the nature of a story from that genre” (ibid. 73).
                                                                                                                                       52
                                                                                 International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4



The system of framings constituted by the rulebook                   fiction. This is especially important if we consider
is therefore crucial in order to establish the specific              the notion that all fiction is in fact a form of
‘interaction codes’ and ‘improvisation patterns’ (as                 pretense play (cf. Walton 1990; Iser 1991; Sutrop,
by Fatland, 2006) relevant to a given game. Equally                  2000). Indeed, much as the players’ individual
important, however, is the fact that by doing so                     visualization of the game events, any aesthetic or
TRPG texts also reveal to their readers, both                        literary work is only truly available as the
implicitly and explicitly, how this is achieved,                     individual experience of a given recipient. When
inciting players to further modify or even replace                   communicating about these texts, negotiation
them with other (framing) texts. This specific mode                  through framings – interpretations, blurbs,
of self-disclosure, as well as the use of framings in                reviews, opinions, etc. – allows us to bridge the gap
TRPGs to incite the production (and not only the                     between our own experience of the text and that of
reception) of text is what I have called genesic                     others6. Thus, not only may role-playing games
framing. Moreover, it is this feature that is likely to              teach us something about the way in which we
account for much of the complexity of the TRPG                       negotiate reality (cf. Mackay, 2001) but, foremost,
medium as well as for its persistence in time.                       about how we negotiate fiction7.
Indeed, despite the appearance of alternatives in
more technologically advanced media, TRPGs are
still unique in that participants are not only playing               5. REFERENCES
                                                                     [1] Achilli et al. 2004. The World of Darkness: White Wolf
a (storytelling) game but, by doing so, they are also                    Publishing.
learning the mechanisms that will allow them to
                                                                     [2] Achilli et al. 2004. Vampire: The Requiem: White Wolf
(re-)construct and manipulate it along the way.                          Publishing.
                                                                     [3] Achilli et al. 2006. Requiem, Chronichler's Guide:
 This specific mode of self-disclosure,                                  White Wolf Publishing.
    as well as the use of framings in                                [4] Blackwelder et al. Vampire: Players’ Guide: White
                                                                         Wolf Publishing.
  TRPGs to incite the production (and
 not only the reception) of text is what I                           [5] Borgstrom, R., 2007. Structure and Meaning in Role-
                                                                         Playing Game Design. In: P. Harrigan and N.
    have called genesic framing.(11)                                     Wardrip-Fruin, eds. Second Person: role-playing and
                                                                         story in games and playable media. Cambridge, MA:
Finally, it is important to note that by focusing on                     MIT Press, 58–66.
rulebooks as “primary” texts, it is possible to                      [6] Bunia, R., 2006. Framing the End. In: W. Wolf and W.
elucidate how the different authorial instances                          Bernhardt, eds. Framing Borders in Literature and
involved in the game – primary, secondary and                            Other Media. Amsterdam: Rodopi, 359–383.
tertiary – extend their influence over the ‘story                    [7] Consalvo, M., 2007. Cheating: gaining advantage in
space’ beyond their specified areas of agency. If the                    videogames. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
narratives created during role-playing games may                     [8] Costikyan, G., 2007. Games, Storytelling, and
be seen as an actualization of player expectations,                      Breaking the String. In: P. Harrigan and N. Wardrip-
                                                                         Fruin, eds. Second Person: role-playing and story in
their (potential) fulfillment is to be understood as
                                                                         games and playable media. Cambridge, MA: MIT
the result of collective negotiation. While the latter                   Press, 5–13.
may be done explicitly, as in meta-game dialog in
                                                                     [9] Dembeck, T., 2006. (Paratextual) Framing and the
general, from what has been discussed in this                            Work of Art. In: W. Wolf and W. Bernhardt, eds.
paper it becomes evident that much of it in fact                         Framing Borders in Literature and Other Media.
results from the manipulation of expectations and                        Amsterdam: Rodopi, 263–295.
diegesis interpretation by means of genesic                          [10] Fatland, E. (2006). Interaction codes: Understanding
framing. In this respect, a description and analysis                      and establishing patterns in player improvisation. In
of how secondary and tertiary authors make use of                         T. Fritzon & T. Wrigstad (Eds.), Role, play, art:
such framing strategies is still a matter for further                     Collected experiences of role-playing (pp. 17-34).
                                                                          Stockholm: Foreningen Knutepunkt.
investigation.
                                                                     [11] Fine, G.A., 1983. Shared Fantasy: Role-Playing Games
As for now, it is possible to assert that tabletop                        as Social Worlds. Chicago, London: Univ. of Chicago
role-playing games demonstrate the true extent to                         Press.
which framings are relevant in mediating works of

23 As a matter of fact, Stefanescu (2006) has pointed out that “all comprehension of a literary work is ultimately a negotiation

 between the interpretive frames imposed by the reader and those suggested by the text itself.” (330)
24 A similar point has been made by Loponen and Stenros (2012)


                                                                                                                              53
                                                                         International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4



[12] Gelber, D., Costikyan, G., and Goldberg, E., 1984.       [29] Lankoski, P., 2004. Character Design Fundamentals
     Paranoia: West End Games.                                     for Role-Playing Games. In: M. Montola and J.
[13] Genette, G., 1997. Paratexts: Thresholds of                   Stenros, eds. Beyond Role and Play: Tools, Toys and
     interpretation. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.             Theory for Harnessing the Imagination. Helsinki:
                                                                   Ropecon, 139–148.
[14] Glaser, B.G. and Strauss, A.L., 1974. Awareness of
     dying. Chicago: Aldine.                                  [30] Loponen, M. and Stenros, J. 2012. Power Relations in
                                                                   Cultural Semiospheres. Paper presented at Role-
[15] Goffman, E., 1974. Frame Analysis: An Essay on the            Playing in Games seminar, 10-11 April, 2012,
     Organization of Experience. Harmondsworth:                    Tampere, Finland.
     Penguin.
                                                              [31] Machell, M., 2002. The Problem with Character
[16] Grünzweig, W. and Solbach, A., eds., 1999.                    Backgrounds [online]. Available from: http://
     Grenzüberschreitungen: Narratologie im Kontext/               www.realms.org.uk [Accessed 21 Sep 2012].
     Transcending Boundaries: Narratology in Context.
     Tübingen: Gunter Narr Verlag.                            [32] Machell, M., 2003. Social Contract Gaming [online].
                                                                   Available from: www.realms.org.uk [Accessed 21
[17] Gygax, G. and Arneson, D., 1974. Dungeons and                 Sep 2012].
     Dragons: Rules for Fantastic Medieval Wargames
     Campaigns Playable with Paper and Pencil and             [33] Mackay, D., 2001. The Fantasy Role-Playing Game: A
     Miniature Figures. Lake Geneva: TSR.                          New Performing Art. Jefferson, North Carolina,
                                                                   London: McFarland & Company.
[18] Hammer, J. (2007). Agency and authority in role-
     playing 'texts'. In M. Knobel & C. Lankshear (Eds.),     [34] Miller, J., 2006. Role Playing Games as Interactive
     A new literacies sampler (pp. 67-93). New York: Peter         Fiction. Reconstruction: Studies in Contemporary
     Lang.                                                         Culture [online], 6 (1). Available from: http://
                                                                   reconstruction.eserver.org/122/contents122.shtml
[19] Harrigan, P. and Wardrip-Fruin, N., eds., 2007.               [Accessed 22 Sep 2012].
     Second Person: role-playing and story in games and
     playable media. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.                [35] Montola, M. and Stenros, J., eds., 2004. Beyond Role
                                                                   and Play: Tools, Toys and Theory for Harnessing the
[20] Harviainen, J.T., 2008. A Hermeneutical Approach to           Imagination. Helsinki: Ropecon.
     Role-Playing Analysis. International Journal of Role-
     Playing [online] (1), 66–78. Available from: http://     [36] Nephew, M.A.B., 2004. Playing with Power: The
     journalofroleplaying.org/ [Accessed 21 Sep 2012].             Authorial Consequences of Roleplaying Games.
                                                                   Dissertation Abstracts International, Section A: The
[21] Harviainen, J.T., 2012. Systemic Perspectives on              Humanities and Social Sciences, 64 (11).
     Information on Physically Performed Role-play.
     Doctoral dissertation. Tampere, Univ of Tampere          [37] Padol, L., 1996. Playing Stories, Telling Games:
                                                                   Collaborative Storytelling in Role-Playing Games
[22] Hayot, E. and Wesp, E., 2004. Style, Strategy and             [online]. Available from: http://
     Mimesis in Ergodic Literature. Comparative Literature         www.recappub.com/games.html [Accessed 24 Aug
     Studies, 41 (3), 404–423.                                     2009 - document no longer available online].
[23] Henry, L., 2003. Group Narration: Power, Information,    [38] Punday, D., 2005. Creative Accounting: Role-Playing
     and Play in Role Playing Games [online].                      Games, Possible-World Theory, and the Agency of
     www.darkshire.net. Available from: http://                    Imagination. Poetics Today, 26 (1), 113–139.
     www.darkshire.net/jhkim/rpg/theory/liz-
     paper-2003/ [Accessed 21 Sep 2012].                      [39] Rein-Hagen, M. et al. 1991. Vampire: The Masquerade:
                                                                   White Wolf Publishing.
[24] Hindmarch, W., 2007. Storytelling Games as a
     Creative Medium. In: P. Harrigan and N. Wardrip-         [40] Schick, L., 1991. Heroic Worlds: A History and Guide to
     Fruin, eds. Second Person: role-playing and story in          Role-Playing Games. Buffalo: Prometheus Books.
     games and playable media. Cambridge, MA: MIT             [41] Sommer, R., 2006. Initial Framings in Film. In: W.
     Press, 47–55.                                                 Wolf and W. Bernhardt, eds. Framing Borders in
[25] Hitchens, M. and Drachen, A., 2008. The Many Faces            Literature and Other Media. Amsterdam: Rodopi, 383–
     of Role-Playing Games. International Journal of Role-         407.
     Playing [online] (1), 3-21. Available from: http://      [42] Stefanescu, M., 2006. The (Dis)Continuity of
     journalofroleplaying.org/ [Accessed 21 Sep 2012].             Framings. In: W. Wolf and W. Bernhardt, eds.
[26] Hruschovski, B., 1984. Fictionality and Fields of             Framing Borders in Literature and Other Media.
     Reference. Poetics Today, 5 (2), 227–251.                     Amsterdam: Rodopi, 329–341.

[27] Ilieva, A. 2012. Cultural Codes, Cultural Memory         [43] Stenros, J., 2004. Notes on Role-Playing Texts. In: M.
     and Cultural Concepts in Live Role-Playing                    Montola and J. Stenros, eds. Beyond Role and Play:
     Discourses. Paper presented at Role-Playing in                Tools, Toys and Theory for Harnessing the Imagination.
     Games seminar, 10-11 April, 2012, Tampere, Finland.           Helsinki: Ropecon, 75–80.

[28] Iser, W., 1991. Das Fiktive und das Imaginäre:           [44] Sutrop, M., 2000. Fiction and Imagination: The
     Perspektiven literarischer Anthropologie. Frankfurt a.        Anthropological Function of Literature. Paderborn:
     M.: Suhrkamp.                                                 Mentis




                                                                                                                          54
                                                                  International Journal of Role-Playing - Issue 4



[45] Wallis, J., 2007. Making Games That Make Stories.
     In: P. Harrigan and N. Wardrip-Fruin, eds. Second
     Person: role-playing and story in games and playable
     media. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 69–80.
[46] Walton, K. (1990). Mimesis as Make-Believe: On the
     Foundations of Representational Arts. Cambridge,
     Mass.: Harvard Univ. Pr.
[47] Wandhoff, H., 2006. Found(ed) in a Picture:
     Ekphrastic Framing in Ancient, Medieval, and
     Contemporary Literature. In: W. Wolf and W.
     Bernhardt, eds. Framing Borders in Literature and
     Other Media. Amsterdam: Rodopi, 179–207.
[48] Waskul, D.D., 2006. The role-playing game and the
     game of role-playing: the ludic self and everyday
     life. In: P. Williams, S.Q. Hendricks, and W.K.
     Winkler, eds. Gaming as Culture: essays on reality,
     identity and experience in fantasy games. Jefferson,
     N.C.: McFarland & Co., 19–38.
[49] Wiegel, K. Game Geeks [online]. http://
     gamegeeksrpg.com/ [Accessed 22 Sep 2012].
[50] Williams, P., Hendricks, S.Q., and Winkler, W.K.,
     eds., 2006. Gaming as Culture: essays on reality, identity
     and experience in fantasy games. Jefferson, N.C.:
     McFarland & Co.
[51] Wolf, M.J.P. and Perron, B., 2003. The video game
     theory reader. New York, London: Routledge.
[52] Wolf, W. and Bernhardt, W., eds., 2006. Framing
     Borders in Literature and Other Media. Amsterdam:
     Rodopi.
[53] Wolf, W., 1999. Framing Fiction: Reflections on a
     Narratological Concept and an Example: Bradbury,
     Mensonge. In: W. Grünzweig and A. Solbach, eds.
     Grenzüberschreitungen: Narratologie im Kontext/
     Transcending Boundaries: Narratology in Context.
     Tübingen: Gunter Narr Verlag, 97–124.



 David Jara is a Chilean Ph. D. candidate in literary
 studies at the University of Heidelberg, Germany.
 His current research focuses on the negotiation of
 narratives and fictional spaces in tabletop role-playing
 games.




                                                                                                      54
