GMJ 235: DMG Chapter 5: Adventure Environments - Settlements & Unusual Environments — Lex Starwalker 
 Lex Starwalker 
 Critical Balance 
 Newsletter 
 Store 
 Game Master's Journey 
 Lex Out Loud 
 Blog 
 Home 
 Support 
 About 
 Other Podcasts 
 GM Intrusions 
 Age of Gaming 
 Beer Tasters 
 Expanse 
 No Man's Sky 
 Through the Rift 
 Lex Starwalker 
 Critical Balance / 
 Newsletter / 
 Store / 
 Game Master's Journey / 
 Lex Out Loud / 
 Blog / 
 Home / 
 Support / 
 About / 
 Other Podcasts / GM Intrusions 
 Age of Gaming 
 Beer Tasters 
 Expanse 
 No Man's Sky 
 Through the Rift 
 Lex Starwalker 
 The official website of Lex Starwalker--science fiction writer and producer of the podcast Lex Out Loud
 Game Master's Journey - Your Multidimensional RPG Podcast
 Game Master’s Journey is a discussion podcast for GMs and players of Daggerheart and other tabletop RPGs hosted by Lex Starwalker. This season Lex is exploring the new hit RPG, Daggerheart. The show explores strategies players and GMs can use to enhance the gaming experience for everyone at the table. Lex also discusses the creation of his custom Daggerheart setting, Primordia, providing a valuable worldbuilding resource for DMs creating their own setting.
 Lex Starwalker 
 Critical Balance / 
 Newsletter / 
 Store / 
 Game Master's Journey / 
 Lex Out Loud / 
 Blog / 
 Home / 
 Support / 
 About / 
 Other Podcasts / GM Intrusions 
 Age of Gaming 
 Beer Tasters 
 Expanse 
 No Man's Sky 
 Through the Rift 
 Donate
 Sign up for my newsletter .
 Join one of my Daggerheart games at StartPlaying.Games.
 December 16, 2018 
 GMJ 235: DMG Chapter 5: Adventure Environments - Settlements & Unusual Environments 
 December 16, 2018 / 
 Lex Starwalker 
 Lex returns to his exploration of the Dungeon Master’s Guide . This week he explores adventuring in settlements, underwater, on the sea and in the sky. He also responds to some Listener-GM thoughts on alignments and gives his own opinions on alignment in D&D.
 RSS 
 Download 
 iTunes 
 Google Play 
 Patreon 
 GMJ 235: DMG Chapter 5: Adventure Environments - Settlements & Unusual Environments
 Lex Starwalker
 You can now purchase Game Master's Journey T-shirts and other swag!
 Call the Game Master's Journey voice mail: 951-GMJ-LEX1 (951-465-5391)
 Join the Starwalker Studios Discord server .
 Join the Game Master’s Journey Community on MeWe.
 Check out Lex's D&D campaign, Hinterlands of Elandria , on YouTube.
 Check out Lex's D&D supplement, Relics of Power .
 Lex's Series on the Player's Handbook 
 Episode 137: PHB Prelude through Chapter 4
 Episode 138: PHB Chapter 5 - Equipment 
 Episode 139: PHB Chapter 6 - Multiclassing & Feats 
 Episode 140: PHB Chapter 7 - Ability Scores 
 Episode 142: PHB Chapter 8 - Adventuring part 1
 Episode 143: PHB Chapter 8 - Adventuring part 2
 Episode 145: PHB Chapter 9 - Combat 
 Episode 146: PHB Chapter 10 & Appendices - Spellcasting, Conditions & Exhaustion
 Lex's Series on the Dungeon Master's Guide 
 Episode 221: Overview of Rules to Focus on as a DM and Where to Find them
 Episode 151: DMG Introduction - Know Your Players 
 Episode 152: DMG Chapter 1 - A World of Your Own 
 Episode 154: DMG Chapter 1 - Gods of Your World 
 Episode 155: DMG Chapter 1 - Developing Gods & Pantheons for Your World
 Episode 156: DMG Chapter 1 - Mapping Your World 
 Episode 158: DMG Chapter 1 - Creating Settlements for Your Campaign
 Episode 161: DMG Chapter 1 - Factions & Organizations 
 Episode 163: DMG Chapter 1 - Magic in Your World
 Episode 164: DMG Chapter 1 - Creating Campaigns 
 Episode 165: DMG Chapter 1 - Creating Campaign Events 
 Episode 173: DMG Chapter 1 - Play Style & Tiers of Play
 Episode 175: DMG Chapter 1 - Flavors of Fantasy 
 Episode 179: DMG Chapter 2 - Creating a Multiverse 
 Episode 183: DMG Chapter 2 - The Astral Plane 
 Episode 200: DMG Chapter 3 - Creating Adventures 
 Episode 202: DMG Chapter 3 - Creating Encounters 
 Episode 207: DMG Chapter 3 - Random Encounters 
 Episode 223: DMG Chapter 4 - Creating Nonplayer Characters 
 Episode 228: DMG Chapter 5 - Adventure Environments - Dungeons 
 Episode 232: DMG Chapter 5 - Adventure Environments - Wilderness Part 1 
 Episode 233: DMG Chapter 5 - Adventure Environments - Wilderness Part 2 
 Adventure Environments - Settlements 
 Random Settlements
 Random Buildings
 Mapping a Settlement
 Urban Encounters
 Law and Order
 Trials
 Sentences
 Random Urban Encounters
 Adventure Environments - Unusual Environments
 Underwater
 Random Undersea Encounters
 Swimming
 Underwater Visibility
 The Sea
 Navigation
 Random Encounters at Sea
 Weather at Sea
 Visibility
 Owning a Ship
 The Sky
 How to Support the Podcast 
 Visit our Support page to learn the many ways you can help us out.
 Subscribe to our Newsletter 
 YouTube 
 Twitter 
 MeWe 
 Discord 
 Email 
 Music Credits
 Heaven's Journey by Cloudwalker 
 Heroic Temples by TranceBoy 
 Oceanview by Ish 
 Shine by Renfield 
 Dream Destination by Stenko 
 ©2019 Starwalker Studios LLC
 December 16, 2018 / 
 Lex Starwalker / 
 Comment 
 GMJ100 
 Lex Starwalker 
 Lex Starwalker endeavors to write hard science fiction that isn’t hard to read. He’s a lifelong nerd and avid reader with interests in astronomy, aerospace, space exploration, cosmology, biology, anthropology, mythology, and pretty much anything else ending in -ology. He’s had experience as an archaeologist, EMT, private pilot, home brewer, server, teacher, tutor, and biotechnology research associate. He has a degree in anthropology and dreams of one day getting a PhD in astrobiology. He lives in Washington with his wife and cat. When he’s not writing, reading, or watching sci-fi, he enjoys cooking, baking, knitting, gardening, podcasting, running tabletop roleplaying games, and playing bass guitar. 
 You can sign up for Lex’s newsletter and find his podcasts at LexStarwalker.com. The newsletter is the best way to stay informed about upcoming novel releases.
 GMJ 236: Hinterlands of Elandria ... 
 GMJ 234: Hinterlands of Elandria ... 
 No results found
 Critical Balance | Newsletter | Store | Game Master’s Journey | Lex Out Loud | Home | Blog | Support | About 
 © 2026 Cedar Moon Publishing LLC - All Rights Reserved. Site created by Nikki Starwalker.
