 
 Ursula K. Le Guin, Bryn Mawr Commencement Address, 1986 
 Home | 
 Search Serendip 
 A digital ecosystem, fueled by serendipity. 
 Serendip is an independent site partnering with faculty at multiple colleges and universities around the world. Happy exploring! 
 Remote Ready Biology Learning Activities 
 Resources for Teaching about Coronavirus has descriptions and links for multiple resources to use in teaching and learning about coronavirus. -->
 Remote Ready Biology Learning Activities has 50 remote-ready activities, which work for either your classroom or remote teaching. 
 playground 
 brain & behavior 
 complex systems 
 biology 
 science education 
 science & culture 
 art exhibitions 
 about us 
-->
 Ursula K. Le Guin 
 Bryn Mawr Commencement Address (1986) 
 Ursula K. Le Guin 
 gave the following address at the 1986 Bryn Mawr College Commencement. 
 It was first published in a collection of essays, Dancing 
 At The Edge of the World: Thoughts on Words, Women, Places , New York: 
 Harper & Row, 1989 (147-160). 
 Serendip is delighted to have Ursula K. Le Guin's permission to reproduce 
 her address in this web format. The exhibit was organized by Anne 
 Dalke . 
 "Holes Explode" by Sharon 
 Burgmayer , 2002 
 You are invited to read and post comments 
 about this address in Serendip's Ursula 
 K. Le Guin Forum. 
 "...when women speak truly they speak subversively--they 
 can't help it: if you're underneath, if you're kept down, you break out, 
 you subvert. We are volcanoes. When we women offer our experience as our 
 truth, as human truth, all the maps change. There are new mountains. That's 
 what I want--to hear you erupting. You young Mount St. Helenses who don't 
 know the power in you--I want to hear you." 
 -- Ursula K. Le Guin 
Thinking about what I should say to you made me think about what we learn in college; 
and what we unlearn in college; and then how we learn to unlearn what we learned 
in college and relearn what we unlearned in college, and so on. And I thought 
how I have learned, more or less well, three languages, all of them English; and 
how one of these languages is the one I went to college to learn. I thought I 
was going to study French and Italian, and I did, but what I learned was the language 
of power - of social power; I shall call it the father tongue. 
 This is the public discourse, and one dialect of it is speech-making-by politicians, 
 commencement speakers, or the old man who used to get up early in a village 
 in Central California a couple of hundred years ago and say things very loudly 
 on the order of "People need to be getting up now, there are things we might 
 be doing, the repairs on the sweathouse aren't finished and the tar-weed is 
 in seed over on Bald Hill; this is a good time of day for doing things, and 
 there'll be plenty of time for lying around when it gets hot this afternoon." 
 So everybody would get up grumbling slightly, and some of them would go pick 
 tarweed-probably the women. This is the effect, ideally, of the public discourse. 
 It makes something happen, makes somebody - usually somebody else - do something, 
 or at least it gratifies the ego of the speaker. The difference between our 
 politics and that of a native Californian people is clear in the style of the 
 public discourse. The difference wasn't clear to the White invaders, who insisted 
 on calling any Indian who made a speech a "chief," because they couldn't comprehend, 
 they wouldn't admit, an authority without supremacy-a non-dominating authority. 
 But it is such an authority that I possess for the brief - we all hope it is 
 decently brief - time I speak to you - I have no right to speak to you. What 
 I have is the responsibility you have given me to speak to you. 
 The political tongue speaks aloud-and look how radio and television have brought 
 the language of politics right back where it belongs - but the dialect of the 
 father tongue that you and I learned best in college is a written one. It doesn't 
 speak itself. It only lectures. It began to develop when printing made written 
 language common rather than rare, five hundred years ago or so, and with electronic 
 processing and copying it continues to develop and proliferate so powerfully, 
 so dominatingly, that many believe this dialect - the expository and particularly 
 the scientific discourse - is the highest form of language, the true language, 
 of which all other uses of words are primitive vestiges. 
 And it is indeed an excellent dialect. Newton's Principia 
 was written in it in Latin, and Descartes wrote Latin and French in it, establishing 
 some of its basic vocabulary, and 
 Kant wrote German in it, and Marx , 
 Darwin , 
 Freud , 
 Boas , 
 Foucault - all the great 
 scientists and social thinkers wrote it. It is the language of thought that 
 seeks objectivity. 
 I do not say it is the language of rational thought. Reason is a faculty far 
larger than mere objective thought. When either the political or the scientific 
discourse announces itself as the voice of reason, it is playing God, and should 
be spanked and stood in the corner. The essential gesture of the father tongue 
is not reasoning but distancing-making a gap, a space, between the subject or 
self and the object or other. Enormous energy is generated by that rending, that 
forcing of a gap between Man and World. So the continuous growth of technology 
and science fuels itself; the Industrial Revolution began with splitting the 
world-atom, and still by breaking the continuum into unequal parts we keep the 
imbalance from which our society draws the power that enables it to dominate 
every other culture, so that everywhere now everybody speaks the same language 
in laboratories and government buildings and head-quarters and offices of 
business, and those who don't know it or won't speak it are silent, or silenced. 
or unheard. 
 You came here to college to learn the language of power - to be empowered. 
 If you want to succeed in business, government, law, engineering, science, education, 
 the media, if you want to succeed, you have to be fluent in the language in 
 which "success" is a meaningful word. 
 White man speak with forked tongue; White man speak dichotomy. His language 
expresses the values of the split world, valuing the positive and devaluing the 
negative in each redivision: subject/object, self/other, mind/body, 
dominant/submissive, active/passive, Man/Nature, man/woman, and so on. The 
father tongue is spoken from above. It goes one way. No answer is expected, or 
heard. 
 In our Constitution and the works of law, philosophy, social thought, and 
science, in its everyday uses in the service of justice and clarity, what I call 
the father tongue is immensely noble and indispensably useful. When it claims a 
privileged relationship to reality, it becomes dangerous and potentially 
destructive. It describes with exquisite accuracy the continuing destruction of 
the planet's ecosystem by its speakers. This word from its vocabulary, 
"ecosystem," is a word unnecessary except in a discourse that excludes its 
speakers from the ecosystem in a subject/object dichotomy of terminal 
irresponsibility. 
 The language of the fathers, of Man Ascending, Man the Conqueror, Civilized 
Man, is not your native tongue. It isn't anybody's native tongue. You didn't 
even hear the father tongue your first few years, except on the radio or TV, and 
then you didn't listen, and neither did your little brother, because it was some 
old politician with hairs in his nose yammering. And you and your brother had 
better things to do. You had another kind of power to learn. You were learning 
your mother tongue. 
 Using the father tongue, I can speak of the mother tongue only, inevitably, 
 to distance it -- to exclude it. It is the other, inferior. It is primitive: 
 inaccurate, unclear, coarse, limited, trivial, banal. It's repetitive, the same 
 over and over, like the work called women's work; earthbound, housebound. It's 
 vulgar, the vulgar tongue, common, common speech, colloquial, low, ordinary, 
 plebeian, like the work ordinary people do, the lives common people live. The 
 mother tongue, spoken or written, expects an answer. It is conversation, a word 
 the root of which means "turning together." The mother tongue is language not 
 as mere communication but as relation, relationship. It connects. It goes two 
 ways, many ways, an exchange, a network. Its power is not in dividing but in 
 binding, not in distancing but in uniting. It is written, but not by scribes 
 and secretaries for posterity: it flies from the mouth on the breath that is 
 our life and is gone, like the outbreath, utterly gone and yet returning, repeated, 
 the breath the same again always, everywhere, and we all know it by heart. 
 John have you got your umbrella I think it's going to rain. Can you come play 
 with me? If I told you once I told you a hundred times. Things here just aren't 
 the same without Mother, I will now sign your affectionate brother James. Oh 
 what am I going to do? So I said to her I said if he thinks she's going to stand 
 for that but them there's his arthritis poor thing and no work. I love you. 
 I hate you. I hate liver. Joan dear did you feed the sheep, don't just stand 
 around mooning. Tell me what they said, tell me what you did. Oh how my feet 
 do hurt. My heart is breaking. Touch me here, touch me again. Once bit twice 
 shy. You look like what the cat dragged in. What a beautiful night. Good morning, 
 hello, goodbye, have a nice day, thanks. God damn you to hell you lying cheat. 
 Pass the soy sauce please. Oh shit. Is it grandma's own sweet pretty dear? What 
 am I going to tell her? There there don't cry. Go to sleep now, go to sleep....Don't 
 go to sleep! 
 It is a language always on the verge of silence and often on the verge of 
song. It is the language stories are told in. It is the language spoken by all 
children and most women, and so I call it the mother tongue, for we learn it 
from our mothers, and speak it to our kids. I'm trying to use it here in public 
where it isn't appropriate, not suited to the occasion, but I want to speak it 
to you because we are women and I can't say what I want to say about women in 
the language of capital M Man. If I try to be objective I will say, "This is 
higher and that is lower," I'll make a commencement speech about being 
successful in the battle of life, I'll lie to you; and I don't want to.
 Early this spring I met a musician, the composer Pauline 
 Oliveros , a beautiful woman like a grey rock in a streambed; and to a group 
 of us, women, who were beginning to quarrel over theories in abstract, objective 
 language - and I with my splendid Eastern-women's-college training in the father 
 tongue was in the thick of the fight and going for the kill - to us, Pauline, 
 who is sparing with words, said after clearing her throat, "Offer your experience 
 as your truth." There was a short silence. When we started talking again, we 
 didn't talk objectively, and we didn't fight. We went back to feeling our way 
 into ideas, using the whole intellect not half of it, talking with one another, 
 which involves listening. We tried to offer our experience to one another. Not 
 claiming something: offering something. 
 How, after all, can one experience deny, negate, disprove, another experience? 
 Even if I've had a lot more of it, your experience is your truth. How can one 
 being prove another being wrong? Even if you're a lot younger and smarter than 
 me, my being is my truth. I can offer it; you don't have to take it. People 
 can't contradict each other, only words can: words separated from experience 
 for use as weapons, words that make the wound, the split between subject and 
 object, exposing and exploiting the object but disguising and defending the 
 subject. 
 People crave objectivity because to be subjective is to be embodied, to be a 
body, vulnerable, violable. Men especially aren't used to that; they're trained 
not to offer but to attack. It's often easier for women to trust one another, to 
try to speak our experience in our own language, the language we talk to each 
other in, the mother tongue; so we empower each other.
 But you and I have learned to use the mother tongue only at home or safe 
among friends, and many men learn not to speak it at all. They're taught that 
there's no safe place for them. From adolescence on, they talk a kind of 
degraded version of the father tongue with each other - sports scores, job 
technicalities, sex technicalities, and TV politics. At home, to women and 
children talking the mother tongue, they respond with a grunt and turn on the 
ball game. They have let themselves be silenced and dimly they know it, and so 
resent speakers of the mother tongue; women babble, gabble all the time.... 
Can't listen to that stuff.
 Our schools and colleges, institutions of the patriarchy, generally teach us 
to listen to people in power, men or women speaking the father tongue; and so 
they teach us not to listen to the mother tongue, to what the powerless say, 
poor men, women, children: not to hear that as valid discourse.
 I am trying to unlearn these lessons, along with other lessons I was taught 
 by my society, particularly lessons concerning the minds, work, works, and being 
 of women. I am a slow unlearner. But I love my unteachers - the feminist thinkers 
 and writers and talkers and poets and artists and singers and critics and friends, 
 from Wollstonecraft and Woolf through the furies and glories of the seventies 
 and eighties - I celebrate here and now the women who for two centuries have 
 worked for our freedom, the unteachers, the unmasters, the unconquerors, the 
 unwarriors, women who have at risk and at high cost offered their experience 
 as truth. "Let us NOT praise famous women!" Virginia Woolf scribbled in a margin 
 when she was writing Three 
 Guineas , and she's right, but still I have to praise these women and 
 thank them for setting me free in my old age to learn my own language. 
 The third language, my native tongue, which I will never know though I've spent 
 my life learning it: I'll say some words now in this language. First a name, 
 just a person's name, you've heard it before. Sojourner 
 Truth . That name is a language in itself. But Sojourner Truth spoke the 
 unlearned language; about a hundred years ago, talking it in a public place, 
 she said, "I have been forty years a slave and forty years free and would be 
 here forty years more to have equal rights for all." Along at the end of her 
 talk she said, "I wanted to tell you a mite about Woman's Rights, and so I came 
 out and said so. I am sittin' among you to watch; and every one and awhile I 
 will come out and tell you what time of night it is." She said, "Now I will 
 do a little singing. I have not heard any singing since I came here." 1 
 Singing is one of the names of the language we never learn, and here for Sojourner 
 Truth is a little singing. It was written by Joy 
 Harjo of the Creek people and is called "The Blanket Around Her." 2 
 maybe it is her birth which she holds close to herself or her 
death which is just as inseparable and the white wind that encircles 
her is a part just as the blue sky hanging in turquoise from her 
neck 
 oh woman remember who you are woman it is the whole earth 
So what am I talking about with this "unlearned language" - poetry, literature? 
Yes, but it can be speeches and science, any use of language when it is spoken, 
written, read, heard as art, the way dancing is the body moving as art. In Sojourner 
Truth's words you hear the coming together, the marriage of the public discourse 
and the private experience, making a power, a beautiful thing, the true discourse 
of reason. This is a wedding and welding back together of the alienated consciousness 
that I've been calling the father tongue and the undifferentiated engagement that 
I've been calling the mother tongue. This is their baby, this baby talk, the language 
you can spend your life trying to learn. 
 We learn this tongue first, like the mother tongue, just by hearing it or reading 
 it; and even in our overcrowded, underfunded public high schools they still 
 teach A Tale of Two Cities and Uncle Tom's Cabin ; and in college 
 you can take four solid years of literature, and even creative writing courses. 
 But. It is all taught as if it were a dialect of the father tongue. 
 Literature takes shape and life in the body, in the womb of the mother 
tongue: always: and the Fathers of Culture get anxious about paternity. They 
start talking about legitimacy. They steal the baby. They ensure by every means 
that the artist, the writer, is male. This involves intellectual abortion by 
centuries of women artists, infanticide of works by women writers, and a whole 
medical corps of sterilizing critics working to purify the Canon, to reduce the 
subject matter and style of literature to something Ernest Hemingway could have 
understood.
 But this is our native tongue, this is our language they're stealing: we can 
 read it and we can write it, and what we bring to it is what it needs, the woman's 
 tongue, that earth and savor, that relatedness, which speaks dark in the mother 
 tongue but clear as sunlight in women's poetry, and in our novels and stories, 
 our letters, our journals, our speeches. If Sojourner Truth, forty years a slave, 
 knew she had the right to speak that speech, how about you? Will you let yourself 
 be silenced? Will you listen to what men tell you, or will you listen to what 
 women are saying? I say the Canon has been spiked, and while the Eliots speak 
 only to the Lowells and the Lowells speak only to God, Denise 
 Levertov comes stepping westward quietly, speaking to us. 3 
 There is no savor more sweet, more salt 
than to be glad to be what, woman, 
and who, myself, I am, a shadow 
that grows longer as the sun moves, drawn out 
on a thread of wonder. If I bear burdens 
they begin to be remembered as gifts, goods, a basket 
of bread that hurts my shoulders but closes me 
in fragrance. I can eat as I go. 
As I've been using the word "truth" in the sense of "trying hard not to lie," 
so I use the words "literature," "art," in the sense of "living well, living with 
skill, grace, energy" - like carrying a basket of bread and smelling it and eating 
as you go. I don't mean only certain special products made by specially gifted 
people living in specially privileged garrets, studios, and ivory towers - "High" 
Art; I mean also all the low arts, the ones men don't want. For instance, the 
art of making order where people live. In our culture this activity is not considered 
an art, it is not even considered work. "Do you work?" - and she, having stopped 
mopping the kitchen and picked up the baby to come answer the door, says, "No, 
I don't work. People who make order where people live are by doing so stigmatized 
as unfit for "higher" pursuits; so women mostly do it, and among women, poor, 
uneducated, or old women more often than rich, educated, and young ones. Even 
so, many people want very much to keep house but can't, because they're poor and 
haven't got a house to keep, or the time and money it takes, or even the experience 
of ever having seen a decent house, a clean room, except on TV. Most men are prevented 
from housework by intense cultural bias; many women actually hire another woman 
to do it for them because they're scared of getting trapped in it, ending up like 
the woman they hire, or like that woman we all know who's been pushed so far over 
by cultural bias that she can't stand up, and crawls around the house scrubbing 
and waxing and spraying germ killer on the kids. But even on her kneebones, where 
you and I will never join her, even she has been practicing as best she knows 
how a great, ancient, complex, and necessary art. That our society devalues it 
is evidence of the barbarity, the aesthetic and ethical bankruptcy, of our society. 
 As housekeeping is an art, so is cooking and all it involves - it involves, 
 after all, agriculture, hunting, herding.... So is the making of clothing and 
 all it involves.... And so on; you see how I want to revalue the word "art" 
 so that when I come back as I do now to talking about words it is in the context 
 of the great arts of living, of the woman carrying the basket of bread, bearing 
 gifts, goods. Art not as some ejaculative act of ego but as a way, a skillful 
 and powerful way of being in the world. I come back to words because words are 
 my way of being in the world. I come back to words because words are my way 
 of being in the world, but meaning by language as art a matter infinitely larger 
 than the so-called High forms. Here is a poem that tries to translate six words 
 by Hélène 
 Cixous , who wrote The Laugh of the Medusa ; she said, "Je suis là 
 où ça parle," and I squeezed those six words like a lovely lemon 
 and got out all the juice I could, plus a drop of Oregon vodka. 
 I'm there where it's talking Where that speaks I am in that talking 
place Where that says my being is Where my being there is 
speaking I am And so laughing in a stone ear 
 The stone ear that won't listen, won't hear us, and blames us for its being 
 stone.... Women can babble and chatter like monkeys in the wilderness, but the 
 farms and orchards and gardens of language, the wheatfields of art - men have 
 claimed these, fenced them off: No Trespassing, it's a man's world, they say. 
 And I say, 
 oh woman remember who you are woman it is the whole earth 
We are told, in words and not in words, we are told by their deafness, by their 
stone ears, that our experience, the life experience of women, is not valuable 
to men - therefore not valuable to society, to humanity. We are valued by men 
only as an element of their experience, as things experienced; anything we may 
say, anything we may do, is recognized only if said or done in their service. 
 One thing we incontestably do is have babies. So we have babies as the male 
priests, lawmakers, and doctors tell us to have them, when and where to have 
them, how often, and how to have them; so that is all under control. But we are 
not to talk about having babies, because that is not part of the experience of 
men and so nothing to do with reality, with civilization, and no concern of art. 
- A rending scream in another room. And Prince Audrey comes in and sees his poor 
little wife dead bearing his son - Or Levin goes out into his fields and thanks 
his God for the birth of his son - And we know how Prince Audrey feels and how 
Levin feels and even how God feels, but we don't know what happened. Something 
happened, something was done, which we know nothing about. But what was it? Even 
in novels by women we are only just beginning to find out what it is that 
happens in the other room - what women do.
 Freud famously said, "What we shall never know is what a woman wants." Having 
paused thoughtfully over the syntax of that sentence, in which WE are the plural 
but "a woman" apparently has no plural, no individuality - as we might read that 
a cow must be milked twice a day or a gerbil is a nice pet - WE might go on then 
to consider whether WE know anything about, whether WE have ever noticed, 
whether WE have ever asked a woman what she does - what women do.
 Many anthropologists, some historians, and others have indeed been asking one 
another this question for some years now, with pale and affrighted faces - and 
they are beginning also to answer it. More power to them. The social sciences 
show us that speakers of the father tongue are capable of understanding and 
discussing the doings of the mothers, if they will admit the validity of the 
mother tongue and listen to what women say.
 But in society as a whole the patriarchal mythology of what "a woman" does 
persists almost unexamined, and shapes the lives of women. "What are you going 
to do when you get out of school?" "Oh, well, just like any other woman, I guess 
I want a home and family" - and that's fine, but what is this home and family 
just like other women's? Dad at work, mom home, two kids eating apple pie? This 
family, which our media and now our government declare to be normal and impose 
as normative, this nuclear family now accounts for seven percent of the 
arrangements women live in in America. Ninety-three percent of women don't live 
that way. They don't do that. Many wouldn't if you gave it to them with bells 
on. Those who want that, who believe it's their one true destiny - what's their 
chance of achieving it? They're on the road to Heartbreak House. But the only 
alternative offered by the patriarchal mythology is that of the Failed Woman - 
the old maid, the barren woman, the castrating bitch, the frigid wife, the 
lezzie, the libber, the Unfeminine, so beloved of misogynists both male and 
female.
 Now indeed there are women who want to be female men; their role model is 
Margaret Thatcher, and they're ready to dress for success, carry designer 
briefcases, kill for promotion, and drink the Right Scotch. They want to buy 
into the man's world, whatever the cost. And if that's true desire, not just 
compulsion born of fear, O.K.; if you can't lick 'em join 'em. My problem with 
that is that I can't see it as a good life even for men, who invented it and 
make all the rules. There's power in it, but not the kind of power I respect, 
not the kind of power that sets anybody free. I hate to see an intelligent woman 
voluntarily double herself up to get under the bottom line. Talk about crawling! 
And when she talks, what can she talk but father tongue? If she's the mouthpiece 
for the man's world, what has she got to say for herself?
 Some women manage it - they may collude, but they don't sell out as women; 
and we know that when they speak for those who, in the man's world, are the 
others: women, children, the poor.... But it is dangerous to put on Daddy's 
clothes, though not, perhaps, as dangerous as it is to sit on Daddy's knees.
 There's no way you can offer your experience as your truth if you deny your 
experience, if you try to be a mythical creature, the dummy woman who sits there 
on Big Daddy's lap. Whose voice will come out of her prettily hinged jaw? Who is 
it says yes all the time? Oh yes, yes, I will. Oh I don't know, you decide. Oh I 
can't do that. Yes hit me, yes rape me, yes save me, oh yes. That is how A Woman 
talks, the one in What-we-shall-never-know-is-what-A-Woman-wants.
 A Woman's place, need I say, is in the home, plus at her volunteer work or 
the job where she's glad to get sixty cents for doing what men get paid a dollar 
for but that's because she's always on pregnancy leave but childcare? No! A 
Woman is home caring for her children! even if she can't. Trapped in this 
well-built trap, A Woman blames her mother for luring her into it, while 
ensuring that her own daughter never gets out; she recoils from the idea of 
sisterhood and doesn't believe women have friends, because it probably means 
something unnatural, and anyhow, A Woman is afraid of women. She's a male 
construct, and she's afraid women will deconstruct her. She's afraid of 
everything, because she can't change. Thighs forever thin and shining hair and 
shining teeth and she's my Mom, too, all seven percent of her. And she never 
grows old.
 There are old women - little old ladies, as people always say; little bits, 
fragments of the great dummy statue goddess A Woman. Nobody hears if old women 
say yes or no, nobody pays them sixty cents for anything. Old men run things. 
Old men run the show, press the buttons, make the wars, make the money. In the 
man's world, the old man's world, the young men run and run and run until they 
drop, and some of the young women run with them. But old women live in the 
cracks, between the walls, like roaches, like mice, a rustling sound, a 
squeaking. Better lock up the cheese, boys. It's terrible, you turn up a corner 
of civilization and there are all these old women running around on the wrong 
side-
 I say to you, you know, you're going to get old. And you can't hear me. I 
squeak between the walls. I've walked through the mirror and am on the other 
side, where things are all backwards. You may look with a good will and a 
generous heart, but you can't see anything in the mirror but your own face; and 
I, looking from the dark side and seeing your beautiful young faces, see that 
that's how it should be. 
 But when you look at yourself in the mirror, I hope you see yourself. Not one 
of the myths. Not a failed man - a person who can never succeed because success 
is basically defined as being male - and not a failed goddess, a person 
desperately trying to hide herself in the dummy Woman, the image of men's 
desires and fears. I hope you look away from those myths and into your own eyes, 
and see your own strength. You're going to need it. I hope you don't try to take 
your strength from men, or from a man. Secondhand experience breaks down a block 
from the car lot. I hope you'll take and make your own soul; that you'll feel 
your life for yourself pain by pain and joy by joy; that you'll feed your life, 
eat, "eat as you go" - you who nourish, be nourished! If being a cog in the 
machine or a puppet manipulated by others isn't what you want, you can find out 
what you want, your needs, desires, truths, powers, by accepting your own 
experience as a woman, as this woman, this body, this person, your hungry self. 
On the maps drawn by men there is an immense white area, terra incognita, where 
most women live. That country is all yours to explore, to inhabit, to describe.
 But none of us lives there alone. Being human isn't something people can 
bring off alone; we need other people in order to be people. We need one 
another.
 If a woman sees other women as Medusa, fears them, turns a stone ear to them, 
these days, all her hair may begin to stand up on end hissing, Listen, listen, 
listen! Listen to other women, your sisters, your mothers, your grandmothers - 
if you don't hear them how will you ever understand what your daughter says to 
you?
 And the men who can talk, converse with you, not trying to talk through the 
dummy Yes-Woman, the men who can accept your experience as valid - when you find 
such a man love him, honor him! But don't obey him. I don't think we have any 
right to obedience. I think we have a responsibility to freedom.
 And especially to freedom of speech. Obedience is silent. It does not answer. 
 It is contained. Here is a disobedient woman speaking, Wendy 
 Rose of the Hopi and Miwok people, saying in a poem called "The Parts of 
 a Poet," 4 
 parts of me are pinned to earth, parts of me undermine song, 
parts of me spread on the water, parts of me form a rainbow bridge, 
parts of me follow the sandfish, parts of me are a woman who 
judges. 
Now this is what I want: I want to hear your judgments. I am sick of the silence 
of women. I want to hear you speaking all the languages, offering your experience 
as your truth, as human truth, talking about working, about making, about unmaking, 
about eating, about cooking, about feeding, about taking in seed and giving out 
life, about killing, about feeling, about thinking; about what women do; about 
what men do; about war, about peace; about who presses the buttons and what buttons 
get pressed and whether pressing buttons is in the long run a fit occupation for 
human beings. There's a lot of things I want to hear you talk about. 
 This is what I don't want: I don't want what men have. I'm glad to let them 
do their work and talk their talk. But I do not want and will not have them 
saying or thinking or telling us that theirs is the only fit work or speech for 
human beings. Let them not take our work, our words, from us. If they can, if 
they will, let them work with us and talk with us. We can all talk mother 
tongue, we can all talk father tongue, and together we can try to hear and speak 
that language which may be our truest way of being in the world, we who speak 
for a world that has no words but ours. I know that many men and even women are 
afraid and angry when women do speak, because in this barbaric society, when 
women speak truly they speak subversively - they can't help it: if you're 
underneath, if you're kept down, you break out, you subvert. We are volcanoes. 
When we women offer our experience as our truth, as human truth, all the maps 
change. There are new mountains.
 That's what I want - to hear you erupting. You young Mount St. Helenses who 
don't know the power in you - I want to hear you. I want to listen to you 
talking to each other and to us all: whether you're writing an article or a poem 
or a letter or teaching a class or talking with friends or reading a novel or 
making a speech or proposing a law or giving a judgment or singing the baby to 
sleep or discussing the fate of nations, I want to hear you. Speak with a 
woman's tongue. Come out and tell us what time of night it is! Don't let us sink 
back into silence. If we don't tell our truth, who will? Who'll speak for my 
children, and yours?
 So I end with the end of a poem by Linda 
 Hogan of the Chickasaw people, called "The Women Speaking." 5 
 Daughters, the women are speaking 
 They arrive 
 over the wise distances 
 on perfect feet. 
 Daughters, I love you. 
 © 1986 by Ursula Le Guin. All Rights Reserved. 
 Endnotes 
 1 Sojourner 
 Truth , in The Norton Anthology of Literature by Women, ed. Sandra 
 M. Gilbert and Susan Garber (New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 1985), pp. 255-56. 
 2 Joy Harjo. "The Blanket Around Her," in That's What She 
 Said: Contemporary Poetry and Fiction by Native American Women, ed. Rayna 
 Green (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1984), p. 127. 
 3 Denise Levertov, "Stepping Westward," in Norton Anthology, 
 p. 1951. 
 4 Wendy Rose, "The Parts of a Poet," in That's What She Said, 
 p. 204. 
 5 Linda Hogan, "The Women Speaking," in ibid., p. 172. 
 Related Resources on Serendip 
 For further reading on Serendip, you will also find a range of explorations 
 of the varieties of languages we use to communicate with one another: 
 The Two Cultures: 
 A Conversation 
 Language: 
 A Conversation 
 Mary Wilson: Housekeeper/Poet/Story Writer 
 Theorizing 
 Interdisciplinarity: Metaphor and Metonymy, Synecdoche and Surprise 
 Story-Telling in (At Least) Three Dimensions: An Exploration of Teaching Reading, Writing, and Beyond 
 With thanks to Gretchen Hitt (BMC '03) and Ann Dixon (BMC '83) for preparing 
 the document for online viewing. 
| Ursula K. Le Guin Forum 
| Science in Culture 
| Serendip Home |
 Send us your comments at Serendip 
 © by Serendip 1994-
 - Last Modified: 
Wednesday, 02-May-2018 10:51:45 CDT 
