
 George R.R. Martin: An American Tolkien for a Jaded Age - TIME 
 Home 
 TIME Magazine 
 Photos 
 Videos 
 Specials 
 Subscribe 
 Mobile Apps 
 Newsletters 
 RSS 
 @TIME 
 NewsFeed 
 U.S. 
 Politics 
 World 
 Business 
 Money 
 Tech 
 Health 
 Science 
 Entertainment 
 SEARCH TIME.COM 
 Full Archive
 Covers
 Videos
 Main 
 TV 
 Summer Preview 
 Cartoons of the Week 
 People 
 All-TIME 100 Toys 
 Videos 
 George R.R. Martin's Dance with Dragons : A Masterpiece Worthy of Tolkien
 By
 Lev Grossman 
 Thursday, July 07, 2011 
 Comment 
 Print 
 Email 
 Reprints 
 share
 LinkedIn 
 StumbleUpon 
 Reddit 
 Digg 
 Del.i.cious 
 Tweet 
 In 2005 I wrote a review of George R.R. Martin's novel A Feast for Crows in which I called him "the American Tolkien." The phrase has stuck to him, as it was meant to. I believed Martin was our age's and our country's answer to the master of epic fantasy. Now it's six years later, and I've read Martin's new novel, A Dance with Dragons , and I'm happy to report that I was totally right.
Martin has produced — is producing, since the series isn't over — the great fantasy epic of our era. It's an epic for a more profane, more jaded, more ambivalent age than the one Tolkien lived in. Tolkien was a veteran of the Somme, and The Lord of the Rings was partly written during World War II. (It was published in 1954.) Tolkien wrote at a time when it really seemed as if a war was on for the fate of civilization.
Now we're not even sure what civilization is. George R.R. Martin (his R.R. stands for Raymond Richard; Tolkien's stands for Ronald Reuel) was born in 1948. He didn't serve at the Somme, though he may have played through it once or twice in a video game. A Song of Ice and Fire — which is the rather florid title of Martin's series — is an epic for us, for the way we live now and the way we fantasize now.
 (See Part I of James Poniewozik's interview with George R.R. Martin.) 
Look at Martin's map. In Middle Earth there were two sides: the war was between good and evil, right and wrong. It was hobbits and elves and dwarves and men coming together to fight Sauron. Martin's books are set (largely) on the continent of Westeros, which has been shakily cobbled together into a nation known as the Seven Kingdoms. Not two: seven. Westeros is in chaos; it's a political jigsaw puzzle, and somebody just turned the table over, and everybody is on the floor scrabbling for pieces. It's impossible to know whom to root for. "Many good men have been bad kings," one character says, "and some bad men have been good kings." Not even God decides who is wrong or right. Each side has its own gods, and they'll back whoever prays to them.
 A Dance with Dragons is the fifth volume out of a planned seven, and in many ways it's the best. Martin was marking time a little bit in Feast for Crows , pushing his pawns up the board but leaving his big pieces alone. Now the camera has swung back to the main characters: Jon Snow and Daenerys Targaryen and Tyrion Lannister, the brilliant, black-witted dwarf whose family has had the firmest grip on power for much of the series, though that's not saying much.
Tyrion is another good example of what separates Tolkien and Martin. Tyrion isn't a hearty, ax-wielding, gold-mining member of a noble dwarven race. He's not Gimli. Tyrion is an actual dwarf, achondroplastic and stubby-limbed, a joke to passersby and an embarrassment to his family. (The rest of the Lannisters are stunted too, but on the inside.) Tyrion is on the run because at the end of A Storm of Swords he fatally shot his father Lord Tywin in the groin with a crossbow bolt as Tywin sat on the toilet. We catch up with Tyrion at the beginning of A Dance with Dragons crossing the Narrow Sea in a state of shock at his own actions.
 (See A Dance with Dragons in the 2011 Summer Entertainment Preview.) 
A long-expected meeting is approaching. Tyrion is vectoring toward the exiled Daenerys Targaryen, who has been isolated from most of the rest of the players in the series until now. As the daughter of Aerys Targaryen, the last (mostly) uncontested king of Westeros, Daenerys has one of the better claims to the throne. She's been running wild in the exotic lands to the east of Westeros in the company of three feral dragons, beasts not seen in that world for at least a century. She rules the city of Meereen. (She is guarded by, among others, Ser Barristan Selmy, an aging, immensely dignified knight of Westeros who wonders how duty has led him so far from home — and into such strange company. He and Tyrion are Martin's finest creations.) Two of the great narrative arcs of the series are bending toward each other, and when they meet, current will flow.
But this being Martin, there are a lot more than two arcs in play. Jon Snow is sitting uneasily astride the great Wall in the north; Theon Greyjoy is languishing in the sadistic hands of the Boltons; prim, stilted Stannis Baratheon — he's the Al Gore of Westeros — is pursuing his claim to the throne; Arya Stark is training as an assassin and plotting revenge; a dorky Dornish prince is trying to find and marry Daenerys. The soil of Westeros is rich in story the way some countries are rich in uranium. There is no such thing as a stock character or a cardboard village there: every person, every wood and stream and street corner has its own tale.
After five volumes Martin is, if anything, a better writer than when he started. If you're watching A Game of Thrones on HBO, you're forgoing the great pleasure of Martin's deft prose. Like Wagner, he gives each of his characters leitmotifs that recur and recur in their streams of thought. "You know nothing, Jon Snow"; Daenerys' theme is "If I look back I am lost"; Tyrion is haunted by his father's last words, "Wherever whores go." These phrases are like dragons' eggs: the characters keep them close, in the hopes that one day, if they think them enough times, the words will hatch forth the wisdom they desperately need.
 (See Part II of James Poniewozik's interview with George R.R. Martin.) 
But the real power of Martin's work arises from his extraordinary skill as a plotter. A Dance with Dragons follows, by my count, 11 major story lines, as well as assorted minor ones, each with its own rhythm, written in its own voice, and each playing off all the others. Martin will never win a Pulitzer or a National Book Award, but his skill as a crafter of narrative exceeds that of almost any literary novelist writing today. Throughout the book I was reminded of Jennifer Egan's A Visit from the Goon Squad (which did win a Pulitzer), as well as Anthony Powell's (similarly floridly titled) A Dance to the Music of Time .
But even Powell can't twist a plot like Martin. A Dance with Dragons is a big book, topping out at 1,016 pages, but it turns on a dime. Reading a novel is a little like commanding a battle: you're always reconnoitering, trying to guess where the author will go next, what's a feint and where the action is really heading. I don't know when I have ever been as comprehensively and pleasurably outgeneraled as I am when I read Martin. He raises and raises the stakes, long past when any other writer would have walked away from the table, and just when you think he's done, he goes all in. There is, apparently, no piece he will not sacrifice, no character that you (and one suspects, he) love so much that he will not orchestrate that character's doom.
The complexity of Martin's design ensures that we experience the struggle for Westeros from all sides at once. It's as if he's trying to show us that every fight is both triumph and tragedy, depending on where you see it from, and everybody is both hero and villain at the same time. Or maybe not even that. "There are no heroes, only whores," says Theon. On the strength of A Dance with Dragons , it's hard to prove him wrong.
 See what the authors are reading in TIME's summer reading list. 
 See the All-TIME 100 novels. 
 Comment 
 Print 
 Email 
 Reprints 
 share
 LinkedIn 
 StumbleUpon 
 Reddit 
 Digg 
 Del.i.cious 
 Most Popular » 
 Full List » 
 MOST READ 
 MOST EMAILED 
 Driven off the Road by M.B.A.s 
 Disaster Highlights Plight of Japanese Orphans 
 The Boy Who Lived Forever 
 Want to Make More than a Banker? Become a Farmer! 
 Gaddafi's New Forces: The Teenagers and Women Keeping Libya's Rebels from Taking Tripoli 
 Time to Ax Public Programs That Don't Yield Results 
 The Great Scientology Implosion: Author Details Church on the Decline 
 What U.S. Economic Recovery? Five Destructive Myths 
 Teen Moms Are Taking over Reality TV. Is That a Good Thing? 
 George R.R. Martin's Dance with Dragons : A Masterpiece Worthy of Tolkien 
 Driven off the Road by M.B.A.s 
 Want to Make More than a Banker? Become a Farmer! 
 The Boy Who Lived Forever 
 Time to Ax Public Programs That Don't Yield Results 
 The End of the Line 
 What U.S. Economic Recovery? Five Destructive Myths 
 Disaster Highlights Plight of Japanese Orphans 
 How Brazil Became the Un-China 
 South Sudan: A Hidden Tour of Juba, the Newest World Capital 
 George R.R. Martin's Dance with Dragons : A Masterpiece Worthy of Tolkien 
 More News from Our Partners
 CNN 
 Daniel Radcliffe cried like a baby on set 
 Look who's (finally) having a moment 
 George Michael thrilled newspaper is closing 
 Rotten Tomato 
 Weekly Ketchup: Angry Birds Movie in the Works 
 Marvel Movie Madness! Part 27: Men in Black II 
 Critics Consensus: Horrible Bosses is Certified Fresh 
 Moviefone 
 'Transformers' Are Still the Boss: Box Office Report July 8-10 
 Oprah Hosting the Oscars? Just a Rumor, Says the Academy 
 How Would John Carpenter's Vampire Hunters Fare vs. 'Twilight' Vampires? 
 Time.com on Digg
 Upcoming 
 Popular Today 
 POWERED BY digg
 Newsfeed
 Will and Kate Head from Red Carpet to Skid Row 
 Lightning Strike Rattles N.J. Senate President on Live TV 
 Embattled 'News of the World' Publishes Final Issue 
 More on TIME.com 
 Pack Your (Book) Bag 
 Top 10 Worst Fictional Camp Counselors 
 The Bikini Turns 65: Pop Culture's 10 Most Memorable Two-Pieces 
 Techland
 3G Rumored for Next iPod Touch 
 Paycheck Friday! Purchasing Suggestions for Your Perusal 
 Is Cyberwar Real or Just Hype? 
 Moneyland
 Even in the Struggling U.S. Economy, It’s Still Only Money 
 60 Money Tips: Cheap Dates She’ll Love, Spending Sins, Smart Tips for Saving at the Mall 
 Woman Faces Jail Time for Planting Organic Vegetable Garden 
 Top Stories on TIME.com
 No Grand Bargain: Boehner Walks Away From Deficit Deal 
 Jubilation in Juba: What Does Freedom Mean for South Sudan 
 Harry Potter: The Boy Who Lived Forever 
 Quotes of the Day » 
 " Juries aren't supposed to make decisions based on public-opinion polls. "
 BELVIN PERRY, the judge for the Casey Anthony criminal case, on the jury's unpopular decision to acquit Anthony of charges that she killed her daughter; Perry has expressed concern for the safety of jurors and postponed a decision on whether to release their names
 More Quotes » 
 For use in rail of Articles page or Section Fronts pages. Duplicate and change name as necesssary to distinguish. 
 Stay Connected with TIME.com
 Subscribe to 
RSS Feeds 
 Sign Up for 
Newsletters 
 Get the TIME 
Magazine iPad Edition 
 Read TIME Mobile 
on your Phone 
 Become a 
Fan of TIME 
 Get TIME 
Twitter Updates 
 NewsFeed 
 U.S. 
 Politics 
 World 
 Business 
 Money 
 Health 
 Science 
 Entertainment 
 Photos 
 Videos 
 Specials 
 Magazine 
 © 2011 Time Inc. All rights reserved 
 Privacy Policy 
 RSS 
 Newsletter 
 Mobile 
 TIME For Kids 
 LIFE.com 
 Subscribe 
 Contact Us 
 Terms of Use 
 Media Kit 
 Reprints & Permissions
 Help 
 Site Map 
 TIME 
 Our partners
 CNN 
 CNN MONEY 
 LIFE 
 