Endless Forms Most Similar:
The Dearth of the Author in AI-Supported Art
MAX KREMINSKI, Santa Clara University, USA and Midjourney, USA
We characterize and discuss the “dearth of the author”: a problem that emerges when AI-based creativity
support tools (CSTs) allow their users to produce highly detailed output artifacts—such as lengthy written
stories, or high-resolution pieces of visual art—from very small amounts of input (e.g., brief textual prompts).
When small amounts of user input are extrapolated by a CST into a highly detailed output, the CST itself has
to make many creative decisions that would otherwise fall to the user, disrupting the usual close relationship
between input intentionality and output detail in the creative process and yielding output artifacts that contain
much more of the tool’s than the user’s creative signature. Though users of such tools are often able to
inject more intention into the output through the adoption of more sophisticated creative practices, these
high-intentionality practices tend to be more effortful than the default modes of use of AI-based CSTs, and the
use of such practices is not always immediately apparent in the output artifacts. We analyze the dearth of the
author from an information-theoretic perspective, focusing on the informational ratio between intent and
meaning in creative artifacts; examine implications of the dearth of the author, including homogenization of
creative outputs and rhetorical confusion around the “soulfulness” or “soullessness” of art produced with AI
assistance; and suggest strategies for mitigating the dearth of the author in future AI-based CSTs.
CCS Concepts: • Applied computing→ Arts and humanities.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: creativity support tools, computational creativity, human-computer
interaction, generative AI
1 INTRODUCTION
Research in the field of creativity support tools (CSTs) [Chung et al. 2021; Frich et al. 2019; Shneider-
man 2007] aims to discover how computation can best be leveraged to support human creativity.
Recent progress in generative artificial intelligence has led to the rapid introduction of a new wave
of AI-based CSTs, including both traditional user-centered tools and mixed-initiative co-creative
systems [Deterding et al. 2017; Liapis et al. 2016] that proactively intervene in the creative process.
Existing AI-based CSTs target creative domains ranging from visual art [Chang et al. 2023] and
writing [Lee et al. 2024] to music [Louie et al. 2022] and videogame design [Anjum et al. 2024],
and tools targeting additional creative tasks and domains are now being introduced on a regular
basis. Many of these tools are based on large pretrained generative models, particularly transformer
language models [Vaswani et al. 2017] and diffusion image models [Ho et al. 2020]; the most widely
deployed user interfaces for these models ask the user to supply a short textual prompt, which is
then used to guide the generation of one or more new artifacts.
Although AI-based CSTs1, especially those driven by prompting, have rapidly become very
popular, some researchers and tool designers have begun to question some aspects of how these
tools aim to support creativity. In particular, many researchers have expressed concerns [Buschek
et al. 2021; Epstein et al . 2023; Hancock et al . 2020; Levent and Shroff 2023] about potential
homogenization effects [Anderson et al. 2024] that these tools may exert on the creative output of
their users, and a range of studies have found some degree of evidence for increased homogeneity
of human creative output stemming from the use of AI-based CSTs in the creative process [Arnold
et al. 2020; Doshi and Hauser 2023; Jakesch et al . 2023; Padmakumar and He 2023]. Given that
1Note that we do not aim to characterize generative AI models as CSTs in a universal sense, only when the outputs of
these models are incorporated into human practices—such as art and design—that are traditionally deemed “creative”.
This characterization is broadly in line with the “normative ground” established by popular interfaces to these models [Li
et al. 2023], which are often marketed as supporting user creativity: see, e.g., OpenAI’s characterization of DALL·E 2 as
“empower[ing] people to express themselves creatively” [OpenAI 2022].
1
Max Kreminski
Fig. 1. An illustration of how great an effect a more detailed prompt can have on the informational content
of a large pretrained generative model’s output. On the left are four example outputs from a diffusion image
model prompted with the phrase “cat pirate”, while on the right are three alternative, more precisely specified
takes on the cat pirate concept. The underspecified cat pirates on the left reflect almost exclusively the
generator’s learned stereotypes of “a typical cat” and “a typical pirate”, and little information can be gleaned
from these images besides the concept of “a cat who is a pirate”. The slightly more constrained cat pirates on
the right are much more obviously evocative of distinctive settings and stories.
definitions of creativity often include originality [Torrance 1966] or novelty [Boden 2004] as one of
creativity’s key facets, it has become important to understand the mechanism by which AI-based
CSTs can sometimes apparently undermine the originality of their users—and how these threats to
originality can be mitigated or reversed.
In this article, we characterize and discuss the effects of AI-based CSTs on originality via an
examination of the “dearth of the author”: a problem that emerges when CSTs allow their users to
produce highly detailed output artifacts—such as lengthy written stories, or high-resolution pieces
of visual art—from very small amounts of input (e.g., brief textual prompts) [Kreminski 2024b].
When small amounts of user input are extrapolated by a CST into a highly detailed output, the
CST itself has to make many creative decisions that would otherwise fall to the user, disrupting the
usual close relationship between input intentionality and output detail in the creative process and
yielding output artifacts that contain much more of the tool’s than the user’s creative signature. This
phenomenon, we argue, is best understood via an information-theoretic perspective, which can also
be used to relate the dearth of the author to well-known difficulties with classical generative methods.
The information-theoretic perspective further allows us to suggest several distinct approaches to
the mitigation or reversal of the dearth—one of which in particular (“lensing the imagination”)
stands out as especially promising for its simultaneous ability to increase the output diversity of
AI-supported creative processes while also preserving or increasing user control.
It should be noted that scholarship in the humanities over the last several decades has done much
to complicate and broaden traditional views of authorship. In particular, Barthes’s original coinage
2
Endless Forms Most Similar: The Dearth of the Author in AI-Supported Art
of the “death of the author” [Barthes 1968] was meant to frame a rhetorical move away from the
centering of authorial intent in the interpretation of texts. This decentering of authorship has aligned
well with post-humanist attempts to characterize creativity as emergent or ecological [Harris and
Holman Jones 2022], as well as practices in generative art [Galanter 2016; Ugander and Epstein
2024], computational fabrication [Albaugh et al. 2020; Twigg-Smith et al. 2021], and computational
poetry [Kreminski 2024a] that lean into the aleatoric or beneficially unpredictable nature of creative
machines. Nevertheless, the expressive or communicative dimension of creative work remains
important to at least some creators and at least some audiences—and for these people, the dearth
of the author represents a weakness of the typical outputs of many modern human-operated
generative AI systems. The nature of this weakness is what we attempt to explain.
2 THE DEARTH OF THE AUTHOR
What’s the point of creating art? Sometimes we create to learn, or create to think, or create for
solitary enjoyment—but when the creative process results in an artifact that’s meant to be shared
with and interpreted by others, what is this artifactfor? In this article, we take the view that in most
cases, an artistic artifact is meant primarily to convey its author’sexpressive intent: to communicate
information, invoke feelings, or otherwise express to the audience a set of ideas and sentiments that
the creator intends to share. Indeed, this assumption forms the basis of theexpressive communication
framework [Louie et al. 2022] that has been used to evaluate AI-based CSTs in the past.
Although the word “intent” is sometimes used narrowly to mean an explicitly articulable intent
that is fully known to the artist, originates fully within the artist, and fully precedes the creation of
a particular artistic work, we use the term more broadly here: namely, to refer to the sometimes-
ambiguous and gradually evolving cloud of mental and emotional factors that lead an artist to
create a particular artifact and accept it as worthy of presentation to an audience. Among other
things, this cloud of factors includes the vague and inarticulable early-stage creative impulse
that Arieti refers to as the “endocept” [Arieti 1976]. In adopting this broad view of intent, we
attempt to establish a significant point of commonality between several different fields of creative
endeavor currently addressed by generative models (particularly creative writing and visual art,
the two most directly impacted fields at the time of this writing) while also acknowledging that
the human factors leading to expressive creation can be characterized very differently by different
artists and theorists. Even a broad view of intent cannot cover every possible perspective on
artistic motivation, and there is of course no guarantee that intent is successfully carried through
to the audience—some have famously gone so far as to argue that authorial intent is ultimately
irrelevant to the audience’s artistic experience—but we nevertheless hold that an understanding of
the communicative dimension of art is necessary for making sense of tool impacts on the socially
embedded facets of the creative process.
The creative process can thus be viewed as a process of decision-making by the author. Consider
writing: authors of fiction must decide on character names and personalities and appearances, on
details of setting and background, on the balance between action and introspection, on moment-to-
moment emotional tone; authors of argumentative essays must decide on the points they want
to argue, on the evidence they want to use in support of each point, on the order in which to
introduce this evidence; authors in general must decide on what words they want to use in what
places to get their ideas across. A piece of writing that contains fifteen hundred words can be
thought of as the result of at least fifteen hundred decisions: perhaps a bit fewer when some of
these words are “forced choices” that could not be exchanged for another due to rules of grammar,
but usually many more due to the need for decisions beyond simple word choices in composing
any useful or interesting piece. In fact, the very choice of writing medium, form, or language can
be taken as reflective of expressive intent, even as these choices condition what can be written
3
Max Kreminski
and how. Much as musicians choose instruments in part for their characteristic “voice” [Tanaka
2006], writers have been known to work with typewriters over computers to avoid easy revision of
their output [McDonell and Brinkley 2000] or write in a new language to distance themselves from
expectations [Shapiro 2016] as a means of deliberately conditioning their own writing.
Historically, an author could not compose a substantive piece of writing without making the vast
majority of these decisions directly.2 Thus the whole of every piece of writing could be taken as
reflecting its author’s intent: the relationship between the length of a written piece and the number
of decisions that its author had to make was relatively fixed, and an author could not lengthen a
piece of writing without deciding what specific words to add.
But we suddenly find that this is no longer the case. In particular, when authors use AI-based
CSTs to expand a small amount of input text (such as a one-sentence instruction) to a large amount
of output text (such as a complete written story or essay), they delegate many of the creative
decisions involved in producing the larger output to the CST—resulting in a piece of writing with
an unusually low ratio of human decision-making to output length. In other words, the expressive
intent of the author is underspecified relative to the amount of text that is generated, and the
resulting piece of writing is unusually sparse in terms of expressive intent per word.
We refer to this unusual situation as the dearth of the author : the naïvely AI-augmented
author is not absent or dead, but their intent is stretched so thinly over their writing that they
may feel barely present. In lieu of authorial intent, creative decisions are made by the CST to
which the author has delegated portions of the writing process; simple LLM-based CSTs like
ChatGPT make these decisions by approximating highly probable choices that a certain set of
raters might also score well [Ouyang et al. 2022], while other CSTs lean on knowledge encoded in
handcrafted rulesets [Kreminski et al. 2022a], in large human-constructed databases of common-
sense knowledge [Gero and Chilton 2019], or in more specialized corpuses of text [Mirowski
et al. 2023]. Across the full range of AI-based CSTs for writing [Lee et al . 2024], the greater the
discrepancy between the size of a minimum viable user input and the size of the output piece of
writing, the more the naïve user’s results tend to exhibit the dearth.
The same analysis applies just as well to other creative domains—including visual art, music,
and a growing number of others—in which AI-based CSTs can be used to produce large outputs
from comparably small user inputs. In visual art, for instance, the assumption of a one-to-one
relationship between marks made on the canvas and authorial decisions—already disrupted in
the 19th century and onward by the introduction of photography as an alternative to manual
mark-making techniques of image production [Sontag 1977]—has been further unsettled by the
widespread use of generative models to summon “paintings” that appear to consist of thousands
of brushstrokes by means of prompts containing only a handful of words. Moreover, although
AI-based CSTs based on large pretrained generative models have only emerged within the last few
years, the perceived homogeneity of computer-generated expressive artifacts substantially predates
the introduction of these models, suggesting that the dearth of the author may originate from
something more fundamental than the particularities of recently introduced technologies. To fully
characterize the dearth of the author, we argue that it is necessary to take an information-theoretic
view of the computational generation of expressive artifacts in general.
2Though some words might be drawn verbatim from quotations, and in rare cases some might be chosen via mechanistic,
aleatoric, or automatic writing processes, such as those adopted by the Oulipo movement [Montfort and Wardrip-Fruin
2003].
4
Endless Forms Most Similar: The Dearth of the Author in AI-Supported Art
3 INFORMATION AND OATMEAL
The joys and pains of computationally supported creative expression have been discovered and
rediscovered over the last several decades by many different communities of research and practice.
One of these communities—the procedural content generation (PCG) research community [Shaker
et al. 2016]—has a well-established name for the problem of perceived homogeneity in computer-
generated artifacts: the “10,000 bowls of oatmeal” problem [Compton 2016], often referred to simply
as the oatmeal problem. Suppose, the metaphor goes, we’ve created a computational generator that
outputs bowls of oatmeal. By minutely varying the position and orientation of individual oats,
we can trivially create an effectively infinite number of mathematically distinct bowls of oatmeal.
But to a human observer, these bowls will not appear to be meaningfully, perceptually distinct:
the human brain can quickly see through a vast number of minor, inconsequential variations to
recognize and dismiss the generator’s entire expressive range [Smith and Whitehead 2010] (the sum
total of its possible outputs, both realized and unrealized) as “just a lot of oatmeal”.
A central challenge for PCG research, then, is to somehow forestall, delay, or work around the
perceptual collapse [Kreminski 2023a] that stems from the audience’s recognition of a generator’s
fundamentally unchanging output patterns. In light of this challenge, PCG researchers and prac-
titioners have proposed a wide variety of experience design solutions to the limited perceptual
novelty of generated artifacts. Some researchers have called for a shift toward “orchard” or “forest”
presentations of generator outputs; in the orchard mode, the goal of generation is not to generate
individually distinctive-feeling artifacts, but to generate sets of artifacts that somehow aesthetically
resonate with one another, while in the forest mode, the goal is to generate a gestalt background
against which other sources of perceptual novelty (such as hand-crafted “landmarks”) can be juxta-
posed [Karth 2019]. Others have suggested presenting each audience member with only a single or
very small number of generated artifacts, instead of allowing them to continue requesting more
artifacts forever [Kreminski et al. 2018]. Still others have created experiences in which audience
members interactively search through a space of possible generated artifacts in a casually creative
manner [Compton and Mateas 2015; Petrovskaya et al. 2020], for instance by moving around within
a rule-based generator’s parameter space [Colton et al. 2018; Kreminski et al. 2020] or a data-driven
generator’s latent space [Epstein et al. 2020] to locate artifacts of interest and perhaps curate these
artifacts for presentation to others somewhere down the line.
All of these strategies operate by changing the presentation—what computational creativity
researchers would call the framing [Charnley et al. 2012; Cook et al. 2019]—of generated artifacts.
But what interventions might be possible at the generator level to increase the distinctiveness
of outputs? Suppose we attempt to expand the maximum possible output complexity𝐾∗(𝐺) of a
generator𝐺, allowing the generator to produce more complex artifacts. Rabii and Cook [Rabii and
Cook 2023] show that there exists a mathematical relationship between the size of the generator’s
possibility space,𝑙𝑜𝑔 2(#𝜋(𝐺)); the length of the generator’s source code,|𝐺|; and the Kolmogorov
complexity of the most complex artifact that𝐺 is able to produce,𝐾∗(𝐺). Kolmogorov complexity
refers to the length of the shortest program that is capable of producing a particular output—with
the intuition being that informationally simple outputs can be described very compactly, whereas
informationally complex outputs must be described in correspondingly more complex ways to
capture their intricacies in full. Especially complex outputs are often most compactly modeled by a
program that simply states a verbatim string to print: a trivial, inflexible “generator” that can only
produce one artifact in particular. Meanwhile, a compact generator that can produce a large number
of possible outputs through mere random combination of values may nevertheless lack sufficient
potential output complexity to yield artifacts that humans find perceptually interesting, especially
5
Max Kreminski
after they have already begun to detect the similarities between a number of other outputs drawn
from the same distribution.
This relationship helps to explain the origins of oatmeal, or perceptually similar artifacts in a
generator’s possibility space. A linear increase to𝐾∗(𝐺) that is not accompanied by any increase
to|𝐺| results in an exponential expansion of 𝜋(𝐺), essentially reducing the density of highly
distinctive artifacts within the generator’s possibility space—such that the majority of artifacts
produced by 𝐺 end up bearing substantial similarities to one another. Increasing |𝐺| (i.e., the
size of the generator itself) tends to be expensive, because it involves the encoding of additional
knowledge into the generator; but a generator whose maximum output complexity is scaled up
without additional knowledge encoding taking place is doomed to decreased perceptual output
diversity. This observation has been referred to as the “limited free breakfast” theorem [Kreminski
2023b]: “You can have free breakfast if you want, but it’s going to be oatmeal. ”
4 THE DEARTH OF THE AUTHOR IS A DEARTH OF INFORMATION
Information-theoretically, the dearth of the author stems from essentially the same place as the
oatmeal problem. Although Rabii and Cook focus predominantly on hand-programmed generators
in their characterization of the oatmeal problem, the information-theoretic structure of their
argument permits generalization to any generative system which functions by applying a finite
range of possible transformations to a finite space of possible inputs—regardless of whether the logic
by which these transformations are applied was hand-programmed (as in traditional procedural
content generation) or learned from training data (as in procedural content generation via machine
learning [Summerville et al. 2018]).
To characterize a modern pretrained generative model that accepts a text prompt as input and
yields an output artifact, the formal definition of a generator𝐺 in Rabii and Cook’s treatment of
the oatmeal problem can be broken into two parts, both representable as bitstrings:
(1) The model𝑚: a large pretrained generative model. This represents, essentially, a compressed
corpus of patterns discovered in the sum of the model’s training data.
(2) The input𝑖: a user’s prompt. This represents, essentially, the only variable portion of the
logic that is used to sample from the model.
Under this bipartite division of the generator, the relationship described by Rabii and Cook between
total generator size, possibility space size, and complexity of the generator’s most intricate possible
output artifact can again be found to obtain.3 If the model𝑚 is treated as a black box that cannot
be extended at sampling time (as is generally the case in present-day usage scenarios), the amount
of information contained in the prompt𝑖 directly maps to the Kolmogorov complexity of the most
complex artifact that the whole generative system𝐺 can produce. To increase𝐾∗(𝐺), one must
either expand the prompt, expand the model, or expand the logic used to post-process the model’s
output—in the latter case redefining the generative system more broadly to include not just the
internal generative model but also any other computation performed after the model yields a result.
As a result, when multiple different users of the same large pretrained model supply the model
with similar short prompts, the outputs that they receive are limited in how much they can possibly
differ from one another. Only the information taken from the prompt itself and the information
given by the random seed (when some degree of stochasticity is used in sampling) are permitted to
3Stochasticity in the sampling process—as is typically present in both transformer language models (modulated by the
temperature parameter) and in text-to-image diffusion models—can be characterized by the addition of a few more bits
of information to the input, representing the seed used to initialize random number generation. Because the amount of
information drawn from this seed is comparable from one generation to the next with the same model and sampling
procedure, this has negligible net influence on the overall analysis. Stochasticity driven by a seed is characterized the same
way in Rabii and Cook’s analysis.
6
Endless Forms Most Similar: The Dearth of the Author in AI-Supported Art
vary from one run of the model to the next; any other information contained in the model output
must be drawn from the fixed information contained in the model itself. Thus, the greater the ratio
of output size to input size, the greater the expected perceptual similarity between different model
outputs. When a short prompt like “write me a story about a cat pirate” is expanded to a story
containing hundreds or thousands of words, the vast majority of words in the output story must be
conditioned primarily on the information contained in the model (which is fixed and unchanging),
rather than on the information contained in the input—which is obviously insufficient to precisely
specify a meaningful cat pirate story, relative to the model’s typical output, from an expressive
perspective (Fig. 1). The end result is perceptual homogeneity [Begus 2023]: stories produced by
the same language model from short prompts share similar structures, characters, tropes, and so
on, because short inputs do not provide the model with sufficient extra conditioning information
to yield creative decisions outside the defaults defined by model training data.
5 IMPLICATIONS OF THE DEARTH
Despite its simplicity, the dearth of the author helps to explain many of the disparate anxieties and
difficulties around AI-based CSTs. We briefly discuss a few of its implications here.
Homogenization of creative output. Several recent studies of AI-based CSTs have found either
direct [Anderson et al. 2024; Arnold et al. 2020; Doshi and Hauser 2023; Padmakumar and He 2023]
or indirect [Bhat et al. 2023; Jakesch et al. 2023] evidence that these tools can exert a homogenizing
effect on the creative outputs produced by different users: in other words, different users of the same
CST may produce more similar outputs than they would without the CST. Homogenization effects
can be explained by authors’ delegation of creative decision-making to a tool that makes similar
creative decisions in similar usage scenarios, with greater degrees of homogenization resulting
from tools that make a greater proportion of creative decisions directly.
Limited feelings of ownership. Recent studies have also found that users of AI-based CSTs for
writing tend to experience a limited sense of ownership of or responsibility for the outputs of their
interaction with the CST [Draxler et al. 2024; Lee et al. 2022]. This is similarly explained by the
delegation of creative decisions to the CST: delegating a greater proportion of creative decisions to
the CST seems likely to result in a commensurately lower feeling of ownership toward the resulting
text, as seen both in Draxler et al . [Draxler et al. 2024] and in the stronger sense of ownership
reported by users of a narrower CST [Kreminski et al. 2022a].
Rhetorical confusion. The typical outputs of AI-supported creative processes are often referred
to as “soulless”. Simultaneously, users who build highly intentful creative processes around AI-based
CSTs—sometimes considering and discarding many dozens of AI outputs before accepting one as
complete [Chang et al. 2023] (Fig. 2)—are perplexed by these assertions. The dearth of the author
helps explain both phenomena. The term “soullessness” reflects the sparseness of intent in the
outputs that are easiest to create with many AI-based tools, and that therefore dominate most
non-enthusiasts’ impressions; meanwhile, the high-intent nature of some AI artists’ processes may
not be immediately apparent to onlookers, because AI tools permit the creation of comparably
sized outputs from much smaller specifications of intent.
Greater impacts on inexperienced creators. Experienced writers (for instance) tend to have
an ear for evocative language and a strong aversion to cliché, both of which are components of a
sophisticated sense of taste built up over many years of paying close attention to language. These
writers are readily able to identify problems in AI-generated text [Chakrabarty et al. 2023], and
are often unwilling to simply accept creative decisions made by the machine when these decisions
conflict with their own sensibilities [Mirowski et al. 2023]. Novice writers, on the other hand, may
tend to treat the machine as a creative authority [Anderson et al . 2024] and delegate a greater
7
Max Kreminski
Fig. 2. An image quilt of the many generations and regenerations involved in producing a single final output
image (shown enlarged at the bottom right) via an AI-based CST built around a diffusion image model. A
large amount of user-controlled information has been brought into the creative process over the course of
many rerolls and adjustments, but each image produced along the way is similar in scale to the final output,
making it difficult to determine from output size alone how much more authorial intent went into the final
image than into the first image generated. A better suite of tools for the specification of expressive intent
could enable the generation of a similar final output image with fewer total regenerations, illustrating the
importance of tool design to preserving detailed authorial intent in AI-based CSTs. [St. Pierre 2024]
proportion of their creative decisions—a form of algorithmic loafing [Inuwa-Dutse et al. 2023] that
is likely to result in a stronger sense of authorial absence.
6 RESPONSES TO THE DEARTH
Fundamentally, the dearth of the author follows naturally from the fact that current generative
models will tend to produce similar outputs in response to similar inputs, even when those inputs
come from different users. Interventions in response to the dearth of the author, then, can come
in three broad flavors: changing the generative models themselves; changing how we use their
outputs; and changing the inputs that we feed into them.
8
Endless Forms Most Similar: The Dearth of the Author in AI-Supported Art
6.1 Changing the Models
6.1.1 ...by training new models. Helena Sarin, a notable and frequently cited AI artist [Browne
2022; Hertzmann 2019], has been training generative models (particularly generative adversarial
networks) on her own photography and hand-drawn artwork—explicitly as a means of avoiding
the homogenous appearance of outputs from pretrained models—for nearly as long as modern
generative AI architectures have existed [Bailey and Sarin 2018]. Given present tools, this approach
to maintaining originality is relatively demanding: most artists do not possess the technical skills
needed to train models from scratch on their own data, and even the assembly of a sufficiently large
and diverse corpus of data to be useful in training a custom model may be both time-consuming
and technically difficult, since even determining what data might make for a “good” model tends to
require some degree of understanding of machine learning principles. Nevertheless, this approach
can be quite powerful if pursued: an artist who follows it can essentially redefine their own creative
process to include the process of training a characterful generative model, allowing expressive
intent to re-enter the process “upstream” of the model usage phase.
As suggested in one discussion of Sarin’s work [Bailey and Sarin 2018], another means by which
artists can avoid tool-imposed homogeneity is to make use of relatively unknown generative models
that impart a different grain onto their outputs, rather than adopting a model that is already widely
used. However, this is easier said than done—in part because new models that are sufficiently
powerful and general to produce a range of coherent outputs are not created often, and in part
because the new architectures that power some novel models are often initially unapproachable to
artists. It is not until new models are wrapped up in widely usable products that most artists tend
to be able to access them, and as soon as a “fresh” model is productized, it is likely to be adopted by
many users at once, resulting in a rapid exhaustion of its freshness.
Can the process of model training itself be made more approachable? Wekinator [Fiebrink et al.
2009] represents an early approach in this direction: by giving musicians tools that they can use to
train machine learning models on bespoke input data without deep ML-specific technical skills, the
Wekinator framework acts as a “meta-instrument” for the construction of new musical instruments
that are driven by a very wide range of different inputs. However, a Wekinator-like toolkit to support
the training of new generative models has not yet appeared as far as we are aware. In addition, it
may not be possible to create such a toolkit for the types of large pretrained generative models that
have received the most attention in recent years: the transformer and diffusion architectures on
which these models are based require many orders of magnitude more data and computation to
train than older architectures, placing the training of such models “from scratch” out of reach for
the vast majority of potential users.
One alternative to from-scratch training involves the adaptation of large pretrained models to a
more specific task using a much smaller amount of data and computation, using parameter-efficient
fine-tuning methods [Mangrulkar et al. 2022] such as low-rank adaptation [Hu et al. 2021]. However,
the outputs of fine-tuned models are still shaped substantially by the unadapted informational
content of the original pretrained model on which the fine-tuned model is based, and the process
of fine-tuning itself requires a greater degree of technical know-how and infrastructure than direct
use of an approachable CST built around a fully pretrained model.
Broadly speaking, introducing new generative models and incorporating them into creative
workflows can help to address the dearth of the author, especially if artists themselves are directly
equipped to train new models on their own specialized datasets via approachable tools. However,
the broad adoption of this approach faces many difficulties. Neural networks trained on similar
datasets tend to converge [Li et al. 2015], so developing AI-based CSTs around a wider range of
large pretrained generative models may not yield much improvement in outcome diversity if the
9
Max Kreminski
underlying models are all trained on similar data. The increasingly widespread use of synthetic
data to train new models results in additional convergence [Shumailov et al. 2023], further limiting
the utility of simply switching which pretrained model is used as a foundation for CST design.
Furthermore, training new models from scratch, especially using the currently most popular
architectures, is substantially costly, requiring large amounts of infrastructure and specialized
knowledge. For all of these reasons, the introduction of new models may remain of limited utility
in mitigating the dearth of the author for the foreseeable future.
6.1.2 ...by sampling or fine-tuning for increased output diversity in general. If the creation of new
models from scratch is generally too costly or difficult to pursue as a strategy for improving AI-based
CSTs, can we simply adjust how we sample from existing pretrained generative models to improve
the diversity of their outputs? A number of approaches in this family have shown promise, including
diverse decoding [Ippolito et al. 2019; See et al. 2019], quality-diversity approaches [Bradley et al.
2023], and even finetuning existing models to force the generation of diffuse distributions [Zhang
et al. 2024] in contexts where a greater degree of output unpredictability is desired. A finetuning
approach in particular may essentially allow for the restoration of output diversity that seems
to be lost in the process of finetuning a large language model to respond appropriately to user
instructions [Padmakumar and He 2023].
Information-theoretically, however, these approaches seem to share a common limitation: they
add diversity to model outputs by drawing onrandom components of model input (i.e., the seed used
for random number generation) rather than on user-supplied components of model input (i.e., the
prompt), and therefore may reduce user control over creative outcomes. Though diversity derived
from randomness may prove useful for getting users out of creative ruts and providing inspiration,
especially early in the creative process, it has yet to be evaluated whether randomness-derived
approaches to improving model output diversity are beneficial to human creativity overall.
6.2 Changing the Use of Model Output
6.2.1 ...at the user level. When designing an AI-based CST that wraps a generative model with a
user interface, it is easy to fall into the trap of assuming that the model’s output must constitute
the final output of the creative process: i.e., that model outputs may be curated by tool users,
but not further modified or acted on by users before they are passed along to a user’s audience
directly. However, different AI-based CSTs for writing (for instance) vary widely in the nature of
their output and their ability to make a large proportion of the decisions involved in writing on
the user’s behalf. When the outputs of a CST take the form of “sparks” [Gero et al . 2022], plot
outlines [Kreminski et al. 2022a], questions [Kreminski and Chung 2024], or feedback [Kim et al.
2024; Stark et al. 2023] rather than output-ready prose, the user cannot as easily delegate creative
decisions about the integration of these elements into a complete piece of writing—leaving open
a space of underdetermination [Albaugh et al. 2020], or perhaps even creative struggle [Zhou and
Sterman 2023], into which expressive intent must flow.
It has recently been suggested that the willingness of users to accept model outputs as author-
itative or final is influenced both by user perception of AI systems as giving “correct answers”
and by the extent to which model outputs resemble the target form of final output in a given
creative context [Anderson et al. 2024]. Both of these factors suggest that, even when AI models
are used to generate output in the target form of the overall creative process, it may be useful for
CSTs wrapping these models to deliberately supply users with model outputs that contain obvious
holes, errors, or points of incompleteness. These minor issues may increase the inferential distance
between model outputs and pieces of a finished creative artifact, thereby adding friction to the
10
Endless Forms Most Similar: The Dearth of the Author in AI-Supported Art
direct or verbatim use of model outputs and leading users to interleave some of their own otherwise
unexpressed creative intent into material output by the model during the process of repair.
6.2.2 ...at the tool level. Beyond requesting and framing model outputs for users to interpret or
use as something other than final components of creative output, model outputs can also be used
to trigger additional algorithmic processes, which are then used to supplement model outputs or
adapt them into a different form prior to the output being displayed to tool users. For instance, a
language model that has been trained to emit a control script for some sort of “agent” apparatus—
one that permits the querying of external information sources or the execution of model-generated
code—may be able to supplement its own outputs with information from these external sources,
perhaps using a web API to supplement its own text suggestions with appropriately constrained
random information when needed or a CST-provided API function to apply a particular filter to a
generated image before displaying the image to the user. These tool-level adaptations of model
output essentially extend the full generative pipeline of the CST beyond the model itself, and use
the extra pipeline stages to inject additional information into the creative process; some of these
adaptations also bleed into alterations of model inputs on subsequent invocations of the model,
which are discussed further in the section below.
6.3 Changing Model Inputs
6.3.1 ...by injecting chaos from another source. If the outputs of an AI-based CST are intended to
provide the tool’s user with inspiration or raw material, it may be valuable for these outputs to be
more diverse than model output conditioned on the user’s input alone. Especially early on in the
creative process when the user has likely not provided very much information that can be used
to steer the model’s generation, improved model output diversity may be most readily achievable
through the supplementation of the user’s input with information from an outside random or
chaotic source: for instance by randomly selecting several keywords from a large vocabulary and
supplying these to the model alongside the user’s prompt.
As with boosting model output diversity via diverse decoding and related randomness-driven
techniques that are applied inside the model’s black box (Section 6.1.2), there are many potential
pitfalls associated with chaos injection at the input level. Most importantly, the supplementation of
user-controlled input with random input (i.e., input that is not under the user’s control) changes the
ratio of user-supplied to non-user-supplied information flowing through the whole creative process,
decreasing the extent to which the user is in control of model outputs. If outside information is
injected invisibly, the user may struggle to reproduce desirable results or avoid undesirable results
on future runs of the model, because they are not directly privy to the input adjustments that are
leading to these results; making the injection of outside information user-visible, however, will
likely lead to increased user interface complexity and a steeper learning curve.
Additionally, if a traditional generative method (such as a generative grammar [Compton et al.
2015], planning domain [Cardona-Rivera et al. 2024], or answer set program [Smith and Mateas
2011]) is used to inject more structured random output into the model—either to give the user greater
control over the random information injected, to ensure that random information is combined
coherently, or both—all the difficulties associated with the selected generative method are now also
brought into play at the tool design level. In particular, these methods tend to require substantial
authoring effort [Jones 2023] and lack the easy adaptability to arbitrary creative domains that
characterizes more recently introduced generative methods [Yao et al. 2019]. These difficulties have
so far hindered the adoption of neurosymbolic approaches to user-controllable output diversification
of large pretrained generative models.
11
Max Kreminski
6.3.2 ...by exploring possibility space. From the perspective of a user of a widely adopted AI-based
CST, one approach to differentiating one’s own output from the output achieved by other users
of the same tool is to reframe the creative process as one of exploring the tool’s input and output
space in search of distinguishable and otherwise undiscovered oddities. This possibility space
exploration approach is similar to the framing of creativity as curation adopted by many casual
creator tools [Compton and Mateas 2015; Petrovskaya et al. 2020], particularly those that explicitly
provide users with a means of rapidly adjusting parameter values in an explicitly defined parameter
space [Colton et al . 2018; Kreminski et al . 2020] or a learned latent space [Epstein et al . 2020].
Searching for unusual (but short) inputs that led to unusual outputs represented an especially
common approach for early “prompt artist” users of text-to-image models, who sometimes framed
this process in terms of discovering and exploiting model glitches [Caramiaux and Fdili Alaoui
2022; Chang et al. 2023]; some of these artists tended to view the textual prompt as part of the
output artifact (along with the image or images generated in response to this prompt) [Chang et al.
2023], while others hoarded unusual prompts to keep others from discovering and exploiting the
remaining relatively unexplored corners of latent space.
Creative differentiation achieved through a possibility space exploration approach alone is often
fragile. Changes to a particular AI-based CST’s underlying generative model can wipe out glitches
and artifacts that once led to reliably unusual outputs, while widespread discovery of a simple
prompting trick can lead to outputs from the corresponding corner of latent space rapidly becoming
much more prevalent (sometimes even to the point of becoming “overplayed”). In addition, an
artistic practice that relies heavily on the discovery of new material characteristics of a particular
generative model may not allow for the expression of a wide variety of different sentiments, ideas, or
other aspects of communicative intent; the resulting artifacts may more closely resemble conceptual
than traditionally expressive art [Karth and Compton 2023]. Ultimately, this approach to making
art with generative models attempts to lean into the fact that the model outputs yielded by short
prompts are necessarily conditioned primarily on the information contained within the model
itself; thus, the results tend to be “about the model” more than they are about the user’s creative
goals independent of the model.
6.3.3 ...by inferring user intent automatically. Getting users of AI-based CSTs to specify their
expressive intent more precisely is difficult, for a wide variety of reasons that we discuss further in
the following section (Section 7). However, informationally diluting user-controlled inputs with
non-user-controlled inputs (as proposed in several sections above) tends to reduce the extent
to which model output is reflective of user intent, thereby reinforcing the dearth of the author.
Can we instead make use of user modeling or personalization techniques to automatically infer a
user’s expressive intent from their actions, then append this inferred intent to model inputs as an
additional facet of (implicitly) user-controlled input?
Although the automatic inference of expressive intent from user actions may be useful for
steering model outputs, there is a need to evaluate whether the personalization paradox [Ontanon
and Zhu 2021] is generally strong enough to substantially inhibit the application of these techniques
in creative contexts. Particular caution should be taken around the potential of creating a self-
reinforcing loop of inferred and intended user preference: if information that is inferred about
the user’s intent is then immediately used to steer the outputs of the generative model, it seems
likely that early identifications of user preference may end up increasing user fixation [Alipour
et al. 2018; Crilly 2019; Jansson and Smith 1991; Purcell and Gero 1996] on unexpected aspects of
inferred intent, whether or not these aspects were actually present in the user’s head as part of
their expressive intent to begin with. Furthermore, especially early in the creative process, when
user intent tends to be weakest and least well-defined, personalization attempts may be especially
12
Endless Forms Most Similar: The Dearth of the Author in AI-Supported Art
prone to displacing these initial sparks of intent, potentially replacing them with an inferred intent
that a particular CST or user-modeling approach is especially prone to inferring—thereby once
again reinforcing the dearth of the author. More research is needed to probe user susceptibility to
these potential effects.
6.3.4 ...by lensing the imagination. Given the limitations of other approaches to mitigating the
dearth of the author, one major approach remains to be discussed: getting the users of AI-based
CSTs to increase the specificity of their input—without influencing their ideational process too
strongly toward tool- or model-favored parts of idea-space along the way. This approach, which
we refer to as “lensing the imagination”, can perhaps best be understood metaphorically: if the
ideal source of originality in the creative process is a human artist’s explicit expressive intent, and
this intent initially tends to arise within users in a vague and poorly defined form, the role that an
AI-based CST must fulfill is that of a focusing and clarifying lens. An ideal CST in this framing
is one that helps users to magnify and sharpen the initially ill-defined spark of intent without
displacing it or snuffing it out.
Let’s briefly return to the example of our cat pirates (Fig. 1). If the user of a basic AI-based
CST for writing approaches the creative process with only the explicit knowledge that they want
to tell a story about cat pirates, and they directly instruct the generative model within the CST
to fulfill this briefly specified intent, they will immediately be confronted with the same kind of
cat pirate story as every other user who makes a similar request: one in which the vast majority
of the story’s informational content reflects information drawn from the model itself, not from
the user. If the user then accepts this story as complete, or substantially modifies their intent
toward the details already contained in the first generated story before re-prompting the model
for another story, the majority of whatever they really wanted to express will be displaced. But if
the user is immediately confronted with a wide variety of different cat breeds they must choose
between, or a question about what cat pirates mean to them thematically (violent oppressors of
press-ganged mice? cute and cuddly residents of a sheltered tropical island? cunning raiders of
heavily defended but resource-rich human installations?), further information may be drawn out
of the user about their true artistic or expressive goals. Repetition of similar interactions, if they
are carefully structured, may eventually draw enough intent out of the user that the final output
artifacts of the creative process reflect predominantly information provided by the user and not the
model—resulting in a neutralization, or even a reversal, of the dearth of the author.
7 FROM DEARTH TO ABUNDANCE
The dearth of the author arises when the ratio of authorial intent to output artifact size is small.
AI-based CSTs that make creative decisions on the author’s behalf tend to decrease this ratio.
But AI-based CSTs can also increase this ratio by leading the author to make a greater number of
meaningful creative decisions per unit of output produced , drawing out unexpressed elements of the
author’s intent and provoking them to refine this intent further. CSTs that do this well enough may
even bring about an unexpected alternative condition: an abundance of the author , in which
every word of a piece of writing (for instance) has been considered more carefully and from more
different angles than the author could otherwise manage or afford.
One way to frame the task of lensing the imagination is through the recharacterization of
AI-based CST design as designing for intent elicitation [Kreminski and Chung 2024]. Kreminski
and Chung argue that user intent in creative processes is essentially always co-constructed with
the materials of a particular “design situation” [Schön 1983], and that intent is therefore not just
underexpressed by users early in the creative process (i.e., specified less completely in the user’s
input to the tool than in the user’s head) but also uncertain (i.e., largely unspecified in the user’s
13
Max Kreminski
head, because they have not yet had a chance to discover completely what they want). Furthermore,
because user actions are often constrained to some extent by fixation, attempts at inferring user
intent from actions may often fail to capture important features of the true underlying intent. There
are thus three key problems for an AI-based CST to solve: helping users discover what they want;
helping users express what they want to the CST in a way that it can be used to steer generative
model output; and helping users avoid fixation by showing them alternative ways of looking at the
design situation they are currently in.
To facilitate user expression of intent, it may be necessary to move past the exclusive use of
textual prompts—which have previously proven difficult for people to use effectively, especially
when they are relatively inexperienced with the particular generative model they are trying to
use [Zamfirescu-Pereira et al. 2023]. Prompting techniques that elicit improved performance on a
particular task from one model may nevertheless worsen another model’s performance on the same
task [Mizrahi et al. 2023], and restricting users to textual prompting alone deprives them of more
straightforward interaction techniques for many modes of content; parts of images, for instance,
may be much more straightforwardly and precisely indicated via pointing and gesture than via
textual description. Domain-specific alternatives to text-only prompting for model steering have
been suggested by a number of researchers [Chung et al. 2022; Chung and Kreminski 2024; Lin
et al. 2023], and many valuable new interaction techniques likely remain to be discovered in this
area. In particular, easier-to-use control modes for specifying aspects of creative intent that are
difficult to express through text may represent an especially fruitful focus for future work.
To facilitate user discovery of intent, meanwhile, prior work on a class of CSTs described as
“reflective creators” [Kreminski and Mateas 2021] may be relevant. Broader design research on the
key role of reflection in design processes [Schön 1983] and HCI research on designing systems
to promote user reflection in general [Bentvelzen et al. 2022] may also apply. Design patterns for
helping users to reflect on what they intend and why are directly applicable to the elicitation of
explicitly stated expressive intents from users, and the deliberate introduction of friction into the
creative process in order to provoke greater reflection is strongly compatible with recent calls to
value the user’s creative struggle [Zhou and Sterman 2023] in AI-based CST design.
7.1 Evaluating Progress Toward Abundance
How can we tell if our tools are making progress toward the goal of improving originality by
drawing out distinctive user intent? Ever since the field was founded, the evaluation of CSTs has
been considered one of the hardest problems in CST research and design [Hewett et al . 2005]—
in part due to the diversity of creative domains, tasks, users, and goals that CSTs might aim to
support, and in part due to fundamental difficulties with the definition and evaluation of creativity
as a concept. Moreover, despite the introduction of a standardized survey instrument for CST
evaluation [Cherry and Latulipe 2014], relatively little progress has been made toward a field-wide
consensus on the best way to evaluate CSTs [Remy et al. 2020]. Nevertheless, we believe that some
existing evaluation methods may prove especially well-suited to the task of evaluating tool effects
on intentional originality.
To evaluate the raw distinctiveness of different users’ tool-influenced creative products, sev-
eral different forms of homogenization analysis [Anderson et al. 2024; Doshi and Hauser 2023;
Padmakumar and He 2023] have been proposed. Generally speaking, homogenization analysis
involves the production by tool users of many different artifacts, followed by the embedding of these
artifacts in some sort of semantic embedding space (e.g., via sentence embeddings [Reimers and
Gurevych 2019] for short textual expressions of ideas) and the quantitative comparison of semantic
similarity between the resulting embedding vectors. Among other applications, homogenization
analysis can be used to draw direct comparisons between two or more different CSTs in the same
14
Endless Forms Most Similar: The Dearth of the Author in AI-Supported Art
creative context; to quantify the degree to which homogenization effects arise from individual-level
fixation [Alipour et al. 2018; Crilly 2019; Jansson and Smith 1991; Purcell and Gero 1996] as opposed
to group-level similarity of AI suggestions; and to evaluate a single CST against multiple different
creative contexts in order to determine whether it exhibits homogenization effects consistently or
inconsistently across these different contexts.
A closely related family of evaluation approaches, which we term overlap analysis [Joshi and
Vogel 2024; Padmakumar and He 2023; Roemmele and Gordon 2018], may be useful when the goal
is to evaluate the extent to which authors are influenced by CST suggestions in the context of
writing. These approaches examine the extent to which sequences of words from a tool’s output
are reproduced in the final output of a tool-influenced creative process, with higher degrees of
overlap likely indicating a greater degree of tool influence on user creative choices. Note that
different levels of overlap between intermediate tool output and final user output may be desirable
in different contexts, and a middling level of tool influence on user output may arguably be best
overall; middling levels of overlap would likely suggest that users consider tool suggestions useful,
but are not inclined to let tool suggestions completely displace their own originality.
Because both homogenization analysis and overlap analysis can be conducted automatically to
produce quantifiable results, they may be especially useful in conjunction with approaches that
aim to visualize and characterize quantifiable dimensions of user movement through design spaces
as they continue using a single tool [Alvarez et al . 2022; Kreminski et al. 2022b]. Visualizations
of user artifacts in relation to broader design spaces defined by a particular generative method
have been directly applied to the study of whether AI-based CSTs lead to homogeneity of output
in the past [Kreminski et al. 2022b]; combining these successful past approaches with additional
quantitative dimensions that aim to capture artifact originality may yield novel visual analytic
techniques for CST evaluation.
Beyond directly measurable characteristics of the creative process, the user’s self-reported sense
of responsibility for creative outputs may function as a qualitative correlate of intent preservation
in finished artifacts. One recent study [Joshi and Vogel 2024] finds that the use of longer prompts
tends to increase users’ feelings of responsibility for their own AI-mediated creative outputs, and
hypothesizes that these increased feelings of responsibility may result from increased overlap
between phrases written by users in prompts and phrases appearing in model output. Meanwhile,
another recent study [Anderson et al . 2024] finds that users feel less responsible for their own
creative outputs when using a tool that exerts a stronger homogenization effect on their creative
process, again suggesting that subjective sense of responsibility may accurately reflect a CST’s
displacement of user intent. This possible correlation should be investigated further, but if it holds,
it may serve as a relatively easy-to-evaluate means of cross-checking quantitative with qualitative
data in attempts to determine whether a particular CST tends to produce a dearth of the author.
Finally, the expressive communication [Louie et al. 2022] framework for CST evaluation may be
the gold standard for evaluating the preservation of user intent through the creative process. This
framework involves first asking CST users to create an artifact that reflects a particular creative
intent, then passing this artifact along to another set of human audience members and asking them
to characterize the artifact. The extent to which the intent of the tool user is accurately received
and reported by the audience members can then be evaluated to determine if a tool is effective
at assisting its user in communicating feelings, ideas, or other aesthetic qualities to the audience.
This framework may need to be adapted somewhat to account for the fact that an artist’s creative
intent is generally not fully formed at the beginning of the creative process (and in fact may be
very ill-defined at first), but the broad concept of using a second pool of human evaluators to
determine whether a tool is successful at supporting expressive communication still seems likely
to be especially valuable for CST evaluation.
15
Max Kreminski
8 CONCLUSION
We have used an information-theoretic perspective to characterize a major recurring difficulty for
AI-based CSTs: the dearth of the author , or relative sparseness of authorial intent in creative output,
that may arise from their use. This characterization puts research on modern AI-based CSTs into
direct conversation with parallel work on classical generative methods. An information-theoretic
view of how generative models are able to produce large output artifacts from small user inputs
enables us to conclude that the homogenization effects of AI-based CSTs can be addressed by
making changes to generative models themselves, how we make use of their outputs, or what we
provide them with as input. However, we also find that the only way to decrease homogenization
while also preserving or increasing user control of creative outcomes involves the expansion of
user input specifically—suggesting that the elicitation of user intent represents a central challenge
for designers of AI-based CSTs.
This approach reflects a fundamental truth about the creative process: namely, that it is a process
of making decisions. The ultimate fantasy of artificial intelligence is that it will simply “do what
we mean” without further input—but if art is about deciding what we mean and why, there can
ultimately exist no system, AI or otherwise, that is capable of simply extracting and executing a
user’s artistic intent without further involvement from the user. Instead, AI-based CSTs must take
up the hard problem of helping users think through their intent—which is rarely as precisely defined
at the start of the creative process as we initially believe it to be—and then gradually transform
that intent into a finished artifact that accurately reflects the meaning the user is hoping to convey.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by Hackworth Grant GR102981, “Investigating Homogenization
of Imagination by Generative AI Models”, from the Markkula Center for Applied Ethics. Some of
the ideas discussed here were initially formulated in response to discussions held at Stochastic Labs
during the summer of 2022; thanks to all who participated in these discussions, and in particular to
Joel Simon and Kyle Steinfeld. Thanks also to Isaac Karth, Phoebe J. Wang, and Barrett R. Anderson
for conversations that helped shape this work.
REFERENCES
Lea Albaugh, Scott E Hudson, Lining Yao, and Laura Devendorf. 2020. Investigating underdetermination through interactive
computational handweaving. In Conference on Designing Interactive Systems . 1033–1046.
Leyla Alipour, Mohsen Faizi, Asghar Mohammad Moradi, and Gholamreza Akrami. 2018. A review of design fixation:
Research directions and key factors. International Journal of Design Creativity and Innovation 6, 1-2 (2018), 22–35.
Alberto Alvarez, Jose Font, and Julian Togelius. 2022. Toward Designer Modeling Through Design Style Clustering. IEEE
Transactions on Games 14, 4 (2022), 676–686.
Barrett R Anderson, Jash Hemant Shah, and Max Kreminski. 2024. Homogenization Effects of Large Language Models on
Human Creative Ideation. In C&C ‘24: Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Creativity and Cognition .
Asad Anjum, Yuting Li, Noelle Law, M Charity, and Julian Togelius. 2024. The Ink Splotch Effect: A Case Study on ChatGPT
as a Co-Creative Game Designer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.02454 (2024).
Silvano Arieti. 1976. Creativity: The Magic Synthesis . Basic Books.
Kenneth C Arnold, Krysta Chauncey, and Krzysztof Z Gajos. 2020. Predictive text encourages predictable writing. In
Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces . 128–138.
Jason Bailey and Helena Sarin. 2018. Helena Sarin: Why Bigger Isn’t Always Better With GANs And AI Art. https:
//www.artnome.com/news/2018/11/14/helena-sarin-why-bigger-isnt-always-better-with-gans-and-ai-art. Accessed:
2024-04-25.
Roland Barthes. 1968. The death of the author. (1968).
Nina Begus. 2023. Experimental Narratives: A Comparison of Human Crowdsourced Storytelling and AI Storytelling. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.12902 (2023).
Marit Bentvelzen, Paweł W Woźniak, Pia SF Herbes, Evropi Stefanidi, and Jasmin Niess. 2022. Revisiting reflection in HCI:
Four design resources for technologies that support reflection. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable
16
Endless Forms Most Similar: The Dearth of the Author in AI-Supported Art
and Ubiquitous Technologies 6, 1 (2022).
Advait Bhat, Saaket Agashe, Parth Oberoi, Niharika Mohile, Ravi Jangir, and Anirudha Joshi. 2023. Interacting with
Next-Phrase Suggestions: How Suggestion Systems Aid and Influence the Cognitive Processes of Writing. In Proceedings
of the 28th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces . 436–452.
Margaret A Boden. 2004. The Creative Mind: Myths and Mechanisms . Routledge.
Herbie Bradley, Andrew Dai, Hannah Teufel, Jenny Zhang, Koen Oostermeijer, Marco Bellagente, Jeff Clune, Kenneth
Stanley, Grégory Schott, and Joel Lehman. 2023. Quality-Diversity through AI Feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.13032
(2023).
Kieran Browne. 2022. Who (or what) is an AI Artist? Leonardo 55, 2 (2022), 130–134.
Daniel Buschek, Lukas Mecke, Florian Lehmann, and Hai Dang. 2021. Nine Potential Pitfalls when Designing Human-AI
Co-Creative Systems. In Joint Proceedings of the ACM IUI 2021 Workshops .
Baptiste Caramiaux and Sarah Fdili Alaoui. 2022. “Explorers of Unknown Planets”: Practices and Politics of Artificial
Intelligence in Visual Arts. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 6, CSCW2 (2022).
Rogelio E Cardona-Rivera, Arnav Jhala, Julie Porteous, and R Michael Young. 2024. The Story So Far on Narrative Planning.
In 34th International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling .
Tuhin Chakrabarty, Philippe Laban, Divyansh Agarwal, Smaranda Muresan, and Chien-Sheng Wu. 2023. Art or Artifice?
Large Language Models and the False Promise of Creativity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.14556 (2023).
Minsuk Chang, Stefania Druga, Alexander J Fiannaca, Pedro Vergani, Chinmay Kulkarni, Carrie J Cai, and Michael Terry.
2023. The Prompt Artists. In Proceedings of the 15th Conference on Creativity and Cognition . 75–87.
John William Charnley, Alison Pease, and Simon Colton. 2012. On the Notion of Framing in Computational Creativity. In
International Conference on Computational Creativity . 77–81.
Erin Cherry and Celine Latulipe. 2014. Quantifying the creativity support of digital tools through the Creativity Support
Index. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 21, 4 (2014).
John Joon Young Chung, Shiqing He, and Eytan Adar. 2021. The intersection of users, roles, interactions, and technologies
in creativity support tools. In Designing Interactive Systems Conference . 1817–1833.
John Joon Young Chung, Wooseok Kim, Kang Min Yoo, Hwaran Lee, Eytan Adar, and Minsuk Chang. 2022. TaleBrush:
Sketching stories with generative pretrained language models. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems .
John Joon Young Chung and Max Kreminski. 2024. Patchview: LLM-Powered Worldbuilding with Generative Dust and
Magnet Visualization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.04112 (2024).
Simon Colton, Mark Nelson, Edward Powley, Swen Gaudl, Rob Saunders, Blanca Perez Ferrer, Peter Ivey, and Michael
Cook. 2018. A parameter-space design methodology for casual creators. In International Conference on Computational
Creativity.
Kate Compton. 2016. So you want to build a generator... https://galaxykate0.tumblr.com/post/139774965871/so-you-want-
to-build-a-generator. Accessed: 2024-04-25.
Kate Compton, Ben Kybartas, and Michael Mateas. 2015. Tracery: an author-focused generative text tool. In Interactive
Storytelling: 8th International Conference on Interactive Digital Storytelling, ICIDS 2015, Copenhagen, Denmark, November
30-December 4, 2015, Proceedings 8 . Springer, 154–161.
Kate Compton and Michael Mateas. 2015. Casual Creators. InInternational Conference on Computational Creativity. 228–235.
Michael Cook, Simon Colton, Alison Pease, and Maria Teresa Llano. 2019. Framing in Computational Creativity–A Survey
and Taxonomy. In International Conference on Computational Creativity . 156–163.
Nathan Crilly. 2019. Creativity and fixation in the real world: A literature review of case study research. Design Studies 64
(2019), 154–168.
Sebastian Deterding, Jonathan Hook, Rebecca Fiebrink, Marco Gillies, Jeremy Gow, Memo Akten, Gillian Smith, Antonios
Liapis, and Kate Compton. 2017. Mixed-initiative creative interfaces. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 628–635.
Anil R Doshi and Oliver Hauser. 2023. Generative artificial intelligence enhances creativity. A vailable at SSRN (2023).
Fiona Draxler, Anna Werner, Florian Lehmann, Matthias Hoppe, Albrecht Schmidt, Daniel Buschek, and Robin Welsch.
2024. The AI Ghostwriter Effect: When Users Do Not Perceive Ownership of AI-Generated Text But Self-Declare as
Authors. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 31, 2 (2024).
Ziv Epstein, Océane Boulais, Skylar Gordon, and Matt Groh. 2020. Interpolating GANs to scaffold autotelic creativity. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2007.11119 (2020).
Ziv Epstein, Aaron Hertzmann, and Investigators of Human Creativity. 2023. Art and the science of generative AI. Science
380, 6650 (2023), 1110–1111.
Rebecca Fiebrink, Daniel Trueman, and Perry R Cook. 2009. A meta-instrument for interactive, on-the-fly machine learning.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression .
17
Max Kreminski
Jonas Frich, Lindsay MacDonald Vermeulen, Christian Remy, Michael Mose Biskjaer, and Peter Dalsgaard. 2019. Mapping
the landscape of creativity support tools in HCI. InProceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems.
Philip Galanter. 2016. Generative art theory. In A Companion to Digital Art . Wiley Online Library, 146–180.
Katy Ilonka Gero and Lydia B Chilton. 2019. Metaphoria: An algorithmic companion for metaphor creation. In Proceedings
of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems .
Katy Ilonka Gero, Vivian Liu, and Lydia Chilton. 2022. Sparks: Inspiration for science writing using language models. In
Designing Interactive Systems Conference . 1002–1019.
Jeffrey T Hancock, Mor Naaman, and Karen Levy. 2020. AI-mediated communication: Definition, research agenda, and
ethical considerations. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 25, 1 (2020), 89–100.
Daniel Harris and Stacy Holman Jones. 2022. A manifesto for posthuman creativity studies. Qualitative Inquiry 28, 5 (2022),
522–530.
Aaron Hertzmann. 2019. Aesthetics of neural network art. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.05696 (2019).
Tom Hewett, Mary Czerwinski, Michael Terry, Jay Nunamaker, Linda Candy, Bill Kules, and Elisabeth Sylvan. 2005. Creativity
support tool evaluation methods and metrics. In Creativity Support Tools: A workshop sponsored by the National Science
Foundation. 10–24.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. 2020. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 33 (2020), 6840–6851.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. 2021.
LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09685 (2021).
Isa Inuwa-Dutse, Alice Toniolo, Adrian Weller, and Umang Bhatt. 2023. Algorithmic loafing and mitigation strategies in
Human-AI teams. Computers in Human Behavior: Artificial Humans 1, 2 (2023), 100024.
Daphne Ippolito, Reno Kriz, Maria Kustikova, João Sedoc, and Chris Callison-Burch. 2019. Comparison of diverse decoding
methods from conditional language models. InProceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics. 3752–3762.
Maurice Jakesch, Advait Bhat, Daniel Buschek, Lior Zalmanson, and Mor Naaman. 2023. Co-writing with opinionated
language models affects users’ views. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems .
David G Jansson and Steven M Smith. 1991. Design fixation. Design Studies 12, 1 (1991), 3–11.
Joey Donald Jones. 2023. Authorial Burden. In The Authoring Problem: Challenges in Supporting Authoring for Interactive
Digital Narratives. Springer, 47–63.
Nikhita Joshi and Daniel Vogel. 2024. Writing with AI Lowers Psychological Ownership, but Longer Prompts Can Help.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.03108 (2024).
Isaac Karth. 2019. Preliminary poetics of procedural generation in games. Transactions of the Digital Games Research
Association 4, 3 (2019).
Isaac Karth and Kate Compton. 2023. Conceptual Art Made Real: Why Procedural Content Generation is Impossible. In
Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on the Foundations of Digital Games .
Jiho Kim, Ray C Flanagan, Noelle E Haviland, ZeAi Sun, Souad N Yakubu, Edom A Maru, and Kenneth C Arnold. 2024.
Towards Full Authorship with AI: Supporting Revision with AI-Generated Views. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.01055 (2024).
Max Kreminski. 2023a. “Generator’s Haunted”’: A Brief, Spooky Account of Hauntological Effects in the Player Experience
of Procedural Generation. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on the Foundations of Digital Games .
Max Kreminski. 2023b. one of my fav recent papers: “Why Oatmeal is Cheap: Kolmogorov Complexity and Procedural
Generation” (by @pyrofoux and @mtrc). https://mastodon.social/@maxkreminski/110273233768792278. Retrieved:
2024-04-30.
Max Kreminski. 2024a. Computational Poetry is Lost Poetry. In Proceedings of the Halfway to the Future Symposium .
Max Kreminski. 2024b. The dearth of the author in AI-supported writing. In Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Intelligent
and Interactive Writing Assistants. 48–50.
Max Kreminski and John Joon Young Chung. 2024. Intent Elicitation in Mixed-Initiative Co-Creativity. In Joint Proceedings
of the ACM IUI 2024 Workshops .
Max Kreminski, Melanie Dickinson, Joseph Osborn, Adam Summerville, Michael Mateas, and Noah Wardrip-Fruin. 2020.
Germinate: A mixed-initiative casual creator for rhetorical games. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment , Vol. 16. 102–108.
Max Kreminski, Melanie Dickinson, Noah Wardrip-Fruin, and Michael Mateas. 2022a. Loose Ends: a mixed-initiative creative
interface for playful storytelling. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital
Entertainment, Vol. 18. 120–128.
Max Kreminski, Isaac Karth, Michael Mateas, and Noah Wardrip-Fruin. 2022b. Evaluating Mixed-Initiative Creative Interfaces
via Expressive Range Coverage Analysis. In IUI Workshops. 34–45.
18
Endless Forms Most Similar: The Dearth of the Author in AI-Supported Art
Max Kreminski and Michael Mateas. 2021. Reflective Creators. In International Conference on Computational Creativity .
309–318.
Max Kreminski, Noah Wardrip-Fruin, and N Wardrip. 2018. Gardening games: an alternative philosophy of PCG in games.
In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on the Foundations of Digital Games .
Mina Lee, Katy Ilonka Gero, John Joon Young Chung, Simon Buckingham Shum, Vipul Raheja, Hua Shen, Subhashini
Venugopalan, Thiemo Wambsganss, David Zhou, Emad A. Alghamdi, Tal August, Avinash Bhat, Madiha Zahrah Choksi,
Senjuti Dutta, Jin L.C. Guo, Md Naimul Hoque, Yewon Kim, Simon Knight, Seyed Parsa Neshaei, Antonette Shibani, Disha
Shrivastava, Lila Shroff, Agnia Sergeyuk, Jessi Stark, Sarah Sterman, Sitong Wang, Antoine Bosselut, Daniel Buschek,
Joseph Chee Chang, Sherol Chen, Max Kreminski, Joonsuk Park, Roy Pea, Eugenia Ha Rim Rho, Zejiang Shen, and
Pao Siangliulue. 2024. A Design Space for Intelligent and Interactive Writing Assistants. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’24). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA.
Mina Lee, Percy Liang, and Qian Yang. 2022. CoAuthor: Designing a human-AI collaborative writing dataset for exploring
language model capabilities. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems .
Isabelle Levent and Lila Shroff. 2023. The Model is the Message. InThe Second Workshop on Intelligent and Interactive Writing
Assistants.
Jingyi Li, Eric Rawn, Jacob Ritchie, Jasper Tran O’Leary, and Sean Follmer. 2023. Beyond the Artifact: Power as a Lens for
Creativity Support Tools. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology .
Yixuan Li, Jason Yosinski, Jeff Clune, Hod Lipson, and John Hopcroft. 2015. Convergent learning: Do different neural
networks learn the same representations? arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.07543 (2015).
Antonios Liapis, Georgios N Yannakakis, Constantine Alexopoulos, and Phil Lopes. 2016. Can Computers Foster Human
Users’ Creativity? Theory and Praxis of Mixed-Initiative Co-Creativity. Digital Culture & Education 8, 2 (2016), 136–153.
Zhiyu Lin, Upol Ehsan, Rohan Agarwal, Samihan Dani, Vidushi Vashishth, and Mark Riedl. 2023. Beyond Prompts: Exploring
the Design Space of Mixed-Initiative Co-Creativity Systems. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on
Computational Creativity. 64–73.
Ryan Louie, Jesse Engel, and Cheng-Zhi Anna Huang. 2022. Expressive Communication: Evaluating Developments in
Generative Models and Steering Interfaces for Music Creation. In 27th International Conference on Intelligent User
Interfaces. 405–417.
Sourab Mangrulkar, Sylvain Gugger, Lysandre Debut, Younes Belkada, Sayak Paul, and Benjamin Bossan. 2022. PEFT:
State-of-the-art Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning methods. https://github.com/huggingface/peft.
Terry McDonell and Douglas Brinkley. 2000. Hunter S. Thompson, The Art of Journalism No. 1. https://www.theparisreview.
org/interviews/619/the-art-of-journalism-no-1-hunter-s-thompson. The Paris Review 156 (2000).
Piotr Mirowski, Kory W Mathewson, Jaylen Pittman, and Richard Evans. 2023. Co-Writing Screenplays and Theatre Scripts
with Language Models: Evaluation by Industry Professionals. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems.
Moran Mizrahi, Guy Kaplan, Dan Malkin, Rotem Dror, Dafna Shahaf, and Gabriel Stanovsky. 2023. State of What Art? A
Call for Multi-Prompt LLM Evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.00595 (2023).
Nick Montfort and Noah Wardrip-Fruin. 2003. Six Selections by the Oulipo. In The New Media Reader , Noah Wardrip-Fruin
and Nick Montfort (Eds.). MIT Press, 147–148.
Santiago Ontanon and Jichen Zhu. 2021. The personalization paradox: The conflict between accurate user models and
personalized adaptive systems. In 26th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces-Companion . 64–66.
OpenAI. 2022. DALL·E 2. https://openai.com/index/dall-e-2. Accessed: 2024-11-22.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal,
Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell,
Peter Welinder, Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. 2022. Training language models to follow instructions with
human feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , Vol. 35. 27730–27744.
Vishakh Padmakumar and He He. 2023. Does Writing with Language Models Reduce Content Diversity? arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.05196 (2023).
Elena Petrovskaya, Christoph Sebastian Deterding, and Simon Colton. 2020. Casual creators in the wild: A typology of
commercial generative creativity support tools. InICCC’20: Eleventh International Conference on Computational Creativity.
Association for Computational Creativity (ACC).
A Terry Purcell and John S Gero. 1996. Design and other types of fixation. Design Studies 17, 4 (1996), 363–383.
Younès Rabii and Michael Cook. 2023. Why Oatmeal is Cheap: Kolmogorov Complexity and Procedural Generation. In
Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on the Foundations of Digital Games .
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. Sentence-BERT: Sentence Embeddings using Siamese BERT-Networks. InProceedings
of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing . Association for Computational Linguistics.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.10084
19
Max Kreminski
Christian Remy, Lindsay MacDonald Vermeulen, Jonas Frich, Michael Mose Biskjaer, and Peter Dalsgaard. 2020. Evaluating
creativity support tools in HCI research. InProceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference. 457–476.
Melissa Roemmele and Andrew Gordon. 2018. Linguistic features of helpfulness in automated support for creative writing.
In Proceedings of the First Workshop on Storytelling (Story-NLP 2018) . 14–19.
Donald Alan Schön. 1983. The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think in Action . Basic Books.
Abigail See, Aneesh Pappu, Rohun Saxena, Akhila Yerukola, and Christopher D Manning. 2019. Do Massively Pretrained
Language Models Make Better Storytellers? In Proceedings of the 23rd Conference on Computational Natural Language
Learning (CoNLL). Association for Computational Linguistics, 843–861. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/K19-1079
Noor Shaker, Julian Togelius, and Mark J Nelson. 2016. Procedural Content Generation in Games . Springer.
Ari Shapiro. 2016. Jhumpa Lahiri Finds Freedom In Italian Memoir: ‘No One Expected Me To Do It’. https://www.npr.org/
transcripts/466001114.
Ben Shneiderman. 2007. Creativity support tools: accelerating discovery and innovation. Commun. ACM 50, 12 (2007),
20–32.
Ilia Shumailov, Zakhar Shumaylov, Yiren Zhao, Yarin Gal, Nicolas Papernot, and Ross Anderson. 2023. The curse of recursion:
Training on generated data makes models forget. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17493 (2023).
Adam M Smith and Michael Mateas. 2011. Answer set programming for procedural content generation: A design space
approach. IEEE Transactions on Computational Intelligence and AI in Games 3, 3 (2011), 187–200.
Gillian Smith and Jim Whitehead. 2010. Analyzing the expressive range of a level generator. In Proceedings of the 2010
Workshop on Procedural Content Generation in Games .
Susan Sontag. 1977. On Photography. Farrar, Straus & Giroux.
Nick St. Pierre. 2024. What gets generated versus what gets posted. Expecting perfect results every time you run a prompt
is a fantasy. https://twitter.com/nickfloats/status/1744710730526421450. Accessed: 2024-04-30.
Jessi Stark, Anthony Tang, Young-Ho Kim, Joonsuk Park, and Daniel Wigdor. 2023. Can AI Support Fiction Writers Without
Writing For Them? In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Intelligent and Interactive Writing Assistants .
Adam Summerville, Sam Snodgrass, Matthew Guzdial, Christoffer Holmgård, Amy K Hoover, Aaron Isaksen, Andy Nealen,
and Julian Togelius. 2018. Procedural content generation via machine learning (PCGML). IEEE Transactions on Games 10,
3 (2018), 257–270.
Atau Tanaka. 2006. Interaction, experience and the future of music. In Consuming music together: Social and collaborative
aspects of music consumption technologies . Springer, 267–288.
E Paul Torrance. 1966. Torrance tests of creative thinking. Educational and Psychological Measurement (1966).
Hannah Twigg-Smith, Jasper Tran O’Leary, and Nadya Peek. 2021. Tools, Tricks, and Hacks: Exploring Novel Digital
Fabrication Workflows on #PlotterTwitter. InProceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems.
Johan Ugander and Ziv Epstein. 2024. The art of randomness: Sampling and chance in the age of algorithmic reproduction.
Harvard Data Science Review 6, 4 (2024).
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia
Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all you need. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30 (2017).
Lili Yao, Nanyun Peng, Ralph Weischedel, Kevin Knight, Dongyan Zhao, and Rui Yan. 2019. Plan-and-write: Towards better
automatic storytelling. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , Vol. 33. 7378–7385.
JD Zamfirescu-Pereira, Richmond Y Wong, Bjoern Hartmann, and Qian Yang. 2023. Why Johnny can’t prompt: how non-AI
experts try (and fail) to design LLM prompts. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems.
Yiming Zhang, Avi Schwarzschild, Nicholas Carlini, Zico Kolter, and Daphne Ippolito. 2024. Forcing Diffuse Distributions
out of Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.10859 (2024).
David Zhou and Sarah Sterman. 2023. Creative Struggle: Arguing for the Value of Difficulty in Supporting Ownership and
Self-Expression in Creative Writing. InThe Second Workshop on Intelligent and Interactive Writing Assistants (In2Writing).
20