Cheap and Easy Open-Ended Text Input
for Interactive Emergent Narrative
Max Kreminski
mkreminski@scu.edu
Santa Clara University
Santa Clara, USA
Figure 1: A screenshot of our demo of PWIM. The text area in the top left allows the player to describe what they want to do;
possible actions are presented below as clickable buttons, colored and sized to highlight actions that are similar to the input.
ABSTRACT
We present a demonstration of Play What I Mean (PWIM): a novel,
AI-supported interaction technique for interactive emergent nar-
rative (IEN) games and play experiences. By assisting players in
translating high-level gameplay intents (expressed as short, un-
structured text strings) into concrete game actions, PWIM aims to
support open-ended player input while mitigating the overwhelm
that players sometimes feel when confronting the large action
spaces that characterize IEN gameplay. In matching player intents
to game actions, PWIM makes use of an off-the-shelf sentence
embedding model that is lightweight enough to run locally on a
player’s device, and wraps this model in a simple user interface that
allows the player to work around occasional classification errors.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → Interaction techniques; • Ap-
plied computing → Computer games; • Computing method-
ologies → Natural language processing .
KEYWORDS
interactive emergent narrative, interactive drama, sentence embed-
dings, interaction techniques
1 PLAY WHAT I MEAN
Interactive emergent narrative (IEN) games and play experiences,
such as Dwarf Fortress and The Sims , allow players to perform
actions in a wide-open sandbox that then responds narratively to
whatever the player has done [7, 9]. The wide-open nature of player
input in IEN supports many of the form’s central aesthetics [ 15,
Sec. 3.2], but also tends to lead to player overwhelm [8] at the sheer
breadth of actions that can be performed. Avoiding overwhelm
while retaining open-endedness of input thus stands out as a central
design challenge for IEN games.
Overwhelm at the breadth of the action space in IEN is partly
downstream of user interface design: a graphical UI that makes all
available game actions visible to the player, when backed up by
a very wide action space, tends to appear visually overwhelming.
For instance, the Versu UI [3]—which displays all available actions
as distinct, clickable buttons—is sometimes described as confusing,
due to the very large number of actions that must be explicitly
considered at each choice point.
Alternatively, interactive narrative games with wide action spaces
have often made use of a text parser to interpret commands entered
by the player as short text strings, allowing players to access the
full breadth of a wide-open action space without navigating an
Max Kreminski
overwhelming GUI. But parsers have problems of their own: verbs
in parser interactive fiction are notoriously hard to discover [6], the
syntax to which parser-interpreted instructions must conform is
notoriously finicky [5], and the implementation of a truly forgiving
parser for open-ended utterances (such as that inFaçade [10], which
aims to respond to arbitrary player-entered dialogue) represents a
major investment of development time and effort—so major that
very few games have ever shipped with such a parser.
To address these difficulties, we demonstrate a new interaction
technique for IEN that aims to provide some of the advantages
of open-ended text input without necessitating the development
or reuse of a sophisticated parser. This technique—Play What I
Mean (PWIM)—builds on the basic text-to-dialogue approach pro-
posed by Chen et al. [1] (i.e., using a sentence embedding model to
map player-entered intent strings to game-provided lines of player
character dialogue) by combining it with a more sophisticated,
Versu-inspired system for state tracking and conditional action
provision [2], as well as a user interface that enables players to ex-
plicitly choose between several game actions that represent likely
matches for their intent. Our demo of PWIM can be played in a web
browser1 and is implemented completely in clientside JavaScript us-
ing a generic, off-the-shelf sentence embedding model [12], demon-
strating the ease of implementation of this interaction technique
for arbitrary IEN games.
2 IMPLEMENTATION
The core of the PWIM interaction loop is as follows:
(1) The player types a natural language phrase or sentence
describing what they want to do.
(2) Currently available game actions are sorted according to
semantic similarity to this sentence.
(3) Sorted actions are displayed in a way that visually priori-
tizes closer matches, but allows the player to choose what
action is ultimately performed.
In our demonstration, possible game actions are provided by a
Praxish domain that mirrors the functionality of Versu. Praxish
actions are defined as small blobs of structured JSON, making them
relatively straightforward to author; see Fig. 3 in the original Praxish
paper [2] for an example.
Semantic similarity between available game actions and a player-
entered intent phrase is determined via the all-mpnet-base-v2
model provided with the open-source SentenceTransformers li-
brary [12]. Every available action is summarized as a short imper-
ative phrase, and embeddings of these action summary phrases
are compared to an embedding of the player intent phrase via co-
sine similarity. Closer matches are displayed with a proportionally
darker background color in the PWIM UI (Fig. 1), and the top 𝐾
matches (in our demo,𝐾 = 3) are displayed at an enlarged size to
further increase their visual prevalence.
One way to explore the potential of this approach is to travel to
the bar in our example game, then enter a wide variety of intent
phrases. In our testing, we found that phrases as diverse as “get
hammered”, “gimme something autumnal”, “play music”, “gotta stay
hydrated”, and “say hisaac” all resulted in the most closely aligned
possible action being surfaced as the top recommended action in
1https://mkremins.github.io/pwim
the PWIM UI. Meanwhile, only a few testing phrases (e.g., “sober
up”) did not result in appropriate top recommendations. Occasional
misclassification of intent phrases is why we choose to display all
possible actions in the UI (giving players a chance to manually
correct misclassifications) instead of automatically performing the
action that represents the closest match; misclassifications can also
likely be mitigated by finetuning the sentence embedding model
against a game-specific set of player intent and action summary
phrases, although this would increase deployment complexity.
3 RELATED WORK
Chen et al . [1] have previously employed a similar approach to
ours, using sentence embeddings to map player utterances to pre-
recorded lines of dialogue. However, this earlier work does not
tie dialogue selection into a deeper emergent narrative simulation
with complicated state tracking and many conditionally available
actions. Additionally, player intent phrases are used in this work to
automatically play the most closely matching line of dialogue; this
simpler approach is more susceptible to derailment by misclassifi-
cation of intent phrases, and may limit the discoverability of game
actions in comparison to PWIM.
Some co-creative narrative play experiences have also made use
of purely language modeling approaches—including data-driven
case-based reasoning systems [13, 17], text-generating recurrent
neural networks [14], and large language models [4, 16]—to respond
to arbitrary text input by players. However, these systems generally
do not attempt to ground out player input in a hand-crafted on-
tology of game actions, often limiting the coherence of the stories
that these systems can produce—or, alternatively, requiring the
intervention of an external game master to weave the results of
command invocations into a coherent story [11].
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to Barrett R. Anderson for initially exploring the possibility
of moving the semantic similarity component of the PWIM demo
into clientside JavaScript.
REFERENCES
[1] Sherol Chen, Ben Pietrzak, Kory Mathewson, Anna Kipnis, and Erin Hoffman-
John. 2020. Text to Dialog: Using Semantic Similarity to Extend Narrative
Immersion in Virtual Worlds. In NeurIPS Workshop on Machine Learning for
Creativity and Design 4.0 .
[2] James Dameris, Rosaura Hernandez Roman, and Max Kreminski. 2023. Praxish:
a rational reconstruction of a logic-based DSL for modeling social practices. In
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital
Entertainment, Vol. 19. 407–415.
[3] Richard Evans and Emily Short. 2014. Versu—a simulationist storytelling system.
IEEE Transactions on Computational Intelligence and AI in Games 6, 2 (2014),
113–130.
[4] Minh Hua and Rita Raley. 2020. Playing With Unicorns: AI Dungeon and Citizen
NLP. DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly 14, 4 (2020).
[5] IFWiki Contributors. 2006. Infocom-type parser. https://www.ifwiki.org/
Infocom-type_parser. Accessed: 2023-12-29.
[6] IFWiki Contributors. 2017. Guess-the-verb. https://www.ifwiki.org/Guess-the-
verb. Accessed: 2023-12-29.
[7] Max Kreminski and Michael Mateas. 2021. A coauthorship-centric history of
interactive emergent narrative. In Interactive Storytelling: 14th International Con-
ference on Interactive Digital Storytelling, ICIDS 2021, Tallinn, Estonia, December
7–10, 2021, Proceedings 14 . Springer, 222–235.
[8] Max Kreminski, Noah Wardrip-Fruin, and Michael Mateas. 2023. Authoring for
story sifters. In The Authoring Problem: Challenges in Supporting Authoring for
Interactive Digital Narratives. Springer, 207–220.
Cheap and Easy Open-Ended Text Input for Interactive Emergent Narrative
[9] Sandy Louchart, John Truesdale, Neil Suttie, and Ruth Aylett. 2015. Emergent
narrative: past, present and future of an interactive storytelling approach. In
Interactive Digital Narrative. Routledge, 185–199.
[10] Michael Mateas and Andrew Stern. 2003. Façade: An experiment in building a
fully-realized interactive drama. In Game Developers Conference.
[11] Stefan Papazov, Wesley Gill, Marta Garcia Ferreiro, Andrew Zhu, Lara J Martin,
and Chris Callison-Burch. 2022. Using language models to convert between
natural language and game commands. In The Third Wordplay: When Language
Meets Games Workshop.
[12] Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. Sentence-BERT: Sentence Embeddings
using Siamese BERT-Networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing . Association for Computational
Linguistics. https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.10084
[13] Melissa Roemmele and Andrew S Gordon. 2015. Creative Help: A story writing
assistant. In Interactive Storytelling: 8th International Conference on Interactive
Digital Storytelling, ICIDS 2015, Copenhagen, Denmark, November 30-December 4,
2015, Proceedings 8. Springer, 81–92.
[14] Melissa Roemmele and Andrew S Gordon. 2018. Automated assistance for cre-
ative writing with an RNN language model. InProceedings of the 23rd International
Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces Companion .
[15] James Ryan. 2018. Curating Simulated Storyworlds. Ph. D. Dissertation. University
of California, Santa Cruz.
[16] Yuqian Sun, Zhouyi Li, Ke Fang, Chang Hee Lee, and Ali Asadipour. 2023. Lan-
guage as reality: a co-creative storytelling game experience in 1001 Nights using
generative AI. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
Interactive Digital Entertainment, Vol. 19. 425–434.
[17] Reid Swanson and Andrew S Gordon. 2012. Say Anything: Using textual case-
based reasoning to enable open-domain interactive storytelling. ACM Transac-
tions on Interactive Intelligent Systems (TiiS) 2, 3 (2012).