You Can Now Publish Your Own Creations Using the New Core Rules | Dungeons & Dragons Skip to Content Play D&D My Characters Create a character My Campaigns Beta Maps VTT More Tools D&D Beyond Mobile App Avrae Discord Bot Browse Homebrew My Homebrew Collection My Homebrew Creations Encounters My Dice Rules Browse Classes Backgrounds Species Feats Spells Equipment Magic Items Monsters Resources How to Play D&D D&D Beyond Basic Rules Rules Glossary D&D Character Sheets System Reference Document (SRD) Unearthed Arcana Featured Article Updating Your Campaign to the 5.5e D&D Rules Article Running Lairs: How to Make the Most of a Monster's Place of Power Library Free books View all Sign in to view your library & saved favorites. Sign in Community Support Help Portal Articles Support Forum Changelog Roadmap Creator FAQ Connect Community Update Forums Organized Play Find Players Discord Legends of Greyhawk Follow Us Featured Article Dungeon Masters: The New D&D Actual Play Marketplace Open search Toggle mobile navigation Sign in Create Account Play D&D Back Play D&D My Characters Create a character My Campaigns Maps VTT More Tools D&D Beyond Mobile App Avrae Discord Bot Browse Homebrew My Homebrew Collection My Homebrew Creations Encounters My Dice Rules Back Rules Browse Classes Backgrounds Species Feats Spells Equipment Magic Items Monsters Resources How to Play D&D D&D Beyond Basic Rules Rules Glossary D&D Character Sheets System Reference Document (SRD) Unearthed Arcana Featured Article Updating Your Campaign to the 5.5e D&D Rules Article Running Lairs: How to Make the Most of a Monster's Place of Power Library Back Library Free books Monstrous Compendium Vol. 1: Spelljammer Creatures Frozen Sick D&D Beyond Basic Rules Basic Rules (2014) Sign in to view your library & saved favorites. Sign in Community Back Community Help Portal Articles Support Forum Changelog Roadmap Creator FAQ Connect Community Update Forums Organized Play Find Players Discord Legends of Greyhawk Follow Us Featured Article Dungeon Masters: The New D&D Actual Play Marketplace Sign in Create an Account Home Posts You Can Now Publish Your Own Creations Using the New Core Rules You Can Now Publish Your Own Creations Using the New Core Rules You Can Now Publish Your Own Creations Using the New Core Rules by DND Staff May 27, 2025 Category Icon Posts Tags Studio Blog Editor’s Note (March 2, 2026): This article uses “2024” to refer to the updated fifth edition rules. On D&D Beyond, that content is now labeled “5.5e” (with 2014 content labeled “5e”). This is a clarity update only—no rules, purchases, or gameplay are changing, and both versions remain fully supported and compatible. SRD 5.2.1 is now available, as of May 1, 2025. Among other corrections, it includes 15 magic items that were accidentally omitted from SRD 5.2. Learn more in our Community Update . The Systems Reference Document 5.2 (SRD 5.2) is now available on D&D Beyond! This document provides the base D&D rules for creators to publish their own products compatible with the 2024 ruleset. As promised to the community, SRD 5.2 has been released under Creative Commons license and will coexist with SRD 5.1. You can learn more below: How to Access SRD 5.2 What is the SRD? What is Creative Commons? What's Changing from SRD 5.1 to SRD 5.2? New Creator FAQ Page SRD 5.2 and the Errata Process What are the D&D Beyond Basic Rules? Are the D&D Beyond Basic Rules the same as SRD 5.2? Artist: Olivier Bernard How to Access SRD 5.2 D&D Beyond is the home of SRD 5.1, SRD 5.2, other versions of the SRD, and everything you need to know about creating third-party content for Dungeons & Dragons. You can access the SRD and an FAQ here: What is the SRD? The SRD contains the base game rules for Dungeons & Dragons. It is used by third-party publishers to build products using the Dungeons & Dragons ruleset, which creators can reference in their products without paying a licensing fee to Wizards of the Coast. SRD 5.2 includes foundational content from the 2024 core rules. You'll find an updated and expanded library of referenceable content, such as the rules glossary, weapon mastery properties, and exploration mechanics. For creators who would like to continue creating content for the 2014 rules, SRD 5.1 will remain unchanged. What is Creative Commons? Creative Commons (CC) is a nonprofit licensing framework that allows creators to share their work freely while retaining certain rights. Publishing the core game mechanics of D&D under a Creative Commons license provides a legally binding promise that essential parts of D&D will remain free to use, remix, and build upon. Forever. What's Changing from SRD 5.1 to SRD 5.2? SRD 5.2 makes it easy for creators to transition their third-party content that was written for the 2014 rules to the 2024 rules. To help with this transition, Wizards of the Coast has published the Converting to System Reference Document 5.2.1 guide . This resource outlines renamed rules, new mechanics, and revised systems across every part of the game, including classes, spells, monsters, and actions. The guide uses clear tags such as [New Rule], [Revised Rule], and [New Name] to help creators identify what's changed and how to adapt their content. New Creator FAQ Page To support our creator community, we have developed a Creator FAQ page that provides information on creating third-party products, fan content, and more. On the new Creator FAQ page, you'll find resources like the Conversion Guide, as well as information about the Fan Content Policy, D&D Beyond's homebrew tools, and pointing your readers to official D&D Content not in the SRD. SRD 5.2 and the Errata Process SRD 5.2 will be regularly updated to incorporate the latest errata for the new core rules. The first errata of the new core rules has just been released , and SRD 5.2 comes with these changes implemented. When errata is released for rules within SRD 5.2, the SRD will later reflect these changes, and its version number will be updated (e.g., SRD 5.2.1, 5.2.2, etc.). All future versions of the SRD will be released exclusively under Creative Commons (CC-BY-4.0) for consistency and broader compatibility. What are the D&D Beyond Basic Rules? With the release of SRD 5.2, we're replacing the Free Rules (2024) on D&D Beyond with the new D&D Beyond Basic Rules . This online resource is intended to help players and Dungeon Masters learn how to play the game. Are the D&D Beyond Basic Rules the same as SRD 5.2? No. Although you will find overlap between the D&D Beyond Basic Rules and SRD 5.2, only SRD 5.2 is being released under a Creative Commons license. The Basic Rules cannot be used in content creation. Start Publishing Today Dungeons & Dragons’ SRD allows publishers to create compatible adventures, rulebooks, and supplements using D&D’s core rules. With the team’s hard work on the 2024 core rules now available for the community to create with, there’s never been a better time to dive into publishing your own products! And, as SRD 5.2 has been made available under Creative Commons license, you can rest assured that these rules will always be available for you to create with. Irrevocably and forever. Stickers and Drag and Drop Come to the Maps VTT by Davyd Barker Gather Your Party in the Official D&D Communities! by LaTia Jacquise Errata and Sage Advice: What’s Next for the New Core Rules? by D&D Staff Tags Studio Blog Our Terms of Service and Privacy Notice have recently been updated to provide greater clarity as to how disputes are handled and transparency regarding the collection and use of personal data. Please review them here: Terms of Service , Privacy Notice . By continuing to use the services, you agree to the new Terms. Support Help Portal Support Forum System Status Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information Your Privacy Choices Cookie Notice System Reference Document (SRD) About Contact Us Careers Wizards of the Coast Credits Find us on social media Download the D&D Beyond App © 2017- 2024 Wizards of the Coast LLC | All Rights Reserved Dungeons & Dragons, D&D Beyond, D&D, Wizards of the Coast, the dragon ampersand, and all other Wizards of the Coast product names, campaign settings, their respective logos, and The World's Greatest Roleplaying Game are © and trademark Wizards of the Coast in the U.S.A. and other countries. © 2024 Wizards. Privacy Policy Terms of Service