SRD v5.2.1 - System Reference Document - D&D Beyond This site works best with JavaScript enabled. Please enable JavaScript to get the best experience from this site. Skip to Content Play D&D My Characters Create a character My Campaigns Beta Maps VTT More Tools D&D Beyond Mobile App Avrae Discord Bot Browse Homebrew My Homebrew Collection My Homebrew Creations Encounters My Dice Rules Browse Classes Backgrounds Species Feats Spells Equipment Magic Items Monsters Resources How to Play D&D D&D Beyond Basic Rules Rules Glossary D&D Character Sheets System Reference Document (SRD) Unearthed Arcana Featured Article Updating Your Campaign to the 5.5e D&D Rules Article Running Lairs: How to Make the Most of a Monster's Place of Power Library Free books View all Sign in to view your library & saved favorites. Sign in Community Support Help Portal Articles Support Forum Changelog Roadmap Creator FAQ Connect Community Update Forums Organized Play Find Players Discord Legends of Greyhawk Follow Us Featured Article Dungeon Masters: The New D&D Actual Play Marketplace Open search Toggle mobile navigation Sign in Create Account Play D&D Back Play D&D My Characters Create a character My Campaigns Maps VTT More Tools D&D Beyond Mobile App Avrae Discord Bot Browse Homebrew My Homebrew Collection My Homebrew Creations Encounters My Dice Rules Back Rules Browse Classes Backgrounds Species Feats Spells Equipment Magic Items Monsters Resources How to Play D&D D&D Beyond Basic Rules Rules Glossary D&D Character Sheets System Reference Document (SRD) Unearthed Arcana Featured Article Updating Your Campaign to the 5.5e D&D Rules Article Running Lairs: How to Make the Most of a Monster's Place of Power Library Back Library Free books Monstrous Compendium Vol. 1: Spelljammer Creatures Frozen Sick D&D Beyond Basic Rules Basic Rules (2014) Sign in to view your library & saved favorites. Sign in Community Back Community Help Portal Articles Support Forum Changelog Roadmap Creator FAQ Connect Community Update Forums Organized Play Find Players Discord Legends of Greyhawk Follow Us Featured Article Dungeon Masters: The New D&D Actual Play Marketplace Sign in Create an Account Home System Reference Document System Reference Document SRD v5.2.1 by Jay Jani Mar 20, 2025 Category Icon System Reference Document System Reference Document (SRD) System Reference Document v5.2.1 The System Reference Document (SRD) contains D&D rules content you can use and reference to publish content under Creative Commons. The purpose of the SRD is to provide a foundation of Dungeons & Dragons content on which third-party publishers can build their products. It allows creators to reference and use the base game rules of Dungeons & Dragons in their products without the need to pay a licensing fee to Wizards of the Coast. The SRD and Creative Commons do not apply to the use of D&D content in streaming, fan art, cosplay, and other fan content; these are permitted as described in Wizards’ Fan Content Policy . In addition to the SRD and its FAQ, we’ve also established a Creator FAQ that further details how content creators of all kinds can develop content, fan works, and other products legally with D&D IP. Download the latest SRD below, along with a conversion guide from SRD 5.1 to SRD 5.2.1 for creators looking to update their materials. See below for the SRD v5.2 FAQ . In addition, you can view or download previous SRD releases below. You can also find more information on SRD v5.1 below. This page was last updated on March 02, 2026 . English Downloads English SRD v5.2.1 (Published: May 01, 2025) Converting to SRD v5.2.1 (Published: May 27, 2025) Localized SRD Downloads Deutsch SRD v5.2.1 (Published: December 08, 2025) Español SRD v5.2.1 (Published: December 08, 2025) Français SRD v5.2.1 (Published: December 08, 2025) Italiano SRD v5.2.1 (Published: December 08, 2025) Creative Commons and the DMsGuild offer different kinds of publishing opportunities. Below is an overview of the programs. Overview Table Activity SRD 5.1* (OGL & CC) SRD 5.2 (CC) DMsGuild I want to design content using the 5e ruleset for D&D ✓ — ✓ (NEW) I want to design content using the 5.5e ruleset for D&D — ✓ ✓ I want to publish my own campaign using the 5e ruleset for D&D ✓ — — (NEW) I want to publish my own campaign using the 5.5e ruleset for D&D — ✓ — I want to publish content using the Forgotten Realms — — ✓ I want to print and sell 5e or 5.5e content on my own ✓ ✓ — *SRD 5.1 was originally published under both OGL 1.0a and Creative Commons. Going forward, all new SRD versions will be released exclusively under Creative Commons (CC-BY-4.0) for consistency and broader compatibility. Previous SRD Releases The following is a list of each of the previous SRD 5.2 versions: SRD v5.2.0 (Published: April 22, 2025) SRD 5.2 FAQ What are the differences between SRD 5.1 and 5.2? See the following table for the differences between SRDs. All content in SRD 5.2 has been updated to 5.5e core rules wording and mechanics. Section SRD 5.2 Difference Legal Disclaimer Wording changes only Table of Contents New Playing the Game Added: Rhythm of Play, Exploration Character Creation Wording/mechanics changes only Classes Wording/mechanics changes only Character Origins Added 3 Backgrounds, 2 Species: Criminal (background) Sage (background) Soldier (background) Goliath (species) Orc (species) Removed: Half-Elf (race), Half-Orc (race) as these are not in the 5.5e core rules. Feats Added 15 Feats: Alert Magic Initiate Savage Attacker Ability Score Improvement Archery Defense Great Weapon Fighting Two Weapon Fighting Boon of Combat Prowess Boon of Dimensional Travel Boon of Fate Boon of Irresistable Offense Boon of the Night Spirit Boon of Spell Recall Boon of Truesight Equipment Added: Weapon Masteries Musket Pistol Brewing Potions of Healing Scribing Spell Scrolls Spells Added 20 Spells: Aura of Life Charm Monster Chromatic Orb Dissonant Whispers Divine Smite Dragon’s Breath Elementalism Ensnaring Strike Hex Ice Knife Mind Spike Phantasmal Force Power Word Heal Ray of Sickness Searing Smite Sorcerous Burst Starry Wisp Summon Dragon Tsunami Vitriolic Sphere Game Rules Added: Rules Glossary Removed: “Between Adventures” section as that is not featured in the 5.5e core rules. Gameplay Toolbox Added: Travel Pace Environmental Effects Magic Items Added 15 Magic Items: Bead of Nourishment Cloak of Invisibility Elixir of Health Energy Bow Gloves of Thievery Hat of Many Spells Potion of Invulnerability Potion of Longevity Potion of Vitality Quarterstaff of the Acrobat Rod of Resurrection Sending Stones Sentinel Shield Shield of the Cavalier Thunderous Greatclub Additionally, two items have a different name in SRD 5.2: Deck of Many Things has been renamed Mysterious Deck * Orb of Dragonkind has been renamed Dragon Orb ** Monsters Added 17 Monsters: Allosaurus Anklyosaurus Archelon Bugbear Stalker Goblin Boss Goblin Minion Guard Captain Hippopotamus Hobgoblin Captain Pirate Pirate Captain Pteradon Sphinx of Wonder Swarm of Crawling Claws Tough Boss Troll Limb Vampire Familiar Updated: Monster names and stat blocks follow the Monster Manual . You can reference Monster Conversions in Appendix B for stat block conversions from 5e to their 5.5e equivalent. Appendix Removed: “Fantasy-Historical Pantheons” and “The Planes of Existence,” as those are not rules-bearing to play fifth edition. *Renamed in SRD 5.2 only to avoid using protected trademarks; still referred to as Deck of Many Things in official products. **Renamed in SRD 5.2 only to avoid using protected trademarks; still referred to as Orb of Dragonkind in official products. Why are some of the names of [spells, items, monsters] different from the names in the Core Rulebooks? We’ve renamed some of the content so that it can be freely used by creators without worrying about infringing Wizards’ IP. The functionality of that content remains the same. Why is [class, spell, monster, etc.] not in SRD 5.2? SRD 5.2 includes a wide range of content from the 5.5e core rulebooks, but some classes (such as the Artificer), species (like Aasimar), and monsters (including the Beholder) have been excluded. These exclusions are based on brand identity protection, licensing strategy, and intellectual property rights. Further, in SRD 5.1 there was confusion around whether any named monsters, items, etc. that appeared in descriptions but not as stat blocks were part of the actual content of the SRD, so we’ve taken steps to ensure that there’s no further confusion there. Names like Strahd, Orcus, and Tiamat won’t appear in SRD 5.2. SRD 5.2 is designed to give creators a strong foundation for building original material, not to replicate every element of the D&D brand or setting. Where content is omitted, creators are encouraged to design and name their own equivalents. Can SRD 5.2 ever be revoked or changed? No. Once a document is published under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC-BY-4.0), it is permanently available under those terms. Wizards of the Coast cannot revoke or alter SRD 5.2 or remove it from Creative Commons. As rules evolve, we may publish future SRD versions (e.g., SRD 5.2.1, 5.3) that reflect errata or new releases. Each version will remain available and independently licensed under Creative Commons. Why is the SRD released under Creative Commons and not OGL 1.0a? Creative Commons (CC-BY-4.0) is a globally recognized, legally stable, and community-endorsed license that provides greater transparency and flexibility. It allows creators to freely use, adapt, and publish compatible content with simple attribution. The community's strong support of SRD 5.1’s release under Creative Commons confirmed it as the preferred standard moving forward. All future SRDs will use Creative Commons exclusively. How will errata interact with SRD 5.2? SRD 5.2 already includes all second-printing errata as of its release. When future errata to the 5.5e core rulebooks are issued, Wizards may release updated SRD versions (e.g., SRD 5.2.1, 5.2.2) reflecting those changes. Each version will retain its own license and will remain available for use under the same Creative Commons terms. Can I use both SRD 5.1 and SRD 5.2 in the same product? Yes. Both SRD 5.1 and 5.2 are available under the Creative Commons CC-BY-4.0 license. You are free to use content from either—or both—in your published work, as long as proper attribution is provided. Can I mix SRD 5.2 content with older editions? Yes, but you’ll need to ensure compatibility on your own. SRD 5.2 is based on the 5.5e rules, so mechanics may differ from older versions. Can I use SRD 5.2 for crowdfunding (Kickstarter, Patreon, etc.)? Yes. SRD 5.2 can be used commercially under Creative Commons, including for crowdfunding and ongoing support platforms, as long as you follow attribution guidelines. System Reference Document v5.1 English Downloads SRD v5.1 (Creative Commons) SRD v5.1 (OGL) Localized SRD Downloads Deutsch SRD v5.1 (Creative Commons) Español SRD v5.1 (Creative Commons) Français SRD v5.1 (Creative Commons) Italiano SRD v5.1 (Creative Commons) SRD 5.1 Creative Commons Update The full contents of SRD 5.1 are now released under both the terms of OGL 1.0a and the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (“CC-BY-4.0”). This means the following: You may choose which license to publish your SRD 5.1 content under. Content you publish under OGL 1.0a must use its attribution terms as specified in the license. Content you publish under Creative Commons must use its attribution terms as specified in its SRD 5.1 preamble. SRD 5.1 FAQ Why does the SRD only have one background and one feat? Why do the PC races not include all of the subraces? The goal of the SRD is to allow users to create new content, not to replicate the text of the whole game. We encourage players, DMs, and publishers to come up with their own backgrounds and feats. Why is the SRD missing some spells, magic items, and monsters? In general, the criteria for what went into the SRD is if it (1) was in the 3E SRD, (2) has an equivalent in fifth edition D&D, and (3) is vital to how a class, magic item, or monster works. For example, the third edition SRD has the Delay Poison spell, but in fifth edition, that’s handled by the Protection from Poison spell, so Protection from Poison is in the SRD. Why do the bookmarks not have spaces in them? The SRD is built in Microsoft Word and converted to a PDF. The bookmarks are created in Word and translated into the PDF (which means we don’t have to manually add all the bookmarks into the PDF every time). Word’s bookmark function doesn’t allow spaces, so the bookmarks in the PDF don’t have spaces. Will more content be added to the SRD? The full fifth edition game and its expansions are available for use via the DMs Guild. New material will be added to the SRD if it is necessary to keep this document and its contents compatible with the latest D&D rules. Creative Commons FAQ What is Creative Commons? As posted on the Creative Commons website: “Creative Commons is a nonprofit organization that helps overcome legal obstacles to the sharing of knowledge and creativity.” They do this, in part, by creating licenses that make it easier for someone, like Wizards, to let people use their content. You can read more at the Creative Commons website . What does Creative Commons do? Creative Commons writes open-source licenses. These licenses are standardized, well-written, widely accepted, and trusted around the world. The CC-BY-4.0 license we chose to use is also irrevocable and Wizards can’t modify it. What does Creative Commons not do? Creative Commons does not take ownership of the content that we are licensing. They do not take ownership in the content you create either. They do not administer the license. They do not have an active role in the process. If Creative Commons doesn’t administer the license, who does? Nobody. There is no need for anyone to have any active involvement. Once we made the SRD 5.1 available under a Creative Commons license, the process is complete. There is nothing left to administer; licensed content is irrevocably available for the world to use. We still own the content we put into SRD 5.1, but anyone can, at any time, use the content we make available under a Creative Commons license as long as their use follows the rules that Creative Commons spelled out in the license itself. What exactly is CC-BY-4.0? Creative Commons has a wide range of licenses to choose from. CC-BY-4.0 is the specific license we selected. We picked CC-BY-4.0 because it is the one that places the fewest restrictions on how third-party creators can use our content. The only requirement is that the user must provide attribution. As long as they do that, they can use the content commercially and they can make new works based on the content. How is this different from the OGL? The OGL places more requirements on creators and contains more restrictions on what they are permitted to do. Creative Commons provides a more modern license, more freedom for creators, and more certainty that the content released under the license will remain available under those terms forever. We put the SRD 5.1 under Creative Commons license in January 2023 so that creators have certainty that Wizards can never revoke or deauthorize SRD 5.1 content. What about VTTs? Are there any restrictions on the types of content that can use Creative Commons? No. The content of SRD 5.1 can be used in any creative expressions, like TTRPGs and VTTs. OGL 1.0a FAQ What is OGL 1.0a? Open Game License (OGL) 1.0a is a license agreement between you and Wizards of the Coast to access the core rules of Dungeons & Dragons through an SRD. This license agreement was created by Wizards in 2000 and has been used by the creator community since then to develop their D&D compatible products. Do I need to sign an agreement to use OGL 1.0a? No, you will instead need to include the full text of OGL 1.0a in your product to confirm it was published under this license. Then is there any benefit to publish my content under OGL 1.0a v Creative Commons? We expect most creators will start using Creative Commons due to its benefits. Still, OGL 1.0a has been the means by which creators have published their D&D compatible works since 2000. We want you to have the choice on which license to use. Our Terms of Service and Privacy Notice have recently been updated to provide greater clarity as to how disputes are handled and transparency regarding the collection and use of personal data. Please review them here: Terms of Service , Privacy Notice . By continuing to use the services, you agree to the new Terms. Support Help Portal Support Forum System Status Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information Your Privacy Choices Cookie Notice System Reference Document (SRD) About Contact Us Careers Wizards of the Coast Credits Find us on social media Download the D&D Beyond App © 2017- 2024 Wizards of the Coast LLC | All Rights Reserved Dungeons & Dragons, D&D Beyond, D&D, Wizards of the Coast, the dragon ampersand, and all other Wizards of the Coast product names, campaign settings, their respective logos, and The World's Greatest Roleplaying Game are © and trademark Wizards of the Coast in the U.S.A. and other countries. © 2024 Wizards. Privacy Policy Terms of Service