 

 Verse and Prose in Fantasy Literature | Great Writers Inspire 

 Jump to Navigation 

 Great Writers Inspire 

 Inspirational literature from the University of Oxford

 Home 

 Writers 

 Themes 

 Library 

 Researchers 

 About 

 -->

 You are here
 Home 

 Verse and Prose in Fantasy Literature

 Please help us improve with this one minute survey (opens in a new tab) 

 Media Files: 

 In this video, Katherine Olley gives an analysis of two forms that dominate fantasy literature: verse and prose.

 Prosimetrum, the alternation between verse and prose as a narrative form, was an extremely popular form of writing in the ancient and medieval world. This talk asks why prosimetrum has survived as a literary form in modern fantasy literature and explores how fantasy writers like Tolkien and Kay employ shifts between verse and prose to dramatic effect within their work.

 Transcript/subtitles (.srt) available here .

 Download: 
 verse-and-prose-fantasy-literaturedefault.mp4 
 Video 
 (175.51 MB) 

 Download: 
 verse-and-prose-fantasy-literaturedefault.srt 
 Document 
 (Subtitles) 
 (26.26 KB) 

 Date Published: 16 December 2020 
 
 Contributors: Katherine Olley 

 In Collection(s): J.R.R. Tolkien , Fantasy Literature: Further Thinking 
 
 Keywords: narrative , prosimetrum , prose , poetry , Medieval Literature , J.R.R. Tolkien , Guy Gavriel Kay 

 Source: University of Oxford Podcasts 

 Cite: Verse and Prose in Fantasy Literature by Katherine Olley at https://podcasts.ox.ac.uk/verse-and-prose-fantasy-literature via http://writersinspire.org/content/verse-prose-fantasy-literature. Published on 16 December 2020. Accessed on 17 June 2026. If reusing this resource please attribute as follows: Verse and Prose in Fantasy Literature (https://podcasts.ox.ac.uk/verse-and-prose-fantasy-literature) by Katherine Olley, licensed as Creative Commons BY-NC-SA (2.0 UK).

 Share: 
 Twitter 

 Facebook 

 Related Content

 Audio 

 Video 

 More 

 The Hobbit at the Bodleian: World Book D... 

 Interview: Catherine Butler 

 The Lord of the Rings: Tolkien's Le... 

 Tolkien's Languages 

 Tolkien and Medieval Literature 

 J.R.R. Tolkien 'Beyond the Shoreles... 

 J.R.R. Tolkien: Medievalist and Mythmake... 

 Talking Tolkien: The influences of Medie... 

 Tolkien and Languages: Ancient and Inven... 

 Tolkien and the Oxford English Dictionar... 

 What Tolkien learnt from Beowulf: Repres... 

 The Stories of Lewis Carroll, J.R.R. Tol... 

 Middle Earth and Tolkien's Digital... 

 Re-Enchanted: The Rise of Children’s Fan... 

 Approaching Fantasy Literature 

 What is the 'Silmarillion'? 

 Old Norse: 'The Tree of Tongues... 

 Old English: 'The Tree of Tongues... 

 Gothic: 'The Tree of Tongues'... 

 Medieval Welsh: 'The Tree of Tongue... 

 Middle English: 'The Tree of Tongue... 

 Tolkien's turning point: Tolkien an... 

 Mythopoeia: myth-creation and Middle-ear... 

 Is Jin Yong 'China's Tolkien... 

 Teaching Pack (Guide): The Hobbit 

 About | Accessibility | Legal Notice | Privacy 

 Creative Commons - Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike license 

