 

 The Masters Of Prose - The Quill to Live 

 Skip to content 

 Menu 
 Home 

 Recommendations 

 Lists (Best of) 

 Archive 

 QTL Bookshop 

 About 

 Twitter 

 TikTok 

 Open Search Popup 

 Search for: 

 Search 

 Close Search Popup 

 The Quill to Live 

 Your Guide To Every World But This One

 The Masters Of Prose
 
 January 7, 2016 May 6, 2021 Categories Lists Gene Wolfe , Guy Gavriel Kay , J. R. R. Tolkien , Joe Abercrombie , Neil Gaiman , Pat Rothfuss , Robert Jackson Bennett , Scott Lynch , Terry Pratchett , Ursula K. Le Guin 6 Comments on The Masters Of Prose 

 When talking about the most talented authors, I hear a lot of fans say it comes down to who has the best prose. While I completely disagree that it is the end-all of importance when judging someone’s books, it is none the less an extremely important aspect of every book. Prose is the vessel in which you tell a story, and requests for recommendations of masterful prose have come pouring in. One of the culprits of this surge in prose love is the talented Patrick Rothfuss, a master wordsmith and one of the current kings of the fantasy world. I get daily requests for authors on par with this giant, so I have decided to make a list of the authors I have read that are prose masters and why. So without further delay, in no particular order, let us begin: 

 Patrick Rothfuss – Let’s start with Rothfuss himself as a introduction. Patrick Rothfuss is almost as much a poet as author, and the fact that his character is also poetically inclined only enhances this fact. Rothfuss’s prose feels both beautiful and accessible, which is what makes it such a powerhouse. He describes scenes in vivid detail, but only focuses on the important and does not waste time on the frivolous. With his honed writing and clever direction Rothfuss piques your curiosity and then paints your imagination without a single word wasted. The combination of both beauty and clarity is what makes him so good.

 Neil Gaiman – Gaiman’s writing always reminds me of Grimm’s Fairy Tales; serious and dark subjects surrounded in whimsy and mystery. There are few authors with prose as imaginative and fun as Neil with his fanciful descriptions and mysterious and silly conversations. Yet these words still pack a punch, with layers of meaning and philosophy built into every single paragraph. Every single time you reread a work of Gaiman’s you will find some new meaning you didn’t see before and find the words more captivating than you remember. He is a thoughtful writer who has induced endless conversations about the complex meanings of stories.

 Scott Lynch – Lynch has the one of strongest voices I have ever read. When you read any of his books you become the characters he creates, and live their lives. His books are both hilarious and alive. I don’t have a favorite part of any of his novels because if you were to open to any single page and start reading you would find yourself smiling and laughing. His books read like your best friend making you laugh after a rough break up and continue to bring me comfort whenever I need them. His prose will make its way to your heart and warm it with his lovable rogues and perfect humor. I have only found one or two books even close to as dripping with humor as Lynch’s work.

 Robert Bennett – I have only read one of Bennett’s books, City of Stairs , but it was enough. Bennett has displayed a talent for action, description, and imagination in his prose. His prose has both vivid detail, and an edge of humor, that makes scenes and descriptions both clear, beautiful, and memorable. In addition, in the creation of his original creatures and places he demonstrates a clear talent in helping the reader see his own imagination with clarity and understanding. His outrageous descriptives, dark humor, and use of the present tense in City of Stairs made me feel like I was reading something one of a kind. 

 Joe Abercrombie – Next we have the king of combat and the Escher of the fantasy world, Joe Abercrombie. I think that many in the fantasy world would agree that Abercrombie is one of the, if not the, most clever writers in the genre. There is so much going on in his prose that multiple people can read it, discuss it after, and wonder if they read the same story. Abercrombie’s prose feels like reality instead of a story, and does wonders bringing his tales to life. In addition, there are only a few authors who can write combat prose as well as Abercrombie. Many books feel like people just waving swords, but with Abercrombie you can feelevery sword blow, run every footstep, and take every breathe alongside the warriors in every battle.

 Terry Pratchett – The world lost a giant when Terry Pratchett passed away last year. I honestly do not feel like I am a good enough writer to describe the power of Terry Pratchett’s prose, so instead for once I am going to refer you to the words of someone else on this list, Scott Lynch, as he describes what it was like to wake up in a world without Terry Pratchett (Warning – It will make you cry). 

 Ursula K. Le Guin – Le Guin’s prose is very, very powerful. She writes the kind of novels that make you feel bad about the way you live your life, and cause you to vow to give more to charity. Her prose uses tone and flow masterfully to manipulate your emotions and makes her messages incredibly heavy hitting. She is one of the few authors I have read to move me with just short stories like this one (only four pages long) . Her work hits you like a truck full of bricks and is a great choice for someone looking for moving prose.

 Gene Wolfe – Gene Wolfe writes the most dense, elusive prose I have probably ever read. His works are not on the same continent as “easy reads”. However, while his work requires a huge investment of time and patience, even the smallest snippet of his prose is enjoyable and oversaturated with meaning. You can read a book like Shadow of the Torturer 30 times and still find that each chunk of prose has new secrets that you did not find before. People are still writing books about the depth of his prose 30 years after it was published, so if you are looking for someone who meticulously chooses each word in a sentence/page/chapter/book he is always worth a read. 

 Guy Gavriel Kay – Kay writes mostly standalones, and his release times are infrequent. However, the long waits are always worth it as Kay’s prose will make you feel like you are living in another world or era. Kay is the most transportive writer I have ever read. He spends years studying the cultures and places he writes about so that he can get the details just right. His prose, without fail, takes you on journeys and fully immerses you in the characters lives until they feel like your own. His writing style is also incredibly poetic but also not too dense. This combination creates passages that are deeply moving but don’t require hours of thought to decipher their meaning. If you want to go on a journey, give any of his books a shot.

 J. R. R. Tolkien – Tolkien. I feel like I really don’t need to justify why Tolkien is on this list, as Lord of the Rings is accepted as literature by a lot of people. However, I will say this – The Lord of the Rings is the kind of book that everyone wants to say they read, but doesn’t want to actually read. Its combination of popularity and dense prose encourage lots of people to skim through them in order to simple claim they have read it. This is a huge shame, because the prose (and everything) in Lord of the Rings is incredible. Tolkien’s prose is poetically descriptive, deeply laden with metaphors and symbolism, grand and inspiring in scope, and often times surprisingly funny and light hearted all at the same time. There is a reason he will forever be considered one of the all time fantasy masters, if you haven’t take some time and read through his books some time. 

 Share this:
 
 Share on X (Opens in new window) 
 X 

 Share on Facebook (Opens in new window) 
 Facebook 

 Like this:
 Like Loading… 

 Published by Andrew Mather - The Quill to Live 

 View all posts by Andrew Mather - The Quill to Live 

 Post navigation

 Previous Post Radiance – Where do I Start…. 
 Next Post Perdido Street Station – Foul And Fanciful 

 6 thoughts on “ The Masters Of Prose ” 

 mervih says: 

 January 10, 2016 at 5:52 am 

 I certainly agree with you on the authors I’ve read (Gaiman, LeGuin, Pratchett, Kay, and Wolfe). Lynch is on my TBR pile and your post encourages me to read him.

 I’d like to point out Lois McMaster Bujold, Patricia McKillip, and Catherynne Valente. They also write very beautifully.

 Loading... 

 Reply 

 Leona says: 

 March 3, 2016 at 1:25 pm 

 Reblogged this on Leona's Blog of Shadows .

 Loading... 

 Reply 

 Pingback: Sunday Showcase #1 | 

 @lynnsbooks says: 

 March 8, 2016 at 3:25 pm 

 I’ve not read all of these but agree with all of those I have so I’m sure all the others are equally awesome.

Great list.

Lynn 😀

 Loading... 

 Reply 

 Dustin says: 

 March 9, 2016 at 2:42 pm 

 Reblogged this on Flaggfan .

 Loading... 

 Reply 

 Pingback: On Ursula Le Guin – Forever Dreaming | The Quill to Live 

 Leave a Reply Cancel reply 

 Follow QTL via Email

 Click to get notified of new posts and reviews via email!

 Email Address 

 Follow QTL 

 Upcoming Reviews 

 Welcome To The Cosmere: A Brandon Sanderson Reading Order Guide 
 Recommendations 
 Why You Should Read Malazan - Part 1: The Introduction 
 Solaris - Waiting Beneath The Surface 
 The Best Of Science Fantasy 
 All You Need Is Love - 25 Perfect Love Quotes In Fantasy 
 Theo of Golden - Not Worth Its Weight 
 The Top Ten Butts Of Fantasy And Science Fiction 
 A Parade Of Horribles - Taking The Power Out Of Power Fantasies 
 Five Reasons Why You Should Be Reading The Expanse 
 Categories

 Announcements (11)

 Audio (8)

 Crosswords (15)

 Discussion (85)

 Guest Post (16)

 Interviews (20)

 Lists (83)

 Musings (7)

 Other Site Content (5)

 Reviews (1,134)

 Tags
 Adrian Tchaikovsky 
 Best of 
 Book Review 
 Brandon Sanderson 
 Character Focused 
 Dark Horse 
 Debut 
 Dystopia 
 Epic Fantasy 
 Fantasy 
 Horror 
 Humor 
 LGBTQ+ 
 Mystery 
 Neil Gaiman 
 Novella 
 Political Intrigue 
 Romance 
 Science Fantasy 
 Science Fiction 
 Space Opera 
 Standalone 
 Stephen King 
 Tor 
 Young Adult 

 Twitter 

 TikTok 

 Home 

 Recommendations 

 Lists (Best of) 

 Archive 

 QTL Bookshop 

 About 

 Discover more from The Quill to Live

 Subscribe now to keep reading and get access to the full archive.

 Type your email… 

 Subscribe 

 Continue reading 

 Loading Comments... 

 Write a Comment... 

 Email (Required) 

 Name (Required) 

 Website 

 %d 

