 

 Review: Sailing to Sarantium, Guy Gavriel Kay 

 Review: Sailing to Sarantium , Guy Gavriel Kay

 "To say of a man that he was sailing to Sarantium was to say
that his life was on the cusp of change: poised for emergent
greatness, brilliance, fortune—or else at the very precipice
of a final and absolute fall as he met something too vast for his
capacity."

 —Guy Gavriel Kay, Sailing to
Sarantium 

 Guy Gavriel Kay's latest novel, Sailing to
Sarantium , is a fine example of the strengths of his
writing: deft characterization, vivid worldbuilding, and a
continuing tribute to civilization and culture.
 Sarantium , the first book of the Sarantine Mosaic
diptych, is both more historical and more fantastic than Kay's
recent books. Set in an analogue Byzantium during the reign of
Justinian I, many events described correspond closely enough to
those of our world that even someone with encyclopedia-only
knowledge of the period (such as myself) can easily identify the
characters, places, and even the dates that the novel adapts.
However, a throw-away line in the prologue is the first signal that
this is not a "straight" historical:

 Fotius the sandalmaker had wagered money he couldn't afford to
lose that the Blues' principal charioteer would win the first three
races today . . . . If he hadn't seen a ghost on the roof of the
colonnade across from his shop yesterday afternoon, Fotius would
have felt entirely sure of the wager.

 A "half-world" of supernatural beings is broadly acknowledged by
the people of the novel. Though magic is not frequently seen, it is
nevertheless important: an encounter with the half-world in the
middle of the book will resonate backwards and forwards throughout
the story. Both the mundane and the supernatural worlds are built
carefully; chariot races at the Hippodrome and sacrifices to pagan
gods are rendered equally vividly and precisely.

 Against this fascinating world is set the story of Caius
Crispus, a mosaicist summoned from Batiara to Sarantium to work on
the rebuilding of the Great Sanctuary. Crispin is a contrary,
irritable, passionate man who loved his work and his family
greatly; after plague took his entire family, work was the only
thing that engaged him even slightly. The core of the story is
Crispin's movement from "following [his family] into a living
death" to accepting that he wants to live, work, and leave a mark
on the world he is inextricably engaged with. Crispin is an
interesting and sympathetic protagonist, and I found his inner and
outer journeys compelling.

 However, Crispin is not the sole focus of the book. To clumsily
summarize an elegant technique, the book is, as the series title
suggests, constructed as a mosaic: the story, particularly the
major plot events, is shown through multiple points of view, where
some dominate but are accented by many minor ones. Each of the
characters contributes something distinctive to the whole, both in
themselves and in their perceptions of events. This technique also
rewards careful reading, as small details relayed in one area refer
to and reflect larger ones in others. Mosaics and puzzles are the
motif of the novel, and a reader has the double pleasure of solving
puzzles posed to the characters and recognizing the details of the
novel's puzzle-like structure.

 Two of the characters that are very good indeed at solving
puzzles are Valerius and Alixana, Emperor and Empress of the
Sarantine Empire. (Some people have suggested that they are
 too good to be believable; I found them credible, but can
understand the concern.) Among the puzzles they are presented with
is the question of Batiara, which Valerius strongly wants to
reattach to the empire. This situation, the central question of the
wider context of the book, appears to have diverged from the
historical model by the end of the book, adding suspense to the
plot: while it is easy to find out what happened to Italy under
Justinian in our world, one cannot predict what might happen to
Batiara under Valerius.

 The contrasts between the wonders of Sarantium and the ruins of
Batiara also illuminate a constant theme of Kay's work, the beauty
and transience of civilization. As an artist surrounded by
military, political, and religious figures at Valerius's Court,
Crispin frequently launches into defenses of the worth and value of
art—and has the tenuous basis on which art rests pointed out
to him. The question of how one approaches life and art reflects
and lends another dimension to the question of if and how Batiara
will be rejoined to the Empire.

 The pleasures of the book are neither solely intellectual nor
solely historical, of course. Kay is generally known for characters
and emotional conflicts that deeply affect the reader.
 Sarantium does not have the same emotional
pyrotechnics [1] as other books; to put it
more subjectively, while there are emotionally charged scenes, none
of them made me cry. However, this should not be considered a
criticism, since this book is setting the scene for the presumed
dramas of the next. Despite this, it does not end on a cliffhanger,
but, as noted above, at a momentary point of calm and purpose for
Crispin; this allows the reader to feel that the novel ended at an
appropriate, non-arbitrary place.

 In summary, Sailing to Sarantium is a novel of many
pleasures. I highly recommend it to all but the most wary of
unfinished series; they have only to wait until next spring, when
the second book is expected to be published. [2] 

 [1] to borrow a phrase from Trent
Goulding.

 [2] The sequel was published in
2000; a review of Lord of
Emperors is available.

%T Sailing to Sarantium
%A Kay, Guy Gavriel
%C New York
%I HarperPrism
%D 1999
%G 0-06-105117-9
%P 438pp
%S The Sarantine Mosaic
%V Book One
%O hardcover

 Copyright May 12, 1999 by Kate Nepveu. Originally posted
to rec.arts.sf.written . 

 [ Back to Book
Reviews ]

 [ The Paired Reading Page | Book Log | Miscellany ]

[ Home | E-mail ]

