 
 Sound and fury, signifying nothing: George RR Martin: American Tolkien? 
Sound and fury, signifying nothing
 Monday, September 19, 2011 
George RR Martin: American Tolkien?
Quoth Time Magazine's Lev Grossman:
In 2005 I wrote a review of George R.R. Martin's novel A Feast for Crows in which I called him "the American Tolkien." The phrase has stuck to him, as it was meant to. I believed Martin was our age's and our country's answer to the master of epic fantasy. Now it's six years later, and I've read Martin's new novel, A Dance with Dragons , and I'm happy to report that I was totally right.
Read more: http://www.time.com/time/arts/article/0,8599,2081774,00.html#ixzz1YQUJ5EUl Well, Mr. Grossman, don't throw your arm out patting yourself on the back.  Proclaiming George RR Martin to be "the American Tolkien" is all well and good (and really rather obvious).  But there's a huge problem:  it also happens to be totally wrong .
Yes, both Tolkien and Martin write about dragons.  Yes, they both have "RR" interposed between their first and last names.  Yes, they are both revered by socially-inept, bookish Dungeons & Dragons players . But that's about as far as the similarities go. Try and stretch the congruity any further than that, and you're spoonin' up some pretty thin gruel.
I'm currently reading the most recent book in the Martin series, A Dance with Dragons and I'm completely enthralled.  Martin is a fantastic story-teller and a great writer.  A Song of Ice and Fire (which is the title of the series) is a complex and intricate web of plots and story lines.  Martin has his world well-populated with interesting and distinct characters.  He has a knack for vivid (sometimes bordering on hallucinogenic) description.  He creates textured scenes full of sounds and smells and tastes.  
But he writes pulp.
For all its entertainment value, A Song of Ice and Fire is raunchy, and often distasteful.  There is no theme; there is no moral.  When reading the Martin books, one catches a strong whiff of making-it-up-as-he-goes each time Martin introduces some new and unlikely wonder in his fantasy world.  (Lady Catelyn the zombie, anyone?)
Martin is good diversion, but don't look too deeply.
Not so, Tolkien.
JRR Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings , aside from being a great read, is a work that withstands (indeed, demands!) scrutiny.  Tolkien was a devout Catholic and his faith guided his work.  The tales from Middle Earth offer wisdom and insight into the nature of good and evil.  The Lord of the Rings never for an instant loses its majesty or nobility by descending into tastelessness or crass language.
With The Lord of the Rings and the larger scholastic work from which it is drawn, Tolkien hoped to create a mythos for Britain. He sought to instruct as well as entertain .  And like all great works of literature , his books present subtle truths that readers will recognize.  That recognition is the reward that comes from reading good literature.
Mr. Grossman, there are many, many reasons that your cavalier proclamation of Martin as "the American Tolkien" is absurd.  But I'll end with the most stark:  Martin writes for money.  Tolkien never did.
Posted by
 Dade Cariaga 
 Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest 
Labels:
 Arts and entertainment: Books 
 Newer Post 
 Older Post 
 Home 
Simple theme. Powered by Blogger .
 