 
 Reviewing A GAME OF THRONES by George R.R. Martin - The Editorial Department, LLC 
 Skip to content 
 (520) 546-9992 | admin@editorialdepartment.com 
 Home 
 Services 
 Manuscript Critique Services 
 Manuscript Editing 
 Developmental Editing Services 
 Line Editing, Copy Editing, Proofreading 
 Publishing Support 
 Traditional Publishing Support 
 Self Publishing Support 
 Ghostwriting and Collaboration 
 For Fiction and Nonfiction 
 For Promotional, Summary, and Pitch Materials 
 For Screenplays, Treatments, and Adaptations 
 Author Coaching 
 Book and Revision Planning 
 Adaptations and Screenplays 
 Blurb, Flap Copy, Query, and Synopsis Writing 
 For Submission to Literary Agents and Publishers 
 For Published Books 
 Editors 
 Authors 
 Client Showcase 
 Our Authors’ Agents and Publishers 
 Notable Reviews 
 Optioned or Adapted to Film 
 Author Testimonials 
 Client Reception 
 Quote and Submission Requests 
 Contact an Editor 
 Contact Us 
 New Client FAQs 
 Leave Feedback 
 Ghostwriting Inquries 
 Share Publication News 
 Reading Room 
 Search for: 
 Home 
 Book Reviews 
 Reviewing A GAME OF THRONES by George R.R. Martin 
 Previous Next 
 Reviewing A GAME OF THRONES by George R.R. Martin A “first 50” review 
 View Larger Image 
[by Shannon Roberts ] 
George R.R.Martin’s A Game of Thrones  turns 20 this month! In honor of twenty years in print, and a hugely successful twenty years at that, here’s a breakdown of the first 50 pages of the book that started it all. 
 Aside from the prologue, the first 50 pages of ‘A Game of Thrones’ is divided into five chapters, each written from the point of view of one of the novel’s main characters. While shifting POV can occasionally lead to confusion, giving each character a clearly titled chapter solves the problem admirably. 
Prologue: 
 We open with three men in a wintry forest, and it soon becomes clear they’re part of a scouting party. The leader, a young lordling, is dismissive of his companion’s superstitious fears that once night falls, they may be prey for some unnamed evil believed to occupy the forest. In the next nine pages, they discover an abandoned camp, where the lord falls prey to terrifying wraiths with cold blue eyes, then rises as one of them and falls upon the youngest of his companions. It’s a frightening and exciting chapter which shows us that magic and monsters, while relegated to the realm of mythology, are in fact lethally real. 
Chapter One: 
 The first chapter opens with the execution of the third and only surviving member of the scouting party—he apparently survives the prologue long enough to flee and desert the Night’s Watch, an order of men responsible for defending the realm against the forests of the North. This chapter is from the POV of Bran Stark, whose father Eddard (Ned), a lord of the realm, acts as executioner. This chapter provides a brief and welcome lull from the fast-paced fear of the prologue and introduces us to some of our major players, including Bran’s brother Robb and their father’s bastard son, Jon Snow. The mystery picks up again when Jon finds six motherless direwolf pups in the snow, one for each of Ned’s children—the sixth, an albino pup, Jon claims for himself. 
Bran Stark as portrayed in the HBO series adapted from Game of Thrones and the Song of Ice and Fire series. 
Chapter Two: 
 The next chapter belongs to Catelyn, Ned’s wife. A southerner by birth, this chapter gives us an outsider’s perspective on the North and its people—cold and hard, but mostly honest. It’s here the story’s primary plot finds its direction (the material of the prologue serves as a sub-plot throughout the novel). Robert, the king of this realm and a close friend of Ned, is coming to visit. 
Catelyn Stark as portrayed in the HBO series adapted from A Game of Thrones and the Song of Ice and Fire series. 
Chapter Three: 
 The next chapter is that of a girl named Daenerys, and it’s here that Martin gives us a little political background. Daenerys and her brother Viserys are the only surviving members of the family that reigned before Robert (in fact, it appears the Roberts overthrew them—and not that long ago, either). By giving us needed information in the form of dialogue and scenes, Martin holds our attention despite the fact that Daenerys is living well apart from events in the North, somewhere across the water and well out of Robert’s reach. This chapter is firmly stitched onto the main story when it becomes apparent that Viserys (who’s petulance borders on insanity) intends to wed his sister off in exchange for an army, which he’ll use to retake his throne and his birthright. 
Daenarys Targaryen as portrayed in the HBO series adapted from Game of Thrones and the Song of Ice and Fire series. 
Chapter Four: 
 In the next chapter (Ned’s), Robert arrives and we learn the purpose of his visit in the north: he wants Ned to ride south with him and become the Hand of the King—the previous Hand died suddenly, leaving a power vacuum that Robert wishes to fill as quickly as possible. 
Ned Stark as portrayed in the HBO series adapted from Game of Thrones and the Song of Ice and Fire series. 
Chapter Five: 
 We finish off the first fifty pages with a Jon chapter. Learning that his father is leaving and knowing Catelyn despises him as a reminder of Ned’s infidelity, Jon makes the bold decision to go north and join the Night’s Watch—thus neatly converging all plots and subplots within one family. 
Jon Snow as portrayed in the HBO series adapted from Game of Thrones and the Song of Ice and Fire series. 
 Martin’s work is masterful—a swift pace and plenty of action are used to introduce the novel’s three key points of conflict (the Night’s Watch, Daenerys, and Ned’s becoming the Hand). Chapters from varying points of view allow us to cover more physical ground, giving us a unique bird’s eye view of the realm and its politics. The prologue is a little out of place, as Martin doesn’t directly address the weights again until much further on in the story, but everything in between moves at a pace brisk enough that this doesn’t really occur to the reader until after the fact. 
 All of Martin’s characters are compelling, and giving them a chapter apiece allows us time and space to become familiar with each—very necessary, since Martin’s cast only continues to expand over the course of the book (and the series). The strongest selling point, however, is a self-sufficient plot that keeps its fantasy elements to a bare and practical minimum—the weights are intriguing, to be sure, but it’s lordly power-play, the game of thrones, that most entices the reader. By keeping the magic to small, measured doses, Martin maintains an air of suspense that many fantasy novels risk losing within the first 50 pages. 
A depiction of the Iron Throne by artist Marc Simonetti 
More on Game of Thrones: 
George R.R. Martin’s blog post about the 20th anniversary of the publication of A Game of Thrones ( here ) 
Visit George R.R. Martin’s website ( here ) 
A Song of Ice and Fire series ( here ) 
Looking for guidance or feedback? We have editors who specialize in everything from plot architecture to character development, world-building to dialogue that sparkles. Please contact Ross Browne at the Tucson office for more information. 
 × 
 Shannon Roberts 
 Associate Editor 
 Shannon is a developmental and line editor specializing in speculative and contemporary adult fiction and books for the young adult and middle-grade markets.
 See Full Bio 
 Manuscript Critique 
 Developmental Editing 
 Line Editing 
 Author Coaching 
 Ghostwriting 
 By Shannon Roberts | 2024-01-07T00:17:06+00:00 | Book Reviews | Comments Off on Reviewing A GAME OF THRONES by George R.R. Martin A “first 50” review 
Enjoy this blog post or know any writers who might find it helpful? Please share and help us spread the word. 
 Facebook X Reddit LinkedIn Tumblr Pinterest Vk Email 
 Related Posts 
 Reviewing BLUE MOON by Lee Child Considering what works and what could work better in Jack Reacher # 24 
 Gallery 
 Reviewing BLUE MOON by Lee Child Considering what works and what could work better in Jack Reacher # 24 
 Reviewing SUDDEN PREY by John Sandford Considering characterization and its impact on story in a bestselling crime series 
 Gallery 
 Reviewing SUDDEN PREY by John Sandford Considering characterization and its impact on story in a bestselling crime series 
 Reviewing CASINO ROYALE, by Ian Fleming: A Most Pleasant Surprise Considering thriller craft and the delights of the unexpected in the first James Bond novel 
 Gallery 
 Reviewing CASINO ROYALE, by Ian Fleming: A Most Pleasant Surprise Considering thriller craft and the delights of the unexpected in the first James Bond novel 
 Reviewing CAREER OF EVIL by Robert Galbraith A reflection on J.K. Rowling's talent as a mystery writer 
 Gallery 
 Reviewing CAREER OF EVIL by Robert Galbraith A reflection on J.K. Rowling's talent as a mystery writer 
 Reviewing HOSTILE WITNESS by Rebecca Forster What a solid legal thriller teaches us about three-dimensional characters 
 Gallery 
 Reviewing HOSTILE WITNESS by Rebecca Forster What a solid legal thriller teaches us about three-dimensional characters 
 WELCOME WRITERS! 
Thanks so much for visiting. This blog is brought to you by The Editorial Department, a 45-year-old freelance book editing firm specializing in: 
 Manuscript Critique 
 Developmental Editing 
 Line & Copy Editing 
 Author Coaching 
 Book & Revision Planning 
 Screenplay Adaptation 
 Ghostwriting 
 Traditional Publishing Support 
 Self Publishing Support 
Topics About Developmental Editing (2) 
 About Editing Nonfiction (1) 
 About Line and Copy Editing (2) 
 book proposals (1) 
 Characterization Technique (15) 
 collaboration (1) 
 Crime Fiction (13) 
 critique (2) 
 Finding a Literary Agent (4) 
 ghostwriting (1) 
 Handling Exposition (3) 
 How The Pros Do It (16) 
 Mystery Writing Technique (11) 
 On Getting Published (9) 
 Outlining (1) 
 Plotting & Pacing (7) 
 POV (4) 
 query and synopsis writing (1) 
 Query Letters and Pitchcraft (3) 
 Sci-Fi (2) 
 Screenplay Adaptation (6) 
 Self Publishing (8) 
 Story Structure (2) 
 TED/ Charles Kingsley (1) 
 TED/Gregory Collins (1) 
 TED/John Marlow (8) 
 TED/ Karinya Funsett (2) 
 TED/ Lindsay Guzzardo (1) 
 TED/ Marcia Ford (2) 
 TED/ Peter Gelfan (4) 
 TED/ Renni Browne (4) 
 TED/ Ross Browne (29) 
 TED/Sean Fletcher (1) 
 TED/ Shannon Roberts (4) 
 TED/Whitney Bak (1) 
 Traditional Publishing (7) 
 Trends (6) 
 Writers' Toolbox (13) 
 Writing Fantasy (8) 
 YA & MG Fiction (6) 
 YA & MG FictionHow The Pros Do It (1) 
Recent Blogposts 
 The Best Books on Writing: 25 Craft Books Our Editors Recommend 
 Book Proposal Checklist: What Literary Agents and Publishers Look For in Nonfiction Books 
 Spotlight on Ghostwriting 
 Anatomy of a Character-Driven Mystery 
 Perfectly Good Words Christian Writers Need to Avoid 
Working with TED For questions regarding our services and staff, quotes for services, or any other questions, please contact Ross Browne at (520) 546-9992, by email at rsb@editorialdepartment.com , or visit our welcome center . 
Get Social 
Contact Us The Editorial Department, LLC
8476 E Speedway Blvd, Suite 202
Tucson AZ 85710
(520) 546-9992 
More Information 
 About Us 
 About Our Book 
 Literary Agents & Publishers 
 Employment Opportunities 
 Confidentiality Agreements 
 Payment Policies & Turnaround Times 
 Privacy Policy & Terms of Use 
 Copyright 2012 - 2017 Avada | All Rights Reserved | Powered by WordPress | Theme Fusion 
 Page load link 
 We use cookies to ensure that we give you the best experience on our website. If you continue to use this site we will assume that you are happy with it. Ok No Privacy policy 
 Go to Top 
