Luther Ray Abel is a William F. Buckley Fellow in Political Journalism and former NR intern, a graduate of Lawrence University, and a veteran of the U.S. Navy. He is a proud native of Sheboygan, Wis.
The purpose of the legislation is to provide progressive activists with a cudgel to beat religious believers into submission.
Andrew C. McCarthy is a senior fellow at National Review Institute, an NR contributing editor, and author of Ball of Collusion: The Plot to Rig an Election and Destroy a Presidency.
A world-class landscape, wars coming and going, and a new look for Lee’s mansion
 Brian T. Allen is National Review\u2019s art critic.
New ‘DEI’ and other initiatives at the school promote not understanding but grievance, in a way that undermines the practice of medicine. 
Dean Robinson, a former president of the Louisiana Psychiatric Medical Association, is associate clinical professor of psychiatry at Tulane School of Medicine.  He is a visiting fellow at Do No Harm.
Jerzy/Joe Skolimowski’s attempt to redefine art ends in nihilism.
Armond White is National Review\u2019s culture critic and the author of New Position: The Prince Chronicles. His new book, Make Spielberg Great Again: The Steven Spielberg Chronicles, is available at Amazon.
Content the ‘Biden team’ asked Twitter to delete included graphic images of Hunter Biden’s nudity.
Caroline Downey is an education reporter for National Review.
The almost overt media class envy toward Taibbi was difficult not to notice.
Jeffrey Blehar is an attorney and elections analyst living in Chicago. He is the co-host of National Review's Political Beats\u00a0podcast.
If you enjoyed this article, we have a proposition for you:\u00a0Join\u00a0NRPLUS. Members get all of our content on the site including the digital magazine and archives, no paywalls or content meters, an advertising-minimal experience, and unique access to our writers and editors (through conference calls, social media groups, and more). And importantly, NRPLUS\u00a0members help keep\u00a0NR\u00a0going.
This month, A Game of Thrones by acclaimed fantasy author George R. R. Martin turns 25. While Martin\u2019s book series \u2014 collectively titled A Song of Ice and Fire \u2014 is inseparable from the more popular HBO adaptation, the books were what originally spurred a massive tonal shift in fantasy literature that the show simply imitated.
While HBO created what may be modernity\u2019s last instance of shared popular culture (nothing will reach Sopranos-like ratings ever again, as the later seasons of Game of Thrones managed), much of the show\u2019s best stuff was lifted straight from the books. The characters lost within political labyrinths, often of their own making; the sense of mystery and impending doom that lingers over the Night King and his army of White Walkers; even the racy, sex-crazed parts of the show (artifacts from the last years in which Americans could be scandalized by media) \u2014 all are present in Martin\u2019s original.
The character of Tyrion Lannister provides one of the most compelling examples of this “one-for-one” quality between the book and the show. Tyrion is a variant of the slacker-genius archetype, granted a perfect combination of wit and political instinct, along with Martin’s down-to-earth depiction of how such a troubled-yet-brilliant tactician might think and act.
The character himself is not that revolutionary — someone with even basic cultural literacy in movies and books has seen many slacker-geniuses — but Martin’s uncanny prose style contains a detailed realism that brings Tyrion to life on the page.
Peter Dinklage\u2019s on-screen depiction of Tyrion matches the book pitch-perfectly. Not since Peter Jackson cast a B-list Danish-American art snob for the role of Aragorn, King of Gondor (and Arnor!), has a fantasy actor surprised audiences by rising so fully to the occasion, as Dinklage did with Tyrion, a boozing but brilliant man with dwarfism. Debauched, yes; but not so badly by the standards of debauchery within the Lannister family.
In fact, to describe Tyrion is also pretty much to describe this first book — and Martin’s entire saga: coarsely obsessed with politics, to the exclusion of almost everything else (except for occasional bouts of sex and/or violence).
Martin’s Machiavellian revolution of modern fantasy literature has its merits, but his series betrays the genre with just how un-fantastical it is. While he keeps the basic trappings and tropes of fantasy (esoteric magic, castles, dragons, royalty, extensive background lore, spooky-sounding dead languages, etc.), Martin’s revealed preference is instead to use fantasy as a backdrop or window dressing for what is essentially a type of bloated Agatha Christie plotline.
Much of A Game of Thrones\u2019s plot centers on a \u201cwhodunit\u201d mystery, as Catelyn Stark, the matriarch of the Stark family, our protagonists, scurries around like Harrison Ford desperately trying to discover who ordered a failed assassination attempt on her son, Bran. What\u2019s so odd is that the reader\u2019s immediate intuitions about the identity of the evil mastermind are effectively confirmed by the end of the series. The quest to find the schemer just drops out of the story over the next four books, and the deflated resolution to this plotline has only ever occurred in the show (Martin failed to catch up with the breakneck pace of HBO\u2019s programming). Within the pages of this first book, though, the assassination plotline goes nowhere as the reader witnesses the characters become practically amnesiac about it in real time.
None of this is to say that A Game of Thrones lacks dramatic merit. While it is true that Catelyn and Bran are duds, most of the vast array of characters Martin crams into the book have singular, interesting personalities. The stoic, honorable Ned Stark is remarkably different from many of the overstated, bombastic male characters in the fantasy stylings of the time, and Martin’s decision to . . . er, let certain events happen to him provides a genuinely dramatic twist. Martin shows a willingness to put his most interesting characters in peril through the book, meaning that the reader can never be completely sure that the most interesting protagonists are safe from harm.
Martin’s best storytelling tactics are synthesized in the character of Sansa Stark, the eldest daughter of the family, and one of the more underrated characters of modern fantasy. She has the calculating brilliance like many others in A Game of Thrones (including Tyrion, but equally Littlefinger and Varys). Unlike many of these others, however, Martin puts her in a situation that is uniquely perilous right from the get-go.
Events in the first book lead to Sansa’s being effectively kidnapped and used as a bargaining chip by the Lannister family for much of the rest of the saga. But the Lannisters, in their extreme cruelty, are in constant debate about whether or not Sansa is worth keeping around, given all of the trouble and political hassle she generates. Sansa’s chapters in A Game of Thrones show Martin’s obsession with cynical politics at its best, as the clear and present danger of Sansa’s circumstances forces her to devise ever cleverer and more pointed rhetorical schemes to justify her value as a living hostage to the Lannisters. Through the whole saga, Sansa’s politicking is unmatched in its brilliance. But the narrative come-down is agonizing and slow for Sansa; her reward at the end of the saga for her incredible displays of political instinct is entirely predictable, and observant readers will likely be able to guess the outcome for Sansa based on the information he or she has access to in this first book. Readers cannot help but feel that Sansa’s author has gifted her a consolation prize.
In this sense, Martin presages the \u201csubverting expectations\u201d silliness that has obsessed other modern, \u201cgritty\u201d storytellers. That phenomenon went from a simmer to a full boil a few years ago with Rian Johnson\u2019s treatment of Star Wars in The Last Jedi \u2014 a film in which the audience\u2019s expectations are subverted (as the memes from this period remind us) precisely because nothing is surprising, and almost every character\u2019s story fails to pay off. A Song of Ice and Fire does the same thing, just on a larger scale and with more complex plot mechanics \u2014 which is what makes it even more frustrating.
These markers of Martin’s storytelling — the crude, matter-of-fact methods by which he quashes the reader’s hope for a higher mystery within the story, the way the book becomes predictable as the reader grows accustomed to interpreting every event through a lens of cynical Machiavellianism — have come to define modern “dark fantasy.”
To crib an argument from Ross Douthat, \u201cdark fantasy\u201d was originally an imprecise term to describe the attitudinal approach of authors who wanted to write darker, grittier, or horror-inspired versions of fantasy. But given time, dark fantasy came to describe novels set in a pseudo-mythological past that was, for all intents and purposes, godless.
To be sure, dark fantasies are replete with “deities,” such as Arioch, one of the beings known as Chaos Lords in Elric of Melnibone by Michael Moorcock. Arioch serves as King Elric’s perverse guardian angel, granting him power and knowledge as Elric becomes his thrall. But Arioch could only be called a “god” in a polytheistic sense. He’s just one of countless equally powerful, magical, undying entities that vie for control over the material world.
Generally, dark fantasy lacks a capital-G God in the biblical sense. There are rarely figures that could be considered the Lord of creation — instead, authors build worlds wherein supernatural power is non-omnipotent, limiting the scope of any one deity’s ambition. Godly magic in such settings remains factional — power remains firmly in the realm of the political, the coalitional, and in the harsh mathematics of risk and reward.
By this definition, A Game of Thrones would appear to be a snug fit within the confines of dark fantasy. It could even be the subgenre’s high point, as Martin strips away as much stereotypical magical fantasy imagery as possible. Sure, there are dragons, there are magical ice people, and there are suggestions of sorcery originating in far-flung exotic lands. But the reader spends a vanishingly small proportion of the story considering such impossible elements, as Martin opts for greater amounts of realpolitik and court-intrigue. The fantastical elements make comebacks at moments when their reality-bending capabilities serve a dramatic climax, but they then recede into the background. The major exception to this is the dragons, which Martin dedicates more and more time to as the books go on, and which become increasingly tedious as he forces the reader to care about the flying death cannons, with hearts of gold.
But Martin inverts the basic ethic at work in dark fantasy: that the world’s cruel politics are not the point of the story. This ethic is why dark fantasy tends to be interesting in the first place; it shows characters who live in a fundamentally pagan world, where no higher power guides world events toward the good, where people suffer not only needlessly and excessively in the material world, but often eternally in the afterlife as well, with no redemptive pathway.
Through this cynical interpretation of human life, dark-fantasy authors often arrive at profound observations about humanity’s character by showing readers how their protagonists adapt to a world without a biblical ethic, where there is no clear spiritual reward in doing good for good’s sake, even (and especially) when doing so is difficult.
Such an ethos means that dark-fantasy authors often eschew the complex political schemes developed earlier in their work as their sagas continue. Their protagonists come to understand that doing anything good in their fallen world requires individual action outside the purview of corrupt institutions. One of Elric’s first actions is to abandon his post as king, for example.
Not for Martin, though — A Game of Thrones sets the tone for the whole series, as it is procedurally revealed that there is nothing beyond conventional politics for this author. There are no events in the saga not swallowed up by court-intrigue, political assassination, cynical demagoguery, the politics of sex, the politics of violence, the politics of . . . politics, on and on forever. Even the White Walkers, introduced in the first book, do not bring about major political shifts until later in the story — and even then, their presence does not completely end the books’ trademark political maneuvering.
Martin may have therefore sacrificed the one method of achieving a hero’s arc in a dark fantasy setting — by reasserting humanity’s rare-but-necessary acts of simple, unprompted, unrequited goodness, and by explicating the ways in which such goodness is heroic — in exchange for even more darkness, grit, and nastiness.
But the result is that the story is actually rather safe. Once the reader becomes desensitized to the story\u2019s brutality, and to the fact that Martin has a tendency to \u201csubvert\u201d expectations by simply confirming one\u2019s worst fears rather than through genuine surprise or inventiveness, it becomes easy enough to read the stage directions in advance. For proof — and spoilers — look no further than Ben Shapiro, who predicted an almost entirely accurate version of the HBO show\u2019s ending for years. Facts really don\u2019t care about George R. R. Martin\u2019s feelings, evidently.
The rinse-repeat quality of the story isn’t completely obvious by the end of this first book, now turning a quarter-century old. Fantasy nerds would be forgiven for picking up the next installment — as many of them did — to see how their favorite characters would escape Martin’s grim entanglements. But the boundless cynicism of A Game of Thrones’s politics begins to wear on attentive readers (and perhaps even on the book’s author, who has yet to finish his series), much as the boundless cynicism of, well, the real world’s politics do. Reality is filled with political capriciousness, suspicion, and frighteningly boring corruption. May the fantasy readers of the next 25 years realize that we don’t need it in our fiction, too.
George R. R. Martin authored an impressive dark fantasy that nonetheless betrayed the genre’s core mission.
Nicholas Pompella is the writer and editor for the Military Family Research Institute at Purdue University.
Apparently, Biden’s world is one in which he and his party are paragons of virtue, moderation, and calm, and everyone who disagrees with him is an extremist.
Charles C. W. Cooke is a senior writer for National Review\u00a0and the host of The Charles C. W. Cooke Podcast.
Bob Iger, who preceded Chapek as CEO, will be returning to the position, the company announced.
Brittany Bernstein is a news writer for\u00a0National Review Online.
A preview of the possible Republican-primary field.
Mr. Continetti is a resident fellow at the American Enterprise Institute.
Democrat Katie Hobbs won by 17,116 more votes than Republican Kari Lake, which is not that small a margin. Much closer races have gone undisputed.
Jim Geraghty is the senior political correspondent of National Review.
When police arrived, Pelosi ‘began walking several feet back towards the assailant and away from police,’ NBC reported in the since-deleted segment.
Ari Blaff is a news writer for National Review. His writing has appeared in Tablet Magazine, Quillette, City Journal, and Newsweek. He holds a Master's from the University of Toronto\u2019s Munk School of Global Affairs and writes from Toronto, Canada.
Disney shocked the world last night by firing CEO Bob Chapek and bringing back his predecessor, Robert Iger.
Strange World had the second-worst opening weekend ever for a Disney movie.
More free speech on Twitter ‘will literally kill people,’ cry the hysterics.
Nate Hochman is a staff writer at National Review.
‘Can you believe this is a weight room?’ Lin reportedly posted on social media. ‘What kind of garbage is this?’
Ibrahim Khan claims that his departure from the office is unrelated to the allegations.
The iconic attraction, according to CEO Bob Iger, is ‘just not appropriate in today’s world.’
The nuke-pursuing mullahs richly deserve an actual defeat.
Harold Bloom was a strange, singular figure: an old-school, elbow-patches academic in literary criticism who managed to generate heated controversy whenever he spoke. Like other great American art critics \u2014 Roger Ebert, for instance \u2014 he was as famous for his harsh, polemical critiques as for how beautifully he described the art he loved.
Bloom was the center of gravity around which American arts and letters rotated, and his death late last year was a major blow.
Fortunately, Bloom was unusually prolific. He published at a blistering pace after getting tenure, an accolade that typically has the opposite effect on professors. The American Canon \u2014 published the day after Bloom\u2019s death \u2014 is therefore a treasure trove, as the book collates a sizable number of Bloom\u2019s American literary critiques that would\u2019ve otherwise been printed only once across a vast array of separate volumes (some of which were published five decades ago), leaving them effectively lost to time for modern readers.
The collection begins with Ralph Waldo Emerson and proceeds along a sequence of increasingly modern authors. This construction creates a narrative thread, wherein Bloom argues that authors took cues from their immediate predecessors: Whitman wrote Song of Myself with Emerson in mind, Hawthorne composed The Scarlet Letter responding to both Emerson and Whitman, and so on.
Emerson is therefore presented as American literature\u2019s genesis \u2014 the founder of a national cultural movement to whom every succeeding American author owes something. When Bloom writes of Emerson and his ideas, he is simultaneously at his best, his weirdest, and his most patriotic. This eclectic mix is what makes the book a delight, and a timely release at a moment when American patriotism\u2019s fundamental value is contested.
Bloom’s weirdness is on full display when claiming that Emerson’s “Self-Reliance” essay marked the founding of an “American religion” of radical independence. He doesn’t use “religion” metaphorically — Bloom is preoccupied with the idea of the heroic individual asserting his will on the world. This is part of Bloom’s lifelong obsession with Gnosticism, a religion of “secret” knowledge that only the spiritual elite were enlightened enough to possess.
Bloom sees imprints of this gnostic spirituality in America\u2019s literature. However strange it sounds, this is the basis of Bloom\u2019s patriotism, which is of a peculiar left-wing variety that\u2019s almost unheard of now. These atypical patriotic attachments make Bloom a liberal in a pure sense. He finds a tradition of radical individualism in American culture, with a through-line in every great American author\u2019s work. This elides the history of early American Christianity. Bloom hardly addresses the contradiction. But it is true that many of America\u2019s great authors were either skeptical of religion or outright disestablishmentarian.
So, why bother with Bloom? For one, his odd New Age leftist patriotism made him un-cancellable. He was that rare intellectual who defended America from the left. He wrote in 1994 that critical theorists and the identitarian Left were destroying the West\u2019s artistic legacy. He even lumped \u201cneoconservatives\u201d into his list of offenders and named the collective hodgepodge the \u201cSchool of Resentment,\u201d which he believed flourished in nearly every college English department.
Bloom was impressive for never being cowed by his critics. He simply didn’t care. His artistic obsessions gave him the unblinking courage to assert that authors will always cease to create literature when they waste time scrambling to meet the ever-shifting goalposts of political correctness. As he notes in The American Canon, “social information . . . seems to me a peripheral gain of reading, and political awareness an even more tenuous dividend.”
This moment seems tailor-made for The American Canon\u2019s release. The book-banning craze, often associated with 20th-century Evangelicalism, has now come full circle in socially liberal educational silos. But this impulse still reappears in conservative spaces \u2014 often with the same American books that were declared too obscene nearly a century ago. The \u201clive-and-let-live\u201d approach to art is disintegrating, as both the cultural Right and Left have decided to make the personal political, collectively speeding up the closing of the American mind (as a different Bloom put it).
Amid this partisan acceleration, Bloom pauses the process to re-instill unashamed love for American art into the culture. He calls us to think of Emily Dickinson as Shakespeare\u2019s equal. The American Canon is an affectionate telling of our literary past, unapologetic in its patriotism, even through Bloom\u2019s New Age-ism. Defying the intersectional critique of the Western canon as a museum of \u201cdead white males,\u201d the book contains a diverse array of authors. While Bloom is enamored of Herman Melville, he also finds Melville\u2019s female contemporaries unmatched. He speaks with equal affection for James Baldwin and Nathaniel Hawthorne. In this way, Bloom is the ideal intellectual in the era of cancellation: He points out quality where he sees it, without regard for group identity.
The American Canon is a great collection, in part because it’s the only recent work of literary criticism that showcases the foregone virtue of American optimism. What other academic would say, as Bloom does when describing how it feels to read Whitman, “Perfection is now and in America”?
The late Bloom’s New Age leftist patriotism made him un-cancellable within his own camp.