
A Comprehensive Analysis
Introduction
Nearly half a millennium has passed since Billy Shakespeare has picked up his pen, and bibliophiles are still reading his plays. Shakespeare captured the imagination of his audience through witty dialogue and a beautiful balance of literacy merit and entertainment. The poetic soliloquies delighted the nobility and sexual metaphors prevented the drunken groundlings from throwing food at the actors.
Which raises the question: what classical literature is written today that will entrance the readers of the future? In recent years, a subspecies of groundlings have proposed GRRM’s magnum opus, A Song of Ice and Fire. Which the literati respond with, “HAHAHAHAHA… fucking plebs.”
Traditionally, page-turners are not masterpieces. And that rule still stands when it runs by GRRM’s works. Yet legions of his fans sprout ridiculous praise, such as GRRM revolutionizing the fantasy genre and the diversity of his characters. Well, I’m here to dispel those myths because GRRM is not a modern Shakespeare, he’s a mainstream hack who was popularized by a HBO TV show. Prepare your anus.
Motifs
GRRM, being the revolutionary monster he is, rejects the romanticism of fantasy in favor for realism. He eschews the wonder, the ideals, the heroism, the chivalry, and the subtle social commentary. Congrats, you’re very innovative, GRRM. What did you replace them with?
Sex
GRRM said sexuality is an important driving force in human life and it should not be excluded from the narrative. I wholeheartedly agree. Sex scenes could portray a facet of a character, and pillow talk could contribute to the plot. But when authors are uncomfortable with sexuality, their fetishes end up leaking onto the paper and reveal more about themselves than contribute to the narrative.
Case in point. Throughout the series I masturbated to rape scenes, lovemaking scenes, and even a lesbian scene in which a vagina is described as a “Myrish swamp.” Yet in the aftermath of my orgasms, I was left to wonder: where’s all the pederasts? GRRM addressed this curious phenomenon by explaining none of the viewpoint characters were homosexual; “Sorry, none of the characters chose to be gay. Nothing I can do about it.”
Which goes to show, GRRM doesn’t use sex for verisimilitude; he exploits it so degenerates such as I can buy his books. Sure, heterosexual rape happens in war. So does homosexual rape, but its complete absence in the books ought to raise some eyebrows.
Additionally, not every graphic sex scene in the books contributes to the narrative. Sometimes it is absolutely redundant. In Dance of Dragons, Asha Greyjoy fucks Qarl the maid, which serves to… Show Asha’s feminine side? Reveal her disdain for her arranged marriage? It obviously didn’t supplement the plot; ten minutes post-coitus, a fucking battle occurs. I don’t understand why it needed to be so explicit as well. Its short appearance in the chapter was awkward, almost entirely random. Yes, sex happens in real life. That doesn’t mean portrayals of real life have to be so ridiculously pornographic.
Violence
Eh, I can tolerate violence. At the age of five, I remember watching from the passenger’s seat as my dad pulverized his colleague by repeatedly smashing his head into the car’s hood and fender, spraying blood all over the windshield. But there’s a distinctive difference between sensational violence and artistic violence. Sensational violence is violence for the sake of violence, for the sole purpose of evoking shock and disgust. It’s tasteless. As bipolar as he is, even my ex-convict padre didn’t attack strangers without reason.
Now artistic violent is something else. This is where violence captures human moments, from a dying soldier crying in the trenches to the rage a man is capable of. The way violence is described can convey incredible feelings for a reader, and well-written scenes can produce a multitude of feelings that are far too complex and conflicted to label. There are very powerful themes that are related to violence: guilt, social failure, mental illness, existential despair, and vengeance. Artistic violence isn’t random and senseless. It’s beautiful.
The best cases of artistic violence contain catharsis. Violence is built up, intensifying until release at the end. The pacing carries the reader through a roller coaster of emotions before it liberates the reader’s repressed feelings. Sensational violence could evoke feelings like surprise, but if it’s overused, the luster fades and becomes dull. When lives become so expendable, deaths eventually stop generating any kind of emotional response from the reader. It loses momentum and suspense and becomes something the reader boringly expects, like a visit from a mailman.
For a good reference to artistic violence, here’s Chuck Palahniuk’s Invisible Monsters. Some context: Evie’s wedding is rudely interrupted by the arrival of her ex-best friend (the narrator), her ex-best friend’s lookalike (Brandy), and her ex-best friend’s closeted ex-boyfriend (Ellis). The narrator is no longer friends with Evie because she burned Evie’s house down. Evie catches her groom fucking Ellis in the pantry while the narrator sets Evie’s room on fire (again). Observe what happens several pages later.
You see, right then, Evie steps out of that wall of flames at the top of the stairs. A rifle in her hands, her wedding dress burned down to the steel hoops, the silk flowers in her hair burned down to their wire skeletons, all her blonde hair burned off, Evie does her slow step-pause-step down the stairs with a rifle pointed at Brandy Alexander.
With everybody looking up the stairs at Evie wearing nothing but wire and ashes, sweat and soot seared all over her luscious hourglass [figure], we all watch Evelyn Cottrell in her big incorporated moment, and Evie screams, “You!”
She screams at Brandy Alexander down the barrel of the rifle, “You did it to me again. Another fire!”
Step-pause-step.
“I thought we were best friends,” she says. “Sure, yes, I slept with your boyfriend [Ellis], but who hasn’t?” Evie says, with the gun and everything.
Step-pause-step.
“It’s just not enough for you to be the best and most beautiful,” Evie says. “Most people, if they looked as good as you, they’d tread water for the rest of their lives.”
Step-pause-step.
“But no,” Evie says, “Here you have to destroy everyone else.”
The second floor fire inches down the foyer wallpaper, and the wedding guests are scrambling for their wraps and bags, all of them headed outdoors with the wedding gifts, the silver and the crystal.
You hear that butt slapping sound from the butler’s pantry.
“Shut up in there!” Evie yells. Back to Brandy, Evie says, “So maybe I’ll spend some years in prison, but you’ll have a big head start on me in hell!”
You hear the rifle cock.
The fire inches down the walls.
“Oh, God, yes, Jesus Christ,” Ellis yells. “Oh, God, I’m coming!”
Brandy stops laughing. Bigger and prettier than ever, looking regal and annoyed and put-upon as if this is all a big joke, Brandy Alexander lifts a giant hand and looks at her watch […]
And I could stop everything at this moment. I could throw off my veil, tell the truth, save lives. I’m me. Brandy’s innocent. Here’s my second chance […] And if I throw off my veil now, I’ll just be a monster, a less than perfect, mutilated victim. I’ll be only how I look. Just the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. Honesty being the most boring thing in the planet Brandy Alexander.
And. Evie aims.
“Yes!” Ellis yells from the pantry. “Yes, do it, big guy! Give it to me! Shoot it!”
Evie squints down the barrel.
“Now!” Ellis is yelling. “Shoot it right in my mouth!”
Brandy smiles.
And I do nothing.
And Evie shoots Brandy Alexander right in the heart.
Violence done correctly in literature. Palahniuk builds up tension before giving the reader release. Through literary devices, the reader gains a sense of time as the sentences flow. It starts off slowly, with Evie’s monologuing diatribe and symbolism of the dispersing flames. But just before the climax, time slows down as the narrator briefly realizes her power in the situation. This passes quickly, and the tension culminates to violence. All without the graphic, repulsive portrayal of gore and pain.
Compare this to one of GRRM’s (paraphrased) violent scenes from A Storm of Swords. Here, Tyrion is granted a Trial of Combat after being accused of regicide. His champion is Prince Oberyn Martell (“The Viper”), who seeks revenge for his sister’s death (Elia). The champion of the plaintiff is Ser Gregor Clegane (“The Mountain”), a 8-feet-tall monster infamous for his sadism and his involvement in the murder of Elia Martell.
When the two men were ten yards apart, the Red Viper stopped and called out, “Have they told you who I am?”
Ser Gregor grunted through his breaths. “Some dead man.” He came on, inexorable.
The Dornishman slid sideways. “I am Oberyn Martell, a prince of Dorne,” he said, as the Mountain turned to keep him in sight. “Princess Elia was my sister.”
“Who?” asked Gregor Clegane. Oberyn’s long spear jabbed, but Ser Gregor took the point on his shield, shoved it aside, and bulled back at the prince, his great sword flashing. The Dornishman spun away untouched. The spear darted forward. Clegane slashed at it, Martell snapped it back, then thrust again. Metal screamed on metal as the spearhead slid off the Mountain’s chest, slicing through the surcoat and leaving a long bright scratch on the steel beneath. “Elia Martell, Princess of Dorne,” the Red Viper hissed. “You raped her. You murdered her. You killed her children.”
Ser Gregor grunted. He made a ponderous charge to hack at the Dornishman’s head. Prince Oberyn avoided him easily. “You raped her. You murdered her. You killed her children.”
“Did you come to talk or to fight?”
“I came to hear you confess.” The Red Viper landed a quick thrust on the Mountain’s belly, to no effect. Gregor cut at him, and missed. The long spear lanced in above his sword. Like a serpent’s tongue it flickered in and out, feinting low and landing high, jabbing at groin, shield, eyes […]
“You raped her.” Prince Oberyn parried a savage cut with his spearhead. “You murdered her.” He sent the spearpoint at Clegane’s eyes, so fast the huge man flinched back. “You killed her children.” The spear flickered sideways and down, scraping against the Mountain’s breastplate.
“You raped her. You murdered her. You killed her children.” The spear was two feet longer than Ser Gregor’s sword, more than enough to keep him at an awkward distance. He hacked at the shaft whenever Oberyn lunged at him, trying to lop off the spearhead, but he might as well have been trying to hack the wings off a fly.
“You raped her. You murdered her. You killed her children.” Gregor tried to bull rush, but Oberyn skipped aside and circled round his back. “You raped her. You murdered her. You killed her children.” Gregor tried to bull rush, but Oberyn skipped aside and circled round his back. “You raped her. You murdered her. You killed her children.”
[…] “SHUT UP!” Gregor charged headlong, right at the point of the spear, which slammed into his right breast then slid aside with a hideous steel shriek. Suddenly the Mountain was close enough to strike, his huge sword flashing in a steel blur
[…] Oberyn slipped the first blow and let go of the spear, useless now that Ser Gregor was inside it. The second cut the Dornishman caught on his shield. Metal met metal with an ear-splitting clang sending the Red Viper reeling. Ser Gregor followed, bellowing […] Oberyn’s retreat became a headlong backward flight mere inches ahead of the greatsword as it slashed at his chest, his arms, his head.
[…] Spectators screamed and shoved at each other to get out of the way. One stumbled into Oberyn’s back. Ser Gregor hacked down with all his savage strength. the Red Viper threw himself sideways, rolling. The luckless stableboy [sic] behind him was not so quick. As his arm rose to protect his face, Gregor’s sword took it off between elbow and shoulder. “Shut UP!” the Mountain howled at the stableboy’s scream, and this time he swung the blade sideways, sending the top half of the lad’s head across the yard in a spray of blood and brains […]
But the Red Viper was back on his feet, his long spear in hand. “Elia,” he called at Ser Gregor. “You raped her. You murdered her. You killed her children. Now say her name.”
The Mountain whirled. Helm, shield, sword, surcoat; he was spattered with gore from head to heels. “You talk too much,” he grumbled. “You make my head hurt.”
[…] Prince Oberyn tilted his dinted metal shield. A shaft of sunlight blazed blindingly off polished gold and copper, into the narrow slit of his foe’s helm. Clegane lifted his own shield against the glare. Prince Oberyn’s spear flashed like lightning and found the gap in the heavy plate, the joint under the arm. The point punched through mail and boiled leather. Gregor gave a choked grunt as the Dornishman twisted his spear and yanked it free. “Elia. Say it! Elia. of Dorne!” He was circling spear poised for another thrust. “Say it!”
[…] The blood trickling from [Gregor]’s armpit was his own now, and he must be bleeding even more heavily inside the breastplate. When he tried to take a step, one knee buckled […]
Prince Oberyn had circled behind him. “ELIA OF DORNE!” he shouted. Ser Gregor started to turn, but too slow and too late. The spearhead went through the back of the knee this time, through the layers of chain and leather between the plates on thigh and calf. The Mountain reeled, swayed, then collapsed face first on the ground. His huge sword went flying from his hand. Slowly, ponderously, he rolled onto his back.
The Dornishman flung away his ruined shield, grasped the spear in both hands, and sauntered away. Behind him the Mountain let out a groan, and pushed himself onto an elbow. Oberyn whirled cat-quick, and ran at his fallen foe. “EEEEELLLLLLIIIIIAAAAA!” he screamed, as he drove the spear down with the whole weight of his body behind it… Four feet of broken spear jutted from Clegane’s belly as Prince Oberyn rolled, rose, and dusted himself off. He tossed aside the splintered spear and claimed his foe’s greatsword. “If you die before you say her name, ser, I will hunt you through all seven hells,” he promised.
Ser Gregor tried to rise, The broken spear had gone through him, and was pinning him to the ground. He wrapped both hands about the shaft, grunting, but could not pull it out. Beneath him was a spreading pool of red […]
Prince Oberyn moved closer. “Say the name!” He put a foot on the Mountain’s chest and raised the greatsword with both hands […]
Clegane’s hand shot up and grabbed the Dornishman behind the knee. the Red Viper brought down the greatsword in a wild slash, but he was off-balance, and the edge did no more than put another dent in the Mountain’s vambrace. Then the sword was forgotten as Gregor’s hand tightened and twisted, yanking the Dornishman down on top of him. They wrestled in the dust and blood, the broken spear wobbling back and forth. Tyrion saw with horror that the Mountain had wrapped one huge arm around the prince, drawing him tight against his chest, like a lover.
“Elia of Dorne,” they all heard Ser Gregor say, when they were close enough to kiss. His deep voice boomed within the helm. “I killed her screaming whelp.” He thrust his free hand into Oberyn’s unprotected face, pushing steel fingers into his eyes. “Then I raped her.” Clegane slammed his fist into the Dornishman’s mouth, making splinters of his teeth. “Then I smashed her fucking head in. Like this.” As he drew back his huge fist, the blood on his gauntlet seemed to smoke in the cold dawn air. There was a sickening crunch.
No literary devices such as symbolism, metaphors, even the fucking pacing. While there is a climax, the scene does not build itself up to it: there is no intensity in the air, and time is not manipulated. Catharsis is missing, and the only feelings a reader has for Oberyn’s death is shock due to the element of hero invincibility. Don’t people get it? GRRM’s writing is boring.
One of the most confusing aspects of this scene was the death of the stableboy. It’s a great example of sensational violence, because his death seems entirely random and unnecessary. His life was so dispensable, the reader could barely register what they’re supposed to feel: sorrow, terror, or shock? What if the killed bystander was someone important? Violence for the sake of violence, and it comes off as tacky.
Moral Ambiguity
Another common theme of epic fantasy is the dichotomy between good and evil, which many contemporary writers are criticized for. Many people, including GRRM, claim to reject these principles, opting to write about people instead. Or so they say.
A Song of Ice and Fire is not morally objective. Here on planet GRRth, decent men could be fighting one another, but it’s the same world that contains stereotypical heroic archetypes and the most cartoonish villains. Just look to the north of Westeros and analyze the moral ambiguity of two rival factions, House Stark and House Bolton, who fought each other for centuries.
House Stark lives in Winterfell and their coat of arms is a direwolf. While they are famous for unifying the North, they are also well known for their traditional values: honor, justice, responsibility, and family. During a civil war, Cregan Stark was in opposition to King Aegon II. Yet when the king was poisoned, Cregan sought justice instead of sacking King’s Landing with his army. He arrested 22 men and put them up on trial, and 11-year-old King Aegon III (and his advisers) appointed Cregan as Hand of the King. Despite being in complete control of King’s Landing, Cregan resigned the day after executions and returned to the North, after being Hand of the King for just a day. These principles continue to resound through Cregan’s descendants, most notably Eddard Stark, a stupider version of Cregan Stark.
House Bolton lives in Dreadfort and their sigil is a flayed man. Based off that sentence, you could practically gauge the moral compass of the Boltons as “the baddies.” The Boltons are infamous for flaying their enemies alive, and all their ancestors were assholes. Royce Bolton IV was known as Royce Redarm since he tore out the entails of his prisoners with his bare hands. Belthasar Bolton had a pink pavilion made from the skins of 100 enemies. Their entire history is rooted in war and torture, and you wouldn’t be surprised if their descendants are assholes too. The most caricatural of them is Ramsay Snow, a Bolton so absurdly evil he is completely exempt from character development. I mean, the guy hunts naked women in the forest with his feral dogs just for sport.
Sure, there are some similarities — Eddard Stark and Ramsay Bolton are both fucking idiots — but to say that the theme of Good VS Evil is absent in the book is just a fallacy. Is it any wonder that the biggest assholes in the Westeros (Tywin Lannister, Roose Bolton, Walder Frey) bonded with one another over a planned wedding massacre involving the honorable (but equally stupid) Robb Stark?
Delving deeper into the lore will reveal that this is not an exclusive case. GRRM has his favorite houses and it is obvious. Some houses are historically “the goodies” (Blackwoods, Velayrons, Daynes) and the others are historically “the baddies” (Brackens, Florents, Peakes, Freys, Rosbys). It’s kind of funny.
Characterization
In an interview with the Wall Street Journal, GRRM claims he’s writing about the internal conflicts that define the human condition. Yet in spite of the myraid cast of characters, GRRM’s characters tend to be one-dimensional and comically focused on singular interests. There’s no internal conflict here, GRRM; Joffrey will always be a piece of shit, Davos will always serve Stannis, and Petyr Baelish will always be a bitter Machiavellian. These characters know what they want, so what do they struggle with? Human condition my ass.
Tropes
GRRM has a “Hall of Tropes” filled with predictable characters due to the nature of who they are. Most of them will never undergo character development and consequently do not undergo any “[human] conflict with itself.” Stannis Baratheon, for example, will continue to act like a pessimistic loner because of the way he is written. Now, that is not to say that using archetypal characters are discouraged. This is an exercise to reveal there is no originality and diversity among the characters as people claim there is.
Match the following characters to the appropriate trope.
Characters:-Randall Tarly-Tywin Lannister-Stannis Baratheon-Eddard Stark-Davos Seaworth-Brienne of Tarth-Barristan Selmy-Robb Stark-Jon Snow-Ramsay Snow-Gregor Clegane
Tropes:-The Patriarch-Ideal Hero-Ax-Crazy
Female Characters
Women have struggled with balancing their own interests with societal expectations for generations, and end up being valued for their physical assets instead of their personalities. Literature reflects the cultural norms and the writers’ perspective of women, and sadly most of it is predictable and shitty.
Great female characters surpass any sort of cultural barrier and bias of their creators. They are their own individuals with their own interests and personalities; if they weren’t female, it would not affect their characterization at all. That is not to say the gender of a character shouldn’t affect her personality, but the character shouldn’t be defined by it either.
This is a very big problem in the fantasy genre, because fantasy female characters tend to be written terribly. They’re stuck in conventional roles (damsel-in-distress) and act irrationally (falls in love with lead character with no chemistry). Female characters are often raped for their character development (or for someone else’s), and this is so fucking common it irritates me that many fantasy writers have no creativity.
Some writers have combated this issue by creating females with masculine attributes: namely, butch warriors that are portrayed as badass or stuck-up bitches. Which isn’t a decent solution, because women who act like men are just as boring as women who act like women. I don’t understand why a girl who tries to act like a man in a patriarchal society is lauded as a great character even if she has a personality of a potato. A great female character can have feminine attributes and be capable of independent intentions, actions, and aspirations.
This is essentially what GRRM does with Brienne of Tarth. She’s incredibly ugly and described as androgynous; her life was filled with scorn and pity for the lack of her feminine social graces, and contempt and resentment due to her violation of gender norms. But even if I was a tomboy in a patriarchal medieval world, I’d have no reason to dress up and act like a knight, especially if I was an aristocrat (which Brienne is). I don’t understand why Brienne couldn’t stay at Evenfall Hall and be her father’s Castellan or Captain of the Guard. She’s the only surviving child (and heir) of Lord Tarth, so I’m confused why her father would let her roam Westeros as a hedge knight. It’s also never explained why Brienne wanted to be a knight in the first place. She idealizes the concept of true knighthood but you can be just as courageous and conscientious as a lord. Brienne acts like a knight just for the purpose of being a female knight.
So her backstory and her motivations suck, but what of her own character? Although Brienne is lionized as a feminist icon, she fails to create her own independence. She needs validation so much that anyone who gives her even a tiny bit becomes idolized by her. Renly, Catelyn, and Jaime acknowledged Brienne’s existence, which impels her to follow them without question, offering her services to all of them simultaneously. In terms of personality, she’s predictably awkward and naïve, but honest, straightforward, loyal, and determined; in other words, she’s just one of the many honorable heroic archetypes in GRRM’s “Hall of Tropes.” Without her sex and gender identity issues, she’s indistinguishable from Robb Stark or Jon Snow.
Want to hear about a strong female character who pretends to be male? While some critics are contentious about Shakespeare’s female characters (such as Katrina from The Taming of the Shrew), no one can deny the extraordinary brilliance of Rosalind from As You Like It.
Feminist critics love Rosalind, because they admire her ability to subvert the limitations that society imposes on her as a woman. With boldness and imagination, she disguises herself as a young man for the majority of the play in order to woo the man she loves and instruct him in how to be a more accomplished, attentive lover — a tutorship that would not be welcome from a woman.
As well as her creativity, Rosalind demonstrates complexity of her emotions, subtlety of her thought, and fullness of her character that no one else in the play can match. The endless appeal of watching Rosalind has much to do with her success as a knowledgeable and charming critic of herself and others. But unlike Jaques, who refuses to participate wholly in life but has much to say about the foolishness of those who surround him, Rosalind gives herself over fully to circumstance. She chastises Silvius for his irrational devotion to Phoebe, and she challenges Orlando’s thoughtless equation of Rosalind with a Platonic ideal, but still she comes undone by her lover’s inconsequential tardiness and faints at the sight of his blood. That Rosalind can play both sides of any field makes her identifiable to nearly everyone, and so, irresistible.
And that, ladies and gents, is how women should be written.
Character Development
“But GRRM writes great characters,” protested the fandom, “Look how dynamic they are over the course of the series!”
If you write two million words of garbage, you’re bound to have characters change and grow. Hence character development in ASOIAF is not impressive. The metamorphosis of Caleb Trask required only 225k words in John Steinbeck’s East of Eden, whereas all the 298k words of GRRM’s A Game of Thrones failed to produce any character development.
Yet readers claim Jaime Lannister underwent a character arc (approximately 3M words into ASOIAF), since he became easily likable. I personally do not believe Jaime has a redemption arc because his mindset, behavior, and opinions do not change. Jaime is still an arrogant prick, and just because he was written agreeably does not indicate his growth as a character.
Now say what you will about Jaime and honor, but I believe Jaime was always insecure about his reputation since the beginning of the series. After all, he aspires to be Ser Arthur Dayne and hates being referred to as “The Kingslayer.” There is so much hype about Jaime’s virtuous redemption, but no reparation and remorse to uphold that allegation. Jaime does not regret defenestrating Bran, nor does he try to use his influence to aid the smallfolk whom were displaced by the war his family is responsible for. Sure, Jaime rescues Brienne and Tyrion on separate occasions, but Brienne and Tyrion mean something to him — when Jeyne Poole is sent away to Ramsay Snow, Jaime simply watches apathetically. Everything he does is for his own selfish needs and his personal honor, ergo Jaime is still an asshole. So why are readers so impressed with Jaime Lannister?
What passes off as “character development” is actually “perception development.” Instead of putting effort into developing his characters, GRRM decides to warp the reader’s perceptions instead. To make Jaime a sympathetic character, GRRM develops Jaime’s backstory (completely justifying Jaime killing the Mad King) and makes Jaime’s actions more approvable (executing a rapist). The former completely nullifies Jaime’s prospective redemption arc, since it reveals that Jaime was just as “well-intentioned” in the past, and the later does not have noble intentions — as a military man, Jaime expects more discipline from his men than Ser Gregor Clegane did.
The way Jaime is written, however, suggests that GRRM intended to build Jaime as a flawed character who matured over the course of the story. Instead we get an impulsive character whose personal inspirations are derived on those who he associate with — Cersei in the past and now Brienne. The same Jaime who would throw Ed Stark’s son out a window for Cersei would encourage Brienne to search for Ed Stark’s daughters. Not because he feels he owes more than an apology to House Stark, but because Jaime befriends Brienne after his relationship with Cersei becomes strained. What’s worse than a misunderstood character is a a character misunderstood by its own creator.
The Plot
Readers don’t need to derive between the lines to realize how meandering, inelegant, and convoluted the plot is. In his quest to pen his magnum opus, GRRM has completely overdone himself: the Others are mentioned less than Daenerys, and Daenerys hadn’t even landed in Westeros yet. Both are meant to play a larger role in ASOIAF, and the series is supposed to close by the seventh book. This is why your professors encourage you to outline, George.
Plot Arcs
This is one of GRRM’s defining trademarks: creating drastic plot arcs that end with the unexpected death of a fond character.
In a literary standpoint, plot lines are never even resolved this way. This is Storytelling 101: It’s not an ending unless it feels like it. This is evident in Shakespearean and Greek plays, all of which follows Freytag’s Pyramid. Groundlings are fond of GRRM’s “Any Can Die” plot twists because they are unconventional and hence they are ingenious. However, I’d like to make the contention that this particular style is a literary abomination and clearly accentuates how terrible of a writer he really is. Allow me break it down.
1. Ending a plotline at the climax only leaves the reader unsatisfied and bitter for wasting their time.
A brilliant example is Quentyn Martell, who traveled all the way to Essos to get burned by a dragon. Unlike Ned Stark’s execution and the Red Wedding, Martell’s death did not open any new plotlines. He was a POV character who is completely irrelevant to the narrative. Seriously, George… you chronicled Quentyn’s entire journey to Essos just to bring Quentyn’s two companions to Essos? What’s the fucking point? There were no new characters or locations unveiled to us throughout that entire episode, and Quentyn and his friends could have been introduced later, when they arrived in Astapor.
2. By overusing unpredictable plot arcs, GRRM sets himself up to become more predictable, the opposite effect that he intends.
Since every POV character GRRM creates must lack the foresight of their fate, readers are already aware of their impending doom.
Exempli gratia. Cersei wasn’t a POV character in Game of Thrones, but Eddard Stark was. His death surprised readers since they (and Ned) were unaware of Cersei’s plots. In A Feast of Crows, Cersei becomes a POV character. To nobody’s surprise, she was no longer the conspirator, and became a target of misfortune by the end of A Feast of Crows.
Being aware of this irony completely ruins every plot twist, since readers already expect their POV characters to experience tribulation. It’s no surprise that Varys, Littlefinger, and their collective henchmen are not POV characters; they are the most successful political players and remain so until GRRM ascends one of them to a POV character.
3. Cutting the dramatic structure at the climax emphasizes how GRRM’s writing is fraught with laziness and whimsicality; developments are created out of convenience rather than literary nuance
Before we delve into this minefield, I’d like to reference Susan Winnett’s Coming Unstrung:
I would like to begin with the proposition that female orgasm is unnecessary. I am not, of course, saying that it is unnecessary to any particular woman that she experience orgasm or, for that matter, to any particular man that his female partner do so; rather, I mean that women’s orgasm and, by extension, women’s pleasure can be extraneous to that culmination of heterosexual desire which is copulation.
Through this sexual metaphor, Winnett questions why naratological models are confined to set [patriarchial] parameters of climaxing arousal followed by quiescent resolution, and later in her essay postulates it may not be wholly appropriate to accept Freytag’s Pyramid as the universal method to apply to literature.
As risqué as her introduction was, she does make a good point. Furthermore, I agree that pigeonholing every narrative to Freud’s Masterplot isn’t the best approach to literature in either feminist literature (which Winnett talks about) and epic fantasy (of which I’m discussing here). I’m not a traditionalist trying to burn heretics (or feminists), but there comes a point when you have to call out a writer for pulling the same “Anyone Can Die” trope out of his inability to tell a story instead of his literary depth.
Writers have all the power when they weave a story, and if they thread the eye of the needle they’re expected to sew up the buttons. GRRM clearly doesn’t know how to sew, because he doesn’t know how to resolve conflicts that he has created. His solution? Kill off the characters with narratives too complex to unravel or too boring to write about. This conveniently creates a vacuum of absent characters to sew together, so when the textile inevitably becomes tangled again GRRM commits another literary genocide. Rinse and repeat.
The repetitiveness of this ploy just demonstrates to me how GRRM cannot tell a story beginning to end, because he doesn’t have the perseverance and the patience. While this forcibly drives the narrative forward, GRRM cannot perform the same murdering spree on the story’s background. This results in a gigantic mythos of thousands of characters, dead and alive, with their jumbled backstories intersecting with one another.
I’m calling it now: GRRM will never finish ASOIAF because he completely lacks the foresight and ability to do so. He cannot write an ending with a gun pointed to his head, and it would not surprise me if even the ending accumulates to the literary equivalent of pulling out at the moment of orgasm.
Writing Style
There really isn’t much to talk about regarding GRRM’s writing style. His prose is shoddy and inconsistent, yet it still gets heavily repetitive. His own readers poke fun at this, pointing out common phrases such as “[X is] as useless as nipples on a breastplate.”
Dialogue
GRRM does put an effort into the dialogue, drafting grandiose statements and swear-ridden rants. Yet behind the ostentatious fluff, there’s little substance in them. Quite frankly, some of it is downright embarrassing. Here’s a brilliant example from A Feast for Crows:
Myrcella Baratheon: “Are you the Sword of the Morning now?”Gerold Dayne: “No. Men call me Darkstar, and I am of the night.”
I can see what GRRM is trying to accomplish, but it’s incredibly cringeworthy. Although readers can see the direct contrast between the two characters, the symbolism is not comprehendible. Hence it also sounds very stupid.
Myrcella Baratheon: “Are you a good guy?”Gerold Dayne: “Nah. Men call me epic evil badass, and I am evil.”
Details
Speaking about ostentatious fluff, GRRM is completely obsessed with expendable details. Is this really the epitome of worldbuilding, wasting ink over obesity-onset gynecomastia and every dish laid out on a feast? It’s such a shame GRRM is like this way, because if he cut down on this superfluous bullshit, the books would be a lot thinner and straightforward.
Conclusion
In On Fairy-Stories, J. R. R. Tolkien argues the fantasy genre ultimately fulfills three purposes: to challenge a reader’s perspective of his or her own world, to provide escapism from reality, and to provide moral and emotional “Consolation of the Happy Ending” which he calls eucastastrophe.
Tolkien delves into his third point more into his conclusion, where he focuses how a true representative fantasy tale is manifested by joy. This does not deny the existence of sorrow and failure. But a happy ending emphasizes the final closing in the universal outcome of the story that provides gratification and catharsis to the reader.
While I do not believe every fantasy tale has to end on such a positive note, truth of the matter is GRRM fails as a fantasy writer to provide any satisfaction to the reader. His prose is not poetic, his dialogue can be childish, and his story is convoluted. The only reoccurring emotion he provides is frustration, and what kind of reader wants to deal with frustration interspersed with moments of boredom? What’s entertaining about cheering the rise of a hero when you expect him to lose? What’s the ultimate purpose of fantasy if verisimilitude is given priority? Why bother writing a monomyth when the grandness is overblown to incorporate the most worthless fine points?
Oh, American Tolkien… sigh.