 Vignette StoryServer 5.0 Mon Dec 05 12:38:04 2011 
 George R.R. Martin: An American Tolkien for a Jaded Age - TIME 
 Vignette StoryServer 5.0 Wed Aug 24 18:06:54 2011 
 Vignette StoryServer 5.0 Thu Apr 22 09:58:43 2010 
 Vignette StoryServer 5.0 Wed Dec 21 11:41:01 2011 
 Vignette StoryServer 5.0 Wed Dec 21 11:41:02 2011 
 Vignette StoryServer 5.0 Wed Aug 24 18:06:56 2011 
 Home 
 TIME Magazine 
 Photos 
 Videos 
 Specials 
 Topics 
 Subscribe 
 Mobile Apps 
 Newsletters 
 RSS 
 @TIME 
 NewsFeed 
 U.S. 
 Politics 
 World 
 Business 
 Money 
 Tech 
 Health 
 Science 
 Entertainment 
 Opinion 
 Vignette StoryServer 5.0 Wed Dec 21 11:41:01 2011 
 Vignette StoryServer 5.0 Tue Jul 05 17:37:09 2011 
 SEARCH TIME.COM 
 Full Archive 
 Covers 
 Videos 
 Main 
 TV 
 Cartoons of the Week 
 People 
 All-TIME 100 Toys 
 Videos 
George R.R. Martin's Dance with Dragons : A Masterpiece Worthy of Tolkien 
 By
 Lev Grossman 
 Thursday, July 07, 2011 
 Comment 
 Print 
 Email 
 Reprints 
share 
 LinkedIn 
 StumbleUpon 
 Reddit 
 Digg 
 Del.i.cious 
 Tweet 
In 2005 I wrote a review of George R.R. Martin's novel A Feast for Crows in which I called him "the American Tolkien." The phrase has stuck to him, as it was meant to. I believed Martin was our age's and our country's answer to the master of epic fantasy. Now it's six years later, and I've read Martin's new novel, A Dance with Dragons , and I'm happy to report that I was totally right. 
Martin has produced — is producing, since the series isn't over — the great fantasy epic of our era. It's an epic for a more profane, more jaded, more ambivalent age than the one Tolkien lived in. Tolkien was a veteran of the Somme, and The Lord of the Rings was partly written during World War II. (It was published in 1954.) Tolkien wrote at a time when it really seemed as if a war was on for the fate of civilization. 
Now we're not even sure what civilization is. George R.R. Martin (his R.R. stands for Raymond Richard; Tolkien's stands for Ronald Reuel) was born in 1948. He didn't serve at the Somme, though he may have played through it once or twice in a video game. A Song of Ice and Fire — which is the rather florid title of Martin's series — is an epic for us, for the way we live now and the way we fantasize now.
 (See Part I of James Poniewozik's interview with George R.R. Martin.) 
Look at Martin's map. In Middle Earth there were two sides: the war was between good and evil, right and wrong. It was hobbits and elves and dwarves and men coming together to fight Sauron. Martin's books are set (largely) on the continent of Westeros, which has been shakily cobbled together into a nation known as the Seven Kingdoms. Not two: seven. Westeros is in chaos; it's a political jigsaw puzzle, and somebody just turned the table over, and everybody is on the floor scrabbling for pieces. It's impossible to know whom to root for. "Many good men have been bad kings," one character says, "and some bad men have been good kings." Not even God decides who is wrong or right. Each side has its own gods, and they'll back whoever prays to them. 
 A Dance with Dragons is the fifth volume out of a planned seven, and in many ways it's the best. Martin was marking time a little bit in Feast for Crows , pushing his pawns up the board but leaving his big pieces alone. Now the camera has swung back to the main characters: Jon Snow and Daenerys Targaryen and Tyrion Lannister, the brilliant, black-witted dwarf whose family has had the firmest grip on power for much of the series, though that's not saying much. 
Tyrion is another good example of what separates Tolkien and Martin. Tyrion isn't a hearty, ax-wielding, gold-mining member of a noble dwarven race. He's not Gimli. Tyrion is an actual dwarf, achondroplastic and stubby-limbed, a joke to passersby and an embarrassment to his family. (The rest of the Lannisters are stunted too, but on the inside.) Tyrion is on the run because at the end of A Storm of Swords he fatally shot his father Lord Tywin in the groin with a crossbow bolt as Tywin sat on the toilet. We catch up with Tyrion at the beginning of A Dance with Dragons crossing the Narrow Sea in a state of shock at his own actions.
 (See A Dance with Dragons in the 2011 Summer Entertainment Preview.) 
A long-expected meeting is approaching. Tyrion is vectoring toward the exiled Daenerys Targaryen, who has been isolated from most of the rest of the players in the series until now. As the daughter of Aerys Targaryen, the last (mostly) uncontested king of Westeros, Daenerys has one of the better claims to the throne. She's been running wild in the exotic lands to the east of Westeros in the company of three feral dragons, beasts not seen in that world for at least a century. She rules the city of Meereen. (She is guarded by, among others, Ser Barristan Selmy, an aging, immensely dignified knight of Westeros who wonders how duty has led him so far from home — and into such strange company. He and Tyrion are Martin's finest creations.) Two of the great narrative arcs of the series are bending toward each other, and when they meet, current will flow. 
But this being Martin, there are a lot more than two arcs in play. Jon Snow is sitting uneasily astride the great Wall in the north; Theon Greyjoy is languishing in the sadistic hands of the Boltons; prim, stilted Stannis Baratheon — he's the Al Gore of Westeros — is pursuing his claim to the throne; Arya Stark is training as an assassin and plotting revenge; a dorky Dornish prince is trying to find and marry Daenerys. The soil of Westeros is rich in story the way some countries are rich in uranium. There is no such thing as a stock character or a cardboard village there: every person, every wood and stream and street corner has its own tale. 
After five volumes Martin is, if anything, a better writer than when he started. If you're watching A Game of Thrones on HBO, you're forgoing the great pleasure of Martin's deft prose. Like Wagner, he gives each of his characters leitmotifs that recur and recur in their streams of thought. "You know nothing, Jon Snow"; Daenerys' theme is "If I look back I am lost"; Tyrion is haunted by his father's last words, "Wherever whores go." These phrases are like dragons' eggs: the characters keep them close, in the hopes that one day, if they think them enough times, the words will hatch forth the wisdom they desperately need.
 (See Part II of James Poniewozik's interview with George R.R. Martin.) 
But the real power of Martin's work arises from his extraordinary skill as a plotter. A Dance with Dragons follows, by my count, 11 major story lines, as well as assorted minor ones, each with its own rhythm, written in its own voice, and each playing off all the others. Martin will never win a Pulitzer or a National Book Award, but his skill as a crafter of narrative exceeds that of almost any literary novelist writing today. Throughout the book I was reminded of Jennifer Egan's A Visit from the Goon Squad (which did win a Pulitzer), as well as Anthony Powell's (similarly floridly titled) A Dance to the Music of Time .
But even Powell can't twist a plot like Martin. A Dance with Dragons is a big book, topping out at 1,016 pages, but it turns on a dime. Reading a novel is a little like commanding a battle: you're always reconnoitering, trying to guess where the author will go next, what's a feint and where the action is really heading. I don't know when I have ever been as comprehensively and pleasurably outgeneraled as I am when I read Martin. He raises and raises the stakes, long past when any other writer would have walked away from the table, and just when you think he's done, he goes all in. There is, apparently, no piece he will not sacrifice, no character that you (and one suspects, he) love so much that he will not orchestrate that character's doom. 
The complexity of Martin's design ensures that we experience the struggle for Westeros from all sides at once. It's as if he's trying to show us that every fight is both triumph and tragedy, depending on where you see it from, and everybody is both hero and villain at the same time. Or maybe not even that. "There are no heroes, only whores," says Theon. On the strength of A Dance with Dragons , it's hard to prove him wrong. 
 See what the authors are reading in TIME's summer reading list. 
 See the All-TIME 100 novels. 
 Vignette StoryServer 5.0 Thu Dec 01 14:23:13 2011 
 Comment 
 Print 
 Email 
 Reprints 
share 
 LinkedIn 
 StumbleUpon 
 Reddit 
 Digg 
 Del.i.cious 
 Vignette StoryServer 5.0 Thu Oct 13 10:24:47 2011 
 Most Popular » 
 Full List » 
 MOST READ 
 MOST EMAILED 
 20 Movies We're Looking Forward to in 2012 (and 10 We're Definitely Not) 
 Heated Exchange Exposes Santorum's Hurdles in New Hampshire 
 SOPA: What if Google, Facebook and Twitter Went Offline in Protest? 
 Did Casey Anthony Intend to Make Her Video Diary Public? 
 Girl Scouts Introduce New Cookie for 100th Anniversary 
 The Top 10 Everything of 2011 
 Look for Gas Prices to Hit $4 a Gallon by Summer, If Not Sooner 
 Bluefin Sells for Record $735,000: In New Year, Same Threats for Tuna in Japan 
 Study: Cognitive Decline Sets in as Early as Age 45 
 50 Best iPhone Apps 2011 
 Vignette StoryServer 5.0 Fri Jan 06 12:20:39 2012 
 How the ANC Lost Its Way 
 Does Microfinancing Really Work? A New Book Says No
 Admin. Plans Change in Immigration Rule 
 Think Ink: Why Print is Being Embraced By Designers 
 Gentle Giant: Is Eli Now the NFL's Main Manning? 
 New York City: 10 Things to Do 
 The Only Child: Debunking the Myths 
 Pressure Relief 
 Las Vegas: 10 Things to Do 
 East Timor: A Former Colony Mulls the Politics of Teaching Portuguese 
 Vignette StoryServer 5.0 Mon Aug 22 13:27:00 2011 
More News from Our Partners 
 CNN 
 Chaz Bono ready to date 
 Photojournalism pioneer Eve Arnold dies at 99 
 Michael Jackson kids to make his footprints 'immortal' 
 Rotten Tomato 
 Awards Tour 2012: The Golden Tomato Awards Winners 
 Critics Consensus: Guess The Devil Inside's Tomatometer 
 Total Recall: Devil Movies 
 Moviefone 
 Ricky Gervais on Golden Globes: 'I Got It a Bit Wrong' 
 'Alvin and the Chipmunks: Chipwrecked': Nude Man Arrested for Stripping at Screening 
 Steven Soderbergh: 'It's Always Good to Kill Movie Stars' 
Time.com on Digg 
 Upcoming 
 Popular Today 
POWERED BY digg 
Newsfeed 
 Reading While Eating for January 6: Thinner In Person 
 Occupy Wall Street: From Zuccotti Tents to Political Primaries 
 Fashion Friday: Jason Wu for Target, Kanye’s Tweets and More Style Scoop 
 Vignette StoryServer 5.0 Thu Jan 05 14:09:15 2012 
 More on TIME.com 
 20 Movies We're Looking Forward to in 2012 (and 10 We're Definitely Not) 
 Antarctica Discovery: New Species in the Deep Ocean 
 Person of the Year 2011 
 Vignette StoryServer 5.0 Wed Jun 08 10:47:21 2011 
Techland 
 Who’s the Fastest Browser of Them All? Firefox 9 for Windows 7, Safari 5 for OS X Lion 
 MARRIAGE for 13 Points: Words With Friends Game Leads to Love 
 Ford to Open Silicon Valley Lab 
Moneyland 
 200,000 New Jobs Is a Good Start, But Good Times May Still Be a Decade Away 
 5 Weirdest Hot-Selling Purchases of the 2011 Holiday Season 
 Digital Music Sales Finally Surpassed Physical Sales in 2011 
 Vignette StoryServer 5.0 Fri Jan 06 12:08:07 2012 
Top Stories on TIME.com 
 The Jobs Reality: 200,000 New Hires Is Promising, But Is Recovery Still 10 Years Away? 
 Rise of the Magi: On Three Kings Day, Believers and Atheists Should Call a Truce 
 Gentle Giant: Is Eli Now the NFL's Main Manning? 
 Vignette StoryServer 5.0 Fri Jan 06 06:37:51 2012 
 Quotes of the Day » 
 " It's a fantastic piece of acting by Meryl Streep, but you can't help wondering, why do we have to have this film right now. " 
 DAVID CAMERON, British Prime Minister, questioning the timing of The Iron Lady , which is about Margaret Thatcher. Cameron thinks it was "more about ageing and elements of dementia rather than about an amazing prime minister" 
 More Quotes » 
 For use in rail of Articles page or Section Fronts pages. Duplicate and change name as necesssary to distinguish. 
 Vignette StoryServer 5.0 Tue Jan 03 11:54:49 2012 
Stay Connected with TIME.com 
 Subscribe to 
RSS Feeds 
 Sign Up for 
Newsletters 
 Get the TIME 
Magazine iPad Edition 
 Read TIME Mobile 
on your Phone 
 Become a 
Fan of TIME 
 Get TIME 
Twitter Updates 
 NewsFeed 
 U.S. 
 Politics 
 World 
 Business 
 Money 
 Health 
 Science 
 Entertainment 
 Photos 
 Videos 
 Specials 
 Magazine 
 © 2012 Time Inc. All rights reserved 
 Privacy Policy 
 RSS 
 Newsletter 
 Mobile 
 TIME For Kids 
 LIFE.com 
 Subscribe 
 Contact Us 
 Terms of Use 
 Media Kit 
 Reprints & Permissions 
 Help 
 Site Map 
 Ad Choices 
 TIME 
Our partners 
 CNN 
 CNN MONEY 
 LIFE 
 Vignette StoryServer 5.0 Wed Aug 24 18:06:54 2011 
 Vignette StoryServer 5.0 Wed Aug 24 18:06:57 2011 
 Vignette StoryServer 5.0 Wed Aug 24 18:06:56 2011 
 