Complications in diagnosing lexical meaning: A rejoinder to Horvath and Siloni (2013)
John Beavers Andrew Koontz-Garboden
The University of Texas at Austin The University of Manchest er
jbeavers@mail.utexas.edu andrewkg@manchester.ac.uk
Abstract
We respond to Horvath and Siloni’s (2013) continued argumen ts against the reﬂex-
ivization analysis of anticausatives, which we show suffermany of the same problems
Beavers and Koontz-Garboden (2013) identiﬁed with the argu ments in Horvath and
Siloni (2011).
In Beavers and Koontz-Garboden (2013) (BKG) we point to meth odological, empirical, and con-
ceptual inadequacies in Horvath and Siloni’s (2011) arguments against the analysis of anticausativiza-
tion as a reﬂexivization operation, as argued by Chierchia (2004), Beavers and Zubair (2013), and
particularly Koontz-Garboden (2009). One of BKG’s main poi nts is a methodological one — a
key task in evaluating claims of semantic unacceptability is ensuring that context is taken into ac-
count in evaluating the relevant data. As BKG demonstrated r epeatedly, examples that sound odd
absent a context are instead judged acceptable when appropriate context is supplied. Such observa-
tions have ramiﬁcations for whether certain acceptability patterns are due to pragmatics vs. lexical
meaning qua the set of lexical entailments encoded by a given word (following e.g. Dowty 1991).
BKG conclude that Horvath and Siloni’s (2011) claim that the ir data indicate an absence of re-
ﬂexive causal meaning in anticausatives is not supported, and that the data instead support such an
analysis. Despite this, Horvath and Siloni (2013) (HS) suffers from essentially the same problems.
As such, our overarching point in this rejoinder is the same as in BKG. In what follows we largely
just point out where these problems arise again, and close byresponding to their assessment of ad-
vantages of the reﬂexivization analysis over alternativessuch as causer deletion, showing that there
are key empirical and formal misunderstandings that lead HS again to unsupported conclusions.
1 Context, acceptability judgements, by itself, and negation
The problems regarding absence of context in HS are seen most clearly in relation to by itself
modiﬁcation. BKG (following both Chierchia 2004 and Koontz -Garboden 2009) claim that by
itself only modiﬁes predicates that lexically encode causal meani ng, including causatives and, we
argued, anticausatives, but not statives. Underived inchoatives vary depending on whether a given
inchoative lexicalizes causal meaning. The crux of HS’s (p. 219ff.) counterargument is that this
predicts by itself modiﬁers to be acceptable with all causatives. However, they note that while
such modiﬁers are acceptable with causatives with animate subjects, they are less acceptable if the
subject is inanimate. Consider (1) from Spanish (their (10a,b)) and (2) from Hebrew (their (9a,b)).
(1) a. El
the
viento
wind
rompi´o
broke
el
the
vidrio
glass
(??por
by
s´ı
REFL
solo).
only
‘The wind broke the glass by itself.’
b. El
the
calor
heat
fundi´o
melted
el
the
hielo
ice
(??por
by
s´ı
REFL
solo).
only
‘The heat melted the ice by itself.’
(2) a. Ha-ruax
the-wind
ˇ savra
broke
et
ACC
ha-xalon
the-window
(??be-acma).
in-itself
1
‘The wind broke the window by itself.’
b. Ha-xom
the-heat
hemes
elted
et
ACC
ha-kerax
the-ice
(??be-acmo).
in-itself
‘The heat melted the ice by itself.’
Thus by itself may not always be available for predicates with causal meaning, calling into question
BKG’s analysis of this diagnostic. However, this conclusion is not supported by the data. First and
foremost, the only inanimates given in (1) and (2) are natural forces. We asked one of our Spanish
speakers about inanimate artifacts withpor s´ı solo, and these are judged to be quite acceptable, e.g.
(3) is acceptable in a context where the hammer fell from a shelf onto the vase without any explicit
intervention (as opposed to being manipulated, i.e. being an instrument).
(3) El
the
martillo
hammer
rompi´o
broke
el
the
vaso
vase
por
by
s´ı
REFL
solo.
only
‘The hammer broke the vase by itself’
This suggests that HS’s main empirical point about animacy i s incorrect — it is a fact more nar-
rowly about natural forces. Furthermore, as is clear from (1 ) and (2), these data are given without
any context. When we consulted speakers of Spanish and Hebrew respectively, they found the sen-
tences improve with contrastive focus regarding the causer.1 For example, (1a) is a ﬁne response to
a question asking whether the wind or the earthquake broke the glass, and (2b) is ﬁne as a response
to an assertion that both the salt and the heat were responsible for melting the ice. Thus there is no
fundamental incompatibility with by itself and natural force causer subjects in (1) and (2).
We suggest that the reason natural forces require a particular context to license by itself modi-
ﬁers follows from how informative such modiﬁers are for particular predicate/subject combinations
given that their main function is to clarify sole responsibility when it is in question (R´ akosi 2012:
193). For anticausatives and causatives with inanimate artifact subjects, by itself modiﬁers clarify
that the patient/artifact was indeed the causer, when the ex pectation would normally be that they
were acted upon. For causatives with animate subjects by itself modiﬁers clarify ultimate personal
responsibility, relevant when human agents are involved (since it is not uncommon that there might
be many potential agent causers in any given context). But it is unlikely that natural forces would
be set in action by or act in tandem with other causes (i.e. they are likely to be unique in any given
context), nor be held responsible in any human sense. Thus itis unsurprising thatby itself modiﬁers
are pragmatically odd with natural force causers absent some other communicative motivation, like
contrastive focus. At any rate, HS are correct in noting that BKG’s analysis predicts that (1) and
(2) should be acceptable — as indeed they are, once the right c ontext is considered. The claimed
unacceptability is instead an artifact of inadequate elicitation techniques.
The problem with context is similar in HS’s discussion of negation, and again we ﬁnd that once
the data they give are properly understood, they provide fur ther evidence for the reﬂexivization
1Incidentally, the Hebrew speaker we consulted did also reje ct me-acmo/a in (2) (consistent with HS’s (8)). The
most reasonable explanation for this, we believe, has to do w ith natural forces being relatively agent-like (see e.g.,
Cruse 1973: 11; Van Valin and Wilkins 1996: 294), and therefo re preferring the agent-oriented be-acmo/a (as dis-
cussed in Horvath and Siloni 2011 and BKG, p. 204-205). Contr ary to the claim in HS (p. 221), this fact is not
inconsistent with the reﬂexivization analysis — the two mod iﬁers are simply in a paradigmatic relationship with
one another, seemingly along the lines of agentivity. So, it seems unsurprising that in clearly non-agentive (i.e. anti -
causative) environments, one is found, while the other is found in environments that are more agentive.
2
analysis. HS (p. 223) incorrectly claim that in BKG we argued against the use of NPIs as a way
of ensuring that the negation in the negation diagnostic is logical rather than metalinguistic. How-
ever, this is a misunderstanding of our position in BKG; we continue to believe that the use of NPIs
is the best way to ensure a logical reading of negation. Our concern was s imply in Horvath and
Siloni’s (2011) implementation of the diagnostic, which is problematic in several ways. In Hun-
garian, Horvath and Siloni’s argument relied on negation with preverbal aspectual particles being
unambiguously metalinguistic. We showed that this is not th e case (nor is negation with postver-
bal particles unambiguously logical, as we also deﬁnitivel y showed). In the case of Spanish, we
showed that there are confounding tense and aspect factors that Horvath and Siloni did not control
for that complicated the judgments. Furthermore, there wer e inconsistencies in which NPIs they
used with which data, where different NPIs may bring additio nal meaning to bear that is orthog-
onal to their use in ruling out metalinguistic negation but c omplicates the judgments. Crucially,
none of these factors invalidate the use of NPIs to rule out me talinguistic negation (although the
Hungarian observations do invalidate particle position as a control for negation type). Rather, they
simply must be controlled for when using this diagnostic. On ce they are controlled for, we main-
tained then and now that NPIs are an effective way of implemen ting the negation diagnostic (see
our extensive discussion in BKG for further details and empirical justiﬁcation).
Nonetheless, HS develop a new negation diagnostic that avoi ds using NPIs, which involves
using negated sentences with “no preceding utterance” (HS, p. 223), building on the idea that
metalinguistic negation can only arise in response to a prio r utterance and thus ‘out of the blue’
negation must be logical. Of course, we welcome any new, well -justiﬁed diagnostic, since the
best support for any argument comes from converging evidenc e. But as with any diagnostic, one
has to be aware of potentially tangential inferences tied to it that can confound the issue under
investigation. Here, once again, we suggest that HS have ove rlooked the role of context in a way
that undermines their argument. In particular, negated sentences uttered ‘out of the blue’ are usually
unacceptable for purely pragmatic reasons. Consider (4) (a contextually enriched English version
of their (18)).
(4) CONTEXT: A and B come upon a child who is bleeding from a cut . A says to B:
?The child didn’t cut himself.
While it is true that the negation in (4) is logical rather than metalinguistic, it is difﬁcult to conclude
anything about the underlying meaning of the verbcut given that the utterance is pragmatically odd
for unrelated reasons. For example, it violates Grice’s Maxim of Relevance, since it is unclear why
(4) would be useful information in the given context. It also violates the Maxim of Manner, since
whatever it is meant to convey is better expressed via some more direct, afﬁrmative assertion.
So if HS’s proposed diagnostic is to be taken seriously, the r elevant utterance must not be
pragmatically unacceptable from the outset. For this to be t he case for an utterance conveying the
negation of a propositionP in the absence of any previous utterance, there must be some reasonable
expectation (given the nature of the world or speciﬁc contextual knowledge) that if things had been
operating normally P might have been the case. If this were so, then an utterance co nveying ¬ P
is relevant and directly informative. For example, (4) is mo re acceptable if the child in question
is known to cut himself on a regular basis (the utterance then suggesting that something afoul is
afoot, although there are more direct ways to convey this).
3
Building on this, in order for a negated anticausative to be pragmatically felicitous in ‘out of the
blue’ contexts on the reading relevant for evaluating the reﬂexivization hypothesis, there must be
a reasonable expectation given the nature of the world or speciﬁc contextual clues that the patient
will have undergone the change-of-state named by the verb wi thout external intervention. This is
rarely the case for objects we can imagine that commonly undergo breaking events, so the infelicity
of (5), HS’s (15), particularly given the poor context givento their consultants, seems unsurprising.
(5) a. Context: You know that ‘Juan broke the glass’; given th is, would you be lying (or
incoherent) if you stated [(5b)]?
b. #No
NEG
se
REFL
rompi´o
broke
el
the
vaso.
glass
‘The glass didn’t break.’
Under such circumstances, the default interpretation of (5) will be negation of the change of state,
which of course gives rise to a contradiction. But this is a fa ct about the nature of objects (that
we can think of) that undergo breaking events, not about the l exical semantics of the verb itself.
However, this is not necessarily true for all participants i n events named by anticausatives. For
example, the earth, particularly in desert-type surroundi ngs, often cracks as part of its natural
development. As a consequence, if someone encountered sucha crack ‘out of the blue’, they might
reasonably expect that the earth opened up on its own. In such a context, a denial that this was the
case will not be pragmatically odd. Crucially, and as predic ted by the reﬂexivization analysis, the
negation of an anticausative clause meaning “the earth cracked” in Spanish is indeed licit in such
a context, as shown by (6).
(6) CONTEXT: There is a large crack in the earth with marks sug gesting that a seismic event
did not do it, but rather human (or machine) intervention. An observer says:
La
the
tierra
earth
no
didn’t
se
SELF
abri´o.
open
Se
REFL
notan
note
las
the
marcas
marks
de
of
una
a
pala
digger
mec´anica
mechanical
aqu´ı
here
y
and
aqu´ı.
here
Voy
going.1SG
a
to
encontrar
ﬁnd.out
al
the
que
who
lo
it
hizo.
did
‘The ground didn’t open. One notes the marks of a mechanical digger here and here. I am
going to ﬁnd the person who did this.’
In (6), it cannot be the change-of-state that is being denied, as this would be ﬂatly false in the given
context. Thus what is instead being denied — via logical nega tion according to HS’s ‘out of the
blue’ diagnostic — must be causation, which must thus be in th e meaning of the anticausative, as
predicted by the reﬂexivization analysis.
By contrast, with negated stative predicates in contexts where the state named by the predicate
clearly holds and what one wants to deny instead is causation of the state, a sharp contradiction is
generated, even in the richest of contexts, as in (7), consistent with the received wisdom that such
predicates lack causative entailments.
(7) CONTEXT: There is a biology teacher well-known for frigh tening children with spiders
unnecessarily. The principal and the superintendent of his school district are walking past
the class one day. They peer into the room and see that the teacher is forcing the children to
hold huge tarantulas on their heads for a minimum of ﬁve minutes at a time while watching
4
a ﬁlm about the virulence of tarantula poison, a ﬁlm which includes images of people dying
painful deaths after tarantula bites. The children are in hysterics, screaming and crying. The
principal, worried about the fact that his teacher is making the students fear tarantulas and
thinking that they need to do something about the situation, says to the superintendent:
#No
no
les
them
tienen
have
miedo
fear
a
to
las
the
tar´antulas
tarantulas
los
the
estudiantes.
students
Tenemos
we.must
que
that
castigar
punish
al
the
maestro.
teacher
‘The students do not fear tarantulas. We must punish the teacher.’
Similarly, with the underived inchoativeempeorar ‘worsen’, even in an enriched context like that in
(8) in which patients do commonly get worse for unspeciﬁed reasons without external intervention,
negation yields a clear contradiction, consistent with empeorar not lexically encoding causation.
(8) CONTEXT: A doctor in a hospital is visiting a patient of hi s, and sees that his condition
has worsened. He detects signs suggesting that the worsenin g may be a side effect of one
of the treatments he earlier provided. He say to his colleagues:
#No
no
empeor´o
worsened
el
the
estado
state
del
of.the
paciente.
patient
Voy
1SG.go
a
to
encontrar
ﬁnd.out
cu´al
which
de
of
los
the
tratamientos
treatments
lo
it
hizo.
did
‘The state of the patient didn’t worsen. I’m going to ﬁnd out which of the treatments did it.’
Rather, the only reading of (8) is to deny the change-of-stat e, which gives rise to a contradiction
in the given context. Thus the data from HS’s own diagnostic support anticausatives having causal
entailments, by contrast with statives and (some) underived inchoatives, which do not.2
In short, we continue to believe that the best way to implement the negation diagnostic, and to
rule out the possibility of metalinguistic negation, is to u se an NPI under the appropriate condi-
tions. HS’s new diagnostic can potentially also rule out met alinguistic negation, but it introduces
unrelated tangential complications regarding the pragmatic context of use that can lead to infelicity
for reasons that have nothing to do with the lexical meaning o f the predicate under investigation.
When these factors are controlled for, HS’s new diagnostic actually provides evidence in support
of the reﬂexivization analysis of anticausatives. Further more, a deletion analysis as proposed by
HS would be unable to account for these data, since on that ana lysis there would be no causative
lexical entailments to be logically negated in anticausati ves, a fact which in turn causes problems
in capturing the contrast between anticausatives vs. statives and (some) underived inchoatives.
As a ﬁnal point regarding context and acceptability, we brieﬂy note an additional argument HS
make about by itself modiﬁers. They suggest that most if not all underived inchoatives actually do
allow by itself modiﬁers, if the context can be enriched enough to make clear the possibility of
external causation. Thus (9), which is normally unacceptable, is ﬁne in the given context.
(9) La
the
situaci´on
situation
del
of.the
paciente
patient
empeor´o
worsened
por
by
s´ı
REFL
sola,
only
(el
(the
m´edico
doctor
no
NEG
tiene
has
la
the
culpa).
fault)
‘The patient’s situation worsened by itself (it isn’t the doctor’s fault).’ (HS, (6a))
2HS also discuss additional Hungarian data, using again thei r new diagnostic but also again failing to control
for context (and they claim to have similar judgments for Heb rew but do not give the data). We have not consulted
Hungarian or Hebrew speakers on such data, but given the prob lems with HS’s use of the new diagnostic in Spanish,
we suspect that HS’s data in these other languages is likely also compromised in similar ways.
5
HS argue that these data undermine BKG’s claim that there is e ver a distinction between anti-
causatives and underived inchoatives. Although this is an i nstance where HS laudably do take
context seriously, the conclusion they draw is a bit of a non-sequitur — as BKG (p. 204) noted, the
reﬂexivization analysis makes no predictions about underi ved inchoatives, so it is not clear why
data such as (9) should matter one way or the other. Indeed, fo llowing the logic of this diagnostic
as outlined in BKG (p. 204), the obvious conclusion from (9) should simply be that sinceempeorar
occurs with por s´ı soloin at least some contexts, then it must encode causation. Thi s is of course
entirely compatible with a reﬂexivization analysis of anticausatives since it has nothing to do with
anticausatives as such (see Koontz-Garboden 2009: 108, fn. 27 and BKG, p. 204 for discussion).
With that said, however, it turns out that an interesting fac t emerges from the data above —
that HS were presumably not aware of — that points towards a mo re subtle conclusion than the
one just suggested. In particular, our speakers who rejected (8) (and other negation diagnostic data
like it — see BKG, p. 205ff.) in fact accept (9). Taken togethe r, this is an apparent contradiction,
since (8) (and other negation data like it) suggests that empeorar does not lexicalize causation,
while the judgment in (9) suggests that it does. Although thi s seems to put the tests at odds, there
is a simple reconciliation already hinted at by BKG (p. 202, f n.3). In particular, there is still a
key empirical difference between causatives and anticausa tives vs. (some) underived inchoatives
and statives, which are also typically unacceptable with by itself modiﬁers: causatives and anti-
causatives all have uses that allow by itself modiﬁers readily without an enriched thematic context
like (9), while (some) underived inchoatives require such a context. Why can context improve by
itself modiﬁers with verbs that otherwise do not allow them and for which other evidence (such as
(8)) suggests they lack causation in their meaning? A simple answer is that the constraint on by it-
self modiﬁcation is more general than previously suggested: it is licensed when causation has been
previously established in the discourse (rather than more narrowly lexically entailed by the modi-
ﬁed verb, as per Levin and Rappaport Hovav 1995, Chierchia 20 04, and Koontz-Garboden 2009,
among others). This can be satisﬁed in at least two ways: (i) through lexical content of the modiﬁed
predicate as with causatives and anticausatives (consistent with earlier approaches cited above) or
(ii) pragmatically in enriched contexts for predicates tha t do not encode it lexically (building on
Koontz-Garboden 2007a, Sch¨ afer 2007: 4 and R´ akosi 2012: 193). The empirical difference will
be the requirement of necessary contextual thematic enrichment. Given the behavior of verbs like
empeorar ‘worsen’ in other constructions as in (8), and that the rightcontext must be found for its
use with por s´ı solo, we believe (9) falls into this latter class. Thusempeorar lacks causative lexical
entailments, even if these can be introduced by other discourse material in ways that satisfy por s´ı
solo’s requirements.3 Thus a more careful view of the data — and a more nuanced unders tanding
of what data involving context can tell us — show that the reﬂe xivization analysis is compatible
with all of these facts.
The moral, reiterating BKG, is that diagnostics must be applied with care, and one must ensure
that in cases where a particular utterance is (in)felicitous it is so for the claimed reasons. This means
not only understanding the relevant meanings of the parts inthe constructions under consideration,
but also providing appropriate contexts for evaluating examples and understanding why these con-
texts play the role they do in facilitating acceptability. As we discussed in BKG and further above,
3See also Jackendoff (1990: 294, fn. 7) for a parallel discuss ion of what he calls “grammatical” vs. “discourse”
patients, i.e. something that is a patient because it is enta iled by the predicate vs. something that is a patient because
of particularized discourse contexts, which will have an impact on affectedness tests and thus must be controlled for.
6
these contextual issues are key in distinguishing lexical from non-lexical information. When con-
sultants are asked to evaluate sentences with contexts that are highly underdetermined, the risk
of running foul of some tangential constraint on use is high; when some otherwise unacceptable
example can be saved by context, we should ask why that is so. A s in Horvath and Siloni (2011),
HS’s discussion suffers from methodological problems rela ted to these issues, leading them to
what we continue to believe is the incorrect conclusion. Once these issues are controlled for, their
arguments against reﬂexivization are actually arguments in favor of it.
2 Greek apo
HS further suggest a previously unnoted prediction of the reﬂexivization analysis in relation to the
Greek causal adjunctapo (see Koontz-Garboden 2009: 121-122). They state that the “.. . reﬂexivization
analysis leads us to expect that the causative alternate should be able to occur with apo PPs no less
than its derived anticausative. The reason for this is that u nder reﬂexivization both the causative
and the anticausative alternates would have an argument with a Cause role (not only a causal mean-
ing) present in the clause, so there is no reason why apo should not behave uniformly with regard
to both.” (HS, p. 228). They provide (10) and (11) suggestingthat this is false.
(10) a. I
the
porta
door
espase
broke
apo
from
ton
the
anemo/apo
wind/from
tin
the
kateyida.
storm
The door broke from the wind/from the storm.
b. I
the
porta
door
espase
broke
apo
from
to
the
apotomo
abrupt
klisimo.
closing
The door broke from the abrupt closing.
(11) a. O
the
anemos
wind
espase
broke
tin
the
porta
door
(*apo
from
tin
the
kateyida).
storm
The wind broke the door (from the storm).
b. I
the
kateyida
storm
espase
broke
tin
the
porta
door
(*apo
from
ton
the
anemo).
wind
The storm broke the door (from the wind).
We have not veriﬁed these judgements, but simply point out th at the acceptability of (11) is not a
prediction of the reﬂexivization analysis. Rather, any rea sonable theory of event semantics, such
as that adopted by Koontz-Garboden (2009), predicts (11) to be unacceptable.4 Koontz-Garboden
(2009: 105), for example, follows Pi˜ n´ on (2001: 18, fn.9) in his view that although a single event
can have more than one cause, it cannot have more than one caus e of the same thematic type.
In the data in (11), both the subject and the apo causer are kinds of natural forces, and thereby
excluded by this condition. By contrast, with anticausatives like (10), as Koontz-Garboden (2009)
4An additional example that HS provide is (i) (their (27c)):
(i) O
the
anemos
wind
espase
broke
tin
the
porta
door
(*apo
from
to
the
apotomo
abrupt
klisimo).
closing
The wind broke the door (from the abrupt closing).
Again, we have not veriﬁed the judgement, but assuming it is i ndeed unacceptable, we presume it is because there is
a problem with the causal order of the subject and apo causer. As suggested (implicitly) by Croft (1991: 185), cau ser
adjuncts other than instrument/means adjuncts should indicate causes that precede rather than follow the subject in the
causal chain. These are reversed in (i), however, since the wind would cause the closing, and not vice versa.
7
discusses and as Beavers and Zubair (2013) provide solid for mal articulation for, although there
are two causes they are of thematically different types. In t he theory of Beavers and Zubair, for
example, the undergoer is the effector of a stative causing e ventuality (less formally, something
about the patient led to the change) while the complement of t he apo PP would be the effector of
an eventive causing eventuality (some action involving thecauser led to the change). Thus there is
no incompatibility between them. In sum, contrary to HS’s cl aims, (10) and (11) differ from one
another in key ways that explain the contrast, once a better a rticulated theory of event semantics
is worked out. Furthermore, the contrast in acceptability between them is at once tangential to the
reﬂexivization theory of anticausativization and also consistent with it.
3 Theoretical and further empirical advantages
Finally, HS attempt to refute several other claimed advantages of the reﬂexivization analysis, both
empirical and theoretical. Empirically, as Koontz-Garbod en (2009) and Chierchia (2004) both
point out, the reﬂexivization analysis of anticausativiza tion makes straightforward sense of the
wide-spread crosslinguistic syncretism between anticaus ativizing and reﬂexivizing morphology
(see e.g. Haspelmath 1990). HS (p. 218) rightly point out that, as the data from Haspelmath (1990)
and Kemmer (1993) show, the same morphemes also commonly mar k middles, reciprocals, and
passives. They thus conclude that because reﬂexivization is clearly not the right semantic analysis
for these additional operations it cannot underlie this morphology at all, presumably calling reﬂex-
ivization into question as the right analysis for anticausa tivization. However, Koontz-Garboden
(2009: 92, fn. 11) already anticipates such an objection in r elation to the syncretism with passive,
pointing out that for most languages the arguments showing t hat a particular operation is passive
rather than anticausative are generally not provided in the ﬁrst place. Still further, even if some
other uses are passive, HS’s argument is dubious — while the relevant morphology is not categori-
cally reﬂexive, it certainly allows that reading in the relevant languages for canonical reﬂexives. If it
is an available interpretation, there is no reason to assumeit cannot also underlie the anticausative.
Indeed, a reﬂexivization analysis of anticausativization is in fact entirely consistent with the
syncretism with these other operations. For example, Beavers and Zubair (2013: 30-31) show that
in Colloquial Sinhala there are two types of anticausatives, one which does not implicate any addi-
tional causer participant for the change-of-state described by the verb, thus conforming to the stan-
dard understanding of an inchoative, and the other which cle arly does implicate some additional
causer participant, giving rise to a passive-like reading d espite not being syntactically passive.
Beavers and Zubair propose that these two types of anticausa tives can be given a uniﬁed analysis
by assuming that the operation that derives anticausativessimply strips a causer from the argument
structure of the verb in question but leaves it in the verb’s l exical semantic content, implemented
formally as saturation by a free variable. 5 Assuming free variables must receive some interpreta-
tion, various language-speciﬁc interpretive processes gi ve rise to the two readings: coidentifying
the underlying causer with the expressed patient subject de rives a reﬂexive and thus canonical
anticausative reading, while existentially binding the ca user derives a passive-type reading. Thus
reﬂexive and passive meanings are two outgrowths of a more basic semantic operation.
Still further, as Beavers and Zubair (2013: 31-32) themselves mention (see also Beavers 2012),
5There may actually be convergence between HS’s own proposed “deletion” analysis and an analysis consistent
with the facts supporting reﬂexivization: Beavers and Zubair note that their idea might be construed as at least one kind
of formal implementation of Reinhart’s (2002) decausativization, also cited by HS, although in Beavers and Zubair’s
analysis causal meaning is still preserved truth conditionally.
8
this analysis could be extended to middles and canonical pas sives if the language-speciﬁc inter-
pretative rules include other ways of binding the underlying causer. This could include existential
quantiﬁcation again for various sorts of passives, generic quantiﬁcation for middles, and plural re-
ﬂexivization qua reciprocalization (straightforward ext ensions of Beavers and Zubair’s analysis).
Thus there is a unifying underlying generalization that uni tes all the various operations (the free
variable) but still admits anticausatives as a type of reﬂex ive while also distinguishing those from
other operations that share the same morphology in terms of the nature of the quantiﬁcational oper-
ation. This in turn allows that these operations might also be marked differently in some cases, e.g.
if the morphology has a meaning that includes the speciﬁc quantiﬁcational meaning. It also leads to
the expectation that anticausativization and reﬂexivizat ion, since they are notional variants of the
same underlying operation of coidentifying a suppressed ar gument with an expressed argument,
would most likely be marked identically. This is consistent with the crosslinguistic morphological
facts — in the survey of Haspelmath (1990: 36) anticausativi zation and reﬂexivization are almost
always marked identically, whereas the marking of passive,for example, more often diverges from
them.6 Notwithstanding HS’s protestations, this is expected under the reﬂexivization analysis.
HS (p. 218–219) also object that a reﬂexivization analysis o f anticausatives cannot explain
why the reﬂexivization operation that derives anticausatives from causatives with effector subjects
does not also always apply productively to agent-subject ve rbs to produce a huge class of proper
reﬂexives. However, BKG (p. 214-215) already addressed thi s, again building on proposals in
both Koontz-Garboden (2009: 93-96) and Beavers and Zubair ( 2013: 41-42), suggesting that the
relative productivity of the type of reﬂexive morphology us ed to form anticausatives can only be
understood by considering the larger system of reﬂexivizat ion in a language, which may include
other forms (such as long reﬂexives) that speciﬁcally encode “agent act on self” readings and thus
may block anticausative morphology from operating in some cases (see fn. 6).
Finally, a higher level issue HS (p. 218; 229–230) bring up is the question of whether an
analysis of anticausativization that is consistent with th e Montonicity Hypothesis is desirable, as
Koontz-Garboden (2009) argues. Firstly, they point to an additional empirical phenomenon — de-
verbal adjective formation — which poses a challenge to Monotonicity, suggesting that it gives rise
to empirically incorrect predictions in that domain and so must be wrong (independent of the facts
of anticausativization).7 They then go on to suggest that there is no independent reason to believe
that Monotonicity should even hold at all. Regarding the iss ue with deverbal adjectives, Koontz-
Garboden (2010) and Deo et al. (2011) show that there is no argument from deverbal adjectives for
deletion in the analysis of deverbal adjective formation (contra, e.g., Dubinsky and Simango 1996).
As with anticausativization, the lexical semantic facts have simply been misunderstood, and once
they are properly understood, it is in fact shown, as with anticausativization, that a deletion analy-
sis makes a series of incorrect predictions. As for the second issue, we do not ﬁnd HS’s discussion
of deletion rules in relation to this issue helpful. We simpl y do not understand what they mean in
6That said, it is possible that a language could distinguish e ven reﬂexivization and anticausativization on this
analysis: although they share a core of coidentiﬁcation of a rguments, the thematic roles of the suppressed arguments
differ in the canonical cases. If a language is sensitive to this it may mark them differently.
7HS (p. 230) also suggest that result nominals may pose a challenge to Monotonicity. As Koontz-Garboden (2007b:
288) points out, however, this depends very much on what the direction of derivation is morphologically (in languages
where this can actually be seen) and what the meaning of result nouns is. Because there has been no typological study
of the issue that we are aware of, nor is there a sufﬁcient understanding of the lexical semantics of result nominals, we
think it is far from clear that these are a challenge, though we agree that this remains to be demonstrated.
9
saying that lexical representations do not “involve semant ic (λ-)formulas” (HS, p. 230) or what
the nature of lexical semantics and semantic composition is that their view entails. We would in-
vite them to implement their ideas model-theoretically, as we have done (Koontz-Garboden 2009,
Beavers and Zubair 2013), so that it can be better understood what exactly they are proposing.
We note with some optimism, however, that it may well be, as no ted in fn. 5, that there is a for-
mal implementation of something akin to their higher-level “deletion” idea that is consistent with
reﬂexivization (“deletion” of an argument as saturation by an open variable, later bound in some
way).8 Crucially, however, such an analysis does not entail deletion of any causative lexical entail-
ments, a welcome result, since the facts in Koontz-Garboden (2009), BKG, and above show that
the derivation of an inchoative from a causative verb preserves such entailments.
As for the broader desirability of the Monotonicity Hypothe sis, it may be that it follows from
independent principles of compositionality (as suggested by Koontz-Garboden 2012, though see
fn. 8). But even if it does not, the fact is that many theoretic ians across a range of frameworks
either explicitly or implicitly do theory development on th e assumption that it does actually hold
(see Koontz-Garboden 2012 for discussion). The point of our discussion, and Koontz-Garboden’s
(2009, 2010, 2012) more generally, has been to question whether this assumption is actually war-
ranted by taking it from axiom to falsiﬁable hypothesis and subjecting it to empirical investigation.
We have so far seen no evidence to suggest it does not hold. Even in the cases where it appears on
the surface to be violated, as with deverbal adjective forma tion and anticausativization, once the
lexical semantic facts are properly understood, it is seen that the hypothesis is still well supported.
Given that examination of difﬁcult cases like anticausativ ization and deverbal adjectives in light
of the hypothesis has led to the better understanding of the l exical semantics of these phenomena
in the ﬁrst place, we believe that adopting it as a working hyp othesis has the advantage of leading
to newer and more subtle empirical predictions in other doma ins as well. Thus its desirability is
based on the value it has as a working hypothesis, and the deba te herein suggests it has much to
offer, even if it were ultimately shown to be empirically incorrect in some domain.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Ricardo Berm´ udez-Otero, Oliver Bond, Itamar Francez, Valia Kordoni,
and Maria del Mar Bassa Vanrell for general comments and/or their help with various datapoints.
We especially thank Julia Horvath and Tal Siloni for raising interesting questions that have led to
a productive debate. We also thank Johan Rooryck for facilitating it.
References
Beavers, John. 2012. On non-agentivity and causer suppress ion in Colloquial Sinhala. Paper
presented at the Workshop on Argument Structure, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary,
May 25-27.
Beavers, John and Andrew Koontz-Garboden. 2013. In defense of the reﬂexivization analysis of
anticausativization. Lingua 131:199–216.
Beavers, John and Cala Zubair. 2013. Anticausatives in Sinh ala: Involitivity and causer suppres-
sion. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 31:1–46.
8Beavers (2012) in fact sketches out a way in which HS could achieve the effects of true deletion compositionally
by constructing the meaning of the anticausative from the gr ound up around the state-denoting root of the causative,
but not including causation in the event structure. However, while compositionally possible, the facts to date show that
such an approach is empirically undesirable.
10
Chierchia, Gennaro. 2004. A semantics for unaccusatives an d its syntactic consequences. In
A. Alexiadou, E. Anagnostopoulou, and M. Everaert, eds., The Unaccusativity Puzzle , pages
22–59. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Croft, William. 1991. Syntactic Categories and Grammatical Relations: The Cognitive Organiza-
tion of Information. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Cruse, D.A. 1973. Some thoughts on agentivity. Journal of Linguistics 9:11–23.
Deo, Ashwini, Itamar Francez, and Andrew Koontz-Garboden. 2011. The morphosemantics of
–ed. Paper presented at the workshop Dimensions of Grammar in ho nor of Paul Kiparsky.
University of Konstanz, August 3, 2011.
Dowty, David. 1991. Thematic proto-roles and argument selection. Language 67:547–619.
Dubinsky, Stanley and Silvester Ron Simango. 1996. Passive and stative in Chiche ˆ wa: Evidence
for modular distinctions in grammar. Language 72(4):749–781.
Haspelmath, Martin. 1990. The grammaticization of passive morphology. Studies in Language
14:25–71.
Horvath, Julia and Tal Siloni. 2011. Anticausatives: Again st reﬂexivization. Lingua 121:2176–
2186.
Horvath, Julia and Tal Siloni. 2013. Anticausatives have no cause(r): A rejoinder to Beavers &
Koontz-Garboden. Lingua 131:217–230.
Jackendoff, Ray. 1990. Semantic Structures. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kemmer, Suzanne. 1993. The Middle Voice. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Koontz-Garboden, Andrew. 2007a. Aspectual coercion and the typology of change of state predi-
cates. Journal of Linguistics 43:115–152.
Koontz-Garboden, Andrew. 2007b. States, changes of state, and the Monotonicity Hypothesis .
Ph.D. thesis, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
Koontz-Garboden, Andrew. 2009. Anticausativization. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory
27:77–138.
Koontz-Garboden, Andrew. 2010. The lexical semantics of de rived statives. Linguistics and Phi-
losophy 33:285–324.
Koontz-Garboden, Andrew. 2012. The monotonicity hypothesis. In L. McNally and V . Demonte,
eds., Telicity, change, and state: A cross-categorial view of eve nt structure, pages 139–161.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Levin, Beth and Malka Rappaport Hovav. 1995. Unaccusativity: At the Syntax-Lexical Semantics
Interface. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pi˜ n´ on, Christopher. 2001. A ﬁner look at the causative-in choative alterna-
tion. In Proceedings of Semantics and Linguistic Theory 11 . Ithaca, NY: Cor-
nell Linguistics Circle. References to prepublication man uscript on WWW at:
http://www.phil-fak.uni-duesseldorf.de/˜pinon/papers/flcia.html.
R´ akosi, Gy¨ orgy. 2012. In defence of the non-causative analysis of anticausatives. In M. Everaert,
M. Marelj, and T. Siloni, eds., The Theta System , pages 177–199. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Reinhart, Tanya. 2002. The theta system - an overview. Theoretical Linguistics 28:229–90.
Sch¨ afer, Florian. 2007. By itself. University of Stuttgart, ms.
Van Valin, Robert D. and David P. Wilkins. 1996. The case for ‘effector’: Case roles, agents, and
agency revisited. In M. Shibatani and S. A. Thompson, eds., Grammatical Constructions: Their
Form and Meaning, pages 289–322. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
11