 
 
The Boundaries of Imagination 
Important aspects of fantasy translation 
 
 
 
Author: Marlies Kok 
Student no: 3125165 
Translation Master Thesis 
First Reader: Ton Naaijkens 
Second Reader: Cees Koster 
  

2 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
Table of Contents 
Introduction ............................................................................................................................................. 3 
Chapter 1 – The Importance of the Setting ............................................................................................. 6 
Chapter 2 – Aspects of Culture .............................................................................................................. 15 
The four categories of fantasy cultures ......................................................................................... 15 
Government in fantasy settings .................................................................................................... 23 
Translating fantasy names and (ir)realia ....................................................................................... 26 
Chapter 3 – Translating Contemporary Fantasy .................................................................................... 30 
Greg Stolze - A Hunger Like Fire .................................................................................................... 34 
Discussing A Hunger Like Fire  ........................................................................................................ 44 
Neil Gaiman - American Gods ....................................................................................................... 47 
Discussing American Gods  ............................................................................................................. 54 
Neil Gaiman & Terry Pratchett - Good Omens .............................................................................. 55 
Discussing Good Omens  ................................................................................................................ 63 
Jim Butcher - The Dresden Files: Storm Front and Fool Moon ..................................................... 64 
Discussing Storm Front  and Fool Moon  ......................................................................................... 79 
Conclusion ............................................................................................................................................. 82 
Appendix A – Original Source Texts ...................................................................................................... 85 
A Hunger Like Fire ......................................................................................................................... 85 
American Gods .............................................................................................................................. 89 
Good Omens .................................................................................................................................. 93 
Storm Front ................................................................................................................................... 99 
Fool Moon ................................................................................................................................... 103 
Bibliography ......................................................................................................................................... 109 
 
  
3 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
Introduction  
The literary genre of fantasy is not new, but in the thousands of years of literature, the concept of 
fantasy literature is relatively long; it has been around for at about a century in its modern definition, 
since the publication of J.R.R. Tolkien’s The Hobbit . Though at that time it may not yet have been 
called such, it is said by some today that Tolkien was the father of all modern fantasy, though names 
such as Edith Nesbit and Lewis Carroll are also mentioned in that role (Nikolajeva, 139).  Some might 
say the genre is older than just a century, having been present since the arrival of the Gothic novel, 
the fairytales of medieval times or the mythology of the old world, the Greek, Irish, or Scandinavian 
folk tales. Most of these examples certainly tick the boxes of what are today considered to be 
hallmarks of a fantasy novel, but mostly because they were the greatest source of inspiration for the 
eclectic genre that is fantasy (Nikolajeva, 139). Magic, powerful gods, strange creatures, other worlds 
even, all are tropes to be found in those traditional tales as well as our modern fantasy. Fantasy is 
part of man, as old as the world itself perhaps, but its current written form, the modern fantasy 
genre, has only gained in popularity in the last sixty years. 
 The novels that have been written since Tolkien fi rst wrote about that hobbit that lived in a 
hole in the ground are numerous, and especially in the last twenty years more and more fantasy 
authors have come out of the woodworks. And of these many authors, only a handful has written 
their novels for children; the main target audience of the largest contributors to the genre are 
(young) adults. It is strange then, that in modern translation studies, adult fantasy translation seems 
to be a suppositious child. Scrolling through any translation studies database with the ‘fantasy’ 
keyword in the search machine will give up pages and pages of articles and books about translating 
children’s literature and the role of fantasy in them, but next to nothing about translating fantasy for 
adults, even though those novels come with their own set of problems. They can be thrillers, spy 
mysteries or might fall into many other genres; dramatic stories set in a completely different world 
and often very graphic in content, with violence and sexuality. Sometimes such a world serves only as 
4 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
a new framework in which to tell the tale, but more often than not the world itself is an intricate part 
of the plot, the field for great feats of magic, political intrigue or titanic power struggles which would 
not fit into our own world. And with these worlds come new, unknown parameters within which the 
translator must stay, and they are far stricter parameters than in fantasy children’s literature. For 
children, the main purpose of a fantasy tale is to amuse, and a secondary purpose might be to teach. 
However, fantasy novels with an adult audience are often created to cast a critical eye on a specific 
source culture, historic events or human behaviour (Loponen, 165). To keep these allusions or 
metaphors recognisable for the target audience, the translator must be aware of the framework in 
which the novel was written. For if the parameters are not kept, and the world is not believably 
translated within the framework the author imagined for it, then the adult fantasy reader could fail 
to recognise the underlying intention of the author and the novel might lose its momentum.  
 Then why has the translation of adult fantasy been  so ignored in the translation studies? The 
answer might be found in the way literary scientists view the genre; it is not considered ‘proper’ 
literature and therefore not worthy of such attention. That attitude is certainly misplaced, however. 
A fantasy author is not any less of an author than any other, or any less read. As mentioned above, 
they often handle the same subjects as those acclaimed literary authors, only against the backdrop of 
an unknown world which gives them more freedom in writing, for they do not have to worry about 
the cultural parameters of our own world; they can create their own. For example, Terry Goodkind 
writes about how one type of people wishes to annihilate the other, to create the perfect human 
race in his Sword of Truth series. Philip Pullman investigates what the world would look like if the 
Church ruled it in his His Dark Materials  trilogy, as well as playing with the many-worlds theory from 
quantum physics. He even goes as far as killing God in the last instalment, a scene that caused great 
outrage amongst the religious community. J.R.R. Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings  may be one of the 
most undervalued literary works of the last century, considering its subject matter touches on many 
things, from an epic struggle between good and evil to the personal struggles of many of its 
5 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
characters. However, titles of fantasy have rarely found their way into scholarly discussions, and it is 
not so strange then that in translation studies, the fantasy genre is also underrepresented. 
 This thesis will be an attempt to change this. It will investigate the challenges provided by 
translating contemporary fiction and fantasy fiction for adults, with a special focus on contemporary 
fantasy, and attempt to list the important aspects of a fantasy novel that a translator will have to 
take into account. The biggest challenge of any fantasy author is to keep the setting and story 
believable, logic and consistent, and to lead the reader into the stage of willing suspension of 
disbelief for full enjoyment of the story. The translator’s challenge is to retain this feeling in the 
translation. It is the goal of this thesis to aid the fantasy translator into meeting this challenge by 
attempting to list the aspects of the novel to which the translator should pay attention from the 
outset. Its focus will be on the different parameters in contemporary fiction and fantasy fiction, the 
cultural differences in source and target language as well as the existing world versus the fantasy 
world, and the role a fantasy world may or may not play in the general plot of the novel. In reviewing 
the translation process of adult fantasy, the main focus will be on the fantasy setting, government 
and politics, and realia. These common aspects of a fantasy have been gathered by extensive reading 
of the genre and translating several excerpts from (contemporary) fantasy fiction. This thesis will 
strive to combine all findings to conclude which are the most important aspects to take into account 
while translating fantasy, with the hope that it will shed some light on this somewhat obscure corner 
of translation.  
  
6 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
Chapter 1 – The Importance of the Setting 
The literary genre of modern fantasy has been gaining strength, momentum and popularity among 
readers in the last twenty years and in Hollywood in the last ten. With the influx of fantasy novels, 
the translation of the genre has also taken flight. Nearly all novels mentioned in this thesis have been 
translated to Dutch and many other languages, and books like the Harry Potter -series by J.K. Rowling 
and the Twilight -series by Stephanie Meyer are immensely popular amongst a broad audience. Other 
popular writers that have been translated to Dutch are Raymond E. Feist, Robin Hobb, George R.R. 
Martin, Robert Jordan and J.R.R. Tolkien. While translating a fantasy novel, one of the first things the 
translator has to familiarize themselves with is the setting. This chapter will, using many original 
fantasy works as an example, discuss the importance of that element of the novel , as it is essentially 
that which denote whether the novel is part of the fantasy genre or not. It will explain the 
characteristics of fantasy as well as discuss the different ways in which the setting can add to the 
story.  
The commonplace characteristics of the genre are simple: a fantasy novel contains elements 
that are impossible in the realistic world. The most common occurrence of unrealism is the 
supernatural such as magic and gods who interact with the world, or creatures such as werewolves, 
vampires and elves (Clute, “Fantasy” 338). The story will most likely be set in a world other than our 
own, a fantasy world sprung from the imagination of the author, but that is the case in only part of 
the novels falling under the genre; for example the sub-genre of contemporary fantasy mixes fantasy 
with our own contemporary world (Clute and Kaveney, 225), while urban fantasy does the same, but 
in an urban setting (Clute, “Urban Fantasy” 975). 
In most fantasy novels, the imagined setting is often based on our own world, with humans 
inhabiting it in a feudal world reminiscent of a (romanticised) medieval western Europe, as in 
Raymond E. Feist’s Midkemia from the novel Magician  or George R.R. Martin’s Seven Kingdoms in his 
A Song of Ice and Fire  series, or other historic cultures, such as feudal Japan in Feist’s Empire Trilogy  
7 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
or the Mongol-like Dothraki in A Song of Ice and Fire . Sometimes the world is completely different 
from ours, such as the world of the mulefa - sentient animals whose four legs are set in a diamond 
fashion: one in the front and back, one to each side - in Philip Pullman’s His Dark Materials  trilogy. 
The world can be inhabited by only humans or have such fantasy creatures as elves, dwarves, orcs 
and goblins appear in it as well. The most important characteristic of the fantasy genre however is 
that it only describes the setting in which the novel is set. Within this fantasy setting, many types of 
stories can be told. Thrillers, murder mysteries, comedies, political intrigue, dramas, all can and have 
been set against a fantastical background, providing a wide variety of tastes for the reader of fantasy. 
The fantasy setting is therefore one of the most important aspects to take into account while 
translating a fantasy novel, as it is a unique backdrop to the story with both similarities and 
differences to known cultures and countries. The choice of a fantasy setting instead of the existing 
world is usually one of significance, and it is therefore paramount that the setting loses nothing in 
translation. 
According to Josip Novakovich, author of the Fiction Writer’s Workshop , the setting is a very 
important aspect of the novel as it answers two of the six questions – who, what, when, where, how 
and why – an author must answer for themselves before starting to write the novel. Whether this is a 
real or imagined setting makes little difference, as long as it is vivid and descriptive enough to be as 
complete a background for the story as possible (Novakovich, 27). A setting can have various 
functions, each of importance to the whole. It can function as the groundwork for the story, the 
starting point from which the rest, the characters and the plot, will sprout. This is most likely the case 
with every imagined setting; first the author creates the world (the setting), then he creates an image 
of the people inhabiting it (the characters) and finally he thinks about how these people interact with 
each other (the plot) (id. 28). The setting can also function as the antagonist (id. 30) or it can 
influence the plot simply be being there and being menacing, or deadly, or difficult to traverse. The 
antagonist can be the intense cold of the North Pole, or the intense heat of a desert, or the pathless 
8 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
tracks of a deep dark forest. It can be a new and big city that seems hostile towards the protagonist, 
or a strange place full of mysteries that is dangerous to the ignorant. In Terry Goodkind’s Sword of 
Truth  series for example, there are several magical boundaries separating the different lands of the 
world. The starting point of the first novel is Westland, a magic-less medieval-like country that is 
peaceful and quiet but for the looming Boundary Mountains, which pose a danger to everyone who 
comes near. For those mountains are actually the Underworld, and its creatures might cross the 
boundary between life and death at night to snatch the unwary. It is an antagonistic piece of the 
setting, which sprouted characters such as the Boundary Wardens, the men responsible to keep 
everyone well clear from the hunting grounds of death’s creatures. Further on in the series there is 
also a magical boundary between the north and the south of the continent, which drives all who go 
through it insane through visions and hallucinations of their worst fears and nightmares or their best 
hopes and wishes, drawing them in never to come out, unless the magic – a fickle power – ‘decides’ 
to let the person pass unscathed. In Pratchett’s and Gaiman’s Good Omens  a part of the setting turns 
against its maker, in the excerpt shown in Appendix A, by becoming one of the biggest obstacles on 
his path. The demon Crowley designed the M25 around London to be a truly hellish highway, but 
because the Apocalypse is nigh and the world is going crazy, the road has turned exactly as he 
intended, hellish, so much so that even the demon would get in trouble if he were to cross it, even 
though he must to get to his goal, the Anti-Christ. The setting can be a powerful tool to motivate 
characters or signify important plot, but it can also be used to underline a character’s mindset, for 
example by showing the setting through that character’s eyes, and colouring it through the 
character’s thoughts and words. 
Without the proper background it could be difficult to make the plot and the characters  
alive, for they don’t only interact with each other but of course also with their surroundings; in a 
fantasy setting, to make the characters and the plot believable and enjoyable, the setting has to be 
believable and consistent too. In a way, while the fantasy setting does not necessarily have to be  
9 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
realistic, it has to feel realistic enough for the reader to believe it. The author must take special 
caution that his setting is logical and inherently functional, being a world upon itself and a holistic 
entity (Loponen, 166).  Even if it is the most fantastical place ever imagined, if the reader does not 
sense any logic to it, he might give it up as a bad job. The translator must pay heed to this, for if the 
novel loses its sense of feigned realism in the translation, the characters and plot could suffer from it; 
mistakes in character-setting interaction could be breaking the suspension of disbelief which, as 
Nikolajeva describes, is the willingness of the reader to accept that which it reads as ‘true’ for the 
purpose of the story (Nikolajeva, 152). 
  The contemporary world, the earth in the late twe ntieth and early twenty-first centuries, is 
the setting in most novels written these past two decades. The advantage of a contemporary setting 
is that “you will be rooted; you will draw new inspirations out of the houses and streets” 
(Novakovich, 27). The advantage of an imagined setting as an author is that there are no boundaries 
to take into account, but complete freedom in what things will be and look like. However, either 
contemporary or imaginative, Novakovich underlines the importance of a well-written and vivid 
background. He states that “without a strong sense of place, it’s hard to achieve suspense and 
excitement – which depend on the reader’s sensation of being right there, where the action takes 
place” (id. 26). In short, the reader must be able to go into a willing suspense of disbelief and see the 
story in his mind’s eye, against a detailed background. This is very important for the translator to 
keep in mind; if the translation fails to attain the same standard of description, if it is not expressed 
as good in translation as it is in the source language, then the story loses momentum, for the 
background frames the characters and the plot, and without a good idea of the background, 
important aspects of the characters and plot might be lost.  
 There are several things in translating background  descriptions that are the same in both 
contemporary and fantasy settings. With a contemporary setting, it is often a place the author is very 
familiar with, while the translator generally is not, having not visited every small town in America, for 
10 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
example. Sometimes, if the setting is a famous or a very big place, it may be that the translator has 
experienced some of it through television or a visit, but more often than not it is a place grounded in 
the author’s mind and strange to the translator’s mind. To try to reconstruct an unknown image from 
the source language to the target language is possible, but the translation will most likely be 
coloured by the translator’s own subjective view of that image if he or she is unfamiliar with it, as Jiri 
Levý describes in his essay “Translation as a Decision Process.” Whenever the translator needs to 
make a choice between one or more possible translations, then he will (hopefully) choose with the 
author’s wishes and background in mind, but the final choice will be influenced by his own 
background and ideas. Once the choice is made, all future choice will go along a similar path with the 
intent to keep the text cohesive (Levý, 136). 
The same can be said for a fantasy setting. The author of  a fantasy novel generally has a 
good idea of the world he’s writing and will have notes and maps about the important places and 
aspects to keep all the facts straight to create the image in his head. The translator only has the 
information provided in the novel itself to go on. Novakovich’s statement that a setting should be 
vivid is especially true for an imagined setting, where the reader does not have many handholds of 
reality to fall back on if the setting description falls short of complete. In translating both settings the 
translator is bound to the parameters provided by the author, but in a contemporary setting the 
translator is also bound by the parameters of the real world and cannot go beyond them. In a fantasy 
setting however, those parameters may give a little more leeway, for they are unknown and 
uncertain and it is not likely to be noticed by many if the translator strays a little from the path to 
embellish a point or a place, to make it feel more alive, especially if the author does not give all the 
information in the novel itself but keeps some things at hand to reveal at a later date. For example, in 
Martin’s A Song of Ice and Fire , it is not completely clear how the seasons work; they are not as the 
seasons in the real world, each lasting about three months of the year in a set cycle that keeps 
repeating itself. In Westeros, the setting for the series, the seasons are controlled by something 
11 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
magical that as of yet has not been revealed. At the start of the first novel, Game of Thrones , what 
the characters call ‘the long summer’ is just starting to turn into fall, and that summer lasted nine 
years. In the world’s past there has been a winter that lasted for decades (called ‘the Long Night’) 
and throughout the novel the characters speak of such things as ‘the year of false spring’ and how 
sometimes autumn lasted only a little while before turning into winter. 
A difference between a contemporary and a fantasy setting is the presence of magic and the 
supernatural in the latter. The presence of magic can be volatile, especially if the author is not careful 
to keep it logical and reasonable. In novels where magic is present in abundance, there is the danger 
of the setting or the plot becoming unbalanced. Some authors may want to give their protagonists 
the best tools to defeat their enemies, and then have to think of something even bigger and worse to 
give his characters something to fight in the next novel. Goodkind’s series are a good example of 
such, where in each novel the antagonists are trying to achieve the end of the world or the 
destruction of all the protagonist holds dear by even bigger means. It is difficult to keep a world 
consistent in that way, which makes it more difficult for the translator to keep track of it all as well. 
Especially if the story extends over several different novels it is probably best to keep it all with one 
translator, for they already have their own notes and thoughts about the setting, which helps to keep 
things consistent in the translation. Again however, if there is use of magic in the novel, it has to feel 
believable, consistent and logic to the reader and that sense must be retained in translation. As the 
author has to make sure his setting is inherently logical and functional, so does the translator with 
the translation. A magical fire blast should not ‘destroy’ in one scene and ‘devour’ in the next if it is 
the same spell, for destroying and devouring are words with two different outcomes.  
Translating occurrences of magic could be as difficult as walking a tight rope, especially if the 
magic forms itself around a prophecy. Prophecies are oft-used plot devices in fantastical settings, 
often a magical incentive to go one way or the other, and the so-called self-fulfilling prophecy a la 
Oedipus is a common occurrence. When a prophecy is mentioned, they always come true later on in 
12 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
the story (Bell and Langford, 789). Translating prophecies is extremely difficult, for they are often 
layered with hidden meanings, and finding all the right words to convey those hidden meanings 
might take hours. Since sometimes the eventual outcome of the prophecy might not even be in the 
same novel, the translator might have to rely on guesswork to finish such a fickle occurrence of 
magic, only to discover later that his interpretation was wrong. Communication with the author 
would help in such a situation, but this is not always possible. Such occurrences in an imagined 
setting only help to underwrite the importance of having as complete an understanding of the 
setting as possible when translating it.  
The last difference between a contemporary and fantasy setting is the amount of knowledge 
residing with the readers that the translator has to take into account. With a contemporary setting 
the translator can rely on some general knowledge present in the target audience and can use that in 
his translation. With a fantasy setting, he cannot rely on this, and also sometimes the author may 
decide to go off the beaten path of what’s common fantasy knowledge in an attempt to be more 
original than the others. This is for example the case in Stephanie Meyer’s Twilight  series, in which 
the vampires, commonly accepted as pale humanlike creatures that can only walk at night, drink 
human blood to survive and wither and die when faced with the sun, can walk the earth by day, 
sustain themselves with animal blood and sparkle in direct sunlight, a controversial change in 
vampire methodology. In Jim Butcher’s Fool Moon , the common werewolf is divided into five 
different categories: the voluntary werewolf, the involuntary werewolf, the Hexenwolf, the 
lycanthrope and the loup-garou. The author uses several foreign terms denoting werewolf and gives 
each different traits to recognize them by. None of them are able to infect other people with the 
disease through biting them – it’s actually not a disease, according to Butcher, but a magic spell, an 
inbred ability or a curse – and only one of them, the loup-garou, is impervious to all weaponry except 
silver, and then it has to be inherited silver. The other categories can be killed with normal weaponry. 
This clashes with the knowledge and expectations most people have when starting to read such a 
13 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
novel, and if the author has managed to believably sell his new take on werewolves, it is up to the 
translator to live up to that, also by keeping each category of werewolf distinct and true to its 
description throughout the novel. The same is true for all other supernatural beings. When writing 
about Elves, Dwarves or Orcs, most people will link them in their minds to the Elves, Dwarves an Orcs 
in the forerunner of modern-day fantasy, The Lord of the Rings, but most authors attempt to make 
their portrayal of the race quite different from their forerunners. George R.R. Martin called his ‘elves’ 
the Children of the Forest, made them smaller, rather unwarlike and most of all old spirits of nature, 
long dead (or so it is said) but not forgotten. His dwarves are not the fantasy type dwarves but the 
real world type dwarves, physically handicapped beings who were born stunted and have to make 
their way in a world which is extremely hostile to anyone different from the norm. And Stan Nicholls 
with his Orcs: First Blood  series portrays a group of orcs not as the senseless murdering beings of 
Tolkien but as rounded characters suffering a slave collar, with likes, dislikes, fears, hopes and 
likeable character traits, while also retaining the more barbarous character traits like bloodlust and 
aggression.  
In short, whilst comparing a contemporary setting with a fantasy setting there are many 
differences but also quite a few similarities to take into account. Both have characteristics which 
might make it more challenging for the translator to find the right tone in which to translate the 
novel, and both need to be thoroughly researched and read to create a believable and realistic 
setting in translation. When translating a contemporary setting the real world parameters are clear 
borders within which a translator must stay, while with a fantasy setting those borders are less 
clearly drawn and to help the translation along the translator might cross those uncertain 
parameters in an attempt to keep the setting grounded in logic. Without the strong sense of scene 
and display of (feigned) realism and functionality, a setting might not be able to support the rest of 
the novel (Loponen, 166). Keeping as close to the source text while translating a contemporary or a 
fantasy setting is important in both cases, and more so when the novel is of the sub-genre of 
14 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
contemporary fantasy, when both characteristics are blended into one to create a world half 
grounded in realism and half in feigned realism.  To understand the inherent rules of the setting is 
important for both reader and translator.  
 
 
15 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
Chapter 2 – Aspects of Culture 
As discussed in chapter one, the setting is considered the basis of a novel. However, the sum makes 
the parts, and the setting is more than just the lay of the land and the existence of strange 
supernatural creatures and/or magic. The culture or cultures in which the story takes place are an 
important element of the setting, as it is that which comprises the rules of interaction between the 
characters and the environment. For example, in a culture where no magic is known, the sudden 
introduction of it would yield from its characters quite different reactions than from their 
counterparts who were raised in a magical environment. The culture in which the protagonist grew 
up will have great effect on his actions and decisions, and his interaction with his surroundings is 
based upon that background which has shaped him or her. Authors often use cultural differences to 
initiate interesting scenes of inter-culture interaction when the protagonist first encounters 
something new, a plot device used by fantasy authors such as Raymond E. Feist, Terry Goodkind, 
George R.R. Martin and many others. The origin of the cultures described in fantasy novels can be 
very different, as will be described in the sub-chapter below. This chapter will also discuss some 
specific cultural elements, namely the form of government used in the fantasy world and the cultural 
realia that are part of the imagined reality and therefore have no basis in reality for translation. 
 
The four categories of fantasy cultures 
It is commonly accepted that the translator has to take the cultural differences between 
source and target culture into account while translating a novel, which Nord defines as the culture-
specific translation problems that appear because of differences between norms and conventions of 
both cultures (Nord, 237). In novels set in a contemporary setting, this is a common occurrence that 
can be solved by researching these differences in realia in relation to the problem at hand, and then 
choosing one of seven translation strategies as defined by Grit: retention, calque, approximation, 
description or definition, core translation, adaption, omission or a combination of two or more 
16 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
strategies, based on whether the connotation or denotation is important for the target audience and 
what would be the best way to relate that connotation or denotation (Grit, 281-284). This strategy 
can also be applied to novels in a fantasy setting, but a fantasy translator might be confronted with 
more than just one strange culture in such a novel. Fantasy settings may be based in or on real world 
cultures to a bigger or lesser extent, may be a mix of several cultures both old and new, may be a mix 
between existing cultures and original elements or may be a completely original world with no 
notable connection to any country, historical setting or culture to help the author in translating the 
pages. Below I will attempt to definite these categories of fantasy cultures based on personal 
observation and reading.  
 
1. The historical setting 
The first one is the historical setting, in which the fantasy setting is based on an existing 
historical culture with added elements of fantasy, such as magic or elves. The most common 
historical culture used is that of medieval Western Europe, with its feudal system of nobility, clergy 
and commoners, sometimes with the addition of the middle class if it is a late medieval historical 
setting. An example of that is The Kingdom of the Isles in Feist’s Riftwar Cycle  - consisting out of 
dozens of books, the first being Magician  - in which lesser nobility owes fealty to their betters and all 
are owed fealty to the King. The clergy (of a polytheistic pantheon) is not as powerful as it was in 
medieval Europe but they had influence and power, some churches more than others, and the 
middle class and commoners have their place as well. A similar system exists in Martin’s A Song of Ice 
and Fire  series in the kingdom of Westeros. The advantages of this are that a lot of realia, like titles, 
are the same as in real history. Squires remain squires, dukes remain dukes – though in Westeros 
there are only kings and queens, princes, lords, knights and squires, with lesser lords having no 
specifically lesser title – and the translations therefore already exist in most target languages that 
have had a similar historical feudal culture. Small things may be changed - like that knights in 
17 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
Westeros are called ‘Ser’ and not ‘Sir’ – but overall, if the translator searches for knowledge about 
the historic culture it will be of help in translating the fantasy setting. If the historic culture that a 
fantasy culture is based on is somewhat more obscure or unknown, such as Martin’s Dothraki being 
based on Mongol horse lords of which most European translators have little knowledge, it may 
require more of an effort to get a clear outline of the culture, but then the translator still has some 
handholds in historic fact.  
In the case of a fantasy culture based on a well known historic culture, the audience will most 
likely recognise the source of the culture and deviations from historic fact might be more obvious to 
the reader. If that is the intention of the author then it will most likely be apparent from the original 
text, though the translator must take care to remain consistent with the changes. With more obscure 
cultures, there might be a little more leeway in translation, for most readers simply accept what they 
have been given for the sake of willing suspension of disbelief and will not look up the minor details.  
 
2. The eclectic historical setting 
The second is a fantasy setting that is a mix of several historical cultures. Such a setting might 
make it more confusing for the translator, especially if he is not acquainted with some cultures and 
will therefore not recognise it as such, the danger then being that the translator then assumes there 
are original fantasy elements and translates accordingly. Often when a fantasy author mixes cultures 
he takes two or more that lie relatively close together, but he might also try to merge two completely 
different historic cultures to make his own a more complex one. More often than not one fantasy 
world has different countries and/or continents that each has their own (mix of) cultures, just like 
each country in our world has different cultural denominators. An example of a setting based on 
more than one culture is the great Empire of Kesh in the Riftwar Cycle , which is a blend of many 
African cultures, reminiscent of what would have happened if the ancient Egyptians would have 
conquered nearly the entire continent. The culture of the ruling people of the Empire, the Keshians 
18 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
or ‘Trueblood’, is based on Ancient Egypt – down to their gods having animal heads and aspects – 
with the Emperor or Empress being both temporal and divine ruler of the land. Their subjects range 
from sophisticated Arab-like desert people to barbaric-seeming tribesmen from the more backwater 
regions. The odd ones out seem the Shing Lai people, which are more reminiscent of an Asian 
culture, though the reference to that culture is too brief and superficial to define its source. Kesh is 
an Empire containing many conquered lands, and each new conquest has added new elements to its 
general culture, since the cultures influence each other, that makes the whole a little daunting and 
confusing, and challenging to translate if the translator is unfamiliar with the many cultures being 
introduced in for example Feist’s Prince of the Blood , in which the protagonist travels from the 
outskirts of the Empire to its capital and meets many of the different inhabitants on the way. Each 
subject of Kesh has values that are strange and values that are common to all subjects, like how the 
Trueblood rulers are being treated. 
 Translating such a mix of cultures might be challenging because the realia might clash, with 
several different characters using different words to denote the same thing, or the different way in 
which one people for example treat women, and how people from another cultural background 
respond to such. A telling scene in Prince of the Blood  is one where the Ashuntai, who treat their 
women like slaves and cattle, clash with the Brijaners, who are raised in a matriarchal society and 
think all women are holy. These blatant differences between cultures can cause friction between 
characters and is therefore a common plot device. Keeping the many cultures straight could be a 
challenge, especially if there might a lack of consistency or logic within the novel itself, with the extra 
work of investigating the more unknown historical cultures the author uses in his setting. If the 
author himself has not properly researched the cultures he is basing his fantasy setting on then 
inconsistencies within the novel or deviation from (historic) fact might occur as well. 
  
19 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
3. The part historical, part original setting. 
The third category is fantasy settings that part existing historic culture(s), part original 
setting, and one of the most common occurrences of a fantasy setting. Often the author borrows 
from known cultures and embellishes upon it through their own imagination to create something 
relatively new. In such a novel, the translator has to investigate both the set parameters from the 
known culture and the new, unknown parameters from the original content. Most often the author 
has already worked at blending both together into a believable setting, and then all the translator 
has to do is retain that status quo. This seems easy, but might be more of a challenge if the existing 
culture is unknown to the translator, so that he might not be able to successfully differentiate 
between what is borrowed and what is original.  
A example for this would be the world Kelewan in Raymond E. Feist and Janny Wurts’s 
Empire Trilogy . The main culture in these novels is that of the Tsurani and the empire of Tsuranuanni. 
The Tsurani culture is Asian in origin, based mainly on feudal Japan and in lesser extent on old Korean 
cultural aspects. Tsuranuanni is ruled by the Emperor, who like in feudal Japan is more of a 
ceremonial and religious figurehead than an actual ruler. The land is ruled by the High Council, the 
congregation of all Ruling Lords and Ladies (akin to a Japanese daimyo) that each rules their own 
estate like it is a small kingdom. The Ruling Families quarrel, through politics and through warfare, 
and the military aspects of the empire are under the care of the Warlord (akin to the Japanese 
shogun), the semi-democratically chosen leader of the High Council. Their culture is based on the 
concept of honour as it was in feudal Japan, where following the Way of the Warrior (Bushido), 
fighting prowess and prowess in advancement of one’s house can gain a Family or a person honour, 
and shame and defeat can lose them honour, up to the point where honour might be regained 
through ritual suicide, the ritual of seppuku or hari-kiri in feudal Japan. They also believe in the 
Buddhist way of Samsara, or the cycle of suffering and rebirth in which one must lead an exemplary 
life according to the station – layer of the hierarchy – they were born in, in order to attain a higher 
20 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
station in the next life and finally achieve Nirvana. The possibility of falling in station – for example 
through loss of honour in their previous life – is also present and feared by the characters. None of 
the terms we know from feudal Japan are explicitly named in the novels, having been anglicised or 
substituted with a new, imagined term. but it is very clear where the basics of Tsurani culture lie.  
 There are several original additions however. One is the natami, the family stone which is 
considered the mainstay of a house and family. The natami is the most important reliquary to a ruling 
house, for their honour and existence is bound within it. It is also seen as the place to which the 
spirits of the ancestors return upon their death, to watch over their house. If a natami was taken 
from the ruling family, their line and power ceased to exist even if many family members were still 
living, for without the natami there could be no house, and any remaining family members would 
most likely either die trying to get it back or commit ritual suicide in shame. Such a relic did not exist 
in the feudal Japanese culture, and has most likely been added by the author as a physical 
representation of a house’s honour, life and line. However, for one unfamiliar with Japanese culture 
it might not be entirely clear that the natami is an original addition to the culture. While in this case it 
has little consequence for translating the novel, it might not always be so. The second original aspect 
is that the Tsurani believe in a polytheistic pantheon which might directly intercede with the world of 
mortals if they so desired. The magic of the gods could have effect on Tsurani life. This in itself should 
cause no translation problems, as it is a clear enough deviation from the existing culture to prevent 
any confusion on the matter. The third addition is the magicians called the Great Ones. They are 
viewed as people outside the Law and the defenders of Tsurani culture and tradition, capable of 
doing whatever it takes to make sure the stability and safety of the Empire is upheld. They are in that 
way a rogue group that can act in unexpected ways, and the position they take in Tsurani culture is 
therefore unique. They are feared and hated, and properly translating the way the rest of the Tsurani 
view and treat them might be a challenging task in some cases. 
21 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
 There is usually a balance between the existing an d original cultural elements as merged by 
the author, and it is something the translator must understand and be aware of while translating 
such a novel. Awkwardly translating certain realia or nomenclatures, such as the honorific “Great 
One” for the magicians in Tsuranuanni, which contains several layers of meaning, might lessen the 
impact of the original additions therefore could fail to convey the importance of such things to the 
reader, which could lead to a lesser experience of the intricacies of the novel. Especially in such a 
politically-oriented series as the Empire Trilogy , where every action and spoken word is only part of a 
very intricate political web of intrigue, misunderstandings in translation could seriously affect the 
way the reader perceives the story. 
 
4. The original setting 
 The fourth category is that of a nearly completely  original setting and/or culture. While a 
completely original setting with no basis in any historical fact is something that has yet to occur in a 
fantasy novel, an original culture as part of the setting, while rare, has been written. This means that 
the translator is facing unknown parameters when translating realia in this culture. Especially if the 
original culture is introduced early in a series of novels in the same setting, these unknown 
parameters can cause pitfalls when translating the sequels. Seemingly unimportant cultural 
references could prove to be very important ones later on, and since the translator has no insight in 
what the author intends, mistakes could be made in translating them. When faced with unfamiliar 
cultural realia, the only available source to check them against is the author of the novel, and it is not 
always possible to confer with the author on such things. Caution is therefore necessary in 
translating the unknown, keeping as close to the original meaning as possible, and even then the 
perceived meaning of the translator might differ of that of the author, or perhaps miss a second layer 
that is to become important later. 
22 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
 An example of original cultures in which such tran slational mishaps may occur is the Cho-ja in 
Feist and Wurts’s Empire Trilogy . The Cho-ja are not humans or humanoids but insects, bugs 
reminiscent of ants, living in hives that resemble giant ant hills. Their biological details are like ants, 
with a queen overseeing the affairs of the hive, breeding whichever type of Cho-ja is needed, but 
they are not animals but sentient beings, and their cultural norms and values are entirely different 
from their human counterparts, a fact which becomes increasingly important throughout the trilogy. 
Only the Queen, the officers of the soldiers and select workers are truly sentient, and the Queen is 
the one person who controls what happens in the hive. The novelty of the race, however, is that they 
seem devoid of human concepts like honour or shame. As the protagonist of the trilogy, Mara of the 
Acoma, learns early on, the Cho-ja queens care little for such things and are like a race of merchants; 
they barter for the lives of their underlings in the hive as much as they would barter for goods. This 
seems strange, until in the final part of the trilogy it is revealed that most of their culture is being 
repressed by the Tsurani through ancient treaties, and that outside the borders of the Empire they 
express much more individuality, for example by showing a wide variety of colours on their carapaces 
as opposed to the Empire Cho-ja, which are all black. This contrast is a marked one, and mishaps in 
translating the Cho-ja’s cultural oddities in the first two instalments might be cause difficulties for the 
translator in the last instalment. Most of those oddities in the Cho-ja culture are born out of 
necessity to survive in – in their eyes – hostile country and are therefore quite strange, especially 
opposed to the cultural norms and values displayed by the free Cho-ja or those of the Tsurani. If this 
concept loses in translation, then the impact of the third novel loses as well. 
 Another strange and original culture in fantasy no vels is that of the Drow in R.A. Salvatore’s 
Forgotten Realms  novels. The Drow are a race of dark elves, black of skin and white-haired, who have 
a matriarchal society that is only distantly reminiscent of the Greek Amazons. They are also a society 
that is inherently evil, following a dark spider goddess whose goal it is to enslave the world in 
darkness and using her priestesses – the leaders of the Drow – to make that come to pass. The leader 
23 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
of a Drow clan is called the Matron, and her word is law; she is also a High Priestess of Lloth, their 
goddess. Only women may be priestesses of Lloth, and only men may practice magic. Their rigid 
hierarchy, with human slaves on the bottom of the pyramid, is not such a strange concept, but the 
way the author has built a culture around it is. Such a strong, inherently evil matriarchal culture has 
never existed in our world, and though some elements may be borrowed from or reminiscent of 
existing cultures, the end result can be called original.  
   
Each category comes with its own set of challenges for the translator to deal with. Especially if the 
used (historical) cultures are unknown to the translator, translating the realia correctly might require 
more effort on the part of the translator, to be able to transfer all layers of meaning to the target 
language. And often heard peeve of fantasy readers about translations is that translators do not 
seem to take the extra trouble to investigate the origins of a fantasy culture or take notes on how the 
realia were translated, resulting in the same thing being translated in two different ways. While this 
lack of thorough investigation is not only practiced by fantasy translators, it may be especially jarring 
if the mistranslations jar the credibility of a culture, especially if it happens in the original additions. 
Uncertainty about meaning in an existing culture can be looked up by the reader if so inclined, but 
with an original setting this is not the case, leaving the reader to guess at what might be an 
important aspect of life in that setting.  
 
Government in fantasy settings 
 Cultural norms, values, habits, customs and histor y are not the only things which help 
differentiate between different fantasy settings. The form of government used by the author is also 
quite telling to what sort of story he is trying to tell. The most common form of government used in 
fantasy settings is the monarchy, with kings, queens and noblemen either vying for each other’s 
powers or kingdoms or working together to face a common enemy; sometimes both. A monarchy is 
24 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
simple in form and easiest to associate with a fantasy setting, especially if it is set in a western 
European medieval background. Monarchies, princes and princesses are most associated with the 
past and with fairytales, and are therefore often deemed a fitting form of government in any form of 
fantasy setting. A constitutional or elective monarchy on the other hand is less common; an absolute 
and hereditary monarchy is the mainly used form, most likely because politics – except court intrigue 
– are not often part of the main plotlines in fantasy novels and it is therefore easier to create as few 
political structures as possible so that one will not have to take such things into account while writing 
towards a great plot twist. Most fantasy novels, if it has multiple cultures and countries in its setting, 
have at least one country in which absolute monarchy is the form of government.  
 The other popular choice for fantasy authors is fa scism, often with the accompanying plot of 
the evil dictator that has to be defeated in order to win freedom for all the land. In most fantasy 
settings implementing a fascist government, the country and its leader or military leaders – in which 
case it is a military dictatorship - are painstakingly described as the antagonist, trying to conquer and 
rule over the free people or the happy kingdom, and the protagonist of the story is exactly the one to 
put a stop to the antagonist’s plans. Whereas a dictator is not inherently evil, since the word simply 
implies being an absolute sovereign without a hereditary title, modern history has only known 
dictators who eventually became mass-murderers and that connotation with the word and the form 
of government has resonated in the fantasy genre. 
 The third most popular form of government is fanta sy setting is that of a theocracy. While 
uncommon in our own world, in a fantasy world with magic and endless possibilities concerning gods 
it offers many possibilities to play with as an author. In a fantasy world, a god or gods can take an 
active interest in the world, and their cult or religious order could have more power to take control 
of the land with more than just physical power. A theocracy is a way of experimenting with religion, 
or even satirizing or demonizing modern religion like in Philip Pullman’s Northern Lights , in which the 
25 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
Christian Church on a parallel earth is controlling most aspects of life in such a way that causes one of 
its underlings to attempt to find a way to destroy all religion by killing God. 
 Often a fantasy setting does not have just one for m of government. A prime example of 
different lands with different governmental institutions is the Sword of Truth  series by Terry 
Goodkind. The story starts in the Westland, a republic with the leader being chosen by popular vote. 
The protagonists then travel towards the Midlands, which is actually many little kingdoms together 
of which delegates from each country form a high council of the Midlands with a ceremonial 
monarch at its head, making it akin to a constitutional monarchy. The Midlands are threatened by 
D’Hara, an autocratic state with Lord Rahl at its head; though the title of Lord Rahl is hereditary, it is 
not given to the firstborn son but to the only son that shows magical abilities, since Lord Rahl has to 
be someone with the ‘Gift’, the ability to do magic. Together these lands comprise the New World. In 
the meantime, in the Old World, a communist state has evolved under the leadership of someone 
who calls himself Emperor Jagang but who preaches the communist belief of equal opportunity for 
all. If it is the case that more forms of government are present in the same fantasy setting, most 
often it means that they are at some point warring with each other to gain superiority over the other. 
It seems strange that even though monarchies, feudal systems and theocracies seem in abundance in 
fantasy novels, the modern concepts of democracy are rarely used. 
 Setting a story against a fantasy background is a way for authors to experiment with concepts 
which are not readily available in the real world. Those that prefer to be grounded in reality will write 
contemporary fantasy, borrowing existing modern cultures and giving it an added layer of the 
supernatural. A fantasy author often experiments with ideas about social, cultural, governmental or 
economical structures, with the purpose of being satirical, informative, philosophical or parodical, 
and might have more possibilities of experimentation in a world of feigned realism where he is not 
hampered by fact (Nikolajeva, 139). A fantasy novel could be simply entertaining or highly critical of 
certain social or political structures.  If the purpose is to be critical, the translator has the task to 
26 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
thoroughly research and understand the choice of government and/or culture of the author, in order 
to translate the intent as well as the literal text.  
 
Translating fantasy names and (ir)realia 
 In translation studies, the cultural specific term s, names, locations and language use are 
called realia, and form an integral part of many discussions on translations, for it is realia that often 
cause translation problems to occur when no target-culture equivalent can be found. Realia can also 
be found in imagined settings and cultures, though in that case many of them are imagined 
themselves, and finding a target-culture equivalent, if necessary, for such created realia would be 
considered a difficult undertaking. A fantasy setting is (partly) constructed out of these fictional 
realia, created by the author to determine the cultural, geographical and historical settings of the 
fantasy world, in order to make it an inherently logical structure (Loponen, 167). Loponen, in his 
article called “Translating Irrealia”, suggests that these fictional realia be called irrealia , to denote the 
fictional aspect of these cultural specific terms.  
The translation of (ir)realia and especially personal names has always been a point of 
discussion in translation studies. Opinions on the matter vary from leaving names as they are to 
altering them slightly to make them sound better in the target language (neutralising) to changing 
them completely to fit the target language (naturalising). In his article titled “Translation of Names in 
Children’s Fantasy Literature”, Lincoln Fernandes quotes Tymoczko:  
“There is a widespread disposition that names should be transposed unchanged in textual 
 writings (…). Indeed, a naïve or inexperienced translator (…) may look forward to the proper 
names in a text as islands of repose – unproblematic bits to be passed intact without effort 
into the new linguistic texture being created – translated in the sense of carried across the 
language gap without alteration, in the sense that a saint’s relics are translated from one 
resting place to another” (Tymoczko via Fernandes 44). 
27 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
With this quote Tymoczko and with him Fernandes implies that occurrences of proper names – for 
characters, for places, for special objects – cannot simply be left alone in a text, transferring them 
from source to target text without trouble. Indeed, many proper names have been chosen with 
specific intentions by the author, and the translator ought to take this into consideration with every 
proper name he encounters. Whereas in a modern setting, leaving a name in the original form might 
add to the exotic nature of the setting, in fantasy it is quite possible that names carry very specific 
meanings. The most often quoted example is of course Harry Potter, in which nearly all characters 
have been named with their personalities or backgrounds in mind. The Harry Potter books are aimed 
at children and young adults, but the same can be said for works of fantasy meant for adults. Often 
you cannot get away with letting the name stand in its original form since then the meaning would 
be lost on the reader of the translation. A good example of this is found in Robin Hobb’s Farseer 
Trilogy . The nobles of the land called the Six Duchies have the custom to name their children after 
virtues or traits, in hopes of them emulating that which they were named after in later life, and with 
a little help from magic, that hope may often be borne out. There’s King Shrewd, Prince Chivalry, 
Prince Verity, Prince Regal, Lady Patience and Queen Desire. If we look at those names from a 
translator’s point of view, some of them are fairly straightforward to translate to Dutch, but decisions 
have to be made; should you translate just a few or translate them all? Keep the names in the target 
text similar to the source text or translate the meaning instead of the exact word? Not translating 
these names would mean the underlying thought for them could be lost on the reader of the 
translation, who might not realise the names are not fantastical-sounding but English words. Some 
translators might worry that the translations of these names might look really odd in their own 
language, since things like ‘Geduld’ and ‘Begeerte’ are not generally considered names, but neither 
are such names as ‘Shrewd’ or ‘Desire’ in the source language. The Dutch translators, Erica Feberwee 
and Peter Cuijpers, seemed to have erred on the side of caution; they translated ‘Chivalry’ to 
‘Chevalric’ and ‘Verity’ to  ‘Veritas’, but kept ‘Patience’ as it is, trusting people would recognize it as 
28 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
an English or even French word, and made ‘Desire’ into ‘Desirée’, which is a common enough name 
to not recognise the meaning behind it, especially since for this character ‘desire’ does not just mean 
she is to be desired, but also that she desires much, has ambition. Especially that second meaning is 
lost in the chosen translation. By only translating half of the noble names to something of similar 
meaning in the target language, the underlying cultural habit of naming noble children after virtues is 
lost on the reader of the translation, since in translation it does not seem to happen often enough to 
be of significance in the setting’s culture while it actually is. 
 Character names are not the only names to which th is applies however. Place names, 
objects, titles, races, all of these irrealia may have important meaning in a fantasy novel, or a 
‘semantic load’ as Fernandes calls it. He states that “names are viewed as mono-referential – they 
refer to a single entity – but not as mono-functional, since they may function as carriers, for instance, 
of semantic, semiotic, and/or sound symbolic meanings in literary works” (Fernandes, 45). This 
basically means that names in literature, especially fantasy literature, more often than not have more 
meaning than just the one on the surface. He goes on to describe three different ways in which a 
name can be formed to relay a deeper meaning (Fernandes, 46-48). It can have a semantic meaning, 
where the name itself is used to sum up someone’s personality, like in Hobb’s Farseer Trilogy  or 
Artemis Fowl (“foul”) in Eoin Colfer’s series of the same name. It can have a semiotic meaning, 
generating signs of ancient or recent historical associations, such as gender denotation, class, 
intertextuality and other things. Lastly it can have sound symbolic meanings, like the name being an 
onomatopoeia or a phonestheme, which “is a sound, sound cluster, or sound type that is directly 
associated with a meaning” (Fernandes, 47). In translating all of these, the translator needs to take 
the intent of the author in creating such names into account and where possible create an equivalent 
name in the target language. This poses quite a challenge, for finding a word with for example a 
similar semantic meaning or a similar phonestheme in the target language might prove very difficult, 
as is shown in the Dutch translations of the virtue names in Hobb’s Farseer Trilogy . If the name is 
29 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
specific to the fantasy culture as described by the author it may even be more difficult, since more 
often than not the translator lacks all in the information of said culture to properly divine the 
intended meaning or reference.  Therefore names are often not “islands of repose” but difficult 
hurdles that require some effort on the part of the translator to properly communicate into the 
target language. 
 In short, while translating a fantasy setting, the  translator must take the cultural differences 
between source culture and target culture but also between book culture and target culture into 
account, lest he makes the mistake of transferring cultural reference from the imagined culture into 
a target culture equivalent. While translating a fantasy novel the translator has to decide in which of 
the four categories the novel belongs and make sure they understand which existing cultures and 
forms of government the author has used, to be able to search for answers when posed with a 
difficult translation problem. Names can often pose a problem in a novel, but especially so in a 
fantasy novel since then the names might have special significance in the fantasy culture in a way 
that might not be easily recognised by the translator. Translating an unknown culture may be 
difficult, but translating a culture that mostly exists in the author’s mind may be much more of a 
challenge.   
30 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
Chapter 3 – Translating Contemporary Fantasy 
When translating a novel, each literary genre often comes with its own set of translation 
specifics and challenges. In murder mysteries it is important to retain the feeling of suspense the 
author is trying to impress on the reader about who did it, in romance novels the reader has to feel 
as the protagonists feel when they share their love, in a thriller the feeling of not knowing what 
happens next is often essential to the scene and to translate that feeling may be very difficult and in 
poetry every rhythm, rhyme and other poetical structures could be mind-bending for the translator. 
While some of these specifics are unique to that particular genre, they may all appear in the fantasy 
genre, for as mentioned before, a novel falls under the fantasy genre because of its setting and not 
its plot. Fantasy is often associated with stories of epic heroes struggling with evil sorcerers or 
demons, the epic fantasy, but that is just one of the types of fantasy novels, though it is probably the 
best known type. There are fantasy detectives, romance novels, thrillers, bildungsromans and even 
fantasy poems, which all combine the specifics of one genre with the specifics of the fantasy genre. 
Some of these general translation specifics, like the cultural differences and translating names and 
(ir)realia, have been discussed in the previous chapter. That the translator would have to pay special 
attention to names and imagined cultures, norms and values were part of the expected translation 
specifics for adult fantasy. It is important for any translator to make careful note of all names and 
realia in translation, especially if the novel is the first book in a series. Casually mentioned characters 
in the first novel might become important to the plot in the second or third novel, and if that 
character suddenly has a different name, someone will notice. If each part of the series is translated 
by a different person, it could make consistency a bit more problematic. This is of course true for all 
translations of fiction but could cause a little more difficulty in fantasy novels since names and realia 
may be strange and unknown, set against the translator’s frame of reference. There is one sub-genre 
of fantasy however in which the fantasy elements may be an even more jarring aspect of the setting, 
and that is the sub-genre of contemporary fantasy.  
31 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
 Contemporary fantasy is a relatively new genre in the literary world, and is in short the 
addition of fantastical or supernatural elements (as described in chapter 1) to a contemporary or 
modern setting. Most often this setting is indeed contemporary, but historical or futuristic settings 
are also amongst the possibilities. They differ from ‘regular’ fantasy in that they are set on the planet 
earth, in factual historic times. With historical settings, the novels might be referred to as low 
fantasy, depending on the time in which the novels take place as well as the amount and variety of 
fantastical and supernatural elements mentioned. For example, books with fantastical elements in 
medieval time, like the Avalon -series of Marion Zimmer Bradley about King Arthur and his court, 
would most likely be dubbed low fantasy, whereas the Temeraire -books by Naomi Novik, about 
dragons in the time of the Napoleonic Wars, would fall under the contemporary fantasy header.  
Contemporary fantasy is a sub genre of the fantasy genre, though with its relative rise in 
popularity in the last twenty to thirty years and the many new novels published that fall into this type 
of setting, it is not a small part of the genre. The most popular aspect of contemporary fantasy is 
urban fantasy, where next to the primary prerequisites to define a novel as contemporary fantasy, it 
must also be set in an urban environment, taking place in an around a single city (Clute, “Urban 
Fantasy”, 975). More often than not, the fantastical and supernatural elements are hiding 
themselves from the common populace in contemporary fantasy, to keep from too many people 
finding out they exist. It is one of the tropes of contemporary fantasy (Clute and Kaveney, 225). 
The primary conditions to decide whether a novel is contemporary fantasy are as follows: 
The tale has to be grounded in an existing setting - i.e. earth as we know or knew it - and needs to 
have sufficient fantastical and/or supernatural elements intertwined with that world to mark it as 
different from the real world that we actually live in (Clute and Kaveney, 225). For example, a novel 
in which there is mention of unproven paranormal activity (houses being ‘haunted’) would not be 
qualified as contemporary fantasy, but a novel where the protagonist has tangible interaction with 
ghosts, and the ghosts with their surroundings, would be. Granted, it is a very fine line between 
32 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
novels where those characters with overactive imaginations meet those who actually do live in a 
fantastical rendition of our world where ghosts simply exist, whether there’s someone to see them 
or not. The difference is that in contemporary fantasy, the supernatural prominently features in such 
a way that there can be no doubt of their existence (Clute and Kaveney, 225). Most novels of the 
contemporary fantasy category are more clearly recognised as such, having their characters being or 
dealing with supernatural creatures such as vampires or werewolves. Contemporary fantasy should 
not be confused with horror fiction, either. In horror fiction, the supernatural elements are mostly 
there to scare and frighten and might not even be real, whereas in contemporary fantasy those 
elements are used to inspire awe and wonder in the protagonist and reader and are real in that 
setting (Clute and Kaveney, 225). 
As mentioned, there has been a great rise in popularity of contemporary fantasy. Throughout 
history there have been many publications that bordered the fantastical, though the eclectic genre 
that we now call fantasy is a “twentieth-century phenomenon” (Nikolajeva, 140). In the last twenty 
years there has been a notable outbreak of contemporary fantasy authors, the most famous of which 
have seen their books being adapted for the big screen or a TV series. Perhaps the most known 
example of a recently popular contemporary fantasy series are the Harry Potter  books by J.K. 
Rowling. Set in the nineties, it tells the story of a young boy who discovers he’s actually a wizard and 
grows up learning that he has to defeat the darkest wizard of all time. It is a bildungsroman in a 
contemporary fantasy setting which, though mostly occurring in a fictional place is set in modern 
England. A second popular example are the Twilight series by Stephanie Meyer, about a group of 
vampires who don’t drink human blood, werewolves who are their natural enemy and the girl who is 
caught between the two groups. They are but two well-known examples of contemporary fantasy, 
though mostly it is not a mainstream genre and only read by a specific group of readers.  
Like ‘normal’ fantasy, contemporary fantasy is written mainly for (young) adults. The subjects 
of the book are gritty, there isn’t always a happy ending, and the characters are more layered and 
33 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
darker than in most novels which people define as fantasy stories. Most contemporary fantasy 
stories are set in a more dystopian version of our own world, where the atmosphere is just a little 
darker, the government just a little more corrupt, and the violence just a little more violent. This 
does not mean it is all horrific, it is simply meant for a more adult audience, to challenge their 
perception of the world (Nikolajeva, 140). Some of the most notable examples of the darker type of 
contemporary fantasy are the novels of the Vampire: The Requiem  series, where the vampires are in 
control of everything behind the scenes, and in the Dresden Files , where a wizard detective comes 
across the most gruesome supernatural entities and occurrences one can imagine. 
Within the genre of contemporary fantasy there are quite a few different characteristics that 
may or may not fall under the fantasy header, and many novels don’t fall into only one category, as is 
usual with works of fiction. Some works of contemporary fantasy stay firmly grounded in our own 
world and universe while others, such as the His Dark Materials -trilogy by Philip Pullman or The War 
of Flowers  by Tad Williams, wander across many parallel universes, including our own, resulting in a 
strange mix of normal-typed and contemporary fantasy, for not every universe is like our own. Many 
authors use every type of old mythology and legends to fuel their stories (Nikolajeva, 139), from the 
usual suspects of vampires and werewolves to the ancient gods, such as in Neil Gaiman’s American 
Gods , where the old Scandinavian god Odin tries to get back into power once more and to achieve 
that has to fight his way through the world’s new gods, such as ‘Media’ and ‘Technology’, or in 
Anansi Boys , which describes what happens if an old god (Anansi the spider, an African trickster god) 
dies and his sons have to take over.  
Translating contemporary fantasy is different from translating fantasy in the way that the 
translator has to consolidate both the existing (contemporary) culture and the imagined culture living 
side by side into the target language. The added challenge with translating contemporary fantasy 
novels is that the translator will have to make sure that every fantastic and supernatural element is 
translated in such a way that it consolidates with the real world and stays believable within it. The 
34 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
small liberties a translator might have while translating normal fantasy, where he is not bound by the 
margins of the real world are not available to translator of contemporary fantasy, since the novel is 
set in the real world and thus provides its margins. The supernatural elements might stretch those 
margins a bit, but rarely breaks them. Some contemporary fantasy novels, like Storm Front  and Fool 
Moon  by Jim Butcher and A Hunger like Fire  by Greg Stolze, add established supernatural elements to 
the setting like vampires, warlocks and werewolves, and build a story around the dynamics between 
the mundane and the supernatural. Some, like American Gods  by Neil Gaiman and Good Omens  by 
Gaiman and Terry Pratchett, are written under the assumption that people like gods, angels and 
demons are real and influence the world of man, and take that as their starting point for story 
dynamics. Through translating these five books it is attempted to gain some insight into the task of 
translating contemporary fantasy, of merging the known and the unknown together into a believable 
story in the target language. By using examples of these five excerpts things like the influence of 
setting, culture (including the clash between ‘normal’ and ‘paranormal’ culture), genre-specific 
irrealia and working with the willing suspension of disbelief of readers are discussed, in hopes of 
shedding some light on the translation mechanics behind them.  
 
Greg Stolze - A Hunger Like Fire 
The first excerpt is A Hunger Like Fire by Greg Stolze, published in 2004. It is the first 
instalment of a trilogy based on the tabletop roleplaying game Vampire: the Requiem , in which the 
players create a vampire character and play out adventures constructed by the game leader, the 
storyteller. The setting is a darker version of our own modern world where vampires, werewolves 
and Fae exist, and especially the vampires have great influence on the world through manipulating 
the people in it, especially people in the government, police force, army, hospitals; any place whose 
existence has influence on the human race. Most big cities have shadow courts of vampires who hold 
the ropes behind the scenes, coming together in the so-called Elysium to discuss the business of the 
35 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
realm, i.e. the city they rule. The court is presided over by a Prince, a title irrespective of gender, who 
is advised in matters of rule by his council of primogen, often elder vampires and leaders of the 
various clans and covenants. It is a very political structure, and it is therefore politics which is usually 
the driving force of many confrontations and character interactions. The hierarchy in the vampire is 
culture is one of both age and lineage; older vampires are more respected, and vampires from some 
clans are of better renown than vampires of others. For example, the vampires belonging to the clan 
called Ventrue are usually of higher standing, being the clan who covets power and money the most, 
whereas those from the clan called Nosferatu is usually of the lowest standing, since their blood 
lineage carries an extra curse that deforms their vampiric bodies into something repulsive, with 
deformities, sores, rashes and pointy teeth, making them seem less human. These vampires are like 
the vampires we know from books like Dracula; creatures of the night, drinkers of human blood, 
more powerful than humans, though they cannot change into bats. Some can control bats, though; 
each clan has clan-specific ‘powers’ with they can for example become stronger, run faster, alter 
themselves, or influence the minds of others. The interaction of the vampire society with real society 
is partly what these novels are about, the ways which both influence each other.  
The setting of the novel is the American city of Chicago. The city is as it would be in our 
world, but there is a shadow society of vampires who roam the night, with its own hierarchy to keep 
the vampire populace under control. The form of government can be best termed as despotism, the 
Prince of a realm having absolute final authority in all things, though counselled by his council of 
primogen who also rule (part of) the populace. The Prince’s position is a precarious one, and he only 
rules as long as he has the majority of the people in power behind him, otherwise he will most likely 
be disposed of in rebellion. This means the position requires great political influence to maintain; a 
vampire does not become Prince if he does not have enough (political) strength to back him up. In a 
sense it is also therefore in a sense a meritocracy; for the ambitious, there are only two outcomes, 
victory and failure. Those who come out on top have walked over many bodies to get there, and 
36 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
those on the losing side often lose, at the very least, a lot of prestige or, at the most, their (un)lives. 
The setting has its own set of irrealia specific to the vampire culture, such as Childe , Sire,  Prince, 
Kindred  and Embrace , which will each be discussed below.  
The following excerpt is a scene setting for the vampire society of Chicago, the hierarchy and 
the court, the description of an Elysium through the eyes of a young vampire who also happens to be 
the 'Childe’ of – meaning she was bitten and created by – the Prince of Chicago, a position that earns 
her less favour than one would expect for the offspring of the current ruler. The weak are quick to be 
eliminated, and showing weakness is a sure way to become the next on everyone’s hit list. The 
protagonist, Persephone, was the Prince’s sign of weakness; creating -  ‘siring’ – offspring is a 
carefully regulated activity, for the court is to remain hidden to human eyes and it would therefore 
not do to have an overly abundant group of vampires in the city. Though the Prince has enough 
power to get away with such an indiscretion, it has earned him some new enemies and a lessening of 
respect and has made Persephone a target for those who would use her to strike at the Prince. The 
moment his power base seems to crumble, the vultures will be on him. This excerpt shows that very 
clearly. Maxwell, the Prince, uses symbols of power – being preceded by his steward, wearing a 
naked sword, sitting on a throne – to emphasize his position, while also showing a genial face to his 
subjects to make them like him. Some of his circle of advisors, like Solomon Birch, are clearly not 
impressed, and show it. The scene ends with a video of another rogue offspring called Bruce causing 
trouble for the vampire community, being ignorant of what he has become. It will later turn out that 
he was the indiscretion of the Nosferatu leader called Scratch, who calls out for his death before his 
mistake can be unearthed and he be punished for it. The problems that were unearthed during the 
translation of this excerpt are listed in the footnotes.  
  
37 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
Honger als vuur 1 
Greg Stolze 
Bella leunt een beetje naar achteren en trekt 2 verdedigend haar kin op. Ze maakt zich klaar 
om haar positie te verdedigen als de klank van een gong door de ruimte weerkaatst.  
Prins Maxwell is aangekomen. 
“Ga staan! ” 
 Dat is natuurlijk niet Maxwell’s stem, het is een man genaamd Garret McLean 
3 en hij valt 
                                                           
1 The first problem a translator usually comes across while translating any form of fiction is the title 
of the novel. Often the title alludes either to the protagonist or the main storyline of the novel, 
whether overtly or subtly. Therefore the title often can only be translated last, when the translator 
has fully read and translated the novel and has a full understanding of the intricacies of the story. In 
this particular case, the title A Hunger like Fire  refers to the hunger for blood the vampires in the 
novel feel, and how it affects their actions; the hunger burns and can make them lose control, such 
as fire is uncontrollable. A second detail is that vampires have an inbred mortal fear for fire, as it is 
one of the few things that can effectively destroy them. As my options I came up with Vurig 
Verlangen, Vurige Honger, Hete Honger and Heet Verlangen , but all the titles made it sounds like a 
cheap romance novel. I finally settled for Honger als vuur , close to the original title but omitting the 
article.  
2 The original phrase is “raises her nose defensively” and my first instinct was to translate it as ‘haalt 
haar neus verdedigend op.’ However, in Dutch the phrase ‘je neus ophalen’ has both the connotation 
of having the sniffles as well as disdain, which is the right connotation in this context. There is also 
the problem of the sentence becoming a little awkward, since the adjective ‘defensively’, while odd 
in the original text, does not really seem to work in the target language in combination with raising 
one’s nose. To make it more logical I substituted ‘chin’ for ‘nose’, which still retains the connotation 
of disdain but removes the awkward combination of ‘neus optrekken’ with ‘verdedigend’ .  
38 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
onmogelijk te negeren. Het is alsof zijn stem door ons heen siddert, zoals zijn hamer de gong 
beroerde. De jongere vampiers springen op als schildwachten die zijn betrapt op luieren. De 
ouderen, Solomon Birch in het bijzonder, gaan met meer ernst staan, met een air van Ik hoef niet te 
staan, ik kies ervoor.   
Garret schrijdt naar binnen, statig en serieus, terwijl hij een simpele mahonie kist van 
ongeveer anderhalve meter lang, vijftien centimeter hoog en vijftien breed hooghoudt. 4 Hij stevent 
geleidelijk af op de lege stoel op de bodem van het amfitheater.  Deze is groot, barok en oud. Hij is 
ongeveer halverwege als Maxwell achter hem binnenkomt. 
De Prins van Chicago is niet echt lang – 1. 75 meter, misschien 1.80. Ongeveer mijn lengte. 
Hoewel, als hij echt rond achttienhonderd is geboren dan moet hij in zijn tijd een reus zijn geweest. 
Hij is gedrongen, gekleed in een conservatieve Phat Farm sweater, zo eentje die Bill Clinton draagt. 
Hij heeft hoge, prominente jukbeenderen en een kalme, vriendelijke verschijning. Vanavond is hij 
                                                                                                                                                                                     
3 I have chosen not to translate any of the names to Dutch, since this is a novel for adults set in 
Chicago, and the readers would expect English names and would also most likely understand them 
enough to keep any kind of allusion to a person’s character or background through the name intact.  
4 This sentence was difficult to translate because of the present continuous in the source text, which 
allows the text to consist out of one sentence with a comma. This caused difficulties in Dutch, 
because the present continuous does not exist in the target language. One of the solutions would be 
to use the Dutch form of the present participle (the “onvoltooid/tegenwoordig deelwoord”) which 
comes closest to the present continuous, but it is not often used by the native speakers of Dutch and 
would therefore come across as forced. I tried hacking the sentence in two (Garrett schrijdt statig en 
serieus naar binnen. Hij houdt ….) but then the deliberate pauses made by the author are lost, whose 
intent it was to accentuate Garrett’s demeanor to underline the gravitas of the situation. Finally I 
came to as it is now, adding ‘terwijl’ to make the second part of the sentence connect to the first.   
39 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
opa die zich klaarmaakt om de kalkoen aan te snijden op Thanksgiving.  
 Mijn ‘schepper’. 5 
 Tegen de tijd dat hij de stoel bereikt, heeft McLe an de kist geopend en er (met gepaste 
zwierigheid) een glimmend metalen zwaard uitgehaald. Maxwell gaat op de troon zitten en McLean 
overhandigt hem het wapen. Maxwell haalt het uit de schede en legt het naakte staal over zijn 
knieën, en het is moeilijk om zijn blik te duiden terwijl hij dit doet. Deze is meerduidig, subtiel. Je 
kunt er de complete overgave aan de zaak die al dit machtsvertoon symboliseert in lezen. Je kunt 
hem lezen als uitgestreken ironie, een dubbel snijdend gelaat dat deze pretentieuze formaliteiten 
bespot door ze te perfectioneren. Je kunt er beheerste tirannie in lezen, een beteugelde minachting 
voor de ceremonie die zegt, ‘ik heb dit belachelijke staafje metaal niet nodig om mijn wil op te 
leggen.’ 6 
                                                           
5 The source word for this is ‘sire’, which in English has the connotation of both forefather and 
creator. There is no one-on-one Dutch equivalent for this word, which made finding a good Dutch 
translation difficult. The word ‘sire’ exists in Dutch, but there it is only used as a ways of addressing 
the king. I wrote down various options for translation, but none were the perfect word I was looking 
for. There was the simple “Vader”, with a capital V, but the word ‘vader’ in Dutch has the 
connotation of love and warmth, a protector, which in vampire society was not often the case. With 
‘Voogd’ it lacked the connotation of creator. ‘Ouder’ was a possibility, being more distant a word 
than ‘father’, but still had that family feeling that didn’t fit the scene of the novel. I finally settled on 
‘schepper’, chosing to bypass the connotation of forefather in favour of that of creator. 
6 This paragraph was rather difficult to translate because of all the commas and pauses, which the 
author uses to lend weight to his description of the Prince of Chicago, the leader of the coven of 
vampires in that city. It didn’t already flow naturally in the source text, which made it doubly difficult 
to achieve some form of natural structure in the target language without breaking up the author’s 
intended effect in describing this character. Stolze uses quite a lot of commas in his writing, which 
40 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
 Zijn uitdrukking verandert en voor even zou ik zwe ren dat hij naar me knipoogde. Daarna zie 
ik de bewegingen, de veranderingen van houding in de gallerij en ik realiseer me precies hoeveel van 
ons hetzelfde dachten. 
 Degenen vooraan, de ouderen – Solomon, Scratch, Ro wen – zij zijn niet overtuigd. Zij in de 
middelste rijen, zoals Bella, schudden het na een paar seconden van zich af. Maar de jongeren, de 
nieuwelingen, zij onder ons die het verste weg staan, bij de gratis drank… de meesten van ons vallen 
ervoor.  
 Ik kijk naar de ongebondenen 
7. Raphael kijkt perplex, Ambrose fronst. Ik kan niet zien of ze 
erin zijn getrapt of niet.  
  “Wij zijn de Verdoemden,” begint Maxwell, “En toc h zijn we niet zo ver gevallen dat we niet 
meer van onszelf kunnen maken dan we zijn. Wij zijn, bij voorkeur, solitaire jagers, maar vanavond 
bevinden wij ons in vredig gezelschap. Wij dragen in elke druppel van ons bloed een vervuilende 
wreedheid… maar hoewel we met honger doordrenkt zijn, blijft de menselijkheid. Koude ogen 
verlangen nog steeds naar schoonheid,” zegt hij, gebarend rondom de hal, en hij heeft gelijk. 
Ondanks het spookachtige of misschien wel juist daardoor is de sobere uitstraling aangrijpend. “Een 
                                                                                                                                                                                    
 
sometimes comes across as rather forced, and then the translator must wonder whether that’s 
intentional or accidental and translate as such. In this case, it was most likely intentional, which 
means puzzling with words until something grammatically correct, yet still with a similar rhythm to it 
as the source text, comes out. 
7 The ‘unbound’ is another one of the setting-specific irrealia. Since I translated ‘sire’ to avoid 
confusion with the Dutch use of the word I must also translate all other setting-specific terms. The 
‘unbound’ are vampires unconnected to a coven and/or a prince. This translation seems rather 
straightforward, though I considered putting it in with a capital to underline the fact that the word 
has a specific meaning. However, since the source text does not use a capital letter either, I opted 
out of it.  
41 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
verstild hart verlangt nog steeds naar gezelschap. Daarom, Elysium. Daarom, ons hof. Daarom, onze 
verdragen. Al onze hogere impulsen – alles dat ons boven brute roofdieren verheft – al het goede dat 
voortleeft, wordt vanavond hier tentoongespreid.” 
 Hij zegt elke keer zoiets, een clichématige openin gstoespraak, maar als hij het zegt, is het niet 
afgezaagd. Als hij het zegt, is het een sprankje hoop in de rode duisternis. Vanavond, zoals elke 
avond, applaudisseert de menigte. 
 “Mijn beste mede-Verwanten 
8, alsjeblieft – neem plaats. We hebben vanavond twee gasten 
in ons midden,” zegt hij, wijzend naar de twee vreemdelingen. Zoals hij vast en zeker had bedoeld, 
kijkt iedereen naar hen op. Raphael gaat rechterop staan en ik voel een straaltje waardering voor 
hem, hij is aan het Duwen 9 maar het is zwak en kunstmatig, te veel uitgespreid over te afgestompte 
zielen. Hij probeert onze blikken te verwarmen, maar het is als een lucifer aansteken in een cel vol 
bevroren vlees. 
                                                          
 
8 ‘Kindred’ is another setting-specific term, denoting the race of vampires. They name themselves 
Kindred because they are, in a way, kinsmen, having all come from the first vampire, the biblical 
Caine, and because they are a secret society and if any hapless mortal should overhear vampires 
talking about each other they would not immediately know the truth. It is also considered tawdry to 
refer to themselves as vampires. I considered ‘familie’ briefly, but that would make it sound too 
mafia, so I settled for the direct translation, ‘Verwanten’. 
9 The source text says “[…] he’s Pushing Out but it’s weak and artificial.” With ‘Pushing Out’ the 
point-of-view character means the vampire in question uses one of the supernatural powers that 
comes with being Embraced, though she herself is young and she (and with her the reader) has not 
yet learned the more common term for that power, Presence, which is the ability to affect the 
feelings of the people around you. It is here described as a sort of altering wave that is pushed 
towards the targets, and therefore I chose to translate it as ‘Duwen’, with a capital letter to denote 
importance, as in the source text.  
42 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
 Ambrose reageert slechts gelaten. 
 “Mag ik onze gasten voor de avond introduceren?” H ij geeft ze een strakke, tolererende 
glimlach. “Ik weet dat jullie de formaliteiten van onze bijeenkomsten wat verstikkend kunnen vinden, 
maar toe, wees ons ter wille met jullie namen en een opsomming van jullie afstamming.” 
 Raphael ontmoet zijn blik. “Ik ben Raphael Ladue, en mijn schepper was Old John.” 
 Ik heb geen idee wie Old John in godsnaam is, maar  anderen blijkbaar wel. Vele bleke 
gezichten kijken reikhalzend op om hem met hernieuwde interesse te bekijken en de meeste 
geïnteresseerden zitten vooraan, waar de macht is. Rowen kijkt niet om, maar alle anderen in de 
eerste rij wel,  de gezichten zorgvuldig uitdrukkingloos. Een paar rijen daarachter zijn er een paar 
Verwanten die hun angst niet kunnen onderdrukken.  
  “Zo, zo,” zegt Maxwell. “Een roemruchte afstammin g, zeker. En je metgezel?” 
 “Ik ben Ambrose Masterson en ik ben Verworden 
10  door de Onheilige.”  
 Dat krijgt iedereen  aan het staren. Iedereen behalve de nieuwsten van ons weten wie de 
Onheilige is. Het is zoiets als zeggen dat je vader de duivel is.   
 “Ge lul ,” zegt een stem uit het midden, een man in een onberispelijk mooi pak met een huid 
als albast. 
                                                          
 
10  Another setting-specific term, ‘Embraced.’ To be Embraced by a vampire is to be turned into one. 
The process involves draining the human body of all blood and then giving it back by letting them 
drink it from the vein of the sire, with the vampire ‘taint’ in it. The word is not used in the 
conventional meaning of ‘taking into one’s arms’ but in the sense of corrupting someone and taking 
hold of someone. The Dutch word ‘omhelzen’ simply would not cut it, having connotations of 
warmth and safety that do not apply to the process. After some searching I found the word 
‘verworden’, which means both ‘to change’ and ‘to deteriorate’. In a way to be turned into a vampire 
is to change and deteriorate the living body, so the word fit the process.  
43 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
 Ambrose ontbloot zijn tanden en we kunnen allemaal  zien dat ze onmenselijk zijn, 
vlijmscherp en onnatuurlijk lang. Niet zoals Scratch, echter. Terwijl Scratch zijn mond een ware ruïne 
is, een fout van de natuur, ziet deze mond er uit als zorgvuldig geëvolueerd om te doorboren en te 
verscheuren.  
 “Ja,” zegt de Prins. “Nu weet ik het weer. Van de DNC.” Ambrose knijpt zijn ogen samen en 
knikt.  
 (Zei Maxwell nu “D&C” – wat een abortus betekent? Of was het “DNC,” de Democratische 
Nationale Conventie met de rellen? Of is het iets compleet anders?) 
 Maxwell gaat verder. “Ondanks hun… welbekende afst amming, hebben onze gasten er in het 
verleden voor gekozen onze gastvrijheid te negeren. Desalniettemin hoop ik dat jullie mij allemaal 
zullen volgen in hen een hoffelijk welkom te heten vanavond.  
 Onze gasten delen een gemeenschappelijk probleem m et ons. We zijn beiden bezorgd over 
de daden van ene Bruce Miner. Garret, als je zo vriendelijk zou willen zijn..? Ik ben vrij hulpeloos als 
het op het programmeren van videorecorders aankomt.” De uitspraak veroorzaakt gelach. 
 Terwijl hij aan het praten was, heeft Garret een g rote tv binnengerold, waar hij nu mee 
rommelt tot er een opgenomen nieuwsuitzending op komt. Het verhaal gaat over een man in Cicero 
die zich verzet tegen zijn arrestatie en de politie ontvlucht; halverwege laten ze een korrelige 
opname van een politiecamera zien, van een potige man in een vieze overal, worstelend met een 
politieman. De twee slingeren tijdelijk uit het beeld van de camera en dan komt de diender over de 
motorkap vliegen. Het is dramatisch, des te meer omdat het zonder geluid is. 
 De sombere nieuwspresentator vult aan met wat ik a l gehoord had – vrouw en dochter 
leeggebloed, handboeien gebroken, et cetera. 
 Ze plaatsen een stilstaand frame uit de opname naa st wat duidelijk een verkleinde foto uit 
het fotoalbum van een buurman is. De eerste is voornamelijk gewoon een grijze vlek, zo ongeveer 
44 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
wat we allemaal in de spiegel zien als we een keer de moeite nemen om te kijken. De laatste is een 
bedroevend gemiddelde blanke man met slecht haar. 
 Als het nieuwsitem eindigt, is het even stil. 
 “Commentaar?” zegt Maxwell uiteindelijk.  
 Scratch staat op. “Maak hem af,” zegt hij. “Hij is  van mijn clan, hij deelt míjn vloek en nog 
steeds zeg ik, maak hem af.” 
 
Discussing A Hunger Like Fire 
 Most of the translation problems in this particula r excerpt are on the language and style used 
for the novel and setting-specific irrealia. Stolze’s way of writing is very erratic, using lots of comma’s 
to force pauses in the text, creating tension and a sense of importance to certain scenes. Since this 
scene is the first entrance of Chicago’s Prince, the usage of the style most likely has the intention to 
lend gravitas to the man and his behaviour by punctuating it with extra pauses. The setting-specific 
irrealia each has its own background and connotations that might be hard to retain in the target 
language, Dutch. While each problem has been individually discussed in the footnotes, below I will 
view them in light of the whole book and the special attention for fantasy-specific aspects of the 
novel. 
 As mentioned, the scene in the chosen excerpt is the first in which the Prince of Chicago, an 
important character in the setting and one of the protagonists, is introduced to the reader. To 
immediately give the reader some sense of who this man is, the author uses certain a certain style of 
writing to emphasize both this man’s character and his status, as well as casting light on the reaction 
of the other vampires to certain behaviour and happenings. In this, attitude is very important, and 
translating the power dynamics in this scene properly was one of the biggest challenges. The author 
uses rhythm and punctuation to set the atmosphere, and to translate that similarly to Dutch proved 
difficult, especially the entrance of the Prince.  
45 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
“By the time he reaches the chair, McLean has opened the box and produced (with suitable 
small flourishes) a shiny metal sword. Maxwell sits on the throne and McLean hands him the 
weapon. Maxwell unsheathes it and lays the naked blade across his knees, and it’s hard to 
explain his expression when he does this. It’s ambiguous, oblique. You can read it as an 
absolute commitment to the cause that all this pomp represents. You can read it as straight-
faced irony, a double bladed visage that mocks this pretentious formality by perfecting it. 
You can read it as a constrained tyranny, a reined-in contempt for the ceremony that says, “I 
don’t need this ridiculous metal stick to enforce my will.” 
 His expression alters, and for a moment I’m certain  that he winked at me. Then I see 
the movements, the shifts of posture through the gallery and I realize just how many of us 
had the same thought” (Stolze, 65). 
The description of Maxwell’s expression was difficult to translate, with the short, pointed sentences, 
the repetition of ‘You can read it as…’ which does not translate well to Dutch, and the message 
behind this particular paragraph about the character that’s being described: pointed, direct, brooking 
no nonsense but suffering it for duty and genial when he wants to. Retaining the short sentence 
structure in Dutch was difficult, and in the ended I decided to not keep the same repetition of ‘You 
can read it as…’ in Dutch but altered it a little to make the sentences flow better, avoid making them 
look construed and unnatural.  
“Tegen de tijd dat hij de stoel bereikt, heeft McLean de kist geopend en er (met gepaste 
zwierigheid) een glimmend metalen zwaard uitgehaald. Maxwell gaat op de troon zitten en 
McLean overhandigt hem het wapen. Maxwell haalt het uit de schede en legt het naakte 
staal over zijn knieën, en het is moeilijk om zijn blik te duiden terwijl hij dit doet. Deze is 
meerduidig, subtiel. Je kunt er de complete overgave aan de zaak die al dit machtsvertoon 
symboliseert in lezen. Je kunt hem lezen als uitgestreken ironie, een dubbel snijdend gelaat 
dat deze pretentieuze formaliteiten bespot door ze te perfectioneren. Je kunt er beheerste 
46 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
tirannie in lezen, een beteugelde minachting voor de ceremonie die zegt, ‘ik heb dit 
belachelijke staafje metaal niet nodig om mijn wil op te leggen.” 
The other problems in this excerpt were the setting-specific irrealia that were present in the text: 
Sire, Kindred, Embrace, Unbound, Elysium. Each term has its own special meaning. Some, like 
‘Elyisium’, did not need translating, being Latin word and retaining the same connotation of peace. 
Others, like ‘Kindred’ (Verwanten) and ‘Unbound’ (Ongebondenen) were fairly straightforward. The 
last two were mind-bending, considering the collocations associated with them by the vampires. That 
same understanding should be felt by the reader, be it source text or target text, and getting that 
right might be rather difficult. With ‘Sire’ (Schepper) the difficulty was to find an equivalent that 
suggested enough distance between Sire and Childe, without any collocation of warmth, for the 
relationship between Sire and Childe is rarely, if at all, one of warmth and love. More likely it is 
reminiscent of a boss and his employee. With ‘Embrace’ (Verworden), the act of being turned into a 
vampire, this is a little more difficult, for embracing someone does have a connotation of warmth 
and affection, even though that is not what is meant; in Embracing someone, the vampire sucks all 
the blood and life out of a human, then feeds them of their own veins to turn them into a vampire. 
The victim gets ‘embraced into the fold’ so to speak. To be embraced is to be created anew, and it is 
from that association that I attempted to find a decent solution. I finally settled on ‘Verworden’ 
cause it has the connotation of creation but also sounds a little like ‘verworven’, the connotation of 
taking someone in, and ‘verdorven’, the corruption that is a vampire according to humans.  
 In short, in this novel the most important fantasy  aspects to pay attention to would be: the 
setting, a mingling of modern Chicago and popular culture with a society of blood-drinking undead 
who live under strict rules imposed on them by their betters; the culture, a strict hierarchy and an 
intricate system of etiquette developed over hundreds of years of (un)living, imposed upon the 
‘younger’ generation by those in power so they can retain their exalted position; and the irrealia, 
which form part of the foundation of the setting and the interaction between the characters.  
47 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
Neil Gaiman - American Gods  
The second excerpt is that of American Gods  by Neil Gaiman, first published in 2001. In this 
novel, the world is as it is, with one major difference: all mythology is fact. Gods like Odin, Loki, 
Thoth, Eostre, Anubis, Kali and Anansi all exist and make an appearance in the novel. It tells the story 
of a man named Shadow - actually the Norse god Baldur, son of Odin, though he doesn’t know this 
himself - who gets hired by a confidence man called Mr. Wednesday to do some jobs for him. 
Gradually Shadow – and with him the reader – learns that Mr. Wednesday is actually the Norse god 
Odin, and that his plan is to regain the power he used to have as a god of the Vikings and rule the 
world once again. For that he needs the support of many of the other forgotten gods of all 
pantheons, though. All these gods have been brought to the United States by the immigrants, and 
therefore live there and not in their country of origin. They travel through the United States to make 
contact with them; the Egyptian gods Anubis and Thoth, who run a funeral home nowadays and have 
Horus and Bast with them, the African trickster god Anansi the Spider, the Slavic god Czernobog and 
Slavic goddesses the Zorya, the German Goddess Eostre. In this they have to contend with the 
world’s new gods however, going by the principle that man creates their own gods; these new gods 
bear names like Technology and Media and are quite against giving up their power over mankind. 
Shadow is the linchpin in this struggle, and he’s not even sure he wants to be. The novel is a sort of 
‘road novel’; Shadow and Mr. Wednesday travel through the United States to find supporters for 
their cause.  
 The excerpt chosen is where Mr. Wednesday tries to  recruit ‘Easter’, who is actually the 
Germanic goddess Eostre, whose fertility rites were the basis of the Christian festival of Easter, as is 
described in the excerpt: rabbits, eggs and candy were part of Eostre’s rites. In the novel, Easter 
claims that she is not a forgotten goddess, for every year the humans still practice her rituals, but 
Wednesday is quick to point out that they don’t do it to honour her but their replacement god, Jesus 
Christ. This results in a monologue by Wednesday to guilt trip Eostre into helping him.  
48 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
 The setting of this novel is not one that would ca use a translator much trouble; it is 
contemporary America, and the fantasy elements are not all that abundant throughout the novel. 
The fact that the protagonists are all gods does little to chance this, as they do not use much divine 
power, they all act mostly like normal humans. Some things, like Shadow’s dead wife following him 
around, are of course elements of the supernatural, but it is not until rather late in the book that 
such things as magic and supernatural creatures really begin to manifest themselves. Aspects of 
government are not important in this novel, since there is no mention of a hierarchy with rules. 
There is a hierarchy amongst the gods, but it is not bound up in rules and is resolved mostly on who 
is the strongest. There are also not many setting-specific realia in this excerpt; since the novel entails 
many mythological aspects, which have been studied in many different countries, many target 
language equivalents already exist. This excerpt was chosen mainly as an example of the difficulties 
that may arise when a translator tries to keep the work inherently logical when the author 
incorporates things that are not easily translated into another language.  
 
Amerikaanse Goden  
Neil Gaiman  
 Er zat een vrouw op het gras, under een boom, met een papieren tafelkleed voor zich 
uitgespreid en een assortiment aan Tupperwarebakjes op het kleed.   
 Ze was – niet dik, nee, verre van dik: wat ze was,  een woord waar Shadow tot nu toe nooit 
reden voor had om te gebruiken, was wulps .11  Haar haren waren zo licht dat het wit was, het soort 
                                                           
11  There is no perfect translation for the word ‘curvaceous’. The image of a well-rounded woman, 
probably with an hourglass figure, that comes with reading that word has several different 
connotations; beautiful, well-rounded, sexual. As with most other occurrences of words where a 
source word has no one-on-one counterpart in the target language – i.e. a word with the same 
multiple meanings – the translator must chose which of those meanings takes precedence and chose 
49 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
platinablonde lokken dat zou moeten toebehoren aan een al lang gestorven filmster, haar lippen 
waren karmijnrood gestift en ze zag eruit alsof ze ergens tussen de vijfentwintig en de vijftig jaar was. 
 Ze was een gevuld ei op een bord aan het uitzoeken  toen ze dichterbij kwamen. Ze keek op 
terwijl Wednesday haar naderde, legde het ei dat ze had gekozen neer en veegde haar hand af. 
‘Hallo, oude bedrieger,’ zei ze, maar ze glimlachte terwijl ze het zei en Wednesday boog diep, pakte 
haar hand en bracht deze naar zijn lippen. 
 Hij zei, ‘je ziet er goddelijk uit.’ 
 ‘Hoe zou ik er anders uit moeten zien?’ verlangt z e liefjes. ‘Trouwens, je bent een leugenaar. 
New Orleans was een grote  fout – Ik ben, wat, dertien kilo aangekomen daar? Ik zweer het je. Ik wist 
dat ik weg moest gaan toen ik begon te waggelen. De bovenkant van mijn dijen wrijven nu tegen 
elkaar aan als ik loop, kan je het geloven?’ Dat laatste was aan Shadow gericht. Hij wist niet wat hij 
als antwoord moest geven en voelde een warme gloed over zijn gezicht trekken. De vrouw lachte 
verrukt. ‘Hij bloost . Wednesday mijn schat, je hebt me een blozer  gebracht. Wat ontzettend geweldig 
van je. Hoe heet hij?’ 
 ‘Dit is Shadow,’ zei Wednesday. Het leek alsof hij  plezier had in Shadow’s ongemak. ‘Shadow, 
zeg Easter eens gedag.’ 
12  
                                                                                                                                                                                     
a word based on that. The Dutch options were ‘welgevormd’ or ‘vol’, focussing on the well-rounded 
aspect, ‘weelderig’ focussing on the beautiful as well as the well-rounded aspect, ‘rondborstig’ or 
‘voluptueus’ focussing on the well-rounded and the sexual aspect or finally ‘wulps’, focussing mainly 
on the sexual and beautiful aspect but with the well-rounded hourglass figure in mind. This last 
option is the one I chose, as the sexual and beautiful aspects seems most important in this scene – 
the protagonist blushes because of her appearance and manner – and she is described as a sort of 
Marilyn Monroe, to whom ‘wulps’ would also apply. 
12  Not translating this occurrence of the word ‘Easter’ has two reasons. One, because it is a name and 
I prefer to keep names as they are as well as that the Dutch equivalent, ‘Pasen’, would not sound 
50 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
[…] 
 Ze dronk een papieren beker met iets wat eruitzag als witte wijn leeg en ging toen staan. 
‘Shadow is een goede naam,’ zei ze. ‘Ik wil een Mochaccino. Kom mee.’ 
 Ze begon weg te lopen. ‘En het eten dan?’ vroeg We dnesday. ‘Je kan het hier niet zomaar 
laten liggen.’ 
 Ze glimlachte naar hem, wees naar het meisje dat n aast de hond zat en hief daarna haar 
armen op om de Haight en rest van de wereld te omvatten. ‘Laat het hen voeden,’ zei ze en ze liep 
weg, met Wednesday en Shadow achter haar aan.  
 ‘Denk eraan,’ zei ze tegen Wednesday terwijl ze li epen. ‘ Ik  ben rijk. Met mij gaat het prima. 
Waarom zou ik je moeten helpen?’ 
 ‘Je bent een van ons,’ zei hij. ‘Je bent net zo ve rgeten en ongeliefd en verwaarloosd als ieder 
van ons. Het is vrij duidelijk aan wiens kant je zou moeten staan.’  
 Ze bereikten een café met terras, gingen naar binnen en namen plaats. Er was slechts één 
serveerster, die haar wenkbrauwpiercing droeg als een teken van sociale status en een vrouw die 
koffie maakte achter de toonbank. De serveerster naderde hen, glimlachend uit gewoonte, en nam 
hun bestelling op. 
13  
                                                                                                                                                                                     
appropriate and two because it has importance further on in the chapter. If I would translate this to 
the Dutch name for Easter then the whole connection between the feast and the old German 
goddess of the dawn, Eostre, would be lost, for Eostre does not at all resemble ‘Pasen’ while it 
certainly resembles Easter. The name is therefore of importance to the story and must stay in its 
original form.  
13  The source text had an extra phrase here, ‘sat them down’, when just a few lines before that the 
characters had already ‘sat down’ themselves. When I informed the author Neil Gaiman of this small 
mistake he at first assumed I had an older version, but when he learned I had what is called “the 
author’s preferred text” from 2005 he did some checking and found that, even though he had known 
51 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
Easter legde haar slanke hand op de rug van Wednesday’s vierkante grijze hand. ‘Ik zeg het 
je,’ zei ze, ‘met mij gaat het prima . Op mijn feestdagen doen ze zich nog steeds tegoed aan eieren en 
konijnen, aan snoep en aan vlees, als symbool voor wedergeboorte en paren. Ze dragen bloemen op 
hun hoed en geven elkaar bloemen. Ze doen het in mijn naam. Elk jaar meer en meer van ze. In mijn  
naam, oude wolf.’ 
‘En jij wordt dik en welvarend van hun aanbidding en liefde?’ zei hij op droge toon. 
‘Doe niet zo stom.’ Plotseling klonk ze erg vermoeid. Ze nam een slok van haar Mochaccino.  
‘Serieuze vraag, mijn schat. Ik ben het er ongetwijfeld mee eens dat miljoenen en miljoenen 
van ze elkaar geschenken geven in jouw naam en dat ze nog steeds de rites van jouw festival 
beoefenen, tot het zoeken naar verborgen eieren aan toe. Maar hoeveel van hen weten wie je bent? 
Hm? Pardon juffrouw?’ Dit laatste tegen hun serveerster.  
Ze zei, ‘Wilt u nog een espresso?’ 
‘Nee, mijn schat. Ik vroeg me enkel af of je 
14  een klein meningsverschil dat we hier hadden, 
kunt oplossen. Mijn vriendin en ik kunnen niet eens worden over wat het woord ‘Easter’ betekent. 15  
Weet jij het misschien?’ 
                                                                                                                                                                                    
 
of it before, it had still slipped his and his editor’s attention in the publication of his final version of 
the novel. Mr. Gaiman said he wanted the second sitting down to be removed, so true to the 
author’s wishes I left it out in the translation. This is a prime example of how a translator can pick up 
things even editors miss, simply because they generally read the text with more attention for detail 
due to having to translate it.  
14  The English ‘you’ can of course be translated to both ‘je’ and ‘u’ in Dutch. Since in this situation it is 
an older man speaking to a younger woman, and Wednesday is a rather jovial fellow, I chose to 
translate it with the informal ‘je’.  
15  I’ve doubted about whether inserting the word ‘Engelse’ to this sentence to make clear that 
‘Easter’ is an English word, but the translator should not insert his own thoughts into the text too 
52 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
Het meisje staarde naar hem alsof groene padden zich door zijn lippen naar buiten begonnen 
te wurmen. Daarna zei ze, ‘Ik weet helemaal niks van dat Christelijke gedoe. Ik ben een paganist.’ 
De vrouw achter de toonbank zei, ‘Ik denk dat het Latijn of zoiets is voor “Christus is 
herrezen” misschien.’ 
‘Echt waar?’ zei Wednesday. 
‘Ja, echt,’ zei de vrouw. ‘Easter. Zoals de zon opkomt in het oosten, east, 
16  weet je.  
‘De herrezen zoon. Natuurlijk – een zeer logische veronderstelling.’ De vrouw glimlachte en 
keerde terug naar haar koffiemolen. Wednesday keek op naar de serveerster. ‘Ik denk dat ik wel nog 
een espresso neem, als je het niet erg vindt. En vertel me, als een paganist, wie aanbid je dan?’ 
‘Aanbid?’ 
‘Dat klopt. Ik neem aan dat je een best wel ruime keuze hebt. Dus aan wie wijd je je huiselijk 
altaar? Voor wie buig je? Tegen wie bid je bij dageraad en schemering?’ 
Haar lippen vertrokken in een aantal figuren zonder iets te zeggen voor ze zei, ‘Het vrouwelijk 
principe. Het is een empowerment iets, weet je wel.’ 
‘Zeker. En dit vrouwelijk principe van je. Heeft ze een naam?’ 
                                                                                                                                                                                    
 
much, and such an addition would not make it any more clear. It is already known from the beginning 
of the book that the characters are in the United States so that they are discussing an English word 
should not be odd. However, it does alert the reader to the fact that they are reading a translation, 
whereas the ideal translation would be one where the reader would not, in fact, realize it was one. 
(Hermans, 4) 
16  This is a similar problem as in note 15, but here I chose to add the ‘east’, to underline the 
importance of the word in this context. The Dutch ‘oosten’ resembles the English ‘east’ but not 
enough as to make the link directly clear. One can argue from context that the reader would 
understand that it was the English east being discussed, but since the connection is fairly important 
to the story I thought that here it would be appropriate to mention it again. 
53 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
‘Ze is de godin in ons allen,’ zei het meisje met de wenkbrauwring, terwijl haar wangen een 
kleur kregen. ‘Ze heeft geen naam nodig.’ 
‘Aha,’ zei Wednesday met een grote apengrijns, ‘dus houd je geweldige bacchanalen ter ere 
van haar? Drink je bloedwijn onder de volle maan, terwijl scharlaken kaarsen branden in zilveren 
houders? Stap je naakt het zeeschuim in, extatisch zingend naar je naamloze godin terwijl de golven 
je benen beroeren, likkend aan je dijen als de tongen van duizend luipaarden?’ 17  
‘U houdt me voor het lapje,’ zei ze. ‘We doen niet van dat soort dingen die u beschrijft.’ Ze 
haalde diep adem. Shadow vermoedde dat ze tot tien aan het tellen was. ‘Nog meer koffie hier? Nog 
een mochaccino voor u, mevrouw?’ haar glimlach leek ontzettend op degene waarmee ze hen had 
begroet toen ze binnenkwamen.  
Ze schudden hun hoofden en de serveerster draaide zich om om een andere klant te 
begroeten. 
‘Daar,’ zei Wednesday, ‘loopt iemand die ‘ het geloof niet heeft en de lol niet zal hebben. ’ 
Chesterton. Een heuse paganist! Dus. Zullen we buiten de straat op gaan, Easter mijn schat, en de 
oefening herhalen? Erachter komen hoeveel voorbijgangers weten dat hun Easter-festival haar naam 
heeft van Eostre van de Dageraad? Eens kijken – ik weet het. We zullen het aan honderd mensen 
vragen. Voor elk van hen die de waarheid weet, mag je een van mijn vingers afsnijden en als die 
opraken mijn tenen; voor elke twintig die het niet weten zal jij een nacht de liefde met mij bedrijven. 
En jij hebt hier het voordeel – dit is immers San Francisco. Er lopen heidenen en paganisten en 
Wiccans genoeg op deze steile straten.’ 
Haar groene ogen keken naar Wednesday. Ze waren, besliste Shadow, precies dezelfde kleur 
als een blad in de lente als de zon er doorheen schijnt. Ze zei niets. 
                                                           
 
54 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
‘We kunnen  het proberen,’ ging Wednesday verder. ‘Maar ik zou eindigen met tien vingers, 
tien tenen, en vijf nachten in jouw bed. Vertel me dus niet dat ze je aanbidden en je feestdag in acht 
nemen. Ze mompelen je naam, maar het heeft geen betekenis voor ze. Helemaal niets.’  
Tranen stonden in haar ogen. ‘Dat weet ik,’ zei ze zachtjes. ‘Ik ben niet dom.’ 
‘Nee,’ zei Wednesday. ‘Dat ben je niet.’ 
 
Discussing American Gods 
The biggest difficulty in this excerpt was the connection between Easter and Eostre that the author 
uses to show the correlation between the Germanic fertility goddess and the Christian Easter festival. 
The Dutch for Easter is ‘Pasen’, but then the whole connection with Eostre is lost to the reader, for 
the whole scene relies on the visual link between Easter and Eostre. Luckily it is made fairly apparent 
for the Dutch reader that it is about the Easter festival, plus the fact that the setting is clearly foreign 
and so keeping the names exotic might not be as jarring, but it requires some linguistic tricks to keep 
the scene intact, which may come across as artificial to the reader. The name ‘Wednesday’ is 
similarly a problem. Wednesday is Odin’s day of old, though more derived from his Anglo-Saxon 
name Woden; people who are unfamiliar with Norse mythology may be unaware of the connection, 
which is most likely exactly the author’s intent. However, here it is important to be consistent: 
translate all names, or translate none of them. Since some names would ruin parts of the plot in 
translation, all names remain as they were.  
 While this excerpt had few genre-specific problems , it is a great example of how the inherent 
meanings or visual aspects of names can be very difficult to translate to the target language – in this 
case Dutch – because of their importance to the characters and the story and the damage it would 
do to the story or scene if it were translated without a second thought. As stated in the previous 
chapter by Fernandes, translating names may be one of the most problematic aspects of translation 
because of how they tie to the character or the plot, and the character of Eostre, while minor, has an 
55 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
important role to play that would be diminished by careless handling of her name and background. 
And this is not only true for her name in this novel; all gods have names that refer, openly or 
obliquely, to their backgrounds. Retaining these references in the target text is challenging, which is 
why sometimes the best option is to keep them as they are. 
 
Neil Gaiman & Terry Pratchett - Good Omens 
The third excerpt is of Good Omens  by Neil Gaiman and Terry Pratchett, first published in 
1990, though this excerpt is from the revised edition published in 2006. Here the setting is England, 
in a world where angels and demons are very much real and meddling with the world in the name of 
God and the Devil, though the authors stress that real good and evil is not made in heaven or hell, 
but is inside the human race itself. The book starts with the arrival of the Antichrist on earth to 
herald the apocalypse; the Antichrist arrives in baby form and is supposed to be swapped with the 
baby of an American diplomat. However, one of the attending nuns makes a mistake and swaps the 
baby with that of an English accountant instead. When both babies go home, both heaven and hell 
send people to the American diplomat’s child, who is a normal human, to teach him good and evil, 
while the real Antichrist grows up undisturbed in Tadfield, England. When the apocalypse begins 
eleven years later this mistake causes the Antichrist to have no idea about who he is and what is 
being expected of him, namely to lead the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse to the end of the world. 
He only has this vague feeling that he wants to conquer the world, but lacks the theoretical 
background to discern why. In this story, the last days of the earth have been correctly predicted by 
the witch Agnes Nutter several centuries before, and it is her descendent, Anathema Device, who is 
now preparing herself for it; Agnes’ prophecies have always come true before. The two scenes in the 
excerpt are about the demon Crowley - who was responsible for making sure the swapping of the 
babies went alright and is now also being held responsible for everything that went wrong after - 
56 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
who is trying to get out of London and towards Tadfield, and about Adam the Antichrist, hiding in a 
grove with his friends, waiting for the Four Horsemen so that the apocalypse can begin.  
The setting of this novel is England, more specifically London and Tadfield, where Crowley 
and Adam respectively live. The authors introduce the supernatural elements of angels and demons 
and witches as something quite natural, something that has always been there but never really 
occurred to the human race because they were simply stories to them. Of course, the angels and 
demons had strict order to keep themselves a secret, so any meddling with humans would be done 
circumspectly. And meddling is why they existed, though generally in small ways, being the little 
butterfly flapping its wings to cause a great storm a while later. All supernatural occurrences 
therefore seem quite small and easy to cover up, though it changes drastically when the apocalypse 
actually starts and no one is bothering to hide it anymore, which is made quite clear in the first part 
of this excerpt where Crowley, to the eyes of the humans, survives driving in a flaming car.  
As with American Gods , this novel has few genre-specific problems next to the setting, but 
many names/realia that cause difficulties in translation to the target language, Dutch. While not all of 
them appear in this excerpt, again I’ve chosen to retain the names in their original format for the 
sake of consistency. Some names, like Crowley and Adam, could have working target language 
equivalence, but others, like Anathema Device and Newton Pulsifer, would lose in translation. Next 
to the names the merging of the supernatural with the contemporary setting so that it remains 
inherently logical takes some effort on the part of the translator, but other than that this novel’s 
greatest challenge is that it is a satire, and the language used by the authors is aimed towards the 
goal of amusing their audience. Retaining that humour would most likely be the translator’s main 
concern with this novel. 
 
Goede Voorbodes  
Terry Pratchett & Neil Gaiman 
57 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
Je zou het niet als dezelfde auto hebben herkend. Er was bijna geen centimeter zonder deuken. 
Beide voorlampen waren gebroken. De wieldoppen waren allang verdwenen. Hij zag eruit als de 
veteraan van honderd sloopraces.  
 De trottoirs waren erg geweest. De voetgangerstunn el was nog erger. Het ergste was het 
oversteken van de rivier de Theems. Hij had tenminste de tegenwoordigheid van geest gehad om alle 
ramen te sluiten.  
 Toch had hij het gehaald. 
 Over een paar honderd meter zou hij op de M40 zijn ; een redelijke vrije rit naar Oxfordshire. 
Er was nog maar een probleempje: tussen Crowley en de open weg lag nogmaals de M25. Een 
schreeuwend, gloeiend lint van pijn en donker licht.* Odegra . Niets kon het oversteken en dat 
overleven.  
 Niets sterfelijks in ieder geval. En hij wist niet  zeker wat het zou doen met een demon. Het 
kon hem niet doden, maar plezierig zou het zeker niet zijn.  
 Er stond een politieversperring voor het viaduct v oor hem. Uitgebrande wrakken –sommigen 
brandden nog – waren getuige van het lot van de vorige auto’s die over het viaduct boven de 
donkere weg moesten rijden.  
 De politie zag er niet blij uit. 
 Crowley schakelde naar de tweede versnelling en tr apte het gaspedaal ver in.  
  Hij reed met honderd door de versperring. Dat was  het makkelijke gedeelte. 
 Voorvallen van spontane zelfontbranding staan in d e hele wereld geregistreerd. Het ene 
moment is iemand vrolijk zijn leven aan het lijden; het volgende moment is er slechts een treurige 
foto van een hoopje as en een eenzame en mysterieus onverkoolde voet of hand. Voorvallen van 
spontane voertuigontbranding zijn minder goed gedocumenteerd. 
Wat de statistieken ook waren, ze zijn zojuist met één omhoog gegaan.  
58 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
De leren stoelbekleding begon te roken. Terwij hij voor zich uit staarde, tastte hij 
linkshandig 18  op de bijrijderstoel voor Agnes Nutter’s Fijne en Accurate Profetieën 19  en verhuisde 
deze naar de veiligheid van zijn schoot. Hij wou dat ze dit had voorspeld.†  Daarna verzwelgde de 
vlammen de auto. 
Hij moest door blijven rijden.  
Aan de andere kant van het viaduct was nog een politieversperring, om de overtocht van 
auto’s die London in probeerden te komen te voorkomen. Ze waren aan het lachen om een verhaal 
dat zojuist over de radio was verteld, dat een motoragent op de M6 een gestolen auto had 
aangehouden, enkel om te ontdekken dat de bestuurder een grote octopus was.  
Sommige politiekorpsen geloofden ook alles. De Metropolitische politie niet. De Met was de 
meest taaie, cynisch pragmatische, koppig nuchtere politiekorps in heel Groot-Brittanië.  
Er was veel voor nodig om een smeris van de Met van streek te maken.  
Er was bijvoorbeeld een grote, beschadigde auto dat niets meer of minder was dan een 
vuurbal, een vlammend, brullend, verwrongen metalen wrak uit de Hel voor nodig, bestuurd door 
                                                          
 
18  It is an English car, so the driver’s seat is to the right and the passenger seat to the left. I’ve 
doubted about whether to naturalise it to make it conform to the Dutch cars that Dutch readers will 
know, but it does not serve much purpose nor does keeping it as left-handed interfere with the story. 
19  The title of the book in the source text is Agnes Nutter’s Nice and Accurate Prophecies . As is 
described in the novel several times, “ nice  also means ‘scrupulously exact’.”(Pratchett & Gaiman, 45) 
With that in mind I had to think of a similar Dutch word which both has the ‘nice’ and ‘exact’ 
connotation, which of course the most common equivalent for ‘nice’ in Dutch, ‘leuk’, has not. The 
only translation of ‘nice’ which came close was ‘fijn’, which aside from the ‘nice’ aspect is also 
mentioned in the van Dale dictionary as meaning “in staat bijzondere onderscheiding te maken”, 
with the connotations of quality, precision and purity attached. This together with ‘accuraat’ makes it 
perfectly clear to the readers that these prophecies are indeed very accurate.  
59 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
een grijnzende gek met zonnebril gezeten tussen de vlammen, die dikke zwarte rook achterliet en 
recht op hen afkwam door de neerslaande regen en wind met een snelheid van honderddertig 
kilometer per uur.  
Dat zou het elke keer weer doen.  
~*~ 
De groeve was een kalm middelpunt in de stormachtige wereld. 
 Donder rommelde niet slechts boven hun hoofden, he t scheurde de lucht in tweeën.  
 ‘Er komen nog wat vrienden van me,’ herhaalde Adam . ‘Ze zullen hier snel zijn en dan kunnen 
we echt beginnen.’ 
 Hond begon te huilen. Het was niet langer het beto verende gehuil van een eenzame wolf 
maar het vreemde getril van een kleine hond in grote problemen.  
 Pepper zat naar haar knieën te staren.  
 Ze leek iets op haar lever te hebben. 
 Eindelijk keek ze op en staarde Adam in zijn lege grijze ogen. 
 ‘Welk stuk ga jij hebben, Adam?’ zei ze. 
 De storm was vervangen door een plotselinge, luide  stilte. 
 ‘Wat?’ zei Adam.  
 ‘Nou, je hebt de wereld verdeeld, toch, en wij heb ben allemaal een stuk gekregen – welk stuk 
ga jij hebben?’ 
 De stilte zong als een harp, hoog en dun.  
  ‘Ja,’ zei Brian. ‘Je hebt ons nooit verteld welk stuk jíj gaat hebben.’ 
 ‘Pepper heeft gelijk,’ zei Wensleydale. ‘Het lijkt  míj alsof er niet veel over is, als wij al deze 
landen gaan hebben.’ 
 Adam’s mond ging open en dicht. 
 ‘Wat?’ zei hij.  
60 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
 ‘Welk stuk is van jou, Adam?’ zei Pepper. 
 Adam staarde haar aan. Hond was opgehouden met hui len en keek zijn meester met de 
onbeweeglijke, gespannen, peinzende blik van een vuilnisbakje aan.  
 ‘I-ik?’ zei hij. 
 De stilte ging maar door, één noot dat de geluiden  van de wereld kon overstemmen.  
 ‘Maar ik zal Tadfield hebben,’ zei Adam. 
 Ze staarden hem aan. 
 ‘En, en Lower Tadfield, en Norton, en Norton Woods —‘ 
 Ze staarden nog steeds. 
 Adam’s blik trok over hun gezichten heen.  
 ‘Dat is alles wat ik ooit heb gewild,’ zei Adam. 
 Ze schudden hun hoofd. 
 ‘Ik kan ze hebben als ik dat wil,’ zei Adam, zijn stem doorspikkeld met stuurse opstandigheid 
en zijn opstandigheid omrand met plotselinge twijfel. ‘Ik kan ze ook beter maken. Betere bomen om 
in te klimmen, betere vijvers, betere...’ 
 Zijn stem stierf weg.  
 ‘Dat kan je niet,’ zei Wensleydale mat. ‘Ze zijn n iet Amerika en al die andere plekken. Ze zijn 
echt echt . Trouwens, ze behoren ons allemaal toe. Ze zijn van ons.’ 
 ‘En je kan ze niet beter maken,’ zei Brian. 
 ‘Trouwens, zelfs al deed je dat, dan zouden we het  allemaal weten,’ zei Pepper. 
 ‘Oh, als dat alles is waar jullie je druk om maken , maak je dan geen zorgen,’ zei Adam luchtig, 
‘want ik kan jullie toch allemaal laten doen wat ik wil, wat dan ook—’ 
61 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
 Hij stopte, terwijl zijn oren met afschuw luisterd en naar de woorden die zijn mond sprak. De 
Zij 20  waren aan het terugdeinzen. 
 Hond deed zijn poten over zijn hoofd. 
 Adam’s gezicht zag eruit als de verpersoonlijking van de val van een keizerrijk.  
 ‘Nee,’ zei hij schor. ‘Nee. Kom terug. Ik beveel het je! ’ 
 Ze verstijfden midden in hun vlucht.  
  Adam staarde naar hen. 
 ‘Nee, ik meende het niet—’ begon hij. ‘Jullie zijn  mijn vrienden—’ 
 Zijn lichaam schokte. Zijn hoofd was achterover ge gooid. Hij hief zijn armen op en beukte de 
lucht met zijn vuisten. 
 Zijn gezicht vertrok. De krijtvloer barstte onder zijn schoenen. 
 Adam opende zijn mond en gilde. Het was een geluid  dat een slechts sterfelijke keel niet zou 
hebben moeten kunnen voortbrengen; ze dreef uit de groeve 
21 , mengde zich met de storm, zorgde 
dat de wolken zich verwrongen tot nieuwe en onaangename vormen. 
                                                           
20  “It didn’t matter what the four had called their gang over the years, […] Everyone else always 
referred to them darkly as Them, and eventually they did too.” (Pratchett & Gaiman, 135) ‘Them’ is 
what the neighbourhood these kids were ‘terrorizing’ called the four characters whenever they were 
referring to them, usually in the context of something bad that happened in their vicinity that the 
Them were blamed for. The Dutch equivalent of this pronoun would be ‘zij’, which also fits the 
context in which it was used. “Who did this?” “Them, who else?” / “Wie heeft dit gedaan? ‘Zij, wie 
anders?” The other option was ‘hen’, but ‘zij’ is more informal and therefore more fitting. It can be 
argued that ‘de Zij’ is not grammatical in Dutch, but the same is true for ‘the Them’ in English, 
because the author has turned the pronoun into a name and therefore into a noun.  
21  “…it wound out of the quarry…” The many options for ‘wound’, ‘blazen’, ‘kronkelen’, ‘schallen’, 
‘draaien’, ‘slingeren’, all were not adequate in the sentence. Some were too strong (like ‘schallen’), 
62 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
 Het ging door en door. 
 Het weergalmde door het universum, welke een stuk kleiner is dan de meeste 
natuurkundigen zouden geloven. Het rammelde aan de hemelse sferen. 
 Het sprak van verlies en het hield een hele lange tijd niet op. 
 En toen wel.  
 Iets stroomde weg. 
 Adam’s hoofd zakte weer naar beneden. Zijn ogen gi ngen open.  
 Wat er ook hiervoor in de groeve had gestaan, Adam  Young stond er nu. Een wijzere Adam 
Young, maar evengoed Adam Young. Mogelijkerwijs zelfs meer van Adam Young dan er ooit eerder 
was geweest.  
 De spookachtige stilte in de groeve was vervangen door een meer vertrouwde, behaaglijke 
stilte, slechts de simpele afwezigheid van geluid. 
 De bevrijdde Hen zaten in elkaar gedoken tegen de krijten klif, hun ogen op hem gericht.  
 ‘Het is goed,’ zei Adam zachtjes. ‘Pepper? Wensely ? Brian? Kom terug. Het is goed. Het is 
goed. Ik weet alles nu. En jullie moeten me helpen. Anders gaat het allemaal gebeuren. Het gaat 
allemaal echt gebeuren. Het gaat allemaal gebeuren, als we niet iets doen.’ 
 
* Eigenlijk geen oxymoron. Het is de kleur na ultraviolet. De technische term ervoor is infrazwart. Het 
kan vrij makkelijk gezien worden onder experimentele omstandigheden. Om het experiment uit te 
voeren selecteer je simpelweg een gezonde bakstenen muur met een goede aanloop en storm je, 
met gebogen hoofd, erop af.  
                                                                                                                                                                                    
 
others did not fit the noun it was connected with. In Dutch, a ‘kronkelend geluid’ or a ‘draaiend 
geluid’ sounds rather odd. A viable option was a ‘schallend geluid’ but it was too strong a word in this 
context. After trying them all I finally settled on a synonym, ‘drijven’, which fit both the noun and the 
scene.  
63 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
 De kleur die in flitsen achter je ogen flikkert, a chter de pijn, vlak voor je doodgaat, is 
infrazwart. 
†
 Dat had ze. Er stond: 
 Een strate van lichte zal schreeuwen, de swarte co ets van de Serpente sal flammen en een 
Kwiene sal niet langer kwiksilveren liederen singen. 22  
 Het grootste gedeelte van de familie had ingestemd  met Gelatly Device, die rond 1830 een 
korte verhandeling had geschreven waarin het werd uitgelegd als een metafoor voor de verbanning 
van Weishaupt’s Illuminati uit Beieren in 1785. 
 
Discussing Good Omens 
As mentioned, the difficulty with this novel is mostly that it is a satire; the writing style is often 
humorous, with short sentences to lead up to the pun. The scene with Crowley is meant to evoke 
laughter, but the scene with Adam would sooner be met with an indulging smile. The fact that angels 
and demons exist is taken completely for granted because it is a humorous book, and the angel and 
demon that are two of the main characters are really what you’d expect very old humans who’ve 
                                                           
22  “A street of light will screem, the black chariot of the Serpente will flayme, and a Queene wille sing 
quickfilveres songes no moar.” A quick search in the Oxford English Dictionary reveals that the 
spelling of the words has no source and has sprouted from the fingers of the author only; ‘flame’ for 
example was never spelled ‘flayme’ according to the OED, nor was ‘scream’ ever spelled as ‘screem’ 
(though there were occurrences of ‘skreem’ and ‘screme’ in Middle English according to the OED.) 
For a fitting translation, I used the Old and Middle Dutch Dictionary and used either Old or Middle 
Dutch spelling for the nouns and verbs, using both forms of Dutch indiscriminately to make the 
prophecy look old. I also chose to change the band Queen’s name to ‘Kwiene’, to keep the English 
pronunciation but making it look a little more Dutch, conforming with the rest of the sentence.  
64 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
seen too much would be: not angelic, not monstrous, just doing their jobs in the eyes of heaven or 
hell. They are utterly without pretention and therefore very mundane for supernatural beings. In this 
scene with Crowley, he has to drive his car to a hell of his own making which, while not permanently 
harming him, is rather ironic; he hadn’t thought to be inside his devised fiery prison when the 
apocalypse began, and he’s escaping it to stop the world from ending. The most difficult part of this 
scene was bringing the humour across to the target language. The authors manage to sketch a very 
lively scene with just a few short sentences, and emulating that in Dutch proved rather difficult.  
In the meantime Adam the Antichrist discovers he is actually very much human, capable of 
love, with some help from his friends, and realises that if he doesn’t do something soon, everything 
he loves will come to an end. The change between Adam the Antichrist and Adam the Human was 
the challenge in this scene, to go from the unfeeling supernatural creature whose goal it was to 
destroy the world to the boy who would do anything to save it. In the end however, combining the 
supernatural with the mundane was fairly easy because of the humoristic writing. As a translator I 
was so intent on translating the puns that the rest becomes a part of that. Keeping the setting 
believable became inherent to keeping the humour as intact as possible, because part of the humour 
was a result of the setting, with angels and demons working together and the Antichrist being raised 
away from all evil influence by pure chance. Mostly Good Omens  is a comment on how we are the 
product of our environment; the son of the Devil can learn to love, angels and demons learn that 
they can work together, and ultimately, good and evil comes not from outside influences, but from 
within. Keeping that message, while not specifically present in this excerpt, would be something to 
keep in mind while translating this novel.  
  
Jim Butcher - The Dresden Files: Storm Front and Fool Moon 
The last two excerpts are from the first two books in the Dresden Files  series by Jim Butcher, 
Storm Front  (2000) and Fool Moon  (2001). The Dresden Files  are about the only openly practicing 
65 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
wizard private detective in the United States, Harry Dresden, whose office is in Chicago and who is 
asked to deal with many different things, from the horribly mundane to the horrifically supernatural. 
In Dresden’s world, not many people believe in the existence of the supernatural and ignore or deny 
it, but that doesn’t stop them from hiring a wizard to exorcise their houses (that usually aren’t really 
haunted) and tentatively ask for help if there is something wrong that they can’t explain. He also gets 
a lot of prank calls of people asking him if he’s serious. To scrape by, Harry Dresden consults for the 
police on cases they cannot mundanely explain away, though lieutenant Murphy of the Special 
Investigation Unit trusts him about as far as she can throw him. Through his consultancy work for the 
police, Harry gets involved in big supernatural problems that threaten his life, his city and the people 
he knows/loves. It is a classic detective novel with a supernatural twist. 
The setting of these novels is again a grim and dark Chicago, though an alternate universe 
from A Hunger Like Fire . In this Chicago, there are vampires, werewolves, witches, wizards, fae, 
ghouls, ghosts, angels and demons, basically everything supernatural a person can think of. All of 
these creatures live side by side with the normal humans, though hiding from them as much as they 
can. It is one of the secret rules of the supernatural society: don’t tell the outsiders. Harry Dresden, 
the protagonist, violates this rule by being the only open practitioner of magic in the city, probably in 
the country. However, nobody really believes him, so this violation goes fairly unpunished. The 
challenge in this setting is to keep the supernatural side of the world grim, dark, and mysterious until 
Dresden himself discovers new facts. The novels are whodunits, with someone causing Dresden and 
lieutenant Murphy a lot of supernatural trouble until they discover and defeat the culprit.  
Harry Dresden is a 30’s detective; poor, gritty, cynical, but with an inherent sense of good to 
guide him; A cynical young man who has already seen too much strange stuff to believe in a good 
world anymore, but also has his own norms and values and a morality and sense of justice that point 
nearly due north. He has killed his own teacher in the arts because the man was trying to make him 
cross over the dark side and would sooner die than let innocents take any harm, but his dark sense of 
66 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
humour and shabby clothing do not make him very likable. He also has a talking skull called Bob, a 
spirit bound to his skull to aid Harry in his magical endeavours. Dresden’s Chicago is a gloomy city, 
where vampires, ghosts and gangsters reign.  
 The setting has two forms of ‘government’, the normal world in which the Chicago Police 
Department has its inner hierarchy, and the supernatural one in which there is a White Council of 
wizards that created the rules on the use of magic and enforces them with the aid of supernatural 
creatures like angels. Dresden is more of a rogue, and gets himself into trouble accordingly. The 
novel also has a fair few irrealia that require careful thought in translation, as will be expanded upon 
in the footnotes and below. 
 
Storm Front 
In the first novel, Storm Front , Dresden is confronted with black sorcerer who flaunts all the 
rules of magic to further his own ambition. Because Harry stands in the way of becoming the most 
powerful sorcerer of the Chicago area, he becomes an obvious target for the sorcerer’s magical 
attacks. The first excerpt is the first few pages of the novel, a character introduction of Harry 
Dresden. The narrative is in the first-person point of view of Dresden himself, as he sits in his office 
waiting for a job. He’s rather broke and desperately needs work, but can’t really do much normal 
work because electrical machines tend to go haywire around him. In this particular scene a new 
mailman comes and makes fun of him, to which Harry gives a resigned response; he is used to people 
not believing him. When a real prospective client calls, he jumps at the chance, abstaining from his 
humoristic remarks to get the job. The author uses short, descriptive sentences to set the scene, and 
Dutch is hardly ever as concise as English can be, so translating in the same style proved difficult. In 
this particular scene there are no supernatural occurrences, but it shows the attitude of the world 
regarding magic and the supernatural; one of contempt, derision and ridicule. To be openly magical 
in such a world is not easy, which makes it rather hard for one in Harry’s profession to earn the rent. 
67 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
This is fairly usual in contemporary fantasy novels: the main characters are either supernatural 
beings or humans getting tangled up with supernatural things, but the one red thread in almost all 
contemporary fantasy novels is that the supernatural community hides from the mundane 
community. Harry Dresden is the odd one out in that he openly admits he is supernatural, magical, 
and for that gets the treatment we would expect such people to be given in our own world, being 
viewed as a quack. That feeling of being the resigned butt of oft-heard jokes was an important part of 
the scene, and getting that through in translation was a little difficult, especially in the direct 
exchange with the mailman, whose confusion and later contempt shows in the words he uses, the 
way he acts through the eyes of Harry. Life is not easy for Harry Dresden, and this first scene shows 
that very clearly. 
  
Stormnacht  
Jim Butcher 
Hoofdstuk 1  
 Ik hoorde de postbode de deur van mijn kantoor nad eren, een half uur eerder dan normaal. 
Hij klonk niet juist. Zijn voetstappen vielen zwaarder, kwieker, en hij fluitte. Een nieuwe. Hij fluitte 
zijn weg tot mijn kantoordeur, viel daarna even stil. Daarna lachte hij. 
 Daarna klopte hij aan. 
 Ik kromp ineen. Mijn post komt door de brievenbus tenzij het aangetekend is. Ik krijg maar 
een beperkt aantal aangetekende brieven en het is nooit goed nieuws. Ik stond op uit mijn 
bureaustoel en opende de deur. 
 De nieuwe postbode, die er uitzag als een basketba l met armen en benen en een 
zonverbrande, kalend hoofd, stond nog te grinniken om het bordje op het deurraam.  
 Hij keek me even aan en wees met z’n duim richting  het bord. “Je maakt een grapje, toch?” 
68 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
 Ik las het bord (mensen veranderen het soms) en sc hudde mijn hoofd. “Nee, ik meen het. 
Mag ik alstublieft mijn post.” 
 Dus, ehm. Zoals feestjes, shows, dat soort dingen? ” Hij keek langs me heen, alsof hij 
verwachte een witte tijger te zien, of mogelijkerwijs een paar schaars geklede assistentes die 
ronddansten in mijn eenkamerkantoor.  
 Ik zuchtte, ik was niet in de stemming om nog eens  bespot te worden en reikte naar de post 
die hij in zijn handen hield. “Nee, niet dat soort dingen. Ik doe geen feestjes.” 
 Hij bleef vasthouden, met zijn hoofd een beetje sc heef gehouden. “Dus wat dan? Soort van 
toekomstvoorspeller? Kaarten en kristallen bollen en zo?” 
 “Nee,” zei ik tegen hem. “Ik ben geen medium.” Ik trok aan de post.  
Hij bleef vasthouden. “Wat ben je dan?” 
“Wat staat er op het bord op de deur?” 
“Er staat, ‘Harry Dresden. Magiër.’ ” 
“Dat ben ik,” bevestigde ik. 
“Een echte magiër?” vroeg hij, grijnzend, alsof ik hem de grap moest vertellen. “Spreuken en 
drankjes? Demonen en incantaties? Subtiel en snel boos te maken?” 
“Niet zo heel subtiel.” Ik trok de post uit zijn hand en keek scherp naar zijn klembord. “Kan ik 
voor mijn post tekenen alstublieft?” 
De grijns van de nieuwe postbode verdween, vervangen door een frons. Hij overhandigde me 
het klembord om me te laten tekenen voor mijn post (alweer een aanmaning van mijn huisbaas) en 
zei, “Je bent gek, dat is wat je bent.” Hij nam het klembord terug en zei, “Een prettige dag nog, 
meneer.” 
Ik keek hem na. 
“Typisch,” mompelde ik en sloot de deur.  
69 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
Mijn naam is Harry Blackstone Copperfield Dresden. Bezweer ermee op eigen risico. Ik ben 
een magiër. Ik werk vanuit een kantoor in de binnenstad van Chicago. Voor zover ik weet ben ik de 
enige openlijk praktiserende professionele magiër in het land. Je kunt me vinden in de gouden gids, 
onder “Magiërs.” Geloof het of niet, ik ben de enige die er staat. Mijn advertentie ziet er zo uit:  
HARRY DRESDEN – MAGIËR 
Verloren Voorwerpen Gevonden. Paranormale Onderzoeken. 
Consultatie. Advies. Redelijke Prijzen. 
Geen Liefdesdrankjes, Eindeloze Beurzen, Feestjes, of Ander Entertainment.  
Het zou je verbazen hoeveel mensen me bellen enkel om te vragen of ik het meen. Maar 
toch, als je de dingen hebt gezien ik heb gezien, als je ook maar de helft wist van wat ik wist, zou je je 
afvragen hoe iemand niet  kon denken dat ik het meende.  
Het einde van de twintigste eeuw en het begin van het nieuwe millenium had een soort 
renaissance gezien in het publieke besef van het paranormale. Mediums, geesten, vampiers – noem 
maar op. Mensen namen ze nog steeds niet serieus, maar alle dingen die de Wetenschap ons had 
beloofd waren niet gebeurd. Ziekte was nog steeds een probleem. Verhongering was nog steeds een 
probleem. Geweld en misdaad en oorlog waren nog steeds problemen. Ondanks de ontwikkeling van 
technologie waren dingen gewoon niet veranderd op de manier waarop iedereen had gehoopt dat ze 
zouden doen.  
Wetenschap, de grootste religie van de twintigste eeuw, was een beetje bezoedeld door 
beelden van ontploffende spaceshuttels, drugsbaby’s en een generatie van zelfingenomen 
Amerikanen die hadden toegelaten dat de televisie hun kinderen opvoedde. Men was op zoek naar 
iets – ik denk dat ze gewoon niet wisten wat. En hoewel ze opnieuw waren begonnen met hun ogen 
te openen voor de wereld van magie en het esoterische die de hele tijd bij hen was geweest, dachten 
ze nog steeds dat het een soort grap moest zijn. 
70 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
 In ieder geval, het was een lange maand geweest. E en paar lange maanden, eigenlijk. 
Mijn huur voor februari werd kon ik niet betalen tot de tiende van maart en het zag er naar uit dat 
het nog langer zou zijn tot ik genoeg had verzameld voor deze maand.  
Mijn enige klus was vorige week geweest, toen ik naar Branson, Missouri ging om een 
mogelijk bezeten huis van een countryzanger te onderzoeken. Dat was het niet. Mijn client was niet 
blij met dat antwoord en was zelfs nog minder blij toen ik voorstelde dat hij moest stoppen met 
stimulerende middelen en proberen om wat beweging en slaap te krijgen, en dan te kijken of dat niet 
meer hielp dan een exorcisme. Ik had reiskosten plus een uurloon gekregen en was weggegaan met 
het gevoel dat ik het eerlijke, juiste en onpraktische ding had gedaan. Ik hoorde later dat hij een 
gewetenloos medium had ingehuurd om een ceremonie met heel veel wierook en zwarte kaarsen 23  
te laten doen. Sommige mensen. 
Ik las mijn paperback uit en gooide het in de doos met GEDAAN er op. Er lag een stapel van 
gelezen en weggelegde paperbacks in een kartonnen doos aan de ene kant van mijn bureau, de 
ruggen gebogen en de pagina’s gescheurd. Ik ben vreselijk hard voor mijn boeken. Ik bekeek de 
stapel met ongelezen boeken, twijfelend over welke ik daarna zou beginnen, aangezien ik niet 
bepaald echt werk te doen had, toen mijn telefoon overging.  
Ik staarde er een beetje kribbig naar. Wij magiërs zijn geweldig in broeden. 24  
                                                           
23  “…a lot of incense and black lights.” Lights and candles are similar but not the same thing. Still, I 
chose to translate to candles because it is more occult, and also because the direct translations of 
light, ‘lamp’ and ‘licht’, don’t fit well with the adjective ‘black’ in this context. Black lights exist, but 
they are not very occult and probably not used in an attempt to drive out a spirit. Candles are used in 
such a manner, especially black ones. 
24  ‘Brooding’ is another good example of an English word that’s difficult to translate because of its 
layered connotations. On the surface it means being deep in thought, usually with negative emotions 
attached, but it calls up all kinds of images for the reader, especially in connection with a wizard who 
71 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
Nadat de telefoon voor de derde keer was overgegaan, toen ik dacht dat ik niet een beetje té 
gretig zou klinken, pakte ik de hoorn op en zei, “Dresden.” 
“Oh. Is dit, ehm, Harry Dresden? De, eh, magiër?” Haar toon was verontschuldigend, alsof ze 
ontzettend bang was dat ze me zou beledigen.  
Nee, dacht ik. Het is Harry Dresden de, eh, agrariër. 25  Harry de magiër zit hiernaast.  
Het is het voorrecht van magiërs om humeurig te zijn. Het is echter niet het voorrecht van 
freelance consultants die laat zijn met hun huur, dus in plaats van iets bijdehands te zeggen, zei ik 
tegen de vrouw aan de telefoon, “Ja mevrouw. Waarmee kan ik u vandaag van dienst zijn?” 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                    
 
are, as the text suggest, famous for their brooding. The options in the target language were 
‘piekeren’, ‘peinzen’, ‘tobben’ and ‘broeden. ‘Piekeren’ is more stress in thought than ‘brooding’ is 
and ‘tobben’ is too much insecurity and doubts and not so much deep thinking, so those were out. 
That left ‘peinzen’ and ‘broeden’, of which the latter was obviously the direct translation, only it has 
the second meaning of breeding as well. There is no such problem with ‘peinzen’, but it is more 
thinking about a specific problem than random thought. I therefore finally chose ‘broeden’, since it 
should be clear enough that it is not meant as ‘breeding’ in this context. 
25  "Oh. Is this, um, Harry Dresden? The, ah, wizard?” […] No, I thought. It's Harry Dresden the, ah, 
lizard.”  
The joke is rather weak and must stay that way in translation. There are several options that rhyme 
with ‘magiër’: dalmatiër, ariër, agrariër, vegetariër, and ‘magistraat’ is also an option, not end rhyme 
but alliteration. ‘Ariër’ is not an option because of the negative connotations to that word. 
‘Magistraat’ sounds out of place and not really Harry’s type of humour, which is very dry. If we wish 
to stay in the animal kingdom (wizard, lizard) then ‘dalmatiër’ would be the only option, but I opted 
to go with ‘agrariër’ because then the ‘g’ is still present in the word so the sound rhymes as well as 
the end. 
72 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
Fool Moon 
In Fool Moon , a couple of excessively violent killings during a full moon get Harry employed by the 
police again, and werewolves seem the obvious cause. But then Harry discovers that what he knows 
of werewolves is quite different from the actual facts about the creatures.  The second excerpt, from 
this novel, shows Dresden in discussion with his spirit skull Bob about the many types of werewolves. 
Far from what Harry – and the reader – know about werewolves, it appears that in this universe 
there are five types, with each their own different characteristics, apart from the wolf part of course, 
that is the same in most of them. The author here uses terms for werewolves in several different 
languages for each type, and keeping them apart is difficult for Harry, let alone the reader who 
knows less of magic. All but one type of these werewolves are not immune to silver and can be killed 
quite easily. Conforming the supernatural with what is known and making the difference with what is 
viewed as common knowledge about werewolves was the challenge in this excerpt, as well as 
keeping true to Harry’s character when responding to all this new information. Since werewolves are 
already fairly known in the real world and there is not really a case of an unknown fantasy culture in 
this excerpt, combining two worlds and cultures is not really the case here. Still, this supernatural 
world is clearly different from what people assume it to be, and the author uses that to stay original 
in the ever-growing field of contemporary fantasy novels.  
73 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
Wolvenmaan 26  
Jim Butcher 
“Oke. Ik kan aan deze beginnen. Hoeveel weet je over weerwolven, Bob?” 
 “Genoeg. Ik was in Frankrijk tijdens de Inquisitie .” Bob’s stem was droog (maar dat 
was te verwachten, als je erover nadacht). 
[...] 
“Heel veel weerwolverie gaande dan?” 
“Meen je dat?” zei Bob. “Het was dé plek voor weerwolven. We hadden alle soorten 
weerwolven die je je kan bedenken. Hexenwolven, weerwolven, lykantropen en loup-garou ook nog 
eens. Elke vorm van wolfachtige theriomorf die je je kan bedenken.  
“Therro-watte?” zei ik.  
 “Theriomorf,” zei Bob. “Alles wat verandert van ee n menselijke in een dierlijke vorm. 
Weerwolven zijn theriomorfen. Net zoals weerberen, weertijgers, weerbuffels...” 
“Buffels?” vroeg ik. 
“Zeker. Sommige Indiaanse sjamanen konden een buffel doen. Maar bijna iedereen doet 
roofdieren en tot vrij recentelijk waren wolven het engste roofdier dat wie dan ook in Europa kon 
bedenken.” 
                                                          
 
26  The original title is Fool Moon , which has a double meaning. The first is that ‘fool’ sounds like ‘full’, 
and the book is about werewolves; a full moon plays a rather big role when it comes to werewolves. 
The second is the meaning of the word ‘fool’, foolish, silly, crazy, in reference to the fact that people 
tend to do the most idiotic things when the moon is full. Since there is no direct translation for Fool 
Moon , the translator must once again choose between the two meanings: wolves, or foolishness. The 
options I’ve considered are Volle Maan , Zotte Maan  and Wolvenmaan . I finally chose Wolvenmaan  
because Volle Maan  is very cliché and the wolf still has the connotation of unpredictability as well as 
werewolves. 
74 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
“Eh, oke,” zei ik. “En er is een verschil tussen typen weerwolven?” 
 “Precies,” bevestigde Bob. “Meestal hangt het er v an af hoe je van menselijke naar 
wolvenvorm gaat en hoeveel menselijkheid je weet vast te houden. Laat de koffie niet aanbranden.” 
Ik draaide geërgerd de vlam onder beker met koffie naar beneden. “Weet ik, weet ik. Oke 
dan. Hoe wordt je een wolf?” 
“De klassieke weerwolf,” zei Bob, “is simpelweg een mens die magie gebruikt om zichzelf in 
een wolf te veranderen.” 
“Magie? Zoals een magiër?” 
“Nee,” zei Bob. “Nou ja, soort van. Hij is zoiets als een magiër die alleen maar weet hoe hij 
die ene spreuk moet doen, degene die hem in een wolf veranderd, en hoe hij er weer uit moet 
komen. De meeste mensen die leren weerwolf te zijn er een tijdje niet heel erg goed erin, omdat ze 
al hun menselijkheid behouden.” 
“Wat bedoel je?” 
“Nou,” zei Bob, “ze kunnen zichzelf veranderen naar de vorm van een wolf, maar het is 
eigenlijk gewoon anatomie. Ze herschikken hun fysieke lichaam, maar hun geest blijft hetzelfde. Ze 
kunnen nadenken en redeneren en hun persoonlijkheid verandert niet – maar ze hebben niet het 
instinct en de reflexen van een wolf. Ze zijn gewend om zicht-gerichte tweevoeters te zijn, niet reuk-
gerichte viervoeters. Ze zouden alles vanaf het begin moeten leren.”  
“Waarom zou iemand zoiets doen?” zei ik. “Gewoon leren om in een wolf te veranderen, 
bedoel ik.” 
“je bent nooit een boer in middeleeuws Frankrijk geweest, Harry,” zei Bob. “Het leven was 
hard voor die mensen. Nooit genoeg te eten, of onderdak, of medicijnen. Als je jezelf een warme 
vacht en de mogelijkheid naar buiten te gaan om je eigen vlees te jagen kon geven, zou je de kans 
ook met beide handen aanpakken.” 
75 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
“Oke, ik denk dat ik het heb,” zei ik. “Heb je zilveren kogels ofzo nodig? Verander je in een 
weerwolf als je wordt gebeten?” 
“Bah,” zei Bob. “Nee. Hollywood heeft dat gejat van de vampieren. En het zilveren-kogels-
ding is alleen in speciale gevallen. Weerwolven zijn net als gewone wolven. Je kan ze net zoals bij een 
echte wolf met wapens verwonden.” 
“Dat is goed nieuws,” zei ik, terwijl ik in het drankje roerde. “Wat voor andere soorten zijn 
er?” 
“Er is nog een versie van een weerwolf – als iemand magie gebruikt om je in een wolf te 
veranderen.” 
Ik keek even naar hem op. “Gedaanteverandering? Dat is illegaal, Bob. Het is een van de 
Wetten van Magie. Als je iemand in een dier verandert, vernietigt het hun persoonlijkheid. Je kan 
iemand niet transformeren zonder zijn geest te vernietigen. Het is zo goed als moord.” 
 “Yea. Handig he? Maar eigenlijk kunnen de meeste p ersoonlijkheden de transformatie 
overleven. Voor even tenminste. Mensen met een heel erg sterke wil kunnen hun menselijke 
herinneringen en persoonlijkheid voor enkele jaren vasthouden. Maar vroeg of laat zijn ze reddeloos 
verloren en heb je enkel nog een wolf over.” 
 Ik wendde me van de drankjes af om iets in mijn no titieboekje te schrijven. “Oke. Hoe maak 
je nog meer een weerwolf?” 
 “De meest gebruikelijke manier, toen in Frankrijk,  was om een deal te maken met een 
demon, een duivel of een krachtige magiër. Je neemt een wolvenhuidriem, doet hem om, zegt de 
magische woorden en tadaaa, je bent een wolf. Een Hexenwolf.” 
 “Is dat niet net zoals de eerste?” 
“Nee, helemaal niet. Je gebruikt niet je eigen magie om een wolf te worden. Je gebruikt dat 
van iemand anders.” 
 Ik fronste. “Is dat niet als de tweede dan?” 
76 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
“Doe niet zo dom,” beriste Bob me. “Het is anders omdat je er een talisman voor gebruikt. 
Soms is het een ring of een amulet, maar meestal is het een riem. De talisman fungeert als een anker 
voor een geest van dierlijke woede. Akelige dingen van de slechte kant van de Nevernever 27 . De 
geest wikkelt zich om een menselijke persoonlijkheid om ervoor te zorgen dat deze niet wordt 
vernietigd.” 
“Een soort van isolatie,” zei ik.  
 “Precies. Het zorgt ervoor dat je je eigen intelle ct en ratio behoudt, maar de geest 
bestuurt alle andere dingen.” 
 Ik fronste. “Klinkt een beetje makkelijk.” 
 “Ja, tuurlijk,” zei Bob. “Het is heel erg makkelij k. En als je een talisman gebruikt om in 
een wolf te veranderen, verlies je al je menselijke remmingen enzo en functioneer je alleen nog maar 
op je onbewuste verlangens, met de talisman-geest in controle over de manier waarom het lichaam 
beweegt. Het is heel efficient. Een gigantische wolf met menselijke intelligentie en dierlijke 
woestheid.” 
[...] 
Bob zei niets terwijl ik de ingrediënten toevoegde en toen ik daarmee klaar was zei ik, “de 
meeste mensen hebben niet de kracht om zo’n geest te controleren, denk ik. Het zou hun acties 
beïnvloeden. Misschien ze zelfs beheersen. Hun bewustzijn onderdrukken.” 
“Ja, en?” 
“Dus het klinkt meer alsof je een monster schept.” 
                                                          
 
27  The ‘NeverNever’ is a setting-specific term, the name of the supernatural parallel world where 
various supernatural creatures like spirits, demons and fae reside. The Dutch translation would be 
‘NooitNooit’, but that sounds rather peculiar in Dutch. Because it is a setting-specific term there’s no 
direct need to translate it and therefore I’m letting it stand. 
77 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
“Het is effectief,” zei Bob. Ik weet niets over het goede of het slechte ervan. Dat is iets waar 
alleen stervelingen zich druk over maken.” 
“Hoe noemde je deze smaak ook alweer?” 
“Hexenwolf,” zei Bob met een sterk Duits accent. “Toverwolf. De Kerk had de oorlog 
verklaard aan iedereen die ervoor koos een Hexenwolf te worden en gooide een groot aantal 
mensen op de brandstapel.” 
“Zilveren kogels?” vroeg ik. “Gebeten worden en in een weerwolf veranderen?” 
“Wil je ophouden voor dat hele ‘gebeten worden en in een weerwolf veranderen’-ding, 
Harry?” zei Bob. “Het werkt zo niet. Nooit niet. Of je zou binnen een paar jaar over de hele wereld 
weerwolven hebben rondrennen.” 
 “Oke, oke,” verzuchtte ik. “En de zilveren kogels? ” 
 “Die heb je niet nodig.” 
 “Oke,” zei ik en ging verder met het opschrijven v an informatie om samen te voegen 
in een verslag voor Murphy. “ Hexenwolf . Begrepen. Nog meer?” 
“Lykantropen,” zei Bob. 
“Is dat geen psychologische aandoening?” 
“Het kan ook  een psychologische aandoening zijn,” zei Bob. “Maar het was eerst realiteit. Een 
lykantroop is een natuurlijke geleider voor een geest van woede. Een lykantroop verandert in een 
beest, maar enkel in zijn hoofd. De geest neemt het over. Het tast de manier waarop hij denkt en 
doet aan, maakt hem aggressiever, sterker. Ze schijnen ook erg goed bestand tegen pijn, 
verwondingen of ziektes te zijn; ze genezen vliegensvlug – dat soort dingen.” 
 “Maar ze veranderen niet daadwerkelijk in een wolf ?” 
78 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
 “Geef die jongen een snoepje 28 ,” zei Bob. “Ze zijn gewoon mensen ook, maar ze zijn 
ontzettend fel. Ooit gehoord van de Noorse berserkers? Die gasten waren lykantropen, denk ik. En ze 
worden geboren, niet gemaakt.” 
Ik roerde in het stimuleringsdrankje en zorgde ervoor dat het gelijkmatig sudderde. “En wat 
was de laatste? Loep watte?” 
“Loup-garou,” zei Bob. “Of dat was de naam die Etienne L’Enchanteur 29  voor ze gebruikte, 
voor hij op de brandstapel belandde. De loup-garou zijn de grootste monsters, Harry. Iemand heeft 
ze vervloekt om een wolfachtige demon te worden en meestal tijdens de volle maan. Die persoon 
moet ook heel krachtig zijn, zoals een grote machtige magiër, een demonenheer of een van de 
Feekoninginnen. Wanneer de volle maan opkomt, veranderen ze in een monster, gaan los 30  en 
slachten alles en iedereen wat op hun pad komt af tot de maan ondergaat of de zon opkomt.  
                                                           
28  My first reaction at seeing the word ‘Kewpie’ in the source text was that it must be some kind of 
American candy, so I naturalised it to ‘snoepje’. After a little research however it turned out a Kewpie 
is a doll, which made little sense. I decided to keep the word ‘snoepje’ because the phrase “Geef die 
jongen een popje” is not something that would be uttered in Dutch in response to someone giving a 
good answer or something similar. 
29  ‘Etienne the Enchanter’ could be directly translated to ‘Etienne de Tovenaar.’ However, ‘Etienne de 
Tovenaar’ sounds a bit like a character in a children’s book and not so much like a serious medieval 
mage. Since Etienne is French and the Dutch, having once been conquered by the French which left 
them with quite a few new French words in their language, are no strangers to French words in their 
texts, I decided to make it ‘Etienne L’Enchanteur’.  
30  The English phrase ‘killing spree’ can be translated into Dutch, such as “moordpartij” or 
‘moordtocht’. However, ‘going on a killing spree’ appeared to be more difficult to fit correctly into a 
Dutch sentence, because every option threw off the rhythm of the sentence. I therefore opted for 
the verb ‘losgaan’, which still holds the connotation of someone losing it completely, while the 
79 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
Een plotselinge koude rilling ging door me heen, en ik huiverde. “Wat nog meer?” 
“Bovennatuurlijke snelheid en kracht. Bovennatuurlijke wreedheid. Hun verwondingen 
genezen bijna meteen, als ze al gewond raken. Ze zijn immuun tegen gif en tegen elk soort 
toverkunst dat op de hersenen is gericht. Moordmachines.” 
 “Klinkt geweldig. Ik neem aan dat dit niet al te v aak is gebeurd? Ik had er dan tot nu 
toe wel eens iets van gehoord.” 
“Precies,” zei Bob. “Niet vaak. Meestal weet de arme vervloekte drommel genoeg om zichzelf 
ergens op te sluiten, of om de wildernis in te gaan. De laatste grote loup-garou rooftocht gebeurde in 
de omgeving van Gevaudan, Frankrijk, in de zestiende eeuw. Meer dan tweehonderd mensen 
werden gedood in iets meer dan een jaar.” 
 “Jezus Christus,” zei ik. “Hoe hebben ze het tegen gehouden?” 
“Ze hebben het gedood,” zei Bob. “Dit is waar de zilveren kogels eindelijk van pas komen, 
Harry. Enkel een zilveren wapen kan een loup-garou verwonden, en dat niet alleen, het zilver moet 
geërfd zijn van een familielid. Geërfde zilveren kogels.” 
“Echt waar? Waarom zou dat werken en niet normaal zilver?” 
“Ik maak de wetten van de magie niet, Harry. Ik weet alleen wat ze zijn en heb er een idee 
van wanneer ze veranderen. Die is niet veranderd. Ik denk dat het misschien iets te maken het met 
het element van opoffering.” 
 
Discussing Storm Front  and Fool Moon 
With these two excerpts, the most of the attention in translating went to keeping the setting 
straight, keeping the characters true to nature, think of the irrealia and focus especially on wordplay. 
                                                                                                                                                                                     
killing-part is being described in the rest of the sentence as it talks about slaughtering everyone in 
sight.  
80 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
The author, Jim Butcher, gives the impression that he likes to play with language, making puns and 
jokes, but also expressing cynicism, sarcasm, emotion, by carefully choosing the words to fit with the 
expression of such a feeling in a written medium. This was one of the main difficulties with these 
excerpts, to achieve the same feeling in the target language. Harry Dresden is introduced as a cynical 
character with a dry sense of humour, which is expressed in the way he responds to the mailman 
(“Subtle and quick to anger?”/ "Not so subtle" (Butcher, 2) and his anonymous caller ("Oh. Is this, 
um, Harry Dresden? The, ah, wizard?” […] No, I thought. It's Harry Dresden the, ah, lizard” (Butcher, 
4). The first few pages of the first novel are very much a character setting, introducing the reader to 
the protagonist as well as to his writing style. Keeping that consistent and believable is one of the 
challenges of the book, especially since it is all from a first person point of view; the reader is in the 
protagonist’s head. Since this will be the case through the entire novel, the first impression is fairly 
vital, which was one of the main concerns in the first excerpt. In the second excerpt the most 
challenges were presented by the interaction between Harry and his magic skull Bob, and the subject 
of their dialogue. There was one case of irrealia, the “NeverNever”, which would suffer in translation, 
and all the other problematic areas were once again because of wording and wordplay. With first 
person point of view, the translator should keep in mind that every word must come from the same 
character, so keeping things consistent might be more difficult with such novels. The short sentences 
and the humoristic take on things by the protagonist are vital to take into account while translating. 
As for believability of the setting, it can be presumed that if the character is believable in translation, 
so could the setting be, for the reader views the setting through the protagonist’s eyes.  
Translating contemporary fantasy is a little bit of both translating contemporary fiction and 
translating fantasy. Some novels are chiefly set in the supernatural culture within the real world, 
some alternate between the two and some are predominantly contemporary with just a few fantasy 
elements mixed in. When translating contemporary fantasy the translator has to take both the 
modern and the fantasy into account, and make sure that they clash where the author intends them 
81 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
to clash and mingle where the author intends them to mingle through a clever use of words. While 
having a little bit of both settings, all in all translating contemporary fantasy does not really differ 
from translating normal fantasy. In both types you have to take both existing and original cultures 
into account that live side by side or mingle, in both types there may be occurrences of genre-specific 
realia, in both types the supernatural elements may be either dominant or subtle, and in both types 
the willing suspension of disbelief from the reader has to be maintained in the translation. The only 
way contemporary fantasy differs from normal fantasy is that it is grounded in reality instead of 
imagination, but reality may be just as twisted as imagination sometimes is.  
 
 
 
 
82 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
Conclusion 
The purpose of this thesis was to discover and describe some of the common points of interest in 
translating fantasy for adults, as the author was quick to discover that very few literary articles 
existed concerning the subject; near all articles about translating fantasy was focussed on doing so in 
children’s literature, even though adult fantasy fiction is a very large portion of the genre. Translating 
fantasy is unlike translating contemporary fiction because the translator has to take original additions 
into account while translating; additions to the setting, culture, and genre-specific irrealia. Especially 
with such original additions, continuance is very important, so the translator has to read the source 
text very carefully to keep everything internally consistent and logical, for the sake of the reader’s 
willing suspense of disbelief. The author sometimes relies heavily on the ability to imagine the new 
surroundings in describing them, so the translator has to make sure to be just as descriptive in the 
target text without drastically altering the content. These things are not unique to translating a 
fantasy novel, but may be doubly so important because what is being described may be something 
that has sprouted from the author’s imagination, and the description they wrote is the only thing the 
reader has to go on when it comes to that person, place or object. 
 The most important thing that sets a fantasy novel  apart is the setting; a fantasy novel is 
most often only named such because the story plays in an original setting, a magical world created by 
the author that has little to no connection to earth. In this setting, a story of every type of genre, 
detectives, horror, thrillers, romance, everything is possible; the author has only chosen to set the 
story against a background of his own imagination. The setting of a fantasy novel often relies on its 
culture to make it internally consistent: the fantasy culture may be, or may be related to, existing 
historic cultures, may be a mix of several cultures, may be an existing culture with new elements or 
may be a wholly new culture, though the last one is rare. The next important thing that sets a fantasy 
novel apart is magic. A fantasy novel will not be called such without magical beasts and races, 
83 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
magical objects, magical or supernatural elements. Fantasy is associated with wizards, dragons, 
mythology, and each of these have magic.  
 While translating a fantasy novel, the translator has to take several things into account. First, 
the way the setting interacts with the story; the setting may be a simple backdrop or may have a 
tangible role in the plot. Second, the way the characters interact with the setting; a setting is only as 
real as the characters make it to be, so the translator needs to make sure there are no jarring 
elements in the translation. Third, the underlying meanings of many of the names in a fantasy novel; 
most names in fantasy literature refer to the character’s background, personality, looks, even intent. 
Translating such underlying meanings is difficult, but should be attempted with every name that 
requires translation. Fourth, the whole is as good as the sum of its parts. All these things are 
separately important, but the most important is that they all work together to form the novel in 
translation.  
Translating contemporary fantasy is not all that different from translating normal fantasy. 
While the background setting is reality with a twist, still things like names, magic and cultural 
differences are an important part of the story, so all the things that apply to translating fantasy also 
apply to its sub-genre of contemporary fantasy. In the five excerpts translated for the purpose of 
putting the investigated theory into practice, one of the translation problems that most often came 
to the fore was the introduction of genre-specific irrealia by the author. Since such irrealia are 
significant for the story and story dynamics, translating them requires some thought from the 
translator. Another common problem in these excerpts was the style used by the author to create a 
setting, and to have the characters interact with it. Especially for the first person novels (A Hunger 
Like Fire, The Dresden Files ), where the reader perceives the setting through the protagonist’s eyes, 
the description of the scene and setting is doubly important, since it also gives insight into the 
protagonist’s mind. The character names in these excerpts also posed a problem, especially when 
their original form was paramount to the scene dynamics, as was the case with Easter in American 
84 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
Gods. Lastly, consolidating the supernatural occurrences with the contemporary setting was also one 
of the translation challenges in these excerpts. It can be concluded that in these five excerpts, the 
theory as discussed in the earlier chapters of this thesis applied.  
 In short, while translating fantasy novels for adu lts, the translator has to take a few key 
differences from contemporary fiction into account, but aside from those, translating fantasy is much 
like translating other types of fiction. Tension, dialogue, description, humour, names, all these things 
may pose difficulties for a translator, and all can be found in fantasy as well as in most types of 
fiction. The key is to see them in perspective with the view of the author when he decided to set his 
story against an imaginary background and work from there.  
  
85 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
Appendix A – Original Source Texts 
A Hunger Like Fire 
Greg Stolze 
Bella leans back a little and raises her nose defensively. She’s getting ready to defend her 
position when the sound of a gong cascades through the room. 
 Prince Maxwell has arrived. 
 “ All stand!”  
 That’s not Maxwell’s voice, of course, it’s a guy named Garret McLean, and he’s impossible to 
ignore. It’s as if his voice shudders through us, the way his hammer shivered the gong. The younger 
vampires start to their feet like sentries caught slouching. The older ones, Solomon Birch in 
particular, rise with more gravitas, projecting a fine subtext of I don’t have to stand, but I’m choosing 
to stand .  
 Garret processes in, stately and serious, holding aloft a plain mahogany box about four feet 
long, six inches deep and six wide. He’s making a gradual beeline towards the empty chair at the 
bottom of the amphitheater. It’s big, baroque and old. He’s about halfway there when Maxwell 
enters behind him.  
 The Prince of Chicago is not really tall – five-ni ne, maybe five-foot-ten. About my height. 
Though if he really was born around 1800, he must have been a giant in his day. He’s stocky, dressed 
in a conservative Phat Farm sweater, the kind Bill Clinton wears. He has high, prominent cheekbones 
and a calm, genial appearance. Tonight, he’s grandpa getting ready to cut the turkey at Thanksgiving.  
 My “sire.” 
 By the time he reaches the chair, McLean has opene d the box and produced (with suitable 
small flourishes) a shiny metal sword. Maxwell sits on the throne and McLean hands him the 
weapon. Maxwell unsheathes it and lays the naked blade across his knees, and it’s hard to explain his 
expression when he does this. It’s ambiguous, oblique. You can read it as an absolute commitment to 
86 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
the cause that all this pomp represents. You can read it as straight-faced irony, a double bladed 
visage that mocks this pretentious formality by perfecting it. You can read it as a constrained tyranny, 
a reined-in contempt for the ceremony that says, “I don’t need this ridiculous metal stick to enforce 
my will.” 
 His expression alters, and for a moment I’m certain  that he winked at me. Then I see the 
movements, the shifts of posture through the gallery and I realize just how many of us had the same 
thought.  
 The ones up front, the elders – Solomon, Scratch, Rowen – they aren’t convinced. The middle 
range, like Bella, they shake it off after a moment. But the youngsters, the fledglings, those of us 
farthest away, up by the free drinks… most of us fall for it.  
 I glance at the unbound. Raphael looks puzzled. Am brose is frowning. I can’t tell if they were 
fooled or not. 
 “We are the Damned,” Maxwell begins, “And yet we a re not so fallen that we cannot make 
more of ourselves than we are. We are, by inclination, solitary hunters, but we find ourselves tonight 
in peaceful company. We carry in every drop of out blood a polluting cruelty… but steeped in hunger 
though we may be, humanity remains. Cold eyes yet seek beauty,” he says, gesturing about the hall, 
and he’s right. Despite its eeriness or maybe because of it, the austere display is thrilling. “A stilled 
heart still craves companionship. Thus, Elysium. Thus, our court. Thus, our covenants. All our higher 
impulses – all that raises us above brute predation – all the good that lingers, is displayed here 
tonight.” 
 He says something like this every time, some corny  opening remark, but from him, it’s not 
trite. From him, it’s a ray of hope in the red darkness. Tonight, as every night, the crowd applauds.  
 “My dear fellow Kindred, please – be seated. We ha ve with us tonight two visitors,” he says, 
gesturing to the two strangers. As I’m sure he intended, everyone else looks at them. Raphael stands 
up straight and I feel a trickle of regard for him, he’s Pushing Out but it’s weak and artificial, spread 
87 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
too thin over souls too jaded. He’s trying to warm our gazes, but it’s like lighting a match in a locker 
full of frozen meat. 
 Ambrose just acts resigned. 
 “May I introduce our guests for the evening?” He g ives them a tight, tolerating smile. “I know 
you may find the formality of our gatherings somewhat stifling, but please. Humor us with your 
names, and a recitation of your lineage.“ 
 Raphael meets his gaze. “I’m Raphael Ladue, and my  sire was Old John.” 
  I have no idea who the hell Old John is, but appa rently others do. Many pale faces 
crane around to look at him with new interest, and most of the interested parties are sitting up front, 
where the power is. Rowen doesn’t turn, but everyone else in the front row does, expressions all 
carefully blank. A few rows back, there are Kindred who can’t repress fear. 
“My, my,” Maxwell says. “A notorious lineage indeed. And your companion?” 
 “I’m Ambrose Masterson and I was Embraced by the U nholy.”  
 That gets everyone looking. All but the newest of us know who the Unholy is. It’s like saying 
your dad is the boogeyman.  
 “Bull shit ,” says a voice from the middle, a man in an impeccably beautiful suit with skin like 
alabaster.  
 Ambrose bares his fangs, and we can all see that h is teeth are inhuman, needle-sharp and 
unnaturally long. Not like Scratch, though. Where Scratch’s mouth is a wreck, a mistake of nature. 
This mouth looks carefully evolved to pierce and shred.  
 “Yes,” the Prince says. “I remember you now. From the DNC.” Ambrose narrows his eyes and 
nods. 
 (Did Maxwell say “D & C” – meaning an abortion? Or  was it “DNC,” the Democratic National 
Convention with the riots? Or is it something else entirely?) 
 Maxwell goes on. “Despite their… well-known herita ge, our guests have opted to ignore our 
88 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
hospitality in the past. Nonetheless, it is my hope that you will all join me in extending them 
courteous welcome tonight. 
 “Our guests share with us a common problem. We are  both concerned with the actions of 
one Bruce Miner. Garret, if you’d be so good…? I’m quite helpless when it comes to programming 
VCRs.” The line gets a laugh. 
 While he was talking, Garret wheeled in a big scre en TV, which he now pokes at until a 
recorded news show comes on. The story is about a man in Cicero resisting arrest and fleeing the 
cops, and in the middle of it they show grainy cop-cam footage of a burly guy in filthy coveralls 
struggling with a policeman. The two of them lurch out of the camera’s coverage for a moment, and 
then the officer comes flying across the hood of the car. It’s dramatic, the more so for being silent.  
 The somber news anchor fills in what I already hea rd – wife and daughter bled out, snapped 
handcuffs, et cetera.  
 They juxtapose a still frame from the video and wh at’s obviously a cropped snapshot from 
some neighbor’s scrapbook. The former is basically just a grey blur, pretty much what we all see in 
the mirror whenever we bother to look. The latter is a depressingly average white guy with bad hair. 
 When the segment ends, there’s a silent moment. 
 “Comments?” Maxwell says at last. 
 Scratch stands. “Ice him,” he says. “He’s from my clan, he shares my curse and still I say ice 
him.” 
89 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
American Gods  
Neil Gaiman  
 There was a woman sitting on the grass, under a tr ee, with a paper tablecloth spread in front 
of her, and a variety of Tupperware dishes on the cloth. 
 She was – not fat, no, far from fat: what she was,  a word that Shadow had never had cause to 
use until now, was curvaceous. Her hair was so fair that it was white, the kind of platinum blonde 
tresses that should have belonged to a long-dead movie starlet, her lips were painted crimson, and 
she looked to be somewhere between twenty-five and fifty. 
 As they reached her she was selecting from a plate  of devilled eggs. She looked up as 
Wednesday approached her, and put down the egg she had chosen, and wiped her hand. ‘Hello, you 
old fraud,’ she said, but she smiled as she said it, and Wednesday bowed low, took her hand and 
raised it to his lips. 
 He said, ‘You look divine.’  
 ‘How the hell else should I look?’ she demanded, s weetly. Anyway, you’re a liar. New Orleans 
was such  a mistake – I put on, what, thirty pounds there? I swear. I knew I had to leave when I 
started to waddle. The tops of my thighs rub together when I walk now, can you believe that?’ This 
last was addressed to Shadow. He had no idea what to say in reply, and felt a hot flush suffuse his 
face. The woman laughed delightedly. ‘He’s blushing ! Wednesday my sweet, you brought me a 
blusher . How perfectly wonderful of you. What’s he called?’ 
 ‘This is Shadow,’ said Wednesday. He seemed to be enjoying Shadow’s discomfort. Shadow, 
say hello to Easter.’  
[…] 
She drained a paper cup of something that looked like white wine, and then she got to her 
feet. ‘Shadow’s a good name,’ she said. ‘I want a Mochaccino. Come on.’ 
90 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
 She began to walk away. ‘What about the food?’ ask ed Wednesday. ‘You can’t just 
leave it here.’ 
 She smiled at him, and pointed to the girl sitting  by the dog, and then extended her 
arms to take in the Haight and the world. ‘Let it feed them,’ she said, and she walked, with 
Wednesday and Shadow trailing behind her.  
‘Remember,’ she said to Wednesday as they walked. ‘I’m  rich. I’m doing just peachy. Why 
should I help you?’ 
‘You’re one of us,’ he said. ‘You’re as forgotten and as unloved and unremembered as any of 
us. It’s pretty clear whose side you should be on.’ 
They reached a sidewalk coffee house, went inside, sat down. There was only one waitress, 
who wore her eyebrow ring as a mark of caste, and a woman making coffee behind the counter. The 
waitress advanced upon them, smiling automatically, sat them down, took their orders. 
Easter put her slim hand on the back of Wednesday’s square gray hand. ‘I’m telling you,’ she 
said, ‘I’m doing fine . On my festival days they till feast on eggs and rabbits, on candy and on flesh, to 
represent rebirth and copulation. They wear flowers in their bonnets and they give each other 
flowers. They do it in my name. More and more of them every year. In my  name, old wolf.’ 
‘And you wax fat and affluent on their worship and their love?’ he said, dryly. 
‘Don’t be an asshole.’ Suddenly she sounded very tired. She sipped her Mochaccino. 
‘Serious question, m’dear. Certainly I would agree that millions upon millions of them give 
each other tokens in your name, and that they still practice the rites of your festival, even down to 
hunting for hidden eggs. But how many of them know who you are? Eh? Excuse me miss?’ This to 
their waitress.  
She said, ‘You need another espresso?’ 
91 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
‘No, my dear. I was just wondering if you could solve a little argument we were having over 
here. My friend and I were disagreeing over what the word “Easter” means. Would you happen to 
know?’ 
The girl stared at him as if green toads had begun to push their way between his lips. Then 
she said, ‘I don’t know about any of that Christian stuff. I’m a pagan.’ 
The woman behind the counter said, ‘I think it’s Latin or something for “Christ has Risen” 
maybe.’ 
‘Really?’ said Wednesday. 
‘Yeah, sure,’ said the woman. ‘Easter. Just like the sun rises in the east, you know.’ 
‘The risen son. Of course – a most logical supposition.’ The woman smiled and returned to 
her coffee grinder. Wednesday looked up at their waitress. ‘I think I shall  have another espresso, if 
you do not mind. And tell me, as a pagan, who do you  worship?’ 
‘Worship?’ 
‘That’s right. I imagine you must have a pretty wide-open field. So to whom do you set up 
your household altar? To whom do you bow down? To whom do you pray at dawn and at dusk?’ 
Her lips described several shapes without saying anything before she said, ‘The female 
principle. It’s an empowerment thing. You know.’ 
‘Indeed. And this female principle of yours. Does she have a name?’ 
‘She’s the goddess within us all,’ said the girl with the eyebrow ring, color rising to her cheek. 
‘She doesn’t need a name.’ 
‘Ah,’ said Wednesday, with a wide monkey grin, ‘so do you have mighty bacchanals in her 
honor? Do you drink blood wine under the full moon, while scarlet candles burn in silver candle 
holders? Do you step naked into the sea-foam, chanting ecstatically to your nameless goddess while 
the waves lick at your legs, lapping your thighs like the tongues of a thousand leopards?’ 
92 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
‘You’re making fun of me,’ she said. ‘We don’t do any of that stuff you were saying.’ She took 
a deep breath. Shadow suspected she was counting to ten. ‘Any more coffees here? Another 
Mochaccino for you ma’am?’ her smile was a lot like the one she had greeted them with when they 
had entered.  
They shook their heads, and the waitress turned to greet another customer.’ 
‘There,’ said Wednesday, ‘is one who “ does not have the faith and will not have the fun ”. 
Chesterton. Pagan indeed. So. Shall we go out onto the street, Easter my dear, and repeat the 
exercise? Find out how many passers-by know that their Easter festical takes its name from Eostre of 
the Dawn? Let’s see – I have it. We shall ask a hundred people. For every one that knows the truth, 
you may cut off one of my fingers, and when I run out of them,m toes; for every twenty who don’t 
know you spend a night making love to me. And the odds are certainly in your favor here - this is San 
Francisco, after all. There are heathens and pagans and Wiccans aplenty on these precipitous 
streets.’ 
Her green eyes looked at Wednesday. They were, Shadow decided, the exact same color as a 
leaf in spring with the sun shining through it. She said nothing. 
‘We could  try it,’ continued Wednesday. ‘But I would end up with ten fingers, ten toes, and 
five nights in your bed. So don’t tell me they worship you and keep your festival day. They mouth 
your name, but it has no meaning to them. Nothing at all.’ 
Tears stood out in her eyes. ‘I know that,’ she said, quietly. ‘I’m not a fool.’ 
‘No,’ said Wednesday. ‘You’re not.’ 
93 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
Good Omens  
Terry Pratchett & Neil Gaiman 
You wouldn’t have known it as the same car. There was scarcely an inch of it undented. Both front 
lights were smashed. The hubcaps were long gone. It looked like the veteran of a hundred demolition 
derbies. 
 The pavements had been bad. The pedestrian underpa ss had been worse. The worst bit had 
been crossing the river Thames. At least he’d had the foresight to roll up all the windows. 
 Still he was here now. 
 In a few hundred yards he’d be on the M40; a fairl y clear run up to Oxfordshire. There was 
only one snag: once more between Crowley and the open road was the M25. A screaming, glowing 
ribbon of pain and dark light 
31 . Odegra . Nothing could cross it and survive.  
 Nothing mortal, anyway. And he wasn’t sure what it  would do to a demon. It couldn’t kill 
him, but it wouldn’t be pleasant. 
 There was a police roadblock in front of the flyov er before him. Burnt-out wrecks – some still 
burning – testified to the fate of previous cars that had to drive across the flyover above the dark 
road.  
The police did not look happy. 
Crowley shifted down into second gear, and gunned the accelerator.  
He went through the roadblock at sixty. That was the easy bit.  
                                                          
 
31  Not actually an oxymoron. It’s the colour past ultra-violet. The technical term for it is infra-black. It 
can be seen quite easily under experimental conditions. To perform the experiment simply select a 
healthy brick wall, with a good runup, and, lowering your head, charge. 
 The colour that flashes in bursts behind your eyes , behind the pain, just before you die, is 
infra-black.  
94 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
Cases of spontaneous human combustion are on record all over the world. One minute 
someone’s quite happily chugging along with their life; the next there’s a sad photograph of a pile of 
ashes and a lonely and mysteriously uncharred foot or hand. Cases of spontaneous vehicular 
combustion are less well documented.  
Whatever the statistics were, they had just gone up by one. 
The leather seatcovers began to smoke. Staring ahead of him, Crowley fumbled left-handed 
on the passenger seat for Agnes Nutter’s Nice and Accurate Prophecies, moved it to the safety of his 
lap. He wished she’d prophecied this 32 .  
Then the flames engulfed the car. 
He had to keep driving. 
On the other side of the flyover was a further police roadblock, to prevent the passage of 
cars trying to come into London. They were laughing about a story that had just come over the radio, 
that a motorbike cop on the M6 had flagged down a stolen police car, only to discover the driver to 
be a large octopus. 
Some police forces would believe anything. Not the Metropolitan police, though. The Met 
was the hardest, most cynically pragmatic , most stubbornly down-to-earth police force in Britain. 
It would take a lot to faze a copper from the Met. 
It would take, for example, a huge, battered car that was nothing more nor less than a 
fireball, a blazing, roaring, twisted metal lemon from Hell, driven by a grinning lunatic in sunglasses, 
                                                          
 
32  She had. It read: 
 A street of light will screem, the black chariot o f the Serpente will flayme, and a Queene wille 
sing quickfilveres songes no moar. 
 Most of the family had gone along with Gelatly Dev ice, who wrote a brief monograph in the 
1830s explaining it as a metaphor for the banishment of Weishaupt’s Illuminati from Bavaria in 1785. 
95 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
sitting amid the flames, trailing thick black smoke, coming straight at them through the lashing rain 
and the wind at eighty miles per hour.  
That would do it every time. 
~*~ 
The quarry was the calm centre of a stormy world. 
 Thunder didn’t just rumble overhead, it tore the a ir in half.  
 ‘I’ve got some more friends coming,’ Adam repeated . ‘They’ll be here soon, and then we can 
really get started.’ 
 Dog started to howl. It was no longer the siren ho wl of a lone wolf but the weird oscillations 
of a small dog in deep trouble.  
 Pepper had been sitting staring at her knees. 
 There seemed to be something on her mind. 
 Finally she looked up and stared Adam in the blank  grey eyes.  
 ‘What bit’re you going to have, Adam?’ she said.  
 The storm was replaced by a sudden, ringing silenc e.  
 ‘What?’ said Adam.  
 ‘Well, you divided up the world, right, and we’ve all of us got to have a bit – what bit’re you 
going to have?’ 
 The silence sang like a harp, high and thin. 
 ‘Yeah,’ said Brian. ‘You never told us what bit you’re  having.’ 
 ‘Pepper’s right,’ said Wensleydale. ‘Don’t seem to  me  there’s much left, if we’ve got to have 
all these countries.’  
 Adam’s mouth opened and shut.  
 ‘What?’ he said. 
 ‘What bit’s yours, Adam?’ Pepper said.  
96 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
 Adam stared at her. Dog had stopped howling and ha d fixed his master with an intent, 
thoughtful mongrel stare. 
 ‘M-me?’ he said. 
 The silence went on and on, one note that could dr own out the noises of the world.  
 ‘But I’ll have Tadfield,’ said Adam. 
 They stared at him. 
 ‘An’, an’ Lower Tadfield, and Norton, and Norton W oods—’ 
 They still stared. 
 Adam’s gaze dragged itself across their faces. 
 ‘They’re all I’ve ever wanted,’ said Adam.  
 They shook their heads. 
 ‘I can have ‘em if I want,’ said Adam, his voice t inged with sullen defiance and his defiance 
edged with sudden doubt. ‘I can make them better, too. Better trees to climb, better ponds, better…’ 
 His voice trailed off. 
 ‘You can’t,’ said Wensleydale flatly. ‘They’re not  like America and those places. They’re really 
real . Anyway, they belong to all of us. They’re ours.’ 
 ‘And you couldn’t make ‘em better,’ said Brian. 
 ‘Anyway, even if you did we’d all know,’ said Pepp er. 
 ‘Oh, if that’s all that’s worryin’ you, don’t you worry,’ said Adam airily, ‘’cos I could make you 
all just do whatever I wanted—’ 
 He stopped, his ears listening in horror to the wo rds his mouth was speaking. The Them were 
backing away.  
 Dog put his paws over his head. 
 Adam’s face looked like an impersonation of the co llapse of empire.  
97 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
 ‘No,’ he said hoarsely. ‘No. Come back! I command you! ’ 
 They froze in mid-dash. 
 Adam stared. 
 ‘No, I din’t mean it—’ he began. ‘You’re my friend s—’ 
 His body jerked. His head was thrown back. He rais ed his arms and pounded the skies with 
his fists. 
 His face twisted. The chalk floor cracked under hi s trainers. 
 Adam opened his mouth and screamed. It was a sound  that a merely mortal throat should 
not have been able to utter; it wound out of the quarry, mingled with the storm, caused the clouds 
to curdle into new and unpleasant shapes. 
 It went on and on. 
 It resounded around the universe, which is a good deal smaller than physicists would believe. 
It rattled the celestial spheres. 
 It spoke of loss, and it did not stop for a very l ong time. 
 And then it did. 
 Something drained away. 
 Adam’s head tilted down again. His eyes opened. 
 Whatever had been standing in the old quarry befor e, Adam Young was standing there now. 
A more knowledgeable Adam Young, but Adam Young nevertheless. Possibly more of Adam Young 
than there had ever been before. 
 The ghastly silence in the quarry was replaced by a more familiar, comfortable silence, the 
mere and simple absence of noise. 
 The freed Them cowered against the chalk cliff, th eir eyes fixed on him. 
98 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
 ‘It’s all right,’ said Adam quietly. ‘Pepper? Wens ley? Brian? Come back here. It’s all right. It’s 
all right. I know everything now. And you’ve got to help me. Otherwise it’s all goin’ to happen. It’s 
really all goin’ to happen. It’s all goin’ to happen, if we don’t do somethin’.’ 
  
99 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
 Storm Front 
Jim Butcher  
Chapter One  
I heard the mailman approach my office door, half an hour earlier than usual. He didn't 
sound right. His footsteps fell more heavily, jauntily, and he whistled. A new guy. He whistled his way 
to my office door, then fell silent for a moment. Then he laughed. 
Then he knocked. 
I winced. My mail comes through the mail slot unless it's registered. I get a really limited 
selection of registered mail, and it's never good news. I got up out of my office chair and opened the 
door. 
The new mailman, who looked like a basketball with arms and legs and a sunburned, balding 
head, was chuckling at the sign on the door glass. 
He glanced at me and hooked a thumb toward the sign. "You're kidding, right?" 
I read the sign (people change it occasionally), and shook my head. "No, I'm serious. Can I 
have my mail, please." 
"So, uh. Like parties, shows, stuff like that?" He looked past me, as though he expected to see 
a white tiger, or possibly some skimpily clad assistants prancing around my one-room office. 
I sighed, not in the mood to get mocked again, and reached for the mail he held in his hand. 
"No, not like that. I don't do parties." 
He held on to it, his head tilted curiously. "So what? Some kinda fortune-teller? Cards and 
crystal balls and things?" 
"No," I told him. "I'm not a psychic." I tugged at the mail. 
He held on to it. "What are you, then?" 
"What's the sign on the door say?" 
"It says 'Harry Dresden. Wizard.' " 
100 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
"That's me," I confirmed. 
"An actual wizard?" he asked, grinning, as though I should let him in on the joke. "Spells and 
potions? Demons and incantations? Subtle and quick to anger?" 
"Not so subtle." I jerked the mail out of his hand and looked pointedly at his clipboard. "Can I 
sign for my mail please." 
The new mailman's grin vanished, replaced with a scowl. He passed over the clipboard to let me sign 
for the mail (another late notice from my landlord), and said, "You're a nut. That's what you are." He 
took his clipboard back, and said, "You have a nice day, sir." 
I watched him go. 
"Typical," I muttered, and shut the door. 
My name is Harry Blackstone Copperfield Dresden. Conjure by it at your own risk. I'm a 
wizard. I work out of an office in midtown Chicago. As far as I know, I'm the only openly practicing 
professional wizard in the country. You can find me in the yellow pages, under "Wizards." Believe it 
or not, I'm the only one there. My ad looks like this: 
HARRY DRESDEN—WIZARD 
Lost Items Found. Paranormal Investigations. 
Consulting. Advice. Reasonable Rates. 
No Love Potions, Endless Purses, Parties, or Other Entertainment 
You'd be surprised how many people call just to ask me if I'm serious. But then, if you'd seen 
the things I'd seen, if you knew half of what I knew, you'd wonder how anyone could not think I was 
serious. 
The end of the twentieth century and the dawn of the new millennium had seen something 
of a renaissance in the public awareness of the paranormal. Psychics, haunts, vampires—you name it. 
People still didn't take them seriously, but all the things Science had promised us hadn't come to 
pass. Disease was still a problem. Starvation was still a problem. Violence and crime and war were 
101 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
still problems. In spite of the advance of technology, things just hadn't changed the way everyone 
had hoped and thought they would. 
Science, the largest religion of the twentieth century, had become somewhat tarnished by 
images of exploding space shuttles, crack babies, and a generation of complacent Americans who 
had allowed the television to raise their children. People were looking for something—I think they 
just didn't know what. And even though they were once again starting to open their eyes to the 
world of magic and the arcane that had been with them all the while, they still thought I must be 
some kind of joke. 
Anyway, it had been a slow month. A slow pair of months, actually. My rent from February 
didn't get paid until the tenth of March, and it was looking like it might be even longer until I got 
caught up for this month. 
My only job had been the previous week, when I'd gone down to Branson, Missouri, to 
investigate a country singer's possibly haunted house. It hadn't been. My client hadn't been happy 
with that answer, and had been even less happy when I suggested he lay off of any intoxicating 
substances and try to get some exercise and sleep, and see if that didn't help things more than an 
exorcism. I'd gotten travel expenses plus an hour's pay, and gone away feeling I had done the honest, 
righteous, and impractical thing. I heard later that he'd hired a shyster psychic to come 
in and perform a ceremony with a lot of incense and black lights. Some people. 
I finished up my paperback and tossed it into the DONE box. There was a pile of read and 
discarded paperbacks in a cardboard box on one side of my desk, the spines bent and the pages 
mangled. I'm terribly hard on books. I was eyeing the pile of unread books, considering which to start 
next, given that I had no real work to do, when my phone rang. 
I stared at it in a somewhat surly fashion. We wizards are terrific at brooding. After the third 
ring, when I thought I wouldn't sound a little too eager, I picked up the receiver and said, 
"Dresden." 
102 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
"Oh. Is this, um, Harry Dresden? The, ah, wizard?" Her tone was apologetic, as though she 
were terribly afraid she would be insulting me. 
No, I thought. It's Harry Dresden the, ah, lizard. Harry the wizard is one door down. 
It is the prerogative of wizards to be grumpy. It is not, however, the prerogative of freelance 
consultants who are late on their rent, so instead of saying something smart, I told the woman on the 
phone, "Yes, ma'am. How can I help you today?" 
103 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
Fool Moon  
Jim Butcher 
"Fine. I can get started on these. How much do you know about werewolves, Bob?" 
"Plenty. I was in France during the Inquisition." Bob's voice was dry (but that is to be 
expected, considering). 
[…] "Lot of werewolfery going on then?" 
"Are you kidding?" Bob said. "It was werewolf central. We had every kind of werewolf you 
could think of. Hexenwolves, werewolves, lycanthropes, and loup-garou to boot. Every kind of lupine 
theriomorph you could think of." 
"Therro-what?" I said. 
"Theriomorph," Bob said. "Anything that shape-shifts from a human being into an animal 
form. Werewolves are theriomorphs. So are werebears, weretigers, werebuffaloes…" 
"Buffaloes?" I asked. 
"Sure. Some Native American shamans could do a buffalo. But almost everyone does 
predators, and until pretty recently, wolves were the scariest predator anyone around Europe could 
think of." 
"Uh, okay," I said. "And there's a difference between types of werewolves?" 
"Right," Bob confirmed. "Mostly it depends on how you go from human form to wolf form, 
and how much of your humanity you retain. Don't burn the coffee." 
I turned down the flame beneath the beaker of coffee, annoyed. "I know, I know. Okay, then. 
How do you get to be a wolf?" 
"The classic werewolf," Bob said, "is simply a human being who uses magic to shift himself 
into a wolf." 
"Magic? Like a wizard?" 
104 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
"No," Bob said. "Well. Sort of. He's like a wizard who only knows how to cast the one spell, 
the one to turn him into a wolf, and knows how to get back out of it again. Most people who learn to 
be werewolves aren't very good at it for a while, because they keep all of their own humanity." 
"What do you mean?" 
"Well," Bob said, "they can reshape themselves into the form of a wolf, but it's pretty much 
just topology. They rearrange their physical body, but their mind remains the same. They can think 
and reason, and their personality doesn't change—but they don't have a wolf's instincts or reflexes. 
They're used to being sight-oriented bipeds, not smell-oriented quadrupeds. They would have to 
learn everything from scratch." 
"Why would someone do something like that?" I said. "Just learn to turn into a wolf, I mean." 
"You've never been a peasant in medieval France, Harry," Bob said. "Life was hard for those 
people. Never enough food, shelter, medicine. If you could give yourself a fur coat and the ability to 
go out and hunt your own meat, you would have jumped at the chance, too." 
"Okay, I think I've got it," I said. "Do you need silver bullets or anything? Do you turn into a 
werewolf if you get bitten?" 
"Bah," Bob said. "No. Hollywood stole that from vampires. And the silver-bullet thing is only 
in special cases. Werewolves are just like regular wolves. You can hurt them with weapons just like 
you can a real wolf." 
"That's good news," I said, stirring the potion. "What other kinds are there?" 
"There's another version of a werewolf—when someone else uses magic to change you into 
a wolf." 
I glanced up at him. "Transmogrification? That's illegal, Bob. It's one of the Laws of Magic. If 
you transform someone into an animal, it destroys their personality. You can't transform someone 
else without wiping out their mind. It's practically murder." 
105 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
"Yeah. Neat, huh? But actually, most personalities can survive the transformation. For a little 
while at least. Really strong wills might manage to keep their human memories and personality 
locked away for several years. But sooner or later, they're irretrievably gone, and you're left with 
nothing but a wolf." 
I turned from the potions to scribble in my notebook. "Okay. What else makes a werewolf?" 
"The most common way, back in France, was to make a deal with a demon or a devil or a 
powerful sorcerer. You get a wolf-hide belt, put it on, say the magic words, and whammy, you're a 
wolf. A Hexenwolf." 
"Isn't that just like the first kind?" 
"No, not at all. You don't use your own magic to become a wolf. You use someone else's." 
I frowned. "Isn't that the second kind, then?" 
"Stop being obtuse," Bob chided me. "It's different because you're employing a talisman. 
Sometimes it's a ring or amulet, but usually it's a belt. The talisman provides an anchor for a spirit of 
bestial rage. Nasty thing from the bad side of the Nevernever. That spirit wraps around a human 
personality to keep it from being destroyed." 
"A kind of insulation," I said. 
"Exactly. It leaves you with your own intellect and reason, but the spirit handles everything 
else." 
I frowned. "Sounds a little easy." 
"Oh, sure," Bob said. "It's really easy. And when you use a talisman to turn into a wolf, you 
lose all of your human inhibitions and so on, and just run on your unconscious desires, with the 
talisman-spirit in charge of the way the body moves. It's really efficient. A huge wolf with human-
level intelligence and animal-level ferocity." 
[…] 
106 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
Bob said nothing while I added the ingredients, and when I was finished I said, "Most people 
don't have the strength to control a spirit like that, I'd think. It would influence their actions. Maybe 
even control them. Suppress their conscience." 
"Yeah. So?" 
"So it sounds more like you'd be creating a monster." 
"It's effective," Bob said. "I don't know about the good or the evil of the thing. That's 
something that only you mortals worry about." 
"What did you call this flavor again?" 
"Hexenwolf," Bob said, with a strong Germanic accent. "Spell wolf. The Church declared war 
on anyone who chose to become a Hexenwolf, and burned a huge number of people at the stake." 
"Silver bullets?" I asked. "Bitten and turn into a werewolf?" 
"Would you get off this 'bitten and turn into a werewolf' kick, Harry?" Bob said. "It doesn't 
work that way. Not ever. Or you'd have werewolves overrunning the entire planet in a couple of 
years." 
"Fine, fine," I sighed. "What about the silver bullets?" 
"Don't need them." 
"All right," I said, and continued jotting down information to put together for Murphy in a 
report. " Hexenwolf. Got it. What else?" 
"Lycanthropes," Bob said. 
"Isn't that a psychological condition?" 
"It might also be a psychological condition," Bob said. "But it was a reality first. A lycanthrope 
is a natural channel for a spirit of rage. A lycanthrope turns into a beast, but only inside his head. The 
spirit takes over. It affects the way he acts and thinks, makes him more aggressive, stronger. They 
also tend to be very resistant to pain or injury, sickness; they heal rapidly—all sorts of things." 
"But they don't actually shapeshift into a wolf?" 
107 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
"Give that boy a Kewpie," Bob said. "They're just people, too, but they're awfully fierce. Ever 
heard of the Norse berserkers? Those guys were lycanthropes, I think. And they're born, not made." 
I stirred the stimulant potion, and made sure it was at an even simmer. "And what was the 
last one? Loop what?" 
"Loup-garou," Bob said. "Or that was the name Etienne the Enchanter used for them, before 
he got burned at the stake. The loup-garou are the major monsters, Harry. Someone has cursed them 
to become a wolflike demon, and usually at the full moon. That someone's got to be really powerful, 
too, like a major heavyweight sorcerer or a demon lord or one of the Faerie Queens. When the full 
moon comes, they transform into a monster, go on a killing spree, and slaughter everything they 
come across until the moon sets or the sun rises." 
A sudden little chill went over me, and I shivered. "What else?" 
"Supernatural speed and power. Supernatural ferocity. They recover from injuries almost 
instantly, if they become hurt at all. They're immune to poison and to any kind of sorcery that goes 
for their brain. Killing machines." 
"Sounds great. I guess this hasn't happened all that often? I'd have heard something by now." 
"Right," Bob said. "Not often. Usually, the poor cursed bastard knows enough to shut himself 
away somewhere, or to head out into the wilderness. The last major loup-garou rampage happened 
around Gevaudan, France, back in the sixteenth century. More than two hundred people were killed 
in a little more than a year." 
"Holy shit," I said. "How did they stop it?" 
"They killed it," Bob said. "Here's where the silver bullets finally come in, Harry. Only a silver 
weapon can hurt a loup-garou, and not only that, the silver has to be inherited from a family 
member. Inherited silver bullets." 
"Really? Why would that work and not regular silver?" 
108 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
"I don't make the laws of magic, Harry. I just know what they are and have an idea of when they're 
changing. That one hasn't changed. I think maybe it has something to do with the element of 
sacrifice." 
 
 
109 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
Bibliography 
Bell, Chris, and David Langford. “Prophecy.” The Encyclopedia of Fantasy . Ed. John Clute & John 
 Grant. New York: St Martin’s Press, 1997. 789-790.  
Butcher, Jim. Fool Moon.  New York: Penguin Group, 2001. 
Butcher, Jim. Storm Front . New York: Penguin Group, 2000. 
Clute, John. “Fantasy.” The Encyclopedia of Fantasy . Ed. John Clute & John Grant. New York: St 
 Martin’s Press, 1997. 337-339. 
Clute, John. “Urban Fantasy.” The Encyclopedia of Fantasy . Ed. John Clute & John Grant. New York: St 
 Martin’s Press, 1997. 975-976. 
Clute, John, and Roz Kaveney. “Contemporary Fantasy.” The Encyclopedia of Fantasy . Ed. John Clute 
 & John Grant. New York: St Martin’s Press, 1997. 2 25. 
Feist, Raymond E. Magician . London: Voyager by HarperCollins Publishers, 1997. (1983) 
Feist, Raymond. E. and Janny Wurts. Daughter of the Empire. London: HarperCollins Publishers, 1996 
 (1987). 
Feist, Raymond. E. and Janny Wurts. Servant of the Empire. London: HarperCollins Publishers, 1996 
 (1990). 
Feist, Raymond. E. and Janny Wurts. Mistress of the Empire. London: HarperCollins Publishers, 1997 
 (1992). 
Fernandes, Lincoln. “Translation of Names in Children’s Fantasy Literature: Bringing the 
Young Reader into Play.” New Voices in Translation Studies 2  (2006), 44-57. 
Gaiman, Neil. American Gods . London: Headline Publishing Group, 2004 (2001). 
Goodkind, Terry. Wizard’s First Rule . New York: Tor, 1994. 
Hermans, Theo. Translation’s Other, Inaugural Lecture . London, 1996. 
 http://discovery.ucl.ac.uk/198/1/96_Inaugural.pdf 
Hobb, Robin. Assassin’s Apprentice. London: Voyager by HarperCollins Publishers, 1995. 
110 
Marlies Kok - 3125165 
Hobb, Robin. Leerling en Meester . Amsterdam: Meulenhoff Boekerij, 1998. Trans. Erica Feberwee, 
Peter Cuijpers.  
Hönig, Hans G. Translating: The Constructive Way . 1993. 13-25. 
Jackson, Rosemary. Fantasy: The Literature of Subversion . London: Routledge, 1981. 
Levý, Jiří. “Vertalen als besluitvormingsproces.” Denken over Vertalen. Utrecht: Uitgeverij Vantilt, 
 2004. 135-147. 
Loponen, Mika. “Translating Irrealia - Creating a Semiotic Framework for the Translation of Fictional 
 Cultures.” Chinese Semiotics , Volume 2. Nanjing: Nanjing Normal University, 2009. 165-175 
Martin, George R.R. A Game of Thrones . London: Voyager by HarperCollins Publishers, 2003 (1996) 
Nikolajeva, Maria. “Fairy Tale and Fantasy: From Archaic to Postmodern.” Marvels & Tales , Volume 
 17, Number 1, 2003. 138-156 
Nord, Christiane. “Tekstanalyse en de moeilijkheidsgraad van een vertaling.” Denken over vertalen .
 Ed. Ton Naaijkens, Cees Koster, Henri Bloemen en C aroline Meijer. Utrecht: Uitgeverij Vantilt, 
 2004. 235-242. 
Novakovich, Josip. Fiction Writer’s Workshop.  Cincinnati: Story Press, 1995 
Olk, Harald. “Cultural Knowledge in Translation.” ELT Journal . Volume 57/2, April 2003. 167-174. 
Pratchett, Terry, and Neil Gaiman. Good Omens . London: Transworld Publishers, 2006 (1990). 
Pullman, Philip. Northern Lights.  New York: Scholastic Inc. 1995 
Pullman, Philip. The Subtle Knife .  New York: Scholastic Inc. 1997 
Pullman, Philip. The Amber Spyglass.  New York: Scholastic Inc. 2000 
Stolze, Greg. A Hunger Like Fire.  Stone Mountain, GA: White Wolf Publishing, 2004.   
“History of Japan.” Wikipedia. Last modified: 14-10-2011. Last seen: 09-11-2011. 
 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_japan 
 
 