 3 
BULGARIAN ACADEMY OF SCIENCES 
 
CYBERNETICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES  Volume 20, No 2 
Sofia  2020 Print ISSN: 1311-9702; Online ISSN: 1314-4081 
DOI: 10.2478/cait-2020-0012 
 
Emotional Valence Coded in the Phonemic Content – Statistical 
Evidence Based on Corpus Analysis 
Velina Slavova 
New Bulgarian University, Department of Informatics, 21 Montevideo Str., Sofia, Bulgaria  
E-mail: vaslavova@nbu.bg  
Abstract: This study investigates the relationship between the phonemic content of 
texts in English and the emotional valence they inspire. The sublexical content is 
presented in terms of biphones composed by one vowel and one consonant. The 
statistical analysis of  a vast corpus of emotionally evaluated sentences reveals a 
strong correlation between this sublexical presentation and the evaluations of 
valence provided by the readers. An initial test performed with other valence -rated 
prose texts makes believing that the feature observed within the corpus can be useful 
for the emotion classification of texts.  
Keywords: Natural language processing, Sound-symbolism, Corpus linguistics, Text 
emotion recognition. 
1. Hypothesis and goal  
The work presented here explores the hypothesis that a relationship between the 
phonemic content of the language and emotional valence exists. This is related to a 
phenomenon known as phonological iconicity.  
There is mounting evidence of non-arbitrary sound-symbolic phonetic patterns 
in language. The known bouba/kiki effect of non -arbitrary mapping between the 
speech sounds and the visual shape of objects, investigated by K ö h l e r [21] in 1929 
was the first that questioned the theory of linguistics signs proposed by S a u s s u r e 
[11], suggesting that the words have arbitrary phonetic content. Since then, the most 
intensively studied sound -symbolic phenomenon is phonological iconicity, i.e., 
vocally emulating referents’ physical features such as shape and dimension. During 
the last years, iconicity is intensively studied to examine the cognitive mechanisms 
that underlie the relation ship between the phon etic content and the meaning of the 
words (e.g., [14, 17, 19, 29, 37], and many other studies). Concerning the universal 
character of the sound -symbolic features, a recent experimental study by 
D’A n s e l m o et al.  [10] showed that there exist sound -symbolic phonological 
features that are language-independent. It is to be pointed out that the great majority 
of examples of sound-symbolic properties appear not to be consciously noticeable – 
their relatedness to words' meaning has been discovered by means of statistical data-
analysis – often of large-scale language corpora (see [12] for an overview).  

 4 
The connection between sound symbolic features and emotions has not been so 
intensively investigated but also start s to gain attention. The fact that emotions 
represent a fundamental parameter of human nature has not been rejected until now. 
However, much is unclear concerning the relation ship between the mechanisms 
underlying emotions and the cognitive abilities related to conceptualization and 
meaning. The results of the work presented here are in support of the hypothesis that 
emotions and meaning are deeply related. 
There exist two main models of emotions – a discrete model of emotion 
categories and a continuous model of emotion dimensions. Emotion categories, such 
as anger, disgust, fear, happiness, sadness, and sur prise, as defined in the works of 
E k m a n [15], have become accepted by the greater scientific community and as a 
foundation for the development of emotion recognition systems. The other largely 
accepted model of emotions presents them in a continuous space [26], usually 
described as referencing three dimensions: Valence, Arousal , and Dominance 
(VAD). Valence indicates whether emotions are pleasant (positive) or unpleasant 
(negative), arousal, the degree to which they are exciting, and dominance is a rating 
of one’s own status in relation to an emotion -causing event. Although less directly 
applicable in the domain of affective computing  than the discrete model, the VAD 
model, as more general, shows a number of advantages and has become largely used 
in machine emotion-recognition practices and in the domain of sentiment analysis. 
That prompted several efforts to transform data annotated with emotional categories 
to VAD-scaled data (e.g., [6, 9]). 
Concerning emotions and their correlates in terms of brain activit y, several 
studies based on brain -imaging techniques identif y clear neural signatures of 
emotions involved in the brain’s multimodal fashion. Numerous pieces of evidence 
from functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) show the existence of specific 
brain regions activated only by unpleasant words and regions activated only by 
pleasant words (e.g., [22]). A recent study [23] of brain-impaired subjects has shown 
that both emotional valence and basic emotions are related to semantic memory, that 
is – to conceptual meaning. Such results lead to suppose that some indicators of 
emotional valence appear in the “meaning-communication protocol” – that is – they 
are detectable in speaking, listening, writing , and reading. The questions related to 
the speech prosody are approximately well studied and intensively used in the 
systems for speech emotion recognition. It is, however, difficult to analyze how 
emotion is conveyed through written texts, as there are no prosodic features 
incorporated, but words alone (with meaning).  
The statistical analysis presented here concerns emotional processing in reading. 
It is known from fMRI and Event-Related Potential (ERP) studies that after visual 
recognition of the word -input, the orthographic information is transmitted for 
“analysis” to the auditory cortex where it gains automa tically its corresponding 
phonetic content [1, 24, 34]. Recognition of lexical meaning proceeds largely in 
accord with the processing of presented spoken word -sequences – that is, as 
perceived speech.  
It was hypothesized in my previous works [31, 32] that emotions are deeply 
incorporated in the cognitive mechanisms of conceptualizing the world . On the 
 5 
presumption that the emotional dimension of valence has a neuropsychological basis 
that is associated with lexical semantics and thus influences the words phonemic 
forms, I undertook an exploration of the relation between the sublexical phonemic 
level of the English language and the emotional dimension Valence. Next in this 
paper, I investigate the hypothesis t hat the phonemic content of the language 
incorporates features related to valence.  
2. Investigating the sublexical level 
The systematic study of the phonological effects on emotion originates from the 
Russian Formalists where the sound in poetry was first examined in a systematic 
fashion (see, e.g., [18, 28]). Further investigations of English poetry and prose genres 
led to the detection of relationships between single phonemes and readers’ 
experienced emotional state [36]. Recently, Adelman and colleagues [2] conducted 
data-analysis of words from English, German, Dutch, Spanish and Polish emotion 
evaluated corpora. They discovered, for all these languages, that correlations exist  
between the phonological properties of individual phonemes (depending, too, on the 
phoneme’s position within the words) and the valence of these words. 
Recent text -emotion studies have found that th e sublexical level of German 
poetic texts  is a reliable source to predict their emotional effects and aesthetic  
qualities. In these studies, Ariani, Ullrich, and colleagues [3, 4, 33 ] examine the 
language phonological content presented into layers, applying the reasoning of the 
Gestalt psychology. The Gestalt principles applied in literary studies may shortly be 
expressed as follows: a text is a whole-body composed by gradual phonemic layers 
– from phones to syllables , words, sentences, etc. – and all of th ese compositional 
layers have an influence on the perception of the reader . At the sublexical level 
investigated by Ariani and colleagues , both single phonemes and sub -syllabic 
segments – onset, nucleus, and coda are shown to provide information that is relevant 
for the investigation of emotion-related phonological iconicity.  
The exploration of the emotion-effects of syllables composed of two phonemes 
reveals important findings. Kawahara and Shinohara [20] have investigated phoneme 
pairs of the type consonant-vowel (c-v) in pseudo-words, organized in two types of 
phonological stimuli of non-words: “abrupt” (“Stop condition”  – e.g., [/tadi/]) and 
“sonorant” (“Sonorant co ndition” – e.g., [/maji/]). The  study has demonstrated a 
tripartite trans-modal sound-symbolic relationship between auditory speech-sounds, 
visual shapes, and emotions. Having in mind  this result, I have explored [30] the 
relationship between the analogically defined sublexical level of texts in n atural 
language (English) and valence. The investigated phoneme couplings were of the 
inverse type  – vowel-consonant (v -c). Two phonological types of v -c have been  
investigated – vowel-abrupt (e.g., /ʊt/) and vowel -sonorant (e.g., /iːm/). The 
statistical result has shown that the frequencies in the texts of subsets of both types 
of v-c phoneme pairings are correlated with valence. The analysis has revealed that 
the vowel-consonant couples provide a sublexical source for estimating valence, but 
as their density in the texts is quite poor, a larger set of sublexical elements has to be 
investigated to better cover the texts’ phonemic content. 
 6 
The approach used in the present study is in alignment with the Gestalt 
reasoning applied in literary studies. The phonemic content of the text is thought in 
layers, supposing that the phonological forms perceived at these layers have an 
emotional impact on the reader. I reasoned that if the phonemic codding of emotion 
exists and contributes to communicating, the sublexical layer that transmits emotion-
related information should be embodied in easily pronounceable and well-
perceivable phonemic structures – such as consonants and vowels in couples. Having 
the results regarding the vowel and consonant phoneme pairs  mentioned above, in 
this study, I investigate a sublexical layer consisting of biphones – that is, pairings of 
phones composed of one vowel and one consonant, in either order.  
To investigate the complete sublexical layer of biphones, models for all the 
possible biphones have been obtained using the full set of phonemes as defined in the 
English language  – the set V of vowels (/æ/, /ɒ/, /ʌ/, /ʊ/, /iː/, etc., including the 
diphthongs /aɪ/, /aʊ/, /eɪ/, /eə/, etc. ) and the set C of consonants (/ŋ/, /d/, /k/, /g/, /tʃ/, 
/dʒ/, etc.). The set of biphone -models composed by one vowel ( v∈ V) and one 
consonant ( c∈ C) was obtained by the Cartesian products V×C and C×V. That 
provided the 1056 possible combinations of vowels and consonant of the two order-
types – 1. v-c: /ɑːdʒ/, /əʊw/, /ʌk/, etc., and 2. c-v: /ʃuː/, /mɔː/, /hæ/, etc.  
The words’ sublexical representation is further considered as composed by such 
biphones, as shown in Fig.1. 
 
 
Fig. 1. Examples of words’ phonemic content presented as composed by biphones  
The sublexical layer being investigated is not a result of syllabification as the 
process of obtaining assemblies of phonemes by decomposing the words’ content 
follows the linguistics’ rules.  The representation by mea ns of biphones leads to a 
more granular layer of phone -gatherings, which are contained in  the syllables and 
sometimes overlap them. It should be noted that the manner of obtaining the layer of 
biphones is universal, as vowels and consonants exist in all languages independently 
of the languages’ particular phonetic content and their respective rules of 
syllabification.  
Further in this study, the phonemic units that are submitted to statistical analysis 
are the occurrences of biphones, as present at the sublexical layer of biphones  
(Fig. 1). The assumption is that each of them has a distinct perceptual effect related 
to valence.  
To investigate the relatedness of this sublexical layer and emotional valence the 
study proposed here relies on a large corpus of valence-evaluated texts.  
3. Data description  
The emotion-evaluated texts used in this study are from the EmoBank corpus ([6], 
[8]). EmoBank involves two previously existing corpora – a manually annotated sub-
corpus of the American National Corpus, and the data set SemEval-2007, consisting 
Word 
Phones
Biphones lʌ ʌv heɪ eɪt wɪ ɪtʃ əb hɔː ɔːr sʌ ʌm θɪ ɪŋ əf reɪ eɪd ʃɔː ɔːr li
ˈʃɔː(r)lilʌv heɪt wɪtʃ əbˈhɔː(r) ˈsʌmθɪŋ əˈfreɪd
love hate which abhor something afraid surely
 7 
of news headlines drawn from major newspapers such as the New York Times, CNN, 
and BBC News. From the standpoint of universality , EmoBank comprises data 
collected over the past decade and covers numerous genres.  
EmoBank contains 10,549 emotion-evaluated sentences (examples in Table 1), 
extracted from 136 different documents, classified into 7 genres  – blog, essays, 
fiction, letters, newspaper, SemEval, and travel-guides. 
Each sentence in EmoBank is evaluated from the point of view of two 
perspectives: writer perspective and reader perspective, in terms of the three emotion 
dimensions – valence, arousal, and dominance. For the writer’s perspective, a number 
of linguistic clues supporting the annotators in their rati ng decisions are presented. 
For the reader’s perspective, it is asked what emotion would be evoked in an average 
reader. Accordingly, writer emotion refers to how someone feels while producing an 
utterance, whereas reader emotion relates to how someone feels right after reading or 
hearing this utterance. For each sentence, five annotators generated VAD ratings. The 
task was available for workers located in the UK, the US, Ireland, Canada, Australia 
and New Zealand. The data in EmoBank is presented after a f iltering procedure for 
the inter-annotators agreement and the introduction of specific metrics (for details, 
see [7]). The Standard Deviation (SD) of the assessments is also offered in the corpus.  
Table 1. Examples of the text-content and data presented in EmoBank.  
ID sentence Text of the sentence  Velence Reader  Valence Writer 
 Mean SD  Mean SD 
hotel-california 
_30738_30790 
Adrienne shook her head and made 
a sound of disgust  1.33 0.47  1.80 0.75 
littleshelter2_1003 
_1081 
It hurts us especially now to see a 
scrawny dog... a wet, starving 
kitten 
 1.60 0.49  1.80 0.40 
The_Black_Willo
w_4372_4422 
“Damn you,” he cried, “will you 
never leave me be?”  1.67 0.75  2.00 0.00 
112C- 
L015_1820_1880 
We wish you and your family a 
new year full of joy and love  4.00 0.89  4.60 0.49 
112C-L014_ 
1227_1282 
We’re proud of our children and 
all that they overcome  4.20 0.75  3.80 0.75 
captured_moments 
_28753_28863 
For a perfect moment, Emil and 
Tasha and I were one entity, 
laughing until our lungs hurt 
 4.60 0.49  4.00 0.82 
 
Further in this work, the Mean of readers’ assessments of valence provided in 
EmoBank is considered as the Valence-score of the sentence or simply – the valence 
of the sentence.  
To facilitate the intuitive understanding of the data submitted to statistical 
analysis, I further use a shifted scale of valence such that the neutral mark fits 0, this 
way presenting the valence axis in positive and negative parts.  
4. Obtaining sublexical metadata 
In order to represent the sublexical level of the evaluated texts from EmoBank as 
biphones, the corpus was stored locally and further treated in  six main st eps, as 
 8 
illustrated in Fig. 2. After having decomposed the sentences into words, 157,974 
word-occurrences were identified in EmoBank.  
Next, the phonetic transcriptions of a large vocabulary of words forms, in the 
form of strings of IPA phoneme symbols, were downloaded using several on -line 
dictionaries. Some differences in the used IPA symbo ls necessitated an additional 
data homogenization to the rules accepted in British English. A manual search was 
performed using the Oxford learner’s online dictionary for a number of words (about 
5000, a big part of which were verb conjugations). Thus, a v ocabulary of 16,392 
phonetically transcribed words was obtained.  
 
 
Fig. 2. General scheme of the approach  
As a third step, the sentences in the corpus have bee n checked for word -
occurrences representing proper nouns (including e.g. the names of months a nd 
abbreviations such as UN) or other words used as proper nouns (e.g. , “Times” as in 
“New York Times” as opposed to “times” in “several times”). Such uses of words 
were manually retrieved and excluded from the statistical analysis. The numerals (as 
part of speech – in linguistics terms) written with arithmetical symbols were excluded 
too, the assumption being that such words are not necessarily chosen by the author 
and hence do not reflect her emotional intent. After this filtering, 141,950 word 
occurrences, that is – 90% of EmoBank ’s texts’ content, were subjected to further 
treatment.  
The downloaded corpus was locally organized in a relational database. The set 
of the 1056 models of biphones obtained as explained in Section 2 has been stored in 
a separate table and used to identify, by the developed parser, the biphones in the 
phonetic transcription of the words. This showed that the corpus sentences contain 
805 different biphones. The used means of data structuring allow s performing the 
obligatory step of data -verification based on comprehensible sentences’ 
decomposition as shown in Fig. 3.  
 
 
Fig. 3. Example of a sentence from EmoBank as composed by biphones 
 Sentence ID
Words and
Transcript ænd
Biphones me en ni tɔː ɔːz wɪ ɪl pæ æk æn ʃɪ ɪp pɜː ɜːtʃ tʃə əs sɪ ɪz
ˈm eni 'stɔ:z wɪl pæk ʃɪp 'pɜ:tʃəsɪz
WhatToHongKong_3191_3232
Many stores will pack ship purchases
 9 
In this way, the words’ phonetic transcriptions were presented in terms of 
biphones for each word and, consequently – a content of biphones for each sentence. 
The sublexical units submitted to further counting and density-evaluation in the text-
data were the biphones. Further, the phonological image of text-data as a sequence of 
biphones is called a biphonic flow, be that of a single sentence or of the aggregated 
word-content of any set of sentences.  
5. Assembling emotion-evaluated texts for statistical analysis  
The first step in composing a convenient source of text-data for statistical analysis is 
the filtering of the sentences. To take only sentences that inspire valence, the 
sentences with a valence -score zero have been discarded . The second filtering 
criterion reflects the valence-stimulus effect of the sentences, measured by means of 
the inter-annotators agreement. The extent of readers’ agreement has been accorded 
in bounds, called agreement thresholds, based on the available in EmoBank value of 
the SD of the valence -ratings. The filtering gave data for statistical analyses shown 
in Table 2. 
Table 2. Data after filtering the sentences with thresholds on the SD of the readers’ ratings  
Data submitted to statistical analysis Readers’ agreement  
SD < 1 
Readers’ agreement  
SD < 0.7 
Number of sentences 6,466 5,312 
Number of occurrences of transcribed words 88,676 72,46 
Number of occurrences of biphones 212,244 173,371 
Number of distinct biphones 784 775 
 
The statistical investigation that follows is based on frequency measures of the 
biphones in the filtered sentences. Two problems have arisen: the first is related to 
the length of the text -data used for the analysis.  To represent a reliable  source, the 
text has to be lengthy in order to contain enough (and different) biphones. This 
suggests the grouping of sentences in bigger volumes of text-data. If the sentences in 
such an assembled textual source are with nearly equal valence, the “collective 
valence” of the group can be accorded as the mean of the valence -scores of the se 
sentences. 
The second problem is related to the granularity of the “collective valences” of 
such sentence-groups. Obviously, if the groups are too huge, the granularity of the 
representation of their valence on the valence axis will be poor , causing trouble for 
the application of regression and correlation methods.  
These two contradictive problems have been solved as follows: I estimated the 
convenient length for a text on the basis of one word containing on average 1.6 
biphones and o ne sentence containing 7 words, as it is in t he sentence provided in 
Fig. 3 . Thus, in theory, the full set of 784 biphones could be co ntained (without 
duplicating any) within a sequence of 6 9 such sentences, i.e., 483 words in total. A 
“normal” text would need to be roughly 7 times that length , that is – around 3300 
words in order to have a reasonable chance of containing a representativ e subset of 
the biphones found in the filtered corpus. 
 10 
For composing texts of that required length, the tactic was sorting the sentences 
according to their valence and then splitting the sorted sentence -list into fractions 
called valence-layers (Fig. 4a). All filtered sentences are included in these valence -
layers and each sentence belongs to only one layer. Further, the sentences from each 
of these layers are considered as a distinct textual source called artificial document. 
An artificial document comprises sentences that have valence-scores in a given range 
independently of the genre to which each sentence belongs. 
 
 
Fig. 4. Manner of composing the artificial documents corresponding to 22 valence-layers (a); the 
valence of the artificial documents (b) 
 
Next, each artificial document was accorded a measure of valence, called 
Document’s Valence, calculated as the mean of the valence-scores of the comprised 
sentences. The regression analysis shows that the artificial documents’ valence is well 
fitted by a linear function  (Fig. 4b) This result meets the objectives, as it allows 
applying methods of linear regression and correlation analysis. 
6. The predictive capability of the phonemic content within the corpus  
This statistical examination aims to ascertain if the statistical parameters derived from 
the biphonic flow of texts composed from one-half of the sentences in EmoBank are 
relevant for texts composed by the other half of the sentences. The corpus have been 
split into valence-layers and the sentences in each layer have been spread into two 
equal parts, each seen as distinct artificial documents – one Train-document and one 
Test-document (Fig. 4a). 
Two parameters have been varied in order to detect factors in fluencing the 
interdependency between the biphonic flow and the perceived valence. The first, 
related to the statistical significance of the text -data, was the length of the artificial 
documents. Successive statistical trials have been performed based on a rtificial 
documents with decreasing length, obtained by splitting the corpus into k=12, 16, 18, 
20 and 22 valence-layers. That layers were organised into N=24, 32, 36, 40, and 44 
artificial documents ( N=2k). For each occasion of splitting, the sentences we re 
accorded auto-incremented numbers and the Train-documents were assembled by the 
odd sentences whereas the Test-documents by the even sentences, thus randomizing 
the participation of each sentence in the test -part or in the train -part of the corpus 
(Fig. 4a).  
(a) 
 (b) 
 11 
For each split of the corpus into layers measures have been calculated, called 
“biphonic weights”, expressing the relatedness of the biphones with valence. This is 
performed using the following procedure: First, the participation score (ScoBiph𝑖𝑗) 
of each biphone in each Train-document is calculated using the equation 
(1)   ScoBiph𝑖𝑗 =
NBiph𝑖𝑗
NWord𝑗
, 
where NBiph𝑖𝑗 is the Number of occurrences of the Biphone i in the Train-document 
j, and NWord𝑗 is the Number of transcribed Words in this document. 
Next, the Biphonic Weight (WBiph) for each biphone is calculated in terms of 
the correlation between its participation scores in the series of the artificial documents 
calculated following (1) and the corresponding valences of the Train-documents:  
(2)  WBiph𝑖 = 𝑟(ScoBiph𝑖,𝑗=1,𝑘, ValenceTrainDoc𝑗=1,𝑘),  
where r is Pearson’s r between the series ScoBiph𝑖,𝑗=1,𝑘 of the k participation scores 
of the biphone i in the k Train-documents and ValenceTrainDoc𝑗=1,𝑘 is the series of 
the valence of these k Train-documents.  
The correlations of the participation scores of the biphones with v alence vary 
(in the interval [ –0.9, +0.8]) from very strong to unimportant. Calculated this way, 
the biphonic weights can, of course, be negative. The biphonic weights  express the 
degree and the direction of the relationship of a given biphone with valence, having 
that the positive correlation signifies that the presence of the biphone influences the 
valence in a positive direction. 
Next, using the biphonic weights obtained from the Train-documents, I verified 
on the Test-documents (the other half of the corpus) the predictive capability of the 
biphones. To do this, I merely applied the weights of the biphones, as obtained from 
the Train documents, to the biphonic flow o f the Test-documents. The obtained for 
each document sum of biphonic weights, called Document’s weight – WDoc has been 
calculated using the equation 
(3)  WDoc𝑗 =  
∑ 𝑛𝑖.WBiph𝑖
805
𝑖=1
NWord𝑗
, 
where WBiph𝑖 is the weight of the biphone i, 𝑛𝑖 is the number of times that the 
biphone i appears in the biphonic flow of the Test -document j and NWord𝑗 is the 
number of transcribed words in the Test-document j.  
The Predictive capability (Pred) of the syllabic weights for emotional valence is 
evaluated in terms of the correlation between the obtained this way weights WDoc𝑗 
of the Test-documents and their corresponding valence: 
(4)  Pred = 𝑟(WDoc𝑗=1,𝑘, ValenceTestDoc𝑗=1,𝑘),  
where r is Pearson’s r between the series WDoc𝑗=1,𝑘 of the weights of the k Test-
documents’ and the series 𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑇𝑒𝑠𝑡𝐷𝑜𝑐𝑗=1,𝑘 of the valences of these k 
documents.  
The result from the trials show that the predictive capability of the biphonic 
weights is very high – between 0.84 and 0.97 (Table 3, all p-values are less than 
0.001). In these trials, the longer artificial document (of both types – Train- and Test) 
consisted of approximately seven pages, and the shorter, of approximately three 
pages.  
 12 
Table 3. Results for the predictive capability of the weights of the biphones within the corpus  
  
Corpus 
divided into 
N artificial 
documents: 
Valence-agreement between readers: 
threshold at SD < 0.7 
Valence-agreement between readers: 
threshold at SD < 1.0 
words per 
Artificial 
Document 
(Avg) 
correlation between 
the Test-documents’ 
weights and Test-
documents’ valence 
words per 
Artificial 
Document 
(Avg) 
correlation between 
the Test-documents’ 
weights and Test-
documents’ valence 
24 2898 0.96 3519 0.97 
32 2174 0.91 2575 0.93 
36 1932 0.92 2299 0.96 
40 1739 0.89 2068 0.93 
44 1559 0.84 1873 0.93 
 
Linear dependence of the 
prediction on the number 
of words 
0.87 
Linear dependence of the 
prediction on the number 
of words 
0.69 
 
This result makes it evident that the biphonic content of the texts in EmoBank 
is strongly related to valence. 
Table 3 shows the results for the predictive capability of the biphonic weights 
when varying the two mentioned parameters: 1) readers’ agreement on valence, and 
2) the length of the artificial documents. As may be seen, in both  agreement 
conditions, the predictive capability depends on the length of the artificial documents. 
The predictive capability decreases with decreasing the length, showing, 
unsurprisingly, that when the text-data is reduced, its content becomes less releva nt 
for statistical purposes. The predictive capability of the biphonic weights is more 
sensitive to the decreasing length of the artificial documents when the sentences are 
with a higher between-readers agreement.  
 
 
Fig. 5. Plots – results of the check performed with 44 artificial documents  
(22 Test-documents) in the two readers’ agreement conditions 
 
The plots in Fig. 5 show the case of 44 artificial documents (22 Train and 22 
Test documents) in the two readers -agreement conditions. When the agreement 
threshold is stronger (SD < 0.7), the obtained artificial documents are reduced in 

 13 
length when compared with the weaker agreement (as the number of sentences that 
correspond to the stronger agreement is smaller). As visible from the plots in Fig. 5, 
in the case of stronger readers -agreement, the line displayed by the documents’ 
weights better tracks the documents’ valence than in the case of long documents with 
weaker readers-agreement. This suggests that the analysis ba sed on sentences with 
stronger readers-agreement has provided text-data that contains in a more refined way 
the sublexical features related to valence. 
7. Estimating the valence of experimental texts out of corpus 
It is known that the feature -values extracted from a corpus are data -sensitive and 
depend on the corpus content. As explained, EmoBank consists of selected sentences 
from several originally provided documents in several genres, and, in order to identify 
some phonemic patterning, the analysis has b een based on  composed artificial 
documents. In these artificially assembled documents, there is no meaningful context 
or any structured linguistic message involved. In contrast, ordinary, real-world texts 
have the normal structure of a language message and  the sentences have a meaning 
within the text’s overall context. Moreover, texts of a narrative nature rarely contain 
multiple successive pages charged homogeneously with one and the same valence. 
However, if valence -encoding of biphones is an intrinsic, n on-arbitrary aspect of 
language, then non -arbitrary relationships between biphonic content and valence 
should be captured, at least partly, in real-world texts. 
The aim of the test presented next is to export the obtained corpus-based weights 
of the biphon es out of corpus and to check their validity on real -life texts (Fig. 6). 
The test is based on a comparison of readers’ evaluation of valence conveyed by prose 
texts and the biphonic content of these texts.  The test was conducted within an 
educational project at the New Bulgarian University. One difficulty concerned the 
problem of finding long texts that are homogeneous in valence. We designated 20 
texts, each about one page long, taken from works by Leigh Bardugo, Charles 
Dickens, Neil Gaiman, Robin Hobb, Derek Landy, Brandon Sanderson, and J. R. R. 
Tolkien. They were incorporating various parts – descriptions, dialogues, etc. These 
texts are named hereafter “experimental texts”. Compared to the artificial documents 
used for the EmoBank-derived result, the experimental texts were at least three times 
shorter than the length estimated as statistically reliable – they contain on average 
534 words (min 207, max 1016). 
 
 
Fig. 6. General scheme of the test 

 14 
The participants in this small experiment were residents of different countries, 
were native speakers of different languages (Arabic=2, Bulgarian=10, English=5). 
For the test presented here, we relied on highly proficient English language users . 
The non-native speakers of English were professors in English as a Foreign Language 
(EFL), linguists specialized in EFL, computer scientists with covered high scores of 
EFL, and students (four) having followed lectures given in English.  
The task was to evaluate each text overall and not i ts parts. We submitted four 
texts (that we judged as different with regards to valence) to each participant to read 
silently and evaluate the valence of each. All participants received in written form 
instruction and evaluated whether the text evokes an em otion. The scale of the 
assessments was the following ordered set of discrete marks: Very negative, Negative, 
Does not arouse emotion, Positive, Very positive. 
Obviously, the participants evaluated the valence when simply reading the texts 
– their attention was not centered on the phonemic content. The assessments were 
based on the meaning of the texts. The 20 experimental texts were evaluated by our 
17 participants, where each text was evaluated by at least 3 subjects (Max 6,  
Mean 4.7). We received 89 marks that vary from very negative to very positive. The 
test is based on quite a small sample and the advanced methods of reflecting inter-
annotators’ agreement  did not apply . In order to work with numeric values, I 
considered the frequencies (Fig. 7a) of each of the marks that every text obtained as 
features of the text and  applied to the  text-to-marks frequency matrix a standard 
procedure of dimension reduction. Thus, I obtained valence-evaluations expressed as 
numeric values and further used them as valence-scores of the texts. As se en from 
the plot in Fig. 7b, the valence-scores of the experimental texts are fitted by a linear 
function.  
 
 
(a)                                                                          (b) 
Fig. 7. Frequencies of the marks of the experimental texts (a);  
Valence scores of the experimental texts (b) 
As Fig. 7a  illustrates, many experimental texts were rated as invoking very 
similar valence. I took further the texts for which the subjects agreed, namely – those 
for which the range of the assigned marks is less or equal to 3 ( in the ordered set 
“very negative”, “negative”, “neutral”, “positive” and “very positive”, Fig. 7a).  
Further, the experimental texts were decomposed into their biphonic content. 
The experimental texts contain 44,557 word occurrences with 39,037 transcribed 
words (proper nouns and numerals excluded) decomposed to 25,482 biphone-
occurrences (636 distinct biphones).  
0
1
2
3
4
Text01
Text02
Text03
Text04
Text05
Text06
Text07
Text08
Text09
Text10
Text11
Text12
Text13
Text14
Text15
Text16
Text17
Text18
Text19
Text20
very negative
negative
neutral
positive
a
 
 15 
To check the validity of the discovered in EmoBank relationship between 
biphones and valence, a set of “valence-indicative” biphones was extracted from the 
corpus data. More precisely , I considered as valence-indicative 165 biphones 
(representing 20% of the biphones in the corpus) that had a correlation with p-values 
less than 0. 05 with the valence of the artifici al documents, as calculated following 
(2). From these biphones, 89 were negatively correlated with valence, and 76 – 
positively correlated (Appendix).  
Further, these EmoBank-derived weights of the biphones were applied to the 
bipohonic content of the experimental texts . The weights of the valence -indicative 
biphones were straightforwardly summed over the content of the experimental texts 
to calculate their Experimental text’s weights (WEText) using the equation 
(5)    WEText𝑗 =  
∑ .165
𝑖=1 𝑛𝑖.WBiph𝑖
NWord𝑗
, 
where WBiph𝑖 is the EmoBank-derived weight of the valence-indicative biphone i, 
𝑛𝑖 is the number of times that the indicative biphone i appears in the biphonic flow 
of the experimen tal text j and NWord𝑗 is the number of transcribed words in the 
experimental text j.  
The weights WEText, calculated using the weights of the biphones as derived 
from EmoBank follow quite well the valence assessed by the subjects  in the 
experiment, as illustrated in Fig. 6.  
To evaluate the valence-to-biphone interdependence, I performed a correlation 
and regression analysis between the experimental texts’ weights calculated following 
(5) and the valence-scores assessed by the subjects to the experimental texts.  
Despite the large difference between the structure of the corpus-based artificial 
documents and the structure of the experimental texts, and despite the very small 
length of the experimental texts, the correlation between the experimental texts’ 
weights and the subjects’ evaluation of valence was important: Pearson’s r = 0.73,  
p <0,02.  
The plot of the linear regression of the Weights of the experimental text  on 
Valence is provided in Fig. 8. As illustrated, the result of this exportation of EmoBank 
derived properties of the biphones has “classified” the experimental texts with 90% 
accuracy.  
 
Fig. 8. Relatedness between the weights of the experimental texts calculated using EmoBank-derived 
weights of valence-indicative biphones and subjects’ assessment of valence 

 16 
This check was performed for weights of the biphones derived from corpus 
splits into 22 valence-layers for both SD agreement thresholds (SD<1 and SD<0.7). 
The results for the correlation between the weights of the experimental texts and their 
valence practically do not differ. The regression analysis gave equivalent results (the 
“classification” plots are quasi -identical). This indicates that the valence -indicative 
biphones, as designated following a criterion based on a reliable p-value of their 
correlation with valence in EmoBank, represent a robust sublexical feature of the 
available in EmoBank text-data.  
While short of perfect, this result is promising with regard to valence -
classification tasks. The sample used in this test was to o small and it wouldn't be 
credible to draw general conclusions based on it. However, the three constituents of 
this test: EmoBank’s texts and readers, the experimental texts, and the subjects in the 
experiment, are completely independent. The common component that could lead to 
this result is the meaning expressed by the language-codded content of the text-data. 
This suggests that, at least for the examined  texts and population, there is a relation 
between three components: the texts’ meaning, the inspired by the text valence and 
the properties of the text’s biphonic content. 
8. Word-based estimation of the valence of the experimental texts 
Biphones occur in words and words inspire emotion. It is to be checked is the 
observed biphonic effect related to occurrences of distinct emotionally charged words 
in the experimental texts.  To do this, I used two recently published data sources :  
1) the “Glasgow Norms” [27] containing normative ratings for emotion of 5,553 
words, and 2) the collected by Warriner and coll eagues [35] “Norms of Valence, 
Arousal, and Dominance” (NVAD), encompassing several data -sources and 
providing ratings for 13,915 English words. I assigned valence -scores to the words 
in the experimental texts using these two dictionaries. It should be noted that such 
dictionaries contain typically singular grammatical forms and, most often  – the 
normal forms of the verbs. For example, the normal form of the verb “to grasp” is 
provided, but the syllabically decomposed for our analysis verb -form “grasped”, is 
not. Phenomena related to the morphological components of the word-forms and their 
corresponding valence are still not well studied, so the two dictionaries were used to 
find strict word-form’s fit – procedures of stemming or detection of morphologica l 
building blocks of the words were not applied to enlarge the word’s coverage based 
on wods’ lemmas. Glasgow Norms covered 2,298 word occurrences in the 
experimental texts (819 distinct words where 808 intersect the 2,048 biphonically 
decomposed words) and NVAD covered 2,777 word occurrences in the experimental 
texts (1,102 distinct words where 1,081 intersect the 2,048 biphonically decomposed 
words). The biphonically decomposed words represent 88% of the words in the texts 
(proper nouns and numerals exclu ded), whereas the dictionaries cover as follows: 
Glasgow – 21% and NVAD – 26% of the words.  
Using the Mean of the words’ valence -ratings as they are given in Glasgow 
Norms and in NVAD, I calculated correspondingly two word-based estimations of 
 17 
the valence of the experimental texts that were evaluated with subjects’ agreement  
(a range of the marks less or equal to 3).  These estimations were obtained  as the 
average of the words’ (as occurrences) valence -scores for each text. The two 
dictionary-based estimat ions of valence correlate strongly – at 0.8 5 (p < 0.001). 
Importantly, both estimations did not show relatedness with the valence assessed by 
the subjects – using Glasgow Norms the correlation is r = 0.12 (p = 0.72) and using 
NVAD: r=0.15 (p = 0.67).  
Thus, I propose that the features of the biphonic flow provide a considerably 
more relevant indication about the valence of the entire text, possibly because the 
biphonic flow covers the phonetic content of the quasi-entire set of the used words. 
9. Discussion 
From this result, it is not possible to explain the principle by which the observed 
phonemic type of emotion-coded signal has “entered” the lexical language -content. 
In all cases, the texts’ biphonic content shows the described property. To my 
knowledge, there is no ready -to-hand explanation within the sound -symbolism 
literature as to the phenomenon reported here. The key question awaiting scientific 
enlightenment is: how did words come to incorporate these sound-patterns?  
It is, obviously, necessary to perform reliably designed large-scale experiments 
built appropriately in order to examine several crucial points. One is ‒  is the observed 
phenomenon dependent on the mother tongue of the reader or it is related, as 
suggested here, to the inferred by him m eaning. This could confirm or reject that 
words’ lexicological meaning has an emotional ingredient that has influenced the 
phonemic content that was attributed to the words during the long process of language 
evolution. Another important “psycho -phonemic” phenomenon that should be 
investigated is ‒ do the biphones per se inspire some valence. That would necessitate, 
for example, composing stimuli of pseudo -words containing solely “positive” or 
“negative” biphones and submit them, as pronounced, to valence -classification by 
subjects. And, obviously, it should be investigat ed what are the phonological 
properties of the biphones that show such a relation with valence and are these 
properties valid for other languages. 
Such steps would contribute to the clarification of the observed phenomenon.  
The broad hypothesis to which this result leads should be investigated further in 
several related domains. Are emotional valence and meaning interrelated in the 
complex processes of our cognitive functioning, and how? It is well accepted that for 
social species, the ability to coordinat e the actions of multiple individuals involves 
communicating emotions, including by means of sounds. Recent advances in brain 
imaging allowed discovering that nonhuman primates, for example, have distinct and 
clear-shaped brain responses to the vocalizatio ns produced by their conspecifics  
(e.g., [25]). Although it is still not clear as to the conceptual and emotional meaning 
of these sounds, the fact that they serve to coordinate the group’s actions indicates 
that these sounds are semantics-discriminative, so they can reasonably be described 
as “proto-phonemes”. Maybe the signatures of the emotional pattern at all levels of 
 18 
language would be present if the language has evolved to convey an amalgamation 
of conceptual meaning and emotion. Then phonemes and th eir combinations, as 
lower-level speech units, would have inheritable properties conveying both meaning 
and emotion. The said capacity could explain the result exposed in this study. 
For the purposes of text emotion recognition and sentiment analysis, the 
described sublexical approach and result need further development, including their 
possible applications for other languages.  
10. Conclusions 
The result of this statistical investigation shows that emotional information is 
incorporated in the phonemic content of words and is detectable in written form. The 
texts are laden with emotional undertone even when their words’ lexicological 
meaning is not taken into consideration and the words are assumed as mere phonetic 
constructs. This leads to an important form the point of view of cognitive languistics 
conclusion – this study’s result confirms that the phonemic content of words is not 
arbitrary from the standpoint of valence.  
The valence -to-biphones relation has been detected in texts from multiple 
genres and includes sources originating from newspapers and travel guides where 
writers’ words are not necessarily chosen to inspire emotion. This leads to a second 
conclusion, namely that phonemic emotional information exerts its effect at the 
ordinary level of language communication. 
Phonetically conveyed emotion presents, figuratively speaking, a slight signal 
for statistical purposes and, in order to extract consistent information using it, it is 
necessary to treat lengthy text-samples composed of valence-homogeneous language 
data. Narrative texts are rarely of that nature – they do not consist of sentences that 
enter within a tiny range of valence, but an assembly of sentences that may or may 
not inspire any valence at all. However, the test with the one -page long prose texts 
and their evaluation permits believing that the reported phonemic feature is useful in 
natural language processing – in tasks related to emotion classification of texts and 
in the domain of sentiment analysis. 
Acknowledgments: The experimenta l test described here was conducted at the New Bulgarian 
University, within a regular course – practical training in internet programming and databases, part of 
the educational program in computer science. I express my gratitude to my colleague Filip Andonov and 
to the Ph.D. student Marouane Saula for their participation in the text-processing tasks, as well as to the 
students Lazar Dilov, Vasil Primov and Steriana Kostova for developing a biphonic parser and 
organizing the access to the experimental texts. Many thanks to the project-collaborator Richard Traub, 
who, in the aim to find an explanation of the result, did a supplementary wide -ranging analysis of the 
domain of emotions, suggested valuable sources and copy-edited early manuscripts of the proposed here 
text. 
I express my gratitude to three unknown reviewers whose valuable suggestions to the description 
of the study’s results dedicated to the domain of cognitive linguistics helped me to formulate the 
described here essentials of the approach to the data, the statistical method and its outcomes.  
 
 19 
R e f e r e n c es 
1.  A b b a s si, E., K. K a h l a o ui, M. A.  W i l s on, Y. J o a n e t te. Processing the Emotions in 
Words: The Complementary Contributions of the Left and Right Hemispheres. – Cognitive, 
Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, Vol. 11, 2011, No 3, pp. 372-385.  
2. A d e l m an, J. S., Z. E s t e s, M. C o s s u. Emotional Sound Symbolism: Languages Rapidly Signal 
Valence via Phonemes. – Cognition, Vol. 175, 2018, pp. 122-130. 
3. A r y a ni, A., M. C o n r ad, A. M. J a c o bs. Extracting Salient Sublexical Units from Written 
Texts: “Emophon,” A Corpus -Based Approach to Phonological Iconicity . – Frontiers in 
Psychology, Vol. 4, 2013, p. 654. 
4. A r y a ni, A., M. K r a x e n b e r g er, S. U l l r i ch, A. M. J a c o bs, M. C o n r ad. Measuring 
the Basic Affective Tone of Poems via Phonological Saliency and Iconicity. – Psychology of 
Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts, Vol. 10, 2016, No 2. 
5. B r a d l ey, M. M., P. J. L a n g. Affective Norms for English Words (ANEW): Stimuli, Instruction 
Manual and Affective Ratings (Technical Report No C-1). Gainesville, FL: NIMH Center for 
Research in Psychophysiology, University of Florida, 1999. 
6. B u e c h el, S., U. H a h n. Emotion Analysis as a Regression Problem – Dimensional Models and 
Their Implications on Emotion Representation and Metrical Evaluation. – In: Proc. of 22nd 
European Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IOS Press, 2016, pp. 1114-1122.  
7. B u e c h el, S., U. H a h n. Readers vs. Writers vs. Texts: Coping with Different Perspectives of 
Text Understandi ng in Emotion Annotation . – In: Proc. of 11th Linguistic Annotation 
Workshop, 2017, pp. 1-12. 
8. B u e c h el, S., U. H a h n. EMOBANK: Studying the Impact of Annotation Perspective and 
Representation Format on Dimensional Emotion Analysis. – In: Proc. of 15th Conference of 
the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Vol. 2, Short Papers, 
2017, pp. 578-585. 
9. B u e c h el, S., U. H a h n. A Flexible Mapping Scheme for Discrete and Dimensional Emotion 
Representations: Evidence from Textual Stimuli. – In: Proc. of 39th Annual Meeting of the 
Cognitive Science Society (CogSci 2017), 2017, pp. 180-185.  
10. D ’ A n s e l mo, A.,  G. P r e t e, P. Z d y b e k, L. T o m m a si, A. B r a n c u c ci. Guessing 
Meaning from Word Sounds of Unfamiliar Languages: A Cross-Cultural Sound Symbolism 
Study. – In: Frontiers in Psychology. Vol. 10. 2019. 593 p. 
11. D e  S a u s s u r e, F.  Course in General Linguistics ( Trans. Roy Harris). London: Duckworth , 
1916/1983. 
12. D i n g e m a n se, M., D. E. B l a s i, G. L u p y an, M. H. C h r i s t i a n s en, P. M o n a g h an. 
Arbitrariness, Iconicity, and Systematicity in Language. – Trends in Cognitive Sciences,   
Vol. 19, 2015, No 10, pp. 603-615. 
13. D o l a n, R. J. Emotion, Cognition, and Behavior. – Science, Vol. 298, pp. 1191-1194. 
14. E d m i s t on, P., M. P e r l m an, G. L u p y an. Repeated Imitation Makes Human Vocalizations 
More Word-Like. – Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, Vol. 285, 2002, 
No 1874. 
15. E k m a n, P. Basic Emotions. Handbook of Cognition and Emotion, 1999, pp. 45-60. 
16. F u s t e r, J. Cortex and Mind. New York City, Oxford University Press, 2003. 
17. I m a i, M., S. K i t a. The Sound Symbolism Bootstrapping Hypothesis for Language Acquisition 
and Language Evolution . – Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological 
Sciences, Vol. 369, 2014, No 1651. 
18. J a k o b s on, R.  Linguistics and Poetics. – In: Style in Language. MA, MIT Press , 1960,  
pp. 350-377. 
19. J o n e s, J. M., G. V i g l i o c co. Iconicity in Word Learning: What Can We Learn from Cross - 
Situational Learning Experiments? – In: Proc. of Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Society , 
2017. 
20. K a w a h a ra, S., K. S h i n o h a ra. A Tripartite Trans-Modal Relationship among Sounds, Shapes 
and Emotions: A Case of Abrupt Modulation. – In: Proc. of Annual Meeting of the Cognitive 
Science Society, Vol. 34, 2012, No 34. 
 20 
21. K ö h l e r, W. Gestalt Psychology. New York, NY: Liveright, 1929. 
22. M a d d o ck, R. J., A. S. G a r r e tt, M. H. B u o n o c o re. Posterior Cingulate Cortex Activation 
by Emotional Words: fMRI Evidence from a Valence Decision Task. – Human Brain Mapping, 
Vol. 18, 2003, No 1, pp. 30-41. 
23. M a c o ir, J., C. H u d o n, M. P. T r e m b l ay, R. J. L a f o r ce, M. A. W i l s on. The Contribution 
of Semantic Memory to the Recognition of Basic Emotions and Emotional Valence: Evidence 
from the Semantic Variant of Primary Progressive Aphasia . – Social Neuroscience, 2019,  
pp. 1-12. 
24. M a r i n k o v ic, K.,  R. P.  D h o n d, A. M.  D a l e, M. G l e s s n er, V. C a r r, E. H a l g r en. 
Spatiotemporal Dynamics of Modality-Specific and Supramodal Word Processing. – Neuron, 
Vol. 38, 2003, No 3, pp. 487-497. 
25.  O r t i z-R i o s, M.,  P. K u ś m i e r ek, I. D e W i tt, D. A r c h a k ov, F. A. A z e v e do,  
M. S a m s, J. P. R a u s c h e c k er. Functional MRI of the Vocalization-Processing Network 
in the Macaque Brain. – Frontiers in Neuroscience, Vol. 9, 2015. 
26. R u s s e ll, J. A., A. M e h r a b i an. Evidence for a Three-Factor Theory of Emotions. – Journal of 
Research in Personality, Vol. 11, 1977, No 3, pp. 273-294. 
27. S c o t t, G. G., A. K e i t e l, M. B e c i r s p a h ic, B. Ya o, S. C. S e r e no. The Glasgow Norms: 
Ratings of 5,500 Words on Nine Scales. – In: Behavior Research Methods. 2018, pp. 1-13. 
28. S h k l o v s ky, V. Theory of Prose. Transl. B. Sher. Elmwood Park, IL: Dalkey Archive, 1990. 
29. S i d h u, D. M., P. M.  P e x m an. Five Mechanisms of Sound Symbolic Association . – In: 
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review. Vol. 25. No 5. 2018, pp. 1619-1643. 
30. S l a v o va, V. Towards Emotion Recognition in Texts – A Sound -Symbolic Experiment. – 
International Journal of Cognitive Research in Science, Engineering and Education, Vol. 7, 
2019, No 2, pp. 41-51. 
31. S l a v o va, V., A. S o s c h en. On Mental Representations: Language Structure and Meaning 
Revised. – International Journal Information Theories & Applications, Vol. 2, 2015, No 4,  
pp. 316-325. 
32. S l a v o va, V., H. S a h l i, W. V e r h e l st. Multimodal Emotion Recognition – More Cognitive 
Machines. – In: L. Fernando, J. de Mingo Lopez, C. K. Markov, K. Ivanova, I. Mitov , Eds. 
New Trends in Intelligent Technologies: Supplement to the Journal Information Technologies 
and Knowledge, Sofia, Institute of Information Theories and Applications FOI ITHEA, 2009, 
pp. 70-78.  
33. U l l r i ch, S.,  A. A r y a ni, M. K r a x e n b e r g er, A. M. J a c o bs, M. C o n r ad. On the 
Relation between the General Affective Meaning and the Basic Sublexical, Lexical, and Inter-
Lexical Features of Poetic Texts – A Case Study Using 57 Poems of HM Enzensberger. – In: 
Frontiers in Psychology. Vol. 7. 2017, 2073. 
34. V a n  O r d e n, G. C., J. C. J o h n s t on, B. L. H a l e. Word Identification in Reading Proceeds 
from Spelling to Sound to Meaning. – Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, 
Memory, and Cognition, Vol. 14, 1988, No 3. 
35. W a r r i n er, A. B.,  V. K u p e r m an, M. B r y s b a e rt. Norms of Valence, Arousal , and 
Dominance for 13,915 English Lemmas. – Behavior Research Methods, Vol. 45, 2013, No 4, 
pp. 1191-1207. 
36. W h i s s e ll, C. Phonosymbolism and the Emotional Nature of Sounds: Evidence of the Preferential 
Use of Particular Phonemes in Texts of Differing Emotional Tone. – Perceptual and Motor 
Skills, Vol. 89, 1999, No 1, pp. 19-48. 
37. W i n t e r, B., M. P e r l m an, L. K. P e r r y, G. L u p y an. Which Words are Most Iconic?. – 
Interaction Studies, Vol. 18, 2017, No 3, pp. 443-464. 
38. EmoBank Corpus [8]. Internet Resource. 
https://github.com/JULIELab/EmoBank 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 21 
Appendix. Valence-related biphones 
 
biphone gʌ nəʊ nɒ hɪ əʊn feɪ ɪd uːm ɔːtʃ ʌd ɔɪd vəʊ wɒ 
weight –0.82 –0.78 –0.77 –0.74 –0.73 –0.72 –0.69 –0.69 –0.69 –0.69 –0.68 –0.67 –0.67 
biphone ɒt leɪ fɪə vɔɪ ʌt ʌdʒ eθ wəʊ bæ vɪə ed fe dæ 
weight –0.67 –0.66 –0.66 –0.66 –0.66 –0.66 –0.65 –0.65 –0.65 –0.65 –0.65 –0.64 –0.63 
biphone dʒɔː nʌ pɔɪ ʃuː bʌ ɒz dəʊ æk kʊ dʒɜː liː daʊ dɪ 
weight –0.63 –0.63 –0.63 –0.62 –0.62 –0.60 –0.60 –0.58 –0.58 –0.58 –0.58 –0.57 –0.57 
biphone daɪ ðaʊ hiː ɜːd ɒb θɪ rʌ kɪ ɪm ɪəd wuː ɜːr de 
weight –0.57 –0.56 –0.56 –0.55 –0.55 –0.55 –0.55 –0.55 –0.54 –0.54 –0.54 –0.54 –0.53 
biphone ʌg wə ðiː sʌ vaɪ dʒʌ lɪ ʌθ ðæ əʊv pʌ aʊt ɪəl 
weight –0.53 –0.53 –0.53 –0.53 –0.52 –0.52 –0.52 –0.51 –0.51 –0.51 –0.51 –0.51 –0.50 
biphone rɔɪ ɜːt eɪs ʌf haʊ ðəʊ ɒr ɔːd ʌz bɜː huː ʃʊ ʊtʃ 
weight –0.49 –0.48 –0.48 –0.48 –0.48 –0.47 –0.47 –0.47 –0.47 –0.46 –0.46 –0.46 –0.46 
biphone bɔɪ θʌ ʃʌ dʒə peɪ ɔɪt bɪə və ʊt iθ ʃɑː     
weight –0.46 –0.45 –0.45 –0.44 –0.44 –0.44 –0.44 –0.43 –0.43 –0.43 –0.43     
biphone jɔː ʊər ve dʒɔɪ eʃ əʊg gɪ gʊ veɪ uːtʃ θæ pɒ uːʃ 
weight 0.79 0.74 0.73 0.72 0.72 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.68 0.68 0.67 0.66 0.65 
biphone aɪf nə æm faʊ juː ɑːdʒ tʃʊə el ʊb tʃɪ ʃə gaɪ tʃɔɪ 
weight 0.64 0.64 0.62 0.61 0.60 0.60 0.59 0.58 0.58 0.58 0.57 0.56 0.56 
biphone uːn ziː be iːtʃ fʌ ɜːv əʊp tʊə æŋ vɪ ʌv iːj ʃɪ 
weight 0.55 0.55 0.54 0.54 0.54 0.54 0.53 0.52 0.52 0.51 0.51 0.51 0.51 
biphone riː kuː ɜːk eɪtʃ dʒu fæ ætʃ ʊəz ih nuː zɪə fə bə 
weight 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.49 0.49 0.49 0.49 0.49 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48 
biphone jeə ɔːg wɪ lʌ aɪw zɜː uːd iːʃ uːz reə waʊ ɪʒ ʊət 
weight 0.47 0.47 0.47 0.47 0.46 0.46 0.46 0.46 0.46 0.45 0.45 0.45 0.45 
biphone æn tʃə tʃɪə dʒɒ ʃaɪ aɪv sʊ ɪv kɔɪ dʒæ ɑːn     
weight 0.45 0.45 0.44 0.44 0.44 0.43 0.43 0.43 0.43 0.43 0.42     
 
NB. These biphones and their weights (correlation r with valence) were obtained 
by EmoBank corpus-split into 22 layers having a reader s-agreement threshold at 
SD<1. 
 
Received: 18.02.2020; Second Version: 27.04.2020; Accepted: 12.05.2020  
 
 