 
Ursula K. Le Guin’ Always Coming Home | A Green Man Review 
 A Green Man Review 
 Never disturb a sleeping cat. Ever.
 Skip to content 
 Ursula K. Le Guin’ Always Coming Home
 Some fifteen years ago, Le Guin created Always Coming Home , an ethnographic history of a people living in a future version of Northern California. Though it’s possible that this might be a far future version of our culture, Le Guin cares not a bleedin’ bit about where or when this takes place; the intent here is world building at its very finest. And world building that is very anthropological in nature. Always Coming Home has been reprinted sans the music and poetry of the Kesh cassette tape by the University of California Press as ‘a California novel’.
 Le Guin was born on the 21st of October, 1929, in Berkeley, California, where she grew up. She’s the daughter of Alfred L. Kroeber, an anthropologist, and Theodora Covel Brown Kracaw Kroeber, another anthropologist. She attended Radcliffe College, which was then still all-female, and did her graduate work at Columbia University, where she studied Romance Literature of the Middle Ages and Renaissance, especially French. She met and married Charles A. Le Guin (pronounced Luh Gwinn) while they were both on Fulbright
scholarships in France. He became a professor of French History at Portland State College, Oregon, where they still live. They have three children: Elisabeth, Caroline, and Theodore; and at least two grandchildren. She has produced over eighty short stories, several collections of essays, ten books for children, several volumes of poetry, and at least sixteen novels.
 So what do we have here? What we have is a marvelous collection of ‘an anthropology of the future’. Le Guin excavates tales, songs, beliefs, myths, traditions, cooking habits, tribal structures, and mores of the people who ‘will be might have been’ someday living in what is, as I previously noted, now Northern California. If you’ve read either The Dispossessed or The Earthsea Cycle by her, you know that she’s an obsessive creator of extremely detailed cultures. However, most of her work actually has a traditional narrative framework of characters involved in a story that has a beginning, a middle, and an end. Sorry, me dear readers, but that is not the case here. This is the antithesis of Tolkien’s Lord of the Rings . Tolkien’s world has virtually no ethnographic detail, while Le Guin’s has no history. Yes, no history — The Kesh, the tribe in Always Coming Home , exist outside of time itself, dwelling almost literally within what the First People of Australia called ‘the eternal present’.
 The subject of Always Coming Home is the Kesh — a people who inhabit a valley in a far-future California. The Kesh are noticeably based on First People models — though Le Guin uses a matrilineal tribal structure, which is not known to have existed in any of the North American First Peoples. (First People and First Nation can be used interchangeably.) Le Guin lets the Kesh speak for themselves, allowing the reader to learn about them through a patchwork quilt of short stories, poems, and myths. These are framed around a novella which tells the story of a woman called Stonetelling who leaves the valley to live with her father’s people, the Condor. (Coyote also makes an appearance.) Like any academic work, the “back of the book” contains additional information about the Kesh in a traditional ethnographic form. Hell, there’s more supplementary material here that you’ll see in most Ph.D. dissertations!
 Always Coming Home is worth reading in large part because it can be — and definitely should be — read in very small pieces. Go ahead — get a cuppa of heather-smoked tea, find a comfortable chair, and read ‘Four Romantic Tales’, which are popular folk tales of the Kesh, or ‘How to Die in the Valley’, which is a fascinating look at the burial customs of this culture. It took me months to read Always Coming Home because I read a wee bit at a time in the evenings, but that way it felt like I was watching a culture unfold before me eyes. This is brilliant storytelling, but it is not, despite the press release from the University of California, a novel.
 But don’t bother getting the older version with the music and poetry of the Kesh as it adds nothing to the story. As theatre, it sucks; as music, it is boring at best. And no, I have no idea what the geomancer credited below had to do with this endeavour!
 Other creative personnel were Todd Barton (music), Margaret Chodos-Irvine (Illustrator) and George Hersh (Geomancer).
 (Harper & Row, 1985; University of California Press, 2001)
 Cat Eldridge 
 I'm the publisher of Green Man Review . I do the Birthdays and Media Anniversary write-ups for Mike Glyer’s file770.com, the foremost SFF fandom site. 
 More Posts - Website 
 Meta
 Log in 
 Entries RSS 
 Comments RSS 
 Editorial Staff
 Cat Eldridge
Gary Whitehouse
 Search
 Search for: 
 Recent Posts
 What’s New for the 30th of August: 
 A Kinrowan Estate story: puppeteers, and their puppets 
 What’s New for the 16th of August: Deborah Grabien’s music criticism essays; new Americana and jazz, and some music for the Dog Days of Summer 
 A Kinrowan Estate story: Midsomer Strangeness 
 A Kinrowan Estate story: Contradances 
 What’s New for the 26th of July: Witches in fiction, both books and film; an Americana reissue and some music on a smoky theme 
 A Kinrowan Estate story: chicken pot pieces 
 What’s New for the 19th of July: Charles de Lint’s Ottawa novels with a quote from Drink Down the Moon, Gary’s review of Nordic fiddle music, It’s Michele Walther and Irina Behrendt playing Aaron Copland’s ‘Hoe Down’ from his Rodeo album 
 A Kinrowan Estate story: Midsomer Odd Things 
 A Kinrowan Estate story: A Library and Its Librarian 
 What’s New for the Fifth of July: Remembering Jane Yolen; some new Americana and jazz music; Fishing Blues 
 A Kinrowan Estate Story: Recursive Loops 
 What’s New for June 21: Jennifer Stevenson’s ‘Solstice’ 
 A Kinrowan Estate story: Turkish Coffee 
 What’s New for the 7th of June: Foxes in literature, live Balkan music, comforting jazz, Americana jazz, and wonderfully weird fusion jazz; and John Fogerty live 
 A Kinrowan Estate story: Bloodied Kings 
 What’s New for the 24th of May: Gary’s Review of Elizabeth Bear’s White Space novels, iain’s review of the Lonely Signal Burns novellas by her, she reading her own story, ‘The Chains That You Refuse’, and I see Gary has some tasty music reviews fir us as well 
 A Kinrowan Estate story: Our Greensward 
 What’s New for the 10th of May: books reviewed by Jennifer Stevenson, music by Teddy Thompson, Americana music from all over, and some live music from John Fogerty 
 A Kinrowan Estate story: A Walk 
 What’s New for the 26th of April: the nature of Stories; some new and newish SF, plus new world, jazz, folk and Americana music 
 A Kinrowan Estate story: A Spring Day 
 What’s New for the 12th of April: Some new and recent SF; new Americana, Norwegian folk rock and jazz; and thoughts on War For The Oaks 
 A Kinrowan Estate story: A Unified Theory of Libraries (A Letter to Anna)  
 What’s New for the 29th of March: Beer and spirits, in song and text, some new Scandinavian fiddle music and jazz flute music, and more 
 A Kinrowan Estate story: A Ghostly Librarian 
 What’s New for the 15th of March: some DeLint stories for early spring; lots of polskas, Serbian folk rock, progressive jazz, and Nordic music from the archives 
 A Kinrowan Estate story: Hedge Witches 
 What’s New for the 1st of March: Emma Bull’s War for The Oaks, Rosanne Cash’s ‘Runaway Train’, Johnny Cash at San Quentin, plus new Americana and jazz music 
 A Kinrorwan Estate story: Cranachanh 
 Experience dynamic entertainment at audgaming , where smooth gameplay and rewarding features create exciting sessions.
 Play with energy at sp77 , featuring smooth performance, engaging gameplay, and rewarding bonuses.
 Shine bright at diamondaud , offering smooth gameplay, exciting visuals, and rewarding bonuses.
 Experience crypto-friendly gaming at ltc casino , offering fast gameplay, smooth performance, and rewarding bonuses.
 Jouez avec style chez Play Regal ! Profitez d'une expérience de jeu de première classe et gagnez gros dès aujourd'hui.
 A Green Man Review 
 Proudly powered by WordPress. 
 Join bassbet for exciting reels, massive jackpots, and smooth gameplay. Bassbet spins you to big wins!
 Explorez le monde des jeux en ligne casino ! Spin, misez et gagnez sur vos titres préférés en toute sécurité.
 Celebrate your wins at Rooster Casino . Spin, play, and enjoy jackpots that make every moment unforgettable.
 Luck is always on your side at Juicy Vegas Casino . Discover thrilling games, spin reels, and win massive prizes.
 Winning has never been this fun at CrownPlay . Play exciting slots, join live tables, and celebrate big.
 Slotocash casino online casino offering a wide range of slots and table games with exciting bonuses.
 Step into Australia's gaming paradise with easy Woo Casino login . Your winning streak starts here!
 