
: RevolutionSF - Epic Pooh : Feature
	 home 
contests  -->
contact us -->
humor -->
: news 
: reviews 
: features 
: fiction 
: podcast 
newsletter 
:  boards -->
: blogs 
: t-shirts
: wtf? 
Epic Pooh 
© Michael Moorcock
Author's Note: 'Epic Pooh' was originally published as an essay by 
  the BSFA, revised for its 
  inclusion in the 1989 book Wizardry and Wild Romance, A Study of Epic Fantasy, 
  and slightly revised again for this publication. It was written long before the publication and much-deserved success of Philip Pullman's 'His Dark Materials' trilogy which, in my view, merits all the optimism I have expressed here. The essay did not attempt to deal with all fantasy, such as Alice in Wonderland or other children's fantasy, 
  but only epic fantasy from its origins in romance poetry to the present day.
Certain highlighted phrases indicate additional 
  comments from the author: mouse over the phrase to read the note. 
Epic Pooh  
  Why is the Rings being widely read today? At a time when perhaps the 
    world was never more in need of authentic experience, this story seems to 
    provide a pattern of it. A businessman in Oxford told me that when tired or 
    out of sorts he went to the Rings for restoration. Lewis and various 
    other critics believe that no book is more relevant to the human situation. 
    W. H. Auden says that it "holds up the mirror to the only nature we know, 
    our own." As for myself I was rereading the Rings at the time 
    of Winston Churchill's funeral and I felt a distinct parallel between the 
    two. For a few short hours the trivia which normally absorbs us was suspended 
    and people experienced in common the meaning of leadership, greatness, valor, 
    time redolent of timelessness, and common traits. Men became temporarily human 
    and felt the life within them and about. Their corporate life lived for a 
    little and made possible the sign of renewal alter a realisation such as occurs 
    only once or twice in a lifetime.
   For a century at least the world has been increasingly demythologized. But 
    such a condition is apparently alien to the real nature of men. Now comes 
    a writer such as John Ronald Reuel Tolkien and, as remythologizer, strangely 
    warms our souls.
   Clyde S. Kilby: "Meaning in the Lord of the Rings", 
    Shadows of Imagination, 1969
  I have sometimes wondered how much the advent of steam influenced Victorian 
  ballad poetry and romantic prose. Reading Dunsany, for instance, it often occurs 
  to me that his early stories were all written during train journeys:
  Up from the platform and onto the train
    Got Welleran, Rollory and young Iraine.
    Forgetful of sex and income tax
    Were Sooranard, Mammolek, Akanax:
    And in their dreams Dunsany's lord
    Mislaid the communication cord.
  The sort of prose most often identified with "high" fantasy is the 
  prose of the nursery-room. It is a lullaby; it is meant to soothe and console. 
  It is mouth-music. It is frequently enjoyed not for its tensions but for its 
  lack of tensions. It coddles; it makes friends with you; it tells you comforting 
  lies. It is soft:
  One day when the sun had come back over the forest, bringing with it the 
    scent of May, and all the streams of the Forest were tinkling happily to find 
    themselves their own pretty shape again, and the little pools lay dreaming 
    of the life they had seen and the big things they had done, and in the warmth 
    and quiet of the Forest the cuckoo was trying over his voice carefully and 
    listening to see if he liked it, and wood-pigeons were complaining gently 
    to themselves in their lazy comfortable way that it was the other fellow's 
    fault, but it didn't matter very much; on such a day as this Christopher Robin 
    whistled in a special way he had, and Owl came flying out of the Hundred Acre 
    Wood to see what was wanted.
   Winnie-the-Pooh, 1926
 It is the predominant tone of The Lord of the Rings and Watership 
  Down and it is the main reason why these books, like many similar ones in 
  the past, are successful. It is the tone of many forgotten British and American 
  bestsellers, well-remembered children's books, like The Wind in the Willows, 
  you often hear it in regional fiction addressed to a local audience, or, in 
  a more sophisticated form, James Barrie (Dear Brutus, Mary Rose and, 
  of course, Peter Pan). Unlike the tone of E.Nesbit (Five Children 
  and It etc.), Richmal Crompton (the 'William' books) Terry Pratchett or 
  the redoubtable J.K.Rowling, it is sentimental, slightly distanced, often wistful, 
  a trifle retrospective; it contains little wit and much whimsy. The humour is 
  often unconscious because, as with Tolkien, the authors take 
  words seriously but without pleasure:
  One summer's evening an astonishing piece of news reached the Ivy Bush and 
    Green Dragon. Giants and other portents on the borders of the Shire were forgotten 
    for more important matters; Mr. Frodo was selling Bag End, indeed he had already 
    sold it-to the Sackville-Bagginses!
   "For a nice bit, too," said some. "At a bargain price," 
    said others, "and that's more likely when Mistress Lobelia's the buyer." 
    (Otho had died some years before, at the ripe but disappointed age of 102.)
   Just why Mr. Frodo was selling his beautiful hole was even more debatable 
    than the price...
   The Fellowship of the Ring, 1954
 I have been told it is not fair to quote from the earlier parts of The 
  Lord of the Rings, that I should look elsewhere to find much better stuff 
  so, opening it entirely at random, I find some improvement in substance and 
  writing, but that tone is still there:
  Pippin became drowsy again and paid little attention to Gandalf telling him 
    of the customs of Gondor, and how the Lord of the City had beacons built on 
    the tops of outlying hills along both borders of the great range, and maintained 
    posts at these points where fresh horses were always in readiness to bear 
    his errand-riders to Rohan in the North, or to Belfalas in the South. "It 
    is long since the beacons of the North were lit," he said; "and 
    in the ancient days of Gondor they were not needed, for they had the Seven 
    Stones."
   Pippin stirred uneasily.
   The Return of the King, 1955
 Tolkien does, admittedly, rise above this sort of thing on occasions, in some 
  key scenes, but often such a scene will be ruined by ghastly verse and it is 
  remarkable how frequently he will draw back from the implications of the subject 
  matter. Like Chesterton, and other orthodox Christian writers who substituted 
  faith for artistic rigour he sees the petit bourgeoisie, the honest artisans 
  and peasants, as the bulwark against Chaos. These people are always sentimentalized 
  in such fiction because traditionally, they are always the last to complain 
  about any deficiencies in the social status quo. They are a type familiar to 
  anyone who ever watched an English film of the thirties and forties, particularly 
  a war-film, where they represented solid good sense opposed to a perverted intellectualism. 
  In many ways The Lord of the Rings is, if not exactly anti-romantic, 
  an anti-romance. Tolkien, and his fellow "Inklings" (the dons who 
  met in Lewis's Oxford rooms to read their work in progress to one another), 
  had extraordinarily ambiguous attitudes towards Romance (and just about everything 
  else), which is doubtless why his trilogy has so many confused moments when 
  the tension flags completely. But he could, at his best, produce prose much 
  better than that of his Oxford contemporaries who perhaps lacked his respect 
  for middle-English poetry. He claimed that his work was primarily linguistic 
  in its original conception, that there were no symbols or allegories to be found 
  in it, but his beliefs permeate the book as thoroughly as 
  they do the books of Charles Williams and C. S. Lewis, who, consciously or unconsciously, 
  promoted their orthodox Toryism in everything they wrote. While there is an 
  argument for the reactionary nature of the books, they are certainly deeply 
  conservative and strongly anti-urban, which is what leads some to associate 
  them with a kind of Wagnerish hitlerism. I don't think these books are 'fascist', 
  but they certainly don't exactly argue with the 18th century enlightened Toryism 
  with which the English comfort themselves so frequently in these upsetting times. 
  They don't ask any questions of white men in grey clothing who somehow have 
  a handle on what's best for us.
Continued . . .
© Michael Moorcock.  London born Michael 
  Moorcock is one of the most prominent, prolific and popular writers in the 
  Western world. As the editor of New Worlds, Moorcock was a primary motivation 
  behind the 1960s "New Wave" literary movement. His prodigious output 
  includes rock songs, comics, screenplays, essays, and over seventy novels. Perhaps 
  best known for his interlocking heroic fantasy series, Moorcock's recurring 
  characters include Elric, Corum, Dorian Hawkmoon, Jerry Cornelius, the Eternal 
  Champion and others. A multiple winner of the British Fantasy Award, Michael 
  has won the Guardian Fiction Award (The Condition Of Muzak), the World Fantasy 
  Award (Gloriana), the John W. Campbell Memorial Award (Gloriana), Nebula Award 
  (Behold The Man) and was a finalist for the Whitbread Prize (Mother London). 
  He currently lives with his wife Linda in Lost Pines, TX. His work can also 
  be found at newworldsmagazine.com.
Illustrations are © Doug Potter.
                       Recommend Us
Send to a Friend
Digg This 
Reddit It 
Add to del.ic.ious 
Share at Facebook 
Discuss!
Send Feedback 
15 Authors Memewill take them into the WildDollhouseBook Forum
Related Pages 
Print This PageMichael Moorcock + Doctor Who = AwesomeRevolutionSF Newsblast : Jack Trevor Story, Urban Fantasy, Comic Books Elric : Stealer of SoulsSearch RevSF
New on RevSF 
Inherit Historic Movie Theater by Writing SomethingStar Wars Memories: The Phantom MenaceRevolutionSF RevCast : Flash, Star Wars and EG DailyRevolutionSF Has an Opinion : Star Wars The Force Awakens SpoilersRevSF Home
 Illustrated by
Doug Potter, © 2002. 
Warning:  include(): http:// wrapper is disabled in the server configuration by allow_url_include=0 in /home3/revolvd6/public_html/php/rightnav_ad.php on line 2
Warning:  include(http://www.revolutionsf.com/ads/house_ads.php): failed to open stream: no suitable wrapper could be found in /home3/revolvd6/public_html/php/rightnav_ad.php on line 2
Warning:  include(): Failed opening 'http://www.revolutionsf.com/ads/house_ads.php' for inclusion (include_path='.:/usr/php/56/usr/share/pear') in /home3/revolvd6/public_html/php/rightnav_ad.php on line 2
                Search RevSF  
Random RevSF
Cosmo Warrior Zero: Cold Steel Immortals
	      contact   : advertising :   submissions : legal   : privacy
  RevolutionSF   is ™ and © Revolution Web Development, Inc., except as noted.
Intended for readers age 18 and above.  		  
