Guide to the Names in The Lord of the Rings
J. R. R. TOLKIEN
These Notes on Nomenclature were made by J. R. R. Tolkien to assist translators of the book
into other languages. They were composed when only the Swedish and Dutch translations had
appeared. They have been revised for publication by Christopher Tolkien. All references to The
Lord of the Rings are by volume and page of the Second (Revised) Edition.
—The Editor
Nomenclature of
The Lord of the Rings
All names not in the following list should be left entirely unchanged in any language used in
translation, except that inflexional -s,
-es should be rendered according to the grammar of the
language.
It is desirable that the translator should read Appendix F in Volume III of The Lord of the Rings
and follow the theory there set out. In the original text English represents the Common Speech of the
supposed period. Names that are given in modern English therefore represent names in the Common
Speech, often but not always being translations of older names in other languages, especially Sindarin
(Grey-elven). The language of translation now replaces English as the equivalent of the Common
Speech; the names in English form should therefore be translated into the other language according
to their meaning (as closely as possible).
Most of the names of this type should offer no difficulty to a translator, especially not to one
using a language of Germanic origin, related to English: Dutch, German, and the Scandinavian
languages; for example Black Country, Battle Plain, Dead Marshes, Snow-mane. Some names,
however, may prove less easy. In a few cases the author, acting as translator of Elvish names already
devised and used in this book or elsewhere, has taken pains to produce a Common Speech name that
is both a translation and also (to English ears) a euphonious name of familiar English style, even if it
does not actually occur in England. Rivendell is a successful example, as a translation of Grey-elven
Imladris 'Glen of the Cleft'. It is desirable to translate such names, since to leave them unchanged
would disturb the carefully devised scheme of nomenclature and introduce an unexplained element
without a place in the feigned linguistic history of the period. But of course the translator is free to
devise a name in the other language that is suitable in sense and/or topography; not all the Common
Speech names are precise translations of those in other languages.
A further difficulty arises in some cases. Names (of places and persons) occur, especially in the
Shire, which are not 'meaningless', but are English in form (that is, in theory the author's translation
of Common Speech names), containing elements that are in the current language obsolete or
dialectal, or are worn-down and obscured in form. (See Appendix F.) From the author's point of
view it is desirable that translators should have some knowledge of the nomenclature of persons and
places in the languages used in translation, and of words that occur in them that are obsolete in the
current forms of those languages, or only preserved locally. The notes I offer are intended to assist a
translator in distinguishing 'inventions', made of elements current in modern English, such as
Rivendell, Snow-mane, from actual names in use in England, independently of this story, and
therefore elements in the modern English language that it is desirable to match by equivalents in the
language of translation, with regard to their original meaning, and also where feasible with regard to
their archaic or altered form. I have sometimes referred to old, obsolescent, or dialectal words in the
Scandinavian and German languages which might possibly be used as the equivalents of similar
elements in the English names found in the text. I hope that these references may be sometimes
found helpful, without suggesting that I claim any competence in these modern languages beyond an
interest in their early history.
Names of Persons and Peoples
Appledore. An old word for 'apple-tree' (it survives in English place-names). It should be translated
by the equivalent—that is, by a dialectal or archaic word of the same meaning. In Germanic
languages this may be a word of the same origin: for example, German (Middle High German)
aphalter; Icelandic apuldur; Norwegian, Old Swedish apald.
Baggins. Intended to recall 'bag'—compare Bilbo's conversation with Smaug in The Hobbit -- and
meant to be associated (by hobbits) with Bag End (that is, the end of a 'bag' or 'pudding bag' = cul-
de-sac), the local name for Bilbo's house. (It was the local name for my aunt's farm in
Worcestershire, which was at the end of a lane leading to it and no further). Compare also Sackville-
Baggins. The translation should contain an element meaning 'sack, bag'.
Banks. Clearly a topographical name containing 'bank' in the sense 'steep slope or hill-side'. It should
be represented by something similar.
Barrow-wights. Creatures dwelling in a 'barrow' (grave-mound); see Barrow under Place-names. It is
an invented name: an equivalent should be invented. The Dutch translation has grafgeest 'grave-
ghost'; the Swedish has Kummelgast 'gravemound-ghost'.
Beechbone. This is meant to be significant, being a translation into the Common Speech of some
Entish or EIvish equivalent. It should be translated similarly (for example as Buchbein, or probably
better Buchenbein?).
Big Folk, Big People. Translate.
Black Captain, Black One, Black Riders. Translate.
Bolger. See Budgeford.
Bounders. Evidently intended to mean 'persons watching the bounds (that is, boundaries)'. This word
exists in English, and is not marked as obsolete in dictionaries, though I have seldom heard it used;
probably because the late nineteenth-century slang 'bounder'— an offensively pushing and in-bred
man—was for a time in very general use, and soon became a term of contempt equivalent to 'cad'. It
is a long time since I heard it, and I think it is now forgotten by younger people. The Dutch
translation uses Poenen 'cads', probably because a well-known dictionary only gives patser 'bounder,
cad' as the meaning of bounder (labelled as slang). In the text the latter sense is meant to be recalled
by English readers, but the primary functional sense to be clearly understood. (This slender jest is
not, of course, worth imitating, even if possible).
Bracegirdle. A genuine English surname, used in the text, of course, with refercnce to the hobbit
tendency to be fat and so to strain their belts. A desirable translation would recognize this by some
equivalent meaning Tight-belt, or Belt-tightener / strainer / stretcher. (The name is a genuine
English one; a compound of the Romance type with the verbal element first, as in Drinkwater =
Boileau; but it is not necessary that the representation should be a known surname in the language of
translation. Would not Gürtelspanner do?)
Brandybuck. A rare English name which I have come across. Its origin in English is not concerned;
in The Lord of the Rings it is obviously meant to contain elements of the Brandywine River and the
family name Oldbuck (see these entries). The latter contains the word 'buck' (animal): either Old
English bucc 'male deer' (fallow or roe), or bucca 'he-goat'.
Buckland is also meant to contain the same animal name (German Bock), though Buckland, an
English place-name, is frequently in fact derived from 'book-land', land originally held by a written
charter.
Brockhouse. Brock is an old word for the badger, still widely current in country speech up to the end
of the nineteenth century and appearing in literature, and hence in good dictionaries, including
bilinguals. So there is not much excuse for the Dutch and Swedish translators' having misrendered it.
In the Dutch translation Broekhuis (not a misprint, since it is repeated in the four places where this
name occurs) seems absurd: what is a 'breech-house'? The Swedish Galthus 'wild-boar house' is not
much better, since swine do not burrow! The translator evidently did not know or look up Brock,
since he uses Grävlingar for the name Burrows (Swedish gräflingar, gräfsvin 'badgers').
Brock occurs in numerous place-names, from which surnames are derived, such as Brockbanks.
Brockhouse is, of course, feigned to be a hobbit-name because the 'brock' builds complicated and
well-ordered underground dwellings or 'setts'. The German rendering should be Dachsbau, I think.
In Danish use Graevling.
Butterbur. So far as I know, not found as a name in England, though Butter is so used, as well as
combinations (in origin place-names) such as Butterfield. These have in the tale been modified, to fit
the generally botanical names of Bree, to the plant-name 'butterbur' (Petasites vulgaris). If the
popular name for this contains an equivalent of 'butter', so much the better. Otherwise use another
plant-name containing 'butter' (as German Butterblume, Butterbaum, Dutch boterbloeme) or
referring to a fat thick plant. The butterbur is a fleshy plant with a heavy flower-head on a thick stalk,
and very large leaves.
Butterbur's first name Barliman is simply an altered spelling of 'barley' and 'man' (suitable to an
innkeeper and ale-brewer), and should be translated.
Captains of the West. Translate.
Chief, The. Translate.
Chubb. A genuine English surname, chosen because its immediate association in English is with the
adjective 'chubby', round and fat in bodily shape (said to be derived from chub, the name of a river
fish).
Corsairs. Translate. They are imagined as similar to the Mediterranean corsairs: sea-robbers with
fortified bases.
Cotton. This is a place-name in origin (as are many modern surnames), from cot, a cottage or humble
dwelling, and -ton, the usual shortening of 'town' in place-names (Old English tūn 'village'). It should
be translated in these terms.
It is a common English surname and has, of course, in origin no connection with cotton the textile
material, though it is naturally associated with it at the present day. Hobbits are represented as using
tobacco, and this is made more or less credible by the suggestion that the plant was brought over the
Sea by the Men of Westernesse (I 18); but it is not intended that cotton should be supposed to be
known or used at that time. Since it is highly improbable that in any other language a normal and
frequent village name should in any way resemble the equivalent of cotton (the material), this
resemblance in the original text may be passed over. It has no importance for the narrative, See
Gamgee.
Cotman appears as a first name in the genealogies. It is an old word meaning 'cottager', 'cot-
dweller', and is to be found in larger dictionaries. It is also a well-known English surname.
Dark Lord, Dark Power. Translate.
Dead, The. Translate.
Dunlendings. Leave unchanged except in the plural ending. It represents Rohan dun(n)lending, an
inhabitant of Dun(n)land.
Easterlings. Translate, as 'Easterners, men from the East' (in the story men from the little-known
regions beyond the Sea of Rhûn).
Elder Kindred, Elder Race, Elder People. Translate. In a language which possesses two forms of the
comparative of old, use the more archaic form. (In English the older form elder implies both
seniority and kinship).
The similarity between Elda-r plural, the western Elves, and Elder is accidental. The name Elda
'Elf' had been devised long before The Lord of the Rings was written. There is no need to seek to
imitate it; it is not useful or significant. Compare Elder Days, which again implies a more ancient
epoch in the history of people of the same kin, that is in the days of their far-off ancestors.
Elf-friend. Translate. It was suggested by Aelfwine, the English form of an old Germanic name
(represented for instance in the Lombardic Alboin), though its analyzable meaning was probably not
recognized or thought significant by the many recorded bearers of the name Aelfwine in Old English.
Elven-smiths. Translate. The archaic adjectival or composition form elven used in The Lord of the
Rings should on no account be equated with the debased English word elfin, which has entirely
wrong associations. Use either the word for elf in the language of translation, or a first element in a
compound, or divide into elvish + smiths, using an equivalent in the language of translation for the
correct adjective elvish.
With regard to German: I would suggest with diffidence that Elf, elfen are perhaps to be avoided
as equivalents of elf, elven. Elf is, I believe, borrowed from English, and may retain some of the
associations of a kind that I should particularly desire not to be present (if possible): for example
those of Drayton or of A Midsummer Night's Dream (in the translation of which, I believe, Elf was
first used in German). That is, the pretty, fanciful reduction of 'elf' to a butterfly-like creature
inhabiting flowers.
I wonder whether the word Alp (or better still the form Alb, still given in modern dictionaries as a
variant, which is historically the more normal form) could not be used. It is the true cognate of
English elf; and if it has senses nearer to English oaf, referring to puckish and malicious sprites, or to
idiots regarded as 'changelings', that is true also of English elf. I find these debased rustic
associations less damaging than the 'pretty' literary fancies. The Elves of the 'mythology' of The Lord
of the Rings are not actually equatable with the folklore traditions about 'fairies', and as I have said
(III 415) I should prefer the oldest available form of the name to be used, and left to acquire its own
associations for readers of my tale. In Scandinavian languages alf is available.
Enemy, The. Translate.
Ent. Retain this, alone or in compounds, such as Entwives. It is supposed to be a name in the
language of the Vale of Anduin, including Rohan, for these creatures. It is actually an Old English
word for 'giant', which is thus right according to the system attributed to Rohan, but the Ents of this
tale are not in form or character derived from Germanic mythology. Entings 'children of Ents' (II 78)
should also be unchanged except in the plural ending. The Grey-elven (Sindarin) name was Onodrim
(II 45).
Evenstar. As title of Arwen Undómiel. When used in the text this translation of Undómiel (a Quenya
name) should be translated.
Fairbairns, Translate. It is an English surname, a northern variant of the name Fairchild. It is used
by me to suggest that the elvish beauty of Elanor, daughter of Sam, was long inherited by her
descendants. Elanor was also remarkable for her golden hair; and in modern English fair when used
of complexion or hair means primarily blond, but though this association was meant to be present in
the minds of English readers, it need not be represented.
Fair Folk. The beautiful people (based on Welsh Tylwyth teg 'the beautiful kindred' = fairies). Title
of the Elves. Translate.
Fallohide. This has given difficulty. It should if possible be translated, since it is meant to represent a
name with a meaning in the Common Speech, though one devised in the past and so containing
archaic elements. It is made of English fallow + hide (cognates of German falb and Haut) and means
'Paleskin'. It is archaic, since fallow 'pale, yellowish' is not now in use, except in fallow deer, and hide
is no longer applied to human skin (except as a transference back from its use of animal hides, used
for leather). But this element of archaism need not be imitated. See III 414 on the relation of special
hobbit words to the language of Rohan.
Fang. A dog's name in I 101; translate. It is meant of course to be the English fang 'canine or
prominent tooth' (Old English fengtōp; German fangzahn); but since it is associated with Grip, the
sense of the now lost verb fang, I should think that German Fang would be a good version.
Fatty Lumpkin. Translate. The kin is of course a diminutive suffix.
Fell Riders. Translate.
Fellowship of the Ring. Translate in the text; also if possible in the title.
Ferny. A name in Bree. Translate. Fern and Ferny, Fernie are English surnames, but whatever their
origin the name is here used to fit the predominantly botanical names current in Bree.
Firefoot. Translate.
Firstborn, The. Title of the Elves. Translate. ('Firstborn', since the Elves appeared in the world
before all other 'speaking peoples', not only Men, but also Dwarves, of independent origin. Hobbits
are of course meant to be a special variety of the human race).
Fladrif. See Leaflock.
Flourdumpling. Translate.
Free Folk; Free Lords of the Free; Free Peoples. Translate.
Gamgee. A surname found in England, though uncommon. I do not know its origin; it does not
appear to be English. It is also a word for 'cotton-wool' (now obsolescent but known to me in
childhood), derived from the name of S. Gamgee (died 1886), a distinguished surgeon, who invented
'Gamgee tissue'. In a translation it would be best to treat this name as 'meaningless', and retain it with
any spelling changes that may seem necessary to fit it to the style of the language of translation.
Gamling (the Old). A name of one of the Rohirrim, and best left unchanged, though like one or two
other names in Rohan (Shadowfax, Wormtongue) it has been slightly anglicized and modernized. It
should be Gameling (with short a). It would be one of the words and names that hobbits recognized
as similar to their own, since it is an English (that is, Common Speech) name, probably the origin of
the surnames Gamlen, Gam(b)lin, and other forms. Compare The Tale of Gamelin, a medieval poem
from which ultimately was derived part of Shakespeare's As You Like It (It is derived from the stem
gamal- 'old', the normal word in Scandinavian languages, but only found in Old English in verse-
language, and in Old High German only as an element in personal names).
Goatleaf. A Bree name of botanical type. It is an old name of the honeysuckle or woodbine.
Compare French chèvrefeuille (medieval Latin caprifolium, probably from the vernaculars). It
presents no difficulty in German, since Geissblatt seems one of the names in use.
Goldberry. Translate by sense.
Great Enemy. Translate.
Grey Company. Translate.
Greyhame. Modernized form of Rohan grēg-hama 'greycoat'. By-name in Rohan of Gandalf. Since
both Grēghama and Greyhame would probably be unintelligible in a language of translation, whereas
at least the Grey- is meant to be intelligible to readers, it would be right, I think, to translate this
epithet: that is, to represent Éomer as translating its sense into the Common Speech (II 37). So the
Dutch version has correctly Grijsmantel; but the Swedish wrongly gråhamn 'grey phantom'. In
German it might be Graumantel?
Grey Host. Translate.
Grey Pilgrim. Another by-name of Gandalf, translation of Mithrandir. It should be translated by
sense.
Grip. Dog-name. Translate. See Fang.
Grubb. A hobbit-name. (Grubbs, I 36, is plural.) Translate, if possible in some way more or less
suitable to sound and sense. The name is meant to recall the English verb grub 'dig, root, in the
ground.'
Guardians. Translate.
Halfling. Common Speech name for Hobbit. It is not actually an English word, but might be (that is,
it is suitably formed with appropriate suffix). The sense is 'a half-sized man / person'. Translate with
similar invention containing the word for 'half' in the language of translation. The Dutch translation
used Halfling (presumably an intelligible derivative of half, though not in use in Dutch any more than
in English).
Harfoots (plural). Meant to be intelligible (in its context) and recognized as an altered form of an old
name = 'hairfoot', that is, 'one with hairy feet'. It is supposed to represent archaic English hæ
¯
r-fōt
later herfoot, with the usual change of er to ar in English. Modern English hair, though related, is
not a direct descendant of Old English h æ
¯
r, hēr = German Haar. German Harfuss would adequately
represent the form, meaning, and slight change of spelling in an old proper name. See Fallohide.
Harry (from Herry from Henry). Any popular man's name of a similar sort will do.
Hayward. Translate. A local official with the duty of inspecting fences and keeping cattle from
straying (see I 19). The word is now obsolescent, surviving chiefly in the very common surname
Hayward; but Hob (III 277, 279) was supposed actually to be a hayward. The word is derived from
hay 'fence' (not 'grass') + ward '
guard'. Compare High Hay, Hay Gate, Haysend, place-names in
Buckland. If the language of translation possesses an old compound of similar sense, so much the
better. The Dutch translation used Schutmesster (which is very close: 'keeper of a pound or fenced
enclosure'.) The Swedish used stängselvakt 'hedge-watch', which I think is made for the purpose.
Healer, The Healers. Translate.
Heathertoes. A Bree name. There is no parallel in English, though Heather- appears in some
surnames. The Dutch translation has Heideteen. For German Heídezhen? (Presumably a joke of the
Big Folk, meaning that the Little Folk, wandering unshod, collected heather, twigs and leaves
between their toes).
Hobbit. Do not translate, since the name is supposed no longer to have had a recognized meaning in
the Shire, and not to have been derived from the Common Speech (= English, or the language of
translation).
Holman, An English surname; but here supposed to = 'hole-man' (pronounced the same). Translate
by this sense.
Hornblower. Hornblow and Hornblower are English surnames. In the Shire they are evidendy
occupational surnames. Translate by sense.
Isengrim, See III 413: 'In some old families, especially those of Fallohide origin such as the Tooks
and the Bolgers, it was ... , the custom to give high-sounding first-names'. The name is an old
Germanic one, perhaps best known now as the name (Isegrim) adopted for the Wolf as a character in
the romance of Reynard the Fox. It is best left untranslated since it is not supposed to be made of
Common Speech elements.
Leaflock. Translate by sense, since this is supposed to be a Common Speech translation of the Elvish
Finglas: fing 'lock of hair' + las(s) 'leaf'. Similarly the Ent-name Fladrif, translated as Skinbark.
Maggot. Intended to be a 'meaningless' name, hobbit-like in sound. Actually it is an accident that
maggot is an English word meaning 'grub', 'larva'. The Dutch translation has Van de Made (made =
German Made, Old English maða 'maggot'), but the name is probably best left alone, as in the
Swedish translation, though some assimilation to the style of the language of translation would be in
place.
Marigold. Translate this flower-name (see III 413). The name is used because it is suitable as a name
in English and because, containing 'gold' and referring to a golden flower, it suggests that there was a
'Fallohide' strain (see 1 12) in Sam's family—which, increased by the favour of Galadriel, became
notable in his children: especially Elanor, but also Goldilocks (a name sometimes given to flowers of
the buttercup kind) who married the heir of Peregrin Took. Unfortunately the name of the flower in
the language of translation may be unsuitable as a name in form or meaning (for instance French
souci). In such a case it would be better to substitute the name of some other yellow flower. The
Swedish translator solved the difficulty by translating the name as Majagull and adding Ringblom
(Swedish ringblomma 'marigold'; compare German Ringelblume). The Dutch translator was content
with Meizoentje 'daisy'; which is good enough. He did not include the genealogies in his translation,
and ignored 'the fact that Daisy was the name of a much older sister of Sam and not a playmate of
Rosie Cotton.
Mugwort. A Bree name; the name of a plant (Artemisia, French armoise, akin to Wormwood, French
armoise amère). Translate by the name of the plant in the language of translation (for example
German Beifuss) If suitable; or by the name of some other herb of more or less similar shape. There
is no special reason for the choice of Mugwort, except its hobbit-like sound.
Necromancer. Translate.
Neekerbreekers, Invented insect-name; represent it by some invention of similar sound (supposed to
be like that of a cricket).
Noakes. Adapt this to the language of translation or substitute some suitable name in it of similar
style.
Noake(s), Noke(s) is an English surname, derived probably from the not uncommon minor place-
name No(a)ke, from early English atten oke 'at the oak'; but since this is no longer recognized, this
need not be considered. The name is in the tale unimportant.
Oldbuck. See Brandywine, Brandybuck. The -buck is derived from a personal name Buck, in archaic
form Bucca (III 368, year 1979). The first name Gorhendad (I 108) should be left unchanged. It is a
Welsh word meaning '
great-grandfather'; the reason for giving the folk of Buckland Welsh names or
ones of similar style is given in III 413-4.
Oliphaunt. Retain this. It is an archaic form of 'elephant' used as a 'rusticism', on the supposition that
rumour of the Southern beast would have reached the Shire long ago in the form of legend. This
detail might be retained simply by substituting O for the initial E of the ordinary name of the elephant
in the language of translation: the meaning would remain sufficiently obvious, even if that language
had no similar archaic form. In Dutch olifant remains the current form, and so is used by the
translator, but with loss of the archaic colouring. Oliphant in English is derived from Old French
olifant, but the o is probably derived from old forms of English or German: Old English olfend, Old
High German olbenta 'camel'. The names of foreign animals, seldom or never seen, are often
misapplied in the borrowing language. Old English olfend, Old High German olbenta, are probably
ultimately related to the classical elephant (Latin from Greek).
Orald. Forn and Orald as names of Bombadil are meant to be names in foreign tongues (not
Common Speech) and should according to the system be left unchanged. Forn is actually the
Scandinavian word for '(belonging to) ancient (days)'. All the dwarf-names in this tale are Norse, as
representing a northern language of Men, different from but closely related to that of the Rohirrim
who came from the other side of Mirkwood (see III 140, 415). Orald is an Old English word for
'very ancient', evidently meant to represent the language of the Rohirrim and their kin. It may be left
unchanged; but since it is the exact counterpart in form and sense of German uralt, this might well be
used in a German translation.
Orc. This is supposed to be the Common Speech name of these creatures at that time; it should
therefore according to the system be translated into English, or the language of translation. It was
translated 'goblin' in The Hobbit, except in one place; but this word, and other words of similar sense
in other European languages (as far as I know), are not really suitable. The orc in The Lord of the
Rings and The Silmarillion, though of course partly made out of traditional features, is not really
comparable in supposed origin, functions, and relation to the Elves. In any case orc seemed to me,
and seems, in sound a good name for these creatures. It should be retained.
It should be spelt ork (so the Dutch translation) in a Germanic language, but I had used the
spelling orc in so many places that I have hesitated to change it in the English text, though the
adjective is necessarily spelt orkish. The Grey-elven form is orch, plural yrch.
I originally took the word from Old English orc [Beowulf 112 orc-nass and the gloss orc = pyrs
('ogre'), heldeofol ('hell-devil')]. This is supposed not to be connected with modern English orc, ork,
a name applied to various sea-beasts of the dolphin order.
Pickthorn. A Bree name; meant to be 'meaningful'. Translate.
Pimple. An opprobrious nickname. Translate.
Proudfoot. A Hobbit surname (it is an English surname). Translate.
Puddifoot. A surname in the muddy Marish; meant to suggest puddle + foot. Translate.
Quickbeam. Ent. This is a translation of Sindarin Bregalad 'quick (lively) tree'. Since in the story this
is represented as a name given to him because he was (for an Ent) 'hasty', it would be best to
translate the name by a compound (made for the purpose) having this sense (for example German
Quickbaum?). It is unlikely that the language of translation would possess an actual tree-name
having or appearing to have this sense. Quickbeam and Quicken are actual English names of the
'rowan' or 'mountain ash'; also given to the related 'Service-tree'. The rowan is here evidently
intended, since 'rowan' is actually used in Quickbeam's song (II 87).
Ring-wraiths. This is a translation of the Black Speech Nazgûl, from nazg 'ring' and gûl, any one of
the major invisible servants of Sauron dominated entirely by his will. A compound must be made out
of suitable elements in the language of translation that has the sense of 'ring-wraith' as nearly as
possible.
Rumble. The name of an old hobbit-woman. It had no meaning (at that time) in the Shire. A form of
similar pattern to suit the language of translation will suffice.
Sackville-Baggins. Sackville is an English name (of more aristocratic association than Baggins). It is
of course joined in the story with Baggins because of the similar meaning in English (= Common
Speech) sack and bag, and because of the slightly comic effect of this conjunction. Any compound in
the language of translation containing elements meaning (more or less) the equivalent of sack / bag
will do.
Scatha. This is Old English ('injurer, enemy, robber') and so is from the language of Rohan and
should be left unchanged.
Shadowfax. This is an anglicized form of Rohan (that is Old English) Sceadu-faex 'having shadow-
grey mane (and coat)'. It does not actually occur in Old English. Since it is not Common Speech, it
may be retained, though better so in a simplified form of the Rohan name: Scadufax. But since in the
text this name has been assimilated to modern English (= Common Speech), it would be satisfactory
to do the same in a Germanic language of translation, using related elements. Fax 'hair' is now
obsolete in English, except in the name Fairfax (no longer understood). It was used in Old High
German (faks) and Middle High German (vahs, vachs), but is, I believe, also now obsolete; but it
could be revived in this name, as it is in the English text: for example Schattenvachs? Fax (faks) is
still in use in Iceland and Norway for 'mane'; but 'shadow' has no exact equivalents in Scandinavian
languages. The Dutch version has Schaduwschicht (shadow-flash), the Swedish Skuggfaxe.
Sharkey. This is supposed to be a nickname modified to fit the Common Speech (in the English text
anglicized), based on orkish sharkû 'old man'. The word should therefore be kept with modification
of spelling to fit the language of translation; alteration of the diminutive and quasi-affectionate
ending -ey to fit that language would also be in place.
Shelob. Though it sounds (I think) a suitable name for the Spider, in some foreign (orkish) tongue, it
is actually composed of She and lob (a dialectal English word meaning 'spider'; see Bilbo's song in
chapter VIII of The Hobbit). The Dutch version retains Shelob, but the Swedish has the rather feeble
Honmonstret.
Shirriff(s). Actually a now obsolete form of English sheriff 'shire-officer', used by me to make the
connection with Shire plainer. In the story Shirriff and Shire are supposed to be special hobbit
words, not generally current in the Common Speech of the time, and so derived from their former
language related to that of the Rohirrim. Since the word is thus not supposed to be Common Speech,
but a local word, it is not necessary to translate it, or do more than accommodate its spelling to the
style of the language of translation. It should, however, resemble in its first part whatever word is
used to represent Shire (see this entry).
Skinbark. English (= Common Speech) translation of Fladrif. The name should therefore be suitably
translated by sense. (Compare Leaflock).
Smallburrow. A meaningful hobbit-name; translate by sense.
Snowmane. A meaningful name (of King Theoden's horse), but (like Shadowfax) translated into
modern English form, for snāw-mana. It should therefore be represented by its proper Rohan form
Snawmana, or translated (especially into a Germanic language), as for example German
Schneemähne.
Stoors. The name of a third kind of hobbit of heavier build. This is early English stor, stoor 'large,
strong', now obsolete. Since it is thus supposed to be a special hobbit word not current in the
Common Speech, it need not be translated, and may be represented by a more or less 'phonetic'
spelling according to the use of letters in the language of translation; but an archaic or dialectal word
of this sense would also be acceptable.
Swertings. Said by Sam to be the name in the Shire for the legendary (to hobbits) dark-skinned
people of the 'Sunlands' (far south). It may be left unchanged as a special local word (not in the
Common Speech); but since it is evidently a derivative of swart, which is still in use (= swarthy), it
could be represented by some similar derivative of the word for 'black / dark' in the language of
translation. Compare Swarthy Men, the Common Speech equivalent (III 73).
Thistlewool. Translate by sense.
Took. Hobbit-name of unknown origin representing actual Hobbit Tūk (see III 415). It should thus
be kept and spelt phonetically according to the language of translation. The Took personal names
should be kept in the form and spelling of the text, as Peregrin, Paladin, Adelard, Bandobras. Note
that Bandobras' nickname 'Bullroarer' is in Common Speech and should be translated by sense (if
possible alliterating on B). This nickname also appears in Bullroarer Took in The Hobbit 17. I
believed when I wrote it that bullroarer was a word used by anthropologists for instruments that
made a roaring sound, used by uncivilized peoples; but I cannot find it in any dictionaries.
Treebeard. Translation of Fangorn. Translate by sense.
Twofoot. Translate by sense.
Underhill, Translate by sense.
Wandlimb. = Fimbrethil, of which it is not a translation. Translate by sense. (An Entwife's name).
Whitfoot. Translate by 'white' and 'foot.' See Whitfurrows under place-names.
Windfola. = 'Wind-foal', but leave unaltered since it is in the language of Rohan (not Common
Speech).
Wingfoot. A nickname; translate by sense: 'winged-foot'.
Wormtongue. 'Modernized' form of the nickname of Gríma, the evil counsellor of Rohan: Rohan
wyrm-tunga 'snake-tongue'. Translate by sense.
Woses. This represents (modernized) the Rohan word for 'old men of the woods'. It is not a purely
invented word. The supposed genuine Rohan word was wāsa, plural wāsan, which if it had survived
into modern English would be woses. It would have been better to call the 'wild men' woodwoses, for
that actually occurs in Old English wudewāsa, glossing 'faunus, satyrus, savage men, evil creatures'.
This word survived into the Tudor period as woodoses (often corrupted to woodhouses), and
survives in heraldry, since the woodhouse = a wild hairy man clad in leaves, common as a supporter
to arms. The wāsa element meant originally a forlorn or abandoned person, and now—for instance in
German Waise and Dutch wees—means 'orphan'. The origin of this idea was no doubt the actual
existence of wild folk, remnants of former peoples driven out by invaders, or of outlaws, living a
debased and savage life in forests and mountains.
Place-Names
Archet. This is actually an English place-name of Celtic origin. It is used in the nomenclature of Bree
to represent a stratum of names older than those in the Common Speech or Hobbit language. So also
Bree, an English place-name from a Celtic word for 'hill'. Therefore retain Archet and Bree unaltered,
since these names no longer have a recognized meaning in English. Chetwood is a compound of
Celtic and English, both elements meaning 'wood'; compare Brill, in Oxfordshire, derived from bree
+ híll. Therefore in Chetwood retain Chet and translate -wood.
Ashen Mountains. Common Speech translation of Ered Lithui (Sindarin orod, plural eryd, ered,
'mountain'; lith 'ash'; + adjectival ui). Translate by sense: mountains of ash-grey hue.
Bag End. The local name for Bilbo's house, and meant to be associated (by hobbits) with the end of a
'bag' or 'pudding-bag' = cul-de-sac. Translate by sense. See Baggins; the same element in the
language of translation should appear both in Baggins and in Bag End.
Bagshot Row. The row of small 'holes' in the lane below Bag End, said to have been so named
because the earth removed in excavating Bag End was shot over the edge of the sudden fall in the
hillside onto the ground which later became the gardens and earthwalls of the humbler dwellings.
Translate by approximate sense, including the same element in the language of translation meaning
'bag'.
Bamfurlong. An English place-name, probably from bean 'bean' and furlong (in the sense of a
division of a common field), the name being given to a strip of land usually reserved for beans. The
name is now, and so is supposed to have been at that time in the Shire, without clear meaning. It is
the name of Farmer Maggot's farm. Translate as seems suitable, but some compound containing the
word for 'bean' and that for 'field, cultivated ground' would seem desirable.
Baránduin. This means 'the long gold-brown river.' Leave untranslated: Brandywine is represented
as a corruption of Sindarin Baránduin (accent on the middle syllable and), from baran 'brown,
yellow-brown' + duin 'river'. The common Elvish was duinē: stem dui 'flow (in volume)'. The
Quenya form would have been luine (in Quenya initial d became l), but the word was not used.
Retain when so spelt. Usually by hobbits altered to Brandywine; see this entry.
Barrow-downs. Translate by sense: low treeless hills on which there are many 'barrows', that is
tumuli and other prehistoric grave-mounds. This barrow is not related to modern barrow, an
implement with a wheel; it is a recent adoption by archaeologists of the English dialect word barrow
(earlier berrow, from English beorg, berg, 'hill, mound').
Barrowfield. See the preceding entry. Translate by sense: a field containing a grave-mound.
Battle Gardens, Battle Pit. Translate by sense.
Better Smials. See Smials under Things.
Black Country, Black Land. Common Speech translation of Mordor. Translate.
Black Stone. Translate by sense.
Blackroot Vale. Translate by sense; Common Speech translation of Morthond (the name of a river,
given because its source was in the dark caverns of the Dead Men).
Blessed Realm. Translate by sense. The name in the Common Speech for the Far Western Land in
which the Valar (guardian powers) and the High Elves dwelt, called in Quenya Aman; the region
where the Valar dwelt being Valimar, Valinor, and that of the Elves Eldamar. The Blessed Realm
was at this time no longer part of the physical world, and could not, except in rare cases, be reached
by mortals.
Bonfire Glade. Translate by sense.
Brandy Hall. This should be translated, but should contain the same element as that used in the river-
name (Brandywine). In this case the whole word in the language of translation, for example
Branntwein or Brendevin, could be used, since the Hall was on the east bank of the river. In the
personal name Brandybuck it could be reduced to the first element, for instance Brendebuk?
Brandywine. This is represented as a hobbit alteration (I 14) of the Elvish (Sindarin) Baránduin
(stressed on the middle syllable). Since this is meant to have been intelligible at that time it should be
translated by sense; but a difficulty arises, since it would be desirable that the translation should also
be a possible corruption of Baránduin. The Dutch translation used Brandewijn; the Swedish missed
the point, using Vinfluden, though Brännavin would have served. Danish Brendevin or German
Branntwein would also do.
Bree. Retain, since it was an old name, of obsolete meaning in an older language; see Archet.
Bree-hill, Bree-land. Retain the first element, and translate 'hill' and 'land.'
Brockenbores. Not (I think) a genuine English place-name; but intended to have the recognized
sense: 'badgers' borings, badgers' tunnellings'. Translate in this sense. See Brockhouse.
Buck Hill, Buckland. The element 'buck' should be translated. See Brandybuck, Oldbuck.
Bucklebury. The name of the chief village in the Buckland. Translate with a name containing the
'buck' element (as above) + some equivalent of English -bury (Old English burg, a place occupying a
defensive position, walled or enclosed; a town. Compare Norbury). The -le in Buckle- is either an
alteration of Buckenbury, with the old genitive plural -en(a), or a reduction of Buckland.
Budgeford. Budge- was an obscured element, having at the time no clear meaning. Since it was the
main residence of the Bolger family (a hobbit-name not to be translated) it may be regarded as a
corruption of the element bolge, bulge. Both Bolger and Bulger occur as surnames in England.
Whatever their real origin, they are used in the story to suggest that they were in origin nicknames
referring to fatness, tubbiness.
Bywater. Village name: as being beside the wide pool occurring in the course of the Water, the main
river of the Shire, a tributary of the Brandywine. Translate by sense.
Chetwood. See Archet.
The Cleft ('of the Spider') = Cirith (Ungol). Cirith means 'cleft', a narrow passage cut through earth
or rock (like a railway cutting). Translate by sense.
Cloudyhead. Translation of Dwarvish Bundushathûr; translate by sense.
Coomb. A deep (but usually not very large) valley. It is very frequent as an element in English place-
names, spelt in various ways, such as -comb, -cumb, -combe. In this story used in the name Deeping
Coomb, or with reference to it. See Deeping Coomb.
Crack of Doom. In modern use derived from Macbeth IV i 117, in which the cracke of Doome
means 'the announcement of the Last Day', by a crack or peal of thunder: so it is commonly
supposed, but it may mean 'the sound of the last trump', since crack could be applied to the sudden
sound of horns or trumpets (as it is in Sir Gawain and the Green Knight lines 116, 1166). In this
story crack is here used in the sense 'fissure', and refers to the volcanic fissure in the crater of
Orodruin in Mordor. See further under Doom and Mount Doom.
Crickhollow. A place-name in Buckland. It is meant to be taken as composed of an obsolete element
+ the known word hollow. The -hollow (a small depression in the ground) can be translated by sense,
the crick- retained (in the spelling of the language of translation).
Deeping Coomb. This should have been spelt Deeping-coomb, since Deeping is not a verbal ending
but one indicating relationship: the coomb or deep valley belonging to the Deep (Helm's Deep) to
which it led up. So also Deeping Stream.
Derndingle. Said by Treebeard to be what Men called the meeting-place of the Ents (II 82);
therefore meant to be in the Common Speech. But the Common Speech name must be supposed to
have been given a long time ago, when in Gondor more was known or remembered about the Ents.
Dingle is still known, meaning 'deep (tree-shadowed) dell', but dern 'secret, hidden' is long obsolete,
as are the related words in other Germanic languages — except Tarn- in German Tarnkappe (from
Middle High German). Translate by sense, preferably by obsolete, poetic, or dialectal elements.
Dimholt. The wood of dark trees at the entrance to the Dark Door. The name is given in the form of
the language of Rohan, and so should be retained unchanged, though dim is still current in English
(but here used in an older sense, 'obscure, secret'), and holt is in occasional poetic use.
Dimrill Dale. The Common Speech name of Dwarvish Azanulbizar, Grey-elven Nan Duhirion. The
Common Speech form is an accurate translation: the valley of the dim (overshadowed) rills that ran
down the mountain-side. Translate by sense. Similarly Dimrill Gate, Dimrill Stair.
Doom. The word doom, in its original sense 'judgment' (formal and legal, or personal), has in
English, partly owing to its sound, and largely to its special use in doomsday, become loaded with
senses of death, finality and fate (impending or foretold). (Outside English doomsday is only
preserved in the Scandinavian languages: Icelandic dómsdagur, Swedish domedag, Danish
dómmedag; also Finnish tuomipäivä).
The use in the text as a word descriptive of sound (especially in I book ii chapter 5) associated
with boom is nonetheless meant (and would by most English readers be felt) to recall the noun doom,
with its sense of disaster. This is probably not possible to represent in another language. The Dutch
version represents doom boom phonetically by doem boem, which is sufficient, and at any rate has
the support of the verb doemen, which especially in the past participle gedoemd has the same sense
as English doomed (to death or an evil fate). The Swedish version usually has dom bom, but
occasionally dum bom. This seems (as far as I can judge) unsatisfactory, since the associations of
dum are quite out of place, and dumbom is a word for 'blockhead' (German Dummkopf).
Mount Doom. This was (in Gondor) the Common Speech name of the volcano Orodruin
('Mountain of red flame'), but was a translation of its other Elvish name Amon Amarth ('Hill of
Doom'), given to Sauron's forge-mountain because it was linked in ancient and little-understood
prophecies with the 'doom', the final end of the Third Age, that it was foretold would befall when
Isildur's Bane was found again; see the verses in I 259. Translate by sense: 'Mountain (of) doom' (in
the sense 'impending fate'). See Crack of Doom.
Dunharrow. A modernisation of Rohan Dūnhaerg 'the heathen fane on the hillside', so-called because
this refuge of the Rohirrim at the head of Harrowdale was on the site of a sacred place of the old
inhabitants (now the Dead Men). The element haerg can be modernised in English because it remains
an element in place-names, notably Harrow (on the Hill). The word has no connection with harrow
the implement. It is the Old English equivalent of Old Norse hörgr (modern Icelandic hörgur), Old
High German harug. In the language of translation it is best represented by an approximation to the
Rohan form. The Dutch version Dunharg is satisfactory; the Swedish Dunharva may be suspected of
having taken harrow as the implement (Swedish harv).
Dunland. This contains the English adjective dun 'dark, dusky, dull-hued'. See III 408.
Dwarrowdelf. For dwarrows = dwarves see III 415. Dwarrowdelf is a translation of the actual
Common Speech name of Moria, Phurunargian, given an archaic English form, since Phurunargian
was already itself archaic in form. The 'archaism' is not of much importance; the name should be
translated by the same element as that used to translate Dwarf (or a variety of that) + a word
meaning 'mine, digging, excavation' — for instance German Zwergengrube?
Eastemnet. Rohan; retain it (though it contains east it is not a Common Speech name, but Rohan for
'east-plain'). Similarly Eastfold (see Folde).
Eastfarthing. See Farthings.
Elvenhome, Elven Door, Elven River. See Elven-smiths, under Names of Persons and Peoples.
Entwade, Entwash, Entwood. These are 'modernised' names in the language of Rohan: Entwaed,
Entwaesc, Entwudu. The second elements, waed 'ford', waesc 'flood-water', wudu 'wood', are given
modern English forms because the Rohan forms were recognisably akin to the words in the Common
Speech: that is, speakers of the Common Speech, especially in Gondor (where of course the names
and geography of Rohan were well-known), used these forms, assimilated to their own language.
The -wade, -wash, -wood may therefore be translated by sense, especially if the language of
translation contains related elements, as Swedish vad 'ford'. On Ent see that entry.
Ettendales. This is meant to be a Common Speech (not Elvish) name, though it contains an obsolete
element eten 'troll, ogre'. This should be retained, except in a language which preserves a form of the
same word, as Danish jaette, Swedish jätte, Icelandic jötunn, = Old English eoten, Middle English
eten, English dialect eten, yetēn.
Similarly Ettenmoors; moor here has the northern sense of 'high barren land'.
Farthings. See I 18. This is the same word as English farthing (Old English feorðing, Middle English
ferthing), quarter of a penny; but used in its original sense 'fourth part, quarter'. This is modelled on
thriding 'third part', still used of the divisions of Yorkshire, with loss of initial th after the th or t in
Northriding, Eastriding, Westriding. The application to divisions of other measures than money has
long been obsolete in English, and farthing has been used since early Middle English for 'a negligible
amount', so that to English ears the application to the divisions of the Shire (an area of about 18,000
square miles) is comical. This tone can hardly be reproduced, but related words could perhaps be
used: as Danish fjerding, Swedish fjärding; or German Viertal (which is applied to 'regions,
districts').
Fenmarch. A Rohan name: the fenny (marshy) border-land about the Mering Stream (map in volume
III) forming the boundary of Rohan and Anórien. This should have been called Fenmark, but since it
appears in III 78 and on the map to volume III I have retained it; the meaning of -mark, or the
French form (of Germanic origin) marche, is the same: boundary, border (land). As a Rohan name
use in translation Fenmark.
Firien. A Rohan name representing an old word (Old English firgen, pronounced firien) for
'mountain'. Compare Halifirien 'holy mount'. As belonging to the language of Rohan, firien should
be retained. Inconsistently, Firienfeld, the flat upland of Dunharrow, has been left unmodernised (the
Firienfield of the Index is in error), but Firienholt has been altered to Firienwood, the wood about
and on the slopes of the Halifirien. In translation it would be best to leave both unaltered, Firienfeld,
Firienholt, as being alien (not Common Speech) names.
Folde. A Rohan name, to remain unaltered. The same word occurs in Eastfold, which should also
remain unchanged (compare Eastemnet). This is Old English folde (Old Norse fold) '
earth, land,
country', not connected either with the English verb fold, or with (sheep) fold. Compare Vestfold and
Østfold in Norway.
The Folde was the centre of the kingdom, in which the royal house and its kin had their dwellings;
its boundary eastward was roughly a line South-west from the junction of the Snowbourn and
Entwash to the mountains; the Eastfold was the land from that line east to the Fenmark between
Entwash and the mountains; the Westfold was the similar land along the mountains as far as the River
Isen. The defensive centre of the Folde and Eastfold was at Edoras; of Westfold at Helm's Deep.
Frogmorton. This is not an actual English place-name; but it has the same element as in Frogmore
(Bucking-hamshire): frog + moor + town. Since this is an intelligible name, it may be translated. Note
that moor/mor has the meaning 'marshy land', as usually in place-names of southern and midland
England.
Gladden Fields. Gladden is here the name for the 'flag' or iris (Old English glaedene), now usually
spelt gladdon, and has no connection with English glad and the verb gladden. Translate by sense,
but avoid if possible the 'learned' name iris. Similarly in Gladden River, which flowed into the
Gladden Fields.
Golden Perch. An Inn name; probably one favored by anglers. In any case Perch is the fish-name
(and not a land-measure or bird-perch).
Great Smials. See Smials under Things.
From here to the end of G in the Index translate by sense: all the names are in modern English (=
Common Speech). But note: Grimslade, mentioned in III 124 as the home of Grimbold, killed in
battle, contains Grim (evidently the name of an ancestor) + slade (Old English slaed, Norwegian
dialect slad), widely used in English place-names, and still in use, mostly with the sense 'forest glade',
'dell' (especially one on a slope up a hillside).
Halifirien. A Rohan name; retain unaltered. See Firien.
Hallows, The. A Common Speech translation (III 247, 253) of the Gondor name (not given) for the
Sacred Places of the tombs. Translate (if possible with a word of archaic or poetic tone).
Hardbottle. In the Shire; the home of the Bracegirdles in the North Farthing (not on the map). -
bottle is an English place-name element, Old English botl, variant of bold (from which modern
English build is derived), meaning '(large) dwelling'; it is not connected with bottle (glass container).
Compare Nobottle on the small Shire-map, which is an actual place-name in England
(Northumberland). Translate by suitable elements, meaning 'hard dwelling'; 'hard' because excavated
in or built of stone (in the rocky North Farthing). The equivalent and related element in German
place-names is -büttel; in Scandinavian -bol (especially in Norway).
Harrowdale. See Dunharrow.
Haysend. The end of the hay or boundary-hedge (not hay 'dried grass'). Translate as 'hedge's end'.
Compare High Hay.
Helm's Deep, Helm's Dike, Helm's Gate. Helm is the name of a man and should be retained.
Hill of Guard. Translate, since this is the Common Speech name of Amon Tirith, the hill on which
Minas Tirith was built.
Hoarwell. The Common Speech translation of Mitheithel = 'pale grey' + 'spring, source'; well, as
usually in place-names, has this sense (not that of a deep water-pit). Translate.
Hobbiton. See Hobbit; the village name should be translated by 'hobbit' and an element meaning
'village'.
Hold. In the Hold of Dunharrow it has the sense 'stronghold, defended refuge'.
Hollin. The Common Speech name (short for Hollin-land) of the country called in Elvish Eregion
'Holly-region'. Hollin is an old form, still used locally, of holly; the region abounded in holly-trees.
Translate.
Hornburg, Hornrock. These are so called because of Helm's great horn, supposed still at times to be
heard blowing. Translate.
Irensaga. Rohan; it means 'iron-saw', with reference to its serrated ridge, crest. It may be left
unchanged as an alien name, or translated (see the next entry).
Isengard and Isenmouthe. These names were intended to represent translations into the Common
Speech of the Elvish names Angrenost and Carach Angren, but ones made at so early a date that at
the period of the tale they had become archaic in form and their original meanings were obscured.
They can therefore be left unchanged, though translation (of one or both elements in either name)
would be suitable, and I think desirable when the language of translation is Germanic, possessing
related elements.
Isen is an old variant form in English of iron; gard a Germanic word meaning 'enclosure',
especially one round a dwelling or group of buildings; and mouthe a derivative of mouth,
representing Old English mūða from mūð 'mouth') 'opening', especially used of the mouths of rivers,
but also applied to other openings (not parts of a body). Isengard 'the Iron-court' was so called
because of the great hardness of the stone in that place and especially in the central tower. The
Isenmouthe was so called because of the great fence of pointed iron posts that closed the gap leading
into Udûn, like teeth in jaws (see III 197, 209).
In the Dutch and Swedish versions Isengard is left unchanged. For Isenmouthe the Dutch uses
Isenmonde, translating or assimilating to Dutch only the second element (a more complete
translation to Ijzermonde would seem to me better). The Swedish renders it Isensgap, which is
incorrect, since Isen is not a proper name but adjectival.
The gard element appears in Old Norse garðr, whence current or dialectal Swedish gård, Danish
gaard, and English garth (beside the original English form yard); this, though usually of more lowly
associations (as English farmyard), appears for instance in Old Norse As-garðr, now widely known
as Asgard in mythology. The word was early lost in German, except in Old High German mittin- or
mittil-gart (the inhabited lands of Men) = Old Norse mið-garðr, and Old English middan-geard: see
Middle-earth. Would not this old element in German form -gart be suitable for a translation or
assimilation to German such as Eisengart?
Of -mouthe the German equivalent appears to be Mün-dung (or in place-names -munde); in
Scandinavian, Danish munding, Swedish mynning.
Note. Whatever form is used in Isengard must also be used in the name of the River Isen, since
the river-name was derived from Isengard, in which it had its source.
Lake Evendim. Common Speech version of Nen Uial 'water of twilight'. Translate by sense:
'evening—dusk/ twilight/gloaming'.
Langstrand. Translation of Anfalas. This is a Common Speech name, so translate it by sense: 'long
strand'. The shortening of long to lang, very frequent in English place-names, can be disregarded.
Limlight (River). The spelling -light indicates that this is a Common Speech name; but leave the
obscured element lim- unchanged and translate -light: the adjective light here means 'bright, clear'.
Lockholes. The hobbit version of 'lock-up (house)'; a place of detention. Translate by sense.
Longbottom. The second element retains its original sense (as locally and frequently in place-names
and derived surnames such as Ramsbottom) of 'valley' (especially the head or inner end of a valley);
related words are Swedish botten, Danish bund; also German Boden, but this does not agree closely
in sense. Translate by sense.
Lune. An anglicised, that is a hobbit, version of Elvish Lhûn. It is thus an alien name, and should be
retained in the language of translation, assimilated if required to its spelling of such a sound as [lūn].
Marish. An old form of English marsh. Translate (using if possible a word or form that is understood
but local or out of date).
Mathomhouse. See Mathom under Things.
Mering Stream. This name appears on the map to Volume III: 'Boundary stream'. (See Fenmarch).
Retain Mering as a Rohan word not in the Common Speech. (Old English māere, mēre 'boundary').
Middle-earth. Not a special land, or world, or 'planet', as is too often supposed, though it is made
plain in the prologue, text, and appendices that the story takes place on this earth and under skies in
general the same as now visible. The sense is 'the inhabited lands of (Elves and) Men', envisaged as
lying between the Western Sea and that of the Far East (only known in the West by rumour).
Middle-earth is a modern alteration of medieval middel-erde from Old English middan-geard (see
Isengard). The Dutch and Swedish versions correctly use the old mythological name assimilated to
the modern languages: Dutch Midden-aarde, Swedish Mid-gård.
Midgewater Marshes. Translate by sense. The name was suggested by Mývatn in Iceland, of the
same meaning.
Mirkwood. A name borrowed from ancient Germanic geography and legend, chiefly preserved in Old
Norse myrkviðr, though the oldest recorded form is Old German mirkiwidu. Not preserved in
English, though Mirkwood is now used to represent Old Norse myrkviðr. Translate by sense, if
possible using elements of poetic or antique tone. The Dutch version has Demster-wold. The
Swedish has Mörkmården, the last part of which I do not understand, since the only mård known to
me is the name of the fur-animal 'marten' (Danish maar). The translators of Norse mythology into
German or Scandinavian languages must have desired something better?
Mirrormere. Common Speech translation of Dwarvish Kheledzâram ('glass-lake'); translate by sense.
Mount Doom. See Doom.
Norbury. Common Speech translation of Forn-ost. The form that Old English norð-burg would take
in modern English place-names, meaning 'north (fortified) town'. Translate by sense, and by related
elements in the language of translation when available. Similarly Nor-land '(belonging to) the north-
lands', in this tale those regions envisaged in the action north of Rohan. The longer form Northerland
(I 390) has the same reference. Northfarthing: see Farthing.
Over-heaven. Translate by sense. This is a Common Speech equivalent of Elvish menel 'firmament',
tar-menel 'high heaven' (I 247), suggested by Old Norse upphiminn, and correctly translated
Upphimlen in the Swedish version. The Dutch has Boven-hemel.
Rivendell. 'Cloven-dell'; Common Speech translation of Imladris(t) 'deep dale of the cleft'. Translate
by sense, or retain, as seems best. The Dutch version retains the name as Rivendel; the Swedish
version has Vattnadal, which is incorrect and suggests that the translator thought that Riven- was
related to river.
Rushey. 'Rush-isle'; in origin a 'hard' among the fens of the Marish. The element -ey, -y in the sense
'small island' (= Swedish ö, Danish ø, OId Norse ey) is very frequent in English place-names. The
German equivalent is Aue 'river-side land, water-meadow', which would not be unsuitable in this
case.
Sarn Ford. Retain Sarn. The name is a half-translation (of Sarn-athrad 'stony-ford'), a process
frequent in place-names. The Elvish Sarn is also seen in Sarn Gebir.
Scary. A meaningless name in the Shire; but since it was in a region of caves and rock-holes (III
301), and of a stone-quarry (marked on the map of the Shire in Volume I) it may be supposed to
contain English dialectal scar 'rocky cliff.' Leave unchanged except as required by the spelling of the
language of translation.
Shire. An organised region with a 'county-town' (in the case of the hobbits' Shire this was Michel
Delving). Since this word is current in modern English and therefore is in the tale in the Common
Speech, translate it by sense.
Shire, Old English scír, seems very early to have replaced the ancient Germanic word for a
'district', found in its oldest form in Gothic gawi, surviving now in Dutch gouw, German Gau. In
English, owing to its reduction to gē (pronounced yē), it survived only in a few old place-names, the
best known of which is Surrey (from Suðer-ge) 'southern district'. This word would seem the nearest
equivalent in antiquity and general sense to the Shire of the story. The Dutch version uses Gouw;
Gau seems to me suitable in German, unless its recent use in regional reorganisation under Hitler has
spoilt this very old word. In Scandinavian languages (in which a related word does not exist) some
other (preferably old) word for 'district' or 'province' should be used. The Swedish version uses
Fylki, apparently borrowing the Old Norse (especially Norwegian) fylki 'district, province'. Actually
the Old Norse and modern Icelandic sýsla (Swedish syssla, Danish syssel, now obsolete in the sense
amt, but occurring in place-names) was in mind, when I said that the real untranslated name of the
Shire was Súza (III 412); hence it was also said (I 14) that it was so named as 'a district of well-
ordered business'.
Silverlode. Translation of Elvish Celeb-rant. Translate by sense: silver and lode 'course, water-
channel'.
Silvertine. Translation of Elvish Celeb-dil. Translate by sense: silver and tine 'spike, sharp horn'.
Snowbourn. Modernised form of Rohan (that is, Old English) snāwburna. Either use Snawburna, or
in a language possessing related elements modernise the name to suit it: for instance,
Schneebrunnen, Snebrønd, Snöbrunn.
Staddle. A village-name in Bree. Staddle is now dialectal, but occurs in place-names with the
meaning 'foundation', of buildings, sheds, ricks, and so forth; from Old English staðol. Use a related
equivalent in the language of translation (if any), such as German Stadel, or assimilate it to the
spelling of the language.
Starkhorn. A mountain-name in Rohan. This may be retained, as a name not in Common Speech; it
meant a horn (peak) 'standing up stiff like a spike'. The occurrence of stark in German (and Swedish)
should make it sufficiently intelligible. The Dutch version has Sterkhorn, the Swedish Starkhorn. To
an English reader stark now has implications of nakedness and grimness (not originally present, but
due to its application to rigor mortos in corpses, and to the expression stark-naked), which would
perhaps be better represented in German by starr.
Stonewain Valley. Translate by sense. The Common Speech name of the long, narrow defile along
which the wains (sleds or drays) passed to and fro from the stone-quarries.
Stoning-land. Represents Rohan Staning (land), a translation of Gondor. Since this has been
modernised (that is accommodated to the forms of English) use the etymological equivalent of 'stone'
in the language of translation, as sten, stein, for the first element.
Sunlands. Translate by sense. It is evidently meant as a popular name, in the Common Speech or
other languages, current in Gondor and the North-west for the little known countries of the far
South.
Sunlending. This is a translation into the language of Rohan of Anórien, the name of the land
immediately attached to Minas Anor (originally including that city and inhabited country as far as the
River Erui). It is thus 'heraldic' rather than climatic, and related to the heraldic names of Elendil's
sons Anárion and Isildur, being the counterpart of Ithilien. It only occurs in the verses (III 77)
purporting to translate the minstrelsy of Rohan, and should be retained. It might well be spelt (indeed
more accurately) Sunnlending, as in the Swedish version. But the translation in the Dutch,
Zuiderleen 'Southern-fief' is erroneous, since the 'southern fiefs', also called the Outlands, referred to
the seaboard lands south of Anórien.
Tarlang's Neck. Translate Neck (as representing Common Speech) and retain Tarlang. The Swedish
version has Tarlangs hals; The Dutch Engte van Tarlang.
The Neck was a long ridge of rock, over which the road climbed, joining the main mass of the range
to the branch (containing three peaks) which separated the plain of Erech from Lamedon. Tarlang,
originally the name of this ridge, was later taken as a personal name.
Teeth of Mordor. Translate Teeth of.
Three-farthing Stone. See Farthings. Translate, using whatever word is adopted to represent
farthing.
Tighfield. This is intended to contain an old word for 'rope' (surviving in some of the senses of the
modern English noun tie, in which the spelling is assimilated to that of the related verb tie). It was
the site of a 'rope-walk' or rope-maker's yard. It would be best translated by some other word for
'rope' than that used in 'rope-walk'. Related are Icelandic taug and the word with various forms toug,
tov, tog, in Danish and Norwegian; also nautical German (from Low German) tou.
Note that English 'rope-walk' seems to have been misunderstood by translators; certainly the
Swedish, with en repbro över älven borta vid Slättäng. There is no mention of a river in my text (II
217; Swedish II 249). Nor is it easy to see why having a 'rope-bridge' over a river would beget an
inherited knowledge in the family about the nature of ropes, and their making. The Dutch has
touwbrug, which I suspect is also due to misunderstanding. I do not know the technical equivalent of
'rope-walk' in other languages: dictionaries give German Seilerbahn, and Danish reberbane, but
these also are possibly mistaken? A 'rope-walk' (known in English since the seventeenth century) is
so called because the ropes were stretched out in long lines over trestles at intervals.
The Swedish Slättäng and Dutch Weideveld do not, of course, translate Tighfield as above
defined, and are probably mere contextual guesses. There is, however, another place-name element
(peculiar to English) that has the same forms as the 'rope' word, though it is probably not related: in
modern place-names tigh, teigh, tye, tey. This meant an enclosed piece of land. It does not occur as
the first element in a compound.
Tindrock. Common speech name (not a translation) of Tol Brandir, the steep inaccessible island of
towering rock at the head of the falls of Rauros. Though originally Common Speech, the name was
given long before the time of the tale, and contains the old word tind 'spike', which if it had survived
would have rhymed with find. But it now appears as tine 'prong', with loss of d. The Old Norse
equivalent was tindr, Old High German zint. It might be possible to use the latter as an archaic form;
but the current (probably related) German Zinne has precisely the right sense. Of this Zinne the
Swedish equivalent is Tinne, Danish Tind(e) — which also seem suitable. Tol Brandir should be
retained as an Elvish name.
Tower. All the place-names under Tower(s) in the Index are contemporary Common Speech
translations or author's translations of the Grey-elven names, and should be translated in those parts
that are English.
Treegarth (of Orthanc). On garth see Isengard. Trans-late by sense: garth is an enclosed space or
garden, usually round a central building (here Orthanc).
Underharrow, See Dunharrow. A hamlet in the valley below the Dunharrow. Use the same word as
that used for harrow ('fane') in Dunharrow.
Upbourn. Up- is used in English place-names for river-side villages far up the named river (as
Upavon in Wiltshire), especially in contrast to larger places near its mouth, as Upwey above
Weymouth. This village was some way up the Snowbourn above Edoras, but not so far up as
Underharrow. Since the name is given in modernised English form, it may be translated if that
presents no difficulty, or retained in its proper Rohan form Upburnan.
Watchwood. Translate.
Waymeet. On the map of the Shire in Volume I this appears as Waymoot, but in the text modernised
as Waymeet, a village at the meeting of three ways. Translate by sense, as convenient.
Weathertop. Translate. It is the Common Speech name of the hill called in Grey-elven Amon Sûl 'Hill
of the Wind'.
Wellinghall. Treebeard's translation into the Common Speech of ('part of') the name of his dwelling.
Translate. The intended sense is 'hall (under or behind) the outflow of the spring.'
Westemnet. Rohan: emnet 'flat-land, plain', equivalent of Danish slette; and of German Ebene (to
which it is related). Retain, as not being a Common Speech name; but West- may be respelt (for
example with V) in a language that does not use W, since the word for West was the same or similar
in the Common Speech and in the language of Rohan.
Westernesse. The Common Speech name of Númenor (which means 'West-land'). It is meant to be
western + ess, an ending used in partly francized names of 'romantic' lands, as Lyonesse, or Logres
(England in Arthurian Romance). The name actually occurs in the early romance King Horn, of some
kingdom reached by ship. Translate by some similar invention containing West- or its equivalent. The
Swedish version has Västerness, the Dutch Westernisse.
Westfarthing. See Farthings.
Westfold. See Folde.
Westmarch (in the Shire). Translate. March means 'borderland'.
West Marches (in Rohan). This is given in Common Speech form and may be translated as 'the
West(ern) Borderlands': in Rohan the land bordering the Isen.
Wetwang. Common Speech translation of Nindalf (Grey-elven nîn 'wet' + talf 'flat field'). But it is in
archaic form, wang being an old word for 'field, flat area'. (Wetwang is an actual place-name in
Yorkshire). Both elements should be translated. In Scandinavian languages the equivalents of both
wet and wang are found: Icelandic votur and vangur; Swedish våt and vång; Danish vaad and vang.
The Dutch version retains Wetwang, though Natwang would have been better; the Swedish has Våta
vägen, which is not the meaning, and is quite unsuitable: the Wetwang was a pathless fen. Wang did
not survive in Dutch, or in German (except in place-names or dialect). German Wange, Dutch wang
'cheek' is a different (but related) word.
Whitfurrows (in the Shire). Translate by sense, whit- being the usual shortening of white in personal
names (Whitlock) and local names (Whitley). Compare Whitfoot. Similarly Whitwell in the Shire (an
actual English place-name). The reference in English place-names is usually to the colour of the soil.
Wilderland. An invention (not actually found in English), based on wilderness (originally meaning
country of wild creatures, not inhabited by Men), but with a side-reference to the verbs wilder
'wander astray' and bewilder. It is supposed to be the Common Speech name of Rhovanion (on the
map, not in the text), the lands east of the Misty Mountains (including Mirkwood) as far as the River
Running. The Dutch version has Wilderland: Dutch has wildernis, but not German or the
Scandinavian languages (German Wildnis, Danish vildnis).
Withywindle. River-name in the Old Forest, intended to be in the language of the Shire. It was a
winding river bordered by willows (withies). Withy- is not uncommon in English place-names, but -
windle does not actually occur (Withywindle was modelled on withywind, a name of the convolvulus
or bindweed). An invention of suitable elements in the language of translation would be desirable.
Very good is the Dutch version Wilgewinde (with wilg = English willow). I do not understand the
Swedish version Vittespring. Words related to withy are found in the Scandinavian languages; related
also is German Weide.
Things
Few of the entries in this section of the Index require comment, since they are either in alien
(especially Elvish) languages, or simply in modern English (= Common Speech) and require normal
translation.
Elder Days. This is naturally taken by English readers to mean 'older' (that is, former), but with an
archaic flavour, since this original form of the comparative is now only applied to persons, or used as
a noun in Elders (seniors). In inventing the expression I intended this, as well as association with the
poetic word eld 'old age, antiquity'. I have since (recently) come across the expression in early
English be eldern dawes 'in the days of our forefathers, long ago'. This, meaning 'Days of the
Seniors', might help in devising a translation that is not just the equivalent of 'the older days'. The
Swedish version has simply i Äldre tiden; the Dutch de Oude Tid (less correctly, since this would
naturally also apply to the other ages before the Third).
The similarity to Eldar, plural of Elda 'Elf', is accidental and unintentional. Elda is the Quenya
form of the Grey-elven word edhel. See Elder Kindred. Elven-
. With regard to this old adjectival
form, see Elven-smiths.
Evermind. A flower-name, translation of Rohan simbelmynë. The element -mind has the sense
'memory'; the name thus resembles 'forget-me-not', but a quite different kind of flower is intended: an
imagined variety of anemone, growing in turf like Anemone pulsatilla, the pasque-flower, but smaller
and white like the wood anemone. Translate by sense. The Swedish and Dutch versions both omit
the element -mind, and so produce names equivalent to 'everlasting flower', which is not the point.
Though the plant bloomed at all seasons, its flowers were not 'immortelles'. (The Swedish has
evighetsblommor, the Dutch Immerdaar).
Ithilstone. Translate the second element -stone.
Kingsfoil. Translate: -foil (from Old French foil) = 'leaf', as in English plant-names such as
cinquefoil. Only the leaf of asëa was valued.
Lithe. The former and later Lithe (Old English líða) were the old names for June and July
respectively. All the month-names in the Shire Calendar are (worn-down) forms of the Old English
names. In the Hobbit Calendar (the) Lithe was the middle-day (or 183rd day) of the year (see
Appendix D). Since all Hobbit month-names are supposed not to be Common Speech, but
conservative survivals from their former language before migration, it would be best to keep Lithe
unaltered—as would be necessary with the other calendar names in any translation of the
Appendices. The Dutch version keeps Lithe. (The word was peculiar to English and no related
calendar word is found elsewhere). The Swedish version rewrites the passage (I 19) '. . . who was
elected every seven years at the Free Fair on the White Downs at the Lithe, that is at Midsummer':
Han valdes vart sjunde år vid midsommarvakan uppe pä kritklipporna i sommarsolståndets natt.
This, besides omitting the 'Free Fair' and misrendering the 'White Downs' as the 'chalk cliffs',
misrepresents the passage and the customs plainly alluded to. It was not a night festival or 'wake', but
a day-celebration marked by a 'Free Fair' (Dutch version Vrije Markt), so called because anyone who
wished could set up a booth without charge. The translator has assimilated the passage to the
Scandinavian summer-solstice festival, christianised in name by association with St. John the
Baptist's day (June 24), which occurred at more or less the right date (Icelandic Jónsvaka,
Jónsmessa, Danish Sankthansnat, Skaersommernat). But the affair was not a Midsummer Night's
Dream! See Yule.
Longbottom Leaf. See Longbottom, under Place-names.
Mathom. Leave unchanged; it is not Common Speech, but a word peculiar to hobbits (compare
Smials, and see III 414). The meaning is defined in I 14 as 'anything that Hobbits had no immediate
use for, but were unwilling to throw away'. It represents Old English máðm 'precious thing, treasure'.
Old Toby. A variety of tobacco, named after Tobold Hornblower. Use whatever equivalent of Toby
is used for the personal name (I 17).
Old Winyards. A wine—but of course in fact a place-name, meaning 'the Old Vineyards'. Winyard is
actually preserved as a place-name in England, descending from Old English before the assimilation
to French and Latin vin-. This cannot, I think, be imitated, and one must remain content with the
word for 'vineyard' in the language of translation, as weingarten, vingaard, and so on. The Dutch
version has Oude Wijngaarden. The Swedish, for no obvious reason (unless failure to recognise
Winyards as a relative of vingård), simply omits the name.
Púkel-men. A Rohan name for the effigies of men of a vanished race. It represents Old English púcel
(still surviving as puckle), one of the forms of the puk- stem (widespread in England, Wales, Ireland,
Norway and Iceland) referring to a devil, or to a minor sprite such as Puck, and often applied to ugly
misshapen persons. The púkel-men are adequately described, and the element púkel may be
retained—or replaced by some word of similar (possibly related) form and sense. The Dutch version
has de Púkel-mensen, the Swedish Pukel-männen.
Rope-walk. Not in the Index, but it occurs in II 217 as a technical name for a rope-maker's yard; see
Tighfield.
Smials. A word peculiar to hobbits (not Common Speech), meaning 'burrow'; leave unchanged. It is
a form that the Old English word smygel 'burrow' might have had, if it had survived. The same
element appears in Gollum's real name, Sméagol. See III 414-5.
Springle-ring. An invention; render it by a similar one suitable to the language of translation,
implying a vigorous ring-dance in which dancers often leaped up.
Tale in Tale of Years means 'counting', 'reckoning'.
Westmansweed. Translate, as a Common Speech rendering of 'herb of the Men of the West' (of
Westernesse, Númenor),
Yule. The midwinter counterpart of Lithe. It only occurs in The Lord of the Rings in Appendix D,
and 'Midwinter' only occurs once during the main narrative. The midwinter festival was not an Elvish
custom, and so would not have been celebrated in Rivendell. The fellowship, however, left on
December 25, which had then no significance, since the Yule, or its equivalent, was then the last day
of the year and the first of the next year. But December 25 (setting out) and March 25
(accomplishment of the quest) were intentionally chosen by me.
In translation, Yule should like Lithe be treated as an alien word not generally current in the
Common Speech. It should therefore be retained, though with a spelling suitable to the language of
translation: so for example in Danish or German spelt Jule. Yule is found in modern English (mostly
as a literary archaism), but this is an accident, and cannot be taken to imply that a similar or related
word was also found in the Common Speech at that time: the hobbit calendar differed throughout
from the official Common Speech calendars. It may, however, be supposed that a form of the same
word had been used by the Northmen who came to form a large part of the population of Gondor
(III 328), and was later in use in Rohan, so that some word like Yule was well known in Gondor as a
'northern name' for the midwinter festival; somewhat like the appearance in modern German of Jul
(as a loan from the North?), in such words as Julblock 'Yule-log' and Julklapp (as in Swedish and
similarly in Danish). In Scandinavia, of course Jule would be well understood.
