 
 Silmarillion Writers' Guild 
 Skip to main content
 Login | Register 
 Search 
 Main navigation
 Home 
 About
 About the SWG 
 Site Etiquette and ToS 
 FAQs 
 Volunteers 
 More
 Governance of the SWG 
 Rings of Power 
 Ratings & Warnings 
 Diplomacy 
 Plagiarism 
 AI 
 Fanworks
 All Fanworks 
 Writing
 All Writing 
 Fiction 
 Nonfiction & Meta 
 Plays & Screenplays 
 Poetry 
 Artwork
 All Artwork 
 Artist 
 Artwork Type 
 Audio 
 Link Collections 
 Multimedia 
 Playlists 
 Series 
 Video 
 Beyond the Silmarillion 
 Browse Fanworks By
 Character 
 Creator 
 Genre 
 Relationship 
 References
 Most Recent 
 By Title 
 By Topic 
 Contribute 
 Author Resources 
 Reference Readers 
 Challenges
 Challenges by Date 
 Challenges by Name 
 Silmfic Prompt Generator 
 News
 SWG News 
 Around the World and Web 
 Subscribe 
 Write for Us 
 Extras
 Find a Fanwork 
 Special Projects 
 Founded in 2005, the Silmarillion Writers' Guild exists for discussions of and creative fanworks based on J.R.R. Tolkien's The Silmarillion and related texts. We are a positive-focused and open-minded space that welcomes fans from all over the world and with all levels of experience with Tolkien's works. Whether you are picking up Tolkien's books for the first time or have been a fan for decades, we welcome you to join us!
 Join SWG 
 SWG News
 New Challenge: Allusive 
Literature and art constantly refer back to each other using allusions, and this month's prompts are inspired by allusions to literature, myth, art, and history.
 Cultus Dispatches: "The Rings of Power" Is a Ripple (So Far) 
Tolkien Fanfiction Survey data for 2025 shows that "The Rings of Power" TV series has not had the same impact on the fandom as the film trilogies did ... so far.
 New Challenge: Building Middle-earth 
Let global architecture be your inspiration in this challenge, where you will work with a prompts that are architectural styles, locations in Arda, or both.
 Cultus Dispatches: Six Demographic Takeaways from the 2025 Tolkien Fanfiction Survey 
Ten years of demographic data from the Tolkien Fanfiction Survey show consistencies in who reads and writes fanfiction, as well as a few key demographic shifts.
 Known Site Issues 
 New & Updated Fanworks
 [Writing] Found at Last by StarSpray 
 Sudden laughter startled Maglor out of his reverie.
 [Writing] On Tides of Light by potorov 
 On Tides of Light, Antariëarcalindalë, begins with Elwing's arrival upon the shores of Eldamar after her flight from the ruins of Sirion. After Eärendil goes alone into Valinor, Elwing is brought to Alqualondë. Rather than hurrying toward the celestial ascent of Vingilot, the core of…
 [Writing] There Is No Story Without a Fall by Deborah Judge 
 Miriel makes a dress for Indis.
 [Writing] From That Rubble by StarSpray 
 Fëanor shrugged, studying the contents of his wine glass. “Something must be done about that house. It will fall down eventually.” 
 “It does not follow that it must be you that tears it down single-handedly. Are you sure you do not want help?” 
 “It’s not as though I… 
 [Writing] Eä's Redemption by AaronAzrael 
 This is my new poetical attempt to add my own interpretation to Tolkien's Cosmology as to Eru's Creation and the Valar's minds and behind-the-scene providence reasons and mechanisms.. I often review Eä as part of our own world, just in another dimension, this is why I have always seriously…
 [Writing] A Thousand Winds that Blow by StarSpray 
 When uneasy dreams bring him back into Beleriand, Daeron finds a pair of twins who have lost their home, and an enemy who has lost himself. The Shadow's reach is growing ever longer, and if they are to survive, they must do it together.
 [Writing] Grief Follows on Icy Feet by Elrond's Library 
 The Helcaraxë is an awful place to be.
 Current Challenge
 Allusive 
Choose from our list of allusions to history, literature, mythology, and art to create a fanwork. Read more ... 
 Random Challenge
 Journey Bread 
Create a fanwork about how lembas is cultivated, made, or used. Read more ... 
 New in References
 Marach by NelyafinweFeanorion 
 There are few details in the texts about Marach, but he is noteworthy for his allegiances and his descendants, who would become pivotal to the history of Middle-earth and the eventual defeat of Morgoth and Sauron.
 Amlach by Himring 
 A dissenting voice in Marach's alliance with the Elves of Beleriand, Amlach experiences a change of mind after a mysterious twist in the story reorients his priorities toward enmity with Morgoth.
 "The Rings of Power" Is a Ripple (So Far) by Dawn Walls-Thumma 
 The Lord of the Rings and Hobbit film trilogies mark perhaps the most influential events in the history of the Tolkien fanfiction fandom. As the Rings of Power show approaches its third season, data from the Tolkien Fanfiction Survey shows that it is not even close to matching the impact of the films ... yet.
 Featured Themed Collection
 Beyond the Silmarillion
 [Artwork] A Memento of Faery by Grundy 
 TRSB26 art 144 - an artifact brought back from Faerie by a Starbearer.
 [Artwork] Piukka by Himring 
 Blackberries of Eriador.
 Edited photo.
 [Writing] Down the Long Years by Isilme_among_the_stars 
 Bilbo, the strange old hobbit with the wandering feet, senses something special in young Frodo the first time he sees the lad; as they become close, they find in each other a cameraderie not well understood by other hobbits. Five poignant moments between Bilbo and Frodo Baggins over the course…
 Around the World and Web
 Forgotten Ground Regained Features Tolkien-Inspired Alliterative Poetry 
The quarterly journal "Forgotten Ground Regained" publishes alliterative poetry and, in Issue 11, turns to focus on poems written about Tolkien's world, including several pieces by SWG poets.
 Sindar Week 2026 
A Tolkien event week for the Sindar, the Grey-Elves, from the Years of the Trees to the Third Age.
 Finwean Sibblings Prompt Fest 2026 
A prompt-based fandom event aiming to focus on celebrating Finwë's children: Fëanor, Findis, Fingolfin, Lalwen, & Finarfin - ships, gen relationships, or character-centric
 Tolkien Sapphic September 
Tolkien Sapphic September is a month long event focusing on Sapphic relationships and characters in Tolkien and adjacent materials.
 View all Around the World and Web announcements. 
 Subscribe to the SWG Newsletter
 Email 
 The subscriber's email address.
 Manage your newsletter subscriptions 
 Select the newsletter(s) to which you want to subscribe.
 Silmarillion Writers' Guild Newsletter 
 Subscribe to our weekly email newsletter with news from in and beyond the SWG!
 CAPTCHA
 This question is for testing whether or not you are a human visitor and to prevent automated spam submissions.
 Manage existing 
 Fingon's rescue of Maedhros in Old English by Himring 
 | | | 
 Chapter 1
 The Earliest Annals of Beleriand are contained in The Shaping of Middle-earth , The History of Middle-earth , vol. 4, chapter VII. The material in this volume was written in the 1930s.
 The Annals of Beleriand continue the Annals of Valinor (ch. VI) and were later superseded by the Grey Annals (in HoME vol. 11), as the Annals of Valinor are superseded by the Annals of Aman (in HoME vol. 10).
 The Annals of Beleriand exist in two versions, AB I, which covers the whole of the First Age, and a later version AB II, which stops after the arrival of the Edain.
 Partial Old English versions exist of both the Annals of Valinor and the Annals of Beleriand , and also of The Quenta (ch. III); all of these are included in volume 4 of HoME, with Old English versions printed in the appendix of the relevant chapters. 
 The making of Old English versions is based off the fact that at that time the whole Legendarium was still envisioned as being transmitted through the work of the Anglo-Saxon Ælfwine or Eriol, who had learned of it from Elves in Tol Eressëa. However, it is likely that there was also an element of experimentation or even fun for Tolkien in producing such versions. He was an Anglo-Saxonist, after all, and was trying to write in the language of documents he was very familiar with and had studied intensively.
 The style of Tolkien's annals (the ones in modern English as well as Old English) is clearly inspired by the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle , which, despite its name, is a group of related sets of annals, a major source of our knowledge of the history of the Anglo-Saxon period.
 The dialect of these annals is the early West Saxon (second half of the ninth century) of traditional Old English textbooks and of the earliest parts of the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle . In translating the Annals of Valinor , Tolkien also experimented with a different dialect, early Mercian.
 Tolkien uses the acute as diacritic to mark long vowels in Old English. This is an older tradition in Anglo-Saxon studies; Old English textbooks subsequently switched to using the macron.
 Below, I have arranged two sentences selected from the Annals of Beleriand in the two modern English versions (AB I and AB II) below each other for comparison with the Old English version, which appears to be partly based off one, and partly off the other, as Christopher Tolkien points out in his commentary. I’ve added a literal gloss or crib for the Old English sentences.
 The selection of Maedhros’s rescue by Fingon to illustrate these three early versions of the annals, here, has been made purely because it is such a favourite passage in the published Silmarillion . Textually, other passages of the Annals are perhaps more interesting in terms of the development of the Legendarium during that time and have received extensive comment from Christopher Tolkien for that reason.
 The passage shows the earlier form of the name of Maedhros, Maidros, and the Old English transliteration of this older name form ( Mæg(e)dros ). A more thoroughly Old English name form exists for Maedhros from this period ( Dægred Winsterhand , literally “Dayred Lefthand”) and also for Fingon ( Finbrand ), but they were not used in translating the Annals. These names are discussed by Christopher Tolkien in connection with The Quenta (Appendix 1 to ch. III). Thorndor , obviously, is Thorondor in the published Silmarillion.
 At this time, the First Age was conceived of as being 250 years long, only half as long as it was in the later Annals.
 Annals of Beleriand, opening section (AB I):
 Maidros, his eldest son, is ambushed and captured and hung on Thangorodrim.
 Second version (AB II)
 Maidros, his eldest son, was ambushed and captured by Morgoth, and hung on Thangorodrim; [..]
 Old English version: 
 Þa wearð Maegdros his yldesta sunu of Morgoþe beswicen, and wearð gefangen, and Morgoþ hét hine ahón be þǽre rihthande on Þangorodrim.
 Literal translation (crib) for the Old English :
 Then was Maidros his eldest son by Morgoth deceived, and was captured, and Morgoth ordered him to be hung by the right-hand on Thangorodrim.
 Annals of Beleriand, year 2 of the First Age (AB I) : 
 Here Fingon son of Fingolfin healed the feud by rescuing Maidros.
 Second version (AB II)
 Fingon son of Fingolfin healed the feud, by rescuing Maidros with the help of Thorndor, king of Eagles.
 Old English version: 
 Hér Fingon Fingolfines sunu sibbe geníwode betwux þám mǽgþum for þám þe he áhredde Mægedros.
 Literal translation (crib) for the Old English :
 Here (this year) Fingon Fingolfin’s son peace renewed betwixt the kindreds (peoples or families) because (for that that) he rescued Maidros.
 Table of Contents | Leave a Comment 
 Site © Dawn Felagund 
Logo © Bunn 
All copyrights for creative work hosted on this site are retained by their creators.
 This site is built using Drupal and the theme W3CSS .
 Footer menu
 Contact 
 Characters and stories associated with J.R.R. Tolkien's works remain the property of his estate. Creative work using this material has been written solely for the enjoyment and enlightenment of its creator and their associates. No profit is made on the materials shared on this site.
