Curse of Strahd | Hipsters & Dragons

 Because roleplaying is social, creative, fun… and kinda cool! 

 About

 My Book: The Creative GM’s Guide to Extraordinary Locations

 My Bio: Duncan Rhodes

Best of the Blog (Start Here!)

5e Adventures

NEW: Youtube!

 About

 My Book: The Creative GM’s Guide to Extraordinary Locations

 My Bio: Duncan Rhodes

Best of the Blog (Start Here!)

5e Adventures

NEW: Youtube!

 Category: Curse of Strahd 

 The Hipsters Play Curse of Strahd…

 By duncan

 On December 3, 2016

 In Curse of Strahd

 Last month we played the final session of a campaign that our Dungeon Master, Juan, had adapted from the official Curse of Strahd adventure published by Wizards of the Coast, especially for The Hipsters. This was my first time playing an official D&D adventure and I really loved it. From my perspective it seemed like […]

MY ENNIE-NOMINATED BOOK OF EXTRAORDINARY LOCATIONS

My book: The Creative Game Master’s Guide to Extraordinary Locations won an ENNIE nomination for Best RPG Supplement 2026 and is available to order now. It features 30 fully-developed Adventure Locations you can drop into your campaign worlds, each will a full-colour hand-drawn map. Foreword by Ed Greenwood. Check it out! $24.95.

“I can’t wait to use these locations in my own campaign…. Rhodes has given every fantasy game master what they need” Justin Alexander, best-selling author.

“Raw modular fuel to run a game on the fly / a masterclass on how to build your own dynamic sandboxes. 9/10.” Professor DM, of DungeonCraft. Full video review here.

Video Preview of My Book!

 Hi, I'm Duncan. I like craft beer, vintage clothes, street festivals... and playing Dungeons & Dragons. Welcome to my blog, and do please subscribe to stay in touch. 

Subscribe To Blog

 Join the 30,000 gamers that read Hipsters & Dragons every month! No paid subscription, just enter your email for FREE D&D content in your inbox. Let's stay in touch!

 Enter email address 

 Click here to SUBSCRIBE! 

New On The Blog

 Players Hate “Gotchas”… How to Surprise Them Fairly!

 September 1, 2026

 The 2026 ENNIES, plus “New Dawn of D&D” with Dark Sun… and Star Wars!?

 August 7, 2026

 Why GMs Railroad… And Techniques To Avoid It!

 July 12, 2026

 Game Design: In Defense of Bonus Actions

 June 16, 2026

 My Favourite D&D / RPG Youtubers…. Plus One!

 May 22, 2026

 Divine Inspiration: My Tips for Designing Temples

 April 15, 2026

 Running Hope’s Last Day (Alien RPG, Evolved Edition)

 March 8, 2026

 ALIEN Starter Set: Does It Pass the Acid Test?

 February 21, 2026

 8 Bloggers Talk Fantasy Locations

 February 2, 2026

 Designing Extraordinary Fantasy Locations

 January 1, 2026

A New Key From The Golden Vault

Challenge your players to infiltrate the enterprising Dragonbowl Airship and escape with the dirigible’s blueprints, in this action-packed heist that requires deception, stealth and cojones of steel. Just $4.95 on the DMs Guild.

“Just finished this delightful modular addition to Keys from the Golden Vault – The Incredible Balloon Bamboozle! If you’re looking for a thrilling adventure set on a blimp, with shenanigans galore and a Beholder ready to ruin your day, check it out!” The Geekly Grind.

A MURDER MYSTERY IN CANDLEKEEP

When the Keeper of Tomes is murdered, and his body mutilated, on Deadwinter’s Eve, all of the Great Readers become suspects in this heinous crime. As the players get embroiled in the library’s tangled web of politics and personal enmities, dark forces are at work trying to uncover Candlekeep’s fabled Vault of Secrets. Snap up this epic adventure on the DMs Guild for just $10.

“I love the murder mystery set up here… the roleplaying notes for all the NPCs are very well handled… I LOVE the Flying Iron Owlbear and the Avowed and library generators are superb. I LOVE THIS ADVENTURE!”

Ed Greenwood, creator of Candlekeep and the Forgotten Realms.

Welcome to DRRAGONBOOWWWL!!!!!!

Don’t miss Faerûn’s action-packed sporting extravaganza in the bowels of Mount Waterdeep – where the booze and the blood flow in equal measure! Aside from taking on up to 16 gladiatorial teams in Dragonbowl Arena, there are 30+ festival locations to visit, scores of side plots to unravel and (if the players win) a confrontation with the Games Master himself at the Breakfast of Champions. This 300-page epic also works as a sequel to Waterdeep: Dragon Heist. Check out the reviews on the DMs Guild. 

“One of the best adventures I have ever run!”

“If you took American Gladiators, the Colosseum, and the Quidditch World Cup and then mashed them all together I imagine you’d end up with something like Dragonbowl. More than just a combat-focused adventure, Dragonbowl is a Bacchanalian-style festival with its own economy and ecology.”

Video Review of DRAGONBOWL

Categories

 Alternative RPGS (Not D&D!) (2)

 ALIEN RPG (2)

 D&D Adventures (19)

 Candlekeep Mysteries (3)

 Curse of Strahd (1)

 Journeys Through The Radiant Citadel (1)

 Keys from the Golden Vault (3)

 Waterdeep: Dragon Heist (2)

 DMs Tips (79)

 Adventure Design (12)

 Running The Game (32)

 World Building (3)

 Game Design (1)

 General Chat (12)

 2024 Rules (1)

 Dungeons & Dragons Explained (3)

 One D&D (3)

 TTRPG News (1)

 Homebrew (9)

 House Rules (48)

 Player Tips (20)

 Character Builds (3)

 Products & Publishing (20)

 DMs Guild (17)

 Kickstarter (1)

 Resources (7)

 Tools & Accessories (3)

CHECK OUT MY PLATINUM BEST SELLER

Bored of daggers of venom, flame tongues and vicious blades…? Grab 120 new magic weapons – at least one for each weapon type in the Player’s Handbook. The book’s “magic weapon generator” makes it easy to roll up 10,000s more… buy for just $7.95 on the DMs Guild. Also available on Fantasy Grounds.

“I love all the weapons in the book, but honestly, I can’t get enough of the weapons generator…. I couldn’t recommend this guide enough.”

CONFRONT ESZTEBAN IN HIS TOWER

Eszteban, the Archmage of the Gossamer Robe Order, hides atop his tower in the Gleaming Cloud Citadel, denying his fellow wizards access to the knowledge of the Upper Library with a series of deadly traps and obstacles. Who will be brave enough to disarm this labyrinth, unravel the Order’s secrets, and confront the potentially deranged archmage? Buy this 5e adventure with an old school flavour for $5.95 on the DMs Guild.

“I cannot recommend this HIGHLY enough. One of the finest adventures on the Guild!”

Tags
5e
5e D&D
2024 rules
adventure
adventures
ALIEN Starter Set
annoying players
barbarians
bonus actions
Candlekeep Murders
Candlekeep Mysteries
combat
D&D
DMs Guild
Dragon Heist
encounters
exhaustion
feats
Fireball
grappling
heists
horror
Inspiration
Keys from the Golden Vault
Lucky feat
magic items
monsters
NPCs
One D&D
overpowered
Paladin
proficiency
review
Rogue Assassin
Rogues
RPGs
rules
Skill Checks
skills
spells
taverns
teleportation
terrain
Waterdeep
Weapons

LikeBox

In The Press…
 In 2020, Hipsters & Dragons was featured in the mainstream UK media, talking about D&D. “You’ve Got to Roll With It” was published in the national broadsheet, The Independent.

 Powered by WordPress & Theme by Anders Norén

 Close this module
 SUBSCRIBE

Get notified whenever Hipsters & Dragons post free D&D content...*

 Email Address 

 Click, then check inbox to confirm! 

*WELCOME GIFT. Once subscribed, message me on duncan@hipstersanddragons.com for a 50% discount on your choice of my DMs Guild releases.