######## tfp_6450
(5e) DDAL-EB-01 The Night Land | tenfootpole.org 
 ← The Anthropophagi of Xambaala
 The Dungeon of Kursh Velgont →
 (5e) DDAL-EB-01 The Night Land
 Posted on January 11, 2020 by Bryce Lynch 
The brokers of Salvation pay good coin for artifacts scavenged from the haunted battlefields of the Mournland. In this nest of cutthroats, daring explorers gather to carve their destinies from the ruins of Cyre. They’ll need all the help they can get: it’s no secret that most scavengers don’t survive their first expedition in the Gray.
This 29 page adventure is a collection of three short “one encounter” adventures in sixteen pages. Set in a kind of post-apocalyptic “Bartertown”/salvage-town bordertown, it has you making trips in to a Forbidden Zone to do short missions. Nice concepts with the whole thing, but the actual implementation is boring. There’s little continuity and the “creative” part of evocative writing is missing.
Ok, so, evidently I’m an asshole. All this time I’ve thought of Eberron as a techno- fantasy setting, kind of RenFaire stuff, which has absolutely no appeal to me at all. Magic railroads and Sphere of Annihilation toilets and the like. But this adventure seems to imply NOT. This is a kind of post-apocalyptic people living in Bartertown kind of vibe going on, or tries to anyway. A less gonzo Rifts or a Gamma World with some magic tossed in? Fuck yeah I’m in! Maybe it’s just this setting and I’ll gouge my eyes out later when magic Zeppelin races appear. Anyway, there’s this underlying vibe of a barely there town and people salvaging things from The Forbidden Zone.
A cloud bank straight out Fury Road, a little ways off from town. Screaming faces and buildings collapsing sometimes appear in the fog. Fuck Yeah! That’s what I want to see! Talk about a transition to the mythic underworld! The description for the threshold is pretty good and gives this great sense of impending danger and YOU ARE ELSEWHERE NOW. The whole town vibe is enhanced by a little newspaper handout with some decently Orwellian writing that again adds to the mood. “Remember: Sheriff is watching. So keep your troubles outside the outpost.” Orwellian inside but a free for all outside! I’m in! And the newspaper announcing 70% of people who go in don’t come back out? Uh huh uh huh. I’m in LUUUUUUV.
Substantial information is conveyed through bullets, with what you can learn from NPC’s being the primary usage of them. Bolding and section headings, indents and a summary table are all present. And, there’s job board handouts in addition to the newspaper. Very nice. And there’s this little NPC, the leader of a fellow salvage gang, with a great little table of how they know you/how you’re connected to you. “Saved from kneecapping” and the like; the table is full of flavour!
And the entire fucking thing is actually implemented lame as all fuck. 
That NPC reference table? Full of the wrong things. Instead of it being a table that helps you run the NPC’s it’s more a writers reference. “Chaotic Good Human Female Artificer.” Great. How about quirks? Goals? A train? Something to help me actually run the NPC? No. For that you need to reference the text and hope that the designer put in a little offset box for that NPC. The table is ineffectual for its intended purpose.
The three “missions” come from the job board in a tavern. There’s really nothing tying the three together at all … which may be ok, I think, if it’s serving as an introduction to the town and the salvage lifestyle. But then THAT becomes the theming and tie to hold them together, and it’s just not there. It feels like three changes of scenery rather than “my life as a salvage worker on the edge.” And that salvage board … a centerpiece of the adventure and the entire town built around salvage? A boring ass bulletin board in a tavern. No mementoes or shrines to the fallen salvagers, no rituals, nothing. This was a SUBSTANTIAL miss in adding to the “Salvage Life 4EVAR” thing that should be going on in this adventure.
Most of the writing it boring. A ghost train comes across as boring. The writing is just not evocative at all. Now, we should all know by now that I’m NOT looking for a lot of text, but I expect the text that IS present it be interesting and describe the scene/thing in a way that makes it comes alive. “The air around you suddenly fills with cracking, ringing noises. Some of the larger black glass shards twitch and fragment, reforming into lizard- like beasts with maws of razor-sharp glass teeth.” B O R I N G. Nice idea, ozone, crackling, maws of obsidian glass … but a “lizard like creature” is boring, as is anything with the fucking word “Suddenly.” This is poor writing. 
More than that though .. The Mournland, inside the fog cloud, is boring. The fog is a barrier. No dust storms. No 70% death rate. No littered landscape. Just more featureless plains. And no wanderers. No hint of danger. I was excited for this shit! “In the morning of the second day of travel …” It’s not even the slow burn of Stalker or Annihilation. Just nothing. No text to speak of and what there is “decrepit wood buildings.” The whole place comes off as dumb and boring. Just Another Shitty Lame Ass Boring Generic D&D Setting. Go somewhere, have an encounter, mission over.
It tries. With that Mournland text. With a sculpture made out of corpses. But it fails. It feels thrown together and as if not much work in to it beyond a draft. Repetition of text, and not in a Salome way but in a Didn’t Think About It way. Some read-aloud gets long. There’s a section in the beginning, in which bar patrons gets hushed when an old salvager gets on top of a table to speak … a load of nonsense. I’d guess it has to do with the overall plot that will eventually show up in these, but it telegraphed HORRIBLY. Everyone should recognize “yeah, this is the evil cult thing we’ll eventually have to stop,” and, at the same time, it would have been MUCH more effective if introduced as a part of one of the other missions (NO! NOT A FUCKIGN DIARY!) or somehow his exposition had an impact. The hushed voices of the rowdy scavvers? Great! Just anti-climactic as fuck. “Oh, it’s a fucking monologue. Great.”
Missed opportunities include a little construct Dog, which should have been called Timmy, or had a Timmy/well codeword/connotation/theming. And a goblin turned to stone with a ghost train hurtling down on her NEEDS to be her caught in the train tracks. No, I don’t know how it works … that’s the designers job. But fuck me if rescuing people from train tracks isn’t iconic.
And then again that scene shows the problems. The train arrives in five rounds to crush the little girl. How far away are you? Who the fuck knows, we’re never told. And this sort of Missing Information thing, critical information for a scene, is not uncommon. The overall impact is that the 70% of people who die in the Mournlands do so of boredom. 
It’s so full of promise, you can see it in the edge. But the actual implementation, the writing, the “now the D&D encounter starts” format … it’s kills the thing. It should be enhancing that half-glimped themes and vibes. I’m not sure I’d tout my MFA in Creative Writing if I turned this out.
This is $5 at DmsGuild. The preview is four pages. The last page actually has something for you to look at. You can see a long/useless read-aloud for the tavern and then the little gnomes speech … that has no impact on the adventure. Bad preview. 
https://www.dmsguild.com/product/296403/EB01-The-Night-Land?1892600
 ← The Anthropophagi of Xambaala
 The Dungeon of Kursh Velgont →
 7 Responses to (5e) DDAL-EB-01 The Night Land 
 ? This is actually super helpful, even though it doesn’t paint the best picture of the module. I plan to run the whole series, so reviews like this show me where I can look to beef it up for a better player experience. Thanks for taking the time – and would it be cruel of me to hope you review each of the modules with such a keen eye? ?
 That took a quick downturn. Sounds, definitely, like some interesting bits though!
 Evard’s Small Tentacle says: 
 This is interesting. I find what Bryce points out here to be an issue for a lot of adventures; the broad summary seems awesome, the details are so mundane and bland that it is horribly misaligned and makes the broad summary a lie.
 Bigby's Affirmative Consent Lubed Fist says: 
 it has you making trips in to a Forbidden Zone to do short missions. Nice concepts with the whole thing, but the actual implementation is boring.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YuOnfQd-aTw
 Ah, but is this a commentary on the adventure or the movie … OR BOTH!
 Bigby's Affirmative Consent Lubed Fist says: 
 So interesting ideas, imperfect execution. There appears to be a sequel, with hero points available for successful completion of missions, and an extra item available for groups that saved the goblin in this module. Some sort of notoriety score would be appropriate, a “town reputation”. I would prefer a much more open-ended set-up, rather than mission of the week; having a list of starting adventures is fine, but then I would let the PCs find clues to other quests, and let them pick which ones to go on, and sell information to other groups for others. I agree “the big enemy” should be shrouded in mystery, tantalising snippets of information rather than some old codger spelling it out.
One point I would not quibble with is that the 70% death rate applies to NPC parties, rather than the PCs. I don’t mind a few fatalities, but there is a limit to the amount of time I want players to spend on rolling up new characters.
######## tfp_3033
The Sunday Stellar – DDAL4-04 – The Marionette | tenfootpole.org 
 The Lost Temple of Forgotten Evil →
 The Sunday Stellar – DDAL4-04 – The Marionette
 Posted on May 8, 2016 by Bryce Lynch 
Yeah, that’s right, it’s not the Sunday Suck anymore … again.
A Vistani fortuneteller has called you out by name during the Burgomaster’s private reading. She raved of an army of the dead, a delicate powderbox, and a beautiful yet dangerous woman. Now the Burgomaster wants to know why you’re more important than he is…
This four-hour adventure is in four parts. The party starts by being asked/hired to look into a missing wagon, bringing an injured person back to town. This is followed by a well done seance in part two, and then a zombie/undead attack on the town in part three. Part four is a dungeon/exploring an old manor home with some undead inside. I’m going to complain a lot upfront, but this is an ok adventure.
The first part of the adventure is mostly disconnected from the rest, providing only the introduction of a couple of NPC’s, one of which provides motivation for rescue in part four and one of which is the villain in part four. Hmmm, I may have been too harsh; the introduction of the characters prior to meeting them again IS good design, but the particular implementation in this adventure is not very strong. The “rescue” is really nonexistent and then the NPC’s are in the hospice. A little more advice/forewarning for the DM, in order to orient the NPC’s the proper way, would have been a nice addition. There’s also a bit of confusion with monsters. Harpies are mentioned in the adventure overview, and again in the appendix, but I don’t believe they are actually introduced anywhere in the encounter. The loss of a token combat hurts nothing though.
The seance sequence in part two is quite well done. The read-aloud is actually god, the mood setting for the DM is good, and the encounters, again, provide forewarning of what’s to be experienced later in the part four dungeon/manor. The part three undead attack is laid out more like a zombie movie than a typical D&D monster fight, which is a very good thing. Zombies ripping out throats of villagers and so on. The manor home is more of a slow burn, with a decent number of lead-you-by-the-nose hints, a few monster attacks, and then the big bad. There’s a decent number of tricks and traps in the home, with at least a token nod to tipping the players off beforehand. For example, the entrance hall has a glass roof that the read-aloud notes is leaking badly. Smart players will ask more questions, which may save them from the water-rotten collapsing floor. This happens FAR less often in adventures then I would like to see and I’m happy to see the designer here taking advantage of it.
There’s a plot shield here, and piece of shit plot shields (Ooops, redundant!) always piss me off. IE: “If the party killed Bob in the last adventure then the Dark powers have saw fit to restore him for their own unfathomable reasons.” No, I know the reason. It’s because of crap ass design, that’s why. Either you don’t put the dude in harms way or you don’t bring him back to life/make him critical for the further adventure.How about a big, fat, FUCK YOU. Why the hell even play the game if the player’s actions have no impact? So they can experience “The Story”? Fuck you and fuck your story. Write something that doesn’t take the god damn player agency away from them. The preceding diatribe has been a service of Fuck You Crappy Design Monitoring service.
While I’m on the subject of “bad design”, let me point out a few more issues before I get to the better parts. The rumors here are lame fact based boringness. Compare “Shadows have been seen near the graveyard” with FAR FAR better statements made by a little ghost girl later in the adventure: “She doesn’t know about her affliction, but says ‘it must be very bad because it makes Mommy very sad and Daddy very angry.’” That’s fucking great. The little ghost girls gets some wonderfully evocative lines to supplement the facts relayed. The rumors should have been done in the same manner.
The choices made are lazy in some places. In the first part you’re sent to go find Vasilly “and his friend.” “And his friend” is mentioned several times. When you find the body its “his friends body.” The poor SOB never gets a name. This is generic, abstracted detail and D&D adventures are seldom good when they rely on that sort of abstracted detail. Specificity. That’s the key to being evocative. Hmmm, lame/weak “you’re in a bar” hook. Not lame because its in a bar but lame because it’s boring and uninteresting done.
Some of the NPC’s get a nice little “roleplaying Bob” tip section. These are a little long for my tastes but their inclusion IS helpful. In particular, the last line, a quote from the NPC, conveys more information than the rest of the tip combined. Recall tha the little girl quotes were quite well done as well, and there is a great scene with a town crier that, again, uses direct quotes and it nicely done. “Oyez, Oyez, Oyez! The following is a decree from the most
distinguished and generous Burgomaster Randovich, to which we are all indebted…in one form or another.” and then also “Let it also be known that… Oleg, it is your turn to light the village lamps tonight.” A single, disembodied groan rises from the back of the crowd, oozing with disappointment. “That is all!” That’s good shit. It’s specific. It’s Olegs turn. He’s unhappy. That’s what players will remember and that the sort of thing that helps the DM out. Not a railroad. Not detailing everything, but instead providing a hard, impactful flavor burst.
I’m going to skip more commentary on part 2, a very excellent seance, and part four, the pretty decent manor crawl, and instead make some comments about part three, an undead attack on the town.
The idea is that straight out of the (non-combat) seance you are confronted by an undead attack on the town. You see four things going on at the same time and need to decide what you will do. Folks will recall that Deep Carbon did this is GREAT impact, and those leading sections were one of the reason is got labeled Grim/Dark: If you did option A then the people in Option B died, usually in front of you and in a very sad way. This being 5e it’s not QUITE as bad, and a splitting up party is assumed/advice is given.
This kind of thing works best when the players know the choices they are making. They have to KNOW that by letting Bob die they will instead save Carl who can do Y for them. This section is strongest when it illustrates those choices. The mayor yells “The food stocks are in there! We’ll die this winter!” when you see the burning building. The players know the consequences; it’s not just a burning building with crates in them. One undead seemingly directs the attack. It’s pretty obvious that if you kill him then you can cut off the head, so to speak. These are good choices presented to the players.
Two other choices are less well done. Zombies have some people cornered in an ally, in one, and in the other a man in a burning jail cell says he’ll reward the players. In both cases the reward is less obvious and more abstract “doing good.” Both have real rewards, one of the future zombie victims knows some of the map layout in the part 4 dungeon. The prisoner does have a nice reward. Instead, having the prisoner SHOW his potion and the set of magic keys he has, that would instead provide a concrete choice for the players. Likewise, putting the map-NPC in servant’s livery, or somehow communicating the reward he has, makes the choice more meaningful for the players.
Another comment here, specifically about the zombie scene/choice. The read-aloud telegraphs the “correct solution” and that’s never good. The second sentence reads “You may be able to distract and lure the monsters near a stack of heavy timbers that can be released upon them, pinning and restraining them, but you will have to offer a convincing distraction.” Instead, a map of the scene, showing a stack of precarious timbers, a pulley hook to swing on, or some other things, typical to a village, would have allowed some DCC-style creative solutions. There’s nothing wrong with providing the logs, but providing a map showing an interesting environment, with lots of stuff WITHOUT THINKING HOW THEY WILL BE USED allows for the creative and interesting solutions that good D&D thrives upon. I love seeing the party come up with a stupid plan. The read-aloud telegraphs the solution. It’s too bad that Organized Play is in such a state that this needs to be done. EVERY encounter is an opportunity to not roll to hit but instead creatively solve the problem.
Shit, I lied. I will comment on the manor. The little ghost girl is friendly, but is directed to provide some scares. A general suggestion, with her dead pet goose, is given at the start, but I think many of the rooms would have been stronger with a suggestion of what she may do here. The ghost goose on the dining room table, and so on. Finally, this section has A LOT of callbacks to the seance earlier. This sort of “first you get a hint then you get to use the hint if youwere fucking paying attention” is something I wish more adventures would do. The seance is excellent, in part two, and part four is made much stronger through the use of callbacks. And some of those callbacks are VERY creepy. Puppet people are not uncommon in adventures, but the marionette’d village rin this one is very well done indeed.
This is a pretty decent adventure, and stellar by Adventurer’s League standards. With a little work, a strong edit and clean up, a little more focus, this could really be a top tier adventure.
This is available on DriveThru.
https://www.dmsguild.com/product/178795/DDAL0404-The-Marionette-5e?affiliate_id=1892600
 This entry was posted in Adventurers League, Level 1, Reviews, The Best. Bookmark the permalink. 
 The Lost Temple of Forgotten Evil →
 One Response to The Sunday Stellar – DDAL4-04 – The Marionette 
 Pretty much agree with everything you say. I ran this adventure last summer at KantCon in Kansas City for the Adventurer’s League. The biggest issue I had was time. It’s a 4 hour con adventure. You really only have 3 1/4 hours to play it in a con setting, allowing for potty breaks, introductions, and for registering the “living campaign” PCs to make sure they’re “legal”, etc. In my first game, a guy had rolled up a PC with a lot high scores, instead of using the stat array that’s required for all A League PCs, so I had to make him re-stat his character, while policing three kids ages 8, 10 an 11…which also meant I had to tone down the horror aspects and spend extra time managing them, since their parents weren’t around to chaperone.
Part one is just there to introduce the setting and NPCs — I shortened the rescue to evoke some mood (the tragedy of the NPC’s deaths, the PCs got to briefly glimpse some undead in the snow that vanish into the woods…just some foreshadowing). The designer on one of the A League errata boards says that the harpies were cut for time (good thing!) but the confusing reference was left in due to sloppy editing.
Part two is pretty good with the character setup in the hospice, culminating in the undead attack. I ditched the descriptive text about the logs–one group figured out how to use them as terrain, but the other didn’t. I ran it by having multiple threats at once, and let the PCs figure out how to best deal with them simultaneously. Then I jumped rapidly between threats, trying to minimize the downtime of any one PC group, which turned out pretty well.
The most creative solution was to have 7 characters split up with individuals using delaying tactics, while a main force knocked out each threat, and a single PC saved the warehouse by using unseen servants to lug out the crates. They actually succeeded at everything (it helped that there were four old-school players whose PCs were a team of squabbling dwarven brothers, who suddenly stopped squabbling and worked together like a well oiled machine when danger actually threatened–they were a lot of fun).
The Seance was great, though the plot shield was annoying–however the League adventures were designed to be played in order, and there was no way of knowing whether the some of the players would have killed “Bob” in their adventure, while Bob survived in the other players’ adventure–plus, the A League designers work semi-independently when making their chapters of the campaign, and only have limited knowledge of what the other designers are doing–hence the plot disconnects. I think this is due to time constraints (they’re all indie designers in D&D clubs who are contracted by WOTC to simultaneously make adventures, which is why they are such a mixed bag quality-wise).
The only problem I had was that intro took 1/2 an hour, the hospice/zombie attack was 1 hour, and the seance was another 1/2 to 3/4 an hour. With setup and potty break it left me only 1-1 3/4 hours to run the mansion, which, if fully explored could’ve taken the full session. You still have to take 15 minutes to wrap up to give awards, and sign off on characters so they get “credit” for the adventure that will carry over to the next League session — that’s 15 more minutes shaved off the time.
The mansion was great, but the payoff for the seance was wasted since if the PCs freely explored the place, they would never get to the boss fight before time expired. I used the ghost girl to lead them around by the nose, and they went along with it because they were curious about how the payoffs for the seance would play out, and the encounters I lured them to were interesting enough so that the players didn’t derail the adventure. Still, to get to the climactic ending, most of the mansion is wasted. I had to be semi-railroady (though I didn’t force the PCs down a path) and there still wasn’t time to really enjoy it.
Despite the rough editing, no-frills presentation, and limited play-testing (hence the time issues), it’s still pretty good. There’s too much content here to fit into a con-adventure, but that’s a good thing if you’re running this for your home group. I’d love to re-work the adventure and run it over 1-2 full sessions in a non-convention setting. Looks like I lucked out drawing this adventure out of the hat.
######## tfp_3019
The Sunday Suck #3 – DDAL4-03 – The Executioner | tenfootpole.org 
 Dungeons of Fel’Valashar →
 The Sunday Suck #3 – DDAL4-03 – The Executioner
 Posted on May 1, 2016 by Bryce Lynch 
I lied. I’m back to using The Sunday Suck. This is in honor of this adventure, one of the worse I’ve seen.
The locals are spreading rumors of the emergence of an age-old relic in a remote farming village. Surely you won’t be the only one to seek it, but can you afford to not be successful in this mission? And why haven’t they claimed it for themselves?
You know the drill. 31 pages, the first nine of which are (mostly) garbage and the last eleven are reference, leaving about eleven pages for two hours of adventure. Suck it you Adventurer’s League fools! Beg to pay for your weekly abuse from WOTC! Bwahahahahahahahaha!
Hmmm, a little harsh. There is a nice little adventure overview section and an NPC reference in the back reference material. Five of the Seven NPC’s presented are not present in the adventure, which means several of the NPC’s that ARE present in the adventure are not mentioned. The hook is either “you’re already in the village” (from the last adventure) or “mists transport you.” The first is fine while the second continues the long tradition of Not Even Trying. It’s ok, the summary looks like a railroad and the baddie, a wight, is running around town wearing a hat of disguise. Why? Please dear god, why? A wight in a hat of disguise. Why not just make him the archdevil asmodeus in a hat of disguise, or an atrophal or a black pudding in a hat of disguise? What do you want for $3? Spend $2 more and get Maze of the Blue Medusa? Ha! Not official WOTC!
The adventure is in three parts. Part one is to sit in the tavern and listen to rumors. The important points are in bullet form and generally summarized nicely, while the non-bullet information is generally useless and adds little to the adventure. One important point, a way to get the party out in tot he town, IS buried in the main text, and the rumors are not particularly interested. “Bob’s has been selling shit to Lazlo” is the form they are in. IE: all fact based. A little colour never hurt no one and a nice little colorful sentence could have replaced the fact, conveyed the same message, and been far more interesting. In the end the entire point of the adventure, the motivating force for he party, doesn’t actually come through. At all. There’s no real motivation provided.
Part two is to roam over town. Long and boring descriptions are the rule of the day, although to its credit at least one of the encounters allows for a nice bribe to avoid a combat. Oh, the wight in the hat, doing his shopping for the day. If attacked/defeated he gets to make a plot shield escape. “A patch of mist glides in and when it fades then he is gone.” That is a crap ass idea. Plot shields are crap ass to begin with but that one is worse than usual. Wait! Wait! It’s better! Check this shit out! “If at any point the characters begin spending too much time outside without taking direction, or they progressed quicker than anticipated feel free to roll on the random encounters table.” Ha! Just monster attack after monster attack there!
Part three is getting attacked by some undead: two zombies and two ghouls. It wants it to be a big torches & pitchforks and fire mob scene, with undead coming out of a burning house and forest to attack the mob and the party and wounded villagers paying about and so on. It fails miserably at this. There’s not much in this to inspire the DM to run a decent adventure … and four undead hardly match what text there is is trying to convey. Oh, then the mayor shows up and demands a strip search of the party and attacks them. Yeah. Great Adventure.
So, just to be clear: nothing in part one ties the adventure to part two. Nothing in part two leads to any other location in part two. Nothing in part two leads to part three and/or the mob. Nothing is strong, but the ties here are VERY tenuous. Basically, the DM MUST feed the party the adventure and lead them around by the nose, cause there ain’t no clues forthcoming and the adventure is not in a form in which the DM could run it in a looser manner.
It’s trying, especially with the bullet points and reference material. But the text is dull and not evocative and the reference material misses the point most of the time. Combine it all with the railroad nature and the UTTER lack of coherence when it comes to providing the DM information, so he can run it for the players, this wins one of my coveted Worst Adventures Of ALL Time awards.
This is available at DriveThru.
https://www.drivethrurpg.com/product/178794/DDAL0403-The-Executioner-5e?affiliate_id=1892600
 This entry was posted in Adventurers League, Reviews, The Worst EVAR?. Bookmark the permalink. 
 Dungeons of Fel’Valashar →
 4 Responses to The Sunday Suck #3 – DDAL4-03 – The Executioner 
 Is there at least an Executioner? Is the wight at least ‘shopping for Evil!’ – you know being the psychic of an evil human driven by the unquenchable thirst for the death and agony of mortals? Is the pervert mayor’s double-cross an effort to show that maybe the undead weren’t the bad guys?
I mean if the real situation is ‘town of mist dwelling cannibal perverts’ whose victims seek revenge from beyond the grave that’s a decent adventure maybe? Still doesn’t explain the hat of disguise … ummm … last set of victims were carnies? Bards?
WOTC I demand answers about this village of carnie eating cannibal perverts!
 I like your comment! It tempts me to buy the scenario, then rebuild it to emphasize the town’s bitterly opposed factions: The secretive cannibals, who feast upon the bones of hapless travelers (such as wandering entertainers…), and the town’s sky-clad leaders, who force strangers to prove they’re not secretly undead by closely inspecting their bodies for signs of putrefaction…
 Dread (Jerry) (@DreadGazeebo) says: 
 Writing for the Adventurer’s League is full of constraints and pre-determined items, monsters, and plot-points. It was very jarring for me as a designer and a writer. Sorry you hated it so much, but at least you’ll be happy to know that I have no further plans in ever writing for the Adventurer’s League again.
 Wait, you’re the writer? Man, that does sound like a slog to write for.
Then again, I’m a raw-improv kinda guy, and people love it, so what do I know? 😛
