5E Adventure Review: The Wizard’s Egg – Merric's Musings

 Skip to main content

 The Wizard’s Egg is an OGL product set in an arcane-punk setting; I wouldn’t be entirely surprised if you could easily adapt it to Eberron. It’s an adventure for level 1 characters, which begins with the characters in their office, waiting for someone to hire them. Does it feel like the start of a noir novel? Absolutely!

There’s a lot of background in the adventure; it takes about ten pages before all the introductory material, including the mission briefing, are out of the way, and the party can get to trying to sabotage something in the egg-shaped building belonging to a wizard – the “wizard’s egg” of the title. Most of the background is used to explain the world, as a world of magic-as-technology is not standard for D&D. For my tastes, there’s too much background, but I tend to like fewer background details than most.

With that task, “sabotage”, it’s apparent that the adventure assumes a more morally-grey world than is common in many heroic D&D tales.

There’s a lot of descriptive boxed text. In the opening stages, not much happens between each set of text, so the players might be sitting there waiting for you to read it all before they can act meaningfully. Strangely, the last location before the Egg is a tavern where, in theory, the characters can gather some last information before they enter their destination. However, there’s very little information provided here. It feels odd.

The Egg itself is made up of ten encounter areas over six pages of text; a nice isomorphic map of the location is provided on a seventh page. It’s a good choice of map to represent the egg.

The locations in the Egg provide a nice range of encounters; they’re combat-light, but there’s a lot to explore. I’m particularly fond of a riddling-elemental, and there’s a definite touch of whimsy to this encounter, something I very much enjoy.

The final section of the adventure, where the characters must flee the Egg, is a bit odd. The details of how to run it seem to be entirely in two (large) sidebars rather than the main text. It uses a “skill challenge” framework, but I found the text quite confusing. The adventure has had a tendency to be overwritten before, but here it comes into full fruition – where I want and need clear, simple instructions, this is anything but!

The layout is good, as is, for the most part, the editing (although a stray “Wizard’s of the Coast” seems to have eluded the proof-reader’s attention). The maps are nicely realised and very clear, but the art could be better.

Overall, the invention in this adventure stands it in good stead. It tends towards being overwritten, but the main adventure holds a lot of interest. Recommended.

Share this:
Email
Print
Facebook
Twitter
Tumblr
Reddit
Pinterest

 Leave a Reply Cancel reply

 This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. Learn how your comment data is processed.

 Melbourne D&D AL Conventions

 Conquest - April 19-22, 2019

 PAX Australia - October 11-13, 2019

Arcanacon - January, 2020

New D&D on Amazon

Categories
Categories
 Select Category
 13th Age
 A Game of Thrones
 AD&D
 AD&D 2E
 Advanced Squad Leader
 Amber
 BattleTech
 Board Games
 Books
 Campaign Coins
 Comics
 Curse of Strahd
 D&D
 D&D
 D&D 3E
 D&D 4E
 D&D 5E
 D&D Adventurers League
 D&D at Guf Ballarat
 D&D Basic
 D&D Encounters
 D&D Miniatures
 D&D Next
 Design
 Doctor Who
 Dragonlance
 Eberron
 Elemental Evil
 Fantasy and Science Fiction
 Forgotten Realms
 Great Battles of History
 Greyhawk
 History
 Initiative
 Kickstarter
 LCG
 Legends of Baldur’s Gate
 Life
 Lost Mine of Phandelver
 Magic
 Men of Iron
 OSR
 Out of the Abyss
 Pathfinder
 Play Advice
 Primeval Thule
 Rage of Demons
 Review
 RPGs
 Scourge of the Sword Coast
 Session Report
 Shadow of the Demon Lord
 Star Wars
 Storm King’s Thunder
 Sword Coast Legends
 Tales of the Yawning Portal
 Third Reich
 Tomb of Annihilation
 Tyranny of Dragons
 Uncategorized
 Wargames
 Waterdeep: Dragon Heist
 Wilderness
 X-Wing

 Recent Posts

 5E Adventure Review: The Wizard’s Egg

 Running the Curse of Strahd season under Season 8 DDAL rules

 What to Play After Finishing Dragon Heist

 5E Adventure Review: Handful of Heists

 5E Adventure Review: Tyrant of the Forgotten Forge

 My Adventures

Buried Temple of the Death God

Death in the Cornfields

The Witch of Underwillow

My DDAL-legal Adventures

Ghoulies and Ghosties

Hulburg Rising

The Mysterious Isle

Eye of Xxiphu

D&D Products on Amazon

Follow me on Twitter
My Tweets
 March 2019

 M
 T
 W
 T
 F
 S
 S

 « Feb

 123

 45678910

 11121314151617

 18192021222324

 25262728293031

Meta

 Log in

 Entries RSS

 Comments RSS

 WordPress.org

 MENU

 Navigation

 Search for:

 Send to Email Address

 Your Name

 Your Email Address

 Cancel

 Post was not sent - check your email addresses! 

 Email check failed, please try again 

 Sorry, your blog cannot share posts by email.