5E Adventure Review: Under His Skin | Merric's Musings

 Merric's Musings

 Life of an Australian Boardgamer and Roleplayer

 Skip to content

 Articles for new D&D players

D&D Adventurers League

 D&D Adventurers League in Victoria, Australia

 PAX Australia 2015

 Tyranny of Dragons

 Elemental Evil

 Rage of Demons

 Curse of Strahd

Dungeons & Dragons 5E

 Dungeons & Dragons 5E Articles

 Dungeons & Dragons 5E Adventures by Level

 The Great List of Dungeons & Dragons 5E adventures

Reviews

 AD&D Reviews

 Basic D&D Reviews

 OSR Reviews

 Pathfinder Reviews

 D&D 5E Reviews

PAX Australia 2016

About

 ← 5E Adventure Review: Tomb of Tiberesh

 5E Adventure Review: The Haunting of Calrow Ruins →

 5E Adventure Review: Under His Skin

 Posted on December 22, 2015 by MerricB 

 Argh! Editing!

It is my fervent desire to review more adventures that are written well and have had a good editor working on them. Sadly, this is not the case for AAW’s recent release, Under His Skin. There’s certainly no editor listed, and the adventure shows the lack.

This is rather a pity, because there are a number of good ideas in the adventure.

The adventure has the players exploring a wizard’s tower, seeking a reclusive sage who has recently disappeared. It turns out that the sage was killed by a recent subject of his experimentation – a Worm Who Walks – and the tower is now filled with dangerous monsters and traps. There are some very nice touches that add to the atmosphere of the place, including a warded forest that reshapes itself to confuse those who wish to reach the tower; normally this magic would just affect those who didn’t use the path, but the death of the sage has disrupted the wards. So, the players will need to pay attention to reach their destination!

Once in the tower, the players must deal with traps, tricks and the odd monster who has taken up residence in the tower. My favourite encounter is a carpeted hallway where some sections are bare of carpet and are actually pit traps; something that allows the players to feel clever about noticing that detail. (Unfortunately, the boxed text fails to mention that only some of the hallway is carpeted!)

The final foe, the Worm That Walks, is potentially terrifying, especially to those players who remember the 3E version. This Worm is a lesser version that the writer has rated as CR 5 (rather than the epic level CR 26!), although I believe a CR of 2 would seem far more appropriate for this Worm’s abilities. This is just as well, even CR 5 is far too high for the first and second-level characters this adventure is purportedly written for. Even so, the final encounter may still be too difficult for a first-level party.

Once you ignore the editing – hard though it is to do – the production values are very nice, with good art and layout used throughout the adventure. This is with the exception of the cover, which I rather dislike.

At $6.99 for a 21-page PDF, this feels somewhat pricey. The adventure isn’t exceptional, but it’s a solid adventure that should provide a session or two of entertainment.

Share this:
Facebook
Email
Print
Twitter
Google
Reddit
Tumblr

Like this:
Like Loading...

 Related

 About MerricB

 Merric Blackman is a 40-something Australian who is fascinated by games: Role-playing games, board games and war games in particular. He writes about his experiences playing them and occasionally reviews something that has taken his fancy. He has also been known to read works of fiction. 

 View all posts by MerricB → 

 This entry was posted in D&D, D&D 5E, Review. Bookmark the permalink. 

 ← 5E Adventure Review: Tomb of Tiberesh

 5E Adventure Review: The Haunting of Calrow Ruins →

 Leave a Reply Cancel reply

 Enter your comment here...

 Fill in your details below or click an icon to log in:

 Email (required) (Address never made public)

 Name (required)

 Website

 You are commenting using your WordPress.com account. ( Log Out / Change )

 You are commenting using your Twitter account. ( Log Out / Change )

 You are commenting using your Facebook account. ( Log Out / Change )

 You are commenting using your Google+ account. ( Log Out / Change )

 Cancel

 Connecting to %s

 Notify me of new comments via email.

 Recent Posts

 Days of Primeval Thule

 5E Adventure Review: Depths of Felk Mor

 Princes of the Apocalypse, sessions 24-27

 5E Supplement Review: Traps

 5E Supplement Review: 15 New Backgrounds

 Coming Soon!

Curse of Strahd (March 15)

Maestro (April 5)

Out Now!

Ashes of the Tyrant

Sword Coast Adventurer's Guide

Out of the Abyss

Book of Lost Spells

Top Posts & Pages

 Dungeons & Dragons 5E Adventures by Level 

 The Great List of Dungeons & Dragons 5E Adventures 

 Armour Class in Dungeons & Dragons 5E 

 A Primer on Skills and Proficiencies in the new Dungeons & Dragons 

 Running Hoard of the Dragon Queen – Episode 1 

Sites I Visit
 EN World

RPG Geek

Sage Advice

The Tome Show

Recent Tweets

 @cadenheadr04 I've got the original grey box and the revised 2e one. I'm curious, okay? :) 4 hours ago

 Anyone know the difference between the 1993 and 1996 Forgotten Realms boxed sets? #dnd #ForgottenRealms 4 hours ago

 @KillerRoo When the most well-known stories in the Known World are Keep on the Borderlands and Isle of Dread, there's a lot more to explore! 4 hours ago

 @AndrewLichey @ChrisPerkinsDnD FR has several iconic stories, but they never really involve the entire realms. #dnd 6 hours ago

 @BeholderPie We created our own major threat... the brother of my PC, a dark jedi called Lord Morlock. Worked very well. :) 6 hours ago

 Follow @MerricB
Calendar

 December 2015

 M
 T
 W
 T
 F
 S
 S

 « Nov

 Jan »

 123456

 78910111213

 14151617181920

 21222324252627

 28293031

Blog Stats

 845,328 hits

Information
 This site contains product links to (primarily) Amazon and DriveThruRPG

 DriveThruRPG
The One Ring - Horse-lords of Rohan
Reach Adventure 1: Marooned on Marduk
OD and D Dungeons and Dragons Original Edition (0e)
Encyclopedia of Impossible Things
Fever Dreams

Categories
AD&D AD&D 2E Advanced Squad Leader A Game of Thrones Amber BattleTech Board Games Books Comics D&D D&D 3E D&D 4E D&D 5E D&D Adventurers League D&D Basic D&D Encounters D&D Miniatures D&D Next Dead in Thay Design Doctor Who Dresden Files Elemental Evil Fantasy and Science Fiction Forgotten Realms Great Battles of History Greyhawk History Hoplite Initiative Kickstarter Life Lord of the Rings LCG Lost Mine of Phandelver Magic OSR Pathfinder Play Advice Primeval Thule Rage of Demons Review RPGs Scourge of the Sword Coast Session Report Star Wars Talisman Tyranny of Dragons Wargames Wilderness X-Wing 

 Merric's Musings 

 The Twenty Ten Theme. Blog at WordPress.com.

 Follow

 Follow “Merric's Musings”

 Get every new post delivered to your Inbox.

 Join 101 other followers

 Build a website with WordPress.com

 Send to Email Address

 Your Name

 Your Email Address

 Cancel

 Post was not sent - check your email addresses! 

 Email check failed, please try again 

 Sorry, your blog cannot share posts by email. 

 %d bloggers like this: