 
Mythmoot II: Back Again 
Proceedings of the 2nd Mythgard Institute Mythmoot 
Conference Center at the Maritime Institute, Linthicum, Maryland  
December 13-15, 2013 
 
 
 
Early Modern English Inflectional Morphology: 
Not Just Another Pretty Spreadsheet 
Sparrow F. Alden 
 
 
 
 
“Escape is one of the main functions of fairy-stories….Escape is evidently as a rule very 
practical, and may even be heroic.” Tolkien praises fantasy as an escape from poverty, 
oppression, and particularly the pressures of modern urban culture (On Faerie Stories 79). 
Archaism brings escape from modernity, comfort in those time-honored things which comprise 
the tale. Tolkien creates a diffuse mood of archaism throughout his legendarium with older 
language. Tom Shippey (2013) points out that Tolkien’s actual vocabulary is not obsolete, it’s 
the style, the syntax and morphology, which does the trick. His diction and style can easily be 
glossed by us Present English-speaking readers: forms old enough to have fallen out of every 
day use, but familiar enough for us to lose ourselves in the long-ago of the story, not in the 
confusion created by incomprehension. 
 
Old English Middle English Modern English 
500-1066 1066-1500 1500-present 
680 - Caedmon’s Hymn 1066 - Battle of Hastings 
1450 - Gutenberg’s printing press 
1500-1700 - Early 
Modern English 
Alden —“Early Modern English Inflectional Morphology”  
  
 
Mythmoot II (2013)    2  
 
There are no hard dates for when one language ends and another begins in its place, of 
course. Language change is a constant, continuous, and dynamic process, so these dates are 
guidelines. The change from “mostly Middle English” to “mostly Modern English” moved with 
geography and the social classes of speakers. We’re going to take from about 1500 to 1700 as 
Early Modern English. 
Early Modern English follows just after the death of Mallory - it is the language of 
Spenser, Shakespeare, and the King James Bible translators. Every modern reader of English is 
familiar with the cadences, vocabulary, and structures of these writers, and these sounds 
evoke an archaic tone for modern readers. It’s the sweet spot of both old-timey and 
recognizable which Tolkien used to create his archaic mood. 
Early Modern English can be marked by syntax - the way that words go together. For 
example, during this time the Object-Subject-Verb sentence form was used more than in 
any other phase of English: “But the Palantir the king will keep” (The Return of the King 
282). 
 
 
 
(“Ainulindalë,” The Silmarillion 17, emphasis Alden). 
 
 
 
 
 
It’s even easier to spot Early Modern English by Morphology - the changes in words 
which change their functions. English - in all centuries - is an inflected language. Changed word 
forms which indicate changes in word function are inflectional morphology.

Alden —“Early Modern English Inflectional Morphology”  
  
 
Mythmoot II (2013)    3  
 
 
 
Many of these inflectional forms have changed or dropped out of use since Early 
Modern English, such as been, eyen, hosen, and housen. Since it is an affix which usually 
changes, Present English readers still recognize and gloss the root words, use a few context 
cues to recognize the old plural forms of bee, eye, hose, and house and the Early Modern 
English forms simply add archaic flavor. 
 
 
We say, "I knit" but "She knits", and that terminal “s” on knits indicates a change in the 
function of the word; in this case, knit has changed to having a third person singular subject. 
In Early Modern English - and before - that inflection of the singular verb was even more 
obvious, I knit, thou knittest, she knitteth. 

Alden —“Early Modern English Inflectional Morphology”  
  
 
Mythmoot II (2013)    4  
 
 
 
 
 
Notice what happened with that pronoun? In Early Modern English, the second person 
personal pronoun declined thus. 
Ye - the plural subject - dropped out of use after 1600, so it is a clear marker for Early 
Modern - or earlier - English. 
The singular forms were also used less and less throughout the Early Modern English 
years. By 1700 those singulars were used for animals and children; only Quakers used thou, 
thee, thy in their former manner. 
Throughout the Ainulindalë, Tolkien does not deviate from the forms in this table. 
In the Quenta Silmarillion, the Elves use these forms almost all the time, the noble Men 
use them less, and the common Men not at all. 
Great - we found a pattern - we’ve spotted the Early Modern English forms which 
create archaic mood, and we discovered how Tolkien used them to define classes and races of 
characters. Can we search these patterns even more deeply? 
In the “Athrabeth Finrod Ah Andreth” (Morgoth’s Ring 301-366) Finrod, High King of 
the Noldor, and Andreth, a noble woman famous for her wisdom, discuss philosophy and 
cosmology; almost the entire thing is dialogue. Of course they use these Early Modern English 
forms of the second person pronoun. 

Alden —“Early Modern English Inflectional Morphology”  
  
 
Mythmoot II (2013)    5  
 
Beyond race and class, in this story Tolkien uses these forms even more subtly. Finrod’s 
manner of addressing Andreth changes over the course of the story, indicating a change in 
Finrod's intentions and feelings toward Andreth. 
 
 
 
 
 
In note 5, on the “Athrabeth,” Christopher Tolkien writes: “The typist of C replaced the 
first ye by you; my father let this stand, but corrected the original occurrence of you to ye. On 
the opening page of the typescript he noted that ye is used for the plural only, and that you 
represents the Elvish pronoun of polite address,” while thou, thee “represent the familiar (or 
affectionate) pronoun” (Morgoth’s Ring 326). This distinction is not always maintained in the 
manuscript; but in a number of cases you, where ye might be expected, may be intended, and I 
have only corrected the forms where error seems certain.” I clarify - you as a subject 
represents the singular Elvish pronoun of polite address. Ye is always the plural. 
Tolkien continues to explain his father's usage of thou, thee, thy as well as the unusual 
use of it in another note: 
The sentence 'But say not thou to me, for so he once did!' was an addition to the 
manuscript; Finrod has begun to address Andreth as thou from shortly before this 
point. But from here to the end of the text the usage is very confused, 
inconsistent in the manuscript and with inconsistent emendation to the 
typescript (both thou to you, and you to thou); it seems that my father was in two 
minds as to which forms Finrod should employ, and I have left the text as it 
stands (328). 

Alden —“Early Modern English Inflectional Morphology”  
  
 
Mythmoot II (2013)    6  
 
I’m absolutely intrigued. I believe that rather than being "in two minds,” Tolkien was 
absolutely clear on which form he wished to use, and moved between you and thou, thee with 
great deliberation. 
So, of course, I made a spreadsheet… I make jokes about my spreadsheets - but really 
they’re simply a tool for finding patterns in the text: 
 There are 28 uses of the intimate singular thou, thee, thy, and thine; none of these 
are in question. 
 There are 36 uses of the subjective case of the plural ye, all clear 
 The subjective case of the formal singular you is used 70 times. I assume that the 
possessive and objective cases of you and ye are identical and therefore 
ambiguous since there is no reference to them, so I have not used them for my 
analysis. Forty nine times, you unambiguously indicates the subject form of the 
singular second person formal pronoun. 
 
 
You is used six times in a manner which seems to be in error. Logic dictates that ye was 
intended in five of these; they are probably errors between Tolkien’s hand and the typist’s 
automatic use of you which Christopher Tolkien noted. 
YOU is used five times when it is unclear whether the subject should be Andreth 
individually or the whole race of Men. Let’s take these as singular will take them as accurate. 
But remember that sixth time which looked like an error? Consideration of the text and 
subtleties of Quenya indicates that the last one is actually proper: 
 "And not long are the years since you first met and your hands touched in 
this darkness" (323). 
 
Finrod is speaking  of Andreth and her sweetheart Aegnor. I expect to read "since ye first  
met.” 
 
 
Alden —“Early Modern English Inflectional Morphology”  
  
 
Mythmoot II (2013)    7  
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, Quenya does have a dual number (Renk), used for two persons as distinct 
froma plural, and of course these characters were speaking in Quenya - the published work is 
merely a translation into Modern English. The editor gives us no indication of how Tolkien 
translated his dual pronouns in English. I posit that you in this line is proper, distinguishing the 
dual from ye, which everywhere else has referred to the entire race of Men. 

Alden —“Early Modern English Inflectional Morphology”  
  
 
Mythmoot II (2013)    8  
 
Mythmoot II (2013) 10 
Alden —“Early Modern English Inflectional Morphology”  
  
 
 
 
We have remaining the section near the end, of which Christopher Tolkien writes “… it 
seems that my father was in two minds as to which forms Finrod should employ” (328). Crazy 
like a fox. 
Finrod begins to address Andreth with thou, thee, thy only after Andreth cries out and 
weeps: "'Is there no bridge but mere words?' And then she wept again" (323). Andreth now 
grieves this separation by war and mortality from her beloved, and Finrod responds tenderly. 
Of course he uses the familiar, intimate forms of address thou, thee in trying to comfort her, 
his "beloved adaneth." 
From Andreth's outburst to the end of the work, Finrod uses an intimate, personal, and 
caring tone, characterized by the use of thou, thee, thy. His use is perfectly clear and 
unambiguous, enhanced by the matching Early Modern English verb form. 'Yet then thou wert 
a maiden, brave and eager...' 
After her outburst and weeping, Finrod does revert and call Andreth you - the singular 
formal - ten times. 
"If I could speak any comfort, you would deem it lordly from one on my side of the 
sundering doom" (323). Since he is trying not to sound lordly, Finrod uses the formal register, 
lest he be misinterpreted as speaking down to Andreth. He has acknowledged that her 
bitterness colors everything she has said and understood in the conversation so far, and he is 
speaking carefully. 
Finrod even uses both you and thou in a single paragraph. 
Mythmoot II (2013) 10 
Alden —“Early Modern English Inflectional Morphology”  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Even here, Finrod's word-choice is absolutely deliberate. "So you feel now. But do you 
think of him?" (325). These words gently rebuke Andreth; Finrod chooses to use you to create 
distance between Andreth and his words, to keep her from feeling them too bitterly. Then he 
speaks on his brother's behalf, making his brother's case as a loving husband. Finrod's choice to 
return to thee closes that distance-just-created, as though he were physically leaning forward 
to take her hand and speak to her grieving heart. 
Near the end of their conversation, Finrod clearly pulls back again to the formal 
register. 
His speech indicates that he is frustrated with his inability to convince Andreth of the 
truth of his words. He is respectfully withdrawing from the field of debate lest it become 
quarrelsome or more hurtful. 
At the end of the “Athrabeth,” Finrod closes with a blessing. He repeats you three times 
speaking directly to Andreth, and the entirely appropriate formal register marks his words as 
benediction. 
  

Mythmoot II (2013) 11 
Alden —“Early Modern English Inflectional Morphology”  
  
 
Tolkien doesn’t tell us what the characters are feeling, that’s an amateur’s move. He 
didn’t show us anything other than tears once and a held hand once. Could these complexities 
of relationship be encoded in the grammar for us readers to understand on the visceral level? 
So, I did an experiment. I gave those last few pages to two readers who are not actors. I 
gave them no stage directions except this: 
• When Finrod says THOU, THEE, he was to lean in and create intimacy 
• When he said YOU, he was to create distance and respect 
Let’s see how they did… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
http://www.mythgard.org/?attachment_id=7001  
 
In the “Athrabeth Finrod Ah Andreth,” Tolkien uses thou and you to indicate the dynamic 
relationship between Finrod and Andreth. Finrod uses the different inflections to connote the 
balance of his caring for and respect for Andreth as she negotiates her complex emotions. 
Tolkien’s linguistic subtlety pulls our heartstrings without saying one extra word - by embedding 
the deeper message of the “Athrabeth”—the eternal connectedness and sundering divide 
between Humans and Elves - in his grammar. 
Mythmoot II (2013) 12 
Alden —“Early Modern English Inflectional Morphology”  
  
 
 
 
WORKS CITED 
 
Renk, Thorsten. “Quenya Pronominal System—a summary.” Parma Tyelpelassiva - The Book of 
Silver Leaves. Web. http://www.phy.duke.edu/~trenk/elvish/quenya_pronouns.html . 
 
Shippey, T. S., “Language and History in Early Britain”. Philology Through Tolkien. Mythgard 
Institute. 1 Oct. 2013 Lecture. 
 
Tolkien, J. R. R. "Ainulindalë." The Silmarillion, 2nd ed. Ed. Christopher Tolkien. Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin Company, 2001. Print. 
 
—. "Book 6: The Return of the King." The Hobbit and the Lord of the Rings. New York: Random 
House, 2012. Print. 
 
—. "On Faerie Stories." The Tolkien Reader. New York: Ballantine Books, 1966. Print. 
 
Tolkien, J. R. R., and Christopher Tolkien. “Athrabeth Finrod ah Andreth.” Morgoth's Ring: The 
Later Silmarillion, Part 1, the Legends of Aman. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1993: 301- 
366). Print. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SPARROW F. ALDEN is a credentialed religious educator designing and implementing 
educational programs for adults, youth, children, and families with a strong bent toward  
earth spirituality. She used to be a statistician, so naturally the Mythgard Institute brings out 
her inner Word Counter. She participates regularly in National Novel Writing Month, wrote 
a monograph about interfaith families, and has published a knitting pattern in honor of the 
Oxford Comma. In the Eowyn Challenge, she has walked to Mount Doom. Sparrow is co- 
owner/builder of a straw bale home in the New Hampshire woods and dearly hopes that her 
children will make it into space. 
 