 

 Tom Shippey: The Road to Middle-Earth; J.R.R. Tolkien: Author of the Century 

 Danny Yee's Book Reviews 

 Subjects |
 Titles |
 Authors |
 Best Books |
 Search |
 Latest 

 Tom Shippey

The Road to Middle-Earth

J.R.R. Tolkien: Author of the Century

HarperCollins 2005, 2000
 A book review by Danny Yee © 2022 https://dannyreviews.com/

Tom Shippey is a medievalist from the same academic lineage as
Tolkien, so is better placed than most to explain the background
and context of his work. The Road to Middle-Earth and Author
of the Century have much the same structure: a chapter on The
Hobbit , three chapters on The Lord of the Rings , a chapter on
the Silmarillion , and a chapter on the minor works. And they
cover much the same material, with a lot of overlap.

The central place of names and their derivations in Tolkien's work.
His use of language and stylistic variation to balance older and
more modern perspectives (Bilbo in the Hobbit is "a bourgeois
burglar") and to bring out differences in status and character
(with a detailed study of the Council of Elrond). The importance of
the embedded songs and poems. The variety of Tolkien's sources,
from the Rohirrim as horse-riding Anglo-Saxons to Macbeth .
The careful chronology and cartography in Lord of the Rings and
the interlacing of different plot threads. The nature of the Ring
and Tolkien's balance between Boethian and Manichaean visions of
evil; the influence of his Christianity. And much more.

Of the two books, The Road to Middle-Earth is more academic, to
some extent "a work of professional piety", it probes a bit deeper
into etymology and historical linguistics and it has additional
chapters, on the divide between "lit" and "lang" in the Oxford
English faculty and on the disciplinary history and status of
philology. Author of the Century is a bit lighter but still
a serious work of literary criticism; while perfectly clear and
accessible, it is unlikely to appeal to Tolkien fans narrowly
focused on Middle-Earth itself.

April 2022
 External links: 

 The Road to Middle-Earth 

- buy from Bookshop.org 

- buy from Amazon.com or Amazon.co.uk 

 J.R.R. Tolkien: Author of the Century 

- buy from Bookshop.org 

- buy from Amazon.com or Amazon.co.uk 

 Related reviews: 

- Tom Shippey - Fictional Space: Essays on Contemporary Science Fiction 

- more fantasy 

- more literary criticism 

%T The Road to Middle-Earth

%A Shippey, Tom

%I HarperCollins

%D 2005

%O paperback, 3rd edition, notes, index

%G ISBN-13 9780261102750

%P 474pp

 %T J.R.R. Tolkien: Author of the Century

%A Shippey, Tom

%I HarperCollins

%D 2000

%O paperback, references, index

%G ISBN-13 9780261104013

%P 347pp

 Subjects |
 Titles |
 Authors |
 Best Books |
 Search |
 Latest 

 Book Reviews by Danny Yee 

