 

Tolkien’s use of parataxis | The Flame Imperishable 

 Skip to primary content 

 The Flame Imperishable 

 A blog about Tolkien, St. Thomas, and other purveyors of the Philosophia Perennis.

 Search 

 Main menu

 Domus 

 Lord of the Rings 

 Fellowship of the Ring 

 “A Long Expected Party” 

 “Shadow of the Past” 

 “Three’s Company” 

 “A Conspiracy Unmasked” 

 “House of Tom Bombadil” 

 “At the Sign of the Prancing Pony” 

 “Strider” 

 “Many Meetings” 

 “The Council of Elrond” 

 “The Ring Goes South” 

 “The Bridge of Khazad-dûm” 

 “Lothlorien” 

 “Farewell to Lorien” 

 Two Towers 

 “Helm’s Deep” 

 “King of the Golden Hall” 

 “Passing of the Grey Company” 

 “The Muster of Rohan” 

 “Treebeard” 

 “Window on the West” 

 Return of the King 

 “Minas Tirith” 

 “Siege of Gondor” 

 “The Ride of the Rohirrim” 

 “Battle of the Pelennor Fields” 

 “Pyre of Denethor” 

 “Mount Doom” 

 “The Steward and the King” 

 “Homeward Bound” 

 “Scouring of the Shire” 

 “Grey Havens” 

 Silmarillion 

 Ainulindale 

 Valaquenta 

 Quenta Silmarillion 

 01 “Of the Beginning of Days” 

 02 “Of Aule and Yavanna” 

 06 “Of Feanor” 

 07 “Of the Silmarils and Unrest of the Noldor” 

 08 “Of the Darkening of Valinor” 

 09 “Flight of the Noldor” 

 13 “Return of the Noldor” 

 17 “Of the Coming of Men” 

 19 “Of Beren and Luthien” 

 Akallabeth 

 History of Middle-earth 

 Book of Lost Tales 

 2 Music of the Ainur 

 3 The Coming of the Valar 

 6 The Theft of Melko 

 Peoples of Middle-earth 

 Sauron Defeated 

 Notion Club Papers 

 Morgoth’s Ring 

 Athrabeth Finrod ah Andreth 

 Unfinished Tales 

 Opuscula 

 The Hobbit 

 “Leaf by Niggle” 

 “On Fairy-Stories” 

 “Mythopoeia” 

 “Beowulf: Monsters and the Critics” 

 Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien 

 Metaphysics of Faërie 

 Sapientes 

 The Ancients 

 Homer 

 Parmenides 

 Pythagoras 

 Aeschylus 

 Thucydides 

 Plato 

 Aristotle 

 Plotinus 

 The Medievals 

 Augustine 

 Boethius 

 Pseudo-Dionysius 

 Beowulf 

 Peter Damian (1007-1072) 

 Anselm (1033-1109) 

 Cur Deus Homo 

 Bernardus Silvestris 

 William of Conches 

 Hugh of St. Victor 

 Bonaventure 

 Breviloquium 

 St. Thomas Aquinas 

 Dante 

 William of Ockham 

 The Moderns 

 Machiavelli 

 Calvin 

 Francis Bacon 

 Descartes 

 Milton 

 Hume 

 Immanuel Kant 

 Hegel 

 Marx 

 Ludwig von Mises 

 The Postmoderns 

 Nietzsche 

 Heidegger 

 Foucault 

 Girard 

 Post navigation

 ← Previous 
 Next → 

 Tolkien’s use of parataxis

 Posted on March 22, 2012 by Jonathan McIntosh 

 Parataxis is the literary technique of using short, simple sentences joined by coordinating conjunctions (e.g., “and”) instead of more complex sentences using subordinate clauses and conjunctions. As John Garth observes, the technique “became a hallmark of Tolkien’s writing,” using it to achieve a sense of “breathless excitement” and “cranking up the tension and foreboding before the denouement” ( Tolkien and the Great War , 271). Below are a couple of examples from The Return of the King . The first is from “The Ride of the Rohirrim” and involves Theoden:

 Suddenly the king cried to Snowmane and the horse sprang away. Behind him his banner blew in the wind, white horse upon a field of green, but he outpaced it. After him thundered the knights of his hohuse, but he was ever before them. Éomer rode there, the white horsetail on his helm floating in his speed, and the front of the first éored roared like a breaker foaming to the shore, but Théoden could not be overtaken. Fey he seemed, or the battle-fury of his fathers ran like new tire in his veins, and he was borne up on Snowmane like a god of old, even as Orome the Great in the battle of the Valar when the world was young. His golden shield was uncovered, and lo! it shone like an image of the Sun, and the grass flamed into green about the white feet of his steed. For morning came, morning and a wind from the sea; and the darkness was removed, and the hosts of Mordor wailed, and terror took them, and they fled, and died, and the hoofs of wrath rode over them. And then all the host of Rohan burst into song, and they sang as they slew, for the joy of battle was on them, and the sound of their singing that was fair and terrible came even to the City.

 The second example is from “The Battle of Pelennor Fields,” involving Éomer :

 These staves he [Éomer] spoke, yet he laughed as he said them. For once more lust of battle was on him; and he was still unscathed, and he was young, and he was king: the lord of a fell people. And lo! even as he laughed at despair he looked out again on the black ships, and he lifted up his sword to defy them. And then wonder took him, and a great joy; and he cast his sword up in the sunlight and sang as he caught it. And all eyes followed his gaze, and behold! upon the foremost ship a great standard broke, and the wind displayed it as she turned towards the Harlond. There flowered a White Tree, and that was for Gondor; but Seven Stars were about it, and a high crown above it, the signs of Elendil that no lord had borne for years beyond count. And the stars flamed in the sunlight, for they were wrought of gems by Arwen daughter of Elrond; and the crown was bright in the morning, for it was wrought of mithril and gold.”

 Share this:

 Share on Facebook (Opens in new window) 
 Facebook 

 Share on X (Opens in new window) 
 X 

 Email a link to a friend (Opens in new window) 
 Email 

 Print (Opens in new window) 
 Print 

 Like Loading... 

 Related 

 This entry was posted in "Battle of the Pelennor Fields" , "The Ride of the Rohirrim" by Jonathan McIntosh . Bookmark the permalink .

 1 thought on “ Tolkien’s use of parataxis ” 

 Pingback: The Light of Valinor – The Errant Scribe 

 Leave a comment Cancel reply 

 Δ 

 Blog at WordPress.com. 

 Privacy & Cookies: This site uses cookies. By continuing to use this website, you agree to their use. 

To find out more, including how to control cookies, see here:

 Cookie Policy 

 Comment 

 Reblog 

 Subscribe 

 Subscribed 

 The Flame Imperishable 

 Join 186 other subscribers

 Sign me up 

 Already have a WordPress.com account? Log in now. 

 The Flame Imperishable 

 Subscribe 

 Subscribed 

 Sign up 

 Log in 

 Copy shortlink 

 Report this content 

 View post in Reader 

 Manage subscriptions 

 Collapse this bar 

 %d 

 Design a site like this with WordPress.com
 Get started 

 