 
 Don't Write Like AI (1 of 101): "It's Not X, it's Y" 
 AI Writers Room
 Home 
 Newsletter 
 Anti-AI Editor 
 About 
 Sign in 
 Subscribe 
 By Blake Stockton 
 in
 AI Writing 
 --
 16 Apr 2025 
 Don't Write Like AI (1 of 101): "It's Not X, it's Y" 
 The #1 AI writing tell and a daily annoyance of millions. 
 One of the most beloved writing techniques of AI is negation. This is when AI writes something like: "It's not just X, it's Y." "We're not just building a product, we're creating an experience." Or throw in an em dash: "Credit card fraud isn't just evolving--it's accelerating!" More technically, this writing structure is called a "contrastive structure" (per Claude) or a "contrastive reframe" (per ChatGPT). Whatever you want to call it, the negation structure is everywhere. I feel like I'm in my own little Black Mirror episode. Just this morning, I check LinkedIn. It was in the third post, discovered in less than 30 seconds: "The teams who will thrive now aren't just using AI for speed. They're combining it with judgment, experience and original thinking." (Aside: The combination of the negation and the triplet series is very AI.) Let's check X. On the fourth post I saw negation in a very cool looking visual: Then, back on LinkedIn, I discovered an article on a personal blog. The blog is about how companies should be more lenient on AI-detected writing. The idea is that good writing is good writing. And I agree. All is well so far. However, when I got to the takeaways section at the end of the blog...negation everywhere. Three instances in 250 words: AI doesn't eliminate labor; it redistributes it. This isn't a retreat from technology; it's an evolution enabled by it. And a little longer: Not performative updates -- but real transparency that restores confidence in both the process and the person. (Aside: The last one gets bonus points for using the em dash with negation.) You may be thinking, Blake, you're way too into this negation thing. And I agree, I'm ahead of the curve and more concerned because I'm studying it. I'm looking for it. Like seeing more red Ferraris on the road after I bought a red Ferrari. (I didn't buy a Ferrari.) However, here's the problem. I think in 6-12 months years people will be more sensitive to negation because like I just showed you, it's everywhere. Once you read the contrastive structure hundreds of times in blogs, ebooks, social posts, emails, newsletters, ads, you start to get a negative reaction. Like actual negative emotions to the writing technique: frustration, annoyance, and a bit of rage. I know I do. Now, I'm not saying you should never use negation. What I am saying is that it needs to be done tastefully. Before we talk solutions, let's talk about why AI is using this structure. There are many reasons, but I want to highlight a couple. I asked Claude why it uses negation in its writing. It gave several reasons, but the summary was telling: Negation adds depth to statements, making content sound more sophisticated. And that, friends, is one of the larger issues with AI writing. It tries to sound sophisticated without being sophisticated. Tuck that thought away for future blogs and videos. Specifically for B2B writing, negation sentences (per Claude): Elevates the product from a simple utility to a strategic solution Shifts focus from features to benefits or outcomes I agree. These are two strategies to make a product or idea appear more sophisticated. But using negation via AI doesn't lead to quality writing. So how do we as content professionals solve for negation struc ture? I have a few solutions for you. First , we need to prompt out negation in the original prompt. Here are a few prompt examples: " Avoid any sentence structures that set up and then negate or expand beyond expectations (like 'X isn't just about Y' or 'X is more than just Y' or 'X goes beyond Y') " Or you can give AI slightly more direction in the output. You can use a prompt like: " Avoid any sentence structures that set up and then negate or expand beyond expectations (like 'X isn't just about Y' or 'X is more than just Y'). Instead, use direct, affirmative statements. Feel free to be creative with your sentence structures and expression styles. " I, personally, like shorter prompts that enable more creativity in the LLM so the output isn't too narrow. I like how the second prompt calls out being creative. However, depending on your other prompts, the output may be too varied. Try both prompts to see which output you like better. Second , add negation to your Content Review Checklist. I'll often search for "just" in the content to see if any obvious negation snuck in. I'll also ask AI to check the content for instances of negation. Again, I want to reiterate that negation can be in content. But, it needs to be tasteful. Third , if you want to include negation in your writing, I'd recommend a couple strategies. Instead of making generic statements, make it more specific. The writing will be more lengthy, but detailed. For example, instead of: " AI doesn't eliminate labor; it redistributes it." Try something more specific: " AI won't eliminate your B2B writing job. It will become your research assistant, handle your first drafts, optimize your content for SEO, and free up your time to focus on the strategic messaging and emotional appeals that convert enterprise prospects into loyal clients. " Additionally, you could make the negation unique by including personal experiences. For me, this is the preferred writing strat. Speaks to the author's direct experience. Alright, I think that's enough, for now, on negation in AI writing. So remember: We're not trying to remove all negation from writing, we're simply elevating writing to a level that would make Hemingway rise from the grave and slow clap. 
 Previous issue 
 How I Improved My Storytelling GPT (And What's Next) 
 Share 
 Next issue 
 Don't Write Like AI (2 of 101): Sentence Stacking 
 Subscribe to AI Writers Room 
 Don't miss out on the latest issues. Sign up now to get access to the library of members-only issues. 
 jamie@example.com
 Subscribe 
 AI Writers Room © 2026
 Powered by Ghost 
 × 
 FREE DOWNLOAD 
 Wait, before you go! 
 Join 4,188 people and get the 
 Top 7 AI Writing Tells of 2026 
 (and exactly how to fix them)
 Get the Cheat Sheet 
 No spam, ever. Unsubscribe anytime. 
 Almost there! 
 Step 1: Check your inbox for a confirmation email 
 Step 2: Click the link to confirm 
 Step 3: Your cheat sheet arrives in a welcome email 
 