 
 In Offense of LLM Poetry - by The Literary Quant 
 New2Criticism Subscribe Sign in In Offense of LLM Poetry some frustrations and one suggestion The Literary Quant Aug 14, 2026 2 Share Confession: I write poetry, and I take it really seriously. I recently submitted to a major literary magazine, the kind that gets listed in Top 10 Articles and recommended by chatbots. I was browsing their featured poems when I came across one that felt…familiar. Cold-dread-familiar. The terse, constantly enjambed lines lacked adjectives and had metaphors that didn't quite parse. I rushed to Pangram, which gave me the 100% AI verdict I suspected. Now, there's reasonable doubt here. After all, LLMs are trained on the stuff that gets published in lit mags. If it is AI, then another magazine has been fooled. But if it isn't AI, then it still sounds so Claude-like that it makes me and Pangram suspicious. Worse, maybe the writer honed their craft by reading, perhaps unwittingly, AI-generated poems. As more LLM poetry gets published, more writers will read and absorb it into their own work, at which point the whole battle becomes harder to win and less meaningful. Second Confession: I've read quite a bit of LLM poetry, specifically Claude poetry (Sonnet, Opus, and Fable). Poetry is the closest thing to a calling for me, so when I'm handed a machine that can supposedly replace human poets, I have to test it. What I found was both surprising and reassuring. It's not bad. It's arguably better than a lot of amateur poems. But it's repetitive and recognizable. Most importantly, I can never get it to write what I want to write, which leaves room for me. LLM poetry takes typical workshop advice to the extreme. Flat description, which it calls "restrained". Strange metaphors, which it calls "elevated". A refusal to state itself too plainly, but a tendency to re - restate its load-bearing moments. The constant objective correlatives and choppy cadence are the cherries on top of the ad absurdum sundae. ( Oh, and it loves contrived mic-drops like the last sentence. ) Maybe it shouldn't matter as long as the poetry is good. To their credit, LLMs mostly avoid poor mechanics, cheap reaches for emotion, clichéd images, and other common mistakes of novice poets. But for now, most magazines advertise strict anti-AI policies (though some allow it for editing). In the long run, rampant AI use has consequences for both writers and publishers. I would hope that every magazine already uses detectors, but I notice a distrust of them among my classmates and online, so there might be reluctance in the editorial room as well. On an emotional level, LLM-suspicion is demoralizing. I spend a lot of time ensuring that my work feels distinct and accurate to what I want to say. It's deflating to know that I might save time and increase my chances with just a few good prompts. If the AI is better, fine, but why should someone get credit for what the AI has produced? I would buy an obviously machine-made chair, but I probably wouldn't buy from someone who insisted it was handmade. No argument about the art of prompting changes the fact that submitting AI-work to an anti-AI magazine is lying. For writers: a quick game-theoretic sketch. Allowing AI to write under your name can earn publications in the short term. This comes at the risk of reputation damage if caught, but for now that risk may seem small. In the long run, if more people use AI (which they would, because it gets published), then the edge becomes diluted. AI writing is non-excludable, non-rival, and often recognizable by those familiar. More AI-gen submissions mean more exposure to readers, increasing the risk of detection for as long as AI writing remains distinct. The latest models will get better and more human, but your fellow prompt-poets will just switch to those asap. Writing the hard way is product differentiation. Claude 1 can't imitate me unless there are poems to imitate. I could take the time to prompt and refine Claude into making distinct stuff that bypasses detectors, but I suspect that doing so would take similar effort to writing (at least for now). Plus, the more specific and vivid my ideas are, the more likely I am to both want and be able to manifest them on my own. "Good ideas and bad writing" aren't really a thing when the whole point is the writing. Especially in poetry, where the choice and arrangement of words are what separate the genre from prose. Regardless of your opinion on the quality of LLM-generated poetry, it's been and will probably continue to be published. Multiple scandals of AI-gen work have already embarrassed the industry. We need to do something . Detection software isn't infallible, sure, but rejections don't need to be based on just Pangram verdicts. A positive flag is a chance to check and prepare for possible accusations. Plus, the old-fashioned evidence of document history and time stamps can be faked. In the absence of a perfect method, taking multiple methods with a grain of salt is better than just the honor system. It's relatively easy to run publication-specific calibrations too. Take a decently sized sample of work that was published in-house, preferably before ~2023, and run it through a detector. Decently sized means at least 30 but ideally 100+. Detectors tend to be less accurate with shorter pieces, so your poetry sample may differ from advertised average false positive rates. Testing on your own corpus estimates the accuracy for the kind of work you want to publish. This might not eliminate all AI-gen submissions, but it can minimize suspicions of publishing AI-gen poetry, and that's what causes PR damage and writer demotivation. Accusations are supported by positive flags, so it's protective to get a rough idea of the likelihood of one. There's still the question of how to respond to positive flags, but I think the solution might be specific to the editorial philosophy of each publication. Personally, I wouldn't publish anything that reads as obvious Claude poetry, but that's just my call. For now, I feel confident that LLM lyrics are not close to replacing human poetry. That could change in the future. Magazines are businesses that rely on readers. If readers prefer LLM poetry, it's common sense for magazines to supply that. At that point, we'll need better arguments about what makes art meaningful and why humans should be empowered to produce it. But until then, we should commit to our expressed preferences for human poetry in our publishing standards. Subscribe Author's Note: Thanks for reading! I've noticed a resistance to detectors among my classmates, and this essay is a trial round for when I'll need to convince them. I'd appreciate any suggestions on what to do with flagged pieces. 1 WLOG for other LLMs 2 Share Discussion about this post Comments Restacks Top Latest No posts Ready for more? Subscribe © 2026 Qualt Quants · Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection notice Start your Substack Get the app Substack is the home for great culture 
