 
 Heroic Language in *The Lord of the Rings* 
 Personal Canon Formation Subscribe Sign in Heroic Language in *The Lord of the Rings* Or, Tolkienian Style, part 2 John Halbrooks Aug 12, 2026 10 3 2 Share Here is a link to my first essay on Tolkienian style , in case you missed it. Warning : today's piece includes a disturbing picture of the aftermath of a firebombing. The Rohirrim riding into battle, as pictured by Alan Lee in the Centenary Edition. Arise, arise, Riders of Théoden! Fell deeds awake: fire and slaughter! spear shall be shaken, shield be splintered, a sword-day, a red day, ere the sun rises! Ride now, ride now! Ride to Gondor! With that he seized a great horn from Guthláf his banner-bearer, and he blew such a blast upon it that it burst asunder. (838) There is a stylistic shift as we move from Book Four to Book Five of The Lord of the Rings . Book Four has focused exclusively on the Frodo-Sam-Gollum narrative thread, and the language has been mostly hobbit-colloquial, with moments of Faramir's somewhat more elevated idiom and Gollum's idiosyncratic speech. The third-person narration has remained mostly neutral--omniscient and plain-spoken--deferring to the hobbit's characteristic dialogue to set the stylistic tone. Compare the passage above, from Chapter 5 of Book Five, "The Ride of the Rohirrim," as Théoden leads his mounted army into battle. Théoden's verse loosely follows the alliterative patterns of Old English prosody that one finds in medieval battle poems like The Battle of Maldon , alliterating on many of the stressed syllables in a four-stress metrical pattern. But what is even more striking to the close reader of this passage is that the third-person narration incorporates the related style of Old English prose, modeled by medieval writers like Ælfric and Wulfstan: a prose pattern that incorporates alliteration, which resonates with the preceding verse. This continues through most of the following paragraph, and indeed through much of the prose describing the following battle, especially when the Rohirrim are involved. Consider this passage describing Théoden and the Rohirrim riding into battle, and note the alliteration, along with the antiquarian feel of the prose: Fey he seemed, or the battle-fury of his fathers ran like new fire in his veins, and he was borne up on Snowmane like a god of old, even as Oromë the Great in the battle of the Valar when the world was young. His golden shield was uncovered, and lo! it shone like an image of the Sun, and the grass flamed into green about the white feet of his steed. For morning came, morning and a wind from the sea; and darkness was removed, and the hosts of Mordor wailed, and terror took them, and they fled and died, and the hoofs of wrath rode over them. and then all the host of Rohan burst into song, and they sang as they slew, for the joy of battle was on them, and the sound of their singing that was fair and terrible came even to the City. (838) This is thrilling stuff. One of my graduate students in class a couple of years ago looked up fey in the OED (which made me happy), and pointed out that it was an antiquarian word that in one obsolete sense means "leading to or presaging death; deadly, fatal." 1 The sense of the "joy of battle" reflects powerfully in the prose. This makes for an interesting contrast to Tolkien's generally anti-war attitude that we have discussed before, and which is apparent through many of his letters and much of LOTR . This is not, I think, contradictory, but rather reflects a romanticized variation of the literary mode that had first moved him as a young, aspiring philologist, which he found in Old English and Old Icelandic poetry and also in the antiquarian romances of William Morris, which imitated Old English alliterative style. (I don't recommend these romances; your mileage may vary, but I find them unreadably bad, though I do like some of Morris's other poetry; Tolkien admired Morris, but his own work is much better.) Tolkien presents us with two visions of war: one that he found in the mechanized warfare of the twentieth century, which he experienced in the trenches of the Great War and his sons experienced in the Second World War, and another that fed his youthful passion for heroic poetry which ended up determining his profession. This romanticized vision carries on a long tradition in English poetry of heroic death and glorious defeat, as in Tennyson's Charge of the Light Brigade : "Into the valley of Death / Rode the six hundred." Fey , indeed! Tolkien expresses this sentiment in his famous essay on Beowulf , in which he refers to the "exaltation of undefeated will, which receives doctrinal expression in the words of Byrhtwold at the battle of Maldon" (123). He refers here to the passage from the Maldon poem in which Byrhtwold vows to fight to the death while protecting the body of his fallen lord: "Thought must be the higher, heart the keener, / courage must be the greater as our strength fades." 2 The result of this concatenation of the two visions of war is a balanced account, which acknowledges both the widely attested, horrific thrill of battle and the heroic impulse in the face of death, along with the cataclysmic consequences of war, especially in a modern, mechanized world that makes possible killing on an industrial scale. He expresses his response to this terrible aspect of war in a letter to his son Christopher from 1944: I sometimes feel appalled at the thought of the sum total of human misery all over the world at the present moment: the millions parted, fretting, wasting in unprofitable days--quite apart from torture, pain, death, bereavement, injustice. If anguish were visible, almost the whole of this benighted planet would be enveloped in a dense dark vapour, shrouded from the amazed vision of the heavens! (110) He literalizes this "dense dark vapour" in the dark shadow that arrives in Gondor ahead of the army of Mordor. As Beregond explains to Pippin, "this is no weather of the world. This is some device of his malice; some broil of fume from the Mountain of Fire that he sends to darken hearts and council" (808). Indeed, despair and terror become weapons of war here. We have a modern word for this: "terrorism." Though this word was not used to describe the military tactics of the Second World War, the industrial process of firebombing cities and civilian populations, used extensively by both Allied and Axis powers and culminating in the two atomic bombs of 1945, was an instrument of terror and despair. The charred remains of civilians after the firebombing of Tokyo. Similar images may be found from many cities during the war, from both Allied and Axis territories. While Tolkien recognized the necessity of modern weapons and armies to defeat Hitler, in his created world he imagines the possibility of another way. As we know, despite the heroic valor of the Rohirrim, Aragorn, and the men of Gondor, it is the nonviolent, quiet hobbit, Frodo, who ultimately holds the key to vanquishing the darkness. Having lived through two global wars that depended on military might for victory, and having witnessed the terror and brutality of war first-hand, he shaped a vision in which the relinquishing of power could bring about a more complete triumph. Thank you for reading. 1 Shoutout to Emma Holm for this reference! 2 My translation. The Old English reads: "Hige sceal þē heardra, heorte þē cēnre, / mōd sceal þē māre, þē ūre mægen lytlað" (lines 312-313). Tolkien's essay can be found in a number of different places. Here, I am using the Norton Critical Edition of Beowulf , edited by Daniel Donoghue and translated by Seamus Heaney (second edition, 2019). 10 3 2 Share Previous Next Discussion about this post Comments Restacks Kim Aug 12 Liked by John Halbrooks That passage you quoted about Theoden and the riders always sends chills down my spine. Reply Share David Roberts Aug 12 Liked by John Halbrooks "they sang as they slew." Reply Share 1 reply by John Halbrooks 1 more comment... Top Latest Discussions No posts Ready for more? Subscribe © 2026 John Halbrooks · Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection notice Start your Substack Get the app Substack is the home for great culture 
