 
 Talking LOTR With Tolkien Expert Professor Thomas Shippey 
 Books 
 Contests 
 Fiction 
 Jobs 
 Poetry 
 Products 
 Prompts 
 Videos 
 Talking Tolkien With Thomas Shippey 
 by Claire E. White 
When Academy award-nominated New Zealand director
Peter Jackson needed an expert to teach the cast of The Lord of
the Rings how to pronounce all the words of the Elven languages
there was only one man who could help: Dr. Thomas Shippey,
well-known scholar, philologist and the world's foremost Tolkien expert.
Professor Thomas Shippey is uniquely qualified to
opine on all things Tolkien: he taught at Oxford University at the same
time as J.R.R. Tolkien, and later taught with the same
syllabus, which
 gives him an intimate familiarity with the works that fueled
 Tolkien's imagination. He subsequently held the chair of
English language and medieval literature at Leeds University
that Tolkien had previously held. He currently holds the
Walter J. Ong Chair of Humanities at St. Louis University
 in Missouri. Dr. Shippey is the author and editor of
numerous books,
including The Road to Middle-Earth (Houghton Mifflin),
 The Oxford Book of Fantasy Stories (Oxford University
Press), The Oxford Book of Science Fiction Stories 
(Oxford University Press), Studies in Medievalism XI :
Appropriating the Middle Ages : Scholarship, Politics,
Fraud (Studies in Medievalism 11) , and Fiction 2000:
Cyberpunk and the Future of Narrative (University of Georgia
Press).
In numerous reader polls, The Lord of the Rings has been consistently voted as the greatest
book written in the 20th century.
However, with some notable exceptions, many highbrow
critics have dismissed Tolkien and the entire fantasy genre as
escapist fare.
Dr. Shippey argues that the so-called literati 
who have dismissed Tolkien and his works are at best misguided,
and at worst have ulterior motives for attempting to dismiss
an author who has become a cultural phenomenon.
Dr. Shippey's latest book is, appropriately
named, J.R.R. Tolkien: Author of the Century (Houghton Mifflin).
The book has been acclaimed by both critics and Tolkien fans.
In 2001, Shippey was awarded a World
 Fantasy Award in the category of "Special Award,
Professional" for the book. He also received the "Scholarship Award in Inkling Studies"
 awarded to him by the Mythopoeic
Society, which is dedicated to the promotion of fantasy as literature.
A fascinating and accessible critical study,
 J.R.R. Tolkien: Author of the Century explores Tolkien's
influences and methods when he was writing The Lord of the
 Rings , The Hobbit 
and The Silmarillion , as well as his lesser-known works,
such as Farmer Giles of Ham and The Adventures of Tom
Bombadil . Professor Shippey explores the themes of religion
(although a devout Catholic, Tolkien does not directly mention religion in
 The Lord of the Rings ), war, redemption, feminism and the nature of
evil. Publisher's Weekly calls Author of the Century ,
 "a wonderfully readable study aimed at not just the Tolkien fan
but any literate person curious about this fantasy author's
extraordinary popularity."
Professor Shippey spoke to us about the challenges of bringing
Tolkien's languages to
the big screen, and why he believes that Tolkien is the 20th century's
 most
underrated author. He also discusses the film version of
 The Lord of the Rings , and shares
some great advice for
writers contemplating a career in academia.
 What did you like to read when you were a boy?
I read pretty well anything I could lay my hands on, but an
early decision was to subscribe to Astounding Science Fiction . This
soaked up most of my spare cash as a young teen, from early 1958.
 How did you get interested in an academic career?
Actually, I started working for Colgate-Palmolive on
graduation, but we then headed briskly into a recession, in which there
were few job openings except for those provided by the state. Universities
in the UK expanded at prodigious rates in the mid-1960s.
 What is it about philology and the study of languages that you find so fascinating?
The link between language, literature, and (pre)history.
Philology opens up visions of the past, and insights into human nature,
which were quite unknown to the ancient, medieval, or Renaissance world.
Along with anthropology and archaeology, it is one of the great modern
soft-science breakthroughs (though universities prefer to support more
dubious ventures like psychology and sociology).
 How did you first get interested in Professor Tolkien's works?
Someone lent me a copy of The Hobbit when I was, I
guess, about 14 --
pretty much the same time I started reading Astounding
Science Fiction .
 What do you enjoy most about teaching?
Seeing a new idea arrive in a student's mind. You can feel
the click.
 I'd like to talk about your latest book, J.R. R. Tolkien:
 Author of the Century . What prompted you to write the book?
I started writing about Tolkien a long time ago out of two motives --
piety, and annoyance. By piety I mean "respect for one's ancestors".
Tolkien was one of my intellectual ancestors, and in what I saw as a line
of professional development now all but forgotten, and I thought that
wasn't right. This view was reinforced by annoyance, both over his many
detractors, who weren't giving him a fair trial, and over many of his
supporters, who weren't really supporting him, but using him to promote
their own agenda, whatever that was (Jungian psychology, radical politics,
the Tao of Tolkien, whatever). I knew this latter would have annoyed him,
and I thought someone ought to speak up for him in a way that he would
have approved. As for the recent book, it started when I came to realize
that while Tolkien could be seen historically, in a line of philologists
going back to people like Jacob Grimm, he could also be seen as a
contemporary 20th century author, comparable with Orwell, Vonnegut,
LeGuin, Golding, T.H. White etc. -- the group I identify as "traumatized
authors".
 Do you consider the work to be a biography?
It's not intended as a biography, but since Humphrey
 Carpenter's authorized biography came out in 1977 we have
 learned a great deal about the way Tolkien worked and wrote,
with the publication of many volumes of his early drafts and
works not published in his lifetime. I try to take this into
account, and I also see some of his minor works as being in
effect autobiographies: I call them "autobiographical
allegories".
 What do these minor works reveal about Tolkien the man? 
 "The academic life has become far more bureaucratic, and is
increasingly dominated by people with the habits of bureaucrats.
....
Good teaching is not measured by the number of degrees you turn out,
or even how highly the students rate you at the time."
They bring out his inner anxieties. One should remember
that Tolkien did not get his major work into print until he
was 62, and that for most of his working life the chances
were that he was going to remain forever unpublished. He
sometimes imagines his own work surviving into the future
as a single manuscript, never read by anybody, with the
 name of the author lost -- exactly like the poem Beowulf ,
in fact. Of course his work has now sold hundreds of millions
of copies, and is set to do the same again in the next generation,
and Beowulf in the end has had more books and articles
written about it than Hamlet . That's ironic, but not all
ironies have to be negative ones.
 Recent polls in both the U.K. and the U.S., show that Tolkien is
 regarded as one of the greatest writers of the 20th century,
 and that The Lord of the Rings is the best book of that century.
 These findings apparently appalled certain members
of the literati -- even those who had not even read
 The Lord of the Rings , as you point out in your book.
What is the reason for the deep-seated animosity that
 certain critics have had for Tolkien? Some of the
 criticism seems so vitriolic, so over the top, that
it makes one wonder what it is that so upsets them.
Their all but hysterical reaction must be caused, I
think, by feelings of threat, or challenge. Tolkien's success challenges
their authority as the definers of literature. It also challenges their
belief, central to their self-image, that they represent the wave of the
future -- that they are the "modernists". But the modern world has
stubbornly refused to go the way it was expected to by the likes of Edmund
Wilson, or Philip Toynbee (upper-class left-wing soft Marxists, you might
say). It also increasingly takes no notice of the activities of
professional critics. People who feel their grip on power/authority
slipping are liable to overreact, as in this case.
 What remains unique in Tolkien's work? 
Two things I'd pick out are the poetry, and the sense of shape.
There are a lot of poems in The Lord of the Rings ,
in many different styles and formats, and not many other
 fantasy writers have the confidence or the literary background
 to go inventing whole new poetic traditions (or re-inventing
 old ones). But this gives Tolkien's work a mythic and imaginative
 dimension which has never been duplicated. As for
the shape, The Lord of the Rings is very tightly
 controlled, with multiple plots integrated by a day-to-day
chronology, which you really need to follow. What it does is
 make each of the characters feel lonely and isolated, while
 in the broader view you can see that everyone's story is a
 part of everyone else's: much more like reality than the plot
 of a conventional novel. It works laterally as well as linearly.
 I'd like to talk a bit about the prelude to
 The Lord of the Rings: The Hobbit . The Hobbit is certainly
lighter in tone, with more humor. What kind of sense of humor
 did Professor Tolkien have? What made him laugh?
 Tolkien had a strong
sense of verbal humor, as you can see in The Hobbit (Gollum, the trolls,
the goblin-songs etc). And songs like Sam's in
 The Lord of the Rings .
 One of the major themes in The Lord of the Rings is the nature
of evil. In your book, you discuss the two views of evil
reflected in The Lord of the Rings : the Boethian view that
there is no such thing as evil, that evil is simply the
absence of good; and the alternative view that evil is
 very real, exists and must be opposed and fought at all
 costs. Based on your research and your reading of The Lord
of the Rings , which view do you think Tolkien held on the
subject of evil? Do you think he ever settled it in his own
mind? 
I think Tolkien eventually decided that both views were true, and
must be seen as continually interacting. So there are limits on the power
of evil -- but they may well be limits beyond our view. And evil may all
lead to future good -- but again, that is almost certain to be beyond our
vision. Maybe I could say that he believed Boethius, but not here in
Middle-earth.
 Author J.R.R. Tolkien 
 Although some critics have alleged that The Lord of the Rings 
relegates women to the background, I have always seen Tolkien
 as being rather advanced for his time in his depiction of women.
 Eowyn, the lady of Rohan who sneaks off to be a warrior certainly
 is no shrinking violet. As for Galadriel: although her scenes are
 not lengthy in comparison with say, Gandalf's, her presence
lingers for many chapters after the characters have left Lorièn.
 What is your opinion on this subject: how did Professor
Tolkien feel about Galadriel? About Eowyn?
I can only point to the scene in "The Houses of
Healing," where there is a careful and sensitive account of what it must
have been like for Eowyn, not only trapped at home while the men rode off
to war, but trapped with Wormtongue, and watching her uncle fall under his
spell. This is a striking and early sensitivity to the theme of female
passivity, which people often miss.
 Although Tolkien himself was a devout Catholic,
religion is not overtly mentioned in The Lord of
the Rings . And you refer in your book to a letter which
Tolkien declared that "The Lord of the Rings is of course
a fundamentally religious and Catholic work…." What do you
 think Tolkien was referring to in this statement? Certainly
 religious and ethical themes are considered in the work, but
there is no traditional religion depicted anywhere in the book
 at all, and I thought that Tolkien himself admitted this. Could
you shed some light on this for us? 
 "One should remember
that Tolkien did not get his major work into print until he
was 62, and that for most of his working life the chances
were that he was going to remain forever unpublished. He
sometimes imagines his own work surviving into the future
as a single manuscript, never read by anybody, with the
 name of the author lost."
I discuss this in my book, but I can only say that
there is almost no allusion to Christianity anywhere in
 The Lord of the Rings , and nearly
everyone misses what there is (dates, as much as anything). Tolkien
perhaps covered himself by feeling that Middle-earth demonstrates the
 need 
for Christianity. Without it the whole of history will only be
 "the long
defeat," as Elrond calls it.
 I'd like to talk about the recent release
of The Lord of the Rings as a feature film directed
by Peter Jackson. I understand you assisted the film makers
in the pronunciation of character and place names from the
book. What challenges
did they face with the language from the book? 
Spelling is not a good guide to pronunciation in The Lord of the Rings ,
because Tolkien used different conventions for different languages. So,
the -ai- in names/words like Thain, Gwaihir, Dain, is different every
time. Also, the stressing of the elvish languages is not what it would be
in English -- DaGORlad, not DAGorlad, etc. This all had to be worked
through.
 Some diehard fans were upset by the deviations from the
 book's plot ( e.g. , Arwen's increased role, the deletion
of the Tom Bombadil scenes etc.), while others felt that
the plot changes were necessary, and that Jackson did keep
to the spirit of the book. What is your opinion of the
finished film, as far as plot, special effects, dialogue
and mood/tone? 
There's no
doubt that
something had to go, just for time considerations. Tolkien
was well aware
of this, and commented to that effect on the filmscript he
 saw in 1957.
I actually reviewed the film for The Times (London).
What I said regarding the condensing of the story was:
 "The Fellowship of the
Ring is well over 200,000 words long, and would take getting on
for forty hours to read out loud. Pictures may be quicker than
 words, though often they aren't, but cutting forty hours to three
cannot be done without loss. Tolkien himself, well aware of the
fact, indicated that he much preferred "abridgement" to "compression".
 Cutting out subplots and travel sequences was much better than
trying to do everything at breakneck pace, a process which would
 tend, especially later on in the story, to throw undue stress
 on the battles and the sieges, while all the time, as the entire
 plot makes clear, these are really subordinate in importance to
the silent and stealthy approach of Frodo and Sam and Gollum to
 Mordor and the Cracks of Doom." 
As to the quality of the film and of Jackson's direction:
 "Jackson's scenery, like Tolkien's, is magnificent. It was a
 brilliant stroke to recreate Wilderland in New Zealand with
its moors, mountains, forests, empty rivers. His special
effects are state of the art, aimed to outgo Star Wars .
His actors put across their lines, archaic though they
often are, with total and persuasive conviction. And he
can do slow scenes, and silent scenes, with just as much
of a grip on his audience as the cataclysmic ones. As the
Fellowship went through Moria you could have heard a pin
drop in the theatre, if anyone had dropped one, but there
 was never a rustle of paper: jaws ceased to move." 
 Fantasy is making a big comeback, with the release
 of both The Lord of the Rings and the Harry Potter films.
 What is the appeal of high fantasy to the modern reader? 
I really don't know why fantasy has made such a comeback.
 What effect has Tolkien had on modern fantasy? 
He created the genre -- not quite single-handed, but very
nearly so. I discuss other fantasy traditions in my Oxford Book
 of Fantasy Stories , but the shelves in modern bookstores
would look very different if Tolkien had not written,
or if Stanley Unwin had decided not to publish him after
all, back in the early 1950s. The eagerness with which he
was followed suggests that there was a suppressed desire
for the kind of thing he did, but nobody before him quite
knew how to do it, or thought it was allowed. C.S. Lewis
 said Tolkien was as hard to influence as a bandersnatch,
and only somebody like that could have broken with literary
convention and established wisdom in the way that he did.
 Have you read the Harry Potter books by J.K. Rowling? If so,
what did you think of them? What Tolkien-esque themes (if any)
do you see
in Ms. Rowling's work?
Rowling really isn't very Tolkienesque at all, as far as I can see.
However, she might not have got the opportunity if it had not been for the
creation of the fantasy market by Tolkien and his many successors. There
 was fantasy before Tolkien, see my Oxford Book
of Fantasy Stories , but
he made it mass-market.
 I'd like to talk a bit about the actual process of writing.
 When you start a new book, how do you approach it? Do you
have a special system for research and organization?
One thing you have to have and that is uncommitted time .
Nothing else is as important. Writers all have different systems for
getting started, but when you're staring at that blank screen,
if there's
a meter running in you head -- "I have to go to the meeting at
 2:00" -- then
you will get nothing done. It's easier once you have started...
 How has the Internet affected your life as a teacher? As an author?
The Internet has had very little effect on me, except for shopping.
It's hard to sort out the information from the misinformation.
 How has the academic life changed over the years from
when you first entered it? What advice do you have for
 writers who are hoping to make a career in academia?
The academic life has become far more bureaucratic, and is
increasingly dominated by people with the habits of bureaucrats.
You have
to either do the bureaucratic stuff on autopilot, and try
to keep some
section of your brain free for thinking, or find a place
where there are
friendly bureaucrats to shield you. I'd say this. Managerial
programs work
best where there is a clear and quantifiable outcome and an
easy way of
checking what the work-force is doing. Neither of these apply
to teaching,
or research. Really productive researchers are often staring
 at the wall,
or going for walks -- and their product tends to turn up ten
years later.
Good teaching is not measured by the number of degrees you turn out,
or even how highly the students rate you at the time. But
 unsophisticated
management systems (and those are the ones we have)
 insist on counting
something. "Them as counts counts more than them as
doesn't count," as it
says in Russell Hoban's Riddley Walker .
 When you're not working, what are your favorite ways to
relax and have fun? 
Have fun? I used to play rugby. Then it dwindled to soccer, as my
injuries accumulated. Maybe I will be down to golf, in the end.
 Return to the March 2002 issue of The IWJ.
 More from Writers Write 
 2024 Nebula Award Winners Announced 
 Merriam-Webster Names Polarization 2024 Word of the Year 
 Winners of the 2024 Kirkus Prizes Announced 
 Han Kang Wins The Nobel Prize in Literature for 2024 
 2024 National Book Awards Finalists Announced 
 Latest News 
 2025 Hugo Award Winners Announced 
 HarperCollins Celebrates 75 Years of The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe 
 Scholastic to Publish Manga Version of Dav Pilkey's Captain Underpants 
 New York Post to Launch The California Post 
 WritersWrite.com 
Copyright © 2024 by Writers Write, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 
 Terms of Service | Privacy Policy 
