 
 Tolkien: Medieval and Modern: The Style of the Elf-Friend 
Tolkien: Medieval and Modern
 Pages 
 Home 
 Syllabus 2026 
 The Forge of Tolkien 
 Further Reading 
 Syllabus 2011-2023 
 Friday, April 18, 2014 
The Style of the Elf-Friend
In his chapter on the Council of Elrond, Shippey spends most
of his effort guiding the reader through the varying styles of the many
speakers in Book II chapter ii, exposing how meticulous Tolkien was in
intentionally shaping his characters' speech. He points out that this chapter
of LotR features more than twenty speakers (if we include "impacted speakers"
quoted but not actually present). I find it curious that although I cannot
think of another passage from any work in which a comparable number of
characters are all so active in the dialogue, let alone in moving the plot, never
when I read this chapter before (and it is one I've lingered on more than many
others) did I notice anything unusual. I think this is a testament to how seamlessly
the chapter is written. One would think that a dialogue in which no one
responds in the same manner of speech as the previous speaker would feel very
choppy and disconnected (although the total opposite, a dialogue in which the
speakers all sound exactly alike, would feel inherently fake); but in Tolkien
it is not a distraction but an aid to both understanding and readability, and
any device that can do this job without being immediately noticed is well used
indeed. 
All that said, I want to now take a closer look at a similar
concept that was also touched on, briefly, in Shippey's writing, as well as in
our class discussion: the variability of style within a single character's
speech, and what its significance is. Naturally, the preeminent character to
examine for this question is Aragorn/Strider; but I will also take a look at
some other figures from a list we have previously dealt with in class, namely
Frodo and Bilbo, and if I don't run on too long also Tolkien himself. 
We already discussed on Wednesday how a greater range of
style indicates a character's adaptability. Shippey examines this in his
exegesis on the Council of Elrond, writing that "The way they [Boromir and
Aragorn] talk reminds us, in miniature, that Aragorn is also Strider, and does
not need to be on his dignity all the time; but at the same time that Strider
is also Aragorn, and can claim just as much, indeed even more authority than
Boromir" (Shippey 73). But I want to take a closer look at another example of
Aragorn's speech, also from our assigned reading, that I think will be useful in
illustrating the significance of this adaptability: his tale of Beren and Lúthien in Book I chapter
xi. In this section Strider (so he is exclusively called in this chapter with
the hobbits) first chants the Elvish song in the Common Speech, then gives a
brief note on the translation from Elvish, then finally gives a fuller account
of the story it tells in plain prose. Here was have an example (one of many) of
Aragorn not only varying his style of Westron, but in fact of showing his
knowledge of varied languages. It is not specified whether Aragorn himself
translated the song from the Elvish, although I think we are to suppose that he
did (he notes that it "is hard to render in our Common Speech," so he at least
he is familiar with the translation process); but in any case we see for the
first time that he is multilingual, and specifically that he has a close
association with the Elves. What is so interesting about this passage, though,
is not just Aragorn's knowledge of Elves; we also get to see Strider
interpreting the song for the hobbits, in a style much their own. (Admittedly
his prose is still a little high-flown, e.g. "As the stars above the mists of
the Northern lands was her loveliness," and also a little weighty in its
content, e.g. "…a King of Elves upon Middle-Earth when the world was young."
But it is, on the whole, a style easily understandable to the hobbits.) Furthermore,
the hobbits notice a change in his appearance in this passage: "As Strider was
speaking they watched his strange eager face… His eyes shone, and this voice
was rich and deep," (Book I chapter xi). 
What I'm driving at, of course, is the characterization of
Aragorn/Strider as an Elf-friend in this passage: his first identification as
such in the whole book, though certainly not the last. Elf-friends are a topic
we have already dealt with quite a bit, but although we have talked about the
adaptability of character necessary for Elf-friends to both journey into the Perilous
Realm and to relate their experiences to those who have not journeyed there, we
have not yet made mention of the accompanying adaptability of the Elf-friend's
style of speech. To some extent it amounts to the same thing; presumably one
can't fully interact with Elves (although possibly with Faerie itself) without
being at least familiar with their style of speech and ideally also able to use
that style oneself. But I submit that we can also use this idea to determine,
to a high degree of accuracy, a given character's Elf-friend status based solely
(or largely) on their style of speech, even when not talking to or about Elves
or Faerie. 
I turn back now to the Council of Elrond, of which Shippey
has so much to say. The easy fluctuation between Aragorn's high and dignified
style (matching Boromir) and Strider's low, common style (telling of his life
among unwitting men and hobbits) has already been noted, and corresponds nicely,
I think, to the fluctuation between the two roles of an Elf-Friend. What can be
said of the other characters present? Taking Shippey's cues about each
character's style: we first have Elrond, who of course is himself one of the fair
folk, and whose style is consistently archaic and formal (Shippey 70). Though
an Elf cannot be eligible for Elf-friend status by nature, Elrond's linguistic
style alone would also preclude his classification as such because of its invariability.
Boromir's language is described by Shippey as "relatively Elrondian…," but "…shows
no sign of knowing anyone of Butterbur's social status" (Shippey 72-3); since
there is no indication that he could communicate extraordinary experiences to
ordinary folk, he too cannot be an Elf-Friend. Bilbo's speech, not discussed at
length by Shippey, is on the whole rather bumbling and characteristic of a
hobbit; he interrupts to ask about lunch, and grandiosely offers to accept a
task clearly not meant for him; in short, he is a kind of comic relief in this
serious scene (LotR, Book II chapter ii). But in the middle of the council he
suddenly pops in with the poem he has written about the Dúnadan, and though he
himself calls it "not very good" I think it feels much more Elvish than hobbitish--certainly
quite different from Sam's hobbit rhymes. Though his style when he addresses
Elrond is not much higher than normal, we see from this poem--again, not
addressed to an Elf or even about Faerie, but rather about a mortal man--enough variation
from his usual style to confirm his status as Elf-Friend. Suffice it to say
that Frodo falls into the same category as Bilbo here, though his higher style
is little exhibited outside of his contact with Elves (such as Gildor in Book I
chapter iii). 
Zooming out, the ability of Tolkien to create so many layers
of style in his rich array of characters is a perfect correlation to the
variation of some of those same characters (most especially Aragorn/Strider,
who shows the greatest variation). This supports the idea of Tolkien himself as
the ultimate Elf-Friend, put forth by Flieger in The Footsteps of Aelfwine . 
--David Jaffe 
By
 "Tolkien: Medieval and Modern" 
at
 April 18, 2014 
 Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest 
Labels:
 Style 
 2 comments: 
 Katie B. 
said...
After reading your post it has become clear to me that, of course, Aragorn/Stride is an Elf-friend. His relationship and history with the Elves and Faerie are obvious indications of his privileged role, but you have pointed out a subtler characteristic in his speech. As we have found in our discussions on the matter, Elf-friends gain a beautiful and elevated style of speaking once they come in contact with Faerie. Gaining the skill to create beautiful things does not only consist in crafts, but as we saw in Smith of Wooten Major, Elf-friends' voices become enchanting. Aragorn's high speech that he uses to portray his dignity and position are at once reflective of the Elves he is close with and therefore also of his position as mediator between Faerie and the primary world. However, there is more to say about Aragorn as an Elf-friend because beauty and dignity are not his only lingual advantages. For Aragorn is also Strider, and as you have mentioned, Strider must not assert his rank and power as consistently as Boromir feels obligated. In doing so, though, Aragorn does not lose his role as an Elf-friend, for his responsibility as an Elf-friend is not only to create beautiful speech, but to also fulfill the other responsibility of his role as mediator between two worlds. Tolkien has given Aragorn/Strider the ability to speak in two forms: high and low. By doing so he has assigned Aragorn/Strider the task of both valuing the high beauty of Faerie and effectively sharing the world with people of lower styles. The role of Elf-friend is twofold because it is not enough to speak in elevated language; the Elf-friend must create beautiful speech while making it accessible to all varieties of people. Tolkien, I believe, has revealed characteristics of Aragorn/Strider through his device of style but also through communication. Aragorn's/Strider's role as an Elf-friend becomes clear through the language he uses in communicating to hobbits, Elves, dwarves, and others all at once. It is a skill of style but also a skill of a mediator. - K. Beach
April 18, 2014 at 9:34 AM
 Unknown 
said...
Dear David, Thanks for your argument on Aragorn/Strider as Elf-friend. I think your use of Shippey's close reading here is helpful, but you nicely do not leave us where Shippey left off but with your own contribution, you connect it back to the idea of the Elf-friend. This is well done. I think you are quite right to see the Elf-friend as essentially a translator–someone conversant in an alien community's language who can bring accounts back to a more homely language (that is, to us). This insight nicely dove-tails with the earlier discussion, and points out the many different levels and kinds of Elf-friends. Aragorn's multilevel translation of the Beren and Luthien tale nicely exhibits this. But, is Aragorn not at a distance from us? His words are only reported by Frodo (&c) and he never returns to tell his tales in, say, the Shire. Does this make him an 'ultimate Elf-friend' but a kind of 'abstract' or 'intermediate' Elf-friend? ~Robert
April 19, 2014 at 9:34 PM
 Post a Comment 
 Newer Post 
 Older Post 
 Home 
Subscribe to:
 Post Comments (Atom) 
 About this course 
"Tolkien: Medieval and Modern"
 J.R.R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings is one of the most popular works of imaginative literature of the twentieth century. This course seeks to understand its appeal by situating Tolkien's creation within the context of Tolkien's own work as both artist and scholar alongside its medieval sources and modern parallels. Themes to be addressed include the problem of genre and the uses of tradition, the nature of history and its relationship to place, the activity of creation and its relationship to language, beauty, evil and power, the role of monsters in imagination and criticism, the twinned challenges of death and immortality, fate and free will, and the interaction between the world of "faerie" and religious belief. 
 View my complete profile 
 But my horn shall be exalted like that of the unicorn 
 Themes 
 Creativity and Free Will I: Aulë and Fëanor 
 (51) 
 Creativity and Free Will II: Númenor 
 (41) 
 Creativity and Free Will III: Frodo and the Ring 
 (47) 
 Death and Immortality I: Elves and Men 
 (55) 
 Death and Immortality II: Men and Hobbits 
 (51) 
 Fantasy and Fairy Tale 
 (21) 
 Fragments and Elf-Friends 
 (28) 
 History and Place 
 (50) 
 Jewels and Trees I 
 (42) 
 Jewels and Trees II 
 (42) 
 Language and Dreams 
 (48) 
 Language and Names 
 (46) 
 Monsters and Critics 
 (51) 
 Style 
 (40) 
 The Meaning of Life I: Worship 
 (49) 
 The Meaning of Life II: Cult 
 (19) 
 The Music of Creation 
 (51) 
 Visits to Middle-earth 
 Followers 
 Nolwë ola, ar cuila lohta 
Course designed and taught by Rachel Fulton Brown Associate Professor of History The University of Chicago 
 Search This Blog 
 Upon an instrument of ten strings 
 Blog Archive 
 ► 
2026
 (78) 
 ► 
June
 (1) 
 ► 
May
 (36) 
 ► 
April
 (37) 
 ► 
March
 (4) 
 ► 
2023
 (68) 
 ► 
May
 (39) 
 ► 
April
 (25) 
 ► 
March
 (4) 
 ► 
2020
 (105) 
 ► 
June
 (14) 
 ► 
May
 (54) 
 ► 
April
 (36) 
 ► 
March
 (1) 
 ► 
2017
 (120) 
 ► 
June
 (1) 
 ► 
May
 (60) 
 ► 
April
 (56) 
 ► 
March
 (3) 
 ▼ 
2014
 (218) 
 ► 
June
 (26) 
 ► 
May
 (110) 
 ▼ 
April
 (82) 
 Creation Myth and the Canon: What It Means to be S... 
 A Concern About Hobbits 
 Ainulindalë is to Elves as Genesis is to Men 
 Literalism and the Problem of Evil 
 The Origin of Evil and If God Is Good 
 Religious Fragmentation in Tolkien's Legendarium 
 Relative realities, framing, and religion 
 Why Music? 
 String Theory: Creation, Music, and Humanity 
 Eru and Eden: How Tolkien's Creation Myth Exemplif... 
 Fragments from Wednesday's Discussion 
 True Names: A Counterexample 
 Some Thoughts on Languages 
 Dream Tongue 
 The Creations of the Valar and Valarin 
 Name and Language in Tolkien 
 Tom is the Master 
 The Sub Creative Art of Language 
 "O felix peccatum Babel!" and the Function of Lang... 
 The Aesthetics of Language 
 Orc-language and why it is corrupt 
 Asterisk History 
 Names and History: the Development of Language 
 The Role of Place and History in the Creation of t... 
 The Past Recedes 
 History, Fantasy and Historical Relativism 
 Between Reality and History in Time, Mythology 
 When the Value of Myth and History Lies in Action ... 
 The History Within Myths 
 An Anachronistic History 
 Seeds and Gardeners: Patterns of Characterization ... 
 History as Myth and a Few Other Things As Well 
 Giving the Ordinary Meaning 
 Historical Fantasy, and Fantastical History: The S... 
 Holly and Ruin 
 Taking Root: Tolkien and the Land 
 How Can History Be Real If Our Myths Aren't Real 
 The World Is Flat, and How We Can Avoid It: Farmer... 
 Translation, Style, and Historical Narrative 
 A Far-off Gleam of Evangelium 
 To Make a Soul: Tolkien and Variations of Speech i... 
 A Hobbit Book: The Simplicity of Style 
 Self-Stylin': Gandalf the Grey 
 Tolkien's Mastery of Words 
 The Style of the Elf-Friend 
 Tolkien's Use of Poetry and Prose 
 Tolkien's Style: Fluidity between the Humble and t... 
 Translating the Red Book of Westmarch 
 Poetry, Peoples, and Memory 
 The Uses of Poetry in Lord of the Rings 
 On Devices, Dreams, and Dumbledore, or, "Of course... 
 The Importance of Machine 
 Spaceships: On Travel Between Primary and Secondar... 
 Paths to a Tangible Legend 
 The Machine that Conquered Time 
 The Author in the Work 
 Tolkien and Time Travel 
 Private languages and Communication in Tolkien's L... 
 Dream-Language Interactions across Tolkien's Work 
 Breaching the Secondary Reality 
 Reincarnation in Tolkien 
 Fragments Within the Works of Tolkien 
 Falling Asleep Again: Frodo's Experience 
 Atlantis and Atalantie 
 Language and People 
 The Route to the Lost Road: Tolkien's Application ... 
 The Reality of the Imagined 
 Whence and why a story? Art and Allegory in Tolkie... 
 Immortality through Fragmentation 
 Our Need for Elf-friends 
 The Inevitable Homecoming 
 Keepers of Faerie 
 The Agency and Destiny of Elf Friends 
 Building Bridges to Faerie 
 The End of the Story 
 On Fragments, Soup, and Rapunzel 
 Elf-friends and Credibility 
 Tom Bombadil and Fantasy as Reason 
 Rissik and the Literary Value of Creation 
 Meditations 
 Our Right: Used and Misused 
 Who Are Fairy Stories Written For? Come, Tom Bomba... 
 ► 
2011
 (176) 
 ► 
June
 (9) 
 ► 
May
 (74) 
 ► 
April
 (89) 
 ► 
March
 (4) 
 In the works of thy hands, I shall rejoice 
 Guides to Arda 
 Ansible 
 Elvish Linguistic Fellowship 
 Family Tree of the Tolkien Legendarium 
 Glǽmscrafu 
 Internet Sacred Text Archive 
 J.R.R. Tolkien and WWI 
 LotR Project 
 Planet Tolkien 
 The (Other) Tolkien Professor 
 The Cambridge Tolkien Society 
 The Catholic Imagination of J.R.R. Tolkien 
 The DM of the Rings 
 The Forge of Tolkien 
 The Grey Havens 
 The One Ring 
 The Tolkien Estate 
 The Tolkien Meta-FAQ 
 The Tolkien Music List 
 The Tolkien Shop 
 Tolkien Collecting Resources 
 Tolkien Collection, Marquette University 
 Tolkien Gateway 
 Tolkien Library 
 Tolkien Sarcasm Page 
 Tolkien Society 
 Tolkien's The Notion Club Papers 
 Tolkienian Fonts for Windows 
 Useful Elvish Phrases 
Images from the Stuttgart Psalter, Stuttgart, Württembergische Landesbibliothek, Cod.bibl.fol. 23. Theme images by caracterdesign . Powered by Blogger .
 