Version 2.7 ©2021 Wizards of the Coast LLC. Permission granted to print and photocopy this document for personal use only.
The Sage Advice Compendium collects questions and 
answers about the rules of Dungeons & Dragons (fifth 
edition). The document’s version number changes when 
substantive additions or revisions have been made to the 
text. The newest material is preceded by the tag “[NEW].”
Rules References
The fifth edition of D&D has three official rulebooks, each 
of which was first published in 2014:
• Player’s Handbook (abbreviated PH)
• Monster Manual (abbreviated MM)
• Dungeon Master’s Guide (abbreviated DMG)
The free Basic Rules contains portions of those three 
books and can be downloaded here:
https://dnd.wizards.com/articles/features/basicrules
 Play in the Adventurers League is also governed by the 
Adventurers League Player’s Guide.
Errata
Errata have been issued for certain fifth edition books and 
can be downloaded at the following locations.
[NEW]  Player’s Handbook
https://media.wizards.com/2021/dnd/downloads/PH-Errata.pdf
Monster Manual
https://media.wizards.com/2018/dnd/downloads/MM-Errata.pdf
[NEW]  Dungeon Master’s Guide
https://media.wizards.com/2021/dnd/downloads/DMG-Errata.pdf
[NEW]  Curse of Strahd
https://media.wizards.com/2021/dnd/downloads/CoS-Errata.pdf
Eberron: Rising from the Last War
https://media.wizards.com/2020/dnd/downloads/ERftLW-Errata.pdf
Ghosts of Saltmarsh
https://media.wizards.com/2020/dnd/downloads/GoS-Errata.pdf
Hoard of the Dragon Queen
https://media.wizards.com/2016/downloads/DND/HotDQ-Errata.pdf
Mordenkainen’s Tome of Foes
https://media.wizards.com/2020/dnd/downloads/MTF-Errata.pdf
Out of the Abyss
https://media.wizards.com/2020/dnd/downloads/OotA-Errata.pdf
Princes of the Apocalypse
https://media.wizards.com/2016/downloads/DND/PotA-Errata.pdf
[NEW]  Storm King’s Thunder
https://media.wizards.com/2021/dnd/downloads/SKT-Errata.pdf
[NEW]  Sword Coast Adventurer’s Guide
https://media.wizards.com/2021/dnd/downloads/SCAG-Errata.pdf
[NEW]  Tales from the Yawning Portal
https://media.wizards.com/2021/dnd/downloads/TftYP-Errata.pdf
[NEW]  Tasha’s Cauldron of Everything
https://media.wizards.com/2021/dnd/downloads/TCE-Errata.pdf
[NEW]  Tomb of Annihilation
https://media.wizards.com/2021/dnd/downloads/ToA-Errata.pdf
[NEW]  Volo’s Guide to Monsters
https://media.wizards.com/2021/dnd/downloads/VGtM-Errata.pdf
Xanathar’s Guide to Everything
https://media.wizards.com/2020/dnd/downloads/XGtE-Errata.pdf
Official Rulings
Official rulings on how to interpret rules are made here in 
the Sage Advice Compendium. A Dungeon Master adjudi-
cates the game and determines whether to use an official 
ruling in play. The DM always has the final say on rules 
questions.
 The public statements of the D&D team, or anyone else 
at Wizards of the Coast, are not official rulings; they are 
advice. The tweets of Jeremy Crawford (@JeremyECraw-
ford), the game’s principal rules designer, are sometimes a 
preview of rulings that appear here.
Compiled Answers
Sage Advice answers that are relevant to the current state 
of the rules are compiled here. 
The Role of Rules
Why even have a column like Sage Advice when a DM 
can just make a ruling?  Rules are a big part of what 
makes D&D a game, rather than simply improvised story -
telling. The game’s rules are meant to help organize, and 
even inspire, the action of a D&D campaign. The rules are 
a tool, and we want our tools to be as effective as possible. 
No matter how good those tools might be, they need a 
group of players to bring them to life and a DM to guide 
their use.
 The DM is key. Many unexpected things can happen in 
a D&D campaign, and no set of rules could reasonably 
account for every contingency. If the rules tried to do so, 
the game would become unplayable. An alternative would 
be for the rules to severely limit what characters can do, 
which would be counter to the open-endedness of D&D. 
The direction we chose for the current edition was to lay a 
foundation of rules that a DM could build on, and we em -
braced the DM’s role as the bridge between the things the 
rules address and the things they don’t.
 In a typical D&D session, a DM makes numerous rules 
decisions—some barely noticeable and others quite obvi -
Sage Advice CompendiumSage Advice Compendium
Version 2.7 ©2021 Wizards of the Coast LLC. Permission granted to print and photocopy this document for personal use only.
ous. Players also interpret the rules, and the whole group 
keeps the game running. There are times, though, when 
the design intent of a rule isn’t clear or when one rule 
seems to contradict another.
 Dealing with those situations is where Sage Advice 
comes in. This column doesn’t replace a DM’s adjudica-
tion. Just as the rules do, the column is meant to give DMs, 
as well as players, tools for tuning the game according to 
their tastes. The column should also reveal some perspec -
tives that help you see parts of the game in a new light and 
that aid you in fine-tuning your D&D experience.
 When I answer rules questions, I often come at them 
from one to three different perspectives.
 RAW. “Rules as written”—that’s what RAW stands 
for. When I dwell on the RAW interpretation of a rule, 
I’m studying what the text says in context, without re-
gard to the designers’ intent. The text is forced to stand 
on its own.
 Whenever I consider a rule, I start with this perspec -
tive; it’s important for me to see what you see, not what I 
wished we’d published or thought we’d published.
 RAI. Some of you are especially interested in know -
ing the intent behind a rule. That’s where RAI comes in: 
“rules as intended.” This approach is all about what the 
designers meant when they wrote something. In a perfect 
world, RAW and RAI align perfectly, but sometimes the 
words on the page don’t succeed at communicating the 
designers’ intent. Or perhaps the words succeed with one 
group of players but not with another.
 When I write about the RAI interpretation of a rule, I’ll 
be pulling back the curtain and letting you know what the 
D&D team meant when we wrote a certain rule.
 R AF. Regardless of what’s on the page or what the de-
signers intended, D&D is meant to be fun, and the DM is 
the ringmaster at each game table. The best DMs shape 
the game on the fly to bring the most delight to their play-
ers. Such DMs aim for RAF, “rules as fun.”
 We expect DMs to depart from the rules when running 
a particular campaign or when seeking the greatest hap -
piness for a certain group of players. Sometimes my rules 
answers will include advice on achieving the RAF inter -
pretation of a rule for your group.
 I recommend a healthy mix of RAW, RAI, and RAF!
Character Creation
How do you calculate a creature’s Armor Class (AC)? 
Chapter 1 of the Player’s Handbook (p. 14) describes how 
to determine AC, yet AC calculations generate questions 
frequently. That fact isn’t too surprising, given the number 
of ways the game gives you to change your AC! 
 Here are some ways to calculate your base AC:
Unarmored: 10 + your Dexterity modifier.
Armored: Use the AC entry for the armor you’re wearing 
(see PH, 145). For example, in leather armor, you cal-
culate your AC as 11 + your Dexterity modifier, and in 
chain mail, your AC is simply 16.
Unarmored Defense (Barbarian):  10 + your Dexterity 
modifier + your Constitution modifier.
Unarmored Defense (Monk): 10 + your Dexterity modi-
fier + your Wisdom modifier.
Draconic Resilience (Sorcerer): 13 + your Dexter-
ity modifier.
Natural Armor: 10 + your Dexterity modifier + your natu-
ral armor bonus. This is a calculation method typically 
used only by monsters and NPCs, although it is also 
relevant to a druid or another character who assumes a 
form that has natural armor.
These methods—along with any others that give you a 
formula for calculating your AC—are mutually exclusive; 
you can benefit from only one at a time. If you have access 
to more than one, you pick which one to use. For example, 
if you’re a sorcerer/monk, you can use either Unarmored 
Defense or Draconic Resilience, not both. Similarly, a 
druid/barbarian who transforms into a beast form that has 
natural armor can use either the beast’s natural armor or 
Unarmored Defense (you aren’t considered to be wearing 
armor when you use natural armor).
 What about a shield? A shield increases your AC by 2 
while you use it. For example, if you’re unarmored and use 
a shield, your AC is 12 + your Dexterity modifier. Keep in 
mind that some AC calculations, such as a monk’s Unar-
mored Defense, prohibit the use of a shield.
 Once you have your base AC, it can be temporarily mod-
ified by situational bonuses and penalties. For instance, 
having half cover gives you a +2 bonus to your AC, and 
three-quarters cover gives a +5 bonus. Spells sometimes 
modify AC as well. Shield of faith, for example, grants a 
target a +2 bonus to AC until the spell ends.
 Magic items can also enhance your AC. Here are a few 
examples: +1 chain mail gives you an AC of 17, a ring of 
protection gives you a +1 bonus to AC no matter what 
you’re wearing, and bracers of defense grant you a +2 bo-
nus to AC if you’re not wearing armor or using a shield.
Racial Traits
Does the Trance trait allow an elf to finish a long rest 
in 4 hours? If an elf meditates during a long rest (as de-
scribed in the Trance trait), the elf finishes the rest after 
only 4 hours. A meditating elf otherwise follows all the 
rules for a long rest; only the duration is changed.
Do the lightfoot halfling and wood elf hiding racial 
traits allow them to hide while observed?  The lightfoot 
halfling and wood elf traits—Naturally Stealthy and Mask 
of the Wild—do allow members of those subraces to try 
to hide in their special circumstances even when observ -
ers are nearby. Normally, you can’t hide from someone if 
you’re in full view. A lightfoot halfling, though, can try to 
vanish behind a creature that is at least one size larger, 
and a wood elf can try to hide simply by being in heavy 
rain, mist, falling snow, foliage, or similar natural phenom -
ena. It’s as if nature itself cloaks a wood elf from prying 
eyes—even eyes staring right at the elf! Both subraces are 
capable of hiding in situations when most other creatures 
can’t, but neither subrace’s hiding attempt is assured of 
success; a Dexterity (Stealth) check is required as normal, 
Version 2.7 ©2021 Wizards of the Coast LLC. Permission granted to print and photocopy this document for personal use only.
and an observant foe might later spot a hidden halfling or 
elf: “I see you behind that guard, you tricksy halfling!”
Can a dragonborn sorcerer with a draconic bloodline 
have two different kinds of Draconic Ancestry?  A drag-
onborn sorcerer can choose a different ancestor for the ra -
cial trait and for the Dragon Ancestor feature. Your choice 
for the racial trait is your actual ancestor, while the choice 
for the class feature could be your ancestor figuratively—
the type of dragon that bestowed magic upon you or your 
family or the kind of draconic artifact or location that filled 
you with magical energy.
How long do a shifter’s temporary hit points last? Un-
less a feature says otherwise, temporary hit points last 
until you finish a long rest (PH, 198).
Does all magical darkness block darkvision? Magical 
darkness blocks darkvision only if the rules text for a 
particular instance of darkness says it does. For example, 
the darkness spell specifies that it produces a magical 
darkness that obstructs darkvision. That obstruction is a 
feature of the spell, not of magical darkness in general.
Class Features
When you use Extra Attack, do you have to use the 
same weapon for all the attacks? Extra Attack imposes 
no limitation on what you use for the attacks. You can use 
regular weapons, improvised weapons, unarmed strikes, 
or a combination of these options for the attacks.
Artificer
What is the timing of Flash of Genius? You use Flash of 
Genius immediately after the triggering d20 is rolled and 
before any of the effects of the roll are applied. Unless a 
rule tells you otherwise, a reaction occurs immediately 
after its trigger.
Which action is used to activate a Spell-Storing Item? 
Activating a Spell-Storing Item uses the Use an Ob -
ject action.
Can an artificer dismiss one of their infusions on an 
object early? No. An infusion lasts until one of the circum -
stances described in the “Infusing an Item” section of the 
Infuse Item feature. 
Barbarian
Does the barbarian’s Danger Sense work against 
breath weapons and enemies’ special abilities? A bar-
barian’s Danger Sense benefits the Dexterity saving throw 
against any effect that the barbarian can see.
For the barbarian’s Reckless Attack, do you grant ad-
vantage to all enemies, or only to the target of your at-
tack? If you use the barbarian’s Reckless Attack, all attack 
rolls have advantage against you until the start of your 
next turn.
Bard
Do the benefits from Bardic Inspiration and the guid-
ance spell stack? Can they be applied to the same roll? 
Yes, different effects stack if they don’t have the same 
name. If a creature makes an ability check while it is un -
der the effect of a guidance spell and also has a Bardic In -
spiration die, it can roll both a d4 and a d6 if it so chooses.
Is the intent that a bard gets to know the number 
rolled on an attack roll or ability check before using 
Cutting Words, or should they always guess? If used on 
a damage roll, does Cutting Words apply to any kind 
of damage roll including an auto-hit spell like magic 
missile? You can wait to use Cutting Words after the roll, 
but you must commit to doing so before you know for 
sure whether the total of the roll or check is a success or 
a failure. You can use Cutting Words to reduce the dam-
age from any effect that calls for a damage roll (including 
magic missile) even if the damage roll is not preceded by 
an attack roll.
Can a bard replace spells gained through Magical Se -
crets? When you gain a level in the bard class, the class’s 
Spellcasting feature lets you replace one bard spell you 
know with another bard spell of an appropriate level. A 
spell learned through your Magical Secrets feature counts 
as a bard spell for you, so it can be replaced upon gaining 
a bard level later. But it must be replaced by a bard spell, 
according to the rule in the Spellcasting feature.
Which spell scrolls can bards understand—spells from 
the bard list only, or spells from the bard list plus spells 
from Magical Secrets? A bard can use any spell scroll 
that has a bard spell on it—including spells gained from 
the Magical Secrets feature, which are treated as bard 
spells for that character.
Does using College of Valor’s Combat Inspiration add to 
the damage of an attack count as a damage die for pur -
poses of critical hits? Yes.
Cleric
When a cleric uses the Destructive Wrath feature, does 
it maximize all damage getting rolled, as long as some 
of it is lightning or thunder? Destructive Wrath is meant 
to maximize lightning and thunder damage only.
If a Grave Domain cleric casts a spell that restores hit 
points to multiple creatures and one of those creatures 
has 0 hit points, does the spell restore the maximum 
number of hit points to all targets of the spell? No. Only 
a creature with 0 hit points benefits from the hit-point-res -
toration portion of the Circle of Mortality feature.
Druid
What happens if a druid wears metal armor?  The 
druid explodes.
 Well, not actually. Druids have a taboo against wearing 
metal armor and wielding a metal shield. The taboo has 
been part of the class’s story since the class first appeared 
in Eldritch Wizardry (1976) and the original Player’s 
Handbook (1978). The idea is that druids prefer to be pro-
tected by animal skins, wood, and other natural materials 
that aren’t the worked metal that is associated with civili -
zation. Druids don’t lack the ability to wear metal armor. 
They choose not to wear it. This choice is part of their 
identity as a mystical order. Think of it in these terms: a 
vegetarian can eat meat, but chooses not to.