Game of Thrones: George R.R. Martin and the Red Wedding - 60 Minutes - CBS News 
 Latest
 U.S.
 Iran War
 Lindsay Clancy Trial
 World
 Politics
 Entertainment
 HealthWatch
 MoneyWatch
 Crime
 Space
 Sports
 Brand Studio
 The Free Press
 Local News
 Atlanta
 Baltimore
 Bay Area
 Boston
 Chicago
 Colorado
 Detroit
 Los Angeles
 Miami
 Minnesota
 New York
 Philadelphia
 Pittsburgh
 Sacramento
 Texas
 Live
 CBS News 24/7
 Baltimore
 Bay Area
 Boston
 Chicago
 Colorado
 Detroit
 Los Angeles
 Miami
 Minnesota
 New York
 Philadelphia
 Pittsburgh
 Sacramento
 Texas
 48 Hours
 60 Minutes
 Shows
 48 Hours
 60 Minutes
 CBS Evening News
 CBS Mornings
 CBS Morning News
 CBS Reports
 CBS Saturday Morning
 The Daily Report
 The Dish
 Face the Nation
 Sunday Morning
 The Takeout
 Things That Matter
 The Uplift
 CBS News Investigates
 CBS News Confirmed
 Podcasts
 Newsletters
 Download Our App
 CBS News Team
 Executive Team
 Brand Studio
 Paramount+
 Join Our Talent Community
 RSS Feeds
 60 Minutes Overtime
 |
 Overtime Latest
 Original
 Rewind
 60 Minutes
 Watch CBS News
 60 Minutes Overtime
 The killing scenes: George R.R. Martin and the Red Wedding
 April 14, 2019 / 10:07 PM EDT
 / CBS News
 Add CBS News on Google
 Anderson Cooper speaks with George R.R. Martin, the author behind "Game of Thrones." Below is a transcript.
The full "60 Minutes" report on "Game of Thrones"
More from the cast and creators of "Game of Thrones"
George R.R. Martin: You know, I have this reputation of being exceptionally bloodthirsty (LAUGH) and killing a lot of characters.
Anderson Cooper: People-- people say you're bloodthirsty? (LAUGH)
George R.R. Martin: And-- I don't think it's entirely true. I-- I think we have to fine-tune this reputation a little. You know, s-- "Star Wars" kills more people than I do. I mean, right in the opening of "Star Wars," they unleash the Death Star against the planet Alderaan. And--
Anderson Cooper: Right. But you don't know who's-- living on Alderaan or--
George R.R. Martin: Exactly. Exactly.
Anderson Cooper: And you don't know what the stormtroopers look like.
George R.R. Martin: It's a statistic. It's a statistic. It's-- oh, well, you know, 30 billion people just died. And then we're on to the next act. But in real life, we suffer when people die. We're afraid of death ourselves. We wonder what's gonna come after. When-- when we lose a-- parent, a sibling, God help us a parent loses a child, our best friend died-- one of my best friends died last year, the brilliant editor Gardner Dozois. Every one of these was an event that shook me, that made me sad, that-- that-- you know, and I want to have that effect on my readers. I don't want death to be just an act break. Oh, okay, this character you never knew and didn't particularly about is dead. Let's get on to the next swordfight. I mean, death-- death should mean something. It's-- along with sex, death, sex, love, these are the most important primal things that define what our life is like here on the planet Earth. So it has to be treated with-- importance. So I try to make you feel the deaths. I don't necessarily have more than any other people, but I try to make you feel them more. And the other thing is, I try to make them unexpected. So it's not necessarily--
Anderson Cooper: Well, yeah.
George R.R. Martin: --the-- the person you think is gonna die. You think Ned is safe, because he appears to be the hero. And the hero is always safe. Right? The hero doesn't die.
Anderson Cooper: Right. You can't have the hero die.
George R.R. Martin: The hero and the hero's girlfriend. No matter how much trouble they get into-- they somehow survive.
Anderson Cooper: You kill people off in completely unexpected ways--
George R.R. Martin: Well--
Anderson Cooper: --which makes the death all the more shocking--
George R.R. Martin: You know, they say you write the books that you wanna read. And I-- I love unexpected twists and turns.
Anderson Cooper: The-- the-- the Red Wedding scene.
George R.R. Martin: The Red Wedding, yes.
George R.R. Martin: That was the-- number one, that was the hardest scene I ever had to write.
Anderson Cooper: How so?
George R.R. Martin: I-- I knew it was gonna happen, but I couldn't bring myself to write it. It occurs about two-thirds of the way through-- A Storm of Swords, not right at the end. So when I got to that chapter, I skipped over it. And I wrote all of the post-Red Wedding stuff. And then when the entire book was finished, I went back and wrote the Red Wedding and made myself-- made myself do that.
Anderson Cooper: What about it was so hard to actually write? Because you feel for them? Or?
George R.R. Martin: Yes. Those characters are like real to me. I mean, I-- I live with them. I-- it's hard to say. I'm-- I'm inside their heads. I'm with them through-- through their triumphs, through their tragedies. To-- I-- I carried Robb with me for-- I started to introduce the character in '91 and I killed him in, like, '99. So, like, eight years this character. And Catelyn had-- had been part of my life. So it's-- it's-- it's tough. It's-- it-- it's-- it's-- emotionally, it is a little part of you, oh, okay, fix it. You're the author. Find some way that he can survive. And then, no, it has to be done.
The video above was edited by Will Croxton.
 More from CBS News
 Neighborhood comes together to give young boy a memorable trick-or-treat birthday
 How much will a $150,000 HELOC cost monthly if opened now?
 What are the monthly payments on a $25,000 home equity loan right now?
 Is charged-off credit card debt easier to settle?
 Go deeper with The Free Press
 Two Drinks with . . . ‘Pharma Bro’ Martin Shkreli
 Trump’s UFO Dump Leaves Earthlings Wanting More
 In:
 HBO
 George R.R. Martin
 © 2019 CBS Interactive Inc. All Rights Reserved.
 The killing scenes: George R.R. Martin and the Red Wedding
 03:33
 The killing scenes: George R.R. Martin and the Red Wedding
 (03:33)
 Neighborhood comes together to give young boy a memorable trick-or-treat birthday
 How much will a $150,000 HELOC cost monthly if opened now?
 What are the monthly payments on a $25,000 home equity loan right now?
 Two Drinks with . . . ‘Pharma Bro’ Martin Shkreli
 Featured
 Political News
 Iran War Latest
 Colorado vs. Georgia Tech
 Fantasy Football Must-Draft Players
 Follow Us On
 YouTube
 Facebook
 Instagram
 X
 Privacy
 Privacy Policy
 California Notice
 Your Privacy Choices
 Terms of Use
 Minors' Privacy Policy
 More from CBS News
 Newsletters
 Podcasts
 Download Our App
 Brand Studio
 Sitemap
 Company
 About Paramount
 Advertise With Paramount
 Join Our Talent Community
 Help
 Feedback
 Contact the Ombudsman
 Copyright ©2026 CBS Interactive Inc. All rights reserved.
 View CBS News In
 CBS News App
 Open
 Chrome
 Safari
 Continue