Literary Hub » Guy Gavriel Kay: 5 Books in My Life 

 Literary Hub 

 Craft and Criticism Literary Criticism 

 Craft and Advice 

 In Conversation 

 On Translation 

 Fiction and Poetry Short Story 

 From the Novel 

 Poem 

 News and Culture History 

 Science 

 Politics 

 Biography 

 Memoir 

 Food 

 Technology 

 Bookstores and Libraries 

 Film and TV 

 Travel 

 Music 

 Art and Photography 

 The Hub 

 Style 

 Design 

 Sports 

 Become A Member 

 Lit Hub Radio The Lit Hub Podcast 

 Awakeners 

 Fiction/Non/Fiction 

 The Critic and Her Publics 

 Windham-Campbell Prizes Podcast 

 Memoir Nation 

 Beyond the Page 

 First Draft: A Dialogue on Writing 

 Thresholds 

 The Cosmic Library 

 Culture Schlock 

 Reading Lists 

 Reading Challenge 

 Book Marks Best Reviewed Books 

 CrimeReads True Crime 

 The Daily Thrill 

 Log In 

 Craft and Criticism 

 Fiction and Poetry 

 News and Culture 

 Lit Hub Radio 

 Reading Lists 

 Reading Challenge 

 Book Marks 

 CrimeReads 

 Log In 

 Guy Gavriel Kay: 5 Books in My Life

 Someday I'll Read Proust...

 Guy Gavriel Kay 

 May 24, 2016 

 Beloved fantasy writer Guy Gavriel Kay’s latest novel, Children of Earth and Sky , is available now from New American Library. 
 Article continues after advertisement 

 What was the first book you fell in love with?

 It was called The Silver Man . I was six or seven years old and checked it out of the library over and over that winter! It was a crossing worlds and time fantasy, with a mammoth and a witch and an intrepid Canadian kid. I think, looking back, I’d had no idea books could do that! Also, the two-page, black-and-white illustration of the witch scared the wits out of me, first time I turned the page (at night) and saw it. I can still see that picture.

 Name a classic you feel guilty about never having read?

 Proust. I have it. I will read it. I haven’t. I hang my head.

 What’s the book you reread the most?

 I’ll cheat a bit and say the poetry of Yeats or George Seferis. I go back to a lot of poets. When I was young I reread Tolkien, Dorothy Dunnett, Mary Renault, often, but it has been awhile.

 Is there a book you wish you had written?

 Shirley Hazzard’s The Transit of Venus . I don’t write like that, but my admiration for the craft and intelligence, the sentence by sentence insight and brilliance is extreme.

 What’s the new book you’re most looking forward to?

 A tie right now. Hilary Mantel’s conclusion of her Cromwell books, and whatever Ferrante gives us next. If my beloved Penelope Fitzgerald was alive, she’d top this list. A sorrow, that we’ll have no more from her.

 Share 
 Save 

 -->

 5 books in my life 
 Dorothy Dunnett 
 Elena Ferrante 
 George Seferis 
 Guy Gavriel Kay 
 Hilary Mantel 
 Mary Renault 
 Proust 
 Shirley Hazzard 
 Tolkien 
 Yeats 

 Guy Gavriel Kay

 Guy Gavriel Kay CM is a Canadian writer of fantasy fiction. Many of his novels are set in fictional realms that resemble real places during real historical periods, such as Constantinople during the reign of Justinian I or Spain during the time of El Cid. Those works are published and marketed as historical fantasy, although Kay has expressed a preference to avoid genre categorization. As of early 2016, Kay has published 12 novels and a book of poetry. His fiction has been translated into more than 25 languages.

 Lit Hub Daily 
 August 31 – September 4, 2026

 Do booksellers think this is the end of reading? 

 Emily Witt reports on Operation Metro Surge 

 Anne Carson having a “Rosalía hangover” 

 More News 

 The Best International Fiction of the Month: September 2026 September 4, 2026 by Molly Odintz 

 How Harry Kurnitz Conquered Hollywood, Broadway, and the Biblio-Mystery September 4, 2026 by Nicholas A. Basbanes 

 How the New T.J. English Reader Mines the Dark Soul of America September 4, 2026 by David Masciotra 

 The Best Reviewed Books of the Week 
 "A maximalist s banquet It is humane blood-flecked disturbing and sustaining James has written a…" 

 The Latest 

 Is Time Even Real? Does It Even Flow? 

 10 Literary Science Fiction and Fantasy Novels That Offer Hope for the Future 

 What Should You Read Next? Here Are the Best Reviewed Books of the Week 

 How Fordism and Fascism Gave Birth to Modern Car Culture 

 Literary Hub

 Created by Grove Atlantic and Electric Literature

 Masthead 

 About 

 Sign Up For Our Newsletters 

 How to Pitch Lit Hub 

 Advertisers: Contact Us 

 Privacy Policy 

 Support Lit Hub - Become A Member 

 If you buy books linked on our site, Lit Hub may earn a commission from Bookshop.org , whose fees support independent bookstores.