Books on My Shelf – BrightWeavings 

 Welcome 

 Tour Journals 

 Art Gallery 

 Scholarship 

 Readers 

 News 

 GGK’s Words 

 Skip to content 

 Welcome 

 Original Introduction 

 Buying Books 

 Tour Journals 

 Children of Earth & Sky 

 River of Stars 

 The Last Light of the Sun 

 Under Heaven TOUR JOURNAL 

 Ysabel JOURNAL 

 Books 

 Written on the Dark 

 All the Seas of the World 

 A Brightness Long Ago 

 Children of Earth and Sky 

 River of Stars 

 Under Heaven 

 Ysabel 

 Lord of Emperors 

 Sailing to Sarantium 

 Last Light of the Sun 

 The Lions of Al-Rassan 

 A Song for Arbonne 

 Tigana 

 The Fionavar Tapestry 

 Beyond this Dark House 

 Art Gallery 

 Written on the Dark Art 

 All the Seas of the World Art 

 A Brightness Long Ago Art 

 A Children of Earth and Sky Art 

 River of Stars Art 

 Under Heaven Art 

 Ysabel Art 

 The Sarantine Mosaic Art 

 The Last Light of the Sun Art 

 The Lions of Al-Rassan Art 

 A Song For Arbonne Art 

 Tigana Art 

 Fionavar Art 

 Beyond this Dark House Art 

 Scholarship 

 Professional Scholarship 

 Student Papers 

 Readers 

 Reader Art 

 Readers Music & Verse 

 Music & Verse 

 Fun Stuff! 

 GGK’s Words 

 Essays & Poems 

 Bibliographies 

 Interviews 

 Tour Journals 

 Readings 

 Contact 

 . 

 . 

 . 

 . 

 THE BOOKS
 FICTION: 
 A Brightness Long Ago 
 Children of Earth & Sky 
 River of Stars 
 Under Heaven 
 Ysabel 

 THE SARANTINE MOSAIC: 
 Sailing to Sarantium 
 Lord of Emperors 

 The Last Light of the Sun 
 The Lions of Al-Rassan 
 Song For Arbonne 
 Tigana 

 THE FIONAVAR TAPESTRY: 
 The Summer Tree 
 The Wandering Fire 
 The Darkest Road 

 POETRY: 
 Beyond this Dark House 

 BUYING BOOKS: 
 Signed and personalized books can be ordered from Bakka-Phoenix Books in Toronto 

 Recently Added

 Where I Have No Notes 
 January 2, 2026 

 Search for: 

 ← Interview with SFX (UK magazine) 

 Lyrics to ‘Ceinwen’s Bow’ by Talis Kimberley → 

 Books on My Shelf

 Posted on November 15, 2014 by Deborah Meghnagi 

 You often find autobiographical sites on the web where people have listed their favourite books. This isn’t a site about me, but one thing occurred to me. If I meet someone who likes the same books as me, then I trust their recommendations for other books a lot. In my experience, there is a lot of really bad writing out there, and a relatively small selection of truly great writing. I’m going to list here some of the books on my shelf (well, shelves, really – a lot of them!) for anyone who feels like trusting my opinion as chief fan. Not that these books are necessarily similar to GGK’s, they’re also not only fantasy, but they are my suggestions, take them or leave them, for some really great reading experiences. And if you really trust me, then you can click on a title, and it’ll lead you to Amazon’s bookstore, where you can buy the book for yourself!

 Fantasy

 J.R.R.Tolkien (It is rightly decreed -by me- that any fantasy list has to start with the great JRRT)

 The Hobbit 

 The Lord of the Rings 

 The Silmarillion 

 Tree and Leaf (out of print, but try the out of print service)

 Tolkien: A biography , by Humphrey Carpenter

 I know this might seem a bit excessive, but even though his books are the subject of my site, and therefore on every other page, how can I list the books on my shelf without including them? I mean, really! You can also click through to buy them elsewhere on the site, from Canada, the UK or America, in the actual books section – here I’ll stick to amazon.com – it’s simpler..

 Guy Gavriel Kay 

The Fionavar Tapestry trilogy:

Bk 1: The Summer Tree 

Bk 2: The Wandering Fire 

Bk 3: The Darkest Road 

 Tigana 

 A Song for Arbonne 

 The Lions of Al-Rassan 

 The Sarantine Mosaic:

Bk 1: Sailing to Sarantium 

Bk 2: Lord of Emperors 

 The Last Light of the Sun 

 Ysabel 

 Stephen Donaldson 

Really great writer. I particularly love Mordant’s Need – and confess, somewhat shamefacedly, to being the teeniest bit in lurve with Geraden – the only time I’ve ever admitted that about a fictional character!

 “The First Chronicles of Thomas Covenant, the Unbeliever:

 Lord Foul’s Bane 

 The Illearth War 

 The Power that Preserves 

 The Second Chronicles of Thomas Covenant, the Unbeliever:

 The Wounded Land 

 The One Tree 

 White Gold Wielder 

 Mordant’s Need:

Bk 1: The Mirror of Her Dreams 

Bk 2: A Man Rides Through 

 Daughter of Regals (collection of short stories)

 Reave the Just (most recent publication – also short stories)

 Donaldson also published a science-fiction series, called The Gap Series. Good, visceral, shocking. But this is a short list, not a list of all my books (I have six bookcases, after all) so I won’t list them all. To my mind, they’re not quite in the same league as his fantasy work.

 Robin Hobb 

A relatively recent discovery, and a more than pleasant one, her books (yes, Robin is a woman) just get better and better. The Farseer Saga was good; the more recent Liveship Traders series was excellent, and brought her on to my shortlist.

 The Farseer Saga:

 Assassins Apprentice 

 Royal Assassin 

 Assassins Quest 

 The Liveship Traders:

 Ship of Magic 

 The Mad Ship 

 Ship of Destiny 

 The Tawny Man:

 Fool’s Errand 

 Golden Fool 

 Fool’s Fate – link here is to amazon uk because the book is out there now but not out till feb ’04 in the States.

 Robin Hobb is a pseudonym, and previously, she wrote under the pseudonym Megan Lindholm. Most of the Lindholm books were out of print for a while, but they’re being reprinted now in the U.K. (still not available in the U.S. from what I can see). The best I read were The Gypsy (written with Steven Brust), Wizard of the Pigeons , and Cloven Hooves – all were excellent.

 I won’t claim to have read exhaustively, so there may well be other authors I just haven’t found yet who belong on that shortlist (feel free to tell me about them!)But those are the truly excellent adult fantasy books. The ones I list below I consider to be interesting, entertaining and thought-provoking, but not quite in the same league.

 Pamela Dean’s Tam Lin is a fascinating novel, a variation on a Scottish ballad – which I absolutely loved because the heroine is a student studying English lit at university who loves fantasy fiction – which is exactly what I was when I first read it!

 Patricia McKillip 

A recent find for me, but her Riddlemaster trilogy is one of the classics of the genre. Powerful and lyrical. And her less ‘epic’ books are even better – I’ve almost never read prose this beautiful. I’m in the process of reading and loving them all:

 The Forgotten Beasts of Eld 

 The Book of Atrix Wolfe 

 Song for the Basilisk 

 Winter Rose 

 The Cygnet and the Firebird (out of print)

 The Sorceress and the Cygnet (out of print)

 Katherine Kerr’s Deverry books:

 Daggerspell 

 Darkspell 

 Dawnspell: The Bristling Wood 

 Dragonspell: The Dragon Revenant 

 There are more books in the Deverry series, but those four make up the first quartet, and are self-contained. The rest are not as good as these, and are anyway still a work in progress…

 Ellen Datlow and Terri Windling have been editing collections of ‘adult’ fairy tales for some time now; reclaiming them from the nursery and putting them back where they belong. I have not read all of the books in the series, only the first two – but they were excellent, and I’m sure the others are equally so.

 Snow White, Blood Red 

 Black Thorn, White Rose 

 And whilst we’re on fairy tales, much as I’m not at all a fan of horror, I recently read an engrossing and beautiful novel-length fairy tale by the acknowledged master of horror, Stephen King. I highly recommend The Eyes of the Dragon . There are a few recent ‘novelizations’ of fairy tales – another couple of good ones include Jane Yolen’s Briar Rose and Robin McKinley’s Deerskin . And not a fairy tale novelization, but a very good, powerful novel that uses some of the more traditional elements of fairy tale and fantasy to very good effect is Patrick O’Leary’s The Gift .

 Tad Williams 

Memory, Sorrow and Thorn:

Bk 1: The Dragonbone Chair 

Bk 2: Stone of Farewell 

Bk 3: To Green Angel Tower: Part One 

 To Green Angel Tower: Part Two 

 Other good authors to mention – Charles de Lint, George R.R. Martin, Tim Powers.

 Relevant non-fiction:

 An Experiment in Criticism , by C.S.Lewis

 Fantasists on Fantasy , ed. Robert H. Boyer and Kenneth J. Zahorski

 The Encyclopaedia of Fantasy , by John Clute and John Grant

 The Dictionary of Imaginary Places , by Alberto Manguel and Gianni Guadalupi

 Children’s Literature

 I’ve found that many authors who write what is officially considered ‘chidren’s books’ write books that are more readable as an adult than much adult fiction. The recent craze for the Harry Potter books has shown how adults can enjoy children’s books. I thinks that the following books deserve the same, if not better, press. I thoroughly recommend them, for children, and for adults.

 Susan Cooper 

 The Dark is Rising Sequence (boxed set)

Bk 1: Over Sea Under Stone

Bk 2: The Dark is Rising

Bk 3: Greenwitch

Bk 4: The Grey King

Bk 5: Silver on the Tree

 Seaward 

 Madeleine L’Engle 

The Wrinkle in Time Trilogy:

Bk 1: A Wrinkle in Time 

Bk 2: A Wind in the Door 

Bk 3: A Swifly Tilting Planet 

 Diana Wynne Jones 

Teenage/adult fiction:

 Deep Secret 

 A Sudden Wild Magic 

 The Dark Lord of Dernholm 

 Fire and Hemlock 

 Hexwood 

 The Merlin Conspiracy (UK)

 Stopping for a Spell (UK)

 Children’s fiction (but still very worthwhile for readers):

Archer’s Goon (out of print at the moment – try and find it secondhand)

 A Tale of Time City (out of print in U.S. – link to Amazon UK)

 The Ogre Downstairs (again, link to Amazon UK)

 Witch Week 

 Lloyd Alexander 

The Prydain Chronicles:

Bk 1: The Book of Three 

Bk 2: The Black Cauldron 

Bk 3: The Castle of Llyr 

Bk 4: Taran Wanderer 

Bk 5: The High King 

 C.S.Lewis 

 The Chronicles of Narnia (boxed set), consisting of:

Bk 1: The Magician’s Nephew

Bk 2: The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe

Bk 3: The Horse and his Boy

Bk 4: Prince Caspian

Bk 5: The Voyage of the Dawn Treader

Bk 6: The Silver Chair

Bk 7: The Last Battle

 Norton Juster: The Phantom Tollbooth 

 Science Fiction

 I’m nowhere near as big an ‘expert’ on Sci-Fi as I am in fantasy, but there are a few strong recommendations I can give…

 Orson Scott Card 

The Ender’s Game series is the only sci-fi series I’ve ever read that comes close to achieving the same extra-literary, profound effect that the best fantasy does. Truly amazing books:

 Bk 1: Ender’s Game 

Bk 2: Speaker for the Dead 

Bk 3: Xenocide 

Bk 4: Children of the Mind 

Bk 5: Ender’s Shadow (a ‘parallel’ book to Ender’s Game – fascinating concept, cleverly e

xecuted)

 Dan Simmons 

 Hyperion 

 The Fall of Hyperion 

 Mary Doria Russell 

 The Sparrow 

 Children of God 

 Julian May 

 Intervention (this comes in 2 books in the States, which aren’t readily available, so I’m linking to the one book format of the UK here)

 Jack the Bodiless 

 Diamond Mask 

 Magnificat 

(These books are related to her four book Pliocene Exile series, but to my mind, this series -The Galactic Milieu- is far better).

 Tad Williams ‘ Otherland series:

Bk 1: Otherland 

Bk 2: River of Blue Fire 

Bk 3: Mountain of Black Glass 

Bk 4: Sea of Silver Light 

 Classics

 Jane Austen 

 Sense and Sensibility 

 Mansfield Park 

 Pride and Prejudice 

 Charles Dickens 

 Hard Times 

 Bleak House 

 Charlotte Bronte 

 Villette (a very powerful and moving exploration of loneliness – this book should be better known)

 George Eliot 

 Daniel Deronda 

 Jonathan Swift 

 Gullivers Travels 

 In terms of poetry, I love the metaphysical poets – John Donne , Andrew Marvell and George Herbert in particular. I also love Emily Dickinson . And I’d like to mention The Happy Prince, a short, heartbreakingly beautiful fairy tale by Oscar Wilde , along with his wonderfully clever plays, The Importance of Being Earnest and An Ideal Husband. I’m not going to be ridiculous and go through the whole canon, but I’ll just say that Much Ado About Nothing is my favourite Shakespeare play.

 Historical Fiction

 I haven’t read enough historical fiction, although I have some books waiting for me on my shelf which may end up on this list once I get round to reading them. Some of my favourite books as a child were historical fiction – I’ll mention Geoffrey Trease’s The Baron’s Hostage (out of print) and Cue for Treason (available in the UK) in particular. One author I have read more recently (emphatically not children’s lit), and who definitely belongs on this list is Dorothy Dunnett. Intricate, complex and fascinating books. And as you’ll know if you’ve read the interviews on the site, GGK things she’s great too:

 The Lymond Chronicles 

 Game of Kings 

 Queens’ Play 

 The Disorderly Knights 

 Pawn in Frankincense 

 The Ringed Castle 

 Checkmate 

 The House of Niccolo 

 Niccolo Rising 

 Spring of the Ram 

 Race of Scorpions 

 Scales of Gold 

 Unicorn Hunt 

 To Lie with Lions 

 Caprice and Rondo 

 Gemini (paperback to be published in June)

 King Hereafter 

 A truly wonderful epistolary novel by Emma Bull and Steven Brust,

 Freedom and Necessity – an absolute must read, recently found.

 Crime Fiction

 I’m not hugely into crime fiction, but there are a few very good authors out there that are on my ‘must read’ list.

 Elizabeth George 

Elizabeth George writes really great, character driven fiction, with some of the most interesting people and scenarios I’ve seen – it’s an ongoing series involving detectives from London’s Scotland Yard.

 A Suitable Vengeance (prequel)

 A Great Deliverance 

 Payment In Blood 

 Well-Schooled In Murder 

 For The Sake of Elena 

 Missing Joseph 

 Playing For The Ashes 

 In The Presence Of The Enemy 

 Deception On His Mind 

 In Pursuit Of The Proper Sinner 

 A Traitor To Memory 

 Dorothy L Sayers Sayers has been a relatively recent discovery for me. I find it fascinating reading books set in 1930’s London, for one thing, and the dialogue is wonderful. Intelligent writing, again, very character based, not so much plot based, and an ongoing cast of characters:

 Whose Body? 

 Clouds of Witness 

 Unnatural Death 

 The Unpleasantness at the Bellona Club 

 Strong Poison 

 Five Red Herrings 

 Have His Carcase 

 Murder Must Advertise 

 The Nine Tailors 

 Gaudy Night 

 Busman’s Honeymoon 

 Minette Walters – very clever, interesting books. Each one very different. This isn’t all of them, these are the best:

 The Scolds Bridle 

 The Ice House 

 The Sculptress 

 The Shape of Snakes 

(not yet published in US, I read a UK edition – a really excellent book)

 Christopher Brookmyre is a Scottish writer who writes extremely witty, clever crime capers. A relatively new discovery – thoroughly recommended!

 Contemporary Fiction

 Harper Lee: To Kill A Mockingbird 

Anna Quindlen: One True Thing 

Charles T. Powers: In the Memory of the Forest 

Barbara Kingsolver: Animal Dreams 

Catherine Fox: Angels and Men (out of print in US – link here is to Amazon UK)

Louis de Bernieres: Captain Corelli’s Mandolin 

Josephine Tey: The Daughter of Time 

William Horwood: Skallagrigg (link to Amazon UK – this is a very moving, complex , almost mythical book about the lives of the disabled.)

Ann Patchett: Bel Canto 

Audrey Niffeneger: The Time Traveler’s Wife 

Marcus Zusak: The Book Thief Ann Patchett: Bel Canto 

 And some more lighthearted, but nonetheless excellent, and funny fiction:

 Katie Fforde: Living Dangerously (Amazon UK link – out of print in US)

Marian Keyes: Rachel’s Holiday (also out of print in US – Amazon UK link)

 Travel Writing

 Not sure if this is so wonderful because I’m English, or just that it’s his best travel book, but Notes from A Small Island , by Bill Bryson, is absolutely fantastic!

 This entry was posted in Historical Site . Bookmark the permalink . 

 ← Interview with SFX (UK magazine) 

 Lyrics to ‘Ceinwen’s Bow’ by Talis Kimberley → 

 Comments are closed.

 Powered by WordPress and Sliding Door theme.