“J. R. R. Tolkien: Author of the Century,” by Tom Shippey | C.S. Lewis and J.R.R. Tolkien
 C.S. Lewis and J.R.R. Tolkien
 An Annotated Bibliography
J.R.R. Tolkien
 “J. R. R. Tolkien: Author of the Century,” by Tom Shippey
 “Splintered Light: Logos and Language in Tolkien’s World,” by Verlyn Flieger
 “Tolkien and the Invention of Myth,” edited by Jane Chance
 Reviews of online sources
 The Gospel According to Tolkien: Visions of the Kingdom in Middle-Earth, by Ralph C. Wood
C.S. Lewis
 C.S. Lewis as Philosopher: Truth, Goodness and Beauty, Edited by David J. Baggett, Gary R. Habermas, and Jerry L. Walls
 “C. S. Lewis and the Ordering of Our Loves: A Review-Essay on Seven Recent Books,” by Ralph Wood
 “Christian Tutor of the 20th Century,” by Ralph Wood
 “Conflict and Convergence on Fundamental Matters in C.S. Lewis and J.R.R. Tolkien,” by Ralph Wood
 “J. R. R. Tolkien: Author of the Century,” by Tom Shippey
 Chapter 1, The Hobbit: Re-Inventing Middle-Earth:
Tom Shippey begins his novel by describing how J.R.R. Tolkien came up with hobbits. He writes about the now famous story of Tolkien writing “in a hole in the ground, there lived a hobbit” on a sheet of paper one of his students turned in. From there, Shippey explains that the word hobbit did, in fact, exist before Tolkien’s creation of Bilbo Baggins. It appeared, according to Shippey, in Volume 2 of The Denham Tracts where they are defined as “a class of spirits.” As this definition has nothing to do with Tolkien’s hobbits, he quickly dismisses any correlation between the two, but suggests that Tolkien may have seen the word before, forgotten its original meaning, and redefined it for his own use. Then he begins to explain more clearly who Bilbo Baggins is. He writes that Bilbo’s hobbit hole is like “the home of the Victorian upper-middle class of Tolkien’s nineteenth-century youth.” From there, Shippey defines Bilbo socially; he is well-off, but not necessarily rich. He is somewhere between middle-middle and upper-class.  To English readers, Bilbo is easily recognizable, according to Shippey. He also asserts that Bilbo and all hobbits are anachronistic of Middle-Earth. They do not fit in with the magical creatures and people that exist within Tolkien’s created world.
Shippey goes on to describe the fairy-tale elements in The Hobbit. He writes that the creatures and people in the work are not all Tolkien’s creation; dwarves come from “Snow White” and share some of their characteristics. Trolls are not as heavily featured, but still prominent in stories like “The Three Billy-Goats Gruff.” Likewise, elves and goblins can be sourced to George Macdonald’s fairy-tales. Shippey goes on to explore the past of dwarves even further back. He writes that Tolkien would know about The Old Norse poems of Elder Edda, where many of the names of Thorin’s company come from. He provides readers with a list of names from Snorri Sturluson’s Skadskaparmal. This list contains eight of the dwarves’s names from The Hobbit, as well as names that seem to suggest Oakenshield and Gandalf.
In this chapter, Shippey analyzes the author’s voice in The Hobbit. Tolkien uses phrases like “of course” and “as you probably know” in order to make it clear that he is speaking of things that should be obvious to his readers. It also implies how there is more to the story than what he has written in the text. Shippey also analyzes the introduction of creatures and peoples. They are introduced separately in the beginning of the novel, and then all come together towards the end of the work.
Shippey analyzes Bilbo’s trajectory as someone who obviously does not fit in with the magical world around him, to someone who deserves respect and authority. Bilbo is quickly written off by the dwarves. Later on, he does his best with the trolls and the goblins, but to no great success. His discovery of the ring is a turning point for Bilbo, as well as Tolkien, Shippey asserts. Shippey goes on to analyze both Gollum and Bilbo’s riddles. Gollum’s are staunchly ancient and dark. Bilbo’s are more modern, and sourced to nursery rhymes. It is important to note, according to Shippey, that the characters understand and know the answers to the other’s riddles. From this point on, the dwarves praise Bilbo for his luck and courage, making him a less contemptible character in the work.
Shippey again sources elements of The Hobbit to Old Norse and ancient texts. For example, he sources Beorn to Beowulf and Hrolfs Saga. He also sources settings from the Elder Edda and Skadskaparmal. Shippey describes the creation of Mirkwood from one of these sources. Furthermore, Shippey describes how Bilbo’s discussion with Bilbo comes from the Eddic poem, Fafnismal. Shippey writes, “He took fragments of ancient literature, expanded on their intensely suggestive hints of further meaning, and made them into cohesive and consistent narrative.”
In reference to Bard, Shippey writes that he is the closest to an ancient hero character. He is the one with lineage to a king of old, which allows him to slay Smaug. Then he begins to talk about the style. According to Shippey, the style see-saws between Bilbo’s “business manner,” the narrator’s matter-of-fact tone, and Thorin’s style. Likewise, he describes the differences of Laketown in the same way. The Master is skeptical, the people of the town are foolish, and Bard is the balance between them. At the end of The Hobbit, Bilbo returns to his professional manner, while Thorin becomes more dignified and aware.
While this chapter does not explicitly help readers understand The Lord of the Rings, it does help readers grasp how Tolkien wrote. In this chapter, Shippey discusses Tolkien’s storytelling, and his resources for characters in The Hobbit. Many of these sources lead Tolkien to ideas that continue in The Lord of the Rings. Also, this background information allows readers to have a better grasp on Tolkien’s writing style in general.
Chapter 2, The Lord of the Rings: Mapping Out a Plot: 
Shippey begins this chapter by mapping out the plot of The Lord of the Rings, as the chapter title suggests. He describes the symmetry of the work, as well as describes how the chapters fall together. Shippey points out the both Book 1 and 2 have second chapters that explain the past and then lead to some decision about the future. Furthermore, he draws links between Gondor and Rohan, as well as Denethor and Theodon. Along these same lines, he writes that Merry and Pippin are set up antithetically, choosing the same rank. He reminds readers that as Tolkien wrote he did not have this schema, or in fact even this story, in mind.
As the chapter goes on, Shippey analyzes the resources that Tolkien had when writing The Lord of the Rings. He remarks that Tolkien’s rejected manuscript of The Silmarillion was a resource for him. Some other resources include his own poems, and his interest and understanding of place-names. Tolkien pulled inspiration and characters from poems that he wrote, like “The Adventures of Tom Bombadil.” Tolkien explained Tom Bombadil as a “spirit of the place” which could not be corrupted by the ring, although he does not have the power to defy Sauron. Shippey argues that The Lord of the Rings has a slow start for the hobbits’ exit from The Shire because Tolkien was still drawing inspiration and information from these resources in order to write it.
Shippey goes on to examine the Council of Elrond. He begins by stating how complicated the chapter is. Although, as he states, nothing happens, there are twelve speakers, and some of them talk about other people and what they have said. This description is difficult for readers to understand. Shippey goes on to interpret how the speakers at the Council of Elrond communicate. He writes that Boromir speaks sort of Elrondian, and that Aragorn speaks this way to Boromir to impress him. Tolkien’s linguistic prowess aids him in expressing who these characters are not only in what they say but how they say it.
From there, Shippey goes on to list out the conversation in The Council of Elrond chapter. He lists out the speakers and their tales. There are many interjections by other characters during the telling of these stories, but nonetheless the conversation eventually circles back around to figuring out what to do with the One Ring. He goes on to interpret these in a way that explains how Tolkien wrote this. Shippey claims that Tolkien wrote himself a story once he hit this point in the novel. He uses this discussion to find a plot for the rest of the novel, according to Shippey.
The Riders of the Mark are the next topic that Shippey analyzes in this chapter. He describes their culture as deriving from Old English. This Englishness, though not exactly like the modern Englishness of the Hobbits, connects them all the same. Shippey notes that one thing is decidedly not Anglo-Saxon about the Riders of Rohan: they ride on horses. Shippey points out that, “The Rider of the Mark are then a reconstruction from many sources, like so much in Tolkien, a blend of ancient and modern, the strange and familiar.”
After his analysis of Rohan and its people, he then draws comparisons between Rohan and Gondor. He draws distinctions between Theodon and Denethor. Theoden is the rightful king of Rohan, while Denethor is just the steward of Gondor. Furthermore, he claims that Merry and Pippin’s oaths are indicative of who they are swearing fealty to. Merry swears his oath due to his love of Theoden; Pippin swears his oath because of pride. These motivations suggest that the men they are swearing to bring up different emotions in the hobbits. Also, Shippey compares and contrasts Eomer and Faramir. While Eomer is up-front and open with Aragorn, Gimli, and Legolas, Faramir is much more restrained. Shippey points out that Faramir is able to get information from Frodo and Sam easily and jumps to the correct assumptions.
In the last section of the chapter, Shippey explains the interlacing method that Tolkien uses in the later books of The Lord of the Rings. The narrative is split in several pieces; Tolkien weaves them together using flashbacks, and by describing movements of the moon. This interlacing allows Tolkien to have suspense and surprise in his narrative, according to Shippey. The most important quality that the interlacing creates, however, is the “profound sense of reality, of that being the way things are.” Shippey also asserts that this interlacing technique also allows for a sense of irony. The reader knows things that the characters do not.
This chapter is useful in the study of The Lord of the Rings because it draws conclusions for many of the characters and plotlines. It allows for readers to better understand the connections and interlacing of the story, while also explaining in greater detail the Council of Elrond chapter. Furthermore, it draws conclusions about Gondor and Rohan, as well as Theoden and Denethor. Shippey’s observations will lead readers to better understand the characters and plots in The Lord of the Rings.
Chapter 3, The Lord of the Rings: Concepts of Evil:
Shippey begins his chapter on the concept of evil by discussing The One Ring. Gandalf has three assumptions about The One Ring, according to Shippey. He knows that it must not return to Sauron, it is dangerous to all who possess it, and it must be destroyed. These assumptions determine the plot of The Lord of the Rings. This falls in line with Lord Acton’s quote, “Power tends to corrupt, and absolute power corrupts absolutely. Great men are almost always bad men.” He also draws a connection between this sentiment and George Orwell’s Animal Farm. Shippey lists out the characters who show some hint or more of the corruption of the ring: Bilbo, Isildur, Gollum, Boromir, Sam, and Frodo. He does draw attention the people who are not tempted by it: Merry, Pippin, Legolas, Aragorn, Gimli, and Faramir. Shippey believes that The One Ring is addictive. Those who use it often become more and more addicted to it, but those who never use it can deny the Ring somewhat easily.
After this discussion of The One Ring, Shippey goes on to analyze the Ringwraiths as images of evil. He suggests that the depictions of evil in twentieth century writing are all linked with the experiences from war. He describes the wraiths as something that is writhed, or writhing. That is, a twisting that is linked with wrath. This etymology connects with ideas of his fellow writers, especially C.S. Lewis. Shippey then interprets the wraiths as shadows or ghosts of people who should be dead; they are effectively intangible, according to Shippey. He argues that they work psychologically, not physically, since they have no true physical form. Tolkien’s image of evil is a realistic one, Shippey argues. Evildoers in modern work are described as hollow, as evidence by Tolkien, T.S. Eliot, and C.S. Lewis’ work.
Tolkien, according to Shippey, describes evil as shadows too. Tolkien wrote about wraiths as an absence, so is Mordor itself, Shippey argues. Here, Shippey draws connections from C.S. Lewis’s Mere Christianity to Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings. They both reference the Boethian view of evil, which states that evil is just the absence of good. Both works reference dualism; C.S. Lewis lists dualism underneath Christianity in acceptable belief systems. Tolkien, though more devout than Lewis, faced criticism for the moral similarities between good and evil in The Lord of the Rings.
Shippey addresses the ambiguity of the ring in this chapter as well. He writes that the ring seems to have a will of its own. Tolkien writes several times in the novel that Frodo feels some external force pushing him to put on the ring. However, he also feels temptation to put it on internally. It is unclear who is willing him to put on the ring in certain scenes, like in The Prancing Pony. He argues that there seems to a Manichaean view present as Frodo gets closer to destroying it. Finally, Shippey argues that perhaps when Frodo says that he does not choose now to do what he came to do, he is truly saying that it is not his choice to take the Ring. Shippey argues that the ambiguity surrounding the ring allows readers to understand that evil does not always come in form, but in many. It is not only external, for it would be easy to write off. It is not always internal either.
Luck is a positive force in The Lord of the Rings, according to Shippey. He argues that Gollum’s fall into Mount Doom is not just luck, but a culmination of the events that came before. Chance, in Tolkien’s work, is something that falls together which the characters cannot explain. In this way, it is chance that Gollum falls to his death with the ring. Tolkien’s logic of luck seems to be that people should not stop trying to do good, but good may come out of their actions, even if they fail.
The second positive force that Shippey describes is courage. First, Shippey addresses some criticism that Tolkien did not appreciate. He discusses Muir’s complaint that the “good boys… emerge at the end of it well, triumphant and happy.” This, according to Shippey, is simply not true. Tolkien wrote often in The Lord of the Rings about defeat, and about how the strengths of evil. However, Shippey argues that this repetition of defeat does not show that Tolkien was pessimistic, but that he wanted to introduce the theory of courage. This theory of courage is influenced by Old Norse mythology; it is to say that characters did not have easy hope, but were conscious of “defeat and despair.” Shippey argues that Sam is the embodiment of Tolkien’s theory of courage.  Sam had not needed hope, as a cheerful hobbit.
At the end of the chapter, Shippey draws some conclusions about Tolkien’s concept of evil. Shippey notes that while Sam had predicted Frodo to be the famousest of hobbits, his pacifism in the Battle of Bywater means that he is not at the top of the list of Hobbits, nor does he gain anything from this battle. Shippey argues that this moment and the work as a whole reflect the disillusionment of the returned veteran. Then, he addresses some critiques of The Lord of the Rings. Shippey argues that most of the criticisms are in reference to Tolkien’s refusal to comply with images of evil that came before him in the literary tradition.
This chapter is helpful for PAR 320 students because it explains many different aspects of evil in The Lord of the Rings. He writes about the twentieth century descriptions of evil as hollow and nothing, which are evident in the work. The chapter describes the Ring’s power and its ambiguity, while also drawing connections from the wraiths to shadows and ghosts. Shippey analyzes the One Ring in terms of both Manichaeanism and Boethianism. He also describes two forces of good that work against evil: luck and courage.
Chapter 4, The Lord of the Rings: The Mythic Dimension:
Overall, this chapter from Tom Shippey’s analytical work on J. R. R. Tolkien texts argues against some of Tolkien’s assertions about his own novel, The Lord of the Rings. Shippey begins this chapter of J. R. R. Tolkien: Author of the Century with an analysis of allegory versus applicability in The Lord of the Rings. Shippey acknowledges that Tolkien did not write with the intentions of having a profound allegory; however, he also reminds readers that while an author’s intentions may start one way, each reader is allowed a new interpretation. Dependent upon one’s definition of allegory, The Lord of the Rings may or may not do just that. Applicability to the World Wars, however, cannot be denied.
As for examples, Shippey draws connections between the shortages of pipeweed in the Shire to shortages in Britain during wartime and the scouring of the Shire and Britain’s landscape after the war. Shippey points out the similar characteristics of Saruman and Denethor. He examines the meaning of the name Saruman as well as the implications his name had on his characterization in the novel. Denethor is juxtaposed with Theoden to reveal more about his seemingly neurotic actions in The Lord of the Rings. As true with the chapter, Shippey analyzes omens said by both characters in conjunction with historical events from World War II, such as nuclear fire.
Shippey’s second point in the chapter is to suggest that The Lord of the Rings is not a Catholic work as Tolkien had said, but rather “a ‘mythic’ work” (179). To emphasize his point, he analyzes most of the scenes with any religious undertones from the novel. With each scene, he finds an absence of a specific religion. Instead, Shippey comes to the conclusion that The Lord of the Rings, like Beowulf, was written by believing Christians; however, there is not sufficient evidence to reflect a specific denomination.
He moves on from the mythic versus religion debate to a seemingly unrelated topic: the origins of the name Frodo. Just as all other names in The Lord of the Rings, Frodo’s name has significance. Shippey correlates Frodo to Froda, father of Ingeld from Beowulf. The father, whom Frodo seems to be named after, was peaceful and quiet thus his story was forgotten by many. Frodo’s actions closely resemble the peace of Froda. Shippey does not stop at a discussion of his name, but delves further into the idea of Frodo as an allegory for Christ.
Shippey’s next section of this chapter discusses the difference between applicability and allegory. Allegory is time sensitive. Shippey agrees with Tolkien in this sense. The poetry and tradition of The Lord of the Rings is discussed in this short section. Important to note is the idea that these songs from the novel are actually built upon by different generations. The songs, just as the novel, transpire through the ages.
In the section entitled “Three Shire-poets: Shakespeare, Milton, and ‘Anonymous,’” Shippey compares and contrasts the themes in The Lord of the Rings and the works of these three. For Shakespeare, Shippey utilizes themes from Macbeth. Although the stories contain similarities, Shippey argues that this comes from the “mythic timelessness” of both (196). Furthermore, he concludes that while Tolkien appreciated the works of Shakespeare, his representation of “magic” was actually enchantment, which sets the two deeply apart. Similarly, he compares and contrasts the “whole myth of the stars and the wood” with Milton’s Comus (203). Shippey also argues that Tolkien’s mixture of myth and poetry was inspired by none other than Milton (200). Shippey also analyzes The Lord of the Rings in conjunction with Pearl, a poem by an unknown poet. Tolkien actually helped to translate this poem about a father’s grief about his deceased infant daughter.
Shippey takes time out to define eucatastrophe in the next section of this chapter. Shippey connects the idea of eucatastrophe as the closest that Christian myth comes to the surface in The Lord of the Rings (206). Shippey selects a couple of eucatastrophic moments to analyze: Sam waking up after what he assumed was his death at Mount Doom and Eowyn and Faramir feeling the great crash of the Dark Tower. Within the eucatastrophic moments, Shippey finds semblances of Christian messages. He explains the happiness in these moments, but also the sadness and defeat.
Closer the themes in The Lord of the Rings are to Christianity, the sadder they become, according to Shippey (212). Shippey contextualizes The Lord of the Rings with Lost Paradise in the scene between Gandalf and the Nazgul. He makes sure to draw distinctions between the work and Christian ideas; however, none of the themes from The Lord of the Rings is inherently Catholic to Shippey. Also in this section, Shippey writes on “The Scouring of the Shire” as a commentary on twentieth-century life. He continues with the idea of industrialization throughout the rest of this section.
Finally, Shippey feels it important to discuss the genre or sub-genre that Tolkien created: “heroic fantasy trilogy” (221). Shippey argues that although Tolkien created this type of work, his novel could fall into several categories. The Lord of the Rings transcends categories. Tolkien’s style and language take the novel into further reaches and allow for the fluidity of the genre.
Chapter 5, The Silmarillion: The Work of His Heart:
Shippey begins this chapter of The Silmarillion with his reason for writing it. Devoted fans and his publisher begged for another work after The Lord of the Rings. Tolkien had several unpublished pieces that his son finished and had published posthumously. The Silmarillion had stories not unlike those in The Shaping of Middle-earth. Shippey encourages readers to understand the complexities in the publication and writing of The Silmarillion. He writes about the struggles of Christopher Tolkien as he tried to complete his father’s dream. Shippey provides a brief summary of The Silmarillion. He also explains the intricacies of language and nationality in this work. There were languages for Light-elves and Wood-elves that were mutually-incomprehensible (231). As for nationality, Shippey recants Tolkien’s own struggle with his nationality, which he presented as English, not British. He also includes critics of Tolkien’s use of nationality.
In Shippey’s next section entitled “A parallel mythology,” outlines Tolkien’s history of the First Age. Shippey argues that the First Age can be split into three sections. The first section deals with the creation of the world up until Melkor’s bounding to Earth. The second section contains the appearance of elves until the end of communication between Middle-earth and Aman. The third section begins with the wars in Middle-earth between the Elves and Melkor until the star is set in the sky as a sign of hope for Middle-earth. Shippey then draws comparisons to the origin story provided with Christian mythology.
The distinction between the different elven tribes is made in Shippey’s next section. He writes that “The most basic of these is the distinction between the Light-elves, the Calaquendi, who reached Valinor and saw the light of the Two Trees before they were poisoned, and the Dark-elves, the Moriquendi, who refused the journey” (242). He then goes on to describe the languages of these elves. Shippey claims that Tolkien’s motivation for writing The Silmarillion was to fill a gap in English tradition; however, he feels as though he worked more on Finnish and Icelandic themes more (244). There is an emphasis on lineage in The Silmarillion, which is essential in understanding the story.
To help understand the third section of The Silmarillion further, Shippey suggests a focused reading on the three Hidden Kingdoms. While providing summary, Shippey also gives the background of which stories J. R. R. Tolkien and when he wrote those. He delves into Tolkien’s themes of death and life in reference to both The Silmarillion and The Lord of the Rings. Shippey also points to the four different times in which the tale of Turin is alluded to in Tolkien’s work. He comments on the stability although each story was written many years apart. Shippey goes on to discuss other human stories from the Kingdoms.
All roads lead to Earendil. This story of escape, Shippey tells his readers, is at the end of all versions of The Silmarillion. He provides another brief summary of this tale and compares the language used in her story with that of Biblical phrases, which can also be seen in The Return of the King (257). The entomology behind her name and this language “provides a suggestive background for Tolkien’s tale of Earendil” (258). Shippey then closely analyzes the relationship between the Creator, angles, and men. He emphasizes not only the Christian elements, but also the pre-Christian beliefs. The entomology of angles is discussed, which leads down a rabbit hole – from messengers to Gandalf to Gospel.
To conclude his discussion of The Silmarillion, Shippey discusses the difficulty of it. He confirms that the readability is not anything like that of The Hobbit or The Lord of the Rings. Shippey concludes that The Silmarillion is a highly detailed origin story.
Chapter 6, Shorter Works: Doubts, Fears, Autobiographies:
Of Tolkien’s shorter works, Shippey does not have a lot to say; however, he does write that “In their different ways these pieces, backed up by the early poems and some of the posthumously-published fragments, take us closer to Tolkien’s inner life than do his major works” (266). One work that Shippey does spend time discussing extensively is his autobiographical allegory “Leaf by Niggle.” It was written on a whim by a frustrated Tolkien who was preoccupied with The Lord of the Rings for an Irish magazine. Tolkien accepts this work as a strict allegory. Niggle’s story starts that he had a long journey to make, but never fully explains this journey. Shippey writes that to niggle means “to work…in a trifling, fiddling, or ineffective way…to work or spend time unnecessarily on petty details; to be over-elaborate in minor points” (267). These were accusations that had been made against Tolkien. Shippey continues with his comparison of Niggle with Tolkien. He does include that thematically, “Life by Niggle” is complex and includes failure, anxiety, and frustration (277).
Shippey briefs describes poems of Tolkien’s that ranged from light hearted to tragic. In this chapter, Shippey really examines the imagery in his shorter works. He dedicates part of the chapter to the land across the sea – Westernesse or the Land of the Undying. Tolkien had taken fragmented mythologies and pieced them together to create his own world. Shippey draws references from many of Tolkien’s smaller works to bring together a cohesive image of these lands. Another theme that Shippey hits repeatedly is the idea that Tolkien had to rewrite countless times. Tolkien is described as a perfectionist.
Because this is a chapter about his shorter works, Shippey includes Tolkien’s only work outside of the hobbit world Farmer Giles of Ham. None of the darker themes are present in this work. The story is humorous. Like all good works though, Farmer Giles of Ham has a point. Much like that of the issue of Laketown, people are too concerned with money instead of songs or creatures. Throughout his section on this story, Shippey makes the point that “Tolkien is quite at ease with himself. In this it remains the exception in his minor works” (292). He also includes a fleeting description of “Aotrou and Itroun” and “Beorhtnoth” in this section; however, the importance is for the religious language.
The final section of Shippey’s chapter discusses a second autobiographical allegory entitled Smith of Wootton Major. Shippey makes the argument that this work is in the same category of “Life by Niggle,” but that it is more difficult to understand. He warns against taking the easy way to interpret stories. Shippey recognizes that “Hall and Cook were allegories of church and parson. In which case, one has to remark, Wootton Major is in a fairly degraded state” (299). This allegory is not absent of rises and falls, successes and failure. Shippey uses a great amount of comparison between Smith of Wootton Major and “Leaf by Niggle” to make thematic sense of the former work. As an allegory, Shippey concludes that Tolkien was writing as if “looking back over his life” (304). This story, his last finished story, as that of a farewell, according to Shippey.
Share this:
 Share on X (Opens in new window)
 X
 Share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
 Facebook
Like Loading...
 Leave a comment Cancel reply
Δ
 Blog at WordPress.com.
 Privacy & Cookies: This site uses cookies. By continuing to use this website, you agree to their use. 
To find out more, including how to control cookies, see here:
 Cookie Policy 
 Subscribe
 Subscribed
 C.S. Lewis and J.R.R. Tolkien 
 Sign me up 
 Already have a WordPress.com account? Log in now. 
 C.S. Lewis and J.R.R. Tolkien 
 Subscribe
 Subscribed
 Sign up
 Log in
 Copy shortlink
 Report this content 
 View post in Reader 
 Manage subscriptions
 Collapse this bar
 %d
 Design a site like this with WordPress.com
Get started