 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gene (Rodman) Wolfe Criticism: Books: 'The Shadow of the Torturer' - Algis Budrys - eNotes.com 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Select an area of the website to search 

 
 
 All Study Guides Homework Help Lesson Plans Criticism Quizzes 

 

 
 
 Search this site 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 Gene (Rodman) Wolfe only 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 Start an essay
 
 

 
 
 
 Ask a question
 
 

 
 
 Join 
 
 
 Sign in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Study Guides 
 

 
 
 Homework Help 
 

 
 
 Interactive Quizzes 
 

 
 
 Teacher Resources 
 

 
 
 Criticism 
 

 

 
 
 
 Start free trial
 

 

 
 Sign In
 
 
 

 
 Start an essay
 

 

 
 Ask a question
 
 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 Gene (Rodman) Wolfe

 

 
 

 

 
 Start Free Trial
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 Criticism 
 

 
 Books: 'The Shadow of the Torturer'
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 Books: 'The Shadow of the Torturer'

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 PDF
 
 

 
 
 
 Cite
 
 

 
 
 
 Share
 
 

 

 

 
 by Algis Budrys 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gene Wolfe is, I think, without peer at his own kind of story, and has a particular gift for the depiction of cataclysmic events through the eyes of a naive central character, usually an adolescent boy. In [the case of The Shadow of the Torturer ], he's Severian of the Torturers' Guild….
 

 
 The narrative is done in the style of an old man, a potentate, inscribing an account of his passage through a convoluted life in a decadently subtle culture of enormous complexity….
 

 
 [The] culture of Severian's world reflects occasional touches of contact with interstellar technology. But in the main it is a blend of medievalism underlain by references to an earlier Hellenistic view of life, which makes sense in terms of actual Terrestrial anthropology, and overlain by a Victorian prurience which differs sharply from the innocent bawdiness and casual violence of the Middle Ages but also makes a kind of sense given the proposed circumstances. (p. 26)
 

 
 [With] its references to DeSade, Plato and Jack the Ripper, this is a fully realized culture, utterly strange and utterly believeable, as might be expected from the author of "The Fifth Head of Cerberus."
 

 
 Severian, considered as a character, is handicapped by the fact that we know we are meeting only one-fourth of him; considering that, he does better than well enough. The Chatelaine Thecla, his prisoner and first love, puts me in mind of certain ladies I have known, and somewhat of Blanche DuBois. Agia the trickstress and her desperate brother are very nicely done. It is Dorcas, the waif of the Botanic Gardens, who will explode into a major situation somewhere in subsequent volumes.
 

 
 The difficulty with taking full satisfaction with The Shadow of the Torturer is that one can't; some people write a series of four books and call it a tetralogy, but Wolfe is clearly writing one book with four aspects. Thus, while the whole will very likely be far greater than the sum of its parts, no one part is whole. It is also not dispensible.
 

 
 Wolfe is asking a lot; he is asking us to read what will no doubt eventually be a quarter-million words while waiting for the full reward. But, you know, he's one of our very best. I think he deserves that much trust, because I think he'll repay it. (pp. 26-7)
 

 
 
 Algis Budrys, "Books: 'The Shadow of the Torturer'," in The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction (© 1980 by Mercury Press, Inc.; reprinted from The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction), Vol. 58, No. 5, May, 1980, pp. 26-7 .
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cite this page as follows:

 
 "Gene (Rodman) Wolfe - Algis Budrys." Contemporary Literary Criticism, 
 edited by Jean C. Stine, Vol. 25. Gale Cengage, 
 1983, 14 Nov. 2024 <https://www.enotes.com/topics/gene-rodman-wolfe/criticism/algis-budrys-2>
 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 Get Ahead with eNotes

 
 Start your 48-hour free trial to access everything you need to rise to the top of the class. Enjoy expert answers and study guides ad-free and take your learning to the next level.

 

 
 
 Get 48 Hours Free Access
 
 Already a member?
 
 
 Log in here. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 Previous

 Books: 'The Devil in a Forest'

 
 
 Next

 Science Fiction: 'The Shadow of the Torturer'

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 Premium PDF

 Download the entire Gene (Rodman) Wolfe study guide as a printable PDF!

 
 
 

 
 Download
 

 
 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 eNotes.com will help you with any book or any question. Our summaries and analyses are written by experts, and your questions are answered by real teachers.

 

 
 Join eNotes
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 Study Tools

 
 Instant Answers 

 Essay Lab 

 Interactive Quizzes 

 Study Guides 

 Lesson Plans 

 Shakespeare Quotes 

 Literary Terms 

 
 
 
 More

 
 FAQ 

 About Us 

 Contact Us 

 Jobs 

 Blog 

 iOS App 

 Android App 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 Popular Summaries

 
 To Kill a Mockingbird Summary 

 Macbeth Summary 

 Romeo and Juliet Summary 

 Hamlet Summary 

 The Great Gatsby Summary 

 Lord of the Flies Summary 

 
 
 
 Trending Study Guides

 
 The Eyes Are Not Here Summary 

 Bienvenido N. Santos Biography 

 The Homecoming Summary 

 To Kill a Mockingbird Themes 

 The Crucible Themes 

 The Pot of Gold Summary 

 
 
 
 Popular Questions and Answers

 
 To Kill a Mockingbird Questions and Answers 

 Macbeth Questions and Answers 

 Romeo and Juliet Questions and Answers 

 Hamlet Questions and Answers 

 The Great Gatsby Questions and Answers 

 Of Mice and Men Questions and Answers 

 
 
 
 Popular Quizzes

 
 The Lord of the Flies Chapter 1 Quiz 

 The Raven (History and Summary) Quiz 

 Frankenstein Overview Quiz 

 "The Summer of the Beautiful White Horse" by William Saroyan Quiz 

 The Black Cat Overview Quiz 

 1984 Part 1 Chapter 6 and 7 Quiz 

 
 
 

 
 
 ©2024 eNotes.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 Terms of Use 
 Privacy Policy 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
