 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gene (Rodman) Wolfe Criticism: A Wizard of the Fabulous - Thomas M. Disch - eNotes.com 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Select an area of the website to search 

 
 
 All Study Guides Homework Help Lesson Plans Criticism Quizzes 

 

 
 
 Search this site 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 Gene (Rodman) Wolfe only 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 Start an essay
 
 

 
 
 
 Ask a question
 
 

 
 
 Join 
 
 
 Sign in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Study Guides 
 

 
 
 Homework Help 
 

 
 
 Interactive Quizzes 
 

 
 
 Teacher Resources 
 

 
 
 Criticism 
 

 

 
 
 
 Start free trial
 

 

 
 Sign In
 
 
 

 
 Start an essay
 

 

 
 Ask a question
 
 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 Gene (Rodman) Wolfe

 

 
 

 

 
 Start Free Trial
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Criticism 
 

 
 A Wizard of the Fabulous
 

 

 
 
 A Wizard of the Fabulous

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 PDF
 
 

 
 
 
 Cite
 
 

 
 
 
 Share
 
 

 

 
 
 by Thomas M. Disch 

 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
In the following essay, Thomas M. Disch argues that Gene Wolfe's "The Book of the New Sun" series transcends typical science fantasy through its poetic and allegorical depth, particularly exploring themes of political authority and social stability, despite some narrative flaws in "The Claw of the Conciliator."

 
 The Claw of the Conciliator is the second volume of a tetralogy-in-progress, The Book of the New Sun , which already seems assured of classic status within the subgenre of science fantasy. This alone would be faint praise, for science fantasy is a doubtful sort of hybrid in which the more decorative elements of science fiction proper— Star Wars hardware, dinosaurs, apemen, etc.—cohabit with the traditional chimeras of myth and legend. Characteristically, writers of science fantasy set windup heroes in quest of some grail across a bedragoned landscape quite as though Cervantes had not long since laughed picaresque romance off the literary map. Even when practiced by writers I ordinarily admire—Ursula Le Guin, Michael Moorcock, Brian Aldiss—science fantasy strikes me as inauthentic, coy, and trivial—circus costumery and paste diamonds, the lot of it.
 

 
 Insofar as it is possible to judge any tetralogy by its first two volumes, The Book of the New Sun is a vast exception to that rule. Gene Wolfe has managed to do what no science fantasy author has done heretofore—he's produced a work of art that can satisfy adult appetites and in which even the most fantastical elements register as poetry rather than as penny-whistle whimsey. Furthermore, he's done this without in any way sacrificing the showmanship and splashy colors that auger a popular success….
 

 
 In allegorical fantasies (and science fantasy is, in its nature, allegorical) it is only possible to achieve intensity and depth if each of the individual elements of the fantasy—the swords, ogres, magic jewels—bears a weight of meditated meaning that intensifies and deepens as the tale progresses. (In the manner, say, of Wagner's Ring cycle.) In most hands these props are deployed with the artless caprice of children trimming a tree with their family's heritage of Christmas ornaments. Wolfe, however, is a Wagnerian, not a tree trimmer; his allegory actually has something to say, and it is said with art, acuity, wisdom and wit.
 

 
 At the risk of compressing it into extinction, I would submit that Wolfe's central theme is the nature of political authority and the use of terror as a necessary means to secure social stability in any society (but especially ours). "Here the master and I do our business still," says Severian, as he pantomimes his trade as torturer in a masque performed at the Autarch's court. "We do it still, and that's why the Commonwealth stands." This cannot be said to be his last word on the subject; rather, the first—the subject up for debate. Here at the center of the labyrinth it is impossible to second-guess the outcome of that debate, but that it will be satisfying can scarcely be doubted.
 

 
 This is not to say that the web is flawless. I doubt that any tetralogy has ever been written in which the second volume didn't come off as second-best. There are chapters in The Claw of the Conciliator that venture perilously close to pulp magazine hugger-mugger, and other chapters—one long interpolated masque, in particular—that are too archly Significant, after the manner of Thornton Wilder's The Skin of Our Teeth . (Wilder is a writer whom Wolfe resembles in other, and happier, respects.)
 

 
 The acclaim and attention that The Book of the New Sun is winning among both critics and readers should further consolidate the reputation Gene Wolfe has won as a writer of short fiction. Eighteen of his stories are assembled in Gene Wolfe's Book of Days , a collection that aspires to unity by the doubtful device of matching the separate tales to national holidays: for Lincoln's birthday a story about the reintroduction of slavery as a solution to the problem of over-crowded prisons; for Valentine's Day a whimsy about computer matchmaking; and so on through the calendar. Actually, the stories suit their occasions fairly well, but sometimes I suspected that Wolfe was dipping toward the bottom of his barrel in order to accommodate his format. Even so, there are many first-rate stories, most notably the selection for Labor Day, "Forlesen," a novella in which all the morose absurdities of a life devoted to middle management job dissatisfactions are compressed into one day of high-speed, low-keyed nightmare.
 

 
 
 Thomas M. Disch, "A Wizard of the Fabulous," in Book World—The Washington Post (© 1981 , The Washington Post), March 22, 1981, p. 11 .
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 Get Ahead with eNotes

 
 Start your 48-hour free trial to access everything you need to rise to the top of the class. Enjoy expert answers and study guides ad-free and take your learning to the next level.

 

 
 
 Get 48 Hours Free Access
 
 Already a member?
 
 
 Log in here. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 Previous

 Science Fiction: 'The Shadow of the Torturer'

 
 
 Next

 Books: 'The Claw of the Conciliator'

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 Premium PDF

 Download the entire Gene (Rodman) Wolfe study guide as a printable PDF!

 
 
 

 
 Download
 

 
 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 eNotes.com will help you with any book or any question. Our summaries and analyses are written by experts, and your questions are answered by real teachers.

 

 
 Join eNotes
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 Study Tools

 
 Instant Answers 

 Essay Lab 

 Interactive Quizzes 

 Study Guides 

 Lesson Plans 

 Shakespeare Quotes 

 Literary Terms 

 
 
 
 More

 
 FAQ 

 About Us 

 Contact Us 

 Affiliates 

 Blog 

 iOS App 

 Android App 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 Popular Summaries

 
 To Kill a Mockingbird Summary 

 Macbeth Summary 

 Romeo and Juliet Summary 

 Hamlet Summary 

 The Great Gatsby Summary 

 Lord of the Flies Summary 

 
 
 
 Trending Study Guides

 
 The Buccaneers Summary 

 Justice Summary 

 The Eyes Are Not Here Summary 

 Gone with the Wind Summary 

 Soap Summary 

 Voss Characters 

 
 
 
 Popular Questions and Answers

 
 To Kill a Mockingbird Questions and Answers 

 Macbeth Questions and Answers 

 Romeo and Juliet Questions and Answers 

 Hamlet Questions and Answers 

 The Great Gatsby Questions and Answers 

 Of Mice and Men Questions and Answers 

 
 
 
 Popular Quizzes

 
 The Lord of the Flies Chapter 1 Quiz 

 The Raven (History and Summary) Quiz 

 Frankenstein Overview Quiz 

 "The Summer of the Beautiful White Horse" by William Saroyan Quiz 

 The Black Cat Overview Quiz 

 1984 Part 1 Chapter 6 and 7 Quiz 

 
 
 

 
 
 ©2025 eNotes.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 Terms of Use 
 Privacy Policy 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
