 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gene (Rodman) Wolfe Criticism: The Urth and All Its Glory - John Clute - eNotes.com 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Select an area of the website to search 

 
 
 All Study Guides Homework Help Lesson Plans Criticism Quizzes 

 

 
 
 Search this site 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 Gene (Rodman) Wolfe only 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 Start an essay
 
 

 
 
 
 Ask a question
 
 

 
 
 Join 
 
 
 Sign in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Study Guides 
 

 
 
 Homework Help 
 

 
 
 Interactive Quizzes 
 

 
 
 Teacher Resources 
 

 

 
 
 
 Start free trial
 

 

 
 Sign In
 
 
 

 
 Start an essay
 

 

 
 Ask a question
 
 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 Gene (Rodman) Wolfe

 

 
 

 

 
 Start Free Trial
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 Criticism
 
 

 
 

 

 
 Start Free Trial
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 Criticism 
 

 
 The Urth and All Its Glory
 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 The Urth and All Its Glory

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 PDF
 
 

 
 
 
 Cite
 
 

 
 
 
 Share
 
 

 

 

 
 
 

 Last Updated August 6, 2024.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 [If] Gene Wolfe is to be taken seriously—and however thrilling or pleasing [ The Book of the New Sun ] may seem, there is simply no point at all in thinking of its author as a creator of mere speculative entertainment—then he must be taken as attempting something analogous to Dante's supreme effort [ The Divine Comedy ]. With great urgency, layer after layer, he has created a world radiant with meaning, a novel that makes sense in the end only if it is read as an attempt to represent the Word of God. How intimate—how dizzyingly remote—how comforting or alienating that Word can be, each reader will of course discover.
 

 
 We are on Urth, millennia upon millennia hence. So densely impacted with millions of years of human life is this world that even commercial mines, dug however deep into the ransacked planet, produce only bone and brick and artifact and icon, layer upon layer of human meaning, most of it indecipherable at first or second glance (just like certain passages of The Book ). So the very earth radiates significance, as do its inhabitants, who live awash in ancientness, but who seem to glow with the fabulousness of their environment, strangely youthful, strangely assured. They have the deep polish of the citizens of the legends of childhood. But Urth is dying. The sun is red; stars are visible in the dark sky of midday. The starships of earlier epochs have become the dwelling places and headquarters of guilds themselves ancient. The mountains of Urth have been carved into giant sculptures of Autarchs, themselves fossils unearthed from deep mines. (pp. 1-2)
 

 
 It may be the case that for some readers Severian's [experiences in the three volumes preceding The Citadel of the Autarch ] may have seemed picaresque, somewhat random in nature, though colorful enough. But inexorably it becomes more and more clear that nothing in Severian's narrative—he tells the whole tale himself some time after he has become Autarch of the land of his birth—is accidental. Everything in his life becomes substance, and the reader can feel at times a kind of sweet cold terror as the true shape of that life begins to come clear. Much that happens to Severian has been lived before (in a manner which the fourth volume reveals) and is therefore twice-told, a code reverently to be broken. But much has not happened before, and represents something new on Urth. New on Urth is the Severian who will redeem humanity by becoming the New Sun/Apollo, or the New Son/Christ.
 

 
 A miracle is required. The miracle (as T. H. White, quoting Malory, once said of Lancelot) is that Severian is allowed to perform a miracle. Early in volume one [ The Shadow of the Torturer ], he has—it seems inadvertently—acquired from a passel of traveling nuns their most treasured relic, the Claw of the Conciliator. The Conciliator is a Redeemer of a past age who may come again. At first the Claw seems to be a kind of weapon, but slowly we come to realize that—in direct contradiction of all the habits of science fantasy—it does nothing but heal. And the land blossoms where Severian sleeps. Only in the fourth volume do we see that the Claw is not the miracle, that it merely releases in Severian his true nature. He returns the Claw to its keepers. He becomes Autarch, in a scene terrible with desire and hints of the burdens to come. Animate projections from his childhood tell him something of what he must face—it is one of the hoariest of all science fiction clichés that he will soon be pitting his wits against, but Wolfe somehow manages to transform it (as he transforms so much else) into something moving, and rich and strange. (pp. 2, 11)
 

 
 Like Funes the Memorious in Borges' story, Severian cannot forget anything, so that The Book which tells his life is like a Theater of Memory, where everything stands for something else, where everything is a relic. Severian's life is a performance which he cannot help but memorize for any future occasion. He needs no prompting; he writes The Book of the New Sun to prompt us.
 

 
 Volume four of this gift is harrowing, but is full of pleasures as well. There are four new-minted fables set into the text. There is Master Ash, who roots Yggdrasillike back through time to observe Severian's Urth. There is time travel, space travel, teleportation; there are laser duels and gentle Mammoths, and delirium and dreams and the tying-up of loose threads. The Book is a feast and a eucharist; layer after layer, we have just begun to know it. (p. 11)
 

 
 
 John Clute, "The Urth and All Its Glory," in Book World—The Washington Post (© 1983 , The Washington Post), January 30, 1983, pp. 1-2, 11 .
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cite this page as follows:

 
 "Gene (Rodman) Wolfe - John Clute." Contemporary Literary Criticism, 
 edited by Jean C. Stine, Vol. 25. Gale Cengage, 
 1983, 5 Oct. 2024 <https://www.enotes.com/topics/gene-rodman-wolfe/criticism/john-clute>
 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 Get Ahead with eNotes

 
 Start your 48-hour free trial to access everything you need to rise to the top of the class. Enjoy expert answers and study guides ad-free and take your learning to the next level.

 

 
 
 Get 48 Hours Free Access
 
 Already a member?
 
 
 Log in here. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 Previous

 'Locus' Looks at Books: 'The Citadel of the Autarch'

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 Premium PDF

 Download the entire Gene (Rodman) Wolfe study guide as a printable PDF!

 
 
 

 
 Download
 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 eNotes.com will help you with any book or any question. Our summaries and analyses are written by experts, and your questions are answered by real teachers.

 

 
 Join eNotes
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 Study Tools

 
 Instant Answers 

 Essay Lab 

 Interactive Quizzes 

 Study Guides 

 Lesson Plans 

 Shakespeare Quotes 

 Literary Terms 

 
 
 
 More

 
 FAQ 

 About Us 

 Contact Us 

 Jobs 

 Blog 

 iOS App 

 Android App 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 Popular Summaries

 
 To Kill a Mockingbird Summary 

 Macbeth Summary 

 Romeo and Juliet Summary 

 Hamlet Summary 

 The Great Gatsby Summary 

 Lord of the Flies Summary 

 
 
 
 Trending Study Guides

 
 The Eyes Are Not Here Summary 

 Footnote to Youth Summary 

 Just Lather, That's All Summary 

 The Pot of Gold Summary 

 The Homecoming Summary 

 The Gift of the Magi Summary 

 
 
 
 Popular Questions and Answers

 
 To Kill a Mockingbird Questions and Answers 

 Macbeth Questions and Answers 

 Romeo and Juliet Questions and Answers 

 Hamlet Questions and Answers 

 The Great Gatsby Questions and Answers 

 Of Mice and Men Questions and Answers 

 
 
 
 Popular Quizzes

 
 The Lord of the Flies Chapter 1 Quiz 

 The Raven (History and Summary) Quiz 

 Frankenstein Overview Quiz 

 "The Summer of the Beautiful White Horse" by William Saroyan Quiz 

 The Black Cat Overview Quiz 

 1984 Part 1 Chapter 6 and 7 Quiz 

 
 
 

 
 
 ©2024 eNotes.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 Terms of Use 
 Privacy Policy 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
