 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gene (Rodman) Wolfe Criticism: Books: 'Operation Ares' - Joanna Russ - eNotes.com 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Select an area of the website to search 

 
 
 All Study Guides Homework Help Lesson Plans Criticism Quizzes 

 

 
 
 Search this site 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 Gene (Rodman) Wolfe only 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 Start an essay
 
 

 
 
 
 Ask a question
 
 

 
 
 Join 
 
 
 Sign in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Study Guides 
 

 
 
 Homework Help 
 

 
 
 Interactive Quizzes 
 

 
 
 Teacher Resources 
 

 
 
 Criticism 
 

 

 
 
 
 Start free trial
 

 

 
 Sign In
 
 
 

 
 Start an essay
 

 

 
 Ask a question
 
 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 Gene (Rodman) Wolfe

 

 
 

 

 
 Start Free Trial
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Criticism 
 

 
 Books: 'Operation Ares'
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 Books: 'Operation Ares'

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 PDF
 
 

 
 
 
 Cite
 
 

 
 
 
 Share
 
 

 

 

 
 by Joanna Russ 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Operation Ares by Gene Wolfe … is going to do the author's reputation a disservice someday. I know what Mr. Wolfe can do when he sets his mind to it; Ares is far below his best. It is a convincing, quiet, low-keyed, intelligent book which somehow fades out into nothing. The characters are surprisingly decent; time after time there are touches of good observation and well-textured realism, but in the end Mr. Wolfe doesn't really seem to care. The book uses an interesting technique of presenting things obliquely; big events happen offstage, and often the explanations of events will be given long after the events themselves—I don't mean that this is mystification but that the significance of many things only becomes apparent long afterwards. One of the best things in the novel is its intense concentration on the present moment—time after time one swallows stereotypes without realizing that's what they are (the rational, naive Martians, the emergency government that can only harass and annoy, the fear of scientific "heterodoxy"). But all in all, the novel is a failure, shadowy and inconclusive. Books like this are generally called "promising," but by the time you read this review, Mr. Wolfe will be as far above Operation Ares as Ares is above the worst science fiction hackwork.
 

 
 
 Joanna Russ, "Books: 'Operation Ares'" reprinted by permission of Ellen Levine Literary Agency, Inc.; copyright © 1971 by Mercury Press, Inc.), in The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction, Vol. 40, No. 4, April, 1971, p. 69 .
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 Get Ahead with eNotes

 
 Start your 48-hour free trial to access everything you need to rise to the top of the class. Enjoy expert answers and study guides ad-free and take your learning to the next level.

 

 
 
 Get 48 Hours Free Access
 
 Already a member?
 
 
 Log in here. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 Previous

 Introduction

 
 
 Next

 Two New (and Major) Works of Speculative Fiction

 
 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 Premium PDF

 Download the entire Gene (Rodman) Wolfe study guide as a printable PDF!

 
 
 

 
 Download
 

 
 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 eNotes.com will help you with any book or any question. Our summaries and analyses are written by experts, and your questions are answered by real teachers.

 

 
 Join eNotes
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 Study Tools

 
 Instant Answers 

 Essay Lab 

 Interactive Quizzes 

 Study Guides 

 Lesson Plans 

 Shakespeare Quotes 

 Literary Terms 

 
 
 
 More

 
 FAQ 

 About Us 

 Contact Us 

 Jobs 

 Blog 

 iOS App 

 Android App 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 Popular Summaries

 
 To Kill a Mockingbird Summary 

 Macbeth Summary 

 Romeo and Juliet Summary 

 Hamlet Summary 

 The Great Gatsby Summary 

 Lord of the Flies Summary 

 
 
 
 Trending Study Guides

 
 Refugee Chapter Summaries 

 Strange Meeting Summary 

 Footnote to Youth Summary 

 Refugee Chapters 14-21 

 Refugee Chapters 7-13 

 Black Woman Summary 

 
 
 
 Popular Questions and Answers

 
 To Kill a Mockingbird Questions and Answers 

 Macbeth Questions and Answers 

 Romeo and Juliet Questions and Answers 

 Hamlet Questions and Answers 

 The Great Gatsby Questions and Answers 

 Of Mice and Men Questions and Answers 

 
 
 
 Popular Quizzes

 
 The Lord of the Flies Chapter 1 Quiz 

 The Raven (History and Summary) Quiz 

 Frankenstein Overview Quiz 

 "The Summer of the Beautiful White Horse" by William Saroyan Quiz 

 The Black Cat Overview Quiz 

 1984 Part 1 Chapter 6 and 7 Quiz 

 
 
 

 
 
 ©2025 eNotes.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 Terms of Use 
 Privacy Policy 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
