 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gene (Rodman) Wolfe Criticism: A Certain Slant of 'I' - Somtow Sucharitkul - eNotes.com 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Select an area of the website to search 

 
 
 All Study Guides Homework Help Lesson Plans Criticism Quizzes 

 

 
 
 Search this site 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 Gene (Rodman) Wolfe only 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 Start an essay
 
 

 
 
 
 Ask a question
 
 

 
 
 Join 
 
 
 Sign in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Study Guides 
 

 
 
 Homework Help 
 

 
 
 Interactive Quizzes 
 

 
 
 Teacher Resources 
 

 
 
 Criticism 
 

 

 
 
 
 Start free trial
 

 

 
 Sign In
 
 
 

 
 Start an essay
 

 

 
 Ask a question
 
 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 Gene (Rodman) Wolfe

 

 
 

 

 
 Start Free Trial
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Criticism 
 

 
 A Certain Slant of 'I'
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 A Certain Slant of 'I'

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 PDF
 
 

 
 
 
 Cite
 
 

 
 
 
 Share
 
 

 

 

 
 by Somtow Sucharitkul 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 [ Sword of the Lictor is the third volume of the Book of the New Sun tetralogy] and it is a shattering tour de force. Those readers who have somehow avoided the previous two episodes in this elegant, comic, searing Bildungsroman of a deeply sympathetic young torturer, have done themselves an unconscionable disservice. (p. 16)
 

 
 The tetralogy folds out like one of those endless Chinese wallets, always different, always seamless, always one…. To summarize [ Sword of the Lictor ] is absurd, but images of wonder and weirdness linger long in the memory: the monstrous alzabo, half vampire, half soul eater; the mad two-headed king; vast statues like the Memnons of myth whose arms follow the sunlight and out of whose eyeballs one can gaze upon vistas of curious terrain. And throughout the work there is the language: acerbic, sensuous, intricate. [Wolfe] has created a language of startling alienness for the tetralogy, in which neologisms mingle with resurrected antique words and chimerical hybridizations of Latin, Greek, Germanic roots, strange as the gene-tailored mutants, remnants of older times, that populate the landscape. And yet there is a rightness about his vocabulary, as though he were plucking his words out of some half-conscious dream-memory; they sound like forgotten friends, not aliens: alzabo, fuligin, balucither, cacogen.
 

 
 In a very real sense, it is this very familiarity, not the baroque weirdness of its textures, that makes Sword of the Lictor so powerful. For Wolfe never loses sight of his sources, his mythical resonances. It is his classical adherence to that most ancient of literary structures, the finding of self within a journey through fantastical and ever-widening landscapes, that pushes the book beyond eccentricity into greatness.
 

 
 Sword of the Lictor seems the finest of the three books published so far in Gene Wolfe's tetralogy. It will be difficult to wait for the final volume. (pp. 16-17)
 

 
 
 Somtow Sucharitkul, "A Certain Slant of 'I'," in Fantasy Newsletter (copyright © 1981 by Florida Atlantic University), Vol. 4, No. 12, December, 1981, pp. 16-17, 32 .∗
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 Get Ahead with eNotes

 
 Start your 48-hour free trial to access everything you need to rise to the top of the class. Enjoy expert answers and study guides ad-free and take your learning to the next level.

 

 
 
 Get 48 Hours Free Access
 
 Already a member?
 
 
 Log in here. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 Previous

 Star Cluster: 'The Claw of the Conciliator' and 'Gene Wolfe's Book of Days'

 
 
 Next

 The Rising of a New Sun

 
 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 Premium PDF

 Download the entire Gene (Rodman) Wolfe study guide as a printable PDF!

 
 
 

 
 Download
 

 
 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 eNotes.com will help you with any book or any question. Our summaries and analyses are written by experts, and your questions are answered by real teachers.

 

 
 Join eNotes
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 Study Tools

 
 Instant Answers 

 Essay Lab 

 Interactive Quizzes 

 Study Guides 

 Lesson Plans 

 Shakespeare Quotes 

 Literary Terms 

 
 
 
 More

 
 FAQ 

 About Us 

 Contact Us 

 Jobs 

 Blog 

 iOS App 

 Android App 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 Popular Summaries

 
 To Kill a Mockingbird Summary 

 Macbeth Summary 

 Romeo and Juliet Summary 

 Hamlet Summary 

 The Great Gatsby Summary 

 Lord of the Flies Summary 

 
 
 
 Trending Study Guides

 
 Refugee Chapter Summaries 

 Strange Meeting Summary 

 Footnote to Youth Summary 

 Refugee Chapters 14-21 

 Refugee Chapters 7-13 

 Black Woman Summary 

 
 
 
 Popular Questions and Answers

 
 To Kill a Mockingbird Questions and Answers 

 Macbeth Questions and Answers 

 Romeo and Juliet Questions and Answers 

 Hamlet Questions and Answers 

 The Great Gatsby Questions and Answers 

 Of Mice and Men Questions and Answers 

 
 
 
 Popular Quizzes

 
 The Lord of the Flies Chapter 1 Quiz 

 The Raven (History and Summary) Quiz 

 Frankenstein Overview Quiz 

 "The Summer of the Beautiful White Horse" by William Saroyan Quiz 

 The Black Cat Overview Quiz 

 1984 Part 1 Chapter 6 and 7 Quiz 

 
 
 

 
 
 ©2025 eNotes.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 Terms of Use 
 Privacy Policy 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
