 
 

 
 
 Review: The Citadel of the Autarch by Gene Wolfe 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 <  The Sword of the Lictor 
 
 Russ Allbery 
 > Reviews 
 
 The Urth of the New Sun  > 

 
 The Citadel of the Autarch 

 by Gene Wolfe

 

 

 
 
 Series: 
 New Sun #4 
 

 
 Publisher: 
 Pocket 
 

 
 Copyright: 
 1982 
 

 
 Printing: 
 November 1983 
 

 
 ISBN: 
 0-671-49666-2 
 

 
 Format: 
 Mass market 
 

 
 Pages: 
 328 
 

 

 

 
This is the final book of the original Book of the New Sun series. You
don't want to read it without having read the previous books.

 
I'm not quite sure what to think of this conclusion to the series. I
found it a little bit disappointing, to be honest, although I'm not sure
if my expectations were just unrealistic or not well-fitted to the world.
(Making that harder to judge, I'm also not completely sure what I was
expecting.)

 
Much is left unrevealed in the end, including what will happen next for
the world of these stories, but it was fairly obvious that would be the
case from early on. The voice of the narrator at the time the story is
being written, in the world, is very present throughout the series, and he
frequently talks about the things he still doesn't know, so there's
warning that those will be left unknown. Even with warning, though, it's
a bit unsatisfying, and ends up limiting the scope of the story. In the
end, this is just Severian's story, and only a portion of it. While huge
potential changes in the surrounding society and world are hinted at, the
series doesn't see their conclusion, or even much of their beginning.

 
That being said, the ending does tie up quite a few loose ends, and is
satisfying and well-worth reading. The book starts slowly, with
battlefield adventure that isn't particularly compelling (although with an
excellent interlude of storytelling), but then moves back into the layered
political intrigue and exploration of the fundamentals of the universe
that I like best about this series. The ongoing subplot with Dorcas is
wrapped up in about the only way that it truly could end, and I liked the
very end of the book quite a lot.

 
In the end, I'm not sure that this series quite lived up to the promise of
its beginning, but at the same time it didn't entirely let it down. I
think it's difficult to follow through on the promise of such a deep and
layered ancient world, and perhaps the best one can do is just maintain
the atmosphere throughout (which Wolfe does admirably). While I might
have wished for a bit more emotional involvement at some points in this
story, Severian is always Severian to the end, and I'm left feeling that
the world was very real.

 
I see that there's a later sequel, The
Urth of the New Sun , that I'm going to have to pick up and read.
Perhaps Wolfe realized the places the readers were left wanting and filled
in the rest of the blanks.

 
Oh, and once again, the translator's notes at the end of the book are one
of the best parts. The use of language remained exceptional throughout
the series, even though I mentioned it mostly in my review of the first
book.

 
Followed by The Urth of the New Sun .

 Rating: 7 out of 10

 Reviewed: 2004-06-28

 
 <  The Sword of the Lictor 
 
 Russ Allbery 
 > Reviews 
 
 The Urth of the New Sun  > 

 

 
 Last spun 
 2025-03-30 from thread modified 2013-01-04
 
 
 
