 
 

 
 
 Review: The Urth of the New Sun by Gene Wolfe 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 <  The Citadel of the Autarch 
 
 Russ Allbery 
 > Reviews 
 
 Sorcery and Cecelia  > 

 
 The Urth of the New Sun 

 by Gene Wolfe

 

 

 
 
 Series: 
 New Sun #5 
 

 
 Publisher: 
 Tor 
 

 
 Copyright: 
 November 1987 
 

 
 Printing: 
 September 1988 
 

 
 ISBN: 
 0-812-55817-0 
 

 
 Format: 
 Mass market 
 

 
 Pages: 
 372 
 

 

 

 
This is a wrap-up of the Book of the New Sun, written some time after the
last book of the original four-book series. While the linkage is not as
tight as between the first four books, you do not want to read it without
having read the previous books.

 
The previous book, The Citadel of the Autarch ,
reached some closure on Severian's life but left quite a few questions
unanswered. I was hoping this book would open up the cover a little and
explain some of the details that had been going on under the main plot,
not just continue it.

 
Alas, it doesn't.

 
The quirk of this series is that its main character and narrator is highly
unreliable in his account of what's going on. The facts are mostly
undistorted, but Severian's interpretation is often worthless. He tends
towards mystical or fantastic explanations of straightforward events,
mundane explanations of events that are actually quite unusual, and
sometimes is simply quite dense. Most disconcertingly, he doesn't signal
to the reader when something important has just happened, which may sound
like a minor inconvenience but can make the details of the story quite
difficult to follow.

 
The Book of the New Sun is a puzzle. I usually don't like working hard at
understanding books, but there were enough puzzles in the first four books
that were fairly easy to figure out. I enjoyed guessing at what bit of
technology was at work when Severian treated something as magic or
mystical and piecing together bits of history and culture from his
descriptions. In The Urth of the New Sun , however, the story moves
away from its grounding in human culture and city surroundings, the plot
becomes far more mystical and complex, and the puzzles hard enough that I
spent most of the book somewhat lost. Severian's lack of cues for the
reader is workable when the basic plot is straightforward, but in
 Urth , I wanted more help from the narrator than Severian is able to
offer.

 
By the middle of this book, I was having great difficulty figuring out
what was really happening beyond the superficial level Severian explains.
Many of the events in Urth seemed purely magical, explainable only
by symbolism and God-like powers. The story wanders deeper into
Severian's head and away from the grounding of events around him, and I
ended up just slogging through the last section of the book, having lost
interest in a world that no longer felt real.

 
It was a disappointing experience. While there were glimmers of the deep
sense of age of the earlier books, and Urth adds some intriguing
links and twists added back to the original plot (usually through time
travel), this is not the book I was hoping for. It neither took a
different look at the New Sun series to shed some light on what had been
happening or kept the formula and feel of the original series intact. The
mythical ending left me bored.

 
I don't think I would recommend this book even to someone who read the
original series. Yes, there are some huge open plot questions left at
the end of Citadel that are resolved here, but I often found
my own ideas of what was likely to happen more interesting than what
happened in Urth . The exception, though, is if you're going
to go on to read an analysis of the series, such as Robert Borski's
 Solar Labyrinth , in which case you
should definitely read Urth to get a complete picture.

 Rating: 5 out of 10

 Reviewed: 2004-09-10

 
 <  The Citadel of the Autarch 
 
 Russ Allbery 
 > Reviews 
 
 Sorcery and Cecelia  > 

 

 
 Last spun 
 2025-03-30 from thread modified 2013-01-04
 
 
 
