
===== PAGE 1 =====
Vector 
THE CRITICAL JOURNAL OF THE BSFA 
Stephen Palmer Interviewed 
1 
9 
2 
£2.25 
March / April 1997 
Holdstock Bibliography The Films of Cronenberg 
Hardback Reviews - page 12 Letters - Page 3 Paperback Reviews - page 25 

===== PAGE 2 =====
Contents 
'l'<I> 
leuerstoVector 
BSFA Award Win ne rs 
Andrew Bulfer 011 Mythago Wood 
A Holdstock Bibliography 
by Gary Daikin and Andrew Butler 
A Very British Tradition 
Gary Daikin lnten •iews Stephen Palmer 
A Croneno logy I 0 
The Feature Films of David Cronenberg 
BSFA Award Winners 13 
Bob Ford on Orbitsvi l!e 
Cogn itive Mapp ing: In visibility 13 
by Paul Kincaid 
First Impress ions 12 
Hardback and Original Paperb ack. Revie ws 
edited by Paul Kin caid 
Pu lp Fict ion 24 
Paperback Reviews edited by Tanya Brown 
Cover by Jim Bum s and O Jim Bums 1996 
Publi shedby 1hc BSFA cl 997. ISSN -05 0514-48 
Allopinionsneuctho~oftheindividualcontributorsand 
should not ne<:essuily be taken aa.s the vie"'s of the editor or the 
BSFA 
EDITORlAL TEAM 
Production amd Genera l Editoria l 
Tony Cullen 16 Weaver'• Way, C:>mden, 
London NWl 0XE EmaiL gun,mlld>@alya .a-MO.<o.uk 
Features 
Andrew Butler - Flat 3, 28 Louis Street, Hull, HU) !LY 
Em•il AM.Bu~ Of@0115liolill,,,ll><.uk 
G:ary Daikin - 5 Lydford Road, Bourn .-,mouth, Done t, 
BH118SN 
Hardba ckRevin; s 
Paul Kincaid 60 Bourn emouth Road, Folke sto n.-,, 
Kent CT!9 SAZ Em,il: m<,_r.@<i•tom?11link«>.uk 
Paf>"'rback Review s 
Tauya Brown E73 DuCane Coun, B:ilh:>m High Road, 
London , SWl7 7JL Email: .,.,.,.,,lh@ , yla ovnc1 co uk 
PRINTED BY: 
POC Copypri nt , 11 Jeffries Pa.,;uge Guildford, Sur~y GUI 4AP 
EDITORIAL 
Machine Messiah 
10 people die in car accidents on British roads every day. AnOlher 140 are seriously injull!d. Half are 
children . There should_be public outrage. calls to ba, the machine. Strangely, t~ is a de~ing 
~~l~~ l~~a:e~;i~~ t~~~ ~d=iycz~t.:i~~i=~~~~:: 
ma,nta,n our crv.lisat,on W!lhoul the care, and ,f somecime we cannOl live w ith 1!, that 1s a pn~ we 
~:fd~~~~~k.,e alw pushed the limits ri cinema, bu! never before has one d 
his fi lms generated such outrage as~ The closest was the contrc,,-er.;y <'.1"ef VKkodrome (1982), 
and~n liesaclue.tthasbeen<:r.'efthetwogreat1We11tielhcentu,ytechnologicaladdic!ions,the1v 
set and the au1omobile, that Cronenberg has p<O'>'Oked the greatest wrath rithe sanctimoniou5 and the 
censorious. These icons~ penetr.ttd every aspect .tioi.K consciousness, our identity; th.loo tKlth 
occasions Cronenberg has confused the macfiinewith outre sexuality has only compounded the 
fracture. 
In its fusion of sex, dealh, disability and car accidents, Crash touch nerw.s. The mc,,ing image has 
from the birth of cinema eroticised the (ll(Ning ~icle . All night, Iv commercial re.-ures =rt, 
sucressful men, beautiful, seductive wcmen, and sleek, fetishised ca~ In this videodrorne church ri 
the new flesh, it is no mete subrext which~ - buy !his car, and a wcman as beao..¢ifu\ as this 
;!,~~ ~~~ ;ze~~~su~i~ex~1:'~!'\~ ~~~~~.;~ 
so extreme in fact that a few years ago they might have earned anyone peddling them a place a1 a 
Hou~ of Conroion. And the man in charge of this Skynet .-ilso has a~ 01 inte<est in the rabid 
tabloids which have called for the heads of 'pornographers-in-chief J.mes Ferman and David 
c-""1< 
Themostcontra.-er.;ia lscenesin Cr~aresobecau 5etheytaketheimp li<:.llionsri~to_their 
logical conc lusions. They place a beau!,ful woman, played by RCISa'lna Arquette, 1n r.exual Sll:uauons 
~ut~l~~~Z~!~gad~~;;.,~, ~~~rer~.:!l~:i~r !\~~~~i~t 
=~~~~~beci~:;e~~='.tta::ni~ ~r!!t~ t~ 
protect thedisabled . 
Ye1thedisabledare1hemostrea!isiicaboutsuchrr!MefS . Thefleshfail sus allin1 heend,alesson 
which the disabled learn first. Cronenberg' ; films ~ repeatedly piesented scenarios in which the 
~~=-~i~~=t=-~~~~~~:t~~~~~~: 
we'd rather 00 think about too cinen. For a cuhure without spinrual belief, which teaches Iha! the 
mind is all, it is such _a terrifying message Iha! the most U5Ual resp()l'\ 51? is denial. C~berg may be a 
prophec d the com,ng technological apocalypse, and we all know what tradit,onally ~s to 
prophe<s. 
1\.-\odem sf, the cinema ,Yl(1 the auiornobile all appeared at the same time, almost eQlly a century 
~isi~ r~i~~~~g~=~n::!r'rc!:t~~n:in ~!°..,dir~ 
~=i::~ger~~gh~:r::1a1~.~,~~~fn~~~n~~ies~~ 
edgoeofaduakarriagew-ay. 
med1:7.;.~~~fnYi~~i:~:.~tY:i ,~~=!ii~.:,~~1%~~u1~'= 
from~. school, shops, ernenainment, nOI knowing our neighbours, ~rfv l of str.\'lgoers- pass in 
the51reet. Thebcdysn.-choomayaswell~takenover:thecentrec.nnOlhold. 
Crash51rikesatcore beliefs. 
\Miilethe resourcesriSpac;eship Earth are plunde,ed to feed the r.iver,ousau,omobile, and while 
~~gt~J°'~~TI/~8sp~li5e ~ hi~~ ,;:i~~zm~ 
:~~~ ~~ot~~=li ~~51~~~~~~~ - la<: ~ c::;~ 
c..hedra l held a special service in celebration lithe <11Aomob1le. One was even dmen down the a,sle 
tothealtarrail. 
God is Dead. Unless He goes to church in a car. And therein lies Cronenberg's ~- There is l'lO 
violenrein Crash. Ther.ex isno moreaplicitth.n in many all moviesrcM inely shov,,n '?'1 rv. Yei: still 
~~~;:h:;m~~ ~~:;1=_\T~ttt.!:~t==;i~~pc,= 
swallow us. Better by far to blane all the ills dour culture on a Canadi.-i film-maker. 
Thei rony-a:ssooften-is that ifnoonehadcomplained,Cra:J-iwould likelyh.Nevanishedas 
quid)y as Naked Lunch and M. Butterl/y, Croneoberg' s two previous ill! mc,,ies did, leaving the 
nation's great unwashed almost entirely uncorrupted. N<7N they will flock to see it in dRl'Y'eS, doubdess 
leavinga51?Xually/renzied littefofautodebrisandshalteredtorsosintheirwakeontheirwayback 
home from the local mu~iplex 
Hereendeththesennon ... 
Now,le!uspray: 
We bel~ in the power d the almighty automobile. We trust it will delivel' us safely, keep us 
from all harm, profeCI us from evil, take us to buy our daily twead. Please, almighty machine, bai this 
blasphemous film .. .' 
Februa 1997 
h, C .. 1n U.1lkm 
The Br1t1sh Science Fiction Asso( iation Ltd. m~11·11Httltib 
Limited byguaran tce. CompanyNo . 92ISOO. 
Registered Address : 60 Bourne mouth Road. Folkestone, Kent. CTl9 SAZ 
BSFA Membership 
UK Res1dents: £ 18 or£9(11nwaged)perycar . Pleasec nquir e for ov.-,r.;casrates 
R [N[ WALS AND NEW l\l[M8[RS - PA UL BILLINGER, I LoNG Row CLOS[ , 
EVF,RDON, DAV[i"oTRY, NORTHA l'ITSN I I )BE 
USA Enquirie i - CyCha uvin. 14248 Wilfr.-,d Street. Detroit. Ml 48213 USA 
Other BSFA Publicatmns 
Focu s: Caro l Ann Gre.-,n. S Rag lan Avenue . Hull . HUS 2JB & 
Julie Venner , 42 Walgrave Str« t. New land Avenue., Hull , HUS 2LT 
J\lalrix : Ch ris Terran , 9 Beechwood Court, Back Beechwood Grove, Leeds, 
West Yorkshire LS42H S 
Administrator - Maureen Kincaid Speller. 60 Bournemouth Road, Folkes tonc, 
Kent CTl9 SAZ Email: lllk•ykttc ix.co,npulink.eo.uk 
Trtnurrr - Elizabeth Billinger, I Long Row Close , Everdon. Davenuy , 
Norlhants N I I JBE Email: billiog e r •eot e rpri!l e .net 
Publications Manag r r - Steve Jeffery, 44 Whit e Way, Kidlin gton, Oxon, OXS 2X 
Orbil t rs - Carol Ann Green. Flat J, 141 Princes Avenue. Hull JIU5 JDL 
Awa rd s - Kev McVeigh , 37 Firs Road, Milnthorpe. Cumb ria, LA7 7QF 
PublicitylPromotion s - Claire Briarlcy, 26 Nonhampmn Road, 
Cro ydon , Surre y. CR0 7HA & Mark Plumm er. 14 Nonhway Road, 
Croydo n,Su rreyC R06JE 
London Merling Coo rdin ator - Paul Hood , 27 Strawberry Lane, Tiptrtt, 
EssexCOS0KX 
Fortign Liaison - Bridget Wilkin son, I 7 Mim osa, 29 Avenue Road, London 

===== PAGE 3 =====
LETTERS TO VECTOR 
Firstly, a rightly irate email from focus editor and Orbiter 
supremo Carol Ann Green: 
I don't know who's responsible for this: but some kind soul has 
just pointed out that the address shown for me in Vector 190 is my 
old address of 5 Raglan Avenue, Raglan Street. Seeing as how it 
changed in May to Flat 3, 141 Princes Avenue, Hull, and 
everyone got change of address notices etc. plus it's been in Focus 
and Matrix, do you think I could have it right in Vectorf I am 
keeping my mail forwarding going for a long while, as my old 
address is on so much literature, but it would help to have the 
correct address in the current issues of the magazine. 
Very many apologies for this, and for the fact that this was nol 
corrected for 191. You did indeed tell us of the move to Flat 3, 
14 1 Princes Avenue, Hull. 
Vector 190 a/so raised the hackles of Mal Washington: 
Prejudice is revolting from whichever side of the minority-majority 
divide it originates. In his article 'Queer New World' {Vector 1901, 
reviewing a book of unfilmed scripts by the late Derek Jarman, 
Bob Ford reveals himself to be prejudiced, and, with Jarman 
himself, ignorant. 
Ford describes Jarman's script Sod 'Em as 'part a denunciation 
of all things heterosoc, part a queer defiance and reappropriation 
of Sodom .. .' Ford does not find this grounds for condemnation, 
indeed he praises Jarman's 'visions', recording that we 'are the 
richer for them.' Well pardon me, but I am utterly sick of the 
prevailing double-standard of political correctness, whereby 
privileged minorities feel it is their right to demonstrate the sort of 
bigotry which would result in a thorough condemnation were it to 
be directed in the opposite direction . If any heterosexual author 
wrote a denunciation of all thing homosexual he would be, 
metaphorically lynched. I do not think Vector should pander to 
Ford's acceptable divisiveness. 
As for his ignorance ... If either Jarman Of' Ford had taken the 
trouble to read the Bible, they would know that the crime of the 
men of Sodom was not homosexuality as such, but group 
homosexual rape. Which is not the sort of thing anyone would 
wish to reappropriate. Jarman was not anyway an SF film-maker, 
but merely a purveyor of pretentious , badly-made, muddled , 
incoherent 'art flicks'. Had he been heterosexual he would have 
been laughed off the screen. 
As for Bob Ford, his narrowness of mind is contrary to the spirit 
of SF. This is a man who can by his own admission only 
empathise with characters of his own sexuality: 'Indepe ndence 
Day lost all interest for me after Harvey Fierstein was killed off.' I 
think 1he BSFA should lose all interest in Bob Ford 
Mal Washington, Glasgow 
Bob Ford replies: 
I will admit to a certain laxness of tone which might have led to 
Washington's outburst. The use of the 'we ' is perhap s an 
overstatement of the audience I'm referring to. Or maybe I slipped 
into the royal we. But white, male, heterosexuals may wish to 
consider how most minorities go through the three stages of 
looking for accep tance, then equality, then give in on this and 
seek for a separate existence. We gays are the richer because we 
have been shown that we do not have to be passive recipients of 
March/Aprll 1997 • Vector 192 
abuse, that we can fight back - and that we can live happily ever 
after and not have to commit suicide. 
Yes 1D4 lost my interest after the disappearance of Fierstein's 
character, but that was not a lot of interest in the fi rst place. It was 
simply the interest generated by seeing a favourite actor in an 
otherwise imbecilic film. But even this was not a particularly good 
performance - the major frisson being oused by the fact that he 
was involved with a character called 'David', the name of his 
adopted son in Torch Song Trilogy. 
Would a heterosexual writer who wrote in Jarman's terms but 
with the 'normal' - or rather common - se)(uality be 
'metaphorically lynched'r Personally I'm more worried about 
actual lynchings or muggings of those of my acquaintan ce who 
have shown affection to their partners in the wrong place, or 
looked at someone in the wrong way, or for no reason at all. Or 
who have faced hypnosis or electric shock treatments or prison -
or, worst of all, the patronising sympathy - for their sexuality. 
When the age of consent is equal, when our partnership s are 
recognised and not condem ned as 'pretend family units' and 
when we can shown the same public affection to each other as 
heterosexuals, then I will consider the idea of privilege. 
Whatever the correct derivation of 'Sodom', it is certainly used 
as a term of abuse against gays. like 'queer', we can take control 
of the meaning by applying it to ourselves. Reappropriation after 
the appropriation by heterosoc . Of course rape is wrong. Any non­
conse nsual sexual act is wrong. But before I get into a long 
discussion of Biblical terminology, I will allow the BSFA to forget 
The editors reply: Every time someone brings up seKual morality 
as suggested by the Old Testament, we feel the urge to memion 
the prohibitions about earing shellfish. Bob Ford has since 
direCl.ed me to John Boswell's Christianity, social tolerance and 
homosexuality: gay people in Western Europe from the beginning 
of the Christian era to the fourteent h century for discussion of the 
relevant Biblical passages allegedly about homosexuality. 
If anyone wishes to write an article demoli shing /arman's 
reputation, then we would be happy to receive it. Vector is partly 
a platform for strong - and hopefully reasoned - opinion. II would 
thus be a shame if we are to lose Bob Ford from our pages. He 
will certainly appear once more, with a piece for the B5FA 
Award-winners sequence which has been in our files for about a 
year. 
A sharp-eyed correction now: 
I'm sure Tanya Brown is generally doing a fine job with editing 
Paperback Inferno (shurely Pulp Fiction? - AMBJ, and deserves 
all our praise for doing the unglamourous bit hidden away at the 
back of Vector, but perhaps she should get someone who knows 
about cinema to scan any film-related reviews. 
In his review of The Crow: City of Angel novelisation, Liam 
Proven writes 'Brandon (lee} arguably had never received the 
success he had earned, although Hard Boiled received some 
acclaim.' Certainly ii did, but not for anything lo do with the late 
Mr Lee, because he wasn't in it. In fact Hard Boiled was John 
Woo's swansong to the Hong Kong action cinema before he went 
Hollywood and went soft. II starred, as ever, the rather thin Mr 
Fat. 
Prior to The Crow, Brandon Lee appeared in a TV show 
entitled Kung Fu: The Next Generation. Then, it says, on page 56 
of the December 1992 issue of Empire, 'an obscure Cantonese 
martial arts flick', followed by Showdown in little Tokyo (199 1) 
and Rapid Fire (1992) . Then, tragically, he died. 
finally, a mystery. What happened to page 33-36 of Vector 
191? 
Keep up the good work! 
Alex O'Co nnor, Truro 
Thanks for this correction. We are reminded ofThe New Yorker 
where learns of fact checkers are employed 10 confirm every 
single fact So for rhe record, {it appears that you should] add 
Laser Mission aka Soldier of Fortune (1990), Legacy of Rage 
(1986) and further Iv work Ohara (I 987) and Kung Fu: The Movie 
(1986J 10 Brandon Lee's chronology. 
Please send all lette rs to either of our Feat ures Editors 
page 3 

===== PAGE 4 =====
\'eclo r 192 • Ma rch/Ap ril 1997 
The BSFA Award Winners 
Robert Holdstock- Mythago Wood(1984- awarded 1985) 
by Andrew M. Butler 
The wood holds a rather special place in the British 
imagination: Robin Hood and Sherwood Forest, Jack­
in-the-Green, Mirkwood, the Forest of Arden , the 
woods outside Athens on a Midsummer 's Night and 
even the Hundr ed Acre Wood. Many times they are 
places of danger in fairy tales: where Red Riding 
Hood's Gnmdmo ther lives, where Hansel and Gretel 
are abandoned and where Goldilocks goes for early 
morning strolls. And it was a wood which cemented 
Robert Holdstock 's critical and popular repuution. 
Originally Mythago Wood was a short story which 
deals with its protagoniSt Steven Huxle y returning from 
the Second World to 2SCertain what is going on with his 
father and his brother Chris tian. The father has become 
fascinated with ancient beings which seemed to be 
appearing mysteriously in a wood next to his house. He 
calls these entities mythagos - myth imagos - and 
believes that they are genera.ted from the collective 
unconsciousness of humanity. Thus a folk hero such as 
Robin Hood or King Arthur takes on flesh in the 
confines and around the edges of the wood. The father 
falls in love with Guiwenneth, a female mythago, and 
attempts to create further entities by stimulating his 
brain with electricity. The father dies shortly before his 
younger son arrives home. The two sons in tum fall in 
love with Guiwinneth, a nd dispute whom she belongs 
10. 
The novel incorporates the majority of the story and 
continues where it left off. After Christian has 
disappeared into the woodland, the younger son, Steve, 
begins to investigate the phenomena of the wood, but 
finds that he is unable to penetrate further than its 
edges. There is some space and time distort ion effect 
occuring; when Christian emerges from the woods he 
has been experience a longer period of time than those 
outside. 
Steve enlists the help of another veteran , Keeton, to 
fly over the wood and ta.kc aerial photographs of the 
inter ior. Keeton , by coincidence, has had a strange 
encounter himsel£ with a patch of ancient woodland. 
Having crashed his plane during the war, he has vague 
memories of faces within it before he was captured by 
the Germans. Keeton thus has his own demons to 
exorcise, and is willing to join Steve on a journey into 
the interior of Ryehope Wood. 
As a novel, Mythago Wood is a generic hybrid. The 
space/time dilation eHect of the wood, the mysterious 
appearance of figures from the past and the odd impact 
of the wood on K eeton's aeroplane point t oward 
fantasy. The hideous appeanmce and nature of the 
Urscumug - a mythago with the face of Steve and 
ChriSt'ian's father - suggest horror. Finally the 
page4 
discussion of l eft/ right brain splits and the use of 
electrodes to attempt to create mythag os classifies the 
novel as science fiction. 
But there is another example of hybridicy at work: 
between Freudian and Jungian psychology. The 
mythagos are Jungian archetypes - warrior women, 
outlaw heroes and wise men. The journe y to th e heart 
of t.he forest is another, such journeys whether 
Marlow's up t.he river Congo in Heart of Darkness or 
Frodo's to the Cracks of Doom are explorations of the 
self. In pursuing, or being purrued by, his brother, 
Steve is confronting a darker version of himseU, is 
confronting his shadow. 
However, there is also a Freudian element to the 
plot, in Steve's battles with father figures. In the classic 
Oedipal drama, the male c hild is attracted to the 
mothe r but does not act upon his desires because of the 
potentially castr.ning presence of the father. When one 
of the parents is absent, or the threat of castration is 
removed, the c hild risks being psychologically 
damaged. 
The mother in Mythago Wood is curiously sidelined. 
It seems likely th at Edward Huxley neglects his wife in 
his studies; indeed in dairy extract we learn: "'Jennif er 
(is] already concerned and dinraught by my absences" 
(p. 43). As he becomes more obsessed by Guiwinneth , 
so Jennifer Hu xley is more neglected. This leads to a 
decline in her health: "J arrived in the study and was 
very distraught . The boys have begun to be upset by J's 
decline. She is very ill, When the girl laughed at her, J 
almost hysterical, but left the study rather th an 
confront the woman she thinks I am betrayin g her 
for ... when S and C around, she remains coldly silent, 
functioning as a mother but no longer as a wife" (pp. 
115-6). As their father' s attention s are transferred from 
Jennifer to Guiwinneth (Guiwinneth, as a version of 
Gwyneth , derives from the same roots as Jennifer), so 
in turn are Christian and Steve's Oedipal urges. When 
battl ing for Guiw inneth, it is Urscum ug, a mythago 
created by their father , th at they have to confront. 
Indeed, lO the encoun ter at the end of the fim pan of 
the novel, Steve noted that "The Urscumug opened its 
mouth to roar, and my father seemed to leer at me" 
{p. 66). 
Mythago Wood was a breakthrough novel for Holdstock 
in terms of acclaim and audience. It is a richly imagined 
novel, with convincing characters who demand our 
sympath y. The wood itself has continued to feature in 
Holdstock's work; indeed the first sequel, LAwndyss, 
went on to wln the BSFA award as well. 

===== PAGE 5 =====
March/Aprll 1997 • Vector 192 
Robert Holdstock: A Selected Annotated Bibliograph y 
Commenta ry by Gary Daikin , additional bibliographic research by Andre w M. Butler 
1. Novels 
The first three novels, excluding N«ramancer, are sf, and 
very much part or British sf of their era. They will be 
enjoyed by anyone with a liking for the 1970s novels of 
Richard Cowper, Christopher Priest and Christopher Evans. 
The best is W1xw Time Wind1 Blow, a haunting and 
atmospheric story which, like the later Mythago books 
features displacements in time as a catalysing force. 
N«r0manc" is an exception, Holdstock's only non­
pseudonymous horror novel, although he has written short 
stories in a similar vein. 
Myrhago Wood was the first novel or what has proved to be 
Holdstock' s best and most popul:u work, the sequence of 
stories centred around the enigmatic Ryhope Wood. The 
~ uence actually first started with the publication or the 
short story •Mythago Wood• (Tbt Magazine of FantASy of 
Science Fiction, September 1981). Hold.stock then expanded 
this into the novel of the same name. Two further volumes, 
Lawndyn and The Hollowing achieve the miraculous feat of 
improving upon an already exceptional preckccessor. Only 
the noveUa-length prequel •The Bone Forest•, which fim 
appeared in /nurzone -46 and was reprinted as the title story 
of Holdstock's second collection, has so far proved a 
disappointm ent. At only a fraction of the length of any of 
the novel its appears rather flat and is, curiously, overlong. 
Hold.stock's two most recent novels, Merlin'1 Wood and 
Anctin1 Echoes, are peripheral to the Mythago ~uence, but 
are so similar in style and theme that they must be considered 
close relations. 
Bulman and Bulman]: Ont of Our Pigeons is Mining are 
novelisations based on the short-lived ITV crime-drama series 
of 1984--5. The scripts were written by Murray Smith and 
based on a character created by Kenneth Royce. Bulman 
starred Michael Elphick before he found greater popularity in 
Boon. Obvious ly these novels are unlikely to be reprinted, 
and have little or no relation to Holdstock tbe sf/fantasy 
writer. 
However, a third novelisa.tion, 7M Emerald Forest, adapted 
from Rospo Pallenberg's script has reantl y been adopted 
into the official Holdstock canon. O riginally Published by 
Penguin U1 1985, with a still from the film on the front 
cover, the current edition is from HarperCollins and features 
a Geoff Taylor painting, bringing it in line with the sequ~~ 
started with Mythago Wood. This unusual move is, U1 this 
~, entirely fitting. Rarely have a novelist and film-maker 
shared such similar and enduring concerns. The love of tree 
which runs through Hold.stock's work can be found, 
together with a similar sense of the mystica.l, in almost all of 
Boorman 's films, from Hell in t.he Pacific (1968), through 
Deliverance (1972) and Excalibur (1981) to Beyond Rangoon 
(1995). 
EytAmong zh,: Blind (London: Faber &c Faber, 1976). 
&.rlhwind (London; Faber &c Faber, 1977). 
N«rt11rumctr (London: Futura , 1978). 
~ TinK Wina'J Blow (London: Faber &c Faber, 1981). 
Bu/m,in (London: Futura , 198-4). 
Mythago Wood (London , Gollana, 1984). 
B11/m,in 2: Ont of 011r Prgttms is MWing (London: Futur a, 1984). 
The £mw,./d fortJt (Harmondsworth, M.iddlesa : Penguin , 1985). 
lavondp.J: /011mey 10 •n Unluiown Rtg1on {London: Gollancz, 1988). 
Tht Fmh (London; Orbit, 1991). 
Tht Hollowing (London: Harpe.rColllllS, 1993). 
Mtrlin '.s Wood or tht Vista of Magic (London: HarperCollins , 1994). 
Ancitnt Echon (London: HarperCollin s, 1996). 
2. Short Fiction 
Robert Holdstock has written a considerable amount of 
short fiction, some of which is collected in In the Valley of the. 
Statues and Other Stories (London: Faber .5l Faber, 1982) 
(designated "') and TM &nc Fomt (London: Grafton , 1991) 
(designated t)-
/n t.he Valley of the StatMa is probably the stronger of the two 
volumes, reprinting the original version of Mythago Wood, 
the excellent title story, •The Touch or a Vanished Hand•, 
•Travellers•, •The Graveyard Cross•, •A Sma.11 Event• 
•Ashes• and the original version of •Earth and Stone•. 
In addition to the title novel, 7bc &ne Fomt also contains 
"Thom•, "The Sbapechanger•, •The Boy Who Jumped the 
Rapids•, •Time of the Tree•, •Magic Man•, "Sc:arrowfell• and 
"The Time Beyond Age". Of th~, although it is quite 
atypica.l of bis later writing, •The Time Beyond Age• is 
almost certainly the single most powerful and memorable 
story Holdstock bas produced. It recounts a laboratory 
experiment in human aging, and is more quietly chilling than 
any horror story. 
After winning the World Fantasy Award, •The Ragthorn" 
w-s slightly revised and appeared in lnterzont 74. lnterzont 84 
featured an extract from Merlin'1 Wood, with an ended 
appended, although this does not count as a separate story. 
When the novel was published, Holdstock included two 
previously published stories, in a section at the back of the 
book "Ot her Tales•. These were •The Silverling" and a 
revised version of "Earth and Stone", which had already been 
collected in the out-of-print In t.he Valleyof~Statue1. 
"Pauper's Plot•, Nrw Worub 184, Vol 52 (November 1968). 
"The Darkness• , N- Writmg, in Horror ,md tht SuJ1"7Wt11r.J 1, 
cdittd by David A. Suu on (London: Sphere, 1972). 
"Microcosm•, N- Writings in SF 10, cdittd by John Camell 
(London: Dobson, 1972). 
• "Ashes• [Originall y• Ash, Ash•). Stopwatch, edited by George 
Hay (London: NEL, 1974). 
• "The Graveyard Cross", Suptrnow I, edited by Philip Pollock 
{London: Faber and Faber, 1976). 
t "Magic Man" , Frighunm 1. edi1td by Mary Danby (London: 
Fontana Boo ks, 1976). 
•on the lruide ", Nrw Writings in SF 18, edited by Kenneth Bulm er 
(London: Sidgwick and Jackson, 1976). 
t "The Time Beyond Age: A Journey", Supuno'fJa I, edited by 
Philip Pollock (London: Faber and Faber, 1976). 
Reprinted in Stan of Albiori, edited by Robert P. 
Hold.stock and Chris1opher Priest (London; Pan, 1979). 
pages 

===== PAGE 6 =====
Vector 192 • March/April 1997 
• •Tr.ivd lers", Andromtda I, edited by Pe1erWcs 1on (London: 
Furura, 1976). 
• "A Small Event•, AndromttU 2, cdi1ed by Peter Weston (London: 
Furur.i, 1977). 
• "The Touch of a Vanished Hand", Vorux Scimtt Furion 0anuary 
1977). 
· T he Quiet G irr , 7ht 19th Am Book of Horror Storiti, edited by 
Herbc.-n van Thal (London : Pan, 1978). Reprinted in D.Jr/r, 
Voicn, edi1cd by S1cphcn Jones and Clarence Pigct 
(London : Pm. 1990). 
"Hig h Pressure•, Pulsar 1, edited by George Hay (Harmo ndswo rth. 
Middlcsa: : Penguin, 1979). 
• "In the Valley of the StalUes·, Ann 1, edited by John Gr.mt 
(London : David and Charles , 1979). 
• "Eanh and Stone" , /r1urf .. ca, edited by Ursula K... Le Guin and 
Virginia Kidd (Ne..,. York: Ace., 1980. R~is,cd reprint in 
Mfflm J Wood (London : H.upcJColli.ns, 199). 
• "Myth.ago wooo•, TMM11g"2Wof F,mwy .. nd Scima- Fution 
Sq,tembc.-r 1981. 
· 0cC:;J;O of Sound ", Pttt-r lMWOn's Boolt of Alim J.fonsun, edited by 
Peter llivison (London : Sl)Ml"o..,., 1982). 
t "The Boy Who Jumped the ~pids", Beyond I..nds ofNtwr 
(London: Allen and Un..,.in, 198). 
t "Thom" , Birmingb.m SFGro11p. (1984). Rcprin 1ed in 7ht 
Mt1g,mnc of Ftlnusy t1nd Scuntt Fur ion (Cktnbcr 1986). 
"The Other Place", f•"IM'JCO" X Progrt1m,m &okht , edited by 
S1q,hcijones and Jo Aetc:hcr (1985). 
t "Scarrowfcll", Orhv Edrns, edited by Cb.mt op her Evam and 
Robcn Hold.stock (London: Unwin, 1987). 
"A Letter from Robcn Holdstoc k", 7ht Dr11bblc Pro.feet, edited by 
Rob Mcadcs and Divi d B. Wake (Birmingham: Beccoo 
Pub lia 1ioru , 1988). 
t "Time of the T ree", Gt1Jigh1 .nd Ghom, edited by Stcpbc njoocs 
and Jo Fle1cher (World Fanta$y Con/ Robinson 
Publia 1ions 1988). Reprinted in Zenith, edi1ed by D:r.vid S. 
Garnett (London : Sph ere, 1989). 
t · Tb e Shapechanger•, GM Maguim (1989). 
t "Th e Bone Forcs1·, ,,,t~or1c 45 (March 1991). 
•The Ragtb om • (with Garry D. Kilwonh). A Whis~ of Blood, 
edited by Ellen Di llow, (New York: Morrow, 1991). 
Reprint ed in 7k Year's Bm F11r1/:IIS'j and Horror: Fifth 
A nn ual Collection, edit ed by Ellen Datl ow and Terri 
Windlin g, (New York: S1. Manin 's, 1992) and lm~ onc74 
(August 1993). 
•The Silvering•, Nt, rrow HouscJ, edited by Peter Crowth er (London: 
Littl e, Brow n, 1992). Reprint ed in Mcr/ir1's Wood (London: 
H arperCo llins, 199). 
•Having His Leg Pulled•, Dark Voiw J, edited by David Sunon and 
Stephen Jones (Londo n: Pan, 1993). 
•Tb e Charisma T recs•, New Wor/dJ 4, edited by David S. Garn ~ 
(London: Gollancz, 1994). 
· Merlin's Wood•, (extract) /m~or1c8 4 0une 199). 
3 Pseudonymous N ovels 
Ro~n Ho ldstock lus wriueo arou nd twenty, passib ly 
more, novels unders various pse udonyms. Kno wn 
pseudo nyms are Ro~n Black, Ken Blake, C bris Cacleson, 
Steve Eisler (non-fiction), Robert Faulco n and Richar d K irk . 
Tb~ books tend to ~ eit her co nvent ional fan tasy o r 
nove lisations , such as those of The ProfwioMh tv series. Of 
most interest is probably the six vo lum es of T he 
Night.hun ter series by Fau lcon, later collected in three 
vol umes as by Hold.stock . T his supernat u ral 
adventur e/hor ror sequence is tangentially related to The 
htch . 
page6 
As Rohen Black: 
Lq,cnd of UN Wcrcwolf(Londo n: Sphere, 1976). 
TM Sat.mists (London: Spher e, 1978). 
Death Ange/ (New York [?]: Page:un , 1988). 
~ Ken Blake, 7ht Profmion,ib 
Cry Wolf(I..ondon: Sphere, 1981). 
Optr•tior1 S.Sic (Londo n: Sphere, 1982). 
7ht Untouth,,bl~ (London : Sphere, 1982). 
You 'II br All Righr (London : Sphere, 1982). 
(Based on episodes in the fifth series, broadast 9 Januuy 1983, I 
Novembe r 1982, 16 January 1983, 21 Novcm.bc.-r 1982 respectively . 
Howeve r all bar Cry Wolf were actually ftlmed as pan of series four) 
~ Chris Carlsm , Berserker series: 
7ht BJ/ O,ief(London : Sphere, 1977) 
Sh,,dow oflhc Wolf (London: Sphere, 1977) 
TbrHomtd w .. mor(London : Sphere, 1979) 
M Rohen Faulcon, Night Hun1er seri" 
7bc S111/kmg (Loodon: Arrow, 1983). 
The T.Jismlln (London : Arrow , 1983). 
7bc Gbost D.Jnu (London : Arrow, 1983). 
Tbt Shnr1c (London : Arro ... , 1984). 
7ht Ho:ing (London : Arrow , 1984). 
7bc Ltbyrinth (Loodo n: Arro..-. 1987). 
Volumes one and 1wo, thr« and four, and five and WC b:ive also 
bc.-eo issued in pJ.lri under the tid es 7htSulk ing (l 987}, TM Chou 
Danu[l987]and TMHnirlg .. nd7htUbyrir1th( l989, no1 seen] and 
subtitl ed A Night H,mlt'r Colltttion Vol11mc I, II and Ill respectively . 
Autho r given is Rohe n H olds1ock writing as Robcn Faulcon.) 
M Richard Kirk, Raven series: 
(with Angus Wells) Su,,ordmistrm of Chaos (London: Corg i, 1978). 
A Time of Ghosts (London : Corg i, 1978). 
Lordi of l« Sh.sdows (London: Corgi, 1979). 
4. Other Works 
Robert H oldst ock has edited the a nth o logy Star of Albion 
with C hristo pher Pri est (Lo ndon: Pan, 1979 ) and th e thr ee 
Other £.dens vo lum es w ith C hristopher Evans (Lo ndon : 
Unwin , 1987 , 1988, 1989). H e h:u: also w ritt en the linkin g 
text for seve ral large fo rmat illu strat ed books , in 
collaborati o n wi th edito r Malco lm Ed wards . These includ e 
Alien Lantbcapes, Lw Realms (198), Magician, Realms of 
Fantasy and Tour of the Uni~. H e has also w ritte n a 
nove lisatio n of a com pu ter game : Elite: The Dark Whtt/ 
(Cam bridg e: Acornsoft , 198) 
Sources: 
AICJC's •Pros• Page http:/MWW.biostatwashington.eool- alex/pos.html 
The Henry Kennet h Bulmer homepage 
http://www.s.avanli.CXllTVepub'hkbworks.html#tliake 
John Oute and Peter N icho ls, The Er,qc.lopcdia o{Scimtc Fu:tion 
(London : Orbi1, 1993). 
William G. Conten10, Inda 10 Seim« Fu:tior1 Ar1thoiogin 11nd 
Collttt10,u, Comlnntd Edition http://www.best.c:cm'-contenlo' 
Wilfu.m G. Con tento and Chules N . Brown, Scimtr Fu:tion, fllnusy 
.ndHorro r. 1984-1"6http :/NNl#.sff.netflocosAlstat 
Jay P. Pederson , TM StJ•tnaGMilht4SrimaFu:tion WriWJ(Ne w 
York: St James Press, 19%). 
David Pringle, edito r, ThcStj,.rrw,Guidcto F,mw, Wriu-n(New 
York:S! JamcsPress, 19%) . 
Perwna1 collect.ions. 
SpccW thanks to Chris T ern.n 

===== PAGE 7 =====
March/April 1997 • Ve<:tor 192 
A Very British Tradition 
An interview with Stephen Palmer by Gary Daikin 
First time novelist Steve Palmer is married and also has an ambient group called Mooch, who will 
hopefully be releasing a new cd Falling Metal Grille this year. He also has a full time job . He says his 
wife is very understanding ... Vector "spoke" to Steve, via the medium of the Internet. 
Long-term members of the BSFA will recall that you"vc 
frequently contributed art icles and reviews to Vector over the 
years. You appear to have moved straight from non-fiction fan• 
writing to becoming a fully fledged novelist. This is pretty 
unu sual. Was Memory Sud your first fiction, or is th ere a trunk 
full of stories we haven't seen yet? 
I first staned reading d in my early tttns. When I was sevcmccn I 
wrote a shon novel, but then did nothing until I began writing 
proper in 1986. There followed a massive splurge of writing as I 
discovered the joys of crc:.ning new worlds and stories. One of those 
early novels was KrAJ, that eventually bca.m c Memory Sttd. 
I think there must be a van load of stories by now. My greatest 
difficulty in writing is trying to contro l the excess of idc:as. I find it 
almost impossible to settle down and decide. "this is the next novel 
I'm going to write", because there arc so many other things I wa.n1 
to do. My bookcase is cr.unmed full of folders with novels ready to 
write - completely planned out, plotted, etc. Memory Sttd, or KrAJ 
as it was then, was the fifth novel I wrote, and the first draft of that 
appeared in 1988. After that, I did other novels, then suddenly 
decided to write a second draft in 1992. That was the draft that 
caught the attention of my editor Tim H olman at Orbit , but by the 
time we had managed to settle down and discuss it I had written a 
third, more radical draft , which is the version that metamorphosed 
into the published novel. So it has had quite a long history ... 
Mtmory Sud is a very British novel, in the sense tha t it follows a 
long line of post-apoca lyptic, cnvironmcnta lly•awarc works. 
How far do you feel you arc working in a British tradition? 
What arc your influences? 
Yes, I do feel I'm working as a very British author in a very British 
tradition; or perhaps that should be ' European author', in the sense 
of having a Europnn rather than an Americ.an point of view, I find 
a lot of American sf impossible 10 read, though of course there arc 
cxccp1ions. I think the clichC of British sf being depressing and 
almost negative, as compared to the bright and bnsh American 
style, is true, but I think that pessimism reflects a certain realism. An 
argument could be made that American sf, with its techno-fixes and 
inevitably happy endings, is rather unr ealistic, in the wider sense of 
the word. I'd rather be occasionally grim than perpetually happy, if 
you know what I mean ... 
As for influcnce!l, I would say my greatest influence, if I had to 
choose just one, was Jack Va.nee, who is unique amongst all writer s. 
Other influences include Mary Gentle, Gene Wolfe, Brian 
Stableford, Brian Aldiss, Gwyneth Jones, William Gibson, and a few 
non-sf authors such as Mervyn Peake and Tolkien. While I was not 
directly influenced by the classic Wyndham di!iasler novels when I 
wrote Memory Sttd, I do love those novels, and re-read them 
occasionally. 
There arc hints that the novel may or may not be set on Earth 
in the distant future. Was there a particularly reason for thi s 
ambiguit y about just where the book takes place? 
Mtmory Seed is set on Earth . In fact, it's set in a very specific place 
on the British coastline that can be guessed from clues in the novel. I 
wanted to present a city that was connected with our culture by the 
thinnest of threads - hints of language and symbol - to heighten the 
effect of Kray being a final, remote outpost. Some reviewers have 
found this lack of history in the novel a bit of a disappointmcm, 
which lli fair enough, but the effect wn deliberate. I wanted the 
reader to be more engrossed in the story than details of whcre-a.nd­
whcn. Besides, the novel is already quite exuberant in terms of 
detail, and more background would have cluttered things funh cr. 
There's two unfortunate possibilities (for humanit y anyway) 
that either we might destroy our environment or Gaia-likc, 
nature will strike back and eradicate humanity , restoring a 
harm ony which has hem lost. Arc you hopeful that we can still 
preserve the natural wor ld alongside technology, or have we, 
like the inhabitants of Memory Sud, gone too far? 
It's so difficult to say. I don 't think that humanity has yet gone 100 
far, but I have a feeling that it will at some poin1 in the futur e. The 
liberal forces opposing the massive weight of corporate Western 
power arc still comparatively weak. The evidence of history suggests 
that only when it lli 100 late does humanity sit up and n.ke notice of 
the dreadful things going on around it. This is to be expected, 
though. I think human beings arc still quite a primi1ivc 101, 
especially in terms of what they understand of the world around 
them, and also how they understand it. Humanit y is still narcissistic. 
h finds looking beyond its own narrow confines quite difficult. 
Because it is split into many factions, there is far less scope for 
tonccn ed action against the curnagc being done by Western 
economics (and, now, the Far Ea.stem variety) than there could be. 
The exJM"ricncc of 1989 [When tk Green Party took 2J % of the 
wte in tk EuropeAn cl«tiom - GD) was, I think . a purel y media 
cvcot, though doubtless many people genuinely felt passionate about 
the grttn issues that came 10 the fore. I know I did! However, I had 
been interested in green thinking before that date. My guess is that 
the doumgc will be done, and hum anity will notice 100 late. It seems 
to me that the chance of technology workin g alongside nature is 
very slim. Technology has a very panicular mind-set. It is 
computational, unemotional, a system that worb for itself only. 
J .K. Galbraith gave the classic definition when h e described the 
tcchnostructure, by which he meant the system of economic growth 
fuel!ed by tcchnologlcal advance. The tcchnostructur c is responsible 
for the obsession with growth that we have these days. Hardly 
anybody questions it. Why do we need this constant growth? Why 
is it that the goal of corporations is no longer the making of the 
largest profit possible, but constant , sustainable growth? If you look 
at natural systems, their growth is characterised by an initial period 
of uab le growth followed by a cessation at some fixed point. 
Economic growth is entirely different. It is often exponential, and 
there is never a final level at which it should stop. That is what 
makes it so dangerous. And the really dangerous thing is that the 
rC$0Urces used by modem corporations arc not infinite. They arc 
natural resources, which have a fini1e value. 
In Memory Sad I wanted to prcscm a scenario where the Eanh 
page7 

===== PAGE 8 =====
Vector 192 • March/April 1997 
becomes angry. l sometimes wish it could happen ... People need a 
slap in the face. Or should it be a kick in the shins? We've become 
so desensitised these days to the truth of what is going on around us 
that many people would need the latt er option 10 awaken them. 
There is a lso a decidedly femini st slant - in fact in severa l of 
your articles for Vtctor you seem to th ink rather better of 
women than m en. Would you consider you rself a femini st? 
Yes I am a feminist. I am happy to do anything to change five 
thousand years of cultural domination by men. It's a wholly bad 
thing. I am not advocating a matriarchy, though I suspect that 
would be a better option than a patriarchy, rather a humane social 
system where men and wom en w ere treated equally. It's not much 
to ask. The first two drafts of Memory Sttd were normal in their 
male-female ratios; it was only in the third draft that I hit on the 
idea of the all-women city. I wanted to write a novel where women 
were th e 'invisible norm', just as men are today. I wanted the male 
charactus to ~ seen as the differem ones - as wom en are today. 
And I wanted this to be experienced by the inhabitants of Kray as so 
normal they hardly ever questioned it. (It is deKray himself who 
makes most of the commems on the imbalance.) 
Also I was inspired by a terrifying Horizon TV programme on 
th e feminisation of animals, which is apparently being caused by 
polluting chemicals that mimic oestrogen. And there 's the really 
quit e fright ening drop in male fcnility in the Western world. 
It's quite hard being a feminist man. I sometimes wonder if I have 
the righ1 10 utilise womtn characurs a,; I do, since the only 
experience I have of wom en is what I have developed as a man - i.e. 
from the outside. I can never really know what it is like to ~ a 
woman 'from the inside'. But I think women and women's culture 
represent 1hc best hope for 1he future, since male culture is largely 
redundant . Really, what women's cultur e rcpr esenu is human 
culture . It is men who , by and large, are dehumanised, while the 
women by vinue of their inferior posi1ion in patriarchy arc allowed 
to develop normal human functions, such as emotional response, 
compassion,etc. 
In the novel I've just finished, Mutzz.inl,md, the thr ee main 
characters arc black women, from Ghana... I think in ming 
characters not in my immediat e experience I'm try ing 10 sound out 
some boundaries; it would be so easy to use white male characters, 
but so pedestrian and unchallenging! 
Most unu sually, th ere is only o ne male c haracter in Memory 
Seed. How far was this a criti que of the tradi ti ona l sf plot of 
men t aking th e acti on roles, an d w omen formin g t he love 
int eres t or askin g dum b questions? 
At firsi, I wasn't sure if having the lone man, deKray, wou ld work, 
but as I got into writing the 1hird draft I knew it would. I just loved 
the idea of having all these women living in the city, even the 
'extras', and just the one man mention ed. It was a critique of 
traditional roles. l wan ted almos t to write men out of the picturt. I 
wanted to ponray deKray as a minor with only a little control over 
his own life - not being able to carry arms, perceived as inferior, and 
all the rest of it. The boot on the other foot! If it happened in rcali1y 
I think we could learn a lot. 
For example, men arc uniquely qualified for being unable to 
communicate, and yet they do practically all the negotiating in the 
world today. lsn't that wrong? If women were allowed to negotiate 
land deals, war settlements, etc., ther e would be a lot more success in 
1hc wor ld. I'm 001 saying all women arc perfect, but at least they 
have the ability to talk to one anmher. I really hate the way women 
are ponrayed in standard media fare, and in books. I find male 
characters quite difficult to write, because it seems to me that to 
mak e them realistic for the twenti eth century sf reader - who is 
quite likely to be a man - I have to limit them. I want to write about 
human people, and for that the beSI templat e is female. If I'm sitting 
down trying 10 think whether a charact er should be a man or a 
woman, eight times out of ten it's the latter. 
pa~e 8 
The cover art of Memory Sud is qui te strik ing. By chance I saw 
som e alternat ive art done by an ex-colleague of yours, which was 
printed in a comput er magaz ine. Do you h ave any feelings 
about this, and are you h appy with the way the nov el has been 
prese nte d? 
In fact he is not an ex-colleague! George Calrns still works with me 
here at th e University of Luton . He is an excellent anisr, and I did 
love th e picture he crea1cd based on Mtmory &td. l gave him some 
extracts of the typescript before it was publish ed to go on. He has ii 
now on his website http:/M'W'IY.lutoo.ac.uk/george.caims, from which 
you can get to my website at http:/,W..,..W.geocilies.comlArea51/2162. I 
suspect we will be set ing a lot mor e of George's anwork in the 
coming years, on the covers of sf novels. 
As for the actual cover of Mtmory &M, I thought it was great. It 
was don e by Duncan Spilling, who is aho doing the next cover, for 
Glass. The greatest covers are works of an in themselves, as with 
Mike Van Houten's Lyonesst Ill cover, and the four done by Broce 
Pennington for Tht Book of tM Ntfll Sun. Evtn the sales team at 
Little, Brown were pleased about the Mtmory S«d cover - it 
garnered a lot of praise. 
In you r review in Vector 187 of Alitm: Earth Hivt & Nigbtmart 
Asylum, it is clear that you don't approve of sequel s: "It always 
seemed to me that even t he film sequel s to A litn were somethin g 
of a waste of tim e (quit e apart from being crap film s) [ ... ] Why 
peop le can 't let a good idea stay as it is I don 't kn ow. Actually I 
do: money." Yet your next novel, Glau, is a sequel to Memory 
Seed. This ra ises the o bvious questio n - is it onl y w ritt en to 
make mon ey? 
Strictly speaking, Gian is not the sequel to Memory Sttd, though I 
have described it as such to a couple of people. It is only a sequel in 
the sense of taking place in the same universe, and happening after 
Mtmory Sttd. It will be presented as a stand-alone novel, and no 
knowledge of Mtmory S«d is required to read it. Readers who have 
read Memory S«d will notice echoes of tha t book, however, as a 
consequence of it being set in the same universe. I wrote the first 
draft of Glass ~fore I had the offer from Orbit; that novel was 
wrinen in 1993-4. Gian will almost ccnainly be the last novel I 
write in that panicular universe. I want 10 go on to other things, 
though I know I will be returning to ecological them es again. I' m 
cur rently researching for a pair of far-future sf novels with an 
ecological and psychological base - a story that follows one 
character as they try to understand th e Earth in iu ent irety , a task 
that would involve changing th eir mental condit ion. 
Finally, and this will probably only make sense to th ose who 
have read Memory Seed, what have you got agains t cats? 
I love cats! We have a cat, Daisy, that we dol e upon. If she is out for 
a long time we start worrying. If she is sprawled over half the sofa, 
we don't move her, rather we sit squashed together in the other half, 
like sardines ... We recently acquired a video for ber, showing lots of 
mice, birds, etc. It's rather sad, really. We originally owned Daisy 's 
sister, Ivy, but owing to constrained space where we live we h.ad to 
have her rehomcd a few months after we got her. We were both in 
floods of tears that day. In Memory S«d I just had this idea to reverse 
the cat thing, so they became thoroughly evil beasts, which of 
course cats can be. They, and the Temp le of Felis, appeared in the 
original draft - they were a very early Krayan characteristic. The 
image of people going round shooting cats like vermin is quite a 
strong one, as most people like cats, and I knew it had to stay i.n the 
novel. 
[Glass will ht publislJM. ldctr this ytar by Orbit- GD] 

===== PAGE 9 =====
A Cronenology 
David Cronen berg 's Feature Films 
from Shivers to M. Butterfly 
1975: Shivers, aka The Parasite Murders, aka They Came 
From Within - 87 mins. Produced by Ivan (Ghoubusten and 
Twim) Reitman. Starring Barbara St~el. A ma_d sci~ntist 
creates a sexual parasite creature which mfects the mhabuantS 
of an isolated luxury apanment. Victims wander around like 
Night of the Living Dead zombies and try to have sex wit? ~he 
survivors. As events escalate the time cycle accelerates , g1vmg 
the film a nightmarish f~el of inextricable ~pocalypse. A 
perverse precursor to Ahen, this is tense, bizarre, almost 
entirely unerotic, and sometimes very silly. Look out for the 
1970s style Y-Fronts! An original work, but perhaps only 
bec:ause no other film-maker could ever have seen the 
purpose in making it. 
1976: Rabid aka Rage - 91 mins. Stars Marilyn Chambers. A 
rare example of a hardcore porn star taking a leading role in 
legitimate cinema: Marilyn Chambers was the s_tar of the 
notorious &hind the Green Door (1972) More stylish ly made 
than Shivers, and with a bigger budget, Rabid is no more than 
a remake of Cronenberg's first feature. A phallic parasite 
implanted in the heroine's armpit causes her to exhibit a 
frenzy of blood lust. Soon much of the population of a major 
Canadian city is infected, and martial law declared. Perhaps 
slightly more conventional than Shivers and therefore more 
'enjoyable'. 
1979: Fast Company - 91 mins. William Smith, John Saxon. 
A film inspired by Cronenberg's love for drag racing, hig? in 
adrenaline and corrupt behaviour - murder and extortion, 
for staners. Often ignored in the Cronenberg canon, but is a 
highly effective explotiation flick. His plans to follow Crash 
with Red Cars perhaps suggest this deserves another look. 
1979: The Brood - 91 mins. Cronenberg's first film with real 
movies star: Olive r Reed and Samantha Eggar, and the first 
for which Howard Shore, his long time collaborato r, wrote 
the score. Reed plays a mad scientist whose psychological 
theories lead people to physica1ly manifest the children of 
their rage. The results are very messy indeed. So distasteful 
did many critics find this film that it. received. th~ worst 
reviews of Cronenberg's career. Others like to claim 1t offers 
a distaff commentary upon the typical Hollywood 
dysfunctional family pies of the time - Kramer vs Kramer and 
Ordinary Ptople. 
1980: Scanners - 103 mins. Jennifer O'Neill, Patrick 
McGoohan, Michael Ironside. By far Cronenberg's best film 
up to this date, partly because of the strength of the cast and 
production values, but also because it is the first to have a 
real plot, rather than a series of increasingly _blo<?dy events. 
That said, the mix of explosive psychokmeuc P?wers, 
conspiracy and political machinations plays much like an 
alienated, less romanticised, version of DePalma's The Fury 
(1978). 
March/April 1997 • ~ec;tor 1 92 
1982: Videodrome - 87 mins. James Woods , Debbie Harry . 
As an inside view of a mental breakdown, through increasing 
paranoia to bloody murder, this contains astonishing images 
and more imagination than any an film on the sa!1'e theme. 
Taken as sf it's incoherent nonsense. However viewed, the 
film is so detached and analytical, it is almost impossible to 
become involved - this is probably a good thing, as the 
otherwise the imagery is so extreme it would be 
unwatchable. The plot? A coded signal in a snuff pirate video 
channel causes a tv executive to hallucinate, commit murder 
and suicide. 
1983: The Dead Zone - 103 mins. Ch ristopher Walken, 
Brooke Adams, Tom Skerrit, Herbert Lorn. Cronenberg's 
most mainstream film, adapted from the Stephen King novel. 
Recovering from a coma after five years, a teacher discovers 
he can foresee the future . After helping police find a serial 
killer, he determines to assassinate the politician he knows 
will become President and start W\VIIL Set against winter 
snows, the film is icily romantic, bleak and melancholy. It is 
Cronenberg's first film working from material originated by 
a writer other than himself, and by far his most 
conventional, least personal film. It does capture much of the 
intensity of King's work. 
1986: The Fly- 100 mins. Jeff Goldblum, Geena Davis. After 
a Stephen King adaptation, a remake of a 1950s schloc~ 
horror classic made it look as if Cronenberg had sold his 
vision to the Hollywood Machine. In fact he succeeded in 
delivering a powerfully visceral yet remarkably moving love 
story: Woman meets Man who turns into Fly. The final 
scene of the fusion of man, fly and machine are both as 
extreme and as powerful as anything to come from a 
mainstream studio {20th Century Fox). 
1988: Dead R ingers - 115 mins. Jeremy Irons , Genevieve 
Bujold. In his first film to contain no fantastical elemen~s, 
and with two outstanding performances by Irons as twm 
gynaecologists divided by their relationships with Buj~ld, 
Cronenberg gained serious critical recognition _for the fi_rst 
time. State of the 1988 An FX enable Irons to interact with 
himself seamlessly, and the film has a dramat_ic P<?w.er 
Cronenbe rg's previous work has lacked. The ex1stenual1st 
motifs remain the same. 
1991: Naked Lunch - 115 mins. Adapted from the 
supposedly unfilmable William S. Bu.rroughs drug 'no':'el' 
and starring Peter Weller, Judy Dav!S, Ian Holm, Julian 
Sands and Roy Scheider. A writer takes bug powder a!1-d 
undergoes ever stranger hallucinations. Eventually reality 
breaks down completely, and he ends up in the lnterzone . 
After the critical success of Dead Ringen this was promoted 
as an upmarket anhouse film, _though it plays like a less 
controlled and imaginative Videodrome dragged out to 
inordinate length . Very tedious and a major disappointment. 
1993: M. Butterfly - 101 mins. Jeremy Iron s. In which 
Cronenberg abandons the extremes of his previous work for 
a low key, 'realistic' drama (based on a hit play) telling the 
story of a western diplomat who marries an oriental woman, 
who after twenty years proves to be a man. A~azingly'. this 
is based on real events. With no appeal to his established 
audience, and gaining generally poor reviews from the 
'quality' press, the film was a commercial d~saster. Perhaps 
not coinciden tally, it is the only Cronenberg film not to have 
an 18 certificate. 
page 9 

===== PAGE 10 =====
Vector 192 • March/April 1997 
The BSFA Award Winners 
Bob Shaw Orbitsville,(1975 -awarded 1976) 
by Bob Ford 
It is often said - and I must admit I can't think of any 
names right now - that in science fiction ideas are 
the character. Not for us the intimacies of Mrs 
Brown or the complexities of Hamlet , for Ill the joys 
of a warp drive and, most appropriately here, slow 
glass. I would go further: the idea is often the 
antagonist. 
Take the subgenre of sf which is centred on 
BDOs: Big Dumb Objects. Be it a ringworld , a 
discworld or a hypercubeworld, the artefact is there, 
challenging our space travelling hero, demanding 
understanding and putting difficulties in his way. Just 
as we learn about the hero through his battles with 
the moustache-twirling villain, so through an 
exploration of a new world do we learn precisely 
what stuff our hero is made of. 
The new world here is a case in point. Orbit.wille 
opens, or may as well open, in the court of Queen 
Elizabeth, where Good Q ueen Bess would spend a 
last few minutes with her explorers before they sailed 
off into the ocean in search of new lands, new 
treasures. (And new ways, it must be said, of 
annoying the Spaniards. And let it also be said, that 
many of these explorers, Drake included, were no 
better than pirates; take this as irrelevant revisionism 
or as a limitation to the goodness of our heroes, 
whoever they are.) Orbitsville, a Dyson Sphere - a 
sphere so large that it contains a star inside it - offers 
a new colony which is billions of tim e larger than 
overpopulated Earth. Its very size, its frontierness, is 
a challenge to the hero in itself. (And a challenge to 
the author : can he encapsulate this brave new world 
with its wonders in a single volume, or will he 
succumb to the tempution of the franchise?). 
Of course, it is an ambivalent antagonist. The 
BOO is a helper as well as a hinderer. The problems 
that the hero faces can either be overcome by his 
own resources and cunning, or through his use of the 
resources the BOO provides . This is nothing new in 
literature: the father who threatens and gives life, the 
old sage who will give limited advice, the Oracle 
whose prophecies will only be worked out too late. 
In Orbiuville we also have a human villain, whose 
actions (or rather, the hero's fear of her actions) set 
the plot in motion , spark the discovery of the BOO, 
and allow the unravelling of the hero's character. 
Elizabeth Lindstrom canno t see Vince Garamond at 
once, and he is left to baby-sit her son. Garamo nd's 
atte ntion is distracted, the boy gets into mischief and 
DaQe 10 
foils to his death before our hero can save him. 
Pausing only to pick up his wife and son (thus 
flagging a climax with second falling child, but also a 
redemption), Garamond sets off with his crew into 
unexplored space. 
The discovery of new land - where so many 
explorations had failed before - is fortuitous in 
several ways, not least because it means that 
Lindstrom must be careful in her public treatment of 
Garamond. But revenge (for this has become an 
Elizabethan brew of revenge tragedy in waiting) is a 
dish best eaten cold. Lindstrom engineers an accident 
which means Gara.mood's ship will crash into the 
(out)side of the planet. Our hero , ever resourceful, 
steers the ship so that it hits the hole, as it were, and 
the ship crash-lands somewhere in the interior. Any 
sane person would now give up and settle as best 
they could, but Garamond is determined to find his 
way back to base, and confront Lindstrom. The 
BOO offers more obstacles, not least in its size, as 
well as aid in unusual ways. 
Trawling back through the archives, I find Tom 
Shippey's review in Fo11ndation. He notes Shaw's 
density of invention , and how one of these ideas 
alone would be enough for a novel. (And suddenly I 
flash back to a talk Shaw gave in 1988, where he 
complained that The Day of the Tri/fuis used two ideas 
in plants and blindness - was Shaw agreeing that this 
was bad? rejecting the charge? - or did I miss the 
joke?). "'A theme like Orbitsville, perhaps , demands a 
series, not a novel• wrote Shippey. Sequels, indeed, 
belatedly followed. These, I felt, were dilutions: 
however good they were, they could not rekindle 
that original shock of wonder. 
Shippey challenges the maths of the new land, 
points out in eleven generation s it will be full to 
overcrowding. He queries the FTL drive, and notes 
how Einstein must have been rejected. This reminds 
me of a later Shavian trilogy, where pi was thr ee - or, 
in short, Whatever Would Make The Science Work. 
If these are fantasies, rather than hard sf, I care not, 
for the heart is in the discovery, the conflict, the fall 
from grace and redemption of the hero . 
&b Ford last annoyed readers with an article on Derek 
Jarman. 

===== PAGE 11 =====
Mareh/Aprll 1997 • Vedor 192 
Cognitive Mapping 7: Invisibility 
by Paul Kincaid 
When Sue reveals her invisibility to Richard Grey in Tht Gl•mour, release from social constr.i.im (invisibility) allows the escape from 
she sums up everything; thac invisibi!icy is used to mean in science one's inhibitions - which is always to be encour:ig;ed in the novels of 
~~t~:~~e :hhil~g; , \ r:t r~:i;ty t~~ Thus s~aking, the ministrr squal'M his narrow shoulders and rh:;i~n!~!:t1~ i;;!:!\~t:/:h 1! 
exposure. Every char:icter in .science walked ovrr to the coffin. lntrrtsttd, Mr Brownfollowtd him. enjoyment of this new, 
fiction who has been invisible has Chari~ conunted himSl:{f with waiting in tht background. As tht uninhibited state and so there is 
changed into someone other than Rtv. Watts pttred do'U.111 at the slultton of Mr Bland, parti.illy the inevitable downfall. 
their normal self, into a Mr Hyde. concraled lxhind hisformidablt ~ard, ont/ltshlm hand shot up Only when writers noticed 
;;~~n~~ ~ ;~~~y v~::~~:r!s :~!:~ :~~ and ~ized we ministrr by the laptl of his coat. With a sharp £~;: ~~:~::\~~~ i~h;hisin;~;i![s~ 
mousiness is what attr:icts Richud to !:;eofbrtarh the Rr-v. W,l'ltS!tapedbackand collapmlintoa presented an opponunity for 
fr:~ Whf~:~nvi~~~e, ~~::;:i~t:h e ~f ~Bt calm," said the skeleton, sitting up in tht coffin. ~Pull ::;;lt~at.:::di~n;~::~~!t~~:~~: 
civiliz.ation, hidden desires are yourSl:/f togtther. Mr Brown, gi-w tht pa non 11. drink." fiction. Both Roben Silverberg 
expoud and she be<:omes sexually Scarctlyre11.lizingwhathtu1asdoing, thtRr-v. Watts .. cctpttd {"To See the Invisible Man• 
voracious, a change in char:icter that asti/fshotofapp/qaclr,whichhtpo111'Mintohisshakm•ndstil/ (1962D and Gardner Do:iois 
contributes to their eventual break-up. quiwring body. ("The Visible Man• [197SD we 
But more is lost than gained by •Have 11.notht-rl'" aslred Mr Brown. invisibility in different wal'$ as a 
~l:n:!r.~~:no~~;e;;~~ t~ ~::~ •Po11r it out," gasped we Rtv. Watts, wiping tht tt,m from ~~:i:~ ~~nli::~;t~ s;~v~~'!: 
~:a/~:1isib~l~? as ~heemep~~o:~;:i~ ~::::- •J'lJ lllM it fllhtn I stop burning. Wbil.t is it, n11balming ;:;i::::t, a ::;:u~~~f~al~; alt~~ 
conclusion: that our identity and our Sirin 11.nd Bonts (193)) - Thorne Smith which is quickly shown to be 
substance are somehow conjoined, one of increasing; vulner:ibility; 
that only by being; corporeal can we also be real. Time and again, no Dozois's criminal c:an be seen but cannot see the people around him, 
matter how the char:icters may relish the power of their invisibility, an enforced alienation that is highly destructive. During the '60$ and 
they eventually discover iu curse. If smries of invisibility are not '70, in panicular, alienation was a common theme in science fiction -
always tragedies, they always end up as tales oflon. which makes it surprising; that the alienation of invisibility was not 
When H.G. Wells introduced The Invisible M .. n in 1897 it might more commonly used - but society was always the Gnil, so that 
have been supposed that this variation on a theme of Jekyll and Hyde being; shut away from one's society by one form of invisibility or 
would be as fenile as any of his othn works from this period in the another was the ultimate evil. 
development of science fiction. It did indeed inspire a lot of films and But it was Chrinopher Priest who explored that form of 
television programmes, more, one su,;pens, for the special effects alienation most tho roughly, in his chilling; novel The G/,.mour. There 
opponunities offered by the invisible centn.l chancter than for is nothing; magical about the invisibility in this novel; it is not the 
anything; else. But although the underlying theme of scientific hubris, product of uys or pocions but is in fact a function of society. The 
the scientist who becomes his ~~-- ~------ - ---~ glamoro\Jli ones, who lead a diny, 
She btcamt in1Jisiblt. diseased and isolated existence in own experimental subject, has 
continued to be a popular topic, Ricbil.rd continutd to start at the pl11et SM had bttn, so sht the interstices of our society, are 
those that society as a whole 
simply chooses not to see. (Neil 
Gaiman employs a similar form of 
invisibility in Nevrrwhert [19%], in 
..,hich the poor, homeless and cast• 
off people who are the d<.-ni:tens of 
the world under London simply 
cannot be seen by, or interact with, 
people in the world above: a 
potent if obvious metaphor for the 
plight of the homeless.) 
invisibility as such has proved to mowd away, unSl:m by him, 11.nd walked to tht other sidt of the 
be far less popular. While bed. 
~~~j~~ ~~:~~ ;vt~;~~~af~~ It -~t/(:/1!:;1:g~: ~ue;n~ef ::::;J:::;;;:~w;:::;:;ed lo. 
t:!s :lie~dei~~~•io:dto th:;a~~ ruilud,ms in p11blic places, liltt saual fant,:IJies of total 
explomion, few if any have used f.lH/nrr11.bility and helplnsness.. Yet in1;isibi/iry U'll.J s«Nrt, a 
invisibility more than once. conctalmmt ,.,,J ii hiding, a pDVJtT 11.nd a CHrSl:. The half guilty 
The invisible hero is visibly SU7Xt of saual arousal, tht swttt dnire of Hnprotecttd surrtndc-, 
alienated from his society, the two tht sacri/t.et of priw.cy, tht exposure of hiddm dtsirt, tht realizAtion 
::d~:!h~i:~~ah~:~na; ;:~ei~;!; that it had started ,.,,J could not~ stopped. 
the forced isolation. Thus Wells's The Glamour (1984, revised version 19';16) - Chris1opher 
hero faces an inevitable descent Priest 
As with so much of Priest's recent 
work, Tht Gl,,.moHr is an 
examination of a disintegrating; 
through crime to death, and few other wmen have found enough 
variety in the subject to avoid str:iightforward recapitulation of 
Wells's original. 
It h:u, at various times, proved an ape subject for comedy, 
notably in Thorne Smith's Skin •nd Bones in which an innocuous 
experimenter, appropriately named Bland, finds one of his 
experiments going; wrong; and he periodically becomes invisible except 
for his skeleton. The novel has great fun with the inconvenient 
tr.i.nsformations: a barber who has shaved him unwr:ips the towel 
from around Bland's face to find a sku!! grinning up at him, a 
prostitute wakes beside her latest client to find a skeleton in her bed. 
Even ro, the book follows the typical pattern of stories of invisibility: 
the change awakens a hidden strand in Bland's chancter which, being; 
a Thorne Smith novel, involves copious amounts of .sex and alcohol. 
In the scene quoted, for example, where Bland, in skeletal form, has 
beto-n assumed to be dead, the transformation provides an excuse for 
corpse, undenaker and priest 10 get drunk. Nevenhelcss, although 
personality- though, like both ThtA/finn11.rion (1981) and ThtP,,migt 
(1995), it also rem on complex questions of fiction and rea!icy - and 
Tht Gl,,.mour resonates with a tale of amnesia and false memory, so 
that throughout the book there are constant metaphors for not seeing; 
and not being; seen. Grey, the amnesiac, makes the world, or has his 
world made, in vuious different ways until he gr:idually approaches 
one that makes sense. Without memory, reality is not fixed and 
absoluce, but something to be recreated by fixing; together Jtr.ty and 
not alW1.ys reliable memories. Those who are deeply glamorous, like 
Grey's rival Niall, on the other hand, are by their very invisibility 
detaching; themselves from the world; they are unmaking; reality. In 
this instance, therefore, invisibility becomes more than ever a perfect 
metaphor for alienation, but we see that it damages far more than the 
individual. By becoming; invisible we do not become insubstintia\, but 
nther the world itself loses substance. 
page 11 

===== PAGE 12 =====
Simon Archer & 
Stan Nich olls 
Gerry Anderso n: The Authorised 
Biography 
l~gmd, 1996, 12Bpp, £15.99 
Reviewed by Mark Plummer 
It's undeniable that Gerry Anderson has been a major 
influence on a generation, indeed on sever.tl generations. For 
some, this may have had a practical manifestation: as a child, 
Alan Bond watched the horizontal. take-off of Finl:u/1 XL5 
and this may have influenced his subsequent work on the re­
usable space craft HOTOL For others, it merely left fond 
childhood memories of the son that inspired the committee 
of the 1995 World Science Fiction Convention in Glasgow to 
invite Gerry Anderson to be one of their Guesu of Honour . 
Everybody, or so it se-ems, loves supennarionation. 
This biography - suned by Archer and, fol.lowing his 
death in 1993 in a road accident, completed by Nicholls -
works iu way through Anderson's various television and 
film projects, from the early days of Twizzle and Four Fe.11.ther 
Falls, through the heights of success with Thunderbirds, the 
live action work with UFO and Space: 1999 and, following 
some fallow years, his return with Spaet Precinct. It offer.. an 
interesting insight into the mechanics of making a television 
programme, covering the administrative and financial aspects 
: 'n;~nde~i;rJ;~att~:e di~r!~~:utasas r~~rid:digb~f;r!af:1~~~~ 
took place), which makes the whole process seem rather 
Vecto r 1 9 2 • March/April 1997 
First 
Impressions 
Reviews of Hardback 
and Paperback 
Originals 
Edited by Paul Kincaid 
jolly, although the lurking presence of second wife Sylvia 
Anderson serves as a reminder that it wasn't all sweetness and 
light. 
It is apparent that Archer, at least, is very much a fan of 
Anderson's work. Most of the programmes are describe in 
glowing terms, stressing the highly advanced techniques used 
which placed Anderson at the forefront of special effects 
technology. Anderson refers again and again to the 
imponance of believability in his programmes and claims 
levels of plot sophistication that raise the them above the 
level of mere children's television. Viewers of, say, Space: 
1999, might be h~d-pwhed to find such sophistication, and 
readers who have se,en Anderson's 1960s programmes again 
within the last few years may not recognise the descriptions 
herein. The urually held view is that the appeal of 
Thunderbirds and the like is largely nost·algic, and while they 
can be viewed and enjoyed today this can only be done if you 
keep a firm eye on whe.n and for whom they were produced. 
The authors of this book make a credible anempt to place 
~e~~:~:e.~h:~ ~~ :!1ai1;::::1 !f t~:ka~~C:\:~~~~~~ 
~f ;~~tp!n;:~;iit!n1h:~h~~t~ ~~n~~;kh=~t~ 
:~~~~ u;f b~~equ~~tif~;;'l;;s ~f}~e~~~~ .;:~~ ri/~sb::; 
~h~ti~g~~ti~:t 1~ ~:v~~.their own.' It is this sense that 
Arst Impression s • page 12 

===== PAGE 13 =====
Poppy Z. Bri te 
Reviewed by Tanya Brown 
Exquisite Corp~ 
Orion, 19'6, 2.Upp, £16.9' 
There is something particularly nauseating abou t the idea of 
eating something that's still alive. Isn't 1here? lf the thought 
doesn't bother you, then you may find this book 
unexceptionable. 
inv;:;it~~:tri;inc~rf! 1s.~~ ~0.0:t~~-iiri~e·~a~re~f!~~ 
novels, Lost Souls (1992) and Drawing Blood (1993), were 
investigations of human horror r~emed by their 
explor.uion of the s;1eroatur.a.I: Exquisite Corpse, however , 
~f;:ir:.!:rt>r~~e d~~~ ~~?g~t ~o~~~~:; ~rihal 
murde:r, necrophilia , cannibalism and sadistic sex that Brite 
presents this time round. 
the ~~~~j~~~w ra::, w;:rn:r:n~te w:it:~~C:f 
slaughter. 
~ ::c:= :tbe::tihJ~t;:Sb:ii~:~~i~ ~~use 
;i:~ t!f !:ii~~~::ur:i ~r::~::~rcs0 ;:~t; 
hkesohbutter. 
After a dramatic escar.e - which, if the protagonist were 
more sympathetic and likable, might be heroic - Andrew 
makes his way from the bars of Soho to sultry New Orleans, 
a f'.avourite setting of Brite's. There he encounters Jay, who 
~f~s:ht:1s~ ,~: :t:ti!gt~f ~~,;~e~~l~e~ t~:h:~r;r~ 
puu it, 'Jay had never ~alive friend be.fore, and he wasn't 
sure what to do with one.' The two talk for hours , exploring 
the shared horrors of their n;m1res: what is imponant , 
however, is that neither of them feel thilt they are monsters . 
As Andrew puts it, 'I emerged from the womb with no 
had'!na;~:thi:;e ::::.~ h~~ :;::t~;nfif~n r:L;i:'J fk·~-! 
species of one. Monste r, mutation, Nietz.schcan superman - I 
could perceive no difference.' 
The 'extraordinary love' of ]ilY and Andrew is balanced 
by the relationship between Tran, a young Vietnamese boy 
whose family have just discovered that he's g•y and thrown 
him out, and Luke, his former lover, who is HIV-positiv e 
and divides his time between vitriolic radio broadc:.SlS on 
~n~ ~i~,:~~int~on fi~:h ~h/~~v~J~b~;~j:: 
will be. bis last. Luke's tirades are directed at the ramhantly 
~he~b~!:t~•"!t~ b~~g~::~i~ 0!~~ ~:i~,~ ili~ 
wo rld, and regard homosexuals as :illt aberration and a threat . 
Tnn nill loves Luke; 'I'd like him to hilve a good life ... but 
a]l I can wish him now is a d«e nt death '. Lost in New 
~~~•, ~h~C:1 ~~;~~ir;~• ~ is o:i; ~~:~;u~r:n~:; 
with the sharing of a victim. 
It's not as straightforward as that, of course. Brite weaves 
Be n Bov a 
Vect or 1 92 • March/April 1997 
together the two p•nllel love stories (Luke ilild Tran' s 
mainly in the form of flashbacks) into a helix, which spin.Is 
:;:~ ;~;0 ::i~~;bitt i\h~~~ 't:~1d\: :~:ii~~ 
previous novels, of love as redemptio n; it is clear early in the 
novel, however, tha1 there on be no happy endings. 
This is a shocking novel, and also a flawed one. Brite 
hit1t~::0:i1h0 ~htr::i~~; ~t~~~ a~r l;~~i~~ ~~~:it 
helpless victims; both are consequences of a casual approach 
to pleasure. And, while at least one character grows and 
chilnges during the novel, a great deaJ of blood is spilt before 
he can prove himself. No one has a decent death. 
The nastiness is not pointless: but one might ask whether 
it's desirable to be able to empathise with someone who can 
lovingly describe the taste and texture of human flesh 'lightly 
fried in butter' . And the butchery - although far from casual 
- pervades the novel; the overall effect is deadening, like 
:h~~:nfnat~~':t!~:n~l:~eB;~ti:iJ1,e ;s humo~r~ i~~ 
cha.ncters tend toW"ilfds a r.oetic profundi~ is faintly 
nauscat.ing: Andrew descnbes AIDS, for example, as ' this 
malady borne on the fluids of love', and waxes lyria.l about 
the sensations which he experiences on seeing the first drop 
of blood on a victim's skin. 
The French playwright Antonin Anaud defined the 
notion of the 'theatre of cruelty' - theatre that disturbs the 
:~:~:~~~' t!r:: h~;~;r:s~ 0h: r:Fi;es~'.0 ~~a:dd st~s l~;t~ 
on the level of perform•nce, 'it is not the cruelty we can 
exercise upon each other by hacking ill each other's bodies ... 
but the much more terrible and necessa.ry cruelty which 
things can exercise •ga.inst us.' Brite's 'nove l of cruelty ' 
: - 0:nJ~~~t>:m:~~~rs~h~e dcri:~zn f::,: 
such crudty. It ts unplcas1I1tly easy to understand the killers' 
motiv.uion; Jay and David .re shown as humu beings, not 
just ciphers of cruelty. It is when their victim's point of view 
is shown that the reader is jolted into revulsion. 
atte!p~i~~e a.nis e:;?'~~i~~ of\~kda:~esiJ::TI:~ai! ~~t:r!: 
she treats it too superficially to be: taken seriously. There's il 
passage when Luke is recalling the reviews of his first novel, 
:::;;~:~;e~:;:ttr!~f:~~ the way Poppy Brite 
The pnise .,u lavish but slightly shdl-shocktd, u if 
~= !=,°the!:i= 1;' ;:kt~ tlo~~;c 
~i!: ~~=. ~:t:Jai~:~ii::::r; =. 
penonally offended the revilers. Lucas was pleued by 
both rextions. He h2d. no UK for middle ground. 
There is no midd1e ground for this novel. It is, in places, 
profoundl y unpleuant: I am not a particularly squeamish 
reader, but there were pil!tS of Exquisite Co rpse that 1 regret 
bu~rl!:v!:~ ;:~·t:a~af :!lIT~:~• t~ ~i~tie ~: ~t~r;:,v; 
about such a book. 
Moonrise (Hodder &-Sto111hton, 1996, 6IJpp, £16.99) 
Reviewed by Gary D:.lk.in 
M<J(!nrise is di~ded _imo three sections. The first is set in t..be iliermath of an attempt on the life of Paul Stavenger, a 
semor execuuve w11;h M:uterson Aerospace, the corporation which runs America's privatised moonbase. As Paul 
st.rugglcs to m:.ke his ':"'ay ~cross the lunar surf.tee to a safe haven, we learn the events, in flashback , which led to 
his current desperat e s1tu:mo n. 
page 13 

===== PAGE 14 =====
Vec:lor 192 • March/April 1997 
Gregory Masterson IJ commits suicide (or perhaps is murde red) while Paul is in bed with Gregory's wife, 
!~;:;t:dph:i~ :;~h! 0ca;r;:r~t:r~hr~~~- ~~=~~;; Ihei~ fur\:~~eb~;s::r;:1 r::r:c:~h:~.;i~= ~ttn:nf;h!~~ ~~1·w~~h 
Melissa who had previously been sleeping with his father before having an affair with P aul. If all thi s sounds like 
Dallas or Dynasty, that 's because it is: neither characters nor plot rise above the level of TV soap opera of the glossy 
American kind, while the writing struggles to achieve even bare compet ency. 
After the murder attempt we jump eighteen years into the futur e and to part two. 
Douglas Masterson is now our hero, while Gregory I.II schemes to shut the base down. The moonbase depends 
on nanotechnology for its survival , but an alliance o f the New Morality back on Earth is about to achieve a 
complete ban on the technology. Meanwhile, a rival Jap anese moon base is introdu ced, but only to provide some 
competitio n and a race to claim water rights at the lunar South Pole. A solar flare and more murderous jealousy 
result in funh er danger, while there are also plans to build a n ew generation of 'clipperships' on the moon from 
nano-engineered diamond, and a rival scheme to develop plasma-fusion energy. 
In the final part business and family rivalries come to a thunderously melodramatic head, with the lives o f 
everyone in the moonbase endangered by two characters who have finally gone quite barkin g mad. 
I have several problems with this book, quite apart from the fact that the writing is poor , the character s badly 
drawn and much of the action painfull y contri ved. There is the sheer length: rarely have I read a book so obviously 
padded out to 'blockbuster' proponions. Almost every piece of informati on is delivered several times, characters 
have long discussions which reach scant conclusions and, even worse, expand the narrative by telling each other 
things they already know (or should know given the circumstances). Long descriptive passages fail to evoke any 
sense of either wonder or danger , which is in itself quite an achievement given the lunar setting. 
a p~v~::e:;~:?as~~;~ ~!!~:!!:: ~i th~t~f ~~::::n~~!e:t/~gm~ ~h:)d~~n;g;,na ~i~:~b=~~= !::{~\~ft;1J/f:1:~ 
heroes taming the high frontier. The sheer costs of running such an enterprise make the idea o f such sole control 
quite absurd, it is as if Bova is still writing in the time of classic Heinlein. More problemati c still is Bova's idea that 
a global moral backlash could ever be enough to prescribe a technology as powerful and potentiall y lucrat ive as 
:;rd::j~;~1h~;-!itfc:i:e7;~~=~:s~:1:;i;~:tc~:~ti~~y T~n;f1~~~~:e::1ir0 h/'i:;f :t::ti; ~:v:c::~: ~~:a:di n~ l~~:t 
powerful technology seems to escape his notice entir ely; at one point Douglas thinks: 'I'll be a target for every 
brain-dead New Morality zealot who can get his hands on a gun', and this because his life has been saved by illegal 
nano-surgery . 
But then, to Bova technology is an unqualified good. He seems unaware of such events as the Chernoby l 
disaster or Three Mile Island, so he can have Joanna say: 'It's like the fear the public had of the old nuclear power 
~::e~1:n~~sh~:~:nb;~~ ~~!~~d::7ci~: ~~• !~~:~~j s ;~e:~~~et~~ dC:1s:~;1~o~n;r~:;1f~rb:r~~~t:d~u:! 1:h~er~h:~i11i~ 
safeguards but they won't always be quite sufficient. There is no reason to think that the introdu ction of 
!uaddi~:ti~!:fJnt~n~eh:nJstI!:di~\i!: 01~!cli::s :ithhr;;~:t i ;:\~7;nth:\he;a~i1i ~!e~h: i~ld.ger as a mind1ess 
the ~ 1o~~b;: ~t~~\~:; h~~~h~£:rthh!~\~~~:~~:i!:; ft~ b!stti~: ~~~~h~o~:fi:~: ~~:?ncl::;:Th~e:~th ~~~ 
ent ire premise is rendered nonsensical. 
One final gripe: there is no indication anywhere other than on the title page that this is but the first volume of a 
series. To say the least, this is deceptive: if I am going to embark on a series th at could well run into thousands of 
pages I want to be informed of the fact in advance. As it is I can only stand amazed that the back cover carries 
fulsome praise from Anhur C. Clarke and Ray Bradbury. 
Storm Constantine Dancer for the World's Death 
lncq,tion, 1996, J6pp, LJ.JO 
Reviewed by Lynne Bispham 
Ever since Storm Constantine burst onto the scene with her 
Wraeththu books, she has shown herself to be a writer with a 
unique voice, able to create exotic and memorable characters 
and almospheric landscapes. 
Dancer for the World's Death is a shon story every bit as 
imaginative as her novels. Lariel Farbuinnen is apprenticed to 
the terpsichore Firfirieth, one of an ancient line of dancers 
who are also priests and seers. The charismatic Firfirieth has 
proved a difficult master and Larie! sometimes suspects that 
he is touched by madness. Now Firfirieth is convinced that 
he has discovered the key to, and the whereabouts of, a 
gateway to another world, one of many worlds abandoned 
page 14 
by Lariel's people aeons past during the centuries-long war 
against their enemies, the denizens of the abyss. Lariel's 
people, the Muinish, are now confined to one world, but it is 
~tf :ishnt~te t:e3::i~i:ids ~h~:-:e;~~n~~eiheTr~~tL;~;j h1: 
no w ish to follow Firfirieth to another world where 
unknown dangers may lurk, but he has no choice. 
Though there is less space to set the scene in a shon story 
than in a novel, Constantine speedily establishes her 
characters and the worlds through which they move. When 
;,hlii ~h1!;f!n~i~~i:;e1:: 0~J tte e~:~~arha~hf 011!:e a~~ 
very powerfully described, making this an engrossing read. 
(Dancer for the World'5 Death, signed and numb ered 
lil a limited editi on of 300, is available from Inception, 
H White Way, Kidllflgton, Oxon, OXS 2X.A.) 

===== PAGE 15 =====
Amitav Ghosh 
Vector 192 • March/April 1997 
The Calcutta Chromosome (Pict,dor, 1996, J09pp, £H.99) 
Reviewed by Bri:ln Stableford 
fu~:~~!"Ci~ri~~;:.;.~ni~!>;e~u!}~s!j/de~:rj~~sst~ea~ ~e~tt?o~:~ ~heNr:;st~; 1t•n~~: ~a:;hP;:a~;e~1 
who 'dunnit' - although there is a sig,ni£icant elemem o7that - as a matter of exactly what it was that they were 
trying to do. If it is the nature of thts solution which defines the genre of the novel, it qualifies both as science 
fiction and as metaphysical fantasy, for what is at stake is not so much the secret per se as the process of its 
revelation. (To explain more fully might, alas, be to give away too much - but it is the whole nature rather than 
;r~:!r ~Ffufi~~l~eb~~r~~e e~;1:~a~~~~si.) defined by its careful use of numinous and tantalising h ints and its polite 
The protagonist of The Calcuua dJromosome is an Egyptian-born clerk named Antar whose menial task it is, in 
the New York of the not-so-distant future, to watch over the work of a supercompu ter named Ava. One day, that 
information flow casts up an item of flotsam which recalls a day in 1995 when Amar briefly met L. Murugan, an 
:r;a1;::i;;o;~ ~=s~t:du~ ~a;~~~! :~~~t~~sH::in~~~1:t~:: 1r::in~h~~:~ :1~aibihheo~~ 
Ava, sets out to discover exactly what became of Murugan, who vanished from human ken aher visiting Calcutta 
in pursuit of his own quest to figure out exactly how - and why - Ross was enabled to make his discovery. 
We live in a time of conspiracy theories, when it is easy to find considerable fascination in reappraisals of the 
historical record which allow us glimpses of some further, hidden, reality. Ghosh is by no means as ambitious in 
his contribution to this modern mythes as Umberto Eco - who offered an engaging account of an extraordinarily 
elaborate and far-ranging conspiracy in Foucault's Pendulum - but his more tightly-organized scheme is complicated 
by its intricate convolutions, and has the additional point of interest of readjusting the balance of Imperialist 
history. 
In the ort hodox account, it required the Victorian gentleman Ross to solve theJro blem which was the enduring 
curse of the greater part of the Thi rd World, thus justifying the colonization an subjugation of India by its new 
Emperors. In this ironic rival version, Ross is not merely guided to the trut h by indigenes he disdains even to notice 
but also deflected from a deeper truth of a profound and peculiar nature. While Ross receives the vulgar gift of a 
mechanism {subsequently augmemed by a Nobel prize :lnd a knighthood}, the givers of that gift press on towards a 
goal that is (ar more elusive but ultimately far more precious: a goal founded in a distinctively Indian view of the 
world, which cannot easily be assimilated to the Western/scientific t«ltamchauung. 
By virtue of the way in which it neatly folds past and present together through the medium of :lI1 academic 
;1;;,u~~;a~.~::e:h~::::s::;nc: ~ oliJ;~n~0 a:;:tof~h:Sf~frli~ip~:::s~:h~~/c 0:b~~~pili:t::!n:~:i; 
as the present and the past and contrives a complexity of which an expert in origami would surely be proud. The 
novel does so, however, without any prejudice to its readability; it is a challe':tng text in its way, but not in the 
;j;~;:;tr:;it?p:C:~;teh::;:bc;',:;;i:::~:~:i":i;h~~:~~:J:~n~:~.ind ivi ual phase of the story is perfectly 
On the basis of an admittedly-haphazard sampling process it seems to me that 1996 has been an unusually good 
year for science fiction. Several fine endeavours emanating from within the genre (Ho[l Fire, Voyage and ldom, to 
:ar::!f~~:e:Ji~a;~t bi~~1:Ji~~e~:~edD~i: 0 ~i:Cj f!:~t~~~n:ntt&~:~ea1a'~;1~:tsi:;:;~.~ t~~~~~:o~ 
The Decbronization o[Sam Magmder). The Calcutta Chromorome extends the latter list still further, and may well be 
in a position to vie for awards within the field if it attracts sufficient attention here. I hope the publishers will see 
fit to submit it to the consideration of the jurors for the Clarke and Campbell Awards. 
William Gibson ldoru (Viki1t1, 1m, 2'J2pp, £16.00J 
Reviewed by L. J. Hurst 
As his occasional journalism as well as his fiction makes clear, William Gibson thinks that all impo rtant events of 
the future will take place in the Asian Pacific rim. ln Idoru one consequence of this is that the female lead, Chia, 
leaves her home in Seattle to travel to Tokyo; for although she is a feistr. 14-year-old with her own {>ersonalised 
laptop computer, in the end she and her friends want the physical details, not the vinua l ones. Ch1a's journey 
across the Pacific allows Gibson 10 introduce a bit of old-fash1oned spy story skulduggery, but that apan almost 
everything (the location excepted) is virtual. 
The book tells two stories in parallel: the first traces Chia's journey, as she attempts to discover what is going 
to happen to Rez, her popstar hero, now he has announced his plans to marry an idoru. Rez is half of the band 
Lo/Rez and bas b<!en the biggest thing in pop worship for longer than Chia's life, yet old as he is be still attracts a 
youth following. Now even the screaming fans wonder if the choice of a virtual bride doesn't indicate he is losing 
something. His idoru is called Rei Toei and she exists only in a computer, though her reality, as far as anything can 
measure it, is growing, and people all over Japan know her from her appearanc~ on billboards. 
page 15 

===== PAGE 16 =====
Vector 192 • March/April 1997 
dig~~; ~;0th~ d~ryoi~ !i~i: ~fl~:i~:;efu'/a dsJ~::~:f{'tclehvt~n u;:!1g~::::e~s ~;t,h!! ci~0 b~ u;ij~}{e:a~!~s ~: 
investigations drove a woman to suicide, he is being used by Rez's bodyguards to investigate the world of Rei Toei. 
Idom is a thriller, and though it depends on the forefront of technology for its thesis - all the characters are 
constantly switching on computers, accessing data, sending e-mail messages, try ing to conflate information - it is 
not especially techn ical, and lacks invent ion in other ways. Love hotels are introduced as a freak, though surely we 
have all heard of them; in the hotel toilet everything is high-tech, controlled by buttons marked in Japanese which 
Chia cannot und erstand; and th e cars on the road are littl e Jap anese runabouts. In fact, Gibson is surprised that 
Jap an is so Japanese -he keeps pointing out that the writing is Japanese, as if the natives as well as Anglo-Saxons 
shou ld expect everything to be in English. 
The question of data mining is much more interesting, and I guess a lot of people would like a job like Colin 
Laney's. We are all aware of what is involved because the effect is being set out in every aspect of our lives. For 
!h:~ndi~c~~:~~yb~~\1~::~11~:ute~e ~;t;:e;::;~;;sofi~di:id~~~t:dt:eile~:rti:d i:f o~d~~i~~ ;;;ro1::he%. ~V:h~~! 
supermarkets could match their data with that of other commercial organ isations, or even government 
departments, what bigger pictures could they form of us? 
Gibson's idoru, though, is the opposite. Lane y found out more and more about an individual, by putting 
together the records they had created as they went about their daily life. Now, if there were records placed in those 
databases without any one having done anything except insert a record, then a new life would be created. The 
more records that could be generated in more and more computers would make the reality of that data subjec t 
~:ii~~;1 ~;1d t!r;;: !~:n~:~~)f ~: te:e;:ti~~iliir~eth!t~h;~~l1ri~:~hi~t~itht~~ a:~~rct~erk~:: C:o~idte: ~~~:~ 
complete. What began during the Second World War with the construction of charact ers such as Colonel Britton 
and William Martin (The Man Who Never Was) cou ld reach a new level of influen ce. 
H owever, rather than investigate these possibilities, Gibson has written a low key thriller in whic h the ultimate 
cause of the action is a search by Russian gangsters for an item which entered Japan when Chia was stupid enough 
to carry someone else's luggage through customs . Of course, your analysis of the data may lead you to different 
conclusio ns. 
Harry Harrison & John Holm King and Emperor 
l tgeruf, 1996, 452pp, £16.99 
Reviewed by Vikki Lee 
This is the third and, presumably, final volume in Harrison 
and Holm's Hammer and the Cross trilogy (or has it now 
become a series?). I mention John Holm because he is the 
mysterious co-author of this series whose name has not 
appeared on the cover of these books since the first volume, 
although he is credited as co-author on the title page. 
Shef, co-King of England along with Alfred, has settled 
down to rule in his capital in the Nonh, Stamford, whilst 
Alfred rules the South from Winchester. Based in the 
marshes, Shef and his loyal followers, a mixture of Vikings, 
Swedes, Danes, Finns and Englishmen, continue their search 
for new knowledge - for only with knowledge can Shef hope 
to hold onto the peace he has won for England so far. After a 
disasterous attempt to fly by one of his subjects, a dream is 
born, and following a visit by an Arab emissary who 
promises knowledge regarding flight (which the Arabs claim 
to have achieved), Shef is lured to the Mediteranean with his 
restless army. 
Striking an uneasy alliance with the Caliph of Cordova, 
Shef agrees to aid the Arabs in their battle for naval 
supremacy over the Greeks - who have a secret weapon of 
t;;:k o;:;~ a~;t~t r~;:·or~~~;i~f t~e f~~i;~~o~:::r f;~! 
~~:fc:_d tts;t::dtrf:: • ~~;~:a~~: t:\~:;~s i~ !t~~~~ 
Garry Kilworth A Midsummer's Nightmare 
&ntam Pms, 1996, 32Jpp, £14.99 
Reviewed by Cherith Baldry 
I've read more than one novel recently which revisits one of 
page 16 
continue the search for answers regarding flight, and of 
course, the Fire. 
Not so very far away, Bruno, Emperor of the Franks, the 
Germans, the Italians and the Burgundians, is searching for a 
holy Christian relic - namely the Graal. Already possessing 
the Lance that was used to spear Jesus on the cross, Bruno 
~::~o~~eE~~;:b:~,r~~n~ ~~ l~~h~~~:~ ~fthi~e r;a~~i~~ 
~g:t ~~:~:;: !~:t s~?fa~:r ei~::1: 0 ihJ · t~ ::e:l ~t~ ~%~! 
from under Bruno's nose, and two old enemies are again set 
on a course that must end this time in the death of one or the 
other. 
Once more, Harrison and Holm have produced a 
rivetting novel set in the late 9th Century. The various 
religions - Christian, Moslem and Norse - and their 
differences are the backbone of the novel, and a lot of 
research into the various customs and beliefs gives the setting 
solidity and believability. Interestingly, none of the religions 
are favoured over the others by the authors, and a sense of 
the turmoil caused solely by different beliefs is present 
throughout. 
King and Emperor could be read as a stand-alone novel, 
but I would recommend reading all three in this series if you 
are an historical fantasy buff. It's cenainly a cut above the 
average. I do, however, hope the story ends here and that the 
~~~:r:: s:i,\~~~ t:~h:~~l;f~h\~ !~~d~o t~~e e~r!~~5m~ro~ 
characters. 
Shakespeare's plays. In this one, Garry Kilworth imagines 
that the fairies of A Midsummer Night's Dream, driven out of 
their home - not A Wood Nol Far From Athens, but 
Sherwood Forest - by the pollution of the twentieth 
century, travel to the New Forest where they hope to settle 

===== PAGE 17 =====
in peace. Their movement releases magic into the world and 
awakes all the legendary creatures that we thought were dead 
and gone, including the evil Morgan le Fay. 
The fairies travel in a bus, driven by Titania who has been 
taught how by an enthralled human, Sid, a 'rude mechanical' 
En route, she steals a baby - not for the first time - who 
turns out to be the last descendant of Guenevere and 
Lan~elot. Morgan knows that if she can kidnap the baby and 
sacnfice her at Stonehenge on Midsummer's Day, she can 
augment her magic, drag the country back into the Middle 
Ages, and get rid of all this tiresome technology. 
Within this basic plot, Kilworth also gives us the stories 
of some of the human characters who come into contact with 
the fairies. Some fall in love, others make new decisions 
about their lives, all achieve their happy ending, for this is, 
after all, a comedy. 
All through the novel I was asking myself whether the 
mixture of Shakespeare and the Arthuri~n legend really 
works: nitpicking Arthurians like myself will point out that 
Guenevere and Lancelot had no descendants. But it is all 
good fun, and on the level Kilworth is using it's unfair to ask 
awkward questions. 
Most of the pleasure of this novel comes from the impact 
of the fairies and the other supernatural creatures on the 
modern world, which isn't always what we might expect. 
~~: ~~~~e !~h;~: :~~itti~;t tt~;oa:~fa1r~::g!t~ t~ee:p~~~ 
Tr:avellers who. fall in with them on their way to the 
~htu::r:r c~:~:~i:n~ 0;:~~:~ :rs:~i:~ h~~e t~ifr{~~f~: 
I enjoyed Morgan's encounter with the policeman at 
Garry Kilworth 
Reviewed by Barbara Davies 
The Roof of Voyaging 
Orbit, 1996, 426pp, Lt6.99 
To say Garry Kilworth is prolific is an understatement - he 
seems to bring out a new book every other month. The Roof 
of Voyaging is the first volume of his new fantasy series, The 
Navigator Kings, which uses as its setting Polynesia and its 
associated myths and legends. 
The great navigator, Kupe, while pursuing an octopus by 
canoe, comes across an island he names 'The Land-of-Mists'. 
It. is, in fact, Britain and while lying off its rocky coast he 
witnesses Dorcha, a Scots woman, try to kill Seumas, the Pict 
:'n~0 s:~~~ ~~~oh~h~as~~: !t:r:':h::::e 1;rc1c~/~~\~r~~: 
and his men and taken back to Raiatea. 
f:veryt_hing in Raiatea is different: climate, housing, food, 
relat1onsh1ps between the sexes, attitudes to masculinity, 
homosexuality, animals, cleanliness - it takes some getting 
used to, and a homesick Seumas finds it much harder than 
Dorcha. The gentle Polynesians, 'darker men with brighter 
souls', are much more to her taste than her own race who 
seem 'to feel the need for constant aggression'. For nearly 
:!~: ~f~~se t1:'d~r:t!i1 ~h:~hii1!VSe~~: 1r~:::t~;i~~cta: 
but her hatred of him remains undimmed. Then everything 
chaT\~·King of Borabora and Raiatea is dying and there is a 
risk of civil war between his sons, T utapu and T angiia. To 
avoid assassination by his paranoid older brother and seek a 
kingdom of his own, Tangiia secretly constructs three great 
ca_noes and fle~ with his followers. Seumas chooses to go 
with them, leavmg Dorcha facing a life that is suddenly and 
unexpectedly bleak. 
Vector 192 • March/April 1997 
Stonehenge, and the efforts of other police to search the 
fairies' bus. 
leas~i~h~~tf:i:!~ 0T~~;\:~e":h:~~go~sn bce~~;t ~f i:t~:;~~: 
so that in our terms they might seem irrationally cruel or 
kind, powerful at one moment and childish the next. Puck, 
~~::cin~tth.~h a r;i~e;~s bo~1 c~~~~~i7,~ ;:!f-~r~:ra~ 
accept that 1f fames existed they would be very like th.is. 
Where the novel falls down is partly in the structure and 
fai~t {!ir~t{~efr~t~s onneec:~;~i~~t:i:~~tei:e~~: bu~yt~~a~:7~ 
plot about the baby hangs together. Within it, though, there 
~:~~:;,ra~tth 0 ~::~i~~ t0 1:~:s j::~o~n\ha~tf,!1:~he ~~~ 
bring in another figure out of legend. There's a long visit to 
the Welsh fairies, also, which holds up the action and 
provides only a minimal contributi on to the plot. 
quo~;ti~;sste~e~~~;J~ta~l~:~fr~:eth:sp\~y~\vt~oa ~~;so! 
:ah[:~0 ~:~:w~~tei~s:-: b!i~;~~fd v::af 0i~hi~1draili1:k 
~:s~1~~la~{)'. ~t:~u~~~~i~t w~11he ~~}~nt\ r:::i~~~ 1J~~~1!~ 
while I might agree with the sentiment, it is awkwardly 
expressed. 
That apart, though, this is a fun read and I'd be sorry to 
have missed it. For goodness sake, though , read the play first 
if you don't already know it, otherw ise you'll miss a lot of 
the joke5 and allusions. 
At first it looks like Tangiia is going to get away with it, 
even though he has abducted Princess Kula who was to be his 
brother's wife. Then Tutapu finds that his brother took one 
of the sacred totems. Losing a minor deity would have been 
bearable, but by mistake Tangiia took the vital God of Hore. 
Angered, Tutapu sets off in pursuit, and Dorcha goes with 
him. 
The rest of the book follows the voyages of the warring 
factions and the hazards they face, such as the Isle of 
~:r;h!frfa!:~;e:-, ~~;:;~tf~o:~::~od:l~~• ~:~~i~a1!~~ 
inevitably, the brothers come face to face in battle, and 
Dorcha and Seumas meet once again. 
You may be wondering how a canoe could possibly travel 
all the way from Polynesia to the British Isles. Kilworth is 
not averse to changing facts when it suits him and here, he 
~f ~~~~e:~c~7r::f fsh~~t~:i;~ f~:7h~:~~~~;t~tt:;~ 
early British and Polynesian peoples and cultures makes for 
fascinating reading. Seumas's initial reaction to the 
Polynesians - he thinks they're too arrogant and full of 
themselves, too feminine, pretty and unblemished, too quick 
to touch one another - holds a mirror up to our own more 
repressed culture. 
dial:~:. 0:i~~;~r: 1a~~t°;c~!~;~:p~rtf ~0~~ncSi:~t{iit:Ji~h~ 
ambiguity about whether phenomena such as sto rms at sea 
were natural or caused by the caprices of the gods. Boy-girl, 
the camp transvestite who has a crush on Seumas, is great 
fun, and I grew rather fond of Seumas's dog, Dirk. Kilworth 
~eroical\y resists, for the most pan, the temptation to 
mfodump: I know a hell of a lot more about Polynesia than I 
did before reading 7be Roof of Voyaging, but the learning 
process was entertaining and completely painless! The third 
volume of The Navigator Kings will be set in 'The Land-of­
Mists' - it should be fascinating to see Britain through these 
alien eyes. 
page 17 

===== PAGE 18 =====
Ric hard La Plante 
Reviewed by An drew Adams 
Tegni: Soul Warrior 
TOR Books, 1996, J4'Jpp, !H.99 
In the late eighties and early nineties, Richard La Plante 
wrote a series of books about a central character called TegnC 
were written. Tor have just re-released the first of these: Soul 
Warrior. 
Richard La Plante is a karate expert, as is obvious from 
the martial ans basis of the book, he may be able to punch 
his way through inch-thick steel plate for all I know, but he 
couldn't write himself, or his characters, out of a paper bai.;. 
He should have stuck the the thrillers which were his 
previous literary output , a nd Tor should have left the 
unlamented TegnC books barking on the shelves of the 
second-hand stores. 
'There is a strange and deep wisdom to Tegnf. I would 
call it metafiction, and I would pronounce Richard La Plante 
~ 5o~;:i~i,~. ~h:e~~~t:~1ii~t::~h:;?eof 0 :h:/r::n!~~~~ 
literary ~em, ET, The Extraterrestrial. Pron ounce away, 
William, 1t won't redeem the author from the Eight Deadly 
Words: 'l Don' t Care What Happens To These People'. 
Incredible meta-fiction Soul Warrior may be (whatever meta-
~~~b1~t~ ~~~g~t~;e na0n/:~:~::;; a~n a~h:ptc:~;le s!t~h 
merely makes for dull reading are what await the poor reader 
Frank Lovece The X -Files Declassified 
Hoddrr& Stoughton, 1996, 4/'Jpp, £9.'J'J 
Reviewed by Steve Palmer 
With the third series of The X.Files now on British TV, here 
comes another book cashing in on the enormous, some 
would say too enormous, success of the spooky, conspiracy­
obsessed televisual feast. There can be no doubt that The X­
Files is well made TV with above average production values. 
It is entenai ning, and many, many people watch it, some for 
reasons other than the leading female role. However The X· 
Files Declassified is not as entenaining. It is yet anot her 
product with a gigantic 'X', shiny against a matte cover, that 
is meant to look incredibly sophisticated, when in fact it has 
the :.1.ppearance of being printed off the internet ... 
It covers some new ground and lots o f old ground. For 
ex:.1.mple, the episode guide is useful if you want to otch 
episodes you particularly liked during re-runs, but who in 
Ken Macleo d 
\'eclor 192 • March/April 1997 
of this book: the Karate Kid meets the Mongol Hordes while 
t~!i!~rbe;:irs ~a:;1~:i; e;;:r:11,1eo~h:i~~:1 ~~e=tsa:~ 
mundane at best and silly at worst. The violence arouses no 
strong emotions at all, though the lack of emotional 
involvement with the characters is probably the root cause of 
this. 
The whole story is fairly obvious from the beginning, 
there is little suspense to keep up interest in the action: there 
is a boy-thief whom Tegne keeps trying to reform and 
failing. This fails to engage the emotions of the reader 
because the c haracters are little more than straw men on 
which to hang the philosophical musings of a martial ans 
expert who thinks fantasy gives him the scope he needs to 
bnng his wisdom to the world. In fact, fantastic fiction 
merely gives him enough rope to hang himself. Confusing 
~~t th~dincnhc~ng~~s?~~:eir :C~!~Jbi~r~ ~~et::: ~~:e__:~ar~ 
impressionist style. The descriptions of savagery and sex arc 
by turns boring and ridiculous, while attempts to include 
some political intrigue with the blood, sweat and tears 
merely heighten the sense that this is completely unreal and 
could never happen. The suspension of disbelief is never 
j~~~fede~~ue~ter~0 ph1tfi~;h y r~d:~:~~~~f~g ~~~u;bi~~ 
send a hyperactive person on speed to sleep. 
In brief, one to avoid. 
their right mind (and that is the key phrase to consider) 
wants to know what number plates featured in what 
;~~did~ ~fs~e~ti;~i~~r~ou~~na 11ili t~~f:p ~;~~~ ~~:1 ~~ 
their local WH Smiths. Sad people. Sad, lonely people. 
What is the point of nit-picking through each episode to 
work out what time each scene occurred? The most 
interesting parts of the book are the biographies of the cast. 
There are points of information here that will not h2ve been 
encounte red in the dozens of magazine articles about Mouldy 
Tnh~ ~~!~~erd~~:i~~l~~~h1: 1be~\ i~hof:~ {~:a~o~':rn~:~t~~f ~ 
rr;:;ds t:r~e!he ~;;e e~}°~e~;ie s~0 b~ ;;1~ja~l ~n r;:~ 
announce during an episode that, 'An Erfenmeyer flask is a 
conical laboratory container... named after the German 
chemist Richard August Carl Emil Erlenmeyer.' In summary, 
avoid like any plague featured during the series. 
The Stone Canal {Legend, 1996, 322pp, £11.99} 
Reviewed by Joseph Nicho las 
Ken MacLeod's first novel, The Star Fraction, was runn er-up for th e 1996 Arthur C. Clarke Award . I haven't read 
the oth er fin alists, but despite its cyberpunky origin and its impl ausible explanati ons for the Balkani satio n of early-
2lst-century Britain, I did enjoy that book - parti cularl y its satir e of both libertarianism 's and socialism's most 
cheris hed ideals, and its culminating ironic genuflection to Trotskyism's fantasies of insurre cti onary general stri kes 
and arm ed poflular uprisi _ngs to overthrow the state. MacLeod's grasp of this ideology surely derive s from student 
~iv~l~ti~~as:r 1ta~i~;i~:s1fn:r~e~n- c~Jd e5:t:rJ1;e~o~~i~:!e~!~h:: tha~h~e~~~~a~e~!~r:~tj~~i~ttfte h!0:7i:~ 
theoretical base as well. The novel's allian ce betwe en socialist revo lutionaries and pro-space agitators seems strange, 
but is thoro ughl y Marxian in concept: the emancipation of the wo rking class via the liberat ory potenti al of an 
advanced techno logy which enables a literal escare from capitalist oppress ion. 
But perh aps one shouldn't read too .much o the aut hor into his characters, for if The Star Fraction has a left-
:~~r~hi~~l;hf1•o~t:~n;f ~=a~a~li::h:o~~f,0 ~te~ I~~:eti :;~g::p~~~~ !~~~.:i:! 11~· :t: ~~k~~1: :i;e::t:dr~s; 
Arst Impressions • page 18 

===== PAGE 19 =====
Veclor 192 • March/April 1997 
mou ld but gradually drifts rightwards into a position more akin to Ayn Rand's. In the process he establishes a 
f~~:~~~~a:g~~~~o~:iti:dfu~~r~n:i:~o~:i~~~n=~!:i~,~~1:;~~T~:~~~ro~s :et~idi! n~tba:t:c~t:~~:;ev~;;h 3! 
story set on the 'New Mars' of a hundred years hence where a reborn Wilde confronts the apparently immortal 
William Reid, a longstanding (at least in the twentieth century) friend who, like him, mixed in ultra~left politics 
before becoming more 'respectable' and joining the r.ro-space faction. Reid is now pursuing Wilde and his allies for 
the return of a 'gynoid', a robotically-enhanced bio ogical entity in the form of Wilde's former wife, Annene . As 
this chase unfolds, however, so its purpose in misdirecting the reader becomes apparent. The real story is in the 
flashback, which has the space movement (led by Reid following Wilde's death) eventw.lly constructing a 
wormhole in Jovian orbit wluch allows humanity to set out for the stars. I ,greatly enjoyed the politic.tl bits, but I 
found this grahed-on chunk of science fiction wish-fulfilment deeply unsatistying. 
Part of this is due to the obvious mismatch between the closely realised present and near-future world, and the 
necessarily sketchier oucline of events a hundred years from now. Part, however, is a uributable to Macleod's 
assumption - common to much extrapo lative sf - that the accelerating rate of techn ological progress characteristic 
of the post-Second Wor ld War era wLLI continue , and that within a decade or so it will be possible to extend our 
lifetimes by injecting nanomachines into our bloodstream s to repair organic damage, then to secure immortality by 
uploading our consciousnesses into computer memory another decade or so later. Despite the speculation which 
surrounds these ideas, no-one knows or 1s likely to soon know how they might be realised - yet if they are to be 
realised in Macleod's time-frame, historical precedent tells us that the first vestiges of the necessary technologies , 
not to mention the scientific understanding which/rec edes technological invention , must already be apparent. 
They are not. I rather suspect - despite what I sai earlier about not mistaking authors for their works - that 
Macleod's characters' desire to ' make it to the ships' is Macleod's own, derived from a hope that technol oip:'s 
~rti:~:r hi.;:;~tt!en~~d':~:lik:Jte:.ill deliver what politicians have clearly given up on. Hence the wish• 
The concluding chapters feature at least two McGuffins that arc both shuffled off with blink-and-you'll-miss­
them perfunctoriness, and are rather disappointing. Nevertheless, one looks forward 10 funher novels by 
Macl...cod. Few sf authors uhibit much political awareness; to find one as intimately familiar with politics as he, 1s 
a rare pleasure. The only other such author l can name is la.in Banks. One day they will collaborate, and we'll all 
die of Jealousy. 
George R.R. Martin 
Reviewed by Steve Jeffery 
A Game of Thrones 
Vi,,-.gt"T, 1"6.69Jpp , £16.99 
George R.R. Martin's return to the field after a number of 
years editing the Wild Cards and New Voices anthologies is 
nothing if not ambitious. A Came of Thrones appears with all 
the distinguishing features of the fantasy blockbuster, as 
Book One of A Song of Fire and la. Those distinguishing 
features include a map, cunningly divided into The North 
and The South, an Appendix listing a cast of Cecil B. DeMille 
proportions, and the obligatory jacket blurb announcing 'the 
most imaginative, 2mbitious and compelling fantasy epic 
since Lord of the Rings' and Martin u yet another 'true heir' 
to Tolkien. 
This sort of gushing hype does no favours to anybody, 
least of all Martin. It merely confirms the view that publicity 
~::::;t:\:tt:~~liri~E~~~::in!liv: 1ktf~ ~:~ 
world of instant pacluging clichCS. A Came of Tbronl!1 
deserves better. 
The action opens on the borders of Winterfell, where 
Lord Edda.rd Stark administers the King's Justice to a crazed 
:;:: l;;:;;;~, :;c;h~r:~~e :r'!t~t~!h~~:thi~:~~ 
his sons, Bran and Robb, and their half brother, Eddard's 
buurd , Jon. After the execution, Jon discovers a de2d 
direwolf and her five still-living cubs, five cubs for the three 
:{;~swai11. t;~/~~,~t~ te~0 :;;::r~ ri~~s::;ntra! 5 ;~; 
discovers the sixth pup, an afbino c3St out from the litter, 
which he takes as his own. 
This sort of stan is, it h35 10 be admitted, not very subtle. 
We are not going to be surprised that the destinies of the 
children are going to be formed in no small part by their 
rel2tionships to the adopted wolf cubs. 
Eddard Stark, meanwhile, hu other worries. The King's 
~:!rr~ii t~ijre:u:~~ihea~si~!:~ T~~~~II ~ak~d~~d 
away from his lands in the north to the uncomfonable 
rivalries and intjucs of the court, :ind in service of :1 king 
;e~~rehhe tanjue :~uf:ve :P;h~t~;!il;n~ ;~i:u;:rthe:rke~ 
;jft~~ ::~a rf~}~hn~ ~;;:::/~,:th ~:~h:t~~~t:;:~:r,: 
and Bran falls (or is pushed) from one of towers of Winterfell 
and i:!~:~~ h~~u::rees~~ei;~ip!'.!d fhi/heid:11 ~~isR~~i; in 
charge of Winterfcll, with Bran still in a coma and little 
Rickon too young to travel, Eddard takes his two daughters, 
Arya 2nd S.nsa to ta.kc up his 2ppointment as the King's 
Hand. Eddard's rigid notion of honour is totally mispl2ced 
~::~; ~~'c/n~~ ~~~:~~he:~ ~~:~ \t'si!c~i~~"! 
fall}'lalc princess, everything goes terribly wrong. On 
Robert's sudden death, the Game of Thrones moves from 
~t~':~nL~~:a~d ~~nal~feH~:c;~a~t~ t:::h~~~ 
both in the nonh and across the seu, older threats to the 
=:,~:~;~t ti~:~~~ g~a~h~i~l~1:~~~:J; ~~ck!;~~~~ 
the bitter cold of Winter. 
This is all pretty much the stuff of widescrecn epic 
~~nk~ t~~k d::i::~:atl~ cc~~~:h~~:h~ 0~~ ~~~te;n;r~r: 
threads start to develop independently towards the end, 
things become more episodic, underlined by Martin's 
technique of alternating chapters between a number of major 
viewpoint characters. But you do need to be aware that this 
is Book One in a series, and it finishes, if not on a cliff-hanger 
page 19 

===== PAGE 20 =====
Vector 192 • Mareh!Aprit 1997 
then with eno ugh thr eads left hanging to carry the action the Dragon Kingdom in exile across the seas, the Song of Firt: 
through into the next volume. and Ice promises to emerge mor e fully. 
There , between the coming of Win ter and the rebinh of 
Alan Moore Voice of the Fire (Gollma, 1996, J20pp, £9.99) 
Reviewed by Chris Amies 
Science fiction has traditionally associated itself with space; with journeys through an unimaginable universe in a 
:faei!fi~r ~~~t~:t:r:n~ nj~~:~:;:t:e~n~;i:c!f !~~h::is:~";f hi~t~;tc~:~ie~: ~~~;,1:~ei: ~;~~u1~;e~:f ;c;t~i~n\~e 
In Voice of the Fire, Alan Moore has drawn a three-dimensional map of his home town, Northampton, and its 
environs where the third dimension is not spatial, but time. He describes an area whose past is both myth ic and 
real, because real historical personages have lived and died for ideals that may well have been mythi cal. The 
narrator of the first story, 'Hob's Hog', speaks a language which is barely recognisable as English - this being four 
thousand years BC, the language of these ancestral people would have been something unimaginable, but language 
in a story is a matter of perception and the strange perceptual shifts of the orphan boy are echoed in his speech. 
For him, reality and myth are the same, and the 'shagfoal' - a huge creature that sometimes seems like a black dog 
- is pan of the real world to him. In later stories it becomes myth, and in the 18th century story of witchcr.i.ft, 
'Panners in Knitting ', it is specificalJy invoked as part of a demonic pact, along with a stoat-like creature with 
human hands which suggests the legendary Gef or the ' Brown Jenkin' figure in H .P. Lovecr.i.ft's 'Dreams in the 
Wi~~~i-:,~h:~•-J;h:~rifi~~:~ho ~t~fJ:\hi:at~JJ Jik:~e~~.~~tf;~h:°to:~d ::~~heTst:!:~u~:~e the 
Hunter . In the longest story, 'The Crematio n Fields', he is specifically a village witch-doctor, Olun, who has a map 
~i~~~et:!1:J\h:tfe~~o:e h~; h~ H:;na; ~d ;~~a~i;~ ~~n~h:~ be~~:;~:~-c ~~ :~c~e::e~i::s~de~i;~:i!r:r~ 
but the weight of history is too great to allow the modern age to dispense so easily with m yth as it does with 
buildings, for example Northampton's fine old structures like the New Theatre and Notre Dame School, whose 
wanton demolition elicits a sudden spurt of rage from Moore in the final story, 'Phipps' Fire Escape', which serves 
as a coda, explanation and maybe expiation of the whole book. 
That mythographer of the built world, Jain Sinclair, puts in an appearance in 'Phipps' Fire Escape', too. Like 
Sinclair, Moore is interested in those who 'expressed contours of the spirit world in terms of stone and monar', 
like Bunyan in Pilgrim's Progress, the first to 'chart the land of spirit and imagination lying under Middle En~land', 
and Robert de Senlis who built a round church, which he explained as not allowing the Devil a corner to hide in. 
Though in 'Limping to Jerusalem' Moore suggests that de Senlis had far stranger reasons in mind, given to him by 
the Masons who had the idea of building as a symbol of Divine revelation: 'Th e impulse is identical, to bind the 
site in word of symbol ... this is our lexicon ... conjure the world and populace invisible'. In Voice of the Fire, 'the 
dreamtime of each town or city is an essence that precedes the form'. 
The book has an end, but the story that it tells can not; although the present century has done much to destroy 
:~nJ:s~:i~:~{ tb:~tf?~~~t~t~7n :h~ j~~;::i:t~7t~~r~~tnc~~~su;:,rt~c s::~:ua;:de~:S~1:::~ i:h: ~::tt:d ecl 
inform:nion - images coming so fast and so random that they cannot make sense, 'ou r culture passing from a fluid 
to a vaporous state' - the closing me~age, like the pulse beamed back by a space probe passing out of our solar 
system, is one of confusion but also expectation. 'All ideas are real ideas. A heavy language is engendered and 
employed to fix these images as marker buoys within the mind.' This is a book of signs and wonders. 
Terry Pratchett 
Reviewed by Lynne Bispham 
Hogfather 
Gollana, 1996, 285pp, £15.99 
The latest Discworld novel has to be science fiction's greatest 
contribution to the festive season. 
In Ankh-Morpork it is H ogswatch night and, of course, 
the Hogfather is out on his hog-drawn slcth delivering toys 
f~t,21-~l1~c ~~~dr~na ~~ ~;;e ~::~ eg~0!} y:a~~r';~ht1~~k 
hard, despite what you r brain is telfing you your eyes repon 
something else: the Hogfather seems to be tall, exceptionally 
~~~K a~i ~~~!~ !~ri:ad~~ ~r ;r~::· t~~w:~i d~:v~ ~ 
will know exactly who is coming down the chimney - but if 
there is a nyo ne who has yet to discover the delights of the 
most achingly hilarious fant asy novels ever wrin en*, well 
read this book and find out! 
page 20 
But what has happened to the real Hogfather? Susan, a 
~id't:n:d;/~h: b~5:r!:~~c~is~:~~h~! :ltid tt0 !tJ~{~ 
poke~ who also happens to be Death's granddaughter, is 
coerced into searching for him . Otherwise, she is reliably 
infor'!1cd by Death himself, the sun will not rise next 
mormng. 
What has, in fact, happen ed is that cenain entities have 
taken out a con tract on the Hogfather with the Guild of 
Assassins. T hese entities refuse to divulge their names, but as 
they arc 't he people with three million dollars' who deposit 
the said amoun t in the Guild's vaults, the Assassins don' t ask 
too many questions. Instead they hand the contra ct to one of 
their more troublesome members, Mr Teatim e (pronounced 
Teh-ah-tim-eh): 
:rh,h;3;a~~!;t t!r::;~~;~diff~~=~t1yfr~% ~!;;e 
bi!~e;:r ~h:G~jf:~e.;:~!:,1i: ~:;r~;°iJ! 

===== PAGE 21 =====
because he'd lo.st both parmu at an early age. I think 
that, 011 rdlecuon, we should have wondered a bit 
more about that). 
One of the delights of a Discworld novel is meeting new 
characters such as Mr Te.i.time, and newly created Qiterally) 
characters such as the Cheerful Fairy with her joke book and 
collection of clothes for charades, and the Verruca Gnome 
and, particularly, the Oh God of Hangovers. Of course, 
another delight is renewing acquaintance with old characters 
like Death and his horse Binky, the wizards of the Unseen 
University, and that grim squeaker, the Death of Rats. 
Like its predecessors, Hogfather is very, very funny. 
Defining why a book is funny is (probably) h.i.rder than 
trying to define what makes a book fantasy or science fiction, 
so you 'II just have to trust me on this, but I defy anyone to 
read Hogfather without laughing aloud. The book is also 
very, very clever. The plot gallops along, diving down side 
streets and doubling back on itself, yet it retains its own 
Will iam Shatn er 
Reviewed by Jon Wallace 
TekMoney 
Simon & Schumr, 1996, 189pp, £9.99 
Tek Money, the latest in the Tek War series written by ex­
Captain Kirk, William Shatner (although Ron Goulart gets a 
credit in the dedication), is one of those sf novels that are 
really something else in disguise. This is a stab at a hard-nosed 
detective yarn, the many sf elements are really just a 
backdrop for the action, put in so that we know this is 
genuinely the future. The storyline , with its evil drug 
runners and double-dealing, could have been played out any 
time and place. 
The thing is, this is not a very good book. The story is 
sketchy and definitely clichCd; the drug-runner/terrorist 
connection has been done to death in innumerable TV 
shows; the characters are eerily familiar: Jake Cardigan is Jim 
Alison Sinclair 
Ve<:tor 192 • March/April 1997 
unique logic and, against all the odds, manages to tie all its 
tenuous strands together in the end. 
f un~;os:~n~~e-~~ht::h;~ :h::i::r::~:;• (i:;~-s~:~~~t~ 
YOU KNOW WHO) arrives in a department store Grotto and 
starts giving the children the toys they actually want. 
Incidentally, in Hog/ather you will also find out just what the 
Tooth Fairy (or Fairies, since the whole operation is run on a 
sort of franchise basis) does with all those teeth. Even as l 
b:!::~11::01f:t~e'sohbe d~:-ttd:h:it~t at:; ::rk , 0 ~o~; 
Hogwatch you'll find this book in your stocking. 
*The existence of readers who have not yet opened a 
DLScworld novel (even in the special congruent reality 
created for the Hogfather where normal rules .ar_e 
suspended) LS generally agreed to be an Ullpombiliry. 
Kirk merged with T.J. Hooker, and isn't Gomez, with his 
continual lapses into stage Spanish, just Chekov in disguise? 
Normally, familiar characters or familiar plots aren't a 
crime; after all, there are hundreds of fantasy books out there 
with 'Gandalf' in them. But is this what you expect of a 
book with a name like William Shatner on the cover? Don't 
be so cynical, it isn't! Shatner could have drawn on his 
experience of life, his career, things of substance like that; 
instead he seems to have used the scripts that he's read, the 
characters that he's played and rehashed them into an odd 
sort of stew. 
eve~nt1;~eth:~~:~:isc~~~~a~~~e!:e:~-~~:od~~~dg;~ ~~~r;i~\d 
who he is, yet when we meet the terrorist Almita suddenly 
for only the second time we are expected to remember 
exactly who she is. All very surprising when a writer like 
Ron Goulart has a hand in things. 
Never mind, when all's said and done it will be the name 
on the cover which sells this book, not the quality or 
otherwise of it~ contents. 
Blueheart (Orion, 1996, 348pp, £16.99} 
Reviewed by Andy Mills 
In Kim Stanley Robinson's Red Mars, there is a debate on whether or not the planet should be terraformed or left as much as 
possible in its present state. In Bb,eheart Alison Sinclair attempts a variation on this which is potentially as interesting: should 
the water-world Blueheart be terraformed, or allowed to remain unchanged? The difference is that Sinclair's planet is habitable 
and many of its inhabitants have, through genetic engineering, been adapted for life in the sea. If the terraforming goes ahead, 
their pastoral way of life will come to an end and the adapted humans will be phased out. Rache, an adapted human who lives 
and works with the unadapted, or primary, humans on a research station - as such, he stands apart from his fellows and 
straddles the two cultures - has a proposal for leaving the planet unchanged which is to be considered by the powers that be: 
Over the years I have come to see it as wrong to regard Blueheart as we have all the other planets. Nowhere else 
g:~:fne~e'::1;~t:;;;~~~ddi~;r:ffi~!fi;i:t:ew:~:~~e~::~i1Jh;~tb~shi~:h~~e~e~~lnn~~ite~~:-!~~d 't 
cannot be persuaded, that for all human experience, we will do it better ... I would rather we be adapted to the seas 
rather than the seas be adapted to us. 
~~:i~:J;da b;i!~l:~:?e~n:i;;ii~ i:t;~f::r::~i:~!h~h! lif~:;1:dof ~he6:da~t!~ah~:~i:~sc~~~~;dis:~:s;~ei~~i~ 
novel). 
Fate intervenes in Rache's life when he finds a body in the sea and is thrown into a maelstrom of plots when it 
is discovered that the dead woman is an illegal adaptee, one whose adaptions have not been sanctioned or 
registered. And there are a lot more like her out there .. 
There are issues addressed in this nove l which are both interesting and imponant , such as the religious and 
ethical arguments against changing the nature of humanity (indeed, what constitutes humanity?) and the rights of 
:~:ldi6e :d~;:eed.a~di: 1r:;~d~ 1r i~~;~~e ~ -s~:;~l:ti~~sib:,f~~ea~h;d~i~t~ 1~:e:h~~h~; 1~~~~~,t~n~~g~~~~:at~:~: 
page 21 

===== PAGE 22 =====
Vecto r 192 • March/April 1997 
takes place. But alas, the treatment is dull; the novel lacks either vital.iry or colour. Bluehe-an could ~ a marvellous 
planet to exp lore, along with the societies which inhabit it, tt it is rarely brought to life (a lava eel hunt ~ing a 
N°~;~!etb:c:~~o~~·t:hir~~~ea~=~=ir°!~~:;~~ke~ cll~~~::::tcsw~~h ~~~hh:1h~~;·u1!likel;:;~~o=~~::: 
Talking of which, two events stand out in particular : in the first, Rache's lover's bracelet is recovered from the 
seabed, a fe:n whic h is mind -boggingly improbab le given the size of this ocean world and th e s mall numb er of 
people who live on it, and in the second the bad guy reveals to a young scienti st, for no good reason at all (apart 
from allowing th e informati on to be used against him in the book 's resolution), his dastardl y plot to infect the 
adapted human s with a virus. And is it feasible th at the existence of thin y thousand illegally adapted human s - one 
tenth of the entire populati on of Bluehean - could be kept secret? 
T oo quickly, Stnclair reveals to her readers what is going on on Bluehean; the nove l then trud ges to a 
somewh at predictable conclus ion. It cenai nlbe does not help that her characters are almost uniformly imensc 
ilio~~:.,ha~1;;;~~ ;;:/~~h~:~~r~eL:r, i::f:~~in~g ~~~~;::td off~:~ :~;;~:O"g\:~ti~~~red linJe 
Angu s Wells 
Reviewed by Andrew Adam s 
Exile's Challenge 
Orion. 1996, 440pp, £16.99 
In Vtttor 1881 wrote of &i/~•1 Childrrn by Angus Wells: 'On 
lhe whole, this is a moderatdy good novel, with little scope 
for a direct sequel (a rarity these days), although he might re­
use the world again.· 
To prove me wrong, Mr Wells has come up with lhe 
second volume. While the first book appeared to end 
n tisfactorily, it is quite obvious that the two books consist of 
one story. The first is about two sets of characters who only 
meet in the last few pages; the follow-up is what happens to 
them together, and how everything ties in and ties up. 
This is not a book 10 be read on iu own: il stans 
immediately aher the first one ends and makes no real effort 
at a rehash. This is a plw: too many books contain a fim 
chapter which tries 10 both reapi tulate the plot and stan the 
new story off, I much prefer writers who ignore this 
complctdy, as Wells does. 
&iJ~•s Challni~ lives up to the first book very well. The 
progression of the plot from the denouement of the first into 
further conflicts and a final resolution is a nice flowing piece. 
The characters continue to be believable, and the plot flows 
from them, not the other way around. We see how Flysse, 
Arcole and Davyd arc taken in by the Matawaye and become 
Philip G. Williamson Enchantment's Edge 
Hoddt"T& S1011ghton, 1996, J76pp, £16.99 
Reviewed by Vikki Lee 
The latest offering from Philip G. Williamson is the first 
book in a new trilogy and a departure, not only from his 
popular FiNtUl(Jr/d series, but from his creation, the loveable 
rogue Ronbas Dinbig. 
Enchantment's Edge is a principality, literally on the edge 
~h~:~':!:/h:v~::t ~;ed~b~~~~~ea :;:;ei!r~:t%~ 1~ 
such it is an enigma, and is dee.med to be where the Gods 
reside. Magic seeps from Enchantment and plays its 1art in 
~~~n!.!:;tantment's Edge generally isolated from t e rest 
King Leth and his beautiful Quee-n, Issul, rule 
Enchantment 's Edge at 2 time of growing iniernal religious 
conflict which is heightened by news of a vast army, the Krai 
;p;;oa~ht~;prr:b!e lt~e w:t. dr~;h .:n~ef~:r 1~~ca~::: 0~~e~ 
:O''t;etgit~h~;:h\~:i:?~nd f ;~t:~~~h!~e!~rc!~~c~ 
page 22 
part of their people; Davyd's dreaming talent ensures him a 
place, but not an easy one. Captain Tomas Var, one of the 
Autarchy's Officers from the first novel, comes into his own 
as the focw of the non-matawaye side of the story, though 
this time, he and the rest mee-t up before the last chapter. 
The parallels with the conquest of the Native American 
tribes by Europeans is very apparent, although Wdls turns it 
into a more peaceful joining than was the case in history. 
This is reminiscent of the way Guy Gavriel Kay has taken a 
tragic pan of our history in his recent fiction and re-written 
it into a more satisfactory mould. The Matawa;:e are 
recogni~bly in the Native American mould, but different 
enough that they come alive in the world in which they are 
set, rather than seeming like tropical plants transferred to 
Siberia. 
The Breakers, the extremely nasty horde from the first 
~:~ :~~~i~;eI:r 1ht::!~:~~ ::il,b{~at~~ ~h~~ ::~ ':!r 
fanusy bad guy often seems less than lifelike, but WeUs 
manages to pull it off, here they are believ,;ible - mostly. 
!'!e::Jhrirn=ea f:;;;e~~ b:~%em~h~ ili~:iif~1f:~! 
arc there - some similarities with the White Wi1ch from 
Narnia come to mind in their roles as avengers of sins. 
In short, this is another solid novel that is worth a look, 
but seek out &ile's Children first. 
~~atc~edu~:::~ t~ f~:i~{h~a~;n~ •~ ~~ :tti! 
invaders and that Leth has fallen foul of the Gods. Beseiged 
from all quaners, Leth struggles not only to retain 
sovereignty over Enchantment's Edge, but to find a way to 
uni~~a~~fc'Q~~':;5~~r::ab7/~:b~;den Leth wi1h any 
bef~; ~h:S1:~:~;~ :\!t:V~d~~ b!~~ 1t:gee;j~71~h!~~1d 
according 10 the outlawed religious faction, the True Sept. 
lssul tries to arrange a mming with the leader of the True 
Sept in order to confirm her fears - that the Legendary Child 
~vfJ:~!r, 6;:~r~:: ~o ch~~~h ~f ~rit;r~f!i: 
safety of the royal line, Issul eventually sets off in secrecy for 
the village of Lastmeadow esconed by only a handful of 
roya] guards, in search of answers. 
wiJ ~~~· t~dt: o1:fe~~~v:t~;ln~n~ oinb~ifc.~ib~; itg~r 
mutual convenience with Grey Venger, the leader of the 
~~~~- ~~t1~~t;::u~ :~1glit{shf;tint\~~~:i/:J 

===== PAGE 23 =====
times has mentally unhinged Leth - and begins to make plans 
of bis own. 
fascf~:;t!~• ;10:~hae~/ :fthca~;t~~ :rihe;1'b~~eanbo~r~hd!t 
Leth's mother hand«! to him when she abdicated, a box that 
for weeks, Leth is unable to open. When one day the box 
mysteriously opens in Leth's hands, he is drawn into what 
seems to be another world, a completely 'blue' world, with 
:p~~hee~tlao~iYofde~:~a~\~:n~~!~s~o?tu~iddks~b~~ ~ 
things that are beyond mere human comprehension. Orbus is 
one of the Gods of Enchantment, bu1 Leth struggles, not 
only to understand Orbw's teachings, but to determine 
whose side Orbw is on - can he be trust«!? 
Veclor 192 • March/Apnl 1997 
Having read and enjoyed several of Williamson's earlier 
novels, he has become one of those authors that I look ou1 
for - one who seems 10 get better with every book he writes. 
Enrhantmmt'1 Edge is no exception. Willianuon is a 
storyteller in 1he true sense of 1he word, and here he has 
created a tale that defies anyone not to want more. A book 
full of intrigue, love, war and magic, stirred into a plot that 
asks questions of the reader, dermmds that the reader thinks 
~e;:;ru~~i::,a~;iJ~!snf:h~~fd bei:i::i:~~:dsd r~/~~ts~ 
Don't take my word for it, folks - go out and get a copy 
now! 
James Woodall The Man in the Mirror of the Book (Hodd~r &StoMghton, 1996, JJJpp, £20.00) 
Reviewed by Paul Kincaid 
In 1927 a story called 'Leye nda Policial' ('Police Tale') appeared in the Argentine journal Martin Fierro, it was 
republished a year later as 'Hombres Pclearon' ('Men Fought') and later still as 'Homb res de las Orillas' ('Men 
from the Edge of Tow n') as by 'Francisco Bustos'. Only in 1933 did the nory reappear - now retitl ed again 
'Hombre de la Esquina Rosada' ('Man of the Rose-Coloured Corner', later tr:mslated as 'Stree tcomer Man') -
under the real name of its author, Jorge Luis Borges. Borges was already in his mid-30s, a poet with a penchant for 
the various literary movements of pan- First World War Europe (especially the Spanish Ultraists) and a reasonable 
critical reputation in his native Argemlfla, where he was involved with a variety of short-lived magazines. 
'Streetcorner Man' was his first story , within 15 yean he would have written most of the stories upon which his 
reputation rests. By the time his Jzcciones were being trans lated - first into French, later into English - and 
~!~:~~~nfa~l~~ ::,~~:~~i::1;htee:0 ~!11e~~~~sh~m£J°rnio0~:demB~~t i,~:c:::~~~~·sw;~:l~~;;;) cae:luff L?br:d~ 
Arena (The Book of Sand, 1975) - appeared after the early 1950s, and there are few who would argue that these 
contain anything like his best work. 
It is a meagre output for such a great reputation . There arc no novels (the longest of his short stories probably 
doesn't amount to as much as a novelene), and th ough his poetry is acclaimed in the Spanish-speaking world for its 
rich language it has made little real impression in translation. But when you realise that his stories include 'TIOn, 
Uqbar, Orbis Tertius' , 'The Aleph' , 'The Circu lar Ruins', 'Pierre Menard , Auth or of the Q11ixote', 'Death and the 
Compass', 'The Library of Babel', 'The Garden of the Forking Paths' , 'The Immortal', 'Funes the Memorious ' and 
a host of othen, it is clear why Borges is one of the most important writen in the history of twentieth century 
fantastic literature . His encyclopedic essay-stories, bristling with (often misleading or invented) cultural references, 
present a bleak and uncompromising picture of eternity and otherness . It raised the images that have shaped 
contemporary fantastic literature , provided a haunti ng reference that can still be detected today, and set a standard 
acknowledged by practically every writer who has venture d beyond the known . 
Though he was never a magic real.isl, despite what some people have claimed, he was fundamental in paving the 
way for the magic realists; creating a climate in which Latin American litenture could take the world stage, and 
establishing a pattern in which the real world and the other world were inextricably imcnwined. Yet all of this 
came from most unpromising soil: a big fish in the small world of Argentine poetry, Borges was nervous of prose, 
nervous of life. He lived with his mot her until she died, in her 90s; he did not marry, and probably had no sexual 
experience (aher a brief and unsenling adolescent visit to a brothel) until he was in his 60s; he went blind in middle 
life, and practically all his greatest work was projected onto this blank, unseeing screen. 
James Woodall's biography of Borges is not the fim (Emir Rodriguez. Monegal's Jorge L11is Borge1: A Literary 
Biography came out in 1978), nor the last (Woodall reports at least 13 oth er biographen working on Borges), nor 
the best. His prose is often clumsy ; his analysis of the stories, where he attempts it, tends to be slight and 
superficial ; his structure, though generally chronological, refers back and fonh through time in a way that can be 
confusing. Nor, it must be said, does Borges's life make an exciting read: a.her a brief visit to Europe in his early 
teens, Borges lived all his life Ul Buenos Aires until the years of his international fame when he toured extensively 
to deliver lectures and receive awards. He lived quietly in a series of small flats, he worked as a librarian , he went 
blind, he had no affairs or great romances, he was an outspoken critic of Peron but later benme (probably 
wrong ly) identified as a suppone r of the junta but was never really active in politics in any way. Having said all 
that, the man someh ow transcends the dullness of his life, he lived in books and it was books that provided the 
wellspr ing for his fiction. And Woodall has been scrupulous in his research, presenting a readable and interesting 
portrait of this incredibly important writer. 
page 23 

===== PAGE 24 =====
Vector 192 • March/April 1997 
Paperback Reviews 
edited by 
Tanya Brown 
(,rc~on Benford I 1mesc,1pc 
\ 1, I -1 I '~ 
Reviewed by John D. Owen 
First published in 1980, Greg Bcnford's Timnca~ won the 
both the Nebula .1nd the John W. Campbell Memorial 
A ward, so it is interesting to go back and sec how well it has 
worn. Th e immediate answer is not well, as it has suffered 
the fate of many very•near.future stories, in that time has 
overtaken it. 
The Story is split between the 'future' or 1998, largely in 
Cambridge, and the early sixties in Californ ia, and broadly 
tells of a project in 1998 to transmit a message via tachyon 
beams into the past to aven th e environmental catastrophe 
~~a~~~t:~:n~1:: :i1I:nn~~n:0 ;~~- :~~1f :0:r e:~:t~:~~: 
carried out by American scientists in 1962, using a t achyon 
beam to introduce a coded signal into th e 1962 results. The 
best part of the book is the detailing of how scientists work , 
both the 10% inspiration -and 90% perspiration that goes into 
it, plw the struggle to obtain funding to buy necessary 
equipment and keep the experiments going for long enough 
to achieve a publishable result. 
As a working physicist (and one who experienced the 
physics scene in California in the early 605), Benford is on 
firm ground when he is telling the early part of the story. 
He's on more uncertain territory writing about Engl-and -and 
Cambridge, portraying 2 rather dated (even for 1980) view of 
England, and its class structures , 2 dating that looks even 
more embarrassing in the late nineties. 
Unfortunatdy , Bcnford's story now seems to lack pace, 
dwelling overlong on the personal difficulties of the 
cha~cters, while skimping on the details of the future 
environment problems. The plot drags, unti l the reader is 
almost screaming 'Get on with it!' at th e characters. The 
obvious errors of faulty prediction stick out, in that the 
Soviet Union still exists, huge environmental disasters 
abound worldwide, and the computers in use in 1998 seem 
rather quaint. A classic text, some say: hut 1 don't think it 
has worn all that well at all. 
page 24 
Sunun < l:ukc D,1rka 
'-.II I -ll ft ,,, 
Reviewed by Stephen Payne 
In 1990 BBR Books published Simon Clarke's first short 
story anthology, Blood & Grit. One of the stories is called 
'Bite Back' and it follows a young man as he attempts to 
escape the deadly dutches of an unnamed force, a shadowy 
creature that can flatten cars and snap tdegraph poles as 
easily as a match. 
With D.:rkn Clarke has expanded this idea, given the 
force a motivation for its behaviour and replaced the sex 
obsessed youth of 'Bite Back' with Richard Young, a video 
scriptwri ter (yeah, right) a nd his family. One day Richard's 
you ng daughter discovers the remains of a white BMW 
crashed in the field opposite his house. A few days later a 
stranger called Michael appears at their door covered in 
blood, claiming he's been in an accident. In fact he's been 
living in their house since the car crash. Michael intimat es 
that he is being chased and requires police assistance, so 
Richard and his family escort Michael to a police station. But 
they soon discover that what he is being chased by is not of 
this earth ... This is a wild and bloody chase story, crossing 
from one side of the country to the other as Richard pursues 
Michael and the force, the monster, pursues them both, until 
at the climax, with much gnashing of teeth and wailing and 
blood-letting, the th ing is sent back to the demonic place 
from whence it ca.me and all is still upon the face of the earth. 
This is a novel about power and its misuse, wherein 
Clarke has visualised power as a definable but barely 
controllab le force - a sort of veiled warning to us all. Yet the 
similes are hardy an·iculated and what we are left with i.s an 
entertaini ng British horror novel. Good fun and all that, but 
a disappointment 2fter Blood Crazy and Nail«/ by The Htart. 
\rthur < < l:ukc & \like \J,.t)u ,l\ RKl•tcr 1:: 
\:1, I I H II 1, 
Reviewed by Andy Mills 
Despite the relative difference in type size of their names on 
th e front cover, this is - as Clarke himself makes clear in the 
foreword - very much the late Mike McQuay's novel. And 
possibly the most fascinating aspect of reading it is 
comparing the final version with Clarke's original 850 word 
movie outline, his contribution 10 th e project. 
Th e starting point for both outline and novel is 1994, 
when you ng Lewis Cr.inc loses his parents to the LA 
eanhquak e. Hencefonh he dedicates his life to defe.iting 
nature a nd trying to ensure th2t the menace to man 
rq,resented by the destructive forces of the earthquake is 
removed forever. As one might expect, Clarke's outline 
appears a more cerebra.I venture than McQuay's product . 
Instead of scientific discounc there i.s much action, and 
McQuay's future world is more of a dystopia than I suspect 
Clarke would ever have made it. Some of McQuay's 
inventio n is, it has to be said, plain silly, such as a .semi• 
sentient replica of the Eanb upon which Cr.inc bases his 
eanbq uake predictions, and a key figure - who rises to 
become President of the United States - who is a woman 
masquendi ng as a m2n. But I do suspect the novel would 
transla1e into a fun action movie since McQ uay handles the 
eanhquake set pieces well; his description of the growth of a 
violent, fundamentalist Islamic movement is also chillingly 
plausible. 
Obviously Clarke's name has been used to sell the book 
to a mass public, but if a publisher out there wants to try a 
refreshingly different angle, I'm happy to supply any number 

===== PAGE 25 =====
of outlines: Andy Mills and Iain M Banks looks good to me 
forstanen ... 
\lu .. h.1d < n ... hton /bt / o<t \\ orld 
\ ~ "t' ' 
Reviewed by Tony Cullen 
He's a bit of an odd fish, Michad Crichton .. He is generally 
considered a writer of pot-boilers, 'airpon novels', and worst 
of a]! - bm~llm. With some exceptions - like Disclom-r - he 
writes what wou ld, in an only slightly different setting, be 
considered as some kind of low-grade hard s£. His hooks have 
a11 the right qualifications: lots of scientific info-dumps, off­
the-shelf characters who take second place in the plot to the 
ideas, and a story-line which follows all the basic preceplS of 
a thriller . 
In this case we have The lost World, billed not merely as a 
sequel, but as 'The Successor to Jurassic Park'. And indeed 
this book does absolve you from any need to read the 
origina l. T he plot, such as it i~, is almost identical. A_ bunch 
of scientists explore the otlNr island where the J urass1c Park 
dinosaurs were actually ra.ised (so you thought they could 
keep an adolescent Tyrannosaur in that iddy biddy lab?). In 
order for there to be a plot , things go wrong, the pany 
become separated, they reunite and escape, with the help 
(panicularly when computer expenise is required) of two 
t~g~h/~~~~;l=p~=:!~T~=~~:~ad: ct~~i; ~:ff, 
along with lolS of other saurians most of whom probably 
won't rmke it into the inevitable movie. There is even a sub­
plot involving a biotechnol~ com~~y trying to stea1 
dinosaur eggs. It a1l sounds hornbl y familiar.. _ 
Overa.11 this is a deeply dull and disappointing book wnh 
a highly unconvincing plot., In the n:iarket his books ~re 
pitched at, Crich ton's works have the vinue _of usua1ly ~ •n_g 
original, whatever his other faults as a wnter. But ~his .is 
nothing more than a tired . re-run, _and an ex:erclSC 1_n 
exploiting a ready mark et, parti cularly since the sequel movie 
isn't going to be based on this book. 
M11.lud ( rn.;hwn & lv.,~r11 Tbc S,ru11pl,n 
\nm.: \Luu: !\Llrtm 
\, 11 )'')I 1 
Reviewed by Susan Badh:am 
l haven't been to see Twister, but I'm told that it is essentially 
a B movie with spectacular special effects. This book is the 
original screenplay, rather than the final ~ersion, and as such 
it's rea1ly only for film buffs and compleusts. . . 
The plot is pretty standard - perso~al r~lat1onsh1p 
traumas played out against the backdrop of, m th½ case ~ut 
~::: ':'::o;;r::1:it~~\~!u~Jo;r;irt::a~ r l~\h! 
tornadoes are not just the background scenery - they are the 
point of the movie.~ 
Don't get me wrong. I'm really ~ci ted abo~t these n_ew 
special effects. I look forward to sumg the science fiction 
films that will be mack now that the film makers can execute 
the novel iru' visions on screen. But a good film happen s 
when you integrate great special effects or scene settings with 
a strong story (All togethe r now: KHe say you Blade 
Runner ... ") 
Twister appears to be a case of 'nice pictures, shame about 
the plot". Even if you really liked the film, don't buy th is 
book: get the video instead and invest in a big TV. 
\'eclor 192 • March/April 1997 
J:1d..:. lk1ghton 1 \011 of 1he Rink 
t> It I - qll ''' 
Reviewed by Joseph Nicho l:as 
Alan is an engineer on a 1our of the planets prior to settling 
into a job with a mining corporation. On the planet Copper, 
being tom apart to provide metals for the expanding 
commonwealth of Onh, he encounters an old man who ca1ls 
himself a Son of the Rock: the .sole remnant of the settlers 
who arrived in the diaspora centuries before. Unlike them, 
he has refused to take Euthuo l, a drug which maintains a 
youthful appearance while not stopping the ageing process: 
therefore he has grown visibly old. Alan has similarly refused 
to take the drug, due to an inherited genetic disorder which 
means it could kill him. 
The old man eventually dies, and his mountain is torn 
apart to provide the iridium for the matter transmitters 
which are replacing hyperspace ships. Alan, whom the old 
man named as a fellow Son of the Rock, discovers that the 
mountai ns of his own planet are to be similarly 
dismembered, and begins a campaign against it - whi~h, 
because he too is no visibly growing old, becomes a campaign 
against Orth's oppressive social conformity, panicularly its 
demand that everyone take Eut huol. The novel is written as 
though it were Alan's memoin . 
There are innumerable parallels with the real world . On 
the planet Copper, the mining station is ca11ed R~land ; 
here, Redland Aggregates plans to level a Hebridean 
mountain to provick gravel for new motorways . 
Corporations such as the Rio Tinto Zinc strip the Third 
World of resources, dispossessing indigenous cultures to do 
so. Orth's constant quest for novelty replicates our own 
rapid shihs of fashion, and its peoples' desire to_ l°:°k ~orev~r 
young is our own. Onh's cheap matter tran.sm1SS1on IS akin 
to modem pack.aged jet travel, which makes everywhere 
foreign indistinguishable from _everywhere el~- One 
inevitab ly wonders why these 1mponant quesuons of 
cultural and environmental colon ialism are addressed 
th rough a science fiction novel rather than dealt with 
directly. 
Perhaps it's symptomatic of our de~li ti_cis_ed age t~at ":'e 
find it easier to cope with such issues via f1ct1on · wh ich 1n 
this case means that the tone is too cool and the message 
unfortunately muffled. But this is his first novel: Deighto n 
should get better. 
John l>ou~l:t" ll,ud 51•011/dt r 
'\[ I IY : d ' 
Reviewed by Selnsti:an Philips 
John Douglas's latest novel, Hard Shoulder, is an enjoyable 
piece of juvenile horror. The plot is simple enough - a man 
pursues a phantom truck which killed his daughter, finall_y 
tracking it down with the :mistance 0£ 2 young psychic 
whose hatred manifests itself as a ph:antom tra.in. There are a 
few evil doctors, and rape with black rubber dildoes, but 
not hing too challengi ng or offensive. Equa1ly, there_ are lots 
of descriptions of mangled bodypans, trucks running over 
people, peeling flesh etc. Fairly basic stuff which adolescents 
will enjoy, but it's not very cerebral. 
Hard Shoulder is a very predictable book, overlong and 
yes, there is a smattering of lesbian sex to keep thing s 
bouncing through - it's difficult not to ski~ the last hundred 
pages as the end is as obvious as - well, a big truck. Overa ll, 
there is nothing shocking or fright ening here, but any horror 
fan will have read much worse than this. 
page 25 

===== PAGE 26 =====
Vector 19 2 • March/April 1997 
Gardner Dozois (Fd. ) !be Best \.cu 5f 
Reviewed by Paul Kinca id 
9tb \111111td Collect1011 
R"'" !'!')(, irprf-'-19 
Titles can be confusing. What is the "9th Annual Collection " 
in Britain is actually the "Thineemh Annual Collection " if 
you get the American incarnation, The Year's &st Science 
Fiction. Either way, this purpons to bring together the best 
shon sf published during 1995. 
Now, there are a number of qualifications we need to 
make in considering such a book. The first, curiously 
enough, concerns the word "short". This collection makes a 
big thing about containing • more than 250,000 words of 
fantastic fiction", a more than hefty amount, yet it contains 
only 24 stories. Ask any writer of science fiction these days 
and you will be told that there isn't much of a market for 
novelettes, or especially novellas; editors will tell you there is 
no call for hem; people who count the nominations for our 
awards will say there are far fewer works that qualify in the 
longer categories. Yet the great majority of the stories 
selected as the "best" are novelettes or novellas - Poul 
Anderson's "Genesis" is not far shon of being a novel. There 
is a moral here, somewhere, but it would probably take more 
space than I have available in this review to tease it out. 
An even trickier word, of course, is "best". The first thing 
to be said, of course, is that this is "best" according to the 
tastes of editor Gardner Dozois. He clearly has his favourites. 
Of the 22 writers featured here (both Greg Egan and Ursula 
K. Le Guin get two shots), all bar one have featured in one or 
more of the previous 12 collections, some many times over. 
The newcomer, David Marusek (whose story, "We Were Out 
of Our Minds with Joy", is one of the freshest and most 
entenaining of the stories here), is acclaimed by Dozois as 
one of the most promising new writers around - and the 
story originally appeared in Asimov's Science Fiction, 
coincidentally edited by Dozois. Perhaps it is no surprise that 
Dozois's taste as editor of one of the leading SF magazines 
around should be reflected in his taste as editor of the best of 
the year collection; so it is worth noting that only eight of 
these stories appeared first in that magazine, though it is 
better represented than any other single source. 
The point is that these may not be your best stories. My 
own selection would be very different • but I suppose that is 
pan of the fun of these things. I am convinced, for example, 
that only Le Guin's name could have got "Coming of Age in 
Karhide" into print in the first place: it is exquisitely written, 
but the characters are surprisingly perfunctory and the story 
is non-existent, I have never felt so strong a sense of "so 
what?" at the end of a story by so reputable a writer. To see 
it turn up here, therefore, is the sort of shock that makes one 
question the whole enterprise. Not that Le Guin's other 
story, "A Woman's Liberation" , is really that much better: 
there is plot and character, but one can't help noting that it is 
first and foremost a didactic message, and the propaganda is 
neither panicularly original or panicular!y challenging. 
Others that don't make the grade? Rohen Reed and 
Michael F. Flynn have both done far better than the 
lacklustre offerings here, they are mechanical exercises in 
writing that go through the paces without any special verve 
or freshness. Anderson's magnum opus would have been 
twice as good at half the length, sprawled over so many pages 
it is merely self-indulgent and flabby. John Kessel ("Some 
Like it Cold "), Michael Swanwick ("Radio Waves"), James 
Patrick Kelly ("Think Like a Dinosaur") all pursue ideas that 
don't feel original in ways that don't feel like they're really 
trying . You can see what I mean when I suggest that people 
are chosen for inclusion on the strength of how familiar their 
page 26 
names are. 
But if these are not the best stories of 1995, others among 
the company dearly are. Greg Egan's "Luminous" is good 
enough, but it is outshone by his other selection, "Wang's 
Carpets" which is a stunningly vivacious picture of the far 
future. Allen Steele's "The Death of Captain Future" may 
not actually be great sf, and it cenainly doesn't take us 
anywhere panicularly new, but it is a joyously iconoclastic 
retake on an old pulp sf hero. "Feigenbaum Number " by 
Nancy Kress is a delightful idea that is perhaps not developed 
as well as it might have been, but it works as a good story 
none the less, and "Looking for Kelly Dahl" by Dan 
Simmons is a superbly twisted adventure. But the two best 
stories here are Brian Stableford's wonderfully mordant 
future history of a future history, "Monimer Gray's History 
of Death" which manages the difficult trick of convincing us 
that this future scholarship is real; and Paul J. McAuley's 
"Recording Angel", a story I raved about when I first 
encountered it in New Legends but which is even better when 
revisited. 
This may not fully justify the "best" in the title, and the 
growing length of the contributions suggests that shon sf is 
going the same otiose way as the novel where one volume is 
now no longer enough; nevenheless, there are stories here 
that more than repay the cost of entry, and all-in-all this is as 
good a survey of the horizon as you are likely to find. 
Mar) Gentle l11c1ent I zght 
\ "I l I! lb ~X.:'pp !._ h '/'-! 
Rev iewed by K. V. Bailey 
After two excursions to Onhe (the now-republished Golden 
Witchbreed, together with Ancient Light), Mary Gentle 
abandoned the planet in favour of her White Crow novels. 
She left behind a world which had slid to internecine warfare 
consequent upon the Trade and Aid practices of Eanh's 
PanOceania Company . The Eldorado sought by trade with 
Onheans is the source of anefacts and 'ancient light' which 
may have survived the virtual extinction of the Golden 
Witchbreed. This race had preceded, and had in fact created, 
the Ortheans. It was, however, the military use of 'ancient 
light' that had devastated much of the planet, so incurring an 
Onhean resistance to technology. Unfonunately, such 
resistance was overcome when Earth military technology was 
traded to claimants to the Golden Empire's hegemony. While 
interaction between 'outworld' (human) individuals, and 
between them and individual Onheans, carries a.long the 
story's drama, there is also powerful mega-drama in the 
planet"s ongoing history. Its first settlers, the 'Eldest Empire', 
were replaced by the 'Golden' humanoids they imported, 
whose line in tum became extinct save for some 
interbreeding with the native Onheans, in turn their 
successors. It is an exemplary patterning of cultures' rise-fall­
and-succession, left intriguingly unfinished. 
The 'I' in both novels in Lynne Christie, who in this 
second novel becomes Representative of the Company. Her 
ambivalence grows as duty to the Company contends with 
Orthean identifications and affections. The reader is skilfully 
led to feel these tensions. Opening pages convey wonderfully 
the spell the planet exercises on the returning Christie. Then, 
as you go with her across the Inner Sea or to the cities of the 
Desert Coast, you become so familiar with Onhean words 
and phrases that resort to the glossary is unnecessary. It's 
rather like travelling abroad and having just enough of a 
language to get by. At one point Christie says of a newly­
arrived co!league: "I saw that she had that look we all have 
after a few weeks on-world ... In the Service we call it 

===== PAGE 27 =====
'grounding in'." Readers are quickly •~ro~nded i~' and sense 
little of the artifice of the genre-writers technique. More 
than in most such creations, both alien scene and aliens ~ so 
contrived as to seem natural while ~ing at the same time 
uniquely exotic. 
Roh (,r:lnt B,1cku.,zrds 
I " ~ "" t ~ ', r ' ' 
Reviewed by Liam Proven 
It's hard to know what to say about Backwards. The 
prologue 's e.sy: it's a R«J Du.urf novel, by half of the team 
behind the TV series · Rob Grant and Doug Naylor, who 
between them also wrote the first two R«J Dwarf novels, 
Infinity Welcomes Careful Driwn and &uer than Life. Nay!~r 
wrote the third book, last Human, alone, and now Lt s 
Grant's turn. h's funny, in places hilarious - at least, if you 
like Red Dwarfs, ahem, •robust• humour. It should ~e; 
Grant and Naylor are experienced hu.mou rists, havmg 
workt'd on Spilling Image amongst other thmgs. . 
Neither of the team reveals why the partnership broke 
up, but it seems likely that Grant wantt'd to go his own way. 
The dedications suggest that Backwards was started before 
last Hurru,n, but took longer to complete: rea~ing last 
Human, this is very beJicvable, as that book embodied much 
of the worst of Red Dwarf: schoolboy humour , 
hallucinatori.ly-convoluted non-sensical storylines, and sillr 
anti-scientific fantasy. Despite this, SFX and others gave 1t 
good reviews, and it would have suited one type of Dwarf­
bn: those who loved the series for its silly funniness, not as 
SF. Backwards is a far more mature and well-written nov:el, 
and shows a possible reason for the split of the gestalt entity 
"Grant Naylor• - Rob Grant has £ar greater ~tential th.i.t 
scripting Dwarf, whilst Doug Nay lor has stuck w1t.h the BBC 
for the latest series, R~ Dwarf Vil/ , which ijudgmg by the 
first episode) has lost all iu rcdttming intelligen~e 4;'1d style. 
The title is deceptive: it's not just a novelasauon of th.e 
famous 'BackW2rds' episode, where ListC'r finally finds his 
way back to (an) Earth, but unfo~unatcly one where the 
now of time is reversed, cause followmg effect. It starts there, 
and adds some interesting new twists to this establish~ idea. 
Grant's intelligent writing shines here: ~hen Naylor invents 
irrational scenarios such as a planet with a habitable OCC'an 
underneath a layer of molten lava, created by an ~ngineer~ 
virus, Gram displays derailed knowledge of felme pe~:ulc 
anatomy. Grant explores 1he (quite genuine) theory tha1 m~c 
need not now in one particular dimension , and wha1 It 
would ~ like for 'forwards' beings to live in a 'backwards' 
world . Later - or is that earlier? - he goes on to other Dwarf 
:~• }~~;~t: ~~;~he; ~(~i;0!.11f~a:::~~~•;: 
together with a lot of new materia.l. I'm a ~rly keen w~tcher 
of the se:rics, but there's plenty here that l didn't rccogmse. 
This book is a joy. The prose clearly and elegantly 
chronicles the ridiculous adventures of Lister, Rimmer, 
Kryten and the Cat, along with a welcome return for 
Norman Lovctt's Holly. Unlike last Hurru,n, the team's 
exploits hang together in a v~uclr believable ~y, and the 
novel is a real page-turner - unlike 1u prequel, which I waded 
through for the sake of r~rch . Don't_ think that BSFA 
reviewers never suffer for their art. Even 1£ you were pu1 off 
by Last Human, you should give Backwards a try: it's a better 
book by £ar. 
Vecto r 192 • March/April 1997 
Phil J.1nes / , 4.mold 
\!,II, "'"' I ", • ~! I 1 ~ 
Reviewed by Andrew M. Butler 
There is a kind of man1ra for reviewi ng humorous sf or 
fantasy novels: •If you like this sort of thing , you"ll likc 1his 
one, and if you don't, you won't•. (Quite how_to fi!l t~e 
remaining four-hundred-and-sixty-one words of this review 15 
then problematic, of course, and here's another twenty). But 
what sort of thing? What if you come to volume thr~, not 
knowing what sort of thing it is? What if you are given a 
book to review when you a n't defend yourself - or, more 
likely, come across volume two ~r three in a library .. 
For a start the book's cover 15 graced by a quotauon from 
Chris Tarrant : •[His] sense of humour is as silly as mine". 
This presumably is meant to ~ S?me kind . ~f 
recommendation. On the other hand, The Times figures It 1s 
"wonderfully unexpected", whatever that means. And a scan 
of the blurb braces us for the fact that it is wacky, or rather 
"Janes'(s) fastest, wackiest novel yet". So if you like this sort 
of thing. .. . 
But let us persis1 with it: ;i, prologue fills m the story so 
far. As docs the first chapter for those of short memories. 
Two supreme beings arc locked i.nto a game to _decide whic~ 
is the most supreme, and arc usmg lesser species to fight ti 
ou1. In the third round, the motley group of humans are 
required to track down a renegade robot. 
In order to negotia.te this prologue, you must first 
overcome the hurdl e of the main character being named 
"Richud Curtis•. Curtis is 0£ course a talent behind Nor CM 
Ninr O 'Oodt N"'1f, Four Weddings and a Funn-al and 7be 
Vicar of Dibley, rather than a bumbling, sub-Anhur Dent 
hero. This Cun·is, on the other hand, ohen on1y see~ t_o 
exist so that others can call him Dick. Oh, yes. Because this 15 
a comedy, all the characters obviously have 10 bicker. 
And because this is a post-Pratcheu comedy, the 
bickering comes comple1c with footnotes. Hence, after 
Curtis is called •Dick-, we get the note: "Not as in 'Going to 
the fancy dress party as a petrol pump'." Quite. And why 
not? O r, rather, why? . 
So the bickering heroes have to run around aimlessly, 
trying to find this robo_t, wh!lst ~me ?f them stands ~or 
president and Curtis avoids being 1dent1fied a:- the mess1a_h 
who shares his name. And an assassin, rather like the Carne 
Fisher character from 7be Blue Brothen - only slightly less 
amusingly - is trying unsuccessfully to kill them every few 
chapters. 
The funniest comedy relies on understatement , 
embarrassment and stylish plotting . h docs say "Hey, I'm 
funny", make you cringe and throw in endless irr~levan~ies. 
l£ you like Rohen Rankin, then you ma~ well like th~- I 
laughed once - as I did with the last Rankm I read - which 
suggesu the mantra holds. 
..,kphc-n Jone ~ & D,trk Terron 
lh,1J "utton (c-J,) 
fl '' 
Reviewed by Sebastian Philips 
Dark Tn-ron is the latest collation of short stor ies assembled 
by two of the UK's most kno~ledgeablc editors .. The ~tories 
assembled herein are a very mixed lot, as they will be m any 
collection which reflects the editors' choice. The stories range 
from the very good indeed ('More Tomorrow' by Michael 
Smith 'Fee' by Peter Straub :and 'Dinner at Grief's table' by 
Robe:Ca Lannes) through the fairly ho hum ("The Puppets' 
by Ramsey Campbell) right down to the truly dreadful 
page 27 

===== PAGE 28 =====
\lector 1 92 • March/April 1997 
('Where the Bodies are Buried 3: Black and White and Red all 
over' by Kim Newman.) In general, the standard of writing is 
very high and leans towards dark fantasy rather than the 
classic ghost story or splatter. Some, such as Lisa Morton's 
'Love Eats' and Jeff VanderMeer' s 'At the Crossroads 
Burying the Dog' have a disturbing lyricism to them. 
This collection contains work from some of the biggest 
names in horror and is particularly representative of the 
more literate end of the British fiction scene. Overall, it is 
very strong and anyone who enjoys a more cerebral line of 
horror will find something here to please them. 
My only complaint with this collection is that a number 
of the well-known authors have contributed some pretty 
weak stories. I can't help feeling the collection would have 
been much stronger without the presence of some of these 
'usual suspects'. Brian Lumley with 'Uzzi' and Christopher 
Fowler with 'The Laundry Imp' are particularly slack. 
Obviously, readers buy a collection because they know the 
authors whose work is contained - on the other hand, they 
also like to see work by less well known writers and that is 
where this collection falls short. 
St Jude. R L;. Sinus & ( )berp1mk /ldndbook 
B:trt N:tg:cl [lbe Rc:tl ( )berp1mk 
Revie wed by Liam Prove n 
f,tkebookj 
\11 \\ ]>>, l'J2ppl1'/I 
Or• if you aren't yet familiar with haqrese[JJ • "Cool, dude!" 
After reading this book, if you can't at least pretend to be a 
hacker, you're a rancid lamer121. 
The Net is growing in significance every day, but as it 
spreads its tendrils throughout the lives of much of the 
developed world, its original denizens are being left high and 
dry. When the Net was young and text-based, the haqrs who 
owned it were rebellious kids, reveling in their superior 
knowledge of UNIX arcana and developing their own 
subculture. This is, guessably, much involved with the youth 
culture of rich young North Americans, often rebellious 
teenagers whose mastery of the systems was matched with a 
certain degree of scholastic and social inadequacy. Thus, a 
new dialect of English, based around intentional misspellings, 
abbreviations, cryptic computer references and so on. This 
evolved, as rapidly as anything involved with computers, in a 
context of purely text-based, nonlinear, non-real-time 
communication, where everything can potentially be 
overheard, so impenetrable obscurity is a positive boon. Off 
the Net, the haquer community developed other peculiarites, 
of dress (from nerdy "I-don't-care-how-I-look" to Gothic "all­
that-matters-is-how-1-look"), "challenging" hairstyles, attitude 
and behaviour, recognition signals, recreational activities, and 
even diet (ramen, twinkies and Jolt cola.) 
And now, it's all fading away in the bright harsh light of 
the World Wide Web: the Internet for all, made so easy to 
opera te that the newb ies are taking over. The time is nigh to 
documen t this disappearing culture along with the aboriginal 
indians, and R. U. Sirius and "Saint" Jude Milhon are just the 
people to do it. Part of the original teams behind Wired, 
Mondo1000 and bOING bOING (seminal Infobahn zines all), 
these guys are definitely members of the elite. No-one seems 
to be quite sure what Bart Nagel's doing in there , but it's 
probably something dull but important like checking that 
most of the words are spelled correctly and in roughly the 
11 l Challenging spelling is part of the cool. OK? 
Pl Don 't understand? You may be one already. Do something! 
QUICK! 
page 28 
conventional order. 
The Cyberp1mk Handbook is a vital tool for all sorts of 
people. If you suspect that someone you know131 may be a 
hacker, this will let you identify the signs. It won't help you 
do anything about it, but at least you will have some idea 
what they're on about. It will give you a brief, glancing 
introduction to deep geek psychology . It will even help a 
newbie take their first proper steps into the Big Room, and 
warn them away from the really dangerous bits. More 
importantly, of course, if you already are a something of a 
hacker, then it has several functions . First, it will tell you 
what level you are. For instance: 
Do you have a Net account, Web access and an 
eddress? [Newbie] 
Do you have at least three eddresses, one ISP account 
and several online service ones, know what the 
current version of Netscape Navigator is, and have a 
non-lame homepage? [Cyber-yup] 
Do you roll your own Linux kernels and run an ISP) 
[Dude] 
Do you have lunch with Tim Berners-LeeC~l :ma 
definitive answers to RFCs? ['Leet(51) 
Secondly, it's a step-by-step DIY guide to upgrading Y· 
knowledge, and therefore cyberhood. (For instance, it list 
number of the seminal SF books and films that you shou 
know.) Thirdly, you should laugh liour nose-ring off. 
Recommended. 4/ 4 shuriken[ 1. OK, it's not actuall} 
science fiction, but it tti/ksabout SF. READ THIS BOOK! 
Paul Kearne, I !,tu ku ood's \ oy,1ge Rook 1 of 
Reviewed b y Norm an Beswick 
The ,\!011,trcb1es of God 
\ 1,( \ j J Ii ,S 't p f ~ i<J 
When so much fantasy takes place in a comfy, soft-edged 
world of wishful thinking , Paul Kearney's new trilogy is an 
exciting contrast: it is tough, harshly imagined and, in 
consequence, wonderfully believable. 
The West, a loose conglomeration of separate nations 
dominated by the Ramusian Church (who have a high 
Pontiff and worship The Saint), is under ferocious attack 
from the invading Merduks (who have Sultans, fight with 
scimitars and worship Ahrimuz) . The West's holy city, 
Aekir, is sacked and destroyed, its womenfolk raped, its 
menfolk put to the sword or crucified; and the response of 
the Inceptines (a party-within-a-party inside the Ramus ian 
hierarchy) is simply to burn more and more heretics and 
tighten their grip on power. 
Sea-captain Richard Hawkwood is sent by King Abeleyn 
to voyage across the western ocean to seek Out an unknown 
land, described in an ancient ship's logbook. He is to take 
with him {in addition to his own crew) a miscellaneous group 
of dweomers and mages, fleeing from Inceptine persecution, 
and a band of soldiers, live animals and other necessities of 
settlement in a strange land. H awkwood is also accompanied 
by Murad, a cousin of the king, who is to rule the new 
colony on Abeleyn's behalf. 
But Hawkwood is not told of the other message of the 
old logbook: that previous explorations of the west have 
been ravaged by werewolves and othe r shapeshifters - and we 
know that there is at least one on Hawkwood' s vessel. 
131 Including yo urself 
l•l What do you MEAN ·'w ho"s he?"'! 
111 That's"'Eli1e··1oyou 
161 -·A kindacyber- star·· 

===== PAGE 29 =====
The differences between the two competing religions 
seem to be purely cultural; we are spared analysis of their 
doctrines but not their intrigues. The battles, the sea journey 
- and indeed everything else - is told with meticulous hard 
detail, and Kearney manages a huge spread of characters and 
incidents. The result is a thrilling and marvellously-told story 
that compels attention. I look forward with eagerness to the 
two succeeding volumes. 
Da, 1d Marshall \\: nght S,t'i.1t1111<th 
1 .. 1Iullil1tu1: I'"'' "'fl !"t 1J 
Reviewe d by Norman Beswick 
David Marshall-Wright owns Lief Publishing, and hopes to 
publish other nonh-eastern writers. He 'declined offers of 
publication through mainstream international publishers' as 
he 'wished to keep control of his work'. Aher reading this 
book, I have to say that he was ill-advised. 
Savannah is the first of a trilogy. Jennifer, an idealistic 
young local reponer, and Louis, a reclusive 'light-theorist 
and programmer', are randomly plucked out by a mysterious 
alien force and placed in full control of an amazing spaceship 
in order to find a solution to 'the human problem '. Under 
their command is a seemingly endless supply of beautiful 
female technicians and limitless technological power. They 
can inspect or record any area or event in detail: appear in 
panial simulation anywhere they wish: whisk before them 
any world politician: impose any punishment or line of 
action they choose. 
As a concept it's quite promising. In execution it's a 
sprawl. Male humanity is very understandably indicted for 
violence, corruption, environmental destruction and much 
else, but when the author wants to describe actual politics, 
say, or the workings of the social services, his use of language 
shows he hasn't done his homework and doesn't know what 
he's talking about. The plot has an improvised feel, moving 
in sudden lurches after lengthy doldrums. Drunken binges 
and remarkable sexual explosions receive detailed description, 
for no apparent reason (they must be the 'Gnostic 
experiences' that the blurb describesQ; but the book's climax, 
when all the world's politicians are whisked before a badly 
hung-over Louis for his instructions, is hurried through as if 
pages were running out. The nations of the world are 
controlled behind the scenes by a secret conspiracy of eleven 
people: an interesting notion, but their motivation, how the 
conspiracy works, and its relevance to the story's theme, are 
quite unclear. 
My review copy needed more careful proof-reading, and 
for some reason page 55 is in double-spacing, as if a paragraph 
or so had been removed and the rest spread out to fill the 
page. 
Sadly, I was disappointed. The next two volumes will 
have to be very good indeed to make up for this. 
Lcon:trd N1m0\ / .4.m Spo,k 
\rr , 1<19, ,.;-pp£, I'/ 
Reviewed by Jon Wallace 
In the mid-70's, Leonard Nimoy wrote an autobiography 
called / Am Not Spock. At the time it must have seemed apt. 
Star Trek had been cancelled and the public were finding it 
difficult to see Nimoy as anything other than Spock. He was 
a talented actor whose career had seemingly been blighted by 
a character that he played for three series, a character that 
had proved to have so strong an attraction to the viewing 
public that they could not see Nimoy as anyone other than 
Spock. (Ask yourself this. Did the sight of Leonard grinning 
Vecto r 192 • March/April 1997 
away as he figured that he'd outsmarted Columbo on the 
repeat last week sit well, or was it disturbing?). Since the 
great Sr.ar Trek revival, with the movies and the series, Spock 
has paid the bills, successfully integrated his Human and 
Vulcan sides and, if this book be believed, become reconciled 
with his creator, Leonard Nimoy. Well, maybe. 
I haven't actually read / Am Not Spock so I can't really 
compare this book with the other, but in/ Am Spock, Nimoy 
writes of Spock with an affection which tempers the negative 
tone of the earlier title. And in the end autobiography is 
autobiography. The first half of this one covers Nimoy's 
early career and Star Trek, the second, his life since; the 
Movies and his other acting and directing jobs. Along the 
way we are regaled with the usual Bill Shatner/Gene 
Roddenberry practical jokes anecdotes carefully spiced with 
the interesting production facts that these Star Trek 
autobiographies are usually made of. (Interestingly, Leonard 
seems kinder to Bill's little foibles that some of his ST 
colleagues ... ) 
If you're a Star Trek fan, a Leonard Nimoy fan, or just 
one of those people who like to read autobiographies, then 
you'll probably read this. 
Lh, 1d Prmg:le (ed) Jbe Best o} llltcrm11e 
\ 'I:" 1,J- ,1sf'f !,19 
Reviewed b y Pat McMurra y 
lnterzone has been a reliable source of good short SF stories 
throughout its 14 years of publication. This anthology 
collects 29 of these stories from the 1990s. (Earlier 
anthologies have been published which cover earlier years.) 
This anthology is a very good mixture and measure of the 
work contained within Interzone. There are stories of alien 
contact, grim future dystopias, true romance, humour , 
alternate history. One or two of the stories would probably 
fail for a non-UK reader - "Slow News Day " by Kim 
Newman is a clever and poignant story of Britain after 50 
years of Nazi occupation that relies heavily on a close 
knowledge of John Major's government for its humour - but 
most of the stories are just good SF, rather than British SF. 
There's quite a lot of humour buried in this book; for 
example, "Norben & the System" by Timons E.sais, and 
"Cyril the Cyberpig" by Eugene Byrne. 
If you like shon stories, you'll find a lot to enjoy in this 
book. If, like myself, you regularly read lnterzone, you'll 
probably be pleased to read these stories again. My only 
quibble is that none of the non-fiction is included - the 
interviews, bibliographies, book & film reviews - but this is 
only a minor flaw. 
Ste, en Spnnll Rulers of D,trkness 
{''"'II'!! "-t11 !_,)) 
Reviewed by Claire Brialey 
The best thing about this book is the title, or the title's 
derivation ("For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but 
against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the 
darkness of this world" - Ephesians). That undeniably reads 
better than anything in the book itself. If I hadn't been 
meant to be reviewing it, I wouldn't have made it past the 
first few chapters. The rest of it is an improvement, but the 
first impression hangs around like a bad taste, threatening to 
get inept again at any moment. 
The basic ideas aren't bad: a (to me) new take on 
vampirism as a particularly unpleasant side effect of, and only 
~cure" for, a strain of childhood leukaemia and the 
accompanying denomination of vampires as hxmophages sets 
page 29 

===== PAGE 30 =====
Veclor 192 • March/April 1997 
this up on the scientific side of horror. As for the plot. it's 
cen;i.inly action-packed even if, somehow. nothing much 
happens for at least the first two-thirds of the book - there's 
a lot of suspense at any rate. Scenes familiar from US cop 
shows and medical dram-as abound , and the focus of the plot 
on eight or nine family memben, at least half of whom have 
no idea in what relation they really stand to one another , 
brings in more than a shade of soap opera -as well. At the 
antre of all of this, and in addition to the Good Cop/ Bad 
Cop sub-plot, we have the Good Vampire/Bad Vampire riff. 
But you have to do more than put a noble vampire into these 
scenarios to get anything new out - particularly if hardly 
anyone else knows he's a vampire (in itself, hardly an 
unfamiliar plot device). And maybe it's the frequent hospital 
scenes, but this book seems to have a lot of de,1d and dying 
characters even for a vampire novel. ls this a metapho r? Just 
anothe r dichC? A neat twist on something or other? 
Ultim:nely, I couldn't care enough to w.i.n1 to analyse it, even 
if I did finally become sufficiently engaged to decide I should 
finish the book. 
Spruill must be doing something right; most of his 
characters awaken some sort of sympathy in the reader, 
enhancing the p lot dilemma which dict;;nes that rom~ne has 
got to get it. as it were, in the neck in order to provide any 
son of happy outcome for the majority of the protagonists. 
And he does at least avoid the clichC of making everyone 
come good at the end. But there is still something in the 
plotting, in the characters' roles and interrelationships, and 
most especially in the first few chapters when all of this is 
spoon-fed 10 the increasingly reluctant reader - clichC is, in 
appropriately but inevitably cliched manner, the only 
dt'scription I can use. And there is to be a sequel. Of course 
there is. All medical drama-cop show-soap opera·=pire 
novels have sequels. 
D:n 1J \\ 1.:hcr l/o11or \moll~ T:11em1es 
I , .. 1 "" ] '~ 'I f I -1 1 
Reviewed by Pat McMurra y 
This is the sixth volume in an ongoing series about a female 
Hornbl ower type in space, and the first to be published in 
the UK. It's also the first of the series I've read, so I was 
picking this up very much in the middle. Basically Hono r 
Harrington is a disgraced Captai n in the Royal Manticoran 
Navy, who's now serving as an Adm iral with the Navy of 
one of their allies, the Graysons. Somehow she's also become 
a great noble amongst the Graysons as well. Very litde 
background is given, and occasionally leaves you wondering 
what the hell is going on. There's also a great deal of political 
manoeuvring amongst the Manticorans over whether or not 
to reinstate Honor in tbe Navy. 
Anywa y, fairly predictably, Captain Hon or Harrington is 
re-insmed, given a small fleet and sent off to fight pirates at 
overw helming odds. She is magnificently successful, 
managing to defeat not only the pirates, but also some Pttps 
as well. (If Manticora is late 18th Century England, the Peq,s 
- the People's Republic - are post-Revolutionary France). She 
does lose her ship, but goes down fighting against 
magnificent odds in a good cause, drawing th e enemy Peeps 
off from a very important civilian vessel. 
In many w.i.ys, this book is absolute tosh. A Napoleonic 
era military structu re is in no way compatible with a Navy 
of eleven million with ships that need several thousand 
sailors, any more than a Napoleoni c era political system and 
nobility could be writ large to form a planetary government. 
It is however brilliant and engaging tosh, and I do want to 
read some: more: about the adventures of Honor Harrington . 
page 30 
\lh,. had J \\ eldon !he Al'cbotro111c \ zdeo 
Reviewed by Stephen Payne 
Gmde 
1nm l'" 'fl-' !.l" '" 
At the front of this book, Michael J. Weldon is pictured 
behind the neon lit glass of a 42nd Street cinema box office. 
With a straight face and an unflinching gne he is offering us 
a cinema ticket, a symbo l of what this book has to declare, an 
inviu.tion to come inside. And what do we find if we enter? -
a guide to 'Psychotronic' films. Weldon describes the 
Psychotronic film thu s: 'horror, science fiction, fantasy and 
exploitation movies ... releases that used to be ca.lied 'B' 
features... hardy released obscuriti es, acknowledged cult 
items, or over-hyped and over merchandised household 
names.' Weldon also encourages us by adding that 'unlike 
other video guides, nothing is omiued because it's in bad 
taste'. 
~ Prychotronic Video Guide is not just an alternative to 
Halliwel/'s Film Guide, it is an alternative Halli~Jl•s - with 
all the weird stuff left in. How do they compare? Halliwtll 's 
uses a star rating system wh ich runs from no stars (poo r or 
worthless) to 4 stars (a work of an). 4 star films are stuff like 
Citiun Kane and 7k Graduate, and Halliwtll's helpfully lists 
them all out, year by year, al the back. They're a pretty 
predictable: bunch. The entry for each film consists of a one 
sentence summary, a sentence of criticism and then a list of 
the credits; director, writer, stars and so on. 
Weldon does not bother with any kind of rating system 
to measure: the quality of the films and his entrio: are not 
nearly so formal. He: does list director, producer and writer, 
but other credits, including the stars, are included {I assume) 
at his whim. He also mako: an anempt to describe the films 
and sometimes passes an opinion - if he feels the mm is 
worthy of comment, then he comments. Information of a 
more: esoteric nnure: is also included, for example: on 
different versions, if it was cut {censored) for distribution, or 
if the special effects are of interest. It's less of a list book and 
because there's no rating system the reader is not inclined to 
make a value judgement on a particu lar film slmply be<:ausc it 
has or has not made the perceived grade. It's a more personal 
guide and when, for example, Weldon suggests Robert Wise's 
1ne Haunting is the best ghost story film ever made, the 
reader is more impressed to respect his opinion. 
But the biggest difference is the type of films that each 
guide covers. You won't find any mention of Hollywood 
Ch.,insaw HooknJ ('Hookers kill the customers and duel with 
chainsaws in this unrated detective / horror spoor) or 7"e 
Ribald Taln of Robin Hood\ All the usual Sherwood Forest 
characters appear, but the women have heavy eye makeup 
and take their clotho: ofr) in Httll1wtll's, just as many of the 
4 star films in Halliwrll's are not mentioned in 7k 
Prychotronrc Guide. In f'.act, where films are mentioned in 
both guides, views differ. According to Halliwtll's, 1k Plryer­
(4 stars), directed by Rohen Altman, is a 'deft and dazzling 
satire on the film industry - witty , surprising and intelligent' , 
wbile Weldon says the film is 'a Hollywood satire/murder 
mystery that was created to irritate.' 
~ Aychotronic Vid~ Guide is the sequel to 7"e 
Psycbotronic Movie Guide which was publis hed in 1989 and 
films covered in that book are 0 0 1 covered in this one. I 
think this is a shame because the two guides are really two 
halves of a who le and the earlier volume covers many of the 
more obvious examples of the genre (but no! so much Kung 
Fu and Hong Kong action movies). For me, the ideal film 
guide wou ld be the two 'Psychotronic' books merged 

===== PAGE 31 =====
together. Now that would be indispensable. 
\ ",m:m \\ 1111:un'i & / /,, /'111 ~11111 Book oj 
R1 .. h:1rd Gh n Jorn:, (cd,) \ludtm f ,ml,lS\ h 
\\ 0 111 1 11 
I "~ LC\ I ]- ]- '~ ' 
Reviewed by Sue Th omason 
Th e joy of a collection like this (thirty-eight short stories by 
women, all originally written in English, "from the Second 
World War to the present day") is that there is almost certain 
10 be something in it that you like. Unfortunately, there is 
almost certainly something you'll dislike in it as well. The 
editors have taken "a broad view of what constitutes 
fantasy", and though the editorial supporting mate.rial is 
literwy-acadcmic in t0ne, the stories arc~ a fine mix of 
'highbrow' and popular, SF, hntasy and horror, and 
surrealist, magical realist, non-realist , and just plain weird. 
The editors "make no claim that the selection i.s 
c:duustive or 'representative'", which is good because il's 
obviously skewed bOlh chronologically (J sto ries from the 
190s, 5 from the 1950s, 7 from the 1960s, 9 from the 1970s, 
9 from the 1980s, and 5 from the first half of the 90s) and 
geograph ically (16 stories from the UK, 14 from the USA, 2 
from Ca nada, I from Ireland, I from New Zealand, and four 
sto ries with multiple attribution s - UK/Mexico, UK/USA, 
New Zealand/ Australia, and India/Canada/U K). I think the 
geographical attribu1ions are where the story was written, 
not necessarily where the author now (or usually) lives. 
Inevitably everyone who's widely read in the field will 
have their own Obvious ly Overlooked Key Fantasy Writer , 
but I suspect that omissions (and inclusions) Lil this collection 
probably have more to do with copyright, and with personal 
taste, than with any Grand Plan. Even so, it is odd to find 
Angela Carter, P. 0. James, Anne McCaffrcy and Muriel 
Spark as literary bedfellows, along with a number of writers 
I'd never heard of before. Three of the most recently written 
stories (by L. A. Hall, Ann Oakley and Lynda Rajan) have 
their first publications In this collection: the rest are reprints 
and many have been anth ologised before. Well-known 
authors Goan Aiken, Tanith Lee, Ursula K. LeGuin, Joanna 
Russ) are represented by well-known stories, representative 
of their work ("Marmalade Wine", "Red as Blood", •sur", 
"The Second Inquisition") and in this respect the book could 
usefully serve as an introductory sampler for people to 
browse through and work out wha1 they'd like to read more 
of - or as a handy collection of old favourites for people who 
don't have them elsewhere. 
Wlu.t's missing? Well, stories of this kind written before 
!!~pan7t~~ol:~!. ~es~:~:lrn ;:,k 4~i~~a~:U, t½ 
Womm. There isn't much horror, or romantic fiction, or 
historical fiction. And (possibly for reasons to do with 
copyright or obscenity law) there is no trace of the vast 
!ur::,i;r::i~~i~:ntf~cbu7~:t:~x:t:i:el~h:d;~io:~;:~;f ~, 
and 'slash' (erotic same-sex 'fan') fiction currently being 
written by and for women. Does this indicate that sexual 
fantasies arc less valued than fantasies of violence, escapism or 
power? 
\11~h:t1..·I \\ 1lli;m1, lll,1d1 
II ,, , 
Rev iewed by Pat McMurra y 
I found this book very offpu tting , and came very dose to 
Vector 192 • March/April 1997 
giving up halfway through . Examined casually it almost 
looks like a standard fantasy, with the maps and genealogy in 
the front, the phoenix and the sphinxes, the combat in the 
forest between rebels and guards. This is the story of five 
cousins who were brought up in Arcady, a mansion on the 
Borders founded by their grandfather. There arc the three 
broth ers; Solomon the priest and appare ntly failed magici:tn, 
Diego a Upui n of the Guards, and Endymion who's 
inhe rited the house and seems to be going insane. There's 
also the two sisters; Anemis, leader of the rebels and Mina, a 
sculptre ss. 
The 'Borders' are the Borders of the Absences, voids 
where reality seems to become unravelled. One of these 
Absences is encroach ing upon the house, and 1he story is 
malllly the a ucm pt of the family to protect Arcady, while 
following their own agen<US. The story has a very rich and 
ornate texture, with constant quot es from the Texts, 
especially where they're used to perform magic. 
I found this book too rich, too involved, too opaque , 
with too many odd occurrences and unexplained 
coincidences. In an odd son of way, everything was wrapped 
up too neatly at the end. I didn't like it, but you may have a 
greater tolerance for this than I do. 
:\l Lee\\ 11nJ / onkm,;: /or tbt· \!dhd1 
\ L 1, I •'J, ,~'If /, I J 
Rev iewed b y Ian Sales 
Of the ingredients that are mixed together to make a science 
fiction novel, the world or universe of the story i.s pretty 
much the ro11x.. The world of Loolting for lhe Mahdi, as 
suggested by the title, is the tin y Gulf Ar.i.b state of 
Khuruchabja . However , since this is a SF novel, Khuruch abja 
is a poor Gulf Arab state ... Ka.hlili bint Munadi Suleiman, 
Arab-American , is a veteran war correspondent of the 
Khuruchabjan War, when Allied forces 'rescued' the cou ntry 
from its oppressive regime. Masquerading as a man, ' Kay Bee 
Suleiman' reponed on the atrocities from the thick of the 
fighting, earning herself several journalistic awards and a 
comfortabl e desk-bound posi1ion. Ten years later, the US 
governm ent approac hes Suleiman and asks her to secretly 
deliver a fabricant (i.e. replicant) to Khuru chabja's curre nt 
ruler to act as hi.s bodyguard. Which is where it all Stans to 
go horribly wrong. 
This is a novel set in the Arab world, so of count ther e 
will be plots within plots, in1cmec.inc rivalries and thinly• 
disguised terrorism. Loolting for lhe Mahdi is a near-future 
thriller, its plot a staple of that genre, as Suleiman delves 
deeper into the Khuruchab jan situation, news.hound's 
instincts to the fore. And, like in much Arab politics , there 
are no good guys - including the Americans, who arc 
lambasted with the son of righteous indignation only an 
expatriate US author can imagine (Wood lives in France). 
But, given the book's setting, Looking for lhe Mahdi, 
stands or falls on its depiction of the invented country of 
Khuruchabja . Perhaps it's just me, but I initially found it 
hard to accept the coun try for what Wood would have us 
believe. Admittedly, I'm a pickier reader than most in this 
regard since I've spen t more years in the Middle East than I 
have in the country of my birth. However, it was only little 
th.ings. K.huruchabja (which, as a name sounds more Urdu 
than Arabic to me; Arabic does not not have a 'ch' phoneme ) 
came across more as a Northern Area Arab country, rather 
than a Gulf state - here, men wear dishdash.:t, aqul and guthr.1; 
not a kaff~h; the 11.bey.z is blKk, not henna'd. I often 
stumbled over the latini..sed Arabic Wood used. Many Arabic 
words have entered Gulf expatriate English, with already 
page 31 

===== PAGE 32 =====
Veclor 192 • March/April 1997 
accepted spellings - wadi and jebel, for instance. Wood's 
latinisation struck me as an attempt to remain more faithful 
to Arabic, but actually made it seem less like Arabic. 
But these are only minor criticisms in what is actually an 
excellent book. Suleiman and the fabricant, Halton, are well­
rounded characters - perhaps Suleiman is a little too much 
the cliched wise-cracking newshound, but a genuine 
personality shines through from beneath. Halton is clearly 
not human, but close enough to sympathise with. And the 
Arabs are handled well. The plot romps along - a little 
sadistic in places, true -and the resolution is as much a 
product of the book's world and technology as it is of the 
story itself. 
However, any author setting a book in the Middle East -
in a real or invented country - can't resist the temptation to 
lecture on the politics of the region. That Wood's view is 
more balanced than those of Americans I've met is admirable. 
But there is still a whiff of admiration for the Israelis, a view 
certainly not shared in this part of the world. Wood's take 
on the Gulf War is definitely not the CNN's and bears a 
closer resemblance to the truth - although from here it was 
more Monty Python than Monty's Desert Rats. All this is 
woven into the extant global situation of the time of the 
book. 
It's only in the closing stages of Looking/or the Mahdi that 
Wood begins to become unglued. The final chapters are the 
most overtly fantastical of what is near-future hard SF - but 
it's political fantasy: a lasting peaceful solution for the Middle 
East. It's a happy ending ... and after the Khuruchabjan 
history lessons Wood slots into the narrative, it's only fair 
the country gets one. 
This is a well-crafted near-future novel, set in a part of the 
world not often used in SF, well-written, and recommended. 
Incidentally, the strapline (on the US edition): "Science 
created him. Government controls him. One woman can set 
him free ... ~ does the book no favours. 
Vector 192 - Index of Books Reviewed 
Simon Archer & Stan N icho lls - Gerry 
Anderson: 7be Authorised Biography .. ..... 12 
Gregory Benford - Timescape ....... 24 
Ben Bova - Moonrise 13 
Poppy Z. Brite - Exquisite Corpse........... 13 
Anhur C C larke & Mike McQuay 
-Ric hter 10 .. 24 
Simon Clarke - Darker ...................... 24 
Storm Constantine - Dancer for the 
World's Death 14 
Michael Crichton - The Lost World ........... 25 
Michael Crichton & Anne Marie Martin 
- Twister: The Screenplay 
Jack Deighton - A Son of the Rock .. 
John Douglas - Hard Shoulder ..... . 
Gardner Dozois - The Best New SF: 9th 
25 
25 
....... 25 
Annual Collection ..... 26 
Mary Gentle - Ancient Light . .. .. . . . . . . . .. . . .. .. . 26 
Amitav Ghosh - The Calcutta Chromosome 15 
William Gibson - ldoru ......... 15 
Rob Grant - Backwards 27 
Harry Harrison & John Holm - King and 
Emperor ............. 16 
PhilJanes-l,Arnold....... . ........... 27 
Stephen Jones & David Sutton - Dark 
Terrors ............... . . .. 27 
St. Jude, R. U. Sirius & Ban Nagel 
- Cyberpunk Handbook ...... . ......... 28 
Paul Kearney - Hawkwood's Voyage .. 28 
page 32 
Garry Kilwonh - A Midsummer's 
Nightmare . . 16 
Garry Kilwonh - The Roof a/Voyaging 17 
Richard La Plante - Tegne: Soul Warrior . .. 18 
Frank Lovece - The XFiles Declassified 18 
David Marshall-Wright - Savannah ........... 29 
Ken Macleod - The Stone Canal.. 18 
George R.R. Manin -A Game of Thrones . 19 
Alan Moore - Voice of the Fire .................... 20 
Leonard Nimoy - I Am Spock 29 
Terry Pratchett - Hogfather ........................ 20 
David Pringle - The Best of lnterzone ......... 29 
William Shatner - Tek Money ... 21 
Alison Sinclair - Blueheart ... 21 
Steven Spruill - Rulers of Darkness .......... ... 29 
David Weber - Honor Among Enemies ...... 30 
Michael J. Weldon - The Psychotronic 
Video Guide.................... . .... 30 
Angus Wells - Exile's Challenge ......... 22 
A. Susan Williams & Richard Glyn Jones 
- The Penguin Book of Modern Fantasy by 
Women.............. . ... 31 
Michael Williams - A ready ..... 31 
Philip G. Williamson - Enchantment's 
Edge... ..................... . ... 22 
N Lee Wood - Looking/or the Mahdi .... 31 
Jame s Woodall - The Man in the Mirror of 
the Book.. 23 