   
  
              
“The best idea in [A Walking Tour ofthe Shambles] we
stole, happily,from what may be the only place it’s ever been done
(which is Charles G. Finney’s The Circus ofDr. Lao): the list
ofunanswered questions. He has a list ofthe questions which
were not answeredinthe book. We actually went one step
further, because weprovide not only a list ofunanswered
questions but a list ofanswers, which Genedid.It’s
absolutely marvelous and rather creepy. The acid bath
one always gets a horrified laugh at readings: ‘What
kind ofman would kill a woman anddis-
solve her body in acid, and
how could that safely be
done today?’”’
NEIL GAIMAN
  
 

 
Gene [Rodman] Wolfe was born May 7,
1931 in Brooklyn, New York and grew up in
Texas, where he graduatedfrom the University
of Houston in 1956 with a BS in mechanical
engineering. He served in the USArmy in Korea
from 1952-1954, was a project engineer for
Procter and Gamblefrom 1956-72, and senior
editor ofPlant Engineeringfrom 1972 - 84, when
he left to writefull time. Hisfirst published story
was “The Dead Man” (1965) for erotic maga-
zine Sir. Most ofhis early SF work appeared in
Damon Knight's Orbit series; manycollections
of his stories have been published over the
years.
Wolfe’s novels began to appear in 1970,
with Operation ARES, and include The Fifth
Head of Cerberus (1972), Peace (1975),
“Latro” books Soldier of the Mist (1986) and
Soldier ofArete (1989), and Castleview (1990);
he has also written booksfor young adults and
poetry. His most ambitious andacclaimedworks
are the 12 books and various stories that share
the same “Urth” universe: the “Bookofthe New
Sun” sequence (four books 1980 - 83, with a
fifth added in 1987, plus several related stories),
the “Book of the Long Sun” (four books 1993—
96), and its sequel trilogy “Book of the Short
Sun” (1999-2001). “NewSun” volume one, The
Shadow of the Torturer (1980), won a World
Fantasy Award; volume two, The Claw of the
Conciliator (1981), a Nebula; and volumefour,
The Citadel ofthe Autarch (1983), the John W.
Campbell Memorial Award. Wolfe’s other
awardsinclude a Nebulafor novella “TheDeath
of Doctor Island” (1973), a World Fantasy
Awardforcollection Storeysfrom the OldHotel
(1988), and a World Fantasy Life Achievement
Award in 1996. He has been to married
Rosemary Frances Dietsch since 1956; they
have two sons and two daughters, and live in
Barrington,Illinois.
Neil [Richard] Gaiman was born
November 10, 1960 in Porchester, England.
After attending school in southern England, he
moved to London, where he worked as a free-
lance journalist in the early 1980s and sold his
first stories to gaming and men’s magazinesin
1984 and 1985. His first work in the field was
co-editing humorous book of SF quotations
Ghastly Beyond Belief (1985, with Kim
Newman). His well-known  “Sandman’”’
comic/graphic series began in 1989, and
includes “A Midsummer Night’s Dream (1990),
the only comic to win a World Fantasy Award.
His novels include Good Omens (1990, with
Terry Pratchett); Neverwhere (1996), a novel-
ization ofhis dark-fantasy BBC series; Stardust
(1998); andAmerican Gods(2001), which won
an International Horror Guild award, a Locus
Award, and is afinalist on the Hugo ballot. His
current children’s book Coraline (2002) is a
bestseller. Other works include Don’t Panic:
The Official Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy
Companion (1988), collection Smoke and
Mirrors (1998), and graphic children’s book
The Day I SwappedMyDadfor Two Goldfish
(1997, with Dave McKean). Gaiman currently
lives in Minneapolis, Minnesota with his wife,
MaryMcGrath, whom he married in 1985, their
son and two daughters.
Wolfe and Gaimanfirst met in 1983, at the
British Fantasy Convention in Birmingham.
They and their families became friends when
Gaimanandhisfamily movedtothe US in 1992.
They recently collaborated on A Walking Tour
of the Shambles: Little Walks for Sightseers
#16, published for the 2002 World Horror
Convention where they were both guests.
The “interview” is a series of talks with
Gaiman interviewing Wolfe, overseen by
Charles N. Brown andJennifer A. Hall.
NG: “The project we just did together was
a lovely bit of fun.”
GW:“J certainly enjoyed it. There’s two
versions printed out —one Neil gets top billing,
and one / get top billing.”
NG: “The fun of it for me was theinitial
problem-solving conversations. I phoned Gene
up andsaid, ‘We’ve beenaskedto collaborate on
a story.’ He laughed hollowly. I said, ‘The only
wayIthink we could doit is if we pick some
kind of thing that will allow us to do what you
did in Bibliomen, where wehaveshorter things
that make up something bigger. We could do a
tarot deck, a dictionary, a guidebook.’ And Gene
said, ‘Let’s do a guidebook.’ He could have said
yes to a dictionary, and it could have beenjustas
strange and dangerous.”
GW:“Butthat, to my knowledge, has been
done more. AmbroseBierce wastheoriginal guy
in that area, and it’s been done by a numberof
other people. It’s very tempting to define terms,
put your own prejudices in as Samuel Johnson
did. But I didn’t know of anybody who had done
a guidebook, other than The Tough Guide to
Fantasy by Diana Wynne Jones (which really
liked).”
NG:“I think what attracted both Gene and
me to it was the incredibly dry tone. Anybody
who’s ever done any touristing anywhere has
ended up with one of these little guidebooks:
‘You are now looking at this example of 1870s
whatever, and this happened here. Nowcrossthe
road and you will see....’ It seemed one of those
things where you could take the style and then
insert your own contents.
‘For any collaborative work, suddenly you
have an audience. With most writing, you have
an audiencebutit’s imaginary —somebodyjust
like you wholikes the same kinds of things and
likes your jokes, but isn’t you and is as smart or
smarter, and you’re writing for him or her. The
joy of our project was, I had my audience.Iwas
writing for Gene. If it made Gene laugh, it
worked. And Gene had an audience, too.
“The best idea in there westole, happily,
from what maybethe only place it’s ever been
done (which is Charles G. Finney’s The Circus
of Dr. Lao): the list of unanswered questions.
He has a list of the questions which were not
answered in the book. Weactually wentone step
further, because we provide not only list of
unanswered questions but a list of answers,
which Genedid. It’s absolutely marvelous and
rather creepy. The acid bath one always gets a
horrified laugh at readings: ‘What kind of man
would kill a woman and dissolve her body in
acid, and how could that safely be done today?’
“The strangest thing is this Gahan Wilson
cover with a picture of me and Gene on it. How
cool is that?”
GW:“The really cool thing there is, we’re
in association with Alice in Wonderland, which
is where I have always wanted to be! I’ve always
wanted this little upper-class English girl to
come up to me, holding a piece of cake in each
hand, and say ‘Which one should I eat?’”
NG:“Gene and I resort to e-mail when we
have to, if I’m on a different continent, but most
of the time when we’re doing a story the fun of
it is posting it to each other, then phoning up and
laughing at each others’ jokes. We wouldn’t
have been able to do that with e-mail. It would
have been moreefficient, but muchless fun.”
GW:“I’mnot sure it wouldhave beenmore
efficient. I’m not nearly as good a writer at e-
mail as I amon paper. I’m an old-fashioned guy.
I need time to print it out and look at it and
revise, scratch my head, pencil out words and
pencil in words. The computer drives menuts. I
always remind people whotalk about how writ-
ing is going to be revolutionized by the comput-
er that Shakespeare wrote with a feather that he
had to resharpen every pageorso, and look what
he did!”
NG: “And you, you started writing in col-
lege?”
GW:“I started writing at Texas A&M,for
The Commentator, which wasthe literary maga-
zine. I wrote three or fourlittle stories for it. I
wish to God I could remember the nameofthe
editor, because I learned more from the student
editor of The Commentator than I have ever
learned from any othereditor.
“He was an upperclassman and I was a
sophomore, and I expected to be beaten. We
Continued on page 81
LOCUS September 2002 / 7

 
Ron Walotsky’s death was and wasn’t a surprise:
weknew he’d been hospitalized in June and had been
following his progress almost daily through e-mails;
and though his condition was very serious, we had
| expected him to pull through. So to suddenly hear he
hadn’t made it was a sad shock. I’d seen Ron at
Worldcon and World Fantasy Conlastyear, and spent
most of I-Con with him in April. We talked mostly
about growing up in the lower-middle-class neigh-
borhoods of Brooklyn in the ’40s, and being Jewish.
I was five years older (he told me he was born in
1942, but then artists don’t have to be exact), but we
shared similar experiences. Ronwasoneofthe warm-
est and friendliest people I knew.In the early ’90s,
we ended up talking about masks and I told him I
had a collection at home. Hetried to sell me one of
his crab warrior masks, but whenI told him I couldn’t
really afford it he insisted I take it for free, “‘so I’ll be
part of your collection.” I ended up trading him a
lifetime Locus subscription even though he said he
wanted nothing in return. I’ll miss him.
On a happier note, we had dinner with China
Miéville while he was on tour in the Bay Area in
July, and showedhimtheLocusoffices.Avery charm-
ing and well-read guy, he was suitably impressed by
my collection. We had dinner at the Claremont Ho-
tel, and I was able to regale him with stories of Ber-
keley in 1968, when the Worldcon banquet was held
in the very room we werein. Wealso had dinner with
Eileen Gunn and John Berry, who have been living
in San Francisco for several years and will be return-
ing to live in the Seattle area in October. Eileen runs
The Infinite Matrix, and we learned a lot about the
problemsofInternet publishing. John Berry still looks
too young to have been on the original Locus sub-
scription list for 1968. We talked about recent trips
to Russia and othertravels abroad, and how eachtrip
gives us new perspective on our own country.
Tim Pratt has survived this place a year and is now
an assistant editor. Congratulations!
CORRECTIONS
In last month’s introduction to Kinuko Y. Craft’s
interview, we incorrectly linked ASFA to the Spec-
trum Awards. While Spectrum at one time included
ASFAlistings, the two are and always have been com-
pletely separate entities. The Spectrum AwardsCraft
has received were presented by the jury of the Spec-
Editorial Matters
trum Board.
E-MAIL PROBLEMS
Unknownto us, our ISP placed a spam filter on
our e-mail that prevented quite a bit of legitimate e-
mail from getting through to us since June, including
subscription, CD-ROM,and back-issue orders. We
have recovered the missing mail and are in the pro-
cess of going throughitand straightening thingsout.
THIS ISSUE
This is Issue 500, and ourfirst with expandedfull-
color coverage, which weplan to continue regularly.
Arnie Fenner did the cover and the color spreads of
RonWalotsky’s workandthe two interviews. Melinda
(Mandy) Himel became our in-house color expert,
doing the table of contents, People & Publishing,
news, and other pages. Other changesinclude a rede-
signed table of contents, courtesy of Arnie. We’ll be
making other changes in the coming months, most
likely beginning with the bestseller pages next issue.
Jenni has been interviewing mesince the begin-
ning of the year. What appearshere is a small portion
of what she’s got. We hopeit serves to give readers
an overview of the roots of Locus and some back-
ground ofits illustrious founder. It seems almost in-
conceivable that 34 years have passedsince that first
 
USA
___$29.00 for 6 issues (Periodical)
___$49.00 for 12 issues (Periodical)
____$90.00 for 24 issues (Periodical)
___$58.00 for 12 issues (1st class)
___$105.00 for 24 issues (1st class)
CANADA & MEXICO
___$32.00 for 6 issues (Periodical)
___$52.00 for 12 issues (Periodical)
___$95.00 for 24 issues (Periodical)
___$58.00 for 12 issues (1st class)
___$105.00 for 24 issues (1st class)
two-page mimeographedissue in 1968. I don’t feel a
day older. Actually, yes I do — a lot older, almost
ancient. I keep looking back at the staff photos and
wondering where the time has gone. Jenni collected
many of the pieces in the Locus 500 section without
showing them to me until this month. I’m suitably
impressed and wish I really was the person they think
I am. Now Id better stop before I get maudlin.
Wehavea bit less news this month because of an
earlier editorial deadline to get in the extra color and
have the issue printed in time for Worldcon.It’s also
the summer doldrums. Wealso had to hold conven-
tions to have room for Ron’s art and obituary. The |
updated convention listing is posted at Locus Online. |
The cover price is now $5.95. We’ll be raising sub-
scription rates in the next month orso, so please re-
new (or subscribe) now.
NEXT ISSUE
October will have the Hugo and Chesley Awards
winners, the Hubbard Awards, and interviews with
Dan Simmonsand probably Jeff VanderMeer. There
will be Hugo Voting Figures, photos of the awards
ceremony, and thefirst installment of our Worldcon
report. There will also be our usual assortmentofre-
views, news, people notes,etc.
Since Worldconispractically in our back yard, the
entire in-house staff will be there as well as Mark R.
Kelly from Los Angeles and Jonathan Strahan from
Perth, Australia. We’ll have a Locus table. Look for
us there! —C.N. BrownlJ.A. Hall
INTERNATIONAL
___$32.00 for 6 issues (Sea Mail)
___$52.00 for 12 issues (Sea Mail)
___$95.00 for 24 issues (Sea Mail)
___$85.00 for 12 issues (Air Mail)
___$140.00 for 24 issues (Air Mail)
All subscriptions are payable in US funds. Canadians, please use bankorpostal money orders, not personal checks. Subscribeto:
Locus Publications, P.O. Box 13305, Oakland CA94661 orcall (510) 339-9198; or fax (510) 339-8144; or email <locus@locus
mag.com>;oronline at <www.locusmag.com>.Single copy price $5.95 + $2.00 s&h. Institutional : $3.00 extra per year.
Name:
Address:
City:
 
State:
Zip: Country:  
Phone:
 
Enclosed is: $
Card Number:
Credit Card Type:
[] New [] Renewal me
ao)
 
 
Exp. Date:
Email:
 
Cardholder’s Signature 
 
 
TheWolfe & Gaiman Show
Continuedfrom page 7
 
 
were beaten all the time at Texas A&M.You had to
take it — bend down, and they whaled away at you
with a big woodenpaddle. This happened with alarm-
ing frequency, and you never got time to heal. What
he did was worse. He got mystory and he got a blue
pencil, and he edited it there in front of me. As I was
standing there, with the drops ofblood coursing down
myface, I said to myself, ‘I see what he’s doing. He’s
taking out every word the sentence doesn’t require.
I’m going to write the next story so he can’t do that.’
AndI tried to doit. I didn’t succeed, but he wascross-
ing out less in that secondstory. If it wasn’t for that,
I would probably be a bitter old retired engineer,
whereas now I’m bitter old still-active writer.
“T was a college dropout — before it wasfashion-
able. I lost my student deferment and I was drafted
into the United States Army.
“T had just got home from the service, and Rose-
mary cametovisit our family in Houston from far off
Peoria, Illinois. Wehad lived next door whenwewere
like three, and our mothers had stayed in touchall
this time. Of course I was required to date her and
take her outplaces. Wegot married in 1956. Wedidn’t
have any money, and we were living in a ‘pointed
apartment,’ whichisrefinishedattic. You could only
walk down the middle. One room was kitchen and
dining room; the other was everything else. Rose-
mary was a secretary and I was a cub engineer, just
starting. (I had gone back to Houston and got a
BSME.) I saw a newsstory that said Gold Medal
Books wanted murder mysteries and would pay a
minimum of $2,000 for any book they accepted. I
 
thought, ‘Well, I wrote those stories for The Com-
mentator. | could write murder mysteries.’ Wrong,
but I thought it and I started writing.
“IT wrote a full-length murder mystery which no-
body would buy, for really good reasons. I wrote a
numberofstories. And I finally made myfirst sale to
a skin magazinecalled Sir in 1965. I wrote ‘The Dead
Man’, this little ghost story involving a crocodile. I
had read anarticle in Readers’ Digest about croco-
diles, and I put it together with stuff I had taken from
Kipling, because I had read a lot of Kipling that was
laid in India. I sent it to probably a couple of dozen
markets (because Sir would have been a bottom mar-
ket), and Sir bought it for $60.
“Of course I had other stories. I had one called
“The Mountains Are Mice’. I sent it to Galaxy and
got it back with a form rejection (which is what hap-
pened with everything I sent). Fred Pohl was editor
then. I was working from an alphabetical list of sci-
ence fiction markets. The next magazine on it was/f.
Little did I know that /fwas also edited by Fred Pohl.
I wrote another cover letter and I put it in a fresh
envelope andIsent it to the editor at Jf. I got back a
letter from Fred Pohl that said, ‘You know,Ithink
the rewrite has really improved this. I’m glad youlet
me see it again. If you’ll take 2¢ a word, I will buy
it.” am God’s own fool, but I’m not such a fool that
I said, ‘No, I want to retain translation rights.’ That
was mysecondsale.
“That got me into Worlds ofIf, and Worlds ofIf
got me an invitation from Lloyd Biggle, Jr. to join
SFWA.Insome SFWApublication, I saw that Damon
Knight was editing an original anthology called Or-
bit and waslookingforstories. I sent him ‘Trip-Trap’,
a riff on the Billy-goat Gruff thing with the troll un-
 
der the bridge, and he boughtit. For years after that,
the Orbit series was mymain market. Myothersales
were stories that Damon Knight had turned down.”
NG: “The first novel was Operation Ares, and
the next thing weget, if memory serves, is The Fifth
Head of Cerberus.”
GW: “That was sometime after. I had written a
numberofOrbit stories. I wrote one called ‘The Fifth
Head of Cerberus’, which was wonderful. I sent it to
DamonKnight. Every year he wouldhave the Milford
Writers’ Conference, which was only for published
writers — either people he was publishing in Orbit or
people he would /ike to publish in Orbit.
“Damonlived in this old Charles Addams house,
The Anchorage. If you have seen the cartoons, you
know exactly what this house was: a haunted Victo-
rian monstrosity with a whopping front porch that
went around three sides of the thing.
“I brought ‘The Fifth Head of Cerberus’ to the
workshop, and while I was there, an editor from
Scribners came up to me andsaid, ‘You know,ifyou
would write two more novellas like this, we would
publish it as a book.’ So I did. That was myfirst hard-
cover, and that wasthe first good book I had.”’
NG: “You did a lot more than add two novellas.
Those three stories interweave, reflect, commenton,
illuminate, confuse, and do all manner of things to
each other.”
GW: “Yes. A lot of readers consider it a sort of
three-part novel. The second novella is a story told
by one of the characters in the third novella, and so
on. There’s lots of uglystuff about being buriedalive,
because I tend to be claustrophobic. I used to have
these horrible ‘buried alive’ dreams, which alternated
with my “being condemned to Hell’ dreams, so a lot
 
LOCUSSeptember 2002/ 81
  

 
The Wolfe & Gaiman Show
 
 
of that tended to show up in myfiction. Have you
evertried to do a story based on a dream? I’ve done a
couple of them that worked, but mostly I can’t. “To
the Dark Tower Came’ wasanightmare story about a
towerthat stretches between the Earth and the moon
and is anchored at both ends.(It’s an engineering
impossibility, but in a fantasy story you can doit.)
The other, ‘Kevin Mallone’, is about a household that
advertises for a ‘well-bred but impecunious young
couple’ who will live in the house and be the master
and mistress. The thing is, the gardener is possessed
(or may be) by the ghost of a former servant in the
house.”’
NG:‘‘Youwrote while doing arealjob for 28 years.
How did you do it? What was your schedule?”’
GW:“I experimented, as I think anybody would.
For 17 years I worked as a mechanical engineer. Af-
ter The Fifth Head of Cerberus had been published,
I woke up one morning and Rosemary wascrying in
bed. She was homesick. So I went in to work that day
and one of the guys in the office had left his Wall
Street Journal on his desk. I picked it up and paged
through it, and there was an ad for technical editors.
I said to myself, ‘If this job is in Illinois, I’m going to
apply for it.’ And by golly, it was in Illinois, so I
applied and interviewed for the job. They gave me
this form to fill out and it said, ‘How muchmoney do
you want?’ I thoughtto myself, ‘I will ask for so much
money, if they give it to me there’s no question I am
going to quit myjob andtakethis oneflat out.’ They
ended up giving me a thousand dollars a year more
than I had asked for. We sold the house in Ohio and I
became a staff member on Plant Engineer.
‘““What I did mostly was get up early in the morn-
ing and write for one to two hours. One of the good
things about working for this magazine was that in
ten minutes I could get from my front door to my
desk, which gave memore writing time. I often wake
up during the night, and I had rule that if it was
after 4 a.m. I got up for the day, and I would write
until Rosemary had breakfast ready. Then of courseI
wrote on Saturdays and Sundays as everybody does,
and the holidays.”
NG: ‘‘Was there a big change when youretired
and becameafull-time writer?”
GW:“Yes and no. I had written on vacation, and
this was like I was on vacationall the time. All I had
to do was write. It was really neat. This was cruel of
me, but I would set the clock radio to a station that
gave traffic reports for commuters. They would be
saying, ‘Oh, the Kennedy is wall-to-wall today. It’s
an hour and a half from over here to the Loop,’ and I
would get up and yawnandstretch andsay, ‘I don’t
have to be downthere.’ So I’d brush myteeth,start
the coffee, and go over to the desk and write.”
NG:‘How different is the person who writes the
stories from the person that everybody gets to meet,
encounter, look up at on the platform today?”’
GW:“I drink blood. Other than that disgusting
proclivity, I’m aboutlike this. The difference was
when I was working as an engineer. I learned that I
had to be very different as an engineer than from be-
ing a sciencefiction writer. I had to be very staid and
conventional, the white shirt and the necktie andall
this stuff. I hadbreakaway neckties with clips inthem,
because if you wore a conventional necktie anditgot
caught in the machinery, you were dead. With a
breakawaytie, you wouldn’t get pulled into the gears
and have your head and neck turned into hamburger.”
NG:“Howdid you feel when The Washington Post
basically said “The Book of the New Sun’is your
masterwork?”
GW:“Well, I know that’s what everybody thinks.
I keep trying to write something better than that. I
may never succeed, but you try and top yourself,
right? I would like to write something my readers
think is better, but I haven’t donethat. I’ve done things
that J thought were better. I did meet one guy today
whosaid Soldier of the Mist is the best thing he had
ever read. That’s very pleasant.”
NG: “‘The Postwas very explicitly saying that ‘The
 
Book of the New Sun’ plus ‘The Book of the Long
Sun’ plus the new three now hadtobe seen as a com-
plete sequence, which I’m not quite sure about. Yes,
it’s set in the same integral universe, but it doesn’t
give that feeling of movement you get from the be-
ginning of “The Book of the Long Sun’all the way
through the next seven books, or whatever.
‘WhenI was reading ‘The Book ofthe Long Sun’,
there was a definite feeling of Kipling, and also ech-
oes of Chesterton’s very first ‘Father Brown’stories.
Stuff that you read when young mulches downinthe
back ofyour head,andit’s there as a tool to draw on.”
GW: ‘‘Absolutely.”’
NG: “‘When you were doing the ‘Long Sun’ and
‘Short Sun’ sequences, were there places where you
were definitely conscious of doing that, or wasitjust
where the story went that day?”’
GW:“There were things I was conscious of, and
there were things I was not consciousof. It depends
on what things we’re talking about. Were mylater
discoveries interesting enough to talk about? No.”
NG: “‘Is feedback important to you? I thought the
Washington Post article made some very sensible
points. It said, ‘This is how good Gene Wolfe is, and
this is why you haven’t heard of him.’ One point was
that you make noeffort in your fiction to be user-
friendly.”
GW: ‘‘What would I do that I don’t do, if I were
being user-friendly?”’
NG:“It goes back to that line I’ve been using ever
 
 
NG:“What’s the most important
thing aboutfiction?”
GW:“The most important thing
is that it assures the readerthat
things need not be as they are
now.In other words,the most im-
portant thing is hope.”
 
 
since I read it in a letter where you defined goodlit-
erature: ‘Mydefinition ofgoodliterature is that which
can be read by an educated reader, and reread with
increased pleasure.’ While ‘user-friendly’ may have
been the wrong word, there is a level on which lot
of fiction these days is expected to give everything
up first time to somebody, whether he knows some-
thing about the subject or not. You do notdothat.”
GW:“Phooey! I don’t want to write that kind of
thing. Rats! I don’t like it and it would bore me to
write it and I’m not gonna write it. And besides, I
don’t know everything fo give it up. You’re going to
see things in there that I don’t see consciously.Ilike
those things.”
NG: ‘“‘I take enormous pleasure in the fact that
people are still arguing about the first four in the
‘Book of the New Sun’ sequence to this day. ‘Was
the Autarch Severian’s mother?’ ‘Is the Clute theory
valid?’ ‘Oh, we’ve got another Australian theory...’
You have these dueling theorists, pointing to the text
and trying to second- and third- and outguess.”’
GW:“Yeah, but the thing is, too often people want
meto go in andsettle their argument. That’s exactly
what I should not do. I am dealing from this position
of presumed expertise. We don’t have a level playing
field. If Arthur Conan Doyle had goneinandsettled
all this ‘Holmes’stuff, there wouldbe no BakerStreet
Irregulars today, yet people have made whole hob-
bies out of being Baker Street Irregulars — why
shouldn’t they? There’s no sacredness to the text.”
NG: “What’s the most important thing aboutfic-
tion?”’
GW:“The most important thing is that it assures
the reader that things need not be as they are now. In
other words, the most important thing is hope.
‘‘Sure I’ve read Barry Malzberg. Barry is very
black, but it seems to me oneofthe things he is say-
 
ing to people is ‘Your life could be much worse. You
could be like these lead characters but you’re not.’
So that’s hope too.”
NG: “‘The various things SF can be include being
predictive, but it can also be cautionary. Much of the
bleakest fiction is cautionary — ‘Don’t go there.’”
GW:“In A Christmas Carol, Marley’s ghost ap-
pears. He’s in Scrooge’s bedroom but he’s also in
Hell even while he’s in Scrooge’s bedroom. Andwhat
he is telling Scrooge is “There’s still hope for you.
There’s no longer hope for me. Mylife is over. I blew
it. You, Ebenezer, formerly my partner, couldstill
pull yourself out.’ That’s hope.”
NG:“Ofcourse what Scrooge windsupgetting is
visions of past, present, and future, and the future he
gets is blacker than anything Barry Malzberg ever
came up with.”
GW:“You don’t give hope the way you give rai-
sins by putting raisins in raisin bread. You give hope
the way you give bread when you bakebread.It’s all
hope. I’m quite conscious of doing that. The basic
hopeisthe hope that things can be different. I’ve been
in some godawful situations, and I think people in
those situations despair because they come to believe
change is impossible. Both science fiction and fan-
tasy can be literatures ofhope. We’re saying the world
doesn’t havetobe like this, and yourlife doesn’t have
to be like this. Whenyou know enoughabouthistory
and you know enough about prehistory, you realize
there are times whenitwas very different. There were
times when Earth’s climate was far warmerthanitis
today, and times whenitwas far colder than it is to-
day. It’s not like we’re veering off the map with glo-
bal warming.”
NG: “‘It’s easy to talk about what we’re trying to
give readers, but what do you take from it as an au-
thor? One of the hardest things of yours I ever read —
in terms of actually feeling the effort involved spiri-
tually and emotionally, in terms ofjust the work and
how you doit—wasinCastle ofDays,Ithink, where
youprinted a prayer you’d written for writing, which
I assume was a prayer you said before going off to
work.Ithad that sort of ‘four o’clock in the morning’
quality. What do you take from writing? What does
it give you?”
GW:“Enormoussatisfaction. When I think that I
have done what I have done the way it ought to be
done, and that I have really created something that
needed to be created and would not have been with-
out me, obviously writing is a dream job. Umpty-
ump people would love to be writers and they can’t
do it. I can do it. You can do it. We’re blessed.”
NG: ‘‘Not only can youlie in fiction, but I think
Gene is the master of lying in fiction, both directly
and indirectly. Peace is built on lies. And I assume
that, being who heis, Gene is pretty damn sure what
the truth and whatthelies are in Peace. Therestofus
have to get through that as best we can. After three or
four times through that text, you begin to be able to
say, ‘I think he’s lying aboutthis or that.’”’
GW: “T never lie.”
NG: ‘‘Gene, you create the trickiest characters!
Like in ‘The Walking Sticks’. You not only get to do
a wonderful Jeckyll and Hyde riff, but it gives us a
narrator whose unreliability cheerfully lies to us all
the way through the story. And we know he’s prob-
ably lying. That’s part of the joy of the story.”
GW:‘Well, if he wasn’t lying he wouldn’t be the
guy in this story! He is a type of man that I have met
working in industry ten thousand times. He is not
going to tell you intentionally anything that is to his
own detriment.”
NG: “‘And we figure out where the story is hap-
pening sometimes from the places where he contra-
dicts himself or he has to tell you a little bit more
than he would have liked. You have a narrator who’s
lying, but the authorisn’t.” .
GW: ‘‘Remember, I was a journalist on an indus-
trial magazine, Plant Engineering. I’ve been in a ton
of industrial plants, in order to talk to ten tons of
people who worked in them, including some places
that are right out of Dante and somethat are so nice
youthink they mustbe movie sets, so clean andbright
 
82 / LOCUSSeptember 2002
 

“WOLFE Is AS FINE A WRITER
AS SCIENCE FICTION HAS PRODUCED.”
theNew York Tinies Book Review
GENEWOLFE
Available now in trade paperback, the acclaimed Book of the Short Sun trilogy.
 
  
 
 
iia
te
osme NRCTI
THE SECOND VOLUMEOo3
HEBOOK OF HE SHORT FY"
 ONBLUE'S WATERS
J AVAILABLE NOWIN TRADE PAPERBACK AVAILABLE NOWINTRADE PAPERBACK
[Wolfe] concludes his alternately
a Oo a ? * *
dreamy and chilling Bookofthe One of the OnBlue's Waters is easily
Short Sun trilogy [with] the Ssenre’s most the best science fiction novel
striking mix of philosophy, humor, BRILLIANT of the year.... Further evidence that
and horrorthatis uniquely t al. t ” Wolfe is the finest living writer
Wolfe's stock-in-trade.” —Booklist con oe tors. in his field.” —The Seattle Times—LibraryJournal
THE URTHor
THENEWSUN
  
 

 
TheWolfe & Gaiman Show
 
 
and cheerful it’s got to be Doris Day over there run-
ning the milling machine.Iwasina rubbertire plant
that was a vision of Hell.”
NG: “To what extent does that stuff wind up in
the fiction?”’
GW:“Towhateverextentitintrudes whenI’mwrit-
ing. You can’t help drawing upon yourself. We take
the facts ofour lives and try andtransmute theminto a
coherent story. A lot of Peace,is autobiographical.
“I’m working on ‘The Wizard Knight’ now, two
big books. The first one, The Knight, is in fourth
draft, and the second, The Wizard,is in first draft,
and it’s going to take a hell of a lot more work.If
you ask mewhatI’ll do next, whatisthe point ofmy
sitting back now and saying, ‘Well, when I finish
this, maybe two years from now, what I’ll dois...’
I’m going to change mymind a dozen times between
now andthe time whenI finishit. It’s pointless.
‘““The Wizard Knight’ books are about an Ameri-
can kid who is switched by fairies into a different
universe, a quasi-medieval universe that works on
the ‘club sandwich’principle: there are several lay-
ers. He, of course, is in the middle layer. There’s
the fairy world below, and up aboveisthe realm of
the Norse gods, and so on and so forth. He has vari-
ous adventures and matures in the course of these,
and experiences love and sex, and sex andlove.All
that good stuff. Actually, he falls desperately in love
with the queen offairies whohas switched him, and
much of it is his attempt to be united again with
her. She’s going to take this kid and make a hero
out of him.”
NG: “‘In some ways,it soundslike the flip side of
Castleview, wherewegotto see Faerie distantly from
Illinois.”’
GW: “‘He’sthere. Bythe endofthe book, heknows
it far better than he knows the America he only
vaguely remembers and never knew that well any-
way, because he was immature whenheleft. Sup-
pose you took a boy of 17 and set him downinChina
for the next 30 years. Howmuch will he know about
America? Butthis is an unfinished workandI’m still
tinkering with it.”
NG:“Howabout horror? Here youare as a guest
at the World Horror Convention, and I don’t recall a
full-length work of horror from you (apart from
Peace, and eventhat is pushing it). But you’ve done
short stories. There’s definitely horrorin stories like
‘The Tree Is MyHat’ or ‘The Walking Sticks’. What
FAWALKING TOURO
THE SHAMBLES
Passe
toe)
ke
Sk
ees
FANTA
P.O. Box 1059, Woodstock, IL,60098 ¢ garpubserv@aol.com
CARRIED BY SCIENCE FICTION SPECIA
84 / LOCUSSeptember 2002
 
is the attraction there?”
GW:“Theattraction in all horror is the same. For
one thing,it’s survivability. The reader comestothe
end and has survived the experience. Thereader may,
to some extent, also feel more qualified to deal with
horror in his or her ownlife. Andweall get a certain
dosage of horror in our own lives, unless we have
very brief lives indeed.”
NG:“Despite the fact that I’ve written a novel
that’s been nominated for the Year’s Best Horror
award, I don’t actually think of American Godsasa
horror novel. I don’t think I could do a horror novel.
I know why / couldn’t, but I’m interested to know
why I can’t see you doing a work ofthat length.”
GW:“Iwouldn’t want to live there for two years.”
NG: “‘Is there any possibility of your ever com-
pleting the Soldier ofthe Mist sequence, the ‘Latro’
books?”’
GW: “‘That’s a possibility, but I don’t know. An
idea takes you, or some sort of impulse takes you,
and that’s how you go. MaybeIwill write a baseball
novel. I’ve never written a baseball novel.
“See this little cane I’m holding? Thisisthe Egyp-
tian God of the dead, which I received as a token of
regard from my friend Neil Gaiman. What doesit
mean when yourfriends give you the Egyptian God
of the dead? Last night he did not come alive. Any-
way, I mightwrite a book-length ‘Latro’ horror novel.
That’s a real idea, yeah! You know whatthose early
Semitic gods were like? Wow. We can do ‘Locked in
the Pyramids’... I’ve always wanted to do a book in
which the Sphinx stood up and walked. The ancient
Egyptians would change the face to be the face ofthe
reigning pharaoh; when they got a new pharaoh,the
stonemasons went in and they reshaped the face.
Think of the possibilities right there — I think we’re
cookin’ here, folks!”’
NG: “I get very frustrated with my fans because
they don’t know anything else. I spend a lot of time
trying to say, ‘Look, go andread this, go andreadthat.
Understand where I’m coming from. I didn’t spring
from the brow ofJove! This is the Chestertonline,this
is the Zelazny line, this is the Lafferty line, this is the
Ellison line. These are the people I came from.”
GW:“I’ve read a lot ofLafferty and I would never
deny that I’ve been influenced by Lafferty, any more
than I would deny that I’ve been influenced by
Chesterton. Youstartwriting, imitating someone con-
sciously or unconsciously. You develop your own
voice, but I think you always bear some imprint of
the people whoimpressed you whenyouwere young.
 
WWW.AMERICAN-FANTASY.COM
- STORES & MAIL 
If somebodystarts absolutely originally, not imitat-
ing anyone,hehastobeginbyinventing speech. Early
Lafferty, he was trying to conform,trying to say ‘I
am a writer like other writers.’ Later he decided to
abandon the pretense, changing from whatIcall
‘Lafferty with water’ to ‘Lafferty straight.’
‘“Myearlier influences include H.G. Wells. He
snuck completely through my defenses, made mere-
alize a lot of the things I had been condemning as
old-fashioned 19th-century fiction were really better
than mostofthe things I was reading then as a kid
reading pulp magazines. Actually, my favorite pulp
magazine, Famous Fantastic Mysteries, reprinted
great old stories, but it didn’t emphasize (to me the
kid reader) what it was doing. I swear there was a
period oftwoorthree years in which I thoughtitwas
publishing the stories that the other magazines were
too cowardly to put into print, this powerful stuff!
My father was a big H.G. Wells fan, so of course I
would not read H.G. Wells. Then Famous Fantastic
Mysteries came out with an entire issue reprinting
TheIsland of Doctor Moreau.I, being a dumb kid,
failed to notice that the author was Wells. It blew me
away! I guess somewhere in the middle of my sec-
ondrereading(Ireaditthree times withoutever stand-
ing up andstretching), I realized this was by the au-
thor my father kept trying to get metoread.
“T read Lewis Carroll, whoIstill think is delightful.
Inthose days, peopledidnotinsistthatlittle boyscould
only read books in which the heroes were otherlittle
boys, andlittle girls could only read books in which
the heroes werelittle girls. I read Alice in Wonder-
land and The Wizard of Oz,all this stuff, and I en-
joyed them because I thought they were goodstories.
‘“‘Then there was a wholetradition of “bad boy’
literature — there’s a lot of it in Tom Sawyer.It’s
died away because kids today watch TV and play
computer games,andthey don’t do thingslike let the
cat down through the chimneyorsteal pies. Modern
kids can’t imagine there was a time when mostkids
went perpetually hungry. They got up hungry and
they went to bed hungry.”
NG:“Iread some analysis of ‘Hansel and Gretel’
which wasall about its psycho-sexual nature. It ana-
lyzed up, down, inside out, and sideways, and I
thought it completely missed the fact that it’s about a
family during a famine whodidnot have enoughfood
for their two children and themselves and so were
going regretfully to dumpthechildren.It’s about two
starving children who descend on this gingerbread
house. Thetrail they leave is eaten by starving birds,
and they themselves are immediately picked up by a
woman as potential food. It’s a story about hunger.”
GW:“Academics can be incredibly obtuse.” |
NG: “One thing I’ve always wanted to ask you
was, how involved were you in the creation of
Pringles?”’
GW:“Iwas the engineer on the original Pringles
cooker. Pringles was invented by a German madman.
He was making them with a kind of scissor and dip
mechanism that wasn’t adaptable to mass production.
There was a four-man team,andI did the cookerthat
closed around the future potato chips and dragged
them through the hot oil and opened them up and
dumped them out. The fourth guy, who did the can-
ning machine,theyliterally drove crazy with all their
nitpicking and pressure to do better.”
NG: ‘‘What do you think about the state of your
career?”’
GW:“I guess I’m not quite as optimistic now. In
1979, I was workingasa technical editor. I had hopes
ofbecoming rich and famous from myfiction. Those
hopes have not eventuated. Neil Gaiman is far more
famousthan I am.Isuspect he’s also richer.”
NG:“Iprobably am, but that’s mainly just thanks
to Hollywood.It’s not abookthing. Movies are where
silly moneyispaid, and they do payitto me. But you
are in a very interesting position. If you asked people
randomly on the street to name science fiction au-
thors, they would probably not name Gene Wolfe,
but if you asked science fiction authors, fantasists,
horror writers, at this point they will all list Gene
Wolfe. You are the writers’ writer.”
 
 
