189
The Fat Magician
 
 
 
May 3, 2000  
Franklin A. Abraham, Ph.D., Chair  
Comparative Religion and Folklore  
U. of Nebraska Lincoln  
Lincoln NE 68501  
Amerika
 
 
Dear Frank,
I have quite a tale to tell. It is not exactly folklore. Not yet, but it is
fast becoming folklore. It is a mystery story if you will, and centers
about a man in league with the Devil, who was on the side of the angels.
It is also a story of murder, though there is no mystery about the murder.
Most signally, it is a horror story, by far the most horrible I have ever
been made aware of.
And it is a ghost story, on top of everything else. You will have to
accept my own testimony as regards the ghost; so let me say here that
everything I am about to tell you is true to the best of my knowledge. I
am going to stretch nothing, because there is nothing that requires
stretching. I am not, however, going to tell you the whole truth. I cannot
do that without betraying the pledge I gave this morning to a most
attractive woman who has been exceedingly kind to me. I know, Frank,
that is not a thing you would wish me to do.
As you will probably be able to tell from the postmark, I am not yet in
Vienna. Trains do not break down—or so I have always thought. It turns
out I was wrong. I am not sorry, but I am very glad that I allowed myself
a few days in Vienna before the opening of the WFC.
In brief, I woke up this morning and found my train at a dead stop
between two flower-spangled mountain meadows when it ought to have
been in the Vienna station. I have my demotic, as you know, and fair
command of Spanish. My German, I fear, is merely amusing. Amusing
190
to me, I mean. Actual Germans and Austrians are inclined to burst into
tears.
By jumping up and down and shouting, I was able to make the
conductor (“Herr Schaffner”) understand that I wished to know why we
were not in Vienna. Herr Schaffner, by shouting back, stamping, spitting
in my face, and wiping his own with his handkerchief, was able to
convey to me that ein gross Herr Shaft (I suppose the crankshaft) of our
engine had broken. In all fairness, I must admit Herr Schaffner’s English
is better than my German. Say, about ten percent better.
Soon we were joined by a handsome young guy called Heinz, a grad
student who speaks English a good deal better than I shall ever speak
German. Heinz conferred with Herr Schaffner, and explained to me that
the Austrian State Railway would not be able to spare us a new engine
for a day or so. We were welcome to stay on the train until the new
engine arrived, eating such food as there was in the dining car. Or we
could walk three kilometers down the tracks to R———, where there
would be restaurants and so forth. When the new engine arrived, the train
would pull into the station at R——and stay there for an hour or more
collecting its passengers.
Heinz and I conferred and decided to walk to the village and perhaps
take rooms there, I promising to buy his breakfast if he would interpret
for me. We fetched the overnight bags that were all we were permitted to
have in our compartments and off we went, hurrying along before the
rest of passengers (they were still yawning and dressing for the most
part) came along to overwhelm the village facilities.
“I myself am living not so far from this place when I was a child in
Freistadt,” Heinz informed me. “This R——, it is where the famous and
terrible Ernst S—lived.”
Naturally I wanted to know what made Herr S——famous and
terrible.
“He is a Hexenmeister.” Heinz grinned and made magical gestures.
“A master of bad luck?”
Heinz laughed. “He will make you a dog or a toad, Herr Cooper. This
is bad luck enough, ja? Only we do not worry now. He is dead. When I
am little, the older kinder scare us with him, the big children.”
After that I wanted to know a great deal more, as you can imagine; but
Heinz could only tell me that “Fat Ernst” (this was the name used to
frighten children, apparently) had been a giant, that he had
191
disappointingly boasted but a single head, and most surprisingly that he
had been a living, breathing man in Heinz’s grandparents’ time. Heinz’s
great uncle, a traveling salesman, had met him more than once; Heinz
thought that he had died during World War II, and that he had probably
been killed by a bomb.
We got to the village and soon found a snug das Café, where Heinz
quizzed our waitress on my behalf. She called “Fat Ernst,” Ernst the
Great (which interested me), agreed that he had been a bad man, but
seemed to feel a secret sympathy for him. An older man with a bristling
mustache stopped at our table on his way out and snapped something in
German that I could not understand, at which our waitress colored. When
she had gone, Heinz explained in a whisper that the other patron had
called Fat Ernst a liar and a thief.
Our Frühstücks came (bread, butter, pastries, cold cuts, three kinds of
cheese, and the wonderful Austrian coffee), and with all the other things
an old man who had been drinking his coffee at a table in the back,
speaking a German so slow and simple that even I could understand most
of what he said: Fat Ernst had been a friend of the Devil’s. It was better
not to talk, or even think, about such people.
Properly chastened, Heinz and I confined our conversation to the
excellence of the food and the length of our delay for the remainder of
the meal.
When I paid our bill, the owner of the cafe said in halting English.
“Quick you will want das Mittgassen, ja? In R——we have ein fine
Gasthaus.” He pointed. “Der Romantik Hotel S——. Sehr alt. Sehr in-
ter-es-ting. Gutes Speise.”
Well, Frank, I have never claimed to be the sharpest knife in the
drawer; but even I could not help noticing that he was—yes, earnestly—
recommending a place other than his own, and that the name of the
“Romantic Hotel” he recommended was also that of Fat Ernst.
In retrospect, we should have found a cab. As it was we assumed that
der Romantik Hotel S——was in the village; and when we found out (by
asking directions on a street in which all the houses seemed to be been
modeled on cuckoo clocks) that it was not, that it was nearby. As, alas, it
was not. Frank, the Chinese are right. Uphill miles are longer. So are
uphill kilometers. By the time we had gone wrong, and found the right
road again, and stopped a couple of times to rest and hold lengthy
conversations concerning job opportunities in American universities, and
192
Austrian folklore, and American folklore (poor Heinz thought that Pecos
Bill and Paul Bunyan were legitimate, but had never heard of the Boss in
the Wall), and German and Russian and Polish folklore, to say nothing of
the opportunities awaiting an unmarried man in Vienna … Well, it was
nearly lunchtime when got there; and I honestly think I could have sat
down, taken off my shoes, and eaten Heinz’s lunch as well as my own.
Now I’m going to describe Gertrun’s hotel. Pay attention, Frank. This
stuff is important.
Although the setting is lovely, the building itself is not. What it is, is
old. It was built (Gertrun says) in 1757 as a hunting lodge. Her family,
the S——s, took it over in 1860 and have operated it as a hotel ever
since. It is of weathered gray stone, is as square as a bouillon cube, and
has three stories, with one of those high, pointed roofs you see
everywhere here and (I suppose) a good-sized attic underneath it. Parlor,
dining room, kitchen, hotel office, et cetera on the ground floor, with a
wine cellar and other cellars underground. High ceilings in all the rooms.
Go up the stairs and you find a square landing on which you might drill
troops, with a massive carved railing. This landing gives access to the
twelve rather old-fashioned bedrooms on the floor. The stair continues to
the floor above where there are more rooms; I did not bother to count
those, but Gertrun says those are smaller, so sixteen up there, possibly.
Gertrun owns and runs the place. Picture a substantial woman between
thirty-five and forty, very blond, with a round, smiling face, a toddler’s
complexion, and truly beautiful clear blue eyes. She showed us into a
dark-paneled dining room ornamented with the antlers of deer that had
died before any of us were born, assured us that lunch would be ready in
a minute or two, and stayed to chat with us. At first I supposed, as I think
anybody would, that she was an employee; I asked if there were any
members of the owner’s family about.
“I am here, Mein Herr. I am Gertrun S——.”
I apologized, and we introduced ourselves and explained about the
train.
When I mentioned Ernst S——, I unleashed a flood of information.
He had been Gertrun’s grandfather. A giant? Oh, ja! She rose on tiptoe
and stretched a hand as high as she could reach to indicate his height,
and embraced an imaginary barrel show his girth. Three hundred kilos—
four hundred. She did not know, but he had been sehr gross, huge.
193
Heinz asked several questions I was too dense to understand; Gertrun
replied in German, but I caught the word Jude.
Heinz turned to me, smiling. “He hid people from the Nazis when they
took power in our country, Herr Doktor. Jews—”
Gertrun interrupted in German.
“She says he had a Jew, a priest, and a man that wore dresses in his
secret room at the same time once.” Heinz roared with unfeigned delight.
“What a rumpus that must have been!”
“They wished to send them to the camps,” Gertrun explained. “Mein
Grossvater did not like.” She shook her head violently. “He was before
on die stage, ein performer.”
I said that I had thought the Nazis sent only Jews to their
concentration camps, at which Gertrun became very somber. “It does not
matter what they say, Herr Doktor Cooper. When such mans have
authority, they send to their camps what they do not like. They send Jews
und the priest does not like that, und so they send the priest. A man
which does Lippenstift.” Her finger signaled lipstick. “He …” (She
groped for a word, one hand on her own soft stomach.) “They grow sick
from seeing it. So him auch. Him also. Mein Grossvater hides him like
those other mans.”
I asked whether the Nazis had found them.
“Nein! To Schweiz they go.” Gertrun’s eyes, which were very round
already, became rounder still. “Again und again der Nazis come! All
night almost for many, many … Mein vater ist a little boy, Herr Doktor.
He hears them up und down die steps, in den cellars, everywhere. Into
his room they come, und under his bed look. If him they frighten, mein
Grossvater will show wo ist das Geheimzimmer. This they think, but
they make der mistake.”
“The secret room,” Heinz translated.
“Never! Never his secret room he shows! Kommen mit, I show you
his chair.”
She led us back into the parlor. It was an enormous chair, like a throne.
The seat was as high as a table and four feet across, and the legs looked
sturdy enough to support a small house. “‘Search!’ he tells them. ‘I sit
till you are done. You leave, you close mein door.’ So they think the
secret room it is he sits on. They make him get up. They move his chair.”
She showed us a nick in the sturdy oak back that the Nazis had
supposedly made. “They take up der carpet. They drill through our floor,
194
but ist der Weinkellar they searched every night. There they find ein
klein Judsch Mutze,” she touched the back of her head, “und mein
Grossvater laughs.”
Naturally Heinz and I wanted to know where the secret room was.
Gertrun’s face went blank. “I do not know, Herr Doktor. Nobody
knows but mein Grossvater. I see in die Kuche. You will be hungry, ja?”
She hurried away.
“She knows,” Heinz told me.
“Of course she does,” I said. “What I’d like to know is why she
doesn’t want us to.”
From that time until our lunches arrived, Heinz tapped panels and
moved pictures, and ran up the stairs to the floors on which the guest
rooms were located, without finding anything. He went back to the train
after lunch, but I decided to rent a room at the Romantik Hotel S——,
enjoy a good dinner (there is excellent food all over Austria, but our
lunches had been superb) and a good breakfast today before Ire-boarded.
“In Juni will be full,” Gertrun told me. “Ist when young people ist
married. They come then to hike und climb. Now you have mein best.”
It was indeed a large room, and beautifully furnished with antiques. I
have seen more dramatic views than the one afforded by its four wide
lacecurtained windows, but few if any that were lovelier.
“There und there ist dem doors for des rooms next door.” Gertrun
pointed them out to me. “Sometimes two ist rented together. For this die
Hotelrechnung for number two ist half. But you have die Bolzen. Chains
mit locks die handles of them both holds, you see?” She demonstrated,
shaking the handle of one of the bolts. “Here ist keys to der locks for
dem chains. So you know nobody comes und bother you. You must give
back to me mit der key of das room when away you go. If you not, I
must telfonieren der Schlosser from R——.” She pantomimed cutting
the shackle.
I promised that I would certainly return all her keys, and asked
whether she had been in show business like her grandfather, praising her
appearance and melodious voice.
She laughed. “Nein! Nein! But I have picture. You would like to see?”
I thought she meant a picture of herself, but she led me to her office, a
small room off the parlor, and showed me a framed theatrical poster on
which rabbits bounded, rings flew, and maidens floated about an
imposing man in evening dress—a man already portly, although from
195
what Gertrun told me he must have been quite a bit younger in those
days than his waxed mustache and full beard made him appear. Behind
him a shadowy, Mephistophelian figure taller even than he stooped as
though to whisper some dreadful confidence. Fat Ernst had been a
conjurer!
“Till his vater ist no more,” Gertrun explained. “Then he comes home
to take care of mein hotel.”
“With the secret room in which he hid the Jew and those others.”
“Ja, ja.” Gertrun looked a trifle flustered. “Many more also, Herr
Doktor.”
“No doubt. The room that the Nazis were never able to find, even
though they searched this building repeatedly and no doubt
systematically, since Austrians are every bit as systematic as Germans.”
“Ja. Never.” She was at ease now, and smiling. She has good teeth and
is very attractive when she smiles.
“You said that they found a yarmulke in the wine cellar?”
Gertrun nodded. “In die attic, too, they find something once. I do not
remember.”
“A rosary or a crucifix, I’m sure. A breviary, perhaps. Something of
that kind.” I took her hand, “Frau S——, I don’t know why you’re so
anxious to keep the location of your grandfather’s secret room a secret,
but I want you to know that whatever harm others may intend to you or
your family, I intend none. I like you—more than I should, perhaps. And
yet I can’t help being curious. Would it trouble you if I had a look at your
wine cellar? And the attic?”
“Nein!” She shook her head violently. “I take you myself, Herr
Doktor.”
I told her she need not bother and went up to my room, where I
immersed myself in thought as well as hot water.
Fat Ernst’s having been a conjurer had given me the clue. When I had
dried myself and changed my underwear, shirt, and socks, I unlocked the
heavy wrought-iron bolt on one of the connecting doors and tried to
move it. It traveled a sixteenth of an inch, perhaps, but no farther.
 
 
Let me interrupt myself here, Frank. On the first page of this letter, I
promised you a mystery. It is the location of Fat Ernst’s secret room. You
have all the facts that I had now. Where was it?
196
 
 
 
Gertrun and I breakfasted together the next morning in her private
apartment—a meal large enough to last me all day. Over coffee, I asked
her whether her grandfather himself had ever spoken of a secret room.
Had he said, for example, that there was one?
She shrugged. “Gone he was before I am here to hear him, Liebling.”
“I doubt that he did, although he may well have said that no one would
ever find it. In that he was quite correct. No one ever will, because it
does not exist.”
She stared without speaking.
“Allow me to tell you, so you’ll know I’m not bluffing. Then I will
give you my word that I will never reveal the name or location of this
hotel, or the name of your family. Never. Not to anyone.”
“Danke.” I had taken her hand as I spoke, and she managed to smile.
“Danke schön.”
“There’s only one kind of secret room that can’t be found no matter
how thorough the search, Gertrun. It’s a secret room that does not exist.
Your grandfather put the people he was hiding into the ordinary rooms of
his hotel. Many hotels have connecting doors between rooms, as yours
does. And all of those I have ever seen have sliding bolts on both sides of
the doors; I cannot enter my neighbor’s room unless his bolt is drawn
back as well as my own, and he cannot enter mine. In this hotel,
however, those bolts are connected by a slot through the door. I don’t
know the word in German, but an American conjurer would say they
were gimmicked. Or gaffed. That’s why you think it necessary to chain
and padlock them.”
I waited for her to speak, but she just stared; I saw her lower lip
tremble.
“When the Nazis put their room key into the lock, the person hiding in
that room had only to slip into the next and hold the bolt of the
connecting door closed until he heard the searchers leave and he could
return. When the Jew’s room was being searched, he could slip into the
priest’s, and when the priest’s was searched he could slip into the Jew’s.
Or both could slip into the room occupied by the transvestite. I would
imagine that they were careful to sleep on the floor, and so on—not to
leave any indication that the room had been occupied that could not be
197
snatched up and carried away. As for the yarmulke in the wine cellar, and
whatever may have been found in the attic, they were false clues planted
by your very clever and very brave grandfather to throw the searchers off
the track.”
She nodded and gave me a shaky smile.
“How did he die? Was it an Allied bomb? That’s what Heinz thought.”
“Nein. These Nazis here take him.”
That puzzled me. I said, “But they can have had no evidence if they
never found—”
“For ein trial, Herr Doktor?” Gertrun’s smile was bitter then.
“Evidence they do not need. They take him, und he ist dead.”
It required some time to digest. That immense body sprawled in a gas
chamber. Half a dozen Storm Troopers to drag it out and get it on the
truck. Then I said, “You keep his secret—”
“For nachst, Herr Doktor. For next time.”
 
 
There you have it, Frank. But my train has not come yet, so let me tie up
a few details. I promised you a mystery, and I think you will agree that I
gave you one.
A murder, as well. Was not Fat Ernst murdered by his government? If
not, how did he die?
That seems to me the greatest of all horror stories. When the
millennium now ending began, government meant a king; and that king,
whatever else he might be, was his nation’s leader. He might wage war
upon his neighbors, but he would have been thought mad if he had
waged war upon his followers. Bandits and cutpurses abounded, and they
constituted a very real and present danger to everyone except the
strongest; but the king was the sworn foe of all such criminals. In the
century we are just now closing out, we ordinary men and woman have
been in much greater danger from our own governments than from all
the criminals in the world.
In Nazi Germany, and not long afterward here in beautiful, smiling
Austria, the government declared that Jews must die. The priest objected,
so the priest had to die too. The man who cross-dressed disgusted the
government’s functionaries, and he was added to the list.
Which is more disgusting, a man in a dress or a government that
murders the people who created it to protect them? Which is more
198
horrible, Frank? Is it the werewolf of our folklore, or this soulless
monster squatting over the corpse of its nation, its hands running with
innocent blood?
Sincerely,  
Sam Cooper
 
 
PS. Still no train, although I spent nearly an hour sipping coffee in das
snug Café. Thus I have time to tell you that last night about one thirty I
woke to the sound of footsteps, footsteps slow and so heavy that the
timbers of the landing creaked and groaned. Very distinctly, I heard the
door open and saw a vertical bar of very bright-seeming light from
stairwell. Somebody standing not more than a step from the bed in which
I lay said softly but unmistakably, “1st gut,” and the door closed again. I
got out of bed and turned on a light, but the only other person in the
room was sleeping soundly. All three doors were securely fastened, as
we had left them.
I intend to return here to R——for a week or so after the conference to
investigate this and other matters.