

1
An EvEning To Honor gEnE WolfE
Program
4:00 p.m. Open tour of the Sanfilippo Collection
5:30 p.m. Fuller Award Ceremony
 Welcome and introduction: Gary K. Wolfe, Master of   
 Ceremonies
 Presentation of the Fuller Award to Gene Wolfe:  
 Neil Gaiman
 Acceptance speech: Gene Wolfe
 Audio play of Gene Wolfe’s “The T oy Theater,” adapted   
 by Lawrence Santoro, accompanied by R. Jelani    
 Eddington, performed by T erra Mysterium
 Organ performance: R. Jelani Eddington
 Closing comments: Gary K. Wolfe
Shuttle to the Carousel Pavilion for guests with dinner tickets
8:00 p.m Dinner
 Opening comments: Peter Sagal, T oastmaster
 Speeches and toasts by special guests, family, and    
 friends
Following the dinner program, guests are invited to explore the collection in 
the Carousel Pavilion and enjoy the dessert table, coffee station and  
specialty cordials. 
An EvEning To Honor gEnE WolfE
By Valya Dudycz Lupescu
A Gene Wolfe story seduces and challenges its readers. It lures them 
into landscapes authentic in detail and populated with all manner of 
rich characters, only to shatter the readers’ expectations and leave 
them questioning their perceptions. A Gene Wolfe story embeds  
stories within stories, dreams within memories, and truths within  
lies. It coaxes its readers into a safe place with familiar faces, then 
leads them to the edge of an abyss and disappears with the whisper 
of a promise. Often classified as Science Fiction or Fantasy, a Gene 
Wolfe story is as likely to dip into science as it is to make a literary 
allusion or religious metaphor. A Gene Wolfe story is fantastic in all 
senses of the word. 
Sometimes esoteric, often symbolic, and nearly always unpredictable, 
Gene Wolfe explores the moral ambiguities of human nature. In his 
books and stories, a torturer can be redeemed, a priest can be a hero, 
a man can reunite with a dinosaur from his childhood, and a puppet 
can be the puppeteer. 
For the last two years, the Chicago Literary Hall of Fame has honored 
historical writers: Carl Sandburg, Gwendolyn Brooks, Studs T erkel, 
Nelson Algren, Lorraine Hansberry, and others who have helped to 
define Chicago Literature. With the creation of the Fuller Award, we 
begin to expand that definition, looking at the contributions of writers 
living and working in Chicago. 
Gene Wolfe is a master of artistry and imagination, and he has earned 
his place among the greatest of living writers. T onight we honor him 
in the context of Chicago’s literary community. We point to the 
incredible volume of Gene Wolfe’s work, the elegance of his prose, 
the lyricism of his language, and the complexity of his characters  
and plot. 
In this Commemorative Program, we have collected tributes from  
colleagues, friends, family, and fans of Gene Wolfe. The pages are 
filled with their inspiring and heartwarming accounts of how the 
man and his writing have touched so many people. A Gene Wolfe 
story is a gift that presents its readers with a world of possibilities, 
and that’s something we could all use in our lives.
2
3
Photography by Mimi Ko
4
gEnE WolfE: ‘onE BEAuTiful SEnTEncE AfTEr AnoTHEr’
by Donald G. Evans
Writing in the Washington Post 
in 2002, Nick Gevers asked the 
rhetorical question, “Could a 
former engineer who helped 
invent Pringles be our greatest 
living writer?”
An impressive array of literary 
luminaries, including Michael 
Swanwick, Neil Gaiman, Harlan 
Ellison and Patrick O’Leary, 
would, unabashedly, say, “Y es!”
“The point is Gene Wolfe writes 
Gene Wolfe but he also writes 
science fiction,” said science fiction editor, critic and biographer Gary 
K. Wolfe, who is no relation. “There’s never a word out of place and 
it’s one beautiful sentence after another.” 
Gene Wolfe has the hardware to support all the bold claims. His 
induction into the Science Fiction Hall of Fame, as well the World 
Fantasy Award for Lifetime Achievement and the Edward E. Smith 
Memorial Award, were the culmination of 30 years producing world-
class stories. Starting in 1974, when Wolfe captured the Nebula and 
Locus Awards for his novella The Death of Doctor Island, his work has 
been at the top of every literary jurists’ manuscript pile; along with  
his two Nebulas and six Locuses, he has knocked down the Rhysling 
Award, British Science Fiction Association Award, World Fantasy 
Award (four times), August Derleth Award and Campbell Award. He 
has been honored for poetry, short stories, novellas and novels.
Now, Wolfe is the recipient of the first Fuller Award, presented by the 
Chicago Literary Hall of Fame.
“It means recognition here, recognition from the people I live among,” 
Wolfe said. “ Awards like the Nebulas are voted on largely by people 
who live on the coasts—New Y ork and LA and their regional neigh-
bors. This comes from the heartland.”
Wolfe left behind a career in engineering development when he 
moved to Barrington in 1972 to work as a senior editor on Plant 
 Photography by Mimi Ko
5
Engineering Magazine.  It was his first and thus far only time living in  
a major urban area, despite having been born in New Y ork City and 
raised in Houston. (The first he left when he was very young and the 
second had yet to grow into the metropolis it is today.)
“Chicago brought me in contact with other writers, editors, and others 
in the publishing business,” Wolfe said. “It also brought me back into 
contact with live theater. I’d had a bit of that in Houston, but had lost 
it when I left there. And of course there was, and is, the Field Museum 
and the Adler Planetarium. Houston had boasted a good art museum 
even when I was a boy, a museum (like the public library) within  
bicycle reach; I had gone there three or four times a year when I was  
a boy. But nothing like the Field Museum or the Planetarium.”
Though Wolfe was 40 when he set down in Chicago, his storied writing 
career lay mostly ahead of him. He’d published two books, Operation 
Acres and The Fifth Head of Cerberus. The rest would come after he’d 
settled in Barrington. Within 12 years, Wolfe’s literary success would 
be such to allow him to retire from Plant Engineering. 
“The move contributed a great deal,” Wolfe said. “Most of all a sense 
of freedom and the confidence of success.  It meant that I had more 
time to write and more to write about.”
T o date, Wolfe has written some 50 novels, as wells as dozens of story 
collections, novellas, chapbooks and several non-fiction books. His 
Book of the New Sun series, featuring former professional torturer 
Severian, ranks as Wolfe’s best known and loved work, though he is 
partial to Peace, Free Live Free, The Wizard, An Evil Guest, and The 
Sorcerer’s House.
As a speculative writer, Wolfe naturally sets his stories in wildly imag-
ined places. But in Free Live Free, Chicago readers can surely detect the 
sites and smells of their own city, even if it goes unnamed. Wolfe mod-
eled the strange, desperate house of that novel on one that was soon 
to be demolished to make way for a Dan Ryan freeway ramp. 
“Great writing is writing that can be reread with increased pleasure 
and clearer understanding,” Wolfe said. “Some simple truths are 
almost always rejected, anathema to the modern mind. One of these 
is that a good book can be written on any subject. And that a bad 
book can be written on any subject, too. A great writer is not merely 
great himself; he makes his readers great. Subjects are not good or 
bad, the writing makes them so.” 
                                                                      
Meghan Owen contributed to this profile.
6
HoW To rEAd gEnE WolfE
By Neil Gaiman 
I wrote this in 2002, for the World Horror Convention, when Gene and I were 
guests of honour. The numbers have changed—you can add ten years to every date 
I mention in it—but my affection for, respect for, and love of Gene Wolfe, the man 
and his work, has only grown in that time. And the reading advice I give is as  
pertinent now as it was then. We in the strange half-worlds of science fiction and 
fantasy and horror and whatever the hell else it is that we do have always known 
how good Gene was and is. It is peculiarly gratifying to see it acknowledged by  
the wider world as well. ~ Neil Gaiman, January 2012 
Look at Gene: a genial smile (the one they named for him), pixie- 
twinkle in his eyes, a reassuring moustache. Listen to that chuckle.  
Do not be lulled. He holds all the cards: he has five aces in his hand, 
and several more up his sleeve. 
I once read him an account of a baffling murder, committed ninety 
years ago. “Oh,” he said, “well, that’s obvious,” and proceeded off- 
handedly to offer a simple and likely explanation for both the murder 
and the clues the police were at a loss to explain. He has an engineer’s 
mind, that takes things apart to see how they work and then puts 
them back together.
I have known Gene for almost 20 years. (I was, I just realized, with a 
certain amount of alarm, only 22 when I first met Gene and Rosemary 
in Birmingham, England; I am 41 now.) Knowing Gene Wolfe has 
made the last 20 years better and richer and more interesting than 
they would have been otherwise.
Before I knew him, I thought of Gene Wolfe as a ferocious intellect, 
vast and cool and serious, who created books and stories that were of 
genre but never limited by it.  An explorer, who set out for uncharted 
territory and brought back maps, and if he said Here There Be 
Dragons, by God, you knew that was where the dragons were.
And that is all true, of course. It may be more true than the  
embodied Wolfe I met 20 years ago, and have come to know, with 
enormous pleasure ever since: a man of politeness and kindness and 
knowledge; a lover of fine conversation, erudite and informative, 
blessed with a puckish sense of humour and an infectious chuckle.
I cannot tell you how to meet Gene Wolfe. I can, however, suggest a 
few ways to read his work. These are useful tips, like suggesting you 
7
Photography by Mimi Ko
take a blanket, a flashlight and some candy when planning to drive a 
long way in the cold, and should not be taken lightly. I hope they are 
of some use to you. There are nine of them. Nine is a good number.
How to read Gene Wolf e
1) T rust the text implicitly. The answers are in there.
2) Do not trust the text farther than you can throw it, if that far. It’s 
tricky and desperate stuff, and it may go off in your hand at any time.
3) Reread. It’s better the second time. It will be even better the third 
time. And anyway, the books will subtly reshape themselves while 
you are away from them. PEACE really was a gentle Midwestern 
memoir the first time I read it. It only became a horror novel on the 
second or the third reading.
8
4) There are wolves in there, prowling behind the words. Sometimes 
they come out in the pages. Sometimes they wait until you close the 
book. The musky wolf-smell can sometimes be masked by the aromatic 
scent of rosemary. Understand, these are not today-wolves, slinking 
greyly in packs through deserted places. These are the dire-wolves of 
old, huge and solitary wolves that could stand their ground against  
grizzlies.
5) Reading Gene Wolfe is dangerous work. It’s a knife-throwing act, 
and like all good knife-throwing acts, you may lose fingers, toes, ear-
lobes or eyes in the process. Gene doesn’t mind. Gene is throwing the 
knives.
6) Make yourself comfortable. Pour a pot of tea. Hang up a Do Not  
Disturb sign. Start at Page One.
7) There are two kinds of clever writer. The ones that point out how 
clever they are, and the ones who see no need to point out how clever 
they are. Gene Wolfe is of the second kind, and the intelligence is less 
important than the tale. He is not smart to make you feel stupid. He is 
smart to make you smart as well.
8) He was there. He saw it happen. He knows whose reflection they 
saw in the mirror that night. 
9) Be willing to learn.
Copyright © 2002. First published in The World Horror Convention 2002 Program Book. 
Reprinted by permission of the author
WHAT iS THE fullEr AWArd?
“The Fuller” is awarded by the Chicago Literary Hall of Fame to a 
Chicago author who has made an outstanding lifetime contribution to 
literature.
The award was inspired by the literary contribution of Henry Blake 
Fuller, one of Chicago’s earliest novelists and author of The Cliff-
Dwellers and With the Procession. Both novels use the rapidly developing 
city of Chicago as their setting and are considered by many to be the 
earliest examples of American realism.
Theodore Dreiser called With the Procession the first piece of American 
realism that he had encountered and considered it the best of the 
school, even during the days of his own prominence.
9
The Virginia Kidd Agency, Inc.
is proud to send our heartfelt
congratulations to you, Gene!   
We couldn’t be happier that  
you’re receiving the Fuller Award,  
and that we have been lucky  
enough to represent you
these many years.
  
All our best wishes,
Vaughne & Chris
Artwork by Murray Ewing
Fuller, in his literature, rebelled against the commercialistic tendencies 
of post-Chicago Fire Chicago, questioned the wisdom of upward 
sprawl, and explored themes of homosexuality in a time when to be 
so was strictly unacceptable. His boldness and commitment to high  
literature made him one of, if not the, most important first Chicago 
writers.
There are additional layers of meaning to the word ”fuller.”
A fuller is also a tool used to form metal when it’s hot, an important 
part of building and a nice metaphor for Chicago, home to the “First 
Chicago School” of architecture that rose up from the ashes of the 
Chicago Fire of 1871. Between 1872 and 1879, more than ten thousand 
construction permits were issued. Chicago emerged as a resilient city 
that took risks and made bold decisions—using iron and steel to 
frame its buildings, giving rise to the world’s first skyscraper. The  
fuller was one such tool that made it happen, a symbol of possibility 
and perseverance.
Inspired by the sleek lines and art deco style of Chicago sculptor,  
John Bradley Storrs whose sculpture Ceres is on top of the Board  
10
of T rade building, the award statue for the Fuller was based on 
Hephaestus, the Greek god of the blacksmith’s fire and patron of all 
craftsmen. According to legend, Hephaestus was the only god who 
worked, and he was honored for having taught mankind that work is 
noble and one should excel at their craft. The patron of artists and 
craftsmen, he seemed a fitting symbol to capture the spirit of excel-
lence embodied by the Chicago Literary Hall of Fame’s Fuller Award.
At this time, the Chicago Literary Hall of Fame only inducts  
historical writers into the Hall of Fame, and so the Fuller was created 
as a way to acknowledge our greatest living Chicago writers. Gene 
Wolfe is the first to receive this award. His body of work distinguishes 
him as one of Chicago’s finest literary treasures.
for gEnE WolfE
Friends, colleagues, and fans share a few words 
about the man they love and respect.
Marc Aramini
Gene Wolfe is special. From my first reading of his work in childhood, 
it had a profound impact on me. Rereading it years later proved that 
unlike most youthful experiences, Gene’s unique  
qualities (the shifting symbols, metonymic patterns of meaning, reli-
gious intonation, subversion and transformation of literary tropes,  
not to mention a beautiful style) only improved on re-examination. 
He deserves the immortal recognition reserved for figures like Homer 
and Shakespeare.
Y ears later, I had the chance to correspond with Gene, and that early 
reverence proved completely warranted. For over a decade, he has 
spent personal time and effort getting to know me, a mere fan. Even  
if he had never put pen to paper, though the world of letters would 
be much poorer, he would still be a great man. Gene Wolfe justly 
deserves all the recognition he has received and much more.
Greg Bear
Gene Wolfe has challenged, amused, and elegantly entertained us 
with a dizzying variety of excellent stories and novels. Here’s my all-
too-brief note of thanks for the years of exhilarating fun! And many 
more to come!
Joe Bushong‑T aylor
My Friend, Gene Wolfe 
Gene Wolfe knows things. Like how to wear a walrus above your lip, 
how to use a cane, how to wear a hat, and how to smile, smirk, and 
twinkle an eye all at the same time.
He knows how to speak things. Be careful when you let his words 
into your ears. They are tricky. They will shimmer and shift and they 
seldom mean only what they say. And he will use words you didn’t 
know you knew. 
He knows how to recite a poem and make you duck as the Jabber-
wocky sails over your head. Even out in public at a breakfast table.
He knows how ancient gods walked among us, how pirates trim a 
sail, how wizards and sorcerers work a spell, how the dead will be 
remembered in space, and what will happen to the sun.
He knows war. Not the shiny scrubbed-up sanitized kind, but the 
dirty noisy horrific real kind. And so he also knows a little about 
peace. 
He knows some stories that no one else knows, and he is writing 
them down. Be careful when you read them because they will make 
your brain hurt if you are not used to using it.
When he reveals the secrets of alien alchemists turning lead into gold, 
do not be fooled. The lead is the printer’s ink you hold in your hands. 
He will get you to read. I mean really read. And reread. And reread.
He knows about knights, how they stay true, and how to be one. 
Rosemary told me this.
He knows a lot of people. He knows someone who never lies, and 
someone who always does. I think they are the same person.
He will give you some friends. He has given me one who remembers 
everything, and one who never can. If you are fantastically lucky, he 
might even give you himself as a friend. I count that honor atop my 
highest riches.
Gene Wolfe shares with us his vision, which sees through the dark 
glass and the mist. He merits his place as leader of the pack. He merits 
even more than what we can possibly represent to him here tonight. I 
say to him Benedictus.
11
12
Rebecca Bushong‑T aylor
I came late to the party. In my younger years I had read a few of the 
novels, thought they were impressive but not the kind of thing that 
really caught me up (remember, I was young) and moved on to other 
writers.
Jump to 2006. Balticon 40 was steamrolling into town, and the Guest 
of Honor was flying in last-minute from Melbourne. He suggested 
that a backup be arranged in the event he was detained. The Con 
chair emailed me in a panic and asked who on earth could be asked  
to “backup Neil Gaiman”?  I thought about it for a few minutes and 
then whimsically responded, “Y ou know, he recently wrote something 
with Gene Wolfe. From what I understand, they had a blast doing it. 
Wouldn’t it be cool if Mr. Wolfe would be the Special Guest of 
Honor?”  Her response was “roflmao.” A week later, she called. In a 
hushed voice, she said, “He said yes. Gene Wolfe said yes.” She had 
announced it to the Baltimore Society and a silence fell over the room. 
Someone softly said, “Whoa.”
Then she paused and asked, “Would you be his GOH liaison?” I  
hesitated, because I was in need of hip replacement surgery, and  
walking was a chore. I needed a cane to get around. Then I said yes. 
Who wouldn’t?
I started to read Wolfe in preparation. The quickest and easiest thing 
to do was short stories. Gene Wolfe has written lots of short stories. 
Amazing, shivery, make you cry short stories. Who knew at my age I 
could fall in love again?
Those four days at Balticon 40 with Gene and Rosemary were some  
of the most remarkably splendid of my life. We all had canes. We 
laughed, a lot. My husband and I found a mirror for our own won-
derfully romantic love story in Gene and Rosemary’s marriage. We 
stayed in touch after Balticon. We became friends. I’ve been moved 
and honored by Gene’s honesty, strength and personal integrity. And 
I’ve rediscovered the books. Oh, the books and stories.

13
Y ou have been a joy to have in my life, and I plan on being in yours 
when you turn 90, and “Y ou Win.” I love you, dear friend. 
Congratulations.
Kyle Cassidy
When you read Gene Wolfe you realize he’s doing six—he’s controlling 
six marionettes at once!—and you’re astonished. One sings, one dances, 
two conspire with hushed voices in a corner, one plays the trumpet 
while walking a tight rope, another sings opera. It’s inconceivable that 
one artist could have so much going on, so you cheer, you applaud, 
you stamp your feet, you shout bravo! because it’s the sort of thing 
you thought impossible. And then you turn around and realize that 
everyone else in the vast theater, everyone around you, as far as the 
eye can see, is also a marionette and he’s controlling them all, at once, 
for you.
John Clute
Gene—The last time we met, a year or so ago at Readercon near 
Boston, I sat down for a moment with you and Rosemary as you were 
finishing breakfast. Rosemary turned to you and said (I think these 
were the exact words), “Y ou’re a treasure.” This was thirty years after 
we’d all met for the first time, here in London, in the flat where I’m 
writing these words today. At Readercon, I thought enough time had 
passed for me to be allowed to say something embarrassing to you. I 
turned to you and said (I think these were the exact words), “Y ou’re a 
treasure, Gene.”
In your face, which was already aglow with foreknowledge, I thought 
I detected, for an instant, something resembling a blush. Perhaps 
nothing more than empathy with an ageing epigone trying to say it 
all, and say goodbye too. 
I did have another phrase in mind, which I did not quite dare utter; it 
is one of your great slingshot endings that tell us, when we’ve finished 
a new novel for the first time, that we’d better start again: that per-
haps the greatest American writer of the past half-century is telling us 
to look again. Greatness in a novel is having to look again. It is also, 
perhaps with unique force in the hundreds of stories you’ve written 
over the past half century, a key that turns and opens a door we had 
not known was locked. Maybe we hadn’t even known it was a door. 
So every time we go back again to read again and learn, it is like a 
slingshot, or sunrise. All I can wish for you, Gene, therefore, is good 
14
fishing. Good fishing! Good fishing! Good fishing! Good fishing!  
Good fishing!
Monte Cook
Gene Wolf scares me. When I was a teen, I stared at the copy of 
Shadow of the Torturer, scared to read it. Something about it frightened 
me in a way no other book had, just sitting on a shelf. But I gathered 
my courage and opened it and it redefined fantasy for me. And then, 
reading further, it redefined science fiction for me. Along the way, it 
taught me the beauty and magic of language.
When I was a fledgling writer, I stared at a notice that Gene Wolf was 
teaching a writing class, scared to sign up. I was intimidated by self-
doubt. But I gathered my courage and joined the class and found 
myself awash in valuable lessons about writing, some that I didn’t 
fully understand until years later. 
Thank you, Gene, for terrifying me throughout my life. 
Please continue.
C.S.E. Cooney
For Gene Wolfe, Honorary Grandfather
“Small writers borrow; great writers steal,” you once alleged
The glint in your eyes like steel, but with laughter edged
Then admonished when I vowed to trunk a story away: 
“Wash her face, change her dress, send her out to fight another 
day!”
How to write a cover letter, how to make a stupid sentence better
The brisk and bask of your attention, what in heck you meant by 
“convention”
Brunches and road-trips, Gilbert and Sullivan 
Ancient Greece, Nubia, Kipling and Chesterton 
My first Sandman comic, three knives, a whole book-heap
More memories than mere mortal memory may keep
John Crowley
When I first began thinking of writing fiction there were names that 
were held up as writers who transcended the genre, writers who 
could (at last) be considered as standing on the same plane as the 
greatest modernists. The only name that I remember being on every-
one’s list of these was Gene Wolfe. He was then and remains now the 
man who broke the bank, and created the possibilities that I and a 
15
hundred others have been able to build on. My warmest greetings 
and deepest respects. 
Charles de Lint 
Reading Gene Wolfe is always a treat but my fondest memory of him  
is spending a few hours together with him and his wife at a con in 
Winnipeg. Such a sweet couple; such a talented writer! 
Michael Dirda 
Nearly 30 years ago, I tried to summarize Gene Wolfe’s Book of the New 
Sun in a sentence:  “If Proust, while listening to late Beethoven string 
quartets, had written I, Claudius and set it in the future, the result 
might resemble this measured, autumnal masterpiece.” That’s the 
kind of sentence only a young reviewer could write, but it’s not one 
that this older reviewer would disagree with. In half a lifetime’s 
engagement with new books, I’ve found only a handful of novels that 
possess the serene strangeness of truly great works of art. Wolfe’s Book 
of the New Sun, it seems to me, belongs on the same shelf as Cormac 
McCarthy’s Blood Meridian and Marilynne Robinson’s Housekeeping. 
That said, nobody owns just one Gene Wolfe book. He is an artist of 
enormous energy and ambition, one who has been producing not just 
single works but a true oeuvre, the whole greater than the individual 
parts. Y es, Gene Wolfe is a great science fiction and fantasy writer, but 
he’s also a great writer, period.
Dave Drake
My first two Military SF stories were published in the October and 
November, 1974, issues of Galaxy magazine. In January, 1975, Galaxy 
published “Straw,” by Gene Wolfe, which was also Military SF . I read 
“Straw.” The first thought that went through my mind afterwards 
was, “Why the hell would anybody read me when Gene Wolfe is writing?”
That’s still a fair question.
Phyllis Eisenstein
I really got to know Gene back when George R.R. Martin and I were 
running the Windy City Science Fiction Writers Workshop. Not only 

16
was he a great workshopper, but he also brought his wonderful,  
enigmatic, challenging fiction to the group, and we had a fascinating 
time talking about it. We even got to see chunks of the first incarna-
tion of The Book of the New Sun (my personal favorite), then called The 
Feast of St. Catherine’s, and I could see that it was going to be a fascin-
ating, top-quality work. Ever since those days, Gene and his fiction 
have inspired me to be a better writer, and for that I will always smile 
when I see him or read his work. 
Harlan Ellison
Sadly, the universe has not existed long enough 
to grow wise enough, or kindly enough, to coin 
words sufficiently magnificent to codify the 
size, shape, depth or value of Gene Wolfe. T o 
speak of him as a man is the easier part: outwardly, 
he is endless in his urbanity, kindness, gentleness 
and courtesy. Oh, there’s a scimitar wit there; not 
a mere sense of humor--amoeba can be funny—you want 
laughs, scan the risibilities of the paramecium— 
anyone can be funny. But wit!  Ah, there you have Gene 
Wolfe: quietly cutting, smoothly softly sibilantly 
savage; a wit one mentions in the same breath with 
Wilde or Whistler. The harder part of the endless 
encomia due him, is summoning up the verbiage to 
approach the mythic land of his T alent. Gene Wolfe 
is sui generis. This is not the first time I’ve been 
asked to dumb encomia upon him, nor will it be the 
last. When all the foofaraw has been shushed away, 
Gene Wolfe will remain as one of the most memorable,  
most enjoyable, most . . . Wolfein writers of Our Time.
Chicago Area Independent Booksellers
17
Murray Ewing
T o a wizard, and a knight, (and perhaps a bit of a literary torturer, 
too?), congratulations on receiving the Fuller Award. Y ou are now  
our Autarch!
B ill F awcett
Having the pleasure of living near and often seeing Gene Wolfe social-
ly I can best offer a warning. Do Not let this man near a Pun. Any Pun 
in his hands is both a dangerous verbal weapon and an inevitable 
groan. He can find puns in Middle English Sagas and Engineering 
textbook footnotes. No Pun is safe in his presence.
Gene, for myself and so many other readers: Thank you for so many 
great hours spent reading your many wonderfully varied and imagi-
native books and stories. 
Raymond E. F eist
Gene Wolfe? What can one say about a guy who was a legend already 
when I was first published . . . for a first book published one year 
before my first book. Shadow of the Torturer had that kind of impact. I 
thought at the time that I might catch up, as such things go, and here 
I am 30 years later thinking I may still catch up. Seriously, you don’t 
catch up with a writer like Gene, because he brings a unique voice to 
the craft, and has a way of looking at storytelling that is as iconic and 
original as anyone you’re going to read in the field. I never counted 
Gene an inspiration, because we were contemporaries, and I didn’t 
read him until I had finished my first book, which was a good thing, 
because had I read him I might have given up before I finished my 
first novel, thinking, “Hell, if you have to be that gifted to do this, I 
might as well stop now.” I’ve heard others say he’s the best writer in 
the English language alive, or that he has been a major influence or 
that he’s as literary a writer of speculative fiction as exists, or a bunch 
of other things with which I will not argue. I will only say he’s one 
hell of a writer and his accolades are well deserved. So let me add my 
one little bit to the mountain of praise and say, “Gene, you did good.”
Nicholas Gevers
Congratulations, Gene, on receiving this splendid award! It is deeply 
deserved. I’ve been reading your work since 1986, when I bought the 
four Arrow paperbacks of The Book of the New Sun in a small bookshop 
in Cape T own. Starting to read them, I quickly realized I had come 
upon The Book of Gold. Since that time, your novels and stories have 
been for me the measure of what the speculative genres, and litera-
ture in general, can achieve in profundity of theme, intricacy of tech-
nique, splendor of language, and richness of characterization. Y ou are 
The Master, and more: the Autarch, the Caldé, the Rajan of SF and 
fantasy.
Therese Goulding
Dear Pops, 
Thank you for bringing me into a world filled with magicians, shape 
shifters and thieves and for sharing your strength and knowledge of 
the arcane to help navigate the way. 
With all my love, 
T eri
Elizabeth Hand
Many years ago, during the summer I was nineteen, a boyfriend and I 
traded our favorite books. I don’t recall what mine was, but his was 
The Fifth Head of Cerberus. I read the three novellas in one (long) sitting, 
then immediately read them all again, and finally a third time. I felt as 
I did when first encountering an extraordinary piece of music: I 
couldn’t bear to stop hearing Gene Wolfe’s voice inside my head. I can 
honestly say that since then, I never have: His fiction rewired my 
brain in the best possible way. Gene’s literary brilliance is matched by 
his generosity and warmth. I feel privileged to share a planet with 
him, and wish I could be there to watch him receive this honor. 
Vaughne Hansen and  Chris Cohen
Congratulations, Gene—and well deserved!  Working with you has 
been one of the highlights of my life. 
Love, V aughne
What V aughne said! All my best wishes and congratulations to you, 
Gene.  
Love, Chris”
David G. Hartwell
One of the reasons I have devoted my life to being an editor is to have 
the privilege of working with writers of true excellence. I have worked 
with Brian Aldiss and Robert A. Heinlein, Frank Herbert and Philip K. 
Dick, but Gene Wolfe is the writer with whom I have had an editorial 
relationship for the majority of my career, longer than with any other 
writer. I am certain that part of my reputation as an editor derives 
from the fact that I am Gene Wolfe’s editor. Gene has been a loyal 
18
18
19
companion on the trail, and I have tried to do my best for him always. 
I am proud on his behalf every time he gets an award, or is honored 
in any way for his literary achievements, and I am proud for him now. 
Gene is the best. 
Steve Hockensmith 
Gene Wolfe is a riddle wrapped in a mystery inside your Uncle Fred. 
His prose is beguiling, his plots delusive, his addiction to puns avuncular 
(and, because he’s such an imp, forgivable). He’s the best writing 
teacher I ever had. I’ll never forget the day one of my fellow students 
passed on advice he’d received from another writer: When you can’t 
figure out how to bring an antagonist to life, just think of the charac-
ter as Sydney Greenstreet in The Maltese Falcon and the scene will 
write itself. There were smiles and nods around the table. And then 
Gene, who’d been quietly preparing to start the class, suddenly thun-
dered, “That . . . is . . . HORRIBLE!” I don’t even remember what he 
said after that. Not much, I think. There was no need. We’d been 
tempted, for just a moment, by the siren song of the shoddy short cut, 
the pulpy cliché, the lazy “homage”/ripoff. Gene reminded us to aim 
higher. That’s what he’s always done, really. That’s the message writ-
ers should take from his work. As the great Jean Shepherd used to 
say: “Excelsior, you fathead!” Gene would probably drop the “you fat-
head.” (He is avuncular, remember.) But the “Excelsior!” rings out loud 
and clear in everything he does. And that . . . is . . . WONDERFUL. 
Elizabeth Anne Hull 
Before we married, Fred Pohl warned me: “Watching a writer work is 
as interesting as watching paint dry.” Even though I’ve known Gene 
for forty years, I’ve never watched him work. 
However he or she does it, readers judge a writer by what appears on 
the page:  we don’t care how the writer creates the magic, how much 

20
effort went into the process. Science fiction critics often discuss whether 
we’d rather read a story “well told,” one that keeps the reader turning 
pages to see what happens next, or a tale “well written,” that may 
have gracefully formed sentences in a pleasing variety of patterns, 
vivid imagery, fresh metaphors, and complex characterization, raising 
important questions, but not necessarily engaging the reader emotion-
ally.  Luckily there is a third kind of writer: the few who don’t make 
us choose, the kind like Gene Wolfe, not only an engrossing storyteller, 
but also a fine craftsman of words and ideas and moral precepts. 
Congratulations on receiving this well deserved award, Gene! 
Kathe Koja
Once there was a man, and he walked in a wood.  Dawn or dark, 
every day he trod the paths, he observed the fauna, he plucked a 
blossom here and there - astringent lady’s mantle, rosemary for 
remembrance. Sometimes he carried a walking stick made of haw-
thorne, sometimes a GPS. Sometimes he was followed by a small,  
irritable dog, and more rarely, by a larger loping hound who never 
made a sound, but sat facing him on the path with bright  
intelligent eyes. 
He carried a mirror, facing outward. He carried a little flat sack, to 
gather what he felt was useful, for later sorting and dispersal. He 
noticed everything, and he wrote down what he saw. When he slept, 
dreams came; when he woke, he walked on.
He has been walking for some time now. The wood is the world. 
Consult his great unspooling cartography, if you wish to know the 
way through the wood.
Nancy Kress
I first met Gene in 1982, when we cotaught a week-long, Clarion-style 
workshop at the State University of New Y ork at Brockport. I was 
adjunct faculty and the unknown author of one novel, and he was 
Gene Wolfe. T o say that I felt intimidated is to say that Everest is a 
mountain. But—I found out that I needn’t have been. 
Congratulations to Gene Wolfe! 
Thank you for all the stories.  
www.wolfswordpress.org 
21
Gene was staying at my house. On the second day of the workshop,  
I was giving a dinner party for students and other faculty (I had  
courage in those days but not much sense). That was the day my  
seven-year-old son fell off a stone wall at daycare and broke his arm. 
From the hospital I kept calling Gene: Could you please put the ham 
in the oven at 325 degrees? Could you please shuck the corn and start 
a big pot of water boiling?  Do you think you could cut up some fruit?  
Gene did it all, I arrived home with my son a half hour before the 
guests, and I had found not just a brilliant colleague but a friend.
Congratulations, Gene. No one deserves this more.
Ellen Kushner
Gene Wolfe taught me about how the raffish dress. This was not by 
observation, nor yet by example. He told me. Gene Wolfe talked to  
me when I was young and in need of someone to listen and respond. 
He refused to judge my manuscript, but told me to trust myself.  
He embarrassed me hugely by praising my newly-published work in 
public, reading it aloud on a panel we were both on. When he read  
it, it sounded good. Gene delighted and uplifted me. He inspired me 
and challenged me. He probably knows how grateful I am. But I  
want you to know, too.
Roy C. Lackey
Congratulations, Mr. Wolfe, for another honor well earned! I wish you 
and Rosemary all the best, and look forward to many more wonderful 
works of fiction from your strong heart and hands and brain. Thank 
you for all those you have already blessed us with. 
Joe Lansdale
Well-deserved Gene. Y ou’re still standing and the pretenders are gone. 
More power to you, and congratulations on a career well played. 
Ursula and Charles Le Guin
Dear Gene: Our heartiest congratulations on receiving the Fuller 
Award. If there were an Even Fuller Award—if there were a Fullest 
Award—an Overflowing Award—you would be entirely worthy of  
it. We are so glad you are being recognized and honored. And it’s a 
rare prophet who is honored in his own country, so, bravo, Chicago, 
for appreciating your most absolutely, recalcitrantly original and  
imaginative writer.
God bless, Gene!
22
Larry Niven
Congratulations, Gene!
Patrick O’Leary
Gene Wolfe. A sequoia camouflaged as pulp. It is my honor to call you 
friend.
F rederik Pohl
Despite having lived within easy driving distance of Gene Wolfe’s 
home for the last quarter century—and having read compulsively in 
those seriously addictive novels he keeps writing—I hesitate to say I 
know Gene Wolfe. He’s one of those people whom you think you 
know really well, and then, without warning, some new side of him 
shows that you never suspected was there and all of a sudden you 
discover there are important parts of him that you’ve never known  
at all.
In the case of Gene Wolfe I thought I had him pegged as a literate and 
gentle guy who just had this strange writing trait of making the nicest 
character in his first great novel a full-time professional torturer whose 
skill was measured by how much agonized screaming his clients  
produced. All right, that’s a facet of his character that I could accept; 
because literary people are expected to explore contradictions in the 
characters they invent. 
But I wasn’t aware that he invented other things than story-book  
characters until I learned that one of his inventions was a critical part 
in the machine the Pringles people use to make their potato chips. 
And then the most unexpected insight of all that came when he and  
I were invited to discuss our military experiences. My own report 
wasn’t very exciting, but when Gene’s turn came he spun this scary 
yarn of the kid he was when the Korean War took him away from 
aiming to be an  
engineer at T exas A & M and repackaged him as a teen-aged Marine 
swept from basic training to the south side of a Korean hill whose 
north side was populated by a large number of Chinese troops whose 
main mission in life was to kill everybody on the other side.
8 Eyes photography, specializing in special event photography including 
engagements, weddings, corporate, convention and stage
23
He’s a treasure, this Gene Wolfe is, and not just an admired writer but 
a valued friend.  
Nigel and Catherine Price 
Dear Gene, 
I am delighted that the city of Chicago is honouring your work. Since 
the day when I first opened The Shadow of the Torturer, your books and 
stories have been a source of wonder and inspiration to me. Y our 
characters, words and worlds haunt my imagination, colouring my 
waking hours and echoing through my dreams. I am thrilled to have 
read your works, proud to have met you and pleased as Punch at the 
dedication to Home Fires. On behalf of Catherine and myself, I say 
thank you, Gene, and well done.
Mike Resnick
Getting honored must be old hat to you, but they wouldn’t keep 
doing it if you didn’t deserve it. On behalf of all us other Balding Old 
Guys, thanks for carrying the torch for us.
Judi, Byron and Bekah Rohrig (aka Li’l Pirate)
We’ve already established James Whitcomb Riley was writing about 
you:
“ An’ The Raggedy Man, he knows most rhymes,
An’ tells ‘em, ef I be good, sometimes:
Knows ‘bout Giunts, an’ Griffuns, an’ Elves,
An’ the Squidgicum-Squees ‘at swallers the’rselves:
An’, wite by the pump in our pasture-lot,
He showed me the hole ‘at the Wunks is got,
‘ At lives ‘way deep in the ground, an’ can
T urn into me, er ‘Lizabuth Ann!
Er Ma, er Pa, er The Raggedy Man!” 
Congratulations to our Raggedy Man for a most deserved honored! 
Lawrence Santoro
I owe more to Gene Wolfe than any other writer. I don’t mean I 
learned craft by reading him, though he has helped in that way. 
Gene’s gener-osity of spirit nudged my life onto a path I wouldn’t 
have found for myself. Thanks, Gene. Y ou are not only a great writer, 
you’re a good man.
24
Nisi Shawl 
Cookies and Kindness: Meeting Gene Wolfe 
Early in my writing career I received lots of horrible advice. One thing 
I got told in no uncertain terms: “Y ou must attend the World Fantasy 
Convention.” So in 1983 I went. From Ann Arbor, Michigan to 
Chicago, Illinois was only about 250 miles. I had already been to 
ConFusion, a science fiction convention held in nearby Detroit. Why 
should this one be any different, any harder on me?
It was, though. I felt lost and lonely. I knew no one. No one. I had 
nothing in the way of publication credits. My hotel room cost twice 
what I’d expected to pay, leaving me without any money for food. 
And I was the proverbial “fly in the sugar bowl,” an isolated person  
of color in a crowd of whites.
Gene Wolfe was a 1983 World Fantasy Guest of Honor. He took pity 
on me. He sat beside me in the lobby and gave me home baked  
gingerbread cookies and spoke with me as if I were a person of conse-
quence. Regency heroines smiled upon by Beau Brummel must have 
experienced that same exhilarating sense of elevation.
When I went home I read all the Wolfe I could find. What an excellent 
writer! He fully deserves the honors bestowed on him today. But 
more than that, what an excellent man: how thoughtful, how kind. 
How memorable it was to meet him, and how inspirational to me and 
many other writers his continuing example of loving greatness. For 
that I bless his large heart and immortal soul.
William Shunn
Dear Gene: 
I must have been 18 when I first stumbled across your work, in the  
form of the four volumes of The Book of the New Sun. T o say those 
books changed my conception of literature would be understating the 
case. I’m still parsing their mysteries and discovering new questions to 
ask about them after five or six readings, but to my younger self, 
working desperately to become a published writer, they opened up a 
world of possibilities I had not before imagined.

25
Y ou’re among my five or so all-time favorite and most admired writ-
ers, but to this day I can’t pick up one of your novels or stories if I’m 
in my early stages of one of my own projects. If I do, an ineffably 
Wolfean quality will infect my writing, and I fear I’m not yet a good 
enough writer for my work to bear that weight. Maybe one day.
My best wishes and fondest appreciation on this occasion.
Steven H Silver
I was first introduced to Gene in the pages of The Shadow of the Torturer 
and was blown away by his prose. I next met him when we were on  
a panel together at Rivercon in the mid-90s and despite the sense of 
awe, I think I even said a few words. A month later, I found myself 
taking a writing class with Gene as my instructor, an experience all 
should be able to have, but an opportunity afforded to too few. I’m 
proud to call Gene my teacher, and grateful to call Gene a friend. 
Congratulations, Gene!
Dan Simmons
Gene Wolfe is the kind of writer who makes other writers envy him 
for his casual-seeming brilliance, yesterday’s and today’s readers love 
him for his uniqueness, and future generations find him because his 
work will last.
The word unique may be the most overused and abused word in the 
English language these days (often used with a modifier like “very” 
by the preliterate, since uniqueness never requires, nor cannot accept, 
a modifier of any sort) – but Gene Wolfe is unique: unique in his  
powerful vision, unique in his style, unique in his discipline as a  
writer, and unique in the high place he has carved out for himself 
both within and outside the worlds of speculative fiction.
Lisa Snellings
During the time Gene and I worked together on Strange Birds, we got 
into a habit of exchanging emails, once a day. Every morning I’d wake 
to find a note from Gene. These were unique bits that could’ve been 
strung together like beads for a strange necklace. I applied that layer 
of Gene  to his work and began to understand why it and this marvel-
ous and brilliant human resonated so strongly with me. He told me 
the stories he wrote for Birds were the darkest he’d ever written. 
Gene’s work taught me a lot about symbols, layers and subtlety. It 
took me into new territories. In an interview later, Gene said he was a 
little scared of me and suspected that secretly I was a cannibal. Maybe 
he thought that or maybe he didn’t, as Gene is a bit of a jester and I a 
bit of a fool.
The funny thing is, I am a cannibal, in engineering terms. I repurpose 
objects into symbols, and it might well be Gene’s work that pushed 
me in that direction. My dear Gene, you may be surprised to learn 
that it was you who turned me into this sort of cannibal. Y our work is 
in mine. Deepest admiration and congratulations, my friend.
I will love you always and, in my dreams, you are delicious. 
Rebecca Spizzirri
Congratulations, Gran’pa!  I’m so happy to share this special day with 
you. Love, Becca
Jennif er Stevenson
Thank you for you old world courtesy. Thank you for your terrible,  
terrible jokes. Thank you for being good with the dog, and for  
knowing what’s on his mind. Thank you for throwing hatchets at 
wooden targets and nowhere else. Thank you for your years with 
Rosemary, which belong to you, but nevertheless you both have 
shared with the rest of us, and we are richer for it.
Peter Straub
For Gene Wolfe—Everything I might say about tonight’s honoree of the 
first Fuller Award by the Chicago Literary Hall of Fame is an adum-
bration of a single concept: that I am seriously in awe of Gene Wolfe. 
No one else does what he does. Given its difficulty almost miracu-
lously, he has simply, even obdurately kept on doing what he does— 
writing novels of such intelligence and depth that they demand to be 
read at least twice. As I once said of his friend Neil Gaiman, Wolfe is  
in a realm all his own. He does not so much transcend science fiction 
and fantasy as demonstrate in book after book how much beauty,  
subtlety, and complexity these genres can attain. I believe Ursula 
LeGuin once called him “our Melville,” and I have no wish to  
26
Terra Mysterium is a Chicago-based collective of musicians, actors, dancers, 
poets, magicians, and fire performers; creating, producing, and performing 
experiential works of music, theatre, and performance art that are rooted in the 
Earth mysteries. Join us August 30-September 9, 2012 at the Chicago Fringe 
Festival for the world premiere of The Alembic, a steampunk romantic tragedy!
27
contradict a writer of such distinction, but for at least a couple of 
decades I’ve been thinking of Wolfe as our Nabokov. I prefer Nabokov 
to Melville (um, except for “Bartleby, the Scrivener”) for precisely 
those qualities I find embodied, however differently, in the work of 
Gene Wolfe: playfulness, passion, wit, straight-up majesty, a transfor-
mational sense of form, and an absolute, core-level willingness to be 
astonishingly experimental. No one deserves the first Fuller Award 
and a celebration like this more than he. 
Michael Swanwick
For a long time I wondered what it was about the mingled genres of 
science fiction and fantasy that had drawn Gene Wolfe to them. Not 
that I don’t love those forms or understand their special virtues. But  
why should the single best writer in the English language alive today 
be working alongside my buddies and me? It’s like discovering that 
the guy who lives down the block is Mozart. Why here? 
Y our work utterly transformed fantastic literature. Y ou raised the 
mountains higher, made the seas broader, and took the lid off the  
sky. For which, those of us who love the stuff, who love the magic  
of words, who love the power of great writing will always be in  
your debt.
Jack Vance
Dear Gene, here’s wishing you lots of luck!  
Sincerely, Jack V ance
Vernor Vinge
Best wishes to Gene Wolfe on his receiving the Fuller Award, and 
looking forward to all his future work.
Gary K. Wolf e
Gene—One of the great pleasures both of reading and reviewing is 
discov-ering a great new writer, someone who’s saying things you 
hadn’t quite thought of before in a way you hadn’t really thought 
possible. This may happen every few years with a short story writer, 
even more rarely with a novelist. But for some decades now you’ve 
given that gift just about every time out. It’s rather astonishing.
I think I’d read The Fifth Head of Cerberus before I ever met you and 
Rosemary, and as it is with many writers who first impress me as a 
name on a title page, I didn’t have a picture much clearer than a  
blob of amorphous wisdom. Later, I always enjoyed the game of  
reconciling the wry and warm dinner companion with that blob, but 
the wisdom stayed pretty much intact.
We’ve been at each other’s homes a couple of times, but seem to see 
each other more often at conventions than here at home. Occasionally 
we’d meet up at Pappadeaux in Arlington Heights when some visiting 
mutual friend was in town. I hear that Pappadeaux is closed now, but 
every time I read a new novel or story, or collection of stories, I’m  
still discovering a great new writer I’d like to have dinner with. So I  
suppose we’ll need to find a new place.
Meanwhile, thanks for showing me all those doors.
James Wynn
How I learned to read Wolfe: A friend gave me four paperback  
volumes of the New Sun series. By the third volume, my wife 
remarked that I sure was “spending a lot of time on those books. 
What are they about?” I told her I had no idea. “Then why are you 
reading them?” “I have to find out how it ends!”I didn’t know yet  
that Wolfe stories have no ending. Nor a beginning or middle.
Y ears later, I finally got around to reading Peace. Half way through  
it, my wife asked, “Is it good?” “Oh, yes!” “What’s it about?” “Well, 
that’s really the point of reading a Gene Wolfe story.”
Thanks, Gene!
Jane Yolen
Ode to Gene Wolfe
Gene is sui generis, 
his own genre, 
the cuckoo in the nest,
the once and future
king and kingdom,
not doggerel nor dogma,
but the doggone best.
28
cHicAgo WriTErS ASSociATion
The Chicago Writers Association is a creative community of more than 
300 Chicagoland writers whose purpose is to share information, expe-
riences, and encouragement with those for whom written expression 
is an integral part of life. Since its establishment as a nonprofit organi-
zation in late 2006, CWA has demonstrated its commitment to its liter-
ary, education and cultural purposes through many accomplishments, 
including development of the Chicago Literary Hall of Fame. Earlier 
this year, CWA launched a Books of the Y ear Contest, celebrating the 
best books of the organization’s members. Learn more at chicagow-
rites.org and CWA ’s blog, windycitywriters.com.
cHicAgo liTErAry HAll of fAmE
The Chicago Literary Hall of Fame’s mission is to promote and  
celebrate Chicago’s rich and proud literary tradition by honoring  
the authors whose words have best captured the essence of our city. 
Since its founding in 2010, the Hall of Fame has honored Nelson 
Algren, Saul Bellow, Gwendolyn Brooks, Cyrus Colter, Theodore 
Dreiser, Lorraine Hansberry, Harriet Monroe, Mike Royko, Carl 
Sandburg, Studs T erkel, Ida B. Wells and Richard Wright at annual 
induction ceremonies. The third ceremony will take place on 
November 30 at the Chicago Cultural Center’s Claudia Cassidy 
Theater, with an announcement of the new class taking place at 
Printer’s Row Lit Fest June 9-10. For more information about the 
Chicago Literary Hall of Fame, visit chicagoliteraryhof.org or contact 
Don Evans, Executive Director, at donaldgevans@chicagowrites.org. 
29
30
liTErAry EvEnTS cAlEndAr
March 23, Chicago Classics: CLHOF 
will participate in a reading created 
to celebrate Chicago’s literary  
heritage. Part of the Story Week 
Festival of Writers, the reading will be 6-8 p.m. at the Museum of  
Contemporary Art.  
April 21, Stormy, Brawling, Husky 
Chicago: Sandburg’s Literary 
Influences in the City of the Big 
Shoulders. CLHOF Executive 
Director Donald G. Evans will lead Paul Durica and Stephen Cogil 
Casari in a discussion about the profound impact Carl Sandburg made 
on Chicago’s literary landscape, as well as the people who influenced 
him. Sandburg Historic Site Barn, 313 E. Third St., Galesburg, 10 a.m.
May 16, Studs Terkel 100th Birthday Party: Free event at 
Chicago’s Newberry Library sponsored by CLHOF , 
Haymarket Pub & Brewery, the Illinois Labor History 
Society, and The Chicagoan.  
June 9-10, Printer’s Row Lit Fest: CWA book 
signings and announcement of the 2012 
CLHOF inductee class at a special  
presentation. For more information, visit 
windycitywriters.com.
November 30, CLHOF’s third annual induction  
ceremony: Chicago Cultural Center’s Claudia 
Cassidy Theater. More information at  
chicagoliteraryhof.org.
SANDBURG DAYS
festival for the mind
Galesburg, Illinois April 18-21
MARCH 18-23, 2012
FREE AND OPEN TO THE PUBLIC
Chicago
June 9 -10
Hall of Fame
CHICAGO LITERARY
Sponsors are needed to help artist Margot McMahon complete a  
portrait bust of Studs Terkel for the CLHOF permanent collection. For 
information, contact Don Evans at donaldgevans@chicagowrites.org.
SpEciAl guESTS
Kyle Cassidy has been photographing American culture since the 
1990s. His bestselling collection of portraits of gun owners, Armed 
America, was named as one of the 10 best art books of 2007 by 
Amazon.com. He’s done collaborative projects with Michael 
Swanwick, Elizabeth Bear, Emma Bull, Caitlin R. Kiernan and Neil 
Gaiman, as well as photographs of authors in their work spaces for  
a project called Where I Write. War Paint, a collection of portraits of  
soldiers, comes out in April. kylecassidy.com
Michael Dirda, a weekly book columnist for The Washington Post, 
received the 1993 Pulitzer Prize for criticism. He is the author of the 
memoir An Open Book and four collections of essays: Readings, Bound  
to Please, Book by Book and Classics for Pleasure. On Conan Doyle (2011) is 
part of  Princeton’s “Writers on Writers” series. Dirda is a regular con-
tributor to many periodicals, including The New York Review of Books,  
as well as a frequent lecturer and occasional college teacher. 
Bill Fawcett has edited or co-edited more than 40 science fiction 
anthologies, including last year’s Nebula anthology. As “Quinn 
Fawcett,” he has co-authored the Mycroft Holmes and Madame 
V ernet mystery novels. His non-fiction books include two oral  
histories of the US Navy SEALs and a number of books on mistakes  
in history. He is also a game and computer game designer.  
http://historymistakes.squarespace.com/.
Neil Gaiman is the New York Times bestselling author of the novels 
Neverwhere, Stardust, American Gods, Anansi Boys and Good Omens  
(with T erry Pratchett); the Sandman series of graphic novels; and the 
short story collections Smoke and Mirrors and Fragile Things. He is also 
the author of books for readers of all ages including the #1 bestselling 
and Newbery Medal-winning novel The Graveyard Book, the bestselling 
novels Coraline and Odd and the Frost Giants; the short story collection 
M is for Magic and the picture books The Wolves in the Walls, The Day I 
Swapped My Dad for T wo Goldfish, and Crazy Hair, illustrated by Dave 
McKean; The Dangerous Alphabet, illustrated by Gris Grimly; and 
Blueberry Girl, illustrated by Charles V ess. He is the winner of numerous 
literary honors, including the Hugo, Bram Stoker, World Fantasy 
Awards, and the Newbery Medal. Originally from England, he now 
lives in America. www.neilgaiman.com.
31
Therese Goulding is a copy editor at G2 USA Marketing, the managing 
editor of Cheeky Frawg Books, and the special projects manager for 
the Shared Worlds Science Fiction & Fantasy teen writing camp. She 
resides in the Chicago area.
David G. Hartwell is a senior editor of T or/Forge Books. He is the  
proprietor of Dragon Press and the president of David G. Hartwell, 
Inc. He is the author of Age of Wonders and the editor of many anthol-
ogies. He is on the board of the International Association for the 
Fantastic in the Arts, co-chairman of the board of the World Fantasy 
Convention, and an administrator of the Philip K. Dick Award. He  
has won the Eaton Award, the World Fantasy Award, and three  
Hugo Awards. 
Audrey Niffenegger is the author of the novels A Fearful Symmetry 
and The Time Traveler’s Wife, which was an international best seller. She 
is also the author of two graphic novels, The Adventuress and The Three 
Incestuous Sisters, both published by Harry N. Abrams. Niffenegger is 
a professor in the Interdisciplinary Books Arts MFA Program at the 
Columbia College Chicago Center for Book and Paper Arts. She is the 
founding member of T3 or T ext 3, an artist and writer’s group that 
also performs and exhibits in Chicago.
Jody Lynn Nye writes fantasy and science fiction books and short  
stories. Since 1987, she has published 43 books and more than 100 
short stories. Over the last 20 or so years, Jody has taught in numer-
ous writing workshops and participated on hundreds of panels. She 
has also spoken in schools and libraries.
Patrick O’Leary is a poet, novelist, songwriter and photographer. His 
first novel, Door Number Three, was chosen by 
Publisher’s Weekly as one of the best novels of 
the year. His second novel, The Gift, was a 
finalist for the World Fantasy Award and The 
Mythopoeic Award. The Impossible Bird was his 
third novel and Other Voices, Other Doors his 
first collection. The Black Heart is a collection of 
his newest stories. O’Leary wrote the poem 
“Nobody Knows It But Me,” which was used 
in the popular 2002 advertising campaign for 
the Chevrolet T ahoe and read in the commer-
cial by James Garner. http://web.mac.com/pad-
dybon/Site/Patrick_O’Leary_-_Books.html
32

Peter Sagal has been the host of the National Public Radio game show, 
Wait Wait… Don’t Tell Me, since 1998. One of the most popular shows 
on public radio, Wait Wait… is heard by two and a half million listen-
ers a week, on 450 public radio stations nationwide and via a popular 
podcast. A native of New Jersey, Sagal currently resides in Oak Park, 
Illinois. He is the author of numerous plays that have been performed 
in large and small theaters around the country and abroad, and he 
has written a number of screenplays, including Savage, and Cuba 
Mine, an original screenplay that became, without his knowledge, the 
basis for Dirty Dancing: Havana Nights. A native of New Jersey, Sagal 
currently resides in Oak Park, Illinois. 
A regular author/narrator on Great Britain’s  StarShipSofa.com, 
Lawrence Santoro is the author of the novel Just North of Nowhere, a 
collection of short fiction, Drink for the Thirst to Come, and the Bram 
Stoker Award-nominated novella God Screamed and Screamed, Then I  
Ate Him. His audio adaptation and production of Gene Wolfe’s The 
Tree Is My Hat, gave him a second Stoker nod. 
Jennifer Stevenson met Gene Wolfe when she invited him to be 
Special Guest at Chimera, a sercon she ran in Chicago in 1991. Since 
then she has become an author, but the fangirl’s still in there some-
where. She has published novels with Small Beer Press, Ballantine, 
Book View Cafe, and has just contracted for four books with Musa.
Peter Straub is an author of seventeen novels, including the classic 
bestseller Ghost Story and fantasy-horror collaborations with Stephen 
King The Talisman and Black House. His fiction has been translated into 
more than twenty languages and has received numerous literary  
honors such as the Bram Stoker Award, World Fantasy Award, and 
International Horror Guild Award. He lives in New Y ork City with  
his wife, Susan, director of the Read to Me program.
Michael Swanwick is the author of eight novels, including Stations  
of the Tide, winner of the Nebula Award. Several of his shorter works 
have won awards as well: the Theodore Sturgeon Memorial Award 
for “The Edge of the World,” the World Fantasy Award for “Radio 
Waves,” and Hugos for “The V ery Pulse of the Machine,” “Scherzo 
with T yranno-saur”, “The Dog Said Bow-Wow,” “Slow Life,” “’Hello,’ 
Said the Stick,” and “Legions in Time.” Swanwick has also published 
essays on the state of science fiction and fantasy, and is a frequent 
contributor to the New York Review of Science Fiction.
33
Sam Weller’s book The Bradbury Chronicles: The Life of Ray Bradbury 
was a Los Angeles Times bestseller, winner of the 2005 Society of 
Midland Authors Award for Best Biography, and a Bram Stoker Award 
finalist. The companion book, Listen to the Echoes: The Ray Bradbury 
Interviews, was published in 2010. With Mort Castle, Weller co-edited 
the forthcoming anthology Shadow Show: All-New Stories in Celebration 
of Ray Bradbury. Weller is a professor in the Fiction Writing 
Department at Columbia College Chicago.
Gary K. Wolfe is contributing editor and senior reviewer for Locus 
magazine, where he has written a monthly review column since 1991 
and currently sits on the board of the Locus Science Fiction Foun-
dation. Wolfe received the Pilgrim Award from the Science Fiction 
Research Association and the Distinguished Scholarship Award from 
the International Association for the Fantastic in the Arts. In 2007, he 
received a World Fantasy Award for criticism and reviews. A graduate 
of the University of Kansas and the University of Chicago, Wolfe is 
Professor of Humanities at Roosevelt University in Chicago.
ArTiSTS & WriTErS
Some of the creative people who helped to make 
An Evening to Honor Gene Wolfe possible.
Jeramie Campana is the owner/chef of Wild Asparagus in Barrington. 
Former Sous Chef for prominent Barrington caterer T astefully Y ours, 
Chef Campana has built his business based on exceptional customer 
service, extraordinary cuisine, and a dedication to his clients.  
http://www.wildasparaguscatering.com
Madeline Carol Matz is the Chicago artist who created the beautiful 
poster and cover for the Commemorative Program. Madeline’s head 
bubbles with thoughts and images, and her artworks are what spill 
out: vintage-looking humanimals, fantastical creatures and other 
improbable beings worked in water media, ink, and acrylic.  
www.mcmatz.com 
Ron Swanson is the Chicago-area sculptor who made the Fuller 
Award statue. Ron’s pieces range from toy sculptures and model  
making, to fine art and large-scale public sculpture. 
34
Lawrence Santoro is the award-winning Chicago writer and narrator 
who adapted Gene Wolfe’s story “The T oy Theater” for the dramatic 
reading. blufftoninthedriftless.blogspot.com/
T erra Mysterium are the performers who brought to life Gene Wolfe’s 
“The T oy Theater.” A Chicago-based collective of musicians, actors, 
dancers, poets, magicians, and fire performers, their experiential 
works of music, theatre, and performance art are rooted in the Earth 
mysteries. www.terramysterium.com
Debra Ann Miller has been a working actress in Chicago for more 
than 20 years. She is currently touring as Mary T odd Lincoln, as well 
as her one-woman show, Just Jane, an evening with Jane Austen. 
www.talklikejaneausten.com
R. Jelani Eddington is the organist for the Gene Wolfe event, perform-
ing on the world’s largest restored theatre pipe organ at the Sanfilippo 
Estate. Jelani has established himself as one of the most prominent 
and sought-after artists on the concert circuit. www.rjeproductions.com
8 Eyes Photography are the official photographers for An Evening to 
Honor Gene Wolfe. Pat and Ellen Prather are married photographers 
that love to work together and want to conquer the world one picture 
at a time. See their work on their website: www.8eyesphotography.com 
Interrobang Photography is one of the videographers. Punk rock 
roots. DIY ethics. Serious lighting skills. Oh, and a love for obscure 
punctuation. www.interrobangme.com
Murray Ewing is the artist who created the Gene Wolfe sketch. Born 
in Reading, Berkshire, in the UK, Murray has a BSc in Computer 
Science from the University of Kent, Canterbury, wrote book reviews 
for one of the first SF & Fantasy webzines (Cybernet2000), and has 
35

had fiction published in Dark Horizons, Cyäegha, Cosmorama, 
Saccade and Start-Up. murrayewing.co.uk.
V alya Dudycz Lupescu earned her MFA in Writing from the School of 
the Art Institute of Chicago. Her novel, The Silence of Trees (Wolfsword 
Press, 2010) is available in print and ebook, and soon as an audiobook. 
Since being published, it has been a Kindle Bestseller, breaking into 
the T op 10. www.vdlupescu.com
Donald G. Evans is the Executive Director of the Chicago Literary 
Hall of Fame, author of the novel Good Money After Bad and editor of 
the anthology Cubbie Blues: 100 Years of Waiting Till Next Year. His short 
story collection An Off-White Christmas will be published by Simon & 
Schuster in 2013. 
A special thanks to these and many others who helped to make this 
day possible: publication designer Roberta Richardson for program 
book design and layout, and artist Drew Baker (drewbaker.com) for 
printing commemorative posters; also Carl Hertz, Gregory Leifel, 
Meghan Owen and Randy Richardson.
Wolf flASH ficTion conTEST
Congratulations to Jake Bourbon for winning the 2012 Wolf Flash Fiction 
Contest. Jake won two dinner tickets to An Evening to Honor Gene Wolfe. 
Nearly 75 entries were submitted from across the United States and Canada. 
Gene Wolfe chose Jake’s entry from these four finalists:
Unraveling 
by Jake Bourbon, Fair Oaks Ranch, Texas 
The first thing he noticed when he awoke was her hair in the dappled 
light, hanging loose around her face like he had never seen before.
“Ow.”
“Hold still, I’m almost done.” She was sewing. She tugged firmly on 
the thread, closing a stubborn loop.
He groaned as he felt the knot tighten. “They’ll be looking for you.”
“They won’t be looking for you. They’ll be certain you’re dead.” She 
managed a grim smile. “They don’t know your body like I do.” She 
pulled gently on the silk.
“Hrnng, this would not have happened if I were one of you.”
36
37
“Y ou would not have survived if you were one of us.”
“Unnh, they blame me for every wrong, every lost chicken, now this.”
“Calm, this is going to be crooked enough.”  She knotted the silk with 
practiced skill then pulled another strand from the cloth in her lap.
“Heh, your Gram’s face when she caught us in her bed.”
“She wasn’t laughing.”
“Things she said.”
“She ran out screaming. That woodsman wasn’t laughing either.”
“They’ll be talking about us for a long time. They’ll say I forced you.”
“I’m sure the tale will grow in the telling. I don’t care. We’ll be gone.” 
Shadows were lengthening across her face. “Done.”
He bent awkwardly to see her handiwork. Dozens of neat scarlet 
stitches held tight the long wound across his belly.
“That thread, you ruined your bonnet.”
“It doesn’t matter. I’ll make a new one, grey like your eyes.”
Lupina Revenant 
by Paulette Livers, Chicago, Illinois 
The gibbous moon is a frayed heel wanting mending. Wanda stands 
in her mother’s footprints at the kitchen window, nearly unmindful  
of the occupation, and in her mind mimes Loretta’s morning routines: 
1. Fill the old chipped goblet with cold water  
2. Unscrew the accursed childproof caps  
3. Slip between lips the variously colored tablets whose names they 
both quit trying to pronounce at some point.
They’d invented stories for the most outrageous ones. Belimumab, 
Loretta smirks behind Wanda, a village of large-breasted women deep in 
the Amazon. Loretta had met her lupus diagnosis years ago with the 
same humor. Wanda sees her mother grip the banister, crab sideways 
down the stairs saying, Old Beowulf crawled into bed with me last night, 
her face ravaged by the butterfly rash under her eyes. The mask-like 
rash is what gave the disease its name. As a girl, Wanda had failed to 
see any resemblance to the markings of a real wolf.
“I won’t survive your going,” Wanda says out loud. When Loretta 
doesn’t answer, Wanda throws her mother’s goblet at the window, 
38

39
lifts the dented sash, and thrusts her head into the breaking dew. 
From her gut erupts a raging howl that startles the neighbor’s rooster 
into silence. 
The moon rises anyway, its pallid white fading into the new  
day’s blue. Behind her, in the dark of the empty kitchen, she pulls 
Loretta’s old cardigan from its hook by the door and draws it over  
her shoulders.
The Hunt 
by Justin Shelton, Bowling Green, Ohio 
She floats imperceptibly through space. She is hungry but she waits 
patiently for her prey. When it comes she must move quickly. She 
must not hesitate.
As with any good hunter, she is aware of her limitations. Her food  
and oxygen holds are small, her engines constructed for speed over 
economy. A Wolf-Class cruiser like her isn’t built for deep space, she must 
feed regularly to maintain her strength.
She senses the arrival of her quarry. 
Then, from nothingness, her prey appears. The name Cervus is visible 
along its side. It hesitates, almost as if sensing danger. Finally it lowers its 
shields, confident of its isolation.
She strikes.
She is on the Cervus before it can react. She targets the neck of the 
ship where the oxygen line is most accessible. Using her vice-like 
clamps she latches on and begins to gorge herself on the precious gas.
Its opportunity to flee gone, the Cervus desperately attempts to shake 
her off but her jaw-like clamps are powerful and she easily maintains 
her hold.
Her prey finally grows silent as she saps the last of its oxygen. It is 
over, she has won. She will survive to hunt another day.
And she must hunt, that is her nature, that is the nature of all preda-
tors. It is her one inescapable instinct and she will act on it until she 
finds herself unable to go on, and then she will die.
But for now the hunt continues. 
40
Little Red Riding Wolf 
Jackie Reuter, Fremont, Illinois
The woodcutter was not invited to the grandmother’s funeral. It was 
said that whenever she saw him, Little Red would scream and run 
away. Why this was the townspeople did not know, but they felt 
much sympathy for the little girl after her ordeal.
The grandmother’s funeral was held a month after the tragedy, on  
the night of the full moon. In her place in the coffin were the  
remains of the wolf who, it was believed, had eaten her up. The  
family remained by the grave until late in the evening, long after  
the townspeople and undertaker had gone home.
The townspeople discussed the poor women’s fate in whispers 
around their fires. In their beds, they sighed with sympathy for the 
poor child who had witnessed the terrible event. They fell fast asleep, 
until they were woken by the howling of wolves. Husbands got out  
of bed and grabbed their axes. Wives and children peered out windows. 
In the town square, the mayor and his family looked out of their  
window to see seven or eight wolves running straight through town. 
When the howling subsided, and the wolves were long gone, the 
townspeople, returned to their beds, but many were unable to return 
to sleep.
In the morning, the grandmother’s family was in good spirits. Little 
Red chased other children around the square, pretending to be a wolf. 
When the woodcutter’s bloody corpse was discovered that afternoon, 
none of them shed a tear.


