 
 Damon Knight papers - Archives West 
 Archives West 
 about 
 contact 
 help 
 Print 
 View XML QR Code 
 Damon Knight papers , 1912-2002 
 Table of Contents 
 Overview of the Collection 
 Historical Note 
 Content Description 
 Administrative Information Additional Reference Guides 
 Detailed Description of the Collection Guide to the Damon Knight papers 
 Names and Subjects 
 Overview of the Collection 
 Aut 
 Knight, Damon, 1922-2002 
 Title 
 Damon Knight papers 
 Dates 
 1912-2002 (inclusive) 
 1912 2002 
1940-2002 (bulk) 
 1940 2002 
 Quantity 
 76.5 linear feet , (55 containers) : 38 record storage boxes, 14 flat manuscript boxes, 3 manuscript boxes 
 Collection Number 
 Coll 340 
 Summary 
 Damon Francis Knight (1922-2002) was a well-known editor, author, and critic in the field of science fiction. He was instrumental in establishing the Milford writers' conference and the Clarion writers' workshops. His book on creative writing, first published in 1981 is still in print. But, he also wrote puns, poems, television and radio scripts, western and detective fiction, biographical and autobiographical works, and an analysis of the artwork of Hieronymus Bosch. The collection contains personal and business correspondence, manuscripts, documents, photos and memorabilia dating from Damon Knight's grandparents' era, the Spanish American war, to his death in 2002. 
 Repository 
 University of Oregon Libraries, Special Collections and University Archives 
UO Libraries--SCUA
1299 University of Oregon
Eugene OR
97403-1299
 Telephone: 5413463068
 spcarref@uoregon.edu 
 Access Restrictions 
 Collection is open to the public. Collection must be used in Special Collections and University Archives Reading Room. Collection or parts of collection may be stored offsite. Please contact Special Collections and University Archives in advance of your visit to allow for transportation time.
 Additional Reference Guides 
 See the Current Collection Guide for detailed description and requesting options. 
 Languages 
 English 
 Return to Top Historical Note 
 Damon Francis Knight (1922-2002) was born in Baker City, Oregon. His family moved to Hood River where Damon attended grade school and high school. Both of his parents, Frederick and Leola Knight, were teachers. His father later became the high school principal and ran a printing press. Damon became a science fiction fan at an early age and received his first check on December 15th, 1939 for the publication of a cartoon drawing in the science fiction magazine Amazing Stories. Upon graduating from high school in 1940, Damon spent a year at the WPA Art Center in Salem. There he published two issues of a fanzine, "Snide", which included a story by Ray Bradbury. By this time he was in correspondence with the group of struggling writers and science fiction fans in New York who became known as "The Futurians". With their encouragement, he joined them, eking out a living with some financial help from his parents. His early literary jobs included proofing and copy-editing for "Popular Publications", then writing comments for aspiring authors' stories for Meredith, followed by a stint at Hillman Publications. Interspersed were publications of occasional short stories and book reviews. In 1955, Knight moved to Milford, Pennsylvania with his second wife Helen. Along with James Blish, Knight set up the Milford Science Fiction Writers' Conference in 1956. That was also the year he won the Hugo Award for "In Search of Wonder. Knight founded the Science Fiction Writers of America in 1965; its annual Nebula Award has become one of the most prestigious awards for science fiction. 
 Knight published about 17 novels and edited over 30 individual anthologies, in addition to 21 volumes of the Orbit anthology, from 1966-1980. TheOrbit anthology helped launch the careers of many new writers, including Gene Wolfe, RA Lafferty, and Knight's third wife, Kate Wilhelm, whom he married in 1963. 
 Knight and Kate Wilhelm were involved in establishing the Clarion Writers Workshops in 1968. They continued teaching there until 1996. Damon's last publication (2000) was the online art history work "Will the Real Hieronymus Bosch Please Stand Up."
 Damon Knight died in Eugene, Oregon on April 15, 2002 at the age of 79. In 2003, he was inducted into the Science Fiction Hall of Fame.
 Return to Top Content Description 
 The collection contains personal and business correspondence, manuscripts, documents, photos and memorabilia dating from Damon Knight's grandparents' era, the Spanish American war, to his death in 2002. 
 The correspondence between his paternal grandmother and his father offers a picture of life in the Forest Grove area of Oregon between 1901 and 1916. There are letters and photographs of his father's service as a high school teacher in the Philippines in 1912-1913; photographs of trips to the Oregon Coast and also to the Fort Rock area of eastern Oregon with his family during the 1920's. There is correspondence between Damon and each of his parents from the time he left home in 1940 until the death of his father in 1945 and mother in 1948. 
 The papers include early handwritten Damon Knight stories and sketches. His drafts of manuscripts are peppered with his drawings and illustrations of background material for his stories – giving them a coherence physically, socially, and scientifically even when the material wasn't written up as part of the story. 
 The correspondence associated with the Orbit series and the Clarion workshops shows Damon Knight's efforts as a teacher of writers: how to write, where to submit a story type, the importance of a contract and how to negotiate and retain rights to stories. His letters of rejection to authors usually suggested how to change the story to make it acceptable and/or where it might be submitted for more likely acceptance. Letters show that many of these people did make changes or write new stories incorporating his suggestions and were eventually successful in having him include their stories in the Orbit series or other collections. Many of them have become very successful writers.
 There are many letters in the Orbit correspondence containing material of personal interest. Among them: Gene Wolfe, Vonda McIntyre, Gardner Dozois, James Sallis, Norman Spinrad, Kim Stanley Robinson, James Tiptree (aka Alice Sheldon), Joanna Russ, George Alec Effinger.
 Return to Top Administrative Information 
 Return to Top Detailed Description of the Collection 
 Description: 
 Guide to the Damon Knight papers
 Names and Subjects Return to Top 
 Subject Terms 
 American literature--20th century
 Authors, American--20th century
 Authors, American--20th century--Correspondence
 Authors, American--20th century--Manuscripts
 Authors, American--Oregon
 Science fiction
 Science fiction, American--Authorship
 Personal Names 
 Wilhelm, Kate
 Form or Genre Terms 
 Correspondence
 Manuscripts for publication
 Photographs
 Other Creators
 Personal Names 
 Knight, Damon, 1922-2002 (aut)
 Joyce Griffith and Stephanie Kays
2015
 About Creative Commons Licenses in Archives West 
 Loading...
 Loading...
 