 A TRIBUTE TO GENE WOLFE
 IF EVER A WIZ THERE WAS: The Ineffable Art of Gene Wolfe
 by Patrick O’Leary
 "Whatever is felt upon the page without being specifically named
 there—that, one might say, is created. It is the inexplicable presence of
 the thing not named." —Willa Cather
 “Now, Dorothy, dear, stop imagining things. You always get yourself into a
 fret over nothing.”
 Like most of us, my family had an annual tradition of watching The Wizard
 of Oz. We relished this improbable concoction of vaudeville and pop,
 Broadway and Hollywood, classic Children’s Lit and MGM’s formidable
 showmanship. Only problem was my family didn’t own a color TV until 1975.
 For years, I didn’t know Munchkin Land had all those colors. I didn’t know
 what I was missing. When I learned that most of the film was in color, I
 filled in the blanks. In either case I never felt like I was shortchanged.
 That is, until I had grown up and finally saw the film as it was intended
 to be seen.
 For me, that was the equivalent of discovering Gene Wolfe.
 Gene Wolfe is the Best Writer Alive. Let me attempt to explain why.
 I can’t.
 “Because, Because, Because, Because, Because…”
 Because what makes him great is simply not on the page. It is somewhere
 tucked inside the heads of the people he has enchanted. There in those
 unreachable reaches of the psyche and the soul, you will find new
 landscapes, unapproachable by any other route. You will find terrible
 beauty and beautiful terror, mystery and comfort, hilarity and tricks and
 truth.
 You will find the ineffable.
 “This is a highly irregular procedure! This is absolutely unprecedented!”
 What Wolfe does for me more than any other storyteller is provide that
 magical moment when your face passes through the membrane of a book and
 you are inside the story. Through the looking glass. Into OZ. How he does
 this is the subject I’m tackling here. It is a complicated if not
 impossible question to answer, because his craft is so transparently
 perfect that its effects are almost invisible on the page.
 You could say this is because Wolfe’s work is rich and he operates on many
 levels: symbolism, suspense, hidden motifs like depth charges,
 slight-of-hand plotting where we have been directed away from something
 very important by the dazzling surface of the tale--misdirection if you
 will. The oldest conjurer’s trick. You could also say that this is because
 Wolfe hides his climaxes offscreen, or he throws them casually away, or he
 does them in a whisper, so that they are easy to miss. This is a writer
 who delights in defeating expectations while, paradoxically satisfying our
 hunger for narrative. No one mystifies and charms like Wolfe.
 “Now, you'd better close your eyes, my child, for a moment - in order to
 be better in tune with the infinite.”
 And yet. And yet. I will venture into dangerous territory and say part of
 the reason why we put up with this shell shuffling is because of something
 else going on. Something deeper. Wolfe always hides his story below the
 story. By never telling us directly what he is talking about, he plants
 the true superstructure of the tale in our minds. It is almost a sketch
 artist's trick, drawing the shadow not the form. And the shadow, which is
 to say, the surface, the thereness of the lead on paper is so vivid and
 enchanting that the true shape of the work often escapes us. The portrait
 suggested by this dazzling outline is not on the page. It is in our
 imagination. And when we’ve read well (and Wolfe does demand we read him
 well) we often find the afterimage of the tale rising up from our mind’s
 eye like a monster emerging from its hiding place beneath a swamp, or the
 photograph taking shape in the red light of the developing room, seeming
 to coalesce from a sunken flat bottom of pure whiteness. Most stories end
 and, if they’re good, we’re left with a powerful memory. Wolfe’s stories
 seem to linger. Days later we still smell them on our clothes. And it
 dawns on us that we are still reading them.
 “I, your Wizard…am about to embark on a hazardous and technically
 unexplainable journey into the outer stratosphere.”
 And yet. And yet there is more. For the story behind the story is not what
 is really happening in a Gene Wolfe story. What is really happening is
 something much deeper. Something I don't think I can talk about without
 sounding silly.
 I think, to paraphrase Johnny Rotten, “He means it, man.” The true story
 of Wolfe’s work is always under the apparent story and still below the
 uncovered story. He is trying to tell the truth and any one who has tried
 to will tell you, it is the hardest thing in the world to tell. Which is
 simply to say he is a moral writer.
 It is easy to take that for granted. Most popular art tells us what we
 want to hear, appeases us, entertains us with cotton candy notions which
 go down easy and will never disturb our most unconscious and unexamined
 values, as well as our most dearly held prejudices. Wolfe forces us to
 look at the unthinkable. His work is never simply comforting, never simply
 amazing. It does that rare challenging thing: holds up a mirror and dares
 us to see ourselves in it. Under the Gee-whiz special effects of
 speculation, under the impressive virtuoso techniques, and still under the
 deep and rich and satisfying pleasures of a sublime fiction narrative,
 Wolfe is playing for higher stakes. He is daring us to examine our lives.
 Or do we think he is talking about dragons and aliens, witches and demons?
 This is the ineffable shape of the hidden book in every Gene Wolfe Story.
 It is risky stuff, for like any true work of art it carries the promise of
 catharsis, and it hides the virus of change: the chance to enlarge
 ourselves. His work demands a response so different than tears or
 laughter, surprise or contemplation--it requires neither an audience or a
 critic. It requires a soul reaction.
 This is why I believe that his work, while resembling other fictions of
 various genres and often crazy quilting a pastiche of tried and true
 forms, is a new thing in and of itself. He is creating original
 experiences you cannot get in any other medium while masquerading under
 the guise of speculative fiction.
 “Oh, we dream lots of silly things…”
 Perhaps the art of his stories cannot be translated because it is
 essentially dream stuff—personal, intimate, woven from the private fabrics
 of our individual unconscious, and it cannot survive the transition into
 waking. It will unravel. Because the most important things are what cannot
 be said. Once cast into the spell of words, they are not on the page; they
 are in you. You are the manuscript; you hold the secrets and the treasures
 and you are the map. In the realm of the fantastic the only exchangeable
 currency is wonder. And wonder isn’t something you can buy; it’s something
 you must invest in.
 So. Let’s take a journey.
 You are dreaming. You are transported to a realm where the impossible
 occurs daily. And you believe it. You can’t help it. Your eyelids are
 pressed open, which is to say: closed. Not always a pleasant experience,
 but it definitely takes you somewhere. And you rediscover the power of the
 only medium that is truly internal. There is no separation between what
 you’re seeing and what you’re experiencing.
 Dreams are you.
 Here’s what you see (The Sword Of The Lictor ):
 You see a man being held upside down by the ankles over a terrifying
 gorge. The camera pulls back to reveal a two-headed monster is gripping
 him. Pull back further to reveal the held man is hanging like a tear in
 the corner of a huge empty stone eye, pull back further to reveal this eye
 resides in an enormous stone face, and further until it crowns a mountain:
 a gigantic carved portrait of one of the monster’s two heads.
 Take a bow. That was nice camera work. Wolfe didn’t do it. You did. Do you
 see?
 Here’s another ("A Cabin on The Coast," Endangered Species):
 A man is standing in the doorway of a cabin on the Pacific. He is soaked
 in saltwater. He has spent 20 years in hell—one paragraph that feels like
 a novel—and he has finally returned to claim his love, the one he rescued
 20 years before, the one he has dreamed about for two decades. He has
 lived for this moment. She hasn’t aged a blink. She is naked on the bed.
 She doesn’t recognize him—which shocks. She takes him for his father—which
 horrifies—imagine if your lover took you for your mom... And he has no
 words for all of this; she does all the talking.
 “Oil can what?”
 The scene is about misunderstanding. And what makes it so powerful are the
 looks on the man's face. Now get this: Wolfe never describes them! He has
 put a description of a man’s face on paper in three lines of dialogue that
 say nothing about how he looks. The only way we know is by his lover’s
 reaction to him. The reader must create the man’s face, the shock, and the
 overwhelming heartbreak. And what we come up with in our own imaginations
 will be much more powerful, will invest us in the story much more vividly
 than any eloquent description Wolfe might write. Do you suppose he knew
 that?
 “Why, it's just like you could read what was inside of me.”
 But wait there’s more. The tale has ended. Yet it’s not over. It has what
 Kim Stanley Robinson has dubbed the prototypical Wolfean “slingshot”
 ending. Here’s what happens next:
 The man now must tell his lover an appalling story, a story impossible to
 tell, and, once told, all but impossible to believe. And in the end there
 are no guarantees that his lover, the one whose absence has sustained him
 during his long and lonely journey, will be his lover any more. And all of
 this, remember, is off the page. Wolfe did not write it, but it is crucial
 to the story. Do you see?
 “Of course, I don't know, but I think it'll get darker before it gets
 lighter.”
 Wolfe is about moments, moments that take you off guard.
 Imagine a child in a house about to be burned down by rioters, going
 upstairs to his bedroom, knowing he must escape but needing to put on (you
 see, he’s a good boy and has been taught well) his coat and boots against
 the winter outside. And, as if that weren’t sad enough, he insists on
 taking the most impractical toy available: a helicopter. (“And When They
 Appear,” Strange Travelers).
 It is in these surprising moments of gentleness or violence, or sudden
 swings into desire and love that Wolfe captures that happenstance flavor
 of reality; where people do not act as characters in stories but as humans
 in life. These glancing, spontaneous, real moments that show us ourselves
 and say this is truth, this is what would happen. Do you see?
 Here’s another ("The Map," Endangered Species):
 A man finds a corpse floating on the river at night.
 "It was a woman, naked and not long dead. Her staring eyes…her teeth
 gleamed faintly through half-parted lips. He tried to judge her as he had
 judged the women whose compliance he had secured for coins, to weigh her
 breasts with his eyes and applaud or condemn the roundness of her belly;
 he discovered that he could not do so, that in the way he sought to see
 her she was beyond his sight, unreachable as the unborn, unreachable as
 his mother had been when he once, as a boy, happened upon her bathing."
 Something truly strange is happening here. Wolfe is describing a state of
 mind that is not happening, that cannot happen, a potential paradigm, if
 you will, that cannot be described, because the character cannot
 experience it. And he is describing something else. A hunger for something
 that isn’t there. Desire, in other words. An emptiness longing to be
 filled. Do you see?
 "Come out, come out, wherever you are...."
 Now understand all the while all these moments are happening, great prose
 is streaming along, wonderful images are cracking us on the head, witty
 puzzles are presented and solved, living characters are saying fascinating
 things, and, perhaps, more importantly, all this takes place somewhere
 which exudes context. Possibilities almost as vivid as actualities are
 trembling along the margins of the tale, like actors waiting for their cue
 offstage--you can feel them, you can almost smell them--anything is
 possible in a Wolfe tale. Because it has so much of the texture of life,
 we expect things to pop out of closets and truth to emerge at the most
 unexpected times. He is telling the tale of our lives which, truth to
 tell, might be and frequently is, interrupted. This sense of potential
 lurking is what I find missing in most of what I read. And it is something
 that Wolfe has in spades.
 "I can't come back! I don't know how it works!"
 There are no maps to this treasure. There are only rumors and words. Most
 of the poetry I read seems to make this mistake—it takes the words for the
 poem. A type of literary fundamentalism/idolatry which regards language as
 sacred in and of itself. So you get all these "word objects" twirling on
 ego, waiting to be admired, insulated in excellence. Wolfe isn’t fiddling
 with words. He never forgets that he is talking to a human who just
 changed the baby’s diapers, fantasized killing their boss with a hatchet,
 remembered the smell of burning leaves, forgotten how to love their
 children, admired their mate’s rump, sweated over the electric bill and
 had a flashback about the time they were slapped by someone they trusted.
 So much depends on that. If these precious words on paper share no
 connection to the real world of pain and joy we swim in everyday—they will
 not work. They cannot gain entrance. The reader will not swallow their
 magic. They are a banging gong or a clanging cymbal.
 “Ooo - EE - hoo! YoOO - ho! Ooo - EE - hoo! YoOO - ho!”
 Any musician knows that space is both the true medium and the most
 critical element of music. Not sound. Not what you play, but what you
 leave out. In the same way you have to see past Wolfe’s words to find out
 what he's doing. You can’t read the notes of the score and forget you’re
 listening to music. It is as if Wolfe were playing a different sort of
 instrument than everyone else which nonetheless uses the same materials
 (metal, wood, skin and bone) and the same scales (do re mi...) and looks
 almost exactly like any other instrument (ink, pulp, typesetting and
 cardboard.) But he is playing an entirely different ballgame. When you get
 that, you get Wolfe, I think.
 "Pay no attention to that man behind the curtain!"
 Gene Wolfe is the Great and Terrible Oz. Approached with a trembling
 enthusiasm he gets cranky: "How dare you presume to question me! I will
 send you on a perilous journey and set for you an impossible task: to
 confront the most horrible creature, and I want you to steal her Volvo and
 bring it back to me!" And this terrible fantastic green god is, of course,
 like any storyteller, a fraud. He is, as we all are, a contract actor
 playing multiple roles: a fortuneteller with a heart of gold stuck in a
 godforsaken gulch in Kansas. He is a forgetful, sentimental gatekeeper of
 the Emerald City who cries a river at the drop of a hat. He is a cabby
 whose horse changes colors when you blink—not something you see every day.
 He is a great and powerful Martian apparition of smoke and flame and
 death—he knows why you’ve come! He knows all! He is a whimpering engineer
 behind a curtain: constructing wonder while covering his ass: hiding his
 true nature: letting us see, finally, the mechanism of his divinity. He is
 a marooned human being using all the showbiz tricks up his sleeve to get
 through his day, to live up to the impossible expectations of his
 followers. He is something like a university president addressing new
 graduates. He presents us with what we’ve possessed all along—now that is
 genius: a salesman who satisfies customers by giving them symbols of their
 most common possessions: hearts, heads, souls and homes. Ourselves, in
 other words. And last we see him he is floating clumsily away on a balloon
 of hot air.
 “No, Aunt Em, this was a real, truly live place. And I remember that some
 of it wasn't very nice - but most of it was beautiful.”
 Imagine a writer who writes children’s books in disguise, because he has
 absolutely nothing to say to grownups. For, after all, what can you say to
 someone who has never seen the foggy figure of a ghost disappear at the
 head of the stairs, never felt the wet velour of a curious dinosaur tongue
 on their cheek, never played scrabble with an alien, never danced with a
 leprechaun, never fucked an escapee from Hell, never made a devil’s
 bargain with a vampire, never juggled in zero gravity, never been
 possessed by a very bad god, never wept for a blind robot, never lost a
 golden book that changed their lives, never been haunted by the forgotten
 memory of a stained-glass window, never tortured the woman they loved,
 never floated on a dirigible over a volcano whose yawning mouth resembles
 a lamprey?
 Grownups know: these are just stories. Impossible. Ridiculous. Useless.
 Like this one: a story which isn’t on the screen in black or white or
 color. When they were preparing costumes for the MGM movie of The Wizard
 of Oz they found the perfect Ring Master’s coat for Professor Marvel. In
 its pocket they discovered a dry-cleaning receipt made out to the
 costume’s original owner: L. Frank Baum.
 Children know: There is another world. It isn’t far. It is as close as
 your own backyard. And it isn’t like school or church. Attendance isn’t
 mandatory. But, once you’ve entered, you will be changed.
 This is what Gene Wolfe isn’t telling us: We already live there.
 “But nobody can see the great Oz! Nobody's ever seen the Great Oz!
 Even I've never seen him.”
 “Well then, how do you know there is one?”
 3/29/00
 From OTHER VOICES, OTHER DOORS, a collection of essays, stories and poems.
References
 Visible links
 1. http://www.wolfewiki.com/pmwiki/pmwiki.php?n=WolfeWiki.TheBookOfTheLongSun
