 
 Gene Wolfe: 1931-2019 - Plant Engineering 
 Skip to content 
 Search 
 Subscribe 
 Topics 
 Back 
 Topics 
 Arc Flash and Electrical Safety 
 Digital Transformation 
 Energy Efficiency and Management 
 Mechanical and Electrical 
 Plant Automation 
 Predictive and Preventive Maintenance 
 Safety and PPE 
 Supply Chain 
 Workforce Development 
 New Products 
 Webcasts 
 Resources 
 Back 
 Resources 
 Magazine 
 Newsletters 
 Ebooks 
 Lubrication Guide 
 Case Studies 
 International Editions 
 Videos 
 Podcasts 
 Voices 
 Views 
 Research 
 Back 
 Research 
 Browse Research 
 All 
 Annual Salary Report 2026 
 The Plant Engineering 2026 Annual Salary Report identifies compensation and current events information as it relates to plant engineers, managers and maintenance professionals to have direct influence on plant performance and productivity. Access your copy of this comprehensive, 39-page report now! 
 Pumps & Compressors Report 2025 
 The Plant Engineering 2025 Pumps & Compressors study obtained insights from plant engineers, managers and maintenance professionals on purchasing behavior and current and future trends related to pumps, compressors and related equipment. 
 2026 State of Manufacturing Operations & Maintenance Study 
 The 2026 Plant Engineering State of Manufacturing Operations & Maintenance report shows manufacturers moving decisively from internal, skills-based approaches to a digital-first model built on increased technology spending, AI and mobile adoption and deeper vendor and supplier partnerships to achieve reliability and efficiency. 
 Systems Integrators 
 Back 
 Systems Integrators 
 Browse System Integrators 
 All 
 The Global System Platform (GSP) supports engineering professionals. 
 System Integrator Giants 
 A ranking of the top systems integrators 
 System Integrator Hall of Fame 
 View the latest and historical data 
 SI Corner 
 Systems Integrator Content 
 Global System Integrator Report 
 View the Digital Edition 
 Awards 
 Back 
 Awards 
 BROWSE ALL EVENTS AND AWARDS 
 All 
 Product of the Year 
 The Product of the Year program is the premier award for new products in the manufacturing and non-manufacturing industries. The annual reader-choice program provides Plant Engineering’s audience with information about the top new products in their fields. 
 Engineering Leaders Under 40 
 The Engineering Leaders Under 40 program recognizes manufacturing professionals under the age of 40 who are making a significant contribution to their company’s success and to the control and/or plant engineering professions. This program aims to display how manufacturers are recruiting and developing the next generation of manufacturing professionals. 
 System Integrator Giants 
 The System Integrator Giants program (SI Giants) lists the top 100 system integrators among companies listed in the WTWH Media Global System Integrator Database, ranked solely on total system integration revenue. 
 System Integrator of the Year 
 Each year, a panel of Control Engineering and Plant Engineering editors and industry expert judges select the System Integrator of the Year Award winners in three categories (based on the size of the organization). 
 2026 Leadership 
 advertise 
 May 20, 2019 
 Educational Facilities 
 Gene Wolfe: 1931-2019
 Former Plant Engineering senior editor became fantasy writing legend.
 To recall the life of Gene Wolfe as a former senior editor of Plant Engineering magazine from 1972 to 1986 would be wholly accurate—and wholly inadequate.
 After leaving Plant Engineering , Wolfe went on to become among the preeminent science fiction writers in the world, and his death on April 14, 2019 at age 87 was commemorated with an obituary in the New York Times, among other places.
 According to his obituary, Wolfe was a veteran of the Korean War and worked as an industrial engineer for Procter & Gamble before embarking on his career at Plant Engineering in 1972. Wolfe recalled those days fondly in a 1998 interview in the fall/winter edition of Nova Express , a science fiction magazine. “I was lucky enough to be the robot editor, so I got to work with modern, real world robotics. I actually have two diplomas from robotics schools I attended. So that was very nice,” Wolfe said. “I guess I’m branching off into other things, but I also got to be the Letters to the Editor editor, which was good and fun and taught me a lot of stuff, and I was the cartoon editor. Basically, I had a real good job.”
 On the Website Ultan’s Library, Wolfe expanded on those duties. “Senior editors had to supply cover articles, ‘supply’ meaning write the articles and take the pictures, including a cover picture that could make it past the art director,” Wolfe said in the interview.
 “We had other responsibilities as well. I was the editor for power transmission (hydraulics, gears, pneumatics, belts, et cetera) and fastening and joining (welding, glue, screws, et cetera), and also the editor for cartoons and letters to the editor,” he added. “There was an electrical editor, a construction editor, a materials-handling editor, a maintenance editor, a safety editor, and so forth. It was hard at times, and easy at others.”
 After leaving the magazine, Wolfe wrote more than 30 novels and hundreds of short stories during his prolific career as a science fiction writer, including the highly acclaimed “The Book of the New Sun” series from 1980 to 1983. In a 1998 reader poll in Locus magazine, the series was ranked third on the list of fantasy novels published before 1990, finishing only behind The Lord of the Rings and The Hobbit .
 Wolfe was awarded the Nebula Award, the John W. Campbell Award, the World Fantasy Award, the British Science Fiction Award, the Locus Reader’s Poll and the Rhysling Award. In 1996, he was given a Lifetime Achievement Award by the World Fantasy Convention, and in 2007, he was inducted into the Science Fiction Hall of Fame.
 Wolfe’s engineering work earned him one other claim to fame. He was one of the people instrumental in the invention of the machine that cooks Pringles potato chips.
 Preceded in death by Rosemary Wolfe, his wife of 57 years, and his son Roy Wolfe, Gene Wolfe is survived by his daughters Madeleine (Dan) Fellers of Mountain Home, Arkansas, Therese (Alan) Goulding of Woodridge, Ill., son, Matthew Wolfe of Atlanta and 3 granddaughters. Memorials in Wolfe’s name may be made to American Heart Association.
 By 
Bob Vavra
 Bob is the Content Manager for Plant Engineering.
 Facebook Tweet LinkedIn Reddit 
 By 
Bob Vavra
 more news
 Educational Facilities 
 Engineers develop method that eliminates need for polymer binders 
 Educational Facilities 
 CFE Media and Technology to Host Spring Virtual Training Week for Engineers 
 Educational Facilities 
 Developing a great sequence of operations: Additional answers 
 Stay in the know
 Subscribe to the newsletter
 This field is hidden when viewing the form 
 Submission URL 
 Email (Required) 
 CAPTCHA 
 Subscribe Now 
 Δ 
 you might also like
 Educational Facilities 
 Health students not hampered by distance, COVID-19 in innovation 
 Educational Facilities 
 Task force discusses the changing world of work due to COVID-19 
 Educational Facilities 
 Five mindful engineering career tips: Set a vision and live it out 
 Educational Facilities 
 Three-step retirement plan for engineers 
 Stay in the know
 Get the newsletter
 Comments 
 This field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged.
 Email (Required) 
 CAPTCHA 
 Sign Up 
 Δ 
 About Us 
 Advertise 
 Contact Us 
 Advisory Board 
 Contribute 
 Part of the DesignWorld and Industrial Automation Network 
 3d CAD forums 
 3dcadforums.com 
 Automated Warehouse 
 automatedwarehouseonline.com 
 Bearing Tips 
 bearingtips.com 
 Consulting-Specifying Engineer 
 csemag.com 
 Control Engineering 
 controleng.com 
 Coupling Tips 
 couplingtips.com 
 DesignWorld 
 designworldonline.com 
 Eng-Tips 
 eng-tips.com 
 Engineering.com 
 engineering.com 
 Linear Motion Tips 
 linearmotiontips.com 
 Motion Control tips 
 motioncontroltips.com 
 Packaging OEM 
 packagingoem.com 
 Tek-Tips 
 tek-tips.com 
 The Robot Report 
 therobotreport.com 
 Wire and Cable Tips 
 wireandcabletips.com 
 © 2026 Arrowfly LLC. All rights reserved. 
 Privacy Policy 
 Terms & Conditions 
 