 Why You Should Read Gene Wolfe (and Where to Start) Counter Craft SubscribeSign in Why You Should Read Gene Wolfe (and Where to Start) On the science fiction author that even literary snobs will love Lincoln Michel Jan 08, 2026 149 71 27 Share Reminder that my (still fairly new!) novel Metallic Realms is available in a bookstore near you. It was named a Best Book of 2025 by Esquire and others, and reviews have called it “a total blast” (Chicago Tribune), “unrelentingly smart and inventive” (Locus), and “just plain wonderful” (Booklist). More information here, if you’re interested. I’m going to begin 2026 by writing about the last, and maybe best, novel I read in 2025: Peace by Gene Wolfe. Counter Craft readers likely had two different reactions to seeing that name. The readers who love science fiction and fantasy probably thought, “Ah yes, one of the great titans of SFF, universally beloved and celebrated, who no less than Ursula K. Le Guin called ‘our Melville.’” The readers who come from the literary fiction world likely thought, “Who?” I’ve written before that the last few decades of fiction have been defined by the breakdown of the barrier between so-called “literary fiction” and so-called “genre fiction.” Today, novels about magic, monsters, and marvels compete for the Pulitzer Prize and the National Book Award and it is common to find past SFF geniuses like Le Guin or Octavia Butler and present greats like Ted Chiang and N. K. Jemisin on MFA syllabi. The Library of America—a decent proxy for what has been canonized in mainstream American literature—has editions of many of the great SFF writers of the 20th century yet no Wolfe.1 Somehow Gene Wolfe hasn’t made the mainstream leap. I have some theories about why. But let me first talk about Peace, which is unique in Wolfe’s oeuvre for not really being SFF.2 Indeed, a summary of Wolfe’s third novel might make it seem like the kind of meandering and plotless literary fiction that SFF fans tend to hate. Peace’s narrator is Alden Dennis Weer, a fairly unremarkable man who has lived his life in a small Midwestern town. When the novel opens, Weer is elderly and thinks he has had a stroke. He reaches into his memory to consult with a doctor from his past. From there the novel moves around Weer’s memories, telling us stories from his life, many of which involve other characters telling stories. The stories-within-the-story range from fables to eerie ghost tales. Many of them are told when Weer is a boy and basically a passive character who relates what others say. That’s it. Well, not it. There are always hidden layers and mysteries in Wolfe’s work. Many of the tales characters’ tell are excellent short stories in their own right, especially the long “true” story told by Julius Smart—one of the suitors of the narrator’s aunt when he is a boy—involving Smart as a young traveling pharmacist, freak show performers, and a possible ghost. But much of what stands out are small, lovely moments, such as when Weer, his aunt, and another of her suitors find a cave while hiking. They decide to have a picnic. Inside, they find remains of an ancient fire and speculate about what the long-dead humans ate. “This may be the last meal ever eaten here,” his aunt says, “that’s what I’ve been thinking while I got the food out. It’s probably the first time anyone has eaten here in at least five hundred years, and it may be the last time anyone ever does.” It’s the kind of novel that’s hard to elevator pitch, because its pleasures are in the lovely prose, dream-like and eerie atmosphere, sharply rendered characters, and general vibe. I guess you just have to trust me. It’s haunting and beautiful. The opening of Peace When I posted about this novel on social media, I said it was the first Wolfe novel I’d read that wasn’t “firmly SFF.” Several Wolfe fans—and he has a lot of fans—responded to tell me that there’s a puzzle the reader has to work out that makes the book technically SFF. This is true. Wolfe is known for cryptic, puzzle-box stories filled with allusions and unreliable narrators. Wolfe fans tend to spend a lot of time deciphering the work and comparing theories. Many of Wolfe’s books are quite cryptic, although I found the mystery of Peace pretty obvious early on. I’ll hide it in a footnote for the spoiler-averse.3 I highly recommend Peace. I adored it. It’s a (technically SFF) novel that will appeal even to literary readers who might be averse to “genre fiction.” But Wolfe’s overtly speculative works are stellar too, and will also appeal to writers who love gorgeous prose, formal innovation, and experimental narratives. So, for the Counter Craft readers who aren’t already Wolfe fans, I’ll offer my own suggestions of what Wolfe books to start with. A little summary of Wolfe first. Gene Wolfe (1931–2019) began publishing in the 1970s during what is called the “New Wave of Science Fiction,” which was basically a time when SFF writers married the imaginative ideas of science fiction with literary style and experimentation. Authors like Le Guin, Ballard, Delany, and Lem are typically considered New Wave. He’s celebrated on the level of those authors within SFF, and won many awards in his life. He wrote in a wide variety of science fiction and fantasy subgenres but is best known for The Book of the New Sun series where fantasy and science fiction elements mingle. To give you an idea of Wolfe’s status in the SFF world, a 1998 Locus magazine poll ranked Gene Wolfe as the second greatest fantasy novelist of all time after only Tolkien and the eighth greatest fantasy or science fiction author ever. One fact every article on Wolfe needs to bring up is that, in his other life as a mechanical engineer, he helped create the machine that makes Pringles chips. (That the mustached Pringles mascot looks like Wolfe is apparently a coincidence.) Gene Wolfe Why isn’t Wolfe as widely read outside of SFF fandom as authors like Le Guin or Butler? My guess is this is because Wolfe’s most famous works are so steeped in the language and ideas of SFF that they can be impenetrable to non-SFF readers. You don’t need to have read a shelf of SFF to understand Kindred or “The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas,” but you probably do to grasp The Book of the Long Sun. At least, I have had well-read friends who bounced off that novel for that reason. Of course, many readers who aren’t huge SFF fans enjoy works like Lord of the Rings and Dune that are also long and full of speculative concepts. But the second reason Wolfe’s work hasn’t traveled as far outside of SFF fandom as it deserves, I think, is the aforementioned enigmatic, puzzle-box style of his writing. Wolfe loves unreliable narrators, mysteries that are revealed in blink-and-you-miss moments, and obscure allusions. His fans will tell you that you have to read his books multiple times to understand them. This quality can try the patience of even dedicated SFF readers. His books are challenging, but readers who are up for the challenge are rewarded. Here are my personal recommendations for reading Gene Wolfe. I imagine readers will have their own suggestions in the comments. STANDALONE NOVEL: Peace Didn’t you read the rest of the post? Read Peace. It is really good! NOVELLAS: The Fifth Head of Cerberus If you want to dive right into Wolfe’s (more strictly) SFF works, the best starting point is The Fifth Head of Cerberus. This was Wolfe’s second book, published a few years before Peace, and is comprised of three interlinked novellas. Each subsequent novella complicates and challenges the previous one. The story takes place on twin planets Sainte Anne and Sainte Croix4 that were home to potentially mythical indigenous shape-shifting aliens. Wolfe was Catholic and somewhat conservative, but The Fifth Head of Cerberus is a complex and progressive anti-colonial SFF novel in many ways, especially for a book published in 1972. There are also robots, clones, mutated humans, strange drugs, and plenty of other SFF elements. The novellas are each different in style, especially the second parable novella, and they add up to perhaps Wolfe’s greatest work. (The book was recently reissued by Tor with an introduction by contemporary SFF great Brian Evenson. I’m linking to that edition, but using an image of an older edition because, well, the older cover is cooler.) SHORT STORIES: The Island of Doctor Death and Other Stories and Other Stories If you want to start with short stories, pick up The Island of Doctor Death and Other Stories and Other Stories. This 1980 book collects Wolfe’s stories from the previous decade. The title is not a typo but a demonstration of Wolfe’s playful side. The collection includes three wildly different stories playing on that title, itself a reference to The Island of Doctor Moreau: “The Island of Doctor Death and Other Stories,” “The Death of Dr. Island,” and “The Doctor Death Island.” The collection is a bit uneven, as many are, but includes three exceptional long stories / novellas that each individually would be worth the price of admission: “Tracking Song,” “The Death of Dr. Island,” and “Seven American Nights.” SERIES: The Book of the New Sun Okay, here’s the big boy. If you’ve read and enjoyed The Fifth Head of Cerberus and the other works above, why not tackle his most famous work? This series is comprised of four novels—often published in two double-editions—plus a fifth “coda” novel. BOTNS is Wolfe’s magnum opus, and the one Locus readers ranked behind only Tolkien in fantasy fiction. The series has everything that makes Wolfe Wolfe. Deeply unreliable narrator, dense and lovely prose, bizarre characters, endless allusions, countless mysteries, and bazillion different SFF ideas all crammed together. For some, it is perhaps too dense and too filled with ideas. Peter Bebergal at the New Yorker, in an article titled “Sci-Fi’s Difficult Genius,” framed it this way: “For science-fiction readers, ‘The Book of the New Sun’ is roughly what ‘Ulysses’ is to fans of the modern novel: far more people own a copy than have read it all the way through.”5 Despite that (perhaps true) claim, the series is also a blast. It tells the story of Severian, a torturer from a torture guild, who goes on a picaresque journey through a far-future “Dying Earth” called Urth that is full of monsters, dystopian societies, weird cults, rusted robots, and remnants of technology that have become indistinguishable from magic.6 Imagine a postmodern retelling of Conan the Barbarian, maybe, in both good ways and bad. It is a fun and multilayered story, but you need to have a good tolerance for pulpy and even cheesy aspects. Don’t yell at me, Wolfeheads! I really enjoyed the series. And yes, I know that Severian is a [redacted] who brings about [redacted] and the work is full of allegory and deep themes… but it is also about a cool torturer dude with a badass sword walking around fighting monsters and banging almost every female character he meets. It is perhaps the ideal book to hand to a very smart teenager who enjoyed LOTR and Dune and say, “Ready to have your mind blown?” Still, it is a rich and worthy read for SFF readers of any age. It’s the kind of series that you can get totally lost in… and also spend hours researching theories online. If you want to get really lost in the universe of the story, Wolfe followed the series with the four-volume The Book of the Long Sun and then the three-volume The Book of the Short Sun. I would recommend starting with Peace (for the SFF skeptical) or The Fifth Head of Cerberus (for the SFF inclined), before deciding if you want to dive into the huge epic of Urth. As for me? I’m looking to next read Wolfe’s Soldier of the Mist, which is apparently about a Roman soldier who gets a head injury that daily destroys his memory (yep another unreliable narrator) yet also lets him speak with supernatural beings. Sounds like a very, well, Wolfian tale. Counter Craft is a reader-supported publication. To receive new posts and support my work, consider becoming a free or paid subscriber. Subscribe My new novel Metallic Realms is out in stores! Reviews have called the book “brilliant” (Esquire), “riveting” (Publishers Weekly), “hilariously clever” (Elle), “a total blast” (Chicago Tribune), “unrelentingly smart and inventive” (Locus), and “just plain wonderful” (Booklist). My previous books are the science fiction noir novel The Body Scout and the genre-bending story collection Upright Beasts. If you enjoy this newsletter, perhaps you’ll enjoy one or more of those books too. 1 Library of America has solo editions for Le Guin, Dick, Butler, Vonnegut, Lovecraft, L’Engle, Bradbury, and Russ. There are also four collections of SF novels from the 50s and 60s with novels by Pohl and Kornbluth, Sturgeon, Brackett, Matheson, Heinlein, Bester, Blish, Budrys, Leiber, Anderson, Simak, Keyes, Zelazny, Lafferty, Russ, Delany, and Vance. Once can quibble with any list, but that is a good collection of great American SFF writers…. with a glaring lack of Wolfe. (One imagines Wolfe will be included in at least the SF anthology series once they do the 70s, but who knows?) 2 Yes, there’s an asterisk here. 3 The narrator is a ghost. A passage near the end of the book makes this explicit when a character says she’ll plant a tree on Weer’s grave. At least explicit if readers remember the opening sentence: “The elm tree planted by Eleanor Bold, the judge’s daughter, fell last night.” But also almost all of the stories involve death and ghosts and the cover features a bunch of skeletons and ghouls, so many observant readers might guess he’s a ghost form the beginning. 4 One of the few SFF novels where the French lead the colonization of space? 5 Like Ulysses, Wolfe’s The Book of the New Sun can be read with the aid of guides. 6 As the famous Arthur C. Clarke quote goes… 149 71 27 Share PreviousNext Discussion about this post CommentsRestacks Chase Burke Jan 8 Liked by Lincoln Michel Gene!! This is the newsletter content I am here for. Reply Share Jeffrey J. Mariotte Jan 8 Liked by Lincoln Michel I was lucky enough to know Gene a little, and to serve as a World Fantasy Award judge the year we awarded him the Best Novel award for Soldier of Sidon (which was not my favorite of his books--I loved Shadow and the rest of the New Sun books). Reply Share 69 more comments... TopLatestDiscussions No posts Ready for more? Subscribe © 2026 Lincoln Michel · Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection notice Start your SubstackGet the app Substack is the home for great culture 