                                        Preprint. Under Review.




                                        E NTROPY-A LIGNED D ECODING OF LM S
                                        FOR B ETTER W RITING AND R EASONING

                                         Kareem Ahmed                                                   Sameer Singh
                                         Department of Computer Science                                 Department of Computer Science
                                         University of California, Irvine                               University of California, Irvine
                                         ahmedky@uci.edu                                                sameer@uci.edu



                                                                                            A BSTRACT




arXiv:2601.01714v1 [cs.LG] 5 Jan 2026
                                                     Language models (LMs) are trained on billions of tokens in an attempt to recover
                                                     the true language distribution. Still, vanilla random sampling from LMs yields
                                                     low quality generations. Decoding algorithms attempt to restrict the LM distribu-
                                                     tion to a set of high-probability continuations, but rely on greedy heuristics that
                                                     introduce myopic distortions, yielding sentences that are homogeneous, repetitive
                                                     and incoherent. In this paper, we introduce E PIC, a hyperparameter-free decod-
                                                     ing approach that incorporates the entropy of future trajectories into LM decod-
                                                     ing. E PIC explicitly regulates the amount of uncertainty expressed at every step
                                                     of generation, aligning the sampling distribution’s entropy to the aleatoric (data)
                                                     uncertainty. Through E NTROPY-AWARE L AZY G UMBEL -M AX sampling, E PIC
                                                     manages to be exact, while also being efficient, requiring only a sublinear number
                                                     of entropy evaluations per step. Unlike current baselines, E PIC yields sampling
                                                     distributions that are empirically well-aligned with the entropy of the underlying
                                                     data distribution. Across creative writing and summarization tasks, E PIC consis-
                                                     tently improves LM- AS - JUDGE preference win-rates over widely used decoding
                                                     strategies. These preference gains are complemented by automatic metrics, show-
                                                     ing that E PIC produces more diverse generations and more faithful summaries. We
                                                     also evaluate E PIC on mathematical reasoning, where it outperforms all baselines.


                                        1       I NTRODUCTION
                                        Despite the unprecedented capabilities of LMs at modeling natural language, generating diverse,
                                        non-repetitive, and coherent text remains elusive. Stochastic sampling tends to produce low quality
                                        text due to sampling the unreliable tails of the distribution.1 Consequently, many decoding algo-
                                        rithms have been proposed that either statically (Fan et al., 2018b) or dynamically (Holtzman et al.,
                                        2020b; Freitag & Al-Onaizan, 2017a; Minh et al., 2025; Hewitt et al., 2022a; Meister et al., 2023)
                                        intervene on the next-token distribution, in an effort to truncate, or restrict, the LM distribution to a
                                        nucleus set of the most promising sentences. Unfortunately, these heuristics are often ad hoc, based
                                        only on empirical observations. Furthermore, these ad hoc heuristics are often implemented greedily
                                        at every step of the generation, yielding a myopic rendition of the desired target distribution.
                                        Instinctively, one might be tempted to associate with high-quality human-like generations a high
                                        probability under the LM distribution. Paradoxically, that does not seem to be the case. In fact,
                                        empirical studies have shown (Holtzman et al., 2020b; Zhang et al., 2021; Meister et al., 2022) the
                                        quality of a generation to exhibits a peculiar relationship with regards to its probability under the
                                        LM distribution: there is indeed a positive correlation between the probability prescribed by a LM
                                        to a generation and its perceived quality up to an inflection point after which the perceived quality of
                                        the generation negatively correlates with its probability. This empirical observation offers a heuris-
                                        tic explanation for the phenomenon whereby lower probability generations returned by stochastic
                                        decoding approaches appear to outperform text generated using probability-maximizing approaches
                                        such as beam search (Lowerre, 1976; Reddy, 1977; Sutskever et al., 2014; Bahdanau et al., 2015).
                                        Information theory offers a principled account of why naive LM sampling fails. The negative log-
                                        probability of an event corresponds to its surprisal; under the asymptotic equipartition property
                                            1
                                                A limitation of softmax is that the resulting probability distribution always has full support.


                                                                                                    1
Preprint. Under Review.




                        4                                         4
                            "The cat sat on the mat."                 "The cat cat cat cat cat."
                        3                                         3


              Entropy
                        2                                         2

                        1                                         1

                        0                                         0
                                  5          10          15                  5          10         15

                                       (a)                                        (b)
                        4                                         4
                            "The cat s inside us and."                "The cat sat by the window."
                        3                                         3



                                                                                                        typical
                        2                                         2

                        1                                         1

                        0                                         0
                                  5          10          15                  5          10         15

                                       (c)                                        (d)

Figure 1: Entropy trajectories during text generation conditioned on "The cat" prompt.
Figure (a) shows a reference sample with entropy values staying in the “typical” band (gray region).
Figure (b) illustrates degeneration into repetition, where entropy collapses below the typical range.
Figure (c) shows gibberish, where entropy rises well above the typical range. Figure (d) demon-
strates E PIC decoding, which maintains entropy close to the typical band and yields coherent text.


(AEP) (Shannon, 1948), samples from a distribution are overwhelmingly likely to fall in its typical
set, with probability mass concentrated near the entropy. In language, typicality is intuitive: highly
predictable strings convey little information, while excessively surprising ones tend toward incoher-
ence. Stochastic autoregressive sampling from an LM is unbiased (Koller & Friedman, 2009)2 , and
so one might expect it to recover the true typical set. However, even a small divergence between
the LM and the true distribution can cause an unbounded mismatch in entropy, and hence in typical-
ity (Braverman et al., 2020). This distortion is further aggravated by mode collapse effects observed
in finetuning (O’Mahony et al., 2024), compounding the departure from natural language behavior.
In this work, we introduce E PIC, a hyperparameter-free decoding method that incorporates the en-
tropy of future trajectories into language model decoding. By correcting the entropy mismatch
between the learned model and the true distribution, E PIC overcomes the distortions of greedy step-
wise heuristics. Our approach combines lazy Gumbel-Max sampling (Hazan et al., 2013; Maddison
et al., 2014; Mussmann et al., 2017) with admissible entropy upper bounds to efficiently prune
candidate tokens, yielding an exact yet tractable algorithm for sampling from the entropy-aligned
next-token distribution. Since entropy is generally intractable to compute (Ahmed et al., 2022;
Valiant, 1979a;b), and naı̈ve Monte Carlo estimates suffer from high variance, we further introduce
a Rao–Blackwellized estimator that achieves substantially lower variance and improved sample effi-
ciency. We evaluate E PIC on AlpacaEval Creative Writing (Li et al.), GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021a),
and CNN/DailyMail (Nallapati et al., 2016), spanning creative writing, reasoning, and summariza-
tion. Across benchmarks, E PIC consistently outperforms top-p (Holtzman et al., 2020b), top-k (Fan
et al., 2018b), and min-p (Minh et al., 2025), producing diverse yet coherent generations.
Contributions In summary, we introduce E PIC, a decoding approach that calibrates, or aligns,
the entropy of the LM with that of the true language distribution. This is achieved by reweighting
the model’s next-token distribution with a quantity proportional to the entropy of the distribution
over future trajectories. Leveraging lazy Gumbel-Max sampling together with admissible entropy
upper bounds, E PIC efficiently prunes candidate tokens while retaining exactness. Monte Carlo es-
timation of entropy is prohibitively high-variance, so we develop a low-variance, sample-efficient,
Rao–Blackwellized entropy estimator. Our experiments across creative writing, reasoning, and sum-
marization benchmarks show E PIC consistently improves the coherence and diversity of generations.

   2
       Each step samples exactly from the model’s conditional distribution.


                                                              2
Preprint. Under Review.




2    R ELATED W ORKS




Sampling methods are crucial in controlling the quality and diversity of text generated by LLMs. The
choice of sampling strategy directly affects the balance between creativity and coherence, which is
critical in many generative tasks. In this section, we review existing approaches and their limitations.
Greedy Decoding and Beam Search Greedy decoding and beam search (Lowerre, 1976; Reddy,
1977; Sutskever et al., 2014; Bahdanau et al., 2015) are deterministic decoding strategies that select
the token with the highest probability at each step (Freitag & Al-Onaizan, 2017b). While these
methods ensure high-probability token selection, they often lead to repetitive and generic text due to
their lack of diversity. Beam search also incurs a significant runtime performance penalty.
Stochastic Sampling Methods Stochastic                   22
sampling methods aim to inject diversity into
the generated text by introducing randomness             20
in token selection. Temperature scaling adjusts
the distribution’s sharpness, balancing diver-           18
sity and coherence (Ackley et al., 1985); how-
ever, higher temperatures often lead to incoher-         16
ent and nonsensical results, limiting its applica-
bility. Top-k sampling selects from the top k            14

most probable tokens, ensuring that only high-
probability tokens are considered (Fan et al.,           12

2018a). While it offers a simple way to prevent                                                            Candidate
                                                         10                                                Filtered by nucleus
unlikely tokens from being sampled, it does not                                                            EPIC­selected
adapt dynamically to varying confidence lev-                                                               Nucleus cutoff
                                                                                                           EPIC entropy cutoff
                                                          8
els across different contexts. Top-p sampling,                0.0   2.5   5.0   7.5   10.0   12.5   15.0         17.5        20.0
also known as nucleus sampling, restricts the
token pool to those whose cumulative probabil-       Figure 2: Interaction of E PIC and truncation.
ity exceeds a predefined threshold p (Holtzman       Points denote candidate tokens, represented by
et al., 2020a). This method effectively balances     probability (→) and lookahead entropy (↑). Gray
quality and diversity by focusing on the “nu-        crosses denote truncated tokens. Tokens consid-
cleus” of high-probability tokens and dynam-         ered by truncation algorithms are denoted using
ically adapts to different contexts. However,        blue circles, while E PIC-candidate tokens are de-
at higher temperatures, top-p sampling can still     noted by violet pluses. The vertical dashed line
allow low-probability tokens into the sampling       denotes the probability cutoff, and the horizontal
pool, leading to incoherent outputs. This trade-     dashed line denotes the entropy cutoff. E PIC fa-
off between creativity and coherence at high         vors tokens that balance both probability and fu-
temperatures is a key limitation that min-p sam-     ture uncertainty, avoiding degenerate low-entropy
pling has aimed to address.                          repetitions or incoherent high-entropy expansions.
Entropy-Based Methods Recent work has introduced methods such as entropy-dependent trun-
cation (η-sampling) and mirostat sampling, which attempt to dynamically adjust the sampling pool
based on the entropy of the token distribution (Hewitt et al., 2022b; Basu et al., 2021). While
entropy- and uncertainty-based approaches show promise in improving text quality, the local heuris-
tics they rely on are often ad hoc, and their parameters tend to be unintuitive and difficult to tune.
Controllable Generation Approaches Our work bears resemblance to prior works that bias LM
samples towards satisfying syntactic (Ahmed et al., 2023; 2025b; Zhang et al., 2024; Geh et al.,
2024; Lundberg et al., 2024; Willard & Louf, 2023; van Krieken et al., 2025; Koo et al., 2024, inter
alia), or semantic constraints (Ahmed et al., 2025a; Yidou-Weng et al., 2025; Zhao et al., 2024;
Loula et al., 2025; Yang & Klein, 2021; Dathathri et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021; Beurer-Kellner et al.,
2024; Kumar et al., 2022; Qin et al., 2022; Du et al., 2024; Pynadath & Zhang, 2025, inter alia),
steering LM generations through adjusting next-token probabilities. Conversely, our setting differs
in that the constraint is distributional rather than token-level, or even sequence-level: we require that
samples be drawn from a restricted subset of the model’s support that satisfies certain distributional
properties, rather than merely biasing next-token probabilities toward syntactic or semantic criteria.


                                                     3
Preprint. Under Review.




3     T HE T YPICAL S ET PARADOX IN LM S

Autoregressive sampling from a language model produces sequences by drawing each token in turn
from the model’s conditional distribution. This ensures an unbiased generation process whereby
the sentences are sampled according to the model’s joint distribution. Importantly, such samples
overwhelmingly come from the typical set of the distribution, rather than from the single most
likely sequence. Roughly speaking, although there is a staggering amount of samples that might be
generated by a random process, the one actually produced is almost surely from a loosely defined
set of samples that all have approximately the same chance of being the one actually realized. And
despite individual samples whose probability dominates that of any single outcome in this set, the
vast number of realizations in the set all but guarantees the the outcome will come from such set.
To make this more intuitive, consider flipping a biased coin (p = 0.7), n times. The most likely
sequence is the one where all flips turn up heads, and has probability 0.7n . By contrast, the typical
set consists of sequences with roughly 0.7n heads and 0.3n tails. Each of these sequences           has
                                                                                       n
                                                                                          
probability roughly (0.54)n , which is smaller than 0.7n . However, there are about 0.7n    ≈ 2nH(0.7)
such sequences. As a result, nearly all of the probability mass lies in this exponentially large typical
set, not on the single mode sequence of all heads, even though the latter is individually more likely.
Concretely, for n = 20, the probability of the all heads sequences is a meager 0.08 compared to the
collective probability of flipping 13, 14, or 15 heads, which accounts for over 53% of the mass.
This raises a paradox: how can we assert that autoregressive sampling draws from the typical set,
yet simultaneously argue for a decoding method to bias generation toward that very same set?

3.1   T YPICAL S ET M ISALIGNMENT UNDER M ODEL M ISCALIBRATION

Concretely, let us denote an LM generation of arbitrary length T by y1:T := [y1 y2 . . . yT ], where yi
is the instantiation of random variable Yi and takes values from a fixed vocabulary V = {1, . . . , V }.
For a distribution p, we denote by H(p) its entropy, defined as H(p) = Ey1:T ∼p [− log p(y1:T )].
Additionally, for a distribution q, we denote by H(p, q) the cross-entropy between the distributions p
and q, defined as H(p, q) = −Ey1:T ∼p [log q(y1:T )], quantifying the average number of bits required
to encode samples from p using a code optimized for q. We can also re-write the cross-entropy as
H(p, q) = H(p) + DKL (p ∥ q), where DKL (p ∥ q) denotes the KL-divergence between p and q,
defined as DKL (p ∥ q) = Ey1:T ∼p [log p(y1:T ) − log q(y1:T )], and quantifies the expected extra
number of bits needed to encode samples from distribution p when using a code optimized for q.
Note that for a calibrated language model, we would hope that H(p, q) ≈ H(q) i.e., it’s uncertainty
regarding its own generations matches the uncertainty it exhibits on data drawn from the true distri-
bution. Furthermore, throughout the paper we will make the assumption that the model is accurate

                               DKL (p ∥ q) = H(p, q) − H(p) < T · ε,                                 (1)

i.e., we assume uncertainty due to imperfect knowledge of p can be made arbitrarily small, so that
the model’s uncertainty primarily reflects the (irreducible) aleatoric uncertainty intrinsic to the data.

Prologue. Next, we will show that even under the aforementioned assumption that the epistemic
uncertainty due to imperfect knowledge of the distribution can be made arbitrarily small, the mis-
match in the entropy between the model and the true underlying distribution can grow unboundedly.
We start by redefining our learned model q as q := (1 − ε) · q + ε · U, where U denotes the uniform
distribution over y1:T . This is to ensure that q(y1:T ) > 0 for all y1:T , as is standard in softmax-
based LMs. Now consider the bounded function f = − log q. If the learned model q is accurate, in
the sense of Equation (1), one might hope that the expected value of f under the true distribution p
would be close to the expected value under q, i.e., µp (f ) ≈ µq (f ). However, as we will show next,
the model q might be ε-accurate and still suffer from entropy miscalibration under long generations.
Lemma 3.1. [Entropy Miscalibration (Braverman et al., 2020)] Suppose the bound in Equation (1)
holds. The calibration error between the true distribution p and the learned model q is bounded as
                                          p
                     |H(p, q) − H(q)| ≤ 2ε(T + 1)(T log M + log(1/ε)).                          (2)


                                                   4
Preprint. Under Review.




The last inequality is the entropy miscalibration bound, and it clearly shows that, in the worst case,
even a small cross entropy may provide little control over the generations under the learned model.
In fact, for ε = O( T1 ), which we may hope is an accurate model, the bound turns out to be vacuous.

3.2   E NTROPY C ALIBRATION VIA E NTROPY-A LIGNED D ECODING

To address the aforementioned entropy miscalibration, we propose explicitly calibrating the model
distribution to the entropy functional, the idea being to define a family of reweighted distributions
                         qt,α (yt | y<t ) ∝ qt (yt | y<t ) exp (−α Ht:t+k (yt )) , 3                       (3)
where Ht:t+k (yt ) := EYt+1:t+k ∼q(·|y≤t )) [H(Yt+1:t+k | y≤t )] denotes the k-step lookahead en-
tropy associated with prefix y<t , and α is a learnable calibration parameter. Intuitively, the entropy-
aligned distribution in Equation (3) biases the sampling process according to the estimated looka-
head entropy of a prefix: sequences expected to devolve into low-entropy repetitions or high-entropy
gibberish are down weighted, whereas those expected to maintain a calibrated entropy are amplified.
We now show that the entropy-aligned distribution in Equation (3) is such that the model’s k-step
lookahead entropy is calibrated to the true distribution without degrading the model’s accuracy. Fur-
thermore, α∗ is the unique minimizer of H(p, qα ), and can be efficiently computed using bisection.
Lemma 3.2. [Entropy-Aligned Decoding Lowers CE and Calibrates Entropy] Let p be the true
distribution, and q be the learned model. For horizon k, prefix y<t , and candidate token yt , let
                        Ht:t+k (yt ) := EYt+1:t+k ∼q(·|y≤t ) [H(Yt+1:t+k | y≤t )].                         (4)
Define the entropy-aligned distribution qt,α (yt | y<t ) as
                          qt,α (yt | y<t ) ∝ qt (yt | y<t ) exp (−α Ht:t+k (yt )) .                        (5)
Let
                                      T
                                      X
                              µD :=         Ey<t∼p,yt ∼D(·|y<t ) [Ht:t+k (yt )] .                          (6)
                                      t=1
Then there exists α∗ ∈ R such that

      1. α∗ = argminα H(p, qα ) [α∗ minimizes CE of the true and entropy-aligned distributions]
      2. µqα∗ = µp [The model’s entropy is calibrated to the true entropy]
      3. H(p, qα∗ ) ≤ H(p, q) [Entropy Aligned decoding does not worsen accuracy]

Lemma 3.2 suggests a simple algorithm. Find the α∗ that minimizes the cross entropy on a held-out
set, or a larger model’s generations prompted on the target task. Then, at every timestep, for ev-
ery token, estimate the lookahead entropy, reweigh the logits by the estimated lookahead entropies,
renormalize and sample. The reader might observe that such a simple algorithm is not a very prac-
tical one: it requires that we perform O(|V|) forward passes of the LM at every time step. In what
follows, we show how we can compute the cross-entropy and draw exact samples from the entropy-
aligned distribution while evaluating the lookahead entropy for only a handful of candidate tokens.

4     E NTROPY-AWARE L AZY G UMBEL -M AX FOR S UBLINEAR S AMPLING
                                                                                    |V|
Background: the Gumbel-Max trick. For any given timestep, let {ỹi }i=1 denote the log unnor-
malized scores, or logits, parameterizing the LM’s next-token distribution. One means of sampling
from the above distribution is to add i.i.d Gumbel noise to each of the logits and take the argmax:
                                                             !
                                                        yi
                                                       e
         y ⋆ = argmax{ỹi + Gi } ∼ Categorical P yj , where Gi ∼ Gumbel(0, 1).                    (7)
                   i                                   je

The resulting sample y is precisely distributed according to the normalized target distribution (Hazan
et al., 2013; Maddison et al., 2014). We will call ỹi + Gi the perturbed scores or perturbed logits.
   3
     This recovers global entropy calibration, i.e., qα (y) ∝ eα−log p(y) · p(y) = p(y)1+α reducing to global
temperature scaling, decomposing token-wise as pt,α (yt | y<t ) ∝ pt (yt | y<t )1+α · Ey>t [p(y>t | y<t )1+α ].


                                                       5
Preprint. Under Review.




Lazy (sublinear) Gumbel-Max. A naive application of Gumbel-Max samples all |V| Gumbels. A
key observation of lazy Gumbel-Max (Mussmann et al., 2017) is that a maximizer of the perturbed
logits either posses a large ỹi , or realizes an unusually large Gi . Consequently, we can avoid
instantiating all Gumbels by (a) selecting the top-k scores S = TopK({ỹi }, k) and instantiating their
Gumbels, and (b) lazily drawing only Gumbels exceeding the gap to the front-runner in the tail.4

Entropy-Aware Lazy Gumbel-Max.                    Applying Gumbel-Max to Equation (3) reduces to taking
                                  y ⋆ = argmax {ỹi + Gi − α · Ht:t+k (yi )} ,                                        (8)
                                            i∈V

requiring we compute the lookahead entropy Ht:t+k (yi ) for each token yi ∈ V, which is infeasible.

Bounding Ht:t+k (·) for lazy selection. Taking inspiration from lazy Gumbel-Max, we can bound
Ht:t+k (·), and therefore the Entropy-Aligned Perturbed Logits (EARL) in Equation (8). We can then
consider only the candidates likely to overtake the front-runner. More precisely, for a token yi ,
                              ỹi + Gi − α · HUt (k) ≤ si ≤ ỹi + Gi − α · HLt (k),                                   (9)
we can loosely bound the entropy from                          12                                  Self-entropy H(q)
                                                                                                   Cross-entropy H(p,q)
                                                                                                   Calibration-aware bound
below by 0 and from above by T ·log |V|,        10                                                 log |V|

the theoretical minimum and maximum,             8
respectively, such that the EARL score
                                                     Entropy
                                                 6
of every token yi is admissibly bounded.
We can, however, further tighten the             4

above bounds by making use of the re-            2
sult in Lemma 3.1 in tandem with the
                                                 0
model error to arrive at much tighter                  20     40       60                 80   100             120
                                                                         Token position t
bounds (see Figure 3). We will now
show that in light of these bounds, we Figure 3: Tighter Entropy Bounds. Making use of
only need a handful of new entropy eval- Lemma 3.1 in tandem with the empirical model error
uations to ascertain the actual winner.      lends to much tighter entropy bounds than theoretical.
                                                                                             |V|
Lemma 4.1. [Expected Entropy Evaluations under Bounded Correction] Let {ỹi }i=1 denote the log
unnormalized scores, or logits, parameterizing the LM’s next-token distribution. Let {Gi } denote
i.i.d standard Gumbel random variables. let zi denote the centered perturbed-logits, zi = (li +gi )−
log j elj . Assume we have an Ĥi such that |Ht:t+k (yi ) − Ĥi | ≤ Ct . Let w := |α| · Ct . Define
     P

plug-in scores ui := zi − αĤi , then it is the case that every true score si lies in the interval si ∈
[ui − w, ui + w]. and we have that the expected number of entropy evaluations is E [Neval ] = e2w .

Instantiating the above lemma with an average per-step error of ε = 10−3 , and α = 0.2, the maxi-
mum we have encountered across domains in our experiments, yields only 4 expected evaluations.
Entropy-Aligned Decoding (E PIC) We are now ready to give a full treatment of our E PIC proce-
dure. To reiterate, our goal is to sample the next token using Gumbel-max from the entropy-tilted
next-token distribution given in Equation (8), while avoiding an expensive lookahead over the full
vocabulary. To that end, we start by perturbing the next-token logits with Gumbel noise on Algo-
rithm 1. Next, on Algorithm 1-Algorithm 1 candidates that are |α| · (HUt (k) − HLt (k)) apart from
frontrunner are eliminated from the race: such candidates can’t overtake the frontrunner even
if the frontrunner only attains the lower bound while the candidates attain the upper bound. If
a single candidate remains, it is declared a winner, terminating our procedure (Algorithm 1). Oth-
erwise, we proceed by tightening our bounds (Algorithm 1-Algorithm 1), computing the one-step
lookahead entropy and upper-bounding the remaining EARL scores by adding the most favorable
value consistent with the bounds, given by max{−α · HUt (k − 1), −α · HLt (k − 1)} on Algorithm 1.
This retains an admissible upper bound that accounts for the sign of α.5 Finally, candidates are exam-
ined block-wise (Algorithm 1), in descending order of their upperbounded EARL scores, computing
the lookahead entropies only as needed on a per-block basis. Evaluation stops once a candidate’s
   4
     Sample the expected number of Gumbels m exceeding the gap. Then, uniformly sample a subset of size m
from the set |V| \ S. Assign each element in the subset a Gumbel drawn conditionally greater than the bound.
   5
     Depending on the domain, α can assume either positive or negative values. Positive α biases decoding
towards low-entropy, predictable continuations, while negative α favors high-entropy, diverse continuations.


                                                                    6
     Preprint. Under Review.




     Algorithm 1: Entropy-Aligned Decoding Logits Processor
     Input: Sequence input ids, next-token scores, calibration parameter α, and lookahead k
     Output: A token yi sampled from the entropy-aligned pα (Yi |y<i ) ∝ p(Yi |y<i ) · e−α·H(Yi:i+k )
   /* Get non-zero candidate tokens and corresponding scores                                         */
 1 candidates = scores.isfinite().nonzero(as tuple = True);
 2 scores = scores[scores.isfinite()];

     /* Perturb the logits using Gumbel noise                                                        */
 3   gumbel logits = − log(− log(rand like(scores))) + scores;
   /* Eliminate candidates separated by α × HUt from frontrunner as they can’t win even if the
      frontrunner only attains the lowerbound entropy HLt while they attain the upperbound HUt */
 4 frontrunner = max(gumbel logits);
                                                       U      L
 5 mask = gumbel logits > frontrunner − |α| · (Ht (k) − Ht (k));
 6 gumbel logits, candidates = gumbel logits[mask], candidates[mask];

   /* Only a single candidate left after pruning                                                     */
 7 if len(candidates) == 0 then
 8     return candidates[0]

   /* Tighten bounds by computing step entropy corresponding to 1-step lookahead entropy */
 9 lookaheads = concat(input ids, candidates);
10 step entropy = Categorical(model(lookaheads)).entropy();
                                                                  U               L
11 upb scores = gumbel logits − α · step entropy + max{−α · Ht (k − 1), −α · Ht (k − 1)};
12 sorted scores, sorted candidates = sort(upb scores, candidates);

   /* Uncover entropy-weighted scores for the top candidates                       */
13 for each block B in sorted candidates do
14     lookaheads = concat(input ids, B);
15     threshold = sorted scores[B + 1] if B + 1 < len(sorted scores) else − ∞;
16     horizn = GetRolloutHorizn(sorted scores[B], step entropy[B], α, k, threshold);
17     lookahead entropies = rb lookahead entropy(model, lookaheads, horizn);
18     candidate scores = sorted scores[B] + α · lookahead entropies;
19     if max(candidate scores) > threshold then
20         return sorted candidates[argmax(candidate scores)]



     EARL score exceeds the next-best upperbounded EARL score, at which point it is guaranteed to be
     optimal. We adaptively compute the lookahead horizon6 (Algorithm 1) by estimating the minimum
     number of rollout steps required for a candidate’s optimistic score to exceed the current threshold.
     The rollout budget is set to the smallest horizon for which the remaining entropy term could close
     the observed score gap, capped by a global maximum. This strategy allocates lookahead compu-
     tations only where it can affect the decision, yielding sizable efficiency gains in practice. Our full
     E PIC procedure is given in Algorithm 1.
     Correctness Note that our E PIC procedure detailed above maintains for each candidate index i
     bounds LBi ≤ si ≤ UBi with LBi non-decreasing and UBi non-increasing as bounds are refined.
     Furthermore, the stopping condition guarantees the returned y ⋆ satisfies sy⋆ ≥ UBj for all j ̸= y ⋆ ,
     and that no unvisited tail index j can have Ht:t+k (yi ) large enough to make sj ≥ sy⋆ . Therefore the
     algorithm returns argmaxi si , i.e., an exact sample from Equation (8), and therefore, Equation (3).


     5       E XPERIMENTS

     In this section, we explore the efficacy of our E PIC decoding strategy. First off, we qualitatively
     ascertain that, using a humble lookahead horizon of merely k = 4, E PIC is able to track the tar-
     get entropy achieving almost perfect calibration. Next, we show that such qualitative merits are
         6
             We give the definition for the GetRolloutHorizn function in the appendix.


                                                            7
Preprint. Under Review.




                          EPIC                                             temperature=1.0                                      top-p=0.9                                              top-p=0.95
 4.0                                                       4.0                                                 4.0                                                4.0
                                 Calibration error: 0.11                             Calibration error: 0.84                            Calibration error: 1.00                                Calibration error: 0.34
 3.5                                                       3.5                                                 3.5                                                3.5

 3.0                                                       3.0                                                 3.0                                                3.0

 2.5                                                       2.5                                                 2.5                                                2.5

 2.0                                                       2.0                                                 2.0                                                2.0

 1.5                                                       1.5                                                 1.5                                                1.5

 1.0                                                       1.0                                                 1.0                                                1.0

                     top-k=50                                                top-k=100                                    min-p=0.05 w/ temp=1.5                                min-p=0.2 w/ temp 1.5
 4.0                                                       4.0                                                 4.0                                                4.0
                                 Calibration error: 1.08                             Calibration error: 0.57                            Calibration error: 0.49                                Calibration error: 1.70
 3.5                                                       3.5                                                 3.5                                                3.5

 3.0                                                       3.0                                                 3.0                                                3.0

                                                                                                                                                                            Mean H t(p,q)
 2.5                                                       2.5                                                 2.5                                                2.5
                                                                                                                                                                            Mean entropy

 2.0                                                       2.0                                                 2.0                                                2.0

 1.5                                                       1.5                                                 1.5                                                1.5

 1.0                                                       1.0                                                 1.0                                                1.0
       0      100   200      300         400        500          0   100    200     300      400        500          0   100   200    300       400        500          0    100      200     300      400        500




Figure 4: Calibration of Decoding Methods to Model Cross-Entropy. We plot the mean condi-
tional entropy of generated sequences as a function of the reference cross-entropy, along with the
resulting calibration error for each decoding strategy. E PIC closely tracks the target cross-entropy
across the full range, yielding substantially lower calibration error and a markedly smoother trajec-
tory than competing methods. In contrast, standard heuristics such as top-p, top-k, and min-p exhibit
systematic bias and high variance, leading to persistent miscalibration despite aggressive tuning.


coupled with meaningful improvements in generation quality, as measured both using an LM- AS -
JUDGE (Zheng et al., 2023) as well as automatic quality and diversity metrics. More concretely,
we evaluate E PIC on three language generation tasks: abstractive summarization, create story gen-
eration, and mathematical reasoning. Our hope in curating such a diverse set of benchmarks is to
establish E PIC’s ability to preserve the fidelity of the articles to be summarized, generate diverse
yet coherent stores in response to creative prompts, and improve the reasoning abilities of LMs. We
assess E PIC’s performance with respect to several other stochastic decoding strategies: nucleus sam-
pling, top-k sampling, typical decoding, and temperature sampling.7 For writing tasks, we report the
win-rate (WR), the length-controlled win-rate (LC-WR). Additionally, for abstractive summariza-
tion we report BERTS CORE -F1 (Zhang et al., 2020) to measure semantic coverage, and for creative
writing we report S ELF -BLEU (Montahaei et al., 2019) to measure the generation lexical diversity.
Lastly, for mathematical reasoning we report the accuracy of predicting the correct answer.

5.1          C ALIBRATION TO C ROSS -E NTROPY

We evaluate how well different decoding approaches preserve the entropy profile of the base model
by measuring their calibration to cross-entropy. For each method, we generate sequences across a
range of operating points and compute the mean entropy rate of the resulting samples. We then com-
pare this quantity to the corresponding reference cross-entropy, reporting both the full trajectory and
an aggregate calibration error. As shown in Figure 4, E PIC closely tracks the target cross-entropy
across the entire range. Its entropy trajectory is smooth and stable, resulting in substantially lower
calibration error than all competing approaches. In contrast, standard decoding heuristics such as
top-p, top-k, and min-p exhibit systematic bias away from the target entropy, leading to persistent
miscalibration even when their hyperparameters are tuned. This behavior highlights a key distinc-
tion between E PIC and prior decoding methods: While conventional approaches adjust next-token
probabilities locally, E PIC constrains the induced sequence-level distribution. As a result, E PIC
maintains global entropy alignment, yielding smoother entropy dynamics and improved calibration.

5.2          Q UANTITATIVE E XPERIMENTS

Implementation and Data We use the HuggingFace framework (Wolf et al., 2020), employing
their implementations of top-p, top-k, min-p, temperature sampling, and typical decoding. For
story generation, we evaluate on the W RITING P ROMPTS dataset (Fan et al., 2018a). For abstrac-
tive summarization, we evalaute on the CNN/DAILY M AIL dataset (Nallapati et al., 2016). In a
       7
           Temperature sampling is defined as ancestral sampling after renormalization with an annealing term τ


                                                                                                               8
Preprint. Under Review.




Table 1: Comparison of the Different Decoding Approaches on the W RITING P ROMPTS and
CNN/DAILY M AIL Datasets. The win rate (WR) and length-controlled win rate are computed
using ChatGPT-5, against min-p, and are averaged across 10 seeds. BLEU denotes the S ELF -
BLEU score, measuring the diversity of each generation against the remaining samples. F1 denotes
the BERTS CORE -F1 S CORE, capturing how well the generated output preserves the source content.

                                       W RITING P ROMPTS                CNN/DAILY M AIL
    Decoding Approach           WR (↑)    LC - WR (↑)   BLEU (↓) WR (↑) LC - WR (↑) F1 (↑)
    Top-k (k = 50)               54%         54%          1.84       49%        49%       0.16
    Top-p (p = 0.9)              51%         51%          1.92       52%        52%       0.18
    Temperature (τ = 1.5)         0%          0%          0.69        2%         2%       −0.24
    Typical (τ = 0.95)           43%         43%          1.80       49%        49%       0.17
    Min-p (p = 0.2, τ = 1.5)       −           −          2.12         −          −        0.17
    E PIC (ours)                 58%        58%           1.55       56%        55%        0.19


preliminary hyperparameter sweep we determine the optimal hyperparameter values on a small vali-
dation set using the LM- AS - JUDGE metric. For mathematical reasoning, we evaluate on the GSM8K
dataset (Cobbe et al., 2021b). The value of α in E PIC is determined using the procedure outlined
in Section B.1. All reported metrics are computed on the respective test sets, or subsets thereof.

E VALUATION METRICS
For writing tasks, we evaluate generation quality using LM- AS - JUDGE (Zheng et al., 2023). We
fix a reference decoding strategy—the best-performing variant of min-p—and compare all other
methods against it in pairwise evaluations. For each prompt, the LM judge is presented with a pair
of generations, one from the reference method and the other from the candidate method. The LM
is then asked to ascertain whether the reference wins, the candidate wins, or there was a tie. All
evaluations are conducted anonymously, with generations presented in randomized order to avoid
positional or method-specific bias. We repeat this procedure across 10 random seeds using the same
underlying set of prompts and generations, reporting the win rate (WR) and the length-controlled
win rate (LC - WR), thereby controlling for generation length, in an effort to eliminate length bias.
Furthermore, to assess lexical diversity in creative writing, we report S ELF -BLEU (Montahaei et al.,
2019) scores, where lower values indicate greater diversity among generated outputs. S ELF -BLEU
measures the average BLEU score of each generation against the remaining samples, and thus cap-
tures mode collapse or excessive similarity across generations. We treat S ELF -BLEU as a com-
plementary diagnostic rather than a standalone quality metric seeing as diversity taken alone is not
indicative of generation quality. Furthermore, we report BERTS CORE -F1 S CORE (Zhang et al.,
2020) on abstractive summarization to measure semantic coverage with respect to the source article.
R ESULTS
                                                      Table 2: Decoding approaches evaluated on
We first evaluate E PIC on open-ended text genera-
                                                      a random subset of the GSM8k dataset.
tion tasks, including creative writing on the W RIT-
ING P ROMPTS dataset and abstractive summariza-
tion on CNN/DAILY M AIL. Our results are shown          Decoding Method           Accuracy (↑)
in Table 1. Across both tasks, E PIC consistently       Greedy                       79.27 %
outperforms competing decoding strategies when          Top-k (k = 50)               71.95 %
evaluated using an LM- AS - JUDGE. On W RITING -        Top-k (k = 100)              68.29 %
P ROMPTS, E PIC achieves the highest preference         Top-p (p = 0.9)              74.39 %
win-rate among all methods, substantially exceed-       Top-p (p = 0.95)             74.39 %
ing standard decoding heuristics such as top-p, top-    Typical (τ = 0.2)            73.17 %
k, and min-p. Importantly, these gains persist un-      Typical (τ = 0.95)           74.39%
der length-controlled evaluation, indicating that im-   min-p (p = 0.05, τ = 1.5)    60.98%
provements are not driven by verbosity but reflect      min-p (p = 0.2, τ = 1.5)     75.61%
higher perceived quality of the generated stories.
                                                        E PIC (ours)                85.37%
These preference-based results are further corrobo-


                                                   9
Preprint. Under Review.




rated by diversity metrics. E PIC attains a markedly lower Self-BLEU score than almost all baseline
methods, in fact matching the S ELF -BLEU achieved by the human reference generations. This sug-
gests that E PIC produces a more diverse set of outputs, avoiding the mode collapse and repetitive
patterns commonly observed in entropy-reducing decoding strategies. Note that while the tem-
perature baseline achieves a much lower S ELF -BLEU, indicative of higher diversity, it achieves
a 0% win-rate compared to Min-p. In fact, upon inspecting the outputs of the temperature base-
lines, generations almost always devolved into incoherent gibberish. This goes to the point we
made earlier: measures of diversity are only meaningful when considered in tandem with mea-
sures of generation quality. On CNN/DAILY M AIL, E PIC again achieves the highest preference
win-rate under the LM- AS - JUDGE evaluation. In addition, E PIC attains the best BERTS CORE -F1
SCORE among the evaluated methods, indicating improved semantic coverage of the source arti-
cles. While the absolute differences in F1 are modest, they are consistent across runs and align with
the preference-based judgments, suggesting that E PIC better preserves salient content without over-
constraining generation. We note that we make use of the official BERTS CORE implementation8 ,
with rescale with baseline = True. Consequently, the BERTScore is normalized relative to
the expected similarity between unrelated sentences for the underlying encoder. As a result, scores
are centered around zero, with negative values indicating worse-than-chance semantic alignment.
While this leads to lower absolute values, it yields a calibrated metric that better reflects seman-
tic fidelity and avoids inflated scores due to embedding bias. We also evaluate E PIC on GSM8K,
shown in Table 2, to assess its performance on structured mathematical reasoning tasks. E PIC out-
performs the strongest baseline approach by an almost 5% absolute accuracy, demonstrating that its
advantages extend beyond open-ended generation to settings requiring precise multi-step reasoning.

C ONCLUSION
We introduced E PIC, an entropy-aware decoding approach for LMs. E PIC steers language model
generations by explicitly aligning the sampling distribution to a target entropy profile, capturing the
irreducible (aleatoric) uncertainty of plausible continuations. We show that, unlike existing decoding
baselines, E PIC yields sampling distributions that are empirically well-aligned with the entropy of
the underlying data distribution. Across creative writing and summarization tasks, E PIC consistently
improves LM- AS - JUDGE preference win-rates over widely used decoding strategies: top-k, top-p,
min-p typical decoding, and temperature scaling. Importantly, these gains persist under length-
controlled evaluation, indicating that E PIC ’s improvements are not driven by superficial verbosity
effects but by genuinely higher-quality generations. These preference gains are complemented by
automatic metrics, which show that E PIC produces more diverse generations in creative settings and
more faithful summaries in summarization tasks. We further evaluate E PIC on mathematical reason-
ing, where it outperforms considered baselines. Through E NTROPY-AWARE L AZY G UMBEL -M AX,
E PIC manages to be exact for any given horizon k, while also being efficient and lightweight.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported in part by the DARPA ANSR program FA8750-23-2-0004 as well as an NSF
CAREER award number IIS-2046873. The conclusions presented within this research paper are of
the authors and do not reflect the official policy or position of DARPA or the U.S. Government.

R EFERENCES
David H. Ackley, Geoffrey E. Hinton, and Terrence J. Sejnowski. A learning algorithm for boltz-
  mann machines. Cognitive Science, 9(1):147–169, 1985. doi: 10.1016/S0364-0213(85)80012-4.
Kareem Ahmed, Eric Wang, Kai-Wei Chang, and Guy Van den Broeck. Neuro-symbolic entropy
  regularization. In The 38th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2022.
Kareem Ahmed, Kai-Wei Chang, and Guy Van den Broeck. A pseudo-semantic loss for autore-
  gressive models with logical constraints. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2023.
Kareem Ahmed, Catarina G. Belém, Padhraic Smyth, and Sameer Singh. Semantic probabilistic
  control of language models. CoRR, abs/2505.01954, 2025a.
   8
       https://github.com/Tiiiger/bert_score


                                                  10
Preprint. Under Review.




Kareem Ahmed, Kai-Wei Chang, and Guy Van den Broeck. Controllable generation via locally
  constrained resampling. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2025b.
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural machine translation by jointly
  learning to align and translate. ICLR, 2015.
Rohan Basu, Rishav Saha, and Lav R. Varshney. Mirostat: A neural text decoding algorithm that
  directly controls perplexity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.14966, 2021.
Luca Beurer-Kellner, Marc Fischer, and Martin Vechev. Guiding llms the right way: fast, non-
  invasive constrained generation. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine
  Learning, 2024.
Mark Braverman, Xinyi Chen, Sham Kakade, Karthik Narasimhan, Cyril Zhang, and Yi Zhang. Cal-
 ibration, entropy rates, and memory in language models. In Proceedings of the 37th International
 Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mo Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias
  Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman.
  Training verifiers to solve math word problems. ArXiv, abs/2110.14168, 2021a.
Kristian Cobbe, Vinay U. Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Jacky Shi, Dawn Song, Serge Egelman,
  and John Schulman. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. In Proceedings of the 9th
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021b.
Sumanth Dathathri, Andrea Madotto, Janice Lan, Jane Hung, Eric Frank, Piero Molino, Jason Yosin-
  ski, and Rosanne Liu. Plug and play language models: A simple approach to controlled text
  generation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Li Du, Afra Amini, Lucas Torroba Hennigen, Xinyan Velocity Yu, Holden Lee, Jason Eisner, and
  Ryan Cotterell. Principled gradient-based MCMC for conditional sampling of text. In Proceed-
  ings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Angela Fan, Mike Lewis, and Yann Dauphin. Hierarchical neural story generation. In Proceedings
  of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pp. 889–898.
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 2018a. doi: 10.18653/v1/P18-1082.
Angela Fan, Mike Lewis, and Yann Dauphin. Hierarchical neural story generation. In Proceedings
  of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
  Papers), 2018b.
Markus Freitag and Yaser Al-Onaizan. Beam search strategies for neural machine translation. In
 Proceedings of the First Workshop on Neural Machine Translation, August 2017a.
Markus Freitag and Yaser Al-Onaizan. Beam search strategies for neural machine translation. In
 Proceedings of the First Workshop on Neural Machine Translation, pp. 56–60. Association for
 Computational Linguistics, 2017b. doi: 10.18653/v1/W17-3207.
Renato Lui Geh, Honghua Zhang, Kareem Ahmed, Benjie Wang, and Guy Van den Broeck. Where
  is the signal in tokenization space? In Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing 2024,
  2024.
Tamir Hazan, Subhransu Maji, and Tommi Jaakkola. On sampling from the gibbs distribution with
  random maximum a-posteriori perturbations. In NIPS, 2013.
John Hewitt, Christopher Manning, and Percy Liang. Truncation sampling as language model
  desmoothing. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2022,
  2022a.
John Hewitt, Danqi Zhao, and Christopher D. Manning. Truncation sampling as language model
  desmoothing. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing (EMNLP), pp. 10839–10853. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2022b. doi:
  10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.746.


                                               11
Preprint. Under Review.




Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural text
  degeneration. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2020a.
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural text
  degeneration. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020b.
Daphne Koller and Nir Friedman. Probabilistic graphical models: principles and techniques. MIT
  press, 2009.
Terry Koo, Frederick Liu, and Luheng He. Automata-based constraints for language model decod-
  ing, 2024.
Sachin Kumar, Biswajit Paria, and Yulia Tsvetkov. Gradient-based constrained sampling from lan-
  guage models. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, 2022.
Xuechen Li, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Alpacaeval: An automatic evaluator of instruction-following
  models.
Alisa Liu, Maarten Sap, Ximing Lu, Swabha Swayamdipta, Chandra Bhagavatula, Noah A. Smith,
  and Yejin Choi. DExperts: Decoding-time controlled text generation with experts and anti-
  experts. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1:
  Long Papers), 2021.
João Loula, Benjamin LeBrun, Li Du, Ben Lipkin, Clemente Pasti, Gabriel Grand, Tianyu Liu,
   Yahya Emara, Marjorie Freedman, Jason Eisner, Ryan Cotterell, Vikash Mansinghka, Alexan-
   der K. Lew, Tim Vieira, and Timothy J. O’Donnell. Syntactic and semantic control of large lan-
   guage models via sequential monte carlo. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning
   Representations, 2025.
Bruce T. Lowerre. The HARPY Speech Recognition System. PhD thesis, Carnegie Mellon University,
  Pittsburgh, PA, USA, April 1976.
Scott Lundberg, Marco Ribeiro, Richard Edgar, and Harsha-Nori. Guidance: a guidance language
  for controlling large language models., 2024.
Chris J. Maddison, Daniel Tarlow, and Tom Minka. A* sampling. In NIPS, 2014.
Clara Meister, Gian Wiher, Tiago Pimentel, and Ryan Cotterell. On the probability–quality para-
  dox in language generation. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), 2022.
Clara Meister, Tiago Pimentel, Gian Wiher, and Ryan Cotterell. Locally typical sampling. Transac-
  tions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2023.
Nguyen Nhat Minh, Andrew Baker, Clement Neo, Allen G Roush, Andreas Kirsch, and Ravid
  Shwartz-Ziv. Turning up the heat: Min-p sampling for creative and coherent LLM outputs. In
  The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
Ehsan Montahaei, Danial Alihosseini, and Mahdieh Soleymani Baghshah. Jointly measuring di-
  versity and quality in text generation models. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Methods for
  Optimizing and Evaluating Neural Language Generation, pp. 90–98. Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics, 2019.
Stephen Mussmann, Daniel Lévy, and Stefano Ermon. Fast amortized inference and learning in
  log-linear models with randomly perturbed nearest neighbor search. 2017.
Ramesh Nallapati, Bowen Zhou, Cicero dos Santos, Caglar Gulçehre, and Bing Xiang. Abstractive
  text summarization using sequence-to-sequence RNNs and beyond. In Proceedings of The 20th
  SIGNLL Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning, 2016.


                                               12
Preprint. Under Review.




Laura O’Mahony, Leo Grinsztajn, Hailey Schoelkopf, and Stella Biderman. Attributing mode col-
  lapse in the fine-tuning of large language models. In ICLR 2024 Workshop on Mathematical and
  Empirical Understanding of Foundation Models, 2024.
Patrick Pynadath and Ruqi Zhang. Controlled LLM decoding via discrete auto-regressive biasing.
  In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
Lianhui Qin, Sean Welleck, Daniel Khashabi, and Yejin Choi. COLD decoding: Energy-based con-
  strained text generation with langevin dynamics. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2022.
D. Raj Reddy. Speech recognition by machine: A review. Proceedings of the IEEE, 65(5):501–531,
  1977. doi: 10.1109/PROC.1977.10529.
Claude Elwood Shannon. A mathematical theory of communication. The Bell System Technical
  Journal, 27, 1948.
Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V. Le. Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks.
   In Z. Ghahramani, M. Welling, C. Cortes, N. D. Lawrence, and K. Q. Weinberger (eds.), Advances
   in Neural Information Processing Systems 27 (NIPS 2014), pp. 3104–3112, 2014.
Leslie G. Valiant. The complexity of enumeration and reliability problems. SIAM Journal on Com-
  puting, 1979a.
L.G. Valiant. The complexity of computing the permanent. Theoretical Computer Science, 1979b.
Emile van Krieken, Pasquale Minervini, Edoardo Ponti, and Antonio Vergari. Neurosymbolic dif-
  fusion models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2025.
Brandon T. Willard and Rémi Louf. Efficient guided generation for large language models. ArXiv,
  abs/2307.09702, 2023.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick
  von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger,
  Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M. Rush. Transformers: State-of-the-art natural
  language processing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing: System Demonstrations. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020.
Kevin Yang and Dan Klein. FUDGE: Controlled text generation with future discriminators. In
  Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, 2021.
Gwen Yidou-Weng, Benjie Wang, and Guy Van den Broeck. Trace back from the future: A prob-
 abilistic reasoning approach to controllable language generation. In Proceedings of the 42nd
 International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2025.
Honghua Zhang, Po-Nien Kung, , Masahiro Yoshida, Nanyun Peng, and Guy Van den Broeck.
  Adaptable logical control for large language models. In NeurIPS, 2024.
Hugh Zhang, Daniel Duckworth, Daphne Ippolito, and Arvind Neelakantan. Trading off diversity
  and quality in natural language generation. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Human Evaluation
  of NLP Systems (HumEval), 2021.
Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q. Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. Bertscore: Evalu-
  ating text generation with bert. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
  2020.
Stephen Zhao, Rob Brekelmans, Alireza Makhzani, and Roger Grosse. Probabilistic inference in
  language models via twisted sequential monte carlo. In Proceedings of the 41st International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Soheil Feizi Zhuang, Yuxin Wu, Yu Zhuang, Zi Lin,
  Zhuohan Li, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-
  bench and chatbot arena. 2023.


                                               13
Preprint. Under Review.




A      P ROOFS
Lemma 3.1. [Entropy Miscalibration (Braverman et al., 2020)] Suppose the bound in Equation (1)
holds. The calibration error between the true distribution p and the learned model q is bounded as
                                          p
                     |H(p, q) − H(q)| ≤ 2ε(T + 1)(T log M + log(1/ε)).                          (2)

Proof. Pinsker’s Inequality tells us that for any bounded function f with ∥f ∥∞ < B, we have that
                                                       p
                                |Ep [f ] − Eq [f ]| ≤ B 2DKL (p ∥ q).                         (10)
We will start by deriving a bound on DKL (p ∥ q), followed by deriving a bound on B.
Recall our re-definition of q in Section 3.1 as a mixture, where, explicating the dependence on ε
                    q (ε) (y1:T ) = (1 − ε) · q(y1:T ) + ε · M −T ≥ (1 − ε) · q(y1:T ),                        (11)
and therefore,
                                        1                1
                                               ≤                    .                                          (12)
                                 q (ε) (y1:T )   (1 − ε) · q(y1:T )
Taking the logarithm, which is a monotonically increasing function, we get
                                               1                        1
                                 log                     ≤ log                                                 (13)
                                         q (ε) (y1:T )         (1 − ε) · q(y1:T )
                                                                  1               1
                                                         = log           + log      .                          (14)
                                                               q(y1:T )        1−ε
              1
Relaxing log 1−ε using a simple bound valid for ε ∈ (0, 12 ], we have that
                                                 1
                                          log       = − log(1 − ε) ≤ 2ε,                                       (15)
                                                1−ε
and therefore,
                                                      1               1
                                         log                 ≤ log          + 2ε.                              (16)
                                               q (ε) (y1:T )       q(y1:T )
Expanding the expression for the KL-divergence and substituting the bound in Equation (16)
                                  p                       1                 1           1           1
    DKL (p ∥ q (ε) ) = Ep [log           ] = Ep [log             ] − Ep [log ] = Ep [log ] − Ep [log ] + 2ε.   (17)
                                 q (ε)                   q (ε)              p           q           p
Substituting the bound in Equation (1), we get our bound on the KL-divergence term,

                                               DKL (p ∥ q (ε) ) ≤ T ε + 2ε.                                    (18)

Lastly, deriving a value for B, we bound the maximum value of − log q (ε) (y1:T ) as

                                                                          MT                1
                  − log q (ε) (y1:T ) ≤ − log(εM −T ) = log                  = T log M + log .                 (19)
                                                                           ε                ε
Substituting Equation (18) and Equation (19) into Equation (2), we get our desired result.
Lemma 3.2. [Entropy-Aligned Decoding Lowers CE and Calibrates Entropy] Let p be the true
distribution, and q be the learned model. For horizon k, prefix y<t , and candidate token yt , let
                        Ht:t+k (yt ) := EYt+1:t+k ∼q(·|y≤t ) [H(Yt+1:t+k | y≤t )].                              (4)
Define the entropy-aligned distribution qt,α (yt | y<t ) as
                          qt,α (yt | y<t ) ∝ qt (yt | y<t ) exp (−α Ht:t+k (yt )) .                             (5)
Let
                                            T
                                            X
                                 µD :=             Ey<t∼p,yt ∼D(·|y<t ) [Ht:t+k (yt )] .                        (6)
                                            t=1
Then there exists α∗ ∈ R such that


                                                                  14
Preprint. Under Review.




      1. α∗ = argminα H(p, qα ) [α∗ minimizes CE of the true and entropy-aligned distributions]
      2. µqα∗ = µp [The model’s entropy is calibrated to the true entropy]
      3. H(p, qα∗ ) ≤ H(p, q) [Entropy Aligned decoding does not worsen accuracy]

Proof. We will write St (yt ) := Ht:t+k (yt ) for brevity. We will also write the token-wise entropy-
aligned distribution, making explicit the dependence on the partition function Zt (α; y<t ), as
                   qt (yt | y<t ) exp (−αSt (yt ))                        X
qt,α (yt | y<t ) =                                 , where Zt (α; y<t ) =     qt (yt | y<t ) exp (−αSt (yt )).
                             Zt (α; y<t )                                  yt
                                                                                                    (20)
Taking the derivative of the log-partition function Zt (α; y<t ) w.r.t. α, we get
                          ∂
                             log Zt (α; y<t ) = −Eyt ∼qt,α (·|y<t ) [St (yt )].                                 (21)
                         ∂α
Moreover, the second derivative
                         ∂2
                             log Zt (α; y<t ) = Varyt ∼qt,α (·|y<t ) [St (yt )] ≥ 0,              (22)
                        ∂2α
and therefore, log Zt (α; y<t ) is convex in α. We will also write the sequence-level cross-entropy
                                               T
                                               X
                   F (α) := H(p, qα ) =              Ey<t ∼p Eyt ∼p(·|y<t ) [− log qt,α (yt | y<t )]            (23)
                                               t=1

and differentiating w.r.t. α
                                T                            T
                                X                            X                  ∂
                    F ′ (α) =         Ey≤t ∼p [St (yt )] +         Ey<t ∼p [      log Zt (α; y<t )].            (24)
                                t=1                          t=1
                                                                               ∂α
Substituting Equation (21) into Equation (24), we get
                     T
                     X
         F ′ (α) =
                                                                                           
                           Ey<t ∼p [Eyt ∼p(·|y<t ) St (yt )] − Eyt ∼qt,α (·|y<t ) [St (yt )] = µp − µqα         (25)
                     t=1

Since F (α) is a sum of a constant, an affine function, as well as the convex log-partition function, it
follows that F (α) is convex. Since F is convex and continuous in α, α∗ is a minimizer of F .
Next, having showed F ′ (α) = µp − µqα Equation (25), and since F ′ (α) = 0, we have µp − µqα∗ ,
which establishes calibratio. Lastly, since α∗ minimizes F (α), then F (α∗ ) = H(p, qα∗ ) ≤ F (0) =
H(p, q0 ) = H(p, q), which proves that entropy-aligned decoding does not degrade accuracy.
                                                                                                   |V|
Lemma 4.1. [Expected Entropy Evaluations under Bounded Correction] Let {ỹi }i=1 denote the log
unnormalized scores, or logits, parameterizing the LM’s next-token distribution. Let {Gi } denote
i.i.d standard Gumbel random variables. let zi denote the centered perturbed-logits, zi = (li +gi )−
log j elj . Assume we have an Ĥi such that |Ht:t+k (yi ) − Ĥi | ≤ Ct . Let w := |α| · Ct . Define
     P

plug-in scores ui := zi − αĤi , then it is the case that every true score si lies in the interval si ∈
[ui − w, ui + w]. and we have that the expected number of entropy evaluations is E [Neval ] = e2w .

Proof. Let M = maxi zi . Then for any y ∈ R, the probability of the maximum M < y is given by
                   n
                   Y                    n
                                        Y                                              X
  p(M ≤ y) =             p(zi ≤ y) =          exp(−e−(y−log ai ) ) = exp(−e−y                ai ) = exp(−e−y ), (26)
                   i=1                  i=1                                              i
              li                                                                                                 −y
with ai = Pe elj the probability of token yi . Then, M is Gumbel with density fM (y) = e−y e−e                        .
             j

We denote by T the count of zi such that each zi is within a w-window of the maximum M , i.e.,
                                                     X
                      T = #{i : zi > M − w} =            1{zi > M − w} .                    (27)
                                                                    i


                                                            15
Preprint. Under Review.




where we’re interested in computing the value of T on average. One observation is that, conditional
on M = y, each non-max indicator 1{zi > M − w} is an independent Bernoulli with probability
                           pi (y) := p(zi > y − w) = 1 − exp(−ai ew e−y ),                         (28)
and consequently,                                          X
                                          E[T |M = y] =         ·pi (y).                           (29)
                                                            i
Averaging out all values of M using the law of total expectation, we get
                                          X                 XZ
                  E[T ] = EM [E[T |M ]] =      E[pi (M )] =        p(y)fM (y)dy                    (30)
                                                 i                      i

Using the fact that if M ∼ Gumbel(0, 1) then X := e−M ∼ Exp(1), we have that for any given zi
                                                    Z ∞
                          w −M                w                   w             ai ew
 E[p(M )] = E[1 − e−ai e e ] = E[1 − e−ai e X ] =       1 − e−ai e x e−x dx =            . (31)
                                                     0                        1 + a i ew
Therefore,
                                                     X     ai ew
                                           E[T ] =                  .                              (32)
                                                     i
                                                         1 + a i ew
For any given token probability a, define
                                                 aew
                                     f (a) =           ,        a ∈ [0, 1]                         (33)
                                               1 + aew
which is concave on the interval (0, 1]. Therefore, by Jensen’s inequality, we have that
                               1X                   1X             1
                                      f (ai ) ≤ f (      ai ) = f ( ),                             (34)
                               n i                  n i            n

and,
                                     X                      1     new
                           E[T ] =         f (ai ) ≤ n · f ( ) =        < ew .                     (35)
                                      i
                                                            n    n + ew
That is, for any set of next-token probabilities {ai }ni=1 it holds that E[T ] < ew .
Moving from a one-sided uncertainty band of width w, where only challengers may gain, to a two-
sided band of width 2w, where the incumbent may decrease and challengers may increase, enlarges
the feasible window from [−w, 0] to [−2w, 0], and since the expected number of near- maximal
points scales as ew , the candidate count increases from ew −1 to me2w −1, concluding our proof.

B      I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
B.1     E FFICIENTLY E STIMATING α

Recall from Lemma 3.2 that α∗ = argminα H(p, qα ) = argminα Ep [− log qα (Y )]. Unfortunately,
as written, computing the cross-entropy, and by extension the minimizer of the cross-entropy is
computationally intractable due to the dependence on qα . In what follows, we will show how we can
efficiently estimate α by leveraging importance sampling while side stepping the above intractability.
We start by rewriting the cross entropy of the distribution p w.r.t. the entropy-aligned distribution qα
              C(α) := Ep [− log qα (Y )] = Ep [− log q(Y )] + αEp [H(Y )] + log Z(α).              (36)
Since only the last two terms depend on α, by differentiating, we get
                                                              d
                                 C ′ (α) = Ep [H(Y )] +         log Z(α),                          (37)
                                                             dα
where
                                       d
                                         log Z(α) = −Eqα [H(Y )],                                  (38)
                                      dα

                                                     16
Preprint. Under Review.




and therefore,
                                C ′ (α) = Ep [H(Y )] − Eqα [H(Y )].                                (39)
We therefore have that any minimizer α⋆ of C(α) satisfies the moment-matching condition
                                    Ep [H(Y )] = Eqα⋆ [H(Y )].                                     (40)
That is, the expected entropy under the entropy-aligned model matches the true expected entropy.
Moreover,
                              d                            
                                 Eqα [H(Y )] = −Varqα H(Y ) ≤ 0,                                   (41)
                             dα
so Epα [H] is nonincreasing in α. Furthermore, letting
                                g(α) := Ep [H(Y )] − Epα [H(Y )],                                  (42)
                 ′
we have that g (α) ≥ 0. Therefore, the function g is monotone nondecreasing in α. Consequently,
the solution to the minimization problem α∗ is unique, and can be efficiently found using bisection.
What remains is to show how to efficiently estimate the two expectations in Equation (42):

      • µp ≡ Ep [H(Y )], estimated from a held-out validation dataset {y (m) }M
                                                                              m=1 via
                                                       M
                                             1 X
                                        µ
                                        bp =       H(y (m) ), and;                                 (43)
                                             M m=1

      • µα ≡ Eqα [H(Y )], which admits the importance-sampling identity
                                            Eq H(Y ) e−αH(Y )
                                                             
                                    µα =                   ,                                     (44)
                                               Eq e−αH(Y )
         estimated using samples ỹ (i) ∼ q and importance weights wα (ỹ) = e−αH(ỹ) .

B.2   E FFICIENT E NTROPY E STIMATION VIA R AO -B LACKWELLIZATION

Naı̈ve Monte Carlo estimator for Ht:t+k (·) One means of estimating the entropy Ht:t+k (·) is to
                      (i)
simulate K rollouts {yt:t+k }K
                             i=1 of length k from p, and averaging their negative log-probabilities
                                                   K
                              MC                1 X
                            Ĥt:t+k (yt ) = −         p(yt+1:t+k | y<t ).                          (45)
                                                K i=1
While the above estimator is unbiased for large values of K, it suffers from very high variance.

Rao-Blackwellized estimator By the chain rule of entropy, we can write the lookahead entropy as
                                                 k
                                                 X
                       H (Yt+1:t+k | y≤t ) =           E [H (Yt+j | Y≤t+j−1 )] ,                   (46)
                                                 j=1

where the inner term H(Yt+j | Y≤t+j−1 ) is the entropy of a one-step predictive distribution that the
model exposes directly from its logits at the corresponding prefix. Equation (46) therefore admits
a low-variance Rao-Blackwellized estimator that replaces the empirical entropy of joint rollouts by
the exact conditional entropies, averaged only over the (random) prefixes, which can be written as
                                           k     K
                            RB
                                          X   1 X               (i)
                                                                        
                          Ĥt:t+k (yt ) =            H Yt+j | y≤t+j−1                           (47)
                                          j=1
                                              K i=1
By the law of total variance,
                                                  
          RB                  MC
                                              MC                                  (i)
  Var Ĥt:t+k     = Var E[Ĥt:t+k | F] ≤ Var Ĥt:t+k   ,          F = {p(Yt+j | Y≤t+j−1 )}i,j ,    (48)
with strict inequality unless the conditional entropies are constant. Intuitively, Equation (47) col-
lapses the Monte Carlo noise due to which token is drawn at step t+j by conditioning on the prefix
                                              (i)
and using the analytic entropy of p(Yt+j | y≤t+j−1 ), for all j. In practice, we found K ∈ {2, 4} to
yielding very low variance estimates of the entropy, yielding a fast and stable entropy estimator.


                                                   17
