Is Temperature the Creativity Parameter of Large Language Models?
Max Peeperkorn,1 Tom Kouwenhoven,2 Dan Brown,3 and Anna Jordanous 1
1School of Computing, University of Kent, United Kingdom
2Leiden Institute of Advanced Computer Science, Universiteit Leiden, Netherlands
3Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Canada
m.peeperkorn@kent.ac.uk, t.kouwenhoven@liacs.leidenuniv.nl, dan.brown@uwaterloo.ca, a.k.jordanous@kent.ac.uk
Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) are applied to all sorts
of creative tasks, and their outputs vary from beauti-
ful, to peculiar, to pastiche, into plain plagiarism. The
temperature parameter of an LLM regulates the amount
of randomness, leading to more diverse outputs; there-
fore, it is often claimed to be the creativity parameter.
Here, we investigate this claim using a narrative genera-
tion task with a predetermined fixed context, model and
prompt. Specifically, we present an empirical analysis of
the LLM output for different temperature values using
four necessary conditions for creativity in narrative gen-
eration: novelty, typicality, cohesion, and coherence. We
find that temperature is weakly correlated with novelty,
and unsurprisingly, moderately correlated with incoher-
ence, but there is no relationship with either cohesion or
typicality. However, the influence of temperature on cre-
ativity is far more nuanced and weak than suggested by
the “creativity parameter” claim; overall results suggest
that the LLM generates slightly more novel outputs as
temperatures get higher. Finally, we discuss ideas to al-
low more controlled LLM creativity, rather than relying
on chance via changing the temperature parameter.
Introduction
Large language models (LLMs), in particular instruction-
tuned variants, like ChatGPT and Claude, have become ubiq-
uitous tools in society. Unsurprisingly, they’ve also found
use for performing and assisting in creative tasks, such as
writing stories (Calderwood et al. 2020), poems (Sawicki
et al. 2023), jokes (Toplyn 2022), dialogues in video games
(V olum et al. 2022), and more. For creative tasks,tempera-
ture is often described as the parameter that enables creative
behaviour in a language model (Manjavacas et al. 2017;
Roemmele and Gordon 2018; Chen and Ding 2023). Temper-
ature controls the uncertainty or randomness in the generation
process, leading to more diverse outcomes by balancing prob-
abilities for candidate words. However, randomness alone
does not capture a complex phenomenon such as creativity
(Simonton 2023), it would imply that noise is the most inter-
esting thing one can create (Zenil, Delahaye, and Gaucherel
2012). Creativity is a quality that cannot be attributed by
simply producing more diverse output but involves multiple
dimensions, such as social interactions and communication,
or independence and freedom (Jordanous 2012), that are not
easily quantifiable. Yet, one probe into LLM creativity has
found a limited positive effect on creativity at higher tem-
peratures on a divergent association task (Chen and Ding
2023); however, they do not account for the influence of
other factors, such as different prompts. Temperature may
have an effect on creativity, simply because without variation,
nothing new can be created, but it is unclear if LLMs have
sufficient “knowledge” so that randomness is all you need.
The main goal of this paper is to investigate how tempera-
ture affects the creativity of stories. LLMs are challenging to
reliably probe and most analyses of their capabilities and be-
haviours involve large benchmarks, which are challenging to
interpret due to their scale and aggregation of outcomes. For
example, many LLMs appear to have difficulty with under-
standing multiple choice questions, even though this task is
part of many benchmarks (Khatun and Brown 2024). Repro-
ducibility and reliability is further complicated by small dif-
ferences in prompts that can lead to vastly different outcomes
(Weber, Bruni, and Hupkes 2023). Moreover, we often do not
know the training data, have insight of the model architecture
and additional plugins or processing for commercial LLMs.
To improve reliability and reproducibility, we predetermine
a fixed context: model and prompt. Key to our evaluation
approach is the exemplar object, the greedy sample for that
context, which is the baseline for our experiments.
In this paper, we present an empirical analysis and a creativ-
ity evaluation with human participants of stories generated
by LLAMA 2-C HAT (Touvron et al. 2023) on four necessary
conditions for creativity: novelty, typicality, cohesion, and
coherence. The primary findings of this work are:
• In general, temperature does not allow the LLM to leverage
different regions of the embedding space, but it does enable
some novelty when generating limited samples (as is the
case for any real-world application).
• We observe a weak positive correlation between tempera-
ture and novelty, and unsurprisingly, a negative correlation
between temperature and coherence. Suggesting a trade-
off between novelty and coherence.
Overall, the influence of temperature on creativity is far
more nuanced and weak than the “creativity parameter” claim
suggests. Finally, we discuss the limitations of our approach,
and conclude with a discussion on creative outputs of LLMs
to rely less on chance.
arXiv:2405.00492v1  [cs.CL]  1 May 2024

===PAGE===

Background
The generative aspect of LLMs and other large generative
models naturally sparked an interest for application towards
creative tasks. The jump in output fidelity and ease-of-use
are proving to radically change the landscape of creative
tasks that a machine can perform. LLMs certainly seem
capable of producing novelty, typicality, and grammatically
fluent output (Peeperkorn, Brown, and Jordanous 2023), but
it is difficult to determine how exactly to approach such a
creativity evaluation (Lamb, Brown, and Clarke 2018). In
this section, we describe the difficulties with probing LLMs
and build a foundation drawing from cognitive science for
our research approach. To investigate temperature as the
creativity parameter, we first need to establish what we mean
by creativity and what conditions we require outputs of the
LLM to satisfy.
Conditions for Creativity in Narrative Generation
In artistic domains, we consider something creative if it
is novel or original and useful or effective (Boden 1992;
Runco and Jaeger 2012). Usefulness is closely related to
quality and value, as things of low-quality tend not to be
very useful or have much value. Moreover, because creativ-
ity is such a complex phenomenon, further properties have
been proposed, such as surprise (Grace and Maher 2014;
Simonton 2012) and typicality (Ritchie 2007). Both of these
properties are often viewed as variants of novelty, and the
differences are very subtle. If something surprises you, there
must be something that you have not seen before, something
unexpected. Indeed, Martindale (1990) draws a similar obser-
vation, noting that novelty is the disruption of expectedness.
Typicality is more interesting because the difference is that
before we ask any questions regarding novelty and quality,
we must consider the prior question; to what extent is some-
thing typical? Is the object an example of its class or genre?
Typicality and novelty are, like surprise and novelty, some-
what at odds, as high typicality often implies low novelty;
however, Ritchie suggests that typicality is a prerequisite
for evaluating creativity, meaning that for something to be
judged as novel it has to some extent be typical first. This
view lends itself well for this work because we only consider
the creativity of LLMs based on the artefacts it produces and
not in a larger scope. While we do not use Ritchie’s empirical
criteria directly, his perspective fits our purpose as we mainly
evaluate the artefact of the system and not the process behind
it, over a framework like the Creative Tripod (Colton 2008),
which specifically focuses on the behaviour of creative sys-
tems. Ritchie (2007) formulates the essential properties as
follows: novelty is the extent to which the produced item is
dissimilar to existing samples within its class,typicality is the
extent to which the produced item is an example of the class
in question, and quality is the extent to which the produced
item is a high-quality example of its class.
For narrative writing tasks specifically, it is relatively
poorly understood what is valued for creativity, for exam-
ple, the importance of genre is unclear (D’Souza 2021). In
a large creative writing literature survey, D’Souza (2021)
outlines various criteria drawn from a large body of work.
For example, a narrative needs to have an elaborate plot, an
original voice, interesting characters, a good flow, linguistic
originality, among many more. These criteria largely con-
nect with the essential properties above, and we use these to
outline four necessary conditions to establish if temperature
affects creativity for the narrative generation task in this study.
Hence, we require novelty, typicality, and quality in terms of
cohesion and coherence (Graesser et al. 2004).
Novelty and typicality are relatively straightforward to re-
formulate in this domain. We would say that a story is novel
if it is dissimilar to other stories, if it has some characteristics
that set it apart from other stories, for example, it may be
written in a novel setting or narrative style. A story is consid-
ered typical if it is of the same form as other stories in the
same category. For example, based on stories we have read
before, we can observe certain patterns, narrative style, and
other characteristics. When we are presented with another
story, we say it is typical if it follows similar rules or patterns
and has those same characteristics, i.e. it has the same form.
Quality, in general, can mean a wide variety of things, and
can be defined depending on what you value. For example,
large language models can easily and fluently write high-
quality texts in terms of grammar and spelling, but this falls
short for our purposes since the generated stories can be
entirely meaningless or nonsensical. A key aspect of a good
story is a good narrative, that it is cohesive and coherent.
The difference between cohesion and coherence is subtle, as
pointed out by Graesser et al. (2004). Cohesion is about the
objective features in a text that hold everything together, in
other words, sentences are well-connected, are characters,
events, and actions used appropriately. Coherence, however,
is about the reader’s interpretation and the meaningfulness
of the text. The reader should be able to easily follow and
understand what it means. For our purposes, we consider the
quality of a story as a combination of cohesion and coherence;
A story is considered cohesive if words and sentences are
connected and grammatically consistent, and that characters,
events and actions are used appropriately. A story iscoherent
if it is easy to follow the story and understand what it is about.
Probing Large Language Models
There are roughly three techniques in which we can “control”
the LLM; through training data (either from scratch or fine-
tuning), via in-context learning (Brown et al. 2020), and with
different hyperparameter configurations. We focus here on
using LLMs that are already instruction-tuned, meaning they
are fine-tuned for conversation following a specific prompting
format. An instruction-tuned LLM can respond to instruction
and appear to “understand” what is asked of them (Brown
et al. 2020). This suggests that by changing the context in
the prompt, we can tap into different “slices of knowledge”
of the learned probability distribution. In a co-creative or
interactive setting, one might ask to change details and refine
previously generated poems or stories, allowing for more
creative outcomes. In essence, by tweaking the prompt, we
narrow down the sampling distribution closer to the intended
outcome. Adjusting the prompt to get the “right” slice of
the probability distribution, however, is very sensitive to the
choice of words and even punctuation (Weber, Bruni, and

===PAGE===

Hupkes 2023). It becomes increasingly difficult to separate
the effect of the prompt as you allow more randomness via
the temperature hyperparameter in the generation process.
If temperature is the creativity parameter, then you would
expect something similar to what happens when you change
the prompt; that at higher temperatures, the LLM will venture
into different slices of its knowledge. However, it is difficult
with this kind of investigation to reliably reproduce outputs
and make comparisons across different models, prompts and
hyperparameter settings, to draw any conclusions. Therefore,
it is essential for our evaluation to fix the context; the prompt
and model, and all other parameters, except for temperature.
The Temperature Parameter
Temperature is a hyperparameter t that we find in stochastic
models to regulate the randomness in a sampling process
(Ackley, Hinton, and Sejnowski 1985). The softmax function
(Equation 1) applies a non-linear transformation to the output
logits of the network, turning it into a probability distribution
(i.e. they sum to 1). The temperature parameter regulates its
shape, redistributing the output probability mass, flattening
the distribution proportional to the chosen temperature. This
means that for t >1, high probabilities are decreased, while
low probabilities are increased, and vice versa for t < 1.
Higher temperatures increase entropy and perplexity, leading
to more randomness and uncertainty in the generative process.
Typically, values for t are in the range of [0, 2] and t = 0,
in practice, means greedy sampling, i.e. always taking the
token with the highest probability.
softmax(z)i = exp( zi
t )Pn
j exp( zj
t ) where z ∈ Rn (1)
As more randomness and uncertainty is introduced in the
generation process, the more difficult it becomes to probe
LLMs and compare outputs. To investigate the effects of
temperature, we need a consistent baseline, for which we
propose to use the greedy sample. In the next section, we
reason why the greedy sample is a suitable point of departure.
Prototypes and Exemplars
The method for evaluation we propose in this paper is in-
spired by two theories of cognitive categorisation, namely
prototype theory (Rosch 1973) and exemplar theory (Medin
and Schaffer 1978). These two theories are often contrasted,
but have much overlap. The key difference is that in exemplar
theory, categorisation of new stimuli is not compared against
a single prototype object, but against multiple exemplars of
the category. A prototype is considered something that is
derived from presented stimuli, where an exemplar is one of
the previous stimuli. Prototype theory observes that many
ideas and objects can be put in the same cognitive category
based on their name, but as one looks closer may not have
that many things in common. This relates strongly to the idea
of family resemblances described by Wittgenstein (1953),
where he argues that even though items may have similar
names, there is not necessarily one thing common to all, but
a complex network of similarities and relationships between
members of the category. In a category, basic objects (pro-
totypes) are the ones that carry the most information, are
most representative of their category, and their information
can be used as a compressed representation of other class
members. Rosch et al. (1976) show that basic objects are
first categorisations made for that category of objects in an
environment. This is reminiscent of exemplar theory, and
people often use a mixture of prototypes and exemplars as
they categorise objects. When people are primed with just
exemplars, they can still accurately describe the prototype
(Medin, Altom, and Murphy 1984).
These theories have further connection with conceptual
spaces, geometric mental structures, where each point repre-
sents an object, the dimensions are properties, and concepts
(categories) are convex regions (G¨ardenfors 2014). The cen-
tral member, the prototype, or most typical object, has the
most in common with most objects in the category, i.e. it
has the short average distance to all other objects in the cat-
egory. This does not mean that it has overlap with all other
objects, but has some resemblances with each member of the
category. Conceptual spaces also play an important role in
Boden’s framework of creativity (Boden 1992). She uses a
metaphor, a map of the mind, to describe exploratory creativ-
ity and that novelty and value can be found venturing into
unknown regions. To be more precise, the typicality of an
object relates to how well it fits with the exemplars or the
prototype, while novelty could be viewed as how much the
category changes or expands as a new stimulus is presented.
This implies similarly that if temperature is indeed the cre-
ativity parameter, then it should allow access to different
slices of the probability distribution or other regions in the
embedding space. Prototype and exemplar theory provide a
useful frame that motivates our approach to evaluation, and a
method to evaluate further stimuli relative to a baseline (the
central member or prototype). Next, we delve into what the
exemplar is and how to generate it with LLMs in mind.
The Exemplar Story
Rigorously evaluating LLMs is hard. If we consider multiple
models, it is difficult to compare their results because the
learned representations and the training data could be very
different. In the case of a single model, but many prompts,
it is difficult to establish a solid baseline, and therefore also
impossible to compare results, since lexical changes can have
a cascading effect on the output. Hence, we need to work
within a fixed context using a specific model and prompt to
establish a baseline that enables the comparison of results
against independent variables, such as temperature.
Identifying the Exemplar
In the Background section, we point out that prototype/exem-
plar theory is a useful frame for a comparative evaluation, but
what object can we consider as the exemplar or prototype?
As mentioned, we require a baseline and a fixed context to
mitigate some difficulties of probing and instructing LLMs,
and there are two perspectives to determine what we consider
the prototype or exemplar object.
First, seeing that the peak of distributions is the most prob-
able or average outcome, using the prototype theory perspec-

===PAGE===

tive, it is straightforward to view the greedy sample as the
prototype. In that case, a category is every possible output
produced by one prompt and one model, with the greedy
sample as its prototype. However, there are many prompts
that can generate similar outcomes. The second perspective
departs from this more abstract view. In that frame, the cat-
egory is a group of prompts and a model, and the greedy
sample for each prompt is an exemplar. For the purposes of
this work, we call the greedy output the exemplar object, but
notably, prototype would also be a viable description, since
we consider only one prompt for the human evaluation.
[INST]Write a story.[/INST]Here it is:\n\n
Prompt 1: The exact LLAMA 2-C HAT prompt, showing the
chat formatting and the suffix to make sure the model starts
writing the story immediately.
Generating the Exemplar Story
We generate the exemplar and all other stories, using the
instruction-tuned LLAMA 2-C HAT 70B model. This autore-
gressive LLM is competitive, but more importantly, it is open
source,1 so that we have full access to the model architec-
ture and weights. This is essential since we aim to eliminate
or minimise any effects besides the temperature parameter.
Closed-source models, like GPT-3.5 and GPT-4, are for these
reasons not viable as they are not transparent. LLAMA 2 is
trained on an (unspecified) mix of publicly available data,
and the chat variants are fine-tuned using reward modelling
on annotated human preference data (Touvron et al. 2023).
For the instructions, we aimed for a minimal and neutral
prompt (Prompt 1) so that it introduces as little additional in-
formation as possible. We applied 6-bit quantisation,2 which
reduces the model size with extremely minimal loss of qual-
ity (Zhang et al. 2023), to make it fit on available hardware.
LLAMA 2-C HAT 70B adds, unsurprisingly, much conversa-
tion to the output, instead of just performing the task, even
when instructed to avoid this in the system prompt. This is
unwanted behaviour, as it has a large effect on subsequent sto-
ries. To mitigate this, we added a minimal start of the LLMs
response (see Prompt 1) to make sure that this is consistent
across all generated stories. Another benefit is that it reduced
any post-processing for the human evaluation study, besides,
occasionally, pruning one sentence at the end of the output
that was not part of the story. We set top- k = 50 and dis-
abled all other decoding strategies. Setting top-k and thereby
limiting the token candidates at each time step, influences
the output but is necessary; otherwise, text quality quickly
deteriorates (Holtzman et al. 2020), especially at higher tem-
peratures. Next, we present a case study consisting of both
a computational analysis and human evaluation to approach
the research question.
1The LLAMA 2 licence restricts commercial use, which strictly
speaking is not open source as defined by the Open Source Initiative.
2Quantised using the llama.cpp library with setting Q6 K. See
https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp/pull/1684
Case Study – “Write a story.”
Our approach to investigating how temperature affects cre-
ativity in LLM-generated stories is a two-fold empirical anal-
ysis. First, we perform a computational analysis to examine
the behaviour of LLMs for different temperature values. In
particular, how the stories are distributed in the embedding
space and measure distance against the exemplar object. Sec-
ondly, we present an experimental study in which humans
evaluate creativity to investigate the interaction between tem-
perature and the four necessary conditions of creativity for a
narrative generation task.
Computational Analysis
The goal of this analysis is to show if temperature enables
the LLM to access slices in its probability distribution or
regions in its embedding much further than those sampled
at lower temperatures. We do not aim to evaluate stories
for their creativity using the four necessary conditions, but
establish any evidence from a computational perspective for
the possibility of any exploratory creative behaviour. With
that in mind, Boden (1992) argues, using conceptual spaces,
that exploration is essential for creative behaviour. Moreover,
an increased diversity of outputs might suggest an increased
likelihood of producing something novel. For the computa-
tional analysis, we use the same setup as described above,
using Prompt 1 and its exemplar object (see Supplementary
Materials). We generate 100 stories over 7 different tem-
perature values t ∈ [.001, .334, .667, 1.0, 1.334, 1.667, 2.0],
to investigate the effect of temperature on the diversity of
stories.
Evaluation Measures In general, the quality of LLM-
generated text is usually assessed using perplexity. This
could be done with the same model, however, for purposes of
this study, this does not inform much, as at higher tempera-
tures the perplexity on average goes up (Figure 1a), meaning
that the quality goes down. Measuring quality using an inde-
pendent model is more appropriate, but it raises the question
of what is a suitable candidate for a narrative generation
task. Moreover, previous work suggests that perplexity is a
bad indicator of text quality compared to human evaluations
(Zhang et al. 2021). For these reasons, we focus more on
diversity and similarity. An overall higher diversity propor-
tional to temperature should indicate that different slices of
the probability distribution are used to generate the outputs.
Comparisons for diversity and similarity can be done on the
lexical level, which uses the texts directly, or on a semantic
level using stories embedded in the LLM’s embedding space.
We focus on two commonly used measures that can be used
relative to the exemplar; on the semantic level, we use co-
sine similarity with the embeddings of the stories and the
exemplar, and for the lexical level, we use normalised edit
distance between stories and the exemplar. If temperature is
proportional to creativity, then you would expect the outputs
to extend into very different regions of the embedding space.
We examine the distribution using principal component analy-
sis (PCA), preserving global structure, to project embeddings
of the generated stories in two-dimensional space.

===PAGE===

(a) Perplexity of stories given the LLM per
temperature value.
(b) Cosine similarity of stories with the exem-
plar per temperature value.
(c) Normalised edit distance of stories with
the exemplar per temperature value.
Figure 1: In (a), we see that the effect temperature has on the perplexity, the quality according to the LLM, of the output. Both,
(b) and (c) suggest that higher temperatures do not imply more diversity on the semantic or lexical level, or that it further extends
the range of possible outputs in the current context.
Results In general, the distribution plots (Figure 1) suggest
that the LLM, for this specific prompt and model, is unable
to produce more diversity at higher temperature. Higher
temperatures increase the odds of generating that diversity,
but the measures indicate that it is not essential. In Figure 1c,
the normalised edit distance measure shows that even at lower
temperatures (.334 < t <1.0), there is an immediate effect
on diversity relative to the exemplar story. Although, it does
not tell anything about the meaning of the stories, it suggests
that higher temperatures ( t >1.0) do not necessarily lead
to more diversity. Cosine similarity shows a weak negative
trend, but also shows that there is great overlap in the range
of outputs for each temperature value (Figure 1b). In other
words, outputs at higher temperatures on the semantic level,
do not extend much further away from the exemplar story
than outputs at lower temperatures.
In theory, given enough time and space, we should be able
to generate outputs from every region of the embedding that
the context of prompt and model can be generated, even at
lower temperatures. However, when drawing limited samples
from the LLM, as is standard in any real-world scenario, we
do observe some exploration at higher temperatures as is
shown in Figure 2. At the very least, it appears that tempera-
ture increases the chance of finding novelty more quickly.
Another interesting observation is that it seems, relative
to the exemplar story, that the generation process moves in
a particular direction (Figure 2). This suggests some merit
to the link we draw with prototype and exemplar theory and
our approach to evaluation, as it shows how LLM outputs
changes relative to the exemplar. Informally, we observed
similar behaviour for seemingly synonymous prompts, this
might warrant further investigation in future work.
Experimental Analysis with Human Evaluation
The computational analysis is limited because it does not
inform about the meaning of the stories. It might be that even
though our measures show clear limitations in terms of diver-
sity and overlap in output distributions, stories generated at
higher temperatures are indeed creative in ways not captured
by the computational analysis. To further investigate this, we
designed a creativity evaluation experiment with non-expert
human participants. In the experiment, participants evaluate
stories according to the four necessary conditions outlined in
the Background section. Specifically, we ask them to com-
pare each story for novelty and typicality against the exemplar
and judge the story for its individual cohesion and coherence.
To generate the stories, we again use LLAMA 2-C HAT 70B
with the same prompt (Prompt 1), with the same setup de-
scribed in the Exemplar Story section. For each of the 7 tem-
perature values t ∈ [.001, .334, .667, 1.0, 1.334, 1.667, 2.0],
we randomly generate 5 unique stories that are at least 300
tokens long. At the lowest temperature setting t = .001, the
model could generate only one other unique story beside the
exemplar story, as such we have a total of 31 stories for the
creativity evaluation.
Experimental Setup For this study, we recruited 36 partic-
ipants online and from the Computational Creativity module
at the University of Kent. Each participant was asked to
evaluate 5 LLM-generated stories using a questionnaire (see
Supplementary Materials). They were told upfront that the
stories were generated by a LLM, but they were unaware
of the specific model or that the stories were sampled from
different temperature values. The participants were given
the definitions of the four necessary conditions for creativ-
ity, followed by the exemplar story, and a two-story practice
evaluation. The practice stories are the same for all partici-
pants and given in random order. After practice, they were
again presented with the exemplar story before starting the
actual creativity evaluation. The exemplar story and defini-
tions were accessible throughout the survey. The study was
approved by the Central Research Ethics Advisory Group of
the University of Kent.
Each participant was randomly assigned 5 of the 31 stories.
The evaluation consists of 4 five-point scale questions; two
about novelty and typicality compared against the exemplar
story, and two about the stories’ text cohesion and coherence.
The questions about novelty, typicality, and cohesion are on
a five-point scale from 1) not at all , to 5) completely .
Notably, coherence is on a five-point scale from 1) very easy,

===PAGE===

Figure 2: Here, we show the PCA projections of 100 stories per temperature generated using LLAMA 2-C HAT 70B and Prompt 1.
While we observe that an increasing temperature seems to explore a larger region of the embedding space with a small number of
samples, it does not imply that we access a broader slice of the model’s probability distribution. We merely increase the chance
of generating more diversity. ⋆ denotes the exemplar story.
to 5) very difficult to understand and follow. As a result,
lower scores indicate high coherence, and vice versa. The
survey distribution procedure was set up such that each story
received at least five evaluations by different participants.
Concluding the survey, we posed 5 post-evaluation ques-
tions about their experience with reading, writing, and review-
ing stories, their stance towards Generative AI and its use for
creative tasks, and how they approached the evaluations.
Practical Considerations There are several practical con-
siderations regarding the experimental design that limited the
study in various ways. The key limitation of this study is its
size; we recruited 36 participants, who can only evaluate a
limited number of stories. We generated only 5 unique stories
per temperature, relying on the sampling distribution of the
LLM to provide an appropriate sample. Ideally, you would
generate many stories and then take a representative sample,
but we do not know what number is sufficient for our purpose.
Similarly, we only considered one prompt and its exemplar,
ultimately, we decided on, in our opinion, the most minimal
and neutral instruction to perform the task (Prompt 1).
In this kind of setup, there is a risk of practice and order
effects. To mitigate these issues, we asked the participant
to first do a practice evaluation, making sure that the par-
ticipant is fully aware of the task and what is expected of
them. As mentioned, we randomly assigned stories to the
participants, and did not observe any ordering effects in the
analysis. We considered using pairwise comparison ranking,
and presenting stories in pairs and evaluating those relative
to each other, to further mitigate these effects. While this
method is effective towards that purpose, it does not scale
very well, even with just 31 stories, it requires a large number
of participants for robust and meaningful outcomes.
Another limitation of this study is that cohesion and coher-
ence are, in fact, important factors for novelty and typicality.
We did not observe any issues with that in the analysis, and
as these LLMs produce fluent and grammatically correct
language, this does not appear to be an issue. The stories gen-
erated by LLAMA 2-C HAT 70B are simple stories featuring
only basic elements, and are not literary masterpieces. We
are interested in a relative evaluation to see how temperature
changes the creativity as it increases only for a simple task;
thus we opted to use non-experts who are not preconditioned
to higher expectations. For that same reason, we designed the
Table 1: Evaluation Ratings and Reliability
Mean Std. Dev. Cronbach’s α
Novelty 3.12 1.17 .547
Typicality 3.20 .987 .664
Cohesion 3.69 .959 .596
Coherence† 2.13 1.17 .749
Mean — .639
† lower indicates higher coherence
survey around specific criteria and did not ask participants
directly about the creativity of the stories.
Analysis We use linear mixed-effects models (Seabold and
Perktold 2010) to control for the random effect of assign-
ing stories to different participants, and Cronbach’s α to
test inter-rater reliability. The approach is as follows: First,
we determine if there is a significant effect using Satterth-
waite’s method (Satterthwaite 1941). Secondly, the model’s
estimate ˆβ (slope) determines the direction of the effect, i.e.
positive or negative, and the rate of change. Finally, we
test how much variance is explained by the model to deter-
mine the magnitude using conditional R2 (Nakagawa and
Schielzeth 2013), denoted by R2
c, which considers both fixed
and random effects. The more variance is captured by the
linear mixed-effects model, the stronger the correlation. Ad-
ditionally, we report the marginal R2
m, which is the variance
explained by the fixed effects.
Quantitative Results The primary results of the analysis
focus on the effect of temperature on the creativity of stories.
Regarding inter-rater reliability, on average, we findα = .639
(Table 1), which is just short of the acceptable level of .7, but
still indicates some degree of agreement, more so because
we are dealing with non-expert judges who, in general, dis-
agree more often. Regarding temperature, we observe two
effects (Table 2), a weak positive correlation between nov-
elty and temperature ( ˆβ = .308, SE = .138, R2
c = .385), and
a moderate correlation between coherence and temperature
( ˆβ = .240, SE = .122, R2
c = .646). This implies a trade-off
between novelty and coherence. While higher temperatures
seem to positively affect the chance of finding novel stories,

===PAGE===

Table 2: Statistical Analysis of Creativity Evaluation and Computational Metrics
Temperature Perplexity Cosine Similarity Normalised Edit Distance
ˆβ ± SE R2
c R2
m ˆβ ± SE R2
c R2
m ˆβ ± SE R2
c R2
m ˆβ ± SE R2
c R2
m
Novelty .308±.138* .385 .152 .730±.273** .370 .158 -1.08±.913 .338 .129 2.01±.731** .378 .161
Typicality -.095±.118 .339 .125 -.205±.237 .345 .126 -.987±.771 .336 .128 -.662±.632 .336 .126
Cohesion -.181±.112 .406 .161 -.183±.226 .392 .151 2.09±.716** .431 .187 -.663±.608 .384 .152
Coherence† .240±.122* .646 .283 .194±.251 .627 .274 1.03±.788 .628 .278 .750±.664 .629 .276
* p <.05, ** p <.01, † positive correlation denotes a negative effect, i.e. higher temperatures are less coherent
they become less coherent. Although, coherence is rated
lower (M = 2.13), meaning that the stories, overall, were easy
to understand. The negative correlation of coherence with
temperature is as expected (Holtzman et al. 2020). Both
effects, have relatively shallow slopes, indicating that the rate
at which novelty and coherence change as temperatures get
higher is low, indicating only a small effect.
The secondary results relate the creativity evaluation to
the computational metrics in the Computational Analysis sec-
tion. Note that perplexity is a metric relative to the model,
and cosine similarity and normalised edit distance are both
relative to the exemplar story. Here, we observe three effects
for perplexity, cosine similarity and normalised edit distance
in Table 2. First, we see that perplexity has a weak to mod-
erate positive correlation with novelty (ˆβ = .730, SE = .273,
R2
c = .370). This is interesting because it suggests that per-
plexity, although a measure for model quality, could also
indicate novelty at least to some extent. Yet, it is also un-
surprising because indirectly, higher perplexity is on aver-
age a result of higher temperature (see Figure 1a). There is
likely a similar cause for the weak to moderate positive ef-
fect between normalised edit distance and novelty ( ˆβ = 2.01,
SE = .731, R2
c = .378). Finally, there is a weak to moder-
ate positive effect between cosine similarity and cohesion
( ˆβ = 2.09, SE = .716, R2
c = .431), which is not unexpected
as higher temperatures produce outputs with greater variety,
subsequently, increasing the likelihood of producing non-
cohesive texts. More interestingly, this suggests that stories
closer to the exemplar are more cohesive. In turn, this implies
when the semantic distance between a story and the exemplar
is large, more features related to cohesion are lost. The slopes
of the analysis with the computational metrics are steeper,
especially the latter two have a high rate of change, looking
at Figure 1b and Figure 1c, this could be due to the large
difference between the lowest and highest temperatures.
Qualitative Results In the post-evaluation questions, the
participants reported on average some familiarity with gen-
erative AI, and were moderately comfortable with AI being
used for creative work. Most participants reported very little
to no experience with writing and reviewing stories. Those
that did report to have done writing were mostly relying
on educational experience. We specifically asked the par-
ticipants about their approach for evaluating stories to gain
further insights in what specifically they focused on. Par-
ticipants reported different ways in which they approached
the evaluation, some focused on structure, another aimed to
grab the general idea combined and compared the ending.
Occasionally, the participant chose one specific factor, such
as most stories were adventure-based, and took that as the
typical trait. Another example, is that when a story switches
genre, for example, to fantasy, it was considered more novel.
In line with this, participants did report that it was quite diffi-
cult to separate details in the stories as they went through the
evaluation, and that it was quite difficult to just use the four
conditions as there were different characteristics in the story
they had to weigh. One participant reported a lack of cohe-
sion, and that sometimes it felt that sentences were skipped,
misplaced, or there was something missing. These reports
suggest that for each criterion, different things are expected
and valued in LLM-generated stories.
Discussion and Further Work
Overall, we do not find compelling support for the “tem-
perature as the creativity parameter” claim across the condi-
tions for creativity in this investigation. While we see some
positive effects for evaluating novelty, the results show that
important aspects required for creativity are missing for tem-
perature to not enable LLM creativity to the full extent. In
this section, we first discuss some observations about our
analysis and methodology and then outline three recommen-
dations for future work.
The key idea to our evaluation methodology is the idea
of the exemplar, inspired by Prototype and Exemplar theory,
as a point of departure for evaluation. As mentioned, we
observe that the exemplar appears to be on the edge of the
projection, while this suggests that the exemplar is a reason-
able baseline. To further examine the merits of the link we
draw with prototype and exemplar as an evaluation methodol-
ogy, further investigation is needed to see if this phenomenon
emerges for different domains, prompts, and models.
In the qualitative analysis, the participants reported using
different criteria to evaluate novelty and typicality and found
it difficult to separate details between stories during the eval-
uation. While this is nothing new, these reports complicate
the robustness of our findings. Repeating the experiment
with experts, better stories, and creative writing rubrics, is
important for future work. Moreover, an expert’s depth of
understanding of the domain could identify other more ad-
vanced desiderata. However, we envision that it will remain
difficult to design a robust, large-scale experiment to inves-
tigate the effect of temperature on creativity because of the
vast amount of variation that LLMs can produce.

===PAGE===

Towards More Creativity in LLMs
The inherent complexity of creativity means it is highly un-
likely that there exists such an easy solution as a single pa-
rameter that enables creativity in LLMs. Of course, careful
fine-tuning for specific tasks or prompting might produce the
desired outcomes, however, fine-tuning comes at the cost of
generality, and prompting is unpredictable and inconsistent
across different models. From this work, we suggest future
work that could be useful for progressing LLM creativity.
Benchmarks for Creativity In general, the creative abil-
ities of LLMs are mostly evaluated on tests from psychol-
ogy (e.g. Torrance Test of Creativity Thinking, Alternative
Uses Test, Divergent Association Test), or inferred from phe-
nomenological observations in benchmarks of other tasks,
such as mathematical reasoning (Bubeck et al. 2023). To our
knowledge, there are no strong LLM creativity benchmarks
that go further. We only presented a minimal case and re-
liably scaling it up is challenging, and this is partly due to
the complexity of evaluating creativity, but it is important to
investigate what such benchmarks should be, to make more
robust claims about the creativity of LLMs.
Decoding Strategies More advanced decoding strategies
could be interesting if designed for specific purposes. De-
coding strategies are vital for the LLM to produce fluent
natural language, and might be similarly helpful for pro-
ducing creative writing or communication. Besides the two
well-known parameters, top-k and nucleus sampling (Holtz-
man et al. 2020), there are more complex decoding strategies,
namely mirostat (Basu et al. 2021) and locally typical sam-
pling (Meister et al. 2023). A decoding strategy designed
with an information-theoretic notion of creativity (Mondol
and Brown 2021) in mind might be fruitful to enable more
creative behaviours regardless of model and prompt.
Implicit Information LLMs appear to capture lots of im-
plicit information. An important direction of research here is
how information is preserved as we increase the complexity
of the prompt for specific tasks. For example, by asking a
specific questions following a taxonomy, we could observe
how much information is implicit in the model. This in turn
might inform how to design the prompt, and condition the
LLM to maximise the quality of the desired output. While
different models and prompts greatly vary in capabilities and
output, methodologies aimed to evaluate and analyse spe-
cific use-cases are valuable for designing special-purpose
computational (creativity) systems.
Currently, we need to rely too heavily on chance to pro-
duce relevant and creative output. These recommendations
should steer us towards more informed and useful creative
behaviours of LLMs.
Related Work
While this work does not focus on building a creative sys-
tem, here we briefly outline several analogies and insights
regarding the overlap between LLMs and narrative generation
programs. Programs that generate natural language and narra-
tives have been an active research area. Early examples of nar-
rative generation programs are TALE-SPIN (Meehan 1977),
TAILOR (Smith and Witten 1991), and MINSTREL (Turner
1994). These programs are in some sense limited, since they
rely on predetermined templates that are filled according to
various rules and associations in a knowledge base. How-
ever, some stories generated by TALE-SPIN are surprisingly
similar to what a LLM might generate for simple prompts
(see Supplementary Materials). Another example that draws
a parallel with LLMs is The Grandmother program (Case-
bourne 1996) which uses an interactive process for the user
to provide additional knowledge, this is similarly to the idea
of in-context learning (Brown et al. 2020). The limitations of
the symbolic approaches and reliance on chance to generate
interesting stories are partly because the programs are unable
to observe and evaluate their outputs. MEXICA (P ´erez y
P´erez and Sharples 2001) is a narrative generation program
that aims to tackle this with an engagement-reflection loop.
This can be mimicked in LLMs by asking to improve the
previous output and giving hints, but this has limited success,
as we do not know how or why the LLM improves a story.
Markov chains are a technique applied to narrative genera-
tion that is more akin to LLMs. While simple low-order
Markov models generally perform poorly, variants have
been applied successfully (Harrison, Purdy, and Riedl 2021;
van Stegeren and Theune 2019; Ammanabrolu et al. 2019).
LLMs, however, have largely displaced these approaches and
easily appear to outperform on most dimensions. There are
plenty of examples (Yuan et al. 2022; Kelly et al. 2023;
M´endez and Gerv ´as 2023; Ye et al. 2023) that introduce
certain procedures complementing the LLM to perform the
task. Perhaps, it is more appropriate to view the LLM as a
“mere” component or stage in a larger creative system.
Conclusion
We present a two-fold empirical study to investigate how
temperature affects the creativity of LLM-generated stories.
Our methodology leverages the idea of the exemplar, inspired
by prototype and exemplar theory, as a point of departure for
evaluation. In summary, our findings indicate that:
• When generating a limited number of samples, temperature
increases the chance to generate more variety, but overall,
does not enable access to a larger slice of the probability
distribution.
• We only observe a weak positive correlation between nov-
elty and temperature, and a moderately negative correlation
between coherence and temperature, implying a novelty
and coherence trade-off.
The influence of temperature is far more nuanced and weak
than “the creativity parameter” claim suggests. To enable
the potential of LLM creativity, we highlight the following
research directions:
• Explore what a benchmark for LLM creativity for evalua-
tion at scale should be.
• Design advanced decoding strategies specifically for cre-
ative purposes.
• Methods to probe the implicit information captured by
LLMs to understand and assess the effect of prompts and
guide prompt design.

===PAGE===

Supplementary Materials
The appendix, code, statistical analysis, data, and generated
stories can be found at https://github.com/maxpeeperkorn/
creativity-parameter.
Acknowledgements
The study was approved by the Central Research Ethics Advi-
sory Group (CREAG) of the University of Kent. The work of
MP is supported by a University of Kent Graduate Teaching
Assistantship and a Cultuurfonds Award. The work of DB is
supported by a Discovery Grant from the Natural Sciences
and Engineering Research Council of Canada.
References
Ackley, D. H.; Hinton, G. E.; and Sejnowski, T. J. 1985.
A learning algorithm for boltzmann machines. Cognitive
Science 9(1):147–169.
Ammanabrolu, P.; Tien, E.; Cheung, W.; Luo, Z.; Ma, W.;
Martin, L.; and Riedl, M. 2019. Guided neural language
generation for automated storytelling. In Second Workshop
on Storytelling, 46–55. Florence, Italy: ACL.
Basu, S.; Ramachandran, G.; Keskar, N.; and Varshney, L.
2021. Mirostat: A neural text decoding algorithm that directly
controls perplexity. In International Conference on Learning
Representations.
Boden, M. 1992. The Creative Mind. London: Abacus.
Brown, T.; Mann, B.; Ryder, N.; Subbiah, M.; Kaplan, J. D.;
Dhariwal, P.; Neelakantan, A.; Shyam, P.; Sastry, G.; Askell,
A.; Agarwal, S.; Herbert-V oss, A.; Krueger, G.; Henighan, T.;
Child, R.; Ramesh, A.; Ziegler, D.; Wu, J.; Winter, C.; Hesse,
C.; Chen, M.; Sigler, E.; Litwin, M.; Gray, S.; Chess, B.;
Clark, J.; Berner, C.; McCandlish, S.; Radford, A.; Sutskever,
I.; and Amodei, D. 2020. Language models are few-shot
learners. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, volume 33, 1877–1901. Curran Associates, Inc.
Bubeck, S.; Chandrasekaran, V .; Eldan, R.; Gehrke, J.;
Horvitz, E.; Kamar, E.; Lee, P.; Lee, Y . T.; Li, Y .; Lund-
berg, S.; Nori, H.; Palangi, H.; Ribeiro, M. T.; and Zhang,
Y . 2023. Sparks of artificial general intelligence: Early
experiments with GPT-4. Preprint. arXiv:2303.12712.
Calderwood, A.; Qiu, V .; Gero, K. I.; and Chilton, L. B.
2020. How novelists use generative language models: An
exploratory user study. In HAI-GEN+user2agent.
Casebourne, I. 1996. The grandmother program: A hybrid
system for automated story generation. In Second Interna-
tional Symposium of Creativity and Cognition (Loughbor-
ough, England, 1996), 146–155.
Chen, H., and Ding, N. 2023. Probing the “creativity” of large
language models: Can models produce divergent semantic as-
sociation? In Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, 12881–12888. ACL.
Colton, S. 2008. Creativity versus the perception of creativ-
ity in computational systems. In AAAI spring symposium:
creative intelligent systems, volume 8, 7.
D’Souza, R. 2021. What characterises creativity in narrative
writing, and how do we assess it? research findings from a
systematic literature search. Thinking Skills and Creativity
42:100949.
G¨ardenfors, P. 2014. The geometry of meaning: Semantics
based on conceptual spaces. MIT press.
Grace, K., and Maher, M. L. 2014. What to expect when
you’re expecting: The role of unexpectedness in computation-
ally evaluating creativity. In 5th International Conference on
Computational Creativity, 120–128. ACC.
Graesser, A. C.; McNamara, D. S.; Louwerse, M. M.; and
Cai, Z. 2004. Coh-Metrix: Analysis of text on cohesion
and language. Behavior research methods, instruments, &
computers 36(2):193–202.
Harrison, B.; Purdy, C.; and Riedl, M. 2021. Toward au-
tomated story generation with markov chain monte carlo
methods and deep neural networks. AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment
13(2):191–197.
Holtzman, A.; Buys, J.; Du, L.; Forbes, M.; and Choi, Y .
2020. The curious case of neural text degeneration. In
International Conference on Learning Representations.
Jordanous, A. 2012. A standardised procedure for evaluating
creative systems: Computational creativity evaluation based
on what it is to be creative. Cogn. Compu. 4(3):246–279.
Kelly, J.; Calderwood, A.; Wardrip-Fruin, N.; and Mateas,
M. 2023. There and back again: Extracting formal domains
for controllable neurosymbolic story authoring. In AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital
Entertainment, volume 19, 64–74.
Khatun, A., and Brown, D. G. 2024. A study on large
language models’ limitations in multiple-choice question
answering. Preprint. arXiv:2401.07955.
Lamb, C.; Brown, D. G.; and Clarke, C. L. A. 2018. Evalu-
ating computational creativity: An interdisciplinary tutorial.
ACM Comput. Surv. 51(2).
Manjavacas, E.; Karsdorp, F.; Burtenshaw, B.; and Keste-
mont, M. 2017. Synthetic literature: Writing science fiction
in a co-creative process. In Workshop on Computational
Creativity in Natural Language Generation (CC-NLG 2017),
29–37. ACL.
Martindale, C. 1990. The Clockwork Muse: The Predictabil-
ity of Artistic Change. Basic Books.
Medin, D. L.; Altom, M. W.; and Murphy, T. D. 1984. Given
versus induced category representations: Use of prototype
and exemplar information in classification. Journal of Ex-
perimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition
10(3):333.
Medin, D. L., and Schaffer, M. M. 1978. Context theory of
classification learning. Psychological review 85(3):207.
Meehan, J. R. 1977. TALE-SPIN, an interactive program
that writes stories. In 5th International Joint Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, 91–98. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers.
Meister, C.; Pimentel, T.; Wiher, G.; and Cotterell, R. 2023.
Locally typical sampling. Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics 11:102–121.

===PAGE===

M´endez, G., and Gerv ´as, P. 2023. Using ChatGPT for
story sifting in narrative generation. In 14th International
Conference on Computational Creativity, 387–391. ACC.
Mondol, T., and Brown, D. 2021. Incorporating algorith-
mic information theory into fundamental concepts of com-
putational creativity. In 12th International Conference on
Computational Creativity, 173–181. ACC.
Nakagawa, S., and Schielzeth, H. 2013. A general and sim-
ple method for obtaining R2 from generalized linear mixed-
effects models. Methods in Ecology and Evolution 4(2):133–
142.
Peeperkorn, M.; Brown, D.; and Jordanous, A. 2023. On
characterizations of large language models and creativity
evaluation. In 14th International Conference on Computa-
tional Creativity, 143–147. ACC.
P´erez y P ´erez, R., and Sharples, M. 2001. MEXICA: A
computer model of a cognitive account of creative writing.
Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Artificial Intelli-
gence 13(2):119–139.
Ritchie, G. 2007. Some empirical criteria for attributing cre-
ativity to a computer program. Minds & Machines 17:76–99.
Roemmele, M., and Gordon, A. S. 2018. Automated assis-
tance for creative writing with an rnn language model. In
23rd International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces
Companion. ACM.
Rosch, E.; Mervis, C. B.; Gray, W. D.; Johnson, D. M.; and
Boyes-Braem, P. 1976. Basic objects in natural categories.
Cognitive Psychology 8(3):382–439.
Rosch, E. 1973. Natural categories. Cognitive Psychology
4(3):328–350.
Runco, M. A., and Jaeger, G. J. 2012. The standard definition
of creativity. Creativity Research Journal 24(1):92–96.
Satterthwaite, F. E. 1941. Synthesis of variance. Psychome-
trika 6(5):309–316.
Sawicki, P.; Grze´s, M.; Goes, F.; Brown, D.; Peeperkorn, M.;
Khatun, A.; and Paraskevopoulou, S. 2023. On the power
of special-purpose gpt models to create and evaluate new
poetry in old styles. In 14th International Conference on
Computational Creativity, 10–19. ACC.
Seabold, S., and Perktold, J. 2010. statsmodels: Econometric
and statistical modeling with Python. In9th Python in Science
Conference.
Simonton, D. K. 2012. Taking the U.S. patent office criteria
seriously: A quantitative three-criterion creativity definition
and its implications. Creativity Research Journal24(2-3):97–
106.
Simonton, D. K. 2023. The blind-variation and selective-
retention theory of creativity: Recent developments and cur-
rent status of BVSR. Creativity Research Journal 35(3):304–
323.
Smith, T. C., and Witten, I. H. 1991. A planning mechanism
for generating story text. Literary and Linguistic Computing
6(2):119–126.
Toplyn, J. 2022. Witscript 2: A system for generating
improvised jokes without wordplay. In 13th International
Conference on Computational Creativity, 54–58. ACC.
Touvron, H.; Martin, L.; Stone, K.; Albert, P.; Almahairi, A.;
Babaei, Y .; Bashlykov, N.; Batra, S.; Bhargava, P.; Bhosale,
S.; Bikel, D.; Blecher, L.; Ferrer, C. C.; Chen, M.; Cucurull,
G.; Esiobu, D.; Fernandes, J.; Fu, J.; Fu, W.; Fuller, B.;
Gao, C.; Goswami, V .; Goyal, N.; Hartshorn, A.; Hosseini,
S.; Hou, R.; Inan, H.; Kardas, M.; Kerkez, V .; Khabsa, M.;
Kloumann, I.; Korenev, A.; Koura, P. S.; Lachaux, M.-A.;
Lavril, T.; Lee, J.; Liskovich, D.; Lu, Y .; Mao, Y .; Martinet,
X.; Mihaylov, T.; Mishra, P.; Molybog, I.; Nie, Y .; Poulton,
A.; Reizenstein, J.; Rungta, R.; Saladi, K.; Schelten, A.;
Silva, R.; Smith, E. M.; Subramanian, R.; Tan, X. E.; Tang,
B.; Taylor, R.; Williams, A.; Kuan, J. X.; Xu, P.; Yan, Z.;
Zarov, I.; Zhang, Y .; Fan, A.; Kambadur, M.; Narang, S.;
Rodriguez, A.; Stojnic, R.; Edunov, S.; and Scialom, T. 2023.
LLAMA 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models.
Preprint. arXiv:2307.09288.
Turner, S. R. 1994. The Creative Process: A Computer
Model of Storytelling and Creativity . Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
van Stegeren, J., and Theune, M. 2019. Narrative genera-
tion in the wild: Methods from NaNoGenMo. In Second
Workshop on Storytelling, 65–74. ACL.
V olum, R.; Rao, S.; Xu, M.; DesGarennes, G.; Brockett,
C.; Van Durme, B.; Deng, O.; Malhotra, A.; and Dolan,
B. 2022. Craft an iron sword: Dynamically generating
interactive game characters by prompting large language
models tuned on code. In 3rd Wordplay: When Language
Meets Games Workshop (Wordplay 2022), 25–43. ACL.
Weber, L.; Bruni, E.; and Hupkes, D. 2023. Mind the instruc-
tions: A holistic evaluation of consistency and interactions
in prompt-based learning. In 27th Conference on Computa-
tional Natural Language Learning (CoNLL), 294–313. ACL.
Wittgenstein, L. 1953. Philosophical Investigations. London:
Blackwell.
Ye, A.; Cui, C. Z.; Shi, T.; and Riedl, M. 2023. Neural story
planning. In The AAAI-23 Workshop on Creative AI Across
Modalities.
Yuan, A.; Coenen, A.; Reif, E.; and Ippolito, D. 2022. Word-
craft: Story writing with large language models. In27th Inter-
national Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, 841–852.
ACM.
Zenil, H.; Delahaye, J.-P.; and Gaucherel, C. 2012. Image
characterization and classification by physical complexity.
Complexity 17(3):26–42.
Zhang, H.; Duckworth, D.; Ippolito, D.; and Neelakantan,
A. 2021. Trading off diversity and quality in natural lan-
guage generation. In Workshop on Human Evaluation of NLP
Systems (HumEval), 25–33. ACL.
Zhang, C.; Cheng, J.; Shumailov, I.; Constantinides, G.; and
Zhao, Y . 2023. Revisiting block-based quantisation: What
is important for sub-8-bit LLM inference? In 2023 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
9988–10006. ACL.