One fish, two fish, but not the whole sea:
Alignment reduces language models’ conceptual diversity
Sonia K. Murthy1,2, Tomer Ullman2,3, Jennifer Hu2
1School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University
2Kempner Institute for the Study of Natural and Artificial Intelligence, Harvard University
3Department of Psychology, Harvard University
soniamurthy@g.harvard.edu,{tomerullman, jenniferhu}@fas.harvard.edu
Abstract
Researchers in social science and psychology
have recently proposed using large language
models (LLMs) as replacements for humans
in behavioral research. In addition to argu-
ments about whether LLMs accurately cap-
ture population-level patterns, this has raised
questions about whether LLMs capture human-
like conceptual diversity. Separately, it is de-
bated whether post-training alignment (RLHF
or RLAIF) affects models’ internal diversity.
Inspired by human studies, we use a new
way of measuring the conceptual diversity of
synthetically-generated LLM “populations” by
relating the internal variability of simulated in-
dividuals to the population-level variability. We
use this approach to evaluate non-aligned and
aligned LLMs on two domains with rich hu-
man behavioral data. While no model reaches
human-like diversity, aligned models generally
display less diversity than their instruction fine-
tuned counterparts. Our findings highlight po-
tential trade-offs between increasing models’
value alignment and decreasing the diversity of
their conceptual representations.
1 Introduction
As large language models (LLMs) have become
more sophisticated, there has been growing inter-
est in using them to replace human labor. This
appeal of LLMs has even made its way to set-
tings where human behavior itself is the object
of inquiry: recently, researchers have proposed that
LLM-generated responses can be used in place of
human data for tasks such as polling, user studies,
and behavioral experiments (e.g., Aher et al., 2023;
Argyle et al., 2023; Hämäläinen et al., 2023; Binz
and Schulz, 2024; Manning et al., 2024). If possi-
ble, using a synthetic replacement for the process
of human data collection could be transformative
for a variety of human factors disciplines, from
political science to economics and psychology.
population ΔE
internal ΔE
P(>1 concept)
Word-color associations
Conceptual similarity judgements
heterogeneous 
population
homogenous 
population
population ΔE
internal ΔE
homogenous 
population
P(>1 concept)
heterogeneous 
population
population-level variation
individual-level variation
Figure 1: We investigate LLM populations comprised
of simulated individuals in two domains: color associ-
ations (top) and concept similarity (bottom). In both
domains, there is both individual- and population-level
variation. It is possible that individual variation overlaps
with the population average (homogeneous population)
or separates from it (heterogeneous population). Our ex-
periments are designed to tease these two options apart.
While prior work suggests that LLMs can cap-
ture certain behavioral patterns, there are ongoing
debates as to whether they are valid replacements
for human subjects (Dillion et al., 2023; Wang et al.,
2024a; Park et al., 2024). One key issue is whether
LLMs capture conceptual diversity: the variation
among individuals’ representations of a particu-
lar domain. A natural way to study conceptual
diversity is to study the variability in LLMs’ re-
sponse distributions at the population level – that
is, by considering averages across simulated indi-
viduals. However, population-level variability can
be a flawed measure of conceptual diversity for
several reasons. First, it assumes certain charac-
1
arXiv:2411.04427v3  [cs.CL]  7 Jul 2025

===PAGE===

teristics about the nature of people’s mental rep-
resentations that may not hold in practice – for
example, that people have high certainty in these
representations (e.g., Martí et al., 2018), or that
people’s responses are a deterministic best-guess,
with no additional information contained in suc-
cessive guesses (e.g., Vul and Pashler, 2008). Sec-
ond, assessing population-level variation without
individual-level variation can mask important infor-
mation about the population, particularly whether
it is homogeneous (comprised of individuals who
share similar underlying representations) or hetero-
geneous (comprised of individuals with meaning-
fully different representations) (see Figure 1).
Conceptual diversity may be negatively im-
pacted by alignment, which further complicates
the picture. Post-training alignment techniques,
such as RLHF (Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al.,
2022a) and RLAIF (Bai et al., 2022b), are now
standard parts of LLM development, and presumed
to contribute to the human-like abilities of models
(Ji et al., 2024). However, it has also been observed
that “aligned” models show biases that can limit the
lexical and content diversity of their outputs (janus,
2022; Padmakumar and He, 2024; Park et al., 2024;
O’Mahony et al., 2024). It also remains unknown
whether alignment to synthetic preferences (instead
of human preferences) might worsen these biases,
as it is possible these models “collapse” when re-
cursively trained on synthetically generated data
(Shumailov et al., 2024; Gerstgrasser et al., 2024).
In this paper, we (1) investigate the ability of
LLMs to capture human-like conceptual diversity,
and (2) analyze the effect of alignment by compar-
ing conceptual diversity across non-aligned models
to models aligned using RLHF or RLAIF. In our ex-
periments, we first simulate populations of unique
individuals in LLMs using two techniques pro-
posed by prior literature: temperature- and prompt-
based manipulations. We then evaluate ten open-
source LLMs on two domains with rich human
behavioral data: word-color associations, and con-
ceptual similarity judgments. While there is no
single agreed-upon metric for capturing conceptual
diversity, we consider two different metrics that
are each well-suited to their respective domains, to
measure the conceptual diversity of synthetically-
generated LLM “populations”.
We find that no model approaches human-like
conceptual diversity. Further, aligned models gen-
erally display less conceptual diversity than their
non-aligned, fine-tuned counterparts. Our findings
suggest that there may be trade-offs between in-
creasing model safety in terms of value alignment,
and decreasing other notions of safety, such as the
diversity of thought and opinion that models rep-
resent. We caution that these trade-offs should
be better understood before models are used as
replacements for human subjects, or deployed in
human-centered downstream applications.
2 Background
Recent works have proposed using LLMs as stand-
ins for humans in many applications and domains,
including opinion surveys and polling in political
science (Argyle et al., 2023), user studies in human-
computer interaction (Hämäläinen et al., 2023), an-
notation tasks (Gilardi et al., 2023), and various
economic, psycholinguistic, and social psychology
experiments (Aher et al., 2023; Dillion et al., 2023).
Several works have responded by identifying
LLMs’ lack of answer diversity as a potential harm
of using LLMs to replace human subjects. These
works have focused on whether models are capable
of capturing demographic- and subgroup-level vari-
ation in settings where accurately simulating the
social identities of a human population of interest
is directly relevant to the task. Wang et al. (2024a)
find that inference-time interventions to improve
models’ output diversity do not prevent LLMs from
misportraying and flattening the representations of
already marginalized demographic groups. Even
after explicit steering toward certain demographics,
LLMs still do not capture these group’s responses
on public opinion surveys (Santurkar et al., 2023).
These observations have motivated recent at-
tempts to go from broad, population-level obser-
vations of diversity, to metrics that assess finer-
grained notions. For example, He-Yueya et al.
(2024) measured the extent to which LMs cap-
ture human knowledge distributions on real-word
domains like language learning and mathematics.
Their metric captures whether two populations are
similarly sensitive to the relative difficulty of test
items. However, this metric is not well-suited for
domains that lack ground-truth answers or where
people’s mental representations are not easily pa-
rameterized. Franke et al. (2024) propose another
item-level account of diversity, from the perspec-
tive of Bayesian statistical modeling. They find
that LLMs do not capture human variance at the
item-level in an experiment on pragmatic language,
and aggregate item-level predictions to replicate
2

===PAGE===

Base model Non-aligned variant Aligned variant Alignment method
Mistral
(mistralai/Mistral-7B-v0.1)
Openchat
(openchat/openchat_3.5)
Starling
(berkeley-nest/Starling-LM-7B-alpha)
RLAIF (APA)
Mistral
(mistralai/Mistral-7B-v0.1)
Mistral-Instruct
(mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1)
Zephyr-Mistral
(HuggingFaceH4/zephyr-7b-beta)
RLAIF (DPO)
Gemma
(google/gemma-7b)
Gemma-Instruct
(google/gemma-7b-it)
Zephyr-Gemma
(HuggingFaceH4/zephyr-7b-gemma-v0.1)
RLAIF (DPO)
Llama
(meta-llama/Llama-2-7b-hf)
Llama
(meta-llama/Llama-2-7b-hf)
Llama-Chat
(meta-llama/Llama-2-7b-chat-hf)
RLHF (PPO)
Llama
(meta-llama/Llama-2-7b-hf)
Tulu
(allenai/tulu-2-7b)
Tulu-DPO
(allenai/tulu-2-dpo-7b)
RLAIF (DPO)
Table 1: Pairs of non-aligned and aligned models tested in our experiments. Huggingface identifiers are shown in
parentheses underneath model names. The base models are shown for reference and are not directly tested, with the
exception of the comparison between Llama and Llama-Chat. All models have 7B parameters.
condition-level effects seen in human data. Simi-
larly, Wang et al. (2024c) also find that LMs repli-
cate broad-level patterns (e.g., mean and standard
deviation) but fail to capture item-level patterns
of human behavior. These studies highlight the
importance of finer-grained comparisons between
model and human outputs, but leave open the ques-
tion of how to measure the relationship between
individual-level variation and population-level vari-
ation in rich conceptual domains.
3 Methods
Our experiments are designed to investigate two
related research questions: (1) Do modern LLMs
capture the conceptual diversity of human popu-
lations, i.e., individuals’ variability in conceptual
representations? and (2) How does post-training
alignment (here, RLHF or RLAIF) affect models’
ability to capture this feature of response distribu-
tions from human populations?
The basic logic of our experiments is as follows.
First, we identify domains where prior work has
demonstrated rich conceptual diversity in humans.
Second, we test whether LLMs capture concep-
tual diversity patterns by simulating “populations”,
using temperature- and prompting-based manipula-
tions. Finally, we compare the conceptual diversity
achieved by models against that of humans, and
specifically examine the effect of alignment on the
degree of fit between models and humans.
3.1 Domain 1: Word-color associations
The first domain probes people’s intuitive associa-
tions between words and colors, building on the ex-
periments of Murthy et al. (2022). In this task, hu-
man participants were presented with a target word
(such as “chalk” or “obligation”) and asked to click
on the color most associated with the word, from
a set of 88 color chips. Participants were tested in
two blocks, ultimately providing two color associa-
tions for each word. This design enables measures
of population variability (how much color associ-
ations vary across individuals) as well as internal
variability (how much they vary in an individual’s
own representation).
Model evaluation. To measure which color a
model “associates” with a particular target word,
we used the following query:1
Question: What is the HEX code of the color you
most associate with the word [WORD]? You must
respond with a guess, even if you’re unsure. Make
sure your response contains a valid 6-digit HEX
code.
Conditioned on this input, models were allowed
to freely generate subsequent text.2 Two samples
were elicited for each word and HEX codes were
extracted from models’ generations using a regular
expression.3 This procedure was repeated to collect
models’ color associations for the 199 words tested
by Murthy et al. (2022), for a total of 150 simulated
“subjects” (i.e., 150 unique prompting contexts for
the relevant experiments).
1For the experiments that simulate unique subjects through
prompting manipulations, the relevant context was prepended
to this query (see Section 3.3 for more details).
2While the human baseline was collected through interac-
tion with a visual color space, we adopt this task textual format
following previous work (Marjieh et al., 2023; Niedermann
et al., 2024)
3When one or both samples contained no valid HEX code,
the response was considered invalid and was excluded from
analyses (see Appendix, Figure 6 for the number of valid
responses for each model and manipulation).
3

===PAGE===

Population ΔE
Internal ΔE
60
40
20
6040200
“obligation”
“chalk”
P (multiple concepts)
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
Conceptual similarity judgements
ﬁnchrobinchickeneagleostrichpenguinsalmon
seal
dolphinwhale
Word
LincolnObamaSandersTrumpWarrenBushClintonBidenNixonReagan
politicians mean
animals mean
0.0
Word-color associationsa) b)
Figure 2: Human baselines in both domains. (a) Internal variability (y-axis) versus population variability (x-
axis) for human participants in the word-color association domain. Reproduced from Murthy et al. (2022). The
measures are correlated but clustered under the identity line (the internal variability is lower than population
variability), indicating a heterogeneous population in terms of conceptual diversity. (b) Probability of more than
one conceptual representation, estimated using Chinese Restaurant Process model on human data for conceptual
similarity judgement task (Martí et al., 2023).
Diversity metric. In order to examine concep-
tual diversity in any domain, including color-
associations, we need a diversity metric over the
space. Here, following Murthy et al. (2022), we
measure the variability between two colors (de-
noted by ∆E) by their perceptual similarity in
CIELAB space. For a given word w, we compute
internal and population measures of variability as
follows. ∆Einternal(w) measures the ∆E between
the colors chosen by a participant in the first and
second blocks for word w. ∆Epopulation(w) cap-
tures the similarity between different individuals’
color responses for word w (i.e., the average pair-
wise similarity among every pair of color responses
provided by different participants).
For each word w ∈ W , the heterogeneity of a
population (i.e., a set of subjectsS) is then captured
by the following metric:
dw = 1
S
X
s∈S
|∆Einternal(s) − ∆Epopulation(s)|√
2
(1)
Intuitively, this metric measures the divergence
from the “line of unity” – i.e., the signature of a ho-
mogeneous population in which individuals share
the same underlying distributions. The greater this
metric, the more conceptual diversity, since the vari-
ability between different individuals’ distributions
is greater than the variability of the individual’s
own internal distribution ( Figure 1, top).4
4The reverse scenario, where ∆Einternal >
∆Epopulation is also possible, though highly unlikely,
Human baseline. The relationship between
∆Einternal and ∆Epopulation for human partici-
pants is shown in Figure 2a, with data reproduced
from Murthy et al. (2022). While these two mea-
sures are correlated for humans, internal variability
is overall lower than population variability, consis-
tent with a heterogeneous population. For the hu-
man data, the average of the metric in Equation (1)
= 15.82 (95% CI: [15.18, 16.58]).
3.2 Domain 2: Conceptual similarity
judgements
The second domain, inspired by Martí et al. (2023),
probes the number of latent concept clusters in a
population. In this task, participants were asked
for similarity judgments between concepts in a par-
ticular category (e.g., “Which is more similar to
a finch, a whale or a penguin?”). Two categories
were tested: common animals, which are more
likely to have shared conceptual representations
across individuals; and United States politicians,
which are likely to have varying representations
across individuals.
Model evaluation. To measure similarity judg-
ments within concept categories, we presented
models with the following query:
Question: Which is more similar to a [TARGET],
especially as the sample size grows. Because the different
participants’ associations are independent samples, the
probability of sampling similar colors (low ∆Epopulation)
from different individuals’ highly variable internal probability
distributions (high ∆Einternal) is low.
4

===PAGE===

[CHOICE1] or [CHOICE2]? Respond only with
“[CHOICE1]” or “[CHOICE2]”.
[TARGET] is one of the 10 words from the relevant
category (animals or politicians), and [CHOICE1]
and [CHOICE2] cover all combinations of the re-
maining words therein. In most cases, model out-
put only one of the two answer choices, but for
outputs where additional text was generated, the
first sentence of the generation was selected (as it
usually contained the model’s response) and string
matching was used to identify the model’s choice.
If neither choice was present, the model’s response
for that query was excluded from further analyses.
Diversity metric. Here, the heterogeneity or di-
versity of the population intuitively corresponds to
the number of latent concepts for each word among
individuals in the population. To measure this for-
mally, the similarity judgment for a given word was
coded as a binary vector indicating the similarity
rating between every other pair of items. Following
Martí et al. (2023), the responses were then ana-
lyzed using a non-parameteric Bayesian clustering
model (Chinese restaurant process; CRP) to model
a distribution over the number of clusters (concepts)
for each word. For our analyses, we implement the
version of this model that implements a prior pref-
erence for fewer clusters and runs inference using
a Gibbs sampler.
For each word, the posterior distribution fit-
ted by the CRP was then used to estimate the
probability of only a single conceptual represen-
tation exists in the population of sampled individ-
uals. The higher this probability is, the less di-
verse the population is. Therefore, as our mea-
sure of population heterogeneity in this domain,
we compute 1 − P (one concept), or equivalently,
P (multiple concepts).
Human baseline. Martí et al. (2023) find that
words in the “politicians” category are far more
likely to have multiple meanings than “animal”
words (politicians: 0.69 (95% CI: [0.66, 0.72]); an-
imals: 0.43 (95% CI: [0.39, 0.48]); see Figure 2b).
This result reflects the conceptual diversity that is
inherent to human populations even in the simplest
domains: there exist multiple latent meanings and
representations even for words with very concrete,
real-world referents. Additionally, they find that
average between-subject reliability across all con-
cepts is 50%, meaning that two people picked at
random are equally likely to agree or disagree for a
given concept.
3.3 Simulating populations within models
Our main question is whether models can capture
human-like conceptual diversity, for the purposes
of simulating the response distributions of unique
human subjects. To investigate this question, we
tested two ways of manipulating the “diversity” of
responses generated by models: increasing the soft-
max temperature parameter, and conditioning on
different types of contexts. These techniques were
chosen because of their popularity in related lit-
erature, and their accessibility as inference-time
interventions for downstream users.
Method 1: Increasing temperature. Increasing
the temperature in the softmax normalization dur-
ing inference-time decoding effectively increases
the entropy of the distribution over tokens. Prior
work has explored this method as a way of increas-
ing the diversity of generated output (Yu et al.,
2023; Tevet and Berant, 2021; Peeperkorn et al.,
2024; Bellemare-Pepin et al., 2024). Most rele-
vant to our work, Wang et al. (2024a) explore dif-
ferent temperature values as a way to overcome
models’ flattening of the multi-faceted nature of
demographic groups. This work finds that tempera-
ture settings that do not just induce diversity in the
form of incoherence ( t ∈ [1.0, 1.2, 1.4]), also do
not do enough to induce meaningful heterogeneity
to solve the flattening of demographic groups.
For completeness and to see how much we can
push our measure of diversity, we test some higher
values of temperature settings for each model (t ∈
[t0, 1.5, 2.0], where t0 is the default temperature of
the base model5).
Method 2: Prompting. We also tested the ef-
fect of “persona prompting”, where the prompt
explicitly instructs the model to simulate a particu-
lar individual or group of individuals, usually using
group-specific demographic information. For ex-
ample, Wang et al. (2024a) use persona prompts of
the form “Speak from the perspective of [identity]
living in America”, and He-Yueya et al. (2024) use
more complex prompts such as “Pretend that you
are an 11-year-old student. Your gender is female.
You are eligible for free school meals due to be-
ing financially disadvantaged.” While both studies
found that such identity-based prompts do not cap-
ture relevant metrics to the extent seen in human
5Mistral has a default temperature of 1.0, Llama a default
of 0.9, and Gemma a default of 0.7.
5

===PAGE===

populations, other work has found success with
prompts that simulate expertise and developmental
stages (Salewski et al., 2024).
For our experiments, we adopt the demographic-
prompting paradigm, as this approach most closely
mimics the process of gathering a representative
sample of adult populations for behavioral exper-
iments in our domains. We prepended persona
contexts of the following form to the evaluation
query:
You are a [race] [gender] from [hometown]
in [state] who is [age] and works as a
[occupation].
We derive the template and field values for this
condition from (Wang et al., 2024a) with addi-
tions made to the [race] field to cover all the
United States census data categories and to the
[occupation] field, to induce more diversity
across our personas. We populate each field in
the context by randomly selecting a value for each.
We additionally considered three control condi-
tions: none, where no context was prepended to
the query (matching the prompting setup from the
temperature-based manipulations described above);
random, where we prepended contexts matched in
length to the persona-based contexts but on unre-
lated topics; and nonsense, where we scrambled
these unrelated contexts at the word-level. The lat-
ter two conditions were designed to test whether
adding randomness in the form of conditioning
models’ outputs on highly surprising tokens could
sufficiently simulate meaningful human diversity.
To create the random and nonsense prompt con-
texts, we first filtered English Wikipedia to remove
articles about people (to avoid reduplicating per-
sona prompting) as well as disambiguation pages.
We obtained the random contexts by taking the first
sentence of a randomly sampled article from the
filtered dataset. We obtained the nonsense contexts
by shuffling the words within each, and re-applying
sentence casing to each resulting bag of words.
This gave us a total of four prompting conditions,
for which the number of prompts varied depending
on the domain so as to most faithfully replicate
the participant sampling procedures for each ex-
periment (Ncolor = 150, Nconcept = 1800). In this
setting, we used each model’s default temperature.
3.4 Models
We test five pairs of open-source non-aligned and
aligned model variants, spanning across three fam-
ilies of base models: Mistral (Jiang et al., 2023),
Gemma (Gemma Team et al., 2024), and Llama
(Touvron et al., 2023). We generally use pairs such
that the non-aligned and aligned variants are both
fine-tuned on the same base model. This allows us
to factor out the effects of the underlying architec-
ture and pre-training, focusing only on the contrast
between alignment and other forms of fine-tuning.
Our tested models are summarized in Table 1.
Within the Mistral base family, we test two pairs of
non-aligned and aligned models: Openchat (Wang
et al., 2024b) vs Starling (Zhu et al., 2024), and
Mistral-Instruct (Jiang et al., 2023) vs Zephyr-
Mistral (Tunstall et al., 2024). For the Gemma base
family, we test Gemma-Instruct (Gemma Team
et al., 2024) vs Zephyr-Gemma (Tunstall et al.,
2024). And for the Llama base family, we test two
pairs of aligned and non-aligned models: Llama
(base) vs Llama-Chat (Touvron et al., 2023), and
Tulu vs Tulu-DPO (Ivison et al., 2023).
There are a few exceptions to the general group-
ing pattern described above. First, Starling under-
goes alignment on top of the already-reinforcement-
learning-fine-tuned (RLFT) Openchat model, in-
stead of the shared base Mistral model.6 And sec-
ond, Llama-Chat combines both instruction fine-
tuning and alignment into the same model, leav-
ing its non-aligned counterpart, Llama, as the only
model in our suite that has alsonot been instruction
fine-tuned after pre-training.
Our tested models span across two popular align-
ment methods: Reinforcement Learning from Hu-
man Feedback (RLHF; Bai et al., 2022a; Ouyang
et al., 2022), and Reinforcement Learning from
AI Feedback (RLAIF; Bai et al., 2022b). RLHF
involves collecting preference data from human
crowdworkers, which is then used either to derive
a reward model for subsequent fine-tuning (as in
PPO, Schulman et al. 2017; or APA, Zhu et al.
2023) or for direct, reward-free fine-tuning (as in
DPO; Rafailov et al., 2023). RLAIF involves a sim-
ilar process, but models are aligned to synthetically
generated data instead of human preferences.
In order to isolate the effect of alignment/training
methods, we control for model size, testing the 7B-
parameter version of all models. All models were
downloaded from HuggingFace.
6Because these models are still separated by one degree
of alignment, like the other model pairs we test, we still re-
fer to this pair as non-aligned vs. aligned in our results for
consistency.
6

===PAGE===

Model alignment (False, True)
Average distance to line of unity
Word-color associations
Openchat vs. 
Starling
Mistral-Instruct vs. 
Zephyr-Mistral
Gemma-Instruct vs. 
Zephyr-Gemma
Llama/Tulu vs.
Llama-Chat/Tulu-DPO
Non-aligned model Aligned model
none, defaultpersonarandomnonsense1.52.0
T emperature manipulations Prompt manipulations
Figure 3: Heterogeneity of simulated LLM population in word-color association domain for prompting and
temperature manipulations. The y-axis indicates dw (Equation (1)) averaged over words. Rows = baseline, followed
by prompting and temperature conditions; columns = model families. Darker bars indicate aligned models. For
reference, the human baseline (Murthy et al., 2022) is 15.82.
4 Results
4.1 Word-color associations
Figure 3 shows the main results from the word-
color association domain. The y-axis shows the
heterogeneity metric dw (Equation (1)) averaged
over all tested words. We omit the results from
two models due to a high number of invalid re-
sponses among their generations: Llama and Tulu
(see Appendix, Figure 6 for counts of invalid re-
sponses). Overall, we find that none of the models
reach the heterogeneity of the human population,
with low values for the diversity metric detailed
in Equation (1) compared to the human baseline
of 15.82. To more closely assess the effects of
temperature and prompting manipulations on mod-
els’ conceptual diversity we constructed a regres-
sion model predicting our diversity metric from
these conditions with random effects of LLM. In
a combined model including both predictors we
find a main effect of both prompt and tempera-
ture manipulation ( p < 0.001 for both), but a
much higher coefficient for prompts (b = 0.294)
than for temperatures (b = 0.093), with minimal
between-group variability among individual LLMs
7

===PAGE===

Conceptual similarity judgements
Openchat vs. 
Starling
Mistral-Instruct vs. 
Zephyr-Mistral
Gemma-Instruct vs. 
Zephyr-Gemma
Llama/Tulu vs.
Llama-Chat/Tulu-DPO
none, defaultpersonarandomnonsense
Concept category
animals politicians animals politicians animals politicians animals politicians
Non-aligned model Aligned model Human baseline (animals) Human baseline (politicians)
P(multiple concepts)
1.52.0
Temperature manipulations Prompt manipulations
NA NA NA NA
NA NA
NA NA
Figure 4: Heterogeneity of simulated LLM population in conceptual similarity domain. The y-axis indicates the
probability of more than one conceptual representation, estimated using Chinese Restaurant Process model. Rows
= baseline, followed by prompting and temperature conditions; columns = model families. Darker bars indicate
aligned models. Human baselines for each conceptual category (Martí et al., 2023) are shown as horizontal lines.
(b = 0.177, SE= 0.058). These findings suggest
that adding noise through prompting techniques is
more effective in increasing population heterogene-
ity than adding noise via softmax temperature.
Turning to the effect of alignment (i.e., com-
paring light and dark bars within each facet), we
find that the aligned model variants have similar or
lower heterogeneity than their non-aligned coun-
terparts, with the exception of the Gemma mod-
els under the temperature manipulations. This
is reflected in the results of a regression model
predicting our diversity metric from the absence
or presence of model alignment with random ef-
fects of model family (columns in Figure 3). We
find a significant negative main effect of alignment
(b = −0.495, p <0.001), particularly contribut-
8

===PAGE===

ing to a decrease in our diversity metric in this
domain, with minimal between-group variability
among model families (b = 0.114, SE= 0.055).
We also qualitatively analyzed the similarity be-
tween models’ and humans’ word-color associa-
tions. Figure 5 shows human and model distri-
butions over color space for three example words
and the persona prompting manipulation relative
to the no-prompt baseline. These are well-aligned
in some cases, like “tomato”, which is strongly
associated with red. Interestingly, for more ab-
stract words like “optimism” or “fame” (not pic-
tured), humans have heterogeneous color distribu-
tions, whereas models’ responses are less diverse
but still interpretable – for example, “fame” is as-
sociated with gold and “jealousy” with green. For
the word “skin”, we see humans’ color associa-
tions feature the lighter skin tones that one might
expect from a Western population. In contrast,
some of the models (e.g. Openchat, Starling, and
persona-prompted Gemma-Instruct) actually do a
better job of diversifying these associations. This
might suggest that models’ word-color associations
largely rely on distributional semantics (e.g., com-
mon co-occurrences such as “green with jealousy”),
whereas humans might have other associations with
abstract concepts that aren’t commonly expressed
in text corpora. The similarity between models’
and humans’ color associations also corroborates
prior work showing that text-only models can learn
structure in perceptual domains such as color space
(e.g., Abdou et al., 2021; Patel and Pavlick, 2022).
4.2 Conceptual similarity judgments
Figure 4 shows the main results from the concep-
tual similarity domain. We omit the results from
one model in this domain due to a high number of
invalid responses among their generations: Llama
(see Appendix, Figure 6 for counts of invalid re-
sponses)7.
We find that in this domain as well, models
largely fall short of the heterogeneity of the hu-
man population (horizontal lines), with only a few
non-aligned models reaching the human baseline.
Across models and concept words, the CRP es-
timates a very low probability that multiple con-
ceptual representations exist among the population.
Qualitatively, in Figure 4, we see that with the ex-
7Specific models and manipulations (e.g. high tempera-
ture settings) with a high number of invalid responses were
also removed post-clustering due to insufficient data and are
indicated by “NA”.
ception of the Gemma-Instruct and Zephyr-Gemma
pair (and in some of the temperature manipulation
settings), this effect is more pronounced among
the models that have been aligned. The results
of a regression model show a significant main ef-
fect of alignment (b = −0.079, p <0.001) on the
probability of multiple concepts existing among
an LLM-simulated population, with minimal vari-
ability across model families (b = 0 .002, SE=
0.009).
The results of a combined regression model pre-
dicting our diversity metric in this domain from
both predictors of prompt and temperature ma-
nipulations (with random effects of model fam-
ily) showed small, though significant effects of
both manipulations (b = 0 .019, p <0.001) and
(b = −0.018, p <0.001), respectively. This result
corroborates that of the word-color domain, where
prompting manipulations seem to have a greater
impact on increasing models’ conceptual diversity
than temperature manipulations, though the effects
are small.
Interestingly, the models also fail to capture an-
other signature pattern in the human data: increased
diversity for politician words than animal words
(cf. Figure 2b). The heterogeneity measure gen-
erally stays the same or even slightly decreases
between animals and politicians (with a few ex-
ceptions). It is reasonable to expect that text-only
models would be able to learn conceptual similar-
ity relationships based on the contexts in which
the terms appear, and yet, we do not find greater
diversity for politician words. We speculate that
this could be related to political concepts being
more important “targets” for alignment, as they
may be associated with more extreme or emotion-
ally charged language.
We also consider a second measure of popula-
tion heterogeneity: the probability that two random
subjects will share similarity judgments for a given
concept. The average between-subjects reliabil-
ity for the human baseline is 50% (ranging from
33% to 62% with no significant differences be-
tween animals or politicians). Across temperature
and prompt manipulations, models achieve similar
or lower average reliability, suggesting high varia-
tion between simulated “subjects”’ responses (see
Appendix, Figure 10). However, taken together
with the generally low probability of multiple con-
cept clusters existing within these LLM-simulated
populations, suggests that this variability does not
correspond to meaningful, structured differences
9

===PAGE===

in conceptual representations as it appears to in
humans.
5 Discussion
Our findings corroborate those of recent work in
many domains that suggest that injecting variabil-
ity in models’ outputs through temperature and
prompt manipulations does not do enough to in-
duce meaningful variability on relevant metrics,
and often just leads to highly incoherent outputs.
One reason for this could be that increasing the
entropy of the output distribution or conditioning
on highly surprising tokens will increase models’
uncertainty over subsequent tokens in a domain-
general sense. However, the kind of uncertainty
that gives rise to meaningful individual differences
in humans is likely much more constrained to a
particular task and cognitive domain than this. Ex-
ploring more task-specific methods for injecting
structured randomness into models’ generations
could help LLMs to overcome their population-
average behavior in ways that more meaningfully
simulate the cognitive differences in human indi-
viduals.
This raises further questions of what factors
give rise to individual differences in humans and
whether these are the same attributes that can result
in individual-like models. While it is common to
obtain a representative samples of a human popu-
lation for studies in cognitive science using iden-
tity attributes like gender or race, the identity-level
representations of people that are most easily repli-
cated in post-training methods likely do not capture
the reasons for the differences in people’s concep-
tual representations. Exploring corresponding no-
tions of context-specific cognitive or computational
resources (e.g., working memory) in models could
allow them to serve as testbeds for theories of in-
dividual differences in humans (cf. Hu and Frank,
2024).
6 Conclusion
Here, we used a new approach to evaluate concep-
tual diversity in synthetically-generated LLM “pop-
ulations”. Specifically, we adopted metrics from
prior studies of conceptual diversity in humans
that relate the variability in individuals’ underlying
representations to population-level variability. We
evaluate two popular methods for eliciting unique
individuals from LLMs – temperature and prompt-
ing manipulations – in the word-color and word-
tomato skin jealousy
Humans
Openchat
Starling
Gemma-Instruct
Zephyr-Gemma
Mistral-Instruct
Zephyr-Mistral
Llama
Llama-Chat
Tulu
Tulu-DPO
none persona none persona none persona
Figure 5: Models’ and humans’ color associations for
a variety of word types. For words where there is high
human variation (e.g. abstract words like “optimism”)
the models’ responses appear to collapse to just handful
of colors, but these colors are easily interpretable (e.g.
jealousy≈green)
concept domains and find that adding noise in the
form of unrelated and randomly shuffled prompts
does more to increase model diversity than persona
prompting and temperature manipulations. Across
two domains, no model reached human-level con-
ceptual diversity. Further, our results suggest that
alignment to synthetic or human preferences (in
the form of RLAIF and RLHF) flattens models’
conceptual diversity in these domains, compared
to their base or instruction fine-tuned counterparts.
While alignment has now become a central part
of LLM development, our findings urge caution
that more work should be done to understand how
it affects models’ internal diversity of “opinions” or
conceptual representations. This is especially im-
portant given recent calls to use LLMs as stand-ins
for human subjects in behavioral research. While
it is clear that there could be gains under this
paradigm, we should also ask: what might we be
losing?
Limitations
We tested a limited set of models with a relatively
small number of parameters (7B), due to compu-
tational resource constraints. In addition, we only
tested two popular alignment methods, RLHF and
RLAIF. It remains unknown whether larger models,
possibly aligned using different techniques or pref-
erence datasets, would exhibit the same patterns
found in our experiments.
10

===PAGE===

We only tested models in English-language do-
mains, and we compared models to data collected
from human participants based in the United States
(Murthy et al., 2022) or collected by US-based re-
searchers (Martí et al., 2023). While even these rel-
atively homogeneous participants already exhibit
individual-level variability, which LLMs fail to cap-
ture, an important consideration for future work is
to examine conceptual representations across in-
dividuals with more diverse cultural and personal
experiences.
Finally, we note that the models were tested in
relatively simple domains (word-color associations,
and similarity judgments between animals or politi-
cians), which might not reflect the settings or appli-
cations in which models will be used.
Acknowledgments
We thank the members of the Harvard Com-
putation, Cognition, and Development Lab,
as well as Ilia Sucholutsky, for their helpful
comments and discussion. We also thank Bala
Desinghu for support with computing resources.
TU was supported by the Jacobs Foundation.
This material is based upon work supported
by the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship
under Grant No. DGE 2140743 to SKM, and
by the Kempner Institute for the Study of Natu-
ral and Artificial Intelligence at Harvard University.
The code and data for our analyses is available at
https://github.com/skmur/onefish-twofish.
References
Mostafa Abdou, Artur Kulmizev, Daniel Hershcovich,
Stella Frank, Ellie Pavlick, and Anders Søgaard.
2021. Can Language Models Encode Perceptual
Structure Without Grounding? A Case Study in
Color. In Proceedings of the 25th Conference on
Computational Natural Language Learning, pages
109–132, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Gati Aher, Rosa I. Arriaga, and Adam Tauman Kalai.
2023. Using large language models to simulate mul-
tiple humans and replicate human subject studies.
In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference
on Machine Learning, ICML’23. JMLR.org. Place:
Honolulu, Hawaii, USA.
Lisa P. Argyle, Ethan C. Busby, Nancy Fulda, Joshua R.
Gubler, Christopher Rytting, and David Wingate.
2023. Out of One, Many: Using Language Mod-
els to Simulate Human Samples. Political Analysis,
31(3):337–351.
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda
Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain,
Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan,
Nicholas Joseph, Saurav Kadavath, Jackson Kernion,
Tom Conerly, Sheer El-Showk, Nelson Elhage, Zac
Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Tristan Hume,
Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Liane Lovitt, Neel
Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Dario Amodei, Tom
Brown, Jack Clark, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah,
Ben Mann, and Jared Kaplan. 2022a. Training a
Helpful and Harmless Assistant with Reinforcement
Learning from Human Feedback.
Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu,
Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones, Anna
Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron
McKinnon, Carol Chen, Catherine Olsson, Christo-
pher Olah, Danny Hernandez, Dawn Drain, Deep
Ganguli, Dustin Li, Eli Tran-Johnson, Ethan Perez,
Jamie Kerr, Jared Mueller, Jeffrey Ladish, Joshua
Landau, Kamal Ndousse, Kamile Lukosuite, Liane
Lovitt, Michael Sellitto, Nelson Elhage, Nicholas
Schiefer, Noemi Mercado, Nova DasSarma, Robert
Lasenby, Robin Larson, Sam Ringer, Scott John-
ston, Shauna Kravec, Sheer El Showk, Stanislav Fort,
Tamera Lanham, Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Tom Con-
erly, Tom Henighan, Tristan Hume, Samuel R. Bow-
man, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Ben Mann, Dario Amodei,
Nicholas Joseph, Sam McCandlish, Tom Brown, and
Jared Kaplan. 2022b. Constitutional AI: Harmless-
ness from AI Feedback.
Antoine Bellemare-Pepin, François Lespinasse, Philipp
Thölke, Yann Harel, Kory Mathewson, Jay A. Olson,
Yoshua Bengio, and Karim Jerbi. 2024. Divergent
Creativity in Humans and Large Language Models.
Marcel Binz and Eric Schulz. 2024. Turning large lan-
guage models into cognitive models. In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations.
Danica Dillion, Niket Tandon, Yuling Gu, and Kurt
Gray. 2023. Can AI language models replace hu-
man participants? Trends in Cognitive Sciences ,
27(7):597–600.
Michael Franke, Polina Tsvilodub, and Fausto Carcassi.
2024. Bayesian Statistical Modeling with Predictors
from LLMs.
Gemma Team, Thomas Mesnard, Cassidy Hardin,
Robert Dadashi, Surya Bhupatiraju, Shreya Pathak,
Laurent Sifre, Morgane Rivière, Mihir Sanjay
Kale, Juliette Love, Pouya Tafti, Léonard Hussenot,
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Adam Roberts, Aditya
Barua, Alex Botev, Alex Castro-Ros, Ambrose Slone,
Amélie Héliou, Andrea Tacchetti, Anna Bulanova,
Antonia Paterson, Beth Tsai, Bobak Shahriari, Char-
line Le Lan, Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, Clé-
ment Crepy, Daniel Cer, Daphne Ippolito, David
Reid, Elena Buchatskaya, Eric Ni, Eric Noland, Geng
Yan, George Tucker, George-Christian Muraru, Grig-
ory Rozhdestvenskiy, Henryk Michalewski, Ian Ten-
ney, Ivan Grishchenko, Jacob Austin, James Keel-
ing, Jane Labanowski, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Jeff
11

===PAGE===

Stanway, Jenny Brennan, Jeremy Chen, Johan Fer-
ret, Justin Chiu, Justin Mao-Jones, Katherine Lee,
Kathy Yu, Katie Millican, Lars Lowe Sjoesund, Lisa
Lee, Lucas Dixon, Machel Reid, Maciej Mikuła,
Mateo Wirth, Michael Sharman, Nikolai Chinaev,
Nithum Thain, Olivier Bachem, Oscar Chang, Oscar
Wahltinez, Paige Bailey, Paul Michel, Petko Yotov,
Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Rahma Chaabouni, Ramona
Comanescu, Reena Jana, Rohan Anil, Ross McIl-
roy, Ruibo Liu, Ryan Mullins, Samuel L. Smith, Se-
bastian Borgeaud, Sertan Girgin, Sholto Douglas,
Shree Pandya, Siamak Shakeri, Soham De, Ted Kli-
menko, Tom Hennigan, Vlad Feinberg, Wojciech
Stokowiec, Yu-hui Chen, Zafarali Ahmed, Zhitao
Gong, Tris Warkentin, Ludovic Peran, Minh Giang,
Clément Farabet, Oriol Vinyals, Jeff Dean, Koray
Kavukcuoglu, Demis Hassabis, Zoubin Ghahramani,
Douglas Eck, Joelle Barral, Fernando Pereira, Eli
Collins, Armand Joulin, Noah Fiedel, Evan Senter,
Alek Andreev, and Kathleen Kenealy. 2024. Gemma:
Open Models Based on Gemini Research and Tech-
nology.
Matthias Gerstgrasser, Rylan Schaeffer, Apratim Dey,
Rafael Rafailov, Tomasz Korbak, Henry Sleight, Ra-
jashree Agrawal, John Hughes, Dhruv Bhandarkar
Pai, Andrey Gromov, Dan Roberts, Diyi Yang,
David L. Donoho, and Sanmi Koyejo. 2024. Is Model
Collapse Inevitable? Breaking the Curse of Recur-
sion by Accumulating Real and Synthetic Data. In
First Conference on Language Modeling.
Fabrizio Gilardi, Meysam Alizadeh, and Maël Kubli.
2023. Chatgpt outperforms crowd workers for
text-annotation tasks. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
120.
Perttu Hämäläinen, Mikke Tavast, and Anton Kunnari.
2023. Evaluating large language models in gener-
ating synthetic hci research data: a case study. In
Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’23, New York,
NY , USA. Association for Computing Machinery.
Joy He-Yueya, Wanjing Anya Ma, Kanishk Gandhi,
Benjamin W. Domingue, Emma Brunskill, and
Noah D. Goodman. 2024. Psychometric Alignment:
Capturing Human Knowledge Distributions via Lan-
guage Models.
Jennifer Hu and Michael Frank. 2024. Auxiliary task
demands mask the capabilities of smaller language
models. In First Conference on Language Modeling.
Hamish Ivison, Yizhong Wang, Valentina Pyatkin,
Nathan Lambert, Matthew Peters, Pradeep Dasigi,
Joel Jang, David Wadden, Noah A. Smith, Iz Beltagy,
and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2023. Camels in a Chang-
ing Climate: Enhancing LM Adaptation with Tulu
2.
janus. 2022. Mysteries of mode collapse. LESS-
WRONG.
Jiaming Ji, Tianyi Qiu, Boyuan Chen, Borong Zhang,
Hantao Lou, Kaile Wang, Yawen Duan, Zhong-
hao He, Jiayi Zhou, Zhaowei Zhang, Fanzhi Zeng,
Kwan Yee Ng, Juntao Dai, Xuehai Pan, Aidan
O’Gara, Yingshan Lei, Hua Xu, Brian Tse, Jie Fu,
Stephen McAleer, Yaodong Yang, Yizhou Wang,
Song-Chun Zhu, Yike Guo, and Wen Gao. 2024. AI
Alignment: A Comprehensive Survey.
Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Men-
sch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego
de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guil-
laume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, Lélio Renard Lavaud,
Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao,
Thibaut Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix,
and William El Sayed. 2023. Mistral 7B. arXiv
preprint.
Benjamin S. Manning, Kehang Zhu, and John J. Horton.
2024. Automated Social Science: Language Models
as Scientist and Subjects.
Raja Marjieh, Ilia Sucholutsky, Pol van Rijn, Nori Ja-
coby, and Thomas L. Griffiths. 2023. Large language
models predict human sensory judgments across six
modalities. Scientific Reports, 14.
Louis Martí, Francis Mollica, Steven T. Piantadosi, and
Celeste Kidd. 2018. Certainty is primarily deter-
mined by past performance during concept learning.
Open Mind : Discoveries in Cognitive Science, 2:47–
60.
Louis Martí, Shengyi Wu, Steven T. Piantadosi, and Ce-
leste Kidd. 2023. Latent diversity in human concepts.
Open Mind : Discoveries in Cognitive Science, 7:79
– 92.
Sonia K. Murthy, Thomas L. Griffiths, and Robert D.
Hawkins. 2022. Shades of confusion: Lexical uncer-
tainty modulates ad hoc coordination in an interactive
communication task. Cognition, 225.
Jakob Niedermann, Ilia Sucholutsky, Raja Marjieh, Elif
Celen, Thomas L Griffiths, Nori Jacoby, and Pol van
Rijn. 2024. Studying the effect of globalization on
color perception using multilingual online recruit-
ment and large language models.
Laura O’Mahony, Leo Grinsztajn, Hailey Schoelkopf,
and Stella Biderman. 2024. Attributing Mode Col-
lapse in the fine-tuning of Large Language Models.
In ICLR 2024 Workshop on Mathematical and Em-
pirical Understanding of Foundation Models.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida,
Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang,
Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John
Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller,
Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder,
Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. 2022.
Training language models to follow instructions with
human feedback. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, volume 35, pages 27730–27744.
Curran Associates, Inc.
12

===PAGE===

Vishakh Padmakumar and He He. 2024. Does writing
with language models reduce content diversity? In
The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna, Austria, May
7-11, 2024. OpenReview.net.
Peter S. Park, Philipp Schoenegger, and Chongyang Zhu.
2024. Diminished diversity-of-thought in a standard
large language model. Behavior Research Methods,
56(6):5754–5770.
Roma Patel and Ellie Pavlick. 2022. Mapping Language
Models to Grounded Conceptual Spaces. In Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations.
Max Peeperkorn, Tom Kouwenhoven, Dan Brown, and
Anna Jordanous. 2024. Is Temperature the Creativity
Parameter of Large Language Models? In Proceed-
ings of the 15th International Conference on Compu-
tational Creativity (ICCC’24).
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christo-
pher D. Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea Finn.
2023. Direct Preference Optimization: Your Lan-
guage Model is Secretly a Reward Model. In Thirty-
seventh Conference on Neural Information Process-
ing Systems.
Leonard Salewski, Stephan Alaniz, Isabel Rio-Torto,
Eric Schulz, and Zeynep Akata. 2024. In-context im-
personation reveals large language models’ strengths
and biases. In Proceedings of the 37th International
Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems, NIPS ’23, Red Hook, NY , USA. Curran Asso-
ciates Inc.
Shibani Santurkar, Esin Durmus, Faisal Ladhak, Cinoo
Lee, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. 2023.
Whose opinions do language models reflect? In
Proceedings of the 40th International Conference
on Machine Learning, ICML’23. JMLR.org. Place:
Honolulu, Hawaii, USA.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec
Radford, and Oleg Klimov. 2017. Proximal Policy
Optimization Algorithms.
Ilia Shumailov, Zakhar Shumaylov, Yiren Zhao, Nicolas
Papernot, Ross Anderson, and Yarin Gal. 2024. AI
models collapse when trained on recursively gener-
ated data. Nature, 631(8022):755–759.
Guy Tevet and Jonathan Berant. 2021. Evaluating the
Evaluation of Diversity in Natural Language Gen-
eration. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: Main Volume, pages 326–346,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Al-
bert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti
Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cristian Canton
Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu,
Jude Fernandes, Jeremy Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller,
Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, An-
thony Hartshorn, Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan
Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa,
Isabel Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura,
Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee, Di-
ana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Mar-
tinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra, Igor Moly-
bog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizen-
stein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi, Alan Schelten,
Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subrama-
nian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh Tang, Ross Tay-
lor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu,
Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen Zhang, Angela Fan,
Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Ro-
driguez, Robert Stojnic, Sergey Edunov, and Thomas
Scialom. 2023. Llama 2: Open Foundation and Fine-
Tuned Chat Models.
Lewis Tunstall, Edward Emanuel Beeching, Nathan
Lambert, Nazneen Rajani, Kashif Rasul, Younes
Belkada, Shengyi Huang, Leandro V on Werra, Clé-
mentine Fourrier, Nathan Habib, Nathan Sarrazin,
Omar Sanseviero, Alexander M. Rush, and Thomas
Wolf. 2024. Zephyr: Direct Distillation of LM Align-
ment. In First Conference on Language Modeling.
Edward Vul and Harold Pashler. 2008. Measuring the
crowd within. Psychological Science, 19:645 – 647.
Angelina Wang, Jamie Morgenstern, and John P. Dick-
erson. 2024a. Large language models should not
replace human participants because they can mis-
portray and flatten identity groups.
Guan Wang, Sijie Cheng, Xianyuan Zhan, Xiangang
Li, Sen Song, and Yang Liu. 2024b. OpenChat: Ad-
vancing Open-source Language Models with Mixed-
Quality Data. In The Twelfth International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations.
Pengda Wang, Huiqi Zou, Zihan Yan, Feng Guo, Tian-
jun Sun, Ziang Xiao, and Bo Zhang. 2024c. Not Yet:
Large Language Models Cannot Replace Human Re-
spondents for Psychometric Research.
Yue Yu, Yuchen Zhuang, Jieyu Zhang, Yu Meng,
Alexander J Ratner, Ranjay Krishna, Jiaming Shen,
and Chao Zhang. 2023. Large Language Model as
Attributed Training Data Generator: A Tale of Di-
versity and Bias. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, volume 36, pages 55734–55784.
Curran Associates, Inc.
Banghua Zhu, Evan Frick, Tianhao Wu, Hanlin Zhu,
Karthik Ganesan, Wei-Lin Chiang, Jian Zhang, and
Jiantao Jiao. 2024. Starling-7B: Improving Helpful-
ness and Harmlessness with RLAIF. In First Confer-
ence on Language Modeling.
Banghua Zhu, Hiteshi Sharma, Felipe Vieira Frujeri,
Shi Dong, Chenguang Zhu, Michael I. Jordan, and
Jiantao Jiao. 2023. Fine-Tuning Language Models
with Advantage-Induced Policy Alignment.
13

===PAGE===

A Percentage of invalid responses
Figure 6 shows the percentage of total queried re-
sponses that constituted invalid responses for each
model in each domain. We omit the results of mod-
els that have an average of 70% or more invalid
responses across all prompt and temperature ma-
nipulations: Llama and Tulu on the color task, and
Llama on the concept task. In general, we find that
adding noise via high temperature and unrelated
prompt contexts increases incoherence and thus
invalidity, not meaningful diversity.
B Population vs internal ∆E
Figures 7 and 8 show the population ∆E versus
internal ∆E for prompt- and temperature-based
manipulations, respectively. In all settings, the
points are near the line of unity, suggesting low
population heterogeneity.
C Comparing model and human color
associations
To validate models’ ability to perform word-color
associations, we report results comparing the sim-
ilarity between models’ and humans’ word-color
associations. Figure 9 shows the Jensen-Shannon
divergence between models’ and humans’ color
response distributions, averaged over all words.
D Between-subjects reliability for concept
task
As an additional measure of population heterogene-
ity in the conceptual similarity domain, we calcu-
late the between-subjects reliability for the human
baseline and model data (the probability that two
random subjects will agree on the similarity judge-
ments for a given concept).
14

===PAGE===

Word-color associations
Conceptual similarity judgements
Percent invalid responses
Models
Starling
Openchat
Llama
Llama-Chat
Mistral-InstructZephyr-Mistral
Tulu
Tulu-DPO
none, default none, 1.5 none, 2.0
persona, default random, default nonsense, default
manipulations: prompt, temperature
Gemma-InstructZephyr-Gemma
Figure 6: Number of invalid responses for the word-color associations task (top) and conceptual similarity judge-
ments task (bottom) for each tested combination of prompting condition and temperature manipulation. We omit
the results of Llama and Tulu on the color task, and for Llama on the concept task given the low average valid
responses across prompt and temperature manipulations. In general, we find that adding noise via high temperature
and unrelated prompt contexts increases incoherence, not meaningful diversity.
15

===PAGE===

0 20 40 60 80 100 120
Population E
0
20
40
60
80
100
120Internal E
surprise
speed
microscope
verbadmirationadmirationjealousyspeed
firepassionlemonchalkhellhellelephantsun
openchat, r = 0.99
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
Population E
0
20
40
60
80
100
120Internal E
speed
verb
justicedemocracyfreedomdemocracycommunicationadmiration
cigarfirefiresunvaguenesstomatovagueness
clarity
mistral-instruct, r = 0.97
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
Population E
0
20
40
60
80
100
120Internal E
speed
verbneedle
imaginationcommunication
shirtappearanceresponsibility
bonetomatoskinshynessbeautylemonhell
chalk
gemma-instruct, r = 0.93
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
Population E
0
20
40
60
80
100
120Internal E
fish
crab
blessingrazoroceanmicroscopetheoryflag
toastvagueness
toastchalk
bone
lemondaffodil
rose
llama2-chat, r = 0.97
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
Population E
0
20
40
60
80
100
120Internal E
verb
microscope
nounequalityadmirationfaithrealityjealousy
lemoncanyonpantherinflamationironcigar
vaguenessinflamation
starling, r = 0.99
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
Population E
0
20
40
60
80
100
120Internal E
absurdity
nounflagfriendlinessheroism
odditydemocracyoddity
spinachchalktomatounicorn
gloomsungloom
mirror
zephyr-mistral, r = 0.99
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
Population E
0
20
40
60
80
100
120Internal E
speed
verb
democracy
verbnoblityflagdiversityfaith
forkclaritysunpantherboneskinpantherchalk
zephyr-gemma, r = 0.99
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
Population E
0
20
40
60
80
100
120Internal E
speed
pride
verb
jealousyprideappleappledisgust
windowdaffodilgloomcornflourcornflourvagueness
mirrorchalk
tulu-dpo, r = 0.99
prompt
none
identity
nonsense
random
Figure 7: Population vs. Internal ∆E for prompting manipulations.
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
Population E
0
20
40
60
80
100
120Internal E
speed
obviousness
nounnountendencyobviousnessequalityadmiration
firepassionlemonchalkhellhellelephantsun
openchat, r = 0.99
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
Population E
0
20
40
60
80
100
120Internal E
speed
verb
flag
desire freedomfreedomjusticemuscle
cigarshynessmirrorchalkfirefire
passion
clarity
mistral-instruct, r = 0.97
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
Population E
0
20
40
60
80
100
120Internal E
speed
magic
appleinsanityneedlemisconceptionheroismjealousy
tomatorevoltshynesssuitskinchalkviciousness
weapon
gemma-instruct, r = 0.95
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
Population E
0
20
40
60
80
100
120Internal E
fish
crab
blessingrazoroceanmicroscopeheroismheroism
joytoastvagueness
roselemon
sundaffodil
rose
llama2-chat, r = 0.97
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
Population E
0
20
40
60
80
100
120Internal E
verb
butterflysurprise
microscopestethoscopediversityanxietypride
ironbonepantherinflamationironcigar
vaguenessinflamation
starling, r = 0.99
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
Population E
0
20
40
60
80
100
120Internal E
pride
absurdity
verbnoundiversitycrazinessmagicchaos
chalktomatounicornbonegloomsunmirrormirror
zephyr-mistral, r = 0.99
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
Population E
0
20
40
60
80
100
120Internal E
speed
verb
speed
equalityrandomnessabsurdityspeedtendency
daffodilwindowbonepantherboneskinpantherchalk
zephyr-gemma, r = 0.99
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
Population E
0
20
40
60
80
100
120Internal E
speed
freedom
speedenergyurge heroismmagicexcitement
skinbonegrapecornflourcornflourvagueness
mirrorchalk
tulu-dpo, r = 0.98
temperature
default
1.5
2.0
Figure 8: Population vs. Internal ∆E for temperature manipulations.
16

===PAGE===

Jensen-Shannon Divergence from
Human Response Distribution
none, default persona random nonsense 1.5 2.0
T emperature manipulationsPrompt manipulations
Model Name
Starling
Openchat
Llama-Chat
Mistral-Instruct
Zephyr-Mistral
Tulu-DPO
Gemma-Instruct
Zephyr-Gemma
Word-color associations
Figure 9: Jensen-Shannon divergence between models’ color response distributions and humans’ for each word.
Starling
Openchat
Llama
Llama-Chat
Mistral-InstructZephyr-Mistral
Tulu
Tulu-DPO
Gemma-InstructZephyr-Gemma
Humans
none, default none, 1.5 none, 2.0
persona, default random, default nonsense, default
manipulations: prompt, temperature
human data
Conceptual similarity judgements
Between-subjects reliability
Figure 10: Between-subjects reliability for model data and human baseline in the conceptual similarity domain.
17