 The Bizarre Cottage Industry of YouTube Obituary Pirates | WIRED 

 Skip to main content 

 SECURITY 
 POLITICS 
 THE BIG STORY 
 BUSINESS 
 SCIENCE 
 CULTURE 
 REVIEWS 

 Newsletters 

 Security 
 Politics 
 The Big Story 
 Business 
 Science 
 Culture 
 Reviews 
 More 
 The Big Interview Magazine Events WIRED Insider WIRED Consulting 

 Newsletters 
 Podcasts 
 Video 
 Livestreams 
 Merch 

 Search 

 Kate Knibbs 

 Culture 
 Sep 22, 2023 6:00 AM 

 The Bizarre Cottage Industry of YouTube Obituary Pirates

 If you Google someone who recently died, you might see a flood of near-identical videos of men reading obits. Here’s why.

 Play/Pause Button 

 Video: James Marshall; Getty Images 

 Save this story 

 Save this story 

 A few weeks ago, a friend of mine found out that a childhood classmate had died unexpectedly. They hadn’t stayed in touch, but he was sad and curious about what had happened, so he did what people do when they hear that someone they know has passed away: Googled her obituary. What he found was odd—so much so that he texted to ask if I’d ever heard of such a thing. Along with pages hosting her official obit, he saw 10 separate YouTube videos of different people casually reciting information about her death.

 Next of Kin 

 After-Loss Tech Wants to Ease the Logistics of Death

 Sophia Laurenzi 

 Death Match 

 The Morbid War Over Online Obituaries

 Ben Weiss 

 Plaintext 

 How to Die—and Grieve—in 2020

 Steven Levy 

 He’s now part of a group united by an unsettling but increasingly commonplace experience. People who lose somebody, whether it’s a dearly cherished family member or a long-lost acquaintance, must now navigate a slimy cottage industry of profiteers trying to hijack their attention. Instead of finding important funeral details or where to write a remembrance or send flowers, they are confronted by a flood of low-budget videos crudely summarizing the death notices of the person they’ve lost.

 Obituary pirating , where people scrape and republish obituaries from funeral homes and websites like Legacy.com, has been an ethically dubious business for years. Piracy websites are often skilled enough at search engine optimization to rise to the top of search results, and they use the resulting traffic to charge a premium for digital ads that appear next to text lifted wholesale from funeral homes, local newspapers, and other authorized obituary publishers. Occasionally, these pirate sites go a step further, manipulating bereaved people into buying sympathy gifts like candles or flowers and pocketing the money.

 The flood of YouTube obituary videos is a janky update on this practice. Some of these channels upload dozens of death notice summaries every hour, abandoning any pretense of looking like an official source of information in an effort to churn out as many videos as they can.
 Although text-based obituary pirating has been a scourge on the industry for years, these videos are a more recent phenomenon . “This is a new one for me,” says Jessica Koth, director of public relations for the National Funeral Directors Association. “These videos are not sanctioned or authorized by the funeral home or family of the person who died. I would imagine they would be quite upsetting to the families involved.”

 Unhappy posts about the practice abound on Reddit, where for the past few years people have complained about how tasteless it is and wondered why it is happening and whether they can do anything to stop it. “These people are monetizing our loved ones’ deaths,” says one such message.

 “It’s predatory toward people who are heavily grieving,” says another. “If there’s nothing that can be done about this, that’s extremely sad.”

 “These videos are not sanctioned or authorized by the funeral home or family of the person who died. I would imagine they would be quite upsetting to the families involved.”

Jessica Koth, director of public relations for the National Funeral Directors Association 

 The more prolific channels upload new videos every few minutes. Many look nearly identical and feature men sitting alone and speaking directly to the camera. They often appear to be lounging at home. (It’s hard to verify exactly where they are; I reached out to the proprietors of several accounts, but none responded.) Others narrate obituaries over corny slideshows of candles and photos of the deceased sourced from social media. Their subscriber numbers are modest, making it all even more puzzling; on the higher end, channels will have a few thousand subscribers and millions of overall views. The highest follower count I found was slightly over 26,000; the page with the highest views had a grand total of around 1.7 million.
 Sometimes these obituary YouTubers promote products in the video description, like a $225 vitamin C cream for sale on Amazon. Sometimes they just list strings of SEO-baiting keywords, like “death,” “cause of death,” “die,” “RIP,” and “what happened.” While each channel differs from the next in small ways, there’s a unifying aesthetic—everything looks rushed and careless, and there’s no hint of emotion or acknowledgement that they’re discussing someone’s greatest tragedy.
 “The audio is crappy, they’ve got fans on,” funeral marketing consultant Robin Heppell says. “It’s not professionally done.”
 That’s because the business model focuses on quantity over quality. Many of the videos have no views at all; when they do, they rarely crack double digits. The success or failure of individual videos isn’t important, as long as they accumulate enough views in the aggregate.
 Despite their shoddiness, the obituary YouTube channels are sometimes amassing enough followers and views to meet YouTube’s Partner Program requirements and start making money off advertisements. (YouTube did not respond to requests for comment.)
 Some of these YouTubers openly describe their projects as money-making ventures, like Quoddos Taunsvi, a Pakistan-based vlogger who brags that following his videos will bring riches: “surely you will earn thounsands $ [sic] per month.” Others make glancing attempts to defend what they do. One channel includes a disclaimer about how its videos are protected by the fair use doctrine. According to intellectual property lawyer Bhamati Viswanathan, this is likely true. “Bummer for the families, but I don’t see what they could do other than appeal to the creators on grounds of taste, sensitivity, basic kindness,” she says.
 The obituary pirates aren’t the only group explicitly trying to ramp up engagement on death-announcement content. Editor & Publisher magazine, for example, hosted a webinar last year called “Optimizing obituaries to drive traffic and increase revenue.” Newspapers take out targeted ads on Facebook specifically to draw more eyes to obituaries. But if local papers presumably have the community’s interests in mind when they share death notices, those reading obits on YouTube seem to be in it solely for the clicks.
 While some YouTubers exclusively post obituary content, others intersperse obituary readings with summaries of other news. One of these channels, Event Click, recently posted photos of an orangutan throwing a possum from its enclosure in Australia’s Perth Zoo. “I would presume it did not survive the fall,” says a robotic voice narrating the video. Before I could watch that video, I had to watch an ad from Etsy. (WIRED reached out to several companies whose ads appeared before obituary videos for comment, including BetterHelp, 1-800-Flowers, and Etsy. As of this writing, none have responded.)

 Anjali Bal, a marketing professor at Babson College in Massachusetts, finds these videos “morbid and weird” and views the business strategy as ultimately short-sighted. They play on a surge of interest in keywords related to recent deaths, pumping out low-effort content in an attempt to capitalize on this temporary flow of web traffic. “In the short term it boosts the page,” she says. “In the long term these things are uncomfortable for the consumer and will not lead to long-term engagement.”
 This genre, while bizarre, does have analogs, albeit ones that seem far more aligned with the public interest. Short-form video is an increasingly central source of news, including videos that repackage original reporting from elsewhere for viewers with shorter attention spans. This isn’t always a bad thing; a TikToker named Kelsey Russell, for instance, has gained an audience by recapping pieces from The New York Times for a younger generation. While the YouTube obituary videos lack Russell’s panache or thoughtfulness, the most generous reading is that they too recap information that audiences are seeking out in an easily-digestible form.
 The rise of this type of video is also directly connected to a broad and enduring cultural fascination with mortality. Obituaries are big business because people are captivated by death; this is one reason serial-killer content has turned into such a reliably popular genre. “Reading obituaries seems like a budget version of the true crime format,” says Josh Cohen, founder of the creator-economy news website TubeFilter. As Cohen points out, YouTube is filled with people copying what works. “There’s tons of knockoffs,” he says.
 In the past, obituary pirates have been punished for their misdeeds. In 2019, for example, a Canadian website called Afterlife that scraped and republished obituaries was ordered to pay $20 million (CDN) in restitution to grieving families. In that case, the class action plaintiffs successfully argued that lifting the obituaries and accompanying photos they’d put online to honor their loved ones was copyright infringement. But in more recent examples, the YouTuber obituary pirates tend to summarize information they’ve found online, rather than repeating it verbatim. While distasteful, it’s not illegal to callously recount the details of other people’s misfortune. (If it were, several prominent true-crime podcasters would certainly be in jail.)
 It seems unlikely that this trend will die down as long as there’s money to be made, even if it’s a modest sum—and the rise of AI tools may make the situation even more infuriating. Last week, Microsoft’s MSN news site was roundly castigated for an incoherent and oddly hostile obituary for former NBA player Brandon Hunter; critics assumed the garbled article was written by AI, as the company had laid off human staffers in favor of algorithmically generated content three years earlier. (Microsoft never confirmed whether the offending story was AI-generated, but it was removed nonetheless.)
 My friend’s experience struck him as strange and crass enough to ask a tech reporter—me—if I’d ever heard of it. But what is viewed as creepy now may look quaint in the future. Considering how the obituary pirates on YouTube prioritize speed and volume above coherence and dignity, it’d be more surprising if they didn’t embrace artificial intelligence in their quest to profit off curiosity and heartache.

 Comments
 Back to top 
 Join the discussion 
 Comments
 Back to top 

 You Might Also Like

 In your inbox: Upgrade your life with WIRED-tested gear 

 McDonald’s built a 515-page dossier on me

 Big Story: AI is dead— organoids are alive

 The manosphere is a multibillion-dollar grievance industry

 How to find us: Add WIRED.com to your preferred sources in Google

 Kate Knibbs is a senior writer at WIRED. She covers prediction markets, the future of media, and how AI is changing the internet. She’s also interested in digital grey markets and regulatory battles over new tech. She is based in Chicago. Send tips to [email protected] , or reach her on Signal ... Read More 
 Senior Writer 

 Topics YouTube death Digital culture 

 Read More 

 Top Hotels.com Coupon Codes for September 2026

 Unlock significant savings on hotels, resorts, and getaways with our verified Hotels.com promo codes and gift card discounts. Plan your perfect trip today!
 Molly Higgins 

 Petlibro Offers: 30% Off in September 2026 (Hydration Season)

 Save on Petlibro essentials, including automatic feeders, water fountains, and accessories to keep cats and dogs fed, hydrated, and comfortable every day.
 Molly Higgins 

 Top Litter-Robot Promo Codes: $150 Off Bundles, $50 Off the Starter Bundle, and More

 Get the latest Litter-Robot Discounts on Litter-Robot self-cleaning litter boxes, accessories, and more.
 Molly Higgins 

 Top Ray-Ban Coupon Codes for September 2026

 Upgrade your frames with major savings on classic shapes, custom designs, and prescription lenses using these verified Ray-Ban discounts.
 Boutayna Chokrane 

 Verizon Promo Codes: Save With Verizon This September

 Ready for an upgrade? Apply our latest promotional codes today and choose a select service plan to score a discount with Verizon.
 Molly Higgins 

 Top Alo Promo Codes and Alo Yoga Coupon Codes for September 2026

 Refresh your workout wardrobe. Save on buttery-soft leggings, chic streetwear, and activewear essentials with verified Alo Yoga discount codes, free shipping, and loyalty program perks.
 Boutayna Chokrane 

 Top Sony Coupons: 45% Off Sony Headphones, WF-1000XM6 Earbuds, and Sony Cameras

 Upgrade your setup with Sony’s newest releases. Save on industry-leading noise-canceling audio, and pro-level Alpha cameras.
 Harry Rabinowitz 

 Top Home Depot Promo Codes: 30% Off in September 2026

 Save up to 50% today with the latest Home Depot promo codes for appliances, power tools, and more this September.
 Matthew Korfhage 

 Top Google Workspace Promo Codes for September 2026

 Boost your productivity and save with exclusive Google Workspace coupons from WIRED. Get up to 14% off plans for three months, including Starter, Standard, and Plus tiers.
 Luke Larsen 

 Top Theragun Promo Codes: 15% Off in September 2026

 Save on the science-backed devices you’ve been eyeing with 15% off Theragun discount code and 30% off other great deals.
 Molly Higgins 

 HostGator Coupon Codes: Save Up to 76% on Hosting in September 2026

 Unlock massive savings on HostGator web hosting, WordPress, VPS, and business email plans with our exclusive HostGator promo codes and deals.
 Molly Higgins 

 Office Depot Coupons and Promo Codes for September 2026

 From furniture and ink to professional printing services, use an Office Depot discount code to maximize your savings on every workspace essential.
 Molly Higgins 

 WIRED is obsessed with what comes next. Through rigorous investigations and game-changing reporting, we tell stories that don’t just reflect the moment—they help create it. When you look back in 10, 20, even 50 years, WIRED will be the publication that led the story of the present, mapped the people, products, and ideas defining it, and explained how those forces forged the future. WIRED: For Future Reference.

 More From WIRED 
 Subscribe 
 Newsletters 
 Livestreams 
 Travel 
 FAQ 
 Contact Us 
 WIRED Staff 
 WIRED Education 
 Editorial Standards 
 Archive 
 RSS 
 Site Map 
 Accessibility Help 
 Reviews and Guides 
 Reviews 
 Buying Guides 
 Streaming Guides 
 Coupons 
 Advertise 
 Manage Account 
 Jobs 
 Press Center 
 Condé Nast Store 
 User Agreement 
 Privacy Policy 
 Your California Privacy Rights 
 © 2026 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. WIRED may earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast. Ad Choices 

 Select international site
 United States Italia 
 Japón 
 Czech Republic & Slovakia 

 