 The rise of obituary spam | The Verge Skip to main content The homepage 

 Tech 
 Reviews 
 Science 
 Entertainment 
 AI 
 Policy 

 The homepage 

 Navigation Drawer

 Login / 
 Sign Up 
 close 
 Search 

 Light System Dark 

 Tech Amazon 
 Apple 
 Facebook 
 Google 
 Microsoft 
 Samsung 
 Business 
 See all tech 

 Reviews Smart Home Reviews 
 Phone Reviews 
 Tablet Reviews 
 Headphone Reviews 
 See all reviews 

 Science Space 
 Energy 
 Environment 
 Health 
 See all science 

 Entertainment TV Shows 
 Movies 
 Audio 
 See all entertainment 

 AI OpenAI 
 Anthropic 
 See all AI 

 Policy Antitrust 
 Politics 
 Law 
 Security 
 See all policy 

 Gadgets Laptops 
 Phones 
 TVs 
 Headphones 
 Speakers 
 Wearables 
 See all gadgets 

 Verge Shopping Buying Guides 
 Deals 
 Gift Guides 
 See all shopping 

 Gaming Xbox 
 PlayStation 
 Nintendo 
 See all gaming 

 Streaming Disney 
 HBO 
 Netflix 
 YouTube 
 Creators 
 See all streaming 

 Transportation Electric Cars 
 Autonomous Cars 
 Ride-sharing 
 Scooters 
 See all transportation 

 Features 
 Verge Video TikTok 
 YouTube 
 Instagram 

 Podcasts Decoder 
 The Vergecast 
 Version History 

 Newsletters 
 Archives 
 Store 
 Verge Product Updates 

 Subscribe 

 The unsettling scourge of obituary spam

 Comments Drawer

 Comments 

 Loading comments
 Getting the conversation ready...

 Policy Policy
 Posts from this topic will be added to your daily email digest and your homepage feed.
 Follow See All Policy 

 AI AI
 Posts from this topic will be added to your daily email digest and your homepage feed.
 Follow See All AI 

 Tech Tech
 Posts from this topic will be added to your daily email digest and your homepage feed.
 Follow See All Tech 

 The unsettling scourge of obituary spam
 In the wake of death, AI-generated obituaries litter search results, turning even private individuals into clickbait.

 by Mia Sato 
 Mia Sato
 Features Writer, The Verge

 Posts from this author will be added to your daily email digest and your homepage feed.
 Follow See All by Mia Sato 

 Feb 12, 2024, 2:00 PM UTC 

 Illustration by Erik Carter 

 Part Of
 From ChatGPT to Gemini: how AI is rewriting the internet

 see all updates 

 Mia Sato 
 Mia Sato

 Posts from this author will be added to your daily email digest and your homepage feed.
 Follow See All by Mia Sato 

 is features writer with five years of experience covering the companies that shape technology and the people who use their tools. 

 In late December 2023, several of Brian Vastag and Beth Mazur’s friends were devastated to learn that the couple had suddenly died. Vastag and Mazur had dedicated their lives to advocating for disabled people and writing about chronic illness . As the obituaries surfaced on Google, members of their community began to dial each other up to share the terrible news, even reaching people on vacations halfway around the world.

 Except Brian Vastag was very much alive, unaware of the fake obituaries that had leapt to the top of Google Search results. Beth Mazur had in fact passed away on December 21st, 2023. But the spammy articles that now filled the web claimed that Vastag himself had died that day, too.

 “[The obituaries] had this real world impact where at least four people that I know of called [our] mutual friends, and thought that I had died with her, like we had a suicide pact or something,” says Vastag, who for a time was married to Mazur and remained close with her. “It caused extra distress to some of my friends, and that made me really angry.”

 “Beth Mazur And Brian Vastag Obituary, Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (CFS/ME) Killed 2,” reads one article on a website called Eternal Honoring. Another site called In Loving Memories News says , “Beth Mazur And Brian Vastag Obituary, Chronic Fatigue Fyndrome (CFS/ME).” In addition to the articles claiming Vastag was dead, there were numerous bogus obituaries about Mazur, written with clickbait-y headlines and search engine optimized structures .

 “...at least four people that I know of called [our] mutual friends, and thought that I had died with her, like we had a suicide pact or something.”

 The Verge identified over a dozen websites that published articles about Mazur’s death, along with several YouTube videos of people reading obituaries off a script. The sites have strange, unfamiliar names and maintain a constant stream of articles about a wide range of topics, including the deaths of individuals around the world. The articles are clunky and provide little information but are filled with keywords for which Google users are searching. Beyond the dozen sites writing about Mazur, there is a sprawling network of high-ranking websites making money when family, friends, and acquaintances go searching for information about a deceased person.

 The sites have hallmarks of being generated using artificial intelligence tools. Vastag suspects that misinformation around his apparent death, for example, could be attributed to someone scraping an op-ed that Vastag and Mazur co-authored (one article claiming Vastag had died appears to be an AI summary of the op-ed ). The obituaries are detached and nearly identical to one another, with a few words moved around and repeating inaccurate details, like where Mazur lived. The articles began appearing within a day of an announcement by MEAction Network , a nonprofit she co-founded.

 Google has long struggled to contain obituary spam — for years, low-effort SEO-bait websites have simmered in the background and popped to the top of search results after an individual dies. The sites then aggressively monetize the content by loading up pages with intrusive ads and profit when searchers click on results. Now, the widespread availability of generative AI tools appears to be accelerating the deluge of low-quality fake obituaries.

 “Obituary scraping” is a common practice that affects not just celebrities and public figures, but also average, private individuals. Funeral homes have been dealing with obituary aggregator sites for at least 15 years, says Courtney Gould Miller, chief strategy officer at MKJ Marketing, which specializes in marketing funeral services. The sites trawl news articles and local funeral home websites, looking for initial death announcements that have basic details like name, age, and where a service might be held. They then scrape and republish the content at scale , using templated formats or, increasingly, AI tools.

 The obituaries are detached and nearly identical to one another, with a few words moved around and repeating inaccurate details

 Legacy.com is the biggest, most established version of aggregators — but countless smaller, sketchier websites pop up continuously. Some of these sites contain inaccurate information, like the date or location of a memorial service. Others collect orders for flowers or gifts that don’t arrive in time, frustrating family and friends and causing headaches for local funeral homes, Gould Miller says. Aggregation sites regularly outrank the actual funeral homes that have a relationship with grieving families.

 “I think [Google is] looking at who has the most backlinks, who has the most authority, who has the most traffic, the typical things that their algorithms are looking at. An aggregator is, of course, going to have more of all of that than a local funeral home,” Gould Miller says. “It’s the core of the business for the aggregators, right? They know that Google search algorithms are on their side.”

 “Google always aims to surface high quality information, but data voids are a known challenge for all search engines,” Google spokesperson Ned Adriance told The Verge in an email. “We understand how distressing this content can be, and we’re working to launch updates that will significantly improve search results for queries like these.” Adriance said Google terminated several YouTube channels flagged by The Verge that were sharing SEO-bait obituary and death notices, but refused to say whether the flagged websites violated Google’s spam policies.

 After Vastag discovered the articles that claimed he, too, had died, he reported them to Google, hoping to get the pages removed from search. The company sent back a canned answer , saying the flagged sites didn’t violate its policies.

 Some websites churn out a constant stream of clickbait news articles about the deceased. AI has only made the problem worse, making it harder to tell the legitimacy of obituaries at first glance, when family and friends in mourning aren’t looking carefully at the URL of an article or its author.

 One site called The Thaiger is filled with news spanning every topic imaginable. Its writers follow viral news cycles, like political dustups at Ivy League colleges. Under the Thailand news category: “Man’s public poop at Thai car showroom creates online buzz.” The Trending section features articles like “Pedro Pascal’s surprising revelation steals show at 2024 Emmy Awards” and other pastiches of early 2010s internet clickbait.

 Stories about deaths are often tagged as “trending” even when there’s no indication the individual was known outside of their community

 But sprinkled among the hundreds of articles of celebrity gossip and recaps of TikTok videos are morbid, robotic write-ups about the deaths of average people who weren’t public figures. Writers at The Thaiger — which is based in Bangkok, Thailand — churn out more than 20 stories a day at times, including the SEO obituary articles about people who died after illnesses; college students who died by suicide; and minors who were in fatal car accidents. The stories follow a similar structure, sometimes using identical vague phrases about the deceased. Stories about deaths are often tagged as “trending” even when there’s no indication the individual was known outside of their community, and the articles appear to be aggregating or rewriting local news reports, social media posts, or actual obituaries from family.

 Content on The Thaiger has hallmarks of being generated using artificial intelligence. The obituary articles are written with a nondescript gravitas, using unnatural phrasing like the “indelible mark” a person has left, or their “untimely demise,” but without any actual detail about their life. The articles are written like typical obituaries and news articles, but they lack quotes from family or friends of the deceased and do not cite outside reporting.

 Obituaries appearing on The Thaiger have an inhuman, inappropriate quality to them. Some articles promise a “comprehensive account” of the death, or that “the internet is abuzz” with interest in the event. “Further updates are anticipated, and the curious and concerned public is advised to stay tuned for verified information,” reads one article on the death of a Calgary, Canada woman. Every corner of the site is loaded with ads.

 The Thaiger staff page lists eight writers, none of whom appear to have LinkedIn profiles, and at least three of whom appear to be AI generated in their headshots. “Luke Chapman,” who covers Australian and New Zealand news, for example, is wearing an open button-down shirt that has buttons running down both sides. “Jane Nelson,” who’s described as “a seasoned financial journalist,” has on a gold necklace that disappears halfway down her chest. Even for the profiles that feature what appear to be real people’s photos, the writers are like ghosts — there’s no record of these journalists existing anywhere else.

 The Thaiger and CEO Darren Lyons didn’t respond to multiple requests for comment. After The Verge asked about the AI-generated headshots, The Thaiger silently removed the authors from the staff page, along with their archive of articles.

 On another site called FreshersLive, articles about people who have died are ruthlessly optimized for Google. Keywords like “Beth Mazur,” “MEAction Network,” and “Chronic Fatigue Syndrome” are sprinkled in every few sentences. The copy is split into several sections with SEO-driven subheadings, like “Who was Beth Mazur?” and “Is Beth Mazur Dead?” There’s even an FAQ section at the bottom — a darker, crueler version of a tactic that is all over the web .

 In an emailed response to The Verge ’s questions, a person who identified themselves only as “Dilip” denied that the site used AI tools, and said staff attempts to contact family of the deceased. When asked how FreshersLive finds and assesses deaths to write about, “Dilip” responded, “That’s highly confidential.”

 “Whoever came up with [the articles] — they didn’t know Beth, they don’t know anything about her,” Vastag told The Verge. “They don’t have any right to publish an obituary on her.”

 Vastag’s own obituary for Mazur was published on January 12th, weeks after she died. And though the spam sites were faster, only Vastag’s obituary captures the actual person Mazur was.

 She worked in tech before she got sick — during the last months of her life she had also experimented with generative AI tools like ChatGPT, Vastag told The Verge . She was funny and smart, and friends and colleagues remember her as a visionary organizer who didn’t look for recognition for her work. She planned and hosted themed parties for friends, danced at Burning Man, and helped patients access care and resources. None of the spam obituaries, of course, mention these facts.

 Follow topics and authors from this story to see more like this in your personalized homepage feed and to receive email updates. Mia Sato 
 Mia Sato
 Features Writer, The Verge

 Posts from this author will be added to your daily email digest and your homepage feed.
 Follow See All by Mia Sato 

 AI AI
 Posts from this topic will be added to your daily email digest and your homepage feed.
 Follow See All AI 

 Google Google
 Posts from this topic will be added to your daily email digest and your homepage feed.
 Follow See All Google 

 Policy Policy
 Posts from this topic will be added to your daily email digest and your homepage feed.
 Follow See All Policy 

 Tech Tech
 Posts from this topic will be added to your daily email digest and your homepage feed.
 Follow See All Tech 

 Web Web
 Posts from this topic will be added to your daily email digest and your homepage feed.
 Follow See All Web 

 More in: From ChatGPT to Gemini: how AI is rewriting the internet 

 YouTube’s AI chatbot can make your next video thumbnail. 

 Richard Lawler Jul 24 

 Common Sense Media says that Google’s AI search is unsafe for kids, with no way for parents and teachers to turn it off. 

 Emma Roth Jul 16 

 People Inc. CEO says it’s “probably” headed for a confrontation with Google over AI crawling. 

 Richard Lawler Jun 24 

 Most Popular

 Most Popular
 DIY plug-in solar gains momentum in the US

 What to expect at Apple’s September 9th launch event

 An Amazon cargo plane crashed at Miami International Airport

 iPhone Handoff will seamlessly share one number between two phones

 Boox’s tiny Picco e-reader should land in November

 The Verge Daily
 A free daily digest of the news that matters most. 

 Email (required) 

 Sign Up 
 By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice . This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.

 Advertiser Content From 
 This is the title for the native ad

 More in Policy 

 The White House is making arcade games racist 

 Microsoft says virtually nobody was grabbing NYT articles through its chatbot 

 Congressman says TikTok backed out of a meeting to avoid child safety questions 

 The Trump administration is supporting OpenAI in the NYT copyright lawsuit 

 Google dodges another breakup attempt 

 OpenAI accused of ‘aiding and abetting’ Tumbler Ridge mass shooting in dozens of new lawsuits 

 The White House is making arcade games racist 

 Gaby Del Valle Sep 4 

 Microsoft says virtually nobody was grabbing NYT articles through its chatbot 

 Lauren Feiner Sep 4 

 Congressman says TikTok backed out of a meeting to avoid child safety questions 

 Lauren Feiner Sep 3 

 The Trump administration is supporting OpenAI in the NYT copyright lawsuit 

 Hayden Field Sep 2 

 Google dodges another breakup attempt 

 Lauren Feiner Sep 2 

 OpenAI accused of ‘aiding and abetting’ Tumbler Ridge mass shooting in dozens of new lawsuits 

 Emma Roth Sep 2 

 Advertiser Content From 

 This is the title for the native ad

 Top Stories

 Sep 6 

 The Fairphone 6 Plus is the midrange phone we desperately needed 

 Sep 5 

 Robotaxis enter their villain era 

 Sep 6 

 Solar power is having its toaster moment 

 Sep 4 

 What to expect at Apple’s September 9th launch event 

 Sep 6 

 IFA 2026: the biggest tech and gadget announcements 

 Contact 
 Tip Us 
 Community Guidelines 
 Archives 
 About 
 Ethics Statement 
 How We Rate and Review Products 
 Cookie Settings 
 Terms of Use 
 Privacy Policy 
 Your California Privacy Rights 
 Your Privacy Choices 
 Cookie Notice 
 AdChoices 
 Licensing FAQ 
 Accessibility 
 Platform Status 

 Penske Media Corporation The Verge is a part of PMX Global, LLC, a subsidiary of Penske Media Corporation.
 © 2026 VM Publishing, LLC. All rights reserved.

 Our Sites 
 The American Pavilion 
 ARTnews 
 Art in America 
 Artforum 
 Art Week NYC 
 Beauty Inc 
 Billboard 
 Deadline 
 Dick Clark Productions 
 The Dodo 
 Eater 
 Flow Space 
 FN 
 Gold Derby 
 Golden Globes 
 The Hollywood Reporter 
 IndieWire 
 Life is Beautiful 
 Popsugar 
 Punch 
 SJ Denim 
 Robb Report 
 Rolling Stone 
 SB Nation 
 SHE Media 
 She Knows 
 Sourcing Journal 
 Soaps 
 Sportico 
 StyleCaster 
 SXSW 
 Thrillist 
 Variety 
 The Verge 
 Vibe 
 WWD 

 Notifications Drawer

 Sign in to see your notifications or create an account to join the conversation.
 Sign in 

 