 The Morbid War Over Online Obituaries | WIRED 

 Skip to main content 

 SECURITY 
 POLITICS 
 THE BIG STORY 
 BUSINESS 
 SCIENCE 
 CULTURE 
 REVIEWS 

 Newsletters 

 Security 
 Politics 
 The Big Story 
 Business 
 Science 
 Culture 
 Reviews 
 More 
 The Big Interview Magazine Events WIRED Insider WIRED Consulting 

 Newsletters 
 Podcasts 
 Video 
 Livestreams 
 Merch 

 Search 

 Ben Weiss 

 Business 
 Dec 26, 2021 7:00 AM 

 The Morbid War Over Online Obituaries

 “Obituary pirates” scrape websites and publish their own versions of death notices, reaping commissions on flowers and gifts.

 Photograph: Holloway/Getty Images 

 Save this story 
 Save this story 

 Jane White Thompson died in August. A blood clot traveled from her leg into her lungs, and in a flash, she was gone. “It was very quick and very unexpected,” says her husband, Joel Thompson, who is 62 years old and lives in Houston.
 Soon after, Thompson and his stepdaughter wrote an obituary. It described how Jane, an avid baker, was known as “The Cheesecake Lady” and how she had two dogs, Tug and Cash. Less than three days later, a company called Echovita published on its website a summary of what they had written. It said Tug and Cash were Jane’s “close friends,” failing to note that they were dogs. Her granddaughter became a grandson. And her children weren’t mentioned as survivors. “It looks like a fourth grader did it,” Joel Thompson says. “She would be very embarrassed if people were reading that, thinking that’s her obituary.”

 Jane's death had become fodder in a morbid, online war. Over the past 20 years, obituaries have turned into prized commodities, valuable enough to power much of a billion-dollar business and attract what some funeral directors call “obituary pirates,” who prey on the online information of the dead. The competition has intensified during the pandemic, which has killed more than 800,000 Americans.

 In July, Service Corporation International, a New York Stock Exchange–traded conglomerate that owns 1,500 funeral homes, sued Echovita. It alleged that the Quebec-based company scraped details from obituaries, including Jane Thompson’s, from SCI’s website and republished them. “Mining people’s personal data—at the lowest point in their lives—is disappointing,” a spokesperson for the funeral conglomerate says in an email.
 Pascal “Paco” Leclerc, who says he owns Echovita, claims that his company’s mission is virtuous. He’s informing the public of recent deaths, and families, he says, can publish obituaries on his website for free. “In reality, the funeral homes should never be the owner of an obituary,” he says in an interview. “The obituary’s purpose is to share the information with the public.”

 “I'm mad that their algorithm, or whatever program they use, printed such a piece of crap. And I'm mad that people that we love and respect read it.” 
 Joel Thompson, whose wife Jane died in August 

 Leclerc has come under fire for alleged obituary piracy in the past. In 2019, a judge in Canada ordered Afterlife, where Leclerc was a director, to pay $20 million in damages in a class-action suit for violating copyright by republishing obituaries in full. Leclerc says he was “a silent investor” in Afterlife, which was run by a partner he declines to name.

 A month after the Canadian lawsuit was filed in January 2018 , Leclerc says he started Echovita to rehabilitate his reputation. “I'm going to prove with a new business model that I’m trying to help society,” he says. The company crawls the web looking for new obituaries, then publishes a summary. Because Echovita isn’t copying obituaries directly, it skirts the copyright issue that damaged Afterlife, says Scott Gilligan, general counsel for the National Funeral Directors Association, in an interview.

 Funeral directors are not appeased. “The site is guilty of flimflamming the unsuspecting public into believing that the family of the decedent is somehow connected with the website,” Gilligan wrote in an industry trade publication.
 Echovita is not the only company employing such tactics. Barbara Kemmis, executive director for the Cremation Association of North America, says reports of obituary piracy are on the rise. Some families in Detroit have complained about a website that republished death notices under different names to raise money for someone else’s funeral, says Phil Douma, executive director of the Michigan Funeral Directors Association. In February, the Bereavement Authority of Ontario warned of websites that purportedly sell flowers and other services alongside copied obituaries. Instead of sending families the gifts, these websites allegedly pocket the money. “It’s not going to go away, because it’s so darn easy to do,” says David Brazeau, a spokesperson for the Bereavement Authority, a government agency.
 All of this chicanery raises the question: Why are obituaries highly valued? The answer is simple, according to Robin Heppell, a funeral marketing consultant: Obituaries attract web traffic.
 Take, for example, Monique Heller, whose obituary for her father , which included how he thwarted "lunch thieves with laxative-laced chocolate cake and excrement meatloaf sandwiches," went viral in 2019. Local newspapers reported on her unusually candid profile of her father, National Public Radio contacted her, and her father’s name briefly trended on Twitter. “I was like, holy cow, Dad, you know, you did it,” she says.
 “The funeral homes should never be the owner of an obituary. The obituary’s purpose is to share the information with the public.” 
 Pascal “Paco” Leclerc, Echovita 

 Obituaries like Heller’s have a magnetic pull. In 2020, SCI’s websites attracted nearly 160 million visitors, up from 130 million in 2019, according to its Securities and Exchange Commission filings. The websites of some funeral homes in metropolitan areas net more than a million visitors in a year, says Heppell, who also designs and manages websites for funeral homes. At some smaller newspapers, the obituaries section draws twice as much traffic as the news section, John Heald, an executive at Legacy.com, a company that partners with newspapers to publish death notices, said on a podcast in July .
 This traffic leads to cash. Leclerc says Echovita generated $5 million in revenue in 2020. The company takes commissions on floral, candle, and memorial tree sales, he says. Since 2018, he says he has reinvested more than $1 million from Echovita into a new business named Funerago , which he envisions as an online marketplace for funeral services. “I want to use the technology to become a disruptor of the industry,” he says.
 Online obituaries can attract investors with deep pockets. Heppell, the marketing consultant and funeral home website designer, says Providence Strategic Growth, a private equity fund, approached him in 2018 about acquiring his business. When the conversation turned to the business’s valuation, he says fund representatives asked him how many obituaries were posted on the websites he managed. “Their valuation of the business was going to be based on obituaries,” he says he concluded. Heppell later ended conversations with Providence.
 At the time, Providence owned Tribute Technology, which offers a suite of technology services for funeral homes, including website design and management. In late 2020, Providence sold Tribute Technology to two other private equity funds, Carlyle Group and Vista Equity Partners, reportedly for more than $1 billion . Providence could not be reached for comment.
 On its website , Tribute Technology says it is “changing the world one obituary at a time.” To gain access to these obituaries, one of its subsidiaries offers a free website to funeral homes, according to Heppell. Brian Waters, a funeral home director in Indiana, says his family’s business received its website for free from a company owned by Tribute. In exchange, Waters says Tribute takes 50 percent of the commission on all flowers sold alongside his funeral home's obituaries as well as a substantial portion of money from memorial trees sold on his funeral home’s website. Then, it collects the published obituaries in a central archive . A spokesperson for Tribute declined to comment.
 Tribute’s rise has pressured Legacy.com, a fixture in the online death economy for more than two decades; the site receives 1.1 billion visits a year, according to Stopher Bartol, Legacy’s founder and CEO. Since 1998, Legacy.com has contracted with newspapers to gain access to the obituaries they publish. In 2017, a Legacy.com vice president told Cnet that the company publishes an obituary for 75 percent of Americans who die. In that same year, Legacy.com told Slate that it partnered with 1,500 newspapers and 3,500 funeral homes. Legacy says those numbers are still “generally representative” but declines to comment on the specifics. Recently, the company has shifted more of its attention to funeral homes, Heald said in the July podcast. It’s also begun selling memorial trees, in a partnership with the Arbor Day Foundation, Bartol says.

 “All the obituaries that appear on Legacy are there at the request of newspapers, funeral homes, and families,” Bartol says in an email. “In some cases, we will report the news that a funeral home has announced a death for which Legacy does not have an obituary. In doing so, we let the user know where they can find that funeral home’s obituaries section online."
 Thompson, the widower, doesn’t know much about the companies fighting over obituaries. But he recently took Jane’s obituary off of Echovita. “I'm mad that their algorithm, or whatever program they use, printed such a piece of crap,” he says. “And I'm mad that people that we love and respect read it.”
 More Great WIRED Stories
 📩 The latest on tech, science, and more: Get our newsletters !
 Amazon's dark secret : It has failed to protect your data
 Need to test a space suit ? Head to Iceland
 This digital bank is designed for the LGBTQ+ community
 Picture-perfect “graze boxes” are taking over Facebook
 Hacker Lexicon: What is a watering hole attack ?
 👁️ Explore AI like never before with our new database 
 📱 Torn between the latest phones? Never fear—check out our iPhone buying guide and favorite Android phones 

 Ben Weiss is a New York writer whose work has appeared in Slate, Input, and local New York publications, including WNYC/Gothamist. ... Read More 
 Contributor 

 Topics death websites magazine-30.03 

 Read More 

 Top Google Workspace Promo Codes for September 2026

 Boost your productivity and save with exclusive Google Workspace coupons from WIRED. Get up to 14% off plans for three months, including Starter, Standard, and Plus tiers.
 Luke Larsen 

 Top Theragun Promo Codes: 15% Off in September 2026

 Save on the science-backed devices you’ve been eyeing with 15% off Theragun discount code and 30% off other great deals.
 Molly Higgins 

 Surfshark Promo Codes for September 2026

 Save up to 87% with a Surfshark coupon code, 3 months of VPN free today, and more from WIRED.
 Scott Gilbertson 

 HostGator Coupon Codes: Save Up to 76% on Hosting in September 2026

 Unlock massive savings on HostGator web hosting, WordPress, VPS, and business email plans with our exclusive HostGator promo codes and deals.
 Molly Higgins 

 Top Squarespace Promo Codes: 30% Off in September 2026

 Get 20% off your next website, 10% off with exclusive Squarespace discount code, 50% off plans, and more top coupons from WIRED.
 Molly Higgins 

 Nike Promo Codes: 30% Off for September 2026

 Check out our deals for Nike this September 2026, including 15% off select purchases.
 Boutayna Chokrane 

 Samsung Promo Codes: 20% Off in September 2026

 Save 30% or 10% with Samsung coupon codes, up to $1,000 on appliances, plus limited-time deals on the Galaxy Z Fold7, Flip7, and S25.
 Molly Higgins 

 Top Loop Earplugs Promo Codes: 20% Off Quiet 2, Sweet Dreams and Gift Sets

 Save on Loop Earplugs, including Quiet 2 and popular gift sets for improved sleep, focus, and comfort.
 Louryn Strampe 

 Top Sony Coupons: 45% Off Sony Headphones, WF-1000XM6 Earbuds, and Sony Cameras

 Upgrade your setup with Sony’s newest releases. Save on industry-leading noise-canceling audio, and pro-level Alpha cameras.
 Harry Rabinowitz 

 Top LG Promo Codes and Coupons for September 2026

 Save 20% with an LG promo code today, plus up to $1,000 off appliances, 40% off bestselling TVs and monitors.
 Harry Rabinowitz 

 Canon Promo Codes: 30% Off for September 2026

 Save an extra 10% or 30% with Canon coupon codes, plus up to $1,600 on cameras, printers, and more this September 2026.
 Scott Gilbertson 

 Top Shark Promo Codes for September 2026

 Shark makes some seriously powerful vacuums, from handheld vacs to steam mops. Don’t miss $100 off, 10% off, and more limited-time coupons from WIRED.
 Nena Farrell 

 WIRED is obsessed with what comes next. Through rigorous investigations and game-changing reporting, we tell stories that don’t just reflect the moment—they help create it. When you look back in 10, 20, even 50 years, WIRED will be the publication that led the story of the present, mapped the people, products, and ideas defining it, and explained how those forces forged the future. WIRED: For Future Reference.

 More From WIRED 
 Subscribe 
 Newsletters 
 Livestreams 
 Travel 
 FAQ 
 Contact Us 
 WIRED Staff 
 WIRED Education 
 Editorial Standards 
 Archive 
 RSS 
 Site Map 
 Accessibility Help 
 Reviews and Guides 
 Reviews 
 Buying Guides 
 Streaming Guides 
 Coupons 
 Advertise 
 Manage Account 
 Jobs 
 Press Center 
 Condé Nast Store 
 User Agreement 
 Privacy Policy 
 Your California Privacy Rights 
 © 2026 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. WIRED may earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast. Ad Choices 

 Select international site
 United States Italia 
 Japón 
 Czech Republic & Slovakia 

 