Nine Worlds Academia and Humanities

 Academia and Humanities meet Geek Culture at London's Nine Worlds Convention

 Menu

 About 

 2016 Call for Content Creators for Academia and Humanities 

 2016 Call for Papers/Panellists 

 2014 Topic Overview 

 2013 Topic Overview 

 Search for: 

 Writing Westeros: a Corpus Linguistic Study of A Song of Ice and Fire

 Writing Westeros: a Corpus Linguistic Study of A Song of Ice and Fire 

 Matthew Voice, University of Sheffield 

 Since finding mainstream success with A Song of Ice and Fire, George R.R. Martin has often been praised for his writing style, and particularly his portrayal of multi-dimensional female characters. But what is Martin doing with language that leads to these observations? What differences, if any, exist between the ways in which each character is written, and what factors exist beyond gender?

 In order to explore these questions, this talk introduces the concept of corpus linguistic analysis. With the aid of contemporary software, the first four books of ASOIAF are rendered searchable in their entirety, and quantifiable patterns of language can be extracted. First examining common collocates of gendered pronouns (words often accompanying ‘she’ and ‘he’, for example), then focusing on the language associated with specific characters, this talk explores how social positioning, as well as gender, age, and race, serve as driving forces in the production of individual identity in Martin’s writing. With comparison to other works, it also aims to show how we can come to understand the development of an author’s style through more than close reading of specific extracts.

 Breaking down the means of stylistic analysis and characterisation as accessibly as possible, this talk should be of interest to language enthusiasts of all levels, fans of the series, and those interested in understanding more about the development and study of writing styles. Time permitting, there may also be an opportunity for audience members to search the corpus themselves during the Q&A session.

 Share this:

 Share on X (Opens in new window) 
 X 

 Share on Facebook (Opens in new window) 
 Facebook 

 Like Loading... 

 Posted in 2014 Abstracts , Abstracts and tagged academia , academic , convention , nine worlds , nine worlds 2014 on August 15, 2014 by nineworldsacademia .
 Leave a comment 

 Post navigation

 ← Theology and Pratchett’s Small Gods 

 ‘Little girls and the things that they love’: MLPFIM, Audience, Identity and Animation → 

 Leave a comment Cancel reply 

 Δ 

 Blog at WordPress.com. 

 Privacy & Cookies: This site uses cookies. By continuing to use this website, you agree to their use. 

To find out more, including how to control cookies, see here:
 
 Cookie Policy 

 Comment 

 Reblog 

 Subscribe 

 Subscribed 

 Nine Worlds Academia and Humanities 

 Sign me up 

 Already have a WordPress.com account? Log in now. 

 Nine Worlds Academia and Humanities 

 Subscribe 

 Subscribed 

 Sign up 

 Log in 

 Copy shortlink 

 Report this content 

 View post in Reader 

 Manage subscriptions 

 Collapse this bar 

 %d 

 Design a site like this with WordPress.com

 Get started
