 
 Can-chatgpt-pass-a-phd-level-history-test 
 Skip to content 
 Education 
 Close Education 
 Open Education 
 People 
 Close People 
 Open People 
 Events & News 
 Close Events & News 
 Open Events & News 
 Visuals 
 Engage 
 Close Engage 
 Open Engage 
 About Us 
 Close About Us 
 Open About Us 
 21.01.2025 
 Social Complexity & Collapse 
 News 
 Can ChatGPT Pass a PhD-Level History Test? 
 According to a new study, the answer is “not yet.” GPT-4 Turbo couldn’t get most of the answers right: it had a balanced accuracy of 46%. 
 For the past decade, complexity scientist Peter Turchin has been working with collaborators to bring together the most current and structured body of knowledge about human history in one place: the Seshat Global History Databank . Over the past year, together with computer scientist Maria del Rio-Chanona , he has begun to wonder if artificial intelligence chatbots could help historians and archeologists to gather data and better understand the past. As a first step, they wanted to assess the AI tools understanding of historical knowledge. In collaboration with an international team of experts, they decided to evaluate the historical knowledge of advanced AI models such as ChatGPT-4, Llama, and Gemini. “Large language models (LLMs), such as ChatGPT, have been enormously successful in some fields—for example, they have largely succeeded by replacing paralegals. But when it comes to making judgments about the characteristics of past societies, especially those located outside North America and Western Europe, their ability to do so is much more limited,” says Turchin, who leads the Complexity Science Hub’s (CSH) research group on social complexity and collapse . 
 "One surprising finding, which emerged from this study, was just how bad these models were. This result shows that artificial ‘intelligence’ is quite domain-specific. LLMs do well in some contexts, but very poorly, compared to humans, in others." 
 Peter Turchin 
 Tweet 
 The results of the study were presented recently at the NeurIPS conference, AI’s premier annual gathering, in Vancouver. GPT-4 Turbo, the best-performing model, scored 46% on a four-choice question test. According to Turchin and his team, although these results are an improvement over the baseline of 25% of random guessing, they highlight the considerable gaps in AI’s understanding of historical knowledge. “I thought the AI chatbots would do a lot better,” says del Rio-Chanona, the study’s corresponding author. “History is often viewed as facts, but sometimes interpretation is necessary to make sense of it,” adds del Rio-Chanona, an external faculty member at CSH and an assistant professor at University College London. 
 World map displaying Seshat's division of regions inspired by the UN geographic regions. On the map, each marker represents a "Natural Geographic Area" (NGA), as defined by Seshat experts. The researchers identified and collected data about each polity that occupied or overlapped with each NGA over the course of history. The colors correspond to the regional division scheme used in the current paper based on the UN geographic regions. 
 Setting a Benchmark for LLMs 
 This new assessment, the first of its kind, challenged these A.I. systems to answer questions at a graduate and expert level, similar to ones answered in Seshat (and the researchers used the knowledge in Seshat to test the accuracy of the AI answers). Seshat is a vast, evidence-based resource that compiles historical knowledge across 600 societies worldwide, spanning more than 36,000 data points and over 2,700 scholarly references. “We wanted to set a benchmark for assessing the ability of these LLMs to handle expert-level history knowledge,” explains first author Jakob Hauser , a resident scientist at CSH. “The Seshat Databank allows us to go beyond ‘general knowledge’ questions. A key component of our benchmark is that we not only test whether these LLMs can identify correct facts, but also explicitly ask whether a fact can be proven or inferred from indirect evidence.” 
 Disparities Across Time Periods and Geographic Regions
 The benchmark also reveals other important insights into the ability of current chatbots—a total of seven models from the Gemini, OpenAI, and Llama families—to comprehend global history. For instance, they were most accurate in answering questions about ancient history, particularly from 8,000 BCE to 3,000 BCE. However, their accuracy dropped sharply for more recent periods, with the largest gaps in understanding events from 1,500 CE to the present. In addition, the results highlight the disparity in model performance across geographic regions. OpenAI’s models performed better for Latin America and the Caribbean, while Llama performed best for Northern America. Both OpenAI’s and Llama models’ performance was worse for Sub-Saharan Africa. Llama also performed poorly for Oceania. This suggests potential biases in the training data, which may overemphasize certain historical narratives while neglecting others, according to the study. 
 Heatmap indicates balanced accuracy score for each NGA (bottom label) and UN geographic region (top label) over time (left axis) for the GPT-4 Turbo model. The figure shows the balanced accuracy distribution across space and time for GPT-4 Turbo, the model with the best overall performance. Darker colors indicate greater balanced accuracy, while completely white areas signify the absence of data points. More recent periods are generally colored lighter, indicating lower accuracy of the model. Although one might assume that lower accuracy in more recent periods is due to more data being available, this is not necessarily true. As an example, the model's accuracy is higher for the earlier years of the NGA Basin of Mexico, where there are roughly the same number of data points between 5000 BCE and 1000 BCE. 
 Better on Legal System, Worse on Discrimination 
 The benchmark also found differences in performance across categories. Models performed best on legal systems and social complexity. “But they struggled with topics such as discrimination and social mobility,” says del Rio-Chanona. “The main takeaway from this study is that LLMs, while impressive, still lack the depth of understanding required for advanced history. They’re great for basic facts, but when it comes to more nuanced, PhD-level historical inquiry, they’re not yet up to the task,” adds del Rio-Chanona. According to the benchmark, the model that performed best was GPT-4 Turbo, with a balanced accuracy of 46%, while the weakest was Llama-3.1-8B with 33.6%. 
 Next Steps 
 Del Rio-Chanona and the other researchers—from CSH, the University of Oxford, and the Alan Turing Institute—are committed to expanding the dataset and improving the benchmark. They plan to include more data from underrepresented regions and incorporate more complex historical questions, according to Hauser. “We plan to continue refining the benchmark by integrating additional data points from diverse regions, especially the Global South. We also look forward to testing more recent LLM models, such as o3, to see if they can bridge the gaps identified in this study,” says Hauser. The CSH scientist emphasizes that the benchmark’s findings can be valuable to both historians and AI developers. For historians, archaeologists, and social scientists, knowing the strengths and limitations of A.I. chatbots can help guide their use in historical research. For A.I. developers, these results highlight areas for improvement, particularly in mitigating regional biases and enhancing the models’ ability to handle complex, nuanced historical knowledge. 
 About the study 
 The paper “Large Language Models’ Expert-level Global History Knowledge Benchmark (HiST-LLM),” by Jakob Hauser, Daniel Kondor, Jenny Reddish, Majid Benam, Enrico Cioni, Federica Villa, James S. Bennett, Daniel Hoyer, Pieter Francois, Peter Turchin, and R. Maria del Rio-Chanona, was presented at the NeurIPS conference, in Vancouver, in December. 
 Text in German 
 Researchers 
 Peter Turchin 
 Faculty 
 Maria del Rio Chanona 
 External Faculty 
 Jakob Hauser 
 Former Researcher 
 Dániel Kondor 
 PostDoc 
 Jenny Reddish 
 Staff Scientist 
 Majid Benam 
 Former Researcher 
 James Bennett 
 Associate Faculty 
 Daniel Hoyer 
 Associate Faculty 
 Pieter François 
 Associate Faculty 
 Related 
 Visual 
 HiST-LLM 
 HiST-LLM is a LLM benchmark and dataset focused on PhD-level historical knowledge. This visualization displays the categories and sub-categories of our data, from the Seshat Databank. 
 Social Complexity & Collapse , AI & Machine Learning 
 Press Highlight 
 22.01.2025 
 Besteht ChatGPT einen Geschichtstest auf PhD-Niveau? 
 GPT-4 Turbo beantwortete die meisten Fragen in… 
 Social Complexity & Collapse 
 Press Highlight 
 23.01.2025 
 Sztuczna inteligencja miała test z historii. Wynik to tylko 46 proc., naukowcy zaskoczeni 
 Sztuczna inteligencja nie radzi sobie z pytaniami z historii 
 Social Complexity & Collapse 
 Press Highlight 
 22.01.2025 
 MSN 
 Can AI pass a Ph.D.-level history test? New study says 'not yet' 
 GPT-4 Turbo had a balanced of 46% 
 Social Complexity & Collapse 
 Press Highlight 
 21.01.2025 
 Können KI-Modelle einen Geschichtstest auf PhD-Niveau bestehen? 
 Ein Forschungsteam klopfte gängige Systeme darauf ab, ob sie… 
 Social Complexity & Collapse 
 Project 
 ESSENCSE 
 Building Critical Mass at the Complexity Science Hub Vienna— Establishing and Expanding Complexity Science in Austria 
 Stefan Thurner 
 Social Complexity & Collapse , Algorithmic Fairness , Transforming Economies 
 Project 
 HuBERT 
 Developing HuBERT: a Natural Language Processing algorithm for extending the Seshat Global History 
 Maria del Rio Chanona 
 Social Complexity & Collapse 
 Project 
 Sustainable Communities 
 Building sustainable communities around Arts and Humanities datasets and Software 
 Peter Turchin 
 Social Complexity & Collapse 
 0  Pages 
 0  Press 
 0  News 
 0  Events 
 0  Projects 
 0  Publications 
 0  Person 
 0  Visualisation 
 0  Art 
 Signup 
 CSH Newsletter 
 Choose your preference 
 Monthly CSH Newsletter 
 Invitations to CSH Events 
 First name 
 Last name 
 E-mail* 
 Organization 
 Position 
 Street 
 ZIP 
 City 
 Country
 Österreich 
 Afghanistan 
 Åland Islands 
 Albania 
 Algeria 
 American Samoa 
 Andorra 
 Angola 
 Anguilla 
 Antigua And Barbuda 
 Argentina 
 Armenia 
 Aruba 
 Australia 
 Azerbaijan 
 Bahamas 
 Bahrain 
 Bangladesh 
 Barbados 
 Belarus 
 Belgium 
 Belize 
 Benin 
 Bermuda 
 Bhutan 
 Bolivia 
 Bosnia And Herzegovina 
 Botswana 
 Bouvet Island 
 Brazil 
 British Indian Ocean Territory 
 Brunei Darussalam 
 Bulgaria 
 Burkina Faso 
 Burundi 
 Cambodia 
 Cameroon 
 Canada 
 Cape Verde 
 Cayman Islands 
 Central African Republic 
 Chad 
 Chile 
 China 
 Christmas Island 
 Cocos (keeling) Islands 
 Colombia 
 Comoros 
 Congo 
 Congo, The Democratic Republic Of The 
 Cook Islands 
 Costa Rica 
 CÔte D ivoire 
 Croatia 
 Cuba 
 Cyprus 
 Czech Republic 
 Denmark 
 Deutschland 
 Djibouti 
 Dominica 
 Dominican Republic 
 Ecuador 
 Egypt 
 El Salvador 
 Equatorial Guinea 
 Eritrea 
 Estonia 
 Ethiopia 
 Falkland Islands (malvinas) 
 Faroe Islands 
 Fiji 
 Finland 
 France 
 French Polynesia 
 Gabon 
 Gambia 
 Georgia 
 Ghana 
 Gibraltar 
 Greece 
 Greenland 
 Grenada 
 Guam 
 Guatemala 
 Guernsey 
 Guinea 
 Guinea-bissau 
 Guyana 
 Haiti 
 Heard Island And Mcdonald Islands 
 Holy See (vatican City State) 
 Honduras 
 Hong Kong 
 Hungary 
 Iceland 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Iran, Islamic Republic Of 
 Iraq 
 Ireland 
 Israel 
 Italy 
 Jamaica 
 Japan 
 Jersey 
 Jordan 
 Kazakhstan 
 Kenya 
 Kiribati 
 Korea, Democratic Peoples Republic Of 
 Korea, Republic Of 
 Kuwait 
 Kyrgyzstan 
 Lao Peoples Democratic Republic 
 Latvia 
 Lebanon 
 Lesotho 
 Liberia 
 Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 
 Liechtenstein 
 Lithuania 
 Luxembourg 
 Macao 
 Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic Of 
 Madagascar 
 Malawi 
 Malaysia 
 Maldives 
 Mali 
 Malta 
 Marshall Islands 
 Mauritania 
 Mauritius 
 Mexico 
 Micronesia, Federated States Of 
 Moldova 
 Monaco 
 Mongolia 
 Montserrat 
 Morocco 
 Mozambique 
 Myanmar 
 Namibia 
 Nauru 
 Nepal 
 Netherlands 
 Netherlands Antilles 
 New Caledonia 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaragua 
 Niger 
 Nigeria 
 Niue 
 Norfolk Island 
 Northern Mariana Islands 
 Norway 
 Oman 
 Pakistan 
 Palau 
 Panama 
 Papua New Guinea 
 Paraguay 
 Peru 
 Philippines 
 Pitcairn 
 Poland 
 Portugal 
 Puerto Rico 
 Qatar 
 Romania 
 Russian Federation 
 Rwanda 
 Saint Helena 
 Saint Kitts And Nevis 
 Saint Lucia 
 Saint Vincent And The Grenadines 
 Samoa 
 San Marino 
 Sao Tome And Principe 
 Saudi Arabia 
 Schweiz 
 Senegal 
 Seychelles 
 Sierra Leone 
 Singapore 
 Slovakia 
 Slovenia 
 Solomon Islands 
 Somalia 
 South Africa 
 Spain 
 Sri Lanka 
 Sudan 
 Suriname 
 Svalbard And Jan Mayen 
 Swaziland 
 Sweden 
 Syrian Arab Republic 
 Taiwan, Province Of China 
 Tajikistan 
 Tanzania, United Republic Of 
 Thailand 
 Timor-leste 
 Togo 
 Tokelau 
 Tonga 
 Trinidad And Tobago 
 Tunisia 
 Turkey 
 Turkmenistan 
 Turks And Caicos Islands 
 Tuvalu 
 Uganda 
 Ukraine 
 United Arab Emirates 
 United Kingdom 
 United States 
 Uruguay 
 Uzbekistan 
 Vanuatu 
 Venezuela 
 Viet Nam 
 Virgin Islands, British 
 Virgin Islands, U.s. 
 Wallis And Futuna 
 Western Sahara 
 Yemen 
 Zambia 
 Zimbabwe 
 Data Protection* 
 Yes, I have read the data protection rules and explicitly give consent to receive emails. 
 Subscribe 
 www.CleverReach.com 
 