Part V
Critical Approaches
25
The Critical Response to Tolkien’s Fiction
Patrick Curry
For the purposes of this essay, “Tolkien scholarship” is used as a generic term for all
critical studies whose subject is Tolkien’s work. That scholarship comprises two parts.
One, the main subject of this essay, is “Tolkien criticism,” in which the overwhelming
majority of professional literary and cultural critics commenting on Tolkien’s work have
made no specialized study of it. The other is “Tolkien studies,” undertaken by relative
experts on his work, who themselves divide into professional critics on the one hand and
informed “fans” on the other, with some qualifying as both. Drout (2005) describes work
by the latter group as “Middle-earth studies.”
The distinction between Tolkien criticism and Tolkien studies is not clear-cut,
however, insofar as a few critical experts on Tolkien have had sufficient impact, both
scholarly and popular, to affect mainstream critical opinion. The leading instance is Tom
Shippey; others include Verlyn Flieger, Brian Rosebury, Michael Drout, and John Garth.
In discussing Tolkien criticism, their work will be included, along with that of a few
critics who, conversely, are not primarily Tolkien scholars but have nonetheless made a
significant contribution to the field. Also, we are only concerned with the response to
Tolkien’s fiction.
It is not enough simply to describe the critical reaction to Tolkien. It is our intellectual
responsibility to reflect on and try to understand that reaction and the reasons for it, so
space must also be made for that. Furthermore, one of the factors that makes the critical
reaction to Tolkien worth considering is his immense popular appeal. It is the
combination of that and elite critical rejection that gives this subject much of its abiding
interest. Tolkien’s popular reception therefore cannot be ignored when considering his
critics.
Any attempt to survey Tolkien criticism in a disinterested manner must conclude that
the weight of critical opinion has been, and largely remains, negative. Indeed, the greater
part seems not an attempt to understand Tolkien and his readers but rather to disqualify
and humiliate them. In this context, Daniel Timmons’s assessment (2000, 1–10) is
admirably irenic but misleading. True, for every critical attack on Tolkien one can find a
positive opinion; but that means little without taking into account the relative status,
perceived authority, and scholarly as well as public impact of the critics concerned. I
therefore make no apology for concentrating overall on the critical hostility to Tolkien’s
fiction.1
Finally, before we embark, it is vital to realize that we are all, public and professional
critics alike, engaged in a common task, namely engaging with the meaning(s) of
Tolkien’s fiction. That is to say: the meanings resulting from how his books, as they are
written, are taken up by readers. So there are two elements to any such process,
analytically distinguishable but seamless in practice: production, or what went into his
fiction, both the materials and his creative uses of them; and reception: what the results
signify to its readers. There is no escaping what Drout and Wynne (2000, 107) call “the
vital epistemological fact that all texts must be interpreted”2 and questions of reception –
what Tolkien (OFS, 48) called “the effect produced now by these old things in the stories
as they are” – are arguably still the more challenging and therefore neglected of the two.
Shippey (2000a) is a model in taking an integrated approach.
The principal phases of critical response are these. The Hobbit was published in 1937
to some acclaim (see ch. 8), but Tolkien criticism started in earnest with publication of
The Lord of the Rings, as a book for adults, in 1954–1955. It stepped up with the book’s
spectacular success beginning in 1965, was given renewed impetus by the results of
readers’ polls in 1996–1998, and again by Peter Jackson’s films in 2001–2003, and
2012–2013. Tolkien also received some critical notice with publication of The
Silmarillion in 1977.
First Wave: The 1950s and 1960s
In several ways, the initial critical response to The Lord of the Rings set precedents which
have continued, with remarkable continuity, into the present. One was the observation by
W. H. Auden, one of Tolkien’s staunchest defenders, that:
I rarely remember a book about which I have had such violent arguments. Nobody seems
to have a moderate opinion; either, like myself, people find it a masterpiece of its genre
or they cannot abide it, and among the hostile there are some, I must confess, for whose
judgement I have great respect. (Auden 1956)
Auden added, shrewdly, “I can only suppose that some people object to Heroic Quests
and Imaginary Worlds on principle.” Praise was also forthcoming from Richard Hughes,
Naomi Mitchison, and, effusively but perhaps predictably, C. S. Lewis (1954, 1955), but
others were less enthusiastic. Alfred Duggan (1954, 541), reviewing The Lord of the
Rings anonymously in The Times Literary Supplement, opined that “This is not a work
which many adults will read through more than once,” thus marking the start of a long
series of patrician critical judgments on Tolkien subsequently perceptible as clearly wide
of the mark. Similarly, Philip Toynbee, writing in The Observer on August 6, 1961
recorded his spectacularly premature relief that “today these books have passed into a
merciful oblivion.”
In the second of three reviews in 1954–1955, Edwin Muir, just appointed Norton
Professor of English at Harvard University, declared that The Lord of the Rings
disappointed because “all the characters are boys masquerading as adult heroes” (1955).
In other words, they are (1) immature, as signaled by what Muir curiously described as an
uncomplicatedly happy ending; (2) one-dimensional, the good ones being thoroughly
good and the bad utterly bad; and (3) problematically masculine and/or sexually
immature. To anyone who knows the books, it is obvious that the first two points are
wrong, and they have been refuted more than once (e.g., Le Guin 1989, 57–58; Shippey
2000b); the third is more complex (see Clark 1997; Green 1998; Curry 2005, 85–87; and
see ch. 32). What is more significant, however, is the durability of the charges.
Probably the most influential single review from this period was by one of the leading
American literary critics of his day, a Marxist modernist, Edmund Wilson (1956). Its
significance is not so much its questionable judgments (the books show “poverty of
invention” and their hero “has no serious temptations”) as its contemptuous mockery,
extending from the title, “Oo, Those Awful Orcs!”, to the dismissal of The Lord of the
Rings as “juvenile trash.” That tone remained a constant throughout the next half-century.
In a little-known rejoinder a few years later though, Donald Davie argued that Wilson’s
attack “quite fails to account for the seriousness of the undertaking, for the pressure that
drove the author through these thousand or more pages, as it has driven many readers
(this reader among them) to follow through the same pages eagerly” (1969, 90).
Also in 1969, amid The Lord of the Rings’ popular success, Columbia University
Press published a full-length academic critique by Catherine Stimpson. She excoriated
Tolkien as “an incorrigible nationalist” (1969, 8, 13), celebrating a “bourgeois pastoral
idyll” with one-dimensional characters who are “irritatingly, blandly, traditionally
masculine.” The (in)justice of these specific charges has been discussed in detail by
Colebatch (2003, Chapter 6) as well as Curry (2005, 83–85), so they need not detain us.
They will serve here to underline the predominantly Marxist, feminist, and literary-
modernist provenance of these attacks.
The Silmarillion: The 1970s
Christopher Tolkien’s edited version of The Silmarillion was published in 1977. It was
the first of Tolkien’s works of fiction to meet with public bafflement and disappointment
(in which connection it may be relevant that it was published posthumously, i.e., without
his approval). It was a response which largely coincided, for once, with the critical
reception. John Gardner reviewed it sympathetically and insightfully, however, in The
New York Times Book Review (October 12, 1977).
It is true, and by now almost a truism, that Tolkien studies must now include Tolkien’s
legendarium in understanding his work as a whole (see Flieger and Hofstetter 2000;
Hammond and Anderson 1993, 229–230). In terms of Tolkien criticism, however, that
importance does not turn The Silmarillion into an accessible or even particularly readable
text. It isn’t, which has naturally served to sharply limit its impact on common
apprehensions of Tolkien’s fiction, and critics are under no obligation to pretend
otherwise. Tolkien himself (Letters 333) noted one insuperable problem that The Lord of
the Rings and The Hobbit depended for their sense of depth and antiquity on “glimpses of
a large history in the background,” which was not possible when presenting that
background itself.
Tolkien’s Fiction in the 1980s
This decade began with two critiques of Tolkien in the mold of Stimpson but issuing
from the new critical industries, recently ascendant within the academy, of structuralism
and psychoanalysis respectively: Christine Brooke-Rose, A Rhetoric of the Unreal
(1981), and Rosemary Jackson, Fantasy: The Literature of Subversion (1981). Brooke-
Rose, an eminent academic structuralist as well as author of “experimental” novels,
turned the big guns of Theory on The Lord of the Rings, appropriating it as little more
than grist to its preset mill (see Attebery 1992, 23–27; Curry 2005, 110–111). As with
those of Wilson and Stimpson but even more so, Brooke-Rose’s account of Tolkien was
littered with both spelling and factual mistakes, suggesting that the diffi culty for these
critics lay in reading Tolkien at all, let alone closely, and undermining confidence in her
wider conclusions.
Jackson, a Marxist and psychoanalytic critic, argued that Tolkien’s “sentimental” and
“nostalgic” work functions as a conservative vehicle for repression supporting a ruling
ideology. The remedy, in standard modernist (and crypto-Protestant) style, is
demystification. Once again, as Attebery shows (1992, 20–23, 27, 31; see also Curry
2005, 106–108), Jackson was more concerned to dispose of Tolkien’s work than to
comprehend it.
Also in 1981, and again in 1983, Fred Inglis, a former student of F. R. Leavis, took
Tolkien criticism to a new nadir, calling Tolkien a “fascist” (Inglis 1981, 197). I have
discussed his critique elsewhere (Curry 2005, 104–106); here it is only needful to point
out the same phenomenon that Shippey (2000a, 306–308) has noted of Toynbee and
Edmund Wilson, namely gross inconsistency between their self-professed critical ideals
and their practice when they encounter Tolkien. In Inglis’s case (1983, 3, 31–32), this
takes the form of criticizing the metropolitan “irony-stereotypewriter” while shamelessly
patronizing a “typical” Tolkien reader as the retired head of art in a market-town
grammar school, reading The Lord of the Rings to his young sons in a pine-paneled flat,
and so on.
Inglis was the respectful biographer of Raymond Williams, the leading Marxist
literary critic of his time and a major influence on the new academic discipline of cultural
studies. In the course of a critique of pastoralism, Williams (1985, 258) casually counted
Tolkien as a practitioner of “country-based fantasy” that is “suburban” and “half-
educated.” Again, the most significant point is not that these criticisms, left unqualified,
are mistaken, which can easily be shown; Tolkien was no more halfeducated than he was
a fascist. It is rather how very mistaken they are, and how consistently. That suggests that
there is (as Marxists like to say) a structural or systematic bias at work.
Fortunately for Tolkien criticism, the early 1980s also saw publication of what is
probably its most important single work, both in quality and (eventually) influence: Tom
Shippey’s The Road to Middle-earth (1982, with revised and expanded editions in 1993
and 2005). A year later, Verlyn Flieger’s pioneering and insightful Splintered Light:
Logos and Language in Tolkien’s World (revised edition, 2002) appeared. Together,
these books revealed the profound linguistic, cultural, and metaphysical dimensions of
Tolkien’s work. It is doubtful that they significantly altered mainstream critical opinion
upon publication, but less so that they have done so over time. Since space is severely
limited, however, and both these books are still widely available as well as unmissable in
both Tolkien studies and (it is to be hoped) criticism, I won’t discuss them directly here.3
The Polls: 1996–1998
In 1996, The Lord of the Rings topped the UK poll by Waterstone’s and Channel 4
(26,000 readers) of the greatest books of the century. Also that year, the Folio Society
asked its members to decide upon their favorite books; in first place, with 10,000 votes,
was The Lord of the Rings. The same finding emerged from follow-up polls in 1997 by
the television program Bookworm (around 50,000 readers) and readers of the Daily
Telegraph, and in 1999 by MORI, although in the last The Lord of the Rings was
formally pushed into second place – by the Bible. That same year, The Lord of the Rings
topped a poll conducted by Amazon.com as the book of the millennium. In several of
these polls, Orwell was placed second, either directly or as the author of Nineteen Eighty-
Four: an interesting fact to which we shall return.
The critical response was explosively hostile. Auberon Waugh (editor of the Literary
Review), Professor John Carey, and Mark Lawson (on the BBC Today program) all
concurred that Tolkien fans had orchestrated the outcome. Tolkien, it seems, has “fans”
rather than “readers.” This conspiracy theory was quietly dropped after the Folio Society
poll. Susan Jeffreys, for The Sunday Times (January 26, 1997), recorded the dismay at the
Waterstone’s/Channel 4 result “up and down the country wherever one or two literati
gathered together.”4 The Times Literary Supplement (January 24, 1997) found it
“horrifying” and Howard Jacobson opined that “It’s another black day for British culture”
(see Pearce 1998, 2–3). Not to be outdone, Germaine Greer (1997, 4) described the result
as a “nightmare,” adding that the books subsequently inspired by Tolkien “are more or
less what you would expect; flight from reality is their dominating characteristic.” The
charge of escapism, reiterating those of immaturity, nostalgia, and conservatism, is
another hardy perennial to which we shall return.
The same pattern persisted into the next decade. In 2003, The Lord of the Rings won
the BBC’s The Big Read poll of readers’ favorite book, with 174,000 votes (23% of the
total of nearly 750,000 readers): by now, surely an unsurprising result except, it seems, to
the three critics live on TV on the night, two of whom had apparently been unable to read
it beforehand. All in all, such instances, together with Tolkien’s critics’ repeated inability
to get the details or narrative meaning of what they are attacking right, point to an
irrational revulsion. This is not irrelevant; it throws a very interesting light on the
dominant literary mindset and, as such, it should form part of any truly critical
consideration thereof.
Meanwhile, in contrast to the public critics, an authoritative work edited by John Clute
and John Grant, The Encyclopedia of Fantasy (1997) offered a measured and reasoned
assessment of Tolkien’s work, especially concerning both his literary influences and his
own influence.
The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: The 2000s
In Tolkien criticism, the new century and millennium opened with publication of
Shippey’s J. R. R. Tolkien: Author of the Century (2000a). Its quality combined with the
backing of a major trade publisher, and Shippey’s eminence in both Tolkien studies and
criticism, makes it central in both, and only points made therein which directly concern
the remit of this essay will be mentioned.
Shippey defends the bold claim of his title on three grounds: democratic, generic, and
qualitative (xvii–xx). These could be summarized by saying that for the last 50 years,
Tolkien has found unignorable numbers of readers, many of whom have not only gone on
to seek out similar works in the fantasy genre he unintentionally founded but “have been
deeply and lastingly moved by Tolkien’s works, and even if one doesn’t share the feeling,
one should be able to understand why.”
Shippey also makes a convincing case that Tolkien should be considered a modern
writer, in the company of Orwell, Golding, Vonnegut and others, with a thoroughly
twentieth-century concern for and treatment of power and evil (see ch. 28). There are two
qualifications: Tolkien’s understanding of them was often at variance with his
contemporaries’, and his work being modern in some respects does not preclude it from
being nonmodern in others.
Finally, Shippey suggests (xxxiv) that “Very probably the reason for the dislike has a
good deal to do with the reasons for the success. Tolkien has challenged the very
authority of the literati, and this will never be forgiven.” In his “Afterword: The
Followers and the Critics” (305–328), Shippey usefully considers the phenomenon of
“intense critical hostility to Tolkien, the refusal to allow him to be even a part of ‘English
literature’ ” (305).
Despite the insights offered by Shippey, Flieger, and others working in Tolkien
studies, the various charges laid against The Lord of the Rings over several decades by his
detractors in Tolkien criticism were prominently revived in 2001 in perhaps the leading
organ of the British literary establishment, the London Review of Books (LRB), in an
article by one of its editors, Jenny Turner (for one of the few responses to Turner, see
Galwey 2004). Entitled, with heavy irony, “Reasons for liking Tolkien,” Turner’s essay
seeks not so much to understand Tolkien or his readers as to place them beyond serious
consideration. Nonetheless, it is illuminating because of what it reveals about the gut
reactions and critical mindset of Wilson, Muir, Stimpson, Jackson, and more recently
Greer. It is thus invaluable as data.
Turner repeats some of her predecessors’ elementary mistakes, describing the Hobbits
of the story as subordinate and powerless, and portraying the message of the book as one
of reassuring safety resulting from a “cosy little universe.” There is also the familiar
snobbery according to which The Lord of the Rings isn’t literature but “junk fiction,” in
the same relation to “literature and learning” as “astrology is to physics,” written by
someone who, if he hadn’t been an Oxford scholar, might have been obsessed with “a
model railway, or a record collection, or military history, or maps.”
Turner’s principal subject, however, is her own reaction to the book. She writes as an
apostate who once read it with “an intensity I now find scary.” She now finds it “silly and
boring,” yet “it still locks with my psyche in a most alarming way. . . . It’s an infantile
comfort that is also a black pit.”5 It seems The Lord of the Rings “has cubby-holes for all
sorts of urges to hide in,” and “[a]ll sorts of visceral needs and desires are involved”
which make it “not just anti-intellectual but a sort of anti-book” and even “a little
sinister.” All Tolkien’s fans are “vulnerable people” smitten by “soggy, yearny
nostalgia,” but “the swotty teenager” is particularly at risk.
Turner mentions Tolkien’s “dreadful prose style” in passing (cf. Drout 2004), and
takes it as read that “[o]bviously there are problems to do with women, and race and
racism,” not to mention “with the elves and so on” (recall in this connection Auden’s
point from 1956). But what she helpfully identifies as “the central problem” is that:
It’s a whole world . . . You would expect elves to figure in Tolkien’s story – if they had
to figure at all – as creatures within a sub-creation, characters in a story, fictions inside a
frame. But actually, they are given much more credence, more constitutive importance,
more ontological weight.
In consequence, “[y]ou find yourself thirsting for some nice sensible wipe-down
concepts like ‘metaphor’ or ‘fiction.’ ”
Why is this a serious problem for Turner and like-minded critics? Certainly the
metaphysical realism and rationalism that dominates so much of mainstream Western
culture are obvious in her response; although to apply a little of her hero Freud, why do
we need constant reminders that Elves, say, are not real? In any case, there is clearly a
program involved – in this case, rationalist, naturalist, and secularist – along the lines of
what Barbara Herrnstein Smith (1988, 179) has anatomized as the enduring effort “to
identify the presumptively universally compelling Truth and Way and to compel it
universally.” When the Truth is at stake in this way, living and letting live is not a critical
option, and anyone claiming to sincerely love, say, the work of Tolkien, Proust, and
George Eliot, must be either deluded or dissembling.
In more strictly literary terms, it seems that Turner – and given that she is on its
editorial board, one wonders about the LRB too – fails to understand two of the most
important things about art, literary or otherwise: that reality is (also) ineluctably fictional,
and that fiction and its referents are (also) unavoidably real. Turner and her allies
evidently want to keep reality and fiction on hermetically separate levels except for what
they, the gatekeepers, will allow through.6 As for metaphor, Paul Ricoeur showed more
than three decades ago that “There is no non-metaphorical standpoint. . . . metaphoricity
is absolutely uncontrollable” (2003, 339). In other words, any critique of fiction has
fiction at its heart, and any critique of metaphoricity can only draw upon metaphor. So
much for a “sensible wipe-down.”
Modernism
This review of the dominant critical reception of Tolkien’s fiction consistently shows two
characteristics which seem especially significant: a visceral hostility and emotional
animus, and a plethora of mistakes showing that the books had not been read closely (or
in a few cases, at all). Taking these together suggests that the inability to really engage
resulted from the loathing, although without inhibiting the same critics from pronouncing
anathema. As the critic J. P. Stern once observed, contempt is a poor guide. We must go
beyond that conclusion, however, in search of an explanation. Why such contempt for
these particular books?
Shippey (2000a, 316) argues that “at the heart of the critical rage, and fear, which
Tolkien immediately and ever after provoked” is the fact that he “threatened the authority
of the arbiters of taste, the critics, the educationalists, the literati. He was as educated as
they were but in a different school.” Furthermore, The Lord of the Rings “showed an
improper ambition, as if it had ideas above the proper station of popular trash.” The
critics’ assumption is often actually that simple: it’s popular, so it must be trash. Shippey
adds, “It was the combination that could not be forgiven”.
This explanation undoubtedly goes far towards explaining the unusual critical
response, but as it stands, it is an excellent summary that awaits more elaboration. This
essay will attempt just that under the umbrella term (to be explained) of “modernism.”
First, however, we need briefly to review other relevant factors which are not captured by
even a broad definition of modernism, although they may well overlap with it.
One is that The Lord of the Rings will never have universal appeal (properly so-
called). That hardly marks it out from any other book, but in terms of content, you
wouldn’t go to it, for example, for subtle insights into relationships between the sexes.
Furthermore, there remain stubborn issues, potentially problematic, with the way it treats
race and politics as well as sex-gender.7 Regarding style, Tolkien’s tone (not unlike that
of Dickens) is sometimes sentimental, and its occasional archaic and “high” style will
never be to some readers’ tastes. It is perfectly understandable that some would prefer
other work (which differs from deploring anyone at all reading it).8
To some extent, a negative response to Tolkien’s fiction may be simply a function of
personal disaffinity. Temperaments, even to the extent they are a matter of nurture as well
as nature, vary widely, and with them, tastes: de gustibus non est disputandum. But taste
alone won’t carry all the weight of the emotive reactions; alternatively, there must be
more to “mere taste” than meets the eye.
In this connection, another potential stumbling-block has been thoroughly explored by
Shippey (2000a, 2005; see also Honegger 2005): the problems posed, perhaps
particularly for intellectuals, by a literary artefact suffused with a philological concern for
words and a particular understanding of language (strongly influenced by Owen Barfield:
see Flieger 2002) as rooted in and indicative of corresponding worlds/mentalities, past
and present. That understanding has almost vanished from the contemporary intellectual
world. As a result, as Shippey (2005, 332) says, “there is an enormous ‘culture-gap’
between him and his critics” – admirers, often, as much as detractors. Among critics,
Harold Bloom (2000) falls in this category; he evinces more bafflement than hatred.9 As
a sign of this problem for literary critics, see the ongoing struggle to place The Lord of
the Rings in a category: it is clearly not a novel, so is it a romance, an epic, mythopoeic
fiction, or simply junk fiction? It has often proved easier to simply opine that whatever it
is, to quote Humphrey Carpenter, it “doesn’t really belong to literature” (BBC Bookshelf,
November 22, 1991; see Simonson 2008).
Another consideration is simple snobbery, itself fed by fear (see Carey 1992). The
power of this attitude, contributing to and fed by membership in a critical elite,
particularly when institutionalized in an academic or media forum, should not be
underestimated – particularly where popular success is also part of the mix. Auberon
Waugh’s contempt for Tolkien was primarily a function of snobbery, and no doubt it also
figured strongly in that of Wilson, Greer, Turner, and others.
Nonetheless, more still seems needed to account for the sheer animus. For that, we
need to invoke something like a worldview, ideology or set of values, relatively coherent
and strongly held (if not necessarily consciously so). Such values are ultimate in two
senses: they cannot be further grounded or justified, yet they are also what their bearer
feels (more than thinks) is fundamental. They are therefore often defended with quasi-
religious or, in the case of values which entail denying religion, crypto-religious fervor.
They can change, of course, but any major shift amounts to a conversion experience. It is
at this level, respecting the critical response to Tolkien’s fiction, that modernism enters
the picture.
What do we mean by “modernism”? In answering that question, we first need a
working definition of “modernity” and “modern” (see also ch. 24). These embrace a
sensibility and set of values which include, prominently:
• A belief in the “right” and ability, in principle, of humanity to determine its own
fate (rather than, say, God or nature), usually through science and technology.
• Secularism and materialism.
• Considerable confidence, if not indeed faith, in reason, and relatedly in modern
science, conceived as the “highest” version of reason, along with efficient
administration as its practical expression.
• All of which coalesces into a narrative ideology of Progress and its enemies (chief
among them, “superstition”, a.k.a. “tradition”) that bears a significant but
unacknowledged debt to Christian eschatology.
Modernity is also an historical period, albeit necessarily broadly construed, in which
that sensibility and set of values finds dominant or preeminent expression and influence
(the best single guide here is Toulmin 1990, but see also Latour 1993). “Modernism” and
“modernist” refer to the valorization and advocacy of modern values – that is, the chief
values of modernity – whether in politics, culture, literature, architecture, music, etc.
They do not necessarily describe a particular school or movement within art, architecture,
literature, etc. Thus, literary modernists need no longer hold up Joyce, Eliot, and Woolf
as exemplars, although they may do so.
As Veldman perceptively notes: “Not all the reviewers who stood outside Narnia and
Middle-earth did so because they misunderstood what Lewis and Tolkien were about.
Many did so precisely because they perceived the protest at the heart of these works”
(1994, 107).10 It is my contention that the dominant ideology of the literati, as self-
appointed guardians of literature, is modernism and that those most aggrieved by Tolkien
are or were, personally as well as professionally, modernists. Given Tolkien’s
uncompromising, erudite, and popularly received rejection of modernism, this makes
sense not only of the most consistent charges – infantilism, nostalgia, escapism – but also
of the casual vehemence with which they have been made.11 As Tolkien himself realized,
his chief crime was not even “the Escape of the Prisoner”; it was encouraging “the Flight
of the Deserter” (MC 148). In this connection, it makes perfect sense that the most
frequent runners-up in the polls of readers were Orwell and Nineteen Eighty-Four: an
author and a book equally agonized over pathological modernity, although from a
socialist rather than conservative perspective.
As evidence and elucidation of this contention, let us examine the issues, as they
appear in the critical texts, of modernism itself and of irony. Starting with modernism,
one can second Shippey’s firm placing of The Lord of the Rings as a work with
characteristically modern concerns, particularly respecting power (see Shippey 2000a,
312– 318, for an analysis of “Tolkien and modernity”; Weinreich and Honegger 2006;
and ch. 24). At the same time, one can also agree with Turner (2001) that “In form, in
content, in everything about it, The Lord of the Rings is the most anti-Modernist of
novels.” Andrew O’Hehir makes the same point: “the crux of the matter . . . lies in
Tolkien’s wholehearted rejection of modernity and modernism. This is what so
powerfully attracts some readers, and just as powerfully repels others” (2001).
Anthony Lane (2001) sees the same dynamic in Tolkien’s “high” style: “Hardly
anyone had used it unironically since Tennyson’s ‘Idylls of the King,’ and to revert to it
with a straight face in the nineteen-fifties was to mount a head-on challenge to
modernity.” Finally, as argued elsewhere (Curry 2004), it is The Lord of the Rings’
nonmodernism, presenting “a Europe that has not been ‘Europeanized’” (Luling 1995,
53), that has powerfully attracted many readers.
There are no contradictions here if we recall the distinction between modernism and
modernity. First, Tolkien himself was definitely anti-modernist; his deep reservations
about advanced technology and industrialism, representative democracy and bureaucracy
are well documented. It would be simple-minded, however, to assume that his books are
therefore straightforwardly anti-modernist. Second, Tolkien’s fiction is certainly modern,
but it is far from purely so. Both Shippey (2000) and Flieger (especially 1997) have
enabled us to analytically disentangle the modern and nonmodern ingredients in the
cauldron of Tolkien’s story. Third, that story is not modernist; no advocacy of modernity
is present. In short, The Lord of the Rings is a modern book, much of the import of which
is also nonmodern, written by an anti-modernist.
Rosebury (2003, 149–154) also concludes that it “could not plausibly be called a
modernist work, because it lacks a crucial quality universal within modernism: irony”
(154). That brings us to our second key consideration. Preeminently, modernist irony
functions as a signal that the writer subscribes to what Latour calls the Modern
Constitution:
1st: . . . even though we construct Nature, Nature is as if we did not construct it. 2nd:
even though we do not construct Society, Society is as if we did construct it. 3rd: Nature
and Society must remain absolutely distinct. (1993, 22)
“Being ironic, especially about what one is writing oneself, says: being intelligent and
highly educated, I know that what I am doing (cultural construction) isn’t real (natural) –
even, indeed especially, if I am writing about nature – and that the two are completely
different.” And anyone whose art is unselfconscious, thus ignoring (or disrespecting?)
this convention, becomes fair game for mockery and contempt.
Like Rosebury, Drout too (2007, 653) notes Tolkien’s failure, or refusal, to meet “the
modernist expectation of pervasive irony.” Attebery (1992, 39) concurs that “The course
of twentieth-century literature can be viewed as the gradual spread of irony into every
phase of storytelling.” Moorcock, one of Tolkien’s bitterest critics (1987, Chapter 5,
“Epic Pooh”), inadvertently confirms the point: “I think my own dislike of J. R. R.
Tolkien lies primarily in the fact that in all those hundreds of pages, full of high ideals,
sinister evil and noble deeds, there is scarcely a hint of irony anywhere” (1987, 107). (For
a recent unconvincing attempt to enlist Tolkien as a “theorist of the ironic imagination”
see Saler 2012.)
Ironies abound within The Lord of the Rings, of course, not least that it turns out to be
not Frodo or Sam who finally destroy the Ring, nor any of the great and good, but
Gollum. But Tolkien is not ironic about The Lord of the Rings; nor does he offer the
slightest opening or invitation to readers to be so. He and his readers are, so to say, post-
ironic. That is not something that will endear them to critics who pride themselves on
being the critical avant-garde and can’t stop using irony to signal it, or checking what
they are reading for such signals. Infuriatingly for some, post-ironists – which, in
Tolkien’s case, evidently comprise the majority of readers – simply don’t care.
Taking Turner (2001) again as an unusually articulate but otherwise representative
critic of Tolkien, recall, in this connection, what she identifies as “the central problem”:
the “ontological weight” given by Tolkien to fictional creatures like Elves (as Shippey
2005, 286 points out, “Most novels are about ‘people who never existed,’ ” but let that
pass). Turner’s cosmopolitan sophistication vanishes when realism, rationalism, and
secularism are at stake. The only alternative, it seems, is “the vague warm surges of
feeling associated with religion and religion substitutes.” Indeed, in a kind of modernist
evocation of cold showers and mittens at night, she warns that “[t]hese responses can be
touched off with a dangerous ease – every self-aware person finds that he has to train
himself from adolescence in withstanding them.” As Galwey (2004, 10) comments,
“Perhaps if one had staked one’s all on modernity, one would feel like that.”
Turner writes, “When I was young . . . I really did believe that the world inside the
book had taken over the world outside,” and such literature “plays on the reader’s desire
to believe that the world Tolkien is writing about is in some way real.” When you grow
up, however, “You know too much about how the world works to be so easily taken in.”
Notice how she resorts to classical epistemology in order to disqualify and domesticate
others’ as well as her own ontological experience of, and as, reality: they (“fans”; it used
to be “natives”) believe, but we literati know. From there it is a short step to associate
such “realism” with maturity, growing up, and Muir’s and Wilson’s anxious concern to
be the Adult in the room. But that is pure rhetoric, not logic or universal experience; and
swollen into an ideology of Progress, on both an individual and collective level, it
encourages an all too familiar obligation to chastise heretics, apostates, backsliders, and
“escapists.”
It is hardly surprising, then, that “Tolkien’s perfectly sincere, perfectly impossible
narrative” (Attebery 1992, 46) so provokes. As the Irish writer Nuala O’Faolain once
remarked:
The language of highbrow criticism can only cope with a certain kind of fiction. It has no
vocabulary with which to discuss a world where neither the individual nor the society is
self-conscious, and the author pretends not to be either. . . . The ordinary reader is far
ahead of the critics in ease with such a world. (The Irish Times, November 7, 1992)
In another genuine irony, it was one of the heroes of modernism, Walter Benjamin (1969,
83, 102), who remarked on modern “embarrassment all around when the wish to hear a
story is expressed” and added approvingly that “[t]he first true storyteller is, and will
continue to be, the teller of fairy tales.” As Tolkien wrote in 1955, “the ‘fairy-story’ is
really an adult genre” – that is, a genre for the ordinary reader – “and one for which a
starving audience exists” (Letters 209).
The Lord of the Rings is thus fundamentally not one but several things: a story told by
a master storyteller; a story inspired by philology; a story suffused with Catholic values;
and a mythic (or mythopoeic) story with a North European pagan inflection. It is also a
story that enables the contemporary reader to imaginatively inhabit a nonmodern world,
one that throws into question some central modern values and assumptions.
There remains one important point to discuss in this connection. Le Guin has pointed
to “a deep puritanical distrust of fantasy.” To such critics, fantasy “is escapism. . . . They
confuse fantasy, which in the psychological sense is a universal and essential faculty of
the human mind, with infantilism and pathological regression” (and not always by sincere
error, one would add) “as if evil were a problem, something that can be solved, that has
an answer.” “That”t she adds, “is escapism” (Le Guin 1989, 58–59; emphasis in original).
Laura Miller (2008, 101) recounts a conversation in which Tolkien asked Lewis
rhetorically, “What class of men would you expect to be most preoccupied with, and
most hostile to, the idea of escape?” The answer, of course, is jailers (OFS 69). Miéville
(2002) has cited Moorcock to the effect that “this is precisely untrue. Jailers love
escapism. What they hate is escape.” But that rejoinder turns on whether you think
imaginatively inhabiting an essentially nonmodern world is already a form of escape,
rather than mere escapism. Of course, any literature, or indeed art, could constitute
escapism. Given the phenomenon of radical nostalgia, however (Curry 2004, 15–16) –
which I take to be empirically confirmed in Tolkien’s case by The Lord of the Rings’
influence in various movements of political and environmental resistance – his fiction is
certainly not necessarily escapist or even quietist, sometimes proving rather to be activist.
From Tolkien Studies
This section is intended to bring attention to contributions to Tolkien scholarship from
Tolkien studies, in addition to those already mentioned by Shippey, which have also
figured in, and affected, Tolkien criticism. One can assume without discussion the
importance of Douglas A. Anderson’s annotated edition of The Hobbit (Tolkien 2002a),
the biography by Humphrey Carpenter (1977), Tolkien’s Letters and essays (MC), the
posthumous Unfinished Tales of Númenor and Middle-earth (UT), and the 12 volumes of
the History of Middle-earth series (1983–1996). To these should be added two collections
from major conferences, edited by Reynolds and GoodKnight (1995) and Wells (2008),
and at least two edited collections: Salu and Farrell (1979) and Clark and Timmons
(2000).
First mention must be of the work of Verlyn Flieger (1997, 2002, 2005), and its
sensitive analysis of the metaphysical and theological dimensions (which are vast and
intricate) of Tolkien’s work, both fiction and nonfiction. In addition, Flieger has provided
definitive editions of Smith of Wootton Major (Tolkien 2005), the landmark essay On
Fairy-stories (Tolkien 2008b, with Douglas A. Anderson), and a collection of essays on
The Silmarillion (2000, with Carl F. Hostetter). She is also the best guide to the vital
place of Faërie or enchantment in Tolkien’s work.
Brian Rosebury (1992) pioneered the first good study of Tolkien’s work as a cultural
phenomenon, and the later edition (2003) is still more useful and insightful. For other
recent work of good quality on Tolkien’s fiction in the light of contemporary literature
and especially cultural studies, see Hughes (2004), Eaglestone (2005), and Fimi (2009).12
Also in 1992, Brian Attebery’s Strategies of Fantasy set the bar high for such studies.
Starting from the premiss that “the task of literary theory is to provide a framework
capable of accounting for the story’s success on its own terms, rather than denying that its
aims are achievable or worth the attempt” (17), his discussion of Tolkien draws upon the
unjustly neglected approach of Meeker (1974) and subsequently Elgin (1985) to show
convincingly that Tolkien’s epic is life affirmingly “comic” and ecological, as opposed to
despairingly “tragic” and Promethean. As such, it is:
neither nostalgic nor transcendental. Tolkien draws on the ancient magical worldview and
the comic narrative structure because they offer something to the present. . . . an
affirmative, integrative worldview, which is not necessarily naïve, escapist, or
reactionary. (1992, 34)
The failure to follow through this insight is the biggest single lapse to date in Tolkien
studies and criticism alike.
Michael Drout is a critic and scholar in Tolkien studies whose comprehensive and
acute metacritical essays (2005 and, with Wynne, 2000) should also be read by anyone
engaged in Tolkien criticism. He has also edited a Tolkien encyclopedia (2007). His
bibliography with Wynne and Higgins (2000) is another major resource, along with those
of Johnson (1986), Hammond (1993, with Douglas A. Anderson), and West (1981, 2004;
see also Wynne 2007, and Lobdell 2007).
John Garth’s exemplary biography of the first part of Tolkien’s life (2003) overlaps
both Tolkien studies and criticism, and it has been deservedly praised. One can only hope
Garth will one day be able to give similar treatment to Tolkien’s entire life, superseding
Humphrey Carpenter’s earlier and useful but flawed biography of 1977.13 Finally,
mention must be made of the excellent series of books produced by Walking Tree
Publishers, founded in 1997, under the direction of Thomas Honegger, and of the annual
refereed journal Tolkien Studies, established in 2004.
Others
This concluding section will mention contributions by writers not Tolkien scholars as
such, nor all literary critics, which have nonetheless enriched Tolkien criticism. Pride of
place here, on account of her unimpeachable status as both writer and critic and her close
relationship, equally personal and professional, with Tolkien’s fiction, goes to Ursula Le
Guin. Her reflections in the collection of her essays from 1989 on the vexed questions of
fantasy and escapism, the complexity of the characters in The Lord of the Rings, and its
treatment of the nature of evil, remain evergreen.
The historian Ronald Hutton (2003, 2011) treats the pagan dimension of Tolkien’s
work, an important but neglected topic, with originality and insight. The result throws an
interesting light in turn on its Christian dimension, which has received considerably more
(and sometimes uncritical) attention.
Another social and cultural historian, Meredith Veldman, wrote an early consideration
of Tolkien’s social and environmental commitments and influence that stands up very
well and should be better known. She was the first to note that:
Decades before the Greens, he denounced the exaltation of mechanization and the narrow definition
of economic progress that resulted in the degradation of the natural environment, and he did so in
romantic terms: in Tolkien’s Middle-earth, nature expressed a reality beyond human comprehension
and worthy of human respect. (1994, 90)
In this context, The Lord of the Rings “could serve as a text of not only withdrawal but
also engagement” (108), and the elective affinity between it and the countercultural
movements of the 1960s, 1970s, and 1990s was far from an anomaly.
Turning to other literature and literary criticism, we should be grateful to a critic for
The Guardian (April 3, 2010), Nicholas Lezard, for finally admitting in print that “of all
the means for professional suicide that are available to the writer, expressing affection for
Tolkien is one of the most effective.” It is depressing (if you think Tolkien deserves
better) that this should still be the case in 2010. On the other hand, there are signs that the
wind is changing. Among the newer generations of contemporary writers, a few are
evidently unafraid to include casual and favorable references to Tolkien in their own
work. These include Junot Díaz, Michael Chabon, and, among literary critics, Anthony
Lane (2001) in The New Yorkerr, Andrew O’Hehir (2001) in the online Salon, and
another writer for Salon, Laura Miller (2008).
China Miéville is an accomplished fantasy/science fiction writer himself. In 2002 he
published a sharp critique of Tolkien in the Socialist Review, an internet journal, but
followed this up with a lighter and more tolerant treatment in 2009, giving “Five Reasons
Tolkien Rocks,” which is recommended. Among the acute and amusing points he makes
is one that breaks through just the modernist barrier erected by Turner and others, which
they see as Tolkien’s “central problem”:
Tolkien refused the notion that a work of fiction is, in some reductive way, primarily,
solely, or really “about” something else, narrowly and precisely. . . . his “cordial dislike”
[of allegory] is utterly key for the project of creating a fantastic fiction that both means
and is vividly and irreducibly itself, and is thereby fiction worthy of the name. (2009)
Miéville, Lane, O’Hehir, and Miller show that it is perfectly possible to subject Tolkien’s
work to serious criticism and even poke fun at it while still recognizing its virtues,
respecting its strengths and retaining affection for the old monster, as it were. In support
of the best of the Tolkien criticism and studies discussed above, they offer hope for
Tolkien scholarship continuing to put flesh on the bones of perhaps the most pithy and
accurate critical judgment ever delivered on The Lord of the Rings, by its first publisher
Rayner Unwin (quoted in Carpenter 1977, 210): “a very great book in its own curious
way.”
Postscript
In the six years which have elapsed since writing this essay, a couple of new points merit
a mention. One concerns the exhibition of ‘Tolkien: Maker of Middle-earth’ at the
Bodleian Library in Oxford (2018) and The Morgan Library and Museum in New York
(2019), and ‘Tolkien, Journey to Middle-earth’ at the Bibliothèque Nationale de France in
Paris (2019-20). All were extremely well-attended, which underlines the perennial
popular appeal of Tolkien’s work, regardless of its critical status. The exhibition in
Oxford was the Bodleian's highest attended exhibition ever, despite the restriction of
timed, pre-booked tickets; visitors averaged 926 a day. Those taking place in New York
and Paris were equally successful (Catherine McIllwaine, pers. comm.).
The second matter, more weighty, is a renewed focus on both Tolkien and his work in
relation to issues of ‘difference’, especially race and racism. There is a welcome new
chapter in this edition on that topic, but insofar as it bears on the ongoing critical
response to Tolkien’s work perhaps I could add a few remarks. They are not intended to
be a full review of the literature.
The first thing to say is that hastiness is unhelpful, especially in an intellectual,
cultural and (not least) technological atmosphere which promotes it. Real social evils,
both past and present, need to be weighed against the temptation of a simplistic rush to
rectitude. An attempt to give the former their full stretch without succumbing to the latter
is therefore a prerequisite for any critical judgment which deserves to be taken seriously.
Second, close attention needs to be given to disentangling questions of Tolkien’s own
beliefs – chiefly of interest to biographers and their readers – from those concerning the
nature of his writings, which surely should be the principal focus of literary critics and
their readers. Of course, one may fall into both camps, but that does not make them
identical. (See Fini, 2008, 2012.)
Tolkien’s own hostility to Nazism, to anti-Semitism, to ‘Nordic’ as a racially-tainted
term, to the idea that the North is a ‘sacred direction’, to apartheid and to imperialism,
especially British, are a matter of record. But as he himself writes (2012a, xxii), ‘An
author cannot of course remain wholly unaffected by his experience, but the ways in
which a story-germ uses the soil of experience are extremely complex, and attempts to
define the process are at best guesses from evidence that is inadequate and ambiguous.’
And that truth cuts both ways, so it still leaves the question: to what extent can Tolkien’s
work be rightly described as condoning or encouraging racial prejudice?
One starting-point is to remind ourselves that his stories are just that – fiction – and
fiction should not be treated as if it were a tract, argument, or direct assertion. It is
unimaginable, for example, without characters who believe, assert and do things with
which neither the author nor perhaps any of their readers agree or support. Furthermore,
storytellers must be free to imagine what and who they like. (Thankfully, there is little
chance of Tolkien being accused of ‘appropriating’ Elvish culture.)
By the same token, subjects in stories should, in the absence of strong evidence to the
contrary, be assumed to be there primarily because the story being told demands it. And
Tolkien in particular wrote in the first and most basic instance not as a religionist, nor a
linguist, nor a patriot and so on, but as an artist – a storyteller – and he specifically denies
and disparages allegorical interpretations whereby the Ring ‘is’ the Bomb, etc.
(2012a,xxi)
The alternative would be to attack Conrad’s Heart of Darkness, say, as imperialist and
racist because it is populated with imperialists and racists, or because it presents
imperialism and racism in action. What could be more absurd, and all the more so since
what it shows is just the horrors thereof? (But that did not prevent Chinua Achebe from
denouncing it as such, and influentially so.)
Granted all this, it might become possible to tease out any respects in which Tolkien’s
work could justifiably be said to be racist. But let me add a few more cautionary notes.
(1) Hobbits were not necessarily white-skinned. Indeed, Sam – ‘the chief hero’ of The
Lord of the Rings (2006, 161) – is twice described as having brown hands (Tolkien
2012b, 714 and 2012c, 915), and the Harfoots, probably Sam’s ancestors, are described
as ‘browner of skin’ than the other two kinds (2012a, 3). (2) Although the Haradrim are
certainly dark-skinned, we don’t know whether the Easterlings were or not. (3) Inter-
racial marriages and friendships play a strong role in The Lord of the Rings: between
Aragorn and Arwen, Gimli and Legolas, and even (given the history of strife between the
Dwarves and the Rohirrim) Gimli and Eomer. (4) White is not always positive, viz.
Saruman the White, of the White Hand. And (5) the various heroes are far from
uniformly white or even human, being strikingly multiracial and indeed multicultural.
Finally, Tolkien’s famous tale is set in North-West Europe (2006, 239), in an ancient
time. As such, the story naturally draws upon centuries of its historical experience in
which, for most by far of its inhabitants, lands to the South were a rumour of heat and
deserts and from the East came fearsome militant invaders (the Huns, then Mongols, then
Turks), while the West was a direction of spiritual mystery, including whatever lay over
the Sea.
The best candidate for an intractable problem regarding racism remains the Orcs. With
all the other races in Middle-earth, individual difference finally trumps group
characteristics. Even when the latter are in play, how they are manifested varies widely
between individuals (see Chism 2007). But Orcs are apparently irredeemable as a whole,
simply as such.
Are they, though? It might have been possible to sustain their generic evil as a
metaphysical or theological abstraction, but in The Lord of the Rings they unavoidably
become more individual, arguing with each other, expressing fear and revulsion of the
Nazgûl, and engaging in blokey camaraderie (‘the lads’). And that individuality surely
makes Orcs more like the other races. Nor are they even uniformly black. Some were –
the Uruks of Mordor – but Tolkien describes Orcs generally as ‘sallow-skinned’, which
Chambers Dictionary defines as ‘of a pale-yellowish colour’. Add Tolkien’s deliberate
and principled rejection of simple-minded allegory, whereby the Orcs ‘are’ or are ‘like’
blacks, and we might wonder what the problem really is.
Yet it is impossible not be struck by Gandalf the (truly) White, the dazzling white light
of the Galadriel’s phial, the White Lady of Rohan and so on, as against the Black Land,
the Black Speech, the Black Riders and so on. There is certainly a pattern at work, and
maybe a problem, which includes colour although not necessarily race.
Rather, it is part of a deeply problematic overarching moral valuation, deeply rooted in
‘Western’ culture, which comprises intensely value-laden hierarchical polarities, notably
light vs dark, high vs low, inner vs outer, culture vs nature, and male vs female (see
Plumwood 1993). The toxic effect of these valuations on race, gender, class and beyond
have been, and remain, considerable. Given their ubiquity and antiquity, however – at
least since Plato, and amplified a thousand-fold by Christian theology – it would have
been very difficult, if not impossible, for Tolkien not to use them. And if readers accept
them uncritically, then there could indeed be a problem with Tolkien’s moral cosmology.
But that is a risk, not an ineluctable result, and I personally feel that in this case, the risk
is a price worth paying. For otherwise, there would have been no story.
NOTES
1 Many of the critical attacks on The Lord of the Rings, up to 2000, are discussed in
Shippey (2005, Chapter 1), and in Shippey (2000a, especially the “Afterword”);
these should definitely be consulted. See also Hammond and Anderson (1993);
Pearce (1998, 1–10); Curry (2004, Chapter 2, and 2005); and Lobdell (2007).
2 It is therefore odd that later in the same paper, they refer to the “intrinsic quality”
of Tolkien’s fiction. “Intrinsic” here is an empty signifier which, to use William
James’s blunt metaphor, can never be cashed in as such. There are only ever
interpretations, better and worse, and any qualities are a function of the work plus
its readers, including critics, which interface is therefore where the real work of
criticism must take place. It follows that any good critical practice must include
reflexive awareness (which is why ex cathedra denunciations are always a bad
sign).
3 Also in 1981, Isaacs and Zimbardo published another collection of critical essays,
Tolkien: New Critical Perspectives, which failed to add very much to their earlier
and innovative one of 1968, Tolkien and the Critics: Essays on J. R. R. Tolkien’s
The Lord of the Rings.
4 Leading unavoidably to the thought, as Shippey (2000a, xxi) observes, that the
literati sometimes talk to themselves.
5 I am vividly reminded of an incident in Vienna in 1910 when Sigmund Freud
asked Carl Jung to promise that he would “never abandon the sexual theory.”
When Jung asked why, Freud hesitated before replying that they had to make it a
“dogma,” an “unshakeable bulwark” against the “black tide of mud, of occultism.”
Interestingly, Turner makes it clear that Freud is exemplary for her, and she too
finds in his particular theory of sexual maturity a bulwark, one against the “black
pit” of Tolkien’s fiction.
6 Behind nearly all such efforts stands the ghost of Plato, that great advocate of a
single and universal truth, and enemy of popular unlicensed fictions; and, at no
great distance, Saint Paul. In terms of their mode, this applies to most modern
Western secularists as much as to theists.
7 On the last, see the references already supplied when discussing Muir’s charges.
On race and racism, see Luling (1995); Fimi (2009); and in general, Eaglestone
(2005).
8 Respecting any defense of Tolkien here, however, Drout and Wynne (2000, 123)
identify as “[t]he biggest failing in Tolkien criticism . . . its lack of discussion of
Tolkien’s style, his sentence-level writing, his word choice and syntax.”
9 It is amusing to imagine Bloom trying to find any “anxiety of influence” in
Tolkien. But did it never occur to him that Joyce’s Ulysses is a much better
candidate than The Lord of the Rings for a work “fated to become only an intricate
Period Piece” (Bloom 2000, 2)?
10 Lumping Tolkien and Lewis together should be done with care, as it can be quite
misleading.
11 Although he doesn’t discuss Tolkien specifically, Fredric Jameson, who dismisses
all contemporary “magical narratives” as “archaic nostalgia” (1975, 61), will serve
as a paradigmatic example of a dogmatic modernist literary and cultural critic.
12 For an interesting collection on The Lord of the Rings by philosophers, see
Bassham and Bronson (2003). It is marred, however, by an annoyingly arch tone
which seems to indicate a need to show that they are not taking Tolkien too
seriously.
13 For interesting reflections on the relatively neglected topic of Tolkien and World
War II, see also Manni and Bonechi (2008) and ch. 31.
REFERENCES
Attebery, Brian. 1992. Strategies of Fantasy. Bloomington : Indiana University Press.
Auden, W. H. 1956. “At the End of the Quest, Victory.” New York Times Book Review, January 22: 5.
Bassham, Gregory and Eric Bronson, eds. 2003. The Lord of the Rings and Philosophy: One Book to Rule
Them All.l La Salle, IL: Open Court.
Benjamin, Walter. 1969. “The Storyteller.” In Illuminations, edited by Hannah Arendt, 83–109. New York:
Schocken Books.
Bloom, Harold, ed. 2000. J. R. R. Tolkien: Modern Critical Views. Philadelphia: Chelsea House.
Brooke-Rose, Christine. 1981. A Rhetoric of the Unreal. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Carey, John. 1992. The Intellectuals and the Masses. London: Faber & Faber.
Carpenter, Humphrey. 1977. J. R. R. Tolkien – A Biography. London: Allen & Unwin.
Christine Chism, ‘Race and Ethnicity in Tolkien’s Works’, pp. 555-556 in Drout, 2007.
Clark, Craig. 1997. “Problems of Good and Evil in Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings.” Mallorn, 35: 15–19.
Clark, George and Daniel Timmons, eds. 2000. J. R. R. Tolkien and His Literary Resonances. Westport,
CT: Greenwood.
Clute, John and John Grant. 1997. The Encyclopedia of Fantasy. London: Orbis.
Colebatch, Hal G. P. 2003. Return of the Heroes: The Lord of the Rings, Star Wars, Harry Potter, and
Social Conflict. 2nd edn. Christchurch: Cybereditions.
Curry, Patrick. 2004. Defending Middle-earth: Tolkien, Myth and Modernity. 2nd edn. Boston: Houghton
Mifflin.
Curry, Patrick. 2005. “Tolkien and the Critics: A Critique.” In Root and Branch: Approaches Towards
Understanding Tolkien, edited by Thomas Honegger, 75–146. 2nd edn. Zurich and Bern: Walking
Tree Publishers.
Davie, Donald. 1969. “On Hobbits and Intellectuals .” Encounter (October): 87–92.
Drout, Michael D. C. 2004. “Tolkien’s Prose Style and its Literary and Rhetorical Effects.” Tolkien Studies,
1.1: 137–163.
Drout, Michael D. C. 2005. “Towards a Better Tolkien Criticism.” In Eaglestone (2005), 15–28.
Drout, Michael D. C., ed. 2007. J. R. R. Tolkien Encyclopaedia. London: Routledge.
Drout, Michael D. C. and Hilary Wynne. 2000. “Tom Shippey’s J. R. R. Tolkien: Author of the Century and
a Look Back at Tolkien Criticism since 1982.” Envoi, 9.2: 101–134.
Drout, Michael, Hilary Wynne, and Melissa Higgins. 2000. “Scholarly Studies of J. R. R. Tolkien and His
Works (in English): 1984– 2000.” Envoi, 9.2: 135–167.
Duggan, Alfred. 1954. “Heroic Endeavour.” Times Literary Supplement, August 27: 541.
Eaglestone, Robert, ed. 2005. Reading The Lord of the Rings: New Writings on Tolkien’s Classic. London:
Continuum.
Elgin, Don D. 1985. The Comedy of the Fantastic: Ecological Perspectives on the Fantasy Novel.
Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Fini, Dimitra. 2008. Tolkien, Race and Cultural History: From Fairies to Hobbits. New York and London:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Fini, Dimitra, ‘Revisiting Race in Tolkien’s Legendarium: Constructing Cultures and Ideologies in an
Imaginary World’ (2012): http://dimitrafimi.com/2018/12/02/revisiting-race-in-tolkiens-legendarium-
constructing-cultures-and-ideologies-in-an-imaginary-world/ (accessed 12.07.20)
Flieger, Verlyn. 1997. A Question of Time: J. R. R. Tolkien’s Road to Faërie. Kent, OH: Kent State
University Press.
Flieger, Verlyn. 2002. Splintered Light: Logos and Language in Tolkien’s World. Revised edn. Kent, OH:
Kent State University Press.
Flieger, Verlyn. 2005. Interrupted Music: The Making of Tolkien’s Mythology. Kent, OH: Kent State
University Press.
Flieger, Verlyn and Carl F. Hostetter, eds. 2000. Tolkien’s Legendarium: Essays on The History of Middle-
earth. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Galwey, Caroline. 2004. “Reasons for not Liking Tolkien.” Mallorn, 42: 5–10.
Garth, John. 2003. Tolkien and the Great War: The Threshold of Middle-earth. London: HarperCollins.
Green, William. 1998. “‘Where’s Mama?’ The Construction of the Feminine in The Hobbit.” The Lion and
the Unicorn, 22: 188–195.
Greer, Germaine. 1997. “The Book of the Century?” W: The Waterstone’s Magazine, 8: 2–9.
Hammond, Wayne G. and Douglas A. Anderson. 1993. J. R. R. Tolkien: A Descriptive Bibliography. New
Castle, DE: Oak Knoll Press.
Honegger, Thomas. 2005. “Tolkien Through the Eyes of a Mediaevalist.” In Reconsidering Tolkien, edited
by Thomas Honegger, 45–66. Zurich and Bern: Walking Tree Publishers.
Hughes, Shaun F. D. 2004. “Introduction: Postmodern Tolkien.” Modern Fiction Studies, 50.4: 807–813.
Hutton, Ronald. 2003. Witches, Druids and King Arthurr. London: Hambledon & London.
Hutton, Ronald. 2011. “The Pagan Tolkien” and “Can We Still Have a Pagan Tolkien?” In The Ring and
the Cross: Christianity and The Lord of the Rings, edited by Paul Kerry, 57–70 and 90–105. Madison,
NJ: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press.
Inglis, Fred. 1981. The Promise of Happiness: Value and Meaning in Children’s Fiction. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Inglis, Fred. 1983. “Gentility and Powerlessness: Tolkien and the New Class.” In J. R. R. Tolkien: This Far
Land, edited by Robert Giddings, 25–41. London: Vision Press.
Jackson, Rosemary. 1981. Fantasy: The Literature of Subversion. London: Methuen.
Jameson, Fredric. 1975. “Magical Narratives: Romance as Genre.” New Literary History, 7.1: 135–163.
Johnson, Judith A. 1986. J. R. R. Tolkien: Six Decades of Criticism. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Lane, Anthony. 2001. “The Hobbit Habit: Reading The Lord of the Rings.” The New Yorker,r December
10. Available at http://www.newyorker.com/ archive/2001/12/10/011210crat_atlarge, accessed
December 13, 2013.
Latour, Bruno. 1993. We Have Never Been Modern. Translated by Catherine Porter. Hemel Hempstead :
Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Le Guin, Ursula K. 1989. The Language of the Night: Essays on Fantasy and Science Fiction. Rev. edn.
London: The Women’s Press.
Lewis, C. S. 1954. “The Gods Return to Earth.” Time and Tide, August 14: 1082.
Lewis, C. S. 1955. “The Dethronement of Power.” Time and Tide, October 22: 1373.
Lobdell, Jared. 2007. “Criticism of Tolkien, Twentieth Century.” In J. R. R. Tolkien Encyclopaedia, edited
by Michael Drout, 109–110. London: Routledge.
Luling, Virginia. 1995. “An Anthropologist in Middle-earth.” In Reynolds and GoodKnight (1995), 53–57.
Manni, Franco and Simone Bonechi. 2008. “The Complexity of Tolkien’s Attitude Towards the Second
World War.” In The Ring Goes Ever On: Proceedings of the Tolkien 2005 Conference: 50 Years of
The Lord of the Rings, edited by Sarah Wells, 33–51. The Tolkien Society.
Meeker, Joseph. 1974. The Comedy of Survival: Studies in Literary Ecology. New York: Scribner’s.
Miéville, China. 2002. “Tolkien – Middle Earth Meets Middle England.” Socialist Review (January).
Available at http://www.socialist review.org.uk/article.php?articlenumber=7813, accessed December
13, 2013.
Miéville, China. 2009. “There and Back Again: Five Reasons Tolkien Rocks.” Omnivoracious. Available
at http://www.omnivoracious.com/ 2009/06/there-and-back-again-five-reasons -tolkien-rocks.html,
accessed December 13, 2013.
Miller, Laura. 2008. The Magician’s Book: A Skeptic’s Adventures in Narnia. New York: Little, Brown.
Moorcock, Michael. 1987. Wizardry and Wild Romance: A Study of Epic Fantasy. London: Gollancz.
Mortimer, Patchen. 2005. “Tolkien and Modernism .” Tolkien Studies, 2: 113–129.
Muir, Edwin. 1955. “A Boy’s World.” The Observerr, November 27: 11.
O’Hehir, Andrew. 2001. “The Book of the Century.” Salon. Part 1 available at http://www
.salon.com/books/feature/2001/06/04/tolkien and Part 2 at http://www.salon.com/books/fea
ture/2001/06/05/tolkien2, both accessed December 13, 2013.
Pearce, Joseph. 1998. Tolkien: Man and Myth. London: HarperCollins and San Francisco: Ignatius Press.
Plumwood, Val. Feminism and the Mastery of Nature. London: Routledge, 1993.
Reynolds, Patricia and Glen H. GoodKnight, eds. 1995. Proceedings of the J. R. R. Tolkien Centenary
Conference. Milton Keynes: The Tolkien Society and Altadena, CA: Mythopoeic Press.
Ricoeur, Paul. 2003. The Rule of Metaphor. Translated by Robert Czerny. 2nd edn. London: Routledge.
Rosebury, Brian. 2003. Tolkien: A Cultural Phenomenon. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. Originally
published in 1992 as Tolkien: A Critical Assessment. Basingstoke: Macmillan.
Saler, Michael. 2012. As If: Modern Enchantment and the Literary Prehistory of Virtual Reality. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Salu, Mary and Robert T. Farrell, eds. 1979. J. R. R. Tolkien: Scholar and Story-teller.r Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press.
Shippey, Tom. 2000a. J. R. R. Tolkien: Author of the Century. London: HarperCollins.
Shippey, Tom. 2000b. “Orcs, Wraiths, Wights: Tolkien’s Images of Evil.” In J. R. R. Tolkien and His
Literary Resonances, edited by George Clark and Daniel Timmons, 183–198. Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press.
Shippey, Tom. 2005. The Road to Middle-earth. Rev. and expanded edn. London: HarperCollins.
Simonson, Martin. 2008. The Lord of the Rings and the Western Narrative Tradition. Zurich and Jena:
Walking Tree Publishers.
Smith, Barbara Herrnstein. 1988. Contingencies of Value: Alternative Perspectives for Critical Theory.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Stimpson, Catherine R. 1969. J. R. R. Tolkien. New York: Columbia University Press.
Timmons, Daniel. 2000. “Introduction.” In J. R. R. Tolkien and His Literary Resonances, edited by George
Clark and Daniel Timmons, 1–10. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Tolkien, J.R.R., The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien, ed. Humphrey Carpenter and Christopher Tolkien. London:
HarperCollins, 2006.
Tolkien, J.R.R. The Lord of the Rings, vol. 1: The Fellowship of the Ring. London: HarperCollins, 2012a.
Tolkien, J.R.R. The Lord of the Rings, vol. 2: The Two Towers. London: HarperCollins, 2012b.
Tolkien, J.R.R. The Lord of the Rings, vol. 1: The Return of the King. London: HarperCollins, 2012c.
Toulmin, Stephen. 1990. Cosmopolis: The Hidden Agenda of Modernity. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Toynbee, Philip. 1961. Review of The Lord of the Rings. The Observer,r August 6.
Turner, Jenny. 2001. “Reasons for Liking Tolkien.” London Review of Books, 23.22, November 15.
Available at http://www.lrb.co.uk/v23/n22/ jenny-turner/reasons-for-liking-tolkien, accessed
December 13, 2013.
Veldman, Meredith. 1994. Fantasy, the Bomb, and the Greening of Britain: Romantic Protest, 1945– 1980.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Weinreich, Frank and Thomas Honegger, eds. 2006. Tolkien and Modernity. 2 vols. Zurich and Bern:
Walking Tree Publishers.
Wells, Sarah, ed. 2008. The Ring Goes Ever On: Proceedings of the Tolkien 2005 Conference: 50 Years of
The Lord of the Rings. 2 vols. Coventry: The Tolkien Society.
West, Richard C. 1981. Tolkien: An Annotated Checklist. 2nd edn. Kent, OH: Kent State University Press.
West, Richard C. 2004. “A Tolkien Checklist: Selected Criticism 1981–2004.” Modern Fiction Studies,
50.4: 1015–1028.
Williams, Raymond. 1985. The Country and the City. London: Hogarth Press.
Wilson, Edmund. 1956. “Oo, Those Awful Orcs!” The Nation, 182, April 14: 312–313. Reprint in The Bit
Between My Teeth: A Literary Chronicle of 1950–1965, edited by Edmund Wilson, 326–332. New
York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1965.
Wynne, Hilary. 2007. “Tolkien Scholarship: Since 1980.” In J. R. R. Tolkien Encyclopaedia, edited by
Michael Drout, 659–662. London: Routledge.
FURTHER READING
Honegger, Thomas, ed. 2008. Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings: Sources of Inspiration. Zurich and Bern:
Walking Tree Publishers.
Horkheimer, Max and Theodor Adorno. 2002. Dialectic of Enlightenment.t Translated by Edmund
Jephcott. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Lewis, C. S., ed. 2003. A Tolkien Compass. Rev. edn. Chicago and La Salle: Open Court.
Shippey, Tom. 2003. “Foreword.” In A Tolkien Compass, edited by Jared Lobdell, vii–xi. Chicago and La
Salle. Open Court.
Shippey, Tom. 2007. “Literature, Twentieth Century: Influence of Tolkien.” In Drout (2007), 378–382.

