 
 D&D 5E – Writer’s Guide | Dungeon Master Assistance 
 Home Buy Me a Coffee 
 D&D 5E Books 
 About Me 
 Downloads 
 Legal 
 Dungeon Master Assistance 
 Where anyone over 18 can share thoughts and ideas on RPGs. 
 Home 
 D&D 5E – Writer’s Guide 
 8 Comments 
 Posted by Ronny on August 3, 2015 
 Style Guide for Dungeon Masters 
 I was looking for an official writer’s guide, or style sheet, from Wizards of the Coast for the 5 th edition Dungeons and Dragons. Perhaps they have one and I just couldn’t find it. So I took the copies I had from 3.5 and 4.0 and updated them for 5 th edition. The following is what I came up with. 
 Format Instructions 
 Capitalization 
 Capitalize abilities (Strength, Dexterity, and so on), skill names (Acrobatics, Sleight of Hand, Survival, and so on), feat names (Crossbow Expert, Healer, and so on), domains (Trickery, War, and so on), schools (Transmutation, Necromancy, and so on), names of languages (Common, Dwarvish, and so on), and sizes (Small, Medium, Large, and so on). The term “Dungeon Master” and the abbreviation “DM” are always capitalized. The term “Difficulty Class” and the abbreviation “DC” are always capitalized. Creatures, classes, alignments, spells, weapons, and magic items that do not include proper nouns are all lower case. Magic items and spell names are italicized. For example, magic weapons, potions, and other items should be fully italicized. If a magic item grants a numerical modifier, treat that modifier as part of the item’s name, placing it at the beginning of the name. Examples: +1 longsword , a potion of healing , +2 cloak of resistance , and a scroll of arcane lock . 
 Monster names. When you refer to a monster in a sentence, do not capitalize the monster’s name unless it is a proper noun. Example: Baphomet’s minotaur cultists often summon goristros … 
 Races. When you refer to a race in a sentence, do not capitalize the race’s name (unless English grammar demands capitalization). Example: Love of stories inspires many gnome heroes to become bards. 
 Character races are to appear in the following singular / plural terminology; dwarf/dwarves, elf/elves, halfling/halflings, human/humans, dragonborn/dragonborn, gnome/gnomes, half-elf/half-elves, half-orc/half-orcs, tiefling/tieflings. 
 Abbreviations 
 Abbreviations usually use all capital letters and no periods (DM, DC, NPC, HD, XP). The abbreviations for hit points and coins use lower case letters and no periods (hp, gp, sp). The abbreviation for experience points is XP. 
 Ability scores are abbreviated as follows: STR (Strength), DEX (Dexterity), CON (Constitution), INT (Intelligence), WIS (Wisdom), CHA (Charisma), and are always listed in that order. 
 Class abbreviations are as follows: 
Bbn = Barbarian 
Brd = Bard 
Clr = Cleric 
Drd = Druid 
Ftr = Fighter 
Mnk = Monk 
Pal = Paladin 
Rgr = Ranger 
Rog = Rogue 
Sor = Sorcerer 
Wiz = Wizard 
Wrk = Warlock 
  Race abbreviations are as follows: 
Hum = Human 
Drb = Dragonborn 
Drw = Drow 
Dwf = Dwarf 
Elf = Elf 
Gno = Gnome 
1/2Elf = Half-Elf 
1/2Orc = Half-Orc 
Hlf = Halfling 
Tfl = Tiefling 
 Rule books 
PHB = Player’s Handbook 
DMG = Dungeon Master’s Guide 
MM = Monster Manual 
 You should type out the entire title the first time it is mentioned. Example: “Use the standard combat rues as described in the Player’s Hand Book (PHB).” 
 Time 
 Do not abbreviate standard game units of time; i.e., round (alternatively; melee round may also be used), and turn should be fully spelled out. 
 Temperature 
 When describing temperature, always use a degrees symbol; i.e., 100˚. When describing an angle or slant, always spell out the word ‘degrees’; i.e., 100 degrees. 
 Inches and feet 
 Never use ‘hash’ marks. Inches and feet should always be expressed as an abbreviation when used in a table or stat block – otherwise, they should not be abbreviated. When indicating the attribute being measured, insert a hyphen between the number and unit. Examples: 8-in wide, 12-ft deep 
 Movement 
 Movement rate in feet should always be expressed as an abbreviation. Example: 30 ft. 
 Advantage/Disadvantage 
 A creature may “have advantage” (or “have disadvantage”) in certain situations. A roll (saving throw or ability check for instance) may be made “with advantage” (or “with disadvantage”). Examples: The target can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, with disadvantage if the spectator is visible to the target. The owl bear has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) checks that rely on sight or smell. 
 I recommend that you not abbreviate the words advantage or disadvantage, but when you must – you can abbreviate advantage Adv and disadvantage Disad. 
 Hyphenation 
 Always hyphenate class and spell levels when they precede a noun (4th-level rogue, 1st-level spell). Hyphenate compound adjectives before nouns (the red-haired, 18-foot-tall fire giant). Do not hyphenate before the suffix “-like” except after double-l endings (for example, snakelike, spell-like). 
 Die Rolls 
 How many and what kind; a lowercase d followed by a number (4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 20, %) indicates a specific polyhedral die to be rolled. It is preceded by a number indicates the number of times to roll the indicated die; i.e., 3d6. It is not acceptable say, “three six-sided die,” to achieve the same result. 
 Die result; when specifying a die roll result that triggers some action, to specify the range of numbers use a dash to separate the low from the high; i.e., 1–2 on 1d6. 
 Skill Checks 
 You should list the skill check in the running text with the DC number listed first. Example : Player characters must make a successful DC 15 Dexterity (Acrobatics) check to climb the wall. 
 Generally, set DCs for tasks that characters can retry at 5 to 10 points higher than DCs for tasks that PCs can’t retry. 
 Tense 
 Write in the present tense. Wherever possible, avoid using the future tense “will” to describe NPC or monster actions. For example, do not say “If the player characters open the door, the golem will attack.” Instead say, “If the player characters open the door, the golem attacks.” 
 Damage 
 Use the phrase “points of damage” when giving damage in numbers or ranges. Always use a die range when giving damage, and always include a numeral before the type of die, even if there is only one. For example: “The skeleton deals 1d3 points of damage with each claw” is correct. Do not use “d3 points of damage,” “1d3 damage,” or “1d3 hp damage.” 
Creatures deal or take damage. They do not inflict or suffer damage. 
Example: “If the saving throw fails, the character takes 1d6+1 points of damage from the poison.” 
 Share this: 
 Share on X (Opens in new window) 
 X 
 Share on Facebook (Opens in new window) 
 Facebook 
 Share on Reddit (Opens in new window) 
 Reddit 
 Like Loading... 
 Related 
 Reference Material 
 abbreviations , Dungeons and Dragons 5th Edition , Reference 
 ← Dragon Hunt – Chapter 2, Part 11 – The Golden Palace Dragon Hunt – Chapter 2, Part 12 – There is a Dragon in the Palace → 
 8 responses to “ D&D 5E – Writer’s Guide ” 
 simonjhudson October 12, 2015 at 3:21 am 
 Thanks for this Ronnie – I’m pulling together a handbook for my Rennaisance-ish steampunk-ish campaign at the moment (it’s complex – set in an analog to north Africa, surface dwelling drow, gnomes in aircities, but low magic – that kind of thing). I’m using your Style guide for this. 
I think I while ago I complimented you on the cover art for your books; and I think you shared the artwork. If so I have misplaced it – any chance you could share again? 
 Like Like 
 Reply 
 Ronny October 12, 2015 at 8:33 am 
 I am glad you are finding this useful. As far as cover art is concerned, Each cover is different. I use Photoshop and combine various images that I find online. Because they are mostly derivative works based on other peoples images I don’t think it would be appropriate for me to provide you with the original Photoshop files. Of course you are free to copy and modify any files you download from this site. 
Let me think about this a bit more. Perhaps I could create a template that I could share. If I do, it might make a good topic for another post. 
I would love to review your handbook when it is finished. It sounds like a great campaign setting. 
 Like Like 
 Reply 
 simonjhudson October 12, 2015 at 8:40 am 
 Thanks Ronny – I’ll be happy to share it. I have it’s predecessor, set in the same world, but focused on an analog on the British Isles. I’d be very happy to share that, if you are interested. 
The main game mechanic change is that casting arcane spells ages you – 1 day per spell level (offset by CON bonus) – it has a fascinating effect on players’ willingness to be arcane casters. There is plenty of backstory etc. as well, with a huge question of what happened to the Serok race, what the standing stones are all about, why Orcs are so smart and what the hell the elves are up to in the Cradle Lands (Europe analog). Happy to send it… 
 Like Like 
 Ronny October 12, 2015 at 12:58 pm 
 Thanks. my email address is hart@pcisys.net . 
 Like Like 
 Jack December 17, 2016 at 11:55 am 
 Nice work and needed. One observation: I think the words “feet” and “inches” are spelled out, unless they’re in a table. 
 Like Like 
 Reply 
 Ronny December 17, 2016 at 1:28 pm 
 It looks like you are right. In a table or in a stat block. After all of my years as an architectural draftsman, the abbreviations just “look” right to me. I doubt that I can break my habit of using them, but I stand corrected. 
Thanks. 
 Like Like 
 Reply 
 Z. August 19, 2017 at 12:46 pm 
 This is great! I’m printing it out for later reference. 
 Where did you find the 3.5 and 4e style guides? And are they still available anywhere? 
 Like Like 
 Reply 
 Ronny August 19, 2017 at 1:10 pm 
 I am sorry, I don’t recall where I found them. You might try a Google search. 
 Like Like 
 Reply 
 Leave a comment Cancel reply 
 Δ 
 RSS feed 
 Subscribe to Blog via Email 
 Enter your email address to subscribe to this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email. 
 Email Address: 
 Subscribe 
 Join 552 other subscribers 
 Top Posts 
 D&D 5E - Armor Class (AC) 
 D&D 5.5 Character Sheet – Fillable and Auto-Calculating 
 D&D 5E - Metals 
 D&D 5E – Quick Play Character Sheets 
 D&D 5.5 - PHB (Weapon Mastery) a Critical Review 
 D&D 5E – Quick Reference – Chase Rules 
 D&D 5E (2014) Character Sheet – Fillable and Auto-Calculating 
 D&D 5E - Artificer Character Sheet 
 D&D 5E – Quick Play Character Sheets - rev. 8 
 D&D 5E - Character Sheet and Instructions 
 Recent Posts 
 I’m taking a break. 
 AT-04 The Cogs of Lost Time – Free PDF of Published Version 
 D&D 5.5 – Class Reference Sheets 
 AT-03 Secrets of the Shattered Temple – Free PDF of Published Version 
 Most popular Posts and Downloads 
 Categories 
 5e compatable 
 adventure 
 Bold Against Monsters 
 D&D 5.5 
 Dragon Hunt – A Novel 
 Encounter 
 House Rules 
 Not D&D RPG 
 One D&D 
 Open DND 
 Optional rules 
 Playing Aids 
 Reference Material 
 ShadowDark 
 Source Book 
 Tales of the Valient 
 ToV 
 Uncategorized 
 Bookmarks 
 Blog (tribality) 
 Bog (Children of the Ampersand) 
 Bog (Fantastic Maps) 
 Bog (World Builder) 
 D&D 1E/3E to 5E Monster Converter 
 D&D Basic Rules 
 D&D Beyond 
 D&D Character Generator (AideDD) 
 D&D Character Generator (D&D Beyond) 
 D&D Character Generator (First Character) 
 D&D Character Generator (Random) 
 D&D Sage Advice 
 D&D Tools (AideDD) 
 D&D Tools (Leugren) 
 D&D Wizards of the Coast 
 Dice Roller 
 RPG Tools (donjon) 
 RPG Tools (Goblinist) 
 Virtual Tabletop (Fantasy Grounds) 
 Virtual Tabletop (Foundry) 
 Virtual Tabletop (MapTool) 
 Virtual Tabletop (Owlbear Rodeo) 
 Virtual Tabletop (Roll20) 
 Virtual Tabletop (Shard Tabletop) 
 Site Maintenance 
 Create account Log in 
 Entries feed 
 Comments feed 
 WordPress.com 
 ↑ Top 
 Blog at WordPress.com. 
 Privacy & Cookies: This site uses cookies. By continuing to use this website, you agree to their use. 
To find out more, including how to control cookies, see here:
 Cookie Policy 
 Comment 
 Reblog 
 Subscribe 
 Subscribed 
 Dungeon Master Assistance 
 Join 552 other subscribers 
 Sign me up 
 Already have a WordPress.com account? Log in now. 
 Dungeon Master Assistance 
 Subscribe 
 Subscribed 
 Sign up 
 Log in 
 Copy shortlink 
 Report this content 
 View post in Reader 
 Manage subscriptions 
 Collapse this bar 
 Loading Comments... 
 Write a Comment... 
 Email 
 Name 
 Website 
 %d 
 