 
 Read the DMG - by Maximilian Hart - d20 Digest 
 d20 Digest Subscribe Sign in Read the DMG It's actually pretty good Maximilian Hart Oct 27, 2022 Share The more I run D&D and create adventures, the more I’m convinced that I’ve been underrating the Dungeon Master’s Guide . Lookit these murderhobos with their dice and fancy costumes… For purposes of this post, let’s say your players find a settlement. A small feudal outpost, mostly an out-of-the-way keep, currently embattled by marauding monsters. Even though its inhabitants live in harmony, and despite the best efforts of its lord (a kind, just, and respected former war hero), the keep has a somewhat sinister reputation in the surrounding area. If the players decide to check the town out, the unsavory rumors have their roots in a raucous dive of a tavern just inside the keep’s walls: The Running Dog. All that took about 30 seconds to create using the tables on pg. 112 (and the tavern name on 113). Literally less time than it took to type it up. Before your next session, whether you’re poking about town (pg. 114), wandering the wilderness (pg. 108-9), or spicing up treasure in a dungeon (pg. 143), give the DMG a flip-through and you might find something to use that very next session. It’s not a perfect book, but there’s a lot in there to make your life easier, plus some good advice to boot. Check it out! Ghost Dragon Tactics - The Monsters Know What They’re Doing One D&D Overview: Expert Classes Review, Rule Changes, & More! & Top 10 Tips to Make Gods & Religion Matter in D&D 5E - Eventyr Games None So Blind – Character Blind Spots - Campaign Mastery Two Wandering Monster tables - Merric’s Musings d100 - Five Hundred Names for Dolmenwood Games - d4 Caltrops (Useful for any game!) d100 Woodland Paths of Auldwood - Elfmaids & Octopi (Same here) 100 Evil Magic Items - dndspeak I’ve started a campaign over on StartPlaying.Games: Sword Coast Adventures (“the only thing better than dragons or pirates is dragons AND pirates”) Now get out there and tell a story! Peace, Maximilian d20 Digest is a reader-supported publication. To receive new posts and support my work, consider becoming a free or paid subscriber. Subscribe Share Previous Next Discussion about this post Comments Restacks Top Latest Discussions No posts Ready for more? Subscribe © 2026 Maximilian Hart · Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection notice Start your Substack Get the app Substack is the home for great culture 
