
 D&D Dungeon Master's Guide | Roll20 Marketplace: Digital goods for online tabletop gaming 
 Roll20 uses cookies to improve your experience on our site. Cookies enable you to enjoy certain features, social sharing functionality, and tailor message and display ads to your interests on our site and others. They also help us understand how our site is being used. By continuing to use our site, you consent to our use of cookies. Update your cookie preferences here .
 × 
 × 
 Cookie Preferences 
 Accept cookies 
 We use Cookies to help personalize and improve Roll20. For more information on our use of non-essential Cookies, visit our Privacy Policy here. 
 Play Now 
 Join a Game 
 Characters 
 Shop 
 Tools 
 Compendium 
 Community 
 Subscribe 
 Sign In 
 Roll20 Marketplace Product 
 D&D Dungeon Master's Guide 
 Author: Wizards of the Coast 
 Package: A combination of art and adventure content. More detail on each item is below. 
 Price:
 $29.99
 You will also unlock a Demiplane version with this purchase. 
 Link your Demiplane account in your Account Settings to gain access 
 This Package Includes:
 Dungeon Master's Guide
 Dungeon Master's Guide Addon
 Dungeon Master's Guide Token Pack 
 This Package is available in the following bundles
 D&D DM Starter Bundle 
 $98.12 USD
 View » This Package is available as part of a larger collection. Click here to review the bundle. 
 The Dungeon Master’s Guide provides the inspiration and guidance you need to spark your imagination and create worlds of adventure for your players to explore and enjoy. 
 Inside you’ll find world-building tools, tips and tricks for creating memorable dungeons and adventures, optional game rules, hundreds of classic D&D magic items, and much more! 
 Play with Less Prep on Roll20 
 Ready to play? Build unlimited 5e characters on Roll20 Characters ! 
 Drag & Drop over 400 iconic magic items onto a character sheet to instantly arm your characters, including the bag of holding , deck of many things , and the Hand of Vecna 
 Search and read the Dungeon Master’s Guide , in or out of the Roll20 Virtual Tabletop 
 Import 11 full-color maps into new or existing campaigns, complete with hidden doors in the GM layer and Dynamic Lighting support ( Subscribe to access Dynamic Lighting !) 
 Drag & Drop gorgeous pre-made tokens and handouts for player characters and NPCs directly onto the map 
 Tempt players with 2 villainous subclasses (like the Oathbreaker Paladin) 
 Generate magic items in one click with over 10 rollable tables 
 Choose from fresh optional rules to put a unique spin on classic adventures 
 What's Inside? 
Click HERE for a full breakdown. 
 Accessing Your Roll20 Content 
 Accessing the Compendium 
You can access all of the rules, items, and creatures from the Dungeon Master’s Guide in and out of the virtual tabletop. 
 In game 
 On the web 
 Using Your Addon 
The Dungeon Master’s Guide includes an addon filled with maps, macros, and rollable tables that you can add into a new or existing game. On the Game Details page, scroll down to the Game Addons section. Select the desired addon from the dropdown menu and then click Add to Game. The next time you enter the game, everything from the addon should be available. 
 Drag & Drop Art 
You can access the Character Art Pack under the Premium Assets section of the Art Library in Roll20. These assets are only available for use inside any virtual tabletop game session. 
 Which Character Sheet should I use? 
All 5e Open Game License content on Roll20 uses the D&D 5e by Roll20 character sheet. 
 Bug Reports 
If you are experiencing any other issues, please let us know on the Roll20 Help Center . 
 DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, D&D, Wizards of the Coast, Forgotten Realms, the dragon ampersand , Player’s Handbook, Monster Manual, Dungeon Master’s Guide, all other Wizards of the Coast product names, and their respective logos are trademarks of Wizards of the Coast in the USA and other countries. All characters and their distinctive likenesses are property of Wizards of the Coast. This material is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the material or artwork contained herein is prohibited without the express written permission of Wizards of the Coast. 
 i 
 Can only be used with Roll20; cannot be downloaded.
 You might also like... 
 License: Roll20 End User License Agreement 
 (Personal Use Only, Do Not Distribute)
 © Roll20, LLC | Terms of Service & Privacy Policy | DMCA | Contact Us | Help Center | All rights reserved. All product and company names are trademarks ™ or registered ® trademarks of their respective holders. 
 Powered by Roll20 
 Roll20 The #1 Tabletop for Playing RPGs Online 
 Roll20 The #1 Tabletop for Playing RPGs Online 
 Roll20 Tabletop 
 Roll20 Characters 
 Roll20 Marketplace 
 Roll20 Compendium 
 DriveThru The Largest RPG Marketplace 
 DriveThru The Largest RPG Marketplace 
 DriveThru 
 DriveThruComics 
 DriveThruFiction 
 DriveThruCards 
 Wargame Vault 
 Demiplane Official Character Creation and Game Companion 
 Demiplane Official Character Creation and Game Companion 
 Demiplane 
 Pathfinder Nexus 
 Daggerheart Nexus 
 Vampire: The Masquerade Nexus 
 Marvel Multiverse RPG Nexus 
 Cosmere RPG Nexus 
 Cyberpunk RED Nexus 
 Dungeon Scrawl Create RPG Maps in Minutes 
 Dungeon Scrawl Create RPG Maps in Minutes 
 Dungeon Scrawl 
 Create a Map 
 Community Content 
 Community Content Adventure by Fans Everywhere 
 Dungeon Masters Guild (D&D) 
 Pathfinder Infinite 
 Starfinder Infinite 
 Miskatonic Repository 
 Storytellers Vault 
 Everything for your adventures 
