Dorothy Dunnett
A celebration of one of Scotland's finest ever writers
≡
Home
All About Dorothy
Biography
Bill's Fife Local Heroes Talk
Makars' Court & the Writers' Museum
Dorothy's Articles
The Real Macbeth
Bill's Publishing News Article 2000
Portrait Painting
Books - Discussion
Bill's Dunnett Blog
Pointer to Talks and Posts
Dorothy's Q & A
Introduction
General questions
Lymond Chronicles questions
House of Niccolo questions
King Hereafter questions
Dorothy's Talks
James Thin 1997
Book Festival 1999
James Thin 2000
Pronunciation
Confessions of a Dunnett Reader
Authors who read Dunnett
External Reviews/Articles
The Chess Game
Opening Moves
The Final Position - coming soon
The Casting Game
Fanfic
Dr Crawford's Casebook Pt 1
Dr Crawford's Casebook Pt 2
Dr Crawford's Casebook Pt 3
Books - Facts
Bibliography
Introduction
The Lymond Chronicles
The House of Niccolo
King Hereafter
The Dolly Series
The Companions
Covers
Lymond Covers
Niccolo Covers
King Hereafter Covers
Dolly Covers
Companion and Poetry Covers
Places to Visit
Scotland
Introduction & Map
Edinburgh - Centre
Edinburgh - Outskirts
East and East Lothians
South - "Midculter"
The Borders
North
West & South-West
Orkney
Europe
Introduction & Map
Bruges
Lyon
Venice
Malta
Istanbul
Madeira
A Modern Orkney Saga
Return to Orkney
About This Site
Its purpose
How I first got involved
Contact
Events
Forthcoming
Old reports
Edinburgh 2000 Gathering
Edinburgh 2001 AGM
Edinburgh 2003 AGM
Edinburgh 2006 - Stone Laying
Edinburgh 2006 - Traquair Visit
The Dorothy Dunnett Society
The Dorothy Dunnett Society
and the Whispering Gallery magazine
Whispering Gallery is the worldwide correspondance magazine for Dunnett readers. For many years there were two versions of it - the US one which started it all off was called Marzipan & Kisses and was run by Jean Clissold and Karen Brandl. It closed in November 2001 (by dreadful irony the month of Dorothy's death) as most of its regular contributors had moved over to the various internet groups. The UK one was called Whispering Gallery and was originally run under the Dorothy Dunnett Foundation and edited by Val Bierman. After the release of Gemini and the last of the major official gatherings at Edinburgh 2000, the Foundation was wound up and Dorothy transferred the funds to a new body - the Dorothy Dunnett Readers' Association - to continue the magazine and maintain the community.
After a number of years operating under that name and going through considerable reorganisation and rebuilding, the name was changed to the Dorothy Dunnett Society .
It holds an annual Weekend Gathering every Spring at the same time as the AGM. Until now this has always been held in Edinburgh but steeply rising costs for both venues and accommodation for delegates have forced a rethink, and the 2025 weekend will be held in Dumfries . Future locations will depend on the success of this innovation and whether other suitable venues can be found in other parts of Scotland.
This gathering is always well attended and very enjoyable - consisting of an opening dinner on the Friday night, lectures, talks, and discussions on the Saturday, followed by a Gala dinner in the evening, and a bus trip to an important Dunnett location on the Sunday.
The Society is a registered Scottish charity and sponsors history prizes at both school and university level and encourages historical research and education into the periods of Dorothy's works. All Society members automatically receive the magazine which is issued 4 times a year and which has developed under successive editors into a superb glossy colour publication of real quality.
The Society is run by a committee of volunteer members. I was a founder member, having been on the steering committee which set up the DDRA, and have served as Chairman and Membership Administrator, before stepping down a few years ago. So I naturally support their activities and encourage readers to join.
DDS Membership
You can find more information about the Dorothy Dunnett Society, and details about joining, on their website at http://dunnettcentral.org
Built and written by Bill Marshall of Spiderwriting Web Consultancy , All Rights Reserved.
