 

 Facts universally acknowledged, being a review of Robin Hobb’s Dragon Haven | Tor.com 

 Tor.com 

 Science fiction. Fantasy. The universe. And related subjects.

 Main menu

 Skip to content 

 Fiction 

 Series 

 Publishing 

 Newsletter 

 Search 

 Search 

 Log In 

 Register 

 written word 

 Facts universally acknowledged, being a review of Robin Hobb’s Dragon Haven 

 Elizabeth Bear 

 Wed Jun 2, 2010 3:03pm 

4 comments 
 Favorite This 

 If Dragon Keeper , the first installment of Hobb’s new Rain Wilds Chronicles series, was long-winded for what it accomplished , the second volume corrects that fault. Often, Book Twos are bridges, but in this case felt as if Book Two was where the story actually kicked into gear, and what had been past was merely prologue. Here, at last, is significant character development. Here is exploration of the world, and progress towards a goal beyond merely identifying it. And here are some developments in the central mysteries of the world.

 Most of Dragon Keeper was devoted to establishing protagonists and villains and getting the quest fantasy show on the road, but Dragon Haven opens with the primary conflicts firmly in place and the characters struggling to run alongside the plot long enough to grab hold and swing aboard. This makes for much better momentum and a more interesting narrative, overall.

 Thematically, this book also exhibits more unification and arc. At the core of this book are a series of romances and potential romances. There’s someone for everyone, apparently, including the carrier-pigeon keepers whose scribbled messages to one another remain one of the more enchanting aspects of the work. As characters work toward adulthood, they also pair off—or fail to pair off—in fairly predictable manners. And they finally— finally! —begin talking to one another.

 As these various love affairs are commenced and hidden truths spoken, the villains are dealt with more or less summarily. While they serve to introduce some conflict, the bad guys are barely the point of this book. Rather, the narrative focuses on the efforts of the rag-tag band of dragons, dragon keepers, and escorts as they continue their search for the lost Elderling city of Kelsingra, which represents their only chance to survive and eventually flourish. Society itself is far more the enemy than the petty power-plays of those who would exploit the dragons for riches, or set themselves up as leaders.

 The series still maintains its curiously young-adult atmosphere (I said of Dragon Keeper that it felt like a book I would have loved unreservedly at age fourteen), with a relatively direct thematic arc in which all of the main characters are groping toward some sort of adulthood. Alise, the bluestocking dragon expert, continues to grow in courage and self-determination; Thymara, the mutated child of the Rain Wilds, moves towards self-acceptance; Sintara, the egotistical and defensive dragon queen, gropes after a more nuanced understanding of the world; and Sedric, the treacherous fop, evolves from treachery toward integrity.

 Of the point of view characters, the only one who feels like a strong adult is Leftrin, the captain of the liveship Tarman, who is a sensible and mature presence necessary to balance the more childish perspectives of the other characters.

 Meanwhile, external changes in the various main characters mimic their internal growth, as the Rain Wilds continues to work its mutagenic magic on dragons and humans alike. This, too, was one of my favorite aspects of the book—the sheer inventiveness with which Hobb brings the threads together is not revelatory, but it’s deft and delightful.

 There is some actual external conflict in the narrative, but it’s mostly cursory. There’s a vast flood which serves to separate the party for a while; there’s the ongoing threat of those who would like to see the dragons parted out for sale (a clever little ecological fable). There’s a Boromir-esque party member who would be king, and another who is Not What He Seems. All in all, however, this is a book about character development, and a highly successful one at that.

 Elizabeth Bear is a writer who has not yet quite been cured of wanting a dragon of her very own, although Sintara is trying. 

 Share:
 Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) 
 Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window) 
 Click to share on Tumblr (Opens in new window) 
 Click to share on Pinterest (Opens in new window) 

 citation 

 book reviews Dragon Haven Epic Fantasy Rain Wild Chronicles Robin Hobb written word 

 Review: Last of the Talons by Sophie Kim 

 Read The Lost Metal (Part 3) 

 Review: Belladonna by Adalyn Grace 

 Books of Secret Knowledge: The Diary and The Yearbook 

 Back to the top of the page 

4 Comments 

 skip to newest 
 skip to unread 

 More Comments 
 Check for New Comments 

 This post is closed for comments.

 Latest Posts

 Veronica Roth 
 Read an Excerpt From Poster Girl 
 5 hours ago 

 Alex Brown 
 Electric and Enticing: Last of the Talons by Sophie Kim 
 6 hours ago 

 Tyler Dean 
 The Knives Are Out and Grim Alliances Forged in House of the Dragon Ep. 7 
 6 hours ago 

 Keith R.A. DeCandido 
 Star Trek: Enterprise Rewatch: “Future Tense” 
 7 hours ago 

 Brandon Sanderson 
 Read The Lost Metal by Brandon Sanderson: Chapters Five Through Eight 
 8 hours ago 

 James Davis Nicoll 
 Eight Works That Blend Mystery and Detective Fiction With Fantasy and Horror 
 9 hours ago 

 Tor.com 
 Tor Publishing Group to Publish a New Entry in Christopher Paolini’s Fractalverse 
 9 hours ago 

 New in Series

 Star Trek: Enterprise Rewatch: “Future Tense” 

 Terry Pratchett Book Club: The Last Continent , Part II 

 Five Genderbent SFF Retellings and Reimaginings 

 Rhythm of War Reread: Chapter Ninety-Six 

 Penelope, Still Waiting: Sonya Taaffe’s “As the Tide Came Flowing In” 

 Reading Lord of Chaos (Part 32) 

 Video Games and the Promise of Cake 

 all series 

 Recent Comments
 Dean on Read The Lost Metal by Brandon Sanderson: Chapters Five Through Eight 11 mins ago 
 James Davis Nicoll on Eight Works That Blend Mystery and Detective Fiction With Fantasy and Horror 14 mins ago 
 JScarborough on Eight Works That Blend Mystery and Detective Fiction With Fantasy and Horror 44 mins ago 
 bad_platypus on Reading The Wheel of Time: The Biggest Battle Yet in Robert Jordan’s Lord of Chaos (Part 32) 53 mins ago 
 FourDs on Eight Works That Blend Mystery and Detective Fiction With Fantasy and Horror 1 hour ago 
 kkozoriz on “Just keep circling…” — Star Trek: Lower Decks : “Hear All, Trust Nothing” 2 hours ago 
 sturgeonslawyer on Eight Works That Blend Mystery and Detective Fiction With Fantasy and Horror 2 hours ago 
 krad on “Just keep circling…” — Star Trek: Lower Decks : “Hear All, Trust Nothing” 2 hours ago 
 André on Eight Works That Blend Mystery and Detective Fiction With Fantasy and Horror 2 hours ago 
 RMK on The Knives Are Out and Grim Alliances Forged in House of the Dragon Ep. 7 2 hours ago 
 more comments 

 About 

 Submissions 

 Advertise 

 Archive 

 Search 

Follow Tor.com 

 Twitter 

 Facebook 

 Instagram 

 RSS 

Follow Tor.com Germany 

 Tor Germany Home 

 Twitter 

 Facebook 

 Instagram 

 Privacy Policy 

 Ads and Cookies 

 Terms of Use 

 Contact 

 © 2022 Macmillan | All stories, art, and posts are the copyright of their respective authors 
 Back to top 

Our Privacy Notice has been updated to explain how we use cookies, which you accept by continuing to use this website. To withdraw your consent, see Your Choices . 


