 

 The Golden Age of Epic Fantasy (a review of Robin Hobb’s Dragon Keeper) | Tor.com 

 Tor.com 

 Science fiction. Fantasy. The universe. And related subjects.

 Main menu

 Skip to content 

 Fiction 

 Series 

 Publishing 

 Newsletter 

 Search 

 Search 

 Log In 

 Register 

 written word 

 The Golden Age of Epic Fantasy (a review of Robin Hobb’s Dragon Keeper ) 

 Elizabeth Bear 

 Fri Feb 5, 2010 10:19am 

9 comments 
 3 Favorites [+] 

 If the Golden Age of science fiction is twelve, it’s quite possible that the golden age of epic fantasy is fifteen. That’s the age when nobody understand you, the world is deeply unfair, and romantic angst proliferates.

 Dragon Keeper (Eos, January 26, 2010 in the USA; the UK version has a definite article and a better cover , and came out last year) fits neatly into that sweet spot.

 This book, the first in a new trilogy, marks a return to the setting of Hobb’s Liveship Traders books: the Rain Wilds, a vast swampy forest where anything that lives must live in the trees, because a caustic river runs through it. Dragons had all but died out in this world, as a result of a particularly nasty/clever worldbuilding twist that I won’t spoil, for those who have not yet read that first trilogy. But now they have returned to the world—and the first group to undergo metamorphosis into their adult forms are crippled due to privation and neglect.

 Because of this, they constitute an economic drain on local humans, who have contracted with the lone surviving adult dragon to care for her kin. When that dragon vanishes amid rumors that disaster or love have befallen her, the young dragons gradually slip further and further down the ladder of civic commitments, until certain elements of the human establishment are strongly considering selling them off for parts.

 But a new bargain is struck, and the dragons require Keepers for an arduous journey upriver, where they believe the fabled city of their ancestors—and salvation—lies. Thriftily, the local government decides to send along their misfits and genetic sports, because in the Rain Wilds, people have a tendency to be born scaled, frilled, or with claws—and to grow ever more so “marked” as time goes by.

 Among those slated to accompany the dragons are Thymara, a heavily “marked” Forest girl raised among the lofty walkways and treehouses of the Rain Wilds; Alise, a bluestocking scholar of dragons who has slipped the lead of her predictably brutal marriage to go adventuring; and Leftrin, the captain of the wizardwood barge Tarman, who can go where no other such boat can travel.

 (I admit to a readerly suspicion that the Rain Wilders’ deformities, the source of the flesh-eating river, and the history of the dragons and the fabled city will all turn out to be inextricably linked. And if the Rain Wild people aren’t somehow linked to dragons, I’ll eat my laptop—especially as there are strong hints that the dragons too are capable of Lamarckian evolution.)

 I had a few disappointments with this book. I have to admit, in a rain forest, I would have expected it to be raining more often, just as a matter of setting—but that’s a minor quibble, as were my problems with the names of some of the minor characters (Alum, Lecter, and so on).

 More seriously, the prose felt rougher than I expect of Hobb, who is generally in very good control of her writing, and a fine stylist. But in this book, bits of exposition phrased as if we had just met a character were repeated when that person showed up for the second or third time, and it felt as if the book could have used one more fiddly editing pass. Alas, this contributes to a general feel of paddedness. There’s a great deal to like here, in the setting and worldbuilding, but the characters often felt self-absorbed and static to me, and the story didn’t really feel like it got rolling until the book was two-thirds done. Admittedly, it is the first volume of a series, but I could have done with a little less elaborate depiction of how the world was unfair to our heroes and a little more peril.

 The leisurely pace can be forgiven, however, in light of a certain amount of companion-animal-fantasy snark, which (predictably) delighted me. I was even willing to forgive the book a level of coyness about same-sex relationships that left me uncomfortable in light of how much I liked the crabby, whiny, self-centered, vain, and generally unprepossessing dragons.

 Additionally, a deeply entertaining political gloss provided by the notes slipped into dispatches by two pigeon-keepers who never appear in their own persons was my favorite element of the story. It’s a great expositional trick, and it’s helped by the fact that I found myself caring deeply about the mundane soap opera of the pigeon-keepers’ negotiations over squabs, apprentices, and bags of feed.

 In general, I think this is a promising start to a new series.

 Elizabeth Bear is the Hugo and Sturgeon Award winning author of many books and short stories.

 Share:
 Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) 
 Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window) 
 Click to share on Tumblr (Opens in new window) 
 Click to share on Pinterest (Opens in new window) 

 citation 

 Dragon Keeper Epic Fantasy Rain Wild Chronicles Robin Hobb written word 

 Reading Lord of Chaos (Part 32) 

 Read The Lost Metal (Part 2) 

 Reading Lord of Chaos (Part 31) 

 Read The Lost Metal (Part 1) 

 Back to the top of the page 

9 Comments 

 skip to newest 
 skip to unread 

 More Comments 
 Check for New Comments 

 This post is closed for comments.

 Latest Posts

 Vanessa Armstrong 
 Guillermo del Toro Guides Us Through Eight Horrifying Tales in the Trailer for Cabinet of Curiosities 
 2 days ago 

 Vanessa Armstrong 
 Robert Eggers Once Again Making Nosferatu , This Time With Bill Skarsgard and Lily-Rose Depp Attached 
 3 days ago 

 Sylas K Barrett 
 Dark Plans Are Revealed in The Rings of Power’ s “New Life” 
 3 days ago 

 Emmet Asher-Perrin 
 Terry Pratchett Book Club: The Last Continent , Part II 
 3 days ago 

 Rachel Ayers 
 Now Is the Perfect Time to Snuggle Up With A Night in the Lonesome October 
 3 days ago 

 Olesya Salnikova Gilmore 
 Read an Excerpt From The Witch and the Tsar 
 3 days ago 

 Vanessa Armstrong 
 Watch Kaiju Movies with John Carpenter during Shout! Factory’s Masters of Monsters Weekend This November 
 3 days ago 

 New in Series

 Terry Pratchett Book Club: The Last Continent , Part II 

 Five Genderbent SFF Retellings and Reimaginings 

 Rhythm of War Reread: Chapter Ninety-Six 

 Penelope, Still Waiting: Sonya Taaffe’s “As the Tide Came Flowing In” 

 Reading Lord of Chaos (Part 32) 

 Star Trek: Enterprise Rewatch: “Cease Fire” 

 Video Games and the Promise of Cake 

 all series 

 Recent Comments
 Zedro on What Is “Curio Fiction”? Finding a Name for a Fantastical Subgenre 3 hours ago 
 Arben on Star Trek: The Next Generation Rewatch: “A Matter of Perspective” 8 hours ago 
 Arben on The Quantum Leap Sequel Series Mostly Sticks the Leap 8 hours ago 
 Arben on Jen Is Not In a Teachable Mood In She-Hulk ’s “The Retreat” 8 hours ago 
 anup-sff on What Is “Curio Fiction”? Finding a Name for a Fantastical Subgenre 8 hours ago 
 sun hobbit on Dark Plans Are Revealed in The Rings of Power’ s “New Life” 9 hours ago 
 Shakey on Five SFF Works About the Aftermath of an Apocalypse 10 hours ago 
 IBookwyrme on Dark Plans Are Revealed in The Rings of Power’ s “New Life” 11 hours ago 
 chip137 on Terry Pratchett Book Club: The Last Continent , Part II 11 hours ago 
 eggertcoby on Terry Pratchett Book Club: The Last Continent , Part II 11 hours ago 
 more comments 

 About 

 Submissions 

 Advertise 

 Archive 

 Search 

Follow Tor.com 

 Twitter 

 Facebook 

 Instagram 

 RSS 

Follow Tor.com Germany 

 Tor Germany Home 

 Twitter 

 Facebook 

 Instagram 

 Privacy Policy 

 Ads and Cookies 

 Terms of Use 

 Contact 

 © 2022 Macmillan | All stories, art, and posts are the copyright of their respective authors 
 Back to top 

Our Privacy Notice has been updated to explain how we use cookies, which you accept by continuing to use this website. To withdraw your consent, see Your Choices . 


