 
 The Dungeon Master Experience Archive! 
 D&D Sage Advice 
 Questions on Dungeons & Dragons answered by game designers 
 Widgets 
 Skip to content 
 Search for D&D answers Search Top Sage Advice Is transmutation spell Alter Self lvl 2 allow to change gender for duration? Polymorph says you can't cast spells while in beast form. Does that mean you also can't concentrate on them? Druid turns into a bug, gets eaten by a humanoid bad guy and reverts back, what happens? D&D CARDS - Equipment, Treasure, Condition, Inspiration and many more! A kid-friendly D&D character sheet 
 Type your email… 
 Subscribe 
 This is an unofficial D&D site made by Zoltar to collect game designer tweets and help players of the best game ever created. 
 Privacy & Cookies: This site uses cookies. By continuing to use this website, you agree to their use. 
To find out more, including how to control cookies, see here:
 Cookie Policy 
 Search for: 
 The Dungeon Master Experience Archive! 
 July 30, 2024 Zoltar 
 Folks have been asking, so here's a link to THE DM EXPERIENCE article archive: http://t.co/CS21ykiBnw 
 — Christopher Perkins (@ChrisPerkinsDnD) November 9, 2014 
 Share this: Tweet WhatsApp Telegram Email 
 Post navigation 
 ← → 
 2 thoughts on “ The Dungeon Master Experience Archive! ” 
 Kyle T. Randall, DM says: 
 Chris! The articles were there up until last week! Help! This is the best set of DM’ing advice I’ve ever had the chance to stumble upon! Is there any way to get the articles back up? 
 Reply 
 December 17, 2015 at 11:09 
 Zoltar says: 
 Mighty Kyle 
 I think that Master Chris Perkins don’t usually read this blog (is unofficial) but I’ve found how to recover The Dungeon Master Experience 
Go here: http://dnd.wizards.com/articles/features 
you notice 2 search box (on topright and middle right) go to search box in the middle with [SEARCH IN ARTICLES] and type Iomandra 
 have fun 
 Reply 
 December 18, 2015 at 02:08 
 Leave a Reply Cancel reply 
 This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. Learn how your comment data is processed. 
 Proudly powered by WordPress 
 | 
 Theme: Fictive by WordPress.com . 
