 
 DMs Guild Creator Resource - Style Guide Resources - Dungeon Masters Guild | DMG Creator Resources | Dungeon Masters Guild 
 Login 
 My Library 
 Wishlists 
 Cart 0 
 New Account 
 (or 
 Log In )
 Hide my password 
 Get the newsletter 
 Subscribe to get the free product of the week! One-click unsubscribe later if you don't enjoy the newsletter. 
 Log In with Facebook 
 Log In 
 ( I am new here )
 Forgot password? 
 Remember me 
 Error: No match for email address or password. 
 Password forgotten? Click here. 
 Log In with Facebook 
 Advanced Search 
Author: 
 Artist: 
Price: 
$ to $ 
 Search 
 DMs Guild Creator Resource - Style Guide Resources 
 From  Dungeon Masters Guild 
 ADD TO WISHLIST > 
 Watermarked PDF $0.00 $0.00 
 Average Rating (316 ratings) 
 Note: The House Style Guide has been updated January 2019. 
 These PDF documents are distributed by Wizards of the Coast to official play writers and are now available for all DMsGuild creators. In addition to the D&D House Style Guide, this package includes tips for adventure design from Chris Perkins and Greg Bilsand, suggestions for how to use D&D IP, and a guide to the Forgotten Realms. Following these style guides is not required to publish on DMsGuild, but they are provided here at the request of our community creators. 
  Customers Who Bought this Title also Purchased
 Reviews ( 8 )
 Discussions ( 3 )
 Please log in to add or reply to comments. 
 Remi P 
 January 12, 2020 5:31 am UTC 
 PURCHASER 
 The guide says not to use rape, then a few pages later claims most half-orcs are products of rape. Which is it? 
(To be clear: I don't want sexual assault in my fantasy tabletop game, I'm just upset why to bother establishing a standard you immediately break.) 
 C R R 
 March 31, 2020 7:36 pm UTC 
 As to the origins of half-orcs, I don't think it an endorsement as much as a logical conclusion in a world where these races do not generally coexist and are often at war. Role-playing rape is gross and bizarre, but that's not the same as being aware of its existence in the world. 
 Vivian R 
 May 27, 2025 10:54 pm UTC 
 Well this hasn't aged well 
 James A 
 March 07, 2019 7:14 am UTC 
 PURCHASER 
 What basis do you have for the change in the established Calendar of Harptos? Is this something that changed by WOTC in 4e? 
Glossary at the end is GREAT! I'd ask to turn it into a dictionary, providing definition. 
 Joseph C 
 February 24, 2019 5:12 pm UTC 
 PURCHASER 
 When discussing ethnicity of humans, the document for the FR notes that there are Realms versions of "eskimos" - should probably be changed to "Inuit" or something similar. The term "eskimo" is a slur. 
Also, under "Banned Words," it says that "hill dwarf should be shield dwarf" and "mountain dwarf should be gold dwarf" - are those reversed? 
 John B 
 February 25, 2019 1:10 am UTC 
 PURCHASER 
 Whoa, I can't believe that made it into this. Wow.... 
 Visvesvaran S 
 April 21, 2020 8:18 am UTC 
 PURCHASER 
 "Also, under "Banned Words," it says that "hill dwarf should be shield dwarf" and "mountain dwarf should be gold dwarf" - are those reversed?" - no, that's correct. "Shield dwarves" and "gold dwarves" are the terms used in SCAG: 
"Gold dwarves have the racial traits of hill dwarves in the Player’s Handbook. 
[...] 
Shield dwarves have the racial traits of mountain dwarves in the Player’s Handbook." 
 November 19, 2020 6:26 pm UTC 
 Still why would use of the terms hill dwarf and mountain dwarf be banned? Aren't those still valid especially if you're not even using SCAG? 
 Reviews 
 Anna T. - May 27th, 2025 If you're looking to write D&D material for Drivethru, this is a must have to provide a consistant layout and format. [...] Kari J. F. - November 15th, 2021 I highly encourage anyone looking to create D&D content to pick up this FREE resource. It's helped me submit writing to editors that is way more polished as well as has helped me in the layout design process to accurately style the copy. I ref [...] Micah T. - October 20th, 2021 I have a confession to make: I'm a nerd. Shocking, I know. Who would expect that from an RPG player? Really though, I'm not just a fantasy nerd, a numbers nerd, or even a storytelling nerd, I'm a read-style-guides-in-my-spare-time [...] Cindy B. - June 28th, 2021 This is a great resource to have, especially if you're going to make your own DMs Guild products or editing for others. Definitely recommend reading and absorbing it. [...] Bunny M. - October 5th, 2019 Imperative to helping me edit my documents to give them the D&D polish. I didn't realize how far off I was before going through this guide. Totally a must-have for any creator. [...] 
 See All Ratings and Reviews 
 Browse Categories Content DMsGuild Guild Adept D&D Adventurers League D&D Classics Campaign Expansions Phandelver & Below Dragon Delves Vecna: Eve of Ruin Dragonlance Rime of the Frostmaiden Waterdeep Curse of Strahd / Van Richten Previous Storylines Product Type Adventures Core Rules Bundles Character Options Gear/Magic Items Resources for DMG Creators RPG Media Tabletop Essentials Board/Miniature Games Gift Certificates Theme Aquatic Arctic Dungeon Planar Underdark/Subterranean Urban Wilderness Comedy Family Oriented Festive Horror Intrigue Mystery Pulp Action Solo/Single-Player Feywild Setting Nonspecific/Any Setting Ravenloft Arcavios(Strixhaven) Theros Dragonlance Eberron Forgotten Realms Greyhawk More Settings Ravnica Plane Shift Planescape Dark Sun Edition Original Edition (OD&D) Basic/Expert 1st Edition 2nd Edition 3rd Edition (d20 System) 4th Edition 5th Edition Format PDF Phone PDF Print ePub Screenreader PDF Virtual Tabletop Creation Method Languages English Japanese 日本語 Deutsch Español Français Italiano Polski Português Svenska Ukrainian / Українська Other Price Pay What You Want Free $ Minimum price to $ Maximum price  Publisher 
 See all titles 
 Publisher Website  
  Follow Your Favorites! 
 Sign in to get custom notifications of new products! 
  Recent History 
 DMs Guild Creator Resource - Style Guide Resources 
 Product Information Social Copy Link Tweet This File Size: 2.85 MB Format Original electronic Scanned image These products were created by scanning an original printed edition. Most older books are in scanned image format because original digital layout files never existed or were no longer available from the publisher. 
For PDF download editions, each page has been run through Optical Character Recognition (OCR) software to attempt to decipher the printed text. The result of this OCR process is placed invisibly behind the picture of each scanned page, to allow for text searching. However, any text in a given book set on a graphical background or in handwritten fonts would most likely not be picked up by the OCR software, and is therefore not searchable. Also, a few larger books may be resampled to fit into the system, and may not have this searchable text background. 
For printed books, we have performed high-resolution scans of an original hardcopy of the book. We essentially digitally re-master the book. Unfortunately, the resulting quality of these books is not as high. It's the problem of making a copy of a copy. The text is fine for reading, but illustration work starts to run dark, pixellating and/or losing shades of grey. Moiré patterns may develop in photos. We mark clearly which print titles come from scanned image books so that you can make an informed purchase decision about the quality of what you will receive. Original electronic format These ebooks were created from the original electronic layout files, and therefore are fully text searchable. Also, their file size tends to be smaller than scanned image books. Most newer books are in the original electronic format. Both download and print editions of such books should be high quality. File Information Watermarked PDF Watermarked PDF These PDF files are digitally watermarked to signify that you are the owner. A small message is added to the bottom of each page of the PDF containing your name and the order number of your purchase. Warning : If any files bearing your information are found being distributed illegally, then your account will be suspended and legal action may be taken against you. Here is a sample of a page from a watermarked title: File Last Updated: February 22, 2019 This title was added to our catalog on February 22, 2019. Publisher Dungeon Masters Guild Publisher Average Rating See All Reviews Publisher Website See all titles (42886) 
 Need help? 
 Customer Questions (FAQ) 
 DMsGuild Creator Questions? 
 Submit Suggestion 
 Contact us 
 Account 
 Login/Create Account 
 Account 
 My Library 
 Affiliate System 
 Create Content for Dungeons & Dragons 
 Information 
 About Us 
 Privacy Policy 
 Our Latest Newsletter 
 Product Reviews 
 New Product RSS Feed 
 Newsletter RSS Feed 
 Bug Bounty Program 
 English 
 Deutsch 
 Español 
 Français 
 Italiano 
 Português 
 Russian 
 日本語 
 한국인 
 Polski 
 US $ 
 € 
 Can$ 
 £ 
 ¥ 
 Au$ 
﻿ 
