 Dungeon Master's Guide (5e) - Shop D&D Beyond 
 grid four by four 
 grid 3 by 3 
 grid two by two 
 grid one by one 
 play 
 preferences 
 close 
 Skip to Content Play D&D My Characters Create a character My Campaigns Beta Maps VTT New D&D Beyond Drops More Tools D&D Beyond Mobile App D&D Event Finder Avrae Discord Bot Browse Homebrew Encounters My Dice Rules Browse Classes Backgrounds Species Feats Spells Equipment Magic Items Monsters Resources Get Started How to Play D&D D&D Beyond Basic Rules Rules Glossary D&D Character Sheets System Reference Document (SRD) Unearthed Arcana Featured Article Updating Your Campaign to the 5.5e D&D Rules Article Running Lairs: How to Make the Most of a Monster's Place of Power Library Free books View all Sign in to view your
library & saved
favorites. Sign in Community Support Help Portal Articles Support Forum Changelog Roadmap Creator FAQ Connect Community Update Find a Group D&D Encounters Legends of Greyhawk Forums Follow Us Featured Article Introducing Journals on D&D Beyond Marketplace Cart Toggle mobile navigation Sign in Create Account Play D&D Back Play D&D My Characters Create a character My Campaigns Maps VTT D&D Beyond Drops More Tools D&D Beyond Mobile App D&D Event Finder Avrae Discord Bot Browse Homebrew Encounters My Dice Rules Back Rules Classes Backgrounds Species Feats Spells Equipment Magic Items Monsters Resources Get Started How to Play D&D D&D Beyond Basic Rules Rules Glossary D&D Character Sheets System Reference Document (SRD) Unearthed Arcana Featured Article Updating Your Campaign to the 5.5e D&D Rules Article Running Lairs: How to Make the Most of a Monster's Place of Power Library Back Library Free books Monstrous Compendium Vol. 1: Spelljammer Creatures Frozen Sick D&D Beyond Basic Rules Basic Rules (2014) Sign in to view your
library & saved
favorites. Sign in Community Back Community Help Portal Articles Support Forum Changelog Roadmap Creator FAQ Connect Community Update Find a Group D&D Encounters Legends of Greyhawk Forums Follow Us Featured Article Introducing Journals on D&D Beyond Marketplace Sign in Create an Account Shop by Categories BEYOND Digital Rulebooks Adventures Campaign Settings Everything Else Home Rulebooks All Rulebooks Dungeon Master's Guide (5e) Dungeon Master's Guide (5e) Publisher: Wizards of the Coast $59.95 Everything a Dungeon Master needs to weave legendary stories for the world’s greatest roleplaying game. 
 The Dungeon Master's Guide (5e) is now Legacy content. Order the Dungeon Master's Guide (5.5e) to play with the latest rules. 
 The Digital edition is only $10 when you choose Digital + Physical. Product Format: Digital + Physical Digital Physical Add to Cart Products shipping outside the US, checkout on our partner site → Dungeon Master's Guide (5e) $59.95 Add to Cart Jump to section Product details Product specifications Product details Entertain and Inspire Your Players 
 “The DMG is a Dungeon Master's best friend. It's the one book to rule them all, the most comprehensive and powerful set of resources needed to run a game of D&D.” —Charlie Hall, Polygon 
 In a game of Dungeons & Dragons, the Dungeon Master (DM) serves as a narrator who creates a world of wonders and challenges for the player characters to encounter. 
 Whether you're running a D&D game already or you think it's something you want to try, this book is for you. 
 Tell a Story of Epic Adventure 
 Kick off your campaign with a thrilling introduction, complicate matters with moral quandaries, and end it all in an epic finale. 
 This book will teach you how to craft compelling plots and create balanced combat encounters that are as easy or deadly as you want them to be—from fresh level 1 characters picking a bar fight to a level 20 party battling a dragon-god. 
 Build Your World 
 From city maps to magical systems, the Dungeon Master’s Guide (5e) is full of worldbuilding advice to help you color in a rich, engaging world for adventurers to explore. 
 Create Unforgettable Characters 
 Inventing characters on the fly is a tricky task. This book includes tables for quickly creating distinctive non-player characters with memorable quirks, personal ideals, and intriguing family secrets. 
 Create the Perfect Villain 
 Get tips for designing the perfect villain—with ideas for dark schemes, key weaknesses, and even spe­cial class options. 
 Create Your Own Monsters 
 Try out blueprints for creating your own monsters, spells, magic items, and more. 
 Discover Legendary Treasures 
 Some adventurers seek more than just glory. 
 The Dungeon Master’s Guide is where you’ll discover D&D’s most coveted items—sentient weapons and bags of holding lie amongst glittering jewels and magic rings in a treasure horde spanning almost 100 pages. 
 Helpful Tools & Optional Rules 
 While the Player’s Handbook (5e) contains all the rules you need to play, the Dungeon Master’s Guide (5e) gives DMs advice and additional tools for running all three pillars of a D&D game—exploration, social interaction, and combat. 
 Optional rules are also included for DMs looking to add a few twists to their campaign, with rules for coping with horrors, using firearms, figuring out alien technology, and more. New features: Learn how to run a thrilling game of Dungeons & Dragons (5th edition) Magic items—a treasure trove of items for your players to discover Advice for creating your own world, monsters, spells, and magic items Guide to balancing encounters—make combat as easy or deadly as you want it to be A Dungeon-Masters-only tour of each plane of the D&D multiverse—from the Feywild to the Shadowfell 1 of 3 D&D Core Rulebooks (5e)—the Player’s Handbook (5e) (rules for playing the game), the Dungeon Master’s Guide (5e) (how to run the game), and Monster Manual (5e) (creatures to encounter in your game) Product specifications DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Dungeon Master's Guide (5e) SKU: dungeon-masters-guide Format: WIZARDS Manufacturer: Wizards of the Coast 