 Dungeon Master's Guide (5.5e) - Marketplace - D&D Beyond 
 grid four by four 
 grid 3 by 3 
 grid two by two 
 grid one by one 
 play 
 preferences 
 close 
 Skip to Content Play D&D My Characters Create a character My Campaigns Beta Maps VTT New D&D Beyond Drops More Tools D&D Beyond Mobile App D&D Event Finder Avrae Discord Bot Browse Homebrew Encounters My Dice Rules Browse Classes Backgrounds Species Feats Spells Equipment Magic Items Monsters Resources Get Started How to Play D&D D&D Beyond Basic Rules Rules Glossary D&D Character Sheets System Reference Document (SRD) Unearthed Arcana Featured Article Updating Your Campaign to the 5.5e D&D Rules Article Running Lairs: How to Make the Most of a Monster's Place of Power Library Free books View all Sign in to view your
library & saved
favorites. Sign in Community Support Help Portal Articles Support Forum Changelog Roadmap Creator FAQ Connect Community Update Find a Group D&D Encounters Legends of Greyhawk Forums Follow Us Featured Article Introducing Journals on D&D Beyond Marketplace Cart Toggle mobile navigation Sign in Create Account Play D&D Back Play D&D My Characters Create a character My Campaigns Maps VTT D&D Beyond Drops More Tools D&D Beyond Mobile App D&D Event Finder Avrae Discord Bot Browse Homebrew Encounters My Dice Rules Back Rules Classes Backgrounds Species Feats Spells Equipment Magic Items Monsters Resources Get Started How to Play D&D D&D Beyond Basic Rules Rules Glossary D&D Character Sheets System Reference Document (SRD) Unearthed Arcana Featured Article Updating Your Campaign to the 5.5e D&D Rules Article Running Lairs: How to Make the Most of a Monster's Place of Power Library Back Library Free books Monstrous Compendium Vol. 1: Spelljammer Creatures Frozen Sick D&D Beyond Basic Rules Basic Rules (2014) Sign in to view your
library & saved
favorites. Sign in Community Back Community Help Portal Articles Support Forum Changelog Roadmap Creator FAQ Connect Community Update Find a Group D&D Encounters Legends of Greyhawk Forums Follow Us Featured Article Introducing Journals on D&D Beyond Marketplace Sign in Create an Account Shop by Categories BEYOND Digital Rulebooks Adventures Campaign Settings Everything Else Home Rulebooks Dungeon Master's Guide (5.5e) Dungeon Master's Guide (5.5e) Publisher: Wizards of the Coast $59.99 Excite your imagination with the Dungeon Master’s Guide (5.5e) , revised and expanded for fifth edition D&D! Whether you're a new or experienced Dungeon Master, here's everything you need to weave epic tales, build fantastical worlds, and inspire memorable moments for your party to enjoy. 
 Level up your game with a DM screen and 50 character sheets . 
 The Digital edition is only $10 when you choose Digital + Physical. Product Format: Digital + Physical Digital Physical Add to Cart Products shipping outside the US, checkout on our partner site → Dungeon Master's Guide (5.5e) $59.99 Add to Cart Jump to section Product details Product specifications Product details Weave Fantastical Adventures 
 Excite your imagination with the Dungeon Master’s Guide (5.5e) , revised and expanded for fifth edition DUNGEONS & DRAGONS! We’ve created this essential resource with wonderful world-building resources and real-world advice for your D&D sessions, such as how to accommodate missing players or address metagaming. 
 A New Game Awaits 
 Engage your players with fresh mechanics, including a revised magic item crafting system and rules for base building with bastions. Get lost in pages of spectacular new artwork, featuring new magic items and marvelous D&D landscapes. Enhance your experience with new quality-of-life improvements, including thoughtfully designed handouts and an alphabetized Lore Glossary. Whether you're a new or experienced Dungeon Master, here’s everything you need to weave epic tales, build fantastical worlds, and inspire memorable moments for your party to enjoy.
 Ready-made Adventure 
Explore the Greyhawk campaign setting as you improve your DM skills. This book presents Greyhawk as a customizable, ready-to-use campaign setting for Dungeon Masters. Set your adventures within Greyhawk or use it as a foundation for worlds you create. New features: Intended for Dungeon Masters of all experience levels, providing useful tools and advice for running your D&D game. Includes real-world examples of common pitfalls for Dungeon Masters, along with suggestions for how to handle them. 15 new, ready-to-use, reusable maps for homebrew adventures. Multiple handouts and resources for keeping track of campaigns. Presents Greyhawk as a customizable, ready-to-use campaign setting for Dungeon Masters. Set your adventures within Greyhawk or use it as a foundation for worlds you create. More than 400 new and improved treasures and magical items, including 18 brand new magical items. Contains rules for bastions, strongholds built and controlled by players. With crafting, base-building, and resource gathering, bastions are a fun between-session option for players. Easily find information on key D&D characters and locations with the Lore Glossary. Includes a double-sided poster map depicting Eastern Oerik from the Greyhawk setting and the city of Greyhawk. Product specifications DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Dungeon Master's Guide (5.5e) SKU: 3710000 Format: Language: English Book dimensions: 8.5 x 11.125 x 0.875 Manufacturer: Wizards of the Coast 