
New Dothraki Words – Dothraki
Skip to content
Dothraki
 A Language of Fire and Blood 
New Dothraki Words
Note:
 This post originally appeared at 
dothraki.conlang.org
. As it makes more sense for it to be here, I’ve moved it over (though 
the original post
 still exists).
So it turned out to be 
more than a few days
, but I’ve finally finished coining new Dothraki words based on the names of those who asked questions during my Dothraki presentation at 
WorldCon 2011
. It involved me reviewing the history of boot, and making and coining dozens of unrelated words, but I’m all finished, so here they are (note: if I’ve spelled your name wrong, or you’d like to give me your last name and/or website to link to, tweet at me 
here
):
Key:
 Name – 
Dothraki Word
 (part of speech) definition.
Notes.
Dave – 
dave
 (animate noun) rosemary bush (also an adjective meaning “pungent”).
There’s already a stem 
dev
 (based on my name!), so I went with the spelling, even though it’s pronounced nothing like “Dave” in English. The inspiration for this word came when I was sitting at my computer trying to come up with words and my wife said, “Dave, can you get me some rosemary from the bush outside?”
Dan – 
dan
 (inanimate noun) ford (i.e. a place where you can cross a river comfortably on horseback).
There was already a word based on the stem 
dan
, so I just had to coin a homonym (not much else you can do with “Dan”!).
Ryan – 
rayan
 (inanimate noun) summit, top, plateau (mainly geological).
The stress shifts to the final syllable, of course, but that just makes the word sound more epic, in my opinion.
Jon (or perhaps John…?)
 John – 
jon
 (adjective) closed, shut, sealed (refers to a seal on a container or something that fits tightly).
My friend Jon already claimed the root 
jan
, which is used for 
jano
, the word for “dog”, so I had to go with the spelling rather than the pronunciation here.
Rick or Rich – 
rich
 (inanimate noun) a bubble or swelling of some kind.
I got a lot of mileage out of this root, coining six related words from it.
Perry – 
ferri
 (inanimate noun, class A, stem 
fer-
) hemp (the material).
Likely to be abundant in, at least, the southern half of Essos, hemp is a useful thing to make stuff out of. Regarding the form, older Dothraki *p became modern Dothraki 
f
, and so the old word *perri has become modern 
ferri
Sondra (or Sandra…?) – 
sondra
 (inanimate noun, class B) obsidian (or what the Valyrians and Westerosi call dragon glass).
I was wondering what to do for this word, but your name looks 
so much
 like another pattern of words I’ve set up for precious gems and metals, this seemed like kismet. Oh, and by the way: if your name is spelled “Sandra” rather than “Sondra”, it’s not too late to change the word!
Gene – 
jin
 (animate noun) goat (female).
I know you’re male, Gene, but I needed a word for a female goat! This just seemed to fit. (Perhaps as consolation, there is another word 
jin
 which means “this”—probably one of the most commonly used words in Dothraki.)
Mapu – 
mafo
 (animate noun) young goat, kid.
A member of the 
Brotherhood Without Banners
 hailing from New Zealand! Note that the older form of this word was, in fact, *mapu, but due to regular sound changes, it is now 
mafo
Sierra – 
siera
 (animate noun) nephew.
Your full name would, in fact, be a licit form in Dothraki, but 
siera
 fits a previously-established pattern 
really
, really well, so I dropped one of the rhotics.
Janice – 
janise
 (animate noun) niece.
As with 
siera
, 
janise
 (with the 
-e
 pronounced at the end) fits a previously-established pattern very well, so I added it on the end.
Finally, there are three people I’d like to mention specially (and for whom I’ve coined words):
Kim Raymoure
 – 
kim
 (animate noun) ancestor (also an adjective meaning [roughly] “original”).
Kim came to all my panels at WorldCon (and 
the LCS workshop
!), and helped to make my first foray into cons a pleasant one. (It’s so nice to see people in the audience who are interested and not scowling.) In addition to being generally cool, she’s written 
a book on Linear A
, which is about as wild as wild gets.
Tim Stoffel – 
tim
 (inanimate noun) boot.
Tim—known as 
Hrakkar
 over at 
the Dothraki fora
—really went above and beyond for my wife and me at WorldCon. We were staying at Circus Circus, which was quite far away from the convention center, and Tim offered to basically shuttle us back and forth the whole time. It saved us a lot of money and a lot of hassle. Tim is also a keeper of big cats, but since I (quite coincidentally) had already coined the Dothraki word for cat (
havzi
) after the name of his former liger (Hobbes), I felt another word was in order.
Leigh Bardugo
 – 
lei
 (animate noun) ghost (also the adjective for “lost”, this is a term for an adult whose body is not burned, and, hence, is not able to ride into the Night Lands).
Last, but certainly not least! Leigh bravely ventured forth during my presentation to read a dialogue with me, and did her best to power through an incredibly long Dothraki passage I sprung on her. She’s a good sport (a real 
lajak
), and so I wanted to honor her with a nice, meaty word that will certainly enjoy use at some point in time. Ultimately, the word derives from *leɣi, which one might spell “leghi”, which contains all the letters for Leigh’s name, so she can always know that it was 
her
 name this word was coined from (thanks for passing along your card so I could get the spelling right!). (
Update:
 Check out 
Leigh’s official site
, and look out for her first novel, 
Shadow and Bone
, coming June 5th, 2012!)
Thanks again to everyone who came out to the Dothraki presentation! If all goes well, I hope to be at future WorldCons, and to meet many more who are enthusiastic about language and want to talk conlanging.
Published 
August 29, 2011
By 
David J. Peterson
Categorized as 
Community
, 
Vocabulary
Tagged 
detailed
, 
misc
, 
responses
, 
WorldCon
Leave a comment 
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.
Required fields are marked 
*
Comment 
*
Name 
*
Email 
*
Website
Δ
This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. 
Learn how your comment data is processed.
Post navigation
Previous post
Game of Thrones: Episode 3 (Comments)
Next post
M’athchomaroon, Zhey Rhaesheser!
Search…
Resources
Dedalvs.com
Dothraki Forums
Dothraki Language Wiki
Dothraki.org
Language Creation Society
Westeros.org
Winter-Is-Coming.net
Dothraki
 Proudly powered by 
WordPress
. 
