=== PDFPAGE 1 ===
Translating Robin Hobb’s Assassin’s Apprentice
       BA Thesis English Language and Culture, Utrecht University
______________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
       Author: Iris Duits 
       Student no.: 3539385
       First reader: Cees Koster
       Second reader: Roselinde Supheert
       April 2012
=== PDFPAGE 2 ===
Table of Contents
_____________________________________________________________
1. Introduction 3
2. Description of author and novels 5
3. Issues when translating fantasy literature 7
4. Proper names 9
5. Translation criticism - Proper names 10
6. Translation criticism - Translation strategies 14
7. Translation - Passage one 19
8. Translation - Passage two 23
9. Translation - Passage three 26
Bibliography 30
Appendix A: Source text passages 32
Appendix B: Passages in translation by Feberwee and Cuijpers 39
_____________________________________________________________
2
=== PDFPAGE 3 ===
1. Introduction
Fantasy literature has become increasingly popular over the years. Writers such as J.K. 
Rowling have successfully introduced the genre to the greater public, who in turn have 
embraced the genre eagerly. The popularity of the genre has led to an increase in fantasy 
writers and fantasy novels. Megan Lindholm, writing under the pseudonym Robin Hobb, is 
one of these new writers who benefited from the increased interest in the genre. Her first 
novel, Assassin’s Apprentice, was published in 1995. She writes about the ruling family of 
the Farseers, who have to defend their kingdom against threats from outside. Hobb’s 
writing style, as well as the perspective of the novels, make it easy to sympathise with the 
main character, FitzChivalry. In the beginning, Fitz is just a young boy, but throughout the 
novels he grows up and ages, while facing many problems. The fantasy aspects, such as 
the ability to bond with animals or the power to influence people’s minds, are very 
appealing. 
 I read Assassin’s Apprentice when I was about 15 years old. Although I had read 
some fantasy novels before, this one was different to me. It immediately grabbed hold of 
me and I could not put it down. I purchased the rest of the trilogy and finished it within a 
week. I was not only impressed by Hobb’s writing style, but also by her use of the English 
language. My grades for English had always been quite high, but they improved after I 
started reading Robin Hobb. It could even be argued that these novels are the reason for 
me currently being a student of English Language and Culture. The way Hobb plays with 
the English language and how she makes you sympathise with her characters is 
beautifully done. Over the years, I have reread Hobb’s novels a great many times. 
Although the initial wonder can never be truly matched, I still find her novels delightful and 
I continue to discover new and interesting features whenever I reread them.
 Having to choose a text to translate was not very difficult for me. Not only was I 
highly impressed by this text, but it also has a Dutch translation already, which is not very 
3
=== PDFPAGE 4 ===
good. I desperately tried to make my friends read the translation, so they would 
understand my passion for Hobb’s novels. None of them, however, made it past the fifth 
chapter. It was too dull, or too complex to continue reading. I could not believe how they 
could say this and started reading the translation myself, which led me to agree with my 
friends. The Dutch translation of Assassin’s Apprentice, called Leerling en Meester is 
written in quite archaic language. The novel loses its flow and graciousness, and becomes 
rather strange. The language used does not come across as natural in Dutch, as it seems 
too formal most of the time. The word order seems unnatural as well, up to a point where 
your mind changes the word order while you read to make sense of it all. Indeed, reading 
Leerling en Meester takes too much effort to enjoy. 
 It may seem a little arrogant to think that I can do a better job. This might not even 
be the case, since my analysis of the translation problems of this text could show that the 
Dutch translation by Feberwee and Cuijpers is as good as it gets. However, this is not the 
case, since my analysis shows that some of their changes are not necessary and 
undesirable, since information is lost. In order to write my own translation, I will first carry 
out research on the topic of fantasy literature and the translation of such literature. I will 
also look at some other problems, such as how to translate proper names. Proper names 
have an important role in this novel, so translating them well is very important. I believe 
that the most important change in my translation will be the sentence structure and word 
order. I hope my translation will read fluently and that it will feel like a truly Dutch text.
 To try and do so, I have chosen three passages to translate. The first passage is the 
start of the first chapter, since that is where a novel has to grab hold of its readers. The 
second passage is a passage with a great amount of action as well as description, where 
Fitz is by himself and has to fight of a group of Forged ones. The final passage includes 
two dialogues, one between Fitz and the Fool and one between Fitz and Prince Verity. 
This final passage also involves many proper names, which offers a fine opportunity for 
4
=== PDFPAGE 5 ===
translating these as well. Hopefully, my efforts will yield a translation that retains the flow of 
the original text, and is able to captivate the reader in the same way. 
2. Description of author and novels
The author of Assassin’s Apprentice is Megan Lindholm, who writes under the pseudonym 
Robin Hobb. In the The Encyclopedia of Fantasy, Clute and Grant describe Megan 
Lindholm as “a restless and varied fantasist, [who] possesses real talents which may be 
coming into full focus in the latest trilogy,” meaning the Farseer trilogy, of which Assassin’s 
Apprentice is part one (583). Clute and Grant categorise Assassin’s Apprentice as 
“dynastic fantasy,” which are fantasy series set in a fantasyland, in which a hero founds 
and/or defends a nation or land (583). Dynastic fantasies avoid metamorphosis, leaving 
the fantasyland and the characters intact so that the series can be extended, sometimes 
indefinitely (Clute and Grant 305). Megan Lindholm has written two other trilogies based 
on the Farseer world and is currently working on a tetralogy, which also features the 
Farseer world (Robinhobb.com). Her novels have been translated in a number of 
languages, such as French, German, Hungarian and Dutch. 
 In the Farseer trilogy, the main character is FitzChivalry Farseer, bastard son of 
Prince Chivalry. He is raised at Buckkeep, the residence of the royal family. He is secretly 
trained to become an assassin by Chade, the King’s current assassin. In this occupation 
Fitz has to perform numerous tasks for his king. He is also trained in the Skill, an elusive 
talent possessed only by few. The Skill allows people to see into the minds of others and 
influence their thoughts. The land that is ruled by the Farseer family, the Six Duchies, is 
attacked constantly by Raiders from the Outislands. They plunder and destroy small towns 
across the coast and Forge the inhabitants of these towns. Forging turns people into 
zombies, humans that have forgotten who they are and are only interested in surviving. 
They attack their families and each other for food or clothing. In these troubled times, Fitz 
5
=== PDFPAGE 6 ===
matures. Prince Verity uses his Skill to confuse the Raiders, but it costs him a great 
amount of energy. King Shrewd decides that it is time for Prince Verity to marry, to give the 
people of the Six Duchies heart. Verity’s half brother Prince Regal is asked to find and 
court a wife for him, since Verity is too busy defending the kingdom. In the end, Verity has 
to marry Princess Kettricken of the Mountain Kingdom, but is unable to attend the 
ceremony himself. His half brother will attend the marriage in his stead. Fitz is ordered to 
secretly murder the Princess’ brother, so that Princess Kettricken, and indirectly the Six 
Duchies, will rule the Mountain Kingdom after her father dies. Prince Regal, however, 
reveals this plot to Princess Kettricken and her brother Rurisk. In the end, Fitz is almost 
killed by Regal’s men, but manages to survive. After this first novel, the story continues 
until Prince Verity is King. The second trilogy shows the perspective of the Raiders, while 
the third trilogy again shows the Farseer family, who ally with dragons to defeat the 
Raiders. The tetralogy focuses on these dragons and is set in the Rain Wilds, which 
borders on the Six Duchies.
  According to Stableford, Hobb’s novels are “elaborately detailed” (200). An 
example of this can be found in the following passage in which Fitz travels to the Mountain 
Kingdom and sees the Chyurda, the Mountain people, for the first time:
 Physically, most of them were Chyurda, and were as I had expected them to be; a 
 tall, pale people, light of hair and eye, and some with hair as red as a fox. They 
 were a brawny people, the women as well as the men. All seemed to carry a bow or 
 a sling, and they were obviously more comfortable on foot than on horseback. They 
 dressed in wool and leather, and even the humblest wore fine furs as if they were 
 no more than homespun. They strode alongside us, mounted as we were, and 
 seemed to have no difficulty keeping up with the horses all day. (Hobb 383)
Since these novels fall into the category of immersive fantasy, details are needed to 
describe the fantasyland in which the story takes place (Stableford 214). Immersive 
6
=== PDFPAGE 7 ===
fantasy is fantasy in which “we sit on the protagonist’s shoulder and while we have access 
to their eyes and ears, we are not provided with an explanatory narrative ... We do not 
enter into the immersive fantasy, we are assumed to be of it” (Mendlesohn). In other 
words, in immersive fantasy the reader is supposedly part of the fantasy world and 
elaborate details enable the reader to see the fantasyland as if it were a real place. 
3. Issues when translating fantasy literature
One major issue when translating fantasy literature is the proper translation of culture. The 
same problem occurs when translating novels that are set in the real world, but with these 
novels it is usually possible to either choose to adapt culture-specific elements (CSEs) to 
the target culture or to preserve these elements (Aixelá 200-203). Often something exists 
in the target culture which is similar to the cultural element in the source culture. It is then 
possible to replace the CSE from the source culture with a CSE from the target culture so 
that readers will understand what is mentioned (Grit 193). If a similar CSE does not exist in 
the target culture, translators can explain the CSE to make readers from the target culture 
understand what is meant (Grit 192-193). When making these choices, it is also important 
to be aware of the fact that translations can be naturalising or exoticising (Holmes 186). A 
naturalising translation will adapt CSEs to the target culture as much as possible, so that 
readers will not encounter foreign elements in the text. An exoticising translation will 
incorporate foreign CSEs to make clear to the readers that they are reading a foreign text, 
based on a different culture than their own.
 Fantasy literature automatically falls into the exoticising category, since fantasy is 
meant to show the reader another world with different possibilities. The exoticising 
elements are introduced by the author of the source text and they have to be retained in 
translation. This means that CSEs that are introduced in the source text might not have an 
equivalent in the target language, since the CSE could be made up by the author. It is 
7
=== PDFPAGE 8 ===
therefore almost impossible, and also undesirable, to produce a naturalising translation of 
a fantasy text. Translators have to keep this in mind when translating, so they retain the 
foreign elements in the target text. CSEs can not be adapted to the target culture, so they 
have to be preserved and explained when necessary. Usually, the source text will explain 
these CSEs as well, so translators do not have to add information in their translation. 
 Another important issue to take into consideration when translating fantasy literature 
is the analysis of the source text. Analysing the source text is important for all translations, 
not just those of fantasy literature. However, with fantasy literature a translator cannot trust 
his assumptions and ideas about the world, since the fantasy world might not comply with 
these notions. Because of this, a thorough analysis is even more important. Translators 
have to carefully examine the novel to learn about the fantasy world and the abilities 
people or creatures have in this world. Magic, for instance, is a common characteristic of 
the fantasy genre. The use of magic has to “feel believable, consistent and logic to the 
reader and that sense must be retained in translation” (Kok 11). The translation of magical 
acts should be consistent, so that readers can form a clear image of what happens when 
this particular magic is used. As a translator, it is very important to analyse these details 
before translating, to make sure that the translation is consistent. 
 A final important feature to analyse is the fantasy world itself. Translators have to 
form a mental picture they can use when describing different parts of the fantasy 
surroundings. Drawing maps will help create a sense of order and control for the translator. 
Sometimes these maps are provided in the form of illustrations, but at other times the 
translator might have to draw these maps him-/herself, based on the text. A thorough 
analysis is needed to make sure the maps and the descriptions are accurate. Especially 
with immersive fantasy like Hobb’s, the details matter since the reader has to feel like he 
or she is part of the fantasy world.
8
=== PDFPAGE 9 ===
4. Proper names
In Assassin’s Apprentice, many proper names occur. These proper names offer a difficulty 
when they have to be translated. The names of the royal family indicate a virtue that the 
royals are supposedly bound to, so it is important to translate these names well in order for 
the target audience to understand what virtues are intended. In the English version, the 
virtues are simply named, for instance with Prince Chivalry and King Shrewd. 
 Many different strategies for translating proper names exist, as indicated by Van der 
Zee in her thesis. Proper names can be preserved, a strategy which is often used for 
names that do not have a specific connotation in the source language. It is also possible to 
preserve the name, but also offer additional information, so that the connotation of the 
name is preserved as well. This strategy is often used “[to bridge] a difference in 
‘knowledge’ between the reader of the source text and the reader of the target text” (Van 
Coillie 125). Proper names can also be phonetically or morphologically changed, so that 
the names become easier to pronounce and look more like names from the target culture. 
Proper names can also be replaced with an exonym, which is a counterpart of the name in 
the target language, such as John in English and Jan in Dutch. This method “integrates 
the names into the target language culture, enabling them to function in a comparable 
manner” (van Coillie 127). Proper names can also be left out entirely, as long as their 
reference function is maintained, for instance by using a more general term such as ‘the 
boy’ or ‘him’ instead of ‘Fitz’. Proper names can also be recreated to produce similar 
effects. Finally, proper names can be replaced by a name with a different or additional 
connotation. Nord notes that “translators do not always use the same techniques with all 
the proper names of a particular text they are translating” (183). It is therefore possible to 
use different strategies within the same translation.
 In the case of Hobb’s novel, different options seem viable. Preserving the names 
seems unnatural, since the virtues are named in English and would not be clear for the 
9
=== PDFPAGE 10 ===
Dutch target audience. Preserving the name while giving additional information is a 
possibility, since the virtues can then be explained when the names are mentioned for the 
first time. This would make their meaning clear to Dutch readers, but it is quite a major 
change compared to the original text, since information is added by the translator. Lady 
Patience, for instance, would become something like: “Vrouwe Patience, geduldig van 
aard”. Simply changing names phonetically or morphologically offers no real solution, 
since the virtue then still remains unclear. Except for Thomas, the proper names used by 
Hobb have no exonym in Dutch, so that strategy also offers no solution. The only 
possibilities seem to be to either translate the virtues into Dutch, or to preserve them but 
explain them to the reader. Either of these strategies is viable and offers a clear 
translation. Perhaps preservation makes the text seem more foreign. Simply translating 
the names creates uncommon names, but this also happens in the source text. Lady 
Patience or Vrouwe Geduld are probably equally weird. 
5. Translation criticism - Proper names
English nameDutch 
translation
Strategy used 
by Feberwee 
and Cuijpers
Effect on the reader
Thomas Tom Exonym Similar to source text (ST), 
although Thomas could have 
been preserved as well.
Burrich Burrich Preservation Probably similar to ST, no 
known connotations
Lady PatienceVrouwe PatiencePreservation Virtue becomes obscure in 
translation
Galen Galen Preservation Probably similar to ST, no 
known connotations
Chade Chade Preservation Probably similar to ST, although 
link to ‘shade’ is lost in Dutch
Fedwren Fedwren Preservation Probably similar to ST, no 
known connotations
10
=== PDFPAGE 11 ===
Prince ChivalryPrins Chevalric Morphological 
and phonetical 
change
Virtue becomes obscure in 
translation
Prince Verity Prins Veritas Morphological 
change
Virtue becomes obscure in 
translation
Prince Regal Prins Regaal Phonetical 
change
Virtue becomes obscure in 
translation
FitzChivalry 
Farseer
FitzChevalric 
Ziener
Morphological 
and phonetical 
change and 
translation
Clearly linked to Prince 
Chivalry, but information is lost 
in direct translation of ‘Fitz’
Hands Manus Recreation Similar to ST, since the 
connotations are kept
Mistress HastyVrouwe GezwindTranslation Similar to ST
King Shrewd Koning Vlijm de 
Listige
Translation and 
adding 
information
Probably similar to ST, maybe 
even more clear or intense 
because of the repetition
Molly 
Nosebleed
Mollie 
Bloedneus
Translation and 
phonetical 
change
Similar to ST
The Fool De nar Translation, but 
without the 
capital letter
Probably less identiﬁable as a 
person, more seen as a 
character or even an object
Nosy Snoet Translation Similar to ST
Slink Sluip Translation Similar to ST
Vixen Vosje Replacement / 
Translation
Different connotations in Dutch, 
less mean and ﬁerce in 
translation
Sooty Zwartvoet Replacement Creates a different picture 
(speckled horse vs. horse with 
black hoofs) 
Smithy Roetje Replacement Creates a different picture
             Table 5. The translation of proper names in Leerling en Meester and their effect on the reader
In their translation of Assassin’s Apprentice, Feberwee and Cuijpers use many different 
methods to deal with proper names. One exonym is found in the translation of Thomas into 
Tom. They could have retained Thomas as well, since it is quite a common name in Dutch. 
11
=== PDFPAGE 12 ===
They probably chose to use Tom because the pronunciation of Tom is similar to Thomas, 
whereas the pronunciation of Thomas in Dutch has a long vowel. 
 The strategy of preservation is used with a number of characters, such as Burrich, 
Lady Patience, Galen, Chade and Fedwren. For most characters, this is not a problem 
since their names are not meant to indicate a specific virtue. Lady Patience is the only 
character with a royal status and therefore a name that indicates her virtue. By preserving 
her name in the Dutch translation, the virtue becomes unrecognisable for most Dutch 
readers. Something similar happens with the preservation of Chade. His name is closely 
related to the word ‘shade’, which is probably clear for English readers and this is used by 
the Fool to divert the attention in the course of the novel. “‘Do you know Chade?’ I asked 
abruptly ... ‘Shade or sunlight, I know when to keep a grip on my tongue’” (Hobb 239). Fitz 
is not supposed to talk about Chade in public, so the Fool cleverly plays on the likeness to 
‘shade’. The pun is translated using Chade and schaduw, but the link is unclear in Dutch. 
“‘Ken je Chade?’ vroeg ik plotseling ... ‘In schaduw of zonlicht, ik weet wanneer ik mijn 
tong in bedwang moet houden’” (Hobb 186-187). Depending on how Chade is pronounced 
in Dutch, it might sound similar to ‘schaduw’, but the clever solution of the Fool most likely 
goes unnoticed. 
 Another method that is frequently employed by Feberwee and Cuijpers is changing 
the proper names either morphologically, phonetically or both. This method is mainly used 
in the translation of the names of the princes. Royal names are supposed to indicate a 
virtue and this virtue might not be clear by simply changing the morphology or phonetics of 
the name. Prince Chivalry is translated into Prins Chevalric, making the connection to 
chivalry very obscure for most Dutch readers. Prince Verity is translated as Prins Veritas, 
which might be clear to Dutch readers familiar with Latin. For most Dutch readers, 
however, the virtue is lost in translation. Prince Regal becomes Prins Regaal, also making 
the virtue more obscure in Dutch. The point of these names is, as explained in the first 
12
=== PDFPAGE 13 ===
chapter of the novel, to indicate the virtue that each royal child is bound to. Through these 
translations, the virtues become obscure, so that most Dutch readers will not grasp the full 
meaning of these names. 
 A special case is the name of the protagonist, FitzChivalry Farseer. He is the 
bastard son of Prince Chivalry, which is indicated by ‘Fitz’, which is the Anglo-Norman 
word for ‘son’ (Oxford English Dictionary). FitzChivalry therefore means ‘son of Chivalry’. 
Feberwee and Cuijpers translate this as FitzChevalric Ziener. They leave the ‘Fitz’ in place, 
but the connotation of this is lost since Dutch does not have this word. Since ‘Chevalric’ is 
present in his name, it is clear that Fitz has a connection with him, but the link is less clear 
in the Dutch version. 
 In Feberwee and Cuijpers’ translation, recreation of a proper name is also used. A 
stableboy called Hands is translated into Manus, giving the connotation of ‘manusje van 
alles,’ which means he is able to perform many small tasks. This fits the character Hands 
very well, since he indeed is used throughout the novel for small tasks in and around the 
keep or on journeys. 
 Some of the proper names in the story are simply translated directly into Dutch, 
such as Mistress Hasty, King Shrewd, Molly Nosebleed and the Fool. These are translated 
as Vrouwe Gezwind, Koning Vlijm de Listige, Mollie Bloedneus and de nar. With the name 
of the King, extra information is added in the Dutch translation, since simply Koning Vlijm 
would have been sufficient. Feberwee and Cuijpers choose to add some information, most 
likely to clarify the virtue associated with King Shrewd. This probably helps Dutch readers 
understand, but it is unclear why the translation of royal names is so inconsistent. The 
virtues of the princes are lost almost entirely, while the virtue of the king is emphasised, to 
be extra clear. Another choice made by Feberwee and Cuijpers is to delete the capital in 
the Fool’s name. By translating it without a capital, he is seen less as a person and more 
13
=== PDFPAGE 14 ===
as a role. In English, the Fool is clearly as much a name as a role that the character fulfils, 
but the idea of a name is lost in the translation.  
 Direct translation of proper names can also be seen in the translation of animal 
names. For instance, Nosy and Slink are translated as Snoet and Sluip. However, quite a 
number of animal names are replaced by another name with different connotations 
altogether. Vixen, Burrich’s watchdog, is translated as Vosje. In English, vixen means 
female fox, but it is also associated with an ill-tempered quarrelsome woman (Oxford 
English Dictionary). In the Dutch translation, this connotation is lost entirely. Vosje clearly 
indicates the female fox part, but the ill-tempered part is lost. In the original novel, it is 
clear from the start that Vixen can be mean if she has to protect something. She is to be 
feared by those with the wrong intentions and can lash out fiercely. Vosje, on the other 
hand, makes her seem sweet, mainly because of the -je suffix, which is used to indicate 
the diminutive in Dutch. Another problem occurs in the translation of Sooty and Smithy. 
Here Feberwee and Cuijpers probably mixed up the names, since Sooty becomes 
Zwartvoet and Smithy becomes Roetje. The word ‘soot’ means ‘roet’ in Dutch. It would 
therefore make more sense to translate Sooty into Roetje. Sooty is described as having 
black specks all over her body, so Zwartvoet is quite an awkward translation. Smithy is 
chosen as a strong name for a “tenacious and alert dog” (Assassin’s Apprentice 238). 
These characteristics are not present in the name Roetje, which makes the dog seem 
sweeter than he seems in English. Something like Smit, Smitje, or even preserving Smithy 
might be a better solution. 
 
6. Translation criticism - Translation strategies
Chesterman states that translation is about making changes (243). When a translator 
encounters a sentence that is not easy to translate, the translator has to make a change in 
14
=== PDFPAGE 15 ===
order to create a natural sounding sentence. Chesterman classifies different strategies 
which can be used when translating a text. His strategies are divided into syntactic, 
semantic and pragmatic strategies, all divided into many sub-strategies. Chesterman’s 
work can be used by translators as a toolbox, so they know what strategies are available 
to them. Chesterman’s work is descriptive instead of prescriptive, so it does not serve as a 
guideline for translators, telling them which strategy should be used. When translating a 
text, it is important to make the right choices, since that will lead to a fluent and 
understandable target text. In line with Skopos theory, the target text is most important 
since that is the one readers will have to read. Before this theory emerged, it was generally 
thought that a translation had to be as true to the source text as possible. The faithfulness 
of translation mattered instead of the final product, the translation itself. Skopos theory 
changed this and translation became more goal-oriented (Hulst 238). Naturally it is also 
important to stay as close to the source text as possible, but this should not lead to texts 
that do not feel right to the translator and/or the target audience. In line with this is “Honig 
and Kußmaul’s ‘der notwendige Grad der Differenzierung’” which indicates that a 
translation has to be as precise as necessary, instead of as precise as possible (Hulst 
238).
  Feberwee and Cuijpers sometimes create sentences in Dutch that are more 
complex than necessary. In the introduction of the first chapter, this is not yet a major 
problem, since this part almost reads like an encyclopaedia, offering factual information on 
the Six Duchies. Even in English, the language seems a bit archaic, and long, complex 
sentences occur. It is therefore not that problematic for Feberwee and Cuijpers to use a 
similar style in Dutch. However, Feberwee and Cuijpers do not change their style in the 
rest of their translation. Particularly in the first chapter, they continue to use complicated 
sentences, for no apparent reason. For instance, Feberwee and Cuijpers translate “I have 
spoiled another leaf of the fine stuff, in what I suspect is a futile endeavour” (Assassin’s 
15
=== PDFPAGE 16 ===
Apprentice 1) into “Weer een prachtig vel bedorven bij wat - naar ik vermoed - een 
vergeefs pogen zal blijken te zijn” (Leerling en Meester 1). The phrase “een vergeefs 
pogen zal blijken te zijn” is more complicated than necessary, mainly because of the 
auxiliary verbs. The English sentence is clear and to the point, whereas the Dutch 
sentence seems formal and wordy. In my own translation I have translated this sentence 
as “Ik heb weer een blad van het goede papier verspild, bij wat mij voorkomt als een 
vergeefse onderneming.” The sentence still is a bit formal, but it is more to the point and 
uses less auxiliary verbs.
 I n  Assassin’s Apprentice, Hobb writes: “There were three of them” (324), which is 
translated by Feberwee and Cuijpers as “Ze waren met hun drieën” (...). It is possible to 
use ‘hun’ in this context, but the word ‘hun’ is becoming more and more stigmatised in 
Dutch. In speech, ‘hun’ is often used ungrammatically, since ‘hun’ is a Dutch possessive 
pronoun, but it is often used as a personal pronoun (Genootschap Onze Taal). Sentences 
like “Hun hebben dat gezegd” instead of “Zij hebben dat gezegd” are used frequently 
nowadays, especially by young people. Feberwee and Cuijpers use ‘hun’ properly here, 
but because of the stigmatisation of the word it might be better to leave it out, especially 
since there is an easy alternative, namely “Ze waren met zijn drieën.” This has exactly the 
same meaning and is not stigmatised in Dutch. 
 On the one hand, Feberwee and Cuijpers sometimes leave out part of the English 
sentences. Leaving parts out is one of Chesterman’s pragmatic strategies, namely PR3 
(259). A translator can leave certain parts out, according to Chesterman, if the information 
in the source text has no clear equivalent in the target language and the information is not 
necessary to understand what is meant (259). However, Feberwee and Cuijpers leave out 
parts that can easily be translated into Dutch, so it is unclear why they leave out these 
parts. For instance, Hobb writes “I was hungry, cold, and tired. My wet shoes were a 
misery, but I had no thought of stopping,” (323) which is translated by Feberwee and 
16
=== PDFPAGE 17 ===
Cuijpers as “Ik had honger, ik had het koud en ik was moe. Maar ik dacht niet aan 
opgeven” (246). The entire bit about the wet shoes is left out, and the sentence is started 
with “maar,” which is as uncommon in Dutch as it is to start a sentence with “but” in 
English. This is not a strict rule when it comes to literature, but it is not the most elegant 
solution. Parts of sentences are left out more often by Feberwee and Cuijpers, for instance 
at the start of chapter fifteen. Here Hobb writes about speaking to the Elderlings and says: 
 But, if incredibly gifted with the Skill, a man can aspire to speak directly to the 
 Elderlings, those who are below only the gods themselves. Few have ever dared to 
 do so, and of those who did, even fewer attained what they asked. For it is said, 
 one may ask of the Elderlings, but the answer they give may not be to the question 
 you ask, but to the one you should have asked. And the answer to that question 
 may be one a man cannot hear and live. For when one speaks to the Elderlings, 
 then is the sweetness of using the Skill stronger and most perilous. (265)
Feberwee and Cuijpers translate this as: “En dan is er nog het talent dat grenst aan het 
ongelooflijke en dat in staat is contact te leggen met de Ouderlingen, die rechtstreeks 
onder de goden staan. Slechts weinigen hebben dat ooit aangedurfd, want wie spreekt 
met de Ouderlingen ervaart de verlokkende zoetheid van het Vermogen in haar sterkste 
en gevaarlijkste vorm (205). Again, a few lines are left out about the questions and 
answers one receives from the Elderlings, and that the answers can even kill a man. 
These are vital details about the Elderlings that readers should be aware of since the 
Elderlings are part of the story later on. The start of every chapter is in italics and offers 
encyclopaedic information on the Six Duchies, so every detail is needed to form a proper 
image of the fantasy world. It therefore remains unclear why Feberwee and Cuijpers chose 
to leave these parts out.
 On the other hand, however, Feberwee and Cuijpers add extra sentences to their 
translation, adding information that is not part of the original text. Chesterman states that it 
17
=== PDFPAGE 18 ===
is sometimes necessary to add information, for instance when relevant information for 
readers of the target text is not found in the source text (259). The translator can then add 
a word or phrase to include this information in his text. The adding of information by 
Feberwee and Cuijpers happens in the first chapter, where Hobb writes: “My memories 
reach back to when I was six years old. Before that, there is nothing” (Assassin’s 
Apprentice 2). In Leerling en Meester, Feberwee and Cuijpers write: “Mijn herinneringen 
gaan terug tot mijn zesde jaar. Daarvoor is er niets, slechts een peilloze diepte waarin mijn 
geest nooit heeft weten door te dringen, hoezeer ik ook mijn best heb gedaan. Voor die 
dag op Maansoog is er niets” (3). They translate the original quite accurately, but after 
‘niets,’ they add a great amount of information that is simply not there in the original text. 
The reason for this could be that this extra bit of information was present in the 
manuscript, but was cut out of the novel. If Feberwee and Cuijpers then used the 
manuscript for their translation, they would have included this bit.
 All in all, Feberwee and Cuijpers make a great number of changes in their 
translation of Assassin’s Apprentice. As Chesterman states, change is inevitable in 
translation since languages differ. However, this does not mean that translators can just 
change whatever they like. They have to adhere to the original as much as possible and 
only change words or phrases when a direct translation creates an irregular sentence. So 
while it is vital to change the original when no other solution is present, it is also important 
to stay as close to the original as possible. Since Feberwee and Cuijpers leave out details 
that matter later on in the story, I am not convinced that all their changes are necessary 
and desirable. Their translation is not as terrible as I initially thought, but the fact that they 
leave out important details in their translation impoverishes the story. Especially since this 
information is easy to translate and truly offers extra insight, it is too bad that Feberwee 
and Cuijpers chose to exclude it.
18
=== PDFPAGE 19 ===
7. Translation - Passage one
De Vroegste Geschiedenis
Een geschiedenis van de Zes Hertogdommen is noodzakelijkerwijs een geschiedenis van 
zijn heersers, de Zieners. Een volledige vertelling zou terug moeten gaan tot voor de 
stichting van het Eerste Hertogdom, en als deze namen bewaard waren gebleven, zou de 
geschiedenis ons vertellen over Buiteneilanders die plunderden vanaf de Zee en als 
piraten een kust binnenvielen die gematigder en zachter was dan de ijzige stranden van 
de Buiteneilanden. Maar we kennen de namen niet van deze vroegste voorvaderen.
 En over de eerste echte koning is weinig meer bekend dan zijn naam en een paar 
buitensporige legenden. Nemer1 heette hij, een eenvoudige naam, en misschien is met 
zijn naam de traditie begonnen om dochters en zonen van zijn geslacht namen te geven 
die hun levens en bestaan zouden bepalen. In volksverhalen wordt beweert dat deze 
namen met een nieuwgeborene werden verbonden door magie, en dat de koninklijke 
nakomelingen niet in staat waren om tegen de deugden wiens naam zij droegen in te 
gaan. Overhandigd door vuur, ondergedompeld in zout water en getoond aan de wind2; zo 
werden de namen verbonden met deze kinderen. Zo wordt het ons verteld. Een mooie 
veronderstelling, en misschien dat dit ritueel ooit heeft bestaan, maar de geschiedenis 
toont ons dat dit niet altijd voldoende was om een kind aan de deugd waarnaar het 
vernoemd werd te binden...
19
1 I decided to translate the proper names of the royal family into Dutch instead of preserving them, 
to make sure that it is clear for Dutch readers which virtues the royals are bound to. In this 
instance, Taker becomes Nemer, since ‘to take’ means almost the same in English as ‘nemen’ 
means in Dutch. 
2 In the original novel, this phrase shows a clear repetition. I wanted to preserve this repetition, 
which made it necessary to choose speciﬁc verbs in my translation. The most difﬁcult verb to 
translate in this respect is ‘passed,’ since it has many different meanings and in English, this is 
clear. In Dutch, however, there is no similar verb that holds the same meanings, so a choice has to 
be made. The English phrase is “Passed through ﬁre,” which can be interpreted in two ways. Either 
someone has passed through ﬁre, or someone was passed through ﬁre. I think the second option 
is more likely, since this act was performed to seal a name to a child, so it was probably done with 
babies. A baby cannot pass through ﬁre on its own, so it is passed through the ﬁre. The closest 
translation I can think of in Dutch is ‘doorgeven,’ but to adhere to the formality of this passage 
something like ‘overhandigen’ might be better.
=== PDFPAGE 20 ===
Mijn pen hapert, valt uit mijn knokkelige greep en laat een kronkelend spoor van inkt 
achter op Fedwren’s papier. Ik heb weer een blad van het goede papier verspild, bij wat 
mij voorkomt als een vergeefse onderneming. Ik vraag me af of ik deze geschiedenis kan 
schrijven, of dat elke pagina een heimelijke bitterheid vertoond waarvan ik dacht dat deze 
al lang verdwenen was. Ik zie mezelf als genezen van alle wrok, maar als mijn pen het 
papier raakt, vloeit de pijn van een jongen als bloed naar buiten met de inkt, totdat ik het 
gevoel heb dat elke zorgvuldig gevormde zwarte letter een korst over een eeuwenoude 
bloedrode wond vormt. 
  Zowel Fedwren als Vrouwe Geduld 3 waren zo vol met enthousiasme als ze over 
een geschreven geschiedenis van de Zes Hertogdommen spraken dat ik mezelf 
wijsmaakte dat het schrijven van zo’n geschiedenis de moeite waard zou zijn. Ik 
overtuigde mezelf ervan dat de inspanning mijn gedachten van de pijn af zou leiden en 
zou helpen de tijd voorbij te laten gaan. Maar elke historische gebeurtenis die ik bekijk 
wekt enkel persoonlijke, duistere gevoelens van eenzaamheid en verlies op. Ik ben bang 
dat ik hier helemaal mee moet stoppen, en anders zal ik moeten terugkijken op alles dat 
mij heeft gevormd tot wat ik nu ben. En daarom begin ik opnieuw, en opnieuw, maar altijd 
realiseer ik me dat ik over mijn eigen begin schrijf in plaats van het begin van dit land. Ik 
weet niets eens aan wie ik mezelf probeer te verklaren. Mijn leven is een web van 
geheimen geweest, geheimen die zelfs nu nog niet veilig gedeeld kunnen worden. Moet ik 
ze allemaal op mooi papier schrijven, terwijl ze alleen vuur en as zullen voortbrengen? 
Misschien.
20
3 The proper name Fedwren has no clear meaning and since he does not belong to the royal 
family, I decided to preserve this name. With Patience, who is royalty, a simple translation seems 
best. However, just translating into ‘Fedwren and Geduld’ seems awkward, so I decided to add 
‘vrouwe’ to indicate that Geduld is a name. I think this makes it easier for Dutch readers to realise 
that this woman is probably royalty, since her name clearly indicates a virtue. In the course of the 
novel, she is often referred to as ‘Lady Patience’ so adding ‘vrouwe’ here is not a too much 
change. The only drawback is that this makes Patience seems like a surname, while it is actually a 
ﬁrst name. However, the explanation at the start of the chapter makes this a possible translation.
=== PDFPAGE 21 ===
 Mijn herinneringen gaan terug tot mijn zesde jaar. Daarvoor is er niets. Maar op die 
dag beginnen de herinneringen plotseling, met een helderheid en gedetailleerdheid die me 
overweldigt. Soms is het te volledig, en vraag ik me af of het echt mijn herinnering is. 
Herinner ik het me echt, of zijn het de eindeloze verhalen van legioenen keukenmeiden, 
reeksen koksjongens en kuddes staljongens, waarmee ze mijn aanwezigheid 
verklaarden? Misschien heb ik het verhaal zo vaak gehoord, van zoveel verschillende 
bronnen, dat ik het me nu herinner als een echte herinnering van mezelf. Is de 
gedetailleerdheid het resultaat van een zesjarige die alles om zich heen in zich opneemt? 
Of zou de volledigheid van de herinnering veroorzaakt worden door de stralende 
bedekking van het Talent, en de medicijnen die een man neemt om zijn verslaving eraan 
onder controle te houden, medicijnen die pijnen en verlangens van zichzelf meebrengen? 
Dat laatste is zeer goed mogelijk. Misschien zelfs hoogstwaarschijnlijk. Ik hoop dat dat niet 
het geval is.
 De herinnering is bijna fysiek; de koude grijsheid van de verdwijnende dag, de 
meedogenloze regen die me doorweekt, de ijzige keien van de straten van een vreemde 
stad, zelfs de eeltige ruigheid van de enorme hand die mijn kleine handje vastgreep. Soms 
verwonder ik me over die greep. De hand was hard en ruig, mijn hand erin gevangen. En 
toch was hij warm, en niet onvriendelijk, zoals hij mijn hand vasthield. Slechts ferm. Hij liet 
me niet uitglijden op de ijzige straten, maar hij liet me ook niet ontsnappen aan mijn lot. Hij 
was zo onverbiddelijk als de ijskoude grijze regen, die een ijslaag vormde over de 
vertrapte sneeuw op het kiezelpad voor de enorme houten deuren van een versterkt 
gebouw dat als een vesting in de stad stond. 
 De deuren waren hoog, niet enkel voor een zesjarige jongen, maar hoog genoeg 
om reuzen door te laten, hoog genoeg om zelfs de magere oude man die boven mij 
uittorende zich klein te laten voelen. Ik vond ze er vreemd uitzien, alhoewel ik me niet kan 
herinneren wat voor soort deur of onderkomen dan gewoon zou zijn. Enkel dat deze, met 
21
=== PDFPAGE 22 ===
houtsnijwerk4 en hangend aan zwarte ijzeren scharnieren, versierd met een hertenkop en 
een klopper van glimmend brons, mijn ervaringen te boven gingen. Ik herinner me dat de 
sneeuwbrij mijn kleren had doorweekt, zodat mijn voeten en benen nat en koud waren. En 
toch kan ik me niet herinneren dat ik ver had gelopen door deze laatste winterse vloek, of 
dat ik was gedragen. Nee, het begint daar, precies voor de deuren van vesting, met mijn 
kleine hand gevangen in die van de grote man.
 Het is bijna als een poppenkast die begint. Ja, zo zie ik het voor me. De gordijntjes 
gaan open, en daar staan we voor die grote deur5. De oude man tilde de bronzen klopper 
op en sloeg er mee, een keer, twee keer, drie keer, op de plaat die zijn kloppen 
weerkaatste. En toen, ergens naast het podium, klonk er een stem. Niet van binnen de 
deuren, maar van achter ons, daar waar we vandaan gekomen waren. ‘Vader, alstublieft,’ 
smeekte de vrouwenstem. Ik draaide me om om naar haar te kijken, maar het was weer 
gaan sneeuwen, een kanten sluier die wimpers en mouwen bedekte. Ik kan me niet 
herinneren dat ik iemand zag. Ik kan met zekerheid zeggen dat ik niet vocht om los te 
komen uit de greep van de oude man, of dat ik ‘moeder, moeder!’ riep. In plaats daarvan 
stond ik, als een toeschouwer, en hoorde het geluid van laarzen in de vesting en het 
openmaken van de grendel aan de binnenkant.
 Ze schreeuwde nog een keer. Ik kan de woorden nog precies horen, de wanhoop in 
een stem die ik nu als jong zou bestempelen. ‘Vader, alstublieft, ik smeek het u!’ Een rilling 
ging door de hand die de mijne vastgreep, maar of dat kwam door angst of door een 
22
4 In the English passage, the door is carved. There is no Dutch verb that holds the same meaning, 
so translating the verb with a verb would lead to a translation such as ‘gekerfd’ which does not hold 
the same meaning. That is why I chose to translate this as ‘met houtsnijwerk’ which brings to mind 
the correct picture.
5 In the English version, this sentence is in the past tense. In English, this works quite well, but in 
Dutch it seems more natural to put this sentence in the present tense, like the two sentences that 
come before it. The present tense immediately calls to mind an image, enabling readers to imagine 
what happens. When written in the past tense (De gordijntjes gingen open, en daar stonden we 
voor die grote deur), the sentence seems more passive. Something that has happened is 
described, while a translation in the present tense makes it seem like the story starts here. First 
Fitz describes the current situation in detail, and after this sentence, his memory starts. I think that 
is what is intended here, so therefore I changed the tense of this sentence.
=== PDFPAGE 23 ===
andere emotie, zal ik nooit weten. Zo snel als een zwarte kraai een stukje gevallen brood 
grijpt, bukte de oude man en griste een bevroren stuk vuil ijs van de grond. Stilzwijgend 
wierp hij het, met veel kracht en woede, en ik dook in elkaar. Ik kan me geen kreet 
herinneren, noch het geluid van getroffen vlees. Wat ik me wel herinner is hoe de deuren 
openzwaaide naar buiten, waardoor de oude man vlug achteruit moest stappen en mij met 
zich meetrok.
 En dan het volgende: de man die de deur opende was geen dienstbode, zoals ik 
misschien zou verwachten als ik dit verhaal slechts had gehoord. Nee, mijn herinnering 
laat me een soldaat zien, een krijger, een beetje grijs geworden en met een buik meer 
gevormd door vet dan door spieren, geen goed gemanierde dienstbode. Hij nam zowel de 
oude man als mij helemaal op met de geoefende argwaan van een soldaat, en stond toen 
stil, wachtend tot wij zouden verklaren wat we kwamen doen.
8. Translation - Passage two
De wind was meedogenloos, en mijn zoute, natte kleding plakte en schuurde. Ik was 
hongerig, koud, en moe. Mijn natte schoenen waren een ellende, maar ik dacht er geen 
moment aan om te stoppen. Ik draafde als een wolf, constant om me heen kijkend, met 
mijn oren gespitst op geluid achter me. Het ene moment was de weg leeg en zwart voor 
me. Het volgende moment doemden er mannen op uit de duisternis. Twee voor me, en 
toen ik me omdraaide, ook een achter me. De kletsende golven hadden het geluid van 
hun voetstappen verhuld, en vanachter de wolken liet de maan6 me slechts glimpen van 
hen zien terwijl ze dichterbij kwamen. Ik ging met mijn rug tegen de massieve muur van 
een pakhuis staan, hield mijn staf gereed, en wachtte.
23
6 In the English version, it says “the dodging moon” which could be translated as “de ontwijkende 
maan”. This seems weird, however, since it makes the moon seem like a living thing. The meaning 
of this phrase is probably something like a moon behind clouds, that only shows itself every once 
in a while. An “ontwijkende maan” would not be clear enough in my opinion, so I decided to add 
some information here. 
=== PDFPAGE 24 ===
 Ik zag ze komen, stil en sluipend. Dat verbaasde me, want waarom schreeuwden 
ze niet gewoon, waarom kwam niet de hele bemanning kijken hoe ik gepakt zou worden? 
Maar deze mannen hielden elkaar net zo goed in gaten als ze mij in de gaten hielden. Ze 
jaagden niet als een bende, maar ieder van hen hoopte dat de anderen zouden sterven 
terwijl ze mij probeerden te doden, waardoor de buit voor het oprapen zou liggen. 
Gesmedenen7, geen kapers. 
 Een vreselijke kou welde in me op. Ik wist zeker dat het kleinste geluid van een 
knokpartij de kapers zou laten komen. Dus als de Gesmedenen me niet zouden doden, 
deden de kapers dat wel. Hoe dan ook, als alle wegen naar de dood leiden heeft het geen 
zin om langs welke weg dan ook te rennen. Ik zou de dingen nemen zoals ze kwamen. Zij 
waren met z’n drieën. Een had een mes. Maar ik had een staf, en was getraind om die te 
gebruiken. Ze waren dun, haveloos, minstens zo hongerig als ik, en net zo koud. Eentje 
was, dacht ik, de vrouw van de nacht ervoor. Toen ze doodstil naderbij kwamen, meende 
ik dat zij zich ook bewust waren van de kapers en ze net zo erg vreesden als ik. Het was 
niet slim om te denken aan de wanhoop die ze er evengoed toe dreef om mij aan te 
vallen. In de volgende adem vroeg ik me af of de Gesmedenen wanhoop of wat dan ook 
voelden. Misschien waren ze te afgestompt om het gevaar te zien.
 Alle heimelijke, geheimzinnige kennis die Schaduw me had bijgebracht, al Hod’s 
beestachtig elegante strategieën voor het vechten tegen twee of meer tegenstanders 
sloeg ik in de wind. Want terwijl de eerste twee binnen mijn bereik stapten, voelde ik de 
24
7 Feberwee and Cuijpers translate this as ‘ontzielden,’ which is quite a nice translation since it 
describes exactly what is wrong with these people. The only problem with it is that the ﬁrst Forged 
ones lived in a little town called Forge, which explains why they are called Forged ones. With 
‘ontzielden’ this falls away, since the town is not called ‘Ontziel’ but ‘Smidse’ in the translation. 
Since the town is famous for its iron ore, changing the name of the town into ‘Ontziel’ would be 
weird. The link between the town and the condition is referred to quite often in the novel, so I think 
it is important to preserve a link between them in translation. Therefore I chose to translate ‘Forged 
ones’ quite literally to ‘Gesmedenen’. The condition of these people is described earlier in the 
novel, so Dutch readers will understand what is wrong with them, even if their condition is not 
clearly mentioned in their name. Also, I chose to translate ‘Gesmedenen’ with a capital letter so 
that it clearly is a name given to certain people.
=== PDFPAGE 25 ===
kleine warmte van Smithy8 wegsijpelen uit mijn greep. ‘Smithy!’ fluisterde ik, een 
wanhopige smeekbede aan hem om hoe dan ook bij me te blijven. Ik kon bijna zien hoe 
het puntje van zijn staart bewoog in een laatste poging tot kwispelen. Toen knapte de 
draad en het vonkje verdween. Ik was alleen.
 Een zwarte vloed van kracht raasde als een waanzinnige door me heen. Ik stapte 
naar voren, stootte het eind van mijn staf diep in het gezicht van een man, trok hem snel 
terug en zwaaide er vervolgens zo hard mee dat ik dwars door de onderkaak van de 
vrouw sloeg. Simpel hout sneed de onderkant van haar gezicht weg, zo krachtig was mijn 
klap. Ik sloeg haar nogmaals terwijl ze viel en het voelde alsof ik een gevangen haai sloeg 
met een knuppel. De derde stormde recht op me af, waarschijnlijk denkend dat hij dan niet 
geraakt zou kunnen worden door mijn staf. Het kon me niet schelen. Ik liet mijn stok vallen 
en worstelde met hem. Hij was vel over been en hij stonk. Ik duwde hem op zijn rug, en 
toen hij in mijn gezicht uitademde rook ik rottend vlees. Met vingers en tanden rukte ik aan 
hem, net zo onmenselijk als hij was. Zij hadden me van Smithy weggehouden terwijl hij 
stervende was. Het kon me niet schelen wat ik met de man deed, als het maar pijn deed. 
Hij beantwoordde mijn geweld. Ik sleurde zijn gezicht over de keien, ik duwde mijn duim in 
zijn oog. Hij liet zijn tanden in mijn pols zinken, en klauwde mijn wang open. En toen hij 
uiteindelijk ophield met vechten tegen mijn wurggreep, sleepte ik hem naar de zeedijk en 
gooide zijn lichaam op de rotsen. Ik stond daar hijgend, mijn vuisten nog gebald. Ik keek 
woest naar de kapers, ze uitdagend om te komen, maar de nacht was stil, op de golven en 
de wind en het zachte gorgelen van de vrouw terwijl ze stierf na. Of de kapers hadden ons 
niet gehoord, of ze waren te bezorgd om gezien te worden als ze geluiden in de nacht 
onderzochten. Ik wachtte in de wind tot iemand de moeite zou nemen om me te 
25
8 I preserved the name Smithy in my translation, since it is a name for an alert and tenacious dog. 
Simply ‘Smit’ is too short in my opinion, and ‘Smitje’ makes him seem too cute and friendly. 
Therefore I decided to keep the English ‘Smithy’ in my translation, which I think is a happy medium.  
=== PDFPAGE 26 ===
vermoorden. Niets bewoog. Een leegheid ging door me heen, mijn razernij verdringend. 
Zo veel dood in één nacht, en zo weinig betekenis, behalve voor mij. 
9. Translation - Passage three
Ik keek de omwindsels nog een laatste keer na voordat ik de kist meenam naar de 
binnenplaats, toen ik de Nar9 achter me hoorde.
‘Ik heb dit voor je meegenomen.’
Ik draaide me om en zag hem in de deuropening van mijn kamer staan. Ik had de deur 
niet eens horen open gaan. Hij bood me een leren tasje met een trekkoord aan. ‘Wat is 
het?’ vroeg ik, en probeerde zowel de bloemen als de pop uit mijn stem te houden.
‘Zeezuivering.’
Ik tilde mijn wenkbrauwen op. ‘Een laxatief? Als huwelijkscadeau? Misschien dat 
sommigen dat gepast zouden vinden, maar de kruiden die ik meeneem kunnen worden 
geplant in de bergen. Ik denk niet dat ...’
‘Het is geen huwelijkscadeau. Het is voor jou.’
Ik accepteerde de buidel met gemengde gevoelens. Het was een ongewoon sterk 
laxeermiddel. ‘Fijn dat je aan me hebt gedacht. Maar ik ben gewoonlijk niet erg vatbaar 
voor reizigerskwaaltjes, en ...’
‘Je loopt gewoonlijk, als je op reis gaat, niet het gevaar om vergiftigd te worden.’
‘Is er iets dat je me wilt vertellen?’ Ik probeerde mijn stem luchtig en plagerig te laten 
klinken. Ik miste de Nar’s normale bijtende uitdrukkingen en bespottingen in dit gesprek.
26
9 I decided to translate the Fool’s name with a capital, since it is clearly a name in the English 
version. Feberwee and Cuijpers leave out the capital letter, even though the Fool is written with a 
capital letter in the English version. This might have something to do with the fact that it is more 
common to use a capital in English, for instance with titles such as ‘the President’. However, in this 
instance I think the capital is used to indicate that the Fool is a name as well as a title. Therefore I 
chose to translate the Fool with a capital in Dutch. In English, the determiner is used whenever the 
Fool is mentioned, so he becomes ‘de Nar’ in Dutch, with the determiner as well. 
=== PDFPAGE 27 ===
‘Alleen dat het verstandig is om weinig te eten, of helemaal niets, van maaltijden die je niet 
zelf hebt klaargemaakt.’
‘Op alle banketten en feesten die gehouden zullen worden?’
‘Nee hoor. Alleen op degene die je wenst te overleven.’ Hij draaide zich om om weg te 
gaan.
‘Het spijt me,’ zei ik snel. ‘Het was niet mijn bedoeling om binnen te dringen. Ik was op 
zoek naar jou, en ik had het zo warm, en de deur was niet op slot, dus ging ik naar binnen. 
Ik wilde niet neuzen.’
Hij stond met zijn rug naar me toe en draaide zich niet om toen hij vroeg, ‘En vond je het 
amusant?’ ‘Ik-’ Ik kon niets verzinnen om te zeggen, wist niet hoe ik hem ervan kon 
overtuigen dat wat ik gezien had in mijn hoofd zou blijven. Hij zette twee stappen en trok 
de deur achter zich dicht. Ik flapte eruit, ‘Ik zou graag willen dat er een plek is die zoveel 
op mij lijkt als die plek op jou lijkt. Een plek die ik net zo geheim zou houden.’
De deur stopte een handbreedte voor hij dicht was. ‘Neem mijn advies aan, dan overleef 
je deze reis misschien. Als je de motieven van een man overweegt, onthou dan dat je zijn 
tarwe niet met jouw korenmaat moet meten. Hij gebruikt misschien een heel andere 
maatstaaf10.’ 
En de deur sloot en de Nar was verdwenen. Maar zijn laatste woorden waren cryptisch en 
frustrerend genoeg om mij het gevoel te geven dat hij me misschien vergaf voor mijn 
inbreuk. 
 Ik propte de zeezuivering in mijn buis, ook al wilde ik het niet hebben, bang om het 
nu achter te laten. Ik wierp een blik door mijn kamer, maar hij was kaal en efficiënt als 
27
10 The English proverb is made up by Robin Hobb. Since it does not exist in English, it will not have 
a Dutch counterpart. This makes it necessary to either translate Hobb’s proverb, or to replace it by 
a Dutch proverb with the same meaning. I chose to translate Hobb’s proverb, since it is meant to 
be cryptic so it should not be an existing proverb. In a translation of Hobb’s proverb, the word 
bushel offers some translational problems, since it is a standard in English, which also exist in 
Dutch but it is quite an unknown standard. I therefore used a more general term, namely 
“korenmaat”.
=== PDFPAGE 28 ===
altijd. Vrouwe Haastig had ervoor gezorgd dat mijn bagage werd ingepakt, omdat ze mij 
niet vertrouwde met mijn nieuwe kledingstukken. Het was me opgevallen dat de 
doorgestreepte hertenbok op mijn borst was vervangen door een hertenbok met zijn gewei 
omlaag, klaar om aan te vallen. ‘Prins Waarheid heeft de opdracht gegeven,’ was alles wat 
ze zei toen ik ernaar vroeg. ‘Ik vind het zelf mooier dan de doorgestreepte bok, en jij?’
‘Ik denk van wel,’ antwoordde ik, en dat was dat. Een naam en een wapen. Ik knikte naar 
mezelf, tilde mijn kist met kruiden en geschriften op mijn schouder en ging naar beneden 
om me aan te sluiten bij de karavaan. 
 Terwijl ik de trappen afliep, kwam ik Waarheid tegen die omhoog liep. Op het eerste 
gezicht herkende ik hem nauwelijks, omdat hij de trap opklom als een wrevelige oude 
man. Ik stapte opzij om hem erdoor te laten en herkende hem toen hij mijn kant opkeek. 
Het is vreemd om een bekende op die manier te zien, als een vreemde. Ik zag hoe zijn 
kleren om hem heen hingen, en het borstelige, donkere haar dat ik me herinnerde was 
bezaaid met grijs. He glimlachte afwezig naar me, en toen, alsof hij het zich opeens 
herinnerde, liet hij me stoppen.
‘Vertrek je naar het Bergrijk? Voor de huwelijksceremonie?’
‘Ja.’
‘Wil je me een plezier doen, jongen?’
‘Natuurlijk,’ zei ik, van mijn stuk gebracht door de roest in zijn stem. 
‘Spreek positief over me tegen haar. Waarheidsgetrouw, natuurlijk, ik vraag je niet om te 
liegen. Maar spreek positief over me. Ik heb altijd geloofd dat je positief over me dacht.’
‘Dat is zo,’ zei ik tegen zijn rug terwijl hij doorliep. ‘Dat is zo, meneer.’ Maar hij draaide zich 
niet om en antwoordde niet, en ik voelde me ongeveer zoals toen de Nar me achterliet.
De binnenplaats was een krioelende massa van mensen en dieren. Er waren deze keer 
geen karren; de wegen naar de bergen waren berucht vanwege hun kwaliteit, en er was 
besloten dat lastdieren voldoende zouden moeten zijn in het belang van de snelheid. Het 
28
=== PDFPAGE 29 ===
was geen optie voor het koninklijke gevolg om te laat te zijn voor het huwelijk; het was al 
erg genoeg dat de bruidegom er niet bij zou zijn.
 De schapen en runderen waren dagen eerder al vertrokken. De verwachting was 
dat onze reis twee weken zou duren, en er waren drie weken voor uitgetrokken. Ik zorgde 
ervoor dat de cederhouten kist werd bevestigd op een lastdier en ging toen naast Roetje 
staan en wachtte af. Zelfs op de geplaveide binnenplaats hing een dikke laag stof in de 
hete zomerlucht. Ondanks al het zorgvuldige geregel dat eraan vooraf was gegaan, leek 
de karavaan chaotisch. Ik ving een glimp op van Sevrens, Vorst’s favoriete lakei. Vorst had 
hem een maand geleden teruggestuurd naar Boktoren, met specifieke instructies voor 
bepaalde kledingstukken die hij gemaakt wilde hebben. Sevrens werd gevolgd door 
Manus11, terwijl hij aarzelde en protesteerde over iets, en wat het ook was, Manus leek er 
niet veel geduld voor te hebben. Toen Vrouwe Haastig me de laatste instructies over het 
onderhoud van mijn nieuwe kledingstukken gaf, had ze onthuld dat Sevrens zo veel 
nieuwe kledingstukken, hoeden en accessoires voor Vorst meenam dat hij drie lastdieren 
toegewezen had gekregen om ze te vervoeren. Ik bedacht me dat de verzorging van deze 
drie dieren waarschijnlijk aan Manus was toegewezen, want hoewel Sevrens een 
uitstekende lakei was, was hij angstig rond grote dieren. Rowd, Vorst’s werkman, doemde 
achter hen op, humeurig en ongeduldig. Op een van zijn brede schouders droeg hij nog 
een hutkoffer, en misschien dat het laden van dit extra onderdeel de reden was van 
Sevrens’ gepieker. Ik verloor ze al snel uit het oog in de menigte.
29
11 In English, the boy is called Hands. Feberwee and Cuijpers translate this as ‘Manus,’ since in 
Dutch the phrase ‘Manusje-van-alles’ exists, which means the same as a jack-of-all-trades means 
in English. This ﬁts perfectly with the role Hands fulﬁls so it offers the right connotations. Simply 
translating Hands into ‘Handen’ of ‘Hands’ seems unnatural and too straightforward. I therefore 
chose to use the same translation as Feberwee and Cuijpers.
=== PDFPAGE 30 ===
Bibliography
Aixelá, Javier Franco. “Cultuurspecifieke Elementen in Vertalingen.” Denken over Vertalen: 
 Tekstboek Vertaalwetenschap.  Ed. Ton Naaijkens, Cees Koster, Henri Bloemen and 
 Caroline Meijer. Nijmegen: Uitgeverij Vantilt, 2004. 197-212. Print. 
Chesterman, Andrew. “Vertaalstrategieën: een Classificatie.” Denken over Vertalen: 
 Tekstboek Vertaalwetenschap.  Ed. Ton Naaijkens, Cees Koster, Henri Bloemen and 
 Caroline Meijer. Nijmegen: Uitgeverij Vantilt, 2004. 243-262. Print.
Clute, John, and John Grant, eds. The Encyclopedia of Fantasy. New York: St Martin’s 
 Press, 1997. Print.
Coillie, Jan van. “Character Names in Translation – A Functional Approach.” Children’s 
 Literature in Translation: Challenges and Strategies. Eds. Jan Van Coillie and 
 Walter P. Verschueren. Manchester: St. Jerome, 2006. 123-39. Print.
“Fitz.” Oxford English Dictionary (OED). 2nd ed. 1989. Web. 6 June 2012.
Grit, Diederik. “Het Vertalen van Realia.” Denken over Vertalen: Tekstboek 
 Vertaalwetenschap. Ed. Ton Naaijkens, Cees Koster, Henri Bloemen and Caroline 
 Meijer. Nijmegen: Uitgeverij Vantilt, 2004. 189-196. Print.
Hobb, Robin. Assassin’s Apprentice. London: Voyager, 1996. Print.
Hobb, Robin. Leerling en Meester. Trans. Erica Feberwee and Peter Cuijpers. Amsterdam: 
 Meulenhoff, 1998. Print.
Hobb, Robin. Leerling en Meester. Trans. Peter Cuijpers. Amsterdam: De Boekerij, 2004. 
 Print.
Hobb, Robin. Robin Hobb. N.p., n.d. Web. 22 Feb. 2012. <http://www.robinhobb.com>.
Holmes, James S. “De Brug bij Bommel Herbouwen” Denken over Vertalen: 
 Tekstboek Vertaalwetenschap.  Ed. Ton Naaijkens, Cees Koster, Henri Bloemen and 
 Caroline Meijer. Nijmegen: Uitgeverij Vantilt, 2004. 183-188. Print. 
30
=== PDFPAGE 31 ===
Hulst, Jacqueline. “Het Product Centraal: Criteria en Methoden voor de Evaluatie van 
 Vertalingen. ” Denken over Vertalen: Tekstboek Vertaalwetenschap. Ed. Ton 
 Naaijkens, Cees Koster, Henri Bloemen and Caroline Meijer. Nijmegen: Uitgeverij 
 Vantilt, 2004. 235-248. Print. 
“Hun/Hen.” Genootschap Onze Taal. Genootschap Onze Taal, n.d. Web. 5 Apr. 2012.
Kok, Marlies. “The Boundaries of Imagination”. Thesis. University of Utrecht, 2011. Web. 
 10 Mar. 2012.
Mendlesohn, Farah. “Rhetorics of Fantasy.” Off Cuts. N.p. 2003. Web. 4 June 2012.
Nord, Christiane. “Proper Names in Translations for Children: Alice in Wonderland as a 
 Case in Point”. Meta: Translators’ Journal 48.1 (2003): 182-96. Web. 8 Mar. 2012.
Stableford, Brian. Historical Dictionary of Fantasy Literature. Lanham: The Scarecrow 
 Press, 2005. Print.
“Vixen.” Oxford English Dictionary (OED). 2nd ed. 1989. Web. 18 Mar. 2012.
Zee, Silvie van der. “Harry Potter goes Dutch.” Thesis. University of Utrecht, 2011. Web. 11 
 Mar. 2012
31
=== PDFPAGE 32 ===
Appendix A: Source text passages
Passage 1: page 1-4
The Earliest History
A history of the Six Duchies is of necessity a history of its ruling family, the Farseers. A 
complete telling would reach back beyond the founding of the First Duchy, and if such 
names were remembered, would tell us of Outislanders raiding from the Sea, visiting as 
pirates a shore more temperate and gentler than the icy beaches of the Out Islands. But 
we do not know the names of these earliest forebears.
 And of the first real king, little more than his name and some extravagant legends 
remain. Taker his name was, quite simply, and perhaps with that naming began the 
tradition that daughters and sons of his lineage would be given names that would shape 
their lives and beings. Folk beliefs claim that such names were sealed to the newborn 
babes by magic, and that these royal offspring were incapable of betraying the virtues 
whose names they bore. Passed through fire and plunged through salt water and offered 
to the winds of the air; thus were names sealed to these chosen children. So we are told. 
A pretty fancy, and perhaps once there was such a ritual, but history shows us this was not 
always sufficient to bind a child to the virtue that named it...
My pen falters, then falls from my knuckly grip, leaving a worm’s trail of ink across 
Fedwren’s paper. I have spoiled another leaf of the fine stuff, in what I suspect is a futile 
endeavour. I wonder if I can write this history, or if on every page there will be some 
sneaking show of a bitterness I thought long dead. I think myself cured of all spite, but 
when I touch pen to paper, the hurt of a boy bleeds out with the sea-spawned ink, until I 
suspect each carefully formed black letter scabs over some ancient scarlet wound.
 Both Fedwren and Patience were so filled with enthusiasm whenever a written 
account of the history of the Six Duchies was discussed that I persuaded myself the writing 
of it was a worthwhile effort. I convinced myself that the exercise would turn my thoughts 
aside from my pain and help the time to pass. But each historical event I consider only 
awakens my own personal shades of loneliness and loss. I fear I will have to set this work 
aside entirely, or else give in to reconsidering all that has shaped what I have become. And 
so I begin again, and again, but always find that I am writing of my own beginnings rather 
than the beginnings of this land. I do not even know to whom I try to explain myself. My life 
32
=== PDFPAGE 33 ===
has been a web of secrets, secrets that even now are unsafe to share. Shall I set them all 
down on fine paper, only to create from them flame and ash? Perhaps.
 My memories reach back to when I was six years old. Before that, there is nothing. 
But on that day they suddenly begin, with a brightness and detail that overwhelms me. 
Sometimes it is too complete, and I wonder if it is truly mine. Am I recalling it from my own 
mind, or from dozens of retellings by legions of kitchen maids and ranks of scullions and 
herds of stable-boys as they explained my presence to each other? Perhaps I have heard 
the story so many times, from so many sources, that I now recall it as an actual memory of 
my own. Is the detail the result of a six-year-old’s open absorption of all that goes on 
around him? Or could the completeness of the memory be the bright overlay of the Skill, 
and the later drugs a man takes to control his addiction to it, the drugs that bring on pains 
and cravings of their own? The last is most possible. Perhaps it is even probable. One 
hopes it is not the case.
 The remembrance is almost physical; the chill greyness of the fading day, the 
remorseless rain that soaked me, the icy cobbles of the strange town’s streets, even the 
callused roughness of the huge hand that gripped my small one. Sometimes I wonder 
about that grip. The hand was hard and rough, trapping mine within it. And yet it was 
warm, and not unkind, as it held mine. Only firm. It did not let me slip on the icy streets, but 
it did not let me escape my fate, either. It was as implacable as the freezing grey rain that 
glazed the trampled snow and ice of the gravelled pathway outside the huge wooden 
doors of the fortified building that stood like a fortress within the town itself. 
 The doors were tall, not just to a six-year-old boy, but tall enough to admit giants, to 
dwarf even the rangy old man who towered over me. And they looked strange to me, 
although I cannot summon up what type of door or dwelling would have looked familiar. 
Only that these, carved and bound with black iron hinges, decorated with a buck’s head 
and knocker of gleaming brass, were beyond my experience. I recall that slush had 
soaked through my clothes, so that my feet and legs were wet and cold. And yet, again, I 
cannot recall that I had walked far through winter’s last curses, nor that I had been carried. 
No, it all starts there, right outside the doors of the stronghouse, with my small hand 
trapped inside the tall man’s.
 Almost, it is like a puppet show beginning. Yes, I can see it thus. The curtains 
parted, and there we stood before that great door. The old man lifted the brass knocker 
and banged it down, once, twice, thrice, on the plate that resounded to his pounding. And 
then, from off-stage, a voice sounded. Not from within the doors, but from behind us, back 
the way we had come. ‘Father, please,’ the woman’s voice begged. I turned to look at her, 
33
=== PDFPAGE 34 ===
but it had begun to snow again, a lacy veil that clung to eyelashes and coatsleeves. I can’t 
recall that I saw anyone. Certainly, I did not struggle to break free of the old man’s grip on 
my hand, nor did I call out, ‘Mother, Mother!’ Instead I stood, a spectator, and heard the 
sound of boots within the keep, and the unfastening of the door hasp within. 
 One last time she called. I can still hear the words perfectly, the desperation in a 
voice that now would sound young to my ears. ‘Father, please, I beg you!’ A tremor shook 
the hand that gripped mine, but whether of anger or some other emotion, I shall never 
know. As swift as a black crow seizes a bit of dropped bread, the old man stooped and 
snatched up a frozen chunk of dirty ice. Wordlessly he flung it, with great force and fury, 
and I cowered where I stood. I do not recall a cry, nor the sound of struck flesh. What I do 
remember is how the doors swung outward, so that the old man had to step hastily back, 
dragging me with him. 
 And there is this: the man who opened the door was not house-servant, as I might 
imagine if I had only heard this story. No, memory shows me a man-at-arms, a warrior, 
gone a bit to grey and with a belly more of hard suet than muscle, but not some mannered 
house-servant. He looked both the old man and me up and down with a soldier’s practised 
suspicion, and then stood there silently, waiting for us to state our business. 
Passage 2: page 323-325
The wind was relentless, and my salt-wet clothing clung and chafed. I was hungry, cold, 
and tired. My wet shoes were a misery, but I had no thought of stopping. I trotted like a 
wolf, my eyes continually shifting, my ears keen for any sound behind me. One moment, 
the road was empty and black before me. In the next, the darkness had turned to men. 
Two before me, and when I spun about, another behind me. The slapping waves had 
covered the sound of their feet, and the dodging moon offered me only glimpses of them 
as they closed the distance around me. I set my back to the solid wall of a warehouse, 
readied my staff, and waited. 
 I watched them come, silent and skulking. I wondered at that, for why did they not 
raise a shout, why did not the whole crew come to watch me taken? But these men 
watched one another as much as they watched me. They did not hunt as a pack, but each 
hoped the others would die killing me and leave the bounty for the picking. Forged ones, 
not raiders.
 A terrible coldness welled up in me. The least sound of a scuffle would bring the 
raiders, I was sure. So if the Forged ones did not finish me, the raiders would. However, 
34
=== PDFPAGE 35 ===
when all roads lead to death, there is no point in running down any of them. I would take 
things as they came. There were three of them. One had a knife. But I had a staff, and was 
trained to use it. They were thin, ragged, at least as hungry as I, and as cold. One, I think, 
was the woman from the night before. As they closed on me, so silently, I guessed they 
were aware of the raiders and feared them as much as I. It was not good to consider the 
desperation that would prompt them still to attack me. Then in the next breath, I wondered 
if Forged ones felt desperation or anything else. Perhaps they were too dulled to realise 
the danger.
 All of the stealthy arcane knowledge Chade had given me, all of Hod’s brutally 
elegant strategies for fighting two or more opponents, went to the wind. For as the first two 
stepped into my range, I felt the tiny warmth that was Smithy ebbing in my grasp. ‘Smithy!’ 
I whispered, a desperate plea that he somehow stay with me. I all but saw a tail tip stir in a 
last effort at a wag. Then the thread snapped and the spark blinked out. I was alone. 
 A black flood of strength surged through me like a madness. I stepped out, thrust 
the end of my staff deep into a man’s face, drew it quickly back, and continued a swing 
that went through the woman’s lower jaw. Plain wood sheared the lower half of her face 
away, so forceful was my blow. I whacked her again as she fell, and it was like hitting a 
netted shark with a fish-bat. The third drove into me solidly, thinking, I suppose, to be 
inside my staff’s range. I didn’t care. I dropped my stick and grappled with him. He was 
bony and he stank. I drove him onto his back, and his expelled breath in my face stank of 
carrion. Fingers and teeth, I tore at him, as far from human as he was. They had kept me 
from Smithy as he was dying. I did not care what I did to him so long as it hurt him. He 
reciprocated. I dragged his face along the cobbles, I pushed my thumb into an eye. He 
sank his teeth into my wrist, and clawed my cheek bloody. And when at last he ceased to 
fight against my strangling grip, I dragged him to the sea-wall and threw his body down 
onto the rocks. I stood panting, my fists still clenched. I glared toward the raiders, daring 
them to come, but the night was still, save for the waves and wind and the soft gargling of 
the woman as she died. Either the raiders had not heard, or they were too concerned with 
their own stealth to investigate sounds in the night. I waited in the wind for someone to 
care enough to come and kill me. Nothing stirred. An emptiness washed through me, 
supplanting my madness. So much death in one night, and so little significance save to 
me. 
35
=== PDFPAGE 36 ===
Passage 3: page 374-376
I was checking their wrappings a final time before taking the chest down to the courtyard 
when I heard the Fool behind me.
‘I brought you this.’
I turned to find him standing just inside the door of my room. I hadn’t even heard the door 
open. He was proffering a leather drawstring bag. ‘What is it?’ I asked, and tried not to let 
him hear either the flowers or the doll in my voice.
‘Seapurge’.
I raised my eyebrows. ‘A cathartic? As a marriage gift? I suppose some would find it 
appropriate, but the herbs I am taking can be planted and grown in the mountains. I do not 
think ...’
‘It is not a wedding gift. It is for you.’
I accepted the pouch with mixed feelings. It was an exceptionally powerful purge. ‘Thank 
you for thinking of me. But I am not usually prone to travellers’ ailments, and ...’
‘You are not usually, when you travel, in danger of being poisoned.’
‘Is there something you’d like to tell me?’ I tried to make my tone light and bantering. I 
missed the Fool’s usual wry faces and mockeries from this conversation.
‘Only that you’d be wise to eat lightly, or not at all, of any food you do not prepare yourself.’
‘At all the feasts and festivities that will be there?’
‘No. Only at the ones you wish to survive.’ He turned to go.
‘I’m sorry,’ I said hastily. ‘I didn’t mean to intrude. I was looking for you, and I was so hot, 
and the door wasn’t latched, so I went in. I didn’t mean to pry.’
His back was to me and he didn’t turn back as he asked, ‘And did you find it amusing?’
‘I-’ I could not think of anything to say, of any way to assure him that what I had seen there 
would stay only within my own mind. He took two steps and was closing the door. I blurted, 
‘ It made me wish there were a place as much me as that place is you. A place I would 
keep as secret.’
The door halted a handbreadth short of closed. ‘Take some advice, and you may survive 
this trip. When considering a man’s motives, remember you must not measure his wheat 
with your bushel. He may not be using the same standard at all.’
And the door closed and the Fool was gone. But his last words had been cryptic and 
frustrating enough that I thought perhaps he had forgiven me my trespass.
 I stuffed the seapurge into my jerkin, not wanting it, but afraid to leave it now. I 
glanced about my room, but as always it was a bare and practical place. Mistress Hasty 
36
=== PDFPAGE 37 ===
had seen to my packing, not trusting me with my new garments. I had noticed that the 
barred buck on my crest had been replaced with a buck with his antlers lowered to charge. 
‘Verity ordered it,’ was all she said when I asked about it. ‘I like it better than the barred 
buck myself. Don’t you?’
‘I suppose so,’ I replied, and that had been the end of it. A name and a crest. I nodded to 
myself, shouldered my chest of herbs and scrolls, and went down to join the caravan.
 As I was coming down the steps, I encountered Verity coming up. At first I scarcely 
knew him, for he was ascending like a crabbed old man. I stepped out of his way to let him 
pass, and then knew him as he glanced at me. It is a strange thing to see a once-familiar 
man like that, encountered as a stranger. I marked how his clothes hung on him now, and 
the bushy dark hair I remembered had a peppering of grey. He smiled absently at me, and 
then, as if it had suddenly occurred to him, he stopped me.
‘You’re leaving for the Mountain Kingdom? For the wedding ceremony?’
‘Yes.’
‘Do me a favour, boy?’
‘Of course,’ I said, taken aback by the rust in his voice.
‘Speak well of me to her. Truthfully, mind you, I’m not asking for lies. But speak well of me. 
I’ve always thought that you thought well of me.’
‘I do,’ I said to his retreating back. ‘I do, sir.’ But he didn’t turn or make a reply, and I felt 
much as I had when the Fool left me. 
The courtyard was a milling of folk and animals. There were no carts this time; the roads 
into the mountains were notoriously bad, and it had been decided that pack animals would 
have to suffice for the sake of swiftness. It would not do for the royal entourage to be late 
for the wedding; it was bad enough that the groom was not attending.
 The flocks and herds had been sent on days before. It was expected that our trip 
would take two weeks, and three had been allowed for it. I saw to fastening the cedar 
chest onto a pack animal, and then stood beside Sooty and waited. Even in the cobbled 
courtyard, dust stirred thick in the hot summer air. Despite all the careful planning that had 
gone into it, the caravan seemed chaotic. I glimpsed Sevrens, Regal’s favourite valet. 
Regal had sent him back to Buckkeep a month ago, with specific instructions about certain 
garments he wished created. Sevrens was following Hands, dithering and expostulating 
about something, and whatever it was, Hands was not looking patient about it. When 
Mistress Hasty had been giving me final instructions on the care of my new garments, she 
had divulged that Sevrens was taking enough new garments, hats and accoutrements for 
Regal that he had been allotted three pack animals to carry them. I imagined that caring 
37
=== PDFPAGE 38 ===
for the three animals had fallen to Hands, for Sevrens was an excellent valet, but timid 
around the larger animals. Rowd, Regal’s ready man, hulked after both of them, looking ill-
tempered and impatient. On one wide shoulder he carried yet another trunk, and perhaps 
the loading of this additional item was what was fretting Sevrens. I soon lost sight of them 
in the crowd. 
38
=== PDFPAGE 39 ===
Appendix B: Passages in translation by Feberwee and Cuijpers
Passage 1
De vroegste geschiedenis
De geschiedschrijving van het Koninkrijk van de Zes Hertogdommen is onontkoombaar 
ook de geschiedenis van het huis dat de Hertogdommen bestuurde: het geslacht der 
Zieners. Om volledig te zijn zou deze geschiedschrijving moeten teruggaan tot voor de 
stichting van het Eerste Hertogdom, en wanneer de namen niet door de vergetelheid 
waren opgeslokt, zou de geschiedenis ons vertellen over de bewoners van de 
Buiteneilanden die vanuit zee het land binnenvielen: piraten die de kusten plunderden van 
een streek die aanzienlijk milder en gematigder was dan de ijzige stranden van hun 
vaderland. Maar de namen van die vroegste voorzaten zijn ons niet bekend. 
En van de eerste echte koning is ons behalve zijn naam weinig meer gebleven dan wat 
buitenissige legenden. Nemer heette hij, een eenvoudige naam, en misschien begon met 
hem de traditie dat de zonen en dochters van het geslacht een naam kregen die van 
doorslaggevende invloed zou zijn op hun levensloop en op de ontwikkeling van hun 
karakter. Onder het volk heerste de overtuiging dat dergelijke namen door magische 
rituelen onlosmakelijk met de nieuwgeborenen werden verbonden, en dat de koninklijke 
nakomelingen niet bij machte waren de deugden waarvan ze de naam droegen, geweld 
aan te doen. De borelingen werden gedoopt met vuur, onderdompeling in zout water en 
blootstelling aan de wind; aldus werd een onverbrekelijke band gesmeed tussen hen en 
de naam die hun was gegeven. Zo vertelt ons de overlevering. Een mooi beeld, en 
misschien heeft een dergelijk ritueel inderdaad ooit bestaan, maar uit de geschiedenis 
blijkt maar al te duidelijk dat dit niet altijd voldoende was om een kind te binden aan de 
deugd waarnaar het was genoemd...
Mijn pen hapert en valt uit mijn knokige hand, zodat de inkt een wormspoor trekt over 
Fedwrens papier. Weer een prachtig vel bedorven bij wat - naar ik vermoed - een vergeefs 
pogen zal blijken te zijn. Ik betwijfel of ik in staat zal zijn deze geschiedenis op schrift te 
stellen, zonder dat bitterheid mijn woorden zal kleuren. Een bitterheid waarvan ik meende 
dat deze reeds lang was gestorven. Ik verkeerde in de stellige overtuiging dat ik alle wrok 
had afgelegd, maar zodra mijn pen het papier raakt, vloeit met de inkt van 
zeezwamvlokken de gekwetstheid van de jongeling mee, zodat elke zorgvuldig 
39
=== PDFPAGE 40 ===
neergeschreven, zwarte letter verandert in een korst, waaronder een oude, bloedende 
wond schuilgaat. 
Zowel Fedwren als Patience raakten steeds weer zo in vervoering, wanneer het idee van 
een geschreven geschiedenis van de Zes Hertogdommen ter sprake kwam, dat ik mezelf 
ervan wist te overtuigen dat het schrijven daarvan de moeite van de inspanning waard zou 
zijn. Ik hield mezelf voor dat een dergelijke bezigheid mijn gedachten zou afleiden van 
mijn pijn en me zou helpen de dagen door te komen. Maar bij elke historische gebeurtenis 
die mijn pen zou moeten beschrijven, ontwaken slechts de schimmen van eenzaamheid 
en verlies die sluimeren in mijn geest. Ik vrees dat ik dit werk nooit zal kunnen voltooien, 
tenzij ik eerst in het reine ben gekomen met alles wat me heeft gevormd en gemaakt tot 
wie ik ben. En dus begin ik telkens opnieuw, en telkens weer kom ik tot de slotsom dat ik 
mijn eigen vroegste geschiedenis beschrijf in plaats van het ontstaan van mijn land. 
Zonder te weten tot wie ik me daarbij richt. Mijn leven was een web van geheimen. 
Geheimen die zelfs nu bij anderen nog niet veilig zouden zijn. Moet ik ze aan dit prachtige 
papier toevertrouwen, wetend dat er slechts vuur en vernietiging uit kunnen voortkomen? 
Misschien.
Mijn herinneringen gaan terug tot mijn zesde jaar. Daarvoor is er niets, slechts een peilloze 
diepte waarin mijn geest nooit heeft weten door te dringen, hoezeer ik ook mijn best heb 
gedaan. Voor die dag op Maansoog is er niets. Maar dan ineens beginnen de 
herinneringen, met een overrompelende helderheid en gedetailleerdheid. Soms lijken ze 
bijna te compleet, en ik vraag me af of de beelden die ik zie, wel herinneringen zijn. Of ze 
werkelijk uit mijn geheugen naar boven komen, dan wel het product zijn van de talloze 
mailen dat ik mijn geschiedenis en de reden van mijn aanwezigheid aan het hof heb horen 
bespreken door keukenmeiden, koksmaten en staljongens. Misschien is de 
gedetailleerdheid van mijn herinneringen niets anders dan het resultaat van de gretigheid, 
waarmee een kind van zes alles om zich heen in zich opneemt. Of zou de volledigheid van 
de beelden die ik me herinner een eerste teken zijn van het Vermogen? Een duidelijk 
bewijs van een gave die een mens later doet grijpen naar middelen om de verslaving 
daaraan beheersbaar te houden; middelen die op hun beurt weer leiden tot andere 
kwellingen en verlangens. Dat laatste is heel goed mogelijk, misschien zelfs waarschijnlijk. 
Ik kan alleen maar hopen dat het niet zo is.
De herinnering is bijna tastbaar: de kille grijsheid van de wegstervende dag, de 
onbarmhartige regen, de ijzige kasseien van de straten in de vreemde stad, zelfs de 
eeltige ruwheid van de reusachtige hand die me meetrok. Soms denk ik er met 
verwondering aan terug. Het was een harde, ruwe hand die me in zijn greep gevangen 
40
=== PDFPAGE 41 ===
hield, maar tegelijkertijd warm en niet onvriendelijk. De hand behoedde me voor uitglijden 
op de bevroren keien, maar zorgde er tegelijkertijd voor dat ik mijn lot niet kon ontgaan. De 
hand was even onvermurwbaar als de kille, grijze regen die een dun laagje ijs legde over 
de grinderige weg van aangestampte sneeuw en bevroren modder naar de reusachtige 
deuren van het fort, dat zich als een burcht boven de stad verhief. De deuren waren hoog, 
niet alleen voor een jongetje van zes. Zo hoog dat ze moeiteloos een reus zouden kunnen 
doorlaten; zo hoog dat zelfs de lange, magere man die boven me uittorende, er nietig door 
leek. Bovendien kwamen ze me vreemd voor, hoewel ik niet zou weten wat voor soort 
deur - of wat voor type behuizing - me vertrouwd zou hebben geleken. Ik weet alleen dat 
deze rijk bewerkte en aan zwarte, ijzeren scharnieren opgehangen deuren, versierd met 
de kop van een hertebok en een glimmend koperen klopper, in niets leken op de dingen 
die tot op dat moment deel hadden uitgemaakt van mijn bestaan. Ik herinner me nog dat ik 
doornat was, en dat ik koude benen en voeten had. Maar ik herinner me niet dat ik lange 
tijd door de late winterkou had gelopen, of dat ik gedragen was. Nee, de herinneringen 
beginnen allemaal daar, voor de poort van die burcht, met mijn knuistje in de grote hand 
van die grote man. Het lijkt wel het begin van een poppenkastvoorstelling. Zo zie ik het nu 
voor me: de gordijntjes gaan open, en daar staan we dan.
De oude man die mijn hand in de zijne hield, hief de koperen klopper en liet deze 
dreunend neerkomen; een keer, twee keer, drie keer. Toen klonk er een stem. Niet vanuit 
de burcht, maar van ergens achter ons, op het pad waarover we waren gekomen. ‘Vader... 
Alstublieft,’ smeekte een vrouwenstem. Ik draaide me om, maar het was weer gaan 
sneeuwen: een kanten sluier van witte vlokken die aan wimpers en mouwen bleven 
hangen. Ik kan me niet herinneren dat ik iemand zag. Wat ik wel weet, is dat ik niet 
worstelde om los te komen uit de greep van de oude man, of luidkeels ‘Moeder, moeder’ 
riep. In plaats daarvan bleef ik slechts toeschouwer terwijl binnen in de burcht het geluid 
van laarzen weerklonk, en van een grendel die opzij werd geschoven.
Een laatste kreet van de vrouw. De woorden klinken nog altijd duidelijk in mijn herinnering, 
en weer hoor ik de wanhoop in een stem die ik nu jong zou noemen. ‘Vader, alstublieft, ik 
smeek u.’ De hand die de mijne vasthield, trilde even. Maar ik zal nooit weten of dat was 
van woede of van een andere emotie. Vlug als een kraai die een stukje brood oppikt, 
bukte de oude man zich naar een klomp bevroren modder. Razend en met grote kracht, 
maar zonder een woord te zeggen, smeet hij de klomp ijs de nacht in. Verschrikt dook ik 
ineen, maar ik herinner me niet dat ik een kreet hoorde, of een geluid alsof het brok ijs 
doel trof. Wat ik me wel herinner, is dat op dat moment de deuren openzwaaiden. De man 
moest haastig een stap achteruit doen, en trok mij mee.
41
=== PDFPAGE 42 ===
Er is nog iets dat ik me duidelijk herinner: de man die de deuren opendeed, was geen 
bediende, zoals ik had kunnen denken wanneer ik dit verhaal alleen maar van horen 
zeggen had. Nee, ik herinner me een gewapende man: een al wat oudere krijgen met een 
buik die verried dat hij van lekker eten hield. Geen welgemanierde huisknecht. Hij nam ons 
zwijgend en enigszins wantrouwend op en wachtte af tot we hem de reden van onze 
komst zouden onthullen. 
Passage 2
Er stond nog altijd een harde wind. Mijn zilte, natte kleren plakten aan mijn lichaam en 
schuurden over mijn huid. Ik had honger, ik had het koud en ik was moe. Maar ik dacht 
niet aan opgeven. Mijn blikken gingen waakzaam heen en weer, ik hield mijn oren 
gespitst. Verlaten en donker lag de weg voor me, maar het volgende moment doemden er 
twee mannen op uit de duisternis. Toen ik me met een ruk omdraaide, zag ik dat er ook 
een achter me stond. Door het geklots van de golven had ik hun voetstappen niet 
gehoord. Terwijl de maan weer achter een wolk verdween, werd de afstand tussen ons 
steeds kleiner. Ik duwde mijn rug tegen de muur van een pakhuis, hield mijn stok in 
gereedheid en wachtte af.
Zwijgend en ineengedoken kwamen ze op me af. Waarom schreeuwden ze niet? Waarom 
riepen ze hun makkers niet? Maar deze mannen jaagden niet als groep. Ze hoopten ieder 
voor zich dat de anderen het gevecht niet zouden overleven, zodat ze de buit voor zich 
alleen hadden. Dit waren geen Kapers, dit waren ontzielden.
Een gruwelijke kilte nam bezit van me. Het minste of geringste geluid zou de Kapers 
waarschuwen. Dus als de ontzielden me niet doodden, zouden de Rode Kapers het wel 
doen. Maar als alle wegen leiden naar de dood, is vluchten zinloos. Ik moest de dingen 
nemen zoals ze kwamen. Ze waren met hun drieën. Een had een mes. Maar ik had een 
stok, en ik wist hoe ik die moest gebruiken. Ze waren mager, haveloos en minstens zo 
hongerig en koud als ik. In een van hen herkende ik de vrouw van de vorige avond. 
Zwijgend sloten ze me in. Ze deden het stilletjes, dus ik vermoedde dat ook zij zich bewust 
waren van de Kapers in de nabijheid. Ik dacht maar liever niet na over de wanhoop die ze 
moesten voelen omdat ze me niettemin aanvielen. Maar een tel later vroeg ik me af of 
ontzielden wel zoiets als wanhoop of andere gevoelens kenden. Misschien waren ze te 
versuft om het gevaar te beseffen.
Maar meteen daarna werd alle esoterische kennis die ik van Chade had opgestoken... Alle 
uitgekiende vechterstactieken van Hod... Kortom, alles wat ik had geleerd, als door de 
42
=== PDFPAGE 43 ===
wind weggevoerd. Want terwijl de eerste van mijn belagers binnen het bereik van mijn stok 
kwam voelde ik Roetjes zwakke warmte uit mijn geest wegebben. ‘Roetje!’ fluisterde ik in 
een wanhopige bede dat hij bij me zou blijven. Maar ik zag alleen zijn staartje nog 
bewegen in een laatste poging om te kwispelen. Toen knapte de draad, de vonk doofde en 
ik was alleen. 
Een zwarte golf van kracht sloeg als een vlaag van krankzinnigheid door me heen. Ik 
stormde naar voren en boorde het uiteinde van mijn stok in het gezicht van een van de 
twee mannen. In een vloeiende beweging trok ik de stok weer terug en haalde ik uit naar 
de vrouw; met zoveel kracht dat de onderste helft van haar gezicht werd weggeslagen. 
Terwijl ze viel sloeg ik haar nogmaals, alsof ik met een visknuppel een haai te lijf ging, 
gevangen in een net. Toen kwam de derde op me af. Mijn stok kon ik niet gebruiken. 
Daarvoor was hij al te dichtbij. Dus ik gooide mijn wapen weg en ging hem met mijn blote 
handen te lijf. Zijn benige lichaam verspreidde een afschuwelijke geur. Toen ik hem op zijn 
rug had gewerkt stonk zijn adem die langs mijn gezicht streek naar dood vlees. De manier 
waarop ik hem met mijn vuisten en nagels bewerkte, was nauwelijks menselijk te noemen. 
Maar ze hadden me bij de stervende Roetje vandaan gehouden, dus het kon me niet 
schelen wat ik hem aandeed, zolang het maar pijnlijk was. Ik sleepte zijn gezicht over de 
keien, duwde mijn duim in zijn oog. Hij zette zijn tanden in mijn pols en klauwde mijn wang 
tot bloedens toe open. Toen hij eindelijk verslapte in mijn worggreep, sleepte ik hem naar 
de muur langs de haven en gooide ik zijn lichaam van de rotsen.
Hijgend en met gebalde vuisten loerde ik in de richting van de Kapers. Ik daagde hen bijna 
uit tot een gevecht, maar de nacht was stil. Het geklots van de golven, de wind en het 
zachte gereutel van de stervende vrouw waren de enige geluiden. Een gevoel van leegte 
nam bezit van me en verdreef mijn krankzinnige woede.
Passage 3
Ik was net bezig de verpakking nog een laatste keer te controleren, toen de nar 
binnenkwam.
‘Ik heb iets voor je.’
Ik draaide me om. Hij stond in de deuropening met een leren buidel. ‘Wat is dat?’ Ik deed 
mijn best de bloemen en de pop niet in mijn stem te laten doorklinken. 
‘Zeepruimen.’
Ik trok mijn wenkbrauwen op. ‘Een purgeermiddel als huwelijksgeschenk? Misschien 
vinden sommigen dat gepast, maar de kruiden die ik meeneem, kunnen in de bergen 
geplant en gekweekt worden. Dus ik denk niet...’
43
=== PDFPAGE 44 ===
‘Het is geen huwelijksgeschenk. Het is voor jou.’
Ik accepteerde de buidel met gemengde gevoelens. Zeepruimen waren een uitzonderlijk 
krachtig purgeermiddel. ‘Dank je wel. Maar ik heb meestal geen last van reisziekte en ...’
‘Je loopt ook meestal geen gevaar om te worden vergiftigd.’
‘Probeer je me iets duidelijk te maken?’ Ik probeerde mijn stem luchtig en nonchalant te 
laten klinken. 
‘Alleen dat je er verstandig aan doet om licht te eten, of beter nog, om helemaal niets te 
eten dat je niet zelf hebt klaargemaakt.’
‘Bij alle festiviteiten?’
‘Nee. Alleen bij de festiviteiten die je wilt overleven.’ Hij draaide zich om en wilde 
weglopen.
‘Neem me niet kwalijk,’ zei ik haastig. ‘Ik wilde niet nieuwsgierig zijn. Maar ik was naar je 
op zoek... En ik had het zo warm... En de deur was niet op slot, en dus ben ik naar binnen 
gegaan.’
Hij stond met zijn rug naar me toe. ‘En, vond je het vermakelijk?’
‘Ik...’ Ik wist niet wat ik moest zeggen, of hoe ik hem ervan moest overtuigen dat wat ik had 
gezien bij mij veilig was. Hij deed twee stappen de gang op en wilde de deur al 
dichttrekken. ‘Ik wou dat ik ook een kamer had die zo duidelijk mijn stempel droeg. Dan 
zou ik hem ook geheim houden,’ flapte ik eruit.
De deur bleef een handbreed open staan. ‘Neem mijn woorden ter harte. Misschien lukt 
het je dan de reis te overleven. Wanneer je probeert je te verplaatsen in iemand 
beweegredenen, moet je altijd goed voor ogen houden dat je zijn tarwe niet met jouw 
schepel moet meten. Het zou best eens kunnen zijn dat hij heel andere maatstaven 
hanteert.’ De deur viel dicht en de nar was verdwenen. Maar na die raadselachtige, 
verwarrende woorden kwam ik tot de conclusie dat hij me mijn overtreding had vergeven.
 Met tegenzin stopte ik de zeepruimen in mijn wambuis en wierp ik een laatste blik 
op mijn kamer. Mevrouw Gezwind had mijn spullen gepakt, omdat ze bang was dat ik mijn 
nieuwe kleren niet zorgvuldig genoeg zou behandelen. Het was me opgevallen dat de 
doorgestreepte hertebok op mijn borst was vervangen door een hertebok met zijn kop 
gebogen, klaar voor de aanval. ‘Opdracht van Veritas,’ was alles wat ze zei toen ik ernaar 
vroeg. ‘Ik vind dit mooier dan de doorgestreepte hertebok, en jij?’
 ‘Ja dat zal wel,’ zei ik. Daarmee was het onderwerp afgedaan. Een naam en een 
wapen. Ik knikte peinzend, nam mijn kist met kruiden en perkamentrollen op mijn schouder 
en liep de trap af om me bij de stoet te voegen. 
44
=== PDFPAGE 45 ===
 Terwijl ik de trap afdaalde kwam Veritas me tegemoet. Aanvankelijk herkende ik 
hem nauwelijks, want hij liep als een sombere, oude man. Pas toen ik een stap opzij deed 
om hem te laten passeren herkende ik hem. Zijn kleren slobberden om hem heen en zijn 
borstelige, donkere haar begon te verkleuren tot peper-en-zout. Hij glimlachte afwezig, 
maar alsof er ineens een gedachte bij hem opkwam, legde hij zijn hand op mijn arm. 
‘Je gaat naar het Bergrijk? Voor de eerste fase van de huwelijksplechtigheid?’
‘Ja.’
‘Wil je iets voor me doen, jongen?’
‘Natuurlijk.’ Ik was geschokt door de gebroken klank van zijn stem. 
‘Doe een goed woordje voor me bij de prinses. Ik vraag je niet om te liegen. Maar probeer 
me niet al te slecht af te schilderen. Ik heb altijd gedacht dat je me welgezind was.’ Hij liep 
alweer door.
‘Dat is ook zo,’ zei ik tegen zijn rug. ‘Dat ben ik ook, heer.’ Maar hij draaide zich niet meer 
om.
 Op de binnenplaats was het een drukte van belang. Mensen en dieren krioelden 
door elkaar heen. Deze keer zou er niet met wagens worden gereisd. De bergwegen 
waren berucht om hun slechte conditie, dus met het oog op snelheid was er gekozen voor 
lastdieren. Het koninklijke gevolg mocht tenslotte niet te laat komen voor de bruilloft. Het 
was al erg genoeg dat de bruidegom er niet bij zou zijn.
 De kudden waren al dagen eerder op pad gestuurd. Naar verwachting zou de reis 
twee weken in beslag nemen. Ik controleerde of de cederhouten kist goed was 
vastgesjord en liep toen naar Zwartvoet. Ondanks alle voorbereidingen maakte de stoet 
een chaotische indruk. Te midden van alle drukte ontdekte ik Sevrens, Regaals 
persoonlijke bediende. Regaal had hem een maand geleden teruggestuurd naar de 
Hertenhorst, met gedetailleerde instructies over de gewaden die hij nodig had. Sevrens 
liep nerveus achter Manus aan, die een ongeduldige indruk maakte. Toen mevrouw 
Gezwind me de laatste aanwijzingen had gegeven over de zorg voor mijn nieuwe 
kledingstukken, had ze verteld dat Sevrens zoveel nieuwe kleren meenam, compleet met 
hoeden en accessoires, dat er drie lastdieren nodig waren om ze te dragen. Ik 
veronderstelde dat de zorg voor de dieren aan Manus was toegewezen, want hoewel 
Sevrens een uitstekende bediende was, kon hij slecht met dieren overweg. Rowd, 
Regaals manusje-van-alles, liep in zijn volle lengte achter het tweetal aan. Nors en 
ongeduldig, met op zijn schouders een houten kist. Misschien kwam het door dit extra stuk 
bagage dat Sevrens zo geagiteerd was.
45