SFE: Encyclopedia of Fantasy (1997) – Lindholm, Megan 

 Home 

 About us 

 Random 

 Contact 

 Donate 

 All entries 

 Themes 

 People 

 Media 

 Culture 

 News 

 Search all entries 
 Checklist titles Art 
 Author 
 Award 
 Character 
 Comics 
 Community 
 Critic 
 Editor 
 Fan 
 Film 
 Game 
 House Name 
 International 
 Music 
 People (media) 
 Poet 
 Prelim 
 Publication 
 Publisher 
 Radio 
 Theatre 
 Theme 
 Translator 
 TV 

 Search SFE 
 Search EoF 

 Omit cross-reference entries 

 Encyclopedia of Fantasy (1997) 
 Lindholm, Megan

 Tagged: Author. 

 Working name of US writer Margaret Astrid Lindholm Ogden (1952- ), who began her career with the conventional Windsingers trilogy: Harpy's Flight ( 1983 ), The Windsingers ( 1984 ) and The Limbreth Gate ( 1984 ), assembled as The Windsingers (omni 1986 UK); a belated sequel was Luck of the Wheels ( 1989 ). The Urban Fantasy The Wizard of the Pigeons ( 1986 ) was the work that brought Lindholm wider attention: the Wizard of the title is a magically talented Vietnam veteran living among the street people of Seattle. This success was followed by the Prehistoric Fantasy The Reindeer People ( 1988 ) and its sequel Wolf's Brother ( 1988 ), assembled as A Saga of the Reindeer People (omni 1989 ). Cloven Hooves ( 1991 ) is an engaging singleton, and Gypsy ( 1992 ), with Steven Brust, is another venture into a contemporary urban setting. Adopting the pseudonym Robin Hobb, Lindholm launched the Farseer trilogy of Dynastic Fantasies with Assassin's Apprentice ( 1995 UK) and Royal Assassin ( 1996 UK). A restless and varied fantasist, Lindholm possesses real talents which may be coming into full focus in the latest trilogy. [DP]

 other works: Alien Earth ( 1992 ), sf; The Silver Lady and the Fortyish Man ( 1994 chap).

 Margaret Astrid Lindholm Ogden

 links 

 Encyclopedia of Fantasy 

 List all EoF entries

 Show a random EoF entry

 Incoming links, who wrote it, etc

 Entry categories: Prelim | Art | Author | Award | Character | Comics | Community | Editor | Film | Game | International | Music | Publication | Radio | Theme | TV | Xref 

 This digital version of the Encyclopedia of Fantasy ( 1997 ) edited by John Clute and John Grant was prepared in 1999 and has not been significantly updated .

 SFE Special Features 
 Latest entries; latest updates 

 Recent deaths

 Anniversaries; also Timeline 

 SFE Picture Gallery; What’s New 

 Affiliate settings

 Show a random SFE entry
 Bar charts, awards and more

 Search help | RSS feed | Encyclopedia of Fantasy 

 Connect with SFE 

 Donate towards SFE expenses 

 Send email feedback to the SFE editors 

 SFE on Substack 

 SFE on BlueSky 

 John Clute on Twitter [X] 

 Follow @john_clute 

 SFE on Twitter [X] 

 Follow @sfencyclopedia 

 SFE on Facebook 

 John Clute on Facebook 

 SFE on Mastodon 

 x

 This website uses cookies. More information here . Accept Cookies 

 Website by Ansible Editions

 Site and SFE content © 2011-2026 John Clute & David Langford