For compliance with applicable privacy laws:

 Are you between 13-15 years old?

 No 
 Yes 

 The Meticulous Character Details of Robin Hobb | Tor.com 

 Tor.com 

 Science fiction. Fantasy. The universe. And related subjects.

 Main menu

 Skip to content 

 Fiction 

 Series 

 Publishing 

 Newsletter 

 Search 

 Search 

 Log In 

 Register 

 writers on writing 

 The Meticulous Character Details of Robin Hobb 

 Natasha Pulley 

 Tue Mar 22, 2022 2:00pm 

6 comments 
 8 Favorites [+] 

 Golden Fool is the second book of Robin Hobb’s Tawny Man Trilogy. It’s about a retired assassin, Fitz, and his best friend, the eponymous Fool. All three books are narrated in first person, by Fitz. I know that there are endless assassin narrators in other books who tend to be snarky and far too cool. They wear unnecessary buckles. Fitz isn’t cool at all.

 He is lonely, neurotic, occasionally selfish, funny in an arid sort of way and worried about being middle aged. The Fool, meanwhile, is a histrionic clairvoyant. He won’t say if he’s really a man or a woman, how old he is, or even much about where he’s from. He plays endless roles and although he is, really, Fitz’s only friend, he has lives upon lives that Fitz isn’t allowed to see, full of people he doesn’t know.

 There’s an unobtrusive moment about halfway through the book. It happens just before a colossal fight, sparked by a misunderstanding about some flowers. The Fool thinks Fitz left them for him, but in fact they’re from a garden maid we never really meet. But nobody just says ‘it was Garetha the garden maid’, which would have been the narratively efficient thing to do. Far more realistically—they live in a castle with hundreds of people in it—neither of them quite know who she is and they have to work it out between them.

 “The garden woman. She is about your age. Freckles on her face and arms. Hair the colour of clean straw.”

 I called the woman’s image back into my mind. “Freckles, yes. Her hair is light brown, not gold.”

 He clenched his eyes shut. “Then it must have darkened as she grew older.”

 That Fitz goes straight into pugnacious pedantry is in itself very true to life. He’s annoyed and becoming more annoyed the longer he has to spend working out who this irrelevant woman is. What’s brilliant, though, is that he does it over straw. He grew up in stables and now he’s having to work as a manservant. The Fool, however, was the King’s jester and now lives rather the high life as a wealthy nobleman. He has no business whatsoever with straw. In the face of everything they’re really fighting about, Fitz is snatching back one image that belongs to him. It says volumes about both of them.

 This trilogy has dragons in it, and prophets, and sweeping landscapes, but it has these pin-sharp moments too. Fitz is one of the most meticulously imagined characters I’ve read, in one of the most meticulously imagined worlds. The details make the books into breezeblocks, each one coming, I think, to at least six hundred pages. Honestly, I wish they were all twice as long.

 Originally published July 2015.

 Buy The Kingdoms from:

 Natasha Pulley , the author of The Watchmaker of Filigree Street, The Bedlam Stacks , and The Lost Future of Pepperharrow, studied English literature at Oxford University and earned a creative writing M.A. at the University of East Anglia. She lives in Bristol, England.

 Share:
 Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) 
 Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window) 
 Click to share on Tumblr (Opens in new window) 
 Click to share on Pinterest (Opens in new window) 

 citation 

 characterization Fantasy Fitz and the Fool reruns Robin Hobb Tawny Man Trilogy writers on writing 

 Read an Excerpt From Sun of Blood and Ruin 

 Review: Somewhere in the Deep by Tanvi Berwah 

 Elantris Reread: Chapters Fifty-One and Fifty-Two 

 Read an Excerpt From Disciples of Chaos 

 Back to the top of the page 

6 Comments 

 skip to newest 
 skip to unread 

 More Comments 
 Check for New Comments 

 This post is closed for comments.

 Latest Posts

 Vanessa Armstrong 
 Author Terry Bisson Passes Away at Age 81 
 3 days ago 

 Mariely Lares 
 Read an Excerpt From Sun of Blood and Ruin 
 3 days ago 

 Vanessa Armstrong 
 Humanity Isn’t Doing So Well In Halo Season 2 Trailer 
 3 days ago 

 Mahvesh Murad 
 Colonial Creatures: Somewhere in the Deep by Tanvi Berwah 
 3 days ago 

 Vanessa Armstrong 
 Abigail Trailer Reveals the Apparent Bloodsucking Side of Being A Child Ballerina 
 3 days ago 

 Molly Templeton 
 The Last of Us Has Found Its Dina and Jesse 
 3 days ago 

 Alissa Burger 
 Not So Happy New Year: R.L. Stine’s The New Year’s Party 
 3 days ago 

 New in Series

 Elantris Reread: Chapters Fifty-One and Fifty-Two 

 Bet You Didn’t Know You Could Get Into This Much Trouble Using Calculus, Redux: Algernon Blackwood’s “A Victim of Higher Space” 

 Ain’t Nothin’ But a Family Thing — Blue Beetle 

 5 Books About Regretting That Cult You Joined 

 Star Trek: Enterprise Rewatch: “Demons” 

 Reading Winter’s Heart (Part 6) 

 Terry Pratchett Book Club: Wintersmith , Part III 

 all series 

 Recent Comments
 Jeff Wright on Bet You Didn’t Know You Could Get Into This Much Trouble Using Calculus, Redux: Algernon Blackwood’s “A Victim of Higher Space” 5 hours ago 
 Yale Strom on A Questionable View of Science: Stowaway to the Mushroom Planet 6 hours ago 
 chip137 on Fake Candidates, Invented Enemies: Five Fraudulent Personas in Classic SF 10 hours ago 
 AlanBrown on What If Marvel’s What If…? Season 2 Gave Us Four Great Episodes, and Five OK Ones? 13 hours ago 
 Carl on Elantris Reread: Chapters Fifty-One and Fifty-Two 13 hours ago 
 Kikishua on Six Sci-Fi Femme Fatales I Would Like To Take Out for a Nice Steak Dinner 13 hours ago 
 Kikishua on K.J. Parker Delivers a Strong Sequel With Saevus Corax Captures the Castle 14 hours ago 
 jaimebabb on Star Trek: Enterprise Rewatch: “Demons” 14 hours ago 
 davep1 on Elantris Reread: Chapters Fifty-One and Fifty-Two 17 hours ago 
 J.U.N.O on Terry Pratchett Book Club: Mort , Part III 18 hours ago 
 more comments 

 About 

 Submissions 

 Advertise 

 Archive 

 Search 

Follow Tor.com 

 Twitter 

 Facebook 

 Instagram 

 RSS 

Follow Tor.com Germany 

 Tor Germany Home 

 Twitter 

 Facebook 

 Instagram 

 Privacy Policy 

 Your Privacy Choices 

 Ads and Cookies 

 Terms of Use 

 Contact 

 © 2024 Macmillan | All stories, art, and posts are the copyright of their respective authors 
 Back to top 

Our Privacy Notice has been updated to explain how we use cookies, which you accept by continuing to use this website. To withdraw your consent, see Your Choices .