
 Official HBO Press Release — Dothraki
Dothraki
Dothraki language and culture, from HBO's Game of Thrones
home
archives
about
Press release audio
 →
Official HBO Press Release
April 12th, 2010 | 
Press
EXPERT CREATES LANGUAGE FOR NEW HBO SERIES GAME OF THRONES
David J. Peterson, an expert language creator from the Language Creation Society (LCS), has been chosen to create the Dothraki language for 
HBO
‘s upcoming fantasy series 
Game of Thrones
, based on the book series 
A Song of Ice and Fire
 by 
George R.R. Martin
.
When 
Game of Thrones
 executive producers David Benioff and D.B. Weiss needed a language for the Dothraki, Martin’s race of nomadic warriors, they turned to the Language Creation Society. The LCS solicited and vetted a number of proposals for the Dothraki language from its pool of experts, with Peterson’s proposal ultimately being selected by the 
Game of Thrones
 production team.
Peterson drew inspiration from George R.R. Martin’s description of the language, as well as from such languages as Russian, Turkish, Estonian, Inuktitut and Swahili. However, the Dothraki language is no mere hodgepodge, babble or pidgin. It has its own unique sound, an extensive vocabulary of more than 1,800 words and a complex grammatical structure.
“In designing Dothraki, I wanted to remain as faithful as possible to the extant material in George R.R. Martin’s series,” says Peterson. “Though there isn’t a lot of data, there is evidence of a dominant word order [subject-verb-object], of adjectives appearing after nouns, and of the lack of a copula [‘to be’]. I’ve remained faithful to these elements, creating a sound aesthetic that will be familiar to readers, while giving the language depth and authenticity. My fondest desire is for fans of the series to look at a word from the Dothraki language and be unable to tell if it came from the books or from me—and for viewers not even to realize it’s a constructed language.”
“We’re tremendously excited to be working with David and the LCS,” says producer D.B. Weiss. “The language he’s devised is phenomenal. It captures the essence of the Dothraki, and brings another level of richness to their world. We look forward to his first collection of Dothraki love sonnets.”
Did you know? (Hash yer ray nesi?)
The name for the Dothraki people—and their language—derives from the verb “dothralat” (“to ride”).
The Dothraki have four different words for “carry,” three for “push,” three for “pull” and at least eight for “horse,” but no word that means “please” or “follow.”
The longest word in Dothraki is “athastokhdeveshizaroon,” which means “from nonsense.”
The words for “related,” “weighted net,” “eclipse,” “dispute,” “redhead,” “oath,” “funeral pyre,” “evidence,” “omen,” “fang” and “harvest moon” all have one element in common: “qoy,” the Dothraki word for “blood.”
Dothraki for “to dream”—”thirat atthiraride”—literally means “to live a wooden life”; in Dothraki, “wooden” (“ido”) is synonymous with “fake.”
The word for “pride”—”athjahakar”—is derived from “jahak,” the traditional long braid worn by Dothraki warriors (“lajaki”).
More information about the Dothraki language (and their love poems) will be released over the course of the series.
Share
|
Discuss this on the Dothraki forum
Search
dothraki@conlang.org
Links
About
Dothraki discussion forum
Facebook fan page
Language Creation Society
Official Unofficial Dothraki Fan Site
Press
Professional language creation services
Recent Posts
More Conlangery
Chicon 7
Dothraki on Conlangery
Conlang Workshop at Tri-Wyrd
Recent Interviews
BayCon 2012
Dothraki on Stupid For Game of Thrones
CNN’s The Next List, April 8th, 2 EDT
Reddit AMA
CNN’s The Next List and Reddit
Archives
September 2012
 (1)
August 2012
 (1)
June 2012
 (3)
May 2012
 (1)
April 2012
 (2)
March 2012
 (2)
February 2012
 (2)
January 2012
 (1)
December 2011
 (1)
September 2011
 (1)
August 2011
 (3)
July 2011
 (1)
April 2011
 (3)
January 2011
 (1)
December 2010
 (1)
October 2010
 (1)
August 2010
 (1)
July 2010
 (1)
June 2010
 (2)
April 2010
 (6)
Meta
Log in
Entries 
RSS
Comments 
RSS
WordPress.org
© Language Creation Society, HBO, and/or George R. R. Martin — 
Copyblogger
 theme design by 
Chris Pearson
