interzone/ss 

£2.75  SCIENCE  FICTION  AND  FANTASY  ^ 


Mad  Scientists! 

Barrington  J.  Bayley 
Geoffrey  A.  Landis 
Mary  Soon  Lee 
Paul  J.  McAuley 
Charles  Stross 


I  \  ar  \  “'f  / 

Launching  July  1995 


Broadsword  is  a  new  quarterly  magazine  specialising  in  fiction, 

AIMING  TO  PROMOTE  FANTASY  LITERATURE  AND  TO  ENCOURAGE  NEW 
AUTHORS  BY  PROVIDING  A  FORUM  IN  WHICH  ALL  WRITERS  MAY  BE  HEARD 


UK  subscriptions:  single  issue  £2.50,  four  issues  (one  year)  £9.00  (all  prices  include  p&p). 
US  subscriptions:  single  issue  $5.00,  four  issues  (one  year)  $18.00. 

Please  send  cheques  or  money  orders  made  payable  to  Dreamscape  International  to: 
Broadsword,  Dreamscape  International,  PO  Box  439A,  Surbiton,  Surrey  KT5  9YR,  UK. 

Submissions  also  welcome,  particularly  short  stories  and  illustrations. 

Please  send  a  self-stamped  addressed  envelope  with  manuscript. 

Dreamscape  International  main  office:  132  Longbridge  Road,  Barking,  Essex  IG11  8SL,  UK. 


Editor  &  Publisher 

David  Pringle 
Deputy  Editor 
Lee  Montgomerie 
Assistant  Editors 
Paul  Annis, 
Andy  Robertson, 
Andrew  Tidmarsh 
Consultant  Editor 
Simon  Ounsley 
Advisory  Editors 
John  Clute, 
Malcolm  Edwards, 
Judith  Hanna 
Graphic  Design  and  Typesetting 
Paul  Brazier 
Subscriptions  Secretary 
Ann  Pringle 
Circulation  Advisers 
The  Unlimited  Dream  Company 


Interzone 

217  Preston  Drove,  Brighton  BN1  6FL, 
United  Kingdom. 
All  subscriptions,  back-issue  orders, 
general  correspondence,  books  for 
review,  and  enquiries  about  advertising 
should  be  sent  to  this  address. 

Subscriptions: 
£30  for  one  year  (12  issues)  in  the  UK. 

Cheques  or  postal  orders  should  be 
crossed  and  made  payable  to  Interzone. 

Overseas  subscriptions  are  £36, 
payable  by  International  Money  Order. 

Payments  may  also  be  made  by 
MasterCard,  Visa  or  Eurocard:  please 
send  your  cardholder’s  name,  initials 
and  address  written  in  block  letters, 
with  card  number,  card  expiry  date  and 
signature.  (Note:  overseas  payments 
will  be  charged  at  the  £  sterling  rate.) 
Alternatively,  American  subscribers 
may  pay  by  dollar  check,  drawn  on  a 
U.S.  bank,  at  $56.  (All  copies  to  other 
continents  are  sent  by  Air  Saver,  i.e. 

accelerated  surface  mail.). 

Lifetime  subscriptions: 
Lifetime  subscriptions:  £300  (UK); 

£360  (overseas);  $560  (USA). 

Back-issues 
of  Interzone  are  available  at  £2.50  each 
in  the  UK 

(£2.80  each  overseas),  postage  included. 
(US  dollar  price:  $5  Air  Saver.) 
All  issues  are  in  print  except  numbers 
1-2,  4-8,  12,  15-18, 20-24. 
Order  them  from  the  address  above. 

Submissions: 
stories,  in  the  2,000-6,000  word  range, 
should  be  sent  singly  and  each  one 
must  be  accompanied  by  a  stamped 
self-addressed  envelope  of  adequate 
size.  Persons  overseas  please  send  a 
disposable  manuscript  (marked  as 
such)  and  two  International  Reply 
Coupons.  We  are  unable  to  reply  to 
writers  who  do  not  send  return  postage. 

No  responsibility  can  be  accepted  for 
loss  or  damage  to  unsolicited  material, 
howsoever  caused.  Submissions  should 
be  sent  to  the  Brighton  address  above. 


interzone 

SCIENCE  FICTION  AND  FANTASY 


No  98  August  1995 

CONTENTS 

Fiction  Features 


6  PAUL  J  McAULEY 

The  True  History  of 
Dr  Pretorius 

Illustrations  by  Russell  Morgan 


22 

33 


CHARLES  STROSS 
Ship  of  Fools 
MARY  SOON  LEE 
Assembly  Line 


Graphic  by  Paul  Brazier 


38 


BARRINGTON  J.  BAYLEY 
The  Island  of 
Dr  Romeau 
/LQ  GEOFFREY  A.  LANDIS 
T  JL  Dark  Lady 
Illustrations  by  Noel  Bateman 


Cover  by  Santos  Garijo 


4  INTERACTION 

Readers’  Letters 


PAUL  J  McAULEY 

interviewed  by 
James  Lovegrove 


29 

30 


DAVID  LANGFORD 
Ansible  Link 

NICK  LOWE  AND 
GARY  DALKIN 


Mutant  Popcorn 

Film  and  TV  Reviews 


CO  PAUL  McAULEY, 

D  A  BRIAN  STABLEFORD, 

CHRIS  MORGAN,  CHRIS  GILMORE, 
JAMES  LOVEGROVE, 

PAUL  BEARDSLEY,  NEIL  JONES, 
PAUL  BRAZIER 

Book  &  Other  Media  Reviews 


Published  monthly.  All  material  is  ©  Interzone,  1995,  on  behalf  of  the  various  contributors 


ISSN  0264-3596 

Printed  by  KP  Litho  Ltd,  Brighton 


Trade  distribution:  Diamond  Magazine  Distribution  Ltd., 
Unit  7,  Rother  Ironworks,  Fishmarket  Road,  Rye, 

East  Sussex  TlN31  7LR  (tel.  01797  225229). 

Bookshop  distribution:  Central  Books, 

99  Wallis  Rd.,  London  E9  5LN  (tel.  0181  986  4854). 


Interaction 


Dear  Editors: 

I  just  finished  reading  Brian 
Stableford’s  two-part  “The  Hunger 
and  Ecstasy  of  Vampires”  in  issues 
91-92,  and  I’m  still  shaking.  Stories 
like  this  justify  my  subscription  until 
the  end  of  the  century.  I  doubt  you  can 
beat  it  as  1995’s  best  story,  but  that  is 
your  big  challenge.  And  let’s  give  the 
Hugo  to  fabulous  Mr  Brian  Stableford! 
Pedro  Miguel  Rocha  Pires 
Lisbon 

Editor:  Dave  Langford  recently  sent  us 
an  internet  review  of  “The  Hunger  and 
Ecstasy  of  Vampires,”  written  by  Evelyn 
C.  Leeper  of  the  USA.  In  part,  she  says: 
“Normally  1  don’t  review  short  fiction 
from  magazines,  but  I’m  willing  to  make 
an  exception  in  this  case.  If  I  don’t,  you 
might  not  realize  you  should  be  nomin¬ 
ating  this  for  a  Hugo  next  year ...  This 
is  a  Hugo-class  novella,  full  of  lyrical 
descriptions,  a  conflict  in  which  both 
sides  have  their  strengths  and  their 
weaknesses...  and  interesting,  three- 
dimensional  characters.  I  know  it  will 
be  hard  to  find  this  in  the  United 
States  (unless  some  far-seeing  company 
decides  to  market  it  as  a  stand-alone 
novella  -  hint,  hint),  so  look  for  it  in 
Glasgow  at  Intersection  if  you’re  there. 
I’ve  just  started  subscribing  to  Inter¬ 
zone,  but  I  can  see  why  it  keeps  making 
the  ballot  for  semi-prozine  when  it 
publishes  stories  of  this  quality.”  It  so 
happens  Brian  Stableford  does  have  a 
story  on  the  Hugo  ballot  this  year:  “Les 
Fleurs  du  Mai”  (from  Asimov’s)  also 
features  Oscar  Wilde  as  a  character 
and  is  typical  of  Stableford  at  his  best 
(well,  near -best  -  we  liked  “Hunger  and 
Ecstasy”  more).  So,  even  if  they  haven’t 
read  that  particular  story,  those  who 
are  attending  the  Glasgow  Worldcon 
in  late  August  have  an  opportunity  to 
vote  for  Brian  if  they  wish.  But  what¬ 
ever  their  particular  tastes  and  choices, 
we  appeal  to  British  and  European 
readers:  don’t  be  reluctant,  please  use 
your  votes! 


Dear  Editors: 

I  would  like  to  congratulate  you  on  the 
effectiveness  and  enjoyability  of  “The 
Ant-Men  of  Tibet”  by  Stephen  Baxter 
in  your  May  1995  issue  (number  95). 
You  probably  intended  the  title  as  a 
satire  on  old  science-fiction  stories,  but 
it  reacted  differently  upon  me.  [The 
choice  of  title  was  the  author’s  -  Ed.] 
When  I  was  young  I  used  to  disparage 
such  titles  as  “Ape-Men  of  Xloti,”  “Devil 
Crystals  of  Arret,”  “Master  Minds  of 
Venus,”  “Winged  Men  of  Orcon,”  “The 
Pygmies  of  Phobos”  and  “The  Human 
Pets  of  Mars”  as  juvenile,  but  your 


use  of  “The  Ant-Men  of  Tibet”  made 
me  reconsider.  I  was  immediately 
drawn  by  the  title.  Then,  when  I  saw 
that  the  cover  actually  pictured  ant- 
men  approaching  a  human  it  intrigued 
my  interest,  as  did  the  interior 
illustration  depicting  the  flora  and 
fauna  of  Luna.  It  had  me  reading  the 
story  before  I  even  thumbed  through 
the  rest  of  the  issue. 

I  enjoyed  it  thoroughly.  In  fact,  I 
would  say  it  ranks  high  among  the 
shared-worlds  stories  that  have  come 
into  vogue  in  recent  years.  I  think  H. 
G.  Wells,  if  living,  would  have  compli¬ 
mented  it  as  a  fitting  sequel  to  The 
First  Men  in  the  Moon.  But  it  also 
convinced  me  that  the  old-time  editors 
were  not  so  far  off  in  their  judgment 
of  the  sales  appeal  of  the  corny  titles 
they  used;  and  that  illustrating  the 
cover  with  a  scene  from  one  of  the 
stories  was  not  such  a  bad  idea.  In  fact, 
I  found  myself  slightly  disappointed 
that  the  protagonist  didn’t  turn  the 
tables  on  the  ant-men.  There  is  some¬ 
thing  to  be  said  for  corn:  it  informs 
your  audience  of  what  you  are  selling. 

I  would  also  like  to  compliment  you 
on  dropping  that  ill-advised  typeface 
[i.e.  issues  88-93  -  Ed.]  and  returning 
to  a  more  readable  one.  When  I  was 
vice-president  of  the  trade  magazine 
Quick  Frozen  Foods,  owned  by  a  giant 
corporation  (British-controlled),  they 
would  periodically  demand  a  redesign 
of  the  magazine  regardless  of  its 
financial  success.  I  can’t  remember  a 
time  when  the  results  were  not  at  the 
very  least  costly  and  often  disastrous. 
Redesign  is  for  magazines  that  are  in 
trouble  or  are  slipping,  not  for  those 
with  a  winning  formula.  All  best. . . 
Sam  Moskowitz 
Newark,  New  Jersey 

Editor:  We’re  delighted  to  hear  from 
sf  scholar  and  editor  Sam  Moskowitz, 
who  has  been  reading  the  stuff  for  over 
60  years  and  no  doubt  wrote  similar 
letters  to  Amazing  and  Astounding 
back  in  the  1930s.  The  main  point  of 
the  redesign  which  commenced  with 
issue  88  (the  Nexus  issue)  was  to  give 
us  more  flexibility,  by  means  of  modern 
computerized  desktop-publishing 
methods.  (It  also  saves  a  little  money!) 
The  old  paste-up  method,  carried  out 
by  a  typesetter  living  on  the  other  side 
of  the  country,  was  terribly  inflexible, 
we  thought  -  all  the  story -headings 
were  monotonously  the  same  (not  that 
we’re  criticizing  the  former  typesetter, 
it’s  just  that  his  method  of  production, 
plus  time  constraints,  didn’t  allow  for 
variety).  But  we  were  never  fully  happy 
with  Paul  Brazier’s  Nexus  typeface, 
and  so  we  decided  to  change  it  with 


effect  from  issue  95  (following  Charles 
Platt’s  one-off  issue  94,  which  had  a 
melange  of  different  type  styles).  We 
hope  most  readers  are  pleased  with  the 
new  larger,  bolder  typeface  -  which  is 
not  in  fact  the  same  as  our  old  (pre¬ 
issue  88)  typeface,  but  closer  to  it. 


Dear  Editors: 

IZ  95  was,  I  thought,  a  nicely  balanced 
issue.  Baxter’s  “The  Ant-Men  of  Tibet” 
was  very  well  written.  Sylvia  Siddall’s 
“Written  in  the  Flesh”  was  good  sf 
and  enjoyable.  Watson’s  “Ahead!”  was 
clever  and  provoking.  Spencer’s  “The 
Crash  Investigator”  was  excellent  no 
matter  from  what  point  of  view  one 
regards  it.  John  Grant’s  “The  Glad 
Who  Sang...”  required  a  rather  more 
receptive  mind  than  mine,  but  I  can 
imagine  it  being  much  liked.  Algis 
Budrys  was  an  interesting  interview 
subject,  and  all  the  departments  were 
well  up  to  the  usual  high  standard. 

As  for  IZ  96,  Alastair  Reynolds’s 
“Byrd  Land  Six”  was  excellent,  very 
enjoyable  and  first-class  sf.  Jones’s 
“Time-Travel  Blues”  was  entertaining, 
and  Brown’s  “A  Prayer  for  the  Dead” 
good-enough  reading.  Di  Filippo’s 
“Big  Eater”  was  too-hard  reading,  and 
Bowkett’s  “The  Gift”  was  not  my  sort. 
But  I’m  not  complaining  -  a  good  issue. 
The  cover  was  quite  beautiful.  I  am  so 
glad  that  the  general  tenor  of  your 
magazine  has  ceased  to  be  so  desper¬ 
ately  depressing  and  hope  that  what  I 
think  to  be  such  an  improvement  will 
be  reflected  by  increased  success. 

E.  R.  James 
Skipton,  North  Yorkshire 


Dear  Editors: 

Number  96  was  an  excellent  issue.  In 
the  past  there  has  been  much  talk  of  a 
standard  Interzone  story  -  depressing 
low  life  and  high  tech  in  a  near-future 
urban  winter.  Eric  Brown’s  “A  Prayer 
for  the  Dead”  strikes  me  as  an  example 
of  another  sort  of  Interzone  story  -  life 
as  it  is  known  in  an  exotic  setting, 
coming  to  an  end  elegiacally. 

The  redesign  is  working  well,  both 
attractive  in  appearance  and  reader- 
friendly.  No  typographical  tricks  for  the 
sake  of  them.  Continue  the  good  work. 
John  Howard 
Oldham,  Lancs. 


Dear  Editors: 

Some  time  ago  Andy  Sawyer  of  the 
Science  Fiction  Foundation  library  at 
Liverpool  University  sent  me  a 
clipping  from  The  Economist,  28th 
January  1995,  page  85.  This  shows 


interzone  August  1995 


the  circulation  by  percentage  of  Editor:  Those  are  unwelcome  figures,  there  a  separate  category  for  it?  In 

fiction  and  non-fiction  in  British  on  the  face  of  it,  hut  I’d  advise  you  to  this  country,  the  huge-selling  Terry 

public  libraries  in  1993-94,  figures  take  the  genre  breakdowns  with  Pratchett  is  virtually  a  category  unto 

derived  from  the  Public  Lending  extreme  caution.  The  figure  of  0.7%  for  himself.  It’s  become  something  of  a 

Right,  which  has  no  counterpart  here  horror  is  very  hard  to  believe:  I  think  truism  that  sf  and  fantasy  together 

in  the  United  States.  Fiction  it  almost  certainly  excludes  the  books  account  for  about  10%  of  fiction  sold  - 

accounted  for  76.8%,  non-fiction  of  Stephen  King  and  Anne  Rice,  and  and  of  that  four-fifths  is  by  Pratchett 

23.2%.  probably  Dean  Koontz.  These  big  (and  clones)!  What  the  Economist 

Of  the  fiction,  science  fiction  bestsellers  tend  to  get  classified  as  figures  do  tell  us  is  what  we  already 

accounted  for  - 1  hope  you’re  sitting  “general”  (which  you  say  accounts  for  know:  namely,  that  “mid-list”  sf, 

down  -  precisely  1.0%,  just  edging  out  19.8%  percent).  There’s  the  rub:  when  labelled  as  science  fiction,  is  dying  in 

westerns  at  0.9%  and  horror  at  0.7%.  novelists  get  to  be  very  successful  they  the  marketplace.  It  is  middle-range 

The  top  fiction  categories  were  general  are  taken  out  of  genre  pigeonholes,  genre  authors  such  as  John  Brunner 

(19.8%),  children’s  (19.1%),  mystery/  certainly  by  their  publishers  and  (see  his  interview,  last  issue)  who  are 

detection  (13.5%)  and  light  romance  probably  by  librarians  too:  they  suffering  in  this  country. 

(13.2%),  with  all  other  categories  in  the  become  “mainstream”  because  they  “Mainstream”  authors  who  happen  to 

single-digit  range.  I  sent  a  letter  to  the  sell  in  mainstream  quantities.  Like-  write  what  we  would  recognize  as  sf 

Library  Journal  asking  if  any  reader  wise,  the  1%  figure  for  sf  will  certainly  (P.  D.  James,  with  Children  of  Men, 

had  any  roughly  equivalent  reader-  exclude  Michael  Crichton’s  Jurassic  and  Robert  Harris,  with  Fatherland, 

ship  figures  for  the  U.S.  With  online  Park  (probably  the  single  most  are  two  recent  bestselling  examples) 

circulation-control  systems  common  successful  novel  of  recent  years  in  any  can  still  do  very  nicely  indeed  -  as  do 

today  in  larger  libraries,  such  data  category),  as  well  as  the  works  of  more  most  forms  of  spinoff  ery,  Star  Trek 

should  be  easy  to  compile.  I’ll  let  you  “literary”  authors  (e.g.  J.  G.  Ballard)  novels.  Dr  Who  novels,  X-Files 

know  if  I  get  any  responses.  who  will  be  classified  as  general.  I  novelizations,  etc,  etc  (and  I  bet  those 

Neil  Barron  would  bet  the  big  “children’s”  category  too  are  not  classified  as  sf,  but  as 

Editor,  (19.1%)  also  includes  a  large  amount  “media  tie-ins”  or  whatever). 

Anatomy  of  Wonder  of  sf  and  fantasy. 

(3rd  edition,  1995)  And  what  about  fantasy?  Was  that  We’d  be  interested  to  receive  other 

Vista,  California  supposed  to  be  subsumed  in  sf,  or  was  people’s  comments  on  this  matter. 


UK  Year  of  Literature  and  Writing  1995 


0  WELCOME  TO  MY  NIGHTMARE 

A  CELEBRATION  OF  HORROR  WRITING 
SWANSEA  27  -  29  OCTOBER  1995 

As  part  of  the  UK  Year  of  Literature  and  Writing  1 995,  Welcome  to  my  Nightmare  will  be  a  celebration 
and  investigation  of  the  nature  of  horror.  Taking  place  at  the  Forte  Posthouse  Hotel  in  Swansea  over 
the  weekend  of  27th  to  29th  October,  events  will  include  debates,  readings  and  writers’  workshops 
featuring  some  of  the  greatest  exponents  of  the  genre.  Guests  confirmed  so  far  include  Ramsey 
Cambell,  Jonathan  Carroll,  Graham  Joyce,  Peter  James,  Lisa  Tuttle,  Garry  Kilworth,  Ben  Leech, 
Mark  Chadbourn  and  Simon  Clark.  Writer  and  radio  presenter  Phil  Rickman  will  also  be  in 
attendance  to  record  a  programme  for  BBC  Radio  Wales  for  transmission  later  in  the  year.  More 
guests  are  still  to  be  confirmed  for  what  will  be  the  major  celebration  of  the  genre  in  1995. 

The  fee  for  attendance  at  all  the  main  events  is  £15  and  room  rates  are  £37.50  in  a  single  room, 
and  £32  in  a  double/twin  room,  prices  per  person  per  night  including  bed  and  breakfast. 

Please  accept  my  cheque  for  £1 5  payable  to  Welcome  To  My  Nightmare  to  confirm  my  attendance  at  the 
Convention  .  Send  to  Steve  Lockley,  14  Cae  Eithin,  Llangyfelach,  Swansea,  SA6  6EZ. 

Name _ _ _ 

Address _ 

_ Teleph  one _ 

I  require  a  twin/double/single  room  for  Friday  27th/Saturday  28th/Sunday  29th  (delete  as  applicable). 
Please  send  me  further  information  about  the  writers’  workshops  (  ) 

For  further  information  telephone  Mike  O’Driscoll  on  01792  403575 


Blwyddyn  Llenyddiaeth  a  Llenydda  y  DG  1995 


To  begin  with,  Larry  Cochrane  thought  that  it 
was  just  another  slice  of  bread-and-butter 
sleaze.  A  contact  in  the  Food  and  Drug  Admin¬ 
istration  tipped  him  to  an  upcoming  investigation 
into  a  Tijuana  Clinic.  The  usual  shit,  peddling  quack 
cures  that  supposedly  delayed  the  onset  of  full  blown 
AIDS,  cut-rate  plastic  surgery,  no-questions-asked 
abortions  and  sex-change  operations.  Added  spice: 
the  clinic’s  owner,  a  certain  Dr  Septimus  Pretorius, 
had  old  Hollywood  connections.  The  kicker:  several 
well-known  AIDS  victims  had  gone  there  for  laetrile 
treatment  of  intractable  Karposi’s,  and  former  TV 
child  star  Bobby  Dupre,  Little  Jim-Bob  in  the  long- 
running  60s  family  TV  saga  Sunrise  Acres,  had  died 
of  acute  septicemia  after  he  was  given  a  complete 
blood  change  to  try  and  cure  his  crack  habit. 

So  far,  so  good.  With  no  complications,  Cochrane 
figured  that  he  would  be  in  and  out  in  a  month,  sell 
it  for  50K  to  one  of  the  glossies,  maybe  earn  twice  as 
much  from  foreign  rights,  not  to  mention  spin-off 
items  that  he  could  get  his  researcher  to  write  for 
the  movie  mags. 

But  within  days  of  starting  the  investigation, 


Cochrane  knew  that  the  story  would  change  his  life. 
Definitely  permanently,  and  maybe  for  ever. 

The  evidence  came  tumbling  out  of  the  archives. 
Through  all  his  long,  colourful  career,  Dr  Pretorius 
had  never  bothered  to  cover  his  tracks.  He’d  left  clues 
scattered  through  newspaper,  film  and  historical 
archives  with  a  recklessness  that  was  either  crazy, 
foolish,  or  incredibly  bold.  Perhaps  he  thought  that 
no  one  would  believe  his  story;  Larry  Cochrane  was 
having  trouble  believing  even  half  of  what  his  long- 
suffering  researcher,  Howard  Zaslow,  had  uncovered. 

Witness: 

A  b&w  photograph  of  white-haired  Dr  Pretorius, 
scrawny  and  bird-like  in  Bermuda  shorts  and  a 
long-sleeved  white  shirt,  playing  polo  with  Charlie 
Chaplin  and  Douglas  Fairbanks. 

A  sepia  photograph,  quartered  by  white  lines  where 
it  had  been  folded,  of  Dr  Pretorius,  looking  scarcely 
younger,  lounging  in  safari  kit  in  a  canvas  chair,  boots 
cocked  on  the  sprawled  corpse  of  a  dog-sized  reptile 
that  one  of  Zaslow’s  pals  at  the  UCLA  Biology  Depart¬ 
ment  was  convinced  was  some  kind  of  dinosaur. 

A  luminous,  sharply  focused  daguerreotype  of  Dr 


Pretorius  in  frock  coat  and  tall  top  hat  standing 
with  a  shorter  man  who  wore  an  even  taller  top  hat 
and  had  his  thumbs  aggressively  tucked  into  the 
pockets  of  his  waistcoat,  both  of  them  looking 
straight  at  the  camera  with  some  great  mechanical 
engine  half  lost  in  shadow  behind  them. 

A  tattered  handbill  advertising,  in  type  that  was  of 
different  sizes  on  every  line,  that  on  June  22nd  1852, 
in  the  town  hall  of  Cheltenham,  Dr  Pretorius,  lately 
of  Geneva,  would  demonstrate  his  electric  elixir  for 
the  countering  of  the  outward  symptoms  of  old  age. 

A  warrant  dated  3rd  August  1809,  stating  that  a 
certain  Dr  Pretorius,  otherwise  known  as  Horace 
Femm,  resident  at  13  Half  Moon  Street,  should  be 
arrested  on  sight,  on  suspicion  of  being  a  French  spy 
and  for  enquiry  into  the  disappearance  of  several 
young  women  known  to  be  common  prostitutes. 

A  facsimile  of  a  handwritten  document,  signed  by 
Elizabeth  the  First  of  England  above  the  imprint  of 
her  seal  in  cracked  wax,  declaring  that  Dr  Pretori- 
ous  of  Cheapside  was  an  agent  invested  with  such 
powers  of  enquiry  as  necessary  to  seek  out  agents  of 
Catholic  powers. 


Another  facsimile,  this  in  Latin  and  dated  1423, 
which  Howie  Zaslow  said  was  the  death  warrant  for 
a  Dr  Praetorius,  a  notorious  practitioner  of  various 
magics  and  malefic  rites;  it  was  from  the  Armand 
Hammer  collection,  and  was  one  of  only  three 
known  holographs  of  Charles  VII  of  France. 

There  was  more,  much  more,  including  a  connec¬ 
tion  with  lisa  Magall,  the  Destroying  Angel  of  the 
Nazi  death  camps,  that  Cochrane  could  use  to  open 
up  Pretorius  like  an  abalone.  But  even  half  of  this 
treasure  trove  was  more  than  enough  to  convince 
Cochrane  that  this  was  even  bigger  than  his  recent 
bestseller  about  the  RoChemCo  disaster  in  Calcutta. 
Dr  Pretorius  had  a  secret  that  could  make  Larry 
Cochrane  rich,  and  more  than  rich.  It  could  enable 
him  to  live  forever. 

Of  course,  Howie  Zaslow  also  knew  the  score,  but 
that  was  a  fixable  detail.  Cochrane  had  a  contact  in 
the  LAPD  who  knew  a  wise  guy.  One  phone  call  and 
10,000  dollars  up  front,  and  it  was  set. 

Armed  with  the  results  of  Zaslow’s  labours, 
Cochrane  started  to  hassle  the  PR  office  of  Dr  Preto- 
rius’s  clinic.  He  got  a  quick  but  inadequate  response: 


THE  TRUE  HISTORY  OF  DR.  PRETORIUS 


Dr  Pretorius  was  willing  to  grant  an  interview,  but 
there  was  some  vagueness  about  the  timing.  “We’re 
undergoing  a  certain  amount  of  reorganization,” 
Ransom,  the  PR  man,  told  Cochrane  over  the  phone, 
and  promised  to  get  back  as  soon  as  he  could. 

So  Cochrane  told  Howie  Zaslow  to  keep  digging  up 
more  dirt,  packed  a  couple  of  changes  of  clothes  with 
his  portable  computer,  modem,  and  the  licensed 
9mm  automatic  he’d  bought  after  the  ‘93  riots,  and 
took  off  in  a  hire  car  for  the  Baja  coast  in  Mexico, 
which  was  where  Dr  Pretorius  had  lived  ever  since 
he  had  set  up  his  clinic  in  the  1920s. 

For  two  days,  Cochrane  sweated  and  chafed  in  a 
roach  motel  with  no  air-conditioning  and  some  kind 
of  lizard  in  the  shower  stall,  in  a  Mexican  fishing  vil¬ 
lage  ten  miles  north  of  Dr  Pretorius’s  estate.  The  vil¬ 
lage  was  a  lost,  God-forsaken  place  where  bearded, 
pot-bellied  refugees  from  the  60s  stood  knee-deep  in 
the  surf,  bombed  on  LSD  or  hash,  or  sat  around  the 
bars  drinking  tequila  from  the  bottle  and  talking 
about  ’Nam.  Cochrane  drove  past  the  estate’s 
impressive  security  fences,  and  made  sure  that  the 
guards  on  the  gate  saw  him  taking  photographs 
with  his  Nikon.  He  talked  to  the  motel’s  owner,  the 
richest  man  in  the  village,  who  said  that  Dr  Preto¬ 
rius  was  a  good  man  who  sponsored  the  Festival  of 
the  Day  of  the  Dead  each  year.  He  phoned  up  the 
estate  office  every  couple  of  hours  to  let  them  know 
he  was  waiting,  and  badgered  Howie  Zaslow  for 
more  dirt,  for  more  on  the  rumours  that  Dr  Preto¬ 
rius  was  about  to  relocate. 

When  Cochrane  left  L.A.,  Zaslow  had  been  close  to 
uncovering  the  crux  of  a  set  of  deals  that  included  sell¬ 
ing  off  the  estate  and  the  private  clinic.  Now,  on  the 
phone,  Zaslow  said,  in  his  slow  thoughtful  way,  that 
Cochrane  should  wait  a  couple  of  days  for  the  fuller 
picture,  the  financial  trail  was  sort  of  complicated. 

Cochrane,  sitting  on  the  edge  of  the  sagging  motel 
bed,  strangling  the  phone  in  one  hand  and  squeezing 
a  sweating  can  of  ice-cold  Coke  in  the  other,  said, 
“Get  your  hands  off  your  chicken-neck  dick,  Howie, 
and  chase  this  down.  That  PR  guy,  Ransom,  told  me 
they  were  relocating,  which  means  soon.  I  need  to 
know  all  about  his  plans.  I  need  an  in.  I  need  you  to 
start  doing  some  real  work.  I’ve  already  waited  long 
enough,  and  this  quaint  fishing  town  outwore  its 
welcome  as  soon  as  I  checked  in.” 

“Another  day,”  Zaslow’s  voice  pleaded.  “Give  me 
time  to  chase  down  the  share  purchases  and  you  can 
hit  Pretorius  really  hard.” 

Cochrane  held  the  can  of  Coke  to  the  back  of  his 
neck  and  counted  to  ten. 

Zaslow  said,  “Are  you  still  there,  boss?” 

“Another  day  and  Pretorius  might  not  be.  There’s 
a  stream  of  trucks  leaving  his  estate.  Maybe  there’s 
another  way  in  if  we  can  get  hard  evidence  about 
this  death  camp  rumour.” 

“That  one’s  no  problem,”  Zaslow  said,  his  voice 
sounding  smug.  He’d  been  working  for  Cochrane  for 
two  years,  and  in  an  odd  way  Cochrane  would  miss 
the  man’s  infuriating  plodding  pedantry.  Zaslow  was 
in  his  30s,  a  pale-skinned  New  Yorker  with  a  summa 


cum  laude  from  Yale  and  the  distracted  air  of  a  per¬ 
petual  research  student.  He  had  an  old-fashioned 
regard  for  facts.  Right  now,  though,  Cochrane  was 
burning  with  impatience.  He  had  a  lot  more  to  lose 
than  some  pissant  story. 

Zaslow  said,  “The  Simon  Weisenthal  Institute 
came  through.  They  have  details  of  his  collaboration 
with  lisa  Magall.  Weird  transplants,  stuff  about  vac¬ 
uum  exposure  that  has  a  link  with  the  V2  rocket 
programme.  I  think  that’s  how  Pretorius  got  into  the 
States,  by  the  way.  The  Army  rounded  up  anyone 
that  had  anything  to  do  with  Peenemiinde  before 
the  Russians  got  there.” 

“Sometimes  you’re  worth  the  money  I  pay  you.  I 
got  to  have  that  stuff.” 

“It’s  coming  from  Austria  by  courier.” 

“I  need  it  now,  fuck-head.  Look,  okay.  Get  it  to  me 
any  way  you  can  as  soon  as  you  can.  This  is  defi¬ 
nitely  kosher?” 

“One  hundred  per  cent.” 

So  Cochrane  phoned  Dr  Pretorius’s  estate  for  the 
fourth  time  that  day,  and  told  Ransom  that  he  had 
documentation  proving  that  his  boss  was  a  Nazi  col¬ 
laborator,  and  would  he  like  to  discuss  it  in  person, 
or  with  the  Israeli  secret  service?  Cochrane  hung  up 
as  Ransom  started  to  bluster,  and  ten  minutes  later 
the  phone  rang.  To  his  amazement,  Pretorius  was  in. 

Early  the  next  morning,  Larry  Cochrane  was  wait¬ 
ing  with  his  holdall  and  portable  computer  outside 
the  village’s  beat-up  cantina.  He  was  wearing  his 
black  Armani  suit;  his  beard  was  trimmed;  his  pony¬ 
tail  was  tied  back  with  a  silver  death’s-head  clasp. 
Cochrane’s  inquisitorial  style  was  modelled  on 
Robert  de  Niro  in  Angel  Heart,  and  generally  its 
brooding  menace  gave  him  an  edge  in  interviews. 

All  in  all,  he  was  feeling  fairly  terrific,  although  he 
was  not  so  carried  away  that  he  had  not  neglected  to 
strap  on  his  shoulder  holster.  This  day,  the  first  in 
what  promised  to  be  a  very  long  life,  was  shaping  up 
pretty  well.  The  sun  was  brassy,  not  yet  at  its  full 
heat.  The  ocean  was  blue,  sparkling  with  whitecaps, 
the  air  so  clear  you  could  see  out  to  the  horizon. 
Except  for  a  couple  of  fishermen  manhandling  their 
boat  up  the  white  beach,  the  village  was  barely 
awake.  An  Americano  was  sleeping  off  last  night’s 
tequila  over  by  the  garbage  cans,  watched  by  a 
piebald  dog  that  trotted  over  and  sat  by  Cochrane  as 
he  drank  a  Coke  in  the  shade  of  the  cantina’s  awning. 

Seven  on  the  dot,  the  limo  swung  off  the  road.  The 
Americano,  hand  out,  stumbled  up  as  the  chauffeur 
loaded  Cochrane’s  bags.  Cochrane  lowered  the 
smoked  glass  window  and  gave  the  bum  the  finger; 
then  the  chauffeur  hit  the  gas. 

Moving  trucks,  two  travelling  together  every  few 
minutes,  heading  north  towards  the  border,  passed 
the  limo  as  it  drove  south.  The  chauffeur  wouldn’t 
answer  Cochrane’s  questions  with  anything  other 
than  a  shrug,  so  Cochrane  watched  MTV  on  the 
inset  TV  and  drank  one  of  Dr  Pretorius’s  Diet  Cokes 
from  the  built-in  fridge. 

The  limo  turned  off  the  highway,  climbed  past  a 
clump  of  coral  trees  and  stopped  while  a  big  brute  of 


interione  August  1995 


PAUL  J.  McAULEY 


a  guard,  sweating  through  his  tan  uniform,  opened 
the  gate  in  the  tall  double  fence.  The  guard  was 
hunchbacked,  and  his  face  was  brutish  and  scarred, 
his  nose  smashed  flat,  his  tiny  eyes  like  piss-holes  in 
snow.  His  blubbery  lips  worked  as  he  waved  the  limo 
through.  The  narrow  road  switch-backed  through 
rolling  pastures  wet  by  sprinklers  that  set  rainbows 
in  the  hot  Mexican  air.  Once,  the  limo  stopped  to  let 
a  couple  of  giraffes  amble  past;  Pretorius  was  sup¬ 
posed  to  have  more  animals  on  his  estate  than  there 
were  in  San  Diego  zoo. 

The  house  itself  came  into  view  only  as  the  limo 
climbed  the  shoulder  of  the  rise:  a  Normandy 
chateau,  with  sharply  ridged  roofs  and  a  spiky  tower, 
standing  in  a  formal  garden  of  lawns  and  clipped 
hedges.  The  limo  rumbled  over  a  wide  cattle  grid 
that  bridged  a  steep-sided  ditch  with  razor  wire  on 
the  outward-facing  slope  —  to  keep  the  animals  out 
of  the  garden,  Cochrane  supposed  -  and  drew  up  by 
the  mansion’s  great  Gothic  door  where  Dr  Preto- 
rius’s  PR  man,  Ransom,  was  waiting. 

Dr  Pretorius  was  ready  to  talk,  Ransom  said,  as 
he  led  Cochrane  around  the  side  of  the  house.  As 
they  walked  across  a  sweep  of  gravel  towards  a  huge 
glasshouse  framed  with  Victorian  ironwork,  palms 
and  tree  ferns  visible  through  the  whitewash  on  its 
panels  of  glass,  Ransom  added,  “Dr  Pretorius  is 
eager  to  tell  the  truth  about  his  life.  He  won’t  hold 
anything  back,  Larry.  You  must  trust  him.” 

But  Cochrane  knew  that  his  job  really  started 
when  the  subjects  of  his  investigations  finally 
agreed  to  talk,  because  they  only  wanted  to  tell  their 
version  of  the  truth,  to  smokescreen,  to  play  the  vic¬ 
tim,  to  shift  the  blame.  Cochrane  had  had  the  presi¬ 
dent  of  RoChemCo  telling  him  that  careless  local 
workers  had  caused  the  explosive  outgassing  in  the 
Calcutta  plant  that  killed  thousands  in  the  sur¬ 
rounding  shanty  town;  the  chairman  of  ScotOil 
blaming  environmentalists  for  regulations  that  had 
distracted  the  crews  of  his  company’s  tankers  and 
led  to  illegal  discharges  killing  millions  of  seabirds 
and  seals  in  the  new  Falklands  oil  fields;  the  Police 
Chief  of  Tupelo  blaming  rioters  for  inciting  police  to 
violence  that  left  more  than  20,  including  a  grand¬ 
mother  and  two  children,  dead  of  shotgun  wounds 
after  cops  opened  up  on  a  group  protesting  compul¬ 
sory  prayer  in  schools. 

Larry  Cochrane  was  a  master  at  the  adversarial 
techniques  of  the  new,  aggressive  breed  of  journalist. 
He  didn’t  agree,  he  didn’t  gently  point  out  the  con¬ 
tradictions  his  interviewees  tangled  around  them¬ 
selves:  he  went  for  the  jugular.  He  had  been  carried 
out  of  the  RoCoChem  headquarters  by  four  security 
guards.  He  had  screamed  into  the  face  of  the  police 
chief  until  she  burst  into  tears.  The  interview  with 
the  chairman  of  ScotOil  had  ended  after  the  man 
threw  a  lead  decanter  at  him.  Cochrane  knew  what 
he  wanted  and  he  didn’t  care  how  he  got  it. 

But  Dr  Pretorius  disarmed  Cochrane  by  simply 
agreeing  with  everything.  He  said  that  it  was  all 
true,  and  he  didn’t  care.  “I’m  disappointed,”  he  said, 
with  a  sly,  foxy  smile.  He  leaned  forward  in  his 
wheelchair,  and  said  into  the  Sony  proDAT  tape 


recorder  on  the  wicker  table,  ‘You’ve  done  so  much 
work,  Mr  Cochrane.  You’ve  found  out  where  the  bod¬ 
ies  are  buried.  You  are  quite  right  when  you  say  I 
have  exploited  the  desperation  of  dying  men  and 
women.  But  you  haven’t  stopped  to  consider  this.  No 
one  wants  to  die,  and  that  is  why  I  am  rich.” 

Dr  Pretorius  was  hunched  within  a  crocheted 
shawl,  with  a  tartan  blanket  wrapped  around  his 
legs,  as  immune  to  the  stifling  heat  in  the  huge 
greenhouse  as  a  mummy.  Only  his  head  and  hands 
were  visible.  If  he  really  was  500  years  old,  he 
looked  every  day  of  it:  a  mummy  indeed,  the  dry, 
deeply  wrinkled  leathery  skin  of  his  face  sunk  so 
close  to  his  skull  that  the  arches  of  his  cheekbones 
and  the  jut  of  his  jaw  were  clearly  visible.  Only  his 
white  hair,  combed  back  from  his  high  forehead  and 
crowned  by  a  crocheted  skull  cap,  showed  any 
vigour.  His  hands  were  spotted  with  age,  and  con¬ 
stantly  fretted  at  the  hem  of  his  shawl;  his  nails 
were  curved  like  talons. 

Cochrane  leaned  forward,  too.  The  wicker  chair 
creaked  under  his  200  pounds.  With  his  face  less 
than  a  couple  of  handspans  from  Dr  Pretorius’s  long, 
sharp  nose,  he  said,  “The  Mexican  government  has 
agreed  to  the  demands  of  the  FDA  that  clinics  like 
yours  should  be  subject  to  full  licensing  procedures. 
Tell  me  you’re  not  worried  by  that,  doctor.  Terminal 
cancer  patients  have  spent  every  last  cent  on  your 
so-called  cures.  AIDS  patients  have  died  while  cross¬ 
ing  the  border  because  of  the  false  hopes  you  held 
out.  Your  clinic  has  peddled  some  weird  treatments 
in  its  time,  none  of  them  anything  to  do  with  real 
medicine.  The  monkey  gland  extracts,  for  instance. 
How  will  you  explain  those  in  court?” 

“In  fact,  they  were  based  on  the  blood  of  langur 
monkeys.  There  were  unfortunate  side  effects,  but  it 
really  did  promote  rejuvenation  of  the  skin.  As  for 
patient  deaths,  how  many  die  in  hospitals?  How 
many  are  killed  by  the  treatments  that  are  supposed 
to  help  them?  Modern  medicine  is  a  brutal  business, 
a  matter  of  poisoning  the  patient  to  the  edge  of 
death  in  the  hope  that  his  illness  is  more  suscepti¬ 
ble.  Ah,  Mr  Cochrane,  they  come  to  my  clinic 
because  they  are  dying.  Even  if  they  are  cured, 
many  die  of  secondary  infections  they  acquired  dur¬ 
ing  their  illnesses. 

“But  that  is  not  what  I  wish  to  talk  about.  I  am 
interested  in  your  interest  in  my  history.  That’s  why 
I  allowed  you  here,  as  my  guest.” 

“I’d  say  you’re  looking  at  extradition,  at  families  of 
your  patients  suing  you  for  everything  you  have,  at 
charges  of  murder  and  false  practice.  You  don’t  look 
like  you’ve  got  long  to  live  yourself,  and  I  think 
you’ll  spend  the  rest  of  your  short  life  being  reamed 
by  sex-starved  lifers.” 

“I  did  not  realize  you  were  homosexual,”  Dr  Preto¬ 
rius  said.  “Ah,  but  perhaps  you  do  not  realize  this 
yourself.”  He  looked  amused.  ‘You  are  32,  Mr 
Cochrane.  Your  father  died  of  heart  failure  in  his 
58th  year;  there  is  a  history  of  pancreatic  cancer  in 
your  mother’s  family.  Actuarial  tables  would  give 
you  no  more  than  another  30  years.  How  would  you 
like  to  live  to  be  a  hundred?” 


interzonc  August  1995 


THE  TRUE  HISTORY  OF  DR.  PRETORIUS 


Cochrane  had  plans  to  live  much  longer  than  that. 
Keeping  his  face  still,  he  said,  “And  end  up  looking 
like  you?” 

“You  would  have  to  live  a  lot  longer  than  that,”  Dr 
Pretorius  said. 

“How  old  are  you?” 

“You  already  know  the  answer  to  that  question,  I 
believe,”  Dr  Pretorius  said,  calmly  meeting 
Cochrane’s  gaze. 

Cochrane  called  his  bluff.  “I’m  supposed  to  believe 
what  could  be  a  bunch  of  fake  documents?” 

“But  you  do  believe.  You  are  hungry  for  my  secret, 
Mr  Cochrane.  That  is  why  you  think  you  are  here, 
although,  as  I  said,  you  are  here  because  I  allow  it. 
Because  I  want  my  story  known.” 

Cochrane  made  a  counterstrike.  “Maybe  I’m  not 
interested  in  your  story.  Maybe  a  better  story  would 
be  your  arrest  and  trial.  Let’s  face  it,  I’m  here  because 
I  threatened  to  print  an  expose  of  your  crimes.” 

“I  think  you’ll  find  that  most  were  committed  in 
other  countries,  far  away  and  long  ago.  It  is  not 
human  justice  I  fear,  Mr  Cochrane,  but  it  is  true 
that  you  could  be  a...  nuisance.  Please,  ask  ques¬ 
tions.  I  will  answer  as  I  can.” 

Cochrane  was  ready  for  this  tactic.  Everything 
was  in  his  head:  his  memory  was  part  of  his  success. 
He  didn’t  need  to  flip  through  notes,  or  pause  to 
check  facts.  He  said,  “Let’s  start  with  a  simple  one. 
You  were  involved  with  the  Edinburgh  surgeon,  Dr 
Moreau.  There  was  a  scandal,  and  Moreau  quit  the 
country.  It  was  rumoured  that  Burke  and  Hare  —  “ 

Dr  Pretorius’s  laugh  was  like  the  dry  rattling  of 
seeds  in  a  gourd.  “Moreau  had  no  need  of  those  gen¬ 
tlemen.  His  was  more  a  veterinary  art.  He  called 
himself  a  surgeon,  but  he  was  a  butcher.  He  knew 
nothing  of  sepsis,  to  begin  with.  He  stole  secrets,  Mr 
Cochrane.  His  end  was  quite  fitting,  an  epitaph  to 
all  such  meddlers.” 

“Then  there  was  no  connection  between  Moreau, 
yourself,  and  Dr  Henry  Jekyll?  I  have  clippings  from 
the  Scotsman  that  says  otherwise.  July  5th,  1886.” 

“Dr  Jekyll  was  a  poor  unstable  fellow.  He  fled  to 
London,  you  know.  Reports  of  his  death  were  quite 
exaggerated.  There  was  a  spate  of  murders  that  had 
his  stamp...  Now,  he  did  know  something  of 
surgery.” 

“And  you  vanished,  too.  There’s  a  gap  in  the 
records  of  about  five  years.” 

“Ah,  Africa,”  Dr  Pretorius  said.  “It  was  a  foolish 
expedition,  but  not  one  I  regret.  I  have  learned  to 
regret  nothing.  Poor  Ayesha.  I  loved  her,  you  know. 
Oh,  not  in  the  coarse  physical  sense.  It  was  some¬ 
thing  higher,  something  purer.  It  was  a  true  meeting 
of  minds.  Haggard  claimed  her  for  himself  in  that 
ridiculous  account,  but  he  was  no  gentleman.  He 
tried  to  force  her  in  the  worst  way,  and  the  wounds 
accelerated  her  aging  -  and  so  she  tried  to  purify 
herself  too  early.  Perhaps  I  do  regret  saving  Hag¬ 
gard’s  life,  but  one  can’t  live  on  regrets.  I  went  there 
in  search  of  rejuvenation,  and  it  was  one  place 
untouched  by  science,  as  was  my  poor,  lovely 
Ayesha,  but  Haggard  and  his  jack-booted  kind  -  I 
think  also  of  that  bombast  Challenger  -  put  an  end 


to  that.  The  last  of  magic  vanished  under  a  wash  of 
British  Empire  red.  Well,  but  I  was  already  tainted 
myself,  of  course.” 

Cochrane  wondered  if  the  man’s  bravado  was 
nothing  more  than  senility.  Old  men  grow  arrogant, 
forgetting  the  uncertainty  of  their  youth,  forgetting 
defeat  and  remembering  only  victory.  Make  a  jump. 
Catch  him  in  a  lie,  a  contradiction.  He  said,  “You 
were  linked  to  a  number  of  women  in  the  30s.” 

“No  doubt  you  know  their  names  better  than  I  do. 
They  were  only  human,  Mr  Cochrane.  Goddesses  on 
the  silver  screen,  of  course,  but  not  in  the  flesh.  Our 
friendships  were,  of  course,  purely  platonic.  All  girls 
together,  as  it  were.” 

“At  least  one  had  an  abortion.” 

“More  than  one.  They  came  to  my  clinic  for  that, 
amongst  other  things.  I  suppose  you  read  it  in  one  of 
Anger’s  books.  He  was  here,  you  know.  A  beautiful, 
puckish  young  thing.  He  rode  up  on  a  motorcycle 
with  a  Mexican  lad  who  was  surely  underage.  There 
was  some  scandal  when  Garbo  found  James  Whale 
and  Anger’s  Mexican  Adonis  sucking  off  each  other  - 
her  phrase,  you  understand  -  in  the  rose  garden. 
She  was  here  with  her  own  lover,  of  course,  a  vain 
but  rather  glorious  woman  who  made  a  habit  of 
stealing  women  from  men.” 

Dr  Pretorius  had  slyly  trumped  Cochrane  with 
this  story.  He  was  a  harder  target  than  he  looked, 
and  Cochrane  thought  that  he  would  enjoy  breaking 
him  down.  It  was  time  to  bring  this  round  to  the 
power  he  held  over  this  old  man. 

But  Dr  Pretorius  quickly  dismissed  the  allegations 
about  collaboration  with  lisa  Magall.  He  rolled  up  his 
sleeve  and  showed  the  blurry  blue  numbers  tattooed 
on  his  wrist,  and  said,  “I  am  a  homosexual  and  a 
Jew.  Luckily,  they  put  the  star  on  me,  not  the  triangle: 
the  queers  flew  up  the  chimney  almost  as  soon  as 
their  feet  touched  the  mud.  Mr  Cochrane,  I  worked  as 
an  alternative  to  death.  Old  men  who  did  not  work 
lasted  no  longer  in  the  camps  than  the  time  it  took 
to  have  them  undress  and  step  into  the  showers.” 

“The  Israeli  government  will  take  a  different  view, 
if  I  choose  to  tell  them  where  you  are.  They’re  look¬ 
ing  for  a  Dr  Loew,  but  that  number  on  your  wrist 
will  be  enough  identification.” 

Dr  Pretorius  shrugged  inside  his  shawl.  “You  have 
no  proof,  or  you  would  show  it  to  me.  You  are  my 
guest  here,  Mr  Cochrane.” 

“Then  you  admit  you’re  guilty.” 

“Of  course  I’m  guilty.  I’m  a  damned  soul,  damned 
by  my  pact  with  Astorath,  and  proud  of  it.  Perhaps 
you’re  damned  too,  perhaps  not,  but  I  know  I  am.  It 
is  a  privileged  position.” 

A  moment  later,  a  male  nurse  and  the  PR  man, 
Ransom,  appeared  through  the  sweating  greenery. 
Just  before  he  was  wheeled  away,  Dr  Pretorius  said, 
“Look  around  as  much  as  you  want,  but  you  will  not 
be  allowed  beyond  the  ha-ha.  It  is  for  your  safety, 
you  understand:  wild  creatures  live  in  the  grounds. 
You  interest  me,  Cochrane.  I  may  allow  you  to  tell 
my  story.  In  the  house  you  may  find  such  evidence 
as  you  need,  to  convince  you.” 

“Convince  me?” 


interzone  August  1995 


PAUL  J.  McAU LEY 


“Of  my  history,”  Dr  Pretorius  said,  and  then  he 
was  wheeled  away  through  a  curtain  of  hanging 
ferns.  “Show  him,  Ransom.” 

Ransom  was  a  bluff,  British  guy  in  his  late  60s,  ex- 
Royal  Air  Force  and  as  stiff  as  a  ramrod,  his  care¬ 
fully  ironed  Jaeger  blazer  and  crisp  white  haircut 
visibly  wilting  in  the  dry  heat  as  he  walked 
Cochrane  through  the  extensive  gardens  to  the 
guest  bungalows.  Dr  Pretorius  would  see  Cochrane 
the  next  day,  Ransom  said;  he  hoped  that  an 
overnight  stay  wasn’t  an  inconvenience? 

“I  guess  that’s  the  Brit  way  of  saying  I’m  a  prisoner.” 

“Oh  no.  No  no.  A  guest.” 

Cochrane  wondered  if  this  was  some  way  of  mak¬ 
ing  a  move  on  him.  If  they  tried,  they  were  in  for  a 
surprise.  He  said,  “I’d  have  to  make  a  call  to  my 
office.  They  like  to  know  where  I  am,  if  you  know 
what  I  mean.” 

“Oh,  quite,”  Ransom  said.  “We  want  you  to  enjoy 
your  stay  here.” 

“Yeah?  I  think  I  will  look  around.  Soak  up  the 
atmosphere.  Shake  off  the  stink  of  the  boonie  fishing 
village  I  just  spent  two  days  in.  I  don’t  like  being 
made  to  hang  about,  Ransom.  In  fact,  I  fucking  hate 
it.  The  only  compensation  is  that  I  get  to  write  every¬ 
thing  up.  If  I  don’t  get  what  I  want,  your  boss  will 
hang  in  Tel-Aviv.” 

“Dr  Pretorius  wants  you  to  write  the  truth.  His 
true  history.” 

“And  what’s  that?  Beyond  the  fact  he’s  ready  to 
make  a  run  for  it?” 

Ransom  emitted  a  patently  false  laugh.  “I  believe 
you  should  talk  to  your  researcher,  Larry,  but  before 
that  perhaps  I  could  show  you  around  the  house  and 
grounds.  This  place  has  seen  quite  a  bit  of  history. 
Chaplin  stayed  in  the  bungalow  we’ll  put  you  up  in, 
and  Churchill  next  door.  Still  has  the  cigar  humidor 
Dr  Pretorius  had  installed  for  him.  Did  I  give  you 
the  information  pack?” 

“I  glanced  at  it.” 

“Best  thing  to  do  with  that  kind  of  stuff,”  Ransom 
said.  He  was  the  kind  of  PR  flak  who  agreed  to  every¬ 
thing.  “Better  at  first  hand,  eh?  I  believe  Dr  Preto¬ 
rius  suggested  that  you  look  around  the  house.” 

“Sure,”  Cochrane  said.  He  was  already  tired  of  the 
man’s  bluff,  hollow  heartiness,  and  said  that  per¬ 
haps  he’d  go  freshen  up. 

“Look  around  by  yourself,  by  all  means,”  Ransom 
said.  “But  please,  as  Dr  Pretorius  suggested,  don’t 
wander  across  the  ha-ha  -  the  perimeter  ditch?  We 
wouldn’t  like  any  of  the  animals  chasing  after  you.” 

“Someone  was  killed,  weren’t  they?” 

“Ah,  I  see  you’ve  done  some  research.  Yes,  some 
minor  50s  starlet  was  killed  by  a  jackal.  Silly  girl 
couldn’t  hold  her  drink  and  wandered  off  downhill 
towards  the  sea.  But  that  was  a  long  time  ago,  and 
you’re  more  sensible,  I  know.  I  believe  that  your 
cocaine  habit  is  quite  cured,  for  instance.” 

Cochrane  wasn’t  surprised  that  Pretorius’s  people 
had  been  checking  up  on  him.  He  said,  “The  50s, 
that  was  when  they  were  coming  up  here  for  so- 
called  rejuvenation  injections,  right?” 


intcrione  Ausust  1995 


THE  TRUE  HISTORY  OF  DR.  PRETORIUS 


“Oh  no,  not  here  at  the  house.  That  would  be  the 
clinic.” 

“The  one  that’s  closing  down.” 

“Re-locating,”  Ransom  said  firmly. 

“Whatever.  I  heard  she  was  found  naked.” 

“Animals  often  do  that  before  they  eat.  Strip  the 
clothes  off.  I  was  in  Africa,”  Ransom  added,  then 
said  goodbye  to  Cochrane  at  the  door  of  the  guest 
bungalow. 

The  bungalow  was  a  big,  airy  room  with  a  tiled 
bathroom  in  back.  Cane  furniture,  white  shutters,  a 
fan  slowly  turning  up  in  the  rafters,  gave  it  an  old- 
fashioned  British  colonial  ambience. 

Cochrane’s  bag  was  at  the  foot  of  the  bed;  his 
clothes  neatly  folded  away  in  the  bamboo  dresser. 
Cochrane  opened  up  his  Compaq  portable  and 
unshipped  his  phone  coupler  -  but  the  only  way  of 
dialling  out  was  through  an  old-fashioned  mechanical 
switchboard  that  wouldn’t  support  computer  traffic. 

“Can  you  believe  this  shit,”  he  said  to  Howie 
Zaslow,  when  he  finally  got  through  to  L.A.  on  the 
phone.  “The  fucker’s  got  the  biggest  satellite  dish 
outside  of  NASA  sitting  in  back  of  his  stately  pile, 
and  I  bet  all  he  uses  it  for  is  to  jack  off  to  the  Play¬ 
boy  channel.  I  want  to  download  stuff  from  you,  I’m 
going  to  have  to  get  someone  to  drive  me  to  the  near¬ 
est  public  phone.” 

Zaslow’s  voice  crackled  down  a  thousand  miles  of 
copper  cable  and  bad  connections  into  the  cream 
bakelite  handset.  “Did  he  talk?” 

“Not  exactly.  He’s  playing  games.  He  agreed  with 
everything  I  said,  then  tried  to  fob  me  off  with  sex 
scandals  from  the  Jurassic,  and  even  more  blatant 
shit  about  pacts  with  devils.  The  Nazi  stuff  shook  him, 
though.  He  has  me  shut  up  in  the  estate  right  now.” 

“Are  you  in  trouble?” 

“Hell,  no.  This  is  just  part  of  the  negotiations.” 
Cochrane  thought  it  funny,  Zaslow  concerned  about 
his  safety  when  he  had  nothing  but  bad  news  for  the 
little  nerd. 

Zaslow  said,  “He  might  come  after  me,  too.” 

“Don’t  be  chickenshit.  I’m  the  one  who’s  out  here. 
You  want  to  benefit  from  this,  you  better  work  your 
sad  ass  digging  dirt.” 

“You  still  don’t  know  if  he  has  a  secret,”  Zaslow 
said.  “For  instance,  he  could  be  a  mutant.  You 
wouldn’t  be  able  to  benefit  from  an  oddity  in  his 
genetic  makeup.” 

“He’s  as  human  as  you  and  me.  Just  a  hell  of  a  lot 
older.” 

“Not  every  mutant  is  a  monster.  In  fact,  most 
aren’t.  There  are  plenty  of  single-locus  mutations  -  “ 

“So  I’ll  sell  him  to  science,”  Cochrane  said  impa¬ 
tiently.  They’d  been  through  all  this  before,  and  it 
hadn’t  convinced  Cochrane  then.  “Do  what  I  tell 
you,”  Cochrane  said.  “Speculate  on  your  free  time.” 

Zaslow  said,  “Well,  I  got  more  on  his  career.  There 
was  a  Dr  Pretorius  teaching  natural  philosophy  and 
chemistry  at  the  University  of  Ingolstadt  in  the 
1800s.  He  was  involved  with  a  scandal  concerning 
some  Swiss  student.  Something  about  robbing 
graves,  and  maybe  necrophilia.  The  student  disap¬ 
peared  after  a  riot.” 


“I  don’t  give  a  fuck  about  ancient  history.  We’ll 
only  get  Pretorius  to  come  across  with  the  goods  if 
he  knows  we  have  evidence  that  could  hang  him.” 
Cochrane  was  about  to  put  down  the  phone,  then  said 
on  a  whim,  “Oh,  check  out  the  name  Astorath  for  me.” 

“Animal,  vegetable  or  mineral?” 

“How  the  hell  should  I  know?  Pretorius  said  he 
had  some  kind  of  deal  going  with  him.  Just  do  your 
job,  and  I’ll  try  and  find  a  place  to  plug  in  my 
modem.” 

The  manicured  gardens  around  the  house  were 
extensive:  long  formal  beds  of  roses,  shedding  petals 
in  the  heat,  between  trimmed  evergreen  hedges; 
neatly  pruned  fruit  trees;  a  formal  Japanese  garden 
with  sinuously  raked  gravel  and  an  arrangement  of 
the  oldest  bonsai  Cochrane  had  ever  seen.  Tennis 
courts,  a  manicured  croquet  lawn,  a  swimming  pool 
in  white  marble  with  a  reproduction  of  Rome’s  Trevi 
fountain  spouting  water  at  the  deep  end,  and  Nep¬ 
tune  and  mermaids  worked  in  mosaic  tile  at  the  bot¬ 
tom  of  the  crystal-clear  water.  A  row  of  brightly 
painted  cabins  beyond;  Cochrane  checked  one  out, 
grinned  when  he  saw  the  hand-carved  daybed 
inside.  The  place  had  been  famous  for  its  discreet 
orgies  in  the  30s  and  40s,  Hollywood  stars  in  cross- 
border  hi-jinks  safe  from  the  press’s  prying  eyes. 

The  gardens  stretched  around  the  back  of  the 
house  towards  a  winding  service  road.  Cochrane  was 
watching  two  trucks  toil  up  the  dusty  road  when  he 
heard  the  cry. 

It  came  from  somewhere  near  the  back  of  the 
house,  husky  and  plaintive,  like  the  cry  of  a  tired 
child,  or  a  woman  who’d  worn  her  voice  out  weeping. 
Cochrane  walked  along  the  path  in  the  shadow  of 
the  house’s  high  wall,  looking  through  the  first 
floor’s  mullion  windows,  but  it  was  only  when  he 
heard  the  cry  again  that  he  found  the  grating.  It  was 
set  flush  in  a  square  of  concrete,  a  hinged  grid  of 
strong  steel  bars  fastened  by  a  padlock  to  a  steel  sta¬ 
ple,  with  a  covering  of  rusting  wire  mesh.  Cochrane 
kicked  aside  the  mesh  and  then  stepped  back  with  a 
start  when  fingers  reached  up  through  the  bars. 

“Hey,”  Cochrane  said.  “Who’s  down  there?” 

The  fingers  were  long  and  white  and  slender,  with 
coarse  hair  sprouting  at  the  joints.  They  flexed  like 
sea-anemone  tentacles,  as  if  tasting  the  air. 

“Hey,”  Cochrane  said  again.  He  glanced  around, 
but  there  was  no  one  in  sight.  “Hey.  Are  you  one  of 
Pretorius’s  guests?” 

The  fingers  gripped  the  bars,  and  for  a  moment  an 
oval  shape  -  a  face  -  glimmered  in  the  darkness 
before  sinking  back  down  out  of  sight.  There  was  a 
scent...  orange  blossom  and  the  musk  of  roses...  it 
was  suddenly  all  around  Cochrane,  like  a  presence. 
More  plaintive  cries  drifted  up  from  the  darkness; 
Cochrane  thought  he  heard  the  word  friend.  He 
looked  around  again.  The  sun-stunned  gardens  were 
still  deserted. 

Friend.  Someone  down  there  needed  his  help. 
Dreamily,  he  took  the  9mm  automatic  from  his 
shoulder  holster  and  shot  off  the  grating’s  padlock. 

The  pistol’s  vicious  crack,  although  reflected  by 


interione  Ausust  1995 


PAUL  J.  McAULEY 


the  house’s  high  walls,  was  not  as  loud  as  Cochrane 
expected  -  he’d  only  ever  shot  it  in  the  gallery  of  his 
local  target  range,  never  before  in  open  air.  There 
was  a  shriek  from  the  darkness  beneath  the  grating, 
then  silence.  Cochrane  lifted  up  the  grating,  called 
down  that  it  was  okay,  but  there  was  no  response. 

Cochrane  waited  a  few  minutes,  calling  down  into 
the  darkness  at  intervals.  Frustrated,  and  suddenly 
nervous  that  security  guards  would  at  any  moment 
come  crashing  onto  the  scene,  he  walked  away,  then 
came  back  and  called  again.  Nothing.  And  the  smell 
-  a  zoo  stench,  thick  and  cloacal.  No  way  was  he 
climbing  down  into  some  unlit  stinking  cellar.  Not 
that  he  was  afraid  of  what  was  down  there.  No,  he 
didn’t  want  to  fuck  up  his  $2,000  Armani  suit. 

Cochrane  headed  back  towards  the  cluster  of  guest 
bungalows.  As  he  started  to  cross  the  wide,  billiard- 
smooth  croquet  lawn,  Ransom  drove  up  in  a  golf  cart 
decorated  with  Pretorius’s  crest  -  a  shield  embraced 
by  a  thing  half  snake,  half  dragon. 

Dinner  would  be  served  soon,  Ransom  said.  “Hop 
in.  No  need  to  walk  in  this  heat.” 

Cochrane,  feeling  the  warm  weight  of  the  auto¬ 
matic  inside  the  shoulder  holster  under  his  jacket, 
said,  “I  need  a  modem  connection.” 

“I’ll  see  it’s  ready  for  you  after  dinner.” 

“Will  your  boss  be  there?” 

“He  eats  alone.  Always  has  done.  Come  on,  you 
can  keep  me  company.  Gets  lonely  up  here.  No  one 
to  talk  to.” 

“What  about  the  other  servants?” 

“They’re  hardly  human,”  Ransom  said,  and  made 
a  neat  turn  onto  the  gravelled  drive  that  led  up  to 
the  house. 

At  the  time,  Cochrane  put  this  remark  down  to 
Ransom’s  Tory  English  xenophobia.  Later,  he  wished 
he’d  paid  more  attention  to  the  PR  man. 

Certainly,  he  didn’t  take  much  notice  of  the  brief 
tour  of  the  public  rooms  of  the  house:  he  already 
knew  most  of  what  he  was  shown  from  Zaslow’s 
research.  There  was  a  library  with  thousands  of 
leather-bound  volumes,  some  of  them  chained  to 
their  shelves  (“Incunabulae,”  Ransom  explained),  a 
long  hall  with  Tudor  oak  panelling  black  as  pitch, 
suits  of  armour  standing  to  attention  under  faded 
banners  hanging  from  high  rafters  and  a  vast  fire¬ 
place,  a  small  cinema  with  a  yellowing  screen  and 
cracked  leather  armchairs,  and  what  Ransom  called 
the  museum,  where  hundreds  of  glass  jars  of  every 
size  stood  on  steel  shelving.  Inside,  floating  in  alco¬ 
hol,  were  slabs  of  tissue,  organs,  and  human  and 
animal  embryos  at  every  stage  of  development.  A 
man  hung  on  a  rack  in  a  glass  jar  taller  than 
Cochrane,  his  skin  flayed  to  show  the  muscles 
beneath,  his  eyes  burned  milky  white  by  alcohol.  An 
entire  pickled  menagerie  of  creatures  Cochrane 
couldn’t  begin  to  identify. 

“Dr  Pretorius  has  made  a  long  study  of  teratol¬ 
ogy,”  Ransom  said,  tapping  a  jar  where  something 
like  a  finny  snake  curled.  The  man  gave  off  an  odour 
compounded  of  whisky  fumes  and  stale  cigar  smoke. 

Cochrane  picked  up  a  human  skull;  a  grisly  tail  of 


vertebrae  was  still  attached,  the  bottommost  cut  in 
a  ragged  line. 

“Ah,  now  that  is  the  skull  of  the  inestimable  Dr 
Dee,”  Ransom  said.  “Dr  Pretorius  likes  to  keep 
reminders  of  his  past  adventures.” 

Cochrane  knew  that  he  should  stay  calm,  stay 
cool,  now  that  the  promise  of  500  years  of  life  was 
within  his  grasp,  but  Pretorius’s  presumption  at 
holding  him  hostage,  and  Ransom’s  bland  affability, 
rubbed  him  the  wrong  way.  The  whole  setup  made 
him  deeply  uneasy.  Rationally,  he  knew  that  this 
was  just  a  show;  instinctively,  the  place  gave  him 
the  creeps,  and  his  mind  kept  returning  to  the  plain¬ 
tive  cries,  the  long  white  fingers,  of  whoever  had 
been  locked  under  that  grill. 

He  said  to  Ransom,  “Are  you  part  of  Pretorius’s 
little  game?” 

Ransom  blinked  owlishly  in  the  dim  electric  light. 
“It’s  no  game,  Larry.  Dr  Pretorius  is  deadly  serious.” 

“So  am  I.  I  know  enough  about  him  to  have  him 
hung  in  Tel  Aviv.  It  would  make  a  great  show  trial. 
The  Israelis  couldn’t  get  Magall  or  Mengele,  but 
your  boss  is  the  next  best  thing.  What’s  it  like,  work¬ 
ing  for  an  ex-Nazi?  Were  you  in  the  war,  Ransom? 
How  do  you  square  that?” 

“I  was  a  navigator  for  a  Lancaster  bomber.  Dr  Pre¬ 
torius  was  a  prisoner  in  a  death  camp.” 

“He  was  working  for  lisa  Magall.  The  Destroying 
Angel.” 

“Let  him  tell  his  story,  Larry.  He  really  does  want 
to  have  his  history  told,  but  your  threats  upset  him.” 

“Yeah?  Tough  shit.  He’s  so  upset  he  kidnapped  me.” 

“You’re  his  guest.”  Ransom  cocked  his  head;  a 
moment  later  a  gong  sounded  distantly.  “Dinner,  I 
believe.” 

When  Cochrane  returned  to  his  bungalow  an  hour 
later,  replete  with  swordfish  and  half  a  bottle  of  ‘81 
Chardonnay  (he  and  Ransom  had  served  themselves 
from  a  catering  trolley;  there  was  no  sign  of  any  ser¬ 
vants),  he  found  his  computer  on  the  desk,  plugged 
into  a  modem  whose  cable  snaked  out  of  a  window.  A 
moment  later,  Cochrane  was  talking  to  Howie 
Zaslow  on  the  phone;  a  few  minutes  after  that,  his 
computer  was  decoding  the  first  graphics  files  and 
loading  them  into  the  picture-viewing  programme. 

A  bunch  of  facsimiles  of  typed  letters  in  German, 
on  note-paper  headed  with  the  S.S.  winged  death’s 
head,  the  S’s  replaced  with  the  infamous  double¬ 
lightning  flash,  Pretorius’s  name  underlined  a  dozen 
times.  A  photograph  in  blurry  greys  of  Dr  Pretorius, 
looking  scarcely  younger  than  he  did  now,  stiffly 
shaking  hands  with  a  woman  in  black  S.S.  uniform 
in  front  of  tangles  of  barbed  wire.  Reproductions  of 
pages  from  laboratory  notebooks:  columns  of  figures 
in  cramped  copperplate,  each  page  stamped  with  the 
death’s  head. 

While  Cochrane’s  bubblejet  printer  was  busy, 
Zaslow  told  him,  “I  checked  the  number  tattooed  on 
the  wrist  of  the  man  in  the  photograph.  It’s  the  same 
as  the  one  given  to  Dr  Pretorius  at  Treblinka  in 
1941.  The  photograph  was  taken  a  year  later,  at 
Auschwitz-Birkenau;  he  was  there  under  the  name 


interzone  August  1995 


THE  TRUE  HISTORY  OF  DR.  PRETORIUS 


of  Loew.  There’s  more  background  on  the  other  stuff 
I  sent  you  earlier,  too.  That  guy  in  the  daguerreo¬ 
type  next  to  Pretorius  is  Brunei,  the  Victorian  engi¬ 
neer;  the  machine  is  supposedly  some  kind  of  deep 
boring  device  they  developed.  I  got  into  the  records 
of  the  Royal  Geographic  Society,  too.  A  Dr  Pretorius 
accompanied  Professor  Challenger  on  an  expedition 
along  the  Orinoco.  Around  about  1890.” 

“Forget  all  the  old  shit.  It’s  the  Nazi  stuff  that  will 
clinch  this.” 

Zaslow  said,  sounding  hurt,  “It’s  important  to  get 
the  whole  story  if  it’s  what  Pretorius  wants.” 

“Fuck  what  Pretorius  wants.  It’s  what  I  want  that 
counts.” 

After  a  brief  pause,  Zaslow  said,  sounding  more 
distant  than  ever,  “I  found  out  about  that  name  you 
asked  about.” 

“Go  ahead.” 

“Astorath  is  the  name  of  a  demon.  In  fact,  he’s  one 
of  the  Dukes  of  Hell.  He’s  supposed  to  manifest  him¬ 
self  as  a  beautiful  angel  astride  a  dragon,  with  a  viper 
in  his  hand.  It  seems  that  the  Church  gave  him  a  sex 
change,  by  the  way.  Originally  he  was  a  she.  Astarte, 
the  Indo-European  Goddess  of  creation  and  destruc¬ 
tion.  Athtar  to  the  Egyptians.  Astroarche,  in  Aramaic. 
The  morning  star  of  Heaven,  Queen  of  the  Stars  who 
ruled  over  all  of  the  dead  whose  spirits  could  be  seen 
as  stars.  In  short,  he’s  big  juju.  If  Pretorius 

Cochrane  laughed.  “I  forget  that  you’re  an 
egghead,  just  like  Pretorius.  Believe  me,  this  mystic 
bullshit  is  just  another  smokescreen.  Stay  cool, 
Howie.  I’ll  see  you  get  what’s  coming  to  you.” 

Cochrane  put  down  the  phone,  waited  a  few  heart¬ 
beats,  then  dialled  the  number  for  which  he’d  paid 
$10,000.  “Time  to  get  to  work,”  he  told  the  man  at  the 
other  end.  “My  assistant  has  outlived  his  usefulness.” 

He  put  down  the  phone.  He  didn’t  feel  a  thing. 
Zaslow  was  a  mayfly  voice  buzzing  in  his  ear.  This 
was  not  a  secret  to  be  shared  with  those  not  worthy. 
He  wondered  if  there  were  many  others  like  Dr  Pre¬ 
torius,  if  there  was  a  secret  cabal  of  immortals.  A 
dream  he’d  been  enjoying,  this  past  week.  Becoming 
a  Master  of  the  Universe.  Learning  the  real  secrets. 
Power.  Life  was  power.  The  dead  sure  as  shit  didn’t 
have  any. 

That  was  when  Cochrane  realized  that  there  was 
gunfire  somewhere  in  .the  grounds. 

It  was  dark  now.  Holding  the  9mm  automatic  inside 
his  jacket  pocket,  Cochrane  navigated  the  garden  by 
the  reflected  glow  of  the  floodlights  which  lit  the 
sheer  walls  of  the  house.  Out  in  the  darkness  beyond 
the  house  was  the  distant  sound,  like  popcorn  ker¬ 
nels  snapping,  of  automatic  gunfire,  unmistakable 
to  any  resident  of  Los  Angeles. 

A  jeep  was  parked  on  the  other  side  of  the  ha-ha: 
the  searchlight  on  its  cab  roof  caught  in  its  beam 
something  human-sized  running  crookedly  towards 
a  clump  of  trees  a  couple  of  hundred  yards  downhill. 
The  creature  turned  to  the  light,  raised  its  arms  above 
its  head,  and  yelled  hoarsely.  Cochrane,  a  hundred 
yards  away,  stepped  back.  The  thing’s  face  was  the 
muzzle  of  a  beast,  its  mouth  full  of  crooked  fangs.  A 


man  on  the  load  bed  of  the  jeep  took  aim.  Two  spaced 
shots:  the  creature  dropped,  kicked,  and  was  still. 
The  jeep’s  motor  started  and  it  spun  away  downhill. 

Behind  Cochrane,  Ransom  said,  “You  should  have 
waited  for  me,  Larry.  We’re  having  a  bit  of  a  cull.  A 
few  of  the  experimental  animals  escaped.” 

Cochrane  thought  of  long  white  fingers  probing 
through  the  grill.  His  heart  was  beating  quickly;  the 
beast’s  human  cry  had  shocked  him.  He  said,  “What 
kind  of  experimental  animals?” 

“Monkeys,  mostly.  A  few  chimpanzees  and  orang 
utan.  No  more  than  the  usual  kind  of  specimens,  you 
know.” 

The  thing  that  Cochrane  had  seen  shot  down  was 
no  ape  or  monkey.  And  the  fingers  at  the  grating. . . . 

“Come  this  way,”  Ransom  said.  “Dr  Pretorius  is 
waiting.” 

The  lights  of  the  greenhouse  had  been  reduced  to 
a  muted  moonlight  glow,  but  the  wet  heat  was  no 
less  stifling  than  it  had  been  that  afternoon.  As 
before,  Dr  Pretorius  sat  in  his  wheelchair  with  a 
glass  and  a  bottle  of  gin  on  the  table  beside  him.  He 
was  hunched  inside  his  blankets  and  shawls,  but 
there  was  a  quick  eagerness  in  his  voice. 

‘You  must  know  now  that  I  need  you,  Mr 
Cochrane.  I  need  you  to  tell  the  truth  about  me.  My 
name  must  not  be  forgotten.” 

“I  believe  you’re  what  you  claim  to  be.  That’s  not 
the  problem.  But  you  lied  about  your  association 
with  Magall.  Let  me  help  you.  Otherwise,  well, 
frankly,  Dr  Pretorius,  you  could  be  in  real  deep  shit.” 

Dr  Pretorius  didn’t  answer  at  once.  He  poured  a 
measure  of  gin  into  the  glass,  sipped  it,  and  smacked 
his  lips.  “My  one  little  vice,”  he  said.  “You  have  the 
documents,  and  you  believe  you  have  me.  But  I  was 
not  even  an  assistant,  Mr  Cochrane.  She  saw  me  as 
an  animal  with  certain  talents  that  were  useful  to 
her  project.” 

“Talents  which  included  torturing  prisoners  in 
experiments.  You’re  guilty  of  war  crimes,  Pretorius.” 

Dr  Pretorius  looked  amused.  “Is  that  the  best  you 
can  do?  Shame  on  you,  Mr  Cochrane.  Oh,  the  torture 
was  real  enough,  but  my  part  in  it  was  an  invention, 
a  cover  story  which  the  Americans  used  to  hide  their 
discovery  of  what  Magall  really  wanted.  She  wanted 
to  create  a  race  of  killing  machines,  soldiers  without 
fear,  with  perfect  obedience.  She  learned  of  my  repu¬ 
tation.  I  did  what  I  was  told,  which  is  no  doubt  what 
you  will  tell  me  the  camp  kommandos  also  said.  But  I 
was  not  a  kommando;  I  was  a  prisoner,  a  mussleman 
who  wished  only  to  avoid  selektion.  Magall  supplied 
the  parts;  I  supplied  the  knowledge.  How  hungry  she 
was  to  learn!  But  her  plans  became  crazier  and  cra¬ 
zier,  and  most  of  her  creations  were  too  deformed  for 
their  hearts  to  support  them,  even  when  we  used  two 
or  three  in  one  body.  Only  one,  a  monster  she  called 
Boris,  lived,  and  it  was  so  tormented  that  it  killed 
several  female  prisoners,  and  then  lisa  Magall  her¬ 
self,  before  the  guards  managed  to  shoot  it  down.  How 
disappointed  Astorath  must  have  been  at  that  setback! 
Through  me,  he  thought  to  challenge  God,  but  always 
it  was  the  same  story.  Moreau  was  killed  by  the  beast- 
men  who  discovered  he  was  not  God;  Jekyll  became 


intcrzone  August  1995 


PAUL  J.  McAULEY 


his  own  creature,  and  so  destroyed  himself;  poor  Vic¬ 
tor  followed  his  creature  into  the  wastelands.” 

“Victor?” 

“A  student  of  mine.  He  was  both  worse  and  better 
than  me.  It  was  when  the  magic  really  began  to  die. 
No  longer  did  we  rely  on  spells,  but  merely  upon  elec¬ 
tricity.  Oh,  there  were  a  few  holdouts  who  attempted 
a  bastard  marriage  of  alchemy  and  science.  Poor 
mad  West  for  instance,  or  the  charlatan  Robert  Cor¬ 
nish.  But  magic  was  already  dead,  killed  by  Victor 
and  those  like  him,  cold  clear-eyed  men  without  an 
ounce  of  romance  or  passion  in  their  souls.” 

“I  suppose  this  would  be  at  Ingolstadt.” 

Dr  Pretorius  shrugged.  “I  remember  so  little  of  the 
affair,  to  tell  the  truth.  I  had  discovered  the  delights 
of  gin  and  opium.  Most  of  the  18th  century  is  a  blur 
to  me.” 

“How  many  monsters  are  you  responsible  for?” 
Cochrane  was  thinking  of  the  thing  he  had  seen 
gunned  down.  He  was  wondering  if  there  were  any 
more.  His  9mm  pistol  made  a  comforting  weight  in 
his  jacket  pocket. 

“Monsters?  You  might  call  them  that,  I  suppose. 
Ah,  but  my  dear,  exquisite  King  and  Queen,  my  poor, 
shy  creatures...  these  were  not  monsters.  It  is  the 
process  that  creates  such  things  that  is  monstrous. 
Science  is  a  corrupting  force  because  it  allows  power 
to  be  wielded  by  those  who  do  not  understand  it.  Do 
you  know  how  your  recorder  there  works,  or  how  to 
fix  your  computer?  Of  course  not.  In  my  salad  days, 
as  a  necromancer,  I  had  to  make  all  the  tools  of  my 
Art  myself.  It  was  more  than  a  precaution;  it  ensured 
that  I  was  fully  engaged  in  the  Great  Work.  Nowa¬ 
days,  amateurs  who  have  skimmed  the  works  of 
Crowley  call  up  demons  they  cannot  control,  and  are 
devoured.  Quite  right  too!  And  so  with  those  who 
misuse  science  without  understanding  it. 

“Victor  may  have  been  my  best  and  brightest  stu¬ 
dent;  he  at  least  studied  Paracelsus  and  Albertus 
Magnus  and  knew  that  there  was  more  to  the  work¬ 
ing  of  the  world  than  reductive  rules  unpicked  by 
parsimonious  experiment.  Yet  he  failed.  They  all 
failed,  and  not  because  they  reached  too  far.  No,  it 
was  because  they  dared  not  reach  far  enough.” 

“These  creatures  of  yours  -  “ 

“I  like  to  keep  my  hand  in,  nothing  more.  An  old 
man’s  hobby,  and  outdated  besides.  The  little  ambi¬ 
tion  behind  my  small  surgical  dabblings  is  as  noth¬ 
ing  to  the  overweening  pride  of  those  who  would 
render  new  creatures  by  meddling  with  DNA.  They 
would  erase  one  gene,  rewrite  others,  mix  genes 
from  different  creatures,  and  yet  they  are  like 
painters  obsessively  reworking  a  tiny  patch  of  a  vast 
picture  they  can  never  comprehend.  Listen  -  “ 

Cochrane  said  after  a  moment’s  silence.  “I  don’t 
hear  anything.” 

“He’s  watching  us,  and  how  little  he  understands. 
A  nice  metaphor.  But  you  understand,  Mr  Cochrane. 
You  will  tell  my  story.  This  nonsense  about  my  time 
in  the  camp,  it  is  only  a  negotiating  ploy.  I  under¬ 
stand  that.  But  I  have  given  you  the  story  anyway. 
You  can  tell  it  all.  In  fact,  I  insist  that  you  do.” 

Cochrane  took  out  his  pistol.  “Fuck  your  story.  I 


interzone  August  1995 


THE  TRUE  HISTORY  OF  DR.  PRETORIUS 


want  your  secret.  I  want  to  be  like  you,  and  live  for¬ 
ever.  If  you  think  I’m  going  to  sell  it  to  some  glossy 
for  a  flat  fee  you’re  out  of  your  mind.” 

Dr  Pretorius’s  eyes  did  not  leave  Cochrane’s  face. 
“Or  you  will  shoot  me?  Then  you  will  not  leave  my 
property  alive.  Already  you  have  meddled.  I  know  it 
was  you  who  set  my  poor  innocent  children  free,  but 
I  forgive  you  and  I  will  give  you  my  secret,  much 
good  it  will  do  you.” 

“I’ll  want  more  than  that.  I’ll  want  to  be  certain  it 
works.  You’re  running  away  because  you’re  a  fraud 
who  can  no  longer  hide  the  truth  that  your  cures 
don’t  work.  There  is  only  one  thing  you  have  that’s 
valuable,  and  I  want  it.” 

“Of  course,  of  course.  You  are  a  very  modern  man, 
Mr  Cochrane.  You  believe  that  science  can  accom¬ 
plish  everything  it  can  dream  of.  How  Astorath 
would  laugh  to  see  in  you  his  victory!  For  he  has 
won.  Science  has  grown  in  power  beyond  his  wildest 
dreams.  God  is  dead,  or  if  not,  he  soon  might  be. 
Cosmologists  abolish  him  from  the  universe,  and  set 
up  a  secular  dream  of  evolution  towards  godhead, 
yet  they  understand  only  the  first  layer  of  reality, 
and  think  there  are  no  more  than  that.  But  although 
my  demon  has  triumphed,  he  shall  not  have  me.  I 
shall  cheat  him  -  ah,  how  sweet!  -  I  shall  cheat  him 
by  the  instrument  of  his  victory.” 

Cochrane  stuck  the  pistol  right  in  the  old  fool’s 
face.  “The  secret.” 

Dr  Pretorius  said  calmly,  ‘You  are  as  bad  as  the 
scientists.  You  have  your  poor  servant  supply  you 
with  knowledge,  but  you  are  not  interested  in 
knowledge  for  its  own  sake;  you  are  interested  in 
what  you  can  do  with  it.  It  is  a  very  old  sin;  Astorath 
merely  provided  a  new  context  for  it.  The  truth  is 
that  I  have  told  you  the  truth.  In  my  library, 
amongst  the  incunabulae,  there  is  a  Book  of  Hours 
by  the  Master  of  Bruges.  A  keepsake  from  an  old 
love,  in  London.  In  the  book  is  a  parchment.  I  doubt 
that  you  can  read  Latin,  but  I  expect  that  you  can 
find  someone  to  do  it  for  you.  Your  poor  assistant 
that  you  wanted  killed,  perhaps.  Oh  yes,  we  were 
listening  in  to  your  conversations  on  the  telephone.” 

Cochrane  said,  ‘You’ll  tell  the  truth.  Enough  bull¬ 
shit.” 

“Ah,  but  it  is  the  truth.” 

“Then  you  did  sign  a  pact  with  the  devil?” 

Dr  Pretorius  smiled.  His  teeth  were  small  and 
black,  like  watermelon  seeds.  “With  a  devil.  It  was 
more  than  500  years  ago,  but  still  I  remember  how 
scared  I  was.  I  was  in  my  youth  then,  full  of  piss  and 
hot  air  like  most  young  men;  it  was  almost  as  a  joke 
that  I  called  him  forth. 

“Certainly  I  did  not  believe  it  possible,  but  that,  of 
course,  is  how  Astorath’s  kind  snare  souls.  Luckily,  I 
had  performed  the  ceremony  correctly,  and  I  was 
protected,  or  he  would  have  eaten  me  there  and 
then,  for  my  presumption.  He  gave  me  the  usual 
deal.  Long  life  and  knowledge  beyond  the  dreams  of 
mortal  men,  in  return  for  my  soul  when  I  died. 

“Cunningly,  or  so  I  thought  in  my  youthful  pride,  I 
stipulated  that  I  should  age  but  five  years  in  one 
century,  supposing  it  as  near  to  immortality  as  not. 


It  was  not,  of  course,  but  I  have  plans  to  thwart 
Astorath,  and  I  do  not  mean  by  recantation,  the  way 
by  which  moral  cowards  are  allowed  to  sneak  into 
Heaven,  for  despite  their  sins,  their  recantations 
spite  Hell.  You  don’t  believe  me,  of  course.  Well,  I  am 
certain  that  I  could  call  up  Astorath  for  you,  should 
you  want  it,  but  I  can’t  guarantee  your  safety.” 

“He’d  have  to  talk  to  my  agent  first.” 

“Among  the  creatures  you  set  free  was  my  famil¬ 
iar.  No  doubt  it  was  he  who  seduced  you  into  the  act. 

I  can  show  you  -  “ 

Cochrane,  shaking  with  a  surge  of  adrenalin,  could 
hardly  keep  the  pistol  centred  on  Dr  Pretorius’s  face. 
“The  secret.  The  real  secret.  No  more  lies.” 

“My  master  is  a  servant  of  the  father  of  lies.  You 
deal  in  lies  made  from  facts.  Where  shall  we  begin?” 

“With  the  fact  that  I’ll  kill  you  for  the  truth.  You 
know  I’m  capable  of  it.” 

“Of  course.  Listen.  Listen.”  Dr  Pretorius  lifted  his 
head  and,  with  a  hand  like  a  bird’s  clawed  foot,  cast 
back  a  corner  of  his  crocheted  shawl,  and  cupped  his 
large,  veined,  almost  transparent  ear. 

This  time  Cochrane  did  hear  something.  A  leafy 
rustle,  a  stealthy  progress  through  the  thickets  of 
greenery  that  surrounded  them.  He  turned,  expect¬ 
ing  to  see  Ransom,  and  yelled  and  jumped  to  his 
feet,  sending  his  cane  chair  toppling,  firing  almost 
without  thought  as  Dr  Pretorius  shouted: 

“No!” 

It  was  a  lucky  shot.  The  noise  echoed  in  the  high 
ironwork  of  the  greenhouse  as  the  creature  fell  back. 
It  was  a  white-skinned  ape  with  a  scant  covering  of 
ginger  hair,  its  head  that  of  panther,  its  tongue  long 
and  forked,  questing  the  air  as  it  gasped  out  its  last 
breath  in  a  bower  of  crushed  palmetto  fronds.  Its 
human  hands  clutched  a  blood-red  blossom  to  its 
broad  chest;  its  legs  kicked,  quivered;  heels  armed 
with  cockspurs  gouged  concrete.  Its  yellow  eyes  fixed 
on  Cochrane’s,  then  gazed  past  him. 

“It  is  so  easy  to  kill,”  Dr  Pretorius  said,  sounding 
tired.  ‘Your  assistant,  for  instance,  how  badly  you 
would  have  rewarded  him.  But  we  warned  him,  and 
he  will  write  my  story  if  you  will  not.  Put  down  that 
pistol,  Mr  Cochrane.  You  have  had  your  chance.” 

With  a  sudden  crashing,  two  burly  guards  pushed 
through  the  screen  of  cycads  and  ferns.  One  bent  to 
the  body  of  the  dead  creature;  the  other  started  to 
wheel  Dr  Pretorius  away.  Cochrane  waved  the  auto¬ 
matic,  but  the  guard  carrying  the  body  of  the  dead 
creature  blocked  his  path.  It  was  the  hunchback 
giant  from  the  gate.  His  craggy  face  was  a  patch- 
work  of  scars.  What  had  he  once  been  -  bull,  gorilla? 

“Save  your  ammunition,”  Dr  Pretorius  called  out. 
‘You  will  need  all  of  it  to  save  yourself.  Go  now,  and 
you  may  escape  with  your  life.” 

The  giant  guard  leered  into  Cochrane’s  face;  the 
stench  of  his  breath  nearly  knocked  him  down. 

Cochrane  ran  in  the  other  direction,  bursting  out 
of  the  greenhouse  just  in  time  to  see  the  limousine 
pull  away  from  the  front  of  the  spotlit  house.  He 
chased  after  it,  but  it  sped  around  a  curve  and  rat¬ 
tled  over  the  cattle  grid.  Its  red  tail-lights  dwindled 
downslope  in  the  night. 


intcrzone  Ausust  1995 


PAUL  J.  McAULEY 


The  telephone  in  Cochrane’s  bungalow  was  dead, 
and  so  was  the  modem  connection,  but  his  computer 
was  showing  a  message  from  Howie  Zaslow.  It  was 
Dr  Pretorius’s  last  business  transaction;  he’d 
become  the  major  shareholder  in  Resurrection,  Inc., 
a  company  that  froze  heads  or  whole  bodies  of  the 
terminally  ill  or  newly  dead  until  they  could  be 
revived  and  cured. 

Dr  Pretorius  had  made  his  escape. 

The  lights  in  the  bungalow  went  out.  The  computer 
died;  the  phosphor  glow  of  its  screen  faded  to  black. 

Outside,  the  spotlights  along  the  front  of  the 
house  went  out,  too.  In  the  distance,  a  human  laugh 
rose  and  rose,  its  hysterical  pitch  breaking  into  a 
frenzied  yelping. 

The  9mm  automatic  in  his  hand,  Cochrane  stalked 
out  into  the  dark  garden.  There  was  just  enough 
light  by  the  stars  to  see  the  white  road  running  away 
down  the  black  hillside.  In  the  other  direction,  howls 
rose  from  somewhere  behind  the  house.  The  things 
in  the  basement  were  coming  out  into  the  night. 

Cochrane  thought  of  running,  but  he’d  never  run 
from  anything  in  his  life.  He  knew  that  Pretorius’s 
creatures  could  be  killed  -  that  was  the  important 


thing.  He  couldn’t  read  a  word  of  Latin  -  as  Dr  Pre¬ 
torius  had  pointed  out,  he’d  always  left  that  kind  of 
thing  to  drones  like  Zaslow  -  and  maybe  he  wouldn’t 
even  find  the  fucking  Book  of  Hours  and  its  precious 
scrap  of  parchment.  But  the  prize  was  so  great  that 
he  had  to  take  the  chance.  He’d  get  some  down-at- 
heel  scholar  to  help  him  riddle  the  secret,  and  this 
time  Astorath  would  be  called  up  by  someone  who 
really  knew  how  to  cut  a  deal.  Pretorius  had  said  it: 
Cochrane  was  one  of  Astorath’s  children.  He  knew 
the  score.  Information  technology.  There  were  places 
to  go  with  that,  with  a  demon  at  your  back.  The 
whole  world,  just  to  start  with. 

Howls  braided  the  night,  nearer  now,  closing  in. 
Cochrane  raised  his  pistol  and  howled  back,  and 
sprinted  towards  the  house.  His  blood  sang  in  his 
veins.  He  had  never  felt  so  alive  as  at  this  moment. 
When  Pretorius  woke  from  his  long  sleep,  he  would 
be  in  for  a  bad  surprise. 


Paul  J.  McAu ley’s  last  story  for  us  was  “Dr  Luther’s  Assistant” 
(issue  68),  and  his  latest  novel  is  Fairyland  (Gollancz).  A  long- 
overdue  interview  with  him  follows. 


Available  Fantasy  &  Science  Fiction 


Beyond 

Issue  2  out  now  -  £2.50 

In  line  with  our  aim  to  publish  the  most  lively,  well-written  and  entertaining  fantasy  and  science  fiction  in 
Britain  today,  issue  2  includes  writers  such  as  Kim  Newman,  Stephen  Gallagher,  Keith  Brooke,  Ian 
Watson,  John  Brunner,  Brian  Stableford  and  Mark  Morris.  Issue  2  also  includes  a  fascinating  interview 
with  top  fantasy  author  David  Gemmell. 

Future  issues  will  include  stories  by  some  of  the  biggest  names  in  fantasy  and  science  fiction,  including 
Eric  Brown,  Darrell  Schweitzer,  William  F.  Nolan,  David  Drake,  Simon  Clark,  Paul  Barnett,  Paul  Collins, 
Simon  R.  Green,  Jack  Wodhams. 

Issue  3  (due  out  July  19)  includes  an  interview  with  Roger  Zelazny. 


W.H.  Smiths, 
John  Menzies 
& 

other  leading 
high  street 
shops. 


To 

be 

sure 

of 

your 

copy 

subscribe 

now. 


Subscription  Rates 

UK  £14.00  (six  issues);  £26.00  (twelve  issues) 
Europe  £16.00  (six  issues);  £30  (twelve  issues) 
Overseas  $45  (twelve  issues) 


From  Issue  No_ 


I  enclose  cheque/PO/International  Money  Order  payable  to  BEYOND  for  £/$_ 

Name . . . Address . 

. . . Post  Code . 

Beyond,  130,  Union  Road,  Oswaldtwistle,  Lancashire,  BB5  3DR,  UK. 


:  Ausust  1995 


Paul  McAuley 

interviewed  by 
James  Lovegrove 


MYTHIC 


Paul  J.  McAuley  is  the  author  of 
six  novels,  including  Secret 
Harmonies  and  Red  Dust,  and  a 
collection  of  short  stories,  The  King  of 
the  Hill.  His  debut  novel,  Four 
Hundred  Billion  Stars,  won  the 
Philip  K.  Dick  Memorial  Award,  and 
both  Eternal  Light  and  Pasquale’s 
Angel  were  shortlisted  for  the  Arthur 
C.  Clarke  Award.  With  Kim  Newman 
he  co-edited  the  anthology  In  Dreams, 
and  his  latest  novel,  Fairyland,  which 
he  describes  as  “a  post-cyberpunk 
romp,”  is  published  in  August  1995  by 
Gollancz.  Given  all  this  literary 
success,  it  comes  as  no  surprise  that 
he  is  soon  to  be  giving  up  his  day -job 
as  a  lecturer  in  botany  at  St. 

Andrew’s  University  to  concentrate 
on  writing  full-time. 

What  is  this  affinity  science-fiction 
authors  have  for  the  middle  initial? 

Isn’t  it  what  sf  writers  are  supposed 
to  do?  Actually,  in  my  case,  I  just 
wanted  to  break  up  the  assonance  of 
“Paul  McAuley.” 

And  let’s  get  the  boring  question 
out  of  the  way:  how  did  you  get 
into  writing? 

It’s  a  boring  answer.  I  just  wrote.  It 
wasn’t  like  I  decided,  “I’m  going  to 
write  for  a  living.”  It’s  just  something  I 
did.  I  remember,  when  I  was  about  14 
or  15, 1  used  to  borrow  the  neighbours’ 
typewriter  and  bang  out  really  appal¬ 
ling  novels  which  I  never  finished. 
When  I  was  17  I  sold  a  short  story  to 
a  magazine  in  the  States,  Worlds  of  If, 
but  it  folded,  so  I  got  the  acceptance 
letter  but  no  money.  I  didn’t  do  any 
more  writing  for  ten  years.  Then,  when 
I  was  a  resident  alien  in  Los  Angeles 
-  interesting  concept  that,  “resident 
alien”  - 1  started  doing  it  again.  Oops. 
That  makes  it  sound  like  some 
horrible  habit.  That’s  what  happened, 
at  any  rate.  I  started  banging  stories 
out  and  eventually  got  a  few  accepted, 
and  I  just  carried  on  from  there.  It’s  a 
very  traditional  route,  and  it’s  not  hard 
to  keep  banging  out  short  stories, 
especially  when  you’re  young  and 
don’t  know  anything. 

Of  course,  the  short-story  market 
in  the  States  is  much  larger  than 
in  Britain. 

When  I  was  starting  out,  there  was  a 
big  recession  in  sf  in  the  UK.  This  was 
the  early  1980s.  Barely  anything  was 


going  on.  Interzone  was  around  then, 
thank  God,  and  it  was  great  because 
that  enabled  me  to  publish  two  or  three 
short  stories  a  year.  I  had  a  job  so  I 
wasn’t  trying  to  live  off  writing.  It 
wasn’t  like  a  serious  commitment  for 
me.  I  was  serious  about  it  but  I  wasn’t 
trying  to  live  off  it.  And  I  was  lucky  to 
be  in  on  the  coat-tails  of  what’s  built 
up  since  then,  to  have  been  caught  up 
in  the  British  sf  boom. 

And  why  did  you  go  for  science 
fiction? 

It’s  just  something  I  started  reading 
when  I  was  young,  something  that 
hooked  me.  I’d  go  to  the  library  -  this 
was  the  time  when  libraries  actually 
had  books  in  them  -  and  I’d  get  out 
three  or  four  sf  novels  a  week,  and  I 
steadily  worked  my  way  through  the 
library’s  entire  collection.  This  was  the 
early  70s  and  I  read  all  the  big  names 
-  Bester,  Delany,  Heinlein,  Asimov 
and  so  on,  Tom  Disch  too  -  and  I  was 
getting  quite  thrilled  by  the  New  Wave. 
I  was  finding  New  Worlds  in  W.  H. 
Smith’s,  and  thinking,  This  is  great 
stuff!  What  really  pushed  my  button 
in  New  Worlds  were  the  Mike 
Harrison  short  stories. 

Would  you  say  that  those  authors 
in  particular  have  influenced  you? 

People  keep  finding  little  bits  of  this, 
little  bits  of  that  in  my  work,  but  one 
of  the  things  I  was  consciously  doing 
in  the  last  few  novels  was  dipping  into 
the  richness  of  the  shared  field  and 
using  echoes  and  allusions  to  build  up 
a  bigger  picture.  It’s  kind  of  a  cheat 
really,  that  by  association  you  can 
build  up  something  that’s  deep  and 
rich  simply  by  tapping  into  something 
that’s  already  deep  and  rich.  I  still 
admire  people  like  Delany  and  Disch, 
but  I’m  also  into  so-called  “mainstream” 
authors  such  as  Graham  Greene  - 
especially  his  short  stories  because 
they’re  so  concise,  not  a  word  is  wasted. 
I  had  a  bad  Hemingway  period  when 
I  was  young. 

It’s  almost  obligatory. 

The  obligatory  Hemingway  period. 
You  start  writing  about  fishing. 
Fishing  on  alien  planets.  Bullfighting, 
but  they’re  not  bulls,  they’re  alien 
bulls  with  three  horns. 

No  wonder,  with  such  a  catholic 
taste  in  reading-matter,  that  your 


work  shows  such  a  diversity  of 
themes  and  styles:  the  space  opera 
of  Eternal  Light,  the  political 
allegory  of  Red  Dust,  the  slipstream 
parahistory  of  Pasquale’s  Angel, 
and  now  Fairyland...  This  must 
be  conscious,  this  desire  to  do 
something  different  each  time. 

I  guess  I’m  scared  of  getting  stuck 
doing  the  same  thing  over  and  over, 
churning  out  The  Chronicles  ofSome- 
body -or -Other,  Volume  9.  But  also  I 
just  get  interested  in  different  things. 
People  ask  me  if  I’m  going  to  do  a 
sequel  to  Pasquale’s  Angel.  I  know 
what’s  going  to  happen  next  after 
Pasquale  gets  onto  the  ship  and  goes 
off  to  the  New  World,  but  whether  I 
want  to  write  it  or  not  is  another  ques¬ 
tion.  Since  I  did  so  much  research  for 
that  book,  it  would  be  shame  to  waste 
it,  but  when  Fairyland  came  along,  I 
decided  I  had  to  go  with  that  instead. 

Fairyland,  which  deals  with  the 
impact  on  the  world  of  the 
creation  of  a  race  of  genetically 
engineered  fairies,  isn’t  just  about 
the  ethics  of  genetic  engineering 
but  also  about  the  interface 
between  mythology  and  pop 
culture.  These  fairies  appear,  and 
they  assimilate  themselves  into 
global  culture  surprisingly  easily. 
Well,  you  see,  they  have  no  culture. 
They’re  invented  creatures,  they’re 
made  creatures  from  made  creatures. 
The  fairies  begin  with  this  thing  I  call 
a  doll,  which  is  really  a  genetically 
engineered  monkey,  a  baboon.  The  dolls 
are  being  used  as  slaves  and  for  sexual 
purposes  and  so  on,  and  then  you  have 
a  bunch  of  people  who  do  an  animal 
liberation  number  on  them,  and  these 
people  evolve  the  fairies  from  the  dolls. 
The  fairies  are  intelligent  creatures 
but  they  get  their  intelligence  in  a  day 
and  they  have  no  family,  they  have  no 
culture,  so  they  have  to  come  up  with 
their  own. 

And  the  culture  comes  from  the 
mind  of  a  nine-year-old  girl 
whose  genius  has  been  artificially 
accelerated.  She’s  responsible  for 
creating  them. 

Milena  is  responsible  for  creating 
them,  but  she  has  no  responsibility 
thereafter.  She’s  like  an  Epicurean  god. 
She  actually  disclaims  responsibility 
for  what  she’s  done.  In  part  the  book 
is  about  the  morality  of  creating 


interzone  August  1995 


TEMPLATES 


Flying  saucers  and  the  atomic  bomb 
are  indivisible.  The  belief  that  the 
Venusians  are  coming  to  save  us  from 
ourselves  is  simply  an  expression  of 
people’s  deep-rooted  worries. 


And  the  UFO-kidnapping  thing  is 
just  the  modern  equivalent  of  the 
old  folk  myth  of  someone  being 
“away  with  the  fairies.” 

What’s  interesting  is  the  aliens  do 
medical  exams.  If  you’ve  ever  known 
anybody  who’s  been  seriously  ill,  you’ll 
know  that  modern  medicine  is  a  fairly 
brutal  business.  The  medical  exam 
aspect  of  UFO  abduction  seems  to  be 
a  very  American  thing,  stemming  from 
the  fear  of  the  body.  The  body  is  now 
the  Other.  Which  is  partly  a  cyberpunk 
thing,  too  -  you  know,  the  body  is 
“meat.”  So  now  you  have  twelve-year- 
old  hackers  on  the  Internet  going  on 
about  “meat.”  They’ve  no  regard  for  it, 
it’s  just  a  shell.  Milena  in  Fairyland 
wants  to  escape  this,  escape  her 
physical  limitations,  so  she  invents 
herself  as  a  goddess  and  in  the  end 


creatures.  It’s  the  old  Frankenstein 
question.  The  Monster  says,  “You’re 
responsible  for  me  and  I’m  going  to 
make  you  suffer,  because  you  made 
me  and  made  me  suffer.”  Except  that 
the  fairies  become  a  whole 
bunch  of  basement 
Frankensteins  making  their 
own  little  monsters.  Milena 
only  produces  the  first  fairy. 

She  comes  up  with  the 
process  and  it  gets 
disseminated.  It’s  like  gene 
hacking  or  whatever. 


The  creatures  then 
conform  to  the  whole 
mythology  of  a 
“fairyland.”  They  readily 
assume  the  roles  of  trolls 
and  Fey  and  Folk  and  so 
on. 

It’s  pushed  onto  them,  and 
the  book  shows  how  they  deal 
with  the  roles  they  assume, 
what  they  do  with  them.  In 
fact,  they  begin  to  evolve 
variations  on  the  traditional 
roles.  There  are  trolls,  but 
they’re  trolls  armed  with 
bazookas  and  stealth 
weapons.  They’re  not  nice. 

But  then  fairies  never  were 
nice,  this  is  the  thing.  It  was 
the  Victorians  who  came  up 
with  the  idea  that  fairies 
were  cutesy.  Conan  Doyle 
had  that  notion.  Kipling,  too. 

But  in  fact,  if  you  go  back 
and  look  at  what  fairies  were 
originally  about,  they  were  pretty 
awful.  They  were  cruel,  they  were  the 
Other,  they  were  the  Wild,  they  were 
the  thing  outside  the  pattern  of 
firelight,  the  thing  outside  the  little 
walled  villages  of  medieval  England 
when  there  were  still  forests,  before 
the  forests  were  clear-felled.  They 
were  the  embodiment  of  what  people 
didn’t  know  about  nature. 


Do  you  think  that  the  whole  UFO 
phenomenon  is  just  a  modern 
synthesis  of  fairy  mythology? 
Artists’  impressions  from 
abductees’  descriptions  of 
extraterrestrials  always  show 
these  elfin-looking  creatures. 

Oh,  absolutely.  It’s  another  expression 
of  the  unknown,  but  in  this  particular 
case  the  unknown  is  technology. 


does  what  I  call  the  Ultimate  Hack, 
which  is  to  hook  your  mind  into  a 
computer,  or  rather  a  simulation  of 
your  mind,  because  you  can’t  actually 
get  your  own  mind  in.  This  is  the 
frightening  thing,  you  have  to  kill 
yourself  to  do  it,  and  the  simulation 
lives  on.  It’s  a  fine  theological  point, 
whether  the  simulation  is  actually 
you  or  not.  But  she  does  the  Ultimate 
Hack  for  completely  different  reasons 
than  computer  freaks  want  to  do  the 
Ultimate  Hack.  They  just  want  to  do 
it  because  it  means  they  can  have 
more  computing  time,  and  without 
having  to  worry  about  getting  pizza. 

I  was  reminded,  when  reading 
Fairyland,  of  something  Arthur 
C.  Clarke  said,  about  today’s 
magic  being  tomorrow’s 
technology. 

What  was  it?  “Sufficiently  advanced 
technology  is  indistinguishable  from 
magic.”  That’s  the  great  science 
fiction  let-out,  like  anti-gravity  and 
nanotech  and  stuff  like  that. 
Whenever  you  get  a  new  technology 
absorbed  into  science  fiction,  it’s,  “We 
don’t  know  how  it  works  -  it  must  be 
magic.” 

In  Pasquale’s  Angel  you  draw 
comparisons  between  magic  and 
science,  although  in  your 
alternative  16th  century,  where 
da  Vinci’s  inventions,  instead  of 
remaining  on  the  drawing  board, 
have  been  made  a  reality,  the 
technocrats  have  become  like 
magicians,  and  the  magicians  are 
almost  redundant. 

Of  course,  it’s  not  real  magic,  because 
it’s  not  a  book  about  magic.  But  the 
contrast  lies  in  the  process  of  science 
compared  with  the  rituals  of  magic.  If 
you’re  a  scientist,  you  don’t  have  to  be 
particularly  intelligent.  As  long  as  you 
can  follow  instructions,  you  can  do 
science.  That’s  the  point  of  science,  it’s 
breaking  down  the  universe,  the  way 
things  work,  into  a  series  of  simple 
rules  or  steps  that  you  can  test  and 
manipulate  until  anybody  can  do  them. 
Whereas  with  alchemy  it’s  the  opposite: 
only  the  operator  can  do  it,  if  he  follows 
certain  steps  which  are  particular  to 
him,  and  he  has  to  spend  his  entire  life 
getting  up  to  the  point  where  he  can 
achieve  what  he  has  set  out  to  do. 
That’s  why  science  won  out,  because 


interzone  August  1995 


MYTHIC  TEMPLATES 


science  is  a  democratic,  sharing  process 
which  disseminates  knowledge  very 
quickly.  Somebody  in  the  States  will 
do  an  experiment,  and  if  it’s  really 
important  stuff,  it’ll  be  published  in  a 
few  weeks,  and  then  somebody  in  Japan 
will  come  along  and  check  it  and 
advance  it  some  more,  and  then  a  few 
other  labs  will  get  in  on  the  process. 
That’s  why  science  moves  at  such 
incredible  speed.  And  that’s  why  it  can 
get  out  of  control  and  stuff  starts  to 
happen  that  you  didn’t  envisage.  No 
way  did  Alan  Turing,  who  basically 
invented  the  way  modem  computers 
work,  envisage  Nintendo.  Neither  did 
science-fiction  writers.  Nobody 
predicted  the  fax  machine,  for  that 
matter.  All  the  important  things. 

But  the  fax  machine  has 
been  technologically 
feasible  for  decades. 

The  fax  machine  was  invented 
in  the  19th  century  by  a 
Scottish  shepherd.  The  Scots  say 
they  invented  everything,  but  in 
this  case  it’s  true.  He  actually 
got  a  patent  out  on  it,  but  it  was 
just  wrong  for  the  times. 

The  relationship  between  pop 
culture  and  mythology  is  also 
examined  in  Red  Dust, 
although  there  you’re  showing 
how  today’s  pop  culture  can 
become  tomorrow’s  mythology, 
with  Elvis  Presley  elevated  to 
the  status  of  a  god. 

He’s  one  aspect  of  this  probe  which 
multiplied  itself  in  Jupiter,  and  to 
hold  it  together  the  programmers 
just  dumped  in  a  load  of  made-up 
personalities.  He’s  not  even  the  real 
Elvis,  he’s  some  programmer’s  idea 
of  Elvis  routines  that  mimic  Elvis 
a  kind  of  heuristic  way. 

The  ultimate  Elvis  impersonator, 
in  fact. 

That’s  it,  exactly.  The  difference  is, 
there’s  no  single  aspect  of  Elvis.  In 
mythology,  especially  in  Greek  mythol¬ 
ogy,  which  is  the  stuff  I’m  probably 
most  familiar  with,  you  can  codify  all 
the  elements  into  neat  little  packages, 
all  cross-referenced.  People  know  the 
individual  attributes  of,  say,  Athena, 
but  different  people  hold  differing 
images  of  Elvis:  for  instance  pre-Army 
Elvis,  Las  Vegas  Elvis,  or  movie  Elvis. 
There’s  no  one  particular  image  or 
attribute  Elvis  has,  yet  he’s  still  recog¬ 
nizable,  that’s  the  interesting  thing.  I 
went  for  the  film  Elvis  because  it  was  a 
neat  way  of  inverting  the  image  of  Elvis. 
Which  will  last?  Will  it  be  the  music, 
or  will  it  be  the  actual  image?  In 
some  way,  images  are  more  powerful. 

Your  novels  been  nominated  for 
the  Arthur  C.  Clarke  Award 
twice.  What  are  your  thoughts  on 
awards  in  general? 


It’s  nice  that  they’re  there.  There  are 
a  lot  of  them,  so  eventually  everybody 
gets  one,  which  is  also  nice. 

But  do  you  think  that  having 
awards  for  science  fiction  specific¬ 
ally  is  perpetuating  the  isolation  of 
the  genre  from  the  mainstream,  in 
effect  saying,  “We  can’t  compete 
with  the  Booker  so  we’re  going  to 
cop  out”? 

What’s  interesting  is  you  get  exactly 
the  same  kind  of  log-rolling  and 
squabbling  and  intrigues  and  walk¬ 
outs  in  science  fiction  awards  as  you 
do  in  the  mainstream.  The  only  differ¬ 
ence  is  that  sf  awards  are  ignored  by 
the  media, 


and  that  leaves  people  feeling 
sore  and  isolated,  so  you  can’t  blame 
them  for  saying,  “OK,  you’re  ignoring 
us  so  we’ll  ignore  you.” 

The  thing  is  that  there  are  sf 
authors  who  could  easily  be 
players  in  the  mainstream,  but  it 
isn’t  until  they  write  mainstream 
fiction,  like  J.  G.  Ballard,  that  they 
get  the  recognition. 

There’s  not  such  a  dichotomy  in  the 
States.  Philip  K.  Dick  is  recognized  now 
as  an  important  20th-century  author 
for  codifying  the  anxiety  of  the  late 
20th  century,  which  Ballard  does  as 
well.  The  terrible  anxiety  we  have 
about  things  falling  apart.  Back  to 
the  idea  of  flying  saucers  and  things 
being  out  of  control.  The  things  beyond 
the  firelight.  Fear  of  technology.  The 
literature  of  the  20th  century,  when 
you  look  back  at  it,  is  going  to  be  the 


literature  of  anxiety,  and  you  can 
address  that  anxiety  better,  perhaps, 
through  science  fiction  than  through 
mainstream  fiction. 

One  shouldn’t  forget,  though,  that 
the  20th  century  has  produced 
some  friendly  technologies. 

E-mail,  for  instance,  which  is  the 
Victorian  Penny  Post  by  any  other 
name.  There  are  humanizing  technolo¬ 
gies  you  can  absorb,  but  a  lot  of  people 
are  alarmed  by  something  like  genetic 
engineering  because  it  tampers  with 
the  essence  of  what  we  are.  You  can’t 
control  what  goes  on  in  your  body,  not 
to  any  great  extent.  With  training 
you  can  make  your  heart  rate  go  up 
down,  things  like  that,  but 
there’s  no  way  you  can  stop,  I  don’t 
know,  phosphorylation  in  your 
mitochondria.  It’s  beyond  your 
control.  But  now  you  can  tamper 
th  it,  tamper  with  the  hidden 
controls,  get  in  the  basement  and 
iss  with  the  boiler,  and  that’s 
what  people  are  worried  about, 
and  there  are  some  legitimate 
fears  there,  because  you  can’t 
predict  what’s  going  to  happen. 
Certainly  you  can’t  predict,  if  you 
let  a  genetically  engineered 
organism  out,  whether  that 
ngineered  gene  is  going  to  stay 
n  that  organism  or  whether  it’s 
going  to  jump,  because  genes  do 
jump  around. 


Some  people  look  to  genetic 
engineering  as  a  means  to 
achieving  perfection, 
perhaps  even  immortality, 
like  the  Golden  in  Eternal 
Light. 

The  first  person  to  get  immor¬ 
tality  will  be  some  Hollywood 
star.  The  second  person  will 
be  some  politician.  But 
perfect  people  already  exist. 
Look  at  Elizabeth  Taylor. 


I  don’t  know  if  perfect’s  the  word 
I’d  use. 

But  she’s  doing  her  best.  Or  Michael 
Jackson.  They’re  just  reinventing  them¬ 
selves,  surgically,  which  is  a  crude 
process,  of  course,  but  eventually 
there’ll  be  surgeons  and  machines  that 
can  work  on  a  cellular  level.  Hence  all 
the  current  interest  in  nanotechnology. 
But  you  also  want  to  be  able  to  alter 
things  so  that  there’s  no  need  for 
surgery,  so  that  the  body  can  readjust 
itself.  Hence  genetic  engineering. 
Genetic  engineering  has  a  lot  of  poten¬ 
tial  medical  applications,  but  then  you 
can  see  a  point  where  the  rich  will  get 
it  and  nobody  else,  and  then  what  will 
you  have?  It’ll  add  a  whole  new  mean¬ 
ing  to  the  word  underclass.  You’ll 
actually  have  Wells’s  Morlocks.  A 
hundred  years  on  from  The  Time 
Machine  and  there  you  go,  it’s 
beginning  to  happen. 


PAUL  McAULEY  INTERVIEWED  BY  JAMES  LOVEGROVE 


In  Fairyland,  and  Red  Dust  too  to 
a  certain  extent,  viruses  are  seen 
as  agents  of  positive  change,  which 
is  interesting  in  the  light  of  the 
current  fears  about  HIV  and  ebola 
and  so  on. 

We  only  see  the  bad  viruses.  Certainly 
the  virus  is  a  prime  metaphor  for  late 
20th-century  malaise.  Your  computer 
gets  “sick”  because  of  a  virus.  It’s  not 
a  virus,  but  people  call  it  a  virus 
because  it  behaves  like  one.  But  it  also 
turns  out  that  viruses  could  be  a 
rather  neat  way  of  getting  genetic 
information  to  cells,  because  that  is 
what  they  do:  they  get  their  own 
information  to  cells  to  make  the 
cells  make  more  of  them.  So  you 
could  use  a  virus  to  get  the  good 
stuff  in,  the  immortality  gene,  the 
Michael  Jackson  nose  gene,  or 
whatever.  Therefore  are  they  bad? 

It  depends  on  what  you  use  them 
for  when  you  start  tampering 
around.  As  in  Red  Dust,  viruses 
can  be  useful  machines  as  well. 

Viruses  are  sort  of  machines 
anyway,  organic  machines. 

It’s  just  another  way  of  saying 
“nanotechnology”,  basically.  This 
goes  back  to  the  thing  about 
advanced  technology  being 
indistinguishable  from  magic. 

You  might  cast  a  nanotech 
“spell”  with  a  “magic”  dust. 

Fairy  dust. 

Exactly. 

As  a  scientist,  do  other 
authors’  scientific  lacunae 
or  inaccuracies  annoy  you? 

What  annoys  me  is  the 
portrayal  of  scientists  in 
fiction.  Not  in  science  fiction, 
because  people  who  write  sf  are 
genuinely  interested  in  science  and 
will  try  and  get  it  right.  But  what  I 
hate  is  the  old  cliche  about  the  mad 
scientist,  the  beautiful  daughter  - 

The  hunchbacked  assistant. 

Yup.  It  doesn’t  exist  any  more.  And 
I’m  annoyed  by  the  usual  media  thing 
about  “boffins,”  bald  men  in  lab  coats. 

Michael  Crichton  heroes,  in 
Congo,  Sphere,  The  Andromeda 
Strain,  are  dashing  scientists. 

But  that  goes  in  the  opposite 
direction,  that’s  like  the  Indiana 
Jones  version  of  scientists.  Scientists 
like  the  guy  in  Jurassic  Park  do  exist. 
Palaeontologists  are  like  that,  they  do 
endure  appalling  conditions  in 
Mongolia  to  get  those  bones.  And  of 
course,  archaeologists  have  all  seen 
Raiders  of  the  Lost  Ark  and  so  they  all 
wear  Indiana  Jones  hats,  so  it  comes 
back  to  mythology  feeding  on  itself.  If  a 
myth  is  strong  enough,  it  will  template 
itself  on  people’s  behaviour.  Another 


that  the  music  on  them  isn’t  actually 
music.  It’s  a  series  of  blips  that  we’re 
fooled  into  thinking  is  music.  Whereas 
the  nostalgia  for  vinyl  lies  to  a  certain 
extent  in  the  fact  that  in  those  grooves 
is  potentially  the  entire  world.  You 
know,  the  background  noises  that  you 
can  pull  out  or  the  sound  engineers 
wanted  to  get  rid  of  -  you  can  hear  all 
that  stuff,  the  unintentional  stuff.  It’s 
intriguing  that  club  DJs  still  use  the 
single  as  a  medium. 

It’s  much  more  satisfyingly  tactile. 
You’re  actually  putting  the  needle 
in  the  groove. 

Which  is  very  difficult  to  do 
with  compact  discs.  The  needle 
keeps  slipping  off!  In  fact,  the 
culture  around  singles  has 
become  like  publishing  fanzines 
almost,  with  twelve-inch  singles, 
white-label  pressings,  limited- 
edition  records  that  are  only 
played  in  clubs,  all  that.  The  old 
technology  of  pressing  vinyl  is 
still  there,  but  it’s  gone 
underground,  it’s  diverted  itself 
into  another  channel.  It  hasn’t 
died  out.  When  Kim  and  I  did  the 
book  we  thought  it  would  die  out, 
but  it  hasn’t. 

Might  not  books  be  going  the 
same  way,  becoming  a  minority 
interest,  becoming  marginalized 
and  cultish? 

Yeah,  it’s  a  great  horror  in  the 
science-fiction  community:  ‘We 
have  destroyed  ourselves!  We  have 
made  this  virus  and  now  it’s  going  to 
eat  us,  and  there  will  be  no  more 
science-fiction  books!”  Fairyland 
was  set  from  disc,  as  a  matter  of  fact, 
but  at  the  moment,  folks,  you’re  still 
going  to  have  to  go  out  to  the 
bookstore,  pay  money  and  bring  this 
thing  made  of  wood  home  with  you. 

What  are  you  currently  working  on? 

I’m  working  on  a  few  short  stories  at  the 
moment,  but  the  next  thing  -  because 
I’m  tired  of  doing  loads  of  research  - 
is  going  to  be  set  in  the  far  future  and 
I’m  going  to  make  it  all  up.  It’s  going 
to  be  set  millions  of  years  from  now, 
at  the  edge  of  the  galaxy,  and  it’ll  have 
no  humans.  It’ll  feature  a  whole  load  of 
different  aliens  who  were  engineered 
by  human  beings  who  by  that  time 
were  no  longer  human  themselves,  so 
there  are  actually  no  human  beings 
at  all  in  the  book.  It’s  probably  going 
to  end  up  being  more  about  myths, 
about  acting  out  mythic  templates, 
which  now  seems  to  be  my  theme. 
Eventually,  if  you  write  enough  books, 
you  find  they’re  all  the  same  book  or 
they’ve  all  got  the  same  theme.  So  this 
one’s  going  to  be  about  myths,  the 
importance  of  myths,  but  I’d  look  at 
that  as  the  importance  of  stories, 
because  we’re  always  going  to  be 
telling  ourselves  stories.  ■ 


myth  that  has  templated  itself  is  the 
hacker  cowboy  myth.  That’s  William 
Gibson’s  Frankenstein’s  Monster,  all 
these  people  on  the  Internet  with 
handles  like  Johnny  Mnemonic  and 
Count  Zero,  and  they’re  just  kids 
sitting  in  their  bedrooms  using  their 
parents’  accounts.  A  lot  of  people  on 
the  Net  -  not  an  overwhelming 
majority  but  quite  a  worrying  few  - 
have  assumed  that  cowboy  mentality. 
They  used  to  do  phone-freaking  or 
whatever,  and  suddenly  they’ve  got  a 
new  role  model:  net  cowboy. 


And  the  anonymity 
protects  them. 

Yeah.  Now  they’re  cool.  They’ve  got 
another,  non-nerdy  persona,  and 
they’ve  adopted  that  and  it  becomes 
like  a  myth,  so  it  becomes  true.  If  it 
rings  true,  it  becomes  true. 

In  Dreams,  the  anthology  you 
co-edited,  is  dedicated  to  the 
magic  of  a  piece  of  outmoded 
technology,  the  seven-inch  single. 

In  Dreams  is  not  so  much  about  songs 
or  rock’n’roll  but  the  culture  that 
surrounds  the  seven-inch  single  itself. 
The  seven-inch  single  as  a  cultural 
artefact.  In  fact,  Barry  Bayley 
contributed  a  great  story  about 
precisely  that:  a  seven-inch  single 
being  unearthed  and  analysed  by 
people  in  the  future,  who  all  of  course 
get  it  completely  wrong.  Interpretation 
of  what  this  physical  thing  is  and  what 
it  does  and  how  you  use  it  is  what  was 
interesting  to  us.  One  of  the  things 
that  annoys  me  about  compact  discs  is 


Interzone  August  1995 


Charles  Stross 


hey  stopped  me  on  the  gangway  and  rolled  up 
my  left  sleeve. 

“Clockwork?  Or  quartz?”  asked  the  one  with 
the  hammer. 

“Oh  -  quartz,”  I  said. 

“Sorry,  but  rules  are  rules,”  said  the  one  with  the 
leather  bag.  I  nodded. 

He  gently  peeled  the  watch  off  my  wrist  and  laid  it 
over  the  ship’s  railing.  Crunch:  the  hammer 
rebounded.  He  scooped  what  was  left  back  into  the 
bag,  careful  not  to  drop  any  glass  fragments  on  the 
deck. 

“I  just  forgot,”  I  said,  slightly  stunned.  “Is  there 
anything  else...?” 

They  looked  at  each  other  and  shrugged.  The  one 
with  the  bag  looked  a  little  guilty.  “Here,  you  can 
borrow  mine,”  he  said,  offering  it  to  me. 

“Thanks.”  I  tightened  the  strap,  then  carried  on 
up  the  gangway.  It  was  an  old  Rolex  Oyster,  case 
tarnished  with  decades  of  sweat.  I  glanced  back.  The 
hammer  team  waited  patiently  for  their  next  target. 
The  one  with  the  hammer  was  wearing  a  red  T-shirt 
with  a  logo  on  its  back.  I  squinted  closer  at  the  mar¬ 
keting  slogan: 

UNIX  -  THE  TIME  IS  RIGHT. 

Rita  was  already  in  the  fore-deck  lounge  when  I  got 
there.  I  had  half-expected  her  not  to  show  up,  but  we’d 
booked  the  tickets  five  years  ago,  three  years  before 
the  divorce,  and  her  name  hadn’t  disappeared  from 
the  roster  since  then.  I  suppose  I’d  assumed  she’d 
22 


forget,  or  dismiss  it,  or  not  think  it  worth  bothering 
with.  I  waited  for  the  usual  cold  shudder  of  unname- 
able  emotions  to  pass,  then  headed  for  the  bar. 

Polished  brass  and  wood  gleamed  in  the  gas-light 
like  an  old-fashioned  pub.  (The  overhead  electrics 
were  powered  down,  except  for  the  red  glare  of  an 
emergency  light’s  battery  charge  indicator.)  One  guy 
was  already  sitting  on  a  bar  stool,  elbow-propped 
above  his  beer  glass.  I  looked  at  him  for  a  moment 
before  I  blinked  and  realized  that  it  was  the  Profes¬ 
sor.  A  blast  from  the  past;  he’d  retired  two  years  ago. 
I  sat  down  on  the  stool  next  to  him.  There  was 
nobody  behind  the  bar,  but  I  figured  a  steward 
would  be  along  shortly. 

“Marcus  Jackman...  isn’t  it?”  he  asked,  glancing 
round  at  me.  Time  hadn’t  been  kind  to  him;  burst 
blood  vessels  streaked  the  tip  of  his  nose  and  his 
eyes  looked  sore. 

“Eight  years  and  counting,”  I  said.  “What  are  you 
drinking?” 

He  glanced  at  the  row  of  optics  behind  the  bar: 
“Perrier  for  now,  I  think.”  He  yawned.  “Sorry,  I 
haven’t  had  much  sleep  lately.” 

“Anything  in  particular?”  I  asked. 

“The  usual,”  he  said.  “The  chancellor  put  a  gagging 
order  on  me,  can  you  believe  it?  Said  what  I  was  say¬ 
ing  was  bad  for  the  institute’s  public  image.  So  I 
packed  my  bags  and  came  here  instead.  Olaf  said 
he’d  keep  a  berth  open  for  me  but  I  didn’t  think  I’d  be 
taking  him  up  on  it  until...  oh,  a  month  ago.  If  that.” 

I  shook  my  head.  A  barman  appeared  silently:  I 
tipped  him  the  wink  and  he  refilled  the  Professor’s 
tumbler  from  the  fizzy  water  tap.  I  asked  for  and 
received  a  double  gin  and  tonic.  I  felt  I  needed  it. 
“They  wouldn’t  listen  to  you?”  I  asked. 

The  Professor  shook  his  head.  “Nothing  ever 
changes  at  the  top,”  he  said  sadly.  “So  what  did  you 
make  of  yourself?” 

“I  run  a  big  switch  site.  Loads  of  bandwidth.  Noth¬ 
ing  that’s  going  to  be  hit  by  the  event  -  at  least,  not 
directly.  But  still,  I  don’t  trust  my  bank  account,  I 
don’t  trust  the  tax  system...  there’s  too  much  brittle¬ 
ness.  Everywhere  I  look.  Maybe  I’ve  just  been  track¬ 
ing  risks  for  too  long,  and  then  again...” 

“You  made  a  down  payment  on  this  holiday  three 
or  four  years  ago,  eh?” 

I  nodded. 

“They  wouldn’t  listen  to  me,”  he  muttered.  “I  kept 
on  for  as  long  as  was  reasonable,  even  though  they 
told  me  it  was  a  career-limiting  move  —  as  if  some 
little  thing  like  tenure  would  stop  them  -  until  I  was 
too  tired  to  go  on.” 

“I  get  to  see  a  lot,  out  in  the  real  world,”  I  volun¬ 
teered.  “That  standard  lecture  piece  you  did,  on  the 
old  reactor  control  system  -  I’ve  seen  worse.” 

“Oh  yes?”  He  showed  a  flicker  of  interest,  so  I  con¬ 
tinued. 

“A  big  corporate  accounting  system.  Used  to  run 
on  a  bundle  of  mainframes  at  six  different  national 
headquarters,  talking  via  leased  line.  Want  to  hear 
about  it?” 

“Pray  continue.”  I  had  his  attention. 

“They  downsized  everything  they  could,  but  there 

interione  Ausust  1995 


were  about  50  million  lines  of  PL/I  on  the  accounts 
system.  Nobody  could  be  bothered  to  bring  it  up  to 
date  -  it  had  taken  about  200  programmers  20  years 
to  put  it  all  together.  Besides  which,  they  were 
scared  of  the  security  implications  of  reverse-engi¬ 
neering  the  whole  thing  and  sticking  it  on  modern 
networked  machines.  In  the  end,  they  hit  a  compro¬ 
mise:  there  was  this  old  VM/CMS  emulator  for  DOS 
PCs  floating  around.  They  bought  six  stupidly  pow¬ 
erful  workstations  running  something  a  bit  more 
modern.  Stuck  a  DOS  emulator  on  each  workstation, 
and  ran  their  accounting  suite  under  the  VM/CMS 
emulator  under  the  DOS  emulator  -” 

I  waited  while  his  spluttering  subsided  into  a 
chuckle.  “I  think  that  deserves  another  drink:  don’t 
you?” 

I  took  a  big  gulp  from  my  G&T  and  nodded. 
“Yeah.”  More  fizzy  water  for  the  Prof.  “Anyway. 
These  six,  uh,  mainframes  had  to  talk  to  each  other 
at  something  ridiculous  like  1200  baud.  So  the 
droids  who  implemented  this  piece  of  nonsense 
hired  a  hacker,  who  crufted  them  up  something  that 
looked  like  a  1200-baud  serial  line  to  the  VM/CMS 
emulator,  but  which  actually  tunnelled  packets 
through  the  internet,  from  one  workstation  to 
another.  Only  it  ran  under  DOS,  ’cause  of  the  extra 
level  of  emulation.  Then  they  figured  they  ought  to 
let  the  data-entry  clerks  log  in  through  virtual  ter¬ 
minals  so  they  could  hire  teleworkers  from  India 
instead  of  paying  guys  in  suits  from  Berkhamp- 
stead,  so  they  wrote  a  tty  driver  just  for  the  weird 
virtual  punched-card  reader  or  whatever  the  bloody 
accounting  system  thought  it  was  working  with.” 

Someone  tapped  me  on  my  shoulder.  I  glanced 
round. 

“Yo,  dude!  Gimme  five!” 

“Six,”  I  said.  Clive  beamed  at  me.  “Been  here 
long?” 

“Just  arrived,”  he  said.  “I  knew  I’d  find  you  prop¬ 
ping  up  the  bar.  Hey,  did  the  guys  on  the  gangway 
give  you  any  aggro?” 

“Not  much.”  I  put  my  hand  over  my  watch’s  face. 
The  whole  thing  disturbed  me  more  than  I  wanted  to 
think  about,  and  Rita’s  silent  presence  (reading  a  book 
in  a  deep  leather-lined  chair  at  the  far  side  of  the 
room)  didn’t  contribute  anything  good  to  my  peace  of 
mind.  “I  was  just  telling  the  professor  about  -” 

“The  mainframes.”  The  professor  nodded.  “Most 
interesting.  Can  I  trouble  you  to  tell  me  what  hap¬ 
pened  in  the  end?  I  hate  an  interrupted  tale.” 

I  shrugged.  “Drink  for  my  man  here,”  I  said. 

“Make  mine  a  pint,”  said  Clive. 

“In  a  nutshell,”  said  the  professor. 

“In  a  nutshell:  they’d  put  it  all  in  an  emulator,  and 
handled  all  the  log-ins  via  the  net,  so  some  bright 
spark  suggested  they  run  six  emulators  in  parallel  on 
one  box  and  use  local  domain  sockets  to  emulate  the 
serial  lines.  It  looked  like  it  would  save  about  50,000 
bucks,  and  they’d  already  spent  a  quarter  million  on 
the  port  -  as  opposed  to  80,  90  million  for  a  proper  re¬ 
write  -  so  they  did  it.  Put  everything  in  one  box.” 

“And  what  happened?”  asked  Clive. 

“Well,  they  stuffed  the  old  corporate  accounting 


system  into  a  single  workstation.  You’ve  got  to 
understand,  it  was  about  50  times  as  powerful  as  all 
six  mainframes  put  together.  The  old  mainframes 
were  laid  off  about  two  months  after  the  emulator 
went  live,  to  save  on  the  maintenance  bill.  So  they 
moved  office  six  months  after  that,  and  they  man¬ 
aged  to  lose  the  box  in  the  process.  The  inventory 
tag  just  went  missing;  it  was  so  unobtrusive  it 
looked  like  every  other  high-end  server  in  the  place. 
By  the  time  they  found  it  again,  some  droid  from  the 
marketing  department  who  thought  Christmas  had 
come  early  had  reformatted  its  root  partition  and 
installed  a  multi-user  game  server  on  it...” 

“Man,  that’s  bad,”  said  Clive.  He  looked  improp¬ 
erly  cheerful. 

“Yes.”  The  professor  looked  worried.  “That  almost 
tops  the  reactor  story.”  He  drained  his  glass  then 
absent-mindedly  checked  the  dosimeter  he  kept 
clipped  to  the  breast  pocket  of  his  sports  jacket:  “but 
not  quite.” 


Unscheduled  Criticality  Excursion  - 

(jargon)  term  used  in  the  nuclear  engineering 
industry  to  refer  to  the  simultaneous 
catastrophic  failure  of  all  of  a  fission  reactor’s 
safety  features,  resulting  in  a  runaway  loss  of 
coolant  accident.  ( Formerly :  melt-down.) 


The  ship  set  sail  three  hours  later.  I  was  already 
adrift,  three  sheets  to  the  wind,  and  Clive  steered 
me  out  on  deck  to  watch  the  pier  drift  astern. 

“Feel  that  breeze,”  he  said,  and  leaned  out  over 
the  railing  until  I  worried  about  him  falling  over¬ 
board.  (An  accident,  so  early  in  the  voyage,  would  be 
a  bad  way  to  start;  there  was  plenty  of  time  for  such 
incidents  ahead.)  “It’s  cool.  Onshore.  Loads  of  salt. 
Iodine  from  decaying  seaweed.  Say,  did  you  bring 
your  iodine  tablets?  Sun  block?  Survival  rations?” 

“Only  what  I  figured  we’d  definitely  need,”  I  said, 
slurring  on  my  certainty.  “Didn’t  know  about  Rita. 
Shit.  Don’t  need  that  shit.  Are  you  okay  over  there?” 

“Don’t  be  silly!” 

And  guess  who’d  seen  fit  to  join  us  on  deck?  If  it 
wasn’t  my  ex.  I  was  drunk  enough  to  be  a  bit  out  of 
control  and  in  control  enough  to  feel  vulnerable:  not, 
in  other  words,  at  my  best.  “And  whash  you  doing 
here?”  I  asked,  leaning  against  the  rail  beside  Clive. 

“Coming  to  ask  what  you’re  doing  here,”  she  said. 
‘You’re  a  mess.”  There  was  no  rancour  in  her  voice; 
just  a  calm,  maddening  self-assurance,  as  if  she 
thought  she’d  earned  the  right  to  know  me  better 
than  I  knew  myself. 

“Funny,  I  could  have  sworn  he  was  an  engineer,” 
quipped  Clive. 

‘You  used  the  original  ticket?”  I  asked. 

Rita  leaned  up  against  the  railing  a  couple  of 
metres  away  from  me.  “I  tried  to  exchange  it,”  she 
said  guardedly.  “By  then,  the  ship  was  over-booked.” 

“More  fools,”  quipped  Clive.  He  leaned  even  fur¬ 
ther  overboard:  “cretins  ahoy!”  Rita’s  stare  could 
have  frozen  molten  lead,  but  Clive  bore  its  weight 
unheeding. 


interzone  August  1995 


23 


SHIP  OF  FOOLS 


“Let’s  talk,”  she  said.  I  followed  her  around  the 
curve  of  the  deck,  away  from  Clive. 

The  sea  was  still,  but  even  so  I  had  difficulty  keep¬ 
ing  my  balance  as  it  gently  rolled  beneath  my  feet. 
She  stopped  in  the  shadow  of  a  lifeboat.  “You  know 
what  this  means?”  she  asked. 

More  histrionics,  I  thought.  “It  means  we  both  just 
have  to  be  very  careful,”  I  said,  emphasizing  the 
final  word. 

Unexpectedly,  she  smiled  at  me.  “Two  years  and 
you  didn’t  change  your  ticket!”  It  was  not  a  very 
pretty  smile.  I  shrugged.  “So  that  makes  me  a  fool?” 

She  looked  at  me  sharply:  “no  more  than  ever, 
Marcus.  See  you  later.”  She  turned  and  stalked  off  in 
the  direction  of  the  door  we’d  come  through.  I  looked 
towards  the  stem  of  the  ship,  a  dark  mass  of  shad¬ 
ows  in  the  night:  the  breeze  became  slightly  chilly  if 
I  stood  in  one  place  for  long  enough.  I  stood  there  for 
a  long  time. 


Risks  of  embarking  on  an  expensive  sea  voyage 
booked  too  far  in  advance,  number  12: 
having  to  share  a  cramped  cabin  with  a 
spouse  who  divorced  you  years  ago. 


I  went  to  bed  drunk,  and  when  I  awoke  the  next 
morning  the  cabin  was  mine.  I  sat  up.  My  neck  ached 
as  if  I’d  lain  too  long  in  the  wrong  position;  my 
tongue  tasted  as  if  something  small  and  furry  had 
died  on  it  far  too  long  ago.  The  cabin  was  a  mess.  My 
trunk  was  stowed  neatly  beneath  the  lower  bunk  bed 
-  but  a  familiar  suitcase  was  open  and  strewn  across 
the  table,  and  she’d  spread  her  toiletries  across  every 
available  surface  in  the  cramped  bathroom. 

I  groaned,  sat  up,  and  hastily  made  for  the  toilet  - 
the  head,  I  remembered  to  call  it.  Today  was  The 
Eve  of  Destruction;  December  the  31st,  to  the  real 
world  at  large,  and  we  would  be  sailing  south-east 
and  out  into  the  endless  blue  eye  of  the  Gulf  of  Mex¬ 
ico.  Theoretically  I  had  booked  a  two-week  holiday 
from  my  job.  As  a  matter  of  caution  - 1  checked  care¬ 
fully  in  the  bag  full  of  dirty  socks  in  my  trunk  before 
heading  for  breakfast  -  both  small,  extremely  heavy 
bars  of  metal  were  still  there.  Five  thousand  ecus 
each,  they’d  set  me  back:  a  whopping  great  hole  in 
my  savings,  but  if  what  we  were  expecting  was  the 
case,  well  worth  it  in  the  long  run. 

The  dining  lounge  had  seen  better  days;  although 
this  cruise  ship  called  itself  a  liner,  I  had  my  suspi¬ 
cions.  It  reminded  me  of  a  run-down  hotel,  formerly 
a  grand  palace  of  the  leisured  classes,  now  reduced 
to  eking  out  a  living  as  a  vendor  of  accommodation 
and  conference  space  to  corporate  sales  drones  on 
quarterly  kick-off  briefings.  I  sat  down  at  one  of  the 
tables  and  waited  for  one  of  the  overworked  stew¬ 
ards  to  come  over  and  pour  me  a  coffee. 

“Mind  if  I  join  you?” 

I  looked  up.  It  was  a  woman  I’d  met  somewhere  - 
some  conference  or  other  -  lanky  blonde  hair,  pallid 
skin,  and  far  too  evangelical  about  formal  methods. 
“Feel  free.”  She  pulled  a  chair  out  and  sat  down  and 
the  steward  poured  her  a  cup  of  coffee  immediately. 


I  noticed  that  even  on  a  cruise  ship  she  was  dressed 
in  a  business  suit,  although  it  looked  somewhat  the 
worse  for  wear.  “Coffee,  please,”  I  called  after  the 
retreating  steward. 

“We  met  in  Darmstadt,  ‘97,”  she  said.  “You’re  Mar¬ 
cus  Jackman?  I  critiqued  your  paper  on  performance 
metrics  for  IEEE  maintenance  transactions.” 

The  penny  dropped.  “Karla...  Carrol?”  I  asked. 
She  smiled.  “Yes,  I  remember  your  review.”  I  did 
indeed,  and  nearly  burned  my  tongue  on  the  coffee 
trying  not  to  let  slip  precisely  how  I  remembered  it. 
I’m  not  fit  to  be  rude  until  after  at  least  the  third 
cup  of  the  morning.  “Most  interesting.  What  brings 
you  here?” 

“The  usual  risk  contingency  planning.  I’m  still  in 
catastrophe  estimation,  but  I  couldn’t  get  anyone  at 
work  to  take  this  weekend  seriously.  So  I  figured, 
what  the  hell?  That  was  about  two  weeks  ago.” 

“Two  weeks  I  stopped.  “How  did  you  wangle 
that?” 

She  sipped  her  coffee.  A  lock  of  hair  dropped 
across  it;  she  shoved  it  back  absent-mindedly. 
“There’s  always  a  certain  roll-over  in  things  like 
this,”  she  said.  “It  just  depends  who  you  talk  to...” 

Show-off.  Whoever  had  set  up  the  booking  system, 
whatever  troll  from  the  deep,  dark,  underside  of  the 
ACM  SIG-RISK  group,  had  known  more  than  a  little 
about  queuing  theory;  I’d  spent  two  months,  on  and 
off,  trying  to  get  Pauli  aboard  the  lifeboat,  while 
she’d  just  walked  on  board.  “I  thought  there  was  a 
waiting  list,”  I  said. 

“Even  lists  have  holes.”  She  stared  coldly  at  the 
steam  rising  from  her  coffee  cup;  “and  even  institu¬ 
tional  coffee  tastes  better  than  this  rubbish.  I  say, 
waiter!” 

“Why  did  you  leave  it  so  late,  if  you  believe  in  the 
roll-over  meltdown?”  I  asked,  wishing  she’d  just  let 
the  coffee-quality  issue  die. 

“Because  it’s  not  the  meltdown  I’m  interested  in,” 
she  said;  “ah,  it’s  about  this  coffee.  It’s  disgusting. 
Have  you  been  letting  the  jug  stand  on  a  hot  plate  for 
too  long?  So  a  few  legacy  systems,  big  hierarchical 
database  applications  for  the  most  part,  wrap  around 
and  go  nonlinear  when  the  year  increments  from  99  to 
00.  A  fair  number  of  batch  reconciliation  jobs  go  down 
the  spout  at  midnight,  and  never  get  up  again.  Yes, 
some  fresh  arabica  will  do  nicely.  Maybe  even  some 
big  ones,  like  driver  licensing  systems  or  the  police 
national  computer,  or  the  odd  merchant  bank.  But 
nothing  bolted  together  in  the  past  ten  years  will  even 
break  wind,  so  to  speak.  Excuse  me,  break  stride.  And 
real-time  systems  won’t  even  notice  it;  they  mostly 
run  on  millisecond  timers  and  leave  the  nonsense 
about  dates  to  external  conversion  routines,  if  they 
understand  the  concept  of  dates  at  all,  thank  you  very 
much,  like  a  Mars  Rover  running  on  mission  elapsed 
time  in  seconds.  Good,  much  better,  thank  you.” 

The  harried  waiter  made  a  break  for  the  other 
diners  and  I  began  to  dig  myself  out  of  the  hole  in 
my  chair  I’d  unconsciously  tried  to  retreat  into. 

“It’s  just  an  artefact  of  the  datum,”  she  continued 
implacably,  ignoring  the  coffee  cup  placed  apologeti¬ 
cally  before  her.  “You  might  as  well  have  picked  on 


:  August  1995 


CHARLES  STROSS 


the  UNIX  millennium;  it  only  runs  for  two  to  the  31 
seconds  from  midnight  on  January  first,  1970,  then 
some  time  32  years  from  now  the  clocks  begin  count¬ 
ing  in  negative  numbers.  Of  course,  not  many  sys¬ 
tems  run  for  70  years  without  maintenance,  but 
there’s  been  an  alarming  trend  lately  towards 
embedding  UNIX  in  black-box  applications  it’s 
totally  unsuited  for.  Personally,  I  think  2032  is  a 
much  more  realistic  Armageddon-type  datum,  for 
that  and  other  reasons.” 

I  cringed  slightly.  “What  brings  you  here,  then,  if  you 
don’t  think  there’s  going  to  be  a  fairly  major  disaster?” 

“Because  this  is  a  ship  of  fools,”  she  said  brightly. 
“I  wanted  to  observe  and  see  how  you’re  managing 
under  perceived  stress.  Not  to  mention  that  some 
people  here  have  jobs  to  go  back  to.  I’m  thinking  of 
collaborating  on  a  paper  with  a  sociologist  from  my 
local  university  on  stress-related  idiopathic  delu¬ 
sional  complexes  in  closed  professional  bodies. 
Chicken  Little  crying  ‘the  sky  is  falling’,  when  quite 
simply  it  can’t  fall  yet  because  this  is  a  premature 
software  apocalypse.” 

I  gritted  my  teeth  and  swallowed  the  last  of  my 
coffee.  “You’re  very  sure  that  this  is  a  false  alarm.” 

“But  it  can’t  be  the  real  thing!  It’s  too  early  -  only 
the  two-thousandth  anniversary  of  the  birth  of  Our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Now  the  two-thousandth  anniver¬ 
sary  of  His  crucifixion  is  another  matter,  and  the 
coincidence  with  the  UNIX  millennium  is  another 
sign.  But  what  really  clinches  it  is  the  timewave  zero 
hypothesis  advanced  by  Terrance  McKenna,  who 
proved  that  the  Aztec  cyclic  history  sequence  actu¬ 
ally  comes  to  an  end  -  a  singularity  -  in  the  same 
time  scale.  If  you  think  this  is  a  survival  trip,  just 
wait  for  the  next  one  in  32  years  time!  The  ability  of 
humans  to  anticipate  an  apocalypse  tends  towards  a 
maximum  in  line  with  the  proximity  of  big  dates  in 
their  numbering  system;  they  unconsciously  fail  to 
plan  for  survival  past  the  next  one,  so  disaster 
ensues.  Now  in  this  age  of  computers  I  think  the 
baseline  has  shifted  from  the  millennium  to  the  kilo- 
year  -  which  as  you  know,  is  two  to  the  tenth  years, 
or  1,016.  And  St  John  was  quite  obviously  talking 
about  access  permission  bits  when  he  said  that  the 
number  of  the  Beast  was  six,  six,  six.  More  coffee?” 

I  excused  myself  and  made  for  the  deck  with  all 
possible  haste;  I  could  tell  it  was  going  to  be  one  of 
those  days. 

I  didn’t  dare  to  venture  back  into  the  dining  room  for 
another  hour,  until  I  was  sure  Karla  had  finished 
browbeating  the  staff;  I  wandered  the  upper  deck  like 
a  lost  soul,  staring  out  across  the  muddy  green 
expanse  of  sea,  towards  the  gently  swaying  line  in  the 
distance  where  green  met  greyish  white.  The  weather 
was  poor  (rather  worse  than  I  had  been  led  to  expect) 
and  my  head  still  throbbed  from  the  night  before. 
Back  in  the  ops  room  at  the  institute,  Marek  or  one  of 
the  other  admins  would  be  sitting  up  with  a  dog-eared 
paperback  and  a  stack  of  blank  backup  cartridges, 
waiting  patiently  for  the  autochanger  to  bleat  for  a 
new  load  to  accommodate  the  terabytes  of  data  spool¬ 
ing  slowly  down  onto  tape.  If  I  was  there  I’d  probably 


be  doing  a  dervish  whirl  of  emergency  disaster-recov¬ 
ery  preparations,  single-handedly  preparing  to  hold 
back  the  deluge  of  user  complaints  due  on  the  first 
day  of  the  new  year.  But  I  wasn’t  there:  all  I  could  do 
was  squint  into  the  wind,  face  pinched  in  by  impo¬ 
tent  tension,  and  wish  I  was  in  another  line  of  work. 

When  my  face  turned  numb  I  went  below,  back  to 
the  gently  rolling  warmth  of  the  dining  room.  Karla 
had  evidently  finished;  Clive  waved  at  me  from  a 
corner  so  I  went  and  joined  him.  “How’s  the  morn¬ 
ing?”  I  asked. 

He  pulled  a  face.  “As  you’d  expect.  Some  woman 
tried  to  chat  me  up  but  it  turned  out  she  was 
recruiting  for  some  Church  or  other.  I  managed  to 
get  away  in  one  piece,  though.  Are  you  on  for  this 
evening’s  festivities?” 

I  nodded.  “What’s  everyone  doing  today,  then?” 

“There’s  a  seminar  session  on  disaster-recovery 
techniques  for  large  transaction-based  systems  in 
the  forward  lounge  on  C  deck.  Some  old  salt  is  giving 
a  lecture  on  navigating  by  the  stars  in  the  bar  before 
lunchtime,  then  the  Professor  is  giving  his  account  of 
the  Sizewell  ‘B’  disaster  —  the  one  he  gave  at  the 
ACM  bash  in  London  this  year.  You  were  there, 
weren’t  you?  Oh,  and  there’s  a  bingo  game  some¬ 
where  or  other,  it’s  on  the  noticeboard  on  D  deck.” 

“What  are  you  going  to  do?”  I  asked. 

Clive  put  his  knife  down  with  a  clatter.  “I’m  going 
to  read  a  book,”  he  said.  “The  weather’s  crap  and  the 
sea’s  going  to  get  rough  according  to  the  shipping 
forecast.  Might  as  well  hole  up  and  relax  a  bit.” 

“There’s  a  radio?” 

“I  brought  mine  along.”  He  fished  something  out  of 
his  pocket;  a  tiny  Sony  multiband  receiver,  with  an 
old-fashioned  analog  tuning  dial.  “Shortwave  recep¬ 
tion’s  okay.” 

“Read  a  book,”  I  echoed.  “Sounds  like  a  good  idea.” 
I  could  already  smell  the  boredom  rising  from  the 
great  and  borderless  sea  outside  our  hull;  a  boredom 
born  of  nervy  fright,  knowledge  of  what  countdown 
was  now  in  progress  in  the  real  world.  Karla,  for  all 
her  objectionable  manner  and  dubious  hypotheses, 
had  maybe  had  a  point;  humans  set  their  historical 
clocks  by  the  stars,  and  the  beginning  of  a  new  mil¬ 
lennium  is  no  insignificant  event.  Even  if  the  real 
fruitcakes  think  the  show’s  coming  32  years  later... 


Boredom  -  Knowing  that  the  end  of  the 
world  is  due  to  happen  in  less  than  81,000 
seconds,  but  being  unable  to  hurry  it  along, 
impede  it,  or  even  ignore  it  and  do  something 
else  in  the  meantime. 


I  had  brought  along  a  book  on  formal  design  method¬ 
ologies  to  break  my  head  on  for  the  voyage,  but  I 
didn’t  feel  like  reading  it.  When  I  returned  to  my 
cabin  I  found  that  Rita  was  still  elsewhere.  She’d 
brought  along  a  huge  mass  of  junk  literature;  dispos¬ 
able  magazines,  novels,  a  two-day-old  newspaper.  I 
read  the  leader  columns  in  the  paper,  then  the 
lifestyle  section,  then  finally  the  job  advertisements. 
They  were  recruiting  lots  of  corporate  drones,  chief 


interione  Ausust  1995 


25 


information  officers:  scope  for  a  hollow  laugh  at  some¬ 
one  else’s  expense.  But  I  didn’t  feel  like  reading 
much,  as  my  stomach  was  slightly  weak  from  the  con¬ 
stant  swaybacked  lurching  of  the  deck,  so  I  lay  down 
on  my  bunk  to  catch  the  40  winks  of  the  truly  bored. 

I  dreamed  that  I  was  being  interrogated  by  three 
sinister  shadowy  men  in  dark  suits  who  kept  a 
bright  light  pointed  at  my  eyes.  They  wanted  to 
know  why  I  had  abandoned  Rita  and  our  two-year- 
old  daughter.  They  didn’t  seem  to  understand  that 
we  had  never  had  a  child,  and  that  Rita  had  left  me 

-  not  the  other  way  around.  They  said  I  set  a  dan¬ 
gerous,  risky  example  to  society  at  large;  that  run¬ 
away  fathers  should  be  allowed  to  make  off  with  the 
taxpayer’s  money  was  not  a  message  they  were  pre¬ 
pared  to  send.  They  were  about  to  sentence  me  to  - 
something  —  when  I  awakened  with  a  panicky  jolt. 
Rita  was  leaning  over  me. 

“Are  you  all  right?”  she  asked. 

I  tried  to  croak  “I  think  so,”  but  nothing  very  intel¬ 
ligible  came  out  so  I  nodded  instead. 

“You  looked  as  if  you  were  having  a  bad  dream.” 

“I  was.”  I  tried  to  sit  up  but  she  put  a  hand  on  my 
shoulder  and  pushed  me  down  again.  “Please...”  I 
said. 

“Lie  down.”  I  did  as  I  was  told.  “Who  were  you 
with  this  morning  at  breakfast?”  she  asked. 

“Some  fruitcake,”  who  thinks  the  apocalypse  is  due 
in  32  years  and  we’re  all  barking  up  the  wrong  tree. 
“She  sat  down  at  the  same  table  and  started  trying 
to  convert  me  to  Baptism  or  whatever  the  hell  she 
believes  in.” 

“I  see.”  She  was  quiet  for  a  moment.  “Well,  just 
don’t  bring  her  back  to  this  cabin,  you  hear  me? 
Don’t  you  dare.”  She  turned  away  abruptly,  leaving 
me  too  dumbstruck  to  say  anything  as  she  stalked 
out  of  the  cabin  and  yanked  the  door  shut  behind 
her.  Maybe  I  was  a  fool  to  be  here,  but  that  didn’t 
make  Rita  any  less  blind  herself. 

I  wandered  along  to  a  late  lunch  -  cold  buffet  only 

-  then  an  afternoon  seminar  on  trusted  anonymous 
systems  validation.  I  avoided  the  deck,  which  was 
subject  to  an  intermittent  cold  rain.  There  was  due 
to  be  a  banquet  in  the  evening;  I  headed  back  to  my 
cabin,  had  a  shower,  then  changed  into  the  suit  I’d 
brought  along  for  the  occasion. 

The  bar  adjoining  the  main  dining  room  was  draw¬ 
ing  a  steady  business  as  twilight  cast  its  shadow 
across  the  ship;  refugee  computer  professionals  in 
various  states  of  formal  attire  held  ice-cube-clinking 
tumblers  of  whisky  in  tense  conversational  huddles, 
while  spousal  units  watched  disinterestedly  or  dis¬ 
cussed  the  foul  weather.  I  saw  Karla  Carrol,  wearing 
a  long  green  dress  and  too  much  makeup,  and 
shrank  into  the  “L”-shaped  recess  at  the  opposite 
end  of  the  bar,  where  two  hunchbacked  mainframe 
administrators  were  trying  to  top  one-another’s 
dumb  user  stories.  Karla  seemed  to  have  snagged  an 
unfortunate  woman  who  was  something  big  in  actu¬ 
arial  systems,  and  was  talking  into  her  ear:  I 
ordered  a  double  vodka  and  coke,  and  then  another 
before  the  steward  ushered  us  into  the  dining  room. 


To  my  surprise,  I  found  myself  seated  next  to  Rita. 
She  seemed  to  be  enjoying  herself  as  long  as  she 
payed  no  attention  to  me;  as  I  hadn’t  seen  her  that 
happy  since  a  year  before  we  split  up,  I  was  quite 
content  to  maintain  my  reserve.  Besides,  the  food 
was  substantially  filling  and  my  glass  never  seemed 
to  empty,  until  I  leaned  back  in  a  bloated  semi-stu¬ 
por  to  listen  to  the  Prof  give  his  keynote  speech 
(after  some  nonentity  from  the  organizing  commit¬ 
tee,  introduced  to  the  limbo  of  my  memory  by  one  of 
the  ship’s  officers). 

The  Professor  staggered  slightly  as  he  took  the 
podium.  “Friends,  I  am  pleased  to  be  here  to  speak 
to  you  tonight,  but  less  pleased  at  the  necessity  for 
this  voyage.”  He  paused  for  a  moment  and  fiddled 
with  the  microphone.  I  was  surprised  by  how  little 
he  had  changed  from  my  perspective,  even  given  an 
extra  ten  years  of  age  on  my  own  account.  He  was 
still  impressive. 

“Software  allows  us  to  build  huge,  invisible 
machines  -  virtual  mountains  so  complex  that 
nobody  can  really  understand  the  whole  scope  of  a 
large  application.  But  software  is  brittle:  change  an 
underlying  constraint,  and  the  whole  edifice  crum¬ 
bles  like  a  mountain  hit  by  an  earthquake.  A  single 
fundamental  assumption  that  changes  -  as  simple  as 
the  shift  from  one  century  to  the  next  at  the  junction 
between  two  millennia  -  can  break  just  about  any¬ 
thing,  anywhere,  in  the  guts  of  such  a  system,  and  it 
could  take  seconds  or  months  for  the  damage  to  sur¬ 
face.  Back  in  the  mid-90s  there  were  an  estimated 
250  billion  lines  of  vulnerable  source  code,  waiting 
for  the  new  century  to  rattle  the  ground  from  under 
them;  at  20,000  lines  of  code  per  programmer  per 
year  that  would  have  taken  a  million  programmers  a 
year  to  fix...  so  everybody  pretended  it  wasn’t  there. 
Except  us.  Everyone  here  tonight  has  had  some  role 
in  attempting  to  cure  the  crisis  of  complacency. 
Everyone  here  has  been  burned  by  the  fire  of  bureau¬ 
cratic  inertia.  And  so  it  is  that  everyone  here  chose  of 
their  own  free  will  to  join  this  ship  of  fools  on  a  voy¬ 
age  whose  motto  might  be,  ‘I  told  you  so!”’ 

He  covered  his  mouth  and  hiccuped  as  discreetly 
as  one  may  in  front  of  an  audience  of  200.  I  glanced 
sideways  at  Rita;  her  face  was  a  carefully  controlled 
mask  for  boredom. 

“In  about  an  hour,  it  will  be  midnight  back  in  Eng¬ 
land.  It  is  already  five  o’clock  in  the  morning  of  Jan¬ 
uary  first,  year  2000,  somewhere  far  to  the  east  of 
here.  The  datum  is  sweeping  remorselessly  round 
the  dark  side  of  the  world,  leaving  random  malfunc¬ 
tions  in  its  wake.  Some  of  those  malfunctions  are 
doubtless  trivial;  bugs  in  systems  long  since  retired. 
Others  are  naggingly  pernicious  but  relatively 
harmless  matters,  such  as  the  school  districts  that 
fall  victim  to  collation  routines  that  tell  them  every¬ 
one  above  the  age  of  103  needs  to  be  enrolled  in  a 
nursery  class.  But  one  or  two...”  -  he  stopped,  and 
for  a  moment  seemed  bowed  down  by  a  terrible 
weight  -  "...  might  be  serious.  As  serious,  perhaps, 
as  the  Sizewell  disaster.” 

I  didn’t  want  to  pursue  that  line  of  logic,  and  nei¬ 
ther  (apparently)  did  the  Prof.  What  happened  at 


Sizewell  happened  because  nobody  understood  the 
entire  system,  and  nobody  subjected  it  to  formal 
proof:  nor  did  they  look  into  some  of  the  more 
obscure  race  conditions  that  could  arise  if  different 
subsystems  found  themselves  marching  to  the  beat 
of  a  different  clock.  The  results  —  of  which  the  least 
were  the  suicides  jumping  from  the  Lloyds  building 
-  had  proven  a  ghastly  point:  but  one  that  the  politi¬ 
cians  did  not  understand.  Or  at  least,  not  profoundly 
enough  to  budget  for  the  consequences. 

“I  should  like  to  stress  that  this  holocaust  of  our 
own  making  is  nothing  less  than  a  matter  of  compla¬ 
cency,”  the  Professor  continued.  “Once  we  quantized 
time,  we  tied  our  work  to  the  clock;  and  now  that  the 
work  is  automated,  so  is  the  ticking.  We  are  a  short¬ 
sighted  species.  That  there  was  a  quarter  of  a  tril¬ 
lion  lines  of  bad  software  out  there  seven  years  ago 
is  no  surprise.  That  such  a  quantity  has  been  halved 
to  date  is  good  news,  but  not  quite  adequate.  We 
have,  in  a  very  real  way,  invented  our  own  end  of 
history:  a  software  apocalypse  that  in  the  day  ahead 
will  engulf  banks,  businesses,  government  agencies 
and  anyone  who  runs  a  large,  monolithic,  database 
that  is  more  than  perhaps  ten  years  old.  Let  us  hope 
for  the  future  that  the  consequences  are  not  too  seri¬ 
ous  -  and  that  the  lesson  will  be  learned  for  good  by 
those  who  for  so  long  have  ignored  us.” 

Polite  applause,  then  louder:  a  groundswell  of 
clapping  as  the  ship  gently  pushed  its  way  through 
the  waves. 

I  began  to  push  my  chair  back;  it  was  close  and  hot, 
and  I  felt  slightly  queasy.  A  hand  descended  on  my 
wrist:  “remember  what  I  said  earlier,”  hissed  Rita. 

“What  are  you  -”  I  saw  her  expression.  Being  the 
object  of  such  ferocity  made  me  feel  as  if  we  had  not 
gone  our  separate  ways.  (And  what  if,  in  the  weeks  of 
confusion  after  the  Sizewell  incident  -  ten  miles  from 
the  hotel  I  had  been  staying  in  while  doing  my  con¬ 
tract  work  -  I  had  not  visited  the  vasectomy  clinic? 
What  if  my  morbid  fear  over  fission  products,  that 
had  in  turn  caused  our  own  atomic  split,  never  quite 
reached  such  a  pitch?  Would  we  still  be  together,  a 
nuclear  family  with  glow-in-the-dark  children?) 
“What  do  you  care?  I’m  no  use  to  you,  am  I?” 

Her  expression  was  unreadable  as  she  let  go  of  my 
arm.  “What  use  is  any  of  this?  We’re  sailing  on  the 
Titanic,  only  the  disaster  starts  when  we  go  back  to 
harbour.  Don’t  spoil  my  cruise  for  me,  Marcus,  or 
you’ll  be  sorry.  I’ll  throw  all  your  luggage  overboard.” 

I  nearly  laughed,  but  instead  I  stood  up  and  stag¬ 
gered  slightly  as  I  headed  back  to  the  bar.  How  like 
Rita;  the  paranoid  over-reaction,  fear  of  shadows, 
utilitarian  approach  to  people  around  her. . .  I  began  to 
wonder  how  much  I  hated  myself  to  have  put  up  with 
her  for  so  long,  and  not  to  have  found  anyone  better. 

I  was  into  my  second  gin  and  tonic  when  Clive 
appeared.  “Been  in  a  car  wreck?”  he  asked  sympa¬ 
thetically. 

“Rita,”  I  said  morosely. 

“Oh.”  He  was  quiet  for  a  minute.  I  heard  faint 
applause  from  the  dining  room.  The  steward  at  the 
bar  turned  his  back  to  us  and  polished  the  brass- 


work.  “Try  one  of  these,”  he  suggested,  offering  some¬ 
thing  that  looked  a  bit  like  a  handmade  lump  of 
chocolate.  “It’s  the  only  way  to  see  in  such  a  fuck-up; 
totally  stoned,  drunk  as  a  skunk,  and  happy  with  it.” 

I  palmed  the  sticky  lump  and  swallowed.  There  was 
a  sweet,  herbal  taste  under  the  chocolate  that  nearly 
made  me  gag.  Not  my  favourite  way  to  take  the  stuff, 
but  better  than  nothing.  (And  Rita  didn’t  approve, 
even  of  something  as  mild  as  marijuana:  which  some¬ 
how  made  it  more  daring,  more  essential. . .) 

“Any  more?”  I  asked,  but  he  shook  his  head. 

“Strong  stuff.  Got  to  have  enough  to  go  round,”  he 
added  with  a  curious  smile.  I  could  see  he’d  been  at 
it  himself,  then.  “Settles  the  stomach,  too.” 

I  drained  my  glass,  winced  slightly,  then  walked 
over  to  the  bar  for  a  refill.  The  barman  didn’t  bother 
with  an  optic,  just  poured  in  the  gin  and  topped  it  off 
by  eye.  “Will  that  be  all,  sir?”  he  asked. 

“I’d  like  one  for  my  friend,”  I  said.  Another  glass 
appeared  as  if  by  magic.  All  drinks  were  on  the 
house,  this  night  if  no  other.  “Thanks.”  I  returned  to 
the  table,  where  Clive  was  tapping  his  fingers  idly. 

“Let’s  go  on  deck,”  he  suggested.  I  tried  to  dis¬ 
suade  him  but  he  was  adamant:  “it’s  fresh  up  there 
but  the  rain  stopped  and  the  cloud’s  clearing.  Let’s 
chill  out,  okay?” 

“If  you  must,”  I  said.  He  stood  up  and  lurched 
slightly  as  he  headed  for  the  door.  I  followed  him, 
expecting  a  chill  of  damp  air  to  rush  in.  Instead,  I 
found  that  he  was  right;  the  overcast  had  lifted  and 
stars  twinkled  high  in  a  deep  black  vault.  There  was 
a  slow  breeze  blowing  from  ahead,  and  it  was  no 
cooler  now  than  it  had  been  during  the  day. 

“What  do  you  expect  to  find  when  you  go  back?” 
asked  Clive. 

“Everything.  Nothing.”  In  the  distance,  a  mon¬ 
strously  deep  horn  sounded  a  bass  note;  ships  pass¬ 
ing  in  the  night,  I  supposed.  “I  can’t  quite  bring 
myself  to  believe  in  the  apocalypse.  End  of  civiliza¬ 
tion  as  we  know  it.  Construction  of  cyberspace,  the 
usual  nonsense;  it’s  bollocks.  We’ll  go  back  and  find 
lots  of  database  programs  have  fallen  over  and 
there’ve  been  some  really  major  cock-ups,  maybe 
even  a  local  stock  exchange  or  two,  but  life  goes  on.” 

“That’s  one  view,”  Clive  said  morosely. 

“What  do  you  expect?” 

“The  end  of  the  world.”  He  leaned  out  across  the 
railing,  staring  into  the  dark  water  beyond  and 
below  us.  “Nobody  expects  things  to  continue,  not 
really.  Everybody  wants  a  Day  of  Judgement,  right? 
An  end  to  the  mortal  coil.  Pot  of  gold  at  the  end  of  the 
information  superhighway.”  Another,  even  deeper, 
horn  sounded  in  the  distance.  “We’ve  designed  for 
obsolescence  for  so  long  that  it  wouldn’t  surprise  me 
if  the  whole  pack  of  cards  tumbles  down.  A  bit  like 
the  fundies,  who  believe  that  it  doesn’t  matter  how 
we  run  the  world  because  they’re  all  going  a-flying 
up  to  heaven  in  a  couple  of  years  anyway.  The  Rap¬ 
ture,  they  call  it.  Every  city  in  the  west  is  maybe  24 
hours  away  from  chaos  and  civil  war  -  that’s  all  the 
supplies  they  store  locally,  you  know  that?  All  it 
takes  is  enough  cracks  in  the  fabric...” 

I  wanted  to  tell  him  he  was  sounding  like  an  old- 


SHIP  OF  FOOLS 


fashioned  fundamentalist  preacher  but  the  words 
caught  in  my  throat:  at  that  moment  an  almost  pal¬ 
pable  wave  of  cold  washed  over  me,  as  if  the  air 
around  me  had  turned  to  seawater.  A  great  distant 
moaning  wail  of  a  horn  shuddered  out  beneath  the 
moonless  sky,  so  deep  and  loud  that  I  felt  my  stom¬ 
ach  relax  and  contract  with  its  passage;  a  chilly 
sweat  prickled  across  my  forehead  for  a  moment, 
and  I  felt  brushed  by  the  ghostly  fingertips  of 
drowned  sailors. 

“What’s  that?”  I  demanded. 

“Tanker,  probably,”  said  Clive.  “Really  close,  too 

A  smell  like  smouldering  insulation  made  my  nos¬ 
trils  twitch:  “too  close!”  We  were  near  the  front  of  the 
ship,  on  the  right-hand  side:  I  wondered  if  we  should 
head  for  the  back,  or  if  someone  on  the  bridge  would 
be  able  to  see  whatever  we  were  bearing  down  on. 
Burning  insulation  and  a  rancid  undertone  of  sul¬ 
phur,  of  reeking  burnt  meat,  of  something  revolting 
and  sweet  at  the  same  time;  a  dim  red  light  loomed 
on  the  horizon.  The  ship  rolled  beneath  my  feet  and 
I  felt  light-headed. 

“Look,  over  there.”  I  followed  Clive’s  outstretched 
arm.  “What’s  happening?” 

Whatever  it  was,  it  bulked  out  of  the  darkness  like 
a  congealing  fog  bank,  lit  from  within  by  a  red  glow. 
That  dreadful  horn  sounded  again,  rattling  my 
innards,  and  there  was  a  faint  echo  from  behind  -  as 
if  its  distant  partner  sounded  a  desolate  mating  cho¬ 
rus  from  across  the  empty  sea.  Stars  burned  like 
halogen  lights  in  the  vast  darkness  overhead.  One 
by  one  they  began  to  fall,  tracing  bright  lines  across 
the  sky  until  they  faded  out  in  the  distance.  I  looked 
towards  the  rear  of  the  ship,  back  the  way  we’d 
come;  a  false  dawn  bulked  green  on  the  horizon. 

“I  don’t  like  this,”  I  said,  clutching  the  railing  with 
fingertips  that  felt  like  dry  bones.  “I’m  too  stoned.” 

“I’m  not.”  Clive  looked  distracted,  as  if  he  was  lis¬ 
tening  to  something.  “What...  did  you  ever  wonder, 
what  it  would  be  like  if  the  Godbotherers  were  really 
right  all  along?  If  maybe  their  revelation  was  the 
truth,  and  it  was  all  going  to  happen  -  only  they’d 
been  out  by  a  couple  of  thousand  years?” 

“Can’t  happen.”  My  teeth  were  chattering.  “No 
Rapture.  No  singularity.  It’s  just  the  way  we  think. 
We  humans,  we  want  to  lose  our  problems  in  some 
future  end  of  all  worries.  Natural  tendency.” 

“Overruns,”  Clive  muttered.  “Schedule  slippage. 
They  got  all  geared  up  at  the  turn  of  the  first  millen¬ 
nium,  then  the  apocalypse  was  cancelled.  Now 
they’ve  got  it  all  over  again.  What  if  they  held  the 
end  of  the  world  but  nobody  came?” 

Something  dark  bubbled  up  from  the  sea  behind 
us.  A  deep  bass  rumble,  like  a  cross  between  an 
earthquake  and  a  sousaphone:  the  angular  mass 
foamed  the  sea  around,  gathering  shrapnel  and 
wreckage  together  into  the  dark  shape  of  an  ancient 
submarine.  Hakenkreutz  half-rusted  into  the  shad¬ 
owy  conning-tower,  it  ghosted  through  the  waves 
towards  the  glow  on  the  horizon,  its  charred  and 
skeletal  crew  staring  incuriously  at  us  as  it  cruised 
past.  Red  and  green  after-images  rippled  across  the 
sea,  across  everything  I  looked  at  except  the  dial  of 
28 


my  borrowed  watch. 

I  shuddered  in  the  grip  of  a  dread  so  intense  that 
my  heart  lurched  towards  pure  panic.  “Don’t!”  Clive 
began  to  walk  forwards,  along  the  curve  of  the  deck 
towards  the  front  of  the  ship  -  “where  are  you  going?” 

“What  if  they  held  the  end  of  the  world,  but  we 
were  all  aboard  the  ship  of  fools  and  unbelievers?” 
he  called  over  his  shoulder:  “I’m  joining  them!” 

A  seventh  rumbling  note  cut  through  the  night,  so 
deep  that  I  could  barely  hear  it  but  only  felt  it  in  my 
bones.  I  turned  and  staggered  back  towards  the 
door,  back  towards  the  warmth  and  safety  of  the  bar 
and  the  dining  room.  Behind  me,  Clive  called:  “don’t 
leave  me  behind!” 

The  door  slammed  behind  me.  I  looked  around;  the 
bartender  glanced  up  from  polishing  the  bar  and 
raised  an  eyebrow. 

“Give  me  a  drink,”  I  gasped.  “Something  strong.” 

“Bad  night?”  he  asked  casually.  “You  look  like 
you’ve  seen  a  ghost.” 

I  shuddered  convulsively  and  took  the  tumbler, 
threw  the  drink  at  the  back  of  my  throat.  “In  a  man¬ 
ner  of  speaking.” 

“Happens,”  he  said,  matter-of-factly.  “Lots  of 
funny  things  happen  at  sea.  I  could  tell  you  some 
tales,  I  could.” 

“Please  don’t.  I’ve  had  enough  of  them  for  one 
night.” 

He  looked  away  as  I  drained  my  glass. 

“This  isn’t  a  good  cruise,”  I  said,  trying  to  communi¬ 
cate.  ‘You  know  what?  You  know  why  we  booked  it?” 

“Why  did  you  book  the  cruise?”  He  studied  me 
with  the  professional  eye  of  an  experienced  barman. 

“There’s  something  we’re  running  away  from.  But 
I’m  not  sure  it’s  the  right  thing.” 

“Then,  if  you’ll  pardon  my  French  sir,  wasn’t  it  a 
bit  stupid  of  you  to  come  along  for  the  ride?” 

I  headed  for  the  inner  corridor,  meaning  to  check 
the  roll  of  dirty  socks  in  my  luggage.  “I’m  not  really 
sure...” 


So  it  came  about  that  multitudes  of  people 
acted  out  with  fierce  energy  a  shared 
phantasy  which,  though  delusional,  yet 
brought  them  such  intense  emotional  relief 
that  they  could  live  only  through  it,  and  were 
perfectly  willing  both  to  kill  and  to  die  for  it. 
This  phenomenon  was  to  recur  many  times,  in 
various  parts  of  western  and  Central  Europe... 

—  The  Pursuit  of  the  Millennium, 
Norman  Cohn 


Over  the  horizon,  without  any  fuss,  all  the  main¬ 
frames  were  quietly  going  down. 


Charles  Stross  is  the  author  of  four  previous  stories  in 
Interzone:  “The  Boys”  (issue  22),  “In  the  DreamTime”  (#26), 
“Generation  Gap”  (#31)  and  “Yellow  Snow”  (#37)  and  has  had 
fiction  and  non-fiction  published  widely  elsewhere.  Trained  as  a 
pharmacist,  he  has  been  busy  building  a  career  in  computing  over 
the  past  two  or  three  years. 

interione  Ausust  1995 


SFX,  “the  hot  new  science-fiction 
magazine,”  published  its  first,  June- 
dated  issue  in  May.  No  fiction  is 
included  and  coverage  is  principally  of 
media  sf  (David  Pringle  can  breathe 
again),  though  there’s  a  suitably 
eccentric  joint  interview  with  Iain 
Banks  and  Iain  M.  Banks.  The  dread 
term  “sci-fi”  is  generally  avoided,  except 
where  one  malevolent  subeditor 
inserted  it  into  a  column  by  (grr)  me. 

A  weird  launch  party  was  held  in 
“Jim  Henson’s  The  Creature  Shop” 
(Camden  Town,  London),  within  a 
disco-lit  and  smoke-clouded  indoor 
marquee  decorated  with  special  effects 
from  Dr  Who,  Alien,  Neverending 
Story,  Dark  Crystal,  etc.  A  Robocop 
clone  prowled  the  crowd  firing  a 
VERY  LOUD  gun,  while  lady  guests 
complained  that  the  wandering  Dalek 
was  taking  personal  liberties  with  its 
plunger.  Thanks  to  a  mysterious  spon¬ 
sorship  deal,  there  was  a  wide  choice 
of  either  bottled  Czech  lager  or 
Smirnoff  vodka  served  by  drag 
queens.  Luminaries  from  the  world  of 
written  sf  included  John  Clute, 
Michael  Scott  Rohan,  Dick  Jude  of 
the  Forbidden  Planet  bookshop 
(“What  have  you  written  about  me 
this  time,  Langford  you  bastard?”), 
myself  and,  er,  that’s  about  it.  We 
never  worked  out  who  all  the  people  in 
Star  Trek  uniforms  were.  Why  doesn’t 
Interzone  hold  parties  like  this? 

SIXTY  HORSES  WEDGED 
IN  CHIMNEY 

Brian  Aldiss  had  immense  fun  with 
his  recent  “Time  Capsule  caper”:  the 
sixth  form  of  West  Buckland  school 
on  Exmoor  was  mobilized  with  metal 
detectors  to  locate  the  biscuit  tin  of 
“raunchy  tales”  nervously  buried 
there  by  the  great  man  while  himself 
a  hand-reared  pupil,  over  50  years 
ago.  News  coverage  extended  as  far 
as  the  Peebles  Observer,  the  Hong 
Kong  press  and  Radio  4:  the  reported 
raunch-level  of  the  “saucy  stories” 
varied  considerably  from  paper  to 
paper.  “I  now  hope  to  sell  the  stories 
to  the  nation,”  says  Mr  Aldiss  in  an 
exclusive  fax.  “Would  take  anything 
between  ten  grand  and  a  million....” 
Stephen  Baxter  stared  pre-publication 
pulping  in  the  face,  but  eventually 
wrote  with  relief:  “I’ve  come  to  an 
agreement  with  the  H.  G.  Wells  estate 
over  approval  for  my  Time  Machine 
sequel  The  Time  Ships.  The  estate 
approved  publication  in  return  for  a 
modest  share  of  the  proceeds,  and  so 
the  huge  pulping  machines  have  been 
turned  back  from  HarperCollins’s 
Glasgow  warehouse.”  The  delayed 
launch  duly  went  ahead  in  June. 
John  Clute’s  Look  at  the  Evidence, 
his  second  mighty  collection  of  sf 
“reviews  and  stuff  (mainly  1987-92),” 
will  be  co-published  by  Serconia  Press 


in  the  USA  and  Liverpool  University 
Press  here  ...  another  happy  indication 
of  Liverpool  U’s  increasing  sf  aware¬ 
ness.  The  book  includes  a  short  but 
exhilarating  denunciation  of  editorial 
malpractice  at  what  Clute  and  others 
reckon  to  be  the  world’s  worst  profes¬ 
sional  outlet  for  sf/fantasy  reviews: 
the  Times  Literary  Supplement. 
Christopher  Hodder-Williams  died 
of  a  heart  attack  on  15th  May,  aged 
69.  He  was  a  generally  underrated 
British  sf  author  whose  novels  The 
Main  Experiment,  The  Egg-Shaped 
Thing,  Fistful  of  Digits  and  98.4  are 
worth  another  look:  Hodder-Williams 
was  probing  the  queasy  human/ 
machine  interface  long  before  it 
became  a  big  cyberpunk  theme. 

Garry  Kilworth  broke  down  under 
our  ruthless  lack  of  questioning  and 
repeatedly  admitted  that  his  novel  The 
Electric  Kid  has  won  the  Children’s 
Book  of  the  Year  Award,  sponsored  by 
NatWest  (so  that’s  what  they  do  with 
the  monstrous  charges  on  my 
business  account)  and  voted  on  by 
children.  The  book  is  now  reportedly 
being  translated  into  American.... 
Charles  Monteith,  the  editor  who 
founded  the  once-great  Faber  sf  list, 
died  in  May.  Among  the  authors  he 
personally  “discovered”  were  William 
Golding  (who  in  those  days  regarded 
himself  as  an  sf  writer),  Brian  Aldiss, 
Christopher  Priest  and  Garry 
Kilworth;  he  also  published  Edmund 
Crispin’s  classic  Best  SF  anthologies, 
James  Blish,  Clifford  Simak,  Harry 
Harrison  and  many  more.  “A  tremen¬ 
dous  force  and  a  kindly  and  hospitable 
man,”  notes  Brian  Aldiss.  “Who  but 
Charles  would  have  gallantly  published 
both  Probability  A  and  Barefoot,  with 
every  token  of  enthusiasm?” 

Kirsty  Watt  of  Ringpull  Press  is 
worried  that  easily  confused  sf  fans 


might  get  the  wrong  impression  from 
a  perfectly  routine  liquidation, 
creditors’  meeting  and  bankruptcy, 
and  wishes  it  known  that  (under  the 
wing  of  Fourth  Estate)  Ringpull 
editorial/publicity  is  living  happily 
ever  after  at  Albion  Wharf,  Albion  St, 
Manchester,  Ml  5LN. 

Paul  Williams,  biographer  and 
literary  executor  of  Philip  K.  Dick, 
and  founder  of  Crawdaddy,  suffered 
severe  skull  injuries  in  an  Easter  bike 
accident.  Two  small  pieces  of  luck:  an 
ambulance  came  within  five  minutes 
thanks  to  a  witness  with  a  cellphone, 
and  a  fortnight  earlier  Williams  had 
bought  health  insurance  for  the  first 
time.  For  a  while  he  could  communi¬ 
cate  only  by  signs,  but  has  since  been 
able  to  speak  at  least  occasionally. 

INFINITELY  IMPROBABLE 

Japanese  Whispers.  One  cause  of 
Uri  Geller’s  famous  failed  lawsuits 
against  psychic  debunker  James 
Randi  was  apparently  an  interview 
conducted  via  interpreter  by  a  Japa¬ 
nese  reporter  who  spoke  no  English. 
Randi’s  remark  “Geller  has  no  social 
conscience”  reached  Japanese  print 
as,  approximately,  “Uri  Geller  is  a 
loathsome  social  disease....” 

George  E.  Challenger’s 
Mysterious  World  is  the  third  of 
Marcus  Rowland’s  Forgotten  Futures 
“period  sf’  role-playing  rules  and 
sourcebooks  issued  as  shareware  on 
disk.  There’s  also  a  “Forgotten  Futures 
Library”  of  weird  out-of-copyright 
articles  and  arcana.  Info:  22  West- 
bourne  Park  Villas,  London,  W2  5EA. 
Oh  No!  The  Federation  of  Australian 
Writers  Bulletin  has  issued  a 
WARNING  TO  CONTRIBUTORS: 
“An  FAW  member  who  sent  work  to 
L.  Ron  Hubbard’s  Writers  of  the 
Future,  which  was  promoted  in  recent 
editions  of  the  Bulletin,  has  advised 
us  that  her  work  was  returned 
unopened.  This  indicates  that  this 
publishing  body  has  closed  or 
changed  address.  We  would  therefore 
advise  FAW  members  against 
submitting  work  to  this  publisher.” 
SF  Masterclass.  “Laurent  had  not 
gasped  or  cried  out.  But  Laurent’s 
cock  was  bobbing  uncontrollably. 
Tristan  was  in  the  same 
transparently  miserable  state,  yet  he 
looked,  as  ever,  quietly  majestic.” 
(Anne  Rice,  Beauty’s  Release,  1985.) 
“Sweat  broke  out  on  his  brow  as  he 
wrestled  with  his  brain  ...”  (Julian 
Flood,  “Control,”  in  Tomorrow  6/95.) 
Down  Deep  (jocularly  known  as 
Down  Under  Visions)  has  been  drawn 
to  my  attention  as  a  coming  anthology 
of  the  very  finest  in  Australian  sf, 
edited  by  Terry  Dowling  and  Harlan 
Ellison.  It  has  been  accepting  stories 
ever  since  1983,  but  unfortunately.... 


interzone  August  1995 


Nick  Lowe 


Tank  Girl  people  have  their  own 
views  about  where  Tank  Girl 
left  the  rails.  Hardliners  contend, 
with  some  persuasiveness,  that  to  take 
the  Hollywood  shilling  in  the  first  place 
was  an  abnegation  of  everything  Tank 
Girl  has  come  to  represent:  anarchy, 
body-piercing,  self-realization  through 
gratuitous  firepower  and  roo-shagging, 
and  the  refusal  to  be  contained  by 
authoritarian  structures  of  power, 
narrative,  or  sense.  Even  without  the 
embarrassments  of  Hollywood’s  idea 
of  attitude  and  LA’s  idea  of  punk, 
popular  film  form  itself  requires  Tank 
Girl  to  don  the  trappings  of  common 
movie  humanity:  a  name,  a  family,  a 
history,  a  rationale,  a  purpose  in  life, 
and  (most  disastrously)  a  set  of  moral 
values.  Others,  however,  including 
creator  Jamie  Hewlett  himself,  prefer 
to  narrow  the  finger  of  blame  to  the 
engagement  of  untried,  and  apparently 
uncomprehending,  screenwriter  Tedi 
(Tedi??)  Sarafian,  whose  boltup  of  all 
the  worst  cliches  from  80s  survivalist 
movies  is  certainly  up  among  the  all- 
time  dreadfuls  -  with  its  leering 
corporate  villain,  jackbooted  future 
jails,  and  amazingly  mechanical  origin 
trauma  to  off  all  our  hitherto-socialized 
heroine’s  near  and  dear  (sparing  only, 
for  motivational  purposes,  her  winsome, 


jeopardy-prone  surrogate  kid  sister). 

But  such  crude  scapegoat  thinking 
is  probably  too  crude  and  linear  to  cope 
with  the  complexities  of  film-making 
faultlines.  The  reality  is,  power  in 
Hollywood  is  a  distributed  entity,  whose 
circumference  is  everywhere  and  whose 
centre  is  nowhere.  Lines  of  decision  are 
less  like  chains  than  nets;  nobody  is 
really  responsible,  and  you  can  take 
out  half  the  system  in  a  quake  and  it’ll 
still  function  much  the  same.  When 
things  go  wrong,  the  buck  simply  gets 
bounced  around  from  site  to  site.  It 
would  be  hideous  to  think  Tank  Girl 
was  someone’s  idea  of  a  good  film,  but  I 
very  much  doubt  it  was  anyone’s  idea  of 
anything.  Rather,  it’s  the  product  of  a 
systemic  mind  so  finely  spread  among 
its  network  of  hosts  as  to  be  unrecogniz¬ 
able  as  a  form  of  intelligence  at  all. 
Successful  speculation  about  how  Tank 
Girl  might  have  been  prevented  could 
lead  profitably  to  a  solution  to  the  major 
problems  of  collective  irresponsibility 
facing  humanity:  global  warming,  the 
debt  crisis,  ozone  depletion,  the 
Bosnian  and  Rwandan  questions, 
Macauley  Culkin  movies. 

It  does  seem  as  though  nobody  with 
any  responsibility  had  any  actual 
control.  First-timers  on  big  movies 
(wave,  director  Rachel  Tallalay,  to 


David  Fincher  and  Danny  Cannon) 
have  notoriously  little  authority  to 
resist  the  creative  input  of  producers 
and  above-line  talent,  and  Tallalay’s 
troubles  have  clearly  been  compounded 
by  her  difficult  transition  from  project 
originator  to  disempowered  hired-hand. 
The  extent  of  Tallalay’s  indenture  to 
the  dark  forces  at  the  top  of  the  strings 
is  indicated  by  the  extraordinary 
disjunctures  of  narrative  where  entire 
characters  and  subplots  have  been 
offered  up  to  placate  the  beast  beneath 
the  cutting-room  floor  (including 
grrly-Thunderbirds  sidekick  Sub  Girl, 
though  her  credit  stays).  In  fact,  the 
elements  that  tend  to  emerge  best  are 
the  ones  over  which  she  seems  to  have 
retained  a  measure  of  say:  the  action 
pieces,  the  designs  (especially  the  tank, 
which  looks  just  as  it  should),  and 
especially  the  care  taken  to  involve 
Hewlett,  whose  last-minute  graphic 
montages  have  ended  up  the  one  joy¬ 
giving  feature  of  the  whole  movie. 
Ironically,  it’s  precisely  these  sequences 
that  most  amply  demonstrate  the 
impossibility  of  turning  comics  into 
movies,  as  every  failed  device  in  the 
repertoire  is  wheeled  out  to  try  to 
emulate  the  energy  and  movement  of 
Hewlett’s  still  images:  staccato  edits 
(necessary  in  any  case  to  disguise  the 


pervasive  continuity  mismatches 
between  graphics  and  live  action), 
manganizing  animation  sequences 
(slightly  more  exciting,  but  not  very 
well  done),  and  some  uproariously 
stately  rostrum  tracking,  all  of  it  to  up¬ 
tempo  modem  American  music  selected 
by  “Executive  Music  Co-ordinator” 
Courtney  Love-Cobain  (sic).  And  yet, 
despite  all  this,  the  richness  of  colour, 
fluidity  and  invention  in  the  graphic 
sequences  still  makes  a  telling  and 
unfortunate  contrast  with  the  drab 
solidity  of  the  surrounding  live  action. 


One  of  the  most  unfortunate 
decisions  was  to  build  so  much  PR  out 
of  the  casting  process  itself  (perhaps  on 
the  inspiration  of  Sara  Stockbridge’s 
well-promoted  bid-by-photoshoot) . 
After  the  embarrassing  backfire  of  the 
bogus  open-audition  stunt  in  London, 
subsequently  compounded  by  Emily 
Lloyd’s  eve-of-filming  walkout,  luckless 
Lori  Petty  marches  on  to  the  screen 
with  her  grim-faced  jury  already  poised 
over  its  scorecards.  Even  so,  nothing 
could  prepare  for  the  sheer  disbelief 
that  Petty’s  interpretation  inspires.  It’s 
not  that  there’s  anything  particularly 
wrong  with  her  performance,  nor 
indeed  anything  particularly  right;  she 
seems  to  be  playing  the  character  as 
scripted,  and  the  character  this  produc¬ 
tion  wants.  But  she’s  so  unrecognizable 
as  the  Tank  Girl  of  Hewlett  and 
Martin,  whose  own  likeness  is  so 
unfortunately  intercut  for  comparison 
throughout,  that  it’s  hard  to  see  on 
what  conceivable  grounds  she  was  cast 
in  the  first  place.  Even  if  it’s  conceded 
that  Tank  Girl  is  by  now  a  global  icon 
whose  style  doesn’t  depend  on  an 
accent  from  England  or  Australia,  and 
even  granted  that  most  actresses  in  the 
running  have  at  least  some  sort  of  chin 
and  a  grin  that  even  at  its  farthest 
shit-eating  extent  isn’t  capable  of  the 
plateswallowing  elasticity  of  Hewlett’s 
muse,  I  don’t  think  anyone  would  have 
easily  pictured  our  heroine  as  so 
entirely  and  inappositely  Valley.  (Who 
exactly  would  be  more  miscast?  Julie 
Delpy?  Demi  Moore?  William  Shatner?) 
Two  thoughts  recur  as  you  watch:  first, 
any  one  of  the  alternatives  mooted  in 
the  casting  stage  would  surely  have 


been  more  suitable  than  the 
disastrously  colourless  and  unsexy 
Petty;  and  second,  anyone  who  actually 
buys  the  official  line  that  Lloyd’s  with¬ 
drawal  was  due  to  purely  tonsorial 
reservations  is  mug  enough  to  deserve 
this  misbegotten  travesty  -  which  as 
the  first  colossal  dead  duck  of  the 
summer  leaves  Judge  Dredd  and 
Waterworld  a  lot  to  live  up  to. 

Over  on  screen  2,  you  could  be  for¬ 
given  for  not  being  bothered  much 
about  Tobe  Hooper’s  The  Mangier  - 
the  kind  of  unpresumptuous  genre- 
horror  flick  you’d  be  more  accustomed 
to  see  as  a  straight-to-video  in  circa 
1985.  It  has,  however,  two  modest 
claims  on  our  interest.  First,  it  belongs 
to  that  most  gourmet  of  trash-horror 
subgenres,  the  Very  Very  Early 
Stephen  King  Story  movie.  Now,  this 
isn’t  the  place  to  argue  why  King’s 
pr e-Carrie  men’s-mag  fiction  is  in  some 
ways  his  defining  oeuvre,  or  to 
speculate  over  whether  the  movie 
rights  to  these  stories  are  perhaps  more 
affordably  available  than  anything  else 
carrying  his  name.  But  what  none 
could  dispute  is  that  the  movies  made 
from  Cavalier  / Night  Shift  shorts  - 
Children  of  the  Corn,  Graveyard  Shift, 
and  absolutely  not  forgetting  The 
Lawnmower  Man  -  are  without  fail  a 
glorious  embarrassment  to  the  great 
man’s  name-tag;  and  that  The  Mangier 
rivals  even  Graveyard  Shift  (its  closest 
competitor)  in  its  tacky,  low-rent,  self- 
parodic  amplification  of  conceits  and 
characterizations  that  must  have 
seemed  so  perishable  and  soon- 
forgotten  in  slabs  of  occasional  prose 
for  early-70s  pom  mags.  “The  Mangier,” 
fans  may  recall,  is  the  one  about  the 
industrial  laundry  press  possessed  by 
a  blood-hungry  demon:  an  exquisitely 
economical  device  (and  metaphor)  for 
splatter  cinema,  proposing  as  it  does  a 
machine  purpose-built  for  converting 
screen  characters  into  special-makeup 
gore.  While  Hooper’s  version  holds  on 
to  a  surprising  amount  of  detail  and 


even  dialogue  from  the  story,  he  inflates 
the  concept  into  an  elaborate  quasi- 
allegorical  saga  of  New  Hampshire 
illuminati  clinging  to  wealth  and 
power  by  a  series  of  virgin  sacrifices  to 
the  satanic  industrial  machine.  If  you 
reckon  this  sounds  like  a  recipe  for 
105  minutes  of  gleeful  exploitation- 
Marxism,  with  visual  nods  to  Blue 
Collar  and  all  male  characters  joining 
in  a  Donald  Sutherland  soundalike 
contest  to  see  who  can  deliver  the 
absurdly  working-men’s  dialogue 
(“Get  a  life!”  “I  got  a  life  -  what  I  need 
is  a  beer”)  in  the  deepest  guttural 
grunt,  then  you’re  already  well- 
positioned  to  enjoy. 

The  second  curiosity  about  The 
Mangier  is  that,  presumably  for 
survivalist  financial  reasons,  it’s  the 
first  international  splatter  flick  to  be 
made  in  The  New  South  Africa.  Up  on 
screen,  this  manifests  itself  mainly  in  a 
number  of  slippage-prone  Afrikaner- 
American  accents,  and  a  few  rather 
evocative  touches  of  estrangement  in 
the  exteriors  -  where  things  are  not 
quite  right  about  the  beige,  boxy 
architecture,  and  street-scenes  bask 
eerily  in  hard  dry  subtropical  light. 
(“Surely  you  must  have  noticed  how 
Riker’s  Valley  is  so  ideally  perfect,”  is 
one  of  the  more  bizarre  claims  by 
Robert  Englund,  starring  as  surely  the 
first  tyrannical  New  England  industri¬ 
alist  to  get  rich  on  running  a  laundry.) 
But  the  Hollywood-in-exile  feeling 
runs  deeper  than  the  surface  of  the 
image.  Hooper,  whose  star  has  slipped 
impressively  of  late,  made  his  last 
movie  in  Israel,  and  while  The 
Mangler’s  parable  of  coarsely  demonic 
bosses  catwalking  it  over  grimed, 
disposable  Morlocks  has  obvious 
resonances  for  the  land  of  its  birth,  it’s 
unlikely  that  was  the  principal  factor 
in  luring  Hooper’s  increasingly  reper¬ 
tory  company  to  suburban  Jo’burg. 

For  despite  its  relatively  lavish 
design  and  makeup,  this  is  film-making 
at  the  edge  of  survival:  without  the 
everyday  luxuries  ordinary  cinema 


interzone  August  1995 


takes  for  granted  like  logic,  pace, 
motivation,  low-decibel  acting,  or 
speakable  dialogue  (portentously: 

“The  one  thing  worse  than  the  devil 
within  is  the  devil  without”).  In  lieu 
of  a  plot,  scenes  segue  together  with 
random  bursts  of  “Come  on!”  “Where?” 
“No  time  for  that  now!”  and  piling  into 
the  car.  In  lieu  of  personalities, 
characters  have  pasts:  “Detective’s 


Wife  Dies  in  Horror  Smash,”  proclaims 
an  improbable  expository  clipping 
improbably  taped  to  a  wall.  “First 
there’s  God,  then  there’s  country,  and 
then  there’s  the  law,”  is  Det.  Ted 
Levine’s  rugged  creed:  “the  rest  is  bull¬ 
shit.”  So  none  of  this  nonsen  se  about 
setting  up  characters,  scenes  that  con¬ 
nect,  or  a  plot  that  conforms  to  main¬ 
stream  canons  of  cinematic  form  and 


sense;  spend  the  budget  on  makeup 
and  spectacle,  and  the  rest  can  look 
after  itself.  As  Englund,  clearly  pleased 
with  the  line,  reminds  us,  “We  all 
have  to  make  sacrifices.”  In  the  harsh 
desert  world  of  survival  cinema,  Tank 
Girl  chose  wrong;  and  the  demons  in 
the  machine  sucked  her  in  and 
mangled  her  soul. 

Nick  Lowe 


WELCOME  TO  THE  MACHINE? 


Two  recent  TV  shows,  cloned  from  30- 
year-old  amber,  demonstrate 
diametrically  opposed  attitudes  to  the 
fruits  of  science. 

Bugs  (BBC  1,  ten  50-minute 
episodes)  is  The  Avengers  transported 
from  the  space  age  to  the  cyberspace 
era  -  “series  consultant”  is  Avengers 
producer  Brian  Clemens  -  and  if  it 
doesn’t  actually  feel  like  science  fiction 
that’s  because  one  day  when  we  weren’t 
looking  the  world  was  quietly  digitized 
around  us.  This  resurrected  dinosaur 
embraces  the  new  with  relish,  showing 
sophisticated  use  of  the  latest  technol¬ 
ogy  to  fight  criminal  abuses  of  science. 
Implicit  is  the  notion  that  machines  are 
morally  neutral,  that  it  is  people  who 
design  and  use  them  for  good  and  evil. 
This  subtext  of  defusing  cybertechno¬ 
phobia  necessitates  a  tongue-in-cheek 
approach  -  “look,  this  stuff  is  FUN!  and 
we  have  to  learn  to  use  it  because  the 
bad  guys  already  have”-while  counting 
on  how  familiar  at  least  part  of  the 
audience  is  with  new  technology. 

The  potential  for  disaster  was  enor¬ 
mous,  but  producer  Brian  Eastman  has 
hired  good  writers,  including  novelist 
Stephen  Gallagher,  and  gifted  the 
show  with  a  disarming  sense  of  its 
own  ridiculousness.  In  Gallagher’s 
“Assassins,  Inc”  our  heroes  repeatedly 
access  a  computer  by  knowing  that 
the  programmer  uses  Frank  Zappa 
song-titles  for  passwords,  conveniently 
overlooking  the  fact  that  Zappa  wrote 
songs  by  the  score.  The  lead  character¬ 
izations  deliberately  evoke  the  two- 
guys-and-a-gal  60s  adventure  teams, 
though  in  deference  to  changing  times 
the  gal,  Jaye  Griffith,  can’t  be  an  iconic, 
high-kicking,  leather-wearing,  man- 
eating  sex-goddess.  Instead  she’s  black 
and  displays  more  intelligence,  humour 
and  charisma  than  the  two  macho 
hunks  combined,  even  if  she  does  wear 
some  decidedly  unstylish  cardigans. 
Craig  McLachlan  is  the  jovial  action 
man,  and  Jesse  Birdsall  is  the  taciturn 
one  with  the  personality  by-pass. 

There’s  a  fairly  complex  assimilation 
into  formula  espionage  plots  of  a  whole 
range  of  devices  which  are  on  the  verge 
of  moving  from  sf  into  reality:  a 
miniature  robot  killing-machine  that 
seeks  a  specific  target  by  pheromone 
coding,  a  gene-tailored  virus  designed 
as  the  ultimate  in  ethnic  cleansers,  a 


voice-activated  bomb,  an  edible 
listening  device,  a  satellite-jammer. 
One  debit  is  that  our  heroes  keep 
stopping  to  explain  the  technology. 

Gregory  Evans’s  excellent  “Manna 
from  Heaven”  used  the  launch  of  a  new 
wonderfood  for  a  surprisingly  straight 
adventure  in  which  the  food  itself  was 
a  part  of  the  plot,  no  mere  techno¬ 
thriller  McGuffin.  Brian  Farnham’s 
direction  squeezed  the  suspense  from 
a  strong  script,  and  Nic  Knowland 
contributed  some  stylish  and  imagin¬ 
ative  photography,  particularly  in  the 
pumping-station  finale.  Gavin  Green¬ 
away’s  music  perfectly  captures  the 
atmosphere  of  the  dangerous  exhilar¬ 
ation  of  dancing  on  a  technological 
high  frontier. 

In  contrast  The  Outer  Limits  (Trilogy/ 
Atlantis/M GM  anthology  series  prod¬ 
uced  by  Justis  Greene,  feature-length 
pilot  plus  41  42-minute  episodes) 
delivers  weekly  dire  warnings  of  the 
dangers  of  thinking  too  much  and 
playing  with  shiny  new  machines. 

The  men  from  Atlantis  say  science  is 
a  demon  which  will  ride  you  to  hell. 

“Blood  Brothers”  (writer  Brad 
Wright,  director  Tibor  Takacs)  offered 
a  slickly  produced  variation  on  the 
wonderdrug-with-horrific-side-effects 
sub-genre.  It  gripped,  was  well  acted, 
with  an  appropriate,  if  predictably 
bleak,  ending.  The  scientists  even 
talked  like  real  scientists.  Less 
positively,  Martin  Kemp  hammed 
dreadfully  as  the  mad  brother,  and  the 
plot  smuggled  out  part  of  Greg  Bear’s 
Blood  Music  (dismissed  assistant 
injects  drug  into  his  body  to  smuggle 
it  from  the  lab).  Also  culpable:  the 
scene  in  which  the  drug  regenerated 
a  monkey’s  cells  so  rapidly  as  to  over¬ 
come  the  effects  of  a  poison  which 
should  have  killed  within  20  seconds; 
and  the  lab  containment  system 
programmed  to  vaporize  all  occupants 
30  seconds  after  a  spill.  Credibility 
was  not  so  much  strained  as  ruptured. 

The  pilot  was  “Sandkings”  (87 
minutes,  teleplay  by  Melinda 
Snodgrass  from  the  novella  by  George 
R.  R.  Martin,  director  Stuart  Gillard), 
starring  Beau  Bridges  and  Helen 
Shaver.  Popular  wisdom  has  it  that  if 
you  remove  the  science  and  still  have 
a  story,  it  isn’t  sf.  In  “Sandkings”  Simon 


Kress  (Bridges)  secretly  continues  his 
work  at  home  after  his  project  is 
terminated  and  he  is  sacked;  his  work 
happens  to  be  breeding  Martian 
beasties  from  ancient  eggs  found  in 
soil-samples  returned  from  the  red 
planet  by  satellite  probe,  but  could  as 
easily  have  involved  reptiles  from  the 
local  zoo.  These  sub-Jurassic  monsters, 
basic  scorpion/crab  composites,  are 
supposed  to  be  intelligent,  but  beyond 
a  few  shots  of  them  following  Bridges 
around,  and  some  intriguing  sand- 
sculptures  they  make  of  his  face,  this 
aspect  is  largely  unexplored. 

What  “Sandkings”  did  have  was 
some  ironic  casting,  acerbic  dialogue 
and  a  powerful  portrait  of  a  psyche 
disintegrating  under  a  self-inflicted 
inferiority  complex.  Kress  believes, 
erroneously,  that  his  father  (played  by 
aged  Lloyd  Bridges)  has  never  loved 
him  as  he  did  his  dead  war-hero 
brother  (we  inevitably  visualize  absent 
superstar  brother  Jeff  Bridges).  In  his 
obsession  to  prove  himself  worthy 
Kress  alienates  everyone  who  does  care  - 
son  (played  by  one  Dylan  Bridges),  wife, 
father.  In  Hollywood  drama  physical 
beauty  often  compensates  for  a  multi¬ 
tude  of  sins,  but  Kress  is  not  good-look¬ 
ing,  and  even  at  the  beginning  has  few 
redeeming  traits.  By  the  end,  unkempt, 
rehearsing  a  Nobel  acceptance  speech, 
rubbing  shaving  cream  into  his  lank, 
rat-tailed  hair  then  hacking  it  short 
with  kitchen  scissors  (in  an  early  scene 
his  father  has  suggested  a  haircut), 
Bridges  portrays  in  unflinching  detail 
an  ugly  man  so  far  over  the  edge  he 
no  longer  knows  himself. 

The  pluses  of  the  anthology  format 
are  considerable  -  no  regular  cast  for 
fans  to  fixate  on,  no  fixed  locations  or 
situations  (though  both  these  episodes 
used  the  same  laboratory  set),  and 
hence,  theoretically  at  least,  greater 
intellectual  freedom  -  but  early  epis¬ 
odes  fall  so  far  short  of  the  opening 
claim  to  explore  the  outer  limits  of 
the  human  imagination  as  to  contra¬ 
vene  advertising-standards  legislation. 
In  “Sandkings”  murder  replaces  imagi¬ 
nation,  followed  by  more  carnage  amid 
the  inevitable  thunderstorm,  topped 
by  a  numbingly  predictable  “twist” 
ending.  For  all  the  sound  and  fury, 
when  the  credits  have  rolled  it  is 
Bridges’s  brave  performance  which 
remains.  Otherwise,  the  technophobe 
backlash  begins  here. 

Gary  Dalkin 


32 


interzone  Ausust  1995 


Date:  October  10,  2019 

Anomalies  in  robot  productivity  confirmed.  Average 
manufacturing  rate  down  12  percent. 

Recommended  actions: 

continue  covert  investigation.  Hire  human  software 
experts  for  all  sites  within  5  days. 

IMPORTANT:  to  protect  RioTech’s  financial  rating 
there  must  be  no  disclosure  of  these  aberrations. 

Even  walking  through  the  industrial  sector, 
past  scarred  factories  rising  out  of  a  concrete 
wasteland,  Marianne  could  smell  the  autumn. 
Dampness  clung  to  the  air,  a  bright  patchwork  of 
leaves  scattered  across  the  sidewalk  from  a  lone 
sugar  maple.  Marianne  bent  down,  selected  a  hand¬ 
ful  of  leaves,  and  carefully  wrapped  them  in  her 
scarf.  A  good  omen  for  her  first  day  at  work.  She 
turned  left  and  crossed  over  to  RioTech’s  entrance. 
The  black  paintwork  was  peeling  from  the  gate,  low- 
grade  steel  bared  around  the  ID  card  slot.  The  com¬ 
puter  squeaked  as  she  inserted  her  card,  and  the 
gate  hinged  open. 

Marianne  stepped  into  a  narrow  hallway.  Dis¬ 
coloured  floor  tiles  curled  up  to  cracked  walls,  but 
ventilation  systems  purred  in  an  expensive  battle  to 
modify  temperature  and  humidity. 


Through  grimy  glass  doors,  she  spotted  the 
l  machines  she’d  be  working  with.  Giant  multi-armed 
robot  manipulators  were  lined  up  beside  conveyor 
belts,  their  bases  anchored  to  the  ground.  A  thou¬ 
sand  camera  eyes  swivelled  on  flexible  stalks, 
angling  for  views  of  the  belts  beneath  them. 

Marianne  let  out  her  breath  in  a  rush:  beautiful, 
they  were  beautiful.  The  heavy  solid  presence  of  the 
machines  pulled  at  her,  like  and  yet  unlike  the  little 
house-bot  that  she  used  to  watch.  With  flowing 
grace,  robot  arms  dipped  and  circled,  drilled  and 
sprayed  and  polished.  A  precisely  orchestrated 
dance  turned  the  raw  stuff  of  the  assembly  lines  into 
fragile  arcs  of  glass,  clock-faces,  televisions,  thin 
tubes  of  clay  piping.  Each  machine  was  capable  of 
switching  from  one  task  to  another,  following  the 
rhythm  of  consumer  demand. 

“You  must  be  Marianne.  I’m  Arthur.” 

She  jumped,  then  relaxed.  The  black  man  beside 
her  barely  came  up  to  her  shoulders,  his  grey  hair 
cropped  short.  A  faded  yellow  sweater  draped  his 
bony  frame,  stretching  almost  down  to  his  knees.  He 
gestured  her  into  a  small  office,  crowded  with  hard¬ 
copy  books.  The  air-conditioning  didn’t  extend  into 
the  office,  and  layered  mustiness  vied  with  the  scent 
of  leather  bindings. 

“Sit  down,  sit  down.”  Arthur  cleared  a  pile  of  Ian 


Ausust  1995 


ASSEMBLY  LINE 


Fleming  novels  from  a  chair,  the  titles  blazed  in 
scarlet  along  the  spines.  “Do  you  drink  coffee?  It’s 
that  or  water.” 

“Coffee’s  fine,  thanks.”  Marianne  eyed  the  mugs 
piled  in  the  sink.  The  stains  caked  on  their  sides 
might  once  have  been  coffee.  “Do  you  also  work  in 
the  computing  department?” 

Arthur’s  wrinkled  face  creased  into  laughter.  He 
leaned  against  the  sink,  his  brown  eyes  kind.  “I’m 
sorry,  Marianne.  There  isn’t  any  computing  depart¬ 
ment,  just  you.” 

“That’s  impossible  -  RioTech  has  hundreds  of 
robots  at  this  site  -” 

“Don’t  worry  about  it.  The  machines  have  always 
worked  fine  without  any  so-called  experts.  No 
offense  meant  to  you.  Some  bored  executive  proba¬ 
bly  decided  that  on-site  software  consultants  would 
look  good  in  the  company  profile.” 

Marianne  swallowed  hard.  Her  professor  had 
warned  her  that  industry  wasn’t  as  exciting  as  she 
might  think.  But  that  wasn’t  the  problem  at  all. 
She’d  signed  on  as  a  software  consultant,  yet  some¬ 
how  she’d  ended  up  in  sole  charge  of  a  host  of  indus¬ 
trial  robots.  And  she’d  never  even  programmed  a 
full-scale  model,  only  the  university  simulations. 

Arthur  put  a  mug  of  coffee  down  in  front  of  her. 
“You’ll  be  fine.  RioTech  wouldn’t  have  hired  you  if 
you  weren’t  over-qualified.  Same  as  any  job,  always 
more  applicants  than  they  know  what  to  do  with.” 

Marianne  wrapped  her  fingers  around  the 
warmth  of  the  mug.  The  coffee  was  laced  with  fresh 
cream,  the  rich  taste  slipping  down  her  throat.  She 
thought  of  the  robots  next  door,  their  motions  an 
exercise  in  fluid  efficiency.  Maybe  this  would  be  all 
right  after  all. 

^  ^  ^ 

Although  Arthur  offered  to  make  room  for  her  in  the 
office,  Marianne  installed  herself  in  the  main  fac¬ 
tory.  She  squeezed  a  desk  onto  a  platform  at  the  far 
end,  overlooking  the  robots.  RioTech  hadn’t  provided 
her  with  specific  instructions,  so  she  browsed 
through  data  almost  at  random.  One  hour  she 
skimmed  the  machine  specs.  The  next  hour  she 
stepped  through  a  section  of  assembly  code,  labori¬ 
ously  tracing  from  raw  commands  to  the  manipula¬ 
tor  joints  through  to  the  complex  trajectories  needed 
to  cut  a  sheet  of  steel. 

She  spent  her  breaks  walking  up  and  down  the 
long  aisles,  pausing  to  watch  each  machine  in  turn. 
At  home  at  night,  she  found  these  walks  coming 
back  to  her.  The  swinging  of  her  angle-poise  lamp 
reminded  her  of  the  play  of  the  robot  And  then  she 
remembered  the  way  her  reflection  caught  in  the 
robots’  sides,  how  the  heavy  machines  transmuted 
to  delicacy  as  they  worked  with  silk  and  airbrush. 

On  the  eighth  morning,  Marianne  estimated  the 
computational  load  on  the  robots,  and  discovered 
that  nine  tenths  of  the  processor  power  was  unused. 
She  frowned.  Each  of  these  computers  had  enough 
spare  capacity  to  control  a  squadron  of  fighter  jets. 
Drumming  her  fingers  against  the  desk,  she  glanced 
down  at  the  machines. 

A  dozen  gold-bright  eyes  stared  back  at  her. 


The  eyes  swung  away  in  a  dozen  different  direc¬ 
tions.  Marianne’s  cheeks  burned  as  she  realized  they 
were  only  robot  cameras.  Just  a  chance  alignment  of 
some  of  the  vision  systems,  their  bright  point- 
sources  blinking  at  her  for  an  instant.  She  forced 
herself  to  let  go  of  the  edge  of  the  desk.  Clearly,  she 
needed  a  rest. 

She  leaned  back  into  the  soft  chair,  staring  up  at 
the  ceiling.  Through  her  earplugs,  muted  noises 
sounded  faintly.  Whistles  and  scrapes,  oscillating 
hums  and  low  bass  rumbles  amalgamated  to  some¬ 
thing  almost  musical  -  waves  crashing  on  an  alien 
beach,  a  storm  sweeping  through  a  forest. 

Somewhat  calmer,  she  turned  back  to  her  com¬ 
puter  terminal.  Her  arm  brushed  across  a  sheet  of 
paper.  She  pushed  it  aside,  then  froze  as  she  focused 
on  the  sheet:  that  wasn’t  hers.  Sketched  lightly  over 
the  cream  paper  was  a  tracery  of  red-lobed  leaves, 
the  colours  softening  into  yellow  at  the  bottom. 

Marianne  stared  from  the  sheet  to  the  sugar 
maple  leaves  she’d  placed  on  the  edge  of  her  desk. 
Slowly,  she  looked  over  at  the  robots.  Scattered 
around  the  base  of  the  nearest  was  a  shower  of 
paper  -  maple  leaves  rendered  in  charcoal,  gold 
paint,  and  a  myriad  shades  of  red. 

Goose  bumps  prickled  her  bare  arms.  The 
machines  loomed  in  front  of  her,  twelve  foot  tall 
metal  bodies  with  razor-sharp  blades.  But  she 
wasn’t  frightened,  not  at  all.  She’d  wanted  this  for 
as  long  as  she  could  remember,  lying  awake  in  bed, 
imagining  something  more  than  programming 
buried  in  computer  circuitry. 

Something  other. 

But  no  one  took  that  idea  seriously  any  more, 
except  in  cheap  horror  vids.  The  computer  she’d 
used  at  the  university  had  a  magnitude  more  pro¬ 
cessing  power  and  a  state-of-the-art  natural  lan¬ 
guage  interface.  She  took  a  deep  breath,  and  shook 
her  head.  The  only  time  that  computer  had  ever 
done  something  unexpected  -  peppering  her  screen 
with  crude  diagrams  -  had  been  another  grad  stu¬ 
dent’s  idea  of  humour.  No,  either  there  was  a  pro¬ 
gramming  glitch,  or  else  someone  was  playing 
games  with  her. 

Marianne  pulled  the  keyboard  forward,  and  called 
up  the  files  for  the  malfunctioning  robot.  Line  by 
line,  she  checked  through  the  designs  it  had  been 
given.  The  machine  was  supposed  to  be  painting 
Celtic  patterns  on  kitchenware,  and  although  it  was 
now  back  in  full  swing,  the  source  of  the  temporary 
aberration  was  elusive. 

Exceedingly  elusive.  She  couldn’t  even  work  out 
where  it  had  gotten  hold  of  the  paper.  The  nearest 
supply  was  three  aisles  away. 

Arthur  came  in  briefly,  asking  when  she  was  going 
to  eat  lunch,  but  she  didn’t  have  time  for  that.  She 
was  trying  to  understand  the  information  flow 
through  the  computer’s  optic  fibres,  only  partly 
determined  by  the  current  program.  Other  patterns 
ebbed  and  surged  in  the  background,  pseudo-ran¬ 
dom  flux  left  over  in  the  processor’s  excess  capacity. 

Really,  she  ought  to  contact  RioTech  headquarters 
for  advice.  But  they’d  probably  blame  her  for  any 


interione  August  1995 


MARY  SOON  LEE 


problems,  and  she  had  broken  the  stall  print  of  the 
regulations  -  she  was  meant  to  query  the  robots  from 
a  remote  terminal,  not  to  sit  in  the  factory  with  them. 

When  the  twinge  of  cramp  in  her  back  grew  too 
distracting,  Marianne  paced  between  the  machines. 
Returning,  she  scooped  up  all  the  drawings  and 
piled  them  on  her  desk. 

She  was  about  to  sit  down  when  she  saw  a  man 
walking  toward  her.  His  long  blond  hair  was  caught 
up  to  one  side  in  a  complex  twist  that  fell  down  into 
a  pony-tail,  and  he  wore  a  tight-fitting  green 
trouser-suit.  Marianne  disliked  the  outfit,  though 
judging  by  the  man’s  studied  elegance,  it  must  be 
considered  fashionable. 

Stopping  on  the  opposite  side  of  her  desk,  he 
shouted  above  the  noise  of  the  machines,  “Marianne 
Daley?” 

“Yes.  And  you  are?” 

Without  answering,  he  swivelled  her  terminal  to 
face  him,  and  tapped  briskly  at  the  keyboard.  The 
robots  stilled  abruptly,  limbs  halted  in  mid-motion. 
He  smiled  urbanely.  “The  name’s  Mark  Raylin, 
senior  technical  advisor  to  RioTech.  How  can  you 
stand  working  in  here?  Don’t  you  hate  the  noise 
those  things  make?” 

“Not  in  the  least;  I  like  it.”  Marianne  forced  a 
smile.  What  was  Raylin  doing  here?  A  system  moni¬ 
tor  might  have  reported  the  malfunction  to  RioTech, 
but  surely  they  wouldn’t  immediately  send  a  senior 
representative. 

“Time’s  money,  as  they  say.  So  I’ll  cut  to  the  point. 
Have  you  altered  the  machines’  programming  in  any 
way?” 

“No.” 

“Did  you  modify  the  set-up?  The  robot  layout  or 
supply  of  raw  materials?” 

“I  re-routed  some  of  the  internal  diagnostics  so  I 
could  track  machine  activity.  Nothing  else.”  Which 
was  true,  as  far  as  it  went.  But  a  knot  coiled  in  her 
stomach,  and  she  wished  she’d  put  the  sheaf  of 
drawings  somewhere  less  conspicuous. 

“Then  you  can  think  of  no  reason  why  this  site’s 
productivity  might  have  changed?” 

“No.” 

“Why  don’t  you  cooperate,  Marianne?  That  would  be 
easier  for  both  of  us.”  Raylin  laid  his  hand  over  hers, 
his  hot  palm  sticky  against  her  skin.  She  yanked  her 
hand  free.  “I  don’t  know  what  you  mean.” 

“Don’t  pretend.  Tell  whoever  you  represent  that 
RioTech  is  ready  to  negotiate.”  He  dropped  a  silver 
data-cube  on  her  desk,  his  smile  thinning,  “we  don’t 
yet  know  who’s  backing  you,  Marianne.  But  there’s 
enough  circumstantial  evidence  here  to  convict  you 
of  industrial  sabotage.” 

For  a  moment,  Marianne’s  jaws  were  clamped 
together  too  hard  to  reply.  She  didn’t  know  what 
Raylin  was  driving  at,  but  it  was  more  than  one 
machine  sketching  some  unprogrammed  pictures. 
“There’s  been  some  mistake.  I  haven’t  done  anything.” 

“Call  me  by  noon  tomorrow  if  you  change  your 
mind.”  He  turned  on  his  heels,  and  strode  away 
without  looking  back. 

Marianne  opened  her  mouth  to  shout  after  him, 


but  couldn’t  think  of  anything  useful  to  say.  Not 
until  she  knew  what  was  going  on.  With  shaky  fin¬ 
gers,  she  inserted  the  data-cube  into  the  terminal 
drive,  and  blinked  at  the  array  of  numbers  that 
scrolled  past.  Slowing  the  feed  down,  she  read 
through  lists  of  production  rates  at  RioTech  sites. 
Over  the  past  three  weeks,  output  had  fallen  signifi¬ 
cantly  at  all  the  RioTech  factories. 

Except  this  one. 

Marianne  checked  the  statistics  again,  but  there 
was  no  mistake.  Since  she’d  joined,  production  at 
this  factory  had  picked  up  again,  and  was  now 
exceeding  quota  by  an  unprecedented  seven  percent. 
Moreover,  the  increased  rates  were  synchronized 
almost  precisely  with  her  working  hours. 

So  unless  RioTech  had  faked  these  figures, 
Raylin’s  attitude  made  sense.  He  thought  she  was 
the  go-between  for  some  industrial  saboteurs  who 
had  found  a  way  to  slow  down  the  production  lines. 
And,  equally  important,  to  speed  them  up  past 
RioTech’s  best  efforts.  That  was  one  hell  of  a  bar¬ 
gaining  chip. 

She  would  have  laughed,  except  that,  for  the  first 
time,  she  was  scared.  Over  the  past  six  years,  RioTech 
had  swelled  from  its  base  in  Brazil  to  become  one  of 
the  biggest  global  conglomerates.  Even  if  she  con¬ 
vinced  them  she  had  nothing  to  do  with  this,  they 
weren’t  going  to  just  apologize  for  troubling  her.  The 
information  on  the  data-cube  alone  was  too  sensitive 
for  them  to  trust  her  afterwards. 

She  thought  about  calling  her  university  friends,  but 
they  probably  couldn’t  help,  and  she’d  almost  certainly 
be  incriminating  them.  She  thought  about  catching 
the  next  plane  out,  but  unless  she  went  to  some 
Third  World  country  that  still  used  hard  currency, 
RioTech  could  track  her  through  her  credit  supply. 

Shivering,  Marianne  stared  at  the  robots.  They 
stretched  before  her  like  a  broken  army.  Frozen  into 
position,  their  limbs  were  heavy,  awkward  things, 
robbed  of  grace. 

On  impulse,  Marianne  rebooted  the  factory  sys¬ 
tems.  The  machines  jerked  into  motion  with  queer 
staccato  gestures.  A  cascade  of  small  disasters  rip¬ 
pled  round  the  room  -  liquids  splashing,  screws 
falling  to  the  ground,  fabric  tearing  -  until  the 
assembly  line  regained  its  rhythm. 

Marianne  gazed  at  them  for  a  long  time,  the  vast 
chorus  of  sounds  seeping  into  her.  But  she  still  had 
no  idea  what  to  do. 

^  ^  ^ 

“Arthur?”  Marianne  knocked  on  Arthur’s  office  door. 
She  badly  needed  to  talk  this  through  with  someone. 
Bending  the  facts  to  fit  industrial  sabotage  took 
coincidences  she  didn’t  believe:  why  should  this  fac¬ 
tory  be  singled  out?  Why  were  its  production  rates 
linked  to  her  work  hours? 

Arthur  pulled  the  door  open  and  waved  her  inside,  a 
book  by  Alice  Walker  in  his  hand.  “Something  wrong?” 

‘Yes,  but  it’s  going  to  sound  crazy.  Have  the  robots 
ever  done  anything...  odd...  since  you’ve  been  here?” 

“Most  of  what  they  do  seems  strange  enough  to 
me.  What  kind  of  odd  were  you  thinking  of?” 

“Painting  pictures.”  She  spread  a  sheaf  of  the 


interione  August  1995 


ASSEMBLY  LINE 


sketches  down  on  the  table,  not  meeting  his  gaze. 
“And  this  morning  I  thought  they  were  watching 
me,  and  then  again  half  an  hour  ago.” 

When  she  said  nothing  more,  Arthur  raised  his 
eyebrows.  “And?” 

“That’s  it.  Now  you  tell  me  I’m  irrational,  and  I  go 
away  and  leave  you  alone.” 

“You  don’t  strike  me  as  the  irrational  kind.”  He 
picked  up  one  of  the  drawings,  then  another.  “And 
these  aren’t  something  that  was  meant  to  come  out 
of  the  assembly  line.  I  like  simple  explanations.  If 
you  think  the  machines  are  watching  you,  then 
maybe  they  are.  And  maybe  these  drawings  are 
something  they’re  trying  to  say  to  you.” 

“But  it  doesn’t  make  sense.  Why  here?  I  mean  the 
robots  are  reasonably  sophisticated,  but  there  are 
tens  of  thousands  of  computers  that  are  more 
advanced.  And  why  now?” 

“Because.”  At  Marianne’s  look,  Arthur  raised  his 
hands  placatingly.  “I  don’t  know  why;  I’m  not  sure 
you’ll  ever  know.  But  just  because  you  can’t  explain 
this,  doesn’t  mean  it  isn’t  happening.” 

Marianne  shook  her  head.  She’d  come  to  Arthur  to 
clear  her  thoughts,  and  instead  he  was  racing  on 
ahead  of  her. 

‘You  look  tired.  Go  home,  get  some  rest.  Things 
often  sort  themselves  out  when  you  sleep.” 

“I  can’t  go  home,  I  need  to...”  she  trailed  off,  not 
wanting  to  drag  Arthur  into  the  mess  with  RioTech. 
“Thanks  for  listening.” 

^  ^  ^ 

Marianne  didn’t  go  home  at  all  that  night.  She  fell 
asleep  at  her  desk  sometime  in  the  early  hours  of  the 
morning,  her  head  pillowed  on  her  arms,  the  noise  of 
the  robots  blending  into  the  edge  of  her  dreams. 

When  she  woke,  the  crick  in  her  neck  had  attained 
Olympic  proportions.  Muttering  imprecations  to  her¬ 
self,  she  reached  for  her  mug  of  cold  coffee.  Her  hand 
closed  on  something  smoother. 

Blinking,  she  focused  on  a  fluted  crystal  glass,  the 
stem  engraved  with  minute  pairs  of  eyes,  the  cen¬ 
tres  picked  out  in  the  exact  brown  of  her  own  irises. 
She  bolted  upright,  and  saw  the  robots  watching 
her.  Every  single  camera  was  turned  toward  her,  a 
sea  of  gold-bright  dots. 

She  couldn’t  breathe,  her  throat  constricted.  After 
a  moment,  she  managed  a  raw-voiced,  “Thanks.” 

But  they  didn’t  answer.  Of  course  they  didn’t 
answer.  How  could  they?  No  one  put  language  data¬ 
bases  into  factory  robots.  If  they  were  thinking  at 
all,  it  might  be  on  some  vastly  different  level,  an 
otherness  more  strange  than  any  living  creature. 
Only  their  gold-bright  eyes  held  constant,  the  stalks 
dipping  and  swaying  in  an  alien  rhythm,  but  the 
lenses  always  focused  on  her. 

And  she  was  scared.  Not  scared  that  the  robots 
would  hurt  her,  not  at  all.  But  that  she  would  move 
too  suddenly,  or  Arthur  would  walk  in,  and  the 
moment  would  shatter.  She  kept  thinking  that  no 
one  would  believe  this.  So,  guiltily,  she  switched  on 
the  video  units  to  record  the  scene. 

The  robots  were  still  watching  her.  She  jumped 
up,  suddenly  unable  to  sit  still  another  second,  and 


ran  down  to  the  factory  floor.  Like  a  child,  she  ran 
the  long  circuit  past  each  machine.  Something  deep, 
piercingly  sharp,  sang  inside  her  as  she  saw  the 
robots  turn  to  watch  her  in  a  bank  of  rippling  gold. 

She  halted,  heaving  for  breath.  One  by  one,  the 
machines  turned  away,  tools  swinging  into  motion  in 
a  rising  crescendo  of  sound. 

“Wait  Marianne  stopped,  it  was  too  late.  The 
robots  weren’t  watching  any  more.  Slowly,  she 
walked  back  to  her  desk.  She  picked  up  the  crystal 
glass,  her  fingers  closing  on  the  base  hard  enough  to 
hurt.  Something  had  happened  here,  something 
rare,  and  fragile,  and  infinitely  precious.  And  it  was 
up  to  her  to  try  to  preserve  it. 

But  still  she  hesitated.  She  had  the  distinct 
impression  that  neither  Mark  Raylin  nor  his 
RioTech  bosses  were  going  to  be  helpful.  To  do  this 
alone,  she’d  have  to  illegally  breach  her  contract. 
Worse  than  that,  when  RioTech  was  finished  with 
her,  jail  might  seem  like  light  relief. 

Glancing  up,  she  caught  two  of  the  nearby  robots 
watching  her,  their  electronic  eyes  blinking  steadily. 
A  gesture  so  insubstantial  that  it  was  hardly  com¬ 
munication  at  all.  And  yet  it  mattered.  Beneath 
their  gaze,  Marianne  reached  for  the  keyboard.  As 
quickly  as  possible,  she  started  copying  confidential 
files,  dumping  sections  of  the  robots’  memories  into 
secondary  storage. 

When  she  paused,  her  wrists  aching,  it  was  nearly 
noon.  Mark  Raylin  might  arrive  at  any  moment.  She 
had  to  transfer  the  data  off-site,  and  she  didn’t  have 
time  to  be  careful.  Using  codes  stolen  from  the  data- 
cube  Raylin  had  given  her,  Marianne  forged  Rio- 
Tech’s  security  protocols  and  established  an  external 
data-line.  She  keyed  in  an  electronic  address,  relaxing 
slightly  when  someone  picked  up  the  connection  at 
the  other  end. 

Her  former  professor’s  face  coalesced  on  her 
screen,  the  ends  of  his  white  moustache  bouncing  as 
he  spoke.  “Marianne,  good  to  see  you  again  — ” 

“I  need  a  favour.  Right  now.  I’m  transmitting  some 
data  to  you.  Please  distribute  it  as  widely  as  possible.” 

“What  type  of  data?  If  there  is  anything  military  — ” 

“No,  nothing  military.  Call  it,  the  ghost  in  the 
machine.  I  don’t  have  time  to  explain.  Please.” 

His  moustache  twitched,  and  then  he  nodded. 
“Very  well.  If  I  dislike  what  I  see,  I  shall  simply 
ensure  your  Ph.D.  is  revoked.” 

His  smile  softened  his  words  as  he  cut  the  video 
link.  There  was  nothing  left  for  her  to  do.  Cupping 
the  crystal  glass  firmly  in  her  hands,  Marianne 
walked  down  to  the  robots. 

^  ^  ^ 

One  moment  the  machines  were  swaying  above 
Marianne,  their  arms  lithe  and  skilful.  The  next 
moment,  they  shuddered  to  a  halt,  silence  breaking 
in  their  wake. 

Marianne  spun  round,  saw  Raylin  leaning  against 
the  motionless  conveyor  belt  to  her  left.  Mustering  a 
smile  from  somewhere,  she  nodded  to  him.  “Mister 
Raylin,  I’ve  prepared  a  preliminary  report  for  you.” 

“Don’t  bother  to  tell  me.  We’ve  already  intercepted 
your  transmission  to  the  university,  and  some  of 


interionc  August ' 


MARY  SOON  LEE 


your  conjectures  were  surprisingly  helpful.” 

There  was  a  sly  viciousness  in  his  tone  that  raised 
the  hairs  on  the  back  of  Marianne’s  neck.  “What  do 
you  mean?” 

He  walked  over,  standing  so  close  she  smelled  the 
tang  of  his  aftershave,  the  staleness  of  his  breath. 
“According  to  you,  the  robots’  internal  logic  is  progres¬ 
sively  corrupted  by  real-world  experiences  -  contact 
with  objects  on  the  assembly  line,  sensors  focusing  on 
neighbouring  machines,  and  so  forth.  Because  the 
robots  communicate  to  share  their  instructions,  the 
logic  malfunctions  spread  through  the  group.  Well?” 

Marianne  stepped  away  from  him,  found  herself 
wedged  into  a  corner.  Her  fingers  gripped  white 
around  the  base  of  the  crystal  glass,  but  she  stead¬ 
ied  her  voice.  “I  didn’t  say  the  robots  were  malfunc¬ 
tioning.  They’re  learning  to  think  independently.” 

“Call  it  what  you  want.  But  to  prevent  it,  all  we 
have  to  do  is  to  periodically  purge  the  robots’  memo¬ 
ries.  Sure,  we  lose  a  few  days  every  year  while  they 
retrain,  but  that’s  an  acceptable  trade-off.  I’m  order¬ 
ing  the  procedure  at  all  our  sites.” 

Marianne  stared  at  him,  bile  rising  in  her  mouth. 
“You’re  going  to  kill  them?” 

“Don’t  overreact.  They’re  just  machines.”  He 
placed  one  heavy  hand  over  her  shoulder,  squeezed. 
“Relax.  Maybe  I  can  persuade  RioTech  to  drop  the 
charges  against  you.”  His  palm  moved  down,  set¬ 
tling  over  her  breast. 

Marianne  writhed  free,  blood  flaming  in  her 
cheeks  as  Raylin  laughed. 

“Fine,  we’ll  do  it  the  hard  way.”  He  gestured  to 
someone  near  the  entrance. 

Turning,  Marianne  saw  a  policeman  walking  toward 
them.  Her  arms  were  trembling,  and  she  thought 
she  might  vomit.  But  the  crystal  glass  was  cool  in 
her  hand.  She  swung  back  to  Raylin,  and  smashed 
the  glass  into  his  face  with  all  her  strength. 

^  ^  ^ 

At  Marianne’s  trial,  the  lawyers  displayed  enhanced 
photographs  of  Raylin’s  face.  Glass  fragments  jutted 
out  of  his  skin  in  a  ripped  scarlet  mosaic.  But  to 
Marianne  they  were  as  unfamiliar  as  to  the  jury.  She 
couldn’t  remember  attacking  Raylin,  couldn’t  remem¬ 
ber  her  arrest,  or  the  bite  of  the  handcuffs  round  her 
wrists. 

When  she  thought  of  it,  all  she  saw  was  the  glass 
shattering.  A  fall  of  crystal  trembling  to  the  floor. 
Broken.  Silent.  And  all  around  her,  the  robots 
frozen,  their  eyes  dulled  to  the  colour  of  dust. 

Arthur  visited  her  every  week  at  the  prison.  He 
told  her  that  some  of  the  academic  community  were 
taking  her  theories  seriously,  and  trying  to  duplicate 
the  results.  There  were  even  minority  groups  lobby¬ 
ing  for  machine  rights. 

Marianne  nodded  in  the  right  places,  but  she 
couldn’t  bring  herself  to  say  anything.  She  listened 
while  he  rambled  on  about  the  books  he’d  read,  the 
weather  outside,  little  things.  Sometimes  just  the 
sound  of  his  voice,  warm  and  familiar,  made  her 
want  to  cry. 

Then  one  week,  he  didn’t  say  anything,  just  pushed 
a  sheet  of  paper  across. 


Marianne  lifted  it.  A  drawing  on  cream  paper, 
washes  of  paint  layered  over  each  other,  perspective 
skewed  in  odd  ways  so  that  at  first  she  saw  nothing 
but  a  mess  of  colours.  Tilting  it,  the  light  caught 
strangely.  For  a  moment  the  image  looked  three- 
dimensional:  a  young  woman  -  herself  -  walking 
under  an  archway  of  robots,  a  host  of  gold-bright 
eyes  intent  on  her. 

“Where?”  She  couldn’t  say  any  more,  the  picture 
blurring  before  her. 

“I  found  it  at  the  factory,  three  days  ago.  Then 
next  morning  your  professor  friend  called  up,  seems 
his  machine  has  also  taken  to  drawing.  There’s  been 
about  eighty  instances  all  told,  and  the  media  are 
making  the  most  of  it.” 

His  voice  rolled  on  in  a  comforting  flow,  pausing 
occasionally.  But  she  only  clutched  the  drawing 
wordlessly. 

“Marianne,  time’s  up.  I  have  to  go.” 

“Thank  you  -”  she  should  have  said  that  ages 
ago  -  “for  bringing  this,  for  coming  every  week.  I  -” 

“It’s  okay.  See  you  next  week.” 

And  it  was  okay,  suddenly  it  was  all  okay.  Next 
spring,  she’d  be  released.  The  buds  would  be  open¬ 
ing  on  the  trees,  the  sky  rinsed  pure  blue.  Maybe  the 
machines  would  be  interested  in  seasons.  Marianne 
smiled.  a 


Mary  Soon  Lee,  who  lives  in  Pittsburgh,  Pennsylvania,  has  sent 
us  the  following  message  about  herself:  “This  has  been  a  good 
year  for  me.  I  had  my  first  publication  in  a  major  magazine  when 
‘Ebb  Tide’  appeared  in  the  May  1 995  issue  of  Fantasy  &  Science 
Fiction.  Also,  my  short-short  story  ‘Conversation  Pieces’  was 
recently  published  in  Beyond  #2,  my  first  sale  to  a  British 
magazine.  I  am  very  happy  indeed  to  sell  a  story  to  Interzone. 
When  I  grew  up  in  London,  it  was  the  only  significant  British  sf 
magazine.  I  hope  no  one  still  remembers  this,  but  many  years  ago 
when  I  was  still  at  school,  I  submitted  a  story  to  IZ:  single-spaced, 
with  narrow  margins,  on  small  paper.  I  think  I  was  lucky  to  escape 
with  a  polite  form  rejection. 

“I  am  indeed  British,  though  my  mother  still  holds  an  Irish 
passport,  and  my  father  was  ethnically  Chinese,  grew  up  in 
Malaysia,  and  held  a  British  passport.  I  was  born  and  raised  in 
London.  I  then  spent  seven  years  living  in  Cambridge,  where  I 
obtained  an  MA  in  mathematics  and  a  diploma  in  computer 
science  from  Cambridge  University,  plus  -  via  a  lengthy  daily 
commute  -  an  M.Sc.  in  astronautics  and  space  engineering  from 
Cranfield  University.  I  also  spent  two  years  working  for  a 
Cambridge-based  software  company,  and  married  my  husband, 
Andrew  Moore. 

“In  November  1990  we  moved  to  Boston,  Massachusetts.  I  had 
intended  to  get  a  job  related  to  my  computing  or  aerospace 
qualifications,  but  ended  up  writing  fiction  instead.  In  1 993  we 
moved  to  Pittsburgh.  I’ve  started  doing  a  little  computer  science 
again,  as  joint  research  with  my  husband,  who  is  an  assistant 
professor  at  Carnegie  Mellon  University.  I  also  run  Pittsburgh 
Worldwrights,  a  local  speculative  fiction  workshop,  which  is  a 
source  of  honest  critiques,  good  friends,  and  fellow  ice-cream 
eaters.” 


:  Ausust  1995 


The  Island  of 

DR  ROMEAU 

Barrington  J.  Bayley 


Clarke  Prentiss  began  to  feel  nervous  as  the 
launch  approached  the  nearby  island  at  what 
seemed  reckless  speed.  He  would  have 
thought  the  off-shore  reaches  quite  impassable  by 
boat.  He  could  see  no  way  at  all  through  the  chaotic, 
jagged  coral,  about  which  the  sea  swirled  and 
churned  with  frightening  violence. 

The  pilot,  however,  glanced  only  occasionally  at 
the  surrounding  hazards.  His  attention  was  on  the 
computer  screen  in  front  of  him,  on  which  was  dis¬ 
played  a  chart  of  the  waters.  A  sinuous  red  snake  or 
worm  was  the  path  they  had  to  follow.  A  blip 
halfway  along  it  showed  the  position  of  the  launch. 

Prentiss’s  red-haired  guide  noticed  his  sudden 
paleness.  “You  are  right  if  you  are  thinking  the 
island  is  pretty  nearly  inaccessible,”  he  said.  “Too 
rocky  to  build  an  airstrip  or  even  to  land  a  heli¬ 
copter.  Without  the  help  of  the  computer  chart  not 
even  a  boat  could  get  through.” 

“So  who  made  the  chart  in  the  first  place?” 

“Doctor  Romeau,  of  course.  One  of  the  greatest 
geniuses  the  world  has  seen.” 

Red  coral  slid  past.  Spray  sprinkled  Prentiss’s 
face,  the  launch  swaying  as  the  blip  on  the  screen 
crawled  and  wriggled  its  way  through  the  red  worm. 
Then  they  were  in  the  calm  water  within  the  small 
lagoon,  heading  for  the  jetty. 

“So  this  is  Romeau’s  fantasy  island,”  Prentiss 
murmured. 

It  presented,  in  fact,  little  more  than  a  rocky  pile 
jutting  out  of  the  water  and  rising  to  a  lofty  peak. 
No  buildings  had  been  erected  on  it.  Prentiss 
already  knew  that  Romeau  had  ferried  in  robot  tun¬ 
nelling  machines  and  excavated  his  premises  from 
within.  Visible  here  and  there  were  windows  and 
balconies  set  into  the  jumbled  rock. 

The  launch  pulled  up  at  the  jetty.  Once  it  was 
secured  the  guide  led  Prentiss  along  a  short  gang¬ 
plank  to  the  timber  platform.  A  door  in  the  solid 
rock  slid  aside.  Prentiss  was  ushered  through.  The 
door  thumped  immediately  shut  at  his  back,  leaving 
the  guide  outside,  giving  Prentiss  a  slightly  uneasy 
feeling  of  entrapment. 

It  soon  passed.  The  artificial  lighting  within  Doctor 
Romeau’s  island  was  a  vibrant  peach  colour,  making 
skin  tones  glow.  The  short  passage,  carved  from  bare 
rock  but  treated  with  a  plaster  lining  to  make  it  look 


like  soft  sandstone,  ended  in  three  archways.  From 
the  middle  one  a  woman  smiled  at  him. 

He  guessed  her  to  be  in  her  late  20s.  Her  eyes 
were  a  melting  brown,  her  mouth  large  and  sensu¬ 
ous.  From  the  waist  up  she  wore  only  bangles  and  a 
brief  basque  supporting  fulsome  breasts.  Incongru¬ 
ously,  a  long  full  white  skirt  covered  her  from  waist 
to  ankles. 

Her  movements  were  loose-limbed  as  she  came 
towards  him.  His  heart  began  to  beat  a  little  faster. 

“Good  day,  Mr  Prentiss.  Doctor  Romeau  has  sent 
me  to  receive  you.  Would  you  like  to  rest  before  you 
meet  him?” 

“Thank  you,  I  am  quite  all  right.” 

“Some  refreshments,  perhaps?” 

“Actually  I  had  hoped  to  do  the  interview  and  get 
back  to  Jakarta  before  dark.” 

“Oh?”  Her  eyebrows  rose.  “But  the  launch  has 
already  left.  It  won’t  return  until  tomorrow.  I  am 
afraid  you  will  have  to  stay  the  night.” 

“What?  Nothing  was  said  to  me  about  this!”  Pren¬ 
tiss  showed  his  annoyance.  The  woman  looked 
embarrassed  and  conciliatory. 

“I’m  sorry,  there  must  have  been  a  misunderstand¬ 
ing,”  she  said.  “But  wouldn’t  you  prefer  to  stay,  in 
any  case?  It  will  help  you  get  the  feel  of  the  place.” 

“Well,  I  suppose  so.”  Prentiss  frowned,  suspecting 
that  he  was  being  manipulated. 

It  seemed  he  was  being  given  no  choice.  He  felt  an 
involuntary  thrill.  If  the  rumours  he  had  heard  were 
true,  he  might  be  invited  to  sample  the  delights  of 
the  island... 

Doctor  Romeau  sat  at  a  lacquered  table  sipping  aro¬ 
matic  tea  from  a  Chinese  bowl.  He  wore  a  long  robe  of 
shimmering  lilac  silk.  He  turned  blue  eyes  on  Pren¬ 
tiss,  who  received  a  shock  of  disorientation.  How  old 
must  the  doctor  be?  The  eyes  had  the  liveliness  of  a 
young  man  of  20,  but  that  could  hardly  be  possible. 
The  face  was  fairly  smooth;  lines  appeared  only  if  one 
looked  close.  The  hair  was  perhaps  more  of  an  indica¬ 
tion:  white  and  fluffy,  not  the  hair  of  a  young  man. 

“Doctor,  this  is  Clarke  Prentiss  of  the  Planetary 
Enquirer,”  the  young  woman  announced. 

“Thank  you,  Lindy.” 

She  left  them  alone.  The  doctor  offered  Prentiss 
some  tea,  which  he  accepted  for  politeness’s  sake.  He 


interzone  Ausust  1995 


switched  on  his  pocket  recorder  and  began  the  inter¬ 
view. 

“Doctor  Romeau,  the  world  is  curious  to  know 
exactly  what  goes  on  in  your  research  station.  I 
gather  you  are  doing  research  into  sexuality.” 

“Oh,  this  is  not  just  a  research  station.  It  is  an 
island  of  pleasure  in  a  world  of  pain.  As  for  research, 
yes,  we  do  research.  But  you  know  the  phrase 
research  and  development ?  Here  we  do  development. 
Our  aim  is  to  provide  the  world  with  happiness.” 

The  bravado  of  the  answer  left  Prentiss  speechless 
for  a  moment.  “Haven’t  others  tried  to  do  that?” 

“Yes,  in  the  fields  of  economics,  psychology,  poli¬ 
tics...  In  truth,  only  sexual  fulfilment  brings  happi¬ 
ness.  Just  as  science  has  expanded  every  other  field 
of  human  activity,  we  seek  to  use  it  to  expand  the 
area  of  sexual  satisfaction.” 

“And  how  would  you  do  that?” 

“Well,  to  give  a  simple  example,  may  I  ask,  what  is 
your  own  sexual  orientation?” 

“Uh,  I’m  just  a  common-or-garden  heterosexual,” 
Prentiss  said  with  a  weak  grin,  trying  to  hide  his 
pride  in  what  he  regarded  as  his  “normality.” 

“Hmm.  Have  you  ever  thought  what  it  would  be 
like  to  experience  homosexual  desires?” 

“I  can’t  say  I  have.” 

“Well,  what  if  there  were  a  pill  which  just  for  a 
few  hours  would  switch  you  from  being  heterosexual 
to  homosexual?  Would  you  take  that  pill  just  to  see 
what  it  is  like?” 

Prentiss  shifted  uncomfortably.  “No,  I  don’t  think  so.” 

“Yes,  that  is  quite  a  common  reaction,  including 
from  homosexuals  who  do  not  want  to  know  what  it  is 
like  to  desire  the  opposite  sex.  One  would  think  curios¬ 
ity  alone  would  -  and  if  not  that,  is  it  not  a  little  cow¬ 
ardly  to  shrink  from  new  experiences?”  Doctor  Romeau 
clucked  his  disapproval,  shaking  his  head.  “One  day 
such  an  attitude  will  seem  hopelessly  old-fashioned 
and  hidebound.  The  SOR  pill  -  Sexual  Orientation 
Reversal  -  will  be  on  sale  at  every  drugstore.” 

“Such  a  pill  is  possible?” 

“Oh  yes.”  Doctor  Romeau’s  eyes  twinkled.  “We 
have  established  the  mechanism  of  sexual  attraction. 
It  is  quite  simple,  really.  In  your  brain  there  is  a  list 
of  features  identifying  the  female  human  being  -  typ¬ 
ical  female  shapes,  distinctive  features  of  the  female 
face,  female  scents,  distinctive  female  behaviours, 
and  so  forth.  When  these  are  perceived,  the  feeling  of 
sexual  attraction  is  triggered.  Likewise,  in  the  het¬ 
erosexual  woman,  there  is  a  list  of  human  male  char¬ 
acteristics  which  acts  in  the  same  way. 

“The  crucial  point  is  that  both  lists  exist  in  every¬ 
one’s  brain.  That  is  proved  by  there  being  such  a  large 
proportion  of  people  who  are  homosexual  or  bisexual. 
At  some  stage  in  a  human  being’s  development,  one 
or  both  of  these  lists  is  activated.  And  that’s  all  there 
is  to  it.  Do  you  follow  me,  Mr  Prentiss?” 

“Yes,  it’s  very  interesting.” 

“Indeed.  We  have  established  here  on  this  island 
that  the  sex  attraction  lists  are  activated  in  the  sev¬ 
enth  month  of  gestation.  This  might  seem  rather  late, 
until  you  remember  that  the  human  body  is  basically 
female;  the  modifications  to  make  a  male  come  later. 


That  is  why  you  have  nipples,  and  a  seam  along  your 
scrotum  and  perineum.  That  is  where  the  lips  of  the 
female  organ  were  sealed  together  when  you  were  in 
the  womb.  Your  penis  is  an  enlarged  clitoris.” 

“Yes,  I’m  aware  of  that,”  Prentiss  muttered.  “So 
homosexuality  is  the  result  of  the  wrong  list  being 
turned  on?” 

“Let  us  not  say  the  ‘wrong1  list.  Homosexuality  is 
not  abnormal  -  if  nature  wanted  matters  that  way, 
the  lists  would  be  activated  right  at  the  beginning  of 
gender  differentiation,  and  not  at  such  a  late  stage 
as  the  seventh  month.  I’m  sure  this  ‘carelessness’  on 
nature’s  part  has  a  strategy  to  it.  Animals  use  sex  for 
reproduction  only,  but  with  human  beings  it  has  a 
much  wider  meaning.  It  embraces  a  whole  spectrum 
of  relationships  and  feelings.  Sadly,  monosexuals  - 
that  is,  non-bisexuals  -  are  colour-blind,  so  to  speak, 
to  one  half  of  humanity.  That  is  why  the  SOR  pill, 
which  can  suppress  one  list  and  activate  the  dormant 
one,  will  prove  so  useful  once  it  is  perfected.” 

Despite  his  attempted  objectivity,  Prentiss  looked 
disgusted.  “You  mean  you  want  to  turn  us  all  into... 
queers ?” 

“Well,  I  don’t  propose  it  should  become  compulsory.” 
Doctor  Romeau  laughed.  “But  we  believe  a  new 
dimension  of  human  warmth  will  pervade  society  once 
people  can  switch  orientation  at  will.  Friends  will 
become  closer,  prejudices  and  fears  will  evaporate.” 

“One  good  use  I  can  imagine  for  such  a  pill  is  to 
show  homosexuals  what  normal  feelings  are  like,” 
Prentiss  said.  He  immediately  regretted  the  words. 
He  was  letting  Romeau  know  what  angle  he  would 
follow  in  his  article. 

“What  other  aspects  of  your  work  can  you  tell  me 
about?” 

“I  will  be  pleased  to  take  you  to  our  laboratories 
later.  For  the  moment,  may  I  suggest  that  you  eat 
and  rest  for  a  while?  I  will  summon  Lindy.”  Doctor 
Romeau  rang  a  little  silver  bell. 

Lindy  took  him  to  a  guest  room  and  left  him  to  eat  a 
light  but  satisfactory  meal.  He  lay  down  on  the 
couch.  Perhaps  an  hour  or  so  later  the  turning  on  of 
the  light  aroused  him  from  a  doze.  He  opened  his 
eyes  to  find  Doctor  Romeau  poking  his  head  round 
the  door. 

“I  am  not  disturbing  you,  I  hope?” 

“Not  at  all.” 

“Good.”  Prentiss  remained  relaxing  on  the  couch  as 
the  doctor  entered  and  seated  himself  on  a  straight- 
backed  chair.  “Was  our  short  interview  useful?” 

“It  seemed  to  harp  on  homosexuality  a  lot.” 

Doctor  Romeau  chuckled.  “And  you  find  yourself 
wondering  if  we  are  one  of  those  sinister  organiza¬ 
tions  dedicated  to  converting  the  world  to  such  prac¬ 
tices!  I  assure  you  it  is  not  so.  As  you  said  yourself, 
the  SOR  pill  will  be  of  equal  service  to  people  of  any 
orientation.”  Thoughtfully,  he  added,  “But  what  is  it 
that  worries  you  about  male  homosexuality?  You 
seem,  if  I  may  say  so,  bothered  by  it.” 

“I  don’t  think  so,”  Prentiss  said  mildly.  “It  just 
doesn’t  interest  me.  Sexually  speaking,  I  find  the 
male  body  repugnant.” 


:  August  1995 


THE  ISLAND  OF  DR.  ROMEAU 


“Except  for  one  part.” 

Prentiss  blinked.  “What?” 

Eagerly,  eyes  gleaming,  Doctor  Romeau  leaned 
towards  him.  “The  penis!” 

“Oh,  come  on!” 

“But  think,  and  be  honest.  You  adore  your  own,  do 
you  not?  Is  it  not  every  man’s  lifelong  playmate?  Don’t 
deny  the  special  relationship  you  feel  with  it,  or  that 
you  have  spent  man-years  toying  with  it,  fondling  and 
admiring  it,  extracting  every  last  drop  of  pleasure 
from  it.  I  see  you  blushing!  I  admit  I  am  direct  to  a 
fault,  but  then  this  is  my  profession.  I  am  merely 
describing  every  normal  male  of  whatever  leaning.” 

Doctor  Romeau’s  wise-looking  face  leaned  even 
closer  towards  his  guest.  “Let  me  describe  an  erotic 
dream  you  have  sometimes  had,  in  which  you  find 
yourself  making  love  to  an  enchanting  woman.  As 
you  gradually  disrobe  her  you  reveal  at  last  her  trea¬ 
sured  part,  only  to  discover  that  instead  of  a  vulva  it 
is  a  smooth,  firm  penis.  In  the  dream,  it  seems  per¬ 
fectly  natural  to  you.  A  female  penis  -  what  a  con¬ 
ception!  And  so,  in  your  dream,  your  lovemaking 
continues  unchecked.” 

Feeling  his  blush  deepening,  Prentiss  was  relieved 
when  he  heard  Romeau  say,  ‘You  see,  you  cannot  hide 
your  psyche  from  me,  simply  because  it  is  the  same 
as  everyone  else’s.  Every  heterosexual  man  has  had 
that  dream.  The  whole  world  worships  the  penis.  You 
have  probably  wished,  secretly  of  course,  that  you 
could  play  with  one  not  your  own.  But  you  do  not 
relish  playing  with  another  man.  How  perfect,  then, 
if  it  could  be  a  woman’s.” 

Prentiss  was  silent.  Romeau  glanced  at  his  watch. 

“Well,  enough  of  that.  As  you  know,  our  island  is  a 
place  of  pleasure  as  well  as  of  work.  As  our  guest 
you  are  invited  to  avail  yourself  of  it.  Do  you  like 
Lindy,  the  young  woman  who  received  and  fed  you? 
Yes,  I  perceived  that  you  do.  She  will  come  to  you 
shortly.  Meanwhile,  am  I  right  in  thinking  that 
prospective  sexual  occasions  make  you  nervous? 
Drink  some  of  this.  It  is  a  mild  aliment  and  will  put 
you  in  a  receptive  mood.” 

Doctor  Romeau  rose  and  opened  a  panel  in  the 
wall,  taking  from  a  small  alcove  a  tall-necked  glass 
and  a  decanter  containing  a  pale  blue  liquid.  He 
placed  them  on  the  bedside  table,  smiled  and  left. 

Damn  the  man,  Prentiss  thought.  Romeau  was 
uncanny!  How  did  he  know  Prentiss  became  a  bag  of 
nerves  when  alone  with  a  woman?  He  poured  some 
of  the  blue  liquid.  It  had  the  consistency  of  a  thick 
milk  shake  and  tasted  pleasantly  of  peach.  Perhaps 
there  was  cannabis  in  it,  for  he  began  to  relax  and 
experience  an  enjoyable  anticipation. 

He  had  grown  drowsy  when  a  gauzy  drape  covering 
one  part  of  the  wall  was  drawn  gently  aside  and 
Lindy  stepped  through  an  archway  which,  unknown 
to  him,  it  had  covered.  She  was  still  wearing  her  red 
basque  and  long  white  skirt.  Her  soft,  straight  black 
hair  fell  to  her  shoulders.  Delight  exploded  in  Pren¬ 
tiss  as  she  smiled  at  him  with  full  lips.  For  once  his 
desire  was  to  be  fulfilled  -  and  on  the  same  day! 

Lindy  beckoned.  Through  the  archway  was  another 

40 


room  with  a  large  bed.  The  walls  were  curved,  with 
no  sharp  corners,  coloured  pink  and  peach.  Prentiss’s 
heart  was  beating  like  a  drum.  He  fell  on  her,  kissing 
her  neck  and  shoulders,  fumbling  to  unloose  the 
basque  while  she  unbuttoned  and  pulled  off  his  shirt. 

Her  breasts  were  full  and  voluptuous.  He  buried 
his  face  in  them,  then  tried  to  ease  her  on  to  the  bed, 
but  she  stood  firm.  Prentiss  sank  to  his  knees,  plant¬ 
ing  kisses  on  her  belly  until  reaching  the  waistband 
of  her  skirt,  which  he  pulled  slowly  down. 

She  was  not  wearing  any  underpants.  Prentiss’s 
lips  followed  the  lower  curve  of  her  belly  and  nuz¬ 
zled  pubic  hair. 

Then  he  drew  back,  startled.  A  smooth  penis 
swelled  in  place  of  the  expected  cleft,  curved  over  a 
neat  scrotum.  Prentiss  climbed  to  his  feet,  moved 
back.  Still  smiling,  she  stepped  out  of  the  skirt,  let¬ 
ting  him  see  her  body  fully  naked  except  for  the  ban¬ 
gles  on  her  arms,  which  she  opened  in  welcome. 

“Are  you...?”  he  stammered. 

“A  transvestite?”  Lindy  laughed  delightedly.  “No,  I 
am  a  woman.  Can’t  you  see?  A  woman  with  a  cock.” 

Yes,  she  was  a  woman.  Her  softly  curving  shoul¬ 
ders  and  wide  hips  spoke  for  that. 

“But  how  is  it  possible?” 

She  answered  him  in  a  well-modulated  voice.  “By 
genetic  manipulation.  Doctor  Romeau  is  a  master  at 
it.  By  appropriate  gene  insertion,  he  made  my 
female  genitals  grow  into  male  ones.” 

“How  long  did  it  take?” 

“Only  a  few  weeks.  I  can  change  back  just  as  easily.” 

Prentiss  couldn’t  stop  staring.  A  crawling  sensa¬ 
tion  was  in  his  abdomen.  “What  —  what  is  it  like?” 

Lindy  stroked  her  organ  and  spoke  breathlessly. 
“It’s  fascinating!”  She  lay  on  her  back  on  the  bed. 
“Come  on!”  she  urged.  “Come  on!” 

“Is  this  what  the  future  will  be  like?” 

‘Yes!” 

It  was  as  Doctor  Romeau  had  said:  on  a  female 
body,  the  penis  had  an  irresistible  attraction  for  him. 
This  was  the  dream  Romeau  had  reminded  him  of, 
but  a  dream  come  true.  Perhaps  the  blue  drink  was 
affecting  him,  for  nothing  about  this  seemed  unnat¬ 
ural.  Her  penis  was  more  exciting  to  him  than  if  it 
had  been  a  vulva.  He  joined  her  on  the  bed,  allowing 
his  hand  to  fondle  it,  experiencing  a  sense  of  power 
as  it  responded,  teasing  the  glans  as  they  kissed 
mouth  to  mouth.  She  pulled  his  remaining  clothes 
from  him  and  they  twisted  and  writhed  together,  her 
breasts  squashing  against  him  and  her  erect  penis 
rubbing  against  his.  Then  he  couldn’t  resist  the 
thought  that  came  into  his  mind.  He  slid  down  her, 
pushed  his  face  into  her  genitals,  then  took  her  cock 
into  his  mouth  and  began  to  suck  expertly.  Gasping 
with  excitement,  he  felt  her  squirt  semen  into  the 
back  of  his  mouth,  five  or  six  times. 

Her  lips  were  parted,  her  eyes  glazed.  He  wanted 
her  to  suck  him,  but  something  else  happened.  Sud¬ 
denly  she  had  seized  hold  of  him  to  throw  him  down 
on  his  back.  She  flung  his  legs  over  her  shoulders 
and  held  them  there.  What  strength  of  purpose 
there  was  in  her  face!  He  felt  like  putty  in  her 
hands,  someone  whose  only  role  was  to  be  used,  and 

interzone  August  1995 


BARRINGTON  J.  BAYLEy 


the  feeling  was  unexpectedly  delicious.  She  moved, 
jockeying  into  position,  and  he  saw  her  fully  erect 
phallus,  the  scrotum  contracted  with  arousal,  the 
glans  swelling  as  if  it  would  burst,  glistening  and  giv¬ 
ing  off  a  thick  odour.  He  yelled  as  he  realized  what 
was  coming,  but  there  was  no  avoiding  it.  His  but¬ 
tocks  were  spread.  There  was  a  searing  pain  as  she 
entered  him.  He  groaned  in  protest,  yet  soon  he  too 
was  thrusting  with  her  rhythm  until  he  felt  some¬ 
thing  warm  and  wet  spill  inside  him  while  she  gri¬ 
maced  with  the  intensity  of  her  pleasure,  ejaculating 
now  into  the  opposite  end  of  his  alimentary  canal. 

Watching  on  the  spy  screen,  Doctor  Romeau  mur¬ 
mured  his  approval.  He  spoke  to  his  staff  lieutenant, 
Doctor  Wells. 

“You  know,  Herbert,  now  that  we’ve  mastered  this 
gene  switching,  well,  why  stop  at  small  things?  Only 
a  tiny  group  of  genes  determines  whether  a  human 
body  develops  as  male  or  female.  Doesn’t  it  intrigue 
you  that  for  every  woman  there  is  potentially  a  male 
version  of  herself,  for  every  man  a  potential  female 
version?  So  why  not  go  the  whole  way?  It  would  be 
an  interesting  experience  in  intimacy  for  a  close  cou¬ 
ple,  a  husband  and  wife,  say,  if  he  became  his  female 
version  and  she  her  male  version.  Just  experimen¬ 
tally,  for  a  few  months,  so  as  to  experience  one 
another  from  the  other  side  of  the  divide.  Get  a  team 
working  on  the  concept,  Herbert.  Map  it  out.” 

He  sighed,  turning  back  to  the  sport  taking  place 
in  the  pleasure  room.  “What  a  wonderful  vista  sci¬ 


ence  is  opening  up  for  the  world!  Those  two  seem  to 
be  having  a  good  time,  at  any  rate.  This  should 
prime  Prentiss  for  the  next  stage.  See  that  the  SOR 
compound  is  slipped  into  his  morning  coffee.” 

“Is  that,  er,  quite  ethical?”  Doctor  Wells  said 
doubtfully.  “He  is  our  guest.” 

“All  the  more  reason  why  we  should  help  him!  The 
poor  fellow  can  barely  hide  his  homophobia  -  it’s  all 
part  of  his  inability  to  relax,  you  know.  It  will  do  him 
the  world  of  good  to  be  one  hundred  per  cent  homo¬ 
sexual  for  a  few  hours.  Besides,  we  need  all  the 
experimental  subjects  we  can  get,  don’t  we?” 

‘Yes,  Dr  Romeau,  but  remember  that  some  of  the 
test  subjects  who  took  the  compound  we  haven’t 
been  able  to  switch  back  yet.” 

“Oh,  I  think  we  ironed  out  that  problem  with  the 
last  little  tweak  we  gave  the  active  molecule, 
wouldn’t  you  say?  Now’s  the  chance  to  prove  it.” 

Doctor  Romeau  smiled  fondly  as  a  squalling  Pren¬ 
tiss  was  anally  penetrated  for  the  second  time  by  a 
panting  Lindy.  “Give  him  the  compound,”  he 
repeated  with  satisfaction.  ‘Yes.  It  will  do  him  the 
world  of  good.” 


Barrington  J.  Bayley  has  contributed  12  previous  stories  to 
Interzone,  from  “The  Ur-Plant”  (issue  4)  to  “Get  Out  of  Here” 
(issue  94).  He  is  presently  engaged  in  looking  for  a  publisher  who 
might  be  interested  in  collecting  all  his  shorter  pieces  between 
one  set  of  covers... 


interzone 


The  leading  British  magazine  which  specializes  in  SF  and  new  fantastic  writing. 
Among  many  other  writers,  we  have  published 


BRIAN  ALDISS 
J.G.  BALLARD 
IAIN  BANKS 
BARRINGTON  BAYLEY 
GREGORY  BENFORD 
MICHAEL  BISHOP 
DAVID  BRIN 


RAMSEY  CAMPBELL 
RICHARD  COWPER 
JOHN  CROWLEY 
THOMAS  M.  DISCH 
MARY  GENTLE 
WILLIAM  GIBSON 
M.  JOHN  HARRISON 


GARRY  KILWORTH 
DAVID  LANGFORD 
MICHAEL  MOORCOCK 
RACHEL  POLLACK 
KEITH  ROBERTS 
GEOFF  RYMAN 
BOB  SHAW 


JOHN  SLADEK 
BRIAN  STABLEFORD 
BRUCE  STERLING 
LISA  TUTTLE 
IAN  WATSON 
CHERRY  WILDER 
GENE  WOLFE 


interzone  has  introduced  many  excellent  new  writers,  and  illustrations,  articles,  interviews,  film  and  book  reviews,  news,  etc. 
interzone  is  available  from  specialist  bookshops,  or  by  subscription.  For  six  issues,  send  £16  (outside  UK,  £19).  For  twelve 
issues,  send  £30  (outside  UK,  £36).  American  subscribers  may  send  $30  for  six  issues,  or  $56  for  twelve  issues.  Single  copies: 
£2.75  inc.  p&p  (outside  UK,  £3.20;  or  USA,  $5.50).  Outside  Europe,  all  copies  are  despatched  by  accelerated  surface  mail. 

To:  intvrzono  217  Preston  Drove,  Brighton,  BN1  6FL,  UK 
Please  send  me  six/twelve  issues  of  Interzone,  beginning  with  the 
current  issue.  I  enclose  a  cheque/p. o./international  money  order, 
made  payable  to  Interzone  (delete  as  applicable) 

OR  please  charge  my  MasterCardA/isa: 

Card  number 

i  i  i  i  i  i i i ii i i i i i  n 

Expiry  date  Signature  j  j 


:  August  1995 


She  drives  an  ancient  Mercedes  convertible.  The 
car  is  in  wretched  shape,  the  body  battered 
and  nearly  rusted  through,  chrome  pitted  and 
discoloured,  the  seat  covers  ripped  and  the  stuffing 
popping  out.  But  the  engine  is  in  racing  condition. 
Every  Saturday  she  tunes  it  up,  working  slowly, 
methodically:  the  engine,  then  the  brakes,  the  tyres. 
The  task  takes  all  morning. 

She  never  takes  the  car  out,  except  for  the  two- 
mile  drive  to  the  University  each  day. 

The  student  scheduled  to  defend  his  thesis  next,  a 
plasma-physics  experimentalist  named  Li,  brought 
the  case  of  beer.  Somebody  shot  the  cork  from  the 
first  bottle  of  champagne.  It  arced  across  the  semi¬ 
nar  room  and  rebounded  off  a  blackboard,  and  sud¬ 
denly  Caroline’s  party  was  in  full  swing. 

Esteban  didn’t  know  Caroline  very  well.  She’d 
kept  to  herself.  He  had  never  seen  Caroline  look  so 
happy,  smiling  and  laughing  as  people  came  up  to 


shake  her  hand.  He  couldn’t  remember  seeing  her 
happy  at  all.  Esteban  pressed  his  way  through  the 
crowds.  “Congratulations,  Caroline!”  He  shook  her 
hand.  “Or  perhaps  I  should  say  Doctor  Caroline?” 

She  laughed.  “By  all  means.  I  worked  hard 
enough  for  it.” 

“So  when  will  you  be  leaving  for  Caltech?” 

“First  thing  in  the  morning.” 

“So  soon?  I’d  think  you’d  stay  around  for  a  while, 
relax  a  bit.” 

“The  sooner  I  get  out  of  this  place,  the  better.” 

“Hey,  that’s  some  attitude!  But  I  guess  it  can  get 
to  you  after  a  while.”  Esteban  looked  around.  “Say, 
where’s  Dr  Hawke?  Isn’t  she  here  to  say  goodbye 
and  congratulate  her  latest?” 

Caroline  shrugged.  “Jenny.  She’ll  come  if  she  feels 
like  it.  Or  not.  Who  knows?” 

“Don’t  you  care?” 

“Not  really.”  She  looked  at  him  for  a  moment.  “So 
you’re  her  new  student,  aren’t  you?” 


:  August  1995 


“Yes,  it’s  all  settled.  I’ll  be  starting  Monday.” 

She  looked  down  at  the  ground.  “Maybe...  have 
you  thought  about  finding  another  advisor?” 

“Why?” 

“No  reason.”  She  made  an  irritated  gesture  with 
one  hand.  “This  and  that.  She’s  not  the  only  theorist 
in  the  physics  department,  you  know.  She’s  not  easy 
to  work  with.” 

“But  she’s  the  best,  isn’t  she?” 

Yeah.”  She  didn’t  sound  very  enthusiastic.  “I 
guess.” 

“Hey,  nobody  said  it  would  be  easy.” 

Caroline  laughed  cynically.  “They  sure  didn’t.” 

“So,  any  words  of  advice  for  the  fresh  meat?” 

Yeah.”  She  paused.  “No.  You’ll  find  out.  Excuse 
me,  I  ought  to  wander  around  more.” 

Esteban  watched  her  walk  away.  “Now  what  does 
she  mean  by  that?”  he  asked,  but  no  one  listened,  or, 
at  least,  no  one  answered. 


interzone  August  1995 


The  Taproom  was  dim,  Friday-night  crowded,  and  it 
took  a  few  moments  for  Esteban’s  eyes  to  adjust  to 
the  murky  blue  light.  He  saw  no  one  he  knew.  It  was 
a  mistake  to  come  here,  he  thought  suddenly.  He 
would  sit  alone,  pour  down  beers,  and  then  at  clos¬ 
ing  time  go  back  to  the  student  housing  with  a  spin¬ 
ning  head.  The  prospect  seemed  dismal,  but  the  idea 
of  going  back  to  his  apartment  to  study  seemed 
equally  bleak  and  uninviting. 

“I  thought  I  might  find  you  here.” 

Esteban  looked  up.  The  slender  man  in  the  wool 
jacket  stood  awkwardly,  a  peculiar  expression  on  his 
face.  He  had  a  short  beard,  with  white  hairs  twisting 
together  with  dark  brown  ones.  It  took  Esteban  an 
instant  to  remember  who  he  was.  “Dr  Taggart.”  He 
suddenly  remembered  that  Taggart  was  said  to  be  a 
friend  of  his  advisor,  Dr  Hawke.  Her  only  friend. 

Taggart  nodded  toward  the  bar.  “Join  me?” 

They  drank  in  silence,  and  Esteban  wondered  why 
Taggart  was  there;  had,  apparently,  particularly 

43 


DARK  LADY 


sought  him  out.  But  Taggart  seemed  to  have  no 
interest  in  conversation.  Finally  Esteban  turned  to 
him.  He  looked  him  over  before  speaking.  “Tell  me 
about  Professor  Hawke.” 

“Jenny?  You  don’t  know  even  know  what  to  ask,  do 
you?” 

“Tell  me.” 

“Not  today.”  Taggart  got  up  without  saying  any¬ 
thing  and  crossed  the  room  to  the  jukebox.  When  he 
got  back  to  the  table  he  sat  down,  lifted  his  head 
back,  and  closed  his  eyes.  “Tell  me,  how  do  you  feel 
about  the  blues?” 

Esteban  shrugged.  “Okay,  I  guess.” 

In  the  distance,  the  jukebox  started  up;  a  saxo¬ 
phone  yowling  blues,  a  single  deep  voice  wailing: 

My  lover  is  a  lady,  purer  than  the  snow 

Yes,  I’ve  got  a  lady,  I  love  her  like  the  snow 

She’ll  show  me  up  to  heaven,  the  heavens  up  above, 

Yes  the  heavens  up  above  me,  and  the  hells  so  far 
below. 

Taggart  said,  “You’ll  learn.” 

“In  the  beginning,  in  the  end,  there  is  only  one  ques¬ 
tion:  what  is  the  universe?  What  is  this  stuff,  that 
the  world  is  made  of?  But  the  more  we  learn,  the 
more  we  understand  the  workings  of  the  universe 
we  live  in,  the  more  subtle  and  elusive  the  answer  to 
the  question  becomes.”  Professor  Hawke  was  silent 
for  a  long  moment,  standing  with  eyes  focused 
blankly  at  some  invisible  object  drifting  slowly  near 
the  back  of  the  room.  Finally  she  continued,  her 
voice  so  soft  that  it  was  almost  a  whisper.  “We  chase, 
and  old  theories  fall  discarded  along  the  wayside, 
but  the  goal  remains  forever  elusive.” 

She  looked  up,  and  seemed  almost  surprised  to 
find  the  physics  students  still  in  the  classroom.  Not 
one  of  them  moved.  She  flicked  a  wrist.  “Dismissed.” 

Esteban  fell  into  the  habit  of  coming  over  to  her 
house  on  Saturdays  when  she  worked  on  the  car. 
While  she  went  through  the  long  ritual  of  tuning  it 
up,  he  worked  on  the  body,  sanding  off  rust,  apply¬ 
ing  primer,  covering  over  with  fibreglass  the  places 
where  the  body  had  rusted  through. 

There  was  an  odd  physical  satisfaction  to  be  found 
in  sanding:  the  smooth,  repetitive  motion,  starting 
with  coarse  grit,  the  texture  almost  like  gravel,  and 
progressively  moving  through  ever  finer  grits  to  pol¬ 
ishing  compound,  finer  than  toothpaste,  rubbed  on 
by  hand.  Professor  Hawke  raced  the  engine,  produc¬ 
ing  a  cloud  of  faintly  blue  engine  smoke.  He  looked 
up.  She  was  grinning  at  him,  wrapped  up  in  her 
overalls,  shouting  over  the  roar  of  the  engine.  “The 
old  beast  sounds  pretty  good,  eh,  Esteban?” 

He  nodded,  pulled  down  his  dustmask  for  a  moment 
and  shouted  back.  “Not  bad.  Burning  a  little  oil,  no?” 

She  tapped  the  accelerator  again  in  response,  and 
the  engine  roared.  “Yeah.  It’s  the  number  two  cylin¬ 
der.  Next  week  I’m  going  to  pull  the  rings.” 

There  were  good  days  and  bad  days.  Sometimes  she 
would  be  brusque  and  uncommunicative,  hollow-eyed 
as  if  she  had  forgotten  how  to  sleep,  silently  starting 


to  work  on  the  engine  with  an  odd  grim  determina¬ 
tion,  ignoring  him.  Other  days  she  would  laugh  with 
exuberant  energy  and  contagious  good  spirits. 

All  during  the  Fall  they  worked  together;  on 
physics  during  the  week,  on  the  car  Saturdays.  The 
asphalt  driveway  was  ankle-deep  in  yellow  leaves. 
As  it  got  colder  he  had  to  keep  stamping  his  feet  and 
moving  about  to  avoid  freezing.  Late  in  November 
they  moved  inside,  the  garage  door  blocked  halfway 
open  with  the  handle  of  an  old  rake  to  let  out  the 
deadly  perfume  of  the  engine.  Gusts  of  early  snow 
blew  in  through  the  opening  to  battle  with  the 
warmth  from  the  kerosene  heater  glowing  in  the  cor¬ 
ner.  Afterwards,  on  the  days  when  she  was  in  high 
spirits,  they  would  go  inside  and  sit  by  the  radiator, 
warming  up,  drinking  coffee,  talking  physics. 

“So  few  people  ever  learn  to  think,”  Dr  Hawke 
said.  “Don’t  memorize,  think!  Think,  think,  think! 
First,  last,  and  always.  Use  your  brainpower.” 

It  was  an  old  house  in  the  middle  of  the  city,  with 
a  high  ceiling  of  elaborately  sculpted  plaster.  On  the 
floor,  beneath  layers  of  dirt,  Esteban  could  faintly 
distinguish  the  wood  parquet.  Fifty  years  ago  the 
house,  and  neighbourhood,  had  been  the  height  of 
fashion.  Now  both  were  deteriorating. 

Stacks  of  paper  covered  every  surface.  Scribbled 
notes,  pages  of  calculations,  unfinished  scientific 
papers,  piles  of  journals  and  conference  proceedings, 
review  copies  of  books,  reams  of  experimental  result 
summaries.  He  was  amazed  that  she  could  ever  find 
anything  in  the  disorder,  but  more  often  than  not 
she  knew  exactly  which  pile  had  the  paper  she  was 
looking  for.  Occasionally  one  would  not  be  where  she 
thought  it  should  be,  and  she  would  rage  through 
the  house  overturning  piles  and  scattering  them 
across  the  floor,  or  else  she  would  go  silent  and  with¬ 
draw  into  herself,  refusing  to  speak  or  acknowledge 
Esteban’s  existence  until  he  left  her  alone  and 
walked  back  the  two  miles  to  his  own  small  apart¬ 
ment  in  the  student  housing. 

Slowly  Esteban  discovers  that  he  is  drifting  into 
deeper  waters,  where  he  doesn’t  know  how  to  swim, 
is  not  even  certain  how  to  float.  Esteban  feels  that 
he  is  drowning.  He  doesn’t  understand  what  he  is 
doing.  Oh,  he  understands  the  mechanics  -  although 
it  is  difficult,  he  can  do  the  mathematics  well  enough 
-  but  the  meaning  eludes  him.  To  him,  it  seems  as  if 
he  is  manipulating  obscure  symbols  according  to 
obscure  rules  toward  some  even  more  obscure  goal 
that  recedes  from  him  further  the  more  he  strives. 
He  fills  notebooks  with  calculations,  attempting  to 
reduce  complicated  expressions  to  simplicity,  and 
failing.  When  he  gets  stuck  he  comes  to  her.  Often 
she  points  out  an  approach  or  an  approximation  he 
can  try.  Other  times,  though,  she  cannot  find  a  way 
through  the  thicket  of  symbols,  and  says,  simply, 
okay,  now  we  can  abandon  that  approach. 

But  when  Esteban  tries  to  ask  her  what  it  all 
means,  she  only  shakes  her  head.  We  are  pathfind¬ 
ers,  she  says.  When  -  if  -  we  find  a  path,  then  we 
can  look  back  and  understand  where  we’ve  gone. 

He  remembers  when  physics  used  to  be  easy.  God, 


interione  Ausust  1995 


GEOFFREY  A.  LANDIS 


he  understood  it  then.  When  had  it  started  to  get  hard? 

Esteban  tries  not  to  show  his  desperation,  not  to 
let  anyone  know  that  he  is  terrified  that  he  will  be 
found  out  to  be  a  fraud,  that  everyone  except  him 
understands  it  clearly.  Taggart  is  the  only  one  he 
confesses  his  fears  to,  and  Taggart  only  laughs. 
“Everybody  feels  that  way,”  he  says.  “After  a  while  you 
get  a  feel  for  it,  and  bit  by  bit  it  begins  to  make  sense.” 

He  pauses,  and  then  says,  “Or  else  it  doesn’t.” 

Esteban  saw  it  in  the  newspaper,  buried  several 
pages  back  in  the  metro-area  section.  Late  last  night 
she  had  been  out  walking  over  by  the  Projects,  and 
she  had  been  assaulted.  She  put  two  neat  holes  in 
the  man  with  a  .22  calibre  Beretta,  then  calmly 
waited  for  the  police  to  arrive.  The  assailant  had 
been  taken  to  the  hospital,  but  was  released  when 
she  declined  to  press  charges. 

But  what,  wondered  Esteban,  what  had  she  been 
doing  in  that  part  of  town  at  midnight?  There  was 
nothing  there;  no  stores,  just  graffiti-covered  bumed- 
out  cars,  drug-dealers,  and  the  blank  brick  walls  of 
the  housing  projects. 

And  nobody  in  the  department  was  even  curious. 
Why  wouldn’t  anybody  talk  about  it? 

The  saxophone  cried  out  in  staccato  rhythm,  while  a 
thin  voice  quavered  softly  over,  between  the  notes: 

Oh  my  lady  love  is  strong  and  cruel,  she  serves  a 
jealous  god 

Yes,  my  love’s  a  jealous  lady,  she  serves  an 
evil  god  - 

Dr  Taggart  went  to  the  bar,  bought  two  mugs  of 
beer,  and  brought  them  back  to  the  booth.  He 
handed  one  to  Esteban. 

“It  was  1962,”  he  said  softly.  “You  have  to  remem¬ 
ber  that  things  were  different  then.  It  was  the  win¬ 
ter  of  our  second  year  in  grad  school.  That  Fall  we’d 
taken  our  comprehensives,  and  we  were  still  basking 


in  the  glow  that  comes  with  knowing  that  we  made 
the  grade.  None  of  us  so  much  as  Jennifer,  of  course. 
She’d  been  the  only  one  to  get  a  perfect  score.” 

Esteban  took  a  sip  of  his  beer.  Her  eyes  had  been 
unfocused  today,  and  he  had  thought  she  was  sick, 
although  she’d  denied  it.  Her  nose  had  been  dripping, 
but  she  didn’t  bother  to  wipe  it.  She’d  just  stared  at 
the  car,  not  even  bothering  to  start  it  up.  After  half  an 
hour  of  staring,  with  her  wrist  and  forearm  twitch¬ 
ing  erratically,  she’d  abruptly  told  him  to  go  home.  It 
had  scared  him. 

He  took  another  gulp  of  beer.  “Go  on,”  he  said. 

“It’s  a  long  story.”  Taggart  sighed.  “Maybe  -  no, 
forget  it.  It’s  been  a  long  day.  We  should  probably 
both  go  home.” 

Neither  one  of  them  made  a  move.  “Go  on,”  Este¬ 
ban  said. 

Taggart  picked  up  his  beer.  “1962,”  he  said,  shaking 
his  head  slowly.  “Yeah.  Well,  I  was  a  little  put  off  by 
the  fact  that  she’d  outdone  me,  to  tell  you  the  truth. 
Until  then,  I’d  thought  of  myself  as  pretty  hot  stuff.  I 
have  to  admit  that  I  wouldn’t  have  minded  so  much  if 
it  had  been  any  of  the  other  students  -  but  to  be  beaten 
by  a  girl!  Yes,  I  know  —  it  seems  rather  petty  now.  We 
were  pretty  damn  narrow-minded  back  then,  and 
nobody  thought  anything  of  it.  Nobody  even  noticed. 
From  then  on,  I  made  a  point  of  ignoring  her.  That  was 
easy.  She  didn’t  try  to  attract  attention,  or  try  to  make 
friends,  and  back  then  any  kind  of  camaraderie 
between  men  and  woman  students  was  quite  discour¬ 
aged.  Women  students  had  nine  o’clock  curfews  -  yes, 
grad  students  too.  They  didn’t  make  any  distinction.” 

‘You  weren’t  worried  about  prelims?”  Esteban  asked. 

“Prelims?  No.  We’d  passed  the  comps,  and  the  pre¬ 
lims  seemed  just  infinitely  far  in  the  future. 

“There  was  an  intense  rivalry  between  the  grad 
students  right  then.  We  had  to  choose  research  advi¬ 
sors,  and  there  was  keen  competition  to  work  for  the 
big  names  in  the  department.  I  don’t  think  that 
Jenny  even  noticed  it.  She  went  right  in  to  see  Ler- 


DARK  LADY 


motov,  told  him  she  was  going  to  work  for  him,  just 
like  that.” 

Esteban  smiled.  “That’s  her,  all  right.” 

“Lermotov  was  a  bear  of  a  man,  with  a  huge  bushy 
brown  beard.  I  think  he  hardly  even  noticed  whether 
his  students  were  men  or  women.  All  he  cared  about 
was  whether  they  could  do  physics,  and,  man,  Jenny 
could  do  physics  in  spades.  She  was  the  best.  I  guess 
that  was  another  way  Lermotov  was  ahead  of  his  time. 

“She  awed  us,  just  walking  in  and  telling  Lermo¬ 
tov  how  it  was  going  to  be.  Didn’t  make  her  any 
friends,  but  it  set  her  apart.” 

Taggart  stopped  talking  and  cocked  his  head  side¬ 
ways.  The  song  ended  on  a  long  lonely  note  almost 
impossibly  high.  It  slowly  warbled  upward  and  then 
faded  into  the  air  like  smoke.  After  a  moment  of 
silence  the  gabble  of  voices  in  the  bar  started  up 
again,  and  then  the  heavy  bass  rhythm  of  a  rock 
song  beat  across  the  room. 

“We  were  all  still  taking  classes,”  Taggart  said. 
“Professor  Saxon  gave  us  a  final  exam  with  just  one 
problem,  to  prove  a  certain  theorem.  Instead  of  prov¬ 
ing  it  true,  the  two  of  us  —  Jenny  and  I  —  found  a 
counter-example,  and  proved  it  false.  We  were  the 
only  ones  in  the  class  who  did. 

“If  only  one  of  us  had  given  that  answer,  I’m  sure 
he  would  have  ignored  it,  given  out  zero  credit,  and 
gone  on.  But  with  two  of  us,  he  had  to  try  to  follow 
the  reasoning  to  show  us  where  we’d  gone  wrong.  Of 
course,  he  couldn’t;  we  were  right,  and  he  -  and  the 
rest  of  the  class  -  was  wrong. 

“When  he  finally  convinced  himself  that  we  were 
right,  Saxon  went  up  to  the  department  chairman  and 
accused  Jenny  of  cheating.  The  argument  was  so  sub¬ 
tle,  he  told  the  chairman,  a  single  brilliant  student 
could  possibly  have  stumbled  across  it,  but  not  two. 
Jenny  must  have  copied  it  from  my  paper,  he  said, 
‘most  likely  without  even  realizing  it  was  a  remarkable 
piece  of  work.’  When  Jenny  was  called  in,  she  denied 
the  accusation  of  cheating  and  pointed  out  her  score  on 
the  comps.  He  accused  her  of  cheating  on  those,  too. 

“So  the  next  day  she  came  bursting  into  my  room 
and  accused  me  of  trying  to  sabotage  her  career.  This 
was  the  first  I’d  heard  anything  about  it.  There  was  a 
big  scene,  but  after  a  bit  of  shouting  back  and  forth  - 1 
did  my  share  of  shouting,  too  -  we  figured  out  what 
had  happened,  and  I  convinced  her  that  I  had  nothing 
to  do  with  it.  It  ended  up  with  her  crying  in  my  arms. 
That  was  the  only  time  I  ever  saw  her  cry.  Later,  she 
understood  not  to  expect  fairness  out  of  the  world. 

“Enough  people  in  the  class  had  remembered  that 
we’d  sat  on  opposite  sides  of  the  room,  and  at  last 
Saxon  stopped  pushing  the  matter.  It  was  allowed  to 
drop,  although  as  far  as  I  know  he  never  withdrew 
the  accusation,  or  apologized  to  either  one  of  us. 

“That  incident  broke  the  barrier  between  us.  From 
then  on,  if  we  weren’t  exactly  best  friends,  at  least 
we  were  companions-in-arms.  We  would  work  prob¬ 
lems  together,  and  I  tried  to  get  her  interested  in 
other  things,  like  hiking  —  I  was  an  avid  woodsman 
in  those  days  -  and  jazz.”  He  shook  his  head.  “Yeah, 
I  listened  to  a  lot  of  jazz  back  then.  I  was  still  too 
young  to  appreciate  the  blues.”  He  took  a  sip  of  his 


drink.  “She’d  listen  carefully  to  whatever  I  played 
for  her,  but  the  only  composer  she  ever  really 
respected  was  Bach. 

“Myself,  I  picked  up  a  little  of  her  dream,  and 
maybe  a  little  of  her  dedication.  I’d  sort  of  drifted 
into  physics.  It  was  not  yet  20  years  after  the  atom 
bomb,  and  a  lot  of  people  still  thought  of  physicists 
as  heroes  who’d  won  the  war  and  saved  a  lot  of 
lives.”  He  laughed  grimly.  “Heroes,  yeah.  Shows  how 
things  change,  doesn’t  it?  I  went  into  physics 
because  it  was  fashionable.  She  showed  me  that  it 
was  beauty,  and  truth,  as  well.” 

“And  so  you  started  sleeping  with  her,”  Esteban 
said. 

Taggart  looked  up.  “You’re  kidding,  right?”  He 
chuckled,  without  any  particular  humour  to  it.  “This 
was  1962.  Nice  girls  didn’t.  Everybody  knew  that.  I 
did  make  a  pass  -  a  rather  tentative  pass,  since  I 
was  rather  inexperienced  at  such  things  myself  - 
and  she  ignored  it.  Maybe  she  didn’t  even  notice  it  in 
the  first  place.  She  just  didn’t  think  that  way. 

“We  were  together  a  lot.  It  was  about  the  happiest 
time  of  my  life. 

“In  the  spring  we  both  took  Eisenstem’s  course  on 
quantum  field  theories.  Field  theory  was  rather  new 
then,  the  cutting  edge  of  science,  and  Eisenstem  was 
one  of  the  best.  I’d  thought  I’d  seen  Jenny  work  before, 
but  she  took  to  that  course  like  she’d  been  walking 
all  her  life,  and  just  learned  she  could  run.  She  left 
us  all  behind.  Me,  too,  I’m  afraid.  Oh,  I  followed  her 
as  well  as  I  could,  and  saw  a  bit  of  the  elegance  of 
the  theory  reflected  in  her  work.  She  tore  apart 
problems  as  if  they  held  some  priceless  treasure. 

“That  was  when  I  made  the  decision  to  become  an 
experimentalist.  I’d  always  thought  I  wanted  to  do 
theory,  but  after  watching  her  approach  field  theory, 
I  realized  I’d  never  be  able  to  do  more  than  follow 
along  behind.  I  wanted  to  make  my  own  trails,  even 
if  I  had  to  explore  less  important  territory. 

“Eisenstern  really  took  an  interest  in  Jenny.  He 
invited  her  over  to  his  house  for  special  sessions.  He 
was  a  young  professor,  maybe  forty,  divorced,  with  a 
big  stone  house  on  the  outskirts  of  town. 

“The  first  time  she  was  invited,  she  took  me  along. 
When  I  got  there  he  was  a  little  taken  aback.  I  could 
tell  that  he  hadn’t  expected  her  to  bring  company. 
We  sat  around  his  fireplace,  drinking  brandy,  the 
two  of  them  talking  physics,  with  me  jumping  in 
occasionally  with  stupid  comments.  It  got  to  be  eight 
o’clock,  and  then  nine.  I  finally  managed  to  drag  her 
away.  I  don’t  know  how  she  got  in  past  the  house¬ 
mother  after  curfew.” 

“Last  call!”  the  bartender  shouted.  Esteban 
walked  up  to  the  bar  and  bought  two  more  beers. 

When  he  got  back,  Taggart  continued.  “Next  time 
he  invited  her  over  I  couldn’t  go.  I  had  a  hike  already 
scheduled.  She  went;  she  never  even  considered  that 
there  might  be  anything  untoward  about  it. 

“She  never  told  me  the  details,  although  over  the 
years  I’ve  pretty  much  figured  out  what  happened. 
He  sat  beside  her,  and  leaned  in  close  -  still  talking 
physics  -  and  then  started  to  caress  her.  She  should 
have  left  then,  but  she  didn’t  really  know  what  was 


:  Ausust  1995 


GEOFFREY  A.  LANDIS 


happening.  She  was  terribly  innocent  in  some  ways, 
for  all  her  mastery  of  theory.  When  she  realized 
what  he  wanted,  and  started  to  object,  he  called  her 
a  tease,  accused  her  of  leading  him  on,  and  called 
her  a  lot  of  other  things  as  well.  She  was  so  con¬ 
fused,  she  didn’t  know  what  to  do.” 

“He  raped  her,”  said  Esteban. 

“He...  was  insistent.”  Taggart  shook  his  head.  “I 
don’t  know  the  details.  He  showed  up  in  class  the 
next  day  with  a  bit  of  a  bruise  on  one  cheek.  She 
didn’t  come  to  class  at  all.  I  didn’t  think  anything 
about  it  at  the  time.  She  had  missed  classes  before, 
though  usually  not  without  calling  me  up  to  ask  me 
to  make  a  carbon  of  my  notes  for  her.  But  she  didn’t 
come  to  the  next  class,  or  the  next,  or  the  next,  and  I 
didn’t  see  her  around  campus,  either.  I  finally  went 
to  see  her  in  her  room  -  which  was  not  at  all  an  easy 
proposition  in  those  days  —  but  she  avoided  the  sub¬ 
ject,  and  wouldn’t  tell  me  anything  was  wrong.” 

“Closing!”  cried  the  bartender,  twisting  the  dim¬ 
mer  switch  to  full.  The  overhead  lights  brightened, 
showing  the  empty  glasses  and  stained  bar  tables  in 
harsh,  ugly  glare.  “Drink  ’em  up!” 

Esteban  does  his  work  in  the  bullpen,  a  large  open 
office  on  the  fifth  floor  of  the  physics  building,  side 
by  side  with  half  a  dozen  other  grad  students,  each 
one  hooked  up  to  earphones  and  huddled  over  a 
stack  of  papers.  He  labours  until  midnight  over 
Feynmann  diagrams,  a  bootleg  tape  of  Buddy  Guy  in 
New  Orleans  blasting  in  his  ears,  summing  up  the 
histories  of  elementary  particles,  hopelessly  trying 
to  cancel  infinity  against  itself.  He  sits  alone. 

Some  days  he  covers  for  her  when  she  doesn’t 
come  in.  He  teaches  her  introductory  physics  class 
unasked,  and  suddenly  remembers  that  Caroline, 
long  since  gone,  had  often  done  the  same.  Hawke  is 
sick  a  lot  recently,  sometimes  for  days  on  end,  and 
then  suddenly  she  is  vigorous  and  full  of  energy. 

“The  most  important  question  in  the  world,”  said  Dr 
Hawke,  “is  this:  why  is  there  something  instead  of 
nothing?” 

“I  don’t  know,”  said  Esteban.  She  is  well  today, 
and  at  the  peak  of  her  form.  “Why?” 

“We  can’t  answer  that  one.  We  don’t  have  the  tools 
yet.  The  next  most  fundamental  question  is  this: 
why  is  that  something  countable?  Why  is  there 
quantization?  We  can  track  that  one,  Esteban,  we 
can  follow  in  its  footsteps  and  hunt  it  down. 

“Quantization  of  energy  levels,  that  we  understand 
pretty  well.  But  why  are  particles  quantized?  Why 
can  you  have  one  electron,  or  two  electrons,  but  never 
half  an  electron,  or  the  square  root  of  two  electrons?” 

Esteban  thought  for  a  moment.  “The  result  of  an 
observation  has  to  be  an  eigenvalue  of  the  hermitian 
operator....” 

“Good!  But  is  that  an  explanation?  Why  do  the 
operators  have  to  be  hermitian?  Why  do  the  eigen¬ 
values  have  to  be  integers?” 

“Well,  since  the  appropriate  field  operator  is  the 
number  operator,  the  spectrum  is  that  of  a  harmonic 
oscillator.” 

interionc  Ausust  1995 


“You’re  not  thinking,  Esteban.  The  number  operator 
was  chosen  because  it  produces  integer  eigenvalues. 
That’s  a  description,  not  an  explanation.  It’s  frighten¬ 
ing.  Or  it  should  be.  People  think  in  integers  because 
people  come  in  integers.  We  don’t  measure  how  much 
people,  we  count  how  many  people.  But  nature  knows 
nothing  of  integers.  Even  in  quantum  mechanics, 
nature  is  continuous.  Waves.  But  electrons  come  in 
integers!  You  count  them,  you  don’t  measure  them. 
Why?  What  comes  in  integers,  Esteban?” 

“Apples?” 

“Very  good.  Are  electrons  made  of  apples?” 

“No.” 

“Right.  Apples  come  in  integers,  but  the  stuff  of 
which  apples  are  made  is  continuous.  We  have  to 
search  for  a  basic  principle.  For  some  reason,  the 
structure  of  the  universe  requires  that  the  fundamen¬ 
tal  particles  be  countable.  Why?  Let  us  consider  what 
mathematical  objects  are  integrally  quantized.” 

Esteban  leaned  back  and  pulled  out  his  pad.  This 
was  going  to  be  worth  taking  notes  on. 

“First,  there  are  topological  objects:  the  number  of 
holes  in  a  torus....” 

But  it  was  rare  when  she  was  that  sharp,  that 
focused.  Often  she  nodded  through  her  classes, 
barely  responded  to  his  questions.  He  had  all  the 
facts,  but  he  didn’t  want  to  put  them  together  into 
the  only  picture  they  would  make. 

She  was  brilliant,  she  was  in  pain,  the  world  was 
too  intense  to  her.  She  needed  it.  She  was  still  in 
control,  wasn’t  she?  She  was  capable  of  anything; 
she  was  crazy,  she  was  above  rules.  How  could  he 
confront  her? 

How  could  he  not? 

Every  day,  after  work,  he  would  go  to  the  bar  and 
drink  until  closing. 

Esteban  waited  in  the  corridor  outside  her  office.  Dr 
Hawke  was  half  an  hour  late,  but  that  wasn’t 
unusual.  She  was  often  late.  Finally  he  heard  her 
car  pull  up  outside,  and  a  few  minutes  later  she 
walked  in.  Today  she  was  bright  and  chipper,  full  of 
energy.  He  wet  his  lips.  His  mouth  felt  unusually 
dry.  All  of  a  sudden  he  wasn’t  sure  if  he  could  say  it. 

“Hello,  Esteban.  Sorry  I’m  late.” 

His  chest  was  so  tight  that  he  could  hardly  breathe, 
but  he  had  to  know  for  sure.  He  concentrated  on  the 
words,  speaking  each  one  separately,  not  thinking 
what  they  meant.  “You’re  using,  aren’t  you?” 

She  stopped  abruptly  and  looked  at  him.  “I  don’t 
think  that’s  any  of  your  business,”  she  said  coldly. 

“That’s  not  an  answer,  is  it?  You’re  a  junkie.” 

She  spoke  very  softly.  “So?” 

“Why?” 

“What  can  I  say?  Do  you'  think  there’s  a  simple 
reason?”  She  crossed  her  arms,  uncrossed  them, 
crossed  them  again,  and  then  shrugged.  “I  do  what 
gets  me  through  the  day.  Do  you  think  it’s  easy,  Este¬ 
ban?  Do  you  want  to  tell  me  how  to  run  my  life?” 

She  reached  across  him  and  opened  her  office.  “Con¬ 
ference  today  is  cancelled.  Get  out  of  here,  Esteban.” 

As  he  turned  around,  the  door  slammed  shut.  He 

47 


DARK  LADY 


could  see  her  silhouette  against  the  frosted  glass. 
“Dr  Hawke?” 

“Go!” 

He  could  see  her  reach  up,  and  then  the  light  went 
out  and  there  was  silence. 

She  don’t  want  your  heart,  but  she’ll  take  your  soul 

You  may  try  to  stay  in  charge,  but  she’ll  always 
take  control, 

You  may  hate  yourself  in  the  light  of  day 

But  it’s  night-time  now  and  you’ll  do  what  it  takes 

Yes,  tonight  you’ll  take  your  pleasure  and  forget 
tomorrow’s  pain. 

“So  you  found  out  about  Jenny.”  Taggart  sat  down 
next  to  Esteban.  “All  of  her  students  do,  sooner  or 
later.  She  hardly  even  tries  to  cover  up  any  more.  It 
affects  them  all  in  different  ways.  Some  quit.  Some 
keep  working  for  her,  but  turn  bitter,  like  Caroline. 
Some  don’t  give  a  damn.” 

“What  does  it  matter  to  you  what  they  think?” 
said  Esteban  bitterly. 

“I  care  about  all  of  her  students.  Somebody  has  to.” 

“You’re  her  friend.  Why  don’t  you  get  her  to  stop?” 

“I  would  if  I  could,  Esteban.  It’s  not  that  simple. 
What  do  you  want  me  to  do?  Kidnap  her,  lock  her  up 
until  she  changes?  Even  if  I  could,  she’d  go  right 
back  to  using.  Should  I  call  the  police?  Do  you  really 
think  that  would  help  her?” 

“Don’t  you  care  about  her?”  Esteban  said,  fighting 
to  keep  from  shouting.  “She’s  killing  herself,  slowly. 
Don’t  you  even  care  at  all?” 

“It’s  her  life,  Esteban.  She’s  been  on  the  road  for  a 
long  time,  and  she  knows  where  it  leads.  If  she’s  going 
to  change,  she  has  to  do  it  herself.  I  can’t  do  it  for  her.” 

Esteban  pushed  his  chair  back  abruptly  and 
walked  to  the  bar.  The  air  was  thick  and  blue  with 
cigarette  smoke.  He  got  two  more  mugs  of  beer,  and 
cleared  off  an  area  on  the  table  to  set  them  on. 
“Mind  if  I  ask  a  personal  question?” 

“Yes,”  said  Taggart,  “as  a  matter  of  fact,  I  do.” 

“You  ever  been  married?” 

“And  what  business  is  that  of  yours?”  Taggart 
looked  at  Esteban  until  Esteban  finally  looked  away, 
and  then  answered  softly.  “No.  I  guess  I  should  have. 
Get  a  wife,  a  house  in  the  suburbs,  kids,  all  of 
that...”  his  voice  trailed  off. 

“So  how  come  you  never  did?”  There  was  no 
answer.  “Are  you  in  love  with  Dr  Hawke?” 

“In  love  with  Jenny?  No.  Well,  only  a  little,  now.” 
Taggart  picked  up  his  beer,  turned  it  around  in  his 
fingers,  and  put  it  down  again.  “No.  I  know  her  too 
well  for  that.  Once.  For  a  long,  long  time.  But  you 
can’t  love  her,  Esteban.  She  won’t  let  you.  It  would 
hurt  too  much,  to  love  her  and  watch  her  destroy 
herself,  and  know  you  are  helpless.” 

“Do  you  buy  for  her?”  asked  Esteban  in  a  bitter 
voice. 

“Esteban,  I’d  do  anything  for  her.  Almost  any¬ 
thing.  But  not  cop  for  her.  I  wouldn’t  do  it,  and  she 
wouldn’t  ask  me  to.” 

Taggart  put  his  beer  down  and  turned  his  back  on 
Esteban.  His  voice  was  soft,  speaking  to  the  brick 
wall.  “Yeah,  guess  I  should  have  gotten  married, 


moved  away,  gotten  away  from  this  damn  place.  I 
should  have  done  it  a  long  time  ago.” 

“Can’t  you  do  anything?”  Esteban  said,  speaking  to 
Taggart’s  back.  “Send  her  to  a  clinic,  or  something?” 

‘You  think  she  hasn’t  been  to  clinics?  Those  things 
won’t  help,  unless  she  wants  them  to  help.” 

“Science,”  she  said.  “There’s  nothing  else  worth 
doing,  Esteban.  It’s  all  there  is. 

“Heroin.  That’s  pleasure,  pure;  almost  as  good  as 
the  thrill  of  discovery.  And  the  pain,  that’s  pure,  too. 
It’s  pain,  but  it’s  pure  pain.” 

Esteban  nodded.  He  didn’t  like  to  see  her  like  this. 
He  didn’t  know  what  to  say. 

“It’s  not  like  people.  People.  It’s  not  that  they’re  so 
complex,  it’s  that  they’re  so  simple.  So  trivial,  lust¬ 
ing  after  trivial  things.  I  hate  them,  I  hate  them  all. 
So  petty,  they  are  so  petty  to  tarnish  something  so 
beautiful,  so  pure,  with  petty  lies  and  politics  and 
scheming.  Can’t  they  see?  Don’t  they  care  at  all? 

“I  always  wanted  to  have  a  baby.  It’s  so  lonely, 
knowing  there  is  nothing  you  can  give  all  your  being 
to.  Don’t  you  think  it’s  lonely?  Don’t  you?” 

Esteban  nodded  again,  not  trusting  himself  to  speak. 

“Do  you  think  I’m  pretty?  I  was,  you  know,  I  was 
pretty.  But  I  didn’t  care,  I  never  cared.  It  doesn’t 
matter.  Looks  don’t  matter.  Do  you  think  I  should 
have  cared?  I  had  a  head  of  gold,  but  feet  of  clay. 

“We  were  never  meant  for  this  world,  you  and  I. 
The  stars,  they  are  so  beautiful  from  the  gutter.  So 
beautiful.” 

Esteban  got  up.  “I  have  to  go  now,  Dr  Hawke.  It 
was  nice  talking  to  you.”  He  practically  ran  out  of 
the  room.  He  didn’t  want  her  to  see  him  cry. 

Tuesday  was  a  slow  night  for  the  Taproom.  Esteban 
and  Taggart  had  it  all  to  themselves.  Taggart  bought 
a  pitcher,  and  filled  both  glasses. 

“That  can’t  be  all,”  said  Esteban.  “How  did  it  come 
out?  How  did  it  finally  end?” 

“End?”  Taggart  paused,  as  if  he  had  never  considered 
the  concept  before.  “Does  it  end?  I  suppose  it  must.” 

Esteban  picked  up  his  beer.  He  didn’t  sip  it,  but 
just  looked  across  the  empty  bar-room  in  silence,  not 
bothering  to  look  at  Taggart.  He  knew  by  now  that 
he  would  talk.  Taggart  had  his  own  compulsions,  no 
less  demanding  than  those  that  tore  at  Hawke. 

Taggart  shook  his  head.  “Well.  End,  eh?  Jenny 
showed  up  for  the  final  exam,  took  it,  and  then  hur¬ 
ried  away  before  I  even  got  a  chance  to  talk  to  her.  I 
saw  her  again  when  it  was  time  to  pick  up  the 
exams.  Even  though  she’d  been  the  best  in  the  class, 
Eisenstern  gave  her  a  C  in  the  course.  I  told  her  she 
should  protest  to  the  department  head. 

“She  just  sort  of  shrugged.  ‘It  doesn’t  matter.’ 

“I  couldn’t  believe  she  wouldn’t  protest.  ‘But  you 
were  the  best  in  the  class.  You  deserve  more  than — ’ 

“It  doesn’t  matter,  she  said.  ‘Let  it  be,  Richard. 
Just  let  it  be.’  She  saw  Eisenstern  coming  down  the 
hall.  I  have  to  run,  she  said.  ‘Talk  to  you  later,  okay? 
Bye.’  She  left  before  I  could  say  anything  more. 

“I  don’t  think  she  ever  did  tell  Eisenstern.  She 
wouldn’t  give  him  the  satisfaction.  The  university 


GEOFFREY  A.  LANDIS 


pressured  her  to  drop  out,  or  get  married,  but  she 
refused.  So  they  did  the  next  best  thing.  Abortions 
weren’t  legal  then,  but,  well,  in  an  Ivy  League  uni¬ 
versity,  certain  exceptions  can  be  made,  in  the  face 
of  overriding  health  reasons.  The  healthy  reputation 
of  the  university,  for  example.  Officially,  I  don’t 
think  she  ever  was  pregnant.  Right  after  finals  she 
stayed  a  week  in  the  infirmary,  and  certainly  she 
wasn’t  pregnant  when  she  left. 

“The  doctors  at  the  infirmary  were  oh  so  sympa¬ 
thetic  to  what  she  was  going  through,  having  lost  a 
child.  They  gave  her  pills  to  help  her  get  over  her 
grief;  and  told  her  to  take  one  every  two  hours,  with¬ 
out  bothering  telling  her  what  she  was  taking.  For 
her  own  good,  of  course. 

“So  after  getting  out  of  the  infirmary,  she  tried  to 
put  her  life  back  together  and  get  started  on  her 
research.  And  she  couldn’t  do  it.  She  couldn’t  con¬ 
centrate  on  physics. 

“They  prescribed  stronger  sedatives,  and  she  started 
having  real  trouble.  I  think  that  she  must  have 
started  to  think  she  had  lost  her  edge,  and  that 
unnerved  her  more  than  anything  else  possibly  could 
have.  When  the  doctors  at  the  infirmary  thought  she 
was  starting  to  get  hysterical,  they  increased  the  dose. 
She  started  falling  asleep  in  conferences,  nodding  out 
at  her  desk.  By  now  she  was  addicted  to  the  pills.  We 
all  knew  that  something  was  wrong,  but  she  wouldn’t 
tell  anybody  what  it  was.  There  was  talk  that  she’d 
lose  her  fellowship. 

“And  then  she  disappeared. 

“Dr  Lermotov  was  the  only  one  who  stood  up  for 
her.  Ya,  I  am  not  vorried,  he’d  say.  Miss  Hawke,  she 
vill  take  care  of  herself.  He  was  right.  Two  months 
later  she  returned.  She  had  a  gaunt  and  hollow-eyed 
look.  She  never  said  where  she  went.  Somewhere 
there  she  learned  cynicism.  But  she’d  beaten  her 
habit,  or  at  least  learned  to  keep  it  under  control. 

“She  had  to  work  hard  to  keep  her  fellowship,  but 
she  did  it.  She  still  knew  how  to  do  physics.  For  the 
next  couple  of  weeks  she  worked  twenty  hours  a  day, 


and  by  the  beginning  of  September  she  had  a  prelim 
presentation  that  was  at  least  as  good  as  any  of  ours.” 

“So  Lermotov  was  the  only  one  she  could  depend 
on,”  said  Esteban. 

“Well,  yes.  But  in  the  end,  he  betrayed  her,  too.  By 
then  she  didn’t  expect  anything  better.” 

“Closing  time!”  called  the  bartender,  one  hand  on 
the  light  switch,  the  other  on  a  rag.  “That’s  it,  boys, 
you’ve  been  here  long  enough.  Finish  ‘em  up  and  get 
on  home  to  your  families.” 

“You  must  have  been  talking  with  Dr  Taggart.”  She 
shook  her  head  softly.  “Ah,  dear  Richard,  where  would 
I  be  without  him?  Yes,  he  has  his  ideas  about  me. 
Stuff  that  happened  long  ago,  that  he  thinks  is  impor¬ 
tant.  The  romantic  heroine,  the  dark  lady,  striving 
for  greatness,  fated  for  tragedy.”  She  picked  up  a 
stack  of  papers  on  her  desk  and,  without  even  glancing 
at  them,  dropped  them  into  a  drawer  and  slammed 
it  shut.  “Nuts.  I  live  the  way  I  do  because  I  choose  to. 
If  I’m  a  junkie,  Esteban  -  and  I  don’t  like  that  word  - 
but  if  I  am,  it’s  my  own  damn  business.” 

“But  don’t  you  get,  ah,  needle  marks  and  all  that? 
Hepatitis?” 

“Don’t  be  ridiculous.  What  the  hell  do  you  think  I 
am,  some  damn  street  junky  fixing  in  an  alley?  You 
won’t  get  needle  tracks  if  you  use  a  sterile  needle  and 
clean  the  skin  with  alcohol  before  fixing.  Junkies  who 
get  needle  tracks  are  plain  stupid.  I  get  sterile  needles 
from  lab  supplies.” 

“Here?  Don’t  they  ask  what  you  want  them  for?” 

She  shrugged.  “I’m  a  professor.  They  may  wonder, 
but  they  won’t  ask. 

“Now,  let’s  quit  talking  about  me,  and  get  to  work. 
Have  you  gotten  any  results  out  of  the  perturbation 
expansion  you  were  working  on  yet?” 

Esteban  nodded.  “Yes,  I’ve  gotten  some  results, 
but  I’m  not  sure  about  a  couple  of  things.  First....” 

Still,  he  couldn’t  help  thinking,  why?  Why  you? 
And  through  it  all,  he  could  even  still  marvel  at  the 
diamond  clarity  of  her  thinking,  the  beautiful,  sim- 


DARK  LADY 


pie  precision  of  the  way  she  could  attack  a  problem. 

They  were  on  the  track  of  something.  He  could  feel 
it  hiding  in  the  mathematics,  looming  huge  just  out¬ 
side  the  corner  of  his  vision,  a  great  truth  that  would 
make  it  all  fit  together,  but  whenever  he  turned  his 
head  it  was  gone,  and  he  wondered  if  it  was  there  at 
all,  or  an  illusion  of  his  desperate  wanting. 

He  told  her  about  it,  but  she  just  shook  her  head 
and  smiled.  “Don’t  look  for  the  great  truth  yet,  Este¬ 
ban.  Do  the  details.  Do  the  math,  fill  out  the  blank 
spots,  and  if  some  great  truth  is  there,  it  will  be 
waiting  there  for  you.  Okay?” 

But  you  know  you’ll  never  leave  her,  though  she’s 
killing  you  so  slow 

The  blood  runs  fire  in  your  veins  and  the  hells  they 
wait  below. 

“There  is  one  thing,”  Taggart  said.  “You  see,  she 
could  have  ruined  Eisenstern’s  career.  A  little  bit  of 
fooling  around  was  something  the  university  might 
turn  a  blind  eye  to,  but  when  a  professor  actually  gets 
a  student  pregnant,  they’d  take  notice.  If  she’d  com¬ 
plained  into  the  right  ears,  he  would  have  found  that 
there  were  plenty  of  positions  available  at  somewhat 
lesser  universities.  If  she  wanted  vengeance,  she  could 
have  gotten  it.  But  she  chose  to  stay  silent;  to  stick 
it  out,  instead. 

“There’s  not  much  more  to  say.  The  year  she  finished 
her  thesis  research,  there  was  a  major  conference  on 
high-energy  physics  theory  in  Stuttgart.  She  and  Ler- 
motov  co-authored  an  abstract  on  her  work  and  sent  it 
off.  It  got  accepted.  Unfortunately,  Lermotov  told  her, 
there  wasn’t  enough  money  to  pay  her  way  to  the  con¬ 
ference.  Since  she  didn’t  have  money  of  her  own,  Ler¬ 
motov  went  to  present  the  paper  in  both  their  names. 

“Somehow,  he  never  happened  to  mention  that  the 
conference  committee  had  been  so  impressed  by  the 
work  that  they  scheduled  it  as  the  lead  paper  and 
offered  to  pay  both  their  ways  over.  Strangely 
enough,  when  he  presented  the  paper,  her  name 
mysteriously  got  left  off.” 

“She  didn’t  object?” 

“She  didn’t  know  about  it.  It  wasn’t  her  first  paper, 
but  it  was  -  should  have  been  -  an  important  one. 
She  didn’t  even  find  out  until  a  year  later,  when  she 
listed  the  paper  on  her  resume,  and  one  of  the  people 
she  interviewed  called  her  out  on  it.  By  then  she  had 
already  been  a  postdoc  for  a  year,  a  thousand  miles 
away.  There  wasn’t  much  she  could  do.” 

Esteban  was  listening,  but  not  with  all  his  atten¬ 
tion.  He  was  sketching  out  topological  manifolds  on 
one  of  the  napkins  from  the  bar.  She  had  been  talking 
about  knot  theory  recently,  and  suddenly  he  under¬ 
stood  how  it  connected  to  field  theory.  It  had  been 
obvious  to  her  from  the  start,  of  course...  but  if  you 
think  about  the  four  dimensional  manifold  this  way. . . 

And,  slowly,  it  was  starting  to  make  sense.  He  begin¬ 
ning  to  stay  even  with  her,  even  though  he  still 
couldn’t  see  the  picture  that  she  seemed  to  feel  intu¬ 
itively,  the  theory  that  the  pieces  were  coming 
together  to  form.  It  was  an  exhilaration,  a  feeling  of 
power  like  a  drug,  the  first  time  that  he  realized 


that  he  understood  something  she  said  so  completely 
that  he  broke  in  and  finished  her  sentence  for  her. 
She  sat  back,  a  smile  on  her  face. 

It  even  seemed  to  him  that  she  was  using  less. 
Maybe?  Could  it  be?  But  then  he  came  in  for  a  confer¬ 
ence  and  she  was  nodding,  her  pupils  tiny  pinpricks  of 
dark,  sitting  at  her  desk  with  a  dreamy  expression, 
oblivious  to  him  or  anything.  He  walked  out  -  she 
didn’t  change  position  -  and  walked  around  the  cam¬ 
pus,  once,  twice,  a  third  time,  then  came  back  to  her 
office  and  entered  without  knocking. 

“Why  did  you  go  back?”  he  said,  almost  shouting 
at  her.  “You  kicked  once.  Dr  Taggart  said  you  kicked 
it  once.” 

She  pulled  him  close  and  brought  her  face  right  up 
against  his,  forehead  to  forehead,  so  that  her  two  grey 
eyes  were  a  single  cyclopean  eye  in  the  middle  of  her 
face.  Her  voice  was  a  hot  whisper  against  his  lips. 

“Richard  likes  to  talk.  Richard  likes  to  tell  stories, 
he  likes  explanations,  likes  everything  to  make 
sense.  Richard  doesn’t  know  a  damn  thing  about  it. 
Talk  to  Richard  if  it  helps  you,  boy,  but  don’t  you 
ever  come  up  and  tell  me  about  it.” 

She  held  him,  stared  into  his  eye  for  a  long 
moment,  then  released  him  and  leaned  back  in  her 
chair.  She  picked  up  a  paper  from  the  pile,  looked  at 
it  without  focusing  on  it.  Slowly  the  hard  look  on  her 
face  relaxed.  She  sat  there  for  several  minutes,  until 
Esteban  wondered  if  she  wanted  him  to  leave,  won¬ 
dered  if  she  had  forgotten  he  was  there. 

“There  are  some  who  open  up  whole  new  fields;  the 
grand  architects  like  Einstein,  Maxwell,  Galileo,”  she 
said.  “And  there  are  others  who  do  the  dirty  work, 
who  painstakingly  fill  in  the  details,  who  lay  the 
bricks  and  shine  their  flashlights  into  areas  of  the 
grand  cathedrals  that  the  architects  have  only  briefly 
mentioned.  Don’t  let  anybody  tell  you  that  this  is 
less  important.  For  all  that  there  are  a  thousand 
bricklayers  for  each  of  the  architects,  that  bricklay¬ 
ing  is  what  builds  up  the  body  of  science,  bit  by  bit. 

“But  still,  I  always  wanted  to  be  one  of  the  trail- 
blazers,  one  who  looked  at  what  others  have  looked 
at  before  and  saw  what  none  have  ever  seen. 

“Maybe  it’s  an  accident  of  luck,  to  be  in  the  right 
place  at  the  right  time.  Maybe  there  is  no  funda¬ 
mentally  new  physics  left,  that  all  is  done  except  fill¬ 
ing  in  the  details.  Maybe  it’s  me. 

“I’ve  tried,  Esteban,  I’ve  tried.  I’ve  gotten  piles  of 
honours  and  citations  for  things  I’ve  done,  and  it’s 
all  shit.  Bricklaying.  I  know  that  I  never  did  more 
than  that,  although  I’ve  done  it  well,  as  well  as  I 
could.  I’ve  always  just  filled  in  the  details  of  work 
that  others  had  originated. 

“I’ve  had  the  dream,  Esteban.  I’ve  had  the  dream 
ever  since  I  can  remember.  And  dreams  die  hard.” 

‘You  love  her  too,  Esteban,  don’t  you?” 

He  nodded  mutely. 

“It’s  hard,  isn’t  it?” 

‘Yes.” 

“You  can’t  change  her,  you  know.  She’s  a  diamond, 
and  we  are  just  rocks.  You  can  only  grind  yourself 
down.” 


50 


interione  August  1995 


GEOFFREY  A.  LANDIS 


“I  know.” 

And  the  saxophone  said, 

Maybe  God’s  above,  but  I’ll  never  know 

I’ve  sold  my  soul  to  the  devils  down  below 

To  take  my  pleasure  of  my  lady  love, 

white  and  cold  like  the  deadly  burning  snow. 

And  then  she  showed  him  what  she  had  done,  how  all 
the  pieces  that  the  two  of  them  together  had  ham¬ 
mered  into  shape  fit  together  into  a  theory.  It  came  as 
a  shock  to  Esteban  to  find  that  she  had  abandoned 
field  quantization.  Her  first  paper  -  the  very  first 
one,  the  one  that  she  had  done  so  long  ago  with  Ler- 
motov  -  had  been  on  methods  of  field  quantization. 

“But  how  do  you  deal  with  photons?” 

“We  have  no  need  for  photons.  Look.” 

And  it  was  everything  he  had  learned,  seen  in  a  new 
way,  all  topsy-turvey.  But  it  worked.  God,  it  worked! 

“But  why?  It’s  so  complicated.” 

“Calculationally  complicated,”  she  said.  “But  con¬ 
ceptually,  neater.” 

It  didn’t  look  neater  to  him.  It  looked  like  the  back 
side  of  a  magician’s  stage,  all  scaffolding  and  hooks 
and  wires,  with  ad  hoc  assumptions  to  make  things 
come  out. 

“It  was  always  like  that,  Esteban.  This  way  the 
theory  just  shows  it  clearly.” 

It  was  crazy,  a  patchwork  quilt  of  a  theory,  but  it 
all  hung  together.  “That  explains  everything,”  he 
whispered.  “It’s  incredible!” 

“Not  everything,”  she  said.  “But  a  lot.”  She  crum¬ 
pled  the  piece  of  paper  in  her  hand,  and  Esteban 
jerked  back  as  if  he’d  been  shot.  “And  it’s  wrong.” 

“What?” 

“Wrong!”  she  shouted.  She  threw  the  ball  of  paper 
across  the  room.  It  bounced  off  the  blackboard  and 
skittered  to  a  stop  out  in  the  hall.  “In  error.  Factu¬ 
ally  incorrect.  False.” 

“Why?  How?” 

She  grabbed  a  sheet  of  paper  -  a  student’s  final 
exam  -  and  started  scribbling  on  it,  oblivious  to  what 
was  already  written  there.  “Look!  You  can  solve  for 
the  mass  of  the  electron 

He  stared  at  it.  “How?  To  do  that  you  need  to 
know  the  coupling  coefficient  — ” 

“No!  Can’t  you  see?  All  those  terms  drop  out!  You 
get  a  Hankel  function;  the  infinities  cancel  and  you 
can  integrate  it  exactly.” 

Esteban  shook  his  head.  “I  can’t  integrate  a  Han¬ 
kel  function  in  my  head.” 

‘You  don’t  have  to.  That’s  why  God  invented  Rus¬ 
sians.”  She  pulled  Rhyzhik  and  Gradshteyn  from 
her  bookshelf.  “Look!” 

It  took  him  half  an  hour  to  convince  himself  she  was 
right,  another  hour  to  go  through  it  again,  this  time 
looking  for  some  adjustable  parameter  he  could  jigger 
to  make  the  numbers  come  out  right.  There  weren’t 
any.  He  went  back  into  the  derivation  then,  trying  to 
find  where  the  error  came  in.  Hawke  had  gone  away  - 
to  fix  up,  he  guessed,  he  had  been  too  busy  to  notice 
her  leaving  -  and  when  she  finally  came  back,  he  was 
staring  at  the  wall. 

He  looked  up,  and  was  surprised  to  notice  that  it 

interzone  August  1995 


was  almost  midnight.  He’d  been  working  for  almost 
six  hours.  “The  standard  model  is  wrong,”  he  said. 

“Obviously.” 

Esteban  let  out  a  sigh  of  relief.  Until  he  had  heard 
her  confirm  it  he  hadn’t  realized  how  much  on  edge 
he’d  been.  “But  -  that’s  a  breakthrough!”  he  said.  The 
standard  model  had  been  used  to  explain  elementary 
particle  physics  for  over  two  decades,  and  their  work 
showed  that  it  was  wrong,  just  like  that.  “Don’t  you 
see 

“Do  you  really  think  I  care?”  she  snapped.  “We’re 
back  at  square  zero.”  She  rested  her  forehead  on  the 
desk.  “I  can’t  start  over  again,  Esteban,  I  just  can’t. 
That  was  everything  I  had,  everything,  and  it  wasn’t 
enough.”  Then  she  raised  her  head  and  looked  at 
him.  “Go  home,  Esteban.  Tomorrow  will  be  soon 
enough  for  you  to  write  this  up  for  publication.” 

“But  we  should  celebrate 

“Go  on  home,  Esteban.”  She  shook  her  head.  “I 
prefer  to  do  my  celebrating  alone,  and  I  don’t  need  any 
help  from  you.  Get  some  sleep.  You  can  be  famous 
tomorrow.” 

It  was  enough.  He  could  see  it  now,  see  the  whole 
thing  completely  -  or  maybe  it  was  just  his  own  tired¬ 
ness  making  him  think  he  could  see  it  all  -  but  he 
knew  that  he  would  get  a  thesis  out  of  it,  and  more. 
Even  if  they  shared  the  credit  -  even  though  Jenny 
would  claim  the  major  portion  of  the  credit,  which 
rightfully  was  hers  -  it  would  still  be  a  major  result. 
His  part  of  the  work  would  be  worth  a  professorship. 

But  Jenny?  On  a  sudden  impulse  he  hugged  her.  It 
was  the  first  time  he  had  ever  dared  touch  her,  and 
she  went  rigid  for  a  moment.  Then  for  just  a  brief 
instant  she  relaxed,  and  he  felt  the  crumpled  cotton 
of  her  blouse,  felt  her  body  heat  and  bunched  mus¬ 
cles  and  quickly  beating  heart,  and  suddenly  real¬ 
ized  she  was  a  human  being  like  any  other,  with  her 
own  fears  and  sadness  and  a  vulnerability  that  he 
could  never  know,  and  then  she  pushed  him  away. 

Her  voice  was  tired  now.  “Home,  Esteban.”  She 
pushed  him  gently  out  her  office  door,  and  closed  it 
behind  him.  He  waited  there,  alone  in  the  silent  cor¬ 
ridor,  and  heard  the  click  of  the  lock,  and  waited 
until  at  last  her  light  went  out. 

He  drives  a  beat-up  Mercedes  convertible.  Every 
morning  at  nine  it  comes  screeching  into  the  faculty 
parking  lot  with  the  deep,  frustrated  roar  of  a  pow¬ 
erful  engine  whose  only  outlet  is  through  twin  racing 
mufflers.  The  body  has  been  painstakingly  restored 
with  fibreglass  patches,  sanded  into  smooth  curves 
and  lovingly  painted  with  a  deep,  hand-rubbed  grey, 
the  grey  of  an  overcast  winter’s  dawn,  the  grey  of 
forgotten  hopes. 

The  body  is  patched  and  sanded,  but  the  engine  is 
in  racing  tune. 


Geoffrey  A.  Landis  last  appeared  here  with  “In  the  Land  of 
Purple  Flowers”  ( IZ  60),  though  perhaps  his  most  memorable 
story  for  us  was  “Paradigms  of  Change"  (IZ  S3). 

5? 


BOOKS  REVIEWED  AND  RECEIVED 


Sometime  in  the  middle  of  the  1980s, 
coincident  with  the  emergence  of 
cyberpunk,  sf’s  obsession  with  catast¬ 
rophe  and  the  dark  side  of  technology 
quietly  began  to  wither.  The  aftermath 
of  limited  nuclear  war  became  no  more 
than  a  single  stitch  in  a  detailed  tapes¬ 
try,  as  in  William  Gibson’s  Neuroman- 
cer  (1984);  misuse  of  technology  caused 
not  the  extinction  of  the  human  race, 
but  its  transcendence,  as  in  Greg  Bear’s 
Blood  Music  (1985). 

But  nothing  is  forever,  and  certainly 
not  themes  or  trends  in  sf.  After  cyber¬ 
punk,  that  mutant  strand  in  which  we 
all  become  our  own  autocatalytic 
Frankensteins,  and  change  is  celebra¬ 
ted  with  positively  neo- Victorian  vigour, 
there  has  been  a  return  to  more  con¬ 
ventional  Awful  Warnings  in  which 
some  new  technology  (biotechnology, 
nanotechnology  or  artificial  intelligence 
-  or  even  all  three,  as  in  Kathleen 
Anne  Goonan’s  recent  Queen  City  Jazz) 
takes  its  revenge  on  its  creators  and 
must  be  fought,  not  embraced.  And  now 
to  hand,  taking  this  a  step  further,  are 
two  books  which  rework  a  particularly 
British  theme,  the  cosy  catastrophe. 

In  Octavia  Butler’s  beautiful  and 
moving  Parable  of  the  Sower 
(Women’s  Press,  £6.99),  the  catastrophe 
is  that  which  is  already  gathering 
around  us.  Things  have  fallen  apart. 
Civilization  exists  only  as  isolated 
islands  in  a  sea  of  anarchy  where  gang¬ 
sters,  the  insane  and  the  disenfranchi¬ 
sed  poor  prey  on  each  other,  and  the 
only  law  is  that  the  weak  die  so  that 
the  strong  may  live.  There  is  precious 
little  of  sf’s  most  recent  obsessions 
here  -  computers  and  virtual  reality 
barely  rate  a  mention  -  because  the 
hopeful  futures  to  which  they  belong 
are  already  in  the  past. 

This  is  the  world  of  Lauren  Olamina, 
and  it  is  through  her  eyes  -  the  novel  is 
cast  as  her  diary  -  that  we  see  things 
fall  apart  and  a  way  in  which  the  future 
may  be  redeemed.  It  is  an  understated 
and  convincing  portrayal  of  ordinary 
life  lived  inside  a  few  blocks  of  Los 
Angeles  suburbia  whose  walled 
defences  are  barely  sufficient  to  keep 
out  the  desperately  poor  that 
surround  it.  The  strength  and  vigilance 
of  Lauren’s  father  keep  the  little  com¬ 
munity  together,  but  Lauren,  who, 
because  of  an  intelligence-enhancing 
drug  her  mother  took,  is  hyperempathic 
and  literally  bleeds  in  sympathy  with 
other  people’s  wounds,  has  a  sense  of 
impending  disaster  that  lends  a  grow¬ 
ing  tension  to  the  first  section  of  the 
book.  Lauren’s  brother  becomes  a  gang¬ 
ster  and  is  killed;  her  father  simply 
disappears;  finally,  the  neighbourhood 
is  invaded  by  a  drug-crazed  gang  and 
almost  everyone  Lauren  knows  is  killed. 
She  survives  only  because  she  antici¬ 
pated  catastrophe,  and  from  the  ashes 
of  disaster  forges  a  kind  of  victory  as 
she  heads  North  within  a  vast  flow  of 
refugees  and  gathers  around  her  a  new 


Things 
fall  apart 

Paul  J.  McAuley 


community  which  may  contain  the 
seed  of  the  future. 

The  narrative  line  is  a  commonplace 
of  catastrophe  novels,  most  notably, 
with  its  despairing  trek  across  a  devas¬ 
tated  landscape  towards  the  hope  of 
refuge,  echoing  John  Christopher’s 
Death  of  Grass.  But  Butler  makes  it 
clear  that,  unlike  Christopher’s  cosy 
catastrophe,  the  seeds  of  disaster  do 
not  originate  from  the  outside:  instead, 
they  are  inextricably  woven  into  the 
human  psyche.  The  struggle  is  not 
against  nature;  it  is  against  our  own 
selves.  It  is  the  human  impulse  towards 
distrust  and  destruction  which  Lauren 
must  overcome,  and  she  turns  the 
weakness  which  her  gangster  brother 
predicted  would  destroy  her  -  her 
hyperempathy  —  into  her  strength. 

The  seed  that  Lauren  casts  into  the 
future  is  embedded  in  an  affirmative 
philosophy,  Earthseed.  Welcoming 
change,  the  antithesis  of  her  father’s 
strict  Baptism  and  the  petty  claustro¬ 
phobia  of  her  neighbourhood,  her  creed, 
quoted  extensively  through  the  narra¬ 
tive,  treads  a  fine  line  between  the 
shallow  life-affirmation  of  the  New  Age 
and  the  cliches  of  sf  utopianism,  but 
never  falls  into  sentiment.  Butler  uses 
it  not  only  to  illuminate  Lauren’s  char¬ 
acter,  but  also  as  the  moral  imperative 
on  which  the  entire  novel  hangs. 

Parable  of  the  Sower  is  a  fine  and 
delicate  portrayal  of  a  coming  of  age, 
and  of  a  heroine  whose  goodness  and 
strength  is  revealed  through  her 
actions.  Butler  combines  convincing 
characterization  with  a  finely  consid¬ 
ered  portrayal  of  racial  and  sexual 
conflicts,  placing  real  people  in  an 
imaginary  but  unsparing  portrayal  of 
a  brutalized  society  a  bare  inch  away 
from  our  own.  In  its  refusal  to  seek  a 
quick  technological  fix,  and  its  forth¬ 
right  examination  of  difficult  questions, 
it  is  a  considerable  and  mature 
achievement. 

In  Kamikaze  U Amour  (St.  Martin’s 
Press,  $20.95),  Richard  Kadrey  has  his 
hero  trek  in  the  opposite  direction  to 
Butler’s  in  more  ways  than  one.  Like 
the  early  work  of  J.G.  Ballard,  Kadrey’s 
long-delayed  second  novel  turns  the 
cosy  catastrophe  scenario  inside  out. 
Instead  of  fighting  towards  redemption 
across  a  landscape  reclaimed  by  nature, 
his  hero  welcomes  change,  finding  in 
the  metamorphosis  of  catastrophe  a 
mirror  for  his  own  internal  conflicts. 


Ryder,  a  rock  star  disgusted  with  the 
excesses  of  fame,  survives  a  suicide 
attempt,  escapes  the  sanatorium  in 
which  he  has  been  dumped  by  his 
manager,  and  assumes  a  new  identity 
in  San  Francisco,  which  has  been  over¬ 
whelmed  by  the  northward  encroach¬ 
ment  of  the  rain  forests.  Here,  amongst 
sleepwalkers  and  suicide  cults,  Ryder’s 
mania  to  discover  a  new  music  form 
for  his  latest  album,  guided  by  his 
synaesthesia,  which  translates  music 
into  forms  of  light  and  vice  versa, 
goes  unnoticed. 

True  to  the  Ballardian  template, 
Ryder  becomes  obsessed  with  a  woman, 
Frida,  who  is  able  to  effortlessly  riddle 
the  secret  language  of  the  catastrophe: 
she  makes  music  by  sampling  rain¬ 
forest  noises  in  an  attempt  to  create  a 
spiritline  that  will  define  the  resurgent 
jungles.  Believing  that  Frida  has  stolen 
the  demo  tapes  of  his  new  music,  Ryder 
follows  her  when  she  leaves  for  Los 
Angeles,  pursued  in  turn  by  a  sinister 
documentary  maker. 

While  there  is  nothing  particularly 
original  in  the  linear  diagram  of  this 
picaresque  journey,  and  it  is  overtly 
templated  upon  the  surrealistic  land¬ 
scapes  and  obsessed  antiheroes  of 
Ballard’s  disaster  novels,  Kamikaze 
L’ Amour  is  crammed  with  arresting 
and  original  imagery  and  guyed  by  a 
wry  self-knowledge.  Kadrey,  who  among 
other  things  has  worked  on  the  Whole 
Earth  Catalog  and  The  Covert  Culture 
Sourcebook  (St  Martin’s  Press,  $12.95) 
in  the  long  spell  between  his  first  novel 
and  Kamikaze  L Amour,  displays  a  fine 
eye  for  pop-culture  iconography,  and 
his  descriptions  of  the  processes  of 
musical  composition  and  form  are  both 
original  and  persuasive.  Slim,  slick, 
crammed  with  richly  detailed  imagery, 
Kamikaze  L  Amour  is  a  bejewelled 
postmodern  Book  of  Hours. 

Earthfall  and  Earthbom  (Tor,  $22.95 
and  $23.95;  both  due  in  Britain  from 
Legend)  bring  to  an  end  the  long  jour¬ 
ney  of  Orson  Scott  Card’s  five-volume 
“Homecoming  Saga.”  It  possesses  all 
the  criteria  for  a  classic  science-fantasy 
series:  godlike  artificial  intelligences;  a 
vast  perspective  on  human  history; 
long  journeys  across  an  alien  world 
and  the  gulf  of  space;  a  far-future  earth 
inhabited  by  post-human  intelligent 
species.  It  also,  and  this  is  still  so 
unusual  for  sf  and  fantasy  that  it  merits 
attention,  contains  strongly  drawn  and 
believable  characters  whose  interac¬ 
tions  nicely  tangle  the  plot,  and  it  is 
deeply  concerned  with  the  moral 
responsibilities  of  power.  And  yet. 

And  yet,  in  sum  it  does  not,  in  the 
end,  stir  the  heart  or  mind  as  much  as 
its  parts  promise.  This  is  not  because 
Card  had  drawn  extensively  on 
Mormon  theology  and,  as  others  have 
pointed  out,  used  particular  parts  of 
The  Book  of  Mormon  to  inform  the 
structure  of  his  saga.  The  long  trek  of 


interzone  August  1995  — ' 


BOOKS  REVIEWED  AND  RECEIVED 


Nafai,  who  has  been  chosen  by  the 
Oversoul  of  the  planet  Harmony  to  lead 
an  expedition  back  to  Earth,  where 
the  Oversoul  hopes  to  find  renewal  of 
purpose  after  40  million  years  super¬ 
vising  human  civilization,  may  indeed 
mirror  the  trek  from  Jerusalem  (Nafai’s 
home  city  of  Basilica)  to  Heaven  (Earth, 
where  an  even  greater  artificial 
intelligence,  the  Keeper  of  Earth, 
dwells).  Yet  that  is  only  the  backbone  of 
a  long  and  intricate  fiction  that  deals 
with  questions  fundamental  to  sf. 

Can  humans,  with  all  their  faults, 
ever  inhabit  a  utopia?  And  if  so,  what 
form  could  that  utopia  take,  and  how 
would  it  be  regulated?  And  if  it  is 
regulated  by  God  (or  something  with 
the  powers  of  God),  what  are  the 
moral  implications  of  miracles?  All  of 
this  is  good.  The  problem  is  this: 

Card’s  well  drawn  characters  are 
never  entirely  themselves.  They  are 
all,  to  a  greater  or  lesser  extent, 
mouthpieces.  The  saga  is  not  so  much 
a  fiction,  as  a  tract  in  which  the  hero 
can  never  be  wrong,  because  he  has 
God  (literally)  on  his  side,  and  God  is 
never  wrong. 

Thus,  while  Card  sets  up  an 
enduring  conflict  between  Nafai  and 
his  brother,  Elemak,  to  drive  the  plot 
through  the  five  volumes,  yea,  even 
after  their  deaths  unto  the  hundredth 
generation,  the  conflict  lacks  tension 
because  Card  shows,  over  and  over, 
that  Elemak  can  never  win.  Indeed, 
one  can  almost  sympathize  with 
Elemak.  He  may  be  a  cowardly 
braggart  and  a  bully,  but  while  Nafai 
simply  accepts  the  word  of  God,  at 
least  Elemak  doggedly  tries  to  do  his 
own  thing. 

In  Earthfall,  the  fourth  book  of  the 
series,  Nafai’s  family  and  their 
husbands  and  wives  and  children, 
chosen  by  the  Oversoul  because  they 
respond  best  to  the  dreams  it  sends  as 
instructions  (and  to  the  dreams  sent 
by  the  mysterious  Keeper  of  Earth), 
finally  leave  Harmony  for  Earth. 
Elemak  stages  a  mutiny  aboard  the 
starship,  and  another  mutiny  once 
they  reach  Earth,  where  they  discover 
two  intelligent  races,  the  Angels  and 
the  Diggers.  Although  constantly  in 
strife,  the  two  races  are  subtly  depen¬ 
dent  upon  each  other,  but  once  the 
humans  riddle  their  symbiosis  and 
render  them  independent,  Elemak 
leads  the  Diggers  and  his  own  family 
off  to  start  an  Empire,  and  Nafai,  who 
sides  with  the  angels,  writes  a  book  on 
gold  plates,  which  is  not  The  Book  of 
Mormon  (also  written  on  gold  plates). 

Earthborn  takes  up  the  story  a 
thousand  or  so  years  later.  All  the 
original  cast  are  dead,  save  for  the 
Oversoul  and  one  woman,  the  biolog¬ 
ist  Shemedi,  who  has  been  granted  a 
kind  of  immortality  by  assuming  the 
power  of  the  shipmaster’s  cloak  once 
worn  by  Nafai.  Shemedi  and  the  Over¬ 
soul  discover  that  the  Earth  has  been 


resettled  before;  the  Keeper  of  Earth 
appears  to  destroy  those  communities 
which  fail  to  achieve  moral  worth. 

The  conflict  between  Nafai  and 
Elemak  is  echoed  in  the  wars 
between  the  nations  of  humans  and 
angels  and  humans  and  diggers.  A 
new  religion,  led  by  a  priest  who  was 
once  a  slave  of  the  diggers,  promises 
to  bind  all  three  races  in  peaceful 
accord,  but  is  threatened  by  the 
priest’s  son,  who  starts  a  campaign  for 
a  kind  of  apartheid  which  if  succes¬ 
sful  will  lead  to  the  destruction  of 
them  all. 

Card  develops  and  sustains  with 
commendable  vigour  a  complex  and 
thickly  populated 


RICHARD 

K  A  UR  E  Y 

f  / 

\\  (* 

i-.  ■ 

*  t 

)/ 

% 

kamikaze 

L'AMOUR 

story  in  which  everyone  is 
manipulating  everyone  else.  But 
although  he  is  superb  at  dramatizing 
moral  conflict,  his  narrative  control 
verges  on  the  hermetic.  His  villains  can 
never  even  begin  to  win  any  argument 
at  any  level,  because  they  are  opposed 
by  characters  who  embody  the  will  of 
the  Oversoul  and  of  the  Keeper  of 
Earth,  and  the  Oversoul  is  Annunciat¬ 
ing  Angel  to  the  Keeper’s  God.  What 
is  left  for  the  villains  then,  because 
they  are  not  allowed  to  sustain  argum¬ 
ents  of  any  complexity,  is  bluster  and 
childish  insults.  In  a  series  that 
increasingly  relies  on  conversation  to 
sustain  the  plot  (in  the  final  volume 
there  is  a  brief  portrayal  of  an  expedit¬ 
ion  to  free  the  slaves  of  the  diggers,  but 
mostly  the  action  centres  on  the  poli¬ 
tics  of  a  single  city),  the  lack  of  true 
argument  is  a  widening  flaw.  Increas¬ 
ingly,  everyone  speaks  with  one  voice, 
and  when  they  do  not,  they  pay  the 
price,  or  are  suddenly  and  miraculously 
redeemed.  What  Card  has  dramatized 
here,  with  the  full  force  of  his  consid¬ 
erable  skill,  is  not  a  dialogue  at  all.  It 
is  a  sermon. 

Ken  Grimwood’s  Into  the  Deep 
(Morrow,  $20)  is  his  first  novel  since 


Replay,  which  came  out  of  left  field  to 
win  the  1987  World  Fantasy  Award. 

So  it’s  disappointing  that  Into  the 
Deep,  which  deals  with  the  well-worn 
trope  of  cetacean  intelligence, 
exhibits  an  apparent  suspension  of 
the  writer’s  critical  faculties.  Despite 
some  nice  twists  on  an  old  theme, 
notably  a  kind  of  cetacean  Internet 
maintained  by  the  group-mind  of 
whales,  the  novel,  imbued  with 
treacly  sentiment,  rolls  along  on 
predictable  lines. 

A  rogue  group  of  dolphins  wants, 
against  the  wishes  of  the  rest  of 
cetacean  civilization,  to  re-establish 
communications  with  humans, 
severed  3,000  years  ago.  The  most 
potentially  interesting  human  charac¬ 
ter  is  the  captain  of  a  tuna-fishing  boat 
(Grimwood  has  witnessed  at  first  hand 
the  needless  slaughter  of  dolphins  that 
occurs  during  purse-seiner  tuna  fishing, 
and  there’s  no  denying  his  deep-felt 
abhorrence),  who  must  reconcile  his 
trade  with  the  onset  of  empathic  cont¬ 
act  with  the  dolphins.  But  he  is  sacri¬ 
ficed  in  a  pointless  sub-plot  in  which 
humans  and  cetaceans  unite  to  save 
Santa  Barbara  from  an  underwater 
volcano,  leaving  centre-stage  to  the 
smug  romance  between  a  journalist 
and  a  marine  scientist,  and  hardly  any 
space  at  all  to  the  implications  of 
restoration  of  the  cetacean-human  link. 
Replay,  in  which  one  man  found  himself 
reliving  his  life  over  and  over,  worked 
so  well  because  of  Grimwood’s  rigorous 
and  unsentimental  use  of  the  plot 
device  to  explore  of  the  degree  to  which 
we  are  able  to  control  our  lives.  Here, 
sentiment  and  whimsy  washes  through 
a  plot  fatally  holed  below  the  waterline. 

John  Brosnan’s  Damned  and  Fancy 
(Legend,  £4.99),  as  hyperkinetic  as  a 
terrier  on  speed,  takes  every  cliche  in 
heroic  fantasy  by  the  scruff  of  the 
neck  and  gives  it  a  good  shaking.  It’s 
a  glorious  piss-take  that  slams  along 
from  one  set-up  to  another  at  such  a 
pace  that  it’s  easy  to  overlook  the  care 
and  cunning  which  Brosnan  has 
invested  in  his  premise. 

Which  is  that  investigative 
journalist  Travis  Thompson  has 
annoyed  a  tycoon  Who  Is  More  Than 
He  Seems,  and  finds  himself  in  a 
medieval  fantasy  world  armed  with 
nothing  more  than  a  magic  gun  and  a 
flatulent  pocket-sized  demon  who 
used  to  be  a  Hollywood  producer  (not 
much  change  there,  then).  As  Travis 
lurches  from  one  spot  of  bother  to  the 
next,  he  encounters  all  the  privations 
that  are  specifically  never  mentioned 
in  fantasies,  such  as  the  lack  of  toilet 
paper  and  the  appalling  underwear, 
rescues  a  princess  from  a  dragon, 
loses  her  to  a  vampire  and  rescues 
her  again,  and  makes  an  heroic  stand 
against  an  army  of  magical  trolls 
kitted  out  as  football  hooligans. 

Brosnan  is  not  a  subtle  satirist,  but 


interzone  Ausust  1995 


BOOKS  REVIEWED  AND  RECEIVED 


that’s  more  of  a  grace  than  a 
handicap,  given  that  his  target  is  a 
sub-genre  that’s  so  sublimely 
unselfconscious  about  the  po-faced 
reverence  with  which  it  treats  its 
third  hand  over-romanticized 
concepts  that  it’s  mostly  beyond 
satirizing.  The  jokes  come  thick  and 
fast,  with  the  kind  of  glee  that 
indicates  that  Brosnan  is  enjoying 
putting  the  boot  into  his  subject,  and 
best  of  all  is  the  last:  Damned  and 


In  his  affectionate  study  of  The  Uni¬ 
verse  Makers:  Science  Fiction  Today 
(1971)  the  late  Don  Wollheim  argued 
that  Isaac  Asimov’s  Foundation  series 
had  created  the  framework  for  a  whole 
“cosmogony  of  the  future”:  a  collective 
science-fictional  image  of  future  history 
whose  centrepiece  was  the  Galactic 
Empire.  The  dominance  of  this  image 
in  sf,  Wollheim  claimed,  might  even  be 
taken  as  evidence  that  this  might  actu¬ 
ally  be  the  shape  of  things  to  come. 
What  a  difference  a  generation  makes! 
By  the  time  Asimov  died  his  increas¬ 
ingly  verbose  attempts  to  breathe  new 
life  into  the  Foundation  scenario  had 
begun  to  seem  like  the  senile  ramblings 
of  a  man  bogged  down  in  the  dead  past. 
In  1995  the  image  of  Galactic  Empire 
has  almost  vanished  from  all  written  sf 
except  that  which  is  tied  to  TV  and  film 
shows  whose  imagery  is  noticeably 
less  sophisticated  than  that  of  the 
average  modern  comic  book. 

The  sf  Wollheim  was  writing  about 
regarded  the  conquest  of  space  as  a 
simple  and  relatively  straightforward 
matter  in  which  the  settlement  of  Mars 
was  a  mere  stepping-stone  of  little  or 
no  intrinsic  interest.  More  recent  sf  has, 
however,  become  so  obsessive  about  the 
means  and  mechanics  of  taking  that 
step  that  the  farther  horizons  have  been 
retired  to  a  distant  numinous  haze. 
Climbing  Olympus  by  Kevin  J. 
Anderson  (Warner  Books,  $5.50)  is  part 
of  a  veritable  glut  of  grittily  tough-min¬ 
ded  Mars-set  novels  which  bring  the 
practical  and  political  difficulties  of 
colonization  into  uncomfortably  sharp 
focus.  Like  Kim  Stanley  Robinson’s 
trilogy-in-progress  it  has  much  to  say 
about  terraforming,  and  like  Thomas  T. 
Thomas’s  recently-authorized  sequel  to 
Frederik  Pohl’s  Man  Plus,  it  has  much 
to  say  about  the  awfulness  of  growing 
old  when  you’re  a  cyborg  whose  technol¬ 
ogical  bits  and  bobs  have  been  super¬ 
seded.  It  is  significant  that  most  of  the 
characters  are  non-American  -  these 
cyborgs  are  conscripts  from  ex-Soviet 
gulags  -  and  that  dreams  of  conquest 
are  not  something  that  they  can  take 
for  granted  by  virtue  of  their  culture. 
Unlike  Robinson’s  “Green  Mars”  nov¬ 
ella  Climbing  Olympus  is  not  actually 
about  mountain-climbing;  its  heights 
are  mainly  symbolic  and  the  painful 
laboriousness  of  their  scaling  is  frank 
testimony  to  the  modern  view  that 


Fancy  is  the  first  of  (breathe  the  word 
gently)  a  trilogy. 

Also  noted: 

Amid  the  plethora  of  cosmology  texts, 
Frank  J.  Tipler’s  The  Physics  of 
Immortality  (Macmillan,  £20),  wins 
the  prize  for  chutzpa.  If  Tipler’s  right, 
and  he  scrupulously  backs  his  text 
with  a  plethora  of  equation-riddled 
appendices  to  convince  those  of  us 
who  can  follow  gauge  theory  and 


THE  EMPIRE 
THAT 

NEVER  WAS 

Brian  Stableford 

progress  is  a  direly  difficult  business. 

Even  when  modem  sf  writers  revisit 
the  manifold  pastures  of  the  Galactic 
Empire,  as  Mike  Resnick  does  in 
A  Miracle  of  Rare  Design  (Tor, 
$21.95),  they  tend  to  find  them  awk¬ 
wardly  unwelcoming.  No  one  has  tried 
harder  than  Resnick  to  preserve  a  sense 
of  wonder  in  the  contemplation  of  a 
galaxy-spanning  society,  in  such  ebul¬ 
lient  epics  as  Santiago  and  Ivory,  but 
his  many  stories  drawing  speculative 
parallels  between  the  colonization  of 
space  and  the  colonization  of  Africa  -  a 
subject  with  which  he  is  very  familiar  - 
have  forced  him  to  a  much  grimmer 
accounting  of  the  costs  and  benefits  of 
such  conquests.  A  Miracle  of  Rare 
Design  is  a  fascinating  tale  of  gradual, 
irreversible  and  literal  alienation,  in 
which  a  travel-writer  who  suffers  ter¬ 
rible  mutilation  in  the  course  of  his 
attempt  to  understand  the  rituals  of  an 
alien  religion  is  re-modelled  time  and 
time  again  by  plastic  surgeons  so  that 
he  might  undertake  a  series  of  ambas¬ 
sadorial  expeditions.  The  point  of  no 
return  is  very  soon  passed,  and  the 
hero’s  quest  to  find  some  viable  purpose 
in  what  he  is  doing  becomes  distinctly 
fraught;  the  fact  that  he  is  helping  to 
secure  a  Galactic  Empire  of  sorts  is 
quickly  condemned  to  incidentality,  if 
not  quite  to  utter  irrelevance. 

Books  like  these  must,  of  course,  sit  on 
many  shelves  alongside  the  products 
of  the  Galactic  Empire’s  Golden  Age; 
yesterday’s  tomorrows  are  still  with  us 
and  will  not  soon  be  forgotten.  The 
ghosts  of  old  Ace  Doubles  haunt  the 
specialist  bookshops,  and  a  few  novels 
of  the  ’50s  are  repeatedly  reprinted  and 
read.  A  novel  from  that  period  which  is 
appearing  for  the  first  time  is  William 
Moy  Russell’s  The  Barber  of 
Aldebaran  (Janus,  £7.95),  which 
serves  to  remind  us  that  the  image  of 
the  future  which  Don  Wollheim  held  so 
dear  was  maintained  partly  by  a  deter¬ 


quantum  mechanics,  then  at  the  end 
of  time,  when  the  Universe  condenses 
down  in  the  Big  Crunch,  surviving 
intelligences  will  become  God,  and 
lovingly  resurrect  us  all  into  Life 
Eternal.  And  if  you  think  that’s 
weird,  Tipler  engages,  with  the 
earnestness  of  a  hyperkinetic  boy 
scout,  in  a  marriage  of  physics  and 
metaphysics  to  divine  the  morality  of 
Heaven.  How  can  you  resist? 

Paul  J.  McAuley 


mined  refusal  to  notice  its  inherent 
preposterousness.  Don  Wollheim  -  who 
was,  I  believe,  one  of  the  many  editors 
who  rejected  this  book  in  times  past  - 
used  to  argue  with  passionate  convic¬ 
tion  that  comedy  science  fiction  didn’t 
work  and  didn’t  sell,  but  what  he  really 
meant  was  that  the  science-fictional 
image  of  the  Galactic  Empire  was  too 
delicate  a  flower  to  be  exposed  to  the 
wind  of  laughter.  It  was  left  to  invaders 
from  other  media  -  The  Hitch-Hiker’s 
Guide  to  the  Galaxy  from  radio  and 
Red  Dwarf  from  TV  -  to  poke  merciless 
fun  at  the  cliches  of  genre  sf,  while  even 
such  affectionately  amiable  jests  as  are 
contained  in  The  Barber  of  Aldebaran 
mostly  languished  unheard. 

Here  we  find  the  Galactic  Empire 
hovering  in  the  background  -  an  undis¬ 
cussed,  taken-for-granted  part  of  the 
decor  -  while  the  stage  is  given  over  to 
comic  figures  with  calculatedly  silly 
names  -  J.  Daedalus  Golem,  Planetarch 
and  supremo  of  Robotics  Inc  and  his 
favourite  bit  of  fluff  Cutie-pie,  Figaro 
the  singing  robot  barber,  etc,  etc  -  who 
breeze  their  way  through  a  two-part 
plot  which  is  fast-moving  and  farcical. 
Behind  such  an  irreverent  foreground, 
the  empire  of  the  star-worlds  simply 
becomes  one  more  casual  folly  -  which 
is,  at  the  end  of  the  day,  all  that  it  ever 
was.  It  is  astonishing  to  think  that  this 
light  extravaganza  was  penned  when 
Douglas  Adams  had  only  just  learned 
to  walk  and  neither  half  of  Grant  Nay¬ 
lor  had  been  born,  and  never  had  the 
chance  to  inspire  or  influence  them.  The 
novel  does  show  its  age  a  little  (thus 
acquiring  a  healthy  measure  of  instant 
nostalgia  appeal!)  but  its  jokes  still 
work  and  —  as  the  author  modestly 
points  out  in  his  afterword  -  the  flit’s 
pheromonal  miracles  now  seem  entirely 
timely  instead  of  boldly  prophetic. 

My  current  publisher  assures  me  that 
the  Sales  Department  no  longer  consi¬ 
ders  the  science  fiction  market  worth 
bothering  with,  because  epic  fantasy  is 
where  all  the  money  is.  If  that’s  true, 
the  decline,  fall  and  obliteration  of  the 
Galactic  Empire  happened  ten  times  as 
fast  as  the  decline,  fall  and  ruination  of 
its  foremost  model,  the  Roman  Empire 
-  which  had  no  greater  range  than  a 
cheap  charter  flight  out  of  Luton  airport. 
I’m  sure  there’s  a  lesson  in  that  for  all 
of  us,  but  I’m  not  quite  sure  what  it  is. 

Brian  Stableford 


:  August  1995  —I 


BOOKS  REVIEWED  AND  RECEIVED 


Among  all  the  talking-animal  tales 
that  have  followed  in  the  wake  of 
Richard  Adams’s  rabbits  in  Watership 
Down  there  have  been  societies  of 
moles,  owls,  eagles,  weasels,  horses, 
hares,  foxes,  wolves  and  divers  other 
creatures  but,  until  now,  not  dragons. 
It  is  obvious  that  Dragoncharm 
(HarperCollins,  £4.99)  is  Graham 
Edwards’s  first  novel,  since  it  is 
imbued  throughout  with  the  gosh- 
wow!  enthusiasm  of  naivete,  which  no 
professional  author  can  hope  to  achieve 
through  artifice.  The  over-the-top  style 
of  writing,  the  hugely  melodramatic 
plot  which  succeeds  in  sidestepping 
credibility,  and  the  characters  -  every 
one  of  them  acting  like  a  schoolboy  - 
conspire  to  produce  a  pacey 
adventure  that,  except  for  a  few 
literary  pretensions,  might  be  well 
suited  to  the  typical  teenage  reader. 

The  setting  is  an  Earthlike  world 
inhabited  by  dragons.  Trolls  have 
lived  there  but  are  long  since  extinct, 
and  a  single  basilisk  still  exists, 
though  it  has  slept  for  centuries. 
Faeries  are  there,  too,  though  they 
play  only  a  minute  role.  The  dragons 
are  of  two  distinct  kinds:  the 
Charmed  who  possess  magical  skills 
and  the  Naturals  who  do  not.  For 
decades  they  have  lived  side  by  side, 
without  strife,  for  the  most  part 
ignoring  each  other.  Both  kinds  are 
intelligent  and  articulate,  politically 
aware  and  often  subject  to  military 
training  and  discipline.  Whether  they 
possess  technological  abilities  of  any 
kind,  or  whether  the  castles,  towers 
and  tunnels  used  from  time  to  time  by 
both  kinds  have  been  magically 
produced  by  the  charm  possessed  by 
Charmed  dragons  is  never  made 
clear. 

For  some  reason  an  idyllic  period 
comes  to  an  end.  Naturals  and 
Charmed  are  soon  engaging  in  war, 
though  there  are  sufficient  factions 
to  ensure  that  members  of  each  side 
are  also  fighting  among  themselves. 
Many  thousands  of  dragons  are  killed 
for  no  good  reason.  Against  this 
peace-and-war  background,  certain 
young  dragons  seem  destined  to 
survive  and  to  be  instrumental  in 
bringing  about  significant  change  to 
the  whole  of  dragon  society.  One  is 
Fortune,  a  Natural;  the  other  is  his 
friend  and  companion  in  adventure, 
Cumber,  a  Charmed.  They  escape 
from  a  massacre  of  dragons  at  South 
Point,  where  they  both  formerly  lived, 
flying  to  Aether’s  Cross  (to  find  that 
strife  has  been  there  ahead  of  them) 
and  finally  to  Covamere,  where  they 
hope  to  alert  Halcyon,  the  chief  of  the 
council  of  dragons,  to  the  problems... 

Of  course,  while  Edwards  calls  his 
characters  dragons,  they  are  in  fact 
just  shallow  and  simplified  represent¬ 
ations  of  humans,  complete  with 
human  emotions  and  sensibilities. 
Their  behaviour  is  always  slightly 


FIRST 

FANTASIES 

Chris  Morgan 

boisterous,  slightly  naive,  slightly 
self-conscious,  just  as  if  they  were  all 
about  13  years  old.  Dragoncharm 
attempts  to  deliver  messages,  albeit 
simple  ones,  to  its  readers.  From  the 
beginning  it  is  clear  that  the  Naturals 
and  Charmed  are  going  to  stop 
ignoring  each  other  and  then  stop 
fighting  each  other,  and  will  learn  to 
live  in  peace,  because  Fortune  learns 
to  accept  a  Charmed  as  a  friend.  It  is 
obvious  that  good  will  triumph  over 
evil,  but  the  sacrifice  necessary  by 
Fortune  so  that  good  can  win  is,  of 
course,  Christian.  At  the  end, 


and 

friends  all  go  to  live  on  the  idyllic 
island  of  Haven,  which  clearly  is 
meant  to  be  taken  as  Heaven. 

Because  Robin  Hobb  is  the  pseudonym 
of  an  experienced  author  from  another 
genre  (presumably  historical  fiction), 
The  Assassin’s  Apprentice:  The 
Farseer,  1  (Bantam,  $12.95;  Harper¬ 
Collins,  £9.99)  is  free  of  most  of  the 
problems  that  tend  to  infect  first 
novels.  Hobb  is  clearly  conversant  with 
fantasy,  so  he  has  been  able  to  avoid  or 
build  upon  the  more  obvious  cliches. 
The  result  is  an  above-average  book, 
entertaining  after  a  slow  start, 
sporadically  surprising,  sometimes 
subtle  and  very  occasionally  brilliant. 
It  is  historically-based  fiction  with 
relatively  small  amounts  of  fantasy. 

In  a  maritime  kingdom,  the  Six 
Duchies,  which  is  vaguely  European- 
medieval,  the  novel’s  narrator 


(usually  known  as  Fitz)  is  the 
acknowledged  bastard  son  of  the 
senior  prince,  Chivalry.  From  the  age 
of  six  he  is  brought  up  at  Buckkeep, 
the  main  castle  of  King  Shrewd  and 
his  three  sons.  Initially,  nobody  seems 
to  know  what  to  do  with  Fitz,  and  he 
is  raised  by  a  burly  stablemaster  who 
trains  him  to  look  after  dogs  and 
horses.  Prince  Chivalry  never  sees  his 
son,  preferring  to  stay  away  from 
Buckkeep  and,  eventually,  to  give  up 
his  position  as  King-in- Waiting  and 
die  in  exile.  It  becomes  clear  that 
there  is  a  power  struggle  between  the 
other  two  princes,  Verity  and  Regal, 
which  draws  in  most  or  all  of  those  at 
Buckkeep.  At  the  age  of  nine,  Fitz  is 
noticed  by  the  King  and  becomes  a 
game  piece  in  the  struggle.  From  his 
earliest  years,  Fitz  has  possessed 
mental  powers  which  are  a  part  of  his 
heritage,  though  these  have  been 
suppressed.  He  has  bonded  with  dogs 
and  horses,  picking  up  information 
through  their  senses.  He  also  has  the 
Skill  (the  ability  to  communicate 
telepathically  with  other  humans, 
which  is  usually  the  prerogative 
princes)  but  when  he  is  trained  to  use 
this  talent  he  is  the  victim  of  jealousy 
and  his  talent  is  sabotaged.  In 
general,  Hobb’s  plot  strands  are 
credible  and  cleverly  interwoven,  and 
only  at  the  end  of  the  novel  is  there  a 
sudden  descent  into  melodrama  of  an 
almost  farcical  nature. 

It  is  the  characters  who  stand  out 
here.  King  Shrewd  and  Prince  Verity 
are  apparently  well-meaning,  though 
remote  and  often  uncaring.  The 
King’s  Fool  at  Buckkeep  is  a 
wonderfully  enigmatic  character, 
speaking  in  riddles  and  offering 
predictions,  but  only  to  those  other 
lonely  people  whom  he  favours,  such 
as  Fitz.  Lady  Patience  is  another 
eccentric,  rather  an  endearing  one  in 
her  over-enthusiastic  attempts  to 
help  Fitz.  By  contrast,  Galen,  who  is 
meant  to  instruct  Fitz  in  the  Skill,  is 
too  manic  to  be  credible  (or,  indeed  to 
be  let  out  on  his  own).  Stylistically, 
the  novel  is  patchy,  since  Hobb 
attempts  to  write  in  a  deliberately 
literary  manner  at  the  start  and 
whenever  he  thinks  about  it,  though 
his  attempts  are  often  in  vain; 
repetitions,  awkwardnesses  and  bad 
habits  creep  in.  It  is  all  the  more 
surprising,  then,  when  Hobb  produces 
an  exquisitely  poetical  phrase  which 
says  much  of  human  nature  in  just  a 
few  words.  In  general,  the  book  is  less 
successful  in  its  early  chapters,  and  it 
flows  better  and  with  more  depth 
later  on.  The  Assassin’s  Apprentice  is 
the  first  in  a  trilogy,  and  now  that  the 
author  has  developed  his  characters 
and  complex  backgrounds,  and  got 
the  education  of  his  ingenu  out  of  the 
way,  he  should  be  able  to  write  two 
fine  follow-up  volumes. 

Chris  Morgan 


:  August  1995 


BOOKS  REVIEWED  AND  RECEIVED 


At  the  Centre  of  Things 


Chris  Gilmore 


O  reg  Egan’s  Axiomatic  (Millennium, 
vX£15.99)  is  the  most  consistently 
impressive  single-author  collection  I’ve 
seen  in  a  decade,  and  as  I  struggled  to 
define  exactly  what  makes  it  so  special, 
I  came  up  with  two  words:  contempor¬ 
ary  and  central.  Being  less  than  fond  of 
either  word  in  a  critical  context,  I  feel 
the  need  to  gloss.  Science  fiction  claims 
to  be  the  literature  of  ideas,  and  a  good 
proportion  of  it  supports  that  claim  -  for 
all  that  many  of  the  ideas  are  second¬ 
hand  or  downright  silly.  Yet  it  must  also 
be  admitted  that  even  the  most  origi¬ 
nal  and  worthwhile  ideas  expressed 
often  have  little  or  nothing  to  do  with 
science.  One  of  the  best  anthologies 
ever  assembled  was  themed  round  the 
concepts  of  sacrifice  and  redemption, 
which  are  no  one  genre’s  monopoly 
(and  if  anyone  can  recall  the  title 
please  let  me  know  -  I’ve  lost  my 
copy). 

As  the  cutting  edge  of  science  ] 
becomes  ever  more  abstruse, 
there’s  a  tendency  for  sf  writers 
to  retreat  into  nostalgia,  to 
ignore  the  imperative  to 
extrapolate  while  still  adopting 
the  crystallized  vocabulary  of 
space  opera  -  because  the 
vocabulary  is  known  to  many, 
while  the  cutting  edge  is 
unknown  to  almost  all.  This  is  not 
to  denigrate  what  they  produce;  I 
have  myself  praised  Lois 
McMaster  Bujold  and  Robert 
Charles  Wilson  for  so  faithfully 
carrying  on  the  traditions  of  Poul 
Anderson  and  Clifford  Simak 
respectively,  but  advances  in 
quantum  theory  and  cosmology 
have  exposed  those  traditions  as 
hardly  closer  to  the  possible  than 
Sword  &  Sorcery. 

Greg  Egan  is  central  to  contem¬ 
porary  science  fiction  because  his 
best  tales  are  based  firmly  on  develop 
ments  that  seem  possible  in  terms 
current  theory  (and  often  current 
research).  Only  David  Brin  can  equal 
him  in  this  (his  story  “Dr  Pak’s 
Preschool”  has  close  parallels  with 
Egan’s  “Eugene”),  but  Brin  is  a  lot 
less  consistent.  Egan  is  also  central 
because  his  treatment  is  seriously 
philosophical  without  being  fanciful, 
lb  be  fanciful  does  not  preclude 
seriousness;  Stanislaw  Lem  is  a 
serious  philosophical  writer,  but  The 
Cyberiad  and  The  Star  Diaries  are 
works  of  fantasy.  For  that  matter,  Iain 
Banks’s  Feersum  Endjinn  is  a  work  of 
high  moral  purpose,  but  it’s  also  wilfully 
fanciful  from  title  down.  Egan’s  staid 


approach  lies  on  the  baseline  to  which 
such  showy  outgrowths  must  refer, 
and  ultimately  defer. 

As  becomes  a  serious  philosopher, 
Egan  is  concerned  with  the  moral 
implications  as  much  as  the  social 
consequences  of  the  novelties  which 
society  must  absorb  (or  be  absorbed  by), 
and  his  theme  is  always  the  confront¬ 
ation  between  man  (or  sometimes 
woman)  and  idea  made  manifest. 
Because  they  are  surrogates  for  us  all, 
Egan’s  characters  reflect  his  own 
concept  of  Everyman:  introspective  but 
lacking  the  comforts  of  solipsism, 
clever  but  not  egregiously  talented, 
sexually  opportunistic  but  not  libertines, 
angst-prone  but  not  suicidal,  dishonest 
but  undeluded,  comfortable  but 
insecure,  more  weak  than  wicked  (but 
never  ask  how 


Greg  Egan 


much  of  each).  Most 
of  us,  I  think,  can  live  with  most  of 
that. 

There  are  18  stories  here,  of  which 
only  one  fails  completely  -  “The  Moat” 
has  all  the  mark  of  Chapter  One  of  a 
book  that  was  rightly  abandoned  - 
but  three  are  brilliant  studies  in  the 
novel  and  terrible  griefs  which  a 
combination  of  common  human 
dishonesty  and  self-indulgence  allied 
to  the  fruits  of  the  rarest  human 
ingenuity  may  unleash.  All  three  are 
from  Interzone,  incidentally:  “The 
Hundred-Light- Year  Diary”  from  #55, 


“Learning  to  Be  Me”  from  #37  and  (my 
personal  favourite)  “The  Cutie”  from 
#29.  Just  below  those  high  points, 
“The  Caress”  considers  the  commodifi¬ 
cation  of  human  life  as  a  branch  of 
aesthetics,  and  does  so  well,  but  not 
quite  as  well  as  Karen  Blixen  did  in 
“The  Immortal  Story”;  “The  Infinite 
Assassin”  grapples  with  the  problem  of 
identity  in  the  context  of  Hugh 
Everett-style  parallel  universes;  “A 
Kidnapping”  finds  a  new  angle  on  the 
human  rights  of  artificial  intelligences, 
and  recalls  themes  from  Permutation 
City,  “Axiomatic”  and  “The  Walk”  look 
for  a  closer  definition  of  intention  and 
personality,  given  that  it  is  possible  to 
modify  your  own  personality  with  the 
intention  of  bringing  about  an  inten¬ 
tion.  Any  of  these  stories  would  be  the 
high  point  of  most  collections,  and  so 
would  “The  Safe  Deposit  Box”  and 
‘Unstable  Orbits  in  the  Space  of  Lies,” 
though  these  last  are  more  fantasy 
than  sf. 

Despite  the  bleak  and  sometimes 
terrifying  possibilities  Egan  presents, 
the  tone  of  the  book  isn’t  technophobe; 
if  most  characters  wind  up  damned,  it’s 
not  the  inevitable  result  of  a  Faustian 
bargain,  but  the  wages  of  the  cowardice 
and  petty  sins  which  beset  us  all.  The 
lessage  would  seem  to  be  that  if  we 
heed  the  warnings  we  may  not  have 
j  take  the  bad  with  the  good  - 
except  in  one  case.  “The  Moral 
Virologist”  is  a  mad-scientist  story, 
and  the  only  one  where  Egan  loses 
his  sense  of  proportion.  John 
Shawcross,  a  born-again  Christian 
who  feels  that  AIDS  was  a  bit  of  a 
damp  squib,  sets  about  creating  a 
virus  that  will  really  rid  the  world 
of  adultery,  sodomy  and 
fornication.  Unfortunately  all 
round,  it  has  the  side-effect  of 
poisoning  all  new-born  children  as 
well,  which  Shawcross  in  his 
tunnel  vision  fails  to  notice  until 
it’s  spreading  out  of  control.  It  is 
then  pointed  out  to  him  in  casual 
conversation  by  (wait  for  it!)  a  London 
prostitute.  She  spots  first  his  moral 
and  then  his  technical  weakness 
presenting  both  in  crisp  and  rigorous 
terms,  to  his  surprise  and  discomfiture. 
“He’d  never  been  lectured  on 
Darwinism  in  any  brothel  back  home, 
but  then  what  could  he  expect  in  a 
country  run  by  godless  socialists?” 
Well,  male  reader,  where  else  do  you 
go  for  such  things? 

Assuming  (as  the  context  implies) 
that  Egan  endorses  this  analysis,  are  we 
to  assume  that  in  socialist  countries 


:  1995 


BOOKS  REVIEWED  AND  RECEIVED 


even  generously  educated  women  of 
powerful  intellect  are  reduced  to  rent¬ 
ing  their  treasure?  Or  does  he  mean 
that  in  socialist  countries  even  the 
whores  are  expert  logicians  of  liberal 
persuasion?  Or  is  she  just  typical  of 
the  bona-robas  Down  Under?  Me,  I’ve 
never  been  to  Australia  ...  perhaps  it’s 
not  too  late  to  complete  my  education. 


I  have  forgotten  who  coined  the 
phrase  “Ruislip  Mandarin”  for  the 
diction  of  characters  in  Joe  Orton’s 
plays,  but  it’s  kissing  cousin  to  the 
baroque  Brentonian  brogue  of  Robert 
Rankin  on  top  form,  and  both  are  sup¬ 
erbly  adapted  to  the  three  premier 
humorous  subjects  -  dignity  (lost), 
semantics  (confused)  and  bodily 
functions  (ill-timed).  Of  the  three, 
semantics  is  the  most  important  (all 
right!  I’m  a  semantician  - 1  admit  it!) 
because,  while  the  capabilities  of  the 
human  body  are  limited,  and  the 
dignities  it  can  assume  (and  thus  the 
indignities  it  can  suffer)  are  more 
limited  still,  language  is  theoretically 
limited  only  by  the  ultimate  refine¬ 
ment  of  the  human  brain. 

All  right,  that’s  (more  than) 
enough  bullshit  for  one  month;  the 
reasons  why  humour  works  are 
notoriously  subjective.  For  me, 

Rankin  at  his  best  stands  well 
higher  than  the  common-or-garden 
writer  of  humorous  sf/fantasy,  and 
I  can  tell  you  a  bit  about  how,  if 
not  why:  after  all,  I’ve  been  given  a 
couple  of  examples. 

The  Greatest  Show  Off  Earth 
(Corgi,  £4.99)  is  a  literary  work  in  the 
same  sense  that  Tom  Sharpe’s  tales  of 
sadism,  snobbery  and  greed  are  literary 
-  they  are  not  driven  by  character,  plot, 
or  philosophy,  but  by  nuance.  The 
underlying  mechanism  is  extremely 
simple  to  define  (which  doesn’t  make  it 
easy  to  apply):  whatever  is  going  on, 
visualize  in  precise  detail  whatever  will 
undermine  it  most  catastrophically, 
and  insert.  Rankin  diverges  from  the 
ruck  (and  his  own  less  successful  books) 
by  adding  two  distinctive  features  to 
the  underlying  send-up  of  a  by  now 
almost  extinct  branch  of  sf:  he’s  excep¬ 
tionally  good  at  establishing  a  running 
gag,  and  his  characters  come  to  grief 
less  from  inherent  stupidity  than  the 
triviality  of  their  preoccupations. 

Greatest  Show  is  an  Evil  Alien 
Invasion  story,  wherein  the  Evil  could 
hardly  be  more  explicit,  and  echoes  a 
joke  from  the  Capeks’  Insect  Play. 


“Can  I  cut  George’s  balls  off?”  asked 
the  darling  daughter 

“Of  course,  dear,”  said  her  doting 
dad.  “But  put  them  on  the  barbecue  to 
cook  with  George.  They  won’t  taste  very 
nice  if  they’re  raw.” 


The  Good  is  a  whole  lot  more 
evasive,  being  irretrievably  infected 
with  the  all-too-human  failings  that 
generate  most  of  the  humour.  The  rest 


depends  crucially  on  internal  logic. 
Rankin  piles  absurdity  on  absurdity, 
but  not  at  random;  the  whole  business 
is  put  together  like  a  watch,  in  terms 
of  both  the  development  and  the  milieu. 
The  world  we  live  on  revolves  inside 
another  spherical  but  hollow  world,  on 
whose  inner  surface  the  artificial  plan¬ 
ets  and  constellations  pursue  their 
stately  dance  -  in  imitation  of  the  real 
ones,  the  whole  shebang  having 


kidnapped  by  flying  saucer  in 
Chapter  1;  Simon  remains  behind,  to 
thwart  the  local  peasantry  whose 
malevolent  intent  is  to  incarnate  the 
Devil  in  a  new  and  ridiculous  form. 
Both  sides  are  more  hampered  than 
helped  by  the  existence  of  a  book  from 
the  future  called  (of  course)  The 
Greatest  Show  Off  Earth,  which  tells 
how  things  will  develop,  but  is  a 
slightly  unreliable  witness.  The  two 
plots  have  nothing  whatever  to  do  with 
each  other,  but  allow  Rankin  to  cut 
between  scenes  with  bogus  linkages  in 
the  manner  of  David  Lean,  a  technique 
intentionally  over-used  to  create 
another  running  gag.  Indeed,  the  book 
has  far  more  resonances  with  film  and 
TV  than  sf,  and  at  times  reads  like  a 
Dennis  Potter  serial  without  the  music, 
as  the  jokes  come  more  and  more  to 
depend  on  the  mismatch  of  form  and 
content. 

There  is  no  theoretical  limit  to 
recursion,  but  Rankin  wisely  plays  it 
strictly  for  laughs.  Many  of  the  jokes 
are  new,  or  newish,  and  even  when 
they  aren’t  (as  when  the  impossible 
accumulator  is  pinched  from  East  of 
Ealing,  or  the  ineluctable  bell-jar  from 
The  Book  of  Ultimate  Truths)  they  are 
presented  with  such  aplomb,  and  at 
the  same  time  so  deftly  undermined, 
that  it’s  impossible  not  to  forgive  him. 


D  ankin’s  newer  The  Most  Amazing 
LvMan  Who  Ever  Lived  (Doubleday, 
£14.99),  a  freestanding  sequel  to 
The  Book  of  Ultimate  Truths,  is  not 
quite  as  good.  The  universe  is  even 
more  complicated  on  this  occasion, 
involving  reincarnation  (serial  and 
simultaneous)  and  characters  who 
blunder  in  and  out  of  reality  like 
extras  on  the  wrong  sound  stage 
(though  some  are  not  extras  but 
stars  -  Thelma  and  Louise,  no  less). 
As  before,  the  reader  is  often  saved 
from  total  disorientation  by  people 
arriving  just  in  time  to  furnish  an 
explanation  (however  misleading  and 
incomplete)  which  will  do  until  develop¬ 
ments  (or  someone  else)  expose  its 
inadequacies  and  vouchsafe  a  bit  more, 
but  there’s  a  feeling  that  the  scale  is 
wrong.  In  The  Greatest  Show  Off  Earth 
people  where  kidnapped  by  the  coach¬ 
load  for  barbecue  treats,  but  this  time 
the  underlying  plot  threatens  not  only 
the  destruction  of  the  human  race  but 
the  consumption  of  all  the  discarnate 
souls  awaiting  their  next  bodies  as  well. 

The  Most  Amazing  Man  of  the  title 
(Hugo  Rune)  has  infiltrated  and  corrup¬ 
ted  the  entire  mechanism  of  Heaven 
for  his  own  ends,  and  with  the  best  will 
in  the  world,  his  ends  seem  puny  when 
set  against  such  means.  If  you’re  well 
on  the  way  to  absolute  control  of  abso¬ 
lutely  everything,  it  seems  petty  to 
devote  time  and  effort  to  bilking  your 
bastard  offspring  of  a  mere  £23M,  or  to 
giving  a  commissioning  editor  a  hard 
time  over  late  delivery  of  your  MS 


been  created  by  the 
inhabitants  of  the  outer  sphere  - 
characters  of  huge  technological 
resource  but  precious  little  imagin¬ 
ation  -  and  sustained  by  a  vast  conspi¬ 
racy.  As  indicated  above,  their  trading 
partners  have  a  taste  for  human  flesh, 
which  is  how  the  principals  (Simon  and 
Raymond,  a  couple  of  south-country 
ne’er-do-wells),  get  involved. 

Raymond’s  involvement  is  more 
direct  than  Simon’s,  since  only  he  gets 


I —  interzone  August  1995 


BOOKS  REVIEWED  AND  RECEIVED 


and  excessive  expenses  claims.  (Of 
course,  Rankin  may  know  something 
about  commissioning  editors  that  I 
don’t,  but  if  so  he  fails  to  put  it  across.) 
Even  the  project  to  extract  gold  in 
eight-figure  amounts  from  sea  water 
fails  to  grip  -  who  would  buy  it  all, 
and  at  how  much  a  fine  ounce? 

Considerations  of  this  kind  detract 
from  the  interest,  as  does  a  less  rigor¬ 
ous  internal  logic.  I  don’t  mind  a  ghost 
who  is  only  intermittently  visible  to  the 
living,  but  there  ought  to  be  a  rationale, 
however  far-fetched,  for  the  intermit- 
tence;  too  many  elements  are  intro¬ 
duced,  and  make  too  little  contribution, 
so  that  the  ending  is  untidy  and  rushed; 
and  the  longest-running  of  the  gags,  the 
one  about  the  bit-player  whose  name 
you  can  never  remember,  is  the  one 
with  least  mileage.  Rankin  seems  to 
have  two  distinct  levels  of  competence, 
and  this  month  offers  one  of  each. 

Remembering  Sarah  Ash’s  first  two 
stories  in  Interzone  (“Mothmusic” 
from  #62  and  “Airs  from  Another 
Planet”  from  #83)  I  was  excited  to 
receive  her  long-heralded  fantasy  novel 
Moths  to  a  Flame  (Millennium, 
£15.99).  To  my  regret,  the  excitement 
dissipated  rapidly.  It  isn’t  that  bad  a 
book  -  indeed,  it’s  rather  well  written  — 
but...  the  shorter  pieces  set  me 
thinking  of  Tanith  Lee  and  Elizabeth 
Hand,  while  this  evoked  much  lesser 
names.  Hindsight,  which  normally 
supplies  answers,  raises  a  question 
this  time:  if  this  is  the  fantasy  novel 
that  was  “doing  the  rounds”  when 
“Mothmusic”  appeared,  has  Ash  come 
on  considerably  since  she  wrote  it,  or 
does  it  represent  a  dilution  and 
coarsening  of  her  vision? 

The  book  has  the  uneasiness  to  be 
expected  of  a  writer  who  has  yet  to  find 
her  true  voice  and  is  attempting  one 
to  which  she’s  unsuited  -  in  this  case, 
sword  &  sorcery.  The  twins  Lai  and 
Laili  (male  and  female  respectively) 
love  each  other,  but  chastely;  both  are 
pledged  to  celibacy  in  the  service  of  the 
Moon  Goddess.  One  could  therefore 
say  that  their  lives  take  a  turn  for  the 
better  when  they  are  kidnapped  by 
slavers  and  sold  to  the  court  of  Ar- 
Khendye.  There  Laili  is  taken  into  the 
harem  of  the  Arkhan  (king)  Melmeth, 
who  (despite  preferring  boys  as  a  rule) 
pays  her  court  and  wins  her  affection 
(such  being  the  pulling  power  of  her 
red  hair). 

Well  enough,  but  Lai’s  fate  is  a  lot  less 
credible.  Despite  being  pledged  to  non¬ 
violence  he  is  selected  for  intensive 
training  by  Ymarys,  the  Arkhan’s 
champion,  and  in  less  than  a  year 
defeats  and  supplants  him.Ymarys,  who 
is  homosexual,  bears  him  no  grudge 
but  falls  in  love  with  him  (that  hair 
again).  Lai  then  defeats  the  champion 
of  the  Haute  Zhudiciar  (which  looks 
as  if  it  should  mean  High  Justice,  but 
is  glossed  as  Prime  Minister)  in  a  set- 
58 - 


piece  duel.  To  make  the  whole  busi¬ 
ness  yet  more  ludicrous,  the  duel  is 
preceded  by  a  melee.  The  Arkhan’s  side 
being  a  man  short,  Lai  is  conscripted  to 
fill  the  gap  and  save  the  day  before 
taking  on  his  fresh  opponent.  By  way  of 
reward,  that  same  night  he  surrenders 
his  virginity  to  the  Arkhan’s  consort, 
Clodole  -  what  a  man! 

There  follows  a  period  of  lackadais¬ 
ical  intrigue  before  the  McGuffin 
appears.  A  plague  of  moonmoths 
afflicts  Ar-Khendye,  with  distressing 
consequences  as  the  dust  from  their 
wings  (Boskh)  is  toxic  and  addictive, 
bringing  blindness,  dementia  and 
death  to  many,  mutation  into  Moth 
people  to  a  few  -  which  is  really  where 
we  came  in  first  time  round,  as  the 
story  of  “Mothmusic”  is  re-told  from  a 
greater  variety  of  viewpoints,  including 
that  of  Dr  Azhrel  from  the  original 
story,  but  with  less  intensity.  Dr  Azhrel 
and  Ymarys  are  in  fact  more  interesting 
characters  than  the  twins;  both  are 
mature  men,  and  each  becomes  tragi¬ 
cally  enamoured  of  a  mutant.  The 
book  picks  up  at  this  point,  but  with 
consequent  loss  of  interest  when  the 
dull  siblings  regain  stage-centre  and 
Ymarys  is  inelegantly  killed,  I  presume 
so  that  Lai  can  have  the  principal  male 
role  to  himself;  if  so,  Ash  killed  the 
wrong  man. 

This  reduced  intensity  brings  into 
focus  a  couple  of  irritating  tics  which 
Ash  has  cultivated,  possibly  because 
someone  told  her  they  were  stylish. 
The  first  and  more  heinous  is  her  habit 
of  running  together  words  which  are 
normally  hyphenated  or  completely 
separate.  This  can  occasionally  be  justi¬ 
fied,  but  “whitebloom,”  “blossomsweet,” 
“goldenhairs”  and  “darkcentre”  all  in 
five  lines  is  excessive.  The  second  is  to 
coin  unnecessary  words  which  read 
like  mis-hearings:  dhamzel  (=  gentle¬ 
woman),  razhir  (=  rapier),  khassafri 
(=  sassafras)  etc.  In  principle  I  object 
neither  to  aspiration  nor  to  word 
games,  but  this  one  has  no  point. 

That  Ash  has  potential  is  undeniable, 
but  this  ill-balanced,  ill-focused,  affected 
exercise  in  a  stylized  and  conventional 
mode  suggests  only  that  Sword  & 
Sorcery  is  not  for  her.  Her  failure  to 
impose  the  consistency  necessary  for 
conviction  extends  to  the  most  minor 
details,  as  when  Ymarys  ventures  into 
a  tunnel  system  connecting  the  arena 
and  the  mausoleum,  where  he  has  been 
only  once  before;  a  page  later,  “He  knew 
the  arena  tunnels  better  than  anyone.” 
Like  Lai,  a  quick  learner.  The  ending 
is  equally  rushed  and  ill  thought-out, 
not  least  because  it  leaves  Laili  (by  now 
a  mother,  but  still  less  than  20)  inex¬ 
tricably  yoked  to  the  blind,  bi-sexual, 
middle-aged  Boskh-junkie  Melmeth  - 
every  girl’s  dream!  Get  the  back 
numbers,  if  you  haven’t  already,  and 
hope  for  better  things  as  and  when 
Ash  regains  her  true  direction. 

Chris  Gilmore 


Perigee 

and 

Pedigree 

James  Lovegrove 


A  mixed  show  this  column.  Two 
Best  of  Breeds  and  two 
L  absolute  dogs. 

The  first  of  the  champs  is  The 
Nano  Flower  (Pan,  £4.99)  by  Peter 
F.  Hamilton,  a  sequel  to  Mindstar 
Rising  and  A  Quantum  Murder,  being 
the  third  mission  that  psychically- 
enhanced  Gulf  War  II  veteran  Greg 
Mandel  has  undertaken  on  behalf  of 
Julia  Evans,  multi-billionairess,  owner 
of  Event  Horizon,  and  an  industrial 
colossus  in  a  post-global-warming 
world  bestridden  by  industrial  giants. 

Where  Mindstar  Rising  was  a  relat¬ 
ively  straightforward,  though  highly 
exciting,  cyber-thriller  and  A  Quantum 
Murder  was  a  locked-room  mystery 
with  earth-shattering  ramifications, 

The  Nano  Flower  is  something  else 
altogether,  a  quantum  leap  forward. 

The  first  two  books  are  set  two  years 
apart;  The  Nano  Flower  takes  place  15 
years  on.  Characters  have  grown  up, 
grown  old,  grown  apart.  Julia  herself 
is  no  longer  the  flighty,  insecure,  self- 
conscious  M&er-Sloane  she  used  to  be. 
She  has  married,  become  a  mother, 
turned  graceful  and  gracious  and, 
thanks  to  her  unimaginable  wealth 
and  her  three  bioware  Neural  Network 
cores,  has  all  but  achieved  goddesshood. 
She  is  virtually  omniscient,  omnipres¬ 
ent  and  omnipotent,  living  proof  that 
the  Reverends  Jerry  Falwell  and 
Jimmy  Swaggart  are  right  about 
money  bringing  you  closer  to  God.  And, 
blessedly,  she  no  longer  says  “Yah”. 
Greg,  meanwhile,  is  a  greying  father  of 
five  who  cares  about  little  else  except 
his  wife,  family  and  orange  groves. 

Julia  is  presented  with  a  gift  from 
her  missing  husband  Royan,  an  orchid 
whose  genetic  make-up  is  indisputably 
extraterrestrial  in  origin.  First  Contact 
has  been  made.  They  are  out  there.  And 
with  the  arrival  of  the  flower  comes  the 
promise  of  a  revolutionary  new  technol¬ 
ogy,  atomic  restructuring,  that  will  make 
whichever  corporation  develops  it  very 
powerful  indeed,  not  to  mention  very 
rich.  Julia,  inevitably,  lures  Greg  out 
of  retirement  to  track  down  Royan,  who 
holds  the  key  to  both  the  alien  and  the 
new  technology.  But  Greg  is  not  the 
only  one  searching.  A  psychotic  mer¬ 
cenary  is  hot  on  his  heels,  as  are  the 
Russian  mafia.  The  chase  is  on. 

It  has  to  be  said  that  the  extrater- 
-  interzone  August  1995  — 


BOOKS  REVIEWED  AND  RECEIVED 


restrial  elements  of  The  Nano  Flower 
don’t  sit  entirely  comfortably  alongside 
the  blistering  action  sequences  and  the 
skilful  Gibsonian  deployment  of  brand- 
name  hardware.  The  peculiar  thrill  one 
gets  from  reading  about  metalloceramic 
battlesuits  with  shoulder-mounted 
Loral  missiles,  stately  angular  black 
airships,  electron-compression  war¬ 
heads  and  a  hollowed-out  asteroid  with 
a  leisure  complex  inside  it  like  an 
orbiting  mini-California  is  slightly 
diluted  when  one  is  asked  to  accept  the 
possibility  of  the  existence  of  an  alien 
race  as  well,  no  matter  how  well 
thought-out  the  xenobiology.  Having 
crafted  such  a  detailed  and  plausible 
projected-future,  for  Hamilton  then  to 
introduce  an  ingredient  more  suited  to 
space  opera  would  seem  to  be  over-spic¬ 
ing  the  soup.  The  fusion  of  the  two 
elements,  though,  ultimately  proves 
synergistic.  The  climax  is  exhilarating, 
and  the  resolution  unexpected  and 
fitting,  not  to  mention  uplifting. 

Hamilton  is  a  top-flight  author,  and 
his  three  novels  so  far  fulfil  all  the 
criteria  of  great  sf:  fully  fleshed-out 
characters  living  in  an  immaculately 
imagined  and  executed  near-future 
world,  lush  prose,  crystal-sharp 
dialogue,  prodigious  quantities  of 
research  blended  in  unobtrusively,  and 
plots  as  slick  and  intricate  as  teflon 
origami.  Unreservedly  recommended. 

Also  coming  top  in  its  class,  though 
something  of  a  crossbreed  this  one,  is 
The  Millennial  Project  (Little, 
Brown,  £11.99)  by  Marshall  T.  Savage. 
Not  strictly  speaking  sf,  the  subtitle 
gives  the  game  away:  Colonizing  the 
Galaxy  in  Eight  Easy  Steps.  This  is  one 
man’s  vision  of  mankind’s  destiny,  and 
while  it  doesn’t  have  a  plot  as  such 
(unless  you  regard  the  evolution  of  Life 
in  the  universe  as  an  ongoing  story), 
many  of  its  themes  and  tropes  will  be 
familiar  to  sf  readers.  Basically,  The 
Millennial  Project  is  a  how-to  manual 
for  anyone  who’s  wondered  if  the 
human  race  is  ever  going  to  slip  the 
confines  of  our  increasingly  overcrow¬ 
ded  planet  and  reach  for  the  stars. 

The  solutions,  if  Savage  is  to  be 
believed  (and  his  arguments  are  persu¬ 
asive),  are  simple.  The  necessary  raw 
materials  and  blueprints  are  to  be  found 
all  around  us,  in  near  space,  in  nature. 
Rather  than  putting  all  our  faith  in  the 
brute  force  of  technology,  we  should 
instead  draw  our  lessons  from  the  sub¬ 
tlety  of  God’s  own  designs.  Hence 
Savage’s  floating  seaborne  cities,  whose 
purpose  is  to  harvest  algae  and  harness 
the  tides  to  feed  and  power  the  world, 
utilise  a  honeycomb  pattern  and  “grow” 
themselves  by  electrolysing  the  magn¬ 
esium  present  in  the  oceans,  while  his 
space  ecospheres,  which  are  made  up  of 
transparent  globes-within-globes, 
resemble  the  volvox,  that  single-celled 
photosynthetic  organism  you  could 
never  see  through  the  microscope  no 


matter  how  hard  your  biology  teacher 
tried  to  convince  you  it  was  there.  Sav¬ 
age’s  ideas  are  cunning  and  credible, 
and  in  many  cases  one  longs  to  see  them 
realised:  for  instance,  the  image  of 
laser-propelled  rockets  shooting  out  of 
the  top  of  Mount  Kilimanjaro  and 
hurtling  up  into  the  stratosphere  on  the 
end  of  prismatic  beams  of  light,  a  con¬ 
cept  Savage  evocatively  calls  Bifrost 
after  the  rainbow  bridge  of  Norse 
mythology,  is  one  that  cries  out  to  be 
made  a  reality. 

Savage’s  breadth  of  learning  is  breath¬ 
taking,  but  The  Millennial  Project  is 
anything  but  dry,  highbrow  and  po- 
faced.  References  to  popular  culture 
abound.  Savage  has  been  inspired  by 
everything  from  Alvin  Ibfler  to  Douglas 
Adams,  from  Carl  Sagan  to  the  lyrics 
of  Queen,  and  he  doesn’t  lose  sight  of 
the  fact  that  he’s  writing  for  ordinary 
people  about  extraordinary  things. 
Here  he  is  discussing  travelling  at  the 
speed  of  light: 

...light  takes  four  long  years  to  cross 
to  the  nearest  star.  . . .  How  many  gulfs 
of  space  as  wide  as  Kansas  are  there  in 
such  a  distance?  Have  you  ever  driven 
across  Kansas?  It’s  endless. 

The  book  has  full-colour  plates, 
copious  illustrations,  and  an 
introduction  by  Arthur  C.  Clarke.  It  is 
inspiring  stuff,  and  while  it’s  difficult 
to  share  Savage’s  optimism  about  the 
ultimate  fate  of  the  human  race  and 
our  role  as  bearers  of  the  sacred  torch 
of  Life,  it  would  be  nice  to  think  that 
some  of  what  he  predicts  will  come  to 
pass.  Hey,  even  cynics  need  a  holiday 
every  now  and  then. 

And  so  to  the  dogs.  A  pair  of  absolute 
mutts  here  that  shouldn’t  really  have 
been  allowed  in  through  the  front 
door  to  widdle  on  the  carpet. 

Mary  Rosenblum’s  The  Stone 
Garden  (Del  Rey,  $4.99)  starts  out 
with  a  neat  idea  and  ends  up  bogged 
down  in  its  own  self-importance.  The 
neat  idea  is  that  certain  asteroids 
harvested  from  space  and  called 
“Stones”  have  the  ability  to  store  and 
replay  human  emotions,  which  has 
enabled  people  who  are  in  tune  with 
the  strange  properties  of  these  living 
rocks  to  “sculpt”  sensations  and  exper¬ 
iences  into  them.  A  Stone-sculptor  is 
therefore  a  combination  of  artist  and 
psychologist,  able  to  recreate  in  vivid 
detail  a  mood  which  can  then  be  picked 
up  and  shared  by  anyone  in  the  vicinity 
of  the  Stone.  So  far,  so  good.  But  by  way 
of  a  plot  Rosenblum  serves  up  the  most 
basic  of  premises  -  why  have  famous 
Stone-sculptors  started  committing 
suicide?  —  and  somehow  believes  that 
this  is  enough  to  sustain  the  reader’s 
interest  through  359  close-printed  pages 
of  meandering,  maundering  meditations 
on  death,  life,  art,  love,  the  nature  of 
time,  and  just  about  any  other  Major 
Theme  you  -  and  she  -  can  think  of. 


On  none  of  these  subjects  does  the 
author  have  anything  new  or  convin¬ 
cing  to  say.  Some  specimens:  “Love, 
hate  —  it’s  when  we  try  to  separate  them 
that  we  do  ourselves  the  most  harm.” 
“Maybe  the  only  people  who  could 
really  hurt  you  were  the  ones  you 
loved.”  “Maybe  we  all  belong  to  some¬ 
body,  whether  we  admit  it  or  not.  And 
maybe  part  of  us  wants  to  belong  to 
someone,  whether  we  admit  it  or  not.” 
The  revelations  rarely  rise  above  this 
level,  and  such  trite  psychobabble 
aphorism  is  a  poor  substitute  for 
genuine  insight.  New  Age  science 
fiction  -  it  just  doesn’t  work. 

There  is  a  hero,  Michael  Tryon,  an 
octogenarian  Stone-sculptor  who  fears 
he  has  (yes,  you’ve  guessed  it)  burned 
out.  There  is  a  heroine,  his  daughter 
Margarita  Espinoza,  aspiring  “holoture” 
artist,  who  is  supposed  to  have  been 
hardened  by  a  childhood  in  the  barrios 
but  not  so  as  you’d  notice:  she  spends 
most  of  her  time  fretting  about  the 
fragility  of  her  talent  and  worrying 
whether  her  dancer  girlfriend  Katrina 
loves  her  or  not.  There  is  a  German- 
bom  businessman  with  the  somewhat 
implausible  name  of  Gunner  Archen- 
wald-Shen,  who  appears  to  run  nothing 
less  than  the  entire  planet,  and  for  light 
relief  Rosenblum  presents  a  parade  of 
effeminate  male  characters  who  for  all 
their  hard-boiled,  streetwise  talk  and 
butch  posturing  are  about  as  convincin¬ 
gly  tough  as  a  crowd  of  moustachioed 
men  in  leather  trousers  hanging  around 
Earl’s  Court  tube-station  at  midnight. 

As  the  action  unfolds  with  snail-like 
slowness,  the  perpetual  jabber  of  the 
artists  about  their  art,  their  constant 
need  for  reassurance  from  themselves 
and  from  others,  scratches  like  rats’ 
claws  at  one’s  nerve-endings.  It’s  like 
listening  to  a  roomful  of  out-of-work 
actors:  screeching  self-pity  alternating 
with  mutual  ego-masturbation.  As  if 
this  were  not  bad  enough,  Rosenblum 
has  her  characters  think  in  rhetorical 
questions,  dozens  of  them,  one  piled 
on  top  of  another,  with  not  an  answer 
to  their  self-interrogation  in  sight. 
Why?  What  is  to  be  gained  by  this? 
Who  knows?  Who  cares? 

The  great  shame  is  that  there  are 
some  decent  ideas  buried  in  here  among 
the  listing  of  facial  tics  that  passes  for 
observation  and  the  tortured  self-pity 
that  passes  for  characterization.  Maybe 
if  fewer  sentences  in  The  Stone  Garden 
began  with  the  word  maybe,  one  would 
have  greater  confidence  in  Rosenblum’s 
skills  as  a  writer.  And  maybe  if  she  had 
concentrated  on  telling  a  story  instead 
of  making  great  sweeping  statements 
about  life,  the  universe  and  everything, 
this  novel  would  have  turned  out  an 
imaginatively  effective  SF  thriller 
rather  than  an  empty,  risible  lament 
for  the  awfulness  of  the  artist’s  lot. 

Another  bow-wow  from  the  Del  Rey 
kennels  is  Out  of  This  World  ($5.99) 


I —  interzone  August  1995 


BOOKS  REVIEWED  AND  RECEIVED 


by  Lawrence  Watt-Evans.  This  is  the 
literary  equivalent  of  a  King  Charles 
spaniel,  one  that  stops  and  gazes  up 
at  you  with  big  mucus-ringed  eyes, 
trying  to  appear  cute  and  silently 
begging  you  to  pick  it  up  and  cuddle 
it  even  though  you  just  know  it’s 
going  to  spray  your  shoes  with 
diarrhoea  the  moment  its  paws  are 
off  the  ground.  Out  of  This  World 
badly  wants  to  be  liked. 

The  story  begins  with  a  weird  psychic 
ripple  that  passes  through  the  mind  of 
the  sensitives  of  the  world  (for  “the 
world”  read  “the  United  States”).  Then, 
in  the  basement  of  one  Pel  Brown, 
Ordinary  Guy,  a  man  in  Hollywood 
Robin  Hood  garb  appears  and  spouts 
some  cod-Shakespearean  tosh  about 
an  evil  entity  known,  inventively,  as 
Shadow.  No  first  name,  no  middle 
initial,  just  Shadow.  At  the  same  time,  a 
few  miles  away,  a  Flash  Gordon-esque 
spaceship  crash-lands  in  the  backyard 
of  a  certain  Amy  Jewell.  Much  comic 
chaos  ensues.  Finally,  everyone  meets 
up  and  passes  through  an  interdimen- 
sional  portal  into  a  pseudo-medieval 
world  of  magic  that  is  a  poor  man’s 
Middle  Earth  and  thence  into  a  univ¬ 
erse  dominated  by  a  galactic  empire 
that  is  a  poor  man’s  Star  Wars.  The  cast 
of  characters  grows  and  grows  and 
keeps  on  growing  until  you  need  a  score 
card  to  keep  track  of  who’s  who,  assum¬ 
ing  you  care  enough  to  do  so.  Then  some 
of  the  characters  are  casually  despat¬ 
ched,  mostly  off-page,  until  finally  it 
seems  that  only  Pel  is  left.  The  book 
ends,  and  you  realize  -  with  the  kind  of 
numb,  detached  horror  that  one  might 
feel  when  watching  a  car  accident  in 
progress  -  that  Out  of  This  World  is 
just  the  first  volume  in  a  projected 
series.  Cue  a  loss  of  will  to  live. 

If  Out  of  This  World  had  been  written 
for  children,  it  might  be  all  right,  but 
the  use  of  rude  words  like  “shit”  and 
“fuck”  suggest  that  Watt-Evans  is 
aiming  at  a  more  mature  audience. 
Adults  with  the  aesthetic  sensibilities 
of  children,  perhaps.  One  shudders  to 
think  that  such  a  readership  might 
just  exist.  He  also  tries  to  corner  the 
Stephen  King  market  by  inserting 
references  to  other,  more  successful 
works  of  the  imagination  into  the  text  - 
a  clumsy  device  that  adds  nothing  to 
the  story.  Why  say  that  a  monster  bears 
a  close  resemblance  to  one  of  the  terror- 
dogs  from  Ghostbusters  when  someone 
who  hasn’t  seen  that  film  won’t  have  a 
clue  what  you’re  talking  about?  Why 
not  come  up  with  your  own  monster? 
And  unlike  King,  who  employs  such 
cultural  cross-referencing  intelligently 
to  emphasize  the  “realness”  of  the 
fictional  world  he  is  creating,  in  Watt- 
Evans’s  case  the  comparisons  are 
odious.  If  he  uses  an  episode  of  Star 
Trek  as  an  example,  one’s  immediate 
desire  is  to  put  down  the  book  and  go 
and  watch  that  episode  instead. 

James  Lovegrove 

60 - 


Magazine  Reviews 

Paul  Beardsley 


Black  Tears  (£1.75  per  issue,  £6.75/4, 
Quarterly,  A5,  60pp)  cheques  payable 
to  editor  A.  Bradley,  Black  Tears,  28 
Treaty  St.,  London  N1  OSY. 

Black  Tears  7  leads  with  an  absurd 
story  by  Martin  Feekins  about  women 
being  stripped  naked  before  being  done 
in  horribly  -  it’s  called  ‘You  Deserve  It, 
Darling.”  Illustrator  Dallas  Goffin 
lovingly  realizes  the  central  image  of 
Shaun  Jeffrey’s  “Voyeurs  of  Death”  -  a 
large-breasted  blonde  with  a  knife  stuck 
in  her  navel.  One  is  left  with  the  nag¬ 
ging  suspicion  that  the  editor  is  cater¬ 
ing  for  people  who  don’t  like  women 
very  much.  There  is  better  stuff  on  offer 
-  a  black  comedy  by  Rhys  H.  Hughes, 
a  D.  F.  Lewis,  and  an  interview  with 
Christopher  Fowler  -  but  it  doesn’t 
raise  the  overall  standard  to  the 
giddy  heights  of  mediocrity. 

Psychotrope:  Tales  of  Psycholog¬ 
ical  Horror,  Mad  Love  &  Surreal¬ 
ism  (£2.10  per  issue,  £7.50/4,  A5, 
48pp),  edited  by  Mark  Beech,  cheques 
payable  to  Psychotrope,  Flat  6,  17 
Droitwich  Road,  Barbourne, 

Worcester  WR3  7LG. 

Psychotrope  2  boasts  a  hideous 
front  cover:  an  atrocious  reproduction 
of  an  unlovely  photograph  by 
surrealist  Hans  Bellmer.  (Don’t  get  it 
out  on  a  crowded-train.)  Interior 
artwork,  by  “Piggy,”  merely  adds  to 
the  scruffy  appearance.  The  editorial 
promises  “some  shit  hot  stories,” 
though  it  has  to  be  said,  the  “hot” 
doesn’t  always  apply.  This  is 
especially  true  of  Hertzan  Chimera’s 
account  of  a  “shirt-lifter”  who, 
ashamed  of  his  “services  to  cockdom,” 
merges  with  solid  objects,  only  to  be 
run  over  when  he  emerges  from  a 
road;  it’s  as  if  the  author  exhausted 
his  imagination  thinking  up  a  pen- 
name.  The  horror  premise  of  Tim 
Lebbon’s  “Old  Treasure”  is  similarly 
silly,  but  it’s  not  the  main  focus  of  the 
story.  The  libido-led  protagonist 
actually  grows  up  and  starts  to  care 
about  the  woman  he  previously  just 
wanted  to  shag;  the  resulting 
denouement  is  heart-rending,  and  a 
far  cry  from  the  “she  deserved  it” 
fantasies  of,  say,  Black  Tears. 

Seven  other  tales  include  two  unread- 
ables,  a  retelling  of  the  Bobbitt  story, 
the  last  days  of  an  unsympathetic 
cancer  sufferer,  and  a  touching  piece 
about  a  lonely  old  man  and  his  cat.  It 


thinks  it’s  more  extraordinary  than  it 
is,  but  I’ve  seen  worse.  For  instance... 

New  Words:  Words  and  Pictures 

(£1.50  per  issue),  edited  by  Steven 
Gilligan,  S.  W.  Theaker,  John 
Greenwood;  cheques  payable  to  the 
first  of  these  at  1  Chelwood  Close, 
Hollingbury,  Brighton,  East  Sussex 
BN1  8FN. 

New  Words  2  comprises  24  A4 
sheets  printed  on  one  side  and  stapled 
in  such  a  way  as  to  guarantee  dog’s 
ears  on  all  four  corners.  It’s  an  awful 
mess.  The  content  is,  if  anything, 
worse  than  the  presentation,  apart 
from  two  quite  good  conventional  sf 
stories  by  S.  W.  Theaker  and  Polly 
Jebson.  Issue  3  has  since  come  out  and 
is  bigger  and  better  printed,  I’m  told. 

Zene:  The  Small  Press  Guide 

(£1.95  per  issue,  £7/4,  A5,  36pp, 
quarterly)  and  The  Third 
Alternative:  Cutting  Edge  Horror, 
Dark  Fantasy  &  SF  (£2.50  per 
issue,  £9/4,  A5,  52pp,  quarterly)  or 
joint  subscription  £14/4,  cheques 
payable  to  either  magazine,  edited  by 
Andy  Cox  and  Mark  Rose,  5  Martins 
Lane,  Witcham,  Ely,  Cambs  CB6  2LB. 

Zene  is  now  three  issues  old,  and 
the  editors  are  considering  going 
bimonthly.  It’s  the  mag  that  treats 
the  small  press  as  a  valid  literary 
phenomenon,  with  in-depth  reviews 
of  selected  titles  (poetry  as  well  as 
prose),  guidelines  from  across  the 
English-speaking  world,  and  articles 
about  criticism  and  erotic  writing.  It’s 
rich  and  intelligent,  for  the  most  part, 
and  excellent  value.  The  only  serious 
lapse  is  in  the  letters  page:  In  the 
previous  Zene,  “outsider”  Peter  James 
gave  an  articulate  and  constructive 
account  of  his  opinion  of  small-press 
attitudes;  rather  than  rise  to  the 
challenge  and  tackle  the  issues,  two 
correspondents  in  the  current  Zene 
dismiss  his  views  out  of  hand. 

Meanwhile,  the  success  story  of  The 
Third  Alternative  continues  -  Julie 
Travis’s  “The  Guinea  Worm”  in  issue 
5  is  not  to  be  missed,  and  issue  6  has 
appeared  on  schedule  as  usual.  A 
recent  advert  for  TTA  warned  readers 
to  beware  of  imitations.  I  wonder 
what  they  meant  by  that... 

Dreams  From  the  Stranger’s  Cafe 

(£2.50  per  issue,  £9/4,  A5,  52pp) 


interzone  August  1995  — I 


BOOKS  REVIEWED  AND  RECEIVED 


edited  by  John  Gaunt,  15  Clifton 
Grove,  Clifton,  Rotherham,  South 
Yorkshire  S65  2AZ. 

Issue  4,  the  first  I’ve  seen,  looks 
fairly  good.  It’s  got  a  glossy  cover  by 
David  Mooring,  and  interior  artwork 
by  Roddy  Williams.  The  layout  is  the 
usual  “I’ve  gotta  font  set  and  I’m 
gonna  use  it,”  but  is  readable  none¬ 
theless.  The  alarm  bells  rang  when  I 
read  the  editorial.  It’s  “A  Magazine  of 
Strange  Fiction.”  Yes,  it’s  another  one 
that  claims  not  to  be  horror,  fantasy, 
sf,  or  even  slipstream  (annoyingly 
referred  to  as  “the  ‘s’  word”). 

So,  what’s  it  got  to  offer?  There’s 
William  Meikle’s  “Aboard  the 
Vordlak,”  a  routine  Lovecraft  story 
set  on  a  spaceship.  For  scientific 
integrity  it  barely  competes  with  Lost 
in  Space.  Far  worse  is  David  Logan’s 
“The  Most  Modern  Prometheus,”  a 
Frankenstein-was-real  story  that 
promises  something  and  delivers 
nothing,  except  for  the  sort  of 
wisecracks  you  thought  you’d  never 
have  to  hear  again  -  “Ever  seen 
Uranus?”  “Only  with  the  aid  of  a 
mirror.”  Pathetic. 

Better  pieces  include  Mark 
McLaughlin’s  story  of  kinky  aliens, 
“The  Last  Poetry  Night  at  the 
Saturnalia  Coffee  House,”  and 
Christopher  Amies’  “Down  To  A 
Sunless  Sea,”  a  vampire  story  with 
strong  imagery.  Several  poems  and 
eight  100-word  stories  by  various 
authors  add  to  the  variety.  On  the 
whole,  though,  it’s  a  collection  of 
stories  that  fall  between  stools  -  the 
genres  they  claim  not  to  be  a  part  of. 

Albedo  One:  Science  Fiction 
Fantasy  Horror  (£1.95  per  issue, 

£8/4,  A5,  68pp,  irregular  schedule)  2 
Post  Road,  Lusk,  Co.  Dublin,  Ireland. 

I  found  Albedo  One  issue  7 
disappointing.  All  five  stories  are 
routine,  and  in  some  cases  very 
boring.  The  showcased  artwork  by 
Stephen  Walker  is,  well,  just  typical 
fantasy  art,  only  not  as  good.  Some  of 
the  text  is  a  bit  dodgy  too.  Still, 
everyone  has  their  off-days;  I  have 
every  confidence  that  future  issues 
will  be  as  good  as  previous  issues. 
Besides,  the  book  reviews  and  the 
interview  with  Kim  Newman  redeem 
this  one  to  some  extent. 

Light’s  List  (£1,  A5,  28pp,  Annual) 
cheques  payable  to  editor  Dr  John 
Light,  29  Longfield  Road,  Tring, 

Herts  HP23  4DG. 

This  is  effectively  a  directory  of 
over  600  small-press  magazines. 
Potentially  useful,  its  only  drawback 
is  that,  what  with  only  appearing 
once  a  year,  it  isn’t  very  up  to  date. 
Consequently,  it  includes  such 
magazines  as  Alternaties,  which 
recently  folded.  Best  get  this  and  a 
subscription  to  Zene. 

Paul  Beardsley 

—  interzone  August  1995  - 


Judge  Who? 

Neil  Jones 


66 Tam  the  Law.” 

-L  Or  at  least  that’s  what  Judge 
Dredd,  as  portrayed  by  Sylvester 
Stallone,  tells  us.  The  prune-visaged 
Dredd  first  appeared  in  the  pages  of 
the  2000  A.D.  comic  and  swiftly 
achieved  the  cult  status  that  has  now 
propelled  him  into  celluloid  -  shifting 
from  one  visual  medium  to  another,  a 
logical  enough  transition.  Not  so  easy 
to  account  for  are  the  Dredd  books  (as 
in  prose/no  illustrations).  What 
exactly  is  a  Dredd-aficionado  supposed 
to  get  from  a  book  such  as  Wetworks 
by  Dave  Stone  (Virgin,  £4.99)?  Since  it 
could,  presumably,  be  turned  into  a 
graphic  novel  by  hiring  a  decent 
artist,  this  is  a  puzzling  question. 

The  story:  in  the  world  Dredd  polices 
-  which  is  already  several  nightmares 
past  the  grimmest  of  cyberpunk  futures 
and  surely  so  harsh  it  would  have  imp¬ 
loded  long  ago  -  3,600  people  have  been 
dying  every  day  for  months  (except  for 
Sundays  when  the  number  is  double) 
and  something  nasty  is  brewing  on  the 
Moon,  all  part  of  a  nefarious  plot  which 
cannot,  of  course,  succeed  unless 
someone  takes  out  Dredd.  Enter  the 
villainess,  a  cyberpunkette  assassin. 

The  indestructible  Dredd,  however,  is 
if  anything  more  of  a  problem  for  the 
book-line  writers  than  any  assassin. 

In  the  comics,  he  is  a  big,  beefy,  forbid¬ 
ding  presence,  usually  seen  meting  out 
on  the  spot  punishment  for  the  slight¬ 
est  infraction  of  the  laws  of  Mega- 
City  One  -  laws  which  are  arbitrary, 
often  unfair,  even  sometimes  ridiculous 
but  which  to  Dredd  are  sacrosanct.  His 
helmet  only  reveals  the  lower  portion  of 
his  face,  and  the  only  expression  we 
ever  see  there  is  his  mouth  curled  in 
strong  disapproval.  His  every  utterance 
is  stern,  implacable,  unforgiving,  etc. 
He  doesn’t  suffer  from  doubt,  or  guilt, 
and  the  only  thing  of  any  importance  to 
him  is  -  you’ve  guessed  it  -  the  law.  As 
it  says  of  Dredd  in  Stone’s  book: 
“You’re  like  a  hole  in  the  world  and 
everyone  else  just  circles  around  it... 
nobody  can  see  what’s  in  your  head  and 
behind  your  cybernetic  eyes,  nobody 
knows  what’s  really  going  on  in  there.” 
In  comics,  with  strong  visual  images  to 
counterpoint  all  sorts  of  other  elements, 
the  Dredd  character  clearly  works  fine, 
but  with  prose  fiction  it’s  very  bad  news. 

Stone  takes  the  only  course  open  to 
him,  and  keeps  Dredd  the  same 
essentially  robotic  figure  he’s  always 
been  and  puts  the  viewpoint  weight  on 
the  secondary  roles,  including  the 
villainess.  The  cliche  would  be  for  her 


(b-a-d,  but  driven  to  it  by  an  utterly 
appalling  childhood)  and  the  remorse¬ 
less  lawman  Dredd  to  be  forced  into  an 
alliance  (they  are),  and  develop  a  grud¬ 
ging  respect,  even  get  romantically 
involved  (they  don’t).  So,  on  the  plus 
side,  the  cliche  is  avoided;  but,  on  the 
minus  side,  there  isn’t  a  lot  of  interest¬ 
ing  human  interaction  either.  About 
the  only  thing  Dredd  experiences  apart 
from  sustained  disapproval  and  right¬ 
eous  anger  is  embarrassment  when  the 
villainess  compels  him  to  wear  her 
miniskirt  -  an  entirely  gratuitous  scene 
which  begs  the  question  whether 
Stone  is  taking  his  revenge  on  Dredd 
for  proving  so  intractable. 

Stone’s  prose,  although  sometimes 
rather  too  clogged  for  its  own  good, 
does  achieve  an  admirably  gritty  cyber¬ 
punk  texture.  The  plot,  though,  is  over¬ 
complex  and  ultimately,  despite  some 
good  scenes,  the  book  just  doesn’t  come 
off  -  but  in  fairness  it’s  Dredd,  rather 
than  Stone,  who  should  shoulder  the 
blame. 

Novelizing  Doctor  Who  is  an  alto¬ 
gether  easier  proposition.  First  off, 
we  know  and  love  the  Doctor.  In  all  of 
his  incarnations,  he  is  quirky,  brilliant, 
vastly  knowledgeable,  compassionate, 
proud,  touchy,  honourable  and  fallible. 
He  is  also  a  being  of  considerable  myst¬ 
ery  with  a  long  and  eventful  existence 
behind  him.  There’s  plenty  of  scope,  if 
not  to  develop  the  character  exactly, 
then  at  least  to  display  him  at  his 
eccentric  best  in  a  suitably  kaleidosco¬ 
pic  storyline.  Just  throw  in  an  engaging 
era  or  two,  low-budget  aliens,  and  a 
nefarious  villain  -  which  is  pretty  much 
what  we  get  in  Daniel  Blythe’s  Infinite 
Requiem  (Virgin/Doctor  Who,  £4.99). 

The  chief  attraction,  of  course,  is 
the  Doctor,  here  in  his  Sylvester 
McCoy  identity,  but  there  is  also  a 
plucky  girl  companion,  Bernice.  The 
main  story-thread  is  provided  by  the 
powerful  being, 

Jirenal/Kelzen/Shanstra,  who  has 
been  split  three  ways  and  scattered 
through  time  and  is  intent  on  putting 
itself  back  together  again.  The  three- 
era  tale  involves  an  abused  Asian 
woman  in  1997  London,  the  colony- 
world  of  Gadrell  Major  ravaged  by 
the  Dalek-like  Phractons  in  the  far 
future,  plus  a  world  of  alien 
telepaths.  Blythe’s  prose  is  fine,  and 
delivers  a  smooth  enough  read,  if 
rather  darker  than  you  might  be 
bargaining  for,  but  again  the  plot  is 
over-complex  and  there  is  definitely 


BOOKS  REVIEWED  AND  RECEIVED 


one  era  (and  one  segment  of  super¬ 
being)  too  many.  Still,  the  Doctor  is 
evoked  quite  satisfactorily,  and  it’s 
easy  to  conjure  up  Sylvester  McCoy’s 
image  as  the  pages  turn. 

As  well  as  Doctor  Who  and  Judge 
Dredd,  there  are  entire  shelves  -  some¬ 
times  a  whole  section  of  the  bookshop 
-  devoted  to  the  various  Star  Treks, 


Star  Wars,  Quantum  Leap  and  Alien! 
Predator  books,  and  there  are  more 
coming  in  all  the  time  -  such  as 
Babylon  5  and  The  X-Files.  Even  for 
fans  of  the  originals,  it  can  be  hard  to 
fathom  why  there  is  a  market  for 
them  at  all  (and  for  those  who  aren’t 
it  must  be  downright  impossible). 
Still,  the  fact  is  that  spinoffery  is 


thriving  when  “real”  sf  is  in  the  dold¬ 
rums.  It  would  be  nice  to  know  why. 

Neil  Jones 

Editor’s  Note:  I  have  a  few  theories 
of  my  own,  but  do  readers  have  any 
answers  to  Neil  Jones’s  query? 

Perhaps  we  can  discuss  the  whole 
question  of  “spinoffery”  in  more  depth 
in  a  future  issue  of  Interzone. 


In  his  speech  at  the  1995  Arthur  C. 

Clarke  Award  ceremony,  Colin 
Greenland  reminisced  about  the  just- 
past  Easter  SF  Convention,  held  at  a 
hotel  in  London’s  Docklands.  He  said 
that  from  his  hotel  bedroom  he  could 
see  the  glittering  futuristic  towers  of 
office  blocks,  and  the  automatic  train 
of  the  Docklands  Light  Railway  run¬ 
ning  back  and  forth  across  its  bridge 
with  no  driver  (“and  no  passengers!” 
quipped  a  member  of  the  audience), 
and  he  came  to  the  conclusion  that  we 
are  living  in  the  future.  Of  course,  we 
are  living  in  the  future  that  writers 
were  attempting  to  imagine  in  the  sf 
we  all  grew  up  with.  But  it  isn’t  the 
future  they  imagined. 

One  of  the  signal  omissions  from 
that  imagining  was  the  arrival  of  the 
personal  computer.  Fiction  did  have 
wrist  videophones,  and  house  compu¬ 
ters,  and  robots,  and  automatic  cars, 
and  any  number  of  other  specialized 
gadgets  that  we  can  now  see  would  be 
run  by  dedicated  computers  —  but  the 
computer-as-general-purpose-tool  was 
simply  never  dreamed  of.  It  took  a  group 
of  computer  nerds  to  dream  up  the 
Apple  and  Apple  II  computers  that 
created  the  personal  computer 
market,  IBM  to  belatedly  launch  the 
PC  which  to  this  day  is  the  most-used 
machine,  and  Apple  again  to  produce 
and  promote  (and  very  nearly  go  bust 
over)  the  Apple  Macintosh,  the 
computer  that  changed  everything. 

In  Insanely  Great  (Penguin,  £7.99), 
subtitled  “The  Life  and  Times  of  Macin¬ 
tosh,  the  Computer  That  Changed 
Everything,”  Steven  Levy  tells  the 
story  of  the  Macintosh.  From  the  first 
imaginings  of  Valdevar  Bush  in  1945 
(yes,  50  years  ago!),  he  traces  the 
history  of  the  Macintosh,  and  the  ideas 
it  incorporates  -  not  only  the  graphic 
user  interface  and  the  mouse,  but  the 
concept  of  hypertext  that  gave  rise  to  the 
program  HyperCard,  still  in  use  today 
for  multi-media  -  that  all  first  came 
together  in  that  friendly  platinum  grey 
case  in  1984.  It  is  an  extraordinary 
story  of  engineering,  doggedness,  genius 
and  mismanagement,  and  is  comparable 
to  anything  you  might  have  read  in 
the  intervening  50  years  as  fiction  in 
Astounding  / Analog.  Levy  links  these 
anecdotes  into  an  immensely  readable 
and  entertaining  story  which  reveals 
Steve  Jobs  as  both  the  hero  and  the 
villain  of  the  piece,  for  his  visionary 
driving  forward  of  the  Macintosh  idea 
and  for  his  woeful  management  prac¬ 
tices.  There  are,  apparently,  other  histor- 


Rambles 

Around 

My 

Macintosh 

Paul  Brazier 


ies  of  the  Mac  available  that  are  much 
more  partisan.  This  book  does  not 
appear  to  have  an  axe  to  grind,  and  I 
would  recommend  it  unreservedly. 

My  first  Macintosh  was  a  Mac  Plus, 
bought  second-hand  for  the 
princely  sum  of  £1,500  in  1986  (at 
£2,000  plus  VAT,  I  really  couldn’t  afford 
a  new  one),  and,  with  the  free  software 
that  came  bundled  with  the  Mac  in 
those  days,  I  was  off  and  running.  I 
was  a  typesetter  then,  and  it  quickly 
became  plain  to  me  that  here  was  the 
nemesis  of  my  trade,  and  indeed,  by 
1991 1  had  been  made  redundant  from 
three  different  typesetting  jobs.  So  I  was 
very  lucky  to  have  been  cross-training, 
and  I  found  no  difficulty  in  getting  free¬ 
lance  work  as  a  “Macintosh  Typesetter.” 
Now  I  am  a  freelance  graphic  designer/ 
typesetter,  have  tripled  my  income  and 
have  a  state-of-the-art  PowerMac  (it 
cost  £2,500  -  over  nine  years,  that  is 
some  price  drop)  that  runs  about  a 
hundred  times  faster  than  the  Mac  Plus 
and  which  I  use,  among  other  things, 
to  produce  Interzone.  So,  for  me  and 
many  like  me  in  the  pre-press  industry, 
the  Macintosh  did  indeed  change  every¬ 
thing.  But  that  is  only  one  small  area 
of  its  influence. 

The  Macintosh  is  also  considered  to 
be  the  best  platform  for  multi-media, 
and  publishers,  concerned  at  the  falling 
sales  of  paper  books,  are  looking  at 
electronic  publishing  as  a  way  of 
diversifying  into  the  new  technology. 
Douglas  Adams,  great  misser  of  dead¬ 
lines,  extracted  a  deadline  extension 
on  one  of  his  books  by  promising  to 
supply  it  ready  to  set  on  disc  -  and  he 
delivered.  It  is  only  one  further  step  to 
publishing  the  book  itself  on  disc,  and 
one  of  the  first  such  manifestations  is 


Peter  James’s  Host:  The  Electronic 
Book  (Penguin,  £12.99  including  VAT 
-  tax  on  books!  egad!).  It  seems  strange 
to  be  reviewing  both  the  book  and  the 
medium  —  rather  like  commenting  on 
the  type,  paper  and  binding  as  well  as 
the  contents  of  a  book.  James’s  novel 
is  an  adequately  written  story  of 
attempts  to  prolong  people’s  lives  by 
freezing  their  bodies  and  downloading 
their  minds  into  computers;  mildly 
horrific,  and  mildly  science-fictional. 
As  for  the  medium,  the  electronic  book 
comes  on  two  floppy  discs  inside  a 
paperback-size  hard  cover  so  it  can  sit 
on  your  shelf  just  like  a  book.  After 
extracting  the  discs  from  their  sealed 
polythene  envelopes  and  the  usual 
rigmarole  of  loading  the  files  and 
configuring  your  system,  double¬ 
clicking  on  the  book  displays  a  window 
with,  on  the  left,  a  picture  of  Peter 
James  with  the  word  “Introduction” 
beneath,  and  on  the  right  a  picture  of  a 
book  with  the  words  “Book  Contents” 
beneath.  Clicking  on  the  picture  of 
James  begins  a  very  brief  Multimedia 
movie  of  him;  but  this  is  hardly  an 
introduction  -  at  three  short  sentences, 
it’s  no  more  than  an  animated  blurb. 

The  text  of  the  novel  itself  is 
presented  in  plain  text  in  HyperCard, 
the  Macintosh  multimedia  and  hyper¬ 
text  development  tool  -  and  as  a  result 
runs  to  83  chapters  (memorably  titled 
“Chapter  1,”  etc)  over  no  less  than 
1,515  pages!  Occasional  words  are 
underlined.  Clicking  on  them  displays 
a  footnote.  Purportedly,  this  gives 
access  to  James’s  research,  but  often 
it  leads  to  jokey  little  asides  from  the 
author.  This  is  certainly  hypertext-in¬ 
action  of  a  sort,  but  it  really  isn’t  very 
useful.  At  the  end  of  the  book,  at  the 
end  of  the  epilogue,  there  is  another 
picture  of  Peter  James,  with  the 
words  “Audio  Epilogue”  underneath. 
Clicking  on  this  begins  a  recording  of 
James’s  voice  that  begins,  “So  you 
made  it  to  the  end;  I  hope  you  enjoyed 
the  novel,”  and  goes  on  to  tell  of  further 
recent  developments  in  the  technologies 
that  he  has  based  his  story  on. 

Alas,  Penguin  may  be  on  a  hiding  to 
nothing  here,  as  you  need  both  a 
strong  interest  in  Peter  James’s  subject 
matter  and,  of  course,  a  Macintosh 
computer  to  read  this  novel. 

On  a  completely  different  level  of 
sophistication,  The  Eastgate 
Quarterly  Review  of  Hypertext 
(Eastgate  Systems,  134  Main  Street, 
Watertown,  MA  02172,  USA;  $19.95; 


:  Ausust  1995  —I 


BOOKS  REVIEWED  AND  RECEIVED 


requires  a  Macintosh,  or  PC  computer 
running  Windows  3.1)  is  a  stunning 
experiment  in  using  the  computer  to 
generate  a  new  form  of  written  art. 
Unlike  the  Peter  James,  this  is  not  a 
book  tarted  up  with  a  bit  of  multi- 
media;  it  uses  the  concept  of 
hypertext  to  add  a  new  dimension  to 
the  reading  experience. 

Hypertext  is  the  philosophical  concept 
that  treats  all  human  knowledge  as  its 
database,  and  the  document  you  are 
interacting  with  at  any  given  moment 
as  your  entry  to  that  database.  The  idea 
is  that  you  can  highlight  any  word  (or 
picture,  or  icon  -  any  form  of  informat¬ 
ion  within  the  document)  and  trace  it 
back  into  the  database.  It  can  supply 
dictionary  definitions,  encyclopedia 
entries,  it  can  tell  you  the  number  of 
times  that  item  appears  in  the  data¬ 
base,  and  what  contexts  it  appears  in: 
any  and  all  links  between  data  are 
possible.  The  writers  featured  in  The 
Eastgate  Quarterly  use  this  ability  to 
create  links  to  add  an  extra  dimension 
to  their  work.  In  this  issue  (Vol.  1,  No. 
3),  sf  critic  and  anthologist  Kathryn 
Cramer  has  produced  a  bewilderingly 
fragmented  story,  “In  Small  and  Large 
Pieces,”  that  I  have  so  far  failed  to  grasp. 
There  are  isolated  episodes,  snatches  of 
conversations,  brief  moments  of  lucidity, 
and  bizarrely,  a  collection  of  rather 
good  poems  that  appear  at  the  oddest 
moments.  Certainly,  it  is  well  known 
that  piecing  together  random  frag¬ 
ments  of  information  is  how  we 
actually  learn,  but  ordering  the  i 

process,  whether  in  a  linear  book  or  , 
an  educational  establishment  gives 
some  sense  of  the  time  to  be  I 

committed  to  that  learning  process.  I 
want  to  read  and  grasp  this  hypertext 
fiction  because  what  I  have  seen  so  far 
is  intriguing.  However,  I  do  have  dead¬ 
lines,  and  cannot  make  this  kind  of 
open-ended  commitment  at  the 
moment.  No  doubt,  if  I  become  more 
expert,  I  will  have  a  better  sense  of 
how  long  these  things  will  take. 
Unfortunately,  at  the  moment  I  have 
to  use  my  Mac  to  earn  a  living. 

Kathy  Mac’s  piece,  “Unnatural 
Habitats,”  is  (I  think)  a  selection  of 
poems  linked  in  various  ways  to  throw 
further  light  on  them.  I  did  not  find 
these  nearly  as  compelling  as  the 
Cramer,  for  the  simple  reason  that  the 
verse  seems  inferior.  Given  that,  the 
idea  of  a  dolphin  living  in  a  desert 
and  working  as  an  impressionist 
painter  but  being  repatriated  against 
his  will  to  the  ocean  by  well-meaning 
nincompoops  did  strike  home.  It  would 
have  made  an  excellent  story;  as  a 
couple  of  linked  verses,  I  thought  it 
weak  at  best.  Finally,  the  real  problem 
with  all  these  things  is  you  need  a 
computer  to  read  them.  Reading  fills 
the  interstices  of  my  day:  I  read  in  bed, 
on  the  train,  in  the  toilet,  in  the  super¬ 
market  queue,  and  I  need  what  I  read 
to  be  portable  and  immediately  acces- 
I —  interzone  August  1995  - 


sible.  When  I  sit  at  my  computer,  I 
either  work  or  play  games.  It  has  made 
for  an  interesting  afternoon  looking  at 
these  electronic  publications,  but  I 
would  never  do  it  for  fun.  The  other 
real  problem  is  that  print  and  graphic 
design  have  a  400-year  start  on  elec¬ 
tronic  media.  The  paper  packaging  of 
The  Eastgate  Quarterly  is  both  better 
designed  and  more  informative  than 
the  electronic  material  it  contains. 
Until  this  problem  is  overcome,  or 
until  someone  generates  a  real  solid 
untranslatable  work  of  art  in  the  new 
medium,  electronic  fictions  will 
remain  curiosities. 


There  is,  of  course, 

another  medium  that  demands  a 
dedicated  platform,  but  which  has 
taken  a  much  firmer  hold  in  the 
popular  psyche  -  video.  When  I  began 
Nexus,  I  wrote  to  the  publishers  of 
videotapes  and  solicited  review  copies  of 
their  products.  The  tapes  I  received 
were  so  unremittingly  awful  that,  after 
the  first  couple,  I  gave  up  reviewing 
them;  there  is  a  limit  to  how  many 
ways  there  are  to  say  that  something 
is  not  worth  watching.  However,  two 
movies  recently  received  have  done 
something  to  moderate  this  image. 

Evolver  (20-20  Vision,  15)  is  a  rather 
peculiar  tale  in  the  vein  of  Short 
Circuit.  But  whereas  in  Short  Circuit  a 
combat  robot  achieves  sentience  and 
is  a  good  guy,  here  a  combat  robot  goes 
out  of  control,  killing  everything  it  sees, 
and  is  shut  down  and  its  development 
abandoned.  Its  designer,  played  by 
John  deLancie  (“Q”  from  Star  Trek: 
The  Next  Generation ),  decides  there  is 
nothing  wrong  with  the  software,  so 
takes  a  job  with  a  toy  manufacturer 
and  designs  and  produces  a  robot  which 
you  play  killer  games  with.  Ethan 
Randall  plays  the  teenage  whizz  at  VR 


games  who  wins  the  right  to  test  this 
new  game.  Only  the  robot  goes  rogue 
again,  and  starts  killing  the  kids  at  his 
school.  It  also  contrives  to  kill  its 
designer,  so  there  is  no  one  to  shut  it 
down  this  time.  This  is  a  typical  horror 
story  from  here  on  in,  with  the  robot, 
seemingly  dispatched,  coming  back  for 
another,  and  then  another  try  to  kill 
Ethan  Randall,  and  Randall  ever  more 
hard-pressed  as  he  proves  his  games 
skill  is  good  in  real  combat  too.  The 
film  even  ends  with  a  metaphorical 
“I’ll  be  back”  from  the  robot. 

The  thing  I  don’t  understand  about 
this  film  is  the  “15”  rating  it  has 
received.  It  certainly  won’t  appeal  to 
anyone  much  over  the  age  of  15, 
and  I  would  have  thought  might 
even  generate  a  cult  following  with 
young  teenage  boys.  It  certainly 
isn’t  a  bad  film,  but  I  doubt  it  will 
have  much  appeal  to  adults; 
perhaps  this  is  a  case  of  telling 
people  they  can’t  have  something  in 
order  to  make  them  want  it. 

T! he  High  Crusade  (20-20 
Vision,  15)  is  an  altogether 
different  animal.  It  is  based  (loosely) 
on  Poul  Anderson’s  1960  novel  of  the 
same  name  and  features  some 
splendid  special  effects  as  an  alien 
scout  ship  comes  to  England  in  the 
middle  ages  to  scout  for  an  invasion. 

It  is  instead  taken  over  by  the 
Crusaders,  who  then  take  it  back  to  its 
base  and  create  mayhem.  This  video’s 
biggest  problem  is  its  unevenness.  The 
aliens  all  have  Scottish  accents  -  good 
joke,  that  -  and  the  chief  alien  has  a 
creditable  Sean  Connery  accent  - 
even  funnier.  But  his  dialogue  is 
peppered  with  obscenities.  Swearing 
isn’t  funny.  The  characters  are 
imported  faithfully  from  the  novel, 
and  there  are  some  clever  dialogue 
moments  as  the  story  progresses.  How¬ 
ever,  there  is  also  some  of  the  most 
tedious  knock-about  I  have  ever  seen, 
culminating  with  the  invading  English¬ 
men  using  a  battering  ram  to  get 
through  an  electronic  door  -  incredib¬ 
ly,  this  scene  is  taken  from  the  book, 
but  Anderson  makes  it  work.  Here,  it 
just  looks  silly.  The  other  thing  added  is 
a  certain  amount  of  sex  comedy  -  that 
sex  exists  at  all  is  only  barely  implied 
in  Anderson’s  original  novel.  The 
cumulative  effect  of  this  video  is  that 
it  looks  rather  like  Monty  Python 
crossed  with  The  Young  Ones,  only  done 
at  half  speed  and  with  strange  lacunae 
even  then.  You  could  enjoy  this  film 
for  the  special  effects,  the  alien 
costumes  and  mask-making,  and  even 
some  of  the  dialogue,  but  whoever  set  a 
German  to  direct  an  English-language 
comedy  must  have  forgotten  or  ignored 
the  awful  reputation  that  the  German 
sense  of  humour  has  in  Britain.  Not  a 
wonderful  film,  no,  but  miles  better 
than  some  videos  I  have  seen. 

Paul  Brazier 


BOOKS  REVIEWED  AND  RECEIVED 


Books  Received 

May  1995 


The  following  is  a  list  of  all  sf, 
fantasy  and  horror  titles,  and  books 
of  related  interest,  received  by 
Interzone  during  the  period 
specified  above.  Official  publication 
dates,  where  known,  are  given  in 
italics  at  the  end  of  each  entry. 
Descriptive  phrases  in  quotes 
following  titles  are  taken  from  book 
covers  rather  than  title  pages.  A 
listing  here  does  not  preclude  a 
separate  review  in  this  issue  (or  in  a 
future  issue)  of  the  magazine. 


Attanasio,  A.  A.  Arthor.  “The 
magical  epic  of  high  fantasy." 
Hodder  &  Stoughton,  ISBN  0- 
340-61775-6,  278pp,  hardcover, 
cover  by  Mick  Van  Houten, 
£16.99.  (Arthurian  fantasy  novel, 
first  published  in  the  USA  [?], 

1 995;  a  follow-up  to  last  year’s 
The  Dragon  and  the  Unicom.)  1 5th 
June  1995. 


Attanasio,  A.  A.  The  Dragon 
and  the  Unicorn.  New  English 
Library,  ISBN  0-340-61772-1, 
483pp,  A-format  paperback, 
cover  by  Mick  Van  Houten, 
£5.99.  (Fantasy  novel,  first 
published  in  the  USA  [?],  1994.) 
15th  June  1995. 


Ballard,  J.  G.  Rushing  to 
Paradise.  Picador  USA,  ISBN  0- 
312-131 64-X,  239pp,  hardcover, 
cover  by  Jeremy  Wolff,  $21. 
(Non-sf  [but  near-sf]  novel  by  a 
leading  sf  writer,  first  published  in 
the  UK,  1994;  reviewed  by  James 
Lovegrove  in  Interzone  90; 
“Picador  USA”  is  a  new 
American  imprint  “used  by  St 
Martin’s  Press  under  license  from 
Pan  Books  Limited.")  May  1 995. 


Balzac,  Honore  de.  Seraphita 
(and  Louis  Lambert  &  The 
Exiles).  Translated  by  Clara  Bell. 
Introduction  by  David  Blow. 
Dedalus,  ISBN  1-873982-41-0, 
xv+3 16pp,  B-format  paperback, 
cover  by  Lise  Weisgerber,  £6.99. 
(Horror/fantasy  collection,  first 
published  in  1989;  the  short 
novel  and  two  novellas  which 
make  up  this  volume  originally 
appeared  in  French,  in  1 835.) 
22nd  June  1995. 


Banks,  lain  M.  Feersum  Endjinn. 
Orbit,  ISBN  1-85723-273-9, 
279pp,  B-format  paperback, 

£5.99.  (Sf  novel,  first  published  in 
1994;  reviewed  by  John  Clute  in 
Interzone  86.)  8th  June  1 995. 


Benford,  Gregory.  Sailing 
Bright  Eternity. 
Bantam/Spectra,  ISBN  0-553- 
08655-3,  404pp,  hardcover, 
$22.95.  (Sf  novel,  first  edition; 
proof  copy  received;  this  major 
work  of  hard  sf  is  billed  as  the 


sixth  and  last  in  the  author’s 
“Galactic  Center  saga”;  the 
previous  volumes,  published  over 
two  decades,  were  In  the  Ocean 
of  Night,  Across  the  Sea  of  Suns, 
Great  Sky  River,  Tides  of  Light  and 
Furious  Gulf.)  September  1 995. 


Besher,  Alexander.  Rim:  A 
Novel  of  Virtual  Reality. 

HarperCollinsWest,  ISBN  0-06- 
258527-4,  x+357pp,  trade 
paperback,  $  1 3.  (Sf  novel,  first 
edition;  a  debut  novel  by  an 
American  writer,  it  was 
shortlisted  for  the  Philip  K.  Dick 
Award;  film  rights  have  been  sold 
to  TriStar  Pictures;  this  book  was 
sent  to  us  by  the  UK  publishers 
Little,  Brown,  who  are  planning 
an  Orbit  paperback  edition  in 
September  1 995,  to  be  priced  at 
£6.99.)  Late  entry:  1994 
publication,  received  in  May  1 995. 


Bibby,  James.  Ronan  the 
Barbarian...  translated  from 
the  Original  Gibberish  by 
James  Bibby.  Millennium,  ISBN 
1-85798-282-7,  260pp, 
hardcover,  £  1 5.99.  (Humorous 
fantasy  novel,  first  edition;  there 
is  a  simultaneous  trade  paperback 
edition  [not  seen];  this  is  a  first 
novel  by  a  Merseyside  author 
who  has  written  TV  comedy.) 

1 5th  May  1995. 


Chalker,  Jack  L.  Gods  of  the 
Well  of  Souls.  “Book  Three  of 
The  Watchers  of  the  Well."  Del 
Rey,  ISBN  0-345-38850-X, 
367pp,  A-format  paperback, 
cover  by  Paul  Youll,  $5.99.  (Sf 
novel,  first  published  in  the  USA, 
1994.)  I  st  May  1995. 


Cherryh,  C.  J.  Tripoint.  Hodder 
&  Stoughton,  ISBN  0-340-63829- 
X,  377pp,  hardcover,  cover  by 
Rolf  Moyr,  £16.99.  (Sf  novel,  first 
published  in  the  USA,  1994.)  15th 
June  1995. 


Clark,  Simon.  Blood  Crazy. 
Hodder  &  Stoughton,  ISBN  0- 
340-62574-0,  343pp,  hardcover, 
cover  by  Steve  Crisp,  £  1 6.99. 
(Horror  novel,  first  edition.)  15th 
June  1995. 


Clark,  Simon.  Nailed  By  the 
Heart.  New  English  Library, 

ISBN  0-340-62573-2,  360pp,  A- 
format  paperback,  cover  by  Steve 
Crisp,  £5.99.  (Horror  novel,  first 
published  in  1995;  reviewed  by 
Pete  Crowther  in  Interzone  97.) 
15th  June  1995. 


Daniels,  Les.  Yellow  Fog.  “The 
Don  Sebastian  Vampire 
Chronicles.”  Raven,  ISBN  I  - 
85487-349-0,  294pp,  A-format 
paperback,  cover  by  Les 


Edwards,  £4.99.  (Horror  novel, 
first  published  in  the  USA,  1988.) 
19th  June  1995. 


Datlow,  Ellen,  and  Terri 
Windling,  eds.  The  Year’s  Best 
Fantasy  and  Horror:  Eighth 
Annual  Collection.  St  Martin’s 
Griffin,  ISBN  0-3 1 2- 1 32 1 9-0, 
555pp,  hardcover,  cover  by 
Thomas  Canty,  $26.95. 
(Horror/fantasy  anthology,  first 
edition;  proof  copy  received; 
there  will  be  a  simultaneous 
trade  paperback  edition  [not 
seen];  the  usual  bumper  feast,  it 
contains  1 994  stories  by 
Nicholson  Baker,  Ray  Bradbury, 
Scott  Bradfield,  Jonathan  Carroll, 
Charles  de  Lint,  Harlan  Ellison, 
Neil  Gaiman,  Charles  Grant, 
Stephen  King,  Nancy  Kress, 
Geoffrey  A.  Landis,  Ian 
McDonald,  Patricia  A.  McKillip, 
Joyce  Carol  Oates,  Nicholas 
Royle,  Kristine  Kathryn  Rusch, 
Darrell  Schweitzer,  Michael 
Marshall  Smith,  Jack  Womack, 
Jane  Yolen  and  many  others, 
including  one  from  Interzone  — 
“A  Friend  Indeed”  by  David 
Garnett.)  August  1 995. 


Duncan,  Dave.  The  Cursed.  Del 
Rey,  ISBN  0-345-38951-4,  436pp, 
hardcover,  cover  by  David  A. 
Cherry,  $22.  (Fantasy  novel,  first 
edition;  this  seems  to  be 
Duncan’s  biggest  novel  to  date, 
and  it’s  billed  as  a  “stand-alone,” 
not  part  of  a  series.)  1 8th  May 
1995. 


Egan,  Greg.  Axiomatic. 
Millennium,  ISBN  1-85798-281-9, 
ix+289pp,  hardcover,  £15.99.  (Sf 
collection,  first  edition;  it 
contains  18  stories,  exactly  half  of 
which  first  appeared  in  Interzone ; 
even  if  you’re  a  longtime  reader 
of  this  magazine,  this  fine  volume 
is  worth  buying  for  the  other 
nine  stories;  see  Chris  Gilmore’s 
review  elsewhere  in  this  issue.) 
Late  entry:  April  (?)  publication, 
received  in  May  1 995. 


Farris,  John.  Sacrifice.  Tor,  ISBN 
0-812-50956-0,  379pp,  A-format 
paperback,  $5.99. 
(Horror/suspense  novel,  first 
published  in  the  USA,  1 994;  it 
comes  larded  with  praise  from 
the  late  Robert  Bloch,  Ed 
Gorman,  Stephen  King,  Richard 
Matheson  and  others.)  June  1 995. 


Greenland,  Colin.  Seasons  of 
Plenty:  The  Tabitha  Jute 
Trilogy,  Volume  2. 

HarperCollins,  ISBN  0-00- 
224208-7,  403pp,  hardcover, 
cover  by  Jim  Burns,  £  1 5.99.  (Sf 
novel,  first  edition.)  22nd  June  1995. 


Henderson,  Zenna.  Ingathering: 
The  Complete  People 
Stories  of  Zenna  Henderson. 

Edited  by  Mark  and  Priscilla 
Olson.  NESFA  Press  [PO  Box 
809,  Framingham,  MA  01701- 
0203,  USA],  ISBN  0-915368-58-7, 
x+577pp,  hardcover,  cover  by 
Elizabeth  Rhys  Finney,  $24.95.  (Sf 
collection,  first  edition;  almost  all 
the  stories  first  appeared  in  The 
Magazine  of  Fantasy  and  Science 
Fiction  between  1 952  and  1 975, 
and  most  of  them  were  collected 
a  few  years  ago  in  a  rather  similar 
British-published  omnibus 
entitled  The  People  Collection 
[Corgi,  1991,  edited  by  Julia 
Smith  and  Rog  Peyton];  however, 
this  nicely  produced  volume  does 
have  one  previously  unpublished 
story,  plus  a  chronology  and 
other  apparatus.)  No  date  shown: 
received  in  May  1 995. 


Ings,  Simon.  Hotwire.  Graphics 
by  Simon  Pummell. 

HarperCollins,  ISBN  0-00- 
647724-0,  344pp,  A-format 
paperback,  £4.99.  (Sf  novel,  first 
edition;  a  follow-up  to  Hot  Head.) 
5th  June  1995. 


Kay,  Guy  Gavriel.  The  Lions  of 
Al-Rassan.  HarperCollins,  ISBN 
0-00-224613-9,  582pp, 
hardcover,  cover  by  John  Howe, 
£15.99.  (Fantasy  novel,  first 
edition  [?].)  22nd  June  1995. 


Kerr,  Philip.  Gridiron.  Chatto  & 
Windus,  ISBN  0-701  1-6248-1, 
373pp,  hardcover,  £14.99.  (Sf 
novel,  first  edition;  Kerr  [born 
1 956]  has  a  reputation  as  an 
intellectual  thriller  writer,  and 
indeed  his  books  are  thriller-ish, 
but  he  seems  to  be  turning  more 
and  more  to  sf;  his  previous  A 
Philosophical  Investigation  [1992] 
was  undoubtedly  sf,  as  is  this, 
which  is  about  a  near-future 
computerized  building  that  goes 
haywire;  the  book  has  been  sold 
to  America  for  $550,000,  and  to 
the  movies  for  an  additional 
$  1 ,000,000,  so  the  author  is  likely 
to  become  a  big  name;  of  course, 
the  term  “science  fiction”  is 
invoked  nowhere  in  the 
packaging,  alas.)  8th  June  1995. 


Lackey,  Mercedes,  and  Larry 
Dixon.  The  White  Gryphon: 
Book  Two  of  The  Mage 
Wars.  Illustrated  by  Larry 
Dixon.  Millennium,  ISBN  I- 
85798-430-7,  305pp,  hardcover, 
cover  by  John  Barber,  £15.99. 
(Fantasy  novel,  first  published  in 
the  USA,  1995.)  15th  May  1995. 


Lansdale,  Joe  R.  Mucho  Mojo. 
Gollancz,  ISBN  0-575-05926-5, 


interzone  Ausust  1995  —I 


BOOKS  REVIEWED  AND  RECEIVED 


308pp,  hardcover,  £  1 5.99. 
(Crime/horror  novel,  first 
published  in  the  USA,  1994;  it’s 
probably  more  crime  than  horror 
["suspense  sublimely  laced  with 
Texas  Gothic”],  but  Gollancz 
have  seen  fit  to  send  it  to  us,  and 
it’s  by  a  writer  well  known  in  the 
horror  field;  it  comes  with  jacket 
commendations  from  crime 
novelists  James  Crumley,  Joe 
Gores  and  David  Morrell,  among 
others.)  22nd  June  I 995. 


Ligotti,  Thomas.  Noctuary. 
Carroll  &  Graf,  ISBN  0-7867- 
0235-4,  xiii+ 1 94pp,  trade 
paperback,  cover  by  Tony  Greco, 
$8.95.  (Horror  collection,  first 
published  in  the  UK,  1 994.)  May 
1995. 


Madsen,  David.  Memoirs  of  a 
Gnostic  Dwarf.  Dedalus,  ISBN 
1-873982-71-2,  336pp,  B-format 
paperback,  cover  by  Lise 
Weisgerber,  £8.99.  (Fantastic 
historical  novel,  first  edition;  the 
author,  who  is  pseudonymous,  is 
described  as  a  “philosopher  and 
theologian  who  has  a  particular 
interest  in  Gnosticism,”)  Late 
entry:  March  (?)  publication  received 
in  May  1995. 


Mitchison,  Naomi.  Solution 
Three.  Afterword  by  Susan  M. 
Squier.  The  Feminist  Press  at  The 
City  University  of  New  York 
[distributed  in  Britain  by  Gazelle 
Books  Services,  Falcon  House, 
Queen  Square,  Lancaster  LA  I 
IRN],  ISBN  1-55861-096-0, 
I83pp,  trade  paperback,  $10.95. 
(Sf  novel,  first  published  in  UK, 

1 975;  this  is  the  first  American 
edition;  there  is  a  simultaneous 
hardcover  edition  [not  seen];  it’s 
good  to  see  this  prophetic  novel 
back  in  print;  the  amazing  Naomi 
Mitchison  [born  1897],  who  knew 
H.  G.  Wells,  Aldous  Huxley,  Olaf 
Stapledon  and  so  many  others, 
and  who  has  been  writing  novels 
herself  since  the  early  1920s,  still 
lives  in  Carradale,  Scotland.)  24th 
July  1995. 


Newman,  Kim.  Famous 
Monsters.  Foreword  by  Paul  J. 
McAuley.  Pocket,  ISBN  0-67 1  - 
85300-7,  xiv+448pp,  A-format 
paperback,  cover  by  T revor 
Scobie,  £4.99.  (Sf/horror/fantasy 
collection,  first  edition;  the 
author’s  second  collection,  it 
contains  1 5  stories,  just  four  of 
which  first  appeared  in  Interzone; 
one  story  is  original  to  the  book, 
and  the  others  appeared  in 
anthologies  such  as  Dark  Voices, 
Narrow  Houses,  New  Crimes, 
Temps,  etc;  there  are  also 
illuminating  and  amusing 
afterwords  by  the  author;  it’s  a 
feast  of  a  book  by  one  of  the  best 
writers  around,  and  a  bargain  at 
the  price:  buy  it  for  your  first- 
edition  collection.)  No  date 
shown:  received  in  May  1 995. 


Niven,  Larry,  Jerry  Pournelle  and 
Steven  Barnes.  Beowulfs 
Children.  Tor,  ISBN  0-312- 
—  interzone  Ausust  1995  - 


8552^-^,  ^KK,„a,Uw.vi, 
$23.95.  (Sf  novel,  first  published 
in  the  UK  as  The  Dragons  of 
Heorot,  1 995;  proof  copy 
received;  sequel  to  the  same 
authors’  The  Legacy  of  Heorot;  see 
John  Clute’s  joke  review  of  an 
imaginary  third  novel  in  the  series 
[co-authored  by  Newt  Gingrich], 
Interzone  94.)  November  1 995. 


Noon,  Jeff.  Pollen.  Ringpull 
[Albion  Wharf,  Albion  Street, 
Manchester  Ml  5LN],  ISBN  I- 
898051-1  1-9,  327pp,  hardcover, 
cover  by  Joe  Magee,  £  1 4.99.  (Sf 
novel,  first  edition;  the  author’s 
second  novel,  follow-up  to  the 
Clarke  Award-winning  Vurt; 
Ringpull  Press  went  bust  just 
around  the  time  this  was  due  to 
be  released;  however,  they  have 
now  been  revived  as  an  imprint 
of  London  publisher  Fourth 
Estate,  and  publication  of  the 
book  has  gone  ahead  — 
apparently  without  too  much 
delay.)  No  date  shown:  received  in 
May  1995. 


Norton,  Andre,  and  Mercedes 
Lackey.  Elvenblood:  Book 
Two  of  the  Halfblood 
Chronicles.  HarperCollins, 

ISBN  0-00-648028-4,  4l2pp,  A- 
format  paperback,  £5.99.  (Fantasy 
novel,  first  published  in  the  USA, 

1 995;  the  first  volume,  The 
Elvenbane,  appeared  in  1991:  the 
lengthy  hiatus  since  then, 
together  with  the  fact  that  no 
packager’s  name  is  involved, 
encourages  us  to  believe  that  this 
is  probably  a  genuine 
collaboration  and  not  a 
sharecrop.)  5th  June  1 995. 


O’Leary,  Patrick.  Door 
Number  Three.  Tor,  ISBN  0- 
312-85872-8,  384pp,  hardcover, 
$23.95.  (Sf  novel,  first  edition; 
proof  copy  received;  a  first  novel 
by  a  new  American  writer;  James 
Morrow  praises  it,  and  the  name 
of  Philip  K.  Dick  is  invoked  for 
comparison.)  November  1 995. 


Palmer,  Jessica.  Return  of  the 
Wizard:  Book  Three  in  the 
Renegades  Series.  Point 
Fantasy,  ISBN  0-590-55857-9, 
336pp,  A-format  paperback, 
cover  by  David  Wyatt,  £3.99. 
(Young-adult  fantasy  novel,  first 
edition;  Scholastic  Publications 
Ltd,  with  their  various  “Point” 
imprints  [Point  Fantasy,  Point  SF, 
Point  Horror,  Point  Crime,  etc], 
seem  to  be  churning  out  the 
books  but  unfortunately  they’re 
very  hit-and-miss  about  sending 
us  review  copies:  this  is  the  third 
volume  in  an  original  trilogy  by  a 
British-based  author  who  has 
been  published  in  Interzone,  but, 
needless  to  say,  we  never 
received  the  first  two  volumes; 
looking  at  other  recent  [unseen] 
titles  in  the  fantasy  list  in  the  back 
of  this  one,  we  note  with  interest 
The  Webbed  Hand  by  Jenny  Jones, 
an  author  of  merit  who  hitherto 
has  been  published  in  hardcover 
by  Headline  and  Gollancz.)  No 
date  shown:  received  in  May  1 995. 


Pike,  Christopher.  The  Cold 
One.  New  English  Library,  ISBN 
0-450-61358-5,  393pp,  A-format 
paperback,  cover  by  Paul  Davies, 
£4.99.  (Horror  novel,  first 
published  in  the  USA,  1995.)  15th 
June  1995. 


Rice,  Anne.  Memnoch  the 
Devil.  “Fifth  volume  of  The 
Vampire  Chronicles.”  Chatto  & 
Windus,  ISBN  0-701 1 -6320-8, 
360pp,  hardcover,  £15.99. 
(Horror  novel,  first  published  in 
the  USA,  1995;  proof  copy 
received.)  7th  September  1995. 


Rusch,  Kristine  Kathryn.  Sins  of 
the  Blood.  Millennium,  ISBN  I- 
85798-450-1,  357pp,  C-format 
paperback,  cover  by  Mark 
Harrison,  £8.99.  (Sf/horror  novel, 
first  published  in  the  USA  [?], 

1 995;  it’s  expanded  from  a  short 
story  which  appeared  in  the 
anthology  The  Ultimate  Dracula, 
1991.)  1 5th  May  1995. 


Stephenson,  Neal.  The 
Diamond  Age.  Viking,  ISBN  0- 
670-86414-5,  455pp,  hardcover, 
£9.99  (Sf  novel,  first  published  in 
the  USA,  1 995;  proof  copy 
received;  the  author’s  fourth 
novel,  and  his  second  success: 
they’re  calling  this  guy  “the 
Quentin  Tarantino  of 
postcyberpunk  sf.”)  7th 
September  1995. 


Vance,  Jack.  Alastor.  Tor,  ISBN 
0-3 1 2-85966-X,  479pp, 
hardcover,  $25.95.  (Sf  omnibus, 
first  edition;  proof  copy  received; 
it  contains  the  novels  Trullion: 
Alastor  2262  [1973],  Marune: 
Alastor  933  [1975],  and  Wyst 
Alastor  1716  [1978].)  September 
1995. 


Watson,  Ian.  The  Coming  of 
Vertumnus.  Gollancz/VGSF, 
ISBN  0-575-05921-4,  288pp,  A- 
format  paperback,  £5.99. 
(Sf/fantasy  collection,  first 
published  in  1 994;  reviewed  by 
Brian  Stableford  in  Interzone  89.) 
I  st  June  1995. 


Wentworth,  K.  D.  House  of 
Moons.  Del  Rey,  ISBN  0-345- 
39461-5,  295pp,  A-format 
paperback,  cover  by  Nicholas 
Jainschigg,  $5.50.  (Sf  novel,  first 
edition;  the  author  is  a  new 
American  writer  [female]  whose 
previous  two  novels  are  The 
Imperium  Game  and  Moonspeaker 
[both  1994].)  I  st  May  1995. 


Willey,  Elizabeth.  A  Sorcerer 
and  a  Gentleman.  Tor,  ISBN 
0-312-85783-7,  443pp, 
hardcover,  $24.95.  (Fantasy 
novel,  first  edition;  proof  copy 
received;  the  author’s  second 
book,  it  features  Prospero,  Ariel 
and  Caliban  as  characters  but 
nevertheless  seems  to  be  rather 
more  than  “a  sequel  to  The 
Tempest"  [which  is  what  Tad 
Williams’s  recent  fantasy  novel 
was].)  August  1995. 


Williams,  N.  L.  Ockham’s  Razor. 
Merlin  [40  East  St.,  Braunton, 
Devon  EX33  2EA],  ISBN  0- 
86303-717-8,  1 5 1  pp,  small-press 
paperback,  £6.95.  (Sf/fantasy 
novel,  first  edition;  it's  a  mystical 
New-Age  work  about  UFOs  by  a 
new  female  writer.)  No  date 
shown:  received  in  May  1 995. 


Wisman,  Ken.  Frost  on  the 
Window:  Fourteen  Stories  of 
Christmas.  Introduction  by 
Kristine  Kathryn  Rusch.  Pulphouse 
[Box  1227,  Eugene,  OR  97440, 
USA],  ISBN  I -56 1 46-482- 1,  141  pp, 
small-press  paperback,  cover  by 
Theresa  T roise  Heidel,  no  price 
shown.  (Sf/fantasy  collection,  first 
edition;  surprisingly,  this  is  the 
first  Pulphouse  book  we  have 
ever  received  for  review:  the 
author  kindly  sent  it  himself  [he 
had  a  couple  of  stories  in 
Interzone  some  years  ago].)  No 
date  shown:  received  in  May  1 995. 


Wolverton,  Dave.  Beyond  the 
Gate.  Tor,  ISBN  0-312-85770-5, 
347pp,  hardcover,  $22.95.  (Sf 
novel,  first  edition;  proof  copy 
received;  sequel  to  The  Golden 
Queen  in  a  Star  Wars-like  space- 
opera  series.)  August  1 995. 


Wood,  Bridget.  The  Lost 
Prince.  Del  Rey,  ISBN  0-345- 
38853-4,  472pp,  A-format  paper¬ 
back,  cover  by  Keith  Parkinson, 
$5.99.  (Fantasy  novel,  first  pub¬ 
lished  in  the  UK,  1992.)  1st  May 
1995. 


Yeovil,  Jack.  Orgy  of  the  Blood 
Parasites.  Pocket,  ISBN  0-67 1  - 
85 1 09-8,  224pp,  A-format  paper¬ 
back,  cover  by  John  Holmes,  £4.99. 
(Sf/horror  novel,  first  edition; 
“Jack  Yeovil”  is  a  pseudonym  of 
Kim  Newman;  we  believe  this  was 
his  first  novel,  written  a  decade  ago 
and  originally  entitled  Bloody  Stud¬ 
ents;  it  was  scheduled  to  appear 
from  HarperCollins  a  few  years 
ago,  but  they  decided  to  cut  back 
on  their  schlock  horror  and  so 
dropped  it;  “schlock  horror”  is 
certainly  what  it  is,  a  way-over- 
the-top  tribute  to  the  novels  of 
“Harry  Adam  Knight”  and  other 
paperback-original  sleaze 
merchants;  good  fun,  if  you’re  so 
minded.)  Late  entry:  Autumn  1 994 
publication,  received  in  May  1 995. 


Zahn,  Timothy.  Conquerors’ 
Heritage.  Bantam,  ISBN  0-553- 
56772-1,  360pp,  A-format  paper¬ 
back,  $5.99.  (Sf  novel,  first  edition; 
proof  copy  received;  this  is  prob¬ 
ably  a  sequel  to  Conquerors’  Pride, 
which  is  listed  among  the  other 
books  by  the  author;  like  the 
Wolverton  novel  [see  above],  it 
appears  to  be  Star  Wars  by  any 
other  name,  and  is  full  of  jaw¬ 
cracking  monikers:  ‘“I  want  to 
speak  with  my  brother,’  he  told 
Chrr’t-ogdano.  ‘Thrr-mezaz 
Kee’rr,  commander  of  the 
Zhirrzh  ground  warriors...”’) 
September  1995. 


BOOKS  REVIEWED  AND  RECEIVED 


This  is  a  list  of  all  books  received 
that  fall  into  those  sub-types  of  sf, 
fantasy  and  horror  which  may  be 
termed  novelizations,  recursive 
fictions,  spinoffs,  sequels  by  other 
hands,  shared  worlds  and  share- 
crops  (including  non-fiction  about 
shared  worlds,  films  and  TV,  etc.). 
The  collective  term  "Spinoffery’’  is 
used  for  the  sake  of  brevity. 


Anderson,  Kevin  J.,  ed.  Tales 
From  the  Mos  Eisley  Cantina. 

“Star  Wars.”  Bantam/Spectra, 
ISBN  0-553-56468-4,  x+386pp, 
trade  paperback,  $5.99.  (Sf 
movie-spinoff  shared-world 
anthology,  first  edition;  proof 
copy  received;  it  contains  original 
stories,  all  taking  their  inspiration 
from  that  famous  bar  scene  in 
Star  Wars,  by  David  Bischoff,  A.  C. 
Crispin,  Barbara  Hambly,  Judith  & 
Garfield  Reeves-Stevens,  Kathy 
Tyers,  Dave  Wolverton,  Timothy 
Zahn  and  others  among  the  usual 
suspects.)  September  1 995. 


Archer,  Nathan.  Concrete 
Jungle.  “Predator.”  Millennium, 
ISBN  1-85798-247-9,  306pp,  A- 
format  paperback,  cover  by  John 
Bolton,  £4.99.  (Sf  film-series 
spinoff  novel,  first  published  in 
the  USA,  1995;  it’s  based  on  a 
Dark  Horse  Comics  graphic 
novel  by  Mark  Verheiden,  itself 
inspired  by  the  20th  Century  Fox 
movies;  here  we  have  a  new 
American  writer  who  has  three 
“debut  novels”  out  more  or  less 
simultaneously  [see  following  two 
entries].)  1st  May  1995. 


Archer,  Nathan.  Ragnarok. 

“Star  Trek:  Voyager,  #3.”  Pocket, 
ISBN  0-67 1  -52044-X,  277pp,  A- 
format  paperback,  £4.50  (?).  (Sf 
TV-series  spinoff  novel,  first 
published  in  the  USA,  1 995;  this 
is  the  American  first  edition  of 
July  1 995  which  presumably  will 
appear  with  a  British  price  sticker 
[the  copy  we’ve  been  sent 
doesn’t  have  one].)  25th  July  1 995. 


Archer,  Nathan.  Valhalla.  “Star 
T rek:  Deep  Space  Nine,  #  1 0.” 
Pocket,  ISBN  0-67 1 -88 1 1 5-9, 
277pp,  A-format  paperback, 
£4.50.  (Sf  TV-series  spinoff  novel, 
first  published  in  the  USA,  1995; 
this  is  the  American  first  edition 
of  April  1 995  with  a  British  price 
sticker;  note  that  this  and  the 
previous  item  have  the  same 
author,  a  similar  title  [maybe 
Archer  is  a  Norse  mythology 
buff],  but  belong  to  quite 
different  series.)  No  date  shown: 
received  in  May  1 995. 


Barrett,  Julie.  The  A-Z  of 
Quantum  Leap.  “Based  on  the 
Universal  Television  series 
Quantum  Leap  created  by  Donald 
P.  Bellisario.”  Boxtree,  ISBN  0- 
7522-0628-1,  294pp,  B-format 
paperback,  £6.99.  (Alphabetical 
companion  to  the  time-travel  sf 
TV  series,  first  published  in  the 
USA,  1 995;  as  well  as  a  who’s 
who  and  what’s  what  of 
characters,  things,  etc.,  it  includes 
66 - 


SPINOFFERY 


an  episode  guide:  we’re 
astonished  to  discover,  though, 
that  this  contains  no  dates  of 
original  transmission,  and  no 
directors’  or  scriptwriters’  or 
actors’  names;  as  a  source  of 
hard  information  the  book  is 
rather  useless.)  1st  June  1995. 


Butcher,  Mike.  The  A-Z  of 
Judge  Dredd:  The  Complete 
Encyclopedia  from  Aaron 
Aardvark  to  Zachary  Zziiz. 

Hamlyn,  ISBN  0-600-58408-9, 

1 60pp,  very  large-format 
paperback,  cover  by  Cliff 
Robinson,  £12.99.  (Illustrated 
alphabetical  companion  to  the 
2000  A.D.  sf  comic-strip 
character  who  also  makes  his 
first  appearance  in  a  big-budget 
movie  this  summer;  first  edition; 
like  the  “Quantum  Leap”  item 
above,  this  volume,  although 
colourful  and  well  designed,  is 
also  near-useless  when  it  comes 
to  seeking  such  basic  information 
as  who  created  the  character  and 
when,  and  which  writers  and 
artists  have  perpetuated  him  over 
the  years.)  1 2th  June  1 995. 


Cornell,  Paul.  Human  Nature. 
“The  New  Doctor  Who 
Adventures.”  Virgin/Doctor 
Who,  ISBN  0-426-20443-3, 
255pp,  A-format  paperback, 
cover  by  Bill  Donohoe,  £4.99.  (Sf 
television-series  spinoff  novel, 
first  edition.)  18th  May  1995. 


Cox,  Greg,  and  John  Gregory 
Betancourt.  Devil  in  the  Sky. 
“Star  Trek:  Deep  Space  Nine, 
#11.”  Pocket,  ISBN  0-67 1  -88 1 1 4- 
9,  280pp,  A-format  paperback, 
£4.50  (?).  (Sf  TV-series  spinoff 
novel,  first  published  in  the  USA, 

1 995;  this  is  the  American  first 
edition  of  June  1995  which 
presumably  will  appear  with  a 
British  price  sticker  [the  copy 
we’ve  been  sent  doesn’t  have 
one].)  27th  June  1995. 


Day,  Martin.  The  Menagerie. 
“Doctor  Who:  The  Missing 
Adventures.”  Virgin/Doctor 
Who,  ISBN  0-426-20449-2, 
264pp,  A-format  paperback, 
cover  by  Paul  Campbell,  £4.99. 
(Sf  television-series  spinoff  novel, 
first  edition;  this  appears  to  be  a 
debut  novel  by  a  new  British 
writer.)  1 8th  May  1 995. 


Dillard,  J.  M.  Recovery.  “Star 
Trek,  #73.”  Pocket,  ISBN  0-67 1  - 
88342-9,  277pp,  A-format 
paperback,  £4.50.  (Sf  TV-series 
spinoff  novel,  first  published  in 
the  USA,  1 995;  this  is  the 
American  first  edition  of  March 
1 995  with  a  British  price  sticker.) 
No  date  shown:  received  in  May  1 995. 


Flinn,  Denny  Martin.  Recovery. 
“Star  T rek,  #74.”  Pocket,  ISBN 
0-671-89007-7,  273pp,  A-format 
paperback,  £4.50  (?).  (Sf  TV- 


series  spinoff  novel,  first 
published  in  the  USA,  1995;  it’s 
billed  as  “a  stunning  sequel  to 
Star  Trek  VI:  The  Undiscovered 
Country  by  one  of  the  writers  of 
the  film!”;  this  is  the  American 
first  edition  of  June  1995  which 
presumably  will  appear  with  a 
British  price  sticker  [the  copy 
we’ve  been  sent  doesn’t  have 
one].)  27th  June  1995. 


Friedman,  Michael  Jan.  All  Good 
Things...  “Star  Trek:  The  Next 
Generation.”  Pocket,  ISBN  0- 
67 1  -52 1 48-9,  248pp,  A-format 
paperback,  £4.50.  (Sf  TV-series 
novelization,  first  published  in  the 
USA,  1995;  note  that  this  one  is 
not  a  spinoff  novel:  it  does  not 
carry  a  series  number  and  is 
billed  as  “the  novelization  of  the 
astounding  final  episode!”;  it’s 
based  on  a  TV  script  by  Ronald 
D.  Moore  and  Brannon  Braga; 
there  are  eight  pages  of 
photographs;  this  is  the  American 
first  edition  of  April  1 995  with  a 
British  price  sticker.)  No  date 
shown:  received  in  May  1 995. 


Graf,  L.  A.  Caretaker.  “Star 
Trek:  Voyager,  #  I .”  Pocket,  ISBN 
0-67 1  -5 1 9 1 4-X,  278pp,  A-format 
paperback,  £4.50.  (Sf  TV-series 
novelization,  first  published  in  the 
USA,  1 995;  “L.  A.  Graf’ is  a 
pseudonym  for  Julia  Ecklar  and 
Karen  Rose  Cercone;  Ecklar  is  a 
contributor  to  Analog  magazine 
and  a  past  winner  of  the  John  W. 
Campbell  Award  as  best  new 
writer;  note  that  this  one  is  not  a 
spinoff  novel:  it  is  based  on  a  TV 
script  by  Michael  Piller  and  Jeri 
Taylor;  there  are  eight  pages  of 
photographs;  this  is  the  American 
first  edition  of  February  1995 
with  a  British  price  sticker.)  Date 
not  known:  bought  second-hand  in 
May  1995. 


Greenberger,  Robert.  The 
Romulan  Stratagem.  “Star 
Trek:  The  Next  Generation, 
#35.”  Pocket,  ISBN  0-671-87997- 
9,  xi+273pp,  A-format 
paperback,  £4.50  (?).  (Sf  TV- 
series  spinoff  novel,  first 
published  in  the  USA,  1995;  this 
is  the  American  first  edition  of 
May  1995  which  presumably  will 
appear  with  a  British  price  sticker 
[the  copy  we’ve  been  sent  doesn’t 
have  one].)  30th  May  1995. 


Hawke,  Simon.  Blaze  of  Glory. 
“Star  Trek:  The  Next 
Generation,  #34.”  Pocket,  ISBN 
0-671-88045-4,  277pp,  A-format 
paperback,  £4.50.  (Sf  TV-series 
spinoff  novel,  first  published  in 
the  USA,  1 995;  this  is  the 
American  first  edition  of  March 
1 995  with  a  British  price  sticker.) 
No  date  shown:  received  in  May  1 995. 


Lane,  Andy.  Original  Sin.  “The 
New  Doctor  Who  Adventures.” 
Virgin/Doctor  Who,  ISBN  0-426- 


20444- 1 ,  320pp,  A-format 
paperback,  cover  by  Tony 
Masero,  £4.99.  (Sf  television- 
series  spinoff  novel,  first  edition.) 
15  th  June  1995. 


Nemecek,  Larry.  The  Star 
T rek:  The  Next  Generation 
Companion.  “A  complete 
show-by-show  guide  to  the 
smash  television  series!  Includes 
over  150  photos!”  Simon  & 
Schuster,  ISBN  0-671-88340-2, 
339pp,  very  large-format 
paperback,  £12.99.  (Illustrated 
companion  to  the  TV  series, 
second  edition;  this  is  the 
American  printing  of  May  1 995 
with  a  UK  price  sticker;  it 
appears  to  have  been 
considerably  “revised  and 
updated  to  include  all  seven 
seasons”;  the  first  edition, 
published  in  1 992,  was  reviewed 
by  Neil  Jones  in  Interzone  72.) 
30th  May  1995. 


Richards,  Justin.  System  Shock. 
“Doctor  Who:  The  Missing 
Adventures.”  Virgin/Doctor 
Who,  ISBN  0-426-20445-X, 
309pp,  A-format  paperback, 
cover  by  Martin  Rawle,  £4.99.  (Sf 
television-series  spinoff  novel, 
first  edition.)  1 5th  June  1995. 


Shatner,  William,  with  Judith  and 
Garfield  Reeves-Stevens.  The 
Ashes  of  Eden.  “Star  Trek.” 
Simon  &  Schuster,  ISBN  0-67 1  - 
52035-0,  viii+309pp,  hardcover, 
cover  by  Bryan  D.  Allen,  £9.99. 

(Sf  TV-series  spinoff  novel,  first 
published  in  the  USA,  1995;  this 
is  the  American,  Pocket  Books, 
first  edition  with  a  British  price 
added;  after  several  months’ 
hiatus,  Simon  &  Schuster  sent  a 
big  boxful  of  “Star  Trek”  books 
to  us  all  in  one  go;  alas,  it  didn’t 
contain  the  one  we  were  most 
interested  in  seeing  —  the  recent 
“Deep  Space  Nine”  title  by  well- 
known  steampunk  author  K.  W. 
Jeter;  Simon  &  Schuster  are  also 
releasing  two-cassette  audio¬ 
book  versions  of  most  of  their 
“Trek”  titles,  read  by  various 
actors  associated  with  the  TV 
series  and  priced  at  £7.99  each; 
they  sent  us  half  a  dozen, 
included  a  recording  of  the  Jeter 
[which  is  called  Warped],  but  we 
don’t  have  room  to  list  them 
here.)  27th  June  1995. 


Smith,  Dean  Wesley,  and  Kristine 
Kathryn  Rusch.  The  Escape. 
“Star  T rek:  Voyager,  #2.”  Pocket, 
ISBN  0-671-52096-2,  244pp,  A- 
format  paperback,  £4.50.  (Sf  TV- 
series  spinoff  novel,  first 
published  in  the  USA,  1995;  this 
is  the  American  first  edition  of 
May  1 995  with  a  British  price 
sticker;  gosh,  even  the  editor  of 
The  Magazine  of  Fantasy  and 
Science  Fiction  is  writing  “Star 
Trek”  novels  now;  but,  as  well  as 
Rusch  and  Jeter,  old-timers  are 
getting  in  on  the  act  too  -  there’s 
a  “Deep  Space  Nine”  title  by 
Robert  Sheckley  advertised  for 
September.)  No  date  shown: 
received  in  May  1 995. 


THE  UNLIMITED  DREAM 
COMPANY:  imported  books  and 
magazines  for  sale:  Aphelion  titles  including 
Mirrorsun  Rising  by  Sean  McMullen;  & 
others,  e.g.  the  outstanding  anthologies 
Alien  Shores  &  Metaworlds:  Best  Australian  SF. 
From  America,  the  brilliant  SF  Eye,  etc.  For 
details  send  SAE  to  THE  UNLIMITED 
DREAM  COMPANY,  127  Gaisford  St., 
Kentish  Town,  London  NW5  2EG. 

MAELSTROM  NO.  7  contains  stories  by 
Garry  Kilworth,  Nicholas  Royle,  Nik  Morton, 
Kenneth  Harker  and  others,  plus  reviews, 
letters  and  poems.  £  1 .80  post  free  from 
Sol  Publications,  58  Malvern,  Coleman  St., 
Southend-on-Sea,  Essex  SS2  5AD. 

NEW  WORDS,  The  Magazine  of  Fantastic 
Fiction:  “I  wonder  what  men  are  afraid  of... 
Any  new  departure,  and  especially  a  new 
word  —  that  is  what  they  fear  most  of  all” 
(Dostoevsky,  Crime  and  Punishment).  Realist 
and  experimental  writing,  SF,  fantasy, 
speculative.  Brilliant  and  transient.  £2  and 
25p  stamp  to  I  Chelwood  Close, 
Hollingbury,  Brighton  BN  I  8FN.  Cheques 
payable  to  Steven  Gilligan. 

FOR  SALE:  SF/F,  horror,  mysteries,  etc. 
Books,  magazines,  comics.  Thousands.  Free 
search.  Buying,  trading.  Write:  JS,  1500 
Main  Avenue,  Kaukauna,  Wl  54 1 30,  USA. 

HARM’S  WAY  -  “What  if  Charles 
Dickens  had  written  a  space  opera?” 

(Locus)  -  large  paperback,  £3.50.  The  Hour 
of  the  Thin  Ox  and  Other  Voices,  paperbacks, 
£1.50  each.  Prices  include  postage.  Colin 
Greenland,  2a  Ortygia  House,  6  Lower 
Road,  Harrow,  Middx.  HA2  0DA. 

ALBEDO  ONE  —  Ireland’s  premier 
magazine  of  sf  and  speculative  fiction.  #7 
now  available:  fiction,  art  showcase, 
reviews,  letters.  Kim  Newman  interviewed. 
£2.50  (£8  for  four-issue  subscription).  2 
Post  Road,  Lusk,  Co.  Dublin,  Ireland. 


SMALL 

ADS 

WANTED:  Earthsearch  by  James  Follett 
(BBC  Publications,  1981/82),  hardback  in  a 
nice  clean  jacket.  J.  Ingham,  41  Rosemary 
Avenue,  Lower  Earley,  Reading  RG6  5YQ. 
Tel.  01 734-869071. 

SF/HORROR/CRIME  and  vintage 
paperback  firsts  catalogue.  Also  collectors’ 
books  and  price  guides,  plus  Paperback, 
Pulp  &  Comic  Collector  magazine  (£3.50  inc, 
p&p).  Send  two  24p  stamps  to  Zardoz 
Books,  20  Whitecroft,  Dilton  Marsh, 
Wiltshire  BA  1 3  4DJ. 

CRITICAL  ASSEMBLY  I  &  II: 

both  volumes  of  Hugo-winner  David 
Langford’s  legendary  sf  review  columns. 

All  revised/reset;  each  volume  70,000 
words  softbound.  Each  £9.75  post  free 
from  David  Langford,  94  London  Rd., 
Reading  RG I  5AU  (e-mail 
ansible@cix.compulink.co.uk). 

“SCHEHERAZADE  9  WAS  A 
DELIGHT,”  said  Gene  Wolfe.  “Very 
much  a  reader’s  magazine.  Recommended 
for  fireside  reading,”  said  Interzone.  The 
best  in  fantasy  and  SF  are  here  to  stay! 
Issue  1 1  includes  stories  by  Brian 
Stableford  and  Lawrence  Dyer,  and 
masterly  illustrations  by  Noel  Bateman, 
Brian  Combe  and  Margaret  Theakston. 
Available  from  Scheherazade,  St  Ives, 
Maypole  Road,  East  Grinstead  RHI9  IHL. 
£7.50  (£8.50  overseas)  for  four-issue 
subscription;  £  1 .99  (£2.30  overseas)  for  a 
single  issue.  Cheques  (sterling  only) 
payable  to  Scheherazade.  Subscribe  now 
before  price  rise. 


“VERY  IMPRESSED”  -  really 
exceptionally  good”  -  “nicely  readable  and 
varied.”  Some  of  the  responses  to  issue  I 
of  Paul  Beardsley’s  Substance  magazine, 
featuring  Stephen  Baxter,  Ben  Jeapes  and 
Lannah  Battley.  £9  for  a  four-issue 
subscription  or  £2.50  for  a  single  issue, 
cheques  payable  to  Neville  Barnes  at  65 
Conbar  Avenue,  Rustington,  West  Sussex 
BN  1 6  3LZ. 

DAY  FOR  WRITERS:  October  7  1995, 
Northbrook  College,  Durrington  Site, 
Worthing.  £26  inc.  lunch.  Simon  Brett, 
Wendy  Perriam  —  Novels,  Radio,  TV.  Bob 
Shaw  —  SF  &  Fantasy.  Also  Writing  for 
Magazines,  Children,  Mass  Market  Fiction, 
From  Your  Own  Experience,  Poetry. 
Competitions.  SAE  for  brochure:  A 
Garner,  225  Brighton  Road,  Worthing,  W. 
Sussex  BN  1 1  2EY.  Tel.:  01903  201923. 

THE  THIRD  ALTERNATIVE:  award¬ 
winning  glossy  magazine  of  quality  science 
fiction  and  fantasy.  Issue  six  out  now: 
brilliant  new  stories,  superbly  illustrated. 
£2.50  (£9  for  four),  from  5  Martins  Lane, 
Witcham,  Ely,  Cambs.  CB6  2LB. 

BRIGHTON  AREA  readers  of  Interzone 
are  welcome  to  join  us  on  Friday  nights  at 
The  Mitre,  a  friendly  pub  on  Baker  Street 
(near  the  Open  Market).  A  few  of  us  meet 
from  9- 1  I  pm,  in  the  smaller  of  the  two 
rooms,  for  informal  drink  and  chat.  You’ll 
recognize  us  by  the  copies  of  IZ  or  other  sf 
publications  lying  around  -  so  come  along 
and  make  yourselves  known.  (Editors.) 

SMALL  ADS  in  Interzone  reach  over 
1 0,000  people.  If  you  wish  to  advertise 
please  send  your  ad  copy,  together  with 
payment,  to  Interzone,  2 1 7  Preston  Drove, 
Brighton  BN  I  6FL,  UK.  Rates:  25  pence 
per  word,  minimum  often  words,  discount 
of  1 0%  for  insertions  repeated  in  three 
issues  (VAT  is  inclusive). 


COMING  NEXT  MONTH 

Surprise!  We  have  a  rare  piece  of  fiction  by  Christopher  Priest 
(author  of  Inverted  World ,  The  Affirmation ,  The  Glamour ,  The 
Quiet  Woman,  etc).  Also  new  stories  by  American  writer  Scott 
Baker,  Hugo-nominated  Brian  Stableford  and  others,  plus  all 
our  usual  features  and  reviews.  So  watch  out  for  the 
September  Interzone,  on  sale  in  August  —  and  stay  with  us 
for  our  special  hundredth  issue,  the  following  month. 


67 


Let  your  imagination  Soar 


BARBARA  HAMBLY 

bmw# 


BARBARA  HAMBLY 

BRIDE  Of  THE 


Chrysanda  Flamande  is  the  sultriest  star  of  the  silent  screen.  Then  an  elderly  Chinaman  warns 
her  that  the  fabulous  necklace  she  wore  in  her  latest  Hollywood  triumph  has  marked  her  to 
become  the  bride  of  an  ancient  devil-god  Manchuria.  When  those  around  her  start  to  die  in 
mysterious  ways,  Chris  and  her  friends  must  thwart  the  magical  powers  and  monstrous 
guile  of  a  fiendish  creature  that  haunts  her  every  move... 

“Comes  very  close  to  being 
Hambly’s  best  book” 

**  I  a  Science  Fiction  Chronicle 

ISBN  1-85487-418-7 
£4.99  July 


AN  EPIC  FANTAST  FOR  THE  HILLENNIUH 


% 


Yellow  Fog 


les  Daniels 

As  blood-drinker  Don  Sebastain  searches  for 
sanctuary  amongst  the  gaslight  and  hansome 
cabs  of  Victorian  London,  can  even  a  vampire's 
kiss  ensure  eternal  love? 
“REWARDING,  CREEPY 
AND  FUN!” 

Stephen  King 

ISBN  1-85487-349-0  £4.99  MAY 


Upland  Outlaws 

Part  Two  of  a  Handful  of  Men 

Dave  Duncan 

High  fantasy  and  adventure  when  a  dwarf-sorcerer 
places  a  magical  substitute  on  the  throne,  and 
no-one  warns  to  start  a  revolution. 

“YOU  I  WILL  RAVE  ABOUT!” 
Anne  McCaffrey 
ISBN  1-85487-352-0 
£4.99  June 


A  Calculated 
Magician 

Robert  Weinberg 

More  magic  and  mirth,  as  Merlin  sends  Jack 
Collins  and  his  mythological  companions  to  Las 
Vagas  to  battle  the  assembled  forces  of  darkness. 
“A  GREAT  READ!” 

f.  Paul  Wilson 
ISBN  1-85487-350-4 
£4.99  August 


0 


The  New  Name 

In  Fantasy 
&  horror 


Available  from  leading  booksellers 

Raven  is  an  imprint  of  Robinson  Publishing,  7  Kensington  Church  Court,  London  W8  4SP 


