HOME
SEARCH
contact
SUBSCRIBE TO NEWSLETTER
SHOP
J.R.R. TOLKIEN & HIS WORKS
COLLECTING TOLKIEN BOOKS
ARTICLES & REVIEWS
NEWS HEADLINES
TOLKIEN BOOK SHOP
SUPPORT US
Tuesday 28 July 2015 - Tolkien Calendar 2016: Illustrated by Tove Jansson
Monday 27 July 2015 - The Amateur Lord of the Rings
Friday 17 July 2015 - J.R.R. Tolkien a writer of note
Friday 17 July 2015 - Why tolkien's books are so popular Among the Students
Thursday 16 July 2015 - The world first publication of a previously unknown work by J.R.R. Tolkien,The Story of Kullervo
Thursday 11 June 2015 - Rare The History of Middle Earth, all 3 Limited Deluxe Editions in Publishers Slipcase
Saturday 6 June 2015 - Signed copy of the Hobbit sells for record at auction
Sunday 3 May 2015 - On the shores of the shoreless sea
Sunday 19 January 2015 - New Collector Profile added - Giulio Torlai
Saturday 29 November 2014 - Back to the past - Simon J. Cook on Tolkien and History
Tuesday 7 October 2014 - Will we ever see The Silmarillion on the big screen?
SHOW ALL ARTICLES Subscribe in a reader
Interview with Douglas C. Kane on Arda Reconstructed: The Creation of the Published Silmarillion (09.03.09 by Pieter Collier) -
Comments
Once in a while there are written books that come forth from a very deep love for Tolkien and his mythology. One of these books is Arda Reconstructed: The Creation of the Published Silmarillion by Douglas C. Kane, the co-founder of the Tolkien internet discussion site thehalloffire.net . Here follows more info on this book, that every serious Tolkien fans should have, and an interview with the author.
In Arda Reconstructed: The Creation of the Published Silmarillion , Douglas C. Kane shows us the changes, omissions, and additions that were made to tolkien's work by his son Christopher Tolkien (with the assistance of the writer Guy Kay) in preparing the Silmarillion for publication, and traces how the disparate source materials were used to create what is in essence a complex composite work.
He compares the published text with the source texts contained in the volumes of The History of Middle-earth , and other books by Tolkien, to identify the patterns of major and minor changes made to these source materials that result in the reconstruction of the finished Silmarillion .
He also cites the works of some of the most important Tolkien scholars, including Tom Shippey, Verlyn Flieger, Christina Scull, Wayne Hammond, Charles Noad, and David Bratman, in an attempt to understand and explain why these changes may have been made.
Very interesting is that supplementing the text of Arda Reconstructed there are 25 detailed tables. The first table provides the dates that each of the source texts that were used in the creation of the published Silmarillion were written. The last table provides the different versions of names of people, places and things that were used in the source texts.
In between, the other 23 tables trace paragraph by paragraph the source material used to create the published texts, showing both the primary source for each paragraph, and the secondary sources used to merge material into the primary sources for each paragraph. These tables provide a key resource for anyone interested in tracing in detail how the published Silmarillion was created.
DOUGLAS C. KANE SIGNED STICKER GIVEAWAY!
The author of Arda Reconstructed: The Creation of the Published Silmarillion, Douglas C. Kane , has been so kind to sent over some signed stickers to stick inside your copy of the book. If you are interested to have a signed Douglas C. Kane sticker please send me an email with your postal address and I'll be happy to sent you one over. ALSO please sent me reviews of this book and I'll be happy to post them at my website.
When you read what the book is all about you should by now be convinced to buy a copy and read it, for sure I have already ordered mine. Here follows an interview with the author Douglas C. Kane (DK) on this fabulous new book.
TL: Could you please tell us a little about yourself?
DK: Sure! I have what some people consider a rather unusual set of interests. Professionally, I am a civil rights attorney specializing in representing employees in discrimination and harassment cases here in Santa Cruz, California, where I live. But I also teach and perform West African percussion music. And, of course, I have been a Tolkien enthusiast for over 30 years.
TL: Some might know you under the name "Voronwe_the_Faithful", why did you choose this nickname?
DK: When I first joined a Tolkien discussion board, I wanted to choose a nickname that I felt reflected my personality. Service to others has always been very important to me, and I felt that that was well represented by the
way that Voronwë faithfully guided Tuor to Gondolin in the tale "Tuor and
his Coming to Gondolin," printed in _ Unfinished Tales _. Also, Voronwë's
descriptions of the bright stars "upon the margin of the world, when at
times the clouds about the West were drawn aside," and of the willows of
Nan-tathren, have long been among my favorite passages in tolkien's works.
TL: You are the author of 'Arda Reconstructed: The Creation of the Published
Silmarillion' could you tell us what this book is about?
DK: It is an attempt to trace how Christopher Tolkien created the published
_ Silmarillion _ (with the help of Guy Kay), from the unfinished works left
behind by his father. Christopher himself made this effort possible by
publishing the bulk of those unfinished works. I went through _ The Silmarillion _ paragraph by
paragraph, comparing the text with the constituent source texts printed in
_ The History of Middle-earth _, as well as in _ Unfinished Tales _, _ The Children of Húrin _, and in one case, Tolkien’s letters . I then made an
effort to explore how the editorial decisions influenced the final product.
I can honestly say that some of the results were quite surprising.
TL: What surprises me is that this book originally started as a thread on a
Tolkien board, when and why did the idea come of making it into a book?
DK: Yes, that is quite true; it started at as a discussion at thehalloffire.net ,
the Tolkien board that I run. Someone asked the question "who actually
wrote _ The Silmarillion _" and we came up with the idea of systematically
comparing the book to the source materials that were available. But when push came to shove, I was the only one who followed through.. Over time, as I persisted through the project, more and more people began telling me that they felt that the information that I was gathering was valuable, and
should be shared with a wider audience. When I finished going through the
text, I decided to go ahead and prepare a manuscript to submit to
publishers. Eventually, the Lehigh University Press agreed to publish it.
TL: Did you have any access to unpublished documents?
DK: I did not. Any relevant unpublished documents are either housed in the
Bodleian Library at Oxford, or are still in Christopher tolkien's
possession. Being an attorney in California with a busy practice, I would
not have been able to take the time to travel to England or France to review
these documents, even in the unlikely event that I had been granted
permission to do so. And truthfully doing so would mostly have involved
duplicating the extensive work that Christopher has already done so
admirably. The fact that I was able to trace so much of the published text
to the source materials available to me shows that to be true. Honestly, I
believe that the most valuable unpublished source material that was not
available to me is the information stored in Christopher's mind. Perhaps,
however, there will be an opportunity for a follow-up work by either myself
or some other Tolkien scholar with access to the unpublished documents.
TL: How did you get interested in the Silmarillion anyways?
DK: I first encountered _ The Silmarillion _ as a young man in my twenties. I had
already been a big fan of _ The Lord of the Rings _ and _ The Hobbit _ since I
was a child, but this was something else altogether. From the first words of
the _Ainulindalë_ I was hooked. I had never encountered anything quite like
it, and I can honestly say that it has had more influence on me then any
other single piece of literature. I proceeded to devour _ Unfinished Tales _
and each volume of _ The History of Middle-earth _, with ever-increasing
wonder at the true scope of tolkien's creation.
TL: What special qualifications do you have for making this study? What makes
you different from your colleagues?
DK: I don't know that I can say that I have "special qualifications" other than
simply the persistence to stick with it. Certainly as an attorney I have a
lot experience in engaging in very detailed research, and in applying facts
to make an argument. But I think the main qualification that I have, and
the main reason why I was able to persevere, is simply that I love the
material so much.
TL: What is the big difference between your book and other books like the
history of Middle-earth?
DK: Well, _ The History of Middle-earth _ books trace in amazing detail the
history of J.R.R. tolkien's work creating his legendarium. But it really
only gives a few hints here and there about Christopher's work in creating
the published _ Silmarillion _. There really is not any work comparable to
_Arda Reconstructed_ that I am aware of. Charles Noad has an excellent
essay in the book _tolkien's Legendarium_ called "On the Construction of
'The Silmarillion'" which delves into the subject to some extent. And Wayne
Hammond and Christina Scull's massive _ J.R.R. Tolkien Companion and Guide _
has entries on the individual chapters of _ The Silmarillion _ which give
brief overviews of the source material used to create them. But neither
explores the subject to nearly the depth that I have done, and neither
attempts to look in detail at how the editorial decisions affected the final
product.
TL: To write this book, did you work alone or did you have help of other
Tolkien scholars?
DK: I mostly worked alone. I did get some very helpful suggestions and advice
from a few Tolkien scholars, including Don Anger, Merlin DeTardo, Bill
Hicklin and Jason Fisher, as well as my colleagues at thehalloffire.net. In
addition, David Bratman twice read the manuscript for the Lehigh University
Press, and provided indispensable suggestions for improvements.
TL: The illustrations were made by Breogan a fairly unknown Tolkien artist,
how did this cooperation work?
DK: I feel incredibly blessed to have had the opportunity to work with Breogan.
And not just because her illustrations are so beautiful and highly detailed.
It is axiomatic that Tolkien fans all have our own individual visions of how
the people and places in his universe look. And yet to a very great extent,
Breogan's illustrations seem to be taken directly from my own mind. I still
can't get over just how accurately they capture my own imagination of how
the scenes depicted should look. It has surpassed my wildest expectations.
TL: This book must have meant a lot of research? How long did it take to
make this book?
DK: It did take a lot of research. The initial process of tracing the source
material paragraph by paragraph took about 8 months. It then took another 3
or 4 months to prepare the initial draft of the manuscript. After I
submitted that to Lehigh University Press they had David Bratman read the
manuscript, and he provided some extensive suggestions for revising the
manuscript. That required an extensive rewrite that took an additional 3
months or so. Then, after it was accepted for publication, it has required
additional work over the course of the past year as a result of reviewing
the copyediting, and the page proofs. The final big (and very important!)
task was preparing the Index. All told, it will have been almost exactly three years
from the time I first began the project to the time that it is available for
purchase.
TL: How long did it take Breogan to illustrate it and make the fabulous
cover?
DK: I can't really answer that with specificity. But I can say that each
illustration took a long time to complete, because they are all so
extraordinarily detailed. And the cover illustration perhaps most of all.
It is beautiful, isn't it?
TL: I read the book has not been endorsed by the Tolkien Estate, do you now
hope that you will somehow be asked by Christopher Tolkien to work further
on the topic?
DK: I would certainly be honored if he did so, but I can't say that I expect it
to happen. I do want to say that I have a tremendous amount of respect for
Christopher Tolkien, and gratitude to him for his extraordinary efforts to
bring the full scope of his father's work to light as much as possible.
TL: What are your expectations for this book?
DK: I honestly don't know what to expect. I do hope, however, that it helps
gives people a greater appreciation for and understanding of the work of
both J.R.R and Christopher Tolkien. And that it perhaps helps to open the
door to further _ Silmarillion _ scholarship.
TL: The book should be available already through Amazon, when do you think
it will be shipped out?
DK: According to my publisher, it should be available for shipping from Amazon
no later than mid- to late-March. So very soon!
TL: A final question, are there any plans for other Tolkien related
publications?
DK: I plan to submit a paper for presentation at the upcoming Mythopoeic Society
conference, expanding on my discussion of the Second Prophecy of Mandos in
_Arda Reconstructed_. Beyond that, there are a couple of subjects that I am
interested in exploring in depth, but nothing that I am prepared to talk
about at this point
Title: Arda Reconstructed: The Creation of the Published Silmarillion
Type: Hardback Edition
Extent: 280 pages
Format: 23.4 x 15.5 x 2.3 cm
Publisher: Lehigh University Press
Publication date: 15 Mar 2009
Language: English
ISBN-10: 0980149630
ISBN-13: 978-0980149630
Enjoyed this post? Click to get the RSS feed .
Spread the news about this J.R.R. Tolkien article:
Spread the news about this J.R.R. Tolkien article:
