 

 Houseguest Episode 3: Simon Vance 

 Subscribe Sign in 

 Houseguest

 Houseguest Episode 3: Simon Vance

 33

 6

 1×

 0:00

 Current time: 0:00 / Total time: -1:07:53

 -1:07:53

 Audio playback is not supported on your browser. Please upgrade. 

 Houseguest Episode 3: Simon Vance

 On audiobooks, AI, inspiration, and art.

 Colin Meloy and Carson Ellis 

 Jan 18, 2023 

 33

 6

 Share

 Another episode of Houseguest has arrived, in which we continue to eschew the original concept of the podcast, that we interview people that are staying at our house, and instead just interview people . This was a lovely conversation with one of my favorite audiobook narrators: Simon Vance. Vance is the reader of over 1,000 audiobooks and is a 17-time Audie winner (making him the Meryl Streep of the audiobook world). He is currently engaged in reading all of Charles Dickens to me. 

 This also happens to be the longest Houseguest episode to date, clocking in at just over an hour, but it was such a treat to be able to hang with Vance and ask all those questions I’d had about what it is to be an audiobook narrator , that we kinda lost track of time. Enjoy! 

 As promised, here are the links to the books Simon recommended: 
 Guy Gavriel Kay 
 Brent Weeks 

 Also mentioned: 
 Great Expectations, by Charles Dickens 
 Nicholas Nickleby, by Charles Dickens 
 Bring Up the Bodies, by Hilary Mantel 
 The Unconsoled, by Kazuo Ishiguro 
 The Dune Books, by Frank Herbert 

 Discussion about this episode

 Comments Restacks 

 Houseguest

 The podcast where Colin Meloy and Carson Ellis interview the people who sleep over at their house.

 The podcast where Colin Meloy and Carson Ellis interview the people who sleep over at their house. 

 Subscribe 

 Listen on

 Substack App

 RSS Feed

 Appears in episode

 Colin Meloy 

 Carson Ellis 

 Writes Slowpoke Subscribe 

 Recent Episodes

 Houseguest Ep 2: Kate Beaton 

 Dec 16, 2022   •   Colin Meloy  and  Carson Ellis 

 Introducing: Houseguest Episode 1 

 Apr 21, 2022   •   Colin Meloy 

 Ready for more?

 Subscribe 

 © 2026 Colin Meloy · Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection notice 

 Start your Substack Get the app 

 Substack is the home for great culture

