

 Warning : Undefined property: stdClass::$body in /home/yourstra/public_html/podcast/wp-content/plugins/wp-hide-post/admin/license/LicenseItem.php on line 378 

 Listen Now: Narrator Simon Vance on Feeding the Birds and Wanting More 

 The Working Actor's Journey 

 Start 

 Programs 

 Podcast 

 Blog 

 About 

 Advertise 

 Resources 

 Contact 

 Ep #23: Simon Vance (1000+ Audiobooks: Millennium series, Sherlock Holmes, Jerusalem, The King’s Speech, The Tao of Pooh) on Feeding the Birds, Pushing Yourself, and Wanting More

 Published December 10, 2019 | Last Updated February 21, 2026 Leave your thoughts » 

 Listen now...

 More options and info below! 

 Warning : Undefined variable $locale in /home/yourstra/public_html/podcast/wp-content/themes/agency-pro/functions.php on line 155 

 I thought being an actor wasn’t for grown-up people, but it didn’t matter whether I considered it that—I discovered it was essential for my soul that I threw myself into this.  — Simon Vance 

 If you’re looking for what it takes to be an actor long-term, over the course of your LIFE, then you’ve come to the right place , and you’re going to really enjoy today’s episode!

 Perhaps you thought that acting couldn’t really be your job , but you still felt it in your soul it’s what you wanted to do—or maybe you’ve experienced some huge and life-altering changes and are unsure where it’s going to lead. Our guest today went through all of that, and has become one of the top performers in his industry—and he continues to push himself!

 Today on the show is actor and narrator Simon Vance . With over 1000 audiobooks recorded in his career, he has narrated such a diverse range of works, from George R.R. Martin and Steig Larsson’s Millennium series (which we discuss), to Brent Weeks and Charles Dickens!

 He’s also focused on getting back in front of the camera as an actor , which we talk about at length because of how much success he’s had in audiobooks, and he still wants to explore new territory!

 We cover a lot of ground, particularly all the years leading up to audiobook work, which Simon shares is often skipped over in other interviews, and that’s exactly why I do this —to talk about as much of the journey as we can, not just the part people might already know!

 Simon’s got a wonderful story to share, including a move to a new continent, practically not knowing anyone, and having quite a tough time breaking into the business . And from hearing Simon’s audio work, you might not know he’s been the wild one of his family, including being part of a rock band at Leeds University!

 I definitely need to thank Kristine Oller (whom you heard on this show talking Cashflow for Creatives last season) for recommending and connecting me to Simon . Of course I knew about him as one of the top narrators out there, and I was quite thrilled to have this opportunity to find out more about the man behind the voice. As usual, there’s such a fascinating story, and I have even more admiration and respect for Simon’s career!

 Just a bit of what we cover in this episode with Simon: 

 What he initially studied at University that didn’t work out

 All the twists and turns and decisions that led him to a job at the BBC

 The weekend workshop that really opened his eyes to being an artist

 The struggles he faced as an actor when first moving to California

 Being nervous before starting to record an audiobook

 His new challenge of getting better as an on-screen actor in film and TV

 And so much more! Simon is wonderfully open about the lack of clarity in his early years, the not knowing, and the challenging relationships. While it hasn’t always been easy, he also has some fantastic ideas and insights on what has worked for him along the way!

 Plus, Simon even shares how he worked on a practically unreadable chapter in Alan Moore’s Jerusalem , so don’t miss that!

 About the guest

 Simon Vance was born in Brighton, England and as part of his early years, attended the local School of Music and Drama. He went to Leeds University, becoming part of the student TV/radio network, and afterward, worked at BBC Radio Brighton, which led to BBC London and Radio 4, the national speech-based network.

 He found he had a knack for audiobooks by working for the Talking Book Service of the Royal National Institute for the Blind. After moving to the Bay Area, he worked on stage and a bit on camera before finding audiobooks, which eventually really took off!

 He currently has 16 Audie Awards, including for The Tao of Pooh , Great Expectations , The King’s Speech , The Complete Sherlock Holmes , and Alan Moore’s Jerusalem . He is also the recipient of 70 Earphone Awards, including for many of the books just mentioned along with The Wind in the Willows , The Prestige , and Dracula . He was chosen as Booklist Magazine’s inaugural “Voice of Choice”, is an AudioFile Magazine “Golden Voice”, and is in the Audible “Hall of Fame”.

 I am really honored to have someone on the show who is so accomplished in audiobooks, especially when it’s a medium I’m working in and developing my own skills and career. Simon, like with our past guest and narrator Ray Porter , may set a high bar, but as they say—it’s certainly achievable!

 Please enjoy my chat with Simon Vance!

 Total Running Time: 2:00:12 

 Stream by  clicking here .

 Download as an MP3 by  right-clicking here and choosing “save as/save link as”.

 Get the show delivered right to you!

 Want to hear from another award-winning audiobook narrator? Check out my talk with Ray Porter !

 What was your favorite quote or lesson from this episode?  Please let us know in the comments . 

 Scroll below for links mentioned in today’s episode and additional show notes…

 Grab the NEW FREE GUIDE: 10 Ways to Stop Worrying and Start Working! 

 Discover the MINDSET of WORKING Actors! 

 Inside are 10 specific ways you can STOP worrying and START working when it comes to being an actor!

 Hear thoughts, ideas, and advice from those who have been acting 40+ years—taken from excerpts from podcast episodes.

 These guests don’t know everything, nor is everything easy—they just have been around long enough to have figured out a few things, and they are sharing this with you. Get your copy of the guide now! 

 Are you looking for more about being a working actor?

 If you’re enjoying these episodes, I want to let you know you can become a premium member of the show and there are a number of different perks, including bonus episodes, exclusive opportunities, and more.

 Members can hear additional conversations with past guests Robert Pine, Dawn Didawick, Richard Riehle, and Tony-Winner Reed Birney !

 A special shout-out to our members at the Co-Star level or higher: Adam, Jeff, Robert, Ken, and Ralph! Thrilled that you all are members!

 Show Notes

 Simon Vance around the web

 His Site | Twitter | Facebook | Wikipedia | Film/TV | Additional Theatre 

 Simon’s Audiobook Items

 Audible Hall of Fame | Audiofile Magazine “Golden Voice” 

 Simon’s “other” voices: as Richard Matthews | as Robert Whitfield | as Michael Gibbs (some of his earliest work!)

 Highlights

 Is Simon an expat or an American citizen?

 Taking holiday back to the “old country”

 “London-by-the-Sea”: how Brighton, UK came to prominence

 What his parents and grandparents did for a living

 Starting classes at the Brighton School of Music and Drama

 The fascination he had and the career he wanted to do when he was young

 What he initially studied at University (and didn’t work out)

 How he got connected with BBC Brighton and started working there

 Getting involved with student TV and radio programs at University

 Even with an Economics degree, working for the Leeds bus company

 Getting his first permanent, full-time job at the BBC

 Neil Gaiman’s 3 stool legs

 The trap that a lot of actors can fall into: the why?

 Getting into Radio 4 at the BBC in London

 Taking acting classes while working at the BBC

 The moment he realized he wanted to be an actor

 The weekend workshop that really opened his eyes to being an artist

 How his free spirit and risk-taking caused friction with his brother

 Audiobooks being the culmination of several lifelong skills he developed

 How a London production of Kiss Me Kate eventually led him to the US

 The struggles he faced as an actor when first moving to California

 How he got started with commercial audiobooks

 Applying for back-up jobs in the late 90s, post-divorce and after bankruptcy

 All the valleys that can come up throughout your life (not just in your 20s or 30s)

 Focusing on the things that need to be done that can ground you

 How Steve Jobs and the iPod changed Simon’s life

 Working hard at “not sucking” [his opinion] in front of the camera

 How to deal with the pressure of recording famous audiobooks

 Working on the Millennium series by Stieg Larsson

 Why he feels confident with audiobooks vs. onstage or on camera

 The research and immense work that went into the audiobook of Jerusalem by Alan Moore

 The “practically unreadable” chapter that Alan Moore wrote

 Making sense of unusual spellings, and dialogue without punctuation in The Wake 

 What makes good narration and why is he always nervous with a new book?

 The challenge of being successful in audiobooks to starting new with on-camera work

 How he got involved hosting the Audie Awards

 What he knows needs to be done for his on-camera career

 How he feels about the awards he’s received and books that have been special to him

 Finding time to read for fun and books that have impacted him

 Selected People and Items Mentioned

 Brighton and Hove, UK 

 All Our Yesterdays (TV program)

 Royal Air Force 

 Christopher Slade , Simon’s friend at BBC Brighton

 Piers Bishop , artist

 Leeds University 

 Leeds Student Television (formerly “Network 4”) at Leeds

 Michael Graham Cox , in the original broadcast of The Lord of the Rings on Radio 4

 The BGB Studio , with Risa Bramon Garcia and Steve Braun

 Radio 4 at the BBC 

 Royal National Institute’s “Books for the Blind” 

 The Actors Centre in London 

 Hampstead Heath 

 The Actors’ Institute (now The TAI Group)

 Esalen Institute 

 Khalil Gibran’s The Prophet 

 Robert Heinlein , author

 Simon narrating the Helliconia series from decades ago 

 Guildhall School of Music and Drama 

 Berkeley Repertory Theatre 

 British Equity (Artists Union)

 Marin Theatre Company 

 Betrayal with Tom Hiddleston 

 Tony Robbins , author and life/business strategist

 Prozac medication

 Rod Stewart’s autobiography (with Simon narrating)

 Stephen Fry , actor/narrator

 Jim Dale , actor/narrator

 Millennium Series of books (Simon narrating)

 Dallas after J.R. was shot 

 Jerusalem by Alan Moore 

 Northampton 

 Audio Publishers Association Conference 

 Finnegans Wake by James Joyce 

 The Wake by Paul Kingsnorth (narrated by Simon)

 Case White: The Invasion of Poland 1939 by Robert Forczyk (narrated by Simon)

 Audie Awards 

 AudioFile Magazine 

 The Sandman by Neil Gaiman , a comic book series

 Christopher Priest’s The Prestige 

 Simon on narrating (children’s) classics

 The beginning of “Around the Bend”—the “unreadable chapter” in Alan Moore’s Jerusalem  

[accordion clicktoclose=”true”][accordion-item title=”+ click to view/close the monologue” id=jerusalem state=closed] Awake, Lucia gets up wi’ the wry sing of de light. She is a puzzle, shore enearth, as all the Nurzis and the D’actors would afform, but nibber a cross word these days, deepindig on her mendication and on every workin’ grimpill’s progress. Her arouse from drowse is like a Spring, a babboling book that gorgles up amist the soils o’ sleep, flishing and glattering, to mate the mournin’ son. Canfind in this loquation now she gushes and runs chinkling from her silt and softy bed, pooring her harp out down an illside and aweigh cross the old manscape to a modhouse brookfast. Ah, what a performance, practised and applausible. She claps her hands, over her ears, to drone out all the deadful wile-ing and the sorey implecations of whor farmlay. With her bunyans all complainin’ she escapes the Settee o’ Destraction and beguines her evrydaily Millgrimage towar’s ridemption or towords the Wholly Sea; to wards, the tranquilisity of night.

[/accordion-item]
[/accordion] Share this episode: bit.ly/waj-vance 

 Thanks for checking out the show!

 To share your thoughts: 

 Leave a comment on YouTube or in the comment section below.

 Connect with WAJ on Facebook and Instagram .

  To help out the show: 

 If you love this show, please leave an honest review. You can click right here and follow the simple instructions. Your ratings and reviews really help and I read each one. Thank you!

  Get the show delivered right to you!

 Filed Under: Episodes , Podcast Tagged With: audiobooks , auditions , awards , bay area , bbc , blind , brighton , california , film , london , los angeles , narrator , radio , san francisco , theatre , tv 

 Join The Working Actor’s Dispatch!

 Download the FREE Guide Keys the Pro’s Use to Unlock Any Script 

 Plus 2 other FREE guides: 10 Ways to Stop Worrying and Start Working, and 12 Top Acting Tips from Season 1! 

Get your copy of this online guide of the actual questions, approach, and PROCESS the professionals use when working on ANY material: plays, scripts, audiobooks , and more...⁠ from actors who've been there!⁠ 

 Go beyond acting theory and hear from professionals that have worked for 40+ years... where the rubber meets the road. 

 Leave a Reply Cancel reply 

 Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked * 

 Comment * 

 Name * 

 Email * 

 Website 

 Δ 

 Join The Working Actor’s Dispatch!

 Download the FREE Guide Keys the Pro’s Use to Unlock Any Script 

 Plus 2 other FREE guides: 10 Ways to Stop Worrying and Start Working, and 12 Top Acting Tips from Season 1! 

Get your copy of this online guide of the actual questions, approach, and PROCESS the professionals use when working on ANY material: plays, scripts, audiobooks , and more...⁠ from actors who've been there!⁠ Go beyond acting theory and hear from professionals that have worked for 40+ years... where the rubber meets the road. 

 Search the site

 Latest on the Podcast

 UNCLE VANYA Final Session: “Echoes of the Past” – Chekhov – Act 2 – The Rehearsal Room [Video, Audio, and Transcript versions] 

 Get the show delivered to you

 follow the journey

 Get the FREE guide "Keys the Pro’s Use to Unlock Any Script" + 2 other bonuses!

 Success! Now check your email to confirm your subscription.

 There was an error submitting your subscription. Please try again.

 Email Address 

Send it!

 More Stuff On The Socials

 Recent Updates

 Our “In Memoriam” video celebrating working artists, 2023-2024 

 George Bernard Shaw’s “Misalliance” in The Rehearsal Room for April 2025 with J. Paul Nicholas, Nathan Agin, Michele Shultz, Dylan La Rocque and director Erika Rolfsrud! 

 UNCLE VANYA Final Session: “Echoes of the Past” – Chekhov – Act 2 – The Rehearsal Room [Video, Audio, and Transcript versions] 

 More on the blog 

 A few listener favorites

 Ep #10: Gigi Bermingham on Being a Misfit and Living Your Dream 

 Ep #5: Geoffrey Wade on People vs. Characters and Doing Your Job 

 Ep #4: 3x Tony-Nominee Harry Groener on Versatility and Learning Lines Quickly 

 What would you like to find?

 (just type and hit “enter”) 

 Copyright © 2026 · Agency Pro Theme On Genesis Framework 

 X

 Join us for new workshop scenes w/ professional actors and directors each month in the Rehearsal Room!

 Learn more 

 