 

 Episode 157 - A Chat with AudioBook Narrator Simon Vance — Book Cougars Podcast 

 Two Middle-Aged Women on the Hunt for Good Read

 Home 

 Podcast 

 Guests 

 About 

 Contact 

 SUPPORT / SUBSCRIBE 

 Search 

 Navigation 

 Home 

 Podcast 

 Guests 

 About 

 Contact 

 SUPPORT / SUBSCRIBE 

 Search 

 Episode 157 - A Chat with AudioBook Narrator Simon Vance 

 June 07, 2022 
 by Emily Fine 

 Book Cougars Episode 157

 Emily Fine & Chris Wolak

 Download 

 Episode One Hundred Fifty Seven Show Notes 
 KEY: CW = Chris Wolak and EF = Emily Fine

Emily starts with a reading of the poem “Aubade with a Chance of Rain” by Danusha Lameris from her collection Bonfire Opera: Poems . 

If you would like to make a charitable gift in Jenny Colvin’s memory, these two organizations have been suggested by those who knew her well: Greenville Animal Care promoting the compassionate treatment of animals was something that Jenny cared deeply for. Friends of the Furman Libraries is planning to make Jenny’s long-held dream of establishing a “mindfulness space” in the Duke Library a reality. Under comments please write “in memory of Jenny”.

 – Currently Reading – [2:50]
 Midnight Chicken (& Other Recipes Worth Living For) – Ella Risbridger, Elisa Cunningham (Illustrator) (CW)
 Under the Sea-Wind – Rachel Carson (CW)
 That Sounds So Good – Carla Lalli Music (EF)
 The Historian – Elizabeth Kostova (CW)
 Eventide – Kent Haruf (EF)

 – Just Read – [11:30]
 Plainsong – Kent Haruf (EF)
 Messy Roots: A Graphic Memoir of a Wuhanese American – Laura Gao (CW)
 Hidden Pictures – Jason Rekulak (EF)
 Manfish: A Story of Jacques Cousteau – Jennifer Berne, Éric Puybaret (Illustrator) (CW) 
 On Wings of Words: The Extraordinary Life of Emily Dickinson – Jennifer Berne, Becca Stadtlander (Illustrator)
 Calvin Can’t Fly: The Story of a Bookworm Birdie – Jennifer Berne, Keith Bendir (Illustrator) (CW)
 Shutter – Ramona Emerson (EF) release date 8/2/2022 

 – Biblio Adventures – [24:20]
 Chris and Emily went on a joint couch biblio adventure via the Mark Twain House with Shelley Puhak, the author of The Dark Queens: The Bloody Rivalry That Forged the Medieval World . Watch the video here .

Chris and Emily went to Rhode Island, visited the Cross Mills Library on the way to a bookseller event with Soho Press at Sly Fox Den Too with authors Ramona Emerson , author of Shutter , and Marcie Rendon , author of the Cash Blackbear Series including Murder on the Red River , Girl Gone Missing , and Sinister Graves (release date 10/11/22). 

 – Upcoming Jaunts – [35:09]
 Emily is heading to Colorado and Utah to hunt for bookstores.

Chris is preparing for Austen in August via Roof Beam Reader .

 – Upcoming Reads – [36:44]
 Mansfield Park – Jane Austen (CW)
 Franny, the Queen of Provincetown – John Preston (CW)
 Fresh Water for Flowers – Valérie Perrin, Hildegarde Serle (Translator) (EF)
 Vacationland – Meg Mitchell Moore (EF) release date 6/14/2022

 – Audiobook Narrator Simon Vance – [39:50]
 Learn more about Simon here .

 – Also Mentioned –
 Impossible Fortress – Jason Rekulak
 Quirk Books 
 Arsenal Pulp Press 
 Girl with the Dragon Tattoo – Stieg Larsson (audiobook narrated by Simon Vance)
 Bleak House - Charles Dickens (audiobook narrated by Simon Vance) 
 Personal Reminiscences of Henry Irving – Bram Stoker (audiobook narrated by Simon Vance) 
 Blackstone Audiobooks 
 The Hunchback of Notre Dame – Victor Hugo
 Death on the Nile – Agatha Christie
 Guy Gavriele Kay 
 Bring Up the Bodies – Hilary Mantel (audiobook narrated by Simon Vance) 
Books narrated by Sissy Spacek 
 The King’s Speech – Peter Conradi & Mark Logue (audiobook narrated by Simon Vance) 
 The Sandman Book One – Neil Gaiman, Sam Kieth (Illustrator)
 Shadow & Claw: The First Half of the Book of the New Sun – Gene Wolfe

 You can help support the Book Cougars via our affiliates:
Libro.fm audiobook platform: Follow this link for the monthly membership. (promo code: bookcougars)
We are an affiliate of Bank Square Books and Savoy Bookstore & Café, click HERE to start shopping.
 Bookshop.org – support us and independent bookstores!

If you’d like to help financially support the Book Cougars, please consider becoming a Patreon member. You can DONATE HERE . If you would prefer to donate directly to us, please email bookcougars@gmail.com for instructions.

Join our Goodreads Group ! 

We have a BookTube Channel – please check it out here , and be sure to subscribe!

Please subscribe to our email newsletter here . 

 June 07, 2022 
 / Emily Fine 

 Newer 

 Older 

