 

River of Stars | Brightweavings Journal 

 Brightweavings Journal 

 The worlds and works of Guy Gavriel Kay

 Search 

 Main menu

 Skip to primary content 

 Skip to secondary content 

 Home 

 Children of Earth and Sky 

 River of Stars 

 About Guy Gavriel Kay 

 BrightWeavings 

 Category Archives: River of Stars 

 Post navigation

 ← Older posts 

 Seasonal note 

 Posted on December 22, 2014 by Guy Kay 

 8 

 Depending on your perspective, I’ve either been remiss, or doing what I am supposed to be doing.

 Focus on the new book, primarily, has led to few posts here through the fall. Of course these journals were envisaged as each being specific to a book release, tour, chronicling various events and ideas associated with those. On the other hand, the online world has changed a lot since I did my first tour journal here and the concept has expanded. I’m good with that, and with the idea of having an ongoing journal as a place to share thoughts and news – at more than 140 characters.

 Holiday season calls for my good wishes to friends, readers, amusing and generous people I’ve encountered online. There are some very funny, thoughtful, clever people in my Twitter feed: I tend not to hang with those waking up every morning to discover what wildly outrages them for that 24 hour cycle. I do comment at times on world events, I try to do so judiciously, with respect for those who might think otherwise. Some issues make that harder than others. Vaccine truthers? Not my people.

 I’m writing steadily. Too soon to give details or set out an estimated time of arrival, but I should be able to do the latter towards the end of spring. For a variety of reasons I never like talking too soon about what the novels are about, or the periods that inspire them. I’ll ask indulgence for that this time around, too.

 There are various ‘plans’ in the works from publishers and elsewhere and the strong possibility of news bulletins from me early in 2015. I prefer these to be really tangible before sharing, but I will absolutely share when ‘tangible’ happens.

 2014 was probably most memorable, professionally, for my being made a Member of the Order of Canada on July 1. Didn’t expect it (recipients aren’t supposed to know it might be coming) and I was very deeply honoured. Small trivia: you are supposed to wear the lapel pin they send you, or other members (or just those in the know) will call you on not doing so if they see you without. Had it happen to me twice, early, when I felt a bit self-conscious about putting it on. I work to remember it now when I wear a jacket. I do not wear it, no, with my Montreal Canadiens jersey. There will be no photos thereof. Hold not thy breath.

 I was really happy to have the Chinese editions of Under Heaven and River of Stars appear this year, with absolutely gorgeous covers. (You can see them in the Art Gallery section here at Bright Weavings, if you haven’t.) Brazil saw the release of Tigana (in two volumes, which is not uncommon) and probably the most assertive and generous set of online reviews and commentary for any foreign language edition yet.

 There were a number of other foreign language editions of different titles; I tend to report these and reveal covers when I get them over on Twitter or at the Facebook page coordinated by Alec Lynch and Elizabeth Swainston. Elizabeth also has created a Pinterest page on my work. I owe them both a great deal. Neither drinks, which kills the ‘single malt scotch as a gift’ vibe.

 I did have some extraordinary single malts, and a very good time with a group that (I’m sorry) included Australians, at World Fantasy Convention where I was a guest of honor this year. The Hungarian Lentil Growers Agrarian Cooperative (HLGAC) was formed there. Of course everyone understands about that, right? Right? Our next meeting is slated for Saratoga Springs at World Fantasy in 2015.

 Finally, before I wrap, a thank you to my readers for, among other things, ongoing patience. I write continuously but don’t emerge swiftly. When I talk to younger writers I feel their pain as many of them discuss the intense pressure to be ‘a book a year’ authors. The gift my readership around the world gives me (and always has, really) is the best gift they can: the opportunity to take my time, do the books as well as I am able, to be as faithful to the work as I can be. I have always believed that if I am being faithful to the novels, I am honouring my readers.

 My best wishes to all, for the season and for 2015.

 GGK

 Posted in River of Stars 

 | 
 8 Replies 

 Party in Fionavar 

 Posted on September 9, 2014 by Guy Kay 

 8 

 So, there seems to be a party afoot.

 Blame Chris Szego, the manager of Bakka Phoenix Books, Canada’s oldest Science Fiction and Fantasy bookstore (since 1972!). And blame HarperCollins Canada while you are at it. Do not blame me. That needs to be very clearly understood.

 It seems that somehow, inexplicably, this autumn marks 30 years since The Summer Tree was published, beginning my career as a novelist.

 I have used various calculators, an abacus, and fingers, toes and forks (don’t ask) to make the number come out smaller, but it don’t work. Thirty years. Ye gods and little fishes, as they say, when they aren’t really swearing.

 And I have made my joke about being 14 years old at the time too often. Won’t do it here (well, sort of won’t).

 The truth is, in a culture where the newnewnew is king and queen, where books disappear (off shelves, out of print) with increasing and alarming speed, I feel deeply grateful and profoundly honoured that Fionavar has remained out there, throughout the English-language world (and in many other languages) all this time.

 So even curmudgeons sometimes say yes to a party.

 There will be music from Martin Springett (backed up by Sam Alex Kay). The absurdly multi-talented Sue Reynolds, who did the map for the trilogy (and the maps for Tigana , too, in fact) has promised to attend ‘with bells on’. Linda McKnight, who acquired the trilogy when she was Publisher at McClelland & Stewart Canada (and later became my agent) will be there, rather pleased with her early judgement. (She likes to be right.)

 We hope John Rose, the original founder/owner/god of Bakka Books will join us. He hosted the original launch for The Summer Tree in the store. My publishers brought me a tree as a gift. There were jokes about binding me to it. There may be a photo of that night. It may be on display. I will look younger in it.

 There will be gifts and door prizes, Martin’s original cover paintings will be on display, with signed posters available. Add food, drink, wild carousing and glasses smashed on the – no, scratch that last.

 So, original launch to thirty year anniversary at Bakka. All are invited if you can get to Toronto on the evening of September 19th. Here’s the evite.

 Posted in River of Stars 

 | 
 8 Replies 

 Order of Canada, the morning after 

 Posted on July 1, 2014 by Admin4Site 

 4 

 Sometimes it is just silly to affect being blasé. It will appear false, contrived. So I’ll repeat what I said yesterday on Twitter: I am feeling honoured and humble, both. I am also truly touched by the responses that have come in the last half day, both public and private. Those Nigerian fellows offering to give me big shares in a diamond enterprise for relatively modest sums of money have been especially enthusiastic.

 For those who missed it (most of the world, as it has to be!) it was announced from the office of the Governor General of Canada yesterday afternoon that I have been named to the Order of Canada. This is, I have learned, not our highest civilian honour. It is second. The highest (I love this stuff) is the Order of Merit, which is ‘in the personal gift’ of Queen Elizabeth II (!), with only 24 people at a time, chosen by her from all countries in the Commonwealth. Then Canada has the O.C. The Order was created in 1967 (Canada’s centennial year) to replace knighthoods and other dignities conferred from London to that point.

 A formal Investiture ceremony, with a medal presented by the Governor General, and a Citation read out for each person, with details of why they are being honoured, comes later, at Rideau Hall in Ottawa.

 For this holiday morning, I just want to thank those who have expressed their support and pleasure. I also want to extend my congratulations to the others named or elevated in rank yesterday, especially David Cronenberg, whom I’ve known a long time, and Chris Hadfield, who brought a different kind of star status to Canada. I have also declined the diamond mine. Here is part of Penguin Canada’s press release, which went out yesterday afternoon:

 GUY GAVRIEL KAY AWARDED THE ORDER OF CANADA 

 – Chris Hadfield, Rick Mercer among other 2014 recipients –

 – David Cronenberg promoted to companion, the highest level within the order –

 June 30, 2014 ( Toronto ) – Penguin Canada is pleased to announce that Guy Gavriel Kay has been named a Member of the Order of Canada for his outstanding contributions to the field of speculative fiction as an internationally celebrated author.

 Kay is the bestselling author of twelve novels and a book of poetry. He has been called “one of the most gifted storytellers of our time” by The Globe and Mail, and his works have been translated into more than 25 languages, with sales approaching three million copies worldwide.

 In the 1970s, he was retained by the Estate of J.R.R. Tolkien to assist in the editorial construction of Tolkien’s posthumously published The Silmarillion . In 1984, Kay’s first novel,  The Summer Tree , the first volume of The Fionavar Tapestry, was published to considerable acclaim in Canada, and internationally. In 1990, Penguin Canada’s edition of his novel  Tigana reached the national bestseller list, and his next book,  A Song for Arbonne,  debuted in the number-one position. Kay has been a bestseller with each novel since. The Sunday Times called his most recent novel, River of Stars , “a work to savour” and the Washington Post called it a “major accomplishment, the work of a master novelist in full command of his subject.”

 Kay was born in Weyburn, Saskatchewan, and raised in Winnipeg. He received a law degree from the University of Toronto and was called to the bar in Ontario. Kay became principal writer and associate producer for the CBC Radio series, The Scales of Justice , which dramatized major criminal trials in Canadian history. He has written social and political commentary in Canada for the National Post  and The Globe and Mail , and for  The Guardian  in England.

 Kay has toured and read on behalf of his publishers and at literary events across Canada, the United States, and internationally. He was awarded the International Goliardos Prize for his contributions to the literature of the fantastic, is a two-time winner of the Aurora Award, won the World Fantasy Award for Ysabel in 2008, and won the Sunburst Prize for best Canadian speculative fiction novel for Under Heaven in 2011. Kay is currently at work on his next novel, due to be published in 2016.

 About the Order of Canada 

 Established in 1967 by Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, the Order of Canada is the cornerstone of the Canadian Honours System, and recognizes outstanding achievement, dedication to the community and service to the nation. The Order recognizes people in all sectors of Canadian society. Their contributions are varied, yet they have all enriched the lives of others and made a difference to this country.

 For more information about the most recent appointments to the Order of Canada, please visit: http://www.gg.ca/document.aspx?id=15694&lan=eng 

 Posted in River of Stars 

 | 
 4 Replies 

 China, and the cover for Under Heaven 

 Posted on June 17, 2014 by Guy Kay 

 9 

 Book covers are such chancy, variable things. Over all these years and books, I’ve been delighted and, well, aghast at different times. It gets even more uncertain when it comes to foreign-language editions. As a rule, by now, I have ‘cover consultation’ for all such sales of rights, but in practice this really can mean nothing.

 Sometimes a publisher forgets. The contracts person doesn’t remind the art department or editor they have to check with the author. Or the rush to get the book finalized (there is alays a rush!) causes a very simple overlooking of that detail. Sometimes they do send the cover image to you – but too late to have input to effect any meaningful change. Screaming ‘Oh, my God, no!’ at this juncture may be a therapeutic release of extreme emotion, but achieves little else.

 One can double down on the technical breach of contract, but this just means the book cannot be released as planned, it must be shelved for up to a year while a new cover is devised, and – in the real world – this is a bad course of action if the idea is an ongoing, working cordial relationship to everyone’s theoretical betterment. I have closed my eyes, swallowed hard (often swallowing a drink hard) and accepted some covers I hate.

 Sometimes even really strong publishers go astray in their conception and execution, and one does that swallowing hard thing and waits to see if they are right. I disliked, to be honest, the covers for HarperCollins UK for Lions and for Under Heaven in hardcover, but then again I absolutely loved both their hardback and paperback for River of Stars . Win some, lose some?

 I’ve been very lucky in North America with the last several novels, good art departments, artists, and steady, congenial consultation and discussion back and forth have produced covers I love – and reader feedback suggests you feel the same way.

 But if you sit authors down in a bar and catch them early enough, while they are still coherent, cover discussion will be a frequent topic, and happiness will be … intermittent?

 All of which is a prelude to this: I am happy to now share what might be my favourite cover for any of my books anywhere. Chongqing Publishing in China is releasing Under Heaven in July. I saw a rough of this a month ago, after waiting with some anxiety as they promised I would see it (with me having no idea at all what it would be). The rough was gorgeous, the finished is even more so. I flat-out love this.

 Not only is it beautiful as a design, and profoundly suited to the book, it is original and inventive and subtle. What you need to know (it may not be evident in the jpeg) is that the cloud cover overlay is just that: an overlay! It flips back if you open it up from the jacket flap, revealing the entire painting, as if clouds had parted. Truly imaginative, and unique in its effect. (And, not incidentally in this business, really expensive design work.)

 Then there is the chosen painting itself. It is a celebrated Tang Dynasty work by Li Zhaodao called ‘Ming Huang’s Journey to Shu’ about the emperor journeying to the far west, framed small against a magnificent landscape. And anyone who knows the novel (inspired by the Tang) will recognize how wonderfully well this suits the story.

 Here’s a link to the original work, for interest:

 http://www.theartwolf.com/landscapes/li-zhaodao-ming-huang-journey-shu.htm

 But there’s even more to this cover. Classic Chinese artwork is usually marked with a variety of red seals on it. These are the personal seals of whatever distinguished (or imperial, if the artist is lucky!) figure has seen and held the work – and then shows this by putting his stamp on it.

 It is a process alien to western art (well, maybe Byron carving his name on Greek ruins!) but in China it enhanced the value and prestige of a painting to have illustrious figure put their seals on it. So, here, the art director uses a brilliant, small red seal of – a heavenly horse. I am touched by the attention to detail and awareness of the nature of the book this shows.

 In short, my appreciation of Chongqing, who are publishing this is extreme. I think this cover is brilliant and beautiful and evocative, and I hope others agree.

 Posted in River of Stars 

 | 
 9 Replies 

 A post about my father 

 Posted on May 25, 2014 by Guy Kay 

 6 

 This morning I went to the cemetery where my dad is buried. I always go on the weekend of his birthday, and I had some nice news this week (which I’ll share when I can) and I often visit his grave at such times, too.

 We planted a sapling there when he was buried, and it is a genuinely majestic tree now, tall and leafy in this springtime. Probably the only measure of time’s passing there that doesn’t conjure sorrow.

 My father was a surgeon, but as far from the cliché of the surgeon as arrogant ‘lord of the ward’ as possible. He was brilliant and gentle, both, and I have often thought about how rarely those are conjoined. Essentially he was an urban, internationally-trained surgeon with the compassion and bedside manner of an old-fashioned country doctor. His patients adored him. Even as a child I could see that, and even as a child understand why.

 He’d stayed on in Europe after the war, did his surgical residency at a teaching hospital outside Edinburgh. When he finished, and indicated he felt it was time to come back to Canada, they tried very hard to keep him there. After he died I found a letter among his files from the head of the hospital, describing him as the most gifted surgical resident he’d ever seen. Typically, my dad had never shown that letter to my mother, or any of his sons.

 I’m aware that many artists find their access to art in hardship and suffering, whether within the family, or in the larger contexts of their lives (I am thinking of George Seferis, the Greek Nobel laureate and a personal icon, and how he was shaped and marked by the tragedy of Greece in WW2 and the savage civil war that followed). Other artists draw strength from their background, discover a willingness and ability to take risks from that sense of being anchored in love. There are no rules (that’s my own only rule about this) but I know I am of that latter group.

 I had a conversation very recently with a man who talked of how he’d worried if he could be a good father, because his own hadn’t been, and his role-modelling was difficult. He spoke of how happy and relieved he was to discover that he had the ability, and the desire, to be a loving father to his son. (There are no rules there, either, only norms and likelihoods.) I know that I am a better person and father because of the example my dad set.

 I have written (most directly in the two Sarantium books) about our desire to leave a name, a legacy, a marker of having been here. For most of us it lies in our families, the way what we were may be passed on to those we marry, parent, befriend. My dad’s legacy is partly in the lives he saved, partly in those who (still) remember him with affection and admiration, and partly in his wife and sons, and what may ripple down through us to grandchildren and perhaps through them one day. That last is the way it is for most of us, I think.

 The first poem in Beyond This Dark House, my selected poetry, is the only one I’ve ever been able to write directly for him, or about him, since he was killed. I’m going to post it here this week as another memorial, with thanks to Penguin Books Canada who published the book.

 NIGHT DRIVE: ELEGY 

 Driving through Winnipeg this autumn

 twilight, a sensation has lodged

 somewhere behind my breastbone

 (impossible to be more precise).

 It is at once a lightness and a weight,

 press of memory and a feeling

 as if tonight has insufficient

 gravity to keep me from

 drifting back, so many

 long years after leaving here.

 Quiet streets, the slowly darkening

 sky (it can take a while). I turn

 on Waterloo and stop outside the house

 where we first lived. No curtains drawn

 on the living room windows. I can see

 into the past, almost. The willow in front

 is so tall now. My parents planted it.

 We played football on this lawn

 (and the next one down, and next,

 as we grew older, needed room to run).

 Used the willow sapling when cutting

 pass patterns, slicing in front of it

 to shake a defender. I hear

 my mother from the porch, ‘Don’t

 break the tree!’ A car approaches,

 slows, someone looks at me

 in the gathering night, moves on.

 So do I, gliding a little further

 to Mathers Bay, where we’d race

 our bikes, the finish line

 right at the intersection,

 so we’d be flying flat-out

 and sometimes have to brake

 in a squeal and sideways skid

 (black tire marks on the road)

 if a car was coming east.

 I wouldn’t let my sons do that today.

 The houses along the bay,

 down to the curve and back

 up the other side, were homes of friends,

 or girls I longed for, and their

 parents – men and women mostly

 dead now. Each address marks

 a grave. Ghosts water the night

 lawns, rake leaves under stars,

 look up as I coast by

 and then turn away, as if politely,

 not to seem to stare as this rented car

 stops again, this time outside

 our second home, the one

 my parents built when I was nine.

 I am heavy and light tonight,

 entangled and drifting, both

 at once. The city

 is so full of my father.

 I used to ride with him to Saturday

 morning rounds at the hospital.

 Proud, anxious not to show it (Why

 was that? Did he know?) as we’d step

 off the elevator and onto a post-op ward.

 I’d read a book by the nursing station

 then cross the street to the

 Salibury House (long gone now)

 and order two sandwiches, a milkshake

 and a coffee, but only at the exact

 minute he’d told me to. And he’d

 arrive from his last patient just 

 as the waitress set the food in front of me.

 I’m guessing he’d watch from the window

 or door, to time it so exactly, for his son.

 East on Mathers now, imagining kids

 on bikes careening into my path forty

 years ago. Waverley, and south. I’d

 hitchhike this route to campus, winter

 mornings, dreaming of away, anywhere

 away. My parents had their first

 date at a nightclub out here on

 Pembina Highway. My father just back

 from overseas. She thought he was

 phony-British, using words like ‘chap’

 and ‘bloody,’ all night long. Still, (she’d

 later tell her sons), that night she

 went home to Enniskillen Avenue and woke

 her mother. Sat on the edge of the bed and said

 she thought she’d met a man she could love.

 We never tired of that story.

 Our pretty mother,barely into her twenties,

 her immediate certainty, the dashing

 image of our father, home from away,

 away, winning a woman for himself.

 The city’s quiet on a Thursday night.

 The forecast was rain but the sky’s been clear,

 the air cooling down; football

 games and burning leaves. Back north now,

 on what seems to have become

 a night drive entirely unplanned. I steer

 with one hand at twelve o’clock and

 an elbow out the open window.

 The downtown ‘Y’ has been demolished.

 My Uncle Jack would take me there

 on Sunday mornings for a steam and

 a swim. Such a sweet man. White hair

 my father always joked of envying, ruefully

 shaking his head in admiration. Dad’s

 was a duller, white-grey, nondescript. Except,

 it seems, the morning of the day he was

 killed in Florida, my mother said to

 him over breakfast, ‘Sam, look at your

 hair! It’s white as Jack’s!’ Salt water,

 winter sun, had bleached it bright.

 I imagine my father surprised

 and pleased, and thinking of his brother

 when he took that last walk

 with the dog along the coastal highway

 in too much twilight.

 There seems to be no crossing of streets

 tonight where I can avoid

 hitting my father or myself. Wellington

 Crescent now, west towards the park

 where I first kissed some girls, broke up

 with others, dreamed of going away. My father

 took a troopship to England in the

 last year of the war, stayed over there

 in Scotland for five years, came back,

 came back, married, had three sons.

 He taught each of us to catch a football, lost

 deliberately (to each of us) in table tennis,

 grimacing elaborately at a drive mis-hit

 into the net, not fooling anyone. He’d look

 shocked, shocked when we accused him

 of letting us win, as if the idea

 couldn’t have even crossed his mind.

 He quizzed me before high school tests,

 tsking with dismay at wrong answers

 that were clear evidence of insufficient

 application. He worked so hard.

 I think we knew that, even very young,

 but still assumed he’d have infinite time

 and room for us. I wince, tonight, remembering

 the absolute sureness of that. How did he

 elicit so much certainty? I wonder

 if he ever looked for and found

 clear signs of his own nature in

 three very different sons,

 or if that kind of thinking

 required too much vanity.

 I liked coming home from a downtown

 appointment with him. Walking to

 the Mall Medical Building, waiting

 in the doctors’ lounge, listening to the

 talk of football and politics, grabbing

 myself a Coke from the little fridge, and then

 the feel of the room altering as he came in,

 loosening his tie, hanging up the white coat,

 raising an eyebrow at my soft drink

 before dinner. The drive back home,

 just the two of us, end of a work day. He’d steer

 with one hand at twelve o’clock and

 an elbow out the open window. No one

 ever born had hands I’d ever rather feel

 enclosing mine. Then. Now. The day

 the son we named for him was born.

 If it was summer, turning west on Grant,

 the sunlight would be on us. We’d put

 the visors down. (I was too short for that

 to help, but copied him.) Or it might have been

 darker, cooler, under a prairie sky

 in a twilight like the one that started

 and compels these images,

 if it was autumn then, as it is now,

 above this ground of memories.

 Heaviness, and that so-strange

 sense of weightlessness. I thought,

 before, I couldn’t locate these feelings

 precisely within myself. Not so,

 in the end. They reside, together,

 anywhere my father was in this city

 and in me, which is pretty much

 everywhere, and he’s been

 dead too many years now already,

 with more years and more years

 and more long years of being gone

 still to come.

 Posted in River of Stars 

 | 
 6 Replies 

 Against: Violence Against Women 

 Posted on May 2, 2014 by Admin4Site 

 2 

 I am aware that everyone is always being pushed to donate for charitable efforts (or for Kickstarter!). But I’ve agreed to support and promote a cause I believe in, and I hope readers will share my feeling that this is worthwhile, and spread the word.

 Also, that people will enjoy what I’ve done for this. The essence is as follows. I’ve joined a campaign called The Pixel Project which aims to raise money to help resist violence against women, worldwide.

 The campaign is taking many forms, and do have a look at their website to see other people who interest you and what is being offered by them in support. In my case, they asked if I’d write them something original, in a format called a Drabble.

 No, this is not an homage to English novelist Margaret Drabble. A Drabble, they advised, is a 100 word short story. Supposed to be exactly so. (If I am off by a word, blame Word’s word count!)

 I liked the idea, and I wrote one for them. Then I thought about something (I do that.) The first idea that had come to me was for a scene that comes after the end of Lord of Emperors . But, of course there are those who have not read that book (I know, hard to imagine.) and there is an inherent spoiler effect in such a scene, however brief. (The puppy dies??? Note: joke.).

 So I wrote them another. This one takes place before the opening of The Summer Tree , so no possible spoiler effect. The puissant Pixel Project People promptly proposed (!) that either Drabble, whichever is desired, be sent to donators of $50, and $75 would get both. Obviously, and in support of the cause, we are asking people not to post them online, though if you like them you are hereby formally given permission to say so. They are ‘themed’. You’ll see.

 I firmly believe, as I am quoted saying in the press release, that one of the measures of any culture is the status of women in that society. Inherent, endemic violence against women is more than some ‘black mark’, it is a blight, and working against that is surely a cause for all of us.

 One more note. You’ll see in the press release and on their site that this is a ‘Celebrity Male Role Model’ campaign. I have advised the members of my scotch group that if they call me that, I am taking my bottles and going home. On the other hand, both my younger brothers are now instructed to use this ‘official’ phrase in future dealings. Ahem.

 Here is the poster they made. Check out the site, do support them if you can. There aren’t a whole lot of things more worthwhile.

 Posted in River of Stars 

 | 
 2 Replies 

 To Market, To Market? 

 Posted on February 8, 2014 by Guy Kay 

 16 

 Help me out, everyone. Comments this time will be useful.

 I wrestle sometimes with my own nature, and the changing nature of the book world and our culture as a whole. As I have said before, the pressure on writers (especially younger ones, but not only) to do more than ‘just’ write their books is more and more obviously undermining people I know. Add this to expectations of speed in delivery of books, and the home run or strike out mentality of the industry, and it is too easy to see some sad, stressed author behaviour (sad for me, at any rate).

 But that ‘sad for me’ is the point of this post. I may just be out of step. I don’t think so, obviously, or I’d be acting differently, but I have friends and colleagues making a case regarding authors and readers and the need to use , to mobilize, one’s reader base. I called this the ‘Release the Fans’ idea in a newspaper op-ed a while back. I just don’t think of readers as there to be mobilized, but that’s the issue.

 This all came up again in discussions over the last ten days or so. CBC in Canada ran an book awards competition called the Bookies, across many categories. Voting was online. River of Stars was nominated in one category, with the immensely distinguished Margaret Atwood as the favourite.

 I didn’t post anything about it here on the journal while the voting was open, or allow (or request) the Bright Weavings team on Facebook or the main website to alert that the competition was even on. I did a generic tweet about the entire multi-category event, and another at the very end expressing (real) pleasure at being runner-up to Atwood’s Maddadam .

 But I didn’t want to campaign. I never want to campaign. And I am now being told by culture-astute and web-savvy friends and professional colleagues that this is because I misunderstand the real nature of what is going on. So I want to open it up for discussion.

 The shrewdest one lecturing me, probably (an unfairly sharp cousin), says I am over-focused on these things in terms of the legitimacy of the award. In other words, I don’t want to turn winning or losing into who cajoles most or loudest, or who has the most fame or Twitter/FB followers (this happens for other awards too, of course). I am, she says, too hung up on the ‘legitimacy’ issue.

 Her take is that these awards are never going to truly be about the ‘best’. That the Oscars, say, have long had aggressive ‘for your consideration’ campaigning. (All thanks to Harvey Weinstein? I think it pre-dates him but he made it a modus operandi .) These popular vote awards are about empowering readers to be more than merely passive enjoyers of a given writer (or writers), she argues. They let readers participate, fight, lobby, engage, be active. She tells me I am denying my readers the chance to do that by staying quiet when the votes come up.

 And there are writers I respect who obviously agree. They treat the Bookies (and others) as a game of sorts – though some think of them as mattering more than they do, I suspect. They rally their online forces, spread the word often … do the ’empowering’ thing, if that is what it is.

 It therefore becomes, some are urging me, about the new age of active consumers of any art. Passive enjoyment is old school. This is an age of real time tweeting of a television show (building community), of Kickstarter campaigns to revive cancelled favourites (why does the network get to decide?), or even, on the very dark side, aggressive online threats to actresses (usually actresses, alas) who are disliked. I’ve written an essay about how this level of consumer activism can’t help but shape the art produced when the work is ongoing and the feedback is continuous and urgent. (I’m not saying this is automatically ‘for the worse’ but I’m noting the process.)

 I have argued before, perhaps quixotically, for the value of some distance between writer and work, writer and reader, preserving a space where the reaction to the books (in this case) is not bundled with a reaction or ‘relationship’ with the writer.

 Let me digress, but it isn’t really a digression (just looks like one!).

 When I was young, first reading and writing and studying poetry, Robert Frost was seen by most of us as safe, bland, boring, the whole crusty New England thing was uncool. It took the outstanding critic Randall Jarrell, with two superb essays on Frost’s brilliance to change my mind (and I’ve tried to be an advocate ever since). But something else happened when I was still young, and it had to do with the man, not the work.

 A three volume biography came out on Frost and it pretty much savaged him, left him in the dumpster. Frost was an evil, odious, selfish, vain, unfeeling near-monster. This biography stamped him in the minds of my generation (those who cared). It was long, long afterwards that we learned that this biographer had had a huge, compromising, personal agenda, a reason for vilifying his subject. But when a far better, balanced, biography came out it made very few waves: the image was set too hard, even among those who knew or should have known better. (Joyce Carol Oates wrote a recent story using Evil Frost as a character and I admit I was disappointed. To be fair, she now says, apparently, she was ‘commenting’ on the phenomenon, not endorsing it.)

 The good news is, just this month the first volume of Frost’s Letters has appeared and reviews seem to be (finally!) working to correct the entrenched maligning view of the man and poet. I’ve seen several pieces to this effect in the last few days.

 My point here (see, it wasn’t a digression) is that focusing on the artist, accurately or otherwise, can lead us to lose or devalue – or overvalue , in other cases – the work. This, as I have said here before, is part of my ambivalence about social media.

 It is possible I am just out of synch in this. On the other hand, I have (this post is evidence!) spent years crossing towards the new online world order, sharing tour information, industry norms, and very personal reflections with readers (and non-readers, in theory) here, through Bright Weavings or its Facebook page, and more recently on Twitter. If I’m hiding, I’m not doing it very well.

 But I still wonder about the Darwinian analysis of the process today. It is being argued that only those who ‘get’ the new system, who plug in all the way, campaign, lobby, hit book clubs non-stop, pop onto each others’ blogs, make deals or promises to vote for each other,  essentially looking to create a readership (or fanbase, but I prefer to speak of readers, not fans) in order to leverage it … these are the writers who will succeed.

 Maybe.

 Leaving aside  issues of excellence (another essay, maybe?) I’d argue, that this take on things may leave open what ‘success’ is in the larger scheme of art and life.

 If people are driven to exhaustion, are made deeply stressed and anxious, feel fearful if they don’t have a good blog idea for a given day, or a witty tweet lined up (or are afraid their latest tweet will elicit hate), if all this subverts their writing, who has won? Do readers win if a liked writer hurries a weaker book out? Do we care about quality or about connecting? Is there a role for grace or restraint? Are we always served by more intimacy – or (very often) the illusion of it?

 I’m not sure. That’s why I’m throwing out these questions. They are real ones, not rhetorical. I’m interested in the answers. And thanks.

 Posted in River of Stars 

 | 
 16 Replies 

 Appearing near you… 

 Posted on January 15, 2014 by Guy Kay 

 Reply 

 Readings, interviews, signing appearances are complex and widely varying things for an author – and for those hosting. They are also receding from the book landscape to a degree, as marketing moves online and brick and mortar stores decline. The cost/return ratio for a publisher to fly an author around gets iffy. Many times now, a signing tour is paid for by the author, as he or she flies/drives hither and yon and may even be doing the bookstore liaisons him or herself. A reality of the bookworld today. These author-funded tours are common in genre fiction, especially, because there are still good specialty bookstores around (crossing fingers for all these indies) and there are also conventions to give something of a springboard, with an area tour launched around one.

 Signings can also be hugely stressful for author and bookstore. Ego and anxiety kick in hard sometimes. Stars can get prickly if they feel under-appreciated or under-promoted. The store doesn’t want it to be a failure, and the author, obviously, does want people to be there. Also books – books in the store are good. Many of the great horror stories of Old Time Tours involve stock not being there when the author was.

 When we launched  Under Heaven in Canada, the attendance at the Toronto Reference Library for the reading and onstage interview blew past what both publisher and library had expected. It was wonderful, and a bit crazy. The library started hustling more chairs down the service elevator from wherever they lock up their folding chairs, and Penguin … well, they did truly yeoman service, but with some good luck, too.

 Purely by coincidence, the launch coincided with the national sales rep meeting in Toronto and all the reps attended that evening, with a reception at a nearby bar beforehand. (I stayed sober and judicious, they didn’t have to.) When we all got to the actual event and they saw what was happening, the Toronto-area reps scattered to their cars where they all had some stock, others zipped up to the office where there were other books (the warehouse was too far) and the bookstore on duty was furnished with  just enough copies to avoid a real awkwardness. It was actually a pretty impressive exercise of publisher adroitness.

 By now, as a craggy (too craggy) veteran of the game, I am pretty relaxed about events. I have read in recent years for 15 people and for many hundreds in another city two days later, and have been surprised both ways, though not rattled.  So many variables can come into it, not just how well the event is publicized. I have been known to thank the NHL in my opening remarks for not scheduling a playoff game during a reading.

 There are variables, too, in how the actual event unfolds. Some venues are very dear to me. I used to love launching books in University of Toronto’s Hart House Library and Reading Room. It was a wonderful room with deep dimpled leather couches, and I had personal memories of cutting law school classes to read  The New Yorker or  Harpers there. There was a warmth, a feeling in that room as it grew crowded; we all felt connected to each other. Actors will know how much the space matters. When the Canadian launches outgrew that space (fire marshall rules, believe it or not) and we reluctantly moved over for a couple of years to the nearby theatre, it suddenly felt so formal, so distant, by comparison.

 I still like doing smaller, more intimate events. Some years ago I was invited out to the Carmel/Monterey area by some readers who arranged a dinner gathering of 12-15 people at a restaurant, then a larger (but not too large) invitation-based reading and signing at an indie bookstore that stayed open after-hours. It was wonderful, classy, memorable. I have some terrific readers.

 This Saturday I am doing something similar, also in California as it happens (the database is too small to draw firm conclusions, though!). There is a group of Canadians in the techworld there, in Silicon Valley, they have annual picnics on Canada Day and various  events through the year, and I am one such event this week, though they have opened it to all readers.

 The information link is here, by way of Kepler’s Books, a wonderful bookstore in Menlo Park (it really is terrific) which will be selling books that night:

 http://www.keplers.com/event/guy-gavriel-kay-0

 You click through to the registration from there. This is an evening event with wine and food and chat, with a short reading and interview tucked in. It is in a private home, and there is even valet parking. I joked on Twitter (what, joke on Twitter?) that I could not vouch for the valets handling quadrigas.

 I am genuinely looking forward to this. The chance to mingle this way, have some time to actually talk, as opposed to a signing lineup where I feel guilty chatting with people too long if others are waiting patiently behind them, is so nice. I expect there will be some football talk, as Sunday is San Francisco vs Seattle, along with ManningBrady Redux.

 If anyone brings a quadriga, I expect a ride.

 Posted in River of Stars 

 | 
 Leave a reply 

 Sweet words 

 Posted on December 17, 2013 by Admin4Site 

 11 

 No pun this time in the header. Crossing everyone up.

 As longtime surfers of these journals will know, I started way back when with the underlying intention of sharing some aspects of ‘how books get made’. Not the writing (so much) as the author/publisher process whereby a title is edited, produced, promoted, sold.

 The stage we’re at right now with  River of Stars is preparing the paperbacks, in all major English language markets, which means three different houses, of course. (And three covers in the spring, as I discussed last post.)

 Shima Aoki, who handles the paperbacks for Penguin Canada, has hit me on the edge of holiday season (hers, writers never rest, you all know that!) with their drafts for cover copy, an author question and answer (to go online when the book appears), a readers’ guide (ditto), and what is called the Praise Sheet.

 The Praise Sheet is not the same as blurbs. Blurbs come before a hardcover is released, when an author or publisher tries to solicit advance comments from ‘influencers’. The quote sheet reflects actual critical response to an already-published book.

 This sheet is what gives rise to the review quotes that appear inside a trade or mass market paperback on the initial pages (sometimes called ‘front material’). The quotes that say, in various ways, ‘better than borscht and beets!’ to interest a buyer holding the book in his or her hands. These days, in addition, quotes are also added by the publisher to the book’s online page on Amazon, B&N, Indigo, as well (though fewer of them, usually: online moves faster).

 The number of quotes that get used in a book is dictated by the final page count, because that determines how many ‘free’ pages there are at the front to work with (and sometimes backlist titles are promoted at the end of a novel so pages are needed there, too).

 The sequencing of quotes will vary by market. Obviously each country will foreground its own reviewers, unless there is one so universally respected (The Washington Post, in this case) that it may go first everywhere. Canada will put a line from the Globe and Mail on the front cover, and lead off with the Washington Post inside – and maybe a line on the back, too.

 In the meantime, this morning I just emailed my Chinese publishers, at their request, the quote pages for both  Under Heaven and  River of Stars  as they will be releasing them both in 2014. I have no idea which media sources or comments will be most useful there. You have to trust your publishers.

 So with all this in mind, and having been really touched as I read  these over (I don’t normally see clips all assembled in one place) I’ll share some of them. The full sheet is way too long to post all, and I’d actually feel embarrassed. I’ll leave you with a question. Does reviewer praise help steer you to consider a book? If you are reckless enough to dive in below, which of the ones here would make you stop and think: that’s pretty extreme love, I should try this book.

 Praise for RIVER OF STARS by Guy Gavriel Kay 

  “From whatever angle you approach it, River of Stars is a major accomplishment, the work of a master novelist in full command of his subject. It deserves the largest possible audience.”

 — The Washington Post 

  “ River of Stars is the sort of novel one disappears into, emerging shaken, if not outright changed. A novel of destiny, and the role of individuals within the march of history. It is touched with magic and graced with a keen humanity … As sumptuous and sprawling as River of Stars is, it is, foremost, a keen example of the storyteller’s art.”

 — The Globe and Mail 

  “ River of Stars : Picture Game of Thrones in China: Guy Gavriel Kay’s exquisite Asian-inspired epic fantasy offers a fresh twist on intrigue and adventure.”

 —Salon.com

  “Kay has the uncanny ability to depict the grand sweep of historical events through the eyes of those living through them…What’s even more amazing is how through his careful rendering of character and environments we are drawn into this history… River of Stars is an exceptional piece of work. History has never felt or been more real and reading about it such a pleasure.”

 — Seattle Post-Intelligencer 

  “There’s a reason that each new fantasy novel by Guy Gavriel Kay is met with so much excitement by a core of devoted readers. These are books in which everything happens–epic battles, forbidden love, violent deaths–yet the threads of story inexorably tangle us in something that goes much deeper. Each book is a journey for the reader, compressed so that the level of intensity remains at the highest setting even in its quietest moments; and what happens on that journey can challenge your perceptions of the world and break your heart . . .With River of Stars , Kay transports readers to a dazzling court and the ravages of war, with language almost impossibly multilayered in its nuance and tone, offering a series of insights that exquisitely build on each other. Even more than in previous books, each sentence seems shaped to further enhance the book’s themes, recalling the craftsmanship of the man-made peony blossom that is a recurring image throughout. Here, too, emotional intensity is amped up more than ever, the shattering catharsis even more complete… one of Kay’s richest creations to date…”

 — Huffington Post 

 “It’s a relief to escape into a Guy Gavriel Kay novel and be reminded of the values of honour, valour and sacrifice for one’s country. River of Stars , Kay’s latest epic, is a captivating and beautiful story of an empire on the verge of destruction. Kay’s portrait of court intrigue and the strings the plotting prime ministers pull to orchestrate events is a marvel of craftsmanship…Reading River of Stars is a treat for the language alone. Kay is also a poet, and his writing is as lyrical as his themes of heroism, the power of legend and myth, and the vilification by history of those who deserve better.”

 — Toronto Star 

  “ River of Stars finds its greatest success in that it is both a vast, grand portrait of an entire culture, and also a very specific, personal story…each personality in River of Stars is flawed and full of friction, awful and lovely by turns, like the Emperor who loves his garden so much he cannot see the terrible human cost of keeping it perfect. While the densely woven and ever-shifting web of intrigue is masterfully managed and often brilliantly surprising in all its complexities, and the sumptuous, poetic language are also highlights, it’s the connection to the characters that captures the reader’s attention, digs hooks deep into their heart…”

 — National Post 

  “ River of Stars exhibits all of Guy Gavriel Kay’s many strengths as a writer: characterization, plotting, dialogue, poetry, the intricacies of the imperial court, and exciting battle scenes.”

 — Vancouver Sun 

  “This is stunning stuff from one of fantasy fiction’s finest. From one of fiction’s finest, frankly.”

 —Tor.com

  “An elegant, imaginative inhabitation of Song-dynasty China of 1,000 years ago by prolific historical novelist Kay … Lucid and lyrical, and skillfully written…”

 — Kirkus Reviews 

  “It is indeed an accomplishment when a fantasy novel pulls its inspiration from the real world so closely that we may feel that it’s real, that we wonder whether it should be found in an actual history book. Guy Gavriel Kay’s new novel River of Stars accomplishes this feat. His book is one of the best fantasy epics of the past few years.”

 —Ars Technica

  “The master of the historical fantasy has found a canvas large enough for his ambitions. Guy Gavriel Kay’s second novel based on the Chinese past is his finest work so far, a vision of tremendous scope, achieved through precise, intimate observation of a brilliant culture in the throes of disintegration and rebirth…a book you don’t want to be over.”

 — Locus Magazine , review by Cecelia Holland

  “Mirroring the glittering, doomed Song Dynasty of China, it portrays a world of changing traditions, casual cruelty, and strict codes of honor and respect … A powerful and complex tale told with simplicity and elegance…”

 — Library Journal 

 “Endlessly graceful, perfectly attuned to time and place and character and mood, never a line out of place; the prose in River of Stars is beautifully crafted at the sentence level: lyrical, but in a muted fashion, beautiful but not clamoring for attention, and often bearing the burden of sorrow… River of Stars is a beautifully crafted, moving novel and one I can’t recommend highly enough.”

 —Fantasy Literature

  “I don’t think it’s a stretch to say that Kay is the greatest fantasist of our generation …It’s hard for me to quantify how much I enjoyed River of Stars , but I’ll be thinking about this book for a long time.”

 —Fantasy Book Critic

  “I wrote in my review of Under Heaven that I was actually reluctant to read River of Stars , since it was all but unimaginable that an author could manage to capture such lyrical magic twice in a row, but Kay has done just that.”

 —Beauty in Ruins

  “Every two or three years, Guy Gavriel Kay releases a new novel which never fails to amaze me…Spanning decades, River of Stars is a novel about destiny and how individuals and their actions can shape the course of history. Beautifully crafted and complex, populated with well-drawn men and women, it should stand on its own as one of Guy Gavriel Kay’s signature works…I’m aware that it’s still early in the year. But as things stand, River of Stars is now in pole position and will be the speculative fiction title to beat in 2013.”

 —Fantasy Hotlist

  “[ River of Stars ] may be the finest work of a major novelist – and a pretty thrilling adventure tale to boot…Kay is precise and judicious in his selection of scenes to dramatize, in his skill at finding the key moments that define a character or a culture, and in his carefully restrained yet crucial deployment of fantastic elements…This is no innocent Middle Earth threatened by Mordor, but a highly problematical society in which such honor is hard to locate. It’s one of Kay’s recurring themes, and it’s never been handled with such complexity, scope, and insight as it is in River of Stars .”

 — Locus Magazine , review by Gary K. Wolfe

 “Kay maintains the verbal opulence he is famous for… River of Stars is a worthy follow-up to the gorgeous Under Heaven , while still standing strong on its own…readers will appreciate the meticulous hand by which the world of Kitai is crafted, both in the present moment of the story and from the perspective of history. Guy Gavriel Kay’s lush prose brings Kitai to life and keeps him firmly situated as one of the top fantasy authors of our time.”

 —Litstack

  “Impermanence, and our attempts to defeat it either through great achievements or the building of legend, is the theme that serves as a foundation for Guy Gavriel Kay’s majestic River of Stars …Kay is less a traditional fantasist than a cryptohistorian, and if the genre can be said to have a great one, Kay’s the man… Kay writes battle scenes with much the same sense of poetic grace as his characters’ more personal, introspective moments. There’s a tangible sense of sorrow over humanity’s march of folly. His narrative is always aware of the bitter ironies, as well as the fantastic good luck, that life’s many moments of pure chance present us. Fate can turn on the most minor occurrence. An empire’s fall can begin when a man is heard weeping in a garden.”

 —SF Reviews

 “This world lives and breathes. River of Stars reads like historical fiction. . . Once you get involved, you can’t stop reading. . . Emperors, assassins, bandits, poets, soldiers, ghosts, spies, barbarian hordes, courtly machinations, battles, intrigue, love, sex, betrayal, destiny, characters to cheer for, despair with, cry over – what more could you want?”

 —Revolution SF

  “The beauty of a Kay novel, to me, is that the stories are so very real…He makes you feel for the characters in such a way that you root for them throughout the novel, and feel those emotions right alongside them…I was immersed in the story until the end, and then felt that subtle form of sadness that only the ending of a terrific book can bring.”

 —Novelnaut

  “…A gorgeous novel. If you aren’t reading Guy Gavriel Kay yet, you’re missing out on some of the very best writing you can find inside or outside the fantasy genre.”

 —Far Beyond Reality

  “It is, for me, wonderful escapist fiction. Except that, it’s not. Or not entirely. In fact, I think Kay might actually be, in his own way, a damn fine historian. The difference between Kay and some other fantasy novels, is two things: his historical sensibility, and his writing style. When I read novels by GGK I am constantly struck by how he is able to make the ideas of academic history come to life in a fictional world.”

 —Everyday History

 “Who is this Guy Gavriel Kay and how does he hijack my imagination so easily?In my review of Kay’s Under Heaven , the 2010 American Library Association Best Fantasy Novel, I asked, “How is he ever going to top this book?”  The answer, with as much certainty as I can express, is River Of Stars . .. “

 —Fantasy Matters

 “ River of Stars is a poetic meditation on duty, compromise, politics and power that has an epic, historical sweep grounded in a host of intensely personal, well-realized stories. Fans of George R.R. Martin’s popular “Song of Ice and Fire” books – or the Game of Thrones TV adaptation – who are looking to scratch that itch in the years between new books will find a lot to like here, as Kay’s book is every bit as in-depth a piece of political fantasy as Martin’s work…joining Kay’s early epic Tigana as well as ambitious later works like The Lions of Al-Rassan and Sailing to Sarantium in putting forth a very strong argument that suggests Kay as, quite possibly, the greatest fantasy writer working today.”

 —Luxury Reading

  “ River of Stars is a success on just about every level. The story is powerful and engaging, the characters are complex and well realized, and the greater themes of the novel such as heroism and man’s role in society are thoughtfully treated. Kay’s prose is poetic without being overwrought or melodramatic. Overall, River of Stars is joy to read.”

 —Booked Solid

 “River of Stars is an epic of immense scope, covering the rise and fall of empires over decades, with many genuinely surprising twists and turns. But ultimately, it recognizes the familiarity of any human story, and so frees itself from trying too hard to avoid (or slavishly live up to) the rhythms of history and legends repeating themselves. Kay is more concerned with how you tell a story…the novel resonates because of its consistent recognition that it is inhabited by humans repeating history that has already repeated a thousand times, and its confidence that their story is still worth telling. Many of Kay’s characters are based on historical figures, again bringing to the fore the hall of mirrors that is human narrative, seamlessly connecting across fact and artifice, history and legend…Not only are Shan and Daiyan wonderfully drawn characters, so is everyone else in the story, no matter how significant or insignificant…each one’s worldview is explored with such balanced, unbiased attentiveness that empathy is always within reach of the reader, even when we’re in the heads of bloodthirsty warlords or unrepentant assassins. Every action holds a weight that has the capacity to be surprisingly moving or tragic, because we feel like we know the aspirations and fears behind them. By the end of the novel, Kay’s evident mastery over plot and character is nothing short of astonishing. In six hundred plus pages, not a word of this novel feels gratuitous, and Kay’s lyrical prose retains a sense of contemplative calm even in the midst of brutal, heated battles, sieges, and ambushes.”

 —Strange Horizons

 “I’ve always maintained, and will likely continue to maintain, that Daniel Day-Lewis is among the greatest actors of all time. While he doesn’t always pick roles that have a wide-ranging mass appeal, he only picks roles that meet his incredibly high standards. His dedication to research and to method acting, completely burying himself in a role in a way that few people can even really understand, is what has led to him being the only person to win three Best Actor academy awards. His rate of appearances in movies is low, only twelve films in twenty-four years, but I’ve yet to see a performance that didn’t utterly blow me away. I include the above to really communicate what I am saying when I compare Guy Gavriel Kay to Daniel Day-Lewis. He is similarly non-prolific, with twelve novels in thirty years, and similarly dedicated to his craft in a way that few people seem to be. Each of his books contains an afterword which talks about the research conducted, works referenced, and experts consulted, and it just flabbergasts me. I’ve read his entire bibliography and not only was I not disappointed, I was hard pressed to find a single thing to complain about. You should read this book if you have an appreciation for expertly crafted, character-driven fantasy of the highest order; if you want to really get to know characters, to get a deep sense of them, and their place in their society and their role therein; if you want to close a book’s back cover, take a deep breath, set it down, and not even consider picking up another book until you’ve had time to just appreciate the raw artistry you’ve just witnessed.”

 —The Ranting Dragon

 The second of Guy Gavriel Kay’s Chinese novels is as enthralling and thought-provoking take on classic historical events as the first, Under Heaven… It’s a hugely enjoyable read and more than just a romp thought the past… Whether you’re feeling philosophical or not, River of Stars is a whole lot of fun, exciting and substantial.

 ­­––”That’s Beijing” Magazine

 Posted in River of Stars 

 | 
 11 Replies 

 Cover up 

 Posted on December 11, 2013 by Guy Kay 

 Reply 

 Well, the cover is up online, so the title of the post works, right? Right?

 At least it is a better pun than one I saw today in the National Post: ‘For Whom the Bell Tolkiens’. Meh. Up with that I will not put!

 Here is the new Penguin Canada trade paperback cover, for the edition that will be released in the spring. They did a reveal on their website this morning.

 Penguin Canada paperback cover

 I have been very lucky with  River of Stars in my English-language covers. (We’ll start seeing some of the foreign language cover roughs soon. Cross fingers with me.) I loved the blue court figure for the Canadian and US hardcovers (and the US will adapt it for their paperback) and I loved the beautiful UK cover as well (they are also staying with a variant of this for their pb).

 I think this new effort by the Penguins in Canada is terrific. My publisher/editor, Nicole Winstanley had some  strong ideas about what she wanted to try for, but of course it becomes the task of the (long-suffering?) art director and department to find visual ways to achieve this. I know, because they made a point of telling me (!) that a lot of work and fine tuning went into this look. I saw it in next-to-last version and had only one note, which they agreed with, and smoothly incorporated.

 In the final version, the yellow for title and name will be gold, and the black tree will very likely be embossed/raised.This will be strong on the shelves, and online, I think. It feels classy without being forbidding, and the red and gold and black work very well – classically, to my mind.

 I imagine people will have favourites among the three that have so far appeared. I don’t think that’s an issue at all because obviously our aesthetic tastes vary. There is probably someone out there who  loves the Hungarian cover for  Ysabel . (Actually, I don’t think there can be. I take that back.)

 Covers for books also have to incorporate awareness on the part of the publishers as to the nature of their specific market, the writer’s readership base (and possible expansion of that) and the dictates of a given format. A hardcover isn’t a trade paperback which isn’t a mass market paperback, among other issues.

 A website a while back was going to put the US/CDN and the UK hardcovers up online for a preference vote, I don’t think it has happened yet. I’m as intrigued as anyone by the results of such comparisons, but in the end, they can tell us something about aesthetics, but less about  effectiveness . There is a famous story of Clive Barker’s  Books of Blood first coming out in the US with quite stylish covers – and bombing. They were pulled, reissued with more downmarket ‘gore’ covers – and took off.

 I remain a gore-free cover zone, and am entirely happy to remain so.

 Posted in River of Stars 

 | 
 Leave a reply 

 Post navigation

 ← Older posts 

 Tweets by @guygavrielkay 

 Search 

 Recent Posts

 Autumn leaves… 

 August, it seems to be 

 Father’s Day 

 Photo Finish 

 Photo Contest! 

 Recent Comments

 Colleen Heffernan on Seasonal note 

 Kirsten M Blair on Autumn leaves… 

 Kira Gushulak on Autumn leaves… 

 Jane Ann McLachlan on Tour Schedule 

 Jane Ann McLachlan on Father’s Day 

 Archives

 October 2016 

 August 2016 

 June 2016 

 May 2016 

 April 2016 

 February 2016 

 January 2016 

 November 2015 

 October 2015 

 August 2015 

 July 2015 

 June 2015 

 December 2014 

 September 2014 

 July 2014 

 June 2014 

 May 2014 

 February 2014 

 January 2014 

 December 2013 

 November 2013 

 October 2013 

 September 2013 

 August 2013 

 July 2013 

 June 2013 

 May 2013 

 April 2013 

 March 2013 

 February 2013 

 January 2013 

 December 2012 

 November 2012 

 October 2012 

 Proudly powered by WordPress 

 