 A character study with Simon Vance | Audible.com 

 Home 

 Latest 

 Best of 2026 

 Interviews 

 Collected 

 More Hear My Story 

 5 Listens 

 Audible Essentials 

 Fandoms 

 Quotes 

 Newsletters 

 Reviews 

 Editors 

 Audicted 

 A character study with Simon Vance 

 On the latest episode of Audicted, we celebrate some of the most iconic characters in literature and the performers who give voice to them.

 The Audible Editors October 13, 2021

 Play Article

 ( 1-Minute Listen )

 Play Article

 ( 1-Minute Listen )

 00:00 00 : 00 

 In this episode of Audicted, cohosts Katie O’Connor and Kat Johnson highlight some of their favorite characters in literature, and share a special conversation with the award-winning narrator Simon Vance. They touch on his process, some of his most notable roles, and more. Download or stream the full episode here .

 Simon Vance on his origins as a narrator 

 SV : I mean, I can go so back to something like age six. So my dad gave me…actually 11, when he gave me a tape recorder. He recorded me at age six reading one of the  Winnie the Pooh  stories, but at 11 I got a tape recorder, so I started making silly noises and funny voices into it, and I've never stopped. 

 On crafting the character of Sherlock Holmes in audio

 Katie O’Connor:  One of the, perhaps, most iconic characters that you've taken on is Sherlock Holmes. We were curious what it was like to voice a character who has been portrayed and interpreted so many times, and what you maybe wanted to do differently, or make sure you absolutely got right with him?

 SV: Sherlock Holmes is an interesting case, because of course I grew up with Sherlock Holmes and he's been present throughout my life in so many different incarnations. I think the one that's really stuck with me the most is Jeremy Brett's. I was probably a teenager when he started them, or whenever I watched all of them, and to me he was the quintessential Sherlock Holmes. But there's also so many others down the years, you know, not forgetting Cumberbatch and his version and all the others. The thing is, and what I've said before is, the text is the source. If it's not there, and you try to put something on top of it, it might work, but basically that's not your responsibility. Your responsibility is to take the text and then draw everything you can from that and I guess if you have to then ladle something on top of that, you can. But for the most part, you go to the original. Now, with Sherlock Holmes it's so iconic, so many different versions. I know that I took bits of all of them and in my head, in that play, that movie that I was running in my head, they were all kind of wandering around there in some way. But all of those came from the original text so what I was drawing from them was probably just through them from the text that I already had in my head.

 Also in this episode:

 Gone Girl 

 Gillian Flynn 

 Presents are being wrapped and reservations are being made when Nick's clever and beautiful wife disappears from their rented McMansion on the Mississippi River....

 Get this title 

 Claudia and the New Girl 

 Ann M. Martin 

 Claudia has always been the most outrageous girl in her class...until Ashley Wyeth comes along. Ashley's really different - she dresses in hippie clothes, wears six earrings and work boots, and is the most fantastic artist Claudia has ever met....

 Get this title 

 Born a Crime 

 Trevor Noah 

 Winner: Celebrity Memoir 

The host of The Daily Show steps away from the headlines to tell his own incredible coming-of-age story, set during the final years and aftermath of apartheid-era South Africa. It's a story that begins with Noah's mother throwing him from a moving car to avoid a potentially fatal dispute with gangsters and follows the comedian's path to self-discovery amidst episodes both bittersweet and comical. Attuned to the power of language at a young age — as a means of acceptance and influence in a country divided, then subdivided into groups at odds with one another — Noah's raw, personal journey becomes something extraordinary in audio. His chameleon-like ability to mimic accents and dialects, to shift effortlessly between languages including English, Xhosa, and Zulu, and to embody characters throughout his past are all on display. The result is a stunning memoir, filled with humor and heart. 

 See all finalists in Celebrity Memoir 

 Get this title 

 When Women Ruled the World 

 Kara Cooney 

 This riveting narrative explores the lives of six remarkable female pharaohs, from Hatshepsut to Cleopatra - women who ruled with real power - and shines a piercing light on our own perceptions of women in power today....

 Get this title 

 The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo 

 Stieg Larsson , Reg Keeland - translator 

 Snowscape 

If you haven't already listened to the thrilling, Simon Vance-narrated, Swedish-set Millennium Series, what are you waiting for ... Summer ? Who knows what that will even be like.

 Get this title 

 The Complete Sherlock Holmes 

 Sir Arthur Conan Doyle 

 Sir Arthur Conan Doyle’s Sherlock Holmes tales are rightly ranked among the seminal works of mystery and detective fiction.

 Get this title 

 A Brightness Long Ago 

 Guy Gavriel Kay 

 International best-selling author Guy Gavriel Kay's latest work is set in a world evoking early Renaissance Italy and offers an extraordinary cast of characters whose lives come together through destiny, love, and ambition....

 Get this title 

 Dune 

 Frank Herbert 

 Set on a desert planet, Dune is the story of Paul Atreides, who would become the mysterious Maud'dib, avenge a plot against his family, and bring to fruition humankind's most ancient dream....

 Get this title 

 Dracula [Audible Edition] 

 Bram Stoker 

 I used to be super intimidated by the classics, but eventually I realized that you don’t have to read or like all of them, you just have to find the ones that do it for you. Dracula is one of those classics I’ve devoured time and time again. Even with all the film adaptations out there, Stoker is still the best source to go to for a dark vampire tale. 

 Get this title 

 Yours Cruelly, Elvira 

 Cassandra Peterson 

 The woman behind the icon known as Elvira, Mistress of the Dark, the undisputed Queen of Halloween, reveals her full story, filled with intimate bombshells - and told by the bombshell herself....

 Get this title 

 The Love Hypothesis 

 Ali Hazelwood 

 When a fake relationship between scientists meets the irresistible force of attraction, it throws one woman's carefully calculated theories on love into chaos....

 Get this title 

 Poirot Investigates 

 Agatha Christie 

 Poirot Investigates is a collection of short stories written by English author Agatha Christie and first published in the UK in March 1924. In the 11 stories, famed eccentric detective Hercule Poirot solves a myriad of mysteries involving greed, jealousy, and revenge....

 Get this title 

 Interview with the Vampire 

 Anne Rice 

 The Vampire Chronicles 

 Book 1, Interview with the Vampire 

Books in Series: Interview with the Vampire (Book 1); The Vampire Lestat (Book 2); The Queen of the Damned (Book 3); The Tale of the Body Thief (Book 4); Memnoch the Devil (Book 5); The Vampire Armand (Book 6); Merrick (Book 7); Blood and Gold (Book 8); Blackwood Farm (Book 9); Blood Canticle (Book 10); Prince Lestat (Book 11); Prince Lestat and the Realms of Atlantis (Book 12); Blood Communion (Book 13)

Anne Rice’s name is near synonymous with the word vampire. Beginning with the iconic Interview with the Vampire , this expansive and long-running series is perfect for any listener who is a little thirsty for bloodthirst. Originating as a short story, Rice expanded it into a full novel about the life of a vampire, Louis de Pointe du Lac, who decides to tell his life story to a reporter. With 13 entries in this ongoing series, there is plenty to get into for those seeking a thrilling horror, including the travails of popular character Prince Lestat de Lioncourt.

 Get this title 

 Bring Up the Bodies 

 Hilary Mantel 

 Though he battled for seven years to marry her, Henry is disenchanted with Anne Boleyn. She has failed to give him a son and her sharp intelligence and audacious will alienate his old friends and the noble families of England....

 Get this title 

 On the Come Up 

 Angie Thomas 

 Sixteen-year-old Bri wants to be one of the greatest rappers of all time. Or at least win her first battle. As the daughter of an underground hip hop legend who died right before he hit big, Bri’s got massive shoes to fill....

 Get this title 

 Listen to the most recent episode of Audicted here: 

 Ep. 6: Iconic Characters, Featuring an Interview with Simon Vance

 Up Next

 The Best Audiobook Narrators to Listen to Right Now

 An audiobook is nothing without a good narrator. This list of our favorite narrators (and their top audiobook) will ensure you're listening to the best of the best.

 Obsessively specific nonfiction for your next rabbit hole

 The essential guide to Agatha Christie

 The best audiobooks to give dad this Father’s Day 

 Tags

 Audicted 

 Audiobooks 

 Narrators 

 Characters 

 Scroll to top

 © Copyright 1997 - 2026 Audible Inc.

 About Audible | 

 Careers | 

 Conditions of Use | 

 Privacy Notice | 

 Interest-Based Ads | 

 Cookies | 

 Your ads privacy choices | 

 