 
 'The Left Hand of Darkness' by Ursula K. Le Guin 
 Books on GIF 
 Subscribe Sign in 
 'The Left Hand of Darkness' by Ursula K. Le Guin
 'Any need to explain the sources of that fear vanished with the fear; what I was left with was, at last, acceptance of him as he was.'—Review #280
 Books on GIF 
 Apr 26, 2026 
 43
 13
 3
 Share
 GIF by @helloall via Giphy.com 
 I read ‘The Left Hand of Darkness’ by Ursula K. Le Guin for the first time many years ago before I started writing Books on GIF. I remember being deeply moved by the sci-fi classic, even being brought to tears during a pivotal scene (something only one other novel has done ). I had long wanted to revisit Le Guin’s book and discuss it with you, but there was always something else to read. With BoG’s 10th anniversary coming next month, it finally seemed like a good time to do a re-read. I was like: 
 GIF by @thelword via Giphy.com 
 I wanted to see if I would have the same emotional response to the story, and if I would pick up on anything new. But I also had concerns. I previously reviewed Le Guin’s novels ‘The Dispossessed’ and ‘The Lathe of Heaven,’ and had mixed feelings. What if I didn’t like ‘The Left Hand of Darkness’ the second time around? I had it listed among my favorite novels and had recommended it many times. Would I tarnish a positive memory and feel I had steered folks the wrong way? With these conflicting thoughts, I reached up to the top row of our bookshelf, where the mass-market paperbacks live, and pulled down the book. 
 It’s been so long that I don’t remember where I bought this copy, but it was probably at Strand Bookstore . 
 Genly Ai has spent the past two years freezing his butt off. He’s been trying to get the people of the snowy planet Gethen (also called ‘Winter’) to join an interplanetary league of human-populated planets called the Ekumen to share knowledge and culture across the stars. So far, no dice. Genly’s from Earth and is the Ekumen’s ambassador to Gethen, but he’s also the first alien the Gethenians have ever encountered. They’ve welcomed and accommodated him, but they’ve also been cool to his mission. They’re wary not just because Genly’s from another planet, but also because he’s physically different and strange to them. You see, the Gethenians don’t have genders or sexes as an Earth-born person might understand them. They’re androgynous, possessing both male and female traits, and they fluidly alter their characteristics depending on their partner. When they learn that Genly is permanently male, they’re like: 
 GIF via Giphy.com 
 Genly also is perplexed by his hosts in the Gethenian kingdom of Karhide, not only because he can’t get his head around their physical nature, but he also struggles to understand the Gethenians’ complex system of politics, protocol and honor called shifgrethor. Genly’s bungling at shifgrethor causes him to make inadvertent slights and missteps that undermine his mission. He also misjudges who are his enemies and who are his potential allies. For example, the prime minister of Karhide, named Estraven, is trying to help Genly, but Genly’s distrustful. Genly doesn’t heed Estraven’s too-subtle guidance ahead of his audience with Karhide’s king; Genly botches the meeting and is oblivious to the mortal danger he’s now in. Things eventually go south, and circumstances force Estraven and Genly into an arduous and unforgiving journey across Gethen’s frozen wasteland. All they have are the clothes on their backs and the supplies they can push along on a sledge. They face a choice: overcome their differences and survive, or end up like:
 GIF by @spongebob via Giphy.com 
 Genly and Estraven’s journey across the icy wilderness is a harrowing and brutal slog through blizzards and other deadly hazards. As they endure it, it grows into a beautiful and heartbreaking exploration of friendship, identity, love and acceptance. Their shared experience forces them to abandon their prejudices about gender and identity, to look beyond their physical and cultural differences and to see their core humanity. Their realization challenges us to do the same, to understand that though our differences may seem strange or unsettling, we all are trying to get through this arduous life as best we can; we’re all pushing the same sledge:
 GIF by @primevideo via Giphy.com 
 I had forgotten how much world-building Le Guin includes. In addition to extensive detail about the attributes and habits of the Gethenians, we learn so much about the trees and snows and mountains and buildings and ice of their planet. One detail in particular stands out: Gethen has no birds. Can you imagine it, a world without birdsong? To wake up every morning to complete silence? How would you know you were alive without:
 GIF by @jojofalkillustration via Giphy.com 
 I’m happy to report that my second reading of ‘The Left Hand of Darkness’ did not disappoint or diminish my love for the book. I didn’t cry this time—I was braced for the gut punch I knew was coming—but I was once again moved by the story. I’ll continue to highly recommend it. If you’re looking for a classic science-fiction novel (it won both a Hugo Award and a Nebula Award ) that searches for the deeper meaning of humanity, you should definitely check out this book. 
 An opening excerpt: 
 From the Archives of Hain. Transcript of Ansible Document 01-01101-934-2-Gethen: To the Stabile on Ollul: Report from Genly Ai, First Mobile on Gethen/Winter, Hainish Cycle 93 Ekumenical Year 1490-97. 
 I’ll make my report as if I told a story, for I was taught as a child on my homeworld that Truth is a matter of the imagination. The soundest fact may fail or prevail in the style of its telling: like that singular organic jewel of our seas, which grows brighter as one woman wears it and, worn by another, dulls and goes to dust. Facts are no more solid, coherent, round, and real than pearls are. But both are sensitive. 
 The story is not all mine, nor told by me alone. Indeed I am not sure whose story it is; you can judge better. But it is all one, and if at moments the facts seem to alter with an altered voice, why then you can choose the fact you like best; yet none of them are false, and it is all one story. 
 It starts on the 44th diurnal of the Year 1491, which on the planet Winter in the nation of Karhide was Odharhahad Tuwa or the twenty-second day of the third month of spring in the Year One. It is always the Year One here. Only the dating of every past and future year changes each New Year’s Day, as one counts backwards or forwards from the unitary Now. So it was spring of the Year One in Erhenrang, capital city of Karhide, and I was in peril of my life, and did not know it. 
 My rating: 
 GIF by @RoadshowPBS via Giphy.com 
 ‘The Left Hand of Darkness’ by Ursula K. Le Guin was originally published by Macdonald & Co. Ltd. in 1969. It was published by Orbit in 1992 and reprinted many times up to and including 2013. $10.24 at Bookshop.org. 
 What’s next: 
 In two week’s well celebrate the 10th anniversary of Books on GIF. After that, we’ll kick off summer with a Memorial Day Weekend review of:
 Subscribe to Books on GIF for free!
 Subscribe 
 Books on GIF does not solicit or accept review copies. We feature books we purchase at independent bookstores around New York City and on our travels, or were borrowed electronically from the Brooklyn Public Library.
 Before you go: 
 ICYMI: Review #279 
 Books You Can Finish in a Day or Two, Part 3
 Books on GIF 
 ·
 Apr 12
 Read full story 
 Watch this: One of my recent Instagram videos gives you a tour of my desk where I write these newsletters. Enjoy! 
 If you enjoyed this review: 
 Share Books on GIF 
 Thanks for reading, and thanks especially to Donna for editing this newsletter!
 Until next time,
 GIF by @candicegifs via Giphy.com 
 Mike
 Reviews you ♥️ the most 
 ‘Middlemarch’ by George Eliot 
 ‘Wuthering Heights’ by Emily Brontë 
 ‘Jane Eyre’ by Charlotte Brontë 
 ‘James’ by Percival Everett 
 ‘Lapvona’ by Ottessa Moshfegh 
 43
 13
 3
 Share
 Previous Next 
 Discussion about this post
 Comments Restacks 
 Books on GIF 
 Apr 26 
 Author 
 Was there a book you were nervous about rereading? How did it go? Did your response to it change on the next trip through? 
 Reply
 Share
 Flybymidnight 
 Apr 26 
Liked by Books on GIF 
 Read this for the first time this year & after reading your piece here I’m already thinking of a reread! 
 Reply
 Share
 1 reply by Books on GIF 
 11 more comments... 
 Top Latest Discussions 
 No posts
 Ready for more?
 Subscribe 
 © 2026 Books on GIF · Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection notice 
 Start your Substack Get the app 
 Substack is the home for great culture
