 
 Earthsea 
 The World of Earthsea
 Only in silence the word,
only in dark the light,
only in dying life:
bright the hawk's flight
on the empty sky. 
--From the Creation of Ea 
 Earthsea is a creation of
 Ursula K. Le Guin .
The original Trilogy was composed of
 A Wizard of Earthsea (1968),
 The Tombs of Atuan (1971), and
 The Farthest Shore (1972). The fourth book,
 Tehanu: The Last Book of Earthsea was published in 1990. 
A number of stories have now been published as 
 Tales from Earthsea (2001) and a fifth novel, The Other Wind , 
also came out in late 2001.
The first published story in the Earthsea world was
 The Word of Unbinding , which was originally published in 
Fantastic (1964) and later reprinted in The Wind's Twelve 
Quarters (1975). The series has won a number of awards:
 A Wizard of Earthsea : Boston Globe-Horn Book Award in 1969.
 The Tombs of Atuan : finalist for the National Book Award for 
 Children's Literature in 1972, nominee for 1972 Mythopoeic Award.
 The Farthest Shore : 1973 National Book Award, nominee for 1973 
 Mythopoeic Award.
 Tehanu: The Last Book of Earthsea : 1990 SFWA Nebula Award, 
 nominee for 1991 Mythopoeic Award, nominee for 1990 HOMer Award
 The Other Wind : 2002 World Fantasy Award
Earthsea is a world of mostly water, with most of the land being composed of
many small islands in an archipelago with each island largely governing itself.
Magic is very important to most of the islands and mages are all trained
on the island of Roke and then sent to those places where they are most
needed. In the original series, all of the mages are male although there are
many women and men outside of Roke with limited magical abilities.
 True Names have great power on Earthsea and are guarded with great care.
Those who know your true name can command you. In fact, names are of such
great importance that one of the primary elements of magical training is to
learn the true names for as many things as possible. 
 Sparrowhawk is the title character of A Wizard of Earthsea .
He is born on the 
 island of Gont in the village of 
 Ten Alders and learns of his inborn magical strength at a young age
defending the village against an attack. He ends up being apprenticed to
 Ogion the Silent , Master Wizard of Gont who also gives him his true
name, Ged . The book is a coming of age tale telling of Sparrowhawk's
growth to maturity and lessons learned along the way. 
 The Tombs of Atuan tells the tale of Tenar , One Priestess of the
Tombs of Atuan. It too is a coming of age tale and a mature Ged , who
is now a full mage, enters into it towards the end.
 The Farthest Shore is the quest of Ged , now the Archmage of Roke,
and Arren, Prince of Enlad, to save Earthsea and the magic of Earthsea by
entering the land of the dead. They succeed, but at great cost to Ged .
Written 18 years later, Tehanu: The Last Book of Earthsea , follows
immediately upon the end of The Farthest Shore as Ged , bereft of
his magical ability, returns to the island of Gont on which he was born and on
which Tenar now lives. The first three books were primarily coming
of age tales. Tehanu is a very different story of adults and grief
and the problems of common people who have no magical powers and what strengths
they can have that those in power never need.
The Sci-Fi channel aired a 2-part, 4-hour miniseries based on the
first two books in December, 2004. Both 
 Ursula Le Guin 
and I 
have railed against it and I can not in any way recommend it. I had 
great troubles with the Lord of the Rings film adaptations but this is
an absolute travesty against a wonderful piece of fantasy literature.
 Illustrations:
 Earthsea Map, drawn by Ursula K. Le Guin (700K Jpeg, 3736x823 pixels) 
 Earthsea, from A Wizard of Earthsea , map by Catherine Stock , 1991. (245K Jpeg) 
 Earthsea, from The Farthest Shore , map by Gail Garraty , 1972. (148K Jpeg) 
 Island of Gont, from Tehanu: The Last Book of Earthsea , map by Margaret Chodos-Irvine , 1990. (340K Gif) 
 Small side images from A Wizard of Earthsea 
 ( Set 1 and 
 Set 2 ) by Ruth Robbins , 1968.
 Cover images from Bantam books 1975 paperback editions (art by Pauline Ellison). 
 A Wizard of Earthsea 
 The Tombs of Atuan 
 The Farthest Shore 
 Cover images from Bantam books recent paperback editions (art by John Jude Palencar (1991)). 
 A Wizard of Earthsea 
 The Tombs of Atuan 
 The Farthest Shore 
 Cover images from earlier Bantam books editions (art by Yvonne Gilbert (1984)). 
 A Wizard of Earthsea 
 The Farthest Shore ( alt. higher resolution scan of the front )
 Cover images from Dutch editions (by Bart van Erkel). 
 A Wizard of Earthsea 
 The Tombs of Atuan 
 The Farthest Shore 
 Cover images from 1992 Russian edition (by Denis Gordeev). 
 A Wizard of Earthsea front 
 A Wizard of Earthsea back 
 Fan art inspired by Earthsea 
 Illustrations by Laurie L Prindle of LLPrindle Design 
 Map of Gont by Cile Graaf of Belgrade, Serbia
 Earthsea's influence on me, 
 Aaron 
I don't know how old I was when I first read the Earthsea trilogy but it
had as strong an effect on me as any other books I have ever read, particularly
 A Wizard of Earthsea . I identified with Sparrowhawk more than I have
with any other character before or since and to this day use Sparrowhawk 
(or Ged) as my preferred alias on the net. His inner strength, talent,
kindness and quietness all appealed to me.
 Earthsea also defined the concept of dragons for me. The dragons
of Earthsea are wise, powerful, ancient, majestic and magical creatures who
care little for the affairs of humans and others who live for such a short 
time. Only a very few humans, the dragonlords, are interesting enough that
they are worth a dragon's effort to notice. These dragons are neither good nor
evil; they are a race totally apart from man.
This image is of Sparrowhawk in his Wizard's staff and cloak, with Otak ,
a small and rare creature who befriends him. When I use one, it is my
signature image as Sparrowhawk . Ged describes the Otak thus: " They
are small and sleek, with broad faces, and fur dark brown or brindle, and great
bright eyes. Their teeth are cruel and their temper fierce, so they are not
made pets of. They have no call or cry or any voice. .... He put it on his
shoulder in the folds of his hood and there it rode. Sometimes during the day
it jumped down and darted off into the woods, but it always came back to him,
once with a woodmouse it had caught. He laughed and told it to eat the mouse,
for he was fasting, this night being the Festival of Sunreturn. "
 Miscellaneous Links
 Ursula K. Le Guin's official web site 
 Guardian Q&A with Le Guin, 2/9/2004 
 Article by writer Max Gladstone on why A Wizard of Earthsea is "the Great Fantasy Novel" 
 Please send Aaron EMAIL if you have any 
comments on or suggestions for these pages or if you just want to say hi.
 To return to the Main House 

