 
 Always Coming Home (Ursula Le Guin) - book review 
 Danny Yee's Book Reviews 
 Subjects |
 Titles |
 Authors |
 Best Books |
 Search |
 Latest 
 Always Coming Home
 Ursula K. Le Guin
Bantam Books 1987
 A book review by Danny Yee © 1995 https://dannyreviews.com/
 Always Coming Home is one of the few works I feel can be compared
with Tolkien, though with the Silmarillion rather than with
 The Lord of the Rings , since it is a fictional ethnography
rather than a novel. Where Tolkien drew on history (along with
linguistics and mythology) to create his imaginative world, Le
Guin draws on anthropology (along with linguistics and mythology)
to create hers. This difference is clear cut: Tolkien's world has
almost no ethnographic detail, while Le Guin's has no history.
The subject of Le Guin's work is the Kesh — a people who inhabit
a valley in a far-future California and who are clearly based on
native American models. Mostly she lets them speak for themselves,
allowing the reader to learn about them through a montage of their
short stories, poems, and myths. These are laid out around a central
novella, which tells the story of a woman called Stonetelling who
leaves the valley to live with her father's people, the Condor.
The "back of the book" contains additional information about the
Kesh in more traditional ethnographic form. While there are a
few passages of reflexive commentary in Always Coming Home ,
where Pandora the archaeologist addresses the reader directly,
and some of these make direct comments on contemporary issues,
Le Guin's "message" is not directly imparted. A more explicit
account of her ideas about utopia can be found in the essay
"A Non-Euclidean View of California as a Very Cold Place to Be"
(reprinted in Dancing at the Edge of the World ).
As a work of fictional anthropology Always Coming Home is a
brilliant success. As a utopia, however, it has some major flaws.
One is the "machina ex machina" of the City of Mind, a benevolent
collection of machine intelligences which provides the Kesh and other
peoples with all the positive benefits of science and technology
(weather forecasts, global communication, etc.), while sparing
them the need to devote resources to those ends. Another is the
straw-man patriarchal and authoritarian society of the Dayao/Condor.
This is too extreme to be an interesting contrast to the Kesh, except
polemically, and its implausibility means that the failure of the
Condor to dominate the societies around them (in effect to reenact
the historical incorporation of traditional societies by empires
and centralised states) actually detracts from the credibility of Le
Guin's vision. (I can't help thinking that things would be a little
different if the Kesh were to face Julius Caesar and a single Roman
legion, even with their technological inferiority.) In an attempt to
avoid this criticism Le Guin falls back on possible genetic changes
in "human nature", a move which undercuts her work's engagement with
reality and which I found as distressing as the ending to Tehanu .
Le Guin seems to have lost the strength of mind and the intellectual
courage which were so apparent in The Dispossessed , where she went
out of her way to face the likely problems in her anarchist utopia.
Despite its flaws, Always Coming Home is a work of extraordinary
creativity. Though many who loved Le Guin's novels will find it
unapproachable, many who would never think of touching a science
fiction novel would enjoy it.
August 1995
 External links: 
- buy from Amazon.com or Amazon.co.uk 
 Related reviews: 
- books by Ursula K. Le Guin 
- more ethnographic fiction 
- more poetry 
- more science fiction 
- more short fiction 
%T Always Coming Home
%A Le Guin, Ursula K.
%I Bantam Books
%D 1987
%O paperback
%G ISBN 0553262807
%P 562pp
 Subjects |
 Titles |
 Authors |
 Best Books |
 Search |
 Latest 
 Book Reviews by Danny Yee 
