RaY
Research at the University of York St John
For more information please contact RaY at
ray@yorksj.ac.uk
Garlick, Ben and King, Liesl (2022) A geography beyond the 
Anthropocene: Ursula Le Guin’s Always Coming Home as topophilia
for survival. Cultural geographies.  
Downloaded from: https://ray.yorksj.ac.uk/id/eprint/6566/
The version presented here may differ from the published version or version of record. If 
you intend to cite from the work you are advised to consult the publisher's version:
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/14744740221126984
Research at York St John (RaY) is an institutional repository. It supports the principles of 
open access by making the research outputs of the University available in digital form. 
Copyright of the items stored in RaY reside with the authors and/or other copyright 
owners. Users may access full text items free of charge, and may download a copy for 
private study or non-commercial research. For further reuse terms, see licence terms 
governing individual outputs.  Institutional Repositories Policy Statement

https://doi.org/10.1177/14744740221126984
cultural geographies 
 1 –20
© The Author(s) 2022
Article reuse guidelines:  
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/14744740221126984
journals.sagepub.com/home/cgj
A geography beyond the 
Anthropocene: Ursula Le Guin’s 
Always Coming Home as topophilia 
for survival
Ben Garlick  and Liesl King
York St John University, UK
Abstract
The science fiction of Ursula Le Guin deftly uses prose to conjure alternative worlds, societies 
and cultures of nature amidst times of profound upheaval. Equally, her writing is suffused with 
quiet hope: the sense that we already possess the tools required to craft better futures, if only 
we paid better attention to the here and now. Across her work, Le Guin poses political and 
ethical questions about the value of, and our relationship to, the wider environment; and the 
consequences that (may) lie in wait along our contemporary lines of flight. In Always Coming 
Home (1985), she excavates a possible future: a speculative cultural geography of life on earth 
that is both careful in its placing and caring of place. In this paper, we consider the space-times 
of this experimental ‘archaeology of the future’ and its imagined post-Anthropocene landscape. 
We explore how Le Guin’s non-linear, digressive, fragmentary writing mobilises the love of place 
(topophilia) to manifest an awareness of there being multiple, potential, situated articulations of 
life after the Anthropocene in tension with profound uncertainty over the earthly legacies of our 
current modes of existence.
Keywords
Anthropocene, landscape, love, science fiction, topophilia, Ursula Le Guin
Introduction: narrating Anthropocene geographies
Discussions of the ‘Anthropocene’ inevitably imagine future geographies. Often, apocalyptic, bar-
ren or ‘blasted’ landscapes materialise socio-cultural anxiety in the face of crisis. 1 However, cau-
tious hope is also manifest in stories of conservation and care that might ‘provision’ future 
ecological abundance.
2 In each case, such narratives tend to figure our present as a vital moment of 
transition, rather than terminus, though to what remains uncertain.3
Corresponding author:
Ben Garlick, School of Humanities, York St John University, Lord Mayor’s Walk, York YO31 7EX, UK. 
Email: b.garlick@yorksj.ac.uk
1126984CGJ0010.1177/14744740221126984cultural geographiesGarlick and King
research-article2022
Article

2 cultural geographies 00(0)
A challenge when speculating on liveable futures is figuring ways of living that might take us 
there. Both comprehending and responding to the distributed causality of planetary change has 
prompted the environmental crisis of the Anthropocene to be seen as a crisis of representation. For 
Bill McKibben, Western paralysis, or apathy, in the face of climate catastrophe reflects our fatal 
‘confusion’ with regards the unfolding geographies of ecological crisis.
4 Timothy Morton argues 
the Anthropocene is characterised by the proliferation of ‘hyperobjects’ – such as ‘climate change’, 
‘nuclear waste’ or ‘microplastics’ – each exerting a force in shaping the world, yet resistant to 
human sense-making because of their complex, distributed, inhuman spatio-temporality. A world 
of hyperobjects poses issues for tracing more-than-human geographies, potentially signalling the 
ends of ‘landscape’ as viable spatial imaginary amidst a world of scattered causality and pan-scalar 
entanglement.
5
Nevertheless, the nebulous, distributed geographies of the Anthropocene do not negate the value 
of situated perspectives. Much writing in geography (and beyond) examines the Anthropocene 
through the lens of place and landscape. More popularly oriented nature writing similarly offers 
encounters with place to grasp the Anthropocene’s affects.
6 Work on extinction, for example, traces 
specific, spatial stories of species decline to illuminate losses unfolding in multiple registers, and 
propose means to articulate or resist them.
7 David Matless conceptualises UK coastal erosion land-
scapes as ‘Anthropo-scenes’, making fathomable deep time environmental transformations. 
Crucially, engaging with Anthropo-scenes as the ‘stepping point for [. . .] stories’ of ecological 
transformation requires acts of representation and looking, as well as phenomenological encounter.
8 
Aurora Fredriksen’s theorisation of ‘ordinary Anthropocenes’, emergent from particular human-
nonhuman assemblages haunted by longer histories of habitat degradation, helps attune to more 
mundane experiences of anthropogenic ecological change.
9 Anna Tsing’s influential work on the 
landscapes of forestry and mushroom picking in the Pacific Northwest and Japan considers the pos-
sibilities and excesses of life amidst the ruins of capitalism.
10 Clearly, then, ‘the geographies being 
engaged for the development of Anthropocene thinking matter’.11
Consequently, this paper critically examines the work of Ursula Le Guin, whose writing inspires 
many via its hopeful worlding. Our engagement with Le Guin reflects an appreciation of the power 
of stories to articulate environmental crisis. Her brand of feminist science fiction (sf) addresses 
many issues that concern contemporary cultural geographies of the Anthropocene, asking how 
particular realities emerge, exist and endure amidst shared conditions of entanglement, violence 
and co-becoming.
12 Offering geographers ‘an informed view of possible futures [. . .] imagina-
tively constructed’, her sf texts provide vital ‘cognitive spaces’ for extrapolating potential trajecto-
ries out of present restrictions and crises.
13 As an ‘inherently geographical’ genre, sf worlds reflect 
and refract ‘real physical, social, and cultural landscapes’ via experimental acts of world building 
that connect the futuristic, or fantastic, with the spaces of a differently perceived, lived present and 
their potential to be otherwise.
14
Rather than re-assert heroic narratives of progress, Le Guin’s sf conjures alternative worlds, 
societies and cultures of nature that materialise, and make ‘thinkable’, more abstract questions of 
ethics, violence and interrelating in times of upheaval. Equally, her stories exude modest optimism: 
the sense that we already possess the tools required to craft alternative futures. We examine her 
novel, Always Coming Home (hereafter ACH), published 1985. An ‘archaeology of the future’, 
ACH constructs the fictional lifeworld of the Kesh: a human society that ‘might be going to have 
lived a long, long time from now’ amidst the ruins of a California ravaged by global catastrophe.
15 
As argued, ACH demonstrates the potential of sf writing to articulate potential geographies beyond 
the Anthropocene via projects of ‘place love’ attuned to future survival.
Additionally, ACH is a particularly intriguing text because of its presentation, stylised as 
anthropological ethnography. Thus, the text articulates a place-love informed by Le Guin’s 
Garlick and King 3
childhood explorations of landscape, and the academic influence of her father, anthropologist 
Alfred Kroeber. Kroeber spent much of his life championing the importance of studying and 
understanding indigenous societies in California, articulating an approach to studying culture that 
eschewed environmental determinism and evolutionary conceptualisations of ‘civilisation’ 
(alongside propositions of inherent, hierarchical racial difference). Instead, he advocated a con-
textual, situated examination of societies in the vein of his mentor Franz Boas.
16 His work is 
significant for geographers, given its influence upon the Berkley School approach to studying 
culture and landscape.
17 Moreover, his practicing anthropology as a gathering of fragments that 
pieced together located ways of living haunts ACH and it’s densely descriptive, at times encyclo-
paedic, treatment of a possible future geography. Equally, in the context of current critical reflec-
tions on Kroeber’s practices, the text entrains questions about the more troubling legacies of 
anthropologists’ efforts to represent non-Western peoples (often conceived as non- or pre-mod-
ern) and their environments. Consequently, whilst foregrounding the progressive potential within 
Le Guin’s treatment of place, we remain cognisant of the awkwardness of ACH’s political project, 
seeking as it does to draw inspiration from indigenous cosmologies, and its risk of appearing to 
promote both appropriation and romanticisation.
18 As discussed below, such concerns are present 
in Le Guin’s own thinking and throughout the text’s account of a possible future geography.
The following section introduces Le Guin’s novel and its critique of rationalist utopia. We then 
proceed to conceptualise the relationship between the novel and California’s Napa Valley. In turn, 
we present our alternative reading of the novel as a practical project of place-love oriented towards 
future survival, informed by work on place and landscape characteristic of cultural geographies’ 
recent ‘telling turn’.
19 Doing so, we argue, reinforces the importance of places and landscapes as 
containers of stories, possibilities and futures in the Anthropocene.
Roaming the Valley
Unfolding amidst a future version/vision of California, ACH invites the reader into the world of the 
‘Kesh’: a human society inhabiting the ‘Valley of Na’ (Napa Valley). Billed as a novel,
20 yet more 
a collection of fragments that cross-cut, interweave, complement, even contradict, reading ACH 
recalls Deleuze and Guattari’s notion of book-as-rhizome. An open-ended tangle of lines of affect 
and flight, the Valley coalesces and pulls apart in the process of writing and interpretation.
21 An 
experimental imagining of a liveable society and landscape following planet-wide destruction 
packaged akin to an anthropological monograph, ACH hosts multiple readings. Le Guin defers 
agency to the reader, letting them to explore the Valley in a non-linear, open-ended manner.
22 
Evoking the Deleuzian ‘plateau’, her text is ‘all middle’.23
In terms of content, the life-story of Stone Telling, a Kesh woman, informs the most consistent 
narrative. Told in three parts, Stone Telling relays her childhood and journey to distant lands with 
her birth father; a warrior from the patriarchal, militarist Dayao, or Condor – a society sharply 
contrasting the Kesh, whilst mirroring our own. Stone Telling’s tale introduces and elaborates ele-
ments of Kesh society examined elsewhere, and her experiences and ultimate return reflect the 
novel’s titular refrain. The remainder of ACH comprises short(er) pieces, illustrations and, origi-
nally, musical recordings that divulge, or collage, Valley life. Presented as a gathering together of 
the collected knowledge of the Kesh, the text has been ostensibly compiled by anthropologist-
ethnographer ‘Pandora’, its content relayed via parable, proverb, poetry, drama, song and the ‘fac-
tual’ documentation of practical information (much housed in additional, encyclopaedia-like 
appendices referred to as ‘The Back of the Book’).
24 A consistent voice and participating character, 
narrator or else implicit translator/reporter, Pandora seemingly hails from our time, operating as 
cipher for both the reader and Le Guin. She dramatises the challenge of representing and 
4 cultural geographies 00(0)
comprehending this future and her often frustrated efforts to communicate with various Kesh 
informants, and document the minutiae of their world, underscores the ontological gap between 
our society and theirs, as well as the awkward relationship between anthropological ethnographer 
and their subject, questioning the limits of imagining and materialising this future.
25
We elaborate aspects of Valley living below, but in brief the Kesh practice a hunter-gatherer 
existence organised around relations of kinship with a variety of human and non-human ‘people’. 
Each ‘person’ in the valley is affiliated to a particular ‘house’, defining their (cross-species) famil-
ial connections and obligations, delimiting sexual practices and diagramming the relational ecol-
ogy of place. Each ‘House’ has an associated ‘heyima’ or lodge, serving as ‘material manifestation’ 
of Kesh cosmology and practical all-purpose community buildings for worship, political debate, 
workshops, discussion, accommodation, knowledge accumulation, education, resource manage-
ment and economic activities (within and beyond the valley). Humans and ‘domesticated’ nonhu-
mans (e.g. cohabiting animals, hunted fauna, gathered flora, building materials) belong to five 
‘Earth’ houses. Other nonhumans (truly ‘wild’ animals, birds), inhuman agencies (the wind, the 
rain) and past/potential human others (the dead, the unborn) belong to four ‘Sky’ houses.
26 This 
cosmology is encapsulated by the ‘heyiya-if’ or ‘hinge’ (Figure 1). An ‘inexhaustible metaphor’,27 
the hinge informs philosophy, architecture, town planning, ceremonial activities and spiritual life. 
Its spiral arms evoke the Taoist taijitu (the yin/yang symbol) as well as the spirals featured through-
out indigenous American iconography. At its centre resides a point of disconnection, signifying the 
unknowable possibility of change and difference, and the un-representable, yet vital, relationship 
between earth (actual, material existence) and sky (excessive, virtual existence). As Pandora com-
ments: ‘A hinge connects and it holds apart’.
28
When exactly the novel occurs, beyond several thousand years hence, remains ambiguous. The 
Kesh are doubly ‘puzzled’ by questions of origin.29 Neither do they possess answers to such ques-
tions; nor do they comprehend time in terms of a periodised, teleological ‘history’. Thus, there is a 
profound discontinuity (captured by the hinge) between our time and geography, and that of the 
Kesh, undermining any clear sense of historical progression from one to the other. As conveyed via 
several awkward exchanges between Pandora and Kesh individuals, they seem to favour thinking 
in terms of geography and journeys through lived landscapes, over progression through linear time. 
One man, Gather, who enjoys studying the historical records of past architectural styles, leaves 
Figure 1. The ‘heyiya-if’/hinge depicted in Always Coming Home (1985). Illustration by Margaret Chodos-
Irvine.
Source: Wikimedia Commons.
Garlick and King 5
Pandora frustrated when he cannot answer questions as to when in history the Kesh are to be 
located. As she describes:
He doesn’t perceive time as a direction, let alone a progress, but as a landscape in which one may go any 
number of directions, or nowhere. He spatialises time; it is not an arrow, nor a river, but a house, the 
house he lives in. One may go from room to room, and come back; to go outside, all you have to do is 
open the door.
30
That is not to say the Kesh they have no concept of temporality: they track the seasons and count 
yearly cycles relative to lived events in the valley (e.g. rituals, harvests). The origin myths of Kesh 
culture suggest that Valley society emerges after several world-ending events (seemingly climate 
crisis and nuclear conflict).
31 Consistently, however, the gyre of circling buzzards and condors 
recurs across the text, conceptualising circularity and return without ‘closing the circle’.32 ‘Coming 
home’ maintains community in harmony with place, rejecting repetition, closure or stasis in favour 
of change and uncertainty.
Linear accounts of civilisation are associated with the ‘sickness’ of past societies, and the cause 
of the world’s ruination. The Kesh inhabit a version of Earth degraded by multiple cycles of anthro-
pogenic destruction. Much of California as we know it lies underwater, its urban centres drowned. 
Large areas have been rendered toxic and uninhabitable; and the coasts and oceans are strewn with 
industrial waste. The Kesh are ‘surrounded with evidence of our values’,
33 manifesting at multiple 
scales. Human and nonhuman bodies in the Valley bear the ‘biocidal legacy’ 34 of stillbirth, con-
genital conditions and restricted life expectancy. Living in ruins prompts the Kesh to reject world-
views manifesting such destruction as the doing of ‘backward-headed’ people who failed to think 
on the consequences of their avaricious quest for progress.
35
The Kesh are, however, hardly technophobic. They generate hydroelectricity, maintain a train 
on wooden rails and construct buildings, wineries and mills. Additionally, communities over 50 
persons host ‘exchanges’: computer terminals enabling inter-settlement communication and access 
to the accumulated information archives of a networked artificial intelligence, the ‘City of Mind’. 
In this future, the City of Mind has long since advanced beyond its human creators, becoming self-
aware and extending its project of information accumulation into the stars. Instead of rejecting 
technology, then, the Kesh choose not to pursue the construction of technoscientific shibboleths, 
favouring the practical, tacit skills and knowledge required to live well in the Valley over those 
complex techno-industrial assemblages (and associated systems of inequality and degradation) 
needed to build tanks, bombs and planes. Valley technology is ‘completely adequate to the needs 
of the people’.
36
Finally, the Kesh are not the only humans living in this world. Other societies – nomadic pig 
herders, coastal merchants, distant cotton growers – exist in (and beyond) California and exhibit 
their own ways of living. These other human societies appear analogous to the Kesh in many ways, 
with whom they trade and communicates from time to time. Some, however, are strikingly differ-
ent in outlook and activity, such as the antagonistic Condor or Dayao. Therefore, whilst Le Guin 
focuses on the Valley, her world is populated with other ‘introverted but cooperative peoples’, 
engaged in distinct projects of survival.
37
A feminist utopia
Le Guin’s writing consciously shirks mainstream sf conventions. Less concerned with idealising 
the ‘high-tech’, her worlds manifest slower, anarchic, anti-authoritarian societies.
38 Le Guin disre-
gards obvious heroes or epic battles, viewing fiction as ‘a bag [. . .] holding things in a particular, 
6 cultural geographies 00(0)
powerful relation to one another’. Thus, her novels are ‘full of beginnings without ends, of initia-
tions, of losses, of transformations and translations’. 39 These are worlds to wander in rather than 
race across.
Consequently, ACH, like The Dispossessed (1974) and The Left Hand of Darkness (1969), 
expresses an alternative feminist, process-oriented utopianism.40 The question of utopia is central 
to sf world-building. For Darko Suvin, utopianism requires grounding in scientific reality via the 
‘novum’: the ‘specific object or change introduced by the author [that] leads to the fictional world’s 
estrangement’.
41 In this sense, utopian sf aims to model how current circumstances could lead to 
‘progressive alternatives’ and futures, extrapolating trajectories of (possible) innovation. Often 
critical of present issues, the novum should ideally open onto better, more equal futures.
42 
Suggesting tangible, material continuities between our ‘now’ and the text’s ‘then’, sf utopias are 
tethered in provocative ways to contemporary modes of living and emphasise the challenges of the 
present as much as the future.
43
For Le Guin, figuring utopia ‘a novum away’ prevents appreciating the ‘possibilities inherent in 
the world we have’.44 She rejects the idea of modernist ‘progress’ as implicated in the ills of con-
temporary planetary degradation, accusing rationalist or ‘Euclidean’ utopians of reproducing such 
discourses. By imagining societies where, conversely, progress is subordinate to process, ACH 
renders in fiction Le Guin’s critique of utopia as a masculine, ‘yang’ enterprise; ‘aggressive, lineal, 
progressive, creative, expanding, advancing, and hot’.
45 An obsession with progress in the present, 
at the expense of environment and people, reproduces a colonising will to master, measure and 
control. In ACH, the City of Mind satirises these ideals via its objective of ‘a total mental model or 
replica of the Universe’.
46 In contrast to ‘yang’ utopia, its ‘[m]odels, plans, blueprints, wiring dia-
grams’, Le Guin’s ‘yin’ utopia is ‘dark, wet, obscure, weak, yielding, passive, participatory, circu-
lar, cyclical, peaceful, nurturant, retreating, contracting, and cold’.
47 Such ways of living are 
un-mapped and involves inhabiting the ‘edges’ of progress, avoiding ‘a one-way future consisting 
only of growth’.
48 Turning (y)inwards, slowing down and learning to know and value the specific 
ecologies of place locates Le Guin’s ‘habitable present’ in acts of processual dwelling, denied 
within reified, abstract progress narratives.
49
The world of the Kesh has been characterised as such a utopia.50 A people ‘predominantly con-
cerned with preserving its existence’, they practice ‘a modest standard of living, conservative of 
natural resources, with a low constant fertility rate and a political life based upon consent’, adapted 
to their environment and living in general harmony with others.
51 The Kesh celebrate ‘process for 
its own sake rather than to facilitate progress [. . .] ontology rather than teleology’. 52 Life in the 
Valley rejects technoscientific innovation’s emancipatory promise. Crucially, such a society could 
‘exist already’. Indeed, it may have once existed in the California landscapes that inspired Le Guin 
(see below).
53 This yin utopia is therefore as much about returning to workable acts of place lov-
ing/living, as imagining the future. Consequently, ACH has been interpreted as a feminist act of 
‘staying with the trouble’, making habitable worlds with what we have.
54
Yet whilst the Valley conjures ‘utopian hope’, 55 Le Guin strives not for a general account of 
utopian geographies. She favours ‘a partial vision’ avoiding both ‘the Scylla of bulldozing univer-
salism and the Charybdis of disempowering relativism’ via a focussed particularity.56 The situation 
of the novel is fundamental: this future takes place somewhere. Reading ACH via the notion of 
‘utopia’ proves awkward for its association with the idealised ‘no-place’, given that Le Guin’s 
project (and its writing, see below) explicitly labours some-place. Furthermore, the text itself 
denies any utopian claims. Kesh society, marked by death, violence, conflict, struggle and toxic 
after effects, is arrestingly un-utopian. ACH’ s account of survival in this ‘messy wilderness’
57 
emphasises the ongoing effort required to resist lapsing into the mental ‘sickness’ that leads humans 
to dominate and control.
58 As one character, a Kesh archivist, remarks to Pandora and the reader:
Garlick and King 7
This is a mere dream dreamed in a bad time, an Up Yours to the people who ride snowmobiles, make 
nuclear weapons, and run prison camps by a middle-aged housewife, a critique or civilisation possible 
only to the civilised, an affirmation pretending to be a rejection, a glass of milk for the soul ulcered by acid 
rain, a piece of pacifist jeanjacquerie, and a cannibal dance among the savages in the ungodly garden of 
the farthest West.’
59
The Valley ‘isn’t a perfect world’. A partial, situated project, it might be ‘close to the best of all 
possible worlds’.60 The text conveys the troubling thought that the world of Kesh might require 
apocalypse and genetic ruination to occur. Therefore, we turn to what ACH does offer: namely, a 
specific account of a specific place and its inhabitation in spite of future catastrophe. In doing so, 
we contend that Le Guin manifests topophilia – the love of place – as a survival strategy in/beyond 
the Anthropocene.
Topophilia for survival
In the remainder of this paper, we present Le Guin’s text as an act of Anthropocene topophilia, 
performing the love of place as a survival strategy. Specifically, ACH mobilises Le Guin’s praxis 
of love of/for/with landscape in three registers, articulating a potential post-Anthropocene geogra-
phy. First, it mobilises love for place accrued through inhabitation, investment, attachment and 
knowledge. Secondly, Kesh society diagrams a model of slow living as part of a more-than-human 
ecology, which is a subject of care. Finally, ACH responds to the absences, silences and disconti-
nuities that percolate through landscape as invitational into acts of loving place by figuring alterna-
tive futures, and recovering lost pasts. In these ways, ACH practices topophilia for survival, traces 
a ‘geography of love’
61 amidst its fictionalised future for northern California. It showcases the kind 
of literary innovation called upon to meet the onto-epistemological challenge of the Anthropocene.62 
Given the difficult task of representing the scope of planetary ecological crisis and our means of 
response, ACH draws on encounters with place to muse on its future potential, and potential future.
Topophilia is a concept with ambivalent politics. We articulate, via Le Guin, a progressive 
place-love as a means to cultivate the necessary ecological attention that living well in/after the 
Anthropocene might demand. Yet one can reasonably frame ACH’ s geographical focusing as of a 
piece with the kind of ‘world reduction’ that her sf has been accused of elsewhere. That is, by virtue 
of a contracted spatial reality, ACH presents an idealistic situation whereby its speculative world-
ing need not wrangle with the questions of how to navigate or respond to the unequal power rela-
tions, competing agencies and distributed processes that characterise the complex geographies of 
the Anthropocene.
63 Equally, one must also acknowledge the troubling tendencies of place-love to 
be mobilised as the basis for exclusionary, parochial and nostalgia-oriented politics. Such concerns 
are elaborated in response to the unequal effects of time-space compression, as well as in more 
discussions of the problematic conflating of ‘landscape’, ‘dwelling’ and notions of ‘homeland’.
64 
To manifest place (and landscape) in more progressive political terms requires, as Doreen Massey 
famously argues, appreciating its open-ended, fluid and always contested qualities as the ‘meeting 
place’ of multiple spatio-temporal relations.
65 This is the treatment of place that we see given form 
in ‘The Valley’, and it is on this basis that we turn to examine her project of topophilia oriented to 
survival in/after the Anthropocene.
Place-love as personal attachment
Yi-Fu Tuan conceptualises environments as ‘objects of profound attachment and love’.66 He argues 
that grasping, and responding to, environmental crises requires reckoning with the affective bonds 
8 cultural geographies 00(0)
between people and environment. Thus, Tuan offers ‘topophilia’ as a term capturing such attach-
ment as the outcome of phenomenal and cultural experience. Through knowing and investing in 
places, affection and commitment grows. Crucially, topophilia demands situatedness; it ‘cannot be 
stretched over an empire’.
67 Place love involves intimately exploring environmental characteristics 
and edges. Thus, Tuan’s contemporary, Edward Relph, frames an authentic place sense in terms of 
home, ‘balancing a need to stay with a desire to escape’. Homes offer ‘the point of departure’ for 
worldly living.
68 Thus, loved places, as home, are more than emotional repositories. They figure an 
ontological orientation onto the world implicated in how we affect and are affected.69
Le Guin’s account of ‘the Valley’ in ACH expresses topophilia by articulating a life-long asso-
ciation with, and affection for, the Napa area of California. She frames her life-long efforts at writ-
ing as, variously, efforts to articulate this place. Specifically, the homestead purchased by her 
father, anthropologist Alfred Kroeber, where she spent summers as a child. Kroeber’s career 
researching the cultures of indigenous communities in California and elsewhere, and his interest in 
the valley as a landscape inhabited by a little-recorded indigenous society, fed her place-love. His 
approach to documenting these cultures – espousing, after his mentor Boas, the importance of 
fieldwork, first-hand ethnographical encounters beyond the museum, and the significance of lin-
guistic processes in cultural development – is evident in her construction of the Valley. His exten-
sive writings on the cosmology and social structures of such communities – much of which he 
documented through first-hand conversations with informants – would inform the ‘anarcho-prim-
itivist’ politics characteristic of societies in her writing.
70
Works of literature engage in acts of ‘spatial dreaming’, giving form to ‘cultural and political 
hopes and anxieties’.71 In elaborating the intention of ACH, Le Guin makes explicit her desire to 
find language capable of expressing the storied landscapes of the Napa Valley. As she describes:
I want to talk about looking at the world, about geography, particularly about geography of the human 
people to whom this isn’t a New Land, not the New World, but just the world, their world. This is going to 
lead me for a little while into rather strange places, but place is what it’s all about, and there’s no use 
talking in abstractions if what you’re trying to get at is exactly the opposite.
72
The subfield of literary geographies, long housing myriad inventive and critical approaches for 
examining texts, proposes multiple ways of examining the geographical ‘event’ of written work as 
involving a variety of activities and sites in their creation, reception and (re-)presentation.
73 
Importantly, this work acknowledges literature as more than ideological, reflecting cultural con-
text; or empirical ‘data’, for its evocative place description. Literature ‘disrupt[s] or challenge[s] 
conventional meaning not simply through its coverage of “geographical” topics but also through 
the particular conventions of literary writing’. Cultural geographies have witnessed a (re)turn to 
story-telling and narrative over the past two decades.
74 This ‘literary’ or ‘telling’ turn views crea-
tive use of narrative as the means of constructing careful and intimate portraits of places and land-
scapes, their mutability and dwelling.
75 A key aim is to nurture ways of writing that ‘realise fidelity 
to place’.76 Read in this context, ACH appears a dedicated, geographical project of love for the 
place Le Guin spent childhood summers exploring from a young age, and later returned to regu-
larly, including when she wrote the novel.
To achieve her goal, Le Guin required a new way to write place. The character of this place is 
central to the poetry, stories, rituals and existence of her imagined Kesh, living inside this land, 
and ‘opening one’s senses to all that [it] has to offer’.
77 Le Guin recalls childhood efforts at writ-
ing the Valley. Her stories, shared with her father, featured angelic messengers, impressing the 
land’s meaning upon visiting explorers. Perhaps reflecting his own rejection of the tendency of 
anthropology to view culture and landscape as explainable in terms of overarching theories (like 
Garlick and King 9
evolution) rather than as objects to be examined and studied in context, Kroeber queried why the 
landscape required mediation. He encouraged her to write place as excessively, materially pre-
sent, free of such elevated interpretation, and rich in its substantive detail. From then, Le Guin 
sought increasingly to eschew those (Western) literary tropes and tendencies that ‘lead me away 
from my own land’.
ACH would feature dense, empirical accounts of the character of the ground, plants, animals, 
trees, rocks and hills, each described and mapped in almost overwhelming detail. She sought to 
render a geography of California concerned less with ‘abstractions’ than the ‘utterly concrete, 
local, fixed in place’.
78 Furthermore, Le Guin encountered and read indigenous literatures, cos-
mologies and oral traditions, finding they contained ‘the right words for my country, my world, 
here’.
79 For many of these communities, landscapes appeared as processual, more-than-human 
ecologies. When writing ACH, she Le Guin sought to connect with the practices, stories and cos-
mologies of those people for whom Napa had once been a home akin to the yin utopia mapped in 
her writing, now long gone and beyond conventional means of excavation (see below). Thus, the 
mythologies and traditions of those indigenous societies that did endure – the Yurok, Swampy Cree 
and Navaho – provided her with ‘unfailing inspiration for an ethic and aesthetic native to the west-
ern American earth’, though she was careful not to exploit their stories.
80
Learning to listen to ‘the people who lived there’ was challenging and time-consuming. 
Indigenous mappings, contrary to Orientalist tropes, are hardly ‘simple’ ways of envisioning land-
scape. As complex, multi-layered ways of thinking about place, they required a reorientation for 
the outsider Le Guin.
81 In this she was aided by the ‘intellectual milieu’ of her childhood, with its 
many fleshy and textual ‘refugees’. Alternative scholars, non-Western texts (notably, the Tao-te-
ching), and representatives from the indigenous communities working with her father circulated 
through her family home. She turned their ideas over in the earth, playing amidst the madrone and 
adobe whilst her brothers fought overseas.
82 Her long exposure to alternative ontologies and texts 
informed her efforts ‘to think like a person of the Valley’ and her text’s attempts to enact a similar 
experience for its readers.
83 Nevertheless, it remains possible to read aspects of the text as roman-
ticising of indigenous ontologies. Despite her efforts at articulating a complex, non-utopic, living 
society, ACH remains embroiled with the legacy of colonial anthropology and unresolved ques-
tions around the extent to which such albeit speculative and creative reimagining of indigenous 
cosmologies might be subject to the charge of appropriation.
Drawing on emplaced ways of writing and thinking, Le Guin’s crafted account of California 
articulated the landscape’s lived multiplicity and distinctive ‘accent’ through fiction. Thus, Le 
Guin’s love of place provided a means to reimagine it as the vessel for a possible future. Mobilising 
a lived geography to communicate a love of place, ACH combines rich description, the rhythms of 
oral tradition and Le Guin’s speculative anthropological eye. Equally, the definitively local and 
bounded feel of the world-in-a-text enables the reader to roam the Valley and mingle with its peo-
ple. In the manner of a rich regional geography, the confinement of place becomes an opening onto 
broader processes, transformations and questions.
84 The world of the Kesh might be a mere 30 miles 
around, but such distance ‘can be a short or a long way’ depending how it is traversed.85
Place-love, care and kin
ACH’s project of topophilia exceeds the expression of personal attachment, performing a place 
love that is ‘spatial, relational and political’.
86 ACH diagrams a model for a slow, emplaced way of 
living amidst a more-than-human landscape, peopled with kin and addressed as a subject of care. 
This is place-love as praxis: a performative commitment to care, respect and response. For Le 
Guin, ‘[w]hen you build a world, you are responsible for it’.
87 Her love for the Valley saw her build 
10 cultural geographies 00(0)
a world in which it was cared for. Building a world responsibly means paying sufficient attention 
to the details. Thus, ACH devotes space to intimately describing the form and character of the land, 
and the practices by which the Kesh engage it. For Relph, places to which we have a genuine 
attachment constitute ‘fields of care’ involving ‘real responsibility and respect for that place both 
for itself and for what it is to yourself and to others’ alongside ‘a complete commitment to that 
place’
88 Although Relph (and Tuan) has been subject to significant criticism for accounts of place 
tending towards solipsism and the erasure of lived difference, 89 such remarks do resonate with 
contemporary writing on love and care in feminist theory addressing such limitations. To elaborate 
the Valley as ‘a field of care’ we read ACH through Donna Haraway’s theorising of non-innocent 
multispecies love.
Haraway draws much inspiration from Le Guin’s work, championing sf as a vital space for 
exploring the implications and obligations of entangled becoming with ‘chthonic’ others in our 
current epoch. Her own sf experimentation, ‘The Camille Stories’, constructs a pan-generational 
tale of transition – via cross-species experimentation and communal, collaborative living – from 
today’s Anthropocene into a flourishing ‘Chthulucene’ of multispecies becoming.
90 Not the only 
theorist to conceptualise love as practical, relational work necessitating definition and direction,91 
for Haraway, kinship, companionship and love between ‘significant others’ – persons (in the Kesh 
sense) who recognise and become-with each another, if asymmetrically – necessitates labour to 
register and respond to the other. Tracing histories of human-canine cohabitation, collaboration 
and co-evolution via reflections on her dog, Cayenne, and the contact zones of their meeting, 
Haraway characterises human-nonhuman ‘response-ability’ – the ability to recognise and respond 
to an-other – as both ‘historical aberration and a natural cultural legacy’.
92
Such theorising helps to articulate relations of love as developing, contingently, over time, 
being reworked and reproduced via the acts of inheritance by which they are (re)made.93 Crucially, 
for geographers, it matters where such relations play out: the geographical character of the contact 
zone mediating encounters with and recognition of the other.
94 In modelling the world of the Kesh, 
ACH presents a far-future is one of a contemporary society that has moved in reverse. The novel 
constructs a slow way of living amidst this ecology as constituent rather than master. This society 
is localised but not closed. They welcome travellers to their lands and are ‘content’ to know of, but 
not visit, places beyond the Valley.
95 Contrasting the (ultimately self-defeating) aggressive expan-
sionism of the exceptionalist, anthropocentric Condor, the Kesh trade and interact with others 
societies as needed, managing these relations across inter-generational via agreed partnerships. 
However, they also direct the majority of their energy and concern inwards, towards the practical-
ity of daily living in the people of the Valley. Indeed, the closing lines of the initiation song for 
members of the Finders Lodge (a guild in charge of trade and excursions beyond the Valley) bids 
the listener ‘walk carefully [. . .] walk mindfully [. . .] walk fearlessly [. . .] return with us, return 
to us, be always coming home’.
96
Haraway’s thinking (and that of other posthumanist-feminists) figures love as active, knotty, inter-
generational, ongoing and necessarily incorporating acts of exclusion as the loving of some occurs at 
the expense of others.
97 Le Guin’s work offers a site for speculating on how such a love might mani-
fest in and through place. Important, too, is Haraway’s rejection of a rational biopolitics for governing 
exclusions, preferring a ‘love that escapes calculation’
98 and which stays with the trouble of relating. 
ACH offers a creative, literary example that is good to think with. It helps us conceive of what such 
love might practically involve when seeking to negotiate place as a more-than-human achievement in 
the wake of ecological catastrophe. The slow, introverted existence in place that characterises Valley 
life is based upon desire to ‘persevere’, rather than expand or dominate. Such an existence is ‘an 
interactive, rhythmic, and unstable process, which constitutes an end in itself’.
99 Thus ACH diagrams 
a caring, responsible form of place loving/living outside of modernist progress. The Valley serves as 
what Haraway terms a ‘quiet place’ for ‘modest possibilities of partial recuperation and getting on 
Garlick and King 11
together’.100 The Kesh defer to landscape, its form and character, with regards practical living. Stone 
Telling recalls the disagreement between the Kesh and visiting Condor soldiers, seeking to bridge a 
nearby creek to transport supplies. For the villagers, such efforts at landscape engineering are ill-
thought: ‘If a bridge at this place were appropriate, there would be one’. As one elder explains to the 
Condor general:
One doesn’t need roads and bridges to go from room to room of one’s house. This Valley is our house, 
where we live.101
As the narrator, Pandora, notes, ‘It is hard for us to conceive, harder to approve, of a serious adult 
person not in a hurry [. . .] Hurry is the essence of the city’ and of civilisation.102 The city, a materialisa-
tion of the anthropological machine via purified spaces and quotidian acts of human exceptionalism,103 
is anathema to the valley. Whilst the Condor ‘keep without giving’, dwelling amidst ‘walls of black 
basalt’ and ‘wide streets at right angles’,
104 the Kesh endure as a ‘loose, light, soft network’, of ‘small 
scale’ settlements, trading, crafting and gathering resources as needed. They ‘were not engaged in 
enterprises requiring heroic sacrifice’.
105 Upon the Valley, Stone Telling’s handmaid, who escapes the 
Condor lands with the protagonist, remarks ‘it’s easy being here’. In the Valley, ‘everybody belongs to 
everybody’ rather than all things belonging to ‘man’, as under the Dayao.
106 Indeed, Pandora observes 
that ‘Kesh grammar makes no provision for a relation of ownership between living beings’.107 An 
external visitor to the Valley, she captures the essence of Kesh existence woven into a more-than-
human, non-hierarchical ecological network of care.
108
Importantly, Pandora suggests, this low-impact way of living reflects a society in which ‘large 
families, a large private food-supply, and a competitive attitude were all socially disapproved’. 109 
However, it is also the deathly consequence of past catastrophes resulting in low birth rates and 
short life expectancies (30–40 years). Such slow living appears predicated on a legacy of slow 
violence. Indeed, there is little desire to live long in this world and the role of doctors incorpo-
rates euthanasia, as the Kesh prioritise ‘the alleviation of misery [. . .] ahead of the prolongation 
of life’ or maintaining ‘an ideal of perfect health’, ensuring ‘that living wasn’t any harder than it 
had to be’.
110 Therefore, such care for place in the eco-corporeal ruins of California is possible 
only after the Anthropocene epoch has occurred. Amidst this blasted earth, efforts unfold to 
replenish refuge. 111
The primary source of food is gained through gathering, though hunting does occur as a pastime 
and for religious purposes. Thus, living requires practical knowledge of regional ecology, exempli-
fied by the Kesh capacity to live well on a diverse range of local edible flora. Indeed, ‘[t]here is no 
word in Kesh for famine’.
112 Domestic animals, being members of ‘earth’ houses, ‘consented to 
live and to die with human beings’ 113 as ‘people living together’. 114 Wild animals, as members of 
the unearthly ‘Sky’ houses, possess their own ways of living. To attempt to ‘coax’ or control these 
lifeforms is viewed as ‘perverse’.
115 Hunted animals consent to die when called upon by the hunter 
to meet their weapon. Reminiscent of certain indigenous American traditions, specific invocations 
mark the killing of hunted animals and the hunter’s gratitude.
116 Stories of spectral beasts leading 
hunters to their death reflect Kesh anxieties around failing to show sufficient ‘respect’. Thus, the 
dealing of death does not negate a recognition of nonhuman personhood.
As a result of their society’s modest size, and proliferating toxic markers of past ‘backward-
headed’ civilisation, the Kesh engage the environment and its inhabitants and active beings, with 
whom they converse and engage in acts of care and attention. All ‘people’ were held to have their 
own ‘dances’, whether perceptible by humans or not. The dances of the Kesh, such as the ‘world 
dance’, acted as seasonal celebrations of humanity’s ‘participation in the making and unmaking, 
the renewal and continuity, of the world’.
117 They greeted its inhabitants, other animals, even 
stones, with a call of ‘heya’: an ‘untranslatable statement of praise/greeting/holiness/being 
12 cultural geographies 00(0)
sacred’118 acknowledging nonhuman personhood. The organising familial ‘houses’ evoke the 
materiality of landscape, named for the madrone tree, red adobe and blue clay. The houses likewise 
materialise Le Guin’s imagined multispecies society, connecting humans, animals, plants together 
in familial networks that can be usefully likened to Harawayan ‘oddkin’, figuring a more-than-
human family network defined by more than genetic relation or straight filiation.
119 As Pandora 
notes, it was normal ‘[to] call an olive tree grandmother or a sheep sister, to address a half-acre 
field of dirt ploughed for corn as “my brother”’. This was neither a ‘primitive’ nor ‘symbolic’ act 
for the Kesh, but the culmination of a love for place that involved understanding one’s existence 
within a larger relational ecology.
120
Place-love and absence
Sf writing creates vital space to respond to the transformations, estrangements, monstrous entities 
and effects of the Anthropocene. As Jonathon Turnbull demonstrates by way of examining Jeff van 
der Meer’s Southern Reach trilogy, such texts render those hauntings, discontinuities, feedback 
loops and forms of ‘weirding’ that trouble linear accounts of modernist progress.
121 Indeed, in the 
context of conceptual turns towards emotion, affect, embodiment and practice, the means by which 
sf texts, authors and readers navigate and manifest the un-/non-representable are significant for 
how they explore and reckon with the limits of perception.
122 Literature inevitably works on the 
reader ‘to affect and inspire [. . .] rather than merely represent’,123 providing a key site for making 
sense of, and evaluating, the representation, experience and relationality of place and landscape.124 
Before concluding, we briefly reflect on ACH as an act of place-love that marshals absences, 
silences and discontinuities as invitations to imagine potential futures.
Whilst Le Guin rejects ‘overt moralizing’,
125 a clear ethical thread runs through ACH. As much 
recent work in geography and elsewhere argues, the Anthropocene, as an epoch of extensive 
human-inflicted environmental degradation, cannot be detached from histories of colonisation and 
colonial violence.
126 Furthermore, as ‘Western’ ontologies of nature and culture as essentialised 
and distinct are seen to legitimate capitalist ecocide, the value of alternative stories and indigenous 
ontologies as a means to reframe human-nonhuman relations and reject dualistic Enlightenment 
thinking is championed. Indeed, Haraway’s recent work engages indigenous American activism 
and knowledges to account for creative ways of resisting extractive industry. She emphasises the 
importance of foregrounding different ways of talking about the environment, singling out Le 
Guin’s fiction to impress that ‘[it] matters what stories use to tell other stories with’.
127
Yet, in the case of the landscape that hosts Le Guin’s speculative future, no stories survive. The 
knowledges, practices and beliefs of those living in Napa Valley prior to the arrival of European 
colonisers were never recorded. As low-impact societies with cultures of oral transmission, their 
genocide and displacement resulted in their ways of living being erased with few traces. As Le 
Guin notes, even their names are unknown; only those afforded to them by the Spanish remain.
128 
This vast absence resides at the heart of ACH, echoing across the text, as it permeated the anthro-
pological survey work of her father, whose initial fieldwork involving indigenous societies and 
cultures in California were driven by a feverish, colonial archival impulse to salvage soon to be lost 
ways of living.
129 For Le Guin, the vanished past inspires as much speculation as the distant future, 
offering fertile ground to cultivate ways to lovingly exist in place:
Which is farther from us, father out of reach, more silent – the dead, or the unborn? Those whose bones lie 
under the thistles and the dirt and the tombstones of the Past, or those who slip weightless among molecules, 
dwelling where a century passes in a day, among the fair folk, under the great, bell-curved Hill of 
Possibility? [. . .] There’s no way to reach that lot by digging.
130
Garlick and King 13
Absence is inherent to the experience of landscape; its capacity to unsettle and disperse our percep-
tion outwards, elsewhere, on affective lines of flight.131 In tension, absence also pulls us in, inviting 
us to it with stories, relations, dreams.132 As a result, ‘the absencing fracture of landscape is simul-
taneously a sort of openness’133 as moments of ‘distance and non-coincidence’ texture our encoun-
ters and perceptions within place in ways that ensure they are never settled. For John Wylie, the 
‘geographies of love’ thus concern less geographies of ‘fusion’ or attachment (after Tuan ), or 
relating and response (after Haraway), than moments of rupture and dispersal, originating out of 
the silence and absence that marks encounters with the other’s unknowable excess.
134 In short, 
experiences of landscape are haunted by that which is not present, or unactualised.135 The inarticu-
lable gap at the centre of landscape invites the labour of love as an ongoing working through of the 
tensions between presence and absence.
Thus, the irresolvable absences at the heart of the Valley – a past unrecorded,; a future yet to 
come – beckon Le Guin into acts of topophilia, and ACH’s twin aims of mourning and worlding.
136 
Itself an expression of love, this sf project attempts to fill this void with new, hopeful stories of 
living in place. As discussed, when constructing ‘her Valley’, Le Guin sought indigenous commu-
nities in California and beyond that remained for inspiration and guidance in writing landscape as 
something lived in across generations, as part of wider ecology of beings – human and not. Yet, the 
absence of the indigenous communities who did once live in Napa Valley remains at the book’s 
heart: ‘One may listen, but all the words of their language are gone, gone utterly’.
137
Moreover, this absence is integral to the central organising metaphor of Kesh culture: the hinge. 
Depicted as two interlocking spirals, it reflects the twin domains characterising Kesh ontology: the 
earth, or actuality, of living; and the sky, or domain of virtual possibility. At the centre of the hinge 
sits a gap, a space, between these sides of existence. That gap, ‘that leap, break, flip, that reversal 
from in to out, from out to in’,
138 is central to A culture that abides in fluidity and uncertainty as 
engines for difference and change. The Kesh practise a deep respect for the transitory, fleeting and 
impermanent. They regularly empty their libraries of books that have long gone unread and burn 
them, creating space for new knowledge whilst expressing faith in the idea that all that is useful is 
either already known or will be rediscovered when needed.
Le Guin’s imaginary future is an intricately woven account of what might yet come to pass in 
the wake of the Anthropocene marked by a further absence, that of conventional narrative. Her 
refusal to indulge what Roland Barthes terms the ‘pleasure’ of the text enables ACH to manifest in 
writing the Kesh’s preference for the gyring returns over and above of the pursuance of linear pro-
gress. To build this world is a conjurer’s attempt to shift the reader’s perception of our own reality 
‘sideways’. And yet, dissonance at the heart of the hinge suggests uncertainty about whether we 
can perceive differently. The Valley remains aporetic, like the fantasy of fulsome dwelling itself.
139 
As Pandora writes:
When I take you to the Valley, you’ll see the blue hills on the left and the blue hills on the right, the rainbow 
and the vineyards under the rainbow late in the rainy season, and maybe you’ll say, “There it is, that’s it!” 
But I’ll say, “A little farther.”
140
In turn, the Kesh’s world proliferates with the absence of our current ways of living. When such 
ways (re)appear – as in the Condor cities and tanks – they do not last long. ACH is bound up with 
our absence, as much as that of those preceding us. As well as working, via love, to recover a way 
of living in place, ACH reminds us that our world is, today, already ghosted by alternative forms of 
worlding. Such sentiment is evoked in one of the many poems, ostensibly shared with Pandora by 
her Valley informants, ‘From the People of the Houses of Earth in the Valley to the Other People 
Who Were on Earth Before Them’. Here the Kesh appear to directly address our time from theirs, 
reminding us that the Valley exists here, now, as yet without expression:
14 cultural geographies 00(0)
In your time when all the words were written,
in your time when everything was fuel,
in your time when houses hid the ground,
we were among you.
[. . .]
You did not know us. We were the words you had no language for.141
Arising out of absences – that of a past where people lived well, and a future where they do again 
– comes Le Guin’s act of place-love in the Anthropocene. The text ‘encourages a conceptual reor-
dering of the world’, and offers ‘an entry into the reciprocal set of relations that characterise 
[Valley] life’.
142 For the Kesh, storytelling is an act of intervention in the world.143 ACH mobilises 
absence to manifest of a geography of love, and its invitation to consider how we might make a life 
amidst the ruins, returning to place and the demands of living well within it.
Conclusion
To conclude, we have drawn from literary geographies and contemporary work on narrating the 
Anthropocene to consider Ursula Le Guin’s Always Coming Home, as a practical act of topophilia 
oriented towards future survival. As Haraway argues, ‘SF is storytelling and fact telling’: as ‘the-
ory in the mud’ it proffers ‘the patterning of possible worlds and possible times, material-semiotic 
worlds, gone, here and yet to come’.
144 Through speculatively offering a future society that lives in 
and through the specifics of place after the planet (and human bodies) have been ravaged and trans-
formed by war, toxins and climate collapse, Le Guin crafts a hopeful vision of future geography. 
She imagines one possible version of life beyond the Anthropocene, found in a specific place and 
way of living each carefully rendered in intricate, excessive detail. Informed by her engagements 
with indigenous knowledge, Le Guin seeks a means of articulating her deep love for a place 
haunted by absence. Her act of ‘storiation’ works to ‘lead us away from hyperobjects, abstraction, 
and indifference’.
145
The Kesh represent one future amongst many, offering hope and a sense of the work required to 
think and make alternative modes of existence. Always Coming Home does not offer a future for 
all humanity. Neither does it suggest that the Anthropocene is a time to abandon the specificity of 
place and landscape – the animating particularities of encounters between people and geography. 
It is also a future packaged and stylised in accordance with conventions reminiscent of the salvage 
anthropology that motivated her father and others’ engagements with California’s indigenous soci-
eties during the early-twentieth century. Yet, what her work does offer is an attempt to craft the 
means for living inside these specificities. Le Guin explicitly tethers the future of humanity to the 
love of (a) landscape. For her, California’s Napa Valley affords the possibility of a life beyond the 
Anthropocene. Thus, her brand of sf showcases the ethical, imaginative and political work that 
returning to ‘place portraiture’ within cultural geographies might undertake.
146
Crucially, such a project for Le Guin requires finding a language both appropriate to articulat-
ing the crises of our time, as well as manifesting ways of living that break free from the toxic 
narrative arc of ‘progress’ and move ‘sideways’ or ‘yinwards’. Of course, her means of doing so 
evoke further questions of how to reckon with anthropology’s colonial history, as well as the 
Garlick and King 15
challenge of engaging (and mobilising) indigenous ecological knowledge alongside the issues of 
romanticisation and appropriation. 147 Clearly, though, an overheating world is ill-served by ‘hot 
utopias’ that position salvation a mere technological ‘novum’ away. ACH rejects what we might 
call ‘eco-modernism’ in favour of evoking (and prefiguring) current enthusiasms for ‘degrowth’, 
local consumption and slow living leading into more processual engagements with the environ-
ment that decentre the human. Le Guin’s work is utopian in its hope for a better future, yet also 
disavows this impulse in both revelling in the gap between our present and that future, and choos-
ing to locate it beyond the violent ruination of our current world. Le Guin presents attentive, 
empirical, lyrical place-writing as a possible strategy for manifesting practical ways of living that 
can open onto better relationships with our surroundings before such ruination – of the planet and 
the body – comes to pass.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank the editors of the special issue for inviting this submission and for their support 
throughout the publication process. We also want to extend thanks to the editors at cultural geographies – 
specifically Harriet Hawkins and Anna Secor – for their assistance during the review process. Finally, our 
gratitude goes to the participants in 2020’s the Earth and its Others online conference event, for engaging 
with our initial ideas; and to those who provided anonymous review feedback on the manuscript, which 
greatly assisted in bringing it up to standard.
Ethics Statement
The authors confirm the work is their own and has not previously been published elsewhere. Every effort has 
been made to ensure all spurces are appropriately cited and acknowledged. There exist no conflicts of interest 
concerning the content of the paper or its publication. All research ethics guidelines have been adhered to in 
the conduct of the research upon which it is based. Any errors appearing in the paper are the responsibility of 
the authors alone.
Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
ORCID iD
Ben Garlick  https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7257-0430
Notes
  1. A.Tsing, ‘Blasted Landscapes (and the Gentle Arts of Mushroom Picking)’, in E.Kirksey (ed.), The 
Multispecies Salon (Durham: Duke University Press, 2014), pp. 87–109; F.Ginn, ‘When Horses Won’t 
Eat: Apocalypse and the Anthropocene’, Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 105, 
2015, pp. 351–9; K.Strauss, ‘These Overheating Worlds’, Annals of the Association of American 
Geographers, 105, 2015, pp. 342–50; T.Walton and W.Shaw, ‘Living With the Anthropocene Blues’, 
Geoforum, 60, 2015, pp. 1–3.
  2. T.van Dooren, The Wake of Crows: Living and Dying in Shared Worlds (New York: Columbia University 
Press, 2019).
  3. D.Haraway, ‘Anthropocene, Capitalocene, Plantationocene, Chthulucene: Making Kin’, Environmental 
Humanities, 6, 2015, pp. 159–65.
  4. B.McKibben, ‘Worried? Us?’, Granta, 80, 2003, pp. 8–12.
  5. T.Morton, Hyperobjects: Philosophy and Ecology After the End of the World (London: University of 
Minnesota Press, 2013); regarding the implications for ‘landscape’ see: T.Morton, ‘Zero Landscapes in 
the Time of Hyperobjects’, Graz Architectural Magazine, 7, 2011, pp. 78–87.
16 cultural geographies 00(0)
  6. Recent examples include: D.Farrier, Footprints: In Search of Future Fossils (London: 4th Estate, 2020); 
K.Jamie, Surfacing (London: Sort of Books, 2019); R.Macfarlane, Underland: A Deep Time Journey 
(London: Penguin, 2019).
  7. K.Symons and B.Garlick, ‘Introduction: Tracing Geographies of Extinction’, Environmental 
Humanities, 12, 2020, pp. 288–95.
  8. D.Matless, ‘The Anthroposcenic’, Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, 42, 2017,  
p. 364.
  9. A.Fredriksen, ‘Haunting, Ruination and Encounter in the Ordinary Anthropocene: Storying the Return 
of Florida’s Wild Flamingos’, cultural geographies, 27, 2021, p. 532.
 10. A.Tsing, The Mushroom at the End of the World: On the Possibility of Life in Capitalist Ruins (Princeton 
& Oxford: Princeton University Press, 2015); A.Tsing, ‘Blasted Landscapes’.
 11. D.Chandler and J.Pugh, ‘The Anthropocene Islands Agenda’, Dialogues in Human Geography, 11, 
2021, p. 448.
 12. C.Åsberg and R.Braidotti, ‘Feminist Posthumanities: An Introduction’, in C.Åsberg and R.Braidotti 
(eds), A Feminist Companion to the Post Humanities (London: Springer, 2018), p. 12.
 13. R.Kitchin and J.Kneale, ‘Science Fiction or Future Fact? Exploring Imaginative Geographies of the 
New Millennium’, Progress in Human Geography, 25, 2001, p. 20, p. 32.
 14. See H.Gunderman, ‘Geographies of Science Fiction, Peace, and Cosmopolitanism: Conceptualising 
Critical Worldbuilding Through a Lens of Doctor Who’, Literary Geographies, 6, 2020, p. 42; also 
J.Kneale, ‘Plots: Space, Conspiracy and Contingency in William Gibson’s Pattern Recognition and 
Spook Country’, Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, 29, 2011, pp. 169–86; L.Harris, 
‘Towards Narrative Political Ecologies’, Environment and Planning E: Nature and Space, 5, 2022,  
pp. 835–60.
 15. U.Le Guin, Always Coming Home (London: Grafton, 1988), p. xi.
 16. On the early work of Kroeber see I.Jackins, ‘The First Boasian: Alfred Kroeber and Franz Boas, 1896-
1905’, American Anthropologist, 104, 2002, pp. 520–32. Kroeber sets out an approach to studying cul-
ture as a ‘superorganic’ domain of existence to be known in terms of its material objects, practices, oral 
traditions and linguistic forms, and their geographical distribution via works including: A.Kroeber, ‘The 
Superorganic’, American Anthropologist, 19, 1917, pp. 163–213; and The Nature of Culture (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1952). For a discussion of Kroeber’s ‘salvage’ anthropology that sought to 
document pre-colonial indigenous societies in California, see: K.Lightfoot, Indians, Missionaries and 
Merchants: The Legacy of Colonial Encounters on the California Frontiers (Berkley: University of 
California Press, 2005).
 17. See discussion of M.Rose, ‘The Question of Culture in Cultural Geography: Latent Legacies and 
Potential Futures’, Progress in Human Geography, 45, 2021, pp. 958–60.
 18. Recent consideration of these issues features in the self-reflective discussions of Bawaka Country; 
W.Sarah, S.Suchet-Pearson, K.Lloyd, L.Burarrwanga, R.Ganambarr, M.Ganambarr-Stubbs, et al., 
‘Everything is Love: Mobilising Knowledges, Identities and Places as Bawaka’, in M.Palomino-
Schalscha and N.Gombay (eds), Indigenous Places and Colonial Spaces: The Politics of Intertwined 
Relations (Abingdon: Routledge, 2018), pp. 53–5.
 19. See H.Lorimer, ‘Telling Small Stories: Spaces of Knowledge and the Practice of Geography’, 
Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, 28, 2003, pp. 197–217; H.Lorimer and H.Parr, 
‘Excursions – Telling Stories and Journeys’, 21, 2014, pp. 543–7; E.Cameron, ‘New Geographies of 
Story and Story Telling’, Progress in Human Geography, 36, 2012, pp. 573–92; M.Rose, D.Cooper and 
H.Griffiths, ‘Acknowledging the Work of Poetry: A Collaborative Commentary on Tim Cresswell’s 
Fence’, cultural geographies, 25, 2018, pp. 257–62.
 20. Le Guin has described the decision to subtitle the original published text with the words ‘a novel’ as “a 
commercial thing”, reflecting her publisher’s fears that the book text would be mistaken for anthropo-
logical account. Indeed, Le Guin revealed she encountered some initial difficulty with copyrighting the 
recordings of Kesh music as the material was assumed to have been recordings of traditional indigenous 
musicians, rather than an sf creation. See: U.Le Guin, T.Barton, M.Chodos-Irvine and G.Hersh, ‘The 
Making of Always Coming Home: A Panel at Mythopoeic Conference XIX Berkeley, California, July 
31 1988’, Mythlore, 17, 1991, pp. 56–63.
Garlick and King 17
 21. G.Deleuze and F.Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia, V ol. 2 (London: 
Bloomsbury, 2013), p. 2.
 22. C.Franko, ‘Self-Conscious Narration as the Complex Representation of Hope in Le Guin’s Always 
Coming Home’, Mythlore, 15, 1989, p. 57.
 23. Le Guin, ACH, p. 163.
 24. Le Guin, ACH, p. xi.
 25. Franko, ‘Self-Conscious Narration’.
 26. A full account of this cosmology is provided within ‘The Serpentine Codex’, in U.Le Guin, ACH,  
pp. 43–9.
 27. Le Guin, ACH, p. 45.
 28. Le Guin, ACH, p. 242.
 29. Franko, ‘Self-Conscious Narration’, p. 59.
 30. Le Guin, ACH, pp. 171–2.
 31. For discussions on the temporality of the Kesh, and some of these origin myths, see Le Guin, ACH,  
pp. 160–9.
 32. Le Guin, ACH, p. 29.
 33. Franko, ‘Self-Conscious Narration’, p. 59.
 34. J.Moore, ‘An Archaeology of the Future: Ursula Le Guin and Anarcho-Primitivism’ (Reading: 
Foundation, 1995), p. 39.
 35. Le Guin, ACH, p. 159.
 36. Le Guin, ACH, p. 380.
 37. Le Guin, ACH, p. 379.
 38. See Moore, ‘An Archaeology of the Future’, pp. 32–9.
 39. U.Le Guin, ‘The Carrier Bag Theory of Fiction’, in U.Le Guin, Dancing at the Edge of the World 
(London: Paladin, 1989 [1986]), p. 169.
 40. A.Chan Kit-Sze, ‘Re-Reading Ursula K. Le Guin’s SF: The Daoist Yin Principle in Ecofeminist 
Novels’, in D.Vakoch (ed.), Dystopias and Utopias on Earth and Beyond: Feminist Ecocriticism of 
Science Fiction (Abingdon: Routledge, 2021), pp. 126–37.
 41. K.Buse, ‘Genre, Utopia, and Ecological Crisis: World-Multiplication in Le Guin’s Fantasy’, Green 
Letters, 17, 2013, p. 267.
 42. I.Csicsery-Ronay Jr, ‘Marxist Theory and Science Fiction’, in E.James and F.Mendlesohn, The 
Cambridge Companion to Science Fiction (Cambirdge: Cambridge University Press, 2003), pp. 113–24.
 43. Strauss, ‘These Overheating Worlds’; M.Woods, ‘Imagining the Anthropocenic City: The New Face 
of Urban Renewal in New Orleans and Josh Neufeld’s A.D.: New Orleans After the Deluge’, Literary 
Geographies, 4, 2015, pp. 84–102.
 44. Buse, ‘Genre, Utopia’, p. 276.
 45. U.Le Guin, ‘A Non-Euclidean View of California as a Cold Place to be’, in U.Le Guin, Dancing at the 
Edge of the World (London: Paladin, 1989 [1982]), p. 90.
 46. Le Guin, ACH, p. 151; Le Guin et al., ‘The Making of’, p. 61.
 47. Le Guin, ‘A Non-Euclidean View’, p. 90.
 48. Le Guin, ‘A Non-Euclidean View’, p. 85.
 49. Le Guin, ‘A Non-Euclidean View’, p. 87; Buse, ‘Genre, Utopia’, p. 270.
 50. See S.Medlicott, ‘Conceiving an Ecofeminist Utopia: Genre, Gender, and Ecology in Ursula K Le 
Guin’s Always Coming Home’, ISLE: Interdisciplinary Studies in Literature and Environment, isaa177, 
2020, pp. 1–14; Buse, ‘Genre, Utopia’; Chan Kit-Sze, ‘Re-Reading Ursula’; Franko, ‘Self-Conscious 
Narration’.
 51. Le Guin, ‘A Non-Euclidean View’, p. 96.
 52. Medlicott, ‘Conceiving an Ecofeminist Utopia’, p. 10.
 53. Le Guin, ‘A Non-Euclidean View’, pp. 81–2, p. 93.
 54. Medlicott, ‘Conceiving an Ecofeminist Utopia’, p. 7; D.Haraway, Staying With the Trouble: Making 
Kin in the Chthulucene (Durham: Duke, 2016).
 55. Franko, ‘Self-Conscious Narration’, p. 57.
18 cultural geographies 00(0)
 56. Åsberg and Braidotti, ‘Feminist Posthumanities’, p. 13.
 57. Le Guin, ACH, p. 239.
 58. As well as featuring in several Kesh parables and myths, and manifesting in the figure of the “back-
ward-headed person”, the nature of this “sickness” is the subject of a lengthy debate in a dialogue 
between various Kesh individuals and the representatives of the ‘Warrior Lodge’ that forms in response 
to the potential threat of the Condor people in the course of the ‘Stone Telling’ narrative: Le Guin, ACH, 
pp. 381–6.
 59. Le Guin, ACH, p. 316.
 60. Moore, ‘An Archaeology’, p. 37.
 61. As elaborated by C.-A.Morrison, L.Johnston and R.Longhurst, ‘Critical Geographies of Love as Spatial, 
Relational and Political’, Progress in Human Geography, 37, 2012, pp. 505–21.
 62. McKibben, ‘Worried? Us?’.
 63. Here we are applying to the geographical scope of ACH the critique of Le Guin articulated by F.Jameson, 
‘World Reduction in Le Guin: The Emergence of Utopian Narrative’, Science Fiction Studies, 2, 1975, 
pp. 221–30.
 64. D.Harvey, The Condition of Postmodernity (New York: Wiley-Blackwell, 1990), p. 351; J.Wylie, ‘A 
Landscape Cannot be a Homeland’, Landscape Research, 41, 2016, pp. 408–16.
 65. D.Massey, ‘Landscape as a Provocation’, Journal of Material Culture, 11, 2006, pp. 33–48.
 66. Y .-F.Tuan, Topophilia: A Study of Environmental Perception, Attitudes, and Values (New York: 
Colombia University Press, 1974), p. xii.
 67. Tuan, Topophilia, p. 101.
 68. E.Relph, Place and Placelessness (London: SAGE, 2008 [1976]), pp. 40–1.
 69. S.Ahmed, The Cultural Politics of Emotion (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2013).
 70. Moore, ‘An Archaeology’.
 71. Strauss, ‘These Overheating Worlds’, p. 348.
 72. U.Le Guin, ‘Legends for a New Land: Guest of Honor Speech at the 19th Annual Mythopoeic 
Conference’, Mythlore, 15, 1988, p. 6.
 73. See A.Saunders, ‘The Spatial Event of Writing: John Galsworthy and the Creation of Fraternity’, cul-
tural geographies, 20, 2013, pp. 285–98; J.Riding, ‘A Geographical Biography of a Nature Writer’, 
cultural geographies, 23, 2015, pp. 387–99.
 74. See Lorimer, ‘Telling small’; Cameron, ‘New Geographies’.
 75. H.Lorimer, ‘Dear Departed: Writing the Lifeworlds of Place’, Transactions of the Institute of British 
Geographers, 44, 2019, p. 332; see also S.Daniels and H.Lorimer, ‘Until the End of Days: Narrating 
Landscape and Environment’, cultural geographies, 19, 2012, pp. 3–9; C.DeSilvey, ‘Making Sense 
of Transience: An Anticipatory History’, cultural geographies, 19, 2012, pp. 31–54; O.Jones, ‘“Not 
Promising a Landfall. . .”: An Autotopographical Account of Loss of Place, Memory and Landscape’, 
Environmental Humanities, 6, 2015, pp. 1–27; F.MacDonald, ‘The Ruins of Erskine Beveridge’, 
Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, 39, 2014, pp. 477–89.
 76. Lorimer, ‘Dear Departed’, p. 341.
 77. Relph, Place and Placelessness, p. 54.
 78. Le Guin, ‘Legends. . .’, p. 6.
 79. Le Guin, ‘Legends. . .’, p. 4.
 80. L.McCaffrey, Across the Wounded Galaxies: Interviews With Contemporary American Science Fiction 
Writers (Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 1990), p. 172.
 81. Le Guin, ‘Legends. . .’, p. 10.
 82. McCaffrey, Across the Wounded Galaxies, p. 154.
 83. McCaffrey, Across the Wounded Galaxies, p. 172.
 84. D.Matless, ‘Writing Regional Cultural Landscape: Cultural Geography on the Norfolk Broads’, in 
J.Riding and M.Jones (eds), Reanimating Regions: Culture, Politics and Performance (Abingdon: 
Routeledge, 2017), p. 18.
 85. Le Guin, ACH, p. 54.
 86. Morrison et al., ‘Geographies of Love’, p. 506.
Garlick and King 19
 87. McCaffrey, Across the Wounded Galaxies, p. 161.
 88. Relph, Place and Placelessness, pp. 37–8.
 89. See G.Rose, Feminism and Geography: The Limits of Geographical Knowledge (Cambridge: Polity 
Press), pp.76–83.
 90. Haraway, Staying With the Trouble, pp. 134–68.
 91. In particular, such an understanding love is informed here by: b.hooks, All About Love: New Visions 
(New York: Harper Perennial, 2000); and Ahmed, Cultural Politics.
 92. D.Haraway, When Species Meet (Durham: Duke, 2008), p. 16.
 93. See T.van Dooren, Flight Ways: Life and Loss at the Edge of Extinction (New York: Colombia University 
Press, 2014).
 94. S.Hinchliffe, ‘Where Species Meet’, Environment and Planning D: Society & Space, 28, 2010, 
pp. 34–5.
 95. Le Guin, ACH, p. 453.
 96. Le Guin, ACH, p. 404.
 97. E.Giraud, What Comes After Entanglement? (Durham: Duke University Press, 2019).
 98. Haraway, When Species Meet, p. 85.
 99. Le Guin, ‘A Non-Euclidean View’, p. 91.
100. Haraway, Staying With the Trouble, p. 10.
101. Le Guin, ACH, pp. 34–5.
102. Le Guin, ACH, p. 410.
103. S.Ruddick, ‘Situating the Anthropocene: Planetary Urbanization and the Anthropological Machine’, 
Urban Geography, 36, 2013, pp. 1113–30.
104. Le Guin, ACH, p. 340, p. 185.
105. Le Guin, ACH, p. 380.
106. Le Guin, ACH, pp. 366–7.
107. Le Guin, ACH, p. 42.
108. We take the notion of a ‘care network’ manifest as distributed attentiveness from: A.Krywoszynska, 
‘Caring for Soil Life in the Anthropocene: The Role of Attentiveness in More-Than-Human Ethics’, 
Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, 44, 2019, pp. 661–75.
109. Le Guin, ACH, p. 437.
110. Le Guin, ACH, p. 473, p. 475.
111. Haraway, Staying With the Trouble, p. 100.
112. Le Guin, ACH, p. 437.
113. Le Guin, ACH, p. 420.
114. Le Guin, ACH, pp. 418–9.
115. Le Guin, ACH, p. 420.
116. Le Guin, ACH, p. 94.
117. Le Guin, ACH, p. 454.
118. Le Guin, ACH, p. 515.
119. Haraway, Staying With the Trouble, pp. 102–3.
120. Le Guin, ACH, p. 424.
121. J.Turnbull, ‘Weird’, Environmental Humanities, 13, 2021, pp. 277–8.
122. J.Kneale, ‘From Beyond: H.P. Lovecraft and the Place of Horror’, cultural geographies, 13, 2006,  
pp. 106–26.
123. Harris, ‘Towards Narrative’.
124. N.Alexander, ‘On Literary Geography’, Literary Geographies, 1, 2015, pp. 3–6.
125. McCaffrey, Across the Wounded Galaxies, p. 170.
126. H.Davis and Z.Todd, ‘On the Importance of a Date, or, Decolonizing the Anthropocene’, ACME: An 
International Journal for Critical Geographies, 16, 2017, pp. 761–80.
127. Haraway, Staying With the Trouble, p. 118.
128. Le Guin, ‘A Non-Euclidean View’.
20 cultural geographies 00(0)
129. Lightfoot, Indians.
130. Le Guin, ACH, p. 4.
131. J.Wylie, ‘Landscape, Absence and the Geographies of Love’, Transactions of the Institute of British 
Geographers, 34, 2009, pp. 275–89.
132. M.Rose, ‘Back to Back: A Response to “Landscape, Absence and the Geographies of Love”’, 
Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, 35, 2010, pp. 141–4.
133. Wylie, ‘Landscape, Absence’, p. 280.
134. H.Reinert, ‘The Landscape Concept as Rupture: Extinction and Perspective in a Norwegian Fjord’, in 
H.Soovali-Sepping, H.Reinert and J.Miles-Watson (eds), Ruptured Landscapes: Landscape, Identity 
and Social Change (Dordrecht: Springer, 2015), pp. 41–54.
135. Wylie, ‘Landscape, Absence’, p. 284.
136. H.Reinert, ‘The Haunting Cliffs: Some Notes on Silence’, Parallax, 24, 2018, pp. 501–12.
137. Le Guin, ACH, p. 4.
138. Le Guin, ACH, p. 153.
139. Franko, ‘Self-Conscious Narration’, p. 59; J.Wylie, ‘Dwelling and Displacement: Tim Robinson and 
the Questions of Landscape’, cultural geographies, 19, 2012, p. 375.
140. Le Guin, ACH, p. 339.
141. Le Guin, ACH, p. 405.
142. K.Zuelke, ‘Keeping Grows; Giving Flows: Reciprocal Relations and the Gift of Always Coming Home’, 
in D.Vakoch (ed.), Dystopias and Utopias on Earth and Beyond: Feminist Ecocriticism of Science 
Fiction (Abingdon: Routledge, 2021), p. 148.
143. Le Guin, ACH, p. 315.
144. Haraway, Staying With the Trouble, p. 31.
145. E.B.Martinez, ‘On Storiation and What is Washed Ashore: The Anthropocene as Big Kahuna’, 
Dialogues in Human Geography, 11(3), 2021, pp. 439–42. 
146. Lorimer, ‘Dear Departed’.
147. Bawaka Country; Sarah et al., ‘Everything’.
Author biographies
Ben Garlick is a cultural geographer at York St John University. His work focuses on the more-than-human 
and literary geographies of landscape, particularly in the context of conservation and environmental change.
Liesl King is an Associate Head of the School of Humanities (Creative Writing, Media & Film Studies), York 
St John University. Her research examines representations of gender and progressive spirituality in twentieth-
century women’s sf and fantasy. In 2017, she launched the online sf magazine Terra Two: An Ark for Off-
World Survival.