 
 Four ways to forgiveness - Ursula Le Guin | libcom.org 
 Skip to main content
 libcom.org 
 Menu 
 Main navigation
 Recent 
 Donate 
 Collections 
 Introductions 
 Organise 
 About 
 User account menu 
 Log in / Register 
 Four ways to forgiveness - Ursula Le Guin
 At the far end of our universe, on the twin planets of Werel and Yeowe, all humankind is divided into "assets" and "owners," tradition and liberation are at war, and freedom takes many forms. Here is a society as complex and troubled as any on our world, peopled with unforgettable characters struggling to become fully human. For the disgraced revolutionary Abberkam, the callow "space brat" Solly, the haughty soldier Teyeo, and the Ekumen historian and Hainish exile Havzhiva, freedom and duty both begin in the heart, and success as well as failure has its costs.
 Submitted by wojtek on May 20, 2013
 In this stunning collection of four intimately interconnected novellas, Ursula K. Le Guin returns to the great themes that have made her one of America's most honored and respected authors.
 Attachments
 Ursula K. Le Guin - Four Ways to Forgiveness (1996).pdf 
 (11.72 MB) 
 fiction 
 Ursula Le Guin 
 sci-fi 
 PDF 
 Comments
 Reddebrek 
 13 years 3 months ago
 In reply to Welcome by libcom.org 
 Submitted by Reddebrek on May 21, 2013
 Congrats on uploading this, I 
 Congrats on uploading this, I was looking for it everywhere. I'll add it to my personal reading list.
 boomerang 
 11 years 10 months ago
 In reply to Welcome by libcom.org 
 Submitted by boomerang on November 11, 2014
 AWWWWWWWW YEAAH! Thanks for 
 AWWWWWWWW YEAAH! Thanks for the rad upload.
 Related content
 The day before the revolution - Ursula Le Guin 
 A prequel of sorts to the novel the dispossessed.
 The Dispossessed
 Full online text -- as well as pdf, epub, and mobi files -- of Ursula Le Guin's anarchist sci-fi classic The Dispossessed.
 The Ones Who Walk Away From Omelas - Ursula K. Le Guin
 A short story.
 The Dispossessed - Radio Play
 A radio drama adaptation of Ursula K. Le Guin's novel The Dispossessed, focussing on Shevek's role in the story. Produced by CBS's Viewpoint…
 50 Sci-Fi & Fantasy Works Every Socialist Should Read by China Mieville
 Originally from https://fantasticmetropolis.com/i/50socialist/full/
This is not a list of the “best”…
 The cotton pickers - B. Traven
 B Traven's novel about migrant labourers, poverty, crappy jobs, and the occasional successful strike... Set in 1920s Mexico. Here presented in…
 Footer menu
 Donate 
 Help out 
 Other languages 
 Site notes 
