 
 A History of Earthsea – Troy Press 
 Skip to content 
 Troy Press 
 MENU 
 RPGs 
 BLUELITE: A Holmes Basic Hack 
 Fantastic Worlds: An Anthology of Resources for Fantasy PbtA Games 
 Hard-Knock World 
 Improv Almanac: Dangers and Discoveries for 88 Places  
 Melee, Missiles & Magic 
 Planet of the Week 
 Suddenly an Ogre: A DW Gamebook 
 Uncommon World 
 Under the Blood-Red Mountain 
 Card Games 
 Civscape 
 Colossal Cave Adventure: The Card Game 
 Diamonds: Trick-Taking Card Game 
 Double Draw: Rules for a 5-Card Draw Variant 
 Hopping Halflings 
 Melee in the Mines 
 The Pearls and the Peril 
 Seven-Card Chaos 
 Solitaire Square 
 Spin Rummy 
 Other Games 
 Axis & Allies 1941 – ABC Variant 
 BASIC Computer Games Online 
 Castle Conquests 
 City Blocks 
 Cycladic League: Civ Lite in a Web Browser 
 Eighty Days: A BASIC Travel Game 
 A New Life in Auspele: A Choose-Your-Way Game 
 Books 
 Best-Delayed Plans: GM’s Guide to Adventure Prep 
 Fantastic Worlds 
 Fith: A Stack-based Conlang 
 How to Design Card Games 
 Improv Almanac 
 Langmaker: Celebrating Conlangs 
 Muna Lingi: A Polynesian Artlang 
 Reflections on PbtA Design 
 Articles 
 About Us 
 Board Games 
 Card Games 
 Conlangs 
 Interactive Fiction 
 Market Research 
 Miscellaneous 
 Poetry/Music 
 Programming Languages 
 Reviews 
 RPG Articles 
 RPG Session Prep 
 Star Trek 
 Top 10 
 Top 20 Pumpkin Beers 
 Top 15 ST:TNG Episodes, in Chronological Order 
 Top 10 Episodes of Star Trek: Voyager, in Chronological Order 
 D&D Rules, According to Past Players 
 Stonetop is a State-of-the-Art Fantasy Role-Playing Game 
 1973 Implementation of Wordle was Published by DEC 
 Most Played Board Games and Card Games 
 Star Trek: Enterprise Top 10 Episode Lists 
 Top 35 Most Famous Poets 
 Best Translations of the Epic of Gilgamesh 
 Hugo-Award Winning Novels 
 FODs 
 Planet of the Week 
 The Top 100 Star Trek Episodes in Chronological Order 
 Star Trek: Enterprise Top 10 Episode Lists 
 Star Trek: Discovery’s Best Season 
 Strange New Worlds’ Top 10 Episode Lists 
 Star Trek: The Original Series’ Top 10 Episodes 
 The Animated Series: Where Star Trek Had Gone Before 
 Star Trek: Voyager’s Top 10 Episodes in Chronological Order 
 Star Trek: Lower Decks’ Top 10 Episodes in Chronological Order 
 Star Trek: Prodigy Top 10 Episodes in Chronological Order 
 Star Trek in Chronological Order 
 Uncommon World: Open-Source Fantasy PbtA 
 Star Trek Panic: Klingons, Romulans, and Tholians, Oh, My! 
 Home 
 Reviews 
 A History of Earthsea 
 A History of Earthsea
 November 11, 2023 
 In high school I discovered  A Wizard of Earthsea  by Ursula K. Le Guin and fell in love with the entire trilogy, though the first book was my favorite.
 But slowly the books kept coming! I had just gotten married when  Tehanu was published in 1990: at the time, I didn’t really appreciate it. I was a father of four by the time  Tales from Earthsea  and  The Other Wind  were published in 2001; I ended up reading aloud  A Wizard of   Earthsea  to one of my sons to launch my re-reading of the series. I missed the publication of two short stories in 2014 (“The Daughter of Odren”) and 2018 (“Firelight”). 
 Why share these details?
 Because the author’s life and experience were changing and shaping the books over this time too. And your knowledge of what Earthsea is may, like mine, have lagged behind what Le Guin finally developed.
 The Books of Earthsea (2018) collects for the first time all the short stories, books, and essays into one volume. Earthsea actually started with two short stories, published in 1964: “The Rule of Names” and “The Word of Unbinding.” As Le Guin writes in the book’s introduction, “They are slight; more like a sailor’s chance sighting of a couple of islands than the discovery of a new world.” In 1968, when asked to write a fantasy novel for young adults, Le Guin started with a map: “The first thing I did was sit down and draw a map. I saw and named Earthsea and all its islands. I knew almost nothing about them, but I knew their names. In the name is the magic.”
 A Wizard of Earthsea  was subversive for 1968. The hero was brown-skinned and the enemies were white-skinned. But it was a masculine fantasy, because that’s what the Le Guin had been raised on herself. And it is masculine despite Le Guin being a pioneer of feminist science fiction with  The Left Hand of Darkness . (See her essay “Earthsea Revisioned” for her take on this.)
 Tombs of Atuan  is about a heroine, but her ability to act is restricted in part by her femininity.
 The Farthest Shore  is a rather conventional fantasy tale, and in my opinion the weakest of the five novels.
 Though, still, like all the Earthsea stories, and unlike much modern fantasy, it does not centralize violence. The Earthsea series may have the lowest on-screen body count of any fantasy series I’ve read. And you can’t say that’s just because it starts as children’s literature:  The Hobbit , after all, has a battle with five armies. “‘Of course’ a heroic fantasy is good guys fighting bad guys, the War of Good Against Evil,” Le Guin writes in the new Afterword to  A Wizard of Earthsea . “But there are no wars in Earthsea. No soldiers, no armies, no battles. None of the militarism that came from the Arthurian saga and other sources and that by now, under the influence of fantasy war games, has become almost obligatory.”
 Le Guin started Tehanu in 1972. “I wrote the first three books in five years: ’68, ’70, ’72. I was on a roll. None of them was closely plotted or planned before writing; in each of them much of the story came to me as I followed what I wrote where it inevitably led. I started confidently on the fourth book.”
 She ended up setting it aside for 18 years.
 The fourth book was about a widow, but she couldn’t figure out how to continue the tale. It would sit for 18 years before she knew how to approach it. At one point she joking titled the resumed draft  Better Late than Never . Re-reading Tehanu now, in my fifties, I appreciate it in ways that were beyond me when I was in my twenties. The book may be young-adult literature but probably is not: “I had abandoned any attempt to suit my vision of Earthsea to a publisher’s category or a critic’s prejudice.”
 And there Earthsea rested for 10 years. After all, Le Guin had subtitled it “The Last Book of Earthsea.”
 Le Guin’s approach to world-building was very different to Tolkien’s. Much more improvisational. She wrote, “The way one does research into nonexistent history is to tell the story and find out what happened.” When Le Guin was asked to write a short story set in Earthsea, she ended up writing five short stories plus a descriptive essay. “The fifth book has been treated as marginal, but it’s integral. The…story ‘Dragonfly’ is a key part of the whole story of Ged and Tenar. It is the link between  Tehanu  and  The Other Wind . It foreshadows the material of that book.” (Don’t make my mistake of reading this book last.)
 Soon after writing “Dragonfly,” she started  The Other Wind , writing that the muse came to her like a dragon, and she followed. Finally, the overall series ends with the short story “Firelight.”
 The Earthsea series is unique and rewards re-reading. Whether you are new to the Archipelago or a seasoned sailor there, I encourage you to read  The Books of Earthsea: The Complete Illustrated Edition .
 Maps and drawings  are copyrighted to the Ursula K. Le Guin Literary Trust and are made available under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs license  (CC BY-NC-ND) . Earthsea map in the  Watershed lab at PNCA . Photo by Celeste Noche, courtesy Willamette University. 
 Related 
 Loading… 
 Battle for Moscow: A Classic Introduction t[…]
 Wealth Systems in RPGs
 Search for: 
 Featured Posts 
 Impulse Drive: Spaceships in the Black 
 Ticket to Ride: City Editions 
 The Top 100 Star Trek Episodes in Chronological Order 
 The Cult of the Old: Board Game Purchases 
 Los Alamos Chess Variant, First Chesslike Computer Game 
 Categories 
 Select Category 
 Board Games  (32) 
    Board Game Reviews  (13) 
    Board Game Survey  (9) 
    Wargames  (3) 
 Card Games  (34) 
    Card Game Design  (18) 
       Design Challenge  (3) 
    Civscape  (1) 
 Conlangs  (38) 
    Esperanto  (6) 
    Model Languages  (4) 
 Interactive Fiction  (21) 
    Adventure Games  (1) 
    Colossal Cave  (3) 
    Text Adventures  (2) 
 Market Research  (28) 
 Miscellaneous  (20) 
 Poetry/Music  (17) 
 Programming Languages  (32) 
    BASIC  (28) 
       BASIC Games  (10) 
       Tiny BASIC  (7) 
 Reviews  (59) 
 RPGs  (139) 
    Game Master Tips  (38) 
       Session Prep  (27) 
    NSR  (9) 
    PbtA  (73) 
       Dungeon World  (24) 
       PbtA Design  (9) 
       Stonetop  (12) 
    RPG Content  (16) 
       Hex Describe  (3) 
       Hexedland  (1) 
 RSS 
 Copyright © 2026 Troy Press All Rights Reserved. 
 Powered by WordPress . Designed by Yossy's web service .
 %d 
