61
Student Version
Th e Left Hand of Darkness
Reading selection for this module:
Le Guin, Ursula K. Th e Left Hand of Darkness.  New York: Ace, 1987.
Science ﬁ ction explores ethical and moral issues created by new tech-
nology. Many of the technologies explored in science ﬁ ction stories of 
the 1940s and 1950s have become a part of our everyday world, and 
we live with the consequences. As Ursula K. Le Guin argues in her in-
troduction to The Left Hand of Darkness, we can think of science ﬁ ction 
as a kind of thought experiment: If we do this, what will happen? How 
will it work? How will it change society? How will it change people? 
Should we do it at all?
The Left Hand of Darkness takes place in a universe in which human-
ity did not originate on Earth. The original humanoid race is the Hain, 
who deposited different versions of humanity on different planets 
throughout the galaxy. Perhaps the strangest to us are the inhabitants 
of Gethen, a planet in perpetual ice age. The humans of Gethen are all 
hermaphrodites, capable of being either male or female when ready 
for reproduction (in kemmer) but asexual the rest of the time. Le Guin 
uses this situation to explore male and female stereotypes as well as a 
number of different political philosophies.
For the purposes of this module, the book is divided into the introduc-
tion and four main sections. The reading assignments may be further 
divided to ﬁ t the schedule and pace of a particular class. Read the 
overview quickly to get a general sense of what the novel is about.
Reading Rhetorically
Prereading
An Overview of the Book
Section One (pages 1–71, Chapters 1–5): This section takes place 
predominantly in the kingdom of Karhide with Genly Ai (the representa-
tive of a sort of federation of planets called the Ekumen) as the 
viewpoint character. It starts with a ceremonial parade. Genly has an 
Activity 1
62   |  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS    CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO
STUDENT VERSION
awkward conversation with Tibe, an unpleasant political type, and 
then an awkward dinner with Estraven, the prime minister. The next 
day Genly has an audience with Argaven, the mad king, and ﬁ nds that 
Estraven has been banished. Genly goes to a group called the “Fore-
tellers” and learns much about the Handdara religion. This section 
also contains a folktale called “The Place Inside the Blizzard,” which 
ﬁ gures later in the story. Much is presented in this section that be-
comes important later, but the relevance and meaning of these events 
are unclear for the moment. Our narrator is confused, and thus, so are 
we. This section, in a sense, lays out the mechanisms of the political, 
cultural, and narrative snares that will ultimately trap both Genly and 
Estraven.
Section Two (pages 72–161, Chapters 6–12): Chapter 6 switches 
viewpoint characters and relates Estraven’s ﬂ ight from Karhide to 
Orgoreyn, a neighboring country organized as an authoritarian, socialist 
state, from Estraven’s point of view. Chapter 7 is presented as a ﬁ eld 
report on Gethenian sexuality from one of the original Ekumen investi-
gators. This report ﬁ lls in much about Gethenian culture and practices 
that have been hinted at in the narrative up to this point. Chapter 8 
describes Genly’s journey to Orgoreyn, and eventually Genly meets 
Estraven there. Chapter 9 is another folktale, this one about “Estraven 
the Traitor,” a distant ancestor of the current Estraven, which has many 
parallels to the current situation. Chapter 10 is about Genly’s negotia-
tions in Orgoreyn from Genly’s viewpoint, and Chapter 11 covers much 
of the same events from Estraven’s point of view. Genly doesn’t under-
stand the politics of Orgoreyn, doesn’t trust Estraven, and continues to 
behave in a naïve and idealistic manner. Estraven understands the poli-
tics of both Orgoreyn and Karhide very well, but is confused at Genly’s 
behavior. At the end of this section, Estraven warns Genly that he is in 
danger of his life. One could say that this section clariﬁ es much that is 
referenced in section one and winds the springs in all the cultural and 
political traps very tightly. In other words, Genly’s continuing misunder-
standings of the culture and politics of both Karhide and Orgoreyn are 
about to get him in big trouble.
Section Three (pages 162–236, Chapters 13–16): In Chapter 13, Genly 
is arrested and sent to a “voluntary farm.” The traps are all sprung. In 
Chapter 14, Estraven escapes Mishnory (the capitol of Orgoreyn) and 
rescues Genly. In Chapter 15, we view events from Genly’s perspective 
again. He begins to recover from the drugs that were administered at 
the farm, and Estraven begins to recover from dothe, a state of height-
ened energy that Gethenians are able to enter when necessary. The 
two set off back to Karhide, traveling the long way around, over a gla-
cier in winter. Chapter 16 is from Estraven’s viewpoint. The two discuss 
philosophy, religion, kinship, love, sexuality, and telepathy. They begin 
to understand one another. 
Activity 1
(Continued)
CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS     |   63
STUDENT VERSION
Section Four (pages 237–301, Chapters 17–20): Chapter 17 is pre-
sented as a Gethenian creation myth. Chapter 18 describes the last dif-
ﬁ cult passage over the glacier. Chapter 19 shows the two crossing the 
border, back into Karhide. They are taken in and fed but are betrayed. 
Chapter 20 winds up the story. Genly has called his ship, and Karhide 
joins the Ekumen.
Introducing Key Concepts
Complete the table provided below according to the directions stated 
here. (You will refer to this table and add to it as you do the next 
activity, “Getting Ready to Read.”)
Steps are as follows: 
1. Select a word or concept and then deﬁ ne the new concept, provid-
ing necessary attributes.
2. Distinguish between new concept and a similar but different concept 
from your background knowledge.
3. Give examples of the concept and explain why they are examples.
4. Give non-examples of the concept and explain why they are non-
examples.
5. Given examples and non-examples (from the teacher), you are to 
distinguish between them.
6. Then present your examples and non-examples of the concept 
and explain your choices.
Deﬁ ne new 
concept: 
reality
Attributes for 
this concept
Attributes for 
truth or other 
concepts that 
are similar
Attributes for 
fantasy or other 
concepts that 
are dissimilar
Examples for 
concept
Explanation for 
why they are 
examples
Non-examples 
for concept
Explanation for 
why they are 
non-examples for 
this concept
The Left Hand of Darkness— Author’s Introduction
Activity 2 
Activity 1
(Continued)
64   |  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS    CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO
STUDENT VERSION
Getting Ready to Read
1. What is science ﬁ ction? (Refer to your working deﬁ nition and 
examples of its attributes. )
 Think of some books, stories, TV shows, and movies that you have 
seen that you consider to be science ﬁ ction. Make a two-column 
list with the name of the work on the left and some reasons why you 
think this work is science ﬁ ction on the right. Then look at your lists 
and try to come up with a deﬁ nition of the genre of science ﬁ ction.
2. How is science ﬁ ction different from other types of ﬁ ction?
 Now think of some books, stories, TV shows, and movies that are 
deﬁ nitely not science ﬁ ction. How are they different from the science 
ﬁ ction works? Add these to your list and describe why they are not 
science ﬁ ction. Are there any works you can think of that are in-be-
tween or hard to categorize? 
 Now write a short answer to this question: Do you enjoy science 
ﬁ ction? Why or why not?
3. What is the role of the literary artist?
 What is the role of the writer in society? Is it to entertain us? Educate 
or enlighten us? Make us think? Change our views? Help us live 
better lives? What do you think?
4. What is the nature of the artistic process?
 How do writers create stories? When you write a story, where does 
your inspiration come from? How do you know what to write about? 
How do you know what words to use? Do you think professional 
writers work the same way?
5. Why do we read ﬁ ction, and what effect does it have on us?
 Have you ever identiﬁ ed with a character in a book, TV show, or a 
movie so much that you felt as though you were living a part of that 
character’s life? Have you ever been inspired to do something be-
cause of a character’s actions in a book or a movie? Have you ever 
wished you could be a character in a story? Have you ever been sad 
when a book or movie is ﬁ nished, because now you have to return 
to the real world? Think of a work that affected you in one or more 
of these ways and write a short description of what it was about 
and why it affected you. Then share your description with another 
student.
Activity 3 
CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS     |   65
STUDENT VERSION
Surveying the T ext 
You are going to read the author’s introduction to one of her most 
famous works. 
1. Look at the reverse of the title page. When was this book ﬁ rst 
published?
2. What kind of information would you expect to ﬁ nd in an 
introduction?
3. How long do you think it will take to read the introduction? 
How much beneﬁ t do you think you will get from it?
4. What do you know about this author? (Try looking at her Web site: 
<http://www.ursulakleguin.com>)
Making Predictions and Asking Questions 
Ursula Le Guin tries to answer the ﬁ ve questions from Activity 3 in her 
introduction to The Left Hand of Darkness. As you read it, think about 
whether her answers to those questions are similar to yours. Here are 
the questions again:
1. What is science ﬁ ction?
2. How is science ﬁ ction different from other types of ﬁ ction?
3. What is the role of the literary artist?
4. What is the nature of the artistic process?
5. Why do we read ﬁ ction, and what effect does it have on us?
Introducing Key Vocabulary
The following words and phrases are important to understanding 
Le Guin’s introduction. Study the words’ derivations and use them to 
summarize the text, or explore the word using the Frayer method or a 
word tree. Share your results with the class. Keep your own dictionary 
of new terms learned here and throughout this module. 
• extrapolation—To project a conclusion or a ﬁ  nal state from a set of 
facts and conditions.
• escapist—Entertainment that allows the reader or viewer to escape 
from his or her problems into a fantasy world.
• rationalist—Based on facts, arguments, and reasoning. One who 
makes decisions based on these things.
• thought-experiment—An experiment that is not actually performed 
but instead takes place in the mind. 
• clairvoyants—People who can see into the future through psychic 
means.
• futurologist—A scientist who tries to predict what the future will look 
like.
• apocalyptic—Having to do with the end of the world.
• androgynous—Having characteristics of both sexes, neither man nor 
woman (Greek roots andro, man, and gyn, woman).
Activity 4
Activity 5
Activity 6 
66   |  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS    CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO
STUDENT VERSION
Reading
First Reading
Think about these questions:
• Which of your predictions turned out to be true?
• How are Le Guin’s answers to these questions different from your 
own? 
• What surprised you about her answers?
Ursula Le Guin’s Answers
1. What is science ﬁ ction?
 Le Guin says that contrary to what most people think, science ﬁ  ction 
does not try to predict the future. Instead, she calls it a “thought-
experiment.” Some people say that science ﬁ ction asks a “what if” 
question. Le Guin gives a couple of examples from other science 
ﬁ ction writers:
• What if the Allies (the U.S., Britain, France, the Soviet Union) lost 
the second world war against the Axis powers (Germany, Italy, and 
Japan)? This question is explored in Philip K. Dick’s The Man in 
the High Castle. In this book, the eastern part of the U.S. is gov-
erned by Nazis, and the western part is governed by Japan.
• What if a young doctor made a living being out of dead body 
parts? (This, of course, is the story told in Mary Shelley’s 
Frankenstein.)
Here are some other “what if” questions:
• What if people lived on the moon?
• What if machines had feelings?
• What if scientists made cows with wings?
• What if everybody looked exactly the same?
• What if people could communicate with anyone, anywhere 
they went? (Note, that isn’t a “what if” question anymore. Cell 
phones have already made that possible, and we know how 
they have changed our culture.)
• What if people could travel from one place to another just by 
thinking about it (teleportation)?
 After reading the introduction, what do you think the “what if” 
question might be in The Left Hand of Darkness?
 Assignment: Think of your own “what if” question. Write it 
down. Try to imagine a world in which your question is true. 
What would it be like? What would people do? Make some 
notes about how your world would be different from our pres-
ent world. Think about what kind of character you might use to 
explore this world. Discuss your world with a partner.
Activity 7 
CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS     |   67
STUDENT VERSION
2. How is science ﬁ ction different from other types of ﬁ ction?
 According to Le Guin, science ﬁ  ction is not very different from other 
ﬁ ction. It just uses some different metaphors, often based on tech-
nology and science. Do you agree?
3. What is the role of the literary artist?
 Le Guin says the business of the novelist is telling lies. What does 
she mean by this? Do you agree? If the novelist tells lies, what is 
truth?
4. What is the nature of the artistic process?
 Le Guin talks about the spirit of inspiration ﬂ  owing through the writer. 
She talks about saying in words what cannot be said in words. She 
talks about Genly Ai (the main character in The Left Hand of Dark-
ness) sitting down at her desk and using up her ink and typewriter 
ribbon. What does this all mean? Do you think that writing is to a 
certain extent an unconscious process for her? If you were going to 
imitate her writing process, what would you do?
5. Why do we read ﬁ ction, and what effect does it have on us?
 Le Guin says that reading a novel makes us temporarily insane be-
cause we hear voices that do not exist and believe in places we have 
never seen and events that never happened. Do you agree? Have 
you ever felt a bit distant from the real world when you are reading a 
story?
Now compare your answers to these questions with those of Le Guin. 
How are they different? Did Le Guin’s introduction make you think 
about any of these questions in a different way?
Looking Closely at Language
Here are some words and phrases from the text that may be unfamiliar 
to you. They are in alphabetical order. Some of them you have seen 
before. If you get stuck on a word or phrase in the text, look to see if 
it is here. Return to the text to see what its meaning is there based on 
the deﬁ nitions provided here or in the dictionary. Add the words to the 
dictionary you are creating. Find synonyms and related words to these 
to learn new words and to increase your vocabulary.
• aesthetically—Having to do with artistic beauty.
• androgynous—Having characteristics of both sexes, neither man nor 
woman.
• apocalyptic—Having to do with the end of the world.
• Apollo—Ancient Greek god of the sun and of music and poetry.
 awen— An ancient Welsh word that means “ﬂ owing of spirit.”
• Battle of Borodino (Russian forces successfully fought Napoleon at 
a village south of Moscow on August 26, 1812. However, that knowl-
edge is unnecessary to understand what Le Guin is talking about 
here.)
Activity 8 
Activity 7
(Continued)
68   |  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS    CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO
STUDENT VERSION
• carcinogenic—Causes cancer. Here it is used metaphorically to 
mean that extrapolating too much tends to lead to a bad result.
• circumstantial—Circumstantial evidence is facts and plausible as-
sumptions that would be consistent with something happening a 
certain way but do not actually prove that it happened that way. 
• clairvoyants—People who can see into the future through psychic 
means.
• Club of Rome—A nonpartisan “think tank.” A group of philosophers 
and scientists who try to come up with solutions to the world’s prob-
lems.
• devious—Tricky or deceiving.
• Dionysios—Ancient Greek god of wine and madness.
• escapist—Entertainment that allows the reader or viewer to escape 
from his or her problems into a fantasy world.
• extrapolation—To project a conclusion or a ﬁ  nal state from a set of 
facts and conditions.
• futurologist—A scientist who tries to predict what the future will look 
like.
• Marshalsea Prison—A debtor’s prison in London that is mentioned in 
the works of Charles Dickens. It no longer exists.
• peculiar—Unique, strange, or different.
• prophets—Religious ﬁ  gures who predict what will happen if people 
do not change their behavior.
• Pythagoras—An ancient Greek philosopher, sometimes called the 
ﬁ rst pure mathematician.
• rationalist—Based on facts, arguments, and reasoning. One who 
makes decisions based on those things.
• Schrödinger—Erwin Schrödinger is famous for a paradox called 
“Schrödinger’s cat.” This was a thought experiment in which we 
imagine a cat in a closed box. Is the cat alive or dead? We don’t 
know until we open the box, and so two universes, one with a dead 
cat and one with a live one, seem to exist in parallel until we open it. 
http://www-groups.dcs.st-and.ac.uk/~history/Mathematicians/
Schrodinger.html
• seers—An older term for clairvoyants, people who can see the 
future.
• simplistic—An explanation that oversimpliﬁ  es the real conditions.
• thought-experiment—An experiment that is not actually performed 
but instead takes place in the mind. 
Analyzing Stylistic Choices
Le Guin makes a number of statements that are unexpected or 
surprising. She says:
 1. Science ﬁ  ction is not predictive; it is descriptive.
 2. A novelist’s business is lying.
 3. When we read a novel, we are insane—bonkers.
Activity 9
Activity 8
(Continued)
CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS     |   69
STUDENT VERSION
 4. Is it any wonder that no truly respectable society has ever trusted 
its artists?
 5. I talk about the gods; I am an atheist.
 6. I am an artist too, and therefore a liar.
 7. Distrust everything I say. I am telling the truth.
 8. In reading a novel, any novel, we have to know perfectly well that 
the whole thing is nonsense, and then, while reading, believe 
every word of it.
 9. The novelist says in words what cannot be said in words.
 10. The truth is a matter of the imagination.
Why does Le Guin use all these contradictory and surprising state-
ments to make her points?
What is the effect on the reader of all these contradictions?
What is Le Guin trying to do in writing this way?
Do you think it would have been better to say these things more 
directly, more straightforwardly? Is it possible to do that?
Pick one of the statements listed above and explain what the author 
might mean by it. Try to include at least three words from your 
vocabulary dictionary in creating your explanation.
The Left Hand of Darkness— Section 1 (pages 1–71, Chapters 1–5)
Prereading
Getting Ready to Read
The following information will help you prepare to read Chapters 1–5 of 
The Left Hand of Darkness.
People have different preferences when reading novels. The ques-
tions and discussion activities that follow are designed to help you get 
the most out of your reading by helping you think about issues, make 
connections, recognize important points, and so forth. However, some 
people just like to read and enjoy ﬁ rst, then go back and think about 
the details. If you are that type of reader, you may want to read the 
whole novel and then come back to the exercises and activities.
Most ﬁ ctional works start in the middle of the events, and the reader 
has to work pretty hard for the ﬁ rst few pages to ﬁ gure out what is 
going on. This problem is even more complicated in science ﬁ ction, 
because the world in which the events are taking place is often quite 
different from the world that we live in. The events of The Left Hand of 
Darkness take place on a world called “Gethen” by the inhabitants and 
“Winter” by outsiders. Gethen is in the midst of an ice age; therefore, 
snow, ice, and cold are major factors in the environment. The names of 
the people and places are unusual and foreign. For example, the story 
Activity 10 
Activity 9
(Continued)
70   |  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS    CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO
STUDENT VERSION
begins in Erhenrang, the major city of the kingdom of Karhide, and the 
major character is Genly Ai (whose ﬁ rst name is pronounced with a 
hard “g” as in “ghost” or “grape,” and whose last name is pronounced 
like “eye”). Genly is from off the world. He is a representative of a sort 
of United Nations of planets called the “Ekumen,” and his job is to 
convince the people of Gethen to join. As the story opens, Genly is 
watching a ceremony and trying to arrange an audience with the king, 
Argaven, but he is confused by the culture and language, and things 
are not going well. 
Surveying the T ext 
The chapters in this section are:
1. A Parade in Erhenrang
2. The Place Inside the Blizzard
3. The Mad King
4. The Nineteenth Day
5. The Domestication of Hunch
Some things to think about when you read these chapters:
• We have parades for celebrations and holidays. What kind of cel-
ebration could it be?
• How could there be a place inside a blizzard?
• Is the king angry or crazy? Is an angry or crazy king a good ruler?
• What is the signiﬁ cance of the nineteenth day?
• A hunch is a kind of irrational feeling, without any visible evidence, 
that something is true or is going to happen. What would it mean to 
“domesticate” the power to have a hunch?
At this point you don’t have enough information to answer these ques-
tions. You need to read the book with these questions in mind.
Making Predictions and Asking Questions 
People often ask, “What is this novel about?” Sometimes they are 
asking about the plot of the novel, the series of events that happen in 
it. But events are usually driven by people who are trying to do some-
thing, who have goals and objectives and are facing obstacles and 
dangers. So we might say that the novel is about the characters, es-
pecially the protagonist, or viewpoint character. However, a novelist is 
usually exploring some particular themes and ideas, and we could also 
say that the novel, in some abstract sense, is about those themes. 
Three points of view. We might see The Left Hand of Darkness as hav-
ing three main areas of exploration: 
• First, Le Guin is clearly interested in the development of her charac-
ters: who they are, what they are trying to do, their emotional states, 
and their growth as people. We might call this a psychological orien-
tation. 
Activity 1 1 
Activity 12 
Activity 10
(Continued)
CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS     |   71
STUDENT VERSION
• Second, this novel explores cultural differences, differences between 
Gethenian culture and our own and between the different countries 
of Gethen. We might call this a cultural or anthropological perspec-
tive. This perspective is especially interesting because physically, in 
one particular sense, the people of Gethen are very different from us. 
• Third, Le Guin is interested in the way different societies organize 
themselves politically. Karhide, where Genly starts out, is a traditional 
monarchy, but it is starting to change. Orgoreyn, where Genly goes 
after he is unsuccessful in Karhide, has a more modern and efﬁ cient 
government, but all is not quite as it seems. This we might call the 
political perspective.
Before beginning to read the novel, you should choose one of the three 
perspectives as a focus for reading. You can be a “psychologist,” an 
“anthropologist,” or a “political ofﬁ cer.” As you read, you will keep your 
particular perspective in mind, looking for information relevant to your 
questions.
The psychologist should pay attention to the main characters, Genly 
Ai and Estraven, and their relationships with some of the other char-
acters, such as Tibe and Argaven. Throughout your reading you will 
encounter “character questions,” such as these: 
• What kind of personality does this character have? How can you 
tell?
• What are the strong points of this character? 
• What are the weak points?
• What is this character trying to do? 
• What motivates this character? 
• What obstacles does this character face?
• How does this character change through the course of the novel?
• What causes the character to change?
• What does the character learn?
• What kind of language would a psychologist use to describe a per-
son? Identify those kinds of words from the text and create a page 
for them in your vocabulary notebook. 
The anthropologist should pay attention to foods, etiquette and 
standards of behavior, cultural practices and concepts, religious ideas, 
signiﬁ cant words, marriage and family customs, and all the ways that 
people in a society interact with one another. Throughout your reading, 
you will encounter “culture questions,” such as these:
• How are Gethenians different from us?
• How does the cold affect Gethenian culture?
• What do Gethenians eat and drink? How is their diet different from 
ours?
• What is the equivalent of marriage on Gethen?
• How do Gethenians organize families?
• What kind of technology do Gethenians have?
• What kinds of weapons do Gethenians have?
Activity 12
(Continued)
72   |  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS    CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO
STUDENT VERSION
• What are the major religions on Gethen? How are they different?
• What is shifgrethor? (This is an important Gethenian concept, some-
what different from any American one.)
• What kind of language would an anthropologist use to describe a 
person, place, or situation? Identify those kinds of words from the 
text and create a page for them in your vocabulary notebook. 
The political ofﬁ cer has an interesting job. The Left Hand of Dark-
ness was written during the Cold War, when the United States and the 
Soviet Union were two nuclear-armed superpowers with very different 
political systems and beliefs. In one sense, this novel explores those 
different political beliefs. Every Soviet naval vessel had a political of-
ﬁ cer whose job it was to make sure that the crew remained true to So-
viet political beliefs. In some ways, the political ofﬁ cer was more pow-
erful than the captain. In your reading of The Left Hand of Darkness, the 
political ofﬁ cer should think about “political questions,” such as these:
• What kind of government does Karhide have? Who has power, and 
what kind of power do they have?
• What aspects of Karhide have remained the same for hundreds of 
years? What aspects are changing?
• What kind of government does Orgoreyn have? Who has power, and 
what kind of power do they have?
• How is the government of Karhide different from the government of 
Orgoreyn? 
• Which of the two countries would you prefer to live in? Why?
• In Orgoreyn, what is the Sarf?
• What kind of communication system do Gethenians have, and who 
controls it?
• What is the Ekumen? Is it a government? What is it trying to do, and 
why?
• What kind of language would a political ofﬁ cer use to describe a per-
son, situation, or setting? Identify those kinds of words from the text 
and create a page for them in your vocabulary notebook.
At least once a week, the three researchers (psychologist, anthropolo-
gist, and political ofﬁ cer) should meet together and discuss their ﬁ nd-
ings. 
Assignment: To begin our reading, read the italicized report headnote 
and the ﬁ rst two paragraphs of Chapter 1, “A Parade in Ehrenrang.” 
Note that this novel is presented as a report from Genly Ai to an Eku-
men ofﬁ cial on another planet. It is called an ansible document. The 
ansible is a faster-than-light communication device. According to 
Einstein’s theory of relativity, nothing can travel faster than light, but in 
Le Guin’s novels, people can communicate instantaneously across in-
terstellar distances by using the ansible. (Although Le Guin apparently 
invented this word, the ansible also appears in the Ender’s Game series 
of novels by Orson Scott Card.)
Activity 12
(Continued)
CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS     |   73
STUDENT VERSION
Genly says, “I’ll make my report as if I told a story, for I was taught as a 
child on my homeworld that Truth is a matter of the imagination.” 
1. What are some of the normal differences between a report and 
a story? Why do you think Genly chooses to tell a story instead of 
writing an ofﬁ cial report?
2. Why doesn’t Genly think that facts equal Truth? What does he mean 
by comparing facts to pearls that look different when worn by 
different people?
3. Genly says that the story is not all his, nor told by him alone. 
What do you think this means about how the story will be told?
4. Genly says, “If at moments the facts seem to alter with an altered 
voice, why then you can choose the fact you like best.” Does this 
mean that the facts change depending on the perspective of the 
teller? Do you agree? 
5. Genly says that where he comes from, “Truth is a matter of the 
imagination.” Le Guin quotes Genly saying this in her introduction, 
so she must think it is an important idea. What does it mean? 
Introducing Key Vocabulary
Le Guin’s style is literary, and there is a lot of interesting vocabulary. 
The following words are useful in understanding the story, especially at 
the beginning. Look for these words in the story when you read it:
• potentates—Persons with power; kings, rulers.
• dignitaries—Important people; people with dignity, which come from 
their social status.
• insolent—Very disrespectful (adjective form).
• insolence—Disrespectful speech and behavior (noun form).
• animosity—Hostile or unfriendly feeling.
• specious—Used to describe an argument that looks reasonable on 
the surface but is not really so.
• proclamation—An announcement.
• pretense—A pretended reason for doing something that is really be-
ing done for another reason.
The following “Gethenian” words are very important to understanding 
the story. These words are made-up words that do not exist in English, 
but you need to know them to understand Gethenian culture.
 shifgrethor —Gethenian term related to honor and prestige.
 kemmer —Gethenian word meaning that a person is in a physical 
state of being “ready for reproduction.”
 kemmering —A vow similar to marriage between two Gethenians.
Activity 13
Activity 12
(Continued)
74   |  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS    CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO
STUDENT VERSION
Reading
First Reading
Read pages 1–71 (Chapters 1–5), keeping in mind the questions raised 
in “Surveying the Text” and “Making Predictions.” As you read, look 
for the answers to the questions listed below for each chapter. Also 
keep in mind your techniques for learning about words from contextual 
clues.
Chapter 1
1. What is the occasion of the parade?
a. A celebration of a great military victory.
b. Mother’s Day.
c. The completion of the Arch of the River Gate.
d. The parade has been done every year for so long that no one 
knows why.
2. Who is Estraven? 
a. The Prime Minister of Karhide.
b. The “King’s Ear.”
c. A dignitary.
d. All of the above.
3. How does Genly feel about Estraven?
a. He doesn’t like him.
b. He trusts him completely.
c. Estraven is his greatest enemy in Karhide.
d. Genly has never met him.
4. Who is Argaven? 
a. A spy from Orgoreyn.
b. The king of Karhide.
c. Estraven’s brother.
d. All of the above.
5. Who is Tibe? 
a. Genly’s landlady.
b. A politician with a wrinkled face.
c. A fortuneteller.
d. Genly’s friend.
6. On Gethen, what is an “island”?
a. A bit of land surrounded by water.
b. A bit of land surrounded by ice.
c. A boarding house or hotel.
d. A part of a roadway.
Activity 14 
CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS     |   75
STUDENT VERSION
7. What caused Estraven to lose favor with the king?
a. A border dispute between Karhide and Orgoreyn.
b. The king thinks Estraven is insane.
c. The king doesn’t like Genly.
d. Estraven wasn’t re-elected as Prime Minister.
8. What is Genly trying to accomplish?
a. He is trying to sell guns and rockets to Karhide.
b. He is trying to sell “ansible” technology.
c. He is a spy from Orgoreyn.
d. He wants Karhide to join the Ekumen, a league of planets.
Chapter 2
1. What is “The Place Inside the Blizzard?”
a. A shelter for lost travelers.
b. A spirit place for people who kill themselves.
c. A famous tavern in the north country.
d. The eye of a hurricane.
2. What crime have Hode and Getheren committed?
a. They robbed a liquor store.
b. They killed a neighbor.
c. They pledged “kemmering” for life, even though they were 
brothers.
d. They kidnapped a woman to be their wife.
3. Why does Getheren curse the people of his homeland?
a. No one would let him stay in their house for longer than three 
days.
b. His homeland had exiled him and called him an outlaw.
c. No one showed him any kindness.
d. All of the above.
4. Why does Getheren refuse to stay inside the blizzard with Hode?
a. It’s too cold there.
b. He is mad at Hode for killing himself.
c. He is scared of Hode because he looks too white.
d. Hode doesn’t want him to stay.
Chapter 3
1. Why was Estraven banished?
a. He was friends with Genly, who is an alien.
b. He made fun of the king’s ear.
c. The king thought he was a spy.
d. His policy on the border dispute with Orgoreyn made the king 
think he was a traitor.
2. Why does Genly, the “First Mobile,” go to Gethen alone?
a. He is less threatening to the people of the planet if he is alone.
b. He doesn’t really like other people very much.
Activity 14
(Continued)
76   |  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS    CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO
STUDENT VERSION
c. There were others with him but they got lost somehow.
d. His partner, Archon Fabrile, was killed by a sonic gun.
3. Why does the king think that all the people in the Ekumen are 
monsters?
a. The people of the Ekumen have two heads, except for the kings.
b. The people of the Ekumen are either male or female and stay that 
way all the time.
c. The people of the Ekumen don’t have any kings.
d. The king is crazy.
4. Why is the king afraid of Genly?
a. Genly has a sonic gun.
b. Genly looks like a monster.
c. Genly brings change to Karhide.
d. He thinks Genly might poison him.
5. Why doesn’t the king want to join the Ekumen?
a. He wants Karhide to go its own way.
b. He wants more money.
d. He is crazy.
d. Estraven told him not to.
Chapter 4
1. Why isn’t Berosty happy with the answer the Foretellers give to his 
question, “When will I die?”
a. The date they told him is too soon.
b. The answer they gave him was too vague.
c. He wanted them to tell him he would never die.
d. Knowing the precise day of his death was too much for him.
2. Why isn’t Berosty happy with the answer Herbor gets from the 
Foretellers?
a. The date they told him is too soon.
b. The answer they gave him was too vague.
c. He wanted them to tell him he would never die.
d. Knowing the precise day of his death was too much for him.
3. How does the story end?
a. Berosty ﬁ nally gets the right answer and is happy until the day of 
his death.
b. Herbor convinces Berosty that it was a stupid question anyway.
c. Berosty goes crazy and kills Herbor and then dies on the 19th day 
of the month.
d. Herbor runs away, never to be seen again.
Chapter 5 
1. What are the two main religions of Gethen? (See the ﬁ rst page of the 
chapter.)
a. The old way of the Handarra and the new way of Yomesh.
b. Nihilism and Bokonism.
Activity 14
(Continued)
CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS     |   77
STUDENT VERSION
c. Socialism and facism.
d. On Gethen, there is no religion.
2. Why don’t Gethenians go to war?
a. They have no weapons.
b. They never commit acts of violence of any kind.
c. Acts of violence are instantly punished by death.
d. They lack the ability to mobilize, and they don’t even have a word 
for war.
3. Why does Genly seek out the Foretellers?
a. He wants to convince them to join the Ekumen.
b. He wants to teach them telepathy.
c. He wants to ﬁ nd out if they can really tell the future.
d. He wants to ask them where Estraven went.
4. What happens if someone asks the Foretellers an unanswerable 
question?
a. They charge twice as much.
b. They won’t even try to answer it, because once they tried and it 
made them all crazy.
c. They just give a vague, ambiguous answer.
d. They just take the questioner’s money and run away.
5. What questions does Genly ask the Foretellers?
a. Who is the fairest one of all?
b. What is the square root of four?
c. Will Gethen be a member of the Ekumen in ﬁ ve years?
d. Where did Estraven go?
6. When Genly asked his question, why were there ten members in the 
telepathic circle of the Foretellers instead of the usual nine? 
a. Estraven was spying on the circle.
b. Genly’s telepathic abilities caused him to join the circle.
c. The Foretellers miscounted how many people were there.
d. Genly’s gems were worth more than he thought, so another 
person was added.
7. Why don’t kings ask many questions of the Foretellers?
a. The Foretellers charge kings a lot of money, and the answers 
aren’t very useful.
b. Kings on Gethen are usually crazy.
c. The Foretellers are afraid of kings.
d. Kings have their own fortune tellers.
8. What answer do the Foretellers give to Genly’s question?
a. “Good fences make good neighbors.”
b. “Karhide isn’t a country; it’s a family quarrel.”
c. “No.”
d. “Yes!”
Activity 14
(Continued)
78   |  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS    CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO
STUDENT VERSION
Looking Closely at Language
1. Gethenian words: Do Le Guin’s made-up Gethenian words add 
essential meaning to the story? What if Le Guin used tuba-trom-
bones instead of gossiwors? What if she said “Estravan suddenly 
became super-strong, but afterwards he was unnaturally tired” 
instead of “Estraven used dothe strength to counter the effects of 
paralysis”? Discuss the Gethenian words noted below with a partner. 
Can you think of English words that would work just as well? To do 
this, you will need to use a little creativity and return to the text to 
see how the words are used in the context of the text. Try to substi-
tute words you know to create meaning.
• gossiwors —A musical instrument of Karhide, played only in the 
king’s presence (3).
• kyorremy —Upper parliament in Karhide (6).
• dothe —A state of abnormal, but temporary strength (59). 
• Handdaratta —People who practice Handdara, the ancient 
religious practice of Gethen (57).
• nusuth —A word used by the Handdarrata meaning “it doesn’t 
matter” (58).
• Yomeshta —People who practice Yomesh, the newer religion that 
branched off from Handdara (61).
2. Some English words from the book might be difﬁ cult. Practice your 
context clues to get meaning from the text, but if you want to be 
sure about a word’s meaning, use the dictionary to support your pre-
diction. The words in each chapter section are alphabetized below. 
You may also opt to identify words you do not know from the text 
and look them up to help you understand the text better.
Chapter 1
 adroit—skillful 
 artisans—artists or craftsmen
 ascends—climbs
 augmentation—an addition
 breeches—trousers reaching to the knees
 diurnal—daily or “of the day” 
 effeminate—a male who looks or acts like a female
 eminence—a high position
 foray—a raid to seize things 
 impugns—to ﬁ  ght against or challenge as false 
 insipidly—blandly 
 masons—bricklayers
 obdurate—stubborn
 obliging—cooperating
 obviate—make unnecessary
 ornate—highly decorated
 patronage—political favors
Activity 15 
CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS     |   79
STUDENT VERSION
 pertinacious—holding ﬁ  rmly to a purpose
 phlegmatic—sluggish, slow, calm
 transmuted—changed or transformed
Chapter 2
 blighted—diseased, sick
 chapfallen—having the lower jaw hanging loosely, surprised and  
 depressed
 prospered—things went well, there was growth and good health
 transgression—breaking the rules
 tumult—disordered action, chaos
Chapter 3
 augmented—added to
 etiquette—politeness
 implicated—involved, responsible
 intently—with great attention
 interior—inside
 panoply—impressive clothes
 perjuring—lying
 physiological—having to do with the physical body and its 
 systems
 predecessors—people who came before
 resolution—strength of purpose
 rufous—reddish
 simultaneously—at the same time
 trudging—walking as if very tired
 verbatim—completely word for word
Chapter 4
 demented—mentally ill
Chapter 5
 abominations—hateful things
 abyss—a deep drop, a canyon
 aerie—the high nest of an eagle; a high dwelling place
 ambiguous—unclear, vague
 anomalies—differences
 appalling—shocking
 buttresses—structures to hold up a wall
 chasms—a wide, deep opening, similar to “abyss”
 creed—a set of beliefs
 emulate—to imitate or copy
 evasion—escape
 frailest—weakest
 hallucinations—things seen that are not really there
 ignoble—not noble, base
 inarticulate—unable to speak or unable to speak clearly
 paraverbal—beyond words
Activity 15
(Continued)
80   |  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS    CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO
STUDENT VERSION
 phantasmal—like a phantasm, an illusion, or a ghostly ﬁ  gure
 precipice—a sharp drop; a cliff
 recoil—pull back in shock or disgust
 sheaf—a bundle
 skein—a coil of yarn or thread
 transients—temporary visitors passing through
 ubiquitous—seen everywhere
 vendettas—feuds 
 voluble—talkative
Analyzing Stylistic Choices
The linguistic choices writers make create certain effects for their 
readers. The questions for discussion are divided into two categories: 
words and sentences. 
Words
Although Le Guin writes this story in English, she also uses some 
Gethenian words, such as gossiwor, kyorremy, shifgrethor, and nusuth. 
Since Gethen is a ﬁ ctitious place, clearly these words have been in-
vented by the author. Discuss the following questions:
1. What is the effect of these alien words on the reader?
2. Does an author need alien words to describe an alien culture?
3. Does using these “Gethenian” words help Le Guin create the feeling 
of a different culture with different ideas? 
4. Would the story be less confusing and easier to read without using 
these words?
5. Do you think words like shifgrethor and nusuth would be useful in 
English? Could you use them with your classmates?
Sentences
Although Le Guin’s sentence structure is quite varied, she does tend to 
favor long, complex structures with phrases and sentences connected 
by semicolons, dashes, commas, and even periods. Here are some 
examples:
1. I don’t trust Estraven, whose motives are forever obscure; I don’t like 
him; yet I feel and respond to his authority as surely as I do to the 
warmth of the sun (7).
2. No doubt this was all a matter of shifgrethor—prestige, face, place, 
the pride-relationship, the untranslatable and all-important principle 
of social authority in Karhide and all civilizations of Gethen. And if it 
was I would not understand it (14). 
3. I thought of Estraven waiting for me there as the snow fell last night, 
and felt a pang of pure pity for the man whom I had seen in yester-
day’s parade sweating and superb under the weight of his panoply 
and power, a man at the prime of his career, potent and magniﬁ -
cent—gone now, down, done (41).
Activity 16 
Activity 15
(Continued)
CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS     |   81
STUDENT VERSION
Each of these sentences names the topic of the sentence in the ﬁ rst 
phrase and then piles up detail and comments about that topic in the 
phrases and independent clauses that follow. 
1. What is the effect of this writing style? Is it quick or slow to read?
2. Would Le Guin’s style be better if it were short, simple, and easy to 
read?
3. In the introduction, Le Guin says that she tries to say in words what 
cannot be said in words. Is this writing style part of her attempt to do 
just that?
As an experiment, try re-writing one of these passages as a series of 
simple sentences. Is it better? Is it easier to read?
Considering the Structure of the T ext
The chapters in this section alternate between presenting Genly’s 
narrative report to the Ekumen and Gethenian folktales that explain 
aspects of Gethenian culture. There are three sections of narrative with 
two folktales in between.
The narrative starts with “A Parade in Erhenrang.”
• Why does Le Guin start the story with the parade? Why not start 
with Genly’s ship landing on Gethen or Genly struggling to learn the 
Gethenian languages and studying the culture before he arrives?
The ﬁ rst folktale is “The Place Inside the Blizzard.” 
• What information does this tale provide about Gethenian culture? 
What do we learn from it?
• Why didn’t Le Guin just give us this information as part of the 
narrative?
The second folktale is “The Nineteenth Day.”
• What information does this tale provide about Gethenian culture?
• How does this tale inﬂ uence our understanding of the chapter that 
follows it?
• Why didn’t Le Guin just give us this information as a part of the 
narrative?
Postreading
Thinking Critically
Read these questions, then look for the answers as you read the text:
Character Questions for the Psychologist
 1. Why doesn’t Genly like Estraven? Is it a personality conﬂ  ict, 
a misunderstanding, a grudge, or some other problem?
 2. What kind of person is Genly? Is he intelligent? Clever? 
Emotional? Idealistic?
Activity 17 
Activity 18 
Activity 16
(Continued)
82   |  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS    CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO
STUDENT VERSION
 3. What kind of person is Estraven? Is he as devious as Genly thinks 
he is?
 4. Why did Estraven help Genly at ﬁ  rst, but then stop helping him?
 5. Why did Estraven invite Genly to dinner?
 6. When Genly is having dinner with Estraven, he thinks, “I was alone, 
with a stranger, inside the walls of a dark palace, in a strange snow-
changed city, in the heart of the Ice Age of an alien world.” What is 
he feeling? Can you imagine how you would feel in this situation?
 7. What kind of person is Tibe? What do you think Tibe is trying to do?
 8. What effect does the constant cold have on Genly?
 9. What kind of person is Argaven? In what sense is he “mad”? 
How can you tell?
 10. Why doesn’t Getheren want to stay with his brother Hode in the 
place inside the blizzard? What is wrong with being together in 
that place?
 11. In “The Nineteenth Day,” why does Berosty kill Herbor after he 
brings back the second answer from the Foretellers? 
 12. When Genly ﬁ rst goes to the Foretellers, does he believe in their 
powers? Does he believe in them after they answer his question?
 13. Faxe says, “The only thing that makes life possible is permanent, 
intolerable uncertainty: not knowing what comes next.” Is this the 
lesson of “The Nineteenth Day”? Do you agree?
 14. If you were going to ask the Foretellers a question, what question 
would you ask?
Cultural Questions for the Anthropologist
 1. What does the ceremony in which the king sets the keystone of 
the arch of the new bridge in red cement say about the culture of 
Karhide?
 2. What does the institution of the “island” show about Karhide?
 3. Genly says he sees “a Gethenian ﬁ  rst as a man, then as a woman, 
forcing him into those categories so irrelevant to his nature and so 
essential to my own” (12). Genly has a lot of trouble even ﬁ nding 
language to talk about Gethenian sexuality. Chapter 5 opens with 
the statement, “My landlady, a voluble man, arranged my journey 
into the East.” What are some of the ways that the dual nature of 
Gethenian sexuality makes their culture different from ours? Do 
you think it would be easier in some ways to live in a society that 
did not have set gender roles?
 4. What does the transportation technology in Karhide say about 
Gethenian culture? What about their media?
 5. Le Guin drops lots of hints about the concept of shifgrethor 
throughout this section. What do you think it means?
 6. Why does Genly go to see the Foretellers?
 7. What are the basic beliefs and practices of the Handdara religion? 
Does it have any wisdom for our own culture?
 8. How did the Yomesh religion start? 
Activity 18
(Continued)
CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS     |   83
STUDENT VERSION
Political Questions for the Political Ofﬁ cer
 1. How is the government of Karhide organized? Who has power?
 2. Estraven says, “Karhide is not a nation, but a family quarrel.” What 
does he mean by this?
 3. Why did Estraven help farmers move out of the disputed border 
area between Karhide and Orgoreyn?
 4. Why is the border dispute between Karhide and Orgoreyn impor-
tant? Why does Estraven see it differently from the king? 
 5. What kind of person is Tibe? What do you think Tibe is trying to 
do?
 6. Estraven says, “You came to my country at a strange time. Things 
are changing” (16). It seems that things in Karhide take thousands 
of years to change. What does he mean?
 7. Estraven says that patriotism does not mean love of country, but 
fear of the other. What does he mean? Is he right?
 8. Estraven says, “The Orgota [people of Orgoreyn] have experience 
in subordinating local interests to a general interest, while Karhide 
has almost none. And the Commensals of Orgoreyn are mostly 
sane men, if unintelligent, while the king of Karhide is not only 
insane, but rather stupid” (20). Genly interprets this statement to 
mean that Estraven has no loyalty to anyone. Is Genly right? What 
does Estraven mean by local interests compared with general 
interests?
 9. Why don’t kings often go to the Foretellers?
Connecting Reading to Writing
Using the Words of Others
In Chapter 4, “The Mad King” (pages 33–40), Genly meets with King 
Argaven and presents his case for joining the Ekumen. Think about the 
following question:
Consider Genly’s arguments to the king. Are they logical? Are they 
well-supported? If you were the king, would you join the Ekumen? 
Why or why not?
In preparation for writing about this question, choose three passages 
from pages 33 to 40 that you might be able to use in your essay. First, 
write each passage down as a correctly punctuated direct quotation. 
Second, paraphrase the material in your own words. Finally, respond 
to the idea expressed in the passage by agreeing or disagreeing with it 
and explaining why. 
Example:
Quote: King Argaven tells Genly Ai, “Keep clear of factions. Tell your 
own lies, do your own deeds. And trust no one” (33).
Activity 19
Activity 18
(Continued)
84   |  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS    CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO
STUDENT VERSION
Paraphrase: King Argaven tells Genly to keep clear of factions, tell his 
own lies, do his own deeds, and to trust no one (33). (Notice that there 
are no quotation marks, and the pronouns change from “your” to “his” 
because it is indirect speech.)
Response: This is an interesting passage because normally Geth-
enians consider it impolite to give someone advice. It is also interesting 
because later in the book Estraven gives Genly the same advice that 
the king gave.
Writing Rhetorically
Prewriting
Reading the Assignment
Writing Assignment
In a well-organized essay of approximately two to three pages, 
answer the following question:
Consider Genly’s arguments to the king. Are they logical? Are they 
well-supported? If you were the king, would you join the Ekumen? 
Why or why not? Support your decision with logical arguments 
and information from the book, especially pages 33–40.
Getting Ready to Write 
Gather your answers to the various questions we have considered up 
to this point and your “quote, paraphrase, response” exercise. Review 
these materials as you think about the question. Is your opinion leaning 
toward joining the Ekumen or not?
List the reasons and justiﬁ cations for your answers, and refer to your 
notes and vocabulary
Formulating a Working Thesis
A thesis statement is a statement of a position that the essay is go-
ing to support. The thesis should be something that the reader could 
possibly agree or disagree with. For example, “Watching television has 
good and bad aspects” is not a strong thesis because almost no one 
would disagree with it.
In The Left Hand of Darkness, Genly’s thesis is on these lines: “Joining 
the Ekumen will bring great advantages to Karhide and Gethen through 
trade in ideas and goods.” Genly believes this strongly. He has devoted 
his life to it.
Activity 20 
Activity 21 
Activity 22
Activity 19
(Continued)
CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS     |   85
STUDENT VERSION
Argaven’s thesis is, “If there are eighty thousand worlds full of monsters 
out there it doesn’t matter because Karhide has its own culture and 
wants nothing from them.” Argaven is afraid that the Ekumen will come 
and impose its ideas on Karhide, changing its culture and making the 
king irrelevant. In the past, change has come very slowly on Gethen.
Might they possibly both be right? How would the people of Earth react 
if Genly Ai showed up in Washington, D.C., with a message like that?
Considering these positions and the evidence in the book, what do 
you think Argaven should do? Do you think Genly is right? Is Argaven 
right to protect his country from outside inﬂ uences? Is change inevi-
table anyway? Is Genly simply trying to get Gethen to rejoin the rest of 
humanity? Write down your working thesis. You can always change it 
later if you ﬁ nd that your opinion has changed after writing about it. 
Here are some examples:
Karhide should join the Ekumen because the people will learn about 
new ideas and technology, and their lives will improve.
Karhide should not join the Ekumen because doing so would threat-
en its own unique cultural heritage, and losing your culture is a ter-
rible thing. 
Karhide should join the Ekumen because that will make it more 
powerful than its neighbors and will bring many technological advan-
tages.
Write your thesis here: 
Now think about what points you want to make to support your thesis. 
You might want to make points about trade, technology, culture, 
religion, and so forth. You might even want to talk about what makes a 
happy life. List your points here:
When you have your thesis and your main points listed, ﬁ nd a partner 
and take turns explaining your thesis and your points.
Activity 22
(Continued)
86   |  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS    CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO
STUDENT VERSION
Writing
Composing a Draft
Write the ﬁ rst draft of your essay by following the plan you have already 
outlined. The most important concern for this draft is to get your ideas 
and arguments down on paper. Try to use some of the quotes from 
the book you gathered in the previous “quote, paraphrase, respond” 
activity. Create lists of the key terms from the novel that will help you 
to clarify your own thoughts and to respond directly to the question 
asked.
Organizing the Essay and Developing the Content 
With your ﬁ rst draft in front of you, think about the following questions:
Introduction
• Do you think you need a question, a surprising statement, or some 
other “hook” to get the reader’s attention? 
• This is an essay for a general audience, some of whom may not have 
read The Left Hand of Darkness. Does your introduction have the 
essential background information that the reader needs to under-
stand what you are talking about?
• Does your introduction provide a context for understanding the 
thesis statement?
• Is your thesis clearly stated? Could some people disagree with it?
• Have you given the reader some idea of how you are going to 
develop the essay?
Body
• Do you have at least two or three paragraphs that support the thesis 
statement?
• Do you have topic sentences that present each main point?
• Are the main points supported with evidence; that is, facts, 
arguments, quotations, or paraphrases from the book?
• Are there paragraphs that include different points of view or address 
counterarguments? Do you address those points of view in one of 
these ways:
– By refuting them?
– By acknowledging them but showing how your own argument 
is better?
– By granting them altogether but showing they are irrelevant?
Conclusion
• Do you have a ﬁ nal paragraph (or paragraphs) that includes a solid 
argument to support the thesis and indicates the signiﬁ cance of the 
argument—the “so what” factor?
Activity 23 
Activity 24 
CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS     |   87
STUDENT VERSION
Revising and Editing
Revising the Draft
After considering the previous questions and revising your draft ac-
cordingly, get into a three- or four-person group and pass your revised 
draft around the circle to the next person. Read each draft carefully and 
make notes on your responses. Answer the following questions:
• What is the thesis? Do you agree with it?
• Do the arguments provide enough support? Which ones are strong? 
Which are weaker?
• Would a reader from outside the class who had not read the book be 
able to understand the paper?
• Does the conclusion wrap things up well?
Do this for each paper in your small group. Then discuss your answers.
At the end of this process, make any revisions to your own draft that 
you think are necessary.
Editing the Draft
Now that the content is in place, it is time to work with the grammar, 
punctuation, and mechanics of your draft to make sure that your essay 
conforms to the guidelines of standard written English. 
Editing Guidelines for Individual Work
• If possible, set your essay aside for 24 hours before rereading 
to ﬁ nd errors.
• If possible, read your essay aloud to a friend so you can hear your 
errors.
• Focus on individual words and sentences rather than the overall 
meaning. Take a sheet of paper and cover everything except the line 
you are reading. Then touch your pencil to each word as you read.
• With the help of your teacher, ﬁ gure out your own pattern of errors—
the most serious and frequent errors you make. 
• Look for only one type of error at a time. Then go back and look for a 
second type, and if necessary, a third.
• Use the dictionary to check spelling and conﬁ rm that you have 
chosen the right word for the context. 
Reﬂ ecting on the Writing
Think about the following questions:
1. Writing often helps us focus our thinking so that we learn about 
things that we might not have otherwise noticed. What did you learn 
about The Left Hand of Darkness from writing this paper?
2. Working systematically through a writing process can help improve 
writing skills. What skills do you think you improved by writing this 
paper?
Activity 25
Activity 26 
Activity 27
88   |  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS    CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO
STUDENT VERSION
Reading Rhetorically
Prereading
The Left Hand of Darkness— Section 2 (pages 72–161, Chapters 6–11)
Surveying the T ext 
The chapters in this section are the following:
 6. One Way into Orgoreyn
 7. The Question of Sex
 8. Another Way into Orgoreyn
 9. Estraven the Traitor
 10. Conversations in Mishnory
 11. Soliloquies in Mishnory
Think about these questions:
• Apparently there are at least two ways into Orgoreyn. Who is going 
there?
• We already know that Gethenians are a bit different physiologically 
from other humans. How does this affect their culture?
• The king thinks that Estraven is a traitor. Is he really?
• A “soliloquy” is a speech made alone by one actor. What could it 
mean that there are both conversations and soliloquies in Mishnory?
At this point you don’t have enough information to answer these ques-
tions. You will have to read the book with these questions in mind.
Making Predictions and Asking Questions
To begin, read the ﬁ rst sentence of Chapter 6:
The cook, who was always at the house very early, woke me up; 
I sleep sound, and he had to shake me and say in my ear, 
“Wake up, wake up, Lord Estraven, there’s a runner come from 
the King’s House!” 
Who is the viewpoint character in this chapter? Why did the author 
decide to change viewpoint characters? What are the advantages of this 
shift? What are the disadvantages?
Introducing Key Vocabulary
Use contextual clues to identify meanings and look for these words 
when you read further:
• celibate—A person who has sworn to have no sexual intercourse (74).
• pretext—A false reason for doing something (76).
• digit—Literally a ﬁ  nger or toe. In Orgoreyn it seems to mean some-
thing such as citizen, and the opposite is dependent (80).
Activity 28
Activity 29 
Activity 30 
CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS     |   89
STUDENT VERSION
• prestige—High social status. On Gethen, this is tied to the concept 
of shifgrethor. Estraven talks about “playing shifgrethor” and 
“prestige battles” (83).
Activity 31 
Activity 30
(Continued)
Reading
First Reading
Read pages 72–161 (Chapters 6–11), keeping in mind the questions 
raised in “Surveying the Text.” As you read, look for the answers to the 
questions listed below for each chapter. 
Chapter 6
1. Why does Estraven have to leave Karhide so quickly?
a. He has to go to another parade.
b. He wants to go look for Genly.
c. The king has exiled him.
d. His rent is due and he doesn’t have any money.
2. What are the rules governing Estraven’s exile? 
a. He has three days to leave Karhide.
b. No one can help him.
c. If he is still in Karhide after three days, anyone can kill him.
d. All of the above.
3. Why does Estraven steal a rowboat?
a. Tibe has warned the sailors not to help him.
b. There is no ship from Orgoreyn to take him.
c. If he stays, Tibe’s men will kill him.
d. All of the above.
4. Why does Estraven end up in a hospital? 
a. He fell overboard and almost drowned.
b. Tibe’s men shot him with a sonic gun, and he used “dothe” to get 
away.
c. He has a bullet wound.
d. The inspector thought he was crazy.
5. Who does Estraven call when he gets tired of loading ﬁ sh? 
a. A job agency.
b. Political leaders of Orgoreyn that he knows because he used to be 
Prime Minister of Karhide.
c. Some dear old friends.
d. Tibe.
6. What are the Commensals?
a. A soccer team.
b. A type of pastry.
c. The 33 rulers of Orgoreyn.
d. A part of a roadway.
90   |  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS    CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO
STUDENT VERSION
7. How does Tibe want to change Karhide?
a. He wants to make Karhide more “efﬁ cient,” like Orgoreyn.
b. He wants Orgoreyn to take over Karhide.
c. He wants to make money selling Genly action ﬁ gures.
d. He wants to have more parades.
8. What does Estraven mean when he asks if the Great Continent can 
hold two Orgoreyns?
a. The Great Continent is really not so great.
b. He is just making a joke.
c. He is trying to ﬂ atter the commensals.
d. If Karhide becomes more like Orgoreyn, there might be war be-
tween the two countries.
Chapter 7
1. Who is Ong Tot Opong?
a. An Investigator from the Ekumen, one of Genly’s predecessors on 
Gethen.
b. A famous radio actor in Orgoreyn.
c. A particularly clever bandit in the mountains.
d. The leader of the commensals.
2. This chapter is supposed to be ﬁ eld notes. What are these ﬁ eld 
notes about?
a. The plants and animals of Gethen.
b. Gethenian weapons and military strategy.
c. Gethenian sexuality and how it came about.
d. Gethenian cultural practices.
3. How are Gethenians different from the other humans in the Ekmen?
a. They have wings and can ﬂ y.
b. They have two heads, a thinking head and a talking head.
c. They can’t read.
d. Each individual is androgynous most of the time.
4. What is the closest thing to marriage on Gethen?
a. They go to the kemmerhouse.
b. Two individuals “vow kemmering” to each other for life.
c. They can’t get married because they are all the same sex.
d. They have to ask the king’s permission.
Chapter 8
1. In the Ekumen, what is the difference between a Mobile and an In-
vestigator?
a. The Investigator stays in one place and does research while the 
Mobile wanders around looking at things.
b. Investigators come ﬁ rst and pretend to be native to the planet, 
working in secret, but the Mobile announces that he or she is a 
representative of the Ekumen and works openly.
Activity 31
(Continued)
CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS     |   91
STUDENT VERSION
c. The Mobile comes ﬁ rst and then the Investigators come later 
when it is safe.
d. The Mobile is the leader, and the Investigators are followers.
2. When Genly is in Old Karhide, he hears a bulletin about the king. 
What does it say?
a. The king is pregnant.
b. The king died of old age.
c. Tibe has become king.
d. The king has learned to play the gossiwor.
3. Who is Foreth, and why does he come to Genly?
a. Foreth is a scientist, and he wants to buy the ansible.
b. Estraven owes Foreth money, and he wants to collect it.
c. Foreth is Estraven’s kemmering, and he has money for Estraven.
d. Foreth is an Orgota spy, and he wants to know if Genly is really 
from another planet.
4. Genly stays his ﬁ rst night in Orgoreyn in a village called Siuwensin, 
but the village is attacked. Who are the attackers?
a. Investigators from the Ekumen.
b. Foretellers from the Handdaratta.
c. Farmers from Karhide.
d. All of the above.
5. When Genly is at a large dinner party in Mishnory, the capital of 
Orgoreyn, he meets someone he calls a “ghost.” Who is it?
a. Estraven.
b. Stokven.
c. Argaven.
d. Faxe.
Chapter 9
1. What does “Estraven” actually mean?
a. Man of the stars.
b. From Estre.
c. Prime minister.
d. Traitor.
2. Is the “Estraven” in this tale the same as the “Estraven” that Genly 
knows?
a. No, it’s his twin brother.
b. Yes, the same one.
c. No, it’s just a fairy tale.
d. No, but the Estraven in the tale could be an ancestor from long 
ago.
3. What is the relationship between Therem of Stok and Therem 
of Estre?
a. They have no relation. Their names are a coincidence. 
b. They are second cousins on their mother’s side.
Activity 31
(Continued)
92   |  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS    CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO
STUDENT VERSION
c. Parent and child.
d. They are kemmerings.
Chapter 10
1. Why is Genly unhappy to see Estraven? 
a. He doesn’t like or trust him.
b. He wants to keep Estraven’s money.
c. Estraven interrupted his breakfast.
d. It’s too early in the morning.
2. Why does Genly have to use the Orgota word for ﬁ recracker when 
talking about his lander?
a. He is trying to keep his rocket a secret.
b. He likes the word ﬁ recracker.
c. He doesn’t trust the Commensals.
d. The Gethenians have no word for rocket, and ﬁ recracker is the 
closest thing.
3. Why are the Commensals so surprised to hear that Genly has 
a starship waiting for his signal?
a. They don’t believe in the lander or the starship because they 
haven’t seen them.
b. They think that they should be able to see the starship in the sky.
c. Genly never talked about the starship before, and the Commen-
sals know everything he said in Karhide.
d. They are confused.
4. What is the Sarf?
a. The trash collection service.
b. A nickname for the Water Ofﬁ ce.
c. The immigration service.
d. The secret police.
Chapter 11
1. Why is Estraven no longer a “dependent” of Yegey but a “unit” of 
Orgoreyn?
a. He swore allegiance to Orgoreyn.
b. The money Genly brought from Ashe allowed Estraven to support 
himself.
c. He got a new job working for the Sarf.
d. He had a big argument with Yegey.
2. Why do the people of Orgoreyn, except for the Commensals, know 
nothing about Genly?
a. The people are not interested.
b. There are no newspapers.
c. The Sarf censored all the radio broadcasts from Karhide and 
will not allow any information about Genly to be broadcast in 
Orgoreyn.
d. They are all too busy.
Activity 31
(Continued)
CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS     |   93
STUDENT VERSION
3. What does Gaum, the agent of the Sarf, think Estraven is doing in 
Orgoreyn? 
a. He thinks he is a spy.
b. He thinks that he is trying to trick the Commensals into believing 
that Genly is telling the truth so that Orgoreyn will lose face.
c. He thinks that Estraven is a traitor, trying to join the Sarf.
d. He thinks that Estraven is crazy.
4. What do the Sarf think Genly is?
a. The Sarf think Genly is a liar sent by Karhide to trick them.
b. They think he is an alien from another planet.
c. They think he is a harmless fool.
d. They think he is actually the king of Karhide.
Looking Closely at Language
Here are some words from Chapter 6 that might be difﬁ cult. If you get 
stuck, look here for some help. The words are alphabetized.
Chapter 6
• bereft—having experienced a loss of something (72)
• celibate—a person who has sworn to have no sexual intercourse (74)
• circumambulating—“Circum” means “around,” and “ambulating” 
means “walking.” Walking around the problem (86).
• digit—Literally a ﬁ  nger or toe. In Orgoreyn it seems to mean some-
thing like “citizen,” and the opposite is “dependent” (80).
• dour—sad, depressed mood or appearance (82)
• engraved—carved into the surface (79)
• folly—foolishness (73)
• haste—in a hurry (72)
• hoax—an effort to make people believe in something that is not true 
(88)
• in exile—forced to live away from your country for political reasons 
(72)
• indifferent—uncaring (73)
• indigent—homeless, unemployed, and without funds (80)
• inexplicable—unexplainable (78)
• invalidated—no longer valid (81)
• mishap—an accident (73)
• obfuscation—to hide ideas behind confusing language (86)
• obscuration—to hide something from view (86)
• prestige—high social status (83)
• pretext—a false reason for doing something (76)
• sledge—like a sled, with runners to slide on ice and snow, but bigger 
(84)
• urgency—important to do quickly (72)
Activity 32
Activity 31
(Continued)
94   |  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS    CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO
STUDENT VERSION
Considering the Structure of the T ext
1. After Estraven’s narrative in Chapter 6, Le Guin gives us a chapter 
that consists of a ﬁ eld report on Gethenian sexual practices from 
one of the original investigators sent to Gethen by the Ekumen. This 
report ﬁ lls in all the details that have been hinted at by Genly Ai in 
the previous chapters. Why include it? And if it is to be included, why 
not start with it so that we have all the information we need at the 
very beginning?
2. Chapter 8 returns to Genly Ai as narrator, establishing a pattern of 
switching back and forth between him and Estraven—a pattern that 
continues throughout the book. What are the advantages of this 
technique? What are the disadvantages?
3. Chapter 9 is another folktale, “Estraven the Traitor.” What is the rela-
tionship between the characters in the tale and the characters in the 
novel as a whole? 
4. Chapter 10 is narrated by Genly, but Chapter 11 is a series of diary 
entries by Estraven. This is the ﬁ rst time in the novel that the genre of 
the diary has appeared. What is the advantage of writing part of the 
novel as a diary? Are there any disadvantages?
Postreading
Thinking Critically
Read these questions before you begin reading the section, and then 
look for answers as you read. 
Character Questions for the Psychologist
1. Why does Estraven treat Ashe so coldly?
2. Estraven steals a rowboat to escape but is shot by Tibe’s men at 
long range with a sonic gun. He is picked up by a patrol boat. As he 
is picked up, the ship’s master says, “It’s not the sixth hour yet,” and 
then answering another, says, “What affair of mine is that? The king 
exiled him, I’ll follow the king’s order, no lesser man’s.” The patrol 
boat takes Estraven to Orgoreyn instead of back to Karhide. Why 
does the master of the patrol boat take Estraven to Orgoreyn instead 
of following Tibe’s order?
3. What does Estraven mean when he says, “At the pit’s bottom is no 
anger”? Do we have a similar saying in our culture?
4. In Chapter 6, Estraven talks about his purpose in coming to Orgo-
reyn (83). Later, in Chapter 11, he says, “For this useless sneaking 
life I threw away my power, my money, and my friends. . . . Why can I 
never set my heart on a possible thing?” (159). What is his purpose? 
If you were Estraven, what purpose would you have?
5. When Ashe Foreth visits Genly to give him money to take to Es-
traven, Genly says that his mission “overrides all personal debts and 
loyalties.” Ashe says, “If so, it is an immoral mission”(105). Who do 
you think is right, and why? 
Activity 33 
Activity 34 
CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS     |   95
STUDENT VERSION
6. At the beginning of Chapter 10, Estraven arrives in Genly’s room to 
pick up the money that Ashe Forthe sent him. Genly says that his 
visit “certainly spoiled the peaceful mood of self-congratulation in 
which I had eaten breakfast” (132). Why was Genly congratulating 
himself? How did Estraven spoil his mood? 
7. What is “farfetching”? Why is Genly Ai ﬁ nding the Orgota politicians 
a little hard to grasp? (147)
Cultural Questions for the Anthropologist
1. How is Orgota culture different from that of Karhide? What are some 
examples of differences?
2. What does it mean to “waive” shifgrethor?
3. In what ways is Gethenian society inﬂ uenced by the “ambisexuality” 
of its inhabitants? (The Investigator does not seem to think that the 
English word androgeny quite covers the Gethenian situation.)
4. What does the tale “Estraven the Traitor” tell us about the culture of 
Gethen?
5. Estraven notes that he insulted Genly Ai by giving him advice but 
that Genly did not seem to know that he was insulted. He wonders 
if Genly had been seeking his advice all along, not knowing how to 
ask for it. He says of Genly, “His shifgrethor must be founded, and 
composed and sustained, altogether differently from ours.” Shifgre-
thor is an essential human concept on Gethen. Is it prestige? Is it 
dignity? Respect? Status? Independence? Authority? A combination 
of these? 
Political Questions for the Political Ofﬁ cer
1. Karhide is a traditional monarchy that hasn’t changed much in a 
thousand years. What kind of government does Orgoreyn have?
2. Why is the trouble in the Sinoth valley more than a border dispute?
3. What is Tibe’s ultimate aim? 
4. Genly Ai notes that Tibe makes long speeches on the radio, full of 
“praises of Karhide, disparagements of Orgoreyn, viliﬁ cations of ‘dis-
loyal factions,’ discussion of the ‘integrity of the Kingdom’s borders,’ 
lectures in history and ethics and economics, all in a ranting, cant-
ing, emotional tone that went shrill with vituperation or adulation.” 
He talked “much about pride of country and love of the parentland, 
but little about shifgrethor, personal pride or prestige.” Who does this 
remind us of? Is Tibe becoming a fascist dictator? (102)
5. Genly Ai gives Estraven the packet of money given to him by Es-
traven’s friend and “kemmering” Ashe Forthe, and he receives the 
following advice as thanks: “You are the tool of a faction. I advise 
you to be careful how you let them use you. I advise you to ﬁ nd out 
what the enemy faction is, and who they are, and never to let them 
use you, for they will not use you well.” What does Estraven mean? 
Why doesn’t Genly trust him?
6. In Chapter 10, Genly asks Shusgis, the person whose house he is 
staying in, about the Sarf. Shusgis’s answer is evasive. He says, “I’m 
Activity 34
(Continued)
96   |  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS    CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO
STUDENT VERSION
in the External Administration, of course, and I can’t keep all of the 
ofﬁ ces straight, over in Internal” (144). Later, in Chapter 11, Estraven 
identiﬁ es Shusgis as a Sarf agent (160). What is going on? Who are 
the Sarf and what are they doing? 
The Left Hand of Darkness— Section 3 (pages 162–236, Chapters 12–16)
Prereading 
Surveying the T ext 
The chapters in this section are:
 12. On Time and Darkness 
 13. Down on the Farm
 14. The Escape 
 15. To the Ice
 16. Between Drumner and Dremegole 
Do you get a positive, happy feeling from these titles? Why or why not? 
Reading
Considering the Structure of the T ext
As we have seen, Ursula Le Guin builds this novel through a number 
of different kinds of texts written from different viewpoints. Chapter 16, 
“Between Drumner and Dremegole,” is a continuation of Estraven’s 
diary. In it, Estraven records a conversation between Genly and him-
self about the uniqueness of Gethenian “ambisexuality.” He quotes yet 
another kind of text, a Handdarata poem:
 Light is the left hand of darkness
and darkness the right hand of light.
two are one, life and death, lying
together like lovers in kemmer,
like hands joined together,
like the end and the way.
Since Le Guin takes the title of the novel from this poem, it must be 
important to the theme. The key phrase here is “two are one.” What 
does Estraven mean by reciting this poem? How does it relate to the 
rest of the novel? How many examples can you think of in which what 
seems to be the opposite of something is really in some sense the 
same thing?
Activity 35 
Activity 36 
Activity 34
(Continued)
CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS     |   97
STUDENT VERSION
Postreading
Thinking Critically
Read these questions before you begin reading the section, and then 
look for answers as you read. 
Character Questions for the Psychologist
1. Alarmed by Estraven’s warnings, Genly tries to contact all his friends 
in Mishnory without success. They don’t answer their doors or return 
his calls. Why?
2. How does Estraven ﬁ nd out what happened to Genly Ai? (184)
3. In order to get Genly out of prison, Estraven forges papers, pretends 
to be a prison guard, and steals food. Are these actions justiﬁ ed?
4. What are some of the things that Genly and Estraven learn about 
each other on the long journey across the ice?
5. Estraven says that Genly Ai is unjust. He says, “I am the only man in 
all Gethen that has trusted you entirely, and I am still the only man in 
Gethen that you have refused to trust.” Why does he say this? 
Do you agree with him? (198)
Cultural Questions for the Anthropologist
1. Long ago, Meshe was the Weaver in a group of Foretellers who tried 
to answer an unanswerable question, “What is the meaning of life?” 
(60) That attempt led to death and disaster for most of the partici-
pants. The cult Meshe founded, the Yomeshta, believes that after 
that experience, Meshe saw all of the past and future clearly for the 
rest of his life. The story “Time and Darkness” is about what it is like 
to be Meshe. Meshe knows all the answers. Is it a good thing to be 
Meshe, or are the Handdarata right to say it is better not to know?
2. Why do the guards at the voluntary farm inject Genly with drugs? 
What effect do the drugs have on him?
Political Questions for the Political Ofﬁ cer
1. What is a “voluntary farm” and why do the Sarf send Genly to one?
2. When Genly wakes up in the truck, he realizes that he had misunder-
stood the “sign” he had been given about Orgota society. What signs 
should he have paid attention to? (167)
3. Genly observes that the qualities of independence and decision 
making are weakened in the Orgota people. How did this happen to 
them? Why didn’t he notice it at ﬁ rst? (173)
4. In the ﬁ rst chapter, Estraven says that patriotism is more about fear 
of the other than about love of country. In Chapter 15, he asks if 
love of one’s country isn’t hate of one’s uncountry, and he says that 
he does not much care if Orgoreyn or Karhide is the ﬁ rst to join the 
Ekumen, because whichever is ﬁ rst the other will follow, and it will be 
good for both. However, he also says that a man who does not hate 
a bad government is a fool and that to serve a good government 
would be a joy (212). How would you describe Estraven’s political 
views? Do you agree with him? 
Activity 37
98   |  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS    CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO
STUDENT VERSION
Prereading
The Left Hand of Darkness— Section 4 (pages 237–301, Chapters 17–20)
Surveying the T ext 
The chapters in this section are:
 17. An Orgota Creation Myth 
 18. On the Ice
 19. Homecoming
 20. A Fool’s Errand
What can you predict about the ending of the novel from these 
chapter titles?
Postreading
Thinking Critically
Read these questions before you begin reading the section, and then 
look for answers as you read. 
Character Questions for the Psychologist
1. In the journey across the glacier, Genly teaches Estraven mind-
speech. What effect does this have on their relationship? Why is 
mindspeech so difﬁ cult for Estraven?
2. Genly says, “Happiness has to do with reason, and only reason 
earns it.” In a sense, Genly is arguing that good pathos comes from 
good logos. Is this true? Is it even true for Genly?
3. One of the characteristics of a good novel is character development. 
What does Genly Ai learn during his experience in Karhide, in Orgo-
reyn, and on the ice? What does Estraven learn?
Cultural Questions for the Anthropologist
1. The Orgota creation myth says, “In the beginning there was the sun 
and the ice and there was no shadow.” How is it possible to have 
sun and no shadow?
2. The myth also says, “In the end, when we are done, the sun will de-
vour itself and shadow will eat light.” Is this scientiﬁ cally true?
3. Compare this myth to other creation myths. How does it reﬂ ect 
Gethen’s unique culture?
4. Estraven says that the word shifgrethor comes from an old word for 
shadow. Is there a connection between the creation myth and the 
concept of shifgrethor?
5. Genly says he has no shifgrethor to waive. In what sense is this true? 
In what sense is it not?
Activity 38 
Activity 39 
CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS     |   99
STUDENT VERSION
Political Questions for the Political Ofﬁ cer
1. After returning to Karhide, Genly sends his radio message to the 
ship, and Estraven is betrayed by his friend and has to return as 
quickly as possible to the Orgota side of the border. When they get 
there, there are no guards on the Orgota side, but there are guards 
on the Karhide side. Estraven calls them “Tibe’s inspectors.” What 
does he mean? (282)
2. Argaven says to Genly Ai, “You’ve served me well.” Genly answers, 
“But I am not your servant.” What has Genly done for Argaven? Why 
is Genly not his servant? (292)
3. This story was written during the cold war. In what ways is Orgoreyn 
like the Soviet Union? How is it different? Does Karhide correspond 
to the U.S.? Or perhaps Europe? Why or why not?
Connecting Reading to Writing
Using the Words of Others
Group Activity
Many people are unhappy with the ending of this book because al-
though Genly survives and completes his mission, his friend Estraven 
is killed. If you were going to rewrite this ending, what kind of ending 
would you write? 
You might think, “I will just have Estraven escape across the border 
without getting shot.” That’s easy, but how would Estraven survive at 
the foot of the ice sheet? Could he go back across the ice without the 
tent and the stove and with no money? What are the other alterna-
tives? What about his banishment?
The problem starts near the end of Chapter 19, when Estraven’s friend, 
Thessicher, betrays him to Tibe by using his radio. In your group, think 
of a general plan for saving Estraven, then ﬁ nd the passages in Chapter 
19 that you need to change to make this plan work. Your group may 
want to assign different passages to different members. Quote the pas-
sage you will change, and then rewrite it to conform to your plan.
Whatever ending you devise, it must ﬁ t seamlessly with the rest of the 
story. Try to make your ending both artistically effective and emotionally 
satisfying. 
Activity 40 
Activity 39
(Continued)
100   |  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS    CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO
STUDENT VERSION
Writing Rhetorically
Prewriting
Reading the Assignment
Your ﬁ nal assignment for The Left Hand of Darkness is to write a book 
review. This is not a “book report” such as you may have done many 
times before. A book report is usually a summary emphasizing some 
key points about the book. The purpose of a book report is often sim-
ply to demonstrate that you have read the book. A book review, on the 
other hand, is a critical analysis of the book designed to convince a 
reader that the book is, or is not, worth reading and why. A book review 
has a thesis. It has an argument to make. 
Writing Assignment
Write a review of The Left Hand of Darkness. Your review depends 
on your reaction to the book:
Did you think that The Left Hand of Darkness was the most fasci-
nating book you have ever read? What kind of reader would agree 
with you? What would that reader want to know about the book in 
order to decide whether or not to read it?
Did you think that this was the coldest, dreariest, most confusing 
book you ever had to read for a class? What made it that way for 
you? How would you warn other readers who probably wouldn’t 
like this book to avoid it? How would you make your case?
Was your reaction to thiat book somewhat mixed? Were there 
some interesting ideas and some ideas you disagreed with? Were 
there good parts and bad parts? In this case, rather than writing a 
positive or a negative review, you would write a mixed review. 
Getting Ready to Write 
Whether you are writing a positive, negative, or mixed review of the 
book, you need to think about what aspects of the book you are 
going to talk about. You could use the character, culture, and politics 
categories that we have been using for the discussion questions. You 
could talk about the language of the book and the made-up words 
and concepts. You could talk about the nature of science ﬁ ction and 
“what if” questions. The role of gender in our own culture is clearly a 
major theme in this book. Some other themes might be:
• The role of the individual and society
• Life under different political systems and governments
• Tradition versus innovation and efﬁ ciency (Karhide versus Orgoreyn)
• Patriotism versus individual loyalty
Activity 41 
Activity 42 
CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS     |   101
STUDENT VERSION
• The role of religion (Handdaratta versus Yomeshta, and the value of 
knowledge)
Whatever you decide to discuss, think about what Le Guin tried to do 
in this book, and how effectively she did it.
Make a list of the topics you want to cover in discussing this book. 
Remember that the purpose of a book review is to persuade the reader 
that the book is, or is not, worth reading. Most readers will not want to 
read about every possible aspect of the book, especially as this book 
has so many themes. If you have several topics to cover, you may want 
to limit your review to the best two or, at the most, three. 
Once you have chosen your topics, make a list of words related to 
those topics (words that you have read in the book or heard in class). 
This process will help you generate ideas.
Formulating a Working Thesis
Your introduction should include the author and title of the book and 
what kind of book it is. Your thesis will be a statement about the qual-
ity of the book in terms of what it tries to do and who, if anyone, would 
enjoy it, learn from it, or be interested in it and why. Here are some 
examples:
• Readers who enjoy science ﬁ ction may ﬁ nd Ursula Le Guin’s The 
Left Hand of Darkness to be an interesting exploration of the role of 
gender in our society—if they can get past the difﬁ  cult vocabulary 
and unusual storytelling devices.
• Harry Potter fans may ﬁ nd Ursula Le Guin’s The Left Hand of Dark-
ness more difﬁ cult than their favorite books, but a little extra effort 
will pay off in a greater understanding of the issues our own society 
faces.
• If you like light sabers, space battles, and bug-eyed monsters, stay 
away from Ursula Le Guin’s The Left Hand of Darkness because it 
doesn’t have anything remotely similar. On the other hand, if you like 
slow, highly detailed novels with lots of serious principles and no ac-
tion, this novel might be just the thing.
You may ﬁ nd that after you begin writing and analyzing, your opinion 
changes. If so, just rewrite your working thesis. 
Activity 43 
Activity 42
(Continued)
102   |  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS    CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO
STUDENT VERSION
Writing
Activity 45 
Activity 44 Composing a Draft
The most important concern for the ﬁ rst draft is to get your ideas and 
arguments down on paper. 
Your introduction should contain some basic information about the 
book and your thesis statement.
Typically, the next section of a book review will include some general 
information about the setting of the novel, the characters, what the 
characters are trying to do, and the plot. This overview may remind you 
of a book report, but you should be careful not to give away the ending 
of the book or anything that may diminish the reader’s enjoyment of the 
book if he or she decides to read it.
The paragraphs that follow should discuss the theme of the novel and 
the main points you want to cover from the list you have already made. 
These points should support your thesis statement about the novel. 
Illustrate and support your points with quotations and paraphrases 
from the novel itself.
In the conclusion, you might remind the reader of some of the best or 
worst aspects of the novel and mention something one might learn 
from reading the novel. You might also make a ﬁ nal recommendation 
to read, or not read, the book.
Organizing the Essay and Developing the Content
With your ﬁ rst draft in front of you, think about the following questions:
Introduction
• Do you need a question, a surprising statement or some other 
“hook” to get the reader’s attention?  
• This is an essay for a general audience, some of whom may not have 
read The Left Hand of Darkness.  Does your introduction have the 
essential background information that the reader needs to under-
stand what you are talking about?
• Does your introduction provide a context for understanding the 
thesis statement?
• Is your thesis clearly stated?  Could some people disagree with it?
• Have you given the reader some idea of how you are going to 
develop the review?
Body
• Do you have at least two or three paragraphs that support the thesis 
statement?
• Do you have topic sentences that present each main point?
• Are the main points supported with evidence (i.e., facts, arguments, 
quotations, or paraphrases from the book)?
CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS     |   103
STUDENT VERSION
• Are there any paragraphs that include different points of view or ad-
dress counter-arguments? Do you address those points of view:
– By refuting them?
– By acknowledging them but showing how your own argument is 
better?
– By granting them altogether but showing they are irrelevant?
Conclusion
• Do you have a ﬁ nal paragraph (or paragraphs) that includes a solid 
argument to support the thesis and indicates the signiﬁ cance of the 
argument—the “so what” factor?
Activity 46 
Activity 47 
Revising and Editing
Revising the Draft
With a partner, or in a small group, go through the following checklist 
for your draft:
Book Review Revision Checklist
 1. Does the introduction contain basic information about the book?
 2. Is there a thesis that makes a statement about whether or not the 
book is worth reading and for whom?
 3. Is it clear that this is a positive, negative, or mixed review?
 4. Does the next paragraph provide information about the setting, 
characters, and plot?
 5. Are there any “plot spoilers” that give away too much information 
and spoil the book for the reader?
 6. Does the essay discuss at least two main points about the book?
 7. Are assertions about the book supported with evidence from the 
text?
 8. Does the conclusion sum up the main points and make a recom-
mendation to the reader?
 9. Does the reader have enough information at the end to make an 
informed decision about whether or not to read the book?
 10. Are any sentences unclear or confusing to the reader?
You may also want to have a friend from another class who had not 
read the book comment on your draft. Revise your draft to correct any 
problems that became apparent during this process. 
Editing the Draft
Now that the content is in place, it is time to work with the grammar, 
punctuation, and mechanics of your draft to make sure that your essay 
conforms to the guidelines of standard written English. 
See Activity 26 for “Editing Guidelines for Individual Work.”
Activity 45
(Continued)
104   |  THE LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS    CSU EXPOSITORY READING AND WRITING COURSE  |  SEMESTER TWO
STUDENT VERSION
Reﬂ ecting on the Writing
Think about the following questions:
1. Writing often helps us focus our thinking so that we learn about 
things that we might not have otherwise noticed. What did you learn 
about The Left Hand of Darkness from writing this paper?
2. Working systematically through a writing process can help improve 
writing skills. What skills do you think you improved by writing this 
paper?
Activity 48 