
Worlds ex Machina: Worldbuilding with AI
LegendKeeper Timelines are here. 
Learn more →
Features
Pricing
Blog
Discord
Changelog
Gift Card
Log in
Try free
5 min read
Worlds ex Machina: Worldbuilding with AI
Exploring new realms of the imagination with Midjourney AI.
Author's Note (Aug 12th, 2025): Even more has happened with AI since this article was written. We've seen big tech vacuum up copyrighted content and train enormous, highly capable video and image models, with a plainly-stated goal to replace human creativity and eliminate blue and white collar jobs. As an organization that values handmade craft, we can't really abide by that. The base technology itself is still very interesting and has lots of potential in many fields, but we can't help but call out that it's unfair to replace artists with models on whose works were trained without appropriate compensation.
I'm not going to tell you how to do your creative process, but keep this in mind as you read this article and use tools in the space. We see a lot of "Like LegendKeeper + tons of AI" competitors pop up every week now–Personally, I wonder why one would generate walls of text that no one will read. Tabletop RPGs and storytelling are an opportunity to step out of our artificially scarce world and enter one of imagination and abundance. I don't think language models should replace that. 
So far, overall, the companies working on these models have shown us that they do not deserve our trust or respect.
Author's Note (Feb 27th, 2024): A lot has happened in generative AI since this article was written in 2022. We've seen the quality of these models skyrocket– enabling large tech companies and home-users alike to commoditize art-adjacent generated images at a scale never before seen. It's worth pointing out that there are many unanswered questions in AI ethics, and the sourcing for image model data is questionable in many cases. I'm a techno-optimist, so I have to believe we'll find an equitable path forward, but that path is unclear for now
. 
I think these tools are still a great launchpad for personal-use creativity.
I'm amazed by the rapid progress of creative AI. 
Midjourney
 recently went into open beta, giving anyone the opportunity to hop on and create art from text prompts. (They have a pretty generous free trial; seriously, go check it out!) They've trained an AI model on a huge portion of the internet's art, essentially creating an "artist-in-a-box" that taps into the collective creative conscious.
There are many big (and troubling) philosophical questions here, but I think technology like this opens up many doors for worldbuilders. In minutes, you can make concept art for your world or D&D campaign. People, places, monsters, maps, items... And the joy of this is that there's some mystery for you as the creator. One of the problems with worldbuilding is sometimes we know too much about our creation! But an AI creative assistant can riff on familiar tropes, while still surprising us with ideas stemming from randomness.
The process of creating AI art is not perfect. The final result is almost always a compromise between you and the AI. But go look up Midjourney examples from two months ago, and then look up examples from today. The progress is 
kinda scary. 
We're at the beginning of a revolution for every type of creator: Imagine combining 
GPT-3
, Midjourney, and your own creative direction to manifest entire worlds in only a few minutes. 
Prompt: 4k of concept art of a dark souls monster with skulls bright red trending on artstation octane maximum detail dark fantasy photorealistic moody lighting
Midjourney, 
Dall-e 2
, and the hundreds of other AI creative tools that are no-doubt coming, will serve as an extension to your imagination. The mechanical barriers to materializing the realms in your mind are 
dissolving, 
for better or for worse.
Prompts for Worldbuilding with Midjourney
I'll share a few prompt formats I've been using for riffing on concept art. You'll notice little keyword tricks you can use to influence quality and style. Stuff like "4K", "trending on artstation"*, and "moody lighting" goes a long way.
4k of barren rocky wasteland devoid of life with mountains in the distance maximum detail dark fantasy photorealistic moody lightin
Prompt: 4k of barren rocky wasteland devoid of life with mountains in the distance maximum detail dark fantasy photorealistic moody lightin
4k of a foreboding door into a dark dungeon that goes deep below concept art maximum detail houdini-render photorealistic moody lighting
Prompt: 4k of a foreboding door into a dark dungeon that goes deep below concept art maximum detail houdini-render photorealistic moody lighting
Your campaign's magic MacGuffin just got a new makeover!
4k of concept art D&D magic item sword of eternal ice dof maximum detail dark fantasy photorealistic moody lighting, glowing blue
Prompt: 
4k of concept art D&D magic item sword of eternal ice dof maximum detail dark fantasy photorealistic moody lighting, glowing blue
Midjourney is getting surprisingly good at creating maps, though the consistency requirements of maps makes it a harder task than the abstract or natural stuff above. They're not "ready-to-go", but I can see a lot of potential here.
top-down view of a dungeon map on parchment paper, ink, intricately detailed 4k
What are your thoughts?
Is AI art the democratization of visual creativity? *Or is it a fancy way to launder copyright and the effort of the world's artists into zero-marginal-cost assets? What will you do with this capability? What if LegendKeeper could look at an article you wrote and then generate a preview image for it automatically? Or vice versa; look at your image and then write an article? What if you dropped a pin on the map and a town map and its inhabitants, prose and pictures for all, suddenly sprung to life? Stop by the 
Discord
and let me know what you think. 
This Week
In addition to taking part in the AI art revolution, I got a lot done this week! I hope to have another patch out soon for 0.12.x to reintroduce preview images and few other quality of life things. Progress on the new editor, mobile UI, and public worlds is also going really well; honestly a lot faster than I thought it would. I think it's likely the first mobile-ready, public world will launch before the end of August. This will perhaps be LK's most important milestone ever. 
GenCon
Justin and I are going to GenCon next week! We look forward to wandering the convention floor, and maybe even playing a game or two. This is our first GenCon so I'm pretty excited! PAX Unplugged was a blast and apparently GenCon is even bigger. If you happen to be going, let me know and we can say hello there!
There will be no weekly next week!
Braden
Published 
Jul 29, 2022
Written by 
Braden Herndon
Join 10,000+ worldbuilders getting practical tips
The LegendKeeper worldbuilding newsletter provides creative deep dives, RPG content, inspiration, and occasional product updates.
First Name
Email
Get Inspiration
Unsubscribe anytime. Your email will be guarded with unbreakable wards.
Read our privacy policy.
Next post:
LegendKeeper 0.12.0.5
Previous post:
The Trope Thief: Building Horrific Worlds Out of Stolen Media
Worldbuilding Blog
LK Shop
FAQ
Team
Changelog
Gift Card
Contact
Log in
YouTube
Twitter
Reddit
Discord
© 2024 LegendKeeper
