
=== PAGE 1 ===
farah mendlesohn - rhetorics of fantasy
file:///C|/Users/calandrd/Desktop/farah%20mendlesohn%20-%20rhetorics%20of%20fantasy.htm[10/6/2014 2:24:06 PM]
Off Cuts 
Rhetorics of
Fantasy
(extract)
Articles:
*Rhetorics of Fantasy
(extract)
*Out of This World
* What We Mean & How We
Are Seen
* Denying the Exoticism of
the Other
* How to Give a Conference
Paper
* Why the Iraq Crisis is on
* Crowning the King
* How I discovered Fandom
* Did you ask any good
questions...
* Popular science for children
* Creativity & Essay Writing
Contact:
farah.sf at gmail dot com
More Farah:
* Intergalactic Playground
* Live Journal
All texts copyright Farah
Mendlesohn
 
 
Extract from Rhetorics of Fantasy (the Introduction)
By Farah Mendlesohn
Health warning:
This book is not intended to create rules.
Its categories are not intended to fix anything in stone.
This book is merely a portal into fantasy, a tour around the skeletons and
exoskeletons of genre.
Taxonomy: Theory and practice of classification.
Classification: Any method of organizing and systematizing the diversity of
organisms, living and extinct, according to a set of rules (Penguin Dictionary of
Biology. 9th ed. 1994. 1996).
Taxonomy is no longer typological. It's now systematics, consciously based in the
axiom "The observer is part of the system" (Richard Erlich, email, 2003).
Formal critics all begin with a truth that ideological critics too often neglect; form is
in itself interesting, even in the most abstract extreme. Shape, pattern, design carry
their own interest-and hence meaning-for all human beings. What some critics have
called "human meanings" are not required; nothing is more human than the love of
abstract forms." (From Wayne C. Booth's introduction to M.M. Bakhtin, Problems of
Dostoevsky's Poetics. Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1984. xiii).
Introduction
This book is not about defining fantasy. The debate over definition is now
longstanding, and a consensus has emerged which has accepted as a viable "fuzzy
set", a range of critical definitions of fantasy. It is now rare to find scholars who
choose between Kathryn Hume, W.R. Irwin, Rosemary Jackson, or Tzvetan Todorov:
it is much more likely they will pick and choose between these and other "definers"
of the field according to the area of fantasy fiction, or the ideological filter, in which
they are interested.
I want to reach out for an understanding of the construction of the genre, and very
specifically to consider its language and rhetoric, in order to provide critical tools for
further analysis. During the research for this book I became aware that while there
are many single author or single text studies in genre fantasy criticism, there is
relatively little comparative criticism beyond the study of metaphorical and thematic
elements. There is almost nothing which deals with the language of the fantastic that
goes beyond aesthetic preference. My contention is that if we do not have a critical
tool which allows us to collate texts in any yielding way (note that I do not insist on
"meaningful"), we cannot engage in the comparative research which illuminates a
genre.
I believe that the fantastic is an area of literature that is heavily dependent on the
dialectic between author and reader for the construction of a sense of wonder, that it
is a fiction of consensual construction of belief. This expectation is historical and
subject to historical change and is not unique to fantasy. Wayne C. Booth has written
that "for experienced readers a sonnet begun calls for a sonnet concluded; an elegy
begun in blank verse calls for an elegy completed in blank verse" (Fiction 12). This
dialectic is conditioned by very real genre expectations that circle around certain
identifiable rhetorical techniques which I will be describing. Intrinsic to my argument
is that a fantasy succeeds when the literary techniques employed are most appropriate
to the reader expectations of that category of fantasy. Understanding the broad brush
strokes of plot or the decoration of device is less fundamental to comprehending the
genre; all of these may be tweaked or subverted while still remaining firmly within

=== PAGE 2 ===
farah mendlesohn - rhetorics of fantasy
file:///C|/Users/calandrd/Desktop/farah%20mendlesohn%20-%20rhetorics%20of%20fantasy.htm[10/6/2014 2:24:06 PM]
the reader's expectation of the text.
I came to this project as a science fiction critic, and that perspective has shaped the
way I understand the structures and rhetorics of fantasy. Crucially, it led me to focus
on an issue which both W.R. Irwin and Brian Attebery (Fantasy Tradition) have
raised, the way in which a text becomes fantasy, or alternatively, the way the
fantastic enters the text and the reader's relationship to this.
In science fiction, how the reader is brought into the speculative world influences the
ways in which that world can be described, so that the incredible invention story
rapidly gives way to the completed future, because the incredible invention permits
only one level of emotional response, that of ritualized amazement or ritualized
horror. In contrast, as Robert A. Heinlein argued and practiced, the completed future-
the enclosed world or pocket universe-permits the author to elicit increasingly
complex responses but demands much more sophisticated narrative techniques. But
the question remains of the precise reader relationship to these futures, and there is a
clear difference between the imaginary society which we enter riding on the shoulder
of the otherworldly visitor (a construct most common to utopian fiction ) and that
which we encounter as a hidden observer for whom no allowances are made; the first
demands-and usually offers-explanations, while the second requires the reader to
unpack the intertext. The consequences of this for science fiction have been explored
by John Clute, Samuel R. Delany, John Huntington, Edward James, and Brian
Stableford, among others. My approach therefore is not new. I am building on work
already done, but work that has primarily been done for science fiction. My intention
is to turn the same critical gaze on fantasy, to take up Roger Schlobin's challenge,
implicit in his claim that the "key to the fantastic is how its universes work, which is
sometimes where they are, but is always why and how they are" (161). Attebery
argues that most fantasy writers create clearly defined frames. "Narrative devices that
establish a relationship between the fantasy world and our own while at the same
time separating the two" (Strategies 66). Which is of course what my book is about-
how this works and the impact of this.
In this book I argue that there are essentially four categories within the fantastic: the
portal-quest, the immersive, the intrusive, and the liminal. These categories are
determined by the means by which the fantastic enters the narrated world. In the
portal-quest we are invited through into the fantastic, in the intrusion fantasy the
fantastic enters the fictional world, in the liminal fantasy the magic hovers in the
corner of our eye, while the immersive fantasy allows us no escape. Each category
has as profound an influence on the rhetorical structures of the fantastic as does its
taproot text or genre. Each category is a mode which is susceptible to the
quadripartite template or grammar-WRONGNESS, THINNING, RECOGNITION,
and HEALING/RETURN-which John Clute suggests in the Encyclopedia of Fantasy
(338-9). Each mode places its emphasis on a different note within this four-note bar,
and within the mode consistencies exist in the use of these templates which
demonstrate coherence in the categories.
The construction of these groups strongly suggests a taxonomy and it would be
disingenuous of me to attempt to fudge this issue. However taxonomy needs to be
understood as a tool, not as an end in itself, and it needs to be understood in the
modern context that taxonomical practices are increasingly polysemic and multiplex,
generated by acknowledged questions and capable of existence alongside other
configurations. It is not the intention of this book to argue that there is only one
possible taxonomic understanding of the genre. The purpose of the book is not to
offer a classification per se but to consider the genre in ways which open up new
questions. It is a tool kit, not a color chart.
If the taxonomy I suggest is to succeed as the critical tool kit I intend, it must work
across the more commercial definitions of fantasy, the categories of children's and
adults' fantasy, of dark fantasy, and of light and comic fantasy, and must help to
explain some of the more anomalous texts: those which find their genre coat of the
wrong cut or color, rough to the touch or tight around the sleeves. In essence, my
contention is that the failure to grasp the stylistic needs of a particular category of

=== PAGE 3 ===
farah mendlesohn - rhetorics of fantasy
file:///C|/Users/calandrd/Desktop/farah%20mendlesohn%20-%20rhetorics%20of%20fantasy.htm[10/6/2014 2:24:06 PM]
fantasy may undermine the effectiveness of an otherwise interesting idea. Eleanor
Cameron wrote that fantasy is "a very special category of literature that compares
with fiction as a sonnet compares with poetry. Either you have a sonnet if you have
written your poem in a certain way, or you don't if you haven't" (165). To use my
own terms, which are outlined below, an immersive fantasy told with the voice of
portal fantasy will feel leaden; a liminal fantasy written with the naivety of the
intrusion fantasy will feel over contrived.
Inevitably, there will be texts which appear to cross categories, but these exceptions
test the rule: where authors move from one category to another within the text, they
invariably assume new techniques; the cadence shifts, and both metaphor and
mimetic writing take on different functions to accommodate the new category. This
shift is at times inadvertent and at other times subject to the manipulation of more
ambitious and skilled writers. Yet while many books move internally from one
category to another very few authors produce a single text which exists
simultaneously within multiple categories (although as we shall see, immersive
fantasy can host an intrusion). These exceptional few will be discussed in chapter
five, and their achievements provide an important caveat for this book: no theory is
worth a damn that claims universal applicability. Here I take serious exception with
Stanley Fish's argument that "theories always work and they will always produce
exactly the results they predict, results that will be immediately compelling to those
for whom the theory's assumptions and enabling principles are self-evident. Indeed,
the trick would be to find a theory that didn't work" (68). This statement, however
amusing, encapsulates much of what is wrong with current "schools" of literary
criticism. This observation may seem egregious, but it is essential when reading this
book to know that the author is not considered to believe in these structures. They are
observations, not diktats and they are powerful only to the degree that they remain
arguable.
This book is very much grounded in a love of forms, but form cannot be wholly
abstracted from content or ideology. Furthermore, I have come to believe that form
may act to constrain ideological possibilities. Consequently consideration is given to
interpretation where the issue is how a particular mode of writing helps to generate,
intensify, or twist meaning: a great deal of this book will consider how particular
rhetorics deliberately or unavoidably support ideological positions and in doing so
shape character, or affect the construction and narration of story. But generally
speaking this is a book about structure, not about meaning.
When I began this book I believed the issue to be taxonomy. Half way through, I was
convinced that I was working within narratology. Later, rhetoric became my principal
concern. In the concluding stages I realized I was working within what is described
as poetics. Finally, I realized that all the most illuminating metaphors came from the
world of landscape painting. This book is the result of an extended thought
experiment. It is not intended to fix sub-categories of genre (as I hope chapter five
will make clear), or to say, "this is how you do x kind of fantasy." It is intended
solely in terms of "This is what I observe over a wide range of texts." It is an
exercise in almost pure Reason, a rather old fashioned approach to criticism, I am
aware. I have used other critics where I found them helpful, but there is surprisingly
little written on the rhetoric or poetics of the fantastic. I am, however, indebted to the
work of John Clute and Brian Attebery, whose work has served as compass poles,
and to the "How to Write Science Fiction and Fantasy" books and blog discussions
of many active fantasy authors. Wherever this text fits, I hope very much that it
provokes more questions than it answers.
A Note on the Selection of Texts
No system of selection has been applied to the choice of texts in this book. At best,
the selection builds on Attebery's notion of the fuzzy set-the idea that there are core
likenesses around which we can construct ever more distant perimeters-but with the
caveat that this book argues that rather than a single fuzzy set, from which fantasy
moves from genre to slipstream, we can actually identify several fuzzy sets, linked
together by what John Clute has termed taproot texts. Inevitably, some forms of

=== PAGE 4 ===
farah mendlesohn - rhetorics of fantasy
file:///C|/Users/calandrd/Desktop/farah%20mendlesohn%20-%20rhetorics%20of%20fantasy.htm[10/6/2014 2:24:06 PM]
fantasy appeal to me more than others and I have yet to find a reader who claims to
enjoy all of the kinds I have outlined: to give just one example, readers who like
portal-quest fantasies rarely seem to enjoy the liminal fantasies, and vice versa. I
have not been able to keep this coloration entirely absent from the text, although
where I knew my own tastes might pre-determine my analysis, I tackled this in part
by asking others (more enthusiastic for the forms) to select my reading. This is
particularly the case in chapter one (portal-quest fantasy) and chapter three (intrusion
fantasy) where all the texts selected came recommended from friends and from
members of the International Association of the Fantastic in the Arts on-line
discussion list. In contrast the books selected for chapters four and five are books that
I had already read, and which had fascinated me. A consequence is that some writers
central to the field do not appear in this book: in each case this is entirely because
my personal taste does not extend in their direction. For these reasons, and aware that
the passive academic voice has a tendency to reinforce reification, I have chosen to
retain the first person.
I am not myself always convinced my assignments are appropriate. Some books have
been haggled back and forth between chapters as I have tried to decide in which
mode they were written. Dividing between immersive fantasies which just happened
to have intrusions as part of their plot but whose rhetoric emphasized the immersive
qualities of the text, and those fantasies set in other worlds in which intrusion is the
source of the fantastic was not always easy. Whether the choices have been correct
or not, the very engagement with them has generated questions about the ways in
which the fantastic is written and any disputes as to where I have placed each book
will, I hope, generate more.
Finally, where possible-and unless stated otherwise-I have referenced all texts to the
first editions. The major exception to this is in chapter three where the classic Gothic
novels are all referenced to current Penguin Classics for the ease of both author and
reader.
The Categories
This book is constructed as a set of interlocking essays: with the exception of chapter
five each of the essays stands alone while leaning against the arguments and
definitions of the other chapters. The critical questions in each chapter are: How do
we get there? How do we meet the fantastic? In what ways does this meeting affect
the narrative and rhetorical choices? How does this affect the choice of language and
in what way does the choice of language affect the construction of the fantastic and
the position of the reader? What ideological consequences emerge from the rhetorical
structures? Perhaps the most crucial question is, Where are we asked to stand in
relationship to the fantastic? In this it is important to understand that I am not
discussing point of view, or what Gerard Genette labeled focalization. Focalization is
a matter internal to the story and there is no common choice within any of the
categories (although one cannot help but notice the extensive use of first person in
the liminal fantasy). What I am interested in is the reader's relationship to the
framework. Bijoy H. Boruah, in trying to rationalize the empathic emotions of the
reader, wrote, "To appreciate fictions is, to some extent, also to fictionalize
ourselves…." (126), an activity he called "metaphoric participation". His phrase is
peculiarly apt for what I'm arguing. That "reader position" to which I will keep
pointing, while on the one hand refers to our ideal and implied reader, is also an
invitation to construct a fictionalized self who can accept the construction of the
rhetoric of a particular fantastic text. But the invitation is not free and open: it is an
exercise in which the author continually seeks the upper hand. In his reader's report
on this book Brian Attebery wrote, "Characters can be categorized variously as being
immersed in, or wandering through, or fighting off invasions of the fantastic; readers,
however, can take any or all of these positions at once, since they are constantly
mediating between the fantasy world and their own experience" (2006). Yet what
this book will argue is that the author seeks to control these choices, even while
understanding the polysemous and pro-active position of the reader. For many
authors the task is to anticipate readers' strategies as part of their own poetics. The
core rhetorical strategy of fantasy remains the same: fantasy is constructed with

=== PAGE 5 ===
farah mendlesohn - rhetorics of fantasy
file:///C|/Users/calandrd/Desktop/farah%20mendlesohn%20-%20rhetorics%20of%20fantasy.htm[10/6/2014 2:24:06 PM]
precision through point of view. Like a perspective puzzle, if the reader stands in "the
wrong place", the image/experience will not resolve.
It is almost impossible to deal discreetly with each category so that there will be
constant comparisons between the forms I identify in order to show the differences
between their workings and tone.
The Portal-Quest Fantasy
A portal fantasy is simply a fantastic world entered through a portal. The classic
portal fantasy is of course The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe (1950). Crucially,
the fantastic is on the other side and does not "leak". Although individuals may cross
both ways, the magic does not.
Closest in form to the classic utopian or alien planet story (sometimes, but not
always, a first contact tale), portal fantasies require that we learn from a point of
entry. They are almost always quest novels and they almost always proceed in a
linear fashion with a goal which must be met. Like the computer games they have
spawned, they often contain elaborate descriptive elements, but while the intrusion
fantasy must be unpacked or defeated, the portal fantasy must be navigated.
Frequently, portal fantasies become more mysterious, rather than less. The reliance
on destiny in so many portal fantasies may reflect the need to create rational
explanation of irrational action without destroying this mystery. The language of the
portal fantasy is often elaborate, but it is the elaboration of the anthropologist or the
pre-Raphaelite painter, intensely descriptive and exploratory rather than assumptive.
It is a rare portal fantasy which achieves the Gothic (although David Lindsay's A
Voyage to Arcturus, 1920, comes to mind, as does Alice's Adventures in
Wonderland, 1865) and when it does the need to describe and explain remains a
driving force behind the narrative and the language used. Most significantly, the
portal fantasy allows and relies upon both protagonist and reader gaining experience.
Where the stock technique of intrusion is to keep surprising the reader, portal
fantasies lead us gradually to the point where the protagonist knows his or her world
enough to change it and to enter into that world's destiny. One way to envision this is
that we ride alongside the protagonist, hearing only what s/he hears, seeing only what
s/he sees; thus our protagonist (even if they are not the narrator) provides us with a
guided tour of the landscapes. Diana Wynne Jones's Tough Guide to Fantasy Land
(1996) both mocks this technique and reduces it to its purest form: the travel guide.
When we think of portal fantasies, we commonly assume that the portal is from "our"
world to the fantastic, but the portal fantasy is about entry, transition and negotiation.
Much quest fantasy, for all that it builds the full secondary world, fits better with the
portal fantasy. Characteristically in quest fantasy the protagonist goes from a
mundane life, in which the fantastic, if he or she is aware of it, is very distant and
unknown (or at least unavailable to the protagonist) into direct contact with the
fantastic, through which he or she transitions, to the point of negotiation with the
world via the personal manipulation of the fantastic realm. In chapter one I will trace
precisely this process in The Lord of the Rings. The discussion in chapter one will, I
hope, help to distinguish the creation of a convincing rhetorical secondary world
from the techniques of immersive fantasy. In the quest fantasy we see the world
through this transitional narrative: for despite the assertion that this world has always
existed, the technique remains identical to that of the portal fantasy and the effect on
the language of the text is the same, forcing the author to describe and explain what
is seen by the point of view character as s/he negotiates the world. The result, when
done poorly, is didactic, but as I hope to demonstrate, even the most creative writers
find it difficult in this form to avoid impressing upon the reader an authoritative
interpretation of their world.
The Immersive Fantasy
The immersive fantasy invites us to share not merely a world, but a set of
assumptions. At its best, it presents the fantastic without comment as the norm both
for the protagonists and for the reader: we sit on the protagonist's shoulder and while

=== PAGE 6 ===
farah mendlesohn - rhetorics of fantasy
file:///C|/Users/calandrd/Desktop/farah%20mendlesohn%20-%20rhetorics%20of%20fantasy.htm[10/6/2014 2:24:06 PM]
we have access to their eyes and ears, we are not provided with an explanatory
narrative. The immersive fantasy is that which is closest to science fiction, and as
such, it makes use of an irony of mimesis, which helps to explain why a sufficiently
effective immersive fantasy may be indistinguishable from science fiction: once the
fantastic becomes assumed, it acquires a scientific cohesion all of its own. In 2000,
this led to endless debates about the status of both Mary Gentle's Ash (2000) and
China Miéville's Perdido Street Station (2000). But the immersive fantasy depends
for its effectiveness on an assumption of realism that denies the need for explication.
The immersive fantasy seems to be described in part by what it is not. We do not
enter into the immersive fantasy, we are assumed to be of it: our cognitive
estrangement is both entire and negated. The immersive fantasy must be sealed; it
cannot, within the confines of the story, be questioned. While an intrusion narrative
may drive the plot, as in Perdido Street Station, the setting is already fantastic so that
the intrusion is not in itself the source of the fantastic. Most important is that the
fantasy be immersive for the point of view characters: unlike the characters of quest
fantasies, which I have argued above are better fitted to the category of portal
fantasy, the point of view character of an immersive fantasy must take for granted
the fantastic elements with which he or she is surrounded; he or she must exist as
integrated with the magical (or fantastic) even if he or she is not magical; s/he must
be "deeply competent with the world they know" (Clute, Strokes 34). As we shall see
in chapter two, successful immersive fantasy consciously negates the sense of wonder
in favor of an atmosphere of ennui. M. John Harrison's The Pastel City both achieves
this and uses this trope to mock our expectations.
The use of the immersive mode can undermine the intentions of an author. One
might presume that Laurell K. Hamilton's vampire novels (beginning with Guilty
Pleasures, 1993) were intended as horror. They contain the requisite actors: the
vampire, the vampire hunter, several nasty monsters, and later a werewolf. But the
fantastic elements are not in themselves frightening, and they are most definitely not
horrific. The potential horror of the Anita Blake novels is subverted by the structures
and language native to immersive fantasy: although a horror novel is read with
expectation, the immersive fantasy places much of that expectation on contextual
difference, rather than the intruding event. Immersion, with its ironic realism,
normalizes the horrific and prevents the sense of attrition which Clute identifies as
essential to Horror. That these novels ended up in chapter 3 (intrusion fantasy) has
nothing to do with the accoutrements of the fantastic by which they are usually
categorized, but by the trajectory of escalation which shapes both the individual
books and the series.
What is perhaps most interesting is that it is most commonly in the immersive
fantasies that one finds oneself in a fantasy world in which no magic occurs.
Sometimes this is because the magic takes place elsewhere, but there are many
immersive fantasy novels which differ only from science fiction in that they are set
in apparently archaic worlds which are not connected to ours: in Titus Groan, the
fantastic is embedded in the linguistic excesses of the text, or in the interaction
between the setting and the protagonists. In the immersive fantasy, the plot may be
the least fantastical element.
Intrusion Fantasy
In intrusion fantasy the fantastic is the bringer of chaos. It is the beast in the bottom
of the garden, or the elf seeking assistance. It is horror and amazement. It takes us out
of safety without taking us from our place. It is recursive. The intrusion fantasy is not
necessarily unpleasant, but it has as its base the assumption that normality is
organized, and that when the fantastic retreats the world, while not necessarily
unchanged, returns to predictability at least until the next element of the fantastic
intrudes.
Fantasy and "reality" are often kept strictly demarcated: in some fictions, those set
apart from the protagonist may not be able to perceive the fantastic even while they

=== PAGE 7 ===
farah mendlesohn - rhetorics of fantasy
file:///C|/Users/calandrd/Desktop/farah%20mendlesohn%20-%20rhetorics%20of%20fantasy.htm[10/6/2014 2:24:06 PM]
experience its effects. These structural characteristics of intrusive fantasy are
mimicked by the language we can associate with this form. Because the base level is
the normal world, intrusion fantasies maintain stylistic realism and rely heavily on
explanation. Because the drive of intrusion fantasy is to be investigated and made
transparent, description is intense, and it is assumed that we, the reader are engaged
with the ignorance of the point of view character, usually the protagonist. One
consequence of this is that the language reflects constant amazement. Unlike the
portal fantasy, which it otherwise strongly resembles, the protagonists and the reader
are never expected to become accustomed to the fantastic.
The required awestruck or skeptical tone is tricky and may contribute to the
preference for stylistic realism in order to maintain the contrast between the normal
world and the fantastic intrusion. It also may explain the tendency of the intrusive
fantasy to continually introduce new protagonists, and to up the ante on the nature or
number of the horrors. Horror, amazement, and surprise are difficult to maintain if
the protagonist has become accustomed to them. Escalation-of many kinds-is an
important element of the rhetoric.
Intrusion fantasy, although usually associated with "real world" fantasy, can be set
within the immersive. If this is the case, the same rules apply: there is a clear line
between the constructed "normality" and the intrusion. Protagonists know what is
normal even if we do not and express this clearly and forcefully, and the intrusion
must be defeated; and the actors remain acted upon. However, the innocence of the
protagonist is combined with their competence within the immersive fantasy, and
because their negotiation of their own world is fundamentally interesting to the
reader, characters become actors within the immersive fantasy as well acted upon by
the intrusion. The technique can be seen in Alexander Irvine's A Scattering of Jades
(2002) in which an Aztec god is reintroduced to 1840s New York. Here, the
historical city is our fantasy land.
The Liminal Fantasy
The liminal fantasy is perhaps the most interesting because it is so rare. M. John
Harrison has spoken of the existence of the trans-liminal moment, the point where
we are invited to cross the threshold into the fantastic, but choose not. The result is
that the fantastic leaks back through the portal. This can be manifested in the leakage
of the monster into the narrated world-Philip Pullman uses this motif to create horror
in The Subtle Knife (1997)-but more subtly, the portal itself may be the intrusion.
Harrison notes this motif in Wells's "The Door in the Wall" (1906), in which a man
is three times tempted by a green door leading to a garden, and three times refuses
the portal. While the metaphorical role of the green door may be significant to the
critic, its position as representative of the fantastic is more important here. This
seemingly ordinary story feels like fantasy. We somehow know that it is the fantastic.
What I would contend is that in this story the fantastic is the temptation framed by
the door. The anxiety and the continued maintenance and irresolution of the fantastic
becomes the locus of the "fantasy". The liminal moment which maintains the anxiety
around this material temptation assists the creation of the tone and mode that we
associate with the fantastic: its presence is represented as unnerving, and it is this
sense of the unnerving which is at the heart of the category I have termed liminal,
which I prefer to Tszvetan Todorov's term, hesitation or uncertainty, because I think
that hesitation is only one strategy employed by these writers. Todorov's concern
with "the fantastic" as something distinct from fantasy (1973) means that his ideas
are encompassed within this section but do not describe the whole. Liminal fantasy
as discussed here is very clear that magic, or at least the possibility of magic, is part
of the consensus reality, a position rather different from, but not in conflict with,
Todorov's more specific interests.
In the liminal fantasy we are given to understand, through cues to the familiar, that
this is our world. When the fantastic appears, it should be intrusive, disruptive of
expectation, but instead while the events themselves might be noteworthy and they
may cause chaos, their magical origins barely raise an eyebrow. We are disoriented.

=== PAGE 8 ===
farah mendlesohn - rhetorics of fantasy
file:///C|/Users/calandrd/Desktop/farah%20mendlesohn%20-%20rhetorics%20of%20fantasy.htm[10/6/2014 2:24:06 PM]
The enclosed nature of the immersive fantasy is absent: the hints and cues are
missing, but as in immersive fantasy, the protagonist demonstrates no surprise. It is
the reaction to the fantastic that shapes this category, as well as the context of the
fantasy.
The tone of the liminal fantasy could be described as blasé. An excellent example
may be found in Joan Aiken's Armitage family stories, in which the family all remain
remarkably calm when unicorns appear on their lawn ("Yes, But Today is Tuesday",
1953). The tone of Aiken's work is matter of fact, casual, and, unlike James Thurber's
"The Unicorn in the Garden" (1940), it is not trying to trick anyone. The protagonist
in M. John Harrison's story, "I Did It" (2001) spends a great deal of time discussing
why he put an axe in his head, and whether it looks good, but neither he, nor anyone
else, questions the viability of its presence. While liminal fantasy casualizes the
fantastic within the experience of the protagonist, it estranges the reader. The
situation is odd, and it is our reaction to oddness which is being exploited. Whereas
in the portal fantasy we ride with the protagonist, in the liminal fantasy we sit in the
subconscious of the point of view character, quietly screaming, "But something is
wrong", a dream on the point of becoming lucid. While the intrusion fantasy is
fascinated with the monster, the liminal fantasy wallows in ennui. To cross the portal
is to confront the illusion, but confrontation (as we shall see in chapter one) reduces
rather than intensifies the fantastic. The transliminal moment, which brings us up to
the liminal point and then refuses to cross the threshold, has much greater potential to
generate fear, awe, and confusion, all intensely important emotions in the creation of
the fantastic mode.
Liminal fantasy may rely on conscious exaggeration of the mimetic style, in defiance
of the conventional understanding of the fantastic as straight-faced; the effectiveness
of this category may rest with its adoption of the ironic mode. It seems clear that this
category is shaped as much by doubts and questions as by assertions. It is perhaps the
most interesting, though also the most elusive, of the categories for which I am
arguing. The liminal fantasy relies on a number of different techniques, but central to
its construction of the Absurd are irony and equipoise, the twisting of the
metonymic/metaphorical structures of fantasy, and a construction of a point of
balance right at the edge of belief.
This kind of fantasy may be the most demanding of the four categories which I have
outlined, and the one which most depends for its effectiveness on the understanding
and subversion of our expectations of the fantastic. Of all the categories it is the one
which depends most on my notion of multiple fuzzy sets. Far from being at the edge
of genre, the least fantastical of texts, liminal fantasy is the fuzzy set supported by
and between the other modes that I am discussing. Liminal fantasies distill the
essence of the fantastic.
The Irregulars
Chapter five, considering as it does texts which warp and distort the patterns I've
sought to identify, and which may well have produced patterns which I cannot yet
see, is essential to this book. This book is about rhetorics, not taxonomic phyla.
Genre markers (whether tropes or patterns) are useful analytical tools but they are
constructions imposed on a literary landscape. The same landscape may be
susceptible to quite a different cartography. The books discussed in this chapter may
point the way to that other cartography.
I have no category title for the books in chapter five. "Hybrid forms" would both
reify the categories in a way which I find uncomfortable and which would suggest
these texts are "between" things. I am also wary of terminology which implies a link
between non-formulaic fantasy and quality. First because quality is to be found in
every one of the rhetorics I outline and much of this quality is to do with how
formula are exploited, and second because these texts are, if anything, hyper-aware
of formula. The texts considered in chapter five straddle the forms I have outlined,
folding, twisting, and re-weaving the material of the fantastic in order to produce
texts that depend on our understanding of these forms, but yet do something "other".

=== PAGE 9 ===
farah mendlesohn - rhetorics of fantasy
file:///C|/Users/calandrd/Desktop/farah%20mendlesohn%20-%20rhetorics%20of%20fantasy.htm[10/6/2014 2:24:06 PM]
Each of the books in chapter five demonstrates the incredible potential which exists
in the genre.
Introduction Endnotes
A cursory consideration of the contents of the Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts will confirm this
impression.
Karen Hellekson made the same decision when she constructed her taxonomy of Alternate History
fictions (Hellekson, 251).
This is itself ideologically revealing. How many guests in utopia are shown the sewers?
Clute and I have had a number of discussions over which formulation of the grammar of Full Fantasy to
use here. Clute being Clute, it has gone through several revisions, rethinkings, and renamings. In the
end, and knowing this is not his preference, I have chosen to go for the most physically accessible
formula, i.e. the version in the Encyclopedia.
For the importance and critical power of accepting the limits of individual theories, see my article,
"Surpassing the Love of Vampires: Or Why (and How) a Queer Reading of the Buffy/ Willow
Relationship is Denied", in David Lavery and Rhonda Wilcox, ed., Fighting the Forces: Essays on the
Meaning of Buffy the Vampire Slayer. Lanham MD and Oxford: Rowman and Littlefield, 2001: 45-60.
At the end of The Lord of the Rings magic (in the form of grey dust from the Elves) is taken back to the
Shire. It is made clear that magic is not normal to the Shire, that it is in fact an intrusion, made
acceptable only because it smoothes the return to "normality".
In conversation over lunch in 2003.
