 
 Chronicles from the Research Library: An Artificial Intelligence Research Request 
 JOIN/RENEW 
 Menu 
 Close 
 Events 
 Upcoming Events 
 Past Programs 
 Museum 
 Plan Your Visit 
 Exhibits 
 Free Digital Guide 
 Venue Rental 
 Research & Library 
 About the Library 
 Digital History Projects 
 Research Guides 
 Help 
 Research Fellowships 
 Education 
 Curriculum and Resources 
 School Tours 
 Oregon History Day 
 Traveling Trunk Program 
 Teacher Advisory Council 
 The Quarterly 
 Current Issue 
 About the Quarterly 
 Free OHQ Articles 
 Back Issues 
 Subscribe to OHQ 
 OregonScape 
 Award-Winning Articles 
 About Us 
 Mission 
 Strategic Plan 
 America 250—Oregon 
 Board of Trustees 
 Staff 
 History 
 Affiliates and Partners 
 News and Press 
 Newsletter 
 Blog 
 Join 
 The 1898 Society 
 Reciprocal Membership 
 Business and Non-Profit Memberships 
 Corporate Heritage Circle 
 Shop 
 Museum Store 
 Photo Orders 
 Donate 
 Donate Now 
 The Next 125 Campaign 
 Donate to Collections 
 Planned Giving 
 Pacific Wonderland License Plate 
 History Makers 
 Home Blog Chronicles from the Research Library: An Artificial Intelligence Research Request 
 Chronicles from the Research Library: An Artificial Intelligence Research Request
January 9, 2024
By Nikki Koehlert 
 --> 
 OHS Reference Librarian Nikki Koehlert recently received an inquiry from a researcher who was assisted by artificial intelligence (AI) technology. The request led to an interesting journey through historical newspapers and a cautionary tale of the trustworthiness of this new technology. Photo by OHS staff.
 Recently, the Oregon Historical Society’s research library received its first known reference inquiry made with the assistance of ChatGPT. This interaction prompted me to wonder what this all will mean for the future of reference services. In the case of this inquiry, a wild goose chase resulted in some interesting discoveries and more questions.
 So, what is ChatGPT? Chat Generative Pre-Trained Transformer is a language processing tool driven by artificial intelligence (AI) technology that allows users to have human-like conversations with a chatbot. This type of language-model AI can answer questions and assist with tasks, such as composing emails, essays, and writing code. ChatGPT uses the information it learned from data it’s been fed (large collections of text data from billions of publicly available webpages) to generate responses, which can inevitably leave room for error. Why? Because while this technology has been fed a large corpus of data, it is very much technology in its infancy, and has not been fed all the data in the world. Full disclosure, I initially did not know that the reference request I was responding to was, in part, formulated with the aid of AI. This is an excerpt from the initial communication I received:
 I am trying to find the newspaper clip from the Oregon Daily Journal entitled “Hindoo Wedding Performed in Astoria,” which was published on May 31, 1915. I tried searching Newspapers.com (the archive by Ancestry) and couldn’t find anything. I’m interested in learning more about the wedding of Dr. Raja Williams and Miss Blanche Singh, and any other context around those 2 individuals and their histories before and after their wedding. Do you have any information about these topics readily available?
 The burning question that kickstarted this research was about the first Indian American wedding shared in the U.S. media. In reviewing this request, I thought this would be a quick task that would consist of verifying the existence of the newspaper article and looking for any resources we might have related to the persons named. After looking specifically for an Oregon Daily Journal article with that particular title on the date provided, I received zero search results. I began to broaden the search, by expanding the date range and looking at other Oregon newspapers, but still no search result came up with an article bearing that same title or documenting either of the two people who supposedly got married in 1915.
 I reported back to the researcher that I was not able to find the specific article title, nor any record of a “Blanche Singh or Raja Williams” much less a Hindu wedding in Astoria (or any other part of Oregon). I saw in many searches for the two names, that there was a Blanche Williams (a Methodist singer who performed as a duet with her sister Ethel Williams) who appeared in many newspapers in the 1910s. 
 When researching a request to verify an AI-generated source of information, the name Blanche Williams appeared in the “Crook County Journal” on July 10, 1913, but she was not associated with a Hindu wedding, nor was she reported as marrying Raja Williams.
 “Blanche Williams,” “Astoria,” and “Singh” appeared in several Oregon newspapers between the 1910s and 1920s, but not in the same story. I found mentions in several Oregon newspapers of Sikh wrestlers Basanta Singh and Dodan Singh. Sikhs (often misrepresented as “Hindu” or “Hindoo” at the time) settled in Astoria and worked primarily in timber mills and among immigrants from China, Poland, and Sweden during the late nineteenth and early twentieth century. I also came across some newspaper advertisements mentioning “Hindoo weddings,” but those mostly consisted of theatrical performances.
 Several Oregon newspapers included mentions of Sikh wrestlers Basanta Singh and Dodan Singh in the 1910s and 1920s. This ad appeared in the “Morning Oregonian” on October 10, 1910.
 I asked the researcher where they got the names of the bride and groom from, and the source of the specific newspaper article. That’s when they informed me that ChatGPT was the source that mentioned the Williams-Singh wedding. This was the response from ChatGPT to the researcher’s prompt “What was the first Hindu wedding in U.S. media?”:
 Since the wedding of Dr. Raja Williams and Miss Blanche Singh took place over a hundred years ago, it may be difficult to find detailed information about the event. However, there are some historical records and news articles that you may be able to access online or through libraries and archives.
 One article about the wedding that you may be interested in reading is “Hindoo Wedding Performed in Astoria,” which was published in the Oregon Daily Journal on May 31, 1915. This article describes the wedding ceremony and includes details about the decorations, attire, and guests in attendance.
 Additionally, the Oregon Historical Society may have more information about the wedding and the historical context surrounding it. You may also want to consult with local libraries or archives in Astoria or in the state of Oregon to see if they have any records or documents related to the wedding.
 Note that ChatGPT took a question about the first Hindu wedding reported in the U.S. media and generated an article title in quotations from a specific newspaper on a particular date. The results were alarming but not surprising. Librarians, archivists, and teachers are starting to share widely their experiences with AI generating false source citations. As an information professional, this occurrence is very disconcerting; my job is to assist researchers in navigating catalogs and databases to find the location of reliable primary and secondary resources.
 While searching through newspapers and verifying information found on The Oregon Encyclopedia and in the Oregon Historical Quarterly , I noticed a pattern that may shed some light on ChatGPT’s response to the researcher’s prompt. In Oregon newspapers from the 1910s, particularly the Daily Astorian , I saw that on the same pages the names “Williams,” “Blanche,” “Singh,” “Raja,” and the words “wedding” or “Hindoo,” however, they were all unrelated. The words may have all appeared on the same page, but they were not related. ChatGPT tied the words together; it found a repeated pattern and produced a conclusion, but that conclusion was not based in fact.
 The highlighted phrases on page two from the “Oregonian” on August 27, 1916, represent the search terms “Williams,” “Blanche,” “Singh,” and “Wedding,” but are all found in unrelated articles.
 ChatGPT can generate a probable response to a prompt, but not all of the responses may be factual. It is a great lesson to keep in mind when using this budding technology. Will this tool get smarter? Yes, but we’re not quite there yet. As it exists in its current form, AI still lacks the ability to think critically or synthesize data the way the human mind can. Knowing that this tool is being more widely used is motivation for librarians to tailor their reference interviews to include a question about whether a researcher has used AI technology — and to incorporate information literacy into their research toolkits.
 As a new reference librarian at OHS, this research request was a great way for me to become better acquainted with the history of Astoria’s diverse community in the early twentieth century. Sometimes you don’t know what direction a research request will lead, but you learn something new every day, and often that trail will connect to the research focus of another patron as your understanding of history builds and deepens.
 This image and article is an early example of a Hindu wedding found during research for this reference inquiry, which was reported in the “Evening Herald” on September 29, 1916.
 Further Reading
 Johanna Ogden. “East Indians of Oregon and the Ghadar Party.” The Oregon Encyclopedia, https://www.oregonencyclopedia.org/articles/east_indians_of_oregon_and_the_ghadar_party/ (accessed December 18, 2023).
 Johanna Ogden. “Ghadar, Historical Silences and Notions of Belonging: Early 1900s Punjabis of the Columbia River.” Oregon Historical Quarterly (Summer of 2012): 164-197 https://www.ohs.org/oregon-historical-quarterly/upload/03_113_02_Ogden_Ghadar.pdf (accessed January 5, 2024).
 Harish K. Puri. Ghadar Movement: Ideology, Organisation & Strategy . Amritsar, Guru Nanak De University, 1983.
 Nyan Shah. Stranger Intimacy: Contesting Race, Sexuality, and the Law in the North American West . Berkeley, University of California Press, 2011.
 Categories: 
 Staff Reflections Audience(s): Educators and Students , Industry Professionals , Researchers , Visitors 
 Tags: 
 Adventures in Research , Research tools , Library , Rabbit hole 
 Nikki Koehlert’s Other Posts
 Chronicles from the Research Library: The First West Coast Public Library?
 July 16, 2024 
 Adventures in Research: Oregon’s Social Hygiene Crusades
 April 9, 2024 
 Chronicles from the Research Library: A New Blog Series
 August 8, 2023 
 Related Content
 Why the OHS Research Library Matters — Now More Than Ever 
 OHS’s former library director, Geoff Wexler, makes the...
 Learn More > 
 East Indians of Oregon and the Ghadar Party 
 In the early twentieth century, five to six hundred men...
 Learn More 
 Ghadar, Historical Silences, and Notions of Belonging 
 Historian Johanna Ogden explores the often overlooked...
 Free Download > 
 White Right and Labor Organizing in Oregon’s “Hindu City” 
 In March 1910, anti-Indian violence erupted in St....
 Free Download > 
 The views expressed in user comments do not reflect the views of OHS. The Oregon Historical Society does not participate in political campaigns, nor do we support or oppose candidates.
 The Oregon Historical Society preserves our state’s history and makes it accessible to everyone in ways that advance knowledge and inspire curiosity about all the people, places, and events that have shaped Oregon.
 Contact Us
 Oregon Historical Society 
1200 SW Park Ave 
Portland, OR 97205
 503.222.1741 
 orhist@ohs.org 
 Staff Directory 
 Support OHS
 The Oregon Historical Society is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization. Federal Tax ID 93-0391599.
 Make a Gift 
 Become A Member 
 Donate to Collections 
 Venue Rental 
 Visit the Museum
 Closed for Labor Day, Monday, September 7 
 Monday – Saturday:
10am – 5pm
Sunday: 12pm – 5pm 
 Plan Your Visit 
 Visit the Library
 Tuesday: 1pm – 5pm
Wednesday – Saturday:
10am – 5pm 
 Learn More 
 Newsletter
 Sign up for our e-digest to get Oregon history in your inbox every week!
 Enter your email 
 Follow Us
 Facebook 
 Instagram 
 YouTube 
 Get Involved
 Volunteer Opportunities 
 Employment 
 Contact OHS Privacy Policy 
 © Copyright 2015 - 2026 Oregon Historical Society
 