film / 
 tv / 
 politics /
 social media / 
 lists 
 celeb /
 pajiba love / 
 misc / 
 about / 
 cbr 

 film / 
 tv / 
 politics /
 web / 
 celeb 

 George RR Martin's Editor Does a Q&A (But Doesn't Have the Answer You Want)

 By Genevieve Burgess | Game of Thrones | May 30, 2014 | 

 By Genevieve Burgess | Game of Thrones | May 30, 2014 | 

 If there’s anything Game of Thrones readers like more than nit-picking what parts of the show don’t line up with the books, it’s debating when (or if) the next books in the series will come out. Yesterday George R.R. Martin’s editor, Anne Groell, did a Q&A session for Suvudu where she revealed some information about the process for the previous books, how the series came to a (tentative) number of seven books, and what she has on The Winds of Winter . It’s spoiler-ish for the books, though not overly so. You can read the whole interview here but if you’re in a hurry, here’s the highlights: 

 1. On The Winds of Winter : “For TWOW, when I have a date, you will have a date. I’m now on Twitter, Del Rey Spectra has a number of social media platforms, and I promise you we will put the word out as soon as we know. All I can say is that George is hard at work, and we hope to have it reasonably soon. I currently have 168 pages that he submitted back in Feb 2013 in order to receive a contracted payment, but I know more exists, because he keeps talking about chapter he hasn’t yet sent me.”

 2. Three battles were cut from A Dance With Dragons for length and for writing time. She states that had the battles been left in, the book would have to be divided again, and Martin would still be writing. At least one of those battles would have been in Meereen. 

 3. Unlike the producers of the television series, she does not know how things are going to end. 

 4. While she was pregnant with her first child, both Martin and author Connie Willis were late getting manuscripts to her. Martin proposed that whoever delivered first should get to name the baby, and Groell declined on the basis that she wouldn’t want Martin naming her kid. Connie Willis won, getting her manuscript in two months before Groell delivered her baby. The child was 2 ½ years old before Martin had his manuscript in. 

 5. She has tried to convince him to write on a laptop instead of only on his home computer. Apparently it hasn’t worked. 

 6. The repeated phrase she tried to cut back on in A Dance With Dragons was “words are wind” (which appears 14 times) but Martin was “stubborn.” No word on niello, nuncle, neeps, little and less, nipples on a breastplate, or other distracting words or phrases. 

 7. She took two weeks to do the initial edit on A Dance With Dragons , most of which was back-checking information from previous books. With the new app connected to the series, she hopes to get the initial editing time for the next book down to a week.

 I realize there’s not much hope here for the book readers, but frankly any fans of this series hanging onto hope haven’t been paying attention. 

 ← 
 The 10 Most Promising New Shows of the Summer 2014 |

 Some Photos From The Next Episode Of 'Game Of Thrones' To Make You Tremble 
 → 

 More Like This 

 Is 'Flowers in the Attic' Based on a True Story? 

 The Best, Most Harrowing Valentine's Day Miracle Story You Will Ever Read (2022 Update) 

 HBO Max Is Even More Terrible in Latin America, and I Can't and Won't Live Without It 

 'Green Lantern' Casting: Him, Really? Also Morbius News 

 Pull Out Your Black Eyeliner And Leather Pants: 'The World of Darkness' Is Coming To TV and Film 

 Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus. 

 The News Feed 

 Tom Hanks Is Not Trying To Sell You Drugs 

 Three Trailers: What Happened Before Rosemary's Baby, and Zoe Saldaña In Her Own Skin 

 Jack White Threatens 'Fascists' In Donald Trump's Campaign With A Lawsuit 

 Taylor Swift Has a Brittany Mahomes Problem 

 'The Acolyte's Amandla Stenberg Got Thrown to the Wolves 

 Christina Aguilera Thinks It’s ‘Corny’ When Celebrities ‘Do Things Intentionally’ to Stay Relevant 

 Pajiba Love 

 Taylor Swift Has a Brittany Mahomes Problem 

 Reviews 

 Review: ‘Greedy People’ Really Wants to be a Coen Brothers Film When it Grows Up 

 Review: Sweet Sticky 'Strange Darling' Is Rom-Com For Psychopaths 

 ‘Evil’ Is Over 

 Spoilers: 'The Umbrella Academy' Pulled Off A Great Ending (Even If Nobody Likes It) 

 Review: 'Alien: Romulus' Falls Into A Black Hole Of Fan Service 

 film 

 tv 

 politics 

 social media 

 lists 

 celeb 

 pajiba love 

 misc 

 cbr 

 about us 

 privacy policy 

 advertise 

 © 2007-2024 Scathing Websites, LLC. All rights reserved. 

Please enable JavaScript to view the 

comments powered by Disqus.
