Boldly to Re-Venture:
New Writing on the Works of
Ursula K. Le Guin
Sylvia A. Kelso
James Cook University, Townsville, North Queensland, Australia
Introducing a critical volume on Ursula K. Le Guin in 2008 is a task 
that, to outrageously misappropriate a famous Australian poem, well 
might make the boldest hold “his” breath. Given the current accumulation 
of journal articles, essay collections, and full-length books on Le 
Guin’s work, bold indeed must be the soul who dares assume the usual 
omniscient, omnipotent editorial voice, implying that he or she has not 
only read all the original texts, but all the secondary work, and now 
knows better enough to pontificate upon it all.
It hardly seems necessary to supply the obligatory career sketch with 
an author like Le Guin: especially since said author is currently garnering 
starred reviews for Lavinia, a return to the historical novel, last seen 
from her with Malafrena (1979), which, we usually assume, grew out 
of the Orsinian tales composed in her oldest imagined country of all. 
Nevertheless, between There and Here intervenes a writing span of more 
than half a century, if we include those early unpublished inventions, not 
only studded with notable works, but in my view, growing stronger as it 
goes. The nearest parallel I can find is W. B. Yeats, whose fruitful span 
is also astonishing, and whose work “improves,” from the melopoeia 
of the “Celtic Twilight” and classics like “The Sally Gardens,” to the 
bareboned landmarks of final poems like “Under Ben Bulben.” Nor 
is it difficult to apply to Le Guin, as is so often done with Yeats, the 
adjective “great.”
It’s personally heartening to me, a late starter in publication, that 
over ten years of that writing span lie before Cele Goldsmith published 
“April in Paris” in 1962. Any writer would hope to emulate the ensuing 
progress: five, six short stories appearing in the mid ‘60s, along with 
three novels, before the quantum leap in 1969. The short story “Winter’s 
King,” the prelude, in so many senses, to The Left Hand of Darkness.
Nor does it seem necessary to labour  Left Hand’s import. Le Guin’s 
first Hugo and Nebula awards—so affirming to a young writer, as she 
noted in a recent interview (Chee, “Breaking”)—the visibility the novel 
brought to SF as a whole, when a literary luminary like Harold Bloom 
edited the first collection of critical essays; most importantly, perhaps, to 
Paradoxa, No. 21 2008
Paradoxa, No. 21, 2008
Sylvia a. KelSo
8
Le Guin as well as to others, her first public engagement with feminism, 
and her first visibility to feminists.
More gallons of ink must have been expended on Left Hand of 
Darkness than any other Le Guin opus, except perhaps The Dispossessed 
(1974). The blaze of attention has tended to mask her other remarkable 
achievements of the ‘70s. Stories that have become SF classics, like 
“Vaster than Empires and more Slow (1971), “The Day before the 
Revolution”(1974), and of course, “The Ones Who Walk Away from 
Omelas”(1973). Cheek by jowl with Left Hand , the first Earthsea 
trilogy—I shall use editorial force majeure here to apply Darko Suvin’s 
suggestion that the later Earthsea books form a second series—then 
The Lathe of Heaven (1971), The Word for World is Forest (1972), and 
in the middle, The Dispossessed itself. Beyond that, The Language of 
the Night (1979) establishing Le Guin’s lyrical, unruly, and individual 
critical voice with essays like “From Elfland to Poughkeepsie,” “Science 
Fiction and Mrs. Brown,” and “Why Americans Are Afraid of Dragons.” 
Also Orsinian Tales (1976), and a book of poetry, Wild Angels (1974)… 
does the woman ever eat or sleep?
Not, apparently, in the ‘80s, which produced another critical collection, 
Dancing at the Edge of the World (1989) with such pieces as “The Carrier 
Bag Theory of Fiction.” Short stories are assembled in The Compass 
Rose (1982), with such memorable inclusions as “The New Atlantis” 
and “The Author of the Acacia Seeds,” then the further collection, 
Buffalo Gals (1987), which to stories of “Animal Presences” added the 
viewpoint of rocks, or in “View of the Road,” trees.
Along with these come two further poetry books, and the novels The 
Eye of the Heron (1983), when Le Guin herself judges she first made 
the full transition to a female-centred novel (Chee, “Breaking”), and the 
major achievement of the decade, Always Coming Home (1985), a work 
where Utopian social thoughts unite, at last, with a Utopic experiment 
in form.
At this point most writers would be resting on their laurels. Not Le 
Guin. The ‘90s open with the first of the two new Earthsea novels, 
Tehanu (1990), in itself a major achievement, topped by The Other 
Wind (2001), which rewrites not merely Earthsea’s gender politics but 
its cosmology, as the series moves into its most powerful resistance to 
Le Guin’s longtime model, the binary oppositions of Jung and the Tao. 
These traditional hierarchies of light/dark, male/female, white/black, 
good/bad, now turn emphatically on their archetypal heads.
 Along the way, we have five story collections, including Tales from 
Earthsea (2001), the “back-stories” of both Earthsea trilogies, Searoad 
(1991) Le Guin’s “realist” variations on Living in Oregon, Four Ways 
New writiNg oN the works of UrsUla k. le gUiN
9
to Forgiveness (1995), with its notable novellas, and two more. Oh, yes, 
did I mention the three books of poetry, the book of criticism, Steering 
the Craft (1998), and the translations, one from Spanish, the other of that 
proverbial mind-cracker in both Chinese and European critical milieux, 
the Tao Te Ching …?
Nor is the hard-pressed critical commentator allowed to relax in the 
21st Century. So far we have another book of poetry, Incredible Good 
Fortune (2006), two more Spanish translations, the critical collection 
The Wave in the Mind (2004), with Le Guin’s thoughts on the importance 
of rhythm, in particular; and two story collections, The Birthday of the 
World (2002) and the suite of post-modern parables, Changing Planes 
(2003). To open the millennium on the novel front, we have The Telling, 
in 2000, followed by the Annals of the Western Shore. Gifts (2004), 
Voices (2006) and Powers (2007)—categorized as YA, but as unlike 
most of the works scrambling to slipstream behind Harry Potter as any 
text could be. And in 2008, Lavinia, which tells the second woman’s 
story running beside The Aeneid—not unhappy Dido’s, but that of the 
woman Aeneas did marry.
The critical commentary is beginning to rival that on the Tao Te 
Ching . From here I discern some three critical generations, and 
three distinguishable though not mutually inaccessible faces, to use 
a geographical metaphor, by which critics and theorists most often 
approach the oeuvre that comprises Mt. Le Guin.
Notable from the beginning has been the Taoist face, first mapped, 
perhaps, by Douglas Barbour in 1973. Unearthing evidence of the 
Tao’s presence and function in Le Guin’s oeuvre  is an ongoing critical 
enterprise, as in Dena C. Bain’s and Elizabeth Cummins’ (then Cogell) 
1970s work, soon supplemented by critiquing uses of the Tao in Le Guin. 
At this point the Taoist face may also be traversed by feminist critics.
As second-wave feminist thought has worked on the philosophical 
underpinnings of women’s oppression, the question of binaries and 
superior/inferior oppositions has been a lasting focus. And since Taoism 
is so apparently thoroughly binary, Le Guin’s long fidelity to its imagery 
and its paradigms has collected some serious flak along with simple 
explorations and explanations. An article by Jewell Parker Rhodes in 
the late ‘80s, which actually targeted the use of the androgyne in Left 
Hand of Darkness, also pointed out the problems with a binary that can 
simplify and essentialize a man/woman opposition that ‘80s feminists 
were eagerly, angrily, or desperately finding had already fractured into 
Women. As Audre Lord asked Mary Daly at the end of the ‘70s, Who 
you calling Woman, white girl?
Sylvia a. KelSo
10
The feminist face of Mt. Le Guin is one of the most frequently 
traversed, from the early strictures of Joanna Russ on that male/female 
hero in Left Hand of Darkness (90-91) to the pointed remarks of Sarah 
Le Fanu in the ‘80s on the dead weight of the liberal humanist hero at 
the centre of the great ‘70s novels (137). Despite Le Guin’s own public 
espousal of feminism, and its often militant infiltration of her work 
from Left Hand on, as feminism has diversified, among the praise, so 
have the critiques.
Most frequently, such critiques centre on Le Guin’s enduring 
heterosexuality, her determination that love, usually heterosexual, can 
bridge even galaxies, and what she herself has called the central topic of 
her work: marriage (“Introduction to Planet of Exile,” 143). Outliers such 
as Elyce Helford, using post-colonial as well as feminist theory, have 
complained about what appears appropriation of non-white cultures, 
as Le Guin herself attempts to redress the not always repressed racial 
bias in, particularly, SF.
Among these critiques, essentialism is not infrequently mentioned, 
especially from the ‘90s on. First Woman had to become Women, then, 
in the burgeoning field of masculinity studies, Man almost at once 
became Men. I myself find that some of Le Guin’s more exhilarating 
essays produce a certain draft of second thoughts up the back of the neck. 
“The Carrier Bag Theory of Fiction” is a good case. It’s very righteously 
valorizing to think that WE, by virtue of our mere sex, don’t produce 
those tales “starting here and going straight there and THOK!” (169) as 
heroes’, and by implication men’s stories do. That we, out “wrest[ing] 
a wild-oat seed from its husk, and then another” (165) could produce 
the novel like a “medicine bundle” (169) that Le Guin herself sewed so 
brilliantly in Always Coming Home.
But, memory ripostes, is all men’s work so linear? What, for instance, 
about Laurence Sterne? The last thing Tristram Shandy does is go from 
here to there…. Even more uncomfortably, there’s Homer, and after 
him, Vergil. “In medias res” was coined for Greek and Roman epics, 
the template of “heroic” tales. Those loops may not be a carrier bag, 
but a (human) appendix, perhaps? And there’s always the grand-daddy 
of modern novels, with those wanderings of Don Quixote; not to even 
begin mentioning modern novelists like Robbe-Grillet.
There has been rather less critique on the third face of Mt Le Guin, 
which the Utopists map. Here too, there was much early unearthing 
of sources, as with the anarchism of Kropotkin (Smith), and siting, 
particularly of The Dispossessed, among the famous ‘70s SF heterotopias 
and “critical” Utopias (Moylan, Somay) The second generation, 
following very short upon if not overlapping the first, began to critique 
New writiNg oN the works of UrsUla k. le gUiN
11
aspects of The Dispossessed, in particular its heterosexuality, as with 
Samuel Delany’s pioneering “To Read The Dispossessed ” (1977). 
Numerous commentators have followed, whose debates frequently 
spill over onto the mountain’s feminist face. An entire recent collection, 
reviewed by Mike Cadden in this volume, debates the possibly bourgeois 
nature of The Dispossessed.
As these expeditions continue, a variety of new climbing tools—I 
am unable to resist this slightly passé extension of the metaphor—have 
appeared, from post-colonialism to queer theory as well as masculinity 
studies, and eco-feminist or other environmentally based approaches. Le 
Guin specialists, such as Elizabeth Cummins, Mike Cadden, and Warren 
Rochelle, have emerged, whose scholarly focus has been largely on her texts. 
Indeed, Mt. Le Guin is beginning to resemble Beowulf in Tolkien’s essay, 
“The Monsters and the Critics”: a massive site—not, in this case, a ruin—that 
provides an inexhaustible source of academic building material (8).
Reading for this volume, I also began to discern the three critical 
generations adumbrated above. Though these blend and overlap, the 
first includes pioneering approaches and source identification, among 
which should also be counted Le Guin’s entry in the first anthology 
of feminist SF criticism, Marleen Barr’s Future Females (1981). The 
second generation, who began to debate and critique earlier with Russ 
and Delany, is now extending into the third, who, just as Beowulf is 
being re-read against post-modern theories, are coming to scale the faces 
and re-view the famous prospects of Mt. Le Guin with new voices, and 
sometimes, different tools.
Le Guin’s international standing appears in the history of this volume. 
The first call for papers brought responses from academics and non-
academics across three continents. Beyond the US, abstracts and proposals 
came from the UK, from Sweden, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Hong Kong, 
and Australia. At least two of the essays here use English as a second or 
even third language, and some of their authors have read or are studying 
Le Guin in second language programs in non-English universities.
Deliberately, the scope of the volume also exceeds the purely academic. 
At its heart, we have a new essay from Le Guin herself, “Living in a 
Work of Art,” an aesthetic/philosophical pondering on beauty, and 
whether beauty might instill moral awareness, especially if encountered 
in youth. These thoughts spring from a memoir that opens a door—yes, 
the metaphor is also deliberate—on Le Guin’s own youth: the experience 
of growing up in a Maybeck house in San Francisco, a house where 
early and continuous experience of aesthetic beauty may foster an 
expectation of order and harmony that might in turn lead to an active 
desire for moral clarity.
Sylvia a. KelSo
12
As a direct foil to Le Guin’s essay comes April Kendra’s memoir, “On 
Almost Meeting Le Guin.” Kendra speaks for all those readers who have 
discovered, cherished, lived with and loved Le Guin’s work, but will 
never reach—or want to reach—the public forum of an academic article 
to convey what she means to them. Kendra expresses the compelling 
urges, on the one hand to pass that feeling back to the writer, and on 
the other, the sheer overpowering terror—it’s not too strong a word—of 
meeting such a writer in the flesh.
At the other end of the spectrum, a Le Guin specialist lifts the mask 
of academic anonymity to tell how her work has shaped his life. Warren 
Rochelle’s “fan-letter” is an exemplary mix of the personal, the academic, 
and the political, and a fitting closure, I feel, to this volume’s essays.
The properly academic essays form two sections bracketing the 
personal “Interludes.” It’s notable that of our original proposals, four 
wanted to work on The Lathe of Heaven, more than on any other single 
work, while three had in mind a mixture of Lathe and Left Hand of 
Darkness.  The section on Earlier Work opens with a Marxist/Utopian 
reading of The Dispossessed, as the culmination of a theoretical essay 
from a founder of SF theory, Darko Suvin. There can be very few 
academics working on SF who have not, at some point, used some of 
Darko’s ideas, from “cognitive estrangement” to “the novum” and on. 
This essay is a notable addition to his oeuvre.
As a foil to Suvin’s “Cognition,” we have Beth Snowberger’s essay on 
The Lathe of Heaven and The Dispossessed, reaching a very different 
position on Mt. Le Guin after traversing much the same ground, applying 
not merely new theoretical tools, but new tools drawn direct from 
science. In this case, superstring theory. This essay made one referee, a 
quantum physicist, actually go out and read The Dispossessed.
Amy Clarke supplies another new voice with her third generation 
feminist reading of the entire Earthsea series, a succinct and also up-
to-date handling of cruces that feminist critics have discussed for years. 
Then Vera Benczik re-visits The Left Hand of Darkness, where, using 
no particularly new theoretical tools, she nevertheless achieves a fresh 
vista on that much traced journey over the ice. The third generation in 
all these essays is particularly evident in the references. Clarke, Keating 
and Snowberger all cite Suvin on Le Guin; Benczik and Keating cite 
Barbour and Bain; Suvin himself cites a current female professor of 
philosophy, Katherine Z. Elgin.
The fourth new voice in the group also ascends a very familiar face, but 
with an approach of unusual depth. Kathy Keating re-views The Lathe 
of Heaven via a discussion of Taoist thought that first contextualizes and 
then engages the I Ching, the “oracular” older work behind the Tao te 
New writiNg oN the works of UrsUla k. le gUiN
13
Ching and Chuang Tzu. The consequent reading of Lathe, especially in 
its relation of narrative movement and structure to the I Ching’s sense 
of “change” and the method of reading its hexagrams, breaks genuinely 
new ground in Le Guin criticism.
After the “Interlude” comes a section on Newer Work, where well-
known SF critic Rich Erlich examines the satirical elements in Always 
Coming Home, with particular interest in attacks on monotheism. To 
Le Guin, it appears, as to Donna Haraway, “One is too few, and two 
is only one possibility” (180). Such possibilities appear in the work of 
other third-generation critics, firstly as Linda Wight sites the suite of 
stories in “The Matter of Seggri” (1993) against previous feminist SF 
texts using the trope of separatism. She does not completely endorse Le 
Guin’s attempt to show how gender inequity can oppress men as well 
as women, but the essay sites “Seggri” discerningly in the ongoing field 
of both masculinity studies and feminist SF.
Howard Sklar, in contrast, bases a study of Le Guin’s writing 
skills upon reader-response theory. He discusses the concepts of and 
differences between empathy and sympathy, and then provides an 
illuminating reading of the novella “Betrayals” (1994) from Four Ways 
to Forgiveness. Kasi Jackson, in contrast, examines Le Guin’s animal 
stories against a history of feminist debates over the praxis and theory 
of science, which moves from animal behaviour in specific to science 
in general, with the work of Karen Barad and Donna Haraway, casting 
light on a theoretical field along with the stories to which it is applied.
Donna Haraway makes a differently inflected appearance in Jenny 
Gal-Or’s performative reading of “Newton’s Sleep”(1991). Here the 
essay takes on the diffractive, fracturing, boundary-blurring nature of 
Haraway’s style as well as her agenda, as Gal-Or demonstrates Le Guin’s 
fictional fulfillment of Haraway’s ideas. Equally feminist, but working 
from detailed comparisons of Le Guin’s texts and Robert Scott’s account 
of the Discovery voyage, Traci Thomas-Card shows precisely how, in 
the frequently anthologized “Sur”(1983), Le Guin critiqued, undercut 
and deconstructed the archetype of the Polar explorer, and at least one 
concept of heroism.
In the process Thomas-Card often cites Marleen Barr’s study of “Sur.” 
And with a combination of new Le Guin text and first-generation critical 
voice, Marleen Barr herself reads Changing Planes against the changing 
planes, in both senses, of New York, the US, and the world in general 
after 9/11. Barr’s knowledge of fiction both inside and outside SF, her 
enthusiasm for Le Guin’s work, and her very pertinent comparison to 
another pattern-maker, needle-worker Ita Aber, provide a fitting finale 
for the purely academic sections.
Sylvia a. KelSo
14
There are gaps not unnaturally left in (re)viewing such a prolific author. 
We have no essay, due to illness and other problems, on Le Guin’s 
poetry, or/and her translation, as the two converge in her work with 
Gabriela Mistral’s poems. We have nothing on her children’s books, or 
the position of her essays in the now formidable fields of SF or feminist 
SF criticism. We have nothing on later work such as The Telling, or the 
Annals of the Western Shore. Limited by space and time from tackling 
these projects, I found my own thoughts turning to the importance of 
rhythm to and in Le Guin’s work as a whole.
Rhythm, as opposed to scansion, eludes most contemporary critical 
frames. It is not susceptible to ideological analysis, cultural or gender 
theory, and attempts to relate it to race can produce alarming stereotypes. 
One theoretical foothold is Julia Kristeva’s post-Lacanian formulation 
of language as two “dispositions” (133): the “symbolic” or “attribute 
of meaning” (134), which is continually invaded by the “semiotic.” For 
Kristeva this springs from pre-Oedipal drives (136-7) which perpetually 
disrupt the symbolic, particularly with rhythm: poetic language produces 
a “pulsation of sign and rhythm,” (139), a fracturing, like Celine’s 
ellipses (141) that “impose a music, a rhythm,” which can “wipe out 
sense” (142. Nevertheless, the symbolic can never be completely erased 
(134). Purely semiotic utterances are literal non-sense.
Two essays from The Wave in the Mind indicate Le Guin’s longstanding 
interest in this difficult and nebulous topic. The first uses rhythm to define 
the central structural unit in The Lord of the Rings, reading the finished 
text at the level of part, chapter and incident (98-107). Most critical 
discussion of rhythm operates either at this level, or by close reading 
sentences and paragraphs, which I soon found sliding toward aesthetic 
judgements and discussion of vocabulary, rhythm’s Siamese twin.
Despite these tendencies, such analysis finds a rich field in Le Guin’s 
work. But in this example, rhythm at sentence level foreshadows the 
tenor of the work as a whole:
Current-borne, wave-flung, tugged hugely by the whole might 
of ocean, the jellyfish drifts in the tidal abyss. (Lathe of Heaven, 
7)
The sentence’s four opposing blocks, two compound adjectives, two 
clauses, echo the rhythm of ocean on beach: Here—and-back. Here—
and-back. But this continued change within continuity, of dynamic 
alternations and oppositions, is also the pattern of the yin/yang dynamic 
as Kathy Keating reads it in the I Ching. And her reading argues that 
this is the overall structure of Lathe of Heaven, where change occurs, 
New writiNg oN the works of UrsUla k. le gUiN
15
and re-occurs, and re-occurs again, fluidly, unexpectedly, in the “same” 
places, yet never entirely the same.
At the same time, the two compound adjectives and “tidal abyss,” 
“tugged hugely,” lean to the more “embroidered,” to use Yeats’ term, 
side of vocabulary. Elsewhere Lathe reaches a contrasting simplicity:
… they made love. Love doesn’t just sit there, like a stone, it has 
to be made, like bread; re-made all the time, made new. (136)
Here too the rephrased repetition echoes the central motif. But the 
closing clauses, rhythmically necessary, actually detract slightly from 
the antithesis of bread and stone, and the entirely homely simile.
Words and rhythm blend more perfectly later, this time in a literal 
vision:
I can stand here in the old pasture where there’s nothing but sun 
and rain, wild oats and thistles and crazy salsify, no cattle grazing, 
only deer, stand here and shut my eyes and see: the dancing place, 
the stepped pyramid roofs, a moon of beaten copper on a high 
pole over the Obsidian. If I listen, can I hear voices with the inner 
ear? Could you hear voices, Schliemann, in the streets of Troy? 
If you did, you were crazy too. The Trojans had all been dead 
three thousand years. Which is farther from us, farther out of 
reach, more silent—the dead, or the unborn? Those whose bones 
lie under the thistles and the dirt and the tombstones of the Past, 
or those who slip weightless among molecules, dwelling where 
a century passes in a day, among the fair folk, under the great, 
bell-curved Hill of Possibility? (Always Coming Home 4)
Here there are no rhythmic superfluities. The long opening clause checks 
into the shortening phrases that throw up first the whole section’s motif, 
the wild oats, then brake to a heavy pause with the colon at “see.” Then 
the actual vision appears, returning through a triple of lengthening 
syntactic units to the run that ends with a singing polysyllable “on a 
high pole over the Obsidian.”
A series of shorter sentences bring a turn of aspect, from Here to There, 
to Troy and the past, and the central, unpunctuated statements that end 
with the roll, reminiscent of Urn Burial , of “three thousand years.” 
After which the paragraph moves into its final rhetoric, another mix of 
simple and polysyllabic words, “thistles,” “dirt” “tombstones,” and the 
rhythm begins to lift with “slip weightless among molecules” to the 
small sections bringing the polysyllable that closes both paragraph and 
Sylvia a. KelSo
16
image in an echo of “Obsidian,” as it underlines the bravura flourish of 
“bell-curved,” on the Hill of “Possibility.”
Like Yeats, Le Guin does seem to move toward simplicity, or at least 
austerity, in both the rhythm and content of her later work. As Always 
Coming Home opens among wild oats and thistles, A Wizard of Earthsea 
starts among village goats. But such is a beginning is traditional for 
fantasy heroes, as is Ged’s prompt move to higher things. Magic. Palaces. 
Wizard schools. Tehanu, on the other hand, starts in farm-life, descending 
at times to the edge of poverty, and the austerity of a few goats, and a 
patch of bean vines (251-52), is where it ends.
At the same time, Tehanu can show the skill of experience making 
less do more, rather than more do more, as in the previous quote. Here 
is a key “data dump” between Tenar and Moss:
‘Dearie,’ she said, ‘a man, you mean, a wizardly man? 
What’s a man of power to do with us?’
‘But Ogion –’
‘Lord Ogion was kind,’ Moss said without irony.
They split rushes for a while in silence.
‘Don’t cut your thumb on ‘em, dearie,’ Moss said. After 
which ‘Ogion taught me. As if I weren’t a girl. As if I’d been his 
prentice, like Sparrowhawk. He taught me the Language of the 
Making, Moss. What I asked him, he told me.’
‘There wasn’t no other like him.’
‘It was I who wouldn’t be taught. I left him. What did I want 
with his books? … I wanted to live, I wanted a man, I wanted 
my children, I wanted my life.’
She split reeds neatly, quickly, with her nail.
‘And I got it,’ she said.
‘Take with the right hand, throw away with the left,’ the 
witch said. ‘Well, dearie mistress, who’s to say? Wanting a man 
got me into awful troubles more than once. But wanting to get 
married, never! No, no. None of that for me.’
‘Why not?’ Tenar demanded. 
Taken aback, Moss said simply, ‘Why dear, what man’d 
marry a witch?’ And then, with a sidelong chewing motion of 
her jaw, like a sheep shifting its cud. ‘And what witch’d marry 
a man?’
They split rushes. (Tehanu, 55-56.)
Where playwrights can score dialogue with significant silences, writers 
have to rely on “business”—more words. So here the apparently trivial 
New writiNg oN the works of UrsUla k. le gUiN
17
“women’s” occupation of splitting rushes for baskets operates as a 
suite of variations to indicate pause and emphasis, which the rhythm 
underscores. The first leisurely, “They split rushes for a while in silence,” 
quickens to the snaps, echoing Tenar’s emotion, of “neatly, quickly, with 
her nail.” Then, “They split rushes,” cuts this phase of the scene with a 
brevity only foreshadowed in the “simple” quote from Lathe.
In contrast is Kalessin’s first arrival, emerging from Tenar’s reverie 
on the cliff:
She watched the slow beat of the wings, far out in the dazzling 
air. Then she got to her feet, retreating a little from the cliff’s 
edge, and stood motionless, her heart going hard and her breath 
caught in her throat, watching the sinuous, iron-dark body borne 
by long, webbed wings as red as fire, the out-reaching claws, the 
coils of smoke fading behind it in the air.
Straight to Gont it flew, straight to the Overfell, straight 
to her. (41)
The rhythm here is almost somnambulistically smooth, the second 
sentence extraordinarily long, commas again weighting the critical 
words: “sinuous,” “claws,” “fire.” The next paragraph opens with a 
classic triple repetition whose final word links by assonance to the 
previous paragraph: “her” with “air,” and again, “air.” The sound device 
suggests how closely this approaches actual poetry. But the type of 
rhythm here also moves us past the felicities of skill and experience in 
a finished text, to adumbrate rhythm’s earliest and perhaps most vital 
role in the work.
This role is substantiated in the second essay from The Wave in 
the Mind, where Le Guin cites Woolf’s own full quote: this implies 
that without the right rhythm, words themselves will not assemble. 
The inchoate idea will not “unlock.” Then Le Guin describes writing 
Tehanu:
… the story came in flights—durations of intense perception 
… which most often occurred while I was waking, early in the 
morning.… Then I had to get up, and go sit outdoors, and try to 
catch that flight in words. If I could hold to the rhythms of the 
dragon’s flight, the very large, long wingbeats, then the story told 
itself. (“Collectors, Rhymesters and Drummers,” 183-84)
Though Le Guin probably means the pattern of the narrative overall, 
“very large, long wingbeats” describes precisely the rhythms of the quote 
Sylvia a. KelSo
18
above. And where Woolf indicates that writing cannot begin without the 
right rhythm, Le Guin tells the consequences of its loss.
… When I lost the beat, I fell off, and had to wait … until the 
dragon picked me up again. (184)
A famous anecdote preserves a perhaps similar but less happy experience. 
The person from Porlock is generally credited with breaking Coleridge’s 
“dream” from which “Kubla Khan” reputedly began. I think it as likely 
the person broke the rhythm that runs swift, unerring and dream-sure 
through the surviving piece of the poem: the relic of a dragon flight that 
Coleridge, unlike Le Guin, could never reclaim.
These instances present rhythm as more than a part or product of 
writing: it is also writing’s enabler, or even its source. For Kristeva, 
rhythm, like all semiotic elements, springs from the chora, the female 
body that the Symbolic Order must repress to allow language (137). But 
many writers derive inspiration from some other sub-terrain. In “The 
Fisherwoman’s Daughter,” Le Guin repeats Woolf’s description of the 
writer, “letting her imagination down into the depths of her consciousness” 
(227). Narrating the progress of a novel in Misery (1990), Stephen King 
refers repeatedly to ideas produced by the guys down “in the sweatshop” 
(132,173, 180). And R.L. Stevenson divided writing between “the part 
done when I am sleeping,” by “the Brownies,” and the editing and 
marketing, “done when I am up and about” (207).
Consequently, inspiration is often sourced in the unconscious, the 
sub-conscious, or even, as I have heard some SF and F writers call 
it, the “lizard brain.” But the true lizard brain is in the cerebellum or 
pons, concerned with breathing and heartbeat and “automatic function.” 
And the “unconscious” and “sub-conscious,” like the “ chora,” are 
metaphorical constructs. A more likely biological source is supported 
by empirical research.
The human right brain was long read as the weaker twin, even as a 
“vestige” of the dominant left (Edwards, 31). Then Roger Sperry’s work 
showed the right brain possesses an equally massive form of processing, 
but parallel rather than sequential (32): where the left brain is verbal 
and analytical, the right is “global, rapid, complex, whole-pattern, and 
spatial” (33). Betty Edwards, author of a classic work on teaching art, 
considers either “brain” can actually lead, or they can work together, or 
even keep knowledge from each other (34). In fact, the double function 
has long been intuited, but in the usual hierarchical binary, the right brain 
has been identified with the literally sinister, supposedly weaker hand 
in the left/right opposition (35-37).
New writiNg oN the works of UrsUla k. le gUiN
19
Scientific evidence now shows that the right brain lets us “understand 
metaphors … dream … create new combinations of ideas” (38.) All 
crucial to the basis of writing, as for thought itself. Edwards teaches art 
students to “see” differently (50-53), and the results are spectacular (18-
19). As she herself puts it, the students must learn to silence the left brain: 
to overthrow their acquired symbol system (81-82.) Which is precisely 
how Kristeva theorises “poetic language” (re)-invades symbolic sense 
with unruly semiotic elements, a process in which rhythm plays a major 
part. The tie of rhythm and creative inspiration is then explicable in both 
Kristevan and empirical terms. Rhythm comes from the pre-Symbolic 
chora. Rhythm, like metaphor, springs from the nonverbal right brain. 
But how does this help writers, if language is a left-brain mode?
Edwards points out that in fact, “L-mode” and “R-mode” thinking are 
not physically limited. Two percent of right-handers mediate language 
in the right brain, eight percent in both, while 15% of left-handers do 
the same, and 15% use the right brain alone (42). Being left-handed, 
it seems I actually have a better chance of writing with L and R-mode 
combined. But the statistics indicate some right-handers do too. Perhaps 
we can all learn to draw on the right brain, like Edwards’ students. Or 
perhaps, supremely gifted writers like Le Guin and Coleridge, who 
acknowledge or imply their reliance on rhythm for impact but also for 
inspiration, have already learned to do so. To reclaim Le Guin’s own 
metaphor, they do not merely ride the dragon: they know how to set 
the dragon loose.
Acknowledgements and Gratitudes
First in chronology, Dave Willingham and I would wish to acknowledge 
Alleen Nilsen, the original proposed editor of this volume, for setting 
up the “seed” seminar which produced the first collection of possible 
papers, and for retaining and passing them on. Without Alleen’s energy 
and generosity, this volume would not exist.
I myself owe a huge debt to Dave, who first conceived the project, later 
asked if I’d co-edit, and has been a fount of knowledge and a tower of 
strength (often both at once), through the process of drafting a call for 
papers, collecting submissions, and the more intensive work of actually 
editing/revising contributions. Apart from his critical perception and 
editorial expertise, his meticulous type-setting is a boon, but valued 
above all has been his encouragement.
Thanks must go next to everyone who submitted to this volume. 
Winnowing out the final inclusions proved one of the most difficult, at 
Sylvia a. KelSo
20
times painful, processes of my academic life. I would particularly like 
to recall and thank those whose complete or near-complete contributions 
we were unable to include, through illness, duplication of essays, pressure 
of other work or family problems. Whether or not your work appears 
here, your generosity of thought, energy and time was essential to the 
whole.
Sincerest thanks are due to the referees, most extremely busy 
academics, who, for no recompense, read and perceptively critiqued 
submissions. Almost everyone I asked, usually completely out of the 
blue, was able to do so, some almost at once, and sometimes more than 
one essay. Your kindness, help, and actual reports were indispensable.
I owe a last and special thanks to the published contributors, who 
both astonished and delighted me with their patient responses to my 
often detailed, sometimes radical, and at times very difficult requests 
for revision, and who in almost every case surpassed not merely their 
previous work but the best of my expectations. It has been a real pleasure 
as well as matter for vicarious pride to oversee your work as it reached 
its final form.
Works Cited
1. Barbour, Douglas. “The Lathe of Heaven: Taoist Dream.” Algol: 
A Magazine about Science Fiction 11.21 (1973): 22-24.
2. Bain, Dena C. “The ‘Tao Te Ching’ as Background to the Novels of 
Ursula K. Le Guin.” In Ursula K. Le Guin, ed. by Harold Bloom. 
1980. New York: Chelsea House, 1986. 211-33.
3. Chee, Alexander. “Breaking Into the Spell. An Interview with 
Ursula K. Le Guin.” http://www.guernicamag.com/interviews/505/
breaking_into_the_spell/ Accessed 26.4.08.
4.	 Cogell,	 Elizabeth	Cummins.	“Taoist	Configurations	in	The Dis‑
possessed.” In Ursula K. Le Guin: Voyager to Inner Lands and 
to Outer Space, ed. by Joe De Bolt. Port Washington: Kennikat 
Press, 1979. 153-79.
5. Delany, Samuel R. “To Read The Dispossessed.” In The Jew‑
el‑Hinged Jaw. New York: Berkley, 1977. 218-83.
6. Edwards, Betty. The New Drawing on the Right Side of the Brain. 
1979. New York: Jeremy P. Tarcher/Putnam, 1999.
7. Haraway, Donna. “A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, 
and Socialist-Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century.” Simians, 
Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of Nature. London: Free 
Association, 1991. 149-81
New writiNg oN the works of UrsUla k. le gUiN
21
8. Helford, Elyce Rae. “Going ‘Native’: Le Guin, Misha, and the 
Politics of Speculative Literature.” Foundation 71 (1997): 77-86.
9. Kristeva, Julia. “From One Identity to an Other.” In Desire in 
Language: A Semiotic Approach to Literature and Art , ed. by 
Leon Roudiez. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1981. 124-47.
10. Lefanu, Sarah. In the Chinks of the World Machine: Feminism 
and Science Fiction. London: Women’s Press, 1988.
11. Le Guin, Ursula K. Always Coming Home . 1985. New York: 
Bantam, 1986.
12. ––. “The Carrier Bag Theory of Fiction.” 1986. In Dancing at the 
Edge of the World: Thoughts On Words, Women, Places. 1989. 
New York: Harper and Row, 1990. 165-170.
13. ––. “Collectors, Rhymesters and Drummers.” In The Wave in 
the Mind. Boston: Shambhala, 2004. 171-84.
14. ––. “The Fisherwoman’s Daughter.” In Dancing at the Edge of 
the World: Thoughts On Words, Women, Places. 1989. New York: 
Harper and Row, 1990. 212-37.
15. ––. “Introduction to Planet of Exile.” In The Language of the 
Night: Essays on Fantasy and Science Fiction by Ursula K. Le 
Guin, ed. by Susan Wood. New York: Perigee, 1979. 139-43.
16. ––. The Lathe of Heaven. 1972. London: Panther, 1972.
17. –– “Living in a Work of Art.” Paradoxa no. 21.
18. ––. “Rhythmic Pattern in The Lord of the Rings.” In The Wave 
in the Mind. Boston: Shambhala, 2004. 95-107.
19. ––. Tehanu.1990. New York: Bantam, 1991.
20. Lorde, Audre. “An Open Letter To Mary Daly.” Extract. In Femi-
nisms: A Reader, ed. by Maggie Humm. New York: Harvester 
Wheatsheaf, 1992. 138-39.
21. Moylan, Tom. Demand The Impossible: Science Fiction and the 
Utopian Imagination. New York: Methuen, 1986.
22. Rhodes, Jewell Parker. “Ursula Le Guin’s The Left Hand of Dark-
ness: Androgyny And The Feminist Utopia.” In Women and Utopia: 
Critical Interpretations, ed. by Marleen S. Barr and Nicholas D. 
Smith New York: UP of America, 1983. 108-20.
23. Russ, Joanna. “The Image of Women In Science Fiction.” In Im-
ages of Women in Fiction: Feminist Perspectives, ed. by Susan 
Koppelman Cornillon. Bowling Green: Bowling Green University 
Popular Press, 1972. 79-94.
24. Smith II, Philip E. “Unbuilding Walls: Human Nature and the 
Nature of Evolutionary and Political Theory in The Dispossessed.” 
In Ursula K. Le Guin, ed. by Joseph D. Olander and Martin Harry 
Greenbergs. York: Taplinger, 1979. 77-96.
Sylvia a. KelSo
22
25. Somay, Bulent. “Towards an Open-Ended Utopia.” Science-Fic-
tion Studies 11. (1984): 25 -38 Tolkien J.R.R. “Beowulf: The 
Monsters and the Critics.” 1937. In The Monsters and the Critics 
and Other Essays. 1983. Ed. by Christopher Tolkien. London: 
HarperCollins, 1993. 5-48.
Sylvia Kelso is an adjunct lecturer at James Cook University of North 
Queensland, Australia. Her PhD. was on the interactions of feminism and 
the modern Gothic and SF, 1968-89. She has published on SF, fantasy, 
the Gothic, (horror), and the creative writing process, in Science Fiction 
Studies, Journal for the Fantastic in the Arts , Foundation, Paradoxa: 
Studies in World Literary Genres and The New York Review of Science 
Fiction. She is a member of the Editorial Board for Femspec and 
Paradoxa. Her novel The Moving Water was short-listed for best fantasy 
novel in the 2007 Aurealis Australian genre fiction awards.