APPLIED
MATHEMATICS
ANTHROPOLOGY
Narrative structure of A Song of Ice and Fire creates a
ﬁctional world with realistic measures of social
complexity
Thomas Gessey-Jonesa
 , Colm Connaughtonb,c
 , Robin Dunbard
 , Ralph Kennae,f,1
 , P ´adraig MacCarrong,h,
Cathal O’Conchobhaire
 , and Joseph Yosee,f
aFitzwilliam College, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB3 0DG, United Kingdom; bMathematics Institute, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL,
United Kingdom; cLondon Mathematical Laboratory, London W6 8RH, United Kingdom; dDepartment of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford,
Oxford OX2 6GG, United Kingdom; eCentre for Fluid and Complex Systems, Coventry University, Coventry CV1 5FB, United Kingdom; fL4 Collaboration,
Institute for Condensed Matter Physics of the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, 79011 Lviv, Ukraine; gMathematics Applications Consortium for
Science and Industry, Department of Mathematics & Statistics, University of Limerick, Limerick V94 T9PX, Ireland; and hCentre for Social Issues Research,
University of Limerick, Limerick V94 T9PX, Ireland
Edited by Kenneth W. Wachter, University of California, Berkeley, CA, and approved September 15, 2020 (received for review April 6, 2020)
Network science and data analytics are used to quantify static and
dynamic structures in George R. R. Martin’s epic novels,A Song of
Ice and Fire, works noted for their scale and complexity. By track-
ing the network of character interactions as the story unfolds, it
is found that structural properties remain approximately stable
and comparable to real-world social networks. Furthermore, the
degrees of the most connected characters reﬂect a cognitive limit
on the number of concurrent social connections that humans tend
to maintain. We also analyze the distribution of time intervals
between signiﬁcant deaths measured with respect to the in-story
timeline. These are consistent with power-law distributions com-
monly found in interevent times for a range of nonviolent human
activities in the real world. We propose that structural features
in the narrative that are reﬂected in our actual social world help
readers to follow and to relate to the story, despite its sprawling
extent. It is also found that the distribution of intervals between
signiﬁcant deaths in chapters is different to that for the in-story
timeline; it is geometric rather than power law. Geometric distri-
butions are memoryless in that the time since the last death does
not inform as to the time to the next. This provides measurable
support for the widely held view that signiﬁcant deaths inA Song
of Ice and Fire are unpredictable chapter by chapter.
A Song of Ice and Fire | Game of Thrones | networks |
Dunbar’s number| comparative literature
T
he series A Song of Ice and Fire (hereinafter referred to as
Ice and Fire) is a series of fantasy books written by George
R. R. Martin. The ﬁrst ﬁve books are A Game of Thrones (1),
A Clash of Kings (2), A Storm of Swords (3), A Feast for Crows
(4), and A Dance with Dragons (5). Since publication of the ﬁrst
book in 1996, the series has sold over 70 million units and has
been translated into more than 45 languages. Martin, a novel-
ist and experienced screenwriter, conceived the sprawling epic
as an antithesis to the constraints of ﬁlm and television budgets.
Ironically, the success of his books attracted interest from ﬁlm-
makers and television executives worldwide, eventually leading
to the television show Game of Thrones, which ﬁrst aired in 2011.
Storytelling is an ancient art form which plays an important
mechanism in social bonding (6–8). It is recognized that the
social worlds created in narratives often adhere to a principle of
minimal difference whereby social relationships reﬂect those in
real life—even if set in a fantastical or improbable world (9). By
implication, a social world in a narrative should be constructed
in such a way that it can be followed cognitively (10). However,
the role of the modern storyteller extends beyond the creation of
a believable social network. As well as an engaging discourse,
the manner in which the story is told is important, over and
above a simple narration of a sequence of events. This distinc-
tion is rooted in theories of narratology advocated by coworkers
Schklovsky and Propp (11) and developed by Metz, Chatman,
Genette, and others (12–14).
Graph theory has been used to compare character networks
to real social networks (15) in mythological (16), Shakespearean
(17), and ﬁctional literature (18). To investigate the success ofIce
and Fire, we go beyond graph theory to explore cognitive acces-
sibility as well as differences between how signiﬁcant events are
presented and how they unfold (19). A distinguishing feature of
Ice and Fire is that character deaths are perceived by many read-
ers as random and unpredictable. Whether you are ruler of the
Seven Kingdoms, heir to an ancient dynasty, or Warden of the
North, your end may be nearer than you think. Robert Baratheon
met his while boar hunting, Viserys Targaryen while feasting,
and Eddard Stark when confessing a crime in an attempt to
protect his children. Indeed, “Much of the anticipation leading
up to the ﬁnal season (of the TV series) was about who would
live or die, and whether the show would return to its signature
habit of taking out major characters in shocking fashion” (20).
Inspired by this feature, we are particularly interested in deaths
as signature events in Ice and Fire, and therefore, we study inter-
vals between them (21). To do this, we recognize an important
Signiﬁcance
We use mathematical and statistical methods to probe how
a sprawling, dynamic, complex narrative of massive scale
achieved broad accessibility and acclaim without surrendering
to the need for reductionist simpliﬁcations. Subtle narrational
tricks such as how natural social networks are mirrored and
how signiﬁcant events are scheduled are unveiled. The narra-
tive network matches evolved cognitive abilities to enable com-
plex messages be conveyed in accessible ways while story time
and discourse time are carefully distinguished in ways matching
theories of narratology. This marriage of science and humani-
ties opens avenues to comparative literary studies. It provides
quantitative support, for example, for the widespread view
that deaths appear to be randomly distributed throughout the
narrative even though, in fact, they are not.
Author contributions: R.D. and R.K. designed research; T.G.-J., C.C., R.D., R.K., P.M., C.O.,
and J.Y. performed research; T.G.-J., C.C., P.M., C.O., and J.Y. analyzed data; and T.G.-J.,
C.C., R.D., R.K., P.M., C.O., and J.Y. wrote the paper.y
The authors declare no competing interest.y
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.y
This open access article is distributed under Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0
(CC BY).y
1To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: ralph.kenna@coventry.ac.uk.y
This article contains supporting information online athttps://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/
doi:10.1073/pnas.2006465117/-/DCSupplemental
.y
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.2006465117 PNAS Latest Articles | 1 of 7
Downloaded by guest on November 10, 2020 
distinction between story time and discourse time. Story time
refers to the order and pace of events as they occurred in the
ﬁctional world. It is measured in days and months, albeit using
the ﬁctional Westerosi calendar in the case of Ice and Fire. Dis-
course time, on the other hand, refers to the order and pacing of
events as experienced by the reader; it is measured in chapters
and pages.
We ﬁnd the social network portrayed is indeed similar to
those of other social networks and remains, as presented, within
our cognitive limit at any given stage. We also ﬁnd that the
order and pacing of deaths differ greatly between discourse
time and story time. The discourse is presented in a way that
appears more unpredictable than the underlying story; had it
been told following Westerosi chronology, the perception of ran-
dom and unpredictable deaths may be much less shocking (22,
23). We suggest that the remarkable juxtaposition of realism
(verisimilitude), cognitive balance, and unpredictability is key to
the success of the series.
Materials and Methods
To perform this investigation we draw on two datasets. The ﬁrst was
extracted manually from Ice and Fire by carefully reading the text and not-
ing interactions between characters. To facilitate comparisons to them, we
follow methodologies developed for network analyses of medieval epics
(16, 24–26) whereby characters are deemed to have interacted if they
directly meet each other or it is explicitly clear from the text they knew
one another, even if one or both are dead by that point in the story. (To our
knowledge, no automated method currently exists that has been proven
to match this manual approach; see, e.g., ref. 27.) From this dataset we
construct a network of all of the characters in Ice and Fire who interact
with at least one other. Characters are identiﬁed as nodes and interactions
between them identiﬁed as edges (links). We also gathered temporal data
on character deaths for interevent time analysis.
Fig. 1 presents, for illustrative purposes, a subset of the network show-
ing the most predominant characters. SI Appendix contains a similar ﬁgure
showing only those characters still alive at the end of the ﬁfth book (the
survivor network). Predominance for these illustrations is measured by the
number of chapters in which a given character interacts with at least one
other character, and nodes are sized accordingly. Each character in Fig. 1
interacts in at least 40 chapters. The full network is far greater in extent.
The thickness of the various edges represents the strength of links between
nodes as the number of times the corresponding pair of characters interact
in the narrative. Fig. 1 is therefore a visual representation of the primary
characters and their interactions. For example, the enduring importance of
characters such as Eddard Stark and Robert Baratheon is clear, despite the
fact that both perished early in the story.
To analyze the dynamics and evolution of the narrative we also use a
second dataset. This is an approximate timeline of the events of Ice and Fire
indexed by the Westerosi calendar date, compiled by fans and followers,
and maintained by the Reddit user identiﬁed as PrivateMajor (https://
www.reddit.com/r/asoiaf/comments/1c07jw/spoilers
all most precise asoiaf
timeline in/). This timeline makes a number of assumptions which are
noted in the dataset. Many of these dates are educated guesses because no
explicit in-story timeline is provided by the author. According to the Reddit
timeline, the opening events of A Game of Thrones take place on 22 April
of the year 297, and the closing events of A Dance with Dragons take place
on 8 February in the year 300. We used this second set of data to assign
an approximate date to each chapter of each book, allowing us to study
events as they occur within the in-story timeline. In many cases, chapters
clearly span multiple days. In such cases we use the date corresponding to
the earliest dated event occurring in that chapter. This allows us to order
the data in two ways, the order in which the events happen (story time)
and the way in which the narrative is told (discourse time).
There are multiple measures of network architecture, nodal importance,
and edge weights. To address the primal issue of societal topology we ana-
lyze the full unweighted network. We assign a degree to each character
as the number of connections it has to other nodes of the network, and
we track average values over story and discourse time. Studies have shown
that real social networks tend to have properties which distinguish them
from other complex networks (15). Notable among these is homophily—the
tendency of people to associate with people who are similar to themselves
(28). One quantitative measure of homophily is assortativity, the extent to
which the degrees of pairs of connected vertices are correlated (29). A net-
work which has a positive correlation is called assortative, and one with a
negative correlation is disassortative.
As degree measures how connected a node is, centrality quantiﬁes how
close it is to the core of the network. There are various measures, and
common examples are betweenness, closeness, page rank, and eigenvec-
tor centrality. We use these tools holistically—no one tool gives a deﬁnitive
characterization of verisimilitude or narratology, but together they build
a picture that we can compare to real networks (15) and to mythological
(16), Shakespearean (17), and ﬁctional literature (18). In the next section
we present betweenness, which is a normalized measure of the number
of shortest paths (geodesics) between all other nodes that include the
Fig. 1. Network of the most predominant characters. For illustrative purposes we size nodes proportional to the number of chapters in which the characters
interact. Edge thicknesses represent the numbers of times that corresponding pair of characters interact in the narrative.
2 of 7 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.2006465117 Gessey-Jones et al.
Downloaded by guest on November 10, 2020 
APPLIED
MATHEMATICS
ANTHROPOLOGY
particular node in question (30). Nodes with high betweenness are impor-
tant conduits for information transfer and in this sense tend to be more
inﬂuential. Further details on data acquisition methodology, network con-
struction, and analysis are provided in SI Appendix. The data and associated
analysis codes are available in ref. 31.
Results
Ice and Fire is presented from the personal perspectives of 24
point of view (POV) characters. A full list of them, ranked by
the numbers of chapters from their perspectives, is provided
in SI Appendix. Of these, we consider 14 to be major: eight
or more chapters, mostly titled with their names, are relayed
from their perspectives. Tyrion Lannister is major in this sense
because the 47 chapters from his perspective are titled “Tyrion
I,” “Tyrion II,” etc. Arys Oakheart does not meet this criterion as
the only chapter related from his perspective is titled “The Soiled
Knight.” We open this section by reporting how network mea-
sures reﬂect the POV structure. We then examine the network
itself—how it evolves over discourse time, its verisimilitude, and
the extent to which it is cognitively accessible. Finally, we analyze
the distributions of time intervals between signiﬁcant deaths and
contrast these as measured in story time versus discourse time.
Most Important Characters. In networks, properties such as
degree and centrality are signiﬁers of node importance. We now
rank nodes according to these measures to examine the extent to
which they correlate with the POV list.
Table 1 lists the 10 characters with the greatest degree and
those with the greatest betweenness. We present results for the
full network and the survivor network. The latter contains only
those characters possibly still living by the end of the ﬁfth book
(e.g., a major character whose fate is uncertain by the end of A
Dance With Dragons is treated as alive).
Table 1 also lists major POV characters that lie outside the
top 10. Degree and betweenness are very different indicators
of importance from the notion of POV characters. However,
POV characters form the majority of the top 10 characters when
ranked by either measure. There are only three non-POV char-
acters in Table 1; Robb Stark, Stannis Baratheon, and Tywin
Lannister. These are highlighted in bold type. The effectiveness
of network measures at qualifying character importance is estab-
lished by the fact that both rankings primarily pick out the POV
characters. Here we use betweenness as indicative of centrality
with other measures presented in SI Appendix. Different cen-
trality measures paint similar pictures, suggesting the importance
portraits they deliver are quite robust in network terms.
Evolution of the Social Network Structure. From the ﬁve books
containing 343 chapters, 2,007 characters were identiﬁed, of
which 1,806 interact with another at least once. Fig. 2 depicts how
character numbers evolve as the discourse unfolds. The numbers
of characters appearing in each individual chapter are plotted in
Fig. 2A. These numbers range from 7 for the ﬁrst chapter up to
89 for chapter 16 of A Feast for Crows. After a short period of
growth in the ﬁrst book, in which the main characters are intro-
duced, the number of characters per chapter settles at around
35. This value has been identiﬁed as a stable subgrouping within
social networks (32) and as the typical size of (contemporary)
bands of hunter-gatherers (33). It has also been identiﬁed as the
typical cast size in Shakespeare’s plays (17) and optimal size for
English language and literature research centers (34, 35). The
cumulative number of characters (introduced up to and includ-
ing a given chapter) is plotted in blue in Fig. 2B. Those who have
not explicitly died by the ﬁfth book are depicted in green. The
near linear growth of each curve indicates remarkable stability
throughout the series.
Fig. 3A (which has the same color scheme as Fig. 2) depicts the
chapter-by-chapter evolution of the mean degree, and Fig. 3B is
Table 1. Characters ranked by various network attributes
Degree Betweenness centrality
Full network
1. Jon Snow (214) 1. Jon Snow (0.0889)
2. Jaime Lannister (212) 2. Barristan Selmy (0.0831)
3. Tyrion Lannister (209) 3. Arya Stark (0.0777)
4. Catelyn Stark (204) 4. Tyrion Lannister (0.0700)
5. Arya Stark (192) 5. Theon Greyjoy (0.0671)
6. Theon Greyjoy (175) 6. Jaime Lannister (0.0606)
7. Cersei Lannister (161) 7. Catelyn Stark (0.0568)
8. Robb Stark (158) 8. Stannis Baratheon (0.0519)
9. Sansa Stark (156) 9. Tywin Lannister (0.0356)
10. Barristan Selmy (156) 10. Eddard Stark (0.0351)
12. Eddard Stark (140) 12. Sansa Stark (0.0275)
16. Brienne of Tarth (108) 13. Cersei Lannister (0.0250)
17. Bran Stark (106) 14. Brienne of Tarth (0.0236)
19. Daenerys Targaryen (104) 17. Samwell Tarly (0.0207)
20. Samwell Tarly (103) 18. Bran Stark (0.0202)
51. Davos Seaworth (72) 21. Daenerys Targaryen (0.0185)
25. Davos Seaworth (0.0167)
Survivor network
1. Tyrion Lannister (162) 1. Tyrion Lannister (0.0972)
2. Jon Snow (150) 2. Barristan Selmy (0.0952)
3. Jaime Lannister (149) 3. Arya Stark (0.0923)
4. Arya Stark (135) 4. Theon Greyjoy (0.0909)
5. Sansa Stark (122) 5. Jon Snow (0.0871)
6. Cersei Lannister (120) 6. Stannis Baratheon (0.0812)
7. Theon Greyjoy (115) 7. Jaime Lannister (0.0805)
8. Barristan Selmy (103) 8. Sansa Stark (0.0408)
9. Stannis Baratheon (86) 9. Samwell Tarly (0.0320)
10. Brienne of Tarth (83) 10. Cersei Lannister (0.0310)
12. Samwell Tarly (79) 12. Brienne of Tarth (0.0274)
18. Daenerys Targaryen (69) 13. Bran Stark (0.0248)
20. Bran Stark (68) 17. Davos Seaworth (0.0184)
38. Davos Seaworth (54) 33. Daenerys Targaryen (0.0093)
Characters are ranked by degree and betweenness centrality (with values
in parentheses). The three non-POV characters that appear in the top 10
are highlighted in boldface, and major POV characters who do not appear
in the top 10 are also listed. Qualitatively, it appears that the 14 major
POV characters correlate well with the most important characters by both
measures.
the counterpart plot for assortativity. The average degree centers
around 16 for the full network and around 12 for the survivor net-
work, values that approximate the 15-layer in egocentric social
networks (36–38). Although the average degree is small, the dis-
tribution is highly skewed as is common in social networks. When
real social networks are constructed from data, one does not
expect every low-degree node to necessarily have few connec-
tions due to sampling bias. The same applies to our ﬁctional
social network; since the the narrative is relayed from individual
perspectives, the ego networks of POV characters feature more
than those of less prominent characters. For example, the high-
est degree value of 214 belongs to POV character Jon Snow and
contrasts markedly with 214 characters having degree 1. The 14
major POV characters have an average degree of 154.0 within
the network of all characters, with SD 47.0. This is close to Dun-
bar’s number of 150, the average number of stable relationships
usually maintained at any given point in human life (33).
Another consequence of the POV style is the suppression of
assortativity compared to real social networks after the fourth
book. The deﬂated degrees of the masses relative to POV char-
acters decrease homophily. The corollary of this effect is visible
in the survivor assortativity jump seen in the third book when
Catelyn Stark, an important POV character, is murdered along
with some other notable characters at the Red Wedding. After an
Gessey-Jones et al. PNAS Latest Articles
| 3 of 7
Downloaded by guest on November 10, 2020 
0
AB
Fig. 2. Number of characters in the narrative. (A) Number of characters appearing in each individual chapter. This shows signiﬁcant ﬂuctuations chapter
by chapter and ﬂuctuates around 35 by the end of A Game of Thrones . (B) Evolution of the cumulative number of characters appearing in the narrative
by chapter (blue) and of characters introduced who have not yet died (green). Both curves grow approximately linearly throughout Ice and Fire. Labels
AGOT, ACOK, ASOS, AFFC, and ADWD represent A Game of Thrones, A Clash of Kings, A Storm of Swords, A Feast for Crows, and A Dance with Dragons,
respectively.
initial growth period in the ﬁrst book, assortativity ﬂuctuates
around 0, before dropping to a slightly negative value (−0.03) by
the ﬁfth book. This is lower than most values measured in real
social networks (15) but not by much. It is certainly sufﬁcient to
endow Ice and Fire with a greater degree of verisimilitude than
more egocentric networks such as Beowulf or the T´ain B´o Cuail-
gne (16). In comparative mythological terms, Ice and Fire has a
narrative networks more akin to those of the Icelandic sagas (24).
Therefore, despite the continuous introduction of new char-
acters, the author has managed to maintain a consistent social
network structure. The number of these interactions is at the
upper end of the cognitive capacity of an average reader. Hence,
while there is a vast number of characters and even greater num-
ber of interactions in Ice and Fire at any given stage of the
narrative, the social network a reader has to consider in order
to follow the story is similar in scale to natural cognitive capacity.
Distributions of Interevent Times for Signiﬁcant Deaths. We now
turn to consider interdeath story time and interdeath discourse
time to reveal an interesting difference between the underlying
chronology and how the narrative is presented. For this purpose
we consider only deaths which we deem to be signiﬁcant. These
are deaths of characters in the network who appear in more then
one chapter. We apply this criterion to avoid the inclusion of
the deaths of “cannon-fodder” characters whose main purpose in
the story is to die immediately after they are introduced. Fig. 4A
shows the number of signiﬁcant character deaths by chapter (dis-
course time). Fig. 4B gives the same data ordered by date (story
time). It is striking how deaths appear far more clumped together
in story time than in discourse time. The structure of Fig. 4A
helps explain the perception that death can occur unpredictably
in the narrative, while Fig. 4B suggests extended safe periods
where no deaths occur.
These observations can be quantiﬁed by examining the empir-
ical distributions of the time intervals between deaths. Our data
analysis follows the reasoning described in ref. 39, and all com-
putations are performed using the associated R package (40).
To explore the (un)predictability of Ice and Fire timelines, we
consider the conditional probability that the number of steps
(chapters or days) to the next event exceeds n + m given that it
has already exceeded m. If this is the same as the unconditional
probability that the waiting time exceeds n,
P(X> n + m| X> m) = P(X> n), [1]
then the interevent time distribution is said to be memoryless. In
other words, knowing the time since the last event provides no
AB
Fig. 3. Evolution of network properties by chapter labeled as in Fig. 2. (A) Evolution of the average degree. After a period of initial growth as main
characters are introduced, the average degree stabilizes at around 16 for the network involving all characters and around 12 if only the living characters
are included. (B) Evolution of the degree assortativity. After the ﬁrst book (A Game of Thrones), the assortativity for the living-character network ﬂuctuates
around 0. While the assortativity of the full network (blue) also ﬂuctuates, it stays slightly disassortative for the later books.
4 of 7 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.2006465117 Gessey-Jones et al.
Downloaded by guest on November 10, 2020 
APPLIED
MATHEMATICS
ANTHROPOLOGY
AB
Fig. 4. Timeline of signiﬁcant character deaths in Ice and Fire. (A) Number of deaths by chapter (discourse time). (B) Number of deaths by date (story time).
information about the time to the next event. It is well known
that the geometric distribution
P(X = n)≡ PX (n) = q (1− q)n−1, [2]
is the only discrete interevent-time distribution that is memo-
ryless and thus maximally unpredictable. Here q is a param-
eter to be ﬁtted from data. Further details can be found in
SI Appendix.
Interevent discourse time data are presented in Fig. 5A, and
the corresponding cumulative data are presented in Fig. 5B. We
use the maximum likelihood method to determine the best ﬁts to
the geometric distribution for the data, and these are also plotted
in Fig. 5. The associated P values characterize goodness of ﬁt; we
reject the hypothesis if the P value is less than 0.05. The results
are as follows: discourse time, q = 0.58, [ 0.50, 0.68 ], P = 0.087;
story time, q = 0.12, [ 0.10, 0.15 ], P≈ 0.
Here parenthesized values indicate the approximate 95% con-
ﬁdence intervals determined by bootstraping. These results sug-
gest that interevent times for signiﬁcant deaths in discourse time
(chapters) are well described by a geometric distribution and
are therefore memoryless. In contrast, the null hypothesis that
signiﬁcant deaths in story time (calendar) follow a memoryless
geometric distribution can be rejected. These data are presented
in Fig. 6.
Since events in story time are inconsistent with memoryless-
ness, we consider an alternative to the geometric distribution.
Evidence suggests that interevent time distributions for many
(nonviolent) human activities in the real world, including com-
munication, entertainment, trading, and work, have power-law
tails, usually with exponents between 1 and 2 (39, 41, 42). Sim-
ilar heavy tails have been observed in interviolence intervals
(43, 44) as well as in human behavior in virtual environments
(45). Therefore, we ﬁt to a discrete power-law distribution of
the form
P(X = k )≡ PX (k ) = k−α
ζ(α). [3]
Here the exponent α controls the power law, and ζ(α) is the
Riemann zeta function. The results are as follows: discourse
time, α = 3.9, [2.0, 8.9 ] ,x0 = 3.7, [ 1, 7 ], P = 0.392; story time,
α = 2.00, [ 1.75, 2.36 ],x0 = 3.6, [ 2, 8 ], P≈ 0.428.
Again, the uncertainties in parameters indicate approximate
95% conﬁdence intervals and are estimated by bootstrapping.
The ﬁts, which are plotted for story time in Fig. 6, suggests
that interevent times for signiﬁcant deaths by date are indeed
well described by a power-law distribution with a lower cutoff.
Interestingly, the story time exponentα≈ 2 is comparable to the
values seen in real-world human activities (39, 41–45), providing
another sense in which the ﬁctitious world of Ice and Fire bears
quantitative similarity to the real social world.
At ﬁrst sight the results for discourse time appear also to sug-
gest that we cannot reject the hypothesis that interevent times
for signiﬁcant deaths by chapter can be matched by a power
law distribution. However, the cutoff x0 excludes long waiting
times from the ﬁt. Unlike the the single-parameter geometric ﬁt,
a power law does not match the entire range of the data. (The
poorer match of the cutoff power law is also reﬂected in the
AB
Fig. 5. Empirical distributions of interevent times for signiﬁcant deaths measured by chapter (discourse time), with ﬁt to geometric distribution. A geometric
distribution is memoryless in that it is what would be expected if deaths are maximally unpredictable throughout, as is suggested by many readers/viewers
of the series.
Gessey-Jones et al. PNAS Latest Articles | 5 of 7
Downloaded by guest on November 10, 2020 
AB
Fig. 6. Empirical distributions of interevent times for signiﬁcant deaths by date (story time). Date here is measured using the ﬁctional Westerosi calendar.
Shown in blue is the best-ﬁt discrete power law (Zeta) distribution.
uncertainties in the α parameter value which are much higher
than their discourse time counterparts.) The memoryless geo-
metric model is therefore the superior description of interevent
times in discourse.
In summary, the interevent time distribution for signiﬁcant
deaths by discourse time is well ﬁtted by a geometric distribu-
tion indicating that such events can seem to the reader to occur
almost at random intervals. However, when analyzing deaths in
terms of story time, this is not the case, with signiﬁcant events
occurring in a more natural way. Portraying signiﬁcant events by
discourse time instead of as they happen appears to maintain the
reader’s suspense.
Discussion
A Song of Ice and Fire is a prodigious modern epic of consider-
able complexity that remains accessible to a vast congregation
of devotees. Among its appeals are the uncertainty and unpre-
dictability of its storyline as characters, including important ones,
can be killed off seemingly at random. Indeed, not even the
POV characters are guaranteed safe passage from one book
to the next. Here we have shown that the network properties
of the society described in Ice and Fire are close to what we
expect in real social networks (16). Also, by relating the story
from the points of view of different characters, the total num-
ber of interactions at any given stage remains within the average
reader’s cognitive limit, making it possible to keep track of these
relationships (19).
The positioning of this paper relative to the context, initiatives,
and aspirations of digital humanities merits further comment.
The recent review (46) identiﬁed some of its methods and
themes, developed in the context of comparative mythology and
traditional epic narrative cycles in particular (8), as one of four
focal points in the extraction and analysis of character networks
(the remaining three foci being literary analysis, video narra-
tives, and computer science methods aimed at data extraction).
Here we go beyond such character network considerations by
introducing two elements to quantitative narratology, namely,
the questions of cognitive limits and the interplay between story
time and discourse time (10). Unlike historical, quasi-historical,
or mythological chronicles of societies and events, a key require-
ment for ﬁctional storytelling in Ice and Fire is that it not spin
out of control because of its enormous scale. Fictional narra-
tives require widespread engagement for commercial success.
Whatever the storyteller’s cognitive competences may be (7),
he has to avoid overtaxing his reader’s ability to keep track of
the action—itself related to the number of characters involved
(10). If the story is allowed to become too complex, there
is a threat of the average reader becoming cognitively over-
whelmed and the story becoming chaotic and unfathomable
(47). Ice and Fire avoids this; although more than 2,000 char-
acters appear, readers and TV audiences alike remain avidly
engaged.
The ﬁndings reported here suggest that this is facilitated by
clever structuring such that each chapter is told by different POV
characters, endowed with social networks containing only around
150 individuals. Moreover, there are only 14 major POV charac-
ters. These are frequent numbers in the structure of real social
networks (32–34, 36–38, 48) and they allow the reader to work
within natural templates; the story reﬂects experiences in the
everyday social world and therefore does not overtax cognitive
abilities that are evolved to match these scales (10).
Our ﬁndings on the constraints on the size and structure of the
cast of characters are not peculiar to this particular drama. Sim-
ilar numerical constraints have been reported for Shakespeare’s
plays (17) and contemporary ﬁlms (49). Much of this seems to
reﬂect natural limits on mentalizing competences—the cognitive
skills that underpin our ability to handle social relationships in
the virtual mental sphere of the everyday social world (7, 10).
These are limited to ﬁve orders of intentionality and provide the
base from which the scaled layers of social networks are built
up (7); more importantly, neuroimaging studies have shown that
competences in this respect correlate directly with the number
of individuals in the 15-layer (50, 51). That this is important
for storytelling has been demonstrated by a series of experimen-
tal studies showing that enjoyment of a story is greatest when
the number of levels of mentalizing (effectively the number of
characters involved in a scene) is closest to the reader’s own
mentalizing abilities (52). Krems and Dunbar (49) showed that
Shakespeare, at least, seemed to adjust the number of charac-
ters in a scene to the effect of remaining within the mentalizing
capacities of the audience.
Also, the characteristic unpredictability of the narrative
appears in discourse time only, with associated interevent times
for signiﬁcant deaths well described by a memoryless distribu-
tion. In story time the plot unfolds in an altogether different
manner for, chronologically, many characters die in a way consis-
tent with regular human activities. The difference suggests that
the author structures the order and pacing of signiﬁcant events
(consciously or subconsciously) to make the series more unpre-
dictable. The distinction between story time and discourse time
was ﬁrst identiﬁed in the early part of the 20th century by the
inﬂuential Russian formalist literary theorists, notably cowork-
ers Schklovsky and Propp (11). Their distinction between fabula
(story, or chronological sequence of events) and sjuzhet (plot)
is essentially that which we draw here. Schklovsky, in particular,
emphasized the importance of defamiliarization (decoupling the
temporal sequence of the plot from the chronological storyline)
as a device for engaging the reader in the story. Our analysis
6 of 7
| www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.2006465117 Gessey-Jones et al.
Downloaded by guest on November 10, 2020 
APPLIED
MATHEMATICS
ANTHROPOLOGY
of signiﬁcant deaths highlights how effectively Martin exploits
this technique. However, the question of whether the quantita-
tive distinction between story time and discourse time applies to
less signiﬁcant events remains open.
Thus, two important, but conﬂicting, requirements of effec-
tive storytelling are successfully married in Ice and Fire: 1) the
reader’s attention is maintained by the unexpected sequencing
of signiﬁcant events to encourage page turning to ﬁnd out why
something happened or what happens next and 2) the reader’s
sense of what is natural is not overtaxed (i.e., seemingly random
events make sense). This remarkable marriage of verisimilitude
(realism) and unpredictability (memorylessness) is achieved in a
cognitively engaging manner.
In summary, we show that despite its massive scale, Ice and
Fire is very carefully structured so as not to exceed the natural
cognitive capacities of a wide readership. Despite its dynamic,
extended temporal basis, the structure of its social world mir-
rors that of natural social networks in ways likely to minimize
the cognitive burden on the reader. At the same time, the
storyteller has manipulated the timeline of the story in such
a way as to make it continuously more appealing by making
signiﬁcant events seem random so as to heighten the reader’s
engagement. The identiﬁcation of patterns of verisimilitude, cog-
nition, and unpredictability through computational methods may
inspire wider quantitative approaches to other areas of liter-
ary study, including drama, television, ﬁlm, periodicity, genre,
canonicity, literature, history, and fantasy.
Data Availability. Text and code have been deposited in GitHub, https://
github.com/colm-connaughton/ASOIAF-data-and
codes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. T.G.-J. was supported by the Gold Travel Fund from
Fitzwilliam College and C.O. by a Coventry University grant. R.K., P.M., and
J.Y. were in part supported by the European Commission’s Marie Curie
Action “International Research Staff Exchange Scheme” project number
612707 and the Leverhulme Trust research grant “Women, conﬂict and
peace: gendered networks in early medieval narratives” RPG-2018-014.
P.M. was additionally supported by the European Research Council (grant
802421). R.K. was additionally supported by a Coventry University City of
Culture award. We thank James Carney and Thierry Platini for discussions.
1. G. R. R. Martin, A Game of Thrones (Bantam Spectra, New York, 1996).
2. G. R. R. Martin, A Clash of Kings (Bantam Spectra, New York, 1999).
3. G. R. R. Martin, A Storm of Swords (Bantam Spectra, New York, 2000).
4. G. R. R. Martin, A Feast for Crows (Bantam Spectra, New York, 2005).
5. G. R. R. Martin, A Dance with Dragons (Bantam Spectra, New York, 2011).
6. P. W. Wiessner, Embers of society: Firelight talk among the Ju’hoansi Bushmen. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 111, 14027–14035 (2014).
7. R. Dunbar, “Mind the gap: Or why humans aren’t just great apes” in Lucy to Lan-
guage: The Benchmark Papers, R. I. M. Dunbar, C. Gamble, J. A. J. Gowlett, Eds.
(Oxford University Press, 2014), pp. 3–18.
8. R. Kenna, M. MacCarron, P. MacCarron, Maths Meets Myths: Quantitative Approaches
to Ancient Narratives (Springer International Publishing, Switzerland, 2017).
9. A. Palmer, “Storyworlds and groups” in Introduction to Cognitive Cultural Studies,
L. Zunshine, Ed. (Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, 2010), chap. 8, pp. 176–
192.
10. R. Dunbar, “Cognitive and network constraints in real life and literature” in Maths
Meets Myths: Quantitative Approaches to Ancient Narratives, Understanding Com-
plex Systems, R. Kenna, M. MacCarron, P. MacCarron, Eds. (Springer International
Publishing, Switzerland, ed. 1, 2017), chap. 2, pp. 7–19.
11. P. Steiner, “Russian formalism” in The Cambridge History of Literary Criticism,
R. Selden, Ed. (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1995), vol. 8, pp. 11–29.
12. C. Metz, Film Language: A Semiotics of the Cinema (University of Chicago Press, 1990).
13. G. Genette, Narrative Discourse: An Essay in Method (Cornell University Press, 1983).
14. S. B. Chatman, Story and Discourse: Narrative Structure in Fiction and Film (Cornell
University Press, 1980).
15. M. E. J. Newman, J. Park, Why social networks are different from other types of
networks. Phys. Rev. E 68, 036122 (2003).
16. P. MacCarron, R. Kenna, Universal properties of mythological networks. Europhys.
Lett. 99, 28002 (2012).
17. J. Stiller, D. Nettle, R. I. M. Dunbar, The small world of Shakespeare’s plays.Hum. Nat.
14, 397–408 (2003).
18. S. Alexander, Social network analysis and the scale of modernist ﬁction. Mod-
ernism/modernity 3, mod.0086 (2019).
19. R. I. M. Dunbar, Neocortex size as a constraint on group size in primates. J. Hum. Evol.
22, 469–493 (1992).
20. J. Vineyard, It’s Hard to Hold Onto Your Head,NY Times, 21 May 2019, Section C, p. 8.
21. S. D. Prado, S. R. Dahmen, A. L. C. Bazzan, P. MacCarron, R. Kenna, Temporal network
analysis of literary texts. Adv. Complex Syst. 19, 1650005 (2016).
22. A. Beveridge, M. Chemers, “The game of Game of Thrones: Networked concordances
and fractal dramaturgy” in Reading Contemporary Serial Television Universes: A Nar-
rative Ecosystem Framework, P. Brembilla, I. A De Pascalis, Eds. (Routledge, 1 edition,
2018), chap. 12, pp. 201–225.
23. J. L. Moreno, “Who Shall Survive?: A New Approach to the Problem of Human
Interrelations (Nervous and Mental Disease Publishing Co., 1934).
24. P. MacCarron, R. Kenna, Network analysis of the ´ıslendinga s¨ogur—The sagas of
Icelanders. Eur. Phys. J. B 86, 407 (2013).
25. J. Yose, R. Kenna, P. MacCarron, T. Platini, J. Tonra, A networks-science investigation
into the epic poems of Ossian. Adv. Complex Syst. 19, 1650008 (2016).
26. J. Yose, R. Kenna, M. MacCarron, P. MacCarron, Network analysis of the Viking age
in Ireland as portrayed in Cogadh Gaedhel re Gallaibh. R. Soc. Open Sci. 5, 171024
(2018).
27. M. Trovati, J. Brady, Towards an automated approach to extract and compare ﬁc-
tional networks: An initial evaluation” in Proceedings 25th International Workshop
on Database and Expert Systems Applications, H. Decker, L. Lhotsk ´a, S. Link, M. Spies,
R. R. Wagner, Eds. (Database and Expert Systems Applications, Munich, Germany,
2014), pp. 246–250.
28. M. McPherson, L. Smith-Lovin, J. M. Cook, Birds of a feather: Homophily in social
networks. Annu. Rev. Sociol. 27, 415–444 (2001).
29. M. E. J. Newman, Assortative mixing in networks. Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 208701
(2002).
30. L. C. Freeman, A set of measures of centrality based on betweenness. Sociometry 40,
35–41 (1977).
31. T. Gessey-Jones et al., Network of thrones: Social networks and inter-event times
in A Song of Ice and Fire: Data and codes (2020). https://github.com/colm-
connaughton/ASOIAF-data-and
codes/releases/tag/v1.0. Accessed 7 October 2020.
32. R. A. Hill, R. Dunbar, Social network size in humans. Human Nat. 14, 53–72
(2003).
33. R. I. M. Dunbar, Structure and function in human and primate social networks: Impli-
cations for diffusion, network stability and health. Proc. R. Soc. A 476, 20200446
(2020).
34. R. Kenna, B. Berche, Critical mass and the dependency of research quality on group
size. Scientometrics 86, 527–540 (2011).
35. R. Kenna, B. Berche, Managing research quality: Critical mass and optimal academic
research group size. IMA J. Manag. Math. 23, 195–207 (2011).
36. W.-X. Zhou, D. Sornette, R. A. Hill, R. Dunbar, Discrete hierarchical organization of
social group sizes. Proc. Biol. Sci., 272, 439–444 (2005).
37. M. J. Hamilton, B. T. Milne, R. S. Walker, O. Burger, J. H. Brown, The complex structure
of hunter–gatherer social networks. Proc. Biol. Sci., 274, 2195–2203 (2007).
38. P. MacCarron, K. Kaski, R. Dunbar, Calling Dunbar’s numbers. Soc. Network. 47, 151–
155 (2016).
39. A. Clauset, C. R. Shalizi, M. E. J. Newman, Power-law distributions in empirical data.
SIAM Rev. 51, 661–703 (2009).
40. C. S. Gillespie, Fitting heavy tailed distributions: The poweRlaw package. J. Stat.
Softw. 64, 1–16 (2015).
41. A.-L. Barab ´asi, The origin of bursts and heavy tails in human dynamics. Nature 435,
207–211 (2005).
42. S. Vajna, B. T ´oth, J. Kert ´esz, Modelling bursty time series. New J. Phys., 15, 103023
(2013).
43. M. V. Simkin, V. P. Roychowdhury, Stochastic modeling of a serial killer. J. Theor. Biol.
355, 111–116 (2014).
44. M. V. Simkin, V. P. Roychowdhury, Statistical study of time intervals between murders
for serial killers. arXiv:1811.00664 (1 November 2018).
45. Y. Holovatch, O. Mryglod, M. Szell, S. Thurner, “Analyses of a virtual world” in Maths
Meets Myths: Quantitative Approaches to Ancient Narratives, Understanding Com-
plex Systems, R. Kenna, M. MacCarron, P. MacCarron, Eds. (Springer International
Publishing, Switzerland, ed. 1, 2017), chap. 7, pp. 115–130.
46. V. Labatut, X. Bost, Extraction and analysis of ﬁctional character networks: A survey.
ACM Comput. Surv. 52, 89 (2019).
47. R. Dunbar, Why are good writers so rare? An evolutionary perspective on literature.
J. Cult. Evol. Psychol. 3, 7–21 (2005).
48. R. Dunbar, V. Arnaboldi, M. Conti, A. Passarella, The structure of online social
networks mirrors those in the ofﬂine world. Soc. Network. 43, 39–47 (2015).
49. J. Krems, R. I. M. Dunbar, Clique size and network characteristics in hyperlink cinema:
Constraints of evolved psychology. Hum. Nat. 24, 414–429 (2013).
50. P. A. Lewis, R. Rezaie, R. Brown, N. Roberts, R. Dunbar, Ventromedial prefrontal
volume predicts understanding of others and social network size. NeuroImage 57,
1624–1629 ( 2011).
51. J. Powell, P. A. Lewis, N. Roberts, M. Garc ´ıa-Fi˜nana, R. Dunbar, Orbital prefrontal cor-
tex volume predicts social network size: An imaging study of individual differences in
humans. Proc. Biol. Sci. 279, 2157–2162 (2012).
52. J. Carney, R. Wlodarski, R. Dunbar, Inference or enaction? The impact of genre on the
narrative processing of other minds. PloS One 9, e114172 (2014).
Gessey-Jones et al. PNAS Latest Articles
| 7 of 7
Downloaded by guest on November 10, 2020 