 Fire & Blood by George R R Martin book Bestsellers book PW Best Books home Publishers Weekly Home lock Use and Privacy Policies menu bestsellers 

 best books 

 free newsletter

 sign up now BUY THIS BOOK Fire & Blood George R.R. Martin. Bantam, $35 (736p) ISBN 978-1-5247-9628-0 Martin’s evocative storytelling style and gift for gripping narrative are mostly absent from this dry history of the blood-drenched Targaryens, one of the central dynasties of the land of Westeros (setting of the Song of Ice and Fire series and the HBO show Game of Thrones ). Beginning with the Targaryens’ fortuitous escape from the destruction of Valyria and Aegon Targaryen’s subsequent conquest of Westeros, and concluding with the ascent of young King Aegon III to Westeros’s Iron Throne some 130 years later, Martin gives equal weight to each member of the Targaryen family. The deliberately inbreeding Targaryens share a number of characteristics through the generations—chiefly brutality, snobbishness, and the single-minded pursuit of power—and it can be hard to keep track of who’s who. Brief sections are dramatic (“the golden dragon devoured the queen in six bites”) or salacious (“it aroused the princess to watch the men disporting with one another”), and there are entertaining snatches of dialogue and detailed depictions of battles, but they only last a few pages before a return to brisk summary. The conceit of the history being written by one Archmaester Gyldayn (“author” of several other works of Westerosi scholarship, most recently The Sons of the Dragon ) mostly gives rise to images of unhappy Westerosi schoolchildren being forced to study this weighty textbook. Fans hungry for the next Song of Ice and Fire novel will find this volume whets, but does not satisfy, their appetites. (Nov.) DETAILS share AUDIOBOOK PREVIEW BUY THIS BOOK close Details Reviewed on: 11/19/2018

 Genre: Fiction

 Mass Market Paperbound - 800 pages - 978-0-593-35753-8

 Paperback - 752 pages - 978-1-5247-9630-3

 Pre-Recorded Audio Player - 978-1-9871-4728-5

 close Audio book sample courtesy of Penguin Random House Audio Amazon Apple Books Bookshop Share Post Copy Link Print More By and About this Author chevron_right Book Reviews Articles The Book of Swords The Book of Swords Garth Nix (et al.) Swords and sorceries abound in this massive anthology, featuring several luminaries of the fantasy genre. A few of these stories stand out, including Ken Liu’s “The Hidden Girl,” in which a girl in Continue reading » Low Chicago: A Wild Cards Novel Low Chicago: A Wild Cards Novel George R R Martin In the upbeat 26th installment (after Mississippi Roll) of the anthology series exploring an alternate history where an alien virus accidentally released in 1946 transforms its survivors Continue reading » Texas Hold’em Texas Hold’em George R R Martin This 26th Wild Cards collaboration (following 2018’s Low Chicago) keeps the stakes low and the conflicts personal. In 1946, the release of the alien “wild card” virus transformed the world, Continue reading » The Book of Magic The Book of Magic Elizabeth Bear (et al.) The final collection from the late, great anthologist and editor Dozois (The Book of Swords) is another superior volume. It seeks, ambitiously, “to cover the whole world of magic” through 17 Continue reading » Deuces Down: A Wild Cards Novel Deuces Down: A Wild Cards Novel George R R Martin Originally published in 2002, the entertaining 16th installment to the Wild Cards series of mosaic novels (after Black Trump) sees 10 authors exploring the concept of the Deuces—people Continue reading » Three Kings Three Kings George R R Martin The enjoyable 29th Wild Cards collaborative fantasy (following Joker Moon) returns to a world changed by an alien virus that both blesses its survivors with amazing powers and curses them Continue reading » George R. R. Martin: Dreamer of Fantastic Worlds From the 'PW' Archives: In 1996, 'Publishers Weekly' talked to George R.R. Martin ahead of the release of 'A Game of Thrones,' which publisher Bantam said, "has the potential to Continue reading » PW EDITORS’ PICKS FOR THE BEST NEW BOOKS Sign Up PW EDITORS’ PICKS FOR THE BEST NEW BOOKS Sign Up Featured Fiction Reviews The Song of Stork and Dromedary The Song of Stork and Dromedary Anjet Daanje This staggering metafictional opus from Daanje (The Remembered Soldier) serves as a reminder of the enduring and mystifying impact a good story can have. It’s about a mysterious Continue reading » Shelter is Necessary for Existence Shelter is Necessary for Existence Brenda Iijima A Brooklyn family is haunted by their newly renovated brownstone in this devilishly entertaining novel from Iijima (Presence). It’s narrated by Sue, a lawyer going through Continue reading » The Disappearers The Disappearers Marlon James “I wonder what it feels like when you don’t care anymore,” reflects 19-year-old Eddy Porteous, one of many narrators in the breathtaking latest from James, who won the Booker Continue reading » The Stager The Stager Matthew Aquilone Aquilone offers a comedic tale of the early days of Covid-19 in this hilarious debut about a struggling young woman who seizes a chance at the high life during lockdown. Maya, a Continue reading » chevron_right 

 title prompt Cancel Continue 