
Dungeons & Dragons’ new art direction isn’t AI generated but almost worse—boring
New Games
Features
Investigations
Crossword
Podcasts
Announcements
About
Get in Touch
Sign in
Subscribe
tabletop
Dungeons & Dragons’ new art direction isn’t AI generated but almost worse—boring
Characters, without character.
Chase Carter
Jun 25, 2024
—
 5 min read
Credit: Wizards of the Coast
A 
slew of fresh illustrations
 from the 
Dungeons & Dragons
’ 2024 core rulebooks recently proliferated across social media, offering players a 
peek into the upcoming editions
 while also providing some easy marketing for Wizards of the Coast. As is increasingly common in a reality shared by AI-powered tools and LLMs, folks began crying foul and pointing out what they claimed was foolproof evidence of the illustrators’ pulling the wool over our collective eyes.
Two pieces in particular fell under heavy scrutiny from the sleuths on Reddit and Twitter: Svetlin Velinov’s 
depiction of the redesigned Copper Dragon
, and several pieces submitted by Wylie Beckert—including the alternate cover for the 2024 Player’s Handbook. In both instances, confident case-crackers posted screenshots festooned with red ink that pointed out missing fingers, weirdly combined limbs and tendrils, off-kilter perspective and other supposed tell-tale signs of machine fuckery—technically called “hallucinations”—from an algorithm fed on a healthy diet of other artists’ stolen work. Velinov’s piece was pilloried thanks in large part to a wonky cat creeping along the bottom portion of the composition.
Here’s the thing: the internet detectives’ were flat wrong. Worse, Velinov and Beckert both were forced to publicly defend themselves, replying in threads and under speculative posts that they did, in fact, use their human appendages to create artwork for a silly game about fantasy heroes and dice. Beckert shot back with well-deserved venom, saying “
Hey Twitter sleuths... my boobs are real too
” with a photo displaying her defiant middle finger in front of a physical print. Later, she posted a page from her sketchbook with the caption, “
Some days I draw ALL the fingers.
”
Fan-based speculation isn’t totally without merit. Wizards of the Coast has 
fended off
 several AI-generated art allegations over the past few years with claims 
connected to both 
D&D
 and 
Magic: The Gathering
. Very few of them 
have been true
, and none were directly connected to WotC staff—contracted third parties take most of the blame—but it only needs to happen once before the public loses trust. That’s the pernicious thing about AI art—its mere existence is a dark weed planted in the garden of creativity, blinding less critical eyes until everything looks like scammy, DALL-E effluent. Beckert’s accuser eventually apologized, deleting the original post and highlighting their misconception. A thin silver lining, especially when the larger sin laid across 
D&D
’s upcoming books isn’t that the art was created by robots, but that it’s just plain boring.
This post is for paying subscribers only
Subscribe now
Already have an account? 
Sign in
Read more
features
A game without players can still be played
Revisiting essays five years later: On lyric games, ownership, and an understanding of what makes up a game.
Lin Codega
Sep 4, 2026
features
In Guadalajara, kids who once photocopied game books now design RPGs and run conventions
Gaming across the US-Mexican border.
Thomas Manuel
Sep 3, 2026
opinion
Finally, a healthy relationship to crowdfunding
Mothership maker Tuesday Knight Games says the team is “exhausted” by crowdfunding initiatives meant to help small publishers.
Chase Carter
Sep 1, 2026
podcast
Reading Club: Blades in the Dark/Doskvol
This ain't Swords in the Light.
Thomas Manuel
Sep 1, 2026
Subscribe
Staff
Send a Tip (narrative)
FAQ
Send a Tip (money)
Write for Rascal
Ethics, Standards, and Disclosures
Bluesky
Public RSS
Rascal Gift Subscriptions
Full-text RSS
The Back of the Book
Rascal is a tabletop roleplaying game and culture outlet striving to sustainably publish voicey journalism that is compelling, deeply-reported, and fearlessly honest. We’re also a little cheeky.
© 2026 Rascal News
