
ENNIE Awards’ updated submission policy won’t accept AI projects… next year
New Games
Features
Investigations
Crossword
Podcasts
Announcements
About
Get in Touch
Sign in
Subscribe
culture
ENNIE Awards’ updated submission policy won’t accept AI projects… next year
The organization “will no longer accept any products containing generative AI or created with the assistance of Large Language Models or similar technologies.”
Chase Carter
Jan 27, 2025
—
 2 min read
Credit: 
ENNIE Awards/Twitter
AI-generated work will no longer be considered for one of tabletop’s largest honors, according to a policy update released by the ENNIE Awards organization. A post titled “
Revised Policy on Generative AI Usage
” has firmly shut the door in the face of projects that use LLMs or generative AI in any part of their creation, but the rule change won’t affect this year’s pool of applicants.
“Beginning with the 2025-2026 submission cycle, the ENNIE Awards will no longer accept any products containing generative AI or created with the assistance of Large Language Models or similar technologies for visual, written, or edited content,” reads the post. “Creators wishing to submit products must ensure that no AI-generated elements are included in their works. While it is not feasible to retroactively alter the rules for the 2024-2025 season, this revised policy reflects the ENNIE Awards commitment to celebrating the human creativity at the heart of the TTRPG community. The ENNIES remain a small, volunteer-run organization that values the ability to adapt quickly, when necessary, despite the challenges inherent in their mission.”
This post is for subscribers only
Subscribe now
Already have an account? 
Sign in
Read more
features
A game without players can still be played
Revisiting essays five years later: On lyric games, ownership, and an understanding of what makes up a game.
Lin Codega
Sep 4, 2026
features
In Guadalajara, kids who once photocopied game books now design RPGs and run conventions
Gaming across the US-Mexican border.
Thomas Manuel
Sep 3, 2026
opinion
Finally, a healthy relationship to crowdfunding
Mothership maker Tuesday Knight Games says the team is “exhausted” by crowdfunding initiatives meant to help small publishers.
Chase Carter
Sep 1, 2026
podcast
Reading Club: Blades in the Dark/Doskvol
This ain't Swords in the Light.
Thomas Manuel
Sep 1, 2026
Subscribe
Staff
Send a Tip (narrative)
FAQ
Send a Tip (money)
Write for Rascal
Ethics, Standards, and Disclosures
Bluesky
Public RSS
Rascal Gift Subscriptions
Full-text RSS
The Back of the Book
Rascal is a tabletop roleplaying game and culture outlet striving to sustainably publish voicey journalism that is compelling, deeply-reported, and fearlessly honest. We’re also a little cheeky.
© 2026 Rascal News
