Skip to content
Matthew Rettino
poetry, stories, #WeirdFictionChallenge
Menu
Search
Home
About
Pilgrimages
Stories
The Goddess in Him
In the Ruins of Shambhala
Not all Traps are Ancient: “In the Ruins of Shambhala” and Cultural Heritage at Risk
The Pilgrim’s Yoke
Published Work
Matthew’s Blog
#WeirdFictionChallenge
Book Reviews
Literature
Essays
Archives
#WeirdFictionChallenge
Writing Advice
Search for:
Search
Beyond this Dark House by Guy Gavriel Kay
On February 7, 2014 March 12, 2022 By matthewrettino In Poetry
You may know Guy Gavriel Kay as a historical fantasy novelist, author of River of Stars , a book that continues to be nominated for various awards. But did you know that he is also a poet?
Beyond this Dark House is that obscure volume of poetry you might have remembered seeing just before the title page of River of Stars . It should actually come of no surprise that Kay has tried his hand at poetry, given the intense lyricism and beautiful descriptions in his novel. Take the following line from Chapter 1 of River of Stars , for example, a few lines that perfectly set the tone for the whole novel:
The boy was alone in the bamboo grove on a morning swaddled with fog, a wan, weak hint of sun pushing between leaves: light trying to declare itself, not quite there.
Kay’s poems are a departure from the grand quasi-historical narratives that define his novels, but only a small one. In his introduction to the collection, Don Coles quotes a line of Kay’s verse where he claims “I have / a mild facility / that lets me turn such phrases.” Whether in prose or poetry, Coles writes that Kay has an ease with crafting words.
I would have to agree. His opening poem “Night Drive: Elegy” allows us a glimpse into Kay’s interior world as he writes about visiting the Winnipeg neighborhood where he grew up and remembering his dead father. I am unsure of the degree to which Kay tells us things that actually happened to him, but if this is Kay speaking about himself, readers of his novels will enjoy reading this intimate and nostalgic poetry.
The collection often turn towards Classical mythology, which should be unsurprising for readers familiar with Kay’s novels. “Being Orpheus” and “Psyche” in particular are well-crafted love lyrics, sensual and resonant. He also treats Shakespeare’s Twelfth Night in “Malvolio” and Biblical myth in “Cain: the Stones.”
Many hidden treasures lie in wait for truly dedicated fans of Kay who do not mind reading poetry. He toasts Tennyson in his short lyric “Shallott” and nods towards his relationship with J. R. R. Tolkien in “If I Should Fly Across the Sea Again,” to whom the poem is dedicated. Kay, who helped Christopher Tolkien edit The Silmarillion , has been close to the Tolkien family and here fantasizes about returning to an old tree in rural England and experiencing some old memories .
A few poems deal with Arthurian legends, which is the closest link I can find to Kay’s novels; it can be read as a loose tie-in to The Fionavar Tapestry . In “Guinevere at Almesbury,” Kay invites us into the monastery where Lady Guinevere resides after the fall of Camelot while she lives out the rest of her days , remembering Lancelot and Arthur–the two men she loved. “Avalon” also treats of the theme of the love triangle, a lyric that is one of my favourites. It opens with the line of dialogue that in 7 words summarizes both the conflict and the intimacy in Guinevere’s relationship to Lancelot: “ But we both knew this long ago .”
On a less sublime level, Kay is capable of adopting more colloquial, twenty-first century styles. For instance “Night Call” opens with a lover’s anxiety that she is being “too literal” on the phone. Yet it ends with this beautiful line: “We have so far to go into what there is of light.” Another poem “Power Failure” is a series of small stanzas with lines only two or three syllables long, lending you a sense of encroaching darkness as you read it. The theme of light and dark is constant through the book.
“Beyond this Dark House” is a long poem about two lovers in the Prairies who walk together at night as the world around them acquires touches of the strange and mythic. Two stanzas in particular ought to resonate with any reader of Kay. They are also a fine example of the sort of poetry you can expect. Here they are:
“You’ve walked beside me,
never knowing,
for six years now.
We’ve been together
in so many places
as I traveled, under skies
with doubled moons.
.
“Beyond this dark house
a train is running away
into the night plain.
We’ve all had
dreams break,
fantasies we shaped.”
Double moons: a reference to the night sky in Tigana perhaps? Whether or not you get the reference, these are a sweet two stanzas, and a true mark of a mature poet. There seems to be some desire for fantasy in these lines, for escape–an escape to a land not unlike the ones which Kay has written about in his novels. What is truly touching about this poem is that two moons are no cheap allusion to his novels, but a suggestion–very slight–that the second moon is the speaker’s beloved. At least that is my interpretation.
I could talk more about this poetry collection, but I will leave the rest for you to read. If you fell in love with River of Stars ‘ lyricism as much as its plot and its characters, then you must take a chance with Kay’s poetry. It will reward you.
Share this:
Share on Tumblr (Opens in new window)
Tumblr
Share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Facebook
Share on X (Opens in new window)
X
Share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
LinkedIn
Share on Pinterest (Opens in new window)
Pinterest
Like Loading...
Related
Beyond This Dark House Canada Canadian literature England Guy Gavriel Kay King Arthur legend literature Myth poetry River of Stars The Fionavar Tapestry Tigana Tolkien
Post navigation
Previous The Secret History of Fantasy, edited by Peter S. Beagle
Next Whylah Falls by George Elliott Clarke
2 thoughts on “ Beyond this Dark House by Guy Gavriel Kay ”
~sb
Hi, Matthew – fellow GGK reader here, via the fb page. You’ve made me want a re-read (not that that takes much, I’ll confess!).
I thought you’d want me to point out, though, that there’s a rather noteworthy transcription error – the line ‘I have a wild facility’ is actually ‘I have a mild facility’. Quite a different meaning than the one intended, probably warrants correcting, in fairness to the author.
(Though I admit the original always makes me smile… ‘mild’ he says… Uh, huh. In other news, water is vaguely wet.)
~Elizabeth
February 9, 2014 at 9:48 pm
Reply
matthewrettino
Yes, I agree that Kay would want to be thought of as having a more humble facility than a “wild” one. I’ve made the change. I remembering seeing the mistake, but apparently I forgot to update. Thank you very much for making this blog a better site!
February 11, 2014 at 2:05 pm
Reply
Leave your thoughts: Cancel reply
Δ
Search for:
Search
Subscribe to My Newsletter
Fiction
“The Goddess in Him”
NewMyths.com, September 2020
“The Pilgrim's Yoke ”
Bards and Sages Quarterly, October 2018
“In the Ruins of Shambhala ”
600 Second Saga, September 2017
Poems
“S ir Arthur Evans ”
Lantern Magazine, May 4th, 2021
Photo by Egor Myznik on Unsplash
"Dream: If you feed the banana to the computer, a hitman receives his orders ”
Lantern Magazine, December 29th, 2020
Photo by Louis Hansel on Unsplash
"Horologium ”
Lantern Magazine, December 20th, 2020
Photo by Rhii Photography on Unsplash
Recent Posts
The Riddle of Three Crimson Doors by Jerome Ramcharitar
May 28, 2026
Weird #110: “Saving the Gleeful Horse” by K.J. Bishop (2010)
December 26, 2025
Popular Posts
What are the Seven Pillars of Wisdom?
Dracula by Bram Stoker
My Critters List of the 5 Most Common Weaknesses in Fiction
For the Sun
"What Walmart Smells Like"
Unreliable Narrators and Historical Fantasy
Tags
archaeology
Art
books
Canada
Canadian literature
catholicism
Charles de Lint
creative writing
death
Edgar Allan Poe
Elizabethan era
England
English
epic fantasy
fantasy
fiction
Genre
Great Britain
Guy Gavriel Kay
H.P. Lovecraft
historical fantasy
history
horror
Jeff VanderMeer
John Clute
JRR Tolkien
literary fiction
literature
McGill
Montreal
Myth
Neil Gaiman
poetry
popular culture
reading
Renaissance
science
science fiction
Short Stories
supernatural
The Lord of the Rings
The Weird
Tolkien
uncanny
United Kingdom
United States
war
Weird Fiction
weird tale
writing
Website Powered by WordPress.com .
Comment
Reblog
Subscribe
Subscribed
Matthew Rettino
Join 241 other subscribers
Sign me up
Already have a WordPress.com account? Log in now.
Matthew Rettino
Subscribe
Subscribed
Sign up
Log in
Copy shortlink
Report this content
View post in Reader
Manage subscriptions
Collapse this bar
Loading Comments...
Write a Comment...
Email (Required)
Name (Required)
Website
%d
