George R.R. Martin's A Game of Thrones 

 In a day and age where door-stopper fantasy series with no apparent endings are hitting the bestseller lists, it's often hard to consider new entries into this particular sub-genre with any seriousness. After all, if Robert Jordan or Terry Goodkind are the heights of the field, what's the point of trying anything else? But each book (or series) should be judged on its own merits - and George R.R. Martin's A Song of Ice and Fire proves that there's still room for diamonds among the rough.

 The first book in the series (promised by the author to be six, and only six, volumes long) is the award-winning A Game of Thrones . Describing it isn't easy, because a short summary will miss one of the precious facets of the work. But here's an attempt to give the feel:

 Imagine a feudal kingdom on a massive continent in a world filled with many cultures and half-legendary lands and an ancient history. Imagine a time where dragons once lived but magic is now dwindling, yet the seasons can be long or short, bringing glorious summers or terrible winters that last years at a time. Imagine a massive iron throne from which seven kingdoms are ruled, with false knights and true all gathered about it in hopes of blood or glory or profit, and shadows behind it pushing the pieces that make up the game of thrones.

 That's the book for you, in a nut-shell. But if you want something more specific, try this:

 The story starts with a frightening prologue that tells us who the truest enemies are, and then turns suddenly to the castle of Winterfell from which the Starks rule the North for King Robert on his Iron Throne far to the south. A man is executed and on that bloody day direwolf pups are found next to the dead body of a huge direwolf slain by a broken antler in her neck. There just happens to be one for every son and daughter of Lord Eddard Stark, including his bastard Jon Snow, and what that strange coincidence can mean is a mystery. On that same day, more blood when news arrives that Lord Eddard's childhood fosterer and friend Jon Arryn, the man who had rebelled against a king to protect him and his best friend Robert and became Robert's Hand, has died. Slowly the history is unveiled, piece-by-piece like a jigsaw puzzle forming into place haphazardly, and layers of events are formed that mold the lives of all the characters.

 What follows is a tumult surrounded by the distant tremor of fear that comes when we hear the Stark motto, "Winter is coming.". Politics, murders, conspiracies. Tournaments, love, hatred. War, battle, trials. Disaster and victory. And that's not the half of it, for a parallel but separate storyline follows Daenerys Targaryen, Stormborn, the last daughter of the dragonkings who had ruled the Seven Kingdoms for three hundred years. Wed to a barbarian khal with an army of 40,000 nomadic warriors, she goes from childhood to adulthood in a harrowing journey that follows her progression further and further from the things she knew.

 It's one of the best fantasies written in the last forty years, and it can stand proudly up there right next to The Lord of the Rings . Where that great work is inspired by epic legends and myth, this one is more grounded in history and reality. You couldn't count the out-and-out villains on the finger of one-hand, because they don't exist, and while the heroes are in greater number they're all flawed. Eddard Stark, for example, is the epitome of decency and honour but he's unsubtle and the tasks he take on are more over-the-head than he could possibly imagine. It should be no surprise to say that in a world filled with so much grey, happy endings may be far and few, instead becoming ambiguous or even terrible. Good people die, as do bad people, and the wicked win as many victories as the good.

 If you want something written in a straightforward manner, without a lot of politics, without bloody battles or frank language and sexual situations, without a huge cast of characters and more than a few POV characters whose chapters are always divided by other POVs lying in-between, then A Game of Thrones may not be for you. But if you want something that will shake you up, that will surprise you and shock you, leaving you elated and angry and sad by the page-turn, and making you think , then give it a try.

 If you'd like to buy A Game of Thrones , the links below will take you straight to the edition of your choice. If a particular edition is missing from the list entirely it likely means its out of print, but if we're wrong please do let us know so we can correct this.

 Amazon.com : US paperback .
 Amazon.co.uk : UK paperback .
 The Internet Bookshop : UK paperback .
 BoL.Com : UK paperback , US paperback 
 AdLibris : UK paperback , US paperback .

The A Song of Ice and Fire setting is copyright © 1996-2001 George R.R. Martin .

This site (save for noted exceptions) is copyright © 1999-2001 Elio M. García and Linda Antonsson . All unauthorised usage is explicitly disallowed.

Hosting is provided by Noderunner.net .

Updates, expanded copyright information, viewing recommendations and other important information can be found here , while a site-specific search engine and site map can be found here .

~ Westeros ~ The Citadel ~ Blood of Dragons ~ A Ring of Ice and Fire ~

~ Concordance ~ So Spake Martin 
 ~ Heraldry ~ Characters ~ History ~ Prophecies ~ Gallery ~ Reviews ~ Miscellany ~ Links ~
