tag -->

 Skip to main content 

 Free standard shipping on all orders 

 Search 

 To hear autocomplete suggestions tab past the search button after typing keywords.

 Shop By Subject 

 New & Bestselling 

 Featured Books 

 Request an Inspection Copy 

 Publish With Us 

 Sale & Offers 

 Preview Book 

 Preview Book 

 Table of Contents 
 Book Description 
 Critics' Reviews 
 Instructor Resources 

 1st Edition

 George R.R. Martin and the Fantasy Form 

 By Joseph Young 
 Copyright 2019 

 230 Pages

 by 
 Routledge

 230 Pages

 by 
 Routledge

 230 Pages

 by 
 Routledge

 Also available as eBook on: 

 Taylor & Francis eBooks 

 (Institutional Purchase) Opens in new tab or window 

 Description

 Using the frameworks of literary theory relevant to modern fantasy, Dr. Joseph Young undertakes a compelling examination of George R. R. Martin’s A Song of Ice and Fire and his employment of the structural demands and thematic aptitudes of his chosen genre. Examining Martin’s approaches to his obligations and licenses as a fantasist, Young persuasively argues that the power of A Song of Ice... Read more 

 Using the frameworks of literary theory relevant to modern fantasy, Dr. Joseph Young undertakes a compelling examination of George R. R. Martin’s A Song of Ice and Fire and his employment of the structural demands and thematic aptitudes of his chosen genre. Examining Martin’s approaches to his obligations and licenses as a fantasist, Young persuasively argues that the power of A Song of Ice and Fire derives not from Martin’s abandonment of genre convention, as is sometimes asserted, but from his ability to employ those conventions in ways that further, rather than constrain, his authorial program.

 Written in clear and accessible prose, George R. R. Martin and the Fantasy Form is a timely work which encourages a reassessment of Martin and his approach to his most famous novels. This is an important work for both students and critics of Martin’s work and argues for a reading of A Song of Ice and Fire as a wide-ranging example of what modern fantasy can accomplish when employed with an eye to its capabilities and purpose.

 Read less 

 Table of Contents

 Acknowledgements 

 Abbreviations 

 Introduction 

 Chapter 1: The American Pratchett? – Muck and Modality 

 Chapter 2: "Enough about Whores" – Sex and Characterisation 

 Chapter 3: "Look with Your Eyes" – Immersion and Thinning 

 Chapter 4: "Dead Men Come Hunting" – Intrusion and Recovery 

 Chapter 5: "Remember that You were Brothers" – Superstition and Cohesion 

 Chapter 6: "But Here You Are" – Magic and Healing 

 Conclusions 

 Bibliography 

 Index

 Author(s)

 Biography

 Dr. Joseph Rex Young lives and works in Dunedin, New Zealand, where he pursues his research interests in Gothic literature, neo-Romanticism, and the intellectual history and structure of modern fantasy narrative. He has taught at universities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Germany, and New Zealand. This is his first monograph.

 Critics' Reviews

 "Young deftly explains the sophisticated literary techniques underpinning Game of Thrones / A Song of Ice and Fire , showing George R.R. Martin to be a master craftsman of the fantasy epic. George R.R. Martin and the Fantasy Form is a pioneering work of Martin criticism." 

 Kris Swank, Signum University and Pima Community College

 "Dr. Young’s treatment of Martin’s A Song of Ice and Fire through the perspectives of most of the important theories of fantasy of the past thirty years makes it a critical book for the student of Martin and, indeed, for the student of fantasy literature." 

 Susan Johnston, Department of English, University of Regina 

 Add to Cart 

 About VitalSource eBooks

 VitalSource is a leading provider of eBooks.

 Access your materials anywhere, at anytime.

 Customer preferences like text size, font type, page color and more.

 Take annotations in line as you read.

 View VitalSource eBook FAQs » 

 Multiple eBook Copies

 This eBook is already in your shopping cart. If you would like to replace it with a different purchasing option please remove the current eBook option from your cart.

 View Cart 

 Book Series

 This book is included in the following book series:

 Routledge Studies in Contemporary Literature 

 Related Subjects

 Gothic Literature

 Science Fiction

 20th Century Literature

 Literature

 Language & Literature

 Literary Genres

 Literature by Period

 Book Preview

 Pre-Order Notification

 We're sorry, your request could not be processed 

 Success! We will email you once this format of the book is available for pre-order.

 Please provide your email address so that we may notify you once this format of the book can be pre-ordered.

 Email Address 

 Email Address will only be used for pre-order notification. 

 Submit 

 Back To Top 

 © Informa UK Limited, an Informa Plc company 

 SOCIAL NETWORKS 

 List of social networks 

 Secure Shopping Payment Options 

 List of payment options 

 Contact Us

 Customer Service 

 Editorial Contacts 

 eUpdates Sign Up 

 Rights and Permissions 

 Sales Contacts 

 Become an Affiliate Partner Opens in new tab or window 

 FAQs 

 Partners 

 Customer Resources

 Authors 

 Booksellers 

 Instructors 

 - Request An Inspection Copy 

 Librarians 

 Press and Media 

 Societies & Associations Opens in new tab or window 

 Students Login (Student Beans) 

 Our Products

 eBooks 

 eBook+ 

 Book Series 

 Online Platforms 

 Open Access Books 

 Focus Shortform Books 

 About Us

 About Routledge 

 About Taylor & Francis Opens in new tab or window 

 Taylor & Francis Journals Opens in new tab or window 

 Careers Opens in new tab or window 

 Blog Opens in new tab or window 

 Policies

 Accessibility 

 AI Policy Opens in new tab or window 

 Conference Proceedings Opens in new tab or window 

 Inspection Copy T&Cs 

 Privacy Policy Opens in new tab or window 

 Returns & Cancellations 

 Shipping Policy 

 Sustainability 

 Tax Exemptions 

 Terms & Conditions 

 The country you have selected will result in the following:

 Product pricing will be adjusted to match the corresponding currency.

 The title Perception will be removed from your cart because it is not available in this region.

 Continue 
 Cancel
