Blog Home George's Website 

 Not a Blog

 Hiya, Kids, Hiya Hiya 

 February 7, 2026 at 5:55 pm

 It’s been a long time since we plucked my magic twanger, I know.

 No, I have not forgotten how to blog.  I just haven’t had the time, or the energy.  Too much else to do, too many projects, too many deadlines, and I was behind on everything.   Too much death as well; we lost some close friends during the last few months, along with artists, writers, and other celebrities whose work meant a lot to us, even if we did not know them personally.  I wanted to talk about all of that.

 Oh, and politics… I have refrained from making any comment on the things going down in the real world this last year, but that does not mean I have nothing to say.

 Had I found time back in the fall, I might have made some football posts too, as I have in past years, but given the seasons the Jets and the Giants had, it was just as well I didn’t.   I am not that masochistic.

 I’ve been on the road a lot as well, more than I’ve been for the past several years; with A KNIGHT OF THE SEVEN KINGDOMS set to debut in January there was a lot of promotion to do.   There was worldcon in Seattle, Bubonicon in Albuquerque, the New York City Comicon, two weeks in the United Kingdom to speak at Oxford, visit my British publishers in London, check out Stratford-upon-Avon, and return to Belfast where Ira, Peter, Dexter, and the rest of their merry company were filming the second season of Dunk and Egg, based on my novella “The Sworn Sword.”   Most recently, I was in Berlin for the world premiere  HBO’s adaptation of “The Hedge Knight,” the first season of A KNIGHT OF THE SEVEN KINGDOMS.

 The last time I visited Germany was a quarter century ago… it came as a real shock when I realized that, it did not seem nearly so long.   The years do go by quickly.

 I hoped to blog about all of this… but there was just so much, and every day it seemed there was more.   I prefer not to lug a computer along with me when I travel.  (I tried it, decades ago, and it never worked).   I do have a staff of loyal minions who take care of my Not A Blog for me when I cannot, and they filled in for me a bit, at the start at least.  The blog posts that went up on November 10, December 12, and December 15, which you’ll find below, were all Minion Posts.  The last one I posted myself was “Dunk & Egg Take the Big Apple,” which went up on October 7, after I got home from the NYC Comicon, before travel, deadlines, deaths, and the like left me overwhelmed.

 I am back at home in Santa Fe at last, I am pleased to say, settling back in at my computer in the Land of Enhantment.  Trying to cover everything that’s happened since October in one gulp would require a blog post as long as one of my novels, I fear, so I am not going to do that.  I do want to catch up some, however, so I  instead I hope to do a series of short mini-posts here, to touch on matters both large and small… though not in the detail I might have had I not fallen so far behind.   We’ll see how that goes.   Watch this space.   (I expect the posts to be all over the place.   So much to cover).

 It has been an exciting half year.  “Interesting times,” as the infamous proverb says.

 But it’s good to be home.

 Current Mood: stressed

 Tags: life and death , travel , writing 

 Dunk, Egg, a Few Random Mutterings 

 January 28, 2025 at 7:14 am

 Where does the time go?  January went by in a flash.  I had a lot of posts I wanted to make, a lot of things I wanted to say,  I had writing to do, I had zooming to do, meetings to attend, I had scripts to read, notes to give.  There was travel, some for business and some for fun.  There were friends to mourn, books to blurb.  I saw a few good movies and television shows, that gave me some pleasure.  The NFL did not.  I missed most of the games this season, but that was probably a good thing, sinceit relieved me of having to write any of those “life is meaningless and full of pain” posts… though it was , the Jets were wretched and the Giants were worse.

 We returned from our summer travels on August 15, and I had a ton of things I wanted to talk about.  Instead of one long post, I decided to break up my trip and make a series of shorter ones.  I figured I’d have it all done by the end of August.  Well, no… I still have a worldcon to cover, and the Alfies, and my visit to Tolkien’s grave.  I DID cover some of that… not in my Not A Blog, but in a rambling speech I gave at Bubonicon… but my phone screwed up and the video we made was lost, so my Not A Blog ended up being Not A Speech.  Sigh.

 Well, I will try to get to that later… eventually… for now, let me touch briefly on better news.

 A KNIGHT OF THE SEVEN KINGDOMS, for starts.  It’s done.  Ira and his team wrapped the first season months ago, and moved right on to post production.  I’ve seen all six episodes now (the last two in rough cuts, admittedly), and I loved them.   Dunk and Egg have always been favorites of mine, and the actors we found to portray them are just incredible.  The rest of the cast are terrific as well.  Wait until you guys meet the Laughing Storm. and Tanselle Too-Tall.

 A KNIGHT OF THE SEVEN KINGDOMS is an adaptation of “The Hedge Knight,” the first of the novellas I wrote about them.  It’s as faithful as adaptation as a reasonable man could hope for (and you all know how incredibly  reasonable I am on that particular subject).   Viewers who are looking for action, and more action, and only action… well, this one may not satisfy you.  There’s a fight scene here, as exciting as anyone could ask for, but there are no dragons this time around, no huge battles, no white walkers… this is a character piece, and its focus is on duty and honor, on chivalry and all it means.  “The Hedge Knight” was published between A GAME OF THRONES and A CLASH OF KINGS in Robert Silverberg’s epic anthology LEGENDS, and was so popular that it brought tens of thousands of new readers to Westeros.   Sales of my novels were much higher after LEGENDS than before, and for that I credit Silverbob, and Anne Groell, and Dunk and Egg.   This one ranks as one of the best stories I’ve ever written, and I am so so so pleased that Ira Parker, Ti Mikkel, Aziza Barnes (may they rest in peace), Owen Harris, and our astonishing cast and crew did right by them.

 The series will make its debut late this year, I am now told.  How late, I could not say.  Maybe in the fall.

 I hope you will love the show as much as I do.

 Meanwhile, we’ll be moving on to “The Sworn Sword,” the second tale of Dunk & Egg.   And once I finish THE WINDS OF WINTER, I will need to get hopping on “The Village Hero,” and all the other tales that await the lads.  Don’t worry, I am sure you folks will remind me.

 Current Mood: excited

 Tags: everyday life , hbo , nfl , politics , travels , writing 

 A Stop at Oxford 

 November 13, 2024 at 8:13 am

 Oxford is a legendary place.  One of the world’s great universities, and the literary capital of England, rich with history, it has figured in more novels than I can count, including many classic works of fantasy.   Philip Pullman’s amazing trilogy HIS DARK MATERIAL is set there.  So is BABEL, OR THE NECESSITY FOR VIOLENCE, R.F. Kuang’s Nebula-winning bestseller.   It was the model for Hogwart’s in J.K. Rowling’s Harry Potter books, and a lot of the Potter films were shot there.   And of course J.R.R. Tolkien lived and taught there.

 Somehow I never made it there on any of my previous visits to the UK, but I was determined to not it miss it this time around.    When the Oxford Writers House invited me to join Pullman for a panel discussion on Writing Fantasy, I had to say yes.   I had never met Pullman … though I’m a huge fan of HIS DARK MATERIALS, with its daemons and armored bears.   ( Armored bears!  So cool!!)    It would have been a thrill to share a platform with him.   I  also wanted to  pop into the Eagle & Child as well,  the pub where Tolkien and C.S. Lewis and the Inklings got together to share a pint and talk about books.

 Alas, it turned out that the Bird & Baby (as the Eagle & Child was nicknamed by the locals)  was closed for renovations.   And then Philip Pullman got ill, and had to cancel, so I was left to fend for myself.

 Fortunately I have lots of practice with fending for myself.

 Instead of a panel, the event turned into an interview and booksigning.  We had a sold out crowd (about 450, they told me) lots of eager students and aspiring writers, and more questions than I could possibly answer if I had been there for a week instead of a day.    And beforehand I got a short tour of Oxford itself, which was just as magical as I thought it would be.   The library was astonishing, and they even showed me some of J.R.R. Tolkien’s working papers… including his first vision of Helm’s Deep, which he drew on the back of a student essay he was grading.

 Oxford was kind enough to record the session, and upload it to YouTube.

 After the questions, we moved to the side of the room  to sign books.   We had a wonderful group of fans and readers on hand.   Not all of them were Oxford students; we had people there from all over England, and some from across the Channel as well.   Several presented me with handwritten fan letters, and I can’t tell you how much I appreciated that.  The letters were heartfelt, thoughtful, and very knowledgeable about my work.   The sort of letters that Tolkien himself might have been moved by.

 I had a wonderful time.  I only wish our visit had been longer.  Oxford was just as fascinating as I hoped it would be, and I could easily have spent days exploring it.   But the road goes ever on, and I had promises to keep, so the best we could do was spend the night, and then head off back to London…

 But not before we made a stop on the outskirts of town, to visit the graveyard where Tolkien and his wife were laid to read.   I could not leave town without paying homage to the greatest fantasist of all time.

 But I’ll save my thoughts about that for the next installment of my “travel blog.”

 I hope I will be able to return to Oxford the next time I make it over to England.   There’s so much left to see.

 Current Mood: pleased

 Tags: a song of ice and fire , signed books , signings , travels , worldcon , writing 

 GOING UP, COMING DOWN 

 September 30, 2024 at 9:52 pm

 Kris Krisofferson has died.

 I knew I would have to write those words eventually, and probably sooner rather than later.   Kris has not looked good the past few times I’ve seen him on the tube.   His health has not been good for some years.   Still, one can hope.   The world was so much richer with Kristofferson in it, and it is poorer now that he is gone.   But we still have his songs, and what songs they are.

 I am no musician myself; that’s a gift I never had.  I cannot sing, I cannot dance, I cannot read music.  But that doesn’t mean I do not love music… or rather, songs .  Instrumental music, classical music, operas, those are all great, no doubt, but they are not for me.   I am a word guy.  I want the lyrics.  I want them to be audible, not drowned out by the instruments.  I want them to be beautiful, I want them to touch me, to move me, to make me think, become a part of me.   Some of you may have noticed that the word “song” keeps appearing in the titles of my books and stories.  A SONG FOR LYA, SONGS OF STARS AND SHADOWS, SONGS THE DEAD MEN SING, DREAMSONGS, A SONG OF ICE & FIRE, SONGS OF THE DYING EARTH.  There’s a would-be songwriter buried inside me, no doubt.    Oh, I managed some to do “The Rains of Castamere” and “The Bear and the Maiden Fair” (part of it, anyway) and “The Dornishmen’s Wife” and “The Last of the Giants,” but damn , writing songs is hard, even if you’re only doing lyrics and leaving the actual music to the listeners.

 I don’t know how Kris Kristofferson did it.

 But he did it better than anyone else.

 He has been my favorite singer/ songwriter ever since I first heard “Me and Bobby McGee,” back when I was in college.

 It was the Janis Joplin version I first encountered, as with most people.   Kristofferson was a songwriter then, but not yet established as a singer himself.   The song was a huge huge hit, the biggest Joplin ever had.   Sadly, it was a posthumous hit, since Janis had died shortly before it was released.    In the days and years and decades that followed, many other people covered “Me and Bobby McGee; there was Roger Miller and Johnny Cash and Gordon Lightfoot and Reba McEntire and many many more.

 I liked almost all of them, but the one I loved best was Kristofferson’s own version, when it was finally recorded and released.

 On my recent visit to England, there were several instances where strangers came up to tell me how much they loved my books, how my writing spoke to them, moved them, even changed their lives.   That’s a lovely thing to hear.   I’ve been on the other end of that as well.  There have been songs and stories and books and authors who have had profound effects on my own life.   Sometimes it seems as if the writer is speaking only to you.

 “Me and Bobby McGee” was like that for me.   I’d had my own Bobby McGee not long before I heard the song.   No, I did not pull my harpoon out of a dirty red bandana and she did not sing the blues, and we’d never rode a diesel from Baton Rouge to New Orleans… but we were good together, and then I’d let her slip away (not near Salinas).   Afterwards, alone, I knew what Kris meant by “freedom’s just another word for nothing left to lose,” and like the singer, I would gladly have traded all of my tomorrows for a single yesterday.

 Kristofferson was a poet.  His best lines haunted me for years.   Only a few years later, I wrote a story I titled “… for a single yesterday” for an anthology called EPOCH.   A  post holocaust story about a singer and a lost love, natch.   I wanted it to be the best story I’d ever written.  It wasn’t.  Some folks liked it well enough, but as a tribute to Kristofferson, I would have liked it to be stronger.

 Kris was no one hit wonder.   In the years that followed, I bought every one of his albums as soon as they came out.  (Albums were these big vinyl things we listened to then).   And there were other great songs that I fell in love with, that spoke to me almost as deeply as “Me and Bobby McGee” had.   There was “Sunday Morning Coming Down” and “Casey’s Last Ride” and “For the Good Times,” there was “Billy Dee” and “Help Me Make It Through the  Night” and “The Taker,” there was “Silver Tongued Devil” and “From the Bottle to the Bottom” and “Loving Her Was Easier,” and “Silver: the Hunger” and “Darby’s Castle” and “Here Comes That Rainbow Again” and…

 This one.

 Half talking, half singing, Kris talking about his early days as a singer.   It seemed deeply personal when I heard it; for him, but it sp0ke to me as well.   Especially during the hard years, when my career crashed and burned (as it did from time to time).

 Kristofferson was an amazing man, all in all.   A Rhodes Scholar,  Flew a helicopter in Vietnam.   Swept floor as a janitor in Nashville trying to break in.   Then he became an actor, and a damn good one.  CISCO PIKE.   BLUME IN LOVE.  PAT GARRETT AND BILLY THE KID.  (Best Billy the Kid movie ever made).  ALICE DOESN’T LIVE HERE ANY MORE.  A STAR IS BORN (the Streisand version).  LONE STAR.  He was damned good at that too.

 But it will be as a singer and songwriter that he will be remembered.

 For “Me and Bobby McGee” and all those other songs… especially this one.   He was singing about himself here, not just the friends he mentions in the opening.  And he was singing about me and  my writer friends as well, my collaborators and contemporaries and rivals, all of us struggling to tell our stories and make a living and survive in SF and fantasy in those bygone days.  We were all pilgrims.

 (I slipped a reference to this song in one of my stories as well).

 I heard Kris live in concert once, back in the 1970s, when I was living in Chicago.   I was never lucky enough to meet him in person.   I wish I had gone backstage after that show and tried to introduce myself, but I was way too shy and I doubt I could have gotten in.   I wish I had tried, though, if  just to tell him how much his music meant to me.   Assuming I just didn’t freeze up and lose my tongue.

 If I could speak to him now,  I know what I would say.

 His going up was worth the coming down.

 And he went up very high.  We shall not hear his like again.

 Current Mood: sad

 Tags: game of thrones , life and death , music , writing 

 A Belated Blog 

 September 9, 2024 at 2:10 pm

 I am way behind in my Not-a-Blogging, I know.

 Along with a thousand other things.

 I was traveling in Europe from July 15 to August 15.    I do not travel with a computer (never have), so I had hoped to catch up before I left… but it was hard, hard.   The first half of my year was pretty miserable, dominated as it was by the death of Howard Waldrop on January 14.  Howard was my oldest friend in science fiction community; we had been corresponding since 1963, when we were both in high school.  His passing came suddenly, only six days after our last conversation,  and there’s a part of me that still cannot accept it, that wants to pick up the phone and ring him up and hear his voice again.

 Nor did I find much solace in my work.   Writing came hard, and though I did produce some new pages on both THE WINDS OF WINTER (yes) and BLOOD & FIRE (the sequel to FIRE & BLOOD, the second part of my Targaryen history), I would have liked to turn out a lot more.   My various television projects ate up most of those months.   Some of that was pleasant (DARK WINDS, and THE HEDGE KNIGHT), most of it was not.   The stress kept mounting, the news went from bad to worse to worst,  my mood seemed to swing between fury and despair, and at night I tossed and turned when I should have been sleeping.   When I did sleep, well, my dreams were none too pleasant either.

 I had been planning our European trip for some time.  The Dunk & Egg show would start  filming in July and I wanted to visit the shoot in Northern Ireland, and a month later there would be a worldcon in Glasgow.   I had not been to a worldcon since the Dublin convention in 2019 (we won’t count Covid Con, the New Zealand worldcon in 2020 that went all virtual) and I wanted to return.   Fandom had been my second family since 1971, and worldcon our family reunion.   Even so, I had so much on my plate that I seriously debated whether I should cancel the whole trip so I could stay home and fight on.   I am glad I decided against that.   I was so stressed out that I doubt I would have accomplished much anyway… and the trip turned out to be a blessing, balm for my bruised soul.

 We had a great time on the trip, and I meant to tell you all about our adventures and experiences when we returned.     Those will be happy posts, made of happy memories, and I still mean to write them… soon…

 But when we finally got back to the Land of Enchantment I had a thousand emails waiting for me.  I also managed to bring covid back home with me, after picking it up at worldcon.   It was a mild case, thankfully, but even so, it put me out of action for a week or so, with the worst sore throat of my life.  (I am fully  recovered and testing negative once again, thank you.  Don’t get covid, boys and girls, it is no fun at all).  And, alas, the moment I opened my computer again, the stress came rushing back.   I managed to put my problems aside for a month, but they were still waiting for me.

 So… I have a lot to blog about.   Big things, small things, glad news and sad news.   I do want to talk about the trip while it is still fresh in my mind, but there is so much else…

 Current Mood: stressed

 Tags: life and death , travel , worldcon , writing 

 Words of Wisdom 

 June 19, 2024 at 9:03 am

 Current Mood: contemplative

 Tags: life and death , writing 

 The Adaptation Tango 

 May 24, 2024 at 9:05 am

 A few years back, Neil Gaiman and I did a joint event in New York City, when we were both in town.

 It was a lot of fun, as events with Neil always are.   We told some funny stories, talked about books and comics, about SANDMAN and WILD CARDS and days at cons… and touched on some serious topics too.

 I would like to upload  a video of the event if I could, but I am not sure one exists.   If anyone was recording us, I have never seen the tape.   But VARIETY had the best report of the session.

 https://variety.com/2022/tv/news/george-rr-martin-neil-gaiman-hate-hollywood-changing-source-material-1235416651/ 

 That was all back in 2022, but very little has changed since then.   If anything, things have gotten worse.   Everywhere you look, there are more screenwriters and producers eager to take great stories and “make them their own.”   It does not seem to matter whether the source material was written by Stan Lee, Charles Dickens, Ian Fleming, Roald Dahl, Ursula K. Le Guin, J.R.R. Tolkien, Mark Twain, Raymond Chandler, Jane Austen, or… well, anyone.   No matter how major a writer it is, no matter how great the book, there always seems to be someone on hand who thinks he can do better, eager to take the story and “improve” on it.   “The book is the book, the film is the film,” they will tell you, as if they were saying something profound.   Then they make the story their own.

 They never make it better, though.   Nine hundred ninety-nine times out of a thousand, they make it worse.

 Once in a while, though, we do get a really good adaptation of a really good book, and when that happens , it deserves applause.

 I can came across one of those instances recently, when I binged the new FX version of SHOGUN.

 Must confess, I was dubious when I first heard they were making another version of the Clavell novel.   It has been a long time, a long long LONG time, but I read the book when it first came out in the late 70s and was mightily impressed.   (I really need to give it a reread one of these days, but there are so many books, so little time).   And the 1980 miniseries starring Richard Chamberlain as the Anjin was a landmark of long form television, right up with with ROOTS; why do it over again, when that version was so good?

 I am glad they did, though.   The new SHOGUN is superb.   Better than Chamberlain’s version, you ask?   Hmmm, I don’t know.   I have not watched the 1980 miniseries since, well, 1980.   That one was great too.   The fascinating thing is that while the old and new versions have some significant differences — the subtitles that make the Japanese dialogue intelligible to English speaking viewers being the biggest — they are both faithful to the Clavell novel in their own way.   I think the author would have been pleased.   Both old and new screenwriters did honor to the source material, and gave us terrific adaptations, resisting the impulse to “make it their own.”

 But don’t take my word for it.   Watch it yourself.

 Acting, directing, set design, costume… it’s all splendid here.  Along with the writing.

 And if SHOGUN is a big enough hit, maybe the same team will adapt some of Clavell’s other novels.

 Current Mood: thoughtful

 Tags: adaptation , television and film , writing 

 Women of the Press 

 April 22, 2024 at 4:34 pm

 Last month I zipped down to the Isleta Resort south of Albuquerque for an afternoon, to deliver the keynote speech for the 75th anniversary luncheon of the New Mexico Press Women, and to receive their Courageous Communicator Award.

 That was a singular honor, and one that really set me to thinking.   Our world needs courageous communicators more than ever in these dark divided days, when so many people would rather silence those they disagree with than engage them in debate and discussion.    I deplore that… but had I really done enough, myself, to be recognized for courageous speech?

 I am not sure I have, truth be told.  Yes, I’ve spoken up from time to time, on issues both large and small… but not always.  It is always easier to remain silent, to stay on the sidelines and let the storms wash over you.   The more I pondered, the more convinced I became that I need to do more.   That we all need to do more.

 I started by delivering a 45 minute keynote address, on the subject of free speech and censorship.   Which, I am happy to say, was very well received (I was not entirely sure it would be).

 After the luncheon plates had been cleared away and the speeches delivered, retiring NMPW president Sherri Burr handed out the awards, including the Courageous Communicator.

 The text on the trophy reads, “New Mexico Press Women On the Occasion of its 75th Anniversary Bestows its COURAGEOUS COMMUNICATOR AWARD on March 15-16, 2024 to George R.R. Martin for building new worlds and creating strong, yet nuanced, women characters in his books and television shows.”

 My thanks to Sherri, and to all the members of the NMWP.

 Current Mood: contemplative

 Tags: awards , speeches , writing 

 Farewell to Melanie 

 April 17, 2024 at 7:08 am

 I was saddened to read that Melanie, the singer/ songwriter whose career took off after a memorable performance at Woodstock, died on January 23, at the age of 76.   Her real name was Melanie Safka.

 I was not at Woodstock, alas (though Parris was), but I started hearing Melanie on the radio soon thereafter.   Never met her, never attended a concert, but I always loved her music.   She had a lovely voice, and wrote some wonderful songs with roots in both rock and folk.   “Candles in the Rain,” “The Nickle Song,” the lively funny sexy “Brand New Key” (her only number one hit, I believe) and many many more.

 Including this one:

 RIP, sweet lady.

 Current Mood: sad

 Tags: life and death , writing 

 Delivering The Chair 

 April 2, 2024 at 8:58 am

 It was Robert A. Heinlein who said we can never pay back the people who helped us when we started, so we need to pay forward instead.

 The last week of February saw me return to the Chicago area, for a visit to my alma mater, Northwestern University’s Medill School of Journalism.   Not for a homecoming or a class reunion, no… but to give away a chair.   February 28 was the official investiture for Cheryl Lu-Lien Tan, a fellow Medill alum (Class of ’97) as the inaugural holder of the George R.R. Martin Chair in Storytelling.

 I attended Medill back in what they now like to call “the turbulent 60s”  (and no kidding, they were pretty turbulent), and departed with a couple of degrees, BSJ ’70, MSJ ’71.  I did not get back often  in the half-century that followed, alas.   Life got in the way, as it has a habit of doing.   But I always looked back fondly on my years in Evanston, and the courses and teachers that helped shape me as a writer.

 I had been writing long before I arrived in Illinois, of course.   Monster stories for other kids in the projects in grade school (got a nickle each for them, enough for a Milky Way, and if I sold two I could buy a comic book) and amateur superhero stories for comic fanzines when I got to high school (Powerman, Dr. Weird, the White Raider, and Garizan the Mechanical Warrior), but it was during my years at Northwestern that I began to submit to professional magazines.   It was while I was in Evanston that I got my first professional rejection slip (from AMERICAN SCANDINAVIAN REVIEW, for “The Fortress,” a story I wrote for a history class at Northwestern) and made my first professional sale (from GALAXY, for “The Hero,” a story I wrote for a creative writing class at Northwestern).   So it seemed only fitting for me to “pay forward” to Medill for all I learned there, by endowing a chair in storytelling.

 The investiture was my first opportunity to meet Cheryl Lu-Lien Tan, who was chosen over thirty other highly qualified applicants to be the first “GRRM Professor.”   It seemed only fitting that I give her an actual chair, as well, as the title… so I did.

 (I considered presenting her with a full-size Iron Throne, but it would not have fit in her new office).

 Cheryl has written both fiction and non-fiction.   She has been a news and fashion reporter for the Wall Street Journal, InStyle, the Baltimore Sun, and other major news outlets.  Her books include the bestselling novel SARONG PARTY GIRLS, set in her native Singapore.  She will teach both undergraduate and graduate students, organize panels and conferences, and conduct an intensive writing workshop every summer,  to help professional journalists cross over into creative writing.

 “​​Storytelling is at the foundation of our school, and Cheryl’s expertise in telling her own stories and helping others tell their stories will allow Medill to build on its tradition of excellence in this area,” Medill Dean Charles Whitaker said when announcing her appointment.

 Medill presented Cheryl Tan with a splendid medallion at her investiture.   (She is wearing it in the picture above).   And hey, I got one too.

 It was such a delight to be back in Evanston, if only for a few hours… and to meet Cheryl Tan.  I expect that she’ll be terrific.

 Current Mood: pleased

 Tags: charity , Northwestern , writing 

 Older » 

 This blog is the only place for official communication from George R.R. Martin. For press inquiries, please contact David Moench 

 Latest Month

 September 2026 

 M 
 T 
 W 
 T 
 F 
 S 
 S 

   1 2 3 4 5 6 

 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 

 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 

 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 

 28 29 30 

 Tags

 a dance with dragons 
 a game of thrones 
 anthologies 
 artwork 
 a song of ice and fire 
 awards 
 bantam spectra 
 calendar 
 charity 
 comic books 
 conventions 
 dance with dragons 
 dark sword 
 editing 
 everyday life 
 fandom 
 films 
 game of thrones 
 hbo 
 hugo awards 
 interviews 
 jean cocteau 
 jean cocteau cinema 
 jean cocteau cinema bookstore 
 life and death 
 meow wolf 
 miniatures 
 movies 
 movie theatre 
 nfl 
 politics 
 santa fe 
 science fiction 
 signed books 
 signings 
 song of ice and fire 
 subterranean 
 television 
 television and film 
 tor 
 travel 
 travels 
 wild cards 
 worldcon 
 writing 

 Recent Posts

 The Mad King is coming to London 

 Better Late Than Never 

 Song of Ice and Fire 2027 Calendar 

 The Mad King Meets the Stage – Tickets on Sale Now 

 The Mad King Is Coming 

 Syndicate

 © 2026 George R.R. Martin. All rights reserved.
