 
 AI isn’t very good at history, new paper finds | TechCrunch 
 Disrupt 2026: OpenAI, Anthropic, Replit, and more take over 6 industry stages. 25% off tickets now 
 Back by popular demand: Save up to $300 on Disrupt 
 Close 
 TechCrunch Desktop Logo 
 TechCrunch Mobile Logo 
 Search Submit 
 Site Search Toggle 
 Mega Menu Toggle 
 Topics 
 Latest 
 AI 
 Amazon 
 Apps 
 Biotech & Health 
 Climate 
 Cloud Computing 
 Commerce 
 Crypto 
 Enterprise 
 EVs 
 Fintech 
 Fundraising 
 Gadgets 
 Gaming 
 Google 
 Government & Policy 
 Hardware 
 Instagram 
 Layoffs 
 Media & Entertainment 
 Meta 
 Microsoft 
 Privacy 
 Robotics 
 Security 
 Social 
 Space 
 Startups 
 TikTok 
 Transportation 
 Venture 
 More from TechCrunch
 Staff 
 Events 
 Startup Battlefield 
 StrictlyVC 
 Newsletters 
 Podcasts 
 Videos 
 Partner Content 
 TechCrunch Brand Studio 
 Contact Us 
 Image Credits: metamorworks / Getty Images 
 AI 
 AI isn’t very good at history, new paper finds 
 Charles Rollet 
 7:01 AM PST · January 19, 2025 
 AI might excel at certain tasks like coding or generating a podcast . But it struggles to pass a high-level history exam, a new paper has found. 
 A team of researchers has created a new benchmark to test three top large language models (LLMs) — OpenAI’s GPT-4, Meta’s Llama, and Google’s Gemini — on historical questions. The benchmark, Hist-LLM, tests the correctness of answers according to the Seshat Global History Databank, a vast database of historical knowledge named after the ancient Egyptian goddess of wisdom.  
 The results, which were presented last month at the high-profile AI conference NeurIPS, were disappointing, according to researchers affiliated with the Complexity Science Hub (CSH), a research institute based in Austria. The best-performing LLM was GPT-4 Turbo, but it only achieved about 46% accuracy — not much higher than random guessing.  
 “The main takeaway from this study is that LLMs, while impressive, still lack the depth of understanding required for advanced history. They’re great for basic facts, but when it comes to more nuanced, PhD-level historical inquiry, they’re not yet up to the task,” said Maria del Rio-Chanona, one of the paper’s co-authors and an associate professor of computer science at University College London. 
 The researchers shared sample historical questions with TechCrunch that LLMs got wrong. For example, GPT-4 Turbo was asked whether scale armor was present during a specific time period in ancient Egypt. The LLM said yes, but the technology only appeared in Egypt 1,500 years later.  
 Why are LLMs bad at answering technical historical questions, when they can be so good at answering very complicated questions about things like coding? Del Rio-Chanona told TechCrunch that it’s likely because LLMs tend to extrapolate from historical data that is very prominent, finding it difficult to retrieve more obscure historical knowledge. 
 For example, the researchers asked GPT-4 if ancient Egypt had a professional standing army during a specific historical period. While the correct answer is no, the LLM answered incorrectly that it did. This is likely because there is lots of public information about other ancient empires, like Persia, having standing armies. 
 “If you get told A and B 100 times, and C 1 time, and then get asked a question about C, you might just remember A and B and try to extrapolate from that,” del Rio-Chanona said. 
 The researchers also identified other trends, including that OpenAI and Llama models performed worse for certain regions like sub-Saharan Africa, suggesting potential biases in their training data. 
 The results show that LLMs still aren’t a substitute for humans when it comes to certain domains, said Peter Turchin, who led the study and is a faculty member at CSH.  
 But the researchers are still hopeful LLMs can help historians in the future. They’re working on refining their benchmark by including more data from underrepresented regions and adding more complex questions. 
 “Overall, while our results highlight areas where LLMs need improvement, they also underscore the potential for these models to aid in historical research,” the paper reads. 
 Topics 
 AI , AI , benchmarks , hallucinations , LLMs , research , TC 
 When you purchase through links in our articles, we may earn a small commission . This doesn’t affect our editorial independence. 
 Charles Rollet 
 Senior Reporter 
 Charles Rollet was a senior reporter at TechCrunch. His investigative reporting led to U.S. government sanctions against four tech companies, including China’s largest AI firm. Prior to joining TechCrunch, Charles covered the surveillance industry for IPVM. Charles is based in San Francisco, where he enjoys hiking with his dogs. You can contact Charles securely on Signal at charlesrollet.12 or +1-628-282-2811. 
 View Bio 
 October 13 – 15 
 San Francisco 
 Don’t miss out . The startup community will gather to answer a pivotal question: How do you build sustainably in the AI era? 
 REGISTER NOW 
 Most Popular 
 Hikers rescued after using Google Gemini for planning 
 Anthony Ha 
 Feds launch investigation into Tesla’s Cybercab deployment 
 Sean O'Kane 
 Kirsten Korosec 
 Tesla is asking people if they want to buy and run Cybercab fleets 
 Kirsten Korosec 
 Norway considers ban on camera-enabled wearable ‘pervert glasses’ 
 Zack Whittaker 
 Uber is laying off 10% of staff, or 3,300 people 
 Ram Iyer 
 AfterQuery reportedly becomes Y Combinator’s fastest-ever unicorn, now valued at $3.2B 
 Julie Bort 
 MapQuest’s app surges to No. 1 in Navigation after refusing to rename Lake Ontario 
 Sarah Perez 
 Loading the next article 
 Error loading the next article 
