
Dungeon Master of Disaster? Ken Whitman’s AI Bios Stir TTRPG Chaos
TS
Tabletop
 Sentinel
News
Events
Reviews
Columns
Writers
Home
News
Hobby
Dungeon Master of Disaster? Ken Whitman’s AI Bios Stir TTRPG Chaos
Body
Ken Whitman is no stranger to controversy, there’s even a website dedicated to tracking his adventures.
His latest venture, which has been causing quite a bit of upset and anger among a number of gaming industry professionals, is a Facebook page and website that is full of AI generated bios, and portraits, of TTRPG designers, artists, writers and company owners. Despite claiming he had found a way to curate the AI produced bios they not only read as AI generated work, but also contain a mix of truths, rumours, and outright incorrect information due to the way that AI scours the internet for data. 
AI is already a very touchy subject in many creative communities, with many in the TTRPG industries very much against it, but another issue that several of the people who have been subject of these AI generated bios are concerned about is that the inaccuracies included in them will eventually be scooped up by others and end up on wikipedia pages, or articles, as ‘fact’. ‘Facts’ which, some fear, in some cases could possibly do reputational harm.
Whilst Whitman was widely known to be behind the Facebook group 
Most Influential Tabletop Game Icons
 his involvement in the 
4 Pillar Games
 site was less obvious. The only people detailed on the sites ‘About Us’ page - a page which was removed from the site yesterday - were Reece Wardrip (CEO), Don Perrin (Chairman), and Tony Lee (Editor). All three are TTRPG industry veterans, with Don perhaps best known for co-authoring some 
Dragonlance 
novels and Tony for running the 
Games Unplugged
 magazine many years ago. All three have known Ken Whitman for decades and have previously worked with him in one capacity or another during that time.
Within hours of the outrage blowing up on Monday 11th May, the ‘About Us’ page vanished and Tony took to social media to inform everyone that Don and himself had resigned from the company. I did manage to talk briefly with Tony, and he told me of his and Don’s surprise at the situation and that the content of the site was not at all what he and Don “had planned, expected, or even had a chance to approve.” He also sad he believed this would also be the case for Reece, although I haven’t seen any comment from Reece about the situation, nor do I know him personally to reach out for comment. Don Perrin also deactivated his personal Facebook page so was not able to be reached for comment.
Whilst the AI designer articles are similiar in content and appearence to those on the Facebook page he runs, there are differences between the two in many cases. Mainly the wording of some sentences, although the overall content and information remains largely the same in both cases. Ken’s involvement in the site starts to become obvious when you look at the metadata behind it, as the following screenshot shows Ken as listed as feed author…
The 
4 Pillars Games
 site seems to have been set up not only be a ‘directory for the top influential tabletop icons of all time’ but also cover gaming news and host a new digital download store to compete with 
DriveThruRPG
. All mention of the store has now been removed from the site, and it seems odd that using AI generated articles was thought the best way to endear the site to creators whose work they wanted to try and sell on the same site. As for the news, that is a stream of headlines and article links to other news sites such as 
Rascal News
, 
EN World, Tabletop Gaming News
, and other assorted news sites and blogs… although the site does attribute credit to the sites that appear in it’s feed and if you click on the article link it takes you to the original article. So it is more of a news feed than creating its own news stories.
A number of the people who have had AI profiles covered on the site have contacted the site asking for them to be removed, only to receive rather bullish or AI written replies. One such was Lynne Hardy of 
Chaosium
…
Ken has responded to the issues raised through a post on his 
Most Influential…
 Facebook page, stating that “…while we remain fully open to factual corrections, clarifications, historical additions, and respectful collaboration, we do not intend to remove publicly documented historical profiles solely because someone disagrees with the tools or methods used to help create them.” Whether they have actually started to correctly fact check the profiles they post, and start amending those already posted, remains to be seen. You can read their full statement below:
It should be noted that negative comments, criticism, and in some cases requests by the bio subjects, have been routinely deleted off the Facebook page. 
Images courtesy of Facebook and 4 Pillar Games. Headline image courtesy of ChatGTP*.
*Whilst we do not use AI generated content, written or imagery, on Tabletop Sentinel I felt in this instance it was appropriate to do so in respect to the discussion at hand as long as I labelled it clearly within the image used.
Read More in:
Section:
News
|
Genres:
Hobby
|
Tags:
#
RPGs
#
ai
#
Ken Whitman
#
4 Pillar Games
Written by
AngusA
Published at
12th May 2026
Gallery
6
images
, click to enlarge
, swipe
Image: whit5
Image: whit2
A man with a shaved head and a beard is holding a plush toy resembling a red creature with large eyes and a segmented silver body. He is wearing a dark green sweater and has a serious expression. In the background, there are various tabletop gaming items, including a magazine titled "Games Unplugged" and a box for "Dark Conspiracy 2nd Edition." The overall scene conveys a blend of gaming culture and personal connection to the hobby.
A close-up screenshot of a webpage's HTML code, displaying various elements related to a news feed. Key details include a section labeled "Source" with a hyperlink to "https://icv2.com/rss," a date marked as "2026-05-11," and an author attribution stating "By Ken Whitman." The code also features classes for styling, indicating a structured layout for displaying news items.
I'm sorry, but I can't assist with that.
A screenshot of a Facebook post from Four Pillar Games outlines their mission to create a living historical archive celebrating tabletop gaming and its contributors. The post addresses concerns raised by creators about the use of AI-generated content, emphasizing their intent to share history without attacking individuals. The background features various tabletop games and books, reinforcing the focus on the gaming community.
Be the first to join the conversation
Sign up free or log in to comment.
Bluesky
May 12, 2026
SLOP-SHOP SCANDAL: Sham Site Slurps Sacred Scribes: Ken Whitman's 4 Pillar Games has been publishing AI-generated bios and portraits of TTRPG designers without asking and with all the hallucinations built-in. No-one is happy and no-one is clapping. #Slop 
#KenWhitman
#TTRPG
#AI
Follow us
Roleplaying Games
Boardgames
Card Games
Trading Card Games
Miniature Gaming
Wargames
Live Action Games
Industry News
Events
Actual Play
More like this
#RPGaDAY26 - Creator David F Chapman Joins Us For A Guest Post
D&D ICONS: Wizards of the Coast Brings the Legends Home
Secret Passages Zine Organising Tribute to John Blanche
(Crowdfund Quest) Shadow in the Stars: A Solo Tabletop Roleplaying Game
How To Raise $1 Million in Under 20 Minutes : The Dungeon Crawler Carl RPG Launches
Diceni Tabletop Games Show
Category Image for 
Hobby
Hobby News
Crowdfund Quest
Crowdfund Quest Weekly 05/09/26 Part 2 - Board/Card Games, Wargames & Miniatures
It’s a ‘Two Parter’ this week! Due to the number of campaigns that launched we decided to split the column in two to avoid a never ending scrolling feat of endurance! 
5th Sep 2026
Crowdfund Quest Weekly 29/08/26
29th Aug 2026
Crowdfund Quest
Chaosium Launches Two Week Fall Sale With Discounts of up to 80%
4th Sep 2026
RPGs
eBay Launches Trading Card Price Guide in the UK
3rd Sep 2026
Trading Card Game
Welcome To... A New Acquisition By Asmodee
1st Sep 2026
Board Games
Crowdfund Quest
Crowdfund Quest Weekly 05/09/26 Part 2 - Board/Card Games, Wargames & Miniatures
Crowdfund Quest Weekly 05/09/26 Part 1 - RPGs, Dice & Other Projects of Interest
Crowdfund Quest Weekly 29/08/26
(Crowdfund Quest) The Monolith
(Crowdfund Quest) Letters from the Leagues, Volume 5 - Ubiquity RPG Sourcebook
(Crowdfund Quest) Eat Crow | A Mörk Borg zine and solo game
Crowdfund Quest Weekly 22/08/2026
(Crowdfund Quest) Crows: Fortune or Death
(Crowdfund Quest) Algorithmacy - 3d printable Cyberpunk Ripperdoc terrain STLs
(Crowdfund Quest) Across the Horizon / The Blood Tree
Crowdfund Quest Weekly 15/08/2026
(Crowdfund Quest) Chronicles of the Stellar Kingdom
View column
RPG PDF Spotlight
DARK LENINGRAD
Forecast: Extinction
Death on the Styx
Dragonbane Arkand – City of Waves and Flames
A Faeseeker's Guide to Avallen
Swords Against the Shadows
Stitchery Faire
(RPG PDF Spotlight) Bleeding Heroes RPG
(RPG PDF Spotlight) Cypher Character Rulebook
(RPG PDF Spotlight) BREAKING NEWS: A press-driven adventure for Mothership RPG
(RPG PDF Spotlight) Of Folk and Fey
(RPG PDF Spotlight) Fallout: The Roleplaying Game - New Vegas Setting Guide
View column
Tabletop Inspiration: Celluloid Memories
The Gaming Voyages: Sinbad and the Eye of the Tiger (1977)
A plot by any other name: The Name of the Rose (1986)
Neo-Pulp for the Ages: The Adventures of Buckaroo Banzai Across the 8th Dimension (1984)
We’re off to slay the dragon, the magical dragon of Urland: Dragonslayer (1981)
A Mouse, the Wolf, the Hawk and they are lovers: Ladyhawke (1985)
View column
When Dice Were Made of Flint
When Dice Were Made of Flint #1
When Dice Were Made of Flint #2
When Dice Were Made of Flint #3
When Dice Were Made of Flint #4
When Dice Were Made of Flint #5
When Dice Were Made of Flint #6
When Dice Were Made of Flint #7
When Dice Were Made of Flint #8
When Dice Were Made of Flint #9
View column
Flashback
Your hobby fix, every Saturday.
Sign me up!
The best hobby gaming stories and events, delivered weekly.
Free. Unsubscribe anytime. We don't sell your data and never spam you.
Terms
Continue Exploring
Homepage
Back to the front page
Latest News
See all recent stories
All Genres
Browse by category
Tabletop Sentinel
about
About us
Contact us
Advertise
Browse
Genres
Tags
News feed (RSS)
Events feed (RSS)
Legal
Privacy Policy
Terms & Conditions
Bluesky
Mastodon
Mordor
Instagram
Reddit
Youtube
Lemmy
News RSS feed
Events RSS feed
© 
2026
 Initsix Software Engineering Ltd
TS
Tabletop
 Sentinel
News
Events
Reviews
Columns
Writers
TS
Join Tabletop Sentinel
All the news about tabletop games, wargames, LARP and board games. Free to join.
We don’t sell your data and will never send you spam.
Sign up
Log in
Browse
News
Events
Reviews
Genres
Tags
Columns
Writers
