 2026-09-07T00:38:10+00:00 https://www.redditstatic.com/icon.png/ /r/genewolfe/comments/kscbvl/.rss?limit=100 https://b.thumbs.redditmedia.com/_utnkfTAT1tY_Fl6BIDaQzL3aELYSXTHrj2bGdO6Y6U.png /r/genewolfe is a community dedicated to author Gene Wolfe, winner of the Fuller Award and author of The Book of the New Sun, Peace, The Fifth Head of Cerberus, and There are Doors. Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory : genewolfe /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks https://www.reddit.com/user/Holly-Crystal-Hawks I've spent a long time going over the pages and thoughts and markers to the text, but I now need to state my case as to why I believe that "Out of Order" theory doesn't add up to certain tests I've put it through, and the more likely somber truth is Gene possibly let a few clues fall behind the desk in his push to get this book out of him while he still had enough energy to do so. I'm going on the assumption that Gene handed in a near-final draft that required more outside editing than any of his prior novels due to his general declining energy--which, respectfully, was still a hell of a lot less editing than I require most days and nights. My first point to bring up is that along with what seems like typographical errors in the text like the Chandra/Charolotte mix up on pg. 32, and the confusion in Chapter 13, the audible copy has more. Now, all versions of the book went on sale on the same day June 30th, 2020--though I don't know how TOR passed on the opportunity to release it on July 31st, a month later, as like Ern, it was overdue--and to be fair, the audiobook version has the most production cost in the same short window. I bring this up because I can hear the "punch-ins" or retakes in several key places, of the actor in another room, having to record the line or sentence again after the main recording of the day (the kind of little reverb effects and audio artifacts you clean up when you have time and unfortunately skip when you don't). On top of that, there are two errors I have found with the audiobook, similar to the errors that made it into the text editions. So my general point being, if those were clues to follow they would be universal across all versions. The first error itself is just odd, and shows a rushed audio production, but again I can't blame them. As I just looked at this clip again to post it I noticed the actor also reads "time" and not the word "while", making me think he may have been reading from a section still under revision at the time of the actor's recording for that day. If that were the case it may also account for the punch-ins as well, and why they didn't get as much production care as they needed (ie., you can edit out that soft sound difference of the multiple rooms the actor may have had to record in... if the production team had enough time). (See il_dropped_word_door) https://reddit.com/link/kscbvl/video/xv1mnniqmw961/player This strikes me as the same style of error that would be caught if they had more time to review it, but also by the way that the actor says "time" and not "while" as the text does, alludes to him maybe reading a different cut of that chapter. Maybe. At the moment he, the actor, could have thought he was reading what was on the page and just missed ever so slightly, and the producer in the room also missed it--it happens. The next one is far more interesting to me and my case. In Chapter 6, Ern finally gets Laura Fevre's eephone number and calls her, but listen to the cut that made it to the audiobook version. Again this error is of the same style, but only in the audiobook version. But the word flub here is too egregious to ignore, and it plays out like an edit that got caught in the text version, but got by the audio editor. The actor is going to read the lines you give him, so I'm guessing this was once on the page at some point before getting caught by an editing pass. Take a listen. (See il_wrong_word_sister) https://reddit.com/link/kscbvl/video/spcd0ewomw961/player That one is hard not to hear as anything but an error the more I go by it, and it makes all those others more guilty by association and likeness. Finally, if multiple Erns are writing this story, sure, but then they are writing it in the comfort of the Spice Grove Public Library after all is said and done, just like in the first book, A Borrowed Man. So there is no need to look into confusion into when Ern is using a screen at Polly's Cove. Here is Ern, our narrator, on pg. 9, which is really just a scant three pages into the first chapter, and also the official temporal place Ern starts his story. Pay very close attention to the verb tense and how it changes in the paragraph. So I’m going to go way far back and start my story where I want to, with graceful Rose and my friend Millie. Millie Baumgartner is like me, a reclone resource here in the Spice Grove Public Library; and I’m sure she looks quite a bit older than she really is. Gray streaks in her lustrous brown hair, lines in her face, and a little too plump; but she has a wonderful smile that she was not using when she came up to me and whispered, “They’re going to get rid of us, Ern. Have you heard?” The way that line about Millie is written implies strongly that both she and Ern not only survive the events of the novel together but that they make it back to the Spice Grove Public Library, where Ern now has the time to sit on his shelf and sneak out at night to use the screen. With all this now in plain sight of my hands and ears, I can't get fully get behind the out of order theory as it is currently presented. I know there is more to this story, so I'm going to keep at it. And if anyone happens to find a green rectangle on a map with no key, at this point, I wouldn't say no to touching it. submitted by /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks [link] [comments] t3_kscbvl 2021-01-07T12:30:02+00:00 2021-01-07T12:30:02+00:00 Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/Dunban_213 https://www.reddit.com/user/Dunban_213 saved this post without reading it because i know i will be back to read all his books at some time t1_gifai2p 2021-01-07T13:54:13+00:00 /u/Dunban_213 on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/YukioMishimama https://www.reddit.com/user/YukioMishimama 4 years later, did you manage to do it ? Quite curious. t1_lc9mku0 2024-07-08T22:55:57+00:00 /u/YukioMishimama on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/aramini https://www.reddit.com/user/aramini The chapter that seems most out of place is the second to last one, since it has Rose and dr fevre, but buck baston sits down. What are they doing in the Heath house? He says if he is checked out again it will make three times ... but he seems to have been checked out that many times already. It is when he starts complaining about being overdue that things get a little wonky. Wasn’t he just checked out again? How is he overdue? But I agree it seems linear ... however, why is adah confused about 12 versus seven years as the time of the sabbatical when her husband left her ... she thinks mrs heuse was there when she came home with almost thirteen year old Chandra as a baby but Mrs heuse only been there two years. So ... is this actually about Chandra? Was Chandra something like a body brought back from lichholm seven years ago and the white spirit girl related to that that Millie sees fade into a wall? Did their real daughter die? What accident happened on the boat? The green thing I am almost certain has something to do with returning spirits to bodies ... maybe t1_giit0g0 2021-01-08T08:05:41+00:00 /u/aramini on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks https://www.reddit.com/user/Holly-Crystal-Hawks Adah is the center of where the weird is happening for sure. And I feel there is enough in the text to figure out what is going on, maybe. You are right to hammer on Adah's discrepancy of twelve years or seven, and how and why Adah could think she was going to bring her baby home to Mrs. Heuse who has only been at the House on Signal Hill two years. I'm on some thin ice here as far as resources to stand on in the text, but I'm gonna throw this theory at the post-board and see what sticks. ​ =WHAT'S UP WITH ADAH'S MEMORY? A SEPARATED FAMILY THEORY= ​ What if the center of the Fevre family confusion is that what we are actually seeing is mad scientist Barry Fevre's post-modern concept of a separated family. The reason he doesn't divorce her is not that she has something on him, but rather that other members of the Spice Grove University (where, according to Adah, Barry and his brother Simon work. Simon..? Still don't know what to do with that piece to the puzzle yet.) know that while Barry was performing some procedure on his wife's brain, Barry made a drastic error. Thus to leave her, when so many of his colleges know he was to blame, would look very bad for him at the university, which seems to be funding Barry's endeavors (always follow the money). In the ice caves, the Chandra that finds Ern takes him to the cottage in the cavern where Ern proceeds to rip into Dr. Fevre for a bit (note this section feels very Gene, in the way that the chapter titled The Cottage in the Cavern ends its last line when Ern sees the out of place house, only to pick up inside the titular cottage in the following chapter. And at the center of Chapter 10, that's when Sven, a tall greyish man, creeps up on Ern and Audrey, handing Ern this small, metal, flat, not totally square, box, that doesn't seem to do anything if it's level, and continues to escape me). Other first time reveals happen in the cottage, as Ern sees Ricci and Idona for the first time, but this scene feels like it's dropping lots of clues that could fit into my version of this separated family theory. See this section from Chapter 11, Jingle Bells, pg. 156. I interrupted him. “You must know about the screes of broken ice. I left Audrey at the top of one with a brunet called Peggy Pepper. You know her, I think.” He nodded. “She’s a coworker.” Adah snorted. “As a matter of fact, she’s taking some of my classes while I’m on sabbatical. That’s probably what she wants to see me about.” He turned to Chandra. “Will you be a darling and have a look for those two ladies? You won’t be sorry you did, I promise.” I motioned toward the blondes. “Why not send one of them?” “For one thing, they don’t know these caves. Chandra does—rather better than I, I believe. That’s enough, but another is that they have no warm clothing. Chandra does, as you know.” One, Ern left Audrey holding the box, so hold that thought level as well. Two, Adah doesn't like Peggy... duh. Regardless of what's happening between Barry and Peggy, from Adah's perspective, she gets to work all day and night with her husband. Adah has a habit of being vindictive, that we hear or, and we can see slices of it, certainly. And three, most importantly, Chandra knows the tunnels better than the Doctor himself!? Odd, but jump to Adah's point of view again later in the chapter, when Adah snaps at the Doctor for his fascination with the re-animated dead. Pg. 158. “True enough!” Adah snapped. “I would never have come here if I hadn’t been looking for you. I know you think I’m insane.” “Disturbed, darling.” “While you yourself are sane. Hasn’t it struck you, my darling living doctor, that you and I are surrounded by the re-animated dead? That man you’re instructing”—Adah pointed to me—“is dead. These beautiful, speechless girls you’re itching to toy with—” “Adah!” “Are dead. This guard you’ve set upon me is dead too.” One of the blondes shouted, “I’m not dead!” and burst into tears. So regardless of how astonishing (clearly I've fallen into the Doctor's camp somewhat) the feat of bringing life back to the dead is, they are all still dead in Adah's eyes. Dead and of another time that is not hers. Uncanny humans. Back to Chandra, it's odd at this point that she seems to know so much about the caves, but turn the pages back to the beginning of Chapter 10 on pgs. 138-139 and we see that since we got to the island Chandra seems a bit off, not a hundred percent the Chandra we have come to know in Polly's Cove, (I'm only typing the end bit which has more to stand on) and hear this exchange before they get to the entrance to the caves. Chandra had more to say. “Like, if somebody’s got a broken arm or something. He has a place in town. A clinic, like. They just call it the doctor’s office, but he brought a full-body scanner. Lots of stuff.” “Good for him.” “He doesn’t charge anybody, either. As long as there’s something really wrong with them, it’s free, like at home. Only fakers have to pay. He told me.” Adah stirred at the sound of her daughter’s voice, and Audrey’s gesture warned Chandra to be quiet. Here, what's most curious to me on subsequent reads is how Adah seems to sum up her daughter. It makes her mind stir as she hears Chandra talk all too knowingly of this island and the Doctor's place in it. I'd say the red herring Gene wanted you to fall into on the first read is Chanda's comment upsetting Adah because of its allusion to her possibly faking her sickness. Make no mistake, from Adah's point of view, she knows she's not at her best mental capacity at several points in the book, but the reason behind it might not be her own, and more so she is upset because her concerns do not seem to be shared or understood. A quick jump to a conversation Ern is having later with Ms. Heath (who I believe is a wholly separate being/reclone than Adah, but one that might just be mostly made up of her memories, current pet mini theory, though I haven't looked much for text to stand on there yet), near the beginning of Chapter 20, pg. 224. “No doubt.” Ms. Heath favored Baston with a quick smile. “This gives me two of you, however. With both of you, I’m doubly protected—or so I hope. You haven’t asked me about the mystery.” For half a second, I thought it over. “You’ll tell me whether I ask or not.” “You’re right. It’s threefold, if you’ll allow that. First, what is the treasure hidden here?” Baston leaned forward. “There’s treasure hid? Is this here real?” Ms. Heath favored him with a wry smile. “It is said to be. I can’t swear to it.” I asked, “Said to be by who?” “The house.” She sighed. “Don’t try to cross-examine it. It doesn’t know where the treasure is, or why it was hidden. There you have the second secret I spoke of, and the third. Presumably it once knew those things.” When neither Buck nor I spoke, she added, “Even human memories can be deleted; no doubt you know.” I nodded reluctantly. “Inorganic memories are easier, though it’s said that sometimes a trace remains. I’m told that an expert might uncover it.” Okay, let's unpack this in a few places. First, Ms. Heath says the mystery is threefold. Nothing else on that now, but I wanted to get eyes on that quote. Also, the way she asks the question she wishes to be asked reminded me of that scene--huge jump, and I need to get out of my chair to grab the right text for reference--in Long Sun where Potto does a similar thing when being questioned by Mint and Remora. It's worth a brief quote for context, but if you haven't read Long Sun, skip it. When you get there, you'll have a good laugh too. Page reference is from the Epiphany of the Long Sun edition which includes Calde and Exodus . It's on pg. 339, and is in Chapter 1, Back From Death, of Exodus. Councillor Potto starts: "The logical question is whether there are two of all of us." Potto struck the table with his fist. "You didn't even ask how I got the wood to burn. How am I supposed to deal with someone who won't stick to the point?" Remora began,"I, ah--" But Potto was not through. "By sticking to the point myself. That's it! I may soon stick with one so well that it sticks out your back." He turned to Remora. "Yes, Patera. You were about to say...?" Back to Interlibrary Loan. More curious, given the picture I'm painting, is the mention of deleting human memories, and the weight put on it by her phrasing. " Even human memories..." seems to imply that it's somewhat difficult, but can be done, while her following statement alludes to possible ghosts or ghost code in tech devices as well--calling The Doctor of Death Island, do you copy...? What the Dickens was that all about? t1_gimhyfn 2021-01-09T04:34:59+00:00 /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks https://www.reddit.com/user/Holly-Crystal-Hawks (character limit, HA!) =A BROKEN FAMILY--OUT ON A LIMB= ​ Anyway, back to the theory painting. So human memories can be deleted. What if the reason why Adah is so messed up has something to do with what happened on the Three Sisters seven years ago? Something maybe involving Chandra, that the Doctor tried to remove from Adah's memory? Strap in because here's where I'm going to jump out on a limb, and it may not hold the weight behind me--the trees are weird here. I believe there are three Chandras in this story. Because I want a motive for their creation, let's see if we can build them. Okay. Let's say Barry and Adah have a child, the good old fashion way; this first Chandra is not a reclone. But Barry being Barry is probably going to start taking scans of his daughter. It's not totally necessary for this theory, but it would be likely knowing what we do about him and how much credit comes with his name and current status. Hard cut to five years later and there is an awful accident, where Chandra, a fully human being, dies in a boating accident on the Three Sisters . Since we're throwing things at the wall, why not call this Chandra, Mermaid Chandra, having gone to the fishes in some form or another, and also in order to keep things level going forward. I know they were clearly on the boat called Three Sisters when all this occurred, seven years prior to Ern getting mixed up in this, but hang with me, I'm only using these names as a kind of useful mirror to see beyond the surface of the novel. Barry, being Barry, is also going to ensure a way to retrieve a clean DNA sample at the scene of the accident. This could be the ghost girl we see at the beginning, at the Polly's Cove Public Library. As a sample of Chandra, exactly as she was when she died as a five-year-old, uploaded somewhere originally by Barry, but now haunting the halls of the library (and possibly Adah's house) at night. Note, Millie says it wasn't Chandra, but the Chandra Millie has just gotten familiar with is almost thirteen, and that ghost would be five. To keep things organized I'm going to give this Chandra, who later walks Ern up to the House on Singal Hill, the moniker Lady Luck as she seems to be "...lucky in the abrupt way that Lady Luck shows up when you are not looking for her." Adah, possibly being a horrified witness or accessory to Chandra's death, is mentally scarred, deeply, by these events. So much so that her husband tries to remove these memories from her, but fails somewhat as it doesn't fully work, leaving her fractured mind to have to make some odd, and incorrect, assumptions about her life, bridging the chasms left by the removal of such traumatic and deeply rooted memories. Mainly she is haunted by inconsistencies that there is only one Chandra, and that she is fully human, because the likelihood that there is just one on the pages of Interlibrary Loan gets thinner and thinner as my fingers attack the keys and word search function. Something in the part of her that is 'mother' is both overly protective of, and yet put off somehow, by her daughter. Barry tries to maintain a relationship with Adah, with Lady Luck Chandra which he tries to pass off as real. Ie, I think only Doctor Fevre knows the full truth about Chandra's history, but maybe that doesn't matter as much. Unfortunately, and shortly after trying to at first stay with Adah post-accident and memory augmentation, Barry decided to separate from his wife. And here he makes things messy for himself because it's here he would likely make another reclone of Chandra to assist him with his work--the mad scientist is going to do mad science--and given the technology of the day, he can make slight alterations to any reclone he wishes to make. So he makes another Chandra, which I will call the Three Sisters Chandra, as Barry being more tech-savvy might have decided to make a few very minor changes to his daughter, with the knowledge he gained while interacting with the two prior interactions of his daughter. In his eyes, this Chandra, the one who is all too helpful in the ice caves, would be both his daughter, and a third sister to the other two, and from that, the naming scheme got hard to shake so I'm sticking to it. I'm sure Barry was thinking something like, "Hey, no custody battle means no courts getting involved to have a closer look at me and my work.", but at what cost? This set up also requires some sort of switch with the Chandras at times, and would have to be done by the Doctor. I don't know where he would have made the switch for Three Sisters Chandra in place of Lady Luck Chandra on the Isle of Corpses. All this being said I'm still stuck holding the box. Wait, no, I left my retelling of the novel with the box in Audrey's hands. Well, later in Chapter 11, Jingle Bells, the box makes its penultimate appearance on the page. The chapter wraps up with Chandra going out to navigate the caves to find Peggy and Audrey. Pgs. 162-163. An hour or so later, Chandra returned with Peggy and Audrey. Audrey, who was pretty well terrified of it, returned the green box (I’ll have a lot more about that later) to me; and we left pretty soon after I got that squared around. There were no spare coats for Ricci and Idona, or for Sven either. The angels wrapped themselves in blankets; Sven signed that he was okay the way he was. Outside it had started to snow again, so we waited in the mouth of the cave until we heard the jingle of sleigh bells. I do not know whether Dr. Fevre had told the driver to come back at a certain time or called him somehow. It was pretty hard imagining that driver with an eephone, but you never can tell. All this time, I was itching to get out the map and check to see if the cave mouth was really the rectangle on it, but I did not dare do it with our patron there in the sleigh with us. She did not know I had pulled it out of the book, contrary to orders, and I was still planning to paste it back in the first chance I got. This seems like a good time to wrap up for now. =EMPTYING OUT THE POCKETS= There are slices of Christmas imagery in this book, but blink they'll pass you by. Ern had the map hidden in his pocket when Sven crept up to him and Audrey with the metal box, and all throughout his time in the caves, but he didn't take it out. Ern doesn't keep that promise in this novel, about having a lot more to say about the box later, as it only shows up on the literal last page, at the 11th hour of the tale (note, Ern makes no mention of his watch here, which was the clear bookend signifier of A Borrowed Man which opens and closes with a beep of his watch, like a clockwork figure... ...outside of time..? No. One series at a time. This Audrey was pretty well terrified of the box and seems affected by the first incident with the box in ice caves when Ern tries to put the box under his arm. Audrey comes back into focus and Ern notes she's rubbing her eyes and commenting on the air in there, yet on the final page of the novel that Audrey tries to grab at the box before Ern does, and fails, as Ern succeeds and reality reels. But that's all I've got. Oh, and the key on the cheap violet key ring that our narrator takes off the dead body of the earlier edition of Ern A. Smithe on page 67. I guess Ern still has that somewhere in his pockets too. For such a sparse novel the gears inside of it seem to turn in ways that make me only wish there were more pages. This is a story that wants so badly to live and have more time, and then it just ends. Leaving me here, spinning, wishing I was in a more solid-state... ... ... ... Wait. Is the green box a harddrive? A harddrive for souls with some kind of high-tech security measure? A Mainframe Mk I? t1_gimi02v 2021-01-09T04:35:25+00:00 /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/aramini https://www.reddit.com/user/aramini So another thing - the man with the feathers comes to maybe kill dr fevre for something he does. I actually think Chandra died and was on that track as well before you posted this. The map was torn out of a book and shoved into another one in the wrong direction. Yes - deleting human memories. The ice cavern, when Ern tilts the box, is like a branching tree for a second. The tree he is inside has all those things over there like fruit with eyes. Did dr fevre steal a soul from there and is that why the big feather guy came through? Ern finds himself in ancient history at the start with Egypt and Babylon - the feather is used to weigh a heart for guilt. There is a thing the dog leads him to at the end that features a thing with green emerald eyes in a cage ... and a bearded giant figure with women’s breasts. I think the box can reload souls, yes, but it has to come from somewhere. Audrey remembers those things that happens after her scan way too well - like talks about how she started talking to herself there and still does it. In myth the male deity Chandra has two siblings and one is associated with dogs. “No bite” the dog says ... but mrs heuse is the one who seems guilty about dogs?!!!! What? What’s with the male female stuff. Also at the start Ern mentions the high heeled shoes tapping that occurred when Chandra was telling him about dr fevre’s murder hmmmm t1_gin9po9 2021-01-09T11:04:42+00:00 /u/aramini on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks https://www.reddit.com/user/Holly-Crystal-Hawks So I'm about ten pages into your analysis and it's helping me focus on a lot of what has been resonating with me but I can't quite give a name to why. But now I have a new thought buzzing that I need to get out before I forget it. Dane van Petten. Look at the words and imagery used to describe him. Remember he and Bantz get into the Taos Tower with what must be a warrant or some other A-1 level access (that takes some flipping back through the pages as we only get Bantz and van Petten's names near the end. But Dane is tall and is always said to have a big hat (again, kindle word search makes finding things very fun and fast, if you know what to ask it). (Also also, Fish and Payne do not show up at the end under Persons in the Narrative, and I am at a loss at this moment as to why. They seemed like the lower-level cops compared to the level of clearance that Dan van Petten has, they all but come out and say so, but are not listed... because they are doubles...maybe... of who..? If that's in the write-up I'll get to it shortly). You know who else gets those descriptors with the hat, our mysterious man who comes through the door at Adah's on the first floor, where Continental Katrine and Ern eventually break down that door and have a visit through a new door like the one he blew up. The feathers and new attire would be crafted from the planet's resources while he was stuck there, and has made a base there, but the general look seems to mirror somewhat well. I remember exactly how I felt when I read this part in A Borrowed Man, pg. 288-- The reactor has gone up—it was on the news, and Millie Baumgartner told me about it, wanting to know if that was the place I talked about sometimes. --which was, 'Hmm. Offscreen death, unaccounted for.' And somewhere around page ten in your write-up, I had to pause to get this set of thoughts out, this awkward puzzle chunk of reasoning I've jumped to. From there I had to then question whether the old Ern, the earlier edition might not have been attacked by Adah, but rather by a vengeful van Petten who was more resourceful than we originally thought and somehow found a way to come back for Ern. Thin ice again, but the spark hit, so I typed. t1_gipx9n0 2021-01-10T02:00:49+00:00 /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks https://www.reddit.com/user/Holly-Crystal-Hawks "'No cut," says the bird; "no bite," says the dog. t1_giv6yvm 2021-01-11T11:04:24+00:00 /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/aramini https://www.reddit.com/user/aramini But bite what? The fruit lol? Or just saying he won’t bite? Dogs do seem to talk here t1_giv7ci4 2021-01-11T11:08:58+00:00 /u/aramini on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/aramini https://www.reddit.com/user/aramini The book with the map shoved in and the fact that a piece of Ern is cut off also seems indicative of a part of fragment shoved in something else. And it is destructive, because old Ern becomes suicidal. A woman’s hand stops him from that. So maybe part of a soul was taken ... t1_gin9sdz 2021-01-09T11:05:58+00:00 /u/aramini on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/aramini https://www.reddit.com/user/aramini I also think the policeman and businessman adah mentions as her lovers are George Franklin/Georges fevre and Conrad coldbrook and that Conrad had access to this thing as well because he also dabbles with the portals and put a part of his wife or himself in the reclones over there, per my first writeup in borrowed man. I’ll post it here later but it basically comes down on the idea that his bipolar was a threat to herself and he tried to reunite with her in a way she wouldn’t kill herself (or something) by meddling with reclones and their memories. Very nebulous as well but there seems to be something dead held in ern/urn, as his name suggests t1_gin9z5u 2021-01-09T11:09:10+00:00 /u/aramini on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks https://www.reddit.com/user/Holly-Crystal-Hawks Hmmmm, I like this. I made a mental note when I looked up names; both Adah and Mahala (Levy) are most commonly listed as old Hebrew names, in a series with seemingly clear name sets. I could do a lot more with these pieces with fresh eyes this weekend. t1_gincfg0 2021-01-09T11:49:34+00:00 /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/aramini https://www.reddit.com/user/aramini Also both the dead Coldbrook mother and Aaah seem to be oddly bipolar but in a very extreme way. t1_gindi2d 2021-01-09T12:06:50+00:00 /u/aramini on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/aramini https://www.reddit.com/user/aramini The green is related to the emeralds of the first book and the yellow and blue tunic of Ern links up where the arm was cut off that would make green - a part sliced off. t1_gina22b 2021-01-09T11:10:33+00:00 /u/aramini on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/aramini https://www.reddit.com/user/aramini At the end I think Ern reloads Audrey or something or something he needs in her. t1_gina44p 2021-01-09T11:11:31+00:00 /u/aramini on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/aramini https://www.reddit.com/user/aramini And ... why would Millie see the ghost? One of the girls, Ricci, sees it too or some darker spirit. You mention her name means tree gardener. That tree house in the different world ... my writeup in borrowed man is long but it makes a lot of the hot and cold imagery - Colette cold brook and the cold water versus the hot fire burning ern’s feet and how the three copies of Arabella are hot and also spring and summer the daughters of the housekeeper. Here the housekeeper is Mrs Snow, who really writes the checks, probably ... . Lichholm preserves bodies in the cold. dr Fevre implies heat his last name. If you haven’t read it I will upload it but I also stress how Ern is wrong about the young writer who choked on a biscuit. No, he was the forger chatterton who poisoned himself. Spring and summer are a school teacher and heart surgeon and mr coldbrook dies of heart medicine poison supposedly ... and chokes his son? Is Ern also wrong about those deaths as he was wrong about chatterton the forger? No one remembers murder on Mars or finds it in the database and Ern doesn’t remember it until he reads it like a trigger / a forgery? murder on Mars - MOM. My writeup is long but the agents know Colette is missing even though Ern can’t report it and make a big deal about violet or blue eyes ... blue and red for cold and hot and maybe a mix like Spring would be associated with violet. t1_ginb52c 2021-01-09T11:28:30+00:00 /u/aramini on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/aramini https://www.reddit.com/user/aramini Here is my Borrowed Man writeup where I go over pretty much everything ever said about it up to that point but the hot and cold stuff and Ern as a forgery or repository for the dead is my position. https://drive.google.com/file/d/1SefkPnnJ_huG4HHYYvRSvfCEyDibO8ZE/view?usp=sharing t1_gind4pu 2021-01-09T12:00:59+00:00 /u/aramini on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks https://www.reddit.com/user/Holly-Crystal-Hawks Just finished this. Thank you again for leaving the link. This shinned a lot of light in a handful of places I hadn't looked yet. Will need to sit on this a bit as I see what my mind does with this new analysis in the mix. t1_giqxvm2 2021-01-10T08:53:54+00:00 /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/aramini https://www.reddit.com/user/aramini Thanks for reading. As I said normally I stick with one reading - the scene that I think is very metaphorical is the bus where someone “takes his place” and Ern reacts violently. I think Wolfe often provides plot closure metaphorically like that. And I really do think that the fact no one can find murder on Mars and it is signed by coldbrook indicates this copy of Ern has been tampered with, and the bird imagery with Cob, Chick (womanish man? Mannish woman?) and the cat who ate the canary are very significant. Note in the room the dog takes Ern to at the end of Interlibrary loan there is a thing in a cage with EMERALD eyes and the huge bearded statue thing looking down with woman’s breasts ... what? At least that’s how I read it. I thought this would be my last writeup so I wanted a more egalitarian approach to the analysis. But I think the hot and cold stuff is really there. t1_gircogo 2021-01-10T13:00:20+00:00 /u/aramini on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks https://www.reddit.com/user/Holly-Crystal-Hawks Pardon. This brings me to my pockets again, just a few things but they now feel heavier somehow having sat there a time more while I was churning other interpretations of the text. And Millie, I think we need more eyes on Millie. She's got me all sorts of curious because of when she shows up in proximity to Ern, but now mostly because of these quotes and the last clue in my pocket. The first is from A Borrowed Man, pg. 48, and comes when Ern reveals the book in the laundry room, and the second is from Interlibrary Loan, pgs. 67-68, where Ern is revealing to Millie who the dead old reclone on the bench is. “Some of mine, yes; but I usually do laundry once a week. There’s no need to do mine now.” I was reaching into the bin. When I found Murder on Mars, I held it up. Colette’s eyes widened and her mouth shaped a little round O. --- “I believe so, although they may have gotten him the same way they got us. Mrs. Fevre had checked him out earlier. He seems to have investigated for her, and I was looking forward to talking with him. Somebody else got to him first. I don’t know what they said or did, but it made him take his own life.” “What did he write? What was his name?” “Mysteries. His byline was Ern A. Smithe. That’s ‘Smith,’ with a silent ‘E’ on the end.” It hung in the air between us while Millie’s mouth formed a neat pink O. At last she said, “He was you, so you must have found out something.” “Or someone thought he had, or feared he might. I agree.” I don't know what to add on that yet other than to point out the obviously mirrored phrasing, and what that might mean for these two characters. Again a word/phrase search through both novels yielded those two as the only pair. Then lastly this bit with Katrine in the car, talking about Ern's life and the books he's written. If Ern is a forged man, and all his stories are forges too, what do we make of the title, and then the clues? On pg. 185 of Interlibrary Loan. “I’m Continental, Smithe.” This time I actually whistled, without making much noise. “You’re a reference, is that right? Sort of a dictionary with legs?” I admitted I was, only not a dictionary. “A historical reference to your own work.” I nodded. “That’s right, although I don’t actually remember everything.” “What about your life. Are you a reference to that?” Here it came, and I knew it. I nodded again. “My work was my life, more or less.” “You wrote…?” “Mysteries. Who Killed Cock Robin? Clues on pages twenty-six, a hundred and five, and two hundred and ninety-nine.” Now as there is a page two hundred and ninety-nine listed, Interlibrary Loan is out. But A Borrowed Man? Two hundred and ninety-nine is the Persons in the Narrative page, which features that fiery Fevre name. One hundred and five has that much-highlighted quote from the truck driver that goes, “ Besides, if one guy could control all them scans, he’d have a lock. Pretty soon, nobody’d know anything he didn’t want ’em to know. You think that one over .” And page 26? That's the last page of chapter one where Ern is all too nonchalant when he mentions something that haunts me on every reread of Interlibrary Loan. A Borrowed Man, pg. 26. “There’s no place for the hovercab to land.” “We can go back.” “If anything’s tracking us, we’ll meet it. You realize that, I hope.” “In that case, the sooner we start back, the safer we’ll be.” “Not if they’re listening.” She paused. “I know you’re right—they might have found out about that spot.” “Who are they? Do you know?” “First I want to sit down. Isn’t that terrible?” I shook my head. “We’ve walked quite a distance, and you’re wearing screw heels. I didn’t think we’d come this far.” Interlibrary Loan makes two mentions of high, hard heels, (the setup and the callback, but no payoff; the flop and the turn, but no river; the A and the B, but no Colette) once in the opening pages of the novel, pg. 8, listed among all the things he cannot banish from his thoughts, and on pg. 176 when he is questioning Chandra in the stiff-looking room Ern would call a parlor: Chandra fell silent. It seemed as if she might talk more without being pushed, so I kept my mouth shut. Someone was walking around upstairs in high heels; I listened to her footsteps and tried to guess who it was. “Do you want to know about Idona, too?” I nodded. Chandra drew a deep breath. “She wants to be queen of the world. Get in her way, and she might kill you. That’s just what I think.” I have to stop here or I might overheat again. As usual, answering a few key questions lead me to further questions. t1_giv3qdu 2021-01-11T10:26:58+00:00 /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/aramini https://www.reddit.com/user/aramini Yes the heels I was trying to figure out who was walking there too unseen! In those damn heels. I connected that with Colette as well. Crazy. t1_giv740j 2021-01-11T11:06:04+00:00 /u/aramini on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/aramini https://www.reddit.com/user/aramini I am writing a writeup on Interlibrary loan and we are kind of working parallel here. I hadn’t noticed the laundry and O but the heels I was working on. I would like to mention you and the direction of our discussion. What name or handle would you like to be identified as for it? You can dm me that if you want. t1_giv792k 2021-01-11T11:07:47+00:00 /u/aramini on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks https://www.reddit.com/user/Holly-Crystal-Hawks Okay, so my first thoughts jumping off from there are these. First, that Long Sun/Potto quote I dropped earlier keeps ringing in my ears now. Also I"m willing to empty my pockets of a few more nagging clues that I don't know what to do with. To touch quickly on the emerald reference, that is the sole time the word 'emerald' shows up in Interlibrary Loan, compared to thirty-four mentions in A Borrowed Man's emerald driven plot. But also now having my attention drawn there I can't help but notice another odd//sloppy/uncharacteristic sentence, right after it--I need to review all copies first-- --- --- ---Yep, all versions, okay, it's small, but another one that shows the tight turnaround time of manuscript to print. Pg 227, Interlibrary Loan. Something in a cage snarled at the dog, then at me; its green eyes caught the light like emeralds. Twice life-sized, the statue of a bearded man with a woman’s breasts bent to inspect me but offered no comment. I had an English teacher that would relish the opportunity to read our improper syntax in class, correcting one or two aloud sometimes so the whole class could get in on it; I don't relish it as he did, but I tend to find them just the same. "...the statue of a bearded man with a woman's breasts bent..." Okay, so my red pen would accept, "...with a woman's chest...", or, "...with woman's breasts...", I would not suggest, "...with a woman's breast..." (as it implies only one of the two that often come as a set), but the exact one I wouldn't be able to justify is the one on the page. Ern, should be fluent in both writing and women's breasts at this point. Jokes aside, lets' jump again. So I can follow that throughout the course of A Borrowed Man what we think of as Ern is really two people, the young consciousness who was engineered and built into the reclone with all these memories of an Ern A Smithe, and whoever engineered a backdoor into gaining their consciousness, which is likely completed by the reading of Murder on Mars. Even if the character of Ern A. Smithe is a wholly fictitious creation of one of the Conrads, (which he probably is on closer examination) the fact that he was programmed with these false memories still creates a separate neural network worth calling Ern, who funny enough, is then the unreliable narrator merely along for the ride at times when the Conrad inside him knows more about what's going than he does. Also from the perspective of the Conrad inside of this Ern collective/shell, the neural network that is Ern might be both a help and a hindrance as he stumbles through things. I'm going to lean harder on the idea that whoever hollowed out a space for themselves in Ern is Conrad Sr., as his signature is on the book which seems to be the key to unlocking the Conrad consciousness (you noted Erns reaction to reading the section at random being significant as well). I need to think about how to timeline this, but my brain wants to click this into place. To stay with A Borrowed Man a minute, let's see if these slight augmentations hold weight. Conrad Sr. is in Ern, and the Collette who checks him hands him the book that awakens him. Structurally this occurs in the chapter titled Collete's Story, the reading of the book, and Ern saying, "I remember it now." The jewelry shop guy seems unaware that there was a daughter, and along with other contextual clues, maybe suggest that this Colette isn't fully human, which if so, is likely one based on the mother, Joanne Rebecca Carole. To greatly summarize then, Conrad Sr. returns in anger and kills his son for spoiling the financial operation and somehow attracting the attention of the tax collector van Petten and crew. He then gets poisoned by his daughter who is likely doing so out of fear that she will never be able to control him. This daughter may also be a reengineered reclone of his wife, who seemed to have killed herself. Might Colette have been augmented at some point, accounting for her discrepancies? You also illustrate the lost day among the ten, which I haven't found a way to connect yet, but if there is a Conrad in the shell who can somehow be awake while the Ern neural network is asleep, I would like how that could play out. Regardless, what I love then is the sinister nature this creates in Ern and Colette's last encounter in the novel. If there is a Conrad Coldbrook Sr. in that hollowed out Ern, he is looking directly into the eyes of the one who killed him, saying in some ways, 'Hey, looks like that didn't work, did it? By the way, I still have contingency plans that run deeper than you think, so you're going to be helpful now and continue to check me out at least once a year, but no more.' Again, I wonder what the Colette on the last page does and doesn't remember about the events of the novel--as she does indicate to be warmer in the presence of Arabella (side note, it's not Poe's poem, but Josh Ritter has a great song, a reprise of sorts of Annabel Lee, called "Another New World" which is good to have in the background while puzzling over this series). I wonder too if Colette realizes then that she's been duped, or if she merely sees the young Ern. Jumping waaaaaaaaay back to Interlibrary Loan with contextual and structural context to stand on. Now. In the early chapter titled The House on Signal Hill, just before Adah's Story, Adah explains that she has had this copy of Ern A. Smithe checked out to help her with a mystery surrounding a book she has, A black leather-bound book, that has a map in it and a name on it, but no clear name is given. Instead, we get a back and forth that eliminates the names Adah and Barry Fevre for being the ones on the book. Adah is curious as to how Ern quickly assumed the name on the book did not belong to her, but he dodges the question. Before Ern touches the green ink which causes a reaction and vision, he says he got Chandra's name, but apologetically had not asked for hers yet. She said Adah Fevre, and he nodded and thanked her. But then after he has the interaction with the green ink Ern interrupts so reactively when hearing the name Fevre that he ends up apologizing twice immediately out of shock almost, after he lets her continue stating that her husband's name was (Adah's use of past tense) Dr. Barry Fevre and that is not the name on the black leather-bound book. It stands to reason by the logic of A Borrowed Man's hollowed-out Ern gaining a Conrad Coldbrook--unlocked by a copy of Murder on Mars which Conrad signed--whomever's name is on that black leather-bound book might be the next figure unlocked and now a part of the Ern Autarchy, I meaN ChE[[ SeA... she[L... oh no! TOo hot... reBOot-> t1_giv3tlr 2021-01-11T10:28:02+00:00 /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/aramini https://www.reddit.com/user/aramini So here is my issue ... chick gives Ern the three sandwiches ... and then he sees Arabella in a trance, and COLETTE is shoved screaming into a book in his dream, and there is the thing on the bus about a man and woman cross dressing and finding each other again, the man a woman, the woman a man,.. so I’m not confident it is Conrad in Ern even though it SEEMs that way give murder on Mars is an acronym for MOM. These late books ... also ... chick looks like a guy but wears women’s clothes and is kind of feminine and has that damn name ... and it matches up nicely with Cob as a young bird ... t1_giv6p4f 2021-01-11T11:01:27+00:00 /u/aramini on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/aramini https://www.reddit.com/user/aramini The book doesn’t have to have a fevre name ... could be coldbrook or Franklin or anything. Actually given how he didn’t notice fevre as a pseudonym for George Franklin until then ... who knows. Weird. t1_giv6s94 2021-01-11T11:02:24+00:00 /u/aramini on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/aramini https://www.reddit.com/user/aramini Also it is kind of super important that they find sven and the treasure when Audrey goes to look at a body that could be hers and they talk about shrunken heads and hair color then the green thing shows up. Ern is also motivated by seeing a body of himself. Hmmm dr fevre and his missing body ... but Audrey looking at her dead body prompt the discovery of the “treasure” ... Ern says jokingly a pirate hid it in the house at the end and adah joked earlier she was a Morgan and for Chandra to tell her brats (but wasn’t she of Indian descent? And she says dr fevre was calling Chandra Chandra BEFORE she was born ... something going on there t1_ginhtoj 2021-01-09T13:10:22+00:00 /u/aramini on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/aramini https://www.reddit.com/user/aramini The check outs - if in a final draft Ern was picked up at the house instead of the library (as Katrine turner suggests she has to return him to the house she picked him up at even though she checked him out) then the second to last chapter and the talk of a third check out would make sense. What happened at that second check out? Audrey was checked out by Chandra again ... then at the third check out some guy came to get her and Ern thought about killing him. What?! Then another Audrey shows up at the end... maybe ... why was it a different Audrey at the start of that chapter? t1_ginabrg 2021-01-09T11:15:05+00:00 /u/aramini on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/aramini https://www.reddit.com/user/aramini You don't think the last Dr. Fevre is Simon, the one in the final chapters? At the start Ern says he can't stop thinking about Dr. Fevre AND HIS BROTHER. t1_gindt4l 2021-01-09T12:11:33+00:00 /u/aramini on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/aramini https://www.reddit.com/user/aramini Adah says that stolen fruit is sweetest. I think the eyed fruit in the tree scenes is important. Maybe dr fevre really had to take something from that place. Do you think the Heath haunted house and adah’s house are the same house? It doesn’t seem to be, right? No mrs snow no heuse as far as I can recall. Does Heath have to be someone we have seen before? t1_ginlwoe 2021-01-09T14:02:17+00:00 /u/aramini on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks https://www.reddit.com/user/Holly-Crystal-Hawks I like the bit here about the fruit, and the allusion that it creates if maybe Barry and Adah stole some sort of valuable secret which could be a metaphor for (or literal) fruit of a foreign world. I have something for this bit about the houses, looking this up... ... ... They are not the same house (they fly off and seem to fly for quite some time when they go off to the Heaths) but these homes are affected by much the same cause, some sort of hi-tech influenced series of ghosts, and/or some unwanted guests. Ern makes a comment that he is sure that the Fevres have many houses, but we'll say Barry as he seems to be in control of the Fevre finances, right before they get the Three Sisters, pg. 89. “Only not now. First, we have to find and engage the Three Sisters, if we can. Then, rum and pineapple juice. After that, the Fevre house—one of them, anyway.” My final remark hoisted the eyebrows. “Do you really think there’s more than one?” Sometimes I have a hard time sounding completely serious, but it was easy now. “I think there are probably more than two.” I'm willing to believe Ern on this one; many Fevre owned abodes, all spread out. Ms. Heath doesn't have to be someone we know, I'm just trying to put myself in Barry's shes a bit, and if she is a reclone I imagine she might have some of Adah's likeness in her mental and physical build. --- Still need to get to your write-up on ABM, on the docket for today. t1_gipjr6s 2021-01-10T00:02:24+00:00 /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/aramini https://www.reddit.com/user/aramini It’s the murder of dr fevre where things get weird t1_giitbl8 2021-01-08T08:10:30+00:00 /u/aramini on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/aramini https://www.reddit.com/user/aramini All right it seems like the chapter where he keeps saying he is overdue is sloppy editing ... but ... katrine takes him to a guy with rimless glasses who puts a helmet on him and asks him questions... if we are going with memory deletions or insertions that complicates things there too a little bit. Then she says she is returning him to the house she picked him up at ... is the library at Polly’s Cove a “house” or not? t1_ginydgg 2021-01-09T16:07:23+00:00 /u/aramini on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks https://www.reddit.com/user/Holly-Crystal-Hawks I wondered if that was Continental Kartine thinking of the Polly's Cove Public Library as somewhat small, and thus house like when compared to the facilities at any of the Continental owned and operated complexes (including the enormous HQ in Niagara that Ern and crew are in awe of upon arrival before being shuffled through seemingly endless tunnels). This being Wolfe, I also now wonder, with as much as this novel feels like the Urth to the first four-parts of The New Sun . These tunnels now give me the same question I felt at the beginning of Urth , that being does the Severian, who tosses that manuscript into the void, land back into the same universe that he was in when he leaped from the deck of the spaceship or a slightly different one, or said here, does the Ern that walks through all those tunnels in the beginning of Interlibrary Loan come back up into the same instance of the world he just left, or a slightly different one? --- I can't help but look for Solar Cycle allusions in Gene's other works, and the dream in ABM that Ern has that seems to show a Mars flooded with wormholes, made me think less that it was a cheeky easter egg, and more of a way to contextualize where in time this story was happening, ie before. I wanted to see Ern experience the real world mirror of what that dream was trying to show. When I heard there was a sequel I fully expected sneaky hints to show more of this. Personal headcanon, but I feel like (but can't prove) the events of this series are showing what caused the advanced beings who come to put a wormhole in the sun to originally feel the need to slow the human race down. Again, will jump to your ABM write-up next, as that book seems so crisp and tight, that tricky as it is, still seems to have a more sturdy structure to stand on in order to contextualize the world of reclones. t1_gipo28w 2021-01-10T00:39:40+00:00 /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/aramini https://www.reddit.com/user/aramini Mrs. Snow writes the checks for the Fevre household hmmm t1_giv8024 2021-01-11T11:16:28+00:00 /u/aramini on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory /u/theq629 https://www.reddit.com/user/theq629 What do you think about places where things seem to repeat in close succession, like the possible two boats in chapter 7, or the food arriving twice in chapter 19? t1_gyephqq 2021-05-17T04:22:51+00:00 /u/theq629 on Interlibrary Loan--The Case Against the "Out of Order" Theory 