 2026-09-07T00:39:08+00:00 https://www.redditstatic.com/icon.png/ /r/genewolfe/comments/oof804/.rss?limit=100 https://b.thumbs.redditmedia.com/_utnkfTAT1tY_Fl6BIDaQzL3aELYSXTHrj2bGdO6Y6U.png /r/genewolfe is a community dedicated to author Gene Wolfe, winner of the Fuller Award and author of The Book of the New Sun, Peace, The Fifth Head of Cerberus, and There are Doors. Names, Corridors, Windows, and Doors: The Sorcerer's House and Other Storeys and Other Stories : genewolfe /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks https://www.reddit.com/user/Holly-Crystal-Hawks Spoilers ( major and minor), resonances, and thin-ice theorizing for the following: ​ Interlibrary Loan A Borrowed Man The Land Across Home Fires The Sorcerer's House Morning Glory A Solar Labyrinth Cherry Jubilee The Doctor of Death Island ​ The forest seems to look a little clearer to me, but the trees all still confuse the hell out of me, and seem to look back with their own questions. I will try to focus on the house. ~~~~~ Okay, so the hot and cold theory I can't shake today is this: many of the odd houses in these stories, are actually connected via fantasy/science fiction portals, windows, and doors. It's all one house, and each of these stories is an anthology that takes place on a connected timeline, or series of fractured timelines. Bax's inherited house, The Willows, what Ms. Harper Heath calls "...a progressive purlieu”, are all accessible through specific new portals (though never explicitly shown) leading to new wings, potentially different whens. There is something too fishy to ignore, and now I need to plant another digital seed in this internet garden of ideas. I keep Charles Dickens in mind throughout all this. Next, I want to drop a quote from a 2014 interview with Wolfe, as it relates to his later novels, and was also done when he was likely starting the A Borrowed Man series. https://www.technologyreview.com/2014/07/25/12916/a-qa-with-gene-wolfe/ Since you became a full-time writer, your prose has become looser: the paragraphs are shorter, you rely more on dialogue, and the entire tone is less poetic. It’s not that, really. It’s that I’ve gotten so much criticism for being unreadable and overcomplex and hard to get into and all this stuff. And I thought, “Well, I’ll loosen up.” I find that hard to bear. While I admire many of the books after The Book of the New Sun, your early and middle prose style is very original. Nabokov would have recognized you as a being like himself. Yet this feeling that “Wolfe is too difficult” is not uncommon. When I asked the MIT Science Fiction Society what I should ask you, they wrote, “How should a science fiction reader who is more accustomed to [Larry] Niven,[Orson Scott] Card, or [David] Brin start reading Wolfe?” I think it’s probably The Sorcerer’s House. It’s an epistolary novel, and that seems to help people along. So long as they don’t get bothered by the fact that the style changes from one letter writer to another. Gene's answer to the first bit alludes to the fact that while he has loosened up, he still is playing the games he wants to, i.e. still leaving plenty in the shadows if you wish to look further, to see what you might connect if you wish. It comes from a thin read of tone, but I can stand on it. And then when pressed on this a bit, he suggests The Sorcerer’s House . The more I read Wolfe the more I read this line as a double-edged sword. Sure, The Sorcerer’s House is a contained story... if that's all you want it to be. Morning Glory starts with Smythe, a professor (kinda like "Prof." Bax, but we'll get there) talking to a therapist character by the name of Black at the university. I'd guess this could be Zwart Black, but not enough to go on. He tells Black one of his actual dreams here--something he says never does--where he was a vine, reaching for the light beyond a translucent barrier, mentioning he had once eaten morning glory seeds for their hallucinogenic properties, via his access in the lab, but did so without the university paper trail. Later he makes a jab at Black internally, calling him a Freudian, while Smythe sees himself as a Watsonian behaviorist. However, the line that Black gives "Schmidt" as he leaves the session seems to imply that we are not getting his true identity. In fact, whenever a "Smith" is brought up in a Gene Wolfe story, their identity is always quested by someone, and the name is never exactly the same, just close. In Cherry Jubilee , Comrade Oussenko at one point questions the validity of a B. Smith's passport amidst a murder investigation on a spaceship en route to Mars. The "Daedalus" of A Solar Labarynth is merely given the name "Mr. Smith" by the narrator, and by the mere suggestion of that greek myth suggests that the Mr. Smith of our story possibly has a criminal past as well as being a maze maker. And then we have our Ern A. Smithe, whose identity is by nature in question, as he himself could be a hollowed-out book, a false title with a very different story inside. But Bax, I brought up Bax before. If I were to try and find a starting point for this wild theory, today, I'd start with Bax. As the compiler writes (pg. 300, The Sorcerer's House ) -- Baxter Dunn was unquestionably a most imaginative and picturesque liar, but all that he tells us cannot be false. By some means he came into possession of Riverscene, the Black House, and the house that had been Mrs. Martha Murrey’s. The back files of the Sentinel fairly bristle with Hound of Horror stories. How much is true? How much fabrication? Perhaps we shall never know. --we don't know how much of this story is true, but I feel due to the conversation about it being, "bad luck to see the sea serpent," meaning somewhat that there are certain things that will never be believed, a fair amount of the fantastical actually occurred, especially everything around the weird house, Faerie, and the way time works within. Oddly, on this last reread of The Sorcerer’s House, I noticed how in Bax's last letter--the one where he signs his name as George, he mentions wanting to go on a Caribbean cruise, a line that means next to nothing at the time of publication. Yet, in the next book Wolfe writes, Home Fires , his characters do just that, while clearly being in a time years ahead of where we left Bax and George. So here's where I really fly off the baluchither. Oh, so we're playing 'Everyone is Severian Bingo'? In that case, let me get some paper-- No, no, no (not yet). What if Bax and George are stuck in an endless death loop, starting with their first bodies and then continuing on as reclones, yet they can never stop trying to kill each other. Bax left us as definitely a con-man, but very likely also now a sorcerer. George likey died in the off-screen duel ala Alexander Hamilton, but potentially not (I think it's more interesting if Bax thinks he's killed George, when in fact George is able to survive somehow). Regardless, say Bax gets better at navigating the corridors of The Black House. But he gets cocky, and starts to get a bit lost, tangled in too many places, and eventually on one of his many runs, he drops or loses the triannulus. It is of some yellow-brown metal I believe must be tarnished brass or bronze. Its frame (as I style it to myself) is perhaps ten inches by ten. (The width of my thumb, George, is my measure for one inch. I measured it in that fashion just now, having it before me as I write.) -- The Sorcerer's House (pg. 26) In Home Fires we see a Skip who clearly has another consciousness inside of him as he has a few "skips" throughout his recollection of events. But the biggest piece we get anthology-wise out of Home Fires is all the info about Reanimation Inc. and a whole lot of cruise ship mischief. And we learn that criminal sentences can extend even beyond your first body's death. In The Doctor of Death Island , our protagonist Alvard begins his story in jail, but with a semi-reprieve via a move to a medical wing. Having murdered his partner in quite a hot fashion--having shattered the glass and then decided at that moment to push him out--suggests he resonates with George rather than a Bax. Bax, in my opinion, is the cold calculated killer, whereas Geroge is the hot one who flares up when he maybe shouldn't. Near the end of the story on the 6th floor (which is the 7th level of the building in this case), we get glimpses of the world both alive and crumbling in the contrast between to two giant ships that he sees out his window in various, all while being haunted by a Doctor with three fingers, whom death always follows. In the end, death comes for Alvard too, his body dying as his own invention invokes the Charles Dickens characters which have now all gotten loose into all books, everywhere. Jump to The Land Across, where there is little to stand on other than the house oddities, mirrors, windows, etc. The only two tangible things I have in my head are that The Willows is a part or a few wings in The Black House, and the "treasure" that is often talked about but never seen...? The triannulus. Same deal in Interlibrary Loan with Ms. Heath's house, which somebody is trying to take from her by her account. The description of the house also fits with the oddities of the house we see described in Medicine Man, where again, we have a missing treasure, what I think is none other than our mysterious green box, now patina green from all the years of being lost, untouched, and exposed to the elements. But now the triannulus is in a state of disrepair and is possibly or not operating correctly. Tilt it a bit and parts that used to not move are now shifting inside. Maybe it's leaking. Hence why Dr. Fevre is apprehensive about getting it to work himself. He asks Smithe to get it working, either in his presence or without it, implying it doesn't seem like it's in working order at the time of asking. If nothing else, here is where I want to tie together this theory of the house, and the strange set of names that seem to surround it. Hold the conversation with Dr. Roglitch in your head simultaneously for more of why I feel this is so. First, we have to find and engage the Three Sisters, if we can. Then, rum and pineapple juice. After that, the Fevre house—one of them, anyway.” My final remark hoisted the eyebrows. “Do you really think there’s more than one?” Sometimes I have a hard time sounding completely serious, but it was easy now. “I think there are probably more than two.” Interlibrary Loan (pgs. 89-90) Rose, Millie, George(s), Jim, Kate/Katrine, are all names doubled in both The Sorcerer's House and A Borrowed Man/Interlibrary Loan. Amongst the doubling cast and crew are also a locksmith, a jeweler, a dog, and a dwarf (the dwarf with chains in Ern's vision when he touched the green rectangle on the map--let's say that's Quorn, as it happens in one of the Fevre's houses, which, again, are all likely connected internally). Also doubled are the antique pistols, by way of Martha Murray to Bax and then Harper Heath to Buck Baston. A many mirrors theory now-- TSH Rose: Real estate agent and part-time lover of Bax, giving him the ring of her late husband; ABM/IL Rose: Reclone and acquaintance of Ern A. Smithe, a romance writer. A troublemaker in her own way by Ern and Millie's account. TSH Millie: George's wife, who is emotionally invested in Bax and might be the worse applicant for a spy by the tone and execution of her letters on face value; ABM/IL Millie: Reclone, troublemaker, and friend of Ern A. Smithe, known for her cooking--no one else seems to have more cookbooks published than Millie at either Polly's Cove or Spice Grove. Ern chuckles when he thinks of her trying to snoop around Polly's Cove, when he realizes that her lack of looking like a spy makes her a somewhat excellent one. TSH George: Bax's twin brother, and in my opinion the hot-headed jock to Bax's cold-calculated con-man; ABM/IL Georges: a knowledgeable traveler who assists Ern, going under the name "Fevre". Hot stuff you got-- TSH Jim: Real estate agent; ABM/IL Jim: The late husband of Judy Peters--the Coldbrook's old housekeeper. TSH Kate: Policewoman, and daughter of Policewoman Biddy Finn, who goes into the weird house with Bax to find George, and the letter this comes from says they do not find George; ABM/IL Katrine: Continental Officer who goes with Ern into a weird house that leads to another world where they shoot... Well, that's one just of those things, isn't it? ...someone they (mostly Ern) suspect has murdered Dr. Barry F. Fevre. We clearly have two family lines in ABM/IL, a Coldbrook line and a Fevre line. Might these be the two family lines derived from the Dunn brothers, representing a hot and cold line? Colette lies just as coldly as Bax in many ways, a familial resemblance through her actions. However, the Georges Fevre we meet in ABM has me thinking way more about Bax. One, he's got that con-man feel, and he knows how to hack a car by way of social engineering the code a specific person might use--or in this case, A-C-E unlocking a rental--rather than some more technical way of plugging into the ECU and hacking the computer code to gain access to the vehicle like you might hack a Tesla. That, and he's now a con-man with his brother's name (oh, that twin mix-up mischief--though, to be fair, it is the last name he used with us, dear readers, via that final forged letter to "My Darling Millie,"). But then why, if Georges Fevre is a Bax having escaped the house in a time closer to where the triannulus is, would he be willing to help Ern blow up the Coldbrook estate in ABM , if those are his relatives, the "cold" line? That, I don't have a clue for. Well, I do have one more geographical clue, which may be of no use at all. Medicine Man could be Medicine Hat, Alberta, which would make it relatively close to the Canadian Rockies and close to Calgary, which for the life of me I cannot convince myself is not Spice Grove. It has clicked, and I cannot as of yet make it unclick. We never really get any description of the outside of Spice Grove at any time other than in ABM it's the height of summer, and IL is winter but we only get some descriptive language after they have been en route in the truck a while, and we know they are headed to Niagra so we expect to start seeing colder. Seems like the perfect Wolfe misdirection. But thinking about all the geographical clues, and knowing that Ms. Harper Heath's plane goes much higher and flies much longer after picking them up at Polly's Cove (east coast, by other contextual notes) they could very well be flying back west toward what I believe is The Black House of Medicine Man. A final jump back to the "Smiths". In Cherry Jubilee, we get possibly the most interesting resonance to The Book of Ern . On an interplanetary fight to Mars, B. Smith gets entangled in a murder investigation involving the death of a magician's clone, Cherry Houdini (to the Merry Houdini, her creator and original to Cherry's clone-twin). But--spoilers-- If they've read this far-- --much like the detective work of Ern in figuring out Colette's involvement with her father's death, B. Smith figures out that not only did the twins make a switch prior to the murder--forcing the clone to perform the dangerous magician act as "Merry", while the true Merry was in fact safe inside the ship--it was the clone herself that murdered Merry, while everyone on the ship was watching the magician's distraction out another window. As Cherry and Smith are talking in the last lines of the story-- You’ve just gotten yourself a girl on Mars—all through radical economics.” “You’re right,” Smith told her. “But I wish I could have gotten my girl the way you got your man.” --the slingshot to the face that I took on this latest reread was this: Smith is a spy, and a clone. The way Cherry "got her man"--meaning Smith by way of him figuring out her con--on Mars was in some ways by Cherry killing her original. And if I lean on that thought, this, Smith says, is how he wishes he had gotten her, by way of killing his previous self, his original, or possibly just his twin. Smith, whom Cherry, even as she is admitting her involvement, is simultaneously voicing that she thinks Smith is likely a spy, and, "Anyway, anybody who thinks the way you do is dangerous.” Just before that line in fact she blatantly suggests she might murder him on Mars. Murder. On. Mars. What if she did just that, killed Smith, on Mars? Well, it wouldn't matter much, I'm sure his superiors have him backed up in a library somehow. So who the hell is Smith (Smythe, Smithe), anyway? My guess: He's a Continental Spy, perpetual reclone, currently undercover as Ern A. Smithe, library resource (possibly as a way to shorten a "life" sentence). In the same way that 007 is just the name of the spy who holds that job title (if you subscribe to that theory), any iteration of "Smith" is merely a Gene Wolfe's spy who is all too excited to share his memoirs with us. So now I'm left wondering, after all that, if indeed Ern A. Smithe--Continental spy, and potential relative, a clone of, or just person who has brushed the shoulders of Bax or George--stands and grasps the aged triannulus, what happens when next? Well, I don't know yet. I just know I need someone to convince me that these things are all unrelated, or else I may have to keep digging. You didn't even get to your thoughts on Sven and George and "The Sea of Memory". Damn, you're right G-- ~~~~~ Here I must break, before my mind does so first. Feel free to poke holes and question my line of thinking. I kind of feel like I've been holding onto a bomb of resonance and I don't fully know what to do with all of it. submitted by /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks [link] [comments] t3_oof804 2021-07-21T00:48:39+00:00 2021-07-21T00:48:39+00:00 Names, Corridors, Windows, and Doors: The Sorcerer's House and Other Storeys and Other Stories /u/Wyrdwit https://www.reddit.com/user/Wyrdwit What a fun read. To add a layer, there's an inherent metafiction throughout Wolfe, and it's not merely post-modern wanking like it usually is, but part of his underlying metaphysics. Books are portals to other words. Implicitly, the gods or God of these worlds (their creator) is a writer who exists Outside of the world, an Outsider. t1_h5y9lae 2021-07-21T02:05:51+00:00 /u/Wyrdwit on Names, Corridors, Windows, and Doors: The Sorcerer's House and Other Storeys and Other Stories /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks https://www.reddit.com/user/Holly-Crystal-Hawks I aim for fun reads. Books certainly are portals, and a few even open doors. t1_h60nz3v 2021-07-21T16:15:50+00:00 /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks on Names, Corridors, Windows, and Doors: The Sorcerer's House and Other Storeys and Other Stories /u/PatrickMcEvoyHalston https://www.reddit.com/user/PatrickMcEvoyHalston Your explorations open doors, i think. t1_h60sjkx 2021-07-21T16:47:25+00:00 /u/PatrickMcEvoyHalston on Names, Corridors, Windows, and Doors: The Sorcerer's House and Other Storeys and Other Stories /u/hedcannon https://www.reddit.com/user/hedcannon I haven’t finished yet, but I have always been convinced that George is a werwolf — that’s the secret Bax is keeping for him. The werwolf Bax killed with the blunderbus when they left the restaurant was George. t1_h5yby7r 2021-07-21T02:25:00+00:00 /u/hedcannon on Names, Corridors, Windows, and Doors: The Sorcerer's House and Other Storeys and Other Stories /u/aramini https://www.reddit.com/user/aramini https://youtu.be/wvUlG2I4PEI sorcerers house and all the late fiction is a unified puzzle with an answer. Here the three spirits at play are the ghost of Ted, the Lamia, and the kikimora (I was a real scarecrow, said Martha murrey, and kikimora means scarecrow- their handshake tells you about them, she forged the lease it was in a woman’s hand). Bax is fucked good and proper and drained he isn’t a sorcerer by the end. The twins are another internal delusion that represent how he is being influenced, so when the one is boyfriends with lupine (really the lamia) and there is the handshake talk it reflects on the handshake he will NOT give his brother when he kills him at the end and takes his place before he is drained by the Lamia in time). The two and one pattern - only the weak ghost of Ted means well for him. But the Fox skin we see in the room with quorn at the start manages to scare off the rose. Her chasing off a rabbit on the kimono, and the rabbit keys on dorris’ car keys. When someone was translating that Native American section at the concluding fight I asked if it could mean snake and of course it was one possible translation. Because yeah. Puzzle with one solution. t1_h5zq44p 2021-07-21T11:41:51+00:00 /u/aramini on Names, Corridors, Windows, and Doors: The Sorcerer's House and Other Storeys and Other Stories /u/mummifiedstalin https://www.reddit.com/user/mummifiedstalin The idea that all the stand alone novels (and Ern's books) are in a shared universe is pretty amazing. Any way to connect the genres to the roles of "Smith et al"? You've got mysteries (ABM/IL), spy thriller (Home Fires), epistolary and con (Sorcerer's House), whatever Land Across is... heh t1_h62p6c9 2021-07-22T01:17:12+00:00 /u/mummifiedstalin on Names, Corridors, Windows, and Doors: The Sorcerer's House and Other Storeys and Other Stories /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks https://www.reddit.com/user/Holly-Crystal-Hawks I don't think I've read enough of Wolfe's middle novels yet and stories to say fully at this moment; the shelf is finally filled but my eyes and mind are slow to chew. But all this began when I started looking back through Interlibrary Loan backward, which is oddly now the story I have reread most, due to its sparse nature. I always have The Land Across close to my mind, but far from my understanding. Having recently reread Home Fires before giving that hardcopy to a friend (I still have a clone of it on my shelf here, you might say), I went through The Sorcerer's House again and found I missed a lot on my first read, (as well as my second on a few things too) but also found too many resonances to IL to not say anything about it. I think I have a big picture reason why there are so many resonances, but there is a lot of metafictional analysis entangled in that thought at present, so it makes it difficult to express appropriately. t1_h62t94q 2021-07-22T01:50:23+00:00 /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks on Names, Corridors, Windows, and Doors: The Sorcerer's House and Other Storeys and Other Stories /u/mummifiedstalin https://www.reddit.com/user/mummifiedstalin Well, keep chugging. You've definitely got the chops to put things together in ways others haven't seen, so I'm a fan. t1_h64sofu 2021-07-22T14:53:55+00:00 /u/mummifiedstalin on Names, Corridors, Windows, and Doors: The Sorcerer's House and Other Storeys and Other Stories /u/hedcannon https://www.reddit.com/user/hedcannon The cold-hot connection between Coldwater and Fevre never occurred to me. I feel like an idiot. t1_h5yhg30 2021-07-21T03:10:57+00:00 /u/hedcannon on Names, Corridors, Windows, and Doors: The Sorcerer's House and Other Storeys and Other Stories /u/aramini https://www.reddit.com/user/aramini Didn’t you read my writeup on borrowed man? I banged on this forever. t1_h5znq1u 2021-07-21T11:13:27+00:00 /u/aramini on Names, Corridors, Windows, and Doors: The Sorcerer's House and Other Storeys and Other Stories /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks https://www.reddit.com/user/Holly-Crystal-Hawks It was that exact write up that got this more universal hot-cold thought-train going for me after my first ABM read. Thank you again for always being so willing to help, and a strong mind to bounce ideas off of. t1_h60ofe4 2021-07-21T16:18:57+00:00 /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks on Names, Corridors, Windows, and Doors: The Sorcerer's House and Other Storeys and Other Stories /u/hedcannon https://www.reddit.com/user/hedcannon I certainly did, but for some reason it didn’t take. It was only after my first read. But the significance of the Fevre name doesn’t really take off until IL. t1_h5zs11u 2021-07-21T12:02:57+00:00 /u/hedcannon on Names, Corridors, Windows, and Doors: The Sorcerer's House and Other Storeys and Other Stories /u/aramini https://www.reddit.com/user/aramini Yeah the hot and cold is the key organizing thing even in the second book with cold lichholm and the fevres. The girls Spring and summer and the blue-red-violet imagery including the eyes. The coldbrooks and the fevres are clearly related but on opposite sides of the heat spectrum. Ern’s wife is described as “hot” t1_h5zsel3 2021-07-21T12:06:51+00:00 /u/aramini on Names, Corridors, Windows, and Doors: The Sorcerer's House and Other Storeys and Other Stories /u/aramini https://www.reddit.com/user/aramini Burning feet for torture, cold feet in the water with Colette at the start. t1_h5zsgya 2021-07-21T12:07:33+00:00 /u/aramini on Names, Corridors, Windows, and Doors: The Sorcerer's House and Other Storeys and Other Stories /u/aramini https://www.reddit.com/user/aramini Death by burning t1_h5zsihh 2021-07-21T12:08:00+00:00 /u/aramini on Names, Corridors, Windows, and Doors: The Sorcerer's House and Other Storeys and Other Stories /u/hedcannon https://www.reddit.com/user/hedcannon Carole = calorie? t1_h5zszh7 2021-07-21T12:12:56+00:00 /u/hedcannon on Names, Corridors, Windows, and Doors: The Sorcerer's House and Other Storeys and Other Stories /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks https://www.reddit.com/user/Holly-Crystal-Hawks More structural Wolfey mirrors ( bold words are of my choice, for emphasis): “There was a lady named Murrey— that’s Murrey with an E —who used to live in my house. I’ve found something that belongs to her. It’s valuable, and I’d like to return it. Have you ever known anyone with that name?” -- The Sorcerer's House (pg. 243); Mahala nodded, and wrote. When she handed me her new tablet it read: WIFE’S NAME? “You’re right, and I should have thought of that.” I turned to Georges. “You must have come across it when you did your search. Do you remember it?” “Yeah. I’m pretty good on that stuff. Joanne Rebecca Carole. That’s ‘Carole’ with an e .” He spelled it. -- A Borrowed Man (pg. 202); She was a middle-aged lady, kind of heavy, with smart eyes. Those eyes told me right off I was going to have to be careful and stick just as close to the truth as I could. Nothing fancy; they made me glad I had told Georges to keep a low profile. “Mrs. Peters? I’m Ern A. Smithe— that’s Smithe with a final e .” -- A Borrowed Man (pg. 227); “May I sit here, Ms. Hopkins? And introduce myself? I’m Ern Smithe— that’s Smith with an E at the end —and I wrote mysteries. I wanted to tell you how much I enjoyed The Boats of the Yerba Buena .” -- Interlibrary Loan (pg. 85); When Audrey came in at last, she didn’t remember me. “You look terribly disappointed Mr.…” “Smithe.” Devastated, I forced a smile. “ That’s Smithe, with a final E . I—we were lovers, Audrey. Another copy of you, of course. This lonely copy of me.” -- Interlibrary Loan (pg. 237). ​ ​ Knowing what I now know about the "Murrey" mentioned in the first quote, and the many resonances between these stories, I really wonder about that "Carole" line now, and why the Smithe of the final volume always capitalizes his use of the E in question, whereas, in A Borrowed Man , he does not. t1_h6nah0y 2021-07-26T23:40:35+00:00 /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks on Names, Corridors, Windows, and Doors: The Sorcerer's House and Other Storeys and Other Stories /u/hedcannon https://www.reddit.com/user/hedcannon Hmmm… what do you suppose is the significance of the E in Murrey? t1_h6wmrrd 2021-07-29T01:53:44+00:00 /u/hedcannon on Names, Corridors, Windows, and Doors: The Sorcerer's House and Other Storeys and Other Stories /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks https://www.reddit.com/user/Holly-Crystal-Hawks As it relates to Ern, I think that the spirits of The Sorcerer's House are still present in the time of Ern's story and are still causing chaos. Martha Murrey, the kikimora, is now under the guise of Colette Coldbrook; The Lamia of Corinth seems to be going by the name Dane Van Petten, which then makes mew think Ted's ghost has found its way into Ern, though he may not be the only extra personality inside Ern, not by a longshot. t1_h6wsu6l 2021-07-29T02:43:36+00:00 /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks on Names, Corridors, Windows, and Doors: The Sorcerer's House and Other Storeys and Other Stories /u/PatrickMcEvoyHalston https://www.reddit.com/user/PatrickMcEvoyHalston In Morning-Glory, Smythe discusses some intercession that breaks a pattern that leads to a being's demise. Radiation is that intercession, is overtly that intercession, as it results in both the morning glory plant and to turtles breaking free of a pattern that was necessary to life. Later, he brings up his father's own intercession in their geneology's pattern, becoming a small town lawyer rather than than the diplomat his family tree was known for. That intercession by his father, resulted in Smythe's own -- for his family -- unique career, becoming a scholar. That is, his fiddling with "intercessions" in his experiments is unconscious constant re-engagement with a family breakage that he has always thought dooming for him. The story, we note, endorses Freudian interpretation. Watson... and behavioural conditioning, gets a backhanded slap in this story. Pavlov is famous for making dogs salivate as a "conditioned response," that is, not to food itself, but to stimuli linked to food (if I remember correctly). The story itself begins with reference to a dog... or a hyena, where Smythe's father is informing his son that he is a dog that must learn to prize food that has fallen to the ground. The story begins with the son remembering how his father told him to eat food on the floor as a dog would. Behavioural conditioning, where lessons from dogs is associated with lessons for humans, comes across as a means of trying to gain control somehow over personal memories of being degraded in this way by "german" authoritarian fathers. None of this really explores your own arguments here, but I read this story to get a more sure response to it, and it simply took me in a different direction. One would wonder how Zvart Black could be this Black though? One chooses to be a Freudian over being bored by medical texts, usually. Thus the antithesis of Freud and Watson. In Interlibrary Loan, the "hot" one is Adah, Fevre's wife. If Fevre is hesistant, reluctant, having Ern do what he fears to do, this doesn't seem so "hot" either. Concerning "hot" and "cold" types, what comes to mind other than Sorcerer's House is There are Doors. In that one, the "hot" one is North and the more cooly-tempered, Green. Doesn't it seem that Wolfe uses these kinds of names, in part because they are so indescript? If you land this sort of name onto a protagonist, you can spin them anywhere you wish, just like a postwar American could turn... like happened to Wolfe and to Smythe himself, from a family tradition of some regularity into something sparkingly new and completely your own? Thanks for the hard thinking in your report. We really appreciate it. t1_h5zko46 2021-07-21T10:33:25+00:00 /u/PatrickMcEvoyHalston on Names, Corridors, Windows, and Doors: The Sorcerer's House and Other Storeys and Other Stories /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks https://www.reddit.com/user/Holly-Crystal-Hawks There are Doors is also on my shelf waiting for my eyes. Noted. Mr. Black in Morning Glory might not be Zwart, and it was written well before TSH, but I guess that's more of a spark of an idea I had that came out of the name resonance I saw. t1_h61lsd0 2021-07-21T20:10:47+00:00 /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks on Names, Corridors, Windows, and Doors: The Sorcerer's House and Other Storeys and Other Stories /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks https://www.reddit.com/user/Holly-Crystal-Hawks What still gets me spinning is that TSH and ABM/IL have the most name resonances of any two Wolfe stories and I keep wondering why that is. t1_h60r8pr 2021-07-21T16:38:28+00:00 /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks on Names, Corridors, Windows, and Doors: The Sorcerer's House and Other Storeys and Other Stories /u/aramini https://www.reddit.com/user/aramini Spoilers for Sorcerers house - it’s the Lamia of Corinth- Bax is toast. Bad luck to see serpents that make illusions of houses to drain their victims and are tracked by their scents, especially in conjunction with jealous kikimoras who send dreams to get rid of true loves like doris rose. All house spirits. The skinny torpedo of a Greek fellow, a blood drinker, is also a serpentine figure, and the gold Corinthian coin links the Lamia to the appearance of gold like the gold tipped staff - all the illusions of the Lamia who convinces brother to kill brother and is both lupine and nicholas. She is tracked to her lair by her scent and is defeated by ambrosius, but here GOLDWyRM (a wyrm is a serpent) kills Apollonius and is the Lamia as well, linked with gold. t1_h5zo293 2021-07-21T11:17:43+00:00 /u/aramini on Names, Corridors, Windows, and Doors: The Sorcerer's House and Other Storeys and Other Stories /u/PatrickMcEvoyHalston https://www.reddit.com/user/PatrickMcEvoyHalston Seems like there are three novels at least that for you are about or feature a protagonist getting sucked into or already existing within, a female. Sorcerer's House. The Knight. And your interpretation of Horn being contained within a beast, within Babbie, after i believe getting sucked into Blue's trees. Not sure if Babbie was male or female, but old gods and trees for me brings to mind the banished dark mother nature goddess of Latro. t1_h6083jd 2021-07-21T14:22:35+00:00 /u/PatrickMcEvoyHalston on Names, Corridors, Windows, and Doors: The Sorcerer's House and Other Storeys and Other Stories /u/aramini https://www.reddit.com/user/aramini After his flight, Latro has another dream: “of love. The woman was raven-haired … with eyes that flashed with desire.… A lake, dark and still, mirrored silver stars; all along the shore men in horned and leering masks capered with women crowned with the vine, to the thudding of timbrels and the rattle of crotali” (Mist, XLI 298). [This seems to be a memory of Hileara and the Bacchic ritual at the start of the book, after which Latro fell into the hands of the helots, who worship the Earth Mother while their masters support the Triple Goddess. The vision at this point in the narrative comes as Latro is about to return to the Persian side of the conflict, if only temporarily.] When Latro awakes, he thinks that the wind seems to be the thought of Jove, “the god who rules the gods and cares little for men. It seemed to me that he was mad, black thoughts repeating one or two words again and again as they brooded upon revenge” (Mist, XLI 298). [The presence of Jove or Zeus in Wolfe’s novels is never clear. We never truly learn if Zeus undergoes synthesis with Kronos and Ahura Mazda in Latro’s scrolls, or if he has himself somehow been fractured into all of the various gods.] Latro notes that he is near an abyss, and soon the Maiden Kore comes to talk to him, telling him she will keep his scroll. The dialogue they exchange features an abrupt cut, typical of Wolfe’s elisions: “And you’re a goddess? I didn’t think–” She smiled sourly. "We still meddled in the wars of Men? Not often now, but the Unseen God wanes, and we are no longer lost in his light. We will never be wholly gone.… “I act for my mother, and not for you. You owe me no thanks. Nor do I owe you any. If you had accepted your beating like any other slave, my task would have been easy.” “I am not a slave,” I said. She smiled again. “What Latro? Not even mine?” “Your worshipper, Maiden.” “Smooth tongued as ever. No man outreaches his gods, Latro, not even in falsehood.” (Mist, XLI 300) [Kore’s comments on the waning of the Unseen God might resonate with the breaking of Persian power and the fragmentation of Ahura Mazda’s might into the disparate pagan Greek and Roman elements that would dominate Europe. Her final line, involving falsehood and a man outreaching his gods, might also reflect back on her identification of Latro as a slave, which he intuitively rejects. Oddly, she says that her job would have been easy if Pasicrates, a servant of Artemis Orthia, had administered his punishment. Just as at the conclusion of Soldier of Arete, this muddles the actual individuality of the different gods and confuses their motives, though she clearly desires Latro’s acceptance of a subservient role.]” — Beyond Time and Memory: An Exploration of the Fiction of Gene Wolfe: 1987 to 1990 by Marc Aramini t1_h6099p9 2021-07-21T14:31:14+00:00 /u/aramini on Names, Corridors, Windows, and Doors: The Sorcerer's House and Other Storeys and Other Stories /u/aramini https://www.reddit.com/user/aramini I think my reading of Latro is now that the father god fragmented into various components when monotheism broke up and Persia lost, female and male, and the great mother and the Sphinx become a part of the memory palace of the war god, Ahura Mazda incognito, when they reassemble and Zeus stops being insane. Let me see if I can find the quote. t1_h608oj9 2021-07-21T14:26:54+00:00 /u/aramini on Names, Corridors, Windows, and Doors: The Sorcerer's House and Other Storeys and Other Stories /u/aramini https://www.reddit.com/user/aramini But to be clear Bax and George are real. Ieuan and emlyn are internal representations of them manifested by the kikimora. t1_h608ug7 2021-07-21T14:28:07+00:00 /u/aramini on Names, Corridors, Windows, and Doors: The Sorcerer's House and Other Storeys and Other Stories /u/PatrickMcEvoyHalston https://www.reddit.com/user/PatrickMcEvoyHalston Your writings on Latro put attention to how strongly each of the various peoples discussed -- Romans, the Greeks, the Persians -- are devoted into female dieties, the female, while the male gods are hardly present. (I've noted myself that the Knight ends with men displaced and powerful female figures in charge -- with Queens, not Kings -- as does New Sun, with Agia as leader of armies and with Severian's wife as autarch... and as does Long Sun, with Mint head of Viron and butch lesbian warriors invading the city, while Silk tries to pull a retreat and the head of the church, dead... and Short Sun a bit too, with Green's human population at least, I think now being ruled by the Triv as well.) Add to that Castleview, where the lamia house is Le Fay's castle, now new home to Shields, who began as Schindler -Shields, a hyphenate, owned into his the-decision-is-mine wife. Land Across as well, with the protagonist as "boy" to the head agent's "mother," and Borrowed Man's Ern into his female borrower and owner, and Home Fire's Skip, who tended home while his wife did the traditional male role of warrior. Males who block the woman a protagonist is falling into, die or get ill. Thus Devil in the Forest and Free Live Free (and Interlibrary Loan, where the man who would block Adah from slaying Ern, Fevre, dies shortly thereafter, even if not, as Ern supposed, owing to the efforts of one of several possible candidates, all women). Though the Spartans do seem to have blocked out the vestigial earth mother successfully, as I recall, and thus I believe her complaint of reduced power. t1_h60v0lu 2021-07-21T17:04:27+00:00 /u/PatrickMcEvoyHalston on Names, Corridors, Windows, and Doors: The Sorcerer's House and Other Storeys and Other Stories /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks https://www.reddit.com/user/Holly-Crystal-Hawks Hmm. Interesting. There is a singular mention of a "bad smell" in A Borrowed Man, this one here at the very beginning of the last chapter: Probably I should have been scared, but I was not, just tired of him. He could be nice around Colette, but it was an act. Get past the act and he was ugly, mean, and cruel. Get past that, too, and there was nothing else, just an empty suit and a bad smell. Maybe you will say I could not know that for sure, but I could feel it. A Borrowed Man (pgs. 274-275) Smithe means Van Petten here, and no sooner does Ern decide to lock him in the world past the laboratory doors as a way to get rid of him. But did it work...? t1_h61jg0p 2021-07-21T19:54:29+00:00 /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks on Names, Corridors, Windows, and Doors: The Sorcerer's House and Other Storeys and Other Stories /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks https://www.reddit.com/user/Holly-Crystal-Hawks I don't think it worked the way Ern wanted it to. t1_h6agbph 2021-07-23T20:25:30+00:00 /u/Holly-Crystal-Hawks on Names, Corridors, Windows, and Doors: The Sorcerer's House and Other Storeys and Other Stories /u/aramini https://www.reddit.com/user/aramini Cherry jubilee: what really happened is the original killed her clone who was muscling in on her to get her birthright back … they were switched at the start and the speech patterns give them away. One is infantile. The one who is supposed to be new talks like a sophisticated adult and the other one is like YiPEE YAY. The detective never figured out they were switched before he met them but otherwise he gets it. So he is fooled. t1_h5zp4e2 2021-07-21T11:30:21+00:00 /u/aramini on Names, Corridors, Windows, and Doors: The Sorcerer's House and Other Storeys and Other Stories 