
Major DnD marketplaces put AI content in the dungeon - Wargamer
Wargamer
Main menu
Warhammer 40k
MTG
D&D
Board games
About us
-->
Network N Media
Search
Major DnD marketplaces put AI content in the dungeon
Dungeon Masters Guild, DriveThruRPG, and the other OneBookshelf platforms have banned many forms of AI content, restricting others.
Timothy Linward 
Updated:
Jul 26, 2023
Dungeons and Dragons
The 
DnD marketplace
 Dungeon Masters Guild has put major restrictions on the sale of AI generated content. As of July 24, the platform's AI content policy requires products containing AI art - like 
DnD One shots
, new 
DnD Classes
, campaigns, or 
DnD Races
 - to be tagged so customers can filter them in search results, and outright bans work that consists solely of AI generated art.
An additional ban on 
Dungeons and Dragons
 "commercial content primarily written by AI language generators" comes into effect on July 31, though the firm "acknowledge[s] enforcement challenges" with this.
Dungeon Masters Guild is operated by OneBookShelf in partnership with DnD IP owner Wizards of the Coast. It's a marketplace for community generated content for DnD 5e, with a licensing agreement permitting users to included official material from the various DnD settings and 
DnD books
 in their creations.
This video interview by Ted Sikora of Nerd Immersion with Dungeon Master's Guild brand manager Lysa Penrose explains more about the site:
OneBookshelf operates many marketplaces for digital and print-on-demand publications, such as DriveThruRPG, which will also implement this policy.
Whether you're for or against the use of AI systems in RPGs, make sure to read this article by Wargamer's Mollie Russell interviewing designers and legal professionals about 
AI art in tabletop RPGs
.
Timothy Linward 
 Our newest full time staff writer, Tim Linward is a 
Warhammer 40k
 and 
Horus Heresy
 fanatic who dabbles in TTRPGs, 
board games
 and 
MTG
. You'll often find him delving through Games Workshop's financial reports for gaming news, combing the indie wargaming scene for cool new titles, or listening to yet more 
Warhammer 40k books
 for deep 40k lore. He's also written for 
PCGamesN
, and 'Grimdark', his book of essays about Warhammer 40k and Games Workshop, will be published by Strange Attractor Press when it finally emerges from the warp. His controversial gaming opinion is that the 
Age of Sigmar
 double turn is objectively bad - it gives a single die roll too much influence over the game state. (He/Him) 
As an Amazon Associate, we earn from qualifying purchases.
As an eBay Partner, we earn if you make a purchase. 
Learn more
.
">
Discord
TikTok
Facebook
X
Bluesky
Steam
Google News
Newsletter
© 2026
Powered by Network N Media
Terms and conditions
About us
Careers
