Skip to content
Close
collapsed
Home
The Library
Renaissance Woman
The Writers’ Writer
Dorothy Dunnett Society
Memorabilia & Shop
Readings & Recollections
Maps
Menu
expanded
The Writers’ Writer
As readers of Dunnett very well know, diving into one of her novels can be the start of a lifelong obsession. There are very few fans who have ever read the Lymond or Niccolò series just once and never returned. We are eternally captivated by her characters, backdrops, plots and language and find it hard – perhaps even impossible — to find other books that satisfy us in quite the same way. Each read — think of it as a literary onion — uncovers another layer of magic. It turns out that we are not alone. Well, of course not! It transpires that Dunnett — that most eloquent of writers — has also influenced and entranced a good many other authors as well. Here you will find the thoughts, whether they be brief or long, of wordsmiths from across the world who, too, have fallen in love with Dunnett.
In honour of Dorothy Dunnett’s centenary year, the National Library of Scotland has gathered a series of essays and articles from DDS members.
The National Records of Scotland (NRS) holds the official records of vital events of our lives and, every January, the records of people who were born 100 years ago, married 75 years ago or died 50 years ago in Scotland are added to the ScotlandsPeople website. Dorothy Dunnett is among those who have been added this year, with a special highlight .
Writers on Dunnett:
Prue Batten, author of the Gisborne series
I discovered histfict long before I discovered Dorothy Dunnett but when I eventually unshelved her in a little seaside library many years ago, I felt as if I had come home. I devoured her books then, one after another, and my life changed. As an hist.fict writer, she is my one and only inspiration. Others will talk of her depthless research, her undeniable intellect and creative wit, but for me it is always about character and colour. The colour comes from enviable threads in the narrative that twist and turn, leaving the reader breathlessly knotted. She dared to take history and strip the threads to suit her purpose and then reweave it into an overpowering masterpiece of warp and weft. She deservedly earned her mantle. None other can ever equal her in my opinion. There are one or two who come so close as to tread on the velvet hems of that cloak, but for me, she is and will always remain, the doyen of historical fiction.
Pamela Belle, author of Wintercombe and many more
I discovered the glories of Dorothy Dunnett’s novels at the tender age of thirteen, nearly sixty years ago. I’d been laid up with flu, and was reading a back copy of my mother’s Woman’s Journal , in which there was a glowing review of DD’s first novel, The Game of Kings , set in 16 th century Scotland. It sounded intriguing, so I borrowed it from the library, and was instantly hooked.
Needless to say, I didn’t understand the half of it, but I fell totally and passionately in love with the hero, Francis Crawford of Lymond. He was a man you could admire – a brilliant musician, soldier and polymath – but he was also, in the old-fashioned romantic tradition, moody, secretive, his own worst enemy, and above all, Misunderstood. There was action, humour, tragedy, suspense, and a thrilling denouement. I’d liked the historical stories of Ronald Welch and Rosemary Sutcliff, and I was now discovering adult authors such as Georgette Heyer and Jean Plaidy, but they were nothing like Dorothy Dunnett; even Heyer seemed dull and predictable by comparison.
I devoured Queen’s Play , the second in the Lymond Chronicles, as the series is now known, but had an agonising wait for The Disorderly Knights , which came out the following year. Pawn in Frankincense was published in 1969, just after I’d finished my A Levels. I remember standing in the bookshop in Ipswich, covertly reading the end – would my beloved hero die? No, he didn’t – but nothing in the world could have prepared me for the agonising scenes which had me reading until 4a.m. and then sobbing myself to sleep. The final two books (which of course I still have) were given to me by my parents, who by then were well aware of my obsession, and I read and re-read the series regularly, to the extent that I can still quote bits of it by heart.
So realistic, compelling and convincing was the world that Dorothy Dunnett had created, moving easily from Scotland to France, the Ottoman Empire, Russia and back to France and Scotland, that I began to do research of my own. Ipswich Library had all the State Papers for the period, and amongst many other things, I discovered to my delight that the raid on Hume Castle, so vividly described in The Game of Kings , was indeed led by a Spaniard (or was he?). I pored over maps and read biographies and histories of the period, confirming that the novels were based firmly in fact.
On a holiday in the Loire valley, I dragged my long-suffering parents round the castle at Amboise, location of a famous scene in Queen’s Play . For a long time, I persisted in the belief that there must be other authors like Dorothy Dunnett out there, I just hadn’t discovered them yet. It took me years to realise that she was unique, and that there are very few, if any, historical novelists who combine wise, witty and beautiful writing, vivid description, accurate research, vibrant characterisation and intricate plotting into a coherent, compelling whole.
For nearly twenty years after I first read The Game of Kings , I was on my own with Dorothy Dunnett. I had tried to interest my mother, but she preferred more straightforward novels. ‘Oh, isn’t that the one about the Scotsman who had trouble with his family?’ she famously commented. But to my delight I eventually discovered, through a new friend who turned out to be also a fan, that there was a huge international community of Dunnett afficionados, passionate, erudite, and full of theories about the numerous ambiguities and mysteries that had enthralled me when I was reading the books.
More than sixty years after the first was published, and after twenty-two novels – six of The Lymond Chronicles, eight in The House of Niccolò (set in the 15 th century), seven Johnson Johnsons (modern thrillers), and King Hereafter , about the historical Macbeth, which many consider to be her masterpiece – people all over the world are still debating, online and through the pages of Whispering Gallery, the Dorothy Dunnett Society magazine, as well as at regular Gatherings, the motivations of various characters, the many mysteries and ambiguities, and the thorny question of How Much Is True (almost always, a lot more than you’d realise). You think everything is clear, then you realise it isn’t. That there are gaps in your knowledge, vital facts which the author knows, and which you don’t. All around, there are clues and hints, but you have to do a lot of the work yourself, and you have to pay attention (which is why just one reading isn’t enough, there are always bits you previously missed). And it’s those ambiguities that fuel our continued fascination, and which will keep people reading Dunnett long into the future.
Pam Thomas is an author of historical fiction, writing under the name Pamela Belle. Her books include Wintercombe (1988), the first in a series set during the English Civil War, available in print and Kindle editions.
Jen Black, author of the Romantic Affair series
My life changed after reading Dorothy Dunnett
The years prior to 1960 provided pretty solid reading in the historical fiction department of public libraries: Elizabeth Byrd’s Immortal Queen in 1956, followed by Serge et Anne Golon in 1957 with Angelique: The Marquise of the Angels . I had taken Game of Kings (1961) from the library for my mother to read, and when she handed it back to me with the words, “You will enjoy this,” she had no idea what she was doing.
I read it with growing delight because suddenly dialogue was not sprinkled with forsooth and pray, my lord , and pages were not filled with exposition and political backstory, nor was there any head hopping which was common back then. Instead, intelligent conversation that often had a sharp and witty edge to it. She had me hook, line and sinker by the time Buccleugh “stopped listening and went for a crowbar” in Chapter 1.
I looked for other books like it and found very few, if any. Like Dorothy Dunnett, I dallied with the idea of filling the gap by writing a book myself but hung back, unsure that I could do it.
Work and bus travel took up a lot of time, and relationships with the opposite sex were important, but the idea sat in the back of my mind all through the publication of the six Lymond novels. I studied her writing, and loved how she was precise in her use of grammar.
There was never any doubt over who was speaking or thinking, as there often is today in popular novels. I also liked the way she broke up long sentences – introducing three words, adding the dialogue tag and then completing the sentence. She didn’t always use dialogue tags, but action tags did the job superbly.
Her settings were so real that one holiday in France my husband and I trudged around Blois on a very hot day tracking the Dame de Doubtance to her lair on the Rue de Papegaults. We did something similar with the drum tower of Amboise and the traboules of Lyon, and the cisterns of Istanbul.
The characters Dunnett creates are unforgettable and almost real. Like everyone else I checked the history of the “real” characters and MacBeth from King Hereafter became the starting point for my first book in which a certain Daveth mac Finlay allies with Thorfinn to secure the throne of Alba.
Margaret Douglas became my next focus and the Scottish Queen Trilogy has dear Meg as a major player in her struggle to stay safe and achieve a secure marriage. Dunnett has her as an evil influence on Lymond, but once I read her life story, I understood Meg walked a tightrope her entire life. It began with her mother, who chose to stay with her son, the future King of Scotland, and handed Meg over to her father the Earl of Angus, whose lands had been confiscated by the Crown.
Dragged up by Douglas relatives all over the borders until her aunt Mary (Henry VIII’s sister) invited her to the English court, Meg had no one to rely on when Aunt Mary died in 1533. Desperate to marry, she was thrown in the tower when Henry discovered her affairs. Without heirs himself, he did not want Meg to marry and have children who could very well claim the crown. She was, after all, his niece and the granddaughter of Henry VII. He was a very real influence on her life choices.
Patricia Bracewell, author of Shadow on the Crown
It must have been more than 30 years ago that I fell in love with Dorothy Dunnett’s daring, witty, and mesmerizing Francis Crawford of Lymond. Some 10 years later my ardor for her clever Renaissance Scotsman was challenged when I was introduced to her equally captivating Nicholas, the brilliant hero of her House of Niccolò series. But I wasn’t dazzled just by Dunnett’s heroes. Oh no. I was drawn to her fascinating heroines as well, and to the vivid, complicated, and breathtaking Renaissance world that she recreated on every single page. Dorothy Dunnett was a storyteller extraordinaire. Each one of her many books remains a tour de force—historical fiction at its very best, to be savored again and again.”
Kate Braithwaite, author of The Girl Puzzle: a novel of Nelly Bly
A Tribute to Dorothy Dunnett
I first read the Lymond Chronicles as a teen, inhaling all six volumes one after another. For however long it took me, I was swept into the fate of those vibrant characters: gutted when favourites died, torn by the seeming good and bad in Francis Crawford, horrified by the betrayals and violence, seduced by the humour, wit, and cleverness of it all. At the time, I didn’t burn to be a writer. I wasn’t scribbling away in quiet corners or dreaming up storylines, although I did have a half-formed idea that I’d like to write a novel one day. As a teenager I loved reading in an uncritical, all-welcoming way, enjoying nothing more than finding an author with big, fat books, and preferably plenty of them, that I could disappear into on a daily basis. I do remember, however, finding The Game of Kings challenging at first. That opening scene shouldn’t really have been hard for me—I’m Scottish after all, born and bred in Edinburgh—but these are dense stories, full of literary allusions and wordplay. Consider Francis Crawford’s first words: “I am a narwhal looking for my virgin. I have sucked up the sea like Charybdis and failing other entertainment will spew it three times daily, for a fee.” I’m so glad my teenage-self persevered.
As I ploughed through Queen’s Play and onto my favourite (at least in terms of title) The Disorderly Knights , my parents repeatedly told me how lucky I was. It was the 1980s. They and their friends had all read the Lymond series and were waiting impatiently for the next Niccolo book to be published. They also shared that one of their friends had read nearly to the end of Checkmate only to abandon the book in shock and refuse to continue. If you’ve read the book, you know the moment I’m referring to!
Thankfully she was persuaded to read on to the end.
So, what did I learn, and how have Dunnett’s books influenced me as a writer? In the first place, the series confirmed me as a life-long fan of historical fiction. Through these books I discovered that reading could be a shared and cross-generational experience.
The series also takes the reader on a huge emotional rollercoaster – as my parent’s friend proved. But perhaps the most significant thing as I reflect decades later, is the way the novels introduced me to the concept of writing as a craft. Finishing the Lymond Chronicles, I marvelled at how Dunnett must have known about her characters and her plot before that scene in The Game of Kings even began to take shape. My eyes were
opened to concepts like character arc and backstory, even though I didn’t have the vocabulary for what I was learning at that point.
Now that I’ve written four historical novels and am an editor for the Historical Novel Review , I’m even more in awe of Dorothy Dunnett’s genius. Writing novels is a lot harder than it looks, at least in my experience! The Lymond Chronicles, for me, are the gold standard for the genre. I’m truly thankful for that seminal reading experience in my teens, and the years of reading and writing pleasure I’ve enjoyed in consequence.
Elizabeth Chadwick, author of the Eleanor of Aquitaine series
When I was fourteen, I graduated to the adult section of our public library and immediately began my relationship with Dorothy Dunnett. It wasn’t love at first encounter, rather a meeting of polite strangers. crossing paths and moving on.
I was entitled to borrow six books at a time and being a fast, voracious reader, devoured three books a week. I had a system. I would choose a couple by favourite authors and read them first – perhaps a Mary Stewart or a Norah Lofts. Another couple would be selected because I was drawn to the cover, the title, or the blurb. I might find books on the returns trolley which often carried interesting titles waiting to be re-shelved. I always chose my sixth book alphabetically just to surprise myself. I’d take one from the A shelf one week, a B the next, a C the next and so on.
I discovered Dorothy Dunnett as my sixth book on the ‘D’ week and it was Pawn in Frankincense. I was a mature reader for my years, but this was the fourth book in a complex series and it was like reading a foreign language. I returned it to the library unread. Nevertheless, the bug had bitten me. Although I wasn’t ready for Dorothy Dunnett then, and moreover had walked through the wrong door, I continued to borrow her books at regular intervals, frustrated, but inexorably drawn. The Game of Kings, first in the series, remained elusive. It was always out on loan.
In my late teens I finally obtained The Game of Kings and by this time had acquired an ‘A’ level in English literature and had begun to write historical fiction for my own pleasure. Borrowing The Game of Kings coincided with a bout of flu, and while on the mend, recuperating in bed, I picked up The Game of Kings and this time, it was different. It was like being given the key to a wonderful garden. Finally, I had found the right door and in that moment, sitting up in bed propped up on pillows, Lemsip in hand, I experienced an epiphany. Suddenly the key clicked in the lock and I understood when I had not understood before.
Many of the metaphors and references went right over my head I admit, but I absorbed the gist, and it no longer mattered because I had entered a different, magical reality. The characters this time, sprang from book to mind to physical existence, and stood before me, every one of them possessed of a vibrant, individual personality.
I read the novel at running pace, and then went back and read it again, and then again, savouring moments I had missed, the first time, loving every moment, and filled with anticipation of more to come.
I borrowed the rest of the series, reserving them this time, to read in order. I was hooked and even became a little obsessive – an addict. The more I read, the more I came to appreciate Dorothy Dunnett’s meticulous and copious research. Her use of language and her scope amazed me, as did her stunning ability to craft scenes, and engage the emotions of her reader, viscerally, and cerebrally. She could go from raucous and bawdy to delicate and ethereal in a single deft turn of phrase, while twisting the tale to the opposite of expectation.
I found myself thinking about the characters and situations as I went about my daily life, reliving the scenes in my mind’s eye. Sitting down to write my own work, I would ask myself ‘How would Dorothy Dunnett have approached this scene?’ She taught me to experiment and to make bigger, bolder leaps of the imagination. She taught me the unfettered pleasure of painting with words. Her prose always raised me up and inspired me. She was the master and I was the eager apprentice colouring in the corner while she created a glorious fresco. If a Dunnett novel was a song, it would be Bohemian Rhapsody.
As a young adult and then young married woman bringing up children and paying the mortgage, money was tight, but I scrimped and saved, and requested the books for birthday and Christmas gifts until I had the full set. I read and re-read them, always finding moments I had missed, and each time, I came to a new level of understanding. One of the defining factors of an exceptional work is that there is always more to discover no matter how many times you go back.
By the time I was half way through the new House of Niccolò series, I had become a published author, and was freshly overwhelmed in an ecstatic way by the Renaissance world Dunnett had created. I was awed by the breadth and scope of her research, and her ability to bring a new cast of characters to life on a broad sweep of canvas and yet in minute and exquisite detail. That takes genius. Once you ‘get’ Dunnett, nothing else comes close. She occupies her own pinnacle.
I confess I have yet to read all of her works. Her lighter detective series remains to be explored and I have yet to read what is often cited as her greatest work, King Hereafter. It is on my bedside book pile, and I look forward to taking another key and opening the door into an unexplored area of the glorious Dunnett garden.
I am sometimes asked which is my favourite Dunnett book or scene, but I honestly do not have one because all of it is magnificent and memorable for its own reason. But if there is a defining moment when I became a reader forever, it was the sword fight between the Crawford brothers, Francis and Richard in The Game of Kings.
Everything that is Dunnett is encapsulated in that scene – the emotion, the drama and tension, the twist, the deep research, all working in merciless tandem to keep the reader barely daring to continue, but compelled and hungry for every crafted cutting-edge word and not just wanting, but needing more. Always more. You don’t just read Dorothy Dunnett once, you read her forever.
Elizabeth Chadwick is an award winning best-selling author of historical fiction, including A Marriage of Lions (2021) out now from Sphere Books. She lives in the UK. More at www.elizabethchadwick.com .
Chelsea Clinton, writer and health advocate
I read Dorothy Dunnett’s King Hereafter on a summer camping trip while I was in high school and was riveted, reading late into the night while being mindful my flashlight might run out of batteries at any moment. A few years later, I picked up Dorothy Dunnett’s Lymond Chronicles in a bookshop and fell happily and completely into the world of Francis Lymond. I’ve read the full six-volume series three times and a few of the books even more.
Where else can a reader traverse the Renaissance – its geography, art, music, literature and most of all, its political intrigues –meeting Mary, Queen of Scots, Queen Elizabeth, Ivan the Terrible, and Sulieman the Magnificent along the way? Dunnett’s mastery is to invite you into Lymond’s lavish world while simultaneously weaving a grand story of the many different ways we love – with friends, lovers, parents, children, even at times antagonists, and hopefully, ourselves. I cannot wait until my children are old enough for us to read these books together.
Barbara Gaskell Denvil, author of the Historical Mysteries Collection
I was very young when I first saw Shakespeare’s Tragedy of King Richard III with Sir Lawrence Olivier bringing the character very much alive. Hypnotised by the play, I was mesmerised by the situation in general and everything else which transpired, and as I lived in London, I was able to begin visiting the remaining monuments, castles and narrow cobbled streets.
When somewhat older, I began to read Dorothy Dunnett’s amazing Lymond series – that was that! I was smitten, and since I have never been rescued, I now live permanently in love with the late medieval period, King Richard III and Francis Crawford of Lymond.
Shakespeare and Dorothy Dunnett. What more could anyone ask?
Naturally I read all of Lady Dunnett’s books, and enjoyed every one but the fascination of Lymond remained on top. By then I was living almost permanently in 15th century London and began to create my own series set during that time. Writing and reading always overtook any other passion which managed to jump into my teenage imagination, and my family inspired me too. Elizabeth Gaskell was my great, great, great (a few more greats!) aunt. My sister was a best-selling author, and my father was an artist and playwright. Now long passed the teenage passions I remember, at the age of 78, I have written many novels, nine of which are set in 15th century.
Dorothy Dunnett is still an inspiration and I have reread her novels many times over the years. Her remarkable talent for characterisation has rarely been overshadowed by other authors. Not only are her heroes and heroines never to be forgotten, but every one of her minor characters also remain constantly in the reader’s memory.
The amazing details of the distant past leap into magical colour in her books, and the accuracy (even though she cleverly adjusted a few dates to bring events together) is gloriously impressive. Her outstanding writing skill brought so much brilliantly to life, and the twists of her long and complicated storylines are amazing. After only the first page of Game
of Kings , I was so impressed and drawn in, I knew there would never be a historical book of hers I would miss.
As an author myself, I fully understand the difficulties of mastering such skills that Lady Dunnett proved over and over again. Her books are un-put-downable! Once started, you are hooked, and are delighted to have discovered such entertainment. I still remember the joy I experienced as a teenager when I discovered the Lymond series.
She has not only inspired my writing, but the absolute love of the medieval world she so brilliantly glued into my own life. Dorothy Dunnett’s books still sit cheerfully on my bookshelves, even though my failing eyesight means I cannot read them anymore. But why should I? They remain comfortably in my head and always will.
Jean Gill, author of the Troubadours series
I fell in love with Lymond over forty years ago. Luckily, the man in my life discovered Dorothy Dunnett’s epic novels with the same enthusiasm. Only a Dunnett fan could insist that one of the three kings had a racing camel to complete the miniature nativity scene at Christmas.
Like her heroes, Dunnett lets her imagination run riot and leaves us breathless as she bounds ahead on a metaphorical rooftop race, yelling, ‘Keep up!’ One minute she’s indulging us with life in a harem or a love scene by a waterfall and the next she’s showering us with quotations in one of six? seven? languages, including her beloved Scots.
When I look back on my 12th century Troubadours series, I realise how much I owe to her. She showed me how to weave the high drama lived by fictional characters into real history. Her plots are twisty, inventive and if they’re chaotic we don’t care because we’re caught up in the emotional ride and we’re rooting for our favourite characters.
Like Lymond, my character Dragonetz has a tortured past, is charismatic and a natural leader, and yet dreads winning because he knows the price. Also like Lymond, he is made vulnerable by music, overwhelmed by his love for one woman. Who can forget the sensual scene where Lymond woos Catherine, his betrothed, with song while the love of his life, Philippa, puts on a brave face and endures each line?
In my Troubadours , the marriage of true minds between Dragonetz and his young protegée Estela is revealed in lines from real troubadours’ verse, with my translations, and their physical passion simmers in every duet. When he arranges her marriage to someone else, it is for the most honourable of reasons, as when Lymond holds back from Philippa. He is not worthy.
Despite writing in a time that was neither woke nor even waking, Dunnett wrote an amazing diversity of people into her medieval worlds: characters who are gay, wheelchair users, of different religions and races, aristocrats and peasants. In The Troubadours I portray people and friendships that might surprise readers but are based on primary sources. Medieval people were indeed our long-ago likenesses, in their failings and feelings – and in the ways their private lives did not conform to the official messages of Church and State.
Dunnett’s meticulous and wide-ranging research underpins the rich detail that draws you into medieval life and I spent a year on research before each book of the Troubadours . Instead of a dye-yard, there is a paper mill and whereas 15th century banking pitted Florence against Venice, banking in 1150 consisted of the promissory note, a recent innovation by the Knights Templar. I loved such details in Dunnett’s work, where trade is also a battlefield, and I include them in my own novels.
Most of all, Dunnett can deliver a knife in the guts. The villain turns out to be damaged himself – or herself. So near escape or so near redemption, doomed by a twist of fate. A happy ending for one character comes with a price for another. In my novels too, betrayal twists that knife, and you can never be sure anyone is safe. If my readers visit the Palace of Joy in Zaragoza and say, ‘This is where Malik and his ancestors lived and this is the garden where Queen Petronilla told Estela that her conduct was unsuitable for one of the queen’s ladies,’ then my work is done. I want
readers to feel as I do in Dunnett’s world: to live my books, not just read them.
Jean Gill is the award-winning author of twenty-five books, best known for her 12th century historical fiction: the Troubadours series set in Europe and the Holy Land, and The Midwinter Dragon series, set in Viking Orkney. Find out more about Jean, her books and her photography at jeangill.com .
Kristin Gleeson, author of the Renaissance Sojourner series
It was the cover of Nicolo Rising that caught my husband’s attention and convinced him it was the perfect book for me when he saw it in a bookstore in America, where we lived. He was right. I read it in just over one sitting. From there it became an anxious and heavily monitored wait until each book in the series came out, sometimes commissioning my husband to buy it in England when he visited his family, because it came out in the UK first. I purchased all of the Lymond novels as well and consumed them quickly, loving Lymond’s character and pathos. I then read Dunnett’s standalone novels and continued to admire the qualities present in all her works that, besides the depth of all her characters, there are also the massive historical knowledge, the wit and the absolute vast geographical scope of her series. I was so smitten with her books that I convinced my European history professor in my graduate program, a person who rarely delved into fiction, to try her. I recommended her to colleagues at work who, like me, were in the history profession, and they also became addicted. Soon, it became my secret marker for real simpatico book buddies of historical fiction. A test. A measure of their passion about history, especially if it was European history. If they hadn’t read her, or worse, didn’t like her, then I knew that my tastes and understanding were too far off from that person and it was best to keep it casual.
When I started writing my own historical novels it became inevitable that she would influence my writing, at first in the dedication to historical accuracy but also the geographical variety. When I started, my second series, The Renaissance Sojourner series my character just begged to have the adventures of a Nicolo or a Lymond. I couldn’t say no and attempted to cover the geographical vastness of Nicolo and Lymond books to take my character, Barnabas (also posing as Giacomo), from England, to Paris, to Venice, to Turkey, and eventually, to the heart of Africa and later, the Silk Route, always in danger, pursuing first vengeance, and with vengeance satisfied, pursuing a child. As his journey progressed his character changes, like Nicolo and Lymond, to shape him into a man who understands there is more to life than the pursuit of adventure, knowledge and vengeance. Within these novels I attempted to create the wit and clever plot twists I would find in all the Dorothy Dunnett novels.
There are several writers who have influenced my writing and who I cite as authors I admire and they come and go on my list, but Dorothy Dunnett is always on there. With such a long and stellar writing career, now sadly ended, I have no doubt she will always remain one of my top favourite novelists.
Deborah Harkness, author of the All Souls trilogy
I ADORE Dorothy Dunnett and as I type I’m looking at my full set of novels on the “precious items” shelf in my office.
I bought the entire Lymond Chronicles between 8/15/1986 and 8/26/1986. I bought the first one to take on my very first business trip on the recommendation of my undergraduate honors thesis advisers. I devoured it in two days, and had to roam the bookstores of Colorado in search of Volume II. Having learned my lesson, I bought all the rest of them the moment I got back home so I wouldn’t be caught short during an all-night reading binge.
“Lymond is back.” I remember the tingle of excitement I got reading that first line of The Game of Kings . Then, I didn’t know who Lymond was, or why he was important, or where he had been—I just knew I had to hear more. And I did, devouring all fourteen volumes of my favorite historical series. I also remember the sense of satisfaction when I read the last line of Gemini : “Here endis the buke of the ches.” Those two lines capture Dunnett’s ability to control her story, plot, and characters.
As a budding historian, I was thrilled with the inside jokes and snatches of song and phrases in foreign tongues, intent on the easter eggs I needed to track down, and awestruck by Dunnett’s mastery of what was happening across Europe during a critical and complicated moment in the past. She plunged you into the sixteenth and fifteenth centuries without apology or coddling, and you wanted to swim in it forever. Dunnett’s work was—and remains—utterly immersive. When reading it, one is swept away on a magic carpet stitched with painstaking care and incredible attention to detail, stopping in Scotland and Venice, Bruges and Rhodes. Her mind was formidable, and her insights into the human experience, refracted through the lens of history, are nothing short of breathtaking.
I wouldn’t be a historian or a novelist were it not for Dorothy Dunnett’s magical ability to interweave fact and fiction.
J.G. Harlond, author of the Chosen Man Trilogy
There are two sets of the Lymond and Níccolò series on my bookshelves, plus two copies of King Hereafter . Some are hardbacks, the rest are now dry, cracked-spine paperbacks, whose pages are so yellow and print so small that I struggle to read them – although I still do. Over the years, originals have been replaced, but I can never bring myself to part with them, despite their appalling covers. Looking at titles I can see scenes: a joyous youth riding a bald ostrich, the same man now older rides a silken-hide camel; a vast eagle swoops across a snowy waste to an outstretched arm; a fearless youth runs across moving oars and marries a woman with ‘spawn-like’ eyes . . . If you recognise these scenes, you probably qualify as a Dunnett fan, and are probably also be a demanding reader.
That adjective, ‘demanding’ – this is what makes my debt to Dunnett complex, what hindered my transition from writing school textbooks to getting published as a fiction author. Dunnett helped to set me off on my travels as a young woman, curious, anxious to see the world, but as an author there’s no denying, she held me back. Stayed my hand. After reading her fiction since the 1960s it took courage to find an agent for my first novel in the 1990s. The agent I found told me what I needed to change and improve for the current market, which I set about doing, but I was reading the House of Níccolò series at the time and a soft Scots voice had
begun whispering in my ear: ‘Is your work good enough yet?’ ‘No,’ I’d sigh, ‘not really.’
That first MS went into a drawer. Two more, unfinished, followed. My agent lost interest in me. Finally, inspired or motivated by the Claes-who-becomes-Níccolò, I started on what became The Empress Emerald. But then, when I decided that book was finished, I began hearing that gentle probing again: ‘Finished? Really? Is it good enough?’ Good enough, I
hoped, but by whose standard? It wasn’t that I wanted to write like Lady Dunnett – would that I could – but she had set both my reading and writing criteria very high. You can see why I took my time to get published – although I’m very glad I did.
Re-reading Game of Kings recently, I had another nasty moment when I realised the scene where Ludo da Portovenere in Book 1 of my Chosen Man Trilogy impersonates a voluble Spaniard to obtain a galleon in Lisbon was very similar to a scene in the first Lymond story.
Ludo’s adventures take place in the 1630s, he is large, charismatic and untrustworthy – nothing like aesthetic Francis Crawford – but Crawford does impersonate a flamboyant Spaniard on more than one occasion for dubious reasons. I must have internalised these scenes: it wasn’t conscious copying. There are aspects of Níccolò in my likeable rogue protagonists Leo Kazan and his ancestor Ludo, but that’s to do with character development, not the story. Except Ludo is sent on secret missions by monarchs based on real events, and I have also written a relatively light-hearted historical crime fiction series . . .
‘Inspired by Dunnett’ has to be my tribute: she inspired me to write well-researched historical fiction, stories of espionage, political and romantic intrigue that take the reader to different countries, but she set a very demanding standard by which to measure my achievements.
Málaga, March, 2023
Karen Heenan, author of the Tudor Court series
My introduction to Dorothy Dunnett occurred in the summer of 2000, when a friend who knew that I enjoyed historical fiction gifted me with both the Lymond and Nicolo series, as well as the companion books. I was thrilled. I’d heard about these books for years but I’d somehow never got around to reading them. I was in for a surprise. I started with Game of Kings and even though I was hooked by that iconic opening, I found that I didn’t much like Lymond. I didn’t like him for most of the book, even though the writing and the characters – Christian! Will Scott! – pulled me along in a way I could scarcely believe for a book that I wasn’t really enjoying.
When I finally finished, sighing with satisfaction at the ending, I put the book aside and thought to myself, I don’t have to read the rest of them. I can just tell her I did. But that night, sitting on the couch, trying to get into something that would remove the lingering traces of Francis Crawford from my brain, I found myself wondering what happened next.
What happened next was Queen’s Play , which I read even faster than the first book, followed rapidly by books 3 through 6. By the end of the second book, I couldn’t believe that I hadn’t fallen in love with Francis Crawford from page one. I read Lymond everywhere. In bed, in the car, in the bathroom at work when I hadn’t finished a crucial scene on the train. On the train, where a badly timed chess game which caused me to sob in public.
It took over my life, and as a writer, I knew I needed to learn to do what she did. But what did she do? And more importantly, how did she do it? That has been the question that has pulled me along, like her writing, for the past twenty-odd years. I learned so much about character development and plot from her books, about how, even when your main character is, say, somewhat unsympathetic, if you have an absolutely killer plot and a
group of supporting characters who elicit sympathy, you can get away with everything short of murder. Certainly, you can get away with setting your mother’s castle on fire.
I wouldn’t say I’m there yet, but Dorothy Dunnett is a high bar to climb over. Five books into my own publishing journey, one of the best compliments I’ve received is on the main character of my second book, A Wider World . Robin Lewis is prickly, introverted, and not particularly likeable – until you get to know him – but he leads an interesting life surrounded by interesting people. When readers told me they didn’t like him until the end of the book but they couldn’t stop reading, I thanked them.
And then I thanked Dorothy Dunnett.
Helen Hollick, author of the Pendragon's Banner Trilogy
I left secondary school at the age of sixteen in 1969 and became a library assistant. I’d always had my nose in a book: characters remain good friends (in many instances, for life,) do not tease or bully, and do not mind that you are shy and a little scared of the real world.
The advantage of working in a library was the unlimited access to those wonderful novels waiting to be enjoyed. I discovered historical fiction in the pages of Rosemary Sutcliff. Wanting more, I picked up a Dorothy Dunnett – a new arrival into the library: Checkmate , the sixth in the
Lymond Chronicles . I had the pleasure of processing the book, gluing in the return date label and the pocket for the book’s charge card.
Curious, I read the opening lines:
“What the celebration at the castle had been, Austin Grey had never discovered. He rode in to his tryst at the Tournai and found the inn ankle-deep in drunk burghers, thronging the common room and spilling out into the courtyard where inoffensive travellers like himself were attempting to sup their bread and mutton and chicory salad in the airless July dusk of Douai.”
I confess: I was alone in the office. I abandoned the new books waiting to be processed and continued reading.
I had wanted to be a writer since the age of thirteen. School, apart from my Welsh Dragon of an English teacher, was unhelpful. My careers’ talk: “I want to write,” I whispered. “Don’t be silly, Helen, you can’t type. But maybe a library is for you,” came the reply. The library bit was useful, the rest was, well, condescending. Writers, I thought were clever people who went to university and had degrees. Were not know-nothings like me.
The need to write is compulsive when there is a story to tell and characters are clamouring in your head to be noticed and made real in the pages of a book, even if it is only an exercise book purchased from Woolworths. By my late teens I was experimenting with writing fantasy and science fiction, but then discovered the joy of historical fiction. Reading those wonderful opening lines that afternoon sparked a glowing ember into a raging wildfire of enthralled desire. Wow! I wanted to write like that!
I was interested in King Arthur, discovering that his legend came from post-Roman Britain not the Medieval knights, that early theatre of his possible existence intrigued me. Where to start? How to bring him to life? How could I, a Secondary School girl with a minor grade GCE English have the audacity to think that I could strip away the popular myth and write a novel about a fifth century Arthur?
Those opening sentences of Dorothy Dunnett’s had shouted at me: “ This is how you do it! You see a scene and describe it down to the smallest detail. You climb into your character’s head and become him. You research your facts. You tell a story that is thundering with passion, along with everything else that you can throw at it.”
It took me ten years (and reading every novel of Ms Dunnett’s) to write what eventually became The Kingmaking . A week after my 40 th birthday in April 1993, I was accepted for publication for what turned out to be enough written words for parts one and two of a trilogy.
I will never be as good as Dorothy Dunnett, but I’ve tried my best and I thank her for the inspiration behind my enthusiasm.
Gwyneth Hughes, documentary director and screenwriter
A big fat shabby old paperback plopped onto my desk. I eyed it suspiciously. The first of a series of six historical novels, sporting a terrible cover, with some daft female swooning in the arms of a blond twit in tights. I’m secretly more of a science fiction nut, and besides, I was right in the middle of dramatising Thackeray’s Vanity Fair for television. So I really wasn’t sure there was room in my head for another romantic foray into the past.
I started reading. There was a shipwreck. A cheetah, and a hare. Some young chaps in doublets jumping about the rooftops, apparently inventing parkour. I hadn’t got the first idea what was going on. Just when I was about to give up, I realized this wasn’t actually Book One… And that’s how I finally came to put Queen’s Play temporarily aside, to find and read The Game of Kings, and then all the rest of them, in the right order, without interruption, days of my life disappearing into Lymond land. There were still stretches where I had no idea what was going on, but who cares? I was happy to follow Dorothy obediently, through those dark thickets of plot, to the sunlit glades where her impossibly vivid heroes and villains do battle. Bliss.
KC Julius, author of the Drinnglennin Chronicles
Where do I begin to express how much the writing of Dorothy Dunnett has been interwoven into my life? As my 70th birthday approaches (looms!) in November 2022, my love affair with Dunnett’s work now spans nearly six decades. My father introduced me, a voracious teenage reader, to The Lymond Chronicles in the last ’60s. I was swiftly swept into Francis Crawford’s exciting, dangerous world, and very soon thereafter, seduced by the man himself. But even more than those audacious dimples, it’s been Lady Dunnett’s writing, her “painter’s eye,” that has stood the test of time, enticing me back over and over again to her vividly depicted tale and the delectable descriptions of people and places, such as this gem from Queen’s Play :
“Each in its nest of gauze and gilt thread, of tissue and taffeta, swathed in silver and satin, in velvet and white fur sugared with diamonds, each face painted, each brow plucked, hair hidden by sparkling hair of raw silk, the well-born of France sat in waxlight and flowers like half a hundred candied sweets in a basket. Last at the last table, soggy gristle next the sugar plums, sat Thady Boy Ballagh.”
Or this visual aria from Race of Scorpions :
“The pods of the carob trees dangled, black and leaking rank gum, ripe for cropping. There were pomegranates in baskets and gourds drying on roof-tops. In every village, it seemed, a donkey circled its trough of crushed olives, and the press thudded down, helped by many brown arms, as the mash yielded its oozings through wicker. Where the scent of orange had deadened the senses in March, the resinous odour of olives weighed down the humid, hot air of this journey. Instead of flower-infused silence, the air was filled with the clamour of autumn; the cries, the chaffing, the folk-songs, the team-songs of the villages; the chinking of blades; the rumble of flint-studded boards driven over the threshing ground. The objecting bray of working donkeys. The shuddering tramp of the oxen spinning the Persian wheels set over every deep well, so that the jars came up, roped with pomegranate wood withies, and tossed their icy water into the stone channels that fed the fields and the housewife’s wood buckets. Vines and almonds, lemons and oranges, pomegranates and sugar.”
And then, of course, there is the romance between my favourite characters, one of the greatest love stories ever told. How could anyone fail to fall under its alluring spell?
“On that, his hands locked, imprisoning them both. He held back one moment longer. Then he slid his fingers into her hair and bending his head, sought her mouth as a man withered by sun might seek water.”
— Checkmate
Even now, after so many re-readings, my pulse quickens.
Like many writers, Dorothy Dunnett has been my inspiration. Because I lack her extensive scholarship, my books are set in a fantasy world, but anyone familiar with Lymond’s exploits will find close parallels in the historical and geographical settings, glimpse both Francis Crawford and Nicholas de Fleury in Borne, one of my protagonists, and shades of Phillipa in Maura, another. I am, and will always be, deeply grateful for this singular author’s works, and the true pleasure, over many years, they have given me and so many others.
Guy Gavriel Kay, author and keynote speaker @ DD Centenary Gathering 2023
I actually have a meet-cute story about the first time I did meet Dorothy. But it is better told than typed so I will likely share it during my speech at the Gathering. I can say that from then, and through many other encounters, she was wonderful in person, not just in print. That isn’t a given, and it was deeply rewarding.
Ellen Kushner, author of Swordspoint
Without Dorothy Dunnett, I would never have written my first novel, or published my first short story. Both were written in conversation with – maybe even to counter, a little – the bodyslam that the Lymond Chronicles had dealt me since I’d begun on The Game of Kings at university a few years previous.
Then and now, I refer to the Lymond Chronicles as “Dorothy Dunnett’s Six-Volume School for Young Authors.” As I read the series, and she put me through the wringer with each book, I became obsessed with her technique. I knew she was pulling all sorts of tricks – but how? How?? I was an unsuccessful English Literature student. Writing papers on the virtues of Wordsworth’s poetry was not for me: What was the point? But considering the words of a living writer with an eye to learning to improve my own writing, that made sense. It was useful. It gave my literary teeth something to chew on – to suck out the juices, to devour.
And so my novel, Swordspoint: a Melodrama of Manners (London: Allen & Unwin, 1987 etc.), was an attempt to engage the reader utterly with the affairs of a charismatic yet villainous couple, while keeping the narrative as spare and devious as possible. The story (which I was writing at the same time, but managed to finish and publish much sooner), “The Unicorn Masque,” (in Elsewhere , New York: Ace Books, 1981) is about an altogether too perfect, too brilliant, too attractive deadly lutenist courtier (who is secretly a woman, transformed).
Dorothy Dunnett is a part of my literary DNA. I will never get her out of my system now. And I never want to.
Amy Maroney, author of The Queen’s Scribe
How a forgotten queen introduced me to Dorothy Dunnett
In 1458, the fifteen-year-old, widowed Queen Charlotta ascended the throne of the Kingdom of Cyprus. Two years later, she moved her court into the seaside fortress of Kyrenia in anticipation of an attack by her power-hungry half-brother, Jacco.
The queen survived Jacco’s massive siege. Then, when her second husband Louis of Savoy proved a weak leader, she voyaged alone across the Mediterranean, entreating allies to help save her crown. Talk about a woman with agency! And yet, like so many other astonishing women of the past, Queen Charlotta has been largely lost to the mists of time.
I discovered this extraordinary young woman while doing research for a series of novelsfeaturing people living under the rule of the Knights Hospitaller in medieval Rhodes and Cyprus. Queen Charlotta haunted my dreams, igniting my imagination in a way that can only end with a novel. So I resolved to bring her to life with my novel The Queen’s Scribe .
Turning to primary sources and history books, I struggled to find information about the woman. Every footnote that mentioned her led me on a hopeful jaunt into the distant past, and I uncovered tantalizing bits and pieces about her that always left me wanting more.
Then I discovered Dorothy Dunnett’s novel, Race of Scorpions . I’d never read anything by Dunnett before, though she’d been recommended to me by a friend. Race of Scorpions , a novel in Dunnett’s House of Niccolò series, was a revelation to me. It featured the moment in time that fascinates me most in European history – the fifteenth century, during the dawn of the Renaissance and the rise of the merchant class, when Europe was still recovering from the lasting social and economic effects of the plague.
The novel drew richly from many of the sources I’d discovered – and clearly, lots more. Somehow, Dorothy Dunnett had accessed a goldmine of data and lore about medieval Cyprus and its treacherous Lusignan court. To my delight, she had woven all that history into a stunning narrative populated with beautifully drawn characters, including Queen Charlotta
(called Carlotta in Dunnett’s novel) and Jacco.
I devoured the book over a couple of days. It’s sitting next to me now, bristling with post-it notes. As much as I loved the novel, I mourned its lack of a historical note. Where did Dunnett do her research? How did she access all that information in pre-Internet days? Was she granted access to the archives and library of the Knights Hospitaller, an organization allied with Queen Charlotta and, indeed, all the monarchs of Cyprus’s Lusignan dynasty? Did she visit Cyprus? Which of the medieval Lusignan structures might she have explored? Did she climb to the windswept ruins of St. Hilarion Castle? Wander the fortifications of Kyrenia Fortress under the blazing sun?
There are so many questions I wish I could ask Ms. Dunnett. But most of all, I’d like to thank her. Race of Scorpions ’ imagined world, and Dunnett’s characterizations of Queen Charlotta and Jacco, helped me chart a path forward as I developed my own story. I’m grateful that by deciding to write a fictional account of Queen Charlotta, I opened a door into Dorothy
Dunnett’s extraordinary legacy. I can’t wait to read more of her work.
Marie Macpherson, author of The Knox Trilogy
A Riddle wrapped in a Mystery inside an Enigma: How Dorothy Dunnett influenced my writing
I’m ashamed to admit it took me many years to appreciate my fellow Scot, Dorothy Dunnett, whose work I’d assigned to the slush pile of romantic fiction writers like Jean Plaidy or Georgette Heyer without ever reading it. In my youth, I admired the short, sharp, spare technique and dry wit of that other Edinburgh writer Muriel Spark, also an alumna of James Gillespie’s School for Girls a few years before Dunnett. Then, later in life, rekindling my interest in 16th Scottish history, I picked up The Game of Kings and I was hooked. Here was a refreshing, exciting way of interweaving fact and fiction with living, breathing characters in striking contrast to the male-dominated tales of derring-do by Scottish writers from Sir Walter Scott to Nigel Tranter.
By raising the bar in the historical fiction genre Dunnett offered plenty of lessons to this aspiring HF author, not least in character presentation. A protagonist who attempts to burn his mother’s house down – with her inside – is no stereotypical romantic hero, but neither is he a moustache-twirling villain who will surely get his come-uppance. The portrayal of Lymond is much more nuanced than that. This anti-hero is an enigmatic, flawed figure whose actions and motives are often contradictory. He may don a cold, cynical and cruel mask but he is also charming, elegant and highly accomplished with boundless charisma.
Most impressive is the way Dunnett breaks all the rules on that contentious topic of POV by rarely letting her anti-hero’s sneering mask drop to reveal the tortured soul behind it. He is seen through the eyes of others who constantly change their minds about him – as does the reader. One minute you love and admire his bravery, the next you loathe his cynical cruelty. In her meticulously plotted books, Dunnett gives us a master class in narrative pace with the tension of nail-biting melodrama defused by humorous episodes. Lymond is thrown into in a series of complicated plots and a tangled web of relationships that not only engage but mystify the reader. So much so that Dunnett’s technique reminded me of Churchill’s oft quoted phrase about Russia – a riddle wrapped in a mystery inside an enigma.
The wealth of historical knowledge that fills her work is awe-inspiring but Dunnett never descends into information dumping. Painstakingly researched, every detail is seamlessly woven into her astonishing tapestries: the profusion of sounds, tastes, colours, and textures offer a sensory experience. Her painter’s eye for gorgeous detail enlivens descriptions so striking that memories of scenes linger long after reading.
Her books not only offered master classes in every aspect of the writer’s craft: character, plot, setting, narration and language but inspired me to take risks when writing. Dorothy Dunnett is quite simply the historical fiction writer’s writer par excellence.
Val McDermid, fellow Scot and crime writer
I first encountered Dorothy Dunnett via the Lymond Chronicles just down the road from her birthplace in Kirkcaldy Central Library. I was a voracious reader and whenever I found a novel that captured my imagination, I wanted more. So in my early teens, I drank in the world of Francis Lymond, loving the atmosphere and the loving detail of the setting, and fascinated by the twists and turns of Lymond’s life and relationships. Now readers are cleaving to period narratives produced by such writers as Hilary Mantel and Maggie O’Farrell, surely it’s only a matter of time before Dorothy Dunnett is rediscovered by a wider audience?
Val McDermid is the author of Karen Pirie and the Wire in the Blood novels. More at ValMcDermid.com .
Cheryl Sawyer, author of The King's Shadow
I first encountered The Game of Kings in my grammar-school library in the mid-1960s, and ever since that enthralling experience I have considered her a master of her genre. I loved historical novels from childhood, my early favourites being writers such as Geoffrey Trease, Henry Treece, Rosemary Sutcliff and Barbara Leonie Picard, and Olivia FitzRoy, who wrote a series beginning with time travel to the Battle of Culloden, perhaps an influential precursor to the late efforts of Diana Gabaldon. My reading led on of course to romps such as The Scarlet Pimpernel and These Old Shades and classics like those of Charles Kingsley, Alexandre Dumas, Robert Louis Stevenson and Walter Scott. Since then I have progressively bought, devoured and reread all her books, I’ve had the privilege of corresponding with her, I met her on her tour of Australia in 2000 and I can truthfully say that she has drunk my whiskey—a gracious concession on her part, as I can’t claim it was of the best—and I continue to see her as a master, for many reasons.
One reason lies in a comparison between her work and other greats of the genre, and I believe it’s fair to say that her stories are even more romantic than Stevenson’s and she has a more brilliant grasp of history than Walter Scott. And in fiction she has done as much to throw accurate and abundant light on Scottish history as either of these. I for one, a New Zealander who has lived, worked and studied in Britain and Europe, can still say that my knowledge of and fondness for Scotland derives principally from the rich and compelling pictures of her homeland that Dorothy Dunnett offers us in her novels. After she read aloud from Queen’s Play in a Sydney bookstore, I mentioned this and said that her books offer a stimulating portrait of Scotland as a nation on the world stage. I asked her if this had been one of her aims in writing the Lymond Chronicle and whether she felt those books might have influenced the devolution movement in Scotland today. She was genuinely surprised by the question! I don’t think that even then she realised how indelibly her pride in her country informed her books, nor what a gift to the nation they remain.
On those who love her work, her influence is very strong. I thought I could see Dunnett-like hints in a certain scene in Keri Hulme’s great novel, The Bone People, and Keri herself acknowledged to me her keen admiration of the Lymond Chronicle. Long after the Christchurch earthquake of 2011 I was speaking to a fellow publisher whose complete sets of her novels had been looted from his library when his house was destroyed. He was still mourning the loss, so at once I mailed him my treasured, signed copy of Gemini, knowing how much that would mean to him. From childhood I wanted to write novels, but it was not until I was in my thirties that I realised my drive was actually to write historical fiction. Her books had so broadened and illuminated the genre that I felt them as an inspiration. When my first novel was published in 1998 I sent her a copy and she kindly replied, with the warmth, the sharp perceptions and tiny handwriting familiar to thousands of admirers. I am fond of parody and in my second novel, Rebel, I included a scene, set at midnight on the Delaware, that was written as an extravagant homage to her. I had the courage to send her the book but never the impudence to ask whether she recognised the scene.
At the bookstore in Sydney she told her audience that there is a sly joke running through the Lymond Chronicles, too, and mentioned that no one had as yet found it out. My guess is that this is a joke of allusion, in her case to film. There are aspects of Lymond’s appearance and behaviour that to me recall some of the attributes of Peter O’Toole in different roles, and at least two of the thousands of incidents in the Lymond Chronicle seem artfully written to match scenes from O’Toole movies. One is the meeting of Henry II and Thomas Becket on a beach in France (Becket) and the other is the prostration of T.E. Lawrence after he has been flogged by the Turkish Bey (Lawrence of Arabia). For all I know, others may have uncovered the rest of the scenes embedded in her sparkling and gloriously inventive texts—or solved the puzzle in a better way than mine.
Another reason to admire and enjoy Dunnett’s work is the deep penetration of her research, the command of several languages that allowed her to pursue it with accuracy, and her skill in selecting and organising her material so that it flows effortlessly into the narrative and makes whole worlds spring into life. In conversation she told me with relish about a trip to Iceland while researching a Niccolò novel, when she forced a terrified taxi driver far beyond his comfort zone over shaky and steamy portions of the earth’s crust to get next to a live volcano. Back in the foyer of the Reykjavik hotel, passenger and driver alarmed patrons by embracing in relief at their escape. She laughed as she spoke of it, with head thrown back in her characteristic manner. In another mood, on an ABC radio program I heard her speak with wistful regret about not being able to drive to Timbuktu while on a research trip to North Africa, because the dangers at the time were too great. In spirit and in fact, I can’t help thinking of her as the Marco Polo of the historical novel.
The undying reason to admire her novels is of course the writing itself. I am sure contributions to the centenary celebrations will do justice to her splendidly original characterisations, her mesmerising prose, the sensuality of her descriptions, her mischievous humour, the incomparable richness of her vocabulary, the emotional complexity and dramatic effects in every scene she drew for us, the majestic power of her storytelling. I honour her memory and, most of all, her work—what an intellect, what a talent, what skills she employed, extending to music, painting and all the vital realms of her country’s culture. A truly Renaissance woman.
Cheryl Sawyer is the author of The King’s Shadow , Rebel and many others. More at CherylSawyer.com .
Marian L. Thorpe, author of the Empire's Legacy series
I read King Hereafter when I was in my early twenties, a time when I was still primarily immersed in fantasy. It’s a book I’ve never forgotten, for several reasons. Perhaps most importantly, it was the first book I’d read that I would call speculative history: the evidence for Thorfinn Ravenfeeder and Macbeth being the same person isn’t strong, although they were contemporaries. Other historical fiction authors have them as half-brothers; some sources claim Thorfinn may have been one of Macbeth’s war leaders. He may have been simply an ally. But Dorothy Dunnett made it more than plausible, she made it believable. If you write convincingly, using a tripartite recipe of some facts, a familiar feel, and a dash (or more) of ‘what if?’, readers will believe it. An important lesson for a then-young writer who would eventually write a series of books set in a world not ours, but without the conventional trappings of fantasy.
With King Hereafter , Dorothy Dunnett introduced me to history I had known next to nothing about: the disputed and fluid rule of the Scottish Highlands and islands; the influence of Norse settlement on what is now Scotland; and the complexity of politics and alliances among the kings and earls. All this both inspired and shaped the world of my own books. She wrote of things often ignored at the time in historical fiction, including the importance of trade. The structure and themes of King Hereafter also have stayed with me. At a time when the three-act structure of screenplays is held up as the model that novels should adhere to, the four parts of King Hereafter gave me another model to consider—and use. Dunnett shows the reader how Thorfinn’s world expands from the islands he knows as a young man to a world wider than he could have envisioned: Alba within a European context, the influence of the Roman church and its global politics as it brings MacBeth’s land into its oversight and imposes its will. If MacBeth is to rule, he cannot ignore the power the church wields. While not consciously borrowing from Dunnett, but undoubtedly influenced by her, my own books examine a similar theme.
Perhaps there is one more thing I can thank Dorothy Dunnett for. Historical biography, as well as historical novels, filled several bookshelves in the house I grew up in, but at the time—more than fifty years ago—historical novels by women tended to focus on queens, and often romanticized their stories. Dunnett showed me that women too could write convincingly about blood and battlefields, politics and diplomacy, and the price—in friendships, in integrity, in morality—paid for power. I owe her more than I can say.
Alison Weir, author of the Six Tudor Queens series
Dorothy Dunnett was one of our finest historical novelists and deserves to be better recognised and celebrated.
Annie Whitehead, author and historian
History as an Arena – Tribute to Dorothy Dunnett
‘History is all very well, but it’s just the showcase. It is the arena in which your characters will perform, and which supplies the conflicts, stresses, dilemmas and the struggles they’ll get through.’ This quotation of Dorothy Dunnett’s is used in the advertising for the Historical Writers’ Association/Dorothy Dunnett Society’s annual short story competition. It was launched in 2017 and I’m proud to say that I was the inaugural winner of this prize. Winning the prize was certainly one of the highlights of my writing career so far, and I am now one of the judges for that same competition. I try always to keep this advice in mind when judging the stories which come in and of course also try to apply it to my own writing.
I read my elder sister’s copy of King Hereafter when I was very young – perhaps too young – but the elegant prose painted vivid pictures in my mind as the saga of Thorfinn’s life in rugged early medieval Scotland played out before me. Even at such a tender age, my imagination was fired. Every so often I re-read it, now with that
quotation in my head, understanding more, especially the character of Groa, and as a writer of books set in the ‘Dark Ages’, I am constantly inspired by a master of the art of placing a character into that ‘arena’, mixing fact with myth, and telling a compelling and unforgettable tale of real historical characters and using impeccable, detailed research to portray what might/could have been.
My own novels feature real life characters from history and, as in King Hereafter , follow that character from childhood to… well, not all end happily! There is much to be learned from going beyond reading, to actually studying; analysing what it was that Dorothy Dunnett did which made her stories come alive so. Ultimately though, I often endeavour to recall what I felt when I first read the book, when I was too young to grasp the subtleties, too young to understand much of the sentiment. What I remember is what I can only describe as the sweep, the broadness of the picture painted; the idea that I was looking at a vast world that was contained within the pages. Yes, she dropped her characters into the ‘arena’ but she also built the stage for them to act upon. It is always a process – build the historical world, drop your characters in, and let them play out those conflicts, stresses and dilemmas. And in King Hereafter , Dorothy Dunnett gave a matchless demonstration of that process.
Learning from the Maestra
All The Writers You Love Probably Love Dorothy Dunnett , by Alaya Dawn Johnson, December 2014.
Writing Epic Fantasy the Historical Fiction Way: Lessons from Dorothy Dunnett’s The Game of Kings , by Marie Brennan, August 2017.
Dorothy Dunnett Society , Copyright 2023 All Rights Reserved
Scottish Charitable Incorporated Organisation SC030649
Instagram
Facebook
Twitter
Mail
Home
The Library
Renaissance Woman
Maps
The Writers’ Writer
Readings & Recollections
Contact Us
Dorothy Dunnett Centenary ,
Proudly powered by WordPress.
Privacy Policy
