Proceedings of the First Workshop on Advancing Natural Language Processing for Wikipedia , pages 67–79
November 16, 2024 ©2024 Association for Computational Linguistics
The Rise of AI-Generated Content in Wikipedia
Creston Brooks Samuel Eggert Denis Peskoff
Princeton University
{cabrooks, sameggert, dp2896}@princeton.edu
Abstract
The rise of AI-generated content in popular in-
formation sources raises significant concerns
about accountability, accuracy, and bias ampli-
fication. Beyond directly impacting consumers,
the widespread presence of this content poses
questions for the long-term viability of train-
ing language models on vast internet sweeps.
We use GPTZero, a proprietary AI detector, and
Binoculars, an open-source alternative, to es-
tablish lower bounds on the presence of AI-
generated content in recently created Wikipedia
pages. Both detectors reveal a marked increase
in AI-generated content in recent pages com-
pared to those from before the release of GPT-
3.5. With thresholds calibrated to achieve a 1%
false positive rate on pre-GPT-3.5 articles, de-
tectors flag over 5% of newly created English
Wikipedia articles as AI-generated, with lower
percentages for German, French, and Italian ar-
ticles. Flagged Wikipedia articles are typically
of lower quality and are often self-promotional
or partial towards a specific viewpoint on con-
troversial topics.
1 AI-Generated Content
As Large Language Models (LLMs) have become
increasingly advanced and more accessible, the
risks of convincingly generated text grow in tan-
dem with the benefits. While benefits include easier
communication through machine translation, in-
creased productivity, and new pedagogical opportu-
nities, risks include the increased scale of disinfor-
mation and misinformation (Goldstein et al., 2023).
Unchecked resampling of AI-generated data for
training can even, in extreme cases, cripple model
performance (Shumailov et al., 2024). Risks can be
mitigated, however, to the extent that AI-generated
data can be detected reliably at scale.
With the rapid release of generative LLMs, AI
detection has been developing in parallel (Tang
et al., 2024). Individuals (Ferrara, 2024), educa-
tors (Baidoo-Anu and Ansah, 2023; Khalil and
Figure 1: Using two tools, GPTZero and Binoculars,
we detect that as many as 5% of 2,909 English
Wikipedia articles created in August 2024 contain sig-
nificant AI-generated content. The classification thresh-
olds of both tools were calibrated to maintain a FPR of
no more than 1% on a pre-GPT-3.5 Wikipedia baseline,
as indicated by the red line.
Er, 2023), companies (Jabeur et al., 2023; Adelani
et al., 2020), and governments (Androutsopoulou
et al., 2019) seek reliable ways of validating that
content has been generated by human authors rather
than machines. Nonetheless, evaluating AI detec-
tors across diverse contexts (e.g., length, domain,
and level of integration with human writing) re-
mains challenging (Bao et al., 2023; Sadasivan
et al., 2023; Liang et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024).
Wikipedia is a longstanding, publicly-curated
reference source for an expansive and ever-growing
set of topics. In the era of LLMs, it has become a
standard source of training data due to its breadth
of information, standards of curation, and flexi-
ble licensing. Therefore, it is an important testing
ground for the proliferation of AI-generated con-
tent. We collect Wikipedia pages created in August
2024 and use a previously curated dataset of pages
created prior to March 2022 as a pre-GPT-3.5 base-
67

===PAGE===

line for our experiments (Section 3). 1 We detect
a noticeable increase in AI-generated content in
the 2024 data and qualitatively assess flagged arti-
cles (Section 5). We compare these findings with
preliminary experiments conducted on other con-
temporary sources (Section 6) and comment on the
implications of AI-generated content (Section 7).
2 Detection Tools
We use two prominent detection tools which were
suitably scalable for our study. GPTZero (Tian and
Cui, 2023) is a commercial AI detector that reports
the probabilities that an input text is entirely written
by AI, entirely written by humans, or written by a
combination of AI and humans. In our experiments
we use the probability that an input text is entirely
written by AI. The black-box nature of the tool
limits any insight into its methodology.
An open-source method, Binoculars (Hans
et al., 2024) uses two separate LLMs M1 M2 to
score a text s for AI-likelihood by normalizing
perplexity by a quantity termed cross-perplexity,
which computes the average cross-entropy between
the outputs of two models over a span of tokens:
BM1,M2(s) = log PPLM1(s)
log X-PPLM1,M2(s)
The input text is classified as AI-generated if the
score is lower than a determined threshold, cali-
brated according to a desired false positive rate
(FPR). For our experiments, we use Falcon-7b
and Falcon-7b-instruct (Almazrouei et al., 2023)
to calculate cross-perplexity, following Hans et al.
(2024) who report it as the best pair of LLMs for
detection. Compared to competing open-source de-
tectors, Binoculars reports superior performance
across various domains including Wikipedia (Hans
et al., 2024).
3 Wikipedia Data Sources
Wikipedia provides an accessible list of articles cre-
ated within the past month for supported languages.
We use the New Pages feature to collect articles
created in August 2024 in English, French, Ger-
man, and Italian (Table 2). These languages were
also available in a set of Wikipedia pages collected
before March 2022.2
1Our data collection and evaluation code is available at
github.com/brooksca3/wiki_collection.
2https://huggingface.co/datasets/legacy-datas
ets/wikipedia
Although GPT-3 was released in June 2020, the
significant public uptake in generating text with
LLMs occurred in March 2022 with the release of
GPT-3.5 and exploded with ChatGPT in November
2022 (Wu et al., 2023). Thus, the dataset of articles
created prior to March 2022 allows us to establish a
FPR for the tools in detecting AI-generated content
post-GPT-3.5.
Language Pre-March 2022 August 2024
English 2965 2909
German 4399 3907
Italian 2306 3003
French 4351 3138
Table 1: Number of Wikipedia pages collected for each
language before March 2022 and in August 2024 after
removing articles containing fewer than 100 words. We
take random subsets of our data pools to stay within
budget constraints.
4 Detection as a Lower Bound
Following Latona et al.’s (2024) approach for mea-
suring AI content in conference reviews, we esti-
mate a lower bound for AI-generated articles by
subtracting the percentage of pre-March 2022 arti-
cles classified as AI by a given tool from the per-
centage of August 2024 articles classified as AI.
As we do not have ground-truth examples of AI-
generated articles, we do not attempt to estimate
the false negative rate (FNR). Doing so would re-
quire creating artificial positive examples by sim-
ulating the various ways Wikipedia authors might
use LLMs to assist in writing—taking into account
different models, prompts, and the extent of human
integration, among other factors.
Although we cannot speculate on how GPTZero
scores text, Falcon models are trained on Wikipedia
data (Almazrouei et al., 2023), and Binoculars is
known to assign false positives to text in its mod-
els’ training data (Hans et al., 2024). Addition-
ally, the tools we use are primarily for detecting
AI-generated content in English. While GPTZero
supports Spanish and French, it is not designed for
other languages (GPTZero, 2024), and using it out-
of-domain may increase FNRs. For non-English
texts, Binoculars reports similar FPRs but higher
FNRs (Hans et al., 2024). The higher the FNRs, the
more AI-generated articles slip past the detectors.
Therefore, while the numbers we report represent
a lower bound, the actual amount of AI-generated
content could be substantially higher.
68

===PAGE===

Language Footnotes per Sentence Outgoing Links per Word
AI-Detected Articles All New Articles AI-Detected Articles All New Articles
English 0.667 0.972 0.383 1.77
French 0.370 0.441 0.474 1.58
German 0.180 0.211 0.382 0.754
Italian 0.549 0.501 1.16 1.64
Table 2: Mean values for footnotes per sentence and outgoing links per word in all articles created in August 2024,
as well as those detected as AI-generated by either GPTZero or Binoculars, with thresholds set to induce a 1%
FPR for each tool. The number of AI articles are 207, 174, 249, and 206 for English, French, German, and Italian.
Our methodology assumes that the pre-March
2022 and August 2024 data distributions are com-
parable, with increased AI use being the primary
factor affecting detection. One concern is that pre-
March 2022 pages may be more polished due to
years of editing. However, we observe that a higher
number of edits weakly correlates with a higher
AI-detection score for pre-March 2022 articles (Ap-
pendix D), suggesting that the FPRs for those arti-
cles may even be inflated. While the base assump-
tion cannot be watertight, we observe a relatively
consistent distribution of page categories between
the two data pools, and we rely on the consistency
of our chosen tools’ reported FPRs.
5 Trends in Pages Flagged for AI
As seen in Figure 1, we estimate that 4.36% of
2,909 English Wikipedia articles created in Au-
gust 2024 contain significant AI-generated con-
tent.3 We set the classification thresholds of both
tools to induce a detection rate of no more than
1% on pre-March 2022 articles. With these thresh-
olds, GPTZero classifies 156 English articles as AI-
generated, and Binoculars classifies 96. Among
these, there is an overlap of 45 articles classified as
AI independently by the two tools. Notably, there
is no overlap between the 39 and 31 pre-March
2022 English articles flagged as AI-generated by
the tools. Hence, there is a strong shared signal
in assumed true positives but tool-specific noise in
false positives.
The quality of articles detected as AI-generated
is generally lower on at least two axes. Table 2
shows how, compared to all articles created in Au-
gust 2024, AI-generated ones use fewer references
and are less integrated into the Wikipedia nexus.4
35.36% detection rate with 1% FPR.
4We normalize by sentence and word count to remove
length as a confounding factor, since longer articles may have
more footnotes and links without being higher quality.
5.1 Manual Inspection
We inspect each of the 45 English articles flagged
as AI-generated by both GPTZero and Binoculars
by examining their edit histories and the activity
logs of their creators to better understand the moti-
vations for using LLMs to create Wikipedia pages.
We observe that several of the 45 pages are au-
thored by the same individuals, which is unsurpris-
ing, as users who use AI in one article are likely to
use it in others. Most of the 45 pages are flagged
by moderators and bots with some warning, e.g.,
“This article does not cite any sources. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable
sources” or even “This article may incorporate text
from a large language model.” We observe distinct
trends after inspecting the user and page histories.
5.2 Advertisement
One prominent motive is self-promotion. Of the
45 flagged pages, we identify eight that were cre-
ated to promote organizations such as small busi-
nesses, restaurants, or websites. These pages are
often the first to be created by their respective users
and typically lack any citations beyond links to
the entity being promoted. One page links to a
personal YouTube video promoting a winery with
fewer than 100 views. Another describes an estate
in the United Kingdom, claiming it has formerly
had notable residents. This is subsequently deleted
by a moderator who notes:
“Reference links are all dead apart from
one for the town council, which makes
no mention of the estate. One link is ac-
tually labelled ‘fictional’... Article reads
like an advert for the house, which is co-
incidentally up for sale at the moment.”
Other self-promoting pages are deleted by modera-
tors who remark: “unambiguous advertising which
only promotes a company, group, product, service,
person, or point of view.”
69

===PAGE===

Figure 2: The activity of this user, who was flagged for instigating an ‘Edit War,’ reveals that within a single day,
they created three articles (red border), all identified as AI-generated. Notably, at 13:00 (green border), the user
edited the outcome of ‘War in Dibra’ from ‘Mixed Results’ to ‘Victory’ and removed key text, just an hour before
creating a new page titled ‘Uprising in Dibra.’ That page (see Figure 3) has since been deleted by moderators.
5.3 Pages Pushing Polarization
While the immediate beneficiaries of advertisement
are obvious, we also identify pages that advocate
a particular viewpoint on often polarizing politi-
cal topics. We identify eight such pages out of
the flagged 45. One user created five articles on
English Wikipedia, detected by both tools as AI-
generated, on contentious moments in Albanian
history. The same user’s profile garnered a warning
from Wikipedia for engaging in an ‘Edit War’ with
other users (Figure 2). The user changed outcomes
of an Albanian conflict from ‘Mixed Results’ to
‘Victory’ and deleted supporting text, before using
AI to generate an entirely new page on said conflict.
The Wikimedia community has since removed the
flagged pages and banned the user in question for
sockpuppetry.5 In other cases, users created articles
ostensibly on one topic, such as types of weapons
or political movements, but dedicated the majority
of the pages’ content to discussing specific politi-
cal figures. We find two such articles that espouse
non-neutral views on JD Vance and V olodymyr
Zelensky.
5.4 Machine Translation
AI detection tools can flag instances of machine
translation. We find three cases where users explic-
itly documented their work as translations, includ-
ing pages on Portuguese history and legal cases
5Sockpuppetry is the practice of using multiple accounts
to mislead other editors (Solorio et al., 2013).
in Ghana. Outside of the 45 articles flagged by
both tools, we identify a top contributor of Italian
Wikipedia who created 57 articles flagged as AI-
generated by Binoculars, but not by GPTZero.6
This user notes in their sandbox that they translated
these articles from French Wikipedia, a common
practice in the Wikimedia editor community (Zhu
and Walker, 2024).
Despite producing fluent and accurate transla-
tions, state-of-the-art LLMs still introduce observ-
able biases (Hendy et al., 2023). Even beyond these
biases, machine translation complicates the process
of vetting pages flagged for AI content: an AI-
generated article in one language can be translated
and propagated into other languages. For example,
Wikipedia communities like Cebuano and Swedish
contain millions of pages made through automatic
methods (Alshahrani et al., 2023).
5.5 Writing Tool
Other pages, which are often well-structured with
high-quality citations, seem to have been written by
users who are knowledgeable in certain niches and
are employing an LLM as a writing tool. Several of
the flagged pages are created by users who churn
out dozens of articles within specific categories, in-
cluding snake breeds, types of fungi, Indian cuisine,
and American football players. One flagged page
points us to a user who seemingly uses AI to cre-
6These 57 translated pages are the reason Binoculars has
a higher detection rate than GPTZero for Italian in Figure 1.
70

===PAGE===

ate chapter-by-chapter books summaries. Another
page details an ongoing criminal case in India and
is flagged by moderators with a warning reminding
editors to treat subjects as innocent until proven
guilty.
6 Detection Beyond Wikipedia
Wikipedia has a distinct genre and brand of contrib-
utor. To contextualize our findings and motivate
further research, we conduct a preliminary inves-
tigation into two other genres—comment-section
debates and press releases—on platforms where
contributors may have different motivations for us-
ing generative AI compared to those on Wikipedia.
We hope this encourages closer examination of AI-
generated content across different domains with
varying contributor incentives.7
6.1 Reddit
Comments on contentious subreddits—Israel-
Palestine, public opinion on Democrats, public
opinion on Republicans—are updated daily on Kag-
gle, a popular data science platform. We randomly
sample 3,000 user comments from 2024 containing
at least 100 words.
Less than 1% of the collected comments receive
a GPTZero score above 0.5, which may mean (1)
few are AI-generated, (2) such content is censored
or (3) AI presence is difficult for detectors to dis-
cern in this domain. Despite being rare, some com-
ments flagged as AI-generated are potentially wor-
risome: one urges others how to vote in an upcom-
ing election (Appendix B).
6.2 Press Releases
The United Nations "remains the one place on
Earth where all the world’s nations can gather to-
gether, discuss common problems, and find shared
solutions that benefit all of humanity". 8 Coun-
try teams of the United Nations provide frequent
updates about developments in that country. We
collect 8,326 press releases across 60 country
teams from the United Nations from 2013 to 2024;
country teams have websites in the format of
https://{country}.un.org.9
7Full details about the sources we evaluated and instruc-
tions for replicating the evaluation are available at our reposi-
tory: github.com/brooksca3/wiki_collection.
8https://www.un.org/
9Due to licensing uncertainties, we do not release the press
releases; however, we release the scripts used to collect them.
As many as 20% of press releases published in
2024 received a GPTZero AI-generation score of
at least 0.5, compared to 12.5% in 2023, 1.6% in
2022, and less than 1% in all years prior. 10 The
marked increase in UN press releases flagged as AI
may stem from translations into English, although
the individuals named as authors of the articles
often hold degrees from institutions in English-
speaking countries. We include three examples of
flagged press releases in Appendix C.
7 Implications and Conclusion
Not all AI-generated text is nefarious. If a human
authors the primary content and approves an AI-
generated summary or translation, AI may be con-
sidered a writing aide. Shao et al. (2024) have even
designed a retrieval-based LLM workflow for writ-
ing Wikipedia-like articles and gathered perspec-
tives from experienced Wikipedia editors on using
it—the editors unanimously agreed that it would be
helpful in their pre-writing stage. Moreover, LLM-
enabled translation can reduce language barriers in
domains of information sharing (Katsnelson, 2022;
Berdejo-Espinola and Amano, 2023).
However, the increasing ease with which it is
possible to generate content at scale to overrepre-
sent a particular perspective has predictable and
dangerous consequences. People are more likely
to believe statements that are frequently repeated,
since familiarity is easily confused with validity
(Hasher et al., 1977; Unkelbach et al., 2019). Con-
sumer confidence is a key determiner of economic
strength, and confidence in the economy is based
in part on how strong individuals perceive others’
confidence to be. To the extent that AI-generated
outputs show less variability than human-generated
texts, we can expect peaks of polarization to con-
tinue to increase (Bail et al., 2018; Heltzel and
Laurin, 2020), undermining the useful wisdom of
crowds (Surowiecki, 2005; Bender et al., 2021).
Continued work is needed to understand differ-
ences in LLMs and human speech and the implica-
tions of widespread AI-generated data (Guo et al.,
2023; Sadasivan et al., 2023; Liang et al., 2024).
The motives to discreetly propagate AI-generated
text online vary across platforms, and measuring
the prevalence of AI-generated content is a neces-
sary step in understanding these motives.
1090/447 press releases from 2024 are flagged, 170/1360
from 2023, and 20/1268 from 2022.
71

===PAGE===

Limitations
The proprietary nature of GPTZero makes ex-
periments costly to run ($1000 for our study).
Binoculars requires non-trivial RAM and com-
pute to run at scale. These factors bound the scale
of the study we are able to conduct and limit our
ability to draw generalizable conclusions. We hope
that future efforts can replicate this work at a larger
scale and across more domains.
Future work should also consider a broader suite
of AI detectors. We considered two other open-
source AI detection tools but did not use them.
Ghostbuster (Verma et al., 2024) requires train-
ing on specific LLM features andFast-DetectGPT
(Bao et al., 2023) reports lower true positive rates
than Binoculars across all domains considered.
Moreover, we focus on English and other high
resource languages given their availability in the
sources we consider. In the multilingual setting,
Liang et al. (2023) detect bias in AI detectors
against non-native speakers, Wang et al. (2024)
create a multilingual dataset to study detection, and
Ignat et al. (2024) study multilingual detection in
the context of hotel reviews.
Ethical Considerations
Detecting AI may have unexpected negative conse-
quences for people implicated as having generated
that text. We have therefore been encouraged to
omit any identifying information in the specific
pages we discuss; however, we will provide more
specific data to researchers upon request provided
that it not be disseminated further.
We are relying on public internet content. All
sources that we investigate are public-facing in na-
ture. The Wikipedia data we collect is under a
Creative Commons CC0 License. The Reddit data
is distributed through Kaggle under a Open Data
Commons Attribution License (ODC-By) v1.0.
There is no clear license for United Nations country
teams. Individual use and download of the data is
explicitly permitted by the parent organization.
Acknowledgements
We thank Adele Goldberg for funding support
along with Brandon Stewart, Preeti Chemiti, and
Rob V oigt for valuable feedback and advice. We
are grateful to the Princeton Language and Intelli-
gence (PLI) for providing computational resources.
Peskoff is supported by the National Science Foun-
dation under Grant #2127309 to the Computing Re-
search Association for the CIFellows 2021 Project.
References
David Ifeoluwa Adelani, Haotian Mai, Fuming Fang,
Huy H Nguyen, Junichi Yamagishi, and Isao Echizen.
2020. Generating sentiment-preserving fake on-
line reviews using neural language models and their
human-and machine-based detection. In Advanced
information networking and applications: Proceed-
ings of the 34th international conference on ad-
vanced information networking and applications
(AINA-2020), pages 1341–1354. Springer.
Ebtesam Almazrouei, Hamza Alobeidli, Abdulaziz Al-
shamsi, Alessandro Cappelli, Ruxandra Cojocaru,
Merouane Debbah, Etienne Goffinet, Daniel Hes-
low, Julien Launay, Quentin Malartic, et al. 2023.
Falcon-40b: an open large language model with state-
of-the-art performance. 2023. URL https://falconllm.
tii. ae.
Saied Alshahrani, Norah Alshahrani, and Jeanna
Matthews. 2023. Depth+: An enhanced depth met-
ric for wikipedia corpora quality. In Proceedings of
the 3rd Workshop on Trustworthy Natural Language
Processing (TrustNLP 2023), pages 175–189.
Aggeliki Androutsopoulou, Nikos Karacapilidis, Euri-
pidis Loukis, and Yannis Charalabidis. 2019. Trans-
forming the communication between citizens and
government through ai-guided chatbots. Government
information quarterly, 36(2):358–367.
David Baidoo-Anu and Leticia Owusu Ansah. 2023. Ed-
ucation in the era of generative artificial intelligence
(ai): Understanding the potential benefits of chatgpt
in promoting teaching and learning. Journal of AI,
7(1):52–62.
Christopher A Bail, Lisa P Argyle, Taylor W Brown,
John P Bumpus, Haohan Chen, MB Fallin Hunzaker,
Jaemin Lee, Marcus Mann, Friedolin Merhout, and
Alexander V olfovsky. 2018. Exposure to opposing
views on social media can increase political polar-
ization. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 115(37):9216–9221.
Guangsheng Bao, Yanbin Zhao, Zhiyang Teng, Linyi
Yang, and Yue Zhang. 2023. Fast-detectgpt: Effi-
cient zero-shot detection of machine-generated text
via conditional probability curvature. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.05130.
Emily M Bender, Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillan-
Major, and Shmargaret Shmitchell. 2021. On the
dangers of stochastic parrots: Can language models
be too big? In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM confer-
ence on fairness, accountability, and transparency,
pages 610–623.
Violeta Berdejo-Espinola and Tatsuya Amano. 2023.
Ai tools can improve equity in science. Science,
379(6636):991–991.
72

===PAGE===

Emilio Ferrara. 2024. Genai against humanity: Nefari-
ous applications of generative artificial intelligence
and large language models. Journal of Computa-
tional Social Science, pages 1–21.
Josh A Goldstein, Girish Sastry, Micah Musser, Re-
nee DiResta, Matthew Gentzel, and Katerina Sedova.
2023. Generative language models and automated
influence operations: Emerging threats and potential
mitigations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04246.
GPTZero. 2024. Introducing gptzero’s multilingual ai
detection. https://gptzero.me/news/multilin
gualdetection/.
Biyang Guo, Xin Zhang, Ziyuan Wang, Minqi Jiang,
Jinran Nie, Yuxuan Ding, Jianwei Yue, and Yupeng
Wu. 2023. How close is chatgpt to human experts?
comparison corpus, evaluation, and detection. arXiv
preprint arxiv:2301.07597.
Abhimanyu Hans, Avi Schwarzschild, Valeriia
Cherepanova, Hamid Kazemi, Aniruddha Saha,
Micah Goldblum, Jonas Geiping, and Tom Goldstein.
2024. Spotting llms with binoculars: Zero-shot
detection of machine-generated text. Preprint,
arXiv:2401.12070.
L. Hasher, D. Goldstein, and T. Toppino. 1977. Fre-
quency and the conference of referential validity.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior ,
16:107–112.
Greg Heltzel and Kristin Laurin. 2020. Polarization in
america: Two possible futures. Current Opinion in
Behavioral Sciences, 34:179–184.
Amr Hendy, Mohamed Abdelrehim, Amr Sharaf,
Vikas Raunak, Mohamed Gabr, Hitokazu Matsushita,
Young Jin Kim, Mohamed Afify, and Hany Hassan
Awadalla. 2023. How good are gpt models at ma-
chine translation? a comprehensive evaluation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2302.09210.
Oana Ignat, Xiaomeng Xu, and Rada Mihalcea.
2024. Maide-up: Multilingual deception detec-
tion of gpt-generated hotel reviews. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.12938.
Sami Ben Jabeur, Hossein Ballouk, Wissal Ben Arfi,
and Jean-Michel Sahut. 2023. Artificial intelligence
applications in fake review detection: Bibliometric
analysis and future avenues for research. Journal of
Business Research, 158:113631.
Alla Katsnelson. 2022. Poor english skills? new ais help
researchers to write better. Nature, 609(7925):208–
209.
Mohammad Khalil and Erkan Er. 2023. Will chatgpt
g et you caught? rethinking of plagiarism detection.
In International Conference on Human-Computer
Interaction, pages 475–487. Springer.
Giuseppe Russo Latona, Manoel Horta Ribeiro, Tim R.
Davidson, Veniamin Veselovsky, and Robert West.
2024. The ai review lottery: Widespread ai-assisted
peer reviews boost paper scores and acceptance rates.
ArXiv, abs/2405.02150.
Weixin Liang, Mert Yuksekgonul, Yining Mao, Eric
Wu, and James Zou. 2023. Gpt detectors are bi-
ased against non-native english writers. Patterns,
4(7):100779.
Weixin Liang, Yaohui Zhang, Zhengxuan Wu, Haley
Lepp, Wenlong Ji, Xuandong Zhao, Hancheng Cao,
Sheng Liu, Siyu He, Zhi Huang, et al. 2024. Mapping
the increasing use of llms in scientific papers. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2404.01268.
Vinu Sankar Sadasivan, Aounon Kumar, Sriram Bala-
subramanian, Wenxiao Wang, and Soheil Feizi. 2023.
Can ai-generated text be reliably detected? arXiv
preprint arXiv:2303.11156.
Yijia Shao, Yucheng Jiang, Theodore A Kanell, Pe-
ter Xu, Omar Khattab, and Monica S Lam. 2024.
Assisting in writing wikipedia-like articles from
scratch with large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.14207.
Ilia Shumailov, Zakhar Shumaylov, Yiren Zhao, Nicolas
Papernot, Ross Anderson, and Yarin Gal. 2024. Ai
models collapse when trained on recursively gener-
ated data. Nature, 631(8022):755–759.
Thamar Solorio, Ragib Hasan, and Mainul Mizan. 2013.
A case study of sockpuppet detection in wikipedia. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Language Analysis
in Social Media, pages 59–68.
James Surowiecki. 2005. The Wisdom of Crowds. An-
chor.
Ruixiang Tang, Yu-Neng Chuang, and Xia Hu. 2024.
The science of detecting llm-generated text. Commu-
nications of the ACM, 67(4):50–59.
Edward Tian and Alexander Cui. 2023. Gptzero: To-
wards detection of ai-generated text using zero-shot
and supervised methods".
C. Unkelbach, A. Koch, R. R. Silva, and T. Garcia-
Marques. 2019. Truth by repetition: Explanations
and implications. Current Directions in Psychologi-
cal Science, 28(3):247–253.
Vivek Verma, Eve Fleisig, Nicholas Tomlin, and Dan
Klein. 2024. Ghostbuster: Detecting text ghostwrit-
ten by large language models. In Proceedings of
the 2024 Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies.
Yuxia Wang, Jonibek Mansurov, Petar Ivanov, Jinyan
Su, Artem Shelmanov, Akim Tsvigun, Chenxi White-
house, Osama Mohammed Afzal, Tarek Mahmoud,
Toru Sasaki, Thomas Arnold, Alham Aji, Nizar
Habash, Iryna Gurevych, and Preslav Nakov. 2024.
73

===PAGE===

M4: Multi-generator, multi-domain, and multi-
lingual black-box machine-generated text detection.
In Proceedings of the 18th Conference of the Euro-
pean Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1369–
1407, St. Julian’s, Malta. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Tianyu Wu, Shizhu He, Jingping Liu, Siqi Sun, Kang
Liu, Qing-Long Han, and Yang Tang. 2023. A brief
overview of chatgpt: The history, status quo and
potential future development. IEEE/CAA Journal of
Automatica Sinica, 10(5):1122–1136.
Kai Zhu and Dylan Walker. 2024. The promise and pit-
falls of ai technology in bridging digital language di-
vide: Insights from machine translation on wikipedia.
SSRN.
74

===PAGE===

Appendix
A (Deleted) Wikipedia Page Classified as AI-Generated
Figure 3: Wikipedia page flagged as AI-generated and deleted by moderators.
B Reddit Post Classified as AI-Generated
The following comment encouraging Americans to vote for a third-party candidate was flagged as AI.
While the acknowledgment of the symbolic rejection of the two-party system is understood, the
contention here lies in the practical consequences of a third-party vote. It’s crucial to recognize
that the call for voting third party isn’t solely symbolic but a strategic push for a more diverse
political landscape over time. The argument asserts that voting for anyone other than Biden
increases Trump’s chance of victory. However, this perspective assumes a binary outcome,
overlooking the potential long-term impact of promoting alternative voices. A shift toward
a multi-party system is a gradual process, and fostering this change requires voters to make
choices aligned with their principles. Moreover, characterizing the choice between a “bland
moderate Democrat" and an “extremely corrupt, authoritarian Republican" as high stakes
underscores the need for broader political options. Supporting third parties now can pave the
way for a more representative democracy in the future, where voters aren’t limited to perceived
lesser evils. While the current election might seem high-stakes, it’s crucial to consider the
long-term goal of breaking the duopoly for a healthier democracy. Third-party votes, rather
than being mere protests, can be strategic steps toward that transformative change.
75

===PAGE===

C Examples of UN Press Releases Classified as AI-Generated
In this section, we present three examples of UN press releases flagged by our tools as likely AI-generated.
We re-emphasize that AI detection can produce false positives, and no individual classification should be
considered definitive.
C.1 UN Belize Press Release
The United Nations in Belize expresses its deep concern over the recent tragic incidents that
have claimed the lives of women and children both in their homes and public spaces
https://belize.un.org/en/263463-united-nations-belize-expresses-its-deep-concern
-over-recent-tragic-incidents-have-claimed
The United Nations in Belize expresses its deep concern over the recent tragic
incidents that have claimed the lives of women and children both in their homes
and public spaces. The right to life is fundamental and should be expected and
respected by all in Belize. We offer our condolences to families affected by these
recent tragic cases of domestic and gender-based violence and commit to continue
supporting the Government and people of Belize in the pursuit of freedom from
violence. We all collectively have a role to play in ensuring that Belize remains
a safe, secure, and inclusive society for everyone. The United Nations works to
support Belize’s commitment to eliminate all forms of violence especially against
women and girls making the recent events even more distressing. The United Nations
is fully committed to support the Government of Belize and civil society in concrete
actions to realize the rights of all women and children, allowing them to live
lives free of violence including preventive support and the attention of mental
health aspects and consequences of those affected.
Table 3: Press Release by the United Nations in Belize, 15 March 2024
76

===PAGE===

C.2 (Abridged) UN Bangladesh Press
UNOPS’ Roundtable Discussion on the ‘Invest in Women: Accelerate Progress’
https://bangladesh.un.org/en/264789-unops-roundtable-discussion-%C2%A0%E2%80%98
invest-%C2%A0women-accelerate-progress%E2%80%99
Dhaka, Bangladesh - UNOPS Bangladesh hosted the 9th episode of "SDG Café," a
monthly roundtable discussion series dedicated to addressing pressing development
challenges and co-creating innovative solutions.
As part of UNOPS’s commitment to getting Agenda 2030 back on track, this
episode places the spotlight on the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG 5),
dedicated to advancing gender equality and empowering women in Bangladesh and
beyond. This roundtable took place on March 21, 2024 with the theme, ‘Invest in
Women: Accelerate Progress’.
The session focused on highlighting the importance of investing in women to
foster inclusive and sustainable economic growth, in line with SDG 5. Addressing
the enduring gender disparities in investment, especially in developing nations,
the talks revolved around discussing obstacles, prospects, and inventive approaches
to boost investment in businesses owned by women, elevate women into leadership
positions, and advance initiatives supporting gender parity.
The highlight of the event was the keynote speeches delivered by esteemed
personalities Rubana Huq, Vice-chancellor of Asian University for Women and
Chairperson of Mohammadi Group, and Azmeri Haque Badhon, renowned Bangladeshi
actress. Huq’s address emphasized the urgency of accelerating investment in women,
drawing from her extensive experience in academia and business leadership.
. . .
Table 4: Press Release by the United Nations in Bangladesh, 2 May 2024
77

===PAGE===

C.3 (Abridged) UN Turkmenistan Press Release
Consultative meeting with national stakeholders on Advancing Cross-Border Paperless Trade
in Turkmenistan
https://turkmenistan.un.org/en/269295-consultative-meeting-national-stakeholder
s-advancing-cross-border-paperless-trade
Turkmenistan, Ashgabat - The United Nations Resident Coordinator’s Office (UN
RCO) in Turkmenistan and the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for
Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) jointly organized a two-day workshop titled "Towards
a National Strategy in Advancing Cross-Border Paperless Trade in Turkmenistan."
The event, held on 20-21 May 2024 at the UN House in Ashgabat, brought together
national stakeholders and development partners to discuss and strategize the
implementation of cross-border paperless trade initiatives in Turkmenistan. The
opening day of the workshop featured esteemed speakers including Ms. Rupa Chanda,
Director of Trade, Investment and Innovation Division at ESCAP, Mr. Dmitry
Shlapachenko, UN Resident Coordinator in Turkmenistan, and Mr. Myrat Myradov,
Head of Legal Regulations and Coordination at the Foreign Economic Relations
Department, Ministry of Trade and Foreign Economic Relations of Turkmenistan.
The first day’s sessions included a comprehensive review of key initiatives
by various ministries and agencies, aimed at enhancing trade facilitation
in Turkmenistan. Development partners, Asian Development Bank, USAID, GIZ,
International Trade Center, also presented their contributions in this domain,
fostering a better understanding of the current trade facilitation landscape in
the country...
The workshop concluded with a practical group exercise, followed by group
presentations, and summarizing the outcomes and proposed strategies for advancing
cross-border paperless trade in Turkmenistan. The event underscored Turkmenistan’s
commitment to embracing innovative solutions for trade facilitation and integration
into the global digital economy. Turkmenistan joined the CPTA in May 2022 and has
actively participated in its implementation. A readiness assessment was conducted,
resulting in a study report published in December 2022.
Table 5: Press Release by the United Nations in Turkmenistan, 22 May 2024
78

===PAGE===

D AI Detection Scores vs. Page Edits Across Languages
Figure 4: GPTZero scores compared to the number of page edits for English (left) and French (right) articles created
before March 2022. Pages with more edits in English receive higher GPTZero scores.
Figure 5: GPTZero scores compared to the number of page edits for Italian (left) and German (right) articles created
before March 2022.
79