 

 Help:Honor Code 

 Skip to main content 

 Log In 

 Log In 

 Log Out 

 First Name 

 Last Name 

 Search 

 Advanced Person Search | Search Help Pages 

Help:Honor Code

 Language: en | de | fr | nl 

 REDIRECT Special:Honor_Code 

 Wiki Genealogist Honor Code 

 WikiTree is free, but it's not a free-for-all. Our community is collaborating to create something special: an accurate single family tree that's free and open to the world. This grand project requires mutual trust and a common understanding of how the community works.

 If you were invited by a family member and are just creating or editing a few private family profiles, the following isn't critical. Those who participate at a higher level must agree to this shared code of ethics and principles.

 This code is a pledge that community members make to each other. The creators and hosts of WikiTree have also made a pledge: to keep WikiTree free forever .

 Our Honor Code 

 We collaborate . When we share ancestors we work together on the same ancestor profiles .

 We care about accuracy . We're always aiming to improve upon our worldwide family tree and fix mistakes.

 We know mistakes are inevitable. We don't want to be afraid to make them. We assume that mistakes are unintentional when others make them and ask for the same understanding.

 We know misunderstandings are inevitable. We try to minimize them by being courteous to everyone , even those who don't act accordingly.

 We respect privacy . We privacy-protect anything we think our family members might not want public. If that's not enough for someone, we delete their personal information.

 We respect copyrights . We don't knowingly copy information that's owned by someone else. If we ourselves want to preserve a copyright, we're clear about what's copyrighted so others don't accidentally copy it.

 We give credit . Although most genealogy isn't copyrighted, researchers deserve credit for the work they've done.

 We cite sources . Without sources we can't objectively resolve conflicting information.

 We are united in a mission to increase the world's common store of knowledge. We always respect copyrights and privacy, but we keep information as free and open as possible .

 Signers 

 Click here for the complete list of signers .

 See About WikiTree for more on our mission and organization or Membership for more on the benefits of signing the Honor Code.

 This page was last modified 06:48, 20 March 2025. This page has been accessed 2,725 times. 

 + Show Categories / Search Help Pages

 Search WikiTree's Help Pages 

 Search 
 Browse all help pages 

 A 

 B 

 C 

 D 

 E 

 F 

 G 

 H 

 I 

 J 

 K 

 L 

 M 

 N 

 O 

 P 

 Q 

 R 

 S 

 T 

 U 

 V 

 W 

 X 

 Y 

 Z 

 WikiTree Home 

 About 

 G2G Forum 

 Help 

 Search 

Important privacy notice & disclaimer: You have a responsibility to use caution when distributing private information. WikiTree protects most sensitive information but only to the extent stated in the Terms of Service and Privacy Policy .

 © 2008 - 2026 The WikiTree Company. Content may be copyrighted by WikiTree community members.

