 

 Help:Photos FAQ 

 Skip to main content 

 Log In 

 Log In 

 Log Out 

 First Name 

 Last Name 

 Search 

 Advanced Person Search | Search Help Pages 

Help:Photos FAQ

Categories:
 WikiTree Help | Image Help 

 Language: en | de | fr 

 Here are questions and answers related to images. 

 See also:

 Help:Uploading Documents 

 Help:Photo Privacy 

 Help:Primary Photo 

 Help:Photo Details Page , aka Edit-Photo Pages

 Ask a question in G2G if you don't your answer here.

 Contents

 1 How do you add a photo? 

 2 How do you remove or delete a photo? 

 3 How do you edit photo information? 

 4 How do you know if you have permission to upload a photo? 

 5 Can anyone see photos? 

 6 How do you upload a printed image to WikiTree? 

 7 How do you change the order of people identified in a photo? 

 8 How do you change the order of photos on a profile? 

 9 Why does my portrait/vertical photo display as landscape/horizontal? 

 10 How do you display a photo in the text of any page? 

 11 Why doesn't my PDF upload have an image thumbnail? 

 12 How do you find an existing image? 

 13 What's the difference between photos and source images? 

 14 What is WikiTree's policy on AI-generated images? 

 15 How should disagreements about the visual appearance of profiles be handled? 

 How do you add a photo? 

 To add pictures or source images to a profile click the "Upload Photo" button in the photo section.

 This will enable you to browse your hard drive for an image to upload.

 After uploading you can edit the information about the photo, i.e. the who, what, when, and where.

 Repeat this for as many photos as you like.

 How do you remove or delete a photo? 

 Remove a photo from a profile 

 Click the "details" link underneath the photo on the profile page. On the photo details page , click the edit icon next to the "In this image" label.

 In the list of profiles connected to the photo, click the radio button labeled " remove from image" for the profiles where you no longer want the photo to show. Scroll to the bottom of the screen and click the Save Changes button.

 If you disconnect all profiles from a photo, the photo will still exist in the database for a short period of time, and it can be recovered. This way photos can't be mistakenly or maliciously deleted.

 Remove a profile's Primary Photo 

 If you just want to remove the profile's Primary Photo (the one that appears as a thumbnail at the top), click the edit icon to edit the person profile, then click "Photo Settings" in the Jump Links toolbar. Under the primary photo, click the checkbox labeled "remove as primary," and save the changes to the profile.

 Immediate removal of a sensitive photo 

 If you need to completely delete a photo immediately because it contains grossly offensive or illegal content that violates our Terms of Service, email info@wikitree.com . This should only be done in emergency situations, e.g. with inappropriate photos of children.

 How do you edit photo information? 

 To add or change the title, location, date, or identification of people or things in a photo, click the "details" link underneath a picture.

 The edit page also enables you to add comments . This is a good place to give a fuller context or add your personal memories.

 How do you know if you have permission to upload a photo? 

 Generally speaking, you have permission to upload a photo if:

 you took the photo yourself.

 the person who took the photo gave you permission to share it on WikiTree.

 the image is in the public domain. See Stanford University's definition of public domain and the Legal Genealogist's " Copyright and the old family photo. "

 You generally do not have permission if you downloaded it from another website.

 Commercial sites such as Ancestry.com and Find A Grave do not generally allow republishing images. Even non-commercial sites may disallow public sharing of downloaded images. You need to check their terms of use. FamilySearch does allow record images to be republished on WikiTree.

 Always include a comment on the photo saying where you got the image, e.g. if you took the photo, if it was scanned from a family collection, etc. This is required . If you found the image on another website explain why it is not copyrighted or how you obtained permission.

 Can anyone see photos? 

 Anyone can see the tiny thumbnail version of any photo. This includes the thumbnails that appear in activity feeds .

 If a profile is private only those on the Trusted List can see the full-size versions and the photo details. However, if anyone in the photo is public the photo will be public.

 If you want to make a photo viewable by everyone, you can create a public Free-Space Profile and add the photo to it.

 See Photo Privacy for more information.

 How do you upload a printed image to WikiTree? 

 To get an image on your computer you need to scan it. Scanners these days are simple to use and can cost around $50. If you don't have a scanner, copy shops can scan images for you.

 Even easier (but lower-quality): if you have a smartphone, take a picture of the printed image. You can then upload the photo as you normally would.

 How do you change the order of people identified in a photo? 

 You might want the caption that names the people in a photo to list them from left-to-right, so that you can identify who is who.

 You can do this in the comments section but not in the name list.

 We may be adding an advanced system in the future that allows you to "tag" faces in a photo. You will be able to move your cursor over a person and have their name appear. This is better for group photos because sometimes people don't stand in perfect left-to-right order.

 How do you change the order of photos on a profile? 

 This is not currently possible. Photos appear on a profile in the order in which they were uploaded.

 In the future, we do plan to add a feature that enables you to sort photos.

 Why does my portrait/vertical photo display as landscape/horizontal? 

 Some operating systems and browsers automatically reorient the display of a photo. It may have been taken horizontally but it appears vertically on your computer because your system "knows" that's the proper orientation. WikiTree isn't this sophisticated. It displays photos as they are uploaded. You should be able to rotate the photo on your local system and save it, then upload it to WikiTree.

 How do you display a photo in the text of any page? 

 Images normally appear along the right-hand side of the profiles they're attached to, as well as on the profile's Images tab. But you can also display them within the text of a profile page or category page, or within a template.

 Click to the photo details page and look near the bottom for a section entitled "Use inside text" . There you will find copy-and-paste code that looks something like this:

 {{Image|file=MyPhoto.jpg

 |caption=Caption text

 }}

 Insert this code inside the text where you want the image to appear.

 For more inline image options and instructions, see Template:Image . Ask in G2G if you need help.

 Why doesn't my PDF upload have an image thumbnail? 

 You can upload and store PDF files as images on WikiTree, but we are not currently able to display them as images. Their thumbnail will be the Adobe PDF logo. Clicking on the full-sized version will show the full PDF as normal.

 How do you find an existing image? 

 All the images attached to profiles in your Watchlist are browseable through the "My Images" link in the "My WikiTree" pull-down menu at the top of this page.

 You can browse some images that others have uploaded at Category:Images .

 Click here to search all public images on WikiTree by keyword. 

 What's the difference between photos and source images? 

 A photo is an image of a person or thing. A source is an image about a person or thing. See Image Types for more explanation.

 What is WikiTree's policy on AI-generated images? 

 WikiTree does not have a rule against uploading AI-generated or AI-modified images of people. From classical paintings to darkroom retouching, images have long been crafted representations. Digital editing and AI tools extend these same practices using newer methods.

 However, if an image was created using AI, it is very important that viewing users understand this. It must be explained in the comments and might also be done in the title, e.g. an image might be entitled "AI Representation of 19th Century Pioneer Woman."

 Similarly, if a photo has been colorized or significantly edited, this should be explained. Many members also link to the original, unedited version of the photo.

 Finally, be aware that some members dislike seeing AI-generated or heavily modified images on their ancestor profiles. These may be considered profile decorations and our policies on Profile
Aesthetics apply.

 How should disagreements about the visual appearance of profiles be handled? 

 See Help:Profile_Aesthetics .

 This page was last modified 19:42, 21 April 2026. This page has been accessed 127,283 times. 

 + Show Categories / Search Help Pages

 Search WikiTree's Help Pages 

 Search 
 Browse all help pages 

 A 

 B 

 C 

 D 

 E 

 F 

 G 

 H 

 I 

 J 

 K 

 L 

 M 

 N 

 O 

 P 

 Q 

 R 

 S 

 T 

 U 

 V 

 W 

 X 

 Y 

 Z 

 WikiTree Home 

 About 

 G2G Forum 

 Help 

 Search 

Important privacy notice & disclaimer: You have a responsibility to use caution when distributing private information. WikiTree protects most sensitive information but only to the extent stated in the Terms of Service and Privacy Policy .

 © 2008 - 2026 The WikiTree Company. Content may be copyrighted by WikiTree community members.

