

 Written on the Dark by Guy Gavriel Kay | CBC Books

Written on the Dark by Guy Gavriel Kay | CBC Books Loaded

Books·Canadian
Written on the Dark by Guy Gavriel Kay

A thrilling tale of love and war set during medieval France.

A thrilling tale of love and war set during medieval France

CBC Books · Posted: Feb 13, 2025 9:12 AM EST | Last Updated: February 13, 2025

Social Sharing

Written on the Dark is a novel by Guy Gavriel Kay. (Penguin Canada)

Thierry Villar is a well-known — even notorious — tavern poet, intimately familiar with the rogues and shadows of that world, but not at all with courts and power. He is an unlikely person, despite his quickness, to be swept into the deadly contests of ambitious royals, assassins, and invading armies.

 But he is indeed drawn into all these things on a savagely cold night in his beloved city of Orane. And so Thierry must use all the intelligence and charm he can muster as power struggles merge with a decades-long war to bring his country to the brink of destruction.

 As he does, he meets his poetic equal in an aristocratic woman and is drawn to more than one unsettling person with a connection to the world beyond this one. He also crosses paths with an extraordinary young woman driven by voices within to try to heal the ailing king — and help his forces in war. A wide and varied set of people from all walks of life take their places in the rich tapestry of this story.

 Both sweeping and intimate, Written on the Dark is an elegant tour de force about power and ambition playing out amid the equally intense human need for art and beauty, and memories to be left behind.

(From Penguin Canada) 

Written on the Dark is available in May 2025. 

The CBC Books summer reading list: 45 hot books to read this summer

12 sci-fi and fantasy books to unwind with this summer

100 writers in Canada you need to know

Guy Gavriel Kay: 6 books I love

Guy Gavriel Kay on what his tombstone will say

Guy Gavriel Kay on why writing fantasy fiction about destiny, dominion and deceit will never go out of style

Guy Gavriel Kay is the author of 15 novels. His Fionavar Tapestry fantasy series has sold over a million copies worldwide since being published in the 1980s and has been optioned by the Canadian production company behind Orphan Black. Some of Kay's other titles include Children of Earth and Sky, Tigana, River of Stars and A Brightness Long Ago. In 2014, he was appointed to the Order of Canada.

Interviews with Guy Gavriel Kay 

All in a Weekend Montreal11:16Guy Gavriel Kay: "Children of Earth and Sky"

Award-winning author Guy Gavriel Kay talks about his latest fantasy novel set in the Renaissance as well as his start in the literary world working on J.R.R. Tolkien's "The Simiarilion".

Guy Gavriel Kay

July 27, 2011|

Duration 3:58

Canadian writer talks about the new directions he sees ahead for fantasy fiction.

Other books by Guy Gavriel Kay

 